PROVO.  UTAH  ^ 


rv 


^ 


* 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet22newy 


THE   PREACHER'S   COMMENTARY 


ON 


ST.  MATTHEW 


THE 


||itat^n''s  Complete  Pamilctkal 

COMMENTAEY 


ON    THE 


NEW    TESTAMEINT 

fON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN) 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toronto 
1896 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO 

ST.    MATTHEW 


BY 

REV.    W.    SUNDERLAND    LEWIS,    M.A. 

AND 

REV.    HENRY   M.    BOOTH 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


THE    LI  BR AH Y 

BRIGHAfvi  YOUNG  U    IVRSITY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


THE 

PREACHER'S  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY. 


ST.    MATTHEW. 


INTEODUCTION. 

I.  The  Author. — 1.  The  man. — The  name  of  Matthew  occurs  in  the  four  lists 
of  the  Apostles:  Matt.  x.  3;  Mark  iii.  18;  Luke  vi.  15;  Acts  i.  13.  He  is 
usually  identified  with  Levi,  for  what  is  in  the  First  Gospel  (ix.  9)  related  of 
Matthew,  is  in  Mark  (ii.  14)  and  Luke  (v.  27)  told  of  Levi.  To  change  the 
name  on  some  life-changing  occasion  was  not  uncommon,  and  Levi  may  have 
taken  the  name  of  Matthew  at  his  call ;  or,  as  is  rather  implied  in  the  First 
Gospel,  he  may  have  had  it  earlier,  to  distinguish  him  from  the  many  others 
called  Levi.  Neither  Mark  nor  Luke,  however,  intimates  that  he  whose  name 
appears  in  their  apostolic  lists  as  Matthew  is  the  same  person  as  the  Levi  whose 
call  they  have  related.  It  has  been  accepted  as  evidence  of  Matthew's 
humility  that  he  adds  to  his  name  the  opprobrious  designation,  "  the  publican," 
which  is  omitted  by  the  other  Evangelists.  He  also  puts  his  own  name  after 
that  of  his  companion,  Thomas,  though  the  others  name  him  first.  Accoi  ding 
to  Mark  (ii.  14)  Levi  was  the  son  of  Alphseus,  and  hence  some  have  concluded 
that  he  was  a  brother  of  James  the  Little  and  a  relative  of  Jesus  (Marcus 
Vods,  D.D.). 

2.  The  significance  of  his  name. — "  Matthew  *'  is  a  Hebrew  name  of  not  quite 
certain  origin.  Grimm  supposes  that  it  means  Manly^  deriving  it  from  a 
disused  root  denoting  Man.     Others  suppose  that  it  means  Trueman^  or  Truman 

«  1  ' 


INTKODUCTION.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


as  if  the  name  had  originally  been  Amittai.  But  it  is  generally  supposed  that, 
along  with  its  synonym,  Matthias,  it  was  a  contracted  form  of  the  old  Hebrew 
word  Mattathias,  meaning  Theodore,  or  Gift-of-God.  It  would  originally  be 
imposed  by  some  devout  parent  on  a  highly  prized  child,  who  was  welcomed  into 
the  world  with  gratitude.  It  is  not  uninteresting  to  note  that  the  name 
Nathanaely  or  Nathaniel,  has  the  same  import,  and  is  indeed  derived  in  part 
from  the  verbal  root  which  gives  the  Matth  in  Matthew  (Jas.  Morison,  D.D.). 

3.  His  original  occupation. — His  business  was  to  examine  the  goods  passing 
either  way  on  the  great  high  road  between  the  territories  of  the  two  neighbouring 
tetrarchs,  to  enter  them  on  the  official  record,  to  take  the  duties  and  credit  them 
in  his  books,  in  order,  finally,  to  pay  over  the  gross  proceeds,  at  given  times, 
to  the  local  tax-farmer  (C.  Geikie,  D.D.).  The  publicans,  properly  so  called 
(publicani),  were  persons  who  farmed  the  Eoman  taxes,  and  they  were  usually, 
in  later  times,  Koman  knights  and  persons  of  wealth  and  credit.  They 
employed  under  them  inferior  officers,  natives  of  the  province  where  the  taxes 
were  collected,  called  properly  portitores,  to  which  class  Matthew,  no  doubt, 
belonged  {Archbishop  Wm.  Thomson). 

4.  His  relation  to  the  Roman  government. — Since  Capernaum  was  in  the 
tetrarchy  of  Herod  Antipas,  it  may  be  inferred  that  Levi  was  an  officer  in  the 
service  of  that  prince,  and  not  in  the^ervice  of  the  Roman  government,  as  is 
sometimes  tacitly  assumed.  This  is  not  unimportant  in  estimating  the  call  and 
conversion  of  St.  Matthew.  A  Hebrew  who  entirely  acquiesced  in  the  Roman 
supremacy  could  hardly  have  done  so  at  this  period  without  abandoning  the 
national  hopes.  Jesus  alone  knew  the  secret  of  reconciling  the  highest 
aspirations  of  the  Jewish  race  with  submission  to  Caesar.  But  to  acknowledge 
the  Herodian  dynasty  was  a  different  thing  from  bowing  to  Home.  Herod  was 
at  least  not  a  foreigner  and  a  Gentile  in  the  same  sense  as  the  Roman.  Idumea 
had  coalesced  with  Israel.  It  is,  therefore,  conceivable  that  a  Jew  who  was 
waiting  for  the  Messiah's  reign  may,  in  very  despair,  have  learned  to  look  for  the 
fulfilment  of  his  hopes  in  the  Herodian  family.  If  it  was  impossible  to  connect 
Messianic  thoughts  with  an  Antipas,  or  even  with  the  more  reputable  Philip, 
still  might  not  a  prince  hereafter  spring  from  that  house  to  restore  the  kingdom 
to  Israel  ?  Might  not  God  in  His  providence  fuse,  by  some  means,  the  house  and 
lineage  of  Herod  with  the  house  and  lineage  of  David  ?  It  was  not  impossible, 
and  probably  the  tyrannical  Antipas  owed  the  stability  of  his  throne  in  some 
measure  to  a  party  among  the  Jews  who  cherished  these  ideas  {A.  Carr,  M.A.). 

5.  His  character. — We  may  infer  that  he  was  influenced  by  what  is  almost  an 
inherent  passion  in  his  race — the  love  of  gain;  had  it  not  been  so  he  would 
never  have  chosen  a  career  which  at  its  best  was  despised  and  odious  {ibid.) ; 
but  we  have  no  right  to  conclude  .  .  .  that,  because  a  publican,  therefore  he 
was  an  immoral  man.  Character  cannot  always  be  safely  inferred  from  trade, 
and  no  proof  can  be  adduced  to  show  that  he  was  partaker  in  the  sins  of  many 
of  his  companions  (C.  E.  B.  Reed,  M.A.). 

6.  His  after  career  and  death. — Of  the   exact   share   which   fell   to  him   in 

2 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      introduction. 

preaching  the  gospel,  we  have  nothing  whatever  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
other  sources  of  information  we  cannot  trust.  Eusebius  {ff.  E.,  iii.  24)  mentions 
that  after  our  Lord's  ascension  Matthew  preached  in  Judfea  (some  add  for  fifteen 
years,  Clem.,  Strom.,  vi.),  and  then  went  to  foreign  nations.  To  the  lot  of 
Matthew  it  fell  to  visit  Ethiopia,  says  Socrates  Scholasticus  (II.  E.,  i.  19; 
Ruflf.,  H.  E.,  X.  9),  But  Ambrose  says  that  God  opened  to  him  the  country  of 
the  Persians  (In.  Ps.,  45) ;  Isidore,  the  Macedonians  (Isidore  Hisp.,  de  Sand.,  77) ; 
and  others,  the  Parthians,  the  Modes,  the  Persians  of  the  Euphrates.  Nothing 
whatever  is  really  known  (Archbishop  Wm.  Thomson).  He  appears  to  have  lived 
an  ascetic  life  (chap.  ix.  15  is  illustrated  by  this  fact),  sustaining  himself  on  nuts, 
berries,  and  vegetables  (M.  Bods,  D.D.).  Heracleon,  the  disciple  of  Valentinus 
(cited  by  Clemens  Alex.,  Strom.,  iv.  9),  describes  him  as  dying  a  natural  death, 
which  Clement,  Origen,  and  TertuUian  seem  to  accept ;  the  tradition  that  he 
died  a  martyr,  be  it  true  or  false,  came  in  afterwards.  Niceph.,  H.  E.y  ii.  41 
(Archbishop  Wm.  Thomson). 

II.  The  Gospel — 1.  Its  Authorship. — It  has  been  rightly  urged  that  the  very 
obscurity  of  St.  Matthew's  name  and  the  odium  attached  to  his  calling,  made  it 
antecedently  improbable  that  a  later  pseudonymous  writer  would  have  chosen 
him  as  the  Apostle  on  whom  to  afiiliate  a  book  which  he  wished  to  invest  with 
a  counterfeit  authority.  On  the  other  hand,  assuming  his  authorship  as  a 
hypothesis  calling  for  examination,  there  are  many  coincidences  which,  at  least 
render  it  probable.  His  occupation  as  a  publican  must  have  involved  a  certain 
clerkly  culture  which  would  make  him,  as  it  were,  the  scholar  of  the  company 
of  the  Twelve,  acquainted,  as  his  calling  required  him  to  be,  with  Greek  as  well 
as  Aramaic,  familiar  with  pen  and  paper.  Then,  or  at  a  later  date,  or  growing 
out  of  that  culture,  he  must  have  acquired  that  familiarity  with  the  writings  of 
the  Old  Testament  which  makes  his  Gospel  almost  a  manual  of  Messianic 
prophecy  (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.).  Although  not  expressly  ascribed  to  Matthew 
until  towards  the  close  of  the  second  century,  our  First  Gospel  was  quoted  and 
used  in  the  sub-apostolic  age  (a.d.  90-120),  and  was  never  ascribed  to  any  one 
else  than  the  Apostle  whose  name  it  bears  (M.  Bods,  D.D.). 

2.  Have  we  the  original  Gospel  ? — The  unhesitating  use  of  the  First  Gospel  by 
the  early  church  as  the  work  of  Matthew  is  somewhat  complicated  by  the 
equally  constant  tradition  that  Matthew  wrote  in  Hebrew  (i.e.  Aramaic). 
Eusebius  (H.  E.,  iii.  39),  quotes  Papias,  a  Phrygian  bishop,  who  died  in  a.d.  164, 
as  giving  a  circumstantial  account  of  the  work  of  Matthew : — "  Matthew," 
says  Papias,  *' compiled  the  oracles  (Aoyta)  in  the  Hebrew  dialect,  and  each 
interpreted  them  as  he  was  able."  In  this  account  he  is  followed  by  Irenseus, 
who  adds  that  the  Gospel  was  composed  while  Peter  and  Paul  were  preaching  in 
Rome.  But  an  examination  of  our  Gospel  discloses  that  our  Greek  Gospel  is 
not  a  translation.  This  is  proved,  not  by  the  plays  of  words  (xxi.  41,  vi.  16, 
xxiv.  30),  nor  by  the  interpretation  of  Hebrew  words  and  sayings  (i.  23, 
xxvii.  33,  46),  for  these  a  translator,  anxious  to  retain  significant  words  of  the 
original,  might  have  interpolated  ;  but  explanations  of  customs  peculiar  to 
.Palestine  (xxvii.  15,  xxviii.  15,  xxii.  23),  and  which  seem  to  be  a  substantive 

3 


INTKODUCTION.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


part  of  the  narrative,  indicate  that  the  Gospel  was  intended  to  be  read  where 
Jewish  customs  were  not  known  ;  and,  above  all,  a  comparison  of  the  passages 
in  which  this  Gospel  coincides  with  Mark  and  Luke  discloses  that  its  author  was 
using  a  Greek  source.  That  our  Gospel  is  not  a  translation  but  an  original  may- 
be accepted  as  one  of  the  ascertained  conclusions  of  criticism.  Is  it  possible  to 
reconcile  this  conclusion  with  the  constant  tradition  regarding  the  Aramaic 
original  ?  A  very  common  opinion  is  that  Papias  was  mistaken.  He  may  have 
seen  or  heard  of  a  translation  of  this  Gospel  into  Aramaic,  which  he  took  for  the 
original  (so  Luther  and  Tischendorf ).  Or  there  may  have  been  neither  original 
nor  translation  of  this  Gospel  in  Aramaic,  and  the  only  Gospel  of  Matthew 
is  the  Greek  Gospel  we  now  have.  Professor  Salmon  (Intro,  to  N.  T.,  202) 
puts  the  alternative  rigorously :  "  We  must  choose  between  the  two  hypotheses, 
a  Greek  original  of  St.  Matthew,  or  a  lost  Hebrew  original  with  a  translation 
by  an  unknown  author.  Or  rather,  since  our  Greek  Gospel  bears  marks  of  not 
being  a  mere  translation,  we  must  choose  between  the  hypotheses  that  we  have 
in  the  Greek  the  Gospel  as  written  by  Matthew  himself,  or  the  Gospel  as  written 
by  an  unknown  writer  who  used  as  his  principal  materials  an  Aramaic  writing 
by  St.  Matthew  which  has  now  perished."  Dr.  Salmon  himself  adopts  the 
former  alternative ;  but  Dr.  Westcott  {Intro,  to  Study  of  Gospels ,  224)  accepts 
the  latter.  He  believes  in  a  Hebrew  original  from  the  hand  of  Matthew,  and 
a  subsequent  Greek  edition,  a  representative  rather  than  a  translation  of  the 
original,  by  an  unknown  hand.  Godet  (JSf.  T.  Studies,  20)  is  more  definite,  and 
affirms  that  Papias  meant  that  Matthew  compiled  in  Aramaic  the  Discourses 
of  the  Lord,  and  that  a  Httle  later  some  coadjutor  of  Matthew,  who  had  helped 
him  in  evangelising,  translated  these  discourses  into  Greek  and  added  material 
from  the  current  tradition,  so  as  to  complete  an  evangelical  narrative.  Nichol- 
son (Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews),  whose  researches  have  not  received  the 
attention  they  deserve,  maintains  that  our  Gospel,  though  evidently  not  a 
translation  of  the  "  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,"  is  from  the  same  hand, 
and  that  the  hand  of  Matthew.  Others,  though  they  do  not  identify  Matthew's 
Aramaic  with  the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,  accept  Papias'  statement, 
that  Matthew  did  write  an  Aramaic  scripture  of  some  kind ;  and  that,  as  it 
attained  an  increasing  circulation  among  those  who  were  more  familiar  with 
Greek  than  with  Aramaic,  Matthew  himself  met  this  demand  for  a  Greek 
Gospel  by  composing  what  is  now  in  our  hands,  and  what  from  the  second 
century  has  been  cited  under  his  name  (M.  Hods,  D.D.).  The  following 
theory  is  advanced  as  a  natural  way  of  explaining  the  facts.  It  can  hardly  be 
doubted  that  St.  Matthew  in  the  first  instance  composed  a  Gospel  for  the  use  of 
the  Palestinian  Jews.  But  on  the  disruption  of  the  Jewish  polity  Aramaic 
would  cease  to  be  intelligible  to  many,  and  the  demand  would  come  for  a  Greek 
version  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Matthew.  How  would  this  demand  be 
met?  Either  Matthew  himself,  or  else  some  faithful  scribe,  would  use  the 
Hebrew  Gospel  as  the  basis  of  a  Greek  version.  Many  of  the  familiar  parables 
and  sayings  of  Jesus,  which  were  orally  afloat  in  all  the  churches,  he  would  (for 
the  sake  of  old  association)  incorporate  with  little  alteration,  but  he  would 
preserve  throughout  the  plan  of  the  original,  and,  in  passages  where  the 
4 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    introduction. 


special  teaching  of  this  Gospel  came  in,  the  version  would  be  a  close  rendering 
of  the  Aramaic.  This  theory  explains  the  verbal  coincidence  of  some  parts  of 
St.  Matthew's  Gospel  with  the  parallel  synoptic  passages,  and  accounts  for 
the  facts  in  regard  to  the  quotations.  Such  a  version,  especially  if  made  by 
St.  Matthew  himself,  would  indeed  be  rather  an  original  work  than  a  translation, 
and  would  speedily  in  either  case  acquire  the  authority  of  the  original  Aramaic. 
Accordingly  we  find  that  even  those  writers  who  speak  of  the  Hebrew  Gospel 
themselves  quote  from  the  Greek  version  as  authoritative  {A.  Carr,  M.A.). 

3.  Its  date. — We  have  no  doubt  that  it  was  near  the  period  of  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  in  a.d.  70,  and  yet  most  certainly  before  that  event,  that  Matthew 
published  his  Gospel  {J.  Morison,  D.D.). 

4.  Its  purpose  and  plan. — It  was  written  for  Jewish  readers,  and  aims  at 
exhibiting  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  of  prophecy,  the  King  of  Israel  who  is  come  to 
set  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Much  prominence  is,  therefore,  given  to  fulfil- 
ments of  Old  Testament  predictions.  The  genealogy  is  given  to  show  that  Jesus 
is  a  son  of  David,  the  story  of  the  visit  of  the  Magi  is  told  because  they  hail 
Him  as  King  of  the  Jews  {J.  Macpherson^  M.A.).  Matthew's  Gospel  is  not 
a  history,  in  our  modern  scientific  acceptation  of  the  term ;  and  hence  it  would 
be  in  vain  and  unfair  to  attempt  to  trace  in  it  a  precise  chronological  conca- 
tenation of  events,  or  a  full  display  of  moral  and  social  causes  and  effects. 
Neither  is  it  an  exhaustive  biography.  Neither  is  it  a  set  of  historical  or 
biographical  annals.  It  is  not  even  a  formal  memoir.  It  is  simply  memorials, 
or,  if  it  be  preferred,  memoirs,  i.e.  as  Johnson  defines  the  phrase,  "  accounts  of 
transactions  familiarly  written,"  and  such  accounts  as  leave  abundant  scope  for 
any  number  of  corresponding  or  supplementary  memoirs  or  memorials  by  "  other 
hands  "  (/.  Morison,  D.D.). 

5.  Its  place. — It  is  fittingly  placed  next  to  the  Old  Testament,  not  because  it 
was  the  earliest  contribution  to  the  New — for  it  was  not  that — but  because  it 
resumes  and  completes  each  strand  of  the  former  revelation.  The  long  and 
chequered  history  related  in  the  Old  Testament  finds  its  consummation  and 
significance  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  .  .  .  The  motto  of  the  life  of  Jesus  as  read  and 
rendered  by  Matthew  is,  "  I  am  come  to  fulfil,"  chap.  v.  17  (if.  Dods,  D.D.). 

6.  Its  title. — As  in  the  inscription  to  all  the  other  Gospels,  so  in  this  also,  the 
expression  "  according  to  Matthew,"  calls  attention  to  the  important  fact,  that, 
notwithstanding  the  human  diversity  appearing  in  the  Gospels,  they  form  but 
one  Divine  message  of  salvation  {J.  P,  Lange^  D.D.), 


CHAPTER  I. 

CRITICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1 . — A  title,  and  might  be  appropriately  rendered,  genealogy  of  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of 
David,  Son  of  Abraham  (Morison).  Eefers,  strictly  speaking,  not  to  the  whole  Gospel  of 
St.  Matthew,  but  to  the  genealogical  table  in  vers.  2-17.  The  book  of  the  generation. — 
An  essentially  Hebrew  formula.  See  Gen.  v.  1,  x.  1,  xi.  10.  The  LXX.  translate  Gen.  v.  1 
by  the  phrase  used  here,  pi^Xos  yeuia-eus.  The  pedigree  extracted  from  the  public  archives, 
which  were  carefully  preserved  and  placed  under  the  special  care  of  the  Sanhedrin.  The 
genealogy,  an  answer  to  the  question  which  would  be  asked  by  every  Jew  of  any  one  who 
claimed  to  be  the  Messiah,  "  Is  he  of  the  house  of  David  ? "  for  by  no  name  was  the  Messiah 
more  frequently  spoken  of  by  Jews  and  by  foreigners,  and  designated  in  the  Talmud, 
than  by  that  of  the  son  of  David  (Can').  See  Matt.  xv.  22,  xx.  30,  xxi.  9,  xxii.  42.  Son  of 
David. — See  above.  Son  of  Abraham. — Not  a  specially  Messianic  title.  A  brother  to  all.  See 
Gen.  xxii.  18 ;  Luke  xix.  9 ;  Heb.  ii.  16.     Of.  also  Gal.  iii.  16. 

The  Genealogies  in  St.  Matthew's  and  St.  Luke's  Gospels. 

1.  Both  trace  Joseph's  descent.  But  see  on  ver.  16.  2.  St.  Matthew  proves  that  Jesus  is 
the  Son  of  David  and  of  Abraham ;  St.  Luke,  true  to  the  scope  of  his  Gospel,  traces  the 
pedigree  from  the  common  father  of  Jew  and  Gentile.  3.  St.  Matthew  traces  the  royal 
succession,  St.  Luke  the  family  lineage.  This  accounts  for  many  variations  in  names. 
4.  This  genealogy  descends  from  father  to  son,  and  is,  therefore,  probably  the  most  exact 
transcript  of  the  original  document.  St.  Luke  ascends  from  son  to  father.  5.  St.  Matthew 
also  differs  from  St.  Luke  in  naming  women  in  the  genealogy  ( Carr).  The  Omissions. — 
The  true  explanation  appears  to  be,  that  all  the  individuals  omitted  by  the  Evangelist 
had,  in  one  respect  or  another,  no  claim  to  be  regarded  as  separate  and  distinct  links  in 
the  theocratic  chain  {La7ige). 

Ver.  3.  Thamar. — It  was  enough  that  the  women  were  historically  notable.  It  would 
appear,  from  the  language  of  the  Talmud,  as  if  the  Jews  looked  on  Thamar' s  strange  and,  to 
us,  revolting  history  with  quite  other  feelings.  To  them  she  was  as  one  who,  at  the  risk  of 
shame  and  it  might  be  death,  had  preserved  the  line  of  Judah  from  destruction,  and 
*'  therefore  was  counted  worthy  to  be  the  mother  of  kings  and  prophets  "  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  5.  Salmon  .  .  .  Rachab  (Eahab). — The  Old  Testament  records  are  silent  as  to  the 
marriage  of  Salmon  with  the  "harlot"  of  Jericho.  Hence  Matthew  must  have  had  access  to 
other  genealogical  records  or  sources  of  information. 

Ver.  8.  Joram  begat  Ozias  (Uzziah). — Three  omissions,  viz.  Ahaziah,  Joash,  Amaziah. 
Motive  apparently  simply  the  desire  to  bring  the  names  in  each  period  into  which  the 
genealogy  is  divided  to  the  arbitrary  standard  of  fourteen.  "A  begat  B"  not  to  be  taken 
literally,  but  simply  as  an  expression  of  the  fact  of  succession,  with  or  without  intermediate 
links  (ibid.). 

Ver.  11.  Carried  away. — Literally,  "of  their  migration,"  for  the  Jews  avoided  the  word 
"  captivity  "  as  too  bitter  a  recollection,  and  our  Evangelist  studiously  respects  the  national 
feeling  (Brown). 

Ver.  12.  Jechonias — Jechonias  the  Second,  son  of  Jechonias  the  First.  Jehoiachin  the  son 
of  Jehoiakim  (Morison)  begat  Salathiel  (Shealtiel).  Cf.  Jer.  xxii.  30  (Coniah  =  Jehoiachin), 
Luke  iii.  27 ;  1  Chron.  iii.  17-19.  A  cluster  of  genealogical  diflSculties. .  Various  solutions 
suggested.  Dr.  Plumptre  says  :  "  The  most  probable  solution  is  that  Assir  was  the  only  son 
of  Jeconiah,  and  died  without  issue  before  his  father ;  that  the  line  of  Solomon  thus  came 


CHAP.  I.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


to  an  end,  and  that  the  son  of  Neri,  a  descendant  of  Nathan,  another  son  of  David  (2  Sam. 
V.  14  ;  1  Chron.  iii.  5 ;  Luke  iii.  27,  31)  took  their  place  in  the  succession,  and  was  reckoned, 
as  by  adoption,  as  the  son  of  the  last  survivor  of  the  other  line.  The  practice  is,  it  may 
be  noted,  analogous  to  that  which  prevails  among  Indian  princes  and  in  other  Eastern 
nations." 

Ver.  13.  Zorobabel  begat  Abiud. — None  of  the  names  that  come  after  that  of  Zerubbabel 
are  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  They  were  doubtless  taken  from  the  public 
or  family  registers,  which  the  Jews  carefully  kept,  and  their  accuracy  was  never  challenged. 
The  royal  family  had  got  sadly  reduced  and  crushed,  indeed,  into  the  deepest  poverty. 
The  Messiah,  when  He  appeared,  was  like  a  rod,  or  shoot,  or  sucker  from  a  lowly  "  stump  " — 
Isa.  xi.  1  {Brown  and  Morison). 

Ver.  16.  Jacob  begat  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary. — Joseph,  the  legal  father,  of  our  Lord. 
In  Luke,  Joseph  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Heli,  and  from  Heli  the  line  of  ancestry  is  traced 
upward  to  Nathan,  son  of  David,  instead  of  to  Solomon.  Thus  an  apparent  discrepancy. 
Several  methods  of  conciliation.  Dr.  Morison  favours  a  view  which  commanded  the 
suflErages  of  the  great  body  of  the  Fathers.  Set  forth  in  a  monograph  by  Julius  Africanus 
(third  century).  He  supposes  that  Jacob  and  Heli  were  half-brothers.  Their  respective 
fathers,  Matthan  and  Melchi,  married  successively  the  same  woman,  named  Estha.  Matihan, 
having  first  married  her,  begat  Jacob.  Having  died,  his  widow  was  married  by  Melchi,  and 
Heli  was  born.  Heli  married,  but  died  without  issue  ;  and  his  brother,  Jacob,  married  the 
widow,  and  had  by  her  a  son,  Joseph,  who  was  truly  his  own  son  by  nature,  but  also  the  son 
of  Heli  by  law.  Africanus  says  that  this  theory  was  in  accordance  with  a  tradition  which 
was  handed  down  in  the  line  of  the  Saviour's  relatives,  and  that  it  was  in  all  respects  a 
satisfactory  solution  of  the  apparent  difficulty.  Dr.  Morison  adds.  "  We  have  no  doubt,  at 
the  same  time,  t  at  Mary  was  a  near  relative  of  Joseph,  and  a  royal  heiress,  so  that  Joseph's 
lineage  was  in  reality,  in  its  essential  elements,  her  lineage."  Christ. — Here,  as  in  ver.  1,  a 
proper  name,  not  an  appellative — the  Christ  {Morison). 

Ver.  17.  Fourteen  generations. — la  the  arrangement  and  division  of  the  genealogical  tree 
Matthew  was  undoubtedly  influenced  by  the  Old  Testament  symbolism  of  numbers  {Lavge). 
Partitioned  for  facility  of  remembrance.  There  is  a  natural  basis  for  the  trichotomy.  The 
first  fourteen  comprises  the  age  of  the  patriarchs  and  judges,  the  spring-time  of  the  Jewish 
people  The  second  comprises  the  age  of  the  kings,  the  summer  season  and  the  autumn  of 
the  nation.  The  third  comprises  the  period  of  Jewish  decadence,  the  winter -time  of  their 
political  existence  {Morison).  Dr.  Morison  gives  the  three  fourteens  as  follows :  1.  From 
Abraham  to  David.  2.  From  Solomon  to  Jechonias  I.  3.  From  Jechonias  II.  to  Jesus. 
Christ  =  t?te  Christ. 

Ver.  18.  Espoused  =  betrothed. — Among  the  Jews  the  betrothal  took  place  a  year  before 
marriage,  and  during  the  interval  the  betrothed  maiden  remained  with  her  own  family.  But 
from  the  day  of  betrothal  the  pair  were  regarded  as  man  and  wife  {Carr). 

Ver.  19.  A  just  man. — Two  courses  were  open  to  him.  He  could  either  summon  her  before 
the  law-courts  to  be  judicially  condemned  and  punished,  or  he  could  put  her  away  by  a  bill 
of  divorcement  before  witnesses,  but  without  assigning  cause.  He  resolved  to  take  the  more 
merciful  course,  which  was  also  the  more  "  just."  Dr.  Brown  says,  "  That  some  communica- 
tion had  passed  between  him  and  his  betrothed,  directly  or  indirectly,  on  the  subject,  after 
she  returned  from  her  three  months'  visit  to  Elizabeth,  can  hardly  be  doubted.  Nor  does 
the  purpose  to  divorce  her  necessarily  imply  disbelief  on  Joseph's  part  of  the  explanation 
given  him.  Even  supposing  him  to  have  yielded  to  it  some  reverential  assent — and  the 
Evangelist  seems  to  convey  as  much  by  ascribing  the  proposal  to  screen  her  to  the  justice  of 
his  character— he  might  think  it  altogether  unsuitable  and  incongruous  in  such  circumstances 
to  follow  out  the  marriage." 

Ver.  22.  Fulfilled. — The  Evangelists  frequently  quote  prophecies,  the  context  of  which 
must,  at  the  time  that  they  were  first  delivered,  have  been  interpreted  of  things  then  present, 
and  that,  too,  according  to  the  Divine  intention.  But  the  same  Divine  intention,  looking 
forward  to  remote  futurity,  so  framed  the  language  of  prophecy  that  it  should  apply  with 
greater  specialty  to  the  times  of  the  Messiah  {Bcngel). 

Ver.  23.  A  virgin. — R.V.,  tlie  virgin,  a  particular  virgin.  The  prophecy  (Isa,  vii.)  is 
distinctly  Messianic,  but  the  sign  in  Isaiah  is  not  concerned  with  the  man7ier  of  the  child's 
birth,  but  with  the  name  and  the  deliverance  which  should  happen  in  his  infancy.  Therefore 
the  weight  of  the  reference  is  to  the  name  "  Emmanuel "  and  to  the  true  Son  of  David, 
whose  birth  was  the  sign  of  His  people's  deliverance  {Carr). 

Ver.  25.  Firstborn.— The  oldest  MSS.  omit  "  firstborn."  So  R.V.  Scripture  supplies  no 
data  for  any  decision  as  to  whether  Mary  had  or  had  not  children  besides  oiG:  blessed  Lord, 
nor  does  any  tradition  that  can  really  be  called  primitive  {Plwnj/tre), 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.        cha1».  i. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—17. 

A  distinguished  lineage. — A  leading  characteristic  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  is 
that  it  presents  Christ  to  us  as  a  "  sign."  The  word  "  behold,"  in  fact,  in  one 
form  or  another,  is  constantly  to  be  found  in  its  pages  ;  more  often,  in  proportion, 
than  in  any  of  the  others.  These  opening  verses  of  the  Gospel  are  found  to 
conform  to  this  rule.  They  set  before  us  what  we  are  first  to  *'  look"  at  in  the 
.>.tory  it  tells  us.  From  what  lineage,  from  what  family,  did  the  Man  it  speaks 
about  spring?  From  a  lineage  distinguished — 1.  As  being  remarkahly  extended. 
2.  Singularly  select.     3.  Highly  significant. 

I.  Remarkably  extended. — Its  mere  lengthy  to  begin  with,  is  obviously  un- 
usual. Not  many  men  can  go  back  through  a  list  of  progenitors  containing 
some  fifty  names,  and  covering  some  fifteen  hundred  years.  This  lergth  strikes 
us  the  more  also  in  this  case  because  it  is  given  "  at  length,"  as  it  were,  name 
after  name  being  reported  to  us  nearly  all  the  way  through.  Also,  because  it  is 
broken  up  into  three  difierent  groups.  It  is  like  having  to  clamber  up  three  flights 
of  stairs  to  the  top  of  a  tower.  Alike,  the  mind  and  the  limbs  are  impressed  by 
the  task.  Also,  the  many  vicissitudes  thus  pointed  to  are  of  a  very  unusual 
description.  How  many  and  great  were  those  connected  with  the  first  of  these 
groups — even  all  those  of  which  we  read  between  the  call  o*  Abraham  and  the 
going  down  into  Egypt,  and  between  the  going  down  into  Egypt  and  the 
settlement  in  Canaan,  and  between  the  settlement  in  Canaan  and  the  final 
establishment  of  the  kingdom  !  Also,  how  many  those  found  in  the  long  but 
much  chequered  splendours  of  the  subsequent  group  !  And  how  many,  again,  in 
the  long  and  trying  obscurity  of  the  third  !  So  long  a  genealogy  of  a  clearly 
traceable  kind  is  in  any  case  a  remarkable  thing.  It  is  still  more  remarkable 
in  a  line  passing  through  such  hazards  as  these. 

II.  Singularly  select. — The  names  inserted  in  this  genealogy  are  such  as  to 
teach  us  this,  on  the  one  hand.  Many  of  them  at  once  point  to  others  set 
aside  for  their  sakes.  Thus  it  is,  e.g.,  that  the  name  of  Isaac  (ver.  2)  points  us 
to  Ishmael,  and  the  name  of  Jacob  {ibid.)  to  Esau,  and  the  name  of  Judah  (ibid.) 
to  those  of  his  brethren  (Gen.  xxix.  35),  and  the  name  of  David  (ver.  6)  to  those 
of  his  brethren  (1  Sam.  xvi.),  and  the  name  of  Solomon  in  like  manner  (1  Chron. 
xxviii.  5).  This  kind  of  principle,  in  fact,  is  almost  pointed  to  all  the  way 
through.  First  one  nation,  then  one  tribe,  then  one  family,  then  one  branch  of 
it  only.  With  equal  emphasis,  on  the  other  hand,  even  if  with  some  obscurity 
also,  the  names  omitted  teach  much  the  same  thing.  We  cannot  exactly  say, 
e.g.  why  the  names  of  three  different  kings  of  Judah,  viz.  those  of  Ahaziah, 
Joash,  and  Amaziah,  are  left  out  of  this  list.  But  the  fact  that,  though  they 
were  notoriously  in  the  line  which  is  here  being  traced,  they  were  thus  de- 
liberately not  reckoned  as  of  it,  points  our  thoughts  the  same  way.  It 
shows,  evidently,  that  things  were  not  taken  here  just  as  they  came,  but  that  there 
was  a  choice,  rather,  and  that  a  very  decided  choice,  though  we  may  not  know 
why.  And  it  shows,  therefore,  that  here  also  this  genealogy  of  Jesus  was  a 
thing  much  by  itself. 

III.  Highly  significant. — Highly  significant,  in  the  first  instance,  because  of 
its  m,ost  promineiit  names.  A  comparison  of  vers.  1,  6,  and  17,  shows  these  names 
to  be  those  of  Abraham  and  David.  The  Old  Testament  story  also  shows  us  in 
what  special  way  it  was  that  both  these  men  had  surpassed  all  other  men  in  the 
past,  viz.  in  the  degree  of  their  promised  intimacy  with  the  coming  Hope  of  the 
world.  (See  Gen.  xxii.  18  ;  Ps.  Ixxii.,  Ixxxix.)  We  see,  therefore,  what  this 
genealogy  comes  to  on  the  question  of  names.  It  connects  this  "  Jesus  "  with 
those  two  men  who  were  to  be  the  principal  ancestors  of  the  Christ.  Hardly 
less  significant  is  it,  next,  in  the  question  of  epochs.      Two  of  these  are  seen 

9 


CHAP.  I.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


prominent  in  the  catalogue  before  us.  The  epoch  of  the  setting  up  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  under  "  David  the  king  "  (ver.  6)  is  one.  The  epoch  of  its 
overthrow  but  not  total  obliteration  at  the  *'  carrying  away  to  Babylon " 
(vers.  11,  12,  17)  is  the  other.  We  see,  therefore,  on  this  point  also  to  what 
this  genealogy  comes.  It  is  a  description,  first,  of  the  setting  up  of  a  particular 
kingdom  or  dynasty ;  of  the  way  in  which  that  kingdom  was  prepared  for  by 
one  set  of  "  fourteen  generations  " ;  and  of  the  way  in  which  it  was  preserved 
afterwards  during  another  fourteen.  It  is  a  description,  next,  of  the  overthrow 
of  that  kingdom  and  yet  of  the  preservation  of  the  line  of  its  kings  for  other 
"fourteen  generations."  In  other  words,  it  shows  of  this  "  Jesus "  that  He 
belonged  to  the  family  which  was  still  in  possession  of  a  claim  to  that  throne. 
Lastly,  this  genealogy  is  hardly  less  significant  as  to  the  question  of  time. 
When  time  is  measured,  as  the  Evangelist  measures  it  here,  how  critical 
and  hopeful  is  the  look  of  the  time  which  closes  this  Hst.  Fourteen  generations 
from  the  first  promise  to  Abraham  to  a  repetition  of  it — to  a  closer  repetition  of 
it — to  David.  Fourteen  generations  from  this  to  its  restoration  to  life,  as  it 
were.  Fourteen  more,  therefore,  to  a  season  of  further  hope  and  remembrance 
— perhaps  of  actual  fulfilment !     Just  then  it  is  that  this  "  Jesus  "  appears. 

Altogether,  therefore,  see  how  fit  a  *'  beginning  "  is  the  beginning  in  hand. 
How  many  significances  it  shows  us,  meeting  together  in  the  appearing  of  this 
Jesus  !  The  hne  by  which  He  has  come,  its  changeful  character,  the  description 
given  of  it,  the  chief  names  it  speaks  of,  the  principal  epochs  it  points  to,  the 
season  it  ends  with,  all  bid  us  fix  our  eyes  upon  Him  as  the  probable  Hope  of  the 
world.  "  Is  not  this  the  Christ  ?  "  So  it  is  that  what  we  read  here,  as  it  were, 
constrains  us  to  ask !  Could  any  beginning,  if  we  think  of  it,  have  well  at- 
tempted any  more  ?  Could  any  beginning,  on  the  other  hand,  have  accomplished 
it  better  ? 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1-17.  The  genealogy  of  our  Lord,  to  be  the  Son  of  David,  and  therefore  a 

— I.  Amongst  those  whom  St.  Matthew  member  of  the  royal  tribe  of  Judah, 

records   as   the    ancestors     of     Christ  not  of  the  priestly  tribe  of  Levi.     Christ 

according  to  the  flesh,  there  are  only  came  as  a  priest,  but  more  particularly 

four  female    names    introduced,   and  He  came  as  a  king, 
they  are  precisely  those  four  which  a  III.  The   genealogies    both    of    St. 

merely  human  historian,     anxious   to  Matthew    and    St.     Luke    trace     the 

throw  in  everything  which  might  seem  descent  of  our  Lord,  not  through  Mary 

to  be  to  the  honour  of  Christ  and  to  His  mother,  but  through  Joseph  His 

omit  everything  which  might  seem  to  reputed  father.     It  cannot  but  appear 

detract  from  that  honour,  would  have  remarkable    that   the   lineage   of   our 

been  desirous  to  have  passed  over  in  Lord  should  be  in  fact  no  lineage  at  all, 

silence.     One  thing  is  clear,  that  there  that,   like   His   type    Melchisedec,  He 

was  no  thought  in  St.  Matthew's  mind  should  be  without  descent.     The  great 

of  throwing  any  false  lights  upon  his  fact  in  the  lineage  of  Christ  is  not  that 

Lord's    history    and     character  ;    and  He  was  the  Son  of  David,  but  that  He 

another  thought  might  have  been  in  was  the  Son  of  man.  —Bishop  Harvey 

his  mind,  which  led  him  to  set  down  Goodwin. 
these  names, — the   wonderful  manner 

in  which  God  brings  His  own  purposes  The     genealogy     of    Christ.— These 

about  by   means  which  seem  at  first  chronicles  have  a  mission.     As  no  star 

sight  to  be  as  little  conducive  to  them  is    useless    in    the    heavens,    and    as 

as  possible.  every  atom  has  been  created  for  a  pur- 

II.  Jesus  is  declared  by  St.  Matthew  pose,  so  God  would  not  devote  seventeen 
10 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.        chap.  i. 


verses  of  His  book  to  a  pedigree,  with-  away.      Men    depart,    man    remains, 

out  a  purpose.      We  learn  from  this  The  world  can   do   without  us.     This 

genealogy  : —  fact  serves — 1.  To  reprove  worldliness. 

I.  God's  fidelity  to  His  promise. —  2.  To  inculcate  humility. 

God  had  promised  Abraham  that  in  II.  The  physical  connexion  of 
him  should  all  the  families  of  the  earth  the  race. — Each  of  these  genera- 
be  blessed,  and  here  we  read  of  its  tions  springs  from  the  preceding  one 
fulfilment.  as    grain   from     grain.       This    unity 

II.  The  eternal  God  never  works  — 1.  Demands  the  spirit  of  brotherhood. 
hurriedly. — Scientists  say  that  the  2.  Helps  to  explain  the  transmission 
earth  existed  ten  millions  of  years  of  moral  character.  3.  Enables  each 
before   any    life   came   into   existence  generation  to  help  its  successors. 

upon  it.     And  God  took  two  thousand         III.  The   moral    difference    of  the 

years  before  He  gave  His  Son  to  the  race. — In  this  list  we  recognise  some 

world.  men    of    distinguished    goodness   and 

III.  The  human  race  is  very  closely  some  pre-eminent  for  wickedness. 
inter-related. — Mankind  is  one  family,  There  is  a  power  lodged  in  each  man's 
and  every  war  that  occurs  is  a  family  bosom  to  prevent  the  combined  in- 
strife.  fluence   of   all  past   generations   from 

TV.  The    universality  of  death. —  moulding  his  character. 
Forty-two  generations  pass  before  us,         IV.  The  partial  history  of  the  race, 

and  sink  into  the  grave.  — Of  these  forty  generations  we  have 

Y.  The  all-inclusiveness  of  Christ's  for  the  most  but  little  more  than  the 

mission. — Christ  touched   all   sorts  of  mention  of  the  name  of  an  individual 

people  in  this  pedigree,  in  order  that  of  each.     Who  knows  the  history  of 

He  might  save  all  sorts  of  people.  one  of  a  generation  ? 

VI.  The  marvellous  way  in  which         V.  The  common  Redeemer  of  the 

God  overrules  evil  in  order  to  give  due  race. — God  redeems  man  by  man. — I). 

prominence  to  Christ. — Who  but  God  Thomas,  D.D. 
could  have  produced  a  perfect  man  out 

of  such  a  pedigree  ? — J.  Ossian  Davies.  Ver.   17.    The  Divine  regulation  of 

time. — 1.  Though  not  one  of  us  can  be 

The  genealogical  table — its  moral  sug-  in  the  family  line  of  Christ,  yet  all  may 

gestions. — I.  The  solemn  succession  of  be  spiritually  related  to  Him.     2.  The 

the  race. — The  representatives  of  forty  tumultuous  generations  bring  the  peace- 

generations  appear  before  us  and  pass  ful  Christ. — Joseph  Parher,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  18—25. 

A  mysterious  birth. — After  the  lineage  of  Jesus  we  naturally  come  to  His 
birth.  Whence  and  when  He  came  we  have  seen,  viz.  from  just  that  direction 
and  at  just  such  a  time  as  were  fitting  in  the  case  of  one  who  was  spoken  of  as 
the  Christ.  What  we  ask  next  is  as  to  the  manner  and  circumstances  of  His 
appearance.  Looked  at  from  the  same  point  of  view,  was  there  anything 
noteworthy  about  these?  The  answer  is  given  us  here.  The  *' birth  of  Jesus 
Christ "  was  on  such  *'  wise  "  as  to  be  well  worthy  of  note.  It  was  so,  first, 
on  account  of  the  perplexities  by  which  it  was  marked.  It  was  so,  next,  on 
account  of  the  light  by  which  these  perplexities  were  removed. 

I.  The  perplexities  of  the  case. — On  these  mysteries  it  does  not  become  us  to 
say  very  much ;  nor  is  it  necessary,  in  fact.  The  Evangelist  explains  their 
origin  and  nature  in  a  few  serious  words.  A  certain  man  named  Joseph 
belonging  to  that  "house  and  lineage  of  David"  (Luke  ii.  4)  of  which  the 
pre«eding  verses  tell  us  so  much,  was  betrothed  to  a  maiden  named  Mary,  of 
the  same  line  with  himself,  but  had  not  as  yet  formally  taken  her  as  his  wife. 

u 


CHAP.  I.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


Whilst  thinking  of  doing  so  he  hears  that  about  her  which  fills  him  with  doubt. 
Ought  he  to  do  what  he  was  thinking  of  doing?  In  that  doubt  of  his  very- 
much  is  implied.  Much  is  implied  about  he7\  Had  the  report  in  question  been 
about  another  than  her,  Joseph  would  probably  not  have  doubted  at  all.  In 
such  a  quarter  he  would  never  have  thought  of  marriage  again.  But  he  cannot 
come  all  at  once  to  this  conclusion  about  her.  Could  such  an  one  as  he  knew  her 
to  be  have  been  guilty  of  evil  ?  Could  she  be  saying  what  she  knew  to*  be  false  ? 
What  is  he  to  do  ?  What  is  to  be  believed  ?  Much  aiso,  in  that  same  doubt, 
is  implied  about  him.  It  shows  how  exceedingly  anxious  he  is  to  do  what  is 
right !  How  equally  anxious  not  to  be  harsh  !  How  completely  occupied  by 
such  thoughts  !  Before  he  can  settle  them  sleep  is  upon  him ;  even  in  his  sleep 
he  is  thinking  about  them.  Surely,  if  ever,  that  was  in  one  sense  *'  the  sleep  of 
the  just." 

II.  The  light  vouchsafed  in  this  ease. — Much  is  noticeable  about  this.  How 
pertinent  it  was  in  the  first  place  !  How  exactly  meeting  the  case  !  What 
Joseph  wanted  was  light  on  his  path.  What  would  God  have  him  to  do  ?  The 
answer  comes  from  the  lips  of  one  whom  he  recoguises  immediately  as  "an 
angel  of  the  Lord."  The  answer  directs  him  as  to  the  very  thing  he  is  thinking 
about  with  so  much  apprehension  and  doubt.  *'  Joseph,  thou  son  of  David, 
fear  not,  take  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife."  What  authority  can  be  higher? 
What  directions  more  clear  ?  How  ample,  next,  is  this  light  !  Befeiriiig,  as 
we  think  (cf .  Luke  i.  34),  to  what  Mary  has  said,  the  angel  goes  on  to  speak  of 
things  present.  These  really  are  as  you  have  heard  them  to  be.  They  are 
indeed  due  to  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (end  of  verse  20).  Also,  next, 
of  things  future.  In  operating  thus  wonderfully  God  is  providing  for  a 
corresponding  result.  The  child  thus  to  be  born  is  to  be  a  child  by  itself.  The 
very  name  it  is  to  bear  proves  that  this  is  true  of  the  work  it  shall  do.  "  Thou 
shalt  call  His  name  Jesus ;  for  He  it  is  who  shall  save  His  people  from  their 
sins."  Do  not  wonder,  therefore,  to  hear  of  such  an  intervention  with  such  an 
object  in  view.  Lastly,  see  how  well  assured  is  all  the  information  thus  given. 
Do  not  hesitate  to  believe  what  I  have  been  telling  you  (we  suppose  the  angel 
in  the  next  words  to  be  still  speaking  to  Joseph)  as  though  it  were  something 
unheard  of  before.  Because  it  is  unexampled  among  men,  do  not  suppose  that 
it  was  unexpected  by  God.  The  very  contrary  is  the  case.  A  well-known 
scripture  proves  this  to  be  so.  In  that  scripture,  on  the  one  hand,  you  find  the 
very  marvel  in  question  expressly  foretold.  '*  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child, 
and  shall  bring  forth  a  son."  There,  on  the  other  hand,  you  read  of  just  the 
same  results  as  those  of  which  I  told  you  just  now,  even  in  regard  to  the  very 
name  of  the  child  so  to  be  born.  For  what  is  the  name  Emmanuel — that  is, 
God  with  us,  but  another  form  of  the  name  Jesus  (=  Jah-Oshea)  or  God  our 
Saviour  ?  And  what  is  this  difference  in  form  but  a  stronger  proof  of  the  far 
foresight  of  God  ?  Understand,  therefore,  how  fully  and  truly  you  will  be  doing 
as  God  wills  by  doing  as  I  have  bid.  Fear  less  than  ever  to  take  unto  thee 
Mary  thy  wife. 

In  conclusion,  how  beautiful  are  the  pictures  we  see  here  : — 
I.  Of  the  mei'ci/  of  God  to  individuals, — How  exceedingly  trying  in  this  case 
were  the  positions  of  both  Joseph  and  Mary.  How  trying  for  him  to  have  to 
suspect  his  betrothed.  How  trying  for  her  to  be  suspected  by  him.  How 
doubly  trying  for  both  of  them,  being  such  as  they  respectively  were.  Nothing, 
we  may  say,  could  well  exceed  this  bitterness  except  the  sympathy  with  which 
it  was  met.  What  full  appreciation  is  manifested  of  its  nature  and  course  ! 
What  wise  selection  and  adaptation  of  the  means  for  its  cure  1  And  what 
mighty  agencies  we  see  set  in  motion  for  bringing  this  issue  about.  Is  it  not 
a  sight  to  see  this  **  angel  of  the  Lord  "  flying  to  that  one  sleeping  man's  room. 

12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,        chap.  i. 


Sooner  than  allow  him  and  that  other  one  to  continue  disquieted,  sooner  than 
allow  those  who  sincerely  desire  to  know  God's  will  to  remain  in  ignorance  about 
it,  heaven  itself  opens  its  gates  and  sends  its  messenger  down. 

2.  Of  the  mercy  of  God  to  mankind. — How  gracious  is  this  design  of  His  of 
sending  men  a  Saviour  !  How  long  ago  resolved  on  !  How  constantly  cherished  ! 
How  carefully  provided  for  !  How  marvellously  begun  !  All  this  we  see  here 
in  this  brief  interview  between  one  angel  and  man  !  A 11  this,  therefore,  we  are 
to  think  of  as  existing  even  when  it  cannot  be  seen.  This  is  the  full  advantage 
of  having  such  a  "  door  "  opened  to  us  in  "  heaven."  The  light  we  thus  see  is 
not  to  be  regarded  by  us  as  being  merely  lit  for  that  time.  Rather  it  is  an 
evidence  to  us  of  what  has  been  before.  Rather,  also,  a  prediction  of  what  is  to 
be  afterwards.  But  for  this,  as  things  are  in  heaven,  it  would  not  have  been 
there  at  all. 

3.  Of  the  consistency  of  God^s  ways. — Most  exceptional,  no  doubt,  the 
intervention  described  here.  Equally  so  the  circumstances  in  which  it  took 
place.  In  connection  with  so  great  a  perplexity,  after  so  unusual  a  previous 
announcement,  and  with  so  direct  a  bearing  on  the  chief  feature  in  the  whole 
history  of  our  race.  Granted  the  possibility  of  such  interventions,  there  could  be 
no  fitter  time  for  their  use. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  18-25.  The  great  exceptional 
birth. — 1.  The  great  exceptional  birth. 
2.  The  whole  life  of  Christ  the  great 
exception  of  being.  3.  The  direct  con- 
tact of  the  human  with  the  divine. 
Son  of  God.  Son  of  man.  4.  God  has 
never  ceased  to  take  an  interest  in  the 
human  race,  but  only  once  has  He 
inserted  into  it  a  new  man — a  personal, 
redeeming,  transforming  life.  5.  The 
race  had  no  power  in  itself  to  give  birth 
to  a  Saviour.  6.  Men  often  misinter- 
pret their  circumstances.  Joy  has 
often  been  threading  its  way  to  us 
through  the  entangled  lines  of  our 
perplexity.  7.  The  marriage  of  Joseph 
and  Mary  was  useful  as  showing  that 
Mary  was  not  superhuman.  She  was 
an  ordinary  member  of  the  human 
family,  and  so  far  Jesus  Christ  was 
bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh. 
8.  Christ  was  the  only  man  born  with 
a  special  mission  in  relation  to  sins. 
Every  other  man  since  Adam  was  born 
in  sin,  but  He  descended,  as  it  were, 
upon  it  to  destroy  its  power.  9.  This 
was    all    in   fulfilment    of    prophecy. 

(1)  Time     a    great    realising    power; 

(2)  the  announcements  of  one  age  are 
the  men  of  another ;  (3)  all  prophecy, 
good  or  bad,  may  safely  be  left  to  the 
determining  power  of  time ;  (4)  great 


events  may  require  preparation ; 
(5)  wonderful  connection  between  the 
prophecies  and  the  facts.  10.  Joseph's 
being  asleep  when  the  announce- 
ment was  made  to  him  is  suggestive. 

(1)  man's  life  is  not  all  comprised  in 
the  little  bustle  of  his  wakeful  hours ; 

(2)  some  communications  can  be 
efl'ectually  made  only  when  men  are 
most  dissociated  from  the  external 
and  material ;  (3)  in  sleep  man  is 
as  thoroughly  alone  as  he  possibly  can 
be  in  this  world,  and  in  a  certain  sense 
is  more  entirely  in  the  power  of 
God  than  in  any  other  condition. — 
Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

Chrisfs  wonderful  incarnation. — 
We  have  five  evidences  of  Christ's 
wonderful  incarnation.  1.  The  Virgin 
Mary  is  found  with  child  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  2.  Joseph's  perplexity,  who 
being  certain  of  the  real  conception 
of  the  Virgin,  and  uncertain  of  the 
holy  manner  of  it,  is  put  to  a  perplexed 
deliberation  what  to  do.  3.  The  tes- 
timony of  the  ange  J  revealing  the 
truth  to  Joseph.  4.  The  manifested 
accomplishment  of  the  prophecy  of 
Isa.  vii.  14.  5.  The  quiet  faith  and 
ready  obedience  of  Joseph,  after  that  he 
is  now  taught  of  God. — David  Dickson, 

13 


CHAP.  I.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  20.  The  disclosure  to  Joseph. — 
1.  No  less  than  divine  revelation  can 
satisfy  a  soul  in  matters  concerning 
Christ.  2.  The  Lord  can  turn  the 
doubts  and  fears  and  perplexities  of 
His  own  into  an  advantage  unto  them- 
selves and  others  also,  and  into  a 
clearer  manifestation  of  His  own  glory. 
3.  The  Lord  useth  to  show  Himself  in 
a  necessary  nick  of  time.  4.  As  Christ 
is  the  Son  of  David  by  lineal  descent 
through  Mary,  His  mother,  so  also 
by  law  through  Joseph,  His  supposed 
father.  *'  Joseph,  thou  son  of  David." 
5.  The  Lord  in  due  time  cleareth 
the  righteousness  of  such  as  suffer  in 
their  name  and  estimation  for  Christ. 
— David  Dickson. 

Vers.   19,  20.  Man^s  extremity,  God's 
opportunity. — Was    ever    faith    more 
tried  than  the  Virgin's,  when  for  no 
fault  of  hers,  but  in  consequence  of  an 
act    of    God    Himself,    her    conjugal 
relation  to  Joseph  was  allowed  to  be 
all  but  snapped    asunder   by   a    legal 
divorce  ?     Yet  how   glorious   was  the 
reward  with  which  her  constancy  and 
patience  were  at  length  crowned  !    And 
is  not  this  one  of  the  great  laws  of 
God's  procedure  towards  His  believing 
people  ?  Abraham  was  allowed  to  do 
all  but  sacrifice  Isaac  (Gen.  xxii.) ;  the 
last  year  of  the  predicted  Babylonish 
capti\dty  had  arrived  ere  any  signs  of 
deliverance  appeared  (Dan.  ix.    1,  2)  ; 
the  massacre  of  all  the  Jews  in  Persia 
had  all  but  taken  place  (Esther  vii., 
viii.) ;    Peter,   under    Herod   Agrippa, 
was  all  but  brought  forth  for  execution 
(Acts  xii.) ;  Paul  was  all  but  assassi- 
nated by  a  band   of   Jewish  enemies 
(Acts   xxiii.) ;   Luther    all    but   fell   a 
sacrifice    to   the    machinations   of   his 
enemies  (1521)  ;  and  so   in   cases  in- 
numerable since,  of  all  which  it  may 
be  said,  as  in  the  song  of  Moses,  "  the 
Lord    shall    judge    His    people,    and 
repent  Himself  for  His  servants,  wlien 
He   aeeth   that   their    power    is    gone " 
(Deut.  xxxii.  36). — D.  Brown,  D.D. 

Ver.  21.  Salvation  from  sin. — How- 
ever absurd  the  statement  may  appear 

14 


to  one  who  has  not  yet  discovered  the 
fact  for  himself,  the  cause  of  every  man's 
discomfort  is  evil,  moral  evil;  first  of 
all,  evil  in  himself,  and  then,  evil  in 
those   he   loves.      With   this   latter   I 
have  not  now  to  deal.     The  one  cure 
for  any  organism,  is  to  be  set  right — 
to  have  all  its    parts  brought   into 
harmony  with   each  other;    the  one 
comfort   is    to    know    this    cure    in 
process. — 1.  Rightness   alone    is    cure. 
Man's    rightness   is    to   be  free   from 
wrongness,  that  is,  from  sin.     The  evil 
is  in  him  ;  he  must  be  set  free  from  it 
— from  the  sin  he  is,  which  makes  him 
do  the  sin  he  does.     The  sin  he  dwells 
in,  the  sin  he  will  not  come  out  of,  is 
the  sole  ruin  of  a  man.     "  This  is  the 
condemnation,  that  light,"  etc.     2.  Do 
you   desire   me   to    say   how    the   Lord 
will    deliver    you   from     your     sins  ? 
Such    a    question    springs    from    the 
passion  for  the   fruit  of   the   tree   of 
knowledge,  not  the   fruit  of  the  tree 
of  life.     Men  would  understand — they 
do  not  care  to  obey — understand  where 
it  is  impossible  they  should  understand 
save  by  obeying. — Geo.  Macdo7iald,  LL.D. 

Jesus,  the  Saviour  from  sin. — This 
name  given  by  Divine  direction.  Jesus, 
a  Son  of  man,  yet  not  chosen  by  man 
or  self-elected  as  "  Saviour,"  but  the 
elect  of  God  (Isa.  xlii.  1).  He  may, 
therefore,  be  received  with  the  utmost 
confidence.  Jesus  the  Saviour  not 
merely  from  the  consequences  of  sin, 
but  from  the  corrupting,  enthralling, 
damning  evil  itself.  This  "  the  central 
idea  of  Christianity."  To  dream  of 
salvation  in  sin  is  as  absurd  as  to  think 
of  *'  saving  a  man  from  drowning  by 
keeping  him  under  the  water  which  is 
destroying  him  ; "  or  of  "  recovering  a 
man  from  sickness  by  leaving  him 
under  the  malady  which  constitutes  the 
complaint  "  {W.  Jay).  How  does  Jesus 
save  from  sin  ? 

I.  He  has  performed  a  work  by 
which  God,  the  infinitely  righteous 
One,  can  deal  with  men  in  grace.-^ 
Human  salvation  could  only  be  accom- 
plished consistently  with  the  eternal 
law  of   righteousness.    But  see  Rom, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.        chap.  i. 


iii.  21 — 26.  Jesus  is  the  true  mercy- 
seat;  the  meeting-place  of  God  and 
man. 

II.  He  has  shown  us  the  true 
character  of  sin. — Presenting  it  in 
such  a  light  that  we  may  well  loathe 
ourselves  on  account  of  it,  and  wish  to 
be  saved  from  it.  We  are  bound  to 
beheve  that  only  by  His  incarnation 
and  sacrifice  could  human  salvation 
become  possible.  What  a  tremendous 
evil,  then,  sin  must  be  ! 

III.  He  has  set  us  an  example  of 
holy  living,  and  made  a  demand  of 
discipleship. — His  was  a  perfect  obe- 
dience, prompted  by  a  perfect  love. 
His  heart  was  pure;  His  life  in  all 
respects  right  and  good.  We  are  to 
be  His  disciples.  "  Learn  of  Me." 
"  Follow  Me."  Discipleship  means  a 
gradual  approximation  to  His  own 
perfect  character. 

IV.  He  gives  us  His  Holy  Spirit 
to  work  in  us  this  great  salvation.— 
(Titus  iii.  5.)  The  Spirit  represented  as 
"  the  Spirit  of  Christ "  (Eom.  viii.  9). 
Not  only  because  He  proceeds  from 
Christ,  but  also  because  He  works  in 
us  a  resemblance  to  Christ.  Christ 
liveth  in  us  (Gal.  ii.  20),  assimilating 
our  characters  to  His  own. — H.  M. 
Booth. 

"  Jesus r — There  is  more  of  power  to 
sanctify,  elevate,  strengthen,  and  cheer 
in  the  word  "  Jesus  "  (Jehovah- Saviour) 
than  in  all  the  utterances  of  man  smce 
the  world  began. — C.  Hodge,  D.D. 

The  influence  of  holy  character. — 
If  to  live  with  men  diluted  to  the 
millionth  degree  with  the  virtue  of 
the  highest  can  exalt  and  purify  the 
nature,  what  bounds  can  be  set  to 
the  influence  of  Christ  ?  To  live  with 
Socrates — with  unveiled  face — must 
have  made  one  wise ;  with  Aristides, 
just.  Francis  of  Assisi  must  have 
made  one  gentle;  Savonarola,  strong. 
But  to  have  lived  with  Christ  must 
have  made  one  like  Christ,  that  is  to 
say,  a  Christian. — Prof.  H.  Drummond. 

Vers.   22,    23.    Emmanuel— I.  The 


mystery  of  Christ's  wonderful  con- 
ception was  not  altogether  hid  from 
the  church  under  the  Old  Testament. 
2.  It  was  foretold  that  the  child  born 
should  be  God  and  man  in  one  person, 
"  Emmanuel."  3.  It  was  foretold 
that  He  should  be  believed  in,  and 
acknowledged  to  be  God  incarnate. 
"  They  shall  call  His  name  Emmanuel." 
— David  Dickson. 

Emmanuel. — I.  The  reality  of  the 
Incarnation.  —  The  uncontroverted 
mystery  of  "God  manifested  in  the 
flesh." 

II.  The  purpose  thereby  contem- 
plated— viz.  the  laying  open  a  way 
for  our  re-union  with  God. 

III.  The  actual  accomplishment  of 
this  purpose  consequent  upon  our 
reception  of  Christ.  —  Actual  union 
with  God,  a  communion  with  Him  as 
our  Friend,  Father,  and  final  Joy. — 
Henry  Craik. 

Ver.  23.  '*  God  with  ?*s."— The  great 
secret  of  our  Christian  joy  lies  in  this 
fact,  that  we  believe  in  a  present, 
not  in  an  absent  Jesus ;  One  who  is 
Emmanuel — God  with  us.  Try  to  get 
hold  of  that  great  fact  of  our  Lord's 
presence,  and  then  you  will  see  what 
results  flow  from  it. 

I.  That  fact  should  make  us  humble. 
— If  the  Son  of  God,  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords,  chose  to  come  to 
this  earth  in  the  lowliest  manner ;  if 
He  chose  a  manger  to  be  born  in,  a 
workman's  home  to  live  in,  the  com- 
monest of  clothing  and  of  food,  surely 
we,  who  profess  to  be  His  followers, 
have  no  right  to  be  proud. 

II.  The  fact  of  our  Lord's  abiding 
presence  ought  to  make  us  brave. — 
If  God  be  for  us,  and  with  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  1  No  temptation  need  be 
too  strong  to  be  conquered,  no  diffi- 
culty need  be  too  hard  to  be  surmounted, 
by  those  who  know  that  God  is  with 
them — Emmanuel. 

III.  The  fact  of  our  Lord's  abiding 
presence  ought  to  make  us  good  to 
each  other. — Look  on  your  fellow-men, 
and   learn    from    the    incarnation   to 

15 


CHAP.  II.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


respect   man,  eve^y  man,   as   wearing  all  carnal  reasoning.     2.  A  soul  that 

the   flesh   which  Jesus  wears. — H.  J.  knoweth  the  worth  of  Christ  will  be 

Wilmot- Buxton.  glad   according    to    its    power    to  do 

service  to  Him,  or  to  any  of  those  who 

Vers.  24,   25.   JosepKs  obedience. —  belong  unto  Him.     3.  When  faith  be- 

1.  From  the  time  that  a  man  is  sure  of  holdeth  the  majesty  of  Jesus  it  breedeth 

Grod's  word    and   warrant,   he  should  fear  and  respect  in  the  believer  toward 

dispute  no  more,  but  stop  his  ears  to  Him. — David  Dickson. 


CHAPTER  11. 
CRITICAL  NOTES, 


Ver.  1.  Bom. — The  birth  of  Jesus  has  been  assigned  to  "  the  fourth  year  before  the 
common  account  called  Anno  Domini."  But  Rev.  A.  Carr  (Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools) 
says,  "  the  year  3  before  the  Christian  Era  has  been  fired  almost  beyond  a  doubt  as  the 
date  of  the  Nativity."  Bethlehem  of  Judsea,  situate  on  a  limestone  ridge,  six  miles  from 
Jerusalem,  south  by  west.  Called  Bethlehem  of  Judaea,  to  distinguish  it  from  Bethlehem  in 
Zebulon  (Josh.  xix.  15).  A  very  ancient  place.  Called  Ephrathor  Ephratah,  before  it  came 
into  the  possession  of  the  Hebrews  (Gen.  xlviii.  7).  Now  called  Beit-lachm.  The  birth- 
place of  David.  Name  means  literally  "  the  house  of  bread  "  ;  derived  probably  from  fertility 
of  soil.  Herod  the  king. — Called  afterwards,  but  not  in  his  lifetime,  "the  Great."  An 
Idumaan  (Edomite)  who,  chiefly  through  the  friendship  of  Mark  Antony,  became  king  of 
Judaea.  He  was  not  an  absolute  monarch,  but  subject  to  the  Roman  empire,  much  in  the 
same  way  as  some  of  the  Indian  princes  are  subject  to  the  British  government  (^Carr).  As 
a  prince  he  was  able  and  magnificent,  but  utterly  unprincipled  and  most  unhappy  (Morison). 
Came. — Probably  shortly  after  the  presentationin  the  temple  (Luke  ii.  22).  Wise  men  = 
fidyoi.— In  Chaldea  and  Persia  a  special  class  who  gave  themselves  to  the  study  of  the 
stars  and  to  that  of  the  occult  arts  generally.  In  Egypt  and  in  Babylon  they  formed  a 
recognised  and  highly  honoured  class  (Gen.  xli.  8  ;  Dan.  ii.  2).  Those  who  came  to  Bethlehem 
may  have  been  from  Media,  but  their  gifts  would  rather  suggest  Arabia  ( Universal  Bible 
Dictionary^. 

Ver.  2.  Born.— Literally,  "the  born  King  of  the  Jews."  Herod  was  not  a  born  king.  It 
was  long  since  there  had  been  a  born  king  in  Israel  {Moi'isori).  King  of  the  Jews.— A  title 
unknown  to  the  earlier  history  of  Israel  and  applied  to  no  one  except  the  Messiah. 
It  reappears  in  the  inscription  over  the  cross  (^Carr).  Star.— It  is  perhaps  safest  to  regard 
it  as  simply  a  luminous  meteor,  which  appeared  under  special  laws,  and  for  a  special 
purpose  {D.  Brown).  Worship.— To  acknowledge  His  worthship  (Morison).  Not  adoration 
in  the  strict  sense.  We  attribute  too  much  to  the  Magi  if  we  suppose  them  aware  of  Christ's 
divinity.  But  it  w^as  clearly  more  than  mere  reverence  for  an  earthly  king.  It  hovered  on 
the  border  line,  and  meant  an  indefinite  submission  and  homage  to  a  partially  discerned 
superiority,  in  which  the  presence  of  God  was  in  some  sort  special  (Maclar en). 

Ver.  3.  Troubled.— When  we  remember  the  recent  agitations  at  Jerusalem,  through  the 
refusal  of  the  Pharisees,  to  the  number  of  six  thousand,  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  him 
(Jos.,  Ant.,  XVII.  ii.,  4),  with  their  prophecy  of  the  divinely  intended  transfer  of  the  kingdom 
from  him  and  his  race,  to  a  favourite  of  their  own,  we  can  easily  understand  how  much  less 
a  thing  would  have  been  sufficient  to  terrify  him  than  this  announcement  of  the  star  and 
tlie  king  (Trf^yicJi).  Jerusalem.— From  a  dread  of  revolutionary  commotions,  and  perhaps 
also  of  Herod's  rage  (B.  Brown). 

Ver.  4.  Chief  priests —Probably  the  high  priest,  with  those  who  had  previously  held  the 
office  of  high  priest  (for  at  this  period  it  was  often  transferred  at  the  caprice  of  the  Romans, 
Jos.,  Ant.,  XV.  iii.),  and  the  heads  of  the  twenty-four  courses  into  which  the  sons  of  Aaron  were 
divided  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  8;  Luke  i.  5).  Scribes.— The  interpreters  of  the  law,  casuists,  and 
_r  .u-  .._. Called 

or  only  of 


Ver.  6    Thou  Bethlehem  —The  passage  is  imp  rtaut  as  showing  tl  at  the  authorised  exposi- 
tors of  tlie  Jewish  scriptures  were  in  the  habit  of  citing  them  by  paraphrase,  and  not  literally 
16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  ii. 


(Speaker's  Commentary).  Princes  of  Juda  (Mic.  v.  2). — "  Thousands."    The  tribe  had  been 
subdivided  into  thousands  or  chiliads,  corresponding  to  the  hundreds  of  England,  and  over 
each  subdivision  there  was  a  chieftain  or  prince  {Morison).    Rule  =  act  the  part  of  a  shep- 
herd to. 
Ver.  7.  Inquired  .  .  .  diligently. — Rather  ♦*  ascertained  exactly  "  (Spealter^s  Commentary). 
Ver.  8.  I  may  come. — It  was  something  like  the  kiss  of  Judas  (Gualther). 
Ver.  11.  House. --It  is  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  holy  family  would  require  to 
stay  long  in  the  public  khan  or  caravanserai,  where  the  infant  Saviour  was  born.  Worshipped. — 
The  gathering  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  light  of  Israel  was  an  essential  part  of  true  Judaism,  and 
could  not  but  be  represented  in  the  Gospel  which  set  forth  the  glories  of  the  King  (Maclaren). 
Gifts. — Natural  enough  as  the  traditional  gifts  of  homage  to  a  ruler  {Plumptre).    Gold  would 
be  always  a  suitable  present.    Frankincense  and  myrrh  would  be  used  chiefly  in  the  houses 
of  the  great  and  in  holy  places.     They  were  prized  for  the  delicious  fragrance  which  they 
suffused  (Morison). 

Ver.  13.  Egypt. — At  all  times  the  readiest  place  of  refuge  for  the  Israelites,  whether  from 
famine  or  from  political  oppression.  In  Alexandria  the  Jews  numbered  a  fifth  of  the 
population.  Wherever,  therefore,  the  infant  Saviour's  home  was  in  Egypt,  it  would  be  in  the 
midst  of  His  brethren  according  to  the  flesh  (  Carr). 

Ver.  15.  Fulfilled. — The  real  key  to  the  Evangelist's  quotation  (Hos.  xi.  1),  seems  to  be 
found  in  the  principle  that  the  whole  Old  Testament  is  but  the  bud  of  the  New.  And  not 
only  so,  but  Israel  was  Israel,  and  God's  national  son,  just  because  it  included  in  itself  Him  in 
whom  is  included  the  true  Israel,  and  who  is  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  They  were 
called  out  of  Egypt  chiefly  that  they  might  bring  up  with  them  the  Seed  of  seeds— the 
Christ.  Hence,  when  Hosea  wrote  the  words  which  the  Evangelist  quotes,  the  kernel  of 
Divine  idea  that  was  within  their  rind  or  outer  shell  could  not  possibly  have  been  fully 
realised,  or  fulfilled,  if  the  Christ  had  remained  in  Egypt  (3forison). 

Ver.  16.  Children. — All  the  male  children,  as  is  indicated  by  the  gender  of  the  article 
in  the  original  (jrdvTas  tous  waidas).  Not  mentioned  by  Josephus.  If  we  consider  how 
small  a  town  Bethlehem  was,  it  is  not  likely  there  would  be  many  male  children  in 
it  from  two  years  old  and  under ;  and  when  we  think  of  the  number  of  fouler  atrocities 
which  Josephus  has  recorded  of  Herod,  it  is  unreasonable  to  make  anything  of  his  silence 
on  tbis  {D.  Brown). 

Ver.  18.  Bama  .  .  .  Bachel. — See  Jer.  xxxi.  15.  The  passage  primarily  refers  to  the 
deportation  of  the  Jews  to  Babylon.  Rachel,  the  ancestress  of  Benjamin,  who  was  buried 
near  Bethlehem,  is  introduced  as  issuing  from  her  grave  to  bewail  the  captivity  of  her 
children.  The  sound  of  her  lamentation  is  carried  northward  beyond  Jerusalem,  and  heard 
at  Rama,  a  fortress  of  Israel  on  the  frontier  toward  Judah,  where  the  captives  were  collected. 
The  meaning  probably  is,  that  the  grief  caused  by  this  deportation,  and  the  consequent 
lamentations  of  the  female  captives,  was  such  as  to  reach  even  the  heart  of  the  ancestress 
of  Benjamin  (which  here  includes  also  Judah).  As  used  by  Jeremiah  it  was,  therefore,  a 
figurative  expression  for  the  deep  sorrow  of  the  exiled  mothers  of  Judah.  But  in  the 
massacre  of  the  infants  of  Bethlehem,  this  earlier  calamity  was  not  only  renewed,  but  its 
description  verified  in  the  fullest  and  most  tragic  manner.  Rachel's  children  are  not  merely 
led  into  exile  :  they  are  destroyed,  and  that  by  one  who  called  himself  king  of  Israel. 
Accordingly,  Rachel  is  introduced  as  the  representative  of  the  mothers  of  Bethlehem 
lamenting  over  their  children  (JLange). 

Ver.  22.  Archelaus. — Succeeded  to  Judaea,  Samaria  and  Idumea,  but  Augustus  refused  him 
the  title  of  king  till  it  should  be  seen  how  he  conducted  himself,  giving  him  only  the  title  of 
Ethnarch.  Above  this,  however,  he  never  rose.  The  people,  indeed,  recognised  him  as  his 
father's  successor;  and  so  it  is  here  said  that  he  "  reigned  in  the  room  of  his  father  Herod." 
But  after  ten  years'  defiance  of  the  Jewish  law  and  cruel  tyranny,  the  people  lodged  heavy 
complaints  against  him,  and  the  Emperor  banished  him  to  Vienne  in  Gaul,  reducing  Judaea 
again  to  a  Roman  province.  Then  "the  sceptre  "  clean  "  departed  from  Judah"  {Brown). 
Galilee,  where  Antipas,  brother  of  Archelaus,  was  ruling  under  the  title  of  Tetrarch.  He 
was  a  tyrant  too,  but  not  so  savage  as  Archelaus  (Morison). 

Ver.  23.  Nazareth. — Said  to  signify  "  the  Protectress  "  (Heb.  natsa?'),  a  small  town  of 
central  Galilee,  on  the  edge  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  beautifully  situated  on  the  side  of  a 
steep  hill,  within  a  sheltered  valley.  Nazarene. — The  meaning  of  this  passage  was  probably 
as  clear  to  the  contemporaries  of  St.  Matthew  as  the  other  references  to  prophecy  (verses 
15,  17)  ;  for  us  it  is  involved  in  doubt.  1.  Nazarene  cannot  =  Nazarite  :  the  word  differs  in 
form,  and  in  no  sense  could  Christ  be  called  a  Nazarite.  2.  The  quotation  is  probably  not 
from  a  lost  prophecy.  One  meaning  of  the  word  Nazorceus  is  an  inhabitant  of  Nazareth,  but 
the  word  either — 1.  Recalls  the  Hebrew  word  netaer  a  branch,  a  title  by  which  the  Messiah 
is  designated,  Isa.  xi.  1 ;  or  :  2.  Connects  itself  in  thought  with  the  Hebrew  natsar^  to  save 
or  protect,  and  so  has  reference  to  the  name  and  work  of  Jesus ;  or :  3.  Is  a  synonym  for 
"contemptible"  or  "lowly,"  from  the  despised  position  of  Nazareth.    The  play  upon  words 

c  17 


CHAP.  11.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW, 


which  1  and  2  involve  is  quite  characteristic  of  Hebrew  phraseology.  The  sound  of  the 
original  would  be  either — 1.  He  whom  the  prophet  called  the  "  Netser  "  dwells  at  "Netser" 
(see  Smith's  Bib.  Did.) ;  or  :  2.  He  who  is  called  "  Notsri "  (my  protector)  dwells  at  "  Nat- 
saret "  (the  protectress)  (  Caj'r). 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—8. 

The  King  proclaimed. — The  previous  passage  was  of  a  comparatively  domestic 
description.  It  told  us  practically  how  the  holy  family  were  made  acquainted 
with  the  true  origin  of  the  heavenly  Babe  just  appearing  among  them.  Here 
we  have  a  wider  field  and  a  more  public  announcement.  That  heavenly  Babe 
is  now  presented  to  the  whole  of  the  world  as  its  King.  So  we  find  here  to  be 
openly  declared,  on  the  one  hand ;  and  distinctly  understood,  on  the  other. 

I.  Openly  declared. — This  may  be  seen  : — 1.  By  the/orm  of  language  employed 
by  those  who  are  spoken  of  here  as  coming  as  visitors  to  Jerusalem.  Nothing  is 
so  emphatic  a  declaration  of  a  fact  as  to  ask  a  question  which  assumes  its 
existence.  *'  Where  is  the  child  we  are  seeking  for  ?  "  Compare  Judg.  iv.  6, 
vi.  14  ;  Josh.  i.  9,  etc.  2.  By  the  purport  of  the  question  thus  asked.  Where 
is  the  King  ?  The  King  of  the  Jews  ?  The  infant  King  of  the  Jews  ?  To  the 
people  addressed  such  questions  could  mean  only  one  thing  :  "  There  is  an  Infant 
among  you  whom  ye  know  not,  although  He  is  really  your  King."  3.  By  the 
known  position  of  those  who  employed  it.  They  were  men  from  afar,  and 
therefore  men  most  probably  having  something  important  to  say  (Isa.  xxxix.  3). 
Men  of  repute,  also,  and  therefore  not  improbably  well  knowing  what  they  were 
speaking  about  4.  By  the  special  experience  which  these  strangers  had  had. 
Continual  watchers  of  the  skies  themselves,  they  had  seen  that  in  the  skies 
which  they  had  learned  to  look  upon  as  of  the  highest  significance.  "  We  have 
seen  His  star  in  the  East."  If  they  are  right  in  their  view,  therefore  (and  they 
were  fair  judges  of  that),  the  message  they  bring  is  a  message  from  heaven 
itself.  5.  By  the  purpose  avowed  by  them.  They  desire  not  to  find  only,  but 
to  do  homage  to,  this  infantile  King.  "  We  are  come  to  worship  Him."  What 
depth  of  conviction  !  To  come  so  far  for  that  purpose.  What  depth  of  con- 
fession !  However  far  off  their  home  was,  they  acknowledge  it  thus  to  be  part 
of  His  realm.  All  these  things  make  their  advent  and  language  a  wide  and 
express  proclamation  indeed ;  especially  so  to  men  who  were  familiar  with  such 
prophecies  as  those  of  Numb.  xxiv.  17;  Ps.  Ixxii.  8-11,  etc.,  and  who  were 
even  then  looking  for  some  one  to  *'  restore  to  Israel "  (Acts  i.  6)  just  such  a 
kingdom  as  that  of  which  these  messengers  spoke.  No  procession  of  heralds 
with  banners  and  trumpets  and  regalia  could  have  said  any  more. 

II.  Distinctly  understood  as  so  being. — The  agitation  this  question 
aroused  is  one  token  of  this.  It  greatly  agitated  king  Herod,  the  then 
ruler  of  Jerusalem  and  Judaea.  The  fact  of  the  question  did  so.  ''Where 
is  the  King  ?  "  was  an  inquiry  which  at  once  put  him  on  one  side.  The  form 
of  it  did  so  still  more.  Where  is  He  that  is  "  born  •"  to  be  King  was 
to  reproach  him  tacitly  as  a  usurper.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  together 
"  with  him " — "  with "  him  and  "  after "  him  both,  so  some  render  the 
words — all  Jerusalem  also  was  agitated.  Agitated  with  hope.  It  would  be 
something  to  get  any  king — more  still  such  a  King  as  that  asked  about — in 
place  of  such  a  notorious  tyrant  as  Herod.  Agitated  with  fear.  Jerusalem 
knew  by  experience  what  it  was  to  have  Herod  disturbed.  It  meant  double 
oppression  for  them.  Next,  the  results  of  this  agitation  had  the  same  significance. 
There  was  the  question  which  immediately  followed.  The  point  it  turned  on — 
where  the  Christ  should  be  born.  The  persons  it  was  addressed  to — those  who 
from  their  ofiice  and  the  direction  of  their  studies  were  the  most  likely  to  know. 

18 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  ii. 


There  was  the  answer  returned  to  this  question.  An  answer  from  the  pages  of 
one  of  the  prophets  which  spoke  so  expHcitly  of  *'  Bethlehem  Judah  "  as  the 
future  birthplace  of  King  Messiah,  and  as  the  city  out  of  which  was  to  come  a 
"  Governor  that  shall  rule  My  people  Israel."  There  was  the  further  question, 
propounded  by  Herod  in  consequence  of  this  answer.  A  question  with  some 
faith  in  it  but  more  unbelief.  A  question  asked  privately  (ver.  7),  so  as  not  to 
extend  the  impression  already  made  by  the  wise  men's  inquiry.  A  question 
asked  "  diligently,"  or  with  much  concernment,  as  though  there  might  be  far 
more  than  was  wished  for  in  that  inquiry.  A  question  asked  in  much  evident 
subtlety,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  be  in  a  position  to  prevent  that  which  was 
feared.  See,  therefore,  how  blind,  yet  how  discerning,  he  was,  and  some  of  those 
he  questioned  as  well.  How  little  they  understood  the  Power  that  was  behind 
the  inquiry  of  these  strangers  !  How  well  they  understood  the  direction  to 
which  it  pointed  their  thoughts.  As  well  to  all  these,  as  in  itself,  it  was  a 
proclamation  of  Christ. 

Being  such,  it  may  be  regarded,  in  conclusion,  under  more  aspects  than  one. 

1.  As  an  act  of  justice  to  the  infant  Jesus. — Thus  indeed  a  King,  it  was  only 
right  that  He  should  be  presented  as  such.  The  equivalent  to  this  is  done  in 
all  earthly  sovereignties  when  a  minor  comes  to  the  throne.  The  actual 
assumption  of  power,  even  the  full  ascription  of  power — the  solemn  coronation — 
may  not  follow  at  once.  But  the  assertion  of  right  is  never  delayed.  Eor  to 
delay  that  would  be  to  deny  it  in  fact. 

2.  As  an  act  of  mercy  to  Israel. — Here  was  a  light  given  them,  which,  if  they 
had  followed  it  up,  would  have  led  them,  as  it  did  the  wise  men,  to  the  very 
cradle  of  Christ  ! 

3.  As  an  act  of  mercy  to  all  mankind. — It  was  not  without  significance  that 
this  *'  star  in  the  East  "  was  manifested  to  Gentiles  and  strangers.  About  this 
time  we  find  from  Virgil  and  others  that  there  was  a  general  expectation  of  some 
Great  One  amongst  the  nations  of  the  earth.  This  message  to  Gentiles,  conveyed 
in  a  language  which  they  could  all  understand  (Ps.  xix.  3),  was  a  kind  of 
corroboration  of  this  idea.  That  great  Christian  church,  indeed,  which  has  been 
since  gathered  in  so  especially  from  the  Gentiles,  has  understood  it  so  ever  since. 
It  was  a  "  manifestation  of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles  "  ;  a  beginning  of  that  which 
has  ever  since  been  distinguished  by  this  most  distinguishing  mark  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.    1-15.    Old   types    of   modern  Vers.    1-12.  The  first  fruits   of  the 

classes. — In  the  historic  facts  of   this  Gentiles.- — I.    We    see    here    heathen 

chapter  we  have  types  of  four  classes  wisdom  led  by  God  to  the  cradle  of 

of  men  which  have  ever  existed,  and  Christ, 

which  exist  still,  viz.  : —  II.  The  contrast  of    these  Gentiles' 

I.  Those  who  earnestly  seek  the  joyful  eagerness  to  worship  the  King 
truth.  of  Israel,  with  the  alarm  of  His  own 

II.  Those  who  rest  in  the  letter  of  people  at  the  whisper  of  His  name,  is  a 
the  truth.  prelude  of  the  tragedy  of  His  rejection, 

III.  Those  who  are  fearfully  and  the  passing  over  of  the  kingdom 
alarmed  at  the  truth.  to  the  Gentiles. 

IV.  Those  who  are  affectionate  III.  Then  comes  the  council  of  the 
guardians  of  the  truth.  theologians,  with  its  solemn  teaching  of 

The  Magi  represent  the  first,  the  the  difference  between  orthodoxy  and 

scribes  and  Pharisees  the  second,  Herod  life,   and  of  the  utter  hollowness  of 

the  third,  and  Joseph  and  Mary  the  mere  knowledge,  however  accurate,  of 

fourth. — D.  Thomasy  D.D.  the  letter  of  Scripture. 

19 


chap.il       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


TV.  Herod's  crafty  counsel;  its 
absurdity. — If  the  Child  were  not 
Messiah,  he  need  not  have  been 
alarmed ;  if  It  were,  his  efforts  were 
fruitless.  But  he  does  not  see  this,  and 
so  plots  and  works  underground  in  the 
approved  fashion  of  king-craft. 

V.  The  discovery  of  the  King. — The 
great  paradox  of  Christianity,  the 
manifestation  of  Divinest  power  in 
uttermost  weakness,  was  forced  upon 
them  in  its  most  startling  form. 

"VI.  Adoration  and  offering  follow 
discovery. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.    1-3.  The   doom    of  Herod. — 
There  is  hardly  any  figure  in  history 
in  whom  the  tragic  irony  of  dreadful 
doom  has  been  more  vividly  or  terribly 
displayed  than  in  that  of  Herod  the 
Great.     His  fate  has  all  the  elements 
of  pathos  and  of  romance  which  con- 
stitute  a   great    drama,   and    it   was 
played   on   a   large   scene   of    human 
history  at  a  moment  when  the  stage 
was  occupied  by  names  famous  to  all 
time :  Pompey,  Caesar,  Crassus,  Antony, 
Cleopatra,  Augustus.     With  all  these 
he  is  concerned.     A  great  drama,  and 
on  a  great  stage  !     It  is  the  splendour 
and  the  passion  of  the  world  that  we 
touch  when  we  read,  "  Then  was  Herod 
troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him." 
He   was    troubled,    troubled    with   a 
wholly  new  and  unanticipated  trouble, 
for  the  peril  to  his  throne,  which  he 
had   hitherto   spent   his  whole  life  in 
arresting  and  subduing,  had  come  from 
another  direction  altogether  from  that 
which  now  disturbed  him.     The  claim 
that  he  had  had  to  fear  and  to  resist, 
and  had  been  forced  by  his  fear  at  last 
to  stifle  by  murder,  had  been  not  that 
of   the   house   of    David,    but   of    the 
Maccabean    princes.       That     was    the 
family  by  whose  fall  Herod  the  Great 
had  risen.     And  now,  when  he  might 
have   supposed   that    the    throne   for 
which  he  had  been  driven  to  pay  so 
dire  a  price  had  been  secured  at  last 
from  the  fear  of  a  competitor,  he  hears 
of  the  arrival  of  wise  men  from  afar, 
asking  for  One  who  has  just  been  born 
*'  King  of  the  Jews."     Why,  had  not 

20 


Herod  swept  every  claimant  out  of  the 
field  ?     Had  he  not  rid  himself  at  last 
of  every  terror  which  could  assail  him  ? 
Yes,  but  here  is  the  irony.     In  wiping 
out    of   the   scene   the   names   of   the 
Maccabees,  he  had  but  stripped  off  the 
veil  that  had  obscured  the  memory  of 
David.     The  Levite  dynasty  of  Matta- 
thias  had,  after  all,  been  usurping  the 
ground  that  was  due  to  another.     As 
long  as  its  hope  of  victory,  fed  by  such 
new  glories,  should  fill  the  imagination 
of  Jewish  patriotism,  the  deeper  tradi- 
tion might  lie  forgotten.     But  Herod 
had  himself  wrecked  the  hope  of  the 
Jews.      He   had    shattered  that  inde- 
pendence ;  he  had  stamped  out  its  last 
spark ;  and  now  his  very  crimes  had 
liberated  a  far  more  dangerous  distur- 
bance.    A  stronger  voice,  long  buried 
in  silence,  wakes  out  of  the  dust,  and 
cries  against  him.     Behind  this,  then, 
and    within   it,    is   all    the   power   of 
gathered  prophecy,  telling  of  One  who 
should   lift   little    Bethlehem-Eplirata 
into  high  place  among  the  thousands  of 
Israel ;  for  out  of  it,  out  of  the  ancient 
stock  of  Jesse,  should  come  One  who- 
should  be  the  ruler  of  God's  people  in 
Israel.     The  entire    force  of  spiritual 
Judaism,  held  in  reserve  hitherto  by 
its  doubtful  allegiance  to   an  intrud- 
ing and  unauthorised  Maccabee,  would 
move  at  the  call  of  One  who  touched  on 
the  heritage  of  Judah  and  on  all  the 
sanctities  of  David.     What  a  strange 
stroke     of     judgment  !       Herod     has 
sacrificed   the   wife    of    his  love,    the 
children  of  his  heart,  to  find  that  they 
have  been  his  safest  barrier  against  a 
peril  which  their  removal  has  endowed 
with  unanticipated  life.     The  heart  of 
the   people — he  knows  it — will   shake 
as  corn  under  the  wind,  if  once  the  cry 
of  David  is  heard  in  the  land.     And, 
therefore,  it  was  a  desperate  hour  when 
the  lonely  and    savage-hearted   king, 
tortured  already  by  his  last  sickness, 
tortured  yet  deeper  by  the  agonies  of 
his  repentance,  suddenly  knew  that  all 
his  sin  had  been  in  vain  if  he  could  not 
by  some  swift  stroke  slay  down  all  the 
childreii  of  two  years  old   and  under 
that  had  been  born  in  Bethlehem  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  ii. 


Juclsea.     We  are  shown  here,  how  God  of  Judah.     A  boy  or  girl  is  not  to  be 

uses  the  sinful  resistance  of  man  only  despised  on  account  of  his  or  her  birth- 

to  evoke  a  yet  deeper  and  stronger  place, 

manifestation  of  His  name.  3.  There    is    a    beautiful    harmony 

1.  Is  not  that  the  whole  story  of  the  between  the  birthplace  and  Him  who  was 
cross?  born    in    it. — Bethlehem    means    the 

2.  This  is  repeated  in  the  story  of  the  *'  House  of  Bread,"  and  Christ  is  the 
church.  bread  of  life. 

3.  This  is  the  story  of  the  crisis  II.  The  place  in  the  village  in 
through  which  our  church  has  passed  which  Christ  was  born  and  the  reasons 
in  the  last  fifty  years. — Each  temporary  for  His  being  born  there. — It  was  not 
disaster  has  served  to  break  down  in  a  house,  nor  in  an  inn,  nor  in  a 
some  artificial  and  incidental  support  stable,  for  the  "  manger  "  was  one  of  the 
of  the  truth,  only  by  that  disappear-  caves  in  the  adjacent  rocks  which  were 
ance  to  throw  us  back  on  the  deeper  used  both  for  the  burial  of  the  dead 
foundations  which  no  man  laid.  and     for     a     temporary     shelter    by 

4.  And  each  personal  life  is  a  repeti-  travellers.  A  friend  of  mine,  with  his 
tion  of  this  iroiiy  of  God. — The  sword  children,  slept  in  one  of  these  caves  for 
of  Herod  only  serves  to  reveal  the  many  a  night  without  suifering  any 
living  Christ ;  sometimes  the  sword  of  discomfort.  Christ  was  born  in  that 
doubt,    but   perhaps   more    often   the  cave : — 

bitter  blade  of  pain.     There  is  a  peace  1 .  That  He  might  teach  men  humility. 

which     passeth     all      understanding ;  2.  To  teach  us  not  to  despise  humble 

there  is  a  power  in  Jesus  which  suffer-  birthplaces. — He  was  not  ashamed   of 

ing   alone    can     disclose ;    there   is   a  the  place  of  His  birth,  but  told   His 

strength  which  is  only  made  perfect  in  disciples  to  write  about  it. 

weakness ;  there  is  a  life  which  has  its  3.  To  show  how  willing  He  was  to  re- 

root  in  death.     We  know  it  at  last;  ceivemen. — Had  He  been  born  in  a  lofty 

the  Christ  of  prophecy,  the  Christ  of  mansion  the  people  might    have  been 

the   Psalms,  is   become  our  Christ. —  too  timid  to  call ;  had  He  been  born  in 

Canon  Scott- Holland.  a  stable  they  might  have  been  afraid 

of  the  cattle ;    but  into    the  peaceful 

Ver.  1 .  The  birth  of  Jesus.     (For  the  cave,  which  was  open  to  all,  they  could 

young.) — "  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethle-  freely  come. — J.  McAuslane,  D.D. 
hem  of  Judaea." 

I.  The  village  in  which  Christ  was  Jesus  the  wonderful  Babe.  (For 
bom  and  the  reasons  for  His  being  children.) — "  Jesus  was  born."  Child- 
bom  there. — Christ  was  born  in  Beth-  ren  are  mightily  pleased  when  a  new 
lehem  : —  baby  appears  in  the  family.     I  want 

1.  To  teach  men  that  the  Old  Testa-  to  speak  to  you  of-  the  most  wonderful 
ment  was  the  book  of  God. — The  past  Babe  ever  born. 

is  somewhat    clear,   but    the    future  I.  He    had     been    talked    about, 

is  dark  to  all.     Yet  the  writers  of  the  written  about,  and  expected  for  cen- 

Old   Testament     named,   hundreds   of  turies. — Prophecies.    Typical  rites,  etc. 

years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  the  Expectation  in  heathen  world  as  well 

place  where  He  would   be  born,  and  as  among  Jews. 

even  the  time.     This  could  only  have  II.  His  birth   caused  more   excite- 

been  because  God  had  told  them  where  ment  than  any  other  birth  has  done 

He  would  have  His  Son  born.  before  or  since. — Excitement  in  heaven 

2.  To  teach  us  the  importance  of  little  (Luke  ii.  9,  10,  13,  14).  On  earth 
things. — Men  would  have  naturally  (Luke  ii.  8,  17;  Matt.  ii.  1,  etc.; 
thought  that  Christ  would  be  born  in  Luke  ii.  25,  etc.). 

the  greatest  city  of  the  world,  but  Beth-  III.  He   was  different  in  Himself 

lehem  was  least  among  the  thousands  from   every    other    babe. — The   Child 

21 


CHAP.  II.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


born ;  the  Son  given.  His  name 
*'  Wonderful."  Incarnation.  Without 
sin,  etc. 

IV.  Far  more  depended  on  His  life 
than  has  depended  on  any  other. — 
Human  salvation.  "  Thou  shalt  call 
His  name  Jesus,"  etc. — H.  M.  Booth. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  wise  men  from  the 
East. — Here  we  have  the  first  indica- 
tion of  the  coming  fulfilment  of  the 
gracious  promises  of  God  toward  the 
Gentile  world.  "  He  came  unto  His 
own  and  His  own  received  Him  not." 
But  these  strangers  recognise  Him  and 
in  worship  bow  before  Him.  A  token 
this  of  what  was  afterward  to  come  to 
pass.  The  Jews  rejecting  Christ,  the 
Gentiles  receiving  Him.     Notice  : 

I.  The  guidance  which  the  Magi  re- 
ceived.— "  Star."  1.  God  will  not  with- 
hold guidance  from  any  who  sincerely 
desire  to  dii^ect   their    steps    to    Chynst. 

2.  If  ordinary  means  are  not  sufficient, 
extraordinary  means  will  be  employed. 

3.  If  we  do  not  succeed  in  finding  the 
Saviour y  it  is  certainly  not  for  want  of 
the  star. 

II.  The  journey  which  the  Magi 
took. — Long  and  arduous,  and  beset 
with  difficulty,  but  the  faith  by  which 
they  were  inspired  surmounted  all. 

III.  The  worship  which  the  Magi 
offered. — It  was  more  than  civil  hom- 
age they  paid,  it  had,  undoubtedly, 
reference  to  the  spiritual  dignity  of 
the  holy  Child.  Nor  did  they  come 
empty-handed.  What  are  the  feelings 
with  which  we  regard  Christ — what 
the  homage  which  we  pay  to  Him  ? — 
W.  R.  Inglis.  if- 

Ver.  1.  The  Child-Saviour.— The 
salvation  of  the  world  in  the  form  of  a 
child  :— 

I.  Concealed,  yet  well-known. 

II.  Hated  and  feared,  yet  longed- 
for  and  loved. 

III.  Signally  despised,  yet  mar- 
vellously honoured. 

IV.  Beset  by  extreme  dangers,  yet 
kept  in  perfect  safety.— t/.P.Ztm^e,i).Z>. 

Ver.  2.  The  inquiry  of  the  ivise  men. 
— 1.  Though  Christ's  kingdom  be  not 

22 


of  this  world,  yet  is  He  King  of  saints, 
the  true  King  of  Israel,  to  whom  the 
throne  of  David  was  promised,  that  He 
should  sit  thereon  and  reign  over  souls 
for  ever.  2.  Saving  faith  looketh 
through  all  clouds  of  human  infirmities 
in  Christ  and  pitcheth  upon  some  point 
of  excellency  in  Him.  These  men 
behold,  by  faith,  in  a  new  born  babe 
the  promised  Messiah  and  the  King  of 
Israel.  '*  The  King  of  the  Jews  "  the 
ordinary  style  of  the  Messiah.  3.  The 
least  degree  of  saving  knowledge  doth 
set  a  man  to  seek  after  Christ. 
"  Where  is  He  1, "  say  they.  4.  Faith 
will  hazard  all  to  find  Christ.  These 
men  confess  Him,  with  the  danger  of 
their  life,  to  be  born  King  of  the 
Jews,  and  do  ask  for  Him  in  Jerusa- 
lem, even  when  and  where  Herod, 
a  stranger,  is  reigning  as  king. 
5.  Though  Christ  came  in  the  form  of 
a  servant,  and  humbled  himself  to 
be  born  of  a  mean  damsel,  yet  is  His 
honour  to  be  seen  in  heaven  and  earth. 
A  star  gives  warning  to  the  world  that 
the  bright  and  morning  Star  is  arisen, 
and  from  the  East  wise  men  do  come  to 
confess  Him.  6.  Though  God  gives 
signs  and  evidences  of  Christ's  coming, 
yet  every  man  doth  not  observe  them, 
but  such  only  as  God  doth  reveal  them 
unto.  Only  these  wise  men  get  a  right 
sight  of  the  star.  7.  Faith  in  Christ 
and  love  to  Him,  will  spare  no  pains 
to  find  Him.  8.  Faith  seeth  Christ  to 
be  God,  and  that  maketh  men  to  over- 
come a  world  of  difficulties  in  seeking 
communion  with  Him.  "  We  are  come 
to  worship  Him." — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  3.  Herod  and  the  Jews  troubled. 
— 1.  It  is  no  new  thing  that  kings  are 
jealous  of  Christ,  when  they  hear  He 
is  a  king.  Yet  their  kingdoms  have 
no  such  friend  as  He.  2.  Worldly 
men,  settled  in  their  honours,  ease  and 
wealth,  are  troubled  about  Christ,  and 
could  be  content  to  "be  quiet  without 
Him.  All  Jerusalem  was  troubled,  more 
fearing  temporal  inconveniences  by 
occasion  of  Christ's  nativity,  than 
rejoicing  in  the  hope  of  salvation 
through  Him. — Ibid, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  ii. 


Fear,  the  constant  companion  of  the 
wicked. — I.  The  wicked  are  afraid  of  the 
good. — The  vicious  man  cannot  conceal 
from  himself  that  the  good  feel  towards 
him  repugnance,  loathing,  and  con- 
tempt, and  are  resolved  to  oppose  his 
wickedness  with  all  possible  energy. 

IT.  The  wicked  are  afraid  of  the 
wicked. — They  have  a  constant  dread 
and  mistrust  of  each  other. ' 

III.  The  wicked  are  afraid  of  them- 
selves.— They  have  no  true  courage  to 
face  the  future.     Conscience  condemns. 

IV.  The  wicked  fear  unexpected 
occurrences. 

V.  The  wicked  have  a  dread  of  the 
invisible. 

VI.  The  wicked  have  a  constant 
dread  of  death. — F.  Mathieson. 

Ver.  4.  Herod  a  type  of  the  enemies 
of  Christ. — In  Herod  we  have  the 
portrait  of  Christ's  enemies.  1.  He 
dissembletb,  like  a  crafty  fox  waiting 
for  the  prey.  So  do  they.  2.  He 
befriendeth  the  wise  men,  who  are 
seeking  Christ,  so  far  as  it  may  serve 
his  own  ends.  So  do  they.  3.  He 
abuseth  the  church-men  and  their 
assembly,  calUng  for  a  meeting  of  the 
chief  priests  and  scribes  and  propound- 
ing questions  to  be  solved,  as  if  he 
wished  to  make  good  use  thereof. 
Specially  he  asks  of  them  where  Cbrist 
should  be  born,  as  if  none  were  readier 
to  serve  Him  than  he ;  meantime  he 
was  seeking  to  find  Him  out  to  kill 
Him.     So  do  they. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  6.  Rulership. — I.  The  world  has 
been  taught  to  hope  for  rulership. 

II.  Rulership  is  right  only  in  pro- 
portion as  it  is  derived  from  Christ. 

III.  All  false  rulership  trembles 
before  the  government  of  the 
Redeemer. 

IV.  Rulership  is  often   connected 


with     improbable      circumstances. — 

1.  Improbable    place,     ''Bethlehem." 

2.  Improbable  person,  "  young  child." 
The  Ruler  does  not  come  from  the 
metropolis ;  does  not  appear  as  an 
imposing  personage. 

V.  True  rulership  is  moral. — Joseph 
Parker^  D.D. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Herod^s  plot. — In  Herod 
we  see  yet  more  of  the  ways  of  the 
enemies  of  Christ.  1.  He  carrieth  on 
his  design  closely,  lest  any  should 
suspect  his  intention.  He  calleth 
the  wise  men  privily.  So  do  they. 
2.  Though  he  hath  learned  more  of 
Christ  than  before,  yet  because  his  know- 
ledge is  not  sanctified,  his  malice  is  not 
abated.  So  with  the  crafty  politicians  of 
this  world.  3.  When  he  hath  gained  one 
point  about  the  place  of  Christ's  birth, 
he  goeth  about  to  gain  another  con- 
cerning the  time  of  His  birth  also,  that 
he  may  draw  so  much  nearer  for  the 
surprising  of  Christ.  So  do  they, 
hauling  in  their  nets  gradually.  4.  He 
covereth  his  purpose  of  murder  under 
pretence  of  a  purpose  to  worship  Christ. 
So  do  they,  drawing  near  in  profession 
of  religion,  that  they  may  more  easily 
betray.  5.  To  make  all  fast,  he 
abuseth  the  simplicity  of  Christ's 
friends,  and  thinketh  to  make  them 
ignorantly  betray  Christ  into  his  hands. 
"  Go  and  search  diligently,"  etc.  So 
do  they. — David  Dickson. 

Hypocrisy. — Hypocrisy  may  be  de- 
signated the  shadow  of  faith  in  the 
world. 

I.  It  accompanies  faith  as  the 
shadow  the  substance. 

II.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  existence  of 
faith  as  the  shadow  is  of  the  substance. 

III.  It  vanishes  before  faith,  as 
the  shadow  before  the  substance. — 
J.  P.  Lange^  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC 8  OF  TH^  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

Doing  homage. — In  these  verses  the  story  of  the  previous  verses  is  carried  a 
step  in  advance.  The  infant  King  is  not  only  heard  of  now.  He  is  also  beheld. 
Not  only,  now,  is  His  kingdom  proclaimed  ;  not  only  is  there  evidence,  now,  that 
the  proclamation  is  understood ;  we  also  find  it  obeyed.     Only,  however,  as  iu. 

23 


CHAP.  II.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


the  somewhat  parallel  case  of  1  Sam.  x.  26,  by  a  few  ;•  even  by  those  "  wise 
men"  of  whom  we  were  previously  told.  Touching  these,  we  see  in  this 
passage :  1.  How  they  were  brought  to  this  sight.  2.  How  they  were  affected 
thereby. 

I.  How  they  were  brought  to  this  sight. — We  may  attribut«U(this,  in  the  first 
place,  to  their  (xwn  perseverance  and  faith.  Unlike  the  priests,  who  had  only  pointed 
out  the  right  place  (ver.  5)  ;  unlike  Herod,  who  had  only  asked  others  to  seek 
it  (ver.  8) ;  these  men  started  to  find  it.  It  would  appear,  moreover,  that  they 
djd  so  with  some  degree  of  anxiety.  If  they  had  gained  something  in  hearing 
of  Bethlehem,  they  had  lost  something  in  missing  the  star.  (For  so  the  subse- 
quent mention  of  it  in  vers.  9,  10,  seems  to  imply.)  For  all  that,  however,  they 
at  once  followed  such  light  as  they  had.  Bethlehem  was  the  place  in  which 
they  were  bidden  to  search.  To  Bethlehem,  therefore,  '*  when  they  had  heard 
the  king,  they  departed."  They  were  brought  to  it,  next,  by  the  special  mercy 
of  God.  This  was  manifested  in  two  separate  ways.  The  way  of  special 
encouragement.  As  they  started  (so  it  appears)  the  "  star  "  reappeared.  The 
sight  filled  them  with  joy  (ver.  10).  Knowing  to  what  it  had  previously  guided 
them,  viz.  to  hearing  of  Bethlehem  as  the  predicted  birthplace  of  the  King  they 
were  seeking,  they  naturally  rejoiced  to  see  it  again ;  and  felt  its  reapptarance 
so  to  be  like  the  voice  of  a  tried  friend  in  their  ears.  The  way  of  specific 
direction.  After  reappearing,  the  "  '  star  '  went  before  them  "  (ver.  9)  to  show 
them  the  right  way.  After  going  before  them,  it  "  stood  "  still  {ibid.)^  to  show 
them  the  right  spot.  "  There — under  that  roof — in  that  dwelling — is  the  sight 
you  desire.     You  have  but  to  go  in." 

II.  How  they  were  affected  by  what  they  saw  in  that  dwelling. — Yery 
significant,  on  this  point,  was  their  demeanour.  In  a  direct  manner  we  are  told 
very  little  of  what  they  beheld.  "  They  saw  the  young  Child  and  His  mother." 
They  saw  the  Babe  for  which  they  were  seeking,  where  such  a  babe  might  be 
expected  to  be,  in  the  arms  of  its  mother.  What  kind  of  sight  was  thus  seen  by 
them  we  can  only  see,  as  it  were,  by  reflection — in  their  looks  and  gestures. 
They  "  fall  down "  before  that  Infant  in  arms.  They  offer  Him  worship  and 
homage.  Their  knees,  their  hands,  their  lips  even  (?)  are  kissing  the  ground 
before  Him.  Every  gesture  shows  that  they  have  found  in  Him  the  King 
whom  they  sought.  Almost  more  significant,  next,  are  their  gifts.  "  The 
peculiar  treasure  of  kings  "  (Eccles.  ii.  9)  is  what  they  present  unto  Him.  The 
things  which  they  have  brought  from  so  far,  and  carried  so  carefully,  and 
concealed  from  all  others,  they  "  open  "  for  Him.  The  tribute  of  *'  gold,"  the 
adoration  of  **  frankincense,"  the  preserving  virtue  of  **  myrrh,"  are  what  we 
see  them  present.  Some  think  that  there  is  unconscious  prophecy  as  well  as 
homage  in  this  last ;  and  that  in  this  mention  of  "  myrrh,"  so  soon  after  His 
birth,  there  is  a  silent  reference  to  His  death  (see  John  xix.  39).  At  any  rate, 
about  the  homage  there  is  no  manner  of  doubt.  Neither  is  there  any  doubt, 
so  we  may  notice  yet  further,  about  the  impressiveness  of  this  homage.  Not 
only  the  nature  of  the  gifts  which  were  presented,  but  the  men  that  brought 
them,  the  distance  they  came  from,  the  guidance  vouchsafed  them,  and  the  very 
tenderness  of  age  of  the  King  to  whom  these  offerings  were  brought,  are  significant 
on  this  point.  Much  is  rightly  made  in  the  Bible  of  the  visit  of  the  Queen  of 
Sheba  to  Solomon  and  of  the  gifts  which  she  brought  (1  Kings  x.  2,  10,  etc. ; 
also  Luke  xi.  31).  Great  was  the  evidence  afforded  thereby  of  his  reputation 
and  power.  All  this  homage,  however,  was  paid  to  one  who,  in  the  ripeness  of 
his  age,  was  seated  on  the  throne  of  his  father  David,  and  had  just  completed 
the  temple  of  God.  The  homage  paid  here  was  to  an  infant  in  arms,  who  was 
hid  in  a  dwelling  which  had  to  be  pointed  out  to  eyes  that  had  been  looking 
for  it   for  months.      It  spoke,  therefore,  with  even  louder  voice  and  greater 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  il. 


accentuation  of  meaning.  It  showed  that  Jesus  in  obscurity  was  felt  to  be 
greater  far  than  even  Solomon  in  his  glory ;  and  that  this  Son  of  David,  even 
in  His  infancy,  was  far  above  that ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 


Vers.  9,  10.  The  Magi  led  to  Beth- 
lehem.— The  wise  men  follow  the  direc- 
tion of  Scripture  and  go  toward 
Bethlehem,  having  (so  far  as  we  read) 
neither  convoy  nor  encouragement  of 
any  company.  1.  If  we  desire  to  find 
Christ  we  must  resolve  to  go  after 
Him,  alone  or  in  company,  either  with 
or  without  encouragements  from  men, 
as  God  shall  dispose.  2.  God  is  not 
wanting  to  such  as  are  on  the  way 
to  seek  Christ,  but  will  renew  direc- 
tions and  encouragements  unto  them 
as  they  stand  in  need  ;  for  the  star 
which  for  a  time  disappeared,  now  ap- 
peareth  again  to  them.  3.  What  one 
means  doth  not  reach,  God  supplieth  by 
another.  The  Scripture  had  told  them 
of  Bethlehem,  but  had  not  descended 
bO  low  as  the  particular  house.  God 
supplieth  the  rest,  by  the  direction  of 
the  star.  4.  Those  means  which  do 
lead  a  man  most  certainly  unto  Christ 
should  be  the  matter  of  his  special  joy. 
"  They  rejoiced,"  etc. — David  Dickson. 

Yer.  11.  Christ  found  and  wor- 
shipped.—  1.  Such  as  seek  Christ 
in  truth  shall  find  Him  at  length. 
2.  Such  as  believe  that  the  Scrip- 
tures speak  of  Christ  will  see  Him, 
though  God,  in  His  deepest  humilia- 
tion, and  by  faith  will  pierce  through 
all  impediments.  3.  Kiches,  wisdom, 
honour,  and  all  that  we  have,  ought  to  be 
laid  down  at  Christ's  feet  and  offered  to 
the  service  of  Christ,  as  the  fountain 
and  owner  thereof. — Ihid, 

Consecration  and  no-consecration. — 
Whatever  more  there  may  be — and 
there  is  much  more — in  the  visit  of 
the  wise  men  to  the  manger-cradle 
at  Bethlehem,  there  is  at  least  the 
lesson  of  consecration.  These  wise 
men  had  no  greater  joy  than  in  empty- 
ing themselves  of  their  treasures,  and 
bestowing  them  in  humblest  adoration 


upon  Him.  To  every  man  there  comes 
the  old  choice  of  the  Greek  mythical 
hero — the  choice  between  virtue  and 
pleasure,  between  good  and  evil, 
between  duty  and  frivolity,  between 
consecration  to  Christ  and  subjugation 
by  some  other  master.  Think  of  a  few 
of  the  ways  in  which  this  call  for  a 
choice  is  answered. 

I.  There  is  the  answer — which  is  no 
answer — of  simple  indifference. 

II.  Another  form  of  no-consecration 
is  simple  self-culture. — It  recognises 
that  we  are  endowed  with  a  complex 
nature,  every  part  of  which  is  capable 
of  being  developed.  And  this  develop- 
ment, this  contact,  are  in  themselves 
enjoyment  of  an  exalted  kind.  Self- 
culture,  even  on  a  humble  scale,  will 
never  disappoint.  But  this  is  short  of 
consecration;  and  the  Christian  con- 
science tells  us  that  it  is  far  inferior 
to  it. 

III.  Consecration  implies  not  only 
self-culture  but  self-surrender,  and  more 
than  this,  the  joy  of  self-surrender. 
There  may  be  consecration  to  a  great 
cause,  like  justice  or  freedom.  There 
may  be  consecration  to  an  idea  which 
we  almost  personify,  and  even  deify, 
like  truth  or  beauty.  But  it  is  to 
a  person — to  some  one  greater,  purer, 
better  than  ourselves — that  consecra- 
tion is  at  once  most  passionately  and 
most  perseveringly  rendered.  And 
never  does  consecration  of  self  take 
a  nobler  form  than  when  a  young  man 
prostrates  himself  before  the  feet  of 
his  Saviour,  and  offers  to  Him,  in  their 
prime,  the  fulness  of  all  his  powers. — 
H.  M.  Butler. 

The  homage  of  the  wise  men. — ■ 
I.  An  outburst  of  faith. — 1.  In  their 
beholding  Christ.  2.  Doing  obeisance. 
3.  Presenting  noblest  gifts. 

II.  An  indication  of  order  and 
succession    of  believing    experience. 

25 


CHAP.  II.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


1.    We    behold.       2.    We  fall    down.  2.  Adoration  issuing  in  joy  of  faith, 

3.   We  present  gifts.  3.    Perseverance   of  faith    issuing    in 

III.  A    picture    of  genuine    faith,  self  dedication    and    works    of   love, — 

— 1.   Vision    issuing    in    humiliation,  J.  P.  Lange^  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—18. 

Apparent  reversal. — The  first  impression  produced  by  this  passage  is  that  of 
contrast  with  the  last.  The  exceeding  brightness  of  the  previous  verses  appears 
exchanged  for  corresponding  darkness  in  these.  How  far  this  is  true^  therefore, 
may  well  be  our  first  point  of  inquiry.  How  far  we  find  anything  of  a  different 
kind  may  equally  well  be  our  next. 

I.  How  far  the  story  is  dark. — It  is  so,  in  the  first  place,  in  what  it  tells  us 
of  the  flight  of  the  heralds.  For  such  in  fact,  and  such  eminently  also,  these 
"  wise  men  "  had  been  ;  heralds  sent  by,  heralds  guided  by,  heralds  loyal  to  God. 
It  is  surprising,  therefore,  to  see  such  men  in  danger  at  all ;  more  so  to  see  the 
nature  of  the  only  counsel  which  is  given  them  in  their  danger.  They  are  warned 
of  God  (ver.  12)  to  avoid  Herod,  and  take  "  another  way  "  home.  Is  this  all  He 
is  pleased  to  do  for  such  exceptional  servants  as  these  ?  Not  less  surprising  is 
what  we  read  here  of  the  flight  of  their  King.  "  Arise,  and  take  the  young  child, 
and  his  mother,  and  flee"  (ver.  13).  How  unexpected  is  such  counsel  from  such 
a  quarter,  and  about  such  persons  as  these  !  That  the  '^  child  "  should  be  in 
danger  from  the  blind  madness  of  Herod,  Herod  being  such  as  he  was,  might  have 
been  looked  for.  What  we  should  not  have  looked  for  is  such  a  method  of 
dealing  therewith.  Is  this  the  sequel  of  that  depth  of  homage  of  which  we  were 
told  just  now  1  Is' this  all  that  He  who  sent  that  "  dream  "  is  pleased  to  do  for 
that  King  ?  Bid  those  who  had  charge  of  Him  merely  take  Him  away  ?  Bid 
Him,  in  fact,  become  a  fugitive  and  exile  because  of  the  enmity  of  about  the 
vilest  of  kings  1  Very  surprising  also,  in  the  last  place,  is  the  consequent 
slaughter  of  the  iiifants  of  Bethlehem  and  its  ^^  coasts. ^^  This  surprise  seems  to 
throw  the  other  two  into  still  stronger  "  relief."  What  we  expect  from  a  king 
is  to  preserve  life,  and  not  to  destroy  it.  Especially  do  we  expect  this  in  the 
case  of  those  who  are  both  guiltless  and  weak.  How,  otherwise,  can  it  be  said 
of  him  with  truth  as  in  Rom.  xiii.  3,  4  ?  Yet  what  do  we  find  brought  about 
here  in  the  case  of  this  Buler  in  chief  ?  What  is  the  first  result  of  His  being 
proclaimed  and  acknowledged  as  such  by  the  "  disposition  "  of  God  ?  The  indis- 
criminate slaughter  of  many  who  were  both  ofFenceless  and  weak;  and  not 
improbably  (it  has  been  thought),  from  the  place  of  their  birth,  near  kinsfolk  of 
Himself  (ver.  16).  Anyway,  it  is  certain  that  they  were  very  near  Him,  both  in 
place  and  in  age ;  also  not  wholly  unlike  Him  in  innocence  too.  How  strange, 
therefore,  that  His  proclamation  as  King  should  have  caused  destruction  to 
them  ! 

II.  How  far  it  is  possible  to  trace  light  in  this  darkness. — Do  we  not,  for 
example,  see  something  of  this  in  what  is  told  us  here  about  men  ?  What  is  so 
surprising  to  us  now  does  not  appear  to  have  been  equally  surprising  to  some  of 
them  at  the  time.  Being  nearer  to  it  they  appear  to  have  seen  more  in  it  than 
we  do  so  far  off.  In  the  case  of  the  Magi,  for  instance,  when  commanded  to  flee, 
they  appear  to  have  obeyed  the  dream  as  unhesitatingly  as  they  had  previously 
followed  the  star.  Joseph,  also,  in  regard  to  his  dream,  appears  to  have  been  at 
least  as  swift  to  obey;  rising  up  "by  night"  (ver.  14,  cf.  Gen.  xxii.  3)  to  do 
as  God  bid,  and  being  evidently  as  satisfied  here  with  God's  appointments  or 
"  judgments  "  as  the  Psalmist  of  old  (Ps.  cxix.  62).  Perceptibly  therefore,  he 
is  not  walking  here  like  a  man  quite  in  the  dark.  Also,  we  find  some  light 
here  in  what  is  told  us  of  God,     In  judging  this  we  must  bear  in  mind  how  God 

26 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  ii. 


is  represented  here  as  speaking  to  His  people — viz.,  as  in  long  previous  days,  by 
''visions  and  dreams"  (see  chap.  i.  20,  ii.  12,  13,  22;  Gen.  xv.  1,  xlvi.  2; 
Isa.  i.  1  j  Dan.  passim,  etc.).  We  must  also  remember  how  it  often  is  with  our 
"  visions  and  dreams,"  how  the  usual  sequences  and  distinctions  of  waking  life 
are  not  always  observed  in  such  things,  and  how  the  dreamer  himself  may  some- 
times almost  appear  to  be  two  persons  in  one.  Viewed  in  this  way  we  can  see  a 
correspondence  between  the  experience  of  Israel  as  described  in  Hosea  xi.  1,  and 
the  experience  of  the  Hope  of  Israel  as  narrated  here,  in  the  land  of  Egypt. 
In  a  similar  way  we  can  understand  a  wide  massacre  of  infants  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Rachel's  sepulchre  (Gen.  xxxv.  19),  being  mystically  viewed  as  though  it 
were  a  bereavement  of  Hachel  herself,  especially,  perhaps,  when  we  bear  in  mind 
some  of  the  particulars  of  her  sad  history  as  a  mother  (Gen.  xxxv.  18).  Anyway 
this  is  how  the  inspiration  of  the  Evangelist  bids  us  look  on  these  prophecies. 
We  are  to  see  in  them  tokens  that  the  things  spoken  of  were  not  unexpected  by 
God  ;  that  they  were  parts  rather  of  some  mighty  plan  which  He  had  in  view 
from  the  first ;  and  that  they  are  not  to  be  judged,  therefore,  by  merely  observ- 
ing their  appearance  at  the  time.  If  these  considerations  do  not  remove  the 
darkness  they  should  at  least  reconcile  us  to  its  existence,  and  show  that  it 
carries  with  it  the  seeds  of  that  which  will  fully  dispel  it  in  time  (cf.  Ps.  xcvii.  11). 
See,  therefore,  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  The  exceeding  watchfulness  of  GodJs  care. — Over  the  Magi.  How  He  reads 
the  feelings  of  Herod  about  them  !  How  He  warns  them  in  consequence  ! 
How  "  precious"  their  lives  are  in  His  "sight"  (Ps.  exvi.  15).  Over  that  holy 
Babe.  Noting  Its  peril.  Giving  time  for  escape  by  sending  the  wise  men 
away,  and  not  back.  Telling  Joseph  of  it  by  night.  Providing  in  Joseph 
himself  so  faithful  a  guardian,  so  obedient,  so  prompt.  Providing  a  place 
of  refuge  at  once  so  safe  and  so  near,  being  out  of  Herod's  jurisdiction  and  yet 
not  out  of  reach.  Probably  also  (if  we  may  judge  from  the  "  two  years  old"  of 
ver.  16),  postponing  all  this  till  the  Babe  and  its  mother  should  be  equal  to  the 
journey  required.     If  that  holy  One  has  to  fly,  it  shall  not  be  in  vain. 

2.  The  assured  depth  of  God's  plans. — When  soldiers  are  under  the  lead  of  a 
commander  in  whom  they  have  fully  learned  to  confide,  and  find  him  issuing 
a  series  of  orders  which  they  did  not  expect  and  do  not  understand,  what  do  they 
say  ?  Not  that  he  is  in  error,  but  that  they  are  in  ignorance.  Not  that  he  does 
not  know,  but  that  he  only  knows,  what  it  is  he  is  doing.  We  may  rightly 
argue  in  the  same  way  of  the  perplexities  of  this  case.  They  are  like  "  sounding 
a  retreat "  when  we  should  have  expected  a  "command  to  advance."  It  is  the 
part  of  faith  not  to  believe  less,  but  to  believe  more,  on  this  ground.  Nothing  is 
more  likely  than  that  the  commands  of  an  all- wise  Commander  should  at 
times  be  perplexing  to  us.  Never  is  this  more  likely  than  when  His  plans  are 
most  remarkable  for  theii'  depth. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Vers.  13-23.    The  King   in  exile. —  Vers.    13-23   bring   this  parallel   into 

Without  supposing  that  the  Evangelist  great   prominence.      There   are   three 

moulded  his  Gospel  on  the  plan  of  the  sections,    each   of    which   has    for    its 

Pentateuch  (as  Dr.    Delitzsch   in   his  centre  an  Old  Testament  prophecy. 
New  Investigations  into  the  Origin  and  I.  The  flight  into  Egypt,  and  the 

Plan  of  the  Canonical  Gospels  tries  to  prophecy  fulfilled   therein. — In   their 

show),  we  cannot  but  see  that  there  is  a  original  place  Hosea's  words  are  not  a 

real  parallel  between  the  beginnings  of  prophecy  at  all,  but  simply  a  part  of 

the  national  life  of  Israel  and  the  com-  a   tender   historical   resume    of    God's 

mencement    of    the    life    of    Christ,  dealings    with    Israel,   by   which   the 

27 


CHAP.  11.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


prophet  would  touch  his  contempo- 
raries' hearts  into  penitence  and  trust. 
How,  then,  is  the  Evangelist  justified 
in  regarding  them  as  prophetic,  and 
in  looking  on  Christ's  flight  as  their 
fulfilment  ?  The  answer  is  to  be  found 
in  that  analogy  between  the  national 
and  the  personal  Israel  which  runs 
through  all  the  Old  Testament,  and 
reaches  its  highest  clearness  in  the 
second  part  of  Isaiah's  prophecies. 
Jesus  Christ  was  what  Israel  was  des- 
tined and  failed  to  be,  the  true  Servant 
of  God,  His  Anointed,  His  Son,  the 
medium  of  conveying  His  name  to 
the  world.  The  ideal  of  the  nation 
was  realised  in  Him.  His  brief  stay 
in  Egypt  served  the  very  same  purpose 
in  His  life  which  their  four  hundred 
years  there  did  in  theirs — it  sheltered 
Him  from  His  enemies,  and  gave  Him 
room  to  grow.  Just  as  the  infant 
nation  was  unawares  fostered  in  the 
very  lap  of  the  country  which  was  the 
symbol  of  the  world  hostile  to  God,  so 
the  infant  Christ  was  guarded  and 
grew  there.  The  prophecy  is  a  pro- 
phecy just  because  it  is  history ;  for 
the  history  was  all  a  shadow  of  the 
future,  and  He  is  the  true  Israel  and 
the  Son  of  God. 

II.  The  slaughter  of  the  innocents, 
and  the  prophecy  fulfilled  therein. — 
Jer.  xxxi.  15  is  still  less  a  prophecy 
than  was  the  passage  in  Hosea.  Seeing 
that  the  prophet's  words  do  not  describe 
a  fact,  but  are  a  poetical  personification 
to  convey  simply  the  idea  of  calamity, 
which  might  make  the  dead  mother 
weep,  the  word  "  fulfilled "  can  ob- 
viously be  applied  to  them  only  in  a 
modified  and  somewhat  elastic  sense, 
and  is  sufficiently  defended  if  we  re- 
cognise in  the  slaughter  of  these 
children  a  woe  which,  though  small 
in  itself,  yet,  when  considered  in 
reference  to  its  inflicter,  a  usurping 
king  of  the  Jews,  and  in  reference 
to  its  occasion,  the  desire  to  slay  the 
God-sent  King,  and  in  reference  to 
its  place  as  first  of  the  tragic  series 
of  martyrdoms  for  Messiah,  was  heavy 
with  a  sorer  burden  of  national  disaster, 
when  seen  by  eyes  made  wise  by  death, 

28 


than  even  the  captivity,  which  seemed 
to  falsify  the  promises  of  God  and  the 
hopes  of  a  thousand  years. 

III.  The  return  to  Nazareth,  and 
the  prophecy  fulfilled  therein. — Such 
prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  the  very 
fact  that  He  was  all  His  life  known 
as  "of  Nazareth,"  and  the  verbal 
assonance  between  that  name,  "  the 
shoot,"  and  the  word  "  Nazarene  "  is 
a  finger-post  pointing  to  the  meaning 
of  the  place  of  abode  chosen  for  Him. 
— A.  Maclaren,  D.D, 

Ver.  13.  The  Divine  Infant  sent 
away. — 1.  Our  Lord  was  persecuted 
so  soon  as  He  was  known  in  the  world. 
He  is  sought  to  be  slain  who  came  to 
save  men.  2.  He  who  is  the  Ancient  of 
days,  the  everlasting  Father,  is  called 
a  young  child  (Isa.  ix.  6).  3.  The 
Lord  will  have  ordinary  means  used 
when  they  may  be  had.  He  will 
save  Christ  by  flight,  and  will  do  no 
miracle  needlessly.  4.  It  is  safe  to 
wait  for  the  Lord  in  all  things,  and 
to  attend  His  providence.  "  Be  thou 
there  until  I  bring  thee  word." — David 
Dickson. 

Ver.  14.  JosepKs  speedy  ohed^ience. 
— 1.  When  our  direction  is  clear,  our 
obedience  should  be  speedy.  2.  When 
Christ  is  known  He  will  be  more  dear 
than  anything  else.  As  the  Child  is 
first  in  Joseph's  commission  to  take 
care  of  Him,  so  in  his  obedience.  **  The 
young  Child  and  His  mother."  3.  Any 
place,  if  God  send  us  there  and  if 
Christ  be  in  our  company,  is  good. 
Even  Egypt. — Ibid. 

Ver.  15.  The  church's  calling. — These 
words,  spoken  by  the  prophet  Hosea, 
were  not  accommodated  to  Christ,  but 
were  most  truly  fulfilled  in  Him.  They 
are  evermore  finding  a  spiritual  ful- 
filment also  in  the  church  of  the 
redeemed.  If  we  have  been  called 
out  of  Egypt  by  the  voice  of  God  to 
be  His  children,  what  are  some  of  the 
duties  which  flow  out  from  our  high 
vocation  ? 

I.  To  leave  Egypt  altogether  behind 


'HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  ii. 


us. — To  have  no  going  back  to  it,  even  blood  !      Say,    who    shall    be    king — 

in  thought,  much  less  drawing  back  to  Christ     or     Herod  ?       The     apparent 

it  in  deed.  blessings  connected  with  the  reign  of 

II.    Not    to   expect    to    enter    the  Herod  are  connected  with  danger.     It 

promised  land   at   once. — There   is  a  is    always    dangerous    to    be    seeking 

time  and  span  between,  in  which  our  flowers   on    the   slopes    of    a    volcano. 

God  will  prove  us  and  humble  us,  and  — Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 
show  us  what  is  in  our  hearts.     This  is 

also  a  sifting  time;  a  separating  of  the  Ver.  16.  The  cruelty  of  the  disappointed 

true  members  of  the  church  from  the  king. — 1.    God  turneth  the  wisdom  of 

false. — R.  C.  Trench,  D.D,  His   enemies   to   folly.      Herod   found 

himself   "  mocked."      2.    Wicked  heads 

Yer.   16-18.    Goodness  v.  Selfishness,  do  take  it  hardly  if  every  instrument 

— 1.  The  power  of  goodness  is  moral ;  whom  they  employ  and  abuse  do  not 

the   power   of    selfishness   is   physical,  serve  their  base  designs.     3.    Enemies 

2.  The  spirit  of  goodness  is  preserva-  of  Christ,  when  fraud  doth  fail  them, 

tive ;    the   spirit   of    selfishness   is   de-  do  fall  to  open  rage.     4.  Satan  and  his 

structive.      3.    The  result  of  goodness  instruments    do    labour    to   overthrow 

is   "  goodwill  towards   men  "  ;    the  re-  such  as  are  likest  unto  Christ,  if  they 

suit  of  selfishness  is  "  lamentation  and  cannot  overtake  Himself.     5.    Wicked 

mourning  and  great  weeping."     4.  See  men  do  not  reverence  God's  providence, 

what  the  world  would  come  to  under  but  are  incensed  the  more  to  do  mischief, 

a  selfish   rulership  !      Passion    flies   to  — David  Dickson, 
the  sword  !    Disappointment  thirsts  for 

MAIJSr  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—23. 

Settled  obscurity. — The  main  idea  of  the  last  passage  in  comparison  with  the 
passage  which  preceded  it  was  that  of  contrast.  The  main  idea  of  the  present 
passage  in  comparison  with  the  last  is  that  of  continuation.  Things  are  found 
to  remain — things  are  meant  to  remain — notwithstanding  some  changes,  very 
much  as  they  were.  What  the  infant  Jesus  was  seen  to  become  in  the  last 
story.  He  is  seen  to  continue  in  this.  We  may  see  this  exhibited  :  1.  In  the 
circumstances  of  His  7'eturn  from  Egypt.  2.  In  its  immediate  consequences. 
3.  In  its  final  result. 

I.  In  the  circumstances  of  His  return. — There  is  a  clear  correspondence 
between  these — certain  minor  diflerences  only  excepted — and  those  of  the  previous 
flight.  Take  the  differences  first :  Herod  was  alive  on  the  former  occasion.  Not 
only  is  he  now  no  longer  alive,  but  the  same  is  true  also  of  all  who  had  sought 
"the  young  Child's  life"  (ver.  20).  The  word  "flee,"  also,  was  used  on  the 
former  occasion  ;  the  word  "  go  "  only  on  this — probably  because  the  occasion 
was  not  an  urgent  one  as  before.  Also,  probably,  for  the  same  reason,  we  read 
nothing  now  of  going  "  by  night."  But,  these  exceptions  excepted,  all  else  is 
very  much  as  before.  The  same  kind  of  messenger  or  "  angel"  ;  the  same  sphere 
of  appearance,  in  a  vision  or  "  dream  "  ;  the  same  kind  and  style  of  injunction ; 
the  same  gracious  vouchsafing  of  reasons  in  support  of  it ;  and  the  same  ready 
and  implicit  obedience  thereto,  are  found  here  as  before  (vers.  19-21).  In  all 
respects  the  Child  is  to  go  back  as  it  had  previously  come.  With  much  care  and 
clearness  of  injunction,  there  was  nothing  of  the  royal,  in  the  first  of  these 
cases.     There  is  neither  less  nor  more,  in  either  respect,  in  this  last. 

II.  In  the  immediate  consequences  of  this  return. — 1.  On  their  negative  side. 
— The  direct  route  from  Egypt  to  "the  land  of  Israel"  (ver.  21),  would  bring 
Joseph  and  his  charges  first  to  the  territory  of  "Judaea"  (ver.  22).  Possibly, 
also,  there  were  other  reasons  which  would  bring  Joseph  there  first.     He  might 

29 


CHAP.  II.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


naturally  think  of  going  back  first  to  the  exact  locality  he  had  left.  He  was 
connected  with  it,  as  we  know  (Luke  ii.  4),  by  his  ancestry.  Also  by  the  way 
in  which  the  story  of  Jesus  had  been  connected  with  it  so  far.  He  might  even 
be  thinking,  for  the  same  reasons,  of  making  that  place  his  abode.  If  such  were 
his  intentions,  they  seem  to  account  exactly  for  what  we  read  of  him  next,  viz. 
that  "  when  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did  reign  in  Judaea  in  the  room  of  his 
father  Herod  (ver.  22),  he  was  afraid  to  go  thither."  He  was  afraid  to  do,  that 
is  to  say,  (so  it  seems  to  mean),  what  he  had  thought  of  doing  before.  Anyway 
we  find  that  he  w^as  checked  in  this  way  from  taking  a  step  which  would  have 
had  (if  taken)  a  certain  kind  of  kingly  appearance  about  it.  Going  back  to 
"  Bethlehem  "  with  its  many  associations,  might  not  have  amounted  to  much  in 
the  then  lowly  estate  of  the  house  of  David  ;  but  it  might  also  have  looked  like 
a  tacit  assertion  of  the  royalty  of  their  rights.  Even  so  much  as  this,  therefore, 
at  that  time,  was  not  to  be  done.  2.  On  their  positive  side. — When  thus  checked, 
Joseph,  of  course,  would  be  in  some  doubt.  If  not  "  thither,"  then  "■  whither  "  ? 
So  he  would  ask.  We  know  that  he  had  connections  in  Galilee ;  as  also  that  it 
was  from  Galilee,  some  time  before,  that  he  had  come  up  to  Bethlehem  to  be 
taxed  (Luke  ii.  4).  Also  we  know  from  other  sources  (Jos.,  Ant.,  XVII.  viii.  1), 
that  Galilee  was  not  included  in  the  jurisdiction  of  this  son  of  Herod — a  man 
already  distinguished  for  his  cruelty  (ibid.,  ix.  3) — but  in  that  of  his  brother 
Antipas.  If  these  things  led  Joseph,  of  themselves  (as  seems  not  improbable)  to 
think  of  going  to  Galilee,  the  idea  was  confirmed — or  may  have  been  altogether 
suggested — by  a  fourth  communication  from  heaven.  "  Being  warned  of  God 
in  a  dream,  he  withdrew  into  the  parts  of  Galilee,"  into  that  despised  province, 
that  is  to  say,  that  obscure  locality,  where  he  would  be  almost  as  much  of  an 
exile,  and  quite  as  far  from  anything  kingly,  as  in  Egypt  itself.  So  directly  did 
God  thus  order  again,  that  Jesus  should  still  be  as  He  was. 

III.  The  final  result. — There  is  an  air — 1.  Of  great  deliberation  in  what  we 
read  about  this.  "He  came  and  dwelt" — he  took  up  his  abode — he  settled 
down — in  that  part  of  the  world.  He  did  so  also — it  is  further  noted — "  in  a 
city  called  Nazareth  ;  "  as  though  to  bid  us  observe  that  he  did  so,  notwithstanding 
its  name ;  notwithstanding  the  well-known  ill  repute  of  its  name  (cf.  John  i.  46). 
For  all  this  the  Evangelist  would  have  us  observe  that  this  was  the  place  which 
he  "  chose" — so  far,  bat  so  far  only,  like  him  we  read  of  in  Gen.  xiii.  11.  There 
is  an  air — 2.  Of  even  greater  deliberation  in  what  accompanies  this.  To  *'  dwell" 
in  such  a  city — to  be  brought  up  in  such  a  city — would  either  mean  no  distinction 
at  all,  or  else  distinction  of  a  most  unenviable  description.  Yet  this,  we  are 
reminded,  is  just  what  God  Himself  had  planned  of  old  about  the  Messiah.  The 
prophets  had  foretold  in  many  places  that  He  was  to  bear  a  name  of  special 
reproach.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  such  passages  that  God  had  in  view  in  the 
choice  of  this  place.  He  meant  Jesus  of  Bethlehem  not  to  be  known  as  such,  but 
as  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth  "  among  men.  He  meant  David's  Son — for  a  time  at  any 
rate — ^to  be  lost  in  the  crowd.  He  meant  to  continue,  in  a  word,  what  He  had 
begun  to  indicate,  when  He  bade  Joseph  take  that  infant  King^  and  "flee"  for 
His  life  ! 

From  the  passage  thus  considered  we  see : 

1.  How  deliberate  sometimes  are  God's  ways. — As  with  Moses  who  was  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness  (Acts  vii.  30)  before  being  sent  to  effect  the  deliverance 
of  Israel ;  as  with  John  the  Baptist  (Luke  i.  80),  so  with  that  Greater  than 
either  whom  we  are  told  about  here.  He  is  purposely  sent  into,  and  left  in 
obscurity  for  nearly  thirty  years  of  His  life — nearly  a  "  generation  "  in  fact 
(Luke  iii.  23).  The  sudden  blaze  of  Luke  ii.  46,  47,  only  makes  this  the  more 
strange.  How  was  it  that  One  who  could  speak  so  well  on  that  occasion  was 
afterwards  in  silence  so  long  ? 

30 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  ii. 


2.  How  significant  they  are  here. — When  we  see  a  lamp  of  great  brilliancy 
lit  and  rejoiced  in,  and  then  immediately  taken  down  and  hid  "  under  a  bushel," 
and  afterwards  kept  there,  though  still  unseen,  with  sedulous  care,  what  do  we 
expect  if  the  master  of  the  house  is  one  who  knows  what  he  does  ?  Evidently, 
that  he  has  some  great  purpose  in  view  !  Most  probably,  also,  that  that  purpose 
is  of  too  profound  a  nature  to  be  understood  by  us  yet ! 

HOMILIES  ON.  THE    VERSES, 

Ver.  19.  Joseph. — I.  A   pattern   of  a  Divine  message,  to  promote  a  definite, 

self-abnegating  submission.  deliberate    counsel   of    God,   to   point 

II.  An   example  of  its  rewards. —  forward  to  a  certified  and  warranted 

The  angel  ever  comes  again  to  those  goal  of  national  history. — Canon  Scott- 

who  have   once   obeyed  and  continue  Holland. 
to  wait. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Prophecy. — What  are  the  conditions 

Yer.  22.  JosepKs  new  fear. — 1.  No  and  assumptions  which  are  involved  in 

wonder  the  children  of  wicked  parents  prophecy  ? 

are  suspected   till   their  regeneration  I.  It  assumes   one   God,  enduring, 

appear.     Joseph  fears  lest  Archelaus  unchanging,  supreme,  who  inhabiteth 

should     be     father-like     or     father-  eternity. 

worse.  2.  When  God  will  comfort  a  II.  The  one  God  is  holy. — He  has 
man  He  removeth  one  doubt  as  well  a  fixed  spiritual  character  which  con- 
as  another.  Of.  chap.  i.  20.  The  stitutes  His  unity — a  character  which 
Lord's  warrant  and  clear  direction  is  consistent  and  true  and  rational, 
doth  quiet  the  mind. — David  Dickson.  working   by   definite   vital    principles, 

a   character  of  deliberate  purpose,  of 

Ver.    23.   The    prophets    mission. —  certified   aim,  not   wilfully    wayward, 

The  prophets  are  not  primarily  poets ;  not  incalculably  uncertain,  but  firm — 

poetry  is  not  their  professional  ofiice :  loving   for   ever    what   He   has   once 

they  only  happen  by  the  way  to  be  loved,  and  hating  for  ever  what  He 

poetically   gifted ;  they   have   another  has  once  hated. 

function  to  the  purposes  and  uses  of         III.  He  is  a  God  who  reveals  Himself 

which  they  bend  all  their  imaginative  to  man. — This  revelation  of  Himself 

gifts.  must  be   adapted  to   the   measure   of 

I.  They  are  intensely  and  supremely  man's  capacity ;  it  must  be  progressive, 
practical. — They  have  practical  ends  educational,  disciplinary.  The  "I  am" 
to  serve,  practical  objects  to  achieve  ;  can  but  gradually  reveal  what  it  will 
they  are  statesmen  directing,  con-  be,  and  yet  all  that  it  will  reveal  itself 
trolling  the  natural  mind  to  political  to  be  will  be  only  an  unveiling  of  the 
issues ;  they  are  furthering  alliances,  eternal  '^  I  am."  And  history  is  the 
carrying  out  policies,  making  history.  medium  of  this  unveiling. 

II.  They  are  preachers. — Aiming  at  IV.  A  specialised  history. — God's 
the  conscience  rather  than  the  imagi-  purpose  is  definite  and  real ;  it  cannot 
nation,  claiming  the  will  rather  than  remain  vague,  primeval,  tentative,  and 
the  emotions.  difiused.     It   must   disentangle   itself, 

III.  They  have  an  official  commis-  sharpen  its  outlines,  shape  its  mate- 
sion  to  fulfil  to  which  all  their  poetical  rials,  push  its  way  forward, 
capacities    are    directed — not    merely  V.  As  the   mind  of  God  opens   it 
exercising  the  gift  of  genius  of  singling  points    more    and    more   to    a   fixed 
out  the  truth  implanted  in   them  by  fulfilment. — Ibid. 

God,    that    is    the    high    mission    of 

every  poet ;  but  a  formal  and  certified  Jesus    at    Nazareth. — Equally    lich 

commission  to  convey  orders,  to  declare      was  the  present  life  on  which  the  eyes 

31 


CHAP.  II.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW, 


of  the  boy  Jesus  looked  out.  Across 
Esdraelon,  opposite  to  Nazareth,  there 
emerged  from  the  Samarian  hills  the 
roadfrom  Jerusalem, thronged  annually 
with  pilgrims,  and  the  road  from  Egypt 
with  its  merchants  going  up  and  down. 
The  Midianite  caravans  could  be 
watched  for  miles  coming  up  from  the 
fords  of  Jordan;  and  the  caravans 
from  Damascus  wound  round  the  foot 
of  the  hill  on  which  Nazareth  stands. 
Or  if  the  village  boys  climbed  the 
northern  edge  of  their  home,  there 
was  another  road  almost  within  sight, 
where  the  companies  were  still  more 
brilliant — that  direct  highway  between 
Acre  and  the  Decapohs,  along  which 
legions  marched,  and  princes  swept 
with  their  retinues,  and  all  sorts  of 
travellers  from  all  countries  went  to 
and  fro.  The  Roman  ranks,  the 
Roman  eagles,  the  wealth  of  noblemen's 
litters  and  equipages  cannot  have 
been  strange  to  the  eyes  of  the  boys  of 
Nazareth,  especially  after  their  twelfth 
year,  when  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem, 
or  with  their  fathers  visited  famous 
Rabbis,  who  came  down  from  Jerusalem, 
peripatetic  among  the  provinces.  Nor 
can  it  have  been  the  eye  only  which 
was  stirred.  For  all  the  rumour  of  the 
Empire  entered  Palestine  close  to 
Nazareth — the  news  from  Rome  about, 
the  Emperor's  health,  about  the 
changing  influence  of  the  great  states- 
men, about  the  prospects  at  court  of 
Herod,  or  of  the  Jews,  about  Caesar's 
last  order  concerning  the  tribute,  or 
whether  the  policy  of  the  procurator 
would  be  sustained.     Many  Galilsean 


families  must  have  had  relatives  in 
Rome  ;  Jews  would  come  back  to  this 
countryside  to  tell  of  the  life  of  the 
world's  capital.  Moreover,  the  scandals 
of  the  Herods  buzzed  up  and  down 
these  roads  ;  pedlars  carried  them,  and 
the  peripatetic  Rabbis  would  moralise 
upon  them.  And  the  customs,  too, 
of  the  neighbouring  Gentiles — their 
loose  living,  their  sensuous  worship, 
their  absorption  in  business,  the  hope- 
lessness of  the  inscriptions  on  their 
tombs,  multitudes  of  which  were 
readable  (and  some  are  still)  on  the 
roads  round  Galilee — all  this  would 
furnish  endless  talk  in  Nazareth,  both 
among  men  and  boys.  Here,  then, 
He  grew  up  and  suffered  temptation, 
who  was  tempted  in  all  points  like 
as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  The  perfect 
example  of  His  purity  and  patience 
was  achieved — not  easily  as  behind 
a  wide  fence  which  shut  the  world 
out — but  amid  rumour  and  scandal 
and  every  provocation  to  unlawful 
curiosity  and  premature  ambition.  A 
vision  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
was  as  possible  from  Nazareth  as  from 
the  Mount  of  Temptation.  The 
pressure  and  problems  of  the  world 
outside  God's  people  must  have  been 
felt  by  the  youth  of  Nazareth  as  by 
few  others  ;  yet  the  scenes  of  prophetic 
missions  to  it — Elijah's  and  Elisha's — 
were  also  within  sight.  But  the  chief 
lesson  which  Nazareth  has  for  us  is  the 
possibility  of  a  pure  home  and  a 
spotless  youth  in  the  very  face  of  the 
evil  world. — Professor  G.  A.  Smith  in 
Expositor. 


32 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  iii. 


CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  In  those  days. — Of  Christ's  secluded  life  at  Nazareth  (see  Luke  iii.  1,  etc.) 
St.  Matthew  passes  over  a  period  of  nearly  thirty  years  (Luke  iii.  23).  Preaching.  — Lt 
heralding  ;  making,  by  command,  a  royal  proclamation.  Wilderness  of  Judaea. — The  name 
was  commonly  applied  to  the  thinly  populated  region  in  the  southern  valley  of  the  Jordan, 
and  so  was  equivalent  to  "  the  country  about  Jordan  "  of  Luke  iii.  3,  including  even  part  of 
the  district  east  of  the  river.     In  this  region  John  had  grown  up  (Luke  i.  80)  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  2.  The  kingdom  of  heaven. — St.  Matthew  alone  uses  this  expression,  but  he  also 
employs  the  equivalent  phrase,  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  common  with  the  other  New  Testa- 
ment writers.  In  itself  the  expression  was  not  new.  It  connected  itself  in  Jewish  thought 
with  the  theocracy — the  direct  rule  of  God — of  which  the  earthly  kingdom  was  a  shadow 
{Carr).  See  Supplementary  note.  At  hand. — By  the  Jews  the  Messiah  was  always 
conceived  as  the  means  whereby  the  kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  set  up  (Wendt). 
Cf.  Dan.  vii.  13,  14. 

Ver.  3.  Prepare  ye  the  way. — The  conquerors  of  the  East  sent  a  herald  before  them  to  call 
the  people  cf  the  countries  through  which  they  marched  to  prepare  for  their  approach.  A 
*'  king's  highway  "  had  to  be  carried  through  the  open  land  of  the  wilderness,  valleys  filled 
up,  etc.  The  words  used  are,  of  course,  poetical  in  their  greatness  iPlumptre).  The  prepara- 
tion was  to  be  by  repentance. 

Ver.  4.  Camel's  hair,  i.e.  woven  of  it.  The  dress  was,  perhaps,  deliberately  adopted)  by 
the  Baptist  as  reviving  the  outward  appearance  of  Elijah  (2  Kings  i.  8)  "  who  suddenly 
appeared  in  the  wild  mountain  region  of  Gilead,  at  a  time  when  Phoenician  manners  were 
making  the  same  havoc  in  Israel  that  Greek  manners"  were  "now  making  in  Jerusalem  " 
iJ.  M.  6ribso7i).  See  Dr.  Edersheim's  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  vol.  i.,  p.  130,  as 
to  the  luxuriousness  of  Jerusalem  at  this  time.  Locusts. — The  insect,  not  the  pod.  Permitted 
by  the  law  (Lev.  xi.  22).  Still  used  by  the  poor  in  Palestine  and  Syria.  Wild  honey. — 
Honey  made  by  wild  bees.  Jos.,  B.  J.,  IV.  viii.  3,  speaking  of  the  plain  of  Jericho,  says 
that  the  palm-trees,  when  pressed,  exude  honey  ;  but,  he  adds,  "  the  country  produces  honey 
from  bees."  Zorn,  Kuinoel,  Fritzsche,  and  others,  suppose  the  "  wild  honey "  to  have 
been  of  purely  vegetable  origin.  There  were  clearly  both  kinds  in  the  wilderness  oC  Judaea 
{H.  R.  Reynolds). 

Ver.  5.  Begion  .  .  .  Jordan.  —This  would  include  the  whole  length  of  the  river- valley,  and 
would,  therefore,  take  in  parts  of  Peraea,  Samaria,  Galilee,  and  Gaulonitis  {Plumptre'). 

Ver.  7.  Pharisees. — The  name  signifies  '*  separatists  " ;  the  party  dates  from  the  revival  of 
the  national  life  and  observances  of  the  Mosaic  law  under  the  Maccabees.  Their  ruling 
principle  was  a  literal  obedience  to  the  written  law  and  to  an  unwritten  tradition.  Originally 
they  were  leaders  of  a  genuine  reform.  But  in  the  hands  of  less  spiritual  successors  their 
system  had  become  little  else  than  a  formal  observance  of  carefully  prescribed  rules. 
Politically  they  were  the  popular  party,  supporters  of  an  isolating  policy,  who  would  make 
no  terms  with  Rome  or  any  other  foreign  power.  The  Zealots  may  be  regarded  as  the  extreme 
section  of  the  Pharisees.  Sadducees. — The  aristocratic  and  priestly  party ;  they  acquiesced 
in  foreign  rule  and  foreign  civilisation.  Refused  to  give  the  same  weight  as  the  Pharisees 
to  unwritten  tradition,  but  adhered  strictly  to  the  written  law  of  Moses.  Their  religious 
creed  excluded  belief  in  a  future  life  or  in  angels  and  spirits.  The  name  is  probably  derived 
from  Zadok  the  priest  in  David's  time  (  Carr).  0  generation  of  vipers. — Perhaps  borrowed 
from  Isa.  lix.  5.  Both  parties  "  poisoners  of  the  nation's  religious  principles  "  (JBronn). 
Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  —The  coming  of  the  Messiah  was  expected  to  be  a  time  of 
judgment  (Dan.  vii.  10,  26)  which,  however,  the  Jews  interpreted  of  the  heathen  only 
(JdanseV). 

Ver.  9.  Abraham  .  .  .  father. — The  boast  seems  to  have  been  common.  See  John 
viii.  33-39.  The  later  Hebrew  literature  frequently  expresses  the  conviction  that  the  children 
of  Abraham  occupied  a  position  of  exclusive  and  exceptional  privilege  {H.  R.  Reynolds). 
Stones. — The  coming  kingdom  of  righteousness  and  truth  will  not  fail,  even  if  Pharisees  and 
Sad<)ucees  and  all  the  natural  children  of  Abraham  refuse  to  enter  its  only  gate  of  repen- 
tance. If  flesh  become  stone,  then  stone  can  be  made  flesh,  according  to  the  word  of 
promise  {J.  M.  Gibson). 

Ver.  10.  Axe. — The  woodman  has,  as  it  were,  taken  his  position,  and,  while  making  his 
brief  preparations,  such  as  the  adjustment  of  his  vesture,  etc.,  has  laid  his  axe  at  the  root. 
The  crisis-time  has  come.     Not  a  moment  should  be  lost  {Morison), 

D  33 


CHAP.  III.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  11.  Shoes,  or  sandals. — Among  Jews,  Greeks,  and  Romans  alike,  this  office,  that  of 
untying  and  carrying  the  shoes  of  the  master  of  the  house  or  of  a  guest,  was  the  well-known 
function  of  the  lowest  slave  of  the  household  {^Plumptre).  With  fire.— Origen,  among  the 
Fathers,  and  among  moderns  Neander,  Meyer,  De  Wette,  and  Lange  interpret  this  as  a 
baptism  of  the  impenitent  with  hell-fire,  and  so  as  a  distinct  baptism  from  that  of  the 
Spirit,  but  t'iiis  is,  as  Dr.  D.  Brown  says,  "  exceedingly  unnatural."  The  "  with  "  would  be 
better  omitted.  It  is  in  italics  in  the  R.  V.  The  Baptist  adds  "  and  fire,"  to  give  a  vivid 
description  of  the  mighty  and  mightily  purificatory  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Morison). 

Ver.  12.  Fan  =  winnowing-fan.  Purge,  cleanse  (R.  V.).  Floor,  threshing -Jiour  (R.V.). 
Chaff  =  all  but  the  actual  grain,  i.e.  the  ungodly  and  evil-doers.  TJnquenchable  fire  =  the 
wrath  of  God  against  evil,  which  is,  in  its  very  nature,  eternal,  and  can  only  cease  with  the 
cessation  or  transformation  of  the  evil  {Plumjytre).  How  picturesque  John's  preaching  1 
Vers.  7-12  are  full  of  striking  imagery. 

Ver.  13.  Jesus  .  .  .  baptised. — He  received  the  rite  as  ratifying  the  mission  of  the  great 
forerunner,  and  He  also  received  it  as  the  beautiful  symbol  of  moral  purification,  and  the 
humble  inauguration  of  a  ministry  which  came  not  to  destroy  the  law  but  to  fulfil  {Farrar). 

Ver.  14.  Forbad,  dieKwXvev  is  emphatic,  and  implies  that  John  interposed  strenuously 
to  hinder  Him.  The  Baptist's  words  imply  that  he  had  some  definite  knowledge  of  the 
character  of  Jesus.  John  i.  33  seems  to  mean  that  he  did  not  know  for  certain,  by  Divine 
intimation  or  revelation,  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  until  the  event  referred  to  occurred 
(^3Ioriso7i). 

T^er.  15.  Now  =  for  the  present.  "The  future  will  make  abundantly  manifest  what  we 
respectively  are."  Fulfil  all  righteousness. — To  leave  nothing  undone  which  would  be 
honouring  to  the  seemly  and  significant  ordinances  of  God  (^Morison). 

Ver.  16.  Heavens  .  .  .  opened. — This  and  the  resultant  manifestations  were  granted 
probably  to  John  and  Jesus  only  (John  i.  32-34).  Dove. — Suggesting  the  idea  of  complete- 
ness and,  at  the  same  time,  of  beauty,  gentleness,  peace,  and  love  {J.  M.  Gibson'). 

Ver.  17.  This  is  My  beloved  Son. — This  revelation  awakened  the  Messianic  consciousness 
of  Jesus  (  Wendt).  The  titles,  "  Son  of  God  "  and  "  beloved,"  or  well-pleasing  to  the  Father, 
according  to  the  Old  Testament  promises,  belonged  to  the  Messiah  (cf.  Ps.ii.  7  ;  Isa.  xlii.  1). 
No  doubt  Jesus  was  previously  conscious  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God  and  an  object  of  the 
Divine  complacency ;  but  through  this  revelation  was  awakened  the  consciousness  of  a 
unique  pre-eminence  of  sonship  in  relation  to  God,  and  of  the  unique  significance  which,  in 
virtue  of  this  pre-eminence.  He  should  have  for  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
the  Messianic  dispensation  (ibid.). 

SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES. 

On  St.  Matthew's  use  of  the  expression  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven.'' — In  regard  to  the  meaning 
of  this  expression,  I  go  along  with  Schiirer  in  explaining  that  it  is  only  in  the  Jewish  custom 
of  using  some  circumlocution  for  the  name  of  God,  and  of  specially  using  the  term  heaven 
for  tbat  purpose  (cf.  Mark  xi.  30  ;  Luke  xv.  18),  that  we  must  seek  the  reason  for  inter- 
changing the  terms  "  kingdom  of  God  "  and  "kingdom  of  heaven."  The  peculiar  meaning  of 
the  notion  "kingdom  of  God"  would  not  be  modified  or  specialised  by  this  transposition. 
It  would  neither  specially  denote  the  heavenly  origin  of  the  kingdom  nor  its  perfect  realisa- 
tion in  heaven,  but  only  that  the  kingdom  belongs  to  heaven,  that  is,  to  God  in  heaven,  and 
that  it  is  governed  from  heaven,  that  is,  by  God.  And  just  because  that  expression  must  be 
explained  by  the  Jewish  custom  of  circumlocution,  and  was  by  no  means  an  original  term  as 
used  by  the  Evangelist,  but  was  adopted  by  him  out  of  the  current  phraseology  of  his 
contemporaries,  and  further,  because  this  expression  simply  meant,  in  the  consciousness  of 
the  first  Evangelist,  the  same  thing  as  the  term  "kingdom  of  God,"  and  did  not  bring  out 
any  peculiar  aspect  of  thought,  we  can  understand  that  the  Evangelist  was  not  always 
consistent  in  the  use  of  that  expression,  but  sometimes  unconsciously  employed  alongside  of 
it  the  expression  "kingdom  of  God"  (vi.  33,  xii.  28,  xix.  24,  xxi.  31,  43)  {H.  H. 
Wirylt,  D.D.). 

The  Baptism  of  Jesftis. — Had  the  main  purpose  of  John's  preaching  and  baptism  of  repent- 
ance lain  in  confession  of  sins  and  penitence,  the  coming  of  Jesus  to  be  baptised  would 
appear  strange,  and  might  be  regarded  as  an  argument  against  the  stainless  purity  of  His 
religious  consciousness,  or  as  the  expression  of  a  false  humility.  We  must  consider,  however, 
that  the  main  element  in  the  idea  of  repentance  lies  in  the  positive  bent  of  the  spirit  towards 
•conformity  with  the  Divine  will ;  and  that  turning  from  sin,  so  far  as  it  has  existed,  forms 
TKly  the  preparation  for,  or  the  reverse  side  of,  that  process.  We  must  remember,  also,  that 
tho  final  and  essential  purpose  of  the  Baptist's  preaching  was  to  create  the  positive 
endeavour  after  a  righteousness  conformable  to  God's  will,  and  to  the  establishment  of  the 
Messianic  kingdom.  Hence,  it  appears  intelligible  and  truly  fitting  that  Jesus  should,  not 
merely  in  spite  of,  but  just  on  account  of,  His  consciousness  of  integrity  and  filial  obedience 
31 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  iii. 


to  God,  feel  impelled  to  submit  to  John's  baptism.  He  thereby  sealed  His  resolve  to  yield 
His  will  wholly  to  the  will  of  God,  abjuring  all  sin,  and  thereby  He  gave  that  resolve  a 
definite  reference  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  whose  nearness  the  Baptist  proclaimed  and  of 
which  he  desired  to  be  a  member  (ibid.).  ' 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. -Verses  1—12. 

Before  His  face.— At  last  the  silence  is  broken.  At  last  a  partial  explanation 
is  given.  One  stands  up  to  tell  us  (at  least)  that  such  an  explanation  is 
coming,  and  to  prepare  us  for  the  mission  which  the  long-silent  Jesus  is  at  last 
about  to  begin.  Let  us  note,  first,  wlmt  is  said  of  this  forerunner  in  the  passage 
before  us.     Let  us  note,  secondly,  what  he  says  of  himself 

I.  What  is  said  here  about  \nm.— About  his  office,  to  begin.  He  is,  pre- 
eminently, a  preacher  (ver.  1);  a  man  with  a  message,  having  something  to 
y  say  "*(ver.  2) ;  a  "  voice  crying  out "  (ver.  3).  He  came  and  preached.  That 
is  his  story  in  brief.  About  the  place  of  his  preaching.  Other  preachers  had 
been  sent  to  deliver  their  messages  in  temples  and  cities  (Jer.  xxxvi.  5,  6  ; 
Jonah  i.  2,  iii.  1,  2) ;  this  man  was  sent  to  raise  his  voice  in  the  solitudes  of  the 
"wilderness  "  (vers.  1,  3).  About  the  object  of  his  preaching.  To  bring  men  to 
"repent"  (ver.  2) ;  to  a  proper  sense,  and  open  acknowledgment,  and  practical 
forsaking  of  their  sins.  About  the  singular  urgency  and  cogency  of  his  preaching . 
Other  preachers  had  referred  to  what  was  to  happen  in  the  future  (Isa.  ii.  2,  etc.), 
he  always  spoke  of  that  which  was  close  (end  of  ver.  2).  About  his  place  as  a 
preacher.  The  greatest  in  word  of  all  previous  prophets  had  foretold  his  coming 
and  work  (ver.  3).  The  greatest  in  deed  of  all  previous  prophets  had  been 
so  like  him  even  in  apparel  and  food  (ver.  4,  cf.  2  Kings  i.  7,  8)  as  to  be 
almost  a  prophecy  of  his  appearance.  About  his  success  as  a  preacher.  On 
this  point  even  those  other  preachers,  with  all  their  advantages,  had  much  to 
lament  (see  Isa.  liii.  1  ;  1  Kings  xix.  10).  In  this  case,  on  the  contrary,  we  see, 
on  this  point,  almost  all  a  preacher  could  wish.  Multitudes  of  hearers,  brought 
out  to  him  in  the  wilderness,  brought  from  afar,  brought  from  all  pai-ts,  brought 
to  "hear"  and  to  "  do,"  brought  to  open  confession  of  sins,  and  brought  also  to 
such  desire  for  amendment  as  to  be  "  baptised  of  him  "  in  the  River  Jordan  in 
attestation  thereof  (vers.  5,  6) — what  true  preacher  would  not  rejoice  in  seeing 
such  results  from  his  words  ?  In  seeing  even  an  approximation  to  such  tokens 
as  these?  About  the  character  of  his  preaching .  Here,  perhaps,  this  preacher  of 
preachers  is  greatest  of  all.  None  of  his  extraordinary  success  is  due  to  anything 
of  an  unworthy  type  in  his  language.  Not  Ehjah  himself,  on  the  contrary, 
could  be  more  faithful  than  he.  No  matter  who  they  were  who  came  to  his 
preaching,  however  high  in  position  or  repute,  whether  believing  too  much  or  too 
little,  even  if  (apparently)  of  all  men  the  least  likely  to  come  (ver.  7),  he  has  but 
one  message  for  all,  and  that  a  message  of  the  most  heart-piercing  kind  (ver.  8). 
Neither  will  he  allow  them,  be  they  who  they  may,  to  dream  of  safety  in  any- 
thing else  (ver.  9);  or  to  be  content,  if  they  listen  to  him,  with  anything  less 
(ver.  10).  On  all  points,  therefore,  what  is  said  of  him  here  points  him  out  as 
a  preacher  indeed.  Never  was  there,  in  fact,— when  all  is  considered— such  a 
preacher  before  !  (cf.  xi.  11). 

II.  What  he  says  of  himself.— Simply  that,  after  all,  his  great  work  is  to 
testify  to  Another.  This,  for  example,  is  why  he  is  so  especially  urgent  in 
demanding  amendment  of  life.  That  great  Searcher  of  hearts,  who  is  so  close 
behind  him,  will  be  satisfied  with  no  less.  Already,  as  it  were.  He  is  "  laying  " 
His  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree  (ver.  10).  The  next  thing,  therefore,  with 
every  fruitless  tree,  will  be  to  hew  it  down  for  the  fire  {ibid.).  This,  again,  is 
why  this  most  successful  of  preachers  insists  on  baptism  as  he  does.    Not  so  much 

35 


CHAP.  III.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


for  its  own  sake  as  for  what  it  prepares  for,  does  he  make  use  of  this  sign.  One 
is  coming  so  much  "  mightier  "  than  he,  that  he  himself  is  unworthy  to  serve 
Him  even  in  the  lowliest  way.  The  principal  use,  therefore,  of  my  baptism, 
which  is  "  with  water  unto  I'epentance,"  is  to  prepare  you  for  His,  which  shall 
be  a  baptism,  on  the  contrary,  "with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire"  (ver.  11). 
Once  more,  this  is  why  he,  finally,  Jixes  attention  on  that  coming  One  and  His 
work.  What  an  instrument  of  discrimination,  e.g.  is  that  which  He  holds  in 
His  hand  !  How  thoroughly,  with  that  "  fan  "  of  His,  will  He  "  purge  His  " 
own  "  floor  "  !  And  how  wide  apart,  and  how  irrevocable  therefore,  will  be  the 
separation  it  works!  Where  is  the  "wheat"?  In  His  "garner."  Where  is 
the  "chafF"?  In  the  "fire."  What  sort  of  fire?  That  which  cannot  be 
"quenched"  (ver.  12). 

See  here,  therefore,  in  this  "  preparation  "  for  Christ,  for  such  it  is  in  effect 
(end  of  ver.  3) : —  , 

1.  How  much  it  contains. — How  it  testifies,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  greatness 
of  Christ  !  In  it  one  who  surpasses  all  the  greatness  of  the  past,  points  to  that 
"coming  One"  as  greater  by  far  than  himself.  How  it  testifies,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  His  holiness !  If  there  has  been  anything  unexamined  before,  ifc  will 
now  be  so  no  longer.  So  holy  is  He  who  comes  that  nothing  unholy  can  remain 
in  His  sight.  What  stillness  of  heart — what  readiness  to  hear — such  testimonies 
should  create. 

2.  How  niuch,/or  all  this,  this  present  testimony  suggests. — A  call  to  repentance 
is  an  indication  that,  so  far,  there  is  no  absolute  need  to  despair.  But  it  is  not 
veiy  much  more.  "  Who  knoweth  if  He  will  return  and  repent?  "  (Joel  ii.  14). 
"Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and  repent  ?''  (Jonah  iii.  9).  It  seems  note- 
worthy, therefore,  that,  in  what  is  told  us  here,  the  Baptist  tells  us  no  more. 
Afterwards,  when  he  sees  the  Saviour  Himself,  he  adopts  a  very  different  strain. 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  "  (John  i.  29). 
Meanwhile,  it  is  not  unlStting,  in  this  preliminary  teaching,  that  he  only 
"  prepares  "  for  that  Light  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1-12.  The  ministry  of  John,  order  to  prepare  it  for  a  higher 
— There  are  two  classes  of  men — those  teachinor.  His  mission  was — 
that  are  made  by  the  times,  and  those  I.  Moral  in  its  aim. — What  kind  of 
that  are  made  for  them.  John  the  reformation  did  he  seek  1  Intellectual  ? 
Baptist  belonged  to  the  latter  class.  Institutional  ?  No ;  he  aimed  at  the 
There  are  three  great  truths  which  reformation  of  Judsea's  heart.  No 
this  passage  develops:  1.  That  the  ministry  is  valid  that  strives  not 
system  of  Jesus  is  a  system  of  Divine  supremely  for  this  moral  reformation, 
rule.  "  Kingdom  of  heaven."  It  is  Three  facts  show  this :  1.  That  all 
the  ruling  power  of  God — God  reigning  systems  of  religion,  erroneous  either  in 
by  His  truth,  over  the  reason,  heart,  idea  or  practice,  spring  from  wrong 
and  conscience  of  man.  2.  That  re-  moral  principles.  2.  Systems  thus 
formation  is  indispensable  to  the  erroneous  may  be  destroyed  in  form, 
enjoyment  of  this  system.  "  Repent."  and  the  moral  principles  from  which 
3.  TliMt  the  effecting  of  this  reforma-  thfey  spring  remain  as  vigorous  as  ever, 
tion  is  one  of  the  greatest  ministries  of  3.  That  the  great  mission  of  Christi- 
man.  This  mission  was  John's.  He  anity  is  to  combat  and  crush  the  moral 
had  an  insight  of  the  heart  of  his  age.  principles  of  wrong. 
Hence  his  cry  for  reformation.  John's  IT.  Faithful  in  its  appeal. — Two 
ministry  may  be  regarded  as  a  type  of  things  show  his  faithfulness:  1.  His 
the  ministry  needed  for  an  age  of  declaration  of  their  character — "  gene- 
religious   form    and    sensuousness,    in  ration  of  vipers."     2.  His  faithfulness 

36 


tlOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap  m. 


is  seen  in  destroying  the  chief  object  of 
their  glory — "  Think  not  to  say,"  etc. 

III.  Symbolical  in  its  ritualism. — 
The  grand  end  both  of  the  Jewish  and 
Christian  rites  was  the  same,  viz.  to 
teach  ;  to  portray  truth  to  the  senses. 
Thus  John  regarded  baptism.  Sym- 
bolic of  spiritual  cleansing.  So  un- 
utterably strong  were  his  convictions 
of  the  importance  of  spiritual  reforma- 
tion that  he  not  only  made  the  Jordan 
help  him  to  speak  them,  but  his 
labouring  soul  made  both  his  dress  and 
diet  symbolic.  There  is  something 
transcendently  more  important  for 
humanity  than  either  food  or  raiment. 

lY.  Self-abnegating  in  its  spirit. — 
"  He  that  cometh  after  me,"  etc. — 
D.  Thomas,  D.D, 

Vers.  1,  2.  John  the  Baptist. — 
I.  John's  character  as  a  man. — 1.  A 

man  of  exti^aordinary  piety.  Filled 
with  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's 
womb.  A  godly  child,  a  godly  boy,  a 
godly  man,  the  greatest  saint  probably 
of  his  dispensation.  2.  His  piety  was 
marked  by  extreme  ahstem^iousness.  A 
Nazarite.  3.  Partly  as  a  consequence 
of  his  Nazaritic  obligations,  his  dwelling 
was  in  the  wilderness.  Herein  we 
partly  see  the  difference  between  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament 
holiness.  The  Old  Testament  holiness 
manifested  itself  principally  in  isolation 
from  the  world.  Its  primary  idea  was 
separation.  But  the  New  Testament 
holiness  consists,  not  in  separation 
from  the  world,  but  in  the  pervasion 
of  the  world.  Its  primary  idea  is 
permeation.  4.  At  the  age  of  thirty 
the  "  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
John  " — he  received  his  official  call  to 
be  a  prophet.  Not  the  product  of  his 
age.  Had  a  mission  to  his  age,  not 
from  it.  The  great  man  should  be  an 
interpreter  of  his  age,  but  to  interpret 
does  not  mean  to  share. 

II.  John's  character  as  a  preacher. 
— 1.  A  voice.  To  behold  John  was  a 
sermon  in  itself.  "  I  am  a  voice ;  I 
am  not  the  Speaker,  only  the  voice  of 
one ;  the  Speaker  is  coming  after  me, 
for  He  was  before  me."     2.  A  voice 


crying.  Literally,  crying  aloud.  Guard 
against  the  supposition  that  his 
ministry  consisted  of  nothing  but 
sound.  "  John  was  a  burning  and  a 
shining  lamp,"  says  the  Saviour.  His 
preaching  was  warm  and  enlightening. 
3.  He  was  a  voice  crying  aloud  in  the 
wilderness.  First  came  John  cr5^ing 
aloud  in  the  wilderness,  shouting 
lustily  at  the  highest  pitch  of  his  voice. 
Then  came  Jesus  Christ,  the  very 
opposite  of  John,  sitting  quietly  whilst 
teaching,  and  speaking  in  calm,  sub- 
dued, and  measured  tones.  4.  He 
cried,  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the 
Lord,"  etc.  His  was  the  work  of 
preparation ;  strength,  therefore,  was 
moie  requisite  than  refinement.  Adorn 
your  frontispieces,  embellish  your 
corner-stones,  but  let  the  foundations 
be  as  rugged  as  you  please. 

III.  The  character  of  John's 
ministry. — 1.  It  aimed  chiefly  at  the 
conscience.  *'  Pepent,"  a  word  ad- 
dressed not  to  the  understanding  or  to 
the  imagination,  but  to  the  conscience, 

2.  He  neither  reasoned  nor  apologised 
but  stated  the  truth  in  its  stark  naked- 
ness. 

IV.  The  motive  forces  of  John's 
ministry. — The  kingdom  of  heaven 
wears  two  aspects ;  of  wrath,  to  those 
who  obstinately  refuse  allegiance  to  it ; 
of  grace,  to  all  who  submit  and  accept 
its  overtures  of  peace.  John  gave 
special  prominence  to  the  Divine 
wrath.  "  Who  hath  warned  you,"  etc. 
We,  living  at  the  zenith  of  the  gospel 
dispensation,  should  expatiate  more 
particularly  on  Divine  grace.  Pepent 
— why  ?  Because  wrath  is  coming. 
Why  ?  Because  grace  has  come. — 
J.  C.  Jones,  D.D. 

Vers.  3-12.  The  herald  of  the  Khig. 
— I.  We  have  an  outline  sketch  of 
the  herald  and  of  his  work. — 1.  John 
was  Elijah  over  again.  2.  His  message 
is  summed  up  in  two  sentences,  two 
blasts  of  the  trumpet — the  call  to  re- 
pentance and  the  rousing  proclamation 
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand. 

3.  John^s  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  4. 
His  asceticism.     The  more  luxuriously 

37 


CHAP.  III.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


self-indulgent  men  are,  the  more  are  touch    the    deepest     ground    for    re- 

they  fascinated  by  religious  self-denial.  pentance  in  the  heart-softening  love  of 

A   man   "  clothed    in    soft    raiment "  God  manifested  in  the  sacrifice  of  the 

would   have   drawn    no  crowds.      His  King,    but    is   based   wholly    on    the 

asceticism  was   the    expression   of  his  certainty  of  judgment.     So  far,  it  is 

severe,   solitary  spirit,   detached  from  incomplete;      but     the     demand     for, 

the  delights  of  sense,  and  even  from  righteous   living   as   the   only   test  of 

the  softer  play  of  loves,  because  that  religious    emotion    is   fully   Christian, 

coming   kingdom   flamed    ever    before  and  needed  in  this  generation  as  much 

him,  and  his  age  seemed  to  him  to  be  as    it   ever   was.       3.  The   next   flash 

rotting  and  ready  for  the  fire.     There  strikes  the  lofty  structure  of  confidence 

is    no    need    to    bring    in    irrelevant  in  their  descent.      He  wrenches  away 

learning  about  Essenes,  to  account  for  this  shield  against  which  his  sharpest 

his  mode  of  life.     The  thoughts  which  arrows  were  blunted.     4.  With  a  new 

burned   in    him   drove   him   into    the  emblem  the  immediate  beginning  of  the 

wilderness.     5.  The  last  point  in  this  judgment  is  proclaimed,   and  its  prin- 

brief   resume   of   John's   work    is    the  ciples  and  issues  are  declared.     5.  The 

universal  excitement  which  it  produced.  comingof  the  kingdom  implied  ^Aecomm^ 

Wherever   a   religious  teacher    shows  of  the  King.      So  his  sermon  reaches  its 

that  he  has   John's   qualities,  as   our  climax  in  the  ringing  proclamation  of 

Lord  in  His  eulogium  analysed  them.  His  advent.       6.  Note  the  grand  con- 

viz.  unalterable  resolution,  like  an  iron  ception  of  the  gifts  of  the  King.     He 

pillar,    not   a   reed    shaken   with    the  would  come,   bringing  with   Him  the 

wind,  conspicuous  superiority  to  con-  gift  of  a  mighty  Spirit,   whose  quick 

siderations  of  ease  and  comfort,  a  direct  energy,  transforming  all  deadness  into 

vision  of  the  Unseen,  and  a  message  its  own  likeness,  burning  out  the  foul 

from  God,  the  crowds  will  go  out  to  see  stains    from    character,    and    melting 

him  ;  and  even  if  the  enthusiasm  be  cold  hearts  into  radiant  warmth,  should 

shallow  and  transient,  some  spasm  of  do   all   that    his   poor,    cold,    outward 

conviction    will    pass   across    many   a  baptism     only     shadowed.       7.    Note, 

conscience,  and  some  will  be  pointed  by  further,  the  renewed  prophecy  ofjudg- 

him  to  the  King.  ment.     There  is  something  very  solemn 

II.  We  have    a   more   detailed  ac-  in  the  stem  refrain  at  the  end  of  each 

count  of  John's  preaching  as  addressed  of    three    consecutive    verses — "  with 

to  the   Pharisees  and  Sadducees. — If  fire."    The  first  and  the  last  refer  to 

they  were  drawn  into  the  current  it  the  destructive  fire ;  the  second,  to  the 

must  have  run  strong  indeed.     John's  cleansing    Spirit.      But   the   fire  that 

salutation   is    excessively    rough    and  destroys  is  not  unconnected  with  that 

rude.     He  was  not  scolding  when  he  which  purifies.     The  very  same  Divine 

called    his   hearers,    "  ye   offspring  of  flame,    if    welcomed    and    yielded    to, 

vipers,"  but  charging  them  with  moral  works    purity,    and    if    repelled    and 

corruption   and    creeping    earthliness.  scorned,  consumes.     8.  Note  the  limita- 

The    summary    of    his    preaching    is  tions  in  John's  knowledge  of  the  King. 

like  a  succession  of  lightning  flashes.  His    prophecy    unites    as     contempo- 

1.  The  remarkable  thing  about  his  raneous  events  which,  in  fact,  are 
teaching  is,  that  in  his  hands  the  great  widely  separate — the  coming  of  Christ, 
hope  of  Israel  became  a  message  of  terror,  and  the  judgments  which  He  executes, 
the  proclamation  of  the  impending  king-  whether  on  Israel  or  in  the  final 
dom  passes  into  a  denunciation  of  "  the  "  great  day  of  the  Lord."  There 
wrath  to  come,"  set  forth  with  is  no  perspective  in  prophecy. — 
a     tremendous     wealth    of     imagery.  A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

2.  Next  comes  the  urgent  demand  for 

reformation  of  life  as  the  sign  of  real  Ver.  3.  John's  call  to  preach. — John's 

repentance.     His  exhortation  does  not  calling   and   authority  to   preach  are 
38 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  iii. 


described  to  be  from  heaven,  according  drawn    from    a    hollow    pomegranate 

to  the  prophecy  past  of  him  (Isa.  xl.  3).  trunk — was  very  slight.     But  I  could 

1.  The  calling  and  authority  of  a  have  imagined  myself  eating  shrimps. 
preacher  are  chiefly  to  be  looked  into,  They  were  well  seasoned  of  salt,  and 
that  he  take  not  this  honour  to  himself.  the  combination  of  the  salty  with  the 

2.  A.  called  preacher  should  labour  that  honey  taste  gave  a  not  unpleasant 
the  hearts  of  the  hearers  be  prepared  originality  and  fragrance  of  flavour, 
for  more  and  more  lively  receiving  of  I  cannot  affirm  that  I  would  care  to 
Christ.  John  sought  to  prepare  the  choose  such  "  food  "  habitually,  but  if 
way  of  the  Lord.  3.  He  should  dis-  circumstance  or  duty  demanded  it,  I 
charge  his  commission  plainly;  keeping  should  be  able  to  "live"  upon  it. 
back  nothing  of  the  Lord's  revealed  Certes,  I  should  very  much  prefer 
counsel  and  not  fearing  what  flesh  can  "  locusts  and  wild  honey  "  to  the  pod 
do  unto  him.  4.  He  should  labour  to  of  the  tree  that  some  have  sought  to 
bring  down  the  pride  of  impenitent  substitute  for  the  "  locusts."  Anything 
hearers,  and  to  lift  up  the  dejected  more  fitshionless  (Scotice,  tasteless  and 
souls  of  such  as  in  the  sense  of  their  nurtureless)  than  the  "washy"  (Scotice, 
sin  and  unworthiness  dare  not  believe,  tasteless)  sweet  pods  of  the  locust-tree 
— David  Dickson.  (Ceratonia  Siliqua)  I  cannot  imagine. 

—A,  B.  Grosart,  D.D. 

Yer.  4.  John^s  fitness  for  his  com- 
mission.— 1.  Such  as  the  Lord  doth  Yer.  7.  A  special  sermon  to  the 
call  to  the  ministry,  He  fitteth  them  Pharisees  and  Sadducees. — 1.  How 
for  the  work,  and  for  the  times  wherein  powerful  is  the  preaching  of  truth, 
He  doth  employ  them.  Such  austerity  when  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  bless  the 
was  fit  in  a  Nazarite,  sent  forth  to  same.  2.  Such  as  profess  to  believe  the 
waken  a  world  besotted  in  security.  Word,  and  to  repent  of  their  sins  and 
2.  Ministers  in  the  outward  manner  submit  to  God's  ordinances,  cannot  be 
of  living  should  so  behave  themselves,  excluded  from  entering  into  the  society 
as  least  exception  may  be  taken  against  of  the  church.  3.  Notorious  sinners 
them,  and  as  the  work  in  their  hand  may  and  should,  in  their  receiving  into 
may  be  most  advanced. — Ihid.  the    church,   after   any    pollution   by 

scandal,  be  put  in  mind  of  their  former 

Locusts    and    wild    honey. — I   have  evil  life,  that  they  may  be  humbled 

myself    "eaten"  exactly  this  food,  of  the  more,  acd  be  more  holy  for  time  to 

"  locusts "  .and  "  wild  honey."      It  so  come.      4.    It  is  a  rare  thing  to  see 

happened   that  when   I    rode  upward  sectaries  converted.     John  wondereth 

from  Jericho  to  Bethel,  and  later,  from  at  their  coming.    5.  Wrath  doth  follow 

Beyrout    to    Baalbec,     the    air    was  on   all    the   wicked    who   either    live 

darkened  with  clouds  of  locusts.     They  epicures,  as  the  Sadducees,  or  seek  to 

covered    the    ground    on    my    return  be  justified  by  their  own  works,  as  the 

journey  two  and  three  inches  deep ;  in  Pharisees.     6.  Coming  to  Christ,  and 

places,    whither   a    strong    east   wind  subjection   to    His   ordinances   is   the 

had  blown  them,  nearly  a  foot  deep,  way  to  eschew  wrath.     7.  When  God's 

Gathering   a    basketful,    I    had   them  glory,  people's  edification  and  salvation, 

preserved,  "  dried,"  pounded,  and  ulti-  do  require  that  public  faults  should  be 

mately  "cooked."      My  cook  (for  the  publicly  reproved,   then   the  credit  of 

occasion)  was  a   Frenchman  ;    but  he  the  party  reproved  is  not  to  be  stood 

assured   me  he  followed  "  the  custom  upon. — David  Dickson. 
of    the    country."      I    must    frankly 

own   that    I   shrank   from    partaking  The  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  coming 

of  the  dish,  and  at  first,  at  any  rate,  to    John. — As    we    recall    who    these 

the    proportion    of    "locust"    to    the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  were,  surely 

delicious  "  wild  honey "  in  the  comb —  most    remarkable    is     the    historico- 

39 


CHAP.  III.      UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


biographic  fact,  that  "  many  "  of  them 
"  came  "  to  "  hear  "  the  "  preaching  " 
and  to  seek  the  "  baptism "  of  John 
the  Baptist  ?     What  brought  them  ? 

I.  That  strange  emotion  and  sym- 
pathy which  sometimes  runs  through 
a  whole  community. — The  tidal  wave 
floods  a  community,  and  all  are  borne 
upon  it. 

II.  Here  was  a  new  sensation. — 
I  must  believe  that,  as  these  Pharisees 
were  human,  their  weary  formalism  of 
outward  observances,  from  which  all 
of  reality  and  sacredness  had  long 
vanished,  often  and  often  made  them 
sigh  for  something  that  would  interest 
and  nurture  them.  Then,  the  Sadducees, 
as  they  too  were  human,  had  instincts 
and  sharp  sorrows  and  achings  and 
ominous  agitations  that,  spite  of  them- 
selves, must  have  led  them  to  doubt 
and  speculate,  wonder  and  dread.  I 
have  observed  that  modern  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees  rather  like  to  have  their 
consciences  flagellated — occasionally  ; 
and  I  can  well  believe  that  the  lash 
and  the  terrors  and  the  authority  of 
John  the  Baptist's  ministry  had  some- 
thing to  do  with  the  coming  of  this 
unique  "  many." 

III.  The  Messianic  expectation  was 
in  the  air. — Even  outside  of  Judaism 
there  was  a  great  *'  hope"  of  a  "  Coming 
One."  Within  Judaism  itself  there 
were  not  a  few  who  *'  waited  for  the 
consolation  of  Israel." 

IV.  The  "  Finger  of  God "  was  in 
it. — God  "sent"  the  man  as  herald 
and  as  preacher,  and  it  could  not  but 
be  that  He  would  see  to  it  that  the 
souls  for  whom  the  summons,  "  repent 
ye,"  was  meant,  aye,  and  the  lightning 
softened  into  light  of  its  sequel,  "  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  should 
be  there  to  hear. — A.  B.  Grosart^  D.D. 

A  generation  of  vipers. — The  self- 
righteousness  of  religious  formalism 
always  produces  a  generation  of  vipers, 
by  hypocritically  conforming  to  its 
demands.  1 .  A  low  and  unimpressible 
generation.  2.  A  cunning  generation. 
3.  A  malicious  and  dangerous  genera- 
tion.— J.  P,  Lange,  D.D. 

40 


The  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  at  JohnJs 
baptism. — Bearing  in  mind  that  coming 
to  John's  baptism  was  the  seal  of  his 
success,  and  that  his  baptism  contained 
in  symbolical  form  the  whole  substance 
of  his  teaching,  these  are  the  two  topics 
of  the  text : — 

I.  The  meaning  of  John's  message. 
— 1.  That  those  baptised  were  in 
danger.  "  Flee,"  etc.  2.  The  import- 
ance of  confession  (ver.  6).  On  the 
eve  of  a  promised  new  life  they  were 
required  to  acknowledge  the  iniquity 
of  their  past  life.  3.  The  necessity  of 
a  renewal  of  heart.  We  lose  part  of 
the  significance  of  baptism  from  its 
transplantation  away  from  the  climate 
in  which  it  was  natural  and  appro- 
priate. It  was  impossible  to  see  that 
significant  act  in  which  the  convert 
went  down  into  the  water,  travel-worn 
and  soiled  with  dust,  disappeared  for 
one  moment,  and  then  emerged  pure 
and  fresh,  without  feeling  that  the 
symbol  answered  to,  and  interpreted  a 
strong  craving  of  the  human  heart.  It 
is  the  desire  to  wash  away  that  which 
is  past  and  evil.  Now  to  that  craving 
John  gave  reality  and  meaning  when 
he  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  ! " 
Had  he  merely  said,  *'  Flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come,"  he  would  have  filled 
men's  life  with  the  terrors  of  antici- 
pated hell.  Had  he  only  said,  "  My 
baptism  implies  that  ye  must  be  pure," 
he  would  have  crushed  men's  hearts 
with  the  feelings  of  impossibility,  for 
excellence  without  Christ  is  but  a 
dream. 

II.  The  Baptist's  astonishment  at 
his  own  success.— 1.  What  was  the 
secret  of  this  power  by  which  he  chained 
the  hearts  of  men  as  by  a  spell  ? 
(1)  One  point  was  what  we  see  every 
day.  Men  of  thought  and  quiet 
contemplation  exercise  a  wonderful 
influence  over  men  of  action.  (2)  His 
was  a  ministry  of  terror.  Fear  has  a 
peculiar  fascination.  The  preaching 
of  John  in  this  respect  difiered  from 
the  tone  of  Christ's.  How  many  of 
John's  terrified  Pharisees  and  Sadducees 
retained  the  impression  six  months? 
Excitement  has  its  uses,  impression  its 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  ill. 


value.  But  excitement  and  impres- 
sion are  not  religion.  (3)  Men  felt  that 
John  was  real.  Religion  in  Jerusalem 
had  long  become  a  thing  of  forms. 
John  spoke  as  men  speak  when  they 
are  in  earnest,  simply  and  abruptly,  as 
if  the  graces  of  oratory  were  out  of 
place.  And  then,  that  life  of  his  ! 
This  tells — the  reality  of  unworldliness. 
2.  Let  us  analyse  that  success  a  little 
more  closely  by  considering  the  classes 
of  men  on  whom  that  influence  told. 
First  of  all,  we  read  of  soldiers, 
publicans  and  the  poor  people  coming 
to  John  for  advice,  and  with  the 
acknowledgment  of  guilt ;  and  we  do 
not  read  that  their  arrival  excited  the 
smallest  emotion  of  astonishment  in 
John's  bosom.  The  wonder  was  not 
there.  But  among  those  who  came, 
there  were  two  classes  who  did  move 
him  to  marvel.  (1)  The  moral,  self- 
satisfied  formalist.  Pharisees.  Men 
who  rested  satisfied  with  the  outward. 
Men  without  souls,  from  whose  narrow 
hearts  the  grandeur  of  everlasting 
truth  was  shut  out.  (2).  The  calm, 
metaphysical,  reasoning  infidel.  Saddu- 
cees.  Could  not  be  satisfied  with  the 
creed  of  Pharisaism.  Passed  from 
doubt  to  denial.  I  deduce  from  those 
facts  which  astonished  John  two  truths : 
(a)  Formalism,  even  morality,  will 
not  satisfy  the  conscience  of  man. 
(h)  Infidelity  will  not  give  rest  to  his 
troubled  spirit.  Theie  is  rest  nowhere 
except  in  Christ,  the  manifested  love  of 
God. — F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A. 

Ver.  8.  Repentance.  —  Repentance 
includes  : — 

I.  Conviction,  or  the  sense  of  the 
fact  of  sin. 

II.  Contrition,  or  the  sense  of  the 
evil  of  sin. 

III.  Confession,  or  the  sense  of  the 
relation  of  God  to  sin.  *'  Against  Thee 
only  have  I  sinned." 

IV.  Conversion,  or  the  practical 
evidence  of  a  real  sense  of  the  above 
things. 

Repentance  distinguished  from  •'  des- 
pair," as  despair  leads  to  doom, 
repentance    to    conditions    of    safety. 


Repentance  put  for  salvation,  as  being 
the  starting  point ;  and  because,  if 
real,  it  will  lead  to  salvation,  not  as 
meriting  that  salvation,  but  as  being  a 
condition  appropriate  to  the  reception 
thereof. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

Hypocritical  repentance. — Fra  Rocco, 
a  Dominican,  preached  a  celebrated 
penitential  sermon  on  one  occasion, 
when  all  the  audience  were  in  terror, 
and  fell  on  their  knees,  showing 
every  sign  of  contrition.  Then  he 
cried,  "All  who  are  truly  penitent, 
hold  up  your  hands  !  "  Every  man  in 
the  vast  multitude  held  up  his 
hand.  Then  he  said,  "  Holy  Arch- 
angel Michael,  thou  who  standest  with 
adamantine  sword  at  the  judgment- 
seat  of  God,  cut  me  off  every  hand 
which  has  been  held  up  hypocritically." 
Every  hand  dropped. — Paxton  Hood. 

Restitution  as  proof  of  repentance. 
— An  extensive  hardware  merchant 
in  one  of  the  Fulton  street  prayer- 
meetings  in  New  York  appealed  to 
his  brother  merchants  to  have  the 
same  religion  for  "  down- town  "  as  they 
had  for  "  up-town  "  ;  for  the  week-day 
as  for  the  Sabbath ;  for  the  counting- 
house  as  for  the  communion  table. 
After  the  meeting  a  manufacturer 
with  whom  he  had  dealt  largely, 
accosted  him.  *'  You  did  not  know," 
said  he,  '*  that  I  was  at  the  meeting 
and  heard  your  remarks.  I  have  for 
the  last  five  years  been  in  the  habit  of 
charging  you  more  for  goods  than 
other  purchasers.  I  want  you  to  take 
your  books  and  charge  back  to  me  so 
much  per  cent,  on  every  bill  of  goods 
you  have  had  of  me  for  the  five  past 
years."  A  few  days  later  the  same 
hardware  merchant  had  occasion  to 
acknowledge  the  payment  of  a  debt  of 
several  hundred  dollars  which  had 
been  due  for  twenty-eight  years  from  a 
man  who  could  as  easily  have  paid  it 
twenty-four  years  before. — Family 
Treasury. 

Ver.  9.  A  far-reaching  principle. — 
That  was  a  mighty,  far-reaching 
principle  established.    To-day  it  abides. 

41 


CHAP.  III.      UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


A  frivolous  story — perchance  mythical 
— is  somewhere  told  of  some  French 
noble  lady,  wherein  she  is  made  to  say 
that  *'  The  Almighty  will  think  twice 
before  He  damns  so  great  a  peer  of 
France  as  Duke  .  .  .  ."  Semi-uncon- 
sciously  there  is  a  vast  amount  of  this 
counting  on  things  that  have  not  a 
grain  of  sand's  weight  with  God. 
Genius,  rank,  beauty,  wealth,  power, 
splendid  service,  go  for  absolutely 
nothing  in  the  supreme  matter  of 
destiny,  divorced  from  character,  apart 
from  the  spiritual  life.  However  much 
they  may  aggravate  doom,  they  will  in 
nowise  touch  the  entrance  into  "  the 
kingdom." — A.  B.  Grosart,  D.D. 

Reliance  on  ancestry. — There  are 
persons  who  seem  to  have  nothing 
on  which  to  base  their  claims  to  notice 
but  the  fact  that  they  had  noble 
ancestry,  and  they  are  never  tired  of 
informing  you  of  that  fact.  There  is 
every  reason  for  likening  them,  as  Sir 
T.  Over  bury  did,  to  that  useful  escu- 
lent, the  potato.  They  make  a  show, 
and  flourish ;  but  the  best  part  of 
them,  according  to  their  own  boasting, 
is,  like  the  potato,  buiied  and  under- 
ground.— Scientific  Illustrations  and 
Symbols. 

Ver.  10.  Christian  reform. — The 
man  from  whose  lips  these  words 
poured  forth  like  a  leaping  bugle-call 
was  an  inspired  reformer.  The  axe 
was  the  spirit  and  genius  of  a  new 
religion.  The  trees  were  bad  laws, 
obsolete  customs,  social  inequalities  and 
religious  bigotries.  Into  the  forest  of 
abuses  John  went,  swinging  his  axe 
and  crying  "  Reform  !  Repent  !  Make 
way!"  Observe:  1.  The  reformer's 
message  proved  the  reality  of  his 
misision.  That  message  was  balled  up 
and  concentrated  in  one  heroic  word 
''Reform."  2.  The  reformer's  c^re^s  in- 
dicated the  intensity  of  his  mission.  The 
reformer  has  no  time  to  waste  on  niceties. 
One  supreme  passion  fills  his  soul — the 
wrongs  of  his  country,  the  sins  and 
sorrows  of  his  fellows.  3.  The  re- 
former's food  proved  his  devotedness  to 
his  mission.     His  was  a  case  of  plain 

42 


living  and  high  thinking.  To-day  we 
need  men  of  the  stamp  and  spirit  of 
John.  To-day  we  need  a  new  instal- 
ment of  Christian  reform. 

I.  Reformation  in  the  State. — I  do 
not  mean  a  reformation  such  as  Luther 
wrought  so  much  as  a  reformation  in 
the  tastes,  manners,  and  lives  of  the 
people.  True  reformation  in  the  State 
will  come  when  the  principles  of  Jesus 
Christ  are  in  the  ascendant.  The 
remedy  must  be  deep  and  divine,  reach- 
ing to  the  very  heart  and  core  of  human 
society. 

II.  Reformation  in  the  home.— No 
man  has  a  right  to  be  thrust  into  a 
hovel,  and  for  that  rent-racked.  But 
the  true  reformation  of  the  home  must 
be  deeper  and  more  radical.  The  home 
should  be  the  spring  of  inspiration  and 
power  to  a  nation.  In  it  should  be 
cherished  and  created  the  purest  ideals, 
the  loftiest  ambitions,  the  holiest 
enthusiasms.  The  best  house-furnishing 
is  to  pack  into  our  homes  the  principles 
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  The  most 
beautiful  ornaments  are  grace,  joy,  and 
love.  The  finest  decorations  are  a  good 
temper,  a  sound  character,  a  Christlike 
life.  You  can  only  reform  your  home 
by  reforming  your  character. 

III.  Reformation  in  the  individual. 
— The  distinctive  note  in  John's  mes- 
sage was  personal.  "  Repent  2/e." — 
Charles  Houghton. 

Yer.  12.  Chrisfs  separating  fan. — * 
1.  The  visible  church  is  like  a  corn- 
floor, wherein  good  and  bad,  as  chaff 
and  corn,  are  mixed  together.  2.  Christ 
as  the  perfect  Husbandman  will  so 
sever  the  one  from  the  other  that  not 
one  of  the  wicked  shall  be  in  company 
of  the  godly.  "Throughly."  3.  Christ 
hath  means  at  hand  to  make  the 
separation.  His  word,  church  cen- 
sures, afflictions,  persecution,  death, 
and  judgment.  4.  The  upright  and 
fruitful  shall  be  gathered  into  heaven, 
the  unfruitful  cast  into  hell. — David 
Dickson. 

The  great  Winnower. — I.  The  dis- 
ciples   of    John    were    to   learn: — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  iii. 


1.   That     their     hearts     were      under  welcome   sufferings   when    they  found 

another    tillage-cultivation    than    their  that  they  were  designed  for  this  object. 

own.      They   could    not    winnow   the  And  so,  too,  the  course  of  history  and 

grain,   they   could   not   separate  corn  the  trials  of    nations  interpret  them- 

from  chaff.     If  there  was  no  one  more  selves.      As    long    as     there    is    any 

skilful  than  they  were  to  do  that,  the  strength,  vitality,  faith  in  a  people,  so 

labour  had  been  thrown  away.     2.  They  loo g  is  there  wheat,  which  Christ  will 

were  to  be  sure  that  this  discipline,  if  it  assuredly  gather  into  His  garner;  and 

was  indeed  Divine  discipline,  would  he  so  long  that  nation  will  be  subjected  to 

thorough.     "  He  will  throughly  purge  frequent  fires,  that  its  chaff,  all  its  un- 

His  floor."     3.  Those  who  heard  John  truth,  and  baseness,  and  heartlessness, 

speak,  and  understood  him,  must  have  may  be  burnt  up  ;  nay,  it  may  be  said 

received  two  lessons  at  first  sight  incon-  always  to  be  in  such  fires,  for  the  time 

sistent.     They  must  have  been  sure  that  of  our  wealth,  as  well  as  the  time  of  our 

He  who    was    conducting   the   sifting  tribulation,  is  a  searching  time.     That 

discipline,  of  which  the  prophet  testi-  is   the   time   in    which    it    is    hardest 

fied,  over  them   and   over   the   whole  for  us  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the 

nation,  was  the  Lord  of  the  spirits  of  wheat,  and  therefore  in  which  we  have 

all  flesh.     And  yet  they  were  told  of  a  most  need  to  recollect  that  there  is  a 

Man  standing  among  them, who  claimed  Lord  who  is  doing  it,   and  will  do  it 

the  floor  as  His,  and  could  prove  it  to  thoroughly. — F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A. 
be  His  by  purging  it. 

II.  John  the  Baptist's  words  were         The  fan;   the  wheat;    the  chaff. — 

fulfilled  when  Jesus  Christ  came  in  the  I.  The  fan  on  the  threshing  floor ;  or 

flesh. — They  have  been  fulfilling  them-  the  Word  of  God  separating  the  two 

selves  in  every  age  since  He  ascended  classes. 

on  high.     In  every  age  men,  who  have  11.  The  gathering  of  the  wheat  into 

been  led  to  discover  their  own   great  the  kingdom  of  love ;  or,  the  complete 

necessities,  have  asked  indeed  for  one  salvation  of  God's  people, 
who  should ybr^M'e  their  sins  ;  but  quite  III.  The  chaff  in  unquenchable  fire  ; 

as  earnestly  for  one  who  should  destroy  or,    the    judgment    of    hypocrites. — 

their  sins.      They    have    learned    to  J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 

Messiah  Himself. — "  Mightier  than  I."  So  the  Baptist,  in  the  preceding 
verses,  had  predicted  of  Christ.  What  he  foretold  in  those  verses  is  accomplished 
in  these.  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth"  Himself  here  appears  on  the  scene.  "  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  "  is  here  openly  acknowledged  to  be  all  that  the  Baptist  had  just 
declared  about  *'  Christ."  This  is  shown  us,  partly,  by  what  is  related  here 
of  the  actions  of  men ;  and  partly  by  what  is  related  here  of  the  action  of  God. 

I.  Of  the  actions  of  men. — We  say  of  "men"  because  of  the  representative 
character  of  the  "  man  "  shown  to  us  here.  "  The  law  and  the  prophets  were 
until  John"  (Luke  xvi.  16).  He  excelled  all  before  him  partly  because  of  the 
fact  that  he  summarised  all.  What  he  does  here,  therefore,  is  done  in  effect  by 
the  whole  "  column  "  he  leads.  Hence  its  significance,  in  the  first  place,  in  the 
way  of  remonstrance.  Whilst  engaged  in  his  work  of  baptising  sinners  and  bring- 
ing them  to  repentance,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  appears  amongst  them,  and  asks  for 
baptism  at  his  hands.  Such  a  request,  to  John  the  Baptist,  seems  to  put  every- 
thing wrong.  So  far  from  seeing  any  need  of  "  repentance  "  in  Jesus,  His  very 
presence  there  only  makes  him  the  more  conscious  of  the  evil  to  be  found  in 
himself.  "  I  have  need  to  be  baptised  of  Thee,  and  comest  Thou  to  me  ?  " 
(ver.  14).     What  a  testimony  this  is  (if  we  think  of  it)  to  the  character  for 

43 


cfiAP.  III.      &OMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


holiness  which  this  Jesus  possessed  in  the  eyes  of  John,  even  before  the  latter 
appears  to  have  known  Him  fully  as  the  Messiah  (cf.  John  i.  33).  What 
a  testimony  from  one  so  holy  himself  !  So  discerning  !  So  faithful  !  So 
connected,  as  we  have  just  seen,  with  all  the  holiness  of  the  past  !  Virtually,  it  was 
all  that  holiness  effacing  itself  before  Christ's.  In  the  way  of  submission.  The 
answer  of  Jesus  to  this  remonstrance  of  John  says  in  effect,  "  As  things  are  now, 
I  ask  you  to  allow  this  to  be  done.  If  it  does  not  seem  so  at  first,  it  is  yet,  in 
reality,  in  fullest  harmony  with  what  I  am  here  to  accomplish ;  the  very  object 
I  have  come  for  being  that  of  occupying  the  place  of  the  unrighteous  and  fulfill- 
ing *  all  righteousness  '  in  his  stead."  Convinced  by  this  language,  John  opposes 
no  more  (ver.  15).  It  is  not  for  him  to  undertake  to  deny  what  this  sinless  One 
says.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  not  only  far  holier.  He  is  also  far  wiser  than  he. 
So  he  confesses  by  thus  "  giving  way."  So,  also,  there  confesses  with  him  all  the 
true  enlightenment  of  the  past. 

II.  Of  the  action  of  God. — As  soon  as  the  baptism  thus  conceded  is  over,  we 
are  in  the  presence  of  this.  It  follows  immediately  on  the  coming  up  of  Jesus 
*'  out  of  the  water  "  (ver.  16).  It  is  manifested,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  way  of 
vision  or  sight.  From  the  "opened  heavens"  above  Him  "  the  Spirit  of  God" 
was  seen  by  the  Baptist  "  descending  like  a  dove  "  upon  Jesus,  "  and  lighting 
upon  Him  "  (ver.  16).  Thus,  as  it  were,  was  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  set  forth 
to  the  world.  The  very  sign  of  that  Messiahship  which  John  was  taught  to 
expect  (John  i.  33)  has  come  upon  Jesus.  That  sign,  as  it  were,  therefore,  is  the 
"  laying  of  hands  "  upon  Him  as  the  man  called  to  this  work — a  gift  at  once 
separating  and  preparing  Him  for  what  that  "  Anointed  One  "  had  to  do.  On 
the  other  hand,  we  see  the  action  of  God  here  in  the  way  of  hearing  and  speech. 
From  the  same  opened  "  heaven "  there  comes,  next,  the  sign  of  a  '*  voice." 
Needless  to  say,  coming  thence,  from  Whom  it  proceeds.  It  is  the  "  voice  "  of  that 
Father  whom  we  are  taught  to  call  upon  as  "  Our  Father  in  heaven " 
(Matt.  vi.  9).  This  sign  is  a  testimony,  therefore,  to  the  unique  dignity  of  the 
Messiah.  Whatever  the  Messiah  was  to  be  in  this  respect,  that  this  Holy  One 
— this  Jesus  of  Nazareth — is  hereby  acknowledged  as  being.  "This" — this 
same  one,  this  just  baptised  one — "  is"  truly  "  My  Son."  "  With  Him,"  also — 
as  being  such — I  am  always  "  well  pleased."  Even  John's  greatness,  as  the 
greatest  of  servants,  is  nothing  to  this. 

This  combination  of  testimonies,  as  well  from  earth  as  from  heaven,  bringr 
before  us,  in  conclusion  : 

1.  The  greatest  of  Teachers. — Who  can  be  better  qualified  as  a  teacher  thaiv 
One  on  whom  the  Spirit  of  truth  (1  Cor.  ii.  11)  thus  descends  and  remains  1  1\) 
thus  altering  the  decision  of  John,  also,  do  we  not  see  Him  instructing  one  who 
had  surpassed  all  teachers  before  ?  Well,  therefore,  may  He  be  accepted  as  the 
Teacher  of  all  teachers  to  come  ! 

2.  The  Gompletest  of  Saviours. — What  He  undertakes  here  to  do  is  just  that 
which  sinners  most  of  all  need,  viz.  to  provide  them  with  that  which  shall 
secure  them  acceptance  with  God.  How  striking  to  find  this  thus  spoken  of  on 
His  first  appearance  in  public  !  How  equally  striking  to  find  that  the  Father 
sets  His  seal  on  this  from  the  first  ! 

3.  Th^  profoundest  of  mysteries. — How  plainly  we  seem  taught  here  that 
there  are  three  persons  in  One  !  How  nothing  short  of  this  seems  to  satisfy  all 
that  is  shown  to  us  here !  How  fully  this  does  satisfy  all  that  is  shown  to  us 
here  !     No  other  key  can  turn  this  lock  with  its  multitudinous  wards  ! 


44 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  iii. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Vers.    13-17.   The   coronation   of  the  person.      2.  It  is  a  thing  both  right 

King. — I.    The   becomingness   of  the  and  comely  for  each  man  to  do  what 

apparently  unbecoming  baptism.—  The  his  calHng  requireth.     3.   When  the 

whole  mystery  of  Christ's  identification  Lord  makes  His  will  clear  unto  us,  we 

of  Himself  with   sinful   men,  and   of  should  renounce   our  will  and  follow 

His  being  "  made  sin  for  us,  who  knew  His.       '*  Then    he    sufiered    Him." — 

no  sin,"  lies  in  germ  in  His  baptism  David  Dickson. 
by  John.     No  other  conception  of  its 

meaning  does  justice  to  the  facts.  The    mode    of    Christ's    baptism. — 

II.  The  Divine  anointing  or  coro-  As  to  the  baptism,  there  has  been 
nation. — The  symbol  of  the  dove  seems  great  discussion  about  it.  It  is  very 
to  carry  allusions  to  the  grand  image  curious  to  me  that  when  the  great 
which  represents  the  Spirit  cf  God  moral  lesson  of  this  incident  has  stood 
as  "  brooding "  over  chaos,  and  confronting  the  church,  instead  of 
quickening  life,  as  a  bird  in  its  nest  considering  what  is  the  real  meaning 
by  the  warmth  of  its  own  soft  breast;  of  Christ's  baptism,  it  has  gone  dis- 
to  the  dove  which  bore  the  olive  cussing  what  Professor  Swing  has  so 
branch,  first  messenger  of  hope,  to  the  well  characterised  as  a  question  whether 
prisoners  in  the  ark ;  to  the  use  of  the  water  should  be  applied  to  the 
the  dove,  as  clean,  in  sacrifice  ;  to  the  man  or  the  man  to  the  water.  We  do 
poetical  attribution  to  it,  common  to  not  know  which  was  done  in  this  case, 
many  nations,  of  meek  gentleness  and  An  ancient  picture,  dating,  T  think, 
faithful  love.  Set  side  by  side  with  from  about  the  fourth  century,  rude 
that  John's  thought  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  rough,  in  the  catacombs  of  Home, 
as  fire,  and  we  get  all  the  beauty  of  represents  Jesus  and  John  standing 
both  emblems  increased,  and  under-  in  the  water,  and  John  pouring  the 
stand  how  much  the  stern  ascetic,  water  from  a  shell  on  Jesus'  head, 
whose  words  burned  and  blistered,  had  We  know  that  in  early  times  water 
to  learn.     Meekness  is  throned  now.  was  poured  on  the  heads  of  priests  to 

III.  The    Divine    proclamation. —  anoint  them.     I  think  myself  it  most 

1.  The  coronation  ends  with  the  solemn  probable  that  the  baptism  of  Jesus  by 
i-ecitation  of  the  style  and  title  of  the  John  was  neither  that  which  the 
King.  2.  The  voice  attests  the  Divine  Baptist  sect  nor  that  which  the  other 
complacency  in  Him.  3.  The  Father's  sects  have  generally  pursued,  but  one 
delight  in  the  Son  is  through  the  Son  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  considerable 
extended  to  all  who  love  and  trust  the  denomination  of  Christendom  has  ever 
Son. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  used,      the     method     of     pouring. — 

L.  Abbott,  D.D. 
Vers.   13-15.  Christ    coming    to    be 

baptised. — The  mighty  impulse  of  the  Ver.   16.   Like   a   dove. — I.   In   His 

Spirit     leading     Christ     to     Jordan,  purity  like  a  dove.      Hence  He  finds 

Apprars    from   the   circumstance :     1.  at    first    only   one    resting-place — the 

That  He  came  from  a  great  distance,  he^  d  and  heart  of  Jesus. 

2.  That  He  came  alone.     3.  That  He  II.  In  His  gentleness  like  a  dove, 
came  fully  decided  on  the  course  before  Hence  addressing  Himself  to  man. 
Him. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.  III.  In    His    harmlessness    like  a 

dove.     Hence   conquering  the  wicked 

Ver.  15.  Christ  in  His  humiliation,  one. 

■ — 1.  Some   things   were   necessary   to  IV.  In  His  love  as  a  dove.     Hence 

be  done  by  Christ  in  the  time  of  His  imparting  life  to  the  church. — Lange. 
humiliation,    which    otherwise    would 

not  have  become  the  dignity  of    His  The   baptism    of  Jesus. — Even    the 

45 


CHAP.  IV.      TIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


pure    offspring    of    the    Spirit    needed  name   we    are   baptised    (xxviii.    19). 

the   anointing   of   the    Spirit ;  and   it  The  early  Fathers  of  the  church  were 

was    only    when    His   human    nature  struck  with  this,  and  often  advert  to 

had    grown    strong    enough    for    the  it.     "  Go  to  Jordan,"  said  Augustine 

support  of   the  fulness   of   the   Spirit  to   the   heretic    Marcion,    "and   thou 

that  it  remained  stationary  and  fully  shalt  see  the  Trinity."     Nor  is  it  to  be 

endowed    with    power   from   above. —  overlooked,  as  Lange  remarks,  that,  as 

Olshausen.  it  is  at  Christ's  own  baptism  that  we 

have  the  first  distinct  revelation  of  the 

Vers.    16,    17.  The    Holy     Trinity,  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  so  it  is  at  the 

— Here,  in  the  baptism  of  our  blessed  institution  of  baptism  for  His  church 

Head,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  presence  that  the   doctrine  brightens  into  full 

at  once  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  glory. — B.  Brown,  B.B. 
the  Holy  Ghost,  into  whose  adorable 


CHAPTER  lY. 
CKITIGAB  NOTES. 

The  Temptation  of  Jesus — General  Eemarks. 

There  is  only  one  way  of  understanding  the  narrative,  viz.  as  the  history  of  a  real  occurrence, 
of  an  actual  temptation  of  our  Lord  by  the  devil  as  a  person.  Such  a  history  it  is  clearly 
the  intention  of  the  Evangelist  to  give  ;  and  the  only  difficulty  which  this  interpretation 
ha?,  peculiar  to  itself,  is  that  it  presupposes  two  things,  which  are  also  presupposed  through- 
out the  rest  of  Scripture  :  the  possibility  of  the  supernatural,  and  the  personality  of  the 
tempter.  If  either  of  these  is  denied,  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith  must 
necessarily  fall  with  them.  To  deny  the  supernatural  is  to  deny  what  is  asserted  in  every 
page  of  the  Gospels ;  and  to  deny  the  personality  of  the  tempter  is  virtually  to  assert  that 
the  temptation  was  suggested  from  within,  not  from  without,  an  assertion  incompatible 
with  the  perfect  sinlessness  of  Christ,  and  with  all  the  edifice  of  Christian  truth,  of  which 
that  sinlessness  is  the  foundation  {Mamel). 

The  account  can  have  come  from  7io  other  than  Jesus  Himself. — The  words  of  the 
Evangelist  describe  an  actual  scene — not  a  dream.  The  devil  really  came  to  Jesus,  but  in 
what  form  is  not  stated.  These  were  not  isolated  temptations  in  the  life  of  Jesus 
(cf.  Luke  xxii.  28),  but  they  are  typical  temptations.  They  cover  the  same  ground  as  **  the 
lust  of  the  flesh,"  etc.  (1  John  ii.  16)  in  which  St.  John  sums  up  the  evil  of  the  world 
{Carr). 

The  temptation  remains  equally  real,  whether  we  conceive  that  the  tempter  appeared  in 
bodily  form  and  actually  carried  the  body  of  our  Lord  from  place  to  place,  or  whether  we 
suppose  that,  during  it  all,  Christ  sat  silent  and  apparently  alone  in  the  wilderness 
{Maclaren'). 

The  possibility  of  temptation  in  the  experience  of  a  sinless  being. — May  not  an  appeal  be 
made  to  our  own  experieuca  ?  Do  we  not  all  know  what  it  is  to  be  *'  tempted  without  sin," 
without  sin,  that  is,  in  reference  to  the  particular  thing  to  which  we  are  tempted  ?  Are 
there  not  desires  in  our  nature,  not  only  thoroughly  innocent,  but  a  necessary  part  of  our 
humanity,  which,  nevertheless,  give  occasion  to  temptation  ?  But  on  its  being  recognised 
that  to  follow  the  impulse,  however  natural,  would  lead  to  wrong-doing,  the  temptation  is 
instantly  repelled  and  integrity  perfectly  preserved.  In  such  case  there  is  temptation, 
coDflict.  victory,  all  without  sin.  Surely  then  what  is  possible  to  us  on  occasion,  was  also 
possible  to  our  Lord  on  all  occasions,  all  through  His  pure  and  spotless  life.  His  taking 
our  nature,  indeed,  involved  not  only  the  possibility,  but  the  necessity  of  temptation 
(J.  Monro  Gilmni). 

Ver.  1,  Then. — After  the  baptism  and  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  Jesus,  *'  Straight- 
way" (Mark  i.  12,  R.V.).  "The  consciousness  of  His  Messiahship  .  .  ,  then  required 
to  be  confirmed  through  an  inner  conflict"  (^Wendt).     Wilderness. — Locality  not  known. 

46 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  iv. 


Tradition  has  fixed  on  a  high  ridge  called  Quarantania  (from  the  forty  days)  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Jericho.  "An  almost  perpendicular  wall  of  rock  twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  feet 
above  the  plain  "  (Robinson).  Tempted. — To  tempt  is,  literally,  to  stretch  out,  to  try  the 
strength  of.  But  generally  used  in  a  bad  sense,  meaning  to  entice,  solicit,  or  provoke  to  sin. 
The  devil,  5idj8oXos  =  a  slanderer,  a  traducer.  "The  devil"  is  always  used  in  the  Bible  to 
signify  an  evil  spirit,  never  to  personify  the  evil  in  man  or  in  the  world  (Abbott). 

Ver.  2.  Forty  days  and  forty  nights. — '*  Forty,"  a  sacred  and  representative  number.  Used 
in  Scripture  in  connection  with  the  facts  of  temptation  or  retribution  (Farrai').  Does  not 
follow  thence  that  it  is  not  to  be  taken  exactly  (Olshausen).  May,  however,  be  used  in  a 
general  way  for  a  long  time.  The  fast,  moreover,  may  not  have  been  an  absolute  abstinence 
from  food,  though  this  would  be  less  of  an  impossibility  in  the  East  than  under  the  con- 
ditions of  western  life,  food,  and  habits  (Tuck).  The  fast  was  naturally  sustained.  It  was 
a  time  of  profound  and  absorbed  meditation  on  His  mission,  and  all  it  involved  ;  our  Lord 
was,  as  we  should  say,  "  carried  away,"  so  as  to  be  wholly  indifferent  to  material  things  (ibid). 

Vers.  4,  7,  10.  It  is  written. — The  words  of  all  the  three  answers  to  the  tempter  come  from 
two  chapters  of  Deuteronomy,  one  of  which  supplied  one  of  the  passages  (vi.  4-9)  for  the 
phylacteries  or  frontlets  worn  by  devout  Jews.  The  fact  is  every  way  suggestive.  A 
prominence  was  thus  given  to  that  portion  of  the  book,  which  made  it  an  essential  part  of 
the  education  of  every  Israelite.  The  words  which  our  Lord  now  uses  had,  we  must 
believe,  been  familiar  to  Him  from  His  childhood,  and  He  had  read  their  meaning  rightly 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  5.  Then, — The  order  of  the  second  and  third  temptations  is  inverted  in  the 
narrative  as  given  by  St.  Luke  ;  but  the  latter  does  not,  like  St.  Matthew,  use  words 
implying  chronological  sequence.  St.  Matthew's  appears  to  be  the  true  chronological  order : 
1.  From  the  use  of  the  word  tlieji  in  vers.  5,  11.  2,  From  the  nature  of  the  temptations 
rising  in  degree  to  the  last  (Mansel).  A  pinnacle. — The  (R.V.).  A  certain  well  known 
projection.  Whether  this  refer  to  the  highest  summit  of  the  temple,  which  bristled  with 
golden  spikes  (Jos.,  B.  J.,  V.  v.  6)  ;  or  whether  it  refer  to  another  peak,  on  Herod's  royal 
portico,  overhanging  the  ravine  of  Kedron,  at  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  an  immense  tower 
built  on  the  very  edge  of  this  precipice,  from  the  top  of  which  dizzy  height,  Josephus  says 
one  could  not  lo  k  to  the  bottom  (Ant.,  XV.  xi.  5)— is  not  certain,  but  the  latter  is 
probably  meant  (Brown). 

Ver.  7.  Tempt. — To  tempt  God  is  to  put  Him  to  the  proof — to  demand  evidence  of  His 
power  and  of  His  will  to  fulfil  His  promises,  instead  of  waiting  patiently  and  trusting  in  Him 
(Ma7isel). 

Ver.  8.  An  exceeding  high  mountain. — This  some  regard  as  proof  that  all  that  passed  in 
the  temptation  was  in  the  region  of  which  the  spirit,  and  not  the  senses,  takes  cognisance. 
No  "  specular  mountain "  (Milton)  in  the  whole  earth  commands  a  survey  of  "  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world,"  etc.  (Plu7nptre).  It  is  enough  that  the  thought  and  the  temptation 
of  earthly  despotism  and  glorv  were  present  to  the  mind  of  Jesus  (Carr).  World. — See 
John  xii.  31,  xiv.  30;  Eph.  vi.  12  (R.  V.). 

Ver,  10.  Worship. — Deut.  vi  13,  A  free  and  easy  translation  of  the  original  Hebrew,  but 
true  to  the  spirit  (Morisoii). 

Ver.  12.  Cast  into  prison. — Delivered  up  (R.V.).  Galilee  =  a  circle  or  circuit  originally 
confined  to  a  "circle"  of  twenty  cities  given  by  Solomon  to  Hiram,  1  Kings  ix.  11 
(cf .  Josh.  XX.  7).  From  this  small  beginning  the  name  spread  to  a  larger  district,  just  as  the 
name  of  Asia  spread  from  a  district  near  the  Mseander,  first  to  the  Roman  Province,  then  to 
a  quarter  of  the  globe.  The  Jews  were  in  a  minority  in  those  parts.  The  population  mainly 
consisted  of  Phoenicians,  Arabs,  and  Greeks  (  Carr). 

Ver.  13.  Capernaum. — A  town  on  the  north-west  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  The  exact 
site  disputed.  The  Palestine  Exploration  Society  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  modern 
Tell  Hum  is  the  spot. 

Ver.  14.  Fulfilled, — The  Evangelist  had  manifestly  the  greatest  delight  in  tracing  the 
radii  of  Old  Testament  prophecy  into  the  great  personal  centre  of  Divine  revelation — the 
Saviour  (Morison). 

Ver  15.  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles. — See  on  ver.  12.  The  whole  territory  described  consti- 
tuted an  area  that  might  be  regarded  as  radiating  out  from  Capernaum,  so  far  as  facilities 
of  intercourse  were  concerned  (Morisoyi).  When  St.  Matthew  looked  back  on  the  change  that 
had  come  over  Capernaum  in  the  arrival  of  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth — a  change  extending  to 
his  own  life — these  words  seemed  the  only  adequate  description  of  it  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  17.  At  hand. — A  kingdom  is  not  constituted  out  of  one  member,  and  so  long  as  the 
Messiah  stood  alone  the  kingdom  of  God  did,  not  exist.  It  would  come  into  existence 
through  the  fact  of  the  Messiah  assembling  a  society  of  other  members  of  the  kingdom 
(  Wendt). 

Ver.  18.  Sea  of  Galilee. — About  thirteen  miles  long,  and  in  its  broadest  part  six  miles  wide. 
The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  call  every  considerable  sheet  of  water  a  sea. 

47 


CHAP.  IV.      EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  19.  Follow  Me.  —John  i.  35-43  refers  to  a  summons  some  months  before. 

Ver.  23.  Synagogues. — Places  of  religious  assembly  and  worship.  After  the  Jews  returned 
from  the  exile  in  Babylon,  a  new  hunger  for  the  law  of  God  and  the  worship  of  God  seems 
to  have  sprung  up  in  their  hearts,  and  as  it  was  difficult  for  those  who  lived  at  any  distance 
from  Jerusalem  to  go  up  to  the  temple  very  often  during  th«  year,  they  planted  synagogues 
in  every  town  of  any  size — some  towns  having  more  than  one — so  that  all  might  have  the 
opportunity  of  hearing  the  Law  of  God  read  and  expounded,  and  of  joining  in  public  prayer 
to  Him.  The  services  of  the  synagogue  were  always  held  on  the  Sabbath  day,  though  some- 
times more  frequently,  and  it  was  our  Lord's  custom,  we  are  told,  to  attend  these  services  in 
whatever  town  He  might  be  staying  at  the  time.  It  was  also  customary  for  the  president  or 
"  chief  ruler  "  of  the  synagogue  to  give  an  opportunity  to  any  strangers  who  might  be 
present  and  who  might  wish  to  speak  a  word  of  exhortation  or  consolation  to  the  congre- 
gation, of  doing  so,  and  Jesus  seems  to  have  availed  Himself  very  frequently  of  these  oppor- 
tunities to  teach  and  to  "  preach  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom"  {G.  S.  Barrett). 

Ver.  25.  Decapolis.—  The  district  of  the  ten  cities  east  and  south-east  of  Sea  of  Galilee. 
Colonised  by  veterans  from  the  army  of  Alexander,  hence  its  Greek  name. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTE. 

What  the  temptation  did  for  Jesus. — The  benefit  derived  by  Jesus  from  thus  fighting  out 
the  battle  against  those  temptations  which  assailed  Him,  immediately  after  baptism,  was 
that  the  consciousness  of  His  Messianic  vocation,  which  had  so  suddenly  come  to  Him,  He  now 
obtained  as  an  abiding  personal  possession.  Henceforth  He  was  no  longer  subject  to  a 
ferment  of  inner  perplexity  and  doubt  ;  whilst,  in  the  prosecution  of  His  Messianic  calling, 
He  was  at  every  step  beset  by  external  conflict  and  hindrances  connected  with  Jewish 
worldly  ideas  of  the  Messiabship,  on  the  part  of  His  disciples,  and  His  enemies.  Having 
dealt  in  no  short  perfunctory  way  with  this  early  temptation,  but  having,  after  weeks  of 
inner  conflict,  reached  calm  and  thorough  victory.  He  could  now  undertake  His  public 
teaching  and  ministry  with  unshaken  conviction  of  His  Messiabship,  and  with  a  marvellous 
clearness  and  consistency  of  view  in  regard  to  the  kingdom  of  God  (Wendt). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses   1—11. 

Open  War. — After  Jesus  has  been  set  apart  for,  He  here  sets  forth  foi*,  His 
work.  In  doing  so  He  finds  at  once  that  it  is  a  work  of  conflict  and  strife. 
And  that  of  strife,  too,  in  all  respects  of  the  most  serious  kind.  With  the  great 
adversary  !  In  the  wilderness  !  By  God's  own  appointment  !  And  in  such 
a  way  as  to  touch,  also,  the  very  springs  of  His  life  !  (ver.  1).  Is  it  to  be  much 
wondered  at,  that,  in  preparing  for  it,  He  seems  to  forget  everything  else  ;  even, 
it  would  appear,  for  nearly  six  weeks  of  fasting,  His  own  bodily  wants  (ver.  2, 
"afterward,"  and  cf.  1  Kings  xix.  8;  also,  in  a  measure,  Acts  x.  9-16; 
2  Cor.  xii.  3).  From  the  first  we  see  that  to  Him  the  work  before  Him  was 
more  than  His  "  necessary  food  !  "  (cf.  John  iv.  32).  The  actual  encounter 
in  this  primary  conflict  consists  of  three  principal  parts.      There  is  : — 

I.  A  temptation  to  doubt. — Great  is  the  craft,  in  every  way,  with  which  this 
first  "assault"  is  both  conceived  and  "delivered."  It  is  suited  exactly  to  the 
Saviour's  condition.  To  one  just  beginning  to  be  conscious  of  the  pangs  of 
extreme  hunger  (ver.  2),  how  great  a  temptation  is  any  prospect  of  food  !  It  is 
suited  exactly  to  the  Saviour's  character.  There  is  no  offering  here  of  what 
would  be  sought  after  by  the  self-indulgent  and  sinful ;  nothing  costly ;  nothing 
stimulating ;  nothing  far-fetched.  All  that  is  spoken  of  is  such  "  loaves  "  as  were 
similar  in  appearance  to  the  rounded  "  stones  "  of  the  desert  (ver.  3,  R.V.,  marg.). 
More  than  this  would  havei^rather  repelled  than  tempted  the  nature  attacked. 
It  is  suited  exactly,  once  more,  to  the  Saviour's  claims  and  position.  Only  a 
little  before  He  had  been  proclaimed  as  God's  Son  in  a  peculiar  degree  (iii.  17). 
If  He  really  was  such,  why  should  He  be  allowed  to  suffer  as  He  was  doing  % 
The  Son  of  God  without  bread  ?  Why  should  He  allow  it  Himself  ?  Why  not 
"  command  these  stones  "  to  supply  Him  with  "  bread  "  ?  The  answer  to  this 
subtlety — to  all  this  subtlety — is  equally  simple  and  perfect.  It  comes,  in 
effect,  to  this :   "  Although  in  truth  the  Son  of  God,  I  am  here  as  a  man ;  and 

48 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  iv. 


*  man '  has  been  appointed  and  also  been  taught  to  live  in  entire  dependence 
on  God"  (ver.  4).  In  other  words,  "  This  'temptation  to  doubt'  is  to  Me  the 
more  ground  for  belief." 

II.  A  temptation  to  presumption. — One  avenue  of  evil  is  closed.  The  act  of 
closing  it  opens  another.  How  great,  here  also,  the  subtlety  shown  !  How 
skilfully  the  previous  reply  of  the  Saviour  is  turned  into  a  fresh  means  of 
attack  !  "  Dost  Thou  depend  upon  God  ?  Then  depend  on  Him  to  the  full. 
See,  here  is  His  house !  Here  its  loftiest  point  !  Are  not  His  angels  about 
Thee  ?  Are  they  not  charged  to  preserve  Thee  1  To  preserve  Thee  in  all  Thy 
ways  1  To  preserve  even  Thy  feet  from  coming  in  contact  with  the  idle  stones 
in  Thy  path  ?  Show  Thy  faith  then  in  this  promise — Thy  faith  in  their  care — 
Thy  faith  in  Thy  rights — by  casting  Thyself  down  from  this  height  "  (vers.  5,  6). 
One  ray  of  truth,  as  before,  clears  away  all  this  mist  of  deceit.  God's  promises 
must  be  fulfilled  in  the  way  that  God  wills.  It  is  forbidden  to  man — it  is 
forbidden  to  any  man — thus  to  put  His  truth  to  the  test.  For  to  do  so  would 
be,  in  effect,  to  cast  doubt  on  that  truth.  This  is  "  written  "  of  old.  "  Thou  shalt 
not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God  "  (ver.  7  ;  Deut.  vi.  16). 

III.  A  temptation  to  treason. — The  subtlety  of  this  temptation  seems  to  lie 
partly  in  the  fact  that  it  makes  use  of  the  two  previous  repulses  for  a  further 
means  of  attack.  Twice  assaulted  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  has  answered 
as  man.  He  shall  now  be  tempted  as  man.  Partly  in  the  fact  that  it  makes 
its  appeal  to  that  which  has  so  often  proved  the  ruin  of  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth.  How  often  has  ambition  conquered  those  who  have  conquered  nearly  all 
else  !  Seeing,  therefore,  the  marked  greatness  of  Jesus,  and  convinced  of  it  all  the 
more — in  all  probability — from  the  very  defeats  under  which  he  is  smarting,  the 
evil  one  now  seems  to  have  made  up  his  mind  to  attack  Christ  on  that  side.  He 
takes  Him,  accordingly,  to  the  summit  of  an  *'  exceeding  high  mountain,"  and 
shows  Him  a  sudden  and  far-reaching  prospect  of  "  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth." 
If  He  will  only  do  homage  to  him,  as  their  present  possessor,  all  shall  be  His 
(vers.  8,  9).  What  a  prospect !  What  easy  conditions  !  Was  there  ever  before 
so  dazzling  a  prize  to  be  had  on  such  terms  ?  Not  for  a  moment,  however,  is  it 
so  regarded  by  the  Man  assaulted  thereby.  The  other  temptations  had  come  in 
disguise  as  it  were.  This,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  naked  incentive  to  treason. 
Unlike  the  other  temptations,  therefore,  it  meets  at  once  with  a  direct  and 
naked  rebuke.  "  Get  thee  hence,  thou  adversary ;  for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt 
v/orship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve  "  (ver.  10). 

1.  The  issue  of  this  great  conjlict  is  very  instructive. — On  the  one  hand,  the 
evil  one  goes.  On  the  other  hand,  a  company  of  "  angels  "  come  in  his  place 
(ver.  11).  Why  not  bef ore  1  Because  they  are  not  to  share  in  Christ's  work. 
Why  now  ?  Because  they  sympathise  with  it.  How  often  they  are  found  to 
show  this  in  the  great  crises  of  that  work  !  His  birth  (supra  chaps,  i.  and  ii.). 
His  agony  in  the  garden  (Luke  xxii.  43).  His  resurrection  (Matt,  xxviii.  2, 
etc.).  His  coming  again  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  Observe  now,  however,  that 
they  come  to  sustain  Him  in — not  to  take  Him  away  from — that  work.  The 
devil  has  only  "departed  from  Him  for  a  season"  (Luke  iv.  13).  Other  and 
greater  conflicts  have  yet  to  come.  Something  as  with  Elijah  in  1  Kings 
xix.  5-8,  these  angels  have  come  to  prepare  Him  therefor. 

2.  The  retrospect  of  this  conflict  is  equally  instructive. — See  how  momentous 
a  thing  in  every  way  is  the  ministry  of  this  Jesus.  The  Spirit  of  God  directs  it 
from  the  first.  The  whole  humanity  of  Christ  is  absorbed  in  it  from  the  first. 
The  mightiest  powers  from  below,  with  the  subtlest  of  temptations  and  most 
resplendent  of  bribes,  are  set  in  action  against  it.  The  elect  angels  also — so  far 
as  they  can — come  to  give  it  their  aid.  Everywhere  it  is  watched — this  blind 
earth  alone  excepted — with  the  deepest  concern. 

B  49 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  1-11.  The  victory  of  the  King.  3.  The    true    nature   of  the   act   as 

Every  word  of  the  first  verses  of  this  dragged  to  light  in  Chrisfs  answer. — 

narrative  is  full  of  meaning.     "  Then  "  The  bearing  of  the  words  quoted  on 

marks  the  immediate  connection,  not  Christ's   hunger   is  twofold.      (1)   He 

only  in  time  but  in  causation,  between  will  not  use  His  miraculous  power  to 

the  baptism  and  the  temptation.     "  Of  provide   food,    for   that    would    be   to 

the  Spirit"— then  God  does  lead  His  distrust  God,  and  so  to  cast  off  His 

Son  into  temptation.     Tor  us  all,  as  filial    dependence.      (2)    He   will   not 

for  Christ,  it  is  true  that,  though  God  separate  Himself  from  His  brethren, 

does  not  tempt  as  wishing  us  to  fall,  and  provide  for  Himself  by  a  way  not 

He  does  so  order  our  lives  that  they  open  to  them,  for  that  would  really  be 

carry  us  into  places  where  the  metal  of  to   reverse   the   very  purpose   of   His 

our  religion  is  tried.    ** To  be  tempted"  incarnation  and  to  defeat  His  whole 

— then  a  pure,  sinless,  human  nature  work. 

is  capable  of  temptation,  and  the  King  II.  The  second  assault  and  repulse 

has  to  begin  his  career  by  a  battle.  on    the    temple. — If    Jesus    was,    in 

"  Of  the  devil " — then  there  is  a  dark  bodily  reality,  standing  on  the  summit 

kingdom  of  evil,  and  a  personal  head  of  the  temple,  the  tempter,  profoundly 

of   it,   the   prince  of    darkness.      He  disbelieving    the    promise,   may  have 

knows   his   rival,  and   yet   he   knows  thought  that  the  leap  would  end  his 

Him  but  partially.   To  a  sinless  nature  anxieties  by  the   death   of   his  rival, 

no  temptation  can  arise  from  within.  But,  at  any  rate,  he  sought  to  lead 

but  must  be  presented  from  without.  His   faith    into  wrong  paths,  and  to 

I.  The  first  assault  and  repulse  in  incite  to  what  was  really  sinful  self- 

the  desert. — Ere  Jesus  enters  on  His  will  under  the  guise  of  absolute  trust, 

work,  the  need  which  every  soul  ap-  Our  Lord's  answer  strips  off  the  dis- 

pointed  to  high  and   hard   tasks  has  guise  from  the  action  which  seemed  so 

felt,  namely,  the  need  for  seclusion  and  trustful.    To  cast  Himself  into  dangers 

communion  with  God  in  solitude,  was  needlessly,  and  then  to  trust  God  (whom 

felt  by  Him.     So  deep  and  rapt  was  He  had  not  consulted  about  going  into 

the  communion  that,  for  forty  days,  them)  to  get  Him  out,  was  to  **  tempt " 

spirit  so  mastered  flesh  that  the  need  God.     True  faith  is  ever  accompanied 

and   desire   for   food  were   suspended,  with  true  docihty.    He  had  come  to  do 

But  when  He  touched  earth  again  the  His  Father's  will.     The  lessons  for  us 

pinch  of  hunger  began.  are  weighty.     Faith  may  be  perverted. 

1.  The  sphere  of  the  temptation. — ^The  III.  The  final  assault  and  repulse  on 
physical  nature.  Hunger,  in  itself  the  mountain. — Satan  has  no  more  to 
neutral,  may,  like  all  physical  cravings,  say  about  "  the  Son  of  God."  He  has 
lead  to  sin.  Satan  had  tried  the  same  been  foiled  in  both  his  assaults  on 
bait  before  on  the  first  Adam.  At  Christ  in  that  character.  If  He  stood 
the  beginning  of  His  course  Jesus  is  firm  in  filial  trust  and  in  filial  sub- 
tempted  by  the  innocent  desire  to  mission,  there  was  no  more  to  be  done. 
secure  physical  support ;  at  its  close  He  So  the  tempter  tries  new  weapons,  and 
is  tempted  by  the  innocent  desire  to  seeks  to  pervert  the  desire  for  that 
avoid  physical  pain.  He  overcomes  both,  dominion  over  the  world  which  was  a 

2.  The  act  suggested. — Seems  not  consequence  of  the  Sonship.  He  has 
only  innocent,  but  in  accordance  with  not  been  able  to  touch  Him  as  Son ; 
His  dignity.  The  need  is  real,  the  can  he  not  spoil  Him  as  King  ?  They 
remedy  possible  and  easy;  the  result  are  rivals;  can  they  not  strike  up  a 
desirable  as  preserving  valuable  life  treaty?  The  hopeless  folly  of  the 
and  putting  an  end  to  an  anomaly,  and  proposal  is  typical  of  the  absurdities 
the  objections  apparently  nil,  which   lie   in   all   sin.     Satan's  boast, 

50 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  iv. 


like  all  his  wiles,  is  a  little  truth  and 
a  great  lie.  His  servants  do  often 
manage  to  climb  into  thrones  and  other 
high  places.  But  the  father  of  lies 
did  not  say  that  if  he  gives  a  kingdom 
to  one  of  his  servants  he  takes  it  from 
another.  He  did  not  say  that  his 
gifts  are  shams,  and  fade  away  when 
the  dayHght  comes.  He  did  not  say 
that  he  and  his  are,  after  all,  tools  in 
God's  hands.  The  temptation  was  not 
only  to  fling  away  the  ideal  of  His 
kingdom,  but  to  reverse  the  means  for 
its  establishment.  Neither  temptation 
could  originate  wathin  Christ's  heart, 
but  both  beset  Him  all  His  life. 
Christ's  last  words  are  not  only  His 
final  refusal  of  all  the  baits,  but  the 
ringirg  proclamation  of  war  to  the 
death,  and  that  a  war  which  will 
end  in  victory.  The  last  temptation 
teaches  us  both  the  nature  of  Christ's 
kingdom  and  the  means  of  its  estab- 
lishment.— A.  MaclareUj  D.D. 

Christ  tempted.  (To  young  men.) — 
Christ  here  beginning  the  work  of  His 
life.  His  years  in  Nazareth  were  not 
wasted.  He  consecrated  labour ;  made 
working  man's  condition  honourable. 

I.  Tempted  through  His  body's 
appetite. 

1.  Nothing  wrong  about  hunger. — In 
itself  nothing  wrong  in  working  a 
miracle  to  supply  it.  But  to  do  it  at 
the  devil's  bidding  was  another  matter. 
"If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,"  q.d., 
"  Does  this  look  like  it  1  '*  Reflection 
on  God's  love  and  providential  care. 

2  Must  only  suggest  to  you  an 
ordinary  temptation  of  young  men 
inseparable  from  their  youth  and 
vigorous  constitution.  Timothy  cau- 
tioned by  Paul :  "  Flee  youthful  lusts." 
Eating  and  drinking  right  per  se,  but 
may  lead  into  grosser  sins.  This  other 
passion  right,  but  leads  into  grosser 
and  more  debasing  sins  than  any  other. 
Remember,  only  to  be  satisfied,  like 
Christ's  hunger,  in  accordance  with  the 
will  of  God ;  never  at  the  devil's  bidding. 

3.  //  to  be  of  any  use  for  God,  keep 
tight  hand  on  all  body^s  appetites,  all 
natural  cravings. 


II.  Satan  would  have  Christ  need- 
lessly thrust  Himself  into  danger,  pre- 
suming on  safety. — "  Cast  Thyself 
down ;  angels  will  see  Thee  safe."  So 
with  young  men.  You  will  be  safe  on 
that  race  ground  or  in  that  music-hall. 
Your  strength  of  character  is  safeguard 
enough.  Or  with  young  Christian 
men.  You  may  dance.  You  can  go 
to  the  theatre  and  come  away  un- 
harmed. You  are  a  Christian  !  You 
can  take  the  good  and  leave  the  evil. 
No  man  is  safe  in  self  sought  danger. 
There  is  danger  !  Look  at  the  com- 
pany !  Look  at  the  entertainment, 
generally  unworthy  a  sensible  young 
man,  always  uncongenial  to  a  godly 
man  !  How  many  young  men  there 
ruined  by  the  experiment  proposed  to 
you !  See  who  await  you  at  your 
exit !  As  well  may  you  expect  to  rub 
against  a  sweep  or  a  miller  or  a  tarred 
fence  and  show  nothing,  as  to  go  to 
the  actual  theatre  or  racecourse  and 
not  be  the  worse.  No  man  may  then 
claim  God's  protection.  Keep  out  of 
danger.  Err  on  safe  side.  '*  Descend 
amongst  the  crowd  in  the  temple 
courts  and  they  will  more  easily  believe 
Thee,  Son  of  God,"  q.d.,  *'Go  into 
danger  to  do  good." 

III.  "  Just  once  worship  me,  the 
world  shall  be  Thine !  "—^.(^.  "All 
will  be  Thine,  but  at  what  a  price  ! 
Here  is  a  short  and  easy  road  to  Thy 
kingdom."  To  young  men  :  "  Will  get 
on  if  only  you  give  up  these  scruples 
and  bow  with  the  rest.  Need  only  do 
it  once.  Just  one  simple  act.  Need 
not  really  in  heart  give  up  anything 
important."  "Only  once  "ruined  our 
race  ;  has  ruined  many  a  young  man 
since.  "  Only  once  "  carries  the  prin- 
ciple :  "  Cannot  get  on,  to  stand  so 
stiffly  by  Sabbath  and  religious  no- 
tions." Then  don't  get  on.  Be  a 
beggar  all  your  days,  but  a  godly 
beggar.  Be  an  *'  unsuccessful  man  " 
all  your  life  ;  see  others  weighted  with 
fewer  scruples  get  before  you  in  the 
race  and  grasp  the  prizes;  but  keep 
your  God.  Let  their  carriage  wheels 
bespatter  you  as,  for  principle's  sake, 
you  trudge  painfully  along;  yet  you 


CHAP.  IV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


are  infinitely  the  gainers  !     Have  none  The    Saviour's    temptation. — I.    The 

of  the  devil's  "short  cuts"  to  ad  van-  temptation     of    our    Lord    was    the 

tage  or  prosperity. — H.  J.  Foster.  result  of  Divine  appointment. — "  Jesus 

was    led    up   of   the   Spirit."       What 

Chrisfs  temptation  and  the  pastoral  the     Divine     purpose    was     we    may 

office. — I.  That   our   ministry  may  be  gather  from  the  manner  in  which  His 

in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  Christ,  temptation,    is   in   the   Epistle  to  the 

and  so  exert   saving   power,    its   first  Hebrews,  connected  with  the  exercise 

requisite    is   experience   of    our   own  of  His  priestly  functions.      1.  It  was 

personal  liability  to  temptation. — This  meant    to    promote    that    perfection 

is  a  quite  different  experience  from  a  which  was  necessary  to  qualify  Him 

merely  general  knowledge  of  our  sinful-  for     interposing    effectually     on     our 

ness.    Nor  does  this  liability  to  tempta-  behalf  both  as   victim    and  as  priest, 

tion  lie  merely,  as  people  say,  on  the  2.  The  temptation   also   enabled  Him 

weak    side     which     every    man    has.  to   sympathise  with    us  in  our  trials, 

Christ  had  no  weak  side.     It  was  His  and    to    help    us    when    engaged    in 

Sonship,  His  very  might  and  strength,  spiritual     conflicts     like      His     own. 

upon  which  His  temptation  fastened.  Through    these    combined     effects    of 

And   so   it   is   on   the   strong   side  of  His    temptation    it    is    that   we    can 

every   good    Christian    man   that   his  "  come    boldly    unto    the    throne    of 

chief  danger  lies,  in  that  which  is  best  grace,  that  we  may  (1)  obtain  mercy, 

and  most  vigorous  in  his  nature,  in  his  and  (2)  find  grace  to  help  us  in  every 

peculiar  endowment  and  excellence,  in  time  of  need." 

the  very  thing  which  men  are  to  II.  The  scene  of  the  temptation. — 
regard  as  a  good  gift  of  God.  Hence  It  is  in  the  crowd  and  bustle  of  life, 
arises  liability  to  temptation  in  the  especially  of  wealth  and  fashion,  that 
three  forms  of  it  seen  in  the  tempta-  inducements  to  evil  most  abound, 
tion  of  Christ.  1.  The  temptation  The  sohtude  of  the  desert  is  freer 
(ver.  3)  to  turn  natural  or  spiritual  from  temptation,  and,  moreover,  it  is 
blessings  selfishly  to  account  for  our  more  favourable  to  its  resistance,  be- 
own  enjoyment  and  honour.  2,  The  cause  of  the  opportunity  it  gives  for 
temptation  (ver.  6)  to  stand  out  and  quiet  reflection  and  prayer.  There- 
shine  before  the  crowd  as  a  specially  fore  we  cannot  think  of  our  Saviour 
gifted  man  of  God,  or  to  attain  quick  being  tempted  in  the  wilderness  with- 
and  magnificent  results.  3.  The  temp-  out  being  impressed  with  the  fact 
tation  (ver.  9)  to  pay  homage  to  the  that  there  is  no  place  in  this  world 
spirit  of  the  age,  and  to  make  terms  altogether  free  from  temptation, 
with  powers  and  tendencies  which  are  III.  The  time  of  the  temptation  is 
in  the  ascendant.  still  more  significant. — The  voice  has 

II.  Victory  is  found  in  a  spirit  of  just  testified.  This  is  My  beloved  Son. 

which  the  positive  elements  are — 1.  A  What  can  the  devil  have  to  do  with 

self-renouncing  love  of  God,  which  seeks  Him  then  ?     But  it  was  when  Moses 

life    and    strength,    not    in    its   own  was  on  his  way  down  from  the  Mount, 

resources,    but    in     the    cleaving    of  from  holding  close  converse  with  God, 

the  inner  nature  to  the  word  of  God.  that  he  gave  way  to  anger  and  broke 

2.    A  humhle  faith    which    has  more  the  tables  of  stone.     It  was  just  after 

desire  to   cleave  to  the   definite   com-  the  victory  in  Car m  el  that  Elijah  was 

mands  of   God  than  to  usurp  Divine  found  under  the  juniper  tree.    "Blessed 

and  glorious  promises.       3.   Undaunted  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona,"  was  closely 

hope,  which   does   not   allow  itself    to  followed  by  "  Get  thee  hence,  Satan." 

be   dazzled   by  the  worldly  splendour  It  is  always  on  the  eve  of  a  specially 

that    strikes    the    eye,    and    by    the  bright    and    joyous    experience    that 

power    that    rules    in    the    world. —  Satan   needs   most  vigilant   attention. 

J.  T.  Becic,  D.D,  Our  foe  is  most  malignant  when  our 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  iv. 


spiritual  elevation  is  at  its  highest. —  He  was  brought  into  the  holy  city. 

W.  Laridelsj  D.D,  — I   have   no    doubt    that   when   our 

Lord  was  reflecting  on  the  iniquities 

Yer.  3.  Reflections  on  Christ's  first  of   the  holy  city  the   devil  suggested 

temptation. — 1.  No   wonder   men   find  to  Him  the  thought,  *'  What  avails  it 

themselves    daily    solicited    by    Satan  to  be  a  Jew,  to  be  a  citizen  of  God's 

unto  sin ;    for  Satan's  style  from  his  city,    a   member   of   the   holy   nation, 

continual  practice  is  the  tempter.     It  when  holiness  and   purity  and  unity 

is  his  trade  to  tempt.      2.  It  is  pos-  have  utterly  deserted  it?     If  Thou  be 

sible   that  such  as  God  loves  may  be  the   Son   of    God   set   an   example   of 

troubled  by  Satan.     3.  It  is  no  wonder  throwing  away  these  vain  privileges." 

to  find  Satan  calling  in  question  the  Precisely  this  temptation  is  presented 

adoption   or    regeneration   of    any   of  to  all  of  us  this  day. 

God's   children,   for    he    dare   call   in  III.     Understand    next    from    this 

question   the   sonship   of   the    Son   of  history  of  our  Lord's  second  tempta- 

God,   notwithstanding  that   within   a  tion  that  we  are  not  to  plead  love  to 

few    days    before    this,    the    Father  our  brethren  as  any  excuse  for  going 

and  the  Holy  Spirit  from  heaven  had  out  of  God's  way  or  doing  work  which 

borne  witness  to  it.     4.  Satan  fits  his  He  has  not  set  us  to  do. — Our  Lord 

temptations  into  men's  present  case  and  was  urged  to  cast  Himself  down  from 

condition.     5.  In  tempting,  Satan  pre-  the  temple  that  He  might  convince  the 

tends   to   be   careful    of    helping   the  Jews  of  their  unbelief.     He  who  urged 

tempted  party  to   a  better  condition.  Him  to  it  wished  Him  in  that  very 

Here  he  seems  desirous  both  to  have  thing  to   commit  an  act  of  unbelief, 

bread  provided  for  Christ  in  His  need  Thousands    of    such    acts    have   been 

and  also  to  see  Him  made  manifest  as  committed  by  men  who  thought  that 

the  Son   of  God    by  such  a   miracle.  they  were  honouring  God  and  helping 

6.  Satan's  temptations  are  more  than  their    brethren.       They    were     doing 

one ;  a  number  linked  together. — David  neither.       To    be     working    together 

Dickson.  with    God     is     our    highest    honour. 

When    we    are    not    doing    this   we 

Yers.  5-7.  Our  Lord^s  second  tempta-  cannot  be   working  any  good  to  our- 

tion. — I.  Our  Lord  was  carried  from  the  selves   or  to  any  other  man. — F.  D, 

wilderness  to  the  holy  city. — Under-  Maurice,  M.A. 
stand  by  this  how  all  our  circumstances 

in  the  world  may  be  changed,  and  yet  The  perversion  of  holy  things, — The 

the  tempter  be  with  us  still.    Hundreds  holiest    things    may    be   perverted   to 

of  men  have  gone  out  into  the  desert  become    the    most     vile     temptation, 

thinking  that  in  that  way  they  should  1.   A   stay   in   the  holy  city.     2.  The 

escape   temptation,  but    it   has   found  prospect    from    the    pinnacle    of    the 

them  out.    The  spirit  of  evil  has  shown  temple.     3.  The  promise  contained  in 

them  that  they  do  not  escape  from  him  an  inspired  psalm. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 
by  escaping   from   men.      Then   they 

have  run  back  into  the  holy  city  ;  they  Yers.  8,  9.  The  third  temptation. — 
have  thought  that  they  were  exposed  I.  The  root  of  the  third  temptation 
to  danger  because  they  were  away  lay  in  the  thought  that  the  kingdoms 
from  the  ordinances  of  God.  But  of  the  world  were  the  devil's  king- 
there,  too,  they  have  found  there  was  doms,  and  that  it  was  he  who  could 
no  security  ;  it  has  only  been  a  change  dispose  of  them. — If  our  Lord  had 
from  "  Command  these  stones  to  be  believed  this,  if  He  had  acknowledged 
made  bread,"  into  "  Cast  thyself  down  this  claim.  He  would  have  been  falling 
from  hence."  down  and  worshipping  the  evil  spirit, 

II.  Consider    what   was  the  parti-  He  would  have   been   confessing  him 

<5ular  temptation  of  our  Lord  when  to  be  the  Lord.    But  for  all  that  He 

53 


CHAP  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


beheld  the  horrible  vision  of  human 
misery  and  human  crime ;  for  all  that 
He  found  men  actually  doing  homage 
to  the  spirit  of  evil,  actually  serving 
him  with  their  thoughts  and  words 
and  deeds ;  in  spite  of  all  this,  He 
believed  and  knew  that  these  king- 
doms were  not  the  devil's  kingdoms, 
but  God's  kingdoms.  He  knew  that 
men's  sins  began  in  this,  consisted  in 
this,  that  they  thought  and  believed 
the  devil  to  be  their  king,  when  God 
was  their  King. 

II.  It  is  hard  to  believe  this,  when 
there  are  so  many  things  that 
seem  to  contradict  it. — But  believe  it 
we  must  if  we  would  be  honest  men. 
Holy  men  have  been  betrayed  into  sins 
which  make  one  weep  and  blush  when 
one  reads  the  history  of  Christ's 
church,  because  they  have  thought 
that  falsehood  and  evil  were  the  lords 
of  the  world,  and  that  if  they  were  to 
overcome  the  world  they  must  do  it  by 
entering  into  some  bargain  or  com- 
promise with  these  masters  of  it.  The 
devil  was  saying  to  them,  "These  are 
mine,  and  I  give  them  to  whomsoever 
I  will."  They  believed  him.  He  asked 
this  token  of  homage  from  them,  and 
they  paid  it.  The  mischiefs  that  have 
followed  from  every  such  faithless  act 
have  been  more  than  I  can  tell  you, 
and  though  they  are  no  warrant  to  us 
in  condemning  others,  they  are  most 
terrible  warnings  to  ourselves. — F.  D, 
Maurice^  M.A. 

Ver.  11.  Christ s  victory . — Let  us  en- 
deavour to  gather  up  the  general  in- 
struction to  be  gained  from  the  history 
of  the  temptation. 

I.  Christ  has,  by  His  example  under 
temptation,  taught  us  how  to  resist  it. 

II.  His  example  shows  us  the 
proper  use  of  God's  word. 

III.  The  greatest  lesson  for  the 
disciple  of  Jesus  to  learn  from  the 
temptation  of  his  Master  is  one  of 
encouragement. — When  One  is  set  be- 
fore us  as  our  ever-present  Helper, 
who  Himself  has  passed  through  the 
struggle ;  when  we  know  that  we  are 
not   alone   in   the    bitterness    of    our 

54 


spirits,  and  that  in  the  darkest  place 
in  our  course  we  shall  find  His  foot- 
steps ;  what  a  different  matter  does 
each  Christian's  appointed  conflict  be- 
come— how  full  of  sympathy,  how  full 
of  promise,  how  full  of  Christ  ! — H, 
Alford,  D.D. 

Vers.  1-11.  Temptation  and  sin. — 
If  Satan  be  the  father  of  our  sins,  our 
will  is  the  mother,  and  sin  is  the  cursed 
issue  of  both. — Bishop  Hall. 

Temptation  and  sin. — You  can't 
prevent  the  devil  from  shooting 
arrows  of  evil  thoughts  into  your 
heart ;  but  take  care  that  you  do  not 
let  such  arrows  stick  fast  and  grow 
there.  Do  as  an  old  man  of  past  times 
has.  said  :  "  I  can't  prevent  a  bird  from 
flying  over  my  head,  but  I  can  prevent 
him  from  making  a  nest  in  my  hair." — 
Martin  Luther. 

Commonness  of  temptation.  —  The 
story  of  the  temptation  is  peculiar, 
but  it  is  not  wholly  unique.  It  is 
not  without  its  parallel  in  human 
experience,  not  without  its  analogue 
in  literature  and  history.  The  great 
heroes  whom  the  world  reveres  have 
passed  through  similar  experiences  of 
test  and  trial.  Thus,  in  the  legends 
of  the  East,  there  is  brought  to  us  the 
story  of  the  temptation  of  Buddha  on 
that  night  when  all  the  powers  of  evil 
gathered  around  about  him  to  assail 
him  by  violence  or  to  entice  him  by 
wiles. 

Nor  knoweth  one, 
Not  even  the  wisest,  how  those  fiends  of  hell 
Battled  that  night  to  keep  the  truth  from 

Buddh : 
Sometimes  with  terrors  of  the  tempest,  blasts 
Of  demon-armies  clouding  all  the  wind 
With  thunder,  and  with  blinding  lightning 

flung 
In  jagged  javelins  of  purple  wrath 
From  splitting  skies ;  sometimes  with  wiles 

and  words 
Fair-sounding,    'mid    hushed  ,  leaves    and 

softened  airs 
From  shapes  of  witching  beauty  ;   wanton 

songs, 
Whispers  of    love ;    sometimes    with  royal 

allures 
Of  proffered  rule  ;  sometimes  with  mocking 

doubts. 
Making  truth  vaia. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  IV. 


So,  in  the  mythology  of  Greece,  we 
have  the  story  of  the  temptation  of 
Hercules.  Pleasure  comes  to  him  in 
wanton  but  bewitching  form,  and  bids 
him  follow  her,  and  promises  him  the 
cup  of  pleasure  and  that  he  shall  drink 
of  it.  She  will  strew  his  path  with 
flowers  all  the  way,  and  accompany 
him  with  song  and  dancing.  Wisdom 
comes  to  him  with  sterner  voice — with 
beauty,  indeed,  but  with  solemn  and 
almost  forbidding  beauty — and  calls 
him  to  combat  and  to  battle  that  he 
may  win  manhood.  So,  in  the  later 
history  of  the  church,  is  the  strange, 
mystical — superstitious,  if  you  will — 
story  of  the  temptation  of  St.  Anthony, 
with  its  wiles  and  its  enticements,  with 
its  demons  inviting  to  sin  by  smiles, 
and  its  demons  tormenting  with  red- 
hot  pincers.  In  human  history  we 
find  the  same  or  like  record.  We  have 
like  temptations  in  the  lives  of  John 
Wesley,  of  Luther,  of  Xavier,  of 
Loyola.  Open  the  page  of  history 
where  you  will,  and  you  can  hardly 
find  the  story  of  any  great,  noble, 
prophetic  soul  that  has  not  had  its 
hour  of  battle  with  the  powers  of 
darkness,  sometimes  not  turning  out 
so  well  as  with  Buddha,  or  with 
Hercules,  or  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth. — 
L.  Abbott,  D.D. 

Temptation  sometimes  subtle. — A 
favourite  amusement  of  the  German 
students  is  duelling.  The  arrange- 
ments for  a  duel  are  made  very 
secretly,  lest  they  should  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  police.  One  morn- 
ing I  rose  at  five,  went  twelve  miles 
by  train,  and  then  walked  some  distance 
to  an  old  castle,  to  witness  one  of  these 
duels.    All  the  approaches  to  the  place 


were  watched.  The  fight  took  place 
in  the  old  dining-hall  of  the  ruin.  The 
students  who  were  to  fight  were  two  of 
the  most  famous  duellists  in  Germany. 
They  began,  and  fought  about  a  dozen 
rounds.  I  observed  that  one  of  the 
two  had  only  a  single  form  of  stroke — 
downwards  upon  the  head ;  the  other 
tried  many  different  forms.  The  spec- 
tators wondered  what  the  first  could 
mean,  as  he  had  never  been  known  to 
fight  in  that  way  before.  Suddenly,  at 
the  thirteenth  round,  his  eye  flashed ; 
and  with  a  rapid  movement  he  changed 
his  stroke,  and  brought  his  sword  up- 
wards, cleaving  the  chin  of  his  op- 
ponent, who  fell  senseless  to  the  ground, 
with  a  wound  that  he  would  bear  all 
his  life.  How  did  it  happen  ?  It  was 
the  sudden  change  of  direction.  Temp- 
tation veers  about  as  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly ;  and  unless  we  watch  we 
shall  be  taken  ofi*  our  guard. — Professor 
H.  Drummond. 

Yer.  9.  Satan,  a  liar. — 0,  thou 
lying  devil,  how  thou  dost  lie  still ! 
Thou  that  didst  lie  art  the  father  of 
lies.  Thou  didst  say  to  Napoleon 
the  Great,  "  If  thou  wilt  bow  down 
before  me  and  worship  me,  I  will  give 
thee  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  and 
the  glory  thereof,"  and  thou  didst  give 
him  St.  Helena.  And  to  ISTapoleon 
III.,  "  Bow  down  to  me  and  worship 
me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  kingdoms 
of  the  earth  and  the  glory  thereof," 
and  thou  didst  give  him  Chiselhurst. 
And  to  Aaron  Burr,  *'  Bow  down  to 
me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  Presidency 
and  political  power,"  and  thou  didst 
give  him  exile  and  shame  and  disgrace. 
—L.  Abbott,  D.D, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  12—22. 

An  unobtrusive  beginning. — We  have  just  seen  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  a 
conqueror  (vers.  1-11).  We  are  to  see  Him  now  as  the  light  (ver.  16).  He  is 
no  longer  in  the  wilderness,  but  in  cities  and  towns.  No  longer  exposed  to  the 
direct  machinations  of  Satan,  but  ministering  to  mankind.  In  beginning  to  do 
this  we  are  shown  in  this  passage  :  1.  The  kind  of  work  He  took  up.  2.  The 
kind  of  locality  He  fixed  on.     3.  The  kind  of  helpers  He  chose. 

I.  The  kind    of  work  He   engaged  in. — In  a  general  way  it  was  that 

55 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


of  "preaching"  (ver  17).  This,  as  we  have  seen,  was  the  great  work  of  His 
predecessor,  the  Baptist  (iii.  1).  At  this  time,  also,  the  message  which  Jesus 
delivered  was  almost  identical  with  that  with  which  John  the  Baptist  began  : 
"Bepent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand"  (iii.  2,  iv*  17).  It  would 
almost  seem,  indeed,  as  though  He  only  intended,  at  first,  to  supply  that  great 
preacher's  place.  It  was  only,  at  any  rate,  after  that  first  preacher  had  been 
silenced,  that  this  other  began;  only  after  "Jesus  had  heard  (ver.  12)  that  John 
was  cast  into  prison,"  and  so  could  speak  openly  no  longer,  that  His  speaking 
began.  (Of.  Bengel,  Decrescente  Joanne  crevit  Christus.)  So  far,  therefore, 
there  is  nothing  especially  novel  about  His  proceedings  and  work.  He  is 
merely  taking  up  the  office — He  is  merely  repeating  the  message — of  one  who 
has  disappeared  from  the  scene. 

II.  The  kind  of  locality  He  fixed  on. — This  is  marked  by  various  features 
of  a  distinguishing  kind.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  very  "  out  of  the  way " 
aThd  provincial.  "  He  departed " — He  retired  (?)  **  into  Galilee  "  (ver.  12, 
cf.  Mark  xiv.  70;  Acts  ii.  7).  This  seems  very  noteworthy.  After  being  almost 
worshipped  by  so  great  a  preacher  as  John  the  Baptist  (iii.  14) ;  after  receiving 
the  open  attestation  of  heaven  itself  (iii.  16,  17)  ;  after  overcoming  the  adversary 
in  chief  in  the  wilderness  (iv.  1-10) ;  who  would  have  thought  of  this  Prince  of 
Israel  settling  down  in  "  G-alilee  of  the  Gentiles  "  ?  (ver.  15).  We  should  rather 
have  thought  it  the  last  place  in  that  land — if  not,  indeed,  the  last  upon  earth — 
for  His  purpose.  In  the  next  place,  the  special  city  chosen  was  one  exceedingly 
busy  and  populous.  Not  in  the  comparative  leisure  of  Nazareth — not  there 
where  He  would  have  about  Him  a  certain  number  of  relations  and  friends — 
but  in  the  thronged  streets  of  the  important  emporium  and  sea-side  town  of 
Capernaum  does  He  begin.  The  Evangelist  himself  seems  to  speak  of  this  with 
surprise — "  Leaving  Nazareth,  He  came  and  dwelt  in  Capernaum  "  (ver  13).  In 
the  last  place,  the  whole  neighbourhood  appears  to  have  been  singularly  un- 
enlightened and  dark.  Its  inhabitants  are  described  as  a  "  people  "  sitting  in 
**  darkness  "  (ver.  16).  The  *'  region  "  is  described  also  as  that  of  "  the  shadow  of 
death"  (ibid.).  Never  before  had  any  source  of  light  arisen  out  of  its  borders. 
Such,  at  any  rate,  was  what  the  boasted  enlightenment  of  Jerusalem  was 
accustomed  to  say  of  it ;  and  that,  moreover,  without  thinking  it  possible  that 
anyone  could  gainsay  them  (John  vii.  52). 

III.  The  kind  of  helpers  He  chose. — These  were  distinguished,  principally,  by 
being  wwdistinguished  in  almost  every  respect.  On  the  one  hand  there  was 
nothing  in  their  origin  to  mark  them  out  from  the  general  obscurity  of  the  place. 
They  were  denizens  of  the  neighbourhood — sons  of  the  soil — Galileans  in  speech 
— probably  in  aspect  as  well  (see  supra).  Of  none  of  those  mentioned  here  (in 
vers.  18,  21)  as  being  called  by  the  Saviour,  are  we  told  anything  else.  "  Simon 
called  Peter  and  Andrew  his  brother,"  "  James  the  son  of  Zebedee  and  John 
his  brother,"  were  just  such  men  as  you  might  find  anywhere  among  the  men 
of  those  parts.  Neither  was  there  anything,  on  the  other  hand,  in  their  social 
position,  to  confer  distinction  upon  them.  By  and  by  they  were  to  become,  so 
the  Saviour  told  them,  "  fishers  of  men."  But  at  the  time  of  their  calling  they 
were  fishers  only  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term  ;  master  fishers,  it  is  true,  in 
a  small  way,  as  we  gather  elsewhere ;  but  working  fishermen  yet,  for  all  that, 
and  men  labouring  with  their  hands  in  the  necessary  duties  of  "  casting  "  and 
"mending"  their  "nets"   (Matt.  iv.  18-22;  Mark  i.  19). 

In  this  account  of  i  the  opening  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus,  we  see  : — 
1.  llis  singular  meekness. — Choosing  so  obscure  a  sphere,  engaging  in  so  quiet 
a  work,  selecting  such  unknown  friends.     How  He  might  have  shone  elsewhere 
we  see  from  Luke  ii.  46.     How  completely  He  became  identified  with  Galilee 
from  Luke  xxiii.  6,  7 ;  John  vii.  41,  52. 

66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  IV. 


2.  His  singular  mercy. — Just  where  the  "  darkness  "  was  greatest — just  where 
there  were  most  souls  in  need  of  Him — just  where  that  need  was  the  greatest 
— did  He  carry  His  "  light."  That  is  the  place,  those  are  the  people,  whom  His 
heart  of  kindness  prefers. 

3.  How  both  these  things  were  foretold. — Long  ago  had  prophecy  spoken 
(vers.  14-16;  Isa.  ix.  1,  2)  of  this  very  land — this  darkness — this  light — this 
deliberate  choice — this  happy  result.  However  strange,  therefore,  such  a  be- 
ginning may  seem  in  our  eyes,  we  see  here  that  it  was  the  kind  of  beginning 
which  God  had  intended.  Doubtless,  therefore,  it  will  lead  in  time  to  the  kind 
of  end  He  designs. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yer.  12.  John  imprisoned^  Jesus  de-  while  they  are  themselves,  if  possible, 

parting. — 1.  Faithful   ministers    must  still  more  melancholy  instances  of  the 

expect   persecution.     2.  All  preachers  potency  of  Satanic  influence — they,  who 

of  the  gospel   are  not   imprisoned   at  amidst  all  the  advantages  and  external 

once,  for  when  John  is  in  prison,  Christ  privileges    of     a    gospel    land,     have 

is  free.    3.  Persecution  of  the  ministers  despised     and      rejected     the     great 

of  the  gospel  is  a  forerunner  of  Christ's  salvation. 

departing  from  a  land. — David  Dickson.  II.  The  gospel  is  here  called  '<  a  great 

light." — 1.  Light  upon  our  origin^  con- 

Vers.  15,  16.  Darkness  and  light. —  dition  and  prospects.     2.  If  the  gospel 

In  this  passage  we  have  a  description  message  he  received  it  certifies  assured 

of  the  condition  of  the  Galileans  ;  but  peace  and  eternal  glory  to  the  receiver. — 

the  description  need  not  be  restricted  Henry  Craik. 
to  them. 

I.  It  applies  to  all  that  are  living  Ver.  16.  Light    in  darkness. — Lord 

without   God,   and    destitute   of    the  Byron   and    Mr.    Hobhouse    explored 

knowledge  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. —  together  a   cavern   in   Greece.     They 

It  applies  to  the  past  and  present  state  lost  themselves  in  its  abysses,  and  the 

of  heathenism,  and  extends  to  all  who  guide  confessed  in  alarm  that  he  knew 

have  received  no  other  light  than  that  not  how  to  recover  the  outlet.     They 

of  nature  to  instruct  them.      1.  They  roamed  in  a  state  of  despair  from  cave 

are  sitting  in  darkness;  i.e.  they  are  to    cell.      They    climbed     up    narrow 

in  utter  ignorance  of  all  those  points  apertures,  but  found  no  way  of  escape, 

with  which  it  is  most  of  all  the  con-  Their  last  torch  was  consuming,  they 

cern  of  immortal  beings  to  be  acquainted,  were  totally  ignorant  of  their  where- 

They  know  not  whence,  or  for  what  abouts,  and  all  around  was  darkness, 

end,  they  were  originally  created  ;  how  By  chance  they  discerned  through  the 

they  may  please  God  ;  what  they  have  gloom  what  proved  to  be  a  ray  of  light 

to  expect  beyond  this  present  state  of  gleaming  towards  them.    They  hastened 

being ;  or  where  to  apply  for  instruc-  to  follow  it  and  arrived  at  the  mouth 

tion   respecting   their   most    enduring  of  the  cave.     Blessed  be  darkness  and 

interests.      2.  They   are   not   only   in  despair  if  through  them   men  discern 

darkness,  but  in  the  region  and  shadow  the  beams  which  shine   from  heaven 

of  death.     Their  hearts  are  as  depraved,  and  reveal  salvation. — H.  Batchehr. 
as    their    minds    are    unenlightened. 

They   are   destitute   of   any  spark  of  The  true  light. — The  Bible  is  like  a 

spii-itual  life,  and  the  gloom  of  present  lighthouse.      It  took   fifteen   hundred 

sinfulness   and   eternal   misery   hangs  years  to   build   it,    stone   upon  stone, 

over  them.     3.  There  are  many  who,  The    lantern,     the    New    Testament, 

it  may  be,  think  themselves  compar-  is  put  in  its  place,  and  the  cap,  the 

atively  in  a  state  of  great  happiness,  epistles.      There   are   four  plate-glass 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


sides  to  it,  the  Gospels ;  and  inside 
there  is  one  intense  glow  of  light,  and 
from  that  light  there  is  a  radiancy 
flashing  all  over  the  world.  That  one 
light  is  He  who  said  :  "  I  am  the  Light 
of  the  world." — B.  Waugh, 

Vers.  17-25.  The  early  welcome  and 
the  first  ministers  of  the  King. — This 
joyous  burst  of  the  new  power,  and  this 
rush  of  popular  enthusiasm,  are  meant 
to  heighten  the  impression  of  the  sub- 
sequent hostility  of  the  people.  The 
King  welcomed  at  first,  is  crucified  at 
last. 

I.  The  King  acting  as  His  own 
herald  (ver.  17). 

II.  The  King's  mandate  summoning 
His  servants. — Was  this  the  same  in- 
cident which  St.  Luke  narrates  as 
following  the  first  miraculous  draught 
of  fishes  ?  On  the  whole  I  incline  to 
think  it  most  natural  to  answer  "  no." 
Accepting  that  view  we  may  note  how 
many  stages  Jesus  led  this  group  of 
His  disciples  through  before  they  were 
fully  recognised  as  Apostles.  First, 
there  was  their  attachment  to  Him  as 
disciples,  which  in  no  degree  interfered 
with  their  trade.  Then,  came  this  call 
to  more  close  attendance  on  Him, 
which,  however,  was  probably  still 
somewhat  intermittent.  Then  followed 
the  call  recorded  by  Luke,  which  finally 
tore  them  from  their  homes ;  and  last  of 
all,  their  appointment  as  Apostles.  At 
each  stage  they  ''  might  have  had  oppor- 
tunity to  have  returned."  Duty  opens 
before  the  docile  heart  bit  by  bit.  Christ's 
call  is  authoritative  in  its  brevity. 
Their  prompt  self -surrendering  response 
is  the  witness  of  the  power  over  their 
hearts  which  Jesus  had  won.  "  I  will 
make  you  fishers  of  men."  That  shows 
a  kindly  wish  to  make  as  little  as  may 
be  of  the  change  of  occupation.  Their 
old  craft  is  to  be  theirs  still,  only  in 
nobler  form.  The  patience,  the  brave 
facing  of  the  storm  and  the  night,  the 
observance  of  the  indications  which 
taught  where  to  cast,  the  perseverance 
which  tc/iled  all  night,  though  not  a 
fin  glistened  in  the  net,  would  all  find 
place  in  their  new  career.     It  was  not 

58 


as  Apostles,  but  as  simple  disciples,  that 
these  four  received  this  charge  and 
ability.  The  same  command  and  fit- 
ness are  given  to  all  Christians. 

III.  The  triumphal  progress  of  the 
King. — 1.  Observe  the  reiterated  use 
of  "  all," — all  Galilee,  all  manner  of 
sickness  and  all  manner  of  disease,  all 
Syria,  all  that  were  sick.  Matthew 
labours  to  convey  the  feehng  of  uni- 
versal stir  and  wide -reaching,  all- 
embracing  welcome.  2.  Observe,  that 
the  activity  of  Christ  is  confined  to 
Galilee,  but  the  fame  of  Him  crosses 
the  border  into  heathendom.  The  King 
stays  on  His  own  territory  but  He 
conquers  beyond  the  frontier.  3.  Note 
the  contrast  between  John's  ministry 
and  Christ's,  in  that  the  former  stayed 
in  one  spot,  and  the  crowds  had  to  go 
out  to  him,  while  the  very  genius  of 
Christ's  mission  expressed  itself  in  that 
this  Shepherd-king  sought  the  sad  and 
sick,  and  '*  went  about  in  all  Galilee." 
4.  He  first  teaches  and  preaches  the 
good  news  of  the  kingdom,  before  He 
heals.  The  eager  receptiveness  of  the 
people,  ignorant  as  it  was,  was  greater 
then  than  ever  afterwards.  Therefore 
the  flow  of  miraculous  power  was  more 
unimpeded.  But  it  may  be  questioned 
whether  we  generally  have  an  adequate 
notion  of  the  immense  number  of 
Christ's  miracles.  Those  recorded  are 
but  a  small  proportion  of  those  done. 
These  early  ones  were  not  only  attesta- 
tions of  His  claim  to  be  the  King,  but 
illustrations  of  the  nature  of  His  king- 
dom. They  were  parables  of  His 
higher  work  on  men's  souls,  which  He 
comes  to  cleanse  from  the  oppression  of 
demons,  from  the  foamings  of  epilepsy, 
from  impotence  to  good. — A.  MaclareUy 
D.D. 

Ver.  17.  Christ  p'eachin^. — 1.  When 
Christ's  gospel  is  opposed,  and  His 
servants  persecuted,  He  can  let  forth 
His  light  and  power  so  much  the  more, 
and  can  supply  the  lack  of  instru- 
ments. 2.  Christ's  doctrine  and  the 
doctrine  of  His  faithful  servants,  is  all 
one  in  substance.  Both  John  the 
Baptist  and  Christ  preached,  "  Repent, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.     cHAP.  iv. 


for/'  etc.  3.  When  the  gospel  cometh 
it  findeth  men  under  the  tyranny  of 
Satan,  for  the  offer  to  bring  them  into 
the  kingdom  of  God  importeth  this. — 
David  Dickson. 

The  kingdom  of  heaven. — For  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  idea  it  is  necessary 
to  understand  its  more  distinctive 
qualities,  aspects,  and  relations. 

1.  It  is  present. — An  already  existing 
reality,  none  the  less  real  that  it  was 
unseen,  undiscovered  by  the  very  men 
who  professed  to  be  looking  for  it 
(Luke  vi.  20,  xvii.  20,  21;  Matt. 
XX.  1). 

2.  It  is  expansive. — Has  an  ex- 
tensive and  intensive  growth,  can  have 
its  dominion  extended  and  its  authority 
more  perfectly  recognised  and  obeyed 
(Matt.  vi.  10,  xiii.  3-8,  19-23). 

3.  It  does  its  work  silently  and  unseen. 
— Grows  without  noise,  like  the  seed  in 
the  ground,  which  swells,  bursts,  and 
becomes  a  tree  great  enough  to  lodge 
the  birds  of  the  air  (Matt.  xiii.  31-33). 
And  its  intensive  is  as  silent  as  its 
expansive  action.  It  penetrates  and 
transforms  the  man  who  enters  it. 
Its  entrance  into  him  is  his  entrance 
into  it,  his  being  born  again,  his  be- 
coming as  a  little  child,  the  new  citizen 
of  a  new  State  (Matt,  xviii.  1-3 ;  Luke 
xviii.  17;  John  iii.  3-5). 

4.  It  creates  and  requires  righteous- 
ness in  all  its  subjects. — To  seek  it  is 
to  seek  the  righteousness  of  God  (Matt, 
vi.  33,  V.  19,  20). 

5.  It  is  the  possession  and  reward 
of  those  who  have  certain  spiritual 
qualities. — (Matt.  v.  3,  10,  xviii.  4.) 

6.  It  is  without  local  or  national 
chmracter. — Can  have  subjects  any- 
where, has  none  for  simply  formal  or 
hereditary  reasons  (Matt.  viii.  11,  xxi. 
31 ;  Luke  xiii.  29). 

7.  It  is  at  once  universal  and  in- 
dividual.— Meant  to  be  preached  every- 
where and  to  every  one ;  to  comprehend 
the  race  by  pervading  all  its  units 
(Matt.  xxiv.  14). 

8.  The  universal  is  to  he  an  everlasting 
kingdom. — To  endure  throughout  all 
generations. — A.  M.  Fairhairn,  D.D, 


Beginning  to  preach. — This  text 
invites  us  to  look  at  two  things  : — 

I.  The  Preacher.—"  Jesus."  Who 
was  He?  Son  of  man.  Son  of  God. 
As  a  preacher,  Jesus  supplied  all  the 
great  conditions  of  supreme  influence. 

1.  There  was  more  human  nature  in 
Jesus  Christ  than  was  ever  in  any 
other  man.  Preachers  must  be  in- 
tensely human  if  they  would  reach 
with  good  effect   the   hearts  of   men. 

2.  There  was  more  intellectual  ability 
and  spiritual  insight  in  Jesus  Christ 
than  ever  distinguished  any  other 
preacher. 

II.  The  subject  of  His  preaching. — 
Repentance.  Repent !  This  is  one  of 
the  most  solemnly  suggestive  words  in 
all  human  language.  1.  Repent — then 
m,en  are  in  a  wrong  moral  condition. 

2.  Repent — then  there  is  a  work  which 
men  must  do  themselves.  One  man 
can  suffer,  pay,  work,  even  die  for 
another — but  never  repent  for  another. 

3.  Repent — then  until  this  special  work 
is  done  everything  else  that  is  seemingly 
good  is  worthless.  Inferences:  (1)  If 
Jesus  preached  repentance,  all  true 
preachers  will  do  the  same.  (2)  If 
Jesus  urged  men  to  repent,  it  is  certain 
that  repentance  is  vitally  necessary  for 
all  mankind.  (3)  If  repentance  is  the 
first  act  needed,  it  is  vicious  and  absurd 
to  attempt  to  make  religious  progress 
without  it.  Repentance  is  not  one 
complete  and  final  act.  It  may  be  the 
exercise  of  a  lifetime.  We  need  to 
repent  every  day.  Even  after  our 
prayers  we  may  have  to  plead  for 
forgiveness  of  the  sin  which  has  marred 
their  purity.  Repentance  will  not  be 
concluded  until  death  itself  has  been 
overthrown. — Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

The  privilege  of  repentance. — 
I.  There  are  two  different  words 
used  in  the  New  Testament,  both  of 
which  are  translated  into  the  English 
w  ord  repentance.  — One  of  them  conveys 
especially  the  notion  of  being  sorry 
for  having  done  wrong ;  the  other 
conveys  specially  the  notion  of  changing 
one's  mind  as  to  things — seeing  things 
in  a  different  light,  and  then  shaping 

59 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


one's  conduct  accordingly — trying  to 
mend  one's  life.  It  is  this  second  word 
which  Christ  used  ;  which  you  can  see 
is  the  fuller  and  larger  word,  including 
substantially  the  meaning  of  the  first 
word  too ;  taking  in  the  being  sorry 
for  the  wrong-doing  and  ashamed  of 
it ;  coming  to  right  views,  beginning 
afresh,  and  trying  to  do  better. 

II.  The  religion  Christ  taught  was 
the  first  which  offered  forgiveness 
without  suffering,  on  the  part  of  the 
penitent,  or  inflicted  by  the  penitent. 
— All  the  suffering  was  borne,  long  ago, 
and  once  for  all,  that  brought  our 
salvation.  And  now,  "if  we  confess 
our  sins  "  (that  is  all),  God  "  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to 
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." 
Christ's  preaching  starts  from  a  fact ; 
the  fact  that  there  is  something  wrong ; 
the  fact  that  men  are  sinners.  Now 
repentance  is  just  the  right  and  healthy 
feeling  of  the  awakened  soul  that  sees 
its  own  sin.  Once  a  man  is  made  to 
see  he  is  a  sinner,  then,  if  his  mind  be 
in  any  way  healthy  and  true,  the  state 
of  feeling  which  arises  in  it  is  what  we 
call  repentance. 

III.  Is  it  not  strange  that  repentance 
should  be  so  commonly  thought  a 
painful  duty  ? — It  is  a  grand  and  in- 
expressible privilege.  There  is  nothing 
degrading  in  it ;  the  degradation  is  all 
in  the  state  it  takes  us  out  of.  It  is 
degrading  to  stay  in  sin,  not  to  get  out 
of  it.  That  Christ's  gospel  invites  us 
to  repentance  just  means  that  man  is 
not  tied  down  to  go  on  in  his  wrong 
and  misery.  It  means  that  he  has 
not  got  into  that  miserable  lane  in 
which  there  is  no  turning. — A.  K.  H, 
Boyd,  D.D, 

Vers.  18-22.  Christ's  call— I.  In 
the  calling  of  these  Apostles  may  be 
seen  the  care  which  our  Lord  hath 
to  provide  ministers  for  His  church. 
2.  None  should  intrude  himself  into 
the  office.  3.  Such  as  Christ  doth 
call  He  doth  furnish  for  the  calling 
and  promiseth  unto  them  good  success. 
4.  Such  as  are  called  to  the  ministry 
must  neither  refuse  pains  nor  peril  to 

60 


save  souls,  but  must  go  about  their 
work  with  as  great  desire  to  convert 
men,  and  as  great  prudence  to  bring 
them  in  as  fishers  go  about  their  work. 
5.  When  Christ  doth  call  His  chosen 
instruments,  He  calls  them  with  power 
of  persuasion  (ver.  20).  6.  His  calling 
of  them  by  couples,  and  those  also 
brethren,  giveth  us  to  understand  that 
the  work  of  the  ministry  requireth 
concurrence  and  affection  among  the 
ministers.  7.  His  calling  of  so  mean 
men  as  fishers,  showeth  the  freedom  of 
His  grace  in  choosing  instruments  ;  the 
power  of  His  kingdom,  subduing  the 
world  by  such  weak  means;  and  the 
depth  of  His  wisdom,  in  so  providing 
for  His  own  honour  that  the  instrument 
shall  not  carry  away  the  glory  of  the 
work. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  18-20.  Christ^ s  choice  of  workers. 
— I.  Whence  the  Master  obtained  His 
workers. — He  goes  to  the  lake  of 
Galilee  and  finds  them  on  the  sea-shore 
— a  most  unlikely  place,  as  some  would 
judge.  He  knows  the  sort  of  men  that 
He  wants ;  He  knows  the  material  out 
of  which  He  can  make  fishers  of  men, 
and  it  is  that  prompts  Him.  1.  He 
wanted  men  who  were  inured  to  hard- 
ship and  seasoned  for  service.  2.  He 
wanted  men  who  were  bold  and  daring. 
3.  I  think  that  Christ  chose  these 
fishermen,  also,  because  they  were  men 
who  had  done  business  in  great  waters, 
and  Imd  there  seen  God^s  wonders  in  the 
deep.  Surely  an  acquaintance  with 
nature  and  with  nature's  God,  had 
been  some  sort  of  preparation  for  the 
higher  and  nobler  employ  to  which  He 
was  able  to  call  them.  4.  The  Lord 
Jesus,  when  He  is  selecting  disciples, 
goes  amongst  men  of  hum^ble  calling, 
for  labour  is  honourable.  5.  It  was 
from  earnest  toilers  Christ  found  His 
workers — men  who  were  already  hard 
at  work.  6.  He  finds  His  preachers, 
too,  amongst  those  who  are  already  His 
disciples;  for  this  was  not  the  first 
time  that  Christ  had  spoken  to  Peter 
and  to  Andrew. 

II.  The  nobler  employment  to  which 
Christ  called  these  men. — I  am  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  iv. 


disparaging  labour  when  I  tell  you 
that  the  highest  form  of  labour  is 
work  for  Christ — the  winning  of  souls. 
Though  Christ  called  these  brethren 
to  a  nobler  employ,  they  were  to  be 
fishermen  still.  "  I  will  make  you 
fishers  of  men."  You  shall  go  on 
fishing,  only  you  shall  have  a  new  sea. 
You  are  still  to  have  nets,  but  they 
are  to  be  of  a  different  sort.  Do  you 
not  think  there  is  for  every  labour 
under  the  sun  a  spiritual  parallel  and 
analogy?  I  began  my  life  as  an 
engraver  on  wood,  preparing  pictures 
for  the  illustrated  papers ;  and  I  re- 
member my  dear  father  writing  to  me, 
"I  am  content,  dear  son,  that  you 
shall  engrave  on  wood  until  God  calls 
you  to  engrave  on  hearts." 

III.  How  did  Christ  transform  these 
men  from  fishermen  into  fishers  of 
men? — 1.  He  called  them.  2.  He 
moulded  them,  and  fashioned  them,  and 
trained  them.  How  ?  By  precept,  but 
principally  by  example.  3.  He  sent 
His  Spirit,  still  to  help  them  in  the 
blessed  work  of  catching  men. — 
Thomas  Spurgeon. 

Ver.  19.  Everything  more  than  it 
seems. — There  is  something  very 
singular  and  altogether  unusual  in 
the  readiness  with  which  these  men 
seem  to  leave  their  business  and  go 
after  Jesus.  From  the  first  He  must 
have  exercised  over  them  a  strange 
fascination.  Their  accepting  the  call 
immortalised  them. 

I.  The  suggestion  of  the  way  in 
which  every  calling  in  life  is  intended 
by  God  to  prepare  a  man  for  some- 
thing higher  than  itself  is  manifestly 
here  in  these  words,  "  Come  ye  after 
Me,  and  I  will  make  you  fishers  of 
men."  Here  is  a  calling  of  the 
simplest  kind — that  of  the  fisherman. 
This  Jesus  of  Nazareth  sees  in  it  more 
than  these  men  who  are  pursuing  it 
see.  He  sees  in  it  an  education  for 
something  higher  than  itself — an 
education  for  the  highest  of  all  con- 
ceivable callings.  Every  fisherman 
must  have  certain  traits  of  character 
in    order  to   succeed — among    others. 


great  adaptability  and  great  patience. 
He  must  learn  to  wait  as  well  as  to 
labour.  He  must  have  a  keen  eye 
and  no  little  of  good  judgment. 
Especially  must  he  study  the  habits 
of  the  fish,  and  adapt  himself  thereto. 
These  elements  of  character  are  all 
needed  in  fishers  of  men.  Taking  all 
the  utterances  on  this  theme  which 
are  scattered  up  and  down  the  New 
Testament,  I  think  we  may  safely  say 
that  every  good  man  doing  good  work 
is  doing  more  than  he  thinks.  Every 
man  on  earth  is  qualifying  or  dis- 
qualifying himself  for  other  and  higher 
work. 

II.  In  order  to  translate  the  lower 
into  the  higher;  in  order  to  get  the 
commonness  and  the  "not- worth- 
while" feeling  out  of  our  every-day 
life ;  in  order  that  we  may  no  longer 
be  fishers  of  fish,  but  fishers  of  men — 
one  thing  is  needful :  we  must  accept 
the  invitation,  "  Come  ye  after  Me, 
and  I  will  make  you  " — what  you  are 
capable  of  being  made.  No  one  can 
teach  us  about  life  as  Christ  can.  The 
one  thing  of  all  things  we  need  to 
learn  is  how  to  live,  i.e.  how  to  use 
everything  we  find  in  ourselves  to  the 
best  advantage. 

III.  The  practical  outcome  of  all  this 
is  that  our  every-day  doings  ought  to 
become  of  most  importance  to  us. — In 
the  doing  we  are  acquiring  qualification 
or  disqualification  for  something  on  a 
higher  level. — Reuen  Thomas,  D.I'. 

Lessons  from  fisher-folk. — The  dis- 
ciples were  fisher-folk.  Jesus  was 
himself  a  fisherman,  "  seeking  and 
saving  the  lost."  Disciples  had  to 
become  fisher-folk  such  as  Jesus  was. 

I.  Fisher-folk  in  many  ways.— 
Single  hook.  Many  hooks  on  line. 
Wading  out  and  throwing  net.  Big 
Seine  net,  etc. 

II.  Fisher-folk  put  skill  into  their 
ways. — So  Christ's  fishermen  must 
give  His  work  skill,  heart,  and  effort. 

III.  Fisher-folk  are  dependent  on 
God's  blessing  in  their  work. — 
Disciples  toiled  all  night  and  took 
nothing  ;  but  when  Jesus  guided,  they 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


enclosed  a  shoal.     If  we  work  to  catch  Him,     It  meant  discipleship,  and  that 

others  for  Jesus,  we  must  never  forget  means  a  progressive  introduction  into 

our    dependence    on    His    help    and  Christ's  thoughts  and  purposes — into 

blessing. — Weekly  Pulpit,  -  the  spirit  and  intention  of  His  life  and 

work.     I  will  proceed  to  specify  more 

The  genius  of  Christianity. — What  minutely     the     particulars     of     this 

is  the  meaning  for  us  of  this  precept  discipleship    or    following    of    Christ. 

*'  Follow  Me  ?  "  1.  A  Christian  at  the  outset  may  have 

I.  The  principle  that  lies  at  the  few  convictions  and  still  fewer  settled 
foundation  of  it  is,  that  Christianity  points  of  faith  ;  all  centres  in  devotion 
must  be  felt  by  its  disciples  as  to  Christ.  2.  The  disciple  comes  to 
surpassing  in  worth  all  other  things  Christ  without  any  system  of  duties  or 
of  life  combined. — For  a  man's  virtues,  save  that  one  principle  of  love 
strongest,  deepest  love,  under  all  to  God  and  man  which  is  involved 
circumstances,  rules  his  life.  A  man  in  loving  Christ.  Life  is  to  be  inter- 
may  be  a  religious  hypocrite  from  all  preted  by  Christ ;  and  how  Christian 
sorts  of  reasons  ;  but  he  can  be  a  principle  will  guide  a  man's  steps  is  to 
Christian  only  when  his  love  for  be  learnt  only  from  the  manner  in 
Christianity  surmounts  every  other  which  Christ  acted.  3.  It  could  not 
love.  This  becomes  still  more  clear  be  expected  of  a  young  disciple  that  he 
and  certain  when  we  relflect  that  would  enter  much  into  the  grand 
Christianity  is  a  constant  struggle —  designs  of  Christianity.  But  he  grows 
that  nearly  every  principle  held  up  into  the  apprehension  of  these  by 
amongst  men  and  every  feeling  of  a  discipleship. — S.  Edger,  B.A. 

selfish  heart  has  to  be  subdued  by  it — 

that  it   has  to  engraft   upon   human  Every  one  has  a  place  to  fill  in  life. 

life    new    habits,    a    fresh    mode    of  — That  every  one   of   us  has   his   or 

transacting   all    our   business   and   of  her  place  to  fill  in  life  is  beautifully 

dealing     with    our     fellow     men,    in  illustrated     by     the     great     teacher 

effecting  which  it  must  break  through  Browning,  in  a   little   poem   entitled, 

innumerable    prejudices   and   trample  "  The  Boy  and  the  Angel."     Theocrite 

down  many  low  and  sensual  inclina-  was  a  poor  boy,  who  worked  diligently 

tions.     It  was  on  this   principle,  and  at  his  craft,  and  praised  God  as  he  did 

not  that  Christ  was  ever  unwilling  to  so.     He  dearly  wished  to  become  Pope, 

receive  any  disciple,  that  He  sometimes  that  he  might  praise  God  better,  and 

put  such  severe  tests  to  men.     With  God    granted     the    wish.      Theocrite 

the  poor,  the  broken-hearted,  the  out-  sickened,  and  seemed  to  die.     And  he 

cast,    and   the    miserable,    He    never  awoke  to  find  himself   a   priest,  and 

applied  any  test,  asking  only  a  loving  also    in   due    time   Pope.      But   God 

faith   in   Himself.       Having    nothing  missed  the  praise  which  had  gone  up 

else    to    love,   already    severed    from  to  Him  from  the  boy-craftsman's  cell ; 

outward  delusions,  the  love  that  rested  and  the  angel  Gabriel  came  down  to 

in  Him   was   sure   to   triumph.     But  earth  and  took  Theocrite's  former  place, 

when    men    came   to    Him   who   had  And  God  was  again  not  satisfied ;  for 

riches  to  care  for,  reputation  to  regard,  the  angelic  praise   could    not   replace 

and  opposing  inclinations  to  surmount,  for  Him  the  human.     *'  The  silencing 

our  Saviour  applied  very  severe  tests,  of  that  one  weak  voice  had  stopped  the 

such  as  would   marvellously  thin  the  chorus    of     creation."      So    Theocrite 

ranks  of  the  professing  church  in  the  returned  to  his  old  self,  and  the  angel 

present  day.  Gabriel  became  Pope  instead  of  him. 

II.  The  precept  plainly  implies  the  Such  is  the  legend ;  and  it  has  its 
principle  of  progress. — No  one  can  lesson.  The  chorus  of  creation  can 
suppose  that  following  Christ  meant  never  be  perfect  till  each  of  us  is  in 
just  walking  about  the  country  with  his  place,  singing  his  own  part,  which 

62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  iv. 


part    Done    other    can    sing. — Eeuen 
ThomaSf  D.D, 

" Forsake  all  and  follow  Me" — 
At  first  it  may  seem  a  hard  require- 
ment ;  but  if  we  really  think  it  so, 
it  is  from  not  attending  sufficiently 
to  the  entire  narrative.  It  was 
quite  essential  that  they  should 
evince  a  readiness  to  give  up  all  for 
Christ,  to  the  most  literal  and  the 
fullest  extent,  since  only  by  such 
abandonment  of  all  other  objects  of 
interest  could  they  be  prepared  for  the 
new  life  Christ  would  breathe  into 
them ;  but  though  the  disciples  were 
thus  ready  to  sacrifice  all  the  secular 
interests  of  life,  such  a  sacrifice  was 
not  really  made,  for  we  find  them 
again,  through  the  whole  history,  at 
their  old  occupations.  Not  because 
they  had  grown  less  zealous  in  their 
devotion  to  the  Master,  but  because 
the  actual  abandonment  of  their 
common  pursuits  was  no  part  of  their 
discipleship.  Thus  much  we  can  see, 
that  they  were  never  too  busy  with 
their  fishing  or  other  secular  pursuits 
to  obey  instantly  the  bidding  of  Christ. 
They  had  forsaken  all  in  the  highest 
sense,  so  as  to  be  no  longer  enslaved 
by  any  pursuit ;  yet  they  might  adhere 
to  it,  making  it  subservient  to  the 
claims  of  their  higher  calling. — 
S.  Edger.B.A, 

All  for  Christ— The  Rev.  W.  Hay 
Aitken  tells  us  of  a  young  lady 
who,  though  professedly  a  Christian, 
shrank  from  yielding  herself  fully  to 
her  Lord.  When  pleaded  with,  she 
said  with  outspoken  honesty  :  "  I  don't 
want  to  give  myself  right  over  to 
Christ,  for  if  I  were  to  do  so,  who 
knoWs  what  He  might  do  with  me  ? 
For  aught  I  know,  He  might  send  me 
out  to  China ! "  Years  passed,  and 
then  there  came  from  her  a  deeply 
interesting  letter,  telling  how  her  long 
conflict  with  God  had  come  to  an  end, 
and  what  happiness  and  peace  she  now 
felt  in  the  complete  surrender  of  herself 
to  her  Lord ;  and,  referring  to  her 
former  conversation,  she  added  :  "And 


now  I  am  my  own  no  longer ;  I  have 
made  myself  over  to  God  without 
reserve,  and  He  is  sending  me  to 
China." 

Vers.  21,  22.  Christ's  call— I,  In 
Christ's  call  there  is  a  voice.  In 
the  days  of  His  flesh  He  called  men 
by  His  living  voice.  Christ  still  lives, 
and  He  calls  us  by  His  voice  which 
speaks  right  to  our  hearts. 

II.  The  voice  of  Christ  brings  a 
message. 

III.  That  message  brings  an  invita- 
tion.— One  day  a  preacher  visited  a 
poor  woman.  He  knocked,  and  again 
knocked,  but  got  no  answer  from  within. 
A  few  days  afterwards  he  met  the 
woman  in  the  street,  and  said  he  was 
sorry  that  she  was  out  when  he  called. 
She  confessed  that  she  had  been  in  her 
house,  but  she  was  afraid  that  a  creditor 
had  come  to  demand  payment  of  a 
debt.  Christ's  knock,  thus  misunder- 
stood, may  frighten  the  heart.  Some 
think  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  a 
sad  and  gloomy  thing,  and  that  it 
makes  sad  and  gloomy  people. 

IV.  Christ's  invitation  is  also  a 
claim. — When  He  called  Peter,  Andrew, 
James,  and  John,  He  spoke  in  the 
gentlest  tone  of  love,  but  He  also  spoke 
as  one  having  authority.  He  had 
every  right  to  call  them,  and  they 
had  no  right  to  refuse.  Christ  com- 
mands when  He  invites.  When  Earl 
Cairns  was  a  boy  of  ten,  he  heard  a 
sermon  in  Belfast.  Three  of  the 
preacher's  words  startled  him;  they 
were,  "  God  claims  you."  These  words 
kept  ringing  in  his  ears,  and  the 
thoughtful  boy  tried  to  understand 
them.  "  God  claims  me,"  he  said  to 
himself,  "and  He  has  a  right  to  claim 
me."  He  resolved  to  yield  to  Grod's 
claim.  A  living  voice,  a  message,  an 
invitation  and  a  claim — add  these  four 
together,  and  you  have  the  call  of 
Christ. — Jas.  Wells,  M.A. 

Ver.  21.  Christ's  colly  and  our  replies. 
— I.  "No"  was  the  reply  of  many  in 
Christ's  day.  There  are  many  ways  of 
saying  "No."     Many  to  whom  Christ 

63 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


appealed   said   ''  No  "  with   politeness  by  Christ's  appeals.     Augustine,  in  his 

and  regret ;    they  had   many  excuses  youth,  often  heard  the  call  of  Christ, 

and   apologies.      Some   said  "  No  "  to  He  wished  then  to  do  two  things — to 

Him    outright,    bluntly   and    without  enjoy   heathen    pleasures   for   awhile, 

phrases.     What  a  strange  power  that  and  at  last  to  become  a  Christian.     He 

is  which  we  have  of  saying  "  No "  to  tried  to  halve  the  difference,  and  used 

God  and  Jesus  Christ !     Each  of  us  is  to  pray,  "  O  Lord,  save  me,  but  not 

like  the  young  Hercules,  the  chief  of  now."      Most    keenly    in    his    "  Con- 

the  heroes  and  emblems  of  antiquity,  fessions "   does    he   regret    his  foolish 

As  he  was  sitting  at  the  cross-roads,  delays. 

two  females  came  to  him.     The  one,  lY.  "  Yes,"  is  the  only  right  reply, 

whose  name  was  Pleasure,  offered  him  Perhaps  the  Apostles  when  called  by 

a  flowery  path  and  every  enjoyment ;  Christ  did  not  say  one  single  syllable, 

the  other,  whose  name  was  Duty  or  Their  whole  after-life  was  just  a  saying 

Virtue,  called  him  to  a  noble  and  un-  "  Yes "   to   Jesus.      No   one   can   say 

selfish  life.    He  listened  to  the  pleadings  '*  Yes  "  for  you.      I  have  heard  that 

of  both,  and  then  made  his  choice,  and  the  Ked  Indians  who  used  to  live  near 

his  choice  made  him  the  hero  he  became.  Niagara  never  heard  the  thunders  of 

Mackay,  the  hero  of  Uganda,  used  to  the  waterfall,  but  they  could  hear  the 

say,  "  Duty  before  pleasure,  but  duty  footfalls  of  a  beast  or  an  enemy  a  mile 

is  pleasure  with  me."  away.      The  will  deafened  the  ear  to 

II.  **  Yes  and  no,"  was  the  reply  of  one  voice,  and  opened  it  to  the  other. 
Judas,  who  betrayed  his  Master  with  They  heard  only  what  they  wished  to 
a  kiss.  He  said  "yes"  with  his  lips,  but  hear.  In  the  very  same  way  the  ear  of 
his  hps  lied  ;  his  heart  and  life  told  the  the  soul  can  be  trained  to  hear  the  voice 
truth.  of   God  amid  earth's  stunning  noises. 

III.  "Yes,   but  not  now,"   is  the  — Jas.  Wells,  M. A,  J 
reply  of  many  whose  hearts  are  touched 


MAIF  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—25. 

Sudden  fame. — We  have  noticed  already  that  the  ministry  of  the  Saviour 
began  like  that  of  the  Baptist.  Like  that,  for  example,  at  the  outset,  it  was 
emphatically  a  ministry  of  preaching.  Like  that  also,  at  the  outset,  a  ministry 
of  preaching  very  much  the  same  truth  (cf.,  as  before.  Matt.  iii.  2  and  iv.  17). 
It  was  different,  however,  in  being  carried  on  not  in  the  wilderness  but  in  towns. 
And  it  speedily  began,  also,  to  differ  in  other  respects  not  unconnected  with  this. 
Two  of  these  are  shown  to  us  here.  It  was  fuller  of  wonder.  It  was  fuller  of 
mercy  as  well. 

I.  Fuller  of  wonder. — Except  in  connection  with  his  birth  (Luke  i.  13,  63,  64) 
we  read  of  nothing  miraculous  in  the  personal  history  of  the  Baptist.  A  wonder 
in  himself — a  wonder  in  his  fulfilment  of  prophecy  (John  i.  23) — a  wonder  in 
his  likeness  to  Elijah  (Luke  i.  17)  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  recommended 
to  men  by  any  wonder  beside  (John  x.  41).  Yery  different  do  we  find  it  here  with 
the  Saviour,  almost  from  the  begi  nning  of  His  course.  A  very  blaze  of  miracle, 
rather,  attends  Him  as  soon  as  He  steps  out  among  men.  These  miracles,  also, 
were  such  as  to  attract  attention  in  every  possible  way.  Their  very  singularity 
would  do  this,  to  begin.  Evidently  the  Baptist  was  just  the  kind  of  man  from 
whom  men  looked  for  such  things  (see  again  John  x.  41 ;  also  Matt.  xiv.  1,  2).  The 
mere  fact,  therefore,  that  what  was  so  notably  absent  in  him  was  present  in  One 
so  like  him  in  other  respects,  would  make  men  look  at  it  the  more.  The  pathetic 
nature  of  these  miracles,  also,  would  do  the  same  thing.  What  physical  evil 
produces  more  misery — deeper  misery  and  misery  affecting  more  persons — thai) 

H 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  iv. 


lack  of  bodily  health  ?  What  prospect  of  good,  therefore,  arouses  greater 
interest  than  the  prospect  of  deliverance  from  such  evil  ?  Every  household 
almost  in  every  community  is  glad  to  hear  tidings  about  it.  Every  hearer  would 
be  drawn  to  the  spot  where  it  was  said  to  be  found  (cf.  Matt.  xiv.  35).  The 
great  variety^  also,  of  the  gifts  of  healing  heard  of  in  this  instance  would  do 
this  the  more.  "  All  manner  of  disease  and  sickness  " — every  one  brought 
to  Jesus  for  healing,  whatever  the  character  of  his  need,  whether  bodily  or 
mental,  whether  natural  or  supernatural  (vers.  23,  24) — found  Him  able  to 
heal.  And  this  effect,  once  more,  would  be  heightened  greatly  by  the  great 
number  of  persons,  and  that  from  all  parts,  who  were  relieved  in  this  way. 
Every  fresh  case,  every  new  locality  touched,  would  at  once  both  widen  and 
greatly  deepen  the  impression  produced.  "  All  Syria,"  in  fact,  as  it  says  here 
(ver.  24),  would  be  full  of  His  fame.  The  "  Great  Healer  "  would  be  in  all  men's 
lips  in  all  parts  of  the  land. 

II.  Fuller  of  mercy. — The  very  nature  of  these  mii-acles,  as  already  noted, 
would  be  some  testimony  to  this.  They  were,  evidently,  the  outcome,  in  all  cases, 
of  much  compassion  of  heart.  John,  in  the  wilderness,  whatever  his  sympathy 
with  suffering,  did  not  see  much  of  the  sick.  Naturally,  that  was  not  the  place 
to  which  they  either  would  or  could  come.  Jesus,  on  the  contrary,  going  about 
amongst  men,  saw  much  of  the  sick ;  and  wherever  He  saw  them,  so  we  are  told 
repeatedly  (see  inter  alia  Matt.  xiv.  14,  xx.  34  ;  Mark  i.  41),  had  compassion  upon 
them.  The  same  is  implied  here  in  the  description  given  of  those  that  He 
helped.  They  were  persons  "  holden  with  divers  diseases  and  torments  "  (ver.  23). 
What  called  out  His  power  about  them  was  the  misery  of  their  case.  What  men 
came  thereby  to  know  about  Him  was  the  unfailing  sympathy  of  His  heart. 
See  how  this  is  exemplified  in  what  is  told  us  of  some  in  Luke  xvii.  12.  Even 
men  '*  afar  off"  could  see  the  compassion  that  was  visible  in  His  looks.  The 
words,  also,  which  accompanied  these  miracles,  told  just  the  same  tale.  How 
emphatic  is  that  description  of  them  given  in  ver.  23.  He  came  "  preaching 
the  gospel " — the  good  news — "  of  the  kingdom."  He  came  declaring  the 
merciful  side  of  the  great  message  of  God  to  mankind.  He  came  setting  it  forth. 
He  came  proclaiming  it — so  the  word  means — as  a  '*  herald."  Just,  in  fact,  as 
had  been  foretold  of  him  in  Isa.  Ixi.  1  and  elsewhere.  And  just,  also,  as  we  find 
recorded  of  Him  in  Luke  iv.  17-22.  And  all  much,  it  is  clear,  as  though  to  say  by 
His  language  what  He  said  by  His  acts;  and  to  prove  by  both  how  He  had  come 
in  order  to  save  both  men's  bodies  and  souls.  Peace  to  the  sinner.  Health  to 
the  sick.  These  were  the  mercies  which,  from  the  very  first,  marked  His 
mission  to  men. 

Do  we  not,  therefore,  see  here  further,  two  notable  secrets  ? 

1.  The  secret  of  God's  miraculous  dealings. — Miracles  are  exceptional  signs 
for  exceptional  times.  They  are  God's  way  of  drawing  attention  to  some  new 
mission,  or  new  truth,  or  revival  of  old.  See  such  cases  as  Ex.  iii.,  iv.,  etc.; 
Josh.  iii.  7 ;  Judges  vi.  36-40,  etc.,  and  the  many  miracles  by  Elijah  and  Elisha 
in  the  dark  days  of  Ahab  and  his  sons.  So  also  here,  therefore,  where  we  have 
a  plenitude  of  miracles  because  a  dignity  of  person  and  a  fulness  of  mercy 
never  heard  of  before. 

2.  The  secret  of  preaching  with  power. — Other  things  may  dazzle  men  ;  other 
things  may  convince  them ;  nothing  wins  them  like  love.  How  perceptibly  we 
can  trace  this  truth  in  the  last  words  of  this  chapter,  "  There  followed  Him  great 
multitudes  from  "  everywhere  round  !  And  what  a  proof  this  is,  at  the  beginning 
of  His  ministry,  of  what  Jesus  declared  near  its  end  (John  xii.  32). 


F  65 


CHAP.  IV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  23  25.  Christ  preaching  and 
healing.  —  1.  How  solicitous  should 
ministers  be  to  seek  out  lost  sheep 
within  their  bounds.  Christ  went 
about  all  Galilee.  2.  The  means  of 
converting  souls  is  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel.  3.  The  special  opportunity  of 
preaching  is  when  people  are  convened 
in  the  ordinary  place  appointed  for 
religious  exercises.  4.  The  gospel  is 
a  matter  of  highest  concern.  It  is  the 
gospel  of  the  kingdom ;  of  that  in- 
comparable kingdom  of  heaven,  which, 
by  the  gospel,  is  revealed  to  men,  and 
offered  to  them,  by  which  they  get 
right  and  title  to  the  kingdom,  yea, 
become  heirs  of  the  kingdom,  and 
whereby  they  are  governed  and  led  on 
unto  the  full  possession  of  the  kingdom. 
5.  Although  our  Lord's  doctrine  needed 
no  confirmation,  it  being  the  truth  of 
the  ever-living  God,  yet  our  weak 
faith  needeth  confirmation.  Therefore, 
Christ  wrought  miracles,  and  those 
profitable  miracles,  such  as  might  lead 
men  to  seek  the  relief  of  the  maladies  of 
the  soul.  6.  The  first  report  of  Christ's 
grace  is  very  taking ;  the  savour  of 
His  grace,  as  of  precious  ointment,  did 
in  the  beginning  of  His  preaching  of 
the  gospel  affect  the  Gentiles  and  draw 
them  to  seek  after  Him.  8.  When  it 
pleaseth  our  Lord  to  let  forth  His 
power  He  can  gather  multitudes 
after  Him. — David  Dickson. 

Christ      and      hwmanity. — I.      The 
lamentable  condition  of  man. 
II.  The  all-sufficiency  of  Christ. 

III.  The  wisdom  of  taking  human 
nature  at  its  most  accessible  points — 
the  wants  of  the  body. — Joseph  Parker^ 
D.D. 

Ver.  23.  The  Great  Preacher.— 1 
think,  if  we  will  look  over  the  history 
of  oratory,  we  shall  be  agreed  that  three 
elements  enter  into  eloquence.  I  do 
not  say  that  other  elements  do  not  also 
enter  into  eloquence,  but  that  there 
must  be  at  least  these  three — a  great 
occasion,  a  great  theme,  and  a  great 

66 


personality.     Jesus   of   Nazareth   had 
these. 

I.  A  great  occasion. — The  world 
had  reached  its  lowest  ebb.  There  was 
no  liberty  in  government.  There  were 
no  equal  rights  among  men.  Half  the 
population  were  slaves.  All  the 
labouring  men  of  Greece  and  Rome 
were  living  in  abject  poverty.  There 
were  no  schools  for  the  education  of 
any  one  except  in  rhetoric  and  the  skill 
of  the  athlete.  There  was  no  literature 
any  longer,  there  were  no  great  teachers, 
no  prophets  even  in  Judaism.  There 
was  degradation,  poverty,  wretched- 
ness everywhere.  If  here  and  there  a 
single  man  managed  to  amass  a  little 
property,  he  dug  a  hole  in  the  ground, 
and  buried  it  to  keep  it  from  the  tax- 
gatherer.  And  yet,  in  this  hour  of 
black,  dark  night,  there  was  one  little 
province  in  which  the  light  of  human 
hope  still  kept  burning.  There  was 
one  little  people  who  still  had  an 
expectation  of  deliverance.  From  afar 
off  in  the  past  the  hope  had  been 
brought  to  them  that  a  Eedeemer,  a 
Deliverer,  would  come,  through  whom 
they  themselves  should  become  in  turn 
the  redeemer  and  deliverer  of  the 
nations. 

II.  A  great  theme. — To  declare  this 
would  be  to  open  up  all  His  ministry, 
and  yet  in  a  few  simple  words  it  may 
be  outlined.  He  came  with  this  message 
first  of  all :  "  The  time  you  have  been 
looking  for  has  come.  The  kingdom 
of  God  is  at  hand.  The  Deliverer  is 
here.  I  am  that  Deliverer.  I  have 
come  to  give  sight  to  the  blind,"  etc. 
It  was  a  message  of  hope. 

Ill  A  great  personality. — So  great 
that  when  He  rose  in  the  synagogue  in 
Nazareth  all  eyes  were  fastened  upon 
Him  before  He  began  to  speak ;  so  great 
that  when  the  mob  gathered  up  stones 
to  stone  Him  He  passed  through  their 
midst  unharmed,  and  they  parted  and 
let  him  go ;  so  great  that  when  in  that 
synagogue  they  rose  up  to  lead  Him  to 
the  precipice  and  cast  him  down,  He 
passed    uninjured   through   them ;    so 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  v. 


great  that  when  the  police,  ordered  by 
the  authorities  of  Jerusalem  to  arrest 
Him,  went  for  that  purpose,  they 
listened  to  His  preaching  and  came 
away  saying,  "  We  could  not  touch 
Him,  for  never  man  spake  as  this  Man." 
—Z.  Ahhott,  D.D. 

Christ^s  exami^le  as  a  Healer. — 
I.  Christ  was  dispensing  the  gift  of 
healing,  narvellously,  for  an  example 
to  all  who  should  believe  on  Him. — 

Healer  of  the  diseases  of  the  body,  as 
He  was  healer  of  the  diseases  of  the 
soul,  Jesus  Christ,  anointed  Saviour, 
this  was  His  mission — to  heal,  to  save. 
What  was  this  but  to  teach  us  that  the 
poor  and  needy  in  anywise  are  com- 
mitted to  the  care  and  charge  of  every 
one  who  sees  their  hard  case  and  has 
power  to  relieve  it  ? 

II.  The  duty  of  giving  is  one  of  the 
simplest  duties  of  all  life,  and  because 


it  is  so  simple  the  Apostle  has  fenced  it 
vdth  the  warning,  "  Be  not  deceived  in 
this  thing ;  God  is  not  mocked." — 
Bishop  Claughton. 

Vers.  23-25.  The  Great  Physician. — 
When  in  London,  I  like  to  visit  one  of 
the  great  hospitals  for  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  over  its  gates  these  generous 
words, ''Royal Free  Hospital ;  strangers, 
foreigners,  etc.,  may  freely  partake  of 
the  benefits  of  this  hospital."  When  I 
see  "  et  cetera,"  I  thank  God  and  I  am 
delighted  that  there  is  one  institution 
in  our  land  that  welcomes  the  "  et 
cetera."  It  means  "  and  the  rest,"  the 
anybody  and  everybody  of  mankind. 
Likewise  this  healing  power  of  the 
cross  of  Jesus  is  for  the  *'  et  cetera." 
The  saving  power  of  the  cross  is  for 
all  sick  people  who  want  to  be  healed. 
— W.  Birch. 


CHAPTER  y. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 
General  Remarks  on  the  Sermon  on  the  Moui^t^ 


The  aim  and  contents  of  the  "  Sermon.'' — No  mere  sermon  is  this,  onlv,distinguished  from 
others  of  its  class  by  its  reach  and  sweep  and  power  ;  it  stands  alone  as'^he  grand  charter  of 
the  commonwealth  of  heaveoA;  or,  to  keep  the  simple  title  the  Evangelist  himself  suggests 
(iv.  23),  it  is  "  the  gospel  (or  good  news)  of  the  kingdom."  To  understand  it  aright  we 
must  keep  this  in  mind,  avoiding  the  easy  method  of  treating  it  as  a  mere  series  of  lessons 
on  different  subjects,  and  endeavouring  to  grasp  the  unity  of  thought  and  purpose  which 
binds  its  different  parts  into  one  grand  whole.  It  may  help  us  to  do  this  if  we  first  ask 
ourselves  what  questions  would  naturally  arise  in  the  minds  of  the  more  thoughtful  of  the 
people,  when  they  heard  the  announcement,  '•  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  It  was 
evidently  to  such  persons  the  Lord  addressed  Himself.  ...  In  their  minds  they  would,  in 
all  probability,  be  revolving  such  questions  as  these:  1.  "What  is  this  kingdom,  what^ 
advantages  does  it  offer,  and  who  are  the  people  that  belong  to  it  ? "  2.  "  What  is  required 
of  tlose  that  belong  to  it  ?  What  are  its  laws  and  obligations  ?"  And  if  these  two  questions 
were  answered  satisfactorily,  a  third  would  naturally  follow.  3.  '•  How  may  those  who 
desire  to  share  its  privileges  and  assume  its  obligations  become  citizens  of  it  ? "  These,j 
accordingly,  are  the  three  great  questions  dealt  with  in  succession  (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D^. 

The  originality  of  the  Sermon. — We  are  not  careful  to  deny,  we  are  eager  to  admit,  that 
many  even  of  the  most  admirable  sayings  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  had  been  anticipated 
by  heathen  moralists  and  poets  {S.  Cox,  D.D.').  To  affirm  that  Christ  was  not  in  the  world, 
nor  in  the  thoughts  of  men,  until  He  took  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us,  is  no  more  to  honour 
Him  than  it  is  to  affirm  that,  when  He  came  into  the  world,  He  showed  Himself  to  be  no 
wiser  than  the  men  whose  thoughts  He  had  previously  guided  and  inspired.  .  .  .  His  teaching, 
we  may  be  sure,  will  not  be  new  in  the  sense  of  having  no  connection  with  the  truths  H& 

67 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   3IATTHEW. 


had  already  taught  by  them;  but  it  will  be  new  in  this  sense,  that  it  will  perfect  that 
which  in  them  was  imperfect ;  that  it  will  gather  up  their  scattered  thoughts,  free  them 
from  the  errors  with  which  they  had  blended  them,  and  harmonise,  develop,  and  complete 
them  (6^.  Cox,  BB.). 

Is  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  evangelical? — You  have  heard,  as  I  have,  that  there  is  no 
"  Cross  "  in  this  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  that  we  are  at  the  foot  of  Sinai  listening  to  Moses, 
and  not  at  Calvary  "  beholding  the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 
Let  us  not  be  deceived.  You  might  as  well  say  there  is  no  sun  in  a  coal-pit  or  a  geyser 
because  you  do  not  see  his  form  there.  Your  British  coalfields  are  as  truly  the  children  of 
the  sun  as  is  the  ray  of  light  that  last  fell  upon  our  eyes,  and  the  high-pitched  morality  of 
this  sermon  is  as  really  the  offspring  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  as  the  first 
pulse-beat  of  joy  on  the  reception  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  Will  you  say  that  the  writer  of 
Todhunter's  Trigonometry  is  unfamiliar  with  the  first  four  rules  of  arithmetic  because  he 
assumes  instead  of  stating  and  proving  them  ?  No  more  should  we  conclude  that  salvation 
by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  for  men  is  absent  from  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  because 
it  is  not  expressly  stated  and  argued  as  it  is  in  the  third  of  the  Romans.  There  is  not  a 
benediction  that  does  not  take  us  to  Calvary.  There  is  not  a  warning  that  may  not  urge  us 
to  Christ.  There  is  not  a  mountain  elevation  of  holiness  that  will  not  force  from  us  the  cry, 
"  Lord,  help  me,  or  I  perish."  The  Sermon  is  full  of  the  great  principles  we  have  to  preach, 
and  those  principles  are  all  embodied  in  the  Speaker  Himself.  Teaching  Him  we  teach  the 
principles  of  this  Sermon,  and  it  is  of  little  use  teaching  the  ideas  of  this  Sermon  without 
also  teaching  Him  (J.  Clifford,  B.D.).  The  Lord  Jesus  did  not  give  the  world  His  best 
wine  in  this  cup,  marvellous  and  precious  though  it  be.  The  best  thing  in  the  Gospels  is  the 
gospel  itself — that  manifestation  of  the  righteousness  and  love  of  God  in  the  person,  the 
life,  and  the  death  of  His  Son  by  which  He  wins  our  love  and  makes  us  righteous 
{S.  Cox,  B.B.). 

The  relation  between  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  as  reported  by  St.  Matthew  and  the  account  of 
it  in  St.  Luke  vi. — Commentators  are  divided  in  opinion  as  to  whether  or  not  these  are  two 
versions  of  the  same  discourse.  Augustine  suggests  a  solution  of  the  difficulty  by  saying 
/  that  the  two  discourses  are  entirely  distinct,  though  delivered  on  the  same  occasion — that 
/  reported  by  St.  Matthew,  on  the  mountain  to  the  disc  iples ;  that  of  St.  Luke,  delivered  on  the 
'  plain  just  below  to  the  multitude.  Dean  Vaughan  concurs  in  this  view,  and  says :  "  Men 
have  doubted  whether  the  discourse  in  St.  Matthew  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  ampler  account  of 
that  which  is  reported  by  St.  Luke.  The  general  sco  pe  and  purport  is  the  same.  Yet,  as 
St.  Matthew  says  expressly  that  Jesus  spake  '  sitting  on  the  mountain,'  and  St.  Luke  says 
that  He  spake  '  standing  on  the  plain,'  it  seems  not  very  unnatural  to  suppose  that  the  one 
(that  given  by  St.  Matthew)  was  a  discourse  delivered,  as  it  were,  to  the  inner  circle  of  His 
disciples,  apart  from  the  crowd  outside;  the  other  (preserved  by  St.  Luke),  a  briefer  and 
more  popular  rehearsal  of  the  chief  topics  of  the  former,  addressed,  immediately  afterwards, 
in  des3ending  the  hill,  to  the  promiscuous  multitude."  Lange  also  favours  this  view.  Carr 
(Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools)  states  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  identity  of  the 
"  Sermon  on  the  Mount "  with  the  "  Sermon  on  the  Plain,"  thus :  1.  The  beginning  and  end 
are  identical  as  well  as  much  of  the  intervening  matter.  2.  The  portions  omitted — a 
comparison  between  the  old  and  the  new  legislation — are  such  as  would  be  less  adapted  for 
St.  Luke's  readers  than  for  St.  Matthew's.  3.  The  "mount"  and  the  "plain"  are  not 
necessarily  distinct  localities.  The  plain  is  more  accurately  translated  "  a  level  place,"  a 
platform  on  the  high  land.  4.  The  place  in  the  order  of  events  differs  in  St.  Luke,  but  it 
is  probable  that  here  as  well  as  elsewhere  St.  Matthew  does  not  observe  the  order  of 
time. 

Ver.  1.  He  went  up  into  a  mountain. — Perhaps  for  the  purpose  of  selecting  His  audience. 
The  idle  and  indifferent  would  stay  down  on  the  plain  (Gibson).  The  mountain  was  ] 
probably  that  known  at  this  day  as  the  Kurn  Hattin,  or  *'  Horns  of  Hattin."  It  is  an 
upland  rather  than  a  mountain,  rising  to  about  a  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea, 
and  distinctly  marked  out  from  the  neighbouring  eminences  by  the  two  humps,  or  horns, 
which  rise  some  sixty  feet  above  and  crown  the  summit.  Between  these  "  horns  "  there  is 
a  wide  stretch  of  grass,  a  natural  amphitheatre,  in  which  a  great  multitude  might  easily 
gather  within  hearing  of  a  single  voice  (6V»,r).  Set. — This  the  custom  of  the  Jewish  doctors 
when  they  taught  in  their  schools  and  synagogues.  Disciples. — It  is  evident  that  at  that 
•    period  Jesus  had  already  made  a  separation  between  His  disciples  and  the  people  (Lange). 

The  Beatitudes.— So   called  from  the  opening  word  "beati"  (blessed)  in  the  Vulgate. 
Their   number. — Though    eight    in    number,   there   are    here   but   seven   distinct   features 
of  character.     The  eighth  one — the  "  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake  " — denotes  merely 
the   possession  of  the  seven  preceding  features,  on  account  of  which  it  is  that  they  are  > 
persecuted  (2  Tim.  iii.   12).     Accordingly,  instead  of  any  distinct  promise  to  this  class,  j 
we  have  merely  a  repetition  of  the  first  promise.     This  has  been  noticed  by  several  critics, 

68 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  v. 


who,  by  the  sevenfold  character  thus  set  forth,  have  rightly  observed  that  a  complete  "^^ 
character  is  meant  to  be  depicted,  and  by  the  sevenfold  blessedness  attached  to  it,  a  perfect 
blessedness  is  intended  (B.  Brown,  D.D.').  Their  purpose. — This  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
seems  to  be  particularly  levelled  against  the  common  indispositions  of  heart  and  errors  of 
hfe,  which  they  were  guilty  of  who  looked  for  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah ;  for  in  it  our 
Saviour  acquaints  the  people  and  His  disciples  who  are  the  blessed  persons  who  shall  be 
admitted  to  that  kingdom,  namely,  not  the  covetous  and  ambitious,  but  the  poor  in  spirit ; 
not  the  luxurious  and  licentious,  but  the  serious,  penitent  mourners  ;  not  the  fierce  and 
haughty,  but  the  meek  and  lowly;  not  they  who  gaped  after,  and  hoped  to  possess  them- 
selves of,  their  neighbours'  estates  by  unjust  conquest,  but  they  who  studied  an  exact 
honesty  and  uprightness  in  all  their  dealings ;  not  the  cruel  and  hard-hearted,  but  the 
merciful  and  charitable  ;  not  the  lewd  and  unclean,  but  the  pure  in  heart ;  not  the  fighting 
and  contentious,  but  the  quiet  and  peaceable ;  not  the  persecutors,  but  the  persecuted  for 
Christ's  sake  and  their  duty.  So  that  all  the  beatitudes  are  the  setting  up  of  so  many  quite 
contrary  dispositions  of  mind  to  those  they  were  prepossessed  with,  and  only  more  particular 
instances  of  the  general  doctrine,  that  they  were  to  repent  because  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
or  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  was  at  hand  {J.  Blair,  M.A.). 

Ver.  3.  Blessed. — Of  the  two  words  which  our  translators  render  "  blessed,"  the  one  here  \ 
used  {fiaKdpioi)  points  men  to  what  is  inward,  and  so  might  be  rendered  "  happy  "  in  a  lofty  ' 
sense  ;  while  the  other  {€vKoyT}/j,4voi)  denotes  rather  what  comes  to  us  from  without  (as 
Matt.  XXV.  34).     But  the  distinction  is  not  always  nicely  carried  out  {Browii).     Poor  in  ' 
spirit. — In  this  and  in  the  fourth  beatitude  there  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  a  real  difference 
between  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke,  beyond  what  can  be  explained  by  mere  verbal  variety 
with  substantial  argument.    Dean  Mansel,  in  the  Speaker's  Commentary,  suggests  as  the 
true  explanation  that  St.  Luke  records  these  beatitudes  as  they  were  actually  spoken  by  our 
Lord,  while  St.  Matthew  (one  of  the  twelve  to  whom  it  was  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  _ 
the  kingdom  of  heaven)  reports  them  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  their  full  meaning,  rather 
than  their  figurative  expression.     The  one  gives  the  words,  the  other  the  mind  of  Christ. 

Ver.  6.  Righteousness. — A  normal  disposition  or  mode  of  action  which  takes  the  will  of 
God  as  its  supreme  norm  (  Wendt). 

Ver.  7.  Obtain.— Not  "merit." 

Ver.  12.  Be  exceeding  glad. — Spring  upward  in  joyful  hope  toward  your  reward  in  heaven 
{Stier). 

Ver.  13.  Salt. — It  is  suggested  by  the  Kev.  T.  H.  Darlow,  M.A.  (^Expositor,  Fourth  Series, 
VIII.  239)  that  it  was  the  familiar  trade  of  fish  curing  which  prompted,  or  at  least  pointed, 
our  Lord's  references  to  salt.  Professor  G.  A.  Smith  says,  "  The  pickled  fish  of  Galilee  were 
known  throughout  the  Roman  world."  We  can  understand  in  this  connection  why  our 
Lord  speaks  of  refuse  salt  in  such  a  wholesale  fashion,  "  Cast  out  and  trodden  under  foot  of 
men."  Lost  his  savour.— This  realisable^  at  least,  when  we  occupy  a  point  of  observation 
that  is  simply  popular.  Dr.  W.  M.  Thomson  says,  "  I  have  often  seen  just  such  salt,  and  the 
identical  disposition  of  it  that  our  Lord  has  mentioned  "  (see  Land  and  Book,  pp.  381,  382). 

Ver.  14.  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill. — Assuming  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  to  have  been 
preached  from  one  of  the  hills  of  Galilee  near  the  "  Horns  of  Hattin,"  our  Lord  may  have 
looked  or  pointed  at  Safed,  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the  sea, 
commanding  one  of  the  grandest  panoramic  views  in  Palestine  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  15.  A  bushel,  the  bushel  (R.V.),  i.e.  the  common  measure  found  in  every  Jewish 
house.  Candle  .  .  .  candlestick,  lamp  .  .  .  lampstand  (R.V.).  The  lamp  in  a/  Jewish 
house  was  not  set  on  a  table,  but  on  a  tall  pedestal  or  stand,  sometimes  made  with  a 
sliding  shaft  (  Carr). 

Ver.  17. — A  fresh  line  of  thought  begins  here  and  extends  to  the  conclusion  of  the 
chapter.  Its  purport  is  to  tighten  the  bands  of  morality  upon  the  consciences  of  our 
Saviour's  followers  {Morison). 

Ver.  18.  Jot.— The  smallest  of  the  Hebrew  letters.  Tittle. — One  of  those  little  strokes  by 
which  alone  some  of  the  Hebrew  letters  are  distinguished  from  others  like  them  (Brown). 

Ver.  19.  Least. — As  the  thing  spoken  of  is  not  the  practical  breaking,  or  disobeying,  of 
the  law,  but  annulling  or  enervating  its  obligations  by  a  vicious  system  of  interpretation,  and 
teaching  others  to  do  the  same  ;  so  the  thing  threatened  is  not  exclusion  from  heaven,  and 
still  less  the  lowest  place  in  it,  but  a  degraded  and  contemptuous  position  in  the  present 
stage  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (ibid.). 

Ver.  20.  Scribes  and  Pharisees. — The  frequent  combination  of  the  two  words  (thirteen 
times  in  the  first  three  Gospels)  implies  that  for  the  most  part  the  scribes  were  of  the 
school  of  the  Pharisees,  just  as  the  "  chief  priests  "  were,  for  the  most  part,  of  that  of  the 
Sadducees  (Acts  v.  1 7).  The  New  Testament  use  of  the  word  differs  from  the  Old.  There 
the  scribe  is  simply  the  man  who  writes,  the  secretary  or  registrar  of  the  king's  edicts  and 
official  documents  (2  Sam.  viii.  17,  xx.  25  ;  2  Kings  xviii.  18).  After  the  return  from  Babylon, 
as  in  the  case  of  Ezra  (Ezra  vii.  6, 12),  it  was  used  first  of  the  transcribers  and  editors  of  the 

69 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


sacred  books,  and  then,  by  a  natural  transition,  of  their  interpreters ;  and  this  is  the 
dominant  sense  of  the  word  in  the  New  Testament  (^Plumptre). 

Ver.  21.  Ye  have  heard. — It  is  as  if  the  Saviour  were  referring  to  some  specific  discourse, 
which  some  Kabbi  or  other  had  recently  been  delivering  to  the  people  ;  and  perhaps  as  a 
polemic  against  the  doctrines  and  influence  of  Jesus.  We  need  not  doubt  that  there  would 
be  many  such  discussional  discourses.  And  while  the  native  majesty  of  our  Lord  would  not 
suffer  Him  to  descend  into  petty  controversies,  it  is  likely  enough  that  several  parts  of  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  owe  their  peculiar  shaping  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  representa- 
tions made  by  his  Kabbinical  opponents  {Morison').  Whosoever  shall  kill,  etc. — The  fact 
that  these  words  are  not  found  in  the  Old  Testament  confirms  the  view  that  our  Lord  is 
speaking  of  the  traditional  comments  on  the  law,  and  not  of  the  law  itself  (Plumptre'). 
In  danger. — The  phrase  had  a  somewhat  more  technical  sense  in  A.D.  1611  than  it  has  now, 
and  meant  "legally  liable  to"  (ibid.).  The  judgment. — That  of  the  local  courts  of 
Deut.  xvi.  18.  Tliey  had  the  power  of  capital  punishment,  though  the  special  form  of  death 
by  stoning  was  reserved  for  the  Sanhedrin  or  Council  (ibid.). 

Ver.  22.  Without  a  cause. — Omitted  in  R.  V.  However  we  decide  as  to  the  text,  we  must 
restrict  our  interpretation  to  "causeless  anger"  (Bro7vn).  Eaca  =  "thou  good-for 
nothing  "  (  Wendf).  Thou  fool  =  "  thou  godless  one  "  (ibid.).  The  distinction  between  raca 
and  thou  fool  is  lost,  and  naturally,  for  they  belong  to  that  class  of  words,  the  meaning  of 
which  depends  entirely  on  the  usage  of  the  day.  There  is,  however,  clearly  a  climax. 
1.  Feeling  of  anger  without  words.  2.  Anger  venting  itself  in  words.  3.  Insulting  anger 
(Carr).  Judgment  .  .  .  council  .  .  .  hell-fire. — There  seems  to  be  an  incongruity  in  passing 
literally  from  the  human  events  described  by  the  "judgment "  and  the  "council "  to  the  divine 
sentence  of  the  "  Gehenna  of  fire."  The  most  natural  interpretation  seems  to  be  to  suppose 
that  three  degrees  of  human  punishment  are  used  to  denote,  by  analogy,  three  corresponding 
degrees  of  the  Divine  sentence  hereafter.  The  judgment,  the  council,  the  Gehenna  of  fire, 
will  thus  figuratively  represent  three  degrees  of  the  Divine  vengeance  against  sin,  corre- 
sponding to  three  degrees  of  temporal  punishment  under  the  Jewish  law ;  death  by  the 
sword  inflicted  by  the  minor  courts,  death  by  stoning  inflicted  by  the  Sanhedrin,  and 
finally,  death  with  the  body  cast  into  the  valley  of  Hinnom  to  be  burned.  It  is  not  certain 
that  this  last  punishment  was  ever  actually  inflicted  under  the  Jewish  law;  it  may  be 
mentioned  as  an  extreme  case  beyond  the  legal  punishments,  though,  in  one  case,  at  least, 
as  Tholuck  observes,  death  by  fire  was  ordained  (see  Lev.  xx.  14),  though  no  place  of 
punishment  is  specified  (cf.  1  Mace.  iii.  5)  (Mansel). 

Ver.  25.  Agree  with  thine  adversary. — The  Saviour  here  shifts  His  scene  a  little.  He 
seizes,  representatively,  on  such  a  specific  manifestation  of  malevolence  as  leads  the  injured 
party  to  become  an  adversary,  i.e.  a  prosecutor  in  a  law -suit,  who  is  determined  to  recover 
damages  (Morison).  The  passion  of  which  you  have  not  repented,  the  wrong  for  which  you 
have  not  atoned,  will  meet  you  as  an  adversary  at  the  bar  of  God  (Tholuck^. 

Ver.  26.  Farthing. — The  Greek  word  is  derived  from  the  Latin  quadrans,  the  fourth  part 
of  the  Roman  as,  a  small  copper  or  bronze  coin  which  had  become  common  in  Palestine. 
The  "  farthing  "  of  Matt.  x.  29  is  a  different  word,  and  was  applied  to  the  tenth  part  of  the 
drachma  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  28.  To  lust  after  her. — With  the  intent  to  do  so,  as  the  same  expression  is  used  in 
vi.  1 ;  or,  with  the  full  consent  of  his  will,  to  feed  thereby  his  unholy  desires  (Browri). 

Ver.  31.  Whosoever  shall  put  away,  etc. — The  quotation  is  given  as  the  popular  Rabbinic 
explanation  of  Deut.  xxiv.  1,  which,  as  our  Lord  teaches  in  Matt.  xix.  8,  was  given  on 
account  of  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,  to  prevent  yet  greater  evils.  The  stricter  party  of 
Shammai  held  that  the  "  uncleanness  "  meant  simply  unchastity  before  or  after  marriage. 
The  followers  of  Hillel  held,  on  the  other  hand,  that  anything  that  made  the  company  of  the 
wife  distasteful  was  a  suflScient  ground  for  repudiation  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  33.  Forswear  thyself. — These  are  not  the  precise  words  of  Exod.  xx.  7,  but  they 
express  all  that  it  was  currently  understood  to  condemn,  namely,  false  swearing  (Lev.  xix.  12, 
etc.).     This  is  plain  from  what  follows  (Browri). 

Ver.  34.  Swear  not  at  all. — Viz.  in  the  following  ways  (Morison). 

Ver.  37.  Yea,  yea ;  nay,  nay.  Let  your  affirmation  and  negation  be  in  accordance  with 
fact  (Grotius). 

Ver.  38.  An  eye  for  an  eye,  etc. — (See  Exod.  xxi.  24).  The  scribes  drew  a  false  inference 
from  the  letter  of  the  law.  As  a  legal  remedy  the  lex  talionis  was  probably  the  best 
possible  in  a  rude  state  of  society  (Carr).  The  aim  of  the  law,  as  Jerome  remarks,  was  not 
to  sacrifice  a  second  eye,  but  to  save  both.  When  a  man  in  a  passion  understands  that  he 
is  liable  to  lose  an  eye  if  he  take  one,  he  is  likely,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  to  be  so 
far  controlled  as  to  save  both  (Morison). 

Ver.  40.  Coat.— The  inner  garment.  Cloke. — The  outer  and  more  costly  garment.  Not 
allowed  to  be  retained  over  night  as  a  pledge  from  the  poor,  because  used  for  a  bed-covering 
(Exod.  xxil  26,  27).    "  Be  ready  to  give  up  even  that  which  by  law  cannot  be  taken  "  (Mansel). 

70 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,       chap.  v. 


Ver,  41.  Mile. — The  influence  of  Kome  is  shown  by  the  use  of  the  Latin  word  (slightly 
altered)  for  the  mille  jpassuum,  the  thousand  paces  which  made  up  a  Roman  mile — about 
one  hundred  and  forty-two  yards  short  of  an  English  statute  mile  {Plumptre'). 

Ver.  43.  Love  thy  neighbour  (Lev.  xix.  18).  Hate  thine  enemy. — Lightfoot  quotes  some  of 
the  cursed  maxims  inculcated  by  those  traditionists  regarding  the  proper  treatment  of  all 
Gentiles.  No  wonder  that  the  Romans  charged  the  Jews  with  hatred  of  the  human  race 
(^Browri). 

Ver.  46,  Publicans. — The  Roman  narae  publicani,  which  our  translators  have  employed  in 
this  and  other  places,  properly  denoted,  not  the  collectors,  but  the  farmers,  of  the  customs  ; 
wealthy  men  of  the  equestrian  order,  who  paid  a  rent  to  the  State  for  the  public  revenues, 
and  collected  them  for  their  own  profit.  The  proper  name  for  the  actual  collectors  was 
portitores.  These  latter  were  sometimes  freedmen  or  slaves,  sometimes  natives  of  the 
province  in  which  the  tax  was  collected  (^Mmisel).  The  same  % — Christianity  is  more  than 
humanity  {M.  Henry). 

Ver.  47.  Salute, — The  prominence  of  salutation  in  the  social  life  of  the  East  gives  a 
special  vividness  to  this  precept.  To  utter  the  formal  "  Peace  be  with  you,"  to  follow  that 
up  by  manifold  compliments  and  wishes,  was  to  recognise  those  whom  men  saluted  as 
friends  and  brothers  {Plumptre).     Publicans. —  Geiitiles  (R.V.). 

Ver.  48.  Be  .  .  .  perfect. —  Ye  therefore  shall  be  perfect  (R.V.).  The  future  for  the 
imperative,  as  in  the  Decalogue :  *'  Thou  shalt  not  kill "  (  Webster  and  Wilkinson). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—16. 

A  singular  benediction. — There  is  something  of  a  "  State  "  character  about  this 
"  Sermon  on  the  Mount."  Leaving  the  plain  for  the  "  mountain  "  (R,V.),  He 
"sat  down"  and  "opened  His  mouth."  Great  "multitudes"  (iv,  23,  25, 
V.  1)  had  been  attracted  to  His  teaching.  Some  among  them  had  already  pro- 
fessed themselves  His  "  disciples."  It  was  right  that  they  should  know — and 
that  others  with  them  should  know  —  the  exact  character  of  His  teaching. 
This,  accordingly,  He  now  proceeds,  in  this  most  deliberate  manner,  to  give 
them  ;  beginning  here  with  the  cardinal  question  of  what  those  who  became 
His  disciples  must  look  for  and  expect,  and  setting  before  them  in  that  connec- 
tion a  gracious  assurance  in  the  first  place  ;  a  faithful  warning  in  the  second 
place  ;  complete  re-assu7'ance  in  the  last. 

I.  A  gracious  assurance. — All  those  who  followed  Him  might  expect  to  be 
"  blessed."     That  is  how  He  begins.     That  word  "  blessed  "  is  the  first  word  that 
falls  from   His  lips.     Whatever  other  distinctions  there  might  be  about  His 
disciples  in  other  respects,  there  would  be  none  on  this  point.     Some  among 
them  would  have  this  blessing,  some  would  have  that.     All  would  have  much. 
Nine  times  over,  in  emphatic  succession,  does  he  assure  them  of  this  (vers.  1-11).  ;         jjlv^^ 
Also,  afterwards,  and  because  of  this.  He  bids  all  of  them  to  be  glad  (ver.  12,  l]Uy^^ 
beginning).     Such  is,  as  it  were,  the  "  dominant  note  "  of  this  opening  strain.  ' 
Such  is  the  thought  which  those  who  followed  Him  were  to  take  in  first  and  in  . 
full.     As  one  of  those  who  heard  Him  then,  afterwards  said  (1  Pet.  iii.  9),  as 
though  in  remembrance  of  this,  they  were  ''  called  to  inherit  a  blessing."     As  . 
the  Saviour  Himself  afterwards  said  -both  to  this  disciple  and  to  others  as  well  ' 
(Matt.  xvi.  17,  xiii.  16),  so  also  at  this  time,  which  is  the  solemn  opening  of  all, 
He  thus  loudly  proclaims.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  "  followeth  "  Me  ! 

II.  A  faithful  warning. — Deeply  true  and  thoroughly  reliable  as  was  this 
assurance,  it  was  not  one  which  would  appear  such  at  first  in  the  judgment  of 
many.  In  the  judgment  of  most?  This  would  be  so,  on  the  one  hand,  on 
account  of  that  which  would  be  expected  by  Christ  from  those  who  were  His.  He 
would  expect  them  to  be  "  poor  in  spirit "  (ver.  3) ;  to  be  men  "  mourning  "  for  sin 
(ver.  4) ;  to  be  persons  hungering  and  thirsting  for  "  righteousness  "  (ver.  6) ;  and 
"meek"  and  "merciful"  (vers.  5,  7);  and  heart-lovers  of  purity  (ver.  8);  and 
men  not  contentious  for  anything  except  for  that  which  causes  contention  to 
end  (ver.  9  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  11,  margin,  R.V.).     In  other  words,  He  expects  from 

71 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


them  that — and  He  shows  that  He  does  so  most  effectually  by  simply  treating 
it  as  taken  for  granted — which,  in  the  judgment  of  most,  would  not  be  to  gain 
advantage  but  throw  it  away.  Who  ever  heard  before  of  such  men  as  these 
being  '*  blessed  "  ?  Also  men  would  Judge  this,  on  the  other  hand,  because  of  what 
His  disciples  are  taught  here  that  they  must  expect  from  the  world.  As  the  Saviour 
most  distinctly  warns  them  here,  they  must  expect  its  resentment.  They  must 
expect  to  be  reviled  and  ill-treated  and  persecuted.  So  it  had  always  been  in 
the  past  with  men  of  this  stamp.  So  it  would  be  even  worse  in  the  future. 
How  then  were  such  men  to  be  blessed  ?  Men  thus  doubly  cursed  in  the  judgment 
of  men  ?  Men  missing  thus  all  that  is  good  ?  Men  incurring  thus  all  that  is 
bad  1  It  is  a  most  serious  question ;  but  it  is  not  evaded  by  Jesus.  Those  who 
would  be  His  disciples  must  face  it  in  full !  Must  face  it  in  full  from  the  very 
beginning  ! 

III.  A  complete  re-assuranco. — ^The  Saviour  conveys  this  to  His  disciples  in 
two  different  ways.  He  does  so,  first,  by  a  reference  to  the  nature  of  their  hopes. 
The  losses  He  has  warned  them  of  are  all  such  as  to  bring  about  in  the  end  a  far 
larger  proportion  of  gain  in  the  exactly  opposite  direction.  The  "  poor  in 
spirit "  are  to  be  "  kings."  Those  who  "  mourn  "  for  sin  to  be  "  comforted " 
doubly  (see  Isa.  xl.  1,  2).  Those  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  to  be 
filled  indeed  (Isa.  Iv.  1-3  ;  John  vi.  35,  etc.).  Those  who  as ''  meek  "  seem  to  have 
no  portion  on  earth,  to  "  inherit "  it  all.  And  all  those,  in  a  word,  who  for 
Christ's  sake  thus  lose  something  for  a  time  in  this  world  to  gain  infinitely  more 
in  consequence,  and  that  for  ever,  partly  in  this  world,  and  still  more  in  the  next 
(cf.  Rom.  viii.  17,  18  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17  ;  Luke  xviii.  29,  30  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  8,  etc.). 
The  Saviour  re-assures  His  disciples,  next,  by  a  reference  to  the  nature  of  their 
calling.  To  be  thus  "  persecuted  "  is  to  belong  to  all  the  "  sons  of  God  "  in  the 
past  (ver.  12).  To  be  thus  "peacemakers"  is  to  be  acknowledged  as  such 
(ver.  9).  More  than  that,  to  be  as  these  are,  is  to  be  like  God  Himself  is  in  the 
world  ;  to  preserve  it,  as  "salt"  does  (ver.  13)  ;  to  instruct  it,  as  "light"  does 
(vers.  14,  15);  to  convert  it,  in  short,  and  so  to  teach  it  to  glorify  God  in  its 
turn  (ver.  16).  Nothing  is  better  than  this  !  Nothing  is  to  be  more  dreaded 
than  to  fail  in  this — to  "  lose  "  this  "  savour  " — to  "  quench  "  this  "  light."  Of 
all  blessings  there  is  none  surpassing  this  of  thus  "  glorifying  "  God  before  men. 
Happy  those  of  whom  this  shall  be  found  true  at  the  last  (2  Thess.  i.  10). 
"Blessed"  indeed — twice  "blessed" — thrice   "blessed"  are  such! 

In  all  this,  note — 

1.  The  reliability  of  this  teaching. — Evidently  we  have  here  the  whole  of  the 
case.  All  the  evil  as  well  as  all  the  good.  There  is  no  "  reserve  "  here — no  ex 
parte  statement,  no  special  pleading,  no  holding  back.  The  worst  is  before  us 
as  well  as  the  best.  All  the  more  precious  therefore— all  the  surer — that  best 
(cf.  John  xiv.  2). 

2.  The  depth  of  this  teaching.  —  Distinguishing  appearance  from  reality, 
embracing  the  future  as  well  as  the  present,  seeing  the  "  light "  that  is  "  sown 
for  the  righteous  "  even  in  the  darkness  which  now  conceals  it  (cf.  Gen.  xlii.  36 ; 
Ps.  xcvii.  11). 

3.  The  sum  of  this  teaching, — "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  enjoy 
Him  for  ever." 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the     Spirit    without    measure    (John 

— I.  The  Preacher. — Jesus  Christ.   The  iii.    34),   and    knew   how  to   speak  a 

best  of  preachers.  word  in  due  season — when  to  humble, 

Ij  An  intelligent  preacher. — He  had  when  to  «omfort. 

72 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


2.  A  powerful  preacher. — He  could  set 
men's  sins  before  them  and  show  them 
their  very  hearts  (John  iv.  29)  That  is 
the  best  glass,  not  which  is  most  richly 
set  with  pearl,  but  which  shows  the 
truest  face.  Christ  was  a  preacher  to 
the  conscience.  What  is  said  of  Luther 
is  more  truly  applicable  to  Christ,  He 
spake  as  if  He  had  been  within  a  man. 

3.  A  successful  preacher  (John  x.  42, 
xii.  42). 

4.  A  lawful  preacher. — As  He  had 
His  unction  from  His  Father,  so  His 
mission  (John  viii.  18). 

II.  The  pulpit  where  Christ  preached. 
A  mountain.  The  law  was  first  given 
on  the  mount ;  and  here  Christ  ex- 
pounds it  on  the  mount. 

III.  The  occasion  of  Christ's  ascend- 
ing the  mount.  "  Seeing  the  multi- 
tudes." The  people  thronged  to  hear 
Christ,  and  He  would  not  dismiss  the 
congregation  without  a  sermon.  From 
whence  observe,  that  Christ's  ministers 
according  to  Christ's  pattern  must 
embrace  every  opportunity  of  doing 
good  to  souls. 

lY.  The  sermon. — Christ  doth  not 
begin  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  as  the 
law  was  delivered  on  the  mount,  with 
commands  and  threatenings,  but  with 
promises  and  blessings. — Thos.  Watson. 

Vers.  3-12.  The  beatitudes  tests. — 
They  are  like  a  dash  of  cold  water  on 
the  fiery,  impure  enthusiasms  which 
were  eager  for  a  kingdom  of  gross 
delights  and  vulgar  conquest.  And, 
no  doubt,  Jesus  intended  them  to  act 
like  Gideon's  tests,  and  to  sift  out  those 
whose  appetite  for  carnal  good  was 
uppermost. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  beatitudes. — In  one  of  Goethe's 
tales  he  tells  of  a  wonderful  silver 
lamp,  which,  when  placed  in  a  fisher- 
man's hut,  changed  the  hut  and  all 
within  it  to  silver.  The  object  of 
Christ's  beatitudes,  when  admitted  to 
a  human  heart,  is  to  change  it  into 
moral  beauty,  transforming  its  selfish- 
ness, hardness,  cruelty,  and  inhumanity 
to  love,  gentleness,  kindness,  sweetness, 
ministry.     These  words  of  Christ  are 


really  transcripts  of  heaven's  laws. 
These  are  the  qualities  that  belong  to 
heavenly  inhabitants.  All  life  there 
is  lowly,  meek,  merciful,  hungry  for 
more  of  God,  pure-hearted. — Christian 
World  Pulpit. 

Ver.  3.  The  poor  in  spirit. — The 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  sums  up  the 
Saviour's  teaching,  the  beatitudes  sum 
up  the  Sermon.  Here  we  have  evi- 
dently the  keynote  of  the  whole  series. 
All  the  classes  successively  named 
might  be  included  in  the  description 
"  poor  in  spirit."  So  that,  if  the 
beatitudes  sum  up  the  Sermon,  this 
first  beatitude  presents  us  with  the 
sum  and  essence  of  the  rest. 

I.  Those  blessed. — "The  poor  in 
spirit."  The  strangest  of  all  para- 
doxes !  If  the  benediction  stopped  at 
the  word  "  poor,"  and  meant  only  the 
indigent,  it  would  have  been  more 
intelligible.  For  we  see  the  perils  of 
wealth.  We  can  discern  in  the  rough- 
ness of  earthly  discomfort  an  influence 
waking  better  longings  and  raising 
looks  for  help  from  heaven.  But 
poverty  in  the  soul  is  a  kind  of 
indigence  which  seems  to  have  no 
redeeming  feature,  and  all  wise  men 
shrink  from  it.  Christ  speaks  from 
the  consciousness  of  bringing  infinite 
wealth  within  reach  of  the  souls  of 
men,  and,  from  His  point  of  view, 
those  were  most  blessed  who  had  most 
room  within  them  for  the  heavenly 
wealth  He  brought.  As  what  is 
glorious  has  no  glory  in  the  presence 
of  a  glory  that  excelleth,  so  what  is 
rich  has  no  preciousness  if  it  prevents 
our  gaining  something  richer  still. 
This  is  most  solemn  as  w^ell  as  most 
comforting.  For  it  warns  us  in  our 
contentment  as  much  as  it  cheers  us  in 
our  despair. 

II.  Their  blessing. — "  The  kingdom 
of  heaven."  Every  blessing  of  rela- 
tionship and  grace.  Christ's  demand 
is  only  need.  Grace,  like  air,  fills  every 
vacuum  of  the  heart. — Richard  Glover. 

The  poor  in  spirit. — All  poverty 
is  not  blessed. 

73 


CHAP.  V.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


J     I.  1  shall  use  a  four-fold  distinction. 

1.  I  distinguish  between 'poor  in  estate 
and  poor  in  spirit. 

2.  Between  spiritually  poor  and  poor 
in  spirit. — He  who  is  without  grace  is 
spiritually  poor,  but  he  is  not  poor  in 
spirit  (Rev.  iii.  17). 

3.  Between  poor-spirited  and  poor  in 
spirit. — They  are  said  to  be  poor- 
spirited  who  have  mean,  base  spirits. 

4.  Between  poor  in  an  evangelical 
sense  and  in  a  Romish  sense. — By 
poor  in  spirit  the  Papists  under- 
stand those  who,  renouncing  their 
estates,  vow  a  voluntary  poverty,  living 
retiredly  in  their  monasteries.  By  the 
poor  in  spirit  we  are  to  understand 
those  who  are  brought  to  the  sense  of 
their  sins,  and,  seeing  no  goodness  in 
themselves,  despair  in  themselves  and 

*  sue  wholly  to   the   mercy  of   God  in 
Christ. 

II.  I  shall  propound  several  ques- 
tions. 

1.  Why  doth  Christ  here  begin  with 
poverty  of  spirit  ? — To  show  that 
poverty  of  spirit  is  the  very  basis  and 
foundation  of  all  the  other  graces  that 
follow.  When  the  heart  becomes  a- 
valley,  and  lies  low  by  poverty  of  spirit, 
then  the  springs  of  holy  mourning  run 
there.  A  man  must  first  be  sensible  of 
want  before  he  can  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness. 

2.  What  is  the  difference  between 
poverty  of  spirit  and  humility  1 — They 
differ  as  cause  and  effect.  He  that  is 
sensible  of  his  own  vacuity  and  indi- 
gence, with  the  violet  hangs  down  his 
head  in  humility. 

3.  What  is  the  difference  between 
poverty  of  spirit  and  self-denial  ? — In 
some  things  they  agree,  in  some  things 
they  differ.  The  self -denier  parts  with 
the  world  for  Christ,  the  poor  in  spirit 
parts  with  himself  for  Christ,  i.e.  his 
own  righteousness. 

III.  I  shall  establish  a  doctrine, 
that  Christians  must  be  poor  in  spirit. 
— 1.  Till  we  are  poor  in  spirit  we  are 
not  capable  of  receiving  grace.  2.  Till 
we  are  poor  in  spirit  Christ  is  never 
precious.  3.  Till  we  are  poor  in  spirit 
we    cannot   go   to   heaven.     The   great 

74 


cable  cannot  go  through  the  eye  of  the 
needle;  but  let  it  be  untwisted  and 
made  into  small  threads,  and  then  it 
may.  Poverty  of  spirit  untwists  the 
great  cable,  and  now  an  entrance  shall 
be  made  unto  him  richly  into  the  ever- 
lasting kingdom.  How  shall  I  know 
that  I  am  poor  in  spirit  ?  He  that  is 
poor  in  spirit  (1)  is  weaned  from  him- 
self ;  (2)  is  a  Christ  admirer ;  (3)  is 
ever  complaining  of  his  spiritual  estate ; 
(4)  is  lowly  in  heart ;  (5)  is  much  in 
prayer.  A  poor  man  is  ever  begging ; 
(6)  is  content  to  take  Christ  upon  His 
own  terms ;  (7)  is  an  exalter  of  free 
grace. — 2%os.  Watson. 

Yers.  2,  3.  The  good  news. — I.  The 
first  words  of  the  Lord  on  this 
occasion  were  "  Blessed  are  the  poor 
in  spirit,"  etc.  The  man  who  does 
not  house  self  has  room  to  be  his 
real  self — God's  eternal  idea  of  him. 
How  should  there  be  in  him  one 
thought  of  ruKng  o'r  commanding  or 
surpassing  !  He  can  imagine  no  bliss, 
no  good  in  being  greater  than  someone 
else.  He  is  unable  to  wish  himself 
•other  than  he  is,  except  more  what 
God  made  him  for,  which  is  indeed  the 
highest  willing  of  the  will  of  God.  H  is 
brother's  well-being  is  essential  to  his 
bliss.  The  thought  of  standing  higher 
in  the  favour  of  God  than  his  brother 
would  make  him  miserable.  He  would 
lift  every  brother  to  the  embrace  of 
the  Father.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in 
spirit ;  for  they  are  of  the  same  spirit 
as  God. 

II.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs. 
— G.  Macdonald,  LL.D. 

Ver.  3.  The  heirs  of  the  kingdom. — 
Long  ago  the  philosophers  warned 
unheeding  crowds  that  the  secret  of 
happiness  consists  in  what  a  man  is 
rather  than  in  what  he  has.  Cicero 
has  left  in  many  an  eloquent  page  the 
lesson  that  he  who  would  taste  bliss 
must  cultivate  virtue.  Seneca,  the 
tutor  of  Nero,  wrote  the  memorable 
sentence,  **  The  happy  man  is  he  to 
whom  nothing  is  good  and  nothing  evil 
but  a  good  and  a  bad  disposition,  who 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


finds  true  pleasure  in  the  contempt  of 
pleasures,  to  whom  virtue  is  the  only- 
good  and  vice  the  only  evil."  But 
neither  Cicero  nor  Seneca  could  in- 
struct men  how  to  change  the  bad 
disposition  into  the  good.  The  gospel 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  solves  the 
problem  by  the  master-key  of  human 
faith  laying  hold  upon  divine  love. 
Yet,  as  if  to  warn  us  that  apart  from 
Him  real  happiness  has  no  existence, 
see  how  Christ's  conceptions  of  blessed- 
ness clash  with  the  common  maxims  of 
the  world. 

I.  The  objects  of  this  beatitude. — 
1.  The  abrupter  form  in  which  Luke 
quotes  the  beatitude — "  Blessed  are  ye 
poor  " — is  proof  that  our  Saviour  had 
in  view,  first  of  all,  those  who  are  liter- 
ally poor.     Did   He  then  mean   that 
poverty,   as  such — the  poverty  which 
abridges  pleasures,  hinders  usefulness, 
limits  generosity,  multiplies  cares,  and 
exposes  to  temptation — is  in  reality  a 
blessed  state  ?     Poor  men  will  find  it 
difficult  to  believe  this,  and  when  they 
remember  that  poverty  is  threatened 
as   a   divine   judgment   upon   idleness 
and  upon  ill-chosen  society,  their  hesi- 
tation  will   seem   justified.      Yet   the 
condition  of  the  poor  man  is,  perhaps, 
more  blessed  than  that  of  his  wealthy 
neighbour.      This   view   seems   to    be 
gradually   developed    as    we    advance 
through   the   Bible.     In  the  writings 
of  Moses  poverty  is  regarded  as  con- 
stituting, a   claim    to    pity ;    but   that 
conception  is  greatly  modified  in  the 
prophets.     And   when   we    reach   the 
Incarnation  we  find  the  Son  of  God 
selecting  the  condition  of  a  poor  man 
as  that  in  which  He,  at  least,  could 
most  effectively  do  His  appointed  work. 
The  pious  are  not  always  poor,  how- 
ever ;  nor  are  the  poor  always  pious. 
2.  While,  therefore,  there  is  reason  for 
affirming  that  poverty  is  not  without 
its  recompense  of  blessing,  it  is  obvious 
that  some  additional  factor  or  factors 
remain  to  be  considered  ;  and  here  the 
remembrance    that    these     beatitudes 
contemplate  character  rather  than  con- 
dition, directs  us  to  Matthew's  version, 
"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit. 


II.  The  reward  of  the  poor  in  spirit. 

— "  Theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
\.  In  relation  to  gospel  blessings  the 
statement  is  historically  true.  Not  only 
did  Jesus  turn  from  the  rulers  of 
Israel  to  the  poor  populace,  but  also 
He  pointed  to  this  very  fact  as  evidence 
that  He  was  the  promised  King  of 
Righteousness  (ch.  xi.  5). 

2.  Much  TYiore,  we  perceive  a  Divine 
blessing  upon  the  poor  in  spirit  (Isa. 
Ivii.  15). 

III.  Why  the  poor  in  spirit  are 
rewarded. — 1.  Surely  that  we  may  cease 
from,  a  desire  to  lay  up  treasures  upon 
earth.  2.  Surely,  also,  that  we  may  learn 
to  Wjortify  our  members  which  are 
upon  the  earth,  and  to  live  soberly, 
righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present 
world.  3.  Surely,  again,  that  we  may 
have  faith  in  Divine  providence,  con- 
fidence in  Divine  bounty,  and  content- 
ment with  Divine  arrangements — the 
very  graces  which  poverty  exercises. 
4.  If  any  wonder  that  the  poor  in 
spirit  should  be  heirs  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  let  them  remember  that 
God  loves  humility,  and  that  they 
whose  self-abasement  is  most  profound, 
are  but  imitators  at  a  long  distance  of 
the  Son  of  God.— W.  J.  Woods,  B.A. 

Christ  and  "  the  survival  of  the 
fittest." — As  we  look  back  over  the 
measureless  ages,  beyond  the  beginning 
of  human  history,  beyond  the  first 
mute  period  of  primitive  man,  beyond 
the  beginning  even  of  animal  life,  to 
the  first  appearance  of  the  first  blade 
of  vegetation  upon  the  earth,  or  further 
even  still — when  we  look  back  over 
this  to  us  practically  infinite  series,  we 
see  one  broad  stream  of  tendency  con- 
tinually asserting  itself.  There  is  a 
struggle  for  existence ;  the  weakest 
perishes,  the  strongest  and  fittest  sur- 
vives. So  comprehensive  is  this  law 
that  it  seems  a  pardonable  exaggera- 
tion to  suppose  that  no  other  law 
existed  beside  it ;  so  fixed  and  roott  d 
that  it  extends  not  only  to  man,  but  to 
animals ;  not  only  to  animals,  but  to 
vegetation,  if  it  stops  even  there.  We 
see  this  one  constant  inevitable  law — 

75 


ciiAP.  V.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY t   ST.  MATTHEW. 


so  broad  in  its  grasp  upon  space,  so  that   of   Judas.       (6)    A    hypocritical 

immense  in  its  reach  over  time — and  mourning,      (c)    A   forced    mourning, 

then    we  see  a   figure  as  of  a  simple  when  tears  are  pumped  out  by  God's 

Galilean    peasant,     surrounded    by   a  judgments,     (d)  An  extrinsical  mourn- 

number  of  peasants  and  fishermen  like  ing  (Matt.  vi.  16).     (e)  A  vain,  fruit- 

Himself.      He   opens     His   mouth   to  less   mourning.       What    is   the   right 

speak  to  them ;  and  His  first  utterance  gospel  mourning  ?     (a)  It  is  spontane- 

is,  as  it  were,  to  fling  down  defiance  to  ous    and   free.     (6)  Mourning  for  sin 

this  seemingly  omnipotent  principle,  to  rather   than   suffering,      (c)  It   sends 

meet  it  with  a  flat  contradiction,  to  re-  the  soul  to  God.     (d)  Mourning  for  sin 

voke  its  decision,  and  to  pronounce  a  in  particular,     (e)  Gospel   tears  must 

solemn  blessing  on  the  one  character  of  drop  from  the  eye  of  faith.     (/)  Gospel 

all  others  that  it  had  not  pronounced  mourning  is  joined  with  self-loathing, 

blessed :    "  Blessed   are    the    poor   in  (g)  Must  be  purifying.     We  must  so 

spirit,    for   theirs   is   the   kingdom   of  weep   for    sin    as    to    weep   out    sin. 

heaven."     Surely   there   is    a    Divine  (h)  Must  be  joined  with  hatred  of  sin. 

audacity  here  ! — W.  Sanday^  D.D.  (i)  In  some  cases  is  joined  with  restitu- 
tion,    (k)  Must  be  a  speedy  mourning. 

Poverty  of  spirit. — Dean  Plumptre,  (f)  Constant.     (2)  The  sin  of  others. 

in    his   deUcious   Life  of  Bishop  Ken,  2.  Misery. — Including  the  aflflictions 

writes  that  he  rejoiced  to  find  that  text  of    the    church.      Special    seasons   of 

woven  into  his  linen  and  engraved  on  mourning.     (1)  When  there  are  tokens 

his  plate  : — "  Seekest  thou  great  things  of  God's  wrath  breaking  forth  in  the 

for  thyself?     Seek  them  not."  nation.      (2)    Before    performing   the 

solemn  duties  of  God's  worship,  as  fast- 

Theirs  is    the    kingdom    of  heaven.  ing  or   receiving   the    Lord's    Supper. 

—  The   poor   in  spirit,    vacant  of  self,  (3)  After  scandalous  relapses, 

waiting     for     God,     conscious     of     a  II.  A  Reason. — "  They  shall  be  com- 

poverty  that  only  the  Divine  indwelling  forted."     Observe:   1,   Mourning    goes 

can  change  into   wealth,  feeling,  like  before   comfort,   as   the   lancing    of  a 

the  wondrous  beggar   in    Martensen's  wound   precedes     the    cure.       2.    God 

Meister    Uckhart,    that    they   "would  keeps      His     best      wine      till     last, 

sooner  be  in  hell  and  have  God,  than  in  3.  Gospel  tears  are  not  lost ;  they  are 

heaven  and  not  have  Him,"  are  already  seeds   of   comfort.       Beason  why   the 

citizens ;    theirs    is    the   kingdom    of  mourner  shall  be  comforted.     Because 

heaven. — A.  M.  Fairhairn,  D.D.  the  mourning  has  this  as  its  end  and 

the  mourner  is  the  fittest  person  for 

Ver.  4.  Mourning. — I.  An  asser-  comfort.  The  comforts  two-fold : — 
tion. — That  mourners  are  blessed  1.  Comforts  here. — The  Spirit  corn- 
persons.  There  is  a  twofold  moui-ning  forts  mediately,  by  the  promises  ;  or 
which  is  far  from  making  one  blessed,  immediately,  by  a  more  direct  act  pre- 
1.  A  carnal  mourning,  when  we  sen  ting  God  to  the  soul  as  reconciled, 
lament  outward  losses.  2.  A  diabolical  These  comforts  are  (1)  real,  (2)  sancti- 
mourning.  (1)  When  a  man  mourns  fying,  (3)  humbling,  (4)  unmixed, 
that  he  cannot  satisfy  his  impure  (5)  sweet,  (6)  satisfying,  (7)  glorious, 
lust  (2  Sam.  xiii.  2  ;  1  Kings  xxi.  4),  (1  Peter  i.  8),  (8)  infinitely  trans- 
(2)  When  men  are  sorry  for  the  good  porting  and  ravishing,  (9)  powerful 
which  they  have  done  (Ex.  xiv.  5).  (Heb.  vi.  18),  (10)  heart-quieting. 
There  are  two  objects  of  spiritual  (11)  abiding  (John  xiv.  16).  God's 
mourning :  mourners    sometimes    want    comfort, 

1.  Sin. — (1)  Our  own  sin.     Its  guilt.  (1)  through  mistake;  they  go  to  their 

Its   pollution.      There    is    a   five-fold  tears  when  they  should  go  to  Christ's 

mourning  which  is  false  and  spurious :  blood  ;    or   they    slacken   the    strings 

(a)  A  despairing  kind  of  mourning,  like  of  duty ;    (2)  through  discontent   and 

76 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


peevishness ;  (3)  through  not  applying 
the  promises ;  (4)  through  too  much 
earthly-mindedness;  (5)  through  falling 
asleep  in  security. 

2.  Comforts  hereafter. — The  great- 
ness of  these  celestial  comforts  is  most 
fitly  in  Scripture  expressed  by  the  joy 
of  a  feast  (Rev.  xix.  9). — Thomas 
Watson. 

The  mourners  blessed. — I.  What  is 
meant  by  them  that  mourn. — In 
general,  I  take  it  to  be  something 
that  guards  us  against  that  frolic- 
some, jovial,  carnal  mirth,  of  which 
the  people  expected  a  large  share  in 
the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  And 
with  this  view  it  will  take  in  several 
very  considerable  Christian  virtues,  as 
to  which  their  wrong  notions  of  Christ's 
kingdom  gave  their  minds  a  very  bad 
disposition  and  temper.  I  shall  name 
the  chief  of  them. 

I.  Sobriety  and  temperance. — He 
who  is  endowed  with  these  virtues 
is  prepared  for  the  hardest  fare 
and  the  meanest  entertainment  he 
can  meet  with  in  this  world.  As 
luxury  effeminates  a  soldier  and  unfits 
him  for  the  laborious  part  of  his  office, 
so  it  is  in  the  spiritual  warfare ; 
pleasure  effeminates  a  soldier  of  Christ, 
whereas  a  steady  preparation  of  mind 
for  bearing  the  cross,  hardens  and 
confirms  him  in  his  duty. 

2.  Contrition  and  penitence,  by  which 
I  understand  not  any  transient  act  of 
sorrow,  but  such  a  deep  repentance  as 
leaves  lasting  impressions  and  makes 
us  put  on  the  habit  of  mourners. 
There  are  many  things  contribute 
towards  the  begetting  and  keeping 
up   of  this    serious    penitent   temper. 

(1)  The    consideration   of    past    sins. 

(2)  A  sense  of  unmortified  corruptions. 

(3)  Imperfect  graces.  (4)  The  sins 
of  others.  (5)  A  sense  of  God's  judg- 
ments, either  threatened  or  impending, 
or  executed. 

3.  A  distaste  of  the  world  and  a  long- 
ing for  heaven. 

II.  Consider  how  blessed  they  are 
from  the  comforts  they  shall  reap  both 
here  and  hereafter. — This  mourning  or 


penitential  sorrow  is  like  ground  well 
prepared,  ready  manured  and  watered, 
fit  to  receive  the  seeds  and  to  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  all  Christian  virtues, 
which  bring  in  a  rich  harvest  of  com- 
fort and  felicity.  If  the  fruits  of  this 
temper  are  so  great  in  this  life,  what 
will  they  be  in  heaven  ? 

III.  Draw  some  inferences  from  the 
doctrine  of  this  beatitude. — 1.  The  folly 
of  those  who  place  their  happiness  in  an 
affluence  of  everything  that  may  gratify 
their  luxury.  2.  That  we  should  en- 
deavour to  be  always  deeply  affected  with 
a  godly  sorrow  in  regard  of  our  past 
sins  and  follies,  and  a  holy  fear  of  fall- 
ing into  the  like  again.  3.  The  sweet- 
ness and  easiness  of  ChrisVs  yoke,  the 
hardest  of  whose  service  {i.e.  repen- 
tance) is  attended  with  so  much  in- 
ward peace  and  satisfaction. — James 
Blair,  M.A. 

Mourners  comforted. — I.  The  mourn- 
ing which  is  here  specified. 

1.  Negatively. — (1)  It  is  not  the 
mourning  of  a  melancholy  disposi- 
tion, that  continually  murmurs, 
whines,  and  rebels.  (2)  It  is  not  a 
sorrow  that  springs  from  afflictions, 
disappointments,  bereavements,  desti- 
tution, adversity,  etc.  (3)  It  is  not  a 
mourning  in  view  merely  of  the  conse- 
quences of  sin.  (4)  It  is  not  therefore 
an  affected  penitence.  *'  I  am  the 
chief  of  sinners,"  said  the  cardinal  to 
the  confessor.  "  It  is  true,"  said  the 
monk.  "  I  have  been  guilty  of  every 
kind  of  sin,"  sighed  the  cardinal.  "  It 
is  a  solemn  fact,  my  son,"  said  the 
monk.  "  I  have  indulged  in  pride, 
ambition,  malice,  and  revenge,"  pursued 
his  Eminence.  The  confessor  assented 
without  one  word  of  pity  or  doubt. 
"  Why,  you  fool  ! "  at  last  said  the 
exasperated  cardinal,  "  you  don't 
imagine  I  mean  all  this  to  the  letter  % " 
**  Ho  !  ho  !  "  said  the  monk,  "  so  you 
have  been  a  liar  too,  have  you  ?  "  Many 
profess  to  be  under  deep  conviction, 
and  cry  aloud  that  they  are  sinners, 
but  when  it  comes  to  the  point,  will 
not  own  that  they  have  broken  one  of 
the  commandments. 

77 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


2.  Affirmatively, — (1)  It  is  a  sorrow 
for  sin.  ''  Eeal  repentance  consists 
in  the  heart  being  broken  for  sin 
and  from  sin."  The  old  divines 
used  to  describe  it  as  consisting  of 
attrition  and  contiition.  Attrition 
is  when  a  rock  is  broken  by  the  spring- 
ing of  a  mine.  Contrition  is  when  an 
iceberg  floating  southward  is  gradually 
nelted  by  the  warmth  of  the  Gulf 
Stream  and  the  sun.  The  first  comes 
by  the  law,  which  reveals  to  us  our 
sin ;  the  second  comes  by  the  gospel, 
which  discloses  to  us  the  loving  mercy 
of  God.  (2)  It  is  sorrow  on  account  of 
the  sins  we  see  around  us  (Jer.  ix.  18), 
— the  sins  of  the  world ;  inconsistency 
of  the  church.  (3)  It  is  a  sympathis- 
ing sorrow  for  others'  afflictions  and 
distresses. 

II.  The  comfort  which  is  here 
promised. — Self-love,  pride,  and  covet- 
ousness  have  their  tears,  but  God 
wipes  away  only  those  of  humility  and 
repentance.  "  Out  of  the  saltest 
waters  God  can  brew  the  sweetest 
liquor."  "  The  bee  gathers  the  best 
honey  from  the  bitterest  herbs."  "  The 
darkest  hour  is  nearest  the  dawn." 

1.  The  Saviour^ s  promise  is  already 
realised  in  this  life. — God  is  to  them 
"  the  God  of  consolation  "  (Rom.  xv.  5). 
"  When  God  comforts,"  says  Chrysos- 
tom,  "then,  though  sorrows  come  upon 
thee  by  thousands,  like  snowflakes, 
thou  wilt  surmount  them  all." 

2.  The  Saviour's  prom^ise  is  destined 
to  have  its  complete  fulfilment  in  the 
life  to  come. — "  Holy  mourning,"  says 
St.  Basil,  *'  is  the  seed  out  of  which  the 
flower  of  eternal  joy  doth  grow." — 
J.  Harries. 

Sor7'oio  the  pledge  of  joy, — I.  Grief, 
sorrow,  pain  of  heart,  mourning 
is  no  partition-wall  between  man 
and  God. — The  Lord  congratulates 
them  that  mourn.  There  is  no  evil  in 
sorrow.  True,  it  is  not  an  essential 
good,  a  good  in  itself,  like  love ;  but  it 
will  mingle  with  any  good  thing,  and 
is  even  so  allied  to  good  that  it  will 
open  the  door  of  the  heart  for  any 
good.     The  gladsome  child  runs  farther 

78 


afield ;  the  wounded  child  turns  to  go 
home.  The  weeper  sits  down  close  to 
the  gate ;  the  Lord  of  life  draws  nigh 
to  him  from  within.  God  loves  not 
sorrow,  yet  rejoices  to  see  a  man  sorrow- 
ful, for  in  his  sorrow  man  leaves  his 
heavenward  door  on  the  latch,  and 
God  can  enter  to  help  him.  So  good 
a  medicine  is  sorrow,  so  powerful  to 
slay  the  moths  that  infest  and  devour 
the  human  heart,  that  the  Lord  is  glad 
to  see  a  man  weep.  Grief  is  an  ill- 
favoured  thing,  but  she  is  Love's  own 
child,  and  her  mother  loves  her. 

11.  The  promise  to  them  that  mourn 
— Is  not  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but 
that  their  mourning  shall  be  ended, 
that  they  shall  be  comforted.  To  mourn 
is  not  to  fight  with  evil ;  it  is  only  to 
miss  that  which  is  good.  It  is  not  an 
essential  heavenward  condition,  like 
poorness  of  spirit  or  meekness.  Mourn- 
ing is  a  canker -bitten  blossom  on  the 
rose-tree  of  love.  Is  there  any  mourning 
worthy  the  name  that  has  not  love  for 
its  root  1  Men  mourn  because  they 
love.  The  Greek  word  here  used 
means  those  that  mourn  for  the  dead. 
It  is  not  in  the  New  Testament 
employed  exclusively  in  this  sense, 
neither  do  I  imagine  it  stands  here  for 
such  only  ;  there  are  griefs  than  death 
sorer  far,  and  harder  far  to  comfort — 
harder  even  for  God  Himself,  with  whom 
all  things  are  possible  ;  but  it  may  give 
pleasure  to  know  that  the  promise  of 
comfort  to  those  that  mourn  may 
specially  apply  to  those  that  mourn 
because  their  loved  have  gone  out  of 
their  sight,  and  beyond  the  reach  of 
their  cry. — Geo.  Macdonald,  LL,D. 

Ver.  5.  The  blessedness  of  the  meek. 

I.  Describe  the  virtue  here  recom- 
mended.— 1.  The  first  and  chief 
ingredient  in  this  meekness  is  an  in- 
ward calmness  and  tranquillity  of  mind, 
2.  This  shows  itself  in  a7i  outward^ 
affable,  courteous,  kind,  and,  friendly 
behaviour  to  men.  3.  The  meek  man  is 
slow  to  anger,  4.  He  is  prudent  and 
moderate  in  his  passion,  tempering  it 
with  a  spirit  of  calmness  and  moderation. 
5.    He  lets  go  his  anger  as  soon  as  he 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW,       chap.  v. 


can  in  reason,  at  least  he  suffers  it 
not  to  settle  into  a  fixed  hatred  or 
lasting  resentment,  but  is  ready  to 
embrace  all  overtures  of  reconciliation. 
Q. 'Meekness  is  always  joined  with  hum- 
ility, resignation,  contentment,  cheer- 
fulness, courtevsy,  gratitude,  moderation, 
peaceableness,  kindness,  patience,  for- 
giveness of  injuries,  charity,  and  all 
other  social  and  good-natured  virtues. 
With  most  of  these  it  is  so  connected 
in  the  Scriptures  that  I  do  not  know 
whether  they  ought  not  to  enter  into 
the  definition  of  it. 

II.  Consider  the  blessing  annexed 
to  the  meek. — The  words  are  a  quota- 
tion  from    Ps.  xxxvii.    11,  where,   no 
doubt,   David    understood   it   of    this 
earth  of  ours,  or  of  the  land  of  Canaan. 
It  is  not  promised  that  the  meek  shall 
have  great  affluence  (see  Luke  xii.  15). 
If  we  look  into  that  part  of  the  psalm 
from  whence  this  quotation  is  brought, 
these  three — protection,  a  competency, 
and   contentment — appear   plainly   to 
have    been   signified   by    the    promise 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  9-11).     The  like  temporal 
promises  we  have  in  the  New  Testament 
(1  Tim.  iv.  8 ;  Matt.  vi.  33).     It  may 
seem  strange  that,  supposing  this  to  be 
true  of  good  men  in  general,  such  a 
promise  should  be  here  annexed  to  the 
virtue  of  meekness,  a  virtue  which  of  all 
others  seems  to  expose  a  man  the  most 
to  oppression  and  injuries  of  all  sorts. 
But   consider :    1.    That    our    blessed 
Lord    might   choose   to    instance   the 
meek  for  this  very  reason,  because  ho 
is  more  exposed  to  injuries,  and  seem- 
ingly more  naked  and  defenceless  than 
others  (see  Ps.   xii.   5).      I  take  this 
promise  in  my  text  to  be  a  particular 
declaration   that    God    will   take   the 
humble,  meek  man  under  His  protection, 
and  that  the  less  he  goes  about  either  to 
hurt  others,  or  to  avenge  himself,  God 
will   so   much   the  more  defend   him. 
2.  Though  the  meek  man,  if  we  con- 
sider him  as  standing  alone,  seems  to 
be   very   much    overmatched    by   the 
proud  and  fierce  oppressor ;  yet  if  we 
will   consider  him  as  he  is  commonly 
fenced  and  guarded  with  the  counten- 
ance   and    protection    of     laws    and 


government,  and  with  the  friendship 
and  love  of  his  neighbours,  and  the 
general  good  opinion  of  all  men,  we 
shall  find  the  meek  man  is  not  so  much 
overmatched  as  at  first  sight  he  would 
seem  to  be.  (1)  He  is  so  peaceable 
and  good-conditioned,  that  he  seldom 
has  any  quarrels  or  controversies  with 
his  neighbours.  (2)  He  is  so  good  a 
subject,  and  so  obedient  to  government, 
that  he  will  live  quietly  and  peaceably 
under  it  if  he  can  ;  and  therefore  he 
is  in  less  danger  than  other  men  of 
being  engaged  in  factions,  rebellions, 
and  insurrections,  which  destroy  men's 
estates  and  peace.  (3)  He  is  more 
like  to  have  the  great  blessing  of  peace 
at  home  in  his  own  family  than  other 
angry  and  ill-conditioned  men ;  and 
this  makes  husbands  and  wives,  children 
and  servants,  love  their  homes,  and 
mind  their  business  with  pleasure  and 
delight.  (4)  He  has  commonly  many 
friends,  and  but  few  enemies ;  and  his 
friends  are  generally  of  the  best,  and 
his  enemies  of  the  worst  sort  of  men. 
(5)  Being  in  his  temper  well  disposed 
to  be  a  good  subject,  he  has  generally 
the  protection  of  laws,  and  favour  of 
government.  (6)  If  such  a  man,  who 
has  been  kind  and  good  to  all,  should 
happen  to  meet  with  crosses  and  losses 
in  the  world,  he  will  be  sure  to  find 
more  pity,  countenance,  and  relief,  in 
his  adversity,  than  other  men,  who 
never  were  good  themselves,  nor  good 
to  their  neighbours  in  their  prosperity. 
(7)  Whatever  portion  the  meek  man 
has  of  the  good  things  of  this  life,  be  it 
great  or  small,  he  enjoys  it  with  a 
quiet,  contented  mind,  and  God's 
blessing  (1  Tim.  vi.  6). — Jas.  Blair, 
M.A. 

The  meek. — In  some  arrangements  of 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  this  is  the 
second  beatitude,  and  that  order  has 
been  preferred  by  such  expositors  as 
Augustine  and  the  late  Archbishop 
Trench.  Poverty  of  spirit,  which  is 
humility  toward  God,  is  held  to  pair 
with  meekness,  which  is  humility 
toward  man,  and  the  inheritance  of 
the   kingdom   of    heaven    in   the   one 

79 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ,    ST.  MATTHEW. 


saying  is  regarded  as  matching  the 
inheritance  of  the  earth  in  the 
other.  If,  however,  we  view  the  first 
three  beatitudes  as  a  group  explaining 
the  sequences  of  early  Christian  ex- 
perience, the  usual  order  must  be 
preferred ;  for,  so  understood,  "  they 
form,"  as  Dr.  Dykes  finely  says,  "  the 
trilogy  of  gospel  humiliation — the 
descending  steps — low,  lower,  lowest — 
by  which  the  soul  is  converted."    When 

A  the  light  of  God's  Spirit  shining  within 
a  man's  conscience  convicts  him  of  sin, 
the  first  effect  is  to  show  him  how 
bankrupt  he  is  of  all  goodness ;  in  the 
light  of  that  discovery  he  becomes 
"  poor  in  spirit."  Next,  he  is  made  to 
perceive  how  the  same  sin  which  has 
stripped  and  left  him  naked  has  been 
a  grievous  wrong  done  to  his  Father 
in  heaven  ;  in  the  shame  of  this  per- 
ception he  becomes  "  a  mourner."  Next, 
the  sense  of  his  unworthiness  forbids 
him  to  walk  haughtily  amongst  his 
fellow-men ;  in  cleansing  fire  his  vanity 
is  consumed,  and  "  out  of  the  ashes  of 
self-love  and  on  the  grave  of  pride" 
springs  forth  the  fair  sweet  flower  of 
meekness — a  grace  the  poets  have  forgot 
to  praise,  a  virtue  the  world  little 
understands,  but  a  disposition  which 
conquers  and  will  conquer  all  the 
earth  ! 

I.  The  disposition. — "  Blessed  are 
the  meek." 

1.  Meekness  is  not  weakness. — Mr. 
William  Oullen  Bryant,  describing 
the  languor  of  October  light,  writes,  in 
a  charming  poem — 

Suns  grow  meek  and  the  meek  suns  grow 
brief. 

He  evidently  means  that  suns   grow 

weak  and  the  weak  suns  grow  brief, 

and  that  confusion  of   meekness  with 

weakness  is  much  too  common. 

2.  The  elements  of  a  meek  disposition 
are  entire  submission  to  God,  courtesy  to 
Tnen,  forbearance  to  evil-doers,  and 
loyalty  to  principle. 

y.  II.  The  special  blessing  which 
rewards  this  disposition.—"  They  shall 
inherit  the  earth." 

1.  This  promises  a  future  possession 
of  the  earth. — By  many   the   sentence 

80 


is  regarded  as  a  quotation  from 
Ps.  xxxvii.  11,  where  David  is 
speaking  of  the  land  of  Canaan — an 
acknowledged  type  of  heaven.  So 
understood,  the  promise  means  that 
the  meek  will  be  rewarded  in  the  world 
to  come. 

2.  It  promises  also  a  present  pos- 
session of  the  earth. — Godliness  has 
the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is 
(Mark  x.  29,  30).  Of  all  men  upon 
earth  the  meek  have  the  best  capacity 
for  enjoying  its  blessings.  Violence 
and  ill-temper,  impatience  and  un- 
kindness,  may  snatch  the  sceptre  for  a 
season;  but  no  gains  of  that  kind 
carry  with  them  ability  to  enjoy  God's 
earth.— PT.  J.  Woods,  B.A. 

The  unappreciated  beatitude. — ^The 
meek  are  few ;  so  few  that  we  hardly 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  name. 
It  has  come  to  suggest  feebleness 
of  spirit,  the  passive  character  that 
accepts  instead  of  conquering  fate, 
the  apologetic  existence,  grateful  for 
sufferance  and  void  of  high  ambitions. 
As  to  the  old  Greeks,  so  to  the  modern 
Christian,  lowliness  of  mind  is  apt  to 
wear  the  aspect  of  infirmity.  Our 
heathen  forefathers  on  this  island, 
according  to  the  Boman  historian, 
found  a  reason  for  insurrection  in  the 
argument  that  "  men  got  nothing  by 
meekness,  but  an  increase  of  their 
burdens."  And  that  old  heathen 
strain  seems  in  our  blood  still.  It 
is  not  difficult  to  understand  this 
imperfect  appreciation.  The  days  of 
outward  persecution  are  ended,  and 
with  them  the  great  stage  for  the 
display  of  heroic  meekness.  Yet,  we 
never  can  get  into  any  circumstances 
where  any  Christian  grace  is  a 
superfluity. 

I.  Those  blessed. — The  meekness 
here  blessed  of  Christ  is  :  1.  The  low- 
liness of  the  spiritual.  2.  Patience 
under  injury.  3.  The  meekness  of  the 
benefactor  (1  Cor.  iv.  11-13). 

II.  Their  blessing.— "  They  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  If  Jesus  had  said 
*'  heaven "  His  word  would  have 
sounded    less    strange.     For   in   their 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  vT 


action  there  is  much  that  betokens 
meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints.  But  when  He  says  *'  they 
shall  inherit  the  earth,"  His  word 
surprises  us.  For  they  seem  quite 
unfitted  to  gain  or  keep  any  earthly 
heritage.  They  will  not  condescend  to 
take  part  in  the  strife ;  they  sacrifice 
their  rights ;  permit  themselves  to  be 
ill-used;  seem  to  be  at  everybody's 
mercy,  and  bound  "to  go  to  the  wall." 
Yet,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word, 
they  do  *'  inherit  the  earth." 

1.  More  than  all  other  classes  they 
enjoy  whatever  God  sends  them. 

2.  They  possess  more  of  the  earth  than 
others. — Fighting  is  not  a  thing  that 
pays.  Sharp  men  cut  their  own  fingers. 
The  meek  prosper  because  their  calmness 
gives  judgment,  their  content  gives 
safety,  their  fairness  attracts  confidence. 
All  men  like  to  deal  with  men  they  can 
trust.  Character  helps,  it  does  not 
hurt,  business.  Besides,  God  is  on 
their  side,  whispering  wisdom,  blessing 
their  going  out  and  coming  in ;  and 
God's  favour  tells,  whatever  men  may 
think  of  it. 

3.  The  meek  are  rewarded  by  a 
sovereignty  that  none  else  can  reach. — 
They  are  calm  advisers  to  whom  men 
listen.  *'The  man  Moses  was  very 
meek,  above  all  the  men  which  were 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,"  and  what 
an  empire  over  the  souls  of  men  he 
has  wielded  in  the  last  three  thousand 
years.  Within  four  centuries  of  the 
obscure  birth  of  the  church  of  Jesus, 
she  is  found  wielding  the  powers  of  the 
Roman  empire.  Her  meekness  has 
been  the  church's  might  in  far-off 
heathen  lands  and  on  our  own  shores 
as  well.  Wear  thy  crown  of  thorns 
and  on  a  painless  brow  thou  shalt  wear 
many  crowns. — Richard  Glover. 

Inheriting  the  earth. — I.  The  meek 
are  those  that  do  not  assert  themselves, 
do  not  defend  themselves,  never  dream 
of  avenging  themselves,  or  of  returning 
aught  but  good  for  evil.  They  do  not 
imagine  it  their  business  to  take  care 
of  themselves.  The  meek  man  may, 
indeed,  take  much  thought,  but  it  will 


Q 


not  be  for  himself.  He  never  builds 
an  exclusive  wall,  shuts  any  honest 
neighbour  out.  He  will  not  always 
serve  the  wish,  but  always  the  good 
of  his  neighbour.  His  service  must  be 
true  service.  Self  shall  be  no  umpire 
in  afiair  of  his.  His  nature  lies  open 
to  the  Father  of  men,  and  to  every 
good  impulse  is,  as  it  were,  empty. 

II.  In  meekness  only  are  we  the 
inheritors  of  the  earth. — 1.  Meekness 
only  makes  the  spiritual  retina  pure 
to  receive  God's  things  as  they  are, 
mingling  with  them  neither  imperfect- 
tion  nor  impurity  of  its  own.  2.  To 
inherit  the  earth  is  to  grow  ever  more 
alive  to  the  presence  in  it  and  in  all  its 
parts,  of  Him  who  is  the  life  of  men. 
3.  Which  is  more  the  possessor  of  the 
world — he  who  has  a  thousand  houses, 
or  he  who,  without  one  house  to  call 
his  own,  has  ten  in  which  his  knock 
at  the  door  would  rouse  instant 
jubilation  ?  Which  is  the  richer,  the 
man  who,  his  large  money  spent, 
would  have  no  refuge ;  or  he  for  whose 
necessity  a  hundred  would  sacrifice 
comfort  ?  Which  of  the  two  possessed 
the  earth,  King  Agrippa  or  tent-maker 
Paul  1  Which  is  a  real  possessor  of  a 
book,  the  man  who  has  its  original 
and  every  following  edition,  and  shows, 
to  many  an  admiring  and  envying 
visitor,  now  this,  now  that,  in  binding 
characteristic,  with  possessor-pride ;  yea, 
from  secret  shrine  is  able  to  draw 
forth  and  display  the  author's  manu- 
script, with  the  very  shapes  in  which 
his  thoughts  came  forth  to  the  light  of 
day,  or  the  man  who  cherishes  one 
little,  hollow-backed,  coverless,  untitled, 
bethumbed  copy,  which  he  takes  with 
him  in  his  solitary  walks  and  broods 
over  in  his  silent  chamber,  always 
finding  in  it  some  beauty  or  excellence 
or  aid  he  had  not  found  before,  which 
is  to  him  in  truth  as  a  live  companion  ? 
— Geo.  Macdonald,  LL.D. 

True  ownership. — How  little  is  the 
man  able  to  make  his.  own  who 
would  ravish  all !  The  man  who,  by 
the  exclusion  of  others  from  the  space 
he  calls  his,  would  grasp  any  portion 

81 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


of  the  earth  as  his  own,  befools  himself 
in  the  attempt.  The  real  owner  of 
his  demesne  is  that  pedlar  passing  his 
gate,  with  a  Divine  soul  receiving  the 
sweetness  which  not  all  the  greed 
of  the  so-counted  possessor  can  keep 
within  his  walls  ;  it  overflows  the  cup- 
lip  of  the  coping,  to  give  itself  to  the 
footfarer.  The  motions  aerial,  the 
sounds,  the  odours  of  those  imprisoned 
spaces,  are  the  earnest  of  a  possession, 
for  which  is  ever  growing  his  power  of 
possessing.  In  no  wise  will  such  in- 
heritance interfere  with  the  claim  of 
the  man  who  calls  them  his.  Each 
possessor  has  them  his,  as  much  as  each 
in  his  own  way  is  capable  of  possessing 
them. — Geo.  Macdonald,  LL.D. 

Ver.  ^.Hungering  and  thirsting  after 
righteousness. — I.  Righteousness.  —  It 
is  a  very  great  word  in  Scripture,  having 
two  meanings.  1.  It  mesms  conformity 
to  God^s  law  as  opposed  to  sin,  which  is 
lawlessness.  2.  But  when  we  turn  to 
the  gospel  we  find  that  God  justifies 
the  ungodly  who  believe  in  Jesus. 
There  is  evidently  a  new  view  of 
righteousness. 

II.  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger 
and  thirst  after  righteousness. — This 
is  a  very  strong  expression.  It  is  no 
uncommon  thing  to  say,  "  Oh,  I  am  so 
hungry,  I  am  so  thirsty  " ;  how  few  of 
us  know  what  the  words  really  mean  ! 
This  comparison  of  hungering  and 
thirsting  is  a  very  severe  touchstone  or 
test  of  character.  Now,  suppose  that 
we  try  to  take  to  pieces  this  great  idea 
of  righteousness,  what  does  it  mean  ? 
In  the  ordinary  details  of  daily  life 
towards  others,  for  example,  it  means, 
briefly,  truthfulness,  sincerity  in  speech 
and  conduct,  evenhanded  justice,  un- 
biassed by  any  thought  of  our  self- 
interest  ;  kindness,  not  only  as  a  super- 
fluous overflow  of  goodness,  but  as 
a  part  of  justice,  because  God  has  made 
it  our  duty  to  do  unto  others  as  we 
would  have  them  do  unto  us.  "  Love 
is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  It 
includes  spotless  honour,  considerate 
thoughtfulness,  courtesy,  gentleness, 
the  mind   of    Christ.     What   does   it 

82 


mean  towards  God  1  It  means  supreme, 
heartfelt  love,  unswerving,  prompt 
obedience,  absolute  trust,  unques- 
tioning, invariable  preference  of  His 
will,  His  service.  His  glory,  to  any 
desire  or  apparent  interest  of  my  own. 
And  this  does  not  exhaust  the  list,  but 
taking  it  so  far,  no  one  can  say  that 
there  is  anything  superfluous,  anything 
exaggerated,  in  any  of  these  details. 
Can  we  honestly  say,  "  That  is  myself 
as  I  would  be,  as  I  would  fain  be,  as  I 
strive  to  be,  and  pray  to  be  :  that  is 
myself  as  I  ought  to  be  :  I  long,  nay, 
I  hunger  and  thirst  to  be  righteous  as 
He  is  righteous  ? "  Now,  surely,  it  is 
not  possible  to  have  this  noble  ambition 
— what  our  Saviour  here  calls  this 
hungering  and  thirsting — and  this  high 
idea  of  character  and  conduct,  without 
having  a  true  humbling  sense  of  our 
own  defects,  our  own  want.  Hunger 
and  thirst  are  not  only  healthy 
appetites,  which  bring  enjoyment  and 
satisfaction  when  they  are  met,  but 
they  are  torments,  tortures,  if  they 
are  not  satisfied. 

III.  But  in  proportion  to  the  keen- 
ness of  the  spiritual  appetite  is  the 
joy  of  satisfaction. — None  taste  the 
joy  of  salvation  like  those  who  hunger 
and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and, 
therefore,  here  comes  the  blessing. 
How  are  they  to  be  filled  ?  When  are 
they  to  be  filled  1  He  who  spoke  this 
blessing  and  promise  is  alone  able  to 
answer  and  to  fulfil.  He  who  behoves  is 
already  delivered  from  condemnation, 
and  shall  be  delivered  from  the  power 
of  sin.  He  is  already  perfectly  justi- 
fied. He  shall  be  perfectly  sanctified. 
—E.  R.  Conder,  D.D. 

Soul  hunger. — The  universal  connec- 
tion between  demand  and  supply. 
"  Righteousness,"  a  generic  word  for  all 
spiritual  blessings.  To  crave  intensely 
after  these  is  blessed.     Because — 

I.  The  supply  begins  as  soon  as 
the  demand. 

II.  The  supply  continues  as  long 
as  the  demand. 

III.  The  supply  is  in  proportion  to 
the  demand. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  v. 


IV.  The  supply  is  of  the  same 
nature  as  the  demand. 

V.  The  supply  satisfies,  never 
satiates. — The  more  we  receive,  the 
more  we  crave.  Blessed  hunger ! 
Blessed  thirst ! — J.  S.  Swan. 

Hunger  after  righteousness.  —  The 
Saviour  employs  "righteousness"  in 
its  old  Bible  sense,  as  meaning  all 
that  is  beautiful  in  loving-kindness, 
all  that  is  stately  in  holiness,  all  that 
is  gracious  in  honour. 

I.  Those  blessed. — The  perfecting  of 
our  character  is  the  supreme  good.  It 
is  the  state  of  our  soul,  not  of  our 
circumstances,  that  chiefly  determines 
our  bliss.  This  righteousness  is  our 
only  safety. 

II.  Their  blessing.— "  Filled."  This 
is  the  strangest  part  of  this  strange 
greeting  ;  for  it  promises  satisfaction 
in  a  matter  in  which  satisfaction  seems 
impossible.  Consider  what  hungerers 
after  righteousness  really  find  which 
fills  and  satisfies  them.  1.  Thei/  find 
a  grace  •of  God,  assisting  repentance, 
consecration,  and  every  duty.  2.  In  the 
pursuit  of  righteousness,  the  soul  can 
realise  a  larger  growth  than  in  any  other 
direction.  3.  What  grace  begins  and 
growth  develops,  heaven  will  perfect. — 
Richard  Glover. 

Moral  hunger. — Man  is  the  centre 
of  longings ;  the  animal  part  for 
food,  the  intellectual  part  for  know- 
ledge and  truth,  the  moral  part  for 
God  and  righteousness.  As  the  prim- 
eval law  of  gravitation  pierces  all 
depths,  and  makes  all  matter  bound 
together  by  an  unconscious  relationship, 
tend  to  the  centre,  even  so  our  moral 
nature  is  obedient  to  one  law  of  motion, 
the  centre  of  gravity — God. 

I.  Man's  moral  hunger. — The  natural 
man  may  hunger  for  that  which  brings 
him  gain,  such  as  wealth,  ease,  and 
honour.  The  raven  held  a  banquet 
amid  the  putrefactions  of  death. 
Raven-like,  unregenerated  man  seeks 
to  allay  his  appetites  by  feeding  on  the 
perishable  and  corrupt.  But  the 
Christian's   hunger    and    his    deepest 


and   intensest   want   is   righteousness. 

1.  This  spiritual  hunger  is  a  sign  of 
life.  2.  This  spiritual  hunger  is  the 
condition  of  refreshment.  3.  This 
spirit2ial  hunger  is  wholesome.  *'  After 
righteousness." 

II.  God's  gracious  supply.  —  The 
blessings  bestowed  by  God  are  not 
given  in  doses  or  in  small  measures. 
God  does  not  give  His  supplies  merely 
once  and  afterwards  let  His  saints 
want ;  His  supply  is  boundless.  But 
let  us  learn  here :  1.  That  the  supply 
continues  only  as  the  demand  is  made. 

2.  That  the  supply  is  in  proportion  to 
our  desire.  3.  God's  supply  is  infinite, 
inexhaustible,  and  free  for  the  asking. — 
J.  Harries. 

The  blessing  of  the  hungry. — I.  Right- 
eousness is  set  forth  not  as  something 
the  lack  of  which  will  entail  suffering 
and  loss,  but  as  a  thing  which  can 
satisfy  the  cravings  of  the  soul.  Christ 
does  not  say,  "  Blessed  are  those  who 
follow  after  or  practice  righteousness  "  ; 
He  is  not  simply  proclaiming  the 
happiness  of  virtuous  conduct ;  He 
has  done  that  elsewhere  in  other 
beatitudes  :  "  Blessed  are  they  which 
hear  the  Word  of  God,  and  keep  it. 
If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye 
if  ye  do  them."  It  is  a  state  of  heart, 
an  attitude  of  soul  that  He  is  blessing 
here — the  mood  of  increasing  aspiration 
after  goodness.  And  He  takes  the 
most  familiar  of  physical  cravings  to 
illustrate  that  desire.  The  peculiarity 
of  the  hunger  and  thirst  which  He 
blesses  is  that  they  must  remain 
hunger  and  thirst  always.  He  docs 
not  say,  "  Blessed  are  they  who  have 
hungered  and  thirsted,"  but  "Blessed 
are  they  who  are  still  hungering  and 
thirsting."  Is  there  any  other  craving 
on  which  our  Lord  has  uttered  His 
benediction  ?  I  know  of  none.  Chris- 
tianity gave  precedence  to  the  pursuit 
of  righteousness  over  every  other  ambi- 
tion and  desire.  More  than  this,  it 
did  not  offer  to  man  a  mere  vague 
sentimental  shadow  of  excellence ;  it 
gave  to  the  world  an  incarnation  of  it. 
It  set  before  them  no  other  standard 

83 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


than  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ.  The  gospel  has  put 
its  veto  upon  stationary  religion.  "  The 
measure  of  our  desire  for  good,"  says 
Archbishop  Magee,  "  is  the  measure  of 
our  religious  life."  But,  may  we  not 
also  remind  ourselves  that  this  hunger 
and  thirst  is  not  a  selfish  thing;  it 
cannot  be  that,  or  Christ  could  not 
have  blessed  it.  The  sure  token  that 
we  have  the  love  of  it  in  our  hearts  is 
the  burning  desire  to  see  it  triumphant 
in  the  hearts  of  others. 

II.  The  promised  reward. — "They 
shall  be  filled."  Christ  cannot  mean 
that  the  sacred  craving  shall  be 
appeased  in  the  sense  that  all  aspira- 
tions shall  come  to  an  end,  and  the 
longing  which  is  so  blessed  shall  never 
be  felt  again.  Satiety  is  not  to  be  the 
outcome  of  man's  holiest  endeavours : 
the  extinction  of  his  craving  for 
righteousness  for  himself  and  the  world 
would  be  the  worst  calamity  that  could 
befall  him.  And  yet,  paradoxical  as 
Christ's  promise  is,  who  can  say  that 
He  does  not  fulfil  it  1  Those  who  are 
foremost  in  the  craving  for  good,  find 
it  most.  The  promise  reaches  beyond 
the  present.  Its  true  fulfilment 
belongs  to  the  hereafter.  —  Canon 
Duckworth. 

The  reward  of  righteousness. — That 
men  may  be  drawn  to  taste  and  see 
and  understand,  the  Lord  associates 
reward  with  righteousness.  The  Lord 
would  have  men  love  righteousness, 
but  how  are  they  to  love  it  without 
being  acquainted  with  it  ?  How  are 
they  to  go  on  loving  it  without 
a  growing  knowledge  of  it  ?  To 
draw  them  toward  it  that  they  may 
begin  to  know  it,  and  to  encourage 
them  when  assailed  by  the  disappoint- 
ments that  accompany  endeavour,  He 
tells  them  simply  a  truth  concerning 
it — that  in  the  doing  of  it  there  is  great 
reward.  Let  no  one  start  with  dismay 
at  the  idea  of  a  reward  of  righteous- 
ness, saying  virtue  is  its  own  reward. 
Is  not  virtue,  then,  a  reward  1  Is  any 
other  imaginable  reward  worth  men- 
tioning beside  it  ?    True,  the  man  may, 


after  this  mode  or  that,  mistake  the 
reward  promised  ;  not  the  less  must  he 
have  it,  or  perish.  Who  will  count 
himself  deceived  by  overfulfilment  ? 
Would  a  parent  be  deceiving  his  child 
in  saying,  "  My  boy,  you  will  have  a 
great  reward  if  you  learn  Greek," 
foreseeing  his  son's  delight  in  Homer 
and  Plato — now  but  a  valueless  waste' 
in  his  eyes  ?  When  his  reward  comes, 
will  the  youth  feel  aggrieved  that  it 
is  Greek,  and  not  bank  notes  1 — Geo. 
Macdonald,  LL.D. 

Filled  with  righteousness.  —  To  be 
filled  with  righteousness  will  be  to 
forget  even  righteousness  itself  in  the 
bliss  of  being  righteous,  that  is,  a  child 
of  God.  The  thought  of  righteousness 
will  vanish  in  the  fact  of  righteo^lS- 
ness.  When  a  creature  is  just  what 
he  is  meant  to  be,  what  only  he  is  fit 
to  be  ;  when,  therefore,  he  is  truly 
himself,  he  never  thinks  what  he  is. 
He  is  that  thing;  why  think  about 
it?  It  is  no  longer  outside  of  him 
that  he  should  contemplate  or  desire 
it. — Ibid. 

Ver.  7.  Mercifulness. — These  verses, 
like  the  stairs  of  Solomon's  temple, 
cause  our  ascent  to  the  Holy  of  holies. 
We  are  now  mounting  up  a  step  higher. 
"  Blessed  are  the  merciful,"  etc. 

I.  The  merciful  man  is  a  blessed 
man. — A  curse  hangs  over  the  head  of 
the  unmerciful  man  (Ps.  cix.  6-16). 
But  the  blessings  of  the  Almighty  do 
crown  and  encompass  the  merciful  man 
(2  Sam.  xxii.  26  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  26,  xli.  1). 

1.  What  is  meant  hy  mercifulness  ? — 
It  is  a  melting  disposition,  whereby  we 
lay  to  heart  the  miseries  of  others, 
and  are  ready  on  all  occasions  to  be 
instrumental  for  their  good.  (1)  Love 
and  mercy  difier  somewhat.  Love  is 
like  a  friend  that  visits  them  that  are 
well.  Mercy  is  like  a  physician 
that  visits  only  them  that  are  sick. 
(2)  Mercy  riseth  higher  than  nature  ; 
it  proceeds  from  a  work  of  grace  in 
the  heart. 

2.  The  several  kinds  of  mercy. — 
Mercy  is  a  fountain  that  runs  in  five 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  V. 


streams.  (1)  We  must  be  merciful  to 
the  souls  of  others — (a)  In  pitying 
them.  "  If  I  weep,"  saith  Austin,  "  for 
that  body  from  which  the  soul  is  de- 
parted, how  should  I  weep  for  that 
soul   from   which    God    is    departed." 

(b)  In  advising  and  exhorting  them. 

(c)  In  reproving  refractory  sinners. 
There  is  a  cruel  mercy,  when  we  see 
men  go  on  in  sin,  and  we  let  them 
alone ;  and  there  is  a  merciful  cruelty 
when  we  are  sharp  against  men's  sins, 
and  will  not  let  them  go  to  hell  quietly. 

(d)  In  praying  for  others.  (2)  We 
must  be  merciful  to  the  names  of  others. 
The  ground  of  un mercifulness  to  names 
is  :  (a)  Pride.  It  cannot  endure  to  be 
out-shined.  (b)  Envy.  Envy,  consult- 
ing with  the  devil,  lays  a  train  and 
fetches  fire  .from  hell  to  blow  up  the 
good  name  of  another.  We  may  be  un- 
merciful to  the  names  of  others  (a)  By 
misreporting  them  (Exod.  xxiii,  1). 
(b)  By  receiving  and  repeating  a 
slander  (Lev.  xix.  16).  (c)  By  diminish- 
ing from  their  just  worth  and  dignity 
— making  more  of  their  infirmities  and 
less  of  their  virtues  (James  iv.  11 ).  Un- 
merciful men  know  how  to  boil  a  quart 
to  a  pint,  (d)  By  refraining  from 
vindicating  them  when  we  know  them 
to  be  calumniated,  (e)  By  bearing  false 
witness  against  them.  (3)  We  must  be 
merciful  to  the  estates  of  others.  If 
a  man  be  thy  debtor,  and  Providence 
hath  frowned  upon  him,  that  he  hath 
not  wherewithal  to  pay,  do  not  crush 
him  when  he  is  sinking.  (4)  We  must 
be  merciful  to  the  offences  of  others 
(Prov.  xix.  11;  Acts  vii.  60).  Bishop 
Cranmer  was  of  a  merciful  disposition  ; 
if  any  who  had  wronged  him  came  to 
desire  a  courtesy  of  him  he  would  do 
all  that  lay  in  his  power  for  him, 
insomuch  that  it  grew  to  a  proverb. 
Do  Cranmer  an  injury,  and  he  will  be 
your  friend  as  long  as  he  lives.  (5)  We 
must  be  merciful  to  the  wants  of  others. 
This  the  text  chiefly  intends.  There 
should  be  (a)  A  judicious  consideration 
(Ps.  xli.  1).  Consider :  (i.)  That  it  might 
have  been  your  own  case,  (ii.)  How 
sad  a  condition  poverty  is.     (iii.)  That 

Jbhe  wise  Grod  has  suffered  an  inequality 


in  the  world  because  He  would  have 
mercy  exercised,  (iv.)  How  quickly  the 
balance  of  poverty  may  turn  (Ruth 
i.  21.)  (6)  A  tender  commiseration 
(Isa.  Iviii.  10;  Matt.  xv.  32).  (c)  A 
liberal  contribution  (Deut.  xv.  8 ; 
James  ii.  15,  16). 

II.  The  merciful  man  shall  be  re- 
warded. 

1.  In  this  life. — He  shall  be  blessed 

(1)  In     his     person     (Ps.     xli.     1). 

(2)  In  his  name  (Ps.  cxii.  6).  (3)  In 
his  estate  (Prov.  xi.  25).  (4)  In  his 
posterity  (Ps.  xxxvii.  26).  (5)  In  his 
negotiations  (Deut.  xv.  10).  (6)  With 
long  life  (Ps.  xli.  2). 

2.  In  the  life  to  come. — Remember, 
whatever  alms  you  distribute  (1)  You 
shall  have  good  security  (Prov.  xix.  1 7 ; 
Eccles.  xi.  1  ;  Luke  vi.  38).  (2)  You 
shall  be  paid  with  overplus.  The 
interest  comes  to  infinitely  more  than 
the  principal. — Thomas  Watson. 

The  merciful. — I.  The  source  of 
Christian  mercy. 

1.  Christian  mercy  must  be  carefully 
distinguished  from  natural  tenderness 
of  heart, — We  should  justly  deem  our- 
selves almost  inhuman  if  the  spectacle 
of  distress  were  not  grievous. 

2.  Christian  mercy  is  that  state  of  heart 
which  is  created  by  experience  of  the 
mercy  of  God. — Now  the  mercy  of  God 
differs  from  mere  tenderness  in  two 
respects;  unlike  natural  sensibility, 
which  is  an  unreasoning  impulse,  it  is 
actuated  by  principle ;  and  unlike 
leniency,  which  is  often  vicious,  it  is 
always  just. 

II.  The  operation  of  Christian  mercy. 
— 1.  Negatively,  Christian  mercy  implies 
a  forgiving  disposition. 

2.  In  its  positive  manifestions  Christian 
mercy  operates  in  a  wide  f  eld. — (1)  "  A 
merciful  man  is  merciful  to  his  beast." 
(2)  Yet  kindness  to  animals  is  the 
merest  beginning  of  Christian  mercy. 
To  man  much  more  than  beasts  its 
kindness  extends. 

III.  The  reward  of  Christian  mercy. 
— 1.  A  merciful  man  has  the  joy  of 
dispensing  blessing.  He  dwells  among 
his    neighbours    like    God's   sunlight. 

35 


CHAP.  \r.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


2.  A  merciful  man  has  his  supreme 
reward  in  receiving  blessing.  "  Blessed 
are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain 
mercy."  They  shall  obtain  mercy  from 
men  because  they  have  spent  them- 
selves for  others.  Moreover,  God  blesses 
the  merciful  man.  3.  In  acquiring  a 
habit  of  mercifulness  a  man  gains 
likeness  to  the  Holiest ! — W.  J.  Woods, 
B.A. 

The  merciful. — The  first  flower  that 
grows  on  the  tree  of  a  righteous  life 
is  the  grace  of  mercy. 

I.  A  Godlike  quality. — The  word 
mercy  among  the  Jews  signified  two 
things,  the  pardon  of  injuries  and 
almsgiving.  The  word  in  Latin  is 
very  expressive,  misericordia,  composed 
of  two  words  miseria,  misery,  and  cor, 
heart ;  meaning  a  heart  touched  and 
pained  at  the  misery  of  another,  a 
tender  heart.  There  is  implied, 
therefore  : 

1.  An  object  in  distress. — Distress 
arising  from  a  suffering  body,  an  anxious 
mind,  and  a  guilty  conscience. 

2.  A  disposition  of  the  heart. — The 
merciful  enter  into  the  miseries  of 
their  fellow-creatures. 

3.  A  practical  purpose. — It  is  not  a 
mere  sentimental  tenderness ;  it  is  not 
a  mere  pity  over  the  world  in  misery, 
nor  merely  a  lively  emotion  at  distress  : 
but  it  is  a  practical  love  which  energises 
the  faculties,  stirs  every  limb,  and 
grasps  every  opportunity  to  serve 
humanity. 

4.  A  universal  duty. — "  Merciful," 
not  to  any  nation,  party,  sect,  or 
church,  but  to  all,  irrespective  of  creed 
or  colour. 

II.  A  reciprocal  reward. — Mercy  is 
not  purchased  at  the  price  of  mercy. 
That  is,  we  cannot  plead  the  exercise 
of  mercy  to  others  as  giving  us  any 
claim  upon  so  undeserved  a  blessing, 
but  we  remove  out  of  the  way  an 
insuperable  barrier  to  the  obtaining 
of  God's  mercy  by  being  merciful. — 
J.  Harries, 

The  merciful  obtaining  mercy. — 
Mercy  cannot  get  in  when  mercy  goes 

86 


not  out.  The  outgoing  makes  way  for 
the  incoming.  God  takes  the  part  of 
humanity  against  the  man.  The  man 
must  treat  men  as  he  would  have  God 
treat  him  (vi.  14,  xxv.  40).  But  the 
demand  for  mercy  is  far  from  being  for 
the  sake  only  of  the  man  who  needs 
his  neighbour's  mercy ;  it  is  greatly 
more  for  the  sake  of  the  man  who 
must  show  the  mercy.  It  is  a  small 
thing  to  a  man  whether  or  not  his  neigh- 
bour be  merciful  to  him ;  it  is  life  or 
death  to  him  whether  or  not  he  be 
merciful  to  his  neighbour.  The 
greatest  mercy  that  can  be  shown  to 
man  is  to  make  him  merciful ;  there- 
fore, if  he  will  not  be  merciful,  the 
mercy  of  God  must  compel  him  thereto. 
The  reward  of  the  merciful  is  that  by 
their  mercy  they  are  rendered  capable 
of  receiving  the  mercy  of  God — yea, 
God  Himself,  who  is  Mercy. — Geo. 
Macdonald,  LL.D. 

Ver.  8.  Hea/rt  purity. — I.  Heart 
purity. 

1.  Its  nature. — It  is  a  sacred,  refined 
thing,  standing  diametrically  opposite 
to  whatsoever  defileth.  We  must  dis- 
tinguish :  (1)  There  is  a  primitive  purity, 
which  is  in  God  originally  and  essentially 
as  light  in  the  sun.  (2)  A  created  purity. 
Thus  holiness  is  in  the  angels  and  was 
once  in  Adam.  (3)  An  evangelical 
purity.  A  face  may  be  said  to  be  fair 
which  hath  some  freckles  in  it.  Where 
there  is  a  study  of  purity,  and  a  loathing 
ourselves  for  our  impurity,  this  is  to 
be  pure  in  heart.  Civility  is  not 
purity;  nor  is  profession.  Purity 
consists  in,  (a)  rectitude  of  mind,  a 
prizing  holiness  in  the  judgment, 
\b)  conformity  of  will,  an  embracing  of 
of  holiness  in  the  affections. 

2.  Its  subject. — The  heart.  Purity  of 
heart  is  the  main  thing  in  religion ; 
there  can  be  no  purity  of  life  without  it. 

3.  Its  reasons. — (1)  It  is  called  for  in 
Scripture  (1  Pet.  i.  16).  (2)  We  are 
filthy  and  cursed  before  purity  is  wrought 
in  us.  (3)  None  but  the  pure  in  heart 
are  interested  in  the  covenant  of  grace 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  25).  (4)  Purity  is  the 
end  of  our  election  (Eph.  i.  4 ;  Eom. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


viii.  29.)  (5)  Purity  is  the  end  of  our 
redemption  (Tit.  ii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19). 
(6)  If  the  heart  be  not  pure  we  differ 
nothing  from  a  pharisaical  purity 
(Matt,  xxiii.  25).  (7)  The  heart  is 
the  chief  seat  of  God's  residence  (Isa. 
Ivii.  15).  (8)  If  the  heart  be  holy  all 
is  holy. 

4.  Its  signs. — (1)  A  sincere  heart 
is  a  pure  heart.  (2)  A  pure  heart 
breathes  after  purity.  (3)  A  pure 
heart  abhors  all  sin.  (4)  Avoids  the 
appearance  of  evil.  (5)  Performs  holy 
duties  in  a  holy  manner.  (6)  A  pure 
heart  will  have  a  pure  life.  The  clock 
hath  not  only  its  motion  within,  but 
the  finger  moves  without  upon  the 
dial.  (7)  A  pure  heart  is  so  in  love 
with  purity  that  nothing  can  draw 
him  off  from  it. 

5.  Its    necessity. — It  is    necessary : 

(1)  In  respect  of  ourselves.  He  who  had 
the  leprosy  whatsoever  he  touched  was 
unclean.  A  foul  hand  defiles  the  purest 
water ;  an  impure  heart  defiles  prayers, 
sacraments,  etc.  (2)  In  respect  of  God. 
The  holy  God  and  the  sinner  cannot 
dwell  together.  (3)  In  regard  of  the 
angels.  What  should  unholy  hearts 
do  among  those  pure  angelical  spirits  ? 

(4)  In  regard  of   the  saints  glorified. 

(5)  In  regard  of  heaven. 

6.  Its  means. — (1)  Often  look  into 
the  Word  of  God  (John  xv.  3,  xvii.  17). 

(2)  Go   to   the   bath   (Zech.   xiii.    1). 

(3)  Get  faith  (Acts  xv.  9).  (4)  Breathe 
after  the  Spirit.  "  The  Holy  Spirit." 
Compared  to  fire,  wind,  water.  (5)  Take 
heed  of  familiar  converse  and  inter- 
course with  the  wicked.  (6)  Walk 
with  them  that  are  pure.  (7)  Wait  at 
the  posts  of  wisdom's  doors.  Keverence 
the  Word  preached.  (8)  Pray  for  heart 
purity. 

II.  The  great  incentive  to  heart 
purity. — "  They  shall  see  God."  I.  In 
this  life,  i.e.  spiritually,  by  the  eye  of 
faith  (Heb.  xi.  27).  2.  In  the  life  to 
come.  This  will  be  the  heaven  of 
heaven;  the  diamond  in  the  ring. 
This  sight  of  God  in  glory  is  partly 
intellectual  and  partly  corporeal,  i.e.d. 
we  shall  with  bodily  eyes  behold  Jesus 
Christ,  through  whom  the  glory  of  God, 


His  wisdom,  holiness,  mercy,  shall  shine 
forth  to  the  soul.  Put  a  back  of  steel 
to  the  glass,  and  you  may  see  a  face 
in  it;  so  the  human  nature  of  Christ 
is,  as  it  were,  a  back  of  steel,  through 
which  we  may  see  the  glory  of  God. — 
Thomas  Watson. 

Purity  of  heart. — Purity  of  heart 
stands  in  direct  opposition  to  external 
affectations. 

I.  The  quality  extolled. — Purity. 
The  word  includes — 1.  Absence  of  the 
corrupt.     2.  The  presence  of  the  pure. 

II.  The  seat  of  purity. — "  In  heart." 
The  heart  here  is  set  forth  as  the  centre 
of  our  spiritual  being;  that  inward 
part  of  man  which  comprehends  the 
mind  and  soul  with  all  their  faculties, 
affections,  motives,  inclinations,  and 
purposes;  "out  of  it  are  the  issues  of 
life."  Hence,  according  to  the  nature 
and  character  of  the  fountain  will  be 
the  character  of  the  stream.  The 
heart  may  be  compared  to  a  reservoir 
which  supplies  a  large  town  with  its 
hundreds  of  streets  and  thousands  of 
houses.  The  w^ater  is  conveyed  by  some 
thousands  of  pipes.  If  the  water  be 
pure  in  the  reservoir  it  will  be  conveyed 
in  its  purity  through  the  pipes  to  the 
inhabitants  ;  but  if  turbid  there,  it  will 
be  impure  at  its  destination.  The 
heart  is  the  reservoir  from  which  life 
flows.  The  mouth,  hands,  feet,  looks, 
actions,  etc.,  are  the  pipes.  If  the 
heart  is  pure,  purity  will  be  manifested 
in  life. 

III.  The  great  favour  attendant  on 
purity  of  heart. — "Shall  see  God." 
Your  best  and  bosom  friends  are  not 
always  seen  by  the  natural  eye.  You 
see  them  best  in  their  kindness,  good- 
ness, and  faithfulness.  Learn  here : 
1 .  That  purity  is  the  only  condition  of 
true  spiritual  insight.  2.  That  purity  is 
the  only  true  condition  of  fellowship  vnth 
God.  3.  Purity  of  heart  is  the  only 
way  to  true  happiness  and  to  heaven. — 
J,  Harries, 

The  strength  of  purity. — I.  Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart. — By  that  limita- 
tion our   Lord   no  doubt    designed  to 

87 


CHAP.  V, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW 


exclude  from  His  benediction  those 
whose  purity  was  the  miserable  purity 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  But 
surely  He  meant  also  to  distinguish 
the  secret  purity  of  the  soul  from  the 
outward  purity  of  act.  There  is  im- 
purity of  act,  there  is  impurity  of 
speech;  and  if  a  man  be  guiltless  of 
these  he  escapes  the  censure  of  the 
strictest  moralist.  Yet  such  innocence 
is  not  enough  to  satisfy  the  rule  of 
Christ,  whose  words,  according  to  His 
wont,  penetrate  to  the  hidden  springs 
of  character  and  conduct. 

II.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the 
blessing  promised  to  the  pure  in  heart 
— that  they  shall  see  God  ? — I  do  not 
take  it  to  refer  to  any  reward  that 
shall  be  bestowed  after  death.  It  is 
true  that  those  who  attain  to  eternal 
life  will  dwell  in  the  presence  of  God. 
They  will  see  the  invisible  God,  in  a 
sense  inscrutable  to  us,  but  plainly 
different  from  any  sense  in  which  a 
man  can  be  said  to  see  God  now.  But, 
so  interpreted,  the  blessing  would  lose 
some  of  its  peculiar  appropriateness  to 
the  virtue  to  which  it  is  attached ; 
and  such  an  interpretation  will  be 
incongruous  with  the  other  beatitudes. 
Let  us  ask,  then,  who  are  they  who  in 
this  life  see  God  ?  Now  and  then, 
sometimes  in  our  reading,  sometimes, 
thank  God,  in  real  life,  we  meet  with 
men  and  women  who  are  justly  called 
saintly.  Now,  if  you  have  any 
appreciation  of  the  beauty  of  these 
rare  natures,  you  cannot  but  recognise 
that  such  men  may  justly  be  said  to 
see  God,  and  to  see  Him,  not  now  and 
then,  but  constantly.  This  is  a 
metaphor,  indeed,  but  a  simple  one. 
The  beatific  vision  that  comes  to 
common  men  at  rare  intervals  of 
spiritual  exaltation  is  with  these  an 
abiding  presence.  There  is  only  one 
perfect  character,  and  the  men  I  have 
tried  to  describe  have,  no  doubt,  faults, 
if  you  choose  to  look  for  them.  But 
there  is  one  sin  which  it  is  impossible 
to  imagine  in  such  a  nature.  We  are 
certain  that  the  imagination  of  such 
a  man  is  never  tainted  by  an  impure 
thought.     At  the  other  extremity  of 

S8 


the  range  of  human  character  there 
are  men  whose  lives  are  utterly  godless* 
These  men  never  see  God.  That  such 
blindness  is  the  result  of  sin  is  evident. 
But  of  what  sin  especially  ?  I  am  not 
speaking  at  random  when  I  declare 
the  belief  that  no  sin  produces  this 
state  of  mind  so  often  as  the  sin  of 
impurity  —  whether  impurity  of  act 
and  word,  or  the  habit  of  sensual 
imagination.  History  abounds  in  proof 
of  this,  and  especially  the  history  of 
Hterature.  By  some  mysterious  law 
of  our  nature,  impurity  has  a  more 
universal  effect  on  the  soul  than  any 
other  vice.  It  lowers  the  tone,  it 
corrupts  the  whole  tissue,  of  character. 
From  this  pollution  arise  the  mists 
that  obscure  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness 
like  a  November  fog. — G.  A.  Vince^M.A. 

The  vision  of  God. — In  the  middle 
ages,  and  sometimes  since,  men 
who  desired  earnestly  to  see  the 
vision  of  God  strove  to  attain  it  by 
asceticism — that  is,  by  a  sort  of  forced, 
mechanical  purity.  The  mechanism, 
we  believe,  failed,  for  it  was  not 
appointed  of  God,  but  was  a  clumsy 
contrivance  of  men.  Yet  the  attempt 
showed  a  recognition,  however  per- 
verse, of  the  truth  which  Christ  puts 
here  so  beautifully  and  simply.  The 
same  truth  inspired  the  chivalrous 
legend  of  the  Holy  Grail.  Many 
brave  and  worthy  knights  addressed 
themselves  to  the  quest  of  the  Sangreal, 
yearning  to  see  the  vision  of  the  chalice 
that  brimmed  red  with  the  very  blood 
of  God  Incarnate,  and  to  win  the 
mysterious  blessings  which  that  vision 
brought.  But  to  none  was  it  given  to 
accomplish  the  quest  save  to  the  pure 
in  heart.  The  knight  who  could 
sing, 

"  My  strength  is  as  the  strength  of  ten 
Because  my  heart  is  pure  " — 

he  it  was  who  was  sanctified  and  con- 
soled by  the  mystic  vision. — Ibid, 

Purity  of  heart. — I.  Its  nature. 

1.  A  pure  heart  is  one  that  is  simple, 
— A  substance  is  called  pure  when 
it  is  without  admixture,  when  it  is  one 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  V. 


thing,   and  not   two    or  more.     Pure  of  peacemaking.     Peace  is  not  a  single 

gold  is  gold  without  alloy.     Purity  of  advantage,  one  amongst  many  comforts, 

heart    means   that   single  eye  to  the  but    it   is  the   element    in   which   all 

glory  of  God  which  aims,  whether  at  blessings  thrive.     There  is  no  waste  of 

home   or    abroad,  to  be   well-pleasing  energies  like  that  which  takes  place  in 

unto  Him,  works  heartily  as  unto  the  discord.     There  is  nothing  that  wears 

Lord  and  not  unto  men,  and  craves  no  men  like  strife.     Nothing  chills  their 

other   recognition   than   the   promised  hearts  like  it.     There    is    no   trouble 

recompense  from  the  Lord's  own  hand,  like  its  suspense.     It  is  the  nurse  of 

2.  A  pure  heart  is  one  that  is  clean. —  anger,    unfairness,  outrage,    of   pride, 

We  call  wine  pure  when  it  is  without  revenge,  injustice.     Much  in  each  one 

admixture,  but  water,  when  it  is  free  of  us  tends  to    produce    discord,  and 

from  pollution  ;  i.e.d.  a  thing  may  be  much  tends  to  augment  discord  between 

pure  in  the  sense  of  being  unadulterated  others.    But  there  are  some  too  saintly, 

without  being  so  in  the  sense  of  clean-  too  self -forgetful,  to  do  anything  but 

ness.     In  like  manner  a  man's  devotion  deplore    this    waste,    and    labour    to 

to    God    may  be  quite  simple  in   its  prevent  its  increase.     Blessed  are : — 

aims  yet  be  far  from  blameless.      In  L  Those  vjho  do  all  in  their  power 

truth,  when  we  remind  ourselves  that  to  prevent  peace  being  broken. — There 

heart  purity  must  include  cleanness  as  are  such,  not  perhaps  endued  with  the 

well  as  simplicity,  we  are  brought  to  weight  of  character  necessary  to  com- 

a  very  sorry  view  of  human  nature.  pose  a  quarrel,    but   still   full  of    the 

II.  Its  attainment. — 1.  Isnotpossi-  ardent  affections  that  are  very  potent 
ble  to  our  own  unaided  strength.     2.   Yet  in  preventing  quarrels  arising. 

the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  give  a  pure  2.  Those  who  compose  the  strifes  which 

heart  even  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  disturb  their  fellows. 

III.  Its  blessedness.  3.  The  statesrnen  who  seeh  to  main- 

1 .  They  that  are  pure  in  heart  attain  tain  peace  between  the  nations  of  the 
a  holy  faculty. — In  Oriental  language  earth. 

the  highest  felicity  of  a  subject  was  to  4.  Those    who    labour,    and    labour 

see  the  king's  face,  and  so  in  the  court  successfully,  to  unahe  peace  between  man 

of  heaven  the  blessedness  of  the  pure  in  and  God. 

heart  is  to  see  God.     That  is  a  sight  no  11.  Their  blessing^. — They  shall   be 

impenitent  man  craves.     Believer,  you  specially  owned  by  God,  as  full  of  His 

see  God  in  all  His  works.     You  see  own   life  and  Spirit ;  as  the  Divinest 

God     behind     the    various   forms    of  souls  on  earth ;  as  thus  likest  to  God 

suffering    humanity,    in    every   needy  in  heart,  in  feeling.      They  are  sons  of 

child   that  craves   support  and   every  God.     There  is  no  greater  proof  of  our 

piteous  invalid  that  inspires  compassion,  sonship  to  God  than   brotherhood   to 

You   see   God   in  your  domestic  rela-  man.     The  true  children  of  God  are 

tions,  in  the  father  keeping  the  house-  all  marked  on  the  brow,  and  the  love 

hold  and   the  husband  cherishing  the  that    maketh    peace    is    their    divine 

wife.      You   see   God   in  providential  stamp.     The  great  God  is  ceaselessly 

events.      You  see  God  in  the  means  playing  the  peacemaker.     And  peace- 

of  grace.     Above  all,  you  see  God  in  makers   being    children   of    God,   the 

Jesus    Christ,    the   revelation   of    the  promise  proves  that  they  will  be  owned 

Father.  as  such.     There   are   strange  endorse- 

2.  They  that  are  pure  in  heart  shall  ments  that  come  to  gracious  lives  even 
enjoy  the  beatific  vision.  —  W.  J.  now.  Their  words  carry  strange 
Woods,  B.A.  weight,  as  if  oracles  of  God.     And  yet 

there   is   something   more    than   this. 

Ver.  9.  The  peacemakers. — I.  Those  In  "  that  day  "  the  peacemakers,  more 

blessed. —  If  there  is  need  of  any  grace  than  penitents,  higher  than  servants, 

in  fullest    exercise,  it  is  of  the  grace  shall    be     owned    as   sons,   with    the 

89 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


richest,  most  endeared,  and  delightful 
of  all  welcomes,  as  sons  of  God,  heirs 
of  God,  joint-heirs  with  Christ,  fittest 
of  all  souls  for  His  highest  heavenly- 
work  and  service. — Richard.  Glover. 

The  peacemakers  and  their  privilege. 
—I.  The  description  of  the  virtue 
itself. — As  to  the  virtue  of  peace- 
making, in  it  our  Lord  meets  with 
another  of  the  wrong  dispositions  of 
mind  His  hearers  were  prepossessed  with 
concerning  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  ; 
for  they  fancied  it  would  be  a  fierce 
and  warlike  kingdom.  In  these  words 
our  Saviour  acquaints  them  that  it 
was  men  of  quiet  and  peaceable  princi- 
ples and  practices,  and  studious  to 
advance  the  same  among  others,  who 
were  the  fittest  subjects  of  that 
heavenly  kingdom.  The  whole  duty 
of  peacemaking  is  reduced  to  this — 
to  consider  and  put  in  practice  such 
methods  of  peacemaking  as  are  lawful 
in  themselves,  and  suited  to  that  station 
which  we  hold  in  the  world. 

II.  The  meaning  of  being  called 
the  children  of  God.  —  1.  What  is 
meant  by  being  the  childi'en  of  God  ? 
In  Scripture  they  are  figuratively 
denominated  the  children  of  any  person, 
who  resemble  that  person  in  his 
qualities,  good  or  bad ;  thus  the 
children  of  Abraham  are  they  who 
imitate  the  faith  of  Abraham ; 
children  of  Belial  are  wicked  men,  who 
take  after  a  wicked  person.  In  this 
sense  a  child  of  God  is  one  who  imitates 
God  (see  Luke  vi.  35).  Another  notion 
of  it  is  they  who  are  beloved  of  God 
(Luke  XX.  36).  2.  What  is  it  to  be 
called  the  children  of  God  ?  This  may 
denote  (1)  the  honourable  esteem  such 
persons  meet  with  among  good  men  in 
this  world  ;  (2)  the  favourable  appro- 
bation of  God  himself,  with  the  rewards 
of  grace  here,  and  glory  hereafter. 

III.  How  this  virtue  entitles  us  to 
such  a  promise. 

1.  This  temjyer  makes  its  resemble 
God. — Martial  men  we  call  the  sons 
of  Mars ;  voluptuous  men  the  sons 
of  Venus ;  learned  men  the  sons  of 
Apollo;    so   peaceable   men  the  sons 

90 


of  God.  One  of  the  titles  God  takes 
to  Himself  is  the  God  of  Peace ;  Christ 
is  called  the  Prince  of  Peace ;  and 
therefore  peacemakers  are  the  sons  of 
this  God.  Again,  as  one  great  part 
of  God's  work  is  to  reconcile  us  to 
Himself,  so  another  part  of  it  is  to 
reconcile  us  to  one  another. 

2.  Peaceableness  and  peacemaking 
dispose  us  for  the  reception  of  those  graces 
which  are  the  peculiar  characters  of  the 
children  of  God  here,  and  for  that  eternal 
happiness  which  is  prepared  for  them,  in 
heaven  (see  e.g.  Ps.  xxv.  9). 

3.  The  inheritance  due  to  God's 
children  is  promised  to  the  peaceable 
(Ps.  cxxxiii.  3). — Among  the  things 
which  exclude  from  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  are  hatred,  variance,  emulations, 
etc.  (Gal.  v.  20).^-Jas.  Blair j  M.A. 

The  peacemaker.  —  John  Dickin- 
son, Esq.,  of  Birmingham,  was  often 
called,  by  way  of  distinction,  "  the 
peacemaker " ;  and  such  was  his 
anxiety  to  keep  the  bonds  of  peace 
from  being  broken,  such  was  his 
solicitude  to  heal  the  breach  when 
made,  that  he  would  stoop  to  any  act 
but  that  of  meanness,  make  any  sacri- 
fice but  that  of  principle,  and  endure 
any  mode  of  treatment,  not  excepting 
even  insult  and  reproach.  From  the 
high  estimate  in  which  his  character 
was  held,  he  was  often  called  upon  to 
act  as  umpire  in  cases  of  arbitration ; 
and  it  was  but  rarely,  if  ever,  that  the 
equity  of  his  decisions  was  impeached. 
On  one  occasion,  two  men  were  dis- 
puting in  a  public-house  about  the 
result  of  an  arbitration,  when  a  third 
said,  "  Had  John  Dickinson  anything 
to  do  with  it  ?  "  "  Yes,"  was  the  reply. 
"  Then  all  is  right,  I  am  sure  ;  "  and  in 
this  opinion  the  whole  party  concurred, 
and  the  disputation  ceased. — Biblical 
Museum. 

Vers.  10-12.  The  persecuted. — The 
last  crowns  the  series  of  the  beati- 
tudes. From  poverty  to  crucifixion, 
the  Saviour's  life  unfolded,  exhibiting 
all  the  graces,  activities,  and  experi- 
ences here  commended.      He  expects 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  V. 


that  the  new  life  which  begins  in  the  faggots  were  lighted  beneath  him. 
hearts  of  the  disciples  in  poverty  of  As  Argyle  laid  his  head  upon  the 
spirit  will  grow  till  it  reaches  that  block  his  physician  found  his  pulse 
vigour  of  holiness,  mercy,  and  useful-  full  and  calm  as  in  his  usual  health, 
ness  which  finds  a  cross  and  has  power  The  persecuted  for  righteousness  have 
to  bear  it.  habitually  reached  a  consolation,  a 
I.  Those  blessed. — A  little  thought  strength,  a  rapture,  which  showed 
will  show  how  constant  must  be  the  that  theirs  was  in  very  deed  the  king- 
antagonism  of  the  world  to  sanctity,  dom  of  heaven, 
for  observe : —  2.  This    bliss   is   enhanced    by    the 

1.  Every  saint  of  God  is  a  ^^  disturber  blessed  influence  they  exert :  they  rank 
of  Israel." — He  is  an  embodied  con-  with  the  prophets  when  they  share  their 
science.  His  character  is  a  law  of  God  fate. — The  glory  of  the  prophets  was 
brought    nigh    to    men.      His    purity  their  usefulness. 

reproves,  his  honour  shames  men.    The  3.  Great  is  their  reward  in  heaven. 

gravity   of  his  purpose  and  his  aims  — We    are    children    of    immortality, 

seems  to  light  up  the  solemnities   of  and    the    main    question    of    our    life 

the  unseen  world.  is    what    that    immortality    is    going 

2.  Every  saint  of  God  offends  the  to  prove.  For  all  goodness  there  is 
pride  as  well  as  disturbs  the  peace  of  reward,  but  for  the  persecuted  there 
men. — It  is  no  small  hatred  that  is  "  great  reward."  Their  large  souls 
envious  evil  feels  to  goodness.  "  Away  expand  above,  and  for  highest  ruler- 
with  Him,"  etc.  ship  and  divinest  joys  find  ample  fitness 

3.  True  saintliness   will   always    be  within  them. — Richard  Glover, 
an  aggressive  thing.     Where  it  is  such 

its  activities  arouse  enmity. — "  I  came  Suffering    for     the     trutKs    sake. — 

not  to  send  peace,"  etc.     The  Christian  I.  We    cannot    be    servants    of    the 

has  to  be  the  reformer  in  a  world  of  truth  and  of  righteousness — in  other 

vested  interests.     "This  our  craft  is  words,  we  cannot  be  the  servants  of 

in  danger."    There  is  but  little  persecu-  Jesus — without  SUiFering. — This  ending 

tion  experienced  by  the  church  of  God  of  the  beatitudes  looks  like  a  paradox, 

to-day.      Why  ?      Partly,    no    doubt.  How  does  it  come  to  pass  that  men  of 

because   the   Saviour's   authority  per-  broken   heart,    full   of    meekness   and 

vades  society,  and  the  evils  which  we  forbearance,  can   provoke  the  enmity 

oppose    are    feebler,    more    apologetic  of  their  fellows  ?     There  is  an  absolute 

and  less  dominant  than  in  other  days.  contrariety  between  such  as  are  poor  in 

But  has  lukewarmness  not  something  spirit   and    all    that   surround   them, 

to  do  with  our  comfort  ?  The  world  proceeds  on  directly  opposite 

4.  There  are  those  faithful  ones  vjho,  in  principles.  Its  delight  is  in  haughty 
matters  of  philanthropy  or  social  or  civil  opulence  and  proud  self-contentment, 
good^  plead  for  causes  with  which  they  and  here  we  have  humility  and  self- 
deem  the  well-being  of  men  is  bound  up,  renouncement.  If  a  man  is  raised  up 
but  for  causes  which  are  unpopular.  who   fully   realises   this   holy  ideal,  a 

II.    Their  blessing. — 1.  Theirs  is  the  man  who  really  shows  what  love  is,  by 

kingdom  in  actual  blessed  participation  laying  down  his  life  for  his  brethren, 

of  its  grace  and   comforts. — By  their  a  man  answering  in  every  respect  to 

persecution  all  powers  of  the  soul  are  the   first   beatitudes,     it   will    be   im- 

strengthened,  and  faith  makes  sure  of  possible  to  reproach  and  persecute  him 

its  ground.     Solitude  strengthens  them  enough.      Such  a  Man  appeared,  and 

to  stand  alone.     Nothing  compels  men  He    called     Himself     "  the    Man    of 

to  prove   all   things   so  much   as   the  Sorrows."      The   Son  of  man  sufiered, 

contradiction   of   those   around   them,  not  only  because  of  the  sacred  oracles 

''  Methinks  they   strew   roses   at  my  which  predicted  His   death,  but  also, 

feet,"  said  one  James  Bainam,  as  the  and  especially,  because  of  the  natural 

91 


63RAP,  V,       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


antipathy  existing  between  the  world  into  sinful  compliance.      In  a  word,  it 

and  God,  between  darkness  and  light,  requires  strength  as  well  as  gentleness, 

You   are    witnesses   for   Christ ;    you  and  that  principles  be  maintained  in 

must   declare   the   divine   message   in  spite  of  persecution.    2.  It  has  a  distinct 

season  and  out  of  season ;  and  if,  in  peculiarity,  inasmuch  as  the  seven  pre- 

doing   this,   you    make   men    feel   its  ceding     words    were     blessings    upon 

urgent    character,    you    are    sure    to  character,   whereas    this    affirms    the 

meet,   first  with    disdain,    then    with  blessedness   of    a   condition   in    which 

hatred,  and  lastly  with  persecution.  that  character  is  exercised.     3.  Very 

II.  Suffering  is  a  source  of  happi-  surprising  is  this  last  of  the  beatitudes, 

ness. — "  Happy  are  ye,  when  men,"  etc.  On  the  top  of  the  sevenfold  delineation 

1.  It  is  a  happiness  to  suffer  for  of  character  which  has  marched  as  to 
a  noble  cause.  the  music  of  blessings,  down  through 

2.  The  fact  that  suffering  for  truth  the  valleys  of  poverty,  mourning,  and 
brings  vnth  it  its  oion  reward  is  also  meekness,  and  up  across  the  highlands 
a  reason  for  real  joy,  as  it  ensui^es  of  right  desire,  and  mercy,  and  purity, 
the  triumph  of  our  cause. — It  is  a  and  peacemaking  —  this  intimation 
noble  and  powerful  evidence  in  favour  that  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  shall 
of  truth  that  it  is  loved  to  such  a  nevertheless  be  persecuted,  reads  like 
degree.      If  the  children   of  darkness  an  anti-climax. 

cast  you  out  in  their  rage,  the  children  I.  The  subjects  of  the  beatitude. — 

of   light,  who   are   seeking  it  with  a  1.  The  Apostles  and  early  disciples  of 

sincere  heart,  come  to  you,  attracted  Jesus    are    first     intended. — "  Blessed 

by  the  strength  of   your  convictions.  are    ^/e."      The    change    of     pronoun 

3.  ^'- Your  reward  is  great  in  heaven.'^ —  shows  the  earnestness  of  the  Speaker 
The  cross  leads  to  glory.  "  Our  bonds,"  in  affirming  a  difficult  doctrine,  marks 
we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Martyrs,  also  an  additional  directness  of  appeal, 
*'are  the  jewels  of  our  holy  betrothal  but  especially  indicates  a  particular 
to  Christ,  and  our  crown  blooms  on  application  of  the  matter  in  hand  to 
the  thorns  which  lacerate  our  brows.  the  persons  actually  addressed. 
When  the  winter  is  past,  and  the  storm  2.  What  was  foretold  of  Apostles  in 
is  over,  the  flowers  will  appear."  particular  is  in  some  measure  true  of  all 

4.  This  triumph  of  truth  in  heaven  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom. — If  we  look 
is  not  enough.  It  must  have  its  at  the  analysis  of  persecution  which 
glorioles  revenge  on  the  very  theatre  our  blessed  Lord  gives  in  the  passage 
of  its  humiliations  and  conflicts. — The  under  review,  it  is  notable  that  actual 
world  must  see  how  mistaken  it  was  in  brute-force  persecution  is  neither  the 
rejecting  it,  and  one  day  it  will  be  first  nor  the  last  item,  but  that  these  are 
forced  to  exclaim,  "  O  Galilean,  Thou  "  reproach  "  and  "  evil-speaking,"  both 
has  overcome  !  "  The  last  word  of  cruelties  of  the  tongue.  To  be  stung 
history  must  belong  to  God,  other-  to  death  by  insects  is  probably  worse 
wise  God  would  not  be  God. — E.  De  than  to  be  felled  by  the  leaping 
Pressense,  D.D.  tiger. 

II.  The  conditions  of  the  beatitude. 
Sufferers  for  righteousness.—!.  The  —The  persecution  must  be  unmerited. 
eighth  beatitude  has  a  corrective  —Certain  of  the  early  Christians  de- 
function,  guarding  against  misuse  of  nounced  themselves  to  the  heathen 
the  previous  sayings.  Thus  Chry-  magistrates  that  they  might  win  the 
sostom  remarks,  *'  This  follows  the  crown  of  martyrdom ;  but  that  was 
beatitude  upon  the  peacemakers,  lest  suicide;  not  receiving  the  crown,  but 
we  should  imagine  peace  at  any  price  snatching  it.  In  like  manner  there 
to  be  a  blessing,"  and  we  may  add,  it  '  are  foolish  people  to-day  who  obtrude 
warns  us  not  to  allow  our  humility  to  de-  their  religious  notions  upon  their  neigh- 
generate  in  to  servility,  nor  our  meekness  hours  with  an  offensive  manner  which 
92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


may  earn  them  persecution,  but  not  a 
part  in  Christ's  blessing. 

III.  The  benefits  of  the  beatitude. 
— 1.  In  this  life  they  who  are  persecuted 
for  Chrisfs  sake  are  blessed.  —  The 
Scriptures  are  never  ashamed  to  en- 
courage righteous  men  with  hopes  of 
reward. 

2.  In  the  life  to  come  "  great  is 
their  reward  in  heaven." — The  phrase 
is  plainly  used  to  intimate  a  high 
degree  even  of  celestial  bliss. — W.  J. 
Woods,  B.A. 

Ver.  10.  Persecution. — I.  The  con- 
dition of  the  godly  in  this  life. — 
They  are  persecuted.  It  is  a  saying 
of  Ambrose,  there  is  no  Abel  but  hath 
his  Cain.     Put  the  cross  in  your  creed. 

1.  What  is  meant  hy  persecution  ? 
— ^To  vex  and  molest,  sometimes  to 
prosecute  another,  to  arraign  him  at 
the  bar,  and  to  pursue  him  to  death. 

2.  The  several  kinds  of  persecution. — 
Twofold,  (1)  of  the  hand;  (2)  of  the 
tongue.  There  have  been  many  pun- 
ished for  clipping  of  coin ;  of  how  much 
sorer  punishment  shall  they  be  thought 
worthy  who  clip  the  names  of  God's 
people  to  make  them  weigh  lighter. 

3.  Why  there  must  be  persecutions. — 

(1)  In  regard  to  God ;  (a)  his  decree 
(1  Thess.  iii.  3).  (6)  His  design,  (i.) 
Trial.  Persecution  is  the  touch -stone 
of  sincerity,  (ii.)  Purity.  The  cross 
is  physic,  it  purgeth  out  pride,  impa- 
tience, love  of  the  world,  etc.  (2).  In 
regard  of  the  enemies  of  the  church 
(Gen.  iii.  15).  Vultures  have  an  anti- 
pathy against  sweet  smells,  so  in  the 
wicked  there  is  an  antipathy  against 
the  people  of  God ;  they  hate  the  sweet 
perfumes  of  their  graces. 

4.  The  chief  persecutions  are  raised 
against  ministers  (ver.  12;  James  v.  10; 
Acts  ix.  15,  16  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6). 

5.  What  that  persecution  is  which 
makes  a  man  blessed. — Not  that  (1) 
when  we  pull  a  cross  upon  ourselves ; 

(2)  when  we  suffer  for  our  offences 
(1  Pet.  iv.  15) ;  (3)  when  we  suffer  to 
keep  up  a  faction.  We  are  blessed  in 
suffering  persecution ;  (1)  when  we 
suffer  in  a  good  cause ;  (2)  when  we 


suffer  with  a  good  conscience  ;  (3)  when 
we  have  a  good  call  (Matt.  x.  18) ;  (4) 
when  we  have  good  ends  in  our  suffer- 
ing, viz.  that  we  may  glorify  God,  set 
a  seal  to  the  truth,  show  our  love  to 
Christ.  The  primitive  Christians  did 
burn  more  in  love  than  in  fire ; 
(5)  when  we  suffer  as  Christians 
(1  Pet.  iv.  16). 

II.  Their  reward  after  this  life. — 
Theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
The  cross  is  a  golden  ladder  by  which 
we  climb  up  to  heaven. — Thos.  Watson. 

Ver.  11.  For  Chrisfs  sake. — Just  as 
when  you  look  at  any  object  through 
coloured  glasses,  the  colour  of  the 
object  seems  to  have  changed  to  the 
colour  of  the  glass ;  in  the  same 
manner  any  disagreeable  duty,  when 
looked  at  through  Christ,  in  the  light 
of  His  marvellous  love  to  us,  will  have 
changed  its  hue,  so  that  we  can  there- 
after contemplate  it  with  pleasure  and 
joy. — S,  Macnaughton,  M.A, 

Ver.  12.  Bejoicing  under  persecution, 
— I.  A  comfortable  direction  when  we 
suffer  for  Christ  or  duty.  "  Pejoice," 
etc.  There  is  no  sort  of  people  con- 
tribute more  to  bring  up  a  bad  report 
on  religion,  than  those  uneasy,  melan- 
choly, discontented  persons,  who  are 
always  fretting  and  repining  at  every 
thing.  They  are  like  the  evil  spies  whom 
Joshua  sent  to  view  the  land  of  Canaan. 

1.  The  nature  and  importance  of 
this  duty  of  rejoicing  when  we  suffer 
for  Christ. — The  mirth  of  the  world 
is  commonly  a  vain,  foolish,  and  un- 
reasonable thing,  as  being  either  a 
suppression  of  thought,  under  pretence 
of  laying  aside  all  care,  or  as  occasioned 
by  some  temporary  felicity  and  success 
in  acquiring  a  large  share  of  the 
things  of  this  world.  But  the  rejoicing 
of  the  text  is  a  much  more  solid  and 
serious  thing.  (1)  The  principal  act 
of  this  rejoicing,  and  which  is  the 
foundation  of  all  the  rest,  is  a  pi'evalent 
love  to  God,  which  disposes  us  to  a 
conformity  to  His  blessed  will  in  all 
things,  and  rejoices  in  everything  that 
may  fit  us  for  the  enjoyment  of  Him 

93 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


be  it  ever  so  afflicting  and  grievous  at  the    same    treatment    that   they   met 

present.     (2)  Another  act  of  this  duty  with  from  the  world, 

of  rejoicing,  when  we  are  reviled  and  II.  The  prophets,  notwithstanding 

persecuted   for   Christ's   sake,    is   the  all  their  extraordinary  qualifications, 

great  duty  of  self-resignation  (Matt,  were  reviled,  calumniated,  and  per- 

xxvi.  39).    (3)  Patience  under  troubles,  secuted  in  their  days,  for   doing  their 

(4)  Contentment.     (5)  A  lively  hope  duty. 

of  good  things  to  come  in  a  "future  III.  The  circumstances  of  the  pro- 
state. (6)  From  all  these  results  a  phets  and  those  of  our  Lord's  disciples 
permanency  of  joy  (Ps.  cxii.  4,  6,  7).  were  similar.— 1.  The  prophets  had 
(7)  A  sedate  courage  not  to  be  to  do  with  the  same  perverse  people 
conquered  by  all  the  most  formidable  as  the  Christians  had  to  treat  with, 
things  in  nature  (Pom.  viii.  36).  2.  The  business  of   the  prophets  was 

2.  The  grounds  of  the  duty.— {1)  It  much  the  same  with  that  of  the 
is  a  point  of  honour  thus  cheerfully  to  Christians.  The  prophets  had  an  im- 
suffer  for  Christ  (Acts  v.  41,  ix.  16;  mediate  commission  and  unction  from 
Phil.  i.  29).  (2)  It  will  be  honoured  God  to  go  and  reform  that  sinful 
by  God  with  the  highest  honours  in  people,  the  Jews,  and  prepare  them  for 
heaven.  (3)  It  is  the  greatest  service  the  reception  of  the  Messiah.  Christ's 
which  can  be  done  for  the  church,  disciples  had  the  like  unction  and  com- 
wh  ether  for  propagating  the  faith  mission  to  prepare  people  to  believe  in 
among  infidels  or  for  confirming  true  the  Messiah  already  come.  The  old 
believers.  (4)  It  fits  us  to  set  about  prophets  had  to  contend  with  idolatry 
every  duty  with  courage  and  alacrity,  and  false  prophets    among  the   Jews. 

(5)  It  is  a  good  mark  of  the  right  way  Christians  had  idolatry  to  encounter 
to  heaven  and  happiness.  all  the  world  over,  together  with  the 

3.  The  ways  and  means  to  facilitate  scribes  and  Pharisees  among  the  Jews. 
the  practice  of  it. — (1)  A  lively  faith  in  The  old  prophets  boldly  reproved  vice 
Christ  (John  xiv.  1  ;  1  Pet.  i.  5).  in  all  ranks  of  men.  And  so  our 
(2)  Keeping  a  good  conscience  (2  Cor.  Saviour's  disciples  were  brought  before 
i.  12).  (3)  A  faithful  discharge  of  magistrates  and  kings  for  His  sake, 
great  and  difficult  duties  (James  i.  2  ;  and  with  wonderful  freedom  and  bold- 
Acts  v.  41  ;  Heb.  x.  34).  (4)  A  con-  ness  told  them  their  duty.  The  old 
firmed  sincerity  or  Christian  perfec-  prophets  denounced  God's  judgments 
tion  (2  Cor.  xiii.  11;  Ps.  xcvii.  11).  against  an  impenitent  people  in  their 
(5)  Promoting  the  work  and  service  days,  and  so  did  our  Saviour  and  His 
of  God.  (6)  A  new  prospect  of  the  disciples  denounce  God's  heavy  judg- 
joys  of  heaven  (Pom.  v.  2 ;  2  Tim.  ments,  more  particularly  in  the  de- 
iv.  8).  struction  of  Jerusalem.   3.  The  obstacles 

II.  The  reasons  of  the  direction. —  the  prophets  met  with  were  the  very 

\.  The  greatness  of  the  reward  in  heaven.  same   with    those   of    the    Christians. 

2.  T'he   honourable   rank    which  joyous  And,  therefore,  it  was  but  reasonable 

suffering  for   Christ    gives    on    earth,  to  conclude  their  treatment  would  be 

viz.  the    company  of  the   prophets. —  much  the  same.     The  men  in  power. 

Jas.  Blair,  M.A.  both  in  church  and  state,  were  pos- 
sessed   with    a    spirit    of    pride    and 

Slander. — I  am  getting  rather  proud,  covetousness,   ease  and  luxury,  which 

for   I  see  that  my  character   is   more  was  an  utter  enemy  to  all  reformation, 

and  more  defamed. — Luther,  and  to  all  thoughts  and  notions  of  a 

spiritual  kingdom.     This  was  not  only 

Th^  persecuted  propliets. — I.  It  is  a  worldly,  but  a  bloody  spirit,  employ- 
matter  of  comfort  and  joy  to  be  found  ing  the  utmost  carnal  force  to  with- 
in the  same  way  with  good  men  that  stand  the  truth.  They  had,  both  of 
have  gone  before  us,  and  to  meet  with  them,  to  do  with  the  most  inveterate 
94 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


prejudices  and  prepossessions  of  edn-  beneficial     influence    on    the     society 

cation,  temper,  and  worldly  interest,  around  them.     Wherever  they  might 

against  the  truth,  backed  with  force,  dwell,  they  would  be  the  salt  of  the 

power,  and  authority ;  and  they  were  land.      The  Latin  church,  in  its  ma- 

both  of  them  destitute  of  any  other  terialistic  fashion,  employs  actual  salt 

means   to  promote  the  truth,  except  in  the  baptismal  service.     The  priest 

the  power  and  demonstration  of  the  puts  it  into  the  mouth  of  the  person. 

Spirit.     So  that  it  might  well  be  ex-  adult  or  infant,  who  is  baptised.     It  is 

pected  the  same  attempts  upon  the  same  an  unauthorised  ceremony ;  but  it  is  a 

sort  of  people  would  have  the  same  ef-  sort  of  traditional  witness  to  the  obli- 

fects — namely,  to  raise  a  great  storm  of  gation  lying  on  all  Chiistians  to  have 

persecution  against  the  reformers.  in  themselves  that  which  salt  might 

IV.  Inferences  with  relation  to  our  symbolise.     Our  Lord  requires  that  all 

duty  may  be  drawn  both  from  the  who  follow  Him  shall  have  that  style 

good  examples   of   the   courage  and  of    character   which    savours    of    the 

patience  of  the  persecuted  prophets,  kingdom   of  heaven,  and  so  exert  a 

and   from   the   bad   examples  of  the  morally  antiseptic  influence  on  others. 

persecuting   world. — 1.  Let   us  learn  Noah,  as  a  just  man,  was  salt  in  the 

an  honesty,  courage,  and  steadfastness  old  world,  but  he  was  not  enough  to 

in   doing  our  duty.     2.  The  patience  save   mankind,   when   "  all   flesh   had 

of  the  prophets  under  the  cross  is  an  corrupted   his   way  upon   the   earth." 

example  well  worthy  of  our  imitation.  Lot  was  as  salt  among  the  dwellers  in 

3.  Though   they  were    persecuted    in  Sodom,  when,  "  in  seeing  and  hearing, 

their  own  time,  yet  all  men  became  he  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day 

quickly  sensible  of  the  unjust  ill-usage  to  day  with  their  lawless  deeds  ;  "  but 

they  had,   and  therefore   blessed   and  it  was  more  than  he  could  do  to  stay 

honoured  their  memories. — Jas.  Blair ^  that  terrible  corruption.    Ten  righteous 

M,A.  men  might  have  saved  the  city,  but 

not  one.     The  Lord  Jesus,  purposing 

Ver.  13.  The  metaphor  of  salt, — The  to  effect  a  vast  and  permanent  moral 

point  of  the  illustration  rests  on  the  change,  not  only  in  the  land  of  Judaea, 

power  of  salt,  coarse  or  fine,  to  pre-  but  in  the  corrupt  Gentile  world,  set 

serve  animal  tissues  from  decay.     This  Himself  to  provide  a  sufficient  quantity 

substance  was  taken  by  the  ancients  of   salt.      A   candid   view   of   the   in- 

as   an    emblem   of   wit    and    piquant  fluence  of  Christianity  on  that  wicked 

wisdom ;  but  our  Lord  gave  it  a  larger  world  into  which  Apostles  and  Evan- 

and    deeper    meaning.      He   had   de-  gelists  pushed  their  way,  and  in  which 

scribed  in  the  beatitudes  the  features  the  primitive   churches  were  planted, 

and  elements  of  that  character  which  must   lead   anyone   to   the   conclusion 

should  be  formed  by  His  disciples,  and  that  a  species   of   moral   "  salt "  was 

would  make  them  useful  to  other  men.  then    applied    to   a   society   otherwise 

If  we  may  speak  of  it  as  of  a  tree,  hastening  to  decay ;  and  it  is  important 

its   root   is   in   the   soil   of    meekness  to  remember  that  this  influence  was 

and      humility,     watered      by     godly  exerted    not    by   the    diff'usion    of    a 

sorrow.     Its  strong  stem  is  the  desire  literature,  or    by  the  performance  of 

of    righteousness,   and    its    fruits    are  prodigies,  or  by  the  hand  of  authority, 

mercifulness,  purity  of  heart,  and  the  but  simply  by  the  individual  and  social 

love   of   peace.      The   Master   warned  life  of  men  and  women — a  few  of  high 

His  disciples  that  possession  of  such  a  degree,  but  far  more  in  humble  station, 

character  would  not  gain  for  them  the  and  not  a  few  of  them    slaves — who 

world's  favour.     On  the   contrary,   it  had  some  new  element  of  wisdom  and 

would    provoke    persecution    and    re-  goodness  in  their  minds  and  hearts — 

proach.     But  such  as  had  this  salt  in  who,  in  fact,  had  salt  in  themselves. — 

themselves  could  never  be  without  a  D.  Eraser^  D.D. 

95 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Christians  as  salt. — To  be  salt  of  the 
land  is  to  be  in  the  highest  sense  useful 
to  our  fellow-men. 

I.  Usefulness  is  a  duty. — It  is  the 
end  which  the  Lord  has  in  view  in 
calUng  us  to  be  His  disciples.  He 
teaches  us  that  we  may  teach  others ; 
blesses  us  that  we  may  bless  others. 
This  method  may  be  traced  through  all 
history. 

II.  The  great  secret  of  usefulness 
is  goodness. 

III.  The  faculty  for  usefulness  may 
decay. — Our  Saviour  warned  the  dis- 
ciples against  losing  the  savour  of  salt. 
Those  who  heard  Him  could  be  at  no 
loss  to  understand  the  phrase.  They 
were  aware  tha*t  the  salt  of  Syria, 
when  long  exposed  to  sun  and  air  and 
rain,  became  quite  insipid.  Various 
travellers  have  reported  on  this  in 
modern  times.  And  such  spoilt  salt  is 
good  for  nothing.  It  must  not  be 
thrown  on  land,  for  it  would  blight  its 
fertility.  Nothing  can  be  done  with  it 
but  to  lay  it  as  a  sort  of  rough  gravel 
on  the  roads,  where  it  is  trodden  under 
foot.  So  useless  are  those  Christians 
who  lose  the  savour  of  goodness  and 
wisdom  from  on  high,  having  a  form 
of  godliness  without  the  power. — Ibid. 

The  citizens  of  the  kingdom  as  salt  of 
the  earth. — It  is  said  that  "salt  and 
sunlight "  are  the  two  great  essentials 
which  keep  the  world  alive  and  pure. 
So  spiritually,  in  the  text,  Christ  sets 
forth  His  disciples  as  "  salt,"  exercising 
an  influence  for  good  on  the  world. 

I.  The  disciples'  peculiar  character. 
"  Salt." — There  is  implied  :  \.  A  sad 
fact,  a  corrupted  condition.  2.  A  moral 
antidote.  3.  The  efficiency  of  the  means 
used.  This  influence  is  exerted  :  (1)  In 
conserving  the  good.  Salt  is  antiseptic. 
It  preserves  flesh  and  some  kind  of 
fruit  from  being  destroyed  by  corrup- 
tion and  decay.  In  the  sacrifices  of 
the  Jewish  law  no  leaven  could  be 
used  and  no  honey,  because  both  were 
liable  to  speedy  fermentation  and  cor- 
ruption, and  could  not,  therefore,  be 
fitting  offerings  to  the  God  of  purity 
and   holiness.     But  in  all   the  meat- 

96 


oflferings — as  in  the  sacred  incense — 
salt  was  used  ;  first,  to  preserve  the 
flesh  ofiered  on  the  altar  from  taint; 
secondly,  to  symbolise  the  enduring 
character  of  the  covenant  of  mercy. 
History  tells  us  that  the  disciples  of 
Christ  were  the  salt  of  the  Roman 
Empire  during  the  evil  days  of  its 
decline,  and  preserved  Christianity  as 
a  moral  force  in  society.  The  heroes 
of  the  Reformation  were  the  salt  of 
England  and  Europe  in  the  fourteenth 
and  fifteenth  centuries,  and  saved  the 
churches  from  a  moral  wreck.  Eng- 
land, Wales,  and  Scotland  are  to-day 
the  homes  of  the  free,  champions  of 
the  slave,  leaders  in  the  van  of  pro- 
gress, civilisation,  and  evangelisation, 
because  of  the  noble,  faithful,  and 
heroic  saints  in  the  past.  (2)  In 
counteracting  the  evil.  Christian  peo- 
ple exercise  a  counteracting  influence 
against  the  moral  corruption  of  society, 
the  world's  selfish  pleasures,  its  de- 
graded lust,  its  trickeries,  and  its  mad 
revelries,  and  they  save  humanity  from 
careless  recklessness,  curse,  and  ruin. 

II.  The  Master's  solemn  warning. 
— *'  If  the  salt  have  lost,"  etc.  Jesus 
Christ  here  implies  : — 

1.  A  possible  false  position. — He  is 
alluding  to  those  who  are  Christians 
and  disciples  in  name  only— the  back- 
slider, the  lukewarm,  and  many  who 
hold  an  outward  profession,  but  have 
no  life  or  power. 

2.  A  possible  deterioration.  —  A 
Christian  may  lose  his  "  first  love  "  and 
his  relish  for  Divine  things.  Christ  de- 
clares— 

3.  A  woeful  consequence. — "  It  is 
good  for  nothing,"  etc. — J.  Harries. 

The  salt  losing  its  savour. — I.  A  sup- 
position— that  the  salt  may  lose  its 
savour.  There  are  two  things  here 
insinuated,  if  not  foretold,  by  our 
Saviour,  which  deserve  serious  con- 
sideration. 1.  That  private  Christians 
may,  by  negligence  and  abuse  of  their 
talents,  lose  all  right  sense  of  religion 
and  virtue.  2.  That  the  Christian 
church  in  general  should  in  time  be 
exceedingly  cor,rupted,  that  that  won- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  v. 


derful  virtue  it  had   to  awaken  and  world."     Christ's  satellites — by  whom, 

reform  the  world,  should  be  lost,  and  in  virtue  of  their  recipient  relations  to 

Christianity  thereby  become  very  con-  Him,  they  hold  forth  the  Christly  light 

temptible.    —  — reflect  it,  and  shed  it  on  men.     As 

II.  The  fatal  consequences  of  this  the  moon  or  stars  reflect  the  light  of 

nnsavouriness.  —  1.     To     Christians  the   sun,   so   the    followers   of    Christ 

themselves.     "  Wherewith  shall  it  be  reflect  His  light ;  teaching  us  : 

seasoned?"      2.  To  the  world.      They  1.  That  the  Christian's  light  is  derived. 

are  then   of  no  manner   of   use,    but  2.  The  Christian  is  a  light-rejlector. 

deservedly  expose    themselves   to   the  — The  Christian  life  reflects  the  great 

utmost  contempt.     "  It  is  thenceforth  Exemplar  and  Saviour  of  the  world, 

good  for  nothing,"  etc. — James  Blair,  Christ  shines  through  His  people. 

M.A,  3.  The  Christian  is  a  light-diffuser. 

II.  The  moral  obligation  enforced. 

Scatter  it. — Every   farmer   will   tell  — "Let  your  light,"  etc.     The  words 

you    that    seed-corn    is    of    no    value  imply  that  eflbrt  is  necessary  to  develop 

until    it    is    planted,    and    his    heap  the  proper  influence  of  the  Christian 

of    fertilisers  is  of  no  use  until  it  is  character.     Either  from  want  of  moral 

scattered  over  the  soil.     Jesus  Christ  courage,  or  want  of  fidelity  to  truth 

tells  his  disciples  that  they  are  the  salt  and  profession,  or  spiritual  indifference, 

of   the  earth,  but  everything  depends  we  may  hide  our  light  under  a  bushel, 

upon  its  being  put  into  the  right  place.  1.  Shine. — That  which  does  not  shine^ 

A  barrel  of  salt  set  in  the  corner  of  a  is  not  light. 

butcher's  stall  is  of  no  more  use  than  2.  Shine  brightly. — "  So  shine."    The 

a  barrel  of  sawdust ;  it  must  be  brought  '  light  of  some  of  the  stars  is  not  large 

into   contact   with   every  inch  of  the ,  in   volume,    yet    very    bright.       It   is 

meat  in  order  to  prevent  decomposi- '  not  the  largeness  of  our  endowments 

tioD.     Spiritual  salt  is  of  little  value  we  have  to   consider,   but  the  trans- 

to   the   community   as    long   as   it   is  parent  lustre  of  our  life.     There  should 

barrelled   up    in    a    church,   however  be  nothing  in  us  to  hinder  the  light, 

orthodox  may  be  the  brand  stamped  In   Christian   perfection  or   character 

on  it.     The  salt  must  be  scattered  so  \  that    shines    brightly   there   must   be 

as  to  touch  and  to  season  those  who  seven  prismatic  colours — all  the  beati- 

are  tending  to  moral  corruption.    How  tudes — which   compose   the    pure   ray 

tenderly  did  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  put  of  Christly  light. 

Himself  in  contact  with  the  diseased  3.    Shin^   conspicuously.  —  "A   city 

and  the  depraved  !     The  Book  of  the  that  is  set  on  a  hill,"  etc. 

Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  the  narrative  of  4.  Shine   constantly. — Fitful   Chris- 

unbarrelling  and  scattering  the  salt  in  tians  do  very  little  good.      It  is  not 

communities  infected  with  heathenism,  the   blazing  comet   or   the  wandering 


The  secret  of  the  success  of  the  Salva 
tion  Army  is  just  this;   they  do  not 
barrel   up   the    salt;    they   scatter    it 


star  that  guides  the  mariner ;  but  the 
fixed  star. 

5.  Shine  usefully. — "  Neither  do  men 


where  the  stench  of  depravity  is  the'  light  a  candle    and    put    it   under    a 

worst. — T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.  bushel."      We  do  not   light   a  candle 

in  open  day  or  in  twilight,  and  then 

Vers.  14-16.  The  citizens  of  the  kitig-  put  it  out  when  it  is  dark,  though  in 

dom  as  the  light  of  the  world. — I.  The  religion  this  kind  of  thing  is  frequently 

interesting    metaphor     employed.  —  done,  in  the  presence  of  the  world. 

*'  Light "  is  a  special  type  of  the  Deity.  III.  The  supreme  end   designed. — 

"  God   is  light " — signifying  that  God  "  That  they  may  see  your  good  works, 

is  the  source  of   purity,  beauty,    joy,  and  glorify,"  etc. 

and   glory.      In    the    strictest    sense,  1.  That  the  chief  end  of  the  Christian 

Christ  Himself  is  "  the  Light  of  the  life    is    to    glorify    God.  —  There   are 

^  H  97 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


some  painters  whose  favourite  works 
are  portraits  of  themselves.  There  are 
many  writings  whose  central  figures 
are  the  authors.  Here  God,  not 
self,  is  the  emphatic  end  of  all  our 
actions. 

2.  2%at  such  a  noble  end  in  our  life 
is  manifested  by  "  good  ivorks^ 

3.  That  such  good  works  seen  in  Chris- 
tian people  are  calculated  to  induce  others 
to  gloinfy  God. — J.  Harries. 

Yer.  14.  Christians  the  light  of  the 
world. — I.  In  what  respect  Christians 
are  compared  to  the  light. 

1.  In  what  respect  men  are  said  to  be 
in  darkness. — In  respect  of  the  dark- 
ness (1)  of  ignorance ;  (2)  of  error  ;  (3) 
of  unbelief ;  (4)  of  inconsideration ; 
(5)  of  vice. 

2.  In  what  way  Christians  ought  to 
be  instrumental  in  bringing  men  out 
of  this  darkness. — (1)  By  teaching.  (2) 
By  controversy  where  sufficient  skill 
and  knowledge  are  possessed.  (3)  By 
testimony  (Mark  v.  19 ;  John  iv.  29). 
(4)  By  exhortation.  (5)  By  reproof 
(Lev.  xix.  17  ;  Gal.  vi.  1).  (6)  There  is 
one  way  more  universal  than  any  of 
the  rest,  and  perhaps  more  directly 
here  meant,  i.e.  the  light  of  good 
example. 

II.  What  is  implied  by  this  ad- 
dition "of  the  world?"— 1.  That  the 
bounds  of  the  church  were  to  be  en- 
larged, that  the  Gentiles  were  to  be 
called  in  to  be  partakers  of  the  glorious 
light  of  the  gospel.  2.  That  those 
very  persons  who  were  now  our 
Saviour's  auditors,  should  have  the 
honour  to  propagate  the  gospel  all  the 
world  over.  3.  That  they  must  be 
much  more  eminent  and  exemplary,  to 
become  lights  of  the  world,  than  the 
Jews,  who  were  only  lights  of  that 
particular  country  of  Judsea ;  as  a 
great  room  requires  a  greater  illumi- 
nation, to  enlighten  it,  than  a  smaller 
one.   -Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

The  analogies  of  light. — I.  Christian 
life,  like  the  light,  is  active. — Light, 
like  heat  and  sound,  is  not  a  substance, 
but  a  more  motion.    The  waves  of  light 

98 


are  very  small,  but  their  motion  is 
inconceivably  rapid.  The  vitality  of 
religion  is  maintained  by  effort. 

II.  Christian  life,  like  the  light,  is 
pure. — Water  and  fire  are  often  used 
as  representions  of  things  pure  and 
holy.  Water  cleanses  and  fire  purifies. 
But  water  becomes  less  pure  itself  by 
washing,  and  fire,  while  it  purifies  one 
metal,  contaminates  other  objects,  by 
evaporating  the  impurities,  or  by 
making  them  combine  with  other  bases 
at  a  high  temperature.  Water  comes 
into  contact  with  filth,  dissolves  it  and 
carries  it  to  a  locality  that  was  pure. 
Fire  attacks  the  scene  of  corruption, 
turns  all  to  vapour  and  noxious  gases, 
which  become  injurious  to  life  all 
around.  But  look  at  light  !  It  comes 
beautiful  and  pure  from  the  sun.  It 
enters  some  scene  of  corruption,  and 
mingles  with  decay  and  death ;  and 
then  it  passes  on  in  its  glorious  path- 
way, having  brightened  and  blessed 
every  object  in  its  way.  It  goes,  how- 
ever, as  it  came,  absolutely  pure.  Real 
Christian  life  is  not  injured  by  contact 
with  sin.  The  history  of  Christian 
enterprise  shows  that  the  holiest  men 
are  those  who,  for  the  sake  of  Christ, 
have  often  come  in  contact  with  most 
unholy  scenes. 

III.  Christian  life,  like  the  light,  is 
life-giving. — Plants  grow  towards  the 
light.  While  the  light  fosters  and 
feeds  the  growing  vegetation,  it  only 
acts  as  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of 
God.  The  Christian  church  is  destined, 
instrumentally,  to  convert  the  world. 

IV.  Christian  life,  like  the  light,  is 
silent  in  its  mode  of  operations. — The 
sun  rises,  and  without  a  whisper  or 
sound,  chases  the  darkness  away.  The 
noise  of  a  growing  forest  would  not 
destroy  an  infant's  sleep.  Thus,  God 
carries  on  His  work  of  grace. 

V.  Christian  life,  like  the  light,  has 
various  forms. — Light  has  colours  and 
an  immense  variety  of  shades,  and  yet 
is  every  shade  of  colour  truly  **  light." 
It  is  the  fault  of  some  men  that  they 
will  not  recognise  as  religion  anything 
which  does  not  shape  itself  according 
to  the  form  which  religion  has  taken 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


in    themselves.  —  Evan   Lewis j    B.A., 
F.R.G.S.,  F.E.S. 

Christianity :  domestic  and  public. 
I.  The  figure  of  the  house-lamp  sug- 
gests domestic  Christianity. — Home 
religion  !  Is  there  anything  more 
needed  1  It  is  a  mere  mockery  of  this 
to  have  a  house  full  of  vanity  and 
discord,  with  a  daily  routine  of  family 
prayer. 

II.  The  city  on  a  hill,  where  it 
catches  the  strong  sunshine,  is  seen  far 
and  wide  over  the  plains ;  and  this 
suggests  the  collective  testimony  of 
Christians.  The  church  may  be  in- 
visible as  respects  the  secret  of  its  life, 
power,  and  endurance  in  God  ;  but  it 
should  be  visible  in  its  influence  on 
society  and  its  benevolent  activities,  "  a 
city  that  cannot  be  hid." — D.  Eraser^ 
D.D. 

The  city  on  the  hill. — I.  The  city 
is  the  church  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  3). 

II.  The  mountain  whereupon  the 
city  stands  is  Christ  (Dan.  ii.  35). 

III.  The  citizens  of  this  city  are  the 
saints  (Eph.  ii.  19). 

IV.  The  towers  of  this  city  were 
the  prophets  who  were  most  eminent  in 
the  church. 

V.  The  gates  of  this  city  were  the 
Apostles,  by  whose  ministry  men  were 
brought  into  the  church. 

VI.  The  walls  of  this  city  are  the 
ministers  of  the  Word,and  the  Apostles' 
successors,  who  are  as  ramparts  to 
defend  the  church  against  the  assaults 
of  sin,  superstition  and  error. — Richard 
Ward. 

Church  responsibility. — Sometimes 
you  notice  on  the  corner  of  the  street 
a  fine  edifice  springing  up.  You 
are  told  it  is  a  new  church  coming 
into  being.  Once  a  pastor  was  asked, 
as  he  stood  unrecognised  upon  the 
walls,  "  When  will  this  building  be 
completed  ?  "  He  easily  gave  the  time. 
"  Will  the  congregation  be  in  debt  ?  ** 
continued  the  stranger.  "  Oh  yes, 
awfully,"  answered  the  thoughtful 
man;  "sometimes  it  frightens  me  to 


think  of  it !  "  Then  came  the  question, 
"  Why  did  you  begin  when  you  had  not 
the  money  ? "  Then  the  minister  of 
God  answered,  "  Oh,  we  have  money 
enough ;  we  shall  have  no  such  debt  as 
that ;  but  think,  think  how  much  a 
church  like  this  is  going  to  owe  the 
community  and  the  world  !  How  they 
will  look  to  us  for  man's  love  and  God's 
grace  ! " — C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D. 

Ver.  15.  The  light  to  be  seen. — The 
candle  is  not  to  be  pvit  under  the 
bushel,  but  on  a  candlestick. 

I.  Not  under  the  bushel  of  the  letter 
merely,  or  of  officialism,  or  of  our 
limited  understanding,  or  of  our 
narrow  sympathies,  but  : 

II.  On  the  candlestick  of  a  sound 
confession,  of  ecclesiastical  order,  of 
spiritual  liberty,  and  of  a  Christian 
life. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Lighted  lamps. — Every  one  of  us 
should  have  a  lamp,  or  rather  be  a 
lamp,  to  shine  out  into  the  darkness  of 
the  world.  .  .  .  Now  there  are  four 
things  necessary  to  a  lamp's  giving  light 
properly.     It  must  be  : — 

I.  Lighted. — Lighted  by  another  ; 
cannot  light  itself,  any  more  than  it 
can  make  itself.  Only  God  can  light 
us.     Teachers  can  polish  the  vessel. 

II .  Set. — Not  under  a  bushel ; 
prominent  place.  Sheltered,  or  may 
be  blown  out.  Set,  so  as  to  shine  for 
useful  purpose. 

III.  Fed. —  Continually,  day  by  day. 
With  proper  oil.  In  proper  way. 
Only  God  has  the  oil  of  grace  to  keep 
the  light  burning. 

IV.  Trimmed. — Cutting  off  what 
would  hinder  the  brightness  of  the 
flame.  Careful  trimming  and  constant 
feeding  needful  to  bright  shining. — 
J.  Edmond,  D.D. 

Ver.  16.  On  doing  good. — If  it  be 
true  that  "  charity  begins  at  home,"  I 
am  quite  sure  it  is  still  more  true  that 
any  kingdom  of  God  for  which  we  are 
earnestly  caring  will  begin  in  our  own 
hearts,  in  a  practical  holiness  which 
will  cost  us  more  self-denial  than  the 

99 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


seemingly    zealous    efforts    men    put  life,  revealing  character,  is  the  test  of 

forth,  as  they  say,  to  save  the  souls  sincerity.— aS.  Edger,  B.A. 
of  others. 

I.  In  seeking  our  own  improvement  Good  Works.  — A  good  work  is  only 
or  growth  in  holiness,  it  is  not  merely  that  which  is  done  :  1.  By  a  child  of 
our  own  personal  advantage  that  we  God.  2.  In  obedience  to  God  his 
pursue. — We  are  seeking  that  which  Father's  command.  3.  For  the  good 
will  ensure  our  doing  good  to  others  ;  of  men.  4.  For  the  glory  of  God. — 
the   unconscious   influence   of   a   good  David  Dickson. 

man's   life   being    wider   in   its   scope 

and  more  certain  in  its  results,  than  The   light  must  shine. — A  Christian 

studied     efforts     directly    to     benefit  mother  told  me  once,  with  eyes  full  of 

mankind.  bitter  tears,  that  she  had  had  a  reproof 

II.  He  who  attains  to  the  greatest  the  day  before  from  her  son,  a  yourg 
amount  of  personal  holiness  or  excel-  man  for  whom  she  had  prayed  and 
lence,  invariably  and  inevitably  does  agonised  during  many  long  years, 
the  most  good  in  the  world. — We  apparently  in  vain,  which  had  almost 
sometimes  think  that  they  are  the  most  broken  her  heart.  She  said,  "You 
useful  men  who  give  away  most,  and  know,  Mrs.  Smith,  how  I  have  wanted 
who  perform  most  seemingly  generous  to  have  my  son  and  my  husband  con- 
acts ;  but  it  is  a  far  nobler  gift  to  the  verted,  and  how  I  have  worked  and 
world  when  we  subdue  in  ourselves  prayed  for  it.  Well,  lately  we  have 
some  passions  or  vices  that  would  had  some  great  anxieties  in  our  family 
corrupt  mankind,  and  when  we  culti-  life,  and.  I  confess  I  was  very  much 
vate  some  Christian  virtues  that  shed  cast  down,  and  did  get  cross  over  it,  and 
light  on  our  human  path.  He  who  go  about  groaning  and  sighing,  and 
lives  an  unselfish  life  does  more  to  looking  and  acting  as  if  I  was  miser- 
banish  selfishness  from  the  world  than  able.  Yesterday,  as  I  was  sitting  at 
he  who  proclaims  all  his  life  against  it.  my  work  with  the  tears  dropping  from 
It  is  one  fault  of  our  age  that  we  make  my  eyes,  and  looking  the  picture  of 
the  hope  of  the  world's  regeneration  woe,  my  son  said  to  me,  '  Mother,  you 
depend  so  much  on  loud  talking  and  so  have  been  wanting  father  and  me  to  be 
little  on  holy  living.  1.  We  learn  this  Christians  for  a  good  many  years,  and 
lesson  from  the  history  of  the  past,  have  wondered  why  we  did  not  yield. 
Who  are  the  men  who  have  moved  I  will  tell  you  why.  It  is  because  you 
the  heart  of  the  world  ?  2.  The  teach-  show  us  in  your  life  such  an  unhappy 
ings  of  Christ  lead  us  to  the  same  con-  picture  of  Christianity  that  it  has  never 
elusion.  He  teaches  that  if  we  are  looked  in  the  least  attractive  to  us.  In 
godly  ourselves  the  kingdom  of  God  this  trouble,  for  instance,  just  look  how 
will  certainly  come  with  power,  much  better  father  and  I  bear  it  than 
3.  Our  experience  of  life  shows  us  how  you  do,  and  we  make  no  professions  of 
much  more  influence  we  may  exert  by  having  a  Saviour  to  help  us.  If  your 
our  actions  than  by  our  speech,  religion  doesn't  amount  to  anything 
"  Example  is  better  than  precept."  A  more  than  the  thing  you  live  out  before 
fact  is  always  mightier  than  an  asser-  us,  you  cannot  wonder  that  we  do  not 
tion.  Moreover,  the  power  of  a  man's  care  to  have  that  sort  of  religion.' " — 
speech   depends   on  its  sincerity ;  and  Mrs.  U.  W.  Smith. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH—Verses  17—20. 

A  definite  aim. — To  many  who  heard  them — perhaps  to  most  who  heard  them 

at  first— the  opening  words  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  must  have  had  a 

well-nigh   revolutionary   sound.      How  different   from    the  thunders  of    Sinai 

their   proclamation   of   blessings!      How   strange  the  persons   declared   to   be 

100 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  v. 


blessed !  How  all  but  unheard  of  the  character  of  those  blessings  !  Was 
everything,  then,  to  be  new  ?  Were  the  old  lines  to  be  entirely  obliterated  ? 
Were  all  previous  teachers  to  be  superseded  by  this  1  To  such  "  thoughts  "  as 
these — as  so  often  afterwards — the  Saviour  seems,  next,  to  reply.  His  hearers 
are  "  not  "  to  "  think  "  thus  for  a  moment  (ver.  17).  Alike  the  general  character 
of-  His  mission,  and  the  special  character  of  those  older  dispensations,  and  the 
special  character  of  that  which  He  is  about  to  introduce,  forbid  such  ideas. 

I.  The  general  character  of  His  mission. — Notwithstanding  what  He  had 
said,  it  was  quite  a  mistake  to  look  upon  this  as  a  mission  to  ^*  destroy."  He 
came  not  to  "  destroy  "  but  to  '*  fulfil  "  ;  not  to  condemn,  but  to  save  (John  iii.  17) ; 
not  to  pull  down,  but  to  build  up ;  not  to  diminish,  but  to  enlarge ;  not  to 
obliterate,  but  to  restore.  All  the  names  that  had  been  given  Him  signified 
this.  He  was  to  be  a  Redeemer  (Isa.  xlix.  26),  a  Saviour  (Matt.  i.  21),  a  Healer 
(Mai.  iv.  2),  a  Rebuilder  (Acts  xv.  16),  a  Shepherd  (John  x.  11,  etc.),  a  Hope 
(Jer.  xiv.  8),  a  *'  Kestorer  "  of  paths  to  dwell  in  (Isa.  Iviii.  12).  If  there  were, 
therefore,  to  be  things  of  a  contrary  kind — if  there  were  to  be  destruction  and 
supercession — He  was  not  the  person  to  do  them.  Those  after  Him,  indeed, 
might  have  to  behold  (John  iv.  21),  those  after  Him  might  have  to  proclaim 
(Acts  XV.  10;  Gal.  v.  3),  a  good  deal  in  that  way.  It  was  not  for  Him,  with 
His  mission,  to  bring  it  about.  Rather,  it  was  for  Him,  by  His  personal 
teaching,  to  fortify  and  enlarge  that  which  previous  teachers  had  taught. 

II.  The  special  nature  of  those  older  dispensations. — For  what  were  those 
things  in  effect  ?  What,  if  we  think  of  them  as  we  ought  1  They  were  declara- 
tions, in  their  day,  of  God's  will ;  they  were  words  which  came  from  His  mouth 
(John  ix.  29  ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  2) ;  and  they  were  meant  to  do  what  He  wished 
(Isa.  Iv.  11).  And  to  what,  therefore,  being  such,  were  those  ^^  economies"  like? 
They  were  like  those  created  marvels  which  we  see  all  around  us — whether  in 
"  heaven  "  above,  or  on  "  earth  "  beneath  (ver.  18).  For  what  are  these  also,  if 
we  think  of  it,  but  so  many  expressions  of  His  will  ?  (Gen.  i.  3,  6,  etc.;  Ps.  xxxiii.  9). 
And  why  are  these  also,  on  the  other  hand,  but  to  fulfil  what  He  wills  1 
(Gen.  i.  14-18;  Ps.  cxlviii.  8).  And  how  is  it,  therefore,  that  we  may  argue 
legitimately,  as  well  of  those  as  of  these  ?  Because  the  heavens  are  thus  the 
results  of  God's  will,  and  intended  also  (in  their  way)  to  accomplish  His  will,  we 
see  them  *'  continuing"  till  they  do  so  (Ps.  cxix.  89,  91).  So,  also,  because  "the 
law  and  the  prophets,"  in  a  difierent  sphere,  were  the  same,  they  also  shall  in 
like  manner  "  abide  "  until  their  work  be  fulfilled.  Not  "  a  jot  or  tittle  "  of 
what  is  necessary  to  this  can  in  any  way  "  pass."  Even,  therefore,  if  Christ  had 
come  as  a  destroyer.  He  would  not  have  destroyed  these. 

III.  The  special  character  of  the  dispensation  which  He  had  come  to  set  up. 
— In  the  last  two  verses  of  this  passage  this  is  mentioned  three  times  in  succession. 
Three  times  over  we  are  told  in  them  what  is  to  be  the  rule  of  His  "  kingdom." 
The  rule  of  His  kingdom  towards  those  who  shall  even  in  part  set  those  old 
commandments  aside,  whether  in  deed  or  in  word.  "  The  same  "  shall  be  re- 
garded as  only  "least"  heirs,  in  that  kingdom  (ver.  19).  Even  if  the  Saviour 
does  not  proceed  to  extremities  against  such,  there  shall  be  no  room  for 
supposing  that  He  looks  upon  them  with  favour  (ver.  19).  The  rule  towards 
those  who  shall  not  desire,  in  any  way,  to  set  these  commandments  aside,  whether 
in  word  or  in  deed.  The  same  shall  be  called  correspondingly  "  great "  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  (ver.  19).  The  more  this  is  true  of  them,  the  more  fit  for  it 
He  will  pronounce  them  to  be.  "  Double  honour  "  (1  Tim.  v.  17)  will  willingly  be 
rendered  to  such.  The  rule  of  His  kingdom,  in  the  last  place,  towards  those 
unhappy  ones  who  virtually  set  these  commandments  wholly  aside.  They  shall  be 
regarded  as  not  even  belonging  to  that  kingdom  at  all.  It  is  true  there  were 
some,  at  that  time,  and  those  in  very  high  places  also,  who  were  doing  as  much 

.  101 


CHAP.  V. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


(Mark  vii.  6-13).  None  the  less  shall  the  rule  He  speaks  of  be  true  about  them  ; 
and  about  all  those  also,  who,  though  they  listen  to  Him,  are  not  on  a  higher 
level  than  they  (ver.  20).  So  far  is  He,  in  short,  from  Himself  wishing  to  destroy 
those  ancient  commandments  that  He  will  not  connive  at  this  being  attempted 
on  the  part  of  any  one  else  ! 

In  conclusion,  what  stinking  combinations  are  visible  here  : — 

1.  Of  severity  and  goodness. — The  utterly  false  are  altogether  outside.  The 
unwillingly  w^eak  have  an  inner — though  not  innermost — place. 

2.  Of  the  minute  and  the  comprehensive.— The  *'jots  and  tittles"  on  the 
one  hand,  "heaven  and  earth"  on  the  other. 

3.  Of  defere^ice  and  demand. — What  respect  is  here  paid  to  His  predecessors  ! 
What  superiority  is  claimed  over  them!  To  "fulfil"  and  surpass  their  words 
is  what  His  words  are  to  do  !  Great  are  they  amongst  men  !  Still  greater 
Himself ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  17-19.  The  unity  and  perpetuity 
of  the  moral  law. — God's  law  is  like 
Himself — inflexible,  unchangeable,  and 
eternal.     Observe : — 

I.  The  organic  unity  of  the  moral 
law. — *'  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to 
destroy  the  law.''     It  is  here  suggested  : 

1.  That  the  law  is  one. — It  is  a  com- 
plete thing ;  it  is  a  unity.  You  cannot 
take  any  part  away  without  injuring 
the  rest ;  you  cannot  relax  one  part 
without  dislocating  the  other.  As  the 
ocean  is  one — a  unity  so  made  up  of 
seas,  and  bays,  and  gulfs,  and  straits, 
that  if  you  cast  a  stone  into  any 
portion,  the  disturbance  is  felt  at  its 
farthest  shores — so  with  the  law,  if 
you  touch  any  part,  you  disturb  the 
whole.  Again,  the  law  is  like  the  body 
— an  organic  whole,  so  that  if  you 
injure  a  limb  you  affect  the  whole 
system.     Hence  we  gather  that : — 

2.  The  Bible  is  OTie.— That  is,  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments  constitute  but 
one  system  of  Divine  truth.  The  law 
and  the  gospel  are  not  separate  or 
opposing  forces.  The  Bible  is  a  single 
and  perfect  body;  not  one  member 
added,  but  the  whole  developed.  There 
is  a  homogeneous  process  of  revelation, 
communication,  and  verbal  expression 
in  the  two  divisions  of  the  inspired 
volume. 

3.  The  purpose  is  one. — One  of  God's 
revelations  cannot  contradict  or  do 
away  with  the  other. 

II.  The  infallible  authority  of  the 
102 


moral  law. — Delivered  by  the  Most 
High  Himself ;  written  by  His  finger 
on  tables  of  stone ;  placed  in  the  ark 
of  the  covenant ;  bespeaking  essential 
distinction ;  and  occupying  a  position 
of  glory  and  supremacy  altogether 
unique.  Therefore  we  consider  the 
law  : — 

1.  Royal. — God  is  the  Author  of  it. 

2.  Supreme. — It  cannot  be  improved ; 
it  cannot  be  annulled. 

3.  Certain. — It  is  raised  above  all 
doubts  in  its  declaration,  and  verifies 
itself  in  its  promises  and  its  threaten- 
ings. 

4.  Final. — From  its  commands  there 
is  no  appeal. 

III.  The  Divine  perfeetness  of  the 
moral  law. — The  word  "  fulfil "  does 
not  imply  imperfection,  but  rather 
implies  to  embody  in  the  living  form, 
Christ,  the  principles  of  the  law;  to 
unfold  and  interpret  and  to  enshrine 
the  same  in  the  affection  and  character 
of  men.  The  moral  law  in  principle  is 
incapable  of  improvement.  "  The  law 
of  the  Lord  is  perfect."  It  legislates 
for  all  our  relations  to  God  and  the 
conditions  of  our  being. 

1.  It  is  a  perfect  transcript  of  the 
Divine  mind. 

2.  It  is  a  perfect  organ  for  Divine  good. 
— Its  meaning  is  the  well-being  of  the 
creature,  and  it  is  altogether  directed 
to  promote  his  happiness. 

3.  It  is  perfectly  sound  throughout, — 
Agrees  with  reason  and  conscience. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


lY.  The   important   duty  enforced  all  duty,  in  the  example  of  our  Lord 

respecting     the      law. — '*  Whosoever  Jesus  Christ,  than  any  they  had  under 

therefore  shall  break,  etc."     There  are  the  law. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 
three  classes  here  referred  to  by  the 

great  Teacher.  The  significance  of  our  Lord^s  teaching. 

1.  "  The  least. ^^ — Meaning  those  who  — The  Pharisaic  type  of  conformity  to 
are  loose  or  lax  in  relation  to  the  law  was  accepted  without  challenge  as 
authority  and  obligation  of  the  moral  the  ideal  of  righteousness ;  but  one 
law  and  Christian  doctrine,  and  who  of  the  very  first  impressions  created  by 
urge  their  own  loose  or  lax  views  on  Jesus  was  the  impression  that  He  was 
others  in  things  moral ;  they  may  be  the  enemy  of  such  righteousness.  Re- 
saved  if  otherwise  consistent,  but  only  nouncing  as  He  explicitly,  emphatically, 
"as  by  fire"  (1  Cor.  iii.  15).  and  with  the  utmost  warmth  renounced, 

2.  "  The  great.^^ — They  who  earnestly  the  goodness  of  the  Pharisees,  the  cry 
contend  for  the  faith  and  live  it.  was  at  once  raised  against  Him  that 

3.  "  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  "  seem  He  was  destroying  the  law,  and  was 
excluded.  For  want  of  spiritual  Himself  a  libertine,  and  a  companion 
sympathy  and  sincerity,  they  are  shut  of  loose  people.  And  perceiving  that 
out  of  the  kingdom. — J.  Harries.  even  in  honest  and  unprejudiced  minds, 

this  impression  was  gaining  ground, 
Ver.  17.  Christ  a  great  encourager  oj  He  feels  Himself  called  upon  publicly 
good  morals. — 1.  He  has  much  better  to  repudiate  the  attitude  towards  the 
cleared  up  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  law  which  was  ascribed  to  Him,  and  to 
law,  whereas  the  Jews  commonly  explain  elaborately  what  the  righteous- 
understood  it  only  in  an  external,  carnal  ness  which  He  required  and  exhibited 
sense.  2.  He  has  likewise  cautioned  really  was,  and  how  it  was  related  to 
us  against  all  the  causes,  occasions,  the  law.  And  it  is  as  one  who  speaks 
and  inlets  of  sin,  than  which  nothing  to  the  uppermost  thought  in  the  mind 
could  have  been  a  greater  bar  against  of  His  hearers  that  He  says,  ''  Think 
it ;  laying  restraints  on  the  eyes  and  not  that  I  am  come,"  etc.  The  word 
ears,  and  hands,  and  tongue,  and  all  TrXrypwo-at  or  TrXrjpovv  means  to  fill  up. 
our  members.  3.  He  has  more  clearly  It  is  used  of  filling  to  the  brim  a  vessel 
proposed  the  benefit,  as  well  as  duty  of  empty  or  half -full.  And  hence  it 
repentance,  accepting  of  repentance  means  to  complete,  to  perfect.  There 
instead  of  innocence;  which  is  a  mighty  are  two  senses  in  which  a  law  may  be 
encouragement  to  come  off  from  a  sinful  completed  or  fulfilled.  1.  By  being 
course.  4.  He  has  called  us  more  off  obeyed.  Thus  Paul  in  Kom.  xiii.  8. 
from  the  ceremonials  of  religion,  and  2.  By  being  issued  in  a  more  complete 
taught  us  to  bend  all  our  strength  to  and  adequate  form.  In  which  of  these 
the  substantials  of  it.  5.  There  were  senses  does  our  Lord  use  the  word 
a  great  many  things  permitted  to  the  TrXrjpojcraL  1  Hardly  in  the  former 
Jews,  because  of  the  hardness  of  their  sense,  because  He  immediately  goes 
hearts,  which  kept  them  very  low  in  on  to  illustrate  His  meaning,  and  His 
goodness  and  virtue.  6.  The  doctrine  attitude  to  the  law  by  citing  a  number 
of  our  Saviour  is  better  suited  to  work  of  instances  in  which  the  precepts  of 
on  our  hopes  and  fears  than  the  law  the  old  law  are  to  be  replaced  by 
of  Moses  was,  having  added  much  precepts  of  His  own.  Besides,  had 
better  sanctions  of  rewards  and  punish-  practical  keeping  of  the  law  been 
ments.  7.  There  is  a  much  larger  meant  by  TrArypwo-at,  then  its  proper 
measure  of  grace  and  of  the  assistance  opposite  would  have  been  not  KaraXvo-ai 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit  promised  and  ex-  but,  as  Wendt  points  out,  irapapaLveiv. 
hibited  under  the  gospel  than  there  was  The  word  KaraXvcrat  means  a  good  deal 
under  the  law.  8.  The  gospel  furnishes  more  than  practical  disobedience  of  a 
us  with  a  much  more  perfect  pattern  of  law ;     it    means    to     deprive    it    of 

103 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


authority   and    destroy   it   as   a   law.  as  a  system  would  never  have  produced 

And  the  proper  opposite  of  this  is  not  the     true     missionary     spirit.       The 

the  practical  observance  of  a  law,  but  Pharisee  wished  for  the  prosperity  of 

something  more,  the  issuing  of  it  with  his  own  sect  and  the  triumph  of  Israel 

authority.  over  her  oppressors  and  enemies,  but 

Luther,  then,  was  on  the  right  track  never   sought   an   outpouring   of    the 

when  he  said  that  7r\>7/ocoo-at  here  means  Divine     blessing     upon     all     nations. 

"  to  show  the  real  kernel  and  true  signi-  3.  Equally  allied  with  this  defect  was 

ficance  of  the  law,  that  men  might  learn  the  fatal  vice  of  formalism. 

what  it  is,  and  what  it  requires."     Or,  III.  The     principles    by    carrying 

rather,  it  may  be  said  that  it  means  out  which  we  shall  be  able  to  attain  a 

the  issuing  of  the  law  in  its  ideal  form,  righteousness    exceeding   theirs,    and 

It  is  thus  that  our   Lord   fulfils  the  so   exceeding   theirs   as   to   merit  the 

law ;  He  keeps  and  He  teaches  it  in  a  kingdom  of  heaven.    Many  are  placing 

form  that  no  longer  needs  amendment,  their  dependence  as  much  upon  a  past 

revisal,     improvement,     as     the     Old  incident  in  their  spiritual  life,   which 

Testament  law  did,  but  in  a  form  that  they  rightly  term  "  conversion"  as  the 

cannot   be   improved,  that  is   perfect,  Pharisees  did  upon  having  Abraham  to 

full.    That  this  was  our  Lord's  meaning  their  father.     1.   Having  uttered  this 

is  apparent  from  the  abundant  instances  warning  against  resting  content  with 

He  proceeds  to  cite,  in  which  the  old  the  blessing  of  regeneration,  we  must 

law  was  to  be  henceforth  known  in  a  emphasise     that    change    as    the   first 

higher  and  more  perfect  form. — Prof,  essential  of  a  true  righteousness  which 

M.  Bods,  D.D.     See  entire  article  in  shall  exceed  the  formal  religion  of  the 

Expositor,  Fourth  Series,  ix.  70.  scribes    and    Pharisees.       2.    Another 

great  principle  is,  that  if  any  man  will 

Yer.  19.  The  authority  of  the  law. —  follow   Christ,  he  must  daily  take   up 

It  is  as  much  treason  to  coin  a  penny  his  cross. — H.  S.  Lunn,  M.D. 
as  a  twenty  shilling  piece,  because  the 

authority  of  law  is  as  much  violated  in  Pharisaical  and  Christian  righteous- 

the  one  as  in  the  other.     There  is  the  ness. — I.  The  defects  of  this  Pharisaical 

same  rotundity  in  the   Httle   ball   or  righteousness. — The    faults    and    the 

bullet  as  in  a  great  one.     The  authority  righteousness     of     the     scribes     and 

of    God   is   as   truly   despised   in   the  Pharisees  are  to  be  distinguished.     By 

breach  of  the  least  commandments,  as  their  righteousness,  I  mean  the  rule  of 

some  are  called,  as  in  the  breach  of  duties  which  they  set.     Their  faults, 

the    greatest,    as    others    are    called,  like   other   men's,  might   be   personal 

— Christian  World  Pulpit.  transgressions  of  good  rules  ;  and  we 

have  nothing  to  do  with  them  in  this 

Ver.  20.  The  sin  of  the   Pharisees,  place.      1.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees 

I.  The  good  traits  in  the  righteous-  in   their  interpretations   of   the   law, 

ness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.—  contented  themselves  with  the  external 

1.  The  Pharisees  wei^e  orthodox.  2.  They  part  of  duty,  without  minding  the 
were  eminently  respectable.  3.  They  spiritual  sense.  2.  Their  righteousness 
were  eminently  religious.  consisted  in  a  strictness  concerning  the 

II.  Why  the  righteousness  of  the  cei  emonials    and    circumstantials     of 

scribes  and  Pharisees  fell  short  and  religion,  with  a  neglect  of  the  greater 

where.  —1.  Their  religious  life,  as  well  and  more  substantial  duties.     3.  They 

as  their  private  life,  was  marked  hy  a  showed   a    zeal    for   traditions,    which 

pride  fatal  to  true  spirituality.     They  they  observed  with  an  equal  veneration 

were  proud  of  their  sect,  and  they  were  with  the  precepts  of  Almighty  God ; 

proud  of  their  own  personal  character.  nay,    sometimes  gave   them   the   pre- 

2.  Closely  allied  to  this  vital  defect  ference.  4.  When  pinched  between 
was  the  sin  of  selfishrma.     Phariseeism  duty  and  interest,  thev  stocked  them- 

104  " 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  V., 


selves  with  evasions  and  distinctions, 
whereby  they  satisfied  their  con- 
sciences in  several  things,  wherein  they 
would  have  been  bound  by  the  law 
(Matt,  xxiii.  16).  5.  They  showed  a 
zeal  for  all  those  duties  and  customs 
which  made  a  great  show  of  devotion 
and  mortification  to  the  world.  6.  They 
valued  themselves  exceedingly  upon 
their  external  privileges  as  being 
descended  from  Abraham,  as  if  they 
had  been  the  only  elect  people  of  God, 
and  all  the  rest  of  the  world  castaways. 

II.  What  further  degrees  of  per- 
fection our  Saviour  requires  of  His 
disciples. — 1.  Evangelical  righteous- 
ness chiefly  regards  the  inner  man  and 
goes  about  all  duty  with  a  pure  eye 
to  God.  2.  It  lays  no  great  stress 
on  ceremonials,  though  it  uses  them 
for  decency  and  order,  but  resei'ves  its 
zeal  for  more  substantial  matters. 
3.  It  delights  in  the  study  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures ;  the  good  Christian  forms 
his  practice  by  that  model.  4.  It 
neither  seeks  for,  nor  admits  of,  any 
evasions  or  subterfuges  to  avoid  duty. 
5.  It  is  well  guarded  by  moderation 
and  humility  against  the  effects  of 
blind  zeal.  6.  The  good  Christian 
beheves  God  to  be  no  respecter  of 
persons,  and  so  works  out  his  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling. 

III.  The  penalty  upon  which  this 
higher  degree  of  duty  is  enjoined. — 
Viz.,  exclusion  from  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

IV.  The  equity  of  this  sentence. — 
1.  The  great  corruption  of  the  Jewish 
doctors  in  our  Saviour's  days,  requiring 
a  great  deal  of  reformation.  2.  The 
greater  advantages  of  Christianity 
beyond  the  Jewish  religion,  making  it 
very  reasonable  that  higher  degrees  of 
righteousness  should  be  required  of  us 
than  of  them. 

V.  Practical  inferences.  —  1.  We 
come  nearest  to  the  spirit  of  our 
Master,  Christ,  when  by  our  life  and 
doctrine  we  are  the  greatest  promoters 
of  Christian  morals.  (1)  Of  all  notions 
in  rehgion,  beware  of  those  which 
undermine  Christian  practice.  (2) 
•Good   morality   is  good    Christianity. 


(3)  Good  moral  preaching  is  good 
Christian  preaching.  (4)  A  good 
moral  life  is  one  of  the  truest  charac- 
teristics of  a  good  Christian.  2.  Let 
us  look  with  a  jealous  eye  on  ourselves 
and  examine  ourselves  very  narrowly, 
to  make  sure  that  our  righteousness 
is  such  as  exceeds  that  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees.  3.  Our  Saviour's 
precepts  are  not  mere  "  counsels  of 
perfection."  Let  us,  as'  a  thing  of 
infinite  consequence,  set  about  the 
study  of  this  gospel  righteousness,  as 
we  expect  to  avoid  hell  and  enter 
the  kingdoiji  of  heaven. — Jas. 
Blair,  M.A. 

The  excelling  righteousness. — What 
is  righteousness,  and  how  can  it  be 
attained  ?  were  the  great  questions 
which  the  systems  of  the  Rabbis 
pressed  most  urgently  on  the  attention 
of  the  people  in  the  time  of  our  Lord. 
No  teacher  could  gain  attention  who 
did  not  deal  with  them.  Indeed,  the 
religious  questioning  of  all  ages  and  cf 
all  lands  comes  to  the  same  thing. 
Jesus  Christ  in  this  Sermon  has  taken 
righteousness  for  His  great  theme  and 
has  shown  us  clearly  : — 

I.  What  it  is  in  itself. — Righteous- 
ness consists  : — 

1 .  In  principle  within. — It  does  not 
consist  in  rites,  and  creeds,  and  cere- 
monies without,  but  it  is  the  inward 
condition  of  the  heart. 

2.  In  likeness  to  God. — From  ver.  1 
to  ver.  16  Christ  shows  what  virtues 
righteousness  inculcates  and  demands, 
which  may  be  summed  up  in  one 
word — holiness.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Model. 

3.  In  moral  meetness  for  ''  glory, 
honour,  and  immortality."   Observe  : — 

II.  How  it  is  to  be  attained. 
— 1.  Historically.  Of  Abel  it  is  said 
that  he  found  out  the  secret  (Heb. 
xi.  4).  Noah  became  "  heir  of  the 
righteousness"  which  is  by  faith. 
Abraham  by  his  unquestioning 
obedience  to  the  will  of  God  had  his 
faith  counted  for  righteousness.  The 
prophets  teach,  '*  Wash  you,  make  you 
clean,"   etc.     And    our   Lord   in   this 

105 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Sermon  therefore  recalls  the  spiritual  scrupulous,  but  inwardly  mean.     They 

conception  of  the  righteousness  of  the  were  mere  machines,  polished  pillars, 

kingdom  of  God.  etc. 

2.  Evangelically.  —  True    righteous-  3.  How  Christian  righteousness  exceeds 

ness    begins    (1)    In   repentance.     (2)  that  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees. — (1)  In 

Attained  by  a  living  and  loving  faith  its     source.     The     heart.     (2)  In    its 

in  Christ "The   righteousness  which  nature.     Christ  is   our   righteousness, 

is   of    faith."      (3)    Eesult :    joy,    and  not  self.     (3)  In  its  motive.     Not  "  to 

peace,  and  love.     Observe  :—  be  seen  of  men  "  that  men  may  glorify 

III.  Wherein        does        Christian  us,  but  that  they,  "  seeing  our  good 

righteousness     excel     that     of    the  works,     may     glorify    our    Father." 

scribes    and     Pharisees? — In     order  (4)  In     its     quality.      Spiritual,    not 

to   understand  rightly  what  was   the  earthly.     (5)  In  its  end.     Love  to  God 

righteousness     of      the     scribes      and  is   the  beginning    and   ending   of   the 

Pharisees,  and  how  far  that  is  to  be  service,  worship,  and  life.     The  scribes 

exceeded     by     the     righteousness     of  and  Pharisees  are  representative  men 

Christians,  we  need  to  consider :  of   two   classes  of   formalists  :   1st,  of 

1.  Who  these  scribes  and  Pharisees  those  who  are  mere  theorists  in  their 
were. — The  scribes  were  the  learned  treatment  of  the  Word  of  God.  Their 
theorists.  The  Pharisees  were  the  religion  is  technical.  2nd,  of  those 
religious  professors.  whose  religion  consists  in  mere   cere- 

2.  What  was  their  religion? — (1)  It  mony,  dead  formality,  and  sham;  an 
was  speculative.  (2)  Negative.  Free  elaborate  system  of  mimicry,  artifici- 
f rom  scandalous  sins,  though  the  heart  ality,  and  egotism ;  stereotyped  routine, 
was  full  of  corruption.     (3)  Outwardly  — J.  Harries. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—37. 

Root  and  branch. — The  Saviour's  purpose  here  seems  to  be  that  of  explaining 
what  He  has  just  before  said.  He  has  described  His  mission  as  being  that  of 
"fulfilling"  God's  "law"  (ver.  17).  Amongst  the  ways  in  which  He  was  to 
do  this — to  do  this  in  connection  with  the  "moral"  part  of  that  law — was  the 
way  of  bringing  it  home.  On  what  principles  were  its  various  precepts  founded? 
How  far,  in  consequence  of  this,  do  its  various  requirements  extend  ?  These  are 
the  questions  which  He  here  sets  Himself  to  answer  so  far  as  they  bear  on  three 
commandments  out  of  the  "  Ten  " — three  commandments  which  seem  selected 
as  samples  of  all. 

I.  The  sixth  commandment  is  the  first  "  old-timo  "  saying  (ver.  21)  which  is 
dealt  with  in  this  way.  Its  actual  language,  as  quoted  here,  is  brief  and  simple 
enough.  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill."  In  dealing  with  this  (vers.  21-26)  our  Saviour 
points  us  first,  as  we  intimated  just  now,  to  its  root.  What  is  the  root  of  the 
wicked  action  which  this  commandment  forbids?  It  is  to  be  found  in  the 
indulgence  of  the  spirit  of  hate.  If  there  were  no  hate,  no  desire  to  hurt,  there 
would  be  no  such  endeavour,  of  course.  It  is  with  this  root,  therefore — this 
murder-germ — that  the  Saviour  begins.  He  bids  us  understand  that  it  is  with  this 
spirit  of  hate — this  anger  "without  cause"  (ver  22) — that  this  commandment 
begins.  In  forbidding  the  action  it  forbids  thereby  its  source.  That  is  the  first 
point  to  be  noted.  But  that  is  not  all.  What  we  are  to  note  next,  is,  that  it 
forbids  also  all  that  follows  frwn  this.  All  that  follows  from  indulgence  in  such  a 
spirit,  whatever  its  shape — all  words  of  contempt  even — all  that  is  meant  to  degrade 
(ver.  22).  All  that  follows  from  this,  also,  no  matter  what  else  in  other 
directions  we  may  think  we  have  to  rely  on  for  acceptance  with  God.  Not  even 
the  "  worship  "  of  our  "  gifts  "  on  God's  own  "  altar  "  is  acceptable  to  Him  if 
we  come  in  this  spirit  of  hate  (vers.  23,  24,  etc. ;  of.,  in  part,  Gen.  iv.  1-10). 
106 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  V. 


Not  only  so,  it  never  can  be  acceptable  so  long  as  this  enmity  lasts.  For  what 
is  it  that  such  unrepented  enmity  does  in  effect  ?  It  turns  your  brother,  as 
before  God,  into  your  "  adversary  at  law  "  ;  and  it  is  an  indirect  appeal  to  Him, 
therefore,  to  deal  with  you  only  as  your  merits  deserve — a  *'  process  at  law  " 
which  can  only  end  in  your  irreversible  death  (vers.  25,  26  ;  also  Ps.  cxxx,  3, 
cxliii.  2 ;  Rom.  vi.  23).  Understand,  therefore,  not  only  how  far,  but  also  how 
peremptorily,  this  commandment  extends.  The  spirit  of  hate,  indulged  in,  is 
the  spirit  of  death  ! 

II.  The  seventh  commandment  is  next  expounded,  in  like  manner,  by  Christ. 
Here,  also,  the  "old  saying"  was  simple  enough  in  its  letter.  But  it  was 
just  as  profound,  also,  and  just  as  far-reaching — so  the  Saviour  shows — in  its 
spirit.  For  here,  also,  on  the  one  hand,  the  commandment,  in  forbidding  the 
action,  forbids  also  the  inward  desire  which  gives  it  birth,  as  it  were  (ver.  28, 
cf.  James  i.  14,  15).  And  here,  also,  on  the  other  hand,  it  necessarily  forbids  also 
all  those  resulting  evil  indulgences  and  habits  which  so  often  become  to  men  in 
consequence  almost  part  of  themselves.  And  it  bids  the  sinner  (which  is  more) 
wholly  to  part  with  them,  even  where  that  is  the  case ;  and  warns  him 
solemnly,  also,  that  the  only  other  alternative  is  that  of  destroying  himself 
(ver.  29,  30,  Eph.  v.  3-6).  All  this  that  "old  saying"  taught  in  the  "germ." 
Further,  on  the  important  question  of  the  dissolution  of  marriage  (which  is 
another  branch  of  this  subject)  it  did  the  same  thing.  The  "  old  saying,"  on 
this  point,  also,  had  been  of  a  very  definite  kind.  If  you  do  dissolve  this 
contract  you  must  do  so  with  as  much  formality  as  you  entered  on  it  at  first 
(ver.  31).  That  restriction  contained  in  it  the  seed  of  another.  You  must  not 
dissolve  it  even  in  that  way  unless  it  has  been  dissolved  in  another  way  first 
(ver.  32).  That  is  the  "spirit,"  and,  therefore,  those  the  results,  of  that 
"letter"  of  old. 

III.  The  third  commandment — possibly  as  being,  unlike  the  previous  two,  a 
part  of  the  First  Table — is  then  taken  up.  To  "  take  God's  name  in  vain  " 
(Exod.  XX.  7)  is  to  invite  His  witness  to  that  which  is  false.  To  forbid  this, 
therefore  (vei-.  33),  is  to  forbid,  as  before,  that  which  lies  at  its  root,  viz.  in  this 
case,  thinking  lightly  of  God.  And,  therefore,  as  before,  to  forbid  all  that 
which  branches  therefrom — all  language  inconsistent  with  a  proper  recollection 
of  the  wide  supremacy  of  His  rule,  whether  in  "  heaven  "  above,  or  "  earth  " 
beneath,  or  in  the  midst  of  His  church  (vers.  34,  35),  or  with  a  proper  sense  of 
our  utter  inability  to  alter  or  modify  the  most  insignificant  part  of  our  frames 
(ver.  36).  What  it  rather  enjoins  on  us  is  a  scrupulous  anxiety  to  avoid  any 
approach  to  these  sins.  Never  call  upon  God  as  a  witness  unless  in  those  cases 
in  which  you  have  His  permission  to  do  so.  Even  to  wish  this  without  adequate 
cause  is  of  the  nature  of  sin  (ver.  37).  So,  of  this  commandment  also,  does  the 
Saviour  explain  both  its  depth  and  its  reach  ! 

Declarations  of  this  kind  lend  double  value  : — 

1.  To  the  mercy  of  the  gospel. — When  the  Saviour  undertakes  to  forgive 
sin.  He  is  not  speaking  in  the  dark.  He  knows  what  He  is  doing,  what  sin 
is,  what  it  involves,  what  it  leads  to,  all  that  it  means.  Knowing  the  worst. 
He  yet  blots  it  all  out. 

2.  To  the  offers  of  the  gospel. — "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ? "  This  He  says 
to  those  whose  extremity  is  known  to  Him  to  the  full  (cf.  John  v.  6). 

HOMILIES  OJSr  THE   VERSES. 

Yers.  21-24.  Spiritual  exposition  of  in  ver.  20,  and  the  meaning  of  that 
sixth  commandment. — The  keynote  of  verse  is  set  forth  in  six  examples — - 
the  portion  (vers,  20-26)  is  contained      murder,   adultery,   divorce,   oaths,  re- 

107 


CHAR  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


taliation,   love  and  hatred.      Consider 
the  Christian  law  concerning  murder : — 

I.  In  the  letter. — Sixth  command- 
ment. We  boast  of  progress,  and  of 
the  march  of  civilisation.  Our  progress 
in  material  civilisation  is  indeed  mar- 
vellous ;  but  so  long  as  the  columns  of 
our  newspapers  abound  with  reports 
of  the  most  wilful  and  cold-blooded 
murders  we  have  cause  for  "shame 
and  confusion  of  face  "  rather  than  for 
vainglory. 

II.  In  the  spirit. — He  who  is  "  angry 
with  his  brother  without  a  cause " 
commits  murder  in  his  heart.  Anger  is 
declared  to  be  a  work  of  the  flesh  (Gal. 
V.  20) ;  but  it  is  often  excused  as  an 
infirmity,  rather  than  bewailed  as  a  sin. 

III.  In  the  punishment. — The  three 
degrees  of  punishment  specified  ac- 
cording to  the  degrees  of  guilt. 

IV.  In  the  application. — Our  Lord 
being  "  a  minister  of  the  circumcision," 
and  the  Jewish  ritual  being  not  yet 
abrogated,  the  language  of  the  Mosaic 
ceremonial  ("  gift "  and  "  altar ")  is 
naturally  employed.  A  pious  Jew  is 
supposed  to  be  on  his  way  to  the 
temple,  intending  to  offer  to  God  on  the 
altar  his  gift,  eucharistic  or  sacrificial. 
Before  reaching  the  altar,  he  recollects 
that  his  brother  has  some  cause  of 
offence  against  him — not  that  he  has 
one  against  his  brother,  which  is 
generally  all  we  think  of.  Our  Lord 
counsels  him  to  "  leave,"  etc.  To  offer 
sacrifice  or  worship,  before  reconciliation 
has  been  effected,  is  but  to  mock  the 
Searcher  of  hearts  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18 ; 
Eph.  iv.  26).— i^.  F.  Goe,  M.A. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Inward  hatred. — I.  The 
evil  of  this  sort  of  anger. — 1.  In 
our  Saviour's  interpretation  it  is  the 
first  step  towards  the  sin  of  murder. 
2.  It  clouds  the  judgment  with  such 
thick  fumes  of  passion  that  it  is  not 
capable  of  discerning  truth  from  false- 
hood, or  right  from  wrong,  and  gives 
a  strong  bias  to  the  affections.  3.  There 
is  no  passion  more  inconsistent  with 
society  and  good  government.  4.  This 
anger  is  directly  opposed  to  the  love  of 
our  neighbours  in  general. 

108 


II.  The  means  for  preventing  and 
removing  it. — 1.  Let  us  avoid  a  weak, 
peevish,  waspish  disposition.  2.  Let 
us  consider  this  world  as  a  place  full  of 
trouble.  3.  Let  us  accustom  ourselves 
to  overlook  the  immediate  instruments 
of  our  troubles,  and  take  them  all  as 
from  the  hands  of  God.  4.  Let  us 
avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  all  the 
usual  causes  or  occasions  of  anger. 
5.  Let  us  consider  how  much  self- 
denial  is  a  principal  duty  of  the  Christian 
religion,  and  what  noble  promises  are 
made  to  it. — Jas.  Blair ^  M.A. 

Ver.  22.  Slight  affronting  words. — To 
guard  us  against  all  disrespect  and 
shght,  or  even  incivility  to  our  neigh- 
bour, there  are  a  few  things  I  would 
offer  to  your  consideration. 

I.  That  this  slight  and  disrespect 
towards  our  neighbour  proceeds  com- 
monly from  bad  causes  ;  such  as :  1.  A 
pride  and  haughtiness  in  ourselves, 
and  a  conceitedness  as  to  our  own 
opinions  and  ways.  2.  At  least,  a 
want  of  due  consideration  of  our 
neighbour's  case  ;  perhaps  that  which 
we  are  offended  at  in  him  is  owing  to 
the  uneasiness  of  his  circumstances ; 
the  pains  and  diseases  of  his  body ; 
the  fatigue  of  business;  the  stiffness 
of  his  natural  temper ;  or  some  little 
mistake  or  oversight  such  as  are  very 
incident  to  all  mankind.  3.  Or  it  is 
owing  to  our  own  hasty  and  impatient 
temper,  which  could  not  bear  with  the 
least  provocation  or  contradiction. 

II.  Disrespect  to  our  neighbour  is 
attended  with  very  bad  consequences 
and  effects. — There  is  no  man  so  dull 
but  he  can  apprehend  the  least  dis- 
respect put  upon  him.  Disrespectful 
words  begin  to  alienate  our  neighbour's 
affection  from  us,  as  persons  that  are 
unjust  to  him,  etc. 

III.  All  slight  and  disrepect  towards 
our  neighbour  is  exceedingly  incon- 
sistent with  the  laws  of  Christianity, 
which  require  a  spirit  of  love,  charity, 
humility,  meekness,  and  patience  ;  that 
we  should  honour  all  men;  that  we 
should  curb  our  tongues,  and  govern 
our    passions;     that    we    should    be 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


courteous  and  condescending,  and 
become  all  things  to  all  men,  that  by 
all  means  we  may  gain  some. 

IV.  Consider  the  good  consequences 
of  the  contrary  virtue. — I  mean,  true 
love  and  respect  to  our  neighbour, 
manifested  by  all  expressions  of 
Christian  friendship  and  civility  ;  how 
it  smooths  men's  tempers,  calms  their 
passions,  disposes  them  for  receiving 
any  good  impressions  we  would  make 
upon  them ;  how  it  contributes  to 
keep  up  peace  and  good  neighbourhood, 
and  a  spirit  of  love  and  friendship 
among  men,  than  which  there  is 
nothing  more  necessary  towards  the 
happiness  of  the  world. — Ibid. 

Degrees  of  punishment  in  the  otiier 
world  — I.  What  foundation  there  is  for 
this  doctrine  from  the  text. — 1.  From 
the  whole  scope  and  purport  of  this 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  it  is  evident  our 
Saviour  is  not  instructing  magistrates, 
but  private  Christians ;  He  is  not 
prescribing  laws  of  human  policy,  but 
directing  the  conscience,  His  kingdom 
not  being  of  this  world.  2.  Our 
Saviour  never  took  upon  Him  either  to 
inflict  or  to  prescribe  human  penalties ; 
but  thought  fit  to  leave  the  govern- 
ments of  the  world  in  the  full 
possession  of  their  jurisdiction ;  and 
therefore  it  is  no  way  probable  that  He 
is  here  prescribing  the  penalties  of 
human  courts  of  judicature.  3.  It  is 
plain  from  the  sins  here  described, 
they  are  such  as  fall  not  under  the 
cognisance  of  human  laws,  the  first  of 
them  being  inward  anger,  which,  till 
it  breaks  out  into  some  outward  words 
or  actions,  cannot  be  the  subject  of 
any  rule,  but  of  Him  who  alone  is  the 
Searcher  of  heo-rts.  The  punishments, 
then,  here  assigned  must  all  relate  to 
the  other  world.  And  if  so,  there 
being  here  several  degrees  of  punish- 
ments assigned,  it  follows  plainly  that 
there  are  several  degrees  of  punishments 
in  the  world  to  come. 

II.  Some  other  Scripture  proofs  of 
the  same  doctrine. — Ps.  Ixii.  12 ; 
Prov.  xxiv.  12;  Matt.  xvi.  27;  Luke 
xii.  47,  48  ;  Matt.  xi.  22,  24. 


III.  What  ground  there  is  in  the 
nature  and  reason  of  the  thing  for 
this  doctrine. — 1.  All  wicked  people 
are  not  wicked  in  the  same  degree. 
2.  Of  those  who  go  to  the  same  degree 
and  pitch  of  wickedness,  the  sin  is  not 
equal  in  them  all.  In  some,  perhaps, 
it  is  only  a  sin  of  ignorance,  and  the 
error  of  their  education  ;  in  others,  it 
is  studied  perverseness  and  wickedness. 
Some  have  been  captains  and  ring- 
leaders in  vice,  others  have  been  but 
followers  and  accessories,  etc. 

IV.  Inferences. — This  doctrine  may 
serve — 1.  To  vindicate  the  justice  of 
God.  2.  To  deter  even  wicked  men 
from  several  high  degrees  of  wicked- 
ness. 3.  To  put  us  upon  a  trial  of  our 
own  state. — Ibid. 

Vers.  23,  24.  Worship  and  recon- 
ciliation.— This  passage  may  be  under- 
stood as  combining  two  lessons. 

I.  The  most  sacred  of  all  occupations 
should  not  be  an  impediment  to  the 
duty  of  reconciliation. 

II.  The  gift  will  not  be  acceptable 
to  God  while  offered  in  enmity  against 
a  brother. — On  this  precept  is  founded 
the  rule  of  the  church  requiring 
adversaries  to  be  reconciled  before 
partaking  of  the  Holy  Communion. — 
Bean  Mansel. 

Vers.  25,  26.  Agreeing  with  one's  ad- 
versary.— I.  The  duty  enjoined. — -1.  We 
are  not  to  abandon  the  adversary's 
company  if  it  may  be  allowed  us. 
2.  We  are  to  leave  no  means  untried 
with  him  that  may  tend  to  reconcilia- 
tion. There  should  be  (1)  Inward  love ; 
(2)  Outward  expressions  of  courtesy 
and  civiUty ;  (3)  Receding  from  our 
strict  right  for  peace's  sake ;  (4)  Acts 
of  beneficence  and  friendship ;  (5) 
Prayer  to  God  for  him. 

II.  The  evil  consequences  attending 
the  neglect  or  delay  of  this  duty. — 
There  are  three  sorts  of  evil  conse- 
quences to  be  considered.  1.  The  evil 
consequences  in  this  world  of  letting 
differences  run  on  so  far  as  to  come  to 
the  extremity  of  the  law.  2.  The  other 
evil  consequences  in  this  world  likewise, 

109 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


of  other  quarrels  beside  lawsuits,  which, 
by  a  parity  of  reason,  fall  under  the 
consideration  of  this  advice  of  agreeing 
with  the  adversary  (James  iii.  5,  6). 
3.  The  evil  consequences  in  the  great 
day  of  judgment  of  neglecting  or 
delaying  to  make  our  peace  with  our 
adversary. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Ver.  26.  (With  Mark  ii.  10).  Sin 
and  forgiveness. — To  the  Christian 
doctrine  of  forgiveness  men  have  offered 
a  twofold  objection — the  objection  of 
levity,  and  the  objection  of  reason. 
1.  The  first  declares  that  sin  is  a 
mere  trifle,  if  it  is  even  as  much  as 
that,  and  that  forgiveness  is  a  simple 
process  which  can  be  magically  and 
swiftly  set  at  work.  2.  To  accept 
the  objection  of  reason  means  despair. 
Reason  says,  "There  can  be  no  such 
thing  as  forgiveness  of  sins."  Science 
utterly  slays  the  doctrine.  All  the 
forgiveness  in  the  world  is  incapable  of 
blotting  out  a  man's  past.  In  nature 
there  is  no  such  doctrine,  neither  can 
there  be  in  religion.  Nature  exacts 
her  tribute  to  the  full,  and  she  says  to 
us,  "  You  shall  not  come  out  thence 
until  you  have  paid  the  uttermost 
farthing."  Reason,  however,  under 
the  guidance  of  God,  will  reach  a  much 
higher  conclusion  than  the  reason 
which  is  its  own  guide — a  conclusion 
which  is  honourable  and  pacific  and 
true  to  law. 

I.  The  universal  law  of  God  is, 
"whatsoever  a  man  sows,  that  shall 
he  also  reap." — Every  violation  of  the 
moral  law  is  followed  by  penalty.  The 
Christian  doctrine  of  forgiveness  does 
not  repeal  that  law.  Whatever  forgive- 
ness does  for  a  man,  it  does  not  sweep 
away  from  his  life  the  consequences  of 
past  misdeeds.  God  forgave  David's 
great  sin,  but  David  had  also  to  pay 
the  bitter  price  of  his  wickedness,  and 
the  ages  have  been  acquainted  with  the 
story. 

II.  What  under  such  circumstances, 
can  a  man  do  ? — There  is  at  least  a 
choice  of  two  courses.  1.  The  first  is 
to  pay  your  own  debt  as  best  you  can. 
This  psoudo-courageousness  has  a  fasci- 

110 


nation  for  some  minds,  but  wUl  you 
think  what  it  really  means?  If  you 
have  a  true  conception  of  the  extent  of 
your  liability,  you  will  not  so  glibly 
talk  about  "  paying  like  a  man." 
2.  The  second  course  open  to  you  is 
that  in  which  God  comes  to  us  and 
makes  us  an  offer  by  which  the  debt 
may  be  paid  with  honour  to  the  law 
and  with  perfect  deliverance  to  the 
sinner.  This  offer  is  known  as  the 
doctrine  of  forgiveness.  Be  careful  to 
observe  that  the  doctrine  of  forgiveness 
is  a  matter  entirely  of  revelation. 
What  then  is  forgiveness?  It  is  the 
first  medicine  administered  to  us  by  the 
Great  Physician  with  a  view  to  our 
complete  restoration  to  spiritual  health. 
— F.  C.  Spurr. 

Vers.  27-32.  The  mastery  of  the  body. 
— The  two  voices  are  again  heard ;  the 
first  "by  them  of  old  time,"  the  second 
that  (apart  from  divinity)  of  a  dogma- 
tist— solemn,  impressive,  in  His  in- 
dividuality. "  But,  /  say,"  etc.  There 
is  no  division  of  responsibility,  all  rests 
upon  that  " 'Eyw  ! "  1.  All  human 
impulses  are  to  be  held  in  perfect 
mastery.  2.  There  is  a  judgment 
upon  the  heart  as  well  as  upon  the 
outer  life.  3.  When  the  bodily 
appetites  and  the  spiritual  nature 
come  into  collision,  let  the  body  suffer, 
not  the  soul.  A  whole  body  (a  body 
wholly  gratified)  oi*  a  maimed  soul — 
which  ?  4.  There  are  bodily  tempta- 
tions as  well  as  mental  temptations. 
The  mind  has  advantages  in  the  pro- 
bationary state  which  the  body  has 
not;  death  has  yet  to  pass  upon  the 
body;  the  body  is  not  to  be  wholly 
pui'ified  or  transformed  until  the 
resurrection ;  the  mind,  on  the 
contrary  (except  so  far  as  modified  by 
the  body),  may  be  "  set  on  things 
above."  5.  Christ,  in  this  paragraph, 
shows  the  bearing  of  His  specific 
truths  on  the  body  and  bodily  relations  : 
(1)  Personal  mastery.  (2)  Personal 
mastery  may  require  the  severest 
measures.  (3)  Personal  mastery 
required  in  the  maintenance  of  the 
conjugal  bond.— X  Parker,  D.D. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.        chap.  v. 


Ver.  28.  Mental  uncleanness. — 
1.  Begin  at  the  root  as  our  Saviour 
here  advises,  and  restrain  all  mental 
impurities.  2.  Carefully  avoid  all 
occasions  of  this  sin,  e.g.  bad  books, 
impure  plays,  lewd  company,  etc. 
3.  Keep  the  body  under  by  labour  and 
temperance.  4.  Avoid  idleness,  and 
be  prudent  as  to  recreations.  5.  When 
temptations  are  presented,  do  not  argue 
or  parley  with  them,  do  not  lie  still 
and  muse  upon  them,  but  flee  from 
them.  6.  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love 
of  God  and  contemplate  the  things  of 
eternity.  7.  Another  remed)^  of  lust 
prescribed  b}^  God  Almighty  is  suitable 
marriage. — Jas.  Blair ^  M.A. 

Vers.  29,  30.  Plucking  out  the  eye 
and  cutting  off  the  hand. — I.  The 
supposition. — That  the  best  members 
of  the  body,  particularly  the  right  eye 
and  right  hand,  may  lead  us  into  very 
dangerous  sins. 

II.  The  duty  of  mortifying  these 
members.  This  implies:  1.  A  serious 
and  firm  resolution  of  restraining  the 
members  and  imagination  from  un- 
lawful objects.  2.  An  avoiding  all 
the  occasions  of  sin.  3.  The  continual 
use  of  all  those  means  whereby  sin  may 
be  entirely  subdued  in  us. 

III.  The  danger  of  suffering  our 
members  to  continue  the  instruments 
of  sin. — Ihid. 

Abandoning  darling  sins. — I.  The 
possibility  of  conquering  darling  sins. 
— If  this  were  not  possible  God  would 
never  require  it  of  us,  and  that  under 
pain  of  damnation. 

II.  The  difficulty  and  the  causes  of 
it. — 1.  To  make  a  darling  sin,  we 
must  suppose  a  great  propensity  of 
corrupt  nature,  and  to  rectify  nature 
is  very  difficult.  2.  This  propensity 
must  be  supposed  to  be  confirmed  by  a 
vicious  course  or  habit,  and  so  to  have 
become  customary  (Jer.  xiii.  23). 

III.  Some  advices  to  facilitate  this 
matter. — 1.  Let  us  be  fully  persuaded 
of  the  necessity  of  parting  with  our 
beloved  sins,  under  pain  of  our  eternal 
and     final    destruction.        2.   Let    us 


believe  that  the  longer  we  indulge  in 
vicious  practices,  so  much  the  harder 
it  will  be  to  get  rid  of  them.  3.  Let 
us  firmly  believe  that  there  is  no 
impossibility  in  overcoming  our  most 
favourite  sins.  4.  Our  chief  care 
must  be  to  apply  ourselves  diligently 
to  the  use  of  all  the  means  of  grace. 
5.  We  must  not  be  discouraged  if  we 
obtain  not  the  victory  at  first. — Ihid. 

Vers.  31,  32.  The  Christian  doctrine 
concerning  divorces. — I.  Explication. — 
Our  Saviour  was  not  here  treating  of 
the  impediments  of  marriage  from  the 
beginning,  but  only  of  the  dissolution 
of  lawful  marriages ;  particularly  He 
is  here  correcting  the  too  great  liberty 
the  Jewish  husbands  took  to  put  away 
their  wives  for  slight  causes.  He 
seems  to  have  determined  as  much  in 
this  case  as  was  fit  in  prudence,  viz. 
that  the  liberty  of  divorce  for  any 
lighter  cause  than  the  marriage 
infidelity  should  be  prohibited ;  but 
that  even  in  that  case  it  should  not  be 
commanded,  but  left  to  the  greater  or 
lesser  aggravation  of  the  crime,  from 
the  various  circumstances  of  it ;  and 
the  consideration  of  the  consequences  of 
severity  or  indulgence,  to  himself,  and 
his  wdfe  and  children,  and  the  world 
abroad.  I  speak  cautiously  on  this 
difficult  subject,  because,  as  far  as  I 
can  perceive,  there  never  was,  nor  is 
any  positive  command  for  divorce. 

II.  Vindication. — 1.  To  some  it 
may  seem  very  hard  that  for  no  other 
fault  but  that  of  adultery,  a  man  can 
put  away  his  wife.  There  are  many 
other  things  which  make  the  married 
state  very  uneasy,  and  if  some  men 
had  their  will  they  would  have  it  as 
easy  a  thing  to  put  away  a  wife  as  to 
turn  out  a  boarder.  But  :  (1)  The 
great  ends  of  marriage  could  never 
be  attained,  if  marriage  were  to  be 
dissolved  upon  every  slight  account. 
Consider  what  those  ends  are,  and 
whether  they  are  generally  attainable 
any  other  way  than  by  making 
marriage  a  mutual  contract  for  life. 
(a)  As  to  the  procreation  and  edu- 
cation of  children ;    could  that   be  so 

111 


CHAP.  V.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


well  minded,  if  their  mothers  were  to 
be  turned  off  at  pleasure,  and  they  left 
to  the  care  of  any  strange  woman,  who 
would  look  upon  them  as  so  many 
encumbrances  upon  the  estate,  and  so 
many  rivals  of  her  own  children? 
{h)  As  to  the  being  a  remedy  of  lust, 
which  is  another  good  end  for  the 
institution  of  matrimony ;  if  marriage 
were  an  ..uncertain  loose  thing,  subject 
to  be  dissolved  vipon  every  humour  and 
caprice  of  the  parties,  and  new  wives 
as  frequently  brought  in,  this  would 
be  no  confinement  of  lust  at  all ;  but 
loose  men  would  change  their  wives  as 
frequently  as  they  do  their  mistresses, 
and  marriage  would  be  only  a  cloak 
for  whoredom,  under  a  more  specious 
name.  (c)  If  we  consider  married 
persons,  as  they  are  mutual  helps  to 
one  another  in  managing  a  common 
estate  for  the  benefit  of  themselves  and 
their  children,  there  is  nothing  can 
so  well  qualify  them  to  answer  that 
end  as  the  being  linked  together  by  an 
inseparable  bond,  which  joins  their  two 
interests  in  one.  But  now,  upon  a 
supposition  of  these  frequent  disso- 
lutions of  marriage,  each  party  would 
have  a  different  interest  to  carry  on ; 
the  woman  upon  the  prospect  of  part- 
ing, nay  upon  the  bare  supposition  of 
the  probability,  or  even  possibility  of 
it,  would  think  it  but  prudence  to 
provide  for  that  time,  and  to  feather 
her  nest,  by  pilfering  and  purloining 
from  her  husband's  estate,  as  much  as 
she  could,  while  they  are  together. 
(d)  Marriage  was  instituted  for  the 
mutual  love  and  comfort  of  the  parties, 
that  such  a  sacred  friendship  might 
ease  and  sweeten  the  several  troubles 
and  uneasinesses  of  life.  Now,  its  being 
a  perpetual  lasting  bond  of  amity,  con- 
tributes very  much  to  this ;  they  know 
now  if  they  have  any  differences,  their 
best  way  is  to  make  them  up.  (2)  This 
discrediting  and  making  light  of 
marriage  would  be  attended  by  other 
very  great  inconveniences.  Particu- 
larly the  weaker  sex,  after  having  left 
father  and  mother,  after  having  been 
deprived  of  their  portion  and  their 
honour,   must  be  turned  off  to  strive 

112 


with  solitude  and  '  discontent  "^ll  tEe 
rest  of  their  life.  2.  As  to  the  per- 
mitting of  divorce  in  case  of  the  breach 
of  the  marriage  covenant;  as  in  all 
covenants,  when  one  of  the  parties 
breaks  the  fundamental  articles,  the 
other  is  absolved  if  he  pleases,  so  it  is 
very  fit  that  it  should  be  in  this  great 
marriage-covenant,  especially  consider- 
ing what  an  intolerable  hardship  it 
would  put  on  the  innocent  party  to  be 
obliged  to  love  and  trust  one  that 
betrays  him,  to  maintain  and  provide 
for  an  adulterous  brood,  and  to  have 
his  right  made  away  to  strangers. 

III.  Inferences. — 1.  Our  Saviour 
not  only  acts  the  part  of  a  good  inter- 
preter of  the  law,  but  sometimes  makes 
use  of  the  authority  of  a  legislator  too. 
2.  We  may  observe  how  sacred  and 
inviolable  He  would  have  the  state  of 
marriage  to  be.  He  makes  it  a 
covenant  for  life.  Teaching  (1)  With 
what  deliberation,  prudence,  and  cir- 
cumspection we  should  enter  into  that 
lasting  state.  (2)  With  what  sweet- 
ness and  friendliness  of  temper  we 
ought  to  behave  ourselves  so  as  to  make 
the  journey  of  life  pleasant,  both  to 
ourselves,  and  to  this  our  inseparable 
companion.  (3)  Since  our  Saviour  has 
left  such  a  blot  on  that  sort  of  unclean- 
ness  committed  by  married  persons, 
that  on  account  thereof  he  permits  the 
dissolution  of  the  marriage,  let  this 
deter  us  from  all  approaches  to  those 
sins.  Let  husbands  and  wives  beware 
of  everything  that  may  in  the  least 
create  any  dryness  or  alienation  of 
affection  from  one  another.  Let  them 
beware  of  those  pretended  friends,  who 
bring  oil  to  inflame,  instead  of  water 
to  quench,  the  fire  of  strife  and  conten- 
tion, when  it  is  kindled  between  them. 
Let  every  approach  of  criminal  address, 
so  soon  as  it  is  perceived,  be  rejected 
with  abhorrence. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Ver.  32.  The  evil  consequences  of 
pa/rting  man  and  wife. — I.  A  general 
lesson. — That  whosoever  commits  any 
sin  is  answerable  not  only  for  the 
necessary,  but  for  all  the  probable 
consequences  of  that  sin. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  v. 


II.  A  particular  lesson. — That  those 
quarrels  of  man  and  wife  which  are 
attended  with  parting,  have  very- 
terrible  consequences.  1.  The  dis- 
honour and  disgrace  of  it  is  apt  to 
throw  the  wife  into  despair,  that  she 
does  not  care  what  becomes  of  her ; 
and  is  consequently  tempted  to  lay 
aside  that  guard  she  had  formerly  upon 
her  honour.  2.  The  excess  of  injury 
is,  perhaps,  greater  than  any  ordinary 
patience  can  bear.  3.  The  great  want 
to  which  such  an  abandoned  state 
exposes  poor  women,  and  the  helpless- 
ness of  their  circumstances,  often  drives 
them  upon  ill  courses. — Ibid. 

Vers.  33-37.  Oaths. — In  these  words 
our  Saviour  gives  another  instance 
wherein  the  righteousness  of  Christians 
must  exceed  that  of  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees.. 

I.  What  was  good  in  the  opinion 
of  the  Jewish  doctors  concerning  the 
third  commandment.  They  condemned 
perjury  (v.  33). 

II.  Wherein  our  Saviour  finds  it 
defective. — 1.  In  that  they  thought 
nothing  else  was  prohibited  in  the 
third  commandment,  but  the  sin  of 
perjury.  2.  That  they  allowed  of 
oaths  by  creatures,  of  which  four  are 
here  mentioned,  heaven,  and  earth, 
Jerusalem,  and  their  head.  3.  That 
they  reckoned  such  oaths  as  were  not 
by  the  name  of  God,  not  binding : 
whereas,  though  they  were  not  in  God's 
name,  yet  they  had  so  near  a  relation 
to  Him,  as  having  the  formality  of  a 
promise  upon  oath,  that  on  that  account 
they  ought  to  have  been  observed. 
4.  That  they  had  brought  in  a 
practice  of  swearing  in  conversation,  and 
so  made  way  for  rash,  idle,  customary 
oaths. 

III.  What  further  improvements 
He  makes  on  this  subject. — 1.  He 
condemns  all  rash,  customary  swearing 
in  conversation.  2.  He  disallows  all 
swearing  by  the  creatures.  3.  He 
asserts  the  obligation  of  such  oaths, 
as  to  men,  though  defective  in  point 
of  duty  to  God.  4.  He  recommends 
such  a  veracity,  honesty,  and  sincerity 


in  speech,  that  we  may  be  trusted  upon 
our  bare  word,  without  an  oath. — 
Ibid. 

Ver.  33.  The  great  sin  of  perjury. — 
I.  Describe  wherein  perjury  consists. — 
It  is  either  swearing  to  a  false  thing 
at  present ;  or  afterwards,  a  voluntary 
breach  of  a  lawful  promise  upon  oath. 
Divines  agree  that  the  chief  properties 
of  an  oath  are  those  three  mentioned 
by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (ch.  iv.  2), 
Thou  shalt  swear  the  Lord  liveth  in 
truths  judgment,  and  righteousness. 
The  first  condition  "  truth,"  excludes 
not  only  all  lying,  but  all  trick,  deceit, 
or  equivocation.  The  second  condition 
is  "  judgment " ;  it  is  not  sufficient 
that  what  we  swear  be  true,  it  must 
be  a  thing  of  weight  and  importance. 
The  third  condition  is  "righteousness"  ; 
it  must  be  a  just  thing  in  itself. 
Perjury  is,  in  general,  the  calling  of 
God  to  be  witness  to  a  lie.    This  is  done : 

1.  When  we  assert  upon  oath  a  thing 
to  be  true,  which  we  know  to  be  false. 

2.  When  we  assert  upon  oath  a  thing 
to  be  true,  of  the  truth  of  which  we 
are  not  fully  assured.  And  this,  though 
the  thing  should  happen  to  be  true. 

3.  When  we  declare  upon  oath  such  a 
thing  to  be  our  judgment,  which  really 
is  not  so.  4.  When,  in  giving  our  testi- 
mony as  to  any  matter  of  fact,  we 
wilfully  suppress  some  material  part  of 
the  truth,  and  aggravate  other  parts  of 
it,  or  endeavour  so  to  disguise  and  change 
our  account  of  facts,  as  that  the  judges 
and  juries  may  not  have  a  right  notion 
of  the  matter  in  question.  5.  They 
that  promise  upon  oath  what  they  do 
not  intend  to  perform  are,  ipso  facto, 
guilty  of  perjury,  because  they  call 
God  to  witness  a  false  thing,  where  the 
intention  of  their  minds  does  not 
concur  with  the  words  and  meaning  of 
their  oath.  6.  They  are  likewise 
guilty  of  perjury,  who,  though  they 
promise  with  a  sincere  intention  to 
perform,  do  afterwards,  of  their  own 
accord,  fall  off;  when  the  thing  they 
promised  is  both  lawful  and  in  their 
power  to  perform.  7.  They  are  guilty 
of   perjury,   who   make   use   of  tricks 

I  113 


CHAP.  V.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW, 


and  equivocations,  and  put  forced  senses 
on  the  words  of  an  oath,  or  look  for 
evasions,  contrary  to  the  plain  and 
genuine   sense  of  the  words. 

II.  What  it  is  that  leads  and  tempts 
men  to  perjury. — Bribery,  rashness, 
partiality,  self-interest. 

III.  The  heinousness  of  the  sin  of 
perjury. — 1.  It  is  a  great  proof  of  a 
profane,  atheistical  mind  2.  It  is 
highly  injurious  to  mankind ;  for  an  oath 
being  of  so  universal  use  among  men, 
in  transacting  matters  of  the  highest 
consequence,  whosoever  goes  about  to 
make  it  vile  and  cheap  does  what  in 
him  lies  to  destroy  the  highest  bonds  of 
faith  and  truth  among  men.  3.  As 
no  sin  has  a  worse  influence  on  all  parts 
of  our  duty,  whether  to  God  or  man, 
so  there  is  no  sin  more  expressly  for- 
bidden, or  more  grievously  threatened 
in  the  law  of  God.  It  is  observed  that 
idolatry  and  perjury  are  the  only  two 
sins  to  which  an  express  threatening  is 
annexed  in  the  Decalogue. 

lY.  "What  absolves  us  from  perjury, 
though  we  cannot  always  perform  our 
oaths. — 1.  They  who  are  under  the 
command  of  a  lawful  superior,  cannot 
execute  an  oath  or  a  vow  in  anything 
to  which  his  consent  is  required,  if  he 
expressly  dissents  from  it.  See  Numb. 
XXX.  All  our  oaths  and  vows  must  be 
understood  to  be  meant  with  this  limi- 
tation, "  as  far  as  it  is  in  my  power." 
2.  When  the  matter  of  the  thing  fails 
about  which  the  oath  was  given,  then 
the  oath  itself  is  no  longer  binding. 
A  soldier  that  takes  the  military  oath, 
when  peace  is  made  and  he  comes  to 
be  disbanded,  he  is  likewise  free  from 
that  oath.  3.  When  we  give  our  oath 
to  another  and  promise  him  something 
for  his  benefit,  if  he  pleases  to  forgive 
that  obligation  in  whole  or  in  part,  no 
doubt  we  are  then  absolved  from  our 
oath  or  such  part  of  it,  provided  no 
harm  be  done  to  any  other.  4.  If  the 
oath  we  take  to  another  be,  either 
expressly  or  in  its  own  nature,  con- 
ditional, that  is,  with  a  proviso  that 
something  be  done  of  his  part ;  then, 
upon  his  faihng  as  to  his  part  of  the 
condition,    we    are   likewise   absolved 

lU 


from  ours.  But  it  is  otherwise  where 
both  parties  absolutely  promise  one 
another,  and  not  conditionally,  for 
there  the  failing  of  one,  doth  not 
absolve  the  other.  5.  Whatever  we 
promise,  even  upon  oath,  must  be 
understood  with  a  proviso  that  it  be 
both  possible  and  lawful  for  us,  and 
that  no  unforeseen  thing  happen  which 
may  make  our  observing  our  oath  an 
evil,  or  uncomely,  dishonest  action. — 
J  as.  Blair  f  M.A. 

Rash  and  supeiifluous  oaths. — Though 
the  words  of  the  third  commandment 
signify  principally,  thou  shalt  not 
swear  falsely,  they  signify  likewise, 
thou  shalt  not  swear  vainly  or  un- 
necessarily. So  that  all  rash,  trifling, 
superfluous  oaths  are  forbidden  as  well 
as  false  ones. 

I.  The  consideration  of  God  should 
deter  us  from  the  common  use  of  oaths ; 
for  He  is  not  a  common  witness  to  be 
called  in  upon  all  trivial  occasions. 

II.  The  sacredness  of  oaths  should 
deter  us  fi-om  making  them  cheap  and 
common ;  for  as  in  human  judicatures 
for  small  matters  there  are  inferior 
courts,  and  it  is  not  allowed  that  the 
superior  courts  be  troubled,  except  in 
cases  of  moment  or  difliculty,  so  God 
hath  set  such  an  honour  upon  an  oath, 
which  is  an  appeal  to  Himself,  that  it 
must  be  a  matter  of  great  consequence 
in  which  this  last  resort  is  allowed. 

III.  A  due  regard  to  our  own  dignity 
and  reputation  should  make  us  abstain 
from  unnecessary  oaths ;  for  he  who 
has  strictly  kept  up  his  honour  and 
reputation  will  be  believed  upon  his 
word  without  an  oath. — Ihid. 

Ver.  37.  Simplicity  and  veracity  in 
conversation.  — I.  A  precept. — "  Let  your 
communication  be,  Yea,  yea;  Nay,  nay." 
I  take  this  to  be  a  prohibition  of  :  1 .  A 
multiplicity  of  words.  2.  A  designed 
doubleness   or   equivocation    in   them. 

3.  Yain    compliments    and    flattery. 

4.  Oaths  and  imprecations.  And  on 
the  contrary,  an  injunction  that  our 
words  be  few,  plain,  sincere,  and  modest. 

II.  The  reason  of  this   precept. — 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  v. 


"  For  whatsoever,"  etc.     1.  If  we  ex-  since,  according  to  the  original  account 

ceed    the    plainness    and   veracity  of  in  Mark  (xiv.  61),  the  high  priest  did 

speech,  this  flows  from  some  bad  pri  -  not  put  his  question  in  the  form  of  an 

ciple  or  other.     2.  Whenever  our  dp-  adjuration.     Still,  we  can  point  to  the 

course    exceeds    the    due    bounds  ^H  fact  that  Jesus,  according  to  the  testi- 

simphcity   and   modesty,    we  aie  im-  mony   of   all   our   sources,  frequently 

mediately  to  take  the  alarm,  as  begin-  strengthened  His   statements   by   the 

ning  then  to  be  under  the  temptation  addition  of  "  verily,"  in  order  to  awaken 

of  the  devil ;  and  to  what  intemperance  a  closer  attention  in  His  hearers,  and 

of  language  he  may  carry  us,  nobody  greater  trust  in  His  word  (e.g.  Matt. 

c&n  tell.— Ibid.  v.   18;   Mark  iii.  28,  viii.   12,  ix.   1; 

John  iii.  3,  v.  19,  24,  etc.).     When  we 
Vers.    33-37.    Christ's    teaching    on  consider  tho  matter,  it  is  certainly  true 
oaths. — In  order  to  avoid  any  conclu-  in  a  certain  sense   that  the  absolute 
sions  drawn  from  this  precept  of  Jesus,  prohibition  of  oaths  can  only  find  its 
which  are  out  of  harmony  alike  with  full  realisation  in  the  perfected  kingdom 
the  general  view  of   Jesus,   elsewhere  of  God,  where  the  disciples  have  no 
expressed     in     regard     to     the     true  longer  dealings  with  men  who  mistrust 
righteousness,    and     with     His     own  them,  and  whom  they  must  themselves 
practice,    we   must    fix   our   attention  mistrust.    But,  to  my  mind,  we  cannot 
upon  the  purpose  He  had  in  view  in  say  that  Jesus  consciously  made  this 
thus  prohibiting  swearing.     T^at  pur-  prohibition  only  for  the  future  ideal 
pose  is  plainly  shown  from  the  line  of  state  of  the  perfected  kingdom,  or  only 
thought  running  throughout  the  dis-  for  His  disciples  in   their  intercourse 
course  on  righteousness.     It  was  the  with  one  another.     For  He  addressed 
inculcation  of  a  righteousness  having  His  precept  to  the  then  present  hearers 
its   root  in  the  heart,    and  therefore  of  His  discourse,  and  that  in  regard  to 
requiring   to    be    unconditionally    ob-  their  speech  in  general,  and  not  merely 
served  in  the  simplest  outward  acts,  to  their  speech  among  other  members 
An  oath  and  solemn  afiirmation  which  'of  the  kingdom.     We  must,  however, 
a  man  may  employ  before  his  fellow-  bear  in  mind  that  principle  which  is  so 
men,   since,  in  their  inability  to  read  often  to  be  observed  in  the  discourses 
his  inward   truthfulness,  they  cannot  of   Jesus,    of   aiming  at  the   greatest 
put  full  confidence  in  his  word  if   it  clearness  in  the  shortest  compass.    Ac- 
be   not    solemnly   asserted,   are   quite  cording  to  this  principle,  in  order  to 
different  in  their   nature  and  inward  make  the  meaning  and  scope  of  a  rule 
motive   from   the  oath   and  protesta-  as   plain   as    possible.   He    abstracted 
tion  with  which   a   man  accompanies  from  all  the  circumstances  of  ordinary 
his  word,  because  he  would  not  feel  life  which  tended  in  any  way  to  obscure 
absolutely  pledged  to  truth  and  faith-  that  meaning  and  scope,  yet  without 
fulness  by  his  simple  word  and  promise,  really  setting  up  an  exception  to  the 
From  the  whole  tenor  of  His  teaching  rule.     According  to  the  tenor  of  the 
in  regard  to  the  righteousness  of  the  discourse,    the  point  intended  here    is 
kingdom  of  God,  there  is  no  reason  to  to  substitute,  for  the  earlier  command 
conclude  that  the  members  of  the  king-  to  be  faithful  and  true  in  regard  to 
dom  were  forbidden  the   use  of  such  oaths,  the  higher  command  to  be  true 
confirmatory  forms  of  speech  towards  and  faithful  in  regard  to  the  smallest 
others,  or  an  appeal  to  God  as  witness  word.     The  prohibition  of   oaths  and 
to  the  truth  of  their  words.     Perhaps  all  confirmatory  additions  to  the  simple 
we  cannot  refer  to  the  fact  that  Jesus  statement,  is  in  this  connection   only 
Himself,  at  His  trial  before  the  high  meant  to  apply  to  the  use  of  oaths  and 
priest,  answered  by  oath  (according  to  other  protestations,  as  expressing  the 
the  adjuration  of  the  high  priest),  the  reservation  that  one  is  not  pledged  to 
(question  whether  He  were  the  Messiah,  truth  and  faithfulness  by  the  simple 

110 


CHAP.  V.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW. 


and   ordinary   form  of  speech.     Jesus  servation,  and  so  far  as  they  arose  out 

sought  with  the  greatest  clearness  to  of  a  deceitful  spirit. — H.  H,   Wendt, 

forbid,  universally  and  unconditionally,  D.D 
such  protestations  made  with  this  re- 

MAm  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGBAPH— Verses  SSA8. 

Counsels  of  perfection. — The  subject  discussed  here  is  at  once  general  and 
restricted.  It  is  general  because,  instead  of  taking  up  individual  command- 
ments, as  in  vers.  21-37,  it  rather  deals  with  the  whole  question  of  the 
second  table  of  the  law.  It  is  restricted  because  it  takes  up  nothing  beside. 
The  duty  of  man  towards  his  neighbour  !  All  that,  and  only  that,  is  spoken  of 
here.  This  one  subject  seems  treated  here  in  two  different  ways.  On  the  one 
hand,  we  find  more  demanded  in  our  Saviour's  teaching  about  the  matter  in  hand ; 
on  the  other  hand  we  find  more  imparted,  than  ever  before. 

1.  More  demanded. — More  demanded,  in  the  first  place,  as  to  the  way  of 
dealing  with  wrong.  The  natural  tendency  of  men,  on  this  point,  is  to  return 
evil  for  evil ;  and  to  return  it,  so  to  speak,  with  interest,  too.  Natural  justice, 
where  wrong  has  been  done,  approves  of  its  being  returned.  Natural  anger  goes 
further,  and  wishes  it  returned  in  excess.  "  I  gave  him  more  than  I  got ; "  so 
we  wish,  naturally,  to  be  able  to  say.  But  the  law  of  old  stepped  in  here,  and 
said  emphatically  that  that  was  too  much.  *'  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a 
tooth  "  (ver.  38).  So  far,  but  no  farther,  it  allowed  men  to  say  ;  and,  in  so  allow- 
ing, it  placed,  of  course,  a  certain  amount  of  restriction — of  clear  restriction  and 
definite,  also,  if  not  very  close — upon  the  wishes  of  men.  What  the  teaching  of 
Christ  does  here  is  both  to  take  up  and  extend  this  idea.  Instead  of  saying  only 
when  evil  has  been  done  us,  that  we  are  not  to  return  it  in  excess ;  instead  of 
saying  even  in  such  a  case,  that  we  are  not  to  pay  back  as  much  ;  it  teaches  us 
rather,  in  the  plainest  language,  not  to  return  any  at  all.  '*  Resist  not  evil ; " 
resent  not  injuries  ;  almost  reward  them,  in  fact  (vers.  39-41).  Do  not  even  turn 
aside  from  the  man  (whoever  he  is)  to  whom  you  can  do  any  good  (ver.  42).  On  the 
other  side,  we  find  more  demanded  also  in  the  way  of  dealing  with  good.  On  this 
point  also,  the  attitude  of  human  nature,  where  wholly  untaught,  is  of  a  most 
unsatisfactory  kind.  It  has  been  said,  and  is  true,  of  certain  wild  beasts,  that 
they  regard  every  other  wild  beast  of  the  same  kind  as  a  natural  foe ;  and 
always,  therefore,  in  catching  sight  of  such,  begin  preparations  for  war.  There 
is  something  not  wholly  unHke  this  in  the  wholly  natural  man.  Ke  naturally 
mistrusts,  and  therefore  dislikes,  and  therefore  "  bristles  "  against  whatever  is 
similar  to  himself.  Therefore  it  was  that  the  law  of  old — God's  earlier  message 
— began  at  this  point.  It  teaches  us  not  to  hate,  but  to  love  those  with  whom 
we  are  brought  into  contact.  **  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  "  (ver.  43)  and  think 
well  of  him  until  he  has  proved  himself  the  reverse.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh- 
bour and  return  his  kindness  if  he  shows  kindness  to  thee.  On  this  advance — 
for  such  we  see  it  is — Christ  advances  still  more.  "  Thou  shalt  love  "  all  those, 
He  teaches,  whoever  they  are,  with  whom  thou  dost  come  into  contact.  Thou 
shalt  love  them  even  when  they  prove  themselves  no  true  *'  neighbours  "  to  thee ; 
"  blessing  "  them  always,  and  "  doing  them  good,"  and  "  praying  "  for  their  wel- 
fare ;  even  as  though,  all  the  time,  they  were  not  in  fact  doing  the  very  opposite 
about  thee.  So  clear  is  it  on  this  side,  as  on  the  other,  that  Christ  asks  us  to 
"  advance."  Let  that  half-emptied  cup  of  bitterness  be  by  you  emptied  entirely. 
Let  that  hcdf filled  cup  of  kindness  be  by  you  filled  to  the  brim.  Yea,  over  it 
also ! 

II.  More  imparted. — If  there  was  an  advance  in  demanding,  there  is  advance 
in  this  too.     An  advance  in  regard  to  the  amount  of  light  vouchsafed  in  this  case, 

116 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW,      chap.  V. 


The  mission  of  Christ  was  not  the  first  step  in  the  revelation  of  God  to  mankind. 
It  was  rather  the  third.  That  precious  but  dim  revelation  made  to  the  Gentiles 
(v.  47  R.  v.),  by  means  of  God's  works  (Rom.  i.  20  ;  Ps.  xix.  1-3)  may  be  looked 
on  as  the  first.  That  fuller  but  still  only  limited  declaration  of  the  nature  of 
God  contained  in  those  '*  sapngs  "  of  "  old  " — those  messages  and  ordinances  of 
Moses  and  the  prophets — to  which  the  Saviour  has  referred  in  this  chapter  so 
often,  may  be  considered  the  second.  That  still  fuller — but  still  not  exhaustive 
— setting  forth  of  God's  character  and  attributes  which  the  Saviour  Himself  had 
come  to  exhibit,  is  the  third  (see  John  i.  17,  18 ;  2  Peter  i.  19).  Of  this  the 
Saviour  Himself  afterwards  said,  that  it  was  greater  than  any  before  (Matt, 
xiii.  17).  To  this,  as  being  such,  in  this  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  He  is  pointing 
all  through.  According  to  Him  in  fact — according  therefore  to  truth — accord- 
ing to  all  also  that  we  have  quoted  just  now — His  teaching  conveyed  both  far 
fuller  light  and  far  clearer  light  than  before.  The  Gentiles,  in  a  word,  had 
walked  in  the  twilight ;  Israel,  in  that  of  the  morning ;  Christ  brought  that  of 
the  noon.  An  advance,  also,  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  its  light.  What  the 
Saviour  taught  was  of  a  more  gracious  character  than  any  before.  The  book  of 
nature  is  a  lesson  to  all  about  God  as  our  King.  His  exceeding  "  glory  " — His 
"  power  and  Godhead  " — are  the  things  it  sets  forth.  The  "  book  of  the  law  "  was 
a  lesson  to  Israel  about  God  as  a  lawgiver.  His  awful  justice.  His  stainless 
holiness,  are  the  chief  things  it  enforces  (Lev.  xi.  44,  etc.).  The  teaching  of  Christ 
is  especially  a  manifestation  of  Almighty  God  as  our  Father  (vers.  45,  48, 
vi.  1,  4,  6,  8,  9,  15,  etc. ;  also  especially  John  xiv.  6-9).  Evidently,  therefore, 
the  special  light  which  it  gives  us  is  that  which  is  most  important  to  us.  Most 
important  to  us,  on  the  one  hand,  as  being  the  works  of  His  hands ;  and  because 
what  it  shows  us  is,  that,  besides  being  such,  we  are  the  special  objects  of  His 
care.  We  are  not  only,  as  it  were,  part  of  the  furniture — we  are  the  "  children  " 
— of  the  house.  Most  important  to  us,  on  the  other,  as  being  children  who  have 
forfeited  their  right  to  that  name.  Here  is  that  which  is  proclaimed  to  us  by 
the  very  coming  of  "  Christ."  This  is  what  God  signifies  to  us  by  sending  us  His 
own  Son — viz.  that  He  is  able  and  willing  to  restore  us  to  our  former  standing 
as  sons  (John  i.  12).  A  light  this,  therefore,  which,  being  the  Light  of  Love,  is 
the  most  precious  of  all. 

We  see,  therefore,  on  the  whole,  the  perfect  reasonableness  of  the  demands 
made  in  this  passage.  They  are  **  counsels  of  perfection,"  it  is  undoubtedly 
true.  But  they  are  counsels,  also,  which  befit  the  atmosphere  in  which  they 
are  found.  We  expect  the  literal  Israel  to  be  nearer  God  than  the  Gentiles. 
We  expect  the  spiritual  Israel  to  be  still  nearer  than  they.  Fuller  light, 
clearer  guidance,  greater  strength,  more  powerful  motives  ought  to  excel,  if 
anything  does.  Those  who  are  privileged  to  know  such  a  Father  ought  on  every 
ground  to  be  like  Him.  What  is  the  object  of  a  perfect  example  except  that, 
as  it  were,  of  .giving  birth  to  similar  copies  ?  Copies  as  "  perfect "  themselves 
as  the  material  they  are  made  of  permits  them  to  be.  Do  we  not  see,  also,  the 
perfect  harmony  of  these  demands  with  those  going  before '?  For  do  we  not  see,  if 
we  may  so  express  ourselves,  that  they  are  such  as  grow  cut  of  those  1  The  restric- 
tions of  Moses  prepare  naturally  for  the  closer  restrictions  of  Jesus.  The  first 
ascent  brings  us  to  the  foot  of  the  second.  Something  in  the  same  way,  in 
earlier  times,  Joshua  had  completed  what  Moses  had  begun.  Something  so,  also, 
out  of  the  tabernacle  the  temple  had  grown.  It  is  true,  in  this  latter  case,  that 
the  "  curtains  "  of  the  one  had  become  the  stones  of  the  other ;  and  that  some 
things  which  were  comparatively  small  in  the  one  were  larger  in  the  other. 
But  it  is  equally  true  that  this  only  displayed  their  harmony  in  almost  every 
other  respect.  The  same  glorious  idea,  the  same  God,  shone  the  more  visibly  in 
them  both  I 


CfiAP.  V.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  38-41.  Retaliation.— I.  The 
doctrine  of  the  scribes  and  Phari- 
sees. —  1.  Though  Moses  is  very 
express  that  it  was  the  judges  and 
magistrates  who  were  to  inflict  this 
punishment  of  retahation,  they  allowed 
the  injured  parties  either  to  avenge 
themselves  or  to  sell  off  the  punish- 
ment by  accepting  a  pecuniary  mulct, 
or  some  other  reward  and  compensa- 
tion, to  the  great  discouragement  of 
pubHc  justice.  2.  They  allowed  of 
retaliation  for  the  smallest  injury, 
leaving  no  room  for  the  virtue  of 
patience.  3.  They  took  no  care  to 
teach  with  what  spirit  this  reparation 
was  to  be  sought,  not  distinguishing 
between  a  just  defence  or  reparation 
and  a  spirit  of  revenge. 

II.  Our  Saviour's  teaching. — 1.  That 
we  are  to  abstain  from  all  private  re- 
venge, let  the  affront  and  injury  be 
ever  so  great ;  there  are  public  persons 
whose  office  it  is  to  be  the  avengers 
of  wrong,  and  these  are  to  be  applied 
to  if  we  will  needs  right  ourselves. 
2.  Our  Saviour  teaches  the  way  of 
patience  and  forgiveness.  3.  He  ob- 
viates an  objection,  which  is  very 
natural  to  be  started — namely,  that 
this  way  of  patience  will  expose  us  to 
be  abused  and  affronted  still  more  and 
more,  when  men  know  they  can  do  it 
unpunished.  Vers.  39-41.  I  take  the 
meaning  of  these  expressions  to  be  that 
we  should  rather  venture  receiving  a 
second  injury  than  revenge  the  iirst. 
The  words  are  not  to  be  interpreted 
literally,  the  turning  of  the  cheek  being 
a  proverbial  phrase  for  exposing  oneself 
to  an  injury  and  patiently  bearing  it. 
Lam.  iii.  30  means,  he  patiently  beareth 
injuries  and  affronts.  Our  Saviour  and 
St.  Paul  did  not  turn  the  other  cheek 
when  they  were  smitten.  That  we  had 
better  venture  the  suffering  a  second 
injury  than  revenge  the  first  will 
appear  if  we  consider :  1.  That  the 
evil  of  suffering  is  not  to  be  compared 
with  the  evil  of  sin.  2.  That  not 
revenging   pacifies  the   wrath  of   the 

118 


adversary,    whereas    retaliating    per- 
petuates strife. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Ver.   39.   Principle  or  rule  ? — It  is 
said  that  many  years  ago  an  eminent 
minister  of  the  gospel,  who  had  been 
a  great   athlete  in  his  youth,  on  re- 
turning to  his  native  town  soon  after 
he  had  been  ordained,  encountered  in 
the   High    Street    an    old    companion 
whom  he  had  often  fought  and  thrashed 
in  his  godless  days.     "  So  you've  turned 
Christian,  they  tell  me,  Charley  % "  said 
the  man.     **  Yes,"  replied  the  minister. 
"  Well,  then,  you  know  the  Book  says. 
If  you're  struck  on  one  cheek  you're  to 
turn  the  other.    Take  that !  "  and  with 
that  hit  him  a  stinging  blow.    *'  There, 
then,"    replied    the   minister    quietly, 
turning   the  other    side    of    his    face 
toward   him.      The    man    was    brute 
enough  to  strike   him   heavily  again. 
Whereupon  the  minister  said,  "  And 
there  my  commission  ends,"  pulled  off 
his   coat,  and   gave  his  antagonist   a 
severe  thrashing,  which,  no  doubt,  he 
richly  deserved.     But  did  the  minister 
keep   the   command   of    Christ  ?      He 
obeyed  the  letter  of  the  rule ;  but  did 
he  not  violate  the  principle,  the  spirit, 
of  it  ?    Hear  [another]  story  and  judge. 
It  is  told  of  a  celebrated  officer  in  the 
army  that,  as  he  stood  leaning  over  a 
wall  in  the  barrack-yard,  one  of  his 
military  servants,  mistaking  him  for 
a  comrade,  came  softly  up  behind  him 
and  suddenly  struck  him  a  hard  blow. 
When   the   officer    looked   round,    his 
servant,  covered  with  confusion,  stam- 
mered out,  "  I  beg  your  pardon,  sir ; 
I  thought  it  was  George."     His  master 
gently  replied,  "  And  if  it  were  George, 
why  strike  so  hard  ? "     Which,  now, 
of  these  two  really  obeyed  the  com- 
mand of  Christ  ?     The   minister  who 
made  a   rule   of   it   and   kept  to  the 
letter  of  the  rule,  or  the  officer  who 
made  a  principle  of  it  and,  acting  on 
the  spirit  of  it,  neglected  the  letter? 
—S.  Cox.  D.D. 


^^s 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  v. 


Ver.  41.    7^/ie  historical  allusion. —  Ver.  42.  Doing  good  for  evil. — I.  It 

The  word  that  is   translated   "  shall  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  do  good 

compel  to  go  "  is  of  Persian  origin,  and  for  evil. — This  is  to  be  gathered  chiefly 

has  reference  to  a  postal  arrangement  from  the   connection  and   purport    of 

that  was  much  admired  by  the  Greek  this  discourse. 

historians.     On  the  great  lines  of  road  II.  If  our  adversary  is  in  want  we 

stations  were  established  where  horses  ought  to  bestow  our  bounty  upon  him, 

and  riders  were  kept  for  the  purpose  as  upon  other  objects  of  charity  and 

of  carrying  forward  the  royal  mails,  beneficence. 

on    the    principle    of     relays.       The  III.  If  he  is  not  in  such  want  as  to 

carriers   were   empowered  in  cases   of  need  our  bounty  by   way  of  charity, 

emergency  to  press  into  their  service  yet  if  he  wants  our  help  out  of  any 

any   available   persons,   or    beasts    of  straits  and  difficulties,  by  lending,  or 

burden,  or  other  means  of  transport,  any   other   favour   and   courtesy,  we 

The  same  kind  of  postal  arrangement  ought   readily  to   aiFord   it,  and  not 

was  adopted  by  the  later  G^ge^  and  show  ourselves  hard-hearted,  difficult, 

by  the    Romans,   and   has  descended,  or  morose.    Exhortation  : — 1 .  From  the 

in   fuller    development,    to    our    own  example  of  Almighty  God  (ver.   45). 

time,  and  is  now  interlacing  the  whole  2.     The     efficacy     of     this     method 

civilized   world.      The   power   of    em-  towards  the  reconciling  of  an  adversary, 

pressment    that    constituted    part    of  3.  This  kind  treating  of  an  adversary  in 

the  original  system  is  what  is  referred  his   want   or   distress   is  reconcileable 

to  in  the  word  which  is  employed  by  with  the  customs  and  maxims  of  the 

our  Lord.     It  would  sometimes  be  ex-  more  generous  sort  of  combatants  in 

ceedingly   annoying    to    private    indi-  the  world.     4.  This  is  one  of  the  best 

viduals ;  and,  no  doubt,  petty  private  signs  of  the  good  temper  of  our  own 

tyrants    would,   in    their    own    petty  souls.      5.    We  have  the  greatest  as- 

dominions  or  demesnes,  put  in  opera-  surance    that     all     actions     of    that 

tion    the    same    principle    when    they  nature     shall    be     amply    rewarded ; 

had  some  express  to  forward  on  their  and     the     contrary    uncharitableness 

own    account.       The   empressment    of  punished  (Matt.    vi.    14,   15).      6.    It 

such    individuals    and    their    officials  will     be    found    that     the     contrary 

would  be  apt  to  be  vexatious.     But,  practices    proceed   always   from    some 

says  Jesus,  do  more  in  such  circum-  base    principle,    such    as    pride,    fro- 

stances    than   is    asked   of    thee ;    of  wardness,  cruelty,  jealousy,  cowardice, 

course,  provided  it  would  be  of  avail  ingratitude,  moroseness,  and  the  want 

to   the    carrier,    and    consistent    with  of  generosity. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 
other  and  perhaps  more  imperious  or 

important  obligations.      Let  there  be  Ver.  44.  The  love  of  enemies. — I.  To 

no  stint  in  your  efforts  to  help  others,  say  that    this    precept    is    romantic 

even  when  your  help  is  ungraciously  and   unpractical  is   to   condemn    the 

asked. — J.  Morison,  D.D.  gospel    of    Christ. — The    Incarnation 

and   coming    into    the    world   of    our 
blessed  Lord  had  the  object  of  making 

Christ  and  Epictetus. — It  is  inter-  us   now,    here,    at    once,    better   men, 

esting  to  note  a  like  illustration  of  the  women,  and  children.     Our  Lord  does 

temper   that  yields   to  compulsion  of  not  teach  us  that  we  are  to  like  our 

this    kind,    rather    than    struggle    or  enemies,  but  to  love  them, 

resist,   in  the   teaching  of   the   Stoic  II.  Our  blessed  Lord  perfectly  fiil- 

Epictetus — "  Should  there  be  a  forced  filled  His  own  law  of  loving  enemies, 

service,  and  a  soldier  should  lay  hold  — Love  is  a  tree  known  by  its  fruits ; 

on  thee,  let  him  work  his  will ;  do  not  and  these   are  justice,   truth,   purity, 

resist  or  murmur  {Diss.,  IV.  i.  79). —  mercy,     patience,     liberality,     honour, 

E.  H.  Plwrnptre,  D.D,  meekness,  sympathy.      The  first  step 

1  119 


CHAP.  V.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST,  MATTHEW. 


in     love,     to     friend     or    enemy,     is 
respect. 

III.  Our  blessed  lord  here,  as 
everywhere,  is  our  Pattern. 

IV.  The  test  of  love  is  not  mere 
fondness  or  fancy,  but  the  trouble  you 
are  willing  to  take  and  the  sacriiee 
you  are  prepared  to  make  for  the 
person  loved.  Instead  of  the  precept, 
"  Love  your  enemies,"  being  a  mere 
lovely  theory,  it  is  to  the  last  degree 
practical,  because  the  principle  which 
underlies  the  whole  matter  is  simply 
this — and  it  admits  of  very  wide  ap- 
jlication  indeed — wherever  a  person 
ifiiids  himself  in  a  position  in  any 
way  whatever  antagonistic  to  that  of 
another,  then  there  arises  at  once  a 
special  call  and  reminder  to  be  just, 
patient,  scrupulously  fair,  to  do  as  one 
would  be  done  by ;  for  who  can  fail 
to  see  that,  when  something  draws 
towards  one  and  not  towards  another, 
the  two  are  judged  by  totally  different 
standards  ?  A  weak  leniency,  a  cari- 
cature of  charity,  sees  nothing  wrong 
in  one,  while  in  another  faults  are 
magnified  and  perhaps  nothing  is 
right.  ^-^.  Percy  Smith,  M.A. 

Loving  enemies. — I  remember  as  a 
boy  sitting  by  the  fireside  of  a  little 
country  inn,  up  near  Dead  Kiver  in 
Maine,  and  hearing  some  men  discuss 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Rough 
fellows  they  were;  and  one  of  them, 
scoffing  at  Christianity,  said,  "  Thou 
shalt  love  thine  enemy — nonsense  !  It 
is  not  in  human  nature."  He  was 
right.  It  is  not  in  human  nature  ; 
qut  it  was  in  Christ's  nature,  and  it 
is  in  the  Divine  nature.  And  it  is 
in  the  Divine  nature  to  impart  it 
through  Christ  to  those  who  claim 
it.— Z.  Ahhott,  D.D. 

Subduing  enemies. — It  is  recorded 
of  a  Chinese  emperor  that,  on  being 
apprised  of  his  enemies  having  raised 
an  insurrection  in  a  distant  province, 
he  said  to  his  officers,  *'  Come,  follow 
me,  and  we  shall  quickly  destroy 
them."  He  marched  forward,  and  the 
rebels   submitted  upon   his  approach. 

120 


All  now  thought  he  would  take  the 
most  signal  revenge,  but  were  surprised 
to  see  the  captives  treated  with  mild- 
ness and  humanity.  "  How  !  '^  cried 
the  first  minister,  **  is  this  the  manner 
in  which  your  promise  is  fulfilled  ? 
Your  royal  word  was  given  that  your 
enemies  should  be  destroyed,  and 
behold,  you  have  pardoned  them  all, 
and  even  caressed  some  of  them." 
"  I  promised,"  replied  the  emperor, 
with  a  generous  air,  "  to  destroy  my 
enemies.  I  have  fulfilled  my  word ; 
for  see,  they  are  enemies  no  longer. 
I  have  made  friends  of  them." — Tools 
for  Teachers. 

Kindness  to  enemies. — A  good  man  is 
kinder  to  his  enemy  than  bad  men  are 
to  their  friends. — Bishop  Hall. 

Vers.  44,  45.  Chrisfs  lavj  ignored. — 
"  Either  these  sayings  are  not  Christ's, 
or  we  are  not  Christians,"  was  the 
exclamation  of  a  great  man  after 
reading  these  words. — H.  W.  Hale, 
LL.D. 

Ver.  47.  What  do  ye  more  than  others  ? 
— I.  Disciples  have  to  do  more  than 
others. — 1.  Maintain  the  Christian 
life.     2.  Extend  the  cause  of  Christ. 

II.  They  are  able  to  do  more  than 
others. — 1.  They  are  in  alliance  with 
God.  2.  They  have  more  light  and 
knowledge.  3.  They  have  more  moral 
power. 

III.  More  is  expected  of  them  than 
of  others. — 1.  By  their  Saviour.  2.  By 
the  world.  3.  By  their  own  con- 
sciences.— J.  C.  Gray, 

Ver.  48.  Christian  perfection. — The 
text  sums  up  that  portion  of  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  in  which  Christ  has  so 
lucidly  developed  the  Christian  ideal 
of  character.  Our  Lord  sets  before  us 
the  only  absolutely  perfect  and  holy 
Being  as  the  ultimate  standard  of 
character  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  We 
have  in  the  text : — 

I.  A  comprehensive  command. — 
"Be  ye  therefore  perfect.'^    Note : 

1.  The  meaning  of  the  attainment, — > 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   St,  MATTHEW.       chap.  V. 


(1)   In   general   the   word    "  perfect "  2.  That  a  high  standard  is  necessary 

signifies  completeness  in  all  its  parts,  in  order  to  lift  our  thoughts  above  the 

The   babe  is   a  perfect  human  being,  earthly  standards. — Boys  at  school  are 

even  though  only  in  germ  or  not  full  bidden  to  look  at  their  copies. 

grown,  when  its  parts  or  limbs  are  com-  3.  That  a  high  standard  is  necessary 

plete.    Creation  was  perfect  or  complete  to   meet   the   boundless   desires   of   our 

in  all  its  adjustments  when  God  pro-  spiritual  being. — Our  nature  is. kindred 

nounced  it  "very  good,"  though  its  high  with   that  of   God.     Man  is  satisfied 

purpose  had  not  been  attained  in  the  only  in  being  like  God. 

activity  of  providence  and  grace.     (2)  III.  A  possible  attainment. — That 

In  particular.     Complete  in  those  ele-  there   is  an   evangelical   or   Christian 

ments   of  goodness  which  form   char-  perfection   which   is   possible   may   be 

acter,   and   which    are   found   in   the  proved : 

full-orbed   goodness    of    our   heavenly  1.  Because  we  are  commanded  to  be 

Father — not  in  degree,   but  in   kind,  perfect. — Text ;  Gen.   xvii.  1 ;    2    Cor. 

2.  The  nature  of  the  oMainment. — It  xiii.   11.     God  never  commands   what 

is  important  that  we  should  distinguish  is  impossible. 

between  a  perfection  which  is  absolute,  2.  Because  prayer  is  offered  in  the 

and  therefore  unattainable  by  us,  and  New  Testament  for  certain  persons  that 

a    relative   or    evangelical   perfection,  they  may  be  perfect  (1   Thess.   v.  23; 

Hence  observe  (1)  Negatively. — It  helps  Col.  iv.  12  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  9). 
us  immensely  to  find  out  what  a  thing  3.  Because   the  means  to  attain   the 

is  if  we  have  found  its  negative,     (a)  blessing  are  sufficient.  —  We   have   a 

It  is  not  the  perfection  of  God.     The  perfect  rule — God's  Word — to  teach  us 

perfection  of  God  is  absolute.     (6)  It  how  to  get  it ;  a  perfect  Redeemer^  in 

is  not  the  perfection  of  angels.      The  whom  there  is  fulness  of  grace,  whose 

angels  have  never  left  their  first  estate,  blood  is  enough  to  cleanse  the  vilest ;  a 

Their  faculties  and  understanding  have  perfect  Pattern  to  copy, 
never  been  impaired  and  perverted,    (c)  4.  Because  it  is  the  will  of  God  that 

It  is  not  Adamic  perfection,     {d)  It  is  we    should    be    perfect. — It    is    God's 

not  the  perfection  of  knowledge.    There  ultimate  purpose  in  all  that  He  has 

are  not  any  of  us  free  from  ignorance,  done  and  is  doing  for  us. — J.  Harries, 
(e)  It  is  not  freedom  from  error.    None 

infallible  but  God.  (/)  It  is  not  freedom  rpj^^  Christian  aim  and  motive.— I. 

from  temptation,    (g)  It  is  not  freedom  j^^ie  Christian  aim— Perfection 
from  mfirmities-bodily  infirmities  and         jj^  jhe  Christian  motive.— Because 

mental  eccentricities,  such  as  weakness  j^  jg  ^.^  j,^  ^nd  Godlike  to  be  perfect. 

of  body,  dulness  of  understanding,  and  ^  jjr,  Robertson  M.A. 

incoherence  of  thought.     (2)  Affirma-  *      '  »      •    • 

lively. — The  word  "  perfect  "  signifies  /.  ^t    .    .     . 

in  the  New  Testament  completion  in  .    The  purpose  of  Christianity.— lleve 

Christian  character  ;  a  desire  to  please  ^^^  Christ  s  idea  of  His  holy  religion. 

God  in  all  things;  and  a  sincere  com-  ^hi^  is  what  it  is  to  do  for  us  :  It  is  to 

pliance  with  all  the  Divine  precepts.  «*«^^  '^^  ^^^^  ^^^'     ^^^^  ^^  our  idea 

II.  A   high    standard.— "Even    as  ^^  religion?     Very  much,  one   might 

your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."    Per-  ^^^ost  say  everything,  depends  upon 

feet  as  God  is  perfect  ?      We  say,  Im-  ^^®  answer.— if.  G.  Fearse. 
possible  !     But  for  our  encouragement 

let  us  look  into  these  words  closely  and  The  perfection  of  love. — It  is  in  a 

remember : —  small  degree  that  we  can  share  God's 

1.  That  a  high  standard  is  necessary  wisdom;  in  a  still  smaller  degree  His 

in  everything  great  to  attain  real  sue-  power.     These  attributes  of  His  nature 

cess. — Painting,    architecture,    music,  must  always  be  over  and  around  us, 

etc.  rather  than  within  us.     But  of  His 

121 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


love  it  is  said,   "God  is  love,  and  he  Difficult  yet  practicable. — When  Dr. 

that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  Horace  Bushnell  originated  the  idea  of 

and  God  in  him."     It  is  as  much  ours  a  public  park  in  Hartford,  Connecticut, 

as  our  home — nay,  as  much  ours  as  our  there  were  some  who  feared  that  the 

heart. — John  Xer,  D.D.  appropriation  it  called  for  would  not 

be  voted.  It  was  suggested  that  it 
Perfection  —  Divine  and  human. —  would  be  wiser  to  ask  for  half  the 
God's  is  the  only  absolute  perfection ;  amount.  He  replied,  "JSTo;  some- 
man's  is  relative,  contained  in  the  times  a  project  is  made  practicable  by 
high  destiny  which  bids  him  ever  being  made  difficult." — J.H.  Tioitchell. 
struggle  towards  the  Infinite  which  he 

yet  can  never  reach.     There  is  no  per-  A  sign  of  perfection. — There   is   no 

fection  so  incomplete  as  the  one  which  greater  sign   of   your  own   perfection 

admits    of    no   increase;    that   is   the  than  when  you  find  yourself  all  love 

perfection  of  death,  not  of  life. — A.  M.  and  compassion  toward  them  that  are 

Fairhairn^  D,D.  very  weak  and  defective. —  Wm.  Law. 


CHAPTER   VI. 
CRITICAL  ROTES,. 


Ver.  1.  Alms. — Righteousness  (R.V.)  is  probably  correct  and  shows  the  connection 
between  this  chapter  and  the  preceding,  better  than  "alms."  In  ch.  v.  20,  the  disciples 
are  told  that  their  *'  righteousness  "  is  to  exceed  that  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  This  is 
explained  at  length  in  what  follows ;  in  the  preceding  chapter,  as  regards  the  actions  them- 
selves ;  in  the  present,  as  regards  the  motives  and  manner  of  performing  them.  Almsgiving, 
in  the  language  of  the  later  Rabbis,  was  especially  called  "  righteousness  "  (see  Lightfoot)  ; 
but  in  the  present  passage  it  seems  rather  to  mean  good  works  in  general,  including  alms- 
giving, prayer  and  fasting  {Mansel).  To  be  seen,  i.e.  as  a  spectacle.  Theatre  and  hypocrite 
(see  next  verse),  are  words  of  cognate  meaning  {BengeV). 

Ver.  2.  Do  not  sound  a  trumpet. — The  expression  is  to  be  taken  figuratively  for  blazoning 
it  (^Brown).  Hypocrites  =  actors.  The  word  originally  signifies,  one  who  answers  ;  thence, 
one  who  tahes  part  in  a  dramatic  dialogue ;  thence,  one  who  assumes  a  feigned  character 
{Bandinel).    They  have. — Greek  "  they  have  to  the  full." 

Ver.  3.  Let  not  thy  left  hand  know,  etc. — Secret  and  noiseless  giving,  metaphorically 
expressed  (Chrysostom). 

Ver.  4.  Openly. — Omitted  in  best  MSS.  and  in  R.  V.  It  is  not  popular  applause  in  the  future 
world,  any  more  than  it  is  popular  applause  in  the  present,  that  is  the  motive  or  the  aim  of 
the  true  Christian's  charities  and  charity  (^Morison). 

Ver.  6.  Standing. — The  ancient  practice,  alike  in  the  Jewish  and  in  the  early  Christian 
church.  That  they  may  be  seen  of  men.— This  was  the  wind  that  set  the  windmill  a- work 
{Trapp). 

Ver.  7.  Use  not  vain  repetitions  =  "  do  not  babble." 

Ver.  11.  Our  daily  bread.— The  Greek  word  translated  "daily"  occurs  only  in  the  Lord's 
prayer  here,  and  Luke  xi.  3 ;  it  is  not  found  in  any  classical  author.  The  rendering  of  the 
E.  V.  "  daily  "  as  nearly  as  possible  represents  the  probable  force  of  the  word,  which  is  strictly 
(bread)  "  for  the  coming  day,"  i.e.  for  the  day  now  beginning.  Others  render  "  bread  for  the 
future,"  taking  bread  in  a  spiritual  sense  ;  others,  following  a  diiferent  etymology,  translate 
"  bread  of  subsistence."  Breads  primarily  the  bread  on  which  we  subsist  (see  Prof.  Light- 
foot  in  appendix  to  his  work  On  a  Fresh  Revision  of  the  N.  T.) ;  subsistence  as  distinct 
from  luxury;  but  the  spiritual  meaning  cannot  be  excluded,  Christ  the  Bread  of  Life  is  the 
Christian's  daily  food  (  Carr). 

Ver.  12.  As  we  toxf^iye.— Have  forgiven  (R.V.)  as  a  completed  act,  before  we  begin  to  pray. 
The  temper  that  does  not  forgive  cannot  be  forgiven,  because  it  is,  ipso  facto,  a  proof  that  we 
do  not  realise  the  amount  of  the  debt  we  owe.  {Plumptre).    So  much  stress  does  our  Lord 

122 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  vi. 


put  upon  this,  that  immediately  after  the  close  of  this  prayer,  it  is  the  one  point  in  it  which 
He  comes  back  upon  (vers.  14,  15),  for  the  purpose  of  solemnly  assuring  us  that  the  Divine 
procedure  in  this  matter  of  forgiveness  will  be  exactly  what  our  own  is  {Browri). 

Ver.  13.  Evil. — The  evil  07ie  (R.  V.).  The  Greek  may  grammatically  be  either  neuter  or  mascu- 
line, "  evil  "  in  the  abstract,  or  the  '*  evil  one  "  as  equivalent  to  the  "  devil."  Dean  Plumptre 
says,  "  the  whole  weight  of  the  usage  of  New  Testament  language  is  in  favour  of  the  latter 
meaning."  Others,  however,  favour  the  neuter.  Dean  Mansel  says,  "  the  neuter  is  more 
comprehensive  and  includes  deliverance  from  the  evil  thoughts  of  a  man's  own  heart  and 
from  evils  from  without,  as  well  as  from  the  temptations  of  Satan  "  (Speaker's  Commentary}. 
For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  etc. — Omitted  in  R.V.  The  whole  clause  is  wanting  in  the  best 
MSS.  and  in  the  earlier  versions,  and  is  left  unnoticed  by  the  early  Fathers,  who  comment  on 
the  rest  of  the  prayer  (Plumptre).     Scrivener  pleads  earnestly  for  its  retention. 

Ver.  17.  Anoint  thine  head  and  wash  thy  face,  i.e.  appear  as  usual. 

Vers.  19,  20.  Lay  not  up  .  .  .  lay  up.  An  instance  of  "the  idiom  of  exaggerated  contrast." 
A  literal  compliance  with  the  negative  half  of  this  precept  would  discourage  thrift,  destroy 
commerce,  and  deprive  the  world  of  the  manifold  benefits  of  capital.  It  is  plain  that  our 
Lord,  in  contrasting  the  two  kinds  of  treasures,  uses  this  emphatic  idiom  in  order  to  point 
out  in  the  most  forcible  way  the  kind  which  is  beyond  measure  the  more  important  (J.  G. 
Carleton).  Rust. — Money  was  frequently  buried  in  the  ground  in  those  unsettled  times,  and 
so  would  be  more  liable  to  rust.     Banks  in  the  modern  sense  were  unknown  (Carr). 

Ver.  22.  Light. — Lamp  (R.V.).  The  eye  is  not  itself  the  light,  but  contains  the  light :  it  is 
the  "  lamp  "  or  candle  of  the  body,  the  light-conveying  principle  {tbid^.  Full  of  light. — As 
it  were  all  eye  {Benyel). 

Ver.  23.  Evil. — I.e.  affected  with  disease.  The  whole  passage  is  on  the  subject  of  single- 
ness of  service  to  God  (ibid.).  How  great  is  that  darkness  ? — As  the  conscience  is  the 
regulative  faculty,  and  a  man's  inward  purpose,  scope,  aim  in  life,  determine  his  character, 
if  these  be  not  simple  and  heavenward,  but  distorted  and  double,  what  must  all  the  other 
faculties  and  principles  of  our  nature  be,  which  take  their  direction  and  character  from  these, 
and  what  must  the  whole  man  and  the  whole  life  be,  but  a  mass  of  darkness  ?  (Brown). 

Ver.  24.  No  man  can  serve  two  masters. — The  application  of  the  foregoing.  Mammon. — Or 
mamon,  was  a  common  word  in  the  East,  among  Phoenicians,  Syrians  and  others,  signifying 
material  riches  or  worldly  wealth.  It  is  here  personified,  as  a  kind  of  god  of  this  world 
(^Morison). 

Ver.  25.  Therefore. — Denoting  a  connection  between  the  service  of  mammon  and  "taking 
thought."  Take  no  thought. — Be  not  anxious  (R.V.).  Life. — The  Greek  word  is  the  same  as 
that  commonly  rendered  "soul,"  and  the  passage  is  interesting  as  an  example  of  its  use  in 
the  wider  sense,  which  includes  the  lower  as  well  as  the  higher  life  (^Plumptre.) 

Ver.  26.  Fowls.— Old  English  for  birds. 

Ver.  27.  Stature. — The  Greek  word  admits  either  this  meaning  (as  in  Luke  xix.  3,  and 
perhaps  Luke  ii.  52),  or  that  of  age  (as  in  John  ix,  21,  23,  and  Heb.  xi.  24).  The  latter  best 
satisfies  the  teaching  of  the  context.  Men  are  not  anxious  about  adding  to  their  stature. 
They  are  often  anxious  about  prolonging  their  life  (Plumytre). 

Ver.  28.  Lilies  of  the  field. — The  hill-sides  of  Galilee  are  clothed  in  spring,  not  only  with 
what  we  call  *'  lilies,"  but  with  the  crown  imperial,  and  the  golden  amaryllis,  and  crimson 
tulips,  and  anemones  of  all  shades  from  scarlet  to  white,  to  say  nothing  of  the  commoner 
buttercups  and  dandelions  and  daisies ;  and  all  these  are  probably  classed  roughly  together 
under  the  generic  name  of  "lilies ''  (ibid.).  Dr.  Thomson  (Land  and  Book,  p.  256),  thinks  the 
Hiileh  lily  is  meant,  but  Canon  Tristram  (Natural  History  of  tlie  Bible)  claims  this  honour 
for  the  beautiful  and  varied  anemone  coronaria. 

Ver.  30.  The  grass  of  the  field. — The  wild  flowers  which  form  part  of  the  meadow  growth, 
are  counted  as  belonging  to  the  grass,  and  are  cut  down  with  it.  Cut  grass  which  soon 
withers  from  the  heat,  is  still  used  in  the  East  for  firing  (Alford).  The  oven. — A  large 
round  pot  of  earthen  or  other  materials,  two  or  three  feet  high,  narrow  towards  the  top. 
This  being  first  heated  by  a  fire  made  within,  the  dough  or  paste  was  spread  upon  the  sides 
to  bake,  thus  forming  cakes  (Abbott). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—18. 

A  group  of  warnings. — A  note  of  warning  begins  this  section  of  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount.  Instead  of  following  the  example  and  seeking  the  approval  of 
our  Father  in  heaven  as  just  before  recommended,  even  sincere  disciples  are  in 
danger  of  being  content  with  the  approbation  of  man.  The  greatness  of  this 
danger,  therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  best  way  of  avoiding  it,  on  the  other, 
are  the  points  taken  up  here. 

123 


OHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


I.  The  greatness  of  the  danger. — This  is  due  to  its  extreme  insidiousness,  to 
begin.  Even  in  discharging  our  most  direct  duty  towards  God,  as  in  helping 
His  poor  (ver.  2) ;  or  in  saying  our  prayers  (ver.  5) ;  or  in  humbling  our  souls 
(ver.  16)  ;  all  things  in  which  the  desire  for  man's  praise  ought  to  be  conspicuously 
absent,  this  danger  besets  us.  And,  if  in  these,  therefore  in  everything  else. 
Yet  that  this  is  so,  the  actions  of  men  too  often  make  plain.  Why  else  that 
"  sounding  of  trumpets,"  that  "  standing  "  to  pray  where  most  eyes  can  behold 
us,  that  effort  to  make  known  by  our  very  countenances  the  humility  of  our 
hearts  (vers.  2,  5,  16)?  All  these  are  so  many  ways  of  appealing  to  the 
favourable  notice  of  men  whilst  professing  to  be  looking — and  perhaps  fancying 
we  are  looking — for  the  favourable  notice  of  God.  Its  extreme  injuriousness,  in 
the  next  place.  If  we  do  thus  think  of  man  rather  than  God,  what  is  the 
result  ?  Is  it  not  merely  to  gain  that  which  is  a  bubble  indeed  ?  For  what  is 
the  value,  at  its  best,  of  the  praise  of  mankind  ?  Is  it  not  often  ill  judged,  never 
enduring,  commonly  poisonous,  always  disappointing?  How  emphatic  the 
statement,  "they  have  received  their  reward"  (vers.  2,  5,  16).  They  have 
secured  that  which  no  one  else  would  call  by  that  name.  They  have  secured 
that  which,  as  a  rule,  they  are  better  without.  Is  it  not,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
lose  that  which  is  worth  everything  else  ?  How  solemnly  it  is  implied  here  that 
such  is  the  case  !  Those  who  have  sought  that  empty  "  reward  "  receive  no 
other  beside.  Where  God's  favour  is  not  accorded  the  supreme  place,  it  is 
altogether  shut  out.  Better  do  anything,  then,  than  seek  thus,  instead  of  it,  the 
mere  approval  of  man.     All  is  lost,  nothing  is  gained,  where  that  is  the  case. 

II.  The  best  way  of  avoiding  this  danger. — Our  Saviour's  advice  on  this 
point  seems  to  be  of  a  twofold  description.  First  and  generally,  and  where  the 
case  admits  of  this,  cut  off  the  occasion.  Would  you  prevent  yourself  from  being 
unduly  influenced  by  the  thought  of  men's  praise  in  what  you  are  doing  ?  Shut 
them  out,  if  you  can,  from  the  very  knowledge  of  what  you  are  doing.  Rather 
than  invite  their  attention  to  your  almsgiving,  do  not  give  it  the  whole  of  your 
own  (ver.  3).  Instead  of  "  standing  "  where  men  can  see  you  *^  praying,"  *'  kneel  '* 
where  they  cannot  (ver.  6).  Instead  of  seeking  to  look  miserable  when  you 
are  "fasting,"  aim  at  the  very  reverse  (v.  17).  That  is  the  path  of  absolute 
safety  with  regard  to  this  peril.  If  men  never  know  of,  they  can  never  praise 
you  for,  what  you  are  doing.  And  if  they  can  never  praise  you  for  it,  you  will  be 
hardly  likely  to  think  too  much  of  their  praise.  Next,  and  more  particularly, 
and  where  this  cannot  be  done,  as  in  united  prayer,  for  example  (notice  the 
transition  from  singular  to  plural  in  vers.  6,  7-16),  make  it  your  great  point  to 
direct  the  attention  aright.  Think  of  God  and  not  of  men  in  the  "  manner " 
(ver.  9)  of  prayer  you  adopt.  Think  of  God  also,  not  as  untaught  men  (ver.  7) 
think  Him  to  be,  viz.  One  unwilling  to  hear  and  only  as  it  were  to  be  compelled 
to  do  so  by  the  multitude  of  our  words ;  or  else  as  One  who  is  ignorant  of  our 
wants,  and  so  only  likely  to  attend  to  them  when  He  has  been  made  acquainted 
with  them  in  full,  but  rather  as  being  indeed  "  our "  common  "  Father  in 
heaven,"  and  so  as  full  of  mercy,  and  wisdom,  and  power  as  our  sins,  and  our 
necessities,  and  our  weaknesses  demand  (vers.  8-13).  The  more  we  think  of 
Him  thus,  the  more  such  thoughts  will  banish  all  else.  Lastly,  in  so  far  as 
you  think  of  men  at  all  in  your  prayers,  think  of  them  too  as  they  are,  viz.  as 
beings  who  are  as  full  of  needs  and  sins  as  ourselves,  and  to  be  dealt  with  by  us, 
in  consequence,  in  abounding  mercy,  if  we  would  hope  for  mercy  ourselves 
(vers.  14,  15).  What  a  crowning  safeguard  there  is  in  this  thought  against 
over-estimating  their  praises  ?  What  does  it  signify  to  a  condemned  man 
whether  those  who  are  his  fellow-culprits  think  highly  of  him  or  not  ?  The 
only  thing  important  to  him  in  that  quarter  is  that  none  should  be  able  to  say 
of  him  truly  as  in  Gen.  iv.  10,  or  Matt,  xviii.  31. 

124 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vi. 


1.  How  wise  are  these  words. — More  than  once  our  Saviour  speaks  here  of 
His  Father  as  "  seeing  in  secret."  Is  there  not  evidence  here  that  the  same 
description  may  well  be  applied  to  Himself  ?  What  knowledge  is  here  of  our 
most  hidden  infirmities  !  What  exposure  of  our  deepest  deceptiveness  !  What 
complete  acquaintance  with  our  best  means  of  protection  !  What  easy  reading, 
in  a  word,  as  in  most  famihar  characters,  of  what  is  *'  in  cypher  "  to  us  !  He 
has  indeed  the  key  of  our  hearts  !  And,  therefore,  does  it  not  follow,  of  every- 
thing else  (Jer.  xvii.  9,  10)  ? 

2.  How  gracious  are  these  words. — It  is  to  our  wilful  natures,  our  perverted 
hearts,  our  self -blinded  judgments,  that  all  this  counsel  is  given.  Also,  it  is  to 
us  thus  ill- deserving  ones  that  His  added  promise  is  given  !  There  is  something 
exceedingly  full,  and  therefore  exceedingly  touching,  in  that  thrice-repeated 
assurance,  "  Thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly."  But 
what  is  most  touching  of  all,  most  touching  by  far,  is  that  it  is  a  promise  given 
to  ics/ 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1-18.  Almsgiving^  prayer^  and 
fasting.— 1.  The  outgoing  of  practical 
pMlanthropy  towards  men. 

II.  The  secrecy,  brevity,  and  com- 
prehensiveness of  communion  with 
God. 

III.  The  moral  education  of  our 
appetites. —  J.  Harries. 

Vers.  1-4.  True  and  false  goodness. — 
The    following    passage    from    Mark 
Aurelius'    Meditations   may    be   pon- 
dered in  connection   with   our  Lord's 
exposure   of    the   ostentatious,   hypo- 
critical righteousness  of  the  Pharisees  : 
"  One  man  when  he  has  done  a  service 
to  another  is  ready  to  set  it  down  to 
his    account    as    a   favour   conferred. 
Another,  while  he  may  not  go  so  far  as 
that,   still  thinks  of  the  man  as  his 
debtor,  and  is  conscious  of  what  he  has 
done.     A  third  does  not,  if  we  may  so 
speak,  even  know  what  he  has  done 
and   betrays   no  consciousness   of   his 
kindness,  but  is  like  a  vine  which  has 
produced  grapes  and  seeks  for  nothing 
after  it  has  produced  the  fruit  proper 
to  it.     As  a  horse  when  he  has  run,  a 
dog  when   he   has  caught  the  game, 
a  bee  when  it  has  made  its  honey,  so  a 
man  when  he  has   done   a  good  act, 
does  not  call  out  for  others   to  come 
and  see,  but  goes  on  to  another  act,  as 
a  vine  goes  on  to  produce  again  grapes 
in  the  season.      What   more  do  you 
want   when    you   have   done  a  man 


a  service?  Are  you  not  content 
that  you  have  done  something  con- 
formable to  your  nature  and  do  you 
seek  reward  for  it,  as  if  the  eye  should 
demand  a  recompense  for  seeing,  or  the 
feet  for  walking  1 "  Professoi*  Marcus 
Dods  remarks :  "  This  passage  from 
the  great  Stoic  opens  up  the  signifi- 
cance of  our  Lord's  comparison  of  a 
good  man  to  a  good  tree  (vii.  16,  etc.). 
The  good  man  will  bring  forth 
righteousness  spontaneously, uniformly, 
as  a  good  tree  produces  its  proper 
fruit." 

Ver.  1.  Vainglory  to  he  avoided  in 
our  good  works. — I.  The  precept. 
*'  Take  heed,"  etc.  By  "  righteous- 
ness" I  think  is  meant  all  manner 
of  good  actions.  Vainglory  is  a  moth 
which  is  apt  to  breed  in  our  best 
actions,  as  worms  breed  in  roses,  and 
therefore  ought  carefully  to  be  watched. 

1.  The  description  of  it. — It  is 
the  doing  of  our  good  actions  before 
men,  with  an  express  design  to  gain 
praise  and  honour  to  ourselves.  We 
are  not  to  imagine  that  we  are 
obliged  to  do  all  our  good  works  so 
much  in  secret  that  the  world  may 
know  nothing  of  them ;  nor  that  it  is 
unlawful  for  us  to  contrive  to  give 
good  examples  ;  all  the  sin  lies  in  con- 
triving our  good  works  in  such  a 
manner  or  with  such  an  intention 
that  the  praise  and  glory  of  them  may 

125 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


terminate  solely  or  principally  in  our- 
selves. A  right  aim  and  intention  is 
absolutely  necessary  in  all  our  good 
actions. 

2.  The  caution  against  it. — (1)  The 
greatness  of  the  sin.  (a)  The  design 
and  intention  is  the  life  and  soul  of  the 
action.  (6)  Whenever  we  set  up  our 
own  pride,  or  vanity,  or  self-interest  as 
the  end  of  our  good  actions,  we  rob 
God  of  His  due  honour  and  glory, 
(c)  No  man  is  entitled  to  any  higher 
reward  of  his  actions  than  he  himself 
proposes  and  aims  at.  {d)  All 
obedience  which  is  levelled  at  a  tem- 
poral design,  is  a  temporary,  not  a 
lasting  obedience.  For  as  times  and 
the  humours  of  men  change,  so  do 
these  men's  actions.  (e)  Acting 
religiously  not  to  please  God,  but  for 
our  own  selfish  ends  in  this  world,  is 
the  proper  character  of  hypocrisy. 
(2)  The  insinuating  nature  of  the  sin. 
(a)  Esteem,  praise,  the  love  and  good 
will  of  men,  in  short,  everything  that 
flatters  our  self-love,  is  very  pleasant, 
and  so  is  apt  to  make  us  forget  that 
nobler  aim  and  reward  which  we 
should  always  have  in  our  eye.  (b)  It 
borders  so  near  upon  virtue  that  it 
requires  an  accurate  and  nice  obser- 
vation to  perceive  the  difference ;  for 
we  are  not  prohibited  to  do  good 
works  before  men,  nor  are  we  obliged 
to  hide  them  so  that  they  may  not 
be  seen  of  them,  nor  are  we  obliged 
totally  to  reject  that  praise,  esteem, 
and  interest,  which  a  continuance  in 
well-doing  will  procure  us  in  the 
world. 

II.  The  reason  of  the  precept. — 
"  Otherwise  ye  have  no  reward,"  etc. 

1.  The  justice  and  equity  of  it. — A 
great  difference  ought  to  be  made 
between  works  sincerely  meant  and 
designed  for  God's  glory,  though  mixed 
with  many  imperfections  of  human 
infirmities,  and  works  principally 
designed  for  our  own  vanity  and  self- 
interest. 

2.  The  great  purity  and  perfection  of 
the  Christian  morals. — Taking  so  much 
care  to  regulate  the  thoughts  and  in- 
tentions of  the  heart,  and  valuing  all 

126 


actions  according  to  the  purity  of  the 
intention. — James  Blair,  M.A. 

Vers.  2-4.  Ostentation  in  alms- 
giving.— I.  A  caution  against  osten- 
tation and  vainglory  in  the  giving  of 
alms. — 1.  Negatively,  a  prohibition  of 
ostentation.  "  Do  not  sound  a  trumpet 
before  thee,"  etc.  This  is  a  figurative 
expression.  2.  Aflfirmatively,  an 
injunction   of   secrecy    and    humility. 

1 .  The  things  supposed. — ( 1 )  That  the 
duty  of  almsgiving  was  practised  by 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  whose 
righteousness  our  Saviour  is  here  cor- 
recting and  improving.  (2)  That  in 
the  exercise  of  this  duty,  they  did  not 
purely  or  chiefly  regard  the  pleasing 
of  God,  but  carried  on  their  own  selfish 
designs  among  men.  (3)  That  alms 
and  other  works  of  charity  have  an 
aptness  in  their  own  nature  to  gain  the 
love  and  applause  of  men,  and  so  may 
easily  be  perverted  to  serve  the  selfish 
designs  of  the  persons  who  put  them  in 
practice. 

2.  The  cautions  interposed. — (1)  There 
is  one,  concerning  the  intention  and 
design  we  ought  to  propose  to  ourselves 
in  our  works  of  charit}^  namely,  the 
glory  and  honour  of  God.  (2)  Another 
is  that  we  do  not  set  up  vainglory  or 
any  other  by-ends  of  our  own  covetous- 
ness  or  ambition,  in  our  alms-deeds 
or  other  good  works.  (3)  A  third 
caution  relates  to  the  way  and  manner 
of  doing  our  good  works,  that  it  be 
with  humility  and  all  requisite  secrecy. 
(4)  That  if  from  our  alms  and  other 
good  works  any  accidental  praise  or 
credit  comes  to  ourselves,  we  do  not 
feed  ourselves  with  the  thoughts  of  it ; 
but  employ  all  that  credit  for  God's 
service. 

II.  The  reasons  of  that  caution. — 
1.  This  wrong  aim  in  our  good  works 
alters  the  nature  oj^  them,  and  makes 
them  hypocritical. 

2.  The  fruit  of  this  practice  in  the 
other  world. — (1)  There  is  no  other  but 
present  temporal  reward  to  be  expected 
for  such  who  do  their  good  works  to  be 
seen  of  men.  (2)  There  is  a  certain 
glorious    reward    for    them    who    do 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  vi. 


their  good  works  with  an  eye  to  God. 
— Ibid, 

Almsgiving  and  righteousness  (R.Y. 
ver.  1). — Almsgiving  is  no  longer  re- 
garded as  distinctively  a  religious  duty. 
Nor  can  it  be  put  under  the  head 
of  morality  according  to  the  common 
idea  attached  to  that  word.  It  rather 
occupies  a  kind  of  borderland  between 
them,  coming  under  the  head  of  philan- 
throphy.  But  whence  came  the  spirit 
of  philanthropy  ?  Its  foundation  is  in 
the  holy  mountains.  Modern  philan- 
thropy is  like  a  great  fresh-water  lake, 
on  the  shores  of  which  one  may  wan- 
der with  admiration  and  delight  for 
great  distances  without  discovering  any 
connection  with  the  heaven-piercing 
mountains.  But  such  connection  it 
has.  The  explorer  is  sure  to  find 
somewhere  an  inlet  showing  whence 
its  waters  come,  a  bright  sparkling 
stream  which  has  filled  it  and  keeps  it 
full ;  or  springs  below  it,  which, 
though  they  may  flow  far  under- 
ground, bring  the  precious  supplies 
from  the  higher  regions,  perhaps  quite 
out  of  sight.  If  these  connections 
with  the  upper  springs  were  to  be  cut 
off  the  beautiful  lake  would  speedily 
dry  up  and  disappear.  Almsgiving, 
therefore,  is  in  its  right  place  here  ;  its 
source  is  in  the  higher  regions  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  kingdom.  And 
in  these  early  days  the  lakes  had  not 
been  formed,  for  the  springs  were  only 
beginning  to  flow  from  the  great 
fountain-head. — J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Hypocrisy  in  praying. — 

1.  A  caution  against  a  hypocritical 
way  of  devotion  (ver.  5). — Both 
Jews  and  Christians,  both  Christ  and 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  are  agreed 
that  prayer  is  a  very  commendable 
duty.  1.  Praying  to  be  seen  of  men 
is   a    practice    taxed   as    hypocritical. 

2.  Our  Saviour  assures  us  with  an 
asseveration  that  all  this  hypocritical 
devotion  shall  have  no  reward  beyond 
this  present  time.  3.  This  sort  of 
practice  is  totally  inconsistent  with  the 
spirit  of  Christianity. 


II.  A  direction  to  the  opposite  sin- 
cerity and  secrecy  (ver.  6). 

1 .  We  have  secret  prayer  recommended , 
rather  than  those  indiscreet  public  de- 
votions. (1)  The  practice  recommended 
to  private  Christians.  (2)  This  precept 
was  exceedingly  proper  to  avoid 
hypocrisy.  (3)  Also  to  avoid  pride 
and  nourish  humility. 

2.  We  have  a  description  of  the 
most  proper  preparation  for  this 
secret  prayer,  viz.,  entering  into  the 
closet.  There  are  three  things  con- 
tained in  this  advice.  (1)  Solitude,  or 
a  withdrawing  from  company.  There 
is  no  greater  enemy  to  devotion 
(excepting  a  wicked  life)  than  a 
mind  dissipated  with  much  company. 
(2)  Leisure,  or  a  withdrawing  from 
business,  or  rather  an  inward  tran- 
quillity from  worldly  cares,  lusts,  and 
passions.  (3)  A  serious  application  of 
the  mind  to  God ;  which  implies  a 
withdrawing  it  from  all  other  objects. 

III.  The  promise  of  an  open  reward 
to  this  secret  prayer. — James  Blair, 
M.A. 

Ver.  5.  The  inwardness  of  Chris- 
tianity.— Mrs.  Judson,  in  her  account 
of  the  first  Barman  convert,  says  :  '*  A 
few  days  ago  I  was  reading  with  him 
Christ's  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  He 
was  deeply  impressed,  and  unusually 
solemn.  '  These  words,'  said  he,  '  take 
hold  of  my  very  heart.  They  make 
me  tremble.  Here  God  commands  us 
to  do  everything  that  is  good  in  secret, 
not  to  be  seen  of  men.  How  unlike 
our  religion  this  is  !  When  Burmans 
make  offerings  at  the  pagodas,  they 
make  a  great  noise  with  drums  and 
musical  instruments,  that  others  may 
see  how  good  they  are  ;  but  this  religion 
makes  the  mind  fear  God ;  it  makes  it, 
of  its  own  accord,  fear  sin.' " 

Ver.  6.  Secret  prayer. — This  is  a 
commandment  in  the  form  of  an  allure- 
ment. It  has  all  the  force  of  a  law, 
but  all  the  grace  of  an  invitation. 
You  are  called  to  secret  prayer  : — 

I.  By  an  alluring  revelation  of  God. 
—1.  "  Father."  2.  ''  In  secret ;  "  "  seeth 
in  secret." 

127 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


II.  By  the  language  of  direct  invita- 
tion.— "  Enter  into  thy  closet."  In 
the  great  cathedral  at  Rome  are  ranged 
a  number  of  confessionals,  closets  of 
carved  wood,  for  penitents,  in  every 
language.  You  see  inscribed  with  gilt 
letters,  over  one,  Pro  Italica  Lingua ; 
over  another.  Pro  Flandrica  Lingua; 
on  a  third.  Pro  Polonica  Lingua ;  on  a 
fourth.  Pro  Illyrica  Lingua ;  on  a  fifth. 
Pro  Hispanica  Lingua ;  on  a  sixth, 
Pro  Anglica  Lingua.  In  each  instance 
the  father  confessor  is  waiting  in  secret 
to  hear  the  secrets  of  penitence.  A 
modern  writer,  having  thus  described 
this  arrangement,  tells  us  that  one  who 
witnessed  it  "  was  impressed  with  the 
infinite  convenience — if  we  may  use  so 
poor  a  phrase — of  the  Catholic  religion 
to  its  devout  believers."  But  "  infinite 
convenience,  if  we  may  use  so  poor  a 
phrase,"  belongs  rather  to  the  religion 
of  that  suppliant  who,  when  his  heart 
is  breaking,  has  no  need  to  wait  until 
he  can  kneel  on  some  consecrated  pave- 
ment, no  need  to  wait  until  he  can 
prepare  language,  no  need  to  wait  until 
he  can  reach  a  distant  priest,  whose 
soul  may  be  more  ignorant,  stained, 
and  troubled  than  his  own ;  but  who, 
in  every  hour  of  every  night  and  day, 
in  every  spot  on  sea  or  land,  may  find 
a  closet  in  which  the  Infinite  Father 
is  listening  for  whatever  the  over- 
burdened heart  may  murmur,  speak  in 
what  native  tongue  ifc  may — a  Father 
who  not  only  hears  the  spoken  prayer, 
but  sees  the  prayer  that  is  too  deep 
for  speech.  By  the  word  "  closet," 
the  Saviour  is  understood  to  convey 
an  allusion  to  the  room  in  the  ancient 
Jewish  dwelling  which  was  set  apart 
for  the  office  of  lonely  prayer.  Yes, 
as  "  stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make, 
nor  iron  bars  a  cell"  for  the  soul, 
neither  are  they,  nor  any  material 
boundaries  answering  to  them,  es- 
sential to  make  the  soul's  closet  of 
devotion.  A  closet  for  the  spirit  is 
whatever  helps  to  close  the  spirit  in 
from  all  distraction,  and  thus  make  it 
feel  alone  with  God.  But  the  phrase 
"  thy  closet "  conveys  an  additional 
meaning.    It  means  more  tjian  mental 

128 


seclusion  in  some  unexpected  place  and 
time.  "  Thy  closet  "  is  the  soul's  own 
fixed,  familiar  place  of  resort  for  com- 
munion with  God.  By  foresight,  by 
contrivance,  by  the  power  of  resolute, 
severe  punctuality,  "enter  into  thy 
closet."  Enter  it  every  day.  When 
sad  with  indistinct  premonitions  of 
calamity — when  struck  down  by  some 
blow  which  benumbs  your  natural 
promptitude  of  thought — you  instinc- 
tively turn  to  the  Almighty  for  help, 
and  the  Allwise  for  guidance, — when, 
after  the  elements  of  true  piety,  which 
are  the  elements  of  true  prayer,  have 
been  hardened  in  a  worldly  atmosphere, 
they  are  brought  into  fusion  again  by 
the  fire  of  adversity,  and  all  your 
glowing  soul,  "  melted  within  you  be- 
cause of  trouble,"  flows  forth  to  God — 
what  is  this  but  the  voice  of  Christ, 
through  affliction,  saying,  "  Enter  into 
thy  closet ! " 

III.  That  you  may  cherish  the  life 
which  marks  the  true  disciple  from 
the  formalist. — *'  But  thou,  when  thou 
prayest."  This  word  is  a  link  which 
connects  the  sentence  with  that  which 
precedes  it.  "  When  thou  prayest,  thou 
shalt  not  be  as  the  hypocrites  are,"  etc. 
1.  Secret  prayer  will  secure  this  end, 
by  helping  you  to  feel  and  cultivate 
the  sense  of  your  own  individual  life 
before  God.  2.  Secret  prayer  deepens 
the  secret  life.  The  more  we  work  the 
more  we  need  to  pray.  3.  Pray  in 
secret  that  your  prayers  may  he  the 
result  of  meditation.  4.  Secret  prayer 
is  needful,  in  order  to  the  fullest  con- 
fidence in  the  intercourse  between  the  soul 
and  God.  This  you  can  never  reach 
in  the  highest  degree  through  the 
medium  of  social  exercises. 

IV.  With  the  promise  of  certain  suc- 
cess.— "  He  shall  reward  thee  openly." 
1.  *'  He  shall  reward  thee."  Reward 
is  a  term  that  no  disciple  must  mis- 
interpret. "Prayer,"  says  Leighton, 
"  like  the  heavens,  hath  a  circular 
motion  ; "  coming  from  God,  it  ascends 
to  God  again.  He  gives  the  praying 
disposition ;  He  gives  His  Son  to  be 
the  Priest  whose  intercessions  make  it 
mighty ;  He  gives  opportunity  to  pray, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST,  MATTHEW,      chap.  VI. 


and  then  He  crowns  every  other  gift 
with  the  gift  of  success.  It  is,  there- 
fore, only  in  the  language  of  delicate, 
infinite  generosity  that  He  calls  such 
success  reward.  2.  "  He  shall  reward 
thee  openly"  When  we  read  all  the 
story  of  the  human  race  in  the  light  of 
the  last  day,  we  shall  find  that  many 
of  the  events  which  have  made  it  most 
sublime,  were  open  rewards  of  secret 
prayer.  Sanctified  sorrows,  heroic 
achievements  of  faith,  marvellous  de- 
liverances from  evil,  the  graces  of 
grand  and  matchless  men  who  shone 
as  the  lights  of  the  world,  innumerable 
conversions,  which  appeared  to  be  only 
the  result  of  faithful  speech  and 
arduous  labour  in  Christ's  service, 
when  traced  to  the  true  antecedents, 
will  be  found  to  have  had  their  mystic 
beginnings  in  the  closet.  3.  '*  He 
shall  reward  thee  openly."  "  Ah  !  but 
when  ? "  Be  comforted  by  this  as- 
surance, that  true  prayer  will  be  ac- 
cepted at  ODce,  even  if  not  rewarded  at 
once. — C,  Stanford^  D.D. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Vain  repetitions  and  length 
in  prayer. — I.  Describe  this  blemish  of 
devotion,  the  using  of  vain  repetitions. 
It  lay  in  turning  devotion  from  the 
affectionate  work  of  the  heart  to  the 
work  of  the  invention,  memory,  or 
tongue,  or  to  an  idle  repetition  of  the 
same  thing  over  and  over  again. 

II.  Wherein  the  faultiness  of  this 
practice  consists. — The  fault  of  these 
devotions  did  not  lie  only  in  the  length 
of  them.  For  if  a  true  spirit  of  de- 
votion is  kept  up  all  the  time,  we  can- 
not well  exceed  either  in  the  frequency 
or  the  continuance  of  our  addresses  to 
God,  or  even  in  a  holy  importunity  at 
the  throne  of  grace.  Nor  is  it  unlaw- 
ful to  make  repetition  of  the  same 
words  and  petitions  in  prayer,  so  it  be 
done  from  a  spirit  of  devotion.  We 
have  several  examples  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures  of  both  these  practices.  1. 
Ostentation,  and  other  worldly  aims 
and  designs  from  long  prayers  are  here 
condemned.  2.  Unworthy  conceptions 
of  God  (ver.  8)  are  here  condemned. 
3.  Prescribing   to   God  a   great   many 


.worldly  and  indifferent  things,  which 
lengthens  out  prayers,  is  here  censured. 
4.  Our  wrong  conceptions  concerning  the 
nature  of  prayer,  turning  it  from  the 
heart  to  a  mere  external,  laborious  ser- 
vice, are  here  rectified.  5.  All  things 
considered, /ei^  words  in  prayer  are  best, 
and  fittest  for  the  generality  of  man- 
kind. (1)  God's  perfection  is  such  that 
it  requires  treatment  with  all  sort  of 
respect  (Eccl.  v.  2).  (2)  Our  own 
imperfection  is  such  that  we  cannot 
fit  our  long  addresses  to  God  without  a 
great  deal  of  impertinence.  (3)  If  we 
consider  the  danger  of  a  Pharisaical 
devotion  few  words  are  best. — Jas. 
Blair,  M.A. 

Ver.  7.  Repetition  in  prayer. — The 
Hindoo  fakir  will  stand  all  day  long  in 
repeating  over  and  over  again  the 
name  of  his  deity ;  the  Buddhist  thinks 
that  there  is  salvation  in  the  endless 
repetition  of  his  magic  formula  ;  the 
Mussulman  will  interlard  even  his 
wickedest  speech  with  endless  paren- 
theses of  "  God  is  patient,  God  is 
great " ;  the  ignorant  Bomanist  repeats 
his  aves  and  his  paters,  dropping  a 
bead  with  every  paternoster.  God 
bears  compassionately  with  our  fool- 
eries, but  when  it  is  this,  what  our 
Lord  calls  mere  stuttering  on  the  one 
hand,  and  on  the  other  the  stumbling 
out  of  empty  words,  prayer  at  last 
becomes  at  this  rate  degraded  into  a 
mere  mechanism.  But  even  repeated 
prayers  may,  indeed,  have  their  place. 
St.  Augustine  tells  us  that  he  once 
spent  all  night  long  in  the  single 
prayer,  '*  Noverim  te  Domine,  noverim 
me."  "  Oh,  Lord,  may  I  know  Thee, 
may  I  know  myself."  Such  a  prayer 
does  not  break  our  Lord's  com- 
mand, so  long  as  it  continues  to  be 
intense  and  fervent.  Our  Lord  some- 
times spent  whole  nights  in  prayer, 
and  in  Gethsemane  He  prayed  thrice, 
ever  using  the  same  words ;  but  the 
more  and  more  a  prayer  becomes  a 
niechanical  weariness,  the  more  and 
more  it  becomes  a  ceremonial  form  the 
more  and  more  the  lips  repeat  it ;  but 
the  heart  cannot  follow  it ;  it  ceases  to 

129 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  C0MMEN2ARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


be  prayer,  and  becomes  but  mockery.         VI.  This  prayer  is  to  be  both  a  form 

— Archdeacon  Farrar.  and  model. — This  I  gather  both  from 

the   two    accounts    St.  Matthew  and 

Vers.   9-13.     The    Lord's  Prayer. —  St.  Luke  have  given  us  of  the  prayer, 

I.  The  lawfulness  and  usefulness  of  and  from  the  practice  of  the  Church. — 

set  forms  of  prayer. — 1.  The  generality  Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 
of    Christians   want    as    much   assist- 
ance in   their   devotions  now,   as  our  Vers.  9,  10.  The  model  prayer  fosters 

Saviour's  disciples  did  then.     2.  If  we  confidence. — The   first    three    petitions 

consider  the  difficulty  of  framing  our  express   confidence,    but    there    is    an 

devotions  aright,  we  shall  be  convinced  undertone  expressing  a  different  state 

that  well -composed  forms  of  devotion  of  mind,  giving  to  them  both  variety 

are     very     useful.       3.     The    Jewish  and  comprehensiveness, 
church,   in   our    Saviour's   days,  used  I.  Confidence  with  filial  love  and 

several  set  forms  of  devotion,   which  reverence,  as    sons  :    "  Our    Father, 

He  was  so  far  from  reproving  that  He  which  art  in  heaven." 
Himself  imitated  them.  II.  Confidence  with  submission,  as 

II.  We  are  called  off  from  minding  subjects  :    "  Thy  kingdom  come." 
the  eyes  of  men  to  mind  only  our         III.  Confidence  with  self-surrender, 
Father  in  heaven.  as  servants  :    "  Thy  will  be  done." — 

III.  Our  prayers  should  be  short. —  S.  Macnaughton,  M.A. 
1.  Few   words   in   prayer   suit   better 

the  conceptions  we  ought  to  have  of  Ver.  9.  God  our  Father. — Is  God  our 
Almighty  God.  2.  Such  prayers  suit  Father?  This  shows  us: — 
better  our  own  weakness  and  infirm-  I.  What  we  are  to  do. — 1.  Honour,  \/ 
ities.  3.  Brevity  in  words  gives  us  a  love,  and  obey  Him  (Mai.  i.  6).  2.  En- 
truer  notion  of  the  nature  of  devotion.  deavour  to  imitate  and  resemble  Him 
For  prayer  is  the  language  of  the  (Eph.  v.  1  ;  Matt.  v.  48).  3.  Banish 
heart  to  God.  all  carking  cares,  and  diffident  fears, 

IV.  Too  great  minuteness  in  prayer  and  sordid  shifts  for  gathering  and 
should  be  avoided  as  a  thing  not  so  keeping  this  world  (Phil.  iv.  6 ; 
proper  for  us,  who  should  come  to  God  Matt.  vi.  31,  32).  4.  Be  patient  in  our 
like  children  to  a  father,  exposing  in  afflictions  (Deut.  viii.  5 ;  Heb.  xii.  9). 
general  our  nakedness  and  wants,  but  5.  Live  up  to  the  dignity  of  so  noble 
leaving  it  to  Him  to  supply  them  in  a  relation  (Phil.  ii.  15).  6.  Love  as 
such  a  manner  as  He  thinks  most  con-  brethren.  7.  Be  heavenly-minded,  and 
venient  for  us.  This  seems  to  be  very  remember  that  there  is  no  concealing 
fairly  deducible  from  the  foregoing  of  our  faults  from  Him,  as  from  our 
words,  applied  to  this  prayer,  with  a  earthly  parents. 

"  Therefore."     And  the  prayer  we  find  II.  What    we     are     to     expect. — 

consists  all  of  general  petitions,  leaving  1 .  Though  we  have  been  ever  so  great 

the   particulars    to    God    Himself   to  prodigals,   if   we   do   but   repent    and 

bestow,   as    He    in   His   wisdom   and  amend  and  return  to  our  Father,  He 

goodness  should   think  fit.  will    receive    us     with    all     the     joy 

V.  The  right  preparations  and  dis-  imaginable.  2.  If  under  ever  so  great 
positions  with  which  we  ought  to  afflictions,  God  pities  us  as  a  Father. 
draw  near  to  God. — Of  these  we  may  3.  If  we  have  ever  so  great  and  many 
easily  observe  a  great  many  noble  ones  enemies,  and  we  flee  to  Him,  He  will 
pointed  at  in  this  very  piayer.  I  shall  be  our  refuge.  4.  We  may  expect 
instance  the  following  graces  : — Faith  ;  blessings  at  the  throne  of  grace  (vii.  11), 
the   love    of    God  ;    the    love   of   our  — Jas.  Blair,  M.A, 

neighbour ;  humility  and  resignation  ; 

watchfulness  against  temptations,  and  a  Our  Father  in  heaven. — I.  Eeverence 

readiness  to  join  obedience  with  prayer,  is  the  keynote  of  this  prayer. — How, 

130 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  vi. 


save  with  reverence,  can  we  possibly 
come  with  any  sanity  before  Him  who 
chargeth  His  very  angels  with  folly, 
etc.  (see  Isa.  vi.  2,  3).  No  noble  nature 
yet  was  ever  irreverent. 

II.  But  if  the  words  "  which  art  in 
heaven "    are    meant    to    strike    the 
keynote  of  reverence,  the  words  "  Our 
Father"  give  us  the  dominant  notes 
of  trustfulness  and  love.     It  was  said 
of  the  great  Roman  Emperor  Augustus 
•^  that  they  who  dared  to  speak  to  "Kim 
vrashly  failed  to  appreciate  his  great- 
ness, but  that  they  who  out  of  fear 
Cdared  not  to  speak  to  him  at  all  knew 
not  how  good  he  was.     So  it  is  with 
God.     He  wishes  us  to  be  reverent,  but 
not   to   be  abject.     We  are  but  dust 
and  ashes,  yet  He  suffers,  nay,  urges 
us  to  come  to  Him  as  unworthy  sons, 
as  prodigals,  yes,  but  still  as  sons. 

1.  This  Fatherhood  of  God  was  the 
most  central^  the  most  essential,  part  of 
the  revelation  which  Christ  came  to 
give. — The  sense  of  "  Father  "  here  is 
far  deeper  than  that  in  which  the 
word  was  used  by  the  heathen  of  God 
as  our  Creator,  far  deeper  than  that 
in  which  the  Jews  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment used  it  of  Jehovah  as  the 
covenant  God  of  their  race.  Those 
privileges  of  natural  and  of  covenant 
relation  have  been  made  fruitless  by 
our  apostasies.  The  word  "  Father " 
here  is  the  witness  and  appeal  to  the 
incarnation  and  the  redemption.  It 
means  the  Fatherhood  which  we  derive, 
as  brethren  of  God's  only  begotten 
Son.  When  Christ  said,  '*  I  go  to  My 
Father  and  your  Father,  and  to  My 
God  and  your  God,"  it  was  not  exactly 
as  we  render  it.  We  cannot  render 
those  words  exactly  right.  They  are 
in  the  Greek  Trpos  rov  iraripa  (jlov  koX 
iraripa  vfxoiv :  "To  the  Father  of  Me, 
and  Father  of  you."  "  First  of  Me," 
says  Bishop  Pearson,  "  then  of  you. 
Not,  therefore,  His  Father  because 
ours,  but  rather  ours  only  because  His." 
And  it  is  remarkable  that  Christ  taught 
us  to  say,  "  Our  Father  " ;  but  He  Him- 
self never  uses  that  form.  He  spoke  of 
God  always  as  "  the  Father,"  as  "  My 
Father  "  and  "  your  Father,"  but  He 


Himself  never  said  "  our  Father,"  be- 
cause among  all  the  sons  of  God  there 
is  none  like  to  that  Son  of  God. 

2.  Only  remember  that  vast  pri- 
vileges involve  immense  duties. — "  If 
I  be  a  Father,"  says  God,  "where  is 
Mine  honour  ? " 

3.  There  remains  but  one  word  more 
— no  less  rich  in  meaning  than  the 
rest — it  is  the  word  ^^our.''  It  is 
a  protest  against  that  selfishness 
which  is  so  ingrained  in  our  nature 
that  it  tends  even  to  intrude  into  our 
holiest  things.  Is  it  hard  for  you 
when  you  pray  "  our  Father  "  to  include 
in  that  prayer  all  who  hate  you  without 
a  cause,  all  who  slander  and  undermine 
you,  all  who  are  the  champions  of 
causes  which  you  believe  to  be  steeped 
in  falsity,  all  who  in  their  arrogance 
treat  you  as  the  very  dust  beneath 
their  feet,  all  whose  vanity  and 
opinionativeness  come  into  rude  col- 
lision with  your  own,  all  the  wrongdoers 
who  make  the  life  of  men  more  wicked 
and  more  miserable  ?  Yes,  in  the  very 
highest  exercise  of  your  lives  you  must 
associate  yourselves  with  every  one  of 
them. — Archdeacon  Farrar. 

Our  Father  in  heaven. — The  first 
words  of  our  text,  "our  Father," 
throw  away  all  selfishness  at  a  breath. 
"  Father,"  the  fountain-word  of  all  love 
and  all  confidence.  "  Our  Father, 
which  art."  It  is  a  beautiful  phrase. 
I  had  a  father  on  earth  once,  but  now 
I  cannot  say,  "  my  father,  which  art ;  " 
he  is  gone.  But  I  can  say  of  Him, 
"  our  Father,  which  art."  "  Our 
Father,  which  art  in  heaven."  Won- 
derful word,  that  utters  the  proper 
name  of  a  palace  fit  for  Him  whose 
name  is  Wonderful.  If  you  wanted  to 
raise  some  enormous  fund  you  would 
not  get  hold  of  a  twenty-years-old 
directory  to  go  and  beg  by.  You 
would  be  running  after  the  dead,  or 
the  absent,  or  the  bankrupt,  or  other 
people  that  were  not  to  be  found.  Before 
you  go  anywhere  you  like  to  know 
that  a  man  is,  you  like  to  know  that 
he  has  got  something,  you  like  to 
know  that  he  is  inclined  to  help  you. 

131 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MATTHEW. 


V 


Those  are  very  simple  rules,  but  they 
are  the  rules  which  everybody  ought 
always  to  apply  to  the  object  of 
worship.  "He  that  cometh  to  God 
must  believe  that  He  is,"  etc. 

I.  The  designation,  Father. — 1.  Its 
tenderness.  2.  Its  majesty.  He  is  a 
heavenly  Father.  What  so  near  as 
father  and  child,  but  what  so  far  as 
earth  and  heaven  t 

II.  The  relation,  our  Father. 

1.  The  Autho7*  of  oMr  being. — There  is 
a  vast  difference  between  a  maker  and 
a  father.  The  outcome  of  paternity 
has  a  resemblance  to  it ;  and  so  when 
God  made  man  it  was  not  like  making 
sparrows.  The  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  your 
Father  feedeth  them " ;  not  "  their 
Father."  When  He  made  man.  He 
said,  '^  Let  Us  make  man  in  Our 
image,"  etc.  "  If  I  be  a  Father,  where 
is  Mine  honour  1 "  There  is  here  an 
argument  to  convince  man  of  the  deep 
dreadfulness  of   his  guilt. 

2.  Some  people  make  great  m,ischief  of 
this  doctrine. — They  say  because  God  is 
a  Father  He  will  not  punish.  Is  God 
a  Father  because  He  is  a  bit  like  you, 
or  are  you  called  a  father  because  you 
are  a  bit  like  Him?  What  was  the 
true  fatherhood  ?  Patriarchy.  Would 
any  man  in  the  days  of  patriarchy 
have  dared  to  say  that  the  father 
would  not  punish  ?  By-and-by  it  came 
about  that  the  patriarchy  was  put 
under  the  king;  but  the  true  patriarchy 
was  the  patriarchal  paternity,  and  the 
fountain  of  authority  even  among  men 
was  in  tHe  father. 

3 .  This  blessed  truth  lies  at  the  bottom  of 
providence. — I  met  a  man  the  other  day 
who  had  got  some  of  these  modern  no- 
tions about  providence.  He  said,  "  Of 
course  everything  is  managed  by  law ; 
there  cannot  be  any  particular  provi- 
dence ;  it  is  all  under  law."  I  said  to 
the  man,  "  Have  you  any  children  1 " 
**  Oh,  yes  ;  half  a  dozen."  "  Well,  do 
you  take  care  of  them  ? "  You  cannot 
think  how  the  man  looked  at  me.  He 
said,  "  Do  you  think  I  am  a  brute?  " 
"  No,  but  I  ask  you,  do  you  take  care  of 
them?"  "Of  course  I  do ;  I  should 
be  a  brute  if  I  did  not."     "  Well,  my 

133 


difficulty  is  this.  You  told  me  a  little 
while  ago  that  there  could  not  be  any 
providing  or  taking  care,  because  there 
were  fixed  laws.  How  do  you  manage 
it  ?  "  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  how  could  I 
manage  it  if  I  had  not  fixed  laws  ? " 
"  You  think  it  helps  you  to  have  fixed 
laws  ? "  "I  think  it  does  on  the 
whole."  "  Yet  you  think  it  hinders  / 
God.  You  can  take  care  of  your  ) 
children,  though  you  have  fixed  laws ; 
and  really  you  speak  as  if  you  thought 
God  was  not  as  wise  as  you  are."  He 
was  silent;  he  said  no  more.  Now  I 
want  you  to  see  that  God's  providence 
is  provide-ence ;  it  is  looking  forward 
with  a  Father's  wisdom  and  a  Father's 
love,  and  so  He  takes  care. 

4.  Those  who  have  come  to  Christ  know 
themselves  spiritually,  gloriously,  to  be 
the  children  of  God. 

III.  The  place — in  heaven. — In 
heaven,  yet  not  confined  to  heaven. — 
S.  Coley, 

''Father''    and    '' King.''— It    is    a^ 
singular   fact,    and   one   well   worthy  \^ 
of   our  notice,  that  when  an  earthly   \ 
king   has  been    unusually    good,   like  / 
Louis  XIV.  of  France,  thoughtful  of  his 
people,  nourishing  their  best  interests, 
cultivating  peace  at  home  and  abroad, 
and   making   his   subjects  prosperous, 
contented,  and  happy,  they  have  called 
him  the  father  of  his  people ;  evidently 
showing  that  the  universal  conscience 
of  men  declares  the  idea  of  father  to 
be  altogether  higher  and  nobler  than 
the  idea  of  king. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

"  Hallowed  be  Thy  name." — Many, 
I  think,  if  they  spoke  with  perfect 
frankness,  would  say  that  of  all  the 
seven  petitions  in  the  Lord's  Prayer 
this  was  the  least  real  to  them.  If  it 
is  so,  should  it  not  be  a  strong  reason 
for  examining  more  deeply  what  the 
petition  means  ?  For  observe  that  our 
Lord  not  only  made  room  for  it  in  this 
brief  prayer,  but  placed  it  in  the  very 
forefront,  and  that,  though  He  has 
just  been  using  the  strongest  possible 
protest  against  all  vain  and  artificial 
petitions. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vi. 


I.  The  nature  of  the  petition,  and  and  end  in  God's  glory  and  honour, 
the  lessons  which  its  place  in  the  This  will  comprehend  these  particulars : 
prayer  may  teach  us. — We  know  that  1.  That  God  may  lay  so  strong  restraints 
Christ  insisted  upon  unselfishness  when  upon  us  by  His  grace  and  providence, 
He  taught  us  to  say  not  "  my  Father,"  that  we  never  aim  at  any  ill  thing, 
but  "  our  Father,"  but  in  this  petition  2.  That  if  we  do  aim  at  it,  we  may 
with  yet  Diviner  force  He  teaches  us  be  disappointed,  and  not  permitted  to 
not  unselfishness  only,  but  self -forget-  bring  it  to  effect.  3.  That  God  would 
fulness.  If  in  the  preface  He  directs  interpose  to  defeat  all  the  evil  works 
to  goodness,  reverence,  and  trustfulness,  and  designs  of  men.  4.  That  in  all 
in  this  first  clause  He  points  to  the  our  good  works,  our  intentions  may  be 
absorption  of  all  thoughts  of  self  in  purely  set  on  His  honour  and  glory, 
the  thought  of  God  as  the  only  true  5.  That  in  all  our  indifierent  actions, 
orientation  of  our  prayers.  we  endeavour  so  to  sanctify  them  that 

II.  What  the  petition  actually  they  may  be  directed  to  God's  honour 
means.  and   glory.      6.  That   God    would   be 

1.  God^s  name  is  Himself  as  He  is  pleased   so  to  overrule   the   wickedest 
made   known    to   its.  —  The   name  of  actions  of  men  that  they  may  likewise 
God   differences    Him  from   all   other  turn  to  His  honour. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 
beings,   as   men   are   by  their   names 

differenced    from     one     another,    and  Ver.    10.  "  Thy    kingdom    come.*^ — 

nothing  is  more   essential   than   that  I.  If  we  can  conceive  of  the  prayer  as 

we    should    understand    God's    name,  being  sincerely  breathed  by  one  who  is 

On  the  thoughts  we  think  of  God  it  not  yet  a  subject  of  the  kingdom,  it  is 

depends  whether  our  religion  uplifts  a  prayer  for  conversion. — The  theory 

our  life,  or  whether  our  life  degrades  of   the   relationship   existing   between 

our    religion    and    smites,    with    the  each  of   the   forty-two   States   of   our 

leprosy  of  selfishness  or   superstition.  Union  and  the  United  States,  declares 

even  our  most  holy  things.  that  each  several  State  is  an  imperium 

2.  But  how  is  God's  name  to  he  in  imperio,  a  government  within  a 
hallowed? — It  is  hallowed  by  all  His  government.  And  when  the  great 
works  except  by  devils  and  by  men.  Is  question  of  the  preservation  of  the 
it  hallowed  by  ourselves  ?  We  should  Union  came  up  a  generation  ago, 
hallow  God's  name  by  utter  humility  the  first  answer  to  it  consisted  of  a 
in  His  presence ;  by  noble  thoughts  of  declaration  by  each  State  of  its  own 
Him,  and  by  giving  thanks  at  the  position.  When  the  attitude  was  loyal 
remembrance  of  His  holiness ;  we  should  the  second  form  of  the  answer  consisted 
hallow  it  more  than  all  by  lives  kind  in  the  furnishing  of  troops  to  bring 
and  pure,  honest,  truthful,  and  con-  back  to  their  duty  the  States  that 
tented.  And  thus  hallowing  it  for  were  in  rebellion.  But  in  that  time  of 
ourselves,  we  should  strive  that  it  trouble  and  heart-searching,  the  first 
should  be  hallowed  by  others  also. —  concern  of  each  State  was  with  itself, 
ArcMeacon  Farrar.  and  to  settle  its  own  position  was,  for 

some  of  the  States,  the  most  formidable 

First  petition  in  the  Lord^s  Prayer. —  question  of  the  four  years'  war.    Every 

I.  Whereas  we  know  not  the  particular  human  life  is  a  sovereign  province  of 

ways  and  means  which  God  makes  use  God's    moral  empire.      I  am  an    im- 

of  for  promoting  His  own   glory,  we  perium    in     imperio.        You    are     a 

pray  for  success  to  all  those  means.  sovereign  government  within  a  govern- 

II.  We  pray  that  all  men  may  come  ment,  and  in  praying  for  the  coming 
to  the  knowledge  and  acknowledg-  of  God's  kingdom  our  first  concern 
ment  of  Him  the  true  and  living  God.  must  be  with  ourselves.     And  the  sad 

III.  We  pray  that  in  all  things  we  fact  is  that  as  rebels  we  need  to  be 
set  about,  they  may  be  directed  to,  reconciled  to  the  King, 

133 


CHAP.  VI.      BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


II.  After  conversion  it  is  largely 
a    kingdom    that    is    to     come. — In 

conversion  the  kingdom  of  God  comes 
to  the  heart  as  leaven  is  placed  by  the 
housewife  in  her  batch  of  meal,  to 
leaven  the  whole  lump.  But  from  the 
deposit  to  the  completed  process  there 
is  a  work  to  be  done. 

III.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  intended 
in  the  purpose  of  the  King  to  spread 
and  fill  the  earth. — Here  also  the 
kingdom  has  but  partially  come. 

IV.  The  kingdom  of  God  has  re- 
lation also  to  political  and  social 
conditions. — It  remoulds  old  insti- 
tutions and  brings  new  ones  into 
existence.  It  reforms  social  habits  and 
customs  and  readjusts  the  relations  of 
man  to  man  and  of  man  to  the  universe. 
It  contemplates,  by  creating  ideal  men 
and  women,  to  produce  ideal  conditions 
of  life.  Here,  also,  "  there  remaineth 
very  much  land  to  be  possessed." — 
Thos.  Sims. 

"  Thi/  kingdom  come"  —  I.  This 
prayer  is  all-embracing  in  its  blessed 
amplitude. — "  We  fancy,"  says  one, 
"  that  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of 
lords  will  reign  over  our  spirits,  souls, 
and  bodies  which  He  has  redeemed. 
We  pray  for  the  extinction  of  all 
tyranny,  whether  in  the  man  or  in 
the  multitude;  we  pray  for  the  exposure 
and  destruction  of  corruption,  outward 
and  inward ;  we  pray  for  truth  and 
righteousness  in  all  departments  of 
government,  art,  and  science ;  we 
pray  for  the  dignity  of  professions,  we 
pray  for  the  banishment  from  trade 
of  every  form  of  fraud  and  chicanery, 
we  pray  for  blessings  which  shall  be 
the  purification  not  only  of  the  palace, 
but  of  every  hovel ;  we  pray  for  these 
things  knowing  that  we  pray  according 
to  God's  will,  knowing  that  God  will 
hear  us." 

II.  This  prayer  is  a  trumpet-call 
to  awakenment  and  to  action. — If  we 
pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  it  is  a 
monstrous  hypocrisy  if  we  are  every 
day  of  our  Uves  hindering  and  thwarting 
the  advance  of  that  kingdom.  I  read 
the  other  day  of  a  young  Indian  officer 

134 


who,  shocked  at  the  many  evils  that 
he  saw  around  him,  began  to  protest 
against  them,  and  at  once  awakened 
all  around  him  the  hornet  swarms  of 
hatred  and  slander.  He  went  in 
distress  to  the  gallant  Outram,  the 
Bayard  of  India.  "  What  am  I  to 
do  ]  "  he  asked,  in  deep  distress ;  "  what 
am  I  to  do  amid  this  storm  of  oppo- 
sition ?  "  Other  men  might  have  bidden 
him  temporise,  to  bend  to  the  hurricane, 
to  keep  quiet,  to  hold  his  tongue,  to 
acquiesce,  to  get  on,  to  be  happy  as 
the  flesh  counts  happiness,  and  success- 
ful as  the  world  counts  success.  But 
Outram,  happily,  was  a  man  who  felt 
the  infinite  nature  of  duty,  and  he 
asked  the  youth  this  question  :  "  Do 
you  fear  God  or  man  ?  If  you  fear 
God,  do  as  you  are  doing  and  bear  the 
insults  that  are  heaped  upon  you ;  if 
you  fear  man  most,  let  everything  go 
on  just  as  it  is,  and  make  no  protest 
at  all."  Ah  !  if  you  mean  the  prayer 
"Thy  kingdom  come,"  act  up  to  it,  do 
the  little  every-day  duty  now  and 
daily,  and  strenuously  and  sincerely, 
so  will  you  promote  that  kingdom  most 
effectually. — Archdeacon  Farrar. 

The  kingdom  within. — A  wounded 
soldier  boy  was  dying  in  a  hospital. 
The  lady  who  watched  by  his  bedside 
said  to  him,  "  My  dear  boy,  if  this 
should  be  death  that  is  coming  upon 
you,  are  you  ready  to  meet  your 
God  ?  "  He  answered  "  I  am  ready, 
dear  lady,  for  this  has  long  been  His 
kingdom  " ;  and  as  he  spoke  he  placed 
his  hand  upon  his  heart.  "  Do  you 
mean,"  questioned  the  lady  gently, 
"  that  God  rules  and  reigns  in  your 
heart  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  answered  ;  but 
his  voice  sounded  far  off,  sweet  and 
low,  as  if  it  came  from  a  soul  already 
well  on  its  way  through  the  "  dark 
valley  and  shadow  of  death." — iV^/e's 
Anecdotes. 

''''Thy  will  he  done." — In  one  sense 
the  prayer  is  needless.  In  nature,  in 
providence,  in  the  great  issues  of  life, 
God's  will  is  done,  for  who  hath  resisted 
His  will  ?     But  there  is  another  and 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap,  vf. 


a  terribly  real  sense  in  which  the  will 
of  God  is  not  done.  Do  not  think  that 
it  is  a  mere  verbal  variation  of  the 
two  previous  petitions.  The  prayer, 
*'  Hallowed  be  Thy  name,"  invites  us 
to  think  less  of  self  and  more  of  God, 
to  think  but  little  or  nothing  of  self. 
The  prayer,  *'  Thy  kingdom  come,"  is 
the  trumpet-call  to  action,  pledging  us, 
unless  we  are  to  pray  the  prayer  of 
the  hypocrite,  to  the  furtherance  of 
that  kingdom  which  we  profess  to 
desire.  This  prayer  is  an  appeal  to 
give  up  our  own  wills  altogether.  And 
it  sets  us  also  an  example  as  to  how  we 
are  to  do  it. 

I.  What  is  God's  will  ? — Our  sancti- 
fication ;  that  we  keep  His  command- 
ments, etc. 

II.  Who  do  God's  will  in  heaven  ? 

III.  How  do  the  angels  serve? — 
Alas !  as  differently  as  possible  from 
the  unwilling  way  in  which  it  is  done 
on  earth. 

1.  God's  angels,  we  know,  do  it 
contentedly  and  unquestioningly,  what- 
ever it  is — if  it  be  a  mission  of 
seeming  wrath,  as  was  theirs  whose 
swords  of  waving  flame  drove  men 
from  paradise. 

2.  Cheerfully.  —  The  archangel 
Gabriel,  as  he  waited  by  the  gates 
of  gold,  was  sent  by  God  to  earth 
to  do  two  things ;  one  to  prevent  king 
Solomon  from  committing  the  sin  of 
forgetting  his  evening  prayer  in  the 
exultation  of  watching  his  matchless 
steeds,  and  the  other  to  help  a  little 
yellow  ant  on  the  slope  of  Ariphat 
which  had  grown  weary  in  getting  food 
for  her  nest,  and  which  would  other- 
wise have  perished  in  the  falling  rain. 
To  Gabriel*  the  one  behest  seemed  just 
as  kingly  as  the  other,  seeing  that  God 
had  ordered  it.  Silently  he  left  the 
presence  and  prevented  the  king's  sin 
and  helped  the  little  ant. 

3.  Zealously. — Swift  is  the  hurricane, 
vivid  is  the  lightning  ;  He  maketh  the 
winds  His  angels,  and  flaming  fires  His 
ministers. 

4.  Harmoniously. — There  are  no 
jealousies  among  the  angels. 

Condusion, — The  prayer  involves  a 


pledge,  and  its  utterance  impUes  a  duty. 
•'  Will  God  mend  all  ?  "  said  Lord  Reay 
in  1630  to  Sir  Donald  Fraser.  "  Nay," 
impatiently  answered  Sir  Donald, 
**  nay,  Reay,  we  must  help  Him  to 
mend  it."  God  cannot  make  best  men 
without  best  men  to  help  Him. — 
Archdeacon  Farrar. 

The  principle  of  Christian  life. — 
When  our  Lord  gave  His  disciples  this 
form  of  prayer  there  can  be  little 
doubt  but  that  He  meant  its  precepts 
to  be  the  rule  and  leading  principle  of 
the  Christian  life.  His  followers  were 
to  be  such  in  their  daily  actions  as  they 
were  in  their  prayers,  and  the  supplica- 
tions which  He  enjoined  them  to  use 
constantly  at  the  throne  of  grace  were 
hourly  to  be  the  guide  of  their  conduct 
and  their  great  object  of  desire.  This 
petition  portrays  the  intensity  of  feel- 
ing to  and  for  God  which  belongs  to 
the  whole  of  the  Lord's  prayer.  1.  Our 
will  it  submits  to  God,  no  easy  task. 
2.  The  full  realisation  of  this  prayer 
belongs  to  the  perfect  state  of  glory. 
But  as  the  church  on  earth  is  the  type 
of  the  church  in  heaven,  and  its  privi- 
leges but  shadows  of  the  perfect  bless- 
ings then  to  be  vouchsafed,  so  also  it  is 
possible  here  for  the  will  of  God  to 
reign  more  and  more  in  our  hearts, 
and  something  of  that  ready  acquies- 
cence in  it  which  will  finally  exist  in 
heaven  to  be  formed  even  now. 

I.  We  must  bear  with  patience 
what  God  causes  us  to  suiFer. 

II.  We  must  act  for  God.  —This  the 
more  important  meaning  of  the  petition. 
1.  Because  it  is  the  true  meaning,  for  it 
is  not  "  Thy  will  be  endured,  and  borne 
patiently,"  but  ''Thy  will  be  done." 
And,  further,  it  is  to  be  done  as  in 
heaven,  but  there  is  no  suffering,  no 
patiently  bearing  affliction  there,  but 
the  holy  angels  are  represented  to  us  as 
ever  actively  engaged  in  doing  the  work 
of  God.  2.  The  doing  God^s  will  in- 
cludes the  bearing  of  it,  as  the  cause 
includes  the  effect. 

III.  This  must  be  done  in  a 
heavenly  manner. — "As  in  heaven." 
The  manner   is  not  indifferent.     Our 

135 


CHAP.  VI.      MOMIL^TIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Lord's  example  (See  Ps.  xl.  7,  8). 
1.  Readily/.  2.  With  delight.  3.  Re- 
cause  God^s  law  written  in  His  heart. 
— R.  Payne  Smith,  D»D, 

The  Father's  kingdom  and  the  Father^ s 
will. — The  parallelism  in  these  two 
sentences  is  very  striking.  A  kingdom 
is  the  rule  of  a  will.  A  living,  active 
will  creates  a  kingdom.  If  God's  will 
were  fully  done  His  kingdom  would 
have  come.  What  is  the  kingdom 
of  God  which  we  thus  desire  to  be 
established?  No  form  of  political 
arrangement.  It  is  universal  and  all 
comprehensive,  as  a  kingdom  of  moral 
beings;  the  Father's  great  family, 
explained  in  the  very  suggestive 
passage,  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghost." 

I.  The  theological  attitude  of  the 
man  who  offers  these  prayers. — He 
must  believe : — 

1.  In  the  reality  of  the  spiritual 
world. — There  is  an  unseen,  as  well 
as  a  seen ;  and  the  unseen  is  the 
true  and  the  real.  It  is  more  im- 
portant that  the  unseen,  spiritual 
kingdom  should  be  established,  than 
that  any  material  blessings  should  be 
gained.  It  is  more  important  to  be 
"  good  "  than  to  be  "  great." 

2.  In  the  actual  present  working  of 
God  in  the  world. — The  kingdom  of  God 
and  righteousness  is  established.  God 
is  actually  perfecting  it,  in  ways  beyond 
all  human  vision  and  reckoning. 

3.  In  the  perfect  righteousness  of  the 
Father's  will. — He  who  desires  that  will 
to  be  done  must  believe  that  the  will  is 
right.  We  cannot  feel  it  right  merely 
as  a  matter  of  sovereignty.  It  can 
only  be  right  as  the  expression  of  the 
righteous  Father's  character. 

4.  In  the  possibility  of  7nen's  obeying 
the  Father's  will. — The  expres^sion  "  as 
in  heaven,"  involves  the  belief  that  some 
created  beings  can  and  do  obey  it. 
This  alone  loosens  the  grasp  of  sin  on 
us,  which  so  often  seems  hopelessly 
fixed. 

5.  In    tJie    truth    that    righteousness 
for  a  creature,  can   mily  be  found   in 

136 


obedience  to  the  Fathe7''s  will. — The 
perfect  righteousness,  for  earth,  is 
submission  and  obedience  to  the  will. 
II.  The  moral  attitude  of  the  man 
who  offers  these  prayers.  —  There 
should  be : — 

1.  Deep  feeling  of  the  blessedness 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  Father  s  will. 
— Beyond  intellectual  acceptance  of 
the  will  there  should  be  holy  admiration 
of  it ;  loving  anxiety  for  the  perfect 
acknowledgment  of  the  Father's 
authority. 

2.  Abiding  anxiety  on  account  of  the 
resistance  offe7'ed  to  the  comi^ig  of  that 
kingdom.- — For  it  is  only  too  manifest 
that  there  is  an  opposing  kingdom  of 
evil. 

3.  Hearty  willingness  to  make  our  own 
selves,  and  our  own  spheres,  scenes  of  the 
triumph  of  the  kingdorti,  and  obedience 
of  the  will. — The  law  of  the  progress  of 
the  kingdom  is  first  within,  then  with- 
out, first  the  individual,  then  the  mass. 
He  who  opens  his  soul,  and  his  sphere, 
to  welcome  the  holy  will,  alone  can 
sincerely  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come." 
— Weekly  Pulpit. 

Acquiescence,  how  far  is  it  to  be 
carried  ? — We  are  not  to  believe 
that  it  is  a  duty  incumbent  upon  us 
actively  to  comply  with  everything 
that  seems  to  be  favoured  by  provi- 
dence; for  sometimes  we  are  not  to 
comply  at  all,  but  according  to  the 
duty  of  our  place  and  station,  are  by 
all  lawful  ways  to  oppose  prosperous 
iniquity.  That  which  seems  a  counten- 
ance of  providence  is  often  no  such 
thing,  but  only  God's  making  use  of 
ill  men  to  be  scourges  in  His  hand  for 
chastising  others,  sometimes  as  bad, 
but  often  a  great  deal  better  than 
themselves.  We  shall  never  be  safe 
in  our  duty  of  acquiescing  in  the  Divine 
providence,  except  where  we  are  sure 
that  we  have  taken  no  sinful  steps  to 
bring  it  about  ourselves;  and  where 
it  is  brought  about  to  our  hand,  it  is 
often  not  an  active  but  a  passive 
compliance  which  God  requires  at  our 
hands.  The  thing  will  be  clearer  by 
an    example.       When    the    king    of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  Vi. 


Assyria  invaded  Judsea  it  would  have  only  asking  God  for  things.     It  is  the 

been    great   treachery   in  any  of   the  process  by  which  we  are  put  into  the 

Jews   to   have  sided   with  him.     Yet  right   relation   towards   all   about  us. 

afterwards   when    he   had    conquered  "  Our   Father,    which   art    in  heaven, 

them,  and  they  were  actually  carried  hallowed  be  Thy  name  ;  Thy  kingdom 

away    captives     into      Babylon,     the  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth  as  it  is 

providence  of  God  deciding  the  matter  in  heaven  " — these  words  set  us  in  the 

so  plainly,  that  they  were  his  subjects,  right    attitude    and   relation   to   God. 

they  were  obliged  to  perform  the  duty  Then  comes  the  next  petition,  "  Give  us 

of  quiet  and  peaceabla  subjects  under  this  day,"  etc.     Thus  we  are  set  in  the 

him,  and  to  say,  God's  will  be  done. —  right  relation  towards  God's  gifts.    In 

Jas.  Blair,  M.A.  this    matter  of  the  daily  bread  there 

are  four  ways  in  which  men  may  get 

God's  work  perfect. — Many  years  ago  wrong,   and   from   each  of  these,  this 

a  Christian  merchant  met  unexpectedly  prayer,  if  rightly  offered,  will  deliver 

with  some  great  losses.     He  began  to  us. 

doubt  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  that  I.  Negligence  in  getting  it. — I  do 

Providence    which    could   allow   such  not  know  that  this   is   an   evil  from 

trials  to  overtake  him.     He  returned  which  men  greatly  suffer  in  these  times, 

to  his  home  one  evening  in  a  despairing  Yet  so  long  as  human  nature  is  what 

state   of   mind.     He  sat  down  before  it  is,  laziness  will  never  be  quite  done 

the  open  fire-place  in  his  library,  tossed  away  with.     The  man  who  is  so  taken 

with  the  tempest  of  doubt,  and  destitute  up  with  the  things  of  heaven,  that  he 

of  comfort.     Presently  his  little  boy,  a  forgets  his  duty  down  here  on  earth,  is 

thoughtful    child    of     six     or     seven  a  hindrance   to   the   coming  of  God's 

summers,  came  and  sat  on  his  knee,  kingdom.      We   are  to   get  our  daily 

Over   the    mantelpiece    was    a    large  bread  so  as  to  hallow  His  name, 

illuminated  card  containing  the  words,  II.    Anxiety   about   it. — When    ye 

"  His    work  is    perfect."      The    child  pray  say,  "  Our  Father,  give   us  this 

spelled  out  the  words,  and  pointing  to  day,"  etc.  (see  vii.  9-11). 

them  said,  "  Papa,  what  does  perfect  III.  Pride  in  the  possession  of  it. — 

mean   here  ?  "     And  then,  before  the  We  say  we  are  rich  and  increased  in 

father,  who  was  somewhat  staggered,  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing.    And 

could  make  a  reply,  there  came  another  yet  we  have  to  knock  at  the  door  of 

question  from  the  little  prattler,  "  Does  the  Father's  house  for  a  crust  of  bread, 

it  mean  that  God  never  makes  a  mis-  His  sunshine  and  His  rain  must  enrich 

take  ?  "     This   was   just   the    thought  us,  or  we  starve.     It  is  because  for  six 

that  the  troubled  father  needed  to  have  thousand  years  some  have  gone  forth 

brought  before  his  mind.    If  the  angel  every  year  to  reap  the  corn  and  care 

Gabriel  had  come  down  from  heaven,  for  it  that  you  to-day  have  got  your 

he  could  not  have  suggested  anything  crust.     Every  loaf  of  bread  leaves  us 

more  timely.     The  father  clasping  his  debtor  to  a  host  of  toilers, 

little  one  in  his  arms,  exclaimed,  *'  Yes,  IV.  Greed  in  relation  to  it. — Let  it 

my  precious  boy,  that  is  just  what  it  suffice  to  listen  to  the  parable  of  the 

means."     That   father's   confidence   in  corn.     It  gave  itself  up  to  the  sower, 

God  was  revived,  the  cloud  was  gone,  and  went  down  in  the  dark  earth,  and 

and    the   sunshine   of   an   unfaltering  braved  the  storms  and  winter's  frost, 

trust  again  lighted  up  his  soul. — Free  and  rose  up  in  new  beauty,  increased 

Methodist,  and  blessed  a  hundred  fold,  and  made 

>  glad  the  heart,  and  cheered  the  home, 

Ver.    11.  The  daily  bread. — Prayer  and  blessed  the  people,  and  woke  the 

is  not  to  be  so  sublime  that  it  forgets  hymns  of  praise.     So  is  it.     We  can 

that  we  are  men  and  women  having  give  ourselves  to  Him  who  soweth  the 

bodies  as  well  as  souls.     Prayer  is  not  good  seed,  and  for  us  some  heart  shall 

137 


CHAP.  VI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


be  brighter,  some  life  be  gladdened, 
and  some  song  be  stirred  that  else  had 
not  been  heard  in  earth  or  heaven — for 
he  that  loseth  his  life  shall  find  it. — 
M,  G.  Pea/rse. 

Our  daily  bread. — St.  Matthew  has 
80s,  *'  give "  in  one  act ;  St.  Luke  has 
StSov,  "be  giving,  give  continually." 
St.  Matthew,  it  has  been  said,  touches 
the  readiness,  St.  Luke  the  steadiness  ; 
St.  Matthew  the  promptitude,  St.  Luke 
the  patience  of  God's  supply.  Again, 
St.  Matthew  says :  "  Give  us  this 
day  ;  "  St.  Luke  says  "  Give  us  day  by 
day."  St.  Matthew  implies  "  sufficient 
unto  the  day  is  the  want  thereof,"  St. 
Luke  says :  "  and  if  there  be  a  morrow, 
for  it  may  God  also  provide."  We 
descend  from  the  spiritual  heights  of 
the  former  petitions.  The  prayer  is 
broad  and  simple. 

I.  Give. — Carnal  men,  it  has  been 
said,  are  like  swine  which  raven  upon 
the  acorns,  but  look  not  up  to  the  oak 
from  whence  they  drop. 

II.  Us. — Christ  would  not  have  us 
say  "  give  me."  Prayers  purely  selfish 
are  altogether  base. 

III.  This  day. — We  are  but  crea- 
tures of  a  day,  we  will  not  be  troubled 
or  anxious  for  the  morrow. 

IV.  Our. — When  we  ask  for  our 
daily  bread,  it  is  only  the  just,  the 
diligent,  and  the  moderate  who  can 
rightly  use  the  prayer.  "  A  noble 
heart,"  says  Barrow,  "  will  disdain  to 
subsist,  like  a  drone,  on  the  honey 
gained  by  others'  labour,  or  like  vermin 
to  filch  its  food  from  the  pubUc  granary, 
or  like  a  shark  to  prey  on  the  lesser 
fry,  but  will  one  way  or  another  earn 
his  subsistence,  for  he  that  does  not 
earn  can  hardly  own  his  bread." 

V.  Daily. — This  strengthens  the 
teaching  that  we  are  to  live  as  children 
in  our  Father's  house,  relying  on  God's 
providence  for  all  that  hes  beyond  the 
immediate  need. 

VI.  Bread.— It  includes  all  that  is 
necessary,  and  it  comes  to  us  day  by 
day  as  the  manna  came  to  Israel  in  the 
■^derness  from  heaven.  Christ  here, 
OS  everywhere,  lays  the  axe  at  the  root 

138 


of  all  our  sensual  desires  for  gluttonous 
luxuries  and  superfluities. — Archdeacon 
Farra/r. 

Vers.  11,  12.  Give  and  forgive. — 
The  Father  has  not  His  interest  wholly 
absorbed  in  the  higher  spiritual  in- 
terests of  His  children ;  or  in  abstract 
contemplations  of  His  own  glory  and 
kingdom.  As  a  Father,  He  is  in- 
terested in  our  daily  bread,  and  daily 
danger. 

1.  What  is  the  theological  attitude 
of  the  man  who  prays  these  clauses 
sincerely  ? — He  must  believe  in  : — 

1 .  The  absolute  and  entire  de'pendence  of 
man  upon  God. — Prayer  involves  belief 
in  the  dependence  of  man  on  God. 
(1)  For  food,  or  in  the  matter  of 
bodily  necessities,  (2)  For  forgiveness, 
or  in  the  matter  of  the  necessities 
caused  by  sin.  These  cover  all  man's 
wants  as  a  dependent  creature. 

2.  The  law  that  God's  dealings  with  us 
depend  on  our  moral  condition. —  In- 
volved in  the  clause,  "as  we  forgive 
our  debtors "  (see  vers.  14,  15).  This 
law  does  not  say,  our  forgiving  others 
is  either  the  cause  or  the  measure  of 
God's  forgiving  us.  It  says  that  God 
is  concerned  in  our  moral  states,  be- 
cause He  wants  all  His  dealings  to  be 
a  moral  blessing  to  us.  If  we  are  in 
an  unforgiving  state  of  mind,  then  His 
forgiveness  cannot  reach  us.  And  if 
we  keep  in  an  unforgiving  state  of 
mind,  we  prove  ourselves  unworthy  of 
His  forgiveness.  Parable  of  unmerciful 
servant. 

3.  The  fact  of  sin  as  disturbing 
our  relations  with  God.  —  If  sin 
be  a  disease  only,  the  man  will  not 
say,  "  forgive."  If  sin  be  a  weakness, 
a  moral  deterioration  only,  the  man 
will  not  say,  *'  forgive."  If  sin  be  not 
a  personal  and  individual  thing,  no 
force  goes  into  the  prayer,  "  forgive." 
Sin  must  be  realised  as  a  fact,  a  wrong, 
a  rebellion,  a  disobedience,  involving 
penalty — then  only  can  we  pray  "  for- 
give." 

Observe  the  relation  of  these  clauses 
to  the  former  parts  of  the  prayer. 
"The  Father."     He  is  surely  willing 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  VI. 


to  forgive.  "  The  Name."  Can  it  be 
more  hallowed  than  in  forgiveness? 
*'  The  kingdom."  Must  have  its  begin- 
ning in  forgiveness.  "  The  will."  Is 
set  most  of  all  upon  forgiveness. 

II.  What  should  be  the  moral  at- 
titude of  the  man  who  prays  these 
clauses  ? — There  should  be  : — 

1.  A  deep  sense  of  the  evil  and  hate- 
fulness  of  sin. — Conceived  as  ingrati- 
tude, insult,  and  rebellion ;  estimated 
in  the  light  Cf  its  consequences.  Such 
impressions  of  sin  are  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

2.  Profound  humility  of  spirit. — He 
who  comes  saying,  "  Forgive,"  cannot 
fail  to  be  humble  when  he  prays, 
«  Give." 

3.  Beady  willingness  to  forgive  others. 
, — Such  forgiveness  is  not  a  number 
of  isolated  acts;  it  is  properly  the 
expression  of  a  spirit  of  forgiveness, 
cherished  in  our  hearts. 

*'  Give"  is  the  cry  of  the  child,  for- 
give is  the  cry  of  the  sinful  child.  How 
tender  and  affecting  to  the  earthly 
father  are  both  attitudes.  This  may 
be  illustrated  from  the  two  attitudes  of 
the  prodigal  son. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

Ver.  12.  The  fifth  petition  of  the 
Lord^s  prayer. — If  any  should  wonder 
why  the  petition  for  temporals  should 
go  before  the  two  petitions  for  pardon 
of  sin,  and  grace  to  resist  temptations, 
there  are  these  two  accounts  I  think 
may  be  given  of  it.  First,  that  the 
natural  life  being  prior  in  time,  though 
not  in  dignity,  to  the  spiritual  life,  is 
provided  for,  and  wants  to  be  provided 
for  in  the  first  place.  Secondly,  on 
the  account  of  devotion  it  may  be  of 
use  that  the  petition  for  temporals 
should  first  briefly  be  dispatched,  that 
the  mind  being  cleared  from  those 
worldly  cares,  may  apply  itself  so  much 
more  intensely  to  the  greater  concerns 
of  the  soul. 

I.  The  blessings  we  are  here  taught 
to  pray  for. — Viz.,  the  pardon  of  sin  for 
ourselves  and  for  others. 

II.  The  qualifications  of  the  persons 
who  are  allowed  to  put  up  this  petition. 
— 1,  If  we  consider  this  petition  with  the 


context,  we  may  easily  discover  faith 
in  Christ ;  for  everywhere  in  the  New 
Testament  we  find  that  our  privilege 
to  call  God  our  Father,  or  to  expect 
forgiveness  of  sins  from  Him,  is  solely 
in  and  through  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  15  ; 
Gal.  iv.  6).  2.  We  are  taught  here  to 
come  unto  God  as  humble  supplicants 
confessing  our  sins,  and  begging  pardon; 
so  here  is  the  qualification  of  repent- 
ance. 3.  We  are  taught  here  that 
though  God  is  now  rendered  propitious 
to  mankind  in  Christ,  yet  it  is  re- 
quisite that  we  sue  for  pardon  by 
incessant  prayer.  4.  We  are  put  in 
mind  here  of  the  necessity  of  charity, 
particularly  that  highest  kind  of  it, 
consisting  in  the  forgiving  our  enemies. 
But  are  we  obhged  to  forgive  all  injuries 
without  the  least  satisfaction ;  nay, 
to  remit  our  just  debts  without  pay- 
ment, and  that  upon  no  less  peril  than 
the  not  being  admitted  to  that  pardon 
of  sin  purchased  by  Christ?  And  if 
not  these,  what  is  to  be  understood  by 
this  part  of  the  petition?  To  this 
objection  and  question  I  shall  endeavour 
to  give  a  short  answer : — 

1.  Negatively. — (1)  By  this  expression 
our  Saviour  did  not  intend  to  en- 
courage the  doing  of  injuries  to  others, 
as  it  would  certainly  be  a  great  en- 
couragement to  all  manner  of  injuries, 
if  they  were  all  to  escape  unpunished. 

(2)  Our  Saviour  did  not  design  to  inter- 
fere with  the  magistrate's  office. . 

2.  Positively. — (1)  All  private  revenge 
is  certainly  forbidden,  and  it  is  left 
entirely  to  the  magistrate's  office  to  do 
right  between  man  and  man.  (2)  All 
rancour  and  malice  in  the  heart  are 
forbidden ;  and  the  duty  of  love  and 
charity  enjoined,  which  is  very  con- 
sistent with  the  doing  of  right  to  all. 

(3)  The  rigour  of  justice,  where  it 
borders  upon  cruelty,  exaction,  or 
severity,  is  condemned.  (4)  Where 
there  is  probability  of  reclaiming  an 
enemy  by  a  seasonable  kindness,  such 
as  neither  encourages  transgression  in 
general,  nor  wrongs  any  third  person 
in  particular,  it  is  commendable  to  pass 
by  a  personal  injury  and  to  be  the  first 
in  breaking  off  contention.     (5)  As  to 

139 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


debts  and  injuries  where  the  party- 
offending  has  not  capacity  or  ability  to 
repair  them,  and  shows  no  malice  in 
the  case,  there  the  Christian  part  is 
rather  to  forgive  than  to  use  the 
offender  rigidly  by  corporal  punish- 
ments and  severities. 

Observations. — (1)  From  the  rank 
and  order  which  this  petition  holds  in 
the  prayer  we  may  conclude  that  it  is  a 
petition  of  extraordinary  consequence. 
It  is  the  first  of  the  spiritual  peti- 
tions for  ourselves  or  our  neighbours. 
(2)  From  the  rank  and  quality  which 
we  ourselves  hold  in  this  petition,  which 
is  that  of  poor  supplicants,  we  may 
learn  what  modest  and  humble  thoughts 
we  ought  to  have  of  ourselves  and  all 
our  performances.  (3)  Here  is  comfort 
for  those  who  are  daily  discovering  new 
failings  in  themselves.  (4)  I  recom- 
mend to  you  a  merciful,  forgiving 
temper,  and  dissuade  you  from  acting 
out  of  principles  of  malice  or  resent- 
ment.— Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

"  Forgive  us  our  debts." — Nothing  is 
idler  than  the  assertion  that  it  is  only 
Christianity  which  has  cast  over  the 
human  race  the  awful  gloom  caused 
by  the  sense  of  sin.  All  history,  all 
literature,  refutes  the  allegation.  Fear 
is  the  centre  of  all  false  religious 
systems.  Men  have  shuddered  in  a 
sense  of  guilt. 

I.  Sin  as  debt. — If  you  have  known 
the  shame,  the  guilt,  the  burden, 
the  misery  of  debt,  the  concealment  to 
which  it  leads,  the  dishonesty  which  it 
implies,  the  impossibility  it  leaves  of 
"  looking  the  whole  world  in  the  face," 
the  tendency  it  has  to  accumulate  into 
an  avalanche  of  disgrace  and  ruin,  you 
will  understand  the  metaphor.  It  will 
help  to  show  you  also  how  the  sin  and 
the  punishment  are  identical.  The 
great  Greek  philosopher,  Plato,  says 
that  sin  and  punishment  are  twins 
who  walk  through  this  world  with 
their  heads  tied  together.  But  it  is 
something  more  than  that.  Penalty 
is  the  inevitable  reaction  of  sin,  the 
inseparable  shadow  which  is  cast  by  it 
and  dogs  it.      Sin   is   a  debt  against 

140 


which  there  are  no  assets,  which  man 
incurs,  1.  To  himself.  2.  To  his  neigh- 
bours.    3.  To  his  God. 

II.  The  miracle  of  forgiveness. — It 
is  a  gospel,  it  is  a  miracle.  It  is  true 
there  is  nothing  like  it  in  the  world  of 
nature  or  in  the  world  of  man.  It  is 
avowedly  supernatural,  it  is  exclusively 
the  gift  of  God.  If  you  pray  this 
prayer  aright,  be  sure  it  will  be 
answered.  Was  not  it  the  disgrace 
of  one  of  the  bad  Stuart  langs, 
James  II.,  that  he  admitted  his 
nephew,  the  Duke  of  Monmouth, 
into  his  presence,  and  saw  him  grovel 
at  his  feet,  and  yet  refused  him  the 
life  for  which  he  had  permitted  him 
to  plead?  When  the  young  Bourbon 
prince,  the  Duke  D'Enghien,  doomed 
to  death,  asked  the  first  Napoleon 
to  have  an  interview  and  see  him, 
Napoleon  refused ;  and  when  asked 
why  he  had  refused,  he  said,  "  Had 
I  admitted  him  I  must  have  pardoned 
him.  As  I  have  determined  not  to 
pardon  him,  I  would  not  see  him." 
Hear  what  the  unjust  judge  saith ! 
and  can  you  do  Christ  the  monstrous 
injustice  to  imagine  that  He  would 
have  the  cruelty  to  bid  you  come  to 
God  with  the  burden  of  all  these 
intolerable  debts  if  He  knew  that 
pardon  was  impossible,  or  that  great 
plea  for  it  would  be  refused? — Arch- 
deacon Farrar. 

The  forgiving  spirit. — We  cannot  be 
reconciled  to  God  until  we  are  recon- 
ciled to  our  fellow-men.  In  the  early 
Christian  church  it  was  customary  for 
the  members  of  a  family  to  ask  each 
other's  forgiveness  before  going  to  the 
Lord's  table.  We  should  carry  this 
spirit  with  us  every  day,  and  extend  it 
to  all  men.  No  man  can  be  at  peace 
with  himself  or  with  God  who  cherishes 
any  grudge  or  ill-will  against  his  neigh- 
bour.— aS'.  Macnaughton,  M.A. 

Ver.  13.  God  and  evil— I.  We  pray- 
here  for  the  staving  off  of  such 
temptations  as  are  disproportioned 
to  our  measure  of  strength  and  grace. 

II.  We  pray  for  preventing  grace 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  vi. 


to  keep  our  minds  in  a  good  frame  idleness,   and   keeping  ourselves    em- 

and  temper,  well  fortified  against  all  ployed  in  the  business  of  our  lawful 

temptations   we   may  be   encountered  calling  ;   the  keeping  of  the  mind  in 

with.  a  good  temper,  not  ruffled  with  anger, 

III.  We  pray  that  God  would  not  nor  debauched  with  lust,  nor  swelled 
desert  us  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  with  pride  and  vanity;  the  keeping 
but  that  His  grace  may  be  sufficient  a  conscience  void  of  ofience,  etc. — 
for  us  to  bring  us  ofi*  victorious.  Jas.  Blair,  M.A . 

IV.  We  pray  that  if  we  are  en- 
snared by  any  temptation,  we  may  be  The   prayer    against     temptation. — 
quickly  delivered  from  the  power  of  For    **  lead    us    not "    the   R.V.   has 

•it,  and  rendered  more  humble,  penitent,  the  more  accurate  rendering,   "bring 
and  watchful.  us     not."        But     we     are     at     once 
Conclusion. — 1.    Here   we    see    the  faced    with   the    question.   Does   God 
proper  remedy  for  what  is  the  most  ever'  bring  us  into  temptation?     (see 
troublesome  thing  in  a  religious  life ;  James    i.    13).      The    explanation    is 
I  mean  the  infinite  number  of  tempta-  very  simple ;  it  lies  in  the  two  sense 
tions  to  which  we  are  subject.     2.  As  of  the  word  temptation.     Temptation 
we  are  thus  to  pray  against  tempta-  means  trial,  the  conditions  which  are 
tions,   we   must   take   care    that    our  meant  to  test  our  faithfulness,  and  it 
actions  and  prayers  be  all  of  a  piece  ;  also  means  actual  incitement,  seduction, 
i.e.  that  in  our  actions  we  follow  such  inducement,  allurement  in  the  direction 
courses  as  may  be  most  effectual  for  of    wrong-doing.      Now,   in   the   first 
overcoming   temptations.       (1)    Many  sense,  God  does  tempt  us.      He  tries 
men  become   their   own   temptei-s,  by  us  as  gold  is  purged  in  the  fire.     In 
raising  and  cherishing  in  their  minds  this  sense  He  tempts  us  because  He 
such    thoughts    and    imaginations    as  has  placed  us  in  a  world  wherein  of 
pollute  the  heart,  and  prove  the  seeds  necessity   we   are   surrounded   by  evil 
of  much  wickedness   in  the  life.     (2)  influences,   and    because   He   has    en- 
Whosoever  they   are   that   lay  snares  dowed  us  with  a  nature  which,  what- 
and  temptations  for  others,  these  per-  ever  it  once  may  have  been,  is  now, 
sons  by  their  practice  contradict  this  at   any  rate,  weakened,    and   corrupt 
petition,  lead    us   not  into  temptation,  and   prone    to    sin.       But    God    only 
(3)    They  who  put  themselves  in  the  brings  us  into  temptation  because  He 
way   of    temptations,    by   frequenting  can  bring  us  out  of   it.       God  never 
lewd   company,   by  reading   lascivious  tries  to  make   us   do  wrong;    on  the 
or    atheistical    books,    by   committing  contrary.    He    brings    to    bear    every 
to   their   memory   profane   songs   and  gracious  influence,  human  and  Divine, 
ballads,  or  by  doing  any  other  thing  to  keep  us  unseduced  by  wrong.     If 
whereby   they    may   probably   be    en-  there  were  no  temptation  to  sin  there 
snared   and   led    into   temptation,  act  would  be  no  glory  of  righteousness  (see 
directly  contrary  to  this  part  of  the  James  i.  2-4,  12).      God,   then,  tries, 
Lord's  prayer.     (4)    They  who  kindly  but  He  does  not  tempt.     Our  prayer 
entertain  and  hug  a  temptation  when  is  that  we  may  not   turn    His  trials 
presented,  and  do  not  flee  from  it,  but  into     Satan's    allurements,     and    His 
flutter   about   it    so   long  till   at  last  fear,     which     purges,     into     Satan's, 
they  burn  their  wings  with  it,  have  which   consumes, 
themselves   a   hand   in  defeating  this  I.  The  sources  of  temptation, 
part  of  their  prayer.     (5)  If  we  would  1.  The  devil. — All  temptations  may 
effectually  answer  the  end  of  this  part  come  from   him,    but  especially  those 
of   the  Lord's   prayer,   we  must  take  universal  ones  of  pride,  selfishness,  pas- 
all  the  most  effectual  methods  we  can  sion,  hatred,  lies,  unbelief,  irreverence, 
think  of,  both  to  prevent  and  to  defeat  self-will,  which  constitute  his  horribly 
temptations ;  such  as  the  avoiding  of  perverted  nature. 

HI 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


2.  The  world. — Its  nearness,  its 
menacing  noise,  the  fear  which  it 
inspires,  the  spell  which  it  exercises, 
the  splendid  illusiveness  of  it,  the  lust 
of  the  eyes  and  the  braggart  vaunt  of 
life. 

3.  The  flesh  (James  i.  14).  This  is 
the  force  which  temptation  derives 
from  our  corrupt  nature  with  the 
fatal  bias  of  its  long  heredities  of  evil. 

II.  The  methods  of  temptation. — 
Temptations  come  entirely  in  two 
ways : — 

1.  By  stealthy  witchery. — Adder- 
like. The  adder  comes  noiselessly, 
gradually,  insidiously,  with  the  creep- 
ing glide,  with  the  almost  imperceptible 
motion  of  a  venomous  thing,  undulatiug 
through  life's  dry  and  fallen  leaves  till 
when  it  is  quite  close  to  us,  and  can 
catch  us  unawares,  it  darts  out  at  us 
with  its  forked  and  flickering  tongue. 
This  represents  the  bewitchment,  the 
glamour,  the  slow,  depraving  fascina- 
tion of  sin. 

2.  In  sudden,  furious  assaults. — 
Like  the  wild  beast.  Sometimes 
when  we  fancy  ourselves  most  secure, 
the  temptation  for  some  deadly  sin 
rushes  out  suddenly  upon  us  like 
a  panther  from  its  lair  with  flaming 
eyes,  lashing  spring,  and  thick  carni- 
vorous roar.  In  one  unexpected 
moment  we  find  ourselves  engaged 
in  fiercest  conflict  with  this  tempta- 
tion which  has  leapt  upon  us,  terrible 
and  with  a  tiger's  leaps  (see  Ps.  xci.  13). 

III.  The  way  to  escape  temptation. 
— Why  do  men  fall  so  fearfully  1  Often 
because  they  purposely  linger  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  temptation,  and  wil- 
fully dally  and  tamper  with  it — e.g. 
Eve,  Achan,  David.  Some,  it  is  said, 
enter  into  temptation  presumptuously, 
to  show  their  power ;  some  curiously, 
to  taste  of  the  allurement ;  some  care- 
lessly, because  they  give  no  heed ;  some 
imitatively,  following  where  others 
go ;  some  Pharisaically,  pretending  to 
glorify  God  by  showing  what  His 
grace  can  do.  But,  alas  !  there  is  no 
necessary  connection  between  entering 
into  temptation  and  coming  out  of  it. 
There   is  but  one  rule   about  tempta- 

142 


tion ;  think  of  it  as  a  serpent's  egg — 
which  hatched  would,  as  his  kind, 
grow  mischievous — and  kill  it  in  the 
shell.  It  is  fugiendo  pugnare ;  like 
the  Parthian  warriors,  we  must  over- 
come by  flight.  1.  How  does  this 
prayer  brand  the  guilt,  the  insanity 
of  those  who  seek  temptation,  who 
revel  in  it  ?  2.  We  pray  "  lead  us  not," 
etc.,  because  there  is  an  escape  for 
every  one  of  us.  Christ  conquered 
for  us  the  three  sources  of  temptation 
in  their  subtlest  and  most  virulent 
form  to  show  that  we  can,  and  how 
we  can,  conquer. — Archdeacon  Farrar. 

Preserved  and  delivered. — The  former 
clauses  of  this  prayer  can  be  uttered  by 
all  men ;  these,  in  their  fuller  applica- 
tions, only  by  the  spiritual  man. 

I.  What  must  be  the  theological 
attitude  of  the  man  who  prays  these 
clauses  sincerely? — He  must  believe: — 

1.  That  maris  life  on  earth  is  a  moral 
trial. — Has  life  any  meaning  1  The 
superior  powers  and  trusts  of  man 
suggest  a  moral  end.  Adam's  trial  is 
renewed  in  each  life.  Could  we  wish 
to  be  incapable  of  temptation  ?  That 
were  to  be  incapable  of  virtue. 

2.  That  evils  have  their  true  root  in  evil. 
— Observe  the  two  meanings  of  the 
term.  We  do  not  believe  in  the  evils  of 
the  world ;  we  know  and  feel  them.  We 
should  believe  in  the  connection  between 
evils  and  evil. 

3.  That  temptation  is  common  to  all, 
but  peculiar  to  each. — "  Deliver  us." 
The  peculiarity  of  temptation  lies  in  its 
relation  to  differing  dispositions.  We 
cannot  pray  "  deliver  us,"  until  this  idea 
is  mastered. 

4.  That  the  force  of  temptation  depends 
on  circumstances. — Apprehending  dan- 
ger of  places  and  of  times,  we  learn  to 
pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation." 

5.  That  God  is  Master  of  circumstances, 
temptations,  and  evil. — If  the  ordinary 
man  were  asked  which  was  the  mightier, 
God  or  evil,  if  he  were  honest  he 
would  say,  "Evil."  If  a  Christian 
were  asked,  he  would  promptly  and 
confidently  say  "  God."  How  different 
life,  temptation,  and  evil  appear  with 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vi. 

"or  without  the  conception  of  a  good  probate,  set  himself  to  secure  his  own 
God,  ever-living,  ever  working  towards  damnation,  and  to  work  all  unclean- 
goodness  !  ness  with  greediness.  Hear  the  memor- 
II.  What  should  he  the  moral  atti-  able  confession  of  St.  Cyprian.  He 
tude  of  the  man  who  prays  these  had  been  a  pagan,  rich,  worldly, 
clauses  sincerely  ? — His  state  of  feeling  eloquent,  entangled  in  pagan  sins.  He 
should  include  : —  grew  disgusted  and  horrified  with  the 

1.  Holy  fear  of  the  power  of  tempta-  misery  and  the  wickedness  of  the  world 
tion. — The  sense  of  sin  that  makes  us  around  him,  and  tossing  and  wandering 
seek  forgiveness,  brings  a  sense  of  alone  from  truth  and  light,  he  thought 
fear  lest  we  should  fall  again.  Holy  he  must  be  born  again,  and  while  still 
fear  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  holy  bound  to  the  body  must  be  changed  in 
courage.  heart  and   soul.      "  How,"  he   asked, 

2.  Conscious  weakness  under  the  "  is  still  conversion  conceivable  ?  How 
subtlety  of  evil. — Lacking  this  sense  of  can  the  impulses  of  natural  tempera- 
self -weakness,  Adam  fell.  ment  and  the  indurations  of  engrained 

3.  Simple  out-looking  of  the  soul  to  God.  habit  be  laid  aside,  how  can  avarice, 
— ^The  attitude  that  assures  the  perfect-  luxury,  ostentation,  ambition,  be 
ing  of  God's  strength  in  our  weakness,  changed  for  self-denial  and  humble 
The  attitude  suggested  by  every  sen-  simplicity  ?  Will  not  the  drunkenness, 
tence  of  the  prayer. — Weekly  Pulpit.  the  pride,  the  passion,  the  lust  in  which 

I  have  been  entangled  still  retain  their 
Deliver  us  from  evil. — I.  From  evil  in  seductiveness  for  me?"  Not  so;  St. 
its  lower  sense. — From  the  evils  of  this  Cyprian  sought  God  and  found  Him, 
hfe ;  from  the  evils  of  penalty  and  of  or  rather  was  found  of  Him.  He  re- 
consequence  ;  from  outward  mischief ;  ceived  a  moral  resurrection,  and  the 
from  the  vulgarism,  stupidity,  and  vice-corrupted  heathen  became,  late  in 
malevolence  of  man;  from  sorrow,  need,  life,  a  godly  Christian,  and  after  many 
sickness,  or  any  other  adversity.  In  years  of  pure  and  holy  living,  he  died 
the  sense  of  : —  a   martyr   to    his    Lord. — Archdeacon 

1.  Protection  from  them. — Such  pro-  Fa/rra/r. 
tection  can  at  the  best  be  only  partial 

and  relative.  Deliver  us  from  evil. — "  Our  Father, 

2.  Deliverance  out  of  them. — God  .  .  .  deliver  us  from  evil."  The  reve- 
delivers,  (1)  when  He  quickly  takes  lation  of  sonship  is  also  the  revelation 
the  evil  from  us  and  does  not  suffer  of  evil.  Until  we  know  God  is  Father, 
it  to  continue ;  (2)  when  He  mingles  and  we  His  dear  children,  we  do  not 
some  comfort  with  our  affliction,  that  know  how  evil  a  thing  is  sin.  It  is  in 
He  may  make  us  bear  it  the  better;  the  light  of  our  higher  relations  and 
(3)  by  giving  us  patience ;  (4)  by  turn-  possibilities  that  we  see  how  evil  has 
ing  the  evils  into  greater  good.  belittled  and  degraded  our  natures. 

II.  From  evil  in  its  higher  sense,         I.   The  prayer    of   God's    child, 
sin,  the  evil  one.     Here  the  sad  thing  1 .  The  evil  God's  child  prays  to  be  de- 

is  that  so  many  who  offer  this  prayer  liveredfrom. — Many  things  we  call  evil 

do  not  really  mean  it,  or  believe  it :  are  not  so  in  reality.     They  may  be  but 

either  they  do  not  wish  that  it  should  the  hiding  of  some  good,  deeper  than 

be   granted,    like   that    poor    African  our  poor  minds  can  grasp,  or  the  painful 

youth  who  prayed  to  God  against  his  shocks   that  are  bringing  health  and 

passions,  with  the  secret  hope,  he  tells  freedom  for  some  captive  child  of  God. 

us,  that  God  would  not  yet  hear  him.  Let  us  in  our  prayer  remember  what 

that  he  might  indulge  them  a   little  the  evil  is.     Poverty  is  not.     Suffering 

longer ;  or  they  do  not  believe  that  it  is    not.     The    only    real   evil   is  sin. 

can  be  granted,  like  that  unhappy  poet  When   we  pray  to  be  delivered  from 

who,   choosing  to  assume  he  was  re-  evil,  we  do  not  pray  to  be  delivered 

U3 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


from  suffering,  but  from  repining  in 
suffering.  We  do  not  pray  to  be 
delivered  from  poverty,  or  calamity, 
or  death,  but  from  the  evil  in  us 
which  would  prevent  us  from  turn- 
ing every  loss  into  gain,  every  trial 
into  strength,  and  every  vicissitude  in 
our  changing  experience  into  a  means 
of  spiritual  progress. 

2.  This  prai/e7'  is  in  'perfect  harmony 
with  God^s  purpose  in  redemption. — 
"  For  this  is  the  will  'of  God,  even 
your  sanctification."  Deliverance  from 
evil  is  the  great  object  of  the  Divine 
discipline  and  culture  of  our  nature. 

3.  The  desire  shall  he  completely 
realised. 

II.  The  reasons  for  using  this 
prayer. 

1.  The  evil  is  within  us. — The 
Saviour  said :  "  The  prince  of  this 
world  Cometh  and  hath  nothing  in 
Me."  But  we  cannot  say  that.  A  man 
cannot  flee  from  the  plague  of  his  own 
heart  by  going  into  a  desert  or  shutting 
himself  up  in  a  cell.  Dore,  in  his 
picture  of  the  Neophyte,  by  a  touch  of 
genius  all  his  own,  has  shown  how  the 
ideal  the  young  man  has  chosen  is 
failing  to  realise  his  hopes.  In  that 
beautiful  face  of  his,  so  marvellously 
expressive,  we  see  hope  trembling  be- 
tween fear  and  disappointment ;  we 
see  the  shadows  gathering  over  the 
beauty  of  the  young  man's  ideal.  The 
brutal  countenances  of  some  of  the  men 
that  surround  him,  the  stern  scowl  of 
others,  the  sensual  look  of  most,  these 
surely  cannot  express  the  purity  and 
beauty  of  God's  ideal.  No ;  the  young 
man  has  made  a  mistake.  The  picture 
says :  The  cloister  is  no  more  sacred 
than  the  world.  Escape  from  the 
world  is  not  escape  from  sin. 

2.  The  evil  is  subtle. 

3.  We  m^itst  he  delivered  from  evil 
before  our  salvation  is  complete. — W. 
Hetherington. 

The  conclusion  of  the  LordJs  prayer. — 
I.  Consider  the  words  as  a  doxology 
or  thanksgiving. — 1.  It  is  very  fit  in 
our  devotions  to  join  thanksgiving  with 
prayer.     2.  The  consideration  of  former 

144 


mercies  is  a  great  encouragement 
in  our  addresses  to  Almighty  God. 
3.  The  many  examples  we  have  had 
of  God's  asserting  His  sovereignty,  and 
of  His  exercising  His  power,  and  of 
the  close  conjunction  of  His  honour 
with  the  happiness  of  His  creatures, 
do  all  furnish  great  matter  for  thanks- 
giving. 

II.  Consider  the  words  as  a  motive 
or  inducement  to  back  our  petitions.—^ 
The  particle  "  for "  gives  them  this 
aspect. 

III.  Consider  the  words  as  directing 
us  to  the  ultimate  aim  and  end  of  all 
our  petitions,  which  is  the  honour  and 
glory  of  God. — Jas.  Blair ^  M.A. 

Amen. — 1.  As  it  is  in  Thy  purposes 
(Isa.  xiv.  27).  2.  So  it  is  in  Thy 
promises  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  3.  So  be  it  in 
our  prayers  (Rev.  xxii.  20).  4.  So 
shall  it  be  to  Thy  praise  (Kev.  xix.  4). 
— Hannam^s  Pulpit  Assistant. 

Amen. — I.  It  is  a  general  assent  to 
all  that  went  before,  a  fresh  renewing 
of  all  the  petitions. 

II.  It  is  a  signification  of  our  faith 
and  hope  to  obtain  what  we  have 
prayed  for. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Vers.  14,  15.  Mercy  in  forgiving  in- 
juries.— I.  The  merciful  temper  and 
disposition  required. 

1.  We  are  not  to  imagine  that  it  is 
to  be  carried  so  far  as  if  it  left  no 
room  for  a  just  reparation  of  injuries. 
— (1)  That  it  never  was  designed  to 
encourage,  but  to  prevent  injuries 
appears  both  from  the  reasonable- 
ness of  the  thing,  and  from  the 
approbation  of  the  magistrate's  office 
in  Holy  Scripture.  (2)  For  the 
same  reason  this  doctrine  of  forgive- 
ness does  not  restrain  private  persons, 
when  they  are  injured,  from  making 
use  of  the  laws,  judges,  and  magis- 
trates, to  do  themselves  right,  after 
they  have  first  in  vain  tried  what 
other  pacificatory  methods  are  in  their 
power.  (a)  There  are  many  lesser 
injuries  which  the  Christian  doctrine 
of  forgiveness  will  teach  us  to  win^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW,      chap.  VL 


at.     (6)  It  will  teach  us,  if  the  injury  take  care  that  we  be  still  in  charity 

is  ever  so  great,  before  we  have  re-  with    our    adversary,    and    that    we 

course  to  law  and  magistrates,  to  try  harbour  no   maHce   or  hatred  in  our 

all  other  amicable  methods  of  agree-  hearts  against  him. 

ment  and  accommodation  (Matt,  xviii.  II.     The    promise    made    to    them 

15-17).     (c)  It  should  teach  us  so  to  who  perform    the  duty. — It   will   be 

manage  our  law-suits  as  to  retain  no  necessary   to   consider   the   excellency 

malice     in    our     hearts    against    our  of   this  temper  of   forgiving  enemies, 

brother    with    whom    we    have    the  and   the   wickedness   of   the  contrary 

difference.  disposition ;    for  then  it   will   appear 

2.   What  is  expressly  required  of  Its. —  how  reasonable  it   is   that  pardon  of 

(1)  That  we  actually  forgive  and  pass  sins  is  promised  to  the  one  and 
by  many  trespasses,  without  expecting  denied  to  the  other.  As  to  the  ex- 
any  reparation.  These  are  chiefly  :  cellency  of  this  temper  of  pardoning 
(a)    All  such  trespasses   ^-s  have   not  trespasses  : — 

proceeded  out  of  malice,  but  ignorance,  1.  This  is  a  good  quality  wherein  we 

mistake,  or  misinformation.      (6)    All  do  most  resemble  God.     2.    Considering 

such  trespasses  as  are  but  small  in  their  that  we  are  great  sinners,  who  have 

nature    and    consequences.       (c)    All  great   need   of    mercy   at    the    hands 

such  trespasses  wherein  men  have  not  of  Almighty  God,  there  is  no  virtue 

so   much    been   the    principals    them-  vnore  becoming  men  in  our  circumstances. 

selves,  but  have  been  led  away  with  3.    Considering  the   frequent   changes 

a  violent  torrent  of  authority,  custom,  and  revolutions  this  world  is  subject 

or  general  prejudice.       {d)    All    such  to,    the   exercise   of  this  virtue  is   our 

trespasses  as  have  not  been  particular  greatest  prudence.     Neither  riches,  nor 

to    them    who    did    the    injury,    but  honour,  nor  power,  are  for  ever ;  and 

common  to  them  with  a  great  many,  in    all    changes     and    revolutions    of 

and  in  which,  perhaps,  they  have  been  fortune,   as   there   are   no   men   more 

obliged  to  execute  the  orders  of  their  kindly   treated   than   they   who   were 

superiors,    upon    peril    of    their    own  moderate    and   merciful    in   the   time 

utter  ruin ;  for  everyone  has  not  the  of    their    power    and    prosperity,    so 

courage    to    resist    an    ill    thing    to  none  are  more  despised  and  fall  less 

martyrdom,  and  not  many  to  the  loss  pitied  than  the  cruel  and  hard-hearted, 

of   places   and   preferments,      (e)    All  4.    This  merciful  temper  includes   in 

those  trespasses,  which  are  not  capable  it  a  great  many  of  the  very  chief  of 

of  reparation  any  other  way  than  by  the  Christian  virtues,  to  which  heaven 

confession  and  repentance,  and  begging  is    promised.       (1)    Humility    is    the 

pardon,  provided  they  were  only  in-  foundation    of   it.       (2)    Self    denial, 

juries  to  ourselves,  and  that   the  ex-  (3)    It  is  a  certain  mark  of  the  love 

ample  of  the  impunity  of  them  is  not  both  of  God  and  our  neighbour  pre- 

prejudicial  to  others,  it  is  much  more  vailing  in  our  hearts.     (4)  This  love 

generous    to   forgive.     (/)    All   those  and  charity  in  the  heart  prevents  all 

trespasses  which  flow  from  errors   of  the   usual    occasions    of    quarrel   and 

conscience  and  mistaken  principles  of  discord;  it  is  apt  to  interpret  all  our 

religion,  provided  they  have  no  further  neighbour's  actions  in  the  most  candid 

ill    effects,    by  raising   disturbance   or  and  charitable  sense ;  it  restrains  the 

sedition  in  the  State,  are  much  better  tongue  from  provoking  injurious  words, 

tolerated  and  forgiven  than  punished,  which  are  commonly  the  first  beginners 

any  other  way  than  by  prudent  dis-  of  differences ;  and  occasions  peace  and 

couragements,      without     persecution,  quiet   both    in    our   own    consciences, 

(2)  That  we  abstain  from  all  avenging  and  in  families,  neighbourhoods,  and 
of  ourselves.  (3)  This  duty  of  for-  governments,  by  withdrawing  fuel 
giving  men  their  trespasses  obliges  from  the  fire  of  contention,  and  so 
us,  in   the   righting  of    ourselves,   to  extinguishing  it. 

L  145 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ill,  The  threatening  to  the  contrary 
temper  and  disposition. — Without  it 
no  pardon  is  to  be  obtained.  The 
ingredients  in  the  composition  of  this 
evil  temper  : 

1.  Pride. — We  think  it  below  us  to 
take  an  affront,  or  not  retaUate  an 
injury. 

2.  Anger. 

3.  Cruelty. 

4.  The  hatred  of  our  neighbour. 

5.  A  contempt  of  the  laws  of  God 
and  Christ,  which  are  so  plain  against 
revenge. 

6.  A  spirit  of  unruliness,  and  con- 
tempt of  all  good  order,  peace,  and 
discipline.  Now  let  any  one  judge  if 
a  compHcation  of  so  many  ill  things, 
expressly  contrary  to  the  doctrine  and 
example  of  Christ,  does  not  deserve  to 
be  threatened  with  such  a  severe 
threatening  as  this  of  my  text,  that 
our  heavenly  Father  will  not  forgive 
such  persons. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Vers.  16-18.  Fasting.  — Properly 
speaking,  fasting  is  not  so  much  a 
duty  enjoined  by  revelation  as  it  is 
the  natural  expression  of  certain  re- 
ligious feelings  and  desires.  There 
is  but  one  special  fast  ordained  in 
the  Old  Testament,  and  there  is  none 
at  all  ordained  in  the  New.  Yet  one 
cannot  fail  to  see  that  the  exercise 
is,  nevertheless,  quite  in  accordance 
with  the  whole  tenor  of  a  true 
religious  life  in  all  ages ;  and  that, 
if  it  is  not  expressly  commanded,  it 
is  only  because  nature  itself  teaches 
us  in  certain  circumstances  thus  to 
afflict  the  soul.  These  circumstances 
which  would  obviously  suggest  this 
exercise  are  twofold. 

I.  Fasting  is  the  natural  expression 
of  g^ief,  and  therefore  the  natural 
accompaniment  of  godly  sorrow. 

II.  Fasting  is  also  a  wise  method 
of  keeping  down  the  law  of  the  flesh 
which  is  in  our  members. 

III.  Our  Lord  counsels  His  people, 
1.  That  their  fasting  must  be  real, 
sincere,  genuine — a  thing  to  be  seen, 
not  of  men,  but  of  God.  2.  That 
fasting  in  the  Christian  church  should 

146 


be  altogether  private,  and  even  secret, 
not  only  not  in  order  to  be  seen  of 
men,  but  absolutely  hidden  from  them. 
ReHgion  does  not  consist  in  a  sour 
visage  or  morose  habit ;  nay,  more, 
religion  is  not  properly  a  sorrowful 
thing.  The  gospel  was  not  sad 
tidings,  but  glad  tidings  for  all  man- 
kind, and  we  are  not  acting  fairly 
by  it  unless  we  strive  so  to  present 
it  in  all  its  winning  and  attractive 
beauty  that  men  shall  be  led  to  seek 
after  Jesus. — W.  C.  Smith. 

The  right  manner  of  fasting. — I.  A 
commendable  duty  observed  by  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees;  and  which 
our  Saviour  supposes  must  be  likewise 
observed  by  His  disciples ;  namely,  the 
duty  of  fasting. 

1.  The  utility  of  fasting. — (1)  For 
the  mortifying  of  lust.  It  is  useful  to 
mortify  the  sins  of  uncleanness  by 
withdrawing  fuel  from  a  pampered 
body  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  (2)  It  is  proper 
as  an  exercise  of  repentance  (Jonah 
iii.  5-10).  (3)  It  is  a  great  help  to  prayer 
and  contemplation  of  divine  things ; 
and  so  we  generally  find  fasting  and 
prayer  joined  together  (Acts  x).  In 
cases  of  importance  and  difficulty,  it 
has  been  the  practice  of  the  church  to 
join  fasting  to  their  prayers  in  their 
addresses  to  Almighty  God. 

2.  The  abuses  of  fasting. — (1)  The 
separating  from  it  the  internal  devotion 
and  repentance,  and  so  making  it  really 
no  more  than  a  little  bodily  penance  (see 
Joel  ii.  13  ;  Isa.  Iviii.  5,  etc.).  (2)  The 
employing  it  for  sinful  purposes,  for  we 
are  not  to  believe  that  fasting  sanctifies 
the  cause,  but  that  it  is  the  cause 
which  sanctifies  fasting  (Isa.  Iviii.  4). 
(3)  That  is  not  a  right  fast  which  is 
made  use  of  out  of  parsimony  and 
penuriousness  (Isa.  Iviii.  7).  (4)  Only 
to  change  the  diet,  abstaining  from 
flesh,  but  eating  to  the  full  of  fish  and 
rarities.  To  do  justice  to  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  there  are  several  of 
these  abuses  of  fasting  which  it  seems 
they  were  not  guilty  of  at  that  time, 

II.  The  abuse  of  this  duty  in  those 
doctors,  to  the  ends  of  hypocrisy,  pride, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vi. 


and  vanity  (ver.  16). — In"  these  words  on  a  mask,  and  never  appear  in  his  own 

we    have    both    the    description   and  true  colours.     2.  That  in  order  to  this 

condemnation  of  hypocrisy.     The  des-  mask,  he  should  not  he  afraid  to  make 

cription  of  it — it  is  an  ostentation  of  use  of  such  a  sacred  thing  as  religion. 

rehgion;    and    the   condemnation    of  3.    Another    ingredient    in    this    vice 

it    is    in    Christ's    asseveration     that  is   pmde    and    vanity.       4.    Covetous- 

they  have  their  reward,   i.e.  that  the  ness  and   divers  other    vices  may  lurk 

popular  applause  and  the  other  worldly  under  this  cloak  of  hypocrisy  (see  Matt, 

advantages    of    hypocrisy   is    all   the  xxiii.  14). 

reward  they  shall  have  for  their  pains ;  III.  Our    Saviour's    direction    and 

there  is  ■  no  reward  to  be  expected  in  encouragement  to  the  contrary  exercise 

the  future  state  for  such  services  as  of  humility,  secrecy  and   sincerity  in 

are  performed  not  with  an  eye  to  God,  the  practice   of   this   duty.     If  every 

but   man.     As   to  this   description  of  one  cannot  bear  the  rigour  of  fasting, 

hypocrisy,  it  will  hold  in  all  parts  of  there  is  another  duty  of  great  affinity 

religion.     It  will  be  no  hard  matter  to  with   it,    which    our    Saviour   enjoins 

see   why  our  Lord    does  so  earnestly  strictly  to  all  persons  and  at  all  times  ; 

dissuade   us   from  it,      1.  There   is  a  namely,    temperance     in   eating    and 

great    deal   of    disingenuity    and   in-  drinking. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 
sincerity  in  it,  that  a  man  should  put 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—24. 

The  evils  of  covetousness. — The  great  Teacher  passes  here  from  one  snare  to 
another ;  from  the  danger  of  thinking  too  much  of  the  praises  of  men  to  that 
of  thinking  too  much  of  the  riches  of  earth.  When  we  make  them  our 
*'  treasure  " — when  we  so  delight  in  them  that  we  always  long  to  have  more  of 
them — that  is  the  evil  meant  here.  Against  this  "  covetousness,"  this  craving 
for  more,  we  are  here  warned,  as  being  at  once  :  1.  A  great  folly.  2.  A  greater 
danger.    3.  A  deadly  offence. 

I.  A  great  folly. — This  folly  is  shown,  first,  in  regard  to  that  which  this 
spirit  seeks.  Is  it  not  foolish,  indeed,  to  make  that  our  "  treasure  "  which  we  can 
never  reckon  on  keeping  ;  which  nature  herself  is  bent  on  "  corrupting  "  by  all 
sorts  of  agencies  which  cannot  be  guarded  against  by  our  powers ;  and  which  the 
envy  and  covetousness  of  other  men  always  desires  to  appropriate  (ver.  19)? 
Probable  disappointment,  more  probable  loss,  certain  anxiety,  are  the  necessary 
results  of  so  doing.  Next,  in  regard  to  that  which  it  misses.  It  misses  that 
"  treasure  in  heaven,"  which  can  always  be  attained  through  the  gospel ;  which 
never  decays  because  there  is  nothing  to  defile  it  (cf.  1  Pet.  i.  4),  and  is  never 
stolen  because  there  are  none  to  steal  it.  Here  is  the  vital  difiierence  between 
these  two  aims.  In  earthly  riches  my  gain  is  another  man's  loss.  In  heavenly 
riches  my  gain  is  my  neighbour's  gain  too.  As  a  mere  question  of  prudence, 
therefore,  seek  earnestly  for  this  heavenly  treasure,  and  "covet"  nothing  beside. 

II.  A  greater  danger. — When  men  do  bring  themselves,  notwithstanding  all 
this,  to  prefer  earthly  riches  to  heavenly,  how  is  it  done  ?  It  is  done,  as  it  can 
only  be  done,  by  shutting  their  eyes  to  the  truth.  The  "  deceitfulness  "  of  such 
*'  riches,"  to  use  the  Saviour's  own  words  (Matt.  xiii.  22),  blinds  their  minds  on 
the  subject.  In  other  words,  they  bring  themselves  to  the  conclusion  spoken 
of,  by  contriving  to  see  only  what  they  wish  to  see  in  the  matter ;  and 
so,  in  regard  to  it,  are  without  that  "  single "  eye  of  which  the  Saviour  here 
speaks  (ver.  22).  But  this  is  a  kind  of  process  which  cannot  be  made  to  terminate 
when  and  as  we  desire.  If  we  thus  pervert  the  instrument  we  look  through  in 
order  only  to  see  what  we  wish  to  see  in  one  direction,  it  will  inevitably,  of  course, 
do  the  same  when  we  look  in  another.     There  is  no  direction,  in  fact,  in  which 

147 


CHAP.  vi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


we  can  rely  upon  it,  where  such  is  the  case ;  and  no  use  we  can  make  of  it  which, 
in  the  end,  will  not  rather  obscure  than  enlighten.  Such  is  the  result  of  trifling, 
in  any  way,  with  the  light ;  and  of  wilfully  looking  at  things,  as  covetousness 
does,  as  they  are  not.  No  darkness  can  be  at  once  more  complete  and  more 
dense  (vers.  22,  23).  Who  can,  in  anything,  trust  a  judgment  which  has 
brought  itself  thus  to  think  of  earth  as  being  higher  than  heaven  ? 

III.  A  deadly  offence. — We  say  this  because  there  is  more  in  this  matter  than 
mere  perversion  of  judgment.  Such  intellectual  misjudging  implies  also  perversion 
of  will.  Devotion  to  wealth  is  more  than  an  error — more  even  than  such  an 
error  as  leads  to  worse  error  in  turn — it  is  also  a  sin.  It  is  a  sin,  first,  because 
it  robs  God  of  His  due.  What  we  ought  to  live  for — what  we  ought  to  devote 
ourselves  to — is  obtaining  His  favour.  If  we  devote  ourselves  to  money-getting 
instead,  we  make  money -getting  our  "  god."  This  is  why  covetousness  (or  TrXcovc^ta) 
is  so  often  spoken  of  in  the  Bible  as  idolatry  (Eph.  v.  5) ;  and  why  both  it  and 
idolatry  are  so  often  compared  in  the  Bible  to  the  sin  of  unfaithfulness  in  the 
marriage  relation  (ibid.  ;  1  Cor.  v.  11,  etc.).  It  is  like  a  man's  taking  away  from 
his  wife  that  exclusive  love  which  he  has  promised  to  give  her  wholly  all  the 
days  of  his  life.  Also,  this  covetousness  is  sin  because  it  transfers  to  the  creature 
what  it  thus  abstracts  from  the  Creator  (cf.  Rom,  i.  25) ;  and  because  it  does 
so,  also,  to  a  creature  or  idol  of  a  peculiarly  contemptible  kind.  Is  not  this  true 
of  this  money-greediness,  this  craving  to  grasp,  this  utter  concentration  on  self  ? 
And  is  not  this  proved,  also,  by  the  very  name  we  give  to  a  man  utterly  under 
its  power.  We  call  him — and  we  call  him  rightly — a  "  miser "  or  "  wretch." 
We  call  him  so  because  it  is  to  such  a  "  wretch  "  of  an  idol  that  he  bows  himself 
down.  Hence,  therefore,  the  peculiar  offensiveness  of  this  kind  of  spiritual 
"  adultery,"  and  the  utter  impossibility  of  combining  it  with  the  worship  of  God. 
"  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon  "  (ver.  24).  Even  if  such  double  worship 
were  possible  in^pther  cases,  it  would  be  out  of  the  question  in  this. 

This  very  difiicult  lesson,  for  such  it  is  to  us,  may  be  further  confirmed  by 
remembering : — 

1.  Who  traversed  it  at  the  time. — Viz.  about  the  most  unreliable  teachers  ever 
known  in  the  world  (see  Luke  xvi.  14;  Matt,  xxiii.  16,  17,  19). 

2.  Who  afterwards  received  it. — Viz.  the  wisest  teachers,  after  Christ,  ever 
known  in  the  world.  Not  at  first,  indeed,  even  they,  when  only  partly  knowing 
the  truth  (Matt.  xix.  23-25) ;  but  afterwards,  when  fully  knowing  the  truth  (Luke 
xxiv.  44-48;  John  xvi.  12,  13),  acting  on  it  in  full  (Acts  iii.  6;  1  Pet.  i.  18, 
V.  2) ;  also,  through  their  example  (Acts  ii.  44,  45  ;  Heb.  x.  34,  xiii.  5) ;  also  in  the 
case  of  one  afterwards  added  to  their  number  (1  Tim.  vi.  5-10  ;  Phil.  iv.  11,  18). 
And  thereby,  indeed,  only  reviving,  and  as  it  were  countersigning,  that  ancient 
deed  and  distinction  of  Ps.  x.  3,  "  blessing  the  covetous  whom  the  Lord 
abhorreth." 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Vers.  19-21.  Warning  against  greed,  making  a  god  of  them,  and  in  all  His 
— Christ  does  not  speak  against  mate-  teaching  strikes  deeply  at  the  worldly- 
rial  wealth ;  rather  He  implies  in  the  mindedness  and  disposition  of  those 
text  and  words  of  similar  meaning,  who  are  absorbed  in  "  greed  of  gain." 
that   His   disciples   are  not   forbidden  Observe  : 

to  accumulate  the  things  of  this  world.  I.  The  treasures  referred  to. — Two 

Capital  and  property  are  necessary  to  kinds — "  treasures    upon    earth  "   and 

social  progress,  civilisation,  evangelisa-  "  treasures   in   heaven."      The    words 

tion,   and   the  temporal  well-being  of  contain  an  antithesis — 

mankind.     But  He  does  speak  against  1.     As     to     their    nature.  —  "The 

148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap  vi. 


treasures  upon   earth"   are  not   only  for    the  more   we   gain    and  possess, 

earthly,  but  earthy.     *'  They  are  but  the   more    we   shall    love    that    gain, 

earth,  and  it  is  but  upon  earth  they  until    we    become    fully   absorbed    in 

are  laid  up,"  including  costly  dresses  it,  make  a  god  of  it,  and  worship  it. 

and     all     worldly     possessions.        In  The  whole  of  life  is  a  treasuring  up 

eastern   countries    they   treasured   up  for  eternity,  either   character   "unto 

gold,     silver,    precious    stones,     corn,  eternal  life,"  or   "  wrath  against  the 

wine,    oil,    and  garments.      To    gain  day  of  wrath."     Use  your  time,  your 

these   the    most   sacred    things   often  talents,   your   influence,   your   money, 

were  bartered.      So  now.      Character  your   life   to   this  great   and  glorious 


and  most  sacred  rights  have  been  and  end — the     chief     end    of     being.- 

are   sold    to    gain    earthly   treasures.  Harries. 
But     "  treasures     in     heaven  "     are 

absolutely  different  in  nature  and  Treasures  in  heaven. — I.  The  char- 
tendency,  and  inestimably  more  valu-  acter  of  the  covetous  man.  —  He 
able,  and  hence  should  be  more  dili-  lays  up  for  himself  treasures  upon 
gently  sought  after.  earth,  and   not   in    heaven.       1.    Our 

2.  As  to  their  influence  upon  character,  hearts  are  too  much  set  on  the  world 
— "  For  where  your  treasure  is  "  etc.  if  we  are  strongly  bent  and  resolved  to 
This  is  important,  for  it  shows  clearly  be  rich  (1  Tim  vi.  9).  2.  If  we  make 
that  wherever  the  heart  is  the  man  is.  too  much  haste  to  be  rich  (Prov.  xxviii. 
The  betting  man  is  at  the  Derby,  the  20).  3.  If  we  look  on  our  neighbour's 
mercenary  in  his  office,  the  politician  thriving  and  prosperity  with  envy  and 
in  the  strifes  of  ambition,  etc.  But  if  discontent.  4.  When  we  contemplate 
the  treasm-e  be  in  heaven  there  is  a  our  own  wealth  and  flourishing  circum- 
transformation.  stances    with    too   much   complacence 

3.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  places  where  and  delight.  Good  men  dehght  them- 
these  treasures  are  laid  up. — Which  is  selves  in  God.  5.  When  we  come  to 
the  best  place  to  treasure  up  in —  put  our  trust  and  confidence  in  our 
"earth"  or  "heaven"?  (1)  Earthly  wealth;  like  the  rich  man  in  the 
treasures  are  precarious  at  best.  Think  Gospel,  who  trusted  more  in  i  his  full 
of  the  risks,  etc.  Riches  of  grace  and  barns  than  in  God.  6.  When  our 
everlasting  peace  and  happiness  are  in  time,  thoughts,  projects,  etc.,  are  spent 
Christ,  which  are  the  true  and  lasting  chiefly  on  worldly  things.  7.  When 
wealth  and  glory  of  the  Christian  man.  upon  any  great  losses,  or  even  povei*ty 
Paulinus,  when  he  was  told  that  the  itself  coming  upon  us,  we  grow  angry, 
Goths  had  sacked  Nola  and  plundered  peevish,  and  discontented.  8.  When- 
him  of  all  that  he  had,  lifted  up  his  ever,  to  save  or  increase  our  wealth, 
eyes  to  heaven,  and  said,  "  Lord,  Thou  we  betray  our  duty  and  conscience 
Imowest  where  I  have  laid  up  my  (1  Tim.  vi.  10;  2  Tim.  iv.  10). 
treasure."  It  was  in  heaven — the  II.  Our  Saviour's  dissuasive  from 
right  place,  the  only  safe  place,  this  practice  of  the  covetous  man. — 
(2)    Earthly  treasures   are  perishable  "  Lay  not  up,"  etc.                    ^ 

— "  moth   and   rust   corrupt."      But  III.  The  reasons  of  this  exhortation, 

spiritual      treasures      are      absolutely  — 1.    The  one  is  an  earthly,  the  other 

secure   and   imperishable.  a    heavenly/    treasure. — (1)    The   gross, 

II.     The    exhortation    enjoined. —  earthly  nature  of  these  blessings.     We 

"  Lay  up."     The  love  of  accumulation  may  as  well  think  to  make  fish  feed 

is   so   strong   in   our    nature   that    it  upon  grass   and   corn,  and   oxen   livH 

behoves  us   to  beware   continually  in  upon  water  and  mud  like  fish,  as  to 

"  laying   up    earthly   treasures "   that  make  men   happy  only  with   worldly 

we    do    not    become    ava/ridous    and  things.      (2)    But   suppose   they  were 

miserly.     The   prohibition,   "  lay  n^t "  ever  so  well  fitted  to  make  us  happy 

has  reference  to  that  kind  of  spirit ;  during  our  stay  in  this  world,   how 

149 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


small  a  part  of  man's  immortal  dura- 
tion is  included  in  this  present  life  ! 

2.  The  earthly  treasure  is  liable  to 
perishing  by  divers  accidents. — Some 
native,  breeding  in  itself,  such  as 
moth  and  rust  which  corrupt  it ;  some 
foreign,  as  thieves  that  break  through 
and  steal  it;  whereas  the  heavenly 
treasures  are  secure.  (1)  They  are 
fitted  for  our  heaven-born  souls. 
(2)  They  last  for  ever.  (3)  They 
are  subject  to  no  accidents,  either 
of  inward  corruption  or  external 
violence. 

3.  If  our  treasures  are  upon  earth 
they  will  draw  our  hearts  after  them 
and  make  them  earthly  too. — Consider  : 
(1)  The  influence  our  treasure  has 
upon  our  hearts,  to  draw  them  after 
it.  The  heart  runs  out  naturally  after 
that  which  it  loves  best.  (2)  The 
influence  the  heart  has  on  the  whole 
man,  to  govern  all  his  thoughts,  words, 
and  actions.  As  the  mainspring  of 
the  heart  goes,  the  man  thinks,  con- 
trives, speaks,  and  acts.  (3)  From 
whence  the  conclusion  follows  very 
naturally,  that  the  laying  up  our 
treasure  on  earth  makes  us  worldly, 
and  forgetful  of  heaven ;  and  that 
the  laying  up  our  treasure  in  heaven 
makes  us  of  a  heavenly  temper,  and 
reforms  the  whole  heart  and  life. — 
Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Treasure. — According  to  our  Lord's 
metaphor,  His  followers  are  to  treasure 
up  treasures  in  heaven.  This  cannot 
mean  to  wish  for  high  seats  in  heaven, 
with  great  lustre  and  distinction  for 
themselves,  for  such  desires  may  in- 
dicate nothing  more  than  a  new  form 
of  selfishness.  The  treasure  must  be 
of  a  more  spiritual  character,  and  such 
as  a  lowly  heart  may  crave.  It  must 
be  riches  towards  God  and  in  God.  It 
must  mean  the  satisfaction  of  longings 
of  the  human  spiiit  which  the  world 
cannot  meet.  It  must  be  treasure  of 
a  calm  conscience  and  a  holy  mind, 
resting  in  the  love  of  God  and  sustained 
by  the  fellowship  of  the  Spirit.  The 
portion  of  the  wise  deserves  to  be  called 
treasure  because  it  is : — 

150 


I.  Precious,  as  meeting  not  the 
fancy  of  a  day  or  even  the  wants  of 
the  passing  years,  but  the  most  pro- 
found requirements  of  the  human  soul, 
and  that,  too,  when  Divine  regenerating 
grace  has  made  it  capable  of  eternal 
life  and  joy. 

II.  Secure,  as  laid  up  in  heaven 
above  the  risk  of  loss. 

III.  Capable  of  indefinite  increase. 
— D.  Eraser,  D.D. 

The  passion  for  hoarding. — In  one 
of  the  best  of  his  essays  Montaigne 
tells  how  a  passion  for  hoarding  money 
possessed  him  at  one  period  of  his  life, 
and  plunged  him  in  continual  solicitude. 
"  After  you  have  once  set  your  heart 
upon  your  heap  it  is  no  more  at  your 
service  ;  you  cannot  find  in  your  heart 
to  break  it;  'tis  a  building  that  you 
fancy  must  of  necessity  all  tumble 
down  to  ruin  if  you  stir  but  the  least 
pebble." — Ibid. 

Dr.  SoutKs  sermon. — In  the  year 
1699,  Dr.  South  preached  on  this 
theme  before  the  University  of  Oxford. 
The  sermon  appears  in  his  works  under 
the  title,  "  No  man  ever  went  to 
heaven  whose  heart  was  not  there 
before." — Ibid. 

Ver.  2 1 .  The  heart  and  the  treasure. 
— The  heart  follows  the  treasure,  as 
the  needle  follows  the  loadstone,  or 
the  sunfiower  the  sun. — M.  Henry. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Singleness  of  aim  in  the 
kingdom  of  God. — The  text  bears  on 
what  went  before,  which  is,  that  the 
supreme  attraction  of  the  heart  should 
be  spiritual  and  heavenly  and  not 
secular  and  earthly.  And  it  bears  also 
on  what  follows,  viz.  that  right  and 
acceptable  service  in  the  kingdom  of 
God  must  be  a  single  service. 

I.  The  truth  here  taught.— "The 
light  of  the  body  is  the  eye."  This 
expression  is  misleading.  Literally 
interpreted,  it  is  not  correct.  The  eye 
is  not  the  light,  but  it  is  the  medium 
of  light  to  the  body,  it  is  the  window 
that  admits  light.     The  human  eye  is 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vi. 


the  most  striking  feature  in  the  human 
constitution.  It  is  the  closest  to  the 
soul.  Hence,  spiritually,  the  great 
truths  suggested  by  the  text.     Notice : 

1.  The  soul  of  man  has  perceptive 
faculties — the  spiritual  eye  of  his 
moral  constitution.  Some  say  that  this 
"  eye "  is  the  intellect,  whereby  we 
discover  causes  and  effects,  and  trace 
their  logical  relation,  processes,  and 
products.  But  it  is  not  the  mere 
intellect  that  is  suggested  by  the  figure 
"  eye."  Some  say  it  is  conscience^ 
whereby  we  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of 
things  unseen,  the  conception  of  God, 
of  moral  truth,  and  spiritual  force,  by 
which  we  judge  of  acts  as  right  or 
wrong,  and  by  which  we  discover  the 
reality  of  the  moral  law  and  determine 
our  character  according  to  that  law. 
But  it  cannot  mean  any  one  faculty, 
but  the  seat  of  all  faculties  and 
affections,  purposes  and  inclinations; 
the  undivided  spirituality  of  our  being, 
represented  again  and  again  in 
Scripture,  as  the  heart. 

2.  The  heart,  the  organ  of  sight, 
requires  light. — We  have  only  to  open 
our  hearts  and  Christ,  the  Light,  enters. 

3.  The  organ  of  sight  is  subject 
to  disease. — Spiritually,  there  is  one 
word  expressive  of  moral  darkness  and 
blindness,  viz.  sin.  No  man  can  see 
either  earth  or  sky  aright,  God,  truth, 
or  man  aright,  if  the  coloured  glass  of 
self  is  always  in  the  window. 

II.  The  condition  specified. — "If 
thine  eye  be  single,"  etc.  The  idea 
conveyed  by  the  singleness  of  eye  is 
threefold : 

1.  Oneness. — The  contemplation  of 
one  object.  The  heart  bent  on  one  thing. 

2.  Clearness. — When  the  eye  is 
directed  singly  and  steadily  towards  an 
object,  and  is  in  health,  everything 
becomes  clear,  distinct,  and  plain. 

3.  Concentration.  —  The  eye  is 
"  single  "  when  it  not  only  sees  or  lives 
for  one  thing,  but  also  when  it  con- 
centrates all  its  power  in  one  direction. 
All  thoughts  and  all  actions  are  f  ocussed 
in  one  object. 

III.  The  inevitable  result.—"  The 
whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light." 


1.  The  blessed  state  of  those  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  whose  aim  is  single. — 
The  light  of  personal  knowledge  of 
salvation.  The  light  of  holiness — 
purity  of  heart.  The  light  of  peace 
and  joy. 

2.  The  awful  result  of  "  the  evil  e^e." 
— Full  of  darkness.  Dark  in  himself 
and  dark  to  every  good  around.  He 
may  be  a  man  of  talent,  and  learning, 
and  genius,  and  yet  blind  spiritually. 
Darkness  is  a  symbol  of  misery, 
adversity,  and  death  ;  of  ignorance  and 
alienation,  from  the  darkness  of  death 
to  the  "  outer  darkness." — J.  Harries. 

The  single  and  the  evil  eye. — I.  There 
is  an  inward  light  of  the  mind  and 
conscience,  which  is  to  direct  the  moral 
part  of  our  actions,  as  the  eye  directs 
the  external  motions  and  actions  of  the 
body. 

II.  Every  evil  affection  obscures 
this  inward  light,  that  it  cannot  so 
well  perform  its  duty,  but  is  apt  to 
mislead  us  into  sinful  courses. 

III.  This  is  particularly  verified  in 
the  evil  affection  of  covetousness  or 
worldly-mindedness. 

IV.  When  the  inward  light  of  the 
mind  and  conscience  is  darkened,  this 
occasions  a  vast  number  of  other  errors 
and  follies  in  the  life  and  conversation. 

V.  It  is  our  duty  to  use  our  utmost 
endeavours,  to  keep  that  inward  light 
free  from  all  clouds  of  evil  affections 
and  inclinations,  that  it  may  give  us 
clear  direction  in  all  duty;  and  to 
follow  those  good  directions  in  our  life 
and  conversation. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

Yer.  ^2.  The  single  eye. — The  idea 
conveyed  by  a  "  single  eye  "  appears  to 
be,  from  its  etymology,  threefold. 
First,  it  means  clear,  with  no  film ; 
secondly,  it  means  in  opposition  to 
double,  seeing  one  object  at  a  time ; 
and  thirdly,  it  means  concentration, 
centred  upon  a  focus.  These  three 
thoughts  mainly  go  to  make  up  the 
word  "  single," — distinctness,  oneness, 
fixedness. 

I.  Many  things  may  give  a  dulness 
to  the  moral  sight. 

151 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


1.  If  it  be  impaired  by  disuse. — 
If  you  do  not  exercise  the  spiritual 
perception  which  God  has  given  you, 
by  meditation,  by  prayer  and  religious 
thought,  then  the  perception  must 
grow  weak. 

2.  Things  coming  in  between^  veil 
and  darken  that  higher  vision.  A 
worldly  life  is  sure  to  do  it.  Much 
care  will  do  it.  Luxury  mil  do  it. 
But,  still  more,  any  wilful  unbelief  or 
any  strong  prejudice. 

II.  A  clear  eye  must  be  often 
cleared. — It  is  the  great  secret  of  a 
happy,  holy  life — to  have  made  up 
your  mind,  once  and  for  all,  to  live  for 
one  thing — to  do  what  is  right,  and  to 
live  to  the  glory  of  God.  And  then 
upon  that  one  object  you  must 
concentrate  yourself. 

III.  There  are  two  worlds  around 
us — a  seen  world  and  an  unseen  world  ; 
and  we  move  equally  in  the  midst  of 
both.  And  the  unseen  system  is  far 
more  beautiful,  and  far  grander  and 
more  important  than  the  system  that 
we  see.  The  seen  is  mainly  the  type 
and  the  shadow  of  the  unseen.  It  is 
the  unseen  which  is  the  real,  for  that 
unseen  is  for  ever  and  ever.  But  it  is 
not  all  of  us  who  see  the  unseen.  Few 
of  us  are  seeing  the  unseen  very 
distinctly,  and  none  of  us  are  seeing  it 
as  we  might;  and  the  reason  is  the 
state  of  the  eye  of  the  soul,  which  is  as 
really  an  eye  to  see  the  unseen  as  that 
natural  eye  by  which  you  gaze  upon 
a  star  or  by  which  you  admire  a  flower. 

^  Vaughan^  M.A. 


Ver.  23.  The  evil  eye. — The  eye  which 
is  sharp  for  self-interest  is  dimmed  for 
moral  insight. — W.  Jackson,  M.A. 

Ver.  24.  One  Master  only  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. — These  words  of 
the  great  Teacher  plainly  indicate  not 
only,  as  in  the  previous  verses,  that 
the  aim  of  the  true  disciple  in  the 
kingdom  should  be  '^single,"  but  also 
that  the  service  must  be  single,  the 
motive  single,  the  purpose  single,  the 
object  single,  and  the  Master  single. 
The   object    we   love    most    rules    us. 

152 


Robert  HaU  once  wrote  the  word 
"  God "  on  a  small  slip  of  paper, 
showed  it  to  a  friend,  and  asked 
whether  he  could  read  it.  He  re- 
plied "  Yes."  He  then  covered  the 
word  with  a  guinea,  and  again  asked 
"  Can  you  see  it  ?  "  and  was  answered 
*'  No."  He  did  this  in  order  to  show 
his  friend  how  easy  it  is  for  the  world 
to  shut  out  of  the  mind  a  sight  and 
sense  of  God. 

I.  The  great  principle  here  em- 
phasised.— "No  man  can  serve  two 
masters."  *'  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon."  We  desire  to  show  the 
impossibility  of  serving  two  masters 
— God  and  mammon. 

1.  Philosophically. — Dr.  Brown's  and 
Dugald  Stewart's  proposition  is  irre- 
futable— "  That  the  mind  cannot  exist, 
at  the  same  moment,  in  two  different 
states,"  proving,  so  far,  the  great 
maxim  of  the  text,  that,  if  the  mind 
cannot  exist  in  two  different  states 
at  the  same  moment,  it  cannot  be 
heavenly  and  worldly  at  the  same 
time.  We  cannot  concentrate  our 
mind,  which  is  indivisible,  upon 
more  than  one  object.  Sir  Isaac 
Newton,  it  is  said,  was  so  absorbed 
in  his  endeavour  to  discover  the  law 
of  gravitation  that  he  knew  not 
his  surroundings  ;  could  not  hear  or 
recognise  the  voice  and  calls  of  his 
wife  ;  and  when  one  morning  he 
was  roasting  before  a  big  fire  he 
called  the  servant  to  move  the  fire 
back.  The  servant  said,  "  Please 
move  back  your  chair,  sir."  "Ah," 
replied  the  great  man,  "  I  did  not 
think  about  that  ! "  A  man  must 
have  two  hearts,  two  souls,  and  two 
selves,  before  he  can  give  a  heart  to 
God  and  a  heart  to  the  world  too. 
The  utter  impossibility  of  serving 
two  masters,  God  and  mammon,  is 
further  shown  : — 

2.  Morally. — (1)  God  and  mammon 
are  absolutely  opposites.  (2)  The  in- 
terests of  the  two  are  absolutely  diverse. 
(3)  The  effects  of  the  two  are  absolutely 
different.  "  For  either  he  will  hate 
the  one  and  love  the  other."  The 
chief   point  of  our  Lord  is  that  the 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vl. 


man  of  the  world  cannot  be  truly  re-  peril  and  shame  of  this  compromise — 

ligious ;    that  is,  the  man  that  makes  e.g.  Samaritans,  Israelites,  Laodiceans, 

worldly   gain   supreme — such   a   man,  Balaam,  Pilate,  young  ruler  who  made 

generally  speaking,  hates  religion.  *'  the  great  refusal."      And  Scripture 

II.     The    important     truths    here  being  thus  full  of  warnings,  the  signifi- 

implied. — The    key-word    is    "serve."  cance  of  those  warnings  has  not  been 

A    man    may  try    to    serve   God   and  lost  upon  the  great  Christian  teachers 

mammon,  because  self  is  so  dear,  and  — e.g.   Dante,  Bunyan  (man  with  the 

the    world    is    so    sweet  ;    but    Jesus  muck  rake).     In  the  precincts  of  this 

Christ   shows   that   even  the  attempt  insincere  religion  good  and  evil  are  not 

is  an  absurdity.     The  practical  truths  wrestling  as  they  should  be,  shoulder 

inferred  are —  to  shoulder,  in   an   irreconcilable   an- 

1.  That  religion  is  a  spiritual  service.  tagonism,  but  they  are  feebly  walking 

2.  That  religion  demands  one  supreme  together,  hand  in  hand,  in  futile 
object. — "  Serve  God."  amity. 

3.  That  religion  requires  wholeness  of  II.  The  causes  of  neutrality. — 
heart  in  its  service.  Mainly  two. 

4.  That  religion  implies  the  power  of  1.  Indolence  and  unbelief. 

choice. — God  or  mammon.     Which  ?  2.  So7ne    besetting    sin. — With    one 

5.  That  religion  teaches  and  enforces  man  it  is  drink,  with  another  it  is 
the  necessity  of  immediate  and  manly,  gold,  with  another  it  is  envy,  hatred, 
decisio7i.  —  We  act  upon  decisions.  or  refusal  to  forgive ;  with  others  it  is 
When  Alexander  the  Great  was  impurity.  And  thinking  that  they 
asked  how  he  conquered  the  world,  can  give  the  rest  of  their  heart  to 
he  answered,  "  By  not  delaying." —  God,  men  try  to  reserve  this  one 
J.  Harries.  dark  corner,  this  one  secret  chamber 

of  unhallowed  imagery  for  their  own 
Neutrality. — "  Of  all  unsuccessful  idolatry.  St,  Augustine  tells  us,  in 
men  in  any  shape,  whether  Divine,  his  terrible  Confessions,  that  in  his 
human,  or  devilish,"  says  a  secular  unconverted  days  he  used  indeed  to 
historian,  "  there  is  no  equal  to  pray  to  God  to  deliver  him  from  lusts 
Bunyan's  '  Facing-both-ways  '  ;  the  of  the  flesh,  but  he  prayed  with  the 
fellow  with  one  eye  on  heaven  and  great  desire  that  God  would  not  hear 
one  on  earth,  who  sincerely  professes  him  yet,  because  he  still  desired  to  live 
one  thing  and  sincerely  does  another,  in  their  base  indulgence. 
and  from  the  intensity  of  his  unreality  III.  The  issue  of  neutrality. — 
is  unable  either  to  see  or  feel  the  con-  Death.  The  poet  saw  in  the  lowest 
tradiction ;  he  is  substantially  trying  hell  the  soul  of  the  Prior  Elbrigo, 
to  cheat  both  God  and  the  devil,  and  and  was  amazed  because  he  knew 
in  reality  only  cheating  himself  and  that  the  man  was  still  alive ;  but 
his  neighbours.  This,  of  all  characters  when  he  asks  for  explanation  he  re- 
upon  the  earth,  appears  to  us  to  be  one  ceives  the  awful  answer  that  some- 
of  which  there  is  no  hope  at  all — a  times  a  man  seems  to  live  above, 
character  becoming  in  these  days  and  eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep,  and 
alarmingly  abundant."  Now,  no  one  put  on  clothes,  but  in  reality  his 
who  has  learnt  the  lesson  of  the  soul  is  sunk  down  even  in  his  life- 
gospel  will  say  of  any  character  time  into  the  abyss ;  he  has  become 
that  there  is  no  hope  for  it  at  all.  that  most  fearful  kind  of  ghost — not 
But  it  is  true  that  this  class  of  a  soul  without  a  body,  but  a  body 
characters,  the  insincere  professor^,  without  a  soul.  Give  up  this  shameful 
the  Mr.  Anythings,  are  hardest  of  attempt  to  deceive  God  by  semblances 
all  to  deal  with.  and  shams  !  Be  not  like  that  Dead 
I.  The  characteristics  of  neutrality.  Salt  Sea,  of  which  it  has  been  said 
— Scripture  is  full  of  indications  o£  the  that  it  reflects  heaven  on  its  surface 

153 


CHAP.  vi.      ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


and  hides   Gomorrha  in   its   heart. —  last    among    all   the  hidden    idols    of 

Archdeacon  Farrar.  God's  people,  both  under  the  Old  and 

the  New  Testament. — J.  P.  Lange,  D,D. 
Mammon  the  greatest  of  all  idols. — 

1.  The  idol  of  all  times.     2.  The  idol  Vers.   24-34.    Greed   and   care.— On 

of   all   nations.      3.    The   idol   of    all  the   one    side   must    be   shunned    the 

unconverted  hearts.     4.  The  origin  of  Scylla    of    greed,    on    the   other    the 

all   idolatry.      5.    The   first    and  the  Oharybdis  of  care.- — J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  25—34. 

The  perils  of  pimdence. — Covetousness  is  one  thing,  prudence  is  another. 
The  one  craves  more  than  enough.  The  other  is  satisfied  with  a  competency. 
Can  it  ever  be  wrong  for  us  to  labour  for  this  ?  Especially,  can  it  be  so,  when 
our  labours  are  undertaken  not  so  much  for  ourselves  as  for  others  ?  It  may  be 
so,  even  in  that  case — so  the  Saviour  teaches  us  here — if  the  spirit  in  which  we 
do  so  be  that  of  distraction  and  doubt.  Even  in  being  prudent,  never  be 
"  anxious  "  as  well.  Four  times  over,  in  slightly  difiering  forms,  this  counsel  is 
given  us  here  (vers.  25,  28,  31,  34).  The  considerations  which  here  support 
it  may  be  put  down  as  three.     Never  be  anxious  because  such  anxiety  is  : — 

I.  Wholly  uncalled  for. — Wholly  uncalled  for,  in  the  first  place,  by  the  natwre 
f  the  case.  He  who  gave  the  "  life  "  and  made  the  *'  body  "  can  do  for  both  all 
that  is  needed.  If  the  original  and  greater  was  in  His  power,  much  more  is  the 
subsequent  and  the  less.  It  cannot  be  impossible  for  HiTU  to  provide  raiment 
and  food  (ver.  25)  !  Wholly  uncalled  for,  next,  by  anything  taught  us  from  the 
observation  of  nature.  In  the  creatures  God  has  made  we  see  living  evidence  of 
the  non-necessity  for  such  anxiety.  The  ^*  fowls  of  the  air  "  (ver.  26)  are  not 
anxious,  the  "  Ulies  of  the  field "  (ver.  28)  cannot  be,  yet  their  wants  are 
supplied.  May  not  those,  therefore,  who  are  "  better  than  they  "  (ver.  26)  look 
without  "  anxiety  "  for  the  same  1  May  not  they  rely  on  the  Fatherly  hand 
which  thus  reaches  beneath  them,  to  reach  as  low  as  them  too  ?  Not  called  for, 
lastly,  by  the  nature  of  the  resources  which  have  been  placed  in  our  hands. 
What  can  we  do  with  the  powers  possessed  by  us,  to  provide  with  certainty  for 
ourselves  1  Will  any  amount  of  anxiety  suffice  to  make  us  certain  as  to  the 
supply  of  our  ne^ds  ?  Will  it  add  to  our  stature  ?  Will  it  lengthen  our  lives  ? 
(so  some).  Much  less  can  it  do  for  us  what  we  see  God  do  for  the  flowers,  when, 
without  anxiety  on  their  part,  and  although  they  are  but  for  a  day.  He  "clothes" 
them  with  a  degree  of  glory  which  the  most  favoured  of  men  cannot  obtain 
for  themselves.  Why,  in  a  word,  should  we  suppose  ourselves  "  called "  to 
attempt  what  He  has  made  us  unable  to  do  ?  Rather,  why  should  we  suppose, 
what  such  *'  anxiety  "  implies,  that  He  has  left  that  task  on  our  hands? 

II.  Most  dishonouring  to  our  Father. — Dishonouring,  on  the  one  hand, 
because  it  reflects  on  His  powe^\  To  be  "anxious"  is  to  imply  that  He  cannot 
do  what  He  has  undertaken  to  do ;  or,  that  there  are  doubts  about  it  at  least. 
It  is  to  regard  Him  as  having  done  the  greater,  but  as  being  incompetent  for 
the  less.  It  is  to  "  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  41),  a  grievous 
sin  indeed,  in  regard  to  His  ability  to  provide.  And  to  be,  in  a  word,  like  those 
disciples  of  Christ  at  a  subsequent  date,  who,  after  seeing  their  Master  twice 
over  feed  thousands  of  men  by  His  word,  thought  He  was  blaming  them  for 
having  "  forgotten  "  to  provide  for  a  few  (Matt.  xvi.  7).  *'  Can  He  give  bread 
also,  or  provide  flesh  for  His  people  ?  "  There  is  more  than  doubt,  there  is  the 
spirit  of  complaint,  in  that  question.  Dishonouring,  on  the  other  hand,  because 
it  reflects  on  Gods  love.     Those  heathen  people  (ver.  32)  who  did  not  know  God 

154 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vi. 


as  He  is,  might  be  almost  excused,  if  not  wholly  pardoned,  for  the  questions  they 
asked  (ver.  31).  Not  so  those  professed  ^'  disciples  "  who  are  here  addressed  by  the 
Saviour.  These  He  had  taught,  only  a  little  before,  to  address  God  as  their 
**  Father  in  heaven "  ;  and,  therefore,  to  ask  from  Him,  as  being  such,  the 
"  daily  "  supply  of  their  wants.  For  Him,  therefore,  to  "  know  "  their  wants — 
as  of  course  He  did,  being  their  Father  in  heaven — was  also,  of  course,  being 
their  Father ^  to  care  for  and  supply  them.  And  for  such,  therefore,  to  be 
"  anxious  "  about  them  was  to  deny  both  of  these  truths.  What  would  become 
of  His  love,  indeed,  if  He  could  and  knew,  yet  omitted  to  do  ? 

III.  Most  injurious  to  ourselves. — Most  injurious  because  doubly  so,  and  in 
two  different  ways.  Most  injurious,  first,  because  of  that  of  which  we  deprive 
ourselves  in  this  way.  Putting  the  kingdom  of  God  first,  and  leaving  all  else 
in  His  hands,  is  to  obtain  that  kingdom,  and  all  its  happy  *'  righteousness," 
and  all  these  other  things  too.  For  God  Himself  in  that  case  is  pleased  to 
**  add  "  them  to  us  so  far  as  this  can  be,  and  is  well.  On  the  other  hand,  to  seek 
these  other  things  first  and  be  "  anxious "  therefore  about  them,  is  to  gain 
them  in  appearance  only,  if  to  gain  them  at  all;  and  to  miss  altogether  that 
kingdom  of  God  which  should  have  been  sought  by  us  first.  Most  injurious,  in 
the  next  place,  because  of  that  which  we  attain  to  thereby.  For  what  is  it  that 
we  are  really  doing  when  we  are  thus  anticipating  the  evils  of  the  future,  and 
when  our  present  thoughts  are  thus  taken  up  with  the  possible  evils  of  to-morrow? 
We  are  making  those  possibilities,  by  so  doing,  the  certain  evils  of  to-day.  And 
we  are  voluntarily  "  adding"  them,  by  so  doing,  to  what  are  great  enough  as  it 
is  !  So  exactly  opposite,  therefore,  both  in  spirit  and  issue,  are  the  two  courses 
in  view.  God,  in  the  one  case,  whilst  giving  us  His  chief  est  blessing,  "  adds  " 
others  beside.  We,  in  the  other  case,  whilst  keeping  our  daily  troubles,  add 
others  beside  ! 

The  best  application  of  this  teaching  is  that  of  the  Saviour  Himself.  Seek 
His  kingdom — seek  it  first — seek  it  just  as  it  is.  This  seems  the  special  signifi- 
cance of  the  word  ''  righteousness  "  in  this  case.  For  what  in  fact,  and  in  strict 
essence,  is  the  "  kingdom  of  God  "  ?  The  Apostle  shall  tell  us  :  It  is  *'  righteous- 
ness, and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Kom.  xiv.  17).  So  also  the 
psalmist  has  spoken  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  10),  so  the  prophet  averred  (Isa.  xxxii.  17). 
There  is  a  seeking  of  the  kingdom  in  which  these  things  are  forgotten.  That  is 
no  seeking  at  all,  or  rather  it  is  seeking  a  kingdom  which  cannot  exist.  Only 
where  we  are  seeking  "  peace  "  through  the  blood  of  the  cross  ;  -only  where,  as  a 
proof  of  this,  we  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  are  our  feet  really  on  the  way  to  that 
"  kingdom  which  can  never  be  moved  "  (Heb.  xii.  28). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  25-34.  Distrustful  anxiety. — 
This  distrustful  anxiety  for  food  and 
raiment  in  time  to  come,  which  is  a 
branch  of  covetousness,  covered  with 
the  appearance  of  necessity,  our  Lord 
refutes  by  eight  reasons.  1.  God,  who 
hath  given  life,  which  is  more  than 
food,  will  take  care  to  provide  food  for 
maintenance  of  life,  so  long  as  He  hath 
appointed  life  to  continue ;  and  God, 
who  hath  framed  the  body,  which  is 
more  worth  than  the  raiment,  will  also 
provide  a  garment.     2.  God,  who  pro- 


vides food  for  birds  and  fowls,  will 
certainly  provide  for  His  own  children. 

3.  Anxious  care  about  the  success  of 
means  cannot  produce  any  good  effect ; 
therefore  it  should  not  be  entertained, 
for  even  when  a  man  hath  eaten,  he 
cannot  make  himself  stronger  or  more 
tall  than  it  shall  please  God  to  dispose. 

4.  God  doth  clothe  the  grass  and 
flowers  of  the  field  with  more  colours 
than  all  the  glory  which  Solomon's 
garments  had ;  therefore  anxiety  in 
God's  children  for  food  and  raiment  (as 

155 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


if  God  were  not  careful  for  them)  is 
unlawful.  5.  Anxious  seeking  of  the 
things  of  this  earth  is  the  fault  of  the 
Gentiles,  who  are  destitute  of  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  ignorant  of 
these  heavenly  things  prepared  for  His 
children ;  therefore  Christians,  who 
are  better  instructed,  should  eschew 
this  godless  anxiety.  6.  Christians  are 
not  fatherless,  nor  is  their  Father 
ignorant,  unable  or  careless  about 
them.  7.  You  have  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness  whereupon 
to  bestow  your  first  and  chief  est  cares, 
which,  if  you  seek  after  earnestly,  ye 
shall  not  need  to  be  anxious  for  food  or 
raiment,  or  any  other  needful  thing  on 
earth,  for  all  these  things  shall  be 
superadded  unto  the  grant  of  your 
chief  desires.  8.  The  morrow  shall 
bring  with  it  troublesome  cares  of  its 
own ;  and  the  day,  or  the  time  present, 
hath  sufficient  trouble  by  itself ;  there- 
fore neither  time  present  nor  time  to 
come  should  be  rendered  more  miserable 
by  anxious  anticipating  of  troublesome 
cares  before  they  come. — David  Dickson. 

Undue  anxiety  reproved,  and  the  chief 
good  urged,  in  the  kingdom  of  God. — 
"  Therefore "  introduces  the  winding 
up  of  the  argument  respecting  the 
unity  of  aim,  of  purpose,  of  object,  of 
life,  which  Jesus  Christ  has  been 
earnestly  urging  in  the  previous  verses. 

I.  A  prohibition.  —  "  Take  no 
thought,"  etc.  The  Bible  teaches  us, 
and  the  instinct  of  self-preservation 
binds  us,  and  self-respect  constrains  us 
to  the  wisdom  of  foresight.  We  are 
made  to  look  forward.  We  are 
naturally  anticipative.  But  Jesus 
Christ  speaks  of  a  very  common  evil — 
an  undue  anxiety  and  care.  To  be 
careful  is  good,  but  to  be  full  of  care  is 
ruinous.  "  Take  no  excessive  or 
harassing  thought  for  the  morrow," 
because : 

I.  It  is  injurious  to  yourselves. — It 
makes  you  unhappy ;  it  confuses  your 
mind ;  it  clouds  your  perceptions ; 
it  ages  you ;  it  breaks  you  down ; 
it  is  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of 
Christianity. 

156 


2.  It  incapacitates  you  for  lifers 
success. — Success  in  life  depends  upon 
the  wholesome  restfulness  of  the  mind. 

3.  It  is  a  sin  against  God. — It  is  a 
sign  of  distrust ;  it  ignores  His  fatherly 
care  ;  and  it  gives  the  lie  to  His  pre- 
cious promises. 

II.  The  reasons  adduced  for  such  a 
prohibition. 

III.  The  divine  command  enforced. 
— "  But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,"  etc.  This  is  the  positive  side  of 
duty.     We  are  taught — 

1.  That  "  seeking  the  kingdom  "  must 
be  our  chief  concern. 

2.  That  this  search  shall  he  rewarded. 
— "  All  these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you."  "  Providence  will  be  your 
mighty  partner  and  helper  in  the 
business."  "  Other  things  being  equal," 
says  Livermore,  "  the  good  man  pros- 
pers better  in  worldly  aifairs  than  the 
bad  man.  All  vices  are  expensive  and 
losing,  as  all  the  virtues  are  gainful 
and  thrifty."  *'  Godliness  is  profitable 
unto  all  things,"  etc. — J.  Harries. 

Vers.  26-30.  Nature  and  nature^s 
God. — Perhaps  the  first  thought  that 
occurs  as  one  recalls  these  words,  is  the 
unbounded  admiration  which  our  Lord 
manifested  for  the  world  of  nature. 
Of  Tauler,  the  mystic,  it  is  recorded 
that  his  constant  custom  was  to  wander 
in  the  convent  garden  with  his  monk's 
hood  well  drawn  over  his  face  and  his 
eyes  partially  closed,  lest  the  sight  of 
the  flowers  might  disturb  his  medita- 
tion. But,  though  Tauler  was  a  true 
Christian  and  one  to  whom  the  fifteenth 
century  owed  a  great  debt  of  gratitude, 
for  the  seeds  of  the  reformation  were 
already  sown  in  his  heart,  he  was  in 
this  respect  utterly  unlike  his  Master. 
If,  then,  we  give  ourselves  up  to  the 
thoughtful  admiration  of  the  world  in 
which  we  live ;  if  we  open  our  eyes  to 
see  its  beauty,  and,  from  the  more  or 
less  sordid  and  belittling  enterprises  in 
which  we  are  called  to  take  part,  let  our 
hearts  go  out  with  wistful  gladness  to 
the  good  and  beautiful  works  of  God, 
we  are  following  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
Master  Himself ;   and  as  He  pleased 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  vi. 


God  in  this  as  in  all  respects,  so  do  we 
please  Him  when  we  admire  the  works 
of  His  hands.  More  than  this,  we  train 
our  spirits  to  rise  above  the  common 
circumstances  of  our  lot  into  thoughts 
of  illimitable  freedom  and  range.  I 
think  one  great  value  of  these  beautiful 
words  consist^  in  this,  that  they  show  us 
very  clearly  the  two  vital  characteristics 
which  distinguished  Christ's  delight  in 
nature  from  that  of  most  men. 

I.  He  saw  God's  hand  in  the  visible 
creation. — In -everything  around  Him 
He  saw  tokens  which  told  Him  God 
had  been  at  work,  making  all  things 
beautiful  in  their  season. 

II.  He  saw  how  infinitely  more 
precious  in  God's  sight  is  the  human 
soul  than  all  these  works  of  His  hands. 
— *'  If  God  so  clothe  the  grass,"  etc. — 
G.  E.  Troup,  M.A. 

Ver.  26.  Gods  diildren  and  the  fovjls. 
— I.  We  excel  the  fowls  of  the  air  in 
regard  of  the  better  circumstances  we 
are  in  to  provide  for  our  wants  than 
they :  for  that  we  can  and  are  allowed 
to  sow,  and  reap,  and  gather  into  barns, 
which  they  cannot  do. 

II.  But  these  words.  Are  ye  not 
much  better  than  they  ?  signify  like- 
wise the  greater  dignity  of  men  above 
fowls,  and  that  upon  that  account 
likewise  they  may  expect  to  be  more 
immediately  taken  care  of  by  God's 
providence. — Jas.  Blair j  M.A. 

Ver  27.  Anxiety  hurtfid  to  life  and 
youth. — The  word  which  we  translate 
"  stature  "  signifies  likewise  "  age,"  and 
especially  the  most  flourishing  time  of 
one's  age,  when  we  are  in  the  prime 
of  our  youth  and  strength.  The  bare 
adding  a  cubit  to  the  stature  seems 
uncouth,  and  a  thing  which  the  anxious 
man  would  not  desire,  whereas  the 
adding  to  life,  especially  the  youthful 
and  prosperous  time  of  it,  is  a  thing 
which  most  men  would  desire. 

I.  Anxiety,  as  to  the  world  is 
needless,  as  neither  adding  to  life,  nor 
to  the  comfortable  part  of  it,  but  is 
rather  hurtful  to  both.  Example, 
1  Sam.  XXV.  37. 


II.  A  cheerfulness  and  resignation, 
which  are  quite  contrary  to  anxiety, 
are  of  great  use  in  all  the  parts  of  life 

(Prov.  xvii.  22.) — 1.  Whatsoever 
troubles  beset  us,  they  are  either  things 
within  our  power  to  remedy  or  not. 
If  they  are  within  our  power  to 
remedy,  there  is  no  temper  of  mind 
so  fit  to  apply  those  remedies,  as  the 
cheerful,  resigned  temper.  But  that  it 
may  more  distinctly  be  apprehended 
what  advantage  this  temper  has  above 
the  solicitous  and  anxious  one,  to 
wrestle  with  the  difficulties  of  life,  I 
s}>all  instance  some  particulars  which 
unfit  the  anxious  man  for  going  cheer- 
fully through  the  business  of  life,  but 
are  easily  overcome  by  the  cheerful 
man  who  puts  his  trust  in  God's 
providence.  (1)  He  who  believes  a 
concurrence  of  divine  providence  with 
his  own  endeavours,  acts  with  another 
sort  of  life  and  vigour  than  the  man 
that  goes  only  upon  his  own  skill 
and  strength  (see  1  Sam.  xvii.  45). 
(2)  As  the  man,  who  is  free  from 
anxiety  goes  upon  his  business  with 
more  courage,  so  he  takes  much  more 
pleasure  and  satisfaction  in  it.  (3)  If 
difficulties  and  troubles  occur  in  busi- 
ness, the  anxious  man,  instead  of 
bearing  them  with  patience,  magnifies 
and  multiplies  them  in  his  own  mind, 
by  his  disturbed  imagination  and  ill- 
boding  fears ;  whereas  the  man,  who 
is  clear  from  anxiety,  has  a  great  deal 
of  reason  still  to  hope  for  the  best ; 
and  though  he  cannot  see  through  all 
tie  intricacy  and  difficulty  in  his 
affairs,  yet  being  conscious  to  himself 
of  the  honesty  and  goodness  of  his 
designs,  and  having  a  firm,  implicit 
faith  in  God,  he  is  not  discomposed  in 
his  thoughts,  knowing  that  God,  if  He 
sees  it  best  for  him,  will  bring  to  pass 
whatever  he  is  about ;  or  if  He  sees  it 
will  prove  to  his  hurt  will  disappoint 
him  in  that  particular,  but  will  answer 
his  expectation  in  general,  and  make 
all  things  co-operate  for  his  good 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  3,  etc.).  2.  There  are  a 
great  many  other  troubles  which  are 
altogether  out  of  our  reach,  and  which 
we  can  no  way  think  of  removing,  and 

157 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


must  therefore  be  patiently  endured, 
if  we  intend  any  peace  and  quiet  with 
respect  to  them.  Now  as  to  all  these, 
the  man  who  is  free  from  anxious  and 
solicitous  thoughts  has  much  the 
advantage,  from  the  temper  of  his 
mind,  to  live  easy  and  quiet  under 
them. — Jos.  Blair,  M.A. 

Ver.  28.  The  lessons  of  the  lilies. — 
I.  Consider  the  lilies — and  identify 
little  things  with  God's  care. — Can 
you  make  a  lily  ?  You  cannot  make  a 
sun  ;  can  you  make  one  drop  of  dew  ? 
God  writes  minutely  as  well  as  largely. 
He  writes  the  great  letters  of  the 
stars ;  He  writes  also  the  small  letters 
of  the  violets  and  daisies. 

II.  Consider  the  lilies — and  see  the 
superiority  of  the  natural  over  the 
artificial. — Let  the  glorious  dress  of 
the  king  represent  the  artificial.  God 
makes  the  original ;  man  makes  the 
copy.  For  all  originality — mental  and 
moral,  as  well  as  physical — we  must 
go  to  the  Father. 

III.  Consider  the  lilies — and  look 
on  things  beneath,  as  well  as  on  tilings 
above. — Look  for  God  when  thou 
lookest  at  the  dust.  The  dust  is  alive 
with  the  life  of  God. 

IV.  Consider  the  lilies — and  have 
faith  in  your  Father. — Think  of  God 
clothing  the  grass  and  forgetting  the 
child  !  It  is  impossible.  Lot  a  lily 
detach  itself  from  its  root,  and  it  must 
perish.  So  with  man.  Let  him  cut 
himself  off  from  God,  and  he  will 
become  as  a  withered  and  driven  leaf. 
— /.  Parker,  D.D, 

Flowers. — We  are  now  "  at  school." 
Surrounded  by  educational  agencies 
and  influences.  Chief  lesson-book  the 
Bible.  But  we  have  another  of  God's 
lesson -books  in  nature.  Nature  a 
book  of  illustrations  of  biblical  truth. 
Christ  used  it  freely.  Would  have  us 
use  it  too.  The  seasons  replete  with  in- 
struction and  suggestiveness.  Summer, 
the  season  of  flowers.  Not  only  do 
they  adorn  our  gardens,  but  make  "  a 
variegated  embroidery  on  the  green 
mantle  of  our  meadows  and  commons." 

158 


Whether  we  will  or  not  they  influence 
us.  But  our  will  is  to  be  brought  into 
action.  We  are  to  *'  consider  the 
lilies."  It  was  evidently  to  wild 
flowers  that  Christ  called  the  attention 
of  His  disciples — "  lilies  of  the  field." 
Palestine  a  land  of  flowers.  We  may 
regard  Christ  as  directing  attention  to 
all  the  floral  world,  using  the  specific 
for  the  generic. 

"  Your  voiceless  lips,  O  Flowers,  are  living 
preachers, 
Each  cup  a  pulpit,  and  each  leaf  a  book." 

I.  Flowers  manifest  God's  love  of 
beauty. — They  are  embodiments  of 
divine  ideas  and  sentiments.  We 
manifest  a  God-like  quality  when  we 
admire  what  is  really  beautiful  in 
nature  or  art.  God  delights  in  "  the 
beauty  of  holiness."  In  His  beloved 
Son  He  was  well-pleased  because  He 
was  perfect  in  this  respect.  And  He 
dehghts  in  us  in  proportion  as  we 
resemble  Him. 

II.  Flowers  exhibit  God's  exceeding 
generosity — His  bountifulness. — Mary 
Howitt  has  said  : — 

"  God  might  have  made  the  earth  bring 
forth 
Enough  for  great  and  small, 
The  oak  tree  and  the  cedar  tree. 
Without  a  flower  at  all. 
He  might  have  made  things  grow  enough 
For  every  want  of  ours, 
For  luxury,  medicine,  and  toil, 
And  yet  have  made  no  flowers." 

William  Wilberforce  used  to  call 
flowers,  *'  the  smiles  of  God's  goodness," 
and  a  poet  has  described  them  as 
"  God's  thoughts  of  beauty  taking 
form,  to  gladden  mortal  gaze."  They 
testify  to  the  happiness  of  the  ever- 
blessed  God  and  to  His  desire  that  we 
should  participate  in  it. 

III.  Flowers  teach  God's  loving 
care  of  all  His  creatures — the  small 
as  well  as  the  great. — This  is  the 
lesson  which  our  Lord  specially  en- 
forced. We  are  despondent ;  we 
should  be  trustful  and  contented. 

IV.  Flowers  speak  to  us  of  resur- 
rection and  immortality. — Though  the 
flowers  pass  away  with  the  summer, 
the  next  summer  will  see  the  face  of 
the  earth  enamelled  and  adorned  again. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.      CHAr.  vt. 


And  there  will  be  an  important  con- 
nection between  the  life  and  beauty  of 
the  next  year  and  the  decay  and  death 
of  this.     Thus,  the  flowers  are 

"  Emblems  of  our  own  great  resurrection, 
Emblems  of  the  bright  and  better  land." 

H.  M.  Booth. 

Ver.  33.  Geography,  amthmetic  and 
gramimar.  (To  boys.) — I.  Geography 
tells  us  where  to  find  places.  Where 
is  the  kingdom  of  God?  Heaven  is 
only  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of 
God ;  the  Bible  is  the  guide-book  to  it ; 
the  church  is  the  weekly  parade  of 
those  who  belong  to  it.  "  The  king- 
dom of  God  is  within  you."  Every 
kingdom  has  its  exports,  its  products. 
What  comes  from  the  kingdom  of  God  ? 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness, 
peace,  and  joy." 

II.  Arithmetic. — Are  there  any 
arithmetic  words  in  the  text? 
"First,"  "added."  1.  You  see  at  once 
why  Christ  tells  us  to  seek  these  first 
— because  they  are  the  best  worth 
seeking.  Do  you  know  anything 
better  than  these  three  things,  any- 
thing happier,  purer,  nobler?  If  you 
do,  seek  them  first.  But  if  you  do 
not,  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God.  It 
is  not  worth  seeking  the  kingdom  of 
God  unless  you  seek  it  first.  Suppose 
you  take  the  helm  out  of  a  ship  and 
hang  it  over  the  bows,  and  send  that 
ship  to  sea,  will  it  ever  reach  the  other 
side  ?  Certainly  not.  It  will  drift 
about  anyhow.  Keep  religion  in  its 
place,  and  it  will  take  you  straight 
through  life,  and  straight  to  your 
Father  in  heaven  when  life  is  over. 
But  if  you  do  not  put  it  in  its  place 
you  may  just  as  well  have  nothing  to 
do  with  it.  There  was  a  boy  in 
Glasgow  apprenticed  to  a  gentleman 
who  made  telegraphs.  The  gentleman 
told  me  this  himself.  One  day  this 
boy  was  up  on  the  top  of  a  four-story 
house  with  a  number  of  men  fixing  up 
a  telegraph  wire.  The  work  was  all 
but  done.  It  was  getting  late,  and  the 
men  said  they  were  going  away  home, 
and  the  boy  was  to  nip  off  the  ends  of 
the  wire  himself.     Before  going  down 


they  told  him  to  be  sure  to  go  back  to 
the  workshop,  when  he  was  finished, 
with  his  master's  tools.  "  Do  not 
leave  any  of  them  lying  about,  what- 
ever you  do,"  said  the  foreman.  The 
boy  climbed  up  the  pole  and  began  to 
nip  off  the  ends  of  the  wire.  It  was  a 
very  cold  winter  night,  and  the  dusk 
was  gathering.  He  lost  his  hold  and 
fell  upon  the  slates,  slid  down,  and 
then  over  into  the  air,  down  almost  to 
the  ground.  A  clothes  rope  stretched 
across  the  "  green  "on  to  which  he  was 
just  about  to  fall,  caught  him  on  the 
chest  and  broke  his  fall ;  but  the 
shock  was  terrible,  and  he  lay  un- 
conscious amongst  some  clothes  upon 
the  green.  An  old  woman  came  out ; 
seeing  her  rope  broken  and  the  clothes 
all  soiled,  thought  the  boy  was  drunk, 
shook  him,  scolded  him,  and  went  for 
the  policeman.  And  the  boy  with  the 
shaking  came  back  to  consciousness, 
rubbed  his  eyes,  got  upon  his  feet. 
What  do  you  think  he  did  ?  He 
staggered,  half  blind,  away  up  the 
stair^.  He  climbed  the  ladder.  He 
got  on  to  the  roof  of  the  house.  He 
gathered  up  his  tools,  put  them  into 
his  basket,  took  them  down,  and  when 
he  got  to  the  ground  again  fainted 
dead  away.  Just  then  the  policeman 
came,  saw  there  was  something 
seriously  wrong,  and  carried  him  away 
to  the  infirmary,  where  he  recovered 
after  some  time,  and  is  now  doing 
well.  What  was  his  first  thought  at 
that  terrible  moment  ?  His  duty ! 
He  was  not  thinking  of  himself;  he 
was  thinking  about  his  master.  First 
the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  But  there 
is  another  arithmetic  word,  "  added.^^ 
Very  few  people  know  the  difference 
between  addition  and  subtraction 
when  they  begin  to  talk  about  religion. 
They  always  tell  boys  that  if  they  seek 
the  kingdom  of  God  everything  else  is 
to  be  subtracted  from  them.  I  do  not 
mean  by  added  that  if  you  become 
religious  you  are  all  going  to  become 
rich.     God  pays  in  better  coin. 

III.  Grammar. — What  is  the  verb  ? 
"  Seek."  What  mood  is  it  in  ?  The 
imperative  mood.     It  is  a  thing  that 

159 


CHAP.  VI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


must  be  done,    because   we   are  com-  which  applies  to  the  whole  of  man  and 

;nanded   to   do   it   by  our  Captain. —  to   the   whole  of   life;    which   creates 

Frof.  H.  Drummond.  virtues  where  before  there  were  none, 

which   touches   human  nature   at  its 

The  righteousness  of  the  kingdom. —  roots,   and  radically  purifies  and  en- 

Our      Lord     carries     His     principle  nobles  it. — Prof.  Marcus  Bods,  D.D. 
(ch.  V.  17,  18)  all  round  the  practical 

life   of   man,  and  points   out  how  in  The  chief  object  of 'pursuit. — I.  There 

every  part  of  conduct  He  heightens  is  an  order  and  relative  value  in  the 

obligation.     But  this  is  all  summed  up  objects  of  our  human  pursuit. — Very 

under  two  more  general  characteristics  much  of  the  confusion  and  mistake  of 

which  are  to  mark  all  righteousness  of  life  comes  from  the  inversion  of  the 

His  kingdom.  true  order.     We  are  placed  at  grave 

I.  The  first  of  these  characteristics  disadvantage  in  deciding  the  relative 
is  that  so  far  from  being  lax  it  was  to  merit  of  the  claims  made  on  our 
exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  most  thought  and  time  by  the  disturbing 
exemplary  of  their  contemporaries,  the  influence  of  sin.  The  pleasant  rules 
scribes  and  Pharisees.  Notice  the  us  rather  than  the  right.  But  in  our 
prominence  given  in  v.  20  to  the  word  text  our  Lord  says  :  There  is  one  great 
7r€pi(r(T€vory.  "Except  your  righteous-  end  and  purpose  in  your  being,  and 
ness  exceed  that  of  those  whom  you  that  you  must  put  the  very  first  of  all. 
regard  as  irreproachable,  ye  shall  in  There  may  be  intermediate  ends  and 
no  case,"  etc.  1.  The  externahty  of  objects  which  rightly  call  for  your  atten- 
Pharisaic  righteousness  is  in  Christ's  tion,  but  there  is  one  which  must  never 
kingdom  to  be  exchanged  for  inward-  be  forgotten.  You  were  made  for  God, 
n£ss  (v.  21,  etc.,  vi.  15,  etc.).  The  to  love  Him,  to  serve  Him,  to  praise 
Pharisee  may  have  the  right  outward  Him,  to  live  in  fellowship  with  Him, 
appearance  ;  but,  after  all,  this  may  to  do  and  to  bear  His  holy  will.  "  Seek 
be  only  the  fleece  laid  on,  not  produced  ye  first  His  kingdom  and  righteous- 
from  the  animal's  nature,  the  fruit  ness."  The  true  order  then  of  our 
artificially  adhering  where  it  never  human  pursuits  is :  first,  God ;  second, 
grew.  2.  The  righteousness  of  the  others  ;  third,  self  Or  to  express  it  in 
kingdom  of  God  is  to  exceed  that  of  another  form  :  first,  righteousness ; 
the  Pharisees  in  spontaneity.  What  second,  duty ;  third,  pleasure.  Confuse 
the  Pharisee  did  he  did  on  com-  or  misplace  these,  and  your  life  can 
pulsion.  Our  Lord  lays  His  finger  never  unfold  into  its  perfect  beauty, 
on  this  damning  blot  in  vi.  2,  etc..  The  "  kingdom  of  God "  is  this  :  The 
("  hypocrites ").  Delitzsch,  in  one  of  rule  of  God  over  every  part  of  our 
his  little  tracts,  draws  a  picture  of  a  being,  and  over  every  aspect  of  our 
Jerusalem  Pharisee  contriving  that  he  relationship.  When,  therefore,  our 
should  be  surprised  by  the  hour  of  Lord  urges  us  to  seek  first  the  king- 
prayer  in  the  open  street,  and  straight-  dom,  we  may  express  His  meaning  in 
way  girding  on  his  ponderous  phylac-  words  of  our  own  and  say :  "  Seek  to 
teries,  and  making  his  prostrations.  do  everything  thou  doest  as  unto  God. 
What  is  done  through  fear  or  com-  Nay,  more,  in  everything  strive  to  be 
pulsion,  or  with  a  selfish  end  in  view,  like  God.  Seek  His  *  righteousness ' 
rises  no  higher  than  its  source.  as  well  as  His  *  kingdom.'  " 

II.  The  righteousness  of  Christ's  II.  That  which  is  worthy  to  be  the 
kingdom  was  also  to  exceed  the  first  object  of  human  pursuit  ought  to 
righteousness  currently  required  be  always  in  its  first  place. — The 
among  men  (v.  46,  47).  Chris-  rudder  sways  to  either  side  by  the 
tians  are  not  to  be  content  with  movement  of  the  waves ;  it  needs  a 
rivalling  natural  and  everyday  virtues.  firm  hand  ever  upon  the  wheel,  to  hold 
There  must   be  a  principle  in  virtue  it  so  that  the  prow  shall  point  for  the 

160 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  vi. 


harbour.  Firm,  constantly  renewed 
resolve  is  needed  in  order  to  hold  our 
soul,  steadily  and  continuously  moving 
amid  the  winds  and  waves  and  cur- 
rents of  life,  towards  righteousness  and 
God.  The  psalmist  says,  "  I  have  set 
the  Lord  alway  before  me."  Can  we 
then  estimate  some  of  these  hindering 
influences  against  which  we  need  to  be 
on  our  guard,  and  against  which  we 
should  anxiously  and  persistently 
strive  ?  Three  things  claim  our  notice  : 
1.  The  intensity  of  business  may 
repress  the  endeavour  to  live  an 
earnest  life  for  God.  2.  The  fulness  of 
living  in  our  times  makes  it  hard  to 
live  our  life  really  setting  God  and 
righteousness  first.  3.  The  current  of 
public  opinion  is  often  against  setting 
the  kingdom  of  God  first.  He  who 
would  follow  the  Lord  fully  must  dare 
to  be  singiilar. — Weekly  Pulpit, 

Ver.  34.  Crossing  the  bridge  before 
you  come  to  it. — The  sin  of  borrowing 
trouble.  Such  a  habit  of  mind  and 
heart  is  wrong  : — 

I.  Because  it  puts  one  into  a  des- 
pondency that  ill  fits  him  for  duty. — 
Our  dispositions,  like  our  plants,  need 
sunshine. 

II.  Because  it  has  a  tendency  to 
make  us  overlook  present  blessing. 

III.  Because  the  present  is  suffi- 
ciently taxed  with  trial. — God  sees 
that  we  all  need  a  certain  amount  of 
trouble,  and  so  He  apportions  it  for  all 
the  days  and  years  of  our  Hfe. 

IV.  Because  it  unfits  us  for  mis- 
fortune when  it  actually  does  come. 

Y.  Because  it  is  unbelief. — T.  De  W. 
Talmage,  B.D. 

Anxiety  for  the  morrow  forbidden. — 
I.  The  precept  by  way  of  antithesis  or 
opposition  to  anxiety.  "  Take  there- 
fore no  thought,"  etc.  There  is  a 
certain  care  for  the  future  which  is 
proper  for  the  present  time.  The 
Israelites  gathered  a  double  portion  of 
manna  on  the  sixth  day,  to  serve  them 
both  for  that  day  and  the  following 
Sabbath.  This  precept  I  take  to  be 
only  a  prohibition  of  those  cares,  which 


are  more  proper  for  the  future  than 
for  the  present  time.  We  are  not  to 
think  it  unlawful,  if  God  gives  us 
opportunity,  to  lay  up  for  sickness 
or  old  age,  or  for  the  provision  of  wife 
and  children,  so  that  it  be  done  with- 
out anxiety  or  carking  care. 

II.  The  enforcement  of  this  precept. 
— The  reasons  are  two  :  1 .  That  the 
morrow,  or  future  time,  when  it  comes, 
will  be  more  proper  to  take  care  of  its 
own  matters  than  any  time  at  a  distance 
from  it.  (1)  It  is  not  certain  we  shall 
ever  see  this  future  time,  for  which  we 
are  so  anxious  and  solicitous,  and  in 
that  case  all  our  labour  is  like  to  be 
lost.  (2)  It  is  impossible,  supposing 
we  may  live  to  that  time,  to  foresee  so 
long  before  what  circumstances  we 
shall  then  be  in,  so  as  to  answer  them 
exactly  by  all  our  pre-anxiety.  (3)  It 
is  very  possible,  if  we  take  our  aim  in 
the  dark,  that  we  may  do  more  hurt 
than  good  by  the  methods  we  shall  lay 
down.  (4)  Our  circumstances  may 
chance  so  much  to  alter,  that  when  we 
come  to  that  futurity  itself,  and  to  see 
all  the  circumstances  of  it  in  a  true 
light,  we  shall  then  wish  that  we  had 
taken  other  measures,  and  shall  begin 
to  pull  down  what  with  all  our  anxiety 
we  had  been  building  up.  2.  That  the 
present  time  has  enough  to  do  with  its 
own  cares.  "  SuflS.cient  unto  the  day," 
etc. — Jas.  Blair,  M. A. 

Be  not  anxious  for  the  morrow. — No 
precept  of  divine  wisdom  has  found  so 
many  echoes  in  the  wisdom  of  the 
world.  Epicurean  self-indulgence, 
Stoic  apathy,  practical  common-sense, 
have  all  preached  the  same  lesson,  and 
bidden  men  to  cease  their  questionings 
about  the  future.  That  which  was 
new  in  our  Lord's  teaching  was  the 
ground  on  which  the  precept  rested. 
It  was  not  simply  the  carpe  diem, — 
"make  the  most  of  the  present" — of 
the  seeker  after  a  maximum  of  enjoy- 
ment (Hor.,  Od.,  I.  xi.  8)  nor  the 
acceptance  by  man's  will  of  an 
inevitable  destiny,  nor  the  vain 
struggle  to  rise  above  that  inevitable 
fate.      Men    were    to    look    forward 

M  161 


CHAP.  vii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


to    the    future   calmly,    to   avoid   the  helpful  is  the  sunset  limit.     If  we  obey 

temper  with  childlike  simplicity  our  Saviour's 

"  Over  exquisite  command  :  "  Take  no  [anxious]  thought 

To  cast  the  fashion  of  uncertain  evils,"  f^p  the  morrow,"    all    the   intolerable 

because  they  had  a  Father  in  heaven  part  of  the  burden  is  lifted  from  us. 

who  cared  for  each  one  of  them  with  a  We  can  bear  whatever   comes    to  us 

personal    and    individualising   love. —  between   the   sun's   rise    and   set,    for 

E.  II.  Flumptre^  D.D.  alongside  of  this  command  about  tak- 
ing no  thought  beyond  the  day  stands 

The  sunset  limit. — Of  all  the  blessed  a  starry  promise — ^is  there  not  always 

guards  placed  by  Holy  Scripture  along  a  promise  waiting  upon  a  command  1 — 

the  Christian's  way  to  keep  him  from  that  "  as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength 

presumption,    on    the    one    hand,    or  be." — Christian  World  Pulpit. 
despair,  on  the  other,  the  most  divinely 


CHAPTER  VII. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  3.  Mote. — The  Greek  noun  so  translated  means  a  stalk,  or  twig.  The  illustration 
seems  to  have  been  a  familiar  one  among  the  Jews,  and  a  proverb  all  but  verbally  identical  is 
found  as  a  saying  of  Kabbi  Tarphon  {Plumptre).  Seam. — A  graphic  and  almost  droll  repre- 
sentation of  a  comparatively  great  fault.     The  word  means  a  log,  joist,  or  rafter  (Monson). 

Ver.  6.  Give  not,  etc. — The  connection  between  this  verse  and  the  preceding  section  is  not 
quite  obvious.  It  seems  to  be  this — although  evil  and  censorious  judgment  is  to  be  avoided, 
discrimination  is  needful.  The  Christian  must  be  judicious,  not  judicial  (Carr).  Dogs. — 
Among  the  Jews  dogs  were  unclean,  and,  as  a  rule,  fierce  and  imdomesticated.  They  are  the 
self-appointed  scavengers  of  the  streets  ;  and  while  engaged  in  their  scavenging  operations, 
or  while  lying  basking  in  the  sun,  touch-me-not  is  the  outstanding  feature  of  their  character 
(Morisofi).  Swine. — The  reference  is  to  wild  swine ;  for  the  animal  was  undomesticated 
among  the  Jews  (ibid.). 

Ver.  12.  Therefore.— The  practical  result  of  what  has  been  said  both  in  regard  to  judgment 
and  to  prayer  is  mutual  charity.  The  thought  of  the  Divine  judgment  teaches  forbearance  ; 
the  thought  of  the  Divine  goodness  teaches  kindness  (Carr). 

Ver.  13.  Destruction. — The  word  implies,  not  annihilation,  but  waste  (xxvi.  8 ; 
Mark  xiv.  4),  perdition,  i.e.  the  loss  of  all  that  makes  existence  precious,  I  question  whether 
a  single  passage  can  be  adduced  in  which  it  means,  in  relation  to  material  tilings,  more  than 
the  breaking  up  of  their  outward  form  and  beauty,  or,  in  spiritual  things,  more  than  what 
may  be  described  as  t'le  wretchedness  of  a  wasted  life  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  14.  Narrow  is  the  way. — Literally,  pressed  or  hemmed  in  between  walls  or  rocks,  like 
the  pathway  in  a  mountain  gorge  (ibid.). 

Ver.  15.  Beware  of  false  prophets. — The  sequence  again  is  below  the  surface.  How  was  the 
narrow  way  to  be  found  ?  Who  would  act  as  guide  ?  Many  would  offer  their  help  who 
would  simply  lead  men  to  the  destruction  which  they  sought  to  escape  (ibid.). 

Ver.  16.  Thorns.— Any  kind  of  prickly  plant  (Brown).  Thistles.— Rather  cd^^^r^^,  a  prickly 
water-plant  {(Jarr). 

Ver.  22.  In  that  day. — The  day  of  judgment.  This  is  a  forecast  far  into  the  distant  future, 
when  it  would  be  worth  while  to  assume  Christianity,  when  hypocrisy  would  take  the  form  of 
pretending  to  be  a  f  )llower  of  the  now  despised  Jesus  (ibid.). 

Ver.  27.  Great  was  the  fall  of  it. — How  lively  must  this  imagery  have  been  to  an  audience 
accustomed  to  the  fierceness  of  an  Eastern  tempest,  and  the  suddenness  and  completeness 
with  which  it  sweeps  everything  unsteady  before  it  !  (Brown).  We  see,  from  the  present 
example,  that  it  is  not  nec(^ssary  for  all  sermons  to  end  in  a  consolatory  strain  (Bengel). 

Ver.  2H,  Doctrine.  —  Teaching  (R.V.).      Not  only  tlie  matter,  but  the  manner. 

Ver.  2t).  Not  as  the  scrihes.— As  a  rule  the  scribe  hardly  ever  gave  his  exposition  without 
at  least  beginning  by  a  quotation  from  what  liad  been  said  by  Hillel  or  by  Shammai,  by 

]62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,    chap.  vti. 


Rabbi  Joseph  or  Rabbi  Meir,  depending  almost  or  altogether  upon  what  had  thus  been  ruled 
before,  as  much  as  an  English  lawyer  depends  on  his  precedents.  In  contrast  with  this  usual 
custom,  our  Lord  fills  the  people  with  amazement  by  speaking  to  them  as  One  who  has  a 
direct  message  from  God  (^Plum^ptre). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

True  brotherhood. — That  duty  towards  our  neighbour  which  is  dealt  with 
as  far  back  as  v.  38-48,  is  again  discussed  here  ;  but  from  a  somewhat 
different  side.  There  we  had  the  general  principle,  that  all  men  should  be  loved. 
Here  we  have  a  word  of  caution  as  to  the  exercise  of  that  love.  Not  everything 
that  seems  desirable  is  to  be  attempted  in  that  line.  Not  every  way  of  attempting 
it  is  pleasing  to  God. 

I.  Not  everything  to  be  done. — This  is  true,  on  the  one  hand,  on  the  score  of 
faithfulness  and  plain  speaking.  As  a  general  rule  this  is  binding  on  us  in 
regard  to  our  neighbour.  Even  the  old  law  recognised  this  (Lev.  xix.  17).  If 
we  can  in  any  way  help  it,  it  is  not  being  neighbourly  to  let  our  brother  ruin 
himself.  But  there  are  cases  in  which  to  attempt  to  prevent  this  would  not  be 
profitable  to  him ;  and  in  which,  therefore,  such  an  attempt  is  not  incumbent  on 
us.  One  such  case  is  where  our  doing  so  would  have  the  appearance  of  sitting  in 
"judgment"  upon  him  (ver.  1).  That  would  have  the  very  effect  we  desire  to 
avoid.  Instead  of  leading  him  to  see  Lis  own  sin  and  consequent  danger,  it 
would  rather  set  him  on  looking  for  ours.  He  would  "judge"  us,  in  fact  (ver.  1,  2), 
instead  of  judging  himself;  and  would  rather,  so,  be  encouraged  by  us,  than 
discouraged,  in  sin.  Not  to  say,  also,  that  this  very  anxiety  of  ours  to  be 
"  judging  "  him  would  show  our  incapacity  for  the  task.     To  be  so  very  keen 

'about  our  brother's  fault  is  to  be  ignorant  of  our  own.  To  make  so  much  of  his 
"  mote"  is  to  make  too  little — at  least  an  equal  sin — of  our  "beam"  (ver.  3). 
Unless,  therefore,  you  would  make  a  double  muddle  of  all  in  this  matter,  begin 
with  thyself  (vers.  4,  5).  Rectifying  thyself  is  sometimes  the  only  way — it  is  always 
the  best  way — of  effectually  rectifying  thy  neighbour.  The  same  caution  applies, 
next,  in  the  way  of  kindness  and  love.  Here  also  the  general  rule  is  abundantly 
plain.  Why  is  that  which  is  "holy"  entrusted  to  us  ?  That  we  may  make  it 
known  in  our  turn  (1  Pet.  iv.  10  ;  Matt  v.  16,  x.  8).  Why  are  the  precious 
"  pearls  "  of  truth  placed  in  our  hand  1  That  we  may  give  them — that  we 
may  "  fling  "  (?)  them — to  others  in  turn.  But  there  are  marked  exceptions,  as 
there  were  before,  to  this  general  rule.  There  are  those  who,  like  "  dogs,"  do  what 
you  will,  always  "return"  to  their  filth  (2  Pet.  ii.  22).  It  is  only  to  profane 
what  is  "  holy  "  to  offer  it  here.  There  are  others,  like  swine,  who  show  by  their 
actions,  by  their  wallowing  in  the  mire,  that  they  cannot  appreciate  what  is 
precious.  No  abundance  of  it,  therefore,  can  be  otherwise  than  offensive  to  them. 
Thus  to  waste  our  love,  therefore — thus  to  do  harm  by  it — is  not  incumbent  on 
us.     Rather,  in  fact,  it  is  forbidden  to  us  by  the  very  nature  of  love. 

II.  Not  every  way  to  be  followed. — Not  every  way,  on  the  one  hand,  when  we 
do  feel  that  we  ought  to  caution  and  wa/rn.  This  on  account  of  our  relation  to 
God.  Do  we  not  know,  on  our  part,  what  God  is  to  us  1  Always  ready  to  listen 
and  grant  ?  (vers.  7,  8).  More  ready  by  far  to  do  so,  in  His  perfection,  than  we  are, 
in  our  imperfection,  even  to  those  we  love  the  best  ?  (vers.  9-11).  Let  us  seek,  there- 
fore, on  our  part,  so  to  be  in  our  turn.  Not  warning  men,  like  Elijah  once,  in 
impatience,  as  though  altogether  beyond  hope  (1  Kings  xix.  10).  Nor  yet  like 
Jonah  (iv.  1,  etc.),  in  anisjer,  as  though  those  he  preached  to  were,  in  any  case, 
too  bad  to  be  spared.  For  the  worst  we  deal  with  are,  after  all,  only  "  dogs  " 
and  "  swine "  in  a  figure.  In  God's  sight  they  are  men  like  ourselves 
(cf.  Acts  xiv.  15  ;  James  v.  17).  God,  in  past  days,  has  often  enlightened  and  con- 
verted men  as  brutal  and  as  stubborn  as  any  before  us.     Let  Him,  therefore,  in 

163 


CHAP.  VII.     EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


this  matter,  be  both  our  example  and  motive.  In  reasoning  with  others,  let  us 
be  as  full  of  hope  and  as  full  of  love  as  Himself.  That  is  to  be  like  Him— that 
is  to  please  Him  as  well.  Also,  next,  when  we  refrain  from  speaking,  let  it  be 
with  discrimination  and  sympathy.  Our  relation  to  men  shows  this  to  be  the 
only  right  way  of  so  doing.  Before  we  do  thus  refrain,  let  us  be  quite  sure  that 
we  have  sufficient  ground  for  so  doing.  And,  to  be  sure  of  this,  let  us  try  to  put 
ourselves  in  our  brother  man's  case.  This  is  the  old  rule  about  doing  our  duty 
towards  our  neighbour  (Matt.  xxii.  39,  40).  This  is  Christ's  rule  as  well  (ver.  22). 
No  better  rule  can  be  found.  No  juster  one.  It  carries  its  equity  on  its  face. 
No  handier  one.  It  is  always  within  reach.  No  simpler  one.  Anyone  can 
apply  it.  Let  it  be  applied  then  in  this  case  as  well  as  in  others.  Never  refrain 
from  speaking  where  such  refraining — supposing  you  and  your  brother  to  have 
exchanged  places — would  seem  a  hardship  to  you.  Stand  where  he  stands,  in 
short,  and  then  do  as  you  would  have  him  do  in  that  case. 
Here,  again,  we  see  as  before  : — 

1.  How  admirable  is  the  wisdom  of  Christ. — Who  else  ever  thought  of  such 
cautions  as  these  1  In  what  other  teaching  than  His  could  the  necessity  for  them 
arise?  And  who  else  could  have  seen  such  protection  against  the  dangers 
involved  in  that  simple  rule  which  had  been  taught  and  studied  for  so  many 
centuries  past  ? 

2.  How  admirable  is  the  mercy  of  God. — Even  this  searching  wisdom  cannot  see 
any  blemish  in  it.  If  only  man  were  to  man  what  God  is  to  man,  much  of  the 
sin  of  the  world  would  be  gone.  Also  some  of  the  worst  of  its  griefs.  So  Christ 
teaches  us  here. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  1-6.  Cautions  against  rash  judg- 
ments. — I.  The  caution  given. — "Judge 
not."  The  whole  meaning  of  the  passage 
depends  on  the  meaning  of  the  first 
word — "Judge"  (KpLvere),  which  has 
various  renderings.  Sometimes  it 
means,  (1)  to  condemn  (John  iii.  17); 
(2)  to  pronounce  guilty  (Rom.  ii.  1-3  ; 
xiv.  22) ;  (3)  to  proceed  against,  accuse, 
arraign  (John  xii.  48 ;  Acts  xxiii.  6, 
xxiv.  21) ;  (4)  to  pass  sentence  of  con- 
demnation (John  vii.  51);  (5)  but 
there  is  another  meaning  which  doubt- 
less is  the  meaning  in  the  text — 
to  express  an  unfavourable  opinion  of 
person  or  persons — censoriousness.  Our 
Saviour  does  not  forbid  a  righteous  judg- 
ment. The  judicial  element  is  in  our  very 
nature  and  we  cannot  avoid  it.  Judges, 
preachers,  teachers,  parents,  etc.,  must 
condemn  the  wrong  and  publicly  cen- 
sure it.  But  the  great  Teacher  cautions 
earnestly  against  judging  with  a 
censorious  or  unkindly  spirit — the 
spirit  of  animosity  and  illiberality  and 
unchnri^nbleness. 

164 


II.  The  reasons  adduced. 

1.  It  provokes  retaliation. — That  is, 
all  such  rash  judgments  will  meet  with 
due  retribution  (ver.  2).  We  can  never 
escape  this  law  of  reciprocity.  A  man 
receives  back  what  he  gives.  Ham  an 
was  hanged  on  his  own  gallows. 
Ishmael's  hands  were  against  every- 
body's, and  every  man's  hand  against 
him.  "  He  that  diggeth  a  pit  shall 
fall  into  it."  Every  act  has  its  con- 
sequences. This  retributive  principle 
is:  (1)  In  kind.  Kindness  begets  kind- 
ness ;  but  censoriousness  begets  cen- 
soriousness. (2)  In  quantity.  Nature 
gives  back  in  proportion  as  we  give; 
society  gives   back   as  we   give  to  it. 

2.  It  condemns  ourselves  (ver.  3). 
— Is  not  the  disposition  to  be  severe  and 
censorious  on  others  indicative  of 
greater  evil  in  ourselves  ?  What  a 
severe  judgment  David  pronounced 
upon  the  man  described  by  Nathan  ! 
But  who  was  the  man  %  "  Thou  art 
the  man."  The  Pharisee's  judgment 
on  the  publican  was  very  severe ;  but 


HOMILEtiC  COMMENTARY:   Sf.  MATTltEW'.    chap.  vif. 


who  was  he  that  went  his  way  home 
justified  ? 

III.  The  duty  enjoined. — "  Give 
not  that  which  is  holy,"  etc.  Though 
we  are  cautioned  against  rash  and 
censorious  judgment,  yet  we  are  urged 
in  the  passage  to  discriminate  between 
what  is  good  and  evil.  The  lesson  is 
one  of  discretion  in  dealing  with  certain 
classes  of  people — as  to  admission  to 
the  sacred  privileges  and  functions  of 
the  church,  and  as  to  the  reality  of 
their  Christian  profession  and  the 
sincerity  of  their  spiritual  experience. 
Notice  :  ■ — 

1.  The  prudence  required  in  church 
government. 

2.  The  proper  reserve  or  safeguard  in 
the  kingdom  of  God. — Do  not  admit 
the  "  dogs "  and  "  swine "  to  your 
spiritual  communion,  for  you  will  only 
infuriate  them.  The  dogs  will  bark 
and  snarl  at  everything  holy  and 
sacred,  and  the  "  swine "  will  only 
indulge  in  sensuality.  "  Dogs  "  and 
"  swine  "  admitted  into  the  church  do 
more  harm  by  far  than  out-and-out 
infidels. — J.  Harries. 

A  twofold  warning.  —  I.  Against 
making  too  much  of  the  evil  we  see,  or 
think  we  see,  in  others  (vers.  1-5). 

II.  Against  making  too  little  of 
it  (ver.  6).—/.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

Ver.  1.  Rash  judging  condemned. — 
I.  Consider  this  prohibition  in  its 
relation  to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees. 

— 1.  They  had  a  great  deal  of  pride 
and  self-conceit,  as  if  it  belonged  to 
them  to  be  dictators  to  all  others 
(Lukexviii.  11).  2.  They  had  in  their 
minds  a  great  contempt  of,  and  a  great 
un charitableness  towards,  all  other 
persons  that  were  not  of  their  own  sect 
and  party  (Luke  xviii.  9).  3.  Agreeably 
to  this  inward  disposition  of  their  minds, 
they  were  very  censorious  of  others ; 
making  faults  where  there  were  none, 
and  aggravating  them  where  they  were. 
4.  When  they  had  made  this  rash 
judgment  in  their  own  minds,  they  did 
not  content  themselves  to  contemplate  it 
there,  but  took  all  opportunities  to  vent 


it  in  their  words  and  actions ;  carrying 
themselves  haughtily  and  superciUously 
to  others  (Isa.  Ixv.  5).  5.  In  all 
companies  they  were  the  dictators, 
the  reprovers,  and  monitors.  It  was  a 
crime  for  a  man  to  see  with  his  own 
eyes  and  not  with  theirs.  6.  In 
admonishing  and  reproving  their  neigh- 
bour, their  aim  was  not  so  much  his 
edification  and  amendment  of  life,  as 
the  gaining  him  over  to  their  party ; 
or  if  they  could  not  compass  that,  the 
running  him  down,  and  exposing  him. 
II.  The  true  meaning  of  the  pro- 
hibition.— 1.  Note  some  lawful  practices 
which  might  seem  to  fall  under  this 
prohibition.  (1)  We  are  not  to  under- 
stand that  the  office  of  judges  or 
magistrates  was  intended  to  be  pro- 
hibited by  these  words.  Our  Saviour 
was  now  preaching  to  a  multitude  of 
private  persons,  showing  them  their 
duty.  (2)  Nor  is  the  authority  of  any 
other  superiors  over  their  inferiors 
designed  to  be  taken  away  or  encroached 
upon.  Parents  may,  and  ought  to, 
administer  admonition  to  their  children; 
masters  and  mistresses,  and  overseers, 
may,  by  authority,  judge  of  their 
servants,  etc.  (3)  Nor  is  it  designed 
that  any  man  should  not  use  a  judg- 
ment of  discretion  as  far  as  relates  to 
the  conduct  of  himself  and  his  affairs 
(1  John  iv.  1  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  6).  (4)  Far 
less  are  they  guilty  of  the  breach  of 
this  rule,  who,  in  the  execution  of  their 
office,  do  in  ever  so  severe  terms,  exclaim 
against  vice  in  general  (2  Tim.  iv.  1  ; 
Titus  ii.  15).  (5)  Nor  are  they  guilty 
of  the  breach  of  this  rule,  who,  with  a 
spirit  of  meekness,  and  from  a  principle 
of  charity,  and  with  a  design  to  reform, 
and  not  to  expose,  perform  the  duty  of 
admonishing  and  rebuking  the  offending 
brother  (Lev.  xix.  17;  Luke  xvii.  3). 
2.  The  evil  forbidden  is  censoriousness, 
i.e.  a  love  to  find  fault ;  and  this  has 
commonly  some  bitter  root  of  vice 
from  which  it  proceeds  ;  such  as  pride 
and  vanity,  malice  and  envy,  resent- 
ment and  revenge,  cruelty,  or  delight- 
ing in  mischief,  though  often  it  flows 
from  mere  custom  and  thoughtlessness. 
(1)  In  this  censorious  spirit  there  is 

165 


CHAP.  VII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


always  a  secret  joy  and  gladness  to  find 
fault ;  whereas  in  a  good  man  there 
is  always  the  quite  contrary  temper. 
(2)  The  censorious  man  is  forward  to 
judge  without  any  obligation  from  his 
office  ;  perhaps  without  any  clearness 
of  evidences,  upon  some  idle  stories,  or 
bare  suspicions,  surmises,  and  sugges- 
tions ;  whereas  a  charitable  man  is 
very  unwillingly  drawn  into  any  such 
employ.  (3)  He  has  a  strong  bias  and 
inclination  to  find  his  neighbour  guilty  ; 
accepts  of  very  slen<ier  proof  of  any- 
thing that  tends  to  his  defamation, 
sometimes  makes  up  what  is  wanting 
in  fact,  with  his  own  malicious  sugges- 
tions and  fruitful  invention.  (4)  He 
usurps  the  ascendant  in  all  companies. 

(5)  He  allows  himself  an  uncharitable 
sharpness  in  censuring  other  men's 
faults ;  never  reflecting  on  the  frailty 
of  human  nature  in  general,  nor  his 
own  errors  and  follies   in   particular. 

(6)  He  is  not  contented  to  judge  and 
condemn  the  evil  actions  of  his  neigh- 
bour ;  but  commonly  adds  some  aggra- 
vating remarks  and  aggravations  of  his 
own,  with  an  intent  to  show  with  what 
an  evil  spirit  and  intention  he  did  them. 
He  enters  upon  God's  prerogative,  and 
judges  of  his  neighbour's  heart  and 
thoughts.  (7)  Another  character  of 
this  judging,  censorious  temper  is  that 
the  person  in  whom  it  resides  never 
keeps  it  to  himself  ;  he  is  impatient  till 
he  sets  it  abroad.  (8)  He  endeavours 
to  fix  the  crime  of  every  single  person 
upon  his  whole  party,  and  to  load  any 
opinion  which  he  has  a  mind  to  blacken 
with  all  the  evil  consequences  that  can 
be  drawn  from  the  errors  and  follies 
of  any  of  those  that  maintain  it. 
(9)  This  spirit  of  rash  and  censo- 
rious judgment  is  near  akin  to  schism  in 
the  church,  sedition  in  the  state,  and 
a  downright  spirit  of  persecution. 
— Jas.  Blair,  M.A. 

On  judging. — If  there  be  one  thing 
more  injurious  to  the  harmonies  and 
the  best  charm  of  life  than  another  it 
is  the  habit  of  judging.  The  world  is 
full  of  unjust  judgments.  Where  is 
the  mischief  ?     What  matter  ? 

166 


I.  If  we  have  any  attachment  to 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  it  ought  to 
matter  on  this  ground — that  without 
any  sufficient  cause  we  think  less 
kindly  of  a  fellow-mortal. — It  must 
be  allowed,  of  course,  that  of  many 
we  are  bound  to  think  severely ; 
though  that  in  itself  is  a  calamity, 
and  by  every  follower  of  Jesus  should 
be  felt  to  be  such.  But  in  this  case 
there  is  no  certain  or  sufficient  need. 
"Where's  the  harm?"  There's  the 
harm.  Two  children  of  the  common 
Father,  two  travellers  on  the  common 
road,  two  human  beings,  the  pathos  of 
whose  life  should  of  itself  create  a 
common  regard,  are  unbrothered  by  an 
unnecessary  and  an  unjust  judgment. 
This  is  a  habit  quickly  formed.  You 
will  find  men,  comparatively  young, 
who  can  hardly  indulge  in  any  lan- 
guage but  that  of  depreciation. 

II.  A  soul  of  this  species  looks 
uncommonly  lost. — To  see  meanness 
everywhere ;  to  suspect  and  asperse 
everything;  to  detract  from  and  to 
depreciate;  to  have  no  great  en- 
thusiasms, no  great  reverences,  no 
admiration,  no  spontaneous  and  whole- 
hearted approval — the  soul  of  a  weasel 
is  a  better  and  larger  thing  than 
that. 

III.  Even  if  we  were  commanded 
to  judge,  we  cannot  judge. — What, 
beyond  broadest  facts,  do  I  know  of 
your  life,  or  you  of  mine  ? 

IV.  There  is  something  so  private, 
so  sacredly  private,  about  every  life, 
that  this  kind  of  thing  should  be  felt 
as  both  irreverent  and  impertinent. — I 
am  no  more  at  liberty  to  pass  gra- 
tuitous judgments  upon  another,  I  have 
no  more  personal  right  to  enter  those 
chambers,  than  I  have  to  enter  another 
man's  house. 

V.  Our  hands  are  not  clean  enough 
for  this  kind  of  work. — There  is  a  fine 
touch  of  humour  in  the  Saviour's 
saying  here.  A  fellow  with  a  joist — 
a  huge  rafter — in  his  eye,  so  anxious — 
so  benevolently  anxious — to  extract  a 
tiny  particle  of  floating  dust  from  the 
eye  of  another  !  It  is  ridiculous.  It 
is  sad  too. — Jas.  Thew. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


Unseen  Virtues. — To  give  an  instance 
wbich  the  preaciier  knows  to  be  an 
actual  fact :  A  merchant  of  his  ac- 
quaintance was  thought  to  be  very 
selfish  with  his  money.  He  was  known 
to  be  very  rich,  and  lived  something 
like  a  rich  man ;  yet  when  asked  for 
subscriptions  he  gave  always  a  small 
sum — he  gave  <£5  when  his  neighbours 
thought  he  ought  to  give  ^20.  He 
was,  therefore,  very  selfish  and  miserly, 
and  bore  a  nickname  in  consequence. 
Everybody  was  looking  at  this  mote 
which  seemed  like  a  beam.  This  went 
on  for  years,  and  he  was  generally 
disliked.  One  of  his  neighbours,  who 
respected  him  on  all  other  points,  was 
determined  to  bottom  the  matter.  He 
learned  with  difficulty,  and  after  care- 
ful inquiry,  that  during  all  these  years 
this  much-abused  man  was  supporting 
handsomely  a  large  family  of  poor 
relatives.  He  educated  them  well,  and 
put  them  out  in  life  with  no  niggard 
hand.  They  lived  in  another  place ; 
no  one,  not  even  his  intimate  friends, 
knew ;  he  never  spoke  of  it ;  but  he 
did  it  for  years.  The  same  inquirer 
found,  too,  that  if  a  real  case  of 
benevolence  were  put  before  this  rich 
man,  and  he  v/ere  told  reasonably 
what  he  ought  to  give,  the  rich  man 
often  gave  it.  So  here  was  a  man 
whom  all  men  were  abusing,  because 
they  did  not  know  enough  about  him. 
—R.  W.  Hiley,  D.D. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Charity  in  thought  and 
speech. — The  meaning  of  our  Lord 
becomes  clear  enough  when  we  turn  to 
St.  Luke's  words,  and  find  that  our 
Lord  there  adds,  as  if  to  guard  against 
misapprehension,  "  Condemn  not,  and 
ye  shall  not  be  condemned."  We  can- 
not help  criticising  the  conduct  of 
others,  but  we  can  guard  against  the 
cruel,  censorious  temper  which  pro- 
nounces ofF-hand  upon  the  misdoings 
of  a  neighbour.  What  are  the  reasons 
urged  in  the  gospel  for  the  suppression 
of  this  temper  ? 

I.  There  is  the  motive  given  us  in 
the  text :  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not 
judged."     "  Condemn  not,  that  ye  be 


not  condemned."  It  is  a  thought, 
which  ought  to  give  us  pause  as  we 
scatter  our  reckless  verdicts  on  the 
doings  of  our  fellow-men,  that  not  only 
will  God  bring  all  that  we  ourselves  do 
into  judgment,  but  He  makes  us  the 
authors  of  the  very  standard  by  which 
He  is  trying  us  now  and  will  try  us 
hereafter. 

II.  The  second  reason  is  to  be  found 
in  those  words  which  appear  to  have 
been  so  often  on  the  lips  of  our  Lord, 
and  to  have  been,  indeed,  a  constant  re- 
frain of  His  teaching,  "  many  that  are 
first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last  shall  be 
first." — It  has  been  well  said  of  those 
words  that  they  must  be  meant  to 
infuse  a  wholesome  element  of  scepti- 
cism or  diffidence  into  our  present  esti- 
mates of  human  character  and  conduct. 
St.  Paul  says  :  "  Judge  nothing  before 
the  time."  That  does  not  mean  that 
we  are  to  suspend  our  critical  faculty, 
to  form  no  opinions  about  anything  or 
anybody  j  but  he  warns  us  that  all  our 
judgments  are  provisional  as  well  as 
fallible,  and  they  proceed  upon  imper- 
fect data.  They  are  arrived  at  by 
observers  blinded  more  or  less  by 
partiality  or  prejudice.  The  great 
tribunal  before  which  we  must  all 
stand  may  reverse  them 

III.  I  pass  to  a  third  reason  for 
merciful  treatment  of  our  neighbours. 
It  is  that  which  follows  the  text  as  a 
searching  argumentum  ad  hominem, 
applicable  to  us  all. — "  Why  beholdest 
thou  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's 
eye,"  &c.  It  is  very  certain  that 
growth  in  self-knowledge  is  the  best  of 
all  cures  for  self-confidence,  and  it  is 
only  the  self-confident,  the  self-satis- 
fied, who  care  to  judge  their  neighbours 
most  harshly.  That  man  is  most  mer- 
ciful to  his  neighbour  who  is  least 
merciful  to  himself. 

IV.  According  to  St.  Luke,  our 
Lord  prefaced  His  warning  against 
censorious  judgments  by  the  precept : 
"  Be  ye,  therefore,  merciful,  as  your 
Father  also  is  merciful."  This  is,  after 
all,  the  great  motive  for  forbearance, 
as  this  is  also  its  great  reward — like- 
ness to  God. — Canon  Duckworth. 

167 


CHAP.  Vii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver;  2.  The  give  and  take  of  life. — 
Christ  says,  in  effect,  that  what  you 
take  to  hfe  determines  what  you  get 
from  it.  What  you  see  in  the  universe 
will  be  the  reflection  of  your  own 
nature.     Apply  the  text : — 

I.  To  the  young  while  under  the 
discipline  and  processes  of  their  edu- 
cation.— Nay,  to  intellectual  culture 
generally,  whether  in  young  or  old. 
Bring  evil  habits,  sloth,  negligence, 
&c.,  instead  of  diligence,  patience,  the 
desire  to  know  the  truth  and  to  accom- 
plish your  work,  and  what  will  be  the 
result?  You  brought  not  the  key  of 
industry.  Consequently  the  door  will 
not  open,  and  you  carry  away  no  spoil. 

II.  To  the  national  and  social  life 
of  the  people.— e.^.  Let  the  well-to-do 
and  the  educated  keep  all  their  good 
things  to  themselves,  measuring  out  to 
the  poor  only  neglect  and  insolence. 
What  will  be  the  result  ?  Illustration, 
French  Revolution. 

III.  To  our  relations  with  the 
kingdom  of  God. — Whether  the 
believer  is  going  to  have  a  life  full 
of  spiritual  triumph  and  satisfaction, 
or  one  only  meagre  and  barren,  de- 
pends on  the  measure  you  mete  out 
towards  God  and  the  spiritual  world. 
— /.  Brierley^  B.A. 

The  cynical  critic. — If  he  chooses  to 
fight  with  a  tomahawk,  he  will  be 
scalped  some  day,  and  the  bystanders 
will  not  lament  profusely.  —  A. 
Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  3-5.  The  chip  and  the  beam. — 
The  case  has  only  to  be  stated  in  order 
to  carry  the  inference  that  he  who  has 
the  large  obstruction  in  his  eye  should 
first  get  rid  of  it,  so  that  he  may  be  fit 
to  operate  on  his  brother's  eye.  In 
other  words,  a  man  should  have  his 
own  errors  and  faults  corrected  in 
order  that  he  may  be  able,  first,  to  see 
clearly,  and  then,  to  correct  firmly  and 
wisely,  the  errors  and  faults  of  others. 

I.  It  is  a  delicate  operation  to 
correct  the  faults  of  other  men. — It 
may  be  likened  to  the  feat  of  taking  a 
chip   of    wood,   a   hair,   or  an  insect's 

168 


wing  out  of  an  inflamed  eye.  A 
clumsy  operator  may  easily  make 
things  worse.  So  may  a  clumsy  or 
unkind  censor  offend  his  brother,  and 
do  no  good,  but  rather  harm.  All  the 
greater  is  the  delicacy  if  one  under- 
takes the  task  as  a  volunteer.  Some- 
thing might  be  said  of  the  risk  that 
attends  all  human  judgment  of  the 
conduct  of  other  men.  It  is  not  often 
that  one  knows  accurately  and  com- 
pletely the  outward  facts,  and  one 
never  quite  knows  the  temptation 
resisted  or  yielded  to,  and  the  inward 
motive,  or  the  commanding  and  deter- 
mining one  among  a  group  of  motives, 
which  influenced  the  action  under 
review. 

II.  Self-ignorance  and  self-conceit 
incapacitate  one  for  performing  this 
operation. — The  case  indicated  by  our 
Lord  is  that  of  one  who  is  insensible  of 
his  own  faultiness,  yet  presumes  to 
deal  with  the  faultiness  of  others  ;  and 
He  addresses  such  a  person  by  the 
strong  term  of  disapproval,  "hypo- 
crite," which  He  often  applied  to  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees.  Literally,  it 
would  be  impossible  for  one  who  had 
even  a  small  chip  of  wood  in  his  eye  to 
be  unaware  of  it.  The  delicacy  of  the 
organ  would  produce  acute  annoyance. 
But,  alas  !  one  may  so  destroy  the 
delicacy  of  conscience  as  to  go  about 
with  a  great  fault  obvious  to  every 
one,  and  yet  forget  it,  and  suppose 
that  no  one  else  can  see  it.  It  is  a 
false  zeal  which  flies  at  extraneous 
evil  and  spares  that  which  is  in 
our  own  homes,  our  own  hearts  and 
lives. 

III.  An  honest  Christian  reserves 
his  strictest  judgment  for  himself. 
— Self-love  will  suggest  excuses,  and 
even  tempt  a  man  to  ignore  his  own 
faults,  or,  at  all  events,  to  change 
their  names ;  but  a  supreme  love  of 
righteousness,  such  as  ought  to  possess 
the  Christian  mind,  keeps  conscience 
at  work,  and  enjoins  self-judgment 
and  self -correction.  *'  Have  fervent 
charity  among  yourselves,  for  charity 
covereth  a  multitude  of  sins."  Such 
was  the  rule  for  the  early  Christians, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  viL 


and  it  is  as  much  in  force  as  ever. —  Ver.  6.  The  dogs  and  the  swine. — It 

D.  Eraser,  D.D,  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  be  morally  and 

spiritually  useful  to  other  men.  Chris- 
Ver.  3.  The  mote  and  the  beam.— We  ^^^^^  usefulness  requires  careful  dis- 
look  at  our  neighbour's  errors  with  a  crimination  of  what  is  fitting  or 
microscope,  and  at  our  own  through  unfitting,  and  a  power  of  reserve  as 
the  wrong  end  of  a  telescope.  We  ^^.^n  ^^g  ^  faculty  of  speech.  Our 
have  two  sets  of  weights  and  mea-  g^viour  did  not  call  men  by  oppro- 
suies  ;  one  for  home  use  and  the  other  ^^^^^^^  names.  It  would,  indeed,  be  a 
for  foreign.  Every  vice  has  two  names,  ^^^^^i  mode  of  speaking  to  stigmatise 
and  we  call  it  by  the  flattering  and  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  and  swine,  as  vile  and 
minimising  one  when  we  commit  it,  g^^^pj^j  animals,  but  it  is  quite  another 
and  by  the  ugly  one  when  our  neigh-  ^^iing  to  introduce  such  creatures  in 
hour  does  it.  Everybody  can  see  the  ^^j^^  ^o  give  point  to  an  illustration  of 
hump  on  his  friend's  shoulders,  but  ^^y^^^  ^^^i^  ^^  unbecoming  and  un- 
it takes  some  efibrt  to  see  our  own.—  suitable  in  the  delivery  of  sacred  truth 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  ^^  profane  persons.  The  first  case 
Yer.  5.  Casting  out  the  mote.— A  supposed  is  that  of  a  priest  or  Levite 
Wind  guide  is  bad  enough,  but  a  ^^«'  ^,^  ^f  ^^^"g  ^\^  ^^^P^^'  observed 
blind  oculist  is  a  still  more  ridiculous  «^^  ''^  ^he  ever-hungry  dogs  that 
anomaly.— /6^d  prowled  about  the  city  of  Jerusalem, 

but  were  never   admitted  withm   the 
Judging  :    true   and  false. — I.  The  gates  of  the  sanctuary.     Forgetting  all 
first    branch    of    the    contrary    duty  considerations    of    manners   and   pro- 
to     rash     judgment     is     to    employ  priety,  he  returned  into  the  court,  took 
our   censoriousness    first    and  chiefly  a  portion  of  flesh  which  had  been  on 
upon  ourselves :    ''  First  cast  out  the  the  altar  of  burnt  ofiering,  and  threw 
beam  out  of  thine  own  eye."     1.  The  it  to  the  dog.     Such  an  action  would 
more   time   we   spend    at    home,    the  violate  the  Divine  law  which  assigned 
less  we  have  to  squander  away  abroad.  the  flesh  of  the  oflerings  to  the  priests, 
2.  The  better  acquainted  we  are  with  and  it  would  indicate  gross  disrespect 
our  own  sin  and  folly,  we  shall  be  so  and  want  of  the  sense  of  fitness.      The 
much  the  more  charitable  to  the  errors  other  case  supposed  is  that  of  a  lavish 
of    others.       3.    The     better    we    are  rich   man,   who    for    some   whim,    or 
acquainted  with  our  own  sins,  we  shall  intending    a     practical     joke,    threw 
be  so  much  the  freer  from  pride  and  pearls,  as  if  they  were  seeds,  before  a 
vanity,    which   is   the   great   cause  of  herd  of  swine.     The  swine  in  Palestine 
rash  judgments.  never  were  tame  creatures,  as  with  us. 
II.  The  second   branch   of   it  is  to  Though  in  some  parts  of  the  country 
look  charitably  on  the  actions  of  our  they  were  kept  in  herds,  they  were  by 
neighbour,    and    not    be    too    sharp-  the  Jewish  law  unclean  animals,  and 
sighted  in  spying  out  his  small  faults,  disallowed  as  food  for  man.     Accord- 
Ill.  A  third  branch  is  that  we  per-  ingly,  they  were  at  the  most  only  half- 
form  the   friendly  office   of  monitors  tamed  ;  and  the  genuine  wild  boar  has 
to  our  neighbour  himself,  instead  of  always   haunted    the    valley    of    the 
exposing  him  to  others.           '  Jordan.       Now,    if    one    should    cast 
IV.  The  fourth    branch   is   that  in  pearls   in    the    way   supposed    before 
administering  our  admonitions  we  use  those    animals,    they   might    rush   for 
prudence    not   to    throw    them  away  what  seemed  to  be  grain,  since  they 
where  they  will  do  hurt,  but  to  contrive  are    always    voracious,    but,    quickly 
to  give  them  when  our  neighbour  is  in  discovering  the  hoax,   would   trample 
the   best   temper    and    disposition   to  on  the   pearls,  as  pigs  commonly  put 
receive  them  kindly,  and  to  make  the  their  feet  into  and  upon  their  food ; 
best  use  of  them. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A.  and,  not  improbably  an  enraged  boar 

169 


CHAP.  VII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


would  rend  the  foolish  man  who  had 
played  this  dangerous  game,  by  a  side 
upward  stroke  of  his  tusk,  as  the 
manner  of  such  creatures  is.  Extreme 
instances  are  chosen  in  order  to  put  a 
much-needed  lesson  in  a  strong  light. 
But  what  is  the  lesson  1  It  cannot  be 
that  Christians  are  never  to  press  the 
gospel  on  an  indifferent,  unsympathetic, 
or  even  hostile  audience.  In  that  case 
it  would  contradict  all  those  counsels 
and  charges  which  require  a  fearless 
and  even  an  aggressive  testimony  to 
the  name  of  Jesus ;  and  it  would  be  at 
variance  with  the  example  of  our  Lord 
and  His  Apostles,  who  preached  the 
word  in  the  face  of  angry  opposition. — 
B.  Eraser,  D.D. 

Reverence  and  discretion.  — The  posi- 
tive lesson  conveyed  in  this  meta- 
phorical saying  of  Jesus  is  one  of 
reverence  and  discretion.  We  under- 
stand it  thus : — 

I.  As  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
— While  the  preacher  is  not  to  evade 
difficulty  or  shrink  from  opposition 
or  personal  danger,  he  is  to  consult 
decorum  and  opportunity  so  far  as  not 
to  expose  names  and  things  that  are 
sacred,  to  open  and  egregious  contempt. 
On  this  principle  one  is  not  to  address 
religious  truth  to  a  drunkard  in  his 
cups,  or  to  him  who  sits  in  the 
scorner's  chair.  Open-air  preaching, 
too,  requires  very  especially  to  be 
placed  under  this  rule  of  Christ.  If 
conducted  at  fit  places  and  times  it 
is  not  merely  an  allowable,  but  a 
highly  commendable  practice ;  but  the 
question  of  fitness  is  of  far  more  import- 
ance than  inexperienced  preachers  are 
aware. 

II.  As  to  statements  of  spiritual 
experience. — In  this  matter  Christian 
men  are  apt  to  fall  into  one  or  other 
of  two  opposite  extremes.  Many  pass 
through  life  with  hardly  a  word,  even 
to  their  pastors  or  their  nearest 
friends,  which  indicates  that  tbey 
have  received  any  spiritual  benefit 
or  have  any  inward  experience  of  the 
grace  of  God.  This  is  the  one  extreme 
of    unreasonable   reticence.      On    the 

170 


other  hand,  a  good  many  talk  too 
much  about  themselves,  and  will  even 
volunteer  before  indiscriminate  assem- 
blies an  account  of  their  conversion,  and 
of  their  great  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 
This  is  the  opposite,  the  egotistical  ex- 
treme. Between  these  extiemes  the 
wise  and  humble  Christian  ought  tu 
steer  his  course.  He  must  consider  his 
company  and  his  opportunity. 

III.  As  to  the  admission  to  sacred 
privileges  and  functions  in  the  church. 
— The  confusion  into  which  Christian 
society  has  fallen  makes  it  difficult  for 
the  most  faithful  churches  to  apply 
the  sound  principle  of  the  separation 
of  the  holy  from  the  unclean.  Churches 
that  have  lost  or  surrendered  the  power 
of  self -discipline  enfeeble  discipline  in 
other  churches  also.  But  none  the 
less  does  it  remain  a  sacred  duty  to 
warn  from  the  Lord's  table  the  carnally 
minded  and  such  as  do  not  discern  the 
Lord's  body,  and  never  knowingly  to 
admit  to  church  privilege  or  office  any 
who  are  of  impure  or  intemperate 
habits. — Ihid. 

Perverted  judgments. — I  think  it 
would  not  be  untrue  to  say  that  on 
the  right  interpretation  of  tbis  verse 
hangs  our  true  understanding  of  the 
whole  of  the  chapter.  And  yet  I 
venture  to  think  that  the  ordinary 
sigtufication  attached  to  the  words 
will  not  satisfy  any  of  us  if  we  reflect. 
Take  this  thing  judgment,  what  is 
behind  it  ?  Prejudice  !  Yes,  and  a 
hundred  other  things.  It  is  not  only 
prejudice  which  is  like  the  beam  in 
the  eye,  but  also  jealousy,  and  envy, 
and  our  own  indolence.  What  Christ 
warns  us  against  are  the  dogs  with- 
in ourselves.  He  says,  "  You  have 
capacity,  but  take  care  that  that 
capacity  is  under  righteous  rule,  take 
care  it  does  not  fall  into  the  power  of 
the  dogs,  the  passions  within  you, 
which  will  trample  that  very  faculty 
under  their  feet,  for  if  it  does  so  you 
imperil  yourself."  There  are  two 
powers  of  judgment  we  may  exercise 
in  the  world,  or  rather,  for  the  purpose 
of  illustration,  we  may  select  two. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


I.  There  are  our  intellectual  judg- 
ments.— Is  it  not  a  fact  that  all  those 
who  have  reflected  upon  the  operations 
of  the  human  mind,  and  the  evidences 
of  that  operation  in  the  world,  have 
reminded  us  that  we  are  very  seldom 
able  to  exercise  judgment  under  the 
influence  of  what  they  call  the  true 
light  of  reason  ?  There  is  a  bias,  a 
bias  belonging  to  every  race  and  class 
in  the  community ;  every  profession 
has  its  bias,  and  you  find  it  a  most 
difficult  thing — and  this  is  the  reason 
very  often  for  the  perpetuation  of 
abuses — for  the  class  to  dissociate 
itself  from  its  bias,  which  makes  it 
judge  the  thing,  not  on  its  merits,  but 
always  upon  the  prevailing,  predomi- 
nating bias  of  that  class.  Just  in  the 
same  way  there  is  the  bias  of  home 
and  family.  In  our  life,  Christ  says, 
ever  coming  to  impair  the  calm,  in- 
tellectual judgment  of  our  nature, 
there  lurk  these  evil  passions  which 
tend  to  pervert,  and  destroy  perhaps, 
the  noble  gift  which  God  has  given  us. 

II.  If  you  turn  to  moral  judg- 
ments, I  think  the  case  becomes 
clearer.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
world  which  is  more  open  to  the  power 
of  the  wild  beast  within  us  than  your 
moral  judgment.  Your  conscience  is 
just  as  capable  of  falling  into  bad 
hands  as  your  reason  is,  and  when  the 
conscience  falls  into  bad  hands  it  is 
worse  with  you  than  when  the  reason 
does  !  The  very  justification  of  all  the 
barbarities  of  the  past  has  been  the 
conscientiousness  of  the  men  who  have 
done  them.  Thomas  Lynch  says,  "  We 
all  of  us  need  a  conscience  in  order  to 
keep  a  conscience."  Catch  the  spirit 
of  Christ  !  I  said  that  my  text  was 
the  pivot  of  the  whole  chapter.  So  it 
is. — Bishop  W.  B.  Carpenter. 

Zeal  and  prudence. — It  is  bad  to 
hide  the  treasure  in  a  napkin  ;  it  is 
qmte  as  bad  to  fling  it  down  without 
preparation  before  some  people.  Jesus 
Himself  locked  His  lips  before  Herod, 
although  the  curious  ruler  asked  many 
questions  ;  and  we  have  sometimes  to 
remember  that  there  are  people  who 


"  will  not  hear  the  word,"  and  who 
must  first  "  be  won  without  the  w^ord." 
Heavy  rains  run  off*  hard-baked  earth. 
It  must  be  softened  by  a  gentle  drizzle. 
Luther  once  told  this  fable  :  "  The  lion 
made  a  great  feast,  and  he  invited  all 
the  beasts,  and  anjong  the  rest  a  sow. 
When  all  manner  of  costly  dishes  were 
set  before  the  guests,  the  sow  asked, 
'  Have  you  no  bran  ? '  Even  so,"  said 
he,  "we  preachers  set  forth  the  most 
dainty  dishes — the  forgiveness  of  sins 
and  the  grace  of  God  ;  but  they  turn 
up  their  snouts,  and  grub  for  guilders." 
This  precept  is  one  side  of  the  truth. 
The  other  is  the  adaptation  of  the 
gospel  to  all  men,  and  the  obligation 
on  us  to  preach  it  to  all.  We  can 
only  tell  most  men's  disposition  towards 
it  by  offering  it  to  them,  and  we  are 
not  to  be  in  a  hurry  to  conclude  that 
men  are  dogs  and  swine. — A.  Maclaren, 
D.D. 

Yers.  7,  8.  Importunity  in  prayer. 
— I.  The  duty  of  fervent  prayer. — 
"Ask;"  "seek;"  "knock." 

1.  The  occasion  of  pressing  the  duty  in 
this  place. — Our  Saviour  had  been  recom- 
mending a  great  many  difficult  duties 
to  His  disciples.  It  was  very  natural 
for  Him  to  think  they  would  be 
mightily  discouraged,  considering  how 
dispropoitioned  their  strength  was  to 
so  difficult  a  task.  Therefore  it  w'as 
necessary  to  put  them  in  a  way 
whereby  they  might  be  enabled  to 
perform  it.  And  herein  especially 
consists  the  advantage  of  the  Christian 
morals,  beyond  the  morals  of  the 
heathen.  They  had  all  the  great 
tasks  of  duty  to  undergo,  only  by 
their  own  strength,  care,  and  en- 
deavours, which  was  a  very  dis- 
couraging, comfortless  business ;  but 
we  Christians  are  taught  where  there 
is  supply  enough  of  grace  to  be  had. 

2.  The  nature  and  exercises  of  the 
duty. — It  is  an  intent  application  of 
the  mind  to  God,  and  comprehends 
the  whole  commerce  which  our  souls 
have  with  Him,  whether  to  pay  our 
homage  and  adorations  to  Him,  or  to 
thank  Him  for   all  His   mercies  and 

171 


CHAP.  VII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


favours,  or  to  address  Him  for  any 
mercies  and  favours  to  ourselves  or 
others.  But  that  part  of  it  which 
is  chiefly  aimed  at  in  this  place  is  the 
begging  of  grace,  whereby  we  may  be 
enabled  and  assisted  to  discharge  the 
great  duties  which  He  requires  of  us. 
Consider :  (1)  The  necessity  of  grace 
to  enable  us  to  do  our  duty.  (2)  The 
fitness  of  prayer  towards  the  obtaining 
of  grace,  (a)  Grace  is  a  treasure  in 
the  hands  of  God  Himself.  It  is  not 
Irke  silver  or  gold,  to  be  dug  with  hard 
labour  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth. 
(b)  The  right  dispositions  for  the  re- 
ception of  grace  are  all  included  in 
prayer.  (c)  God  is  more  ready  to 
grant  than  we  are  to  desire. 

3.  The  circumstance  of  instancy  or 
frequency. — Taught  us  in  the  triple 
repetition  of  the  precept,  ask,  seek, 
knock.  (1)  It  is  not  enough  that 
we  pray  for  a  good  thing  once ;  but 
we  must  insist  and  renew  our  petitions 
often,  for  the  words  do  each  of  them 
imply  a  further  degree  of  industry  and 
diligence.  The  easiest  way  of  obtaining 
a  thing  is  to  have  it  for  asking.  Then 
the  word  "  seek "  implies  a  further 
degree  of  diligence,  as  when  a  thing 
is  out  of  place,  and  we  cannot  have  it 
for  calling  for,  then  we  are  at  the 
pains  to  search  and  look  for  it.  But 
the  word  "  knock "  signifies  a  yet 
greater  degree  of  patience  and  per- 
severance in  our  suit.  For  it  supposes 
that  there  may  be  several  difficulties 
in  the  way,  and  that  the  passage  may 
be  shut  up,  yet  that  we  should  patiently 
wait,  and  drive  on  our  suit  with  greater 
importunity.  (2)  Asking,  seeking,  and 
knocking  imply  that  we  ought  not  to 
be  discouraged  with  the  difficulties  we 
meet  with,  either  in  putting  up  our 
prayers  to  God,  or  in  not  receiving 
quickly  a  due  return  of  them  ;  but 
that  we  should  strive  to  conquer  and 
overcome  all  difficulties,  and  be  incessant 
in  our  prayers  to  God.  (3)  Asking, 
seeking,  and  knocking  imply  a  careful 
watching  and  embracing  the  favourable 
opportunities  of  devotion,  whether  these 
arise  from  external  providences  or  in- 
ternal favourable  dispositions.     (4)  The 

172 


words  ask,  seek,  and  knock  import  a 
great  assiduity  in  devotion.  (5)  Also 
that  we  use  our  utmost  endeavours  to 
obtain  what  we  pray  for. 

II.  Encouragements  to  this  duty, 
taken  from  the  promises  and  nature 
of  God. — Jas.  Blair ^  M.A. 

Prayer. — I.  The  qualifications  of 
the  persons  that  pray. 

1.  Faith. — (1)  They  must  believe  in 
God's  being,  ability,  and  goodwill.  ( 2 )  In 
the  mediation  and  intercession  of  Jesus 
Christ.  (3)  That  God  for  Christ's 
sake  will  hear  and  grant  their  prayers. 
(4)  That  the  good  things  needed  cannot 
be  obtained  without  prayer. 

2.  Practice. — (1)  There  must  be  a 
care  and  endeavour  to  comply  with  all 
God's  commandments  (1  John  iii.  22  ; 
Prov.  xxviii.  9,  xv.  8).  (2)  If  conscious 
of  having  committed  sin,  we  must  re- 
pent of  it  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18 ;  Isa.  i.  15). 
(3)  We  must  set  about  our  prayers 
with  our  hearts  free  from  malice,  and 
full  of  charity  to  all  men  (v.  23,  etc. ; 
Mark  xi.  25).  (4)  There  must  be  no 
bad  design  in  any  petition  (James  iv.  3). 

II.  The  matter  of  our  prayers. — 
1.  The  expression.  "  Every  one  that 
asketh  receive th  "  must  be  understood 
only  with  relation  to  good  things 
(ver.  11).  2.  The  promise  is  limited  to 
such  things  as  are  good  for  us  that 
ask  them.  For  it  is  possible  there  may 
be  gifts  good  in  themselves  and  yet 
not  proper  for  us  in  our  particular 
circumstances. 

III.  The  manner  of  our  praying. — 
1.  Fervent  and  hearty.  2.  With  pa- 
tience and  constancy.  3.  With  humility 
and  submission.  4.  With  gratitude 
for  former  mercies.  5.  With  vigilance 
and  the  diligent  use  of  other  lawful 
means  appointed  by  God. 

IV.  The  grant  of  our  prayers. — God 
performs  this  promise,  not  only  when 
He  grants  the  very  thing  we  pray  for, 
but  in  other  cases  when  we  are  not  so 
sensible  of  it  (2  Cor.  xii.  7). — Ibid. 

The  efficacy  of  prayer. — Jesus  Christ 
did  not  mean  that  His  followers  may 
have  whatever  they  like.     The  way  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


spoil  a  child  is  to  give  it  all  it  asks, 
and  He  does  not  mean  to  spoil  us. 
Therefore  He  must  thwart  our  wishes 
till  they  run  parallel  with  His  will, 
and  are  fixed  on  higher  good  than 
earth  holds.  So,  of  course,  this  promise 
is  true  only  in  the  spiritual  realm,  or 
in  regard  to  the  development  of  the 
Christian  character.  We  may  have  as 
much  of  God  as  we  will.  Christ  puts 
the  key  of  the  treasure  chamber  into 
our  hand,  and  bids  us  take  all  that  we 
want.  If  a  man  is  admitted  into  the 
bullion  vault  of  a  bank,  and  told  to 
help  himself,  and  comes  out  with  one 
cent,  whose  fault  is  it  that  he  is  poor  1 
Whose  fault  is  it  that  Christian  people 
generally  have  such  scanty  portions  of 
the  free  riches  of  Godi — A.  Maclaren, 

Ver.  7.  How  to  pray. — 1.  Be  short. 
— Jesus,  by  word  and  example,  incul- 
cated this.  Persons  who  sought  His 
aid  offered  short  petitions.  Peter  in 
the  water,  the  publican  in  the  temple, 
and  the  thief  on  the  cross  made  short 
prayers. 

II.  Be  specific. — Prayer  that  is  in- 
definite does  not  avail.  "  My  son," 
"  my  daughter,"  *'  my  servant,"  "  my 
sight " — that  is  the  form  of  request : 
and  the  accompanying  charge  is, 
"  Bring  him  to  Me." 

III.  Be  importunate. — The  mid- 
night prayer,  "Friend,  lend  me  three 
loaves,"  was  short,  specific,  and  impor- 
tunate. And  it  was  answered,  not  for 
friendship's  sake,  but  because  of  impor- 
tunity. 

IV.  Pray  with  a  forgiving  spirit. — 
"  When  ye  stand  praying,  forgive." 
I  once  attended  an  ecclesiastical  con- 
vention, and  was  entertained  in  a 
refined.  Christian  household.  A  young 
lady  in  the  family  in  a  conversation 
remarked,  "  I  never  offer  the  Lord's 
prayer."  On  my  expressing  surprise, 
she  added,  "  I  don't  dare  to ;  I  don't 
dare  pray,  '  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as 
we  forgive  our  debtors ' ;  I  am  so 
afraid  that  I  have  not  a  forgiving 
spirit  that  I  dare  not  ask  God  to  for- 
give me  as  I  forgive  others."     I  asked. 


"What  do  you  pray?"  She  replied, 
"I  say,  'as  we  ought  to  forgive 
others.' " 

V.  We  must  do  what  we  can  to 
answer  our  own  prayers. — A  little  boy 
heard  his  father  pray  that  God  would 
feed  the  poor ;  and  when  the  prayer 
was  over,  he  said,  "  Father,  if  you  will 
give  me  the  key  to  the  granary  door,  I 
will  answer  your  prayer  myself." 
Frederick  Douglass  tells  that  when  he 
was  a  slave  he  prayed  seven  years  for 
liberty,  but  received  no  answer ;  at 
length  it  occurred  to  him  that  he  must 
answer  his  own  prayer ;  and  when, 
with  his  eye  fixed  on  the  north  star, 
he  prayed  with  his  legs,  his  prayer  was 
answered.  If  we  pray  for  the  con- 
version of  a  child,  a  scholar,  or  a 
friend,  we  must  speak  to  that  person 
and  do  what  we  can  to  bring  him  to 
Christ. 

VI.  We  must  expect  that  our 
prayers  will  be  answered.  (Heb.  xi.  6 ; 
Matt.  ix.  29).— X.  H.  Read,  D.D. 

Prayer  a  key. — "  Knock  and  it  shall 
be  opened  unto  you." 

I.  Prayer  opens  to  us  the  door  to 
the  knowledge  of  God. 

II.  It  opens  to  us  the  knowledge  of 
ourselves. — "  Now  mine  eye  seeth 
Thee,"  etc. 

III.  It  opens  to  the  soul  the  glory 
of  the  natural  world  (Ps.  xcii.  4  6). 

IV.  It  opens  to  us  the  clearest  and 
most  glorious  knowledge  of  heaven. — 
The  Study. 

Asking. — Emerson  tells  how  he 
arranged  his  first  sermon  in  these 
divisions  :    1.  Men  are  always  praying. 

2.  All    their    prayers    are     granted. 

3.  We  must  beware,  then,  what  we 
ask.  He  had  got  the  thf me  from  the 
blunt  saying  of  a  field  labourer,  that 
men  are  always  praying,  and  all  their 
prayers  are  heard. — W.  M.  Macgregor, 
M.A. 

Vers.  9-11.  God^s  love  to  us  and  our 
duty  to  Him. — I.  God's  readiness  to 
give  good    things  to   His  creatures. 

1.  His  goodness  to  those  who  pray  to 

173 


CHAP.  vn.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


ffim,  is  really  beyond  anything  we 
have  to  explain  it  by. — We  know  nothing 
in  nature  of  a  more  sincere  and  steady 
love  than  that  of  parents  to*their 
children,  yet  it  is  much  allayed  and 
abated  by  other  bad  qualities. 

2.  The  promise  and  encouragement  of 
the  text  are  limited  to  good  things. 

3.  The  p^'omise  is  not  restrained  to  the 
elect  but  extended  to  all  that  pray. 

II.  God  loves  to  be  asked  and 
waited  upon  for  good  things.  Three 
plain  reasons  for  this  : — 

1.  God's  honour. — Suppose  a  prince 
ever  so  merciful,  would  it  be  con- 
sistent with  his  honour  to  pardon  his 
rebellious  subjects  if  they  refused  so 
much  as  to  beg  pardon,  or  to  petition 
for  any  favour  1 

2.  The  good  of  the  persons  themselves. 

3.  The  right  government  of  the 
world. 

III.  What  duties  are  incumbent 
upon  us,  '^rom  the  knowledge  and 
belief  of  this  paternal  affection  in  God, 
toward  His  poor  creatures.  The  loving 
Him  out  of  gratitude,  with  all  our 
heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and 
strength;  manifested  in  (1)  faith; 
(2)  obedience ;  (3)  hope ;  (4)  filial 
reverential  fear;  (5)  trust;  (6)  patience ; 

(7)  disposition      to      honour      Him ; 

(8)  humility. — Jas.  Blair ^  M.A. 

Ver.  12.  The  golden  rule  in  the 
kingdom. — This  is  the  golden  rule — 
the  Christian's  law  of  reciprocity, 
which  will  serve  as  a  rule  of  conduct 
for  all  the  life.  Legitimately  applied, 
it  would  serve  all  social  life,  family 
life,  commercial  life,  political  life, 
church  life,  and  national  life.  To 
obey  it  out  and  out  would  soon  bring 
the  golden  age. 

I.  The  characteristics  of  this  golden 
rule. 

1.  Its  principle. — The  principle  here 
stated  by  our  Lord  is  the  second 
great  commandment — "  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Place 
thyself  in  thought,  in  the  condition  or 
the  circumstances  of  thy  neighbour, 
amd  judge  accordingly. 

2.  It  is  fundamental. — It   underlies 

174 


all  public  and  private  justice,  govern- 
ment, society,  education,  and  religion. 

3.  It  is  reasonable. — Have  not  others 
the  same  rights  as  ourselves,  be  their 
condition  or  position-  what  it  may? 
It  is  universal  for  all  classes — for 
employers  and  employed  ;  for  all  lands 
and  times. 

4.  It  is  equitable. — The  equity  of 
this  law  is  clearly  seen  if  we  consider 
its  grounds.  (1)  The  equality  of  all 
men  by  nature.  (2)  The  possible 
equality  of  all  men  as  to  condition  and 
state  of  life.  (3)  Wherein  we  may  be 
unequal,  the  inequality  is  not  such  as 
to  be  the  ground  of  unequal  dealing 
with  one  another  ;  for  we  ought  to 
treat  our  neighbour  as  we  would 
expect  to  be  treated  by  him  in  the 
same  circumstances.  (4)  Wherein 
men  may  be  unequal,  the  inequality  is 
not  fixed.  They  may  rise ;  others 
may  fall.  (5)  Consequently,  the  great 
advantage  and  blessing  of  such  a  rule. 
It  teaches  that  with  us,  as  with  God, 
there  is  no  respect  of  persons.  The 
law  is  mutual  and  universal,  and  if 
acted  upon  would  bring  social  salvation. 

5.  It  is  portable. — It  is  not  only 
easy  to  be  remeoibertd,  but  it  is  the 
handiest,  readiest,  and  best  of  all 
moral  maxims.  "  It  is  the  '  two-foot 
rule  '  which  the  skilful  artisan  always 
carries  with  him  ready  to  take  the 
measurement  of  any  work  to  which  he 
is  called." 

6.  It  is  evangelical. — It  is  more 
than  a  moral  maxim,  it  is  an  evan- 
gelical pi'inciple  ;  for  it  teaches  us  that 
in  order  to  be  able  to  act  it  thoroughly, 
truly,  and  sincerely,  we  need  the  i^race 
of  God  in  a  large  degree.  "  The 
Emperor  Alexander  Sever  us  was  so 
charmed  by  the  excellence  of  this  rule 
that  he  obliged  a  crier  to  repeat  it 
whenever  he  had  occasion  to  punish 
any  person,  and  caused  it  to  be  in- 
scribed in  the  most  noted  parts  of  his 
palace,  and  on  many  of  the  public 
buildings.  He  also  professed  so  high  a 
regard  for  Christ,  as  having  been  the 
author  of  so  excellent  a  rule,  that  he 
desired  to  have  Him  enrolled  among 
the  deities." 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


II.  The  argument  adduced  for  the  parents  and  children,  etc.     3.  The  rule 

enforcement  of  this  rule.  we  are  to  go  by  in  our  dealings  with 

1.  "  For  this  is  the  law  and  the  our  neighbour  is  not  what  he  doth 
prophets.''  by  us,   but  what   we  should  think  his 

2.  The  authority  which  enjoins  duty  to  do  by  us,  in  such  and  such 
obedience  to  it. — The  authority  of  circumstances.  4.  It  taJces  in  all 
Christ.  duty,    and    we    should   ask   what   we 

3.  The  example  of  Christ  also  enfoixes  should  think  to  be  our  duty  if  our 
it. — J.  Harries.  neighbour  were  in  our  place  and  we  in 

his. 

The  sum  of  our  duty  to  our  neighbour.  III.    Our      Saviour's      honourable 

— I.  The  dependence  of  this  rule  on  character  of  this  rule. — "  This  is  the 

the  foregoing  doctrine. — "  Therefore."  law  and  the  prophets."     Consider  : — 

1.    By   way   of    imitation    of  God    in  1.   The  comprehensiveness  of  this  rule. 

His  goodness.     2.  By  way  of  gratitude  — It  is  a  complete  sum  of  all  the  rides 

to    God    for    His   goodness.     3.  From  set  down  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  con- 

His    relation    of    a    loving   Father   to  cerning  our   duty    to   our  neighbour; 

us,   which  makes  us  all  brethren.  and  it  is  likewise  in  the  nature  of  a 

II.   The  rule  itself. — 1.   It  must  be  good  casuist  to  decide  all  the  particular 

limited  to  the  poi7it  of  duty,  and  not  cases    and    doubts    which    rise    from 

extended  to  foolish  and  unreasonable  those  rules. 

desires.     2.   It  was  not  our  Saviour's  2.  The  brevity  of  this  rule. — It  helps 

design  to  set  all  men  on  a  level,  taking  both     the     understanding      and     the 

away  all    distinction  between  princes  memory. — Jas.  Blair,  M.A, 
and    subjects,    masters   and   servants, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—23. 

Trtie  discipleship. — The  end  of  this  passage  may  be  taken  as  a  kind  of  key  to 
all  its  earlier  part.  What  is  said  about  beginning  the  journey  in  ver.  13,  must 
be  compared  with  what  is  said  of  the  result  of  it  in  vers.  22,  23.  "  In  that  day  " 
there  will  be  "  many  "  men  claiming  to  be  the  Saviour's  disciples,  to  whom  He 
mil  testify  that  He  ''  never  knew  "  them,  notwithstanding  that  claim.  How  are 
His  true  disciples  to  be  distinguished  from  these  ?  In  three  principal  ways,  viz.  : 
1.  By  the  decision  of  their  choice.  2.  By  the  carefulness  of  their  judgments. 
3.   By  the  consistency  of  their  lives. 

I.  The  decision  of  their  choice. — See,  for  example,  what  such  persons  select. 
They  select  the  "  gate  "  which  is  "  strait  "  (ver.  13),  in  other  words  the  gate  which 
is  easily  overlooked  unless  looked  for  ;  which  can  only  be  passed  through  with  a 
good  deal  of  effort  ;  and  which  allows  little  more  than  the  man  himself  to  pass 
through.  They  select,  also,  the  "  way  "  which  is  ''  narrow."  In  other  words,  the 
way  of  restriction,  both  on  this  side  and  on  that ;  the  way,  therefore,  from  which 
much  is  shut  out ;  the  way  of  exactness  ;  the  way  of  limitation  ;  and  not,  there- 
fore (at  any  rate  in  appearance)  the  way  of  free  will.  Not  many  travel  this 
road,  for  there  is  a  "  broad  "  way  without  these  restrictions,  which  they  can 
easily  travel  instead.  Not  many  enter  that  gate;  for  there  is  a  wide  gate  very 
much  nearer,  through  which  many  are  always  entering ;  and  which,  therefore,  as 
it  were,  thrusts  itself  on  their  notice.  All  the  more  manifest,  therefore,  is  the 
earnest  purpose  of  those  who  "  find  "  that  strait  "  gate  "  and  pass  through  to  its 
"way."  They  are  men,  indisputably,  eyen  so  far,  who  have  "made  up  their 
minds."  See,  also,  what  such  persons  refuse.  They  pass  by  that  "  wide  gate  " 
with  all  its  facilities.  They  turn  from  that  "  broad  road,"  with  all  its  allure- 
ments. They  give  up  its  apparent  liberty  ;  its  many  apparent  enjoyments ;  its 
jolly  companionships ;  its  sure  popularity ;  its  resounding  mirth  ;  its  appearance 

175 


CHAP.  VII.     EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW. 


of  ease.  All  this,  and  much  more  than  this,  which  that  "  strait  gate  "  will  not 
allow  to  pass  through,  they  leave  behind  when  they  begin  this  "  way."  Doubly 
evident,  therefore,  is  their  resolution  of  purpose.  Alike  what  they  do  not,  and 
what  they  do ;  alike  what  others  do,  and  what  is  done  by  themselves ;  prove  that 
their  minds  are  made  up  (cf.  Gen.  v.  22,  vii.  1  ;  Josh.  xxiv.  15  ;  Dan.  i.,  iii., 
vi. ;  1  Kings  xviii.  21  ;  John  vi.  67-69,  etc.). 

II.  The  carefulness  of  their  judgments. — This  goes,  in  great  measure,  with 
what  we  have  said  already.  A  man  who  is  thus  resolute  and  determined  will 
feel  it  only  right  to  be  correspondingly  careful.  Careful,  on  the  one  hand,  as  to 
the  guides  he  follows.  He  will  be  aware,  as  implied  in  ver.  15,  that  there  are 
many  "  false  prophets  "  abroad  in  the  world.  The  very  conviction  which  has 
made  him  so  decided — the  conviction  that  he  is  dealing  with  a  matter  of  the 
intensest  importance — will  make  him  feel  this  to  be  true.  The  more  valuable 
the  coin,  the  more  numerous  its  counterfeits.  For  the  same  reason  he  will  be 
the  more  anxious  to  avoid  being  cheated  by  them.  The  more  in  value  such 
counterfeits  ought  to  be,  the  more  he  loses  by  accepting  them.  The  more  they 
look  precious,  the  more  they  injure.  As  the  Saviour  here  says,  looking  like 
**  sheep"  (ver.  15),  they  are  not  only  "wolves" — they  are  "ravening"  wolves — 
rejoicing  to  slay.  On  every  ground,  therefore,  such  "  disciples " — such  true 
learners — will  desire  to  be  taught  only  by  teachers  of  truth.  Every  such  true 
disciple  will  be  equally  careful,  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  the  kind  of  test  he  employs. 
How  are  teachers  of  truth  to  be  known  ?  This  is  what  the  great  Teacher  here 
teaches  us  next.  "  They  are  to  be  known  by  their  fruits."  This  is  the  beginning 
(ver.  16),  and  this  the  end  (ver.  20)  of  what  He  says  on  the  point.  Nature,  He 
reminds  us,  teaches  us  this  (end  of  ver.  16).  Nature  teaches  us  that  this  is  always 
the  case  (ver.  17).  Nature  teaches  us  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise  (ver.  18). 
Even  the  absence  of  good  fruit  on  a  tree  is  evidence  enough,  on  the  same  authority, 
that  it  is  only  fit  for  "  the  fire  "  (ver.  19).  Every  one  who  knows  what  "  godli- 
ness "  is  will  know  this  to  be  true,  because  he  will  know  for  himself  what  godliness 
does.  He  will  know  that  it  changes  the  life.  Only,  therefore,  to  teachers  with 
"  changed  lives  "  will  he  look  for  his  light.  His  spiritual  "  instinct " — if  he  be  a 
true  man — will  make  him  act  thus. 

III.  The  consistency  of  their  conduct. — What  such  a  man  looks  for  in  others 
he  will  seek  for  himself ;  and  will  attain  to,  also,  as  a  true  scholar  of  the  teachers 
of  truth.  Two  great  mistakes  on  this  point  are  named,  next,  by  our  Lord.  The 
true  disciple  will  prove  his  consistency  by  avoiding  them  both.  He  will  not 
mistake  prof ession  for  practice.  "  Saying  Lord,  Lord  "  (ver.  21),  is  only  saying  it, 
if  there  be  nothing  beside.  Professing  subjection  is  not  subjection  itself.  To  do 
homage  is  not  of  itself  to  be  loyal.  Merely  to  call  the  Saviour  King  is  not  to 
belong  to  His  kingdom.  There  may  be  any  amount  of  such  "  calling  "  without 
any  result ;  any  result  but  that  of  exposing  the  caller,  and  proving  him  nothing 
better  than  a  traitor  in  heart,  and,  therefore,  still  outside  the  kingdom  to  which 
he  claims  to  belong.  The  true  disciple,  the  man  within  the  kingdom,  will  know 
this  to  be  so;  and.  will,  therefore,  act  accordingly  in  all  that  he  does.  Facta 
non  verba,  in  short — deeds  not  words — will  be  the  rule  of  his  life.  Also,  he  will 
not  mistake  work  for  obedience  (ver.  22) — a  more  subtle  form  of  deception.  There 
are  those  who,  besides  saying  "Lord,  Lord,"  besides  always  saying  it,  so  the 
repetition  may  mean,  really  labour  much  for  Christ  in  their  way.  They 
prophesy  about  Him  ;  they  prophesy  for  Him  ;  they  make  Him  known  ;  they  do 
so  with  diligence ;  they  do  so  with  power ;  they  accomplish  His  work ;  they 
vanquish  His  enemies ;  they  fill  the  world  with  surprise  (ver.  22).  All  this  the 
Judge  Himself  does  not  appear  to  deny.  Yet  all  this  may  be  in  combination  with 
not  doing  His  will ;  these  works  of  "power"  with  works  of  "iniquity,"  or  direct 
opposition  thereto.     The  true  disciple  will  be  aware  of  this,  and  will  avoid  this, 

176 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


of  himself ;  for  his  chief  desire  will  be,  instinctively,  to  accomplish  that  will. 
For  what  is  a  "  disciple  "  ?  Is  he  not  one  who  learns  ?  And  what  has  he  learned 
if  he  has  not  learned  to  put  his  Master's  will  first  1 

The  one  lesson  to  be  laid  to  heart  from  this  is  that  of  keeping  the  heart  (Prov. 
iv.  23 ;  Ps.  li.  6).  From  the  heart  come  our  words  and  our  deeds  (Matt.  xv.  19). 
By  the  character  of  these  will  all  be  tested  at  last  (Matt.  xxv.  40,  45).  Nothing 
can  be  more  public  than  the  issue  of  all  (Matt.  xxv.  31,  32).  It  is  wide  as  the 
sea  (Ps.  civ.  25).  Nothing  more  secret  than  the  beginning  of  all.  Far  away 
inland,  in  the  depths  of  the  forest,  in  the  solitude  of  the  mountains — in  the 
innermost  man — is  the  beginning  of  all.  The  beginning  of  search,  therefore — 
the  beginning  of  cleansing,  the  beginning  of  amendment,  the  beginning  of  life, 
the  beginning  of  eternity — must  be  at  that  source  (see  Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 


Vers.  13,  14.  The  broad  and  narrow 
ways. — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  broad 
and  narrow  way. — By  "the  strait  gate," 
and  "  the  narrow  way,"  are  meant  the 
difficulties  both  of  the  first  entrance 
upon  a  serious  course  of  life,  according 
to  our  Saviour's  precepts,  and  the 
difficulties  of  continuing  steadfastly  in 
it.  And  by  the  "  wide  gate  "  and  the 
"  broad  way,"  are  meant  this  way  of 
vice  which  offers  itself  and  allures  us 
both  with  a  more  easy  entrance  into 
it,  and  with  its  greater  agreeableness 
to  our  corrupt  inclinations. 

II.  How  little  company  there  is  in 
the  narrow  way  of  duty,  and  how 
much  in  the  broad  way  of  sin. 

1 .  The  truth  of  this  assertion. 

2.  The  danger  we  run  from  the 
'prevalence  of  evil  example. — Two  duties 
are  naturally  consequent  upon  this 
observation:   (1)  caution;   (2)  courage. 

III.  The  different  ends  to  which 
these  ways  lead. 

1.  Destruction. — When  we  speak  of 
an  enemy's  destroying  a  country,  we 
mean  only  that  he  makes  it  very 
miserable  by  all  the  calamities  of  war. 

2.  Life. — The  union  of  the  soul  with 
God  (1  John  v.  12).  It  is  called  "  life  " 
by  way  of  excellency,  as  signifying  a 
happy  life.  (1)  The  body  will  be 
greatly  improved  (1  Cor.  xv.  53,  54). 
(2)  So  will  the  soul.  (3)  Such  happiness 
shall  be  provided  for  us  as  shall  answer 
the  utmost  capacities  of  such  a  perfect 
and  glorified  creature.  These  different 
states  result  from  the  different  courses 
of  Ufe  of  good  and  bad  men — "  leadeth." 


IV.  The  great  duty  here  enjoined. 

— "  Enter     ye     in,"     etc.       See    also 
Luke  xiii.  24. — Jas.  Blair ,  M.A. 

The  two  ways. — "  The  way  "  was  one 
of  the  earliest  designations  for  the 
Christian  life.  Our  Lord  here  con- 
trasts the  two  courses  of  discipleship  and 
of  worldliness  in  four  particulars  : — 

I.  The  contrast  of  the  entrances. 

II.  The  contrast  of  the  ways. 

III.  The  contrast  of  the  ends. 

IV.  The  contrast  of  the  travellers. 
— A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Two  gates  and  two  ways. — In  all 
times  and  all  languages  human  life 
has  been  likened  to  a  journey.  There 
is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  that 
when  Jesus  Christ  employed  in  His 
teaching  the  illustration  of  two  gates 
and  two  roads.  He  meant  to  indicate 
two  modes  and  tendencies  of  human 
life.  In  fact.  He  put  vividly  before 
His  audience  the  same  alternative 
which  a  great  painter  put  on  the 
canvas  in  the  rival  persuasions  of 
Minerva  and  Venus — wisdom  and 
pleasure  —  appealing  from  opposite 
sides  to  inexperienced  and  impulsive 
youth.  It  is  a  bold  and  comprehen- 
sive generalisation.  As  they  appear 
to  us,  the  paths  of  human  conduct  are 
very  various  ;  but  under  all  the  moral 
shades  and  circumstantial  diversities 
of  human  life,  our  Lord  saw  two 
opposite  lines  of  tendency,  and  only 
two. 

I.  A  wide  i^ate  lying  open  invites 

N  177 


CHAP.  vii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


your  entrance,  and  a  broad,  smooth 
avenue  gives  promise  of  leading  you 
to  some  mansion,  castle,  or  pleasure- 
ground.  Such  is  the  gate,  and  such  is 
the  way  of  self-indulgence.  The 
pleasure  indeed  is  only  for  a  season. 
The  way  becomes  rough,  and  for  one 
who  continues  on  it  smiling  to  the  last 
you  may  find  seven  grumbling  and  out 
of  humour.  The  road  of  pleasure  is 
infested  with  stinging  nettles  of  pain. 
Wounded  pride,  satiated  appetite, 
foiled  ambitions,  disappointed  plans, 
gnawing  jealousies,  spoil  everything 
this  world  can  furnish.  It  is  one  of 
the  inducements  to  men  to  enter  the 
wide  gate,  that  "  many  go  in  thereat." 
Men  are  very  gregarious,  and  the 
crowd  always  draws  a  greater  crowd. 
"  Leadeth  to  destruction."  So  said  the 
faithful  and  true  Witness.  He  did  not 
set  Himself  to  prove  the  statement,  or 
enter  into  any  argument  to  show  that 
such  is  the  necessary  conclusion  to  a  life 
of  self-seeking  and  self-indulgence.  He 
was  not  a  reasoner,  but  a  revealer. 
He  saw  the  end  from  the  beginning, 
and  declared  it  with  the  calm  authority 
of  one  who  had  complete  cognisance  of 
the  issues  of  life  in  good  and  evil, 
in  weal  and  woe.  From  this  there  is 
a  possibility  of  escape ;  but  at  the 
beginning,  not  at  the  end.  If  one 
has  unhappily  entered  the  gate  and 
proceeded  on  the  way,  he  must,  at 
the  warning  of  Christ,  be  converted. 

II.  A  narrow  gate  is  overlooked  by 
the  crowd,  or  is  avoided  because  it 
opens  on  a  mere  footpath  closely 
hedged  or  walled  in  on  either  side. 
The  presumption  is  that  it  leads  to  a 
poor  man's  cottage  or  a  cattle-shed. 
True,  that  over  the  gate  indicated  by 
Christ  those  who  believe  His  word 
may  see  an  inscription,  "  To  the 
palace  of  the  King."  But  the  heedless 
multitude  do  not  see  this  inscription  ; 
or  if  their  attention  is  called  to  it, 
make  light  of  it,  persuading  themselves 
that  there  must  be  much  easier  and 
more  conspicuous  avenues  to  the  palace. 
Mark  the  entire  frankness  with  which 
Jesus  Christ  proclaimed  the  difficulty 
of    being    one    of    His   disciples    and 

178 


walking  in  the  way  of  His  steps. 
Evidently  He  was  conscious  of  a  right 
to  command  the  allegiance  of  men  at 
whatever  cost,  and  of  a  power  to 
recompense  those  who  might  suffer  for 
His  name  and  "for  righteousness' 
sake."  Yet  what  mournful  words  are 
these  that  follow !  *'  Few  there  be 
that  find  it."  There  are  two  mistakes 
opposite  to  each  other,  to  be  avoided  : 
1.  That  the  saved  of  the  Lord  in  every 
generation  must  be  few.  Christ  stated 
a  melancholy  fact  in  regard  to  His  own 
generation,  who  "  received  Him  not," 
but  did  not  predict  that  the  same  state 
of  matters  would  last  throughout  all 
generations.  2.  They  err  on  the  other 
side  who  think  it  due  to  charity  to 
suppose  that  all,  or  nearly  all  men  are 
to  be  saved. — D.  Eraser,  D.D. 

The  strait  gate  and  the  narrow  way 
to  the  kingdom. — The  text  is  the  be- 
ginning of  the  epilogue.  The  perora- 
tion begins  by  proclaiming  the  hearty, 
free,  and  universal  invitation  of  the 
gospel  to  all  to  enter  into  the  king- 
dom, and  enjoy  its  privileges,  and 
joyfully  anticipate  the  glorious  end. 
In  other  words,  Jesus  Christ  earnestly 
presses  His  audience  to  '*  lay  hold  of 
eternal  life." 

I.  The  two  entrances. — The  gate 
suggests  two  important  truths  : — 

1 .  That  the  beginning  of  true  disciple- 
ship  is  not  easy  to  Jlesh  and  blood. — 
(1)  The  attainment  of  salvation  is 
difficult.  The  gate  can  be  none  other 
than  repentance.  (2)  The  attainment 
of  salvation  demands  the  exercise  of 
self-denial.  Everything  good  has  its 
price.  (3)  The  attainment  of  salvation 
demands  singularity.  You  must  leave 
the  multitude  and  follow  the  few. 
(4)  To  attain  salvation  there  is  an 
inducement.  Though  the  gate  is  strait 
it  is  always  open.  If  some  of  Her 
Majesty's  soldiers  had  been  taken 
prisoners  by  an  enemy  and  confined  in 
a  fortress  far  in  the  interior  of  a  foreign 
land,  and  if  an  intimation  were  given 
them  by  a  merciful  and  friendly  hand 
that  at  a  certain  point  of  the  prison 
walls  there  was  an  opening,  but  it  was 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


strait  and  narrow,  and  the  path  beyond  complished    not    by    triflers,   but    by 

not  very  smooth,  what  do  you  think  enthusiasts,  who  know  how  to  spend 

they  would  do  1    Would  they  mind  the  themselves  on  their   work.     To  be  a 

narrowness  of  the  hole  through  which  Christian — that    is   the    hardest    and 

they  might  gain  their  liberty,  or  the  greatest  work  that  is  set  before  you, 

roughness  of  the  path  beyond  ?     Nay ;  and   for  it  you  need  enthusiasm,  de- 

they   would    leap   for    joy   and    push  votion,  and  self-sacrifice.    Christ  knows 

through,  having  the  joy  of  liberty  in  what  forces  there  are  in  your  heart 

prospect.  warring   against   His   claim   on    you. 

2.  That  the  entrance  to  a  sinfid  life  The  broad  way  is  just  the  way  where 

is   wide. — Above   the   entrance    there  spiritual  struggles  cease.     The  narrow 

is  written  by  the  enemy  of  our  souls,  way  is  known  by  its  aspirations — its 

"  Do  as  you  like."  aspirations  after  Christ  and  the  life  of 

II.  The  two  courses  of  conduct. —  Christ. 

"  The  narrow  way  "  and  "  the  broad  II.  You  have  a  choice  to  make. — 

way."     From  this  we  learn  : —  The  narrow  path  is  rough  and  steep  ; 

\.  That  there  are  hut  two  ways  for  you  will  sometimes  find  yourself  alone  ; 

human  conduct. — There  is   no   middle  Christ  demands  the  devotion  of  your 

way ;     there     is    no     such    thing    as  heart,  and  that  devotion  will  cost  you 

neutrality.  dear.     It  means  that  you  crucify  your 

2.  There  is  only  one  way  to  eternal  evil  passions,  that  you  forego  many  a 
life. — It  is  the  way  of  Jesus  Christ ;  pleasure  you  love,  that  you  let  some  of 
the  way  of  truth  ;  the  way  of  humility  ;  life's  prizes  go  past  you,  that  you  be 
the  way  of  holiness.  It  cannot  tolerate  willing  to  part  with  what  the  world 
self -pride,  self -righteousness,  and  sin ;  counts  success.  The  other  path  is 
it  is  the  path  of  practical  obedience  to  easier — at  least,  it  seems  easier  at  the 
God.  start.     It  is  easy  to  let  passion  master 

3.  That  there  is  hut  one  way  to  ruin.  you,  easy  to  yield  to  the  love  of  pleasure, 
— "  the  broad  way."  This  is  easy.  of  excitement,  of  position,  of  money,  of 
The  train  will  run  down  an  incline  self.  On  the  broad  path  there  is  no 
without  steam.  panting  for  breath,  no  straining  of  the 

III.  The  two  destinies. — "Life"  muscle,  and  there  is  no  lack  of  company, 
and  "  destruction." — J.  Harries.  But  on  that  path  you  will  lose  your 

life — in  that  way  lies  death. — D.  M. 

The  narrowness  of  the  gospel. — You  Ross,  M. A. 
are  surprised  at  the  expression.     The 

narrowness  of  the  church,  the  narrow-  Ver.  13.  The  wicket  gate. — (To  chil- 
ness  of  Christians — such  phrases  excite  dren).  At  the  great  Centennial  Ex- 
no  surprise,  they  are  justified  by  facts  ;  hibition  at  Philadelphia  there  were  a 
but  the  narrowness  of  the  gospel  ?  number  of  little  turnstile  gates  by 
It  is  not  narrowness  you  associate  with  which  people  went  into  the  grounds, 
the  teaching  of  Christ,  but  breadth  These  gates  would  only  admit  one  at 
and  breeziness,  light  and  gladsomeness.  a  time.  Every  time  a  person  entered, 
It  is  true  there  is  an  extraordinary  the  gate  clicked  and  registered  the 
breadth  in  Christ's  teaching,  but  at  number  of  persons;  and  in  this  way, 
the  same  time,  and  from  another  point  at  the  end  of  the  day,  by  counting  up 
of  view,  it  is  also  true  that  there  is  an  the  sum  total  of  all  the  numbers  of  the 
extraordinary  narrowness  in  the  gospel,  register   of   the   gates,   the   officers  in 

I.  It  is  not  easy  to  be  a  Christian. —  charge  knew  just  how  many  people 

You  cannot  fall  into  the  Christian  life  had  been  admitted  for  the  day.     But 

by  chance.     A  strait  gate  faces  you  when  the  time   came  for  closing   the 

which  you  cannot  enter  save  by  effort  gates,  the  great  fog-horn  sounded,  and 

and  sacrifice  and  self -surrender.     The  then  wide  doors  were  thrown  open  on 

great   tasks   of    human   life    are    ac-  all  sides,  and   the  people   within   the 

179 


CHAP.  vii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


grounds  flocked  forth  by  hundreds  and  as  the  *'  Choice  of  Hercules."  The 
thousands.  People  entered  at  the  young  Hercules,  emerging  from  boy- 
narrow  gate,  and  went  out  at  the  hood  into  manhood,  is  pondering  how 
broad  way.  It  would  have  been  im-  he  is  to  shape  his  life.  Two  women 
possible  for  them  to  have  gone  in  at  appear  before  him — one  voluptuous  in 
the  wide  doors  and  come  out  at  the  form  and  luxurious  in  dress,  the  other 
narrow  turnstile  gate,  one  at  a  time.  severe  and  strict  in  mien,  and  clothed 
Each  person  who  wanted  to  go  into  the  in  a  simple  white  garment.  The  name 
grounds  had  to  take  his  turn  at  the  of  one  is  Pleasure,  the  name  of  the 
narrow  turnstile  gate.  Every  one  was  other  is  Virtue.  The  one  promises  to 
registered  as  they  went  in.  Now,  our  lead  the  young  Hercules  by  the  shortest 
Lord,  in  His  Sermon  upon  the  Mount,  road,  and  without  any  toil,  to  the  en  - 
told  those  who  were  listening  to  Him  joyment  of  every  pleasure.  The  other 
that  they  must  seek  to  enter  in  at  the  beckons  him  along  another  path — a 
strait  gate,  or  the  narrow  gate.  What  path  where  he  will  meet  labours  and 
our  Lord  meant  by  entering  in  at  the  suffering,  but  where  alone  he  will  find 
narrow  gate,  was  getting  started  right  a  beautiful  and  good  life  worthy  of  his 
for  heaven.  And  the  right  gate  to  manhood.  An  old  parable  which  is 
begin  the  Christian  life  with,  is  the  ever  new,  and  an  old  parable  which  is 
strait  or  narrow  gate  of  obedience  to  made  more  meaningful  by  the  words  of 
the  will  of  God.  When  we  go  with  our  Lord. — D.  M.  Ross,  M.A. 
the  crowd,  and  please  only  ourselves, 

we  are  walking  in  the  broad  way.  In  Vers.  15-20.  Trees  and  their  fruit. — 
Bunyan's  story  of  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  The  comparison  of  men  to  fruit-trees  is 
Christian  is  represented  as  beginning  a  very  obvious  one,  and  of  frequent 
his  journey  to  heaven  by  entering  in  occurrence  in  the  Bible.  Every  tree 
at  the  wicket-gate.  Before  this  he  brings  forth  after  its  kind.  Every 
had  not  been  considered  as  fairly  on  man  acts  according  to  his  prevailing 
the  way  to  the  celestial  city.  The  disposition  and  will.  One  of  the  chief 
old  motto  says,  "  Be  sure  you're  right,  dangers  which  beset  primitive  Chris- 
then  go  ahead ! "  tianity    was    the    intrusion    of    false 

I.  We  must  find  out  what  this  strait  prophets.  The  Epistles  are  full  of 
gate  is. — Our  Lord  Himself  tells  us,  allusions  to  such  men,  as  misleading 
*'  I  am  the  Door."     "  I  am  the  Way."  the  churches.    The  delusive  professions 

II.  We  must  find  out  why  the  gate  of  the  false  prophets  and  teachers  were 
is  so  narrow. — Even  Jesus  found  the  only  so  much  ''sheep's  clothing"  worn 
way  of  submission  to  the  will  of  God  a  for  a  purpose.  The  early  churches 
strait  or  narrow  way.  Gethsemane.  It  were  required  to  protect  themselves 
is  always  a  hard  or  narrow  way  when  from  the  false  teachers.  Apostles 
we  have  to  give  up  our  own  wills  for  could  not  be  everywhere  to  test  every 
the  sake  of  another.  one  who  claimed  to  address  the  Chris- 

III.  We  are  to  find  out  why  it  is  tian  assemblies.  So  the  brethren  were 
that  we  must  enter  in  at  this  gate. —  to  exercise  a  wise  and  necessary  caution. 
Just  as  surely  as  we  must  take  the  and  not  hearken  to  every  teacher  or 
train  south  when  we  want  to  go  south,  believe  every  spirit.  The  development 
and  not  the  train  for  the  north,  just  of  doctrine  had  not  proceeded  far  when 
so  surely  must  we  enter  in  at  the  strait  our  Lord  taught  on  the  mount,  and 
gate  of  obedience  to  Jesus  Christ,  if  we  His  reference  to  the  fruit-trees  indicates 
want  to  get  started  right  for  heaven  !  a  practical  and  not  a  dogmatic  test. 
— Sermons  for  Boys  and  Girls.  See  how  it  applies : — 

I.  To  the  teachers  of  religion. — We 

Vers.    13,  14.  The  great  choice. — In  do    not    admit    that    there   were    no 

Xenophon's  Memoirs  there  is  a  striking  doctrinal  tests   in  the  apostolic  times 

story  told  by  Socrates, the  story  known  (see  Gal.  i.  8;  1  John  iv.  1).     But  the 

180 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vil. 


moral  test  was  a  primary  one,  and 
could  be  applied  by  any  man  with  a 
correct  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  even 
though  he  might  not  be  much  versed 
in  theology.  And  the  Apostles  followed 
their  Master  in  urging  on  the  churches 
the  application  of  this  moral  test. 

II.  To  religious  systems. — Religion, 
however  taught,  must  stand  or  fall 
according  to  the  moral  effect  it  produces 
on  those  who  embrace  and  obey  it.  On 
this  principle  Christianity  may  boldly 
invite  comparison  with  any  form  of 
heathenism,  with  Mohammedanism,  or 
with  the  negation  of  religion.  The 
imperfection  with  which  Christianity 
has  been  illustrated  and  obeyed  by  its 
own  adherents  may  be  cited  as  one  of 
the  proofs  of  its  lofty  origin.  It  is 
comparatively  easy  to  be  a  thorough 
exponent  and  example  of  heathenism 
or  Mohammedanism;  but  where  can 
you  find  a  perfect  Christian  1  There  is 
a  consummate  Christ,  there  are  no 
consummate  Christians.  But  in  so  far 
as  men  follow  Christ  and  are  imbued 
with  His  Spirit,  they  are  good,  virtuous, 
righteous.  On  the  other  hand,  you 
cannot  say  that  the  more  thoroughly 
heathen  a  man  is,  or  the  more  intensely 
Mohammedan,  or  the  more  decidedly 
materialistic  and  secularistic  in  his 
convictions,  the  more  sure  he  is  to  be 
good,  virtuous,  righteous.  The  same 
test  will  lead  to  just  conclusions  re- 
garding the  rival  forms  of  Christianity, 
provided  always  that  a  sufficiently  large 
induction  of  instances  be  taken,  and 
that  time  enough  has  been  given  for 
the  working  out  of  genuine  results. 

III.  To  all  men. — In  this  sense  the 
saying  is  often  applied,  and  has  become 
a  sort  of  moral  adage — "The  tree  is 
known  by  its  fruit."  Application  of 
such  a  text  to  our  fellow  men  must  of 
course  be  with  caution  and  charity. 
1.  Let  us  be  sure  of  our  facts ;  then,  if 
it  is  our  duty  to  judge  at  all,  let  us 
proceed  on  those  facts  as  the  evidences 
of  character.  Let  us  look  not  at  leaves, 
but  at  fruit.  And  let  us  not  be  too 
severe  on  youthful  faults.  Trees  some- 
times yield  poor  and  even  bitter  fruit 
when  they  are  young  which  give  sweet 


and  finely  flavoured  fruit  when  they 
come  to  maturity.  2.  Some  estimate 
of  our  fellow-men  we  must  form  in 
order  to  guide  our  own  behaviour  to- 
wards them,  and  to  warrant  our  trust 
or  distrust.  Then  let  our  estimate 
depend  not  on  professions,  words,  or 
appearances,  all  of  which  may  be  de- 
ceptive, but  on  solid  actions  and  the 
sustained  tenor  of  life.  3.  The  same 
test  maybe  used  in  self -judgment.  An 
honest  man,  trying  to  prove  and  judge 
himself,  may  be  perplexed.  It  is  hard 
to  know  the  predominant  motive  or  to 
detect  the  relative  strength  of  desires 
that  have  twined  together  in  the  mind. 
Then  comes  in  well  this  practical  test, 
What,  on  the  whole,  is  the  bent  of  the 
character  and  will?  What  are  the 
ends  for  which  one  lives  day  after  day  ? 
— D.  Fraser,  D.D. 

The  true  test  of  character  in  the  king- 
dom of  God. — Our  Lord  has  just  said 
that  there  are  a  few  that  find  "  the 
strait  gate,"  and  that  walk  in  "  the 
narrow  way "  "  which  leadeth  nnto 
life."  But  having  said  that  He  pro- 
ceeds to  warn  His  hearers  against  such 
as  might  mislead  them.  Hence  the 
caution — "  Beware  of  false  prophets." 
The  text  suggests  : — 

I.  The  true  and  false  in  human  life. 
— "  Beware  of  the  false  !  " 

1 .  In  all  ages  the  false  has  followed 
the  true. — False  money  is  never  coined 
except  where  good  money  exists.  Quack 
doctors  obtain  patronage  only  because 
there  are  true  physicians.  False 
remedies  are  sold  only  because  there 
are  good  remedies.  False  diamonds 
could  not  be  sold  were  there  no  real 
diamonds.  Of  course,  the  nearer  the 
false  approaches  the  true  the  more 
dangerous  it  is. 

2.  The  Scriptures  treat  largely  of  the 
false,  that  we  may  he  on  our  gvxird. — 

(1)  False  gods.  (2)  False  doctrines. 
(3)  False  hopes.  (4)  False  teachers. 
What  irony  !  A  prophet  false  ?  Yes. 
Such  are  found  all  along  and  down  the 
line  of  history.  "  Mere  talent,"  says 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  "ought  not  to  attract 
us.     Carrion,  well  dressed  and  served 

181 


CHAP.  VII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


on  Palissy  ware,  is  still  unfit  for  men.  show   of   things   went,   the    worthless 

As  we  would  not  be  fascinated  by  the  plants  indeed  had  the  advantage.     It 

azure   hues   of   a   serpent,    so  neither  was    the   ripe,    rich   fruit   alone   that 

should  we  be  thrown  off  our  guard  by  proved   the   generous   quality   of    the 

the  talents  of  an  unsound  theologian."  tree.      And   so,    says   Christ,    are  the 

3.  Seek  the  good,  the  7'eal,  and  the  false  prophets  to  be  known  from  the 
durable. — There  is  a  true  God ;  there  true,  and  thus  are  religious  professions 
are  true  doctrines  ;  there  are  true  and  to  be  tested,  and  religious  systems,  and 
blessed  hopes  and  promises ;  there  are  everything  that  either  is,  or  pretends 
true  teachers — the  chief  of  which  is  to  be,  of  God.  That  form  of  Chris- 
Jesus  Christ ;  there  are  true  Christians  tianity  which  shows  the  largest  propor- 
and  true  characters.  tion  of  strong,  unworldly,  self -forgetting 

II.  The  infallible  test  by  which  the  lives  is  proved  by  that  fact  to  have 
true  and  false  may  be  distinguished,  most  of  the  mind  of  Christ.  Our 
and  therefore  detected. — "  Ye  shall  common  Christianity  must  always  de- 
know  them  by  their  fruits,"  by  the  pend  upon  this  in  the  long  run. 
practical  results  of  their  life  and  teach-  I.  We  are  witnessing  a  deliberate 
ing.  attempt  in  many  quarters  to  prove 

1.  Fruit  is  the  natural  production  of  that  the  moral  fruits  of  Christianity 
life.  owe  nothing  to  its  beliefs. — That  were 

2.  Fruit  develops  according  to  the  the  creed  of  Christianity  gone,  its  works 
nature  of  its  root. — As  in  the  natural  might  and  would  survive ;  that  men  of 
world  so  in  the  spiritual,  every  species  the  most  opposite  schools,  from  the 
brings  forth  fruit  "  after  its  kind."  extreme    Calvinist     to     the     extreme 

3.  Fruit  may  he  seen  as  it  tells  on  agnostic,  are  equally  lovable  in  char- 
the  future. — J.  Harries.  acter  and  equally  great  and  generous 

in  their  devotion  to  self-denying  aims 

Yer.  16.  The  test  of  fruit. — I.  There  and    labours   for   human   good;    that 

is  a  necessary  distinction  to  be  made  men  can  be  Christians  in  act  and  fact 

between  true  and  false  teachers.  though  they  deny  almost  every  truth 

II.  The  making  of  this  distinction  which  Christians  have  held  sacred ; 
falls  within  the  duty  and  capacity  of  and  that,  in  fact,  what  we  call  re- 
private  Christians. — "  Ye  shall  know  ligious  beliefs  may  be  put  aside  and 
them."  yet  leave  all  that  is  most  attractive  and 

III.  What  fruits  these  are  from  generous  in  human  nature.  This  is  the 
which  even  private  Christians  may  insidious  teaching  of  the  books  which 
know  the  difference  between  true  and  are  having  a  popular  run — "  Eobert 
falss  teachers. — By  their  fruits,  I  Elsmere,"  "  John  Ward,  Preacher,"  "A 
think,  must  be  meant  the  natural  Story  of  a  South  African  Farm,"  and 
tendency  and  consequents  of  their  in  a  somewhat  less  degree  Edna  Lyall's 
corrupt  doctrines,  both  on  themselves  works — all  of  them  full  of  pure  and 
and  others,  which  are  visible,  and  so  tender  thought,  suffused  with  the  finest 
may  be  easily  known. — Jas.Blair,M.A.  Christian  sentiment,  and  pointing  to 

unexceptionable  moral  ideals. 

Ver.  20.  By  their  fruits. — One  can  II.  There  are  a  few  who  have  cut 

hardly  make  this  figure  plainer  than  it  themselves  ofi*  from  the  original  source 

is.     It  is  by  the  produce  of  the  tree  of  inspiration,  yet  carry  with  them  still 

only  that  its  innermost  nature  is  re-  some,  or  all,  of  its  moral  effects,  and 

vealed.        Appearances    may    deceive,  unbelievers   point   to   them   and   say : 

The  thorns  to  which  our  Saviour  re-  *'  See   what   great   and   generous   and 

ferred  bore  a  small  black  berry,  very  true  lives  men  can  live  without  your 

much  like  the  grape,  and  the  thistles  Christian  beliefs  ! "     But  what  was  it 

put  forth  a  flower  closely  resembling  that  made  those  lives  great  and  true  7 

that  of   the  fig-tree.      So  far   as  the  Many  a  man   remains   noble,  though 

182 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


the  mother  who  trained  him  to  that  are  always  apologising  for  the  scanti- 

nobility  is  dead.     But  is  any  one  so  ness  of  our  service,  because  we  set  it 

foolish  as  to  say  that  the  mother  had  against  the  claim  of  a  perfect  Master, 

nothing  to  do  with  it  because  she  is  no  But  set  the  church  against  the  world 

longer  present  to  influence  that  life  ?  and  it  has  no  need  to  apologise  at  all. 

Last  year  one  of  my  plum  trees  had  a  If   a   Christian   falls   and   becomes    a 

branch  laden  with  fruit  nearly  smitten  scandal  a  thousand  voices  proclaim  it. 

off  by  the  storm.     It  hung  on  by  a  It  was  so  unexpected  there ;  yet  the 

mere  strip  of  fibre  and  bark,  yet  the  same  thing  is  happening  every  day  in 

fruit  showed  no  decay.     I  gathered  it  the  ranks  of  unbelievers,  and  the  world 

a  month   afterwards   sweet  and  ripe,  takes  it  as  a  matter  of  course.    No  one 

But  what  insanity  it  were  to  suppose  looked   for    any   particular    fruits    of 

that   the   fruit   owed    nothing   to    its  righteousness     there.       So,    also,    we 

living  connection  with  the  tree.     The  grieve  over  the  want  of  unity  in  the 

effects  of  forces  often  remain  long  after  church,     over      the      jealousies      and 

the  forces  have  ceased  to  operate.    The  divisions    in    the    church.       Yet   are 

locomotive  does  not  suddenly  stop  when  there     not     more     and     far    bitterer 

the  steam  is  shut  off ;  the  tidal  wave  divisions,  hatreds,  and  class  alienations 

still   flows   for    a   while,    though    the  outside     the     church  ?        And     what 

attraction  of   the  moon  is  no   longer  brotherhoods  are  equal  to  those  of  the 

felt ;    and    the    glory    of    a    summer  church — the  staunch  friendships,   the 

evening  lingers  on,  gliding  into  tremu-  lovely   sympathies,   the   care    and   in- 

lous  and  beautiful  twilight,  long  after  terest  for  each  other  ?     And,  finally, 

the  sun,  which  was  the  source  of  the  where  do  you  find  the  happy,  joyous, 

illumination,   has  vanished  below  the  patient,  and  serene  lives,  rounded  off 

horizon.    The  fruits  of  Christianity  are  with  sweet  content,  and  holy  calm,  and 

often  found  in  those  who  have  drifted  strong  hopefulness  ? — J.  G.  Greenhough, 

from  Christian  beliefs.  M.A. 

III.    The   instant   Christianity  and 

unbelief  are  brought  face  to  face  in  Vers.  21-23.    The  true  qualification 

this  way  and  challenged  to  show  their  for    admission     into     the    kingdom. — 

respective  fruits,  the  question  is  settled  I.  That  true  religion  is  not  a  mere  pro- 

beyond  all  doubt.     Which  of  the  two  fession. — "  Not  every  one  that  saith 

classes   contains  the  high-minded  and  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord,"  etc. 

honourable  members  of  the  community?  1.    True  discipleship  is  not   merely 

Who  fill  the  positions  of  trust?    Where  nominal. 

do  the  active  philanthropists  come  from  2.    True   discipleship   is  not  merely 

except  from  the  churches  ?     Who  are  official. — "  Many   will    say   to   Me   in 

foremost  in  all   educational   matters?  that   day.    Lord,    Lord,    etc."       These 

From  what   homes  do  the  sober  and  words  suggest,  (1)  that  teaching  and 

industrious   young  men  go  forth,  and  active  zeal  for  Christ  is  no  guarantee 

the  maidens   who   make  the  sweetest  for  a  holy  life.     Moreover,  these  words 

a,nd  the  most  helpful  wives  ?     Really,  suggest  (2)  a  religion  of  merit.     "  May 

it  is  almost  absurd  to  ask  the  question,  we   not   merit  the  favour  of  God  by 

because  the  answer  is  so  self-evident,  what  we  have  done  ?  "  say  many.     The 

We  are  always  confessing  oiir  inconsis-  religion  of  merit  is  the  reHgion  of  self- 

tencies  as  Christians,  always  lamenting  conceit,  and  self-deception, 

that  our  churches   are  not  sufficiently  3.    True  discipleship   is  not   merely 

awake  to  their  calling,  that  our  church  orthodoxy. — We  may  be  up  in  theory 

members  fall   far  below  their  profes-  but   down   in   practice.     We   may   be 

sions ;    and   this   is   right.      It    is    a  thoroughly  versed  in  the  principles  of 

necessity  of  our  position.     Our  ideal  is  music,  and  yet  not  able  to  perform  a 

so   great  that  the   performance  must  single  note.     We  may  be  able  to  teach 

always  seem  poor  and  incomplete.    AVe  grammar  and  rhetoric,  and  yet  be  very 

183 


CHAP.  VII.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


feeble  and  clumsy  speakers.  A  clear- 
headed doctor  of  divinity  may  be  able 
to  work  out  the  stiifest  truth  in  theo- 
Ibgy,  as  he  would  reason  out  a  syllo- 
gism in  logic  or  a  problem  in  Euclidj 
but  yet  lack  experimental  knowledge 
of  the  truth.  A  brilliant  poet  may 
rhyme  admirably  the  virtues  of  the 
gospel,  and  yet  be  himself  sadly 
wanting  in  a  virtuous  life.  A  physician 
may  prescribe  to  others  and  restore 
them,  and  yet  die  himself  for  the  want 
of  taking  the  same  pi-escription.  A 
preacher  may  preach  to  others,  and  yet 
he  himself  become  a  castaway. 

II.  That  true  religion  is  real  and 
practical. — "  He  that  doeth  the  will," 
etc. 

1.  Obedience  to  God  is  the  sum  of 
religion. 

2.  Obedience  to  God  is  faith  in  action. 

3.  Obedience  is  the  test  of  love. — A 
child  was  told  to  bring  her  father's 
slippers,  but  she  wanted  to  play.  At 
length  she  does  it,  but  unwillingly, 
saying,  "  I's  b'ing  'um,  papa ;  but  I 
guess  you  needn't  say  thank  you, 
'cause  I  only  did  it  with  my  hands ; 
my  heart  kept  saying,  I  won't."  Those 
who  wish  to  see  a  splendid  programme 
of  a  perfect  obedience  must  begin  at 
Bethlehem,  and  follow  on  the  life  of 
Christ  to  Calvary,  "  obedient  unto 
death." 

III.  The  danger  and  doom  of  pre- 
tence and  formality. — "  Many  will  say 
to  Me  in  that  day,  '  Lord,  Lord,' "  etc. 

1.  Deception  exposed. — *'  I  never 
knew  you." 

2.  Deception  denounced  and  doomed. — 
"  Depart  from  Me."  There  are  limits 
to  Divine  long-suffering  and  mercy. — 
J.  UarHes. 

Ver.  21.  Solemn  warnings. — The 
gate  to  righteousness  is  a  strait  gate  ; 
the  way  to  righteousness  is  a  narrow 
way ;  it  is  the  gate  and  way  of 
obedience  to  the  laws  of  God,  for  these 
are  the  laws  of  spiritual  well-being. 
No  man  can  violate  the  laws  of  health 
either  in  body  or  soul  and  preserve  a 
strong  constitution  by  morning  and 
evening   prayers.     One    of    his    con- 

184 


temporaries  says  of  Cardinal  Lorraine 
that  he  was  avaricious,  malignant,  cruelj 
and  deceitful j  but  "  full  of  religion*" 
In  no  age  of  the  world  have  there  been 
Wanting  false  prophets  to  tell  men  how 
they  might  have  the  Cardinal's  religion; 
how  they  might  lie,  cheat,  rob,  murder, 
how  they  might  indulge  their  ambition, 
their  avarice,  their  animal  nature,  and 
yet  be  secure  of  heaven.  Sometimes 
these  false  prophets  have  told  their 
hearers : — 

I.  To  pay  the  church  and  the 
ministry  liberally.     E.g.,  Tetzel. 

II.  To  join  the  church. 

III.  That  a  mystic  rite  brings 
salvation. 

IV.  That  since  God  is  merciful  He 
will  bring  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
every  one,  whether  he  has  sought  or 
not. — The  condition  of  attaining  the 
character  of  a  child  of  God  is  twofold  : 

1.  A  high,  spiritual  aspiration — a  seek- 
ing of  glory,  honour,  and  immortahty. 

2.  That  aspiration  made  the  impulse 
and  motive  of  lofty  and  persistent 
practical  endeavour,  manifested  in  a  life 
of  patient  continuance  in  well-doing. — 
L.  Abbott,  D.D. 

The  great  test. — Alas,  for  many 
hearers  of  the  word  !  Alas,  for  many 
admirers  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount !  Where  will  they  be  when 
everything  turns  on  the  question 
"Wert  thou  a  doer  of  it?"— J".  M. 
Gibson,  D.D. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Self-deception.  — 
1.  There  is  a  day  of  judgment  appointed 
for  all  men  when  Christ  shall  sit  as 
Judge.  2.  Many  build  hopes  of  heaven 
upon  great  gifts  and  employments  in 
the  ministry,  given  to  them  with  some 
success,  who  shall  be  rejected  of  Christ. 

3.  All  men  have  need  to  beware  lest 
they  deceive  themselves  in  the  matter 
of  their  own  salvation,  when  they  hear 
that  preachers  and  prophets  and 
workers  of  miracles  deceive  themselves, 
and  may  be  destitute  of  saving  faith 
and  sound  repentance,  which  they  do 
preach  to  others.  4.  Such  as  Christ 
shall  reject  at  the  last  day  were  never 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


endued  with  saving  grace,  or  accounted  ward  conversation  seem  to  themselves 

by  Him   for    true    beHevers,    for    He  or  others,  are  in  Christ's  account  but 

saith,    "  I   will   profess  unto  them,   I  workers   of    iniquity,    and    shall    not 

never   knew   you."      5.    Such   as   are  dwell   in   His   company  in  heaven. — 

destitute  of  true  faith  and  repentance,  David  Dickson. 
however  specious  their  gifts  and  out- 

MAIJSr  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  24—29. 

Striking  home. — In  the  earlier  part  of  these  words  we  find  our  Saviour  bringing 
His  solemn  discourse  to  a  close.  In  the  latter  part  we  have  an  account  of  the 
effect  it  produced  at  the  time.  The  two  together  may  be  regarded  as  showing 
us  two  opposite  things,  viz.  on  the  one  hand,  the  solemn  testimony  of  Christ  to 
His  hearers  ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  open  testimony  of  His  hearers  to  Him. 

I.  His  testimony  to  them. — This  was  such  as  to  put  before  them,  in  the  first 
place,  a  serious  twofold  choice.     Just  before  (vers.  21-23),  He  seems  to  have  been 
speaking  of  more  than  one  unsatisfactory  way  of  dealing  with  His  words ;  the 
way  of  mere  profession,  the  way  of  mere  preaching,  the  way  of  mere  work.     In 
reality  and  essence,  these  came  to  but  one.    These  were  all  ways — however  varied 
ways — of  doing   one  thing,  viz.  of  hearing  Christ  with  contempt.     Here  is  the 
vital  point  in  this  matter  of  hearing.     To  hear  and  obey  is  to  hear  with  respect. 
To  hear  without  doing  is  to  hear  with  contempt.     One  of  the  two  all  His  hearers 
must  do  (vers.  24,  26).    There  is  no  other  method;  no  middle  course  ;  ro  possible 
third.     This  testimony  gives  warning,  in  the  next  place,  of  a  serious  common 
experience.     Both  these  ways  of  hearing  will  be  tested  in  time  in  a  similar  way. 
Both    "  buildings  "   will   be   exposed,   in   the   nature   of   things,   to  essentially 
identical  perils,  perils  of  waters,  perils  of  winds,  perils  of  both  not  only  "  beat- 
ing" on,  but  as  it  were  "smiting"  their  walls  (vers.   25,  27).      Cf.  also  such 
passages  as  Job  i.   11  ;  Luke  xxii.  31  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  7;  1  Cor.  iii.  13;  1  Pet.  i.  7  ; 
Rev.   iii.    10.     Also    such  passages  as  declare  that  the  "good   fish"  and    the 
"  bad,"  the  "  tares"  and  the  "  wheat,"  the  "  goats"  and  the  "  sheep,"  are  to  be 
discriminated   first   and  then  divided  asunder.     A  day  of  judgment — a  day  of 
testing — on  whichever  side  we  really  are — is  to  come  to  us  all.      Lastly,  this 
testimony  speaks,  in  consequence,  of  a  serious  twofold  result.     There  will  be  the 
result  of  failure,  or  else  of  success ;  of  approval  or  of  condemnation ;  of  confirmed 
stability  or  of  ruin.     This  is  inevitable  in  the  nature  of  things.     The  man  who 
does  as  the  Saviour  counsels  is  treating  those  counsels  with  reverence  ;  in  other 
words,  he  is  building  on  a  "  rock,"  and  doing  as  wisdom  dictates.     The  man  who 
does  otherwise  is  practically  despising  them.     He,  on  the  other  hand,  is  building 
on  the  "  sand,"  and  doing  as  folly  dictates.    It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  such 
different  courses,   when  they  come  to  be  tested,  should  have  a  common  result. 
Hardly  any  amount  of  wind  and  water  will  affect  the  removal  of  a  "rock."' 
Almost  any  amount  of  wind  and  water  will  do  this  for  the  "  sand  " ;  and  therefore,, 
of  course,  for  all  that  which  has  been  erected  upon  it.     The  more  conspicuous 
this  is,   therefore,   the   more   conspicuous   also   will   be   the   magnitude   of   its 
wreck  (ver.  27). 

II.  Their  testimony  to  Him. — In  a  general  way,  this  may  be  expressed  in  one 
word.  It  was  the  testimony  of  astonishment.  "  They  were  astonished  at  His 
doctrine."  Astonished  at  it  in  two  ways,  and  on  two  different  grounds. 
Astonished,  first,  at  its  claims.  All  that  their  usual  teachers  even  pretended  to 
was  very  much  less.  They  claimed  only  to  sit  "  in  Moses'  seat,"  and  to  be  the 
expounders  of  his  teaching.  Only  up  to  that — not  a  step  above  that — did  they 
venture  to  claim.  Cf.  Matt.  xix.  7;  Mark  xii.  19;  John  ix.  28.  As  to 
"adding  to"  his  words,  whatever  they  did  in  practice  (Mark  vii.  13),  that  they 

185 


CHAP.  VII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


professed  to  abhor  (Acts  vi.  14).  Yet  this,  on  the  other  hand,  though  only  in 
the  way  of  confirming,  is  just  what  Christ  claimed  to  do  in  this  case.  Moses 
said  so  much.  I  say  to  you  more.  Moses  gave  this  law.  I  give  you  a  further. 
Also  the  Saviour  did  this — which  is  of  even  greater  importance — in  a  way  of  His 
own.  The  utmost  that  could  be  said  of  Moses  was  that  he  spake  as  he  was  told. 
He  was  faithful  as  a  servant  in  all  his  house  (Heb.  iii.  5).  Christ  speaks  here 
as  a  son.  He  adds  and  explains ;  He  alters  and  modifies ;  He  assures  and 
predicts ;  He  legislates  and  enacts — all  on  no  authority  but  His  own.  No 
wonder,  therefore,  that  His  hearers  compared  this  with  that  lack  of  authority 
which  was  so  conspicuous  with  the  scribes  ;  and  were  astounded  thereby.  Equally 
astounded  were  they,  in  the  next  place,  at  His  manifest  power.  It  was  not  only 
that  He  claimed  such  authority.  It  was  felt  also  that  His  teaching  possessed  it. 
There  was  that  about  it  which  compelled  their  attention.  There  was  that  in  it 
which  made  it  sink  into  their  thoughts.  From  the  peculiarity  of  the  expression 
employed,  rjv  8i8ao-Ko>f,  He  "  was  teaching  "  with  authority — it  would  appear 
that  they  felt  this  all  the  way  through.  All  that  they  heard  Him  say  they  felt 
to  be  worthy  of  saying.  All  that  His  manner  claimed  His  matter  justified. 
There  was  a  weight  and  lucidity  and  decision — a  holiness  also,  and  justice  and 
mercy — a  majesty,  and  at  the  same  time  a  meekness — about  all  that  He  said 
which  made  them  listen  to  it,  if  not  as  yet  with  perfect  faith,  yet  with  the  pro- 
foundest  respect.  "Never  man  spake  like  this  man  "  (John  vii.  46).  "  As  He 
spake  these  words,  many  believed  on  Him  "  (John  viii.  30).  "  He  was  mighty 
in  word"  (Luke  xxiv.  19).  These  things,  which  were  said  of  Him  afterwards, 
describe  what  was  felt  concerning  Him  from  the  first. 

From  this  account  of  the  close  of  our  Saviour's  great  opening  discourse  several 
reflections  aiise : — 

1.  How  completely  it  answered  its  purpose. — Coming  when  it  did,  its  great 
object  was  to  prepare  men  for  His  ministry.  The  verdict  of  His  hearers  shows 
that  this  was  thoroughly  effected.  They  left  Him  with  the  conviction  that  He 
was  one  who  knew  what  He  said,  and  who,  therefore,  was  worth  hearing  again. 

2.  How  comparatively  limited,  yet,  was  its  scope. — It  is  full  of  our  duties, 
less  full  of  our  hopes.  It  was  not  such  an  "  invitation  "  as  afterwards  (Matt. 
xi.  28).  Nor  had  it  quite  such  a  result  as  afterwards  (John  xvi.  29).  It  was 
the  "  Sinai,"  in  short,  rather  than  the  "  Zion "  of  the  New  Testament  (Heb. 
xii.  22)  ;  an  introduction  to  the  gospel — as  became  its  position — rather  than 
the  gospel  itself. 

3.  How  sitggestive,  therefore,  its  position. — Does  it  not  point  us,  for  fulness 
of  knowledge,  to  the  end  of  Christ's  ministry  ?  And  do  we  not  find  this  fulness 
in  those  discourses  pronounced  by  Him  (Matt.  xxvi.  26-29  ;  John  xiv.-xvi.)  on 
the  night  of  His  death  ?  Here,  as  we  have  seen,  we  are  taught  principally  about 
the  nature  of  our  duties.  In  Matthew,  as  above,  we  are  taught  where  to 
find  mercy  for  our  failures  in  duty.  In  John,  as  above,  where  to  find  help  in 
doing  better  in  future. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Ver.    2  4.  General  observations  from,  profession,   or  in  his  gifts,  or  in  the 

the    Sermon   07i    the   Mount. — I.    The  great  esteem  he  acquires  in  the  world, 

connection  of  this  part  with  the  fore-  if  he  neglects  the  main  thing,  a  sincere 

going    in    the    particle    "  therefore."  obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  gospel. 

From  what  has  gone  before  it  follows  II.  Our    Saviour's    Sermon   on  the 

clearly  that  he  is  a  very  unwise  man  Mount  contains  all  things  which  were 

who  bestows  his  pains  and  places  his  then  necessary   to   salvation. — As  to 

hopes  in  his  knowledge,  or   faith,  or  faith  in   Christ,    it   is   probable    they 

186 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vil. 


had  it  as  far  as  was  then  necessary  for  Evidently  this  foolish  man  is  not  one 

persons  in  their  circumstances.     As  to  who  makes  a  mistake  in  judgment  as 

Christian  hope,  besides  what  the  Jews  to   the   best   foundation  for  a  house, 

knew   before   of   a    future   state,   our  judging  sand  to  be  the  best,  which  in 

Saviour     had,     in    this    Sermon,    ac-  certain  circumstances  it  really  is ;  but, 

quainted  them  with  the  great  rewards  rather,  one  who  loses  sight  of  the  fact 

in    heaven,    and    everlasting    life,    to  that   the   foundation   of    a    house    is 

which  the  narrow  way  of  duty  leads,  matter     of     prime     importance,     and 

and     with     that     destruction     which  thoughtlessly     begins    to    build,    like 

attends  the  going  on  securely  in  the  children    who    amuse    themselves    by 

broad  way  of  sin.     He  had  acquainted  erecting  miniature  houses  on  the  sea- 

them,  likewise,  with  the  great  day  of  shore,      within      high-water       mark, 

accounts,   and  what  would   and  what  destined   to   be   washed    away   a    few 

would  not  be  accepted  as  a  discharge  hours    after    by    the    inrolling    tide, 

of  their  duty.  Let  us  now  see  what  light  this  fact 

III.  This  doctrine  of  our  Saviour's,  throws  on  the   interpretation  of   the 

contained  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  whole  passage. 

belongs  to  all  men. — "  Whosoever."  I.  We  can  see  the  special  appro- 

lY.  Christ's  doctrine  is  a  practical  priateness  of  the  emblems  employed 

doctrine. — "  Doeth  them."  by  our  Lord  to  represent  two  different 

1.  In  its  own  nature  it  is  all  reducible  types  of  men  in  reference  to  religion. 
to  practice. — It  is  not  a  system  of  hard  On  the  general  appropriateness  of 
and  unintelligible  terms  and  dis-  these  emblems  it  is  unnecessary  to 
tinctions,  etc.  dilate.     1.  The  building  of  a  house  is 

2.  It  is  our  Saviour's  great  design  manifestly  an  apt  emblem  of  the  pro- 
that  it  he  applied  to  this  use. — For,  fession  and  practice  of  religion.  (1)  A 
(1)  God's  glory;  (2)  our  neighbour's  house  is  for  rest. — It  is  our  place  of 
good;  (3)  our  own  soul's  benefit. —  abode,  our  home.  In  like  manner  reli- 
Jas.  Blair,  M.A.  gion  is  the  rest  of  the  soul  (Ps.  cxvi.  7, 

xc.  1).    (2)  A  house  is  for  shelter  from,  the 

Vers.    24-27.  The   wise   and  foolish  elements. — In  like   manner  religion  is 

hearers. — The  contrast  intended  is  not  the   soul's  shelter   from   sin,   tempta- 

that   between   two    men    deliberately  tion,    fear,    and   care  (Ps.   xci.    1,    2). 

selecting     different     foundations     on  (3)  A  house  is  for  comfort. — It  is  the 

which  to  build,  but  that  between  two  scene  of  domestic  happiness  and  peace, 

men,  one  of  whom    makes   the  foun-  Even  so  is  religion  the  bliss  of  the  soul 

dation    a    matter   of   deliberate   con-  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  4,  Ixv.  4).     2.  A  difficulty 

sideration,    while    the   other,   on    the  may  be  felt  in  reference  to  the  house 

contrary,     never    takes    a    moment's  built    on    the    sand.     A    flood    in    a 

thought  about  a  foundation,  but  pro-  river   is   a   thing  of   annual,  or   even 

ceeds   to  build  at   haphazard,  on  the  more    frequent,    occurrence ;     and    it 

surface,     anywhere,    just     where     he  seems   to   violate   all    natural    proba- 

happens  to  be — on  the  loose  sand  on  bility  to  represent  men  as  acting  in 

the  banks,  or  even  in  the  bed,  of  a  entire   disregard  of  so   gi^eat   a   risk, 

river  dried  up  by  the  severe  drought  But   in  this  very  violation  of  proba- 

and    scorching    heat   of    summer,    as  bility  lies  the  very  point  and  peculiar 

rivers   are  so  apt  to  be  in  the  East.  appositeness   of    the   metaphor.      For 

Insight  into  the  whole  connection  of  Christ  would  suggest  that  men  do  in 

thought  in  the  Sermon  might  lead  us  religion  things  the  like  of  which  they 

to   this   conclusion,   even   were   we  to  would    not    dream    of    doing  in    the 

confine    our    attention   to    Matthew's  ordinary  affairs  of   life ;  and  the  im- 

narrative ;    but   it   is    forced    on  our  plied  assertion  is  unhappily  too  true, 

attention  by  the  way  in  which  Luke  3.   We  are  at  the  same  time  impressed 

reports  Christ's  words  (Luke  vi.  48,  49).  with  the  peculiar  appositeness  of  the 

187 


CHAP.  viL    HOMILEfiC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


other  comparison,  of  the  man  who 
heareth  and  doeth,  to  one  who  being 
minded  to  build  a  house,  begins  by- 
digging,  and  going  deep  in  digging,  for 
a  foundation.  It  points  him  out  in 
contrast  to  the  other  as  one  who 
considers  well  what  he  is  about,  bears 
in  mind  all  the  uses  of  a  house,  and  all 
that  it  may  have  to  endure.  In  a 
word,  his  characteristics  are  consider- 
ateness  and  thoroughness,  as  those  of 
the  other  are  inconsiderateness  and 
superficiality. 

II.  What  light  is  thrown  on  the 
difference  between  the  two  classes  of 
men  spoken  of  by  the  Preacher,  by 
the  contrast  drawn  between  the  two 
builders. — Our  Lord  Himself  distin- 
guishes the  two  classes  by  representing 
a  man  of  the  one  class  as  one  who 
heareth  His  sayings  and  doeth  them, 
and  a  man  of  the  other  class  as  one 
who  heareth  His  sayings  and  doeth 
them  not.  The  distinction  is  suffi- 
ciently definite  for  practical  purposes. 
We  all  have  an  approximately  correct 
idea  of  the  two  types  of  character  thus 
discriminated.  It  will  be  observed 
that  in  the  figurative  representation 
both  men  appear  as  building  a  house. 
The  difference  lies  in  the  quality  of  their 
work.  1.  Two  points  of  difference  in 
character  are  clearly  hinted  at.  (1)  The 
wise  builder  has  a  prudent  regard  to 
the  future ;  the  foolish  builder  thinks 
only  of  the  present.  (2)  The  wise 
builder  does  not  look  merely  to  appear- 
ance ;  the  foolish  builder  cares  for 
appearance  only.  His  house  looks  as 
well  as  another's,  so  far  as  what  is 
above  ground  is  concerned ;  and  as  for 
what  is  below  ground,  that,  in  his 
esteem,  goes  for  nothing.  Carrying 
these  two  distinctions  with  us  into  the 
spiritual  sphere,  we  are  supplied  with 
the  means  of  distinguishing  very 
exactly  between  the  genuine  and  the 
spurious  professors  of  religion.  The 
spurious  look  only  to  what  is  seen,  the 
outward  act ;  the  genuine  look  to 
what  is  not  seen,  the  hidden  foundation 
of  inward  disposition,  the  heart-motive, 
out  of  which  flow  the  issues  of  life. 
2.    But  another  equally   marked   dis- 

188 


tinction  between  the  genuine  and  the 
counterfeit  disciple  is  to  be  found  in 
their  respective  attitudes  towards  the 
future.  The  one  has  forethought,  the 
other  none. 

III.  The  infallible  judges  of  the 
builders  and  their  work. — The  rain, 
the  wind,  the  floods.  Trial  is  to  be 
expected  and  may  come  quite  suddenly. 
—A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 

Character-building. — I.  All  men  are 
building. 

II.  All  builders  have  a  choice  of 
foundations. 

III.  All  foundations  will  be  tried. 

IV.  Only  one  foundation  will  stand. 
— Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

The  wise  builder  and  the  foolish. — 
Moses  descended  a  terrible  mountain 
in  the  wilderness,  bringing  the  law  for 
Israel  inscribed  on  tablets  of  stone. 
The  Prophet  "  like  unto  Moses  "  sat  on 
a  mountain  of  Palestine  in  the  sun- 
shine, with  His  disciples  and  the 
multitude  listening  while  He  opened 
His  mouth  in  blessings,  and  then  pro- 
ceeded to  indicate  the  deeper  meanings 
of  the  Divine  law,  and  to  explain  the 
righteousness  which  belongs  to  the 
Divine  kingdom  among  men.  Sore 
punishments  were  denounced  against 
those  "  who  despised  Moses'  law."  A 
grave  responsibility  fell  on  those  who 
heard  Christ's  teaching  on  the  mount. 
So  in  closing  His  discourse.  He  warned 
His  hearers  not  to  think  it  enough  to 
pay  an  outward  respect  to  His  in- 
struction. They  should  be  doers  of 
the  word,  and  not  hearers  only.  The 
admonition  is  for  all  who  read  His 
words,  as  much  as  for  those  who 
originally  heard  them.  It  is  much 
needed ;  for  scarcely  any  part  of 
Scripture  has  been  more  praised  and 
less  obeyed  than  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount. 

I.  The  two  builders.— 1.  To  the 
wise  builder  "  shall  be  likened "  the 
obedient  hearer  of  the  words  of  Christ. 
To  some  this  mode  of  describing  a 
Christian  appears  to  be  scarcely 
evangelical.     It  seems  to  lay  stress  on 


HOMILETIC  C0MMEN2ARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


doing,  and  not  on  believing.      But  in 

reality   to   "do    the   words "   and    to 

believe  on  Him  who  uttered  them  are 

not  different  actions  of  the  mind,  but 

essentially    one    and    the   same.       It 

should  be  observed  that  the  Sermon  on 

the  Mount  was  delivered  at  an  early 

stage  of  our  Lord's  career,  when  He 

showed     Himself     in     Galilee     as     a 

prophet.      In  that  capacity  He  spoke, 

and    the    proper    mode    in   which   to 

express  faith  in  Him  was  to  hearken 

to  His  sayings  and  keep  them.     When 

He  came  to  be  more  fully  revealed  in 

His  saving  purpose  and  power,  more 

emphasis  was  laid  on    faith   in  Him. 

Those  who  follow  Him  are  disciples,  as 

He  is  their  Teacher ;  believers,  as  He 

is  their  Saviour.     In   fact,  it  is  the 

adherence   of    the    whole    heart    and 

mind     to    the     Lord    Jesus    that    is 

essential  and  fundamental.     This  is  to 

base  the  house  upon  the  rock.     2.  To 

the  foolish  builder  "  shall  be  likened  " 

the   disobedient  hearer  of  the  words  of 

Christ.       He    listens    and    seems    to 

honour  and  approve,  yet  does  not  keep 

or  do  the  word — is  no  true  disciple. 

II.  The  day  of  trial. — In  fair 
weather  the  two  houses  described  may 
look  equally  safe,  but  a  day  of  storm 
soon  tells  the  difference.  Now  there 
are  many  critical  hours  in  life  that  test 
to  some  extent  our  spiritual  character 
and  hope  ;  but  the  day  of  judgment 
indicated  for  the  two  houses  is  properly 
that  day  of  which  our  Lord  had  spoken 
in  which  doers  of  His  Father's  will 
will  be  received  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  and  workers  of  iniquity,  how- 
ever they  may  cry  "  Lord,  Lord,"  will 
be  shut  out.  The  higher  and  larger 
the  foolish  builder's  house,  the  greater 
the  ruin  into  which  it  falls.  Dis- 
appointment of  vain  hopes  confidently 
cherished,  enhances  the  misery  of 
perdition.  With  these  sad  words, 
"  Great  was  the  fall  of  it,"  ended  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount. — D.  Eraser,  B.D. 

Builders  in  the  kingdom  :  a  contrast. 
— I.  The  two  builders. 
II.  The  two  foundations. 
HL  The  two  results. — J.  Harries. 


Vers.  24,  25.  The  right  hearers  of 
Christ's  sayings. — I.  The  description 
of  a  good  Christian. — He  is  a  n\an  well 
instructed  in  the  Christian  doctrine, 
and  one  that  frames  his  life  and  con- 
versation according  to  the  direction 
thereof. 

1.  The  right  qualifications  of  a 
hearer. — (1)  It  is  necessary  that  he 
shake  off  whatever  may  obstruct  his 
hearing,  or  attending  to  what  he  hears. 

2)  Hearing  must  be  mixed  with  faith. 

3)  What  is  heard  must  be  retained. 

2.  The  doing. — There  are  a  great 
many  good  Christian  exercises  compre- 
hended under  this  practical  part; 
namely,  holy  resolution,  vigilance 
against  temptations,  fervent  prayer  for 
grace,  repentance  after  lapses,  courage 
against  evil  examples,  and  patience 
and  perseverance  to  the  end. 

II.  The  good  success  of  his  labours. 
— Consider  : 

\.  The  comparison  between  the  fabric 
of  religion  and  the  fabric  of  a  house. — 
As  building  a  great  house  is  one  of  the 
greatest  designs  men  commonly  under- 
take, a  design  which  ought  to  be  well 
laid,  and  the  expense  of  it  well  con- 
sidered before  it  is  gone  about,  so  it  is 
with  religion. 

2.  The  coTYiparison  between  a  lively 
faith  in  Christ,  and  the  laying  a  good 
solid  foundation  for  building  upon. — 
This  means,  (1)  serious  consideration 
and  forecast ;  (2)  faith  in  Christ ;  (3)  a 
firm  resolution  to  add  practice  to  our 
knowledge  of  Christ's  doctrine.  These 
three  are  the  digging  deep,  and  laying 
the  foundation  of  religion  so  solidly 
that  it  will  never  fail. 

3.  The  superstructure  of  a  good  life. 

4.  The  proof  of  the  excellency  and 
solidity  of  his  religion,  beyond  that  of 
the  hypocrite,  in  that  it  stood  firm 
against  all  shocks  and  trials. 

5.  The  consequence  of  this. — That  his 
religion  served  him  not  only  for  his 
present  temporary  ends,  but  like  a  good, 
well-built,  durable  house,  answered  the 
ends  of  a  lasting  habitation. — Jas. 
Blair,  M.A. 

Vers.     28,    29.    The     climax.— Th^ 

189 


CHAP.  VII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  all  through 
His  marvellous  life  excited  not  only 
admiration ;  it  also  excited  wonder  and 
amazement.  The  Evangelists  record 
such  several  times.  His  majestic 
authority  everywhere  commanded 
reverence  where  it  did  not  secure  love. 
Such  also  were  the  effects  and  results 
after  our  Lord  concluded  His  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  that  the  whole  multitude 
who  heard  it  were  ''  astonished  at  His 
doctrine,"  and  doubtless  scores  were 
converted  under  the  Sermon  and  sought 
discipleship.     Observe  : — 

I.  The  doctrine  which  He  taught. 
— *'  These  sayings,"  the  gospel  of  right- 
eousness. Jesus  Christ  did  not  deal  in 
metaphysical  subtleties,  or  philosophical 
abstractions,  or  theological  mysticism, 
but  in  practical  Christianity.  His 
theoretic  theology  was  always  intended 
to  lead  to  practical  religion.  He 
addressed  the  understanding  always 
in  order  to  reach  the  heart.  The 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  worth  more 
than  all  human  commentaries  upon 
the  law;  infinitely  superior  to  all 
codes  and  treatises  on  ethics,  and 
incomparably  above  all  systems  of 
moral  philosophy. 

1.  The  teaching  of  Christ  is  practical. 
— Practice  is  the  truth  lived. 

2.  The  teaching  of  Christ  is  practic- 
able.— The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  has 
given  us  a  very  high  ideal,  holding 
forth  a  standard  of  the  highest  ex- 
cellence conceivable ;  yet,  the  ideal  is 
approachable  and  attainable. 

II.  The  impression  produced. — 
**  Astonished ; "  or,  as  the  word  is 
sometimes  rendered,  amazed  or  as- 
tounded. But  what  gave  this  extra- 
ordinary power  to  His  teaching  ?  Some 
might  suggest  as  a  reason  His  natural- 
ness, others  His  oHginality,  others 
His  beautiful  simplicity,  others  His 
catholicity,  others  His  winning  manner. 
Doubtless  these  characteristics  had 
much  to  do  in  popularising  the  teaching 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  in  making  it 
tell  on  the  people  ;  even  "  the  common 
people " — that  is,  what  we  call  in 
our  day  *'  the  masses  "  —  "  heard  Him 
gladly."     But  there  is  a  deeper  secret 

190 


in  His  teaching  than  the  above  cha- 
racteristics, viz. :  — 

1.  His  power  lay  in  Himself. — He 
did  not  repeat  lessons  given  Him.  He 
did  not  teach  from  books  or  traditions. 
What  would  be  offensive  and  intoler- 
able egotism  in  other  teachers  was 
essential  in  Christ. 

2.  His  power  lay  in  His  life. — His 
life  is  an  expression  of  His  Divine 
thoughts,  is  the  melody,  the  charm,  and 
the  secret  and  the  convincing  power  in 
all  His  teaching.     But  learn  here — 

3.  The  terrible  possibility  of  being 
filled  with  amazement  and  yet  not  saved. 
— Astonishment  or  admiration  will  not 
save. 

III.  The  reason  assigned. — "For 
He  taught  as  one  having  authority," 
etc.  As  Dr.  Caird  puts  it,  "  the  truth 
we  receive  from  the  lips  of  another 
may  either  derive  its  authority  from 
the  teacher,  or  reflect  on  him  the 
authority  it  contains.  As  the  receiver 
of  money  may  argue,  either  that  f?he 
money  is  good  because  it  is  an  honest 
man  who  pays  it,  or  that  the  man  is 
honest  because  he  pays  good  money; 
so  in  the  communication  of  truth,  it 
may  be  a  valid  inference,  either  that 
the  doctrine  is  true  because  it  is  a 
trustworthy  man  who  teaches  it,  or 
that  the  man  who  teaches  is  veracious 
or  trustworthy  because  his  doctrine  is 
true ! "  The  word  authority  can  be 
taken  in  both  senses  in  the  text. 
1.  The  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  came  with 
authority,  because  of  His  inherent  Divine 
character.  2.  Because  of  the  credibility 
of  Him  who  taught. — J.  Harries. 

The  Divine  Teacher. — I.  The  ex- 
cellency of  the  doctrine. — Instead  of 
a  discourse  of  rites  and  ceremonies, 
customs  and  traditions,  wherewith  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees  used  to  entertain 
them,  here  was  an  instruction  of  the 
purest  morals  the  world  had  ever  been 
taught;  morals,  which  do  not  rest  in 
regulating  only  our  external  behaviour, 
but  such  as  reach  to  the  root  of  all  our 
disorders,  the  thoughts  and  imagina- 
tions of  the  heart.  The  doctrine  was  : 
1.  Admirable  in  itself .    2.  Well  adapted 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST,   MATTHEW,     chap.  vii. 


to  the  condition  and   circumstances   of 
the  hearers. 

II.  The  admirable  design,  order,  and 
contrivance  of  the  whole  discourse. — 
It  was  when  Christ  had  ended  these 
payings  that  the  people  were  astonished 
at  His  doctrine.  This  Sermon  was  so 
contiived  that  though  every  particu- 
lar part  of  it  was  beautiful,  there  is  a 
new  beauty  results  from  the  whole. 
The  first  part  (v.  1-13)  meets  the 
carnal  expectations  of  men,  from  the 
Messiah's  temporal  kingdom,  as  they 
imagined  it  would  be.  And  this  gave 
our  Saviour  an  opportunity  to  guard 
His  disciples  against  all  gross  immoral- 
ity and  profaneness,  and  to  principle 
them  in  the  contrary  virtues.  Then  in 
the  second  part  (v.  13  to  vii.  7) 
which  exposes  the  Pharisaical  right- 
eousness and  describes  at  large  how 
the  Christian  morals  are  to  exceed  it, 
we  find  the  several  parts  of  duty  set  oflT 
to  a  higher  degree  of  perfection  than 
ever  the  world  knew  before,  and  those 
vices  of  pride,  covetousness  and  cen- 
soriousness,  which  are  apt  to  stick 
to  the  better  sort  of  people,  most  ex- 
cellently guarded  against.  Then, 
lastly  (vii.  7-28)  being  now  well 
principled  against  both  profaneness 
and  hypocrisy,  great  care  is  taken  in 
the  end  to  direct  us  to  the  best  means 
of  reducing  these  precepts  to  practice, 
and  to  guard  against  all  the  ways 
whereby  holiness  and  virtue  aie 
commonly  undermined ;  and  we  are 
excellently  instructed  how  to  stand 
against  these. 

III.  The  wonderful  authority  of 
the  Speaker. — 1.  He  spake  not  like  a 
common  interpreter  of  the  law,  con- 
firming his  doctrine  as  the  Jewish 
doctors  commonly  did,  by  the  authority 
of  their  learned  men,  but  with  the  air 
arid  authority  of  a  prophet,  and  by  that 
authority  took  upon  Him  to  correct 
the  doctrine  even  of  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  themselves.  And  He  showed 
His  authority  for  this  His  mission  and 
commission  from  God,  by  the  many 
miracles  which  He  wrought.  2.  By 
His  speaking  with  authority  may  be 
meant,    His    delivering    those    divine 


truths  with  a  seriousness,  gravity,  and 
majesty,  suitable  to  the  great  weight 
and  importance  of  them,  and  not  drily 
and  coldly,  as  the  scribes  did  the 
doctrines  about  their  traditions  and 
ceremonies.  3.  By  His  speaking  with 
authority,  or  with  a  powerful  influence, 
so  as  to  touch  the  hearers,  may  be 
meant,  the  inward  grace,  which  accom- 
panied His  outward  preaching. — Jas. 
Blair,  M.A. 

Sources  of  pulpit  power. — Jesus  is 
pre-eminently  the  Preacher,  and  the 
Pattern  and  Inspiration  of  preachers. 
We  therefore  ask,  what  can  we  learn 
as  to  our  work  as  students  and 
preachers  of  the  Word  from  the  Evan- 
gelist's report  of  the  emotions  of  the 
crowd  of  listeners  to  the  teaching  of 
this  marvellous  Preacher  ?  His  words 
suggest  at  least  five  lines  along  which 
we  may  travel  in  quest  of  the  chief 
sources  of  the  preacher's  power  ;  and 
at  the  head  of  each  line  we  see  the 
comprehensive  and  suggestive  words, 
God,  Character,  Truth,  Aim,  and 
Sympathy.  God  :  seen,  trusted,  and 
obeyed,  the  light  of  the  preacher's 
intelligence,  the  inspiration  of  his  life. 
Character :  based  on  the  one  founda- 
tion, and  carefully  built  up  after  the 
likeness  of  Christ.  Truth  :  as  truth  is 
in  Jesus.  An  Aim  that  lifts  out  of  self 
and  places  the  worker  at  the  centre  of 
man,  charged  with  and  made  victorious 
by  the  energies  of  a  true  human  Sym- 
pathy. The  most  incisive  element  in 
this  characterisation  of  the  power  of 
our  Pattern  Preacher  is  in  the  brief 
and  forcible  contrast  between  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  and  that  of  His  con- 
temporaries. A  world  of  meaning  lies 
in  the  phrase  "  not  as  the  scribes." 

I.  He  was  original. — Himself  ; 
sharply  separated  from  the  generation 
of  mimics.  True,  as  a  Jew,  He  adopted 
some  of  the  Jews'  ways,  and  even 
cast  His  discourses  in  the  moulds 
used  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis.  They 
used  parables ;  so  did  He.  They 
questioned  their  hearers  and  received 
and  answered  questions  from  them ;  so 
did  He.     They  moved  from   place  to 

191 


CHAP.  VII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


place  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  teaching  thoughts   from   all    these,   the   writer 

functions ;  so  did  He,     But  the  resem-  here    directs     our    attention    to    one 

blances  went  little  further.       .  special   feature  of    His  teaching,  viz. 

II.  He  inculcated  inwardness  and  the  authority  with  which  He  spoke. 
reality  (v.  20).  Nor  is  the  matter  in  any  way  difficult 

III.  The  truth  he  taught  was  self-  of  explanation.  We  all  know  that 
witnessing. — The  "  golden  rule "  will  truth  has  a  genuine  ring  about  it 
not  need  argument  till  the  sun,  shining  which  renders  it  unmistakable,  while 
in  his  undimmed  strength,  requires  the  falsehood  is  characterised  by  cowardice 
labours  of  Euclid  to  demonstrate  his  and  nervousness.  And  so  the  quibbling 
presence.  The  blessing  on  the  pure-  doctors,  at  whose  feet  the  people  sat, 
hearted,  on  peace-makers,  on  those  slavish,  and  speculative,  and  super- 
who  hunger  and  thirst  for  righteous-  stitious,  were  neither  forcible  in  their 
ness ;  the  parables  of  the  good  Samari-  utterances,  nor  commanding  in  their 
tan,  and  of  the  prodigal  son,  are  their  address.  But  when  Christ  taught  He 
own  credentials.  They  do  not  ask  for  did  so  as  One  who  came  out  from  God 
logic  ;  they  receive  welcome.  They  to  preach  what  was  true,  and  who  felt 
make  no  call  for  argument ;  they  are  intensely  the  worth  of  what  He  spoke, 
revelations,  and  force  their  way  into  II.  The  matter  of  Christ's  teaching, 
the  souls  of  men  by  their  own  light.  — The  particular  cause  of  their  amaze- 

lY.  His  aim  differed  radically  from  ment  at  this  time  was  the  teaching 

that  of  the  scribes. — They  made  more  contained  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 

of  the  mechanism  of  worship  than  of  which  had  just  been  delivered.     And 

its  soul,  and  served  systems  till  they  well   might   such   a    homily  startle  a 

became      their      taskmasters.       Jesus  Jewish  audience !     It  announced  ideas 

worked  for  souls,  not  systems.  which   were   altogether   unfamiliar  to 

V.  His    aim   was    originated    and  the    Hebrew    mind,    and    laid    down 

sustained  by  intense  love  and  glowing  principles  of  life   and  conduct  which 

sympathy. — He  who  is  most  man  works  ran  counter  to  much  of  their  teaching 

best    for    and    speaks    best   to   man.  and    many  of   their  traditions.     Now 

1,  Sympathy  affects  the  preacher's  style,  on   these   topics   we   might   dwell,    as 

making  it  telling,  direct,  powerful  and  furnishing    many   points   of    contrast 

homely.    2.  It  kindles  fancy,  filling  the  with  the  theology  of  the  Jews,  and  as 

mouth  with  parables,  and  the  preach-  well  fitted  to  excite  surprise  in  their 

ing    with    illustrations.       3.    It   gives  minds.     But  it  will  be  more  for  our 

persuasive  power.     Nothing  gets  hold  profit  to  select  from  the  teaching  as  a 

of  men  like  manly   sympathy.     4.  It  whole   one   or  two  of   the  new  ideas 

renders  the  preacher  a  messenger  of  hope,  which  Christ  propounded,  and,  through 

a  helper  of  joy,  a  source  of  brightness  the  Jews,  communicated  to  the  world, 

and  sunshine. — J.  Clifford,  D.D.  1.  The  idea  of  a  spiritual  empire  and 

constitution.  — "  The  kingdom  of  God," 

Ver.  29.  Christ's  originality. — I.  The  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

manner  of  Christ's  teaching. — If  we  2.  A  new  and  second  birth. 

reflect  on  His  three  years  of  missionary  3.  That   the   Holy  Spirit  is  a  real, 

work     in      Palestine,     and      on     the  living,  personal  presence  in  the  world. 

specimens   of    His    methods  of  work  III.  The  results  of  Christ's  teach- 

which  are  published  in  His  biography,  ing. — Christ,   with  no   pretensions   to 

we  shall  find  abundance  of  material  for  culture,  came  forth  from  the  obscurity 

illustrating  this.     We  can  see  at  once  of  a  Galilean  hamlet  to  startle  Jeru- 

how    patient,   how   graphic,   and    how  salem   with    His    wisdom,    and    make 

effective  the  manner  of  Christ's  teach-  hundreds  of  bigoted  Hebrews  proselytes 

ing     was.       But      withdrawing     our  to  the  Christian  faith. — J.  Barclay, 


192 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  viii. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  2.  And  behold,  etc. — The  time  of  this  miracle  seems  too  definitely  fixed  here  to  admit 
of  our  placing  it  where  it  stands  in  Mark  and  Luke,  in  whose  Gospels  no  such  precise  note  of 
time  is  given  {Brown).  Leper. — Confining  ourselves  to  the  Biblical  form  of  the  disease,  we 
note:  1.  Its  probable  origin  in  the  squalor  and  wretchedness  of  the  Egyptian  bondage.  It 
was  the  "  botch,  or  plague  of  Egypt  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  27).  In  the  Egyptian  legends  of  the 
Exodus,  indeed,  the  Israelites  were  said  to  have  been  expelled  because  they  were  lepers 
(Jos.,  c.  Apion,  I.  26 ;  Tacit.,  Hist.,  v.  3).  2.  Its  main  features  were  the  appearance  of  a 
bright  spot  on  the  flesh,  whiter  than  the  rest,  spreading,  inflaming,  cracking ;  an  ichorous 
humour  oozing  from  the  cracks;  the  skin  becoming  hard,  scaly,  "as  white  as  snow" 
(Ex.  iv.  6 ;  2  Kings  v.  27).  One  so  affected  was  regarded  as  unclean ;  his  touch  brought 
defilement  (Lev.  xiii.  3,  11,  15).  He  was  looked  upon  as  smitten  with  a  Divine  plague,  and 
cases  like  those  of  Miriam  (Num.  xii.  10),  Gehazi  (2  Kings  v.  27),  and  Uzziah  (2  Chron. 
xxvi,  20),  gave  strength  to  the  belief.  He  had  to  live  apart  from  his  fellows,  to  wear  on  his 
brow  the  outward  sign  of  separation,  to  cry  out  the  words  of  warning,  "  Unclean,  unclean  " 
(Lev.  xiii,  45).  The  idea  which  lay  at  the  bottom  of  this  separation  seems  to  have  been  one 
of  abhorrence  rather  than  precaution.  The  disease  was  loathsome,  but  there  is  no  evidence 
that  it  was  contagious  or  even  believed  to  be  contagious.  At  the  stage  in  which  it  reached  its 
height,  and  the  whole  body  was  covered  with  the  botch  and  scabs,  the  man  was,  by  a  strange 
contrast,  declared  to  be  ceremonially  clean  (Lev.  xiii.  13),  and  in  this  state,  therefore,  the 
leper  might  return  to  his  kindred,  and  take  his  place  among  the  worshippers  of  the  syna- 
gogue {Plumptre).  Worshipped  Him. — The  leper  regarded  Jesus  at  least  as  a  great 
prophet,  though  it  is  diflicult  accurately  to  define  the  measure  of  knowledge  possessed  by 
such  believers.  Hence  the  import  of  this  worship,  and  of  the  designation  "  Lord,"  differed 
under  various  circumstances  {Oerlcucli). 

Ver.  4.  The  gift. — See  Lev.  xiv.  For  a  testimony  unto  them.— Either  :  1.  To  the  priests,  or  : 
2.  To  the  people  who  were  following  Jesus.  In  either  case  to  show  that  Jesus  came  to  fulfil  the 
law.  Christ  enjoins  the  cleansed  leper  to  tell  no  one,  thus  instructing  us  that  He  would  not 
have  people  converted  by  His  miracles.  Christ  addresses  Himself  to  men's  hearts  not  to 
their  eyes  or  ears.  He  will  not  fling  Himself  from  the  height  of  the  temple  to  persuade 
men  (jCarr). 

Ver.  6.  A  centurion. — I.e.  a  captain  or  commander  of  a  century — a  company  normally 
composed  of  a  hundred  men,  the  sixtieth  part  of  a  legion  in  the  Roman  army.  This  cen- 
turion was  probably  an  officer  in  the  army  of  Herod  Antipas,  which  would  be  modelled  after 
the  Roman  fashion  (iMd.).  The  presence  of  a  centurion  implied  that  of  a  garrison  stationed 
at  Capernaum  to  preserve  order  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  6.  Servant,  rats,  hoy  (R.V.  margin). — The  word  is  one  which  answers  to  the  old 
EngHsh  "  chylde,"  and  denotes  a  servant  in  a  peculiarly  honourable  sense  {Laidlaw). 
Palsy,  grievously  tormented. — In  this  instance  we  have  probably  a  case  of  progressive 
paralysis,  attended  by  muscular  spasms,  and  involving  the  respiratory  movements,  where 
death  is  manifestly  imminent  and  inevitable.  In  such  a  case  there  would  be  symptoms 
indicative  of  great  distress,  as  well  as  immediate  danger  to  life  {Sir  R.  Beiinet,  M.I).). 

Ver.  9.  I  am  a  man  under  authority,  etc. — His  argument  is  evidently  from  less  to  more. 
"  I  am  a  servant,  and  know  how  to  obey ;  a  master,  and  know  how  to  be  obeyed.  If 
my  word,  who  am  only  a  subordinate  in  command,  be  so  promptly  heeded,  how  much  more 
Thine  1  My  word,  with  the  authority  of  Herod  or  Caesar,  how  much  more  Thine  with  the 
authority  of  God  !  "  {Laidlaim).     My  servant. — r<^  Soi^Xy,  bondservant  (R.V.  margin). 

Ver.  10.  Marvelled. — A  genuine,  human  wonder,  which  we  shall  not  find  at  all  stumbling, 
or  foreign  to  our  conception  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  unless  we  have  allowed  one-sided 
theological  views  to  take  our  Saviour  away  from  us,  and  cannot  tell  where  they  have  laid 
Him  (Laidlaw). 

Ver.  11.  Sit  down. — i.e.  recline  at  a  feast. 

Ver.  12.  Outer  darkness. — i.e.  the  darkness  outside  the  house  in  which  the  banquet  is 
going  on.  Gnashing  of  teeth. — The  natural  bodily  expression  of  extreme  cold.  It  is  the 
condition  of  one  who  is  turned  out  of  a  heated  banqueting-hall  into  the  chill,  dark,  winter's 
night,  clad  only  in  his  light,  festal  robes.  We  are  more  familiar  with  the  very  similar 
expression,  "  chattering  of  teeth  "  {Tuck). 

o  193 


CHAP.  VIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  16.  When  the  even  was  come. — Or,  as  St.  Luke  has  it,  '*  while  the  sun  was  setting." 
There  were  two  reasons  why  the  time  should  be  thus  specified.  1.  It  was  natural  that  the 
sick  should  be  brought  in  the  cool  of  the  evening,  rather  than  in  the  scorching  heat  of  the 
afternoon.  2.  It  was  the  Sabbath,  and  the  feeling  which  loade  the  Pharisees  question 
the  lawfulness  of  a  man's  carrying  the  bed  on  which  he  had  been  lying  (John  v.  10),  would 
probably  have  deterred  the  friends  of  the  sick  from  bringing  them  as  long  as  it 
lasted.  But  with  sunset  the  Sabbath  came  to  a  close,  and  then  they  would  feel  themselves 
free  to  act  {Plumptre).  Possessed  with  devils. — Or  demoniacs.  Persons  who  had  lost 
hold  of  the  helm  of  self-control,  and  who  were,  in  both  body  and  mind,  steered  hither  and 
thither,  without  any  regard  to  the  chart  of  reason,  by  malevolent  spirits  {MoHsoii).  But 
some  hold  a  different  view.  "  We  cannot  find  more  in  this  so-called  devil-possession  than  an 
attempt  to  explain  cases  of  disease  which  were  obscure  then,  and  are  obscure  still"  {Tuck). 

Ver.  17.  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  4). — A  more  literal  translation  of  the 
original  Hebrew  than  is  given  in  our  Old  Testament  version  (Morison). 

Ver.  18.  To  depart. — Thus  Jesus  sought  repose,  and  gave  to  the  people  time  to  bear  fruit 
from  His  teaching,  and  kindled  their  interest  in  Himself  for  the  future  {Bengel). 

Ver.  20.  Nests  =  shelter,  roosts,  or  lodging  places  (R. V.  margin).  The  Son  of  man.—  The 
origin  of  this  expression  as  a  Messianic  title  is  found  in  Dan.  vii.  13.  Hence  to  the  Jews  it 
would  be  a  familiar  designation  of  the  Messiah — the  King  whose  *'  everlasting  dominion  "  is 
described  in  the  next  verse  (Dan.  vii.  14).  The  Hebraism  may  be  considered  in  the  light  of 
similar  expressions,  "  sons  of  light,"  "  son  of  perdition,"  "  son  of  peace,"  etc.,  in  all  of  which 
the  genitive  denotes  a  quality  inherent  in  the  subject.  Sons  of  light  =  the  spiritually 
enlightened,  sons  of  wisdom  =  the  wise.  By  the  Son  of  man  then  is  meant  He  who 
is  essentially  man,  who  took  man's  nature  upon  Him,  who  is  man's  representative  before 
God,  showing  the  possibilities  of  purified  human  nature,  and  so  making  atonement 
practicable  {Carr). 

Ver.  22.  Let  the  dead,  etc. — Like  all  the  other  paradoxical  sayings  of  our  Lord,  the  key  to 
it  is  the  different  senses — a  higher  and  a  lower— in  which,  the  same  word  "  dead  "  is  used 
{BrowTh). 

Ver.  28.  Gergesenes. — The  readings  vary  between  Gerasenes,  Gadarenes,  and  Gergesenes 
( Carr).  Modern  research  claims  to  have  ascertained  the  exact  locality  of  the  transaction. 
The  ruins  right  opposite  the  plain  of  Gennesaret,  from  which  they  had  sailed,  bear  still  the 
name  of  Kersa  or  Gersa.  About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  the  south  of  Gersa  is  a  steep  bluff, 
which  descends  abruptly  on  a  narrow  ledge  of  shore.  The  whole  neighbourhood  abounds  in 
limestone  caverns  and  rock  chambers.  These  local  features  meet  the  requirements  of  the 
story  {Laidlaw).  Two  possessed  with  devils. — See  on  ver.  16.  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  speak 
of  "  one  "  only.  A  like  difference  meets  us  in  St.  Matthew's  "  two  blind  men  "  at  Jericho 
(xx.  30)  as  compared  with  the  **  one "  of  the  two  other  Gospels.  The  natural  explana- 
tion is  that,  in  each  case,  one  was  more  prominent  than  the  other  in  speech  or  act,  and  so  was 
remembered  and  specified,  while  the  other  was  either  forgotten  or  left  unnoticed.  The 
difference,  as  far  as  it  goes,  is  obviously  in  favour  of  the  independence  of  St.  Matthew's 
narrative  (JPlumptre). 

Ver.  29.  Thou  Son  of  God. — The  utterance  rather  of  the  demons  than  of  the  demoniacs 
{MorisoTi). 

Ver.  30.  Swine. — Unclean  animals  that  were  an  abomination  to  all  true  Jews  (Lev.  xi.  7 ; 
Deut.  xiv.  8).  The  keeping  of  them  or  the  rearing  of  them  was  strictly  forbidden  by  the 
Jewish  canon-law,  as  Dr.  Lightfoot  shows  in  his  "  Exercitations  "  (ibid.). 

Ver.  31.  Suffer  us  to  go  away,  etc. — Whence  such  a  request  ?  We  are  not  told,  and  we 
need  not  anxiously  conjecture.  Theophylact  supposes  that  their  aim  was  to  arrest  the 
influence  of  Jesus  in  the  locality,  by  stirring  up  the  opposition  of  the  proprietors  of  the  flock. 
Perhaps  there  was  pure  malice.  Perhaps,  too,  there  was  infatuated  malice,  for  it  is  needless 
to  suppose  that  they  always — or  even  that  they  ever — reasoned  well.  Are  they  not  always, 
in  the  end,  outwitted  ?  (ibid.). 

Ver.  32.  Go. — We  are  at  least  on  the  right  track  in  suggesting  that  only  in  some  such  way 
could  the  man  be  delivered  from  the  inextricable  confusion  between  himself  and  the  unclean 
spirits  in  which  he  had  been  involved.  Not  till  he  saw  the  demoniac  forces  that  had 
oppressed  him  transferred  to  the  bodies  of  other  creatures,  and  working  on  them  the  effects 
which  they  had  wrought  on  him,  could  he  believe  in  his  own  deliverance.  Those  who 
measure  rightly  the  worth  of  a  human  spirit  thus  restored  to  itself,  to  its  fellowmen,  and  to 
God,  will  not  think  that  the  destruction  of  brute  life  was  too  dear  a  price  to  pay  for  its 
restoration.  Other.'jsubordinate  ends—  such,  e.g.,  as  that  it  was  a  penalty  on  those  who  kept 
the  unclean  beasts  for  their  violation  of  the  law,  or  that  it  taught  men  that  it  was  through 
their  indulgence  of  the  swinish  nature  in  themselves  that  they  became  subject  to  the 
darker  and  more  demoniac  passions — have  been  suggested  with  more  or  less  plausibility 
QPlumj?tre). 

194 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  viii. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—4. 

Following  up. — The  story  here  told  us  is  a  fit  sequel  to  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount.  Its  introduction  is  so  (ver.  1).  Having  gone  up  to  the  mountain  (v.  1) 
for  one  purpose,  the  Saviour  now  ''  comes  down  "  for  another.  Notwithstanding 
the  faithfulness  and  even  severity  (in  appearance)  of  much  of  His  teaching,  such 
was  the  power  of  it  also  (vii.  28,  29),  that  "  great  multitudes  "  follow  Him  still. 
In  accordance  with  this,  also,  is  the  story  itself.  Alike  in  the  leper's  request 
as  described  to  us  in  it,  and  in  the  Saviour'' s  immediate  reply.,  and  in  the  parting 
injunction  with  which  He  concludes,  we  see  that  which  follows  up  what  has 
been  told  us  before. 

I.  The  leper's  request. — How  remarkable  this  was  in  its  nature.  Leprosy 
before  this  time  appears  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  practically  incurable  thing. 
Only  two  instances  of  its  cure — and  those  apparently  miraculous  ones — are 
mentioned  before  in  the  Bible  (Num.  xii.  11-15;  2  Kings  v.).  Neither  does 
the  law  of  Moses,  with  its  many  injunctions  about  the  detection  and  spiritual 
treatment  of  this  sickness,  say  anything  about  its  cure.  If  spoken  of  at  all  in  those 
days  it  is  only  spoken  of  as  a  signal  exercise  of  God's  power  (2  Kings  v.  3,  8,  15). 
It  is  all  the  more  noticeable,  therefore,  that  in  this  case  we  see  a  man  coming 
out  of  his  way  in  order  to  ask  it.  He  "  worships  Him  "  (ver.  2)  because,  already, 
he  believes  in  Him  as  a  "  prophet."  How  remarkable  also,  was  the  tone  of  the 
request.  It  is  made  in  hope — in  much  hope — hope  in  every  quarter  but  one. 
Given  the  requisite  mercy,  the  man  who  asks  has  no  doubt  of  the  power. 
Great  as  the  boon  is,  there  is  power  to  grant  it,  if  there  be  only  the  will  (ver.  2). 
How  evidently,  therefore,  in  this  condition  of  things  we  are  pointed  hack  to  the 
past.  Pointed  back  by  the  hope.  Amongst  the  many  widely-reported  *'  healings" 
of  "  all  manner  of  sickness "  related  in  iv.  23,  24,  some  healings  even  of 
leprosy  could  hardly  have  been  missing.  Hence  the  "  hope  "  in  this  case.  If 
done  for  others,  why  not  for  me  1  Pointed  back  by  the  doubt.  With  all  else 
that  was  admirable  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  there  was  not  conspicuous  that 
fulness  of  love  of  which  so  much  was  afterwards  shown.  Therefore,  apparently, 
in  this  poor  leper's  case,  this  measure  of  doubt.  Jesus  had  "  come  not  to  destroy 
the  law,  but  fulfil  it"  (v.  17).  Would  He,  after  all,  only  treat  him  as  was 
done  by  the  law  1 

II.  The  Saviour's  immediate  reply. — How  striking  its  mercy  !  Its  mercy  in 
beginning  with  that  of  which  the  poor  suppliant  was  not  sure.  "  If  Thou  art 
willing  ?  "  I  am  willing.  Know  that,  to  begin.  Be  assured  that  your  application 
will  not  be  cast  out.  Be  assured,  though  so  exposed  to  contempt,  that  you  will 
meet  with  none  at  My  hands.  I  have  just  pronounced  a  blessing  on  the  "  poor 
in  spirit,"  and  the  "  meek,"  and  the  "  mournful  "  (v.  2-5),  and  will  deal  in  the 
same  spirit  with  you.  And  see,  I  show  this  by  putting  My  hand  upon  you 
(contrast  2  Kings  vii.  3,  etc.).  How  sti'iking  also  its  power  !  The  "  power  "  in 
its /orm.  Not  the  word  of  experiment  (2  Kings  iv.  31,  35) ;  nor  the  word  of 
entreaty  {ibid.  33  ;  1  Kings  xvii.  20) ;  nor  yet  of  dependence  on  the  name  of 
another  (Acts  iii.  6)  ;  but  the  word  of  direct  authority — the  word  of  command. 
"I  will,  be  thou  clean."  Also  the  ''power"  in  its  issue.  How  complete  the 
cure — "he  was  cleansed."  How  direct — by  a  word  and  a  touch  ;.not  by  going 
away  even  to  wash  in  Jordan  (2  Kings  v.  10,  13).  How  immediate — as  the 
word  was  spoken.  All  these  special  proofs  of  very  great  power.  So  we  read 
everywhere  of  God^s  works  and  servants.  See  as  to  completeness  Deut.  xxxii.  4 ; 
as  to  swiftness  Ezek.  i.  14  ;  as  to  directness  Ps.  xxxiii.  4,  9. 

III.  The  Saviour's  parting  injunction. — This  has  two  aspects,  a  negative  and 
a  positive.  The  negative  refers  to  Himself  The  exceptional  power  of  this 
miracle,  to  say 'nothing  also  of  its  exceptional  mercy,  was  just  the  thing  certain, 

195 


CHAP.  viii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


if  proclaimed  abroad,  to  add  to  His  fame.  Just  the  thing  also  that  the  subject  of 
this  miracle,  in  his  wonder  and  gratitude,  would  be  likely  to  speak  of  with  this 
view.  But  that,  we  find  here,  was  just  the  very  thing  which  the  Saviour  did 
not  wish  to  have  done.  He  did  not  desire,  He  rather  strongly  deprecated  the 
mere  praise  of  mankind.  Hence  the  first  part  of  His  injunction.  "  See  thou 
tell  no  man."  Hence  in  this  also  we  see  a  further  connection  with  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount.  As  He  there  taught  His  disciples  to  do  (vi.  1,  etc.),  so  He 
here  does  Himself.  The  positive  side  refers  to  Moses.  There  were  certain 
officials  to  whom  the  man  was  to  tell  what  was  done.  He  was  to  go  to  the 
*'  priests  "  whom  Moses  had  appointed.  He  was  to  submit  to  the  examination 
which  Moses  had  enjoined.  He  was  to  make  the  oflferings  which  Moses  had 
ordered  (Lev.  xiv.  3,  4,  10).  In  other  words,  whilst  forbidding  the  man  in  any 
way  to  magnify  Himself,  Jesus  bids  him  do  that  which  shall  magnify  Moses  in 
every  way.  Just  in  accordance,  therefore  (so  we  notice  once  more),  with  what 
He  had  said  a  little  before.  "  I  am  not  come  to  destroy  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
but  to  fulfil."  So,  on  the  mountain  He  had  said  to  the  multitudes.  So  here, 
on  the  plain,  in  a  different  way.  He  now  says  to  this  man. 

Thus  strikingly  and  fitly  did  this  conspicuous  miracle — for  such  it  appears 
to  have  been — being  wrought  in  the  presence  of  the  multitudes  who  had  been 
listening  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount — succeed  to  that  Sermon.  Thus  did  it 
both  add  to  and  confirm  its  teaching,  and,  as  being  also  apparently  the  first  of 
a  very  remarkable  series  of  similar  works  (viii.,  ix.),  prepare  for  teaching  of  a 
deeper  and  more  advanced  kind.  That  Sermon  had  shown  Jesus  to  be  "  mighty 
in  word  " — a  Man  to  be  heard  when  he  spoke.  These  miracles  showed  Him  to 
be  a  Man  "  mighty  in  deed  " — a  Man  to  be  believed  when  He  spoke  (John  iii.  2). 
The  two  together  cover  the  whole  field  of  what  an  inspired  teacher  requires 
(see  Acts  vii.  22  ;  Luke  xxiv.  19.) 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  2-4.  The  miracles  of  Jesus. — 
I.  Seals  of  His  authority. 

II.  Exercises  of  His  love  to  men. 

III.  Types  of  truth. — Gonder, 

The  cleansing  of  the  leper. — Let  us 
describe  : — 

I.  This  particular  instance  of 
leprosy. — Attention  is  at  once  arrested 
by  the  leper's  faith.  This  is  the  first 
instance  in  which  we  are  called  specially 
to  note  that  element.  The  cure  of  a 
fever  patient  or  of  a  demoniac  must 
take  place  with  no  reference  to  the 
sufferer's  state  of  mind.  Friends,  in 
some  of  these  cases,  brought  the 
patients  and  showed  faith  in  the  Healer. 
Now  one  comes  of  his  own  motion, 
declaring  his  own  confidence  in  the 
Saviour.  From  this  point  onwards 
the  narratives  are  rich  with  references 
to  the  link  between  personal  faith  and 
the  desired  healing.  This  man's  faith 
is  shown  by  his  immediate  and  earnest 

196 


4,-      Tj5.;S^ 


application — "  He  caT5s©  T50  Jestis,  u^- 
seeching  Him ;  "  and  by  his  rendering  to 
Jesus  something  like  Divine  honours — 
"  kneeling  down  to  Him  he  worshipped 
Him."  Still  more  distinctly  does  the 
character  of  his  faith  come  out  in  his 
words,  made  emphatic  by  their  exact 
reproduction  in  all  three  Gospels : 
"  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt  Thou  canst  make 
me  clean."     This  faith  was : — 

1.  Original. — There  had  been  no 
previous  instance  amid  all  the  Judsean 
and  Gi-alilean  healings  of  such  a  cure. 

2.  Courageous. — For  this  was  no 
slight  form  of  the  malady.  St.  Luke 
notes  that  this  man  ^'  was  full  of 
leprosy."  The  patient  honoured  Jesus, 
therefore,  in  taking  to  Him  such  a 
case  and  in  such  a  spirit.  But  what 
of  this  ''if  Thou  wilt  "?  Usually,  it 
is  assumed  that  here  was  a  defect  in  the 
man's  faith.  It  is  at  least  as  probable 
that  it  shows  his  entire  and  implicit 
trust.     He  says  in  effect,  "  I  know  not 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  Vill. 


whether  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  that 
under  Thy  mission  any  lepers  should 
be  cleansed.  Of  the  power  of  God  in 
Thee  to  do  it,  I  have  no  doubt ;  for  it 
is  mightily  witnessed ;  and  as  for  the 
intention,  I  cast  myself  on  Thy  Godlike 
heart ;  if  Thou  wUt,  Thou  canst."  In 
most  of  these  particulars,  this  man's 
faith  is  a  model  for  us  of  the  faith 
which  saves.  We  have  not,  indeed, 
his  difficulty  to  overcome.  We  know 
it  is  our  Lord's  intention  to  save 
sinners. 

II.  Our  Lord's  method  of  dealing 
with  it. — 1.  St.  Mark  alone  has  the 
significant  words,  "  And  Jesus,  inoved 
with  compassion."  We  can  see  what 
an  appeal  there  was  to  the  Saviour- 
heart  of  Jesus  in  the  case  of  such  a 
man. 

2.  He  ^^put  forth  His  hand  and 
touched  him,  saying,  I  will,  he  thou 
clean."  The  act  before  the  word.  This 
was  His  immediate  answer  to  the 
leper's  "  if."  The  doubt  in  the  sufferer's 
mind  was  mainly  whether  Jesus  would 
have  anything  to  do  with  outcasts  from 
the  church  and  commonwealth  of  Israel, 
and  this  was  His  reply.  That  touch 
was  everything  to  the  lonely  outcast. 
It  swept  the  barrier  down  that  held 
him  aloof  from  mankind.  And  this 
act  reflected — how  simply,  yet  grandly 
— the  power  as  well  as  the  grace  of 
Jesus.  He  touched  the  polluted  and 
took  no  pollution.  Then  the  word ; 
how  apt !  "I  will ;  "  exactly  it  meets 
and  yet  overpasses  the  leper's  prayer. 
He  honours  faith  as  faith  honours 
Him.  But  He  drives  no  bargain  about 
its  degree  or  kind.  It  is  simply  that 
He  is  trusted. — Prof,  Laidlaw,  B.D. 

Cleansing  the  leper.  —  The  Great 
Speaker  is  here  the  Great  Healer. 

I.  Sorrow  turns  instinctively  to  the 
supernatural. — Leprosy  was  known 
among  the  Jews  as  *'  the  finger  of 
God."  The  removal  of  leprosy  was 
always  considered  a  Divine  act  (2  Kings 
V.  7).  When  Christ  sent  an  answer  to 
John,  He  bade  the  disciples  tell  their 
master  that  *'  the  lepers  are  cleansed," 
etc.     It  is  less  easy  to  be  an  atheist  in 


sorrow   than  in   joy.      Men   are   less 
courageous  at  midnight  than  noonday. 

II.  Christ  is  never  deaf  to  sorrow's 
cry.—*'  I  will."  Did  His  ''  will  "  ever 
run  counter  to  the  sinner's  welfare  ? 
The  will  of  man  must  concur  with  the 
will  of  God ;  he  who  would  "  find  *' 
must  "seek."  The  great  difficulty  is 
to  persuade  (not  logically,  but  morally) 
men  to  have  perfect  faith  in  the 
Divine  will,  that  it  is  not  wise  only,  but 
loving.  When  they  feel  this  they  will 
pray,  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  etc. 

III.  Christ  is  superior  alike  to 
material  contamination  and  legal 
restriction. — He  could  "touch"  the 
leper  and  yet  feel  no  injury.  Others 
touched,  and  the  touch  meant  death, 
but  He  touched  and  yet  was  uncon- 
taminated.  This  is  a  type  of  His 
relation  to  sin.  The  ceremonial  law 
forbade  that  the  leper  was  to  be 
touched.  Christ  superior  to  ceremonial 
limitations. — J,  Parker,  D.D. 

The  leprosy  of  Scripture. — The  best 
experts  now  insist  on  distinguishing 
the  leprosy  of  Scripture,  or  of  the 
Hebrews,  from  the  so-called  "  true 
leprosy "  of  mediaeval  and  modern 
times.  This  disease  is  one  of  the  most 
formidable  and  hopeless  of  known 
maladies,  and  finds  its  nearest  ana- 
logue in  scrofula  or  syphilis.  It  is 
irremediable  by  any  known  human 
means.  Though  not  directly  con- 
tagious, there  is  always  the  terrible 
risk  to  those  who  mingle  much  with 
the  sufferers  of  at  last  falling  under 
its  power.  This  was  the  malady  known 
from  an  early  period  of  European 
civilisation  for  which  the  lazarettos, 
or  lazar-houses  of  the  middle  ages 
were  provided.  .  .  .  On  the  other 
hand,  every  probability,  derived  from 
the  terms  used  in  Scripture  and  in 
ancient  medicine,  from  the  very  full 
description  of  its  symptoms  in  the  Old 
Testament,  and  from  the  whole  strain 
of  the  narratives  in  which  it  occurs  in 
the  sacred  text,  goes  to  show  that  the 
leprosy  there  meant  is  a  totally  differ- 
ent malady.  It  was  a  skin  disease  of 
various  and  compUcated  forms,  some 

197 


CHAP.  VIII.      BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


of  which  may  have  had  a  resemblance  we  see  our  own  sinful  nature  and  life 

to  the  symptoms  of  the  modern  terror.  as  these  appear  in  the  sight  of  holy 

It  was  of  repulsive  aspect,  indeed,  but  beings,   above  all  of   the  Holiest,  we 

neither   usually   fatal    nor   absolutely  should   be  appalled  at   its  loathsome- 

irrecovei-able.     Whether   the    Hebrew  ness.     Then : — 

leprosy  was  always,  or  ever,  contagious  2.  The  suggestion  of  impurity  or 
is  the  second  point  of  confusion  which  defilement  in  leprosy  is  most  patent. — 
ought  to  be  cleared.  But  here  the  true  The  appropriate  and  almost  invariable 
solution  is  not  so  evident.  It  involves  word  for  its  removal  is  "  cleansing  "  in 
the  allied  question,  whether  the  Mosaic  the  narratives  of  our  Lord's  cures.  It 
rules  for  its  segregation  were  sanitary  is  upon  its  uncleanness  that  the  em- 
only,  or  were  in  no  respect  so,  but  only  phasis  of  the  Bible  representations  of 
symbolic  and  religious.  The  truth  leprosy  depend.  And  this  leads  to  the 
seems  to  lie  between  the  two.  There  kindred  idea  of  : — 
is  no  need  for  the  antithesis.  There  is  3.  Isolation  or  separation. — An  idea 
fair  ground  for  concluding  that  this  burned  into  the  Hebrew  mind  by  the 
leprosy  was  not  necessarily  infectious  sacred  legislation.  Here,  then,  is  a 
by  contact ;  but  that  it  was  contagious  sufficiently  expressive  symbolism . 
in  the  wider  sense  of  being  communi-  Sin,  like  leprosy,  is  hideous  in  the 
cable  by  social  or  family  interchange  ;  sight  of  all  pure  beings.  It  covers  the 
also  that  other  similar  diseases  really  soul,  as  that  covers  the  body,  with  a 
infectious  were  not  easy  to  distinguish  universal  taint  of  impurity.  It  is 
from  it.  The  Hebrew  legislation,  incurable  by  any  ordinary  human 
therefore,  justifies  itself  at  once  on  appliances.  It  separates  from  the 
sanitary  and  on  ceremonial  grounds. —  camp  of  God's  Israel  because  it  cuts 
Prof.  Laidlaw,  D.D.  off  from  the  fellowship  of  God.     The 

dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  have  no 

Leprosy  a  type  of  sin. — The  use  of  place  in  the  true  church  of  the  living 

leprosy   as   a   type    for    sin    is   quite  God.     It  is  discovered  by  the  law,  but 

legitimate,  but  the  analogy  requires  to  it  is  taken  away  only  by  the  Son,  who 

be  handled  with  greater  accuracy  and  was  manifest  to  do  that  which  the  law 

point   than   is   usually  applied   to   it.  could   not   do,   in    that    it   was   weak 

The  usage  in  the  Christian  pulpit  and  through  the  flesh. — Ibid. 
commentary  dates  from   the   Fathers 

themselves,  who  no  doubt  had  the  Ver.  4.  The  Saviour's  injunction. — 
proper  Hebrew  leprosy  in  view.  But  The  charge  was  twofold : — 
most  theological  or  religious  teaching  1.  To  keep  silence. — The  injunction, 
on  the  subject  has  been  coloured  by  "  See  thou  say  nothing  to  any  man," 
the  impression  of  "  the  deep-seated,  was  not  unusual  with  Jesus  in  His 
all-pervading,  corrupting,  and  mortal  healing  miracles.  The  reasons  for  it 
character  of  mediaeval  leprosy,  rather  might  lie  partly  in  the  circumstances 
than  from  anything  said  in  the  Bible."  of  the  Master  Himself.  Much  noise 
(Sir  Risdon  Bennet,  31. D.)  Yet  the  about  the  cure  hindered  His  work ; 
figure  presented  in  the  Hebrew  leprosy  and  in  this  case  it  proved  so  ac- 
is  full  of  significance,  full  of  that  cording  to  St.  Mark's  pointed  detail 
peculiar  aptness  which  marks  the  (Mark.  i.  45).  Yet  it  could  not  be 
emblems  of  Scripture  when  truthfully  absolute  concealment  of  the  healing 
interpreted.  All  diseases,  especially  that  the  Lord  intended  to  enjoin  in 
those  which  Jesus  healed,  have  their  this  case,  for  it  was  performed  in  pub- 
symbolic  side,  but  Divine  legislation  lie  before  a  multitude  of  people  (ver.  1). 
itself  emphasised  the  specialities  of  Bather,  then,  the  other  reason  for  the 
this  one.     These  were  : —  commanded  silence  must  be  supposed 

1.  Its  repulsiveness. — We  naturally  the  stronger  one  here,  viz.  that  which 

shrink  from  skin  diseases.     So,  could  concerned  the  moral  effect   upon  the 

198 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  viii. 


subject  of  the  cure.  The  disposition  those  in  charge  of  the  sacred  legis- 
of  the  man  was  evidently  such  that  lation.  The  main  design,  doubtless,  of 
silence,  for  a  time  at  least,  was  a  this  immediate  despatch  to  the  piiest 
needful  discipline.  was  to  complete  the  benefit  for  the 
2.  To  go  to  the  priest. — This  throws  man  himself.  He  was  really  not  cured 
the  clearest  light  upon  the  Saviour's  in  the  highest  sense  till  he  was  socially 
intention  (see  Mark  i.  43,  R.  V.,  and  and  spiritually  restored  to  the  common- 
margin).  It  has  all  the  effect  of  a  wealth  of  Israel,  and  that  by  obedience 
paradox.  The  blessing  hand,  a  moment  to  the  Divine  requirements.  So  let  all 
before  stretched  out  to  the  unclean,  our  spiritual  work  and  the  marvels  of 
now  thrusts  him  away  when  he  is  God's  grace  among  us  be  brought  to 
cleansed.  This  brings  again  into  full  the  test  of  the  Divine  precept,  to  the 
view  the  precise  religious  significance  law  and  to  the  testimony.  Leprosy 
of  leprosy  and  its  cure.  Leprosy  was  was  a  vivid  type  of  sin  in  the  social 
a  social  and  spiritual  ban  even  more  death  which  it  entailed.  The  means 
than  it  was  a  disease.  Set  free  from  appointed  for  its  ceremonial  cleansing 
the  disease,  this  man  must  at  once  be  were  emblematic  of  a  restoration  which 
also  set  free  from  the  curse  and  iso-  goes  to  the  very  root  of  the  spiritual 
lation  which  his  disease  entailed.  That  life.  To  honour  these,  as  Jesus  here 
the  Lord  held  this  essential  to  such  did,  was  to  set  forth  a  deep  truth  of 
cases  is  proved  by  the  uniformity  of  His  salvation.  His  pardon,  His  pro- 
His  procedure  (cf.  the  narrative  of  nouncement  that  the  soul  is  clean, 
Luke  xvii.).  This  miracle  must  have  carries  with  it  that  complete  removal 
for  the  Worker  its  proper  attestation,  of  sin's  pollution  and  power,  which  the 
and  for  the  subject  its  due  legal,  pure  and  impartial  judgment  of  God's 
social,  and  religious  fruits.  These  law  must  attest  (I^.  li.  7,  8,  12). — 
could  only  be  attained  in  the  way  here  Ibid. 
so  pointedly  prescribed,  by  recourse  to 

MAIJSr  HOMILETfCS  OF  THE  PABAGBAPB.—Yerm  5—13. 

Repeating  the  type. — "With  some  points  of  difi^erence,  there  are  more  of  similarity 
between  this  miracle  and  the  last.  The  leper  was  probably  outside  of  Caper- 
naum, the  centurion  was  within.  In  the  former  story  it  is  an  outcast  who  asks  ; 
it  is  the  man  of  position  in  this.  There  the  sufferer  prays  for  himself ;  here  the 
sufferer  is  prayed  for  by  another.  Yet  for  all  this  there  are  two  main  features 
common  to  both.  Equally  notable  in  both  cases  is  the  marvellousness  of  the  work ; 
equally  notable  the  simplicity  of  the  means. 

I.  The  marvellousness  of  the  work. — }low  fearful  the  evil^  in  the  first  place, 
as  well  in  this  case  as  in  that  !  If  leprosy  was  awful  outwardly,  so  was  "  palsy  " 
(ver.  6)  within.  It  is  said  of  the  nerves,  in  cases  of  wasting,  that  they  are  the 
last  to  lose  weight.  When  these  are  affected,  therefore,  nothing  is  right.  How 
much  was  wrong  in  the  present  case  is  shown  by  two  things.  The  poor  sufferer 
was  so  ill  that  he  had  been  left  ** lying  at  home"  (ver.  6).  He  could  neither 
come  nor  be  brought  (contrast  ix.  2).  The  poor  sufferer  suffered  so  much  that 
only  the  strongest  language  could  be  used  of  his  case.  He  was  ''  grievously  tor- 
mented " — in  fearful  pain — *'  en  proie  k  de  violentes  douleurs"  (Lasserre).  Also, 
as  in  the  previous  instance,  how  complete  the  cure.  "  The  servant  was  healed," 
not  relieved  only,  not  partially  cured,  not  merely  made  convalescent,  or  on 
the  way  to  recovery,  but  with  the  recovery  over,  the  journey  accomplished,  sick- 
ness gone  (and  suffering  also),  and  health  and  ease  in  their  place.  Also,  yet 
more,  all  this  in  a  moment ;  not  by  a  tedious  climb,  but  as  it  were  by  a  spring 
(ver.  13,  cf.  ver.  3).  Also,  further  yet,  as  before,  by  a  word;  and  that,  in  this 
case,  by  a  word  afar  off",  out  of  the  hearing  and  in  a  place  beyond  the  sight  of 

199 


cflAP.  vm.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


him  of  whom  it  was  spoken;  and  addressed  to  another  (ver.  13)  and  not  himself. 
In  this  case,  in  short,  there  was  that  present  which  only  the  very  largest  faith 
(ver.  10)  had  thought  of  before.  Shall  we  say,  therefore,  of  the  healing  in 
question,  that  it  was  effected  by  only  a  word?  So  far  as  the  man  who  was 
healed  was  concerned,  it  was  effected  by  less  than  a  word — by  a  thought.  A 
"  thought "  about  this  man — which  he  knew  nothing  about — brought  him  up,  as 
with  the  swiftness  of  thought,  from  the  very  shadow  of  death  to  meridian  life  ! 

II.  The  simplicity  of  the  means. — How  was  this  wonderful  triumph  accom- 
plished so  far  as  man  was  concerned  1  It  was  accomplished  by  faith.  That 
faith  was  present  in  this  case  is  easily  seen.  The  very  coming  to  Jesus  for  help, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  leper  before,  is  a  proof  of  this  truth.  No  man  would  come 
for  help  where  he  had  no  hope  of  obtaining  it  (see  Heb.  xi.  6).  Also  the  faith 
present  was  of  a  very  remarkahle  kind.  The  testimony  of  the  centurion  to  the 
Saviour  proves  this  to  be  so  (vers.  8,  9).  Where  do  we  find  the  appearance  of 
stronger  faith  than  we  find  in  those  words?  Thy  commands  to  sickness  and 
suffering  are  like  mine  to  my  soldiers.  I  have  only  to  let  them  know  what  I 
wish,  and  it  is  immediately  done.  So  also  of  all  the  forces  which  are  now 
distressing  and  killing  my  servant  at  home.  Any  message  of  Thine  to  them 
will  be  obeyed  by  them  at  once.  Nor  was  this  signal  faith  in  appearanee  only. 
It  was  also  a  fact.  So  we  are  taught,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
to  the  centurion.  "  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith  "  even  where  men  are  re- 
nowned for  it  most.  Lastly,  the  effect  produced  was  distinctly  connected  with 
faith.  Connected  with  it  directly  by  the  Saviour  Himself.  "As  thou  hast 
believed  so  be  it  done"  (ver.  13).  Connected  with  it  to  the  exclusion  of  every- 
thing else.  This  stranger  was  accepted,  and  many  others  with  him,  because  of 
their  faith.  Others  would  be  rejected,  although  nominally  of  Israel,  because  men 
without  faith.  Faith  it  was,  therefore,  and  nothing  but  faith,  which  brought 
this  wonder  about. 

Thus  does  this  story,  therefore,  enforce  the  lesson  of  the  story  before. 
In  the  case  of  the  leper  there  were  just  two  things  to  recommend  him  to 
Jesus,  the  presence  of  faith  in  him  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  severity  of  his 
need  on  the  other.  But  these  two  were  enough.  Jesus  put  forth  His  hand 
and  touched  him,  and  sent  him  away  a  healed  man.  Exactly  the  same  two 
recommendations  were  found  in  this  other  case  too.  Exactly  the  same  treatment, 
therefore,  was  accorded  to  it.  It  is  the  rule  of  His  kingdom  throughout.  In 
all  the  Saviour's  subsequent  miracles,  if  not  expressly,  by  plain  implication,  the 
same  rule  is  observed.  See,  for  example,  in  the  immediately  subsequent  chapter 
(ifx.  1-8,  18,  22,  27,  28).  It  was  well,  therefore,  that  this  key-note  should  be 
struck — and  struck  twice — at  the  first ;  even  in  these  two  stories  which  are  the 
first  of  their  kind  related  at  length. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  5-13.    The  centurion  and  the  to  "  love  our  nation,"  certainly  not  be- 

Captain   of  the   Lord's  host. — I.    The  cause  of  their  amiability,  but  because 

man   and   his   faith. — 1.    If    we   put  of  the  revelation  which  they  possessed, 

together  the  traits  of  character  given  He  had  built  them  a  synagogue,  and 

by  Matthew  and  Luke,  we  get  a  lovable  thereby  expressed  his  adhesion  to  their 

picture  of  a  man  with  a  much  tenderer  worship,  and  won  the  confidence  even 

heart  than  might  be  expected  to  beat  of  the  suspicious  elders.    His  solicitude 

beneath   the  armour  of   a  mercenary  for  his  servant  bespeaks  a  nature  from 

soldier,  set  to  overawe  a  sullen  people.  which  neither  the  harshness  of  military 

Like  so  many  of  the  better  spirits  of  Hfe  nor  the  natural  carelessness  about 

that  strange  era,  he  had  been  drawn  a  slave's  welfare  had  been  able  to  banish 

200 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  viii. 


the  sweetness.  The  crowning  trait  of 
his  character  is  his  humility,  which  is 
manifest  in  Matthew,  and  even  more 
conspicuous  in  Luke's  version  of  the 
story,  where  he  does  not  venture  to 
approach  the  miracle-working  Rabbi, 
but  sends  the  elders  to  intercede  for 
him.  Such  a  character,  springing  up 
in  heathenism,  like  a  fair  flower  on 
some  waste  unsheltered  open,  puts  to 
shame  the  results  of  centuries  of  patient 
culture  by  the  Great  Husbandman,  as 
shown  in  the  Jewish  nation.  One  can 
scarcely  help  noticing  the  common 
type  of  character,  in  different  degrees, 
shown  in  the  centurions  of  the  New 
Testament ;  this  man,  the  anonymous 
one,  who  stood  by  the  cross,  and  was 
more  open  to  its  teachings  than  rulers 
and  priests,  Cornelius,  and  the  kindly 
Julius  who  had  Paul  in  charge  on  his 
voyage.  2.  The  centurion's  appeal,  as 
given  by  Matthew,  does  not  say  what 
he  wants,  but  simply  tells  the  tale  of 
suffering,  as  if  that  were  enough  to 
move  Christ's  heart.  The  sad  sisters 
at  Bethany  sent  a  like  message  to 
Jesus,  but  their  confidence  was  the 
growth  of  years  of  close  friendship. 
This  man's  was  greater  because  its 
foundation  was  less.  3.  Christ's  answer 
is  full  of  consciousness  of  power,  as  well 
as  of  willingness  to  meet  the  unbreathed 
prayer.  He  volunteers  to  come  where 
He  had  not  been  asked.  He  refuses  to 
go  when  His  going  seems  made  an 
indispensable  condition  of  His  miracle, 
as  in  the  story  of  the  healing  of  the 
*' nobleman's"  son  at  Capernaum.  His 
wisdom  may  be  trusted  to  decide  when 
it  is  best  to  exceed  and  when  to  fall 
short  of  our  wishes.  Here  the  promise 
to  come  is  spoken  to  evoke  the  noble 
confession  which  follows,  and  so  to  give 
the  centurion  a  higher  blessing  than 
his  servant's  healing,  even  a  self-con- 
scious and  uttered  faith.  4.  That 
confession  begins  with  humble  acknow- 
ledgment of  unworthiness,  and  rises 
to  perhaps  the  clearest  and  deepest 
conception  of  Christ's  authority  over 
all  the  forces  of  the  universe  which 
was  ever  attained  during  His  earthly 
life.     But  the  centurion's  conception  of 


the  manner  of  exercising  the  power  is 
the  remarkable  thing  here.  A  word  is 
enough. 

II.  The  eulogium  on  faith. — The 
confession  is  followed  by  praise  from 
Christ's  lips.  Contrast  His  calm  accept- 
ance of  the  highest  place  which  could 
be  given  Him  with  the  king's  ''  Am 
I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive  ?  "  or 
with  Peter's  "  Why  look  ye  so  earn- 
estly on  us  ? "  The  centurion's  faith 
was  great  in  the  clearness  of  the  belief 
which  it  included ;  great  in  the  diffi- 
culties which  it  had  overcome ;  great 
in  the  rapidity  of  growth  on  so  slight  a 
knowledge  of  Jesus ;  great  in  the  firm- 
ness and  completeness  of  its  moral  part, 
confidence;  great  in  the  humility  which 
it  produced.  The  centurion  was,  in 
some  sense,  the  first-fruits  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  our  Lord's  sad  prescience 
sees  in  him  the  forerunner  of  a  long 
train  who  shall  exercise  a  faith  which 
puts  the  children  of  the  kingdom  to 
shame.  Those  to  whom  the  kingdom 
was  offered  shall,  some  of  them,  not  be 
there.  What  could  be  plainer,  when 
taken  in  connection  with  the  immedi- 
ately preceding  eulogium  on  the  cen- 
turion's faith,  than  this  teaching,  that 
the  one  condition  of  entrance  into  the 
kingdom  is  just  that  which  the  cen- 
turion had,  and  Israel  had  not,  viz. 
faith  in  Him.  The  darkness  is  but,  as 
it  were,  the  externalising  of  the  dis- 
positions of  those  who  are  in  it. 
Darkness  reigned  in  them  here,  the 
darkness  of  sin ;  and  now  they  dwell 
in  darkness  of  sorrow,  the  creation  of 
their  own  evil  natures.  The  picture  is 
darkly  shaded,  but  by  One  who  *' speaks 
that  He  knows,"  and  whose  every  word 
throbbed  with  love. 

III.  The  answer  to  faith.— "Go  thy 
way,"  etc.  These  great  words  of 
Christ's  give  the  key  of  His  storehouse 
into  our  hands,  and  lay  down  the  law 
to  which  He  rigidly  adheres.  Our  faith 
is  the  measure  of  our  reception.  As  St. 
Bernard  beautifully  says,  **  He  puts 
the  oil  of  His  mercy  into  the  vase  of 
our  trust."  The  centurion's  willing- 
ness to  be  content  with  a  word  showed 
a  strong  faith,  which  He  confirms  by 

201 


CHAP.  vm.      BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW. 


demonstrating  that  it  had  not  thought 
too  loftily  of  Him. — A.  Maclaren^ 
D.D. 

Yers.  5-10.  Christ  and  the  centurion^ s 
servant. — Loving  zeal  a  characteristic 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

I.  The  servant  obeying  his  master 
from  attachment  and  devotedness ;  or 
Christianity  in  the  domestic  circle  and 
in  civil  society. 

II.  The  centurion  serving  his  sub- 
ordinate from  esteem  and  compassion ; 
or  Christian  philanthropy. 

III.  Christ  serving  both ;  or,  the 
kingdom  of  grace. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D, 

The  centurion's  regard  for  his  ser- 
vant.— We  know  something  of  the 
hardening  effects  of  slavery  in  the 
United  States  of  America.  But,  as 
the  greatest  of  Roman  historians 
(Mommsen)  tells  us,  African  slavery  is 
a  mere  drop  in  the  ocean  in  comparison 
with  the  horrors  of  slavery  in  the  old 
Roman  empire.  Even  so  tender- 
hearted and  amiable  a  man  as  Cicero 
once  blushed  and  offered  an  abject 
apology  because  he  so  far  forgot  him- 
self as  to  feel  a  twinge  of  regret  at  the 
painful  death  of  a  slave.  It  was  in 
this  corrupt  and  horrible  atmosphere 
that  this  man  cared  for  his  slave ;  and 
I  know  nothing  that  is  more  noble, 
more  indicative  of  the  Godlike  man, 
than  a  proper  courtesy  and  thoughtful- 
ness  and  a  disinterested  and  unselfish 
care  for  those  who  are  our  social  in- 
feriors.— H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A. 

Vers.   11,    12.-4   great   transforma- 


tion.— The  great  transformation  of  near 
and  far  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 

1.  In  the  cause  of  history. — 1.  At 
the  time  of  Christ.  2.  At  the  time  of 
the  migration  of  nations.  3.  At  the 
time  of  the  Reformation. 

II.  Its  inner  lesson. — 1.  The  peni- 
tent sinner  who  relinquishes  every 
claim,  hears  the  call  of  mercy  afar 
off",  2.  The  least  appearance  of  self- 
righteousness  obstructs  our  view  of 
the  light  of  salvation,  however  near. — 
J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  13.  The  centurion's  faith. — I. 
What  were  the  characteristics  of  the 
faith  of  the  centurion  of  Capernaum  ? 

— 1.  It  must  have  been  a  thing  of 
gradual  growth,  and  it  must  have  grown 
under  no  ordinary  difficulties.  2.  It 
was  marked  by  thoroughness.  3.  Bi/ 
humility. 

II.  Why  should  such  a  disposition, 
such  an  eiFort  of  faith,  have  this  power? 
— 1.  It  involves  knowledge  of  facts, 
which  are  of  the  first  importance  to 
the  religious  well-being  of  men. 

2.  It  is  a  test  or  criterion  of  the  'pre- 
dominant disposition  of  the  soul  or  char- 
acter.— Jealousy  (scribes  and  Pharisees), 
habit  of  insincerity  (rich  ruler,  etc.),  a 
scornful  or  satirical  temper  ("  Can  any 
good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth?") 
are  fatal  to  growth  of  faith. 

3.  It  is  leverage. — It  sets  the  soul  in 
motion ;  it  embodies  an  element  of 
will.  Faith  does  not  create,  it  only 
apprehends  its  objects. 

III.  The  reward  of  faith.— 1.  To 
nations.  2.  To  churches.  3.  To  in- 
dividual souls. — Canon  Liddon. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  U— 17. 

One  and  all. — These  two  narratives,  though  in  some  respects  different,  may 
well  be  taken  together.  Both  illustrate  the  special  nature  of  the  healing  work  of 
the  Saviour.  ^  In  the  first  story  we  see  its  singular  completeness.  In  the  second, 
its  amiazing  extent.  In  the  comment  made  on  this  second  story,  its  wonderful 
depth. 

I.  Its  singular  completeness. — We  see  this,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  state  of 
things  with  v)hich  tlie  Saviour  began.  Coming  into  the  house  of  Peter  He  finds 
his  wife's  mother  suffering  from  a  fever.  It  appears  to  have  been  an  attack  of 
fever  of  a  very  serious  kind.  St.  Luke,  as  a  physician,  seems  to  have  especially 
noted  this   fact,  and   speaks   of   it   as   "  great "    (Luke   iv.    38).      Its   effects, 

202 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  vm. 


however,  of  themselves,  seem  to  have  testified  sufficiently  to  this  fact.  The 
sufierer's  strength  had  altogether  given  way  under  its  fury.  She  was  "  laid" — 
almost  she  had  "  flung  herself  " — on  the  bed.  Not  even  for  such  a  guest  as 
Jesus  was  she  able  to  rise.  The  state  of  things  that  finally  followed  on  this. 
Touching  her  hand — and  *'  lifting  her  up  "  (Mark  i.  31) — the  Saviour  both 
banished  the  fever  and  brought  back  her  strength.  Also  (Mark  i.  31  again). 
He  did  this  "immediately."  Also,  yet  more.  He  did  it  so  that  all  her  vigour 
came  back.  She  was  immediately  as  strong  as  she  had  been  before  the  fever 
came  on,  and  was  soon  engaged  again  in  the  same  kind  of  duties  as  she  attended 
to  then.  "  She  arose  and  ministered  unto  them  " — unto  Him  (so  some) — thus 
showing,  if  we  adopt  that  reading,  that  He  had  touched  her  heart  as  well  as  her 
hand ;  and  so  that  there  was  nothing  deficient,  in  any  way,  in  what  He  had 
done. 

II.  The  amazing  extent  of  Christ's  work. — How  wide,  in  every  way,  in  the 
second  narrative  is  the  area  touched  by  His  mercy  !  How  wide,  to  begin,  in 
mere  number  and  magnitude.  "  When  the  even  was  come  " — probably  the  eve 
after  the  Sabbath  (Mark  i.  31,  32),  when  it  would  be  lawful  to  do  so — they 
"  brought  unto  Him  many."  So  many  (we  learn  from  Mark  i.  33),  that  "  all 
the  city  was  gathered  together  at  the  door."  How  wide  in  variety  also.  Those 
who  were  "  possessed  with  devils,"  and  so,  in  all  probability,  would  not  have 
come  by  themselves.  Those  who  were  suffering  from  sickness,  and  so,  in  all 
probability,  could  not  have  come  by  themselves.  All  these — all  such  of  all  sorts 
on  that  memorable  evening  to  be  found  in  that  populous  city — met  together 
outside  that  door.  What  an  assemblage  they  were !  All  differing  in  the 
nature,  but  none  in  the  fact — and  probably  in  the  extremity — of  their  needs. 
Such  and  so,  however,  in  no  case,  were  they  allowed  to  remain.  The  more  there 
came  the  more  there  were  "healed"  (ver.'lG).  He  healed  them  "all."  The 
more  varied  their  needs,  the  more  varied  His  help.  The  greater  their  extremity, 
the  more  present  His  power  (cf.  Luke  v.  17). 

Oh  1  in  what  divers  pains  they  met ! 
Oh  1  with  what  joy  they  went  away  1 

III.  Its  wonderful  depth. — There  was  more  here  beneath  the  surface  than 
there  was  even  upon  it.  There  was  the  hidden  power,  in  the  first  place,  of  the 
spirits  of  evil.  All  sickness  is  spoken  of  sometimes  as  being  not  unconnected  with 
them  (Job  ii.  6 ;  Luke  xiii.  16 ;  Acts  x.  38,  etc.).  There  were  some  sicknesses 
which  are  spoken  of  as  being  in  a  special  way  connected  with  them.  Such  are 
mentioned  here  in  ver.  16;  and  still  more  explicitly  in  the  parallel  passage  of 
Mark  i.  32,  34.  We  cannot  doubt,  therefore,  even  though  we  do  not  know  how, 
that  these  were  at  work  in  this  case.  Also  here  again,  beneath  the  surface — 
though  not  in  such  a  way,  therefore,  as  to  be  minutely  followed  by  us — there  was 
the  operation  of  sin.  For  what  is  sin  but  the  shadow  of  death  ?  And  what  is 
"  death  "  but  "  the  wages  of  sin  ? "  (Rom.  vi.  23).  And  how  could  there  be  the 
shadow  without  the  substance  that  casts  it  ?  And  how  the  substance  without 
its  cause  ?  And  is  not  this  truth  implied  also  in  those  striking  words  of  the 
prophet  (Isa.  xxxiii.  24)  1  Not  to  say,  also,  that  the  general  truth  of  the  hand 
of  the  evil  one  in  our  sicknesses  carries  with  it  also  the  general  truth  of  the 
presence  of  sin  ?  For  what  could  he  do  against  us,  with  all  his^^ower,  were  it 
not  for  our  sin  ?  Lastly,  there  was  here,  beneath  the  surface,  the  atoning  passion 
of  Christ.  How  was  it  that  He  could  so  far  deliver  these  victims  of  Satan  and 
sin  ?  Because  He  was  about  to  do  that  which  should  deliver  them  from  still 
worse  !  Because  "  by  death  "  He  was  about  to  "  destroy  him  that  had  the  power 
of  death,  i.e.  the  devil "  (Heb.  ii.  14).  Because  as  the  "  Lamb  of  God,"  He  was 
about  to  "  take  away  the  sins  of  the  world  • "  ^nA  to  "  bear  our  sins  in  His  own 

203 


CHA1».  VIII.      MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


body  on  the  tree."     Such  were  His  sympathy  with  us,  and  His  work  for  us  in  con- 
nection with  our  sins.    It  was' the  same  spirit  which  He  shows  here  in  regard  to  our 
sorrows.     "  Himself  took  our  infirmities  and  bare  our  sicknesses."     We  may  say 
this  because  He  actually  did  thus  with  regard  to  their  roots. 
Two  brief  pregnant  truths  follow  from  this  : — 

1.  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  of  all. — However  many,  however  diverse,  however  needy 
those  who  come  to  Him  for  salvation,  they  cannot  exhaust  either  His  love  or  His 
power.     "  All  fulness  " — of  every  kind — "  dwelleth  "  in  Him. 

2.  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  of  each. — He  is  as  ready  for  one  as  He  is  for  the  multi- 
tude (vers.  2,  6,  14,  16).  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me" — not  only  them  that  come 
to  Me — "  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out "  (John  vi.  37). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  14,  15.  The  healing  of  Peter's 
wife' smother. — 1.  Marriage  is  lawful 
and  honourable  in  the  preachers  of 
the  gospel.  2.  Christ  will  not  disdain 
to  visit  the  families  of  His  own,  how 
mean  soever  they  be.  3.  The  special 
thing  our  Lord  taketh  notice  of  in  the 
house  He  cometh  unto  is  what  aileth 
any  in  it,  and  what  need  they  stand  in 
of  His  help.  4.  Christ  will  show  His 
goodness  and  power  as  need  be,  for  the 
comfort  of  His  friends.  5.  Although 
this  might  seem  no  great  matter,  in 
comparison  of  other  miracles,  yet  faith 
will  observe  Christ's  Divine  power  in 
a  little  matter,  as  clearly  as  in  the 
greatest  work.  6.  What  benefit  we 
receive  of  Christ  ought  to  be  employed 
for  service  to  Him  and  His  followers. — 
David  Dickson. 

Simon's  wife's  mother. — The  notice- 
able features  of  the  transaction  are 
these : — 

I.  That  this  healing  was  done  at 
the  request  of  those  around  Jesus 
(Luke  iv.  38). — Jesus  sought  out 
many  cases  Himself,  and  healed  them 
unasked.  Here  He  gives  examples 
numberless  of  the  converse — for  this 
was  only  the  first  of  a  whole  crowd  of 
such  answered  requests  that  afternoon 
and  evening  (ver.  16) — direct  seals  of 
His  own  maxim,  "ask  and  ye  shall 
receive."  Ask,  not  only  for  yourselves, 
but  for  others.  "Ask  believing,  and 
it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

II.  The  specific  action  with  which 
the  cure  was  accompanied. — The 
laying   His   hands  upon   the  patient. 

204 


This  action  seems  to  have  character- 
ised the  whole  group  of  healings  which 
took  place  on  this  occasion,  for  St.  Luke 
says  of  this  great  transaction,  that 
"  He  laid  His  hands  on  every  one  of 
them  and  healed  them  "  (Luke  iv.  40). 
The  action,  though  not  invariable,  was 
a  very  frequent  one  with  Him.  We 
may  regard  it  as  giving  a  sacramental 
character  to  these  healings.  It  was 
significant  that  the  Sent  of  God  and 
the  Saviour  of  men  should  use  such  an 
action.  It  means  that  He  comesoas 
well  to  reverse  the  curse  of  disease  and 
suffering  as  to  remove  the  sin  which 
brought  it.  That  He  absolves  both 
from  the  guilt  and  from  the  yoke  of 
sin  and  restores  men  to  the  favour  of 
God. 

III.  The  immediate  and  entire 
recovery  of  the  patient. — In  addition 
to  the  statement  common  to  all  the 
synoptic  Gospels,  that  the  complete- 
ness of  the  recovery  was  proved  by  the 
good  dame's  prompt  help  at  the  table, 
St.  Luke  records  the  "  rebuke  "  of  the 
fever — a  detail  which  would  strike  the 
mind  of  a  physician.  The  transaction 
is  utterly  removed  by  these  details  out 
of  the  category  of  an  ordinary  event. — 
Prof.  LaidlaWf  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  Sin  as  a  fever. — Sin  may 
be  likened  unto  a  fever : — 

I.  In  regard  of  the  origin  thereof. — 
Both  arise  within. 

II.  In  regard  of  the  nature  thereof. 
— 1.  The  substance  of  the  fever  is  a 
heat  besides  nature,  which  extin- 
guisheth  the  natural  heat.      So  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  viii. 


fire  of  concupiscence  and  lust  of  sin,  Sin  differs  from  a  fever  in  that  it  can- 
doth  extinguish   the  fire  and  heat  of  not  be  cured  of  itself.     It  is  cured  and 
zeal.     2.  The  fever  ariseth  diversely,  healed  by  Christ  the  only  Physician  of 
from   divers   humours.     So   sin  some-  the  soul. — Richard  Ward. 
times  ariseth  from  the  lust  of  the  flesh, 

sometimes  from  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  Ver.  16.  The  healing  Christ. — 1.  No 

sometimes    from    the    pride    of    life,  time  was  unseasonable  to  Christ,  when 

3.  There   are   two   kinds  of   fever :  a  people   came   to   Him.       ^'  When   the 

continual  fever  and  a  fever  with  some  even  was  come,"  when  rest  was  due  to 

intermission.      Some   sin    with   inter-  Christ.     2.  Among  other  eff*ects  which 

missions  of  repentance,  some  sin  per-  sin   hath   brought   upon  men,   this  is 

petually.  one,  to  be  bodily  possessed  with  devils. 

III.  In  regard  of  the  manner  of  3.  There  is  no  method  of  liberating 
the  proceeding  thereof. — 1.  At  first  the  men  of  devils  but  that  they  come, 
fever  makes  us  cold,  but  by  and  by  we  or  be  presented  by  others,  to  Christ, 
burn.  So  at  first  wO'are  afraid  of  sin,  4.  Christ  by  His  word  or  command 
by  and  by  fearless  thereof.  2.  The  can  easily  deliver  men  from  deepest 
fever  inflames  the  whole  body.  So  sin  possession.  5.  Never  man  came  to 
wounds  and  enfeebles  us,  from  the  Him  to  be  helped  whom  He  cured  not  ; 
crown  of  the  head  to  the  sole  of  the  therefore  justly  do  they  perish  who 
foot.  come  not  unto  Him. — David  Dickson. 

IV.  In   regard    of  the    effects. — 

1.  The  fever  debilitates  and  weakens  Ver.  17.  Christ  hearing  our  sick- 
the  whole  man.  So  by  sin  we  are  so  nesses. — It  is,  at  first  blush,  paradoxical 
weakened  that  we  are  neither  able  to  to  quote  woi  ds  which  seem  to  express, 
walk  in  the  ways  of  God,  nor  run  the  not  what  the  recovered  crowds  and 
race  that  He  hath  set  before  us,  nor  their  friends  were  enjoying,  but  what 
work  out  our  salvation.  2.  The  fever  the  Healer  Himself  was  undertaking. 
in  the  understanding  disturbs  ai  d  But  note  the  occasion.  Not  without 
takes  away  the  use  of  reason,  making  significance  are  these  words  quoted  in 
a  man  not  know  what  he  saith  or  connection  with  this  remarkable 
doth.  And  this  is  very  often  mortal  Sabbath  day's  work.  From  morning 
and  deadly.  So,  when  men  grow  to  evening,  and  beyond  evening  into 
obstinate  and  bold  in  sinning,  and  are  night,  had  Jesus  been  curing  diseases 
neither  sensible  of  sin  nor  punishment,  — bodily,  mental,  and  spiritual.  He 
but  will  do  whatsoever  they  will,  it  is  was,  doubtless,  much  fatigued.  Much 
an  argument  of  a  soul  not  distant  from  virtue  had  gone  out  of  Him.  Much 
death.  3.  The  fever  in  the  appetite  compassion  had  been  excited  within 
produceth  these  effects  :  (1)  It  loathes  Him.  He  had  found  many  harrowing 
the  most  wholesome  things.  So  sin  cases  of  possession  to  deal  with, 
makes  us  loathe  fljood  works  and  good  Many  sore  distresses  had  been  sub- 
counsel.  (2)  It  longs  for  that  which  is  jected  to  His  view.  True,  He  had 
unwholesome.  So  we  love  the  vain  been  victorious  over  them  all.  It  was 
pleasures  of  sin,  etc.  (3)  There  is  a  a  day  of  gladness  in  that  place  such  as 
thirst  not  to  be  quenched  or  satisfied.  had  never  been  seen  since  it  was  a 
So  many  are  furious  in  sinning,  and  place  of  human  habitation,  and  doubt- 
cannot  cease  to  sin.  less  the  soul  of  Immanuel  rejoiced  in 

V.  In  regard  of  the  end  thereof. —  this  outpouring  of  God -like  help.  But 
Sometimes  a  fever  ends  in  health  and  this  well -chosen  citation  directs  our 
life  of  itself  ;  sometimes  it  ends  in  attention  to  some  other  aspects  of  the 
health  and  life  by  the  use  of  good  meaiis  Lord's  healing  offices.  Think  of  the 
and  the  help  of  the  physician ;  some-  Son  of  God,  the  Eternal  King  of  a 
times  it  ends  in  a  sickly  and  weakly  city  where  no  inhabitant  can  ever  say, 
estate ;    sometimes  it   ends  in  death.  "  I  am  sick,"  now  sojourning  among 

205 


CHAP.  VIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


suffering  men.  See  what  work  ready 
for  Him,  what  evils  to  grapple  with 
in  one  little  town  of  one  obscure 
province  of  this  dark  earth,  on  one 
Sabbath  afternoon.  Then,  think  of 
His  three  years'  ministry,  day  after 
day  healing,  helping,  suffering  with 
and  for  men.  Think,  further,  of  the 
tremendous  mass  of  human  misery 
which  Jesus  Christ,  through  His 
blessed  gospel,  has  come  to  remove,  of 
the  weight  of  His  glorious  but  mighty 
undertaking,  as  it  lay  upon  His  mind 
during  that  compassionate,  open-eyed 
public  life  of  His  in  Judaea  and  Galilee. 
Think,  finally,  of  the  innumerable 
evils  of  humanity  meeting  upon  Him 
— Him  alone — who  was  to  redeem  us 
from  them,  and  the  force  of  the  woids 
will  make  itself  felt. — Prof.  Laidlaw, 
D.D. 

Christ's  vicarious  sufferings. — It  is 
a  further  surprise,  leading  to  a  further 
expansion  in  the  sense  of  this  great 
utterance,  to  note  that  the  words 
"  took  "  and  ^'  bare  "  will  not  admit  of 
being  rendered  merely  *'  took  away  " 
or  "  carried  off."  They  are  the  proper 
terms  for  representative,  place-taking, 
substitutionary  suffering.  Scholar- 
ship admits  no  other  rendering  of 
them.  Now,  at  first  sight,  or  on  a 
superficial  view,  it  does  seem  strange 
to  say  that  Jesus  "  bare  "  or  "  carried," 
like  a  surety  or  substitute,  men's  sick- 
nesses and  infirmities  when,  in  point  of 
fact.  He  was  sympathising  with  them, 
or  better  still,  was  relieving  and 
removing  them.  But  the  truth  is,  in 
a  great  deal  of  our  Christian  teaching 
the  central  doctrine  of  atonement  has 
been  shrivelled  up  to  a  mere  test- 
point  of  orthodoxy,  instead  of  taking 
in  the  breadth  of  the  Sciiptures.  Is 
not  this  quotation  of  the  Evangelist  a 
fresh  light  thrown  on  the  vicarious 
work  of  Jesus  ?     Not  His  death  alone 


bare  that  character,  but  His  life  as 
well.  The  same  redeeming  energy  was 
shown  in  these  blessed  healings  as 
when  in  the  latest  and  highest  phase 
of  it.  He,  through  the  Eternal  Spirit, 
offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God. 
And  the  connection  of  the  two  sides  of 
this  gieat  redemptive  work  becomes 
clear  when  we  read  the  Scriptures  in 
their  own  light.  Accept  the  doctrinal 
standpoint  of  the  sacred  writers,  and 
the  whole  becomes  clear  as  a  sunbeam. 
Suffering  and  disease  are  effects  of  sin 
and  types  of  sin.  The  removal  cf 
disease,  then,  is  an  effect  and  a 
symbol  of  the  removal  of  sin  itself. 
And  He  who  takes  away  the  sin  of  the 
world  is  He  who  takes  it  upon  Himself 
in  life  and  death.  As  Jesus  wrought 
these  mighty  and  merciful  works 
throughout  the  towns  and  villages  of 
Galilee,  He  was  showing  Himself,  by 
type  and  foretaste,  the  suffering,  yet 
conquering  Redeemer  upon  whom  the 
Lord  had  laid  that  iniquity  of  us  all 
from  which  all  our  pains  and  diseases 
flow. — Ibid. 

Christ  and  affliction. — This  central 
thought  brings  the  diseases  and  suffer- 
ings of  the  children  of  God  in  every 
age  within  the  sweep  of  that  healing 
ministry  of  Jesus.  There  is  more  in 
this  one  line  of  the  Gospel  to  support 
suffering  Christians  than  in  all  the 
writings  of  the  philosophers.  Sick- 
nesses and  infirmities  are  to  God's 
children  no  longer  of  the  curse,  but 
within  the  covenant.  He  bore  them 
for  us  in  His  passion ;  He  bears  them 
with  us  in  His  compassion.  He  can 
be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  them  all. 
He  touches  them  with  the  transmuting 
power  of  His  love,  and  so  makes  them 
"  light  afflictions  which  are  but  for  a 
moment,  working  out  for  us  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory." — Ihid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—22. 

A  significant  pause. — This  passage  begins  with  a  remarkable  change.  Instead 
of  being  ready,  as  before,  to  welcome  and  heal  the  "  multitudes,"  the  Saviour 
deliberately  goes  away  from  them  (ver.  18).     With  equal  deliberation  He  takes 

206 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  viii. 


away  His  "  disciples "  (ver.  23).  His  reasons  for  this  double  action  may  be 
gathered  from  what  follows — from  the  story  of  the  ^^ scribe"  (vers.  19,  20);  the 
story  of  the  ^'disciple"  (vers.  21,  22). 

I.  The  case  of  the  scribe. — To  understand  this,  see  first  what  is  said  here 
about  him.  "  There  came  one  who  was  a  scribe  "  as  it  may  be  translated  (see 
E-.V.).  Evidently  his  position  and  office  are  of  importance  in  the  story.  As  a 
scribe  he  was  more  accustomed  to  lead  than  to  follow.  All  the  more  is  it  to  be 
noted  that  he  addresses  Christ  here  as  a  "  Teacher  "  and  offers  to  follow  His  lead, 
and  offers  to  do  so  at  this  particular  juncture,  when  the  Saviour  is  preparing  to 
leave.  "  Let  us  go  to  the  other  side."  "  I  will  go  too,  if  yot  will  let  me."  More 
than  that,  "  I  will  follow  Thee,  whithersoever  Thou  goest"(ver.  19).  Does  he 
not  appear  to  be  a  disciple  indeed  ?  When  we  turn,  next,  however,  to  what  was 
said  to  him,  there  is  a  great  change  in  the  scene.  Instead  of  being  welcomed,  he 
is  almost  forbidden  to  do  as  he  proposes.  At  any  rate  he  is  taught  indirectly 
to  count  the  cost  of  the  step  (ver.  20).  He  is  bidden  to  consider  Who  it  is  that 
he  proposes  to  follow  ;  what  His  lot  will  be,  what  His  companionship  means. 
Not  even  the  irrational  creation  will  be,  at  times,  so  without  shelter  as  He. 
Also,  if  this  is  to  be  true  of  the  Leader,  what  will  be  true  of  His  followers  ?  With 
so  little  for  Himself,  what  can  He  bestow  upon  them  ?  What  all  this  implies,  in 
the  third  place.  About  the  man  himself,  on  the  one  hand  ?  That  his  real  motive 
in  wishing  to  follow  was  hardly  known  to  himself.  That  he  had  been  attracted  by 
the  Lord's  miracles  and  became  desirous  of  being  associated  with  such  a  Great  One. 
Apparently,  also,  that  he  expected  much  worldly  advantage  from  being  permitted 
to  do  so  (cf.  John  vi.  26;  Acts  viii.  19).  About  many  others  beside,  on  the 
other  hand.  ''  Ex  uno  disce  omnes."  There  would  be  many  others  like  him ; 
persons  ready  to  follow  but  not  to  be  taught ;  glad  to  receive  but  not  to  labour  ; 
anxious  to  get  but  not  to  give.  "  Non  tali  auxilio,  nee  defensoribus  istis,  tempus 
eget."  All  such  followers  would  be  to  the  Saviour  rather  a  hindrance  than  a 
help  (2  Tim.  ii.  4,  etc.).  Therefore,  at  this  juncture,  in  the  most  effectual  way 
possible,  He  would  be  rid  of  all  such.  Let  true  disciples — and  true  disciples  only 
— come  with  Me  to  My  work. 

II.  The  case  of  the  disciple. — His  original  position  was  exactly  opposite  to 
that  of  the  other.  He  was  a  "  disciple  "  already.  There  came  one  who  was  a 
"  disciple"  (ver.  21).  He  had  been  called  to,  and  had  not  only  volunteered  for, 
that  office  and  work.  This  is  distinctly  stated  (if  the  account  be  the  same,  and 
it  is  quite  the  same  in  other  respects,  as  Luke  ix.  59,  60) ;  and  follows  fi  om  the 
fact  that  we  find  him  expected  here  (as  all  disciples  are)  to  follow  and  learn 
(John  viii.  31).  Hence,  therefore,  in  the  next  pla^e,  the  very  natural  character 
of  the  request  he  preferred.  It  was  sin)ply  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  post- 
pone doing  what  he  had  been  asked  to  do  then  (ver.  21).  Postpone  it  only,  not 
neglect  it  entirely.  Postpone  it  on  account  of  another  duty  which  had  great 
claims  on  him  as  a  son  ;  as  great,  in  fact,  in  that  direction,  as  could  very  well  be. 
Who  should  bury  a  father  if  not  his  own  son  ?  What  son,  also,  if  he  neglects 
that  duty  could  make  amends  for  it  afterwards?  Hence,  finally,  the  great 
significance  of  the  reply  he  received  (ver.  22).  What  did  this  mean  to  that 
disciple  himself  ?  Does  it  not  mean  that  the  duty  even  of  burying  a  father  could 
be  fitly  discharged  by  those  other  members  of  his  family  who  had  not  been  so 
called  to,  and  so  specially  fitted  for,  Christ's  work  as  himself  ?  Does  it  not  mean, 
therefore,  that,  for  himself,  he  should  put  no  other  work  above  that  ?  No,  nor 
even  before  that  work,  though  but  for  a  time.  Was  not  this  reply,  also,  though 
thus  addressed  to  one,  meant  for  others  beside  ?  Let  all  disciples  there  present 
understand  from  it  what  true  discipleship  means.  Wherever  may  be  the  **  other 
side  "  to  which  the  Saviour  asks  them  to  go  in  His  company,  they  must  be  ready 
to  go  with  Him  at  once — all  other  persons,  and  calls,  and  duties,  whatsoever, 

207 


CHAP.  VIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


being  left  behind  for  His  sake.     Always  a  truth,  this,  of  the  highest  importance, 
it  was  doubly  so  at  that  time. 
See  here  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  How  much  this  Teacher  thought  of  His  work. — When  the  presence  of  others 
with  idle  wonder  and  interested  motives  threatens  to  interfere  with  it,  He  at 
once  leaves  them  behind.  When  the  most  pressing  of  other  duties  comes  in  com- 
petition with  this,  He  at  once  leaves  that  other  for  this,  and  commands  the  same 
to  all  His.  Nothing  must  hinder  this  paramount  aim  (John  iv.  34;  Luke 
xii.  50). 

2.  How  much  we  ought  to  think  of  it  too. — Shall  we  neglect  what  was  thus 
provided  for  us  1  Shall  we  despise  what  was  thus  valued  by  Him  ?  Especially 
when  we  remember  that  it  was  so  valued  by  Him  because  of  its  importance  to 
us !     Nothing  is  there,  surely,  that  in  our  eyes  should  stand  higher  than  this. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  19-22.  Too  hasty  and  too  slow,  ing  his  fair  profession  and  liberal  offer, 

— These  words  of  our  Lord  seem  to  be  he  had  not  counted  the  cost,  he  could 

stumbling  blocks  deliberately  placed  in  not  stand  the  minimum  test  of  ordinary 

the  way  of  those  who  are  anxious  to  discipleship.       The    character    of    the 

become  His  disciples.     Let  us  examine  man  may  be  summed  up  in  a  sentence, 

these  two  cases  more  closely.     We  may  His  profession  of  religious   attachment 

assume  at  once  that  they  are  not  what  was   inspired   by  feeling    and  impulse 

at  first  they  appear  to  be.     The  two  only.     His  determination   was  formed 

cases  are  the  antithesis  of  each  other.  under   the   influence  of    emotion,  and 

They  are  specimens  of  two  extremes.  not  of  the  understanding,  and  a  glance 

I.  The  too  hasty  disciple. — He  is  a  at  the  context  reveals  the  secret  of  his 

scribe — a  man  of  position  and  influence,  zeal.     Our  Lord  had  just  preached  His 

of  learning  and  intelligence,  who,  were  peerless  sermon,   and  performed  some 

he  attaching  himself  to  the  new  cause,  of  His  most  wonderful  works  (ver.  16). 

could  be  of  immense  advantage  to  it.  Wondering  crowds  had  flocked  to  see 

worth  a  dozen  ignorant  fishermen  or  Him  ;  the  excitement  was  intense.   The 

boorish     villagers.       He     has     been  scribe  had  caught  the  contagion ;   and 

attracted   by   Christ's   preaching    and  while  his  wonder  and  enthusiasm  were 

miracles,   and    all    at    once,   without  raised    to    the    utmost    pitch,    all    at 

delay,  or  reserve,  or  conditions,  he  says  once  he  formed  the  resolution  fco  become 

unto  Him,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee  a   disciple,    and   broke   out    into    the 

whithersoever  Thou  goest."     It  was  a  exclamation,    "  Master,  I    will   follow 

magnificent  offer,  and  at  first  sight  we  Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest."     But 

should   expect   that   Christ   would   at  he  had  neither  considered  the  nature  of 

once  commend  the  man's  earnestness,  the  service  nor  the  cost  of  the  under- 

But,  on  the  contrary,  what  is  Christ's  taking.     We  need  to  beware  of  that 

reply  ?     "  Foxes  have  holes,   and   the  religion  which  is  based  on  feeling  alone, 
birds  of  the  air  have  nests ;  but  the  Son  II.  The  too  slow  disciple. — The  first 

of   man   hath   not   where  to  lay  His  ofiered  himself  as  a  disciple  ;  the  second 

head  " — as  much  as  to  say,  "  You  had  is  called  by  Christ,  but  asks  for  delay, 

better   not    follow   Me,     for    nothing  He   was   already   a  disciple  at  large, 

awaits  those  who  become  My  disciples.  He  is  now  invited  to  become  a  regular 

but   poverty   and   privation,    and  evi-  disciple.       The    command    which   our 

dently  this  is  not  what  you  expect."  Lord  imposes  upon  him  strikes  us  at 

Now,  the  reason  of  Christ's  forbidding  first  as  being  harsh  and  unreasonable, 

reply  is,  that  He  rightly  gauged  this  and  many  attempts  have  been  made  to 

man,     He    read    Him    through    and  soften  the  austerity  or  explain  it  away, 

through,  and  knew  that,  notwithstand-  The  words  to  which  the  chief  objection 

208 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  viii. 


has  been  taken  still  remain  in  all  their 
bluntness,  "Let  the  dead  bury  their 
dead,"  i.e.  let  the  spiritually  dead 
bury  their  own  physically  dead ;  let 
those  ungodly  brothers  of  yours  look 
after  your  aged  father ;  leave  the 
world  and  the  things  of  the  world  to 
mind  themselves,  but  follow  thou  Me." 
What  is  the  explanation  of  this  ap- 
parently unfeeling  command?  For 
light  on  the  subject  we  must  refer  to 
the  circumstances.  This  man  has  been 
for  some  time  a  disciple  at  large, 
hovering  around  the  outer  circle  of 
Christ's  followers  ;  but  there  has  been 
a  slackness  or  backwardness  about  him 
indicating  a  disposition  to  fall  away. 
At  this  particular  time,  owing  to 
Christ's  preaching  and  mighty  works, 
there  has  been  a  renewed  enthusiasm 
among  His  followers — a  kind  of  revival 
of  spiritual  fervour.  Our  Saviour, 
conscious  of  this  man's  spiritual  con- 
dition, urges  him  to  take  advantage 
of  the  occasion  and  come  to  a  decision 
at  once.  It  was  now  or  never.  Every 
moment  was  precious.  Every  delay 
and  temptation  might  involve  a  relapse 
into  worldliness.  Therefore  He  must 
deal  with  the  case  sharply  and 
decisively.  There  were  elements  of 
good  about  the  man.  He  had  desires 
and  aspirations  after  a  Christ-like 
service  ;  but  this  was  a  critical  moment 
in  his  history,  when  a  postponement 
of  the  gospel  call  would  virtually  be 
its  rejection ;  when  a  return  into  the 
midst  of  a  peculiarly  worldly  circle  of 
relatives,  where  he  would  be  exposed 
to  ridicule  and  opposition,  would  involve 
such  danger  to  his  soul  that  Christ 
must  absolutely  forbid  his  request. — 
John  Boyd^  M.A . 

Christ  repelling  and  attracting. — We 
have  Christ : — 

I.  Repelling  the  too  willing. 

II.  Drawing  to  Himself  the  half- 
reluctant. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Impulsiveness  and  hesitancy. — I.  The 
impulsive  scribe. 

II.  The  hesitating  disciple.—/,  M. 
Gibson^  D.D, 


Precipitancy  and  procrastination. — • 
I.  The  rash  or  precipitate  disciple. 

II.  The  procrastinating  or  en* 
tangled  disciple. — D.  Brown,  D.D, 

Ver.  19.  Following  Christ, — What- 
ever may  have  been  the  motive  that 
prompted  their  utterance,  these  words 
considered  in  themselves,  express  the 
feelings  of  a  truly  devoted  disciple. 
They  are  the  true  expression  of  a  soul 
wholly  consecrated  to  Christ.  Taking 
them  in  this  sense,  let  us  ask  what  do 
they  imply  1 

I.  The  recognition  of  Christ's  claims. 
— It  is  possible  to  realise  much  of  the 
benefits  of  His  death,  and  yet  but  very 
imperfectly  recognise  Christ's  lordship 
over  us.  He  must  take  the  place  of 
absolute  supremacy  (Acts  x.  36 ; 
1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  Acts  xxvii.  23).  We 
are  only  safe  as  we  recognise  Christ's 
claims.  It  is  also  because  we  fail  to 
recognise  Christ's  lordship  that  we 
often  get  burdened  with  anxiety  and 
hampered  with  care. 

II.  Obedience  to  Christ's  commands. 
— (See  John  ii.  5.)  Christ  claims  our 
obedience,  step  by  step,  as  He  reveals 
to  us  His  will,  and  gives  us  His  com- 
mands. "  His  commands  are  not 
grievous,"  i.e.  they  may  be  fulfilled. 
To  follow  Christ  is  not  the  same  thing 
as  to  have  a  religion  or  a  system  of 
morality.  It  implies  that  we  have 
come  to  a  Person.  It  is  the  obedience 
of  the  heart. 

III.  Likeness  to  Christ's  character. 
— Outward  conformity  to  Christ  can 
only  come  by  union  and  fellowship 
with  Him  in  the  secret  springs  of  one's 
being.  "  The  branch  cannot  bear 
fruit  from  itself "  (John  xv.  4).  As 
one  has  said,  here  is  "  the  imperative 
of  a  natural  law,"  cannot.  So  is  it 
also  the  imperative  of  a  spiritual  law, 
the  law  of  true  service.  And  because 
He  had  taken  the  place  of  a  servant, 
He  voluntarily  submits  to  the  same 
law  which  He  bids  us  to  observe 
(John  V.  30,  viii.  28,  xiv.  10). — Eva/n 
H.  Hopkins y  M.A. 

Vers,  21,  22,  Spiritual  evolution. — 
P  209 


CHAP.  VIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


He  who  follows  Christ  will  be  an 
example  of  moral  and  spiritual  evolu- 
tion. There  will  be  progress  of  the 
whole  nature  to  higher  and  higher 
planes.  But  that  does  not  mean 
progress  of  every  part  and  along  every 
line.  Only  the  nobler  powers  and 
capacities  of  his  nature  are  to  be 
nourished.  Only  the  fittest  will  survive. 
If  there  is  to  be  true  progress  of  the 
whole  man,  there  must  be  degeneration 
of  certain  parts.  Let  us  take  a  few 
examples  of  this  truth.  We  have  to 
bury  : — 

I.  Dead  hopes  and  ideals. — There 
can  be  no  true  progress  of  man  unless 
there  be  progress  in  aspiration. 

II.  Black  days  of  the  past. — Days 
of  mistake.  Do  not  dissipate  the  energy 
of  the  present,  and  miss  its  golden 
opportunities  through  morbid  pining 
for  that  which  cannot  be. 

III.  Great  sorrows. — The  greater 
sorrows  of  Hfe  influence  us  differently. 
To  many  they  have  been  an  occasion 
of  greater  spiritual  impulse.  But  with 
others  they  have  had  a  paralysing 
effect.  They  have  become  self  centred. 
A  sorrow  may  be  great  and  mysterious, 
but  let  it  not  be  overwhelming.  On 
the  death  of  the  Prince  Consort  The 
Times  of  December  16th,  1861,  stated 
that  after  the  first  passionate  burst  of 
grief  was  over,  the  Queen  called  her 
children  around  her  and  said  that 
although  she  felt  crushed  by  the  loss 
of  one  who  had  been  her  life-companion, 
she  knew  how  much  was  expected  of 
her,  and  asked  for  their  assistance  in 
order  that  she  might  do  her  duty  to 
them  and  her  country.  Our  Queen 
has  been  true  to  her  word.  The  wound 
has  never  healed  and  never  will,  ''  till 
God's  love  set  her  at  his  side  again." 
But  she  has  exemplified  in  her  splendid 
career  the  very  spirit  of  this  passage. 
— R.  Baldwin  Brindley. 

*'  Suffer  me  farst  to  go  and  hury  m,y 
father. ^^ — The  words  "  Suffer  me  first  to 
go  and  bury  my  father,"  probably  do  not 
mean  that  the  man  wished  to  bury  his 
father  who  was  already  dead  ;  but  that 
he  wished  to  put  off  becoming  a  follower 

210 


of  Jesus  until  he  should  have  buried 
his  father,  who  at  that  time  was  still 
alive.  After  the  natural  bond  which 
still  united  him  to  his  parents'  house 
was  dissolved  in  the  way  of  nature,  he 
would  devote  himself  to  the  new  task  in 
connection  with  the  kingdom  of  God. 
I  have  been  prompted  to  this  interpre- 
tation by  the  following  communication 
in  the  Feuille  religieuse  du  canton  de 
Vaud  (1879,  p.  476,  ff.),  to  which 
Pastor  L.  Monod  of  Lyons,  has  called 
my  attention.  A  missionary  in  Syria, 
M.  Waldmeier,  there  relates  that  an 
intelligent  and  rich  young  Turk,  whom 
he  had  advised  at  the  close  of  his 
education  to  make  a  tour  to  Europe, 
had  answered,  "  I  must  first  of  all 
bury  my  father."  As  that  father  had 
hitherto  been  in  the  enjoyment  of  good 
health,  the  missionary  expressed  sur- 
prise at  the  sad  intelligence  of  his 
death.  But  the  young  man  hastened 
to  set  his  mind  at  rest  in  regard  to  his 
father,  and  explained  that  he  only 
meant  that  one  must  before  all  things 
devote  himself  to  the  duties  owed  to 
his  relatives.  If,  in  this  same  sense, 
the  form  of  expression,  "  would  first 
bury  my  father,"  was  used  by  the  man 
who  was  called  to  be  a  disciple,  the 
answer  of  Jesus  loses  the  appearance  of 
harshness  which  is  otherwise  attached 
to  it,  and  gains  a  very  striking  and 
significant  sense.  When,  in  place  of 
all  the  other  considerations  that  bound 
him  to  his  paternal  home,  the  man 
mentioned  the  burying  of  his  father, 
which,  on  the  one  hand,  postponed  to 
an  indefinite  future  the  required 
severance  from  his  home,  and  which, 
on  the  other  hand,  indicated  a  duty 
apparently  so  weighty  that  all  further 
contention  in  regard  to  his  refusal 
appeared  to  be  precluded,  Jesus,  how- 
ever, did  not,  in  the  given  circumstances, 
recognise  the  alleged  duty  to  be  one 
which  gave  the  man  a  right  to  shirk 
the  duty  of  preaching  the  kingdom  of 
God  to  which  he  was  now  called.  In 
the  view  of  the  speaker,  the  alleged 
reason — that  he  should  bury  his  father 
— directly  represented  all  the  other 
reasons  why  he   should   not   quit   his 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap,  viil 


home,   and   indirectly   it   made    those  sive    designation   for   all    acts   which 

other  reasons  appear  as  weighty  duties  have  reference,  not  to  the  Ufe,  but  to 

of  fihal  piety.     Jesus,  on  the  contrary,  the  death  of  men  ;  not  to  their  soul, 

found  it  characteristic  that  the  other  but  to  the  perishing  body.      In   this 

specified  a  duty  that  was  to  be  performed  sense  He  says,   "Let  the  dead  (those 

for  the  dead,  and  not  for  the  living.  who  are  destitute  of  true   life)    bury 

The  "  burying  of  the  dead  "  appeared  their  dead." — H.  H.  Wendtj  D.D. 
to  Him  a   figurative  and  comprehen- 

MAIJSr   HOMILETICS  OF    THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—27. 

Dormant  'power. — In  the  first  verses  of  this  passage  the  resolution  of  ver.  18  is 
executed  in  part.  The  disciples — apparently  with  some  reluctance — enter  a 
ship.  They  ''follow"  Jesus  into  the  "boat"  (R.  Y.).  The  "boat"  which  He 
had  possibly  spoken  of  previously  (ver.  18).  The  "  boat "  which  probably  to  their 
nautical  eyes  seemed  too  small  for  its  work.  (Note  the  words  "  gave  command- 
ment^^ in  ver.  18.)  The  voyage  which  followed  was  characterised  by  two  princi- 
pal features.  On  the  part  of  the  disciples  there  was  an  agitated  appeal.  On  the 
part  of  the  Saviour  a  gracious  response. 

I.  An  agitated  appeal. — The  occasion  of  this  was  a  "great  tempest" — a  sort 
of  convulsion  (a  acLo-fJios)  in  that  sea.     The  author  of  "  The  Land  and  the  Book" 
tells  us  that  such  tempests   are   common  still  in  those  parts,  and  that  they 
are  caused  principally  by  the  sudden  rush  of  the  wind  down  some  of  the  deep 
gullies  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  lake.     This  fact  seems  to  explain  much  that  we 
read  of  in  this  case.     A  vessel  making  for  the  East  would  be  especially  exposed 
to  that  wind ;  and  the  waves  raised  by  it  would  naturally  drive  over  its  prow  so 
as  to  "  cover  "  the  decks  of  such  a  "  boat "  where  it  had  them,  and  "  fill "  it  where 
it  had  none  (Matt.  viii.  24  ;   Mark  iv.  37).     Either  way,  the  peril  was  great. 
Could  they  hope,  in  such  a  craft,  to  survive  such  a  storm  1     The  ground  of  their 
appeal  lay  in  the  unexpected  attitude  of  their  Master  and   Lord  at  that  time. 
Somewhere  away  from  those  navigating  the  vessel  (note  the  word  "came"  in 
ver.  25) — somewhere,  St.  Mark  says,  as  would  be  natural  in  such  a  storm  (see 
above),  in  the  "hinder  part"  of  the  vessel,  with  "  His  head  on  a  pillow" — He 
was  buried  in  "  sleep."     To  us  this  is  an  affecting  evidence  of  the  true  humanity 
of  the  Master,  and  of  the  serious  effects  of  His  many  labours  at  times  upon  it. 
To  them  it  would  doubtless  have  a  different  look.     Was  it  lack  of  discernment  ? 
Was  it  want  of  concern?     Should  they  not,  in  any  case,  wake  Him  out  of  His 
sleep  1     The  nature  of  their  appeal,  when  they  came  to  make  it,  was  in  full  accord 
with  such  feelings.     On  the  one  hand,  as  natural  to  men  who  did  not  know  how 
many  moments  they  had  to  live,  it  was  exceedingly  brief  and  abrupt.     "  Help, 
Lord,  we  perish  "  (see  R.V.).     On  the  other  hand,  as  men  feeling  their  need 
of  all  the  sympathy  and  help  that  they  could  possibly  obtain  in  their  awful  ex- 
tremity, there  was  something  like  a  tone  of  reproach — almost  of  complaint — 
not  to  say  of  accusation  itself — in  their  words.    St.  Mark's  language  (Mark  iv.  38) 
puts  this  very  bluntly  indeed.     "  Carest  Thou  not  that  we  perish  1 "     Almost 
"  Have  you  no  feeling  at  all  for  our  need?  "     Great  indeed  must  have  been  the 
tempest  within  them  to  give  such  utterance  to  such  thoughts. 

II.  A  gracious  response. — For  gracious  it  was — most  gracious — though  in  the 
form  of  rebuke.  A  rebuke,  first,  to  t\ie  disciples  themselves.  "  Why  are  ye  fear- 
ful " — timorous — ye  "  little-faithed  "  souls  ?  What  is  there  really  to  fear  ? 
What  is  there  lacking  except  in  your  faith  ?  In  form,  of  course, — and  in  effect 
also — this  was  to  them  a  rebuke.  But  what  a  rebuke  !  What  pity  was  in  it  ! 
What  assurance  as  well  !  How  exactly  calculated  to  begin  quieting  the  storm 
of  feeling  within  them  !     Could  there,  indeed,  have  been  greater  love  consistent 

211 


CHAP.vm.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


with  truth  1  The  other  rebuke  was  but  the  sequel  to  this  ;  its  complement,  as  it 
were.  Very  wise  was  its  direction.  "  He  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea " 
(ver.  26).  He  attacked  the  cause  of  their  danger;  the  spring  of  their  fears. 
Let  these  be  hushed,  there  would  be  terror  no  more.  Very  effectual  were  its  first 
consequences.  Not  the  winds  only  but  the  waves  are  silent.  Not  the  waves 
only  but  the  lingering  "  swell  "  by  which  such  waves  were  usually  followed.  All 
motion  was  gone.  "There  was  a  great  calm"  (ver.  26).  Very  striking  were  its 
remoter  results.  There  was  now  as  great  a  stillness  in  the  hearts  of  those  who 
looked  on  as  there  was  in  the  elements  round  about  them.  A  stillness  more  than 
the  stillness  of  peace,  though  doubtless,  in  their  circumstances,  that  would  be 
blessed  and  deep.  It  was  the  stillness  of  wonder  ;  the  hush  of  bewilderment ;  the 
silence  of  awe.  "  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even  the  winds  and  the  sea 
obey  Him?  "  (ver.  27).  A  question  that  may  very  well  have  been  accompanied 
by  others.  Where  was  our  faith  ?  How  came  we  ever  to  question  His  power  ? 
How  came  we  ever  to  question  His  love  1     Shall  we  ever  do  so  again  ? 

This  story  has  long  been  valued  by  all  true  disciples  of  Christ.  It  is  a  beautiful 
illustration  of  His  ways  of  dealing  with  those  that  are  His. 

1.  Of  the  way  iniohich  sometimes  He  brings  them  into  trial. — Himself  (perhaps) 
bidding  them  do  that  which  is  contrary  to  their  judgments ;  Himself  allowing 
their  fears  and  scruples  to  appear  justified  for  a  time ;  Himself  leaving  them  to 
do  battle  with  the  forces  against  them,  almost  in  despair.  Does  He  care  for  us 
at  all  ?  Is  it  beyond  Him  to  help  us  ?  Why  are  things  with  us  thus  ?  (Judges 
vi.  13).     Can  we  hope  ever  to  get  to  the  other  side  of  this  cloud  1 

2.  Of  the  way  in  which  He  may  be  expected  to  bring  them  through  their  trials  at 
last. — Viz.  in  such  a  way  as  to  learn  far  more  both  of  His  mercy  and  power ;  in 
such  a  way,  therefore,  as  to  reach  a  greater  "  calm  "  and  deeper  "  faith  "  in  the 
end ;  and  to  wonder,  therefore,  now  as  much  at  our  former  fears  as  we  did  at 
His  slumber  before. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  23-27.  Christ  stilling  the  tem-  company  and  service.  "Why  are  ye 
pest. — 1^  Our  Lord,  of  set  purpose,  will  fearful  ?  "  8.  He  can  make  a  diflfer- 
lead  His  disciples  into  dangers,  for  the  ence  between  small  faith  and  no  faith, 
stirring  up  and  trial  of  their  faith,  and  and  as  He  will  reprove  unbelief,  so 
for  evidencing  His  own  glory.  2.  His  will  He  not  despise  the  smallest  meas- 
presence  exempteth  not  His  disciples  ure  of  belief.  9.  Whether  He  seem 
from  trouble  and  danger.  3.  Our  to  sleep  or  to  be  awake,  He  is  Lord  of 
Lord,  as  He  took  on  Him  our  nature,  heaven  and  earth,  Kuler  and  Com- 
so  also  He  subjected  Himself  to  our  mander  of  wind,  sea,  and  land,  whom 
natural  and  sinless  infirmities.  Being  all  the  creatures  must  obey.  10.  The 
weary.  He  falls  asleep.  4.  The  church  glory  of  the  deliverance  which  Christ 
may  be  like  to  be  drowned,  and  Christ  doth  give  to  His  people  in  their  great- 
may  seem  to  neglect  the  matter.  est  strait  is  marvellous  and  far  above 
5.  The  church  must  believe  Christ  to  all  that  they  can  apprehend  ere  it 
be  God  and  able  to  deliver  them.  He  come.  "The  men  marvelled."  11.  The 
can  carry  Himself  as  one  asleep,  to  faith  which  Christ's  disciples  had  in 
the  end  He  may  be  awakened  by  their  His  Godhead  was  little  in  comparison 
prayers.  6.  As  a  sense  of  danger  and  of  what  they  had  ground  for.  "  What 
need  is  a  choice  argument  when  we  manner  of  man  is  this  ? "  etc. — David 
deal  with  Christ  for  help ;  so  is  it  an  Dickson. 
ordinary  forerunner  of  deliverance  and 

help.      7.  It  is  a  simple  misbelief  to  The  stilling  of  the  tempest. — I.Christ's 

be  too  much  afraid  to  perish  »in  Christ's  sleep  in  the  storm. — His  calm  slumber 

212 


JSOMILEfiC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  VIM. 


is  contrasted  with  the  hurly-burly  of  storm  rage  on.     It  can  do  no  harm, 

the  tempest  and  the  fear  of  the  crew,  and,  for  the  present,  may  blow  as  it 

It  was  the  sleep  of  physical  exhaustion  listeth,  while  He  gives  the  trembling 

after  a  hard  day's  work.     It  is  a  sign  disciples  a  lesson.     Observe  how  lov- 

of  His  true  manhood,  of  His  toil  up  to  ingly   our   Lord   meets   an    imperfect 

the  very  edge  of  His  strength.     It  is  faith.     He   has   no   rebuke   for   their 

also  a  sign  of  His  calm  conscience  and  rude    awaking.       He    does    not    find 

pure  heart.     Jonah  slept  through  the  fault  with  them  for  being  *' fearful," 

storm  because  his  conscience  was  stu-  but    for  being  "  so  fearful "  as  to  let 

pefied  ;    but   Christ   as   a   tired   child  their  fear  cover  their  faith,  just  as  the 

laying  its  head  on  its   mother's   lap.  waves  were  doing  the  boat.     He  shows 

That    sleep    may   have    a    symbolical  them  and  us  the  reason  for  overwhelm  • 

meaning   for   us.      Though   Christ   is  ing  fear  as  being  the  deficiency  in  our 

present,  the  storm  comes,  and  He  is  faith.     And  He  casts  all  into  the  form 

sleeping  through  it.     He  delays  His  of  a  question,  thus  softening  rebuke, 

help  that  He  may  try  our  faith  and  and  calming  their  terrors  by  the  appeal 

quicken  our  prayers.     He  sleeps,  but  to  their  common  sense.     Fear  is  irra- 

He  never  ovt  rsleeps,  and  there  are  no  tional  if  we  can  exercise  faith, 

too-lates  with  Him.  lY.  The  word  that  calms  the  storm. 

II.  The  awaking  cry  of  fear. — The  — Christ  yields  to  the  cry  of  an  im- 
broken  abruptness  of  their  appeal  perfect  faith,  and  so  strengthens  it. 
reveals  the  urgency  of  the  case  in  the  He  does  not  quench  the  dimly  burning 
experienced  eyes  of  these  fishermen,  wick,  but  tends  it  and  feeds  it  with 
"  Save  us "  is  the  language  of  faith  ;  oil — by  His  inward  gifts  and  by  His 
"  we  perish "  is  that  of  fear.  That  answers  to  prayer — till  it  burns  up 
strange  blending  of  opposites  is  often  clear  and  smokeless,  a  faith  without 
repeated  by  us.  A  faith  which  does  fear.  As  He  lay  asleep  He  showed 
not  wholly  suppress  fear  may  still  be  the  weakness  of  manhood;  but  He 
most  real ;  and  the  highest  faith  has  woke  to  manifest  the  power  of  indwel- 
ever  the  consciousness  that  unless  ling  Divinity.  So  it  is  always  in  His 
Christ  help,  and  that  speedily,  we  life,  where,  side  by  side  with  the  signs 
perish.  of   humiliation   and    participation    in 

III.  The  gentle  remonstrance. —  man's  weakness,  we  ever  have  tokens 
There  is  something  very  majestic  in  of  His  Divinity  breaking  through  the 
the  tranquillity  of  our  Lord's  awaken-  veil.  All  this  is  a  symbol  of  our 
ing,  and,  if  we  follow  Matthew's  order,  individual  lives,  as  well  as  of  the 
in  His  addressing  Himself  first  to  the  history  of  the  church. — A.  Maclaren, 
disciples'   weakness,    and    letting    the  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses.  28—34. 

The  powers  of  darkness. — What  happened  by  the  way,  when  the  Saviour 
took  His  "disciples"  away  from  the  "multitudes"  which  He  had  gathered 
around  Him  at  Capernaum,  for  the  "  other  side "  of  the  lake,  is  told  us  in 
the  verses  preceding.  What  happened  when  they  arrived  thither  is  found  in 
the  verses  before  us.  They  may  be  fitly  treated,  we  think,  as  illustrating  on  the 
one  hand,  the  extent  of  His  power ;  and  on  the  other,  the  depth  of  His  mercy. 

I.  The  extent  of  His  power. — The  first  step  towards  a  fitting  realisation  of  this 
is  to  be  found  in  what  is  told  us  of  the  'persons  He  meets  with  on  landing.  As 
the  boat  touches  the  shore  there  have  come  down  to  meet  Him  two  highly 
exceptional  men.  They  are  exceptional  in  their  wildness,  their  fierceness,  their 
strength  (Mark  v.  4).  Also  because  of  these  things  they  had  the  neighbour- 
hood almost  to  themselves  (ver.  28).  Other  men  shunned  a  place  which  such 
worse  than  beasts  as  could  neither  be  "  tamed"  nor  controlled,  had  to  themselves. 

213 


CHAP.  vm.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Besides  this,  they  were  beHeved  to  be  exceptional  in  a  still  more  evil  degree.  In 
the  eyes  of  the  Saviour,  and  so  of  truth,  they  were  in  a  special  degree  under  the 
influence  and  control  of  the  spirits  of  evil.  They  were  "  Sai/iovt^o/xcvoi "  men 
possessed  with  devils — in  a  peculiarly  manifest  way.  The  language  they  employ, 
in  the  next  place,  was  in  full  accord  with  this  view  of  their  case.  It  is  language 
which  has  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  those  uniiappy  beings  as  men.  There  is 
a  knowledge  of  the  present  which  those  isolated  wanderers  could  hardly  have 
learned  (ver.  29,  "  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  God").  There  is  a  knowledge  of  the  futur:^ 
of  which  the  same  can  be  said,  and  which  points  also  to  what  we  are  not  told 
anywhere  of  the  children  of  men  (end  of  ver.  29,  also  xxv.  41).  And 
there  is  a  request  or  entreaty  which  would  be  absolutely  impossible,  if  not 
unmeaning,  if  merely  spoken  by  men.  A  numerous  "  herd  of  swine  "  is  seen 
feeding  some  distance  away.  The  voices  that  speak  are  voices  asking  permission 
to  "  enter  into  "  those  swine.  Such  a  request  would  be  an  utter  absurdity  if 
only  spoken  by  men.  Moreover,  the  voices  themselves  are  such  as  to  teach,  by 
the  language  they  use,  that  they  are  not  uttered  by  men.  How  could  men  even 
think  of  asking  not  to  be  "cast  out"  (ver.  31)  of  themselves?  Evidently, 
therefore,  there  are  beings  here  which  are  other  than  men.  The  issue  of  the 
request,  in  the  last  place,  tells  just  the  same  tale.  "  Permit  us  to  go,"  the 
voices  cry  out.  The  Saviour  replies  to  them  by  whomsoever  they  are  uttered. 
He  says  to  them,  "  Go."  What  follows  next  ?  The  real  utterers  of  those  strange 
utterances  do  as  He  permits.  They  "  go  out  "  ;  they  go  away  ;  they  "  go  into  "  the 
swine  (ver.  32).  Suddenly  maddened,  the  whole  herd  rushes  down  the  "  steep  " 
cliff,  and  is  choked  in  the  sea  at  its  foot.  Who  can  doubt  that  there  were  powers 
here  far  greater  than  man's  ?  Who  can  doubt  also  that  there  is  a  Power  here 
far  greater  than  theirs  1 

II.  The  depth  of  His  mercy. — The  case  of  the  persons  delivered  may  show  this, 
to  begin.  What  befel  the  swine  is  vivid  evidence  of  what  had  been  previously 
suffered  by  them.  The  very  suddenness  and  universality  of  that  sweep  to 
destruction  only  makes  this  the  more  plain.  What  must  have  been  the 
condition  of  those  two  human  personalities — each,  it  may  be  believed,  with  a 
capacity  for  suffering  beyond  that  of  all  the  swine  in  existence — when  in 
the  hands  and  at  the  mercy — if  they  had  mercy  at  all — of  such  powers  \ 
And  what  an  act  of  mercy  therefore — as  well  as  of  power — was  that  of  setting 
them  free !  What  a  merciful  substitution  of  heaven  for  hell  must  it  have 
seemed  to  their  hearts  !  On  the  other  hand,  we  see  almost  equal  mercy  in 
that  v)hich  ensued.  When  the  swine  rushed  down  into  the  waters,  those  that 
kept  them  rushed  away  to  the  "  city,"  and,  open-mouthed,  and  doubtless 
with  abundance  of  gesture,  told  the  story  of  their  loss  ;  as  also  of  what  had 
happened  in  consequence  to  the  two  demoniac  men.  Touched  in  purse  and  so  to 
the  quick,  the  greedy  owners  come  forth.  They  see  Jesus  ;  they  see  the  men  He 
has  blessed  ;  they  see  where  their  riches  had  been.  This  last  sight  affects  them 
the  most.  They  have  but  one  request  to  prefer.  Would  He  "  depart  out  of 
their  coasts  ?  "  (ver.  34).  Not  to  see  Him  now  ;  never  to  see  Him  again ;  that 
is  all  they  desire.  To  this  insolent  requirement  the  Saviour  replies  only  in 
meekness  and  love.  Without  a  word  of  anger — or  even  of  remonstrance  so  far 
as  we  know — the  Saviour  does  as  they  ask.  Instead  of  this,  if  we  may  judge 
from  Luke  viii.  39,  He  goes  away  in  a  spirit  of  deepest  concern  for  those  who 
have  sent  Him  away — and  so  is  as  merciful  to  them  as,  in  another  way,  to  the 
poor  demoniacs  themselves  ! 

Do  we  not  also  see,  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  How  excellent  a  lesson  there  would  he  in  all  this  to  the  disciples  of  Christ. — 
Having  before  seen  Jesus  in  triumphant  contact  with  nature,  they  now  see  Him 
the  same  in  contact  with  Hades  ! 

214 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  viii. 


2.  How  exceedingly  unwise  it  is  to  judge  hastily  and  a  priori  about  such  matters 
as  these. — Who  can  tell  what  goes  on — or  what  ought  to  go  on — in  the  invisible 
world  ? 

3.  How  wide  and  deep  are  the  sc7'iptural  foundations  for  the  belief  implied 
here. — Cf.  as  above,  end  of  ver.  29  with  xxv.  41 ;  also  Luke  viii.  31  ;  Rev.  xx.  S, 
etc.  ;  also  Acts  xvi.  16,  17,  compared  with  the  utterances  noted  above. 

4.  How  there  is  a  kind  of  "  possession  "  even  now  which  is  as  bad  in  result  as 
anything  described  here. — A  "  possession  "  which,  as  it  were,  "  casts  out  "  the 
presence  of  Jesus  Himself,  a  ''  possession,"  therefore,  which  does  the  very  worst 
for  us  that  even  Satan  can  wish. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  28-34.  Christ  casting  out  devils,  wicked  spirits  love  always  to  do  evil, 

— 1.    Christ  went  nowhere  but  for  a  and  make  it  a  sport  to  destroy  what 

special   errand.      Pity   for   these   two  they  are  permitted.      12.  To  the  end 

poor  possessed  men  moved  Him  to  cross  that  the  trial  of  men  may  be  perfected, 

the   sea   of   Tiberius.      2.  Christ   can  Christ   will   have  them   to  know   the 

make  the  devils  bring  men  to   Him.  spiritual  benefits  of  the  gospel,  as  well 

3.  The  malice  of  the  devils  is  exceeding  as  the  temporal  inconveniences  follow- 

cruel,  where  they  can  get  liberty  to  ing  it.     This  is  why  Christ  will  have 

show   it   against   men.      4.    However  the  Gadarenes  know  of  the  delivery  of 

powerful  devils  may  be,  yet  they  can  the  men  possessed  with  devils,  as  well 

neither    stand    out    against    Christ's  as  of  the  drowning  of  the  swine.     The 

power,  nor  flee  from  Him,  nor  abide  swineherds  tell  them  of  all,  that  so  they 

His  presence.     5.  The  case  of  possessed  might  be  inexcusable.      13.  Men  left 

souls,  in  whom  the  spirit  of  disobedience  to    themselves    will    choose   anything 

doth  rule,  is  to  be  seen  in  these  whose  rather     than     Christ,     and     will     do 

bodies  were  possessed  with  devils.    The  no  better  than   these  Gadarenes  did. 

man  is  their  lodging-house.     He  is  no  14.  Temporal  loss  of  swine  is  so  great  in 

more  master  of  his  own  actions,  but  worldly  men's  estimation  that  spiritual 

Satan's  slave.     The  man's  eyes  look  for  advantage    is    nothing    esteemed    of. 

Satan,  his  hands  and  feet  work  and  15.    If   men   see   nothing   of    Christ's 

walk   for  Satan,    his   throat   is   made  sweet  mercies,   but  only  take  up  His 

Satan's      blowing-horn,      his      mouth  power  they  will  be  loth  to  have  Him 

speaketh  for  Satan.     6.    Devils  knew  in    their    company    (ver.    34).       Such 

Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  but  they  worldly  men  will  rather  quit  the  gospel 

knew  also  that  He  came  not  into  the  than  hazard  their  worldly  goods.     16. 

world  for  their  good,    but  to   be  the  This  is  the  greatest  token  of  Christ's 

Saviour  of  men.     "  What  have  we  to  leaving  a  place,  or  not  coming  into  a 

do   with   Thee?  "      7.  Although   it   is  place,    when    the    whole    place    doth 

not  in  the  power  of  devils  not  to  yield  consist  only  of  Gadarenes,  and  all  do 

to  Christ,  yet  they  retain  their  wicked  consent   that    He   should  depart;   for 

aversion  to  obey  Him,  being  loth  to  there  apparently  He  hath  no  errand  to 

leave   the    possession    they   have   got.  stay  Him ;  and  wherever  Christ  hath 

They  would  be  let  alone  by  Him  if  they  no  employment,  thence  will  He  remove, 

could.     8.  They  know  there  is  a  time  — David  Dickson, 
coming  when  they  shall  be  more  tor- 
mented than  they  are  as  yet.     9.  They  Vers.    28,    29.   A    Saviour,    not    a 

cannot  hurt  so  much  as  a  sow  except  tormentor. — 1.    It    would    seem    that 

Christ,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  do  there  were  two  natures  in  the  men — 

suffer  them.     10.  The  Lord  sometimes  one,  a  good  and  sane   nature,  urging 

suffereth   Satan   to   have    his   will   of  them  to  go  to  meet  Jesus,  the  other, 

men's  bodies  and  goods.      11.    These  a  bad  and  mad  nature,  making  them 

215 


CHAP.  viii.     HOMILEfiC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHilW. 


cry,  "  What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee, 
Thou  Son  of  God  1 "     Is  it  not  so  with 
all    of    us?      Two    voices    there    are 
within— one    calling    us    to   what    is 
healthy  and  holy,  the  other  to  all  that 
is   destructive   and   bad.      2.  Just  as 
the  Saviour  did  not  land  on  the  coast 
of  the  Gadarenes  to  torment  them,  but 
to  save  them  from  the  demons  and  sins 
that  were  their  real  tormentors,  so  He 
did  not  come  into  the  world  to  torment 
us,  but  to  save  us  from  evil  passions 
and  desires,  than  which  there  are  no 
worse    tormentors.       3.    It    may    be 
frankly   admitted    that   true   rehgion 
does  restrain  our   conduct;    but   this 
ought  not  to  be  considered  a  torment- 
ing characteristic,  because  every  man, 
if  he  is  to  remain  a  man  and  not  to 
become  a  brute,  must  restrain  himself. 
4.  Nor  does  Christ  torment  us  by  taking 
up  aU  our  time.     What  time  does  it 
take  to  do  everything  to  the  glory  of 
God,  which  is  true  religion  ?     No  more 
time  than  to   do  everything  to  God's 
dishonour.     5.  "What  have  we  to  do 
with  Thee,  Thou   Son  of  God?"   was 
the  question  asked  by  these  wretched 
men,  and  each  of  us  must  ask  the  same 
question  at  different  periods  of  life. — 
E.  J.  Eardij,  M.A, 

Ver.  34.  Christ  and  the  commercial 
spirit. — We  may  observe : — 

I.  That  it  is  the  special  mission  of 
Christ  to  save  men  from  the  devil. — 

1.  The   devil  has  possession   of   man. 

2.  The  devil  in  the  man  becomes  in- 
jurious to  him  and  makes  him  injurious 
to  all  about  him.  3.  When  once  the 
devil  gains  possession  he  will  not  go 
out ;  he  must  be  cast  out.  4.  Christ 
only  can  cast  out  the  devil  from  the 
human  soul. 

II.  That  the  salvation  of  man  may 
involve  the  destruction  of  property. — 
This  may  be  an  unavoidable  conse- 
quence of  the  progress  of  a  good  work, 
or  it  may  be  an  indirect  result  follow- 
ing upon  a  particular  case.  Thus  : 
1.  Property  may  lose  its  value,  e.g, 
the  damsel  who  had  the  spirit  of 
divination;  progress  of  the  gospel 
destroying  the  trade  of  the  craftsmen 

216  ;  ^ 


of  Ephesus.  2.  Property  may  even  be 
destroyed.  The  chariots  of  Egypt; 
idols  of  Israel  and  the  nations ;  goods 
and  cattle  of  the  Amalekites. 

III.  That  it  is  possible  to  suppose  a 
state  of  society  in  which  property  is 
more  highly  prized  than  man. — The 
loss  of  the  swine  held  to  be  more 
important  than  the  saving  of  a  man. 
Is  not  this  the  besetting  sin  of  a 
commercial  age  ?  "  Wealth  accumu- 
lates and  men  decay."  This  is  also 
the  characteristic  of  despotic  govern- 
ments— Turkey  and  the  East  generally 
— all  slaveholders,  etc.  There  are 
three  states  of  society  to  which  we  may 
direct  attention.  1.  The  slave  state. 
When  man  can  hold  property  in  man. 
2.  The  commercial  state.  When  man 
regards  man  as  a  means  of  increasing 
his  wealth,  as  if  one  class  lived  for  the 
aggrandisement  of  another.  3.  The 
Christian  state.  When  man  holds 
property  for  man,  as  a  trust  for  humane 
and  benevolent  purposes,  never  to  be 
set  against  the  highest  welfare  of  the 
race. 

ly.  That  when  people  prefer  pro- 
perty to  man,  they  may  well  wish  to 
be  rid  of  Christ. — Where  Jesus  is, 
there  are :  1.  Sacrifices  to  be  made  for 
the  good  of  others.  2.  Efforts  to  be 
made  for  the  good  of  others.  3.  Men 
are  to  be  saved  at  all  risks. 

V.  That  when  people  show  that  they 
prefer  wealth  to  humanity,  Christ  is  not 
likely  to  make  His  abode  with  them. 
— He  gives  them  up  to  commerce  and 
devils,  since  they  desire  Him  to  depart 
from  them.  1.  May  not  this  be  so  in 
a  society  or  church  ?  2.  May  not  men 
of  business  experience  a  crisis  when 
they  must  hold  their  wealth  for  Christ, 
or  else  hold  their  wealth  instead  of 
Christ?  3.  How  awful  the  condition 
of  those  who  prefer  wealth  and  devils 
to  Christ. 

Lessons. — 1.  Set  a  high  value  on 
everything  human.  2.  Save  the 
human  from  the  diabohcal.  3.  Let 
property,  and  time,  and  talent,  be 
devoted  to  this  work.  4.  Let  us  be 
assured  that  this  is  the  work  of  Christ, 
and  therefore  worthy  of  us. — W.  Whale. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  ix. 


CHAPTER   IX. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Yet.  1.  Ship. — Boat  (R.V.).  His  own  city.— Capernaum  (see  iv.  13  ;  Mark  ii.  1). 
Ver.  2,  Palsy. — SuflEering  apparently  from  a  less  severe  type  of  paralysis  than  the  cen- 
turion's servant  (viii.  6).  Their  faith. — The  faith  of  the  sick  man  and  of  his  friends  who 
brought  him  (Morisoit).  Son. — A  young  man  apparently.  It  would  scarcely  be  too  strong 
to  translate  it  thus :  "My  dear  child,  be  of  good  cheer;  thy  sins  are  forgiven"  (Gibson). 
Thy  sins  he  forgiven  thee. — This  forgiveness  was  doubtless  the  very  boon  which,  above  all 
others,  the  young  man  needed  and  desired.  Jesus  was  reading  his  heart.  Possibly,  too, 
there  may  have  been  in  this  case  a  peculiar  connection  between  the  youth's  sins  and  his  sick- 
ness {Morisoyi). 

Ver.  4.  Knowing. — Or  seeing. 

Ver.  6.  Take  up  thy  had. — The  Oriental  frequently  spreads  a  mat  upon  the  ground  and 
sleeps  in  the  open  air  ;  in  the  morning  he  rolls  up  his  mat  and  carries  it  away  (^Carr). 

Ver.  8.  Marvelled. —  Were  afraid  (R.V.).  Unto  men. — This  power,  which  hitherto  had  been 
enthroned  in  the  most  holy  place  as  the  prerogative  of  Jehovah,  now  stood  embodied  before 
them,  as  it  were,  an  incarnate  Shechinah.  Hence  their  joyous  expression,  He  has  given  it 
to  the  Sonx)f  man,  and  therefore  to  men  {Lange). 

Ver.  9.  Receipt  of  custom. — Place  of  toll  (R.  V.).     See  Introduction. 

Ver.  10.  Jesus. — He  (R.  V.),  probably  Matthew.  Sat  at  meat  in  the  house. — The  modesty  of 
our  Evangelist  signally  appears  here.  Luke  says  (Luke  v.  29)  that  "Levi  made  Him  a  great 
feast,"  or  "reception,"  while,  Matthew  merely  says,  *'He  sat  at  meat,"  and  Mark  and  Luke 
say  that  it  was  in  Levi's  "  own  house,"  while  Matthew  merely  says,  "He  sat  at  meat  in  the 
house."  Whether  this  feast  was  made  now,  or  not  till  afterwards,  is  a  point  of  some 
importance  in  the  order  of  events,  and  not  agreed  among  harmonists.  The  probability  is 
that  it  did  not  take  place  till  a  considerable  time  afterwards  (Brown). 

Ver.  11.  When  the  Pharisees  saw  it. — Rev.  A.  Carr  thinks  that  though  not  guests,  they 
came  into  the  house — a  custom  still  prevalent  in  the  East. 
Ver.  12.  They  that  be  whole. — A  touch  of  irony. 

Ver.  13.  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice. — I.e.  the  one  rather  than  the  other.  Quoted 
from  Hosea  vi.  6.  "  Sacrifice,"  the  chief  part  of  the  ceremonial  law,  is  here  put  for  a  religion 
of  literal  adherence  to  mere  rules ;  while  "  mercy  "  expresses  such  compassion  for  the  fallen 
as  seeks  to  lift  them  up  (Bronm).    To  repentance. — Omitted  by  leading  MSS.  and  R.V. 

Ver.  14,  The  disciples  of  John. — The  passage  is  interesting  as  showing:  1.  That  the 
followers  of  the  Baptist  continued  during  our  Lord's  ministry  to  form  a  separate  body 
(as  in  xi.  2,  xiv.  12).  2.  That  they  obeyed  rules  which  he  had  given  them,  more  or  less 
after  the  pattern  of  those  of  the  Pharisees.  They  had  their  own  days  of  fasting  (the 
context  makes  it  probable  that  the  feast  in  Matthew's  house  was  held  on  one  of  them),  their 
own  forms  of  prayer  (Luke  xi.  1).  They,  it  would  seem,  acting  with  the  Pharisees,  and 
perhaps  influenced  b^  them,  were  perplexed  at  conduct  so  unlike  that  of  the  master  they 
revered,  and  came,  therefore,  with  their  question.  But  they  were,  at  least,  not  hypocrites, 
and  they  are  answered,  therefore,  without  the  sternness  which  had  marked  the  reply  to  their 
companions  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  15.  The  children  (sons,  R.V.)  of  the  bridechamber. — On  the  day  of  marriage  the 
bridegroom  went,  adorned  and  anointed,  to  the  house  of  the  bride,  attended  by  his  com- 
panions (Judg,  xiv.  11),  and  led  her,  attended  by  her  maidens,  in  festive  procession,  with 
music  and  dancing,  at  even,  by  torchlight,  into  the  house  of  his  father.  The  marriage  feast, 
which  was  defrayed  by  the  bridegroom,  lasted  seven  days  (Lange). 

Ver.  16.  New  cloth. —  Undressed  (R.V.).  It  denotes  cloth  that  has  not  passed  through  the 
process  of  fulling — that  process  by  which  cloth  is  thickened  and  made  compact,  as  well  as 
cleansed.  When  the  up- filling  patch  shrinks  it  takes  along  with  it  a  margin  of  the  old  and 
tender  robe,  and  the  rent  is  made  worse  {Morison).  John  was  not  a  member  of  the  newly 
inaugurated  kingdom  of  God  (xi.  11).  In  accordance  with  this,  Jesus  declared  the 
forms  of  righteousness  practised  by  John's  disciples  to  be  antiquated  and  out  of  keeping 
with  the  new  righteousness  which  He  taught  as  belonging  to  the  kingdom  of  God 
iWendt). 

Ver.  17.  "Rottle^. —Wine-skins  (R.V.). 

Ver.  18.  A  certain  ruler. — The  president  of  a  synagogue.  His  name  was  Jairus  (see 
Mark  v.  22;  Luke  viii.  41).     Every  synagogue  had  its  president,  who  superintended  and 

217 


CHAP.  IX.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


directed  the  services.  The  ruler  of  a  synagogue  was  at  the  same  time  president  of  its 
college  of  elders  (^Lange).  My  daughter. — Mark  v.  23,  t6  dvydTpiov  =  the  "little  thing." 
Luke  says  she  was  about  twelve  years  of  age.  Is  even  now  dead. — But  see  Mark  v.  23 ; 
Luke  viii.  42.  It  is  probable  that  he  would  employ  various  expressions  in  representing  the 
case ;  and  very  likely,  indeed,  the  case  itself  was  such  that  he  would  be  fairly  puzzled  to 
determine  precisely  whether  she  were  dead  or  alive  (Morison). 

Ver.  19.  And  Jesus  arose,  etc. — It  thus  happened  that  Jesus  could  prove  to  the  objectors 
(vers.  11,  14)  that  He  was  able  and  willing  to  liee  from  the  feast  and  to  sympathise  with  the 
deepest  suffering,  nay,  to  enter  the  valley  of  death  itself.  This  constituted  both  the  fasting 
of  Jesus  and  His  mission  to  relieve  the  sick  (Lange). 

Ver.  20.  A  woman. — Tradition  makes  her  a  resident,  not  at  Capernaum,  but  at  Paneas  or 
Caesarea  Philippi,  who  had  wandered  to  Galilee,  seeking  relief  from  her  trouble.  A  group  of 
two  statues,  supposed  to  commemorate  the  miracle,  existed  at  that  place  in  the  time  of 
Eusebius  (fourth  century),  and  one  was  seen  by  him  as  he  records  (Eccles.  Hist.,  vii.  18). 
Another  church  historian  (Sozomen),  a  century  later,  describes  the  destruction  of  the  same 
monument  by  order  of  tl  e  Emperor  Julian  {Laidlaw).  An  issue  of  blood. — See  Lev.  xv.  19  seq. 
Hem  of  His  garment. — The  border  or  fringe  of  the  loose  outer  garment,  probably  of  a  bright 
blue  mingled  with  white  (see  Numb.  xv.  38 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  5). 

Ver.  21.  She  said. — The  imperfect  tense  of  the  original  denotes  intensity  of  feeling.  *'  She 
kept  saying  over  and  over  to  herself  "  (^Carr). 

Ver.  22,  Daughter. — A  pure  and  affectionate,  yet  masterful  name  {ChadwicTi).  Thy  faith. — 
Not  thy  touch  merely. 

Ver.  23,  Minstrels. — Flute-players  (R.V.).  Their  presence  indicated  that  the  preparations 
for  the  funeral  ceremonies  had  commenced. 

Ver.  24.  Not  dead,  but  sleepeth. — Christ  used  the  same  expression  afterwards  of  Lazarus ; 
and  when  misunderstood  He  put  it  plainly,  "  Lazarus  is  dead"  (Laidlaw^. 

Ver.  27.  Two  blind  men.— This  miracle  narrated  by  St,  Matthew  only.  Blindness  is  a  far 
more  frequent  calamity  in  Palestine  aad  the  adjoining  countries  than  with  us.  Its 
frequency  is  attributable  to  various  causes,  as,  e.g.  to  the  flying  dust  and  sand  pulverised  by 
the  sun's  intense  heat ;  to  the  perpetual  glare  of  light ;  to  uncleanness  ;  to  the  effect  of  dews 
during  night  on  those  who  sleep  on  the  roof  of  their  houses,  etc.  Thou  Son  of  David. — 
See  on  i.  1. 

Ver.  28.  The  house, — The  house  in  which  He  sojourned  at  Capernaum,  probably  that  of 
Peter  and  Andrew  (Mark  i,  29),  Believe  ye?  etc. — His  early  cures  had  been  wrought  almost 
without  solicitation.  Now  that  evidences  were  multiplied,  the  kingdom  recognised,  a  pro- 
portionate expression  of  faith  is  expected  {Laidlaio). 

Ver.  30.  Straitly. — Strictly,  sterrdy  (R.V.  and  margin).  The  word,  implying  originally  the 
panting  breath  of  vehement  emotion,  is  one  of  the  strongest  used  by  the  New  Testament 
writers  (Mark  i.  43,  xiv.  5  ;  John  xi.  33,  38)  to  express  repugnance,  displeasure,  or  the 
command  that  implies  annoyance.  It  is  as  if  our  Lord  saw  the  garrulous  joy  on  the  point  of 
uttering  itself,  and  sought  by  every  means  in  His  power  to  restrain  it.  The  reasons  may  be 
sought,  as  elsewhere,  either  :  1.  In  its  being  good  for  the  spiritual  life  of  the  men  themselves 
that  they  should  show  forth  their  praise  of  God,  not  with  their  lips,  but  in  their  lives ;  or 
2.  In  the  shrinking  from  mere  notoriety,  from  the  gaze  of  crowds  drawn  together  to  gaze 
on  signs  and  wonders,  and  ready  to  make  the  Wonder-worker  a  king  because  He  wrought 
them  (^Plumptre). 

Ver.  33  Marvelled. — This  miracle  produced  a  great  impression.  Why  so,  we  may  easily 
understand.  The  Jewish  Rabbis  and  teachers  practised  exorcism.  They  professed  to  cast 
out  evil  spirits.  They  did,  perhaps,  produce  effects  of  a  noticeable  kind  on  nervously 
disturbed  persons.  But  a  deaf  and  dumb  "  possessed  "  person  was  beyond  their  reach.  They 
could  do  nothing  with  such  a  case.  They  could  not  address  the  man.  He  was  beyond  the 
scope  of  any  influences  which  they  could  bring  to  bear.  Jesus  Himself  explains  to  the 
disciples  in  another  case,  where  "  possession  "  is  ascribed  to  a  "  dumb  spirit,"  that  such 
were  peculiarly  hard  even  for  faith  to  deal  with  (Mark  ix.  29).  Here,  then,  was  an  instance 
of  Jesus'  power  specially  fitted  to  impress  the  people,  and  it  also  specially  exasperated  the 
hostility  of  His  enemies  {Laidlaro). 

MAIN  BOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—8. 

The  pardon  of  sin. — The  miracles  of  the  Saviour  had  both  a  temporal  and  a 
spiritual  side.  The  multitudes  mentioned  in  viii.  18  appear  to  have  thought 
too  much  of  the  former.  Therefore  it  was  that  He  went  away  to  the  other  side 
of  the  lake ;  and  so,  as  it  were,  for  a  season,  cut  off  the  supply.  Now,  it  appears, 
in  coming  back,  that  He  has  the  same  error  in  view,  but  desires  to  treat  it  (if 

218 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  IX. 


we  judge  Him  rightly)  in  a  different  way,  viz.  in  the  way  of  rather  fixing  attention 
on  the  spiritual  side  of  His  works.  The  probable  evidences  of  this  will  be  found  : 
1.  In  the  claim  with  which  He  begins.  2.  In  the  proof  with  which  He 
concludes. 

I.  The  original  claim. — This  was  remarkable,  first,  in  its  general  scope.  It 
was  a  tacit  claim  to  a  right  to  speak  on  the  most  momentous  of  topics,  viz.  on 
the  "  forgiveness  of  sins  "  (ver.  2).  No  topic  reaches  so  far  as  this  does  both 
towards  God  and  towards  men.  It  affects  the  Ruler  because  it  affects  the  equity 
and  so  the  continuance  of  His  rule.  It  affects  the  offender  because  it  affects  the 
continuance  of  his  life.  It  was  doing  not  a  little  to  undertake  to  speak  at  all  on 
such  a  matter.  Kemarkable,  next,  because  of  its  special  manner  and  tone.  On  this 
highest  of  topics  He  claimed  the  right  to  speak  in  the  highest  possible  way.  It  is 
both  as  a  Father  and  as  a  King ;  and  as  both  these  in  such  a  way  that  His  word 
may  be  trusted  to  the  full,  the  Saviour  speaks  in  this  case.  "  Son,  be  of  good 
cheer,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  "  (R.V.).  In  other  words — "  The  cause  is  over,  the 
question  settled ;  I  pronounce  thee  forgiven."  Equally  remarkable  was  the 
claim  made  in  regard  to  the  effect  it  produced.  This  was  of  a  twofold  description. 
On  the  one  hand  it  produced  in  those  who  stood  by  and  heard  it  a  certain  feeling 
— in  all  probability  partly  real  and  partly  also  affected — of  horror.  It  seemed 
to  them,  and  they  were  men  who  professed  to  be  both  diligent  students  and  special 
teachers  of  truth,  that  there  was  nothing  less  than  absolute  blasphemy  in  the 
words  'they  had  heard.  At  the  same  time  it  is  observable  that  they  do  not 
seem  to  have  dared  to  put  this  thought  of  theirs  into  words  ;  not,  at  any  rate, 
to  Himself.  Only  *'  in  themselves " — to  their  own  hearts — do  they  whisper 
their  thought.  Any  way,  this  silence  itself  may  seem  to  show  the  more  what 
they  thought  of  His  claim,  viz.,  as  one  involving  that  which  it  was  hardly 
befitting  to  sp(  ak  of  out  loud.  Finally,  the  claim  is  remarkable  as  being  one 
which  we  have  never  heard  from  Him  before.  So  far  as  we  can  judge  there  had 
been  other  occasions  for  it  quite  as  fitting  as  this.  The  case  of  the  leper 
(viii.  1-4) ;  the  case  of  the  centurion's  servant,  a  case  of  palsy  (viii.  6) ;  the  case  of 
"  Peter's  wife's  mother  "  (viii.  14,  15)  (to  say  nothing  of  the  unnumbered  cases  of 
bodily  healing  that  are  referred  to,  in  the  mass,  without  being  severally  described 
in  viii.  16,  17) — are  all  cases  in  which,  if  this  claim  had  to  be  made,  it  would 
have  been  in  its  place.  Why,  then,  was  it  deferred  until  now  ?  Apparently, 
because  the  Saviour,  as  we  saw  before,  had  a  special  object  in  view,  the  object, 
viz.,  of  drawing  special  attention  to  the  spiritual  side  of  His  works.  Therefore  it 
was,  in  this  case  of  healing,  that  He  begins  with  this  claim. 

II.  The  subsequent  proof. — Having  made  such  a  claim  He  could  hardly  leave 
it  unsupported  by  proof.  Having  Himself  provoked  such  thoughts,  and  knowing 
He  had  (ver.  4),  He  could  hardly  leave  them  alone.  At  any  rate.  He  did  not.  On 
the  contrary  He  proceeds  to  give  good  evidence  that  He  could  really  do  as  He 
said ;  and  that,  in  drawing  attention  in  this  way  to  the  spiritual  side  of  His 
work.  He  was  not  only  declaring  what  was  transcendantly  important  but  abso- 
lutely indisputable  as  well.  The  evidence  in  question  was  two-fold  in  character. 
It  proved,  on  the  one  hand,  that  He  had  the  requisite  knowledge.  He  who  would 
pardon  sin  rightly  must  be  acquainted  with  "  all  about  "  it,  of  course.  What 
the  sinner  has  done.  Why  he  did  it.  How  much  he  was  tempted.  What  he 
thought  to  do  more  (Acts  viii.  22).  In  other  words,  any  one  who  would  be 
beyond  the  reach  of  mistake  on  this  matter  must  be  a  judge  of  the  heart.  Such 
accordingly,  in  this  case,  by  the  language  He  uses,  the  Saviour  proves  that  He  is. 
He  "  sees  " — so  some  copies — in  the  cage  before  Him,  the  hidden  thoughts  of  the 
heart ;  and  He  proves  Himself  thereby  to  be  fully  competent — if  we  may  so 
express  ourselves — to  *'  try  "  the  question  in  hand.  Why  should  He  not  be, 
indeed,  if  He  is  seen,  in  this  way,  to  have  all  the  requisite  "  data "  on  hand  ? 

219 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTBtlW. 


There  is  evidence  also,  in  the  next  place,  that  He  has  the  requisite  power. 
Witness  the  "  order  "  He  gives.  Speaking  Himself  to  the  man  who  is  sick — 
who  is  so  sick  as  to  be  unable  to  move  of  Himself  (ver.  2),  and  had  been  brought 
there  in  pity  by  others — He  bids  him  go  back  of  himself.  "  Arise,  and  take  up  thy 
bed  " — the  previous  sign  of  his  feebleness  to  be  thus  the  sign  of  his  recovery — 
"  and  go  unto  thy  house."  No  challenge  could  be  bolder — no  token  clearer — no 
issue  more  sure.  If  he  can  do  as  I  tell  him,  it  is  with  him  as  I  say.  Witness, 
next,  the  results  of  that  order.  The  first  result,  on  the  sick  man  himself.  The 
paralytic  does  as  he  is  told  to  do.  He  took  up  "that  whereon  he  lay"  (Luke 
V.  25).  He  did  so  "  before  them  all"  (Mark  ii.  12).  Witness  the  second  result 
on  all  that  stood  by.  They  see  at  once  what  it  means.  Things  are,  indeed,  as 
Jesus  has  said.  What  He  has  claimed  He  possesses.  Let  God  be  praised  that 
He  does.  However  marvellous,  it  is  strictly  true.  The  thesis  propounded  has 
been  proved  to  the  full.  "  The  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins." 
Besides  this  most  vital  of  truths,  we  may  learn,  from  the  passage  thus  analysed, 
two  others  of  hardly  less,  if  of  any  less  weight. 

1.  How  all  important  is  this  question  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin. — What  our 
Saviour  put  first  from  His  point  of  view  we  may  well  put  first  from  our  own. 
What  the  Saviour  begins  with  we  should  begin  with  as  well.  What  other 
advantage,  indeed,  is  worthy  of  mention  along  side  of  this  ?  It  is  like  a  ship  at 
sea  which  has  sprung  a  leak,  which,  if  not  "  stopped,"  will  infallibly  sink  it. 
What  other  things  are  worth  striving  for — what  other  things  are  worth  seeking 
for — what  other  things  are  worth  thinking  of,  until  this  is  done  ? 

2.  How  utterly  impossible  it  is  for  us  to  obtain  this  blessing  except  in  the  way 
presented  here. — Who  else  has  the  requisite  knowledge  ]  Who  else  has  the 
requisite  power  ?  Who  else  can  give  the  requisite  proof  ?  Our  Saviour,  when 
challenged,  gave  proof  of  His  claim.  Is  it  too  much  to  ask  as  much  in  all 
similar  claims  ? 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1-8.  The  great  Healer. — I.  The  pany,  and  to  bring  out  as  they  were 
diseased  man. — Paralysed.  The  result  able  to  bear  it.  His  true  character, 
of  sin.  His  friends  brought  him  "  on  a  III.  The  caviUers. — The  accusation 
bed,"  i.e.  on  a  mat,  or  cushion,  which  they  made  was  right  from  one  stand- 
could  easily  be  thrown  over  one's  arm  point,  and  it  was  wrong  from  another, 
(ver.  6).  1.  There  are  many  who  from  1.  They  were  right  in  asserting  that 
spiritual  disease  cannot  come  to  Jesus  God  alone  can  forgive  sins.  2.  It  was 
and  have  to  be  brought.  2.  Faith  is  wrong  inasmuch  as  they  counted  Jesus 
necessary   to  the    overcoming    of    the  a  mere  man. 

great  difficulties  and  obstacles  that  beset  IV.  The    eiFects. — The    cure    was  : 

the  way.  L  Immediate.    2.  In  sight  of  them  all. 

II.  The  great  Physician. — Jesus  saw  3.  Complete.     4.  Perfect.     5.  Glorify- 

their  "  faith  "  and  honoured  it.     How  ing  to  God.     So  in  spiritual  healing. — 

tender  His  first  word  "  Son  "  !     Then  The  Study. 
He  proceeded  to  encourage  him,  "  Be 

of  good  cheer.     Cheer  up  !  "     Then  the  The   Peace-bringer   in   the  world    of 

Saviour  exceeds  all  their  wishes,  ''  Thy  conscience. — I.  The  apparently  irrele- 

sins  be  forgiven  thee."     He  forgave  the  vant  answer  which  Christ  gives  to  the 

sins  first  and  healed  his   body  after-  unspoken  petition  of  the  paralytic  and 

wards   to    show:    1.    His   sovereignty.  his   friends.      "Thy   sins    be  forgiven 

2.  That  the  taking  away  of  the  guilt  thee."     It  was  far  from  their  wish,  but 
of  the  soul  was  vastly  more  important,  yet  the  shortest  road  to  it.     Probably 

3.  To  try  the  disposition  of  the  com-  the  palsy  was  the  result  of  fast  living 

220 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  ix. 


— "  a  sin  of  the  flesh,  avenged  in  kind." 
Perhaps,  too,  whatever  his  friends 
may  have  wanted  for  him,  the  poor 
man  himself  dimly  knew  that  forgive- 
ness was  his  most  pressing  want. 
Christ  would  not  thiis  abruptly  have 
offered  the  pearl  of  pardon  to  an 
altogether  unprepared  heart.  The 
gospel  cures  sorrow  second  and  sin 
first. 

II.  Forgiveness  is  an  exclusively 
Divine  act. — The  same  deed  may  be 
a  sin,  a  vice,  and  a  crime,  according  as 
we  regard  its  aspect  towards  God, 
towards  morals,  or  towards  law.  As 
sin  God  can  forgive  it ;  as  a  breach  of 
ethical  law  there  is  no  forgiveness, 
for  ethics  cannot  pardon  ;  as  a  breach 
of  the  law  of  the  land,  the  supreme 
power  may  remit  penalties.  God's 
pardon  often  leaves  some  of  the  natural 
consequences,  which  are  the  penalties 
of  our  sius,  in  order  that  we  may  hate 
and  avoid  the  evil ;  but  it  brings  the 
assurance  that  there  is  nothing  in  God's 
heart  towards  the  sinner  but  pure  and 
perfect  love. 

III.  Jesus  Christ  claims  and  exer- 
cises this  Divine  prerogative  of  pardon. 
— His  claims  to  Divinity  were  urged  in 
such  a  fashion  that,  if  they  are  denied, 
it  is  impossible  to  save  the  beauty  and 
lowliness  of  His  character. 

IV.  Christ  brings  visible  facts  into 
the  witness-box,  in  attestation  of  His 
invisible  powers. — We  may  make  a 
more  general  application  of  this  prin- 
ciple of  the  visible  evidences  of  invisible 
powers.  Are  not  the  results  of  every 
earnest  effort  to  carry  the  message  of 
forgiveness  to  men — in  homes  made 
Bethels,  passions  tamed,  and  lives 
elevated — witnesses  of  the  reality  of 
Christ's  claim  to  exercise  the  Divine 
prerogative  of  forgiveness?  All  the 
difference  between  Christendom  and 
heathendom  attests  Him  as  the  Foun- 
tain of  the  invisible  good  which  has 
passed  into  visibility  in  the  secondary 
results  of  the  gospel,  which  the  blindest 
can  see  and  the  least  spiritual  can 
appraise. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The   Gospel    of  forgiveness. — Many 


truths  are  here  presented  to  us,  e.g. 
1.  A  strong  faith  will  overcome 
difficulties.  2.  The  readiness  of  our 
Lord  to  welcome  the  needy,  and  to 
reward  faith.  3.  The  enmity  and 
opposition  of  the  human  heart.  4.  The 
superiority  of  spiritual  to  temporal 
blessings.  5.  Testimony  given  to  the 
Divinity  of  Christ  by  His,  (1)  for- 
giving sins ;   (2)  searching  the  heart ; 

(3)  healing  the  body.  But  the  cen- 
tral truth  of  the  passage  appears  to 
be  the  gospel  of  forgiveness  preached 
to  the  poor.  The  gospel  of  com- 
munism sends  the  weakest  to  the 
wall;  the  gospel  of  modern  science, 
with  its  doctrine  of  natural  selection, 
destroys  the  feeble.  It  was  the  glory 
of  Christ's  mission  that  He  stooped 
to  the  poorest  and  the  lowest,  and 
brought  the  message  of  life  and  hope 
within  the  reach  of  all.  View  this 
miracle,  then,  as  proclaiming  the 
gospel   of   forgiveness. 

I.  The  need  it  meets. — The  figure 
presented  to  us — a  paralysed  man, 
helpless,  incurable,  a  mere  wreck. 
Three      things      combined     in      him. 

1.  Disease. — Perhaps  the  consequence 
of  sinful  indulgence;  certainly  to  be 
traced  to  sin.     The  parable  of  sin. 

2.  Poverty. — The  *'  bed "  a  mere 
couch  or  mat. 

3.  Poverty  of  spirit. — Our  Lord's 
words  imply  this. 

II.  The  hope  it  awakens. — The  hope 
of  good. 

III.  The  blessing  it  bestows. 

1.  Forgiveness. 

2.  Manner  of  hestov)ment. — (1)  Im- 
mediate ;     (2)     free ;    (3)     complete ; 

(4)  authoritative  ;  (5)  effectual. 

IV.  The  opposition  it  excites. — The 
spirit  of  opposition  to  grace  always  the 
same — the  form  differs.  Man  will  be 
saved,  but  not  on  God's  terms. 

V.  The  vindication  it  receives. — 
Christ  proves  His  power  to  forgive, 
confutes  His  adversaries,  saves  the  man. 
The  gospel  may  appeal  to  results. 
Application  to  : — 

1.  T'he  careless. — Many  went  away 
unsaved.     "  Will  ye  also  go   away  ? " 

2.  The  anxious. — N"o  rest  except  in 

221 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Christ.      Never   rest   until   you   have      Walk  in  newness  of  life — in  the  power 
found  Him.  which  Christ  imparts. — Sir  E.  Bayley, 

3.  The  healed. — Go    sin    no    more.      Bart,  B.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—13. 

The  treatment  of  sinners. — The  calling  of  "  Matthew  the  publican  "  appears  to 
have  excited  a  great  deal  of  attention.  The  mingled  wealth  and  infamy  of  his 
avocation ;  the  fact  that  he  was  actually  engaged  in  it  when  called  away  from  it 
by  the  Saviour ;  and  the  readiness  and  completeness  with  which  he  responded — 
"  rising  "  up,  and,  as  it  were,  leaving  .the  "  violence  "  which  was  then  "  in  his 
hands  "  (Jonah  iii.  8) — would  all  have  this  effect.  All  men  of  all  sorts  would 
hear  of  it  with  wonder.  Nor  is  it  surprising,  that  being  the  case,  that  it  soon 
led,  as  described  to  us  here  :  1.  To  a  great  movement.  2.  To  a  strong  remonstrance. 
3.  To  a  TYiost  instructive  reply. 

I.  A  great  movement. — A  great  movement,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  way  of 
desire.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  true  disciple  that  he  wishes  other  men  like 
himself  (Acts  xxvi.  29).  Having  learned  the  truth  — and  that  happy  truth — 
and  that  truth,  moreover,  which,  amongst  its  first  teachings,  teaches  both  the 
duty  and  privilege  of  "  loving  one  another  " — such  a  man  cannot  help  desiring 
that  others  should  be  as  he  is.  And  he  will  desire  this  first,  also,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  for  those  nearest  to  himself  (John  i.  41).  And  he  will  desire  this  most, 
when,  as  in  the  present  instance  he  has  given  up  much  for  its  sake.  What  can 
I  do  for  my  brother  outcasts  in  regard  to  this  matter  1  How  can  I  show  them 
that  there  is  something  better  than  all  their  idolised  gains  ?  How  have  I  learned 
this  myself  ?  I  will  bring  them,  if  I  can,  under  the  same  influence  which  has 
taught  it  to  me.  They  shall  meet  in  my  house  with  my  Master  Himself.  The 
thought  was  as  new — but  as  natural  under  the  circumstances — as  his  conversion 
itself.  In  the  way  of  effort.  The  thing  desired  was  soon  brought  about.  Soon 
after  there  was  a  new  sight — a  very  new  sight — in  the  city  of  Capernaum.  In 
the  tax-gatherer's  house  there  is  a  vast  assemblage  of  such  men  as  himself,  or 
rather,  we  should  say,  of  such  men  as  he  had  previously  been.  *'  Many  publicans 
and  sinners  "  are  "  sitting  down  "  in  his  company.  They  are  sitting  down  as  his 
guests.  In  order  to  bring  them  together  he  has  made  a  "  great  feast "  (Luke 
V.  29) ;  of  which,  however,  it  may  be  noted  by  the  way,  he  does  not  tell  us  him- 
self. To  this  feast  he  has  invited  also  both  the  Saviour  and  His  disciples.  All 
that  can  be  done,  therefore,  Matthew  has  done  to  bring  about  his  desire.  It  is 
a  very  notable  fact.  The  previous  gain-lover  is  now  a  soul-lover  instead.  The 
man  who  was  always  for  making  money  is  now  spending  it  freely.  He  who  sat 
formerly  in  the  "  receipt  of  custom  "  is  now  at  the  feet  of  the  Saviour ;  and  is 
doing  all  he  can  to  bring  others  under  the  sound  of  His  voice.  All  Capernaum, 
we  cannot  doubt,  would  look  on  with  surprise. 

II.  A  strong  remonstrance. — Some  would  look  on,  we  are  reminded  next,  with 
much  more  than  surprise.  They  would  look  on,  we  may  almost  say,  with 
indignation  and  hate ;  with  a  degree  of  indignation  that  very  soon  found  expression 
in  words.  The  persons  so  speaking,  would,  very  naturally,  be  amongst  the 
Pharisees  of  the  place.  Their  very  name  signified  that  they  held  themselves 
aloof  from  all  others.  It  would  shock  them,  therefore,  especially  to  see  an 
assembly  where  the  very  opposite  idea  was  in  force.  They  might  almost  be 
excused,  indeed,  if  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  kind  of  reproach  to  themselves.  The 
ground  of  their  remonstrance  would,  therefore,  be  connected  with  this  self -same 
idea.  Are  we  not  as  Israelites,  a  people  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  world  ? 
(Deut.  xiv.  2,  etc.).  Are  we  not  as  Pharisees,  a  body  of  Israelites  pledged  to  see 
that  this  separation  be  carried  out  to  the  full  ?   But  what  is  it  we  see  here  ?    We 

222 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  IX. 


see  this  new  Teacher,  though  a  teacher  of  holiness,  sanctioning  confusion  instead  ; 
sitting  down  at  the  same  table  at  a  common  feast  with  men  notorious  for  their 
sins.  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners  and  eateth  with  them  "  (Luke  xv.  2).  That 
is  the  point — that  is  the  sting — of  their  cry.  A  remonstrance,  finally,  which  is 
all  the  more  remarkable  because  of  the  persons  to  whom  it  is  made.  "  When  the 
Pharisees  saw  it,  they  said  to  His  disciples,"  Why  doth  your  Master  do  thus  ? 
Apparently  there  was  a  holy  majesty  about  Him  which  prevented  them  from 
saying  this  to  Himself.  Apparently,  on  that  very  account,  they  felt  the  supposed 
scandal  the  more.  That  such  a  man  should  eat  with  such  !  This,  to  them,  was 
the  unendurable  wrong. 

III.  A  complete  reply. — This  was  given  by  going  further  into  the  nature  of 
things.  What  seems  so  objectionable  was  not  at  all  so  when  further  examined. 
So  fai'  from  this,  the  thing  objected  to  was  what  ought  to  be  done.  Whether  we 
consider  the  needs  of  men  on  the  one  hand,  or  what  is  pleasing  to  God  on  the 
other,  it  is  what  ought  to  be  done.  If  mercy  is  to  be  shown  it  should  be  shown 
to  those  who  need  it  the  most  (ver.  12,  end  of  13).  Also,  that  mercy  is  to  be 
shown  is  abundantly  manifested  from  what  God  Himself  has  said  on  the  point. 
Of  the  two  ways,  in  fact,  of  worshipping  God  this  is  the  way  He  prefers.  "  I 
will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice."  If  you  can  give  both,  give  "  mercy  "  the 
first.  If  you  cannot  give  both,  give  "  mercy  "  alone.  Nothing,  therefore,  is  more 
pleasing  to  God  than  what  is  being  done  at  this  time.  Also,  it  is  just  that 
which  ought  to  be  done  by  Myself.  Here,  as  we  saw,  was  the  crowning  grievance 
in  this  Pharisaic  remonstrance.  Herein,  on  the  contrary,  the  Saviour  shows 
them,  was  His  crowning  justification.  He  had  come  into  the  world — He  had 
been  sent  into  the  world — to  carry  out  in  practice  the  very  spirit  described  in 
that  text.  "  Mercy,  and  not  sacrifice,"  was  to  be  in  all  things  the  rule  of  His 
life.  Why  should  He  be  blamed,  therefore,  for  acting  upon  it  in  *'  calling 
sinners  "  to  Himself  ?  Especially  when  it  was  remembered  that  in  doing  so 
He  was  calling  them  to  "  repentance  "  as  well  ? 

Here,  therefore,  in  conclusion,  we  see  the  special  glory  of  the  mercy  of  Christ. 
It  is  mercy  to  the  sinner,  but  not  to  his  sins  (cf.  Ps.  cxxx.  4).  It  is  mercy 
to  the  man  who  needs  mercy  the  most — to  the  greatest,  the  most  notorious,  the 
most  generally  despised.  But  mercy  to  him,  at  the  same  time,  with  still  more 
mercy  in  view,  viz.,  that  kind  of  mercy  which  shall  help  to  make  him  the 
greatest  of  saints.  See  how  conspicuously  this  change  was  effected  in  the 
person  of  Matthew  himself  !  How  much  more  he  had  learned  of  the  mind 
of  Christ  than  those  Pharisees  who  despised  him  !  How  holy  he  had  become 
both  in  his  desires  and  ejQforts  through  coming  to  Christ !  And  how  well  he 
discerned  (and  acted  on)  both  the  kind  of  "  separation  "  that  is  desirable,  and 
where  it  should  come  in.  Separation  rather  unto  Christ  than  away  from  our 
fellows.  Separation  as  a  consequence,  and  not  as  a  means  !  Separation  in  love, 
and  not  in  contempt ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  9.  The  call  of  St.  Matthew. —  had  become  previously  acquainted  with 

It   may  be  that   this  was   their   first  Matthew  in  Capernaum,  had  secured 

meeting,  and  that  a  magnetic  attrac-  his   affection   and    permitted   him    to 

tion  was  exerted  upon  the  publican  by  return  for  a  while  to  his  tax-collecting, 

that     countenance     which    owed    its  as  the  sons  of  Jonas  to  their  fishing,  so 

majesty    not    to    external    comeliness  that  now  there  needed  but  the  recogni- 

so  much  as  to  the  dignity  and  goodness  tion  and  repeated  claim.     That  claim 

of  soul  reflected  in  its  features.     It  is,  was  peremptory.     Not  less  prompt  was 

however,  much  more  likely  that  Jesus  the  obedience  rendered. 

223 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


I.  It  was  a  good  indication  of 
energy  that  he  rose  up.  The  man 
who  rouses  himself  to  receive  a  message, 
who  starts  to  his  feet  and  reflects  in 
the  attitude  of  activity  and  readiness, 
like  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  early- 
observance  of  the  Passover,  is  more 
likely  to  obey  his  conscientious  con- 
viction than  he  who  remains  seated 
and  will  scarcely  shake  off  habitual 
lethargy  sufficiently  to  give  fair  atten- 
tion. 

II.  It  was  a  noble  thoroughness  of 
surrender. — He  "  left  all."  And  yet 
to  leave  all  is  often  easier  than  to 
leave  half,  to  evacuate  an  untenable 
position  at  once  than  to  retreat  by  a 
few  yards  at  a  time  and  be  beaten 
back  blow  by  blow.  Hesitation  petrifies 
resolution  now  as  it  did  in  Lot's  wife. 

III.  Thus  he  "  followed,"  esteeming 
the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches 
than  the  treasures  in  Egypt.  He  was 
to  find  the  preciousness  of  a  clear 
conscience  and  of  investments  made, 
not  in  material  securities  but  in  the 
gratitude  and  happiness  of  men  whose 
welfare  he  advanced ;  he  was  to  learn 
the  value  of  his  Lord's  teaching,  to 
enjoy  the  golden  smile  of  His  friendship 
and  the  heavenly  rewards  of  His  service. 
—C.  E.  B,  Reed,  M.A. 

Ver.  10.  Matthew' s  feast — The  scene 
now  shifts.  Hitherto  Christ  had  been 
the  inviter,  Matthew  the  invited ;  the 
order  is  inverted  and  the  Master  be- 
comes His  disciple's  guest.  Levi  made 
Him  a  great  feast,  expressive  of  grati- 
tude ;  for  he  could  look  even  upon 
commands  as  mercies  and  on  self-deny- 
ing service  as  a  privilege.  Jesus  came 
to  the  feast  thus  prepared  for  Him ; 
and  so  it  ever  is.  He  calls  us  to  Him- 
self and  then  accepts  our  invitation, 
not  disdaining  to  enter  the  poor 
chamber  of  our  heart ;  for  unlike  the 
petty  lords  of  earth  who  stand  on 
ceremony  as  a  stool  to  give  them 
height,  His  native  glory  fears  no  eclipse 
but  freely  condescends  to  men  of  low 
estate.  It  is  interesting  to  remark  the 
character  of  Levi's  feast.  '*  There  was 
a  great  company  of  publicans  and  of 

224 


others  that  sat  down  with  them."  One 
can  see  that  Matthew  had  already 
studied  to  good  purpose  his  Lord's 
character. 

I.  First  of  all  he  perceived  that  he 
could  best  serve  Him,  not  by  eating 
and  drinking  alone  in  His  presence, 
but  by  inviting  the  outcasts  of  society 
and  befriending  them  for  the  sake  of 
Him  who  made  their  cause  His  own. 

II.  He  invited  to  the  feast  his  old 
associates. — Many  men  would  have 
forsworn  the  class  from  which  they 
had  been  called  and  sought  some  new 
field  of  benevolence;  whereas  he  does 
not  disown  his  publican  comrades,  but 
selects  them  as  earliest  recipients  of  his 
bounty. 

III.  He  recognised  that  the  best 
thing  he  could  do  for  them  was  to 
bring  them  into  contact  with  Jesus. — 
Instead  of  going  among  them  and 
talking  about  his  new  Master,  he 
wisely  brought  them  face  to  face  with 
Him  whose  teaching  he  could  not 
match  either  for  breadth  or  power. 

lY.  This  intercourse  between  Christ 
and  the  publicans  Matthew  contrived 
to  bring  about  by  means  of  an  enter- 
tainment.— He  knew  well  that  most  of 
them  would  never  come  to  hear  a 
formal  discourse  from  the  Lord,  but 
that  meat  and  drink  would  open  their 
hearts  to  receive  the  scattered  seeds  of 
His  teaching.  Upon  the  same  principle 
may  be  defended  many  acts  of  the 
modern  church  to  which  exception  is 
often  taken. — Ibid. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  words  that  came  of 
Matthew^ s  'promotion.  (For  children). 
— Do  you  children  know  what  is  meant 
by  promotion  ?  It  means  going  up. 
From  a  tax-gatherer  for  the  Koman 
Emperor,  Matthew  became  an  Apostle, 
that  is,  a  messenger  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.  Was  not  that  a  promotion 
for  Matthew  ?  Yes,  and  he  felt  it  to 
be  so,  and  he  was  very  glad,  and  to 
show  his  gladness  he  made  a  feast,  and 
he  invited  Christ  and  His  disciples,  and 
a  number  of  his  old  friends  who  were 
publicans  as  he  had  been.  But  some 
other  people  came  to  the  feast  besides 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  ix. ' 


the  Saviour  and  the  disciples,  and  the 
publicans  and  sinners.  Some  Pharisees 
were  there,  and  they  began  to  find 
fault  and  to  say,  "  Why  eateth  your 
Master  with  publicans  and  sinners  1 " 
And  what  I  want  to  speak  to  you  most 
about  is  the  answer  which  Jesus  made 
to  the  Pharisees,  "  They  that  be  whole 
need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are 
sick ;  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous, 
but  sinners  to  repentance." 

I.  Jesus  is  a  Physician  for  all,  be- 
cause all  are  sinful. — Some  years  ago 
I  used  to  visit  a  large  hospital  every 
week.  In  the  first  room  I  used  to  find 
men  very  thin,  with  very  bad  coughs, 
and  hardly  able  to  breathe.  They 
were  in  consumption.  The  next  room 
was  the  accident  ward,  where  men  were 
lying  with  broken  legs,  or  walking 
about  with  bandages  on  their  heads  or 
arms.  Then,  in  another  room,  there 
were  men  with  fever,  tossing  from  side 
to  side,  and  finding  no  rest  anywhere. 
And  last  of  all  theie  was  a  room 
strongly  bolted,  where  men  were  put 
who  were  prisoners  and  were  sick. 
This  was  a  very  sad  case  to  be  in — 
not  only  to  be  sick  but  to  be  in  prison. 
Now,  did  all  these  people  need  a  doctor  ? 
Yes.  Were  they  all  equally  sick  ?  No ; 
some  were  much  worse  than  others,  but 
they  all  wanted  a  doctor  or  they  would 
not  have  been  in  a  hospital.  Now,  my 
dear  children,  this  world  is  like  a 
hospital — everybody  in  it  needs  to  be 
cured  of  sin. 

II.  But  Jesus  does  not  cure  every- 
body's sin. — How  is  this?  It  is  not 
because  He  is  not  able,  nor  yet  be- 
cause He  is  not  willing,  but  because 
some  people  do  not  want  to  be  cured. 
In  a  sad  railway  accident  which 
happened  some  time  ago  a  young  lady 
was  taken  out  of  one  of  the  carriages, 
and  she  said  she  was  not  hurt  at  all, 
she  felt  no  pain.  She  stood  up  and 
tried  to  walk,  and  then  fell  back  dead. 
She  had  received  a  very  serious  injury, 
and  yet  she  did  not  feel  it  at  the 
moment.  So  it  was  with  these 
Pharisees.  Now  you  will  say,  "  How 
do  we  come  to  feel  that  we  need  Jesus 
to  heal  us  ?  "     It  is  by  trying  to  do 


; 


right  by  ourselves  that  we  find  out  how 
weak  we  are.  1.  Jesus  is  a  physician 
who  can  see  what  is  the  matter  with  us 
as  soon  as  He  looks  at  us.  2.  Jesus  is 
always  at  home.  3.  Jesus  can  attend 
to  all  who  come  to  Him  at  the  same 
moment.  4.  Jesus  never  fails  to  cure. 
There  is  an  old  saying  I  am  sure  you 
will  remember  if  I  tell  it  to  you.  It 
is,  "  The  three  best  doctors  that  a  man 
can  have  in  this  world  are.  Dr.  Diet, 
Dr.  Quiet,  and  Dr.  Merryman."  Now 
let  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  ) 
be  these  three  doctors  to  you. — 
W.  Harris. 

Yer.  11.  Jesus  with  the  sinners. — 
I.  He  sympathised  with  them  as  His 
brother-men. 

II.  He  knew  that  they  had  in 
them  the  making  of  better  men. — 
S.  Fendred. 

Yer.  12.  The  soul's  malady  and  cure. 
— The  charge  brought  against  Christ 
(ver.  11)  was  groundless.  1.  He  did 
nothing  but  what  was  according  to 
His  commission  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  2.  .He 
went  with  sinners,  not  to  join  in  their 
sins,  but  to  heal  them  of  them.  To 
accuse  Christ  was,  as  Austin  saith,  as 
if  the  physician  should  be  accused  be- 
cause he  goes  among  them  that  are 
sick  of  the  plague. 

I.  The  dying  patients. 

1.  Sin  is  a  soul-disease. — Sin  may  be 
compared  to  sickness.  (1)  For  the 
manner  of  catching  :  {a)  Often  through 
carelessness.  So  Adam,  (h)  Sometimes 
through  superfluity  and  intemperance. 
So  our  first  parents.  (2)  For  the  nature 
of  it.  (a)  Sickness  is  of  a  spieading 
nature  (Isa.  i.  5,  6).  The  understand- 
ing, memory,  will,  affections,  conscience, 
are  diseased.  Conscience  is  either 
erroneous,  dumb,  or  dead.  (6)  Sick- 
ness debilitates  and  weakens  the  body. 
So  the  soul  (Rom.  v.  6).  (c)  Sickness 
eclipses  the  beauty  of  the  body.  Sin 
has  turned  beauty  into  deformity. 
(d)  Sickness  takes  away  the  taste.  So 
the  sinner  has  lost  his  taste  for  spiritual 
things,  (e)  Sickness  takes  away  the 
comfort  of  life.     So  the  sin-sick  soul  is 

J  225 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


void  of  all  true  comfort.     (/)  Sickness  (c)  Because  they  do  not  look  out  after 

ushers  in  death  (James,  i.  15).  a  physician      (^)  Because  they  would 

2.  Sin  is  tJw  worst  disease.-{\)  The  be   self-healers,     (e)   Because   they  do 

body  may  be  diseased  and  the  conscience  not    take    the    phy.ic    which    Christ 

quiet      But  see  Isa.  Ivii.  21.     (2)  The  prescribes   them.       (/)    Because   they 

i  odv  may  be  diseased  and  the  favour  have  not  confidence  m  their  physician, 
of  God  enioyed.     But  soul- diseases  are  b.  Christ    is   the    best   physicioM.— 

Symptoms  of  God's  anger.     (3)  Sick-  (1)  The    most   skilful.     (2     He   cures 

ness,atworst,doth  but  separate  from  the   better    part    the   soul.       (3)    He 

the  society  of  friends ;  but  this  disease,  causeth  us  to  feel  our  disease.     (4)  He 

if  not  cured,  separates  from  the  society  shows  more  love  to  His  patients^  than 

of  God  and  angels.  any  other  physician,     {a)  In  that  long 

II    The  heaUnff  Physician.  journey  He  took  from  heaven  to  earth 

1.  'Christ  is  a  soul-physician.  (b)  He  comes  to  His  patients  without 

2  Why  Christ  is  a  physician.— (I)  In  sending  for  (Isa.  Ixv.  1).  (c)  He  Mim- 
regard    of    His    call    (Luke    iv.    18).  self   lets   blood  to   cure  His  patients. 

(2)  Because  of  our  need.  Not  because  (d)  Our  repulses  and  unkindnesses  dp 
we  desired  Him,  but  because  we  needed  not  drive  Him  from  us.  ye)  He  Him- 
Him.  (3)  Because  of  the  sweetness  of  self  drank  that  bitter  cup  which  we 
His  nature.    Like  the  Good  Samaritan,  should    have    drunk      (5)    The    most 

3  Christ  is  the  only  physician  cheap  physician  (Isa.  Iv.l).  (b)  Christ 
/Acts  iv  12)  Ideals  with  more  ease  than  any  other. 
^  4.  How  Christ  heals.-{\)  By  His  (7)  He  is  the  most  tender-hearted 
word      (2)  By  His  wounds  (Isa.  liii.  5).  physician.     (8)   He    always  prescribes 

(3)  By  His  Spirit.  (4)  By  His  rod.  the  physic  which  is  suitable,  and 
Why  are  not  all  healed  %  (a)  Because  withal  blesseth  it.  (9)  He  never  fails 
all  do  not  know  that   they  are  sick,  of  success.— Thos.  Watson. 

(b)  Because  they  love  their  sickness. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—17. 

The  law  of  fastvng.-'Ihe  connection  of  this  passage  mth  the  preceding  one 
may  be  only  in  the  order  of  thought ;  the  thought  of  ''  feasting  (ver.  10)  leading 
to  that  of  '' fasth)g  "  in  the  Evangelist's  mind,  by  the  rule  of  opposites,  as  it  were. 
Or  there  may  have  been  a  connection  between  them  of  a  closer  description.  As 
some  understand  Mark  ii.  18,  -  the  disciples  of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  were  ^e.p- 
Z  a  fast  at  that  time  "  (Wordsworth,  in  loc).  If  so,  there  would  be  both  fasting 
and  "feastinc"  side  by  side,  as  it  were ;  and  nothing  would  be  more  natural, 
theref oreTt^^^^^^  that  those  who  were  fasting  should  then  and  there  ask  the  others 
why  they  were  not.  "  Why  is  it  that  Thy  disciples  never  do  what  is  done  so 
often  by  us  ?  "  (see  end  of  ver.  14).  The  Saviour's  answer  seems  to  take  m  the 
case  of  all  the  parties  concerned  t—ZTis  own  discipUs ;  the  '^disciples  of  tU 
Pharisees"  ;i\ie'' disciples  of  John:'  ,     ^  ,     .•,  -j    „ 

I  His  own  disciples.— Their  case  could  be  disposed  of  by  the  mere  considera- 
tion of  time.  There  was  a  time  for  everything  under  the  sun  (Ecc.  m  1); 
amongst  other  things  for  lamentation  and  grief ,  and  for  that  abstinence  from 
food  which  is  so  usual  an  accompaniment  and  token  of  grief  (2  Sam.  xn.  lb). 
For  that  very  reason  such  abstinence  was  not  suitable  for  a  season  ot  joy  ;  such  a 
season,  e.g.  as  when  the  -  friends  "  of  a  -  bridegroom  "  come  to  congratulate  him 
on  his  happiness.  This  applied  to  the  then  condition  of  the  disciples  of  Christ 
Unlike  the  disciples  of  John  (so  it  is  supposed  by  some),  who  were  then  separated 
from  their  master  and  head  in  consequence  of  his  imprisonment  by  Herod,  these 
disciples  were  enjoying  the  full  sunshine  of  the  presence  of  their  Head  The 
very  thought  of  fasting,  therefore,  in  their  present  circumstances,  was  wholly  out 

226 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  ix. 


of  the  qviestion.  The  time  would  come,  indeed,  when  their  case  in  this  respect 
would  be  diflferent ;  when  their  "  Bridegroom  "  also  would  be  taken  away.  In 
one  sense  they  would  have  '*  fasting  "  enough  at  that  time.  But  for  the  time 
then  present,  and  as  things  were  then,  the  observance  of  fasting  was  not  to  be 
asked  at  their  hands.  "  Can  the  children  of  the  bride-chamber  fast  while  the 
bridegroom  is  with  them  ?  " 

II.  The  disciples  of  the  Pharisees. — Their  case,  also,  could  be  disposed  of  in 
an  equally  summary  way.  The  question  here  was  that  of  purpose  and  aim.  If 
there  were  times,  as  implied  before,  in  which  it  was  not  unbecoming  to  deny  the 
body  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  the  support  it  required,  with  what  object  and  in 
what  spirit  should  such  denial  be  practised  ?  Our  Saviour's  parable  seems  to 
answer  this  question  by  showing  what  ought  not  to  be  in  this  case.  In  par- 
ticular. He  warns  men  against  the  view  which  the  Pharisees  held  on  this 
subject.  Their  great  idea  in  enjoining  fasting  was  that  of  reparation  and 
atonement.  The  mortification  of  the  body  was  prescribed  by  them  in  order 
thereby  to  "  make  up "  for  the  sins  of  the  mind.  Was  there  a  "  rent,"  as  it 
were,  in  the  garment  of  righteousness  through  the  commission  of  sin  or 
omission  of  duty  ?  They  looked  to  "  fasting  "  to  mend  it.  See  how  this  idea  is 
involved  in  Tsa.  Iviii.  3  ;  Luke  xviii.  12.  See,  on  the  other  hand,  how  emphatically 
it  is  here  rejected  by  Christ.  To  "  put "  such  a  piece  of  ''  new  cloth  " — rather  a 
piece  of  such  "  unfulled,^^  and  therefore  unfinished,  and  therefore  imperfect  and 
unsuitable  material  as  this  on  the  faulty  garment — is  not  to  improve  the  matter 
but  to  make  it  much  worse.  It  is  to  "take  away"  in  fact,  and  not  to  "  make 
up";  to  make  the  "rent"  at  once  larger  and  more  conspicuous;  and  to  add  to 
nothing,  in  any  way,  except  the  original  fault.  No  guilt,  in  a  word,  can  be 
atoned  for  by  such  a  clumsy  mockery  of  atonement  !  The  very  idea  of  it 
is  sin. 

III.  The  case  of  the  disciples  of  John  was  the  case  of  men  in  a  transitional 
state.  It  was  the  kind  of  case,  therefore,  in  which  the  disciples  of  Christ  would 
find  themselves  before  long,  in  passing  from  the  comparative  darkness  and  bondage 
of  the  law  (cf.  Acts.  xv.  10)  to  the  light  and  liberty  of  the  gospel.  The  first  thing 
for  all  persons  so  situated  to  remember  is  this,  that  no  transition  of  the  kind  can 
take  place  without  some  amount  of  dislocation  and  shock.  Also,  that  this  dislo- 
cation will  affect  primarily  the  question  of  ordinances  and  customs.  Customs 
proper  enough  where  the  light  is  partial  may  not  be  so  proper  where  the  light  is 
complete ;  or,  at  any  rate,  may  require  to  be  greatly  modified  in  order  to  render 
them  so.     It  is  like  that,  in  a  word,  which  is  so  well  known  to  be  true  about 

,  wine-skins  and  wine.  Old  wine-skins  do  all  that  is  wanted  in  the  case  of  old 
wine.  It  is  when  men  fill  them  with  new  wine  that  they  make  a  mistake,  and 
find  that,  instead  of  gaining  much,  they  lose  everything  by  so  doing  (ver.  17). 
The  same  is  true  of  the  strictly  parallel  question  of  ordinances  and  doctrines. 
Some  ancient  ordinances  were  only  intended  for  an  undeveloped  measure  of  truth. 
To  try  to  use  them,  therefore,  for  a  fully  developed  measure,  is  to  make  confusion 
of  all.  Let  this  be  remembered,  therefore,  with  regard  to  the  special  question  at 
issue.  How  far  can  "  fasting "  be  made  to  fit  the  new  condition  of  things  ? 
How  far,  under  it,  can  fasting  be  employed  to  do  what  it  doubtless  accomplished 
before  ?  This  is  the  direction  in  which  they  must  search  in  order  to  settle  this 
point.  What  He  had  said  at  first  had  settled  it  for  the  present.  What  He  now 
says  is  in  order  to  help  them  to  settle  it  in  the  future.  Much,  in  short,  as  they 
were  seen  to  do  afterwards  in  the  kindred  subject  referred  to  in  Acts  xv. 
On  the  whole,  therefore,  of  this  subject,  we  seem  able  to  say : — 
1.  That  Christ  Himself  does  not  positively  settle  it  for  us. — He  does  not  say,  in 
so  many  words,  either  fast  or  fast  not.  He  does  not  forbid ;  neither  does  He 
enjoin.     The  utmost  on  one  side  seems  to  be,  "  It  may  have  to  be  done."     The 

227 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


utmost  on  the  other  seems  to  be,  "  It  is  quite  possible  so  to  do  it  as  to  increase 
your  transgression." 

2.  That  we  cannot  settle  it  for  each  other. — The  considerations  it  depends  on  are 
of  too  private  a  nature  to  admit  of  interference  on  the  one  side,  or  to  warrant  it 
on  the  other.  Whether  we  are  rejoicing,  individually,  in  the  sense  of  Christ's 
presence  or  lamenting  His  absence ;  whether  we  profit  most  by  bewailing  the 
one  (1  Sam.  vii.  2)  or  by  realising  the  other  (Neh.  viii.  10;  Matt,  xxviii.  20)  ; 
whether  we  are  of  vigorous  or  weakly  bodily  health ;  whether  we  are  most 
tempted  to  evil  by  fulness  or  want  (Prov.  xxx.  9) — who  can  settle  these  questions 
for  others  1  And  yet  who,  without  them,  can  settle  that  question  at  all  ?  See 
therefore  Kom.  xiv.  3. 

3.  That  we  ought  to  settle  it  for  ourselves. — If  a  man  thinks  that  the  practice  is  not 
incumbent  on  him  individvially,  he  ought  to  know  why.  If  he  thinks  that  it  is 
he  ought  to  know  why.  Also,  how  far,  at  what  times,  and  in  what  way  too, 
ought  these  to  be  clear.  Men  may  be  wrong,  of  course,  even  so,  in  the  conclu- 
sions they  come  to ;  but  they  can  hardly,  even  so,  be  more  wrong  than  in  refusing 
to  give  it  a  thought. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.     14-17.     Spiritual    life    more  inner   spiritual    life,    they  hinder   the 

authoritative  than  custom.— The  spirit  free  development  of  soul-life  and  stay 

of  the  Christian  religion  is  the  spirit  of  the  progress  of  divine  truth, 
liberty   and   progress.       The   question  I.  The  question  propounded  by  these 

"  Why  do  we,"  etc.,  shows  the  readiness  men  rests  upon  a  wrong  assumption, 

with  which   men  learn  to  worship  a  viz.    that    all    religious    life    should 

custom,  and  give  to  some  temporary  manifest  itself  in  precisely  the  same 

form  all  the  dignity  and  authority  of  way. — 1.  This  receives  no  countenance 

an   everlasting   law.  .  .  .  They   made  from  the  variety  of  life  and  beauty  in 

the   mistake  of    supposing  that  what  nature.     2.  The  varied  manifestations 

was  good  and  helpful  for  them,  must  of  intellectual  life  disprove  it.     3.  The 

be  binding  upon  every  person  in  every  diversity  of  character  displayed  in  the 

condition  ;  or  in  other  words,  that  the  Bible  contradicts  it. 
religious  observances  which  they  had  II.  This  question  leaves  out  of  sight 

received  and  used,  must  be  of  constant  an  important  principle,  which  is  that 

and   universal   obligation.     The   same  our  spiritual  experience  must  regulate 

mistake  is  often  made  still.    Because  a  the  outer  life,  and  not  any  mere  custom. 

custom  is  of  service  to  us,  we  have  no  — Jesus  says,  "  Can  the  children  of  the 

right  to  make  it  a  hindrance  to  others ;  bridechamber    mourn,"   etc.  ?      Or   to 

that  which  inspires  and  uplifts  us  may  put  it  into  common  speech,  "  Can  you 

cramp   and   restrain    them.      Men    do  expect  My  disciples   to    mourn    when 

harm  when  they  try  to  transform  the  they  are    just    beginning  a    new    and 

temporary   into   the    immutable,    and  joyous  life  ?      They  are  realising   the 

the  local  into  the  universal ;  by  seeking  power  of  My  teaching,  and  the  inspira- 

to    gain    undue    reverence    for    forms  lion  of  My  presence ;  if  they  were  to 

which  are  of  human  origin,  they  lessen  hang  down  their  heads  and  look  sad 

men's  regard  for  the  invisible,  change-  now,  they  would  belie  their  experience 

less   laws    of    God.       The   divine   life  and  play  the  part  of  hypocrites.     Let 

survives  all   the  changes  of  form  and  them  be  happy,  they  are  serving  God 

system.       The   teaching   of    the   New  in  their  own  simple  way ;  and  bear  in 

Testament   on  this  point  seems  to  be  mind   the  time  will  soon  come  when 

that  when  men  seek  to  give  to  outward  they  shall   fast,  because  it  will  be  in 

forms  of  religious  expression  that  im-  harmony  with  their  deep  feeling.     The 

portance   which   belongs   only   to   the  Shepherd   shall    be   smitten   and    the 

228 


kOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  IX. 


sheep  scattered  abroad.  I  shall  be 
nailed  to  the  bitter  cross,  and  My 
followers  will  wander  in  sad,  dark 
loneliness ;  they  will  feel  themselves 
orphans  in  the  world,  desolate  and 
bereaved,  then  shall  they  fast." 

III.  After  correcting  these  false 
assumptions,  our  Lord  declares  the 
principle  that  real  spiritual  life  will 
always  find  appropriate  forms  of  ex- 
pression.— "No  man  putteth  a  piece 
of  new  cloth,"  etc.  We  take  this  to 
mean  that  it  is  of  no  use  attempting 
to  bind  new  life  down  to  old  forms ; 
whenever  this  is  done  there  is 
conflict  and  confusion.  Illustrate  by 
reference  to  early  attempt  to  chain  the 
Christian  religion  to  the  old  ceremonial 
forms  of  Judaism.  "  I  am  come  that 
they  might  have  life,"  etc. — W.  G. 
Jordan,  B.A. 

Vers.  16,  17.  Garments  and  wine- 
skins.— By  these  illustrations  our  Lord 
conveyed  a  lesson  on  the  charm  of 
naturalness  and  the  law  of  congruity 
in  religion.  Times  of  transition  are 
critical.  The  disciples  of  John  the 
Baptist  were  anxious  to  know  whether 
Jesus  meant  only  to  reform  the  old 
Judaism,  or  to  break  away  from  it  and 
introduce  a  new  faith,  with  new  rules 
and  usages.  On  the  question  of  fasting, 
for  instance,  they  agreed  with  the 
Pharisees,  and  were  concerned  to  find 
that  the  disciples  of  Jesus  diflered. 
Then  the  Lord  answered  them  with 
heavenly  metaphors  which  clothed  a 
grave  lesson  with  a  veil  of  kindly 
humour.  As  old  cloth  and  new  cloth 
are  one  in  being  cloth,  old  wine  and 


new  are  one  in  being  wine ;  so  th^ 
religion  before  Christ  and  that  which 
He  introduced  are  essentially  one 
in  kind,  if  not  in  quality.  But  it 
would  not  answer  any  good  purpose  to 
limit  the  new  by  the  conditions  of  the 
old,  or  to  place  the  Christian  faith  and 
life  under  the  rules  of  the  Pharisees, 
or  even  of  the  disciples  of  John.  So 
Jesus  put  it  very  plainly  that  He  had 
not  come  to  patch  up  Pharisaism,  or 
garnish  Babbinism,  or  to  pour  His 
doctrine  and  all  its  vital  force  into  the 
rigid  forms  of  the  later  Judaism.  The 
effect  of  a  forced  junction  of  the  old 
and  the  new  would  be  injurious  to 
both.  This  is  shown  by  throwing  the 
illustration  of  the  old  garment  patched 
with  undressed  cloth  into  two  forms. 
St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  report  the 
Lord  as  indicating  the  damage  to  the 
old,  whilst  St.  Luke  reports  Him  as 
pointing  out  the  injury  to  the  new. 
In  either  case,  it  will  be  observed,  the 
disruptive  force  is  in  the  new.  So  to 
make  Christianity  a  mere  addendum 
to  Babbinical  Judaism  would  only 
spoil  the  former,  and  would  not  pre- 
serve the  latter.  The  second  metaphor 
is  to  the  same  effect.  To  insist  on  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  fasting  because  the 
Pharisees  and  the  disciples  of  John 
fasted  by  rule,  was  to  repress  their  joy 
at  a  time  when  they  had  a  right  to 
rejoice,  and  this  was  as  unwise  as  to 
pour  new  wine  into  old  wine -skins  and 
shut  it  up.  Thus  again  the  Lord  taught 
that  a  forced  amalgamation  of  the  old 
and  the  new  dispensations  would  be 
disastrous  to  both.  Let  the  law  of 
congruity  be  observed. — D.  Eraser ^  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—26. 

A  succession  of  answers. — In  these  "interlaced  stories,"  as  they  have  been 
called,  there  seems  some  confusion  at  first.  The  way  out  of  it  seems  to  be  that 
of  recognising  the  Saviour  as  the  centre  of  all.  If  so  regarded,  we  shall  here  see 
presented  to  us  His  manner  of  dealing:  1.  With  outspoken  request.  2.  With 
tacit  desire.     3.  With  insult  and  scorn. 

I.  With  open  request. — Openness,  first  in  action.  A  man  "enters  in"  (so 
some)  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  men  to  "  behold,"  and  so  ask,  we  suppose,  why 
he  has  come  ?  The  same  man  next  acts  in  such  a  manner  as  to  show  why  He 
has  come.  He  worships  Jesus — he  casts  himself  at  His  feet  (Mark  v.  22) — he  is 
in  the  position  of  a  suppliant — evidently  he  has  something  of  moment  to  ask. 

229 


CHAP,  IX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTAitt :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Openness  of  speech,  in  the  next  place.  How  fearfully  plain  are  his  words.  His 
daughter —  his  ''  little  "  daughter  (Mark  v.  23) — is  "  even  now  dead  "  ;  or,  if  not 
quite  dead,  as  near  to  death  as  she  can  he  {ibid.) ;  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  his 
anguish,  he  hardly  knows  which.  ISTor  does  it,  from  one  point,  signify  much. 
Only  let  Jesus  touch  her,  and  whatever  is  wrong  will  be  right.  That  is,  there- 
fore, what  he  now  asks  for,  in  so  many  words.  To  this  open  request  the  Saviour 
replies  in  as  open  a  way,  though  not  as  express.  "  He  rises  up  "  to  show  He  is 
ready.  He  does  that,  in  fact,  which  is  the  beginning  of  "  coming."  The  action 
is  so  understood  by  the  ruler,  who,  therefore,  leads  the  way  home,  and  is  con- 
firmed by  Jesus,  who  "  follows  him,"  and  by  the  disciples,  who  follow  both.  All 
things,  in  short,  signify  hope  ! 

II.  With  tacit  desire. — This  tacit  desire  was  on  the  part  of  a  woman  who  is 
hidden  in  the  crowd  which  follows  the  Saviour.  Those  who  o'ead  countenances  could 
see  this  desire  in  her  looks.  "  Twelve  years"  of  suffering  and  hope  deferred  had  not 
passed  over  her  without  leaving  their  footprints  behind  them,  if  only  in  that 
touching  and  wistful  expression  which  we  so  often  see  in  like  cases,  saying  so  plainly, 
"  Oh  !  what  would  I  give  to  be  rid  of  this  plague  ! "  Those  who  read  actions 
would  see  it  in  hers.  Coming  "  behind  Him,"  so  as  not  to  be  seen — "  touching 
His  garment,"  so  as  to  be  in  touch  with  His  grace — she  yet  touches  only  the 
"  hem  "  of  it — perhaps,  so  as  not  to  be  felt.  All  shows  not  only  how  much  she 
desires,  but  how  secretly  too.  Those  who  read  thoughts,  also,  would  see  this 
desire  amongst  hers.  "  If  I  may  but  touch,"  she  said  to  herself,  "  I  shall  get  all 
I  desire."  That  was  the  spring  of  the  whole — that  burning  desire  which,  for  all 
that,  she  could  not  bring  herself  to  put  into  speech.  The  Saviour's  reply  to  it 
was,  first  of  all,  most  express  and  dh^ect.  That  it  had  reached  Him  was  plain 
from  His  "  turning  about " ;  that  He  knew  where  it  had  come  from,  by  His 
looking  at  her.  If  her  "  looks  "  had  said  much,  so  also  did  His.  Next,  it  was 
overflowing  with  kindness.  She  had  come  as  a  stranger.  He  addresses  her  as  a 
"  daughter."  Only  in  fear  and  trembling  had  she  ventured  so  far.  He  bids  her, 
notwithstanding  this,  to  "be  of  good  cheer."  Already,  therefore,  if  we  may  say 
so,  was  she  mentally  cured.  Full  of  assurance  and  power.  What  you  desire  is 
now  yours.  It  is  yours  by  your  faith.  Now  she  is  one  who  is  "  whole  " — whole, 
too,  from  that  hour  (ver.  22). 

III.  With  insult  and  scorn. — Two  successive  "  pictures  "  represent  this.  A 
picture  of  uproar  and  insult.  The  uproar  is  outside  the  house  of  the  ruler  to 
which  he  has  now  come  with  the  Saviour  ;  and  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  meantime, 
his  little  daughter  has  unmistakably  died ;  and  so  caused  the  place  to  be  filled 
with  the  usual  "  minstrels  "  and  others  "  making  a  noise  "  (ver.  23).  The  insult  is 
piovoked  by  the  request  of  the  Saviour  to  be  allowed  to  pass  through  (ver.  24), 
and  by  the  character  of  the  reason  by  which  He  supports  it.  Knowing,  that, 
with  the  purpose  He  had  in  view,  the  child  was  only  "  dead,"  so  to  speak,  for  a 
time,  He  speaks  of  her  as  such.  "  The  maid  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth."  This 
was  beyond  endurance  to  them.  "  Knowing,"  as  they  did,  "that  she  was  dead" 
(Luke  viii.  53),  knowing  that  they  had  only  come  there  on  that  account,  "  they  > 
laughed  Him  to  scorn  "  (ver.  24).  On  the  other  side,  in  marked  contrast  to  this,  ;• 
we  have  the  picture  of  the  Saviour's  reply,  a  picture  of  stillness  and  power.  ' 
When  the  multitude  were  "  thrust  out "  at  last,  Jesus  went  in.  How  silent  the 
scene  !  How  still  that  "  little  one  "  on  the  bed  !  How  collected  and  quiet  the 
Master  !  How  markedly  so  after  the  rudeness  just  shown  Him  !  How  simple, 
also,  His  action — "  touching  her  hand  "  !  How  instantly  wonderful — how  pro- 
found— the  result !  She  that  was  prostrate  is  now  sitting  up  !  She  that  had 
been  dead — certainly  dead — so  dead  that  it  was  thought  madness  to  doubt  it — 
is  now  as  certainly  living  !  More  than  that,  more  than  a  hundred  throats  are 
now  proclaiming  the  news  (ver.  26). 

230 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  IX. 


See,  therefore,  in  these  consecutive  answers  : — 

1.  What  encouragement  there  is  to  prayer  of  all  sorts. — By  whomsoever  it  is 
offered,  whether  by  a  ruler  or  by  one  of  the  crowd;  in  whatever  way  it  is 
offered,  whether  openly  or  secretly,  whether  by  action  or  speech  ;  and  in  what- 
soever place  it  is  offered,  whether  on  the  highway,  or  in  the  house  of  the  living, 
or  in  that  of  the  dead — it  is  acceptable  to  the  Saviour. 

"  Where'er  they  seek  Thee  Thou  art  found, 
And  every  place  is  hallowed  ground." 

2.  What  double  encouragement  to  continuance  in  it. — The  greatest  blessing 
vouchsafed  here  was  the  longest  in  coming,  and  had  most  obstacles  in  its  way. 
But  no  obstacle  can  remain  such  in  the  way  of  ''continuous  prayer."  No 
distance,  no  interruptions,  no  delay,  no  unbelief  of  others,  nor  any  depth  of  need, 
however  undoubted,  or  beyond  hope  in  the  eyes  of  men  !  (Zech.  iv.  7)  Much  is 
meant  by  every  word  in  that  counsel  of  the  Apostle — ''  continuing  instant  in 
prayer  "  (Rom.  xii.  12). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  18-33.  The  Healer  and  thehealed. 
— I.  Christ's  side. — 1.  The  Speaker  was 
called  upon  for  action.  It  is  a  long  way 
from  eloquence  to  beneficence  in  the  case 
of  some  speakers ;  in  the  case  of  Christ 
speech  and  action  were  convertible 
terms.  2.  Christ  will  interrupt  an 
exposition  for  the  sake  of  a  man  who 
mourns  a  little  dead  girl  (Luke  viii.  42). 
3.  It  is  more  congenial  to  Christ  to  be 
binding  up  a  broken  heart  than  to  be 
debating  with  factious  Pharisees  re- 
specting intercourse  with  publicans  and 
sinners,  or  even  to  be  explaining  to 
sectarians  the  conditions  which  make 
"  fasting "  acceptable  to  God  and  use- 
ful to  man.  4.  Christ  was  ever  equal 
to  the  call  of  the  hour.  Was  exposi- 
tion required?  The  living  stream 
flowed  from  His  gracious  lips.  Was  a 
miracle  required  ?  The  same  voice  had 
but  to  alter  its  tone,  and  the  miracle 
was  complete. 

II.  The  human  side. — Here  are  four 
miracles,  the  raising  of  the  dead ;  the 
healing  of  the  issue  of  blood  ;  the  open- 
ing of  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ;  the  cure 
of  a  dumb  man  possessed  with  a  devil. 
These  diversified  cases  reveal  the 
human  side  of  the  transactions  under 
several  aspects  :  1.  The  right  spiritual 
state  in  which  to  approach  Christ — the 
ruler  "  worshipped  Him ; "  the  poor 
woman  modestly  and  trustfully  said, 
"  If  I  may  but  touch  His  garment  I 
shall  be  whole;"  the  blind  man  said, 


"  Have  mercy  on  us ; "  the  dumb  man 
possessed  with  a  devil  found  in  his  utter 
helplessness  the  best  possible  recom- 
mendation to  Christ's  mercy.  2.  The 
indispensableness  of  faith  in  any  trans- 
action between  the  natural  and  the 
supernatural.  Faith  is  the  link  ;  with- 
out that  connection  is  impossible. 
3.  This  transactional  faith  can  operate 
only  in  connection  with  profound  con- 
sciousness of  want.  "  To  know  our- 
selves diseased  is  half  the  cure." — 
J.  Parker^  D.D. 

Vers.  20-22.  The  woman  with  an 
issue  of  blood. — I.  The  woman's  faith 
in  the  Saviour,  its  strength  and  its 
weakness. — 1 .  She  put  herself  in  Jesus' 
way  on  this  eventful  occasion,  and  thus 
proved  the  st7xngth  of  her  faith.  She 
had,  most  likely,  never  seen  Him 
before,  had  never  heard  Him  speak,  had 
never  beheld  one  of  His  miracles.  In 
these  circumstances  it  would  not  have 
been  surprising  after  all  she  had 
suffered  and  spent  through  her  wasting 
disease  and  her  physicians  togethei-, 
had  she  thought  of  coming  to  the 
Galilean  Healer  as  a  forlorn  hope.  On 
the  contrary,  she  not  only  had  hope  so 
much  as  led  her  to  think  it  worth  while 
to  make  the  journey,  but  she  had  some- 
how gathered  a  strong  persuasion  of 
His  ability,  such  that  she  said  to  her 
neighbours,  to  herself,  or  to  both,  "  If 
I  may  touch  but  His  clothes  I  shall  be 

231 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


whole."  Nor  was  the  persuasion 
arbitrary  or  fanatical.  It  was  simple 
and  generous,  but  it  was  thoroughly 
reasonable,  because  justified  by  facts. 
It  was  when  she  had  "  heard  the  things 
concerning  Jesus  "  (Mark  v.  27,  R.V.), 
that  she  came  to  Him.  2.  No  doubt 
there  were  defects  in  this  faith.  Its 
strength  and  weakness  lay  close 
together.  It  had  the  defect,  so  to  say, 
of  its  quality.  Its  promptness  may 
have  owed  something  to  the  mechanical 
or  material  conception  of  the  Healer's 
power,  as  if  it  were  some  atmosphere 
that  surrounded  Him,  or  some  magical 
influence  that  flowed  even  from  His 
garments.  The  swift  and  secret  touch 
was  directed  perhaps  to  the  sacred 
rringe  of  His  Jewish  robe,  in  which, 
with  a  superstitious  fondness,  the  heal- 
ing power  was  thought  specially  to 
reside.  The  confidence  she  had  in  Jesus 
was  typical,  in  that  it  was  strong  and 
well-founded.  That  it  was  mixed  with 
1»hose  other  elements  from  which  the 
Lord  proceeds  immediately  to  purify  it 
may  teach  us  a  double  lesson.  It  hints, 
on  the  one  hand,  how  small  a  part  of 
gospel  truth  may  save  the  soul  if  there 
be  faith  to  receive  and  love  to  act  upon 
it.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  trust 
which  is  well-founded  and  generous, 
will  meet  with  its  reward  in  a  rapid 
and  progressive  enlightenment  through 
Christ's  word  and  Spirit.  3.  This  faith, 
as  it  was  buoyant  in  persuasion,  was 
prompt  and  immediate  in  action  (ver.  20). 
4.  It  was  as  immediate  in  its  success 
(see  Mark  v.  29). 

II.  The  Saviour's  action  towards  the 
woman,  its  wisdom  and  tenderness. — 
The  critical  point  in  this  miracle  is  that 
at  first  sight  it  seems  "as  if  it  had  been 
wrought  outside  the  consciousness  and 
will  of  Jesus  "  (Godet).  But  He  was 
not  unconscious  of  the  virtue  He  put 
forth,  nor  of  the  faith  which  received 
it.  We  can  *  see  why,  for  His  own 
sake,  and  His  work's  sake,  Jesus  had 
to  make  this  cure  public.  But  we  are 
also  to  note  how  good  it  was  for  the 
sake  of  herself.  Reserve  was  her  fault, 
a  wish  to  hide  the  cure ;  thus  at  once 
cheating  her  own  self  of  comfort,  and 

232 


withholding  from  the  Lord  His  due 
honour.  He  corrects  that  fault  most 
gently  and  wisely.  He  does  not  insist 
upon  publicity  till  the  healing  had 
taken  place,  thus  making  confession  as 
easy  as  possible  for  her.  The  object  of 
its  publication  then  becomes  apparent. 

1.  To  show  that  the  medium  of  the 
cure   was  faith,  not  physical   contact. 

2.  To  confirm  what  she  had  already 
taken  by  His  own  pronounced  bestowal 
of  it.  3.  To  bring  her  out  in  grateful 
acknowledgment  both  for  His  glory 
and  her  good.  There  are  Christians 
whose  fault  is  reserve.  They  would  be 
saved,  as  it  were,  by  stealth.  The 
Saviour  will  not  have  it  so.  True 
conversion,  no  doubt,  is  first  of  all  a 
secret  transaction,  very  close  and 
personal,  between  the  soul  and  Christ. 
But  because  it  is  so,  it  cannot  remain 
so.  A  seen  religion  is  not  always  real, 
but  a  real  religion  is  always  seen. — 
Professor  Laidlaw^  D.D. 

The  teachings  of  the  incident. — The 
incident  has  ever  been  a  favourite  and 
piquant  analogue  for  the  effects  of 
living  faith  in  Christ  as  contrasted  with 
mere  professed  or  traditional  adherence 
to  Him.  As  that  day  in  the  streets  of 
Capernaum  many  pressed  Him,  but  one 
touched  Him,  so  is  it  still.  Why  it  is 
so  this  story  may  instruct  us.  \.  This 
woman  came  at  once  to  the  vital  touch, 
because  she  ivas  so  convinced  of  her 
disease  and  its  danger.  But  so  many 
nominal  followers  of  Christ  are  trying 
to  persuade  themselves  that  their 
disease  is  not  fatal.  2.  She  was  quite 
done  with  all  other  physicians,  and 
broken  oflT  from  them.  But  many  of 
us  have  not  been  conclusively  shut 
up  to  Christ.  3.  This  woman  went 
straight  to  Jesus  so  soon  as  she 
heard  that  He  was  nigh.  But  so  many 
among  us  are  waiting  for  the  "  con- 
venient season."  4.  She  made  the  most 
inconvenient  season  serve  her  turn.  The 
Healer  was  on  His  way  elsewhere. 
Jairus  and  the  disciples  were  hurrying 
Him  along.  It  was  the  worst  time 
and  place  for  such  an  invalid.  But  it 
was  hers,  for  it  was  given  her  of  God ; 


HOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap,  ix. 


she  made  the  best  of  it,  and  was  saved. 
5.  Some  of  our  hearers  say  their 
difficulties  are  peculiar.  There  is 
nothing  in  ordinary  preaching,  in  the 
common  statements  of  the  gospel,  that 
meets  their  case,  and  relieves  their 
perplexities.  They  are  waiting  for 
some  clearer  light,  for  some  more 
special  agency.  This  woman's  case 
was  peculiar.  She  was  by  Jewish  law 
unclean.  She  could  not  repair  to  the 
synagogue,  where  so  many  met  Jesus 
and  were  healed.  She  could  not  stand 
up  before  the  Healer  in  a  public 
audience,  and  tell  her  case,  and  get  His 
hands  laid  on  her,  as  so  many  did. 
The  ordinary  mode  of  even  these  heal- 
ing miracles  would  not  have  met  her 
need.  So  she  got  her  health  in  the 
crush  of  the  street  procession,  by  steal- 
ing behind  Him,  and  pressing  with  the 
energy  of  hope  till  her  fingers  grasped 
His  garment;  for  she  was  fully  per- 
suaded that,  peculiar  as  was  her  case, 
she  would  find  in  Him  an  appropriate 
and  certain  cure.  Those  who  in  their 
soul-search  for  spiritual  health  follow 
her  example  will  be  as  successful  and 
as  blessed  as  was  she. — Ibid. 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  woman  with  the 
issue  of  blood. — 1.  Poor  and  rich  are 
alike  welcome  to  Christ,  for  here,  while 
He  is  going  with  the  ruler,  He 
neglecteth  not  this  poor  sick  woman. 
2.  That  which  separates  us  from  the 
society  of  the  holy  must  not  separate 
us  from  Christ,  but  rather  drive  us 
unto  Him.  This  woman  legally 
polluted,  and  so  separate  from  the 
temple  and  all  clean  persons,  draweth 
near  to  Christ  to  touch  Him.  3.  Though 
all  remedies  fail  and  our  evil  be  of  long 
endurance,  yet  Christ  must  be  run 
unto.  4.  Although  Christ  seem  to 
take  no  notice  of  us,  but  to  be  about 
the  helping  of  others  only,  yet  must  we 
take  notice  of  Him  and  draw  near 
to  Him  upon  all  occasions  offered. 
5.  None  can  come  to  Christ  rightly,  but 
such  as  expect  to  be  the  better  for 
coming. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.      22.     The     woman      cured. — 


1.  Though  modest  souls  resolve  quietly 
to  creep  to  heaven,  unknown  to  others, 
yet  God  will  have  His  work  in  them 
brought  to  light,  for  His  own  glory. 

2.  Faith  in  Christ  gets  a  sweeter  wel- 
come than  it  can  expect.  It  may  come 
trembling,  but  shall  find  joy  ere  it  go. 

3.  Our  Lord  will  not  suffer  any  means 
of  our  devising  to  take  the  place  of 
means  appointed  by  Himself.  There- 
fore He  doth  not  say,  "  touching  my 
garment,"  but  "thy  faith  hath  made 
thee  whole.^'— Ibid. 

Yer.  24.  The  lowest  depth. — "And 
they  laughed  Him  to  scorn."  These 
words  throw  light : — 

I.  On  the  nature  of  our  Saviour's 
work. — 1.  How  wonderfully  they  reveal 
to  us  the  great  depth  of  His  humili- 
ation. He  was  man,  that  is  much  ; 
a  poor  man,  that  is  more;  more  still 
one  of  the  "homeless  poor"  (Luke 
ix.  58) ;  most  of  all  a  man  derided  and 
despised.  So  psalmists  and  prophets 
had  foretold,  and  so  Evangelists  relate. 

2.  Notice,  also,  the  completeness  of 
His  sorrow.  "  He  was  acquainted 
with  grief,"  with  eveiy  side  and  shape 
and  variety  of  it,  even  with  that  form 
which  we  should  have  expected  to  be 
the    farthest    of    all    from    His    lot. 

3.  This  consideration  may  teach  us  yet 
further  the  greatness  of  His  love. 
All  this  depth  of  sufifering  was  for  our 
sake.  Like  one  descending  a  coal 
shaft,  who  does  not  stop  short  of  the 
very  lowest  depth,  because  those  he 
would  rescue  are  known  to  be  trembling 
there,  so  was  it  with  the  Lord.  He 
endured  even  the  scorn  of  contemptible 
man  in  order  to  save  man. 

II.  On  the  right  interpretation  of 
His  words. — And  so,  generally,  of 
those  Holy  Scriptures  which  bear 
testimony  of  Him.  The  special  saying 
which  called  forth  this  outburst  of 
scorn  was  the  following  :  "  The  maid 
is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth  ;  "  and  the 
special  ground  of  it  was  the  intimate 
conviction  of  the  hearers  that  she  had 
actually  died — "  knowing  that  she  was 
dead."  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that 
they   took   the   words    in   their    most 

233 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


ordinary  and  obvious  sense,  never 
stopping  to  search  for  another,  and 
never  considering  whether  such  a 
Teacher  and  Miracle -worker  could  have 
meant  anything  so  absurd.  It  was  a 
confounding  the  obvious  with  the 
true — mistaking  the  apparent  for  the 
real — and  considering  "  first  thoughts  " 
so  much  better  than  "  second,"  that 
no  second  thoughts  are  required.  The 
mistake  is  very  common.  "  He  that 
belie veth  on  Me  shall  never  die "  ; 
"  Ye  must  be  born  again  "  ;  "  Destroy 
this  temple  "  ;  "  This  is  My  body,"  are 
all  cases  in  point.  The  mistake  arises 
from  not  recollecting :  1 .  That  the 
true  significance  of  a  passage  is  not 
that  which  the  hearer  imagines,  but 
which  the  speaker  himself  designed. 
2.  That  in  the  sayings  of  the  Bible 
where  God  is  practically  the  speaker 
and  man  the  hearer,  these  two  mean- 
ings  are  often  so  far  from   identical 


that  they  are  as  wide  asunder  as  the 
poles. 

As  a  concluding  thought,  take  notice 
of  the  profound  wisdom  here  displayed. 
See  how  this  contempt  of  man  was 
made  to  minister  to  the  mission  of 
Christ.  These  scorners  built  up  the 
very  platform  on  which  the  evidence 
of  the  miracle  stood.  When  the 
damsel  arose  and  took  food  (Mark 
V.  43)  there  could  be  no  doubt  about 
life.  Was  it  restored  life  ?  Had  it 
really  been  preceded  by  unmistakable 
death  ?  These  unhappy  despisers,  with- 
out meaning  it,  had  established  this 
beyond  doubt.  They  had  shut  their 
own  mouths  on  this  point  by  their 
scorn.  They  had  shut  the  mouths 
of  mankind.  So  will  it  be  at  the 
last  of  all  wilful  despisers  of  Messiah. 
''  Every  knee  shall  bow  to  Him,"  etc. 
— Mathematicus  in  *'  Homilisty 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  27—31. 

A  sharp  contrast. — The  earlier  and  later  halves  of  this  passage  are  alike  in  one 
thing.  They  both  speak  of  requests.  They  are  different  in  almost  everything 
else.  The  first  request  was  the  request  of  two  blind  men  to  Jesus.  The  second 
request  was  the  request  of  Jesus  to  them.  The  first  request  was  complied  with. 
The  second  was  not. 

I.  The  request  of  the  blind  men,  which  we  consider  first,  was  natural 
enough  in  their  case.  He  being  such  as  they  had  doubtless  heard  Him  to  be, 
and  they  being  such  as  they  knew  themselves  to  be,  what  more  natural  than 
that  they  should  ask  from  Him  what  they  required  1  If  others  had  been  helped 
by  Him,  why  not  they?  What  was  more  remarkable  was  the  apparent  strength 
and  depth  of  their  faith.  Not  every  one,  at  that  time,  had  recognised  Jesus  as 
the  "  Son  of  David."  Not  every  one  was  ready  by  calling  Him  so,  virtually  to 
salute  Him  as  Christ  (cf .  2  Tim.  ii.  8).  It  is  carefully  to  be  noted,  therefore,  that 
these  two  blind  men — not  blind  in  mind — were  not  afraid  so  to  do ;  and  still 
more  to  be  noted  that  they  followed  this  up  with  much  endeavour  and  prayer. 
It  is  never  very  easy  for  blind  men  to  "  follow  "  any  one.  Perhaps  for  two 
blind  men  more  difficult  still.  Yet  we  are  told  here  with  something  of  emphasis 
that  this  was  done  by  these  two.  They  follow  Jesus  in  the  way  (ver.  27) ;  they 
follow  Him  into  the  house  (ver.  28) ;  they  come  finally  to  Himself.  If  their 
efibrt  is  to  fail  it  shall  not  fail  through  any  slackness  of  theirs.  Nothing 
could  better  prove  the  strength  of  their  faith.  Yet  before  He  blesses  them, 
the  Saviour  requires  from  them  a  further  proof  still.  They  have  virtually 
professed  faith  in  His  mission.  They  must  now  openly  declare  their  faith 
in  His  power.  "  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ? "  That  question 
must  be  answered,  and  answered  aloud,  before  anything  can  be  done.  When  it 
was  answered,  as  answered  it  was  immediately,  then  all  that  was  needed  was 
done.      Done  by  a   "touch,"  done  by  a  word,  done  by  the  exercise  of  their 

234 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chak  ix. 


faith  (ver.  29),  done  with  a  yet  added  blessing  at  least  as  great  as  the  first.  "  Their 
eyes  are  open,"  and  they  are  looking  on  Christ  !     A  double  blessing  indeed  ! 

II.  The  request  of  Jesus  to  them. — This  was  noteworthy  in  its  matter.  In 
what  it  did  not  ask.  In  what  it  did.  What  might  not  have  been  asked  of  two 
men  who  had  just  been  enabled,  so  to  speak,  to  gain  half  the  world  at  a  stroke  ? 
Certainly,  compared  with  what  it  had  been  a  moment  before,  the  world  was  now 
double  to  them — twice  as  full  of  sources  of  pleasure,  of  the  means  of  knowledge, 
of  ideas  of  beauty  and  glory.  To  them,  in  a  word,  what  Christ  had  done 
was  to  say  ''  Let  there  be  light."  How  strange,  therefore,  that  all  He  asks  in 
return  should  be  of  a  negative  kind,  not  to  publish  what  He  had  done  for  them, 
to  be  silent  about  it,  to  leave  it  untold.  That,  in  substance,  is  all  He  asks. 
The  manner  of  His  request  is  as  surprising,  in  an  almost  equal  degree.  He 
"  sternly  "  charged  them,  so  some  ;  He  peremptorily  forbad  them,  so  others  ;  He 
did  with  them,  in  a  word,  in  a  manner  which  is  illustrated  by  what  is  said  (the 
word  is  the  same)  of  the  severity  and  indignation  of  some  of  the  disciples  in 
Mark  xiv.  5.  Do  not  you  go  and  begin  telling  this  story.  That  is  My  express 
word  and  command.  Whatever  you  do  if  you  wish  to  please  Me,  do  not  take 
up  that  line.  The  reception  accorded  to  this  request  is  the  last  surprising  thing 
here.  It  was  as  uncompliant  and  defiant  in  every  way  as  it  could  possibly  be. 
Instead  of  being  silent,  the  two  men  did  nothing  but  speak.  Instead  of  not 
telling  it  at  all,  they  spread  it  abroad.  Instead  of  confiding  it  only  to  a  few, 
they  proclaimed  it  wherever  they  could.  They  acted,  in  a  word,  just  as  though 
the  request  of  the  Saviour  had  commanded  them  the  very  thiug  He  forbade. 
Apparently  His  request  was  as  strange  to  them  as  it  is,  at  first,  to  ourselves. 

To  us,  who  look  on  from  a  distance,  and  compare  what  is  said  here  with  what  is 
said  elsewhere  of  our  Saviour,  there  are  two  truths  which  this  very  strangeness 
seems  all  the  more  to  enforce. 

1.  The  superiority  of  Chrisfs  character. — At  the  least  we  see  here  that  He 
does  not  seeh  for  that  praise  of  men  which  is  sought  for  by  most ;  which  is  the 
very  breath  of  their  nostrils  to  many  men ;  and  about  which  they  are  more 
jealous  than  anything  else  (1  Sam.  xviii.  8;  Prov.  xv.  30;  Matt,  xxvii.  18). 
The  love  of  fame,  it  has  been  said,  is  "  the  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds." 
Evidently,  in  His  case,  there  is  not  a  trace  even  of  this. 

2.  The  identity  of  His  nature — His  human  nature — with  ours. — This  supreme 
anxiety  to  avoid  the  praises  of  men  in  this  case  points  to  something  behind  ;  to 
something  which  is  deeper  than  it  is  possible  for  us  in  all  points  to  explain. 
But  we  may  at  least  hope  that  we  are  on  the  right  track  to  such  an  explanation 
when  we  bear  in  mind  the  mysterious  yet  indubitable  truth  that  our  Divine 
Lord  and  Master,  on  the  human  side  of  His  being,  was  ''tempted  in  all  points  as 
we  are."  Viewed  in  this  light,  what  we  read  of  here  seems  quite  parallel  to  such 
passages  as  iv.  10,  xvi.  23 ;  and  not  altogether  dissimilar  to  those  words 
of  Bishop  Hooper,  who,  when  someone  was  led  to  speak,  on  the  night  before  his 
martyrdom,  of  all  the  misery  he  might  escape  from  if  only  willing  to  recant, 
replied  by  saying,  "As  you  love  my  soul  do  not  speak  to  me  so."  At  any  rate, 
in  those  words  of  His  we  seem  to  hear  something  of  the  same  indignant  earnest- 
ness as  that  noted  by  us  above.  We  may  believe,  therefore,  that  it  was  due  in 
part  to  a  similar  cause  ! 

"  He  knows  what  sore  temptations  mean, 
For  He  hath/et^  the  same." 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  29.  Expectancy  and  success. —  words  embody  a  principle  which  applies 
"  According  to  your  faith,"  etc.     These      to  church  work.      If  we  expect  little 

235 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


we  shall  have  little ;  if  we  expect  much 
we  shall  have  much.  Large  success  is 
greatly  to  be  desired.  A  hopeful  spirit 
is  important  in  order  to  success  in  any 
work.  If  the  school-boy  believes  him- 
self a  dunce,  he  loses  heart,  his  lessons 
become  irksome,  and  there  is  great 
danger  of  his  becoming  the  dunce  he 
fears  he  is  already.  If  a  man  takes 
up  a  business  without  much  hope  of 
succeeding,  if  he  imagines  he  sees  the 
bankruptcy  court  ahead,  it  is  not  un- 
likely that  he  will  see  it  indeed.  How 
can  he  go  into  his  new  enterprise  with 
enthusiasm  if  he  indulge  in  gloomy 
forebodings,  and  how  can  he  achieve 
any  considerable  success  without  en- 
thusiasm ?  So  in  church  work  ;  if  we 
expect  large  success,  we  are  much  more 
likely  to  realise  it  than  if  there  be  no 
such  expectation.  Notice  how  this 
spirit  of  expectancy  works  : — 

I.  It  stimulates  prayer. — Our  pray- 
ing will  be  very  different  if  there  be  a 
lively  expectation  of  receiving,  from 
what  it  will  be  if  this  be  absent. 
There  will  be  a  ring  of  joyous  exul- 
tation about  it,  and  the  voice  of 
thanksgiving  and  praise  will  be  heard 
as  well  as  the  voice  of  prayer.  It 
might  seem,  at  first,  as  though  expec- 
tation would  check  prayer  rather  than 
stimulate  it,  for  why  should  we  ask  if 
we  are  already  confident  of  receiving  ? 
But  experience  teaches  that  this  is 
not  so.  Having  prayed,  and  received 
the  assurance  that  blessing  will  be 
given,  we  continue  in  prayer ;  our 
expectant  eyes  are  raised  unto  the 
Lord  our  God,  and  we  wait  before 
Him  still  with  eager  desire.  Indeed, 
our  confidence  enlarges  our  desire. 

II.  It  stimulates  eflfort. — To  achieve 
nothing  requires  no  great  exertion  ;  so 


if  the  members  of  a  church  are  not 
expecting  success  they  will  not  work 
for  it. 

III.  It  promotes  co-operation. — 
Where  the  members  of  a  church  are 
not  standing  shoulder  to  shoulder  and 
together  striving  for  the  faith  of  the 
gospel,  it  is  an  indication  that  there  is 
no  expectation  of  large  success. 

IV.  It  promotes  consistent  Christian 
living.  — The  conversion  of  souls  to  God 
being  much  in  the  thoughts,  Christians 
are  careful  about  their  conduct  lest 
they  should  be  stumbling-blocks  in  the 
way  of  any. 

Why  should  we  not  have  success? 
1.  Think  of  the  material  we  have  to 
operate  upon — in  the  congregation,  the 
Sunday-school,  the  town.  2.  Think 
of  the  power  of  the  gospel.  3.  Think 
of  the  capabilities  of  the  church. 
4.  Think  of  the  experience  of  the  past. 
Has  not  God  granted  success  when 
the  conditions  have  been  fulfilled? 
Experience  should  work  hope.  He 
may  be  depended  upon  for  the  future. — 
H.  M.  Booth. 

Faith. — It  is  the  bucket  let  down 
into  the  fountain  of  God's  grace,  with- 
out which  the  man  could  not  draw  up 
out  of  that  fountain ;  the  purse  which 
does  not  itself  make  its  owner  rich,  but 
which  yet  effectually  enriches  him  by 
the  treasure  which  it  contains. — Anon. 

Ver.  30.  ^  time  to  he  silent. — I.  When 
silence  is  commanded. 

II.  When  the  truth  itself  may  be 
out  of  season. 

III.  When  the  truth  is  only  partially 
known. 

IV.  When  it  might  be  as  pearls 
cast  before  swine. — J.  C.  Gray. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  FAJRAGBAPH.— Verses  32— 35, 

Continuance  in  well-doing. — As  the  two  blind  men  go  out  a  dumb  man  is 
brought  in.  This  is  the  key  of  this  passage.  Whoever  may  be  brought  to  Him, 
whatever  His  enemies  say  about  Him,  Jesus  goes  on  as  before. 

I.  The  case  of  the  dumb  man  illustrates  this,  to  begin. — It  does  so,  in  the  first 
place,  by  the  singularity  of  its  features.  There  was  something  about  it  that 
pointed  at  once  to  a  supernatural  cause ;  something,  it  may  be,  in  the  evident 
sense  of  oppression  on  the  part  of  the  sufferer ;  or  in  the  peculiar  obstinacy  of 

236 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  IX. 


his  dumbness ;  or  in  the  utter  absence  of  anjrthing  in  physical  organization,  or  in 
lack  of  mental  power  in  other  respects,  to  account  for  it.  What  is  evident  is 
that  no  one  present  doubted  its  cause  ;  not  the  multitude  who  were  so  unusually 
impressed  by  its  cure ;  not  the  Pharisees,  who  would  only  too  gladly  have  ascribed 
the  evil  to  something  else  than  demoniac  possession  had  they  thought  that  their 
doing  so  would  be  of  any  avail.  All  were  agreed  that  it  was  a  true  case,  and 
apparently,  also,  a  very  maiked  case  of  being  "  possessed  of  "  the  evil  one.  If 
the  poor  man  said  nothing  himself,  his  very  appearance  said  that.  It  did  so, 
next,  by  the  completeness  of  the  cure.  This  was  complete  in  regard  to  its  origin — 
"  the  devil  went  out."  Complete  in  its  issue — the  dumb  man  spake.  He  has 
regained  his  own  will.  He  has  regained  his  old  powers.  He  proves  both  by  his 
sptech.  We  can  well  believe  that,  when  he  spake  at  first,  no  one  spake  but 
himself.  All  ears  would  listen  to  hear  speech  where  they  had  not  heard  it  for  so 
long.  But  all  those  ears,  and  all  minds  behind  them  as  well,  were  fully  satisfied 
when  they  did.  There  was  no  doubt  of  the  matter  in  the  judgment  of  any.  The 
miracle  really  "  spoke  for  itself."  However  abnormal  the  case,  the  treatment  of 
it  had  been  triumphant.  And  this,  yet  further,  all  the  more  so,  because  of  the 
manner  of  action.  For  the  Evangelist,  it  may  be  observed,  speaks  of  the  process 
almost  as  a  matter  of  course ;  like  one  who  does  not  think  it  necessary  to  describe 
what  he  has  described  so  often  before,  or  even  to  state  expressly  by  whose  inter- 
vention the  result  described  was  effected.  His  language,  in  fact,  to  use  a  modern 
expression,  was  almost  casual  in  its  tone.  "  When  the  devil  was  gone  out,  the 
dumb  spake."  Nothing  else  need  be  said.  Not  Who  did  it.  Nor  how  it  was 
done.  Nor  how  well  it  was  done.  In  this  respect  the  cry  of  the  multitude  "  It 
was  never  seen  so  in  Israel,"  did  not  apply.  On  the  contrary,  very  much  of  the 
kind  had  been  so  seen  in  Israel  in  the  case  of  the  Saviour.  What  was  so 
observable  here  was  His  doing  so  now,  after  having  done  like  it  so  often  before, 
and  in  such  an  exceptional  case. 

II.  The  case  of  the  Pharisees  illustrates  the  same  point. — When  those  enemies 
of  Jesus  saw  what  was  done,  and  still  more,  when  they  saw  the  efiect  it  produced, 
their  envy  and  perplexity  were  equally  great.  Something  must  be  attempted  to 
stay  this  effect ;  some  explanation  offered ;  some  pretext  put  foi  th.  What  they 
bethink  themselves  of  is  what  they  often  afterwards  tried.  They  ascribe  the 
power  displayed  against  the  devils  to  a  source  of  like  kind ;  in  fact,  to  the 
highest  source  of  like  kind.  These  minor  devils,  they  said,  were  cast  out  by  the 
greatest  of  all.  Passing  over  for  the  moment  the  absurdly  impossible  and 
absolutely  suicidal  character  of  this  explanation,  what  we  would  here  notice  in  it 
more  especially  is  its  outrageous  f?pite  and  ingratitude.  There  is  no  token  of 
sympathy  with  the  rescued  victim  ;  no  word  of  thankfulness  to  the  God  of  Israel, 
as,  apparently,  on  the  part  of  the  multitude ;  only  a  resolution,  while  admitting 
the  facts,  not  to  admit  their  true  force,  if  possible.  Anything  rather  than  allow 
them  to  be  to  the  credit  of  Jesus,  and  in  support  of  His  work.  How  then,  we 
ask  next,  does  He  meet  this  attempt?  This  ungrateful  action?  This  cruel 
wrong  ?  Not,  as  afterwards,  by  spoken  language,  and  in  a  singularly  telling 
manner,  but  by  going  on  with  His  work.  That,  indeed,  seems  to  be  all  that  the 
Evangelist  has  to  tell  us  at  present.  As  day  follows  day  ;  as  place  after  place  is 
visited  ;  as  He  meets  with  many  or  few ;  as  He  is  confronted  with  this  or  that 
kind  of  malady  ;  in  all  this  variety  there  is  no  variation  in  His  own  objects  and 
plans.  First  of  all,  everywhere  He  is  the  Teacher  and  Preacher.  Next,  every- 
where the  Physician  and  Friend  (ver.  >  35).  Not  even  that  "  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  Himself,"  of  which  we  have  just  heard,  prevents  Him  from  going 
on  in  that  course.  Anything  less  like  the  "  works  of  the  devil  "  it  is  impossible 
to  conceive.  Anything  more  triumphant  it  is  folly  to  ask.  It  is  like  burying 
darkness  under  mountains  of  hght ! 

237 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


1.  WTiat  a  pattern  of  work  we  have  here. — "  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing." 
So  the  Apostle  taught  us  by  word.     So  the  Saviour  here  by  His  life. 

2.  What  an  incentive  to  work  we  have  here. — What  was  the  incentive  to  work 
in  Christ's  case  ?  To  recommend  the  "  gospel  of  the  kingdom."  To  rescue  men 
from  the  power  of  the  devil,  however  exhibited.  To  "do  good  "  to  us  men — us 
sinners — us  lost  ones — us  undeserving  ones.  Can  we  do  better  than  imitate  Him  ? 
Can  we  do  anything  less,  indeed,  and  do  right  ? 


MAIN  HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  33.  Spiritual  dumbness.  — 
I.  Some  complain  that  their  intellectual 
culture  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  them 
to  speak  to  edification.  Out  of  the 
mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings  God  hath 
ordained  praise.  The  demon  of  intel- 
lectual pride  must  be  cast  out. 

II.  Some  say,  "  I  have  very  little 
ability,  others  can  do  so  much  better." 
God  does  not  want  ability  so  much  as 
availability.  The  demon  of  selfishness 
must  be  cast  out. 

III.  Others  say,  "  I  can't  and  I 
won't  use  my  tongue  in  the  church's 
service.  I  have  not  been  used  to  it." 
The  demon  of  wilfulness  must  be  cast 
out. — J.  F.  Clymer. 

Yer.  35.  Christ  the  Physician. — In 
Christ  we  are  allied  to  the  highest  and 
the  largest  ideal  of  the  most  disinterested 
efiferts  for  the  physical  and  moral  wel- 
fare of  man  that  our  earth  has  ever 
seen.  Times,  indeed,  there  were  in 
His  ministry  when  it  might  even  have 
seemed  that  the*  human  body  had  a 
greater  claim  on  His  attention  than 
the  haiman  soul. 

I.  Now  it  would  be  a  great  mistake 
to  suppose  that  this  feature  of  our 
Saviour's  ministry  was  accidental  or 
inevitable.  Nothing  in  His  work  was 
accident ;  all  was  deliberate  ;  all  had 
an  object.  We  may  infer  with  reverence 
and  certainty  that  Christ's  first  object 
was  to  show  Himself  as  the  Deliverer 
and  Restorer  of  human  nature  as  a 
whole — not  of  the  reason  and  conscience 
merely,  without  the  imagination  and 
the  affections — not  of  the  spiritual  side 
of  men's  nature,  without  the  bodily  ; 
and  therefore  He  was  not  only  Teacher, 
but  also  Physician. 

238 


II.  What  is  the  present  function  of 
the   human  body?     We   see  in  it  at 

once  a  tabernacle  and  an  instrument ; 
it  is  the  tabernacle  of  the  soul  and  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  thus 
the  human  body  is,  in  our  idea,  itself 
precious  and  sacred ;  it  is  an  object  of 
true  reverence,  if  only  by  reason  of 
Him  whom  it  is  thus  permitted  to 
house  and  to  serve. 

III.  And  again  there  is  the  destiny 
of  the  body. — Canon  Liddon, 

Christ's  care  of  the  multitude. — 
1.  Diligence  in  teaching  and  preaching 
the  gospel  is  the  proper  way  to  con- 
vert and  save  souls,  which  Christ 
Himself  hath  appointed  and  practised 
in  His  own  person.  2.  Justly  is  the 
gospel  called  "  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom,"  both  of  grace  and  glory, 
seeing  it  is  the  light  which  showeth  the 
kingdom,  the  furnisher  of  weapons  to 
fight  for  it,  the  sceptre  whereby  the 
subjects  of  the  kingdom  are  guided, 
the  rules  and  law  for  the  subjects'  life. 
It  containeth  the  evidences  of  the  subjects' 
right  to  the  kingdom,  and  being  received 
in  a  man's  heart  it  bringeth  with  it  a 
kingdom  of  righteousness,  peace,  and 
joy.  3.  The  best  opportunity  of 
people's  convening  must  be  taken  for 
teaching  the  gospel,  and  no  pains 
should  be  spared  for  that  purpose. 
Christ,  the  Prince  of  pastors,  went 
about  all  the  cities  and  villages,  teach- 
ing in  their  synagogues.  4.  Christ's 
miracles  were,  all  of  them,  profitable 
to  men.  5.  There  is  no  evil  or  malady 
of  soul  or  body  among  people  which  our 
Lord  is  not  able  and  willing  to  heal  in 
all  those  that  employ  Him. — David 
Dickson. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  ix. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH,— Verses  36—38. 

Preparing  for  change. — We  seem  here  to  be  like  men  arriving  at  a  new  stage  on 
their  journey.  At  such  a  juncture  they  naturally  ask,  on  the  one  hand,  how  far 
they  have  reached ;  and,  on  the  other,  what  is  required  hy  them  more.  With 
regard  to  our  Saviour's  ministry,  we  shall  find  that  both  these  questions  are 
answered  for  us  in  the  passage  before  us. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  position  arrived  at. — This  was  a  position  in  which,  on 
the  one  hand,  there  were  great  evidences  of  success.  Twice  before  we  have  had 
special  mention  of  such  evidences.  One  (iv.  25)  just  before  the  delivery  of 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  One  (viii.  18)  before  leaving  Capernaum  for 
''  the  other  side."  So  also  here,  as  it  were,  we  see  the  Saviour  stirred  by  like 
evidence  of  success  on  seeing  the  **  multitudes  "  at  His  feet.  To  a  feeling  heart 
it  is  always  affecting  to  see  a  vast  assemblage  of  souls.  Still  more  to  know  that 
they  have  assembled  together  to  hear  what  can  be  said  to  them  by  that  heart. 
Much  must  have  been  done  by  it  already,  very  much,  before  they  were  brought 
to  that  point.  A  position,  on  the  other  hand,  in  which  there  were  still  greater 
evidences  of  necessity.  For  what,  in  fact,  and  as  they  were,  were  these  vast 
multitudes  like  ?  They  were  like  those  who  had  already  receive  d  very  much  ;  but 
who  also,  on  that  very  account,  were  in  need  of  still  more.  They  were  like 
unnumbered  "  sheep,"  who,  just  because  of  their  numbers,  needed  tending  the 
more.  They  were  like  plenteous  crops  which,  because  of  their  plenteousness, 
needed  reaping  the  more.  If  it  was  affecting,  therefore,  to  see  their  abundance, 
it  was  still  more  so  to  see  thtir  condition.  So  many  sheep  waiting  to  be  tended, 
and  no  one  to  do  it  !  So  many  harvests  asking  to  be  reaped,  and  no  one  to 
reply  !  No  one  at  any  rate,  in  such  way  as  that  Master-shepherd  desired  ;  and 
desired  so  because  only  His  wisdom  knew  as  well  the  depth  as  the  reality  of  their 
need.     Oh  !  for  more  and  better  means  oi  following  up  this  success! 

II.  The  nature  of  the  requirements  thus  brought  into  view. — These  are  shown 
by  reverting  again  to  the  nature  of  the  comparisons  which  are  here  employed  by 
our  Lord.  To  what,  e.g.  are  we  pointed,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  figure  of 
"  sheep  ?  "  What  do  "  sheep  "  need  but  to  be  shepherded  ?  To  be  under  pastoral 
care  ?  Also  to  be  so  in  such  degree  as  both  their  condition  and  their  numbers 
demand]  Being  so  many,  and  being  so  exposed,  and  being  also  so  recently 
"  found  "  and  acquired,  as  it  were,  and  not  having  as  yet  gone  very  much  farther 
— if  all  so  far — as  to  "  know  the  voice  "  of  their  shepherd,  they  required  attention, 
so  to  speak,  at  every  moment  and  side.  Instead  of  which,  as  things  were,  the 
Saviour  beheld  them  "  fainting  and  scattered  abroad " — fainting  (so  some) 
because  ^'  fleeced  "  (?) — deprived  of  support  rather  than  supplied  with  it — scattered 
from  the  fold,  not  gathered  into  it.  Under  that  aspect  the  great  need  was  that 
of '' pastors  and  teachers"  (Eph.  iv.  11)  to  labour  under  the  Saviour.  On  the 
other  side  what  are  we  pointed  to  by  the  similitude  of  the  "  harvest  "  ?  Is  it  not 
to  the  fact  that  amongst  those  vast  multitudes  gathered  together  before  the 
Saviour  (representatives  of  others  beside)  there  were  very  many  who  could  hardly 
yet  be  rightly  described  as  His  "  sheep."  They  were  rather  ready  to  hear  than 
hearers  already  ;  disciples  rather  in  desire  than  in  attainments  ;  souls  that  "  had 
need  "  of  being  made  acquainted  with  the  first  principles  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  (Heb.  v.  12).  Little  was  possessed  by  such  but  the  desire  to  possess.  If  they 
were  to  be  taught,  there  must  be  some  to  teach  them.  If  they  were  to  be 
"  gathered  in,"  there  must  be  those  to  do  it.  Under  this  head,  therefore,  the 
great  need  was  that  of  "  evangelists  "  and  preachers  of  Christ — reapers  rather 
than  shepherds — the  men  of  the  sickle  rather  than  those  of  the  crook. 

This  being  so,  what  ought  to  be  done  ?  What  ought  first  to  be  done  ?  The 
close  of  this  passage  teaches  to  pray.     "  Pray  ye,  therefore  " — because  of  these 

239 


CHAP.  IX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


things — before  anything  else.  This  is  the  first  lesson  taught  by  this  Scripture. 
In  all  your  necessities  begin  with  prayer.  Too  often  too  many  of  us  only  bring 
it  in  last.  "  There  is  nothing  left  but  to  pray  " — we  sometimes  hear  said  of 
the  sick.  "  I  am  sure  I  have  tried  all  and  every  one.  I  see  nothing  now 
but  to  pray."  Observe  here,  therefore,  how  exactly  different  was  the  way  of 
our  Lord.  Whether,  on  the  one  hand,  with  His  counsel,  in  teaching  His 
disciples.  Whether,  on  the  other  hand,  with  Himself  as  we  find  at  this  very 
time  from  LukQ  vi.  12,  13.  Why  go  to  prayer  first  ?  Because  it  takes  us  at 
once  to  the  right  quarters.  Who  so  certain  to  know  about  the  harvest  and  all 
its  needs  as  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  1  Who  so  likely  to  be  interested  in 
them?  Who  so  able  to  help?  Who  so  able,  especially  in  this  case  where 
the  need  of  help  is  extreme ;  where  labourers  have  to  be  even  "  thrust  forth  " 
(ver.  38)  to  this  work  1  Who  so  able  to  do  this  as  He  who  sent  Saul  of  Tarsus 
into  His  harvest  ?  Also,  because  it  is  not  only  worse  than  idle  to  begin  any- 
where else ;  but  self-sufficient  and  presumptuous  and  distrustful  also  in  an  equal 
degree. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  36-38.  Motives  to  missionary 
1^07*^.— The  two  emblems  Christ  uses 
present  most  strikingly  the  great 
motives  to  missionary  work. 

I.  Compassion  for  the  lost. 

II.  Zeal  for  the  Divine  glory. — 
•* Sheep  having  no  shepherd" — this 
appeals  to  our  human  sympathies  ;  the 
Lord  of  the  harvest  deprived  of  His 
harvest  for  want  of  labourers  to  gather 
it  in — this  appeals  to  our  love  and 
loyalty  to  God. — J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

Com'passionfor  the  multitude. — Under 
two  aspects  the  state  of  the  people 
appeared  to  the  Saviour's  eye  and 
affected  His  heart. 

I.  As  scattered  sheep  having  no 
shepherd. — In  all  antiquity,  both 
heathen  and  Hebrew,  it  was  usual  to 
speak  of  nations  as  flocks  and  their 
rulers  as  shepherds.  A  people  without 
instruction,  guidance,  and  motive,  were 
sheep  without  a  shepherd.  The  Old 
Testament  uses  this  mode  of  speech 
frequently.  In  the  time  of  our 
Saviour's  sojourn  in  Galilee  the  rulers, 
priests,  and  scribes  were  bound  to 
shepherd  the  people,  to  watch  over 
them,  and  feed  tbem  with  knowledge, 
disclosing  to  them  the  love  of  the 
Divine  Shepherd  of  Israel.  But  these 
men  went  about  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness,  exalting  and  pleasing 
themselves,  while  the  people  were 
perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge. 

240 


1 .  The  eye  of  Christ,  while  fixed  on 
mens  outward  condition,  is  fastened 
most  earnestly  on  their  moral  and 
spiritual  condition. — So  should  ours  be. 

2.  llie  Lord  spoke  of  the  fault  of  the 
shepherds  rather  than  of  the  sheep. — 
i.e.  He  will  reckon  most  strictly 
with  men  that  have  positions  of  trust 
and  opportunities  of  usefulness. 

3.  The  cure  of  moral  and  spiritual 
neglect  must  be  gradual. — Why  did  not 
the  Son  of  God,  at  one  stroke,  with 
Divine  power,  remedy  all  that  was 
wrong  ?  Conversions  may  be  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  but  much  has  to 
be  done  and  taught  before,  and  much 
after. 

II.  As  a  plenteous  harvest  spoiling 
for  want  of  reapers. 

1.  Labourers  are  needed. 

2.  The  Spirit  of  God  blesses  the  pains 
we  take  to  bring  our  instruments  to 
the  best  efficiency. 

3.  But  men  are  demanded  sent  by  the 
Lord  of  the  harvest  Himself. — How  to 
get  them  is  clearly  indicated  in  ver.  38. 
There  is  another  array  of  reapers 
coming  for  whom  you  do  not  need  to 
pray  (xiii.  41). — Donald  Eraser,  D.D. 

Yer.  36.  Compassion  for  the  multi- 
tude.— This  compassion  is  : — 

I.  The  incident  of  brotherhood.— 
The  one  great  mark  of  the  humanity 
of  Jesus  is  the  perfect  naturalness  of 
the    feeling   which    it    expresses    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  ix. 


moment  the  scene  calls  it  forth. 
Nothing  is  ever  arranged  for.  Nothing 
is  ever  got  up.  As  He  goes,  that 
happens  which  sets  the  fountain  play- 
ing. That  is  Christ's  brotherhood,  and 
Christ's  brotherhood  is  not  a  thing  of 
yesterday,  it  is  to-day  too.  He  is  what 
He  was.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and 
was  dead."  Wherever  there  is  the 
Christ -spirit  there  is  the  sense  of 
kinship  with  the  struggling,  vdth  the 
weary,  with  the  restless,  with  the  ever 
moving  multitudes. 

II.  The  mainspring  of  action. — 
Human  action,  like  human  life,  is 
very  complex.  Motives  are  various. 
There  is  a  man  who  does  kind  things 
now  and  again.  He  does  generous 
things  even  now  and  again,  but  it  is 
by  a  sort  of  iluke.  He  is,  perhaps, 
religious  in  a  sense,  but  he  is  essentially 
selfish.  The  mainspring  is  self.  And 
the  multitudes — why,  they  are  only  to 
him  what  he  can  get  out  of  them  ! 
His  interest  does  not  really  travel 
beyond  that.  There  is  another  man. 
Occasionally  he  does  a  hard  thing; 
occasionally  he  speaks  a  harsh  word 
and  his  judgment  is  harsh,  but  it  is  a 
mistake.  In  the  core  of  his  being  he 
is  a  really  generous-souled  man.  And 
yet,  because  Christ  loved  the  multi- 
tudes so  well.  He  never  pandered  to 
them.  That  is  what  a  great  many 
people  are  doing  in  this  day.  It  is 
very  very  difficult  to  find  persons  who 
will  speak  honestly  and  deal  faithfully 
and  truly  with  the  multitudes. 

III.  The  revelation  of  God. — He 
who  is  thus  moved  is  the  very  bright- 
ness of  the  Father's  glory.  All  love  in 
us  is  a  reflection  of  a  love  that  is 
greater  than  ours.  But  Christ  is  moi'e 
than  a  reflection ;  He  is  the  exact 
likeness.     He  is  God  in  our  very  flesh. 


What  you  behold  in  Him  is  the  sign  of 
that  which  God  eternal  is. — J.  M. 
Lang,  D.D. 

Multitudes. — A  right  view  of  a  mul- 
titude cannot  but  deeply  affect  a  right- 
hearted  man.  1.  Diversified  histories. 
2.  Conflicting  emotions.  3.  Opposite 
relations  to  God  and  truth.  4.  Differ- 
ent destinies. — J.  Parker,  D.D, 

Pity. — Balzac,  in  *'  The  Alchemist," 
in  depicting  an  ideally  perfect  love, 
makes  the  object  of  it  deformed,  thus 
profoundly  indicating  that  love  is  not 
at  its  height  and  perfection  without 
the  element  of  pity  {T.  T.  Hunger). 
Nothing  but  the  infinite  Pity  is  suffi- 
cient for  the  infinite  pathos  of  human 
life. — Sho7'thQuse' s  ^'' John  Inglesant.^^ 

Vers.  37,  38.  The  abundance  of  the 
harvest  and  the  scarcity  of  the  labourers. 
— I.  The  harvest. 

II.  The  labourers. 

III.  The  Saviour's  plan  for  increas- 
ing the  number  of  the  labourers. — 

1.  Where  persons  offer  this  prayer  in 
sincerity,  they  make  a  solemn  acknow- 
ledgment that  God  must  do  all  the  work. 

2.  They  mean  that,  when  God  raises 
up  men,  they  will  furnish  the  means  to 
convey  them  to  the  heathen,  and 
support   them   when   they   get   there. 

3.  When  youDg  men  utter  this  prayer, 
they  mean  that,  if  it  is  the  will  of  God, 
they    are    ready    to    become    labourers. 

4.  When  Christian  parents  offer  up 
this  prayer  they  express  their  willing- 
ness that  their  children  should  go. — 
Richard  Knill. 

Ver.  38.  The  Lord  of  the  Jiarvest. — 
I.  The  seed  is  His. 
II.  The  field  is  His. 

III.  The  harvest  is  His.—/.  P. 
Lange,  D.D. 


B 


241 


CHAP.  X.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


CHAPTER  X. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver,  1.  Called. — We  must  distinguish  three  calls,  the  first  to  be  disciples ;  the  second  to 
serve  as  Evangelists  ;  and  now  the  third  to  the  Apostolic  office.  This  call  to  the  Apostolate, 
however,  was  only  preliminary,  and  limited  by  the  present  circumstances  and  position  of  the 
church.  The  Apostolic  office  obtained  its  full  proportions  after  the  ascension  of  our  Lord, 
■when  the  knowledge  of  the  disciples  and  their  testimony  was  completed,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
poured  out  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  {Lange).  Gave  them  power. — Authority  (R.V.).  By  this 
time  they  had  been  so  far  instructed  and  trained  by  their  companionship  with  Christ  that 
they  could  be  safely  intrusted  with  a  mission  by  themselves  ;  accordingly  He,  for  the  first 
time,  gives  them  power  to  do  deeds  of  mercy  of  the  same  sort  as  those  which  He  Himself 
had  iDcen  doing,  as  signs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ( Gibson).  The  word  (e^ovalav)  signifies 
both  "  power "  and  "  authority "  or  "  right."  See  Luke  ix.  1.  He  both  qualified  and 
authorised  them  {Rrown).  Great  is  the  authority  of  conferring  authority  {BengeV).  Unclean 
spirits. — Demons.  They  were  characteristically  unclean  or  impure,  revelling  in  moral  im- 
purity (3Iorison). 

Ver.  2.  Apostles. — The  only  passage  in  this  Gospel  where  the  word  occurs.  Means,  "  sent 
forth,"  '•  envoys."  The  first. — He  was  first  among  the  Apostles,  not  placed  over  the  Apostles ; 
in  the  Apostolate,  not  above  it  (^BengeV). 

Ver.  3.  Bartholomew. — A  family  surname  =  son  of  Tholomew,  Tholmai  or  Talmai.  Probabl 
to  be  identified  with  Nathanael.  The  reasons  for  this  view  are  given  by  Eev.  A.  Carr  as 
follows:  1.  St.  John,  who  twice  mentions  the  name  of  Nathanael  never  mentions  that  o' 
Bartholomew.  2.  The  three  Synoptists  mention  Bartholomew  but  not  Nathanael,  3.  Phili] 
is  closely  connected  with  Nathanael  and  also  with  Bartholomew.  4.  Nathanael  is  mentione  . 
with  six  other  disciples  (John  xxi.  2),  as  if,  like  them,  he  belonged  to  the  Twelve.  Matthew 
.  .  .  James  .  . .  Lebbseus. — Lebbaeus,  Thaddseus,  Jude  the  [son]  of  James,  are  all  names  of  ont 
and  the  same  person.  He  was  the  son  in  all  probability  of  a  James  or  Jacob,  not,  as  nsnaily 
translated,  brother  of  James.  The  name  "  Lebbaeus  "  =  "  courageous  "  from  a  Hebrew  v  or  1 
signifying  "  heart."  This  Jude  or  Judas  must  not  be  confused  with  Jude  or  Judas  the  "  brother  " 
of  our  Lord  ;  nor  must  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus  be  confused  with  James  the  brother  of  our 
Lord.  The  "  brethren  of  the  Lord  "  believed  not  on  Him,  and  could  not  have  been  among  His 
Apostles,  James  and  Judas  were  both  common  names,  and  the  variety  of  names  seems  to 
have  been  small  at  this  epoch.  According  to  this  theory  there  are  four  persons  named 
James :  1.  The  son  of  Zebedee.  2.  The  son  of  Alphaeus.  3.  The  father  of  Jude.  4.  "  The  less  " 
or  rather  "the  little,"  the  brother  of  the  Lord;  and  three  named  Judas  :  1.  The  brother  of 
the  Lord.  2.  The  Apostle,  son  of  James.  3.  Iscariot.  Matthew  or  Levi  also  was  son  of  an 
Alphaeus,  but  there  is  no  evidence  or  hint  that  he  was  connected  with  James  son  of  Alphaeus 
( Carr). 

Ver,  4,  Simon  the  Canaanite, — The  Canancean  (R,V,),  Luther  supposed  that  the  reference  of 
the  word  is  to  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  hence  he  renders  the  expression,  Simon  of  Cana.  But  if 
that  had  been  the  meaning  of  the  word,  it  would  have  been  Canaite,  not  Canaanite.  It  is,  in 
truth,  a  Hebrew  or  Aramaicword,  meaning  "  Zealot,"  and  hence  in  Luke  vi.  15,  it  is  translated 
into  Greek,  "  Simon  called  Zelotes."  In  Acts  i.  13  the  expression  is  simply  Simon  Zelotes, 
i.e.  Simon  the  Zealot,  The  Zealots  were  a  political  party  among  the  Jews,  who  were 
animated  with  peculiar  zeal  for  the  recovery  of  Jewish  freedom  and  the  maintenance  of  all 
the  distinctive  Jewish  institutions.  Phinehas  was  the  model  after  which  they  sought  to  mould 
their  character  (Numb,  xxv.  6-8),  They  scrupled  not  to  take,  as  they  had  opportunity,  the 
punishment  of  law-breakers  into  their  own  hands  ;  and  amid  the  subsequent  wars  that  are 
narrated  by  Josephus,  they  played  a  fiery  and  somewhat  conspicuous  part  {Morison). 

Ver.  5,  Go  not,  etc. — The  emphatic  limitation  seems,  at  first  sight,  at  variance  with 
viii,  11  and  John  iv.  35,  We  must  remember,  however:  1.  That  the  limitation  was 
confined  to  the  mission  on  which  they  were  now  sent,  2,  That  it  did  but  recognise  a  Divine 
order  (Rom,  ii.  9,  10).  3.  That  the  disciples  themselves  were  as  yet  unfitted  to  enter  on 
a  work  which  required  wider  thoughts  and  hopes  than  they  had  yet  attained  to  (JPlumptre). 

Ver.  6.  Lost  sheep. — They  were  lying  "  panting  for  life  "  {Trapp). 

Ver.  8.  Baise  the  dead. — This  clause  is  wanting  in  so  many  MSS.  and  ancient  versions  that 
Tischendoif  and  others  omit  it  altogether,  as  having  found  its  way  into  this  verse  from 
xi.  5.  Retained  in  R.V.  Dr.  D.  Brown  says,  "  It  seems  very  improbable  that  our  Lord 
imparted  at  so  early  a  period  this  highest  of  ail  foi  ms  of  supernatural  power,"     The  first 

242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  x. 


instance  in  which  the  dead  were  raised  by  Apostolic  agency  occurs  in  the  Book  of  Acts 
(ix.  36,  etc.)  ;  but  the  Seventy  reported,  on  their  return,  that  the  evil  spirits  were  subject  to 
them  (Luke  x.  17)  (  Gerlach). 

Ver.  9.  Brass  =  copper.  The  Hebrews  were  not  acquainted  with  that  comparatively 
modern  alloy  of  copper  and  zinc  which  we  call  brass  (Morison).  Purses  =  girdles,  the 
twisted  folds  of  which  were,  and  are,  habitually  used  in  the  East  instead  of  the  "  purse  "  of 
the  West  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  10.  Scrip  =  wallet.  A  small  basket  carried  on  the  back,  or  by  a  strap  hanging  from 
one  shoulder,  containing  the  food  of  the  traveller  (ibid.).  Neither  shoes — I.e.  nor  a  change  of 
shoes  or  sandals.  Lightfoot  and  Macknight,  not  perceiving  that  an  extra  set  of  these  con- 
veniences is  referred  to,  have  supposed  that  plain  sandals  were  allowed,  but  not  the  more 
comfortable  and  luxurious  shoes  (see  Mark  vi.  9)  (Morison). 

Ver.  11.  Inquire. — /.(?.  carefully  ;  search  out  (R.V.).  Worthy. — Or  "meet"  to  entertain 
such  messengers  ;  not  in  point  of  rank,  of  course,  but  of  congenial  disposition  (Browri).  Abide. 
— A  change  of  houses  might  have  the  appearance  of  fastidiousness  {Bengel). 

Ver.  12.  Salute  it. — Saying  "  Peace  be  unto  you,"  the  usual  salutation  at  this  day  {Carr). 

Ver.  14.  Shake  off  the  dust. — Probably  as  implying  that  the  city  was  to  be  treated  as  a 
heathen  place,  the  dust  of  which  was  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  defiling.  See  Lightfoot 
(Mmnsel). 

Ver.  17.  Synagogues. — The  ecclesiastical  and  civil  elements  were  so  thoroughly  inter- 
blended  among  the  Jews,  that  "in  every  synagogue,"  says  Lightfoot,  "there  was  a  civil 
triumvirate,"  or  judicatory  of  three.  These  magistrates  sat  in  judgment  on  all  cases  that 
required  to  be  treated  judicially  (Movison). 

Ver.  23.  Till  the  Son  of  man  be  come. — The  immediate  reference  is,  probably,  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  25.  Beelzebub.— In  the  original,  Beelzebul.,  which  is  probably  the  true  reading  in  all 
the  places  of  the  New  Testament  where  this  name  occurs.  Two  principal  explanations  have 
been  given  of  the  word  as  thus  written  :  1.  According  to  the  Hebrew  of  the  Old  Testament, 
the  signification  is,  lord  of  the  dwelling,  a  term,  perhaps,  corresponding  to  that  of  prince  of 
the  power  of  the  air  (Eph.  ii.  2).  To  this  meaning  there  may  possibly  be  an  allusion  in  the 
choice  of  the  expression,  the  Master  of  the  house  ;  our  Lord  thus  appropriating  to  Himself, 
in  another  sense,  as  a  term  of  honour,  the  name  which  His  enemies  had  given  in  blasphemy. 
2.  In  later  Hebrew,  the  word  Beelzebub  means,  lord  of  dung ;  and  is  possibly  a  contemp- 
tuous perversion  of  the  name  Baalzebub,  lord  of  flies,  the  god  of  the  Ekronites  (2  Kings  i.  2). 
Or,  as  Lightfoot  (on  xii.  24)  explains,  an  ignominious  name,  signifying,  lord  of  idolatry.  It 
is  possible,  however,  that  the  change  may  be  merely  euphonic  {ManseV). 

Ver.  27.  "What  ye  hear  in  the  ear. — Lightfoot  refers  this  to  a  custom  in  the  "  Divinity 
School "  of  the  synagogue  (see  iv.  23),  where  the  master  whispered  into  the  ear  of  the  inter- 
preter, who  repeated  in  a  loud  voice  what  he  had  heard  {Carr).  Upon  the  housetops. — The 
flat  roofs  of  which  were  often  actually  used  by  criers  and  heralds  for  their  announcements 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  28.  Fear  Him. — Lange  in  his  "  Life  of  Jesus  "  applies  this  with  Stier,  to  Satan,  but  in 
his  Commentary  he  acknowledges  himself  to  have  been  in  error  and  applies  it  to  God  (see 
James  iv.  12).     Hell. — Greek,  Gehenna. 

Ver.  29,  Sparrows. — Any  small  kind  of  bird.     Farthing. — See  note  on  v.  26. 

Ver.  38.  Takelh  not  his  cross. — By  the  Roman  custom  criminals  were  compelled  to  bear  the 
cross  to  the  place  of  execution.  The  Galilasans  would  know  too  well  what  was  meant  by 
"  taking  the  cross."  Many  hundreds  had  paid  that  forfeiture  for  rebellion  that  had  not 
prospered,  under  Judas  the  Gaulonite  and  others  (Carr). 

Ver.  39.  He  that  findeth  his  life. — The  word  is  the  same  as  that  translated  "  soul  "  {i.e. 
that  by  which  man  lives  in  the  lower  or  the  higher  sense  of  life)  in  verse  28.  The  point  of 
the  maxim  lies  in  the  contrast  between  the  two  senses.  To  gain  the  lower  now  is  to  lose  the 
higher  hereafter,  and  conversely,  to  lose  the  lower  for  the  sake  of  Christ  {i.e.  to  die  a 
martyr's  death  in  confessing  Him)  is  to  gain  the  higher. — Plumptre. 

Ver.  41.  In  the  name  of  a  prophet  .  . .  righteous  man. — I.e.  for  the  sake  of  that  which  the 
name  connotes — the  prophet's  work  as  a  messenger  of  God,  the  righteousness  of  which  the 
living  righteous  man  is  the  concrete  example  (ibid.). 

Ver.  42.  One  of  these  little  ones. — The  reference  may  be  to  the  disciples.  But  there 
appears  to  be  a  gradation,  in  the  lowest  step  of  which  are  "  these  little  ones."  Possibly  some 
children  standing  near  were  then  addressed,  or,  perhaps,  some  converts  less  instructed  than 
the  Apostles  had  gathered  round.  "  The  little  ones  "  then  would  mean  the  young  disciples, 
who  are  babes  in  Christ.  The  lowest  in  the  scale — Apostles,  prophets,  the  saints,  the  young 
disciples. — Ca/rr, 


243 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,   MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—15. 

A  new  departure. — The  end  of  the  last  chapter  was  a  kind  of  preamble  to  this. 
It  taught  us  that  action  should  be  preceded  by  prayer.  The  beginning  of  this 
chapter  teaches  us  the  converse  truth,  viz.  that  prayer  should  be  followed  by 
action.  Does  the  action  described  tally  with  the  prayer  ?  We  believe  that  it 
does ;  and  that  in  this  primary  mission  of  the  Apostles  (for  we  seem  to  read  at 
least  of  one  other  afterwards,  distinguished  from  this,  Luke  xxii-.  36,  etc.)  the 
"action"  taken  will  be  found  to  correspond  throughout  to  the  "prayer" 
previously  recommended  ;  and,  further,  that  this  may  be  seen  especially  by 
comparing:  1.  The  kind  of  work  to  which  they  were  called.  2.  The  kind  of 
hire  on  which  they  were  enjoined  to  depend. 

I,  The  special  character  of  their  work. — In  a  broad  way  this  was  the  work  of 
being  fellow-workers  with  Christ  (contrast  afterwards  2  Cor.  v*.  20).  Virtually 
it  was  for  such  workers  He  had  taught  His  disciples  to  ask  (ix.  36-38) ;  for  those 
who  should  help  Him  in  tending  the  many  untended  "  sheep  "  He  beheld  ;  those 
who  should  aid  Him  in  reaping  and  securing  the  vast  "harvest"  fields  within 
sight.  Pray  for  more  labourers — more  harvest  labourers — additional  "  hands  "  in 
a  word — that  was  the  thing  to  be  asked.  That,  accordingly,  is  what  the 
Saviour's  action  now  aims  to  provide.  Choosing  a  number  of  men  from  amongst 
those  who  were  already  His  disciples  (Luke  vi.  13),  and  who  appear  to  have  been 
of  much  the  same  kind  of  station  (iv.  18-22 ;  Mark  vi.  3),  and  from  much 
the  same  part  of  the  country  (Acts  ii.  7 ;  Luke  xxiii.  6)  with  Himself,  He  "  sends" 
them  "  forth "  (ver.  5)  to  be  helps  to  Himself.  In  other  words,  and  more 
particularly,  He  sends  them  forth,  first,  to  do  the  same  kind  of  work  as  Himself ; 
to  teach,  e.g.  the  same  truths  as  had  been  taught  by  Himself  from  the  first 
(cf.  ver.  7,  iv.  17) ;  and  to  do  this  also,  through  His  blessing  upon  them,  in  the 
same  spirit  of  power  (vers.  8,  ix.  35).  Also,  remarkably  enough,  to  do  it  in 
this  "  primary  "  mission  in  the  same  limited  sphere  as  Himself  (cf.  vers.  5  and 
6,  XV.  24).  Note  how  seldom,  if  ever,  the  Saviour  in  His  ministry  went  beyond 
the  borders  of  Israel  (see  ibid,  and  Matt.  xvi.  13);  even  His  going  "through 
Samaria  "  being  apparently  a  thing  to  be  noted  (John  iv.  4).  Also,  once  more,  to 
do  this  same  work  in  the  same  unlimited  spirit  of  beneficence  with  which  it  was 
done  by  Himself  (ver.  8  compared  with  ix.  35,  iv.  23,  24).  In  all  these 
particulars  we  find  these  "  Apostles  "to  be  yet  companions  now  of  the  Saviour  ; 
men  "  sent  forth,"  yet  "  with  Him  "  also  (Luke  viii.  1,  Mark  iii.  14)  ;  and  just  such 
helpers,  therefore,  as  the  juncture  required,  and  as  He  had  taught  His  disciples 
to  pray  for. 

II.  The  special  character  of  their  hire. — How  were  these  labourers  to  be 
supported  ?  This  is  taught  them  in  two  ways.  Negatively,  on  the  one  hand. 
They  were  not  to  depend  at  this  time  on  their  own  efforts,  or  exertions,  or  fore- 
thought; not  to  "  provide  gold  or  silver,"  or  so  on;  not  even  to  go  so  far  as  to 
have  a  second  "coat"  or  "staff"  in  reserve  (vers.  9,  10).  In  this,  of  course, 
they  were  very  different  from  what  was  afterwards  true  of  their  body  ;  as  when 
St.  Paul,  e.g.  though  having  a  full  right  to  look  for  the  ministration  of  others,  pre- 
ferred to  supply  his  necessities  by  his  own  exertions  and  care  (2  Thess.  iii.  9 ; 
2  Cor.  xi.  9,  etc.).  In  this,  therefore,  they  were  the  more  strikingly  like  the 
Saviour  Himself  at  this  time,  who  would  not  make  use  of  His  own  power  to 
supply  His  own  needs  in  the  wilderness  (iv.  3,  4).  Positively,  on  the  other 
hand.  What  they  were  to  depend  upon  was,  under  one  aspect,  what  would  come 
to  them  from  below ;  from  the  purely  voluntary  assistance  of  those  amongst 
whom  they  should  be  called  upon  to  labour  (ver.  11).  What  they  were  to  depend 
on  was,  under  another  aspect,  what  would  be  ordered  about  them  above  ;  ordered 
about  them  by  Him,  in  fact,  whose  "  workmen  "  they  were  (ver.  10),  and  whp 

244 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  x. 


fully  recognised  their  claim,  as  such,  for  such  help ;  and  was  exceedingly  jealous, 
also,  as  to  whether  they  received  it  or  not ;  and  would  even  notice  in  His 
jealousy  what  was  testified  on  that  subject  by  the  very  dust  of  their  feet 
(vers.  12-15).  And  in  this  again,  therefore,  they  were  to  be,  as  before,  like  their 
own  Master  and  Lord  ;  who  was  supported  only,  so  far  as  we  know,  by  the 
voluntary  ministrations  of  others  (Luke  viii.  3) ;  and  who  applied  specially  to 
Himself  those  words  to  be  found  in  Matt.  iv.  4.  So  it  was,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
that  Christ  was  living  then  in  the  world.  So  He  appointed,  therefore,  that 
there,  also.  His  "  fellow -workers  "  should  live. 

One  sees,  in  this  passage,  amongst  other  things  : — 

1.  The  consistency  of  the  Saviour. — The  prayers  He  enjoins,  the  provisions 
He  makes,  the  instructions  He  gives,  are  all  of  a  piece. 

2.  The  consideration  of  the  Saviour. — He  does  not  set  His  workmen  to  begin 
at  the  top  of  the  ladder.  He  does  not  ask  from  them  at  first  what,  to  many 
among  them,  will  not  be  too  easy  at  last.  Not  first  apart  from  Him,  but  first 
by  His  side. 

3.  The  forethought  of  the  Saviour. — He  sets  them  at  first  to  that  which  will 
help  to  qualify  them  for  what  has  to  be  done  at  the  last. 

4.  The  authority  of  the  Saviour. — It  is  partly  as  a  Master,  partly  as  a 
Prophet,  and  partly  as  the  Ruler  of  time  that  He  speaks.  Do  you,  my  fellow- 
workmen,  do  as  I  bid  you,  and  you  will  find  God's  providence  on  your  side  !  So 
here  in  prospect.     So  afterwards  in  retrospect  also.     See  again  Luke  xxii.  35. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1-8.  The  seed  of  the  church. —  twelve. — The  number,  of   course,  has 

I.  Christ  selected  men  for  a  specific  reference    to    the   twelve   tribes,    and 

work. — Not    all    who    followed    Him  proclaims  that  the  kingdom,  of  which 

were  required  to  become  preachers  of  they   were   the   ministers,  is  the  true 

the  gospel ;    not  all  who  accepted  Him  Israel.       In    each    group    the     same 

were  even  required  to  follow  Him  per-  Apostle  is  at  the  head  in  all  the  lists, 

sonally.     On  the  contrary,  he  forbade  Clearly  the  most  important  come  first, 

some  to  do  so ;  some  He  bade  go  back  and  probably  the  most  important  in 

to  their  homes ;  some  He  forbade  to  each    group    heads    it.       They    were 

talk   about    Him.      Twelve   men    He  brethren,  and,  in  some  sense,   a  pure 

selected  for  the  special  work  of  preach-  specimen   of   a   Christian   democracy  ; 

ing  His  gospel.       There  is  a   ground  and  yet  the  men  of  weight  came  to  the 

and  authority  in  Christ's  own  example  front,   and   there   are   degrees   among 

for  a  professionally  appointed,  life-con-  them    dependent    on    their    force    of 

secrated,  life-devoted  ministry.  goodness  and  consecration,  as  well  as 

II.  But  while  He  established  such  on  natural  endowment. 

an  order,  organised  it,  if  you  will,  He  II.    Note,  too,  the  smaller  groups 

organised  it  as  a  prophetic,    not  a  within  the  circle. — There  were,  at  all 

priestly  order.  events,    two    pairs    of    brothers,   who 

III.  This  order  was  wholly  depen-  constituted  the  four  chief  Apostles. 
dent  upon  the  voluntary  subscription  One  theory  makes  a  third  pair  in  the 
of  the  people  for  its  support.  persons  of  James  and  Judas,  or  Thad- 

IV.  It  was  an  itinerant  ministry.  dseus  as   Matthew   calls  him.     Philip 

V.  It  was  to  be  a  philanthropic  and  Bartholomew  {i.e.  Nathanael) 
ministry. — L.  Abbott,  D.D.  were  friends.     All  the  first  six  were 

closely  connected  before  their  disciple- 

Vers.  2-4.  The  King^s  ambassadors. —      ship.     Further,  Matthew  and  Luke — 

I.  Note  the  broad  fact  that  there  is     in  both  his  lists — give  the   names  in 

an  order  in  the  enumeration  of  the     pairs ;  and  Mark,  who  does  not  do  so, 

245 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


mentions  what  was,  no  doubt,  the 
reason  for  the  pairs,  that  they  were 
originally  sent  out  by  twos.  1.  Learn 
the  good  of  companionship  in  Christian 
service,  which  solaces  and  checks  ex- 
cessive individuality  and  makes  men 
brave.  One  and  one  is  more  than  two, 
for  each  man  is  more  than  himself  by 
the  companionship.  2.  Note  the 
allowableness  of  special  friendships 
among  Christian  workers,  the  conse- 
cration of  friendship,  and  the  beauty  of 
the  bonds  of  kindred  and  amity  when 
they  are  heightened  and  sanctified  by 
yoking  us  to  Christ's  plough.  3.  These 
lists  also  teach  us  that  Christ's  service 
separates  and  dissolves  natural  ties. 
One  of  the  twelve  was  Thomas  Didy- 
mus,  and  his  name  in  both  languages 
means  "  a  twin."  Where  was  his  twin 
brother  ? 

III.  Note,  again,  the  variations  in 
the  order. — Matthew  belongs  to  the 
second  group,  and  in  his  own  Gospel 
stands  last  in  it.  The  lowest  place 
which  he  could  take  he  modestly  takes. 
Another  little  touch  of  lowliness  lies  in 
the  fact  that  he,  and  he  only,  calls 
himself  *'  the  publican,"  and  that  in  no 
other  instance  is  the  occupation  of  any 
of  them  mentioned.  The  list  in  Acts 
may  be  taken  as  giving  the  final 
positions  of  the  Apostles  ;  and  in  it  the 
pairs  of  brothers  in  the  first  group  are 
parted,  Peter  and  James  being  united, 
as  probably  the  more  active,  while 
John,  whose  work  was  "  to  tarry,"  and 
Andrew,  are  placed  together — the 
latter  being  last,  as  certainly  the  least 
important  of  the  four.  Then,  in  the 
second  division,  Thomas  comes  up  from 
the  last  place,  which  he  occupies  in 
Mark  and  Luke,  and  probably  would 
have  occupied  in  Matthew,  but  for 
that  Apostle's  m.odesty,  and  is  coupled 
with  Philip,  whose  companion  ISTa- 
thanael,  whom  he  brought  to  Jesus,  is 
now  put  third.  So  we  may  learn  that 
our  place  in  Christ's  army  is  altered  by 
our  diligence  and  faithful  use  of 
opportunities.  It  used  to  be  said  that 
in  Napoleon's  time  every  French 
soldier  carried  a  field-marshal's  baton 
in    his    knapsack.      Every    Christian 

246 


soldier  has  the  possibility  of  high  rank, 
and  his  advance  will  injure  or  hinder 
none  of  his  fellows. 

IV.  We  may  note,  too,  the  lessons 
of  the  last  pair  of  names.— Simon,  the 
Zealot,  had  been  a  member  of  that 
fierce  party  who  were  ready  to  draw 
the  sword  against  Eome,  and  in  whom 
hot  passion  masqueraded  as  holy  zeal. 
The  impure  fire  had  been  clarified,  and 
turned  into  holy  enthusiasm,  by  union 
with  Christ,  who  alone  has  power  to 
correct  and  elevate  earthly  passion  into 
calm  and  permanent  consecration  and 
ardour.  What  a  contrast  he  presents 
to  the  last  name  !  A  strangely  assorted 
couple,  these  two ;  the  zealot,  and  the 
cold-blooded,  selfish  betrayer,  whose 
stagnant  soul  has  never  been  moved 
by  any  breath  of  zeal  for  anything  ! 
Contact  with  Christ  hurts  where  it 
does  not  help,  and  maddens  to  malig- 
nant hatred  if  it  does  not  soften  to 
adoring  love. 

V.  But  perhaps,  not  the  least  im- 
portant lesson  to  be  learn  f^d  from  these 
names,  is  that  contained  in  the  plain 
fact  that  of  half  of  them  we  never  hear 
again. — None  of  them,  except  the 
three  *'  who  seemed  to  be  pillars," 
appear  to  have  been  of  much  import- 
ance in  the  work  of  the  church. — 
A.  Maclaren^  D.D, 

Our  Lord^s  Apostles. ^l.  Laymen, 
unconnected  with  the  priesthood. 
2.  Unlearned  men,  unconnected  with 
traditional  philosophy.  3.  Plain  men, 
unconnected  with  the  false  culture 
and  the  pomp  of  the  world.  4.  Pious 
Isiaelites.  5.  Believers  in  the  Messiah. 
6.  Discipl(s.  7.  Men  of  gifts,  and 
that  of  so  diverse  a  character  as  to 
form  a  kind  of  contrast,  and  yet  to 
display  their  higher  unity  in  Christ. — 
/.  P.  Lange^  D.D. 

Wisdom  in  the  LordJs  choice  of 
Apostles. — In  this,  as  in  all  other 
matters,  our  Lord's  selection  was  guided 
by  a  wisdom  above  that  of  the  world, 
and  justified  by  the  attainment  of  the 
ends  in  view.  There  were  two  reasons 
why  this  principle  of  careful  adaptation 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  x. 


of  means  to  ends  should  not  have  been  hinder  Him  from  taking  them  as  His 

neglected  by  our  Lord.     He  bore  our  daily  associates. 

nature  in  all  but  its  sins,  and  therefore  II.  As  a  second  motive  prompting 
must  have  followed  the  general  lines  His  choice,  may  be  named  His  design 
of  human  foresight  ;  and  as  He  lived  that  the  Apostles  should  bear  public 
for  our  example  it  is  incredible  that  He  witness   of  all  they   saw  and  heard 
should   have    shown    a    disregard    of  whilst    remaining    with    Him. — But, 
natural  fitness  in  the  means  employed,  granted  the  need  for  witnesses,  were 
which  it   is  admitted    no   living   man  the  men  upon  whom  the  solemn  choice 
would  be  profited  or  even  justified  in  fell  competent  for  the  discharge  of  so 
displaying.     If  we  examine  His  choice  grave   a   function  ?      The   miracles   of 
of  Apostles  from  the  human  point  of  Jesus    were    of    a    kind    which    the 
view,  we  are  disposed  to  reckon  amongst  humblest   observer    could    judge,   and 
His  motives  : —  perhaps   judge   even   better   than   his 
I.  His    desire   for    sympathy. — His  superiors  in   rank.      It    becomes    us, 
nature    was    genial.       But    were    the  moreover,  to  remember  that,  even  if 
Twelve    whom     He     actually   selected  the  Twelve  were  in  any  measure  dis- 
qualified   to   give    Him    the    required  qualified     by    inferior     station     from 
support  ?      When  He  chose  them  their  bearing    trustworthy    evidence,    they 
faith  was  of  the  feeblest ;  they  appeared  were  thereby  just  as  much  incapacitated 
unable   to    enter    into    His    plans    or  for  the  concoction  of  a  clever  forgery, 
understand  His  lofty  motives,  and  often  III.  He  called  them  also  to  aid  Him 
when  He   came  to   them    after    the  in  His  life-work  and  prosecute  it  for 
fatigue  and  disappointments  of  public  Him  after  His   departure    from    the 
teaching  they  would  harass  His  spirit  earth. — So     brief     was     His     public 
vith  some  trifling  contention.     "What  ministry  that,  but  for  their  co-opera- 
joy  could    He   find   in  the  society  of  tion.  He  could  not  have  done  all  the 
minds  so  coarsely  strung  and  so  little  acts  of  mercy,  nor  said  all  the  words  of 
\n   harmony  with  His  own  pure  and  wisdom,  which  were  crowded  into  that 
sensitive  heart  ?     At  times,  indeed,  He  eventful    time.      And   if    during   His 
seems  to  have  felt  the  jar  unbearable,  sojourn  here  He  needed  their  services 
and  gladly  to  have  escaped  at  evening  in  spreading  His  doctrine  and  healing 
from   the  jangling  voices  of  the  house  the    sick,   much     more    would    those 
to   find    the    solace    of    the    Father's  services  be  required  when  His  day  of 
presence  amid  the  hush  of  the  listening  earthly  work  was  ended.    In  His  choice 
stars.    Yet,  in  spite  of  this  incongruity  of  such  men  for  sympathy,  witness,  and 
of  temper,  He  could  and  did  find  true  active  work,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that 
help  in  their  attendance.    He  ordained  He  calls  no  man  common  or  unclean, 
them    that     they    should     "  be    with  but  that,  as  the  sun  can  turn  a  chip  of 
Him  "  ;  He   called  them  not  servants  glass  into  a  flashing  gem,  or  transfigure 
but  friends ;    His  appreciation  of  their  the    dullest    bank    of     cloud    into    a 
friendship     discovered    itself     in    the  Himalaya  range,  so  the  least  promis- 
pathetic     appeal,     "Will   ye    also    go  ing   materials   can   in    His   hands    be 
awayV  and  at  the  end  He  expressed  manipulated  to  grandest  ends. —  C.  B. 
even    gratitude    for    their    sympathy,  B.  Eeedj  M.A. 
saying,  "  Ye  are  they  which  have  con- 
tinued with  Me   in   My  temptations."  Vers.  2-8.  Christ^s  choice  of  Apostles. 
Encouragement    ought   to   flow   forth  — As    there    is    no    comparison     for 
to   us    from   this   fact,    that   common  effectiveness  between  the  single  machine 
people,      poor     artisans,      rustics     of  which  prints  so  many  sheets  of  paper, 
unpolished    manners,    were    not    too  or  winds  so  many  reels  of  silk  in  the 
vulgar   company  for    Him,    and    that  hour,  and  the  steam  engine  which  sets 
their  stumbling  faith,  their  brooding  and  keeps  in  motion  a  whole  room  full 
doubts,    and    grievous    sins    did    not  of  such  machines,  so  the  man  who  seeks 

247 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEm 


to  do  the  largest  amount  of  good  will 
recognise  that  far  higher  results  may- 
be attained  by  instructiog  a  few  persons 
of  influence  who  "  shall  be  able  to  teach 
others  also,"  than  by  worjking  always 
upon  an  inert  mass,  destitute  of  life 
and  reproductive  energy.  Hence  we 
find  that  all  the  world's  greatest 
teachers  have  gathered  around  them 
disciples.  Socrates  frequented  the 
market-place  and  gymnasia  of  Athens 
at  their  busiest  hours,  and  was  ready 
to  talk  with  anybody  and  everybody ; 
but  there  clustered  about  him  a  group 
of  pupils  and  companions,  whom  he  took 
pains  to  instruct  in  the  esoteric  parts 
of  his  system,  because  to  them  he 
looked  for  its  preservation  and  propaga- 
tion. Nor  was  his  hope  misplaced ; 
for  the  thoughts  of  mankind  were 
moulded  and  stamped  in  succeeding 
ages  by  the  rough  old  Greek,  who, 
through  Plato  and  Aristotle,  his  in- 
tellectual heirs,  exercised  a  widening 
power  through  many  generations. 
Peter  the  Hermit  inflaming  Europe  to 
the  Crusades,  Luther  waving  on  the 
world  against  priestly  craft  and 
tyranny,  Loyola  the  founder  of  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  Savonarola  at 
Florence  with  his  penitents,  and  in 
England  the  twin  leaders  of  Methodism 
— these  are  examples  of  religious 
teachers,  not  in  every  case  formally 
organising  disciples,  but  ever  setting 
their  followers  to  work,  and  through 
their  labours  reaching  men  of  all 
lands  and  in  days  long  after  the  watch- 
fires  of  their  own  lives  had  died  down. 
This  same  principle  was  acknowledged 
by  our  Saviour  to  a  remarkable  degree. 
—G.  E.  B.  Reed,  M.A. 

Ver.  4.  Christ  and  Judas. — Jesus 
Himself  knew  Judas  from  the  begin- 
ning, and  yet  selected  him.  The  choice 
was  in  mercy.  There  was  yet  time  to 
check  the  disciple's  evil  tendencies,  and 
his  character  might  have  developed  into 
strength  and  nobleness.  Never  was 
there  such  an  opportunity  as  was  now 
given  to  him  !  Not  only  was  he  placed 
beneath  the  influence  of  Christ's  own 
character  and  teaching,  but  there  were, 

248 


all  through  that  Divine  ministry, 
special  appeals,  directed  against  his 
besetting  sin,  which  might  well  have 
sunk  into  his  heart.  "A  man's  life 
consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
things  which  he  possesseth."  "  Take 
heed  and  beware  of  covetousness."  *'  It 
is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  a 
needle's  eye."  Such  words  as  these 
become  most  significant  and  solemn 
when  we  think  of  Judas  as  listening  to 
them.  Jesus  uttered  them,  knowing 
what  was  in  the  heart  of  His  disciple. 
They  were  the  last  appeals  of  love  to 
a  heart  where  the  world  and  self  were 
becoming  supreme. — S.  G.  Green,  D.D, 

Yers.  5,  6.  Home  first! — 1.  Home 
first  is  the  dictate  of  a  true 
philanthropy. 

II.  The  law  is  the  dictate  of  wisdom 
as  well  as  love. — 1.  We  have  greater 
facilities  for  giving  the  gospel  to  our 
neighbours  than  to  foreigners.  2.  Our 
neighbours,  when  evangelised,  would 
become  more  effective  allies  than 
foreigners.  The  stronger  the  forces  in 
the  centre,  the  more  powerfully  the 
inflaence  will  be  felt  at  the  extremities. 
—D.  Thomas,  D.D. 

Vers.  7-10.  The  work  of  Christ^s 
Missionaries. — I.  Preaching. — Herald- 
ing.    A  message  to  deliver. 

II.  Working. — To  disciples  miracu- 
lous powers  were  entrusted,  only  to 
forcibly  illustrate  what,  with  God's 
help,  our  ordinary  powers  can  do.  See 
our  work  for:  1.  Those  in  suffering; 
"  heal  the  sick."  2.  In  disability ; 
**  cleanse  the  lepers."  3.  In  wicked- 
ness ;  "  cast  out  devils."  Learn  the 
value  of  auxiliaries  to  missionary 
labours ;  medicine  and  charity  open 
heai'ts  to  receive. 

III.  Giving.  —  "  Freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give."  Nothing  that 
we  have  is  for  keeping 

IV.  Trusting.  —  Let  your  care  be 
entirely  about  your  work,  and  not 
about  yourselves.  The  greatest  of  all 
curiosities  would  be  the  man  who  was  in 
want  because  he  gave  so  much  to  Christ, 
and  to  His  cause. —  Weekly  Pulpit. 


BOMILETW  COMMENTAMY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  x. 


Christ^  s  itinefi^ant  preachers. — The 
pilgrims,  lightly  attired,  carrying  in 
their  hearts  the  treasures  of  heaven. 

I.  Outwardly  unburdened. 

II.  Inwardly  laden  with  the 
greatest  riches. — /.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  7.  The  kingdom  of  God  with 
men. — We  learn  from  this  passage  how 
needful  it  is  for  us  all  to  remember 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  exists  now 
in  the  world.     Consider  : — 

I.  What  this  remembrance  means. 
— God  has  come  forth  from  His  hiding 
place  that  we  may  know  Him  as  a 
people  knows  its  king,  may  have  com- 
munion with  Him,  and  may  love  Him, 
as  a  subject  loves  his  sovereign.  Our 
labour  is  from  henceforth  no  longer 
earthly  and  perishable,  it  reaches  on 
to  heaven. 

II.  Who  are  those  that  most  need 
this  reminder  ? 

1.  Those  who  are  v^ell  satisfied  with 
earth. — Who  blindly  live  by  the  day, 
apparently  oblivious  even  to  the  idea 
of  a  kingdom  of  God. 

2.  Those  who  hy  a  spiritualising  of 
earthly  things  seek  to  transform  the  earth 
itself  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — To 
them  I  would  say,  the  kingdom  that 
you  strive  to  raise  is  here  already — no 
realm  of  dreams,  but  a  kingdom  of 
glorious  reality ;  break  loose  from  your 
enchanted  world,  and  believe  in  the 
truth  which  has  appeared  among  us ! 

3.  Those  who  think  their  own  power 
sufficient  to  establish  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. — R.  Rothe. 

Yer.  8.  Receiving  to  give. — I.  Man, 
a  needy  dependent  creature. — Never 
self-sufficient.  Looks  up  to  God  by  a 
law  of  his  nature. 

II.  Man  receives  freely. — Without 
money  and  without  price,  not  stint- 
edly.  "  God  upbraids  not "  for  in- 
gratitude, unworthiness,  and  abuse. 
A  Christian  is  abundantly  blessed  with 
all  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ. 

III.  Man  receives  freely  to  give 
freely. — Nature  gives  freely ;  the  sun 
and  the  moon,  the  sea  and  soil,  flowers 
and  trees  give  in  fulfilling  the  end  of 


their  creation.  Man  gives  voluntarily 
or  involuntarily.  Giving  is  a  com- 
mand of  Scripture,  and  the  duty  of 
Christians  especially.  Give  money, 
time,  influence,  life,  all  for  Christ. 
Give  freely,  you  have  received  freely. 
"  God  loves  a  cheerful  giver."  If  you 
would  receive,  give ;  if  you  would  live, 
give  (Luke  vi.  38). — The  Study. 

Yer.  11.  ^^  Abide." — The  reason  is 
very  obvious  to  one  acquainted  with 
Oriental  questions.  When  a  stranger 
arrives  in  a  village  or  an  encampment, 
the  neighbours,  one  after  another, 
must  invite  him  to  eat  with  them. 
There  is  a  strict  etiquette  about  it, 
involving  much  ostentation  and 
hypocrisy ;  and  a  failure  in  the  due 
observance  of  this  system  of  hospitality 
is  violently  resented,  and  often  leads  to 
alienation  and  feuds  among  neighbours. 
It  also  consumes  much  time,  causes 
unusual  distraction  of  mind,  leads  to 
levity,  and  every  way  counteracts  the 
success  of  a  spiritual  mission.  On 
these  accounts  the  Evangelists  were  to 
avoid  these  feasts  ;  they  were  sent,  not 
to  be  honoured  and  feasted,  but  to  call 
men  to  repentance,  prepare  the  way  of 
the  Lord,  and  proclaim  that  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand. 
They  were,  therefore,  first  to  seek  a 
becoming  habitation  to  lodge  in,  and 
there  abide  until  their  work  in  that 
city  was  accomplished. — Thomson!  s 
"  Land  and  Book." 

Fireside  preaching. — They  went 
from  town  to  town,  receiving  hospi- 
tality, or  rather  taking  it  for  them- 
selves, according  to  custom.  The 
guest  in  the  East  has  many  privileges  ; 
he  is  superior  to  the  master  of  the 
house,  who  has  the  greatest  confidence 
in  him.  This  fireside  preaching  is 
admirably  adapted  to  the  propagation 
of  new  doctrines.  The  hidden  treasure 
is  communicated,  and  payment  is  thus 
made  for  what  is  received ;  politeness 
and  good  feeling  lend  their  aid ;  the 
household  is  touched  and  converted. 
Remove  Oriental  hospitality,  and  it 
would   be   impossible    to  explain    the 

249 


CHAP.  X.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


propagation    of   Christianity.      Jesus,  there  were  hostelries.     Once  installed 

who    adhered    strongly    to    good    old  in    any   house,    they  were  to   remain 

customs,   encouraged    His   disciples  to  there,   eating  and  drinking  what  was 

make  no  scruple  of  profiting  by  this  offered  them,  as  long  as  their  mission 

ancient  public  right,  probably  already  lasted. — Renan. 
abolished   in   the   great   towns  where 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  16—23. 

Special  cautions. — This  word  "  behold  "  seems  to  invite  us  to  take  a  new  view  of 
affairs.  What  is  the  Saviour  really  doing  in  sending  forth  His  Apostles 
(vers.  5-15)  ?  The  Saviour  answers  for  Himself  (the  "  I  "  is  emphatic).  "  I  am 
sending  you  forth  as  sheep  among  wolves."  Therefore  it  is  that  He  would  have 
them  both  "  wary  "  and  "  guileless."  Never  forget  that  you  are  exposed  to  evil. 
Never  be  tempted  to  evil  methods  of  guarding  against  it.  From  this  principal 
stem  three  branches  grow  out : — 

I.  Do  not  trust  in  mankind. — On  the  contrary  "  beware  "  (ver.  17)  even  of 
those  (He  is  speaking  to  Jews)  of  your  own  country  and  race,  who  meet  in 
*'  synagogues "  and  higher  "  councils  "  for  the  administration  of  justice.  You 
must  expect  little  justice  from  them.  Rather  as  far  as  their  powers  go  (to 
"  scourging  "  e.g.)  they  will  be  exerted  against  you  ;  and,  not  satisfied  with  this, 
they  will  invoke  against  you  the  more  extreijae  powers  of  "  Gentile  "  rulers  and 
"  kings"  (ver.  18).  All  this,  also,  will  come  upon  you  because  of  your  connection 
with  Me  (for  My  sake)  ;  and  must  be  borne  with  by  you,  you  must  remember 
further,  on  that  very  account.  For  your  doing  so  will  enable  you  to  bear 
"  testimony,"  that  is  to  say,  to  do  the  work  you  are  called  to  in  a  most  effectual 
way,  viz.  in  higher  quarters,  amongst  wider  numbers,  and  with  greater  force 
than  could  otherwise  be  the  case.  See  Acts  iv.  10;  2  Tim.  iv.  17 ;  Phil.  i.  12,  13, 
etc. 

II.  Do  not  trust  in  yourselves. — To  this  they  might  be  tempted  by  the  very 
point  named  last.  If  this  "  testimony  "  of  theirs  was  so  important  a  thing 
both  to  others  and  themselves,  how  equally  important  that  they  should  seek  to 
make  it  the  best  in  their  power.  The  inference  was  natural,  but  not  a  correct 
one.  Kather,  the  Saviour  says,  it  is  in  that  exact  direction  that  I  would  next 
have  you  beware.  Beware  of  thinking  that  the  success  of  your  "  testimony  " 
depends  on  yourselves.  Beware  even  of  supposing  that,  in  giving  it,  you  will 
be  left  to  yourselves;  or  that  it  will  be  necessary  for  you  to  take  long  and 
anxious  thought  beforehand  as  to  how  or  what  ye  shall  say.  On  the  contrary 
the  knowledge  of  this  *' at  the  time  itself"  shall  be  yours  as  a  gift  (ver.  19). 
For  the  truth  is,  that,  in  cases  like  these,  where  it  is  God's  own  providence  that 
has  virtually  made  you  ambassadors  of  Him  for  the  time,  the  word  that  ye 
speak  is  the  word  in  reality  of  a  far  higher  than  you  (ver.  20).  Be  only  anxious, 
therefore,  not  to  be  anxious  about  what  ye  shall  say  (cf.  Acts  iv.  13,  vi.  10, 
vii.  passim). 

III.  Do  not  be  weary  of  trusting  in  Me. — In  the  circumstances  named  they 
might  sometimes  be  tempted  to  this.  Sometimes,  e.g.^  they  might  find  those 
nearest  to  them  to  be  the  most  bitter  against  them ;  the  "  brother "  who  is 
*'  born  for  adversity  "  (Prov.  xvii.  17),  being  the  very  one  to  bring  adversity  on 
his  brother  in  its  most  terrible  shape  (ver.  21).  Or  the  author  of  life  being  the 
one  to  promote  its  taking  away  ;  or  the  life  bestowed  be  that  which  sets  itself  to 
take  the  life  of  its  author  away  (ibid.).  With  these,  naturally,  all  sorts  of  men 
(ver.  22)  might  be  leagued  together  against  them  ;  all,  in  fact,  being  as  one 
in  their  common  opposition  to  Christ.  How  great  the  temptation,  therefore,  in 
such  circumstances,  to  one  of  two  things.     The  temptation  to  give  up  one's  pro- 

250 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  X. 


fession,  and  so  escape  that  deluge  of  hate ;  or  the  temptation  to  give  up  hope, 
and  battle  against  the  evil  no  more.  Against  the  first  of  these  temptations  the 
end  of  ver.  22  seems  to  speak.  He  that  gives  up  his  profession  will  not  be 
*'  saved  " ;  only  those  who  "  endure  "  to  the  "  end."  Against  the  other  the 
assurance  of  ver.  23  seems  to  be  directed.  Never  give  up  hope,  for,  in  any 
circumstances,  there  will  always  be  some  means  of  escape — some  city  of  refuge 
somewhere  in  Israel,  when  all  others  are  closed  (2  Pet.  ii.  9;  Rev.  iii.  10). 
This  will  be  true  even  until  "  the  Son  of  man  be  come."  After  that,  places  of 
refuge  will  be  wanted  no  more. 

Thus  it  was  that  our  Saviour  taught  His  disciples  to  look  forward  to  their 
work.  His  words  are  not  bright  words  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  term.  Yet 
how  truly  wise,  and  therefore  how  truly  kind  they  were  may  be  seen  by  con- 
sidering : — 

1.  The  effect  they  had  on  the  disciples. — First,  negatively.  They  turned  no 
one  back.  Another  cause  turned  the  traitor  back.  Next,  positively.  They 
sent  all  the  rest  forward,  ready  to  encounter,  equipped  to  battle  with,  able  to 
conquer,  all  He  had  said.  What  is  the  church  now,  in  fact,  with  all  its  draw- 
backs, but  a  living  proof  of  this  truth  ?  It  is  the  result,  under  God,  of  their 
labours,  and  sorrows,  and  courage,  and  perseverance,  and  faith.  Such  a  result 
like  that  we  read  of  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  39,  40,  proves  the  wisdom  of  the  original 
choice. 

2.  The  effect  they  ought  to  have  on  ourselves. — Where  can  we  seek  for  a  surer 
foundation  than  in  such  an  initiatory  experience  as  this  ?  Weapons  and 
instruments  and  buildings  of  importance  to  many  are  often  tested  at  first  by 
being  exposed  to  a  greater  strain  than  can  ever  afterwards  come  to  them  in 
practice.  Was  it  not  something  thus  at  first  with  these  Apostles  of  Christ 
(1  Cor.  iv.  9). 

HOMILIES  OJSr  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.   16,    True  wisdom. — The    pro-  True  simplicity. — What  is  this  good 

pertles  of  this  good  wisdom  are  these :  simplicity  that  we   must  labour   for  ? 

1.  To   perceive   and    understand   evils  Wherein   doth    it   consist?       1.   In   a 

and  dangers.     2.  To  do  evil  unto  none,  single   heart   (Acts   ii.    46).     2.    In  a 

but  to  pardon  and  forgive  those  who  tender  conscience,  and  a  fear  to  sin  or 

offend  and  injure  us.      3.  To  suspect  offend   God.     3.   In   a   single   tongue, 

evils   from   evil   men,  especially  those  4.  In  a  boldness  unto  that  which  is 

who  hate  us  ;  for  Christ  Himself  would  good. — Ihid. 
not   commit    Himself   unto   the   Jews 

(John    ii.    24).     4.    To   keep  our  own  Serpents  and  doves. — The  Apostles  of 

counsel ;  for  it  is  lawful  to  conceal  some  Christ,  when  persecuted,  were   not  to 

truths.     A  man  is  not  bound  by  his  attempt  to  meet  force  by  force  of  the 

own   babbling   to   betray  himself  ;    it  same  description.     They  could  no  more 

being  the  part  of  a  fool  to  utter  all  his  fight  their  enemies  than  sheep  can  fight 

mind  (Prov.  xxix.    11).     5.   To  avoid  a  pack  of   wolves.     Yet  the  result  of 

peril,  and   not  to  run  into  the  lion's  the  conflict  was  to  be  in  favour  of  the 

mouth.     6.    To  endure   patiently  and  *'  little  flock."     The  meek  endurance  of 

contentedly  the   evils  which  lie  upon  the  Apostles  and  other  messengers  of 

us.     7.    So   to   live   that  we   give  no  Christ  was  to  win  a  signal  victory.   By 

offence,  either  to  the  Jew,  the  Gentile,  a  double  reference  to  the  serpents  and 

or  the  church  of  God.     8.  To  profess  the  doves  of  Palestine,  the  Lord  indi- 

Christ   and   religion  in   sincerity,  not  cated   to    His   Apostles   the   spirit   in 

show ;    in  truth,   not   in   hypocrisy. —  which  they  ought  to  meet  hardship  and 

Richird  Ward,  violence,  viz.,  by  a  blending  of  qualities, 

251 


CHAt>.  X.      HOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


a  balancing  and  harmonising  of  ap- 
parent opposites,  which  no  one  attains 
to  without  pains  and  prayer.  The 
servants  of  Christ  should  be,  on  the 
one  hand,  wary,  but  not  crafty ;  on 
the  other,  simple,  but  not  simpletons. 

I.  "Wary  as  the  serpents." — The 
illustration  must  be  confined  to  the  one 
point  which  is  indicated.  He  who,  on 
another  occasion,  stigmatised  the  hypo- 
critical scribes  and  Pharisees  as 
"  serpents "  and  "  the  offspring  of 
vipers "  was  not  likely  to  bid  His 
Apostles  be  "as  serpents."  He  spoke 
of  serpent-like  prudence  evidently  with 
an  exclusive  reference  to  the  shrewd 
instinct  by  which  those  creatures  per- 
ceive impending  danger  and  avoid  it. 
His  Apostles  ought  not  to  offer  them- 
selves to  injury  or  martyrdom,  or 
involve  themselves  needlessly  in  trouble 
or  danger.  They  were  bound  to  use 
discretion,  and  even  astuteness,  in 
avoiding  mischief  and  guarding  life  and 
liberty.  "  Beware  of  men "  is  the 
counsel  which  immediately  follows.  It 
may  be  supposed  that  men  hardly  need 
exhortation  to  take  care  of  themselves ; 
but  in  point  of  fact  men  do  need  such 
admonition  when  they  are  carried 
away  by  a  strong  enthusiasm.  It  is  a 
familiar  incident  in  war  that  young 
soldiers,  ardent  and  burning  for  dis- 
tinction, foolishly  and  unnecessarily 
expose  themselves,  and  are  with  diffi- 
culty restrained.  Something  like  this 
appeared  in  the  church  of  Christ  after 
a  generation  or  two  had  passed.  There 
arose  a  fanatical  thirst  for  martyrdom, 
stimulated  by  the  excessive  honour 
which  had  come  to  be  paid  to  the 
names  and  relics  of  the  slain  confessors 
of  Christ.  But  this  was  a  departure 
from  the  example  and  teaching  of  the 
Saviour  Himself  and  of  His  Apostles. 
The  general  principle  is  that  a  servant 
of  Christ  should  not  court  reproach, 
invite  trouble,  or  involve  himself  in 
suffering  or  in  danger,  if  he  may 
honourably  and  conscientiously  avoid 
it.  And  by  inference  we  get  a 
similar  direction  for  active  service. 
Zeal  is  good,  but,  if  not  associated  with 
tact  and  discretion,  it  may  do  harm  by 

252 


provoking  irritation  against  the  truth 
and  exposing  holy  things  to  contempt. 
II.  "  And  guileless  as  the  doves." — 
No  doubt  the  word  "  harmless  "  has  an 
appropriate  meaning,  for  the  Apostles 
were  to  suffer  wrong,  not  to  inflict  it. 
But  such  is  the  idea  conveyed  in  the 
figure  of  unresisting  sheep  surrounded 
by  wolves.  The  characteristic  of  the 
dove  intended  by  Christ  was  evidently 
meant  to  balance  the  knowingness  of 
the  serpent.  And  this  is  the  unwili- 
ness  of  that  bird — the  figure  of  a  pure 
and  ingenuous  nature.  So  the  Apostles 
of  Christ,  while  behaving  themselves 
prudently,  were  to  ignore  wiles  and 
stratagems,  and  pursue  their  ministry 
with  a  holy  frankness  and  simplicity. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  consummate 
example  to  illustrate  His  own  teaching. 
He  was  always  on  His  guard,  and 
penetrated  all  the  manoeuvres  and  plots 
of  those  who  watched  and  hated  Him. 
He  fell  into  none  of  their  snares ; 
never  lost  self-possession  ;  never  spoke 
at  random  ;  uttered  all  His  words  and 
conducted  all  His  intercourse  with 
infinite  discretion.  But  He  formed  no 
counterplots  and  devised  no  stratagems. 
No  craft  was  in  His  bosom ;  no  guile 
was  in  His  mouth.  Everywhere  He 
showed  that  the  Spirit  which  rested 
upon  Him  had  descended  in  the  form 
of  a  dove. — D.  Fraser,  D.D. 

Wisdom  with  simplicity. — I.  Let  me 
speak  of  knowledge  and  sincerity ; 
light  as  well  as  love  in  social  and 
domestic  life. — Christian  charity  shows 
itself  not  in  being  blind  to  faults  in 
others,  but  in  graciously  bearing  with 
them  and  with  the  gentle  tact  of  the 
loving  heart  dealing  with  them.  It  is 
the  clear-sighted,  yet  large-hearted, 
considerate  person  who  is  the  most 
reliable  friend.  It  is  not  the  parent 
who  is  so  stupid  as  not  to  see  his 
children  as  others  see  them,  who  gives 
the  highest  proofs  of  parental  afi'ection. 
It  is  a  much  stronger  evidence  of  love 
to  bear  in  the  right  spirit  with  faults 
which  fuller  acquaintance  reveals  after 
marriage  than  what  it  was  not  to 
be    aware    of    their    existence   before 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  x. 


marriage.     It  is  when  the  head  does  the  best,  and  they  must  not  be  made 

its  duty  that  the  heart  has  its  oppor-  fewer  by  wanton  self-sacrifices.    Think 

tunity  of  showing  its  goodness.  of  the  work,  think  of  the  object,  think 

II.  InteUigence  and  rectitude — the  of  souls,  think  of  the  Saviour  ;  think  of 
wisdom  of  the  serpent  and  the  harm-  these  more  than  of  yourselves.  Martyr- 
lessness  of  the  dove — or  light  and  love  dom  itself  may  be  a  sublime  selfishness, 
in  business. — If  a  man  has  received  enthusiasm  may  exaggerate  even  sacri- 
intellectual  energy  to  succeed  in  fice ;  or,  at  least,  the  sacrifice  of  the 
business,  is  he  to  put  his  light  under  a  life  may  be  nobler,  more  heroic,  more 
bushel  ?  No  ;  it  is  his  duty  to  show  his  divine  than  the  sacrifice  of  the  death, 
wisdom,  sagacity,  enterprise,  by  trying  Each  as  God  wills  ;  but  you  must  in- 
to succeed  in  business.  He  should  be  terpret  the  will  of  God  by  the  exigencies 
shrewd  in  his  dealings,  that  is,  of  nice  of  the  work.  Flight  may  be  courage, 
discernment  as  the  result  of  careful  if  it  be  flight  for  Christ  and  with 
scrutiny ;  he  should  be  prudent  in  his  Christ. 

investments,    that    is,   provident,   far-  II.  The  work  of  Christ  in  the  world 

seeing,  taking  as  accurate  a  gauge  as  will  never  be  finished  till  He  comes. — 

possible  of  the  probable  course  of  things  Not  only  will  the  workmen,  one  by  one, 

in  the  commercial  world,  avoiding  what  be  removed  by  death — the  work  itself 

is  risky,   not  hasting  to  be  rich,  and  will  be  cut  short,  unfinished,   by  the 

yet    seeking    a    reasonable    and    fair  advent  of  Christ.     "  Ye  shall  not  have 

return.      He    shpuld    have    his    wits  finished  the  cities  of  Israel,  till  the  Son 

about  him  in  buying,  and  his  suavity  of   man   be   come."      Our   Lord    thus 

should  not  fail  in  selHng  ;  in  short,  he  ministers  to  our  necessities  by  warning 

should  have  common  sense,  which  is  a  us  against  several  mistakes  which  are 

sound  judgment  in  common  things  all  apt  to  spoil  and  ruin  true  work.     One 

round,  and  should  as  far   as   possible  of   these    is   the    demand    beforehand 

manifestthepower  that  leads  to  success,  for  a  roundness   and   completeness  of 

such  as  Abraham,  Joseph,  and  Daniel,  defined  duty,  which  is  not  often  to  be 

and  other  saints  of  God  have  attained  found,  and  which  must  certainly  not  be 

in   all   ages.     But   then   there  is  the  waited  for.     The  life  and  work,   and 

other   side — the   harmlessness   of    the  the  Christ-work  of  which  this  text  tells, 

dove,  integrity,  honour,  rectitude,  un-  are  never  finished  till  the  Son  of  man 

mixfdness.     There  is  moral  principle  to  comes.     1.  One  reason  for  this  lies  in 

control   the   desire  and  the  power  to  the  mere  sequence  of  human  generations, 

succeed.  Births     and     deaths     are     incessant. 

III.  Knowledge  and  sincerity,  light  *'  One  generation  goeth,  and  another 
and  love  in  religion. — The  two  dis-  generation  cometh,"  but  they  are  both 
tinct  types  in  the  religious  world  are  on  the  stage  at  once  during  a  large 
zeal  without  knowledge,  and  knowledge  part  of  the  lifetime  of  earth,  and  the 
without  zeal.  The  faith  that  is  with-  board  is  never  cleared  for  a  new  be- 
out  intelligence  and  the  intelligence  ginning.  2.  Another  and  a  deeper 
that  has  lost  the  robustness  and  vitality  reason  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  work. 
of  its  faith — we  should  decline  to  be  The  most  real  work  of  all  is  the  in- 
driven  either  to  the  one  extreme  or  the  tangible,  impalpable  thing  which  we 
other. — Jas.  Stark.  call  influence.     Influence  is  the  thing 

which   Christ  looks  for,   and  it  is  an 

Yer.  23.  A  precept  and  a  reason  for  indefinite,  and  so  an  interminable  thing. 

it. — The  precept   is   unusual   and  the  3.  We   can  see   one  other  reason  for 

reason  ambiguous.  this  arrangement — the  incompleteness  of 

I.  The  precept  is  a  precept  of  pru-  all  work  that  is  worth  the  name  ;  and  it 

dence. — It  says,  there  is  a  great  work  is  the  security  thus  given  for  the  salu- 

before   you — a    work    which   requires  briousness  of  labour. — C.  J.  Vaugha/n, 

workmen.     The  labourers  are  few  at  I).D, 

253 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  24—33. 

Further  cautions. — All  the  ''  cautions"  of  this  passage  seem  to  be  alike  in  being 
all  associated  with  courage.  "  Fear  not "  (ver.  26).  "  Fear  not "  (ver.  28). 
"  Fear  not"  (ver.  31).  They  seem  to  be  distinguished  from  each  other  in  being 
connected  partly  with  passive  courage  (vers.  24-26),  and  partly  with  aggressive 
courage  (vers.  27-32). 

I.  Passive  courage  or  fortitude. — Let  there  be  strength  to  bear  what  has  to 
be  borne  in  the  shape  of  ill-will ;  and  that  especially  (here)  in  that  form  of  it  in 
which  it  is  usually  manifested  the  first.  Ill  "  words  "  are  usually  the  first  fruits 
of  ill  "  will."  People  proceed  from  words  to  blows;  not  the  opposite  way — as  a 
rule.  Christ's  Apostles  must  begin  with  bearing  the  first.  They  must  bear  the 
less  as  well  as  the  greater.  Let  those  who  hate  you  say  of  you  whatever  they 
will.  Two  reasons  for  this  kind  of  courage  are  virtually  given.  One  is,  because, 
in  manifesting  it,  they  are  only  sharing  the  lot  of  theii-  Master.  Those  who  are 
enemies  of  Him  and  of  His  servants  have  already  said  the  worst  of  Him  in  their 
power.  Professing  to  come  as  God's  Son  they  have  declared  Him  to  be  in  reality 
the  worst  of  God's  foes.  "  They  have  called  the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub  " 
(ver.  25).  Little  is  the  wonder,  therefore,  if  they  say  the  same  of  His  household. 
Of  the  two  things,  indeed,  it  is  not  so  bad  as  to  say  it  of  Him  !  The  other  reason 
is  because  this  kind  of  trial  can  only  last  for  a  time.  The  future,  in  their  case, 
was  bound  to  much  more  than  compensate  for  the  injustice  of  the  present.  The 
day  was  coming  which  would  briug  to  light  everything  which  was  at  present 
concealed  (ver.  26).  In  that  day,  therefore,  so  far  from  being  found  really  con- 
nected with  the  evil  one,  the  true  connection  of  such  maligned  ones  with  the 
Source  of  all  good  would  shine  forth  as  the  light  (xiii.  43  ;  Rom.  viii.  19,. etc.). 
That  being  so,  leave  the  glories  of  eternity  to  reply  to  the  slanders  of  time. 
Why  seek  to  answer  that  which  before  long  will  for  ever  silence  itself  ? 

II.  Aggressive  courage. — The  Apostles  of  Christ  were  called  upon  to  do  more 
than  endure.  They  were  bound  sometimes  to  speak,  and  that,  too,  with  boldness 
(Eph.  vi.  19).  This  thought  seems  to  account  for  the  transition  from  ver.  26  to 
ver.  27.  That  day  will  "  declare"  all  things.  Do  you,  who  know  of  this,  do  the 
same  in  your  measure.  Turn  "  darkness  "  into  "  light "  ;  turn  "  secrecy  "  into 
"  publicity  ";  fill  the  whole  placa  with  your  words  (cf.  Jer.  xxxvi.  2-6  ;  Acts  v.  20, 
etc.).  A  bold  thing  indeed  to  do  with  such  a  message  as  theirs — a  message  which 
had  already  been  spoken  of  as  causing  them  to  be  "  hated  of  all  "  (ver.  22).  The 
encouragements  to  make  them  equal  to  this  were  of  three  principal  kinds.  There 
was  the  consideration,  first,  of  the  limitations  of  time.  Whatever  the  enmity 
aroused  by  such  boldness,  its  operations  were  necessarily  confined  to  this  world. 
If  it  did  its  worst  it  would  leave  untouched  that  which  God  alone  could  either 
preserve  or  destroy,  and  which  they  knew  in  consequence  to  be  most  precious 
of  all  (ver.  28).  In  doing  its  worst  to  them,  in  short,  that  kind  of  enmity 
may  be  said  to  destroy  itself  as  it  were ;  like  a  bow  which,  in  shooting  its 
arrow,  has  broken  itself.  There  is  the  coasi deration,  next,  of  the  limitations 
of  Providence.  Even  so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned  no  human  enmity  can 
do  more  than  God  allows  it  to  do.  Moreover,  His  care  in  this  direction  extends 
to  preserving  things  far  beneath  them>.  Creatures  so  worthless  in  men's  eyes  that 
they  part  with  them  sometimes  for  nothing  (cf.  ver.  29  with  Luke  xii.  6)  are 
far  from  despicable  in  His  sight.  "  Not  one,  even  of  such,  falls  to  the  ground 
without  Him  "  (ver.  29).  Neither  is  one  hair  of  the  head  of  any  one  of  His 
servants  left  unreckoned  by  Him.  Well,  therefore,  may  they  leave  that  which 
is  vital  to  them  in  those  all-fatherly  hands  (cf.  1  Pet.  iv.  19).  There  is  the  con- 
sideration, in  the  last  place,  of  the  order  of  grace.  After  all,  it  is  only  those  who 
do  thus  practically  confess  Him  before  men  whom  He  at  the  last  will  so  confess 

264 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  X. 


before  all  (vers.  32,  33).     This  is  not  only  true  of  the  end ;  it  is  true  of  all  the 

times  we  pass  through.  "  Those  who  eye  a  Providence,"  says  an  old  writer, 
*'  will  always  find  a  Providence  to  eye  "  (see  also  2  Chron.  xvi.  9).  In  ether  words, 
the  more  entirely  we  leave  ourselves  in  the  hands  of  God's  providence,  the  more 
of  a  providence  we  shall  find  it  to  be. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  we  see  of  this  "  courage  "  in  service,  that  it  is  the 
most  prudent  method  as  well.  Leave  the  words  of  the  wicked  to  say  what  they 
will.  Leave  the  hands  of  the  wicked  to  do  as  they  will.  God  can  restrain  them 
better  than  you  can  from  going  too  far.  And  God  will  do  so,  moreover,  and 
that  openly,  if  you  openly  confess  Him  before  them.  This  is  the  secret,  and 
this  is  the  reward,  of  being  bold  for  His  name. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  24,  25.  Likeness   to   Christ. —  and  is  worthy  to  be  avowed  openly. — 

I   Likeness  to  the  Teacher  in  wisdom  David  Dickson. 
is    the    disciple's    perfection. — *'  The 

disciple  is     not   above,"   etc.       "  It   is  Vei*.  28.  Is  death  the   end  ? — There 

enough  for  the  disciple,"  etc.     If  that  is    an    essential     difference    between 

be  a  true  priuciple — that  the  best  that  the  soul  and  the  body.     Death  is  the 

c  an  happen  to  the  scholar  is  to  tread  end  of  the  physical  organism,  but  it  is 

in  his  teacher's  footsteps,  to  see  with  not   the   end    of   man.     It   is   not   to 

his  eyes,  to  absorb  his  wisdom,  to  learn  science  that  a  man  must  go  for  proof 

his    truth,    we   may   apply  it  in   two  of  the    life  to   come.      When   science 

opposite   directions.     1.  It  teaches   us  has  said  her  last  word,  the  reasons  on 

the  limitations,   and   the  misery,   and  which  we   chiefly   rely  are   yet  to  be 

the  folly  of  taking  men  for  our  masters,  heard. 

2.  It  teaches  us  the  large  hope,  the  I.  One  of   the   famiHar  indications 

blessing,  the  freedom  and  joy  of  having  that  the  soul  and  the  body  are  not  one, 

Christ  for  our  Master.  but  twain,  is  seen  in  the  utter  dispro- 

II.  Likeness  to  the  Master  in  life  is  portion  which  often  exists  between 
the  law  of  a  disciple's  conduct.—  There  the  physical  and  the  mental  powers, 
is  no  discipleship  worth  naming  which  and  especially  in  the  fact  that  in  many 
does  not,  at  least,  attempt  that  likeness,  cases  the  ravages  of  disease  in  the  body, 

III.  Likeness  to  the  Master  in  and  the  near  approach  of  death  itself, 
relation  to  the  world  is  the  fate  that  seem  to  despoil  the  soul  of  none  of  its 
the  disciple  must  put  up  with. — If  we  vigour.  The  late  Samuel  Bowks — one 
are  like  Jesus  Christ  in  conduct,  and  of  the  most  brilliant  men  I  ever  knew 
if  we  have  received  His  word  as  the  — performed  much  the  largest  and 
truth  upon  which  we  repose,  depend  best  part  of  his  life-work  after  his 
upon  it,  in  our  measure  and  in  varying  health  was  shattered.  Mrs.  Browning 
fashions,  we  shall  have  to  bear  the  seems  to  have  gained  in  intellectual 
same  kind  of  ueatment  from  the  world,  power  as  her  bodily  strength  waned. 
— A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  This  is  not  the  rule ;    but  if   in  one 

instance  the  soul  seems  undisturbed  by 

Yer.  27.  Revealed  ami  proclaimed. —  the  suflPerings  of   the   body,  that  one 

1.  The  matter  of  preachers'   sermons  instance    strongly    indicates   that   the 

should  be  nothing  but  truth  revealed  soul   may  continue   to    live   after  the 

by  Christ.     2.  Christ  doth  not  reveal  body  has  crumbled  into  dust, 

anything    to    His    servants,  whether  II.  The  fragmentary  character  of 

ordinarily,  as  by  reading  and  medita-  human  experience,  without  this  length- 

tion,  or  extraordinarily,  by  His  Spirit,  ening  of  the  term  of  life,  is  another 

but  it  is  able  to  abide  the  light,  and  indication  that  life  will  be  lengthened, 

the  trial  of  all  who  shall  hear  of  it.  There   is   no   sign  of   a   term   in   the 

255 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


growth  of  the  human  soul.  Is  the 
prospect  of  indefinite  growth  in  know- 
ledge which  opens  up  so  grandly  before 
every  thoughtful  human  being  an 
illusion  1  Are  these  powers  of  knowing 
and  of  loving,  that  in  the  greatest  and 
the  best  men  seem  to  be  only  just 
beginning  to  unfold  when  death  comes, 
never  to  reach  perfection  ?  If  there 
be  no  future  for  men,  every  man's  life 
is  but  the  introduction  to  a  book  that 
never  will  be  written,  the  prologue  to 
a  drama  that  never  will  be  acted. 
Our  faith  in  the  wholeness  and  unity  of 
nature  discourages  such  a  supposition. 

III.  The  moral  imperative  within 
us  seems  to  ask  for  its  realisation  a 
longer  term  than  human  life.  The 
stringency  and  vigour  of  its  injunctions 
seem  cruel  if  there  be  not  time  for 
compensations  hereafter.  Its  one  word 
is,  "  Wait  !  put  the  present  pleasure 
by;  wait  for  the  enduring  good."  If 
there  be  no  future,  this  most  august 
voice  is  the  voice  of  a  mocker. 

IV.  The  underlying  sentiment  of 
justice  within  us  demands  another 
life,  where  the  miscreants  that  here  go 
unwhipt  shall  get  their  dues  ;  where 
the  troubled  and  heavy  laden  shall  find 
comfort  and  rest. 

Y.  All  the  strongest  reasons  for  this 
faith  are  summed  up  in  the  belief  that 
God  exists,  and  that  He  is  good  ;  and 
that  the  universe  is  the  expression  of 
His  righteous  will.  For  if  God  is, 
then,  in  the  largest  and  fullest  sense, 
what  ought  to  be  will  be. — Washington 
Gladden,  D.D. 

Vers.  29-31.  The  providential  care  of 
God. — I.  That  in  the  estimation  of  the 
great  God  some  of  His  creatures  are 
more  valuable  than  others. — Men  are 
more  valuable  than  birds. 

II.  That  over  those  of  His  creatures 
which  are  the  lowest  in  the  scale  of 
value,  He  exercises  a  benevolent 
providence. 

III.  That  the  fact  that  He  exercises 
a  benevolent  providence  over  the  least 
valuable  is  an  assurance  that  He 
does  so  over  the  most  valuable. — 
D.  Thomas,  D.D. 

256 


Vers.  32-39.  The  King^s  charge  to  His 
ambassadors. — I.  The  duty  and  bles- 
sedness of  confessing  Christ. — The 
"  therefore  "  is  significant.  It  attaches 
the  promise  which  follows  to  the 
immediately  preceding  thoughts  of  a 
watchful,  fatherly  care,  extending  like 
a  great  invisible  hand  over  the  true 
disciple.  Nothing  can  come  between 
Christ's  servant  and  his  crown.  The 
river  of  the  confessor's  life  may  plunge 
underground  and  be  lost  amid  persecu- 
tions, but  it  will  emerge  again  into  the 
better  sunshine  on  the  other  side  of 
the  mountains.  The  confession  which 
is  to  be  thus  rewarded,  like  the  denial 
opposed  to  it,  is,  of  course,  not  merely 
a  single  utterance  of  the  lip.  Judas 
Iscariot  confessed  Christ  and  Peter 
denied  Him.  But  it  is  the  habitual 
acknowledgment  by  lip  and  life,  un- 
withdrawn  to  the  end. 

II.  The  vi-sion  of  the  discord  which 
follows  the  coming  of  the  King  of 
peace. — The  ultimate  purpose  is  peace ; 
but  an  immediate  purpose  is  conflict, 
as  the  only  road  to  peace.  Christ  is 
first  King  of  righteousness,  and  after 
that  also  King  of  peace.  But  if  His 
kingdom  be  righteousness,  purity,  love, 
then  unrighteousness,  filthiness,  and 
selfishness  will  fight  against  it  for  their 
lives.  The  conflict  ranges  the  dearest 
in  opposite  ranks.  As  when  a  sub- 
stance is  brought  into  contact  with 
some  chemical  compound  which  has 
greater  affinity  for  one  of  its  elements 
than  the  other  element  has,  the  old 
combination  is  dissolved,  and  a  new 
and  more  stable  one  is  formed,  so 
Christianity  analyses  and  destroys  in 
order  to  synthesis  and  construction. 
Perhaps  it  is  fanciful  to  observe  that 
the  persons  "  set  at  variance "  are  all 
junior  members  of  families,  as  if  the 
young  would  be  more  likely  to  flock  to 
the  new  light.  However  that  may  be, 
the  separation  is  mutual,  but  the  hate 
is  all  on  one  side. 

III.  Our  Lord  passes  from  the 
warnings  of  discord  and  hate  to  the 
danger  of  the  opposite,  viz.,  undue  love. 
— He  claims  absolute  supremacy  in  our 
hearts.     He    goes    still    farther    and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  x. 


claims  the  surrender,  not  only  of 
affections,  but  of  self  and  life  to  Him. 
Self-denial  for  Christ's  sake  is  the 
badge  of  all  our  tribe.  Observe  that 
word  "  take."  The  cross  must  be 
willingly  and  by  ourselves  assumed. 
No  other  can  lay  it  on  our  shoulders. 
Observe  that  other  word  "  his."  Each 
man  has  his  own  special  form  in  which 
self-denial  is  needful  for  him.  Ver.  39 
contains  a  lesson,  not  only  for  times  of 
persecution ;  the  words  go  down  into 
the  very  depths  of  Christian  experience. 
Death  is  the  gate  of  Ufe.  To  die  to 
self  is  the  path  to  living  in  Christ. — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  32,  33.  Confessing  Christ. — 
Notice : — 

I.  Whom  are  we  to  confess  ? — 
"  Me"  says  Christ.  Not  a  denomina- 
tion or  a  creed,  but  a  Person.  He 
must  be  confessed  in  His  offices,  suffer- 
ings, His  ministers,  His  people.  "  He 
that  receiveth  you  receiveth  Me." 
"  Forasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it,"  etc. 

II.  Before  whom  are  we  to  confess 
Christ  ?—"  Before  men."  Good  and  bad, 
poor  and  rich,  ignorant  and  learned. 


III.  How  are  we  to  confess  Christ  ? 
— 1.  Verbally. — We  should  never  blush 
to  own  that  we,  (1)  need  Him ;  (2)  trust 
Him  ;  (3)  love  Him. 

2.  Practically. — ^Actions  speak  louder 
than  words.  Christ  must  be  confessed 
in  sanctuary,  shop,  family. 

3.  Passively. — The  Christian  in 
poverty,  affliction,  bereavement  may 
confess  Christ. 

lY.  What  hinders  us  from  confess- 
ing Christ? — 1.  Fear  of  being  reviled 
(ver.  25).  2.  Fear  of  men's  hatred 
(vers.  21,  22).  3.  Fear  of  persecution 
and  loss.  The  parents  of  the  blind 
man  had  this  fear  (John  ix.  22). 

V.  What  are  the  advantages  of 
confessing  Christ? — 1.  An  approving 
conscience  (Rom.  x.  9,  10).  2.  Open 
deliverance.  The  three  Hebrew 
young  men.  Peter.  3.  Open  ac- 
knowledgment and  approval  (Rev. 
iii.  5). 

VI.  What  will  be  the  consequences 
of  not  confessing  Christ  ? — 1.  A  guilty 
conscience.  2.  A  useless  life.  3.  A 
miserable  death.     4.  A  dark  eternity. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  34—42. 

Final  counsels. — The  Saviour's  object  in  these  final  counsels  seems  to  be  that 
of  enforcing  decision.  He  would  have  His  Apostles  go  forth  on  this  their  primary 
mission  with  their  minds  fully  made  up.  With  this  object  He  brings  before 
them,  in  closing,  some  fuller  information.  First,  respecting  the  nature  of  the 
case,  and,  secondly,  respecting  the  nature  of  the  issv^. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  case. —  It  was  one  requiring  decision.  It  was  so  on  account 
of  the  vital  nature  of  that  which  had  to  be  taught.  The  message  they  had  to 
carry  to  men  in  His  name,  or  as  it  were  to  "  cast "  down  (ver.  34,  R.  V.)  in  their 
sight,  was  not  one  which  would  leave  the  feelings  of  men  as  they  had  previously 
been.  It  would  not  lie  there,  like  a  dead  thing,  having  no  effect  on  their 
thoughts.  Rather,  it  would  excite  those  thoughts  in  no  common  degree,  and 
arouse  men  wholly  out  of  any  such  unthinking  peace  as  they  may  have  previously 
known.  Also,  the  feelings  which  would  be  aroused  by  it  would  not  be  aU  on  one 
side.  Rather,  again,  they  would  be  on  exactly  opposite  sides  from  the  very 
nature  of  the  case.  They  would  be  on  more  than  opposite — they  would  be  on 
conflicting  sides — and  on  such  as  bring  about  strife.  Not  peace,  in  a  word,  but 
a  "  sword  "  (ver.  34).  That  would  be  the  first  result  of  promulgating  His  word. 
Moreover,  this  will  be  so  even  in  those  cases  where  we  should  otherwise  have 
looked  for  it  least.  No  natural  tie,  no  tie  of  affinity  (ver.  35)  can  resist  the 
separating  force  of  this  "  sword."  Nor  will  even  home  itself — the  very  place  of 
peace — be  always  undisturbed  by  its  power  (ver.  36).  That  is  the  essence  of 
the  story  to  be  told.     It  is  such  as  will  divide  those  who  hear  it  amongst  them- 

s  257 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


selves,  wherever  they  are.  Also,  it  will  do  so  in  a  manner  which  does  not  admit 
of  either  compromise  or  half  measures.  One  of  two  things  only  can  be  done  with 
the  truth  it  declares.  That  truth,  in  effect,  is  nothing  less  than  the  truth  about 
Christ.  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  that  is  the  question  which  it  presents  to 
men's  minds.  The  answer,  therefore,  to  such  a  question  can  be  of  only  two  sorts. 
It  must  put  Christ  first,  or  it  puts  Him  nowhere,  according  to  His  view  of  the 
case.  This  is  true,  moreover,  no  matter  to  whom  else  the  first  place  may  be 
given.  "  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me  " 
(ver.  37) — is  not  considered  by  Me  to  be  "  loving  "  Me  as  he  ought.  No  one,  in 
short,  is  considered  by  Me  as  doing  so  who  is  not  willing  for  My  sake  to  bear  any 
*'  cross  "  of  this  kind  (ver.  38).  That  is  how  I  expect  men  to  be  on  My  side. 
Such  a  proclamation,  as  it  were,  at  once  sifts  men  into  two  opposite  camps.  In 
the  one  camp  are  all  those  who  deal  in  any  way  falsely  with  such  a  requirement. 
In  the  other  camp  are  only  those  who  accept  it  in  full.  I  expect  My  Apostles  to 
"  lead  the  way  "  to  this  last. 

II.  The  nature  of  the  issue. — This  is  not  such  as  may  be  supposed.  This  is 
not  so  doubtful  as  may  sometimes  appear.  On  the  contrary,  looking  on  things  as 
a  whole,  and  taking  *'  life,"  as  it  comes  to  us,  as  a  thing  in  which  good  and  evil 
are  greatly  mingled  together,  this  fulness  of  decision  on  Christ's  side  is  far  the 
best  side  in  this  "war."  So  much  so,  indeed,  that  in  no  other  way,  can  "  life" 
really  be  to  us  what  it  should.  All  other  seeming  gains  amount  to  deadliest 
loss  in  the  end.  All  apparent  losses  in  this  way  are  but  the  price  paid  for 
"finding"  all  in  the  end.  "He  that  findeth  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  he  that 
loseth  his  life  for  My  sake  shall  find  it "  (ver.  39).  Let  nothing,  therefore,  be 
allowed  to  shake  you  as  to  the  truth  of  that  paradox.  That  alone  should  satisfy 
you  as  to  the  wisdom  of  being  heartily  on  My  side.  At  the  same  time,  that 
statement,  with  all  its  preciousness,  does  not  stand  by  itself.  It  is  not  only  true, 
as  it  were,  that,  on  a  general  balance,  things  will  come  out  as  I  say,  and  that 
the  good  to  be  hoped  for  will  be  found  in  the  end  to  more  than  compensate  for 
the  evil  to  be  borne ;  it  is  true  also,  meanwhile,  and  in  every  particular,  when 
things  are  judged  as  they  should  be,  that  it  will  be  best  to  do  as  I  say.  For 
there  is  a  blessing,  in  fact,  about  your  very  mission  which  is  found  in  practice  to 
make  a  blessing  of  every  action  that  is  in  accordance  therewith.  A  blessing  on 
yourselves  and  those  who  receive  you  (ver.  41),  a  blessing  on  the  least  as  well  as 
on  the  greatest  (vers.  41,  42);  a  blessing,  in  short,  on  everything  that,  in  any 
way  is  a  ministration  of  blessing  in  turn.  Even  a  cup  of  cold  water  given  to  one 
of  whom  nothing  more  can  be  said  than  that  he  is  one  of  the  "  little  ones  "  but 
one  of  the  true  ones  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  far  more  than  it  seems.  It  is 
something  done  with  a  worthy  object  in  view.  It  is  something  done  unto  Christ 
(xxv.  40),  and,  therefore,  not  without  note  (Heb.  vi.  10).  It  is  something 
which  it  is  Godlike  and  Christlike  to  do ;  something,  therefore,  which  in  itself  and 
in  its  very  essence,  it  is  a  signal  blessing  to  do.  Happy  is  the  man  so  devoted  to 
Christ  that  His  life  is  a  life  of  such  deeds.  Every  step  in  his  life  is  in  itself  a 
justification  of  his  choice. 

In  speaking  thus  to  His  chosen  Apostles  Christ  is  also  speaking  to  us.  This 
is  true  whether  we  consider  : — 

1.  The  points  of  resemblance  between  us  and  them. — In  their  measure  all  true 
disciples  are  in  a  similar  position  with  these.  They  have  the  same  Master  above 
them,  the  same  deposit  entrusted  to  them,  the  same  duty  in  regard  to  it,  the  same 
choice  and  the  same  difficulties  before  them,  the  same  assurances  to  support 
them.  As  did  these  first,  therefore,  so  must  we  in  our  turn.  All  the  arguments 
then  drawn  from  the  nature  of  the  case  may  be  drawn  from  it  still.  There  is 
but  one  choice,  and  one  way  of  choosing,  in  the  great  strife  betwixt  Christ  and 
thfe  world.     All  for  Him  who  does  all  for  us — is  still  the  badge  of  His  church, 

258 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  X. 


2.  The  points  of  difference. — When  the  Apostles  thus  went  forth  to  their  work 
with  their  lives  in  their  hands,  they  went  forth  to  a  forlorn  hope  in  the  eyes  of 
the  world.  We,  in  our  day,  and  in  this  respect,  are  not  called  to  the  same.  We 
have  the  benefit  of  both  their  example  and  experience,  and  that  of  generations 
like  them  till  now.  All  the  greater,  therefore,  would  be  our  disgrace  if  we  were 
to  hang  back.  Every  disciple  is  not  expected  to  lead  like  these  first ;  but  no 
disciple  can  expect  to  be  called  a  disciple  if  he  does  not  follow  when  led. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  34-36.  Christianity  producing 
social  divisions. — I.  Christ's  doctrines 
create  divisions  amongst  men  even 
where  there  is  the  closest  physical 
relationship. — Christianity  is  simply 
the  occasion  of  their  development. 

II.  The  feelings  which  these 
divisions  create  are  generally,  on  the 
part  of  the  rejecter,  most  malignant. 
— Matthew  Henry  justly  says,  "  The 
most  violent  feuds  have  ever  been  those 
that  have  arisen  from  difference  in 
religion.  No  enmity  like  that  of  the 
persecutors  ;  no  resolution  like  that  of 
the  persecuted." 

III.  As  the  result  of  all  this,  the 
promoters  of  Christianity  are  to  expect 
opposition,  and  even  persecution. — 
D.  Thomas,  D.D. 

Yer.  34.  Not  peace  hut  a  sword. — 
The  influence  of  Jesus  was  not  of  a 
peaceful  order.  It  was  a  reforming, 
a  dividing,  a  disturbing,  a  dissolving,  a 
revolutionary  influence.  It  was  a 
pungent,  painful,  sacrificial  influence. 
The  history  of  Christianity  is  not  a 
peaceful  history.  This  fact  is  brought 
forward  sometimes  as  a  proof  that 
Christianity  has  been  a  failure. 

I.  But  now,  before  we  admit  the 
validity  of  this  objection,  let  us  just 
consider  this  prior  question.  Is  the 
assumption  upon  which  it  is  based  a 
valid  one  ?  Is  peace  the  first  aim  of 
Christianity  ?  Is  it  the  main  object  of 
the  Christian  religion  to  give  you  an 
undisturbed  and  placid  life  ?  It  is  an 
ignoble  view  of  life  which  regards  its 
highest  good  as  a  placid  and  undis- 
turbed existence.  To  live  is  to  endure 
and  overcome,  to  aspire  and  to  attain. 
And  the  man  who  settles  down  upon 
his  lees  and  thinks  that  religion  has 


done  its  work  with  him,  because,  for- 
sooth, he  is  at  peace,  is  very  far  from 
knowing  the  true  intent  either  of 
religion  or  of  life. 

II.  But  lest  I  should  seem  to  over- 
state the  truth,  or  perhaps  to  indulge 
in  wanton  paradox,  let  me  discriminate 
between  two  kinds  of  peace,  or, 
rather,  let  me  define  more  closely  the 
nature  of  that  "  peace  "  which  alone  is 
worthy  of  the  name.  What  is  peace? 
Is  it  mere  quiescence  ?  Is  it  a  per- 
fectly inactive  existence  1  Do  you  call 
a  stone  which  lies  upon  the  path  or  the 
mere  puddle  by  the  roadside  '^  peace- 
ful "  ?  We  feel  at  once  that  the  term 
is  ludicrously  inapplicable  to  such 
cases,  and  that  there  is  something 
lying  liidden  in  it  which  may,  perhaps, 
after  all,  reconcile  this  hard  saying  of 
our  Lord's  with  a  just  conception  of 
religious  peace.  1.  The  true  idea  of 
"  peace "  involves  the  idea  of  *'  life." 
There  is  no  peace  where  there  is  no 
life.  In  order  to  be  peaceful  there 
must  be  a  possibility  of  the  opposite. 
2.  Let  me  illustrate  this  in  some  of 
the  main  divisions  of  our  nature. 
(1)  The  quickening  of  thought.  Is 
peace  {i.e.  quiescence)  the  best  thing 
for  a  man's  intellectual  life  ?  Cer- 
tainly not.  It  is  not  the  best  thing  in 
the  world  for  a  man  to  have  no  doubts, 
to  ask  no  questions,  to  be  free  from  all 
speculation  and  all  wonder.  It  is  not 
the  best  thing  for  a  man  to  receive  his 
opinions  ready-made  and  to  reiterate 
them  unthinkingly  till  he  comes  to 
look  upon  them  as  infallible.  (2)  We 
may  illustrate  the  truth  by  an  appeal 
to  the  emotions.  Is  the  happier  man 
he  who  has  no  sympathy  or  he  who 
has  much  ?  Is  it  better  to  be  hard- 
hearted or  tender-hearted  ?     (3)  As  it 

259 


CHAP.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


is  in  our  intellectual  life,  and  as  it 
is  in  our  emotional  life  so  is  it  in 
our  moral  life.  Let  your  memory  go 
back  to  some  one  moral  decision  of 
your  life,  some  one  occasion  when  you 
sacrificed  advantage  to  principle.  The 
pain  of  renunciation  may  have  been 
sharp;  it  may  have  been,  in  very 
truth,  a  "  sword  "  to  which  you  bared 
your  breast.  But  would  you  have  it 
unmade  now  ?  Would  you  recall  the 
act  even  if  you  could  ?  Was  not  the 
glow  of  moral  success  worth  all  the 
self-denial  ?  The  truest  peace  is  com- 
patible with  life,  and  peace  of  this 
order  is  the  gift  of  religion.  There  are 
two  ways  in  which  you  may  set  to 
work  in  order  to  produce  harmony  in 
the  individual  or  social  life — you  may 
work  from  without  inwards  or  from 
within  outwards.  The  politician  works 
from  without  inwards — he  has  to  deal 
with  the  outward  conditions  of  life. 
This,  of  course,  is  very  good  and 
necessary,  but  the  object  and  method 
of  the  politician  are  quite  distinct  from 
those  of  religion.  Religion,  too,  seeks 
to  produce  peace — not  necessarily, 
however,  in  the  visible  sphere  of  human 
life.  Keligion,  in  dealing  with  our 
disordered  life,  regards  the  causes 
rather  than  the  symptoms  of  disease, 
and  in  dealing  with  the  causes  may 
sometimes  even  aggravate  the  symp- 
toms, bringing  strange  trouble  and 
conflict  where  it  enters. — H.  Rix,  B.A. 

Elements  of  Christ's  unpopularity. — 
We  are  to  consider  what  were  some 
of  the  causes  of  the  hostility  which 
was  aroused  against  Jesus  Christ : — 

I.  Christ  set  Himself  against  the 
established  order.— He  was,  in  the 
true  sense  of  the  term,  a  revolutionary 
preacher.  The  established  order  was 
one  of  hierarchy  in  church  and 
aristocracy  in  state.  There  were  few 
rich,  and  many  poor.  There  were  few 
learned,  and  many  ignorant.  He  set 
Himself  to  reverse  this  condition.  He 
set  Himself  to  make  the  many  rich,  to 
make  the  many  wise.  And  the  few 
who  were  at  the  top  of  society  did  not 
like  it — they  never  have  liked  it,  and 

260 


it  is  doubtful  whether  they  ever  will 
like  it  to  the  end  of  time.  It  is  true 
His  teaching  was  not  inconoclastic. 
It  is  true  that  He  clothed  it  in  forms 
as  little  likely  to  excite  prejudice  as 
possible — at  least,  in  His  earlier 
ministry.  He  announced  principles 
out  of  which  were  to  grow  revolution- 
ary results.  Christ  was  a  reformer. 
He  was  a  leveller  ;  not  a  leveller  down, 
but  He  was  a  leveller.  Christ  led  the 
great  democratic  movement  that  has 
gone  through  history  from  the  time 
of  the  birth  of  Christ  up  to  this 
day,  levelling  all  institutions  and 
organisms  that  have  stood  in  the  way 
of  the  uprise  of  humanity.  Man — not 
the  Jew-man,  not  the  learned  man, 
not  the  rich,  not  the  blooded,  not  the 
aristocratic — but  7nan  is  to  be  trans- 
formed, educated,  ransomed,  enfran- 
chised, enriched,  until  the  whole 
human  race  shall  stand  bound  together 
in  one  great  brotherhood.  And  the 
established  order  of  things  armed  itself 
against  Him. 

II.  This  established  order  was  en- 
trenched behind,  and  allied  with,  a 
superstitious  conception  of  religion, 
with  a  reverence  for  material  things. — 
The  temple  was  the  centre  of  all 
worship,  and  men  could  hardly  con- 
ceive that  religion  could  live  if  the 
temple  were  destroyed.  Christ  told 
them  that  the  temple  would  be  des- 
troyed. Christ  told  them  that  obedience 
was  better  than  an  elaborate  system 
of  sacrifices  that  had  come  down  to 
them  from  their  fathers.  And  all  the 
conventional  religious  reverence  of 
Palestine  gathered  up  to  arm  itself 
against  a  Man  who  really  seemed  to 
the  rehgious  teachers  of  that  day  to  be 
teaching  irreligion,  if  not  atheism,  to 
be  sweeping  the  land  of  its  religious 
institutions. 

III.  Along  with  this  entrenched 
established  order,  supported  by  this 
religion  of  reverence  for  forms  and 
ceremonies  went  a  traditional  theology. 
— It  was  laid  down  as  a  rule  and  law 
in  theological  schools,  that  each  man 
must  repeat  what  the  father  before 
him  had  taught,  and  each  pupil  must 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  X. 


learn  and  commit  to  rote  what  the 
instructor  had  taught  to  him.  Religion 
consisted,  not  in  believing  truth,  but  in 
committing  catechisms  to  memory. 
Christ  came  into  the  world,  and  fer- 
mented men ;  He  incited  men  ;  He 
flung  out  aphorisms  at  them  that  set 
them  thinking;  He  stirred  them  up 
with  thought ;  He  did  just  that  which 
the  church  in  that  age,  and  which 
sectarianism  in  all  ages,  endeavours  to 
prevent ;  He  excited  independent 
thought.  If  a  heretic  is  what  the 
dictionary  tells  us  he  is — a  man  who 
gives  forth  his  own  opinions  when  they 
are  in  conflict  with  the  received 
opinions  of  his  age — there  never  was 
such  a  heretic  as  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  This  established  order,  this 
superstitious  reverence,  this  traditional 
theology  was  further  entrenched  and 
supported  by  a  race  prejudice. — The 
Jews  believed  that  they  were  the 
chosen  people  of  God  and  all  other 
people  were  of  no  account.  Now 
Christ  assailed  this  race  prejudice. — 
L.  Abbott,  D.D. 

Ver.  37.  The  exclusiveness  of  Christ^ s 
claims. — How  easily  we  may  misunder- 
stand Christ  here  !  It  is  as  if  He 
underestimated  family  ties,  responsi- 
bilities, and  duties  ;  and  treated  lightly 
the  "  first  commandment  with  promise." 
Yet  we  know  well  that,  both  by 
precept  and  example.  He  ever  upheld 
parental  rights.  His  point  here  is  a 
twofold  one  : — 

I.  His  claim  must  be  wholly  absorb- 
ing, because  it  is  Divine. — The 
disciples  only  gradually  apprehended 
that  He  wanted  them  altogether. 
They  were  to  be,  in  an  outward  sense, 
given  over  entirely  to  His  service. 
But  that  was  only  the  illustration  of 
their  entire  spiritual  separation  unto 
Him.  We  ask,  Cannot  we  be  Christ's, 
and  yet  have  a  reserve  for  self;  and 
yet  have  others  in  our  love,  taking 
their  place  with  Chiist. 

II.  Christ  being  first,  we  must  keep 
Him  in  His  place  by  putting  every- 
thing else  second. — Life  offers  so  many 
things  to  us  all  that  may  easily  absorb 


our  interest,  and  push  Christ  into  the 
background.  Loves,  pleasures,  pur- 
suits. But  here  is  the  great  Christian 
law  for  us. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

Yer.  38.  The  necessity  of  self -denial. 
— I.  The  nature  of  self-denial. — 
1.  Self-denial  is  opposed  to  our  feeling  Sj 
propensities,  and  our  selfishness. — Self- 
denial  must  be  submitted  to,  in  order 
to  the  well-being  of  society — the 
child  to  the  parent — the  scholar  to  the 
teacher — the  servant  to  the  master — 
the  subject  to  the  sovereign ;  but  the 
self-denial  referred  to  is  altogether  of 
a  spiritual  character. 

2.  Mortification. — Take  up  the  cross. 
This  language  is  highly  figurative,  and 
is  borrowed  from  a  custom  of  putting 
criminals  to  death  by  the  Bomans,  and 
other  nations.  The  criminal  was  com- 
pelled to  bear  his  own  cross  to  the  place 
of  execution.  It  was  doing  some- 
thing extremely  humiliating  and 
painful. 

3.  Imitation  of  Christ. 

II.  The  necessity  of  self-denial — 
There  are  two  kinds  of  necessity, 
natural  and  moral ;  what  is  absolute 
in  itself,  and  what  is  rendered  so  by 
circumstances.  In  order  to  become  a 
disciple  of  Christ  you  must  comply 
with  His  conditions.    It  is  necessary : — 

1 .  To  the  maintaining  of  the  spirit  of 
religion. — The  religion  of  Jesus  in- 
cludes a  belief  of  the  doctrines  He 
taught — but  it  includes  more — it  in- 
cludes the  conquering  of  self. 

2.  To  the  practice  of  religion. — The 
Christian  is  a  racer — soldier — pilgrim. 
These  designations  all  show  the  neces- 
sity of  self-denial. 

3  To  the  enjoyment  of  religion. — 
Why  are  so  many  professors  crying, 
My  leanness,  my  leanness?  S<ilf  is 
not  denied — Christ  is  not  followed 
fully. 

4.  To  the  final  reward  of  religion. — 
Jesus  said,  "  To  him  that  overcometh 
will  I  grant  to  sit  upon  My  throne," 
etc.  Then,  overcoming  is  necessary  to 
the  final  reward. 

III.  The  reasonableness  of  self- 
denial. — 1 .  From  the  character  of  God» 

261 


ciiA?.  X.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


— How  reasonable  that  the  will  of  such  things  again   to   their    remembrance, 

a  Being  should  rule.  and    help     them     to     interpret     His 

2.  From  our  mutual  dependence  upon  teaching  aright  ?  I  think  we  must 
one  another.  accept     this     latter     as     the    correct 

3.  From  the  Jinal  destination  of  man.  assumption.  Our  Lord  had  taught 
— God  is  training  the  Christian  for  a  the  nature  of  the  righteous  man's  and 
station  of  infinite  dignity. — Anon.  prophet's  reward  before  this,  as  after 

it,  but  I  fear  we  cannot  credit  the 
Ver.  41.  The  prophet^ s  reward. —  disciples  at  this  period  with  having 
Two  questions  suggest  themselves  to  fully  grasped  it.  They  partook  too 
the  thoughtful  reader  of  these  words :  largely  of  the  spirit  of  their  race  and 
1.  What  is  a  prophet's,  what  is  a  of  their  times  to  rise  so  early  as  this  to 
righteous  man's  reward  ?  2.  No  the  loftier  conception  of  Christ's  king- 
matter  what  that  reward  is,  is  it  quite  dom  and  of  the  rewards  it  conferred  on 
fair  and  equitable  that  a  man  who  those  who  were  of  it  which  we  find  in 
merely  receives  a  prophet  or  a  the  Master's  general  teaching  and  in 
righteous  man  ;  who,  that  is,  gives  the  pages  of  St.  Paul  and  others  in  the 
shelter  and  hospitality  to  them  because  New  Testament. 

they  are  what  they  are,  should  get  the  II.  The  whole  tenor  of  our  Lord's 

same  reward  which  those  men  them-  teaching  was  to  bring  out  in  regard  to 

selves    get  %     If    a    man  may  get   a  this  matter  that  a  man's  true  wealth 

prophet's     reward     by    merely    being  lay   in   himself,    not    in    his    belong- 

hospitable   to   either    of    them,   what  ings,  not   in  his    surroundings. — This 

is  the  good  of  being  a  prophet  or  a  was   what    our    Lord    was  constantly 

righteous  man  ?     We  look  in  vain  for  teaching,   and   it    was   to    seek    after 

any  light  on  this  difficulty  from  the  these    treasures    that    He    was    ever 

context.      The  Master  is  speaking  to  exhorting    the   crowds    that    followed 

His  disciples  here  before  sending  them  Him.     This  being  so,   we   know  very 

forth    on    what    might    be    called    a  well  what  is  the  reward  of  the  prophet, 

missionary    enterprise,    and    He    tells  and  what  is  the  reward  of  the  righteous 

them  what  kind  of  treatment  they  are  man.      It   is   not   money.       It   is  not 

to  expect.     He  identifies  Himself  here  place.     It  is  not  power.     These  things 

with  them  in  the  work  they  are  to  do  may   come,  or   they   may    not ;    more 

and  the  treatment  they  shall  receive,  likely  by  far  that  they  do  not.     But  if 

Nay,  He  identifies  God  with  them,  and  they  come,  they  come  as  additions  to 

regards  every  kindness  shown  to  them  their  true  reward,  bringing  with  them 

in  their  service  or  ministry  as  a  kind-  other  and  grave  responsibilities  which 

ness  paid  to  Him.  further  try  the  prophet's  gifts  and  the 

I.  The  Master  does  not  here  tell  us  righteous  man's  character.     The  true 

what   is   the    prophet's    reward,    nor  reward  of  the  prophet,  the  only  one 

what  is  the  reward  of  the  righteous  that  really  enriches  him,  is  the  growing 

man. — Yet  here  must  lie  the  key  that  power  of  seeing  more  deeply  into  the 

wiU   open   for  us  the  mystery.      The  deep  things  of  God,  and  the  growing 

Master  here  does  not  tell  us — did  not  power   of   revealing   these    more    and 

tell   His  disciples.     Why  ?      Did  they  more  clearly  to  men.     The  true  reward 

know   already  %      Or   did   the    Master  of  the  righteous  man  is  his  becoming 

tell  them  before  this  what  it  was  ?    Or  more   righteous   still,  his   finding    the 

were  they  left  to  learn  the  nature  and  virtuous  principles  within  him  growing 

extent  of  it  gradually  by  the  teaching  stronger,  the  vicious  in  their  presence 

of  experience,  which,  through  the  help  becoming  weaker,  his  finding  the  path 

of  the  Holy  Spirit — the  Spirit  of  light  of  duty  before  him  growing  clearer  and 

and   grace — was    to  develop  in    them  clearer,  and  himself  more  able  to  walk 

the   power    of    spiritual   apprehension  in  it  without  stumbling.     The  reward 

and  understanding — was  to  bring  all  of  the  one  is  the  growing  strength  of 

262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  x. 


his  character,   that  of   the  other  the 
increasing  fitness  for  his  office. 

III.  This,  then,  being  the  reward  of 
the  prophet  and  of  the  righteous  man, 
that  they  grow  in  power  and  goodness, 
in  the  capacity  for  work,  and  in  the 
practice  of  virtue,  it  is  not  hard  to  see 
why  the  man  who  receives  the  prophet 
in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  and  the 
righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a 
righteous  man  should  receive  their 
reward — the  same  reward  as  they  do. 
Observe  that  in  the  one  case  the  man 
receives  the  prophet  in  the  name  of  a 
prophet.  He  receives  him  because  he 
knows  him  to  be  a  prophet.  This 
indicates  that  the  man  esteems  the 
prophet  for  the  sake  of  his  office,  that 
his  sympathy  is  with  him,  and  that  he 
is  interested  in  his  work.  He  rejoices 
to  hail  this  stranger,  and  gladly  offers 
him  hospitality,  because  he  is  of  a 
kindred  spirit  to  himself.  And  what 
follows  ?  Their  intercourse  brings  to 
the  host  the  prophet's  reward.  The 
host  is  enriched  in  his  prophetic  gifts 
by  his  guest's  conversation,  and  truly 
receives  the  prophet's  reward,  shares 
with  him  and  through  him  that  en- 
largement of  mind  and  that  penetrating 
spiritual  vision  which  are  the  richest 
fruits  of  his  prophetic  labours,  as  well 
as  the  power  of  clothing  his  thoughts 
in  more  accurate  and  impressive 
speech.  The  other  case  is  similar  to 
this.  The  righteous  man  is  received  in 
the  name  of  a  righteous  man ;  that  is, 
because  he  is  a  righteous  man.  The 
man  who  thus  receives  him  has  himself 
the  cause  of  righteousness  at  heart, 
and  his  ready  hospitality  brings  to  his 
table,  to  his  hearth,  one  whose  words 
and  example  stimulate  all  his  own 
virtuous  aspirations ;  evoke  and 
strengthen  everything  that  is  noble 
and  good  in  him  ;  bring  him,  in  fact, 
the  reward  of  the  righteous  man. 

IV.  There  is  no  question  in  either 
case  of  the  equality  of  the  reward  so 
far  as  amount  is  concerned.  Such 
reward  is  proportioned  to  our  capacity, 
very  often  to  our  length  of  service, 
always  to  our  devotion  to  God  and  the 
right. — It  is  a  thing  of  growth,  and 


the  prophet  cannot  but  stimulate  the 
prophetic  gifts  in  all  hearts  that  come 
under  his  influence,  nor  the  righteous 
man  fail  to  strengthen,  confirm,  and 
ripen  the  character  of  those  who  are 
already  in  sympathy  with  him,  and, 
because  of  that  sympathy,  receive  him 
and  give  him  hearty  welcome. — 
W.  Ewen,  B.D. 

Yer.  42.  God^s  7Wti.ce  of  little  things. 
— I.  God's  intimate  acquaintance  with 
every  member  of  His  spiritual  king- 
dom.— "  One  of  these  little  ones."  This 
reflection  should : — 

1.  Inspire  a  feeling  of  prof ound  trust 
in  God. 

2.  Inspire  a  feeling  of  profound 
reverence  for  God. — His  eye  is  upon  me, 
etc. 

II.  God  appreciates  a  gift  according 
to  the  motive  which  actuates  the 
giver. — '*  In  the  name  of  a  disciple." 
See  also  Mark  ix.  41 ;  Heb.  vi.  10.  It 
is  of  vital  importance  to  understand 
this  principle,  because  : — 

1.  It  casts  light  on  the  subject  of  good 
works. — If  the  gift  of  ''a  cup  of  cold 
water  "  is  to  be  rewarded,  then  all  the 
world  might  be  rewarded,  because 
there  is  hardly  a  man  but  would  give 
such  a  gift  to  a  fellow-creature.  Mark, 
however,  the  regard  which  is  paid  to 
the  subject  of  motive.  A  distinction 
is  inferentially  drawn  between  mere 
animal  kindness  and  Christian  gene- 
rosity. 

2.  It  tends  to  prevent  self-deception. — 
Why  was  that  gift  given — that  deed 
done — or  that  word  uttered?  How 
prone  we  are  to  deceive  ourselves  on 
the  subject  of  motive  ! 

III.  In  the  vast  economy  of  the 
universe  there  is  nothing  lost. — That 
"cup  of  cold  water  "  is  not  lost.  This 
thought  applies  : — 

1.  To  the  sublime  processes  of  physical 
creation. — In  the  flight  of  boundless 
ages  we  are  taught  that  not  one 
particle  of  matter  is  lost ! 

2.  To  the  moral  effects  of  the  gospel. — 
"  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  Me 
void."  It  will  be  **  a  savour  of  life 
unto  life,"  etc. 

263 


CHAP.  XI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


3.  To  all  efforts  in  the  cause  of  moral  of  the  subject : — 1.  To  belong  to  Christ 

regenieration. — The  humblest  effort  in  is  the  highest  of  all  honours.     2    He 

the  cause  of  Christ  cannot  be  lost.  who  belongs  to  Christ  will  be  a  giver  as 

Let  us  treasure  up  the  holy  lessons  well  as  a  receiver. — J,  Parker,  D.D. 


CHAPTER  XI. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


The  general  heading  of  the  chapter  may  be  given  as  :  Jesus  judging  His  contemporaries 
and  Himself  {A.  B.  Bruce,  B.D.).  Hitherto  almost  everything  has  been  hopeful  and 
encouraging  in  our  Evangelist's  record  of  the  Saviour's  ministry.  But  the  path  of  the  King 
is  not  to  be  a  triumphal  progress.  It  is  to  be  a  via  dolorosa,  leading  to  a  cross  and  a  grave. 
It  is  not  at  all  to  be  wondered  at,  then,  that  the  Evangelist  should  now  give  his  readers  some 
idea  of  the  discouragements  which  met  the  King  in  the  setting  up  of  His  kingdom  on  the 
earth.  1.  The  first  of  these  which  he  mentions  comes  from  a  quarter  from  which  least  of 
all  it  might  have  been  expected  :  John  in  doubt  (vers.  1-15).  2.  The  unreasonableness 
of  the  people  (vers.  16-19).  3.  The  unbelief  of  the  cities  (vers.  20-24).  How  does  the 
Saviour  bear  Himself  under  these  repeated  discouragements  ?  The  passage  which  follows 
will  show  (vers.  25-30).     See  note  below  on  ver.  25  {J.  M.  Gibson,  B.B.). 

Ver.  1.  He  departed  thence. — I.e.  from  the  place  from  which  He  had  sent  forth  the  Twelve. 
Where  this  was  St.  Matthew  does  not  tell  us  ;  but  ix.  36  makes  it  probable  that  it  was 
not  in  Capernaum  nor  any  other  city,  but  from  some  spot  in  the  open  country  where  He 
had  rested  with  them  (Pluinptre).  Their  cities. — Might  seem  grammatically  to  point  to  the 
towns  where  the  Twelve  had  been,  or  to  which  they  belonged ;  but  probably  used  here 
vaguely  for  the  cities  of  Galilee  in  general  (ibid.). 

Ver.  2.  Prison. — See  note  on  xiv.  3.  The  position  of  the  Baptist  was,  so  far,  that  of 
a  prisoner  treated  with  respect.  Herod  himself  observed  him,  and  heard  him  gladly. 
Herodias  had  not  yet  found  an  occasion  of  revenge.  His  disciples  came  and  went  freely. 
Some  of  these  were  present  when  our  Lord  was  teaching  (ix.  14),  and  were  certain  to 
hear  of  such  wonders  as  those  narrated  in  viii.  and  ix.  (ibid.).  Two  of  his  disciples. — By 
7ds  disciples  (R.V.),  a  reading  supported  by  the  best  MS.  authority. 

Ver.  6.  Shall  not  be  offended  in  Me. — Shall  Jirtd  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  Me  (E.V.). 
Some  had  thought  only  of  an  avenging  and  triumphant  Christ  (Carr). 

Ver.  7.  And  as  they  departed,  etc. — Dr.  Plumptre  holding  that  the  Baptist  himself  was 
really  in  doubt,  and  sent  his  disciples  to  Christ  for  his  own  satisfaction,  remarks  on  this 
verse  :  "  There  was  an  obvious  risk  that  th  ose  who  heard  the  question  of  the  Baptist,  and  our 
Lord's  answer,  might  be  led  to  think  with  undue  harshness,  perhaps  even  with  contempt,  of 
one  who  had  so  far  failed  in  steadfastness.  As  if  to  meet  that  risk,  Jesus  turns,  before  the 
messengers  were  out  of  hearing,  to  bear  His  testimony  to  the  work  and  character  of  John." 
A  reed. — The  imagery  drawn  from  the  rushes  that  grew  upon  the  banks  of  the  Jordan. 

Ver.  8.  Clothed  in  soft  raiment.  — Like  the  Roman  officials  in  the  palace,  which,  in  those 
degenerate  days,  were  Jerusalem's  pride  (Gibson). 

Ver.  9.  More  than  a  prophet.—  Other  prophets  foresaw  the  Messiah,  the  Baptist  beheld 
Him,  and  ushered  in  His  kingdom  ;  he  was  the  herald  of  the  King.  Further,  John  was 
himself  the  subject  of  prophecy  (Carr). 

Ver.  10.  Which  shall  prepare  Thy  way.— It  is  remarkable,  that  both  St.  Matthew  and 
St.  Luke,  as  well  as  St.  Mark  in  another  place  (Mark  i.  2),  cite  this  prophecy  of  Malachi  with 
the  substitution  of  '*  Thy  way  before  Thee."  In  the  original  God  is  represented  as  speaking  of 
Himself;  in  the  citation  He  addresses  the  Messiah.  The  Lord  thus,  in  applying  the 
prophecy  to  Himself  as  Messiah,  asserts  His  own  Deity,  as  one  with  the  Lord  of  Hosts  who 
speaks  through  the  prophet.  The  fact  that  this  verse  is  quoted  by  all  the  three  Evangelists 
in  the  same  form — a  form  which  does  not  correspond  either  with  the  LXX.  or  with  the 
Hebrew — cannot  be  explained  on  the  theory  of  quoting  from  memory.  There  is  clearly  some 
principle  of  quotation.     Compare  Lee's  "  Lectures  on  Inspiration,"  p.  358,  ed.  2  (Mansel). 

Ver.  11.  Le&Bt.— But  little  (R.V.). 

Ver.  13.  Prophesied  until  John. — John  was  "  the  last  representative  of  those  who  belonged 
to  the  prophetic  period  of  expectancy  "  (  Wendt).  John  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  the  clasp 
of  the  two  Testaments  (Reynolds). 

264 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  XL 


Ver.  14.  Elias. — See  Mai.  iv.  5.  John  was  the  personal  duplicate  of  Elijah.  There  was  in 
him  the  reproduction  of  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  Old  Testament  prophet  {Morison). 

Ver.  19.  Wisdom. — God  regarded  as  the  All- Wise.  Justified.— Acquitted  of  folly.  Children. 
— The  Divinely  wise.  The  spiritual  recognise  the  wisdom  of  God  both  in  the  austerity  of  John 
and  in  the  loving  mercy  of  Jesus  (Carr).     But  see  R.V. 

Ver.  21.  Sackcloth  and  ashes. — In  the  East,  it  was  common  for  mourners  to  put  on  a  black 
garment  which  resembled  a  sack,  with  holes  for  the  arms,  and  to  strew  ashes  upon  the  head. 
The  symbol  of  mourning  and  of  repentance  {Lange). 

Ver.  23.  Hell. — Hades  (R.V.),  denotes  a  far-down  subterranean  region  and  so  used 
figuratively  to  express  a  position  of  the  utmost  abasement  ( Wendf).  The  antithesis  of 
heaven ;  the  lowest  as  contrasted  with  the  highest  position  {Mansel). 

Ver.  25,  Answered  and  said. — A  Hebraism  for  "spake  and  said"  {Carr).  But  Dr.  Monro 
Gibson  observes :  "  As  we  read,  first  of  the  doubts  of  John,  then  of  the  thoughtlessness  of 
the  multitudes,  and  then  of  the  impenitence  of  the  favoured  cities  by  the  lake,  is  there  not  a 
question  in  our  hearts,  becoming  more  and  more  urgent  as  each  new  discouragement  appears  : 
What  will  He  say  to  this  ?  What  can  He  answer  ?  "  {Expositor's  Bible).  "Bxu^ent.  — Under- 
standing (R.V.).     The  understanding  is  a  born  atheist  (Jacobi). 

Ver.  28.  Come  unto  Me,  etc. — These  words  derive  their  significance  from  the  preceding 
assertion  of  our  Lord's  unity  with  the  Father.  It  is  only  as  God  that  He  is  able  to  give  rest 
to  the  souls  of  those  who  are  weary  with  the  burden  of  sin  and  of  the  law  (^Mansel). 
Labour,  etc. — Imagery  borrowed  from  the  agriculture  of  the  time  and  place  (2).  Thomas). 

Ver.  30.  Easy. — The  Greek  has  a  wider  range  of  meaning— good,  helpful,  kind,  profitable 
{Plwnptre). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—6. 

Untaught  disciples. — Hitherto  in  this  Gospel  we  have  met  with  little  else  than 
advance.  The  personal  ministry  of  Jesus  has  prospered  so  far  that  He  has 
just  finished  selecting  and  commissioning  twelve  special  servants  to  aid  Him 
in  His  work.  But  now  we  hear  of  words  and  actions  which  are  symptomatic  of 
doubt.  A  message  is  brought,  and  another  is  returned,  which  whisper  it  at  the 
least.  If  we  would  rightly  trace  out  the  story  of  the  Saviour's  ministry,  we 
must  consider  them  both. 

I.  The  message  brought. — A  niessage  remarkable,  first,  for  the  person  it  comes 
from.  It  is  from  "  John  the  Baptist " — the  forerunner  of  Christ — the  man  to 
whom  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  been  pointed  out  as  Messiah  both  by  vision  and 
voice  (iii.  16,  17),  and  the  man  who,  in  turn,  had  pointed  Him.  out  to  the 
faith  of  the  world  (John  i.  29).  More  remarkable  is  it,  next,  this  being  so,  for 
the  question  it  asked.  Ostensibly  and  generally  that  question  asks,  "Who  art  Thou 
that  art  filling  Syria— filling  even  my  *'  prison  "  (ver.  2) — with  the  fame  of  Thy 
works  ?  More  particularly,  and  in  reality,  it  asks,  Art  thou  the  "  Man,"  or  only 
His  shadow  ?  The  end  of  the  series,  or  only  another  step  in  it  1  The  fulness 
of  hope,  or  merely  another  postponement,  not  to  say  another  disappointment 
as  well  ?  Most  remarkable  is  it,  however,  for  the  state  of  things  it  implies,  viz. 
a  state  of  suspense  which,  in  such  a  matter  and  circumstances,  was  a  state  of 
ofience.  Whether  this  was  so  on  the  part  of  the  Baptist  himself,  shut  up  there 
in  his  unfriended  prison,  most  are  reluctant  to  hold.  They  rather  believe  that 
he  asks  thus  for  the  sake  of  his  disciples  only,  and  to  clear  up  their  doubts  on  the 
subject.  But,  even  so,  it  is  surprising  that  his  disciples  should  have  such  doubts 
to  clear  up.  To  think  that  he  should  have  to  send  them  to  the  Saviour  Himself 
to  settle  their  minds  about  Him.  What  has  been  the  aim  of  his  preaching 
amongst  these  disciples  ?  What  the  subject  of  it  ?  What  the  power  of  it  ? 
What  the  efiect  it  produced  1  Apparently,  the  very  message  he  came  to  teach 
has  been  so  taught  by  him  as  not  yet  to  be  learned  ! 

II.  The  message  returned.  —This  is  remarkable,  on  the  one  hand,  in  not  being 
a  direct  answer  at  all.  It  does  not  say  who  Jesus  was  in  so  many  words.  It 
only  does  so  in  the  way  of  inference.  It  is  remarkable  also  in  that  it  only  points, 
in  so  doing,  in  the  first  place,  at  any  rate,  to  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  was 

265 


CHAP.  XL      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


already  in  existence.  We  are  expressly  told  that  John  had  "  heard  in  the 
prison  " — not  improbably  through  some  of  his  own  disciples — of  the  works  of 
Jesus.  When  he  asks  to  know  for  the  sake  of  his  disciples  (as  is  supposed)  what 
he  is  to  think  of  Him  who  wrought  these  marvels,  he  is  simply  referred  to  more 
of  the  kind.  "  Go  and  report  to  John  what  you  are  looking  on  now."  There  is 
the  first  answer  to  what  he  inquires  (ver.  5).  Are  not  these  works  which  he  has 
heard  of  just  the  things  which  the  "  Coming  One  "  ought  to  do  ?  The  second 
answer  also  seems  to  be  a  reference  to  what  was  already  known  to  the  Baptist. 
We  cannot  but  believe  that  he  was  familiar  with  that  declaration  of  Isa.  Ixi. 
about  the  Messiah,  which  the  Saviour,  in  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth,  once 
applied  to  Himself  (Luke  iv.  15-21).  Well,  his  messengers  were  to  go  and 
report  what  they  had  seen  on  this  point  also.  They  were  to  bid  the  Baptist,  in 
fact,  judge  for  himself  on  what  he  already  knew  and  had  read  of ;  and  so 
understand,  therefore,  that,  employed  as  it  should  be,  that  settled  the  point  about 
which  he  inquired.  A  view  which  is  confirmed  by  the  apparent  purport  of  the 
solemn  words  which  ensue  (ver.  6).  As  though  He  would  say  thereby  to  the 
Baptist,  *'  Let  thy  disciples  beware  how  they  allow  themselves  to  doubt  about 
Me.  Let  them  understand  that  they  have  evidence  enough  on  the  point  as  it 
is,  and  that,  if  there  be  anything  which  disappoints  or  perplexes  them  on  what 
else  they  may  hear  about  Me,  they  had  better  fall  back  upon  that.  Happy 
indeed  for  all  who  do  so.  Blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in 
Me"  (ver.  6). 

1.  How  trying  all  this  must  have  been  to  the  Saviour. — There  is  a  touch  of 
reproach  in  these  closing  words  which  signifies  this.  How  grievous  to  find 
doubt  where  He  had  looked  for  support  !  To  be  questioned  about  His  mission 
where  He  had  looked  for  testimony  in  its  favour  ! 

2.  How  instructive  to  all  who  favour  His  cause. — The  disappointments  and 
defections  of  these  days  sometimes  tend  to  overwhelm  us  with  fear.  We 
may  see  from  this  that  they  are  by  no  means  new  to  the  church.  She  has 
survived  countless  others  before.  She  began  with  them  in  the  time  of  the 
Saviour  Himself.  Scarcely  indeed  had  He  fully  risen  before  such  mists  gathered 
around  Him. 

3.  How  encouraging  also  to  some  of  those  who  are  troubled  by  doubts ! — Why 
are  they  so  ?  For  lack  of  light  ?  Rather  for  not  rightly  availing  themselves  of 
the  light  which  they  have.  There  is  that  in  Christ's  works  which  is  sufficient  to 
prove  the  truth  of  His  words.  There  is  more  in  "  Moses  and  the  prophets " 
(Luke  xvi.  31)  than  men  have  found  out  as  yet.  • "  What  is  that  in  thy  hand  ?  " 
So  it  was  that  God  Himself  once  confirmed  faith  (Exod.  iv.  2).  So,  in  effect,  it' 
was  here  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1-6.    JohrCs  doubting   message  stumbled  at   something   in  the  public 

to    Jesus. — There    was    real,    serious,  life  of  Jesus,  and  the  something  was 

honest  doubt  in  John's  mind  concerning  just  the  works  which  Jesus  sent  the 

Jesus ;  and  doubt,  be  it  observed,  not  disciples  of    John   back   to   report   to 

in  regard  to  the  identity  of  the  worker  their  master. 

of  the   works  reported  to  John  with         I.  But   why   should  John    stumble 

Jesus,  but  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  at  those  works,  so  full  of  the  spirit  of 

the  works  viewed  as  Messianic.     That  love  and  mercy  ? 

he  was  staggered  by  the  character  of  1.  Just  because  they  were  works   of 

the  works  is  plainly  indicated  in  the  mercy. — These   were   not   the   sort   of 

reflection,  "Blessed  is  he  that  is  not  works  he  had  expected  Messiah  to  busy 

offended  in  Me."     Obviously  John  had  Himself  with ;    at   all   events   so   ex- 

266 


.HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xi. 


clusively  (see  iii.  10,  12).  He  had  missed  by  being  in  such  a  state  of 
looked  for  judgment  and  beheld  mind  that  that  in  His  own  work  which 
unaccountable  patience,  and  the  grim  was  most  Godlike  was  a  stumbling- 
Hebrew  prophet  was  astonished  ;  none  block  to  him.  Translated  into  positive 
the  less  that  his  own  forlorn  plight  form  the  reflection  means  :  "  Blessed 
brought  very  vividly  home  to  his  mind  are  they  to  whom  the  mercy  and  grace 
how  evil  the  time  was  and  how  utterly  of  which  I  am  full,  and  whereof  My 
ripe  for  judgment.  ministry  is  the  manifestation  and  out- 

2.  In   his   astonishment   and  doubt  flow,     are     no     stumbling-block     but 

John  was  not  only  in  harmony  with  rather  worthy   of   all   acceptation." — 

his  own  antecedents,  but  with  what  we  A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 
may    venture    to    call    the    prophetic 

temperament. — The   prophet,  from  the  Vers.  2-5.  The  world's  King. — This 

nature  of  his  vocation,  is  a  man  more  chapter  is  a  mirror  wherein  is  reflected 

Hkely   to  have  sympathy  with  mani-  the  restlessness  of  the  age  in   which 

festations  of  Divine  righteousness  than  Christ   lived.      Even   John   seems    to 

with   manifestations   of   Divine   long-  have  shared  this  feeling  to  some  extent ; 

sufiering.     When   we  say  this  we  do  hence  his   question.      In   thinking   of 

not    forget    that    there   are   splendid  Christ's  relationship   to  humanity  we 

exceptions,  notable  above  all  the  author  must   think    of    Him   not   merely   as 

of   the   second   half   of    the   Book  of  dealing  with  individuals  here  and  there, 

Isaiah,    whether    Isaiah    or    another,  but  as  dealing  with  the  world  as   an 

In  one  sense  John  was  not  wrong,  for  organised  whole. 

Israel's  judgment-day  was  not  far  off;  I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  King  of  the 

and  just  on  that  account  it  was  needful  world. — It    is    a    familiar    fact    that 

that  the  messengers  of  mercy  should  Christ  gave  Himself  this  title.      The 

make  a  hasty  run  over  all  her  borders,  Apostles  and  Evangelists  also  made  it 

urging  her  with  unwonted  earnestness  prominent.     The   charge  laid    against 

to  repent.     But  he  was  too  hasty  and  them  in  one  place  was  that  they  said 

too    impatient,    and    hence    he    was  "  there  was  another  king — one  Jesus." 

offended  in  Jesus.  What  is  a  king  ?     Does  the  putting  of 

II.  The  reply  sent  back  by  Jesus  a  crown  on  a  man's  head  make  him  a 

to   John   amounted   to   this,  that  the  king  ?     That  depends  upon  what  sort  of 

sure  marks  that  He  was  the  Coming  a  head  it  is  which  receives  the  crown. 

One,  the  Christ,    were  just   the   very  1.  Is  not  a  king  one  who  governs  by 

works  which  had  awakened  his  (John's)  the  mighty  influence  of  his  personality 

surprise   (vers.    4-6).     It   was  a  good  — by    the    force    of     a    commanding 

reply,  not  only  on  its  own  merits,  but  character  ?     Many    are    called    kings 

from  the  point  of  view  of  Old  Testa-  who  are  not  kings ;  many  are  kings  who 

ment  prophecy,  as  it  claimed  for  Jesus,  have  not  the  name.     Kingliness  is  the 

as  marks  of  His  Messiahship,  some  of  true  sign  of  the  king,  and  judged  by 

the  most  outstanding  features  in  the  this   criterion   Christ   is    the    greatest 

picture  of  the  Messianic  era  drawn  by  king    who   has   ever   appeared.      This 

that  very  prophet   from    whom   John  royal  quality  was  put  to  the  severest 

took  his  own  watchword:  "The  voice  test.    Art  Thou  the  King  ?  is  virtually 

of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Prepare  the   question   which   John   put.       He 

ye   the   way   of   the   Lord "    (cf.    Isa.  had    proclaimed    the    coming   of    the 

XXXV.  5,  6,  xlii.  7,  Ixi.).     Having  re-  kingdom,  but   this  does  not  yet  look 

counted   rapidly   His    mighty    works,  much  like  the  King.    I  do  not  wonder  at 

Jesus   appended   the  reflection,   "and  the  doubt;    we   should    have   doubted 

blessed  is  he,"  etc.     The  tone  of  com-  too.      But   the   fact   that    there    was 

passion,   rather   than   of    severity    or  room  for  doubt  supplied  an  additional 

soreness,  is   audible  in  the  utterance.  opportunity  of  proving  His  real  kingli- 

Jesus   felt    keenly    how    much    John  nesy.       The    life     of    Christ    was    a 

267 


CHAP.  XI.      tiOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


revelation,  in  a  thousand  forms,  of  the  patient  question  of  the  Baptist,  "  Art 

kingliness  of  His  person.     2.  Another  Thou  He  that  should  come,  or  look  we 

sign  of  real  kingliness  is  the  power  to  for  another  ? "     The  point  on  which  it 

bless.     Some  are  great  by  what  they  is  important  we   should  fix   attention 

receive  ;  the  greatest  are  great  by  what  is  that,  in  answer  to  John's  perplexed 

they  bestow.  inquiry,  Christ  simply  pointed  to  His 

II.  The  sphere  of  His  kingship. — In  own  method  of  working.  To  a  lament- 
words  which  belong  either  to  a  madman  able  extent  there  has  been  misapprehen- 
or  to  God,  Christ  says :  "  All  power  is  sion  and  mistake  on  the  part  of  the 
given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  church  and  of  Christian  people  as 
He  claims  what  all  men  desire  for  to  the  way  of  advancing  the  Divine 
themselves  and  yet  are  jealous  of  in  kingdom. 

others.     The  expression  is  unqualified.  I.  Let  us  observe  how  the  person  of 

Consider  this  power  in  regard  to  its  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  has  been  largely 

operation  on  human  life  in  two  of  its  obscured.  —  When    we    turn    to    the 

dimensions  : —  gospel  record  we  find  a  Christ  who  de- 

1.  Its  depth. — Christ  touches  human  lighted  in  the  name,  "  the  Son  of  man," 
nature  not  merely  on  the  surface,  and  who  abundantly  proved  His  right 
The  glory  of  His  work  lies  in  His  to  that  name.  But  now  we  turn  to 
power  to  change  the  heart  itself  into  history ;  and  away  back  in  the  early 
something  it  could  not  have  been  centuries  the  clouding  influence  comes 
without  Him.  in.       We   find   controversy   raging   so 

2.  Its  breadth. — It  goes  without  fiercely  over  dogmatic  definitions  of  the 
saying  that  if  Christ  thus  acquire  nature  of  Christ,  and  men  so  intoler- 
dominance  over  the  hearts  of  men,  His  antly  eager  regarding  His  Divine  glory 
influence  will  also  be  felt  in  every  alone,  that  His  true  and  tender 
department  of  their  life.  The  ques-  humanity  fell  quite  into  the  back- 
tions  of  life,  of  death,  of  society,  of  ground.  Hence  it  came  about  that, 
politics,  and  of  commerce  are  best  in  course  of  time,  men  and  women 
understood  by  him  who  kneels  at  the  began  to  crave  anew  for  some  more 
feet  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  approachable  mediator.     Christ  was  so 

III.  What  should  be  the  eflfect  upon  far,  so  high  above  them,  so  widely 
us  of  this  view  of  the  greatness  of  separated  from  poor,  weak,  burdened, 
Christ's  kingdom  ?  —  One  thing  is  sinful  men  and  women  that,  though 
certain ;  if  we  are  to  partake  of  the  He  might  be  the  ultimate  way  to  the 
spirit  of  the  King,  and  so  belong  to  Father,  others  must  first  form  a  way 
Him  in  the  truest  sense,  our  faith  of  access  to  Him ;  and  so  longing  hearts 
must  not  be  a  weak,  effeminate  thing,  groping  about  turned  to  the  "Virgin 
but  a  strong  confidence,  which  sees  Mother,  and  to  the  saints,  that  they, 
all  power  arrayed  on  its  side. —  in  the  first  instance,  might  interpose 
J.  B.  Stedeford.  and  intercede;  and  a  corrupt  church, 

instead  of  feeling  its  way  back  to  the 

Vers.  3,  4.  The  supreme  social  Bene-  manhood    which    had    been    ignored, 

factor. — There  are  times  when  the  old  sanctioned  the   dishonouring   idolatry, 

problems  of  human  life  seem  to  come  Let  us  give  thanks  that  a  characteristic 

back  upon  us  more  imperiously  than  feature  of  the  religious  thought  of  our 

ever.     We  cannot  forget,  for  example,  time  is  a  return  to  the  recognition  of 

that  nigh  two  thousand  years  have  run  Christ  in  His  true  and  tender  human 

their    course    since   the    night    of    the  life.     We  are  taking  our  ideas  of  His 

angels'    song ;   and   what  of   our  poor  person,  not  from  dogmatic  systems,  but 

world  to-day  ?     If  the  world's  Saviour  from  His  own  life  on  earth, 

be  indeed  born,  how  is  the  world  still  II.  We    are    thus    reminded    how 

thus?     And  so  from   our  perplexity  Christ's  method  of  working  has  been 

there  goes  up  to  Christ's  ear  the  im-  to  a  sad  extent  overlooked. — The  usual 

268 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xi. 


method  of  exposition  with  reference  to  entered  into  his  labours  and  left  him  at 

our  Lord's  works  of  healing  is  this :  the  mercy  of  this  profligate  king.   And 

These  works  are  expressive  symbols  of  these  things  entered  into  John's  soul, 

the  great  spiritual  work  He  came  into  and  perhaps  made  him  a  little  bitter, 

the   world   to  effect.     But  while  His  and  he  wondered  if   the  great   King 

works  of   mercy  may  undoubtedly   be  who  was  to  come,  just  and  victorious, 

viewed  as  symbols  worthy  of  something  had  really  come  when  things  like  that 

more,  have  they  not  a  reahty  of  their  were  really  being  done  in  the  world ; 

own  ?      They    were    themselves    most  and   despondency  made   him   ask   the 

real  acts,  instinct  with  the  living  breath  question  again  and  again,  till  it  became 

of  a  most  practical  pity.      But  now,  unbearable,  and  he  felt  bound  to  put  it 

what  as  to  the  church's  way  of  follow-  direct  to  Jesus. 

ing    Christ?       Has     it     adequately  II.  Notice  how  Jesus    deals  with 

imparted  and  expressed  through   the  this  kind  of  question. — Practically  He 

centuries  His  spirit  of  earnest  sympathy  said   to   John:    Yes,    I   am   He    that 

and  helpful  service  ?    In  our  answer  to  should  come.    He  pointed  to  the  works 

such    questions    we   must   be   on   our  that  He  did,  and  how  these  works  were 

guard    against     exaggeration.      Time  the  very  things  that  the  Coming  One 

would  fail  me  to  tell  of  all  the  various  had  been  foretold  to  do,  and  left  John 

ways  in  which  the  spirit  of  Christ,  the  to  draw  the  inference.    But  Jesus  adds 

Divine    leaven,    reveals   its    pervasive  another  word,  a  word  of  warning  to 

power  in  our  modern  social  life,  or  of  the  doubter — "  Blessed  is  he,  whosoever 

the  countless  agencies  and  institutions  shall  not  be  offended  in  Me."     Possibly 

which  bear   growing  testimony  to  its  in  the  prison  John  had  begun  to  think 

beneficent  and  abiding  presence.     But  too  much  about  himself,  to  think  that 

while  truth  and  gi*atitude  call  for  large  the  kingdom  of  God  could  not  have 

acknowledgments  we  may  not  shut  our  come    because    he    was    left    in    the 

eyes   to   the   fact    that    the    church's  dungeon  to  suffer  and   to  die.     Now 

energies   and   efforts   have   been  to  a  Jesus  had  that  very  trial  to  bear  Him- 

large    extent    deplorably    misdirected,  self.     He  knew  that  His  own  path  led 

Instead  of  steadily  striving  to   carry  straight  to  the  cross,  and    He   knew 

on   Christ's   saving   work   amidst   the  that  that  did  not  throw  any  shadow  of 

world's  millions  it  has  earned  for  itself  doubt  on  His  calling  to  be  the  Saviour 

a  reputation  as  a  debating  ground,  an  of  the  world.     So  He  says,  "  Blessed  is 

arena   where   gladiators   fight   to   the  the  man  who  can  look  on  Me  who  am 

death  for  their  respective  tenets,  and  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  come 

where   preachers   show   their   skill   in  without  the  axe  and  the  fan  ;  who  can 

defining    and    dividing    and    drawing  look  on  Me  preaching  glad  tidings  to 

hair-splitting  distinctions  in  regard  to  the  meek,  healing  the  sick,  cleansing 

matters  far  apart  from  ordinary  human  the  lepers,  and  raising  the  dead;  who 

interests.     The  great  need  of  our  time  can  see  Me  suffering  for  righteousness' 

is  that  our  abounding  Christian  pro-  sake ;   who  can  do  all  that   and   not 

fession   be   translated   into    Christlike  doubt."     Jesus  warns  us  in  this  place 

lives. —  W.  R.  Taylor,  M.A.  that  no  man  is  too  good  to  suffer  for 

God's  sake ;  that  no  man's  life  is  too 

Ver.  3.  John^s  question. — I.  What  is  good  a  thing   to   lay  down   that   the 

the  explanation  of  John's  doubt  about  kingdom  of  God  may  come,  and  that 

Jesus?  it  is  a  danger  when  what  he  has  to 

1.  No    doubt    it  was   in    part    his  bear    for    the    kingdom    of    heaven's 
disappointment. — Jesus' did  not  do  the  sake  makes  a  man  wonder  whether  the 
very  things  that  John  expected  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  there  or  not. 
very  way  that  John  expected.  III.  Let    us    bring    this    question 

2.  His    own    unhappy    lot. — John  about  doubting  concerning  Jesus  down 
seemed  to  have  laboured,  and  Jesus  to    our    own    time. — People    wonder 

269 


CHAP.  XL      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MAYTHEW. 


whether  after  all  Jesus  is  the  Saviour 
of  the  world,  or  whether  there  may  not 
be  something  better  to  hope  for  than 
the  gospel  has  really  brought.  What 
are  the  reasons,  what  are  the  forces 
that  create  that  kind  of  doubt  in 
people's  minds  now  1  1 .  One  is  this — it 
is  the  same  as  in  John's  time — that  we 
are  standing  at  the  beginning  of  a  new 
age.  Young  people  especially  cannot 
help  asking,  Is  Christ  to  be  for  us 
what  He  has  been  to  oui*  fathers  ?  Is 
He  still  to  preside  in  the  future,  as  He 
has  done  in  the  past,  over  the  growth 
of  all  that  is  worthiest  and  best  in 
human  nature  ?  Is  the  gospel  still  to 
be  the  inspiration  and  the  restraint  of 
men  ?  Or  have  we  to  put  that  away 
and  look  for  something  else  ?  Now 
that  kind  of  doubt  one  may  call  with- 
out offence,  I  think,  thoughtless.  One 
can  only  cherish  that  kind  of  feeling 
if  he  looks  at  the  future  vaguely,  and 
does  not  look  at  Christ  at  all.  But  if 
we  think  of  the  new  ideas  that  are 
really  working  themselves  into  promi- 
nence, we  shall  feel  that  almost  all  of 
them  are  really  Christian.  2.  Another 
kind  of  doubt  arises  out  of  ignorance. 
Sometimes  people  meet  Christ  at  a 
particular  place.  They  get  one  revela- 
tion of  what  Jesus  is,  very  often  that 
precise  revelation  that  John  had  when 
he  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God," 
etc.  But  then,  although  Jesus  does 
bear  the  guilt  of  the  race,  that  is  not 
all  He  does,  and  that  is  not  all  we 
should  find  in  Him.  And  if  we  do  not 
go  on  to  find  more  in  Him,  even  what 
we  have  found  will  become  doubtful. 
I  suppose  there  is  no  kind  of  doubter 
more  common  than  the  doubter  who 
has  once  been  fervently  evangelical. 
And  that  is  not  any  fault  at  all  of 
evangelicalism  ;  it  is  the  fault  of  some 
slothfulness  or  worldliness  that  has 
kept  a  man  from  improving  his  know- 
ledge of  Christ,  and  that  keeps  him 
walking  not  in  the  light  of  Christ's 
presence,  but  in  the  light  of  some  far 
away,  and  often  fading,  recollection  of 
Christ.  3.  This  kind  of  doubtful 
question  is  often  prompted  still  in  good 
men  and  earnest  men,  as  it  was   in 

270 


John,  by  disappointment.  Men  lose 
temper  when  they  see  that  God  is  so 
slow,  that  things  do  not  go  swiftly  in 
their  way ;  and  they  say.  Art  Thou  He 
that  should  come?  Is  the  thing  we 
see  salvation  ?  It  was  a  question  that 
was  put  straight  to  Christ  Himself, 
and  He  answered  it.  And  the  way  He 
answered  it  was  to  point  out  that  this 
trial  of  the  partial  failure  of  the  gospel 
was  one  that  He  Himself  had  to  bear. 
In  this  very  chapter  a  little  further 
down  we  are  told,  "  He  began  to 
upbraid  the  cities  wherein  most  of  His 
mighty  works  were  done,  because  they 
repented  not." — Jas,  Denney,  D.D. 

Looking  for  another  Christ. — I  find 
it  rather  hard  to  believe  that  John  the 
Baptist's  faith  was  really  shaken. 
With  his  severe  ascetic  habits,  with  the 
resoluteness  of  his  nature  in  which  will 
counted  for  quite  as  much  as  passion, 
and  with  his  religious  temper,  which 
made  more  of  righteousness  than  of 
emotion,  a  few  months'  imprisonment 
could  hardly  have  produced  upon  him 
an  effect  so  disastrous.  The  real 
explanation  seems  to  be  that  the 
Baptist's  conception  of  the  Messiah 
included  elements  in  it  which  it  was 
difficult  to  bring  together.  The  pro- 
phetic visions  of  the  Christ  were 
generally  bright  with  glory,  but  they 
were  sometimes  clouded  with  intima- 
tions of  struggle  and  of  suffering.  A 
Christ  knowing  nothing  of  sorrow  was 
hardly  the  Christ  that  this  sorrowful 
world  needed;  and  the  prophets  felt 
sure  that  He  must  endure  pain  and 
humiliation.  How  the  glory  and  the 
sufferings  were  to  be  blended  they  could 
not  tell.  And  so  John,  in  his  earlier, 
preaching,  had  spoken  of  the  power 
and  glory  of  the  Christ.  He  was  to 
found  a  kingdom ;  He  was  to  be  a 
mighty  prince;  He  was  to  cut  down 
the  trees  that  did  not  bring  forth  good 
fruit ;  He  was  to  burn  up  the  sin  of 
the  world  with  unquenchable  fire. 
Later  on,  after  Christ's  baptism,  John 
the  Baptist  began  to  speak  of  Him  as 
"the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world  " ;  and  I  think  it 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xi. 


must  have  been  difficult  for  John  to 
understand  how  it  should  be  possible 
for  the  Christ  both  to  suffer  and  to 
reign,  to  bear  the  sin  of  the  world 
and  yet  to  be  enthroned  in  glory. 
Some  of  the  learned  teachers  of  the 
Jewish  race  had  speculated  on  the 
possibility  of  there  being  two  Messiahs, 
a  Messiah  who  should  suffer,  and  a 
Messiah  who  should  be  enthroned,  in 
majesty  and  in  splendour.  This  idea 
had  not  penetrated  the  popular  mind, 
and  there  is  no  trace  of  it  in  the 
Gospels ;  but  when  John  came  to 
reflect  in  prison  on  all  that  the  pro- 
phets had  spoken  of  the  Messiah's 
glory,  and  on  what,  I  imagine,  Jesus 
had  told  him  at  the  baptism  about  His 
being  the  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the 
world,  it  is  very  possible  that  John 
began  to  wonder  whether  Jesus  Him- 
self would  both  suffer  and  reveal 
Himself  to  the  world  in  glory.  With 
unfailing  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ, 
with  an  immovable  conviction  that  He 
was  all  that  He  claimed  to  be,  John 
may  have  been  unable  to  see  how  He 
was  to  be  at  once  a  great  Prince  and 
the  Lamb  of  God  taking  away  the  sin 
of  the  world ;  and  so,  in  his  perplexity, 
he  sends  two  of  his  disciples  to  Jesus  to 
ask  Him  whether  He  was  the  Christ 
that  was  to  come,  or  whether  they 
were  still  to  look  for  another.  That 
John  should  have  sent  to  Christ  Him- 
self to  solve  the  doubt,  shows  that  his 
faith  in  Christ  was  unshaken. 

I.  There  are  times  when,  through 
the  disappointments  and  failures  of 
our  personal  religious  lives,  it  may  be 
necessary  for  us,  in  a  sense,  to  look  for 
another  Christ  than  the  Christ  we  have 
already  known.  1.  Some  have  been 
restless  for  months,  perhaps  years, 
about  their  sin.  They  have  appealed 
to  Christ  again  and  again,  and  the 
peace  of  Christ  has  not  come  to  them. 
They  are  almost  ready  to  say,  "Art 
Thou  He  that  should  come  ? "  etc. 
Christ  may  reply  to  that  question 
by  pointing  them,  as  He  pointed 
the  disciples  of  John,  to  the  great 
triumphs  of  mercy  by  which  they 
are    surrounded.     2.    Some    have    no 


trouble  about  forgiveness.  Long  ago 
they  were  able  to  bring  their  sins 
to  the  feet  of  Christ  and  leave  them 
there.  But  their  Christian  life  has 
not  had  the  power  and  brightness  they 
hoped  for.  I  believe  that  this  also 
often  arises  from  a  defective  knowledge 
of  Christ.  He  is  a  "  Prince  and 
Saviour."  He  gives  us  a  law  that  we 
must  obey,  and  if  we  expect  Him  to 
keep  His  promises  we  must  be  willing 
to  keep  His  precepts. 

II.  This  question,  or  something  very 
like  it,  may  be  suggested  by  the 
general  condition  and  history  of  the 
world. — He  came  to  save  the  world, 
and  the  world,  or  a  large  part  of  it, 
remains  still  unsaved.  Well,  do  you 
look  for  another  Christ  ?  And,  if  you 
do,  what  kind  of  a  Christ  do  you 
desire  Him  to  be  1 

III.  We  do  not  look  for  the  coming 
of  another  Christ,  but  the  Christ  whom 
we  know  will  come  in  another  form 
(Acts  i.  11). — He  will  seem  to  some  of 
us  to  be  another  Christ  from  the  Christ 
that  we  once  knew,  a  Christ  whom  we 
never  expected  to  see,  and  in  whom 
we  had  never  believed.  But  He  will 
come  in  His  power  and  majesty,  only 
to  complete  the  work  which  He  com- 
menced in  weakness  and  in  shame,  for 
it  was  always  His  purpose  to  assert 
the  authority  of  righteousness,  to  get 
the  will  of  God  done,  to  defeat  and 
destroy  sin,  to  give  to  holiness  a  per- 
fect and  everlasting  triumph. — E.  W. 
Dale,  LL.D. 

Ver.  5.  The  gospel  and  the  poor. — 
There  must  have  been  something  very 
remarkable  in  the  act  of  preaching  to 
the  poor  if  it  was  striking  enough  to 
be  held  forth  as  a  proof  of  the  Divinity 
of  the  Preacher.  And  it  certainly  was 
a  contrast  to  the  ways  of  those  then  in 
authority.  By  them  the  poor  were 
despised.  But  our  Lord  most  probably 
desired  to  call  attention  to  the  fulfil- 
ment of  prophecy.  Consider  the  fact 
related  in  the  text : — 

I.  As  a  distinguishing  mark  of  the 
Christian  religion. — Heathen  nations 
cared  little  for  their  poor.    They  might 

271 


CHAP.  XI.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


live  or  die.  In  some  cases  they  were 
put  to  death.  Selfishness  was  the  only 
motive  of  their  lives,  and  the  burden 
of  helpless  people  was  not  to  be  under- 
taken. But  the  motive  of  Christianity 
is  disregard  of  self,  and  tenderness, 
gentleness,  love,  and  kindness  towards 
the  sick  and  weak. 

II.  As  showing  the  inclusiveness 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — It  does 
not  consist  of  any  one  particular  class. 
The  rich  and  the  poor  are  one  in 
Christ. 

III.  As  intimating  the  character  of 
enlightened  hearers. — It  is  those  who 
are  poor  in  spirit  who  alone  accept  the 
gospel  (xviii.  3;  Luke  xviii.  14). 
Application  :  This  fact  brings  consola- 
tion and  encouragement  to  those  who 
feel  their  weakness  and  to  those  who 
have  nothing  of  their  own.  They  are 
welcome  to  the  Saviour,  and  the  mes- 
sage of  love  is  their  inalienable 
heritage. — B.  in  '■^ Homilist'^ 

Ver.  6.  Offended  in  Christ. — I.  The 
causes  of  offence. — "  Ofiended  in  Me." 

1.  The  strictness  of  Chrisfs  require- 
ments.— Christ  demands  our  whole 
service,  our  whole  attention,  our  self- 
denial.  His  love  is  inexorable.  To 
follow  Him  requires  the  renunciation 
of  much  that  is  congenial  to  human 
nature. 

2.  The  painful  consequences  of  a 
religious  profession. — In  ancient  times 
it  involved  persecution.  In  the  present 
day  it  courts  sneers,  domestic  strife 
and  bitterness.  There  is  the  dissever- 
ing of  old  companionships,  the  breaking 
off  of  old  friendships.  True,  there  are 
many  encouragements.  Many  loving 
hands  and  tender  hearts  smooth  the 
young  convert's  first  steps  to  heaven, 
but  this  does  not  remove  the  fact  that 
much  unpleasantness  must  be  endured. 

3.  The  apparent  discrepancies  of  the 
gospel. — The  true  follower  of  Christ 
should  remember  that  Scripture  con- 
tains many  things  hard  to  be  under- 
stood, that  God  does  not  reach  the  soul 
through  the  intellect,  but  through  the 
heart,  and  that  He  leaves  many  things 
unexplained  in  order  to  test  our  faith. 

272 


II.  The     reward   of    constancy. — 

"  Blessed."     This  blessedness  will  con- 
sist of : — 

1 .  The  approval  of  Christ. — His  smile 
of  recognition  will  encourage.  His 
"  well  done  "  will  rejoice.  His  friend- 
ship will  make  up  for  the  loss  of  all. 

2.  The  participation  in  His  reward. 
— This  will  include  :  (1)  Victory  over  all 
doubts.  There  is  no  triumph  so  sweet  as 
victory  over  self  and  mental  misgivings. 
(2)  A  share  in  His  kingdom.  (3)  The 
enlightenment  of  the  understanding 
and  the  clear  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  purposes.  Application  :  To  be 
ofiended  in  Christ  is  unreasonable  as 
well  as  sinful.  It  seems  inhuman  to 
refuse  infinite  love,  reject  almighty 
power,  and  cast  away  unspeakable 
blessedness. — Ihid. 

Beatitude  of  unfaltering  faith. — 
These  words  imply  that  the  temptation 
to  unbelief  is  inward  and  experimental 
rather  than  speculative  in  its  origin ;  it 
starts  in  a  wounded  afiection  rather 
than  in  the  revolt  of  the  reason  and 
the  understanding.  It  was  not  enough 
that  the  Baptist's  thought  should  be 
turned  to  the  outward  sign  of  Christ's 
Messiahship.  Christ's  message  on  that 
point  only  confirmed  what  he  already 
knew  by  common  rumour.  The  heal- 
ing of  mental  tribulation  must  begin 
within.  The  most  convincing  sign  will 
fail  of  its  appointed  end,  unless  the 
mind  can  be  freed  from  the  distress  of 
its  own  entangling  wilfulness  and  pre- 
conception, and  made  loving  and  loyal 
in  its  every  fibre  and  sensibility. 
"  Blessed  is  he,  whosoever,"  etc. 

I.  These  words  suggest  a  danger  of 
secret  and  subtle  disaifcction  of  heart 
towards  Christ  that  threatens  to  destroy 
faith.  Our  Lord  felt  how  much  there, 
was  in  Himself  and  His  plans  that  was 
out  of  harmony  with  the  best  opinion 
of  the  time.  Whilst  the  most  advanced 
mind  of  the  old  dispensation  was 
staggered  by  His  method,  He  knew  He 
must  inevitably  become  a  stone  of 
stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence 
to  men  at  large,  unless  they  could 
be  warned  against  themselves.     1.  The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  xi. 


peculiarities  of  earl^  education  often 
give     rise     to     this     temptation     of 
offence  in  Christ.      The  past   twelve 
months  of  Christ's  ministry  had  been 
replete   with    proofs    of    His    Divine 
authority ;  but  the  proofs  were  not  of 
such  a  character,  nor  did  they  seem  to 
attest  the  particular  kind  of  Messiah, 
that  John's  special  education  had  led 
him    to   expect.      We,   too,   have  the 
prejudices    of    our    own    special  edu- 
cation and  standpoint.     2.  This  temp- 
tation  is   sometimes    connected    with 
the     fact      that     Christ      seems      to 
abandon    His    friends    to     the     most 
cruel  suffering    and-     oppression.     The 
unbelief  that  starts  in  suffering  rather 
than  in  a  syllogism  of  the  scribe  has  a 
special  claim  to  sympathy  and  patient 
love.     Christ  dealt  very  tenderly  and 
mercifully  with    that.      Do    we  hot 
sometimes  fall  into  the  temptation  of 
thinking  that  Christ    under-estimates 
our     temporal     well-being?      3.    The 
limitations    that    hem    in    our    love  of 
the  excitements  and  activities  of  public 
service   often   give    rise  to  this   peril. 
John  cannot  realise  as  yet  that,  as  he 
has  been  Christ's  type  and  forerunner 
in     his     public     teaching,    he    must 
now   be    type    and    forerunner    like- 
wise  in    his   final  suffering.     And   in 
our  quieter  paths  some  of  us  may  be 
just  on  the  point  of  stumbling  for  very 
similar    causes.      Our    service    seems 
lightly    esteemed   in   the    dispensation 
under  which  we  are  placed.     Possibly 
we  feel  within  us  a  capacity  for  effec- 
tive   religious     enterprise,    from    the 
exercise  of   which   we  are  cut  off  by 
some    embarrassing    condition   in   our 
lives.  4.  This  peril  sometimes  springs  up 
because  our  knowledge  of  Christ  comes 
through  indirect  and  prejudiced  channels. 
There  had    been    scarcely  any    inter- 
course between  the  King  and  the  herald 
who  was  sent  to  announce  His  coming. 
After  the  days  of  childhood  Jesus  and 
the   Baptist   probably   only   once  saw 
each  other  face  to  face.     Now  this  was 


a  disability  for  John's  personal  faith 
although  a  gain  in  the  end  to  the  cause 
of  Christ.  This  offence  may  arise  in 
us  because  we  have  to  view  Christ,  in 
some  of  His  relations,  through  crude, 
ignoble,  small-minded  representatives. 
II.  Consider  the  beatitude  of  the 
heart  that  is  proof  against  this  hidden 
temptation. — Christ  knew  just  the 
measure  of  admonition  and  just  the 
measure  of  encouragement  His  great 
servant  needed ;  and  He  adjusted  the 
one  to  the  other,  and  each  to  the  bleed- 
ing sensibilities  of  the  prophet,  with 
the  silken  touch  of  an  exact  science. 

1.  Not  offended  in  Christ  he  proved 
the  beatitude  of  an  unwavering  faith  in 
the  hour  of  trial.  No  curse  that  can 
poison  human  life  is  so  deep  and 
dire   as    the    curse   of    a    lost    trust. 

2.  This  beatitude  includes  full  salva- 
tion from  all  the  power  and  disability 
of  sin.  Herod's  captive  began  to  see 
at  last  that  the  earthly  kingdom  for 
which  he  had  pined  was  denied  him 
only  because  its  limits  were  too  narrow 
to  receive  the  vastness  of  the  Messianic 
gift,  and  he  was  content  to  die  that  he 
might  prove  its  unfathomed  mysteries 
of  blessing.  Whatever  secretly  alienates 
us  from  Christ  robs  us  of  the  benefits  of 
that  salvation  He  is  appointed  to  achieve 
in  us.  3.  Not  offended  in  Christ,  John 
proved  the  beatitude  linked  with  con- 
formity to  a  higher  plan  of  life  than 
his  own.  If  the  temper  of  hidden 
loyalty  be  maintained,  life  will  be 
worked  out  for  us  in  agreement  with 
counsels  that  will  issue  in  higher  honour 
and  more  abiding  satisfactions  tlian  our 
own.  John  could  not  picture  a  future 
for  himself  other  than  of  activity, 
heroism,  unselfishness.  Bat  his  own 
future  would  have  been  barren  in  com- 
parison with  that  which  God  was 
ordaining  for  his  trial  and  for  his 
deathless  renown.  Remember,  Christ 
is  Master,  you  are  servant. — T,  G, 
Selby, 


273 


CHAP.  XL     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—15. 

Undiscerning  faith. — From  the  language  found  in  the  end  of  ver.  5  it  seems 
probable  that  a  good  many  "  poor  "  heard  the  reply  of  the  Saviour  to  John.  We 
know  of  these,  as  a  rule,  that  they  held  John  as  a  prophet,  and  had  accepted  his 
baptism  (cf .  xxi.  26,  32 ;  Luke  vii.  29,  30).  Possibly,  in  now  speaking 
to  these  same  "  multitudes  "  "  concerning  John,"  the  Saviour  has  this  in  His 
mind  ;  and  directs  Himself,  therefore,  to  teaching  them,  first,  to  think  very  highly 
indeed  ;  and  yet,  secondly,  not  to  think  too  highly  of  John  the  Baptist. 

I.  Very  highly. — Very  highly,  first,  as  being  a  man  of  unusual  force  of 
character.  This  was  felt  about  him  from  the  beginning.  No  one,  in  going  out 
to  hear  him,  had  expected  to  look  on  a  "  reed" — a  man  easily  moved  and  shaken 
— and,  as  it  were,  without  a  will  of  his  own — nor  had  they  found  him  so.  This 
was  allowed  ;  and,  indeed,  insisted  on,  too.  To  ask  such  a  question  was  to 
answer  it  in  the  judgment  of  Christ.  The  same  was  true,  in  the  next  place,  as 
to  his  signal  independence  of  life.  Who  expected  to  find  such  a  man  in  the  "  soft 
raiment "  of  a  "  court  " ;  looking  daily  for  the  favour  of  "  kings,"  and  not  able, 
without  it,  to  live  1  To  ask  such  a  question  about  this  dweller  in  the  wilderness 
was  to  answer  it  too.  No  man  content  with  "locusts  and  wild  honey"  (iii.  4) 
could  be  very  easily  bribed.  He  was  to  be  thought  of  very  highly,  once  more, 
on  account  of  his  most  distinguished  'prophetical  gifts.  Was  he  a  prophet  ?  He 
was  very  much  more  (ver,  9).  He  was  the  immediate  *'  messenger"  of  Jehovah 
Himself  (ver.  10) — the  last  figure  in  a  long  procession  of  such  anticipators — the 
last  to  move  forward  of  all  such  inspired  predictors  of  Christ.  No  one  before,  in 
fact,  had  been  greater  than  he  in  this  question  of  prophetical  gift.  God  had 
never  spoken  before  by  any  human  lips  greater  than  his  (ver.  11). 

II.  Not  too  highly. — Not  too  highly,  first,  with  regard  to  his  position.  After 
all,  if  he  was  at  the  summit  of  one  set,  he  was  beneath  the  feet  of  another. 
Previous  inspired  ones  had,  as  it  were,  shown  the  door  of  life  afar  ofi*.  He  had 
put  his  hand  on  its  latch.  Yet  even  this  attainment,  great  as  it  was,  was  not 
greatest  of  all.  It  was  not  so  great  a  thing  as  to  open  the  door  and  pass  in.  It 
was  not,  therefore,  in  this  sense,  to  be  so  great  as  was  the  very  least  of  those 
who  had  really  done  this  (end  of  ver.  11).  Not  too  highly,  next,  in  regard  to  his 
message.  His  message  had  been  to  tell  men  of  One  who  was  coming.  As  it  were, 
with  all  "the  law  and  the  prophets"  behind  him  (ver.  13)  he  had  pointed  still 
forward  to  Christ.  His  work  had  been,  therefore,  to  prepare  men  for  what 
that  Coming  One  should  declare.  But,  since  then — perhaps,  since  his  practical 
silencing — that  fuller  Light  had  appeared  (iv.  12-16).  In  other  words,  since 
that  time  "  the  kingdom  of  God  had  been  preached "  (Luke  xvi.  16) ;  and 
was  "amongst"  men  (Luke  xvii.  21)  even  now,  with  all  its  fullest  mercy  declared 
(see  above  ix.  2).  What  had  been  the  result  ?  Why,  that  men  had  "  pressed 
into  it"  (Luke  xvi.  16),  even  "with  violence"  (ver.  12),  giving  up  "all  for  its 
sake "  (xix.  27) ;  not  excluding  even,  in  some  cases,  the  teaching  of  John 
(John  i.  35-39).  Let  them  remember  this,  therefore,  in  seeking  to  estimate 
rightly  "  the  teaching  of  John."  Its  chief  glory  lay  in  preparing  for  what  was 
more  glorious  still.  Even  so,  moreover,  had  it  been  taught  in  spirit  in  the 
mystical  language  of  old.  For  what,  in  fact,  was  this  great  "  messenger,"  when  he 
appeared,  to  be  ?  Was  it  not,  in  fact,  to  be  another  "  Elias  "  (Mai.  iv.  5,  6) — 
an  Elias  "  in  spirit  and  power  "  (Luke  i.  16,17) — an  Elias  in  turning  them  back 
to  the  God  of  their  fathers  (1  Kings  xviii.  37,  39),  and  preparing  them  for  His 
truth  ?  That  is,  therefore,  "  if  ye  will  receive  it,"  how  ye  are  to  think  of  this 
man.  That  will  teach  you  the  exact  truth  both  about  him  and  Myself.  That 
is,  therefore,  to  be  listened  to  by  you — if  anything  is  (ver.  15). 

This  to  the  "  multitudes  "  as  they  stood  by  at  that  time.     This  to  us,  also,  who 

274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xi. 


look  on  from  afar.  We  have  much  in  the  Bible  whick  is  preparatory  to  the 
gospel.  Taught  by  this  passage,  let  us  never  dare  to  set  it  on  one  side ;  let 
us,  rather,  always  seek  to  use  it  in  that  preparatory  way.  This  is  giving 
proper  honour  to  all.  The  Saviour  was  able  to  say,  *'  I  have  greater  witness 
than  that  of  John  "  (John  v.  36).  Yet  He  would  have  men  think  of  it  and  use 
it,  for  all  that,  just  as  it  was.  It  is  thus,  therefore.  He  would  now  have  us 
make  use  of  all  the  teaching  which  He  has  given  to  men  in  the  past.  The 
more  correct  we  are  about  that,  the  more  correct  we  shall  be  also  about  the 
fuller  Light  of  the  present.  Even  so  we  find  to  be  true,  in  fact,  in  the  researches 
of  science.  The  "life"  that  is  before  our  eyes  is  to  be  understood  better — if 
we  may  not  say  indeed  is  to  be  understood  only — by  understanding  the  "  life  "  of 
the  past.  This  is  true,  moreover — perhaps  most  signally  true — even  of  the 
"fossil  life"  of  the  past.  For  there  is  a  sense  in  which  all  such  "fossil  life" 
lives  in  the  life  of  to-day. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Vers.    7-11.     Absent  friends. —  I.  personal  disapproval,  did  mean  to  point 

Should  be  spoken  of  kindly  by  their  at  features  of  the  new  movement  which 

Mends.  made  it  an  object  of  aversion,  astonish- 

II.  Should  be   defended    in    their  ment,  or  at  least  of  doubt,  to  others. 
character.  It  may  be  well  to  particularise  some 

III.  Should  be  truly  represented. —  aspects  of  the  work  of  the  kingdom 
Biblical  Museum.  which  would,  not  unnaturally,  wear  an 

aspect  of  violence  to  minds  not  able  to 
Ver.  11.    The  greatness  of  John. —      regard  them  with  Christ's  eyes,  though 

1.  Singular  predictions  were  of  him,  to  Christ  Himself  they  were  the  bright 
more  than   of   any  of   the   prophets,      and  hopeful  side  of  an  evil  time. 

2.  His  bringing  into  the  world  had  I.  We  may  mention,  first,  that  which 
more  extraordinary  passages  of  pro-  most  readily  occurs  to  one's  thoughts, 
vidence  than    any    of    the  prophets,      viz.   the  passionate  earnestness  with 

3.  His  authority  and  office  to  bring  in  which  men  sought  to  get  into  the 
a  new  sacrament  were  singular.  4.  Be-  kingdom,  heralded  by  John  and 
sides  the  baptising  of  our  Lord  and  preached  by  Jesus  ;  an  earnestness  not 
converting  of  such  multitudes,  his  free  from  questionable  elements,  as  few 
ministry  was  countenanced  with  the  popular  enthusiasms  are;  associated 
clearest  vision,  and  revelation  of  the  with  misconceptions  of  the  nature 
ministry  of  the  Trinity  that  ever  was.  of  the  kingdom,  and,  in  many  cases, 
5.  The  sanctification  of  his  person,  fervent  rather  than  deep,  therefore 
from  the  womb  to  his  martyrdom,  was  likely  to  prove  transient  —  still  a 
singular.  6.  The  clearness  of  his  powerful,  impressive,  august  movement 
knowledge  of  the  way  of  righteousness  of  the  human  soul  God  wards  (see 
by  Christ,    and   of  the  application  of  Luke  xvi.   16,  II.V). 

types   of   the  Messiah  unto  Christ,  as  II.  From  the  volcanic  bursting  forth 

the  true  Lamb  of  God,  was  singular. —  of  religious  earnestness  in  the  popular 
David  Dickson.  mind,  we  may  naturally  pass  to  speak 

of  another  respect  in  which  the  king- 

The  greatest. — A  Christian  is  the  dom  of  heaven  may  be  said  to  have 
highest  style  of  man. — Fope.  suffered     violence,    viz.    the    kind   of 

people  that  had  most  prominently  to 

Ver.  12.  The  storming  of  the  king-  do  with  it. — PubKcans,  sinners,  harlots, 
dom. — In  employing  words  suggesting  the  moral  scum  and  refuse  of  society, 
the  idea  of  violence,  Jesus,  though  such  were  the  persons,  who,  in  greatest 
certainly    not    intending    to    express      numbers,  were  pressing  into  the  king- 

275 


CHAP.  XL     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,   MATTHEW. 


dom,  to  the  astonishment  and  scandal 
of  respectable,  "righteous,"  religious, 
well-conducted  and  self-respecting 
people.  Why,  it  was  a  revolution, 
society  turned  upside  down  ;  as  great 
an  overturn  in  principle,  if  not  in 
extent,  as  when  in  France,  in  the 
eighteenth  century,  bishops,  aristo- 
crats, princes  and  kings  were  sent 
adrift,  and  sans-culottism  leigned 
triumphant,  believing  itself  to  be  in 
possession  of  a  veritable  kingdom  of 
God.  What  wonder  if  wise  and 
prudent  ones  looked  on  in  wistful, 
doubting  mood,  and  sanctimonious  men 
held  up  their  hands  in  pious  horror, 
and  exclaimed,  Call  you  this  a  kingdom 
of  God  ?     Blasphemy  ! 

III.  The  kingdom  of  God  as  it 
actually  showed  itself  in  connection 
with  the  work  of  Christ,  differed  widely 
from,  did  violence,  we  may  say,  to 
preconceived  notions  of  what  it  would 
be. — Kot  a  few  of  those  who  actually 
entered  the  kingdom,  in  so  far  as  they 
understood  its  true  character,  had  to 
do  violence  to  their  own  prejudices 
before  they  took  the  step.  There  were 
conversions,  not  unaccompanied  with 
inward  pain,  not  merely  from  sin  to 
righteousness,  but  from  ideal  mistaken 
to  rectified  notions  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  from  political  dreams,  noble,  but 
destined  never  to  be  fulfilled,  to 
spiritual  realities. 

IV.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  may  be 
said  to  have  suffered  violence  in  SO 
far  as  its  coming  was  promoted  by  the 
use  of  irregular  methods  and  agencies. 
— In  this  respect  John  and  Jesus  were 
themselves  stormers,  though  in  different 
ways,  to  the  scandalising  of  a  custom- 
ridden  generation.  Let  us  make  one  or 
two  reflections,  suggested  by  the  saying 
we  have  been  studying,  concerning  Him 
who  uttered  it.  1.  It  is  very  evident 
that  one  who  spoke  thus  had  a  very 
clear  conception  of  the  deep  significance 
of  the  movement  denoted  by  the  phrase 
"  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Christ 
knew  well  that  a  new  world  was 
beginning  to  be.  2.  How  calmly  He 
takes  it  all.  3.  Yet  how  magnani- 
mously He  bears  Himself  towards  the 

•      276 


doubters.  ''  Violence  " — the  very  word 
is  an  excuse  for  their  doubts. — A.  B. 
Bruce,  D.B, 

The  kingdom  of  heaven  taken  by 
force.  —  The  ministry  of  John  con- 
tained these  characteristics :  1.  The 
preaching  of  repentance.  2.  Wonder- 
ful directness  and  simplicity.  3.  He 
bore  clear  testimony  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Proposition :  People 
who  would  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  must  use  violence ;  they  must 
take  it  by  force,  or  not  have  it  at  all. 
In  proof  of  this  I  must  refer : — 

I.  To  the  testimony  of  the  sacred 
Scriptures. — "  Work  out  your  own 
salvation,"  etc.  "  Strive  to  enter  in," 
etc.     "  Fight  the  good  fight,"  etc. 

II.  To  the  forces  opposed  to  us. 
— 1.    The    spirit   of    human    society. 

2.  Philosophies,    falsely     so    called. 

3.  Forces  within  ourselves ;  (1)  self- 
will  ;  (2)  self -righteousness  ;  (3)  self- 
indulgence.  4.  Spiritual  wickedness 
in  high  places. 

III.  To  the  analogy  of  the  depart- 
ments of  life. — I  will  make  three  other 
verses.  The  kingdom  of  wealth 
suffer eth  violence,  etc.  The  kingdom 
of  hnowledjge  suffereth  violence,  etc. 
The  kingdom  of  fame  and  honour 
suffereth  violence,  etc. 

IV.  To  the  grandeur  of  the  reward. 
— The  spiritual  athlete  stretches  every 
sinew  and  at  last  heaven's  door  is 
gained,  a  flash  of  glory  meets  the  eye, 
and  the  faithful  servant  enters  into  the 
joy  of  his  Lord. — Thos.  Jones. 

Peace  by  power. — This  is  to  most 
readers  a  puzzling  saying.  Doubtless 
there  is  more  than  one  line  in  which 
its  truth  runs. 

I.  This  saying  passes  judgment  on 
the  state  of  mind  in  which  a  great 
many  respectable  people  are  too  con- 
tent to  live.  —  They  live  like  the 
luxurious  heirs  who  take  their  ease 
upon  the  fortune  which  their  hard- 
working grandfather  amassed  by  a 
frugal  and  strenuous  life. 

II.  It  passes  judgment  also  on  the 
state  of  mind  which  many  respectable 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       cHap.  xi. 


people  entertain  towards  energetic  re- 
formers.— What  becomes  of  things  that 
are  let  alone — your  garden,  your  roof, 
your  drain-pipes  ?  But  the  reformer, 
without  whom  we  should  all  be  heathen 
savages  to-day,  is  well  scolded  while 
doing  his  work,  and  well  praised  when 
his  work  is  done.  As  Jesus  said,  one 
generation  stones  the  prophets  and 
another  generation  decorates  their 
tombs.  Fifty  years  ago  William 
Lloyd  Garrison  was  dragged  through 
Boston  streets  with  a  rope  around  his 
neck,  but  now  he  forms  an  imposing 
statue  in  Boston's  noblest  avenue. 

III.  It  passes  judgment,  further,  on 
the  failure  of  moral  force  to  work 
towards  God's  kingdom. — Here  the 
story  of  that  tragic  Thirty  Years' 
War,  which  well-nigh  destroyed  Ger- 
many, brings  in  its  lesson.  There 
was  not  enough  moral  force  then  in 
Germany  to  establish  the  fundamental 
truth  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  that 
men  must  respect  each  other's  con- 
sciences— the  Catholic  not  to  vex  the 
Protestant,  nor  the  Protestant  the 
Catholic.  The  moral  force  failing, 
the  physical  force  came  in  to  do  the 
necessary  work.  So  came  the  Roman 
sword  to  put  an  end  to  the  iniquities 
which,  forty  years  before,  when  John 
and  Jesus  called  for  a  reform,  there 
was  not  enough  moral  vigour  in  the 
nation  to  abolish.  Especially  to  every 
young  man  I  would  repeat  the  lesson 
of  the  poet  Whittier's  life,  as  given 
in  his  own  words,  and  illustrated  by 
his  own  career :  "  Identify  yourself 
actively  with  some  righteous  but  un- 
popular cause."  "  For  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  forcibly  won,  and  forceful 
are  they  that  secure  it." — J.  M.  Whiton, 
D.D. 

Pressing  into  the  kingdom. — By  the 
clearness  of  John's  preaching  the  gates 
of  heaven  and  the  way  of  the  church 
were  made  so  patent  that  men  did  not 
stand  upon  the  bar  and  partition  of 
ceremonies,  or  upon  any  orderly  way 
of  the  proselytes  coming  into  the 
church  ;  but  multitudes  did  leap  over 
all  the  Levitical  ceremonies,  so  that 


publicans,  sinners,  heathen,  Levitically 
unclean,  and  the  naturally  loathed 
lepers  did  thrust  themselves  all  in 
upon  the  company  of  converts,  and 
upon  the  grace  manifested  by  John's 
doctrine;  and,  indeed,  obtained  grace 
to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
by  this  their  pressing  themselves  upon 
Him.  Hence  learn  :  1.  That  the 
Levitical  ceremonies  were  never  ap- 
pointed to  hinder  people  from  Christ, 
but  to  lead  them  to  Him,  and  that, 
therefore,  when  the  observance  of  these 
ceremonies  might  be  a  hindrance  of 
people  coming  to  Christ  (as,  e.g.  so 
many  days  ought  to  pass  ere  a  leper 
were  legally  purified,  that  he  might 
come  in  the  company  where  the  word 
of  God  was  preached) ;  in  such  a  case, 
God  was  not  displeased  that  men 
violently  ran  over  these  impediments 
to  come  to  God's  grace  manifested  in 
Christ.  2.  Yea,  the  doctrine  of  grace 
being  clearly  revealed,  no  impediment 
of  bygone  sins  or  sense  of  un worthiness 
present,  should  hinder  a  humbled  soul 
from  entry  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
If  we  cannot  remove  impediments,  let 
us  set  foot  on  them,  and  make  stepping- 
stones  of  them,  thrusting  ourselves  so 
much  more  on  Christ's  grace,  as  we 
find  ourselves  unworthy  ;  laying  hold 
so  much  more  on  His  offered  salvation, 
as  we  find  ourselves  otherwise  to  be 
lost. — David  Dickson, 

Religious  excitement.  —  Jonathan 
Edwards,  speaking  apologetically  of 
the  religious  movements  of  his  own 
time,  remarks :  "  A  great  deal  of 
noise  and  tumult,  confusion  and  up- 
roar, darkness  mixed  with  light,  and 
evil  with  good,  is  always  to  be  ex- 
pected in  the  beginning  of  something 
very  glorious  in  the  state  of  things 
in  human  society  or  the  church  of 
God.  After  nature  has  been  shut  up 
in  a  cold  dead  state,  when  the  sun 
returns  in  the  spring,  there  is,  together 
with  the  increase  of  the  light  and  heat 
of  the  sun,  very  tempestuous  weather 
before  all  is  settled,  calm  and  serene, 
and  all  nature  rejoices  in  its  bloom 
and  beauty." — Works,  vol.  i.,  p.  372. 

277 


CHAP.  XI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  15.  Attention  and  obedience. — 
This  was  a  favourite  saying  of  our 
Lord's. 

I.  It  is  an  appeal  for  attention. — 
If  we  want  to  hear,  not  only  must  we 
have  ears,  but  we  must  "give  ear,"  as 
the  old  English  phrase  runs  ;  we  must 
make  some  effort.  We  may  be  where 
there  are  loud  noises  constantly  going 
on,  and  yet  not  hear  them  at  all.  A 
miller  is  said  not  to  hear  any  of  the 
noise  inside  his  mill.  He  gets  so 
accustomed  to  the  continuous  clamour 
that  he  never  heeds  it.  In  fact,  there 
is  a  st©ry  told  of  a  m;ller  who  slept 
night  after  night  entirely  undisturbed 
by  this  noise,  but  when  his  mill 
suddenly  ceased  working  he  was 
aroused  by  the  complete  silence! 
Have  you  not  yourselves  sometimes 
been  reading  quietly  at  home,  and 
the  clock  on  the  mantelpiece  has 
struck  the  hour,  and  so  deeply  in- 
terested have  you  been  in  your  book, 
that  you  have  not  heard  it  at  all, 
though  you  are  sure  the  clock  has 
been  going  all  the  time,  and  must 
have  struck  quite  loudly?  Thus  we 
see  that  if  attention  is  not  given,  but 
turned  away,  we  do  not  hear,  though 
we  have  ears.  The  first  order  of 
command  that  is  given  to  soldiers 
after    they    have    "  fallen    in  '*    and 


stand  in  order  is  "  Attention  !  "  It 
is  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Listen  !  Be 
ready  for  the  next  order  !  "  "  He 
that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  !  " 
It  is  sad  to  think  what  is  lost,  at  the 
time,  by  inattention  ;  sadder  still  to 
think  of  the  trouble  we  bring  upon 
ourselves  by  it  afterwards.  Sometimes 
we  miss  what  we  can  never  regain. 

II.  Attention  should  be  followed 
by  obedience.- — Christ  requires  us  not 
only  to  hear  His  sayings,  but  to  do 
them.  1.  What  vexation  and  unhap- 
piness  disobedience  to  parents  causes 
in  a  home.  2.  Obedience  is  a  simple 
thing  ;  you  have  but  to  listen  to  what 
you  are  told,  and  do  it.  The  general 
in  a  battle  has  many  things  to  think  of, 
but  the  common  soldier  has  only  to  do 
what  he  is  told.  3.  Yet,  after  all, 
obedience  is  not  so  very  easy.  Luther 
said,  "  I  would  rather  obey  than  be  able 
to  work  miracles."  This  shows  that  he 
knew  what  a  hard  and  yet  noble  thing 
it  is  to  obey.  4.  The  first  sin  in  the 
world  was  a  sin  of  disobedience,  the 
hateful  forerunner  of  untold  evil. 
5.  Christ  set  us  an  example  of 
perfect  obedience.  6.  He  described 
the  fate  of  the  obedient  and  the  dis- 
obedient man  in  vii.  24-27. — W.  J. 
Foxell,  M.A, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—19. 

Wilful perverseness. — From  addressing  the  "multitudes"  (ver.  7)  before  Him, 
the  Saviour  naturally  passes  in  thought  to  those  not  before  Him  at  that  time. 
Those  present  are  but  representatives  of  the  larger  mass  to  which  they  belong. 
What  is  to  be  said  of  that  mass — of  that  Jewish  "  generation  "  of  that  particular 
day — when  looked  at  as  a  whole  ?  To  it  especially  had  come  that  message  of  the 
Baptist  with  its  reference  to  Himself,  of  which  the  Saviour  has  just  been 
speaking.  What  has  been  and  is  its  attitude  towards  that  message  and  its 
connections  1  Our  Saviour's  reply  to  this  inquiry  consists  of  a  familiar  parable 
or  picture,  on  the  one  hand  ;  and  a  suitable  apj)lication  of  it,  on  the  other. 

I.  The  parable  itself. — This  presents  us,  first,  with  a  well-known  locality.  It 
is  in  the  "  market  place  " — a  place  open  to  all,  and  where  all  are  accustomed  to 
meet — that  the  scene  of  the  parable  lies.  It  presents  us,  next,  with  a  well- 
known  inxiident.  The  children  of  the  place  have  met  there,  and  are  engaged  in 
their  sports  (cf.  the  well-known  passage  in  Zech.  viii.  5).  Their  sport  at  this 
time  is  that  of  imitating  their  seniors,  and  "  making  believe  "  to  be  men  and 
women  themselves,  and  doing  as  they  have  seen  done  by  those  "  grown-up." 
One  company  of  them,  with  this  object  in  view,  visits  another  company  and 
invites  them  to  "  play."     They  invite  them  to  "  play,"  first,  at  being  mirthful 

278 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,  MATTHEW.      chap.  XL 


and  joyful;  to  "make  believe"  that  it  is  a  season  of  gladness  ;  and  to  respond 
to  them  therefore  in  a  similar  strain.  But  this  the  other  company  refuse  to  do. 
They  will  not  "dance"  in  response  to  their  *'  piping"  (ver.  17).  They  are  not 
inclined  to  that  at  this  time.  Thereupon  the  first  company,  being  still  anxious 
to  "  play,"  at  once  alters  its  role.  It  pretends  now  that  the  time  is  a  mournful 
one ;  and  puts  on  the  usual  tokens  of  sorrow  and  mourning  ;  and  invites  the 
other  company  to  respond  in  like  manner.  But  neither  does  this,  again,  meet 
the  wishes  of  those  unaccommodating  play -mates.  If  they  disliked  the  first, 
they  dislike  the  other  as  much.  There  is  no  pleasing  them,  in  fact,  whatever  is 
planned.     Do  what  you  will,  you  can't  content  them. 

II.  The  application  of  the  parable. — This  is  at  once  very  simple  and  very 
natural.  According  to  it  the  company  of  children  thus  twice  invited  to  **  play," 
but  both  times  in  vain,  represents  the  men  of  that  "  generation."  The  call  to 
be  "  sorrowful "  and  "  mournful  "  which  came  to  that  company,  represented  the 
message  of  the  Baptist  to  that  "  generation."  It  was  a  message  of  austerities 
and  of  sternness  (John  himself  "came  neither  eating  nor  drinking,"  ver.  18) ;  an 
earnest  call  to  immediate  repentance ;  an  invitation  to  "  mourn."  And  it  had 
been  received,  on  the  whole,  in  the  same  spirit  as  the  similar  invitation  had 
been  in  the  parable.  It  had  been  pronounced,  on  the  whole,  that  is  to  say,  to  be 
an  unseasonable  invitation  ;  so  much  so,  in  fact,  that  men  had  virtually  said  of 
him  who  brought  it,  that  he  must  be  "  mad "  to  press  it  just  now  (see  end 
of  ver.  18).  The  other  invitation,  that  to  be  joyful,  represented  the  message  of 
the  Saviour  to  the  men  of  that  day.  Instead  of  being  characterised  by 
austerities  it  had  been  characterised  by  a  suspension  of  them  (see  above  ix.  14) 
which  had  already  scandalised  some.  The  Saviour  Himself,  moreover,  in 
delivering  it,  had  "come  eating  and  drinking,"  it  might  be  said.  He  had 
certainly  "  sat  at  meat "  (ix.  10)  with  some  who  were  not  conspicuous,  to  say  the 
least,  for  their  abstemiousness  in  such  matters.  And,  above  all,  perhaps, 
instead  of  only  calling  them  to  "  repentance  "  and  "  mourning,"  He  had  both 
declared  and  sealed  in  a  most  open  manner  the  fullest  forgivenness  of  guilt 
(ix.  1-8).  Neither,  however,  had  this  invitation  been  more  to  the  taste  of  that 
age.  Like  the  children  in  the  parable  they  had  refused  this  as  well  as  the 
other.  If  the  other  was  too  austere,  this  was  too  easy.  If  John  was  mad, 
Jesus  was  worse  (ver.  19).  Any  way,  in  both  cases,  the  upshot  was  one.  The 
"  generation  "  which  heard  both  the  Baptist  and  the  Saviour  rejected  them  both ! 
And  maligned  them  both,  too  ! 

What  do  we  learn  from  this  condition  of  things  ?  Amongst  other  lessons  of 
great  importance  we  seem  to  learn : — 

1.  That  questions  of  truth  are  not  questions  to  he  decided  hy  vote. — It  is 
unquestionable,  we  see,  that  the  men  of  their  own  generation  thought  the 
teaching  of  both  John  and  Jesus  to  be  utterly  in  the  wrong.  It  is  just  as 
unquestionable  that  these  same  men  were  utterly  in  the  wrong  in  so  doing. 

2.  That  questions  of  truth  may  he  decided  hy  the  testimony  of  facts. — ^As  a 
matter  of  fact,  to  what  did  the  comparative  severity  of  John  bring  men  in  the 
end  ?  To  repentance  and  Jesus  (see  iii.  5,  6 ;  John  i.  29,  seq.).  As  a 
matter  of  fact  to  what  did  the  abounding  mercy  of  Jesus  bring  men  in  the  end  ? 
To  forgiveness  and  renewal ;  to  the  presence  of  God  and  fitness  for  it ;  to 
deliverance  from  both  the  guilt  and  the  bondage  of  sin  (Acts  iii.  26  ;  Rom.  viii.  1-4, 
etc.).  So  by  these  their  "works"  (R.V.)  did  both  these  "children"  of 
"  wisdom  "  justify  their  claim  to  that  name. 


27d 


CHAP.xi.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  16-19.  Unreason. — This  sort 
of  unreason  shows  itself  again  and 
again. 

1.  Men  will  find  fault  with  Christ 
and  Christianity^  put  the  matter 
how  you  will. — Prejudice  can  always 
find  some  objection ;  and  proud  men 
who  do  not  like  John  because  he 
preaches  repentance,  do  not  like  Jesus 
because  He  not  only  preaches  repent- 
ance, but  brings  gratuitous  salvation 
to  the  heart  and  to  the  home. 

2.  The  attitude  of  Christians  toward 
society  is  not  seldom  made  a  ground  o^ 
censure  by  persons  who  have  a  good 
deal  in  common  with  the  Pharisees 
and  rulers  of  the  Jews.  They  are  too 
unsocial  or  they  are  too  social.  The 
critics  are  hard  to  please.  If  a 
Christian  be  reserved  in  his  habits  and 
a  lover  of  retirement,  they  describe 
him  as  narrow  and  un  genial.  If  he 
be  frank  and  accessible,  they  shake 
their  heads  over  his  worldliness  and 
inordinate  love  of  society.  He  is 
never  quite  right  in  their  eyes.  Let 
not  such  judgments  of  men  disconcert 
or  discourage  any  who  with  an  honest 
heart  endeavour  to  be  true  to  Christ. 
The  Lord  Himself  is  our  Master  and 
our  Example. — D.  Eraser ,  D.D. 

Playing  in  the  marhet-place.  — 
I.  Jesus  takes  notice  of  children  when 
they  are  playing.  —  What  we  call 
little  things  are  sometimes  very  much 
noticed  by  great  people.  The  great 
Son  of  God  takes  great  notice  of  little 
children,  because  He  knows  that  upon 
one  of  them  may  depend  very  gieat 
things.  Your  actions  at  play  are 
noticed  by  Christ,  and  when  nothing 
wrong  is  said  or  done.  He  loves  to  see 
you  having  a  merry  game. 

II.  Jesns  noticed  that  among  the 
children  playing  in  the  market-place 
there  were  some  who  were  sulky. — 
They  would  play  at  neither  weddings 
nor  funerals.  These  cross  children, 
like  some  children  now,  were  very 
good  at  one  thing — they  were  good  at 
finding  fault.     Some  children  are  very 

280 


much  given  to  this  bad  habit ;  they 
find  fault  with  their  food,  with  their 
lessons,  with  their  parents'  commands, 
even  with  their  games.  Perhaps  some 
playfellow  wants  to  play  a  game  at 
hide-and-seek.  They  find  fault  with 
that.  Then  blind-man's-buff  is  pro- 
posed. They  don't  like  that.  And  so 
they  go  on,  finding  fault  with  every 
game  that  is  proposed  instead  of  find- 
ing fault  with  themselves  for  being  so 
very  disagreeable. 

III.  Jesus  here  uses  what  the 
children  did  to  teach  men  and  women 
what  they  ought  to  do  and  what 
they  ought  not  to  do.  —  He  says, 
"  Whereunto  shall  I  liken,'*  etc.  "  It 
is  like  unto  children  sitting  in  the 
markets,  and  calling,"  etc.  And  in 
vers.  18,  19,  He  tells  us  why  He  so 
compares  them.  Neither  the  stern 
John  nor  the  gentle  Jesus  pleased 
these  people.  They  found  fault  with 
God's  servant  and  with  God's  Son. 
And  what  lesson  can  we  learn  from 
this  ?  Do  you  not  see  that  God  wants 
to  bring  people  to  Christ  both  by  what 
is  sad  and  by  what  is  glad. — W.  Harris. 

Ver.  19.  Wisdom  justified  of  her  chil- 
dren.— I.  If  wisdom  was  justified  in 
the  cases  both  of  John  and  Jesus,  it 
follows  that  wisdom  is  compatible 
with  various  ways  of  life. — Wisdom 
was  justified  both  in  John  and  the 
Son  of  man  —  God's  wisdom  in 
sending  them,  such  as  they  were ;  their 
wisdom  in  being  what  God  meant 
them  to  be.  John's  work  as  the  fore- 
runner of  Messiah  was  one  involving 
rough  tasks  and  demanding  a  stern 
will.  It  became  him  to  come  neither 
eating  nor  drinking,  an  austere  ascetic, 
by  the  very  exaggerations  of  his  self- 
denial  protesting  against  all  forms  of 
sensualism.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
law  of  congruity  required  Jesus  to 
come  eating  and  drinking,  and  dress- 
ing like  other  people,  within  the  limits 
of  the  innocent.  For  Jesus  was  the 
"  Son  of  man,"  and  as  such  it  became 
Him  to  be  in  all  sinless  respects  like 


HOMlLEflC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xt. 


unto  His  brethren,  that  He  might  get  putting  of  the  Divine  force  that  is  in 

close  to  them,  and  find  His  way  into  him,     regardless    of     the     immediate 

their  hearts  with  His  gospel  of  mercy,  consequences,  at  least  comparatively. — 

and  the  peace  of  forgiveness,  and  the  A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 
rest  of  a  new  heart  and  endowed  with 

rightly    ordered    afiections.      Wisdom  Wisdom  and   her  children. — I.  The 

was  justified  through  His  own  lips ;  various  manifestation  of  truth  to  man 

for  His  apologies  for  so  living,  to  them  is  ascribable  to  the  highest  wisdom. 
that  examined  Him,   are   among  the  II.  Wisdom  has  a  certain  class  of 

wisest  as  well  as  the  most  beautiful  of  men  on  earth  who  are  to  be  regarded 

His  utterances.     And  wisdom,  in  the  as    its    offspring.  —  The   children   of 

person  of  Jesus,  was  justified  also  by  wisdom    are    those    who    have    been 

her  children,  i.e.  by  those  who  received  regenerated   by    the    doctrines   which 

the  benefit  of  His  grace.  wisdom  dispenses.      They  see  things  in 

II.  Wisdom  is  not  a    time-server,  the  light  in  which  wisdom  points  them 

seeking  to  please  the  world  by  follow-  out,  and  they  pursue  a  course  of  life 

ing  its  fasMon. — Both  Jesus  and  John  agreeable  to  that  which  wisdom  directs, 

came  so   that    their   generation    was  They   are    the    children    of    wisdom, 

extensively     displeased      with     them,  having     a    spirit    of    reverence    and 

Herein  the  true.  Divine,  heaven-born  obedience  for    that   heavenly   wisdom 

wisdom  differs  from  the  wisdom  of  the  displayed  everywhere  in  the  Bible, 
world,    the    very    essence    of    which         III.  These    children     of    wisdom 

consists  in  time-serving.     True  wisdom  thoroughly  approve   of   the  truth  in 

cares  more  for  ultimate  than  immediate  whatever   form  it   comes. — The  dark 

results,  has  faith  in  the   future,   and  and  bright  sides  are    both   approved, 

prescribes  to  a  man  as  his  first  duty  They  have  experienced  the   worth   of 

the  expression  of  conviction,  the  forth-  both  sides. — D.  Thomas,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.^Yerses  20-24. 

Invincible  unbelief. — Three  cities  are  made  to  stand  out  here  among  all  the 
cities  of  Galilee.  One  of  these  is  made  to  stand  out  in  a  similar  way  amongst 
these  three.  We  shall  examine  what  is  said  of  them  here  as  they  are  thus 
separated  by  the  Saviour ;  considering  the  first  two  in  the  first  place,  and  the 
remaining  third  in  the  second. 

I.  The  first  two. — These  are  by  name  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida,  and  are 
believed  to  have  been  situated,  the  one  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Lake  of 
Gennesaret,  and  the  other,  probably,  at  its  northernmost  point,  and  on  each 
side  of  the  river  Jordan  as  it  there  enters  the  lake.  They  are  compared  by  the 
Saviour  with  two  others,  Tyre  and  Sidon,  on  the  borders  of  the  far  larger 
Mediterranean  Sea  ;  but  not  belonging  in  any  way  to  the  land  and  people  of 
Israel.  Of  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida,  as  compared  with  these  well-known  cities, 
the  Saviour  here,  in  the  first  place,  implies  a  good  deal.  In  temporal  matters, 
e  g.  He  seems  to  imply  that  the  two  Jewish  cities  thus  named  were  so  far  like 
the  Gentile  cities  in  question  as  to  be  places,  as  these  were,  of  no  little  success  in 
the  pursuit  of  commerce  and  wealth.  In  spiritual  matters,  on  the  contrary.  He 
implies  clearly  that  they  were  not  at  all  alike  ;  and  that  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida 
had  had  advantages  in  this  respect  which  had  been  wholly  confined  to  themselves ; 
the  teaching  and  the  *'  mighty  works  "  which  had  abounded  in  them  having  been 
wholly  unknown  in  the  other  two.  From  this  the  Saviour  goes  on  to  declare  very 
mvxih  more.  He  opens  to  us,  as  it  were,  the  secret  door  of  the  hypothetical  and 
contingent.  He  declares  to  us  what  wouLd  have  been  had  things  been  other- 
wise than  they  were ;  and  does  not  hesitate  to  say  what  Tyre  and  Sidon  would 
have  done  had  they  had  the  advantages  which  they  had  not.     On  this  point  He 

281 


CHAP.  XL     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW. 


is,  indeed,  peculiarly  outspoken  and  clear.  They  would  not  have  done,  He  says, 
as  had  been  done  by  those  other  two  cities.  They  would  not  have  refused  to 
"  repent "  (ver.  20).  Still  less  would  they  have  refused  with  the  same  continued 
impenitence,  notwithstanding  all  that  was  done.  On  the  contrary,  He  says, 
they  would  have  "  repented  long  ago," and  that  openly  and  in  "ashes"  (ver.  21). 
In  a  word,  all  would  have  been  present  in  their  case,  that  was  so  conspicuously 
absent  in  the  case  of  those  others.  Finally,  from  this  the  Saviour  goes  on  to  a 
higher  step  still.  He  does  not  hesitate  even  to  forecast  the  issues  0/ the  day  o^  all 
days.  He  tells  us  exactly  how  it  will  be  with  those  He  is  speaking  of  in  that 
time  of  judgment  and  light.  How  the  people,  e.g.  that  had  the  less  light  will 
not  then  be  held  responsible  for  more  than  that  light ;  and  will  not,  therefore, 
be  called  on  to  suffer  beyond  a  certain  amount.  Also,  how,  all  the  same  for 
that  (cf.  irXi^v,  nevertheless,  ver.  22)  and  however  bad  that  certain  amount 
may  be  to  them — and  it  is  not  spoken  of,  be  it  observed,  as  being  anything  else — 
worse  still  will  be  the  doom  of  those  who  used  greater  light  to  worse  ends.  It  is 
a  terrible  picture,  and  need  not  be  dwelt  on.  But  it  must  not  be  slighted,  or 
put  to  one  side.  "/  say  unto  you  that  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  (!)  for  Tyre 
and  Sidon  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  you  "  (ver.  22). 

II.  The  remaining  third. — The  parallel  here  is  on  the  same  lines  with — but 
considerably  in  advance  of — the  preceding  one.  This  is  true,  in  the  first  place, 
as  to  the  cities  compared.  If  Tyre  and  Sidon,  among  the  cities  outside  of  Israel, 
had  been  specially  warned  and  denounced  by  the  prophets  of  God  on  account  of 
their  abundance  and  "  pride  "  (see  Isa.  xxiii. ;  Ezek.  xxvi.,  xxvii.),  much  more 
had  this  been  so  of  that  one  city  specified  now  (Gen  xiii.  13,  xix.  ;  Isa.  i.  9,  iii.  9  ; 
Rev.  xi.  8).  The  very  place  of  that  city,  in  fact,  had  been  for  ages  past  a 
standing  testimony  against  it  (Jude  7).  On  the  other  hand,  if  Chorazin  and 
Bethsaida  had  been  places  favoured  singularly  and  above  others  by  the  presence, 
and  teaching,  and  miracles  of  the  Saviour,  even  more  so,  in  all  respects,  had  been 
"  His  own  city "  (ix.  1)  Capernaum.  In  this  respect,  indeed,  it  might  be 
said  to  have  been — or,  possibly,  because  of  this,  had  itself  supposed  that  it  would 
be — "exalted  unto  heaven"  (ver.  23).  No  greater  privileges  of  that  kind  could 
very  well  be.  Also,  in  regard  to  the  cities  compared  so  are  the  declarations  here 
uttered  about  them.  More  is  taught,  e.g.  about  the  case  of  Sodom  than  had  been 
of  those  others.  Of  them,  it  is  said,  that  if  they  had  had  the  light,  it  would  have 
led  them  to  repent.  Of  Sodom  it  is  taught,  that  if  she  had  had  the  light, 
she  would  have  repented  to  good  purpose.  In  other  words  that  her  repentance 
would  have  been  accepted,  her  sentence  reversed,  herself  spared  to  that  day 
(ver.  23).  Even  more  terrible,  therefore,  is  that  which  is  finally  told  us  in  this 
connection  about  the  last  day.  Briefly  put,  it  is  this,  that  of  all  "  intolerable  " 
sentences  passed  in  that  day  of  abiding  decision,  nono  will  be  worse  than  that 
passed  on  those  who  have  received  most  and  profited  least.  No  name  of  shame, 
in  that  day  of  shame,  will  be  lower  than  theirs.  "  Howbeit  I  say  unto  you," 
etc.  (ver.  24). 

How  much  light  is  thrown  by  these  words  of  Jesus  : — 

1.  On  the  breadth  of  His  mercy. — Not  only  Israel,  but  those  outside  it ;  not 
only  their  doings,  but  what  they  would  have  done  also — are  thought  of  and 
allowed  for  ! 

2.  On  the  intensity  of  His  love. — He  is  far  more  grieved  for  these  guilty 
Galilean  cities  than  they  are  for  themselves. 

3.  On  the  supreme  dignity  of  His  person. — Nothing  is  worse  for  any  than 
neglect  of  Himself  !  Nothing  that  He  declares  can  be  ever  set  aside  !  Nothing 
can  be  removed  that  He  has  once  fixed.  All  that  He  declares  about  all  is  to  be 
as  He  says  (cf.  John  xvi.  9,  v.  22 ;  Acts  xvii-  ^^1,  etc.). 

282 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xi. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  20-30.  Christ's  voice. — I.    The  complete     history   of    Capernaum,   in 

voice  of  sad  uphraiding  (vers.  20-24).  relation  to  our  Lord's  ministry,  we  find 

II.  The  solemn  voice  of  thanks-  the  conduct  and  the  experience  of  the 
giving  (vers.  25,  26).  men  of  that  city  were  in  happy  contrast 

III.  The  majestic  voice  of  self-  to  the  experience  and  conduct  of  men 
attestation  (ver.  27).  in  most  other  cities  embraced  by  His 

IV.  The  pleading  voice  of  universal  labours.  E.g.  cf.  xiii.  58.  Surely,  if 
invitation  (vers.  28-30). — A.  Maclaren,  the  people  had  lacked  sympathy  with 
D.D.  our  Lord's  benevolent  purpose,  if  they 

had  lacked  confidence  in  His  healing 
Vers.  20-24.  Mighty  works. — I.  That  power,  if  they  had  lacked  thankfulness 
God  vouchsafes  a  greater  manifestation  for  the  blessings  He  conferred,  He  would 
of  Himself  to  some  men  than  to  others,  not  in  their  midst  have  done  "  most  of 
II.  That  the  design  of  all  these  His  mighty  works."  2.  Who  can  fully 
mighty  works  is  man's  spiritual  re-  realise  the  joy  there  must  have  been  in 
formation.  Capernaum  while  our  Lord  was  minis- 
Ill.  That  the  mighty  works  which  tering  there  ?  If  we  had  heard  that 
would  prove  effective  to  reform  some  He  was  going  to  speak  concerning  the 
have  no  saving  effect  upon  others. —  city  and  His  ministry  in  it,  we  should 
Does  not  this  show — 1.  The  diversity  have  gathered  about  Him,  expecting 
in  souls.  2.  The  moral  freedom  even  to  see  His  countenance  lit  up  with 
of  depraved  souls.  3.  The  sovereignty  triumph,  and  to  hear  His  lips  pour 
of  God  in  His  dealings  with  men.  forth  exultant  strains.  His  counten- 
4.  That  we  must  not  depend  too  much  ance  was  dark,  His  tones  were  sad,  His 
upon  "  mighty  works  "  to  convert.  heart  was  bleeding,  for  the  great  end 

IV.  That  the  guilt  of  the  uncon-  of  His  ministry  had  not  been  secured, 
verted  is  measured  by  the  Divine  II.  The  lessons  which  this  one  fact 
works  that  have  been  done  amongst  teaches  us  are  very  obvious.  In  our 
them.  Christian  labour,  whether  at  home  or 

V.  That  the  relative  degree  of  abroad,  we  must  not  be  satisfied  with 
guilt  belonging  to  sinners  will  fully  results  that  did  not  satisfy  Christ, 
appear  on  the  day  of  judgment. —  The  evangelical  history  will  be  sure  to 
D.  Thomas,  D.D.  be  repeated    wherever    the   gospel   is 

preached.  Miracles  will  not  be  wrought, 

Ver.  20.  The  true  test  of  success. — We  but,  by   processes  that   work    just  as 

see   the    Son  of    man  mourning    over  certainly,    though  more   slowly,   tem- 

comparatively  wasted  labour.      There  poral  good  will  be  created.     We  may 

were  G-alilean  cities,  with  Capernaum  use   these    temporary    results    as    an 

at  their  head,  in  which  He  had  spent  instrument  for  securing  the  end.     The 

much  of  His  time,  and  done  most  of  end   is    not    temporal  prosperity^   but 

His  mighty   works.      Great   blessings  spiritual   life;    not  the   refinement  of 

had  been  conferred,  great  joy  created,  society    but    the     conversion    of    the 

But  there  was  not  repentance,  and  all  individual. — Charles  Vince. 
the  other  fruit  of  our  Lord's  ministry 

failed  to  meet  His  desire.     This  fact  Vers.  23,  24.  Capernaum  and  Sodom. 

shows   us   what   in   the    judgment  of  — 1.  The  honour  of  a  town  is  the  gospel ; 

Jesus  is  the  high  and  true  success.  and  where  it  is  most  clearly  preached, 

I.  Glance   at   what  took   place  in  that  place  is  exalted  most  and  made 

Capernaum,  at  the   spirit  the  people  nearest  heaven.     2.   Means  of  grace 

manifested,  and  at  the  great  amount  if  they  avail  not  unto  true  conversion, 

of  good  that  was  done. — 1.  By  going  do  bring  a  man  deeper  in  the  state  of 

through  the  four  Gospels  and  making  a  condemnation.    3.  Abuse  and  contempt 

283 


CHAP.  :^i.     SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


of  the  gospel,  impenitent  unbelief,  and      the   grossest  sins  against    the  law. — 
disregarding  the  offers  of  God's  grace      David  Dickson. 
do  weigh  heavier  in  God's  balance  than 

MAIN  HO  MILE  TICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  2^— ^0. 

Invincible  meekness. — The  "  season "  here  mentioned  was  one,  apparently,  of 
disappointment  and  gloom.  The  doubtful  faith  of  the  "  disciples  of  John " 
(vers.  1-6) ;  the  general  unbelief  of  that  "generation"  both  in  Jesus  and  John 
(vers.  15-19) ;  and  the  especial  perverseness  of  those  "  cities  "  for  which  the  Saviour 
had  done  the  most  (vers.  20-24) — had  all  been  present  to  His  mind.  What  did  it 
all  mean  ?  Clearly,  to  Christ,  that  God  did  not  intend  His  mission  to  have  more 
than  a  limited  scope.  In  other  words,  that  God  did  not  intend  the  blindness 
of  those  so-called  "  wise  and  prudent "  who  rejected  the  message  of  His  Son  to 
be  removed  by  its  means ;  but  that  He  rather  intended  its  truths  to  be 
"  revealed  "  only  to  those  whom  they  regarded  as  "  babes  "  (ver.  25  ;  cf.  1  Cor. 
i.  26,  etc.).  This  was  the  truth  which  that  "season  "  had  begun  to  make  plain. 
How  our  Saviour  accepted  it,  in  the  first  instance,  and  how  He  acted  on  it  in 
the  second — are  what  we  have  now  to  consider. 

I.  How  our  Saviour  accepted  this  truth. — In  the  first  place,  with  what 
expressions  of  meekness  !  The  Saviour's  language  is  not  that  of  merely  reluctant 
acquiescence.  "  I  submit  because  I  can  do  nothing  else."  Nor  yet  that  of  merely 
dutiful  but  sorrowful  resignation.  "  I  submit  because  I  feel  that  I  ought.'*  It 
is  the  language,  rather — the  express  language — of  satisfaction  and  joy.  "I 
thank  Thee — I  praise  Thee  (R.V.) — for  what  Thou  hast  done."  In  the  next 
place,  we  may  see  with  what  reality  of  meekness  the  Saviour  accepted  these 
facts.  This  is  evident  from  the  reason  given  for  His  expressed  satisfaction  and 
praise.  Why  was  this  appointment  so  pleasing  to  Him  ?  Because  He  found  it 
to  be  pleasing  to  God — pleasing  to  Him  towards  whom  He  stood  in  the  relation 
of  Son.  This  was  the  exact  reason — this,  in  fact,  the  only  assigned  reason — 
why  it  was  pleasing  to  Him.  "  Even  so.  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy 
sight  "  (ver.  26).  To  His  spirit  that  was  almost  more  than  enough.  Lastly,  we 
may  see  with  what  depth  of  meekness  this  submission  is  made.  Who  is  this  that 
thus  rejoices  in  being  Hmited  thus  ?  He  is  One  so  great  that  the  Father  Himself 
has  entrusted  all  into  His  hands ;  so  great,  again,  that  no  one  knows  Him  fully 
except  the  Father  Himself ;  so  great,  once  more,  that  only  He,  and  those  whom 
He  pleases  to  teach,  can  know  the  Father  Himself  (ver.  27).  Yet,  of  all 
these  "  crowns  " — and  all  involved  in  them — He  openly  divests  Himself  here. 
Distinctly  claiming  them  all.  He  as  distinctly  accepts  them  all  only  in  sub- 
mission to  His  Father,  Thus  to  be  limited  is  part  of  His  mission.  It  is,  also, 
to  Him,  its  chiefest  privilege.  Also,  to  Him,  its  crowning  joy.  No  one  is 
greater — no  one  meeker — than  He  ! 

II.  How  He  acted  upon  it. — With  what  marked  alacrity ^  in  the  first  place. 
There  is  a  beautiful  abruptness  about  the  beginning  of  ver.  28.  From  speaking 
of  His  glory  and  greatness,  the  Saviour  turns  suddenly  to  His  duty.  Is  it  so — 
though  being  such  as  He  is — that  He  is  sent  unto  "  babes  "  ?  Unto  "  babes,"  at 
once  He  will  go.  Unto  "  babes,"  to  those  that  are  "  weary,"  and  so  in  need  of 
His  help.  Unto  "  babes,"  to  those  "  heavy  laden "  also,  and  so  confessing 
their  need  (cf.  ix.  13 ;  Rev.  iii.  17,  18).  All  such  He  invites  at  once  to 
"  come  "  unto  Him  (ver.  28).  With  what  precision  and  fulness,  in  the  next  place. 
Come  unto  Me  and  you  shall  have  just  that  which  your  special  condition 
requires.  Are  you  weary?  Here  is  "rest."  Have  you  no  help  in  yourselves? 
Here  is  all  in  Me.  Trust  Me,  in  short,  to  do  for  you  just  that  which  you  need. 
Trust    Me,    also,    to    do   it   for    you   without    lacking    or   doubt.      Whatever 

284 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xi. 


may  be  the  case  with  others,  /  will  give  it  unto  you  (end  of  ver.  28).  Also  see, 
finally,  with  what  admirable  consistency  the  Saviour  acts  in  this  case.  Where 
would  He  have  those  who  listen  to  Him  find  this  contentment  and  *'  rest "  ? 
Where  He  has  found  it  Himself.  He  seems  to  say  to  such,  in  short,  as  on 
another  occasion  (John  xiii.  13-15),  you  "  see  what  I  have  done."  How  I,  on  my 
part,  have  submitted  to  a  "  yoke  "  !  How  completely  and  meekly  I  have  done 
so !  How  bright  has  been  the  result ;  what  seemed  most  exacting  having 
turned  out  most  full  of  joy  in  the  end  !  I  counsel  you,  on  your  part,  to  do  the 
same  kind  of  thing.  Take  this  "  My  yoke  "  upon  you  !  Learn  to  do  in  this  as 
I  do.  Believe  Me  your  doing  so  will  cause  you  to  be  in  this  as  I  am.  "  Kest " 
indeed  shall  be  yours. 

Two  principal  stages  of  Christian  experience  seem  portrayed  to  us  here. 

1.  There  is  some  rest — there  is  much  rest — even  in  first  ^^  coming  "  to  Christ. — 
In  this  sense  he  that  has  once  believed  has  "  entered  into  his  rest  "  (Heb.  iv.  3). 
In  a  certain  wholesome  and  most  true  sense  he  rests  from  his  *'  works." 
In  an  equally  wholesome,  though  difierent  sense,  he  rests  from  his  *'  sins." 
And  he  rests,  especially,  and  of  course,  from  his  harassing  fears.  It  follows, 
therefore,  that  merely  to  have  come  into  the  great  Sinbearer's  presence, 
merely  to  have  accepted  His  offer — to  have  tasted  His  mercy — to  have 
committed  all  to  His  grace  (2  Tim.  i.  12) — is  the  day-break  of  peace.  The  sun 
"has  risen  "  where  this  is  true  of  the  soul  (Rom.  v.  1,  viii.  1,  etc.). 

2.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  a  fuller  rest.,  even  a  "  rest  to  the  soul,"  in  having 
done  more ;  in  having  thereby  become  conformed  to  His  likeness ;  and 
especially  in  being  conformed  to  it  in  that  respect  which  is  spoken  of  here. 
Good  it  is  to  have  reached  the  presence  of  the  Saviour  at  all.  Better  still, 
because  a  sure  proof  of  this,  to  have  reached  His  image  as  well.  Best  of  all  to 
have  done  so  in  this  innermost  matter  of  "  will."  "  Even  Christ  pleased  not 
Himself"  (Rom.  xv.  3).  Be  that  also  our  mark!  Rest  of  this  kind  is  rest 
from  "  self  " — and  so,  from  everything  else  ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  25-27.  Christ^ s  thanksgiving. 
— Is  it  to  be  a  thanksgiving,  then, 
after  such  a  series  of  disappointments 
and  vexations?  Even  so.  As  He 
has  looked  to  the  cities  of  the  plain 
His  voice  has  been  a  wail;  now  that 
He  looks  up  to  His  Father  wailing 
ceases,  and  thanksgiving  takes  its 
place.  So  will  it  always  be  to  faith 
which  is  genuine  and  deep  enough. 
It  is  only  when  we  look  below  and 
around  that  we  are  depressed.  When 
we  look  up  we  are  strong.  "  I  will 
lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills,"  etc. 
(Ps.  cxxi.  1,  2).  Was  it  the  remem- 
brance of  this  passage  at  the  time 
of  need  which  suggested  the  form  of 
His  thanksgiving :  *'  I  thank  Thee, 
Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth "  ? 
Surely  we  have  heard  the  living 
original  of  that  grand  apostolic  word, 
"  In  everything  give  thanks  "  j  for  if 


"  at  that  season"  (R.  V.),  the  Saviour 
of  men  found  occasion  for  thanksgiving, 
we  may  well  believe  that  at  any 
season,  however  dark,  we  may  find 
something  to  stir  our  hearts  to  grati- 
tude ;  and  the  very  exercise  of  thanks- 
giving will  bring  a  deep  spiritual  joy 
to  set  against  the  bitteiest  sorrow, 
even  as  it  was  with  our  Lord,  who, 
as  St.  Luke  informs  us,  **  rejoiced  in 
spiiit "  as  He  lifted  up  His  soul  in 
thanks  to  God  that  day.  What, 
then,  does  He  find  to  be  thankful 
for? 

I.  He  discovers  a  cause  for  grati- 
tude in  the  very  limitation  which 
occasions  His  sorest  disappointments. 
— "  I  thank  Thee  .  .  .  because  Thou 
hast  hid  these  things,"  etc.  There 
is  of  course  the  cheering  thought  that 
amid  the  general  unbelief  and  rejection 
there  are  some  childlike  ibouIs  who  have 

285 


CHAP.  XL     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


welcomed  the  truth.  Some  are  fain  to 
make  this  the  sole  cause  of  thankfulness, 
as  if  He  meant  to  say,  "  I  thank  Thee, 
that  though  Thou  hast  hid,"  etc.  But 
there  is  no  authority  for  introducing 
this  little  word.  The  Saviour  gives 
thanks,  not  merely  in  spite  of  this 
hiding,  but  because  of  it.  It  is  true, 
indeed,  that  He  uses  the  language  of 
resignation,  "  Even,  so  Father,"  etc., 
which  makes  it  evident  that  the  fact 
that  so  many  of  the  wise  and  intelligent 
rejected  His  gospel  presented  a  real 
difficulty  to  His  mind,  as  it  has  done 
to  earnest  souls  in  all  ages.  But  while  it 
was,  no  doubt,  enough  for  Him  to  feel 
sure  that  it  was  right  in  the  sight  of 
God,  we  are  not  without  indication  in 
what  follows,  that  His  faith  not  only 
led  to  resignation,  but  enabled  Him  to 
see  for  Himself  that  it  was  wisely 
ordered.  For  what  is  the  great  object 
of  the  gospel  ?  Is  it  not  to  dethrone 
self,  and  enthrone  God  in  the  hearts  of 
men  ?  It  is  clear,  then,  that  if  it 
had  in  any  way  appealed  to  pride  and 
self-sufficiency,  it  would  have  defeated 
its  own  end.  Suppose  the  revealing  of 
things  had  been  to  the  wise  and 
prudent  as  such,  what  would  have  been 
the  result  ?  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
would  have  become  a  mere  scholarship 
prize.  And,  however  good  a  thing 
scholarship  may  be,  and  however  im- 
portant that  it  be  encouraged,  this  is 
not  the  work  of  the  Christ  of  God. 
His  gospel  is  for  all ;  so  it  is  addressed 
not  to  the  great  in  intellect,  which 
would  confine  it  to  the  few,  but  to  the 
lowly  in  heart,  which  brings  it  within 
reach  of  all,  for  the  very  wisest  and 
greatest  in  intellect  may  be,  and  ought 
to  be,  meek  and  lowly  in  heart. 
Indeed,  is  it  not  to  the  meek  and  lowly 
heart  that  even  truths  of  science  are 
disclosed?  A  man  who  approaches 
nature  with  a  preconceived  theory, 
about  which  his  mind  is  already  made 
up,  is  sure  to  miss  the  mark.  In  this 
connection  one  sees  the  special  appro- 
priateness of  the  reference  to  *'  the 
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth."  The 
principle  is  one  which  is  not  restricted 
in    its   range ;    it    runs    all    through 

286 


nature.  Still  more  appropriate  is  the 
appeal  to  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  It 
is  not  for  the  Father  to  be  partial  to 
His  clever  children,  and  leave  the  less 
favoured  ones  to  shift  for  themselves. 
So  the  more  one  thinks  of  it,  the  more 
in  every  point  of  view  does  it  seem 
good  and  necessary  that  these  things 
should  not  be  made  known  to  the 
"  wise  and  understanding  "  (R.V.),  as 
such,  but  should  be  revealed  to  "  babes," 
to  those  of  childlike  spirit. 

II.  The  next  great  thought  which 
comes  to  the  relief  of  the  Saviour  in 
His  discouragement  is  that,  while 
there  are  barriers  in  the  heart  of  man, 
there  is  no  barrier  in  the  heart  of  God, 
no  limit  whatever  to  the  outpouring  of 
Divine  love  and  grace.  *'  All  things 
are  delivered  unto  Me  of  My  Father." 
Even  at  the  time  when  it  is  borne  in 
upon  Him  that  men  will  have  none  of 
Him,  He  exults  in  the  thought  that 
He  has  everything  for  them.  As  He 
thinks  over  it  His  heart  yearns  over 
the  orphaned  children  of  men,  and  He 
exults  in  the  thought  that  He  has  for 
them  the  revelation  of  the  Father's 
heart  and  home,  with  enough  and  io 
spare  for  all  His  children  (ver.  27). 
Then  follows  such  an  outpouring  of 
heart  as  there  never  has  been  before 
(vers.  28-30).—/.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

The  Johannine  character  of  this 
passage. — The  passage  seems  to  me  just 
one  solitary  flower  testifying  to  the 
presence  in  the  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew 
and  St.  Luke  of  the  same  root  of  thought 
and  feeling,  which  everywhere  blossoms 
in  that  of  St.  John.  It  looks  as  if  it 
had  crept  out  of  the  fourth  Gospel  into 
the  first  and  third,  and  seems  a  true 
sign,  though  no  proof,  that  however 
much  the  fourth  be  unlike  the  other 
Gospels,  they  have  all  the  same  origin. 
— Geo.  Macdonald,  LL.D. 

Vers.  28-30.  Ch^isVs  universal  invita- 
tion.— I.  The  twofold  designation  of 
the  persons  invited.  — They  are  such  as 
"  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."  These 
two  expressions  cover  the  active  and 
the  passive  sides  of  our  need.     The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,   MATTHEW,      chap.  xi. 


former  refers  to  work  which,  by 
reason  of  excess  in  amount,  or  distaste- 
fulness  in  kind,  has  become  wearisome 
toil.  The  latter  points  not  so  much  to 
the  burden  of  duties  or  tasks  as  to  the 
heavy  and  painful  experiences  which 
we  all,  sooner  or  later,  have  to  carry — 
the  burdens  of  sorrow  and  care.  Both 
have  a  deeper  significance  when  viewed 
in  relation  to  God's  law  of  righteous- 
ness. There  are  painful  and  futile 
efforts  to  keep  the  law,  which  weary 
the  doers ;  and  there  is  the  sore  burden 
of  failure,  guilt,  and  habit,  which  bows 
down  men's  backs  always,  whether 
they  know  it  or  no. 

ir.  The  twofold  invitation. — "  Come 
unto  Me  "  and  '*  Take  My  yoke  upon 
you."  The  former  is  faith  ;  the  latter, 
practical  obedience.  The  former  is  the 
call  to  all  the  weary  ;  the  latter  is  the 
further  call,  which  they  only  who  have 
come  will  obey.  The  whole  sum  of 
piactical  obedience  is  further  set  forth 
as  "  learning  of  Him."  The  imitation 
of  Jesus  is  the  one  commandment  of 
Christian  morals ;  but  it  should  never 
be<  forgotten  that  such  imitation  is 
only  possible  when  His  Spirit  dwells  in 
us  and  makes  us  like  Him.  There 
may  be  as  much  weariness  and  bond- 
age in  imitating  Christ  without  His 
life  in  us,  as  in  any  other  form  of 
trying  to  work  out  our  own  righteous- 
ness. 

III.  The  twofold  rest. — Perhaps  the 
variation  in  the  form  of  the  promise  in 
the  two  clauses  is  intended  to  carry 
a  great  lesson.  "  I  will  give  you 
rest,"  seems  more  appropriate  to  de- 
scribe the  rest  consequent  on  our  first 
coming  to  Christ,  which  is  simply  and 
exclusively  a  direct  bestowment,  and 
"  ye  shall  find  rest "  more  fitted  to 
describe  a  repose  which  is  none  the  less 
His  gift,  though  it  is  dependent  on  oar 
practical  obedience,  in  a  way  in  which 
the  former  is  not.  There  is  an  initial 
rest,  the  rest  of  faith,  of  pardon,  of  a 
quieted  conscience,  of  filial  communion 
with  God ;  a  rest  involved  in  the  very 
act  of  trust,  as  of  a  child  sleeping 
secure  on  its  mother's  breast.  But 
there  is  a   further    rest    in    bearing 


Christ's  yoke.  Obedience  delivers  us 
from  the  unrest  of  self-will.  To  obey 
an  authority  which  we  love  is  repose. 
It  brings  rest  from  the  tyranny  of 
passion,  from  the  weight  of  too  much 
liberty,  from  conflicting  desires.  There 
is  rest  in  Christ-likeness.  He  is  meek 
and  lowly;  and  they  who  wear  His 
image  find  in  meekness  tranquillity, 
and  some  quieting  from  His  deep 
calm  hushes  their  spirits.  Such  rest  * 
is  like  God's  rest,  full  of  energy.  His 
yoke  is  easy,  and  His  commandments 
are  not  grievous,  not  because  He 
lowers  the  standard  of  duty,  but 
because  He  alters  the  motives  which 
enjoin  it,  and  gives  the  power  to  do 
them.  Christ's  yoke  is  padded  with 
love,  and  His  burden  is  light,  because, 
as  St.  Bernard  says,  it  carries  the  man 
who  carries  it. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  28.  Christ's  call  to  the  weary. — 
This  verse  is  frequently  misquoted,  as 
if  *'  weary  and  heavy-laden."  This 
only  brings  out  half  its  truth.  The 
call  would  then  be  only  to  one  side  of 
human  weariness,  whereas  it  is  to  both 
— to  the  labouring  as  well  as  to  the 
heavy-laden,  to  the  active  as  well  as 
the  passive  side  of  human  weariness,  to 
those  weary  in  doing  as  well  as  those 
weary  in  bearing. 

I.  To  the  weary  in  active  life. — 
"  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour." 

1.  To  the  weary  worker. — We  are  too 
fond  of  spiritualising  Christ's  words. 
He  addresses  the  literal  labourer  and 
offers  real  rest.  (1)  To  the  individual. 
The  weary  workman ;  tired  business 
man.  He  gives  body -rest,  nerve-rest, 
mind-rest,  because  He  gives  spirit-rest. 
(2)  To  the  class.  In  the  degree  in 
which  the  community  comes  to  Christ 
it  finds  rest  both  in  and  from  labour. 
The  spirit  of  Christ  in  human  society 
allays  the  fever  and  fret. 

2.  To  the  weary  worshipper, — 
(1)  Weary  in  religious  observances. 
Some  from  custom.  Need  to  come  to 
Christ  as  well  as  to  church ;  then  there 
is  rest  and  refreshment  in  worship. 
Others  come  as  a  duty.  '^  Come  to 
Me,"   not    to    foims    and    ceremonies 

287 


CHAP.  XI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW, 


(xxiii.  4).  Religion  an  inward  thing; 
love  and  devotion  to  a  Person.  No 
rest  in  mere  ritualism.  (2)  Weary 
in  self -reformation.  In  struggle  with 
evil  tendencies  or  bad  habits.  De- 
feated and  disappointed.  Christ  gives 
double  rest — rest  of  pardon  and  rest  of 
power. 

3.  To  the  weary  worldling. — The 
sated  pleasure-seeker  or  society-monger, 
who  cries  with  the  wisest  and  weariest 
of  worldlings,  "  Vanity  of  vanities." 

II.  To  the  weary  in  passive  life. — 
"  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that — are 
heavy-laden."  There  is  the  weariness 
of  still  life  as  well  as  that  of  active 
life. 

1.  To  those  with  a  physical  burden. 
— (1)  The  aged.  These  have  borne  the 
burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  and  feel 
the  weight  of  years.  Rest  in  faith,  in 
contemplation.  (2)  The  feeble.  Christ 
will  give  the  rest  of  resignation  and  of 
quiet  service.  (3)  The  suffering  (see 
ver.  5).  Rest  to  soul  and  ease  to 
body.  The  spirit  of  Christ  is  in  social, 
sanitary,  and  medical  science  for  the 
mitigation  and  abolition  of  suffering. 
To  the  incurable  He  cries,  "  Come 
unto  Me,"  in  heaven — where  the  weary 
are  at  rest. 

2.  To  those  with  a  mental  burden. — 
(1)  The  careworn.  Christ  cures  cark- 
ing  care,  gives  rest  from  worry. 
*'Your  Heavenly  Father  knoweth," 
etc.  (2)  The  sorrowful.  He  comforts. 
(3)  The  doubting.  To  weary  doubters. 
"  Come  unto  Me."  *'  If  any  man  will 
do  His  will,"  etc.  Come  to  a  loving 
divine  Person,  not  to  creeds  and  argu- 
ments ! 

3.  To  those  with  a  spiritual  burden. 
— They  need  deliverance  from  the 
guilt  and  power  of  sin. 

Conclusion:  (1)  The  call  is  wide  as 
human  misery,  yet  hmited  to  the 
weary.  If  you  are  not  yet  tired  of 
the  world,  of  self  and  sin,  it  is  not 
for  you.  You  will  not  listen.  (2)  But 
listen,  ye  weary  !  He  who  calls  knows 
the  weariness  of  doing  and  bearing. 
He  was  the  weariest  that  ever  walked 
the  earth.  He  bore  the  burden  of  a 
world's  sin. — S.  E.  Keeble. 

288 


Christ  our  rest. — "  I  will  rest  you." 
This  is  the  literal  translation,  which 
means  more  than  "  give  you  rest."  It 
is  not  as  if  rest  were  a  blessing  He 
could  bestow  as  a  friend  would  make 
a  present  which  might  be  retained 
after  the  giver  had  gone.  Rest  is  not 
so  much  what  He  gives  to  us  as  what 
He  is  to  us ;  and  so  He  says,  not  "  I 
will  give  you  rest,"  but,  "  I  will  rest 
you  "  {i.e.  "  I  will  be  your  rest). — J.  M. 
Gibson,  D.D. 

"/."—In  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin" 
there  is  a  picture  drawn  of  a  slave, 
weary  and  worn  with  toiling  in  the 
sultry  sun.  One  quotes  the  words 
"  Come  unto  Me  all  ye,  "  etc. 
"  Them's  good  words,"  is  the  response, 
*'  but  who  says  'em  ? "  Obviously  all 
depends   on   that. 

Ver.  29.  The  lowly  Teacher. — When 
Jesus  sought  disciples  He  professed 
Himself  meek  and  lowly  in  heart. 
What  was  the  attraction  of  this 
claim  ? 

1.  It  was  a  promise  to  be  kind 
and  patient  with  slow  learners. — In 
His  school  the  lessons  are  often  hard  ; 
the  Teacher  never  is.  We  cannot 
learn  from  the  brilliant.  They  dazzle 
us ;  they  do  not  instruct  us.  We 
cannot  learn  from  the  austere  ;  terror 
paralyses  our  slow  faculty,  and  we  lose 
heart  to  go  on.  But  we  may  learn 
from  One  who,  however  far  above  us, 
is  lowly  of  heart,  who,  however  slow 
He  finds  us,  never  loses  patience,  but 
remains  meek. 

2.  It  was  the  claim  of  a  Teacher  who 
was  also  a  Learner. — No  human  teacher 
is  great  if  he  is  not  learning.  Over 
the  teaching  of  Jesus  our  Lord,  to 
whom  all  things  were  delivered  of  the 
Father,  no  cloud  of  error  can  rest. 
But  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  He  was  a 
Learner.  Though  He  were  a  Son,  He 
learned  obedience  by  the  things  that 
He  suffered,  and  all  His  schooling  is  in 
His  memory  still. 

3.  It  was  proof  that  He  loved  the 
slow,  dull  scholars.  —  "  Love  never 
boasteth  of  herself."     Is  it  so  ?     Then 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xi. 


how  did  He  say :    "I  am  meek  and  canings  were  alike  in   vain.      Seizing 

lowly  of  heart  "  1     Should  He  not  have  the  little  fellow  angrily,  he  thrust  him 

left  another  to  praise  Him  ?     Nay,  He  out  of  the  school,  and  sent  him  home 

never  was  so  meek  and  lowly  as  when  as  too  dull  to  learn   anything.      The 

He    professed    Himself    such.       Love  frightened    child    hid    himself   in   his 

opens  her  mouth  and  speaks  the  truth  mother's  arms,  and  sobbed  out  all  his 

when  she  is  claiming  the  place  where  grief.     Then  she  sat  beside   him    and 

she  can  render  fittest  service. —  W.  R.  patiently  taught  him  his  letters,  and 

JVicoll,  LL.B.  bore   with    a    hundred    failures,    and 

praised  his  occasional  success,  and  so 

The  yoke  of  Christ. — Have  you  ever  led  him  on  until  he  was  a  scholar  almost 

noticed    where    this   direction   comes  ?  before  he  knew  it. — M.  G.  Pearse. 
It  comes  after  the  invitation,   '  Come 

unto  Me."     It  comes  after  the  promise,  Ver.  30.  Christ's  yohe  and  burden. — 

"  I  will  give  you  rest."     Christ's  yoke  The  yoke  of  Christ  is  easy,  and  His 

is  : —  burden  light : — 

I.  His  will.  —  Salvation  may  be  I.  Because  we  bear  it  with  the 
looked  upon  as  a  series  of  acceptances,  approbation  of  conscience. — The  yoke 
We  accept  His  pardon,  His  righteous-  which  is  borne  by  a  good  conscience  is 
ness.  His  rest.  We  accept  also  His  always  light ;  the  burden  which  does 
will.     Our  study  now  is,  not  what  we  not  consist  of  sin  is  never  heavy. 

shall  choose,  but,  what  is  it  that  He         II   Because  it  is  borne  in  love . 

has  chosen  for  me  ?  Love  lightens  labour,  lessens  adversity, 

II.  His  rule. — Liberty  in  Christ  sweetens  care,  and  is  unconscious  of  a 
does  not  mean  freedom  from  control ;  yoke  which  otherwise  would  be  heavy, 
that  would  be  lawlessness.  Christ  When  we  are  murmuring  within  our- 
sets  us  free  by  translating  us  out  of  selves  at  the  cost  of  our  Christianity, 
the  reign  of  sin  into  the  reign  of  grace.  it  is  because  we  have  not  yet  realised 
The    best   way  to   be   free  from  sin's  the  value  of  Christ. 

dominion  is  to  be  well  under  Christ's  III.  Because  it  is  borne  with  the 

control.  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

III.  His  discipline. — We  are  under  IV.  Because  His  burden  becomes 
His  correction  and  instruction  as  well  lighter  the  longer  it  is  borne. — That 
as  His  protection.  We  are  in  His  which  required  eflfort  at  first  is  at 
school.  To  take  Christ's  yoke  is  a  length  done  with  ease  and  enjoyment. 
voluntary  act  and  means  submission  Nobody  will  believe  that  until  he  has 
2iiidi  obedience. — Evan H.  Hopkins^  M. A.  experienced  it.      But   every  Christian 

knows  that  it  is  true. 
A  teacher  should  be  meek. — The  story  V.  Because  we  are  sustained  under 
is  told  of  one  of  our  most  gifted  poets,  it  by  a  good  hope. — Heaven  and  end- 
that  when  a  little  lad  of  six  he  was  less  happiness  are  before  us,  and  the 
sent  to  what  was  called  a  *'  charity  "  assurance  that  they  are  reserved  for 
school.  Sensitive  and  timid,  frightened  us,  while  we  are  kept  for  them,  steadies 
at  the  master's  look  and  voice,  and  at  us  beneath  a  weight  which  else  might 
the  cane,  without  which  nothing  was  bear  us  down. — W.  M.  Taylor^  D.D. 
done  in  those  days,  he  could  only  tremble 

over  his  lesson,  and  blunder  tearfully  Christ's  burden  light. — Somewhere  in 

instead  of  saying  it,  going  back  beaten  Schiller's  poems  a    beautiful    story   is 

and  bewildered  to  try  again.      Little  told  illustrative  of  what  I  wish  to  tell 

wonder  that  he  came  to  think  himself  you.     The  story  says   that  when  God 

as  stupid  as  the  master  said  he  was,  made  the  birds  He  made   them  with 

and  despaired   of  ever  knowing   any-  gorgeous    plumage    and    sweet   voices, 

thing.     At  last  the  master's  patience  but   without  wings.      They  knew  not 

was  exhausted,  the  scoldings  and  the  how  to  soar  but  how  to  sing,  and  the 

u  289 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


story  runs  that  God  laid  wings  on  the  thought  were  burdens  were  changed  to 

ground  and  said,  "  Take  these  burdens  pinions.      So  thei-e   are   many   things 

and  bear  them."     They  took  them  up  which    God    imposes   upon    us   which 

on  their  backs,  and  struggled  along  with  seem  too  heavy  for    us  to    bear,  but 

them,  folding  them  over  their  hearts,  if   in    the    name   of  Jesus,    we    take 

Presently  the  wings  grew  fast  to  their  them  up,  we  shall  find  they  grow  fast 

breasts,  and  spread  themselves  out,  and  to  us  and  become  pinions. — A.  T.  Pier- 

then  they  found  that  what  they  had  son,  D.D. 


CHAPTER  XII. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Pluck  the  ears  of  corn. — See  Deut.  xxiii.  25. 

Ver.  3.  What  Bavid  did. — David's  action  was  not  an  apparent  contravention  of  the 
Sabbath-law,  but  an  apparent  contravention  of  the  temple-  or  tabernacle-law.  But  our  Lord 
reasons  from  equals  to  equals,  or,  on  the  principle  of  equivalents.  The  temple  and  the 
Sabbath  were  equivalent  or  equal  in  sanctity  (Morisofi). 

Ver.  4.  Did  eat  the  shewbread. — The  old  bread  that  was  removed  on  the  Sabbath  morning 
from  the  g:olden  table  to  make  way  for  the  fresh  loaves  (Lev.  xxiv.  5-9  ;  1  Sam.  xxi.  6). 

Ver.  5.  Profane  the  Sabbath. — Viz.  when  they  do  the  work  of  the  temple ;  in  removing,  e.g. 
the  old  shewbread  and  replacing  it  with  the  "  hot,"  and  in  offering  up  the  sacrificial  lambs, 
etc.  It  was,  indeed,  one  of  the  sayings  of  the  Kabbins,  "  There  is  no  Sabbath -keeping  in 
the  temple."  Thus,  if  all  work  on  the  Sabbath  "profaned"  the  Sabbath,  as  the  Pharisees 
maintained,  the  priests  were  guilty  of  continual  profanation  (Morisoi). 

Ver.  7.  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice. — Moral  and  not  positive  duties,  these  made 
up  the  true  life  of  religion,  and  were  alone  acceptable  to  God.  It  was  because  they  had 
inverted  the  right  relation  of  the  two  that  they  had,  in  this  instance,  condemned  those  whom 
our  Lord  now  declares  to  have  been  in  this  respect  absolutely  guiltless  (Phimptre). 

Ver.  8.  Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath  day. — A  prophetic  intimation  cleared  up  by  the  event,  that 
the  law  of  the  Sabbath  would  be  changed,  as  it  has  now  been  under  the  gospel,  not  by  any  alter- 
ation in  the  proportion  of  time  due  to  God,  but  in  the  position  of  the  day ;  by  the  transfer  of 
it  from  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  to  the  first,  in  memory  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Son  of 
man  (^Word swarthy . 

Ver.  10.  Hand  withered. — Shrunk  and  dried  by  some  kind  of  atrophy.  Is  it  lawful,  etc. — 
Talmudical  scholars  tell  us  that  in  later  days  the  Rabbins  differed  on  the  point,  but  that  the 
prevalent  opinion  was,  that  only  sickness  threatening  immediate  danger  to  life  could  lawfully 
be  treated  on  the  Sabbath  {Maclaren).    Accuse  Him. — To  the  local  judicatory. 

Ver.  13.  He  stretched  it  forth. — By  this  act  the  restored  man  defied  the  authority  of  the 
Pharisees  and  acknowledged  that  of  Christ.  Hence  it  was  a  signal  manifestation  of  faith, 
even  as  the  cure,  in  the  midst  of  such  contradiction,  was  an  instance  of  special  power, — 
{Lange). 

Ver.  18.  Judgment. — The  idea  embodied  in  the  prediction  is  that  it  would  be  the  aim  of 
the  Messiah,  as  universal  Judge,  to  put  all  things  to  rights  among  all  nations.  The  judicial 
function  is  one  of  the  most  important  elements  in  the  office  of  a  monarch.  It  is  in  virtue  of 
it  that  differences  between  man  and  man  are  adjusted,  while  the  rights  of  all  the  members 
of  the  community  are  vindicated,  so  that  harmony  and  co-operatiou  may  be  secured. — 
(Jdorison). 

Ver.  20.  Till  He  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory. — The  idea  is  that  the  Messiah  sliall 
persevere  in  His  own  quiet,  gentle,  meek,  unostentatious,  unobstreperous  way,  healing  heart 
after  heart,  and  adjusting  difference  after  difference,  until  He  shall  succeed  in  getting  His 
gracious  arbitrative  action  thrust  in  victoriously  upon  all  the  injustices  and  unrighteousnesses, 
that  alienate  man  from  man,  and  men  from  God  (ibid.). 

Ver.  23.  Is  not  this  the  Son  of  David  ?— See  "The  Parallel  New  Testament"  (1882).  The  "not  " 
is  omitted  in  both  columns.  It  "  was  wisely  omitted  by  King  James'  translators.  It  is  not 
found  in  the  1611  edition,  the  primary  edition.  Neither  is  it  found  in  the  four  succeeding 
folio  editions,  those  of  the  years  1613,  1617,  1634,  1640.  But  somehow  or  other  it  has 
got  smuggled  into  our  present  copies  "  (Jforison).  The  form  of  the  question  expresses  be- 
wilderment and  hesitation  ;  but  hesitation,  nevertheless,  that  inclined  to  a  negative  decision. 

290 


HOAIILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xii. 


The  idea  that  the  Wonder-worker  was  the  Messiah,  the  Messianic  son  of  David,  was  forced 
in  upon  their  minds,  but  yet  they  could  not  entertain  it  (ibid.). 

Ver.  24.  Beelzebub. — See  on  x.  25.  A  like  narrative  has  met  us  in  ix.  32,  and  it  is  probable 
enough  that  the  charge  was  repeated  as  often  as  the  occasion  presented  itself,  and  as  often 
answered  in  identical  or  like  words  (Plumptre).  The  words  appear  to  have  been  whispered 
by  the  Pharisees  among  the  people.  They  were  not  addressed  to  Jesus  {ibid.).  Two  things 
are  here  implied  :  1.  That  the  bitterest  enemies  of  our  Lord  were  unable  to  deny  the  reality 
of  His  miracles.  2.  That  they  believed  in  an  organised  infernal  kingdom  of  evil,  under  one 
chief.  This  belief  would  be  of  small  consequence,  had  not  our  Lord  set  His  seal  to  it ;  but 
this  He  immediately  does  (vers.  25,  26)  (Brown). 

Ver.  27.  By  whom  do  your  children  cast  them  out  I— The  "  children"  of  the  Pharisees  are 
their  disciples,  and  in  this  case,  such  as  practised  exorcism,  like  the  sons  of  Sceva  in 
Acts  xix.  13.  The  belief  in  demoniacal  possession  had  as  its  natural  accompaniment  the 
claim,  on  the  part  of  those  who  could  control  the  disordered  reason  of  the  possessed  person, 
of  power  to  cast  out  the  demon.  We  need  not  assume  that  such  power  was  always  a  pretence, 
or  rested  on  spells  and  incantations.  Earnestness,  prayer,  fasting,  faith — these  are  always 
mighty  in  intensifying  the  power  of  will,  before  which  the  frenzied  soul  bows  in  submission 
or  yields  in  confidence,  and  these  may  well  have  been  found  among  tlie  better  and  truer 
Pharisees.  Our  Lord's  question,  indeed,  requires  for  its  logical  validity  the  admission  that 
the  "children"  of  the  accusers  did  really  cast  out  demons,  and  that  not  by  Beelzebub 
(Plumjjtre). 

Ver.  28.  The  kingdom  of  God. — The  Destroyer  of  Satan  is  already  in  the  midst  of  you,  and 
that  kingdom  which  is  destined  to  supplant  His,  is  already  rising  on  its  ruins  (Bron-n). 
Come  unto  you. —  Upon  you  (R.V.).  Literally,  surprised  you  by  coming,  came  upon  you 
unawares  (Carr). 

Ver.  31.  Blasphemy. — In  general,  the  idea  of  a  malicious  attack  upon  a  person,  whose  fame 
is  calumniously  injured,  attaches  to  the  term  "blasphemy."  Hence,  defamation  of  what  is 
good,  noble,  and  holy,  on  its  appearance  in  the  world,  with  malicious  (lying  and  murderous) 
intent  (Lange). 

Ver.  32.  Neither  in  this  world,  etc. — Just  an  extended  way  of  saying  "never."  Of. 
Mark  iii.  29  (Morison). 

Ver.  33.  Either  make  the  tree  good,  etc. — The  meaning  and  connection  are  :  "  Be  honest  for 
once;  represent  the  tree  as  good,  and  its  fruit  as  good,  or  the  tree  as  evil,  and  its  fruit  as 
evil ;  either  say  that  I  am  evil,  and  that  my  works  are  evil,  or,  if  you  admit  that  My  works 
are  good,  admit  that  I  am  good  also  and  not  in  league  with  Beelzebub  "  ( Carr). 

Ver.  34.  0  generation  of  vipers,  etc.— IT;  offspring  of  vipers  (R.V.).  Here  the  law  which 
had  been  pressed  in  its  logical  bearing  in  the  preceding  verse,  is  brought  in  to  explain  the 
bitter  and  evil  words  of  the  Pharisees  (Plumptre).  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  etc. 
— What  is  in  the  well  will  be  in  the  bucket  (Trapp). 

Ver.  37.  By  thy  words. — Words  exhibit  the  righteousness  or  unrighteousness  which  is  in 
the  heart  (Bengel). 

Ver.  38.  A  sign. — See  Luke  xi.  16.  They  wanted  something  of  an  immediate  and  decisive 
nature,  to  show,  not  that  His  miracles  were  real — that  they  seemed  willing  to  concede — but 
that  they  were  from  above,  not  from  beneath  (Brown).  Gerlach  and  Lisco  suggest  that  these 
Pharisees  were  better  inclined,  and  less  opposed  to  Jesus,  than  the  others.  But  in  our 
opinion  they  were  rather  the  worst  among  the  bad  (Lange). 

Ver.  39.  Adulterous. — Adultery,  taken  in  a  spiritual  sense,  according  to  the  Old  Testament 
idea,  is  equivalent  to  apostasy  or  idolatry  (Isa.  xxiii.  17).  Jesus  foreknew  that  the  apostasy 
of  the  Pharisees  would  lead  them  even  to  an  outward  alliance  with  the  heathen  in  the  act  of 
His  crucifixion  (Lange).  No  sign. — The  words  seem  at  first  to  place  our  Lord's  miracles  of 
healing  outside  the  category  of  signs,  and  yet  it  was  to  these  that  He  referred  the  messengers 
of  the  Baptist  as  proof  that  the  Christ  had  indeed  come  (xi.  5),  and  appealed  in  John  v.  36. 
They  must,  however,  be  interpreted  by  the  context.  One  sign  and  only  one,  such  as  they 
demanded,  differing  from  and  transcending  the  miracles  of  healing,  should  be  given  to  those 
for  whom  the  oth.er  notes  of  Messiahship  were  insufficient,  and  that  should  be  the  sign  of  the 
prophet  Jonas  {Plvmjdre^. 

Ver.  40.  Three  days  and  three  nights. — I.e.  three  of  the  periods  composed  of  a  night  and  a 
day  (pvxdvfjiepov)  which  was  reckoned  as  one  day.  On  the  Jewish  principle,  that  a  part  of 
any  such  period  is  as  the  whole,  a  whole  day  and  part  of  two  other  days  would  be  reckoned 
as  three  (Mansel).  Whale. — Sea-monster  (R.V.  margin).  Heubner  relates  an  instance  of  a 
sailor  who  was  swallowed  by  a  shark,  and  yet  preserved.  In  the  heart  of  the  earth. — Some 
interpret  simply  in  the  grave  ;  others  in  hades. 

Ver.  41.  Rise. — Stand  up  (R.V.).  The  word  "rise"  is  used  not  of  the  mere  fact  of  resur- 
rection, but  of  standing  up  as  witnesses  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  42.  The  queen  of  the  south.— Of  Sheba,  Southern  Arabia  (1  Kings  x.  1).  A  greater 
than  Solomon.— Solomon  was  wise,  but  here  is  Wisdom  itself  {Bengel). 

291 


CHAP.  XII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  43.  When  the  unclean  spirit,  etc. — The  connection  is  not  clearly  marked.  It  seems  to 
be  this :  Christ  has  been  speaking  of  "  this  generation ; "  He  now  contrasts  it  with  past 
generations.  The  Jews  of  former  times  were  like  a  man  possessed  by  a  demon,  the  Jews  of 
this  day  are  like  a  man  possessed  by  many  demons  {Carr).  Dry  places. —  Waterless  (R.V.) 
The  waterless  desert  uninhabited  by  man  was  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  the  especial  abode  of 
evil  spirits  (ibid.). 

Ver.  44.  Empty. — Properly,  at  leisure.  To  have  cast  out  a  sin  does  not  make  a  man  safe 
from  sin  ;  there  must  be  no  leisure  in  the  Christian  life  (ibid.). 

Ver.  46.  His  brethren.— See  on  xiii.  55.  Desiring  to  speak  with  Him. — A  motive  is  assigned 
(Mark  iii.  21).  It  would  seem  that  the  Pharisees,  on  the  pretext  that  Jesus  had  a  demon,  had 
persuaded  His  friends  to  secure  Him  ( Carr). 

SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTE. 

Vers.  31,  32.  The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  they  would  never  have  for- 
Ghost. — In  "  Exegetical  Studies,"  by  the  Rev.  giveness,  but  be  guilty  of  eternal  sin.  And 
P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.  (T.  and  T.  Clark),  there  is  an  from  this  we  infer  that  it  is  probable  that 
able  exposition  of  this  subject,  in  which  the  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  no 
various  opinions  that  have  been  held  are  particular  act  of  sin,  but  a  malicious  dis- 
stated.  Dr.  Gloag's  view  is  similar  to  that  position ;  a  perseverance  in  opposition  to 
of  Dr.  David  Brown,  as  given  in  the  outline  Christ  in.  spite  of  the  Spirit's  influences  to 
on  p.  309.  He  says,  "The  sin,  then,  against  overcome  that  opposition;  an  incurable,  and 
which  our  Lord  cautioned  the  Pharisees,  therefore,  an  unpardonable,  evil  disposition  ; 
supposing,  as  we  think  most  probable,  His  and  this  disposition  is  here  called  blasphemy 
words  to  be  a  caution  and  not  a  sentence,  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  it  consists 
was  the  continuance  in  tlicir  opposition  to  in  a  continued  resistance  to  His  influences." 
Him  and  to  His  doctrine  after  the  Holy  An  article  on  the  subject  in  the  Evangelical 
Ghost  was  given.  These  blasphemies  against  Magaiine^  from  the  pen  of  the  Eev.  G.  S. 
Him  were  pardonable ;  their  malicious  dis-  Barrett,  B.A.,  called  forth  some  valuable  dis- 
position had  not,  as  yet,  placed  them  outside  cussions  and  notes  in  the  Expository  JimeSf 
the  pale  of  Divine  mercy  ;  if,  however,  they  November  1891  to  March  1892. 
persevered  in  their  opposition  after  the  Holy 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—8. 

Sabbatical  needs. — The  strife  and  opposition  of  the  last  chapter  seem  to  be 
continued  in  this.  Animated  probably  by  what  we  are  told  of  there,  certain 
Pharisees  here  come  forward  to  make  an  attack  in  words  on  the  Saviour  of 
mankind.  That  attack  itself,  in  the  first  place ;  the  rephj  it  received  at  the 
time  ;  the  instruction  it  afterwards  led  to,  are  the  main  features  of  the  story 
which  follows. 

I.  The  attack  itself. — The  occasion  of  this  was  the  action  of  the  disciples  when 
walking  with  their  Master  on  one  particular  Sabbath-day  through  the  "corn- 
fields." "  Being  hungered  " — a  point  specially  noted — they  plucked  a  portion  of 
the  standing  corn  as  they  passed;  and  "  rubbing  it  in  their  hands,"  (Luke  vi.  1), 
ate  the  grain  obtained  in  this  way.  Although  such  use  of  the  corn  was  expressly 
sanctioned  in  Deut.  xxiii.  25,  the  "  plucking  "  and  *'  rubbing "  necessary  for 
this  purpose  were  considered  by  the  Pharisees  to  be  sufiiciently  near  to  "  reap- 
ing" and  "  threshing"  to  constitute  them  "  secondary"  violations  of  the  fourth 
commandment.  They,  therefore,  accused  His  disciples  unto  Him  of  having  so 
done  (ver.  2).  Nothing  is  said  of  the  fact  that  the  disciples  were  hungry ; 
nothing  of  the  fact  (for  so  it  seems  to  have  been)  that  the  disciples  only  had  thus 
partaken  of  corn  ;  all  the  supposed  blame  of  all  done,  is  virtually  charged  upon 
Him.  *'  Why  is  it  that  Thou  dost  thus  permit  Thy  disciples  to  do  what  ought 
not  to  be  done  ?  " 

II.  The  primary  reply  to  this  attack  corresponded  to  it  in  every  respect.  It 
did  so  as  to  persons.  Only  the  disciples  had  been  avowedly  blamed.  Only  the 
disciples  are  avowedly  defended.  It  did  so  as  to  purport.  What  the  question 
implied  was  that  they  had  broken  the  law  and  were  guilty.  What  the  reply 
implied  was  that  they  were  "  guiltless  "  (end  of  ver.  7),  and  had  not  broken  the 

292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.    chap.  Xit 


law.  It  did  so,  also,  as  to  method  of  proof.  The  Pharisees  had  aimed  at  their 
point  by  appealing  tacitly  to  a  method  of  interpreting  the  law,  which  certain 
later  Israelites  among  themselves  had  designed  and  invented.  According  to  this 
way  of  interpretation,  it  was  breaking  the  law  even  for  a  hungry  man  to  do 
anything  which  could  be  considered  even  an  approach  to  such  things  as  "  reaping  " 
and  "threshing"  on  the  Sabbath  day.  The  Saviour,  in  this  reply,  therefore, 
appealed  in  turn  to  other  methods  of  "understanding  the  law.  I*sotably,  on  the 
one  hand,  to  that  adopted  in  one  particular  case,  where  one  of  the  most  pious  and 
revered  of  their  ancestors,  David  the  king,  with  the  full  sanction  of  the  priests 
of  his  day  (1  Sam.  xxi.  3-6),  had  done  exactly  as  had  been  done  now  by  the  disciples 
of  Christ,  viz.,  set  aside  a  strict  ceremonial  observance  where  it  was  necessary  to 
do  so  for  the  preservation  of  life.  Also,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  interpretation 
practically  adopted  in  a  vjhole  collection  of  cases  of  a  similar  kind,  as  when  the 
*'  priests  in  the  temple,  e.g.  the  acknowledged  examples  and  guides  of  the  people 
in  the  intei'pretation  of  the  law,  constantly  did  that  in  the  discharge  of  their 
duties,  under  the  law,  which  "  profaned  the  Sabbath  "  in  fact,  and  which  yet, 
being  necessary,  was  not  considered  to  profane  it  in  law.  In  all  these,  and  that 
of  David  before,  the  obvious  principle  was  that  that  is  not  to  be  regarded  as 
rebellion  which  cannot  be  avoided.  Exactly  the  same  principle  applied  to — 
and  cleared — the  disciples. 

III.  The  further  instruction. — Although  these  most  legitimate  tu  quoques 
had  thus  fully  silenced  the  accusers  of  the  disciples,  they  had  not  been  equally 
successful  in  instructing  the  disciples  themselves.  They  had  only  shown,  as  it 
were,  the  negative  side,  viz.,  that  it  was  neither  right  nor  necessary  to  insist 
rigorously  on  the  absolute  letter  of  the  law.  For  the  sake  of  His  disciples, 
therefore,  in  the  first  instance — and  not  without  an  eye  in  all  probability  to  many 
others  in  subsequent  years — the  Saviour  adds  what  we  may  consider  a  few  words 
in  briefest  outline,  on  the  positive  side  of  the  matter.  If  not  in  the  mere  letter, 
how  then  were  God's  ordinances  to  be  observed  ?  On  this  question  He  appears 
to  give  a  short  succession  of  rules.  The  first  rule  is  to  look  upon  it  as  a  question 
of  degree.  The  physical  life  of  man  is  a  greater  thing  in  itself  than  the  mere 
physical  rest  of  the  Sabbath.  So  also  were  the  positive  enactments  of  the  temple 
service.  "  There  was  one  " — there  was  "  that "  (R.  Y.,  both  statements  are  true) 
— which  was  "greater"  than  these.  They  must  carry  that  principle  out.  The  ques- 
tion must  be  settled  by  reference  to  that  "  greatest  "  of  all.  The  second  rule  was 
to  look  upon  the  point  to  be  settled  as  being  also  a  question  of  kind.  How  were  they 
to  determine  the  relative  greatness  of  an  appointment  ?  By  its  relative  capacity 
for  eiFecting  the  good  purpose  of  God.  What  God  had  in  view  in  His  ordinances 
about  men  was  their  welfare,  not  their  injury ;  their  profit,  not  their  loss ; 
increasing  their  happiness,  not  merely  restricting  their  liberty  ;  "showing  mercy" 
towards  them,  rather  than  exacting  "  sacrifice  "  from  them.  Let  them  judge  ac- 
cordingly, therefore,  in  regard  to  all  His  ordinances  on  this  question  of  "  greater  " 
and  "  less."  That  was  the  truest  method  of  observance  which  corresponded 
most  truly  to  the  merciful  objects  in  view.  Lastly,  let  them  consider  to  whom 
both  these  principles  would  conduct  them  at  last.  Who  was  this  "  greater  than  " 
the  "temple?  "  This  greatest  of  all?  Who  but  the  Saviour  Himself  of  whom 
and  of  whose  work  all  these  were  but  shadows  and  types  ?  And  why  was  He,  in  this 
way,  the  greatest  of  all  ?  Because  He  was,  in  Himself  and  His  work,  the  very 
embodiment,  and  secret,  and  seal  of  all  God's  fullest  purposes  of  mercy  to  the 
children  of  men — "  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  "  because  Lord  of  all  that  was  for  the 
good  of  mankind. 

From  the  points  thus  settled  certain  further  points,  having  special  reference 
to  the  two  here  specially  mentioned  types  of  the  Sabbath  and  the  temple,  seem 
to  arise,  viz. : — 

293 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILEfIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


1.  That  the  types  in  question  differ  widely  in  character. — The  one  pointing 
forward  only  to  that  which  has  been  long  since  accomplished  by  the  Saviour 
(John  ii.  21).  The  other,  apparently,  pointing  to  that  which  He  has  yet  to  bring 
in  (Heb.  iv.  9). 

2.  That  there  is  a  cori^esponding  difference  in  the  language  of  the  Saviour  about 
them. — The  Saviour  deliberately  saying  that  about  the  one  in  John  iv.  21  which 
He  nowhere  says  about  the  other,  not  even  in  such  circumstances  as  those 
described  here. 

3.  That  the  spirit,  therefore,  of  this  latter  symbol,  should  be  observed  by  us  still. 
— A  type  which  has  never  been  fulfilled,  an  observance  which  has  never  been 
abrogated,  can  hardly  be  obsolete  yet. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-14.  The  Pharisees^  Sabbath 
and  Christ's. — This  passage  includes  two 
Sabbath  incidents,  in  the  first  of  which 
the  disciples  are  the  transgressors  of 
the  Sabbatic  tradition ;  in  the  second, 
Christ's  own  action  is  brought  into 
question.  The  scene  of  the  first  is  in 
the  fields,  that  of  the  second  is  the 
synagogue.  In  the  one,  Sabbath 
observance  is  set  aside  at  the  call  of 
personal  needs  ;  in  the  other,  at  a  call 
of  another's  calamity.  So  the  two 
correspond  to  the  old  Puritan  principle 
that  the  Sabbath  law  allowed  of 
*'  works  of  necessity  and  of  mercy." 

I.  The  Sabbath  and  personal  needs. 
. — What  a  glimpse  into  the  penury  of 
their  usual  condition  the  quiet  state- 
ment that  the  disciples  were  hungry 
gives  us,  especially  if  we  remember 
that  it  is  not  likely  that  the  Master 
had  fared  better  than  they  !  As  soon 
as  they  "  began "  to  eat,  the  eager 
Pharisees,  who  seem  to  have  been  at 
their  heels,  call  Him  to  "  behold  "  this 
dreadful  crime.  If  they  had  had  as  sharp 
eyes  for  men's  necessities  as  for  their 
faults  they  might  have  given  them 
food  which  it  was  ''  lawful "  to  eat, 
and  so  obviated  this  frightful  iniquity. 
But  that  is  not  the  way  of  Pharisees. 
Moses  had  not  forbidden  such  gleaning, 
but  their  casuistry  decided  that  pluck- 
ing the  ears  was  of  the  nature  of 
reaping,  and  reaping  was  work,  and 
work  was  forbidden,  etc.  Our  Lord 
accepts  His  questioners'  position  for 
the  time,  and  gives  them  a  perfect 
answer  on  their  own  ground.  He 
quotes   two   instances   in   which   cere- 

294 


monial  obligations  give  way  before 
higher  law.  "In  this  place"  (He 
adds) — here  among  the  growing  corn, 
beneath  the  free  heaven,  far  away 
from  Jerusalem — "  is  One  greater  than 
the  temple."  He  is  all  that  the  temple 
symbolised.  Where  He  stands  is  holy 
ground,  and  all  work  done  with  refe- 
rence to  Him  is  worship.  These  poor 
followers  of  His  are  priests  ;  and  if,  for 
His  sake,  they  had  broken  a  hundred 
Sabbath  regulations  they  are  guiltless. 
So  far  our  Lord  has  been  answering 
His  opponents  ;  now  He  attacks.  The 
quotation  from  Hosea  is  often  on  His 
lips.  Here  He  uses  it  to  unmask 
the  real  motives  of  His  assailants. 
Their  murmuring  came  not  from  more 
religion,  but  from  less  love. 

II.  The  Sabbath  and  works  of 
beneficence. — Matthew  appears  to 
have  brought  together  here  two  inci- 
dents which  were  separated  in  time, 
according  to  Luke.  Matthew  tells  us 
that  they  ask  our  Lord  the  question 
which  Luke  represents  Him  as  asking 
them.  Perhaps  we  may  say  that  He 
gave  voice  to  the  question  which  they 
were  asking  in  their  hearts.  The 
whole  thing  was  an  attempt  to  get^, 
Jesus  within  the  meshes  of  the  law.  |r 
Again,  as  in  the  former  case,  it  is  the* 
traditional,  not  the  written  law,  which 
healing  would  have  broken.  It  is  a 
significant  instance  of  the  absurdity 
and  cruelty  which  are  possible  when 
once  religion  has  been  made  a  matter 
of  outward  observance.  Here  Jesus 
appeals  to  the  natural  sense  of  com- 
passion to  confirm  the  principle  that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  Xli. 


Sabbath  observance  must  give  way  to  on  whose  watchfulness  the  safety  of 
the  duty  of  relieving  others.  The  form  the  city  depends,  desert  his  post,  and 
in  which  our  Lord  puts  His  conclusive  go  and  look  for  food  because  his  heart 
answer  to  the  Pharisees  gives  an  is  heavy  for  want  of  it.  The  laws  of 
unexpected  turn  to  the  reply.  He  honesty  and  duty  are  above  everything, 
does  not  say  "  It  is  lawful  to  heal,"  But  it  is  just  a  sign  of  the  disorder  and 
but  "  It  is  lawful  to  do  well,"  thus  at  discordance  of  this  world  that  in  it 
once  showing  the  true  justification  of  natural  rights  seem  sometimes  to  con- 
healing,  viz.,  that  it  was  a  beneficent  flict,  and  natural  necessities  go  unsup- 
act,  and  widening  the  scope  of  His  plied,  because  their  supply  would  be  a 
answer  to  cover  a  whole  class  of  cases,  sacrifice  of  higher  things.  In  a  world 
The  principle  is  a  wide  one. — A,  of  perfect  order  every  hunger  would 
Maclaren,  D.D.  instantly  assert  its  right  to  food,  and 

find    that    right   recognised   by   every 

Ver.  2.  Pharisaism. — 1.  It  is  no  new  obedient  energy  back  to  the  centre  of 

thing  to  see  men  who   are  otherwise  all  energy,  which  is  God  Himself.     In 

learned,  and  are  in  account  for  their  all  his  ideal  teachings  Jesus  lepresents 

holiness    in  the  church,  to  be  ad  ver-  this   condition,    in    which    every   true 

saries  unto  Christ  and  His  disciples.  want  of  man  has  a  right  to  and  claims 

2.    Christ's   disciples   readily   shall   be  an  immediate  supply  from  God.     The 

mistaken  and  misconstrued,  do  what  claim  of  the  human  upon  the  Divine  ; 

they  please.      3.    Hypocrites   do  urge  how  better  can  I  describe  the  compre- 

ceremonies  and  external  observations,  hensive   meaning   of   the    gospel  1     It 

more  than  the  greater  things  of  the  appears  in  its  widest  presentation  in 

law. — David  Dickson.  the  wonder  of  the   Incarnation.     Ke- 

membering  that  general  law,  as  applied 

Vers.  3,  4.   The  sacredness  of  tnan^s  to  this  instance  of  which  we  have  been 

needs. — I.     This   is   the   lesson   which  speaking,  will  it  not  be  the  portion  and 

Christ    intended    to     teach     in     His  duty  of  every  man  who  knows  himself 

reference   to   this   act  of   David.      In  to   be   a   child   of   God   to   claim    im- 

general,     it    may    be    stated    as    the  mediately  the  highest  and  Divinest  of 

sacredness  of  mans  needs,  or  the  right  his  Father's  helps  for  all  his  own  most 

of  man  in  his  healthy  human  wants  ordinary  needs  1 

to  the  holiest  and  best  supply. — The  II.  There  is  a  distinction  which  we 

picture  is  of  a  hungry  man.     Hunger  are  always  drawing  between  what  we 

is    natural     and    healthy.       Equally  call  things  secular  and  what  we  call 

natural  with  hunger  is  the  relief   of  things    sacred. — It    is    good    to    per- 

hunger.       The    world    is     made    not  petually   remind    ourselves    that    the 

merely  to  produce  the  want,  but  the  difference  between  things  sacred  and 

bread.     The  hungry  man  has  a  table  things  profane  is  not  that  in  things 

at  his  side.     The  very  field  in  which  sacred  God  is  present,  and  that  from 

the  farmer  works  until  he  is  faint  and  things   secular   God   is   absent.       Yet 

weary  brings  forth  corn  which  gives  there    is    a    difference    between     the 

strength  and  refreshment.      Here,  in  sacred   and    the   secular.      There  is  a 

token  of   natural   adjustment,  is   the  difference  between  reading  your  Bible 

sign  of  the  Divine  recognition  of  the  andreadingyour  novel,  between  talking 

certain  right  which  hunger  has  to  its  politics     and     saying     your     prayers, 

supply.     That  right,  indeed,  is  subject  between  going   to  the    counting-house 

to,  and   sometimes   held   in    abeyance  and    going    to    church.      One    set    of 

and  suspense  by,  a  higher   right.     A,  actions  belongs   distinctly   to   a  lower 

hungry   man   must   not    put   out   his  region  than  the  other.     But  notwith- 

hand   and   steal    a    loaf    because    his  standing  this  is  so,  nay,  all   the  more 

unappeased  hunger  is  unnatural  and  because  this  is  so,  we  need  to  recog- 

wrong.    Nor  may  the  sentinel  on  duty,  nise  that  the  lower  life  is  God's,  and 

295 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     ST.   MATTHEW. 


that  He  cares  for  it,  and  that  He  uses 
it  as  truly  as  the  higher.  The  secular 
is  no  less  truly  sacred  than  the  sacred 
itself.  There  is  no  difference  of  quality 
between  them  ;  when  you  come  down 
from  the  summit  you  do  not  come  away 
from  God.  The  great  lesson,  the  great 
blessing  that  is  pressing  into  men's 
souls,  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the  truth, 
that  none  of  all  the  notes  of  life  can 
sound  truly  except  when  they  are 
sounded  in  the  atmosphere  of  God. 
The  mountain  tops  will  glow  more 
richly  as  the  valleys  are  all  filled  with 
light  and  send  up  a  reflection  of  the 
highest  glory.  The  temple  will  be  not 
less,  but  more  sacred  when  the  sacred- 
ness  of  the  shock  and  the  field  and  the 
home  are  cordially  and  thankfully 
acknowledged.  The  shewbread  will  be 
all  the  more  holy  when  it  is  proved 
that  it  is  not  too  holy  to  fill  the  hunger 
of  a  hungTy  man.  The  highest  realms 
of  religious  speculation  and  religious 
rapture  will  reach  higher  still  when 
religion  has  been  claimed  for  the 
commonest  duties  and  the  more  sordid 
sufferings  of  life  as  their  only  strength 
and  help. — Phillips  Brooks,  D.D. 

Interpreting  the  law. — 1.  When  the 
mind  of  the  Law-giver,  and  the  intent 
and  end  of  the  commandment  are 
not  contravened,  the  precept  is  not 
broken.  This  is  the  ground  of 
Christ's  defence.  2.  Not  reading  nor 
considering  the  Scripture  whereby  the 
meaning  of  the  law  may  be  understood, 
is  the  cause  of  error  and  mistaking  of 
duties. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  6.  Christ  greater  than  the 
temple. — I.  The  temple  exists  but  for 
Him. 

II.  It  is  but  a  place  of  assembly 
where  men  may  meet  with  Him. 

III.  However  splendid,  it  is  nothing 
except  He  be  there. 

ly .  However  lowly,  the  presence  of 
"the  great  King"  makes  of  it  a 
heavenly  palace. — J.  C.  Gray. 

Ver.  7.  Knowing  and  judging. — 
1.   The   true   meaning  of  God's  word 

296 


being  known,  will  prevent  rash  judg- 
ment. "If  ye  had  known."  2.  Con- 
demning the  guiltless  doth  draw  the 
judge,  being  rash,  under  guilt.  "  Ye 
would  not  have  condemned  the  guilt- 
less." 3.  It  is  not  every  man,  no,  not 
every  learned  man,  who  is  acquainted 
with  the  true  meaning  of  the  Scriptures, 
for,  in  saying,  "  If  ye  had  known  "  He 
taxed  both  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  of 
ignorance. — David  Dickson. 

Why  must  we  he  merciful? — 1.  Be- 
cause God  will  have  us  merciful,  and 
His  will  must  rule  us.  2.  Because 
charity  is  the  sum  of  religion.  3.  Be- 
cause herein  we  imitate  our  Father 
who  is  a  God  of  mercy.  4.  Because 
we  have  obtained  mercy  from  our 
Father.  5.  Because  otherwise  we 
neither  can  be  assured  of  mercy  from 
God  or  men  (v.  7,  vii.  2 ;  James 
ii.  13). — Richard  Ward. 

Mercy  and  sacrifice.  —  Archbishop 
Tillotson  gave  the  most  exemplary 
proof  of  his  charity  at  the  revocation 
of  the  edict  of  Nantes,  when  thousands 
of  Huguenots  were  driven  over  to  this 
country,  many  of  whom  settled  at 
Canterbury,  where  their  posterity  still 
continue.  The  king  having  granted 
briefs  to  collect  alms  for  their  relief, 
Dr.  T.  was  peculiarly  active  in  pro- 
moting their  success.  Dr.  Beveridge, 
one  of  the  prebendaries  of  Canterbury, 
refusing  to  read  the  briefs  as  being 
contrary  to  the  rubrics,  he  was  silenced 
by  Dr.  Tillotson  with  this  energetic 
reply,  "  Doctor,  Doctor,  charity  is 
above  rubrics." — Biblical  Museum. 

Sabbath-service. — In  the  Sabbath  of 
eternity  we  shall  rest  from  evil,  but 
doing  good  will  be  our  Sabbath  itself. — 
Bishop  Wordsworth. 

Vers.  7, 8.  Spirit  not  letter. — Although 
I  think  that  the  whole  law  is  done 
away  with,  so  far  as  it  is  the  law  given 
on  Mount  Sinai,  yet,  as  far  as  it  is  the 
law  of  the  Spirit,  I  hold  it  to  be  all 
binding;  and  believing  that  our  need 
of  a  Lord's  day  is  as  great  as  ever  it 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,    chap.  xii. 


was,  and  that,  therefore,  its  observance  should  think  it  mischievous  to  weaken 
is  God's  will,  and  is  likely,  so  far  as  we  the  respect  paid  to  it. — Dr.  Arnold] s 
see,   to    be  so  to  the  end  of  time,   I      letter  to  Justice  Coleridge. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—13. 

Sabbatical  mercy. — In  these  verses  we  have  a  natural  sequel — not  improbably 
a  very  close  sequel — to  the  verses  before.  "  When  Jesus  departed  from  "  the 
scene  of  the  last  story,  He  "  went  into  their  synagogue  " — the  synagogue,  appa- 
rently, of  the  very  persons  with  whom  He  had  just  had  to  do.  If  not  so,  the 
persons  He  found  there  were  certainly  of  much  the  same  kind ;  and  were  dealt 
with  by  Him,  also,  on  the  whole,  in  much  the  same  way.  It  will  be  instructive 
to  notice  how  far  the  two  stories  differ  from  each  other  :  1.  As  to  the  conduct  of 
the  opponents  of  Jesus.     2.  As  to  the  conduct  of  Jesus  Himself. 

T.  The  conduct  of  His  opponents. — The  first  difference  observable  here  is  as  to 
the  manner  of  attack.  Taught  by  experience,  if  they  were  the  same  persons  as 
before — or  else  taught  by  report,  if  they  were  not — they  did  not  as  before 
proceed  to  ask  a  question  which  implied  blame  of  itself.  The  previous  result 
was  not  of  a  kind  to  invite  the  repetition  of  such  tactics  as  that.  They  rather 
asked  a  question  which  they  hoped  might  lead  Him  into  giving  them  occasion  of 
blame.  There  was  a  man  there  with  a  "  withered  hand."  They  seem  to  have 
taken  for  granted  that  the  Saviour  was  both  able  and  willing  to  "  heal "  him. 
They  would  use  this  double  virtue  of  His,  if  they  could,  to  bring  an  "  accusation  " 
against  Him.  He  had  just  justified  the  disciples  for  satisfying  their  hunger  on 
the  Sabbath.  What  does  He  now  say  in  the  same  connection  about  healing  the 
sick  ?  (ver  10).  There  was  a  difference  also  as  to  the  ground  of  attack.  That  other 
question  was  one  of  necessity.  This  turned  on  mercy  alone.  In  all  probability 
the  burden  under  which  this  synagogue  worshipper  lay  was  one  of  some  standing 
already.  To  wait  for  its  removal  till  the  Sabbath  was  over — in  other  words, 
till  the  "even  was  come"  (cf.  viii.  16) — was  not  to  wait  very  long.  Would 
it  not  be  better  to  wait  until  then  1  (cf .  the  reasoning  to  this  very  effect  in  Luke 
xiii.  14).  In  other  words,  starvation  was  one  thing,  mere  relief  was  another. 
Even  if  He  had  taught  that  the  letter  of  the  Sabbath  law  might  be  infringed 
in  that  greater  emergency,  did  He  mean  to  teach  the  same  of  this  minor  one  too  % 
That  was  the  point  of  their  present  question. 

II.  The  conduct  of  the  Saviour. — The  Lord's  reply  to  this  question,  though 
like  that  given  in  the  previous  instance  (vers.  1-8)  in  being  a  virtual  appeal  to 
what  was  an  acknowledgedly  legitimate  way  of  understanding  the  "  command- 
ment "  in  question,  differed  from  it,  the  circumstances  being  difterent,  in  other 
respects.  It  did  so,  first,  in  regard  to  the  scope  of  the  illustration  employed. 
In  the  previous  case  the  question  of  necessity  being  that  in  hand,  the  illustra- 
tions chosen  (those  of  the  shewbread,  ver.  3  ;  and  of  the  temple  services,  ver.  5) 
were  such  as  dealt  with  this  point.  In  the  present  instance,  the  chief  question 
being  rather  that  of  mercy  alone  (as  we  have  seen)  the  illustration  selected  is  one 
that  turns  on  that  question  alone.  It  was  not  an  absolutely  necessary  action — 
it  was  only  a  kind  action — to  pull  out  "  one  sheep  "  from  the  "  pit."  It 
differed,  next,  in  regard  to  the  character  of  the  illustration  employed.  The  other 
illustrations,  being  addressed  chiefly  to  the  "  Pharisees  "  (ver.  2),  were  drawn 
from  sources  with  which  they,  as  Pharisees,  were  supposed  to  be  familiar. 
(Note  "  Have  ye  not  read  ?  "  in  ver.  3.)  This,  on  the  contrary,  being  addressed 
to  a  congregation  at  large  (cf.  "What  man  shall  there  be  of  you?"  ver.  11), 
was  specially  suited  to  such.  It  touched  only  on  such  a  matter  as  might  happen 
to  all.  It  spoke  only  of  such  an  action  as  would  be  adopted  by  all.  There  was 
no  man  there  who  on  the  Sabbath  day  would  not  draw  his  sheep  from  the  pit. 

297 


CHAP.  XII.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


And  hence,  perhaps,  in  the  third  place,  the  pecuhar  efficacy  of  this  reply.  In 
the  previous  case  the  question  answered  (ver.  2)  had  been  followed  by  another 
(ver.  10).  In  this  ease  the  answer  given  is  followed  by  silence.  No  one, 
apparently,  says  anything  when  the  Saviour  acts  on  His  answers  (vers.  12,  13). 
All  they  do  is,  when  He  has  done  so,  to  go  out  from  the  place  (ver.  14).  A 
marked  contrast,  apparently,  to  what  we  read  of  before.  After  the  first  answe 
His  enemies  seem  to  follow  Him  in  (ver.  9).  After  this  second  answer  they 
retire  from  His  presence. 

The  great  lesson  they  leave  behind  them  is  that  of  the  true  character  of 
the  Sabbath.  Not  only  does  it  admit  freely,  as  we  saw  before,  of  the 
supply  of  men's  needs.  Not  only  does  it  even  enjoin  this  as  in  perfect 
keeping  with  itself.  It  does  exactly  the  same  also — so  we  see  here — with  all 
that  is  really  for  his  welfare.  Nothing  is  more  in  keeping  with  it  than  to  "do 
good."  To  this  proposition,  in  the  way  of  demur,  there  is  nothing  to  be  said. 
*'  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man."  It  is  truly  "  keeping  the  Sabbath,"  there- 
fore, to  do  that  on  it  which  is,  in  the  truest  sense,  for  "  his  good  "  ! 


HOMILIES    ON    THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  9-12.  Healing  on  the  Sabhath. — 
1 .  Christ  went  on  to  follow  His  calling, 
notwithstanding  enemies  and  opposi- 
tion, for  after  His  disputation  in  the 
fields  with  the  Pharisees,  He  goeth  into 
the  synagogue,  where  He  might  do 
good  to  the  people.  2.  Christ's  enemies, 
when  they  have  no  just  quarrel  against 
Him  or  His  followers,  they  invent  one  ; 
as,  when  they  could  find  no  sin  at  all 
in  Him,  they  sought  to  accuse  him  for 
miraculous  healing  of  men  on  the 
Sabbath.  3.  Malice  maketh  men  blind, 
reasonless,  and  absurd ;  they  ask  if  it 
be  lawful  to  heal  a  man  miraculously 
on  the  Sabbath  day,  wherein  there  can 
be  no  apparent  ground  of  doubting. 
4.  The  more  impudent  Christ's  enemies 
be  against  Him,  the  more  shame  and 
confusion  the  Lord  will  bring  on  them  ; 
for  our  Lord  refuteth  His  adversaries 
by  their  own  confession,  that  it  was 
lawful  to  do  more  on  the  Sabbath  to  a 
beast,  than  they  did  question  Him  for 
doing  unto  a  man  (vers.  11,  12). — 
David  Dickson. 

Ver.  12.  Man  better  than  a  sheep. — 
There  are  few  things  in  our  Lord's 
teaching  more  interesting  to  notice 
than  the  enormous  value  which  He 
puts  upon  man.  Notice  a  series  of 
points  in  respect  of  which  a  man  is 
better  than  a  sheep  : — 

I.  His  physical  form  and  beauty. — 

298 


Are  you  going  to  take  that  noble  and 
beautiful  form,  and  make  it  the  instru- 
ment of  sin  ?  Are  you  going  to  dese- 
crate a  temple  so  fair  ? 

II.  He  is  endowed  with  reason. — 
The  true  glory  of  man  consists  not  in 
the  speed  with  which  he  can  run,  nor 
the  number  of  pounds'  weight  he  can 
lift,  nor  the  strong  wrestleis  he  can 
throw;  for  in  these  respects  even  the 
ostrich  and  the  ass  and  the  lion  easily 
outmatch  him.  And  yet  what  com- 
pensation intellect  provides  !  There  is 
no  point  in  respect  to  which  the  brute 
excels  us  where  reason  does  not  enable 
us  far  to  excel  the  brute. 

III.  He  is  endowed  with  a  moral 
nature. — He  is  an  accountable  and 
responsible  being  Even  the  fact  that 
he  has  it  in  his  power  to  do  wrong  pro- 
claims his  exalted  place  in  creation 

IV.  His  capacity  of  progress. — In 
this  respect  he  stands  alone  in  creation, 
so  far  as  it  presents  itself  to  our  view. 

V.  His  spiritual  nature  and  his 
capacity  for  knowing  God. 

VI.  He  is  possessed  of  immortality. 

VII.  Christ  died  for  him. — J.  Thain 
Davidson,  D.D. 

The  dignity  of  human  nature. — The 
truth  implied  in  this  question  is  pre- 
eminently Scriptui-al  and  Christian. 
It  is  not  a  discovery,  but  a  revelation. 
Look  at : — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  Xii. 


I.  The  state  of  the  world. — Corre- 
sponding to  differences  in  belief  as  to 
Biblical  truth  are  differences  in  feeling 
and  practice  as  to  the  point  referred 
to  in  our  text.  Where  the  Bible 
is  allowed  to  shine  "  ifl~  its  native 
lustre,    there   human  life  is  regarded 

\  as   very  sacred   and   precious;    where 
j  that   lustre   is    dimmtd    and    clouded 
C  by  men's  fancies  and  additions,  there 
the    life    of    man    is    held    cheap   in 
comparison ;    and   where  the  light   of 
Scripture  is  practically  invisible,  there 
the  life  of  man  is  as  dross.     In  Eng- 
land a   deliberate   case   of   life-taking 
convulses    the    wLole    neighbourhood 
in    which     it    occurs — sometimes    the 
whole  land.     But  in  some  continental 
countries  such  an  occurrence  is  little 
more  than  an  ordinary  death  amongst 
US;^     ,  We    may     compare    professing 
^Christendom  and  heathendom  in  much 
r  the  same  way.     As  for  Mohammedan 
^nations,     e.g.     who     approach    Cbris- 
tianity  the  nearest  and  detest  it  the 
most,     their    indifference    to     life    is 
sufficiently    evidenced    by     the    well- 
known     alternative     of     Mohammed 
himself — the    Koran    or    the    sword. 
And    as    for    pagan    nations    of    all 

/kinds,  where  "win  you  find  any  one 
that  shows  any  tenderness  for  man's 
life  ?  Not  even  amongst  those  supple 
worshippers  of  Brahma,  to  whom 
animal  life  is  so  dear.  These,  indeed, 
and  some  sects  of  Mohammedanism, 
are  the  farthest  of  all  from  our  text. 
They  respect  every  life,  except  man's, 
even  the  life  of  positive  vermin,  as 
well  as  of  sheep  and  cows. 

II.  The  contents  of  God's  word. — 
Scripture  references  :  "Ye  are  of  more 
value  than  many  sparrows."  "  Doth 
God  take  care  for  oxen  ? "  *'  Whoso 
sheddeth  man's  blood,"  etc.  Positive 
injunction  of  Moses  that  "  no  satis- 
faction "  should  be  taken  for  the  life 
of  a  murderer  (see  also  Gen.  i.  ; 
Ps.  viii.).  But  man  is  much  more 
than  the  highest  creature  on  the 
animal  ladder ;  he  is  the  child  of 
God,  the  image  of  His  nature  origin- 
ally, as  well  as  the  work  of  His 
hands.       All    this    lends    a    peculiar 


sanctity  to  the  life  of  a  man.  But, 
further,  while  as  the  work  of  His 
hands,  and  as  His  "  offspricg,"  we 
are  precious  to  God,  it  is  as  the 
race  which  the  Lord  of  glory  died 
to  redeem  that  human  nature  appears 
like  a  jewel  in  the  hands  of  its  God. 
If  you  value  things  by  tha  price  which 
is  given  for  them,  what  can  be  of  S 
greater  worth  than  a  man  ?  Let  us  / 
beware,  then,  how  we  allow  ourselves 
to  despise  any  one  of  man's  race,  what- 
ever his  position,  kindred,  character, 
or  creed.  Let  us  not  despise  ourselves 
either.  Let  a  sinner  be  what  he  will, 
unless  he  casts  himself  away  (which 
thousands  do),  he  is  too  precious  to 
be  lost  ! — Mathematicus  in  "  Homili»ty 


The  dignity  of  man.  —  Humboldt 
travelled  the  world  over,  and~saw 
everything ;  and  he  recorded  in  his 
diary  at  the  last  what  sounds  almost 
like  an  aphorism  :  "  The  finest  fruit 
earth  holds  up  to  its  Maker  is  a 
man  !  " — C.  S.  Robinson,  D.B. 

Doing  well  on  the  Sabbath-day. — 
Miss  Ellice  Hopkins  said,  in  reference 
to  her  work  among  woi'king  men  in 
Cambridge  :  "  I  trust  I  shall  not  have 
to  meet  any  objection  to  writing  being 
taught  on  the  Sunday.  As  a  grave 
mild-eyed  Quaker  replied  to  such  a 
foolish  Judaising  objector,  '  Friend, 
does  thee  not  think  that  pot-hooks 
are  better  than  the  pot-house  on 
the  Lord's  day?'  When  a  man  has 
written  six  times  down  his  copy-book 
with  much  labour  of  his  horny  palms, 
and  much  unwonted  attitude  of  his 
whole  person,  *  Be  not  overcome  of 
evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good ; ' 
or,  '  No  drunkard  shall  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  heaven ; '  there  is  net 
much  fear  of  his  forgetting  that  text." 

Ver.  13.  Man^s  power  of  volition. — 
I.  A  recognised  capability  of  voli- 
tion.— The  command  implies  that  the 
diseased  had  the  power  of  willing. 
Man  can  will. 

II.  The  true  law  of  volition. — The 
will  of  Christ,  not  circumstances. 

299 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTA'RY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


III.  The  value  of  obedient  volition. 

— He  obeyed  Christ,  and  his  volition 
sent  blood,  life,  and  energy  into  his 
withered  hand.  Let  us  will  what 
Christ  commands,  and  mighty  will  be 
our  achievements. — D.  Thomas,  D.D. 

Achieving  the  impossible.  —  With 
every  command  given  by  Christ  there 
comes  the  power  to  obey,  and  what 
is  needed  on  our  part  is  the  endeavour 
of  faith. 

I.  Many  Christians  are  like  this 
man  with  the  withered  hand. — 1.  They 
have  life,  hut  lack  poiver  ;  or :  2.  They 
have  life,  hut  carry  som^e  dead  limb  of 
sinful  habit,  doubt,  etc. ;  or  :  3.  There 
is  some  particular  gift  which  they  have 
lost  the  use  of  through  their  own  neg- 
lect, and  which  now  seems  dead. 

II.  To  such  Christ  comes  with  His 
commands,  which  seem  impossible,  un- 
reasonable ;  as  the  command,  "  stretch 
forth,"  to  this  man.  He  commands 
the.  weak  to  be  strong,  the  indolent 
to  be  active,  the  sinful  to  be  pure,  the 
feeble  to  put  forth  power — to  use  the 
dead  limb.  Never  so  firm  and  so 
exacting  a  master  as  Christ.  No 
moral  standard  so  high  as  His.  No 
religious  leader  ever  demanded  such 
complete  self -surrender.  Yet  His 
commands  not  grievous.  His  }oke 
easy,  etc.,  because  with  every  command 
He  gives  adequate  power  to  obey. 


III.   To    achieve    the     impossible 

on  our  part  there  must  be  :  1.  Desire; 
2.  Faith;  3.  Volition,  or  the  en- 
deavour of  the  will — the  acting  upon 
our  faith,  or,  rather,  upon  the  word 
of  Christ — the  "  stretching  forth. ' 
These  essential  on  our  part,  whether 
we  seek  power,  holiness,  restoration, 
or  deliverance  from  besetting  sin. 
Illustration  :  Ulysses  and  the  sirens. 
He  desired  to  escape,  put  forth  en- 
deavour. Beyond  that,  we  have  the 
Almighty  power  on  which  to  depend. 
'^  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,"  etc., 
so  that  *'  the  lame  take  the  prey." 
Same  truths  apply  to  unconverted. 
Christ  commands  you  to  repent,  be- 
lieve, live.  Have  you  the  desire  ? 
If  so,  move  Christward,  in  dependence 
on  Him,  and  with  the  endeavour  of 
faith.  He  will  give  the  adequate 
power,  and  though  dead,  yet  shall 
you  live.  His  work  complete — "  whole 
as  the  other." — W.  H.  Richards. 

Yers.  1-14,  The  Pharisee-spirit. — 
The  Pharisee  is  always  blind  as  an 
owl  to  the  light  of  God  and  true 
goodness  ;  keen-sighted  as  a  hawk 
for  trivial  breaches  of  his  cobweb 
regulations,  and  cruel  as  a  vulture, 
to  tear  with  beak  and  claw.  The 
race  is  not  extinct.  We  all  carry 
one  inside,  and  need  God's  help  to 
cast  him  out. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—21. 

Avoiding  strife. — The  friction  with  the  Pharisees,  of  which  we  have  just  read 
so  much,  could  have  only  one  end.  To  be  so  baffled,  so  eclipsed,  so  silenced  by 
one  like  Jesus,  in  the  presence  of  those  for  whose  praise  they  lived  (xxiii.  5-7), 
must  arouse  deadly  anger  at  last.  So,  accordingly,  we  find  expressly  stated  in 
ver.  14.  The  Evangelist  proceeds  to  tell  us,  first,  how  the  Saviour  replied  to 
this  move  ;  and  secondly  how  His  manner  of  doing  so  had  been  predicted  of  old. 
We  shall  find  a  striking  picture  in  the  first  of  these  accounts,  and  a  st/riking 
pi^ophecy  in  the  second. 

I.  A  striking  picture. — A  picture,  first,  of  very  great  power.  What  a  sense  of 
power  was  left  behind  by  that  which  we  read  of  Him  last.  Though  "  filled  with 
madness"  (as  said  of  them  in  Luke  vi.  11,  on  the  same  or  on  an  exceedingly 
similar  occasion)  all  that  His  enemies  can  do  now  is  to  "  go  out  "  and  begin 
"  conspiring  "  against  Him  (ver.  14).  Such  an  attempt  is,  in  itself,  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  His  power.  It  is  only  the  "  powers  that  be  "  that  are  ever  **  plotted 
against"  !  Also  now,  when  away  from  them  (ver.  15),  and  with  *' multitudes  " 
of  the  sick  about  Him  instead,  how  manifest  again  is  His  power.     He  "  heals 

300 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xii. 


them  all,"  it  is  said  (ver.  15).  Nothing  whatever  in  the  way  of  sickness  can 
contend  against  Him.  The  only  limit  is  as  to  making  known  (ver.  16)  what  He 
has  done.  A  picture,  secondly,  of  corresponding  forbearance  and  meekness.  For- 
bearance in  refraining  from  meeting  the  known  hostility  of  His  enemies  by  any 
counter  move  of  like  kind.  All  we  are  told  of  Him  is  that  He  first  "  perceived  " 
it,  and  then  got  out  of  its  way  (ver.  15).  Forbearance,  also,  in  not  wishirg 
that  anything  done  by  Him  should  bring  Him  into  conflict  with  them 
(ver.  16).  What  He  does,  in  short,  is,  so  far,  to  beat  a  "  retreat"  ;  and  to  take 
special  care,  in  doing  so,  that  even  the  mercy  shown  by  Him  should  not  interfere 
with  that  object.  Anything,  just  now,  rather  than  enter  on  strife  !  A  picture, 
lastly,  of  wonderful  pity  and  love.  Of  "wonderful  pity  "  because  of  the  miracles 
of  pity  which  we  see  wrought  by  His  hands.  Of  more  wonderful  pity  because 
of  the  circumstances  in  which  that  pity  is  shown.  Even  when  He  is  perfectly 
aware  that  His  enemies  are  seeking  His  life — even  when  He  is,  as  it  were, 
beating  a  retreat  from  their  malignity,  even  in  these  chilling  circumstances — He 
is  a  glowing  centre  of  love. 

II.  A  striking  prophecy. — According  to  the  Evangelist  a  far  older  pencil  than 
his  had  drawn  the  same  portrait  as  he.  A  certain  passage  from  the  prophet 
Isaiah  which  he  now  proceeds  to  quote,  had  long  ago  described,  in  all  essential 
particulars,  what  has  been  described  by  him  now.  This  he  seems  to  point  out  to 
us  in  four  principal  ways.  Has  he,  e.g.  now  presented  Jesus  to  us  as  the 
choeen  of  God,  even  as  one  who  could  say  of  Himself  as  in  xi.  27  ?  Did  not 
Isaiah  also  speak,  as  quoted  here  (ver.  18),  of  God's  chosen  Servant — God's 
best  beloved  Servant — God's  specially  sanctified  Seivant  ?  Has  the  Evangelist 
also  just  drawn  our  special  attention  to  the  "  power  "  of  the  Saviour?  Has  not 
Isaiah  also  here,  twice  over,  connected  Him  he  speaks  of  with  the  administration 
of  *' judgment"?  (vers.  18,  20).  And  what  is  "judgment"  with  all  its 
accompaniments — its  sword  and  its  robes ;  its  throne  and  its  bar — but  an 
assertion  of  "  power "  ?  Has  the  Evangelist,  again,  given  us  here  a  special 
presentment  of  the  forbearance  and  meekness  of  Christ  ?  How  closely,  again, 
correspond  to  this  those  words  of  the  prophet,  "  He  shall  not  cry  nor  strive, 
neither  shall  His  voice  be  heard  in  the  streets"  (ver,  19).  Finally,  has  the 
Evangelist  here  especially  dwelt  on  the  tenderness  of  His  love  ?  How  admirably, 
once  more,  does  the  language  of  the  prophet  describe  the  same  thing  !  Never 
was  there  before — never  has  there  been  since — a  more  gracious  description  ! 
"  A  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench." 
In  other  words,  to  the  most  afflicted,  to  the  most  infirm,  shall  it  be  His  to  give 
the  most  of  His  love.  So  much  so,  that  the  very  farthest  off",  when  they  hear 
it,  shall  believe  in  His  name.  In  that  ''  name  shall  the  Gentiles — even  the 
Gen  til  es — trust , ' ' 

In  this  same  thought,  also,  seems  the  one  application  of  the  whole  of  this  pas- 
sage.   The  whole  passage  is  pre-eminently  a  lesson  in  trust.     It  is  so,  because : — 

1.  Of  the  characteristics  it  combines. — This  power  which  has  such  complete 
power  over  itself  ;  this  courage  which  is  not  afraid,  where  need  be,  to  "  retreat "  ; 
this  love  of  truth  which  loves  peace  as  much  ;  this  dignity  which  can  stoop  to 
the  lowest ;  this  tenderness  of  love  which  is  most  at  home  with  those  who  need  it 
most  and  deserve  it  least — is  a  constellation  of  excellences  to  be  trusted  by  us, 
if  anything  is  !     To  be  trusted  by  all  of  us,  for  it  meets  the  case  of  us  all  ! 

2.  Of  the  evidences  it  combines. — This  incidental  illustration  of  these  various 
excellences  does  not  stand  by  itself.  We  have  seen  something  of  it  before 
(ix.  10-13).  We  shall  see  more  of  it  hereafter  (xiv.  13).  What  we  are  to 
notice  specially  here  is  that  it  formed  a  definite  part  of  the  whole  purpose  of  the 
kingdom.  This  was  the  kind  of  High  Priest  that  "  became"  us  (Heb.  vii.  26). 
This,  therefore,  the  kind  of  High  Priest  whom  God  sent  into  the  world. 

30i 


CHAP.  XTi.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  15.  Christ^ s  7'etirement  from  His 
enemies. — A  solemn  sign, 

T.  Not  of  fear  or  weakness. 

II.  But  of  power,  of  wisdom,  of 
compassion  and  of  judgement — Lange. 

Plotting  and  persevering. — I.  Phari- 
sees plotting  the  destruction  of  Jesus. 

II.  Christ  persevering  in  works  of 
beneficence  and  salvation. 

III.  One  district  suffers  but  another 
gains  by  the  secret  council  of  the 
wicked. — J.  C.  Gray. 

Yers.  18-20.    The  gentle  Servant   of 
Jehovah. — The    Elect    Servant   is    the 
Messiah,    and   Jesus    is    that    Christ. 
Mark  how  He  served  : — 

I.  Unostentatiously. — All  through 
His  ministry  Jesus  avoided  a  mere 
glare  of  publicity,  and  in  Galilee 
actually  charged  some  whom  He  had 
healed  not  to  make  Him  known.  He 
knew  that  to  attract  a  gaping  multitude 
of  followers  would  do  very  little  to 
promote  the  spiritual  ends  of  His 
ministry,  if,  indeed,  it  might  not  rather 
tend  to  hinder  them.  So  little  did  He 
think  of  a  "  big  crowd "  that,  when 
He  saw  it  gathering  under  the  influence 
of  curiosity,  or  a  desire  for  temporal 
advantage,  He  often  said  or  did  some- 
thing to  disperse  the  people,  or  to  escape 
from  them.  Evidently  He  regarded  it 
as  a  better  use  of  His  time  and  strength 
to  attach  to  Himself  a  smaller  number 
of  disciples,  so  training  them  and  imbu- 
ing them  with  His  spirit,  as  to  fit  them 
to  plead  His  cause,  and  plant  His  gospel 
after  He  had  returned  to  His  Father. 
It  is  not  to  be  inferred  that  preachers 
of  the  gospel  are  not  to  speak  in  the 
open  air,  or  in  chief  "  places  of  con- 
course." Timidity  and  fastidiousness 
have  no  right  to  claim  sanction  from 
the  unostentatiousness  of  Jesus.  There 
is  need  of  courage  and  enterprise ;  only 
one  must  not  court  personal  notoriety, 
or  glory  in  numbers.  Ministry  is  weak 
when  at  any  point  it  falls  out  of 
harmony  with  that  of  the  Chosen 
Servant.     One  may  draw  a  crowd,  and 

302 


yet   gain   very   few   disciples   for    the 
Lord. 

II.  Tenderly. — True,  that  the  min- 
istry of  Jesus  had  a  searching  power, 
like  that  of  a  "  refiner's  fire."     It  was 
even  scathing  and  terrible  to  hypocrites 
and  vainglorious  pedants  of   the  law ; 
but   it  was  full  of   gentleness  to  the 
people,  and   had  special  consideration 
for   the   weary   and  heavy-laden.     So 
"  the    common    people     heard      Him 
gladly,"   and   mourners   sought    Him, 
and  little  children  were  not  afraid  to 
come  at  His  call.     As,  after  rigorous 
winter  the  breath  of  spring  is  doubly 
sweet,  so  after  the  hard  prescriptions 
of  the  unfeeling  scribes  and  Pharisees, 
the    healing     ministry     of     Jesus     of 
Nazareth  was  felt,  at  least  by  some,  to 
be   doubly   welcome.     Meekness   must 
not  be  confounded  with  feebleness,  or 
gentleness  with  indecision.     We  know 
the   kind   of    softness    and,    quietness 
which    belongs    to  persons  of  a  timid 
nature,  and  of  weak  convictions,  who 
are  reluctant  to  look  closely  into  serious 
questions,  or   to   assume  any  resolute 
attitude   involving    responsibility.       A 
gentleness    which    is    born   of   fear   or 
selfishness  is  not  after  Christ,  for  His 
was    the  kindness  of   a  magnanimous 
spirit,  the  patience  of  a  mind  that  saw 
clearly  the  insufficiency  of  man  and  the 
boundless  love  of  God.     Therefore  His 
endurance    of    the    "  contradiction    of 
sinners,"  and  His  sweet  encouragement 
of  the  timorous  who  sought  His  help. 
Therefore  the  light  in  His  countenance, 
the  grace  in  His  lips,  the  meekness  in 
His   bearing,   the    compassion   in    His 
mien,  which  drew  men  out  of  them- 
selves, to  tell  their  wants  to  Him,  and 
cast  their  cares  upon  Him. — D.  Eraser y 
B.D. 

Vers.  18-21.  A  lovely  portrait  in  an 
unlovely  frame. — Observe  the  spirit  in 
which  our  Lord  meets  the  repeated 
attacks  of  which  the  record  is  given  in 
this  chapter.  There  are  four  in  close 
succession.  The  first  is  the  charge  of 
Sabbath -breaking   made    against    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xii. 


disciples,  because  they   rubbed  a  few  quench    the    smoking    flax,    He    will 

ears   of   corn  in  their  hands  as  they  nevertheless     declare     judgment    and 

passed    through     the    fields    on    the  secure   victory,    and   make   His  name 

Sabbath   day ;    and   following   it,  the  such  a   power  in  the  earth,  that  the 

eDtangling  question  put  to  the  Master  Gentiles  shall  hope  in    Him   and  the 

in  the  synagogue.     Then  there  is  the  world  go  after  Him.     We    can  fancy 

accusation  founded  on  the  healing  of  the  glow  on  the  Evangelist's  face   as 

the  blind  and  dumb  demoniac  (ver.  24).  He   pauses   in    the   midst  of   the  sad 

The  third  attack  is   the   hypocritical  record  of  these  cruel  assaults,  to  look 

application,  "  Master,  we  would  see  a  at,  and  show  to  us  that  lovely  portrait 

sign   from  Thee  "  (ver.  38),  the  word  of  the  Son  of  man.     And  is  it  not  all 

**  Master "    being    evidently    used    in  the  lovelier  that  it    shines   out   from 

mockery,  and  the  request  for  "  a  sign  "  such  a   background  ? — J.    M.    Gibson, 

a  scornful  way  of  suggesting  that  all  D.D. 
the  signs  He  was  giving  were  worth 

nothing.       These   three   attacks   were  Ver.  20.  Smoking  flax. — "  Smoking 

made  by  the  Pharisees,  and  were  most  flax  "  may  mean  that  which    has  fire 

irritating   and   vexatious,    each  in  its  smouldering   among   its   fibres,  which 

own  way.     The  first  was  annoying  on  may  yet  break  out  into  a  flame.     But 

account   of    its   pettiness,   the    second  probably     we    ought    to     prefer    the 

because  of  its  bitter  malice,  while  the  marginal  reading,   "  a   dimly  burning 

third  was   a   studied  insult ;  and  yet,  wick  shall  He  not  quench  "  (Isa.  xlii.  3). 

galling  as  these  repeated  attacks  must  I.  It  suggests  the  faint  beginnings 

have  been,  we  may  well  suppose  that  of  penitence  and  faith,  and  newness 

the  keenest  wound  of  all  to  the  gentle  of  life. — The  wick  is  not  trimmed,  or 

spirit  of  the  Son  of  man  would  be  the  does   not   draw   sufiiciently   from    the 

last,  inflicted  by  the  members  of  His  reservoir  of  oil,  and  therefore  does  not 

own  family,  who  seemed  at  this  time  yield  a  steady  flame. 

as   unsympathetic  and  unbelieving  as  II.  Or  it  may  illustrate  some  degree 

the    Pharisees    themselves;     for    tie  of  spiritual  declension,  the  lamp  that 

untimely  interruption  recorded  at  the  once   was   bright  now   needing  to   be 

close  of  the  chapter  was  intended,  as  trimmed    with    care,    and    fed    with 

we   learn    from    the    account   in    the  fresh   oil.     The  Lord    Jesus   does  not 

second    Gospel,    to    put    Him    under  disdain  every  disciple  who  is  not  "  a 

restraint   as   a   madman.      This    last  burning   and   shining   light."       He  is 

interruption,      in     which     even     His  willing  to  recognise  and  to  foster  what 

mother   joined,   must   have   been  gall  is  defective  and  dim.     He  knows  how 

and  wormwood  to  that  tender  heart,  to  bring  good  results  out  of  confused 

How   does    He  bear  Himself  through  and   hesitating   beginnings.     He  does 

these   storms  of  calumny  and  insult  ?  it   by   gentleness ;    and   it  cannot    be 

He  bears  Himself  so  that  out  of  this  done  any  otherwise.     A   strong  wind 

dark   chapter    of    His    history    there  will  blow  out  a  lamp  which  a  gentle 

comes    to     us     one    of    the    loveliest  current  of  air  will  brighten.     Violence 

portraits   of   Him    to   be    found    any-  has   the    fatal    power    of    extinction, 

where.     It  had  been  sketched  by  one  Severity    irritates     into    defiance,    or 

of  the  old  masters  as  an  ideal  portrait,  crushes  into  despondency ;  but  kindli- 

and  is   now  at  last   matched   in   real  ness   can    evolve   happy   results   from 

Ufe.        "  Behold,    My   servant    whom  unsatisfactory  rudiments,  and  love  is 

I    have    chosen,"    etc.    (vers.    18-21).  the  supreme  secret  of  success  in  Christ 

What  gentleness  and  tenderness,  yet  and   all    Christlike   men.— i>.    Eraser, 

what    strength     and     majesty  ! — for,  D.D. 
though  ''  He  strives  not,"  nor  lifts  up 

His  voice  in  angry  altercation,  while  Bruised   reed   and    smoking  flax. — 

He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  President  Da  vies  says  :  '*The  imagery  of 

303 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


the  '  bruised  reed  '  may  be  derived  from 
the  practice  of  the  ancient  shepherds, 
who  were  wont  to  amuse  themselves 
with  the  music  of  a  pipe  of  reed  or 
straw ;  and  when  it  was  bruised  they 
broke  it,  or  threw  it  away  as  useless." 
But  the  bruised  reed  shall  not  be 
broken  by  this  Divine  Shepherd  of 
souls.  By  way  of  securing  the  practical 
applications  of  this  view  of  our  Saviour's 
relations  to  His  people,  we  will  con- 
sider : — 

I.  Christ's  ways  with  bruised  reeds, 
or  humbled  sinners. — 1.  Bruised  reeds 
seem  very  fitly  to  represent  such. 
The  reed  itself  may  properly  stand 
for  the  sinner.  It  is  so  straight,  so 
upright,  and  to  all  appearance  so  firm 
and  strong ;  and  yet  it  is  one  of  the 
weakest  things  that  grow.  The  storm 
will  bend,  and  bruise,  and  spoil  it.  In 
mockery  of  the  kingly  claims  of  Jesus, 
they  put  a  helpless  reed,  instead  of  a 
sceptre,  into  His  hands,  taunting  thus 
the  weakness  both  of  His  kingdom,  and 
of  Himself  as  King.  There  is  much 
appearance  of  confidence  and  strength 
in  the  sinner,  at  least  while  life  goes 
.smoothly  and  easily  with  him .  He  would 
not  wish  you  to  take  up  the  idea  that 
he  is  only  a  reed.  But  let  God  but  try 
his  strength  by  buffeting  him  with  some 
fierce  storms,  and  you  will  soon  see  that 
poor  reed  bruised  and  bent,  and  hanging 
low.    There  is  no  strength  in  such  reeds 


for  the  days  of  trouble  that  come  round 
to  every  man,  to  try  of  what  sort  he  is. 
Now  it  is  God's  wise  and  gracious  way 
of  dealing  to  bruise  such  reeds. 
2.  How  is  He  wont  to  deal  with 
'*  bruised  reeds,"  humbled  sinners  ? 
"  He  does  not  break."  Bruise  He 
may,  but  break  He  never  does,  and 
never  will. 

II.  Christ's  ways  with  smoking 
flax,  or  feeble  believers. — 1.  Perhaps 
the  best  explanation  of  this  metaphor 
is  that  flax  was  used  in  the  East  for 
the  wicks  of  oil  lamps;  and  these 
wicks,  unless  well-cut  and  constantly 
trimmed,  would  give  but  a  flickering  and 
smoky  light.  And  this  may  effectively 
illustrate  the  feeble,  struggling,  often 
fainting  Christian,  whose  life  is  a 
smoke  rather  than  a  fire ;  a  spark 
rather  than  a  flame;  a  glimmer 
rather  than  a  glow ;  a  name  rather 
than  a  living  reality  and  power. 
2.  How  does  Christ  deal  with  such? 
*'  He  does  not  quench."  Let  Bunyan's 
Interpreter  show  us  the  fire  in  the 
wall,  on  which  the  soul's  enemy  is 
pouring  the  water-floods,  but  whose 
flames  still  rise  high.  There  is  a 
secret.  Look  behind !  One  stands 
there,  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  pour- 
ing in  the  oil  of  His  grace,  that  makes 
the  flames  leap,  and  the  fire  glow. — 
Weekly  Pulpit. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  22-37. 

Encountering  blasphemy. — The  best  way  of  dealing  with  some  adversaries  is  to 
leave  them  alone.  So,  in  our  last,  with  those  mentioned  in  ver.  14.  Here  we 
read  of  some  adopting  a  different  line.  An  (apparently)  most  unusual  case  of 
demoniac  (dispossession  had  produced  a  corresponding  effect  on  the  people  at 
large.  *'  Is  this,"  they  said — when  the  "  blind  and  dumb  "  both  "  spake  and 
saw " — is  this  indeed  the  Son  of  David  ?  Stirred  up  by  this  question,  the 
"  Pharisees  "  fell  back,  as  once  before  (ix.  34),  on  counsels  of  despair.  Having 
nothing  better  to  say,  they  say  as  before :  He  casteth  out  devils  "  by  Beelzebub, 
the  prince  of  the  devils  "  (ver.  24).  This  time  the  Saviour,  hearing  their  words, 
and  "knowing  their  thoughts,"  thinks  it  well  to  take  up  the  accusation  in  ques- 
tion, and  will  be  found,  in  doing  so,  to  point  out  its  extreme  folly  in  the  first 
place,  and  its  extreme  peril  in  the  second.  He  also  finally  counsels  men  as  to 
how  best  to  avoid  the  extreme  peril  described. 

I.  The  extreme  foUy  involved. — The  proposed  solution  was  utterly  foolish  : — 
first,  because  it  was  not  consistent  with  what  was  true  about  Satan.  Had  things 
been  as  they  alleged,  the  "  kingdom  of  Satan  "  would  before  now  have  come  to  its 

304 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xii. 


end  (Mark.  iii.  26).  That  is  true  of  all  kingdoms,  and  therefore  of  this.  A  king 
opposed  is  a  king  c^eposed — if  opposed  by  himself.  The  very  fact,  therefore,  that 
there  still  existed  demoniacs  to  be  healed,  proved  of  itself  that  His  way  of  healing 
them  was  not  of  this  kind.  The  proffered  solution,  in  the  next  place,  was  toot 
consistent  with  what  they  believed  of  themselves.  Besides  the  Saviour  Himself 
there  were  those  who  were  considered  capable  of  effecting  similar  cures,  and  who, 
either  because  of  their  birth  and  extraction  (as  the  Saviour's  own  disciples,  it 
may  be),  or  else  because  of  their  extraction  and  faith  (as  some  of  their  own 
disciples,  it  may  possibly  mean  (Acts  xix.  13)  ) — might  be  described  as  being  their 
"  children."  Anyway,  whoever  they  were,  it  was  to  thiem  Hie  appealed.  Let 
them  deal  with  this  charge  (ver.  27).  Lastly,  the  explanation  was  foolish 
because  it  was  not  consistent  with  what  was  trioe  about  Christ.  For,  after  all, 
in  the  instances  before  you,  what  is  it  you  see?  Do  you  not,  in  fact,  see  the 
"  strong  man  "  spoiled  of  his  goods  ?  And  do  you  not,  therefore,  see  that  there 
is  something  present  which  is  stronger  than  he  ?  And  what  can  that  something 
be  excipt  that  which  we  know  of  as  the  "  kingdom  of  God  '  ?  Who,  in  a  word, 
can  cast  out  the  spirit  of  evil  except  the  "  Spirit  of  God  "  ?  That  is  the  solutioli 
— the  only  solution — of  the  miracles  you  behold  (vers.  28,  29). 

II.  The  extreme  peril  involved, — This  the  Saviour  seems  to  point  out  by  a 
succession  of  steps.  To  attribute  works  wrought  in  the  way  just  described  to  the 
spirit  of  evil  is  fraught  with  danger  of  the  extremest  kind ;  first,  because  it  is 
practically  taking  the  wrong  side  on  this  question.  If  the  "  kingdom  of  God"  has 
indeed  "  come "  thus  "  upon  you "  (ver.  28),  you  cannot  safely,  in  this  way, 
declare  that  it  has  not.  If  you  are  not  ''  with  Me  "  in  acknowledging  this,  you 
are  '*  against  Me,"  and,  in  fact,  denying  it  (ver.  30).  And  you  are  openly  putting 
yourselves,  therefore,  in  otber  words,  against  "  the  kingdom  of  God."  Also,  next 
you  are  taking  that  side  in  a  pecidiarly  deliberate  way.  For,  to  do  as  you  are 
doing,  is  not  only  to  sin  against  light,  but  against  special  light  as  it  were.  It  is 
to  do  even  worse.  It  is  to  turn  that  light,  as  it  were,  into  darkness.  It  is  to  use 
the  proofs  of  truth  as  supports  of  error.  And  so,  not  only  to  show  contempt  for 
the  person  of  the  Ambassador  but  for  His  very  credentials  as  welL  In  other 
words,  not  only  to  sin  against  the  *'  Son  of  man,"  but  against  the  ^'  Spirit  of 
God."  Lastly,  you  are  on  the  way  towards  committing  yourself  to  that  wrong 
side  in  an  irreversible  manner.  For  there  is  a  possibility  in  this  direction  of  going 
»o  far  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  come  back.  There  is  a  blasphemy  in  this  sort 
of  blasphemy  for  which  no  remedy  has  been  provided.  Neither  this  world — nor 
yet  the  world  to  come — knows  anything  of  the  kind.  This  I  say  unto  you 
because  of  that  which  ye  have  said  now  about  Me  (Mark  iii.  30). 

III.  The  best  way  to  escape. — It  is  like  the  Saviour  to  conclude  this  subject 
with  a  word  on  this  point.  It  is  like  Him  also  to  do  so  in  the  way  that  he  does. 
Some  would  deliver  us  from  the  sin  intended  by  attempting  to  define  it.  Of 
these  we  may  say  much  as  in  Mark  xiv.  59.  The  Master  would  deliver  us  from 
it  by  impressing  on  us  not  to  go  near.j^  In  two  ways  especially  He  here  seems  to 
impress  this  upon  men.  First  of  al  He  says  to  them,  take  care  of  thy  heart. 
The  sin  in  question,  whatever  its  after  developments,  springs  up  in  the  heart. 
This  is  true  of  all  sin,  therefore  most  so  of  this.  In  no  other  case  can  a  corrupt 
source  produce  a  wholesome  result  (ver.  33).  Least  of  all,  therefore,  in  the  case 
of  this  sin  of  sins— the  most  "  venomous  "  known  (ver.  34).  Seek,  therefore,  if 
you  would  escape  its  outgrowth,  to  have  none  of  its  root  in  your  heart.  Rather 
seek  to  have  there  a  perfect  "  treasure  "  of  thoughts  of  the  exactly  opposite  kind 
(ver.  35).  In  the  next  place,  take  care  of  thy  lips.  Take  care  of  thy  lips  lest 
they  should  unadvisedly  utter  any  thoughts  of  this  kind.  Take  care  of  thy  lips 
because  of  the  part  which  thy  words  are  to  play  at  the  last.  They  are  to  pro- 
yied  much  of  the  evidence  by  which  is  to  be  determined  thy  true  state  be.'ore 

X  300 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MATTHEW. 


God  (ver.  37).  Even,  therefore,  the  apparently  "  idlest  "  of  them  may  have 
much  weight  in  this  way  (ver.  36).  Also  remember — so  it  seems  to  be  meant — 
that  of  all  evidence  furnished  in  this  way  of  the  true  state  of  the  heart,  none  is 
more  weighty  than  that  furnished  by  suppression  of  speech.  Evil  eccpressed  is  evil 
approved  of  and  brought  to  the  birth  (James,  i.  15).  Evil  sitppressed  is  evil  repented 
of  before  it  is  born.  Let  the  evil  within  thee,  therefore, — if  there  is  to  be  any — 
be  all  of  this  sort.  So  shalt  thou  be  safe  from  ever  giving  utterance  to  what  is 
here  meant  !  The  only  proper  sequel  to  these  solemn  thoughts  is  in  the 
language  of  prayer.  "  Set  a  watch,  (3  Loid,  before  my  mouth  ;  keep  the  door  of 
my  lips  "  (Ps.  cxli.  3). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 


Ver.  22.  Blindj  and  dumb. — 1.  The 
fearful  condition  of  men  spiritually 
possessed  by  Satan  may  be  seen  in 
bodily  possessions ;  and  among  the  rest, 
in  this  man,  on  whom  Satan  shutteth 
all  doors,  that  he  can  neither  let  in 
comfort,  nor  let  forth  the  sense  of  his 
misery,  for  he  maketh  him  blind  and 
dumb,  which  dumbness  is  ordinarily 
accompanied  with  deafness  also. 
2.  Such  as  Christ  will  deliver  from 
Satan,  albeit  they  cannot  come  of 
themselves  to  Him,  yet  He  can  furnish 
means  to  bring  them  to  Him.  3.  Christ 
is  the  powerful  Physician  of  evils  in- 
flicted by  the  devil,  as  here  He  giveth 
evidence,  in  healing  this  man  perfectly. 
— David  Dickson. 

Vers.    25,    26.    Sound  reasoning. — 

1.  In  pondering  men's  sins  the  Lord 
looks  much  to  the  inward  disposition, 
mind,  and  affection  of  sinners,  whether 
they  sin  of  infirmity  or  of  presump- 
tion; of  ignorance,  or  against  their 
light.     "  Jesus   knew  their  thoughts." 

2.  The  way  to  preserve  all  societies  is 
union,  and  the  way  to  ruin  them  is 
dissension.  3.  Satan  hath  a  kingdom 
among  men,  which  by  all  means  he 
goeth  about  to  maintain,  and  will  be 
loth,  really  and  in  effect,  wholly  to 
dispossess  himself,  both  of  the  soul  and 
body  of  any  in  whom  he  hath  power 
and  place. — Ihid. 

Ver.  25.  Thoughts.— I.  Thought,  the 
seat  of  greatest  sin. — Of  sin  that  men 
dare  not  actually  commit,  or  speak. 

IT.  Thought,  the  seat  of  grandest 
wishes  and  holiest  aspirations. — 
Biblical  Museum. 

306 


Ver.  28.  The  true  evidence  of  Chris- 
tianity. —  The  world  is  growing 
singularly  impatient  of  institutions 
which  cannot  justify  themselves  by 
some  practical  work,  by  the  test  of 
some  good  effect.  The  Founder  of  our 
religion  based  His  appeal  on  results. 
The  Apostles  took  up  the  same  ground. 
Whenever  men  seriously  attempt  to 
apply  to  Christian  history  and  Chris- 
tian experience  the  processes  of  scientific 
investigation,  weighing  and  counting 
over  the  effects  which  the  gospel  has 
produced,  then  the  church  may  calmly 
and  with  confidence  await  the  verdict, 
for  then  the  world  will  be  nearer  than 
it  has  been  to  the  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  mankind. 
For  one  reason,  however,  the  force  of 
this  argument  is  less  felt  than  it 
deserves  to  be.  We  expect  from  the 
gospel  what  it  never  professes  to  do, 
and  because  we  are  disappointed,  we 
fancy  that  it  has  failed.  It  is  only 
fair  that  the  gospel  should  be  tried 
upon  its  own  pretensions. 

I.  Did  Jesus  speak  as  though  on 
the  advent  of  the  gospel  sin  was  to  he 
abolished  from  society  ? — Did  He  ever 
dream  of  founding  a  perfect  society 
which  should  contain  no  black  sheep  ? 
On  the  contrary,  the  gospel  shows 
that  His  eyes  gauged  more  accurately 
than  those  of  His  friends  the  future  of 
the  world.  He  expected,  indeed.  His 
religion  to  fill  the  land  and  overshadow 
the  earth.  But  for  all  that,  the  vision 
before  His  eyes  was  of  a  little  company 
of  saints,  persecuted  and  almost 
crushed  by  evil,  etc.  The  Apostles 
predicted  schisms  and  false  Christs  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,    chap.  xii. 


plenty,  but  they  never  encouraged  the 
hope  of  a  whole  world  turning  to 
God. 

II.  What,  then,  did  our  Lord  and 
His  Apostles  profess  the  gospel  should 
effect? — This,  that  it  could  create 
peace  with  God  for  every  human  being, 
no  matter  how  degraded,  who  believed 
the  gospel  in  its  entirety,  and  should 
follow  the  doctrines  laid  down  therein. 

III.  Has  the  gospel  established  its 
claim  by  irrefutable  facts? — 1.  Take 
all  the  most  characteristic  lives  we 
know  of  such  as  have  attained  the 
character  of  Christians.  These  state 
that  they  have  obtained,  though  with 
a  struggle,  peace  of  conscience  and 
entered  into  happier  relations  with  the 
Most  High.  2.  They  all  agree  as  to 
the  value  of  Christianity  in  giving 
a  fresh  motive  for  virtue,  more  effectual 
than  they  possessed  before.  3.  They 
are  equally  at  one  in  referring  these 
happy  changes  to  the  power  of  the 
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
while  they  constantly  bemoan  their 
failures,  they  as  constantly  blame  for 
these  failures  only  themselves.  4.  This 
is  the  uniform  testimony  of  Christians 
in  every  age.  5.  And  of  every  race. 
Thus,  (1)  the  gospel  does  accomplish 
what  Christ  promises ;  (2)  its  proper 
work  is  limited  only  by  a  full  and  free 
out  and  out  acceptance  of  it,  and 
submission  to  its  demands  on  the  part 
of  every  human  being. 

TV.  Practical  inferences. —  1.  How 

completely  it  rests  upon  us  to  demon- 
strate the  value  of  Christ's  gospel  by 
our  own  lives.  2.  To  inquirers  and 
hesitators — Christianity  is  in  practice 
and  in  power.  It  offers  you  deliver- 
ance from  evil ;  it  asks  nothing  but 
implicit  trust  and  self-surrender.  If 
you  doubt  it,  then  it  refers  you  to  its 
success  in  others.  3.  To  those  who 
pretend  to  be  Christians,  but  do  not  in 
their  lives  show  Christ's  work.  The 
only  test  of  being  Christ's  is  that  His 
work  upon  us  succeeds,  and  this  work 
is  to  make  us  holy.  The  failure  is  in 
yourselves  and  not  in  the  gospel. — 
New  Outlines. 


Ver.  30.  The  intolerance  of  the 
gospel. — Rejecting  the  idea  that  Satan 
was  divided  against  himself,  our 
Saviour  added,  that  if  Satan  was  not 
His  accomplice,  as  the  Pharisees 
supposed,  it  followed  that  he  was  His 
adversary.  And  why  ?  Because  with 
reference  to  Jesus  Christ  it  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  be  one  thing  or 
another.  Thus  Jesus  Christ  took 
occasion  from  a  particular  fact,  to 
proclaim  a  great  truth.  Who  is  the 
man  that  is  against  Jesus  Christ  ?  It 
must  be  sufficiently  obvious  to  all, 
that,  by  this  expression,  our  Saviour 
designs  every  man  to  whom  the  gospel 
is  an  object  of  aversion  and  hatred, 
whether  he  conceal  his  sentiments  in 
his  heart,  or  manifest  them  in  his 
words  and  actions.  Who,  then,  is  the 
man  that  is  not  with  or  for  Jesus 
Christ  ?  The  world  is  full  of  persons 
who  are  not  for  Him.  We  recognise 
them  in  all  those  members  of  the 
Christian  church  who  belong  to  it  only 
by  birth,  and  by  certain  external 
usages,  but  whose  whole  life  proves 
that  the  church  inspires  them  with  no 
interest.  Religion  is  to  them  a  matter 
of  high  propriety,  an  interesting  fact, 
a  social  necessity,  but  nothing  more. 
It  is  neither  the  rule  of  their  life,  nor 
one  of  their  interests.  We  do  not 
know  a  better  way  of  establishing  the 
truth  of  what  the  Saviour  eays  in 
reference  to  such  men  than  by  showing 
the  falseness  of  the  contrary  proposi- 
tion, viz.  "  One  may  not  be  for  Jesus, 
and  yet  not  be  against  Him  ;  he  may 
be  neither  His  friend  nor  His  enemy ; 
he  may  observe  with  respect  to  Him 
a  species  of  neutrality."  Let  us  see 
if  such  neutrality  is   possible. 

1.  A  real  neutrality  is  one  of  the 
rarest  things  in  the  world. — Man  is  not 
made  for  indifference.  Whatever 
affects  him  nearly,  everything  which 
exerts  an  influence  upon  his  fortune, 
nay  more,  everything  which  he  sees 
exciting  general  interest,  becomes  to 
him  an  object  of  some  kind  of  sentiment. 

2.  This  is  specially  so  in  the  domain 
of  religion. — If  a  religion  is  true,  it 
follows  that  we  ought  to  love  it  with 

307 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


.  all  our  heart,  if  false,  to  detest  it  with 
all  our  heart;  for  the  question  turns 
upon  a  matter  of  the  highest  excellence, 
or  a  criminal  imposture ;  a  work  of 
God,  or  a  work  of  the  devil.  Is 
neutrality,  in   such  a    case,  possible  1 

3.  If  we  had  even  remained  in- 
different^ we  would  not  the  less  have 
made,  without  willing  it,  a  choice. — 
Because  true  religion,  meriting  nothing 
less  than  our  whole  love,  not  to  devote 
ourselves  to  it  is  to  be  against  it ;  and 
a  false  religion,  not  deserving  anything 
but  our  deepest  hatred,  not  to  oppose 
it  is  to  be  for  it. 

4.  To  make  this  last  truth  more 
evident,  suppose  that  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh  has  descended  to  the  earth,  in 
the  person  of  a  being  resembling  you  ; 
that  the  character  of  that  being  is  the 
ideal  of  perfection ;  His  work,  the 
salvation  of  the  human  race ;  His 
precepts,  holiness  itself ;  His  feelings 
in  reference  to  you,  a  boundless  com- 
passion. You  acknowledge  in  Him  all 
these  attributes,  and  you  say  to  Him, 
*'  Since  Thou  art  the  ideal  of  perfection, 
the  rule  of  holiness,  God  Himself 
manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  since  Thou  hast 
shed  Thy  blood  upon  the  cross  for  the 
salvation  of  my  soul,  I  cannot  be 
against  Thee,  but  I  will  not  be  for 
Thee."  For  whom  then  is  that  heart  ? 
The  heart  must  attach  itself  to  some- 
thing. 

5.  The  better  to  appreciate  this 
neutrality,  let  us  enter  the  heart  of  the 
indifferent,  and  give  account  of  the 
feelings  which  reign  there.  He  says 
he  has  no  hatred.  Bat  are  there  in 
his  heart  love  and  obedience;  love 
especially  for  Jesus  Christ  1  Assuredly 
not,  seeing  he  is  not  for  Jesus  Christ- 
Well,  to  refuse  love  to  Jesus  Christ, 
I  affirm,  is  to  do  Him  all  the  evil 
which  an  open  enemy  could,  or  at 
least,  would  do.  He  who  loves  not 
obeys  not. 

6.  When  circumstances  will  it,  the 
indifferent  hecom.es  an  enemy,  posi- 
tively, and  in  fact. — As  long  as  it  is 
not  excited  by  circumstances,  this 
enmity  remains  asleep ;  and,  in  some 
persons,  it  remains  in  this  form,  the 

308 


most  dangerous,  perhaps,  all  their  life 
long.  But,  in  many  others,  unforeseen 
circumstances  awaken  it,  and  cause  it 
to  appear  in  its  real  character. 

7.  To  hate  Jesus  Christ — such  is  the 
result  in  which  neutrality  and  indifference 
eventually  terminate. — A.  Vinet,  D.D 

Christian  work. — We  learn  : — 

I.  That  Christian  work  is  construc- 
tive.— It  is  gathering  together,  collect- 
ing, saving,  preserving.  Worldly  work 
is  destructive,  scattering,  altering, 
tinkering. 

II.  That  Christian  work  is  collective. 
— It  is  in  accordance  with  laws.  It 
must  follow  the  direction  of  Christ,  the 
ways  of  Christ,  the  object  of  Christ,  and 
it  must  promote  the  glory  of  Christ. 
Worldly  work  is  undisciplined.  Every 
man  would  be  a  master,  and  the  scene 
would  become  a  tower  of  Babel. — 
B.  in  "  Homilist.^^ 

Ver.  32.  Sin  against  the  Son  of  man 
and  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — I.  Observe, 
Christ  speaks  of  Himself  here  as  the 
Son  of  man,  the  Son  of  God  in  a 
disguise,  as  it  were  ;  God  under  the 
veil  of  human  flesh.  Can  we  wonder 
that  He  should  look  with  a  merciful 
and  forgiving  eye  upon  any  of  His 
brethren  who,  not  suspecting  His 
greatness,  should  rudely  jostle  against 
Him  in  the  crowd  ?  Suppose,  for 
instance,  a  king  were  to  assume  for 
purposes  of  state  the  disguise  of  a 
subject,  and  to  mingle  with  the  simplest 
and  rudest  of  his  people,  and  suppose 
that  while  in  such  disguise  he  were  to 
meet  with  an  insult ;  would  not  a  broad 
line  of  demarcation  be  drawn  between 
an  insult  so  offered  and  an  act  of 
avowed  treason  against  the  king  upon 
his  throne  ?  A  comparison  of  this  kind 
will  be  of  considerable  help  to  us  in 
understanding  our  subject.  Even  the 
murderers  of  Christ  sinned  against 
the  Son  of  man,  against  Christ  in  His 
human  nature ;  whereas,  had  they 
known  who  it  was  whom  they  crucified, 
many  might  possibly  have  been  over- 
whelmed with  shame,  and  have  be- 
sought His  forgiveness, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xii. 


II.  But  in  the  case  of  blasphemy 
against  the  Holy  Ghost  no  such  plea 
can  be  set  up. — Here  we  have  a  sin 
not  against  God  in  the  guise  of  Jesus 
the  Son  of  Joseph  the  carpenter, 
but  against  God  in  His  essential 
Deity,  God  upon  the  throne  of 
heaven,  God  who  does  good,  and  is  the 
Author  of  all  good  both  in  heaven 
and  earth.  The  sin  of  the  Jews  which 
our  Lord  rebuked  partook  of  this 
character ;  for  they  had  said  that  He 
was  under  the  influence  of,  and  in 
league  with,  an  unclean  spirit ;  to  do 
good,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  perform 
acts  which  undeniably  tended  to  over- 
turn the  kingdom  of  Satan  and  establish 
the  kingdom  of  God — this,  they  said, 
was  the  work  of  the  devil.  Now 
unquestionably  this  was  to  put  dark- 
ness for  light  and  light  for  darkness, 
to  confound  all  distinctions  between 
good  and  evil,  to  confuse  the  works 
of  Satan  and  those  of  the  Most  High 
God,  as  though  they  were  not  the 
exact  opposites  of  each  other.  The 
person  who  does  fully  commit  this  sin 
places  himself  exactly  in  the  position 
of  the  lost  angels  ;  the  sin  of  Satan  is 
that  of  deliberately  worshipping  evil 
and  hating  good,  and  on  this  account 
is  unpardonable  sin — unpardonable  for 
this  reason,  if  for  no  other,  that  it 
cannot  be  repented  of. — Bishop  Harvey 
Goodwin. 

The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — 
What,  then,  is  this  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  unpardonable  sin  ? 

I.  One  thing  is  clear.  Its  un- 
pardonableness  cannot  arise  from 
anything  in  the  nature  of  the  sin 
itself;  for  that  would  be  a  naked  con- 
tradiction to  the  emphatic  declaration 
of  ver.  31,  that  all  manner  of  sin 
is  pardonable.  And  what  is  this, 
but  the  fundamental  truth  of  the 
gospel  ? 

II.  Then,  again,  when  it  is  said  that 
to  speak  against  or  blaspheme  the  Son 
of  man  is  pardonable,  but  the  blasphemy 
against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  pardon- 
able, it  is  not  to  be  conceived  that 
this  arises  from  any  greater  sanctity 


in  the  one  blessed  Person  than  the 
other. — These  remarks  so  narrow  the 
question,  that  the  true  sense  of  our 
Lord's  words  seems  to  disclose  itself  at 
once. 

III.  It  is  a  contrast  between  slander- 
ing "  the  Son  of  man "  in  His  veiled 
condition  and  unfinished  work — which 
might  be  done  "  ignorantly,  in  un- 
belief"  (1  Tim.  i.  13),  and  slandering 
the  same  blessed  Person  after  the 
blaze  of  glory  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  soon  to  throw  around  His  claims, 
and  in  the  full  knowledge  of  all  that. 
. — This  would  be  to  slander  Him  with 
eyes  open,  or  to  do  it  "  presumptuously." 
To  blaspheme  Christ  in  the  former 
condition — when  even  the  Apostles 
stumbled  at  many  things — left  them 
still  open  to  conviction  on  fuller  light ; 
but  to  blaspheme  Him  in  the  latter 
condition  would  be  to  hate  the  light 
the  clearer  it  became,  and  resolutely  to 
shut  it  out ;  which,  of  course,  precludes 
salvation.  The  Pharisees  had  not,  as 
yet,  done  this  ;  but  they  were  bordering 
upon,  and  in  spirit  committing,  the 
unpardonable  sin. — D.  Brown^  D.D. 

Ver.  36.  The  connection. — Our  first 
rule  in  seeking  to  understand  a  passage 
of  Scripture  must  always  be  to  review 
it  in  connection  with  its  context.  The 
discourse,  of  which  the  words  in  question 
form  a  part,  had  its  rise  in  the  circum- 
stance of  the  Pharisees  attributing  our 
Lord's  miracles  (even  those  of  them 
whose  character  presented  most  diffi- 
culty to  such  an  explanation)  to  Satanic 
agency.  .  .  .  Now,  at  first  sight,  it  is 
natural  to  suppose  that  by  idle  words 
are  meant  such  as  the  Pharisees  had 
just  vented — words  of  blasphemy 
against  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  it  is 
not  difficult  to  perceive  what  kind  of 
words  those  were.  The  Pharisees,  like 
the  multitude  (ver.  23),  were  internally 
convinced  of  the  Messiah  ship  of 
Jesus  by  the  miracle  which  they  had 
witnessed.  But  it  would  have  been 
inconvenient  to  them  to  have  acknow- 
ledged His  claims.  By  doing  so,  they 
would  have  to  retract  their  whole 
previous   career — to   place   themselves 

309 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


after  the  fashion  of  Mary  at  His  feet,  by  the  Holy  Spirit)  "  it  shall  not  be 

as    His    disciples.       This    would    have  forgiven  him,  neither   in    this   world, 

humbled  the  pride  of  those  ecclesiastical  neither  in  the  world  to  come."     As  if 

rulers,  and    such    a  humiliation    they  the  Lord  had  said :  "  Your  language 

could  not  brook.      So,  without  honestly  is  not,  as  you  vainly  imagine,  a  separate 

believing  their  own  explanation,  they  and  separable  thing  from  your  reason  : 

attributed  the   cure  of   the  blind  and  it  has  a  deep   and   living   connection 

dumb  man  to    the    agency    of   Satan.  with  your  state  of  mind.      Language 

It  was  a  supernatural  cure — that  they  and  reason  have  their  fibres  twined  up 

admitted — but   there    are,    said   they,  together — so  that  a  corrupt  language 

supernatural  evil  agencies,  as  well  as  argues   a   corrupt   reason.     And  then 

supernatural     good     ones,     and     this  follows  our  passage,  introduced  by  the 

particular  miracle  is  due  to  the   first  formula,  But  I  say  unto  you — "  Every 

of  these  causes.    It  might  have  occurred  idle  word,"  etc. — E.  M.  Goulbum,  D.D. 
to  them  (probably  it  did  occur  to  them 

in  the  deep  of  their  hearts)  that  this  The  idle  word. — Now  is  the  idle 
was  a  flimsy  and  transparently  false  word  to  be  explained  simply  and 
explanation — that,  on  no  recognised  solely  by  the  blasphemy  preceding  ? 
principle  of  craft  or  policy,  could  the  If  so,  the  warning — though  still  an 
devil  cast  out  his  own  agents.  Yes,  awful  one — will  scarcely  possess  a 
such  an  account  would  not  serve  the  general  applicability ;  for  the  number 
turn ;  it  was  a  dishonest  shuffle,  and  of  those  is  few,  whose  circumstances 
they  knew  it  to  be  so,  to  avoid  making  resemble  the  circumstances  of  the 
a  confession  which  was  irresistibly  Pharisees.  We  think  there  are 
forced  upon  their  minds,  but  which  reasons  for  giving  to  these  solemn 
would  have  involved  them  in  con-  words  a  far  more  extended  applica- 
sequences  from  which  their  pride  and  bility.  1.  They  are  introduced  by 
jealousy  shrunk.  And  then  came  in  a  formula,  which  will  be  found,  I 
the  corrupt  special  pleading,  so  natural  think,  to  indicate  a  transition  from 
to  the  human  mind  under  such  circum-  a  more  limited  to  a  more  extended 
stances:  "After  all,  though  I  am  application,  the  word  translated  "but" 
giving  an  explanation  which  I  do  not  having  the  force  of  Tuoreover,  further- 
believe— with  which  I  am  not  satisfied  more.  2.  The  same  conclusion  will 
myself — which  finds  no  response  what-  follow  from  examining  the  word  ren- 
ever  in  my  convictions — yet  these  are  dered  "  idle  "  (apyos).  According  to 
but  words,  the  breath  of  the  lips,  its  derivation,  this  word  means  not 
lightly  uttered  and  soon  forgotten — my  working  (a-epyov).  Now,  the  words 
mind  recognises  the  truth,  though  I  of  the  Pharisees  were  not  simply 
cannot  bring  my  tongue  to  confess  it."  useless,  unfruitful,  unprofitable  words ; 
The  eye  of  Him  who  knew  what  was  but  far  worse.  They  were  false 
in  man  detected  this  reasoning  at  the  words ;  they  counteracted  conviction ; 
bottom  of  their  hearts ;  and  down  came  their  fault  was  not  that  of  omission  ; 
the  lightning  of  His  censure  to  crush  they  were  positively  bad,  mischievous, 
and  blast  a  fallacy  so  dangerous :  and  wicked  words.  They  were  a  lie 
*'  Whosoever  speaketh  a  word  against  in  the  teeth  of  conviction,  and  they 
the  Son  of  man  "  (without  violating  were  calculated  to  do  harm,  to  mis- 
internal  convictions,  like  Paul  before  lead  the  ignorant  people  who  looked 
his  conversion,  who  spake  many  things  up  to  their  authority.  Hence  we 
against  the  Son  of  man,  but  spake  infer  that  when  our  Lord  condemns 
them  ignorantly  in  unbelief)  "  it  shall  idle  words,  He  is  going  a  step  beyond 
be  forgiven  him  —  but  whosoever  that  sin  of  blasphemy  upon  which  His 
speaketh  against  the  Holy  Ghost "  censure  had,  at  the  outset  of  the  dis- 
(violates  those  internal  convictions  of  course,  so  heavily  fallen ;  and  that 
truth  which  are  wrought  in  the  mind  our   text,   rendered   so   as   to  exhibit 

310 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xii. 


the    emphatic    transition,    would   run  Pharisees   might   have  imagined  that 

thus :    "  Nay,    I   even  say   unto   you,  as    they   had    but    spoken,    and    had 

that   every   idle   word "    (not    merely  perpetrated  no  real  act  of  enormity, 

every    false     and     hlasphermtus^     but  no   guilt  was   contracted.     Christ  dis- 

every    idle     word)    that     men     shall  abuses   them    here    of    such    an   im- 

speak,  they  shall  give  account  thereof  pression.     *'  Every  idle  word."     There 

in    the    day   of    judgment."      Nor   is  are   three   considerations    which    may 

there   anything   which    need   surprise  serve    to   show   us   the    responsibility 

us,  in  this  strictness  of  the  Christian  that  attaches  to  idle  words, 

law  on  the  subject  of  words.      It  is  I.    Their    reactive    force. — "  Those 

strictly  in  accordance  with  the  general  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  mouth 

tenor  of  evangelical  precept.     We  are  come  forth  from  the  heart,  and  they 

often    instructed    that    that     precept  defile  the  man." 

cannot  be  satisfied  by  innocuousness  II.  Their  social  influence. — Science 
— that  we  are  required  not  merely  affirms  that  every  movement  in  the 
to  abstain  from  harm,  but  to  do  material  creation  propagates  an  in- 
positive  good.  What  the  passage  fluence  to  the  remotest  planet  in  the 
condemns  is  useless  words,  words  con-  universe.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  seems 
ducive  neither  to  instruction  nor  to  morally  certain  that  every  word  spoken 
innocent  entertainment ;  words  having  on  the  ear  will  have  influence  lasting 
no  salt  of  wit  or  wisdom  in  them — flat,  as  eternity. 

stale,   dull,  and   unprofitable,   thrown  III.     Their    Divine    recognition. — 

out   to   while   away  the   time,   to  fill  The  great   Judge   knows   every   word 

up  a  spare  five  minutes ;    words  that  we  have  spoken.     "  Out  of  thine  own 

are  not  consecrated  by  any  seriousness  mouth  will  I  judge  thee." — ffomilist. 
of  purpose  whatever. — ibid. 

Ver.     37.     Condemning     words.  — 

WJiat   are,   and   what   are   not,   idle  Consider  some  of  the  ways  by  which 

words. — Words  are  idle  which  do  not  words  are  used  that  minister  to  our 

fulfil  the  proper  end  of  the  existence  condemnation. 

of  words.    We  may  remark,  in  general,  I.  At  the  head  of  this  list  we  must 

that  what  constitutes  the  excellence  or  put  profane  swearing, 

virtue  of  anything,  is  that  it  should  II.  Another  way  in  which  we  expose 

fulfil  its  proper  end.     What,  then,  is  ourselves  to  God's  displeasure  is  by  what 

the  proper  function  of  words,  the  end  St.  Paul  calls  "  foolish  talking." 

for  which  they  were  given,  by  fulfilling  III.    Another   example  of   the   im- 

which  they  become  good,  and  escape  proper   use   of   the   gift    of    speech   is 

the  censure  of  being  idle  words  ?    1.  The  an   indulgence   in   the    petulant    and 

first,  and  perhaps  (by  comparison)  the  complaining  language  which  so  often 

lowest  end  of  words,  is  to  carry  on  the  destroys  the  harmony  of  private  life. 

business  of  life.      2.    The  second  end  IV.    A   fourth   illustration    of    our 

which    words    should    fulfil,    and    for  text    is    found   in    the   case    of    mis- 

which  they  were  no  doubt  designed,  representation  and  slander, 

is  to  refresh  and  entertain   the  mind.  V.    Angry  words  are   another   de- 

— Ibid.  scription  of  words  by  which  we  may 

endanger    our    everlasting    salvation. 

Responsibility  for  idle  words. — The  — J.  N.  Norton. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  38—45. 

Pretended  friends. — We  have  here  yet  another  phase  of  opposition  to  Christ. 
*'  Certain  "  men  amongst  His  opponents  come  to  Him  with  a  show  of  respect. 
Setting  aside  as  unimportant  all  the  "  signs  "  He  has  hitherto  shown,  they  come 
to  Him  as  though  persons  only  wanting  a  sufficient  further  "  sign  "  to  enable 

311 


CHAP.  xii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW, 


tliem  to  believe  (cf.  Mark  viii.  11,  a  "  sign  from  heaven").  That  the  Savioui' 
saw  through  the  hollowness  of  this  request  is  plain  from  His  language  (ver.  39). 
Yet  He  was  pleased  to  give  their  request,  notwithstanding  this,  a  certain  amount 
of  reply.  We  may  regard  this  reply  as  consisting  :  1.  Of  a  mysterious  promise. 
2.   Of  a  solemn  warning.     3.  Of  a  lamentable  forecast. 

I.  A  mysterious  promise. — No  "  sign,"  indeed,  of  the  kind  they  meant  should 
be  granted  to  such  as  they  were.  What  they  asked  for  was  not  really  what 
they  desired.  They  were  "  evil  "  (ver.  39).  Nor  would  they  use  it,  if  granted 
to  them,  in  the  way  they  professed.  They  were  adulterous  (ver.  39).  It  were 
a  waste  of  power,  therefore,  as  well  as  an  encouragement  of  treachery,  to  do  as 
they  asked.  Yet  He  did  not  intend,  on  that  account,  to  leave  them  without 
further  evidence  of  any  description.  In  due  course,  rather,  they  should  have  a 
sign — a  sign  indeed — of  His  mission.  This  "  sign  "  would  be,  on  the  one  hand, 
like  one  already  known  to  them  all.  The  prophet  Jonah  had  been  a  most 
remarkable  sign  to  the  men  of  his  generation.  Few  things  more  extraordinary 
than  his  story — few  more  famous — few  more  effectual,  had  ever  been  known. 
The  "  sign  "  which  He  was  now  speaking  of  should  be  of  like  kind.  It  should 
be  something  fully  worthy  of  being  placed  by  its  side.  It  should  be  like  it  even 
in  that  particular  which  was  the  most  crucial  part  of  the  whole  story  of  Jonah. 
Jonah  was  a  space  of  "  three  days  and  nights  "  in  the  inside  of  the  fish.  The 
Son  of  man  should  be  a  similar  time  in  the  "  heart  of  the  earth "  (ver.  40). 
What  that  meant  the  event  itself  would  fully  explain.  Meantime,  it  was  in 
that  event,  whatever  its  nature,  that  they  would  ultimately  be  able  to  discover 
the  "  sign  "  that  He  meant.  In  due  time,  in  a  word,  there  would  be  no  lack  of 
proof — of  abundant  proof — of  His  mission. 

II.  A  solemn  warning. — Had  they  been  right  then,  after  all,  in  demanding 
a  "  sign  "  ?  If  more  evidence  was  thus  to  follow  in  time,  did  it  mean  that  they 
had  been  right  in  supposing  that  they  had  not  enough  as  it  was  ?  No,  the 
Saviour  replies  in  effect,  that  was  far  indeed  from  the  truth.  On  the  contrary,. 
He  points  out,  there  were  those  who  had  believed  on  less  evidence  still.  Twa 
cases  of  this  kind  stood  out  in  the  past.  There  was  the  case  of  those  to  whom 
the  prophet  Jonah,  already  mentioned,  was  sent.  Those  people  of  Nineveh,  in 
this  matter  of  evidence,  had  no  such  advantages  as  they  had.  Jonah  had  not 
been  in  his  day  what  Jesus  was  in  the  present.  There  had  not  been  the  same 
array  of  miracles  (John  iii.  2),  the  same  converging  prophecies  (Acts  x.  43),  the 
same  manifest  authority  (vii.  29),  the  same  abounding  love  (Jonah  iii.  10,  iv.  1) 
in  the  case  of  that  prophet.  All  that  Jonah  taught  the  Ninevites,  was  to 
believe  it  possible  that  God  might  repent  if  they  did  (Jonah  iii.  9).  Yet  they 
had  repented  and  had  believed  in  him,  and  that  thoroughly,  to  a  man  (Jonah  iii.  5). 
On  the  other  hand,  there  was  the  parallel  case  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  and 
Solomon.  There  again  present  advantages  were  far  "  greater  "  than  past.  All 
she  had  heard  of  was  the  probability  of  learning  the  truth.  They  had  its  fulness 
in  view.  Both  cases,  therefore,  were  a  contrast  to  them,  and  a  lesson  as  well. 
If  those  earlier  hearers,  with  their  smaller  light,  used  it  so  well,  what  would  that 
say  for  these  later  ones,  by  whom  such  far  greater  light  was  despised?  How 
could  these  later  stand  beside  those  earlier  ones,  when  all  things  came  to  be 
judged  ? 

III.  A  sad  forecast. — What  then,  this  was  the  next  question,  would  be  the 
end  of  such  conduct  ?  Even  the  same  as  always  followed  in  similar  cases.  There 
was  a  fixed  rule — a  sad  rule — an  inevitable  rule — in  such  matters.  Where  a 
measure  of  light  is  so  dealt  with  as  not  to  be  allowed  to  do  its  full  work — 
where  it  brings  about,  therefore,  nothing  more  at  best  than  a  kind  of  outward 
reform,  and  so  leaves,  as  it  were,  the  actual  source  of  life  unenlightened  thereby — 
the  end  of  so  doing  is  a  measure  of  darkness  even  worse  than  at  first.     In  other 

312 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  Xil. 


words,  the  evil  spirit  so  cast  out  wanders  about  for  a  time,  but  finds  no  rest  in  so 
doing.  Naturally,  therefore,  it  desires  to  go  back  to  the  kind  of  rest  which  it 
had;  and  naturally  also,  in  that  "empty"  house  (ver.  44),  finds  nothing  to 
prevent  this  being  done.  At  the  same  time,  remembering  well  its  former  expulsion 
therefrom,  it  seeks  to  prevent  the  possible  recurrence  of  anything  of  the  kind  by 
getting  the  company  of  other  spirits  still  wickeder  than  itself.  And  thus  it  is, 
therefore,  that  in  every  way,  the  last  state  is  the  worst.  There  are  more  in 
number,  they  are  worse  in  character,  they  have  a  more  tenacious  hold  than 
before.  Even  so,  therefore,  was  it  to  be  expected  of  the  "  geneiation  "  before 
Him.  The  light  that  had  been  given  them,  not  being  truly  welcomed  by  them, 
would  end  in  greater  obscurity  still.  Their  partial  delivery — being  only  partial 
— would  be  seven-fold  bondage  at  last. 

How  sadly  this  forecast  was  verified  in  the  case  of  that  "  generation  "  hardly 
needs  to  be  told.  The  whole  subsequent  history  of  Israel  is  its  fulfilment. 
Think  of  a  time  coming  when  it  should  benecessary  to  say  of  the  chosen  people 
that  they  were  not  all  of  them  bhnd  (Rom.  xi.  5). 

How  solemnly  this  verification  should  tell  upon  all  hardly  needs  to  be  told. 
Doubtless  thepiinciple  involved  accounts  for  most  of  the  apostasy  in  the  world, 
whether  on  the  part  of  individual  Christians  or  associated  bodies  of  Christians. 
Doubtless,  therefore,  the  warning  applies  to  us  all.  Nothing  is  more  dangerous 
than  not  making  the  best  of  the  light  that  we  have  ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  38.  Dictating  to  Christ. — 
1.  Christ  was  exercised  with  divers 
sorts  of  temptations  by  His  adversaries, 
some  openly  blaspheming,  some  subtly 
insinuating,  as  if  they  would  deal 
reasonably  with  Him.  "  Master  "  say 
these  men,  *'  we  would  see  a  sign  " ; 
as  if  they  had  never  seen  any  of  His 
miracles  before ;  or  as  if  upon  the 
doing  of  some  miiacle,  they  minded  to 
believe  in  Him.  2.  Christ's  miracles 
were  sufficient  to  show  that  He  was 
the  Messiah,  for  even  His  enemies  can 
crave   no   more    but  to    have  a  sign. 

3.  Obstinate  believers  will  not  be 
satisfied  with  any  of  God's  words  or 
works,    but     still     crave    new     ones. 

4.  Misbelievers  are  also  limiters  of  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel ;  nothing  will 
satisfy  these  men,  but  a  sign  at  their 
direction. — David  Dickson. 

Vers.  38,  39.  Sign-seeking, — Many 
men  of  blameless  lives — of  whom  it 
would  be  a  breach  of  charity  to  say 
that  they  loved  darkness  rather  than 
light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil — 
nevertheless  declare  themselves  un- 
satisfied with  the  signs  of  the  Divine 
mission  of  Christ  our  Lord.  Why  is 
this  ?     It  is  because  they  are  infected 


with  the  spirit  of  the  age,  engrossed 
with  the  material,  the  sensible,  the 
secular.  Such  persons  not  only  cannot 
recognise  the  signs  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  but  are  in  a  state  of 
heart  and  mind  to  which  no  sign 
can  possibly  be  given.  We  are  in- 
debted to  the  fine  candour  of  the  late 
Mr.  Darwin  for  a  striking  illustration 
of  this.  In  his  Life  there  is  an  inter- 
esting correspondence  with  Prof.  Asa 
Gray,  the  great  botanist,  who,  wonder- 
ing how  Darwin  could  remain  uncon- 
vinced by  the  innumerable  evidences 
of  design  in  nature,  took  the  liberty  of 
asking  him  if  he  could  think  of  any 
possible  proof  which  he  would  consider 
sufficient.  To  this  Mr.  Darwin  replied, 
"  Your  question,  *  wbat  would  convince 
me  ? '  is  a  poser.  If  I  saw  an  angel 
come  down  to  teach  us  so,  and  I  was 
convinced,  from  others  seeing  him,  that 
I  was  not  mad,  I  should  believe."  If 
he  had  left  it  there,  it  might  have  been 
pertinent  to  ask  him  whether  Christ  is 
not  just  such  an  angel  come  down  from 
heaven  to  teach  us,  and  whether  a 
sufficient  number  of  persons  did  not  see 
Him  in  the  flesh,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
multitudes  who  know  Him  in  the 
spirit,  to  convince  us  that  we  are  not 

313 


CHAP.  XII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


mad  in  believing  it.  He  did  not,  how- 
ever, leave  it  there,  but  went  on  to  say  : 
"  If  man  was  made  of  brass  and  iron, 
and  in  no  way  connected  with  any 
other  organism  which  had  ever  lived, 
I  should,  perhaps,  be  convinced." 
Nothing  could  be  more  candid,  or  more 
in  keeping  with  the  transparent 
honesty  of  this  great  man.  But  what 
an  acknowledgment !  Man  must  cease 
to  be  man  and  become  a  metal 
machine,  and  the  universe  must  cease 
to  be  a  harmonious  whole  before 
there  can  be  evidence  enough  for  so 
simple  and  elementary  a  principle  as 
design  in  the  universe ;  and  then  only 
a  "  perhaps "  !  If  all  this  were  done 
for  me,  *'  I  should  perhaps  be  con- 
vinced." Is  our  Lord's  answer  to  the 
seekers  after  a  sign  out  of  date  ? 
"  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  there  shall 
no  sign  be  given  unto  this  generation  " 
(Mark  viii.  12).  How  could  there  be  ? 
—J.  M.  Gibson^  D.D, 

Yer.  40.  Jonas  a  sign. — I.  As 
affording  a  type  of  the  resurrection. 

II.  As  a  preacher  of  righteousness 
to  a  people  who  needed  repentance  as 
this  generation  needs  it. — A.  Carr, 
M.A. 

/  er.  41.  The  Ntnevites  and  the  Jews. 
— What  dissemblance  or  disparity  was 
between  the  Ninevites  and  the  Jews  ? 
1.  The  Ninevites  were  strangers  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel  and  people 
of  God ;  neither  had  they  received  His 
word  before  this ;  but  the  Jews  had 
received  the  law  from  the  Lord,  and 
did  boast  therein,  and  yet  would  not 
hear  Christ,  who  interpreted  and 
explained  the  law  unto  them.  2.  The 
Ninevites  had  but  one  preacher  of  the 
word,  viz.,  Jonas,  and  yet  they  obeyed 
him ;  but  although  God  had  spoken 
unto  the  Jews  by  many  prophets,  and 
by  John  the  Baptist,  yea,  by  His  own 
and  only  Son,  yet  they  shamefully  and 
reproachfully  rejected  them  all.  3.  The 
Ninevites  having  heard  but  only  one 
sermon  from  Jonah,  the  servant  of  the 
Lord,  repented,  beheved,  and  changed 
their  lives  ;  but  the  Jews  had  heard 

314 


many  sermons  from  the  prophets  in  all 
ages,  and  at  last  heard  those  sermons 
repeated  and  confirmed  by  Christ,  the 
Lord  and  Master  of  the  prophets,  and 
yet  they  would  not  repent  and  amencl 
their  lives.  4.  The  Ninevites  heard  a 
stranger  and  believed  him,  although  he 
came  from  a  nation  which  they  hated 
and  envied ;  but  the  Jews  despised 
Christ,  who  came  of  the  fathers, 
according  to  the  flesh,  and  was  no 
stranger,  but  a  child,  and  free-born, 
amongst  them.  5.  The  Ninevites 
believed  Jonas  without  any  sign, 
content  with  this,  that  he  had  come 
unto  them  for  their  disobedience 
towards  God  ;  but  the  Jews  daily 
saw  many  signs,  i.e.  miracles  wrought 
by  Christ,  and  yet  persevered  in  their 
obstinacy,  as  though  He  had  done 
nothing  worthy  of  faith,  or  for  which 
they  had  reason  to  believe  in  Him. 
6.  None  had  ever  foretold  the  Nine- 
vites anything  concerning  Jonas,  and 
yet,  when  he  came,  they  believed  and 
obeyed  him ;  but  all  the  prophets  had 
foretold  the  Jews  of  Christ's  coming, 
and  they  saw  His  words  suit  and  agree 
with  their  predictions,  and  yet  they 
would  not  believe  Him,  nor  amend 
their  lives.  7.  The  Ninevites  patiently 
suffered  Jonas,  although  he  threatened 
the  miserable  destruction,  both  of  their 
city  and  kingdom  ;  but  the  Jews  would 
not  endure,  or  hear,  or  obey  Christ, 
although  He  preached  grace  and  salva- 
tion unto  them,  yea,  did  not  prescribe 
any  hard  or  harsh  rules  of  living  unto 
them,  but  declared  remission  of  sins  to 
every  one  who  would  repent,  believe,  and 
obey.  8.  Jonas  was  not  derided  and 
mocked  by  the  Ninevites,  although  he 
fled  when  God  sent  him  unto  them; 
but  the  Jews  scoffed  and  taunted 
Christ,  who  refused  not  to  undergo 
reproach,  hatred,  persecution,  and 
death  for  them  and  their 'salvation. — 
Richard  Ward. 

Yer.  42.  The  example  of  the  Queen  of 
Sheba. — 1,  She  went,  notwithstanding  the 
distance  of  her  residence. — She  had  a 
long  journey  to  perform,  with  little  of 
those  facilities  and  accommodation  for 


y 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xii. 


travelling  which  we  enjoy.  And  yet 
she  went  all  the  way  to  Jerusalem  that 
she  might  hear  and  witness  the  wisdom 
of  Solomon.  Will  not  this  procedure 
on  her  part  condemn  those  of  us  to 
whom  God  has  brought  nigh  His  word  ? 
You  have  His  ordinances;  His  Sabbaths 
are  every  week  enjoyed  by  you — His 
house  opened  for  your  reception — His 
word  in  a  language  you  can  understand. 

2.  She  went,  notwithstanding  all  the 
anxieties  of  her  public  station. — She 
might  have  pleaded,  *'  I  have  so  much 
to  do,  so  many  cares  devolving  upon 
me  that  I  cannot  go."  But  she  acted 
on  different  principles  and  was  well 
rewarded  for  her  labour.  Can  you, 
then,  plead  any  cares,  any  anxieties, 
any  occupations,  as  a  reason  why  you 
should  not  make  every  effort,  submit 
to  every  sacrifice,  go  through  every 
necessary  difficulty,  in  order  to  attend 
to  the  wisdom  of  the  Son  of  God — in 
order  to  listen  to  the  oracles  of  truth 
— in  order  to  seek  the  things  that 
belong  to  your  everlasting  peace  "^ 

3.  She  went  though  uninvited.  — 
There  was  no  offer,  no  appeal  made  to 
her.  Mere  report,  general  testimony 
that  she  heard,  induced  her  to  go. 
Can  you  say  you  are  uninvited  ? 

4.  She  v)ent  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  a 
mortal,  at  best  fallible,  and  who  after 
all  was  guilty  of  sad  and  criminal 
defection.  But  you  are  invited  to 
listen  to,  and  receive  the  instructions  of 
heavenly  wisdom,  of  eternal  life. — 
J.  Fletcher,  D.D. 

Vers.  43-45.  The  spirit  of  evil. — The 
words  have  a  twofold  symbolism  as 
representing  : — 

I.  The  state  of  the  possessed  man. 

II.  The  state  of  the  nation  of  which 
he  is  made  the  type.  The  latter  be- 
longs to  the  interpetation  of  the 
parable  as  a  whole.  The  former 
portrays  the  state  of  the  man  who 
has  been  delivered  from  the  wildness 
of  frenzy,  but  has  been  left  to  the 
routine  of  common  life  and  conven- 
tional morality,  with  no  higher  spiritual 
influence  to  protect  and  guard  him. — 
E.  K  Plumptre,  D.D. 


The  Jewish  people. — In  applying  the 
parable  to  the  religious  life  of  the 
Jewish  people  we  have  to  ask — 

1.  What  answers  to  the  first  possession 
and   the   expulsion    of  the  evil  spirit  ? 

2.  What    to    the     seven    other    spirits 
joined  with  the  first,  and  yet  m,ore  evil  ? 

3.  What  is  the  last  state,  yet  future 
at  the  time  our  Lord'  spoke,  which  was 
to  he  worse  than  the  first  ? — The  answer 
to  the  first  question  lies  on  the  surface 
of  their  history.  Their  besetting  sin 
from  the  time  of  the  Exodus  to  that  of 
the  Captivity  had  been  idolatry  and 
apostasy.  The  worship  of  other  gods 
exercised  a  strange  and  horrible  fasci- 
nation over  them — deprived  them,  as 
it  were,  of  light,  reason,  and  true 
freedom  of  will.  They  were  enslaved 
and  possessed  by  it.  Then  came  the 
return  from  the  exile  in  Babylon,  when, 
not  so  much  by  the  teaching  of  the 
prophets  as  by  that  of  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  idolatry  seemed  banished  for 
ever.  But  the  house  was  "  empty, 
swept,  and  garnished."  There  was  no 
indwelling  presence  of  the  enthus'asm 
of  a  higher  Hfe,  only  an  outward  cere- 
monial religion  and  rigid  precepts,  and 
the  show  of  piety.  The  hypocrisy  of 
the  scribes  was  the  garnishing  of  the 
house.  And  then,  the  old  evil  came 
back  in  the  form  of  mammon-worship, 
the  covetonsness  which  is  idolatry,  and 
with  it  bitterness  and  hate,  and  the 
licence  of  divorce,  and  self-righteous- 
ness, and  want  of  sympathy,  and  that 
antagonism  to  good  which  had  come  so 
terribly  near  to  ''  the  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost."  That  state  was  bad 
enough  as  it  was,  but  our  Lord's  words 
point  to  a  future  that  should  be  yet 
worse.  We  must  turn  to  the  picture 
drawn  by  the  Jewish  historian  of  the 
crimes,  frenzies,  insanities  of  the  final 
struggle  that  ended  in  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  if  we  would  take  an 
adequate  measure  of  the  "  last  state  " 
of  that  "  wicked  generation."  We  note 
in  2  Pet.  ii.  20  a  striking  reproduction 
of  the  thought  by  one  who  may 
have  heard  it  as  spoken  by  our  Lord. 
—Ibid, 

315 


fciiAP.  xii.     HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  i^—bO. 

True  kinsfolk. — What  was  thought  of  earthly  kinship  by  the  Saviour  of  alU 
We  have  some  answer  to  this  question  in  what  is  told  us  about  Him  as  a  citizen 
of  the  world.  As  an  Israelite  Himself  He  had  a  special  regard  for  the 
Israelite  people  and  faith.  He  even  went  so  far  on  one  occasion  as  to  declare 
that  His  own  personal  ministry  was  almost  exclusively  for  their  good 
(xv.  24).  Yet  we  do  not  always  find  Him  giving  the  first  place  to  men  of 
this  race.  Sometimes,  on  the  contrary  (as  in  xv.  28),  it  is  to  a  woman  of 
Syrophoenicia.  Sometimes  (as  in  Luke  x.  33)  to  a  member  of  the  mixed  race  and 
hybrid  religion  of  the  Samaritans.  And  sometimes  (as  in  viii.  10)  to  a 
Roman  centurion  ;  or  even  afterwards  (in  that  chapter,  ver.  12),  under  certain 
circuifistances,  to  those  of  any  Gentile  connection.  Altogether,  therefore,  it  is 
evident,  that,  in  this  broader  sense,  kinship  was  not  the  first  thing  in  His  eyes. 
The  Israelite  was  only  first  when  he  did  that  which  was  best.  Otherwise,  any 
other  man  might  take  that  place  in  his  stead.  In  the  present  passage  the  same 
subject  is  dealt  with  again ;  only  in  a  still  closer  degree.  Family  ties  now,  and 
not  only  national  ones,  are,  as  it  were,  in  the  arena ;  and  we  are  bidden  to  see 
how  Christ  comported  Himself  with  regard  to  their  claims.  We  shall  find  that  it 
was  in  a  manner  parallel  to  what  we  have  noted  already  ;  and  that  both  on  the 
negative  and  positive  side. 

I.  On  the  negative  side. — Whilst  engaged  in  teaching,  the  Saviour  hears  of 
some  "  without "  (ver.  46)  who  are  desirous  to  see  Him.  From  the  point  of  view 
which  is  now  before  us  theirs  was  a  crucial  case.  It  was  so,  in  the  first  place,  on 
account  of  what  is  told  us  of  their  natural  relation  to  Him.  They  were  His 
"  mother  and  His  brothers,"  i.e.  His  very  nearest  of  kin.  This  is  true,  whoever 
is  meant  exactly  by  the  latter  expression.  According  to  the  ties  of  earth  there 
were  none  on  earth  nearer  to  Him.  This  was  so,  in  the  next  place,  on  account 
of  what  is  not  told  us  of  them  in  a  higher  respect.  At  one  time  we  are  told  that 
His  brethren  did  not  believe  in  His  work.  We  are  not  told  whether  or  not  this 
was  so  at  this  time.  On  one  occasion  we  read  that  His  "  friends  "  thought  He 
was  "beside"  Himself  (Mark  iii.  21)  because  of  His  devotion  to  His  work. 
Whether  this  was  so  of  these  "  friends  "  now  we  are  not  informed.  We  are  only 
told  that  when  others  were  "  within,"  they  were  standing  "  without."  We  are 
not  told  even  that  they  wished  to  "  hear  "  Him ;  only  that  they  wished  to 
"  speak  "  to  Him — without  saying  why.  There  is  nothing  before  us,  in  fact, 
except  the  fact  that  they  were  His  nearest  of  kin.  Hence  the  importance, 
therefore,  lastly  of  what  the  Saviour  did  not  do  when  He  heard  of  their  presence. 
He  did  not  stop  His  discourse.  He  only  varied  its  tenor.  He  did  not  at  once 
come  out  to  meet  them  and  hear  their  communication.  Still  less  did  He  do  as 
Solomon  did  on  a  certain  very  widely  different,  yet  sufficiently  parallel  case 
(1  Kings  ii.  19).  The  inference  is  clear,  though  it  must  not  be  pushed  into 
unbecoming  regions  of  thought.  Mere  kinship,  even  of  the  very  closest  kind,  was 
not  supreme  in  His  eyes.  Thus  much,  we  say,  is  quite  clear,  without  dis- 
respectfulness  to  any.  Where  all  that  He  hears  of  is  kinship  alone,  all  that  He 
does  is  to  leave  it  alone. 

II.  On  the  positive  side. — On  this  side  we  have  everything  different  from 
what  we  found  on  the  other.  This  is  true,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  persoTis 
described.  Much  was  said  in  the  case  of  those  others,  of  kinship  to  Christ. 
Nothing  is  said  of  it  here.  Nothing  was  said  in  the  previous  case  of  anything 
higher.  Much  is  said  of  it  here.  Much  acknowledged  in  the  way  of  profession. 
The  persons  sitting  there  did  so  as  disciples  of  Christ.  Much  implied,  also,  in  the 
way  of  practice.  Of  some  amongst  them,  at  any  rate,  Jesus  could  see  that  they 
were  doing  the  will  of  His  Father  in  heaven.    Just  as  different,  therefore,  on  the 

316 


HOMILETr:  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xii. 


other  hand,  is  the  treatment  vouchsafed  to  them  here.  Instead  of  being  left 
unnoticed,  Hke  those  others,  they  are  specially  noticed  and  marked.  "Jesus 
stretched  forth  His  hand  to  them  "  as  they  sat  at  His  feet.  Instead  of  there 
being  no  word  for  them  there  is  every  word  they  could  wish.  "  Behold  My 
mother  and  My  brethren  !  For  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  My  Father  which 
is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother  "  (ver.  50).  There 
we  see  what  is  supreme  in  the  eyes  of  the  Saviour,  viz.,  identity  of  will  in  all 
things  with  His  Father  and  Himself ;  and  not  the  closest  identity — even  with 
Jesus  Himself — in  the  things  of  this  earth.  There  is  no  greater  glory  than 
that  of  being  a  true  disciple  of  Christ  !  There  is  no  surer  test  of  it  than  that  of 
sharing  His  mind  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Vers.  46-50.  A  distressing  interrup-  of  the  message  from  His  mother  was 
tion  wisely  utilised. — What  will  He  not  only  necessary  at  the  time  and  for 
make  of  the  distressing  interruption  her,  but  for  the  ages  to  come  as  well. 
caused  by  the  interference  of  His  It  certainly  is  no  fault  of  Mary  herself, 
mother  and  brethren  ?  Knowing  their  whose  name  should  ever  be  held  in  the 
motives  and  intentions  as  He  did.  He  highest  respect  by  all  who  love  the 
could  not,  for  a  moment,  yield ;  and  Lord,  that  a  corrupt  church,  reversing 
how  was  it  possible  to  deal  with  them  all  the  teaching  of  the  church's  Head, 
without  a  public  rebuke,  from  which,  not  only  elevated  the  earthly  relation- 
seeing  that  His  mother  was  involved  in  ship  far  above  the  spiritual,  but  in 
it,  His  heart  would  instinctively  shrink  ?  virtue   of    this    relationship    put    the 

1 .  It  was  a  most  painful  position ;  mother  in  the  place  of  the  Son,  and 
and  the  more  we  think  of  it,  and  taught  an  ignorant  people  to  worship 
try  to  imagine  possible  ways  of  extri-  her  and  trust  in  her  as  a  mediator, 
cation,  the  more  we  must  admire  But  the  fact  that  this  was  done,  and  is 
the  wisdom  and  kindness  shown  in  the  persisted  in  to  this  day,  shows  that 
way  in  which  He  confronted  the  when  our  Lord  set  aside  the  mere 
difficulty.  He  makes  use  of  the  oppor-  earthly  relationship  as  one  that  must 
tunity  for  giving  a  new  and  most  be  merged  in  the  spiritual,  He  was 
winning  view  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  correcting  not  only  a  pardonable  error 
as  a  happy  family,  united  each  to  of  Mary,  but  a  most  unpardonable 
Himself,  and  all  to  the  Father  by  the  error  that  afterwards,  without  any 
holiest  bonds ;  thus  opening  out  the  encouragement  whatever  from  her, 
paradise  of  a  perfect  home  to  all  who  should  be  committed  in  her  name, 
choose  to  enter  it,  taking  the  sacred  4.  How  this  gospel  of  the  family  of 
ties  involved  in  the  sweet  words  God  rebukes  all  sectarianism  I  He 
"  brother,"  and  " sister," and  "  mother,"  "stretches  out  His  hand  towards  His 
and  giving  them  a  range,  a  dignity,  and  disciples,"  and  then  to  all  the  world  by 
a  permanence  they  never  had  before,  that   word    "  whosoever."     No    arm's- 

2.  In  all  this  there  vms  not  a  word  of  length  recognition  there ;  He  takes  all 
direct  censure  ;  yet  the  i-adly  mistaken  true  disciples  to  His  heart.  5.  Observe, 
conduct  of  His  kindred  did  not  pass  moreover,  the  emphasis  on  doing,  with 
without  implied  rebuke  ;.  for  the  effect  which  we  are  already  familiar.  In 
of  His  words  was  to  make  it  clear  that,  setting  forth  the  gospel  of  the  king- 
sacred  as  were,  in  His  eyes,  the  ties  of  dom,  our  Lord  was  careful  to  warn 
earth,  their  only  hope  of  permanence  His  hearers,  "not  everyone,"  etc. 
was  in  alliance  with  the  higher  ties  of  (vii.  21) ;  and  now  that  He  is  setting 
heaven.  3.  The  course  of  events  in  forth  the  gospel  of  the  family  the 
later  times  has  proved  that  the  gentle  emphasis  is  still  in  the  same  place, 
rebuke  involved  in  our  Lord's  reception  It  is  not,   "  Whosoever  shall  connect 


CHAP.  XII.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


himself  with  this  church  or  that 
church,"  it  is  not  "  Whosoever  shall  be 
baptised  and  take  the  sacrament  ";  it  is, 
"  Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  My 
Father  in  heaven."  This  emphasis  on 
doing,  in  connection  with  these  en- 
dearing relations,  is  most  significant. 
There  must  be  love  among  the  members 
of  the  family.  But  how  is  love  to  be 
shown  ?  How  are  we  to  distinguish  it 
from  mere  sentiment  1  Our  Saviour  is 
careful  to  teach  us ;  and  never  is  He 
more  careful  than  in  those  passages 
where  tender  feeling  is  most  prominent ; 
e.g.  John  xiv.  15,  21. — J.  M.  Gibson^ 
D.D. 

Ver.  50  Thekinsmanship  of  Christ. — 
I.  A  few  points  of  doctrinal  import- 
ance. 

1.  Christ  represents  it  as  being  a 
matter  o^  great  consequence  that  a  man 
should  be  permitted  to  claim  a  kinsmarts 
interest  in  Him. — We  never  find  Moses, 
or  Isaiah,  or  Daniel,  using  it  as  a 
motive  to  serve  God  that  if  a  man 
were  faithful,  he  (Moses  or  Isaiah  or 
Daniel)  would  honour  him  by  calling 
him  a  brother ;  and  as  little  do  we 
find  the  Apostles  imitating  Christ  in 
this  respect.  Learn  another  lesson  of 
oar  Lord's  divinity  as  being  the  only 
begotten  Son  of  God. 

2.  Liberal  as  Christ  appears  in  our 
text  in  lavishing  on  His  disciples  the 
relations  of  an  endeared  kinsman  ship, 
yet  it  is  done  vnth  a  marked  exceptio7i. — 
It  was  with  design  that  the  father's 
relationship  was  excluded.  And  what 
was  the  design  ?  Evidently  to  protect 
the  character  of  His  Divine  incar- 
nation. Not  even  in  a  figurative 
sense  will  He  permit  any  man  to  call 
himself  by  the  name  of  His  Father. 
That  honour  He  preserved  entire  for 
God,  in  respect  of  His  human  as  well  as 
His  Divine  nature. 

3.  Observe  how  little  importance  com- 
paratively Christ  attaches  to  carnal  descent 
and  connection. — It  is  something,  I 
admit,  for  a  man  to  have  been  born  of 
a  pious  mother,  and  it  is  something 
for  a  woman  to  be  the  mother  of  a 
pious  son.     But  of  itself,  and  by  itself, 

318 


it  is  nothing  ;  and  there  must  be  some- 
thing— even  personal  faith  and  well- 
doing— before  it  be  even  of  the  little 
profit  of  which  it  is  possessed.  Christ 
did  not  disesteem  His  mother  ;  on  the 
contrary.  He  set  His  disciples  the 
example  of  being  a  most  tender  and 
dutiful  son ;  but,  as  if  in  anticipation 
of  the  idolatry  of  Popish  apostasy.  He 
appears  to  have  waited,  in  a  manner, 
for  opportunities  to  teach  His  disciples 
that  she  derived  no  very  peculiar 
advantage  from  the  circumstance  of 
her  being  His  earthly  parent.  See 
also  Luke  xi.  27,  28. 

4.  Observe  what  is  the  condition  on 
which  Christ  will  acknowledge  the  kins- 
man's 7'elation  to  any  one. — Beautifully 
logical.  First,  He  Himself  is  God's  Son ; 
then  if  He  see  any  man  doing  His 
Father's  will  with  zeal — "  That  must  be 
a  son  of  My  Father,"  He  will  say,  *'  for 
who  but  a  son  would  serve  Him  thus  ? 
and  if  he  is  a  son,  since  I  am  a  Son 
too,  he  must  be  My  brother."  And 
again,  as  He  looks,  there  is  a  youthful 
maiden — "  Who  could  be  so  devoted 
to  My  Father,"  He  says,  ''but  a 
daughter?  She  must,  therefore  be  My 
sister,"  etc. 

II.  Having  thus  directed  your 
attention  to  what  may  be  considered 
doctrinal  in  the  passage,  we  are  now 
prepared  for  the  consideration  of  its 
sentiment  and  duty. — 1.  How  great 
are  both  the  folly  and  the  sin  of  those 
who  despise  and  reject  this  prof  erred 
kinsmanship  of  the  Son  of  God. 
(1)  Their  folly.  There  is  no  man's 
happiness  independent  of  a  friend. 
Does  not  the  folly  amount  to  mad- 
ness when  anyone  shall  reject  His 
prof  erred  brotherhood  ?  (2)  Their  sin 
is  greater  than  their  folly ;  it  is 
because  their  evil  heart  would  rather 
have  no  friend  at  all  than  one  as  holy 
as  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Turning  now  to 
the  consideration  of  the  case  of  those 
who  have  accepted  of  the  preferred 
friendship,  I  call  on  them  to  cherish  it 
with  much  endearment  and  confiding 
expectation.  There  are  three  classes  : 
(1)  Those  whom  He  salutes  as  brothers, 
and   there   may    be   distinguished  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiii. 


child,  the  young  man,  the  middle-aged 
man,  and  the  old  man.  (2)  Those 
v)hom  He  salutes  as  sisters.  The 
personal  ministry  of  our  Lord  was 
characterised  by  the  manner  in  which 
it  honoured  the  weaker  sex,  and 
w^herever  His  religion  has  gone  through 
the  earth,  it  has  been  eminently  a 
woman's  salvation.  (3)  The  maternal 
class.  The  matron's  lot  is  the  heaviest 
for  sorrow,  but  equally  is  it  the  richest 
for  consolation.  3.  Let  us  now  consider 
what  are  the  duties  which  flow  from 
these  various  relationships.  And, 
(1)  Let  us  emulate  one  another  in  the 
confidence  with  which  we  surrender 
ourselves  to  the  protection  and  cherish- 
ing of  His  kinsman  love.  "  I  was 
vexed  for  Christ,"  said  Bunyan,  "  when 
I  thought  how  my  ingratitude  must 
pain  Him."  (2)  Let  us  beware  of  being 
ashamed  of  our  heavenly  kinsmanship. 
How  wonderful  that  any  of  His  pro- 
fessed saints  should  be  ashamed  to 
acknowledge  Him  !  (3)  Let  us  take 
care   that    we   do    not   discredit    our 


heavenly  Kinsman  in  the  estimation  of' 
the  world  by  the  unworthiness  of  our 
conduct.  (4)  "If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My 
commandments."  I  know  of  no  case 
in  the  economy  of  human  life  in 
which  obedience  is  more  sweetly 
rendered  than  by  a  mother  to  a 
prudent,  manly  ^on.  (5)  Let  us  con- 
sider one  another  as  the  brethren,  the 
sisters,  and  the  mothers  of  Christ.  (6)  I 
call  for  a  faith  founded  on  good  reasons, 
but  equally  for  a  faith  of  warm 
feelings. — Wm.  Anderson,  LL.D. 

A  character  and  a  blessing. — I.  The 
character. — "  Whosoever  shall  do  the 
will  of  God."  So,  then,  God  has  a 
will.     God  has  a  will  concerning  : — 

L  Our  condition. — That  we  should 
become  a  new  creation,  etc. 

2.  Our  conduct. 

3.  Our  destiny. 

11.  The  blessing. — "  The  same  is  My 
brother,  and  sister,  and  mother." — 
C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


CRITICAL    NOTES. 


Preliminary  Remarks. 

The  pa/rables  of  Jesus. — The  word  "  parable  "  has  in  the  New  Testament,  in  its  application 
to  the  discourses  of  Jesus,  a  considerably  wider  meaning  than  the  one  in  which  we  speak  of 
the  parables  of  the  Lord  in  the  current  phraseology  of  the  church.  The  designation 
irapa^oK-f},  from  irapa^aWeiv  (therefore  =  placing  side  by  side,  comparing),  belongs  to  every 
utterance  containing  a  comparison  of  any  kind  (see  Luke  v.  36,  vi.  39 ;  Mark  iii.  23  ff . ; 
Matt.  xxiv.  32  ;  Mark  xiii.  28).  All  these  maxims  are  called  parables  because,  in  a  visible 
fact,  belonging  to  the  sphere  of  physical  or  human  life,  they  picture  a  corresponding  truth 
in  the  sphere  of  religious  life.  A  still  more  general  use  of  *'  parable  "  is  seen  in  the  passage 
(xv.  15),  where  it  refers  to  the  utterance  of  the  Lord  in  ver.  11  (cf.  vers.  16-20).  Here, 
therefore,  it  refers  to  a  concrete  maxim  without  a  properly  figurative  character,  simply  of  an 
enigmatical  stamp.  A  sim-'^-r  use,  under  another  aspect,  is  found  in  the  passage  Luke  iv.  23 
where  the  proverb^  *'  Physician,  heal  thyself,"  is  called  a  parable,  and  that,  as  it  seems,  not 
so  much  because  of  its  figurative,  as  rather  merely  because  of  its  proverbial  character. 
(^Goehel). 

The  '■'■parable  "  in  the  stricter  sense. — The  idea  of  the  parable  may  be  generally  defined  to 
this  effect :  A  narrative  moving  within  the  sphere  of  physical  or  human  life,  not  professing 
to  communicate  an  event  which  really  took  place,  but  expressly  imagined  for  the  purpose  of 
representing  in  pictorial  figure  a  truth  belonging  to  the  sphere  of  religion,  and  therefore 
referring  to  the  relation  of  man  or  mankind  to  God  (ibid.). 

The  seven  parables  of  the  kingdom  in  this  chapter  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  grouped 
together  by  Slatthew.     They  were  spoken  consecutively,  as  is  obvious  from  the  notes  of  time 

319 


CHAP.  XIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,   MATTHEW. 


in  vers.  36  and  53.  They  are  a  great  whole,  setting  forth  the  "  mystery  of  the  kingdom  "  in 
its  method  of  establishment,  its  corruption,  its  outward  and  inward  growth,  the  condition 
of  entrance  into  it,  and  its  final  purification.  The  sacred  number  seven,  impressed  upon 
them,  is  the  token  of  completeness.  They  fall  into  two  parts,  four  of  them  being  spoken  to 
the  multitudes  from  the  boat,  and  presenting  the  more  obvious  aspects  of  the  development 
of  the  kingdom  ;  three  being  addressed  to  the  disciples  in  the  house,  and  setting  forth  truths 
about  it  more  fitted  for  them  (A.  Maclaren,  B.I).). 

Ver.  1.  The  same  day. — The  time  is  marked  of  this  following  sermon,  and  the  place  also, 
to  teach  us  that  nothing  could  hinder  Christ  from  spreading  the  doctrine  of  salvation.  No 
opposition  of  foes,  no  misconstructions  of  friends  were  able  to  discourage  Him  from  His 
calling  ;  for  that  *'  same  day "  wherein  He  had  a  bitter  conflict  with  the  Pharisees  and 
interruption  from  His  friends,  that  same  day,  without  wearying  or  fainting  in  labour.  He 
goeth  to  the  sea-side  to  teach  {David  DicTison).  The  house. — Where  He  was  accustomed  to 
dwell,  and  where  also  the  events  of  this  day,  previously  related,  took  place  {Goebel.)  Sat. 
— See  note  on  v.  1.  By  the  sea  side. — While  the  Sea  of  Galilee  is  almost  entirely 
surrounded  by  mountains,  yet  the  mountains,  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  never  come  down  into  the 
water,  but  always  leave  a  beach  of  greater  or  less  extent  along  the  water's  edge." 

Ver.  4.  The  wayside. — The  ordinary  roads  or  paths  in  the  East,  lead  often  along  the  edge 
of  the  fields,  which  are  unenclosed.  .  .  Hence,  as  the  sower  scatters  his  seed,  some  of  it  is 
liable  to  fall  beyond  the  ploughed  portion,  on  the  hard,  beaten  ground,  which  forms  the 
wayside  {Hacltetf). 

Ver.  5.  Stony  places. — Rocky  (R.V.).  Not  soil  containing  loose  stones,  but  a  bed  of  rock, 
with  only  a  slight  covering  of  soil. 

Ver.  8.  An  hundred-fold. — See  Gen.  xxvi.  12.  The  return  of  a  hundred  for  one  is  not 
unheard  of  in  the  East,  though  always  mentioned  as  something  extraordinary  {Trench). 
When  I  was  at  Geneva,  in  1855,  I  got  from  an  adjoining  field  a  single  ear  or  spike  of  barley 
containing  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  grains  {Morison).  In  1868,  a  year  remarkable  for 
its  heat  in  Great  Britain,  it  was  mentioned  in  the  newspapers  that,  in  a  field  of  wheat  in 
Kent,  there  were  many  single  seeds  which  produced  each  "  thirty  straws,  topped  with  closely- 
set  and  fully-developed  ears,  which  yielded  between  nine-hundred  and  one  thousand  grains 
from  a  single  parent  seed." — Daily  Review^  August  14th,  1868  (ibid.). 

Ver.  10.  And  the  disciples  came,  etc. — Their  question  seems  to  show  that  our  Saviour  had 
just  begun  this  peculiar  style  of  teaching,  at  least  in  its  more  fully  developed  form.  It  was, 
as  we  learn  from  Mark  iv.  10,  when  "  He  was  alone,"  that  the  disciples  asked  their  question. 
We  may,  therefore,  suppose  that  some  of  the  other  parables  were  addressed  to  the  people 
before  the  question  was  put  (ibid.). 

Ver.  11.  Mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — Those  glorious  gospel  truths  which  at  that 
time  only  the  more  advanced  disciples  could  appreciate,  and  they  but  partially  (Brown). 

Ver.  12.  Whosoever  hath. — J.e.  keeps,  as  a  thing  which  he  values.  Whosoever  hath  not. — 
Who  lets  this  go,  or  lie  unused,  as  a  thing  on  which  he  sets  no  value  (ibid.). 

Ver.  13.  Because  (6'ti)  they  seeing  see  not— In  Mark  (iv.  12)  and  Luke  (viii.  10),  it  is 
"  that  ('iva)  seeing  they  might  not  see."  Two  different  objects  were  effected  at  the  same 
time,  and  by  the  same  act,  corresponding  to  those  two  terms  ;  it  is  true  that  the  Lord 
employed  parables,  as  one  employs  pictures  to  teach  a  child,  because  His  auditors  were 
children  in  understanding  ;  and  it  is  also  true  that  He  veiled  His  doctrines  under  metaphor 
in  order  that  those  who  were  children  in  understanding,  but  in  malice  men,  might  not 
perceive  His  drift,  and  so  might  not  violently  interfere  to  suppress  His  ministry  (Arnot), 
But  even  here  we  may  venture  to  trace  beneath  the  penalty  an  element  of  mercy.  The 
parable  could,  at  all  events,  do  men  no  harm.  It  could  not  rouse  the  fierce  enmity  that  had 
been  kindled  by  truth  spoken  in  its  plainness.  And  it  might  prepare  the  way,  might  set  men 
thinking  and  questioning,  and  if  so,  that  was  at  least  one  step  towards  the  "  having,"  though 
it  were  but  a  very  little,  which  might  place  them  among  those  to  whom  more  shall  be  given. 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  14.  Fulfilled. — Or  rather,  is  completely  fulfilled,  a  strong  expression,  not  otherwise  used 
by  Matthew,  but  foremost  in  the  sentence  by  way  of  emphasis  (Lange).  The  tense  is  that 
of  a  work  still  in  progress  (Plumptre).     The  quotation  is  from  the  LXX. 

Ver.  15.  Ihis  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross. — The  heart  was  regarded  as  the  seat  of 
intelligence.  Gross  =/(«^,  so  stolid,  dull  (Carr).  Should  be  converted. — Should  turn  again 
(R.V.).   Moral  unwillingness  resulting  in  moral  inability  (Schajff-). 

Ver.  19.  Which  received  seed. — That  was  sown  (R.Y.).  A  change  in  the  figure  quite  common 
among  Orientals.  It  should  have  been  :  This  is  he  in  whose  case  the  seed  was  sown  by  the 
wayside  (Meyer).  But  there  is  a  deeper  meaning  in  this  change.  The  loss  of  the  seed 
becomes  in  reality  the  loss  of  one's  own  life,  just  as  the  seed  sown  on  good  soil,  so  to  speak, 
becomes  identified  with  our  personality  (Lange).     See  ver.  23,  R.V. 

Ver.  31.  Mustard  seed. — It  is  disputed  whether  the  allusion  is  to  the  Sinapis  or  common 

320 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xiil. 


mustard  plant,  or  to  the  Salvadora  Persica  of  European  botanists.  Dean  Plumptre  suggests 
that  the  name  was  probably  used  widely  for  any  plant  that  had  the  pungent  flavour  of 
mustard.  Dr.  W.  M.  Thomson  remarks  that  the  mustard  seed  was  the  smallest  of  the  seeds 
which  the  husbandman  was  accustomed  to  sow,  while  the  plant,  when  full  grown,  was  larger 
than  any  other  herb  in  his  garden  (see  R.V.,  "greater  than  the  herbs").  Of  the  Salvadora 
Persica  Dr.  Royle  says  :  '*  The  nature  of  the  plant  is  to  become  arboreous,  and  thus  it  will 
form  a  large  shrub,  or  a  tree,  twenty-five  feet  high,  under  which  a  horsepaan  may  stand, 
when  the'soil  and  climate  are  favourable.  It  produces  numerous  branches  and  leaves, under 
which  birds  may  and  do  take  shelter,  as  well  as  build  their  nests  ;  and  its  seeds  are  used  for 
the  same  purposes  as  mustard."  Proverbial  sayings  of  the  Rabbins  which  take  the  mustard 
seed  as  the  representative  of  smallest  objects  are  collected  by  Wetstein. 

Ver.  35.  Fulfilled. — The  quotation  illustrates,  much  in  the  same  way  as  those  in 
viii.  17,  xii.  17,  St.  Matthew's  peculiar  way  of  dealing  with  the  prophetic  language  of  the 
Old  Testament.  He  found  the  word  "parable"  at  the  opening  of  a  psalm  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  2). 
The  psalm  itself  was  in  no  sense  predictive  of  the  coming  Christ  and  has  never  been  classed 
among  the  Messianic  psalms,  but  was  simply  an  historical  survey  of  God's  dealings  with 
Israel  from  the  days  of  the  Exodus  to  those  of  David.  But  the  occurrence  of  the  word  was 
enough  for  him.  Here  was  one  whose  form  of  teaching  answered  to  that  which  the  Psalmist 
had  described,  who  might  claim  the  Psalmist's  words  as  his  own  ;  and  excluding,  as  he  did, 
the  idea  of  chance  from  all  such  coincidences,  he  could  use  even  here  the  familiar  formula, 
"  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  "  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  47.  Net. — The  reference  is  to  the  large  drag-net  or  seine^  [_<ray7)VT} — hence  sagena 
(Vulgate)  and  English  sean  or  seine'].  One  end  of  the  seine  is  held  on  the  shore,  the  other 
is  hauled  ofE  by  a  boat  and  then  returned  to  the  land  {Carry 

Ver.  52.  Instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — The  new  law  requires  a  new  order  of 
scribes  who  shall  be  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven — instructed  in  its  mysteries,  its 
laws,  its  future — as  the  Jewish  scribes  are  instructed  in  the  observances  of  the  Mosaic  law 
(ibid.).  Things  new  and  old. — 1.  Just  as  the  householder  brings  from  his  stores  or  treasury 
precious  things  which  have  been  heirlooms  for  generations,  as  well  as  newly  acquired 
treasures ;  the  disciples,  following  their  Master's  example,  will  exhibit  the  true  teaching  of 
the  old  law,  and  add  thereto  the  new  lessons  of  Christianity.  2,  Another  interpretation 
finds  a  reference  to  Jewish  sacrificial  usage  by  which  sometimes  the  newly-gathered  fruit  or 
corn,  sometimes  the  produce  of  a  former  year  furnished  the  offering  (ibid.). 

Ver.  54.  His  own  country. — The  district  of  Nazareth. 

Ver.  55.  The  carpenter's  son  (see  Mark  vi.  3), — Joseph  was  an  artificer,  for  the  word 
"  carpenter  "  must  not  be  interpreted  in  its  narrowed  modern  import.  The  word  "  carpenter  " 
originally  meant  "  cart-maker."  But  the  term  employed  by  the  Evangelist  rather  corresponds 
to  our  more  general  word  "  wright,"  which  properly  means  just  a  workman,  being  etymo- 
logically  connected  with  the  word  "  work  "  or  "  wrought."  Like  the  Evangelist's  Greek  term, 
it  would  originally  designate  an  artificer,  who  worked,  indeed,  in  wood,  but  not  exclusively 
so.  {Moriso/i).  His  brethren. — An  exceedingly  difficult  question  here  arises,  What  were  these 
'•brethren"  and  "  sisters  "  (ver.  56)  to  Jesus?  Were  they:  1.  His  full  brothers  and  sisters? 
or :  2.  His  step-brothers  and  step-sisters,  children  of  Joseph  by  a  former  marriage  ?  or :  3.  His 
cousins,  according  to  a  common  way  of  speaking  among  the  Jews  respecting  persons  of 
collateral  descent  ?  On  this  subject  an  immense  deal  has  been  written ;  nor  are  opinions  yet 
by  any  means  agreed.  For  the  second  opinion  there  is  no  ground  but  a  vague  tradition, 
arising  probably  from  the  wish  for  some  such  explanation.  The  first  opinion  undoubtedly 
suits  the  text  best  in  all  the  places  where  the  parties  are  certainly  referred  to  (xii.  46  and 
its  parallels,  Mark  iii.  31  and  Luke  viii.  19  ;  our  present  passage  and  its  parallel,  Mark  vi.  3  ; 
John  ii.  12,  vii.  3,  5,  10  ;  Acts  i.  14).  But,  in  addition  to  other  objections,  many  of  the  best 
interpreters,  thinking  it  in  the  last  degree  improbable  that  our  Lord,  when  hanging  on  the 
cross,  would  have  committed  His  mother  to  John  if  He  had  had  full  brothers  of  His  own 
then  alive,  prefer  the  third  opinion ;  although,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted 
that  our  Lord  might  have  good  reasons  for  entrusting  the  guardianship  of  His  doubly 
widowed  mother  to  the  beloved  disciple  in  preference  even  to  full  brothers  of  His  own. 
Thus  dubiously  we  prefer  to  leave  this  vexed  question,  encompassed  as  it  is  with  difficulties 
QBrown). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—17 

Timely  teaching. — The  Saviour  here  adopts  a  style  of  instruction  almost 
peculiar  to  Himself.  "  He  spake  unto  them  by  parables."  So  much  so,  indeed, 
at  this  time,  that,  when  He  ceases  to  do  so,  attention  is  drawn  to  the  fact 
(ver.  53).     It  may  not  be  amiss,  therefore,  to  use  the  first  of  these  parables — 

Y  321 


CHAP.  XIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


that  now  before  us — to  see  what  a  parable  is.  In  other  words,  to  try  and  learn, 
from  this  specimen  of  the  class:  1.  The  chief  chai'acteristics.  2.  The  natural 
consequences.     3.  The  special  purpose — of  this  method  of  teaching. 

I.  Its  chief  characteristics. — These  are,  first,  and  of  course,  that,  on  the 
surface,  it  speaks  of  things  familiar  and  known.  In  this  first  parable,  e.g.  that 
of  the  sower  (vers.  3-8),  this  is  obviously  the  case.  All  the  Saviour's  hearers  had 
heard  something  of  sowing  and  soils,  of  harvests  and  crops.  Probably  most  of 
them  thought  that  of  such  things  they  knew  a  great  deal.  Secondly,  it  was 
necessary,  of  course,  if  the  parable  was  to  be  listened  to,  that  it  should  have  a 
story  of  some  kind,  or  main  idea,  to  characterise  it  throughout.  In  this  first 
parable,  this  '*  main  idea  "  was  that  of  failure  in  sowing.  Out  of  four  kinds  of 
soils  mentioned,  there  was  only  one  from  which  a  harvest  was  reaped.  Thirdly, 
it  was  equally  necessary,  to  make  it  a  "  parable,"  that  the  story  told  should  mean 
more  than  it  says.  Like  a  "  safe"  locked  up,  its  very  aspect  should  show  that  it 
holds  a  treasure  within.  This  was  plainly  so  in  this  case.  Evidently  the 
Saviour,  as  He  sat  in  that  ship  and  spake  to  the  multitudes  that  were  pressing 
upon  Him  to  hear  His  instructions,  was  thinking  of  more  than  mere  sowing  and 
reaping.  If  they  did  not  think  this  during  the  setting  forth  of  the  parable,  they 
must  have  felt  so  at  its  close.  *'  He  that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear  "  (ver.  9,  K.  V.). 
What  was  this  but  to  say,  in  effect,  I  have  told  you  more  than  appears  ? 
Such,  therefore,  according  to  this  primary  parable,  is  what  a  parable  is — a 
familiar  story,  the  meaning  of  which  is  not  familiar  as  yet. 

II.  Its  natural  consequences. — These  would  be,  on  the  one  hand,  identical ; 
on  the  other,  diverse.  They  would  be  identical,  to  begin.  To  such  teaching 
almost  every  hearer  would  be  disposed  to  listen  at  first.  A  "  bit  of  a  story  " 
about  things  we  know  about  has  inevitable  charms  for  us  all.  It  is  like  hearing 
the  accents  of  one's  mother  tongue  in  a  far-away  land.  One  naturally  turns  to 
it  from  everything  else.  After  this,  however,  the  consequences  would  differ  very 
widely  indeed.  In  the  case  of  a  willing  and  teachable  hearer,  for  example,  this 
form  of  teaching  would  at  once  stimulate  further  inquiry,  and  so  prepare  for 
further  instruction ;  and  so,  finally  and  fully,  when  received,  insure  its  reten- 
tion. No  man  could  learn  more  than  such  a  learner  would  from  this  style  of 
instruction.  At  once  it  would  open  his  hand,  and  fill  his  palm,  and  tighten  his 
grasp.  On  the  other  hand,  all  this  would  be  exactly  reversed  with  a  hearer  of  a 
different  stamp.  Such  a  hearer  would  never  get  beyond  the  mere  shell  of  this 
nut.  He  would  see  the  outside  of  the  "  safe,"  but  nothing  beside.  Never 
troubling  to  inquire,  he  would  never  learn.  Never  searching,  he  would  never 
discover.  A  form  of  words,  in  short,  that  had  a  meaning  of  some  sort ;  a 
challenge  to  inquiry  never  responded  to  on  his  part ;  a  great  opportunity  come 
and  gone — that  is  all  that  the  parable  spoken  would  be  in  his  case. 

III.  Its  special  purpose. — This  was,  briefly,  in  order  to  bring  about  the  very 
consequences  described.  According  to  the  order  of  the  Gospel  before  us,  recent 
events  had  brought  strongly  to  light  the  exceeding  captiousness  of  some  of  the 
hearers  of  Christ.  Their  extraordinary  perverseness  (xi.  18,  19),  their  invincible 
unbelief  (xi.  20-24),  their  lamentable  hypocrisy  (xii.  24-37),  had  all  been — 
almost  strikingly — brought  home  to  His  notice.  On  the  other  hand,  this  had 
only  the  more  strikingly  exhibited  the  opposite  bearing  of  some  of  His  hearers ; 
of  those,  e.g.  of  whom  He  had  only  just  now  spoken,  because  of  this,  as  His 
"brothers"  indeed  (xii.  49,  50).  How  is  the  Saviour  to  deal  with  both  sides  of 
this  condition  of  things  ?  Here  are  hearers  before  Him  of  both  the  opposite 
kinds  of  which  we  have  spoken.  How  is  He  to  speak  words  which  shall  be 
suitable  to  them  both  ?  Words  which  shall  convey  the  "  pearls  "  of  His  teaching 
to  those  who  truly  desire  them  ?  Words  which,  at  the  same  time,  shall  not 
merely  expose    them  in  other  quarters  to  be  "  trampled  on  "  with  contempt  ? 

322 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      CHAP.  xiii. 


This  method  of  "  parables  "  exactly  accomplishes  both  these  two  ends.  And  in 
this  fact,  therefore,  is  the  reason  why  He  chooses  it  now.  According  to  His  own 
account  of  the  matter — according  to  that  account  of  the  matter  which  had  been 
given  in  the  pages  of  prophecy  ages  before — this  is  why  He  chooses  it  now 
(vers.  10-17). 

In  a  general  way  this  view  of  a  "  parable  " — as  a  kind  of  ''  parable  "  itself — 
may  teach  us  two  things.     It  may  teach  us : — 

1.  Hov)  easily  truth  may  he  missed. — These  careless  hearers  of  the  Saviour's  par- 
ables had  only  to  continue  their  carelessness  and  their  wretched  object  was  gained. 
This  is  tiue  of  other  things  too.  Of  almost  all  the  teaching  of  God  in  His  word. 
Of  the  story  of  Israel  of  old.  Of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  law.  Of  the 
story  and  passion  of  the  Saviour  Himself.  It  is  also  true  of  the  teaching  of  God 
in  His  works.  There  is  something  of  the  "  parable  "  in  them  all.  "  They  half 
reveal  and  half  conceal  the  truth  within."  It  is  only  too  easy,  therefore,  in  the  case 
of  all  of  them,  to  miss  the  truth  they  convey.  We  have  only  not  to  knock  at 
the  door,  and  the  whole  treasure  is  lost ! 

2.  How  easily  truth  may  he  gained. — What  can  be  really  better,  for  such 
scholars  as  we  are,  than  such  a  method  of  teaching  ?  To  begin  with  us  just  as 
we  are,  to  stir  us  up  thereby  to  seek  more,  and  to  insure  thereby  that,  if  we  do, 
we  shall  find  and  keep  it — is  surely  not  only  the  only  way,  but  the  simplest  way 
too  !  What  more  can  we  ask  than  that  we  may  be  fully  enabled  to  find  our 
way  to  the  light  ? 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1-9,  18-23.  The  sower.— ThQ 
parable  is,  in  our  language  at  least,  so 
universally  ^associated  with  this  name, 
that  it  would  not  readily  be  recognised 
under  any  other  designation ;  but 
*'  The  Four  kinds  of  Ground,"  the  title 
which  seems  to  be  in  ordinary  use 
among  the  Germans,  is  logically  more 
correct,  inasmuch  as  it  points  directly  t 
to  the  central  idea,  and  expresses  the 
distinctive  characteristic.  We  turn  to 
the  ground  and  the  various  obstacles 
which  there  successively  meet  the  seed 
and  mar  its  fruit  fulness. 

I.  The  wayside  (ver.  19). — Behold 
in  one  picture  God's  gracious  offer, 
man's  self -destroying  neglect,  and  the 
tempter's  coveted  opportunity  !  The 
parallel  between  the  material  and  the 
moral  here  is  more  close  and  visible  in 
the  original  than  it  appears  in  the 
English  version.  But  our  language  is 
capable,  in  this  instance,  like  the 
Greek,  of  expressing  by  one  phrase 
equally  the  moral  and  the  material 
failure :  "  Every  one  that  hears  the 
word  of  the  kingdom  and  does  not  take 
it  in  "  (/x,^  cruvt€i/TOs). 

1.  The  seed  is  good. — "  The  word  of 


God  is  quick  and  powerful," — i.e.  it 
"  is  living,  and  puts  forth  energy " 
(Heb.  iv.  12).  Like  buried,  moistened 
seed,  it  swells  and  bursts,  and  forces 
its  way  through  opposing  obstacles. 

2.  The  fault  lies  not  often,  or  to  a 
great  extent  even,  in  the  sower,  although 
his  work  may  have  been  feebly  and 
unskilfully  done. 

3.  Nor  does  the  cause  of  failure,  in 
the  last  resort,  lie  in  the  soil. — Believei's 
and  unbelievers  are  possessed  of  the 
same  nature  and  faculties. 

4.  It  was  the  breaking  of  the  ground 
which  caused  the  difference  between  the 
fruitful  field  and  the  barren  wayside. 
Those  minds  on  which  the  good  seed  has 
often  been  thrown,  only  to  be  thrown 
away,  may  yet  yield  an  increase  of  a 
hundredfold  to  their  owner  when 
conviction  and  repentance  shall  have 
rent  them  open  to  admit  the  word 
of  life. 

II.  The  stony  ground. — A  human 
heart,  the  soil  on  which  the  sower  casts 
his  seed,  is  in  itself,  and  from  the  first 
hard  both  above  and  below  ;  but  by  a 
little  easy  culture,  such  as  most  people 
in  this  land  may  enjoy,  some  measure 

323 


CHAP.  xiii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


of  softness  is  produced  on  the  surface. 
Among  the  affections,  when  they  are 
warm  and  newly  stirred,  the  seed 
speedily  springs.  Many  young  hearts, 
subjected  to  the  religious  appliances 
which  abound  in  our  time,  take  hold  of 
Christ  and  let  Him  go  again.  This, 
on  the  one  hand,  as  we  learn  by  the 
result,  was  never  a  true  conversion  ; 
but  neither  was  it,  on  the  other  hand, 
a  case  of  conscious,  intentional  deceit. 
It  was  leal,  but  it  was  not  thorough. 

III.  The  thorns.— In  the  appli- 
cation of  the  lesson  this  term  must  be 
understood  not  specifically,  but  gener- 
ically.  In  the  natural  object  it 
indicates  any  species  of  useless  weed 
that  occupies  the  ground  and  injures 
the  growing  crop ;  in  the  spiritual 
application  it  points  to  the  worldly 
cares,  whether  they  spring  from 
poverty  or  wealth,  which  usurp  in  a 
human  heart  the  place  due  to  Christ 
and  His  saving  truth.  In  two  distinct 
aspects  thorns,  growing  in  a  field  of 
wheat,  reflect  as  a  mirror  the  kind  of 
spiritual  injury  which  the  cares  and 
pleasures  of  the  world  inflict  when 
they  are  admitted  into  the  heart ;  they 
exhaust  the  soil  by  their  roots,  and  over- 
shadow the  corn  with  their  branches. 
The  faculties  of  the  human  heart  and 
mind  are  limited,  like  the  productive 
powers  of  the  ground.  Worldly  cares 
nursed  by  indulgence  into  a  dangerous 
strength  interpose  a  veil  between  the 
face  of  Jesus  and  the  opening,  trustful 
look  of  a  longing  soul.  Fitful  glances 
of  sunshine  now  and  then  will  not 
bring  the  fruit  to  maturity. 

IV.  The  good  ground. — While  all 
the  ground  that  was  broken,  deep  and 
clean  in  spring  and  summer,  bears 
fruit  in  harvest,  some  portions  produce 
a  larger  return  than  others.  The 
picture  in  this  feature  is  true  to  nature ; 
and  the  fact  in  the  spiritual  sphere  also 
corresponds.  There  are  diversities  in 
the  Spirit's  operation ;  diversities  in 
natural  gifts  bestowed  on  men  at  first ; 
diversities  in  the  amount  of  energy 
exerted  by  believers  as  fellow-workers 
with  God  in  their  own  sanctification ; 
and    diversities,    accordingly,    in    the 

324 


fruitfulness  which  results  in  the  life  of 
Christians. — W.  Arnot,  D.D. 

The  sower. — I.  The  fir;st  faultiness 
of  soil  our  Lord  specifies  is  impervious- 
ness. — The  proposals  made  to  the  way- 
side hearer  suggest  nothing  at  all  to 
him.  His  mind  throws  ofl"  Christ's 
offers  as  a  slated  roof  throws  off  hail. 
You  might  as  well  expect  seed  to  grow 
on  a  tightly-braced  drum-head  as  the 
word  to  profit  such  a  hearer  ;  it  dances 
on  the  hard  surface,  and  the  slightest 
motion  shakes  it  off.  The  consequence 
is  it  is  forgotten. 

II.  The  second  faultiness  of  soil  our 
Lord  enumerates  is  shallowness. — The 
shallow  hearer  our  Lord  distinguishes 
by  two  characteristics  :  he  straightway 
receives  the  word,  and  he  receives  it 
with  joy.  The  man  of  deeper  character 
receives  the  word  with  deliberation,  as 
one  who  has  many  things  to  take  into 
account  and  weigh.  He  receives  it 
with  seriousness,  and  reverence,  and 
trembling,  foreseeing  the  trials  he  will 
be  subjected  to,  and  he  cannot  show  a 
light-minded  joy. 

III.  The  third  faultiness  of  soil 
which  causes  failure  in  the  crop  is  what 
is  technically  known  as  dirt. — The  soil 
is  not  impenetrable,  nor  is  it  shallow  ;  it 
is  deep,  good  land,  but  it  has  not  been 
cleaned — there  is  seed  in  it  already. 
This  is  a  picture  of  the  pre-occupied 
heart  of  the  rich,  vigorous  nature, 
capable  of  understanding,  appreciating, 
and  making  much  of  the  word  of  the 
kingdom,  but  occupied  with  so  many 
other  interests,  that  only  a  small  part 
of  its  energy  is  available  for  giving 
effect  to  Christ's  ideas.  The  care  of 
this  world  has  been  called  the  poor 
man's  species  of  the  deceitfulness  of 
riches,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches 
a  variety  of  the  care  of  this  world. 
Man  is  possessed  of  free  will,  of  the 
power  of  checking,  to  some  extent, 
natural  tendencies,  and  preventing 
natural  consequences. 

TV.  In  contrast,  then,  to  these  three 
faults  of  impenetrability,  shallowness, 
and  dirt,  we  may  be  expected  to  do 
something   towards    bringing    to    the 


BOMILETiC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xill. 


hearing  of  the  word  a  soft,  deep,  clean 
soil  of  heart  (see  Luke  viii.  15). — 
There  must  be  :  1.  Honesty,  2.  Medi- 
tation. "  If  there  is  a  person,  of 
whatever  age,  or  class,  or  station,  who 
will  not  be  thoughtful,  who  will  not 
seriously  and  honestly  consider,  there 

(is  no  doing  him  any  good."  You  must 
let  your  milk  stand  if  you  wish  cream. 
And  meditation  is  a  process  of  mind 
whose  necessary  element  is  the  absence 
of  hurry.  3.  Patience. — M.  Dods, 
D.D. 

Vers.  3-9.  The  v^ord  of  the  kingdom 
diversely  received. — The  reason  for  this 
parable  is  to  be  sought  in  the  moral 
situation  of  the  hour.  The  motives 
must  have  come  from  the  spiritual 
composition  and  condition  of  the 
crowd.  1.  "  For  this  people's  heart  is 
waxed  gross,"  etc.  2.  The  great  his- 
torical melancholy  fact  of  the  Caper- 
naum crisis  recorded  in  John  vi.,  in 
which  the  Galilean  revival  came  to  a 
deplorable  end.  "  From  that  time 
many  of  His  disciples  went  back,"  etc. 
3.  The  minute  particulars  of  infor- 
mation supplied  by  the  Evangelists 
as  to  the  circumstances  amid  which 
Jesus  spake  our  parable  show  that 
the  Galilean  enthusiasm  is  at  its 
height,  and  therefore,  that  the  crisis, 
the  time  of  reaction,  must  be  near. 
The  crisis,  then,  is  approaching  and  it 
is  in  view  of  that  crisis  Jesus  speaks 
the  parable  of  the  sower.  We  shall 
best  learn  to  discriminate  accurately 
the  different  classes  of  hearers  by 
giving  close  attention  to  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  respectively  character- 
ised by  our  Lord. 

I.  The  wayside  hearer  hears  the 
word,  but  does  not  understand  it, — or, 
to  use  a  phrase  which  expresses  at  once 
the   literal   and   the  figurative  truth, 

^does  nottakeit  in.  Thoughtlessness, 
spiritual  stupidity,  arising  not  so  much 
from  want  of  intellectual  capacity  as 
from  pre-occupation  of  mind,  is  the 
characteristic  of  the  first  class.  For  a 
type  of  this  class  see  Luke  xii.  13. 

^  III.  He  that  received  seed  into 
stony  places,  is  he  that  heareth  the 


word  and  anon  with  joy  receiveth  it. 
The  characteristic  of  this  class  is 
emotional  excitability,  inconsiderate 
impulsiveness.  If  a  type  of  this  class 
is  sought  for  in  the  Gospel  records,  it 
may  be  found  in  the  man  who  said 
unto  Jesus  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee 
whithersoever  Thou  goest,"  and  to 
whom  Jesus  replied,  "  Foxes  have 
holes,"  etc.  The  crowd  by  the  lake  to 
which  the  parable  of  the  sower  was 
spoken  was  full  of  such  professors. 
The  melancholy  history  of  many  hope- 
ful religious  movements  is  this ;  many 
converts,  few  stable  Christians ;  many 
blossoms,  little  fruit  coming  to 
maturity. 

III.  He  that  received  the  seed 
among  the  thorns  is  so  described  as  to 
suggest  the  idea  of  a  double-minded 
man — the  avr]^  Slif/vxos  of  St.  James 
i.  8.  This  man  is  neither  stupid, 
like  his  brother-hearer  of  the  first 
class,  nor  a  mere  man  of  feeling,  like 
those  of  the  second  class.  He  hears  in 
the  emphatic  sense  of  the  word,  hears 
both  with  thought  and  with  feeling, 
understanding  what  he  hears,  and 
realising  its  solemn  importance.  The 
soil  in  his  case  is  neither  hard  on  the 
surface  nor  shallow  ;  it  is  good  soil  so 
far  as  softness  and  depth  are  con- 
cerned. Its  one  fault  (but  it  is  a  very 
serious  one)  is  that  it  is  impure  ;  there 
are  other  seeds  in  it  besides  those  being 
sown  on  it,  and  the  result  will  be  two 
crops  struggling  for  the  mastery,  with 
the  inevitable  result  that  the  better 
crop  will  have  to  succumb.  This  man 
has  two  minds,  so  to  speak  ;  we  might 
almost  say  he  is  two  men.  Of  the 
thorny  ground  hearer,  the  man  of 
divided  mind  and  double  heart,  we  have 
an  example  in  him  who  came  to  Jesus 
and  said  "  Lord  I  will  follow  Thee, 
but  first  let  me,"  etc.  How  many 
men  are  wasting  their  lives  at  home, 
who  might  go  forth  to  a  life  of  abun- 
dant fruitfulness  in  mission  fields, 
were  it  not  for  an  attachment  like 
that  of  John  Mark  for  fathers  or 
mothers  or  native  land  ! 

IV.  He  that  receiveth  seed  into 
good  ground  is  he  that  heareth   the 

825 


CHAP.  XIII.     HOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW. 


word   and   understandeth   it.     This  is  trees  of  the  more  inland  parts,  in  the 

inadequate  as  expressing  the  idea  of  a  very  midst   of   the   waving   wheat. — 

perfect    hearer.       For    the     "  under-  Dean  Stanley. 
standeth"   of    Matthew,    Mark    gives 

"  receive  ''   and    Luke    "  keep."      The  Yer.  4.   The  wayside. — It  represents 

precise  distinction  of  the  perfect  hearer,  the  case  of  men  whose  insensibility  to 

however,  is  this — that  he  receives  and  the  word  is  caused  by  outward  things 

retains   the  word  alone   in  his  mind.  having  made   a  thoroughfare  of  their 

He  is  characteristically  single-minded  natures   and     trodden   them   into   in- 

and   whole-hearted  in   religion.      The  capacity   to   receive     the   message    of 

kingdom  of  God  has  the  first  place  in  Christ's   love.        The    heavy    baggage- 

his  thoughts  and  everything  else  only  waggons  of  commerce,  the  light  cars  of 

the  second.      His  motto  is  taken  from  pleasure,     merry     dancers,    and     sad 

the  words  of  the  Psalmist :  "  Bless  the  funeral  processions,  have  all  used  that 

Lord,  O  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  way,  and  each  footfall  has  beaten  the 

me."     This  is  undoubtedly  the  idea  in  once  loose  soil  a  little  firmer.     We  are 

Luke  viii.  15.     See  Christ's  eulogium  made  insensitive  to  the  gospel  by  the 

upon   Mary,    "  She    hath   wrought    a  efiect  of  innocent  and  necessary  things, 

noble    work    upon    Me."      Barnabas,  unless  we  take  care  to  plough  up  the 

"  For  he  was  a  good  man,"  etc.    Lydia,  path  along  which  they  travel,  and  to 

*'  Whose  heart  the  Lord  opened,  that  keep  our  spirits  susceptible  by  a  dis- 

she   attended   unto   the  things  which  tinct  efibrt. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 
were  spoken  of  Paul." — A.  B.  Bruce, 

D.J).  Vers.  5,  6.  Surface  religion. — It  is  a 

case  of  "  lightly  come,  lightly  go." 
Ver.  3.  The  sower, — A  slight  recess  Quick-sprouting  things  are  soon-dying 
/  in  the  hill- side,  close  upon  the  plain  things.  A  shallow  pond  is  up  in 
(Gennesareth),  disclosed  at  once,  in  waves  under  a  breeze  which  raises  no 
detail,  and  with  a  conjunction  which  sea  on  the  Atlantic,  and  it  is  calm 
I  remember  nowhere  else  in  Palestine,  again  in  a  few  minutes.  Readily  stirred 
every  feature  of  the  great  parable.  emotion  is  transient.  Brushwood 
There  was  the  undulating  cornfield  catches  fire  easily,  and  burns  itself  out 
descending  to  the  water's  edge.  There  quickly.  Coal  takes  longer  to  kindle, 
was  the  trodden  pathway  running  and  is  harder  to  put  out.  The  persons 
through  the  midst  of  it,  with  no  fence  meant  are  those  of  excitable  tempera- 
or  hedge  to  prevent  the  seed  from  ment,  whose  feelings  lie  on  the  surface, 
falling  here  and  there  on  either  side  of  and  can  be  got  at  without  first  passing 
it,  or  upon  it ;  itself  hard  with  the  through  the  understanding  or  the  con- 
constant  tramp  of  horse,  and  mule,  science. — Ihid. 
and    human     feet.      There    was    the 

**  good,"  rich  soil,  which  distinguishes  Vers.  1-9.  N'o  parable  teaches  every- 

tlie    whole    of     that    plain     and     its  thing. — Paths,  rocks,  and  thorns  cannot 

neighbourhood    from    the    bare    hills  change.     But  men  can  plough  up  the 

elsewhere    descending   into    the    lake,  trodden   ways,   and    blast    away    the 

and  which,  where  there  is  no  interrup-  rock,    and   root   out  the  thorns,  and, 

tion,  produces  one  vast  mass  of  corn.  with  God's  help,  can  open  the  door  of 

There  was   the   rocky   ground   of  the  their  hearts,  that  the  sower  and  His 

hill-side,  protruding   here    and    there  seed  may  enter  in.     We  are  responsible 

through  the  corn-fields,    as   elsewhere  for  the  soil,  else  His   warnings  were 

through    the     grassy    slopes.      There  vain,  "Take  heed,  therefore,  how  ye 

were  the  large   bushes  of  thorn — the  hear." — Ihid. 
"  nabk,"  that  kind  of  which  tradition 

says  that   the   crown   of    thorns   was  Vers.    10-17.  The  revealment   of  the 

woven — springing   up   like   the    fruit  gospel. — I.  The     evident    necessity  of 

326 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiii. 


its  revealment. — 1.  The  gospel  can  only 
bensfit  us  as  it  is  believed.  2.  There 
can  be  no  belief  without  knowledge. 
3.  Without  a  revealment  the  realities 
of  the  gospel  could  never  have  been 
known. 

II.  The  parabolic  method  of  its 
revealment. 

III.  The  different  spiritual  results 
of  its  revealment. 

1.  There  is  a  difference  in  the  kind  of 
result. — The  gospel  ministry  is  a  damning 
as  well  as  a  saving  process.  It  has  made 
millions  of  Pharaohs.  (1)  The  gospel 
benefits  by  design ;  it  does  not  injure 
by  design.  (2)  The  gospel  benefits  by 
adaptation ;  it  does  not  injure  by 
adaptation.  (3)  The  gospel  benefits 
by  Divine  influence ;  it  does  not  injure 
by  Divine  influence. 

2.  There  is  a  difference  in  the  degree. 
— "  Many  prophets,"  etc.  The  disciples 
had  a  fuller  manifestation,  and  a  richer 
enjoyment  of  the  gospel  than  the 
prophets  and  righteous  men  of  whom 
Christ  speaks. — D.  Thomas,  B.I). 

Vers,  10-13.  The  reason  of  Christ's 
method  of  teaching. — In  answer  to  the 
question,  "  Why  speakest  Thou  to 
them  in  parables  ? "  Christ  replies, 
"  Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know," 
etc.  "  Therefore  speak  I,"  etc.  The 
reason  is,  the  spiritual  obtuseness  of 
sinners.  I  am  aware  that  many  ex- 
positors, Olshausen  and  Doddridge 
amongst  them,  interpret  the  words  of 
our  Saviour  as  meaning  that  He 
taught  in  parables  in  order  to  conceal 
His  meaning  from  His  ungodly  hearers. 
I  cannot  entertain  this  thought  for 
the  following  reasons  : — 

I.  The  language  does  not  necessarily 
imply  this  idea. — He  gives  parables, 
not  to  produce  moral  obhquity,  but 
because  moral  obliquity  existed. 

II.  This  idea  is  essentially  incon- 
sistent with  the  nature  of  parabolic 
teaching. — The  very  nature  and  de- 
sign of  a  parable  are  to  make  an 
obscure  truth  clear — to  illustrate. 

III.  This  idea  is  incompatible  with 
the  character  and  mission  of  Christ. — 
Does  it  comport  with  His  kindness  to 


suppose  that  He  sought  to  intensify 
the  darkness  of  the  human  spirit? — 
Ibid. 

Ver.  10.  Christ's  method  of  teaching, 
— Christ's  method  of  teaching  the 
people  by  parables  seemed  strange  in 
the  eyes  of  His  disciples.  It  was  not 
the  method  of  teaching  adopted  by  the 
scribes,  nor  by  John  the  Baptist.  It 
may  even  seem  strange  to  us ;  for 
there  is  almost  an  inversion  of  the 
order  of  education  and  teaching  as  we 
are  accustomed  to  see  it.  We  are 
accustomed  to  see  first  the  indirect  and 
story  teaching,  and  then  the  direct 
instruction.  But  viewing  the  two 
ministries  of  John  the  Baptist  and  our 
Lord  we  find  the  process  reversed ; 
from  the  Baptist  we  have  the  direct 
teaching,  from  Jesus  Christ  more 
picturesque  methods.  Stranger  still 
is  the  reason  given  for  the  adoption 
by  our  Lord  of  this  teaching  by 
parable  ;  the  reason  is  startling  and 
stern,  "  That  hearing  they  might  hear 
and  not  understand."  This  quite 
reverses  our  notions;  we  should  have 
said  probably  that  the  parable  was 
used  because  it  simplified  the  teaching 
to  the  mind  of  the  hearer. 

I.  We  must  first  fix  our  thoughts 
on  the  parable  method  of  teaching, 
and  discover  its  advantages. — The 
true  end  of  teaching  is  surely  to  make 
the  mind  available  in  life.  It  is  to 
make  all  the  powers  usable.  The  true 
and  wise  teacher,  theiefore,  is  con- 
stantly seeking  to  awaken  the  thought, 
the  imagination,  the  will,  to  co-operate 
with  his  efforts.  This  is  indispensable 
in  religious  teaching.  Here  it  is 
absolutely  essential  that  the  will  and 
the  affections  should  co-operate  wdth 
the  understanding.  "  Beligion,"  says 
Coleridge,  *'is  the  will  in  the  reason, 
and  love  in  the  will."  Compulsion  is 
not  only  irrelevant  but  fatal.  Take 
a  man  who  is  notoriously  avaricious. 
You  wish  to  rescue  him  from  his  yoke 
of  greed.  You  attempt  a  direct  attack 
upon  his  vice  ;  you  accuse  or  you  abuse 
him.  You  run  the  risk  of  arousing 
his  pride.    You  try  an  indirect  method ; 

^  327 


CHAP.  Xiii.      HOMILEfiC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


you  select  a  story  of  grief  or  misfortune  ; 
you  speak  of  another's  sufferings  ;  he 
is  moved ;  the  stirred  heart  becomes 
genial ;  the  opening  of  the  purse 
follows — you  have  gained  a  subscrip- 
tion; you  have  done  more,  you  have 
won  a  human  heart.  The  indirect 
method  carries  the  greater  chance  of 
success.  Example,  Nathan  and  David. 
When  the  abrupt  and  direct  plan  of 
assault  is  made,  the  will  is  found  to  be 
pride- locked  and  armed  for  defence. 
By  the  indirect  process  the  heart  is 
prepared  for  surrender ;  the  man  is 
made  to  co-operate  against  himself  for 
his  own  benefit.  This  was  the  method 
which  our  Lord  seems  to  have  most 
frequently  adopted.  Almost  all  His 
parables  are  examples  of  the  employ- 
ment of  it ;  and  it  was  all  the  more 
forcible,  inasmuch  as  it  followed  the 
direct  startling  method  of  John  the 
Baptist.  Jesus  Christ's  teaching 
suggested  more  than  it  said. 

II.  It  is  easy  enough  to  see  that 
to  speak  by  parab.es  may,  because  of 
its  very  indirectness,  be  the  best  way 
of  winning  the  hearts  of  men;  but 
what  surprises  us  is  to  find  that  the 
reason  stated  for  the  use  of  parables 
is  apparently  the  very  reverse. — That 
seeing  they  might  not  see,  etc.  One 
thing  we  have  seen,  that  the  indirect 
and  parable  method  of  teaching  does 
not  diminish  the  chance  of  the  surrender 
of  the  hearer's  heart.  On  the  contrary 
it  seems  to  be  a  plan  which  was  most 
widely  successful.  If  this  be  the  case, 
the  harshness  of  the  words  is  half 
gone.  The  plan  was  not  employed  to 
diminish  the  opportunity  of  spiritual 
illumination.  There  was  nothing  in 
the  nature  of  the  parables  themselves, 
which  were  numerous  and  varied,  to 
close  the  mind  which  was  not  willingly 
blind.  It  is  as  though  the  man  of 
avarice  listened  unmoved  to  the  sad 
and  pathetic  story.  "  He  has  eyes  and 
sees  not,"  etc.  We  have  found  out 
how  hard  human  nature  can  be.  We 
have  even  unwittingly  contributed  to 
harden  it  more;  for  every  appeal 
resisted  builds  a  fresh  wall  against 
sympathy.     Now  in  all  this  we  have 

328 


not  been  at  fault.  What  has  been 
wrong  has  been  the  moral  sense  of 
him  we  have  appealed  to.  It  is  this 
which  must  be  kept  in  mind  in  reading 
these  stern  words  of  the  Evangelist. 
Everything  has  been  tried,  the  direct 
and  the  indirect  method  ;  but  the  heart 
gives  no  response,  and  shows  tokens  of 
no  surrender.  The  moral  nature  of 
those  whom  He  spoke  to  closed  itself 
against  all  the  varied  appeals.  What 
more  could  be  done?  If  they  resist 
this  strategy  (the  solemn,  the  plaintive, 
the  pathetic  parable)  they  are  mani- 
fested to  be  those  who  having  eyes,  see 
not,  and  having  ears,  hear  not. — Bishop 
W.  B.  Carpenter. 

The  importance  of  illustrative  teach- 
ing.— Robert  Hall's  criticism  on  a 
brother-minister  was,  "  You  have  no 
*  likes '  in  your  sermons.  Christ 
taught  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
was  like  to  leaven,  like  to  a  ^rain  of 
mustard  seed,  etc.  You  tell  us  what 
things  are,  but  never  what  they  are 
like." — Metaphors  are  windows  of 
speech  ;  through  them  the  truth  shines, 
and  ordinary  minds  fail  to  perceive 
truth  clearly  unless  it  is  presented  to 
them  through  this  medium  {E.  P.  Hood). 
The  story,  like  a  float,  keeps  the  ti-uth 
4  from  sinking ;  like  a  nail  fastens  it  in 
I  the  mind ;  like  the  feather  of  an 
f  arrow,  makes  it  strike,  and  like  the 
j  barb  makes  it  stick  {T.  Guthrie,  D.I).). 
LWhen  the  mental  energy  is  only 
smouldering  in  a  lukewarm  way  inside 
the  subject,  then  you  have  the  common- 
place prosaic  statement ;  when  the 
warmth  increases  you  get  the  clear, 
strong,  impressive  statement ;  but 
when  the  glow  has  thoroughly  mastered 
the  mass,  and  flames  all  over  it,  then 
come  the  gorgeous  images  and  parables 
which  dwell  for  ever  in  the  minds  of 
the  hearers. — J.  Stalker,  D.D, 

Parables   are   like   the  husk    which  ^ 
1  preserves  the  kernel  yrom  the  indolent 
Ntndybr  the  earnest. — Gerlach. 

Ver.  12.  The  law  of  habit. — This  is  a 
principle  of  immense  importance,  and, 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiii. 


like  other  weighty  sayings,  appears  to  strong  disapproval.     "  How  could  the 

have  been  uttered  by  our  Lord  on  more  girl's  feet  make  the  daisies  rosy  1 "  he 

than  one    occasion,    and   in  different  asked  triumphantly,  ''  it  is  nonsense  !  " 

connections.       As     a     great     ethical  "  Nonsense  ?  "  said  the  sculptor,  "  it  is 

principle  we  see  it  in  operation  every-  an  exquisite    instance  of  observation  ! 

where,  under  the  general  law  of  habit,  It  means   that   the   light  feet   of  the 

in   virtue   of   which   moral   principles  maiden,    bending    the     stems   of   the 

become  stronger  by  exercise,   while  by  daisies,  have  shown  their  rosy  under- 

disuse,   or  the   exercise  of   their   con-  surface.     Have  you  never  noticed  that 

traries,  they  wax  weaker,  and  at  length  the  underside  of  the  daisy's  petal  passes 

expire.     The  same  principle  reigns  in  by    beautiful    gradations    from    rose- 

the  intellectual  world,  and  even  in  the  colour  to  deep  crimson  ?  "     "  No  !  "  was 

animal — if  not  in  the  vegetable  also —  the  astounding  answer  of  the  critic. — 

as  the  facts  of  physiology  sufficiently  F,  W.  Farrar,  D.D, 
prove.     Here,   however,   it    is   viewed 

as   a  Divine  ordination,  as  a  judicial  Ver.    14.  Nev)   truth   bewildering  to 

retribution     in     continual     operation  some. — Men  who   have  lived  in  tradi- 

under  the  Divine  administration.— Z>.  tional  knowledge  do  not  thank  you  for  a 

Brown  D.D.  J^^w  truth.     It   dazes   and  confounds 

their  dim  vision,  which  is  unsuited  to 

Ver.  13.  Seeing  hut  not  perceiving . —  its  reception.     Their  bewilderment  at 

In  Tennyson's  "  Maud  "  we  read  : —  the  light  is  similar  to  that  of  the  cricket. 

"  I  know  the  way  she  went  ^^  ^^^  cricket  lives  chiefly  in  the  dark, 

Home  with  her  maiden  posy,  so    its     eyes  ^  seem   formed     tor    the 

For  her  feet  have  touched  the  meadows,  gloominess  of  its  abode  ;  and  you  have 

And  left  the  daisies  rosy."  only  to  light  a   candle   unexpectedly, 

Now  an  eminent  sculptor  told  me  that  and   it    becomes   so    dazzled    that    it 

a  still  more  eminent  critic  to  whom  he  cannot  find  its  way  back  to  its  retreat, 

was   talking     quoted    this   line    with  — Scientijic  Illustrations  and  Symbols. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—23. 

The  art  of  hearing, — We  have  before  us  here  the  Saviour's  own  explanation 
(ver.  18)  of  the  first  of  His  parables  at  this  time.  And  we  find,  appropriately  enough, 
that  the  subject  of  it  is  the  subject  of  "  hearing."  There  are  three  wrong  ways 
— there  is  only  one  right  way — of  hearing  the  word.  That,  in  brief,  is  what  His 
explanation  amounts  to.  The  consideration  of  the  three  wrong  ways  will  make 
the  consideration  of  the  one  right  way  a  comparatively  easy  proceeding. 

I.  The  first  wrong  way  of  hearing  may  be  described  as  hardly  hearing  at 
all.  It  is  hearing  without  understanding  (ver.  19).  It  is  hearing  the  sound 
only,  and  not  the  sense.  To  such  a  "  hearer  "  it  matters  little  what  message  is 
sent  him.  He  takes  in  as  much — or  rather  as  little — whatever  is  said.  He  is 
well  represented,  therefore,  by  that  "  wayside  "  soil  which  is  trodden  so  hard 
that  the  seed  which  falls  on  it  cannot  enter  into  it.  Just  so  is  it  of  such  a 
hearer,  and  of  the  truth  which  he  hears.  When  all  has  been  said,  the  truth  in 
question  remains  outside  of  his  mind.  Naturally,  therefore,  the  result  of  such 
"  hearing  "  is  just  nothing  at  all.  No  seed  that  only  lies  on  the  surface  can 
germinate  or  increase.  It  cannot  even  take  the  first  step  in  that  vital  direction. 
It  can  only  lie  there  till  one  of  the  birds  of  the  air  carries  it  off,  and  "  devours  "  it. 
Even  so  of  that  truth,  by  whomsoever  spoken,  which  does  not  even  enter  the 
mind.  Not  only,  in  that  condition,  can  it  then  do  nothing  at  all;  there  are 
influences  at  work  which  will  soon  take  away  its  chance  of  doing  anything  in 
the  future  (end  of  ver.  19). 

II.  The  second  wrong  way  of  hearing  may  be  described  as  only  hearing  hi 

329 


CHAP.  XIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


part.  It  is  not  in  this  case,  as  in  the  previous  one,  that  nothing  at  all  is  received. 
On  the  contrary  a  good  deal — and  that  "straightway  " — and  even  ''  with  joy" 
— is  received  (ver.  20).  But  it  is  not  so  received  for  all  that,  but  that  a  good 
deal  more  is  left  out.  As  it  were  the  pleasant  side  of  the  message  of  the 
"  kingdom,"  the  peace  it  offers,  the  hope  it  sets  forth,  the  glory  it  promises 
are  appreciated  in  full.  But  the  sterner  and  less  alluring  side  of  the  question, 
the  probability  of  "  persecution  or  tribulation  arising  because  of  the  word,"  is  not 
considered  as  it  should  be,  if  considered  at  all.  When  this  comes  about,  there- 
fore, as  come  it  must,  such  a  hearer  is  not  prepared  for  such  a  stumbling-block 
in  his  way.  The  first  consequence  is  that  he  is  as  quickly  displeased  now  (end 
of  ver.  21  R.V.  "  straightway  ")  as  he  had  been  quickly  pleased  at  the  first.  And 
the  consequence  of  that  is,  that  he  goes  back  again  wholly  from  such  good  as  he 
had.  Precisely  as  happens,  in  short,  where  the  seed  of  the  sower  falls  upon  one  of 
those  *'  rocky  places  "  where  there  is  "  no  deepness  of  earth  "  (verses  4,  5).  The 
only  thing  quicker  than  the  subsequent  growth  of  that  seed  is  its  still  later 
decay.  And  the  only  relic  it  leaves  is  a  "  withered  "  blade  (ver.  6),  which  tells  of 
what  had  been  hoped  at  one  time. 

III.  The  third  wrong  way  of  hearing  may  be  described  as  that  of  not 
hearing  in  truth.  It  is  indeed,  "  receiving  "  the  word,  but  it  is  also  receiving 
together  with  it  that  which  is  inconsistent  therewith.  Bather,  perhaps,  it  is  not 
making  sufiicient  room  for  it  by  previously  casting  all  such  other  things  out. 
When  the  seed  of  the  sower  falls  into  soil  in  which  "  the  thorns  "  (vers.  7,  22) — 
"  the  thorns  "  that  ought  not  to  be  there — are  there  in  germ,  if  not  in  anything 
more,  that  seems  to  describe  exactly  the  kind  of  thing  that  is  meant.  Beally, 
in  such  soil,  there  is  not  "  room  enough  "  for  that  seed.  It  cai^not  possibly  grow 
there  as  it  should.  Precisely  so,  is  it  too,  with  the  hearer  who  does  indeed 
receive  the  word  of  God  into  his  heart ;  but  only  to  find  there  such  things  as 
"  the  care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches"  ready  to  grow  by  its  side. 
Not  even  the  word  of  God  in  such  a  case,  can  do  what  it  should.  It  does  effect 
indeed — even  so — a  good  deal  for  a  time.  Such  a  hearer  of  the  word  becomes 
also  a  doer  of  it  to  a  certain  extent.  In  this  case  there  would  appear  to  be  even 
the  "  setting  "  of  fruit.  But  not  anything  more.  Not  the  growth  of  it — not 
the  ripening  of  it — not  the  "full  corn  in  the  ear  "  (Mark  iv.  28).  Even  the 
power  of  the  word  cannot  do  this  in  that  pre-occupied  soil.  There^  are  rival 
powers  there  which  "  choke  "  even  its  powers,  and  cause  it  to  become  "  unfruitful  " 
at  last  (end  ver.  22). 

IV.  From  these  wroug  ways  of  hearing  it  should  be  easy  now  to  put 
together  the  right  way. — The  right  way  is  one  which  escapes  the  evils  of  each 
of  these  three.  It  is  to  hear  the  sense  as  well  as  the  sound.  It  is  to  hear  the 
whole  and  not  only  a  part.  It  is  to  hear  in  sincerity,  and  not  in  any  way  in 
pretence.  Also  we  see,  thus,  by  what  results  the  right  way  may  be  known.  Not 
mere  sterility,  as  a  matter  of  course — nor  yet  "withered"  blades  only,  how- 
ever abundant — nor  yet  abortive  fruit  only,  however  advanced — prove  the  ground 
to  be  good.  Nothing  proves  this  except  the  actual  presence  of  "  something  to  be 
reaped."  Not  however,  that  this  something,  be  it  observed  in  conclusion,  must 
always  be  of  the  "  most."  This  seems  the  comforting  lesson  with  which  the 
parable  ends.  There  are  "some  thirty,  some  sixty,  some  a  hundred-fold"  in 
return.  Of  course,  this  last,  to  all  true  hearts,  will  be  far  away  best.  Of  course 
this  "  most  "  will  be  desired  most  by  every  one  who  "  hears  "  rightly.  But  even 
the  "  less  "  in  this  field  of  the  "  kingdom,"  will  not  be  set  on  one  side.  True 
"  fruit "  means  true  life,  even  if  not  in  greatest  abundance.  True  obedience 
means  true  hearing,  even  if  there  might  have  been  more.  "  She  hath  done  what 
she  could  "  (Mark  xiv.  8). 

330 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  X III. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  24—30. 

The  seeds  of  error. — The  explanation  of  the  last  parable  is,  in  part,  the 
explanation  of  this.  It  teaches  us,  e.g.  what  is  meant  in  this  parable  by  sowing 
the  seed,  viz.  the  dissemination  of  truth.  In  the  same  general  way,  therefore, 
it  enables  us  to  consider  this  parable  as  it  stands,  and  without  entering,  at 
present,  into  that  copious  explanation  of  it  which  was  afterwards  given  to  the 
disciples  in  private  (vers.  36-43).  So  regarded,  it  will  be  found  to  tell  us,  first, 
of  a  remarhahle  discovery  in  the  field  of  the  "  kingdom  " ;  and  secondly,  of  an 
equally  remarkable  decision  about  it. 

I.  A  remarkable  discovery. — A  discovery  which  seems  to  have  caused  those 
who  made  it  to  stand  still,  and  cry  out,  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  "  For 
truly  serious,  in  the  first  place,  according  to  what  we  are  taught,  was  the  nature 
of  the  appearance  they  beheld.  It  was  the  appearance  of  one  set  of  plants  where 
other  plants  had  been  sown.  More  than  this,  according  to  the  interpretation  of 
some,  it  was  the  appearance  of  a  noxious  plant  instead  of  a  wholesome  one. 
Instead  of  wheat  there  was  darnel — and  that  a  kind  of  darnel,  it  is  said,  which, 
when  taken  into  the  system,  produced  vertigo  and  sickness.  Instead  of  profit, 
therefore,  there  was  the  appearance  of  loss.  Instead  of  food,  the  development 
of  poison.  Equally  serious,  in  the  next  place,  was  the  time  of  this  appearance. 
Not  till  the  grain  had  been  formed  in  tbe  ear  (ver.  26),  because  not  till  then, 
so  it  is  said,  could  the  distinction  be  made — not,  therefore,  till  the  harvest  was 
approaching,  and  so  till  long  after  all  possibility  of  prevention  was  over,  was 
this  discovery  made.  But  most  serious  of  all,  in  the  third  place,  was  the  origin 
to  which  it  pointed.  That  this  appearance  should  be  due  to  any  action  on  the 
part  of  the  ''  householder  "  himself,  was  wholly  out  of  the  question.  He  had 
never  put  anything  whatever  but  "  good  seed  "  in  his  field.  The  only  possible 
way,  therefore,  of  accounting  for  this  appearance  was  by  supposing  that  an 
adversary  had  caused  it.  This  was  the  conclusion  of  the  householder  himself, 
immediately  that  he  heard  of  it.  And  this  is  the  point,  therefore,  the  great 
point,  on  which  our  final  thoughts  are  to  be  fixed.  In  the  householder's  own 
property,  where  he  himself  had  never  put  anything  but  that  which  was  good, 
someone  utterly  hostile  to  him  had  put  that  which  was  evil.  "  An  enemy  hath 
done  this  "  (ver.  28). 

II.  A  remarkable  decision. — This  was  remarkable,  first,  because  a  far  more 
obvious  course  had  first  presented  itself  to  men's  minds.  That  first  idea  had  been 
to  go  at  once  and  root  out  the  bad  seed.  To  the  servants  of  the  householder 
this  appeared  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world.  If  "  an  enemy  "  hath  done 
this,  shall  not  we  who  are  friends  go  and  undo  it  at  once  ?  Therefore  it  is  that 
they  suggest  it  at  once  to  the  householder  himself.  "  Wilt  thou  then  " — that 
being  the  case — *'  that  we  go  and  gather  them  up  ? "  Nothing  appears  to  them, 
in  the  circumstances,  a  more  proper  proceeding.  All  they  wait  for  is  leave  to 
adopt  it.  All  the  more  remarkable,  therefore,  in  the  next  place,  is  the  decisive 
way  in  which  this  proposal  of  theirs  is  put  to  one  side.  The  thing  proposed  by 
his  servants,  on  the  one  hand,  is  not  to  be  attempted  by  them  at  all.  "  He 
saith  "  unto  them  "  nay."  It  is  as  though  be  would  prevent  them  from  taking 
even  a  first  step  in  that  line.  It  is  not  to  be  attempted  by  them,  on  the  other 
hand,  because  of  the  fact  that  such  an  endeavour  would  lead,  inevitably,  to  more 
evil  than  good.  It  might,  or  it  might  not,  remove  some  of  the  darnel.  With 
eyes  such  as  theirs,  with  hands  such  as  theirs,  whatever  the  excellence  of  their 
purpose,  it  would  certainly  eradicate  some  of  the  wheat.  What  they  are  to  do 
for  the  present,  therefore — all  they  are  to  do  for  the  present — is  to  let  the  field 
remain  as  it  is.  Let  *'  both  "  kinds  continue  to  "  grow  together  "  as  they  do  now. 
And  even  hereafter — this  is  what  he  says  to  them  lastly — when  the  time  of 

331 


CHAP.  XIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST,  MATTHEW". 


harvest  shall  have  arrived,  and  with  it,  therefore,  the  time  for  separating  the 
evil  from  the  good  without  any  fear  of  mistake,  and  of  binding  them  together  in 
separate  "  bundles "  for  those  widely  different  final  uses,  for  which  they  are 
respectively  meant — he  does  not  mean  that  separation  to  be  effected  by  those 
he  is  speaking  to  now.  "  In  the  time  of  harvest,  I  will  say  to  my  reapers  " — to 
my  reapers,  then,  and  therefore  not  to  you  now — let  this  division  be  made.  Can 
anything  be  more  decisive  from  beginning  to  end  ? 
The  parable,  thus  viewed,  may  very  well  teach  us  : — 

1.  To  moderate  our  expectations. — What  the  Saviour  thus  foretold,  and  thus 
found  true  also  in  His  own  case  (John  vi.  70),  will  be  found  true  in  all  others. 
Whether  we  look  at  the  church  at  large,  or  at  any  particular  branch  of  it,  no 
matter  how  large  on  the  one  hand,  or  how  select  on  the  other,  it  will  never  be 
without  "  tares."  Often  and  often  their  presence  is  a  surprise  to  the  servants. 
It  is  never  so  to  the  Master. 

2.  To  limit  our  efforts. — If  He  permits  the  '^  tares "  to  be  sown,  let  us 
permit  them  to  gi'ow.  Let  us  refrain,  at  any  rate,  from  violent  efforts  to 
remove  them  from  the  field.  That  is  not  the  task  for  our  hands.  Nor  yet  for 
our  time.     To  attempt  it  is  only  to  do  harm  to  the  wheat. 

3.  To  encourage  our  faith. — If  the  *'  tares "  are  never  absent  all  the  more 
wonder  at  the  amount  of  good  that  exists.  If  things  are  always  so  mingled  all 
the  higher  the  wisdom  and  all  the  greater  the  power  which  preserves  that 
which  is  good  !  In  this  sense  the  very  imperfection  of  the  church  proves  the 
truth  of  its  message  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Vers.  24-30.  The  parable  of  the  tares,  world  of  mankind,  and  not  the  limited, 
— I.  The  origination  of  the  kingdom  bounded  area  of  a  single  people.  2.  In 
of  God,  or  of  Christian  society,  in  its  a  second  sense  as  well,  is  the  world 
widest  sense,  is  likened  to  an  act  of  Christ's  field,  wherein  His  precious 
sowing.  Seed  does  not,  as  in  the  plants  are  to  grow  and  ripen.  He 
former  parable,  stand  for  the  truth  of  sows  them  not  merely  in  all  the  wide 
the  gospel,  but  for  the  men  who  receive  world,  but  in  this  present  world,  such 
it.  At  first  one  might  suspect  that  as  it  is.  That  is  but  a  sickly  idea  of 
our  Lord  is  only  playing  with  the  Christianity  which  treats  it  like  a  hot- 
emblem  in  an  arbitrary  fashion,  making  house  plant.  But  there  is  a  hidden 
it  mean  just  what  He  chooses.  Not  so.  night-sower  too.  This  illustration 
The  wheat  plants  are  just  the  seed  in  answers  perfectly  to  the  character 
a  changed  form.  Somewhat  parallel  which  Scripture  ascribes  to  the  origin- 
is  it  with  the  new  life  and  character  ator  of  human  sin.  From  the  first  he 
that  are  produced  upon  the  soil  of  is  represented  as  a  circumventor  of 
human  nature  by  the  accepted  truth  God's  fair  designs;  a  spoiler  and 
of  God's  gospel.  That  new  life-char-  blaster  of  what  was  created  very  good ; 
acter  in  a  Christian  man  is  morally  a  sower  of  weeds  among  corn.  For  it 
a  product  of  the  truth  he  has  taken  is  characteristic  of  evil  that  it  can 
into  his  being.  The  place  which  the  make  nothing  to  profit ;  can  only 
Son  of  man  has  destined  for  the  unmake,  mar,  and  waste.  Now  the 
ripening  place  of  His  plants,  i.e.  His  setting  up  on  earth  of  Christ's  kingdom 
*'  field,"  is  the  world.  Few  words  in  gave  occasion  to  a  new  manner  of 
Scripture  have  been  more  stumbled  mischief -making,  the  point  of  which 
over  than  this.  Let  us  take  it  in  two  lay  in  its  mimicry  of  the  new  work 
distinct  senses,  both  of  them,  no  doubt,  of  God.  This  was  men  with  the 
intended.  L  The  field  for  the  kingdom  appearance  of  Christians,  speaking 
of    Christ    is,    in    extent,   the    whole  Christian  words,  and  growing  up  inside 

332 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,   chap.  xiii. 


the  Christian  community,  hardly  to  be 
distinguished  from  others,  who  yet 
were  in  their  real  nature,  men  of  an 
unchanged,  evil  heart,  and  yielded  at 
the  last  bitter  or  unwholesome  fruits. 
It  is  in  perfect  keeping,  also,  with  the 
whole  of  Christ's  teaching,  thus  to 
represent  human  character  in  its  great 
contrasts  of  good  and  bad,  as  no  isolated 
spiritual  phenomenon,  but  as  somehow 
reclining  against  a  superhuman  back- 
ground. A  Spirit  of  grace  and  light 
regenerating  men,  if  they  will,  by  the 
word  of  truth ;  no  less,  another  spirit 
of  darkness  and  malice,  misleading 
men,  if  they  will,  to  the  service  of  a 
lie.  The  revelation  of  this  contact  of 
an  upper  and  lower  spiritual  world 
with  human  character,  has  done 
nothing  to  solve  the  old,  dark,  hopeless 
mystery  of  evil.  The  question  of  the 
servants  in  the  parable,  is  just  the 
last  and  deepest  question  with  which 
the  reason  of  man  has  at  all  times 
approached  the  eternal  God  :  "  Lord, 
didst  not  Thou  sow  good  seed  in  Thy 
field  ?  Whence  then  hath  it  tares  ? " 
All  we  can  know,  and  for  practical  uses 
need  to  know  is,  "  An  enemy  hath  done 
it."  "God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no 
darkness  at  all." 

II.  The  progress  of  the  kingdom  of 
God. — The  interest  of  the  parable 
passes  swiftly  on  to  the  close  of  the 
history.  All  that  lies  between  is,  so 
to  say,  natural  development,  and, 
therefore,  is  in  this  parable  touched 
with  a  light  finger.  What  we  do 
gather  concerning  this  growing  time, 
is  only  the  negative  lesson  that  it  must 
be  "  let  alone."  Christ  meant  the 
juxtaposition  of  good  men  with  bad  to 
continue  in  this  world.  As  a  religious 
community,  the  church  is  bound,  no 
doubt,  to  expel  the  openly  wicked  and 
unchristian  from  her  own  membership. 
That  is  undoubted  from  other  texts. 
But  she  is  to  strive  after  no  unnatural 
or  forced  separation  from  society. 

III.  The  close  of  the  kingdom  of 
God. — The  weight  of  the  passage,  as  a 
lesson  to  individuals  in  the  kingdom 
of  God,  lies  in  the  awful  severance  of 
false  from  true  at  last  by  unerring 


celestial  servants  of  the  King.  The 
Master's  objection  to  human  weeders 
was  simply  that  they  could  not  be 
trusted  to  discern  between  the  evil  and 
the  good.  How  true  has  that  been 
found!— /o  0.  Dykes,  D.D. 

The  parable  of  the  tares. — I.  The 
sowing. — The  field,  originally  had  no 
seed  in  it;  it  could  not  produce  any 
seed  ;  it  was  necessary  to  sow  the  good 
seed  in  it.  In  like  manner  goodness  is 
not  innate  to  human  nature  ;  there 
are  not  inhering  in  it  any  germs  of 
goodness.  1.  "  He  that  soweth  good 
seed  is  the  Son  of  man  ;  "  there  is  not 
one  sound  seed  in  your  nature,  but  it 
has  been  deposited  there  by  the  Son  of 
man.  2.  "  The  field  is  the  worldP 
Within  the  church  discipline  must  be 
upheld  ;  the  bad,  so  far  as  practicable, 
must  be  separated  from  the  good, 
believers  from  unbelievers.  That  is 
often  taught  us  in  the  New  Testament ; 
the  Apostles  cast  men  out  of  the  com- 
munion of  the  saints.  It  is  about  the 
world,  and  not  about  the  church,  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  speaking.  He  does  not 
say.  Do  not  cast  bad  men  out  of  the 
church  ;  but.  Do  not  cast  them  out  of 
the  world.  3.  *'  The  good  seed  are 
the  children  of  the  kingdom.^^  Accord- 
ing to  the  preceding  parable,  the  good 
seed  is  the  word  of  God ;  according  to 
this  parable,  the  good  seed  are  the 
children  of  the  kingdom.  The  Saviour 
here  contemplates  the  seed  in  its  full 
growth.  It  is  quite  right  to  say,  the 
acorns  are  the  seed  of  the  forest.  But 
it  is  equally  right  to  say,  the  acorns 
are  the  trees  of  the  forest.  In  the 
first  stage  the  good  seed  are  the 
good  thoughts  sown  in  your  mind, 
the  good  principles  instilled  into  your 
nature ;  but  in  the  last  stage  the 
good  seed  are  the  good  men.  4.  But 
another  is  sowing.  *'  While  men 
slept,"  etc.  "  The  tares  are  the  children 
of  the  wicked  one.^^  The  sowing  here, 
too,  begins  with  evil  thoughts  and  ends 
with  evil  men.  5.  *'  The  enemy  that 
sowed  them  is  the  devil."  Good  is  not 
indigenous  to  our  nature,  it  has  been 
implanted  in  us  by  the  Son  of  man. 

333 


CHAP.  XIII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Neither  is  evil  indigenous  to  our 
nature,  it  has  been  sown  in  us  by  the 
devil. 

II.  The  growing  (ver.  26). — The 
difference  between  the  wheat  and  the 
tares  became  manifest  only  after  a 
period  of  growth.  "  The  servants 
said  unto  him,  Wilt  thou  then  that 
we  go  and  gather  them  up  ? "  etc. 
Here  is  brought  into  proximity  the 
human  method  and  the  Divine  method 
of  dealing  with  sin.  Good  men  and 
bad  are  wonderfully  mingled  in  the 
world ;  you  cannot  destroy  the  bad 
without  seriously  damaging  the  good. 
They  are  mingled  in  the  family ;  you 
cannot  kill  the  father  without  hurting 
the  mother.  They  are  mingled  in 
society ;  you  cannot  shoot  the  tenant 
without  injuring  the  landlord,  etc. 

III.  The  reaping. — "  Let  them 
grow  until  the  harvest."  "  The  harvest 
is  the  end  of  the  world."  Good  will 
continue  to  grow  better,  and  evil  to 
grow  worse,  till  the  harvest  time.  I 
do  not  know  that  evil  will  continue  to 
grow  in  bulk,  that  is,  by  the  multipli- 
cation of  bad  men.  I  hope  not.  But 
it  will  grow  in  intensity,  in  bitterness, 
in  subtlety,  in  poisonousness  (2  Thes. 
ii.  6-10).  When  good  and  evil  shall 
have  fully  ripened,  then  will  begin  the 
process  of  separation  :  "  The  Son  of 
man  shall  send  forth  His  angels,"  etc. 
"  Bind  them  in  bundles  and  burn 
them."  Is  there  here  an  intimation 
that  in  eternity  sinners  shall  congre- 
gate together  according  to  their  sinful 
propensities— that  misers  shall  be 
gathered  to  misers,  drunkards  to 
drunkards,  adulterers  to  adulterers? — 
J.  C.  Jones,  D.D. 

Ver.  25.  The  tares. — No  weed  is  so 
troublesome  to  the  Syrian  farmers  as  a 
kind  of  wild  rye-grass,  which  they  call 
zuwdn.  It  grows  abundantly  in  corn- 
fields, and  is  so  extremely  like  wheat 
in  its  earlier  stages  that  even  a 
farmer's  eye  cannot  tell  the  difference 
with  certainty  till  it  is  shot.  Then 
the  peasants  know  it  by  its  blacker 
heads.  By  that  time,  however,  they 
find  it  hazardous  to  pull  it  up  by  hand, 

334 


because  its  rootlets  are  too  closely 
twisted  about  those  of  the  corn. 
When  harvest  comes  it  is  necessary  to 
pick  out  the  stalks  with  care,  and 
finally  to  winnow  its  pickles  from  the 
seed ;  because  this  weed  is  really  a 
bitter  intoxicant  poison,  so  strong  that 
even  a  pickle  or  two,  ground  among  the 
flour,  will  cause  in  the  eater  giddiness 
and  nausea.  One  sees  what  a  truly 
Oriental  refinement  of  revenge  it  would 
be  deliberately  to  oversow  a  neighbour's 
field  with  such  a  weed  the  night  after 
he  had  been  sowing  his  wheat.  One 
sees  how  exquisitely  this  atrocious 
piece  of  mischief  sets  forth  the  malice 
and  cunning  of  the  devil. —  J.  0. 
Dykes,  D.D. 

Sowing  tares  among  the  wheat. — 
We  are  not  without  this  form  of  malice 
nearer  home.  Thus,  in  Ireland,  I  have 
known  an  outgoing  tenant,  in  spite  at 
his  ejection,  to  sow  wild  oats  in  the 
fields  which  he  was  leaving.  These 
ripening  and  seeding  themselves  before 
the  crops  in  which  they  were  mingled, 
it  became  next  to  impossible  to  get 
rid  of  them. — Archbishop  Trench, 

Ver.  27.  Ministerial  watchfulness. — 
Our  Saviour  here  shows  the  servants* 
care ;  to  teach  us  that  ministers  ought 
to  be  watchful.  Wherein  doth  this 
watchfulness  consist  1 

I.  In  a  daily  watchful  visiting  of 
their  fields  and  flocks. 

II.  In  a  rejoicing  when  the  wheat 
thrives,  i.e.  when  they  see  the  Lord 
to  bless  and  prosper  His  own  word  and 
give  an  increase  to  that  which  they 
sow. 

III.  In  a  sorrow  for  the  springing 
up  of  tares. — These  servants  come 
(and  certainly  not  without  grief)  and 
tell  their  master  that  there  are  tares 
amongst  the  corn.  Thus  faithful 
ministers,  when  they  see  errors, 
heresies,  hypocrisies,  and  formality  in 
religion  to  begin  to  spring  and  spread 
itself  among  their  flocks,  must  seek 
unto  God,  and  do  all  that  lies  in  their 
power  to  redress  it. — R.  Ward. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xitt. 


Vers.  28-30.  Human  intolerance  and  remove  all  the  tares,  we  must  remove 
Divine  patience. — I.  What  men  would  one  another  off  the  face  of  the  earth, 
do. — "  Wilt  thou  then  that  we  go  and  or  consign  one  another  to  certain  con- 
gather  them  up?"  It  should  always  ventional  hells,  social,  political,  or 
be  remembered  that  there  is  an  arro-  sectarian.  The  truth  is,  though  we 
gance  of  virtue,  as  well  as  the  sauciness  are  no  better  than  we  should  be,  yet 
and  presumption  of  vice.  Men  may  we  are  unquestionably  better  than  we 
have  pure  intentions,  but  their  pro-  think  each  other  to  be.  Hence  comes 
posed  methods  of  giving  effect  to  their  the  grand  function  of  the  church — 
intentions  may  corrupt  them.  It  is  of  preferring  one  another  in  love,  nurtur- 
the  essence  of  pride  and  effrontery,  for  ing  the  feeblest  virtues,  feeding  babes 
men  to  propose  to  do  God's  work  in  in  Christ,  helping  each  other  on  to 
their  own  way.  the  perfect  stature  of  men  in  Christ 

II.  What  would  be  the  result  of  Jesus, 
such    impatient  action? — "Nay,  lest         III.    What    the    Master    does. — 

while  ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root  "  Let   both    grow   together   until   the 

up  the  wheat  with  them."     Men  may  harvest."     How  Godlike  is  this  large 

not  only  do  evil  that  good  may  come,  patience,  like  the  firmament  of  heaven, 

but  good,  and  evil  may  be  the  result,  serene   and  vast,   while  the  storm  of 

and,   if  judged  by  this,   may  be  con-  men's  passions   rages  beneath.      And 

demned   as   tares.      The   intermixture  yet  the  very  largeness  and  fulness  of 

of  good  and  evil  by  the  conditions  of  this   patience   irritate   us.     There  are 

life  and  the  relations  and  institutions  certain  crimes   committed   by  certain 

of  society  is  a  problem  and  a  difficulty.  men  which  perhaps  no  human  law  can 

If   we    could    cut    down   evil   as   the  touch,  and  we  feel  as  if  God  ought  to 

mower  cuts  the  grass,  if  its  forms  all  come  out  of  His  hiding-place  and  smite 

grew  together,    the  field  of  the  world  or  brand  the  criminal  as  in  the  case  of 

could  soon  be  cleared.     But  this  inter-  Cain.     But  if  the  man  we  think  of  was 

mixture  of  good  and  evil  forbids  rash-  branded,    he    would   perhaps    be    the 

ness  and  haste.      Besides,  every  man,  wrong  man,  or,  not  knowing  the  whole 

perhaps,  is  a  tare  to  some  other  man  in  circumstances  of  the  case,   we  might 

some  aspects  of  his  character.     None  overwhelm   the   most   urgent   extenu- 

are  all  wheat  in  human  judgment,  and  ations. — Jos.  Shaw. 
not  so   even   in   fact.      If   we   would 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  31—33. 

The  growth  of  truth. — These  two  parables  are  regarded  by  some  persons  as  a 
kind  of  counteractive  to  the  preceding  two.  In  the  parable  of  the  sower  we  are 
warned  not  to  expect  fruit  from  every  description  of  soil.  In  the  parable  of  the 
tares  we  are  taught  that  there  may  be  evil  fruit  even  where  good  fruit  is  pro- 
duced. What  we  seem  now  taught  is  that,  even  so,  there  is  another  side  to  the 
case.  Truth  will  grow  and  the  gospel  prevail,  notwithstanding  these  drawbacks. 
This  will  be  the  case,  first,  in  the  world.  This  will  be  the  case,  next,  in  merHs 
hearts.     So  (with  many)  we  understand  the  two  parables  now  before  us. 

I.  In  the  world. — On  this  point  the  parable  of  the  "  mustard  seed  "  is  thought 
to  instruct  us  the  most.  The  truth  of  the  gospel  has  already  been  compared  to 
a  seed.  In  that  comparison  there  are  more  than  one  "  seeds  of  hope,"  as  it  were. 
There  is  one  such,  e.^.,  in  what  we  see  of  the  nature  of  seed^  specially  of  such  a 
seed  as  that  specified  now.  Proverbially  small  as  the  "  mustard  seed  "  was,  we 
yet  see  in  it,  as  we  see  in  all  other  seed,  a  thing  meant  to  increase.  We  see  in 
this  seed,  indeed,  a  thing  meant  to  increase  in  a  proverbially  remarkable  way. 
So  much  so,  that,  in  few  cases  is  there  a  greater  difference  in  magnitude  between 
beginning  and  end.     Witness  what  was  true  about  it  in  connection  with  the 

335 


CHAP.  XIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


"  birds  of  the  air."  Not  improbably  only  such  eyes  as  theirs  could  see  it  at  first. 
Afterwards  even  whole  flocks  of  them  could  find  shelter  in  its  branches.  That 
was  an  exact  picture  of  what  was  to  be  true  of  gospel  truth  in  the  world. 
Utterly  insignificant  as  it  might  appear  at  first  amongst  other  influences  in  the 
world,  it  would  so  grow  in  time  that  many  of  those  other  influences  would  be 
glad  of  its  protection  at  last.  This  is  to  be  true,  also — here  is  another  ground  of 
hope — from  the  very  nature  of  growth.  How  does  the  mustard  seed  grow  in  the 
ground  ?  Only,  as  it  were — apart  from  Divine  influence — through  that  which 
belongs  to  itself.  Certainly  it  owes  nothing,  in  this  way,  to  the  wisdom,  or  skill, 
or  might  of  the  hand  which  "  casts  it  "  into  the  ground.  All  the  materials,  on 
the  contrary,  necessary  for  its  increase,  it  collects  for  itself.  All  the  energies, 
also,  necessary  fqr  assimilating  and  transmuting  that  which  it  collects,  it  contains 
in  itself.  Given  only  the  soil,  in  fact,  and  the  requisite  heat  and  proper 
humidity,  and  that  tiny  seed  will  ultimately  build  itself  up  into  its  farthest  sub- 
sequent ''  growth."  And  even  so  is  it,  again,  with  that  truth  of  God  of  which  that 
seed  is  a  figure.  God's  creative  hand  has  given  it  such  intrinsic  force  that  it  is 
able  to  "  grow  of  itself  "  (cf.  Mark  iv.  28).  And  nothing  is  wanting,  therefore, 
on  man's  part,  except  to  give  it  the  opportunity  for  so  doing.  A  great  encour- 
agement, indeed,  when  we  remember  the  magnitude  of  the  task  which  it  has  to 
accomplish ;  and  a  sure  ground  of  confidence  among  all  the  difliculties  and  hin- 
drances of  the  case. 

II.  In  men's  hearts. — Here  the  other  parable,  that  of  the  leaven,  is  considered 
to  teach  us  the  most.  And  a  new  figure  is  supposed  to  be  used  because  both  a 
new  locality  and  new  exigencies  are  here  referred  to.  A  previous  parable 
(vers.  18-23)  showed  us  what  were  the  chief  obstacles  to  the  growth  of  truth  in 
men's  hearts,  viz.  want  of  attention,  want  of  consideration,  want  of  thorough' 
sincerity.  In  this  parable  we  seem  taught  how  that  truth  itself  is  calculated  to 
overcome  them.  For  what  does  "  leaven  "  do,  when  "  hid  "  as  here,  in  a  collec- 
tion of  meal  of  the  ordinary  amount  of  "  three  measures  "  ?  It  begins  at  once  to 
turn  the  portion  next  it  into  that  which  is  identical  with  itself.  And,  having  so 
begun,  it  goes  on,  naturally,  to  do  the  same  in  the  rest  of  the  *'  lump,"  working 
through  all,  and  by  all,  everywhere,  till  the  whole  is  leavened.  The  word  of  God 
is  calculated  to  do  just  the  same  with  regard  to  man's  heart.  Once  "  hid  "  there, 
there  is  a  power  about  it  which  tends  to  assimilate  all  it  finds  there  to  itself ;  and 
to  do  this,  also,  in  an  increasing  degree,  till  it  has  assimilated  all  to  itself.  And 
that,  also,  whatever  the  nature  of  the  "  hand  "  which  *'  hid  "  it  therein.  This  is 
thought  to  be  the  reason  why  we  are  told  here,  finally,  that  the  "  leaven  "  was 
employed  by  a  "  woman  " — the  usual  agent  to  be  employed  in  all  cases  of  this 
kind.  The  thing,  in  a  word,  for  our  thoughts  to  fix  on  is  the  "  leaven  "  itself. 
**  The  entrance  of  Thy  Word  giveth  light "  (Ps.  cxix.  130). 

If  these  interpretations  of  these  two  parables  are  accepted,  one  cannot  but 
admire  the  wonderful  way  in  which  experience  has  fulfilled  them. 

1.  In  the  world. — Every  record  of  sustained  missionary  effort  has  illustrated 
the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed.  Most  of  all  has  the  history  of  the  church  at 
large.  What  was  the  gospel  when  this  parable  was  spoken  ?  In  the  eyes  of  the 
world  a  thing  too  small  to  be  seen ,  What  is  it  now  ?  With  all  drawbacks,  with 
all  rivalries,  with  all  corruptions  and  treacheries,  the  mightiest  force  upon  earth. 

2.  In  the  heart. — The  story  of  the  "  leaven  "  has  been  the  story  of  every  con- 
verted soul  from  the  first.  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth ;  Thy  word  is 
truth"  (John  xvii.  17).  That  has  been  the  assimilating  energy  which  has 
wholly  "leavened"  the  "■  lump"  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.  11,  xxxvii.  31). 


336 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW,     chap.  xili. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Vers.  31-33.  Parables  of  the  mustard  II.  The   parable  of  the   leaven. — 

seed  and  the  leaven. — We  are  now  to  Both  parables  represent  progress ;  but 
see  Christianity  from  the  inside,  as  a  in  the  mustard  seed   progress   means 
hidden  Hfe  which  must  put  forth  its  growth,  in  the  leaven  it  means  change, 
own  indwelling  strength,  and  make  its  Again,  we  have  a  small  beginning  and 
own    way    in    the    world.      A    little  a    large    result.      The    real   point   of 
attention  to  the  two  emblems  before  us  consequence  is  the   alteration   of   the 
will  show  that  this  is  the  central  idea  mass  into  a  new  character  through  a 
common  to  both.     Yet  each  presents  foreign  substance  introduced  into  the 
that  truth  on  a  different  side.  heart  of   it.     What   our   attention   is 
1.  The  parable  of  the  mustard  seed,  now  to  be  fixed  upon  is,  that  the  gospel 
—When  our  Lord  first  spoke  of  seed  works  upon  human  society,  not  merely 
He   meant  by   it    the    word   of    God.  grows    up   within    it.      It    grows   by 
Kext,  He  used  it  for  those  men  them-  altering  and  assimilating  what  it  finds, 
selves  in  whom  God's  word  quickens  a  It  is  a  regenerating  principle,  trans- 
religious  life.     Now  you  have,  instead  forming   into   its   own    character   the 
of  numerous  and  separate   corn-seeds  nature   and   the   lives   of    men.     One 
in  the  field,  one  single  seed  only,  which  can  readily  see  how  a  system  so  many- 
bears    the    many    branches    of    God's  sided  as  the  kingdom  of  God  should 
great  kingdom  upon  a  single  stem,  to  be  incapable  of   exhaustive  treatment 
be  nurtured  from  one  root.     By  this  under  any  single   emblem.      Yet  the 
last  modification  of  the  emblem,  are  use  of  this   particular   emblem   must 
we  not   carried  downfto  the  ultimate  strike  us  as  strange.     For  it  was  very 
fact  that,  though  Christians  are  many,  closely  associated  in  a  Jew's  mind,  not 
they  are  but  one  after  all  in  the  secret  with  grace  but  with  sin.     How  came 
source  of  their  life  ?    That  the  kingdom  our  Lord  to  employ  the  same  figure 
of    the   church   is   a   unity   springing  which    had    for   ages    set    forth    the 
from  the  solitary  Seed-corn  who  flung  permeating  power  of  sin,  to  set  forth 
Himself  into  this  world's  soil,  and  died  the  permeating  power  of  grace  ?     Was 
that  He  might  bear  upon  Himself  the  it  for  this  reason  that  simply  to  cast 
entire  spiritual  fruitage  of  humanity  out  the  old  leaven,  were  that  possible, 
as   a  vine   bears   shoots   and   grapes  ?  would  be  inadequate  ?      The  gospel  is 
Here  we  have,  at  least,  one  beautiful  not  a  merely  negative  process.     There 
and    suggestive    lesson     in    the    first  is  a  new  leaven  as   well  as   an   old. 
parable,  which  is  absent  or  less  obtru-  There  is  need  for  the  new  to  undo  and 
sive  in  the  other.     For  the  lump  of  reverse  the  action  of  the  old. 
dough,  even  when  leavened,  though  it  Lessons — 1.  The  source  of  Christian 
may  be  made  into  one  loaf,  possesses  life  is  not  in  me,  it  is  not  in  my  fellow 
no  such  living  unity  as  belongs  to  a  Christian  ;  it  is  in  the  Root  that  bear- 
plant.     We  measure  roughly  with  the  eth  both  of  us.     2.  The  life  of  Christ, 
eye  the  power  of  growth  which  resides  if  it  is  to  do  its  work  upon  us,  must  do 
in   a   plant   by  the   disproportion  we  it  in  the  way  of  change  and  overcom- 
discover  betwixt  the  smallness  of  the  ing.     3.  It  is  by  individual  effort  and 
seed  and  the  largeness  of  the  perfect  personal    influence   that    the   blessing 
plant.      Now    of     this    the    mustard  spreads. — /.  0.  Dykes,  D.D. 
formed  an  excellent,  familiar  instance. 

On  this  point  of  comparison  rests  the  Vers.  31-32.  Rise  and  progress  of  the 

stress  of  the  parable.     Christianity  is  church. — I.  Compare  the  insignificance 

not  only  a  creation  of  the  Saviour's  of  Christianity  at  first. — 1.  IJnostenta- 

own  life,  it  is  the  work  and  monument  tious    worship.      2.  Simple    teaching, 

of    the   most    extraordinary  spiritual  3.  Social  position  of  Apostles.    4.  Small 

force  we  know.  number  of  disciples. 

z  337 


CHAP.  XIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


II.  Careful  planting  of  Christianity. 
— 1.  A  single  seed  taken.  2.  De- 
signedly sown.      3.  In  a  chosen  place. 

III.  Rapid  growth  of  Christianity. 
— See  history  of  church  in  first  three 
or  four  centuries. 

TV.  Phenomena  consequent  there- 
upon.— Birds  come.  1.  Men  who  first 
opposed  come  for  their  own  ends. 
2.  Men  for  their  salvation.  3.  Christ- 
ians lodge  there,  and  draw  others,  as 
singing  birds  attract  by  their  song. — 
J.  C.  Gray. 

Ver.  33.  Leaven. — I.  The  working 
of  evil. — As  our  Lord's  eye  travelled 
over  the  field  of  common  life  it  rested 
on  one  phenomenon,  which,  habitual 
and  ordinary  as  it  was,  nevertheless 
had  a  look  in  it  of  something  abnormal 
and  sinister — the  working  of  leaven. 
This  did  not  seem  at  first  sight  to 
belong  to  the  more  regular  processes 
of  nature.  Man's  imagination  had 
been  long  struck  here  by  a  likeness  to 
something  dark  and  ominous  and  evil 
— this  strange  disturbance  into  which 
the  natural  substances  are  thrown  by 
the  arrival  of  this  alien  matter.  What 
did  it  express  ?  Was  it  healthy  ?  Was 
it  not  typical,  rather,  of  disease  and 
corruption  ?  It  looked  so  uncanny,  so 
uncomfortable.  This  mysterious  tu- 
mult— surely,  men  said,  here  is  the 
very  picture  of  what  we  mean  by  the 
nature  of  sin.  They  might  use  it, 
indeed,  for  the  homeliest  affairs,  but 
still  it  had  become  to  them  a  type  of 
evil ;  its  working  seemed  to  embody 
the  dreadful  character  of  the  mystery 
of  evil,  so  proverbially  it  had  a  sinister 
significance,  and  the  Bible  always, 
with  this  one  exception,  uses  it  with 
this  meaning.  "  Know  ye  not,"  saith 
St.  Paul,  "  that  a  little  leaven  leaven - 
eth  the  whole  lump  1 "  So  he  spoke  as 
if  he  detected  in  the  Corinthian  church 
the  germ  of  some  hateful  growth — 
that  sin  which  they  had  moving  in 
their  midst  as  a  focus  of  fermentation, 
a  spot  of  disease  spreading  and  fester- 
ing till  its  restless  irritation,  its  feverish 
energy  would  be  felt  everywhere. 
"  Do  ye  not  know  well  how  a  little 

338 


leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump  ? " 
Or,  again,  *'  Beware  of  the  leaven  of 
the  Pharisees."  So  our  Lord  Himself 
used  the  metaphor.  Lieaven  would  ob- 
viously image  that  working  of  the  spirit 
of  the  Pharisees,  that  spirit  which  so 
insidiously  crept  in  unseen  within  the 
very  heart  of  goodness,  within  the  very 
core  of  the  moral  will,  and  thence  it 
sent  its  noxious,  turbid,  infected  mo- 
tions, till,  like  an  evil  possession,  it 
permeated  the  entire  man.  Beware  of 
that  leaven.  And  then  how  deeply 
was  this  impression  intensified  by  the 
sacred  memory  of  the  Jews'  great  feast 
of  deliverance,  the  Feast  of  the  Pass- 
over. There,  at  that  hour  of  high 
thanksgiving,  in  grateful  remembrance 
of  the  redemption  that  once  for  all 
brought  them  up  out  of  the  darkness 
of  Egypt,  the  Jew  was  summoned  year 
after  year,  to  cast  out  of  his  house 
every  fragment  of  the  evil  leaven  that 
recalled  the  black  days  of  sin  and 
servitude.  Such  was  the  Jew's  natural 
memory  of  leaven,  and  we  can  well 
understand  what  force  it  would  lend  to 
St.  Paul's  appeal  to  this  ancient  feeling 
as  he  bade  those  Corinthians  "  Purge 
out  the  old  leaven  that  ye  may  be  a 
new  lump,  as  ye  are  unleavened,"  etc. 
(1  Cor.  V.  7,  8).  Leaven  was  popularly, 
was  instinctively,  a  metaphor  that 
suggested  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  the 
working  of  evil. 

II.  The  beginning  of  good.— But 
our  Lord,  as  His  eyes  rested  on  its 
familiar  use,  as  He  caught  sight  of  this 
or  that  woman  inserting  the  little  piece 
of  sour  dough  into  two  or  three  large 
measures  of  meal,  saw  a  symbol,  a  type 
which  He  might  use  for  the  portrait  of 
His  own  kingdom.  This,  you  say,  is 
the  well-known  way  in  which  evil 
creeps.  Well,  it  is  a  strangely  effectual 
way,  it  is  typically  complete  ;  why  not 
turn  it  to  good  use  ? 

III.  The  leaven  in  the  church. — If 
we  turn  our  eyes  to  what  claims  to 
embody  and  represent  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  we  need  again  and  again  to 
recur  to  this  parable.  For  here,  too, 
there  is  such  a  huge  mass  of  matter 
involved  that  has  suffered  no  change 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiii. 


to  pass  over  it ;  it  lies  there  within  the  irrepressible  activity  of  the  gospel.  It 
church,    sluggish    and    heavy.      How      is  a  living  f orce^. 

Httle  the  surface  of  this  church  speaks  III.  Christianity,  like  leaven,  works 
of  the  spiiituai  thrill  that  is  alive  in  a  congenial  and  much  assisting 
within  it ;  how  much  of  it  is  blindly  sphere. — It  is  hid  in  meal,  the  material 
unconscious  of  the  secret  it  enshrines !  which  has  an  affinity  for  it,  and  upon 
God  can  be  patient  as  the  woman  that  which  it  is  specially  fitted  to  act.  The 
watches  the  three  measures  of  meal,  leaven  is  placed  where  it  is  wanted, 
A  little  leaven  will  at  last,  if  you  give  where  it  can  work,  and  where  it  can 
it  time,  leaven  the  whole  lump.  Christ  work  with  success.  Leaven  is  not 
is  our  leaven.    That  is  our  sole  security,      better   suited   to  work  in   meal   than 

and  that  security  is  alsolute. — Canon  Christ  in  men's  hearts  for  their  salva- 

II.  Scott- Holland.  tion. 

ly.  The  most  distinguishing  feature 

y      Leaven  as  a  symbol  of  Christianity,  of  leaven  is  that  it  leavens  the  meal 

— I.    Christianity  is    really  alive. —  in  the  midst  of  which  it  is  placed. — 

"  Careful  investigation  has  shown  that  So   the   most    characteristic    effect    of 

the  process   of   fermentation    entirely  Christianity    is    that    it    christianises 

depends  upon  the  presence  and  growth  men ;  it  assimilates  them  to  Christ  by 

of   certain   living   organisms    forming  filling   them    with  the  life  of  Christ, 

the   ferment"   (Boscoe).      Christianity  He  puts  His  life  into  each  part  of  a 

is  itself  a  living,  breathing  presence,  man.      1.   The   life   of   His   thoughts 

not  a  mere  dull,  dead  thing ;  a  life  not  into  his  thinking.     2.  The  life  of  His 

a  book  ;  a  Person,  and  that  Person  our  love   into   his   heart.      3.   The  life   of 

Friend  and  Saviour,  our  Reconciliation  His   righteousness  into  his  conscience. 

and    our    Rest,   our    Hope    and    our  4.  The   life  of  His  obedience  into  his 

Victory.     The  rule  of  God  is  not  like  will. 

a  set  of  parchment  laws  stored  in  the  V.  The  leaven  moreover  is  hidden 

archives  of  a  government  library  ;  not  in  the  meal,  and  all  the  work  it  does, 

like  a  telephone  dependent  upon  the  it  does  secretly. — Christ's  best,  most 

skill  and  activity  of  the  worker  ;  not  real,  and  most  powerful  work  is  always 

hke  an  empire  directed  by  an  absentee  unseen. 

ruler ;  no  it  is  like  leaven,  it  is  alive.  VI.    But  it   advances   victoriously 

II.  Christianity  is  at  work  as  well  and    totally. — "  Till    the     whole    is 

as  alive.     It  is  characteristic  of  leaven  leavened."      It  is  so  in :   1.  The  indi- 

to  show  an  almost  insatiable  greed  of  vidual.    2.  Nations.     Christ  speaks  of 

activity.     It  is  a  type  of  stupendous  a  woman  as  putting  the  leaven  into 

increase.     "  The  globular  or  oval  cor-  the  meal.     Does  He  thereby  indicate 

puscles  which  float  so  thickly  in  the  that  Christianity  is  to  be  propagated 

yeast  as  to  make  it  muddy,  though  the  by  the  v/inning  forces  of  tenderness, 

largest   are   not   more  than  one  two-  and  sympathy,   and  fulness  of  grace, 

thousandth   of   an   inch   in   diameter,  so    characteristic    of    woman,    rather 

and   the    smallest    may   measure   less  than   by   the   rougher   forces   of    this 

than  one  seven-thousandth  of  an  inch,  world,    the   sharpness    of   swords   and 

are  Uving  organisms.      They  multiply  the  strength  of  States  ? — John  Clifford, 

with    great    rapidity    by    giving    off  i>  i>. 
minute   buds,   which  soon   attain  the 

size  of  their  parent,  and  then  either  Similitudes  used  in  opposite  senses. — 
become  detached  or  remain  united.  The  appropriation  by  Christ  to  His  king- 
forming  compound  globules.  Yeast  domof  a  similitude  which  had  previously 
will  increase  indefinitely  when  grown  been  applied  in  an  opposite  sense,  may 
in  the  dark"  {Huxley).  In  no  point  be  illustrated  by  many  parallel  ex- 
is  the  Teacher's  simile  better  sustained  amples  in  the  Scriptures.  Of  these,  as 
by  facts  than  in  the  unspeakable  and  far  as  I  know,  the  diflferent  and  opposite 

339 


CHAP.  xm.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW, 


figurative  significations  of  the  serpent 
are  the  most  striking  and  appropriate. 
A  similar  example  occurs  in  the  parable 
of  the  unjust  steward ;  it  teaches  that 
the  skill  of  the  wicked  in  doing  evil 
should  be  imitated  by  Christians  in 
doing  good  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.).  In 
different  passages  the  lion  is  used  as 
a  figure  of  Satan,  but  also  of  Christ ; 
the  serpent  as  a  figure  of  the  enemy, 
but  also  of  the  wisdom  needful  to  the 
Apostles ;  birds  as  a  figure  of  believing 
trustfulness,  but  also  of  the  devil  catch- 
ing away  the  Word. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 


Reformation  from  within. — There  are 
twa  ways  in  which  you  may  revolu- 
tionise any  country  or  society.  You 
may  either  pull  down  all  the  old  forms 
of  government,  or  you  may  fill  them 
with  men  of  a  different  spirit.  A  watch 
stops,  and  somebody  tells  you  it  needs 
new  works,  but  the  watchmaker  tells 
you  it  only  needs  cleaning.     A  machine 


refuses  to  work,  and  people  think  the 
construction  is  wrong,  but  the  skilled 
mechanic  pushes  aside  the  ignorant 
crowd,  and  puts  all  to  rights  with  a 
few  drops  of  oil.  *'  Your  bread  is 
unwholesome,"  says  the  public  to  the 
baker,  and  he  says,  "  Well,  I'll  send 
you  loaves  of  a  new  shape ;  "  but  the 
woman  of  the  parable  follows  the  wiser 
course  of  altering  the  quality  of  the 
bread. — M.  Dods,  D.D. 

Inwardness. — The  soul  of  all  im- 
provement is  the  improvement  of  the 
soul. — H.  Bushnell,  D.D. 

Christianity  as  leaven. — Sir  Bartle 
Frere  speaking  of  the  gradual  change 
wrought  by  Christianity  in  India,  says 
in  regard  to  religious  innovations  in 
general,  "  They  are  always  subtle  in 
operation,  and  generally  little  notice- 
able at  the  outset  in  comparison  with 
the  power  of  their  ultimate  operation." 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  34—43. 

The  triumph  of  truth. — Jesus  still  continues  here  to  "  speak  unto  the  multitudes 
in  parables  "  ;  and  in  parables  only — much  as  had  been  predicted  of  Him  a  long 
time  before  (vers.  34,  35).  This  makes  all  the  more  conspicuous  what  we  are 
told  of  Him  next,  viz.  that  when  His  "  disciples "  asked  Him  for  it.  He  gave 
them  a  full  explanation  of  the  previous  parable  of  the  tares.  It  is  this  explana- 
tion that  we  have  now  to  consider.  We  shall  find  that  it  brings  out  into  even 
clearer  light  than  before,  both  that  great  trial,  on  the  one  hand,  and  that 
greater  triumph,  on  the  other,  of  which  our  previous  consideration  of  the  parable 
itself  made  us  aware. 

I.  The  trial. — The  trial  involved  in  the  present  mixed  condition  of  things  in 
the  field  of  the  kingdom  (vers.  26,  30).  The  special  greatness  of  this  is  shown, 
first,  by  the  gread  dignity  of  the  Sower.  "  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed  is  the 
Son  of  man  "  (ver.  37).  Wherever  the  truth  of  the  gospel  is  proclaimed,  it  is 
proclaimed  in  reality  by  Himself.  It  is  of  His  person,  His  work,  His  death  that 
it  speaks.  It  is  in  His  name,  and  by  His  authority  that  its  message  is  given. 
And  it  is  with  the  view  of  accomplishing  His  gracious  purposes  that  its  gracious 
offers  are  made.  Great  is  the  trial,  therefore,  to  His  faithful  servants  when 
they  see  falsehood  prevailing  instead,  and  efforts  being  made,  and  made  suc- 
cessfully, to  teach  what  is  contrary  to  His  truth.  Only  to  think — they  say — 
that  the  work  of  the  Master  Himself  should  be  apparently  nullified  thus  !  The 
greatness  of  the  trial  is  to  be  seen,  next,  in  the  greatness  of  the  arena.  *'  The  field 
is  the  world  "  (ver.  38) — the  whole  world — the  whole  "  religious  world,"  as  we 
are  accustomed  to  speak — including  in  it,  therefore,  all  those  "  who  profess  and 
call  themselves  Christians,"  and  amongst  whom  alone  we  can  speak  with  pro- 
priety of  the  "  seed"  being  "  sown."  This  is  the  vast  arena — this  the  full  extent 
of  it — which  is  thus  evilly  affected.  Wherever  there  is  the  "wheat,"  there  is  the 
**  darnel "  as  well.     Lastly,  the  trial  is  greatest  of  all  because  of  the  greatness  of 

340 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  Xiil. 


the  actual  evil  itself.  Who  are  these  that  are  to  be  found  in  this  "  field"  thus 
"  growing  together  "  ?  The  *'  sons  of  the  kingdom  "  ;  the  "  sons  of  the  evil  one ; " 
those  "sown"  by  the  Saviour;  those  ''sown  by  the  devil;"  those  that  are 
finally  to  "  shine  "  as  the  sun ;  those  that  cause  stumbling  and  do  iniquity — in 
a  word,  those  that  are  just  such  as  ought  not  to  be  there.  Here  is  the  crowning 
aggravation  of  all.  Where  the  Saviour  Himself  meant  the  light  to  be,  there  is 
blackest  darkness  instead  ! 

II.  The  triumph. — The  peculiar  greatness  of  this  shall  be  seen,  at  the  last,  in 
what  is  to  become  then  of  the  evil.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  to  be  entirely  removed. 
All  that  now  "  causes  stumbling  and  does  iniquity "  shall  be  gone.  At  the 
appointed  time — the  time  of  the  ''harvest,"  the  "end  of  the  world  " — the  appointed 
persons — the  "reapers,"  the  "angels" — shall  "come  forth" — to  do  at  last,  and 
efFectnally,  their  appointed  work  in  this  line ;  and  shall  "  gather  out,"  then,  of 
the  whole  "  kingdom  "  all  that  ought  not  to  be  there  (ver.  40).  On  the  other 
hand  the  evil  in  question  is  to  be  so  disposed  of  then,  that  it  can  never  come 
back.  So  far  is  quite  plain.  It  shall  all  have  gone  to  that  which  is  spoken  of  as 
"  the  furnace  of  fire."  It  shall  be  found  only  where  there  is  the  "  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth  "  (ver.  42).  Never,  therefore,  shall  the  "  good  " — whatever 
be  that  which  is  meant  here  concerning  the  "  evil " — be  troubled  by  it  again 
(cf.  Zech.  xiv.  end  ver.  21).  Also,  the  greatness  of  the  triumph  is  to  be  seen, 
finally,  in  what  is  to  become  then  of  the  "  good."  How  bright  their  lot  is 
to  be  at  that  time !  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun " 
(cf.  Rom.  viii.  19,  23).  How  exalted  their  lot !  "  Shine  forth  in  the  kingdom  " 
(cf.  Rev.  i.  6,  XX.  6).  How  blessed  their  lot !  "  In  the  kingdom  of  their 
Father  " — known  then  as  His  children  indeed,  because  "  made  "  visibly  "  like  " 
to  His  Son  (1  John  iii.  2).  On  the  one  hand,  the  total  absence  of  all  evil  shall 
contribute  much  to  this  great  consummation  (Rev.  xxi.  27).  On  the  other,  the 
full  presence  of  God  in  Christ  shall  for  ever  complete  it "  (Rev.  xxii.  3). 

Here  is,  therefore,  the  "  patience  and  faith  of  the  saints."  Here  we  see  how 
we  should  look  upon  many  of  the  perplexities  of  the  present,  viz. : — 

1.  As  so  many  hopes  in  disguise. — One  reason  why  they  are  tolerated  now,  is 
because  they  are  to  be  so  completely  obliterated  in  the  future.  They  are  like 
those  mists  of  the  morning  which  only  show  that  the  sun  has  not  come  yet  to 
his  strength.  No  sensible  man  gives  up  his  journey  because  he  sees  them  on 
the  mountains.  Experience  teaches  him  rather  to  expect  in  consequence  a 
brighter  noon  when  it  comes. 

2.  As  so  many  warnings. — Who  that  thinks  over  it  can  really  suppose  that 
the  present  mingled  condition  of  things  in  the  kingdom  of  God  should  be  in- 
tended to  continue  ?  What  can  it  be  but  something  borne  with,  and  that  with 
much  difficulty,  for  a  time  ?  In  the  very  nature  of  things,  in  such  a  field  the 
time  of  harvest  must  come.  When  it  does  come,  what  can  it  lead  to  but  dis- 
crimination and  separation  ?  And  when  the  separation  has  been  once  effected 
what  do  we  know  of — what  can  we  even  think  of — that  shall  cause  it  to  be  ever 
reversed  ? 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  34,  35.  Christ  the  Revelation. —  Ver.  39.  The  reaping  time. — I.  The 

Christ  the  Re vealer  of  all  secrets.  fact   announced— End   of   the    world. 

I.  Of  those  of  God.  Its:  1.  Certainty.    2.  Reasonableness. 

II.  Of  humanity.  ^       3.  Importance.    4.  Grandeur. 

III.  Of  the  history  of  the  kingdom  II.  The  figure  employed.— 1.  Human 
of  God.  actions  are  the  seed — prolific.    2.  Life 

IV.  Of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.—  is    the    seed-time— sowing    deeds.     3. 
J,  P.  Lange,  D.D.  Judgment     is      the      harvest  — "  To 

341 


CHAP.  xm.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


every    seed    his    own    body." — Pulpit 
Germs. 

The  devil, — Yes,  Jesus  says,  in  dry 
clear  words,  "  The  enemy  that  sowed 
them  is  the  devil."  But  surely  there 
is  not  any  devil  ?  Who  says  that  ? 
The  Son  of  God,  the  mouth  of  eternal 
truth,  who  knows  the  realm  of  spirits 
even  as  He  knows  this  visible  world, 
who  is  the  highest  Reason  and  the 
deepest  Wisdom,  yea,  even  Omni- 
science itself.  He  believes  it.  He 
holds  it  reasonable  to  believe  in  it. 
He  teaches  what  He  believes.  Dost 
thou  know  it  better  than  He,  thou 
short-sighted  being,  thou  dust  of 
yesterday,  thou  child  of  error  and 
ignorance  ?  He  says  it,  and  therefore 
it  is  eternal  truth.  *'  But  is  it  not 
intended  to  be  taken  figuratively  ?  " 
Well,  suppose  it  were  meant  figura- 
tively, we  can  only  comprehend  the 
figures  of  actually  existing  things,  and 
the  figurative  representation  of  the 
devil  would  imply  His  real  being ;  but 
here,  in  the  text,  the  speech  is  not 
figurative ;  the  expression  stands  not 
among  pictures  and  parables,  but  in 
the  interpretation  of  a  picture  and  a 
parable. — Fred.  Arndt, 

Ver.  43.  Hearing. — Whence  comes  it 
that  there  are  so  many  hearers,  who 
are  neither  changed  nor  benefited,  nor 
edified  by  the  word?  Certainly,  it 
proceeds  from  hence,  because  they  do 
not  endeavour  to  prepare  their  hearts. 
For  :  1.  Without  meditation  before  we 
come  into  the  house  of  God,  we  can 
have  no  true  reverence,  neither  con- 
ceive of  the  word  as  the  word  of 
God.  2.  Without  preparation  there 
can  be  no  endeavour  to  profit  by  that 
which  we  hear,  nor  labour  to  digest 
it  and  imprint  it  strongly  in  our 
memories.  3.  Without  prayer  there 
can  be  no  hope  of  the  co-operation  of 


the  Holy  Spirit  (without  whose  assist- 
ance we  can  do  nothing),  because  we 
do  not  awake  and  stir  Him  up  (2  Tim. 
i.  6) ;  yea,  we  are  unworthy  of  His 
aid  if  we  will  not  beg  it,  for,  by  a 
neglect  of  prayer,  we  seem  to  think 
that  He  is  not  worth  asking  for. 
4.  For  such  a  contempt  and  neglect 
God  is  incensed,  and  in  His  just  anger 
hardens  such  a  hearer  more  and  moi  e, 
making  the  word  a  means  to  harden 
and  not  to  soften  him. — Richard  Ward. 

Hearers. — How  many  sorts  of  hearers 
are  there  ?     Many  sorts,  viz  : — 

1.  Unwilling  and  constrained 
hearers. — Who  only  are  compelled  to 
hear. 

2.  Treacherous  hearers. — Who  hear 
that  they  may  learn  something  whereby 
they  may  entrap  him  whom  they  hear. 
Thus  the  Herodians  heard  Christ. 

3.  Scoffing  and  taunting  hearers. — 
Thus  some  heard  Paul  (Acts  xvii.  18, 
32). 

4.  Malevolent  hearers. — Who  pervert 
all  things  they  hear,  wresting  them 
to  their  own  private  senses ;  yea,  are 
angry  when  the  word*  reproves  them, 
and  tax  the  minister  with  malice,  as 
though  all  his  reprehensions  proceeded 
from  spleen  or  envy. 

5.  Blind  hearers. — Who  understand 
no  more  than  David's  idols  (Ps.  cxv.  6  ; 
1  Cor.  ii.  14). 

6.  Proud  hearers. — Who  are  puffed 
up  with  their  own  wisdom,  like  the 
Pharisees,  who  thought  they  knew  so 
much  that  Christ  could  teach  them  no 
more  than  they  knew. 

7.  Sinful  hearers. — Who  are  so 
hindered  and  entangled  by  their  sins 
that  they  cannot  hear  anything  which 
crosseth  or  opposeth  their  sins. 

8.  i:^luggish  hearers — Who  hear,  but 
neither  remember  nor  practise  what 
they  hear. — Ibid. 


r 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. -Verses  44—52. 

The  price  of  truth. — Two  of  these  parables  appear  as  like  to  each  other  as  they 
seem  different  from  the  third.  It  is  not  difficult,  however,  to  trace  in  all  of 
them  one  general  thought ;  a  thought  which  comes  in,  also,  in  what  the  Saviour 
afterwards  says  to  His  disciples,  in  bringing  this  series  of  parables  to  a  close 

342 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xili. 


(vers.  51,  52).  Briefly  expressed,  this  general  thought  is  the  exceeding  value 
of  truth.  iVo  possession  is  better.  JVo  beauty  is  greater,  Nothing  will  show  this 
like  the  end. 

I.  No  possession  is  better. — "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  treasure  "  (ver.  44). 
So  the  first  parable  says.  Even  the  man  who  is  desirous  of  treasure  may  not 
see  this  at  first.  It  is  treasure  "  hid  "  in  a  field.  He  does  not  appreciate  at  first 
the  full  value  of  what  is  before  him.  But  when  he  does  see  it — observe  the  fact 
— he  "  hides  "  it  again.  He  covers  it  up  as  being  that  which  he  wants  to  keep 
for  himself.  He  covers  it  up  also,  as  being  the  only  thing  which  he  desires  to 
possess.  For  joy  thereof — for  its  sake — he  parts  with  all  else  that  is  his.  "  He 
goeth  and  selleth  all  that  he  hath,  and  buyeth  that  field."  That  is  what  truth 
is — the  truth  of  the  gospel — to  him.  It  is  the  thing — the  one  thing — which  he 
desires  to  possess  (cf.  Luke  x.  39,  41,  42). 

II.  No  beauty  is  greater. — This  seems  the  further  idea  of  the  parable  of  the 
*'  pearl."  A  pearl  is  not  only  a  valuable  possession.  It  is  a  lovely  one,  too ;  a 
thing  of  grace  and  adornment ;  a  thing  of  lustre  and  glory.  It  is  also  to  be 
observed  that  the  man  described  here  is  a  man  who  appreciates  this.  He  is  a 
" merchant  seeking  goodly  pearls"  (ver.  45).  The  very  reason  why  he  is  seeking 
them  is  because  of  their  goodliness  and  beauty.  And  the  thing  he  sets  store  on 
in  his  seeking  and  selecting  is  that  they  should  be  eminent  in  this  way.  Hence, 
therefore,  the  great  significance  of  his  final  decision.  In  his  search  he  comes 
across  one  particular  pearl,  such  as  he  had  never  previously  seen.  He  believes 
it  to  be  one  which  it  is  impossible  to  surpass.  He  finds  it  therefore — hardly 
surprisingly — to  be  of  very^  "  great  price."  That  matters  not  in  his  eyes.  He 
''goes  and  sells"  all  that  he  lias,  and  brings  the  money  together,  and  thankfully 
hands  it  over  in  exchange  for  that  "  pearl "  (ver.  46).  So  it  is,  also,  that  we  ought 
to  feel  and  do  by  the  gospel  of  grace.  As  it  was  with  the  Apostle,  so  should  it  be 
to  ourselves,  *'  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,"  the  thing  in  comparison 
with  which  all  other  things  are  but  as  ''  dung  and  dross  "  (Phil.  iii.  8),  and  for 
the  sake  of  which  all  that  is  inconsistent  therewith,  is  parted  from  with  delight 
(cf.  Ps.  xxvii.  4,  the  "beauty  of  the  Lord,"  xcvi.  9  etc.).  Even  so,  in  brief, 
the  word  of  salvation  is  to  those  who  view  it  aright,  something  as  super- 
excellent  in  its  methods  and  means  as  it  is  in  its  end. 

III.  Nothing  will  show  all  this  like  the  end. — For  the  present,  no  doubt,  it 
often  appears  as  though  the  reverse  were  the  truth,  and  as  though  it 
signified  little  whether  a  man  saw  or  did  not  see  the  preciousness  and  beauty  of 
truth.  But  that  is  simply  because  of  wha  t  the  third  parable  tells  us  with 
regard  to  the  present ;  and  of  what  the  parable  of  the  tares  had  previously  told 
us  of  it  in  a  different  way.  The  present  is  a  permittedly  mingled  condition  of 
things.  This  had  been  represented  in  the  previous  parable  by  the  tares  and  the 
wheat  growing  together.  This  is  represented  here  under  a  different  figure,  that  of 
a  "  net."  The  "  kingdom  of  heaven,"  as  it  is  now,  is  "  like  unto  a  net  cast  into 
the  sea,"  and  having  within  it,  therefore,  "  gathered  "  together  fish  of  "  every 
kind."  For  the  present,  therefore,  and  while  the  "  net "  is  still  in  the  "  sea," 
its  contents  are  mingled  together.  The  good  and  the  bad  are  both  there,  sharing 
a  common  lot,  for  the  time.  But  it  was  for  a  time — and  for  a  time  only — that 
this  state  of  things  was  meant  to  continue.  By  and  by,  in  the  nature  of  things, 
the  "  net "  would  be  drawn  up  on  "  the  beach."  And  when  "  on  the  beach,"  in  the 
nature  of  things  again,  its  contents  would  remain  "  mingled "  no  more.  There 
were  those  there,  on  the  contrary,  who  would  "  sit  down  "  and  begin  separating 
between  them,  and  who  would  not  conclude,  also,  till  they  had  made  a  thorough 
and  permanent  end  of  the  task.  Then  would  be  seen  finally,  what  was  sometimes 
so  hidden  now,  how  great  was  the  difference  in  their  lot ;  and  how  much  it 
signified  whether  men  saw  or  did  not  see  the  true  character  of  the  word.    Where 

343 


CHAP.  xiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY-.    ST.   MATTHEW. 


are  the  '^  good  "  fish  now  ?  Gathered  in  vessels.  Where  are  the  **  bad  "  now  ? 
"  Cast "  wholly  "  away."  Where  those  persons  now  that  once  despised  the  word 
and  yet  were  allowed  for  a  time  to  stand  by  the  side  of  those  who  honoured  and 
prized  it  ?  "  Severed "  now  from  among  them  by  the  hands  of  those  angels 
who  have  come  forth  for  that  purpose.  "  Severed  "  from  among  them  and  "  cast 
away  "  from  them — to  where  ?  To  the  same  place  and  state  as  were  previously 
spoken  of  in  the  same  connection  in  the  parable  of  the  tares  (^cf.  vers.  50  and  42). 
So  doubly  assured  is  it,  therefore,  that  it  shall  not  be  with  them,  as  with  those 
who  love  the  word,  in  the  end. 

Hence  briefly,  and  to  the  disciples  especially,  as  to  those  appointed  to  sow 
that  seed  of  the  word,  the  application  of  all.  Let  them,  as  such,  take  very  good 
care : — 

1.  To  understand  the  gospel  themselves  (ver.  51). — How  could  they  teach  it 
unless  they  did  ?  How  could  they  lead  into  truth  if  they  themselves  were  in 
error  ? 

2.  To  prize  it  themselves. — This  word  of  the  kingdom,  we  have  just  seen, 
should  be  a  peculiar  "treasure"  (vers.  44-46)  to  all.  It  should  be  especially  so 
to  the  "  scribe  "  who  should  be  of  all  men  the  most  familiar  with  its  meaning 
And  almost  more  so  to  the  "householder"  or  steward  (1  Cor.  iv.  1),  who  has  to 
dispense  it  to  others.  Let  neither  know  of  any  "  treasure  "  but  this  (end  of 
ver.  52). 

3.  To  follow  in  doing  so  the  example  and  teaching  of  the  Master  Himself. — 
This  method  of  parables  had  been  emphatically  a  bringing  forth  of  "  things  new 
and  old  " — of  illustrating  and  teaching  the  unfamiliar  by  means  of  the  familiar 
(see  before  on  vers.  1-17).  Also,  as  we  saw  before  (v.  17  etc.),  all  that  both 
seemed  and  was  "  new  "  in  the  teaching  of  the  Saviour,  was  in  very  truth  only 
the  further  extension  and  so  the  fulfilment  of  the  "  old."  Let  those  who  were  to 
go  forth  in  the  Saviour's  name  adopt  the  same  plan.  Never  be  stale.  Never  be 
crude.  Never  obsolete.  Never  new-fangled.  Always  "  up  to  date."  Never 
despising  the  past. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Yer.  44.  Treasure  hid  in  a  field. —  this  world,  rich  beyond  all  comparison 

1.  Another  parable  teaching  us   that  or  conception  ;  a  treasure  incorruptible, 

the  church,  in  regard  of  the  precious  and  undefiled,  and  unfading, 

doctrine  of  grace  and  salvation  to  be  II.  The  treasure  is  hidden, 

had  by  Christ  in  it,  is  a  rich  treasure.  III.  The  hidden  treasure  is  at  last 

able  to  relieve  and  supply  all  wants  found. 

and  necessities  ;  therefore  called  a  hid  IV.  The  instant,  ardent  effort  of  the 

treasure,  which   the   misbeliever,   how  discoverer  to  make  the  treasure  his  own, 

wise  soever  in  the  world,  cannot  per-  now  that  he   knows   what   it   is   and 

ceive.     2.  The  believer  who  findeth  it  where  it  lies. 

will  make  no  reckoning  of  the  worth  V.  He  parts  with  all  in  order  that 

of  any  earthly  thing  in  comparison  of  he  may  acquire  the  treasure, 

it,    but   will    part    with    whatever    is  VI.  When  the  man  had  discovered 

pleasant   or    profitable    unto    him    in  the   treasure,    "for    joy   thereof"    he 

this   life,  rather  than  be  deprived   of  went  and  sold  all,  in  order  to  buy  the 

this   grace.       3.    As   he   laboureth   to  field  that  contained  it. — W.  Arnot^D.D. 
have  this  treasure,  so  he  hath  a  care 

to  keep  it. — David  Dickson.  Vers.    45,    46.    The  pearl   of  great 

price. — I.  The  person  represented  by 

TJie  hidden  V'easure. — I.  There  is  a  this   merchant. — Different   characters, 

treasure,   placed  within  our  reach  in  different  classes  of  sinners,  are  repre- 

344 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xiii. 


sented  as  being  saved  in  the  two 
parables  of  the  hid  treasure  and  the 
pearl  of  great  price.  For  examples  of 
these,  let  me  select  two  remarkable 
men  —  Colonel  Gardiner  and  John 
Bunyan.  Gardiner's  was  a  sudden 
and  remarkable  conversion.  In  salva- 
tion he  found  as  much  as  the  man  in 
the  treasure  which  his  ploughshare 
brought  to  light,  what  he  never  sought 
nor  expected.  Bunyan,  on  the  other 
hand,  seeking  the  pardon  of  sin,  a 
purer  life,  and  a  holier  heart,  had  been 
a  merchant  seeking  "  goodly  pearls  ;  " 
and,  in  his  case,  the  seeker  became  the 
finder. 

II.  The  pearl  of  great  price. — As 
all  which  the  merchant  sought  in 
acquiring  many  goodly  pearls  was 
found  in  one — one  precious,  peerless 
gem — Jesus  teaches  us  that  the  soul 
finds  in  Himself  all  it  feels  the  want  of 
and  has  been  seeking  in  other  ways 
— peace  with  God  and  peace  of  con- 
science, a  clean  heart  and  a  renewed 
mind,  hope  in  death  and  a  heaven  of 
glory  after  it. 

III.  How  this  pearl  was  obtained. 
— It  was  not  bestowed  as  a_gift.  On 
the  contrary,  the  merchantman,  trading 
in  goodly  pearls,  bought  it  at  the  price 
of  all  he  had.  Though  we  cannot,  in 
the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  buy 
salvation,  no  man  is  saved  but  he  who 
gives  up  his  sins  for  Christ,  takes  up 
his  cross,  and,  denying  himself  daily, 
follows  Jesus. 

IV.  Some  lessons   taught  by  this 
figure   of  a  merchant. — 1.    To  make, 
religion  our  chief  pursuit.    2.  To  guard 
against  deception.     3.  To  examine  our 
accounts  with  God. — T.  Guthrie,  D.D. 

Ver.  46.  Goodly  pearls. — No  heart 
is,  at  this  moment,  quite  vacant,  quite 
listless,  quite  objectless.  We  will  not 
speak  of  men  whose  goodly  pearl  is 
mere  thoughtless  self-indulgence.  But 
we  speak  of  three  goodly  pearls,  some- 
times reflecting,  sometimes  counterfeit- 
ing, the  pearl  of  great  price. 

I.  The  pearl  of  true  reality. — The 
thin^  that  is  a  substance  of  which  there 
are  ten  thousand  shadows.      Is  there 


a  goodlier  pearl  than  this  in  all  God's 
universe  ?  We  do  not  complain  of  this 
object  of  search,  but  of  the  method  of 
seeking.  How  often  is  the  search  of 
truth  not  a  business,  but  a  pastime, 
not  a  struggle,  but  an  excuse  !  Away 
with  the  worship  of  doubting. 

II.  The  pearl  of  virtue. — Let  no 
man  disparage  it.  God  does  not ; 
Christ  does  not ;  but  let  no  man  make 
the  pearl  a  thing  which  looks  only  at 
the  act,  and  never  enters  into  the 
heart,  out  of  which,  God  says,  are  the 
issues  of  life.  The  seeker  of  the  pearl 
of  virtue  must  listen  to  what  God  has 
to  say  about  it,  and  be  wrapped  within 
the  folds  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ. 

III.  The  goodliest  pearl  of  all  to  be 
threaded  on  this  string  is  the  pearl  of 
love. — But  who  can  tell  the  sorrows 
of  the  pursuit,  or  the  disappointment 
of  the  attainment  ?  One  loves  and  the 
other  does  not.  Oh,  the  merchant 
seeking  this  pearl,  is  a  very  sorrowful 
man  ere  all  is  done  !  But  God  is  the 
Fountain  of  love,  and  offers  Himself 
as  its  satisfaction.  That  is  the  Pearl 
of  price. — C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D. 

Yers.  45,  46.  Finding  something 
better  than  sought. — The  application  of 
the  parable  is,  intellectually  at  least, 
a  short  and  easy  process.  It  is  not 
precisely  the  case  of  a  man  who  finds 
the  kingdom  of  God  when  he  is  seeking 
something  else  ;  neither  is  it  the  case 
of  a  man  who  first  thoroughly  knows 
the  worth  of  that  kingdom  and  then 
sets  out  in  search  of  it.  There  is  no 
such  example  ;  no  man  knows  its  worth 
before  he  obtains  it.  The  merchant 
knew  the  value  of  pearls  and  set  out 
in  search  of  them,  but  such  a  pearl  as 
that  which  he  found  he  had  never  seen 
before,  and  never  expected  to  see.  So, 
although  a  man  has  some  spiritual 
perceptions  and  spiritual  desires, 
although  by  a  deliberate  judgment  he 
determines  to  seek  the  life  eternal  in 
preference  to  all  the  business  and 
pleasures  of  the  world,  he  does  not  at 
the  outset  understand  how  exceeding 
rich  the  forgiving  grace  of  God  is. 
Nay,  he  thinks,  when  he  first  begins 

345 


CHAP.  XIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


his  search  for  salvation,  that  it  may  be 
accomplished  by  the  union  of  many 
attainments,  such  as  men  may  possess. 
Precious  pearls  and  a  number  of  them 
indeed ;  but  still  such  pearls  as  he  has 
often  seen  in  the  possession  of  other 
merchants,  and  as  he  has  in  former 
times  had  in  his  own  store.  He  goes 
out  with  cash  in  hand  to  buy  pearls, 
but  he  leaves  his  house  and  land  still 
his  own.  He  expects  to  acquire  many 
excellent  pearls  and  retain  all  his 
property  besides.  He  did  not  conceive 
of  one  that  should  be  worth  all  he  had, 
until  he  saw  it.  It  is  thus  that  people 
under  conviction  set  out  in  search  of 
something  that  will  make  them  right 
before  God. — W.  Arnot^  D.D. 

Ver.  46.  Sacrifice  for  gain. — If  a 
man  wants  money,  he  must  seek  it; 
if  he  wants  learning,  he  must  pay  its 
price  in  hard  study.  Ignorance  he 
may  have  without  effort.  To  raise 
thistles  a  man  need  not  prepare  the 
ground  nor  sow  the  seed ;  to  raise 
wheat  he  must  do  both.  Toil  is  ever- 
more the  standard  of  value.  Cost  and 
worth  are  ever  close  neighbours.  Only 
by  the  rugged  path  of  toil  do  men 
reach  the  heights  of  great  attainment ; 
only  by  paying  the  price  of  heroic  effort 
do  they  write  their  names  high  in  the 
temple  of  fame.  We  are  all  familiar 
with  the  answer  of  Euclid  to  King 
Ptolemy  Lagus  when  he  asked,  "  Is 
there  not  a  shorter  and  easier  way  to 
the  study  of  geometry  than  that  which 
you  have  laid  down  in  your  Elements  ] " 
His  reply  was,  "  There  is  no  royal  road 
to  geometry."  There  is  no  road  to 
heaven  but  that  of  sacrifice,  that  of 
cross-bearing ;  we  must  go  in  this 
narrow  way  or  not  at  all.  But  it  is 
also  a  way  of  joy,  a  path  of  pleasant- 
ness and  peace.  You  must  not  expect 
to  become  a  Christian  by  accident. 
That  blessed  experience  must  be  the 
result  of  deliberate  determination,  of 
intelligent  seeking,  and  of  faithful 
enduring.  This  truth  is  earnestly 
affirmed  in  many  parts  of  Christ's 
teaching.  Christ's  honesty  is  worthy 
of   commendation.      He    clearly   lays 

346 


down  the  conditions  of  discipleship ; 
we  must  take  up  the  cross  and  follow 
Him. — R.  JS.  MacArthur,  D.D. 

Vers.  47-50.  The  net— I.  The  net 
gathers  of  "  every  kind." — This  is  set 
before  us  as  a  picture  of  the  church  of 
Christ  as  it  now  is.  It  embraces  every 
variety  of  character. 

II.  This  mixture  arises  from  the 
manner  in  which  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  proclaimed  among  men. — It 
is  not  proclaimed  by  addressing  private 
messages  to  selected  and  approved 
individuals,  but  publicly  to  all.  The 
recruiting  sergeant  watches  for  likely 
men  and  singles  them  out  from  the 
crowd ;  but  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
opens  its  gates  to  all,  because  it  has 
that  which  appeals  to  humanity  at 
large,  and  can  make  use  of  every  kind 
of  man  who  honestly  attaches  himself 
to  it. 

III.  But  this  mixture  is  at  length 
to  give  place. — The  end  is  not  a  mere 
running  down  of  the  machinery  that 
keeps  the  world  going,  it  is  not  a  mere 
exhaustion  of  the  life  that  keeps  us 
all  alive,  it  is  not  a  hap -hazard  cutting 
of  the  thread ;  it  is  a  conclusion,  coming 
as  truly  in  its  own  fit  day  and  order, 
as  much  in  the  fulness  of  time  and 
because  things  are  ripe  for  it,  as  the 
birth  of  Christ  came. 

IV.  The  distinction  which  finally 
separates  men  into  two  classes  must 
be  real  and  profound. — It  is  here  said 
to  be  our  value  to  God.  It  is  possible 
some  one  may  defend  himself  against 
the  parable  by  saying,  "  I  will  not 
alarm  myself  by  judging  of  my  destiny 
by  my  own  qualities  ;  I  am  trusting  to 
Christ."  But  precisely  in  so  far  as  you 
are  trusting  to  Christ,  you  have  those 
qualities  which  the  final  judgment  will 
require  you  to  show.  "  If  any  man 
hath  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is 
none  of  His."  You  are  useful  to  God 
in  so  far  as  you  have  the  Spirit  of 
Christ.— if.  Dods,  D,D, 

The  draw-net. — The  net  is  not  the 
visible  church  in  the  world,  and  the 
fishes,  good  and  bad,  within  it,  do  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.     cHap.  xiii. 


represent  the  true  and  false  members  of   His   Apostles,    said,   "Follow    Me, 

of  the  church.     The  sea  is  the  world.  and  I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men " 

The  net,  almost  or  altogether  invisible  (iv.  19).     He  did ;  and  I  think  it  is  by 

at  first  to  those  whom  it  surrounds,  is  a  mistake  in    instituting   an   analogy 

that  unseen  bond  which,  by  an  invisible  between  that  fact  and  this  parable  that 

ministry,  is  stretched  over  the  living,  interpreters  have  been  led  into  a  wrong 

drawing     them     gradually,     secretly,  track.     2.   But  has  not  the  Lord  said 

surely,  towards  the  boundary  of   this  in  this  parable,  as  in  all  the  rest  of  the 

life,  and  over  it  into  another.    As  each  group,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 

portion  or   generation  of   the  human  unto  a  net  that  was  cast  into  the  sea  ? 

race  are  drawn  from  their  element  in  He  has ;  yet  the  fact  does  not  prove 

this  world,  ministering  spirits,  on  the  that  He  meant  to  represent  the  church 

lip  of  eternity  that  lies  nearest  time,  by  the  net,  and  the  labour  of  Apostles 

receive   them   and   separate   the  good  by  the  spreading  and  drawing  of  the 

from  the  evil.  net.      The   closing  lesson    about    the 

I.  Some  of  the  reasons  which  com-  kingdom  relates  to  the  closing  scene  of 
mend  this  interpretation.  ■ —  1.  It  the  kingdom — the  separation  of  the 
assumes,  according  to  the  facts  of  the  wicked  from  the  good  on  the  great  day. 
case  and  the  express  terms  of  the  Scrip-  From  the  order  of  the  subjects  in  the 
ture,  that  the  same  persons  who  draw  series  you  might  expect  this ;  from  the 
the  net  also  separate  the  worthy  from  picture  actually  presented  you  are 
the  worthless  of  its  contents  on  the  shore,  logically     led     to     infer      this;    but, 

2.  In  owning  this  along  with  Olshausen,  especially,   you   know   this    from    the 
it    owns    also    that    the    angels    who  spontaneousexplanation  then  and  there 
separate  the  good  from  the  evil  at  the  given  by  the  Lord. — W.  Arnot,  D.D. 
end  of  the  world  are  angels,  and  does 

not,  with  him,  explain  them  away  into  The  parables  of  the  net  and  the  tares. 

the    numan    ministry    of    the    gospel.  — There  is   obviously  considerable  re- 

3.  It  is  perfectly  congruous  with  the  semblance  between  this  parable  of  the 
habits  of  fishermen,  and  the  char-  net  and  the  parable  of  the  tares.  But 
acter  of  the  instruments  which  they  the  one  is  not  a,  mere  repetition  of  the 
employ.  "When  you  allow  that  the  other  under  a  different  figure.  Evefy 
angels  cast  and  draw  the  net  as  well  parable  is  intended  to  illustrate  one 
as  divide  its  contents,  the  incongruities  truth.  Light  may  incidentally  be 
disappear  and  the  picture  starts  into  life,  shed  on  other  points,  as  you  cannot 
true  to  the  original.  4.  If  any  struggles  turn  your  eye,  or  the  light  you  carry, 
are  made  against  the  encircling  net  on  the  object  you  wish  to  examine 
during  the  slow,  solemn  process  of  without  seeing  and  shedding  light  on 
drawing,  any  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  other  things  as  well.  Now  the  one 
captives  to  leap  out  into  freedom,  they  truth  which  is  especially  enforced  in 
are  made,  not  by  one  kind  in  dis-  the  parable  of  the  tares  is  that  it  is 
pleasure  at  being  shut  up  with  another,  dangerous  in  the  extreme  to  attempt 
but  by  every  kind  indifferently  in  dis-  in  this  present  time  to  separate  the 
pleasure  at  being  shut  up  at  all.  Like  evil  from  the  good  in  the  church  : 
the  indefinite  terror  of  mute  fishes  whereas  the  one  truth  to  which  the 
when  they  feel  the  net  coming  closer  parable  of  the  net  gives  prominence  is 
in,  is  the  instinctive  alarm  of  human  that  this  separation  will  be  effected  by 
beings  when  the  hand  of  death  is  felt  and  by  in  its  own  suitable  time.  No 
gradually  contracting  the  space  in  doubt  this  future  separation  appears 
which  the  pulses  of  life  are  permitted  in  the  parable  of  the  tares  also,  but  in 
to  play.  that  parable  it  is  introduced  for  the 

II.  Objections  which  maybe  urged  sake  of  lending  emphasis  to  the  warning 
against  this  interpretation. — 1.  The  against  attempting  a  separation  now; 
Lord  at  another  time,  in  calhng  some  in  this  parable  of  the  net  it  is  intro- 

347 


6HAP.  xiii.      HOMILEfIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


duced     with      no 
M,  Dods,  D.D. 


such      purpose. — 


The  emphasis  in  the  parable. — The 
parable  sets  the  present  mixture  of 
good  and  bad  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
or  in  the  church  over  against  the 
eventual  separation. — Ibid. 

Vers.  51,  52.  The  householder  and  the 
disciples. — I.  All  truth  is  of  necessity 
old  as  well  as  new. — The  truths  Christ 
taught  were  only  new  truths  because 
men,  from  sin  and  neglect,  had  over- 
looked them. 

II.  As  things  new  are  in  reality  old, 
so  things  old — the  things  of  the  Spirit 
of  God — never  become  obsolete. — They 
take  new  life,  and  are  seen  in  new 
developments  day  by  day. 

III.  Every  man's  experience  is  a 
treasure-house  of  old  and  new  things, 
by  which  it  is  allowed  him  to  profit. 
The  past  is  a  precious  possession  of 
every  one  of  us. — A.  Ainger. 

Things  new  and  old. — What  were 
the  things  which  our  Lord  was  anxious 
to  assure  Himself  that  His  disciples 
had  understood  ?  Evidently  the  things 
which  they  had  just  heard.  "  There- 
fore "  is  a  particle  of  inference ;  but 
the  argument  from  which  the  conclu- 
sion comes  is  not  explicitly  given.  We 
can  have  little  difficulty,  however,  in 
supplying  it. 

I.  Our  Lord  is  arguing  from  His 
own  example. — "  You  say  you  have 
followed  Me ;  well,  then,  note  My 
practice ;  let  My  method  show  you 
what  yours  must  be ;  let  it  show  you 
what  is  the  duty  of  every  scribe  who 
is  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ;  his  teaching,  like  Mine,  must 
blend  the  old  and  the  new."  It  was, 
no  doubt,  strange  to  the  Twelve  to  hear 
their  work  set  forth  under  the  image 
of  the  text.  They  could  understand 
being  disciples  of  a  prophet,  or  heralds 
of  a  kingdom  ;  they  were,  perhaps,  not 
greatly  startled  when  they  were  told 
to  be  fishers  of  men ;  but  the  name  of 
scribe  must  have  had  sinister  associa- 
tions for  them.     Jesus  would  have  it 

348 


understood  that  in  itself  the  office  was 
not  only  a  necessary,  but  a  great  and 
noble  thing.  It  was  right  that  those 
who  had  the  leisure  and  capacity 
should  make  a  special  study  of  the 
words  of  inspiration,  that  they  should 
not  keep  to  themselves  the  knowledge 
they  gained.  Our  Lord  would  have 
His  Apostles  know  that  work  of  this 
honourable  kind  awaited  them.  They 
were  not  to  be  the  mere  preachers  of 
a  new  doctrine.  The  later  prophets 
and  the  Psalms  were  to  be  as  dear  to 
them  as  to  the  greatest  of  Kabbis  ;  nay, 
infinitely  dearer  and  more  suggestive 
because  vocal  with  life-giving  truths 
hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent. 
Yes,  they  also  were  to  be  scribes  and 
interpreters.  We  hardly  realise,  I 
think,  how  closely  our  Lord's  own 
practice  corresponded  with  this  re- 
markable precept;  but  in  all  His 
teaching  how  careful  He  was  to  blend 
the  old  and  the  new !  His  discourses 
are  filled  with  thoughts  and  illustra- 
tions, the  germs  of  which  it  is  easy  to 
discover,  and  with  sayings  which  had 
become  the  common  property  of  gener- 
ations. When  He  pointed  His  disciples 
to  the  parables  they  had  heard  that  day, 
He  intended  them  to  obsei-ve  this  very 
fact,  that  they  were  a  fusion  of  old  and 
new.  He  laid  no  claim  to  a  perfect 
originality,  but  freely  chose  His 
materials  out  of  the  popular  teaching  of 
the  day.  We  know  that  some  of  the 
most  impressive  parables  He  spoke — 
the  surprise  parables,  as  they  are  called, 
because  they  tell  of  the  Master's 
coming,  as  well  as  the  fixed  limiting 
of  Christ's  work — are  expansions  of 
sayings  to  be  found  in  the  Jewish 
Talmud.  And  not  a  few  of  the  terms 
most  characteristic  of  Christianity  were 
current  in  our  Lord's  day.  "  Baptism," 
"  regeneration,"  "  kingdom  of  God," 
"kingdom  of  heaven" — these  were 
words  and  expressions  not  strange  but 
familiar  to  Jewish  ears.  They  were 
not  the  coinage  of  Christianity,  but 
they  were  minted  anew  by  its  Author ; 
they  were  stamped  afresh  with  the 
Divine  image  and  superscription. 
II.  As  in  His  teaching,  so  in  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xiii. 


choice  of  His  witnesses  we  see  the 
action  of  the  same  principle. — He  calls 
the  fishermen  from  their  craft,  not  to 
obliterate  their  old  experience,  but  to 
utiUse  it  in  the  new  when  He  should 
make  them  fishers  of  men,  to  prove 
that  the  patience  and  fertility  of  re- 
source in  which  they  were  trained  on 
the  Sea  of  Galilee  had  ample  scope  in 
the  higher  vocation.  He  calls  Matthew, 
bidding  him  abandon  the  most  secular 
for  the  most  sacred  of  employments ; 
but  must  not  the  publican  have  found 
abundant  opportunity  of  bringing  out 
of  his  treasury  things  new  and  old  ? 

III.  The  Christian  teacher  is  as- 
sumed by  our  Lord  to  have  a  treasure 
on  which  to  draw,  and  a  varied  treasure. 
— And  this,  of  course,  implies  that  it  is 
a  treasure  which  is  for  ever  growing. 
It  is  true  both  of  teachers  and  the 
taught  that  our  Lord's  ideal  is  in  many 
cases  an  alarming  one.  They  are 
uneasy  when  the  old  is  presented  in 
a  new  garb ;  suspicious  when  old  terms 
and  formularies  are  exchanged  for 
equivalents  which  make  a  fresh  appeal 
to  the  conscience  or  demand  fresh 
exercise  of  thought.  Through  a  dread 
of  innovation,  the  secret  of  which  is 
often  nothing  else  than  mental  indo- 
lence, people  identify  truth  with  a 
certain  set  of  words,  any  revision  of 
which  is  felt  to  be  profane.  The  old, 
imperishable  truths  must  be  fused  with 
new  and  living  thought.  Surely  no 
view  of  Scripture  does  it  less  honour 
than  the  assumption  that  it  has  been 
completely  explored,  and  that  no  new 
methods  of  inquiry,  no  new  conditions 
of  the  church  and  the  world,  can  ever 
make  it  yield  what  it  has  not  yielded 
already.  *'  I  am  verily  persuaded," 
said  the  pastor  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers, 
as  they  embarked  in  the  Mayflower^ 
"  that  the  Lord  has  more  truth  yet  to 
break  forth  out  of  His  Word."  "  It  is 
not  incredible,"  says  Bishop  Butler, 
"  that  a  book  which  has  been  so  long 
in  the  possession  of  mankind  contains 
many  truths  as  yet  undiscovered." 
Yes,  the  old  prayer  of  the  Psalmist  is 
that  which  befits  every  student  of  the 
Bible  :  "  Open  Thou  mine  eyes  that  I 


may  see  the  wondrous  things  of  Thy 
law."  And  yet,  precious  as  is  the 
treasure  of  the  written  revelation,  it 
does  not  constitute  the  whole  treasure 
of  the  Christian  scribe.  Our  confidence 
that  the  words  of  Christ  shall  never 
pass  away  lies  in  this — that  they  are 
not  rigid  rules  for  spiritual  life;  they 
have  a  power  to  consecrate  all  human 
interests,  and  to  adjust  themselves  to 
all  conceivable  social  conditions,  until 
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  be 
finally  brought  under  His  sway.  The 
attempt  has  been  made  to  treat  Mo- 
hammedanism as  a  religion  worthy  to 
be  placed  in  competition  with  Chris- 
tianity. Is  not  this  the  essential 
quality  which  differentiates  Cl)ristianity 
from  all  other  religious  and  professed 
revelations,  that  whereas  they  profess 
to  be  complete  and  final,  the  Christian 
revelation  is  not  confined  within  the 
covers  of  a  book,  but  consists  in  a  life 
and  a  spirit  ?  But  the  essential  weak- 
ness of  Mohammedanism  is  this,  that 
it  has  upon  it  the  mark  of  finality.  It 
is  a  religion  of  the  letter,  and  not  of 
the  spirit. 

IV.  But  is  not  the  text  intended  to 
describe  the  attitude  of  mind  incum- 
bent upon  us  all  in  regard  to  truth? 
— We  cannot  fulfil  our  Lord's  descrip- 
tion unless  we  are  keeping  our  minds 
loyally  open,  and  while  reverentially 
tenacious  of  the  old,  are  ready  to  hope- 
fully welcome  the  new.  Look  at  the 
map  of  the  world  according  to  Strabo 
or  Ptolemy.  Can  anything  be  more 
ludicrously  incomplete  than  that  strange 
medley  of  fact  and  guesswork  ?  But 
the  geography  of  Strabo  and  Ptolemy 
satisfied  the  ages  in  which  they  lived, 
and  was,  no  doubt,  regarded  at  the 
time  as  a  final  achievement.  It  took 
centuries  to  develop  the  knowledge  we 
have  to-day.  And  the  map  of  human 
knowledge  is  in  the  same  condition. 
It  is  made  up  of  ascertained  facts  and 
conjectures  more  or  less  wide  of  the 
tnark;  while  beyond  the  regions  of 
the  explored  or  guessed  at  there  lies 
the  vaster  domain  for  which  no  voyager 
has  set  sail.  But  this  courageous  open- 
ness of  mind,  which  is  the  mark  of  a 

349 


CHAP.  xiii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


firm,  manly  faith,  is  a  very  different  combine  facts,  explain  facts,  or  manipu- 

thing    from    the     restless,    inconstant  late  facts. — Canon  Duckworth. 
spirit  which  is  ever  on  the  look  out  for 

novelty,  which  grasps  at  the  new  be-  Ver.  51.    Understanding    the    word. 

cause  it  fe  new,  and  distrusts  the  old  1.  Hearers  of  the  gospel  should  labour 

because  it  is   old  ;  which     makes    no  to  understand  what  they  hear.     2.  The 

distinction  between  facts  and  theories,  minister   by    catechising    should    take 

but  takes  up  eagerly  with  the  latest  account   of    his   hearers,    for   so   doth 

speculation.      In  a  stirring,   excitable  Christ,  saying,  "  Have  ye  understood  1 " 

time  we  cannot  too  carefully  remember  3.  People,    of    what    quality    soever, 

that    while   facts   have    an    imperious  should  be  willing  to  give  account   to 

claim  upon  us,  theories  have  no  such  their    teachers   of   their   profiting   in 

claim.     They  are  not  yet  parts  of  the  knowledge  :  for  the  disciples   answer, 

truth,  and  they  may  never  be  parts  of  "  Yea,  Lord." — David  Dickson. 
it.     They  are  only  tentative  efforts  to 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  53—58. 

Jesus  in  Nazareth. — The  end  of  this  chapter  is,  perhaps,  connected  with  the 
end  of  the  last.  Some  of  the  people  of  Nazareth,  including  at  any  rate  those 
amongst  them  who  were  nearest  of  kin  to  the  Saviour,  aie  described  there  as 
coming  to  Him ;  though  not  (apparently)  in  the  spirit  of  sympathy  with  His 
work  (xii.  46-50).  Here  we  find  Him,  not  impossibly  on  account  of  that  visit, 
coming  to  them.  The  incidents  related  are  such  as  to  throw,  first,  some  light 
upon  thenn  ;  secondly,  iniore  light  upon  Him. 

I.  Some  light  upon  them. — Evidently,  in  the  first  place,  they  were  not 
amongst  the  distinguished  ones  of  the  earth.  Persons  of  culture,  persons  of 
learning,  persons  of  influence  were  not  common  amongst  them.  When  anyone 
came  to  "  their  synagogue  "  who  could  "  teach  "  with  effect  it  seems  to  have 
been  a  surprise.  It  was  certainly  so  when  they  found  the  Speaker  to  be  one  of 
themselves — a  man  brought  up  amongst  them — a  man  whose  father,  and  whose 
father's  occupation  as  a  "  carpenter,"  were  known  to  them  all — and  whose  other 
relations,  also,  of  the  nearest  description,  were  all  of  them  as  well  known  to  them, 
even  by  name  (vers.  55,  56).  Who  would  have  thought  of  such  an  one  appearing 
amongst  us  ?  Are  those  who  belong  to  Him,  and  who  are  "  with  us,"  anything  of 
the  kind  ?  Are  they  not  rather,  all  of  them,  just  the  same  as  ourselves  ? 
Persons  who  make  no  pretension,  and  have  no  right  to  do  so,  to  anything  more  ? 
Evidently  also,  in  the  next  place,  like  most  common-place  folk,  they  were  a  very 
p7'ejudiced  set.  It  was  nob  only  an  "  astonishment  " — it  was  an  "  offence  "  to 
them — that  there  should  be  such  a  man  in  their  midst  (ver.  57).  Far  from 
glorying  in  the  fact  that  He  was  "one  of  them,"  they  objected  to  Him  the 
more  on  that  ground.  What  right  had  He  to  be  a  man  of  such  a  different 
stamp  ?  That  He  was  so,  and  that  both  in  word  and  deed,  it  was  impossible  to 
deny.  The  *'  wisdom  "  He  spoke  with,  the  "  mighty  works  "  which  accompanied 
it,  were  as  manifest  as  Himself  (ver.  54).  What  exasperated  them  was  that 
they  could  not  make  out  how  it  was  they  were  there.  "  Whence  hath  this 
man  all  these  things  1  "  The  very  language  of  prejudice  ever  since  it  was  born. 
It  will  not  accept  what  yet  it  cannot  deny.  It  will  not  trace  facts  to  their 
source.  It  will  not  submit  to  learn  from  them  what  they  are  intended  to  teach. 
It  quarrels  with  them  simply  for  being  facts.  It  only  wishes  them  out  of 
their  way. 

II.  More  light  upon  Him. — Light,  for  example,  on  what  He  had  been  in  the 
days  of  the  past.     Why  were  they  so  exceedingly  astonished  to  see  so  much  in 

350 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiii. 


Him  now?  Because  they  had  seen  so  little  in  Him  up  to  that  time.  It  is 
evident  that  when  He  left  Nazareth  to  be  baptised  of  the  Baptist,  and  to  open 
His  chief  ministry,  after  a  short  probable  stay  in  Judaea,  in  Capernaum  and  its 
neighbourhood  (iv.  12,  etc.),  there  was  no  one  amongst  them — with  one  possible 
exception  (Luke  ii.  19),  who  knew  the  kind  of  man  that  He  was.  It  is  evident 
also  (Luke  iv.  23)  that  they  heard  of  His  doings  at  Capernaum  on  this  account, 
with  no  little  surprise.  And  just  as  evident  (as  we  have  noticed)  that,  when 
He  now  brings  His  greatness  amongst  them,  they  are  "  astonished  "  still  more. 
Evidently,  once  more  therefore,  there  had  been  no  preUminary  scintillations  of 
all  this  during  those  many  years  that  He  had  been  dwelling  amongst  them  before 
the  baptism  of  John.  Whatever  His  thoughts,  whatever  His  hopes,  whatever 
His  plans,  whatever  His  powers  had  been  duiing  those  thirty  long  years  of 
dwelling  amongst  them  up  to  that  date — those  years,  on  His  part,  had  been  years 
of  long  silence  and  self-restraint  in  more  directions  than  one.  It  is  a  picture 
to  mark !  How  singularly  unobtrusive,  how  retiring,  how  meek  His  life  then 
must  have  been  !  How  much  must  have  been  repressed  that  they  should  now 
look  on  the  opposite  with  such  unmeasured  surprise.  What  was  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  to  all  outward  appearance  during  all  those  years  ?  Just  a  "  Nazarene  " 
— and  no  more.  Light,  in  the  next  place,  as  to  what  He  is  to  them  now.  How 
desirous  to  teach  !  Going  into  "  their  synagogue  "  where  He  would  have  the 
readiest  opportunity  for  so  doing  ;  and  availing  Himstlf  of  it  when  He  was  there 
to  offer  them  instruction.  Little  as  they  either  expected  or  wished  it,  they 
should  have  the  offer  of  light  from  His  hands.  How  ready,  again,  to  make 
allowance  for  such  unpreparedness  to  hear  on  their  part  !  He  well  knew  that 
it  was  but  with  them  as  with  all  men  in  this  world.  No  man  likes  to  find  one 
of  his  apparent  equals  claiming,  for  all  that,  to  be  one  endowed  with  such  gifts 
as  to  make  him  his  superior  in  any  important  respect  ;  least  of  all  to  make  him 
so  in  such  a  capacity  as  that  of  a  prophet "  (ver.  57).  If  these  His  townsfolk, 
therefore,  had  such  a  feeling  now  with  regard  to  Himself,  He  was  the  more 
disposed  by  it  to  feel  sorrow  than  either  disappointment  or  wrath.  At  any 
rate,  it  shoidd  not  induce  Him  to  withhold  from  them  entirely  that  which  He 
knew  He  was  able  to  give.  He  would  do  some  works  among  them,  if  not 
*'  many,"  whatever  their  prejudices.  They  should  have  some  witness  among 
them,  if  not  so  much  as  some  others,  notwithstanding  "  their  unbelief  "  (ver.  58). 
A  most  gracious  answer  indeed — as  gracious  an  answer  as  the  case  admitted  of — 
to  such  behaviour  as  theirs. 

Let  us  learn  from  all  this,  for  our  own  use  and  instruction  : — 

1.  To  hevmre  of  limiting  God. — It  is  not  for  us  to  say  where  He  is  to  look 
for  the  instruments  of  His  work.  No  place,  certainly,  seemed  less  likely  for 
such  a  purpose  than  Nazareth  did  at  that  time  (John  i.  46).  Those  who  knew 
it  best,  its  own  inhabitants,  thought  so  the  most.  Also,  amongst  its  inhabitants 
no  one  appeared  less  likely  for  such  a  calling  and  that  for  the  years  of  a  "  genera- 
tion "  than  Jesus  Himself.  Yet  never  has  there  been  called,  from  anywhere 
else,  such  a  Teacher  and  Light — even  the  Light  of  the  world. 

2.  To  beware  of  despising  any. — Probably  greater  prejudice,  and  less  excuse 
for  it,  there  never  was  in  the  world  than  amongst  these  townsfolk  of  Jesus. 
Yet,  with  all  the  scorn  that  they  showed  to  Him,  and  all  the  multitudes  waiting 
to  hear  Him  elsewhere,  there  is  no  contempt  in  His  treatment  of  them.  If  He 
does  not  give  to  them  what  is  due  rather  to  others,  He  still  has  something  for 
them.  He  has  something  for  them,  though  they,  on  their  part,  have  only 
prejudice  and  anger  for  Him. 


351 


CHAP.  xiii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


"Ver.  55.  The  carpemter^s  son. — Con- 
sider how  the  fact  that  Jesus  was  a 
carpenter  should  be  a  help  to  our 
faith. 

I.  This  fact  is  a  sign  of  the 
humility  of  Christ. —  It  is  true  that 
when  He  came  down  the  tremendous 
way,  from  heaven's  glory  to  man's 
humiliation,  it  did  not  signify  so  veiy 
much  to  Him  whether  He  alighted  at 
a  king's  palace  or  a  peasant's  cottage. 
The  condescension  would  not  be 
appreciably  difterent  in  the  two  cases. 
Yet  to  us  the  humility  of  Christ  is 
more  apparent  in  His  lowly  earthly 
lot. 

II.  This  fact  is  a  proof  that  Jesus 
Christ  went  through  the  experience 
of  practical  life. — Work  takes  up  a 
large  part  of  life.  It  has  its  difficul- 
ties, its  disappointments,  its  weariness. 
We  all  know  them,  whether  we  work 
with  the  hand  or  with  the  brain. 
Christ  knew  them  too.  Work  has  also 
its  special  requirements,  its  duties,  its 
obligations.  The  apprentice  must 
learn  the  various  branches  of  his  trade, 
if  only  that  he  may  afterwards  under- 
stand how  to  direct  and  judge  of  the 
work  of  the  mechanics  who  will  be 
under  his  control.  Christ  knows  good 
work.  When  we  serve  Him  let  it 
be  with  the  thoroughness  He  so  well 
understands  and  has  a  right  to  expect. 

III.  This  fact  shows  that  Christ 
found  the  school  for  His  spiritual 
training  in  His  practical  work. — 
As  He  bent  over  His  task  with  care 
and  diligence  to  do  it  well.  His  soul  was 
growing  silently  in  those  excellencies 
which  were  ultimately  revealed  when 
His  disciples  "  saw  His  glory  full  of 
grace  and  truth." 

IV.  This  fact  sheds  a  glory  over 
the  life  of  manual  industry. — Every- 
thing that  Christ  handles  becomes 
beautiful  beneath  His  touch.  His 
presence  in  the  workshop  throws  a 
holy  light  over  its  commonest  contents. 
As  the  carpenter  handles  his  tools, 
shall  he  not  remember  that  he  is  doing 
the  very  work  his  Master  did  before 

352 


him,  and  so   exalted   and   consecrated 
work? 

V.  This  fact  should  attract  working 
men  to  Christ. — How  strange  that  it 
should  be  said  that  working  men  are 
not  so  interested  in  Christianity  as 
other  classes.  It  must  be  because  they 
are  repelled  by  the  artificial  respecta- 
bility of  the  church.  It  cannot  be 
that  they  see  anything  in  Christ  Him- 
self that  is  less  attractive  to  them  than 
to  others.  For  He  was  a  working 
man  Himself. — W.  F.  Adeney^  M.A. 

"Ver.  56.  The  originality  of  Jesus. — 
When  Jesus  began  to  be  a  force  in  human 
Hfe,  there  were  four  existent  types  on 
which  men  formed  themselves,  and 
which  are  still  in  evidence.  One  is  the 
moral,  and  has  the  Jew  for  its  supreme 
illustration,  with  his  faith  in  the 
eternal,  and  nis  devotion  to  the  law 
of  righteousness.  The  next,  is  the 
intellectual,  and  was  seen  to  perfection 
in  the  Greek,  whose  restless  curiosity 
searched  out  the  reason  of  things,  and 
whose  aesthetic  taste  identified  beauty 
and  divinity.  The  third  is  the  'political, 
and  stood  enthroned  at  Rome,  where 
a  nation  was  born  in  the  purple  and 
dictated  order  to  the  world.  And  the 
last  is  the  commercial,  and  had  its 
forerunner  in  the  Phoenician,  who  was 
the  first  to  teach  the  power  of  enter- 
prise and  the  fascination  of  wealth. 
Any  other  man  born  at  the  beginning 
of  the  first  century  could  be  dropped 
into  his  class,  but  Jesus  defied  classifica- 
tion. As  He  moved  among  the 
synagogues  of  Galilee  He  was  an 
endless  perplexity.  One  could  never 
anticipate  Him.  One  was  in  despair 
to  explain  Him.  Whence  is  He  %  the 
people  whispered  with  a  vague  sense 
of  the  problem,  for  He  marked  the 
introduction  of  a  new  form  of  life. 
He  was  not  referable  to  type ;  He  was 
the  beginning  of  a  time.  —  John 
Watson,  M.A. 

Ver.  57.  The  worMs  offence  in 
Christ. — What  is    there   ofiensive    in 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  XIIL 


Christianity  to-day — why  do  so  many 
people  now  find  in  Christian  teaching 
a  cause  of  vexation,  an  incitement  to 
opposition,  or,  at  least,  an  excuse  for 
indifference  1 

I.  One  chief  cause  of  the  opposition 
is  the  very  widespread  misunderstand- 
ing about  this  religion  of  Christ  as  to 
its  aims  and  spirit. — This  misunder- 
standing may  be  traced  to  some  extent 
to  the  imperfect  teaching  of  the  church 
in  the  past.  But  the  chief  cause  is 
want  of  attention,  the  absence  of  any 
serious  desire  to  understand  which 
marks  the  attitude  of  so  many  people. 
In  a  certain  tropical  country,  where 
rains  were  rare  and  streams  were 
small,  a  period  of  drought  had  brought 
great  distress  upon  the  people.  The 
ground  was  baked  hard  by  the  burning 
sun,  the  grass  withered  and  died,  the 
rivulets  failed,  the  cattle  began  to 
suffer.  Water  even  failed  for  the 
supply  of  the  households.  Things  got 
worse  and  worse.  Many  lost  their 
all ;  some  even  perished  in  the  bush 
from  thirst ;  when  one  man,  more 
keen-witted  than  the  rest,  and  having 
a  little  more  knowledge  of  things, 
managed  to  sink  a  well  on  his  farm. 
He  soon  tapped  a  spring,  and,  by  a 
rude  arrangement  of  buckets  and  ropes 
he  was  able  to  draw  sufficient  water 
for  all  his  needs.  He  filled  the  great 
trough  which  ran  along  the  front  of 
his  house,  and  sent  to  all  his  neigh- 
bours to  tell  them  the  good  news,  and 
to  invite  them  to  share  his  good 
fortune.  But  the  story  had  gone 
about  among  the  people  that  the  man 
was  a  wizard,  and  that  he  had  obtained 
the  water  by  magic,  and,  moreover, 
that  what  was  life  to  him  would  be 
death  to  everyone  else.  So  they  re- 
fused to  come,  and  hundreds  suffered 
and  even  perished  in  the  very  presence 
of  the  saving  fountain.  This  is  an 
allegory. 

II.  There  is  a  certain  unworldliness 
about  Christ. — The  kingdom  He  founds 
is  a  spiritual  one,  and  such  teaching  is 
not  appreciated  by  the  greater  number 
of  people.  Robert  Buchanan  describes 
a  meeting  on  London  Bridge  between 


himself  and  a  weak  and  miserable  old 
man,  with  bare  and  bleeding  feet — 
this  is  Jesus,  the  Jew.  And  presently 
he  pictures  Him  arraigned  before  "  the 
spirit  of  humanity,"  as  His  judge — 

"  Humanity  itself  shall  testify 
Thy  kingdom  is  a  dream,  Thy  word  a  lie, 
Thyself  a  living  canker  and  a  curse 
Upon  the  body  of  the  universe." 

Many  there  are  who  could  echo  such 
words  if  they  dared.  But  there  is  one 
fact  which  stands  in  the  way  and  con- 
fronts them.  Christ's  kingdom  lives  ! 
It  lives  and  has  greater  vitality  to-day 
than  it  ever  had. 

III.  Men  stumble  at  this  teaching 
because  of  the  slow  progress  and  im- 
perfect results  of  the  preaching  of 
Christianity.  —  I  grant  that  it  is  a 
natural  cause  of  hesitation,  and  at 
first  sight  a  difficulty.  The  condition 
of  society  in  Christian  countries  —  in 
England  and  America  to-day — is  not 
creditable  to  our  professions,  and  must 
be  an  "  offence."  While  Christianity 
has  power  to  uplift  all  who  submit  to 
it,  it  has  not  the  power  to  compel  men 
to  submit.  And  I  shrewdly  suspect 
that  if  it  attempted  to  usurp  such  a 
power,  those  who  now  complain  of  it 
as  imbecile  would  be  the  first  to  attack 
it  as  tyrannical.  But  the  very  argu- 
ment seems  to  allow  the  fact  on  which 
I  lay  stress.  It  seems  to  acknowledge 
that  Christ  intended  to  make  a  complete 
reform  of  society,  that  at  least  this  was 
the  ideal  He  set  before  Himself  and 
His  followers.  And  this  is  admitting 
a  great  deal.  If,  however,  people 
would  use  their  reason  a  little  more 
carefully  they  would  surely  see  that  no 
religion  can,  by  its  very  nature,  have 
a  power  of  compulsion.  Christianity 
aims  at  what  is  radical  ;  it  touches  the 
springs  of  life ;  and,  while  people  are 
debating,  fault-finding,  arguing,  this 
kingdom  of  Christ  is  quietly  going  on 
its  way.  It  is  working  out  its  destined 
ends ;  it  is  renewing  hearts  and  en- 
nobling lives. — P.  W.  Darnton,  B.A. 

Prejudice  against  t/esus. — It  was 
once  said  to  a  sceptic  :  "  Sir,  I  think 
you  would  be  about  the  last  man  i  hat 

A  A  353 


CHAP.  XIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


would  willingly  do  injustice  to  any 
one."  He  smiled  and  gracefully  bowing 
said,  " Certainly."  "Well,  then,  sir," 
was  the  reply,  ''  I  hope  you  will  not  do 
injustice  to  Jesus  Christ."  "  Pooh  !  " 
said  he,  and  turned  away. — 
C.  Clemance,  D.D. 

Prejudice. — Richard  Cecil  illustrates 
the  obvious  tendency  of  man's  pre- 
dilections to  bias  the  judgment,  by  a 
watch  which  a  gentleman  put  into  a 
watchmaker's  hands,  as  it  went  irregu- 
larly. "  It  was  as  perfect  a  piece  of 
work  as  ever  was  made.  He  took  it 
to  pieces  and  put  it  together  again 
twenty  times.  No  manner  of  defect 
was  to  be  discovered,  and  yet  the  watch 
went  intolerably.  At  last,  it  struck 
him  that  possibly  the  balance  might 
have  been  near  a  magnet.  On  apply- 
ing a  needle  to  it,  he  found  his  sus- 
picions true.  Here  was  all  the  mischief. 
The  steel  work  in  the  other  parts 
of  the  watch  had  a  perpetual  influence 
on  its  motions,  and  the  watch  went  as 
well  as  possible  with  a  new  wheel.  If 
the  soundest  mind  be  magnetised  by 
any  predilection,  it  must  act  irregu- 
larly." 

Prejudice  unreasonable. — A  gentle- 
man was  one  day  stoutly  asserting 
that  there  were  no  gold  fields,  except 
in  Mexico  and  Peru.  A  nugget,  dug 
up  in  California,  was  presented  to  him 
as  evidence  against  his  positive  asser- 
tion. He  was  not  in  the  least  discon- 
certed. "  This  metal,  sir,  is,  I  own, 
extremely  like  gold ;  and  you  tell  me 
that  it  passes  as  such  in  the  market, 
having  been  declared  by  the  assayers 
to  be  indistinguishable  from  the 
precious  metal.  All  this  I  will  not 
dispute.  Nevertheless,  the  metal  is 
not  gold  but  auruminium  ;  it  cannot 
be  gold,  because  gold  comes  only  from 
Mexico  and  Peru."  In  vain  was  he 
informed  that  the  geological  formation 
was  similar  in  California  and  Peru, 
and  the  metals  similar ;  he  had  fixed 
in  his  mind  the  conclusion  that  gold 
existed  only  in  Mexico  and  Peru ;  this 
was    a    law   of    nature — he    had    no 

354 


reasons  to  give  why  it  should  be  so ; 
but  such  had  been  the  admitted  fact 
for  many  years,  and  from  it  he  could 
not  swerve. — Lewes. 

Ver.  58.  Unbelief  a  hindrance  to 
miracle. — I.  Our  Lord's  conduct  in 
Nazareth. — He  did  not  perform  many 
miracles  in  Nazareth  because  of  the 
unbelief  of  the  Nazarenes.  This  is  the 
very  opposite  of  what  we  might  have 
been  disposed  to  anticipate.  Surely 
we  should  have  thought  beforehand 
that  where  there  was  most  of  unbelief 
there  would  have  been  the  largest 
employment  of  miracle  in  order  to 
overcome  it.  Miracles  were  for  the 
production  or  the  confirmation  of  faith. 
Moreover,  our  Lord  had  been  brought 
up  in  Nazareth ;  all  His  earliest 
associates  were  there.  His  human 
breast  was  filled  with  patriotism,  and 
therefore,  doubtless.  He  yearned  for 
the  welfare  of  the  Nazarenes.  Yet  it 
is  of  Nazareth,  where  there  was  so 
much  unbelief,  and  so  much  prejudice 
to  be  overcome,  that  we  are  told,  **  He 
did  not  many  mighty  works  there," 
etc.  What  is  the  explanation  of  this  1 
Observe : — 

1.  That  although  Christ  did  not  work 
many  miracles  in  Nazareth,  He  did 
work  some. — "  Not  many  "  implies 
some  (see  Mark  vi.  5).  He  wrought 
sufficient  to  arouse  attention  and  excite 
inquiry  (ver.  54). 

2.  The  evidence  afforded  by  a  miracle 
is  not  enhanced  by  its  frequent  repetition. 
—  The  very  opposite  is  really  the  case. 
The  probability  is  that  had  our  Lord 
multiplied  miracles  in  Nazareth  He 
would  only  thereby  have  enhanced  the 
guilt  and  aggravated  the  final  punish- 
ment of  these  Nazarenes,  inasmuch  as 
the  greater  the  evidence  which  they 
resisted,  the  greater  the  guilt  which 
would  have  attached  to  them,  and  the 
more  severe  the  condemnation  to  which 
they  would  have  been  thereby  ex- 
posed. And  then  there  is  another 
reason : — 

3.  In  the  dealings  of  grace  God  in- 
variably treats  men  as  morally  account- 
able and  responsible  beings. — He  does 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.    MATTHEW. 


CHAP.  XIV 


enough  to  enable  those  to  whom  the 
gospel  is  sent  to  believe,  but  no  more. 
He  does  not  compel  the  men  to  believe. 
But  why  was  it,  after  all,  that  the  un- 
belief of  the  Nazarenes  restrained  the 
wonder-working  arm  of  the  Redeemer  ? 
In  St.  Mark's  Gospel  we  are  told, 
"  He  could  do  no  mighty  works  there 
because  of  their  unbelief,"  as  though  to 
tell  us  that  the  arm  of  the  Redeemer 
was  paralysed  by  the  unbelief  of  those 
amongst  whom  He  sojourned.  I  think 
there  is  a  deep  reason  to  account  for 
this;  and  in  order  to  perceive  that 
reason  we  should  bear  in  mind  the 
two-fold  design  with  which  all  the 
miracles  which  Christ  wrought  upon 
earth  were  performed.  The  miracles 
were  evidences  of  the  Divine  commission 
which   Christ    bore;    but    they   were 


more  than  this.  They  were  types  of 
those  wonders  of  grace  which  Christ  is 
still  able  and  willing  to  work  in  behalf 
of  men's  souls.  In  almost  every 
instance  where  Christ  wrought  a 
miracle.  He  required  in  the  subject  of 
the  miracle  faith,  as  a  condition  of  its 
performance.  Why?  Because  the 
miracle  was  intended  to  foreshadow  His 
mode  of  acting  in  the  economy  of  gi  ace. 
II.  The  lessons  which  our  Lord's 
conduct  afford  to  ourselves.— 1.  If 
not  converted  to  God  under  the  ordinary 
means  of  grace  you  have  no  right  to 
expect  that  extraordinary  means  will  he 
employed,  or  that,  if  employed,  the  result 
vjould  be  different  from  what  it  is. 
2.  That  the  great  secret  why  we  do  not 
make  greater  progress  in  religion  is  unbe- 
lief.— Dr.  Bickersteth,  Bishop  of  Ripon. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
CRITICAL   NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  At  that  timt- Season  (R.V.).  In  our  idiom  we  should  bring  out  the  idea  by  eivine 
a  somewhat  different  turn  to  the  expression,  viz.,  about  that  time  {MoHson).  Herod -Ant7pas^ 
rn?n?r''iV^'  ^r^'  ^^  ^^^-^'.^T-   .^"^^^  ^''  ^^^^^^'«  ^ill  ^«  succeeded  to  the  govern! 

^ Jnf'  ^'  ^®  "  !^^^''  ^^"^  ^i^  dead.-The  policy  of  the  tetrarch  connected  him  with  the 
par^on'o?  xvf^^  ^Tt/  mI' f  *S^^-i^^t^^  ^^^^  Popular  and  rigid  Pharisees,  and  a  com- 
parison ot  xvi.  6,  with  Mark  viii.  15,  at  least  suggests  the  identity  of  the  "  leaven  of 
Herod  with  that  of  the  Sadducees.  The  superstitious  terror  of  a  conscLce  stained  with 
guilt  IS  stronger  than  his  scepticism  as  a  Sadducee  (Plumptre).  Therefore  etc  -(bee  R  v\ 
Icarrr'^''^''''^       having  risen  from  the  dead  he  is  thought  to  be  possessed  of  larger  powers 

Ver.  3.  In  prison  —At  Machaerus,  in  Peraea,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea  near  the 
southern  frontier  o  the  tetrarchy.  Here  Antipas  had  a  palace  and  a  prison  unde^  one  roof 
as  was  common  m  the  East  (cf.  Neh.  iii.  25).  It  was  the  ordinary  arrangemenUn  feudal 
castles  At  Mach^rus  now  M'khaur,  remains  of  buildings  are  still  vifibTe  iLse  are 
probably    he  ruins  of  the  Baptist's  prison.     Herod  was  living  in  this  border  fortress  in  order 

aTr.f '  *''  T\  "'^^  \'  ff'i^^  father-in-law,  Aretas^  He  was  completely  vanquished 
n.^,f  ?'*^"  P^P"\^^-T  ascribed  to  his  treatment  of  John  the  Baptist  (Carr).  Herodias - 
Daugliter  of  Anstobuhis,  son  of  Herod  the  Great.  ^      xxcroaias. 

TlJvTci  t.l^  i"  "f  lawful  Josephus  adds  that  besides  this  motive  for  imprisoning  John, 
nnnvlr  ^  •  ^^'"^  ^^fx!^  ^^"^  ^^^^  «^«"1^  ^^^'i^e  a  popular  tumult  (Ant,  XVIII.  v.  2).  But  this 
TW  fir.?"'''"  "^  ^''^  originated  in  the  Baptist's  denunciations  of  his  adultery  (La,ar\ 
wrenhPrZir^^'^^^'TT^''*^?''".^^^  ""^^^'  ^"^  ^^'  ^^«^«"<5,  if  marriage  it  can  be  called, 
unlawful  (2^^^^^^^^^     ""''"^  '  ^'''  ^^^^  ^^*^  ^^^^^^'  -^«  -i^h  her  step-uncle,  and  thus  triply 

thJrv;hich^At?J^^^^^^  Iianced.-The  kind  of  darning  is  obviously 

malice  irbot^^r^^^^^^  ^^'  ^T'""'  ^''^'     ^^^^^"^  ^"*  shamelessness  or  inveterate 

S-ofession  hfw  S..  '  ""  u'l^'l  ^^""^  ^"'^^^  ^  P"'^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^^  blood  to  practise  such  a 
(^.yS)  assembled  magnates  and  the  Roman  officers  of  the  court  of  Herod 

Ver.  8.  Bein^  before  instructed.-Better,  being  prompted  or  instigated.     The  word  does  not 

355 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


imply  that  the  girl  had  been  instructed  before  she  danced  what  to  ask  for,  and  St.  Mark  dis- 
tinctly states  ( Mark  vi.  24)  that  she  went  out  from  the  banquet  hall  to  ask  her  mother  what  use 
she  was  to  make  of  the  tetrarch's  promise.  The  mother's  absence  shows  that  the  supper  was 
one  for  men  only,  and  that  it  was  among  them,  flushed  as  tbey  were  with  wine,  that  the 
daughter  had  appeared  in  reckless  disregard  of  all  maiden  modesty  {Plumptre).  A  charger. 
— A  wooden  platter  or  trencher. 

Ver.  9.  The  king. — The  tetrarch  is  freely  called  king,  inasmuch  as  he  was  a  sovereign  within 
his  territory  {MorisoTi).  Oath's  sake. — The  sake  of  his  oaths  (K.V.).  It  would  appear  that 
Herod  had  repeated  his  oath ;  perhaps,  in  the  exuberance  of  his  enthusiasm,  he  had  re- 
peated it  {ibid.), 

Ver.  11.  His  head  was  brought. — If  Herod  had  been  at  Tiberias,  his  usual  residence,  the 
messengers  would  have  required  two  days  to  execute  their  commission.  Following  the 
opinion  of  Maldonatus,  Grotius,  and  others,  Meyer  holds  that  the  feast  had  taken  place  in 
Machaerus  itself.  According  to  Hug  and  Wieseler,  it  was  celebrated  at  Julias  or  Livias, 
another  place  of  residence  of  Antipas,  situate  not  far  from  Machaerus,  in  the  mountains  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea.  This  view  seems  to  us  to  have  most  in  its  favour  {Lange). 
If  the  festivity  was  held  in  the  palace  at  Tiberias,  then,  not  improbably,  John  had  been 
removed  to  that  place,  as  Herod  might  wish  to  have  him  under  his  own  eye  (^MoHson). 

Ver.  13.  He  departed  thence. — Matthew  traces  the  withdrawal  from  Capernaum  to  the 
eastern  side  of  the  lake  to  the  news  of  John  Baptist's  martyrdom.  Luke  tells  us  that  Herod 
desired  to  see  Jesus,  and  the  resolve  to  avoid  the  tetrarch  would  be  increased  by  the  sad 
tidings.  Mark  adds  a  second  motive  for  the  passage,  in  the  wish  to  secure  a  period  of  quiet 
for  the  Apostles  who  had  just  returned  from  their  missionary  tour  (Maclareii).  A  desert 
place  apart. — See  Luke  ix.  10.  Probably  near  Bethsaida- Julias,  on  the  north-east  shore  of 
the  lake.  "  In  the  dominions  of  Philip  Jesus  found  a  safe  retreat,  where  His  followers 
might  recover  their  tone  of  mind,  and  prepare  for  going  forth  anew "  {Lange').  Out  of  the 
cities. — Capernaum,  Chorazin,  Bethsaida,  etc. 

Ver.  15.  Evening. — The  Hebrews  reckoned  two  evenings,  viz.  the  first  from  the  ninth 
hour,  or  about  three  o'clock,  until  sunset ;  the  other  from  sunset  onward  (RoMnson).  The 
reference  in  the  text  is  to  the  early  evening.  The  time  is  now  past. — The  fitting  time  for  the 
multitudes  to  disperse,  if  they  are  to  pay  due  attention  to  their  bodily  wants,  has  already 
gone  by  {MorisoTi). 

Ver.  19.  Brake. — The  Jewish  loaves  were  broad  and  thin,  like  cakes ;  hence,  we  never  read 
of  cutting,  but  always  of  breaking  bread  {Holderi). 

Ver.  20.  Twelve  baskets. — The  word  used  here  and  in  the  parallel  places  of  the  other 
three  Gospels,  and  rendered  "  basket "  is  different  from  that  employed  in  the  account  of 
the  feeding  of  the  four  thousand  (xv.  37  ;  Mark  viii.  8).  The  former  word  {k6(j)lvos) 
is  the  basket  used  by  the  Jews  in  travelling,  to  hold  their  food.  The  latter  word  ((tttiz/jis) 
denotes  a  large  basket  capable  of  holding  a  man's  body.  It  is  the  word  used  in  describing 
the  escape  of  St.  Paul  (Acts  ix.  25).  The  constant  observance  of  this  distinction,  which 
would  probably  have  been  lost  in  the  transmission  of  the  narrative  to  a  narrative  at  third  or 
fourth  band,  seems  to  mark  the  impression  produced  on  the  minds  of  eye-witnesses  and  the 
formation  of  the  text  from  immediate  testimony  {Hansel). 

Ver.  22.  Constrained  His  disciples. — Perhaps  they,  too,  were  carried  away  by  the  frenzy 
of  the  time,  and  would  have  joined  the  people  in  proclaiming  Him  King  (John  vi.  15) ;  or 
perhaps  they  were  unwilling  to  leave  Him  behind  among  the  people  at  a  moment  of  such 
excitement  (Laidlaw). 

Ver.  23.  The  evening. — The  later  evening  (see  note  on  ver.  15). 

Ver.  24.  Tossed. — Distressed  (R.V.).  The  expression  in  the  original  is  forcible,  "tor- 
tured by  the  waves,"  writhing  in  throes  of  agony,  as  it  were.  These  sudden  storms  are 
very  characteristic  of  the  lake  of  Gennesaret  ( Carr).  See  Thomson's  "  Land  and  Book," 
chap.  XXV.  p.  374. 

Ver.  25.  The  fourth  watch. — I.e.  between  tliree  and  six  o'clock  in  the  morning.  At  an 
earlier  period  both  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks  divided  the  night  into  three  watches,  each  of 
four  hours.  From  the  time  of  Pompey,  however,  they  adopted  the  Roman  practice  of 
reckoning  four  watches,  each  of  three  hours  {Lange).  Walking  on  the  sea. — We  should 
find  here  the  hint  of  a  precise  element  in  redemption.  The  exact  point  of  the  act  is  not  the 
suspension  of  natural  law.  The  law  of  gravity  is  not  suspended  so  much  as  superseded  by 
the  intervention  of  a  higher  law,  viz.,  the  liberation  of  a  spiritual  or  glorified  body  from  the 
bondage  of  earthly  conditions  {Laidlaw). 

Ver.  26.  It  is  a  spirit,  etc. — An  apparition  (R.V.),  Their  belief  in  the  apparition  of 
spectres  is  here  presupposed.  They  seem  to  have  regarded  the  apparition  as  an  indication 
of  coming  evil  {Lange). 

Ver.  34.  The  iand  of  Gennesaret. — A  plain  two  miles  and  a  half  in  length  and  about  one 
mile  in  breadth.  Josephus  speaks  of  its  beauty  {Wars,  III.  x.  8),  and  Dr.  Robinson  says, 
"Its  fertility,  indeed,  can  hardly  be  exceeded." 

356 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,      chap,  xiv/ 


MAIJV  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  I— 12. 

The  approach  of  danger. — This  passage  is  like  an  episode.  The  name  of  the 
Saviour  is  mentioned  only  at  its  beginning  and  end.  All  the  rest  of  the  story 
is  an  account  of  the  way  in  which  Herod,  the  tetrarch,  was  led  to  put  John  the 
Baptist  to  death  ;  of  what  there  was,  on  the  one  hand,  to  deter  him  from  com- 
mitting so  great  a  crime ;  and  what  there  was,  on  the  other,  to  bring  it  about. 
The  consideration  of  these  points  will  probably  show  us  why  we  have  them 
related,  viz.  because  of  the  Hght  they  throw  on  the  position  of  the  Saviour  at  this 
particular  time. 

I.  What  there  was  to  deter. — There  was,  first,  the  general  opinion  of  the 
"  multitude  "  of  that  day  respecting  the  Baptist.  They  all  "  counted  him  a 
prophet "  indeed  (ver.  5).  It  was  a  serious  thing  to  lay  hands  on  any  one  who 
was  even  believed  to  stand  in  such  a  highly  exceptional  place.  Prophets  had  not 
been  at  all  plentiful  for  many  years  now  in  the  land.  To  touch  this  "  prophet," 
therefore,  now  at  last  vouchsafed,  was  a  very  serious  thiug,  if  there  was  any 
degree  of  truth  in  the  common  belief.  Even,  indeed,  if  there  were  none  at  all 
in  it,  such  a  step  was  one  which  involved  no  slight  measure  of  risk.  The 
family  of  the  Herods  had  found  it  well  worth  while,  from  a  worldly  point  of 
view,  to  profess  respect  for  the  religious  opinions,  and  even  prejudices,  of  the  Jews ; 
witness  the  temple  itself  in  the  condition  of  glory  to  which  Herod  the  Great  had 
brought  it  in  direct  pursuance  of  a  policy  of  that  kind.  To  kill  John  the 
Baptist,  therefore,  in  the  circumstances  named,  would  be  to  reverse  that  policy  in 
a  most  dangerous  and  ostentatious  degree.  It  would  be  to  outrage  the  belief  of 
the  "  multitudes"  instead  of  respecting  it,  and  that  in  a  most  scandalous  way. 
Well,  therefore,  might  one  whose  family  position  had  not  always  been  in- 
dependent of  popular  feeling  (cf.  the  probable  reference  of  Luke  xix.  14), 
hesitate  on  this  account  before  determining  to  put  John  the  Baptist  to  death. 
Also,  next,  there  was  much  in  Herod^s  own  opinion  of  that  eminent  servant  of 
God  to  make  him  hesitate  before  doing  so.  Evidently  he  had  some  idea  himself 
that  John  was  truly  a  prophet.  Elsewhere,  indeed,  (Mark  vi.  20)  we  are  told 
expressly  that  he  knew  *'  that  he  was  a  righteous  man  and  a  holy,  and  kept 
him  safe."  As  also  that  "  when  he  heard  him,  he  did  many  things  (so  some 
ancient  authorities),  and  heard  him  gladly."  Even  here,  also,  where  nothing 
is  said  expressly  to  quite  the  same  effect,  there  are  several  indications,  hardly 
less  strong,  of  the  same  impression  within  him.  It  is  clear,  e.g.  that  he  thought 
John  the  Baptist  a  kind  of  man  in  connection  with  whom  the  performance  of 
miracles  to  almost  any  extent — not  excluding  even  the  greatest  of  all,  that  of 
being  raised  again  from  the  dead — might  not  unreasonably  be  expected  (ver.  2). 
Most  awful,  therefore,  even  to  his  mind,  must  have  been  the  actual  step  of  ordering 
such  a  man's  death — the  death  of  one  who  might  be  expected,  afterwards,  to  be 
brought  back  again  from  the  dead  !  Be  his  words  what  they  might  be  in  other 
respects  (ver.  4),  it  was  no  light  thing  to  put  an  end  to  them  by  taking 
his  life  ! 

II.  What  brought  it  about. — Herod's  own  love  of  sensual  indulgence  was  the 
first  thing  to  do  this.  Already  the  strength  of  this  evil  influence  had  leaped 
over  several  hindrances  in  its  way.  Already  it  had  led  him  to  no  small  measure 
of  crime.  He  had  put  away  one  who  belonged  to  him  of  right ;  he  had  taken 
one  who  belonged  to  another,  and  that  other  his  "  brother  ";  he  had  done  this 
notwithstanding  the  plain  remonstrances  of  a  man  whom  he  looked  upon  (see 
above)  as  a  prophet  (ver.  4) ;  and  lastly,  because  that  man  had  still  continued 
to  disapprove  of  his  conduct,  he  had  taken  him  away  from  his  work  and  confined 
him  in  prison,  and  even  thought  of  his  death  (ver.  5).  In  this  way,  therefore, 
he  had  placed  himself  on  the  incline  which  sloped  down  to  that  murder ;  and 

357 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


had  begun  that  in  his  heart  which,  if  it  went  on,  would  end  in  that  crime 
(cf.  James  i.  15;  1  John  iii.  15).  The  bitter  enmity  oi  Herod's  partner  in  evil  w&s 
the  next  thing  which  helped  to  bring  this  crying  consummation  about.  This  is 
one  of  the  evils — the  great  evils — of  partnership  in  trangression.  It  seldom 
happens  that  both  partners  are  equally  advanced  in  obduracy  and  perverseness. 
It  happens  still  more  seldom  that  the  lefeS  advanced  of  the  two  holds  the  other  one 
back.  How  should  this  be  indeed  when  they  are  both  on  that  "  slope  "  of  which 
we  have  spoken  1  Does  not  that  slope  itself,  rather,  give  all  its  advantage  to 
that  which  is  already,  so  to  speak,  the  naturally  heavier  will  of  the  two  ?  And 
must  it  not  be,  therefore,  that,  in  the  end,  they  both  come  to  the  foot, 
whatever  reluctance  on  the  part  of  one  of  them  there  may  be  for  a  time  ?  It 
was  so  in  this  case,  because  of  yet  another  cause  of  which  we  are  told.  Shall  we 
say  there  came  that  which  tripped  up  Herod  as  he  was  trying  to  steady  himself 
on  that  *'  slope  "  ?  If  we  did,  it  would  not  be  an  inapt  description  of  what  finally 
led  to  his  fall.  The  "  daughter  of  Herodias  "  came  in  and  so  ''  danced  "  as  to 
make  "  the  king  "  dance  in  thought,  as  it  were,  and  "  promise  with  an  oath  to 
give  her  whatsoever  she  should  ask."  She,  "  put  forward "  by  her  mother 
— apparently  beforehand — asked  for  the  head  of  the  Baptist.  He,  soreh 
"  grieved,"  and  still  most  unwilling  to  do  so,  felt  constrained  to  give  way.  He 
feared  his  "oath";  he  feared  them  that  "sat"  by;  he  feared,  in  short,  to  do 
right;  and  so  became  distinguished  ever  afterwards  as  the  "Herod"  \\ho  put 
John  the  Baptist  to  death. 

This  was  the  man  who  had  now  heard  of  the  miracles  of  Jesus.  What 
was  to  be  expected,  that  being  the  case  ?  That  the  two  would  soon  be  brought 
into  contact,  if  things  went  on  as  before.  That  this  would  lead  necessarily. 
Herod  being  such  as  he  was,  to  their  being  brought  into  conflict.  And  that  this, 
finally,  would  expose  the  Saviour  to  a  danger  not  known  by  Him  previously, 
even  to  that  of  which,  probably  some  time  after,  we  read  in  Luke  xiii.  31. 
From  this  time,  therefore,  we  must  look  on  the  Saviour  as  not  so  free  as  He 
had  been;  and  as  moving  about  with  yet  another  thundercloud  over  His  head. 
Here  He  is  in  the  country  and  under  the  notice  of  the  murderer  of  the  Baptist 
— of  another  Ahab,  as  it  were,  sitting  to  rule  with  another  Jezebel  by  his  side. 
The  position  adds  to  the  pathos  as  well  as  to  the  solemnity  of  all  that  He 
bore  for  our  sakes. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Yers.  1-12.  The  ma/rtyrdom  of  John.  done.  There  is  a  resurrection  of  deeds 
— It  takes  a  long  time  for  news  of  as  well  as  of  bodies.  We  may  best 
Christ  to  reach  the  ears  of  Herod,  gather  up  the  lessons  of  the  narrative 
Peasants  hear  of  Him  before  princes  by  taking  the  actors  in  the  tragedy, 
whose  thick  palace  walls  and  crowds  of  I.  We  have  in  Herod  the  depths 
courtiers  shut  out  truth.  Note  the  of  evil  possible  to  a  weak  char- 
alarm  of  the  conscience-stricken  k'ng.  acter.  The  singular  double  which 
In  his  terror  he  makes  confidants  of  his  he,  Herodias,  and  John  present  to 
slaves,  overleaping  the  barriers  of  posi-  Ahab,  Jezebel,  and  Elijah,  has  often 
tion  in  his  need  of  some  ears  to  pour  been  noticed.  In  both  cases  a  weak 
his  fears  into.  He  was  right  in  king  is  drawn  opposite  ways  by  the 
believing  that  he  had  not  finished  with  stronger -willed  temptress  at  his  side, 
John,  and  in  expecting  to  meet  him  and  by  the  stern  ascetic  from  the 
again  with  mightier  power  to  accuse  desert.  How  John  had  found  his 
and  condemn.  *'  If  'twere  done  when  way  into  "  kings'  houses  "  we  do  not 
'tis  done,"  says  Macbeth;  but  it  is  not  know;  but,  as  he  carried  thither   his 

358 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


undaunted    boldness    of    plain-spoken  a  strain  of  sensuous  passion  to  their 

preaching  of  morality  and  repentance,  vices,    which     heightens    the    horror, 

it  was  inevitable  that  he  should  find  Many  a  shameless  woman  would  have 

his  way  from  the  palace  to  the  dungeon.  shrunk    from    sullying    a    daughter's 

1.  In  this  vncked  world  weak  men  childhood  by  sending  her  to  play  the 
will  always  be  wicked  men  ;  for  it  is  part  of  a  shameless  dancing-girl  before 
less  trouble  to  consent  than  to  resist,  a  crew  of  half -tipsy  revellers,  and  from 
and  there  are  more  siren  voices  to  teaching  her  young  lips  to  ask  for 
whisper  *'  Come "  than  prophets  to  murder.  But  Herodias  sticks  at 
thunder  "  It  is  not  lawful."  Strength  nothing,  and  is  as  insensible  to  the 
of  will  is  needful  for    all    noble   life.  duty   of   a   mother   as    to   that   of   a 

2.  We  may  learn  from  this  man,  wife.  We  have  a  hideous  picture  of 
also,  how  far  we  may  go  on  the  road  corrupted  womanhood.  The  criminal- 
of  obedience  to  God's  will,  and  yet  leave  ity  of  the  daughter  largely  depends 
it  at  last.  What  became  of  all  his  upon  her  age,  of  which  we  have  no 
eager  listening,  of  his  partial  obedience  knowledge.  Probably  she  was  old 
(Mark  vi.  20),  of  his  care  to  keep  enough  to  be  her  mother's  fellow- 
John  safe  from  Herodias'  malice  1  All  conspirator,  rather  than  her  tool,  and 
vanished  like  early  dew.  What  became  had  learned  only  too  well  her  lessons 
of  his  conscience -stricken  alarms  on  of  impurity  and  cruelty.  She  inherited 
hearing  of  Christ  1  Did  they  lead  and  was  taught  evil ;  that  was  her 
to  any  deep  convictions  ?  They  faded  misfortune.  She  made  it  her  own ; 
away  and  left  him  harder  than  before.  that  was  her  crime. 

Convictions  not  followed  out  ossify  the  III.  There  is  something  dramatically 

heart.     If  he  had  sent  for  Christ,  and  appropriate  in  the  silent  death  of  the 

told  Him  his  fears  all  might  have  been  lonely  forerunner. — The  faint  noise  of 

well.     3.  He  shows  us,  too,  the  intimate  revelry  may  have  reached  his  ears,  as 

connection  of  all  sins.      The  common  he  brooded  there,  and  wondered  if  the 

root  of  every  sin  is  selfishness,  and  the  coming  King  would  never  come  for  bis 

shapes  which  it  takes  are  protean  and  enlargement.     The  King  has  come  and 

interchangeable.     Sensual  crimes  and  set  His  servant  free,  sending  him  to  pre- 

cruelty   are    closely    akin.       Sins   are  pare  His  way  before  Him,  in  the  dim 

gregarious,  and  a  solitary  sin  is  more  regions  beyond.     A  world  where  Herod 

seldom   seen    than   a   single    swallow.  sits  in  the  festal  chamber,  and  John 

4.  Herod  is  an  illustration,  too,   of  a  lies   headless    in    the   dungeon,    needs 

conscience  fantastically  sensitive,  while  some  one  to  set  it  right, 

it  is  dead  to  real  crimes.      He  has  no  IV.    It   needed    some    courage   for 

twinges  for  his  sin  with  Herodias,  and  John's     disciples     to     come    to    that 

no  efiective  ones  at  killing  John,  but  gloomy,    blood  -  stained    fortress,    and 

he  thinks  it  would  be  wrong  to  break  bear  away  the  headless  trunk  which 

his  oath.       The  two   things    often   go  scornful  cruelty  had  flung  out  to  rot 

together ;     and    many    a    brigand    in  unburied.      When   reverent   love   and 

Calabria,  who  would  cut  a  throat  with-  sorrow  had  done  their  task  what  was 

out  hesitation,  would  not  miss  mass  or  the  little  flock  without  a  shepherd  to 

rob  without  a  little  image  of  the  Virgin  do  ?      They    show     by    their     action 

in  his  hat.  that  their    master   had   profited  from 

II.  The  next  actors  in  the  tragedy  his  last  message  to  Jesus.      At  once 

are  Herodias  and  her  daughter. — Her  they  turn   to    Him,   and,    no    doubt, 

portrait  is  drawn  in  a  few  strokes,  but  the  bulk   of   them   were   absorbed   in 

they  are  enough.     In  strength  of  will  the  body  of  His  followers.     The  best 

and  unscrupulous  carelessness  of  human  thing    any  of   us   can   do   is   to    "  go 

life  she  is  the   sister  of  Jezebel,  and  and    tell   Jesus "   our   loneliness,    and 

curiously    like     Shakespeare's     awful  let  it  bind  us  more  closely  to  him. — 

creation.  Lady  Macbeth;  but  she  adds  A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

■369* 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Miseries  of  a  guilty  con- 
science.—I.  Conscience  is  no  respecter 
of  persons. 

II.  A  guilty  conscience  possesses  a 
retentive  memory. 

III.  Is  exposed  not  only  to  real,  but 
to  imaginary  woes. 

IV.  Will  torment  a  man  in  spite  of 
all  his  intellectual  theories  and  all 
the  articles  of  his  religious  creed. — 
Homilist. 

Vers.  3-5.  John  the  Baptisfs  death. 
— 1 .  Faithful  ministers  will  not  spare 
to  tell  even  kings  their  sins.  2.  It  is 
no  new  thing  that  kings  and  great 
men  take  it  evil  to  be  reproved  of 
their  sins  and  are  ready  to  persecute 
faithful  preachers.  3.  The  Lord  can 
make  any  means  serve  to  keep  His 
servant's  life  so  long  as  He  pleaseth, 
as  here  He  maketh  the  fear  of  the 
people  a  means  of  John's  safety  for  a 
time.  4.  Wicked  men  do  not  abstain 
from  any  sin  but  for  worldly  reasons  ; 
they  do  nothing  for  regard  to  God. 
Herod  "  feared  the  multitude." — David 
Dickson, 

Ver.  3.  The  influence  of  women  on 
kings. — A  princess  of  the  house  of 
Bourbon,  on  being  asked  why  the 
reigns  of  queens  were,  in  general,  more 
prosperous  than  the  reigns  of  kings, 
replied,  "  Because,  under  kings,  women 
govern  ;  under  queens,  men." 

Vers.  6-11.  Herod's  sacrifice  of  John 
the  Baptist. — 1.  When  a  man  hath  a 
mind  to  an  evil  work,  a  time  shall  be 
found  fit  for  the  doing  of  it.  2.  A 
time  of  carnal  feasting  is  a  time  for 
plotting  and  practising  against  God's 
servants.  3.  A  foolish  and  graceless 
heart  is  easily  taken  with  a  small 
delight,  as  Herod  is  marvellously 
pleased  with  a  damsel's  dancing. 
4.  A  foolish  delight  is  able  to  en- 
snare a  man  for  practising  a  wicked 
work,  as  Herod's  vain  delight  engageth 
him  in  a  rash  general  promise  and 
oath,  and  so  he  is  engaged  in  the 
murder  of  the  Lord's  servant.  5.  Such 
as  the  parents  are,  such  is  the  educa- 

360 


tion  of  their  children.  6.  The  malice 
of  the  wicked  against  reprovers  of 
their  sin  is  deadly.  John  Baptist's 
head  must  pass  for  his  reproof  of 
incest.  7.  Malicious  persons  will  pre- 
fer the  satisfaction  of  their  malice  to 
anything  else.  Herodias  had  rather 
have  John's  head  than  half  a  kingdom. 
8.  A  graceless  soul  may  have  a  wrest- 
ling with  his  lusts  ere  he  commit  a 
sin,  and  may  be  sorrowful  for  carnal 
reasons  to  do  some  wicked  deed,  as 
Herod  here  is  loth  to  kill  John.  9.  A 
natural  conscience  is  not  able  to  resist 
a  temptation,  though  it  may  restrain 
a  man  for  a  time,  for  Herod,  though 
he  be  sorry,  yet  he  yieldeth.  10.  A 
sinner  ensnared  is  holden  by  bands 
which  he  might  lawfully  break,  as  Herod 
here  by  a  rash  oath.  11.  That  which 
indeed  is  a  man's  shame  will  appear 
unto  a  foolish  sinner  to  be  his  credit ; 
and  when  credit  appears,  it  will  more 
prevail  with  the  wicked  than  either 
conscience  or  carnal  fear.  Herod  here 
for  their  sakes  that  sat  with  him  at 
meat  doth  yield  that  John  shall  lose 
his  head.  12.  God's  dearest  servants 
may  be  taken  away  by  a  light  occasion, 
after  that  the  Lord  hath  ended  His 
work  by  them,  as  here  John  dieth  at 
the  desire  of  a  wanton  lass.  13.  The 
bodies  of  the  saints  may  be  abused 
after  death  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
persecutors,  as  John's  head  here  is 
made  a  spectacle  to  his  foes. — Davia 
Dickson. 

Ver.  6.  Herod s  hall-room. — 1.  Before 
the  ball. — The  news  of  Christ's  miracles 
had  reached  Herod.  He  was  startled. 
Who  is  this  Jesus?  John  risen  from 
the  dead  ?  Why  these  fears  ?  John 
had  reproved  Herod,  and  Herod  im- 
prisoned John  for  eighteen  months. 
The  guilt  of  an  unlawful  marriage  was 
on  his  conscience.  He  rushes  into 
gaiety  to  drown  his  troubles.  The 
pleasures  of  the  feast  and  the  ball- 
room "minister  to  a  mind  diseased." 
Men  fly  to  the  ball,  the  theatre,  the 
card-table,  the  tavern,  not  simply  for 
pleasure's  sake,  and  to  "taste  life's 
glad  moments,"  but  to  drown  care,  to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


smother  conscience,  to  laugh  away  the 
impressions  of  the  last  sermon,  to  soothe 
an  uneasy  mind,  to  relieve  the  burden, 
or  to  pluck  out  the  sting  of  conscious 
guilt !  O  slaughter-houses  of  souls  ! 
O  shambles,  reeking  with  blood  ! 

II.  During  the  ball. — A  gay  scene. 
The  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the 
eye,  and  the  pride  of  life  are  there. 
AH  that  can  minister  to  these  are 
there.  Herod  is  there,  stupefying 
conscience.  The  fair  daughter  is  there, 
in  all  the  splendour  of  gay  wanton- 
ness. The  vile  mother  is  there, 
lascivious  and  revengeful.  Courtiers 
are  there  in  pomp  and  glitter.  Music 
and  mu'th  are  there.  The  dance  and 
the  song.  But  some  are  absent :  John 
is  not  tl  ere  ;  his  disciples  are  not  there. 
Jesus  is  not  there,  nor  His  disciples. 
They  were  present  at  the  marriage 
festival  at  Cana ;  but  this  ball-room  is 
not  for  them.  It  is  not  the  place  for  a 
follower,  either  of  Jesus  or  of  John. 
The  beauty  of  "  this  world "  is  one 
thing,  and  the  beauty  of  the  "world 
to  come"  another.  These  scenes  of 
vanity  are  instructive ;  they  present 
the  world  in  its  most  fascinating  as- 
pects. .  .  .  These  balls  are  the  most 
seductive  specimens  of  pure  worldliness 
that  can  be  found.  Surely  the  god  of 
this  world  knows  how  to  enchant  both 
eye  and  ear.  Here  the  natural  man  is 
at  home.  It  is  a  place  where  God  is 
not ;  where  the  cross  is  not  ;  where 
such  things  as  sin  and  holiness  must 
not  be  named.  It  is  a  ball  where  the 
knee  is  not  bent  except  in  the  waltz ; 
where  music  in  the  praise  of  Jesus  is 
not  heard  ;  where  the  book  of  God  and 
the  name  of  God  would  be  out  of 
place  ;  where  you  might  speak  of 
Jupiter,  Venus,  Apollo,  but  not  of 
Jesus.  ...  It  was  during  that  ball 
that  the  murder  of  John  was  plotted 
and  consummated  ("  Lust  hard  by 
hate,"  Milton) ;  that  a  drunken,  lust- 
ful king,  urged  on  by  two  women, 
perpetrated  that  foul  deed.  .  .  .  Such 
are  the  masquerades  of  time.  .  .  . 
Such  was  the  coarse  worldliness  of  old 
days ;  but  is  the  refined  worldliness  of 
modern  times  less  fatal  to  the  soul? 


.  .  .  "  Ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses, 
know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the 
world  is  enmity  with  God  ?  " 

III.  After  the  ball.— Of  the  chief 
actors  in  this  ball-room  murder  nothing 
more  is  said.  They  pass  to  the  judg- 
ment seat.  They  have  sent  John 
before  them  to  receive  his  reward.  .  .  . 
His  Hps  are  silenced,  and  his  disciples 
bury  the  body ;  then  they  go  and  tell 
Jesus.  Jesus  hears  of  the  murder  and 
is  silent !  .  .  ,  This  is  the  day  of 
endurance  and  patient  suffering.  The 
day  of  recompense  is  coming. — H. 
Bonar,  D.D. 

Murderous  though  beautiful. — Beau- 
tiful, innocent -looking  creatures  are 
sometimes  deadly  in  their  influence, 
The  Lucilia  honiinivorax  is  rather 
more  than  the  third  of  an  inch  in 
length  ;  the  head  is  large,  downy,  and 
of  a  golden  yellow.  The  thorax  is 
dark  blue  and  very  brilliant,  with  gay 
reflections  of  purple.  The  wings'  are 
transparent,  yet  prettily  tinged  ;  their 
margins  as  well  as  the  feet  are  black. 
This  innocent- looking  insect  is  very 
beautiful,  yet  it  is  an  assassin.  M. 
Ooquerel  has  informed  us  that  it  some- 
times occasions  the  death  of  those 
wretched  convicts  who  have  been 
transported  to  the  distant  penitentiary 
of  Cayenne.  When  this  fly  gets  into 
the  mouth  or  nostrils  it  lays  its  eggs 
there,  and  when  they  are  changed  into 
larvae,  the  death  of  the  victim  generally 
follows.  The  larvae  are  lodged  in  the 
interior  of  the  nasal  orifices  and  the 
frontal  sinuses,  and  their  mouths  are 
armed  with  two  very  sharp  mandibles. 
They  have  been  known  to  reach  the 
ball  of  the  eye,  and  to  gangrene  the 
eyelids.  They  enter  the  mouth,  corrode 
and  devour  the  gums  and  the  entrance 
of  the  throat,  so  as  to  transform  those 
parts  into  a  mass  of  putrid  flesh,  a 
heap  of  corruption.  What  an  em- 
blem are  these  of  the  pleasures  which, 
in  an  unsuspicious  form,  are  apt  to 
fasten  themselves  upon  man — beau- 
tiful in  appearance,  yet  ruinous  in 
result  ! — Scientific  Illustrations  amd 
Symbols. 

361 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Remarkable  days  of  high  festival  are 
accompanied  with  great  danger  of 
falling  into  sin. — Bengel. 

Dancing. — A  sedate  and  devout 
Christian  leaves  dancing  to  goats, 
calves,  and  children,  and  orders  his 
steps  according  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  not  the  directions  of  the  dancing- 
master. — Hedinger. 

Yer.  9.  Herod  an  example  of  an 
alleged  necessity  of  sinning. — There  is 
a  world  of  sad  meaning  in  the  little 
word  that  quaUfies  the  intimation  of 
Herod's  grief.  "  The  king  was  exceed- 
ing   sorry ;   yet "    (Mark    vi.    26). 

"  He    was    sorry  ;    nevertheless ." 

The  full  half  of  all  the  sins  of  men  on 
earth  are  committed  in  this  very  way, 
with  a  feeling  of  sorrow  and  an  excuse 
of  necessity.  But  yet  even  this  most 
trimming  waverer — "  but  yet  " — may 
demand  a  hearing.  He  has  his  rea- 
sons— "  For  his  oath's  sake,"  etc.  And 
they  are  strong  enough  reasons;  an 
oath  in  heaven  and  a  pledge  on  earth 
— the  entanglement  of  a  double  obliga- 
tion, on  which  God  above  and  man 
below  may  equally  insist.  Are  the 
reasons  valid  ?  Such  a  question  we 
need  scarcely  ask  or  answer.  But  are 
they  alleged  honestly,  and  in  good 
faith  ?  This  is  a  more  interesting 
inquiry,  and  in  dealing  with  it  we 
must  distinguish  between  excuses  of 
weakness  and  apologies  for  wilfulness. 

1.  Is  it  a  case  of  weakness  ? — Is  it 
in  all  sincerity  that  you  pitifully  urge 
the  plea — You  have  gone  too  far  to 
draw  back?  You  would  fain  do  so; 
but  yet .  Certainly  you  are  en- 
titled to  sympathy.  It  may  be  proper, 
however,  to  ask  you,  in  all  tenderness, 
two  questions  deeply  affecting  your 
responsibility  : — 

1.  How  came  you  into  such  a 
position  ? — You  are  pledged  before 
God  ;  there  is  your  oath.  Now,  this 
may  mean  that  you  really  have  in- 
volved yourselves  so  deeply  as  to  admit 
of  a  question  of  conscience  or  scruple 
of  religion  being  raised  when  you 
attempt  to  draw  back.     The  far  more 

362 


probable  supposition  is  that  what  you 
mistake  for  a  sacred  pledging  of  your- 
selves in  the  sight  of  God,  is  really 
nothing  more  than  your  being  com- 
mitted in  your  own  opinion.  You 
have  formed  a  resolution  more  or  less 
deliberately,  and  it  is  a  mortification  of 
your  self-esteem  to  find  that  you  n.'ust 
alter  your  course.  And  then,  you  are 
pledged,  not  only  in  your  own  mind, 
but  in  the  judgment  or  opinion  of  men. 
Have  you  learned  that  wickedness 
makes  a  tool  of  wickedness"?  That 
tutors  in  sin  invariably  become  tyrants  ? 
Truly  you  are  to  be  pitied.  But  the 
question  must  be  pressed  upon  you : 
How  came  you  into  a  position  so  em- 
barassing?  (1)  That  you  may  appre- 
hend and  feel  your  guilt.  There  is  a 
risk  of  your  being  fondled  in  the 
cradle  of  a  spurious  sentimental  sym- 
pathy, when  it  would  be  far  better  for 
you  to  be  startled,  were  it  even  as  by 
the  alarum  of  judgment  and  the  trump 
of  doom.  (2)  That  you  may  not  des- 
pair of  recovery.  The  listless  impres- 
sion of  utter  helplessness  that  creeps 
into  the  soul  when  folly  or  excess  has 
contrived  to  cast  its  lethargic  spell 
over  you,  is  like  the  stupor  that  steals 
upon  the  senses  of  the  benumbed 
traveller  as,  weary  and  wayworn,  amid 
the  northern  ice,  he  yields  to  the 
seduction  of  an  insidious  slumber.  It 
is  real  kindness  to  break,  however 
painfully,  that  sleep  of  death. 

2.  What  really  hinders  your  escape 
from  your  present  embarrassment  2 — 
Assuming  still  that  yours  is  a  case  of 
weakness  rather  than  wilfulness,  we 
ask  you  to  consider  the  real  value  and 
force  of  your  excuses.  To  what  do 
they  amount  ?  Your  vow,  your  oath 
— what  is  that  but  a  feeling  of  false 
pride  ?  The  opinion  or  expectation  of 
your  fellow- men — what  is  that  but  a 
feeling  of  false  shame  ?  Even  at  the 
last  hour,  might  not  Herod  have 
frankly  owned  a  fault  in  himself,  and 
fearlessly  disowned  the  fellowship  of 
those  "  who  sat  at  meat  with  him  "  ? 
Had  he  summoned  up  courage  enough 
to  abandon  his  false  pride  and  his 
false  shame,  that  night,  so  dark  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


bloody,  might  have  been  to  him,  ere  it  II.  His  disciples  came  and  took  up 

closed,  the  dawn  of  a  bright  and  blessed  the  body  and   buried   it. — They  who 

day.  might   not   minister  to   tiie  life    shall 

II.  But  the  partition  between  weak-  minister  to  the  death.     No  jealousy, 

ness  and  wilfulness  is  "very  slight  and  no   tyranny,  survives   death ;    so  now 

tender. — The    growth    of    this  wilful  the  disciples  are  free  to  come  and  take 

spirit  may  be  traced  :  \.  In  your  Trior e  the  body. 

deliberate  justifying  of  yourselves.    2.  In  III.  Unhappy   that    sorrow   which 

your  more  daring  defiance  of  God.  cannot  tell  itself  to  Jesus. — There  are 

We  close  with  two  brief   remarks,  such   sorrows.     The  burning  fever  of 

1.  How  unsatisfying,  at  the  best,  are  passion,  whether  in  the  form  of  baffled 

these  pleas  !     2.  And  how  unsubstan-  lust,  or  dissatisfied  ambition,  or  self- 

tial  ! — R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.  defeated  speculation,  will  not,  scarcely 

can,  go,  quite  as  it  is,  to  tell  Jesus. 

Herod^s  oath. —  There  are  two  things  And  yet  if  it  would,  it  would  not  be 

required  in  an   oath  :    1.  That   it   be  cast  out.     Little  do  we  know,  the  best 

lawfully  taken.     2.  That  it  be  lawfully  of  us,  of  the  largeness  of  that  heart. — 

observed   and    kept.     Herod   offended  C.  J.  Vaughan^  D.D. 
against  both  these.    For  :  1.  He  sinned 

against  the  first  because  he  took  an  John's  burial. — 1.  The  faithful  must 

oath    in   a   vain    and    foolish    thing,  not  be  ashamed  at  the  suffering  of  the 

without  any  necessity.     2.  He  sinned  saints,  but  testify  their  respect  to  the 

against   the   second,    for   he   was   not  living   and    to   the    dead.       2.  When 

content  to  swear  foolishly,  but,  which  pastors  are  cut  off  men  must  resort  to 

was  worse,  he   did  wickedly  perform  the  Chief  Shepherd  so  much  the  more, 

and  grant  what  was  wickedly  desired.  — David  Dickson. 
— Richard  Ward. 

Telling  Jesus. — I.  They  went   and 

Ver,  12.  A  solitary  death  ;  a  great  told. — 1.  Human   sorrow  must  speak. 

sorrow. — I.  Our  text  tells  of  a  death.  2.  Will    speak    to    the    tried    friend. 

— It  was  a  sudden  and  violent  death.  3.  Will  make  an  effort  to  find  him — 

It  was  a  solitary  death.     No  congenial  they  went. 

spirit  was  with  the  departing  to  cheer  II.  They  told  Jesus. — L  He  waited 

him  with  a  thought  of  hope  or  with  a  to  be  told.     2.  Was  willing  to  be  told, 

breath  of  prayer.     The  life  itself  went  3.  Encouraged  them  to  tell.     Go  and 

out  in  inactivity.     It  might  seem,  man  tell    Jesus    your    doubts,   fears,    sins, 

might   call  it,   a   failure.      Its   latest  sorrows. — J.  C.  Gray. 
days  were  its  least  brilliant. 

MAIJSr  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  13-21. 

Jesus  in  the  desert. — Partly  because  of  the  danger  implied  in  the  previous 
verses  (note  "heard"  in  ver.  13),  and  partly  perhaps  for  the  reasons  implied  in 
Mark  vi.  31  and  John  vi.  4,  our  Saviour  seems  now  to  be  desirous  of  absolute 
retirement.  Hence  His  "  withdrawing,"  His  wishing  to  be  "  apart,"  His 
departure  to  the  '*  desert,"  perhaps,  also,  His  going  by  sea.  This  desire  of 
His,  however,  was  very  far  from  being  gratified  at  the  time.  Instead  of  retire- 
ment, on  the  contrary,  when  He  reaches  the  place  of  His  destination,  and 
"comes  forth"  from  His  boat  (so  some),  He  finds  a  vast  and  thronging 
multitude  awaiting  His  coming — persons  who  had  come  thither  "  on  foot " 
(ver.  13),  apparently  with  much  exertion  (Mark  vi.  33),  from  all  the  neighbour- 
ing "  cities."  It  was  a  singular  and,  so  far,  an  entire  disappointment.  He  had 
fled  from  the  "  cities,"  only  to  find  that  the  "  cities "  had  already  come  to  the 
"  desert."     This  lends  all  the  greater  significance  to  the  story  of  "  compassion  " 

363 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


which  follows,  and  more  especially  to  those  two  features  of  it  in  which  it  stands 
out  from  anything  told  us  before  :  the  extreme  need,  viz.,  which  it  describes  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  abundant  supply  of  which  it  tells  us  on  the  other. 

I.  The  extreme  need. — One  peculiarity  of  this  need  was  to  be  found  in  the 
fact  that  it  was  of  singularly  wide  application.  In  previous  ^'  multitudes  "  we 
read  of  many  whole,  and  some  only  that  were  "  sick."  Here  we  read  of  a  kind 
of  need  from  which  none  present  were  exempt.  Also  the  need  in  question  was 
of  a  most  serious  kind.  It  was  nothing  less  than  the  need  of  that  which  was 
necessary  to  all — of  the  "  staff  of  life  " — of  daily  bread — of  that  which  the 
strongest  as  well  as  the  weakest  require — of  that  without  which  the  very 
strongest  soon  find  all  their  strength  gone.  Further  yet,  the  need  in  question 
was  of  a  most  aggravated  description.  It  was  a  need  which  had  come  on  the 
multitudes  late  in  the  day  (ver.  15),  apparently,  as  we  have  seen,  after  unusual 
bodily  exertions ;  certainly  in  a  place  where  there  was  nothing  (naturally)  to 
meet  it ;  and  with  no  places  within  reach — even  if  within  reach  before  nightfall 
— except  certain  "  villages,"  or  small  collections  of  inhabitants  who  were  hardly 
likely,  on  that  very  account,  to  have  a  sufficient  extra  supply  on  hand  for 
multitudes  such  as  these.  And  even  if  they  had,  it  would  be  a  very  hard  case 
for  such  famishing  multitudes  to  have  to  go  far  at  that  hour  for  such  a 
*'  scramble  "  for  food  !  Lastly,  the  need  was,  for  all  this,  of  a  most  undeniable 
kind.  If  there  was  small  hope  of  food  at  a  distance,  humanly  speaking  there 
was  none  at  all  on  the  spot.  The  search  now  made  on  this  point — or  that  had 
been  made  previously — proved  this  to  the  hilt.  Not  impossibly  it  was  this  very 
fact  which  had  previously  led  the  disciples  to  suggest  sending  the  starving  people 
away  to  the  villages,  as  being  the  only  alternative  in  such  circumstances,  of  which 
they  could  think.  Certainly  now,  when  they  report  the  result  of  their  inquiry 
to  the  Saviour,  it  has  the  most  desperate  look.  "  We  have  here  but  five  loaves 
and  two  fishes" — two  "  small  fishes"  (John  vi.  9) — in  other  words,  perhaps,  con- 
sidering the  probable  size  of  these  "  loaves,"  and  the  famishing  condition  of  the 
multitudes,  about  sufficient  for  one  !  It  was  almost  less  than  having  nothing 
at  all !  It  undoubtedly  was  so  in  regard  to  its  effect  on  the  feeling  of  need. 
Only  that  between  all  these  and  starvation  ! 

II.  The  abundant  supply. — This  is  brought  before  us  with  great  vividness  in 
various  ways.  It  is  so  first  by  the  unmistakable  publicity  of  the  transaction. 
"  Make  the  men  sit  down."  They  do  so,  the  whole  five  thousand,  "  by  companies" 
(ver.  21) — "upon  the  green  grass"  (Mark  vi.  39) — the  green  grass  natural  at 
that  time  of  the  year  (John  vi.  4).  "  Bring  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes 
hither  to  Me."  This  was  done  in  its  turn  ;  and  with  this  was  done,  also,  all 
that  was  done  in  preparing.  You  see  these  multitudes.  You  see  this  scanty 
supply.  You  see  all  except  that  which  the  Saviour  Himself  is  going  to  do. 
Equally  vivid,  in  the  next  place,  is  the  simplicity  of  the  transaction.  The  food  is 
taken  and  blessed,  and  then  broken  and  given  out.  So  it  passes  from  Him  to 
the  hands  of  the  disciples.  From  the  hands  of  the  disciples  it  passes  in  turn  to 
those  of  the  multitudes  as  they  recline  on  the  grass.  In  those  two  things  you 
see  the  whole  that  is  to  be  seen  by  the  eye.  There  the  supply  begins.  So  it 
passes.  Thither  it  goes.  Nothing  whatever  mingles  with  it  from  the  outside. 
Hence,  therefore,  in  the  last  place,  most  striking  of  all,  is  the  completeness  of  the 
result.  Notwithstanding  the  scantness  of  the  original  supply,  notwithstanding 
the  perfect  simplicity  of  the  method  itself,  it  turns  out  that  there  is,  in  the  end, 
what  is  sufficient  for  all.  "  They  did  all  eat  and  were  filled  "  (ver.  20).  No  one 
desired  more.  Not  only  so,  but,  as  though  to  show  in  this  instance  that  the 
same  power  which  had  done  all  this  could  also  have  done  as  much  more  if  so 
wished,  there  was  more  than  sufficient  for  all ;  more  than  sufficient  by  a  good 
deal ;  more  to  end  with,  in  fact,  and  that  by  far,  than  there  had  been  at  first. 

364 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


One  lad  had  easily  carried  all  there  was  to  begin.     The  twelve  disciples,  at  the 
end,  had  gathered  together  of  that  which  remained  one  large  basket-full  each. 
Evidently  there  was  no  limit  here  but  the  criminal  limit  of  waste  ! 
In  the  story  thus  considered  we  may  find  yet  further  : — 

1.  A  rebuke  to  some. — Let  none  of  us  dare  to  think  anything  "  too  hard  for  the 
Lord  ;  "  or  take  upon  us  to  advise  Him  with  respect  to  His  doings  (ver.  15).  In 
all  other  matters,  as  well  as  in  this,  that  is  true  of  Him  which  we  read  in 
John  vi.  6. 

2.  Instruction  to  more. — What  blessing  for  us  is  like  that  of  being  the  channel 
of  blessing  to  others  ?  What  disciple  can  give  to  others  unless  he  first  take  for 
himself?  And  whither  else  shall  he  go  for  what  he  would  give  except  to  the 
"  fulness  "  of  Christ  ? 

3.  Promise  of  mercy  to  all. — The  sixth  chapter  of  St.  John  seems  to  show  us 
that  it  was  a  very  "  mixed  multitude  "  that  was  fed  in  this  way  (see  John  vi. 
26,  41,  60,  ^^).  For  all  that,  in  the  time  of  their  need  there  was  more  than 
sufficient  for  all.  No  questions  were  asked.  No  other  fitness  demanded.  Only 
let  them  take  the  place  of  the  needy.  Only  let  them  accept  the  provision  made 
for  the  hungry.     Everything  else  was  supplied  (cf.  Phil.  iv.  19). 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.    13-21.    The   teachings   of  the  interpreting  an  event  from  which  the 

miracle. — I.  Its  most  obvious  inference  Lord  Himself  drew  His  discourse  on 

is  one  which  it  yields  in  common  with  the  Heavenly  Bread.     The  significant 

several  of  the  Nature-miiacles  present-  points  in  the  action  of  that  day  were  : — 
ing,  as  they  all  do,  the  Lordship  over  1.    The  provision  accepted  from  the 

nature  and  providence  which  belongs  to  disciples. — The  Lord  could  have  made 

Jesus  as  Head  of  the  spiritual  kingdom,  bread  out  of  stones,  or  grass,  out  of 

The  followers  of  Christ  are  here  taught  anything  or  nothing.      But  He  chose 

that  when  engaged  in  the  work  of  the  with  a  Divine  significance  to  ask  from 

kingdom  they  are  to  have  no  anxiety  the  Twelve  what  they  had.    With  that 

about  the  supply  of  their  bodily  wants.  He  began.     In  this  work,  miraculous 

He  Himself  makes  precisely  this  appli-  though  it  was,  the  servants  had  a  part 

cation  of  the  incident  on  a  subsequent  assigned  them.     They  had  to  prepare 

occasion,  when  the  disciples  supposed  the  means,  to  do  their  part,  to  do  their 

one  of  His  sayings  to  reflect  on  their  best.     We  are  to  do  our  best,  humanly 

insufficient  supply  of  food  (Mark  viii.  speaking,  for  His  cause.     He  asks  us 

14-19).  to  do  more  for  Him  than  we  can  in 

II.  A  less  obvious  inference,  but  order  to  show  us  how  easy  it  is  when 
one  which  invites  explanation,  is  its  we  rest  it  on  Himself. 
symbolic  bearing  on  the  spiritual  2.  The  blessing  of  the  provision  by 
provision  of  the  kingdom  and  the  Jesus. — Let  us  get  our  spiritual  pro- 
mode  of  its  distribution  to  mankind,  vision  passed  under  the  Master's 
The  event  took  place  at  a  time  when  blessing  hand.  Let  us  neither  give 
the  disciples  had  made  their  first  trial  nor  take  what  has  not  first  gone 
of  preaching  the  word  of  the  kingdom.  round  by  the  head  of  the  table. 
They  were  anxious  about  the  result.  Christ  blesses  all  the  real  bread  that 
In  the  most  instructive  and  comforting  is  brought  to  Him. 
way  this  feeding  of  the  multitude  3.  The  distribution  of  the  food. — It 
showed,  and  was  meant  to  show,  how  ^as  through  the  blessing  the  miracle 
the  Living  Word,  Christ,  in  the  was  wrought,  but  it  was  in  the  bi  eaking 
preached  word,  the  gospel,  becomes  and  parting  of  the  bread  that  it  was 
the  Bread  of  Life  to  a  perishing  raalised.  So  is  it  with  the  gospel.  It 
world.      We  cannot   be  wrong   in   so  is  in  the  distribution  of  the  word  of 

365 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


life,  in  the  breaking  of  it  down,  in  the 
turning  it  over,  in  the  sharing  and 
the  spreading  of  it,  that  the  benefit  is 
realised. — Prof.  Laidlaw,  D.D. 

Vers.  15-21.  Jesus  and  His  bounty. 
— I.  The  problem  of  the  disciples. — 
They  seemed  to  have  forgotten  :  1.  That 
the  people  had  followed  their  Master, 
not  them.  2.  That  the  Master  knew 
as  much,  and  more,  of  the  multitude 
than  they  did.  3.  That  the  Master 
was  moved  with  compassion  towards 
the  people. 

II.  The  solution  of  the  Master. — 
J.  0.  Davies. 

Ver.  16.  An  assurance  and  a 
command. — Our  Lord's  answer  is 
studiedly  enigmatical,  and  meant  to 
stimulate  attention  and  anticipation. 
It  consists  of : — 

I.  An  apparently  incredible  assur- 
ance. 

II.  An  obviously  impossible  com- 
mand.— A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Value  of  the  Bible. — The  Bible,  so 
little  in  bulk,  like  the  five  barley  loaves 
and  the  two  fishes,  what  thousands 
upon  thousands  has  it  fed,  and  will  it 
feed,  in  every   age,  in   every  land  of 


Christendom,   to    the   world's    end ! — 
D.  Brown,  D.D. 

Vers.  19,  20.  Tested  and  honoured. — 
I.  A  test. 

II.  Obedience,  having  in  it  the 
element  of  faith. 

III.  Reward. — The  miracle. — A. 
Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  20.  The  satisfying  Christ. — 
I.  Christ's  gifts  are  for  all. — As  on 
the  green  grass  there  were  men,  women, 
and  children;  so  all  ages,  conditions, 
diversities  of  character,  rank,  culture, 
and  circumstance  may  find  the  satis- 
faction of  their  soul's  hunger  in  Him. 
The  world  spreads  a  table  at  which 
there  is  often  satiety  without  satisfac- 
tion, and  oftener  hunger  surviving 
after  all  vain  attempts  to  make  husks 
serve  for  bread.  *'  It  shall  be  ias  when 
an  hungry  man  dreameth,  and,  behold 
he  eateth ;  but  he  awaketh,  and  his 
soul  is  empty." 

II.  Christ's  feast  satisfies,  but  never 
cloys.  The  world  often  cloys,  but 
never  satisfies. 

III.  Christ's  gift  is  inexhaustible. — 
After  five  thousand  have  fed,  full  more 
is  over  than  appeared  at  first. — Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF    THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—33. 

Jesus  on  the  waters. — If  the  Saviour  was  bent  on  retirement  before  (ver.  13), 
He  seems  more  bent  on  it  now,  and  in  an  even  greater  degree.  Probably 
because  of  what  we  read  in  John  vi.  15,  He  resolves  on  sending  the  multitudes 
home  (ver.  22).  Probably  on  account  of  the  efiect  of  the  same  on  the  minds  of 
His  disciples  He  "  constrains"  them  to  go  too  (ver.  22).  After  which,  it  is  said, 
that  He  "  goes  up  into  the  mountain  apart  to  pray,  and  when  the  even  is  come 
He  is  there  alone "  (ver.  23) — in  complete  retirement  at  last !  About  that 
retirement  itself  nothing  is  told  us,  though  much  may  be  imagined.  What  is 
told  us,  and  what  we  have  now  to  consider,  is  what  He  was  to  His  disciples  after 
it  was  over ;  what  He  was  to  them  collectively  and  as  a  body ;  what  He  was  to 
them  individually  and  in  the  person  of  their  most  representative  member. 

I.  Collectively. — How  great,  e.g.  at  this  time,  was  His  sympathy  with  their 
troubles.  These  were  then  by  no  means  of  a  trivial  kind.  Instead  of  being  at 
rest  in  their  homes  at  that  natural  time  of  rest,  the  night  time,  they  were  toiling 
on  the  sea  (ver.  24),  in  the  face  of  a  "  contrary  "  wind.  With  all  their  toil, 
moreover,  they  were  hardly  making  any  progress  to  speak  of.  Already  it  was 
"  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night."  They  were  nearing  the  morning,  in  fact,  but 
not  the  shore ;  and  were  hardly  more,  indeed,  if  any  more,  than  half-way  across 
(John  vi.  19).    Just  in  this  their  despair  it  was  that  Jesus  comes  to  see  how  they 

366 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  xiv. 


are  doing — taking  steps,  indeed,  wholly  unheard  of  in  order  to  do  so — and 
"  walking  "  upon  the  "  sea  "  itself  to  **  visit  "  His  own.  In  other  words,  knowing 
everything  about,  and  ready  to  do  anything  for,  those  who  are  in  trouble 
through  obedience  to  Him.  How  great,  in  the  next  place,  His  sympathy/  with 
their  fears.  These  were  natural  enough  in  the  circumstances  detailed,  on  the 
part  of  the  disciples.  To  see  one  walking  upon  the  water  at  any  time  might 
make  any  men  think  that  they  had  before  them  something  superhuman  indeed ! 
To  see  one  doing  so  in  the  darkness  of  night,  and  over  that  tempestuous  sea,  and 
to  be  doing  so  (apparently)  from  behind — thus  accounting  for  the  fact  that  '*  all" 
those  rowers  beheld  it  (Mark  vi.  50) — and  to  be  doing  so  (apparently  again)  as 
though  for  the  purpose  of  coming  into  that  ship  into  which  they  afterwards  so 
*'  willingly  received  Him  "  (John  vi.  21) — might  well  double  their  fears.  What 
did  it  all  mean  ?  What  could  it  be  ?  Something  unreal  ?  Something  awful — 
something  non-earthly  at  best  (ver.  26).  It  is  beautiful,  therefore,  to  see  next 
how  the  Saviour  met  their  very  natural  fears ;  and  how  He  showed  thereby  that 
He  thinks  of  the  troubles  of  His  people  not  only  as  they  are  in  themselves,  but 
as  they  are  in  their  eyes.  First,  He  lets  His  disciples  hear  the  sound  of  His 
voice.  "  Straightway  Jesus  spake  unto  them."  That  of  itself  would  be  much. 
Then  He  uses  His  voice  in  the  way  of  encouragement  and  reassurance.  *'  Be  of 
good  cheer."  Then  He  tells  them  of  that  fact,  which,  of  all  facts  in  existence, 
would  be  most  reassuring  to  them.  It  is  not  only  My  voice,  "  It  is  I  "  Myself. 
Therefore  "  be  not  afraid." 

II.  Individually. — And  in  the  person  of  Peter.  In  this  we  see  exemplified, 
on  the  one  hand,  how  graciously  it  pleases  Him  to  Tneet  the  wishes  of  His  people. 
This  is  the  point  which  seems  to  come  out  first  in  what  is  told  us  here  about 
Peter.  The  attempt  which  he  made  to  walk  on  the  water  was  not  suggested  to 
him  by  anyone  else.  Even  the  permission  to  make  it  was  not  granted  to  him  until 
he  had  asked  that  it  might  be.  "  Lord,  if  it  be  Thou,  bid  me  come  unto  Thee 
on  the  water."  So  far  below  does  he  seem  to  have  left  now — so  far  below  surely  has 
he  left  now — his  former  unbelief  and  alarm.  No  longer  is  he  afraid  of  the 
"  apparition."  He  is  anxious  to  join  it.  No  longer  does  it  surprise  him  to  see 
another  walking  upon  the  water.  He  would  do  so  himself.  All  he  waits  for 
is  the  permission  to  try.  The  Saviour  meets  this,  on  the  one  hand,  by  giving 
him  leave.  He  says  to  him  '•  Come."  Also,  and  further,  on  the  other  hand,  by 
giving  him  help.  He  enables  him  to  start,  at  any  rate.  The  Apostle  finds,  in 
consequence,  that  he  can  do  what  he  wanted  to  do.  He  does  walk  on  the  waves. 
He  does  approach  to— if  he  does  not  come  close  to  (R.Y.  margin) — Jesus 
Himself.  So  far,  therefore,  his  Master  has  enabled  him  to  carry  out  his  desire  ; 
and  has  met  him  most  freely — met  him  most  eflfectually — in  that  which  he 
proposed.  Also  we  see  exemplified  here,  on  the  other  hand,  how  graciously  it 
pleases  the  Saviour  at  times  to  repair  the  errors  of  His  people.  Peter's  bold 
beginning,  as  we  all  know,  was  not  followed  up  in  like  manner.  Instead  of 
continuing  to  look  to  Him,  for  example,  who  had  given  him  permission  to  come, 
he  began  to  look  at  "  the  wind " ;  at  the  evidences  of  its  violence ;  at  the 
proofs  of  its  strength.  Doing  this,  he  inevitably — such  is  the  infallible  result 
of  looking  away  from  the  only  true  Object  of  faith — began  to  lose  the  strength 
of  his  faith.  Doing  this,  he,  just  as  inevitably,  found  himself  "  beginning  to 
sink."  And  doing  this,  again,  would  doubtless  have  continued  to  sink  until 
wholly  overwhelmed  by  the  waters  had  not  the  Saviour  "  immediately "  and 
graciously  responded  to  the  little  faith  he  had  left ;  faith  only  enough,  so  it 
appears,  to  cry  to  Jesus  for  help  (ver.  30).  How  gracious  the  action  of  the 
Saviour  in  reply  !  First  of  all,  "  He  stretches  forth  His  hand  "  and  saves  His 
disciple  both  from  destruction  and  fear.  How  gracious  the  word  which  ensues  ! 
It?  gentle  reproach  !     Its  invincible  help  !     Its  unanswerable  logic  !    "  O  !    thou 

367 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


of  little  faith,  wherefore  dost  thou  doubt  1 "     What  a  way  of  bringing  home  to 
all  that  He  was  a  Saviour  indeed  ! 

It  is  observable,  in  conclusion,  that  this  seems  to  have  been  just  the  effect 
produced  on  all  that  were  with  Him.  On  a  previous,  somewhat  similar,  but 
not  equally  striking  occasion,  the  effect  produced  had  been  that  especially,  if  not 
solely,  of  wonder  (viii.  23-27).  On  this  occasion  the  effect  produced  is  that  of 
"  worship  "  as  well  (ver.  33).  Before,  those  present  declared  admiringly  that 
they  had  never  seen  such  a  Man  (viii.  27)  !  Now,  those  present  acknowledge 
devoutly  that  they  are  in  the  presence  of  God's  Son  !  "  Truly  "  so ;  and, 
therefore,  as  at  once  befits  such  a  conviction,  humbly  so,  on  their  knees. 
"  Verily,"  so  they  said  by  this  action,  "  Thou  art  a  Saviour  indeed  !  "  And  if  to 
them,  then  to  us  as  well  who  hear  of  their  words.  This,  indeed,  is  one  reason 
why  this  story,  amongst  so  many  others,  has  been  thus  reported  to  us,  viz., 
that  it  may  both  be  to  us,  in  our  way,  and  do  for  us,  also,  all  it  was,  and  all  it 
did,  for  them  at  the  first.  So  St.  John  declared  of  all  he  wrote  in  his  account 
of  the  gospel  (John  xx.  31).  So  may  it  be  to  us  of  all  we  read  of  this  "  Saviour 
indeed  "  I 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  23.  Jesus  alone. — The  first 
evening  or  afternoon  had  passed  into 
the  second  evening  or  nightfall ;  twi- 
light deepened  into  dark,  dark  into 
midnight ;  midnight  passed,  and  the 
chill  morning  hours,  and  still  He  was 
there,  alone,  praying.  We  have 
here  : — 

I.  Jesus  our  Example  in  prayer. — 
Not  only  praying  with  and  for  others, 
but  actually  a  suppliant  by  Himself, 
and  such  a  suppliant ! 

II.  An  example  of  solitary  prayer. 
— He  had  no  closet,  but  a  "  mountain 
apart." 

III.  An  example  of  continued  prayer. 
— He  had  been  so  busy  aU  day  that 
the  night  must  be  drawn  upon,  and 
the  whole  night ;  He  only  ceased 
towards  the  dawn. 

IV.  An  example  of  special  prayer. 
— I.e.  of  a  special  season  devoted  to 
ifc  beyond  the  common. — Prof.  Laid- 
laWj  D.D. 

Christ's  seasons  of  special  prayer. — 
Several  instances  are  recorded ,  such 
as  (Mark  i.)  after  the  first  Sabbath's 
work  in  Capernaum,  and  again 
(Luke  vi.  12)  just  before  the  choosing 
of  the  Apostles,  on  which  occasion  He 
continued  all  night  in  prayer  to  God, 
and  when  it  was  day  proceeded  to  the 
calling  of  the  Twelve.      So  here    He 

368 


gave  a  night  to  prayer  after  the  first 
mission  of  the  Apostles  and  at  what 
we  may  call  the  crisis  of  His  Galilean 
ministry.  Observe  especially  this  last 
note  of  connection.  John  expressly 
records  that  Jesus  departed  that  even- 
ing into  the  mountain  alone,  because 
He  perceived  that  the  piBople  would 
come  and  take  Him  by  force,  to  make 
Him  a  King.  He  probably  passed, 
that  night,  through  one  of  those  inward 
experiences  which,  as  recorded  in  other 
instances  of  Him,  were  followed  by 
significant  acts  and  words.  He  "  per- 
ceived "  the  ease  with  which  He  could 
then  have  founded  a  great  party  in 
the  Jewish  nation,  an  outward  and 
visible  following  far  more  powerful,  to 
human  appearance,  than  that  which 
He  did  finally  leave  on  earth.  But 
the  decision  wrought  out  in  that  night's 
prayer  appealed  the  very  next  day. 
He  went  straight,  when  He  had  crossed 
to  the  other  side,  and  preached  in  the 
synagogues  of  Capernaum,  so  John 
records  it,  such  a  sermon  that  almost 
all  but  the  Twelve  left  Him,  and  many 
disciples  went  back  and  walked  no  more 
with  Him.  "It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth,"  He  said;  "the  flesh 
profiteth  nothing."  And  He  had  to 
found  His  kingdom,  not  on  the  glory 
of  the  flesh,  which  "  falleth  away,"  but 
on  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  that  word 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  lakes,  that  the  water  is  speedily  dis- 

ever. — Frof.  Laidlaw,  D.D.  turbed   by  sudden  gales  which  sweep 

down  between  the  mountains.     So  is  it 

Vers.   22-24::  Christ    omdj  His    dis-  with  the  Sea  of  Galilee.     Fierce  cold 

ciples. — 1.  We  should  be   sure   of   an  winds  pass  down  the  snowy  ranges  of 

urgent  calling  before  we  undertake  a  Lebanon  and  Hermon,  and  rush  through 

hazardous  voyage.  Jesus**  constrained"  the  ravines  of  the  Persean  Hills  with 

His  disciples.     2.  Christ  will  not  have  terrific  force.      There  is  also  another 

men  diverted   from   their   places   and  reason  why   the    Sea    of    Tiberias    is 

callings  under  pretence  of  waiting  on  frequently    agitated    to    an     unusual 

Him,  nor  to  expect  to  live  by  miracu-  extent.     The  Jordan  runs  through  the 

lous  means,   but  to  attend   upon   the  lake  with  a  very  strong  and  distinct 

ordinary  blessing  of  each  man's  voca-  current,  and  when  this  is  opposed  by 

tion ;  therefore  He  sendeth  the  multi-  a  powerful   south   or  south-east  wind 

tude  away.     3.  Christ,  albeit  the  Son  the  sea  is  at  once  beaten  into  fury, 

of  God,  yet  because  He  had  taken  our  I.    That    period    of    the     disciples' 

nature  and  the  ofiice  of  Mediator,  upon  anxiety  suggests   to  us   that  we,  too, 

all  occasions  of  retiring  He  prayeth  and  are  exposed  to  many  difficulties  and 

intercedeth  with  God  for  His  people.  dangers. — Our  life  is  a  voyage.    During 

4.  When  the  godly  are  in  trouble  and  our  course   we   are   all  called   to   en- 

under  trials,  the  Mediator  is  praying  counter  storms. 

for  their  upholding.  When  the  disciples  II.  But    such    storms    of   trial   are 

go  to  sea,  Christ  goeth  to  the  mount  to  designed  by  God  to  be  disciplinary, 

pray.     5.  Christ's  disciples  must  be  in  — Many   lessons  are  conveyed  to  the 

trouble  -and  hazards  when  others  are  mind    by  seasons    of    anxiety.       The 

at  ease.     6.  Albeit  men  have  Christ's  disciples  must  have  been  impressed  by 

warrant  for  their  voyage,  yet  are  they  their    inabihty    to    steer     their    own 

not  exempted  from  trouble  and  danger  barque  or  save  their  own  lives.     On  one 

therein.    7.  Men  may  have  fair  weather  occasion  the  great  Napoleon  arranged 

in  the  beginning  of  a  work,  and  danger  to  review  his  fleet  off  Boulogne.    Seeing 

and    trouble    may   be  kept  back,    till  that   a  severe   storm  was  impending, 

they  be  so  far  engaged,  as  it  is  more  the  admiral  in  command  sent  word  to 

safe  for  them  to  go  forward  than  to  the  Emperor,  advising  that  the  position 

return. — David  Dickson.  of  the  ships  should  be  altered.  Napoleon 

demanded  obedience  to  his  first  direc- 

Vers.    22-27.    The   walk    upon    the  tions,    and    the    vice-admiral    obeyed. 

waters. — I.  The   Saviour    often    sends  The  storm  burst   in   terrific  violence. 

His  disciples  into  scenes  of  toil  and  Several  gun-sloops  were  wrecked,  and 

trial.  over  two  hundred  soldiers  and  sailors 

II.  While  they  are  there  He  were  obliged  to  battle  with  the  angry 
watches  and  prays  for  them.  sea  for  hfe,  and  few  escaped.      The 

III.  When  they  have  been  enough  Emperor  at  once  ordered  the  boats  out 
tried,  He  will  appear  for  their  rescue,  to  rescue  the  drowning  men,  but  he 
gladden  them  by  His  presence,  and  was  told  that  no  boat  could  live  in 
reward  them  with  His  blessing. —  such  a  sea.  Then,  in  the  strength  of 
Baptist  Magazine.  his  determination,  he  ordered  a  company 

of   grenadiers   to  man    his   boat,    and 

Ver.  25.   T'he  sea  and  the  Saviour. —  springing  into  it, he  exclaimed :  "Follow 

The  Jews  had  a  proverb  to  the  effect  me,  my  brave  fellows  !   Push  on  !    Push 

that   "  God  created  seven  seas  in  the  oh  ! "       In    vain    the     poor     soldiers 

land  of  Canaan,  but  one  only — the  Sea  struggled  at   the  oars.     **  Push  on  1 " 

of  Galilee — did  He  choose  for  Himself."  cried  Napoleon.      **  Do  you  not  hear 

It  is  characteristic  of    most  lakes,  as  their  cries!      Oh,  this  sea!  this  seal 

it  is  of  our  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish  It  rebels  against  our  power,  but  it  may 

9  B                                                  369 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


be  conquered ! "  Scarcely  had  the 
words  escaped  his  lips  when  a  mighty 
billow  struck  the  boat,  and  sent  it  and 
its  occupants  with  terrible  force  high 
up  the  shore,  leaving  them  like  a 
stranded  waif.  Thus  was  the  proud 
monarch  taught  his  impotence.  Thus 
ulso  is  self-confident,  self-important, 
self -conceited  man  often  driven  back  by 
life's  storms,  driven  back  upon  the 
very  first  principles  of  a  truly  religious 
life — conscious  weakness  and  necessary 
dependence. 

III.  Another  thought  during  that 
night  of  anxiety  must  have  been  forced 
home  upon  the  minds  of  the  disciples, 
viz.,  the  supremacy  and  saving  power 
of  Jesus. — When  He  discerned  their 
spiritual  fitness — their  conscious  help- 
lessness and  earnest  yearning  for  His 
presence  and  aid — then  He  appeared. 
So  He  deals  with  us  still.  He  often 
seems  absent  when  we  most  need  Him. 
But  He  is  really  close  at  hand,  and 
cognisant  of  everything.  A  lifeboat, 
with  its  precious  cargo,  was  pitching 
and  rolHng  in  a  fearful  storm,  when 
the  old  captain  cried  aloud  to  all, 
"  Hold  on  !  hold  on  !  "  The  response 
came,  "  Ay,  ay  !  "  But  there  was  one 
little  voice  which,  in  the  sadness  of 
despair,  exclaimed,  "  I  can't  hold 
on  !  "  Instantly  the  strong  arm  of 
the  captain  was  thrown  around  that 
trembling  child,  and  he  was  safe.  So 
when  Jesus  sees  and  hears  that,  not- 
withstanding our  utmost  efforts,  we 
feel  we  need  Him,  and  crave  His 
Divine  help.  He  hastens  to  our  relief. 
How  many  have  been  brought  to 
Christ  by  sorrow  ! 

IV.  How  those  disciples  must  have 
prized  the  rest  and  quietude  of  the 
haven  after  that  night  of  anxiety  ! 

V.  As  Christ  went  to  the  relief  of 
His  distressed  disciples,  so  we  who 
profess  to  value  the  religion  of  Jesus 
should  be  willing  to  do  all  we  can  for 
our  sons  of  the  sea. — They  are  a  noble 
race — our  sailors.  A  ship  was  once  in 
distress.  Though  the  angry  sea  dashed 
and  foamed  with  terrible  fury,  yet 
some  noble  sailors  put  off  to  rescue 
the  ship's  crew.    After  prolonged  effort 

370 


and  peculiar  danger  they  succeeded  in 
bringing  the  whole  company  safely  to 
shore.  A  man  of  wealth,  standing  by 
the  water's  side,  as  spectator  of  the 
men's  heroism,  was  moved  by  the  way 
they  risked  their  lives.  Pulling  out 
his  purse  he  offered  all  the  gold  it 
contained  to  the  coxswain  and  his  men. 
The  gift,  however,  was  respectfully 
declined,  the  boatswain  saying,  *'  No, 
sir  ;  we  would  save  a  man  for  nothing 
any  day." — /.  H.  Hitchens,  D.D. 

Yer.  26. — The  disciples  in  the  storm. 
— A  little  thing  frightens  us  in  a 
storm  (M.  Henry).  Things  oft  go 
backward  ere  they  come  forward  with 
us. — Trapp. 

Yers.  28-32.  Peter  walks  on  the  sea. — 
Learn : 

I.  It  is  not  always  good  to  have 
a  literal  and  exact  answer  to  our 
requests. — Translated  into  its  real 
meaning,  our  prayer  too  often  is  that 
we  may  walk  on  some  rough  dangerous 
sea  in  whose  rising  waves  we,  for  want 
of  faith,  or  for  want  of  faith  enough, 
should  be  engulfed.  Like  Peter  we 
say,  "Bid  us  come  there,  where  we 
want  to  be  "or  ''  where  we  may  display 
our  superior  strength."  Sometimes 
the  answer  is  "  Come,"  in  order  that 
we  may  know  our  weakness,  and  have 
our  pride  of  wisdom  brought  low. 
Peter  must  have  the  offending  Adam 
washed  out  of  him,  etc. 

II.  The  miraculous  power  of  faith. 
— So  long  as  Peter  looks  only  to  Christ, 
so  long  as  he  gathers  up  all  powers  of 
heart  and  mind,  and  bends  them  on  the 
Master,  he  walks  on  the  rough  sea  as 
easily  as  on  the  green  mountain  slopes. 
'Tis  only  when  he  begins  to  doubt, 
when  his  will  wavers,  and  his  thoughts 
tend  now  in  this  direction  now  in  that, 
that  he  begins  to  sink. 

III.  The  symbolic,  prophetic  signi- 
ficance.— Christ  stands  on  the  eternal 
mountain,  watching  and  interceding, 
while  the  ship.  His  church,  labours 
across  the  sea  of  time. — The  Church. 

Yers.    28-31.    Peter:    the  trial,  in- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


firmity  and  triumph  of  his  faith. — The 
incident  recorded  in  this  passage  of 
Scripture  not  only  illustrates  generally 
the  character  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  but 
affords  a  particular  example  of  his 
faith — its  power,  and  its  weakness, 
too — such  as  may  be  usefully  studied. 

I.  That  Peter's  faith  in  Jesus  was 
at  all  events  and  upon  the  whole 
sincere,  is  manifest  from  these  two 
circumstances  in  his  behaviour. 
1.  In  dependence  upon  Jesus  he  left 
the  vessel.  2.  When  sinking  he  called 
upon  Him  for  aid.  And  the  very 
words  of  our  Saviour's  reproof  mani- 
festly imply  that  it  was  so  (ver.  31). 
Peter  is  not  charged  with  the  sin  of 
having  no  faith  at  all,  though  he  is 
reproved  for  having  little  faith.  Un- 
easy thoughts  and  anxious  fears,  how- 
ever inconsistent  they  may  be  with  the 
abundance  and  the  strength  of  ener- 
getic faith,  are  not  always  or  neces- 
sarily inconsistent  with  its  genuine 
reality. 

II.  The  faith  of  Peter,  though 
sincere,  was  yet  imperfect. — Let  us 
mark  the  progress  of  his  temporary 
distrust  and  doubting,  that  we  may 
see  exactly  the  nature  of  his  sin. 
When  Peter  first  recognised  his 
Master's  presence,  so  forward  was  he 
to  profess  his  faith,  and  to  put  his 
resolution  to  the  test,  even  at  the 
hazard  of  his  Ufe — so  great  was  his 
anxiety  to  meet  Jesus,  and  so  implicit 
his  confidence — that  he  was  willing  to 
trust  himself  with  Him  even  on  the 
yielding  waves.  Yet  he  did  not  ven- 
ture  without  first  inquiring  what  his 
Master  would  have  him  to  do.  His  sin 
lay,  not  in  the  zealous  profession  which 
he  made  of  his  faith,  nor  in  the  prompt 
alacrity  of  his  faithful  obedience,  but 
in  the  weakness  and  doubtfulness  of 
that  faith  which  he  professed,  and  in 
which  he  obeyed.  Such  is  the  sin 
against  which  we  have  to  guard. — 
R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D. 

Ver.  28.  Peter's  fault. — Wherein  lay 
the  fault  in  Peter's  proposal?  We 
answer : — 

I.  In  self-confidence,  self-preference. 


— *'  Bid  me."  He  would  outdo  and 
outdare  all  the  rest  with  a  mightier 
display  of  faith.  Here,  just  as  at  the 
supper  table,  with  his  greater  show  of 
humility,  "  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my 
feet "  (John  xiii.),  Peter  rehearsed;  so 
to  speak,  his  great  fall.  He  boasted  a 
larger  faith  than  all  the  rest,  and  fell 
to  a  lower  and  pitiable  depth  of  fear ; 
as  in  that  sadder  after-scene  he  boasted 
a  greater  faithfulness,  and  fell  to  the 
lowest  depths  of  unfaithfulness  short  of 
final  apostasy.  The  secret  springs  of 
the  action  in  both  cases,  are  discovered 
by  comparison  of  the  two.  "  Let  him 
that  thinketh  he  standeth,"  etc. 

II.  In  the  impulsiveness  which  even 
in  religious  faith  is  allied  to  rashness, 
and  therefore  to  weakness.  Exagger- 
ated faith  is  really,  as  appears  in  this 
instructive  story,  weak  faith,  little 
faith.  It  is  a  small  faith  boasting 
itself,  stretching  itself  out  and  over- 
doing itself.  On  this  occasion,  however, 
"  He  said  come."  To  have  repressed 
Peter's  suggestion  might  have  checked 
that  bold  and  loving  disposition  which 
the  Master  sought  to  train  for  deeds  of 
renown.  To  be  let  try  this  thing,  and 
suffer  partial  failure  in  it,  was  the  way 
by  which  Peter's  real  faith  would  be 
strengthened  and  his  fault  of  carnal 
overboldness  corrected.  The  Lord  puts 
His  answer  in  the  form  of  a  simple 
permission,  "  Come  ! " — Professor  Laid- 
laWj  D.D. 

Ver.  30.  The  failure  of  Peter's  faith, 
— So  long  as  the  inner  soul  of  Peter 
was  purely  and  simply  turned  towards 
the  Person  of  the  Lord,  he  was  capable 
of  receiving  within  himself  the  fulness 
of  Christ's  life  and  Spirit,  so  that  what 
Christ  could  do  he  could  do ;  but  so 
soon  as  his  capacity  for  receiving  the 
Spirit  was  contracted  by  his  giving 
place  and  weight  to  a  foreign  power,  the 
result  was  .  .  .  that  the  sea-walker  fell 
back  under  the  dominion  of  earthly 
elements. — Olshausen. 

Vers.  28,  29.  Doing  the  impossible, — 
There  is  no  real  success  in  the  work  of 
Christ's  kingdom  which  is  not  to  man's 

371 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


judgment  as  impossible  as  to  tread  the  tion,  "  Who  will  go  for  us  ? "    "  Here 

waves.     When  Paul  went  to  convert  am  I ;  send  me." — Professor  Laidlaw, 

the  nations  of  Greece  and  Rome  to  the  D.D. 
faith  of    the    crucified    Nazarene,    he 

went   to   walk   on   the    waters.      All  Vers.  31,  32.  Christ  glorified. — Now 

reason  was  against  the  probability  of  the   exercise    is    ended,    the   disciples' 

his  success.     When  Luther  revived  the  weakness    and    Christ's   strength   are 

gospel    of   free   grace    in  face  of  the  manifested.     1.  When  the  trial  is  at 

Roman  hierarchy  and  the  empire,  he  an  end,  the  trouble  is  at  an  end.  Christ 

went  to  walk  on  the  waters.     Pope,  and  Peter  come  up  into  the  ship  and 

emperor,  princes,  and  churchmen  were  the  wind  ceaseth.     2.  It  is  a  blessed 

ready  to  swallow  him  up.     There  is  not  trouble    which    endeth    in    glorifying 

a    true    missionary    abroad    or    true  Christ  and  in  the  increase  of  knowledge, 

mission  worker  at  home,  but  goes  to  3.  New  experience  doth  furnish  deep 

seek  results  above  nature,  by  methods  impressions  of   Christ's  Divine  power 

that  work  beyond  reason.     If  we  would  and  Godhead.     4.  DeHverance  from  im- 

truly   serve   Jesus  and  His   kingdom,  minent  death  speaketh  more  of  God's 

walk  on  the  waves  we  must ;  for  we  power  to  the  humble  person,  than  the 

walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.     Only  let  greatest   works    do    speak     unto    the 

us  gather  from  this  story  the  condition,  secure ;  as  the  deliverance  of  the  dis- 

and  take  our  motto  from  Isaiah  rather  ciples  from  the  raging  sea  maketh  them 

than  from  Peter.     Instead  of  choosing  more  sensible  of  Christ's  Godhead  than 

for  oneself  the  path  of  duty  and  saying,  the  miraculous  feeding  of  five  thousand 

"  Lord,  bid  me  come,"  let  us  put  our-  with  so  few  loaves  in  the  wilderness. — 

selves  and  our  service  always  into  His  David  Dickson. 
hands,  saying  in  answer  to  His  ques- 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  Zi—ZQ^ 

Jesits  on  land. — From  the  fact  that  this  land  of  Gennesaret  is  only  mentioned 
here  and  in  Mark  vi.  53-56,  and  from  the  parallel  fact  that  the  men  who  lived 
there  do  not  seem  to  have  recognised  Christ  at  the  first  (ver.  35),  it  has  been  thought 
by  some  that  it  lay  outside  the  usual  "  beat "  of  the  Saviour.  If  so,  that  may  be 
why  He  chooses  it  now ;  being  still  anxious,  it  may  be,  not  to  come  very  much 
under  the  notice  of  Herod  (see  vers.  1,  12).  But  even  if  so,  we  find  that  when 
He  does  come  to  this  place  He  is  the  same  here  as  elsewhere.  Indeed,  in  some 
things,  we  here  find  unusual  evidence  of  His  usual  mercy  and  power ;  as,  for 
example,  in  the  need  dealt  with,  in  the  first  place ;  the  means  employed^  in  the 
second  ;  and  the  effect  achieved  in  the  third. 

I.  The  need  dealt  i«?ith. — Many  things  seemed  to  draw  unusual  attention  to 
this.  The  unusual  fertility  and  abundance  of  the  neighbourhood,  of  which  the 
commentaries  tell  us  so  much,  from  Josephus  and  others,  would  do  so,  to  begin. 
Where  every  corner  and  all  the  growth  of  that  garden-like  land  seemed  to  be 
ministering  to  the  abundance  of  its  inhabitants,  it  was  the  more  striking  and  the 
more  pathetic  to  find  many  of  them  in  need ;  and  in  that  kind  of  need,  also, 
which,  lying  within  a  man,  no  outward  wealth  can  supply.  What  signifies  it  to 
a  *'  sick  "  man  that  he  has  the  choicest  of  foods  within  reach  ?  The  largest 
possible  supply  of  them  leaves  his  necessity  where  it  was  ;  if  it  does  not  even  go 
further  and  make  its  utter  helplessness  so  much  the  more  grievous.  Further, 
the  unusual  efforts  made  by  the  "  men  of  that  place  "  to  bring  their  sick  within 
reach  of  the  Saviour,  tell  much  the  same  tale.  Once  they  discovered  who  their 
Visitor  was,  they  allowed  no  rest  to  any  who  could  help  in  bringing  any  sick  ones 
to  His  feet.  No  part  of  *'  that  region  "  was  left  un visited  by  them.  None  that 
were  known  to  be  sick  were  allowed  to  remain  where  they  were.     A  lively  proof, 

372 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xlV. 


indeed,  of  the  depth  of  the  sympathy  felt  for  their  case.  A  sympathy  shown  all 
the  more,  in  the  last  instance,  by  the  Icmgitage  employed  when  brought  near. 
"  They  besought  Him  "  for  His  help  (ver.  36).  "  They  "  did  so—"  they  "  all  did 
so — alike  the  sick  and  the  whole.  The  sick  by  their  looks,  if  by  nothing  beyond. 
The  whole  by  the  extreme  earnestness,  by  the  tearfulness,  of  their  words.  "  Do 
not  let  these,  our  utterly  needy  ones,  be  without  help." 

II.  The  simplicity  of  the  means. — So  far  as  the  patients  and  their  friends 
were  concerned,  nothing  more  was  required,  in  the  first  instance,  than  that  they 
should  be  brought  somehow  into  the  presence  of  Jesus.  Only  let  Him  know  of 
them — only  let  Him  notice  them — nothing  more  was  required.  No  external  in- 
ducement. No  evidence  of  worthiness.  No  appeal  to  vainglory.  No  offer  of  fee. 
All  that  was  sought  for  was  to  move  His  compassion.  All  that  was  needed  was 
to  elicit  His  power.  Nor  was  anything  more  required,  in  the  second  instance, 
than  to  be  brought  into  contact  with  that.  Any  action  of  faith  that  sufiiced  to  do 
that,  sufficed  to  do  all.  Not  merely  the  blessed  person  of  the  Saviour  Himself — 
not  merely  any  part  of  any  of  the  garments  by  which  that  person  was  clothed 
— but  even  that  "  hem  of  His  garment  "  which,  as  it  were,  was  little  more  than 
an  appendage  thereto,  if  touched  only  in  that  spirit,  sufficed  to  do  all.  So  far  as 
the  sick  themselves  were  concerned,  all  who  "  touched  "  the  "  border  of  His 
garment "  did  all  that  was  needed.  That  touch  of  faith  comprised  the  very  outside 
of  all  that  was  asked  at  their  hands. 

III.  The  perfection  of  the  result. — Two  things  especially  are  said  here  to 
impress  this  upon  us.  The  first  has  to  do  with  the  universality  of  the  result. 
There  were  no  exceptional  cases  amongst  the  "  many  "  cases  brought  for  relief. 
No  cases  "  discharged  "  only,  as  being  less  "  amenable  "  than  the  rest.  Doubt- 
less, among  so  "  many,"  there  were  some  of  exceptional  nature  and  depth.  Some 
that  would  be  brought,  it  is  possible,  with  much  less  hope  than  the  rest.  Some 
who  would  say  probably,  and  say  so,  moreover,  not  without  some  excuse  for  it, 
from  their  side  of  the  matter,  He  can  do  nothing  for  me.  Even  such  cases, 
however — from  His  side  of  the  matter — were  just  the  same  as  the  rest.  He  did 
for  the  worst  there  as  He  did  for  the  best.  The  second  special  feature  has  to  do 
with  the  thoroughness  of  these  cures.  They  were  not  partial  cures  only,  or  half 
cures,  or  unfinished  recoveries,  or  mere  mitigations  of  evil ;  or  of  mere  relief  only, 
and  not  of  removal ;  or  of  anything  in  short,  at  all  less,  in  any  way,  of  utterly 
banishing  the  whole  sickness  in  hand.  "As  many  as  touched  were  made 
perfectly  whole  "  (Stca-w^ryo-ai/),  were  thoroughly  saved  (ver.  36).  This  was  true 
of  them  all.  They  went  away  from  the  Saviour — all  of  them  did — wholly 
delivered  from  whatever  evil  they  had  brought  to  His  feet. 

We  may  apply  the  truths  thus  brought  before  us  with  great  comfort  and 
force,  to  the  greater  needs  of  our  souls.  He  who  thus  did  so  much  and  so 
freely  for  the  bodies  of  men  has  Himself  drawn  our  attention  to  the  deeper 
importance  of  their  souls  (see  x.  28).  We  cannot  doubt,  therefore,  but  that 
He  will  be  at  least  as  willing  to  help  us  in  this  respect  too.  We  may  even 
argue,  and  that  most  legitimately,  seeing  that  it  was  His  infinite  compassion 
only  that  moved  Him  to  give  such  perfect  relief  to  these  touching  cases  of 
bodily  suffering,  that  He  will  be  even  more  willing,  if  that  be  possible,  to  give 
help  to  the  soul.  The  deeper  the  necessity,  the  stronger  the  claim  to  such  a 
nature  as  His.  Nor  can  we  doubt,  on  the  other  hand.  His  being  in  this  case 
also,  as  able  to  help.  He  "  who  was  made  sin  for  us  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him  "  has  obtained  thereby  a  sufficiency  of  redemptive 
power  for  the  very  utmost  of  our  needs  (2  Cor.  v.  21  ;  see  also  Heb.  vii.  25). 
And  that,  such  a  power  also,  as  can  be  secured  by  us  by  the  simple  exercise  of 
faith,  provided  only  and  of  course  that  it  be  faith,  and  not  a  mere  substitute 
only  for  that  simplest  and  yet  most  precious  of  gifts. 

373 


CHAP.  XIV.      HOMILETIC  eOMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 


"Vers.  34-36.  Miracles  hy  wholesale. — 
I.  The  forwardness  and  faith  of  the 
men  of  that  place. — These  were  more 
noble  than  the  Gergesenes,  their 
neighbours,  who  were  borderers  upon 
the  same  lake.  Those  besought  Christ 
to  depart  from  them — they  had  no  occa- 
sion for  Him ;  these  besought  Him  to 
help  them,  they  had  need  of  Him. 
Christ  reckons  it  the  greatest  honour 
we  can  do  Him  to  make  use  of  Him. 
Here  we  are  told : — 

1.  How  the  men  of  that  place  were 
brought  to  Christ. — They  "  had  know- 
ledge of  Him."  If  Christ  were  better 
known  He  would  not  be  neglected  as 
He  is.  The  discerning  of  the  day  of 
our  opportunities  is  a  good  step  towards 
the  improvement  of  it. 

2.  How  they  brought  others  to  Christ. 
— By  giving  notice  to  their  neighbours 
of  Christ's  being  come  into  those  parts, 
(ver.  35).  There  is  in  Christ  enough 
for  all,  so  there  is  nothing  got  by 
monopolising.  Neighbourhood  is  an 
advantage  of  doing  good  which  must 
be  improved. 

3.  What  their  business  was  with 
Christ, — They  "  brought  unto  Him  all 
that  were  diseased." 

4.  How  they  made  their  application  to 
Him  (ver.  36). — (1)  With  great  impor- 
tunity. (2)  With  great  humility. 
(3)  With  great  assurance  of  the  all- 
sufficiency  of  His  power. 

II.  The  fruit  and  success  of  their 
application  to  Christ. — 1.  Christ's  cures 
are  perfect  cures.  2.  There  is  abund- 
ance of  healing  virtue  in  Christ  for 
all  that  apply  to  Him,  be  they  never  so 
many.  3.  The  healing  virtue  there  is 
in  Christ  is  put  forth  for  the  benefit  of 
those  that  by  a  true  and  lively  faith  touch 
Him. — Matthew  Henry. 

Ver.  36.  The  great  Healer.— ''  As, 
many  as  touched,"  etc.  Our  Lord's 
miracles  of  healing  had  a  twofold 
import;  they  were  credentials  of  His 
Divine  authority  and  also  representa- 
tions of  the  higher  work  He  had  come 
to  do  for  the  world.     Physical  disease 

374 


IS  a  type  of  moral  disorder,  and  as 
Jesus  dealt  effectually  with  the  one,  so 
can  He  with  the  other. 

I.  Man's  moral  condition  may  be 
represented  as  one  of  disease. — A  state 
of  disease  is  an  abnormal  state.  This 
disease  a  very  terrible  one. 

1.  It  is  asold  and  as  extensive  as 
the  race. 

2.  It  affects  the  entire  man.  (1)  To 
this  evil  are  to  be  referred  the  infirmities 
and  deformities,  the  pains  and  sick- 
nesses, that  afflict  the  body  and 
eventually  bring  it  down  to  the  grave. 
The  physical  evils  from  which  many 
suffer  are  the  direct  fruit  of  their  own 
wrong-doing.  Infants  sufier  by  reason 
of  the  solidarity  of  the  race.  Moral 
evil  the  root  from  which  all  physical 
evils  spring.  (2)  And  the  immaterial 
part  of  man  is  affected  by  this  terrible 
malady  as  well — his  intellectual  and 
spiritual  nature,  his  mind  and  his  soul. 
The  understanding  is  impaired  and 
darkened  (Eph.  iv.  18;  1  Cor.  ii.  14). 
The  judgment  is  deranged.  The  will 
perverse  and  obstinate.  The  affections 
turned  from  God,  their  true  Object 
(Rom.  viii.  7).  The  conscience  so 
affected  that  a  man  may  act  con- 
scientiously and  yet  do  wrong  (John 
xvi.  2 ;  Acts  xxvi.  9).  A  loadstone 
near  the  needle  may  turn  a  ship  out  of 
its  course.  The  memory  has  much 
greater  affinity  for  what  is  evil  than 
for  what  is  good.  And  the  imagination 
is  ever  deluding  the  soul.  In  addition 
to  all  this,  man  is  insensible  to  his 
true  condition.  Sin  "  affects  the  very 
organ  by  which  itself  can  be  detected." 

3.  It  is  a  most  virulent  and  con- 
taminating disease.  —  Like  physical 
disorders,  it  has  its  stages.  The  worst 
man  living  might  become  worse  still. 
Every  sinner  gives  out  an  influence 
which  is  calculated  to  call  forth  into 
evil  deed  the  latent  evil  slumbering  in 
the  natures  of  those  around  him.  It 
is  useless  for  a  man  to  say  *'  I  will  keep 
my  bad  habits  to  myself ;  they  shall 
affect  no  one  else."  There  is  a  force 
in  a  man's  evil  example  that  must 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xiv. 


affect  others,  and  that  is  calculated  to 
draw  out  the  depravity  of  their  hearts 
in  the  same  direction  and  make  them 
like  himself  (Ecc.  ix.  18  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  33). 
4.  Left  to  run  its  course  it  must  in  every 
case  terminate  fatally. — Man  insensible 
to  his  condition.  But  if  fully  alive  to 
his  state  would  be  powerless  to  help  him- 
self. "Without  strength."  Nor  is 
there  any  tendency  to  reaction  or  con- 
valescence (Jer.  xiii.  23;  James  i.  15). 

II.  There  is  a  fulness  of  healing 
virtue  in  Jesus  Christ. — He  is  the  only 
physician  who  can  deal  effectually  with 
man's  case.  The  world's  specifics  for 
the  regeneration  of  society  are  good  as 
far  as  they  go,  but  not  radical  enough. 
E.g.  Education,  socialism,  etc.  But 
Jesus  Christ  is  equal  to  the  task  of 
removing  this  disease  in  its  most 
malignant  forms  (see  Tit.  ii.  14;  Phil, 
iii.  20,  21,  etc.). 

III.  The  healing  virtue  which 
dwells  in  Jesus  Christ  is  available  for 
every  sincere  and  earnest  applicant. 
— The  diseased  ones  spoken  of  in  the 
text  were  "  brought "  to  Jesus  by 
others,  but  they  themselves  "touched" 
Him.     This  implies  : — 

1.  That  they  were  distressed  about 
this  diseased  condition  and  anxious  to  he 
cured. — Though  the  great  moral  malady 
renders  its  subjects  insensible  to  their 
true  state,  a  gracious.  Divine  influence 
is  exerted  upon  their  minds  for  the 
purpose  of  discovering  to  them  their 
depravity  and  sin,  and  of  leading  them 


to  the  great  Healer.  If  not  healed, 
the  fault  is  your  own.  You  have 
received  light,  but  have  not  improved 
it — have  not  thought  on  your  ways — 
"  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  " 
etc. 

•'  The  deaf  may  hear  the  Saviour's  voice, 
The  fettered  tongue  its  silence  break  ; 
But  the  deaf  heart,  the  dumb  by  choice, 
The  laggard  soul  that  will  not  wake, 
The  guilt  that  scorns  to  be  forgiven, 
These  baflQe  e'en  the  spells  of  heaven." 

2.  That  they  had  faith,  more  or  less 
strong,  in  Christ's  ability  and  willingness 
to  heal  them. — So  we  must  not  only 
cast  away  all  expectation  of  being 
healed  by  any  other,  but  must  cherish 
the  assurance  that  Christ  is  both  able 
and  willing  to  make  us  whole.  Not 
that  we  must  remain  from  Him  until 
the  assurance  becomes  strong.  The 
all-important  matter  is  to  get  to  Christ 
and,  I  say,  it  is  a  sense  of  His  ability 
and  willingness  to  heal  and  save  as 
well  as  a  sense  of  need  that  brings  the 
sinner  to  Him. 

3.  They  were  healed  by  a  most  simple 
method. — A  "  touch  "  opened  the  com- 
munication between  the  springs  of 
healing  virtue  that  dwelt  in  Christ  and 
their  poor  diseased  selves.  They  could 
not  boast  of  what  they  had  done.  All 
the  glory  of  this  work  of  healing  was 
Christ's.  So  in  salvation  (Rom.  iv.  16). 
Believe  !  Live  by  faith,  and  a  complete 
cure  shall  be  wrought  in  thee ! — H.  M, 
Booth. 


375 


CHAP.  XV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


CHAPTER  XY. 
CRITICAL    NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Of  Jerusalem. —i^/'om  Jerusalem  (see  R.V.).  Probably  a  deputation  from  the 
Sanhedrin  sent  expressly  to  watch  Him. 

Ver.  2.  Transgress  the  tradition. — The  Jews  attached  greater  value  to  tradition  than  even 
to  the  written  law,  appealing  in  support  of  it  to  Deut.  iv.  14,  xvii.  10  {Meyer).  Wash  noi 
their  hands. — The  custom  of  washing  the  hands  before  a  meal  was  not  only  a  cleanly  and 
desirable  one,  but  was  rendered  absolutely  necessary  by  the  habits  of  the  East,  which  involve 
the  dipping  of  all  hands  into  a  common  dish.  But  it  is  obvious  that  occasions  would  arise 
in  which  the  nature  of  a  meal,  which  might  consist  of  dry  bread  and  fruit,  or  some  pressing 
urgency,  or  some  difficulty  of  obtaining  water  at  the  moment,  might  render  the  custom 
impossible.  Even  Talmudists  admit  that  handwashing  is  needless  if  the  hands  be  clean 
{Farrar').  Jesus  did  not  reject  this  tradition,  viewing  it  merely  as  a  custom  (which  was 
also  common  among  the  Persians,  Greeks,  and  Romans).  He  only  refused  to  recognise 
it  as  a  binding  or  religious  ordinance,  and  hence  omitted  it  in  urgent  circumstances 
(^Lange). 

Ver.  3.  Why  do  ye  also  transgress  ...  by  your  tradition  % — Because  of  (R.V.).  The 
"also  "  must  be  noted.  It  admits  that  there  was  some  kind  of  transgression  on  the  part  of 
His  disciples —transgression  of  a  human  injunction.  But  it  asserts  that,  on  the  part  of  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees,  there  was  transgression  too,  though  in  a  far  higher  plane  of  things ; 
and,  what  was  of  very  serious  significance,  transgression  on  account  of  their  tradition.  The 
Saviour  thus,  as  Luther  remarks,  meets  the  bolt  of  their  question  by  a  counterbolt,  which, 
as  it  is  driven  home,  pushes  out  theirs,  till  it  falls  to  the  ground  (  Morison). 

Ver.  4.  Die  the  death.-  The  expression  "let  him  die  the  death"  is  idiomatic,  but  now 
obsolete.  It  is  intended  to  be  emphatic — let  him  die  the  death  (which  is  the  appropriate 
penalty  of  such  a  crime).  The  Hebrew  expression  is  also  idiomatic,  and  idiomatically 
emphatic  ;  and  so  is  the  Greek  expression,  which  literally  means  "  let  him  come  to  his  end 
by  death  "  (ibid.). 

Ver.  5.  It  is  a  gift. — Rather,  let  it  be  a  gift,  or  '•  devoted  to  sacred  uses,"  which  the  Jews 
expressed  by  the  word  Corban,  found  in  Mark  vii.  11.  The  scribes  held  that  these  words, 
even  when  pronounced  in  spite  and  anger  against  parents  who  needed  succour,  excused  the 
son  from  his  natural  duty ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  oblige  him  really  to  devote  the 
sum  to  the  service  of  God  or  of  the  temple  {Carr). 

Vers.  5, 6  {see  R.  V.).  Made  the  commandment  of  God  of  none  effect. — Were  this  clause  literally 
translated  it  would  run  thus:  And  ye  abrogated  tke  lam  of  God  because  of  your  tradition! 
The  Saviour  speaks  with  indignation — mingling  into  His  words  a  withering  element  of 
irony,  which  may  be  partially  indicated  to  the  English  reader  by  an  exclamation  point  at  the 
close  {Morison). 

Ver.  9.  Doctrines  .  .  .  commandments. — Neither  word  is  quite  adequately  rendered.  The 
"doctrines"  are  not  articles  of  faith,  propositions  to  be  believed,  but  precepts  which  were 
taught  as  binding.  The  "  commandments "  are  single,  special  rules,  as  contrasted  with 
the  Divine  "commandment,"  which  was  exceedingly  broad  \Plumptre). 

Ver.  10.  He  called  the  multitude. — The  moment  our  Lord  turns  to  the  people.  His  teach- 
ing is  by  parables.  This  appeal  to  the  multitude  as  worthier  than  the  Pharisees  to 
receive  the  Divine  truths  is  significant  of  the  popular  character  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
{Carr). 

Ver.  11.  Defileth. — This  principle  virtually  invalidated  the  whole  mass  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment legislation  which  had  reference  to  defilement  through  external  influences  and  conditions 
( Wendt). 

Ver.  12.  The  Pharisees  were  offended. — A  proof  of  the  influence  of  the  Pharisees.  The 
disciples  believed  that  Christ  would  be  concerned  to  have  offended  those  who  stood  so  high 
in  popular  favour  {Carr). 

Ver.  13.  Every  plant,  etc. — Not  a  wild  flower,  but  a  cultivated  plant  or  tree.  Here  the 
plant  cultivated  by  human  hands — the  vine  that  is  not  the  true  vine  of  Israel — is  the 
doctrine  of  the  Pharisees  {Carr).  At  the  same  time  we  should  also  bear  in  mind  what  was 
said  in  xiii.  about  the  identification  of  individuals  with  the  doctrines  which  they  pro- 
fessed {Lange) 

Ver.  14.  Blind  leaders  of  the  blind. — It  would  appear  from  Rom.  ii.  19  that  the  phrase  "  a 
leader  of  the  blind  "  was  one  in  common  use  to  describe  the  ideal  of  the  Rabbi's  calling. 

376 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  XV. 


Now  they  beard  it  in  a  new  form,  which  told  them  that  their  state  was  the  very  reverse  of 
that  ideal.  And  that  which  was  worst  in  it  was  that  their  blindness  was  self-chosen 
(xiii.  15),  and  that  they  were  yet  all  unconscious  of  it,  and  boasted  that  they  saw  (John 
ix.  41)  (^Plvrniptre). 

Ver.  15.  This  parable. — The  parable  (R.V.).  The  answer  shows  that  Peter's  question 
referred  not  to  the  proverb  that  immediately  preceded,  but  to  what  seemed  to  him  the 
strange,  startling  utterance  of  ver.  11.  It  was  significant  that  he  could  not  as  yet  take  in 
the  thought  that  it  was  a  truth  to  be  received  literally  (Plumptre).  The  language  of  ver.  11 
is  not  strictly  a  parable,  but  it  has  a  feature  of  the  parable  proper  in  that  invisible  things 
are  represented  under  visible  images,  the  ceremonial  defilement  of  the  Mosaic  law  being 
used  as  an  image  to  indicate,  by  contrast,  the  moral  defilement  of  the  heart  (3fansel). 

Ver.  16.  Ye. — Emphatic.  Slowness  of  spiritual  apprehension  in  His  genuine  disciples 
grieves  the  Saviour;  from  others  He  expects  no  better  (xiii.  11)  (Brown). 

Ver.  17.  The  draught. — The  word  is  used  in  its  old  English  meaning,  as  equivalent  to 
"  drain,"  "  sewer,"  *'  cesspool "  (see  2  Kings  x.  27).  The  principle  here  implied  is,  that  a 
process  purely  physical  from  first  to  last  cannot  in  itself  bring  any  moral  defilement 
(^Plumptre). 

Ver.  21.  Ji&T^BXi%6..— Withdrew  (R.V.)  for  retirement  (Mark  vii.  24).  Coasts. — Parts 
(R.V.).  The  reference  is  apparently  to  the  places  of  Galilee  that  bordered  on  the  narrow 
strip  of  maritime  land  in  which  Tyre  and  Sidon  were  situated  (Morison).  Tyre  and  Sidou. — 
Phoenician  cities,  sea-ports,  great  commercial  emporiums,  and  of  great  antiquity.  They  are 
only  about  twenty  miles  apart  from  one  another,  Tyre  being  the  more  northerly  of  the  two. 
At  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  sojourn,  they  were  still  in  a  comparatively  flourishing  condition 
{ibid.). 

Ver.  22.  A  woman  of  Canaan. — Called  in  Mark  "  a  Greek,  a  Syrophoenician  by  nation." 
The  two  expressions  are  identical,  for  the  land  of  Canaan,  literally,  the  low  lands  or  nether- 
lands,  at  first  applicable  to  the  whole  of  Palestine,  was  confined  in  later  times  to  the 
maritime  plain  of  Phoenicia  (Carr).  Vexed  with  a  devil. — St.  Mark  says  the  young  girl  had 
or  was  held  by  an  unclean  spirit.  This  clearly  puts  the  case  into  the  same  category  as  that 
of  the  boy  brought  by  his  father  to  the  foot  of  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  The  theory 
which  would  attribute  *'•  possession  "  always  to  moral  causes  in  the  subjects  of  it,  will  not 
cover  these  instances.  Young  people  of  that  age  could  not  be  among  the  desperately  wicked 
in  whom  Satan  ruled  through  their  own  evil  will.  Some  terrible  physical  or  hereditary 
malady  was  the  seat  or  organ  of  the  demonic  power  (Laidlarv). 

Ver.  26.  Dogs. — The  word  used  was  diminutive  in  its  form  and  as  such  pointed  not  to  the 
wild,  unclean  beasts  that  haunt  the  streets  of  an  Eastern  city  (Ps.  lix.  6),  but  to  the  tamer 
animals  that  were  bred  in  the  house  and  kept  as  pets  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  27.  Truth,  Lord:  yet. —  Yea,  Lord:  for  even  (R.V.).  The  woman  catches  at  the 
diminutive  form  which  had  softened  the  usual  word  of  scorn,  and  presses  the  privilege 
which  it  implied  (ibid.). 

Ver.  28.  Great  is  thy  faith. — Thus  showing  that,  in  the  one  main  point,  she  was  one  of  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel. 

Ver.  29.  A  mountain.  —Rather,  the  mountain  country  ;  the  high  land,  as  distinguished  from 
the  low  land,  which  He  had  left  (Carr).  From  Mark  vii.  31  R.V.,  it  would  appear  that  His 
journey  led  Him  actually  through  Sidon. 

Ver.  30.  Cast  them  down  at  Jesus'  feet. — Indicating,  according  to  Bengel  and  Meyer,  their 
haste ;  according  to  Fitzsche  and  de  Wette,  implicit  confidence  ;  and  according  to 
Baumgarten-Crusius,  the  helplessness  of  the  persons  who  were  afflicted.  But  may  it  not  at 
the  same  time  indicate  both  the  rudeness  of  these  mountaineers  and  their  confidence,, bold- 
ness, and  their  rapid  movements  in  order  to  bring  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  all  who  were  diseased 
(Lange). 

Ver.  37.  Baskets. — Not  the  hophinoi  or  hand-baskets  of  xiv.  20,  but  spurides,  denoting 
somewhat  larger  baskets.  The  word  was  often  used  to  denote  a  basket  or  hamper  for 
holding  provisions,  and  in  particular  for  holding  fish  (see  Wetstein  in  loc).  Carr  says  the 
spuria  was  "  probably  a  larger  basket  made  of  rope-net."  Dr.  Morison  suggests  that  on  this 
occasion  the  baskets  may  have  been  extemporised  from  the  shrubs  that  were  growing 
around.     See  on  xiv.  20. 

Ver.  39.  Magdala.— i¥«^«rffwt  (R.V.).  The  MSS.  vary  between  "Magdala"  and 
"  Magadan " ;  but  the  latter  reading  has  by  far  the  highest  authority  in  its  favour. 
Probably  an  altered  form  of  the  Hebrew  Migdol  =  a  tower.  Usually  identified  with  the 
modern  village  of  El  Me j del,  about  three  miles  north  of  Tiberias.  Dean  Plumptre  says : 
"  On  the  assumption  that  "  Mary,  called  Magdalene  "  derived  her  name  from  a  town  of  that 
name,  we  may  think  of  our  Lord's  visit  as  having  been  in  some  way  connected  with  her 
presence.'* 


377 


CHAP.  XV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTE. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Release  hy  "  Corhan^ — So  great  was  the  solemnity  attached  to  vows,  whether 
they  were  rightly  or  wrongly  made,  that  the  Rabbins  were  prepared  to  argue  that  ic  was 
of  less  importance  that  parents  should  be  honoured  than  that  a  vow  should  be  broken. 
It  is  the  universal  penalty  that  follows  on  attaching  undue  importance  to  forms,  that 
presently  they  come  to  override  even  the  great  natural  laws  of  human  associations,  and 
the  Divinely  announced  commandments  of  the  Decalogue.  Ecclesiastical  rules  come  to  be 
valued  above  Divine  laws  ;  and  ecclesiastical  rules  can  be  made  to  excuse  the  neglect  of 
the  first  and  essential  human  duties.  This  rabbinical  custom  is  not,  however,  generally 
understood,  and,  indeed,  it  is  so  repulsive  to  all  men  of  noble  and  generous  feeling  that 
it  is  diflficult  to  secure  for  it  a  patient  consideration.  It  seems  to  have  been  established  as 
a  principle  that  any  man  was  at  liberty  to  make  a  vow  consecrating  his  property,  or  any 
portion  of  it,  to  the  service  of  the  temple,  after  his  decease,  or  even  during  his  life,  with 
the  understanding  that  he  would  keep  the  use  of  it  so  long  as  he  needed.  Properly  speaking, 
such  "  devotements  "  ought  always  to  be  thank-offerings  for  special  mercies  received,  and 
they  ought  only  to  have  been  accepted  when  they  had  such  a  religious  feeling  inspiring 
them.  But  such  a  custom  of  "  devotements  "  was  open  to  serious  abuse  by  unprincipled 
men.  If  a  man's  property  was  in  peril  of  being  seized  by  his  creditor,  he  could  at  least 
save  the  life-use  of  it  by  making  it  a  gift  to  the  temple.  And  if  any  special  claim— as 
by  parents  or  brothers — was  made  on  a  certain  portion  of  his  property,  he  successfully 
evaded  the  claim  by  affirming  that  the  particular  portion  had  been  devoted,  by  a  vow,  to 
the  service  of  God.  "  Corban  "  denotes  anything  offered  to  God,  or  the  service  of  the  temple. 
"  Almost  every  possession  a  man  had  might  be  rendered  "  Corban  "  by  him,  even  his  own 
person ;  and,  when  once  offered  to  God,  the  article  was  sacred,  and  could  on  no  account 
be  turned  to  a  secular  use  until  redeemed.  All  that  was  necessary  was  that  a  man  should 
say  respecting  a  given  thing  "  May  this  be  as  the  temple  to  me  "  ;  or,  "  as  the  altar,"  etc. ; 
or,  "as  the  (sacred)  fire,"  etc.;  or,  "as  the  sacrifice  to  me."  Thereupon  a  man,  being 
displeased  with  his  aged  or  poor  parents,  might  free  himself  from  all  obligation  to  support 
them  by  merely  pronouncing  one  of  these  forms ;  and  then,  when  either  father  or  mother 
appealed  to  him  for  aid,  he  would  say,  "  Whatever  I  might  have  bestowed  on  you  is  now 
Corban."  And  the  Pharisees,  as  Christ  complains,  insisted  on  the  fulfilment  of  this  execrable 
vow,  even  though  it  necessitated  the  violation  of  natural  instinct,  as  well  as  the  command, 
"  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother."  In  fact  there  was  no  duty  a  villain  might  not 
shun  Jay  this  infamous  procedure.  The  Talmud  actually  teaches  that  every  one  ought  to 
honour  his  father  and  his  mother,  or  to  support  them  if  they  were  poor,  unless  he  has  vowed 
to  the  contrary.  We  cannot  wonder  that  such  abominable  doctrines  excited  our  Lord's 
utmost  indignation,  and  drew  from  Him  one  of  His  severest  censures. — {R.  Tuck,  JS.A.). 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.^Verses  1—20. 

Jes7is  in  controversy. — We  seem  to  have  further  indications  here  of  the  growing 
fame  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Even  in  distant  and  haughty  Jerusalem  some  of  the 
most  learned  and  zealous  of  its  inhabitants  (ver.  1 )  have  heard  of  His  teaching ; 
and  are  present  now  for  the  purpose  of  engaging  in  controversy  with  Him. 
Truly  characteristic,  also,  of  their  teaching  is  the  subject  of  their  dispute,  being 
only,  in  fact,  a  mere  outward  question  of  ceremonial  tradition  (see  ver.  2).  The 
Saviour,  in  reply,  deals>  first,  with  the  occasion  itself;  and  then,  secondly,  with 
certain  difficulties  to  which  it  gave  occasion  in  turn. 

I.  The  occasion  itself. — He  begins,  e.g.  by  pointing  out  to  His  questioners 
the  disloyalty  of  their  inquiry.  Why  do  My  disciples  transgress  the  tradition 
of  the  elders  ?  There  is  another  question  comes  first.  Why  do  ye  act  as  ye  do  ? 
Why  do  ye  use  words  in  such  a  way  as  practically  to  prevent  men  from  doing 
their  duty  to  their  parents  ?  The  word  of  God  is  plain  enough  on  this  subject, 
and  strong  enough  too  (see  ver.  4,  "  let  him  die  the  death  ").  Why  do  ye  set 
it  aside  ?  Why  teach  men  by  a  subterfuge  how  not  to  do  what  God  has  told 
them  to  do  ?  (vers.  5,  6).  Next,  the  Saviour  points  out  to  them  plainly  the 
hypocrisy  of  their  conduct.  This  excessive  zeal  about  cleanness  of  skin  was  a 
thing  of  the  surface  alone.  There  was  nothing  corresponding  to  it — there  was 
much  opposed  to  it — within.     The  prophet  Isaiah  had  long  ago  foreseen  this, 

378 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,       chap,  x v. 


when  he  said  as  in  ver.  8.  This  must  be  so,  indeed,  in  such  a  case  as  that  at 
present  discussed.  Wherever  men  put  the  "  teachings "  of  men  on  the  same 
level  with  the  teachings  of  God,  especially  where  they  do  so  in  connection  with 
the  "worship"  (ver.  9)  of  God,  and  as  a  mark  of  zeal  in  His  service,  they  (naturally) 
do  so  "in  vain."  Worse  than  "in  vain  "  in  fact;  so  as  to  give  Him  offence. 
Why  should  He  be  pleased  with  that  which  is  only  done  in  pretence  ?  Lastly, 
the  Saviour  points  out  the  ignorance  involved  in  this  fault.  Ignorance  so  great 
as  to  lead  the  Saviour  (apparently)  to  seek  to  deliver  from  it  not  only  teachers 
but  taught.  "  CalKng  "  the  "  multitude  "  to  Him,  He  says  to  them.  Hear  the 
truth  on  this  point.  Hear  how  opposed  it  is  to  all  that  these  teachers  have 
usually  taught  you  about  it.  It  is  not  "  that  which  entereth  into  a  man  " 
which  is  to  be  thought  of  the  first.  Kather,  and  instead,  it  is  that  which  "  pro- 
ceedeth  out "  of  him  which  is  to  be  thought  of  the  first.  What  his  mouth  says, 
in  short,  not  what  it  feeds  on,  is  that  which  defiles.  This  is  the  truth — the 
primary  truth  which  their  teaching  ignores. 

II.  After  the  occasion. — Here  the  Master  is  found  dealing,  not  with  His 
enemies,  but  His  friends.  Certain  difficulties  appear  to  have  arisen  in  the 
minds  of  His  disciples  from  what  they  have  heard.  The  first  of  these  has  to  do 
with  the  question  of  authority.  Knowest  Thou  that  that  concluding  saying 
of  Thine  about  that  which  defiles,  gave  great  offence  to  the  Pharisees?  That 
they  were  absolutely  "  scandalised  "  by  it,  in  fact  ?  Dost  Thou,  therefore,  in  the 
face  of  this — so  their  question  may  be  understood  to  imply — adhere  to  it  still  ? 
The  Saviour's  answer  shows  plainly  and  emphatically  that  He  did.  "Every  plant 
which  My  heavenly  Father  planted  not  shall  be  rooted  up"  (ver.  13).  By 
that  test  I  abide.  To  that  proof  I  appeal.  Do  not  ye,  therefore,  trouble 
yourselves  as  to  what  these  Pharisees  say.  But  understand,  rather,  that  for 
those  who  follow  them  it  will  be  as  bad  as  for  them  (ver.  14).  That  difficulty 
disposed  of,  another  arises — a  difficulty  of  comprehension.  There  is  something 
here,  the  Apostle  Peter  seems  to  feel,  which  we  do  not  understand  as  we 
ought.  This  "  saying"  of  Thine  about  that  which  "  defiles"  is  but  a  "parable  " 
to  us  at  present.  Wilt  Thou  not  then  "  declare  "  to  us  its  meaning  and  truth  ? 
(ver.  15).  This  difficulty  is  met — not  without  a  touch  of  reproachfulness 
(ver.  16) — by  two  appeals  to  themselves.  By  an  appeal,  on  the  one  hand,  to 
what  they  knew  about  the  nature  of  food.  Perceive  ye  not  what  happens  to 
food  when  taken  in  at  the  mouth — where  it  passes  to — how  it  passes  away — and 
how,  therefore,  it  affects  nothing  but  the  body  alone  1  By  an  appeal,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  what  they  knew  of  men's  hearts.  Did  they  not  know  the  kind 
of  things  which  came  forth  from  the  "  heart "  ?  The  "  evil  thoughts,"  on  the 
one  hand,  to  which  they  pointed  as  their  origin  ?  The  evil  actions  and  words 
of  all  sorts,  on  the  other  hand,  to  which  they  gave  birth  ;  and  by  which, 
therefore,  all  that  inward  evil  was  at  once  evidenced  and  increased  ?  This  was 
the  thing,  this  outward  passage  of  evil,  which,  beginning  with  much  pollution, 
and  ending  with  more,  "  defiled  "  all  it  passed  through.  The  evil  of  "  eating 
bread  with  unwashen  hands  "  was  not  to  be  named  by  its  side  (vers.  18-20). 

How  thoroughly  radical,  therefore,  if  man  is  to  be  reformed  at  all  must  be 
the  reformation  of  his  nature  !  And  by  how  mighty  a  hand  must  it  be  effected, 
if  effected  at  all  !  For  the  truth  on  this  point,  see  Ps.  li.,  beginning  of  ver.  6. 
For  the  only  proper  prayer,  therefore,  in  connection  with  it,  see  Ps.  li.  10. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Vers.  1,  2.  Traditions. — 1.  It  is  no  even  such  as  bear  office  in  places  most 
new  thing  that  Christ  hath  adversaries,  famous  for  religion  ;  for  here  are 
and  these,  chiefly,  coiTupt  churchmen,      scribes  and   Pharisees  which  were  of 

379 


CHAP.  XV.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Jerusalem  going  about  to  divert 
disciples  from  following  Christ,  and  to 
put  a  disgrace,  if  they  could,  on  our 
Lord,  for  His  disciples'  cause.  2.  It 
is  no  wonder  to  see  Christ  and  His 
church  molested  with  the  controvery 
of  nonconformity  in  human  inventions 
of  religion.  "  Why  do  Thy  disciples 
transgress  the  traditions  ? "  say  they. 
3.  Antiquity  and  Fathers,  without 
Scripture,  is  the  old  charter  of  super- 
stitious formalists.  "  Why,"  say  they, 
"  do  Thy  disciples  transgress  the  tradi- 
tions of  the  elders  ?  "  4.  That  which  is 
lawful  in  itself  while  it  abideth  within 
the  limits  of  civil  fashions,  may  be  left 
undone,  and  be  discountenanced,  when 
it  is  set  up  in  state,  within  the  limits 
of  religion  ;  therefore  the  disciples  did 
not  wash  their  hands  before  meat,  in 
the  company  of  Pharisees,  who  made 
washing  at  that  time  to  be  a  holy  and 
religious  act. — David  Dickson. 

Vers.  1-3.  Technical  fault-finding. — 
It  is  always — I.  Punctilious  and  trivial. 

II.  External  and  superficial. 

III.  Associated  with  a  wrong  con- 
dition of  heart. 

lY.  Opposed  to  the  spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ.— e/.  Parker,  D.D. 

Ver.  2.  Hand-washing. — The  Phari- 
sees had  elevated  ablutions,  and  even 
the  minutest  regulations  about  the 
method  of  performing  them,  into  a 
matter  of  religion.  A  whole  order  of 
the  Talmud — that  called  Taharoth,  or 
Purifications — is  devoted  to  washings ; 
and  two  separate  tracts  of  it,  Mikvdoth, 
or  "  baths,"  and  Yadaim,  or  "  hand- 
washings,"  deal  especially  with  cleans- 
ings  of  the  person.  These  ablutions 
were  extended  to  all  kinds  of  objects, 
and  in  later  days  were  accompanied  by 
elaborate  liturgies  of  recognised  prayers. 
Indeed,  so  ultra -Pharisaic  was  this 
branch  of  Pharisaism,  that  it  originated 
the  jest  of  the  Sadducees,  who,  seeing 
their  opponents  washing  the  golden 
candlestick,  said  that  soon  they  would 
not  be  content  until  they  could  wash 
the  sun  ! — F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D. 

Eating  with  unwashen  hands. — Rabbi 
380 


Joses  determined  that  to  eat  with 
unwashen  hands  is  as  great  a  sin  as 
adultery.  And  Eabbi  Akiba,  being 
kept  a  close  prisoner,  having  water 
sent  him,  both  to  wash  his  hands  with 
and  to  drink  with  his  meat,  the 
greatest  part  being  accidentally  shed, 
he  washed  his  hands  with  the  remainder, 
though  he  left  himself  none  to  drink, 
saying  he  would  rather  die  than  trans- 
gress the  tradition  of  the  elders. — 
M.  Henry. 

Imaginary  defilement. — Christ,  no 
doubt,  would  exceed  all  scribes  and 
Pharisees  in  the  love  of  real  cleanliness 
and  cleanness,  inner  and  outer.  But 
He  felt  constrained  to  lay  His  ban 
upon  the  imaginary  virtue  that  was 
supposed  to  be  inherent  in  the  act  of 
removing  imaginary  uncleanness.  It 
was  supposed  that  there  was  a  demon 
called  Shibta,  "  which  sits  upon  men's 
hands  during  night ;  and  if  any  person 
touches  his  food  with  unwashed  hands, 
then  that  demon  sits  upon  his  food, 
and  makes  it  dangerous."  (Rab. 
Taanith,  fol.  xx.  2). — J.  Morison,  D.D, 

Ver.  3.  The  traditions  of  men  and 
the  commandTTients  of  God. — 1.  Tradi- 
tions may  be  fathered  or  mothered  on 
those  that  maintain  them,  no  less  than 
on  those  who  invented  them ;  for 
Christ  saith,  "  Why  do  ye  by  your 
traditions  transgress?"  2.  Such  as 
are  most  zealous  for  human  traditions 
shall  readily  be  found  transgressors 
and  contemners  of  Divine  commands, 
and  God's  traditions  given  by  Scripture. 
3i  When  the  authority  of  human 
traditions  doth  loose  or  weaken  the 
obligatory  power  of  a  moral  command 
in  anything,  it  may  and  should  be 
despised  altogether  and  rejected,  as 
unworthy  to  be  a  rule  for  a  man's 
carriage  in  anything. — David  Dickson. 

Vers.  4-6.  The  claims  of  parents. — 
1.  The  duty  of  children  unto  parents 
is  straitly  urged  by  God's  command,  and 
the  wicked  transgression  of  it  is  made 
capital.  2.  It  is  a  part  of  the  honour 
due   to  parents   that  children  sustain 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap,  x v. 


them  in  need  as  they  are  able,  for  not 
helping  is  here  as  much  as  not  honour- 
ing their  father  or  mother.  3.  Such 
traditions  as,  directly  or  bj  consequence, 
do  prejudge  the  true  intent  of  any  of 
God's  laws  (whatsoever  pretence  of 
religion  be  made)  are  wicked,  for  He 
saith,  '^  You  by  your  traditions  have 
made  the  command  of  God  of  none 
effect."  4.  No  gift  nor  voluntary 
offering  presented  unto  God  doth  please 
Him,  when  the  duty  of  love  owing  to 
others  is  neglected  or  contravened 
thereby,  for  Christ  calls  such  a  gift  a 
breach  of  the  fifth  commandment. 
5.  Dispensation  with  God's  law  by 
human  authority  and  urging  of  men's 
traditions  more  than  of  God's  com- 
mands, is,  in  effect,  the  abolishing  of 
God's  law  (ver.  6). — Ibid, 

Vers.  5,  6.  Unholy  antagonisms. — 
I.  There  ought  to  be  no  conflict  be- 
tween the  Divine  and  social  claims. — 
The  family  has  its  claims ;  society  has 
its  claims;  God  has  His  claims,  and 
they  are  all  righteous.  They  are  all  on 
the  same  line  of  rectitude.  There 
ought  to  be  no  conflict  between  them. 
This  conflict  exists  among  us  because 
the  claims  of  society  are  often  unjust. 
God's  claims  are  never  unjust. 

II.  Those  who  most  devoutly  re- 
cognise the  Divine  claims  are  the 
most  faithful  in  their  discharge  of 
social  claims. 

III.  The  discharge  of  the  one  kind 
of  claims  should  not  be  used  as  a 
pretext  for  the  neglect  of  the  others. 
— J.  Owen, 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  hypocrite. — I.  How 
far  a  hypocrite  goes. — He  draws  nigh 
to  God  and  honours  Him  ;  he  is,  in 
profession,  a  worshipper  of  God. 

II.  Where  He  rests  and  takes  up. 
— This  is  done  but  with  His  mouth 
and  with  His  lips  ;  it  is  piety  but  from 
the  teeth  outwards. 

III.  What  that  is  wherein  he  comes 
short. — It  is  in  the  main  matter,  "  their 
heart  is  far  from  Me." — M.  Henry, 

Ver.  7.  Isaiah  and  Christ. — I.  The 


importance  of  plain  speaking  on 
all  questions  affecting  the  interests  of 
truth.  Jesus  Christ  was  pre-eminently 
a  plain  speaker.  In  the  text  He 
calls  certain  persons  hypocrites.  He 
does  not  say  behind  their  backs  that 
they  were  hypocrites,  but  He  looked 
straight  at  them  and  right  through 
them,  and  said,  "  Ye  hypocrites."  If 
we  had  more  such  plain  speaking  it 
would  be  an  advantage  to  us  all.  Two 
things  are  required  in  the  plain 
speaker  : — 

1.  Personal  rightness. — "  Let  him 
that  is  without  sin  cast  the  first 
stone." 

2.  Moral  fearlessness. — Our  courage 
is  not  always  equal  to  our  convictions. 

II.  The  far-seeing  spirit  of  prophecy. 
— Jesus  Christ  said  to  the  men  of  His 
day,  "  Esaias  prophesied  of  you." 
Observe  the  unity  of  the  moral  world  ; 
observe  the  unchangeableness  of  God's 
laws ;  see  how  right  is  ever  right  and 
wrong  is  ever  wrong  ;  how  the  centuries 
make  no  difference  in  the  quality  of 
righteousness,  and  fail  to  work  any 
improvement  in  the  deformity  of 
evil. 

III.  The  high  authority  of  the 
righteous  censor. — Anon. 

Ver.  8.  True  prayer. — The  power  of 
a  petition  is  not  in  the  roof  of  the 
mouth,  but  in  the  root  of  the  heart. — 
Trapp. 

Vers.    10,    11.     Moral    pollution. — 

1.  Contesting  against  Christ's  disciples, 
slandering  and  reproaching  of  such  as 
do  not  observe  human  traditions,  is  a 
pollution  of  the  slanderer,  and  more 
dangerous  than  the  omission  of  human 
ceremonies,  which  may  be  omitted 
without  pollution  of  sin.  "  That  which 
Cometh  out   of  the  mouth  polluteth." 

2.  Albeit  unto  mocking  adversaries 
we  need  not  always  give  reasons  of 
what  we  do  or  omit,  yet  unto  indifferent 
spectators,  it  is  good  to  give  a  reason, 
for  their  edification  and  our  own 
clearing,  as  here  Christ  giveth  satis- 
faction to  the  common  people.  3.  The 
fountain  of  the   pollution   of  a  man's 

381 


CHAP.  XV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


actions  is  his  heart,  conscience,  and 
affections,  not  being  rightly  disposed. — 
David  Dickson. 

Mamis  morality  not  affected  hy  man!s 
receptivity. — This  fact  : — 

I.  Eefates  the  sophism  that  crime 
is  necessitated  by  circumstances. 

II.  Charges  upon  man  the  responsi- 
bility of  his  own  words. 

III.  Shows  that  every  man  is  the 
source  of  his  own  character  and 
influence. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Ver.  13.  God  the  Uprooter. — I.  The 
disciples  needed  this  lesson — That 
they  might  not  be  startled  by  the  fading 
away  of  much  which  had  seemed  to 
them  fair  and  vigorous,  but  still  more 
that  they  might  understand  what 
there  was  in  the  Jewish  soil  which 
could  not  be  rooted  out — what  there 
was  that  would  spread  its  fibres  more 
widely,  genially,  and  send  out  higher 
branches,  wherein  the  fowls  of  the  air 
might  dwell.  The  sect  of  the 
Pharisees,  our  Lord  says.  His  heavenly 
Father  hath  not  planted.  The  disciples 
of  Jesus  learnt  gradually  from  His  lips 
that  they  were  called  and  chosen  out 
to  preach  to  their  own  countrymen 
that  the  Son  of  David  and  the  Son  of 
Abraham  had  come  to  bind  together 
in  one  publicans  and  sinners — Jews, 
Galileans,  Samaritans.  With  this 
message  they  were  to  go  forth  to  Jews 
and  Gentiles.  As  they  bore  it,  they 
soon  discovered  that  the  natural  and 
necessary  antagonists  of  it  were  the 
sects ;  that  Sadducees  and  Pharisees 
hated  it  equally ;  that  they  saw  in  it 
the  destruction  of  the  sect -principle  ; 
that  they  felt  they  could  only  maintain 
even  a  temporary  ascendancy  by  fight- 
ing with  this  rival  as  for  life  and  death. 
Then,  when  they  found  how  mighty 
this  sect -principle  was,  and  what 
numbers  were  pledged  to  it,  they  must 
have  recollected  the  words  which  had 
been  spoken  to  them :  "  Every  plant 
which  My  heavenly  Father  has  not 
planted  shall  be  rooted  out." 

II.  There  is  a  plant  in  your  heart 
and  mine  which  our  heavenly  Father 

382 


has  not  planted,  and  which  must  be 
rooted  out.  It  is  that  same  plant  of 
self-seeking,  of  opinionativeness,  of 
party-spirit,  which  has  shed  its  poison 
over  the  church  and  over  the  world. 
It  springs  in  us  from  that  same  root  of 
unbelief  in  One  who  is  the  Head  of  us 
all,  whose  life  is  the  common  life  of  all, 
out  of  which  all  sects  and  parties  have 
proceeded. — F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A, 

Ver.  1 4.  Blind  leaders  of  the  blind. — 

1.  Obstinate  maintainers  of  false  doc- 
trine and  of  corrupt  traditions,  enemies 
to  Christ  and  His  disciples,  are  given 
over  of  God,  and  are  worthy  also  to  be 
given  over,  and  let  alone  by  men,  i.e. 
fellowship  is  not  to  be  kept  with  them. 

2.  Where  the  teachers  and  people 
follow  mere  traditions  in  religion,  and 
not  the  rule  of  God's  word,  the  leaders 
and  they  that  are  led  are  both  blind. 

3.  The  following  of  false  teachers  and 
blind  guides  will  not  be  an  excuse 
before  God  for  people  to  plead  im- 
munity ;  but  seeing  none  should  follow 
any  man,  but  as  that  man  doth  follow 
the  Lord,  the  blind  guide  and  the  blind 
follower  shall  both  perish,  if  they  hold 
on  in  their  wrong  way. — David 
Dickson. 

Vei'.  19.  Crime  in  germ. — Human 
law  takes  notice  of  acts,  not  of  disposi- 
tions. God's  law  determines  everything 
by  the  motive  or  purpose  which  leads  to 
action.  1.  "Thou  shalt  not  kill." 
Killing  is  not  mere  blood-shedding. 
Anger  without  cause  is  murder.  Op- 
pression of  the  weak  is  murder. 
Depriving  a  man  of  the  means  of  get- 
ting a  livelihood,  to  gratify  his  revenge 
is  murder.  *'  Whosoever  hateth  his 
brother  is  a  murderer."  2.  "  Thou 
shalt  not  steal."  A  man  may  rob  God 
as  well  as  his  neighbour.  He  who 
wastes  his  employer's  time  is  a  thief. 
He  who  withholds  just  praise  is  a  thief. 
He  who  detracts  from  the  just  honour 
of  his  fellow-man  is  a  thief.  He  who 
vows  and  does  not  pay  is  a  thief. 
3.  "  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness." 
False  witness  is  lying.  But  what  is 
lying  ?     You    may    repeat    the    very 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xv. 


words  of  a  speaker,  and  yet  misreport  life  ?  "     "We    cannot   reach   it !     Is  it 

him  !      How  ?      By  putting  upon  his  then  never  to  be  reached  ?     When  we 

words  an  emphasis  not  his  own.     You  put  this   question  in  earnest,    we  are 

infuse   into   the   emphasis    your    own  prepared   to  hear  the  glorious  gospel, 

passion    or   purpose.     The   words   are  So  long  as  we  think  we  can  wash  the 

his,  the  tone  is  yours  !    Take  the  words  evil  otf  our  hands  in  any  one  of  the 

"  When  I    come,  I  will   come  with  a  world's  rivers,  we  do  not  feel  our  want 

rod  "  ;  they  may  be  spoken  with  tender-  of  a  gospel.     That  want  is  felt  only  in 

ness  and  reluctance,  they  may  also  be  proportion  to  our  conviction  that  sin  is 

so  emphasised  as  to  denote  pettishness  in  our   very    souls,  that  it  penetrates 

or  even  vengeance.     He  who  tells  an  every  fibre,  and  poisons  every  spring 

incomplete  tale,  involving  the  reputa-  and  energy  of  our  being.     Seeing  what 

tion  of  another,    bears   false   witness,  is  meant  by  the  spirituality  of  sin,  we 

So   does    he    (negatively)    who    lacks  shall   feel   our   need    of    Divine  help, 

courage  to  defend  an  injured  man,  for  Nay,  more  than  help,  God  must  under- 

whom  he  could  say  a  word  of  explana-  take  the  whole  case   for  us.     He  has 

tion.     Now,  strange  as  it  may   seem,  done  so.     See  the  Cross  !     There  is  a 

the  three  crimes  of  which  we  have  been  sacrifice  which  touches  sin  before  sin 

speaking    are  spiritually  similar,   and  comes  into  action — touches  it  in   the 

almost  identical.     He  who  kills,  steals  heart — touches  it   as   a   germ.     Then 

life ;  he  who  steals  life  is  prepared  to  see  the  ministry  of  the   Holy  Ghost  ! 

bear  false  witness ;  he  who  bears  false  That  ministry  operates  upon  the  very 

witness    both    steals    and    kills.     As,  life  of  life,  upon  the  first  pulsation  and 

therefore,  sin  is  in  the  sight  of  God  a  breathings  of  our  spiritual  nature.    We 

question  of  the  heart,  and  not  merely  a  have  only  to  see  ourselves  as  we  really 

question  of  the  hands,  there  arises  an  are,  to  see  our  need  of  the  sacrifice, 

inquiry     of     the      keenest     practical  and  our  dependence  upon  the  Spirit. — 

interest.     "  How  are  we  to  reach  the  J.  Parker,  D.D. 
disease  which  is  consuming  our  spiritual 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAR  AGRA  PH. —Verses  21—28. 

Jesus  in  banishment. — Amongst  the  many  striking  features  in  this  beautiful 
story,  perhaps  the  most  striking  is  to  be  found  in  the  contrast  between  its  begin- 
ning and  end.  At  the  beginning  we  find  the  Saviour  again  "  retiring  "  (see 
ver.  21,  and  cf.  xiv.  13)  from  where  He  usually  laboured ;  and  going  away  as  far 
as  to  the  heathen  region  near  "Tyre  and  Si  don  "  (ver.  21);  and  also  being 
anxious,  when  arrived  there,  that  "  no  man  should  know  it "  (Mark  vii.  24). 
These  were  hardly  things  to  encourage  any  one  in  applying  to  Him  for  help, 
least  of  all  a  woman  who  seems  to  have  been  brought  up  in  religion  as  a 
"Greek"  (Mark  vii.  26),  and  to  have  belonged  by  birth  to  one  of  the  hostile 
nations  of  Canaan  (ver.  22).  Yet,  at  the  end,  we  find  the  Saviour  saying  even 
to  her,  "  Be  it  done  to  thee  as  thou  wilt."  It  will  be  interesting  to  notice  the 
succession  of  steps  by  which  she  arrived  at  that  height ;  and  also  to  trace  out  the 
sv/icession  of  causes  to  which  these  advances  were  due. 

I.  The  succession  of  steps. — The  first  step  was  permission  to  make  known  her 
request.  This  was  conveyed  only,  it  is  perfectly  true,  in  a  negative  way.  To 
some,  indeed,  at  first,  this  "  step  "  may  hardly  appear  to  be  at  all  worthy  of  being 
called  by  that  name.  When  she  cried  to  Him  as  the  "  Son  of  David  "  to  "  have 
mercy  upon  her,"  He  answered  her  not ;  not  even,  for  the  time,  by  so  much  as  a 
"  word  "  (ver.  23).  Yet,  even  so,  it  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  so  doing,  He  did 
not  send  her  away.  If  there  was  no  word  of  direct  encouragement,  mither  was 
there  of  despair.  Not  to  answer  at  all  is  not  to  answer  "  no  " — even  if  we  take 
things  at  their  worst.     And  this  at  least,  therefore,  this  woman  obtained  by  this, 

383 


CHAP.  XV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


her  first  step,  viz.,  that  her  "right  to  petition"  was  not  denied.  Her  next  step 
was  that  of  obtaining  cm  answer  ;  though  not,  it  is  true,  at  first  sight  of  a  very- 
encouraging  look  ;  and  only  vouchsafed,  even  so,  in  an  indirect  way.  Still  it  was 
something  to  see  that  the  Saviour  and  His  disciples  were  conferring  together 
about  her  application  and  case.  Evidently  these  cries  of  hers  had  not  been  quite 
without  fruit.  Still  more  evident  was  this  when  we  Hsten  to  that  which  these 
disciples  are  saying  to  Jesus  about  her.  As  a  matter  of  fact  they  are  so  dis- 
turbed by  what  she  is  saying  that  they  desire  Him  earnestly — that  they  even 
"  beseech "  Him — to  "  send  her  away  "  (ver.  23).  Even,  also,  in  the  answer 
which  He  gives  to  this  entreaty,  if  looked  at  steadily,  though  at  first  it  appears 
as  a  simple  refusal  to  do  anything  for  her,  there  is  that  which,  to  one  in  her 
extremity,  has  something  of  encouragement  in  it.  "  I  was  not  sent  but  unto  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  For  saying  that,  after  all,  is  not  acquiescing 
in  what  the  disciples  had  asked.  It  is  not  openly  bidding  her  to  "  go  away  "  as 
they  had  so  earnestly  asked.  It  is  simply  leaving  her  free,  instead,  if  she  so 
desire  it,  to  go  on  with  her  cry.  And  this,  moreover,  notwithstanding  the  fact 
(made  plain  as  it  was  by  the  nature  of  the  Saviour's  reply  about  her  to  the 
disciples)  that  the  exact  nature  and  purport  of  her  cry  had  been  both  attended  to 
and  perceived.  Jesus  knew  what  she  was  doing  when  He  thus  openly  refrained 
from  bidding  her  cease  !  The  third  step  was  obtaining  an  answer  addressed  to 
herself ;  and  that  one,  also,  which  though  harsh  in  appearance,  carried  with  it  at 
least  an  indistinct  intimation  of  hope.  *'  It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's 
bread  and  cast  it  to  the  dogs."  For  what  was  this  answer  but  saying,  in  effect, 
that  others  came  first  ?  And  what  did  this  mean,  on  the  other  side,  but  that 
there  was  something  afterwards,  if  not  much,  for  those  who  came  second. 
Naturally,  therefore,  the  last  step  was  the  highest  of  all.  From  this  tacit  admis- 
sion to  open  action  was  not  a  very  long  stride.  From  allowing  that  there  was 
room  for  mercy  to  actually  showing  it  was  but  a  short  step  in  His  eyes.  And 
from  showing  it  at  all  to  showing  it  fully  was  hardly  anything  more.  See,  I 
have  heard  thee  !  See,  here  is  thy  answer  !  See,  it  is  all  thou  hast  asked  for  ! 
How  like  a  king  to  say  that  ! 

II.  The  succession  of  causes  which  led  to  this  succession  of  gains.  These 
would  seem  to  be  three.  The  first,  probably,  was  that  singularly  open  confession 
of  faith  with  which  this  "stranger"  began.  "Have  mercy  on  me,  0  Lord,  Thou 
Son  of  David."  We  know  how  deeply  He  was  touched  by  a  similar  confession 
soon  after  on  the  part  of  a  disciple  (xvi.  17).  How  greatly,  also,  still  further  on 
in  His  story,  by  something  which  was  equivalent  to  it  of  some  who  were  strangers 
(John  xii.  20-23).  Equally,  therefore,  in  secret  would  this  confession  tell  on 
Him  now.  How  could  He  finally  refuse  one  who  thus  openly  addressed  Him  as 
the  Saviour  of  all  1  A  second  secret  of  the  success  obtained  by  this  woman 
appears  to  have  lain  in  her  most  extraordinary  and  irrepressible  perseverance  in 
prayer.  The  more  the  disciples  wished  her  to  go  away,  the  less  she  went,  as  it 
were.  The  less  the  Saviour  said  to  her,  the  more  she  inferred.  If  He  did  not 
answer  her  when  at  a  distance  she  would  try  the  effect  of  being  nearer.  If  mere 
supplication  was  not  sufficient,  she  would  try  adoration  as  well  (ver.  25).  If 
there  was  anything  in  His  answers  to  encourage  her,  she  would  forget  everything 
except  that  (see  xi.  12).  The  last  cause,  and  perhaps  the  strongest  of  all,  was 
the  extraordinary  strength  of  her  faith.  This  was  shown,  on  the  one  hand,  by  her 
humility.  Whatever  name  the  Saviour  applied  to  her,  she  acquiesced  in  its 
truth  (ver.  27).  Herein  being  a  great  contrast  to  that  disciple  who,  because  he 
could  not  acquiesce  in  his  Master's  description  of  his  weakness,  so  nearly  ship- 
wrecked his  faith  (Luke  xxii.  32  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  33-35).  Also,  apparently,  by  her 
marked  discrimination.  The  "  dogs  "  referred  to  are  thought  to  have  been  of  that 
kind  only  (Kwaptois)  which  were  admitted  into  men's  houses.     If  so,  her  faith 

384 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xv. 


discerned  even  the  atom  of  hope  which  that  distinction  conveyed.  Lastly,  it  was 
shown  by  the  evidently  overwhelming  sense  which  she  had  of  Christ's  power. 
Even  the  mighty  blessing  she  was  asking  from  Him  (ver.  22)  was  but  a  "  crumb  " 
unto  Him.  Hence,  therefore,  according  to  the  Saviour  Himself,  the  final  great- 
ness of  her  success  (ver.  28). 

The  story  teaches  us  pre-eminently,  amongst  other  things,  that  none  need  des- 
pair.    None  need  despair  : — 

1.  Because  of  depth  of  distress. — What  could  be  worse  in  that  respect  than  the 
case  relieved  heie  (end  of  ver.  22). 

2.  Because  of  disadvantages  of  position. — What  could  be  worse — and  could  be 
made  more  of  as  well — than  those  found  in  this  case. 

3.  Because  of  non- success  for  a  time. — Did  ever  anything  look  less  like  success 
than  this  case  did  for  so  long  ?  Can  anything  fuller  be  even  thought  of  than  the 
success  it  reached  to  at  last  ?    How  often  this  is  the  case  !  (cf.  Ps.  xxvii.,  12,  13, 6). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  21-28.  Exemplary  maternal 
love. — In  this  narrative  we  have  ex- 
emplary maternal  love : — 

I.  Vicariously  suffering. — The  ac- 
tual sufferings  of  the  daughter  were 
perhaps  great,  but  the  sufferings  which 
the  mother  endured  by  sympathy  were 
greater  still.  Vicarious  sufferings  are 
always  great  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  love  that  one  has  in  his 
nature.  Hence  the  greatest  sufferer 
on  earth  was  Christ.  He  bore  the  sins 
and  "  carried  the  sorrows  "  of  the  world. 

II.  Importunately  praying. — '*  Have 
mercy,"  etc.,  and  "  Lord,  help  me." 
Her  importunity  became  more  and 
more  intensified  as  Christ  appeared  to 
disregard  her  case.  1 .  He  was  reticent. 
"  He  answered  her  not  a  word." 
2.  He  was  disparaging.  "  I  am  not 
sent,"  etc.  And  again,  "  It  is  not  meet 
to  take  the  children's  bread,"  etc.  But 
all  this,  instead  of  cooling,  only  in- 
tensified the  ardour  of  her  entreaties. 
The  more  importunate  we  are,  the 
more  qualified  we  become  to  appreciate 
the  mercy  we  require.  Our  impor- 
tunity, whilst  it  does  not  influence  the 
Giver,  qualifies  the  receiver  for  the  gift. 

TIL  Gloriously  succeeding. — "  O 
woman,  great  is  thy  faith,"  otc.  Why 
did  she  succeed  %  Not  because  she  was 
importunate,  but  because  her  impor- 
tunity was  that  of  love,  and  not  of 
selfishness — importunity  growing  out 
of  an  unbounded  faith  in  Christ  as  the 
great  Dehverer  of  mankind.    Mothers, 


let  the  conduct  of  this  mother  become 
your  example. — Homilist. 

Ver.  23.  Christ's  apparent  indifference 
— Her  request  must  be  won  by  earnest 
prayer,  "  lest  the  light  winning  should 
make  light  the  prize." — A,  Carry  M.A. 

Ver.  27.  Acquiescent  yet  persistent. — 
The  woman's  remark  is  admirable  and 
delightful.  It  is  full,  indeed,  of  true 
theology  and  real  philosophy.  1.  She 
apprehended  clearly  that  it  was  right 
that  our  Lord's  personal  ministry  should 
he  devoted  to  the  Jews.  2.  She  appre- 
hended as  clearly  that  He  bore  a 
benignant  relation  to  the  Gentiles.  He 
was  not,  in  her  opinion,  a  sectarian 
Saviour.  3.  She  apprehended  also, 
clearly,  that  it  would  not  in  the  least 
interfere  vnth  His  ministry  in  relation 
to  the  Jews,  to  put  forth,  by  the  way. 
His  blessed  energy  in  behalf  of  such 
suppliant  Gentiles  as  herself  It  would 
havo  been  altogether  different  to  have 
asked  or  wished  Him  to  forsake  the 
land  of  Palestine,  and  the  people 
of  the  Jews,  that  He  might  conse- 
crate His  ministry  exclusively,  or 
even  mainly,  to  Gentile  populations. — 
J.  M orison,  D.D. 

Christ's  word  is  understood  by  faith. 
—He  said  ''No,"  but  he  looked  "Yes." 
— A.  Saphir,  D.D. 

Ver.  28.  Discouragement  and  victory 
of  faith. — All  earnest  souls  have  diffi- 
culties  of   some    kind    in   seeking   to 

cc  385 


CHAP.  XV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW 


realise  the  salvation  of  the  gospel. 
Faith  is  tried ;  and  because  it  is  the 
greatest  and  best  of  gifts  its  trials  are 
sharper  and  more  severe.  1.  To  dis- 
tinguish it  from  mere  profession. 
2.  To  show  its  excellency.  3.  To 
purify  it  and  strengthen  it.  The  case 
of  this  woman  is  a  remarkable  one. 
Jesus  departs  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon.  He  touches  upon  the 
borders  of  heathendom,  into  which  His 
fame  as  a  wonder-worker  had  pene- 
trated. There  is  no  chance  or  accident 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.  He  went 
there  with  a  purpose,  which  included 
this  woman  and  her  child. 

I.  Discouragements. — 1.  She  was 
not  one  of  the  covenant  people.  2.  She 
was  not  able  to  bring  her  afflicted  child 
before  Him.  3.  Christ's  silence.  4,  The 
disciples  are  troubled  with  her  loud  cries 
and  importunity,  and  beg  Him  to  dis- 
miss her.  5.  Christ's  words,  "  I  am  not 
come,"  etc.     6.  "  It  is  not  meet,"  etc. 

II.  Victory  of  faith. — 1.  She  per- 
severes under  all  discouragements. 
2.  She  finds  (such  is  the  keen  insight 
of  true  faith)  encouragement  in  the 
Lord's  words.  3.  Chi'ist's  final  repl)^ : 
"  0  woman,"  etc. 

Lessons. — 1.  Nothing  can  prevent 
us  receiving  the  blessing  of  salvation, 
but  unbelief.  This  woman  a  Canaanite. 
2.  We  may  bring  our  absent  children 
and  friends  to  the  Lord  by  prayer  and 
be  successful.  3.  Christ's  silence  is  not 
to  be  taken  as  indicating  His  mind 
toward  us.  We  need  the  discipline  of 
silence  that  we  may  learn  patience  and 
humility.  The  Lord  is  sovereign  in 
the  bestowal  of  His  mercy.  4.  We 
are  not  to  be  deterred  by  the  apparent 
want  of  sympathy  in  disciples.  5.  We 
are  not  to  be  deterred  by  hard  or 
mysterious  words  or  acts  of  the  Lord. 
Doctrine  of  election  and  similar  revela- 
tions are  not  to  be  a  stumbling  block. 
The  word  is,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me," 
Qtc.—Jas.  Kernahan,  M.A.,Ph.D.^F,G.S. 

The  Syrophcenicean  woman^s  great 
faith. — This  faith  was  great : — 

I.  In  overcoming  obstacles. 

II.  It  was  implicit  trust  in  Christ's 

3S6 


word  for  the  instantaneous  cure  of  her 
absent  child. 

III.  It  was  great  in  spiritual  tact. 
This  is  the  characteristic  excellence  on 
which,  doubtless,  the  Lord's  special 
encomium  here  rested.  If  we  are 
right  in  our  exposition  of  His  action 
in  the  case,  that  it  was  not  feigned 
refusal,  but  a  needful  process  by  which 
alone  at  that  point  in  His  mission  a 
soul  outside  of  Israel  could  be  led  to 
Christ,  then,  the  greatness  of  her  faith 
lay  in  the  quick-witted  tact  with  which 
the  woman  perceived  and  accepted  her 
relationship  to  the  world's  Redeemer. 
— Prof.  Laidlaw,  D.D. 

The  true  Christ. — Hours  and  hours 
Fritz  and  I  spoke  of  Dr.  Luther,  and 
what  he  had  done  for  us  both  ;  more, 
perhaps,  for  Fritz  than  even  for  me, 
because  he  had  suffered  more.  It 
seems  to  me  as  if  we  and  thousands 
besides  in  the  world  had  been  wor- 
shipping before  an  altar-picture  of  our 
Saviour,  which  we  had  been  told  was 
painted  by  a  great  master  after  a 
heavenly  pattern.  But  all  we  could 
see  was  a  grim,  hard,  stern  countenance 
of  one  sitting  on  a  judgment  throne  ; 
in  his  hand  lightnings,  and  worse  light- 
nings buried  in  the  cloud  of  his  severe 
and  threatening  brow.  And  then, 
suddenly,  we  heard  Dr.  Luther's  voice 
behind  us,  saying,  in  his  ringing, 
inspiriting  tones,  "  Friends,  what  are 
you  doing?  That  is  not  the  right 
painting.  These  are  only  the  boards 
which  hide  the  Master's  picture."  And 
so  saying,  he  drew  aside  the  terrible 
image  on  which  we  had  been  hopelessly 
gazing,  vainly  trying  to  read  some 
traces  of  tenderness  and  beauty  there. 
And  all  at  once  the  real  picture  was 
revealed  to  us,  the  picture  of  the  real 
Christ,  with  the  look  on  His  glorious 
fac9  which  He  had  on  the  cross,  when 
He  said  of  His  murderers,  "  Father, 
forgive  them ;  they  know  not  what 
they  do  ";  and  to  His  mother,  *'  Woman, 
behold  thy  son " ;  or  to  the  sinful 
woman  who  washed  his  feet,  "  Go  in 
peace." — Chronicles  of  the  Schonherg- 
Cotta  Family. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xv. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  29—31. 

Jesus  still  from  home. — We  gather,  from  Mark  vii.  31,  that  the  scene  of  this 
story  lay  on  that  side  of  the  sea  of  Galilee  (ver.  29)  where  the  cities  of 
"  Decapolis  "  were  situated  ;  and,  therefore,  in  a  country  which  was  hardly,  if  at 
all,  within  the  proper  borders  of  Israel.  Here  as  before,  therefore,  and  most 
probably,  also,  for  the  same  reasons  as  before,  we  fmd  the  Saviour  away  from 
His  home.  If  He  was  not  to  cut  short  His  ministry  before  His  "time  was 
come  "  (John  vii.  6)  He  must  still  keep  away  from  those  neighbourhoods  where 
His  enemies  would  expect  Him.  Anywhere,  now,  except  where  He  had  usually 
been.  The  precise  locality  now  specified,  also,  has  its  importance.  On  the  one 
hand,  it  seems  to  lend  greater  significance  to  the  miracles  ivrought ;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  seems  to  account  for  the  great  effect  they  produced. 

I.  The  miracles  wrought. — For  they  were  wrought  in  a  neighbourhood  from 
which,  in  the  first  place,  He  had  been  previously  banished.     Somewhere  near 
here  it  was,  in  this  semi-Gentile  region  of  "  Decapolis "  that  those  keepers  of 
swine  who  had  lost  their  property  through  the  cure  of  the  demoniacs  that  had  so 
long  been  a  terror  to  the  whole  country-side,  had  prevailed  upon  all  their  neigh- 
bours, when  they  "saw  Jesus,"  to  entreat  Him  to  leave  them.     All  they  ask  is 
that  they  may  see  Him  no  more  (viii.  34).     It  was  for  this  same  neighbourhood, 
also,  notwithstanding  this,  that  the  blessed  Saviour,  in  going  away,  had  shown 
so  much  love,  by  carefully  arranging  that,  even  so,  they  should  not  be  without 
some  witness  about  Him.     Doing  this,  also,  by  the  adoption  of  a  method  which 
was  unusual  indeed  on  His  part ;  the  method,  viz.,  of  sending  the  man  out  of 
whom  He  had  cast  the  legion  of  devils  (notwithstanding  his  earnest  desire  to  be 
allowed  to  go  away  with  Him),  back  again  to  his  old  neighbours  and  friends  for 
the  express  purpose  of  "  telling  "  them  himself  what  God  had  done  for  him  (Luke 
viii.  38,  39,  contrast  Matt.  ix.  30,  31,  etc.).     It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  this 
grace  of  the  Saviour  had  had  its  due  effect  on  these  men ;  and  that  this  is  the 
reason  why  we  now  find  them  as  anxious  to  see  Jesus  as  before  they  were  not ; 
and^why  we  now  read  of  such  "  great  multitudes "  in  these  parts  coming  unto 
Him ;  and  "  having  with  them  the  lame,  bhnd,   dumb,    maimed,    and    many 
others;  "  and  then  finally  "  casting  them  down  at  His  feet,"  as  though  exhausted 
by  the  efforts  they  had  made  in  bringing  them  there,  and  feeling  also  that  in 
doing  that  they  had  done  the  very  best  in  their  power.     It  was  a  marvellous 
change,  if  so,  on  their  part.     And  it  was  responded  to,  apparently,  by  an  equally 
marvellous  manifestation  of  power  on  the  part  of  the  Saviour.     "  He  healed 
them "   (ver.    30) — He   healed    them    all — whosoever   they  were.       He   gladly 
welcomed  their  change  of  mind,  however  tardy  and  late.     He  forgets  the  ingrati- 
tude of  the  past  in  the  need  of  the  present.     And  almost  seems,  in  a  word,  to 
have  done  more  abundantly  now  because  of  the  fact  that  He  could  do  nothing 
before. 

II.  The  effect  produced. — The  effect,  on  the  one  hand,  of  even  prodigious 
surprise.  To  the  people  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake,  the  dwellers  in  Capernaum 
and  its  environs,  miracles  such  as  these  had  by  this  time  become  almost  ordinary 
occurrences.  They  beheld  them,  therefore,  if  not  quite  without  wonder,  at  any 
rate  without  note.  To  the  people  of  this  side  of  the  lake  who  had  previously 
driven  the  Saviour  away,  they  come  now  with  the  vividness  of  a  flash.  "  See  what 
it  is  of  which  we  have  been  depriving  ourselves  all  this  long  time  "  (see  ver.  31). 
Also  the  language  of  St.  Mark  in  reference,  apparently,  to  one  especially  com- 
plicated case  of  affliction  and  of  equally  complete  deliverance  from  it,  marking 
this  particular  time  (Mark  vii.  31-37).  The  effect,  on  the  other,  of  very  fervent 
and  singularly  discriminate  praise.  They  "  glorified  God  " — so  it  is  said — as  well 
they  might,  for  these  things.     They  saw  what  was  meant  by  such  miraculous 

387 


CHAP.  XV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


doings,  especially  when  accompanied,  as  these  were,  by  such  equally  miraculous 
love.  It  was  God's  power,  and  nothing  less,  that  lay  behind  all.  Also,  in 
these  things,  they  saw  that,  which  to  these  half-heathenised  dwellers  in  Decapohs 
would  probably  come  home  with  much  power,  if  nob,  indeed,  with  a  pang.  After 
all  *'  salvation  was  of  the  Jews."  It  is  not  only  to  God  therefore — but  to  "  the 
God  of  Israel "  that  they  offer  their  praise  (end  of  ver.  31).  A  happy  ending  indeed 
to  what  had  seemed  at  first  so  exceedingly  unpromising  a  beginning  (see  again 
viii.  34). 

Let  the  backslider,  from  all  this,  learn  to  return.  What  is  gained — what  is 
not  lost — by  sending  Jesus  away  ?  Who,  again,  can  be  more  ready  than  He 
is  to  return?  Or  can  possibly  bring  back  with  Him  such  an  abundance  of 
gifts  ? 

Let  the  doubter,  from  all  this,  learn  to  believe.  Why  we  believe  is  not 
because  of  His  miracles  only,  though  there  are  none  like  them  elsewhere ;  nor 
yet  of  His  character  only,  though  there  is  nothing  elsewhere Hke  it;  but  because 
of  His  miracles  and  His  mercy  combined.  Nothing  but  Deity  could — nothing 
but  Deity  would — have  done  as  He  did  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.     29,     30.     Christ^s      grace. —  and  lying  there,  remind  us  that  Jesus 

\.  When  Christ  hath  done  His  work  in  is  the  well-defined  centre  of  an  undefined 

one  place.  He  followeth   His  work  in  circumference.  "  Many  others  "  indicate 

another  place.     2.  Many  may  come  to  a  vast  number  ;  we  are  glad  not   to 

Christ  at  once,  without  impeding  one  know  exactly    how    many.      "  At  the 

another  ;  it  is  not  so  among  men,  where  feet  of  Jesus  "  is  the  place  for  helpless 

one  must  wait  till  another  be  despatched.  misery — yours  and  mine,  and  "many 

3.  Christ  standeth  not  how  many  and  others'." 

how  desperate  the  cures  there  be  that  2.  Jesus  came  to  he  the  ingatherer  of 

are  presented  unto  Him.     He  healed  all  misery. — ^That  which  man  most  of 

them     all,    blind,    dumb,    lame,    etc.  all  avoids.  He  most  of  all  sought. 

4.  It  is  sufficient  to  lay  our  miseries  3.  He  healed  them  all. — His  only 
before  Christ ;  our  miseries  will  speak  alternative  was  to  go  away,  or  to  send 
for   us,    and    He    will  answer   us    by  the  people  away  unhealed. 

helping  us.     They  did  but  cast  down  4.  "  We  cannot  plead  in  prayer  as 

the   miserable    at   His   feet,    and   He  some,"  is  often  urged  as  an  excuse.     In 

healed  them. — David  Dickson.  answer  to  this  we  read  of  "  multitudes" 

simply  lying  "  at  His  feet " — and  "  He 

Ver.    30.  At    the  feet    of   Jesus. —  healed  them  all."     To  lie  at  the  feet  of 

\.  These  "lame,  blind,  maimed,    and  Jesus  is  itself  prayer. — P.   B.  Power^ 

many  others"  cast  down  at  Jesus'  feet,  M.A. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  32—39. 

Jesus  repeating  Himself — If  we  may  judge  from  ver.  39  of  this  chapter,  and 
from  Mark  viii.  10,  as  well  as  from  the  omission  of  any  mention  of  removal  on 
the  part  of  the  Saviour,  we  may  suppose  Him  to  be  still  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  lake.  If  so,  we  find  Him  doing  on  that  side  what  He  had  previously  done 
on  the  other  side ;  or  done  previously,  it  may  be,  at  its  northernmost  end 
(see  on  xiv.  13,  etc.).  Anyway,  we  have  here  a  repetition  of  the  original  miracle 
of  the  loaves  (xiv.  13-21).  We  believe  that  we  shall  find  that  the  occurrence  of 
this  second  miracle  at  once  gave  greater  certainty  and  greater  importance  to  both. 

I.  Greater  certainty. — This  evidently  would  be  the  case  at  the  time,  and  in 
the  case  of  the  disciples  themselves.     If  ever  tempted  to  think  of  that  first 

388 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  xv. 


miracle,  because  of  its  exceeding  wondrousness,  as  a  dream,  this  second  specimen 
of  similar  wondrousness  would  be  just  the  thing  to  prevent  them.  It  would  be 
very  much  with  them,  indeed,  as  it  is  with  a  man  who  hears  himself  called  by 
name  by  some  one  whom  he  cannot  see,  both  a  first  time  and  a  second.  Even  if 
he  doubts  the  first  time  he  believes  the  second.  If  he  says,  Can  it  be  %  when  he 
hears  it  once ;  he  says,  It  must  be  !  when  he  hears  it  twice.  That  second  blow 
drives  the  nail  of  conviction  into  a  wellnigh  immovable  place.  The  special 
differentiations  also  of  this  second  miracle  would  have  a  like  efiect  on  the  mind. 
They  are  all  such  as  would  not  have  eventuated  had  not  both  stories  been  true. 
The  differences  in  numbers,  e.g.  in  the  two  cases  respectively,  and  that  both  as 
to  need  and  supply — the  fact  also  that  these  differences  are  not  such  as  to  make 
the  second  miracle  appear  the  more  marvellous  of  the  two,  the  feeding  of  four 
thousand  persons  with  seven  loaves  being  palpably  not  so  surprising  a  thing 
as  the  feeding  of  five  thousand  with  two — and  the  yet  further  fact  that  the 
"  baskets  "  spoken  of  in  the  two  accounts,  and  in  all  subsequent  refer-ences  to 
them,  are  always  distinguished  by  names  which  signify  something  like  "  hampers  " 
in  the  one  case  and  "  hand-baskets  "  in  the  other — are  all  peculiarities  which 
agree  better  with  the  supposition  of  truth  than  with  that  of  falsehood,  or  e\  en 
with  that  of  inaccuracy  or  mistake.  Stories  so  like  and  yet  not  identical — stories 
so  like  and  yet  so  curiously  different — stories  so  like  and  yet  so  consistently 
different — are  stories  which  can  be  accounted  for  best — if  not  accounted  for 
only — by  supposing  them  to  be  built  upon  facts.  It  is  not  easy  indeed  to 
conceive  of  their  standing  on  anything  else.  Had  they  been  fictions  the  difieren- 
tiations  would  have  been  of  a  veiy  different  kind. 

II.  Greater  importance. — The  occurrence  of  this  second  miracle  brings  out, 
e.g.  in  a  greater  degree  than  ever,  the  the  inexhaustible  fulness  of  Christ.  His 
abundance,  if  we  may  say  so,  is  not  confined  to  one  side  of  the  lake.  Not  only 
in  Galilee  are  the  "  words  of  His  mouth  "  more  than  their  "  necessary  food  "  to 
mankind  (Job  xxiii.  12).  Not  only  there  can  He  do  that  which  is  beyond  the 
dreams  of  His  disciples  (John  vi.  9).  Wherever  there  is  need,  on  the  contrary, 
and  whatever  its  amount.  He  has  a  full  supply  within  reach.  What  indeed  can 
He  not  do  who  has  done  such  a  thing  twice  ?  Who  can  doubt  of  the  immensity 
of  His  power  after  such  a  double  witness  as  this  ?  (2  Cor.  xiii.  1).  Also  it  shows, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  holy  consistency  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour. 
"  Coelum  non  animum  mutant  qui  trans  mare  currunt."  Wherever  He  is  (so 
this  repetition  shows  us),  there  is  the  same  depth  and  spontaneity  of  compassion ; 
the  same  discrimination  and  considerateness  of  affection ;  the  same  recollection 
as  well  of  the  temporal  as  of  the  spiritual  needs  of  His  hearers  ;  the  same  marked 
disapprobation  also  (with  all  His  fulness)  of  waste  ;  and  the  same  resolute  avoid- 
ance, also,  when  the  wants  of  the  multitude  have  been  fully  met,  of  idle  wonder 
and  fame.  When  He  has  done  sufficient  for  them  He  has  done  wholly  with 
them,  as  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake  (cf.  xiv.  13-21  with  the  present  passage 
passim). 

Happy  those  who,  observing  these  things,  are  taught  thereby  to  trust  Christ 
to  the  full,  and  are  anxious  for  nothing  except  to  be  sure  that  they  leave 
all  in  His  hands.  How  impressively  this  double  witness  teaches  us  the  fulness 
and  depth  of  His  knowledge  !  How  convincingly  it  shows  us  also  that  for  Him 
to  know  our  needs  is  enough  !  (cf.  vi.  32;  see  also  Phil.  iv.  6;  2  Tim.  i.  12) 

Happy  those  also  who,  as  a  means  to  this  end,  put  full  trust  in  His  word. 
What  we  know  of  the  Saviour  we  know,  in  the  first  instance,  from  what  His 
Evangelists  tell  us.  Do  we  not  see  here  with  what  singular  wisdom  their  story 
is  told  ?  As  also  that  the  source  of  this  wisdom  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  tell  us 
simply  what  was  actually  done  ?  In  portraying  wisdom  there  can  be  nothing 
wiser  than  to  be  as  faithful  as  possible  in  reproducing  it  just  as  it  was. 

389 


CHAP.  XV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  32-39.  The  multitude  fed. — 
This  miracle  : — 

I.  Illustrates  Christ's  care  for  the 
bodies  of  men. — We  must  not  tempt 
men  to  adopt  religion  by  bribery  ;  we 
should  thus  encourage  hypocrisy,  pro- 
mote indolence,  give  a  premium  to, 
iniquity.  But  as  Christians  we  should 
relieve  temporal  want,  and  with  due 
caution  and  discretion  use  this  as  a 
means  of  imparting  spiritual  good. 
Our  Lord  fed  the  multitude  on  this 
occasion  though  He  well  knew  that 
their  motives  in  following  Him  were 
far  from  being  pure.  We  should 
distinguish  between  vulgar  bribery  and 
Christian  benevolence.  In  any  case  it 
were  better  to  do  good  to  men's  bodies 
than  do  no  good  at  all. 

II.  Illustrates  what  St.  Paul  calls 
♦the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ." — Much  as  was  eaten 
of  the  miraculous  bread,  much  still 
remained.  The  more  we  feed  upon 
Christ,  the  Bread  of  Life,  the  more 
there  is  to  feed  upon.  This  multitude, 
fed  and  satisfied,  went  forth  out  of  the 
abundance  of  their  hearts  to  trumpet 
Christ's  fame,  to  tell  of  His  love.  If 
there  be  fulness  in  Christ,  there  should 
be  accompanying  fulness  in  us. 

III.  Suggests  the  need  of  daily  feed- 
ing upon  Christ. — The  miracle  falls 
short  here.  To  feed  once  for  all  not 
sufficient. — R.  W.  Forrest,  M.A. 

Subsidiary  lessons. — I.  A  lesson  in 
generosity. — Jesus  made  His  disciples 
bring  out  their  seven  loaves  and  small 
fishes,  and  give  thus  their  all  away. 
No  doubt  some  of  them  wondered  why. 
It  is  our  common  plea  for  withholding 
from  the  cause  of  charity  or  of  religion 
that  what  we  have  we  shall  need  for 
ourselves.  At  least  there  is  a  fear 
that  we  may.  But  as  our  household 
commentator  has  it,  "  Niggardliness 
for  to-day,  arising  out  of  thoughtful- 
ness  for  to-morrow,  is  a  complication  of 
corrupt  affections  that  ought  to  be 
mortified  "  {M.  Henry). 

II.  A  lesson  of  thankfulness. — First, 

390 


Jesus  took  the  seven  loaves,  and  brake 
them,  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  and 
the  disciples  to  the  multitude.  Then, 
as  if  they  had  overlooked  the  few 
small  fishes,  Mark  relates  that  they 
also  were  brought  to  Him,  and  He 
blessed  and  commanded  to  set  them 
also  before  them.  Two  words  are 
used,  "gave  thanks"  and  "blessed" — 
one  in  connection  with  the  first  part  of 
the  meal,  and  the  other  with  the  second. 
With  such  words  He  turned  these  poor 
materials  into  a  royal  feast.  Let  us 
also  learn  that  giving  of  thanks  is  a 
blessing  upon  our  daily  food. — Prof. 
LaidlaWf  D.D. 

Vers.  34-38.  Feeding  the  four 
thousand. — 1.  Ere  the  Lord  work,  He 
will  have  it  seen  how  little  ground  He 
hath  to  work  upon ;  therefore  by 
asking  His  disciples  He  draweth  forth 
how  few  loaves  and  fishes  for  such  a 
work  were  to  be  had.  2.  He  will  not 
despise  His  own  ordinary  appointed 
means  for  so  far  as  they  can  reach, 
nor  will  He  do  anything  extraordinary 
further  than  is  necessary ;  for.  He 
could  have  fed  them  without  these 
seven  loaves,  but  He  will  take  them 
and  make  use  of  them,  seeing  they 
may  be  had.  3.  Christ  shames  the 
misbelief  of  His  servants,  by  making 
them  actors  in  the  work,  which  they 
could  not  believe  to  see,  for  He  gave 
to  the  disciples,  and  they  to  the 
multitude.  4.  There  is  no  scant  when 
the  Lord  giveth  the  banquet,  for  all 
are  filled  when  He  inviteth  His  guests. 
5.  His  manifold  wisdom  will  glorify 
Himself  as  He  pleaseth,  but  ever  in  a 
way  sufficient  to  manifest  His  Divine 
power. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  34.  How  many  loaves  have  ye  % 
— This  question  of  Christ's  is  wonder- 
fully suggestive  for  those  who  are 
tempted  to  be  content  with  doing 
nothing  for  Christ,  because  they  cannot 
do  much  for  Him,  and  who  honestly, 
though  ignorantly,  suppose  that  an 
acceptable  excuse  for  their  standing  all 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW      chap.  xvi. 


the   day   idle,   is  that  no  man  hath  lY.    We   must  not  be  daunted  or 

hired  them.  baffled  by  the  insignificance  of   the 

I.  The  first  condition  of  usefulness  help  it  may  be  in  our  power  to  give, 
absolutely  indispensable  for  every  one  or  the  poverty,  even  the  scantiness,  of 
is  to  see  the  need  of  it  and  to  observe  our  resources. 

the  scope  of  it.  V.  The  great  thing    is    to    brush 

II.  The  next  condition  is  to  recognise  away  difficulties,  to  remember  that 
that  the  opportunity  of  usefulness  is  waiting,  and  trembling,  and  reasoning, 
ever  at  hand,  if  we  are  only  willing  to  and  putting  off,  never  yet  made  a  duty 
perceive  it.  easier,    or    lightened    a   soul    with  a 

III.  Another  condition  of  usefulness  burden  on  its  back.  Most  of  all  learn 
is  to  be  perfectly  sure  that  every  duty  that  the  great  thing  is  to  begin. 

is  possible ;  and  that  if  we  will  take  VI.  The  Lord  would  not  do  it  all 

the  trouble  to  inquire,  each  and  all  of  Himself,    nor     would    He     summon 

us  have  resources  as  well  as  opportu-  angels    to    do    it    for    Him. — Bishop 

nities  for  diminishing  the  anguish  of  Thorold, 
the  world. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  The  Pharisees  also  with  the  Sadducees. — The  presence  of  members  of  the  latter 
sect,  who  do  not  elsewhere  appear  in  our  Lord's  Galilean  ministry,  is  noticeable.  It  is 
probably  explained  by  St.  Mark's  version  of  the  warning  in  ver.  6,  where  "  the  leaven  of 
Herod "  appears  as  equivalent  to  "  the  leaven  of  the  Sadducees "  in  St.  Matthew's  report. 
The  Herodians  were  the  Galilean  Sadducees,  and  the  union  of  the  two  hostile  parties  was 
the  continuation  of  the  alliance  which  bad  begun  after  our  Lord's  protest  against  the  false 
reverence  for  the  Sabbath  which  was  common  to  both  the  parties  (Mark  iii.  6)  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  4.  The  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas. — As  if  he  would  say,  I  refer  you  to  my  former  state- 
ment on  this  subject  (xii.)  as  sufficient  and  final  {Lange).  He  left  them. — This  abrupt 
termination  indicates  that  He  judicially  gave  them  up  (ibid.). 

Vers.  9,  10.  Baskets. — See  notes  on  xiv.  20,  xv.  37. 

Ver,  12.  Doctrine. — Teaching  (R.V.).  Not  so  much  the  formulated  dogmas  of  the  sect  as  its 
general  drift  and  tendency  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  13.  Coasts. — Parts  (R.V.).  i.e.  neighbourhood.  There  were  various  inhabited  places 
in  the  locality  (see  Mark  viii.  27).  Caesarea  Philippi. — Probably  on  the  site  of  the  Old 
Testament  Baalgad  (Josh.  xi.  17),  at  the  foot  of  Hermon,  built  by  Philip  the  tetrarch,  and 
distinguished  by  his  name  from  other  C£esareas  {Macpherson's  Bible  Dictionary).  This  con- 
versation at  Caesarea  Philippi  is  universally  regarded  as  marking  a  new  era  in  the  life  of 
Chri'it.  His  rejection  by  "His  own"  is  now  complete.  ,  .  .  With  the  very  small  band  He 
has  gathered  around  Him  He  withdraws  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Gentile  town  of 
Caesarea  Philippi ;  not  for  seclusion  only,  but,  as  the  event  shows,  to  found  an  Ecclesia — His 
church  (^Gibson). 

Ver.  14.  And  they  said. — Some,  entertaining  the  opinion  suggested  by  the  fears  of  Herod, 
say,  that  Thou  art  John  the  Baptist  ;  others,  adopting  the  Jewish  notion  of  the  advent  of 
Elijah  as  the  forerunner  of  the  Messiah,  say  that  Thou  art  Elias ;  others,  in  accordance  with 
the  prevalent  tradition  that  Jeremiah  was  to  come  and  reveal  the  place  where  the  sacred 
vessels  were  concealed  (2  Mace.  ii.  1-7),  say  that  Thou  art  Jeremias  ;  and  others,  generally  and 
Indefinitely,  that  Thou  art  a  prophet,  perhaps  the  herald  of  the  Messiah  (  Gloag). 

Ver.  17.  Bar-jona. — "Bar  "  is  Aramaic  for"  son  "  ;  cf.  Bar-abbas,  Bar-tholomew,  Bar-nabas. 
For  flesh  and  blood,  etc. — Not  man,  but  God  ;  "  flesh  and  blood  "  was  a  common  Hebrew  ex- 
pression in  this  contrast  {Carr). 

Ver.  18.  Thou  art  Peter  (Petros)and  upon  this  rock  (petra),  etc.— The  only  natural  interpre- 
tation is  that  which  refers  the  rock,  on  which  Christ  builds  His  church,  to  St.  Peter  himself. 
This  is  the  opinion  adopted  not  only  by  the  Romanists,  but  by  most  recent  crif  ics  and  com- 
mentators.    It  is  certainly  the  one  most  agreeable  with  the  connection  and  the  sense  of  the 

391 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


passage  ;  and  is  assuredly  not  to  be  rejected,  merely  because  it  appears  to  militate  against 
our  preconceived  opinions.  There  is  in  the  passage  an  evident  play  upon  words  ;  a  parano- 
masia  vi^hich  is  not  seen  in  our  version  ;  the  irirpos  in  the  first  clause  refers  to  the  verpa  in 
the  second  ;  so  that  the  words  might  be  rendered  :  "  I  say  unto  thee  that  thou  art  indeed  a 
rock  {ir^rpos),  and  upon  this  rock  {irh-pa)  will  I  build  My  church."  It  is  assuredly  most 
natural  to  refer  the  emphatic  pronoun  this  to  the  rock  previously  mentioned ;  that  rock  was 
St.  Peter,  being  his  name,  and  the  rock  afterwards  mentioned  is  a  manifest  allusion  to  that 
name.  The  whole  beauty  and  force  of  the  allusion  would  be  lo'st,  and  the  meaning  of  the 
passage  rendered  obscure,  if  we  did  not  adopt  this  interpretation.  Similar  allusions  to  names 
are  common  in  the  Old  Testament.  As  when  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  Thy  name  shall 
be  Abraham,  for  a  father  of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee  "  (Gen.  xvii.  5)  ;  and  to  Jacob, 
"  Thy  name  shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel,  for  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power  with 
God  and  with  men  and  hast  prevailed  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  28)  ;  so  here,  in  precisely  the  same 
manner,  it  may  be  said  :  "  Thy  name  shall  be  called  Peter  ;  for  on  this  rock  will  I  build  My 
church."  The  interpretation,  then,  most  agreeable  with  the  connection  of  the  passage,  the 
natural  meaning  of  the  verse,  the  force  of  the  allusion  to  the  name  Peter,  and  the  grammatical 
structure,  is  to  refer  the  rock  on  which  the  church  was  built  to  St.  Peter  {Gloag).  On 
these  words  mainly  rest  the  enormous  pretensions  of  the  Roman  pontiff.  It  is  therefore  im- 
portant :  1.  To  remember  that  it  is  to  Peter  with  the  great  confession  on  his  lips  that  the 
words  are  spoken.  The  Godhead  of  Christ  is  the  keystone  of  the  church,  and  Peter  is  for 
the  moment  the  representative  of  the  belief  in  that  truth  among  men.  2.  To  take  the  words 
in  reference  :  (1)  To  other  passages  of  Scripture.  The  church  is  built  on  the  foundation  of 
the  Apostles  and  Prophets  (Eph.  ii.  20),  on  Christ  Himself  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).  (2)  To  history. 
Peter  is  not  an  infallible  repository  of  truth.  He  is  rebuked  by  Paul  for  Judaising.  Nor 
does  he  hold  a  chief  place  among  the  Apostles  afterwards.  It  is  James,  not  Peter,  who 
presides  at  the  council  at  Jerusalem.  (3)  To  reason.  For  even  if  Peter  had  precedence  over 
the  other  Apostles,  and  if  he  was  Bishop  of  Rome,  which  is  not  historically  certain,  there  is 
ho  proof  that  he  had  a  right  of  conferring  such  precedence  on  his  successors  (6'arr).  The 
gates  of  hell  {hades,  R.V.)  shall  not  prevail  against  it. — Death  is  the  entrance  into  hades, 
and  therefore  the  gates  or  entrance  of  hades  denote  death.  The  expression  may  accord- 
ingly denote  that  death  will  not  destroy  the  church  of  Christ.  The  church  will  never  be- 
come extinct  {Gloag). 

Ver.  20.  Tell  no  man. — Jesus  had  not,  even  to  His  Apostles,  said  that  He  was  the  Christ,  but 
He  left  it  that  they  might  discover  it  themselves  from  the  testimony  of  facts.  It  was  not 
suitable,  therefore,  that  that  should  be  openly  told  by  the  Apostles  to  others  before  His  resur- 
rection which  was  to  corroborate  the  whole  testimony  to  the  fact  of  His  being  the  Christ. 
For  he  who  injudiciously  propounds  a  mystery  to  those  who  do  not  comprehend  it,  injures 
both  himself  and  others.  Had  they  done  so,  those  who  believed  in  any  way  that  Jesus  was  the 
Christ  might  have  sought  for  an  earthly  kingdom  with  seditious  uproar  ;  whilst  the  rest,  and 
by  far  the  greater  number,  might  have  rejected  such  a  Messiah  at  that  time  more  vehem- 
ently, and  have  been  guilty  of  greater  sin  in  crucifying  Him,  so  as  to  have  the  door  of 
repentance  less  open  to  them  for  the  future.  Afterwards  the  Apostles  openly  bore  witness 
to  this  truth  {Bengel). 

Ver.  21.  From  that  time  forth. — An  important  note  of  time.  Now  that  the  disciples  have 
learned  to  acknowledge  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah,  He  is  able  to  instruct  them  in  the  true 
nature  of  His  kingdom  {Carr). 

Ver.  22.  Then. —  And  (R.V.).  We  should  do  injustice  to  the  reality,  were  we  to  imagine 
that  in  a  moment  or  two  after  Peter's  noble  confession,  our  Lord  abruptly  said  all  He  had 
to  say  about  the  tragedy  that  was  looming  in  the  distance ;  and  that  in  a  moment  or  two 
later,  Peter  acted  the  part  that  is  now  about  to  be  narrated.  It  is  the  salient  points  of  many, 
and  perhaps  of  lengthened,  conversations,  that  alone  jut  up  into  view  in  the  narrative  of  the 
Evangelist  (Morison).  Took  Him. —  I.e.  aside.  Began. — But  the  gracious  Lord  rose  up  in 
majesty  and  interrupted  him.     Be  it  far  from  Thee. — God  forbid  !  {Doddridge). 

Ver.  23.  He  turned. — See  Mark  viii.  33.  Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan. — If  the  words  of  the 
tempter  are  in  Peter's  mouth  he  is  addressed  as  the  tempter  ;  when  he  speaks  the  words  of 
truth  he  is  the  foundation-stone  of  the  church  {Carr).  An  offence. — Literally,  My 
stumbling-block  ;  by  suggesting  visions  of  earthly  pride  (ibid.).  Thou  savourest. — Mindest 
(R.V.).  Thou  art  carried  away  by  human  views  of  the  way  of  setting  up  Messiah's  kingdom, 
quite  contrary  to  those  of  God  {Brown). 

Ver.  21.  Take  up  his  cross. — These  words,  which  the  disciples  had  heard  before  (x.  38), 
were  now  clothed  with  a  new  meaning. 

Ver.  25.  Whosoever  will  save  his  life,  etc. — See  note  on  x.  39. 

Ver.  27.  Works. — Doing  (R.V.  marg.).  The  word  is  put  in  the  singular,  for  the  whole  life  of 
man  is  one  "  doing  "  (  Bengel).  The  total  outward  manifestation  of  his  inner  life  as  a  believer 
or  unbeliever  {Lange). 

Ver.  28.  There  be  some  standing  here,  etc. — The  expression  is  referred  to :  1.  The  Trans- 

392 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xvi. 


figuration.  2.  The  Day  of  Pentecost.  3.  The  Fall  of  Jerusalem.  The  last  best  fulfils  the 
conditions  of  interpretation — a  judicial  coming— a  signal  and  visible  event,  and  one  that 
would  happen  in  the  lifetime  of  some,  but  not  all,  who  were  present  (Carr).  Our 
Saviour  refers,  though  in  an  indefinite  way,  to  the  establishment  and  extension  of  His 
kingdom,  and  the  manifestation  of  Himself  as  the  victorious  King,  that  took  place  when 
Jerusalem  and  Judaism — both  thoroughly  corrupted  to  the  core — were  overturned  (Morison). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—4. 

Evil  repeating  itself. — We  have  seen  reason  to  believe  that  the  Saviour,  in 
going  to  Tyre  and  Sidon  (xv.  21),  and  in  going  afterwards  to  the  other  side  of 
the  lake  (xv.  29)  was  actuated  by  a  desire,  for  the  sake  of  His  work,  to  be  out  of 
the  way  of  His  enemies.  The  story  before  us  seems  to  show  us  how  much  reason 
He  had  for  this  wish.  Scarcely  is  He  back  again  before  some  of  His  bitterest 
enemies — sinking  for  the  time  their  mutual  antipathy  (Acts  xxiii.  7-9)  in  their 
greater  hatred  of  Him — come  upon  Him  with  a  hostile  design.  It  is  a  repetition 
of  what  we  have  read  of  before  in  xii.  38— a  request  for  a  "  sign  from  heaven  " — 
as  though  to  put  an  end  to  their  doubts  (ver.  1).  The  Saviour  meets  this  second 
request,  the  insidious  and  treacherous  character  of  which  He  fully  perceives 
(ver.  4),  by  a  twofold  reply,  in  which  He  points  them,  first,  to  what  they  already 
possess,  and,  secondly,  to  what  He  has  already  promised — in  the  very  way  they 
demand. 

I.  What  they  already  possess. — They  possessed  signs,  on-  the  one  hand,  which 
were  not  difficult  to  perceive.  They  might  see  this  by  that  which  was  palpably 
true  about  them  in  other  respects.  They  speak  of  *'  heaven."  Let  th(  m  look 
upon  *'  heaven."  Are  there  not  certain  frequent  and  well-known  appearances 
there  by  means  of  which  they  were  all  in  the  habit,  in  a  certain  way,  of  judging 
of  the  times  ?  Did  they  not  constantly  argue,  e.g.  from  what  they  saw  of  such 
signs  as  to  the  kind  of  weather  to  be  expecttd  by  them  in  the  immediate  future 
(vers.  2,  3)  ?  And  were  there  not  at  that  time,  also,  in  the  spiritual 
firmament,  very  similar  signs  ?  Certain  conspicuous  appearances  which  the 
least  intelligent  among  them,  if  only  they  looked  for  them,  could  not  fail  to 
descry  ?  Possibly,  in  so  speaking,  the  Saviour  referred  to  such  cotemporaneous 
occurrences  as  the  mission  and  message  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  His  own 
subsequent  appearance  and  works  as  predicted  by  John  himself.  And  certainly, 
if  He  did  so.  He  referred  to  such  things  as  the  generation  He  spoke  to  had  already 
acknowledged  as  signs  (see  such  passages  as  Luke  iii.  15;  Matt.  iii.  1-6; 
John  iii.  1,  2,  etc.).  Let  them,  therefore  (so  He  says  to  them,  first),  make  use 
of  these  signs.  In  other  words,  let  them  read  what  they  had  before  seeking  for 
more.  And  that  all  the  more,  in  the  next  place,  because  of  the  character  of  the 
signs  they  possessed;  these  not  being  of  such  a  character  as  to  make  them, 
in  reality,  at  all  difficult  to  interpret.  A  certain  amount  of  discrimination  would 
be  required,  no  doubt,  if  men  would  do  so  aright.  But  the  same  thing  was  true, 
and  that  notoriously,  in  regard  to  those  '*  weather-signs  "  too  of  which  He  had 
spoken.  Men  had  to  consider,  in  judging  of  them,  the  question  of  time  ac  well  as 
that  of  appearance.  The  very  same  appearance,  when  seen  at  one  time,  meant 
the  exact  opposite  of  that  which  it  signified  when  beheld  at  another  (vers.  2,  3). 
Men  knew  this  so  well,  in  fact,  that  they  argued  accordingly  every  day  that  went 
by.  Let  those  that  heard  Him,  therefore,  do  the  same  by  those  other  "signs" 
to  which  He  had  alluded.  Let  them  consider  their  date,  as  it  were,  as  well  as 
their  nature.  Let  them  consider  how  things  were  in  Israel  (xxi.  13),  let 
them  consider  how  they  were  in  the  world  (Rom.  i.  28-32),  when  these 
spiritual  signs,  so 'to  call  them,  were  seen  in  that  sky.  Let  them  consider  these 
things  and  they  will  see  how  these  "  signs  "  pointed  to  Him  as  the  "  Christ." 

II.  What  He  had  already  promised. — Besides  these  present  "  signs  "  there  was 

393 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


that  future  one  of  which  He  had  spoken  before  (xii.  39,  40).  Three  things  seem 
observable  here  with  regard  to  this  sign.  The  first  is,  that,  as  before,  our  Lord 
does  not  allow  it  to  be  a  thing  to  be  claimed.  It  was  an  "  evil  and  adulterous 
generation  "  that  was  "  seeking  "  it  at  His  hands  (xii.  39,  and  here  ver.  4).  They 
were  not  asking  for  it  in  sincerity.  They  would  not  use  it  aright.  All  the 
same  they  should  have  it  in  its  proper  season  and  way.  Not  even  this  unreason- 
able request  of  theirs  should  be  wholly  rejected.  The  second  is  that  the  Saviour, 
on  this  occasion,  merely  refers  to  the  fact.  On  the  previous  mention  of  it,  whilst 
even  then  leaving  the  event  itself  to  explain  His  meaning  in  full.  He  yet  gave 
some  sort  of  intimation  of  the  kind  of  "  sign  "  to  be  expected  (see  xii.  40).  Now 
He  appears  to  do  nothing  more  than,  as  it  were,  refer  back  to  those  words.  It  is 
to  be,  but  what  it  is  to  be  you  will  not  fully  know  till  it  comes.  And  the  last 
is,  that  when  He  has  given  them  this,  He  has  given  them  all  they  must  ask.  In 
the  future  let  them  understand  fully  that  there  should  be  evidence  enough  of  His 
mission.  A  "  sign  "  should  be  given  which  would  declare  plainly  enough  that 
"  heaven "  attested  His  work.  But  for  the  present  they  must  understand 
as  fully  that  He  was  only  biding  His  time  ;  and  must  diligently,  therefore,  fall 
back  on  the  use  of  those  signs  they  possessed.  Such  was  the  tone  of  the 
Saviour's  language.  Such  also  appears  to  have  been  the  significance  of  His 
action.     "  He  left  them  and  departed  "  (see  also  Mark  viii.  13). 

Here  is,  therefore,  a  lesson  for  all  of  us  as  to  hearing  the  word.  When 
the  Saviour  had  given  these  inquirers  what  was  enough  for  them  at  the  time, 
when  He  had  let  them  know  that  a  good  deal  more  might  be  expected  by  them 
in  time,  He  added  no  more.  He  left  it  with  them  to  do  with  it  as  they  thought 
well.  Even  so  of  the  world  at  large  and  of  Scripture  at  large.  It  is  not  intended 
to  give  us  light  on  every  department  of  thought.  It  does  not  aim  at  making  it 
impossible  for  us  to  disbelieve  in  its  truth.  It  appeals  to  us  only  as  free  agents 
and  reasonable  beings.  And  it  asks  us,  therefore,  while  waiting  for  more  light, 
to  use  the  light  that  it  gives  (2  Pet.  i.  19).  We  shall  not  find  it  too  little,  if 
used  aright,  to  be  a  guide  to  our  steps.  Neither  shall  we  find  it  too  little,  if 
despised  by  us,  to  prove  our  condemnation  and  death  (cf.  John  v.  45-47 ; 
Luke  xvi.  31). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Yer.  3.  The  signs  of  the  times. — Two 
evils  in  judging  the  moral  and  spiritual 
condition  of  our  times  :  that  of  the 
optimist,  and  that  of  the  pessimist. 
Keasons  for  difficulty  of  forming  fair 
judgment.  1.  They  are  our  times. 
We  are  not  dispassionate.  2.  Each 
one's  circumstances  tend  to  warp  his 
judgment.  3.  Special  opinions  bias  our 
conclusions.  Christ  told  us  that  we 
ought  to  understand  the  "  signs  of  our 
times."     What  then  can  we  see  1 

I.  Vast  increase  of  intelligonce  and 
education. — Supposed  panacea  for  all 
woes.  Knowledge  is  wider,  but 
shallower.  Knowledge  of  our  day 
loves  surprises.  Men  are  becoming 
"  vain  in  their  imaginations."  To 
know  is  trying  to  take  the  place  of  to 

394 


believe.       Will   it   succeed?      Can   we 
ever  know'i 

II.  Seeking  after  pleasure.— We  are 
sent  into  the  world  to  serve,  not  first 
to  enjoy.  We  may  come  to  put 
pleasure  before  duty.  And  what  moral 
condition  would  that  indicate  ? 

III.  Pressure  of  business  and  haste 
to  be  rich. — Fortunes  made  rapidly  in 
manufacturing  districts.  Is  this  con- 
sistent with  Christian  calmness  and 
content  ?     Success  is  the  modern  god. 

IV.  Preaching  is  intellectual  and 
moral,  rather  than  evangelical  and 
spiritual. 

V.  Organisations  for  Christian  work 
are  multiplied. — In  this  advantages 
and  disadvantages.  Danger  of  loosen- 
ing the  sense  of  personal  responsibility. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  xvi. 


Paints  to  impress. — 1.  God  must  not  let   slip   the    gale    (see   Jer.    viii.    7; 

be  thought  of  as  separate  even  from  a  Isa.  i.  3). 

decaying  and  dying  church.     See  His  III.  It  is  great  hypocrisy  when  we 

messages    to   the   Seven    Churches   of  slight  the  signs  of  God's  ordaining,  to 

Asia.      2.  It  is  in  the  power  of  God  seek  for  signs  of  our  own  prescribing. — 

alone    to     revive    a     dying     church.  M.  Henry. 
3.  Revival  begins  in  the  experience  of 

some    individual   soul.       The    kindled  The  duty  of  pondering  the  signs  of  the 

flame  will  run  and  enlarge,  until  the  i^imes.— It  isa  reUgious  duty  to  estimate 

new  love  will  inspire  the  whole  church,  the  times  in  which  we  are  called  to  live 

Will  you  be  the  one  ? — Weekly  Pulpit.  a  Christian  life,    and   by   our   life   to 

render  our  witness  for  God.     It  is  said 

Overlooking  the  signs  of  the  times. —  that   some  years   before   the   Franco- 

I.  There   are  signs  of  the   times   by  German    war,    German    officers    had 

which  wise  and  upright  men  are  enabled  visited  the  probable   battlefields,   and 

to  make  moral  prognostications,  and  so  had  made  plans  and  maps  of  mountain 

far   to   understand   the   motions    and  range,  village,  wood,  watercourse,  road, 

methods  of  Providence  as  from  thence  and  rail.     To  that    wise  foreknowing 

to  take  their  measures,   and  to  know  and  estimating  of  difficulties  the  German 

what  Israel  ought  to  do,  as  the  men  success  was  largely  due.     It  is  possible 

of   Issachar,    as   the    physician    from  for  us  to   hide  ignorance   and  unpre- 

some  certain  symptoms  finds  a  crisis  paredness   behind   the   use   of   merely 

formed.  general    terms.       We   say    that     the 

II.  There  are  many  who  are  skilful  Christian  must  fight  the  "  world,  the 

enough  in  other  things,  and  yet  cannot,  flesh,  and  the  devil,"  but  we   fail   to 

or  will  not,  discern  the  day  of  their  observe  the  exact  forms  in  which  each 

opportunities ;  are   not   aware  of   the  evil   power   is   clothing    itself   in   our 

wind  when  it  is  fair  for  them,  and  so  times,  and  for  us. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  ^~U. 

Unlearned  learners. — When  the  Saviour  has  left  His  enemies,  as  He  appears 
to  have  done  somewhat  abruptly  and  with  a  good  deal  of  decision  (ver.  4),  He  is 
in  the  company  of  His  friends  (ver.  5).  His  thoughts  were  with  them  as  well ; 
and  He  has  that,  in  consequence,  which  He  feels  it  important  to  say  to  them 
when  they  arrive  at  "  the  other  side."  What  this  was,  in  the  first  place  ;  how  it 
was  misconceived,  in  the  second ;  and  how  that  Tnisconception  was  put  right,  in  the 
third  place — are  the  points  we  have  to  consider. 

I.  What  the  Saviour  said. — It  is  the  language,  on  the  one  hand,  of  agitation 
and  distress.  Evidently  His  mind  is  still  full  of  His  late  encounter  with  His 
enemies.  Evidently  He  is  much  impressed  with  the  secret  "  hypocrisy  "  of  their 
conduct  (cf.  ver.  6  with  Luke  xii.  1).  The  description  given  of  Him  in 
Mark  viii.  12  applies  to  Him  still.  The  sight  of  such  wickedness — the  sight 
of  such  folly — has  left  a  deep  mark  on  His  soul.  It  is  the  language,  also,  of 
apprehension  and  fear.  This  leaven-like  insincerity  of  theirs  was  a  thing  much  to 
be  dreaded.  Corrupt  in  itself  it  tended  inevitably  to  produce  corruption  in  turn. 
It  tended  to  do  this,  also,  in  a  peculiarly  dangerous  and  insidious  way,  after  the 
manner  of  "  leaven."  He  Himself,  it  is  true,  had  only  just  now  withstood  and 
exposed  it.  Would  the  same  be  true  of  those  disciples  whom  He  had  chosen  to 
speak  in  His  name  ?  It  was  the  language,  therefore,  in  the  third  place,  of 
earnest  entreaty  and  wa/rning.  "  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees  and  Sadducees"  (ver.  11).  St.  Mark  has  it  (Mark  viii.  15)  a  little  differently 
in  appearance.  "Beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  Herod."  The 
difference  is  not  a  discrepancy  but  rather  a  proof  of  agreement.     For  Herod 

395 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


himself  is  believed  to  have  been  a  Sadducee,  and  may  very  well,  therefore,  have 
had  something  to  do  with  the  movements  of  the  Sadducees  at  this  time  and  in 
that  part  of  Palestine  which  was  subject  to  bim  (see  above  xiv.  1,  13 ; 
Luke  xiii.  31,  32).  Anyway,  there  was  that  about  the  men  referred  to  which 
made  them  a  danger  indeed.  Take  heed  and  beware — take  note  of  and  avoid — 
that  which  I  mean  by  their  leaven. 

II.  How  the  disciples  misunderstood  Him. — Looked  at  from  their  point  of 
view  this  was  an  exceedingly  natural  thing.  Partly,  it  may  be,  in  consequence 
of  the  abruptness  (end  of  ver.  4)  with  which  they  seem  to  have  left  the  other 
side  of  the  lake,  the  disciples  had  "forgotten"  to  "take  bread."  It  was  found, 
indeed,  when  they  came  to  inquire — or  else  came  out  in  some  other  way — that 
they  had  only  with  them  "one"  little  "loaf"  (Mark  viii.  14)— "  little,"  i.e. 
compared  with  such  as  we  are  accustomed  to  see.  This  being  so,  it  was  not 
unnatural,  when  they  hear  mention  of  leaven,  that  they  should  bethink  them  of 
loaves.  When  their  Master  had  spoken  of  sowing  seed  He  had  meant  preaching 
the  word  (xiii.).  When  He  had  spoken  of  a  dead  child  as  only  sleeping.  He 
meant  that  she  could  be  recovered  from  death  (ix.  24).  May  there  not,  then,  be 
something  similar  in  this  mention  of  leaven  1  Something  other  and  further 
meant  than  that  which  is  said  ?  To  us,  in  these  days,  it  may  be,  with  all  that  we 
have  further  learned  of  this  Teacher  of  teachers,  such  a  way  of  reasoning  may 
appear  almost  like  that  of  a  child.  But  it  is  highly  probable,  had  we  been  in 
the  place  of  those  disciples,  that  we  should  have  done  the  same  thing.  We 
should  have  thought  that  the  Master  must  be  referring  to  that  which  was  at 
that  time  in  our  thoughts  (cf.  ix.  4,  xii.  25  ;  John  ii.  25,  etc.). 

III.  How  this  misconception  was  put  right. — This  does  not,  at  first  sight, 
seem  quite  easy  to  follow.  There  seems,  indeed,  at  first  sight,  something  like 
inconsistency  in  the  Master's  language.  At  one  time  He  seems  to  reprove  His 
disciples  on  the  score  of  their  unbelief.  "  O  ye  of  little  faith."  At  another  time 
He  seems  to  point  rather  to  the  obtuseness  of  their  understandings.  "  How  is  it  ye 
do  not  perceive  ?  "  Perhaps  the  explanation  lies  in  supposing  one  deficiency  to  lie 
at  the  root  of  the  other.  Perhaps  they  did  not  understand  for  the  simple  reason 
that  they  did  not  believe  as  they  ought.  And  how  this  might  come  about  in 
their  case  is  not  difiicult  to  imagine.  Evidently  the  thought  which  was  pressing 
on  them  was  that  of  deficiency  of  supply.  W^hat  was  that  one  loaf  among  more 
than  a  dozen  ?  Full  of  this  thought  they  had  no  room  for  the  thought  of  what 
the  Saviour  had  done  already  in  two  cases  of  far  greater  necessity  and  far  less 
comparative  supply ;  still  less  for  that  far  remoter  meaning  which  the  Saviour 
then  had  in  His  mind.  A  view  this  which  appears  to  be  strongly  confirmed  by 
two  other  considerations.  One  is  that  the  Saviour,  in  correcting  thtir  thoughts, 
sets  Himself  to  do  so  not  only  by  reminding  them  of  the  two  occasions  in  question, 
but  of  certain  also  of  their  most  striking  and  characteristic  distinctions  ;  such  as  the 
relative  numbers  and  needs,  and  the  precise  kind  of  basket  employed  in  each 
particular  case  (vers.  9,  10).  The  other  is  that,  having  done  this.  He  does 
nothing  beside.  "  How  is  it,"  He  asks,  "  that  ye  do  not  understand  that  I  was 
not  speaking  to  you  about  bread?  "  What  He  was  speaking  of  He  leaves  them 
to  find  out  for  themselves.  In  other  words,  having  driven  out  the  wrong  thought 
in  this  manner  He  makes  room  for  the  right.  Having  shown  that  One  who 
had  supplied  those  far  greater  deficiencies  could  hardly  have  been  referring  to 
this  very  much  smaller  one  now  in  the  way  of  complaint,  there  is  at  once  an 
opening,  as  it  were,  for  what  He  was  thinking  of  to  come  in  (see  ver.  12). 

Here  are  lessons  of  much  importance  :  — 

1.  With  regard  to  ourselves. — What  need  we  have  to  pray  that  we  may  come 
with  unbiassed  minds  to  the  study  of  Scripture  !  How  little  can  be  learned  from 
the  words  of  Jesus  Himself  unless  this  is  the  case.     Be  the  "  wells  of  salvation  " 

396 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xvi. 


as  deep  as  they  may,  we  shall  taste  none  of  their  waters  if  the  vessels  we  bring 
to  them  are  already  otherwise  filled. 

2.  With  rega/rd  to  others. — Some  candid  minds  are  greatly  disturbed  sometimes 
by  the  way  in  which  they  find  other  minds  misusing  the  Scriptures  of  truth, 
and  by  noting  how  they  seem  to  overlook  that  in  them  which  is  as  plain  to  them  as 
the  day.  We  seem  to  be  taught  here  that  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  even 
amongst  true  disciples  of  Christ.  "  The  eye  sees  what  it  brings  the  power  of 
seeing,"  says  Thomas  Carlyle.  "It  is  no  argument  against  the  writings 
of  Paul,"  says  a  still  higher  authority,  "  that  they  are  *  wrested '  by  some " 
(2  Pet.  iii.  15,  16).  There  are  those  whom  the  sunshine  itself  only  lights  to 
their  death.     Let  us  not,  on  that  account,  refuse  to  enjoy  it  ourselves. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  5-12.  The  Master'  and  His 
disciples.  —  I.  The  foresight  of  the 
Master  and  the  negligence  of  the 
disciples. 

II.  The  freedom  from  care  of  the 
Master  and  the  anxieties  of  the  dis- 
ciples. 

III.  The  calmness  of  the  Master 
and  the  excitement  and  distress  of  the 
disciples. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  6.  The  souVs  hunger  for  truth. 
— Let  us  look  at  some  thoughts  arising 
out  of  this  passage. 

I.  That  the  profoundest  energies 
and  most  urgent  appetites  of  life  are 
those  of  the  moral  and  spiritual 
nature. — "  They  had  forgotten  to  take 
bread."  How  was  this?  A  more 
urgent  hunger  was  at  their  heart ; 
a  profounder  appetite  was  craving  for 
satisfaction.  The  expulsive  power  of 
this  more  potent  principle  had  banished 
hunger  from  their  thoughts.  Has 
not  the  history  of  the  growth  and 
expansion  of  spiritual  truth  in  the 
world  — religious  progress — illustrated 
this  principle  ten  thousand  times  ?  The 
Divine  Master's  ministry  began  with 
its  assertion.  Fasting  forty  days — 
ignoring  bodily  wants,  forgetting  phys- 
ical appetites.  The  Master  had  bread 
to  eat  that  the  tempter  knew  not  of. 
"  Man  shall  not  live,"  etc.  So  the  Great 
Teacher's  searching  words  aroused  the 
dormant  inner  life  of  His  disciples, 
and  leaving  fishing  nets,  etc.,  all  the 
sources  of  bodily  revenue,  they  cling  to 
this  poor  Nazarene.     There  are  epochs 


in  life  in  which  the  higher  nature 
of  the  man  transcends  the  earthly 
appetites;  he  breathes  a  Diviner  air, 
**  hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteous- 
ness." 

II.  That  those  truths,  therefore, 
which  deal  with  the  spiritual  nature 
of  man  take  the  deepest  hold  upon 
his  life. — All  doctrines  that  touch  the 
moral  and  spiritual  in  man  are  leaven- 
like :— 

1.  In  the  subtlety  of  their  operation. 
— "  Not  with  observation." 

2.  In  their  progressive  effect. — "  A 
little  leaven  leaveneth,"  etc. 

3.  In  their  assimilative  power. — The 
leaven  makes  the  mass  like  itself. 

III.  That  hence  it  is  imperative  to 
guard  against  the  inroads  of  erroneous 
doctrine. — "  Beware,"  etc.  Life  can- 
not be  right  if  those  beliefs  that  are 
the  basis  of  its  moral  character  be 
wrong.  What  was  the  Pharisee's  life  ? 
What  the  Sadducee's  ?  Why  ?  Their 
lives  were  the  direct  result  of  their 
doctrine. — Nevison  Loraine. 

Caution  against  false  doctrines. — I. 
Of  Sadducees. — Materialism,  no  soul, 
no  hereafter. 

II.  Of  Pharisees. — Human  righteous- 
ness a  sufficient  ground  of  hope. 

III.  With  each  false  doctrine  was 
held  some  truth. — Hence  the  danger. 

IV.  Ptespectability  of  sects  and 
moral  uprightness  of  some  indi- 
viduals holding  false  doctrine,  in- 
crease the  danger. — J.  C.  Gray. 


397 


CHAP.  xvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  13—19. 

A  culminating  point. — The  Saviour  is  once  more  at  the  outskirts  of  the  land. 
This  time  He  has  gone  to  the  north  of  it,  to  the  "  parts  of  Csesarea  Philippi," 
near  the  sources  of  Jordan.  It  can  hardly  be,  however,  that  He  should  thus 
continue  to  absent  Himself  from  the  proper  sphere  of  His  work  (xv.  24). 
Some  day  the  dangers  which  threatened  Him  there  would  have  to  be  faced,  if 
only  for  the  sake  of  that  very  work  which  had  led  Him  to  shun  them  for  a  time. 
How  would  it  be,  when  He  did  face  them,  with  regard  to  His  disciples? 
Apparently  His  present  object  is  to  prepare  them  for  this.  Knowing  so  fully, 
as  He  presently  shows  that  He  does  know  (ver.  21),  all  that  is  to  happen  so  soon 
to  Himself,  He  would  first  establish  them  in  their  faith.  And  this  He  does, 
first,  by  eliciting  from  them  what  they  have  to  say  about  Him;  and  then  by 
informing  them,  secondly,  of  what  He  has  to  say  about  them. 

I.  What  they  have  to  say  about  Him. — This  is  brought  out,  on  the  one  hand, 
in  the  way  of  report.  They  knew  His  usual  name  for  Himself.  He  had  called 
Himself  constantly  "  the  Son  of  man."  Who  did  men  say  that  He  was  ? 
(ver.  13).  The  answers  given  are  one  in  substance,  though  they  vary  in  form. 
Some  identify  Him  with  His  predecessor,  the  Baptist.  Some  with  the  Baptist's 
predecessor,  Elias.  Some  with  that  prophet  Jeremiah  who  is  said  to  have  been 
looked  upon  by  the  Jews  as  the  greatest  of  the  prophets.  While  others  again 
only  regarded  Him  as  a  conspicuous  and  undoubted  revival  of  the  old  spirit  of 
prophecy,  without  identifying  Him  with  anyone  in  particular.  All  practically 
agree,  therefore,  in  pronouncing  Him  equal  to  any  before.  There  are  no  men 
like  men  of  God  in  any  age  of  the  world.  There  are  no  men  amongst  such  to 
whom  Jesus  had  not  been  compared.  That,  in  substance,  is  their  report  (ver.  14). 
The  same  is  brought  out,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  way  of  confession.  This  report 
of  theirs,  though  striking  enough  so  far  as  it  went,  did  not  yet  go,  for  all  that, 
so  far  as  it  ought.  The  Saviour,  therefore,  inquires  further, — "  But  who  say  ye 
that  I  am?"  (ver.  15).  The  answer  is  given  by  that  one  of  their  number  who 
usually  speaks  out  for  the  rest  (ver.  16).  He  does  so,  to  begin,  in  a  way  which 
marks  the  depth  of  their  faith.  It  is  not  of  that  which  they  think  or  suppose — 
nor  even  of  that  merely  which  they  hold  or  believe — but  of  that  which  they 
regard  as  undoubted,  and  which  is,  therefore,  to  them,  in  short,  nothing  less 
than  a  fact — that  this  witness  proceeds  to  speak  :  ''  Thou  art  the  Christ."  How 
brief,  how  emphatic,  how  unqualified,  and,  therefore,  how  undoubting  this 
confession  of  faith  !  He  answers  next  in  a  way  that  shows  the  clearness  and 
definiteness — and  that  in  two  ways — of  their  faith.  Their  faith  in  the  office  of 
the  "  Saviour  "  :  "  Thou  art  the  Christ " — the  Anointed  One — such  as  never  any, 
therefore,  so  fully  before.  Their  faith  in  His  nature.  Of  all  life  the  life  of  God 
Himself,  is  the  intensest  and  highest.  To  that  life  no  other  stands  in  so  intimate 
a  relation  as  Jesus.  ''  Thou  art  the  Son  of  the  living  God  "  (ver.  16).  Do  all  the 
creeds  together  say  more  than  this,  as  a  matter  of  fact  ? 

II.  What  the  Saviour  has  to  say  about  them. — This  we  learn  from  what  He 
says  to  that  one  of  their  number  who  had  just  spoken  for  all  in  answer  to  His 
question,  "  Who  say  ye  that  I  am  1 "  Taking  him  thus  as  a  sample  of  all.  He 
speaks,  first,  of  the  present.  He  declares  with  unusual  fervour  how  great  is  the 
blessedness  of  being  enabled  to  make  such  a  confession  as  that.  All  that  we 
have  just  seen  in  it  the  Lord  sees  in  it  too.  It  is  indeed,  in  its  way,  the  very 
summit  of  truth.  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar- Jonah  " — blessed  art  thou,  who- 
soever thou  art,  who  hast  reached  such  a  height.  Never,  as  it  were,  had  any 
father's  son  a  happier  standing  than  this.  The  Saviour  next,  in  a  precisely 
similar  spirit,  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  past.  Not  by  any  mere  human  power  had 
that   happy  disciple  been  brought  to  that  height.     Not  "  flesh  and  blood,"  but 

398 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xvi. 


the  wisdom  which  made  them,  had  taught  him  these  truths.  He  has  acknow- 
ledged Christ  as  the  Son  of  the  Father.  He  has  been  taught  to  do  so  by  the 
Father  Himself.  Finally,  the  Saviour  addresses  Peter  with  regard  to  the  future. 
Having  received  so  much,  he  was  to  give  as  much  in  His  turn.  First  of  all  man- 
kind, in  this  solemn  way,  to  make  this  confession,  he  was  to  be  first  in  other 
ways  too.  As  his  very  name  signified,  e.g.  he  was  to  be  the  first  ^*  stone  "  in  that 
edifice  of  the  church  which  the  Saviour  was  then  intending  to  build  (1  Pet. 
ii.  4-8),  which  was  to  be  also  so  emphatically  His  church  (observe  "  My  "  in  ver.  18) 
because  built  upon  Him  as  its  only  foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  11),  and  against  which, 
therefore,  all  the  powers  of  the  unseen  world,  though  often  attacking,  should 
never  prevail  (ver.  18).  Also,  as  being  such,  this  "  Peter  "  was  afterwards  to  be 
the  first  man  authorised  to  proclaim  to  mankind,  whether  Gentiles  or  Jews,  the 
terms  of  admission  into  that  heavenly  kingdom,  and  to  lay  down  the  requisites 
to  be  demanded  of  those  who  sought  admission  thereto  (see  Acts,  ii.  37-42, 
X.,  XV.  7).  The  first  so  to  do,  but  not  the  only  one  (Acts  xv.  13-29)  ;  nor  yet  in 
all  things  the  chief  (1  Cor.  xv.  10).  First  in  order,  in  short,  if  not  first  in  every- 
thing, because  first  to  confess. 

Certain  things,  therefore,  even  in  this  disputed  passage,  would  appear,  in 
conclusion,  to  be  clear.  One  is  that  we  see  here,  in  the  strictest  sense,  the  first 
beginning  of  the  church  of  Christ  in  the  world.  "  The  holy  church  throughout 
all  the  world  doth  acknowledge  Thee."  The  first  beginning  of  that  wide 
acknowledgement  is  what  we  read  of  in  this  place.  Another  is  that  none  but 
those  who  make  such  a  confession,  as  well  in  life  as  by  the  lips,  really  belong  to 
that  church.  A  thiid  would  seem  to  be  that  all  those  who  really  do  make  such 
a  confession  do  belong  to  that  church  (Eph.  vi.  24).  A  fourth  certainly  is 
that  we  can  only  make  such  a  true  confession  by  help  from  above  (see  above,  also 
1  Cor.  xii.  3).  And  a  last  is  that  there  shall  never  he  wanting  a  true  succes- 
sion of  such  true  confessors  whatever  the  "  times  "  that  pass  over  the  church,  and 
whatever  the  powers  that  rise  up  against  it.  Here,  in  short,  began  a  confession 
which  is  never  to  end. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  13-19.  The  Divine  Christ  con-  seen  as  well  in  the  questions  He  put  as 

fessed. — I.  The  preparation  for  the  con-  in  the  answers  He  gave, 

fession. — Our  Lord  is  entering  on  a  new  I.  Our   Lord's  question  reminds  us 

era  in  His  work,  and  desires  to  bring  that  at  the  very  beginning^  there  were 

clearly  into  His  followers'  consciousness  various  and  conflicting  opinions  con- 

the  sum  of  His  past  self -revelation.  cerning  Him. 

II.  The  contents  of  the  confession.  II.  We  learn  from  our  Lord's  ques- 
— It  includes  both  the  human  and  the  tion  that  amidst  the  diversity  of 
Divine  sides  of  Christ's  nature.  opinion  we  must  look  well  to  our  own 

III.  The  results  of  the  confession.  belief.  '^  Whom  do  ye  say  that  I  am  ? " 
— They  are  set  forth  in  our  Lord's  III.  We  learn  from  our  Lord's  ques- 
answer,  which  breathes  of  delight,  and  tion  that  He  counts  correct  opinions 
we  may  almost  say  gratitude.  His  man-  of  Himself  to  be  of  great  importance. 
hood  knew  the  thrill  of  satisfaction  at  IV.  Amidst  the  diversity  of  opinions 
having  some  hearts  which  understood,  concerning  Him,  there  was  one  which 
though  partially,  and  loved  even  better  our  Lord  emphatically  commended, 
than  they  knew. — A.  Madaren,  D.D.  and  the  possessor  of  which  He  pro- 
nounced to  be  blessed.     "  Thou  art  the 

Vers.    13-17.    "  What    think    ye    of  Christ,    the   Son   of   the   living  God." 

Christ  ?  " — Our  Lord's  Divine  wisdom  is  — Charles  Vince. 

399 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


Vers.  13-16.  What  men  say  of 
Christ.  —  Christ  did  not  ask  this 
question  :  1.  For  information.  2.  Nor 
because  He  desired  the  applause  of 
men.  3.  Nor  because  He  intended  to 
form  His  course  according  to  the  reply. 
4.  But  because  He  desired  to  ground 
His  disciples  in  the  deepest  faith.  It 
was  a  kind  of  catechising  to  photo- 
graph and  engrave  the  fact  upon  their 
hearts.  The  answer  to  His  question 
suggests  the  following  things. 

I.  People  held  different  opinions 
concerning  Christ. — "Some  say,"  etc. 
These  difFeient  opinions  were  very 
natural.  There  was  something  like 
every  one  of  these  men  in  Christ.  I 
should  like  to  speak  here  in  praise  of 
Christ.  All  the  virtues,  all  the  graces 
of  the  ancient  spiritual  men  met  in 
Him. 

II.  The  opinions  held  of  Him  were 
high  and  honourable. — Only  some  five 
or  six  people  in  the  whole  history  of 
literature  have  spoken  disrespectfully 
of  Him. 

III.  High  as  these  opinions  were 
they  fell  short  of  the  reality. 

IV.  It  is  important  that  we  should 
have  this  high  estimate  of  Jesus 
Christ. — Thos.  Jones. 

Ver.  13.  Who  is  Christ?  —I  want  to 
show  that  Christ  in  the  gospel  is  the 
resting-place  where  the  heart  of  man 
can  find  repose ;  not  because  we  there 
at  once  learn  all  that  we  want  to  know, 
but  the  greatest  questions  are  there  set 
at  rest ;  and  there  we  may  ultimately 
find  the  key  to  interpret  all  the  prob- 
lems that  have  so  long  and  so  painfully 
agitated  the  thoughtful  mind.  Two 
phrases,  full  of  deep  significance,  Christ 
applied  to  Himself  ;  Son  of  God  and 
Son  of  man ;  and  different  as  may  be 
the  precise  meaning  of  the  term  "  Son  " 
in  these  two  applications  of  it,  the  two 
phrases  point  in  the  same  direction — 
viz.,  that  Christ  is  the  best  and  com- 
pletest  revelation  of  both  God  and 
man. 

I.  Son  of  God. — How  did  men  con- 
ceive of  God  without  Christ?  We 
know  quite  well  how  they  did,  and  how 

400 


we  should  if  we  were  left  once  more 
without  a  gospel.  The  human  mind 
wavered,  and  was  cast  about  in  painful 
perplexity  between  mere  abstractions 
that  could  not  move  the  heart,  and  gross 
ideas,  that  corrupted  the  heart.  The 
men  of  genius,  the  philosophers,  who 
knew  quite  well  that  no  idol,  no 
material  thing,  could  represent  God, 
lost  themselves  in  the  abstractions  of 
their  own  minds,  or  confounded  the 
Deity  with  the  powers  of  nature,  or 
tried  to  rest  in  the  Athenian  belief  in 
the  unknown  God.  The  mass  of  men, 
incapable  of  rising  to  such  conceptions, 
found  gods  in  every  material  object, 
and  then  came  to  shaping  gods  for 
themselves — ending,  at  last,  in  a  low, 
sensual,  and  debasing  worship.  Men 
of  shrewd  intelligence,  with  too  much 
sense  really  to  believe  in  any  sensual 
religion,  and  too  little  devotion  labo- 
riously to  think  of  God  philosophically, 
took  refuge  in  a  universal  scepticism, 
until  they  came  to  doubt,  not  only 
whether  God  could  be  known,  but 
whether  it  was  possible  to  know  any- 
thing at  all,  when  the  highest  Object 
of  knowledge  seemed  so  inaccessible. 
Now,  in  the  midst  of  all  this  confusion, 
superstition,  gross  folly,  and  unattain- 
able abstraction,  when  the  mind  of 
man  seemed  rapidly  sinking  into  the 
most  dreary  despair,  Christ  stood  forth, 
and  said  to  the  world,  I  can  tell  you 
what  God  is ;  I  am  the  Son  of  God ; 
he  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen 
the  Father.  How,  then,  shall  we 
understand  this  phrase.  Son  of  God? 
Doubtless  Paul  has  given  us  the  best 
interpretation  of  it.  "  In  Him  dwelt 
all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 
Suppose  we  had  heard  of  such  a  thing 
as  loving  generosity,  but  had  never 
seen  a  generous  action.  Our  own 
feeling  of  love  might  tell  us  something, 
but  whatever  we  may  be  conscious  of 
in  our  hearts,  M^e  do  not  really  know 
its  meaning  till  it  appears  in  the  life. 
Never,  then,  having  seen  an  action  of 
self-denying  love,  never  having  put 
forth  a  hand  to  help  a  fallen  brother, 
or  to  feed  a  hungry  brother,  how  little 
would  the  word  "  love  "  convey  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xvi. 


mind.  It  would  be  only  an  abstraction. 
But  if,  while  trying  to  imagine  what 
love  might  mean,  we  should  see  an  act 
of  splendid  generosity,  how  instantly 
would  the  meaning  of  love,  in  all  its 
depth  and  tenderness,  be  revealed  to 
us ;  and  we  might  then  comprehend 
the  power  of  this  principle  throughout 
the  universe  of  intelligent  creatures. 
This  is  true  of  everything ;  it  is  Hfe 
alone  that  we  can  understand.  Only 
in  living  does  any  principle  of  heart 
and  mind  become  intelligible.  Just 
what  this  explanatory  action  is  to  the 
inexplicable  principle,  just  that  is 
Christ  to  God. 

II.  Son  of  man. — By  the  universal 
consent  of  mankind,  man's  own  poor 
life  does  not  tell  him  what  man  is. 
Yet  till  Christ  came  there  was  no  other 
source  of  knowledge  accessible  to  the 
masses.  We  may  be  perfectly  sure 
that  when  any  thoughtful  mind  looked 
on  human  life — then  as  now — it  could 
not  possibly  appear  as  if  man — the 
race — was  answering  the  end  of  his 
creation.  How  little  can  we  tell  the 
passionate  earnestness  with  which  the 
best  men  longed,  for  ages,  that  some 
one  would  arise  and  tell  them  what 
life  meant  and  why  man  was  created  ! 
That  One  came  at  last.  I  am  the  Son 
of  man.  Christ  said,  here  let  your 
questionings,  your  agonising  doubts, 
your  dreary  scepticism,  end.  Human 
life  is  meant  for  what  I  make  it ;  man 
in  his  real  nature  is  what  I  show  you. 
I  am  the  Light  of  the  world.  By  Me  if 
any  man  walk,  it  shall  not  be  in  dark- 
ness. His  universal  precept  to  men — 
"  Follow  Me  " — rightly  understood,  can 
mean  nothing  less  than  that  every 
thing  in  His  human  life  is  possible  to 
His  followers. — S.  Edger,  B.A. 

Jesus  at  Ccesa/rea  Philippi. — In  its 
original  name  of  Panium,  as  in  its  modern 
equivalent  Banias,  has  been  preserved 
the  memory  of  the  great  god  Pan  who, 
with  the  nymphs,  had  his  shrine  there 
and  whose  empty,  shell-bound  niche  is 
still  shown  in  the  recess  of  the  grotto. 
But  now,  face  to  face  with  that  embodi- 
ment   of    all   heathen   religions,    was 


brought  the  King  of  everlasting  life ; 
and  as  the  mummy  crumbles  with  its 
first  exposure  to  the  air,  so  must  all 
the  discrowned  deities  of  Olympus  go 
to  dust  before  the  incoming  of  the  true 
Messiah.  Here  then  of  all  places  it 
was  fittest  that  Christ  should  establish 
in  the  minds  of  His  disciples  the 
supremacy  of  His  own  character  and 
claims — G.  E.  B.  Reed,  M.A. 

Yer.  18.  The  church :  its  Builder 
and  its  safety. — I.  The  church. — This 
is  the  first  place  in  the  New  Testament 
in  which  we  meet  with  this  much  used 
and  much  abused  word.  What  did  it 
mean  when  Christ  used  it  ?  Remember 
that  He  was  speaking  to  a  few  poor, 
plain  men,  and  these  men  evidently 
understood  it.  The  word  which  we 
have  ti  anslated  ''  church "  means 
simply  a  number  of  people  called  to- 
gether. Hence,  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  where  we  find  it  again,  it 
is  translated  "  assembly,"  and  the 
revisers  have  not  attempted  to  change 
it.  By  common  consent  we  have  now 
enlarged  the  meaning  and  imported 
the  idea  of  religion  into  it,  and  may 
regard  it  as  a  number  of  people  united 
for  the  worship  and  service  of  God. 
We  read  of  churches — churches  in 
cities,  churches  in  towns,  and  more 
than  once  we  read  of  "  the  church  that 
is  in  thy  house  "  ;  and  so  with  perfect 
correctness  we  speak  of  the  Methodist 
church,  the  Baptist  church,  the 
Episcopal  church.  Let  us,  however, 
beware  that  we  do  not  apply  the 
definite  article  to  any  of  our  churches ; 
the  word  belongs  only  to  the  church 
of  which  Christ  speaks.  A  part  is  not 
the  whole  ;  the  regiment  is  not  the 
army.  Christ  speaks  of  His  church. 
What  is  this  ?  The  glorious  title  be- 
longs to  no  earthly  organisation,  but  to 
all  true  believers  on  earth  and  in 
heaven.  The  church  is  Christ's  special 
property,  the  gift  of  His  Father  and 
the  object  of  his  tenderest  love. 

II.  The  Builder  of  the  church.—"  I 
will  build  My  church."  The  church 
is  frequently  referred  to  in  the 
Scriptures  as  a  building.     Hence   we 

Q  401 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


read  of  stones,  workmen,  house,  and 
temple.  Of  this  glorious  structure  it 
had  been  foretold  by  Zechariah  that 
Christ  should  be  the  Builder.  He  had 
said  that  the  Messiah  should  "  build 
the  temple  of  the  Lord  and  bear  its 
glory."  Here  Christ  claims  the 
prophecy  as  having  been  spoken  of 
Him,  and  says,  "  I  will  build  My 
church." 

1.  It  is  His  to  prepare  the  material  of 
which  the  building  is  composed. — The 
church  is  His  workmanship.  (1)  Look 
at  the  two  corner-stones.  See  the  first, 
Simon  Peter  by  name ;  who  but  the 
Omnipotent  could  have  made  a  corner- 
stone of  him  1  A  stone  ?  By  nature 
he  was  but  a  handful  of  sand,  which  a 
maiden's  breath  can  scatter  to  the 
winds ;  but  Christ  touched  him  and 
petrified  him  into  a  rock  that  neither 
earth  nor  hell  could  move.  Here  is  the 
second,  Saul  of  Tarsus,  a  human 
volcano,  breathing  out  threatenings 
and  slaughter  against  all  that  called 
on  the  name  of  Christ,  but  at  a  word 
from  Christ  he  is  changed  into  a  whole 
burnt-offering,  counting  not  his  life 
dear  unto  him  so  that  he  may  win 
Christ.  And  as  we  gaze  upon  them, 
we  may  hear  them  gratefully  saying  : 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  we  are  what  we 
are."  (2)  Look  next  at  the  first  course 
of  stones  in  the  building.  You  have 
them  described  in  1  Cor.  vi.  9-11. 
(3)  Let  us  again  glance  at  the  building 
itself,  as  it  rises  before  us.  On  this 
side  I  see  a  lot  of  Kings  wood  colliers, 
who  could  not  open  their  mouths  with- 
out blasphemy ;  but  Christ  touches 
them,  and  "  blasphemies  are  changed 
to  praise."  On  that  side  I  see  a  lot  of 
Fijian  cannibals,  whose  very  name  was 
a  terror,  to  those  around  them ;  but 
Christ  touches  them,  and  they  "  love 
one  another  with  pure  hearts  fervently." 
On  the  other  side  I  see  a  lot  of  African 
Hottentots,  who  had  sunk  so  low  that 
our  scientific  men  refused  to  own  them 
as  brethren  ;  but  Christ  touches  them, 
and  they  become  sons  of  the  living  God, 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with 
Christ.  Yes,  every  stone  in  the  build- 
ing is  a  miracle  of  grace,  and  as  we 

402 


gaze  upon  it  we  can  only  say  :  "  This 
is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  marvellous  in 
our  eyes." 

2.  It  is  His  to  provide  the  labourers. 
— It  has  pleased  God  to  save  man  by 
man,  to  make  us  co-workers  with 
Himself,  that  the  excellency  of  the 
power  may  be  of  God.  There  is  a  great 
variety  of  work  to  be  done. 

3.  It  is  His  to  complete  the  erection. — 
It  is  strange  that  any  of  God's  servants 
should  talk  about  Christianity  being  a 
failure  and  Christ  being  defeated. 
What,  hath  He  spoken  and  shall  He 
not  do  it  1  True,  as  with  earthly 
structures,  there  will  be  hindrances  to 
the  progress  of  the  building,  but  He 
knew  His  ability  to  overcome  them  all. 
Sometimes  the  storms  of  persecution 
howl  around  the  church,  and  men  have 
to  die  instead  of  work,  and  it  hinders 
building.  Sometimes  the  frost  of  un- 
belief sets  in,  and  men's  hands  get  so 
cold  that  they  cannot  give,  and  their 
tongues  so  stiff  that  they  cannot  speak, 
and  their  knees  so  cramped  that  they 
cannot  pray,  and  that  hinders  building. 
Sometimes  the  fog  of  error  steals 
around,  and  ever)d:hing  gets  dispropor- 
tionate, and  men  imagine  that  because 
they  don't  see  what  their  fellow -work- 
men are  doing,  they  are  doing  nothing, 
and  those  who  are  at  work  can't  see 
what  they  are  doing,  and  this  hinders 
building.  Sometimes  there  is  a  strike 
— Judah  vexes  Ephraim,  and  Ephraim 
envies  Judah  —  and  the  workmen 
quarrel  with  each  other,  and  this 
hinders  building.  The  great  Master 
sees  all  this,  and  though  for  a  while  He 
may  hide  Himself,  it  will  be  but  for  a 
moment.  Does  the  storm  howl  ?  He 
says,  *'  Peace,  be  still,"  and  there  is  a 
great  calm,  and  the  church  has  rest, 
and  is  multiplied.  Does  the  fog  blind  ? 
At  the  breath  of  His  mouth  it  is 
scattered,  and  men  see  clearly.  Does 
the  frost  set  in  ?  He,  the  Sun  of 
Bighteousness,  pours  His  warm  rays 
upon  them,  and  the  winter  is  soon  past 
and  gone.  Is  there  a  strike  ?  He 
takes  the  two  sticks  into  His  hand,  and 
they  become  one. 

III.  The  safety  of  the  church. — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xvi. 


"  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against  it."  Men  talk  about  "  the 
church  being  in  danger."  A  more 
foolish  cry  was  never  raised.  The 
church  is  the  most  precious  thing  in 
the  universe.  It  is  "  the  bride — the 
Lamb's  wife."  His  love  is  towards  it, 
and  His  omnipotent  arm  is  ever  around 
it.  The  church  on  earth  is  as  safe  as 
the  church  in  heaven. — Charles  Garrett. 

Christ's  com.mendation  of  Peter's  con- 
fession. — A  writer  quoted  by  Stier  says, 
*'The  demonstrative  {this  rock)  can 
just  as  little  have  the  force  of  isolating 
the  faith  and  the  confession  of  Peter 
from  his  person,  as  it  would  be  justifi- 
able to  refer  the  promise  to  the  person 
of  Peter  apart  from  his  faith  ; "  or,  as 
another  puts  it  more  succinctly,  *'  The 
word  of  Peter  is  the  heart  of  Peter ;  it 
is  he  himself." 

The  character  of  Peter. — As  the  world 
counts  rock,  rock  was  no  character- 
name  for  this  favourite  of  Jesus,  with 
whom  He  chose  to  live  as  His  daily  and 
nightly  friend.  Immovableness,  solidity 
of  character  to  the  outward  eye,  Peter 
had  none.  But  the  outward  eye  judges 
falsely.  Peter  was  clearly  neither  a 
great  pioneer,  nor  a  great  theologian, 
nor  a  great  scholar  ;  but  he  was  a  great 
child,  and  for  his  fitness  to  express  this 
one  permanent  power  of  the  life  of 
faith  he  was  the  foremost  of  the  Twelve. 
— Mary  Harrison. 

"  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against  it'' — The  traveller  on  the 
Highland  Pailway  can  hardly  fail  to 
be  struck,  as  he  journeys  north,  with 
the  unusual  sight  of  a  picturesque  and 
well-kept  flower-garden  blooming  in 
the  angle  of  ground  formed  at  the 
junction  of  two  railway  lines.  The 
helpless  flowers  thiive  there  in  spite  of 
the  terrible  forces  that  come  so  near 
them  on  every  side.  If  you  were  to 
put  an  untaught  savage  inside  the 
garden  hedge,  and  let  him  hear  the 
screaming  engines,  and  see  the  files  of 
carriages,  or  the  trucks  laden  with  coal, 
timber,  and  iron,  converging  towards 
this  fairy  oasis,  he  would  be  ready  to 


say,  "'  these  beautiful  things  will  be 
torn  to  shreds  in  a  moment."  But 
behind  the  garden  fences,  there  are 
lines  of  strong,  faithful  steel,  keeping 
each  engine,  and  carriage,  and  truck 
in  its  appointed  place  ;  and  though  the 
air  vibrates  with  destructive  forces,  the 
pansy,  primrose,  and  geranium  live  in 
a  world  of  tremors,  not  a  silken  fila- 
ment is  snapped,  and  not  a  petal  falls 
untimely  to  the  earth.  In  the  very 
angle  of  these  forces  the  frailest  life  is 
unharmed.  To  all  these  possibilities  of 
destruction  the  steel  puts  its  bound. 
So  with  the  fine  spiritual  husbandries 
that  foster  faith  in  the  souls  around  us. 
That  faith  sometimes  seems  a  thing  of 
hair-spun  filaments,  a  bundle  of  frailties, 
a  fairy  fabric  of  soft-hued  gossamers 
trembling  at  every  breath.  The  ar- 
rogancies  of  sacerdotalism  menace  it. 
The  avalanche  of  nineteenth  century 
atheism  is  poised  over  it.  The  air 
hurtles  with  fiery  hostilities.  The 
mechanisms  of  diabolic  temptation  en- 
croach on  every  side  upon  our  work. 
Public-house,  gaming  club,  ill-ordered 
home  threaten  disasters,  of  which  we 
do  not  like  to  think.  The  air  quivers 
with  the  anger  of  demons.  Yet  the 
work  is  God's,  and  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  it.  In  the 
very  angle  of  these  demoniac  forces  the 
work  shall  thrive,  for  the  hidden  lines 
of  His  protecting  power  are  round  about 
it.  "I,  the  Lord,  do  keep  it;  I  will 
water  it  every  moment  j  lest  any  hurt 
it.  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day." — 
T.  G.  Selby. 

Ver.  19.  The  keys. — L  The  kingdom 
of  heaven  does  not  mean  heaven.  Yet 
the  failure  to  mark  this  obvious  dis- 
tinction has  given  prevalence  to  the 
foolish  notion  that  St.  Peter  is  porter 
at  heaven's  gate,  and  admits  souls  to 
paradise.  2.  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
does  not  mean  the  church.  Attention 
to  this  distinction  would  have  made 
short  work  with  the  Papal  claim  to 
the  power  of  the  keys,  and  would  have 
saved  our  Protestant  divines  a  great 
deal  of  discussion  regarding  the  power 
of   the   keys   in  the   church   and  the 

403 


CHAP.  XVI.      EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


hands  in  -which  that  power  is  vested. 
But  what  is  meant  by  the  keys  ?  The 
phrase  is  metaphorical,  and  the  mean- 
ing is  to  be  found  by  comparison  of 
this  and  other  Scriptures.  It  certainly 
indicates  power. 

I.  Administrative. — The  keys  of  a 
palace  are  entrusted  to  the  major-domo. 
The  key  of  the  house  of  David  is  said 
in  Isaiah  to  be  laid  on  the  shoulders  of 
Eliakim,  a  trusty  counsellor  (Isa.  xxii. 
20-22).  The  mention  of  keys  suggests 
stewardship,  not  lordship.  So  a  power 
of  administration  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  was  as-signed  to  Simon  Peter,  as 
the  first  of  the  Apostles.  It  is  from  this 
that  divines  have  described  the  right 
to  exercise  church  discipline  as  "  the 
power  of  the  keys,"  distinguishing  it 
from  the  jurisdiction  of  civil  rulers, 
which  is  enforced  by  the  power  of  the 
sword. 

II.  Didactic. — Jesus  reproached  the 
lawyers  of  the  time  for  having  "  taken 
away  the  key  of  knowledge."  They 
hindered  the  enlightenment  of  their 
nation.  On  the  other  haod,  a  scribe 
well  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  had  been  likened  by  Him  to 
a  householder  with  command  of  a 
treasury.  We  infer  that  the  Lord 
promised  to  Simon  Peter  the  keys 
by  which  he  would  have  access  to 
the  treasure  of  wisdom  and  under- 
standing in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  so  be  able  to  teach  with  clearness 
and  authority.  This  interpretation  is 
confirmed  by  the  words  which  follow  : 
"  And  whatsoever  thou-  shalt  bind  on 
earth,"  etc.  Not  "  whomsoever,"  but 
*'  whatsoever."  The  saying  refers  to 
points  of  doctrine  or  practice  which 
might  come  into  dispute.  Among  the 
Jewish  Rabbis  to  bind  meant  to  forbid 
or  declare  forbidden ;  to  loose  meant 
to  allow  or  declare  allowed.  We 
understand,  therefore,  that  the  Apostles 
were  authorised  to  teach  and  guide 
their  fellow-Christians,  showing  what 
things  were  forbidden  and  what  allowed, 
indicating  what  rites  and  ordinances 
were  superseded,  and  how  debatable 
questions  should  be  settled  in  the  new 
community.      In   fact,    the   power   to 

404 


bind  and  loose  was  just  the  function 
of  directing  the  judgment  and  practice 
of  the  new-born,  inexperienced  church, 
and  ordering  its  beginnings  of  thought 
and  life  according  to  the  mind  of 
Christ.  But  while  he  shared  the 
power  to  bind  and  loose  with  all  his 
colleagues,  there  is,  in  the  Acts  of  the. 
Apostles,  a  very  special  ascription  of 
the  power  of  the  keys  to  Simon  Peter. 
The  door  of  faith  was  opened  first  to 
the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  ii.,  iii.,  iv.)  ; 
next  to  the  Samaritans,  a  kind  of  inter- 
mediate people  (Acts  viii.) ;  and  finally 
to  the  Gentiles  (Acts  x.).  So  was  the 
gospel  given  to  the  whole  world,  and 
in  each  instance  it  was  the  hand  of 
Simon  Peter  that  held  and  turned  the 
key. — D.  Eraser,  D.D. 

On  earth  and  in  heaven.  —  Go  into 
an  observatory  and  watch  some  astro- 
nomer as  he  is  following  the  transit  of 
a  star.  His  telescope  is  so  adjusted 
that  an  ingenious  arrangement  of 
clock-work  is  made  to  shift  it  with 
the  transit  of  the  star.  His  instrument 
is  moving  in  obedience  to  the  movement 
of  the  star  in  the  heavens.  But  the 
clock-work  does  not  move  the  star. 
The  astronomer  has  made  his  faultless 
calculations;  the  mechanic  has  adjusted 
his  cranks  and  pendulums  and  wheels 
and  springs  with  unerring  nicety,  and 
every  movement  in  the  telescope 
answers  to  the  movement  of  the  star 
in  the  far-off  heavens.  The  corre- 
spondence rests  on  knowledge.  And 
so  when  the  things  that  are  bound 
on  earth  are  bound  in  heaven.  Every 
legislative  counsel  and  decree  and 
movement  in  a  truly  Apostolic  and 
inspired  church  answers  to  some 
counsel  and  decree  and  movement 
in  the  heavens.  But  then  the  power 
of  discerning  and  forecasting  the 
movements  of  the  Divine  will  and 
government  rests  upon  the  power  of 
interpreting  the  Divine  character,  and 
applying  its  principles  of  action,  as 
that  character  is  communicated  to  us 
by  Jesus  Christ.— 7^.  G.  Selhy, 

Bi7iding  and  loosing. — "To  bind  up 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xvi. 


sins  as  in  a  bundle,"  says  Lange,  "  im-  binds   it,    the   school    of    Hillel   looses 

plies  coming  judgment,  while  sins  for-  it,"    in   the   sense   of    prohibition   and 

given  are  described  as  loosed."     It  is,  permission ;     so    that    he    paraphrases 

however,  maintained  strongly  by  other  our    Lord's    words    thus  :     "  If    thou 

critics  that  the  sense  of  the  words  is  askest    by   what    rule   that   church   is 

altogether    different.       Lightfoot    has  to  be  governed,  when  the  Mosaic  rule 

cited  a  triple  decade  "out  of  thousands"  may    seem    so    improper    for    it,   thou 

of  instances  of  the  Jewish  use  of  this  shalt  be  so  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit 

expression  "  binding  and  loosing."     To  that  whatsoever  of  the  laws  of  Moses 

all  manner  of  ceremonial  regulations  thou   shalt  forbid  them   shall   be   foi- 

about   leaven,  festivals,  starting  on  a  bidden ;  whatsoever  thou  gi  antest  them 

voyage,    or   even  so   small   an   act   as  shall   be   granted,    and   that    under   a 

looking  into  a  mirror,  the  formula  is  sanction  made  in  heaven." — C.   E.  B. 

appended,    "the    school    of    Shammai  Reed^  M.A. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  20—28. 

A  sudden  descent, — Most  unexpected  must  have  been  the  opening  words  of 
this  passage  to  those  who  heard  them  first.  One  of  their  number  had  just 
openly  confessed  Jesus  as  Christ ;  and  had  been  just  as  openly  commended  for 
doing  so ;  and  been  encouraged  also,  in  consequence,  by  many  promises  with 
regard  to  the  future  (vers.  16-19).  Yet  now,  on  the  other  hand,  with 
regard  to  the  future — to  the  immediate  future  at  any  rate,  if  not  to  anything 
more — they  are  all  solemnly  admonished,  and  even  "  charged  "  to  do  nothing  of 
the  kind.  Do  not  confess  Me  before  men.  So  ver.  20,  in  effect.  Some  of  the 
reasons  for  this  unexpected  injunction  are  what  come  next  in  the  story ;  and  are 
such  as  appear  to  turn  first,  on  what  was  about  to  be  true  of  Jesus  Himself^ 
and,  secondly,  on  what  was  about  be  true  of  His  disciples. 

I.  About  the  Saviour  Himself. — This,  for  example,  was  true  of  Him,  on  the 
one  hand,  viz.,  that  He  would  have  to  suffer  and  die.  In  various  ways  before 
now  He  had  obscurely  hinted  at  this  (John  ii.  19;  Matt.  xii.  40).  Now  He 
plainly  "shows"  it  to  them  (ver.  21)  in  so  many  words.  In  what  place;  by 
whose  hands;  in  how  many  ways  ;  and  to  how  extreme  a  length  He  was  thus 
to  "  suffer  "  is  "  shown  "  (ver.  21).  Also  how,  in  a  certain  sense,  these  were 
things  that  "  must"  be.  Of  one  mitigation  only,  and  that  of  a  most  mysterious 
kind  (end  of  ver.  21)  does  He  make  mention.  All  else  here  foretoM  of  Him  was 
of  the  gloomiest  possible  kind.  They  must  prepare  themselves  "  from  that 
time  "  to  think  of  Him  as  an  eminently  suffering  Man.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was 
true  about  Him,  also,  that  He  meant  to  accept  this  to  the  full.  This  resolution 
of  His  is  brought  out  in  a  highly  noteworthy  manner.  When  that  forward 
disciple  who  had  just  before  stood  out  from  the  rest  to  confess  Him  as  Christ, 
hears  this  (as  it  clearly  was  to  him)  most  extraordinary  announcement.  He 
cannot  receive  it  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  something  which  seems  to  him 
as  "  far  "  as  possible  from  what  is  fitting.  What  can  the  Master  be  thinking  of 
to  speak  in  that  way?  He  even  takes  upon  himself  to  "  chide  "  Him  (eTrtrtftav) 
for  what  He  has  said.  Why  speak  in  this  way  1  Why  talk  thus  about  "  must  ?  " 
Surely  there  is  some  other  and  less  painful  way  of  doing  Thy  work  ?  Such  appears 
to  have  been  the  inward  spirit  of  this  most  unbecoming  reproof.  Apparently,  if 
we  may  say  so,  it  touched  the  Saviour  in  a  very  sensitive  part.  Once  before,  the 
great  adversary  had  approached  Him  in  a  virtually  similar  way.  Only  worship 
me,  he  had  said,  and  Thou  shalt  be  at  once,  and  with  ease,  all  thou  deservest 
to  be  to  mankind  (iv.  8,  9).  Once  again,  therefore,  and  with  the  same 
vehemence  as  previously  (iv.  10),  He  bids  the  adversary  begone — even  going 
so  far  as  to  address  Peter  himself   by  that  name,  and  speaking  now  of  that 

405 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


chosen  "  stone"  as  a  rock  of  "  olFence,"  and  declaring  of  that  once  God -instructed 
witness  (end  of  ver.  17)  that  he  was  now  taught  from  below  (ver.  23).  So  resolved 
is  the  Saviour  to  let  nothing  stand  between  His  appointed  "  sufferings  "  and 
Himself. 

II.  About  the  Saviour's  disciples. — That  they  must  be  prepared,  first,  on  their 
part,  for  a  similar  kiiid  oj  expeinence.  A  similar  experience,  not  necessarily — 
not  possibly,  indeed,  in  some  respects — of  the  very  same  kind.  This  was  true  of 
all  those  who  would  be  His  disciples  indeed.  If  "  any  man  "  makes  up  his  mind 
to  "  come  after  Me,"  he  must  make  up  his  mind  also  to  meet  the  kind  of  things 
whic  h  I  meet  with  Myself  (ver.  24).  He  must  be  as  resolved  in  his  way  as  I  am 
in  Mine.  He  must  "  deny  himself  and  take  up  his  cross  "  as  you  see  Me  taking 
up  Mine.  Only  so  can  he  "  follow  Me  "  and  walk  in  My  steps.  That  they  will 
find  it,  next,  well  worth  while  to  do  so.  To  see  this  let  them  consider,  in  the  first 
place,  the  nature  of  the  alternative  before  them.  Not  thus  to  deny  themselves 
in  some  things  would  be,  in  efiect,  to  lose  all — to  lose  one's  "  life,"  which  is 
more  than  all  else — to  lose  that  for  which  there  is  no  possible  compensation. 
Better  never  have  such  a  gift  at  all  than  thus  to  have  and  to  lose  it.  Let  them 
consider,  next,  the  certainty  of  this  statement.  For  who  is  to  decide  this  in  the 
end  save  He  who  is  speaking  ]  In  whose  awful  name,  also,  and  with  what  holy 
assessors,  will  this  be  done  on  His  part?  (ver.  27).  And  on  what  principles, 
finally,  in  that  day  of  days  will  the  issue  be  made  to  depend  ?  Is  it  not,  in  fact, 
on  that  very  principle  of  which  He  has  assured  them  just  now,  viz.,  that  as  a 
man  sows  so  shall  he  reap  ?  (end  ver.  27).  Better,  therefore,  give  up  anything 
than  be  on  the  wrong  side  on  that  day.  Also,  let  them  understand — so,  perhaps, 
in  conclusion — that  that  most  momentous  of  days  was  nearer  in  some  ways  than 
many  persons  imagined.  At  any  rate,  there  were  some  standing  there  at  that 
moment,  who,  before  the  little  span  of  their  lives  should  come  to  its  close,  would 
see  that  which  might  be  regarded  as  such  a  second  "  coming  "  of  Christ  (ver  28 ; 
see  also  2  Pet.  i.  16-18). 

The  passage  thus  treated  shows  us : — 

1.  How  ifYiuch  these  disciples  had  to  be  taught. — Their  Master  was  destined  and 
resolved  to  endure  what  they,  at  that  time,  could  hardly  endure  to  hear  men- 
tioned. Things  were  to  become  realities  both  about  Him  and  themselves  which 
had  no  place  as  yet  in  their  dreams.  How  wise  of  the  Saviour,  therefore,  and 
how  considerate,  thus  to  teach  them  these  things  beforehand  (cf.  Luke  xiv.  28). 
Even  with  all  He  did  in  this  way  from  this  present  ''  beginning  "  of  doing  so 
(ver.  21),  how  all  but  fatal  to  the  faith  of  some  of  them  were  the  things  foretold 
when  they  came  (see  Luke  xxiv.  21,  "we  trusted" — we  used  to  trust — that  He 
should  redeem  Israel).  What  a  key  there  is  in  all  this,  therefore,  to  the 
constancy,  and  continuity,  and  earnestness  with  which  the  Saviour  from  this 
time  forth  begins  to  show  forth  His  death.  Not  until  they  had  learned  very 
much  more  both  about  Him  and  themselves  would  they  be  either  fit  or  able  to 
confess  Him  before  men. 

2.  How  very  unlikely  that  many  of  the  Saviour^ s  p^^esent  disciples  should  know 
mjuch  about  the  future. — At  any  rate  in  regard  to  anything  more  than  its 
more  conspicuous  and  ultimate  features.  We  may  judge  this  from  what  we  see 
here  of  these  personal  disciples  of  Jesus.  Also  from  what  ought  to  be  evident  to 
us  of  the  nature  of  the  case.  God's  plans  are  too  wide,  His  purposes  are  too 
deep,  our  experience  is  too  scanty,  and  even  the  light  He  has  given  us  is  too 
partial  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12)  and  mysterious  to  allow  of  any  but  directly  inspired  men 
being  safe  guides  on  such  points.  Not  improbably,  the  most  unfitted  of  all  for 
such  semi-prophetical  work  are  those  who  suppose  themselves  the  most  fit. 
Certainly  this  experience  of  St.  Peter  rather  points  in  that  line, 

406 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xvi. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  21.  Christ  foretelling  His  death 
and  resurrection. — 1.  Our  Lord  was 
not  ignorant  of  what  He  was  to  suffer 
ere  it  came,  nor  ignorant  of  the  outgate 
appointed  for  Him,  how  He  should  be 
killed  and  raised  agaiia.  2.  Whoso 
would  look  rightly  on  Christ's  sufferings 
must  also  look  unto  His  outgate  and 
victory  over  the  same — he  must  look 
on  His  raising  as  well  as  His  killing. — 
David  Dickson. 

Chi'isfs  sufferings. — I.  The  scene. — 
Jerusalem. 

II.  The  instruments. — The  rulers  of 
the  nation. 

III.  The  climax. — Death. 

IV.  -  e  issue. — His  resurrection. — 
A .  MocIuj  ^n,  D.D. 

Wliy  Christ  suffered. — I.  The  Divine 
necessity,  as  expressed  in  that  solemn 
"  must." 

II.  Christ's  willing  acceptance  of 
that  necessity. — "  Go."  The  necessity 
was  no  external  compulsion,  driving 
Him  to  an  unwelcome  sacrifice,  but  one 
imposed  alike  by  filial  obedience  and 
by  brotherly  love.  He  must  die  because 
He  would  save. — Ihid. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Mistaken  views  of  good 
men. — Founded  upon  : — 

I.  Error  of  Judgment. 

II.  Lack  of  knowledge.  —  Why 
should  the  innocent  Jesus  suffer  ? 

III.  Misguided  affection. — Far  from 
Thee,  etc.  Men  often  are  biassed  in 
their  views  of  the  sins,  sufferings,  and 
future  of  others  by  their  affections. — 
/.  C.  Gray. 

Ver.  23.  Chrises  reproof  of  Peter. — 
1.  Our  Lord  so  loved  to  work  out  our 
redemption  that  He  could  not  endure 
to  be  any  way  hindered ;  therefore,  saith 
He,  *'  Get  thee  behind  Me."  2.  What 
Satan  cannot  do  immediately,  he  will 
essay  to  do  by  instruments.  Christ 
findeth  him  out  here,  saying,  "  Get 
thee  behind  Me,  Satan."  3.  Naturally 
a  man  savoureth  not  things  spiritual, 


neither  knoweth  them,  nor  loveth  them, 
if  they  be  told  him.  4.  We  should,  in 
temptations  beware  of  Satan,  whoever 
be  the  instrument,  and  the  more  im- 
pudently we  be  tempted  unto  sin,  we 
should  the  more  stoutly  and  peremp- 
torily resist,  as  Christ  did,  saying,  "  Get 
thee  behind  me,  Satan."  5.  After  a 
man  hath  been  much  lifted  up  in  con- 
solation, he  may  readily  miscarry,  and 
fall  in  some  offence,  as  Peter's  case  is 
here,  compared  with  ver.  16.  6.  A 
man  may  be  a  stumbling-block  unto 
others,  albeit  he  do  not  intend  it,  for  to 
Peter  it  is  said,  "  Thou  art  an  offence." 
7.  Apparent  good  counsel  from  a  carnal 
friend  may  readily  carry  some  tempta- 
tion in  the  bosom  of  it,  as  Peter's 
counsel  here  doth  ;  and  sin  will  serve 
Satan's  turn,  wherever  he  find  it, 
whether  in  the  godly  or  wicked,  for 
Peter's  corruption  here  is  Satan's 
instrument  fit  enough  for  the  time. — 
David  Dickson. 

Ver.  24.  Self-denial. — Self-denial  is^ 
the  foundation  of  godliness  ;  and  if  this 
be  not  well  laid  the  whole  building 
will  fall.  Self-denial  is  the  thread 
which  must  run  along  the  whole  work 
of  religion.  To  deny  signifies  to  lay 
aside,  to  put  off,  to  annihilate  one's  self. 
Beza  renders  it,  let  him  renounce 
himself.  "  Self "  is  taken  four 
ways.  1.  Worldly  self,  i.e.  his  estate 
(xix.  27).  2.  Relative  self,  i.e.  his  dearest 
relations  if  God  calls  (Luke  xiv.  26). 
3.  Natural  self  ;  he  must  be  willing  to 
become  a  sacrifice,  and  make  Christ's 
crown  flourish,  though  it  be  in  his  ashes 
(Rev.  xii.  11).  4.  Carnal  self.  This  I 
take  to  be  the  chief  sense  of  the  text. 

I.  He  must  deny  self-ease  (2  Tim.' 
ii.  3). 

II.  He  must  deny  self-opinion. 

III.  He  must  deny  self-confidence. 
— Peter's  self-confidence  undid  him 
(xxvi.  33,  34). 

IV.  He  must  deny  self- wisdom 
(2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  James  iii.  17). 

V.  He  must  deny  self-will  (2  Pet. 
ii.  10). 

407 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


y 


VI.  He  must  deny  self-reasonings. 

— Consider :  1.  Whatever  you  deny 
for  Christ,  you  shall  find  again  in 
Christ  (xix.  29).  2.  'Tis  but  equity 
that  you  should  deny  yourselves  for 
Christ ;  did  not  Jesus  Christ  deny 
Himself  for  you  ?  3.  Self-denial  is  the 
highest  sign  of  a  thorough-paced 
Christian.  I  have  read  of  a  holy  man 
who  was  once  tempted  by  Satan. 
"  Why  takest  thou  all  this  pains," 
saith  he  ;  "  thou  wat chest,  and  fastest, 
and  abstainest  from  sin  ;  O  man,  what 
doest  thou  more  than  I  ?  Art  thou  no 
drunkard,  no  adulterer  ?  ISTo  more  am 
I.  Dost  thou  watch  ?  Let  me  tell 
thee,  I  never  slept.  Dost  thou  fast? 
I  never  eat.  What  doest  thou  more 
than  I?"  *'Why,"  saith  the  good 
man,  "  I  will  tell  thee,  Satan;  I  pray, 
I  seive  the  Lord,  nay,  more  than  all, 
I  deny  myself."  "  Nay  then  "  saith 
Satan,  "thou  goest  beyond  me,  for  I 
exalt  myself,"  and  so  vanished.  4.  To 
deny  yourself  is  what  others  have  done 
before  you  (Heb.  xi.  8,  25).  5.  If  you 
do  not  deny  the  world  fcr  Christ,  the 
world  will  deny  you,  and,  what  is 
worse,  Christ  will  deny  you  (x.  33). 
— Thomas  Watson. 

Self-denial. — I.  Inquire  what  self- 
denial  is. — 1.  It  is  not  to  deny  what  a 
man  is  or  has,  what  he  truly  is,  and 
what  he  really  has,  for  that  would  be 
a  falsehood;  in  this  sense  "  God  cannot 
deny  Himself"  (2  Tim.  ii.  13);  not 
His  nature,  and  the  perfections  of  it ; 
or  do,  or  affirm  anything  contrary 
thereunto.  So  a  man  ought  not  to 
deny  himself  as  a  man,  nor  the  rational 
powers  which  he  is  possessed  of.  If 
God  has  bestowed  internal  endowments 
on  men,  gifts  and  talents,  qualified  for 
public  service  and  usefulness,  some  way 
or  another,  they  are  to  own  them  and 
use  them ;  and  not  to  wrap  them  in  a 
napkin  or  hide  them  in  the  earth, 
which  is  interpretatively  to  deny  that 
they  have  them.  Nor  should  a  truly 
good  and  gracious  man  deny  what  he 
is  and  has,  but  acknowledge  it,  and 
how  by  grace  he  came  by  it.  2.  To 
deny   a    man's  self   is   not    to   refuse 

408 


favoui's  conferred  on  him  in  a  course 
of  Providence,  nor  to  neglect  a  lawful 
use  of  them,  nor  to  take  care  of  him- 
self and  of  his  affairs.  3.  Self-denial 
does  not  require  that  a  man  should 
refuse  temporal  honours  and  riches 
bestowed  on  him  in  a  Providential 
way.  4.  Nor  are  the  creatures  of  God, 
and  the  use  of  them,  to  be  rejected 
(1  Tim.  iv.  4).  5.  Nor  should  a  man 
be  careless  of  his  life,  and  health,  and 
family,  though  he  should  not  be 
anxiously  careful  for  life,  nor  food  and 
raiment,  to  support  and  secure  it. 
6.  There  is  a  self-love  which  is  not 
criminal,  nor  contrary  to  the  grace  of 
self-denial  (Eph.  v.  29).  7.  Nor  is  it 
self-denial,  or  any  part  of  it,  to  abuse 
the  body  in  any  respect ;  not  even  on 
religious  accounts.  Self-denial  lies  in 
a  man's  renouncing,  foregoing,  and 
postponing  all  his  pleasures,  profits, 
relations,  interests,  and  whatever  he 
enjoys,  which  may  be  in  competition 
with  Christ,  from  love  to  Him,  and  to 
be  given  up  at  His  command.  A  self- 
denying  Christian  is  made  willing  to 
part :  1 .  With  natural  and  civil  self, 
with  things  relative  both  to  soul  and 
body,  of  which  a  man's  self  consists. 

2.  Another  branch  of  self-denial  lies 
in  denying  smf  ul  self ;  this  lesson  not 
nature  but  grace  teaches,  even  to  deny  = 
ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  which  \ 
includes  all  kinds  of  sin ;  internal  lusts 
and  external  actions  of  sin ;  sins  of 
heart,  lip,  and  life ;  everything  that  is 
contrary  to  God  and  His  righteous  law. 

3.  Another  branch  of  self-denial  is  to  ^ 
deny  righteous   self,  which  is  not   to 
refuse  to  do  works  of  righteousness  for 
necessary  uses,  to  glorify  God,  to  adorn 
the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour ;  but 

to  deny  righteous  self  is  to  renounce 
all  trust  in  and  dependence  on  a  man's 
own  righteousness  for  justification 
before  God,  and  acceptance  with  Him, 
and  to  submit  to  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  and  depend  upon  that  for  such 
purposes  (Phil.  iii.  6-9). 

II.  The  arguments  or  motives  to 
excite  to  the  exercise  of  this  grace  of 
self-denial,  in  the  several  branches  of 
it.     1.  It  is  an  injunction  of  Christ  on 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,      chap.  xvi. 


His  disciples,  even  all  of  tliem.  excellence  is  not  hard  to  discover. 
2.  Christ  has  not  only  commanded  it,  Humbleness  of  spirit,  the  most  per- 
butiHe  has  set  an  example  of  it  Him-  vading  and  universal  of  all  graces,  is 
self  (Phil.  ii.  5-8).  3.  The  examples  of  in  the  Christian  code  the  very  essence 
saints  in  all  ages  may  serve  to  excite  of  perfection,  and  sorrow  borne  with 
and  encourage  to  it.  4.  If  a  man  do  resignation  has  a  direct  tendency  to 
not  deny  himself,  as  required  of  God,  produce  it.  Now,  because  our  Re- 
he  sets  up  himself  for  God ;  makes  a  deemer  knew,  what  it  is  so  hard  to 
God  for  himself,  lives  to  himself  and  persuade  even  His  avowed  followers, 
not  to  God.  5.  The  loss  and  gain  of  that  in  this  direction  lies  the  true 
not  denying,  and  of  denying  self,  perfection  of  man — that  a  gentle,  un- 
should  be  considered. — Anon.  murmuring   submission  is   his    truest, 

brightest   heroism — therefore  did  He, 

Tke  imitation  of  Christ. — The  com-  in  His  own  person,  adopt  the  way  that 

mand  which  the  text  contains  is  based  leads  to  it.     He  daily  suffered,  because 

upon  the  great  principle  of  the  imita-  suffering  subdues  the  pride  of  human 

tion  of  Christ.     Unlike  all  other  legis-  hearts,    and   He   would    teach    us    to 

lators.  His  life  is  the  law  of  His  people,  accomplish  that  conquest. —  W.  Archer 

If  we  would  gain  the  root  of  the  matter,  Butler,  D.D. 
then  we  must  contemplate  suffering  as 

manifested  in  Christ  Himself.  Self-denial  is  the  first  law  of  grace. — 

I.  The  great  primary  fact,  upon  A  nuir*)er  of  ministers  were  once  dining 
which  all  the  essential  peculiarities  of  together  after  an  ordination,  and  when 
our  religion  are  founded,  is  that  God  one  of  them  seemed  unduly  attentive 
became  strangely,  inconceivably  con-  to  the  good  things  before  him,  he  met 
nected  with  pain ;  that  this  Being,  with  the  approval  of  the  host,  who 
whose  nature  is  inherent  happiness,  by  said,  **  That's  right !  To  take  care  of 
some  mysterious  process  entered  the  self  is  the  first  law  of  nature."  *'  Yes, 
regions  of  suffering,  crossed  the  whole  sir,"  said  an  old  minister  sitting  near, 
diameter  of  existence,  to  find  Himself  in  reply  ;  "  but  to  deny  self  is  the  first 
with  His  own  opposite  ;  bore,  though  law  of  grace  !  " 

incapable  of  moral  pollution,  the  dark 

shadow  of  pollution,  even  anguish  un-  The     cross. — Every    high      mission 

speakable ;  and  though  unsubdued  by  means  the  cross. —  W.  S.  Lilley. 

the  master.  Sin,  exhibited  Himself,  to 

the  wonder  of  the  universe,  clad  in  the  Yer.  25.  Gaining  life  hy  losing  it. — 

weeds  of  the  servant.  Death.    The  main  It  is  true   that  with   respect   to   the 

reason  of  this  fact  is  to  be  found  in  the  work  man  has  to  do  outside  himself, 

necessity  of  atonement.    But  the  Divine  the  way  to  do  it  is  to  keep  it  directly 

Person  also  visited  the  regions  of  pain  in  view,   aim  consciously  at  it.     But 

in  such  a  sense  as  to  be  our  Example  ;  the  moment  you  come  to  the  operations 

for  so  the  text  presents  Him.  of  mind  or  life  in  man  himself,  not 

II.  Must  we  not  think  that  there  is  merely  in  this  higher  life  Christ  speaks 
something  in  the  sorrow,  thus  cordially  of,  but  in  almost  any  part  of  his 
and  perpetually  chosen  by  our  Master,  nature,  in  man  himself,  the  opposite 
that  is  eminently  adapted  to  elevate  principle  comes  in — this  very  principle 
and  purify  our  being? — Must  there  which  seems  so  paradoxical,  the  prin- 
not  be  something  Divinely  excellent  in  ciple  that  losing  the  life,  letting  it  go, 
that  which  was  deliberately  chosen  by  not  thinking  of  it,  is  the  surest  way  of 
a  Divine  nature  as  its  peculiar  taberi  saving  it.  This  is  not  only  true  with 
nacle  out  of  all  the  world  afforded,  the  regard  to  coming  to  the  best  for  one's 
sad  but  awful  cloud  above  the  mercy-  soul,  it  is  true  of  coming  to  the  best 
seat  in  which,  while  among  us.  His  even  in  the  commonest  faculties  and 
glory   was    to    dwell  ?       This   special  qualities  of  life.     Did  you  ever  try  to 

409 


CHAP.  XVI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


cross  a  stream  by  some  rather  awkward 
stepping-stones,  or  by  a  rather  narrow 
plank  1  Or  have  you  tried  to  walk  at 
some  dangerous  height?  or,  in  fact, 
anything  requiring  a  particularly  clear, 
steady  head  1  If  you  have,  you  know 
that  it  is  to  be  done  exactly  by  not 
thinking  about  it.  If  you  begin  looking 
down  at  the  stepping-stones,  or  at  the 
water,  or  at  the  depth  beneath  you, 
and  thinking  about  it,  and  about  how 
you  shall  go  through  with  it,  you  are 
lost.  Whereas,  if  you  are  so  occupied, 
thinking  about  something  else,  that 
you  hardly  notice  the  stepping-stones ; 
if  you  are  on  some  errand  in  which  you 
are  so  eager  that  you  are  not  thinking 
of  yourself — that  losing  yourself  is  your 
safety ;  you  may  go  perfectly  safely 
over  places  and  heights  that  after- 
wards, when  you  do  come  to  think 
about  them,  will  make  you  dizzy  to 
look  at.  There,  too,  life  is  safest  by  not 
thinking  about  saving  it.  Take  another 
matter,  the  preservation  of  health. 
One  condition  of  keeping  in  good  health 
is  not  to  think  about  your  health, 
but  to  be  wholesomely  occupied  with 
quite  other  thoughts.  Think  about 
your  health,  begin  feeling  your  pulse, 
watching  your  symptoms,  considering 
all  the  things  which  might  possibly 
be  the  matter  with  you,  and  you  may 
think  yourself  into  an  illness.  Why 
do  physicians  so  often  order  "  change 
of  scene  "  and  "  something  to  distract 
the  mind,"  but  that  the  patient  may 
be  led  to  lose  himself  and  so  find  the 
health  which  he  could  not  gain  while 
anxiously  thinking  of  himself?  And 
so,  when  there  is  some  epidemic  about, 
how  true  you  constantly  see  it  that 
'*he  that  will  save  his  life  shall  lose 
it."  The  most  dangerous  thing  of 
all  is  to  be  constantly  thinking  and 
scheming  how  to  escape  infection. 
Take  reasonable  precautions,  indeed — 
especially  such  precautions  as  are  de- 
manded for  the  general  safety — and  then 
go  straight  forward.  Think  of  others, 
not  of  self. — Brooke  Herford. 

Ver.    26.     The   preciousness    of  the 
soul — I.  The  soul  is  very  precious, 

410 


1 .  The  soul  has  an  intrinsical  worth, 
which  appears  in — (1)  Its  spirituaUty. 
It  is  spiritual  in  its  essence  (Gen.  ii.  7), 
a  sparkle  lighted  by  the  breath  of  God ; 
in  its  object,  it  contemplates  God  and 
heaven ;  in  its  operation,  it  doth  not 
depend  upon  the  body  in  its  working. 
(2)  Its  immortality. 

2.  The  soul  has  an  estimative  worth. 
— (1)  Jesus  Christ  hath  set  a  high  value 
and  estimate  upon  the  soul.  He  made 
it.  He  bought  it,  therefore  He  best 
knows  the  price  of  it.  (2)  Satan  doth 
value  souls. 

II.  The  soul  is  more  precious  than 
a  world. — The  world  is  of  a  coarser 
make. 

1.  If  the  soul  is  so  precious,  see  what 
the  worship  is  that  God  doth  expect  and 
accept,  viz.,  that  which  comes  from  the 

soul  (Ps.  XXV.  1). 

2.  If  .the  soul  is  so  precious,  then  of 
what  precious  account  should  ordinances 
and  ministers  he. 

3.  Take  heed  of  abusing  your  souls. — 
Socrates  exhorted  young  men  that  they 
should  look  at  their  faces  in  a  glass, 
and  if  they  saw  they  were  fair,  they 
should  have  a  care  to  do  nothing 
unworthy  of  their  beauty.  Christians, 
God  hath  given  you  souls  that  sparkle 
with  Divine  beauty;  oh,  do  nothing 
unworthy  of  these  souls  !  They  abuse 
their  souls:  (1)  That  degrade  their 
souls,  (a)  Panting  after  the  dust  of 
earth  (Amos  ii.  7).  {h)  Making  their 
souls  lackeys  to  their  bodies.  (2)  That 
sell  their  souls.  (a)  The  covetous 
person  sells  his  soul  for  money.  (6)  The 
ambitious  person  sells  his  soul  for 
honour.  (c)  The  voluptuous  person 
sells  his  soul  for  pleasure.  (3)  That 
poison  their  souls.  (4)  That  starve 
their  souls. 

4.  Take  heed  you  do  not  lose  your 
souls. — (1)  It  is  a  foolish  loss,  because  : 
(a)  There  is  a  possibiHty  of  saving  the 
soul.  (6)  Because  we  lose  the  soul  for 
things  of  no  value,  (c)  Because  the 
man  hath  himself  a  hand  in  the  loss. 
(2)  It  isa/a^aHoss.  {a)  Unparalleled, 
because  so  much  is  lost  with  it,  Christ, 
the  Comforter,  heaven,  etc.  (6)  Ir- 
reparable,    (c)  Eternal. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xvi. 


5.  Bo   what   you   can   to   save   these  question  as  if  the  man  were  successful. 

precious  souls. — Thos.  Watson.  Suppose  a  man  should  gain  the  whole 

world,    what    then?       Where    is    the 

Profit  and  loss  i^oyoxm^-mQX)). — You  profit?     Let  us  not  be  unreal  enough 

are  resolved  to  gain  the  world,  and  I  '  to  make  light  of  worldly  prosperity,  of 

want  you  to  abandon  your  resolution : —  happiness,  of   friendship,  of  learning, 

I.  On  the  ground  of  probable  failure.  of  wealth,  of  place  or  power.  It  is 
— That  the  pleasures  of  the  world  are  surely  well  to  be  above  want,  to  have 
agreeable  I  admit ;  and  that  its  no  undue  pressure  from  without.  Who 
honours  are  attractive  I  admit  also  ;  again  does  not  know  how  the  burden 
and  that  its  riches  are  desirable  I  admit  of  life  is  lightened  by  family  ties  and 
besides.  But  you  may  not  be  able  to  get  friendships  ?  And  if  we  think  of  the 
them  for  your  own.  Have  you  never  blessings  of  learning,  surely  no  one  will 
heard  of  competition  ?  You  may  find  dare  to  despise  the  man  to  whom  know- 
yourselves  outstripped.  By  untoward  ledge  has  unfolded  her  ample  page,  rich 
circumstances  you  may  find  yourselves  with  the  spoils  of  time  !  And  is  there 
baffled.  By  bodily  sickness  you  may  nothing  noble  in  the  warrior's  or  the 
find  yourselves  unmanned.  By  mental  statesman's  career  ?  3.  But  now 
malady  you  may  find  yourselves  comes  the  grand  question.  What  is 
prostrate  in  the  dust.  You  are  em-  the  exact  profit  to  the  fortunate 
barking,  therefore,  upon  an  absolute  possessor  of  all  that  the  world  can 
uncertainty.  give  of  wealth  and  wisdom,  of  honour 

II.  On  the  ground  of  impending  and  friendship,  and  material  comfort  ? 
unsatisfactoriness. — Let  our  supposi-  Does  the  possession  of  wealth  add  to 
tion  be  that  you  have  actually  gained,  in  human  happiness  ?  Was  David  the 
the  particular  forms  most  pleasant  to  king  happier  in  his  palace  with  all 
yourselves,  the  world's  pleasures,  and  Israel  at  his  bidding  than  he  was 
the  world's  honours,  and  the  world's  when,  as  a  shepherd  boy,  he  solaced 
wealth.  You  have  gained  the  world,  his  nights  of  watchfulness  with  his 
but  it  does  not  fit  you,  and  by  the  harp?  Was  he  not  more ''a  man  after 
want  of  fitness  you  are  vexed  ;  it  does  God's  own  heart "  in  that  pure,  strong 
not  solace  you,  and  by  its  want  of  youth,  than  when  his  soul  was  led 
solace  you  are  irritated ;  it  does  not  astray  by  the  vanities  and  vices  which 
assure  and  reassure  you  of  the  future,  became  the  bane  of  his  later  years  ? 
especially  of  that  future  away  beyond  But  surely  wisdom,  the  pursuit  of 
the  grave ;  and  by  its  want  of  assurance  knowledge,  is  free  from  drawbacks, 
you  are  aggrieved.  Surely     there     is      deep     delight     in 

III.  On  the  ground  of  inevitable  knowing,  yet  what  saith  the  wisest  of 
ruin. — That  old  Book  tells  you  that  men?  *'  In  much  wisdom  is  much 
you  cannot  go  in  for  the  world  without  grief,"  and  "  he  that  increaseth  know- 
losing  your  soul. — W.  Brock.,  D.D.  ledge  increaseth  sorrow."     Well  then, 

you   may  say,  you  will  spare  us  our 

A   terrible  mistake. — I.  Let  us  look  last   sanctuary   on    earth — the   warm 

at    the    profit    side    of    the    account.  light  of  home,  and  the  love  of  friends  ? 

"If     he     gain     the     whole     world."  Surely  a  father's  care,  a  mother's  love, 

1.    What   a    world   of   meaning   there  a   wife's   devotion,    a   child's   trust,    a 

is     in    that    little    word     "  if " !      It  friend's   proved   fidelity — surely   these 

suggests   the    fact   that   few,    perhaps  things   are   aU   gain  ?     Yes ;    but    do 

not   one   in   ten   thousand,    does  gain  these    things    endure?     Is    not    decay 

that  portion  of  the  world  on  which  he.  written  on  them  all? 

sets   his   heart.     We   see   this  in   the  II.  This  brings  us  to  consider  the 

struggle   for   all   kinds    of    prizes   on  loss  side  of  the  account.     What  is  it 

which  men  set  their  hearts.     2.  But  to  lose  one's  own  soul?     What  is  the 

let   us  come    now    and    consider   the  worth  of  a  human  soul  ?      Doubtless 

411 


CHAP.  XVII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


some  souls  are  of  more  intrinsic  value 
than  others.  But  to  every  man  his 
own  soul,  whatever  its  value  in  the 
estimation  of  others,  is  of  infinite 
value  to  himself.  The  man  who  loses 
his  own  soul  loses  ''  himself."  The 
account  stands  thus  :  Eternal  ages  of 
loss  against  seventy  years  of  all  that 
the  world  can  give.  If  duration  alone 
were  to  be  taken  into  account  the  mere 
worldling  makes  a  poor  bargain ;  but 
the  loss  will  be  still  more  apparent  if 
you  consider  the  nature  of  the  loss 
sustained.  Verily,  the  soul  is  lost 
when  its  faculties  are  degraded.  Man 
has  been  created  with  a  soul  capable  of 
pure  desires,  of  holy  effort,  of  loving 
sacrifice,  and  therefore  capable  of  com- 
munion with  the  Father  of  Spirits, 
who  is  pure  and  holy,  just  and  true 
and  loving.     If  any  man  degrades  his 


soul  till  it  is  dead  to  love,  to  truth  and 
purity,  what  remains?  Has  he  not 
slain  his  soul  ? — J.  W.  King,  M.A . 

Ver.  27.  The  final  advent  of  Christ. 
— Our  attention  is  here  directed  to  : — 

I.  The  Son  of  man. — As  the  Pro- 
mised One.  As  the  Manifested  One. 
As  the  Ascended  One. 

II.  His  reappearance  on  earth. — It 
is  predicted.  It  is  possible.  It  is 
necessary. 

III.  His  superhuman  glory. — His 
herald  is  glorious.  His  Person  is 
glorious.     His  retinue  is  glorious. 

III.  His  important  work. — To  raise 
the  dead.  To  change  the  living.  To 
judge  all.  To  reward  each.  To 
resign  the  reins  of  government  into 
His  Father's  hands. — A.  Macfarlane. 


CHAPTER  XYII. 


CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  After  six  days. — Within  a  week  of  Peter's  confession.  St.  Luke  has  "  about  an  eight 
days  after,"  according  to  the  common  Jewish  reckoning,  by  which  each  part  of  a  day  is 
counted  as  a  day  (^Carr).  An  high  mountain. — Since  the  fourth  century  tradition  has  fixed 
on  Mount  Tabor,  in  Galilee,  as  the  locality  of  this  event.  This  opinion  is,  however,  evidently 
untenable.  Not  only  was  Mount  Tabor  inhabited  to  its  summit  at  the  time  (see  Robinson), 
but  it  seems  exceedingly  improbable  that  Jesus  would  have  so  suddenly  left  His  retreat  in 
the  highlands  of  Gaulonitis,  and  transferred  the  scene  of  one  of  His  most  secret  revelations 
to  Galilee,  where  He  was  everywhere  persecuted.  The  mountain  seems  likely  to  have  been 
Hermon  {Lange). 

Ver.  2.  Transfigured. — The  transfiguration  proper,  the  general  statement  that  Jesus  "  was 
transfigured  before  them,"  is  immediately  followed  out  into  explanatory  details.  It  was 
twofold  :  the  radiance  of  His  face,  and  the  gleaming  whiteness  of  His  raiment,  which  shone 
"like  the  snow"  on  Hermon,  smitten  by  the  sunshine.  Probably  we  are  to  think  of  the 
whole  body  as  giving  forth  the  same  mysterious  light,  which  made  itself  visible  even 
through  the  white  robe  He  wore.  This  would  give  beautiful  accuracy  and  appropriateness 
to  the  distinction  drawn  in  the  two  metaphors,  that  His  face  was  "  as  the  sun,"  in  which 
the  undiluted  glory  was  seen ;  and  His  garments  as  the  light,  which  is  sunshine  diffused  and 
weakened.  There  is  no  hint  of  any  external  source  of  the  brightness.  It  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  a  reflection  from  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence,  as  was  the  fading 
radiance  on  the  face  of  Moses.  That  symbol  does  not  come  into  view  till  the  last  stage  of 
the  incident.  We  are  then  to  think  of  it  as  arising  from  within,  not  cast  from  without.  We 
cannot  tell  whether  it  was  voluntary  or  involuntary  (Maclaren).  Are  we  to  think  of  night 
or  of  day  ?  Perhaps  the  former  is  slightly  the  more  probable,  from  the  fact  of  the  descent 
being  made  "the  next  day"  (Luke).  Our  conception  of  the  scene  will  be  very  different,  as 
we  think  of  that  lustre  from  His  face,  and  that  bright  cloud,  as  outshining  the  blaze  of  a 
Syrian  sun,  or  as  filling  the  night  with  glory.  But  we  cannot  settle  which  view  is  correct 
(ibid.). 

Ver.  3.  Moses  and  Elias. — The  appropriate  representatives  of  the  law  and  the  prophets. 
And  as  all  the  distinguishing  peculiarities  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  pointed,  as  with 

*  412 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xvii. 


outstretched  finger,  to  the  Messiah,  and  waited  for  their  accomplishment  in  His  person  and 
in  His  work,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  Moses  and  Elijah  should  have  had  much  in  their 
hearts  which  they  would  like  to  say  to  Jesus,  and  that  Jesus  should  have  much  in  His  heart 
which  He  would  like  to  say  to  them.     See  Luke  ix.  31  {Morison). 

Ver.  4.  Let  us  make. — /  will  make  (K.V.).  The  transition  to  the  singular  is  in  keeping 
with  Peter's  temperament  {Carr).  Tabernacles. — Little  huts  made  out  of  boughs  of  trees  or 
shrubs  (ibid.). 

Ver.  9.  The  vision.— See  Mark  ix.  9  ;  Luke  ix.  36. 

Ver.  10.  Elias  must  first  come. — If  Elijah  was  to  come  and  prepare  the  way,  why  had  he 
thus  come  from  the  unseen  world  for  a  moment  only  ? 

Ver.  11.  Elias  truly  shall  first  come. —  Cometh  (R.V.).  Our  Lord's  words  are  obviously 
enigmatic  in  their  form,  and,  as  such,  admit  of  two  very  different  interpretations.  Taken 
literally,  as  they  have  been  by  very  many  both  in  earlier  and  later  times,  they  seem  to  say 
that  Elijah  shall  come  in  person  before  the  yet  future  day  of  the  Lord,  the  great  second 
advent  of  the  Christ.  So,  it  has  been  argued,  the  prophecy  of  Mai.  iv.  5  shall  yet  have  a 
literal  fulfilment,  and  John  the  Baptist  when  he  confessed  that  he  was  not  Elijah  (John  i.  21) 
was  rightly  expecting  his  appearance.  The  words  that  follow  in  the  next  verse  are, 
however,  more  decisive  (Plumjjtre). 

Ver.  12.  Elias  is  come  already. — So  far  as  the  prophecy  of  Malachi  required  the  coming  of 
Elijah,  that  prophecy  had  been  fulfilled  in  tbe  Baptist,  all  unconscious  of  it  as  he  was,  as 
coming  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah  (Luke  i.  17)  (ibid.). 
Ver.  15.  Lunatick. — Epileptic  (R.V.).  "The  child  was  a  possessed  epileptic  lunatic." 
Ver.  20.  Grain  of  mustard  seed. — See  note  on  xiii.  31.  The  proverbial  type  of  the 
infinitely  little  (Plumptre).  Ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove  hence. — Such  expres- 
sions are  cbaracteristic  of  the  vivid  imagery  of  Eastern  speech  generally.  To  "remove 
mountains"  is  to  make  difficulties  vanish.  The  Jews  used  to  say  of  an  eminent  teacher,  he 
is  "  a  rooter  up  of  mountains  "  (see  Lightfoot  ad  loc.)  (  Carr). 

Ver.  21.  This  kind,  etc. — In  his  eighth  edition  of  the  New  Testament  text,  Tischendorf  has 
omitted  the  twenty-firbt  verse  altogether,  imagining  that  it  has  crept  in  from  Mark  ix.  29. 
And  indeed  it  is  not  found  in  the  original  Sinaitic  text ;  or  in  the  Vatican  MS. ;  or  in 
No.  33,  "  the  queen  of  the  cursives."  It  is  wanting,  too,  in  some  of  the  oldest  MSS.  of  the 
old  Latin  translation,  as  also  in  Curetou's  Syriac  version,  and  the  Jerusalem  Syriac,  etc. 
We  could  suppose  that  Tischendorf  is  right  in  this  case.  The  twentieth  verse  is  complete 
and  needs  no  appendix  of  reply  (3Iorison).     The  verse  is  omitted  in  the  R.V. 

Ver.  22.  While  they  abode. — See  R.V.  margin.  While  they  were  sojourning  in  Galilee  on 
their  way  back — on  their  return  from  the  northern  parts  about  Ceesarea  Philippi  (Morison). 

Ver.  24.  Tribute  money  (to.  StS/oaxMa.)— "  The  double  drachma  ;  "  a  sum  equal  to  two  Attic 
drachmas,  and  corresponding  to  the  Jewish  "  half-shekel,"  payable,  towards  the  maintenance 
of  the  temple  and  its  services,  by  every  male  Jew  of  twenty  years  old  and  upwards.  For 
the  origin  of  this  annual  tax  see  Exod.  xxx.  13,  14  ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  6,  9.  Thus,  it  will  be 
observed,  it  was  not  a  civil,  but  an  ecclesiastical  tax.  The  tax  mentioned  in  the  next  verse 
was  a  civil  one.  The  whole  teaching  of  this  very  remarkable  scene  depends  upon  this 
distinction  (Brown).  The  half-shekel  was  worth  about  fifteen  pence.  Came  to  Peter. — At 
whose  house  Jesus  was  probably  lodging.  Doth  not  your  Master  pay  tribute  1 — The  question 
seems  to  imply  that  the  payment  of  this  tax  was  voluntary.,  but  expected ;  or  what,  in 
modern  phrase,  would  be  called  a  "  voluntary  assessment "  (Brown). 

Ver.  25.  Jesus  prevented  him. — Spake  first  to  him  (R.V.),  i.e.  anticipated  him.  Take 
custom. — Beceive  toll  (R.V.).  Custom  on  goods  exported  or  imported  (Brown).  Tribute 
(Kriv(Tov). — From  the  Latin  word  census,  meaning  tbe  poll-tax,  payable  to  the  Romans  by 
everyone  whose  name  was  in  the  "  census  "  (ibid).  Of  their  own  children. — Sons  (R.V.),  i.e. 
the  princes.  Strangers. — This  cannot  mean  "  foreigners,"  from  whom  sovereigns  certainly 
do  not  raise  taxes,  but  "  those  who  are  not  of  their  own  family ,"  i.e.^,  their  subjects  (Brown). 
Ver.  26.  Then  are  the  children  free. — By  "  the  children "  our  Lord  cannot  here  mean 
Himself  and  the  Twelve  together,  in  some  loose  sense  of  their  near  relationship  to  God  as 
their  common  Father.  For  besides  that  our  Lord  never  once  mixes  Himself  up  with  His 
disciples  in  speaking  of  their  relation  to  God,  but  ever  studiously  keeps  His  relation  and 
theirs  apart  (see  e.g.  on  the  last  words  of  this  chapter),  this  would  be  to  teach  the  right  of 
believers  to  exemption  from  the  dues  required  for  sacred  services,  in  the  teeth  of  all  that 
Paul  teaches,  and  that  He  Himself  indicates  throughout.  He  can  refer  here,  then,  only  to 
Himself ;  using  the  word  "  children  "  evidently  in  order  to  express  the  general  principle 
observed  by  sovereigns,  who  do  not  draw  taxes  from  their  own  children,  and  thus  convey  the 
truth  respecting  His  own  exemption  the  more  strikingly,  q.  d.  "If  the  sovereign's  own 
family  be  exempt,  you  know  the  inference  in  My  case ;  "  or,  to  express  it  more  nakedly  than 
Jesus  thought  needful  and  fitting :  "  This  is  a  tax  for  upholding  My  Father's  house ;  as  His 
Son,  then,  that  tax  is  not  due  by  Me — I  am  free  "  (ibid.). 
Ver.  27.    Lest  we  should  offend  them. —  Cause  them  to  stuvible  (R.Y.).    Misconstruing  a 

413 


CHAP.  xvii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


claim  to  exemption  into  indifEerence  to  His  honour  who  dwells  in  the  temple  (^Brown).  A 
piece  of  money  (aTarrjpa). — A  stater — a  shekel  (R.V.).  A  coin  equal  to  two  of  the  fore- 
mentioned  "  didrachms  " ;  thus  the  exact  sum  required  for  both.  Me  and  thee. — Our  Lord 
does  not  say  "  for  us,"  but  "  for  Me  and  thee,"  thus  distinguishing  the  Exempted  One  and 
His  non-exempted  disciple  {Brow7i). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses   1—13. 

A  glimpse  of  glory. — This  passage  is  connected  very  intimately  with  that 
immediately  before  it.  The  occurrence  it  describes  took  place  about  a  week — 
about  "six  days"  (ver.  1  ;  Mark  ix.  2)  according  to  one  way  of  counting — about 
**  eight  days  "  (Luke  ix.  28)  according  to  another  way — "  after  "  the  prediction 
of  xvi.  28.  We  may  look  upon  it,  therefore,  as  a  following  up  of  what  the 
Saviour  had  said  in  the  concluding  portion  of  that  chapter  (xvi.  21-28)  to  the 
disciples  at  large,  and  as  intended  still  further  to  prepare  them  all,  by  preparing 
three  of  the  chief  among  them  (two  of  whom  were  afterwards  spoken  of  as 
*'  pillars,"  Gal.  ii.  9),  for  His  (most  unexpected)  coming  passion  and  death.  And 
it  certainly  seems  to  have  been  well  calculated  to  have  this  effect,  partly  by  the 
impressive  assurance  which  it  gave  to  these  three  of  the  coming  glory  of  Christ ; 
and  partly  by  the  significant  way  in  which  it  connected  that  glory  with  His 
previous  passion  and  death. 

I.  The  coming  glory  of  Christ. — This  was  testified  to  them  in  various  ways. 
First,  by  what  they  are  now  shown  of  His  person.  They  see  Him  (ver.  2)  as 
He  is  to  appear  when  He  comes  in  His  "glory"  (xxv.  31) — "transfigured" 
till  His  very  "  garments "  have  the  radiance  of  "  light."  Next,  by  what 
they  are  shown  of  those  who  appear  with  Him  in  ^^  glory '^  (Luke  ix.  31).  Two 
chief  representatives  of  the  faith  of  the  past,  one  representing  the  "  law,"  and  one 
the  "  prophets,"  are  seen  in  attendance  upon  Him  ;  and  are  heard  "  talking  with 
Him"  of  that  which  had  yet  to  be  accomplished  by  Himself  (Luke  ix.  31). 
Thirdly,  by  the  striking  effect  thus  produced  on  themselves.  It  fills  them  at  once 
with  rapture  and  fear.  It  overwhelms  them,  at  the  same  moment,  with  both 
confusion  and  joy.  What  they  ought  to  say  they  none  of  them  know.  What 
one  of  them  does  say  shows  what  they  all  feel,  viz.,  that  nothing  can  be  better, 
in  their  judgment,  than  for  things  to  stay  as  they  are  (see  ver.  4).  Oh  !  what 
fervour  and  depth,  what  wonder  and  joy,  what  utter  contentment  there  breathes 
in  those  words  !  And  how  prophetic  they  are  also  of  that  which  is  to  be  verified 
with  regard  to  all  faith  at  the  end  !  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  Fourthly,  by  that  which 
they  are  now  permittel  to  see  of  the  glory  of  the  Father  Himself.  For  such  we 
take  that  "  bright  clou  1  "  of  which  we  read  here  to  have  been — something  akin 
to  that  mysterious  "  Shekinah  "  of  which  they  had  heard  tell  in  old  days,  and 
which  filled  them  with  "  fear,"  therefore,  as  they  "  entered  into  it,"  and  felt  it 
both  above  and  around  them,  on  every  side.  And  lastly,  by  that  which  they  are 
now  ^QrxmttQdi  to  hear  of  His  voice — coming  "out  of  the  cloud,"  as  it  did,  and 
proclaiming  aloud  as  well  the  supremacy  and  Sonship,  as  the  faultless  perfection 
of  Jesus,  and  calling  upon  all  those  who  would  listen  to  the  Father  to  listen  to 
Him  (end  of  ver.  8) ;  and  testifying  to  Him  so  as  He  who  was  to  come  hereafter 
in  the  "  glory  of  the  Father "  (xvi.  27).  Almost  all,  in  short,  that  is  to 
mark  the  consummation  itself  is  anticipated  here,  as  it  were.  On  that  "  high 
mountain  apart,"  these  three  disciples  catch  the  radiancy  of  that  yet  unrisen 
Sun  ;  and  see  in  this  vision  what  is  at  last  to  be  seen  openly  by  every  eye  in  the 
world  (Rev.  i.  7).  The  whole  scene,  in  a  word,  is  both  a  pledge  and  a  sample  of 
the  future  glory  of  Christ. 

II.  The  previous  passion  of  Christ. — This  vision  of  His  glory  was  connected 
with  His  passion  in  two  remarkable  ways.  It  was  so,  on  the  one  hand,  at  the 
time  of  the  vision  itself.      In  the  very  midst  of  its  glory,  when  the  Saviour 

414 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xvii. 


Himself  is  seen  in  "  glory,"  and  when  the  same  is  true  of  those  visitors  from 
heaven  who  are  heard  speaking  with  Him,  this  subject  of  His  passion  is,  as  it 
were,  that  brought  to  the  front.  It  is  the  subject,  St.  Luke  tells  us,  of  which 
they  converse  (Luke  ix.  31).  They  spake  of  it  also  under  a  peculiar  title — viz., 
as  a  departure  or  "decease" — perhaps,  because  when  looked  at  in  the  light  of 
that  glory  it  was  not  so  much  a  death  or  dissolution  of  nature  as  a  mere  change 
of  place,  a  going  away.  They  spake  of  it,  at  the  same  time,  as  being  something 
of  great  importance  and  necessity,  something  to  which  both  they  and  He  were 
then  looking  forward  as  that  which  had  yet  to  be  "  accomplished."  They 
speak  so  much  so,  in  fact,  as  even  to  name  the  place  where  it  had  to  be  done. 
And  thus  show,  as  it  were,  that  to  them  His  future  glory  was  to  follow  His 
passion.  First  the  cross  and  then  the  crown.  First  the  shame  and  then  the 
glory.  First  death,  then  fulness  of  life.  So  it  is,  in  the  very  midst  of  that 
vision,  that  their  language  declares.  Hardly  less  remarkable,  next,  in  the  same 
direction,  is  that  which  follows  this  vision.  When  it  is  all  over,  Jesus  touches 
them  and  they  gain  courage  thereby  to  "  lift  up  their  eyes  "  and  look  round. 
They  see  "  no  one  save  Jesus  only  "  (ver.  8).  Then,  rising  up  together  with 
Him,  they  come  down  from  the  mountain — apparently,  for  the  present,  too  full 
of  thought  to  say  much.  But  their  Master  speaks ;  and  that  so  as  to  show  at 
once  what  is  still  in  His  thoughts.  See  the  order  of  thought.  In  the  distance 
that  coming  in  glory  of  which  the  vision  was  an  assurance.  In  the  foreground 
that  death  of  which  He  had  previously  told  them,  and  which  they  had  heard 
spoken  of  during  the  vision  itself.  Between  the  two  His  "  rising  again  " — what- 
ever that  meant  (Mark  ix.  10).  Much  the  same  is  it,  when,  perplexed  by  this 
saying,  they  ask  Him  about  Elias  (ver.  10).  For  His  answer  is  such  as  to  fix 
their  attention  immediately  on  that  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Elias,  which 
was  to  be  found  in  the  appearance  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  to  that  termination 
of  the  career  of  the  Baptist  which  was  a  prophecy,  as  it  were,  of  His  death 
(vers.  11,  12).  That  great  catastrophe  is  what  He  is  thinking  of  now  the  vision 
is  over  ;  as  that  was  also  what  He  had  thought  of  and  spoken  of  so  plainly  before 
(xvi.  21)  the  vision  began. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  we  see  how  strikingly  mingled  is  the  character  of  this 
scene;  and,  therefore,  how  doubly  calculated  to  effect  the  object  apparently 
in  view.  By  one,  at  least,  of  those  mentioned  here,  we  learn  that  this  assurance 
of  Christ's  future  glory  was  never  forgotten  (2  Peter  i.  16-18).  And  we  can 
well  believe  that  it  would  be  with  the  darker  lines  of  the  intimation  (and  with 
that  touch  of  light  in  reference  to  the  resurrection  by  which  these  were 
brightened  in  turn),  as  we  know  it  was  with  that  very  similar  twofold  intimation 
of  John  ii.  19-22.  And  thus  would  all  the  disciples  through  these  three,  and 
these  three  through  this  special  deposit  entrusted  to  them  alone  for  the  time 
(ver.  9),  be  prepared  to  overcome  that  coming  trial  which  was  to  try  them  indeed. 
Forewarned  and  fore-encouraged ;  and  so  doubly  forearmed  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1-9.     The      transfiguration. —  these   three   were   in  deeper  sympathy^ 

I.  The  witnesses  of   the    transfigura-  with   the    Saviour.     3.  Notwithstand- 

tion :    Peter,    James,  and  John — why  ing  their  sympathy,  the  A.  Y.  repre- 

these  three  ?     1 .  Because  three  could  sents    them   as  falling    asleep   (Luke 

keep   a  secret,  but   twelve    could    not.  ix.    23).        Trench    proposes    another 

The   context   shows    that    it    was    of  translation — "  Having  kept  themselves 

extreme  importance   that   the   trans-  awake  throughout,  they  saw  His  glory 

figuration  should  be  kept  hid  till  after  and   the    two   men    that    stood    with 

the  resurrection.    2.  Because,  probably,  Him."      The  A.Y.  teaches  that  they 

415 


CHAP.  XVII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST,  MATTHEW. 


slept  at  the  commencement  of  the 
scene,  but  awoke  before  it  was  over. 
But  according  to  the  other  rendering, 
they  were  eye-witnesses  of  the  whole 
transaction.  Either  way  the  language 
implies  that  they  felt  drowsy,  that  they 
wanted  to  sleep.  Was  this  drowsiness 
natural  ?  Not  altogether ;  the  excessive 
splendour  around  them  produced  a 
sensation  of  heaviness. 

II.  The  principle  of  the  transfigura- 
tion.— 1.  One  of  the  Evangelists  notes 
that  as  "  He  prayed "  the  marvellous 
change  in  His  appearance  was  effected. 
In  communion  with  His  Father  such 
intense  rapture  possessed  His  soul  that 
it  visibly  glowed  through  the  dark 
covering  of  the  body.  Are  we  to 
perceive  in  this  notable  occurrence  a 
principle  illustrated  or  a  principle 
defied  ?  Is  there  anything  in  it  for 
the  race  ?  I  believe  there  is ;  it  is  only 
a  marked  exemplification  of  a  universal 
principle  —  that  the  outward  form 
receives  its  lustre  or  its  baseness  from 
the  spirit.  2.  The  word  "trans- 
figured" means  literally  ^^metamor- 
phosed." 3.  Many  critics  of  no  mean 
ability  maintain  that  the  emphatic 
words  in  the  verse  are — "  before  them." 
Professor  Tayler  Lewis,  for  instance, 
says  that  the  tense  of  the  verb  suggests 
that  transfiguration  was  not  a  rare 
exception  in  the  Saviour's  career  upon 
the  earth.  Communing  night  after 
night  with  His  Father  on  solitary 
mountain  tops,  it  was  not  unusual  for 
Him  to  be  transfigured  ;  the  sweet  joy 
of  His  soul  often  pierced  like  sunbeams 
through  His  frail  tenement  of  clay ; 
the  extraordinary  thing  on  this  occa- 
sion was  that  He  permitted  the  Divine 
ecstasy  to  be  witnessed  by  others. 
Professor  Godwin  in  his  "  Notes " 
throws  out  a  similar  hint. 

III.  The  celestial  visitants  at  the 
transfiguration. —  Moses  and  Elias. 
1.  These  departed  saints  appeared 
probably  as  representatives  of  the  ancient 
economy.  Moses  was  the  founder  of 
Judaism,  Elias  its  reformer.  Now, 
the  system  which  the  one  inaugurated 
and  the  other  ratified,  was  about  to 
undergo    a    change,    not,    indeed,    of 

416 


destruction  but  of  transfiguration. 
2.  They  further  appeared,  probably,  as 
representatives  of  the  other  world.  Jesus 
is  on  the  eve  of  His  passion.  Con- 
sequently the  attention  of  the  other 
world  is  concentrated  on  this — two 
appear  as  a  deputation  to  convey  to 
Him  the  sympathy  of  the  saints  already 
made  perfect.  The  grandest  purpose 
of  this  scene  was  to  gird  Him  for  the 
hour  of  His  agony  and  death.  3.  "They 
appeared  unto  Him  in  glory,  and  spake 
of  the  decease"  literally,  exodus  or 
departure.  What  a  strange  com- 
mingling of  colours  !  Glory  and 
decease,  heaven  and  death,  are  brought 
into  close  juxtaposition.  4.  "They 
talked  of  the  decease  which  He  was 
about  to  accovfiplish  in  Jerusalem."  In 
death  others  are  passive,  save  as  they 
struggle  against  the  dissolution  of  the 
nature ;  but  He  was  active,  focussing 
the  everlasting  energies  of  His  being 
upon  its  performance. 

IV.  The  witness  of  the  Father  at 
the  transfiguration. — 1.  The  bright 
light — a  cloud  made  luminous  by  the 
Divine  effulgence  within.  2.  The 
voice.     3.  "  Hear  Him,." 

V.  The  effect  of  the  transfiguration. 
1.  The  effect  upon  the  disciples  was  to 
exhilarate  them,  to  throw  them  into  a 
rapture  of  wonder  and  joy  which  they 
could  hardly  restrain.  2.  The  effect 
upon  the  Saviour  was  to  gird  Him  for 
the  coming  conflict. — J.  G.  Jones,  D.D. 

On  the  Holy  Mount. — Some  of  the 
more  general  lessons  which  we  may 
learn  from  this  striking  scene.  1.  We 
are  reminded  that  seclusion  is  needed 
for  the  highest  sort  of  devotion.  Luke 
tells  us  that  the  transfiguration  of  the 
Lord  took  place  as  He  was  praying, 
and  so  we  are  warranted  in  concluding 
that  Jesus  and  His  three  disciples  with- 
drew to  the  mountain-top  for  special 
communion  with  God.  2.  We  are  re- 
minded that  a  devotional  spirit  sees  new 
glory  in  Christ  and  in  His  Word.  When 
Peter  and  his  brethren  retired  apart 
with  Christ  He  was  transfigured  before 
them,  and  Moses  and  Elijah  shared  His 
brightness.  Now, when  we  give  ourselves 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xvii. 


to  the  devotional  study  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, new  radiance  breaks  forth  from 
its  pages  for  us.     3.  We  are  reminded 
that  devotion  is  not  the  whole  of  life. 
Peter  wanted  to  remain  on  that  summit 
altogether.     But  he  knew  not  what  he 
said.  There  was  a  world  to  be  redeemed, 
and  how  could  that  be  accomplished  if 
Jesus  were  held  back  there  from  the 
cross?     There  was,  even  at  that  very- 
moment,  a  poor  demoniac  in  the  valley, 
waiting  their  descent,  in  order  that  he 
might  be  cured.     4.  We  are  reminded 
that  devotion  furnishes  support  for  the 
performance  of  the  duties  and  the  endur- 
ance of  the  trials  of  life.    The  Redeemer 
Himself,  even  in  the  garden  and  on  the 
cross,  was  upheld  by  the  remembrance 
of   this   voice   from   the  midst  of  the 
cloud;  and  we  know  that  Peter,  long 
after,  when  contemplating  his  decease, 
looked  back  upon  the  whole  scene  as 
one   of   the   strongest  verifications   of 
the  gospel  (2  Pet.  i.    16-18).— TT.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D. 

The  transfiguration. — When  we  set 
ourselves  deliberately  to  consider  what 
the  obstructions  were  which  then  lay 
in  the  way  of  a  true  faith  in  Christ  on 
the  part* of  the  Apostles,  we  can  discern 
how  singularly  fitted,  in  its  time,  its 
mode,  and  all  its  attendant  circum- 
stances, this  glimpse  of  the  glorified 
condition  of  our  Lord  was  to  remove 
these  obstructions  and  establish  them 
in  that  faith.     For  : — 

I.  It  helped  them  to  rise  to  a 
true  conception  of  the  dig^ty  of  the 
Saviour's  person. 

II.  It  was  not  a  little  perplexing, 
the  position  which  Christ  assumed 
towards  the  Jewish  priesthood  and  the 
Mosaic  ritual.  But  if  there  entered 
into  the  minds  of  our  Lord's  Apostles 
a  doubt  as  to  the  actual  inner  spiritual 
harmony  between  their  Master's  teach- 
ing and  that  of  Moses  and  the  Prophets, 
the  vision  of  the  mount — the  sight  of 
Moses  and  Flias,  the  founder  and  the 
restorer,  the  two  chief  representatives  of 
the  old  covenant,  appearing  in  glory, 
entering  into  such  fellowship  with 
Jesus,  owning  Him  as  their  Lord — 


must  have  cleared  it  away,  satisfying 
them  by  an  ocular  demonstration  that 
their  Master  came  not  to  destroy  the 
law  and  the  prophets — not  to  destroy, 
but  to  fulfil. 

III.  The  manner  of  Christ's  death 
was  thus,  and  of  itself,  a  huge 
stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  faith 
— one  over  which,  with  all  that  had 
been  done  beforehand  to  prepare  them, 
the  Apostles  at  first  stumbled  and 
fell.  It  formed  the  one  and  only 
topic  of  that  sublimest  interview 
(Luke  ix.  31). 

TV.  The  peculiar  way  in  which 
Jesus  spake  of  His  relationship  to 
God  was  another  great  difficulty  in 
the  way  of  faith.  It  seemed  so  strange, 
so  presumptuous,  so  blasphemous,  for 
a  man — with  nothing  to  mark  him  off" 
as  different  from  other  men — to  speak 
of  God  as  His  Father,  not  in  any 
figurative  or  metaphorical  sense,  not 
as  any  one,  every  one  of  His  creatures 
might  do,  but  in  such  a  sense  as 
obviously  to  imply  oneness  of  nature, 
of  attributes,  of  authority,  of  possession. 
So  from  that  cloudy  glory  which  hung 
for  a  few  moments  above  the  mountain- 
top  the  Father's  own  loving  voice  was 
heard,  authenticating  all  that  Jesus 
had  said,  or  was  to  say,  of  the  peculiar 
relationship  to  Him  in  which  He  stood, 
and  saying,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son," 
etc. — W.  Hanna,  D.D. 

Ver.  8.  Christ  central  and  alone. — 
The  surface  lesson  of  the  text  is  this, 
that  Jesus  Christ  does  not  leave  us 
when  the  extraordinary  manifestations 
of  His  glory  are  taken  away — when 
the  joy  and  the  splendour  of  the  vision 
are  gone  He  is  still  left  to  His  faithful 
disciples.  As  Matthew  Henry  quaintly 
puts  it :  "  After  the  special  feast  is 
over  daily  bread  will  yet  be  ours." 
Let  who  will  depart,  then ;  He  lives  ! 
He  remains  !  "  Jesus  only  " — it  sums 
up  the  common  heritage  of  the  saints 
of  God  through  the  dim  centuries  of 
the  past,  and  it  will  do  so  right  on 
until  the  end. 

I.  Jesus  Christ  stands  alone  here, 
as  elsewhere  in  Christian  experience. 

EE  417 


CHAP.  XVII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


— Moses  is  gone  and  Elias  is  gone ; 
law-giver  and  prophet  have  vanished ; 
the  disciples  see  only  the  Master  Him- 
self, present  in  their  midst.  And  this, 
too,  is  significant,  for  the  gospel  offers 
to  us,  not  the  law  and  not  the  prophets, 
/out  Christ,  and  Christ  only;  Christ 
linked  with  the  lav/  if  yon  will,  Christ 
fulfilling  the  law ;  Christ  revealed  in 
the  prophets,  Christ  testified  to  by  the 
prophets;  but  Christ  standing  alone 
in  the  matter  of  salvation  to  every 
one  of  us.  To  men  with  eyes  turned 
heavenward,  looking  toward  the  unseen, 
longing,  it  may  be,  for  visions  and 
revelations,  it  offers  "  Jesus  only  " — 
the  revelation  of  the  Father  in  the 
face  of  the  Son. 

II.  The  pre-eminence,  therefore, 
given  to  Jesus  in  these  exalted  mo- 
ments of  discipleship. — Moses  and  Elias 
appear,  law-giver  and  prophet  stand 
there,  that  they  may  "  testify  of  His 
glory."  Then  they  have  gone,  and  you 
may  say  of  them  their  splendour  has 
been  dwindling  ever  since,  even  as  the 
stars  disappear  when  the  sun  itself  has 
arisen.  ''  These  are  they,"  said  Christ 
of  all  the  prophets  and  of  all  the 
Scriptures,  "that  testify  of  Me."  And 
if  you  search  the  New  Testament 
through  and  through  it  is  always  so 
of  Him  who  is  the  Author  and  Finisher 
of  this  faith,  the  Prophet,  Priest,  and 
King  of  this  new  dispensation.  And 
if  men  miss  this  they  miss  everything, 
the  one  point  above  all  else  of  import- 
ance. For  long  centuries  astronomy 
went  wrong  and  made  no  progress, 
until  it  learned  to  place  the  sun  in 
its  true  position  as  the  centre  of  the 
solar  system ;  and  so  it  is  with  men 
and  with  creeds  until  they  come  to  see 
Jesus  as  He  is  and  as  the  Father  has 
revealed  Him. 

III.  All  this  points  to  the  sufficiency 
of  Jesus  in  the  life  left  to  these  dis- 
ciples coming  down  from  the  mount. 
— If  the  vision  means  anything  it 
means  this — whatever  else  it  may 
imply — Jesus  Christ  is  presented  alone 


to  His  people,  because  Jesus  Christ 
alone  and  in  Himself  is  enough  for 
His  people. — W.  Baxendale. 

"  Jesus  only." 

1.  It  is  the  summing  up  of  revelation. 
— All  others  vanish  ;  He  abides. 

2.  It  is  the  summing  up  of  the  worldls 
history. — Thickening  folds  of  oblivion 
wrap  the  past,  and  all  its  mighty 
names  get  forgotten;  but  His  figure 
stands  out,  solitary  against  the  back- 
ground of  the  past,  as  some  great 
mountain,  which  is  seen  long  after 
the  lower  summits  are  sunk  below  the 
horizon. 

3.  Let  us  m^ahe  this  the  surnming  up 
of  our  lives. — VVe  can  venture  to  take 
Him  for  our  sole  Helper,  Pattern, 
Love,  and  Aim,  because  He,  in  His 
singleness,  is  enough  for  our  hearts. 
There  are  many  fragmentary  precious 
things,  but  one  pearl  of  great  price. 

4.  Then  this  may  be  a  prophecy  of 
our  deaths.  — A  brief  darkness,  a  passing 
dread,  and  then  His  touch  and  His 
voice  saying,  "  Arise,  be  not  afraid." 
So  we  shall  lift  up  our  eyes  and  find 
earth  faded  and  its  voices  fallen  dim, 
and  see  ''  no  one  any  more,  save  Jesus 
only." — A.  Maclaren,  B.D. 

^^  Jesus  onlyT — Consider  the  words 
as  they  are  connected  with : — 

I.  Christian  doctrine. — 1.  The  soli- 
tariness of  Christ's  personal  grandeur 
—Jesus  only  is  the  Son  of  God.  2.  The 
exclusiveness  of  Christ's  official  work — 
Jesus  only  is  the  Bedeemer  of  the 
world.  3.  The  permanence  of  the 
dispensation  of  Christ  —  Moses  and 
Elias  are  gone,  but  Jesus  remains, 
and  *'  Jesus  only." 

II.  Experience  of  the  believer. — 
Christ  is  the  only  unchanging  source 
of  the  believer's  comfort. 

III.  The  only  hope  of  the  sinner. — 
"  Jesus  only "  is  the  way  to  God. 
"  There  is  none  other  name,"  etc. — 
Edward  Steans,  D.D. 


418 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chaf.  x\ii. 


MAm  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—21. 

A  lesson  in  faith. — The  disciples  of  Jesus  were  called  upon  in  an  especial 
manner  at  this  time  "  to  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight."  Things  were  to 
happen  which  would  be  wholly  contrary  to  what  they  naturally  expected 
(xvi.  21,  22).  Therefore  it  was,  perhaps,  that  our  Lord  spake  to  them  as  in 
Luke  ix.  44.  And,  therefore,  perhaps,  that  He  gave  to  them  such  a  "lesson  in 
faith  "  as  we  find  in  this  passage.  How  this  lesson  was  conveyed  may  be  seen  by 
considering,  first,  the  striking  contrast  here  described,  and,  secondly,  the  two-fold 
explanatio7i  of  it  which  is  afterwards  given. 

I.  The  striking  contrast. — On  one  side  of  this  we  have,  first,  the  utter  failure 
of  the  discijdes  of  Jesus.  When  those  who  have  been  on  the  Mount  of  Trans- 
figuration come  down  again  to  the  rest  of  their  company,  they  find  them  in  the 
midst  of  a  large  and  agitated  assemblage  (Mark  ix.  14).  Out  of  these  there 
comes  one  to  the  very  feet  of  the  Saviour  (ver.  14).  He  has  a  sad  story  to  tell 
Him.  He  has  a  son — an  only  child  (Luke  ix.  38) — who  is  described  as  an 
"  epileptic"  (ver.  15  11.V.) — one  "  grievously  "  vexed.  At  times,  indeed,  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  be  ready  to  fall,  in  his  helplessness,  into  the  "fire"  or  the 
"water" — and  so  be  in  uttermost  danger  of  wholly  losing  such  life  as  he  has. 
This  helpless  case  the  father  had  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Saviour's  disciples 
during  His  absence,  only  to  find,  however,  that,  in  their  way,  they  were  as  help- 
less as  it.  Whatever  they  had  been  able  to  do  in  other  cases  (x.  8),  they  could 
do  nothing  whatever  in  this  (ver.  16).  On  the  other  side,  we  have,  in  regard  to 
the  same  instance,  the  complete  success  of  the  Saviour.  What  the  disciples  had 
thus  attempted  in  vain  He  accomplishes  fully.  He  does  this  also,  as  in  other 
cases,  by  the  simple  authority  of  His  word  (Mark  i.  27).  A  "  rebuke  "  from 
Him  (ver.  18)  is  enough.  However  strong  and  unwilling  (cf.  Mark  ix.  25,  26), 
the  demon  hears  and  goes  out.  He  goes  out  also  in  such  a  manner  that  there  is 
no  recurrence  of  the  evil  (Mark  ix.  25).  The  child  was  cured — and  cured 
permanently — "from  that  hour"  (ver.  18).  In  every  respect,  in  short,  on  the 
Saviour's  side,  there  was  every  evidence  of  success.  Instead  of  nothing,  every- 
thing was  accomplished.  Utter  helplessness  had  been  followed  up  by  irresistible 
power. 

II.  A  twofold  explanation. — Twofold  because  supplied  to  us  from  two 
opposite  sides.  From  the  side  of  the  applicant  first.  With  all  the  father's 
depth  of  distress,  and  all  the  urgency  of  his  love  and  entreaty,  we  cannot  doubt 
the  fact  of  there  being,  at  first,  some  deficiency  in  his  faith.  This  seems  implied 
from  what  the  Saviour  said  when  first  He  heard  of  his  case,  and  was  told  by  the 
man  how  he  had  "  spoken  "  to  His  disciples,  but  altogether  in  vain  (see  ver.  17, 
also  Mark  ix.  19  ;  Lukeix.  41).  It  certainly  comes  out  in  the  case  of  his  second 
application  to  the  Saviour  as  related  by  St.  Mark.  "  If  Thou  canst  do  anything, 
have  compassion  on  us,  and  help  us  "  (Mark  ix.  22).  Also,  this  same  smallness  of 
faith  is  just  as  certainly  at  once  rebuked  and  encouraged  by  the  Saviour's  reply 
— a  reply  which  says,  in  effect  (see  Mark  ix.  23),  "//I  can  ;"  that  is  not  the 
question.  "  If  thou  canst  believe  ; "  that  is  the  point.  For  "  all  things  can  he 
to  him  that  believeth."  A  reply  also  which  the  poor  father  evidently  took  in 
exactly  that  sense,  as  shown  by  the  tenor  and  urgency  of  his  immediate  response 
— "  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  Nothing  is  plainer,  in  short,  so 
far,  than  that  all  turned  upon  faith.  Lack  of  faith  in  coming  was  one  great 
reason  of  that  signal  lack  of  success  which  had  marked  the  first  part  of  this 
case.  The  same  is  true,  also,  when  we  look  at  it,  next,  from  the  side  of 
the  disciples.  Nothing,  indeed,  can  be  more  express  than  our  Saviour's  own 
words  on  this  point.  "  Why  could  not  we  cast  it  out  1 "  "  Because  of  the  little- 
ness of  your  faith  "  (ver.  20).     And  nothing  stronger  than  the  cogency  of  the 

419 


CHAP.  XVII.     MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


reasoning  by  which  He  demonstrates  the  truth  of  this  saying.  For  what  is  this 
faith — this  true  faith — of  which  He  is  speaking?  It  is  a  principle  of  activity, 
like  that  ''  grain  of  mustard  seed  "  of  which  He  once  told  them  before  (xiii.  31,  32), 
which  grows  of  itself.  If  you  have  any  at  all  of  it,  therefore,  you  have  that 
which  is  quite  certain  to  grow  into  more ;  and,  therefore  again,  that  which  will 
be  competent,  ultimately,  to  remove  the  greatest  obstacles  that  can  be.  Nothing, 
in  short,  can  be  beyond  the  power  of  such  true  faith  to  accomplish  (ver.  20). 
Nothing,  therefore,  is  to  be  sought  by  us  more  !  (So  we  may  gather  from 
Mark  ix.  29,  as  it  stands  in  R.V.)  Even,  if  need  be,  at  the  cost  of  much  self- 
denial  in  other  respects.  (So  we  may  understand  the  addition  which  *'  many 
ancient  authorities  "  make  to  that  verse.) 

1.  Here  is  a  general  lesson  to  all. — Let  all  those  who  come  to  God  come  to  Him 
in  faith  (Heb.  xi.  6).  Let  them  have  faith  enough  in  any  case  to  be  desirous  of  more. 
The  poor  man  in  this  story  does  not  appear  to  have  had  more  than  this  to  begin. 
But  this  little  faith — this  mere  "  mustard  seed  "  of  it — did  all  he  wished  in 
the  end. 

2.  Here  is  a  special  lesson  to  some. — Even  to  all  such  as  seek,  in  any  way,  to 
help  in  ministering  the  word.  Let  them  believe  in  it  themselves  !  Let  them 
seek  to  realise  both  what  it  is  and  how  much  it  can  do.  Oh,  the  amount  of 
sterility  in  the  field  of  the  kingdom  because  of  deficiency  here  !  Why  is  it  that 
we  have  done  so  little  although  having  the  truth  itself  in  our  hands  ?  Because 
of  the  littleness  of  our  faith.  Because  we  have  not  realised,  on  the  one  hand, 
that  it  was  really  the  truth  !  And  have  not  realised,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
truth  vanquishes  all ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  14-18.  Household  trouble. — 
We  have  here — 1.  A  household  in 
misery  because  of  one  of  its  members. 
Trouble  may  be  intensive  as  well  as 
extensive.  One  prodigal  may  destroy 
the  peace  of  a  whole  family.  2.  A 
household  troubled  by  an  uncontrollable 
circumstance.  The  sufferer  in  this 
case  was  not  blamable.  Some  troubles 
we  bring  upon  ourselves ;  others  are 
put  into  our  lot  by  a  power  beyond 
us.  3.  A  household  united  in  deep 
concern  for  one  of  its  members.  The 
father  spoke  not  for  himself  only,  but 
also  for  others,  "  Have  compassion  on 
?^,"  etc.  (Mark  ix.  22).  An  unfeeling 
heart  is  a  greater  calamity  in  a  family 
than  the  most  painful  affliction. — 
J.  Parker,  D.D. 

The  church  and  humanity. — The 
incident  may  be  viewed  not  only  from 
the  point  of  the  household,  but  from 
the  point  occupied  by  the  church. 
1.  The  church  expected  to  have  restor- 
ing energy.  2.  The  church  overborne 
by  the  evil  which  confronts  it.     3.  The 

420 


church  publicly  rebuhed  for  its  in- 
capacity. 4.  The  church  shown  to  be 
powerless  in  the  absence  of  Christ. — Ibid. 

The  position  of  Christ. — 1.  Christ 
calm  in  the  midst  of  social  tumult. 
2.  Christ  exposing  Himself  to  severe 
reprisals  in  the  event  of  failure.  He 
spoke  rebu kingly  before  He  performed 
the  miracle.  3.  Christ  asserting  His 
independence.  **  Bring  him  to  Me." 
Jesus  needed  no  help.  "  Without  Me 
ye  can  do  nothing,"  but  without  us  He 
can  do  everything.  4.  Christ  over- 
ruling and  destroying  evil.  He  never 
put  evil  into  any  man ;  always  He 
sought  to  cast  it  out. — Ibid. 

The  restoration  of  men. — 1.  The 
worst  of  cases  are  not  hopeless. 
2.  Devils  do  not  come  easily  out  of 
men.  3.  Jesus  Christ  not  only  expels 
the  devil.  He  gives  His  own  personal 
help  to  the  recovered  man  (Mark  ix.  27). 
We  need  Jesus  even  until  we  are  set 
in  heaven.  The  devil  throws  down, 
Jesus  lifts  up. — Ibid. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xvii. 


Vers.  19-21.  Christian  work  at  home 
cmd  abroad. — I.  The  lesson  of  the 
failure. — The  failure  must  have  been 
a  trial  of  no  mean  severity  to  the 
disciples.  It  was  failure  to  fulfil  the 
commission  with  which  they  had  been 
entrusted.  It  was  failure  under  the 
unsympathetic  and  scornful  eye  of  the 
multitude.  It  was  failure  after  they 
had  been  braced  by  success  and  lifted 
up  with  strange,  not  to  say  wild,  hopes. 
It  was  a  sore  humiliation,  yet  was  it 
full-charged  with  blessing  to  them. 
It  was  of  the  nature  of  that  baptism 
of  fire  by  which  true  men  are  made 
more  true,  and  strong  men  more 
strong,  and  which  in  some  form  all 
men  undergo  who  are  appointed  to 
signal  service  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  Our  main  concern  must  be 
to  discover  the  cause  of  the  failure. 
1.  The  failure  of  the  disciples  was  to 
our  Lord  a  question  of  their  spiritual 
life.  It  was  a  question  of  their  attain- 
ments and  habits  in  the  matter  of 
faith,  prayer,  and  fasting.  The  faith 
which  our  Lord  desiderated  concerned 
the  deepest  springs  of  life  and  force 
in  the  soul.  "Prayer  and  fasting!" 
It  was  no  mere  matter  of  abstinence 
from  meats  and  drinks,  or  of  the 
observance  of  seasons  and  forms  in 
prayer  and  sacrifice.  We  know  how 
little  store,  comparatively,  our  Lord  set 
by  these  things.  Here  was  a  question 
rather  of  faith's  maturity  and  practical 
prevalence  throughout  the  whole  sphere 
of  the  spiritual  life,  of  faith's  triumph 
over  everything  which  tended  to  bring 
the  man  under  the  dominion  of  the 
present  and  visible;  of  a  faith  which 
would  lift  the  soul  into  habitual  com- 
munion with  God,  and  enrich  the  will 
with  the  energies  of  self-restraint. 
The  cause  of  failure  thus  concerned  the 
very  element  of  life  which  distinguished 
them  as  religious  and  spiritual  men, 
from  men  who  were  carnal  and  ir- 
religious. Here  was  no  question  of 
the  want  of  tact,  or  aptitude,  or 
courage,  or  readiness,  or  energy,  or  of 
any  of  the  secondary  and  accidental 
quahfications  of  good  workmen,  but 
a    question   of    vital    spiritual    force. 


2.  To  our  Lord  the  failure  of  the 
disciples  in  this  pai'ticular  instance 
was  a  question  of  degree  in  the  fulness 
of  the  spiritual  life.  His  explanation 
was  that  there  was  a  disproportion 
between  the  inherent  difficulties  of  the 
case  and  the  power  which  the  disciples 
had  brought  to  it.  "  This  kind  goeth 
not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting." 
Faith  grows  by  culture — it  may  be 
weakened  by  neglect,  it  may  be  cor- 
rupted by  sin.  Had  the  disciples 
yielded  to  weakening  and  corrupting 
influences?  They  had  been  giving 
forth  spiritual  energy  in  the  service  of 
Christ ;  had  they  been  careful  to  have 
the  springs  of  that  energy  replenished 
from  time  to  time  by  communion  with 
God  ?  3.  To  our  Lord  the  failure  of  the 
disciples  was  a  question  exclusively  oj 
their  spiritual  life  and  attainments.,  and 
the  spiritual  power  which  these  engender. 
The  case  was  admitted  to  be  exception- 
ally difficult,  but  it  is  implied  that  a 
robust  faith,  a  spiritual  power  duly 
nurtured  by  prayer  and  chastened  by 
fasting,  would  not  have  been  put  to 
shame  in  dealing  with  it.  Our  Lord's 
exposure  of  the  cause  of  the  disciples' 
failure  thus  reveals  to  us  a  law  of  the 
Christian  service — that  the  power  in 
which  the  labours  and  conflicts  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth  are  to  be 
sustained  is  spiritual  in  kind — the 
power  of  a  genuine  rehgious  life  ;  and 
that  the  power  is  in  the  proportion  in 
which  the  hfe  is  full. 

IL  The  application  of  the  lesson. — 
We  have  failures  to  deplore  as  well 
as  successes  to  celebrate.  To  our 
"  Why  %  "  the  Master  might  say,  "  Be- 
cause of  your  unbelief,"  etc.  The 
demons  we  seek  to  cast  out  of  the 
nations  are  of  a  kind  which  will  not 
go  out  except  on  the  imperative  of  a 
spiritual  power  of  the  highest  order. 
The  subject  has  a  bearing  : — 

1.  On  our  national  life. — Alas  for 
the  apostles  of  a  faith  which  is  dis- 
credited by  the  life  of  the  nation 
which  sends  them  forth  ! 

2.  On  the  spiritual  conditioyi  of  the 
churches. — Our  missionaries,  with  few 
exceptions,  will  be  men  who  represent 

421 


CHAP.  XVII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


the  average  spiritual  power  and  moral 
enthusiasm  of  the  churches.  We  have 
to  look  to  the  churches  for  the  men 
who  are  to  conduct  its  affairs  at  home, 
and  also  for  material  and  moral 
support.  Causes  of  anxiety  :  (1)  Con- 
formity to  the  world.  (2)  Some  popu- 
lar tendencies  of  theological  opinion. 

3.  On  the  spiritual  attainments  of 
those  more  immediately  engaged  in  the 
service. — Ultimately  the  question  is  a 
personal  one. — A.  Hannay^  D.D. 

Ver.  21.  Prayer  and  fasting.  (A 
Lenten  Sermon.) — Here  is  an  un- 
doubted approval  of  two  things  very 
much  called  in  question — prayer  and 
fasting. 

I.  The  true  thought  touching  prayer 
is  that  it  makes  us  more  fitted  to 
receive,  not  that  it  makes  God  more 
ready  to  give. 

II.  Jesus  couples  prayer  with  fast- 
ing to  secure  Heaven's  choicest  gifts. — 
"  This  kind,"  etc.  The  church  of 
England,  in  its  staid  sobriety  of  doc- 
trine, recognises  the  value  of  the 
discipline  of  the  soul  upon  the  body, 
and  orders  all  Fridays  throughout  the 
year  to  be  observed  as  days  of  ab- 
stinence, together  with  the  whole  of 
Lent,  the  forty  days  from  Ash  Wed- 
nesday, until  Easter ;  also  the  Ember- 
days  of  the  four  seasons,  with  other 
days  named.  Jesus  Himself,  more- 
over, stamps  with  authority  the  practice 
of  the  church  in  this  matter,  and  gives 
special   directions   relative  to  fasting. 


Hence  says  He,  "  When  ye  fast,  be 
not,  as  the  hypocrites,"  etc.  (vi.  16-18). 
The  common-sense  view  with  reference 
to  fasting  is  this  :  We  ought  to  be  as 
little  indebted  to  earth  as  possible ; 
tethered  here  and  pinned  to  this  world 
by  as  few  material  things  as  will  serve ; 
bound  by  as  few  cords  to  animal 
existence  and  fleshly  life  as  alone  are 
needed  to  keep  body  and  soul  together. 
"  Set  your  affections  on  things  above, 
and  not  on  things  on  the  earth."  This 
injunction  of  the  Lord  Jesus  should  be 
the  text  held  in  remembrance  through- 
out Lent :  *'  Chasten  with  stripes  the 
inner  man."  There  are  various  ways 
of  doing  this.  There  are  many  ways 
in  which  we  may  specially  now — as  at 
all  times  we  ought  to — deny  ourselves 
for  our  neighbours'  good.  Some 
luxury,  doubtless,  there  is  which  we, 
without  any  great  hardship,  may  give 
up — some  luxury  which  may  minister 
to  the  necessity  of  our  poorer  neigh- 
bour, and  make,  to  a  brother  that 
lacketh  and  hath  need,  his  woeful 
want  less  bitter.  Yea,  let  those  who 
have  much  of  this  world's  good  laid  up 
in  store  for  many  years  just  fast  a 
little  during  Lent,  that  those  who 
from  chronic  want  and  penury  have  to 
keep  Lent  right  through  the  year  may 
now  feast  a  little,  and  even  in  my 
suggested  breach  to  them  of  a  church 
rubric,  their  indulgence  shall  not  be 
cursed,  while  our  austerities  shall  be 
blessed. — Archdeacon  Colley. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  22—27. 

Self-taxation. — In  the  beginning  of  these  verses  we  find  our  Saviour  coming 
back  to  Galilee  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Caesarea  Philippi  (xvi.  13),  and 
making  His  way  once  more  to  "  His  own  city  "  (ix.  1)  Capernaum.  Apparently 
He  did  so  now  for  the  last  time  in  His  life,  and  as  one  marked  step  in  His 
journey  southward  to  meet  His  death  at  Jerusalem  (see  xix.  1,  xx.  17,  xxi.  1). 
This  may  help  to  account  for  the  fact,  that,  on  this  occasion.  He  did  not  wish  to 
be  known  (see  Mark  ix.  30).  And  this,  in  turn,  for  the  peculiar  form  of  the 
tax-gatherers'  question  to  Peter  (ver.  24)  "  Doth  not  your  Master  pay  the  half- 
shekel  ?  "  as  though  they  suspected  Him,  from  His  being  out  of  the  way,  of  a  desire 
to  avoid  it  this  time.  And  this,  once  more,  for  the  very  positive  and  apparently 
displeased  character  of  the  Apostle's  reply  (v^er.  25).  As  though  he  would  say, 
"  Of  course  He  does — as  He  has  done  always  before — and  as  you  very  well  know." 

There  are  two  things  to  be  noted  in  the  way  in  which  the  Saviour  Himself 

422 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xvii. 


meets  their  demand.    He  treats  it  as  wholly  uncalled  for,  on  the  one  hand,  and  yet 
as  absolutely  irresistible,  on  the  other. 

I.  As  wholly  uncalled  for.— And  that  first,  it  would  seem,  because  of  the 
nature  of  tribute  in  general.  For  tribute  then  was  a  thing  universally  regarded 
as  a  token  of  subjugation  and  conquest.  Hence  the  irresistible  force  of  the 
argument  in  xxii.  19-21.  Hence  also,  what  we  find  implied  in  the  language 
used  in  Ezra  iv.  13,  viz.,  that  people  who  are  so  far  independent  as  to  have  a  well- 
protected  city  and  walls  of  their  own,  would  refuse  to  submit,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  to  anything  of  the  kind.  Peter  himself  knew  of  this  as  a  fundamental 
rule  on  such  subjects.  Hence,  therefore,  he  would  see  at  once  the  extreme 
unreasonableness  of  laying  a  tax  on  his  Master.  No  one  on  earth  had  the  shadow 
of  a  right  of  asking  "  tribute  "  from  .Christ.  Still  more  unreasonable  was  such  a 
demand,  when  considered  in  connection  with  the  special  character  of  the  tribute  in 
view.  As  both  the  amount  asked  for,  and  the  way  in  which  it  was  spoken  of — *'  the 
half -shekel " — seem  to  point  out,  it  was  that  poll  tax  expected  from  every  male 
in  Israel  for  the  temple  expenses  and  service,  originally  levied  only  (so  it  is 
said),  when  the  census  was  taken,  but  aftervvarrls  made  an  annual  demand 
(see  Jos.,  Ant.,  XVIII.  ix.  1 ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  9,  etc.)  How  monstrous,  therefore, 
in  every  way,  even  to  propose  such  a  thing  to  One  who  was  really  the  Lord  of  the 
temple  (xii.  6),  and  the  Temple  itself  in  a  sense  (John  ii.  19-21),  and  also,  as  Peter 
himself  had  not  long  before  both  seen  and  confessed,  Son  of  God  in  the  highest 
possible  sense.  Asking  this  temple- tribute  from  Him,  therefore,  was  in  every 
way  wrong,  for  it  was  treating  One  as  a  stranger  and  a  subject  who  was  pre- 
eminently both  a  Son  and  a  King. 

II.  As  absolutely  irresistible. — We  find  this  implied,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the 
reason  advanced.  Pay  this  tribute  the  Saviour  says  in  effect,  however  unreason- 
able the  demand  for  it  undoubtedly  is,  lest  "  we  cause  them  to  stumble  "  (ver.  27). 
In  other  words,  lest  our  refusal  to  pay  it  should  give  them  "  offence"— or  be  a 
"  scandal  "  to  them  and  others — or  cause  them  to  think  about  us  otherwise  than 
is  correct,  or  desirable  either.  How  very  easily  this  might  have  been  is  just  as  easily 
seen.  Such  a  refusal  to  pay,  under  the  circumstances,  would  be  almost  certainly 
attributed  either  to  unseemly  covetousness,  or  else  to  contempt  for  God's  services, 
or  to  want  of  love  for  His  house — to  anything,  in  short,  but  those  other  reasons 
of  which  the  Saviour  had  spoken.  And  that,  of  course,  would  be  a  most  injurious 
thing,  in  almost  every  way,  because  a  thing  which,  besides  bringing  most  un- 
deserved reproach  on  Christ  and  His  followers,  would  greatly  hinder  them  in 
their  work.  Sooner,  therefore,  than  cause  such  results,  the  Saviour  will  put  up 
with  this  wrong.  Sooner  than  mislead  others,  or  hinder  true  godliness,  or  be 
thought  of  Himself  as  profane.  He  will  comply  with  this  otherwise  most  un- 
reasonable demand.  If  He  cannot  even  allow  it  on  other  grounds.  He  cannot 
refuse  it  on  this.  The  same  is  taught  us  also,  in  the  next  place,  by  the  method 
adopted,  inasmuch  as  this  shows  to  how  great  lengths  the  Saviour  was  willing  to 
go  in  order  to  carry  out  His  resolve.  From  this  point  of  view  the  very  strange- 
ness of  the  almost  unique  miracle  of  which  we  read  next,  is  its  best  justification. 
It  was,  indeed,  a  kind  of  stately  procession  of  marvellous  signs.  Pefer  was  to  go 
to  the  neighbouring  sea  and  to  cast  in  a  hook,  and  at  once  secure  a  fish,  and  find 
a  coin  in  its  mouth,  and  find  that  coin  also  to  be  exactly  sufiicient  for  the  twofold 
purpose  in  view  (ver.  27).  All  the  more  fitted,  therefore,  was  it  to  show  the 
thought  which  the  Saviour  had  in  His  mind.  He  will  not  pay  that  tribute  money 
out  of  ordinary  resources.  Probably,  in  His  case,  they  were  already  needed  in 
other  directions  (see  John  xiii.  29).  He  will  meet  it,  instead,  by  a  supply  of  His 
own — by  an  unheard  of  supply — by  an  exactly  fitted  supply — by  something  which 
shall  show  how  great  is  the  importance  He  attaches  to  doing  as  now  asked  !  The 
very  fiish  of  the  sea  shall  help  Him  to  avoid  giving  avoidable  cause  of  offence. 

423 


CHAP.  xvil.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW, 


Here,  therefore,  we  may  see  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  A  great  lesson  in  doctrine. — It  was,  as  it  were,  almost  under  the  shadow  of 
the  cross  that  this  transaction  took  place.  See  what  is  said  in  vers.  22,  23,  and 
note  how  we  read  there  for  the  first  time,  of  the  "  betrayal "  of  Christ.  We  may 
well  judge,  therefore,  that  we  have  here  a  kind  of  parable  of  what  was  about  to 
be  done  on  the  cross.  The  temple  tribute  was  due  from  Peter.  It  was  not  due 
from  Christ.  He  paid  for  them  both.  Just  so  with  that  "  obedience  "  of  His 
"  unto  death  "  by  which  "  the  many  "  are  "  made  righteous  "  (Phil.  ii.  8  ;  Rom. 
V.  18,  19).     "  Thou  shalt  answer  for  me,  O  Lord,  my  God." 

2.  A  great  lesson  in  conduct. — If  we  have  really  laid  hold  of  this  hope  in 
Christ,  we  shall  seek  to  resemble  Him  in  our  lives.  Especially  shall  we  do  so  in 
feeling  it  incumbent  on  us  to  avoid  at  all  costs  all  really  avoidable  cause  of  ofience. 
See  such  passages  as  2  Cor.  vi.  3;  Kom.  xiv.  13,  15,  xv.  3;  Matt,  xviii.  5,  etc. 
Anything  rather  than  let  our  good  be  evil  spoken  of,  if  we  can  help  it. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  24-27.  Christ  paying  tribute. — 
1.  Tribute  is  due  to  magistrates  for  their 
public  service.  2.  Christ  is  not  un- 
friendly to  magistrates  and  rulers,  nor 
anyway  a  hinderer  of  paying  anything 
due  to  them,  for  Peter  affirmeth  that 
Christ  paid  ordinarily.  3.  He  will  not 
exempt  His  ministers  or  followers  from 
the  common  civil  duties,  whereunto  other 
subjects  are  liable  ;  therefore  He  saith 
to  Peter,  "  What  thinkest  thou  ?  "  etc. 

4.  Christ  by  no  ordinary  course  of  law 
was  subject  unto  any  power  under 
heaven ;  for  as  king's  sons  are  natur- 
ally free  from  tribute,  so  is  the  Son  of 
God  naturally  free  also,  for  He  is  the 
Heir     and     Owner     of      all    things. 

5.  Although  Christ  was  the  rich  Heir 
of  heaven  and  earth,  as  of  His  own 
workmanship,  yet  for  our  cause  He 
voluntarily  subjected  Himself,  and 
became  poor,  that  He  might  make  us 
rich ;  for  He  had  no  money  to  pay 
His  tribute.  6.  As  in  matters  of  civil 
loss,  Christ  did  dispense  with  His  own 
right  civil,  and  subjected  Himself  to 
pay  tribute,  which  He  was  not  bound 
to  do,  so  must  His  servants  do  ;  and 
not  only  must  they  pay  tribute,  which 
is  their  due  by  civil  obligation,  but 
rather  than  mar  the  gospel  and  breed 
scandal,  they  must  bear  burdens  which 
civilly  they  are  not  bound  to  bear. 
7.  Christ  was  never  so  far  abased  at 
any  time,  but  the  glory  of  His  Godhead 
might  have  been  seen  breaking  forth 
in  the  meantime,  or  shortly  after,  lest 

424 


His  humiliation  should  at  any  time 
prejudice  His  glory  at  our  hands ;  as 
here,  at  the  time  when  He  doth  subject 
Himself  to  pay  tribute.  He  showeth 
Himself  Lord  of  all  the  creatures,  who 
can  make  the  most  wild  of  them 
come  to  His  angle,  and  bring  money 
with  them  in  their  mouth. — David 
Dickson. 

The  coin  in  the  JisKs  mouth. — The 
uses  intended  by  this  narrative  are : — 

T.  Doctrinal. 

II.  Ethical. — The  doctrine  taught  is 
the  place  of  Jesus  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  His  own  place  of  Sonship  by 
right  of  nature,  and  that  which  He 
wins  for  His  followers  in  grace.  The 
moral  enforced  is  that  greatness  in  the 
kingdom  is  best  proved  by  service  and 
humility. — Prof.  Laidlaw^  D.D. 

The  ethical  aspect  of  the  conversation. 
— A  comparison  of  the  synoptic  narra- 
tives makes  it  plain  that  during  this 
homeward  journey  to  Capernaum, 
probably  near  its  close,  occurred  the 
dispute  among  the  disciples,  about 
priority  in  the  kingdom,  which  drew 
from  the  Lord  several  touching  and 
instructive  utterances.  There  is  reason 
to  think  this  is  one  of  them.  The 
words  immediately  following  our  story 
in  Matthew's  Gospel  tell  us  that  "  at 
the  same  time"  (kv  iKuvy  rrj  wp^, 
xviii.  1),  they  came  to  put  their  ques- 
tion to  Jesus  on  this  topic.    Mark  says 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xvil. 


that  "  being  in  the  house,  He  asked 
them,  What  was  it  that  ye  disputed 
among  yourselves  by  the  way  ?  "  The 
suggestion  has  much  probability,  that 
with  Peter  alone  in  the  house,  the  Lord 
here  forestalls  the  discussion,  and  makes 
this  incident  bear  upon  it.  It  is  when 
viewed  in  this  connection  that  the 
present  story  becomes  luminous,  and 
that  the  words  of  Jesus  about  the 
temple-tax  are  seen  to  have  their  moral 
design.  To  teach  "  the  foremost 
disciple  "  a  lesson  of  humility  and  self- 
effacement,  Jesus  directs  his  attention 
pointedly  to  His  own  claim,  to  His 
willingness  to  waive  it,  and  to  His 
reason  for  so  doing,  viz.,  lest  offence 
should  follow  upon  a  premature  or 
punctilious  assertion  of  even  a  Divine 
right.  This,  rather  than  any  other, 
is  the  point  of  ethical  moment  in  the 
narrative,  not  so  much  the  poverty  of 
His  lot  as  Son  of  man,  His  command 
over  the  resources  of  nature  and  provi- 
dence as  Son  of  God,  the  extraordinary 
manner  in  which  upon  occasion  His 
necessities  were  relieved — not  so  much 
these,  as  the  forbearance  and  self- 
restraint  of  the  kingdom's  Head;  an 
example  to  His  followeis  of  meekness 
and  self -repression  for  the  kingdom's 
sake.  The  key  to  the  moral  intention 
of  the  story  then,  lies  in  the  words, 
"But  lest  we  cause  them  to  stumble" 
(R.Y.).  It  was  a  lesson  of  meekness 
and  wisdom.  Jesus  waives  the  exercise 
of  a  right,  founded  upon  the  plainest 
and  most  momentous  grounds,  lest 
the  exercise  of  it  in  the  circumstances 
should  prove  a  stumbling-block  to  those 
who  were  as  yet  unprepared  to  receive 
the  grounds  themselves.  Thus  does 
Jesus  set  forth  one  of  the  most  char- 
acteristic features  of  Christian  morality. 
—Ibid. 

Ver.    27.    The  tribute    money. — The 
story  of  the  tribute-money  is  not  one 


of  the  great  miracles,  and  yet  its  lessons 
are  well  worth  our  careful  study. 

I.  There  is  what,  for  the  want  of  a 
better  word,  we  must  call  the  modesty 
of  Jesus. — Eather  than  offend  the 
prejudices  of  the  people.  He  would 
waive  His  claim.  Are  not  we  who 
call  ourselves  His  disciples  too  ready 
to  put  forth  our  titles  to  men's  respect 
and  to  stand  upon  our  dignity  ? 

II.  We  leain  something  of  the 
poverty  of  Jesus. — There  is  a  some- 
thing of  greater  moment  than  wealth, 
and  that  is  character.  Money  may 
not  elevate,  good  deeds  do.  In  the  con- 
ventional meaning  of  the  words,  Christ 
was  not  worth  fifteen-pence  ;  yet  He 
could  heal  the  sick  and  raise  the  dead. 
It  will  be  worth  our  while  to  weigh 
ourselves  in  the  true  balances,  and  to 
find  out  Heaven's  assessment  of  our 
belongings. 

III.  The  story  gives  us  a  peep  into 
Christ's  resources. — Though  He  had 
not  the  money  -by  Him,  He  knew 
where  it  was.  The  gold  and  silver 
are  all  His. 

IV.  We  learn  that  God  does  not 
often  act  without  human  agency. — 
Christ  could  have  done  without  Peter. 
It  would  have  been  easy  to  have  willed 
it,  and  the  fish  would  have  swum  to 
His  feet,  as  He  stood  by  the  side  of 
the  lake,  and  have  dropped  the  coin 
within  His  reach.  But  He  knew  that 
Peter  could  catch  the  fish,  and  so  he 
was  sent  to  do  what  He  was  able.  It 
appears  to  be  the  Divine  plan  to  do 
what  men  cannot,  but  not  to  act  for 
us. 

V.  The  story  teaches  that  he  who 
works  for  Jesus  is  sure  to  get  his 
pay .-r— Christ  wanted  fifteen  pence,  and 
Peter  took  out  of  the  fish's  mouth  half- 
a  crown.  And  thus  in  obeying  Christ 
he  paid  his  own  taxes.  In  keeping 
His  commandments  there  is  a  great 
reward. — T,   Champness. 


425 


CHAP,  xvill.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


CHAPTEE    XYIII. 
CRITICAL   NOTES. 

Ver.  5.  One  such  little  child. — Whether  literally  or  only  morally  a  little  child.  Our 
Saviour  had  reference,  we  doubt  not,  to  both  phases  of  childhood.  That  He  refers  to  literal 
childhood  may  be  inferred  from  Luke  ix.  48.  But  such  a  reference,  though  real,  would  be 
only  bridging  the  way  for  His  far  more  important  reference  to  moral  or  spiritual  childhood 
{Morison).  In  My  name. — Literally,  upon  My  name,  upon  the  ground  or  footing  of  My 
name,  i.e.  in  consideration  of  Me — out  of  regard  or  respect  for  Me  (ibid). 

Ver.  6.  Offend. — Or  morally  ensnare.  "  Whosoever  shall  give  him  occasion  for  relapsing 
into  unbelief,  as  was  done  by  hierarchical  arrogance"  (Lange).  It  were  better  for  him. — It  is 
profitable  for  him.  (R.V.).  Literally,  it  is  advantageous  to  him,  in  order  that  a  millstone 
might  be  hanged  about  his  neck.  There  is  an  awful  and  august  irony  in  the  literal 
expression.  It  it  assumed  that  he  who  leads  astray  one  of  Christ's  little  ones  had  an  end 
in  view.  He  contemplated  some  advantage  or  other.  Let  it  be  so  !  says  our  Saviour. 
Advantage  !  Let  him  have  the  paltry  advantage  which  he  seeks.  It  is  an  advantage 
with  a  tremendous  disadvantage  coming  behind.  The  spiritual  wickedness  which  is 
impelling  him  to  seek  the  imagined  advantage  has  a  terrific  aim  beyond.  And  thus, 
poor  infatuated  creature,  he  is  advantaged — is  he  ?  If  he  be,  it  is  in  order  that  a 
millstone  may  be  hanged  about  his  neck  !  Such  is  the  graphic  force  of  the  Saviour's  idea, 
when  his  expression  is  resolved  into  its  constituent  elements  {MoHson).  A  millstone. — 
Literally,  a  millstone  turned  by  an  ass,  and  so  larger  than  the  ordinary  millstone.  The 
manner  of  death  alluded  to  appears  to  have  been  unknown  to  the  Jews.  But  Plutarch  mentions 
this  punishment  as  being  common  to  Greece  and  Rome.  Of.  Juv.,  Sat.,  xiv.  16,  17,  where,  as 
in  other  places,  it  is  named  rather  than  the  cross  as  a  swift  and  terrible  penalty  for  crime 
(Carr). 

Ver.  7.  Woe. — The  interjection  is  one  of  sorrow  as  well  as  denunciation,  and  here  the 
former  meaning  is  predominant,  as  the  latter  is  in  the  next  clause  of  the  verse  (Plumptre). 
Needs  be. — Especially  in  the  age  blessed  by  the  presence  of  the  Messiah;  just  as  insects 
abound  in  summer  {BengeV).  Oifences. — The  occasioyis  (R.V.).  It  is  possible  that  Matthew 
here  (vers.  7-9),  according  to  his  custom,  has  grouped  cognate  sayings,  not  originally  spoken 
in  this  connection  (Maclaren). 

Ver.  10.  In  heaven  their  angels. — A  difficult  verse,  but  perhaps  the  following  may  be 
more  than  an  illustration :  Among  men,  those  who  nurse  and  rear  the  royal  children, 
however  humble  in  themselves,  are  allowed  free  entrance  with  their  charge,  and  a  degree 
of  familiarity  which  even  the  highest  state-ministers  dare  not  assume.  Probably  our  Lord 
means  that,  in  virtue  of  their  charge  over  His  disciples  (Heb.  i.  13  ;  John  i.  51),  the  angels 
have  errands  to  the  throne,  a  welcome  there,  and  a  dear  familiarity  in  dealing  with  "  His 
Father  which  is  in  heaven,"  which  on  their  own  matters  they  could  not  assume  (Brown). 

Ver.  11.  For  the  Son  of  man,  etc. — Omitted  in  the  Sinaitic,  the  Vatican,  and  other 
important  MSS.,  also  in  R.V,  However,  as  Carr  says,  it  falls  in  precisely  with  the  train 
of  thought,  and  is  almost  required  to  connect  vers,  10  and  12. 

Ver.  15.  Moreover,  etc. — Better,  arid  if  thy  brother  shall  sin.  A  twofold  train  of  thought 
is  traceable  in  what  follows.  1.  The  presence  of  "  offences  "  implies  sin,  and  the  question 
arises  how  each  man  is  to  deal  with  those  sins  which  affect  him  personally.  2.  The 
dispute  in  which  the  teaching  recorded  in  this  chapter  had  originated  implied  that  the 
unity  of  the  society  which  was  then  represented  by  the  Twelve,  had  for  the  time  been 
broken.  Each  of  the  disciples  thought  himself,  in  some  sense,  aggrieved  by  others.  Sharp 
words,  it  may  be,  had  been  spoken  among  them,  and  the  breach  had  to  be  healed  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  17.  Church. — The  word  **  church  "  (Gr.  ehklesia),  is  found  only  here  and  in  xvi.  18 
in  the  Gospels.  Carr  says  the  reference  is  either  to :  1.  The  assembly  or  congregation  of  the 
Jewish  synagogue,  or  to :  2.  The  ruling  body  of  the  synagogue  (collegium  presbyterorum, 
Schleiisn^r).  This  must  have  been  the  sense  of  the  word  to  those  who  were  listening 
to  Christ.  But,  as  Dr.  Morison  points  out,  the  Saviour  had  deliberately  gone  out  of 
his  way  to  avoid  the  employment  of  the  word  "  synagogue,"  The  expression,  he  adds, 
just  means  the  church.  And  yet,  as  assuredl3%  it  determines  nothing  as  to  the  arrangements 
which  the  church  might  be  at  liberty  to  make  for  the  profitable,  seemly,  and  efficient 
transaction  of  its  discipline  and  other  business, 

Ver.  18.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth,  etc. — What  was  spoken  to  Peter  alone 
(xvi.  19)  is  now  spoken  to  all  the  disciples  representing  the  church  (Carr). 

426 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xviii. 


Ver.  19.  It  shall  be  done  for  them. — The  promise  is  dependent  on  implied  conditions. 
Those  who  pray  must  be  gathered  together  in  the  name  of  Christ  (ver.  20),  i.e.  as  trusting 
to  His  intercession,  asking  a  prayer  which  is  not  the  utterance  of  the  natural  but  the 
spiritual  man,  asking  it  in  entire  submission  to  the  will  of  their  Father  in  heaven.  In  the 
absence  of  those  conditions,  as  in  the  prayer  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  asking  they  knew  not 
what  (xx.  20),  that  which  they  desired  might  be  withheld  from  them,  or  granted  in  quite 
another  manner  than  that  on  which  they  had  set  their  hearts  {Plumptre^. 
.  Ver.  22.  Until  seventy  times  seven. — That  is,  as  often  as  there  is  a  cause— a  certain 
number  is  put  for  an  uncertain  (John  Wesley). 

Ver.  24.  Ten  thousand  talents. — The  talent  was  not  a  coin,  but  a  weight  or  sum  of  money. 
See  margins  A.V.  and  R.V.  The  amount  here  intended  cannot  be  exactly  determined. 
*'  Even  if  silver  talents  are  meant,  the  sum  is  enormous — at  least  two  million  pounds  of  our 
money.  It  was  probably  more  than  the  whole  annual  revenue  of  Palestine  at  this  time  " 
{Carr).  The  expression  is  perhaps  used  indefinitely  for  a  very  large  sum  ;  yet  it  might  be 
understood  literally,  if  we  suppose,  with  Archbishop  Trench,  that  the  servant  in  question 
is  a  satrap  or  governor  of  a  province,  who  should  have  remitted  the  revenues  of  his  province 
to  the  royal  treasury.     Cf.  Esther  iii,  9  {Mansel). 

Ver.  27.  Forgave  him  the  debt. — The  Greek  noun  in  this  case  expresses  a  debt  contracted 
through  a  loan,  and  in  the  interpretation  of  the  parable  suggests  a  thought  like  that  in  the 
parables  of  the  Pounds,  the  Talents  and  the  Unjust  Steward.  What  we  call  our  own— life, 
with  all  its  opportunities — is  really  lent  to  us,  and  God  requires  repayment  with  interest 
(JPlv/mptre'). 

Ver.  28.  An  hundred  pence. — A  hundred  Eoman  denarii.  See  margin  A.V.  and  R.V.  The 
denarius  was  the  common  wage  per  day  of  a  labourer  (xx.  2). 

Ver.  29.  Besought. — Not  the  same  word  as  "worshipped"  (ver.  26).  The  word  in  the 
text  would  be  used  by  an  equal  addressing  an  equal  ( Carr). 

Ver.  31.  Very  sorry. — This  seems  to  point  to  the  common  conscience  of  mankind 
approving  or  anticipating  the  Divine  sentence  (ibid.). 

Ver.  34.  Tormentors. — This  word  probably  signifies  more  than  "keepers  of  the  prison," 
as  it  is  sometimes  interpreted.  Though  there  is  no  evidence  of  torture  being  applied  to 
debtors  under  the  Jewish  law,  yet  the  practice  was  not  unknown  in  other  countries 
(Ma7isel). 

Ver.  35.  From  your  hearts. — A  different  principle  from  the  Pharisees'  arithmetical  rule 
of  forgiveness  (Carr).  Their  trespasses. — Omitted  in  R.V.,  the  MS.  authority  being  against 
the  retention  of  the  words. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Vet-ses  1—14. 

True  greatness. — Hovr  the  opening  question  of  this  passage  came  to  be  asked 
seems  to  be  taught  us  by  St.  Mark.  It  was  after  a  dispute  on  the  subject  of 
inquiry,  which  had  occurred  "  by  the  way "  (Mark  ix.  33,  34).  The  same 
reference  also  seems  to  throw  light  on  the  exact  purport  of  the  question  itself. 
Tell  us  "  then  "  (ver.  1,  R.V.)  what  is  the  truth  about  this  subject  of  greatness. 
Who  is  greater  and  who  is  less,  in  regard  to  this  point  ?  The  Saviour  answers  by 
placing  a  little  child  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  then  taking  it  in  His  arms 
(Mark  ix.  36),  as  though  He  would  say  by  that  action.  This  is  to  be  great  in  My 
kingdom,  and  to  be  dear  unto  Me,  viz.,  to  be  as  this  babe  is,  and  think  nothing 
about  it.  True  greatness  in  My  kingdom  consists,  in  other  words,  in  not  seeking 
greatness  at  all.  In  the  rest  of  the  passage  the  Saviour  goes  on  to  further 
explain  and  enforce  this  statement,  by  showing,  first,  what  is  true  of  such  persons 
on  earth  ;  and,  second,  what  is  thought  of  them  in  heaven. 

I.  What  is  true  of  them  upon  earth. — Viz.,  that  they  are  those  on  whom  the 
welfare  of  the  world  itself  turns.  We  may  see  this,  on  the  one  hand,  by  what 
is  true  of  their  friends.  How  well  it  is  with  all  those  who  show  them  kindness 
and  love  !  How  well  it  is  even  in  the  case  of  the  very  humblest  among  them  ! 
To  receive  the  least  of  such  as  being  what  he  is,  viz.,  a  believer  in  Christ,  is  all 
one,  in  Christ's  sight,  with  receiving  Himself  (ver.  5).  This  is  the  well-known 
principle  of  xxv.  40.  And  this  is,  also,  if  we  think  of  it  rightly,  having  a 
crown  of  greatness  indeed.  What,  for  a  creature,  can  be  a  greater  privilege 
than  that  of  ministering  to  the  Creator  (see  Rev.  xxii.  3).     It  is  a  privilege 

427 


CHAP.  xviiL    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


certainly  of  which  the  holy  angels  seem  glad  indeed  to  partake  (iv.  1 1 ; 
Luke  xxii.  43).  Can  any  persons  be  greater,  therefore,  than  those  who  can  put 
this  privilege  within  any  man's  reach  1  And  who  are  in  this  way,  therefore,  as 
it  were,  the  ambassadorial  representatives  of  Christ  Himself  upon  earth? 
We  may  see  the  same  also,  next,  by  seeing  what  is  true  of  those  persons  who  are 
the  enemies  of  such  men.  Unhappily,  that  there  are  such  is  only  too  plain. 
There  are  those,  who,  so  far  from  "  receiving  "  (ver.  5)  these,  seek  to  hinder 
them  in  their  course ;  and,  either  by  persecution  or  opposition,  on  the  one  hand, 
or  by  persuasion  and  temptation,  on  the  other,  seek  either  to  drive  them  or 
seduce  them  into  wrong.  Evil  indeed  is  it  with  any  man  who  attempts  anything 
of  the  kind.  All  such  attempts  are  things,  in  God's  sight,  of  the  most  serious 
kind.  Nothing  more  so,  in  fact.  Better  anything,  in  fact,  for  any  man  than  to 
have  this  true  about  him.  Better  have  round  about  him  in  the  most  helpless 
position  the  heaviest  possible  weight  (ver.  6).  Better  lose  also  any  part  of 
himself — even  the  limbs  he  moves  with,  the  eye  he  sees  with — than  in  this  way 
to  lose  all  and  lose  it  also  for  ever  !  (vers.  8,  9).  Nothing  is  more  evil,  in  fact, 
than  being  the  "  occasion "  (ver.  7)  of  evil  to  those  that  are  Christ's.  See, 
therefore,  on  the  whole,  what  a  double  crown  of  greatness  these  carry  about  with 
them  as  they  move.  There  are  none  more  to  be  cherished  than  these — none 
more  to  be  feared  than  these — amongst  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world.  Can 
any  of  its  inhabitants  either  expect  or  ask  to  be  really  higher  than  that  ? 

II.  What  is  thought  of  them  in  heaven. — Under  this  head  we  are  shown,  on 
the  one  hand,  that  they  are  the  constant  objects  of  God's  regard.  In  Gen.  xxviii. 
we  read  of  the  angels  of  God  *' ascending  and  descending"  between  heaven  and 
earth.  In  Ezekiel  i.  14  of  "  the  living  creatures  that  ran  and  returned  as  the 
appearance  of  a  flash  of  lightning."  In  Zech.  vi.  5,  of  "  spirits "  which  *'go 
forth  from  standing  before  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  And  in  Zech.  i.  11 
of  some  such  bringing  in  their  report  of  what  they  have  seen  on  the  earth.  A  like 
way  of  speaking  seems  to  be  employed  in  this  place.  Even  Christ's  "  little  ones  " 
are  represented  as  having  "  angels  "  who  bring  back  tidings  about  them.  And 
of  such  angels  we  seem  taught  that  they  all  have  immediate  access  to  the  presence 
of  God.  Whatever  the  mysteries  and  the  difficulties  and  the  errors  connected 
with  the  subject,  this  much  appears  plain.  What  happens  to  these  "  little 
ones  "  is  of  immediate  interest  to  the  Great  Father  of  all.  Through  these  higher 
ones  the  eye  of  the  Highest  of  all  is  for  ever  bent  upon  them.  Is  not  this  to  be 
*'  great "  1  Next,  they  are  shown  to  be  the  special  objects  of  God's  recovering 
grace.  Even  when  astray  and  so  "  less  than  the  least,"  they  are  not  only  within 
— they  are  even  specially  within — the  scope  of  His  thoughts.  Almost  in- 
expressible, indeed,  is  the  degree  of  tenderness  with  which  they  are  thought  of  at 
such  times.  It  is  like  that  which  happens,  when,  in  a  flock  of  one  hundred 
sheep,  one  amongst  them  is  lost.  Immediately  that  one  sheep,  in  the  shepherd's 
mind,  has  a  place  of  its  own.  Immediately,  therefore,  he  leaves  all  the  rest  of 
them  to  go  in  search  of  that  one.  And  naturally,  therefore,  if  he  finds  it,  he 
rejoices  in  finding  it  more  than  over  the  ninety  and  nine  (vers.  12,  13).  It  is  a 
true  picture,  though  an  inadequate  one,  of  the  will  of  the  Father.  His  straying 
"  little  ones "  are  not  less  precious  to  Him  because  they  are  in  danger  of 
"  perishing."  They  are  rather — if  not  more  precious,  which  could  not  very  well 
be — more  thought  about,  and  more  longed  for,  and  more  sought  after  by  Him 
(ver.  14).  Never,  it  would  seem  indeed,  are  His  thoughts  tenderer  than  they 
are  to  those  who  need  His  tenderness  most.  How  great  a  thing,  therefore — how 
truly  great — to  be  numbered  amongst  them  at  all  ! 

1.  See,  therefore,  in  conclusion,  in  the  first  place,  what  a  secret  of  contentment 
is  here. — What  other  distinctions  ai-e  comparable  to  this  of  really  belonging  to 
Christ  ?     What  can  they  add  to  us  if  we  possess  this  ?      How  far  can  they 

428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,  chap,  xviii. 


compensate  us,  if  we  do  not  ?  And  what  have  we  really  lost,  if  possessing  this, 
we  only  attain  them  in  part  ?  Also,  and  lastly,  can  we  really  miss  what  is  good 
in  them,  if  this  other  possession  be  ours  (1  Cor.  iii.  22)  ? 

2.  See,  in  the  next  place,  what  an  incentive  to  effort  is  here. — Why  should  those 
who  enjoy  this  greatness  desire  to  keep  it  to  themselves  ?  Will  it  not,  in  reality, 
be  all  the  greater  if  they  do  not  1  There  is  no  blessing  like  that  of  being  a 
blessing.  There  is  no  greatness  greater  than  that  of  sharing  greatness  with 
others.  The  more  light  we  communicate  to  our  fellow-tiavellers,  the  more  there 
will  be  for  us  all. 

HOMILIES  OJSr  THE  VERSES, 

Ver.  2.  The  ministry  of  children. —  gracious,  gentle,  loving  heart  towards 

The  Evangelists  never  hesitated  to  tell  Jesus. — J.  G.  Rogers,  B.A. 
the  truth  about  themselves  ;   however 

humiliating,  still  it  was  told ;  so  that  A    child  in   the   midst   (A  Sunday- 

if  this  be  not  a  -veritable  record,  the  school     anniversary    sermon).  —  Jesus 

men   who  wrote  it  must,  of  all  men,  set  a  little  child  in  the  midst  ! 
have  been  the  most  singular  in  their         I.  This  is  what  God  did  in  redeem- 

taste.     What  can  be  more  humiliating  ing    the   world. — By   the   incarnation 

than  the  spectacle  of  the  disciples  as  it  there  was  *' set  in  the  midst  "  of  the 

is   presented   to   us   in    this   chapter  1  prophets,  philosophers,  armies,  govern- 

The  little  child  is  their  teacher.     We  ments  of  the  world,   "  a  little   child." 

are  in  a  world  of  children.     They  are  The  sign  that  God  has  come  to  redeem 

the  poetry  of  life.  the  world  was  not  in  blare  of  trumpets, 

I.  The  little  child  has  something  to  volleys  of  artillery,  edicts  of  emperors, 

give   us.  but    in     the    swaddling-clothes    that 

1.  What  an  opening  of  the  heart  swathed  a  Babe  in  a  manger.  Among 
is  made  hy  the  coming  of  a  little  the  lessons  of  the  holy  manger  are  : — 
child. — It  is  a  great  lesson  for  us  in  1.  The  might  of  gentleness.  2.  The 
more   ways    than    one.       It   suggests  love  of  God. 

that   there  is  no  power  by  which  we  II.  This     is    what    Jesus     did    in 

are  so  likely  to  move  the  hearts  of  an  teaching   the   disciples.  —  Some   have 

adult   generation    gone    from   God   as  said    it   was    Ignatius,    some   Peter's 

the  power  of  little  children.  child.     He  takes  him  into  His  arms. 

2.  When  the  world  is  redeemed  the  There  is  a  fourfold  lesson  here. 
spirit  of  the  little  child  will  he  supreme.  1.  Imitate  childhood.  2.  Receive  child- 
"  A  little  child  shall  lead  them."  hood.  3.    CowsiWer  childhood.     4.  Care 

II.  We   have    something   to    give  earnestly  for  childhood. 

the  little  child. — I  speak  especially  to  III.  This  is  what  the  church  does 

Sunday-school  teachers.    Your  primary  here  to-day. — The  Sunday-school  calls 

work   is   to   train   children  for   Jesus  us  round  the  cradle — sets  a  child   in 

Christ.      Teach   them   that   they   are  our  midst.     1 .  It  indicates  faith  in  the 

the  children  of  God,  that  they  are  not  worth   of    childhood.       2.  Admits   the 

the  children  of   the   devil ;  that  they  need  of  childhood.     3.  Promotes  loyalty 

are  not  meant  to  do  the  devil's  work  ;  to    the  Saviour  of   childhood.  —  U.  R. 

that  the  love  of  the  Father  is  towards  Thomas,  B.A. 
them,    that    though    they    may   have 

evil  passions    and  sins    and   frailties.  Our  LordJs  object-lesson. — The  child  I 

yet  they  are  God's  children.     Surround  suppose  to  have  been  a  very  young  child, 

them  from  their  infancy  upwards  with  For  such  a  little  child  is  completely  free 

an  atmosphere  of  love.     Expect  them  from  folly,  and  the  mania  for  glory,  and 

to  feel  the  power  of  the  love  of  Christ  from  envy,  and  contentiousness,  and  all 

early.       Welcome     every    sign    of    a  such  passions. — Chrysostom. 

429 


CHAP,  xviii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MATTHEW, 


Vers.  3,  4.  The  greatest  in  the  king-  without    it   entering  the   kingdom  of 

dom. — I.  None  but  the  lowly  are  in  heaven  is  impossible  for  any  man? 

the  kingdom  (ver.  3). — A  most  heart-  I.  It  is  aversion  from   sin. — Edu- 

searching  lesson  !     What  grave  doubts  cation,    society,   natural   temperament 

and    questionings   it   must   have   sug-  may  lead  a  man  to  dislike  some  sins, 

gested   to   the   disciples  !      They    had  But  with  sin,  as  sin,  the  unconverted 

faith  to  follow  Christ  in  an  external  man     lives     at     peace.        Conversion 

way;  but  were  they  really  following  changes  all  this.     What  the  chill  of 

Him  ?     Had  He  not  said,  "  If  any  man  an  iceberg  would  be  to  a  tropical  plant, 

will   come    after    Me,    let   him    deny  or   the    gnawings   of    an   ulcer   to   a 

himself  ?  "     Were  they  denying  self  ?  sensitive  nerve,  sin  is  to  his  soul.     He 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  we  need  fears  it,  he  hates  it.    And  this  aversion 

not   suppose    that   this  selfish   rivalry  from  sin  includes  all  sin — sins  of  the 

was    habitual    with    them.       It    was  heart,  as  well  as  of  the  life, 

probably  one  of  those  surprises  which  II.  It  is  inclination  towards  God. — 

overtake   the   best   of   Christians ;    so  Just  as  the  flowers  open  to  the  sun  ; 

that  it  was  not  really  a  proof  that  they  just  as  the  child  runs  into  the  parent's 

did   not   belong  to   the  kingdom,   but  arms ;    so    does    the    converted    man 

only   that,    for   the   time,   they   weie  rise  in  all  his  being  towards  the  God 

acting    inconsistently    with    it ;     and  who  is  at  once  his  life  and  joy.     His 

therefore,  before   they  could  think  of  God-ward  tendencies  take  a  practical 

occupying   any   place,    even    the  very  shape.     He  loves  and  delights   in  all 

lowest    in    the    kingdom,    they   must  that    God     loves — God's     book,     day, 

repent,  and  become  as  little  children.  people.     Now,    to   such   a   man  "  the 

II.  The  lowliest  in  the  kingdom  are  kingdom  of  heaven  "  is  open.     He  has 

the   greatest    (ver.    4). — Though    the  an  eye  for  its  beauty,  an  ear  for  its 

thought  was  new  to  them  at  the  time,  song,    a   heart   for   its   service.      This 

it   did  come  home  to  them ;  it  passed  here   on   earth.      But    hereafter    the 

into   their   nature,    and   showed  itself  same  will  be  true.     Let   death   come 

afterwards  in  precious  fruit,  at  which  when   it    may,    he    is    ready   for   the 

the  world  still  wonders.     They  did  not,  "kingdom."—^    C.  Price,  B. A. 
indeed,  get  over  their  selfishness  all  at 

once  ;  but  how  grandly  were  they  cured  Children  a  parable  of  the  kingdom  of 
of  it  when  their  training  was  finished  !  heaven. — Every  reader  of  the  Gospels 
If  there  is  one  thing  more  character-  has  marked  the  sympathy  of  Jesus 
istic  of  the  Apostles  in  their  after  life  with  children.  How  He  watched  their 
than  any  other,  it  is  their  self  forget-  games.  How  angry  He  was  with  His 
fulness — their  self-effacement,  we  may  disciples  for  belittling  them.  How 
say.  Where  does  Matthew  ever  say  He  used  to  warn  men,  whatever  they 
a  word  about  the  sayings  or  doings  did,  never  to  hurt  a  little  child.  How 
of  Matthew  ?  Even  John,  who  was  grateful  were  children's  praises  when 
nearest  of  all  to  the  heai't  of  the  all  others  had  turned  against  Him. 
Saviour,  and  with  Him  in  all  His  most  One  is  apt  to  admire  the  beautiful 
trying  hours,  can  write  a  whole  Gospel  sentiment,  and  to  forget  that  children 
without  ever  mentioning  his  own  were  more  to  Jesus  than  helpless  and 
name  ;  and  when  he  has  occasion  to  gentle  creatures  to  be  loved  and  pro- 
speak  of  John  the  Baptist  does  it  as  if  tected.  They  were  His  chief  parable 
there  were  no  other  John  in  existence.  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  As  a  type 
So  was  it  with  them  all. — /.  M.  of  character  the  kingdom  was  like  unto 
Gibson,  D.D.  a  little  child,  and  the  greatest  in  the 

kingdom  would  be  the  most  child-like. 

Ver.  3.  Meetness  for  the  hingdom  of  According  to  Jesus,  a  well-conditioned 

heaven. — What    is   this    "conversion"  child  illustrates  better  than  anything 

concerning     which    Jesus    says     that  else  on  earth  the  distinctive  features  of 

430 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.'  chap,  xviii. 


Christian  character :  1.  Because  he 
does  Twt  assert  nor  aggrandise  himself. 
2.  Becatise  he  has  no  memory  for 
injuries,  and  no  room  in  his  heart  for  a 
grudge.  3.  Because  he  has  no  previous 
opinions^  and  is  not  ashamed  to  confess 
his  ignorance.  4.  Because  he  can 
imagine;  and  has  the  key  of  another 
world,  entering  in  through  the  ivory 
gate  and  living  amid  the  things 
unseen  and  eternal.  The  new  society 
of  Jesus  was  a  magnificent  imagination, 
and  he  who  entered  it  must  lay  aside 
the  world-standards,  and  ideals  of  char- 
acter, and  become  as  a  little  child. — 
John  Watson,  M,A. 

Ver.  4.  Receiving  the  kingdom  of 
God  as  a  little  child. — There  are  throe 
senses  in  which  this  humility  may  be 
understood.  1.  As  opposed  to  the  pride 
of  intellectual  self-sufficiency — in  i-e- 
ceiving  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  in 
a  spirit  of  docility,  without  doubting  or 
disputation,  as  when  the  child  shall 
receive  his  father's  word  with  implicit 
faith.  2.  As  opposed  to  the  pride  of  self - 
righteousness — in  receiving  the  blessings 
of  the  kingdom  without  any  conscious- 
ness of  desert,  as  when  the  child  shall 
expect  and  take  favours  at  his  father's 
hand  without  the  faintest  sentiment  of 
any  merits  of  his  own.  3.  As  opposed 
to  ambitious  pride — in  receiving  the 
kingdom  in  a  spirit  of  love  for  the 
brethren,  without  contention  for  pre- 
eminence, as  when  the  nobleman's 
child  shall,  if  permitted,  make  a  com- 
panion of  the  beggars  on  a  footing  of 
the  most  perfect  equality. — W,  Ander- 
son, LL.D. 

Humility. — A  farmer  went  with  his 
son  into  a  wheat-field  to  see  if  it  was 
ready  for  harvest.  "  See,  father," 
exclaimed  the  boy,  "  how  straight 
those  stems  hold  up  their  heads ! 
They  must  be  the  best  ones.  Those 
that  hang  their  heads  down  I  am  sure 
cannot  be  good  for  much."  The 
farmer  plucked  a  stalk  of  each  kind, 
and  said,  "  See  here,  foolish  child. 
This  stalk  that  stood  so  straight  is 
light-headed,    and   good    for    nothing. 


while  this  that  hung  down  its  head  so 
modestly  is  full  of  the  most  beautiful 
grain." 

Ver.  6.  Injuring  others. — The  atmos- 
phere of  carnality  and  selfishness  in 
which  the  disciples  were  moving,  as 
their  question  showed,  would  stifle  the 
tender  life  of  any  lowly  believer  who 
found  himself  in  it ;  and  they  were  not 
only  injuring  themselves,  but  becoming 
stumbling-blocks  to  others  by  their 
ambition.  How  much  of  the  present 
life  of  average  Ohiistians  is  condemned 
on  the  same  ground  !  It  is  a  good  test 
of  our  Christian  character  to  ask — 
would  it  help  or  hinder  a  lowly  believer 
to  live  beside  us?  How  many  pro- 
fessing Christians  are  really,  though 
unconsciously,  doing  their  utmost  to 
pull  down  their  more  Christ-like 
brethren  to  their  own  low  level  !  The 
worldliness  and  selfish  ambitions  of  the 
church  are  responsible  for  the  stum- 
bling of  many  who  would  else  have 
been  of  Christy's  little  ones. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.t). 

Ver.  7.  Giving  occasions  af  stumbling. 
— If  there  is  any  work  in  the  world 
which  peculiarly  deserves  the  name  of 
the  work  of  the  devil,  it  is  the  hindrance 
which  men  sometimes  put  in  the  path 
in  which  their  fellow-creatures  are 
called  by  God  to  walk. 

I.  The  most  glaring  form  of  the  sin 
of  tempting  others  is  that  of  persecut- 
ing and  ridiculing  the  conscientious. — 
Every  one  who  endeavours  to  live  as 
God  would  have  him  is  suie  to  lay 
himself  open  to  ridicule,  if  nothing 
worse.  How  easy  it  is  to  ridicule  the 
imperfect  virtue,  because  it  is  imperfect ; 
how  easy,  and  yet  how  wicked  ! 

II.  Are  Christians  quite  safe  from 
doing  this  great  and  sinful  mischief? 
— I  fear  not.  1.  Christians  are  not 
exempt  from  the  common  failing  of 
all  men,  to  condemn  and  dislike  every- 
thing   which    is    unlike    the    wdinary 

fashion  of  their  own  lives.  2.  Christians 
are  quite  as  liable  as  other  men  to  be 
misled  by  the  customs  of  their  own  society, 
and  to  confound  the  laws  that  have 

431 


CHAP.  XVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


grown  up  amongst  themselves  with  the 
law  of  God.  3.  Christians  are  very 
often  liable,  not,  perhaps,  to  put 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  efforts  to  do 
right,  so  much  as  to  refuse  them  the  need- 
ful help  without  which  they  have  little 
chance  of  succeeding,  4.  Christians  are 
quite  as  liable  as  any  to  give  wrong 
things  untrue  names,  and  to  take  away 
the  fear  of  sin  hy  a  sort  of  good-natured 
charity  towards  particular  faults. 
5.  Christians  are  liable  to  that  which 
is  the  common  form  of  tempting  among 
those  who  are  not  Christians;  not  to 
persecute  or  ridicule  what, is  right,  but 
to  seek  for  companions  in  what  is  wrong. 
They  are  tempted,  whenever  sin  is  too 
powerful  for  their  wills,  to  double  it 
by  dragging  others  with  them  on  the 
same  path. — Bishop  Temple. 

Responsi  hility  for  wrong -doing.  — The 
words,  "  It  must  needs  be  that  offences 
come,  but  woe  unto  that  man  .  .  . ." 
unite  in  strange  contrast  the  two  truths 
which  all  the  history  of  human  guilt 
brings  before  us.  Ciimes  seem  to  recur 
with  something  like  the  inevitable 
regularity  of  a  law,  and  yet  in  each 
single  instance  the  will  of  the  offender 
has  been  free  to  choose,  and  he  is 
therefore  rightly  held  responsible  both 
by  Divine  and  human  laws. — E.  H. 
PlumptrCy  D.D. 

Vers.  8,  9.  Self-injury. — I.  How, 
and  when,  and  in  what,  do  men  thus 
injure  themselves? — 1.  We  may  take 
the  hand  and  eye  and  foot  as  sym- 
bolical of  what  belongs  closely  and 
intimately  to  our  being  and  nature ; 
our  habits,  affections,  dispositions, 
tendencies.  Do  not  these  perpetually 
offend  us ;  harm  and  obstruct  the 
growth,  and  mar  the  beauty  and 
symmetry  of  the  spiritual  life  ?  Indol- 
ence, pride,  lust,  passion,  selfishness. 
2.  Under  this  symbolical  language  we 
may  include  things  that  we  blindly 
and  foolishly  turn  into  means  of  offence 
and  self -injury,  viz.,  outward  relation- 
ships and  circumstances  and  duties  and 
pleasures. — Any  thing  that  makes  a  man 
less  virtuous.  Christlike,    less   humble 

432 


and  heavenly-minded  and  self-sacrific- 
ing, becomes,  in  its  measure,  an 
"  offence "  unto  him,  a  means  of  self- 
injury. 

II.  What  is  the  prevention? — A 
decisive  one  :  "  cut  them  off,"  etc.  We 
may  think,  as  we  hear  people  say  of  a 
child  with  some  physical  weakness  or 
deformity,  "  in  the  course  of  time  he 
will  outgrow  it."  We  fear  the  reverse 
will  be  the  case  with  character.  Our 
habits,  weaknesses,  obstacles,  snares, 
offences,  all  these  would  only  gather 
power  with  time,  undermine  our 
character,  and  do  us  deeper  harm.  It 
must  be  no  momentary  self-chastise- 
ment or  penance — no  mere  determina- 
tion to  try  to  repress — we  must  adopt 
no  half-measures  whatever.  Just  as 
with  dross  in  gold,  and  speck  in  fruit, 
and  moth  in  garment,  as  with  parasite 
and  weed,  so  with  these  moral  offenders, 
we  must  "  cast  them  out."  1.  For  our 
own  sake.  2.  For  Chrisfs  sake.  3.  For 
the  sake  of  others. — Theodore  Hooke. 

Self-regard  involves  self-sacrifice. — 
There  are  stringent  principles  in  these 
vivid  words.  Lawful  things  may  be 
occasions  of  sin.  Taste,  occupations, 
the  culture  of  some  bodily  or  mental 
aptitude,  study,  art,  society,  all  perfectly 
innocent  in  themselves  and  perfectly 
permissible  for  others  who  are  not  hurt 
by  them,  may  damage  our  religious 
character.  We  may  be  unable  to  keep 
them  in  bounds,  and  they  may  be  draw- 
ing off  our  interest  and  work  from 
Christ's  service.  If  so,  there  is  but  one 
thing  to  do,  put  your  hand  on  the 
block,  and  take  the  axe  in  the  other, 
and  strike  and  spare  not.  It  is  of  no 
use  to  try  to  regulate  and  moderate ; 
the  time  for  that  may  come.  But,  for 
the  present,  safety  lies  only  in  entire 
abstinence.  Other  people  may  retain 
the  limb,  but  you  cannot.  They  must 
judge  for  themselves,  but  their  ex- 
perience is  not  your  guide.  If  the 
thing  hurts  your  religious  life,  off  with 
it.  Christ  bases  His  command  of  self- 
mutilation  on  the  purest  principles  of 
self-regard.  The  plainest  common  sense 
says  that  it  is  better  to  live  maimed 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xviii 


than  to  die  whole.  He  is  a  fool  who 
insists  on  keeping  a  mortified  limb, 
which  kills  him. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Cojnplete^  yet  lost ;  maimed^  yet  saved  ! 
— Note,  too,  the  possibility  of  a  man 
cultured,  full-summed  in  all  his  powers, 
yet,  for  lack  of  the  one  thing  needful, 
perishing,  like  some  tree,  rounded, 
symmetrical,  complete,  without  a  branch 
broken  or  a  leaf  withered,  which  is 
struck  by  lightning,  and  blasted  for 
ever.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man 
may  be  maimed  in  many  a  faculty,  and 
extremely  one-sided  in  his  growth, 
ignorant  of  much  that  would  have 
enriched  and  beautified,  but  if  he  have 
the  root  of  all  perfectness  in  him,  then, 
though  he  passes  into  life  maimed^  he 
will  not  continue  so  there,  but  every 
grace  which  he  abjured  for  Christ's 
sake,  will  be  given  him,  and  then  "  shall 
the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing." — Ihid. 

Yers.  10-14.  Consolation  respecting 
the  little  ones. — In  the  Saviour's  words, 
there  appear  three  guarantees  for  the 
safety  of  His  "  little  ones  "  : — 

I.  The  care  of  the  guardian  angels 
(ver.  10). — It  does  not  follow  from  this 
that  each  individual  has  one  guardian 
angel  assigned  to  him  as  a  good  genius 
to  watch  over  him  from  the  cradle  to 
the  grave.  Of  this  Scripture  reveals 
nothing.  Enough  that  to  the  good 
angels  as  heavenly  servants  is  com- 
mitted the  care  of  the  heirs  of  salva- 
tion. 

II.  The  love  of  the  Good  Shepherd 
(vers.  11-13). — The  Son  of  man,  the 
Lord  of  angels,  has  saved  those  little 
ones,  and  He  will  not  suffer  them  to 
perish.  There  is  no  weakness  in  His 
purpose,  no  negligence  in  His  oversight, 
no  change  in  His  love.  In  regard  to 
those  who  are  actually  children  a  fine 
passage  occurs  in  the  second  part  of  the 
Pilgrim^ s  Progress.  "By  the  river- 
side in  the  meadow  there  are  cotes  and 
folds  for  sheep,  and  a  house  built  for 
the  nourishing  and  bringing  up  of  those 
lambs,  the  babes  of  those  women  that 
go  on  pilgrimage.    Also  there  was  here 


One  that  was  intrusted  with  them, 
who  could  have  compassion,  and  could 
gather  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and 
carry  them  in  His  bosom.  Now  to 
the  care  of  this  Man  Christiana  ad- 
monished her  four  daughters  to  commit 
their  little  ones,  that  by  those  waters 
they  might  be  housed,  harboured, 
succoured,  and  nourished,  and  that  none 
of  them  might  be  lacking  in  time  to 
come.  This  Man,  if  any  of  them  go 
astray,  will  bring  them  back  again. 
He  will  also  build  up  that  which 
was  broken,  and  will  strengthen 
them  that  were  sick.  This  Man  will 
die  before  one  of  those  committed  to 
His  trust  shall  be  lost.  So  they  were 
content  to  commit  their  little  ones  to 
Him."  In  a  word,  all  young  children 
who  are  committed  to  the  Lord  in  faith, 
and  all  childlike  Christians,  are  "  safe 
in  the  arms  of  Jesus." 

III.  The  will  of  the  Father  in 
heaven  (ver.  14). — It  is  the  Father's 
will  which  the  Son  interprets  and  fulfils 
in  saving  the  lost.  It  is  the  same 
supreme  will  which  secures  by  the 
providence  of  the  Son,  the  guidance  of 
the  Spirit,  and  the  ministry  of  good 
angels,  that  none  of  the  rescued  ones 
shall  perish.  *'  Not  one  of  these  little 
ones."  The  Father  has  a  smile  for  this 
child  and  correction  for  that ;  a  promise 
for  this  one  and  a  warning  for  that, 
as  each  may  require  ;  but  for  every  one 
He  has  love. — D.  Eraser,  D.D. 

Ver.  10.  Interest  in  tJie  children 
(For  a  Sunday-school  anniversary). — 
I.  Christ's  interest  in  a  little  child. 
— Because  the  thing  on  earth  most  like 
Himself.  So  much  in  men  and  women 
unlike  Christ.  So  much  in  child  like 
Him.  Because  of  the  mission  Christ 
came  to  fulfil.  Put  into  word  "  save." 
Can  we  clothe  the  idea  in  other  forms  1 
1.  Christ  came  to  win  love.  Just  what 
a  child  can  do.  Wins  his  mother's  love 
first.  2.  To  keep  up  the  sense  of  beauty. 
The  most  beautiful  thing  on  earth  is  a 
little  child.  3.  To  raise  the  idea  of 
innocence.  Purity  is  taught  through 
innocence.  4.  To  teach  dependence  on 
God. 


FF 


433 


CHAP,  xviii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


II.  Christ's  revelation  of  His  Father's  assumes,  may  prove  the  truth  of  it. 
interest  in  a  little  child. — In  heaven  *'  If  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them 
God  keeps  the  picture,  photograph,  that  are  lost."  4.  God  wanted,  in  the 
vision,  correspondent,  of  every  child.  creation  of  men,  free  beings  like  Him- 
God  has  with  Him  ever  our  glorified  self,  and  capable  of  common  virtues 
children,  and  also  the  picture  of  the  with  Himself — not  stones,  or  trees,  or 
earth-children.     Then  : —  animals — and,  being  free,  and  therefore 

1 .  He  knows  all  that  happens  to  them  not  to  be  controlled  by  force,  they  must 
on  earth.  of  necessity  be  free  to  evil.     This  being 

2.  He  knoivs  what  we  do  with  them —  true,  creatures  may  be  made  that 
how  we  treat  them ;  how  we  neglect  perish,  or  fall  into  lost  conditions, 
them.  5.  The  amiable  virtues,   high   aspira- 

3.  He  knows  the  children  that  hear,  in  tions,  and  other  shining  qualities  you 
bodily,  and  in  home,  and  social,  disability  see  in  mankind,  make  the  assumed 
— and  in  early  death — the  sin-burden  of  fact  of  our  lost  condition  seem  harsh 
humanity.  The  pattern,  the  picture,  and  extravagant.  But,  considering 
of  every  suffering  child  is  always  before  how  high  and  beautiful  a  nature  the 
God.  What  a  precious  thought  for  the  soul  is,  it  should  not  surprise  you  that 
children  !  What  a  searching  thought  it  shows  many  traces  of  dignity,  even 
for  those  who  have  to  do  with  the  after  it  has  fallen  prostrate,  and  lies  a 
children  !  broken  statue  on  the  ground. 

III.  Christ's  command  to  His  dis-  II.  Look  at  the  ei'idence  of  the  fact 
ciples  to  take  interest  in  little  children,  and  accept  the  conclusion  it  brings. — 
— Our  temptation  is  to  "despise  the  1.  Our  blessed  Master,  in  assuming 
little  ones."  We  may  fail  of  our  duty  your  lost  condition,  is  not  doing  it 
in  two  ways.  1.  In  active  faithfulness  harshly,  or  in  any  manner  of  severity. 
to  them.  2.  In  receptivity  of  influence  2.  Possibly,  He  knows  you  more 
from  them. — Weekly  Pulpit.  adequately  than   you   know  yourself. 

What  does  He  in  fact  say?  Notice 
Yer.  1 1 .  Salvation  for  the  lost  con-  His  parables  of  the  lost  sheep  and  the 
dition. — Every  kind  of  work  supposes  lost  piece  of  money,  etc.  3.  Think 
something  to  be  done,  some  ground  or  it  not  strange  if  your  heart  answers, 
condition  of  fact  to  be  afiected  by  it ;  after  all,  to  the  heart  of  Jesus,  and  re- 
education the  fact  of  ignorance,  punish-  affirms  exactly  what  He  has  testified, 
ment  the  fact  of  crime,  charity  the  fact  You  live  in  a  world  where  there  is 
of  want.  The  work  of  Christ,  com-  certainly  some  wrong — ^you  have  seen 
monly  called  a  work  of  salvation,  it,  suffered  from  it,  and  consciously 
supposes  in  like  manner,  the  fact  of  a  done  it.  But  all  wrong,  it  will  be 
lost  condition,  such  as  makes  salvation  agreed,  is  something  done  against  the 
necessary.  ''  Was  lost."  This  work  is  perfect  and  right  will  of  God,  and  a 
to  be  a  salvation,  not  as  being  a  pre-  shock  must  of  necessity  follow  it. 
ventive,  but  as  being  a  remedy  after  III.  Speak  of  the  salvation — what 
the  fact.  it  is,  and  by  what  means  or  methods  it 
I.  Clear  away  some  obstructions,  is  wrought. — Manifestly  this  can  be 
or  points  of  misconception. — 1.  Christ  done  only  by  some  means  or  operation 
does  not  mean,  when  He  says  "  was  that  respects  the  soul's  free  nature, 
lost,"  that  the  lost  condition  is  literally  working  in,  upon,  or  through  consent 
accomplished  in  the  full  significance  of  in  us,  and  so  new  ordering  the  soul, 
it,  but  only  that  it  is  begun,  with  a  Christ  works  by  no  fiat  of  absolute 
fixed  certainty  of  being  fully  accom-  will,  as  when  God  said,  "  Let  there  be 
plished.  2.  "  Total  depravity,"  is  no  light."  He  moves  on  your  consent, 
declaration  of  Christ,  and  He  is  not  by  moving  on  your  convictions,  wants, 
responsible  for  it.  3.  Your  want  of  sensibilities,  and  sympathies.  He  is 
sensibility  to  the  lost  condition  Christ  the  love  of  God,  the  beauty  of  God,  the 

434 


HOMILETIC  COMMENJARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xviii. 


mercy  of  God — God's  whole  character 
brought  nigh,  through  a  proper  and 
true  Son  of  man,  a  nature  fellow  to 
your  own,  thus  to  renovate  and  raise 
your  own.  The  result  can  never  be 
issued  save  as  we  on  our  part  believe. 
— H.  Bushnellf  D.D, 

"  Was  lost." — If  you  see  a  man  topple 
off  the  brink  of  a  precipice  a  thousand 
feet  high,  you  say  inwardly,  the  moment 
he  passes  his  centre  of  gravity,  "  He  is 
gone  "  ;  you  know  it  as  well  as  when 
you  see  him  dashed  in  pieces  on  the 
rocks  below  ;  for  the  causes  that  have 
gotten  hold  of  him  contain  the  fact  of 
his  destruction,  and  he  is  just  as  truly 
lost  before  the  fact  accomplished  as 
after.  So  if  a  man  has  taken  some 
deadly  poison,  and  the  stupor  has 
begun  to  settle  upon  him  already,  you 
say  that  he  is  a  lost  man;  for  the 
death-power  is  in  him,  and  you  know 
as  well  that  he  is  gone  as  if  he  lay 
dead  at  your  feet.  So  a  soul  under 
evil  once  begun  has  taken  the  poison, 
and  the  bad  causation  at  work  is  fatal ; 
it  contains  the  fact  of  ruined  immor- 
tality, in  such  a  sense  that  we  never 
adequately  conceive  it,  save  as  we  give 
it  past  tense,  and  say,  "  was  lost." — 
Ibid. 

Ver.  12.  Seeking  the  wanderer. — 
T.  Look  at  the  figure  of  the  one 
wanderer.  1.  All  men  are  Christ's 
sheep.  All  men  are  Christ's,  because 
He  has  been  the  Agent  of  Divine 
creation,  and  the  grand  words  of  the 
hundredth  Psalm  are  true  about  Him, 
"It  is  He  that  hath  made  us,  and  we 
are  His ;  we  are  His  people,  and  the 
sheep  of  His  pasture."  They  are  His 
because  His  sacrifice  has  bought  them 
for  His.  Erring,  straying,  lost,  they  still 
belong  to  the  Shepherd.    2.  Notice  next 


the  picture  of  the  sheep  as  wandering. 
The  straying  of  the  poor  half -conscious 
sheep  may  seem  innocent,  but  it  carries 
the  poor  thing  away  from  the  shepherd 
as  completely  as  if  it  had  been  wholly 
intelligent  and  voluntary.  Let  us 
learn  the  lesson.  In  a  world  like  this, 
if  a  man  does  not  know  very  clearly 
where  he  is  going  he  is  sure  to  go 
wrong.  If  you  do  not  exercise  a  dis- 
tinct determination  to  do  God's  will, 
and  to  follow  in  His  footsteps  who  has 
set  us  an  example,  and  if  your  main 
purpose  is  to  get  succulent  grass  to  eat 
and  soft  places  to  walk  in,  you  are  cer- 
tain, before  long,  to  wander  tragically 
from  all  that  is  right,  and  noble,  and 
pure. 

II.  Look  at  the  picture  of  the 
Seeker. — In  the  text  God  leaves  the 
ninety  and  nine,  and  goes  into  the 
mountains  where  the  wanderer  is,  and 
seeks  him.  And  thus,  couched  in  veiled 
form,  is  the  great  mystery  of  the 
Divine  love,  the  incarnation  and  sacri- 
fice of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Not 
because  man  was  so  great ;  not  because 
man  was  so  valuable  in  comparison 
with  the  rest  of  creation — he  was  but 
one  amongst  ninety  and  nine  unfallen 
and  unsinful — but  because  he  was  so 
wretched,  because  he  was  so  small, 
because  he  had  gone  away  so  far  from 
God,  therefore  the  seeking  love  came 
after  him,  and  would  draw  him  to 
itself. — A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

Yer.  14.  The  love  of  God  for  little 
children. 

I.  A  love  of  utter  unselfishness. 

II.  A  love  of  delight  in  them. 

III.  A  love  of  compassion  towards 
them. 

IV.  A  love  of  trust  in  the  almost 
infinite  capacities  of  children. — T. 
Gasquoirie. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   15—20. 

Collective  grace. — "  Occasions  of  stumbling  "  cannot  always  be  avoided  (ver.  7). 
When  they  do  come  how  should  they  be  dealt  with  ?  They  should  be  dealt 
with  by  the  "  church,"  in  other  words,  by  that  general  body  of  believers  in 
Christ  of  whom  He  spoke  under  that  name  not  long  before,  in  reply  to  the 
confession   of   St.    Peter   (xvi.    18).      This   seems  to  be  the   general   principle 

435 


CHAP,  XVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


implied  in  this  passage.  The  cautions  to  be  observed  in  applying  it,  and  the 
reasons  which  make  these  cautions  necessary  seem  to  be  the  chief  further  points 
here  presented  to  our  notice. 

I.  The  requisite  cautions. — These  may  be  regarded  as  three.  The  first  is 
a  caution  against  too  great  eagerness  in  applying  this  method  at  all.  It  is  not  the 
first  thing — it  is  rather  the  last  thing — to  be  thought  of  in  such  cases.  The  first 
thing  to  be  thought  of,  if  thy  brother  Las  ofiended  thee,  is  the  welfare  of  thy 
brother.  The  thing  to  be  done,  if  it  may  be,  is  to  bring  him  to  a  sense  of  his  sin ; 
and  so,  as  it  were,  to  "  gain  him  "  back  again  to  his  proper  standing  and  place 
(ver.  15).  If  this  be  accomplished  there  will  be  no  necessity  for  appealing  to 
the  church.  And  this  can  best  be  done,  it  is  evident  on  the  face  of  it,  by  dealing 
with  him  alone.  Let  this,  therefore,  be  the  universal  first  rule  in  regard  to  such 
offences.  Do  not  have  recourse  to  any  degree  of  publicity  till  you  have  seen 
what  private  dealing  can  do.  The  next  caution  is  on  similar  lines.  Do  not  go  by 
one  leap  from  the  individual  to  the  general.  Even  if  strictly  private  remonstrance 
should  fail  entirely  of  obtaining  a  hearing  (ver.  16),  there  is  a  process  far  short 
of  complete  publicity  which  may  be  adopted  with  hope ;  and  which  you  are 
bound  to  adopt,  also,  if  you  wish,  as  you  ought,  to  make  sure  of  your  ground. 
In  reality,  the  matter  in  question  is  one  both  of  fact  and  of  judgment.  Has 
thy  brother  really  done  as  you  say  1  Is  the  character  of  that  which  he  has  done 
really  that  which  you  think?  If  he  refuses  to  "hear"  thee  privately  because 
he  disputes  these  two  things,  endeavour  to  obtain  the  opinion  of  others  about 
them;  but  only  so  in  sufficient  numbers  for  the  occasion  (Deut.  xix.  15).  And 
then,  with  these  to  fortify  you  (if  they  agree  with  you),  appeal  to  him  again.  In 
any  case,  till  you  have  tried  this,  do  not  proceed  to  the  extreme  step  of  appealing 
against  him  to  all.  Kather — so  the  legitimate  inference  is — try  all  other  plans 
first.  Finally,  be  careful  if  at  last  driven  to  this,  not  even  then  to  push  matters 
too  far.  Keep  in  view  carefully  what  is  the  very  outside  of  what  you  have  to 
do  in  such  matters.  All  that  is  asked  of  you,  in  regard  to  such  offences,  is  to 
avoid  complicity  with  the  offender  (cf.  1  Tim.  v.  22).  And  all  that  the  church  itself 
can  do  legitimately,  in  regard  to  such  offenders,  is  to  withdraw  its  countenance 
from  them.  Let  that,  therefore,  be  the  very  utmost  that  you  yourself  seek  to 
attain  in  this  way.  Let  the  most  obdurate  brother  be  to  you  only  as  not  a 
brother  m  truth  (ver.  17). 

III.  Why  these  cautions  are  so  especially  needed. — Generally,  we  may  say, 
because  of  the  vast  importance  attaching  to  the  idea  of  the  "  church."  Like  an 
ironclad  on  the  waters,  the  great  body  of  believers  has  a  momentum  about  it 
which  makes  its  least  movement  momentous.  This  seems  to  be  illustrated  here  in 
three  separate  ways.  There  is  special  weight,  we  are  taught,  in  the  first  place, 
in  the  common  judgment  of  those  who  believe.  In  a  general  way  we  may  even 
say  of  that  judgment  that  it  is  the  judgment  of  God.  Whatever  difference  of 
opinion  there  may  be  as  to  the  best  way  of  ascertaining  this  common  judgment, 
and  whatever  undoubted  and  formidable  difficulties  theie  are  in  the  way  of  so 
doing,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  that,  if  ascertained,  it  is  a  thing  of  great  weight. 
No  true  believer  will  readily  venture  either  on  setting  it  aside,  on  the  one  hand, 
or  adding  to  it,  on  the  other  (ver.  18).  In  a  similar  way,  we  are  taught,  next, 
that  there  is  very  great  power  in  the  common  desires  of  those  who  believe.  What 
God  leads  them  to  agree  in  (ver.  19),  He  aa^rees  in  as  well.  We  cannot  doubt 
this  if  we  really  believe  them  to  be  "led"  by  His  "Spirit"  (Rom.  viii.  14). 
Neither  dare  we  deny  this  even  where  the  number  of  those  thus  "  agreeing 
together"  is  the  very  least  that  it  possibly  can  be  in  the  nature  of  things. 
There  cannot  be  agreement  at  all  unless  there  are  two  at  least  to  agree.  If 
there  are  but  two  such,  we  are  taught  here,  their  prayer  will  be  answered 
(ver.  19).     Judge,  therefore,  of  the  efficacy  of  the  "  common  prayer"  of  all  who 

436 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xvm. 


believe.  Lastly,  these  things  are  true  because  of  the  special  honour  which  it  has 
pleased  God  to  put  on  common  confession  of  Christ.  This  would  seem  to  be  the 
secret  of  all.  Where  "  two  or  three  only  "  are  so  far  united  as  to  be  *'  gathered 
together  "  in  the  "  name  "  of  Jesus,  they  are  doing  open  homage  to  Him.  The 
fact  of  their  being  there  with  that  object — the  fact  of  their  having  come  there 
with  that  object — the  fact  of  their  being  there  unitedly,  with  that  object — all 
lend  significance  to  their  presence.  That  significance  is  not  lost  on  their  Master. 
So  far  from  this  He  is  with  them  in  spirit  to  accept  their  homage.  He  is  with 
them  in  power  to  honour  them  for  it ;  He  is  with  them  in  grace  to  give  weight 
and  authority  and  efficacy  to  all  that  they  do  in  His  name.  That  is  why  these 
"  candlesticks  "  give  the  light  that  they  do — because  He  Himself  walketh  in  the 
midst  of  them  (Kev.  i.  13).  That  is  why  '*  the  blessed  company  of  all  Christian 
people  "  is  the  thing  that  it  is — because  it  is  "  the  fulness  of  Him  who  filleth  all 
in  all  "  (Eph.  i.  23). 

Two  brief  but  not  unimportant  lessons  seem  to  follow  : — 

1.  We  shall  he  very  careful  how  we  allow  ourselves  to  trust  iTYiplicitly  in  all  we 
hear  on  the  subject. — There  are  those  who  are  always  ready  to  speak  in  the  name 
of  the  church.  They  are  to  be  found  in  very  diverse  and  very  far  apart  ecclesi- 
astical quarters.  We  shall  be  very  careful  how  we  admit  so  great  a  claim  simply 
because  it  is  claimed.  Nothing  comes  more  naturally  to  a  partisan  spirit  and  a 
self  -  sufficient  judgment  and  a  narrow  nature,  than  the  assertion  of  such  a  claim. 
All  the  more  reason  for  not  allowing  ourselves  to  accept  it  without  thought 
(1  John  iv.  1). 

2.  We  shall  he  equally  careful  not  to  oppose  ourselves  rashly  to  what  others 
think  on  this  suhject. — So  to  do,  in  effect,  would  be  little  else  than  making  a 
church  of  oneself.  And  that  may  safely  be  said  to  be,  of  all  conceivable 
churches,  the  farthest  of  all  from  the  truth.  How  is  it  possible  for  one  mind  to 
be  a  collection  of  many  ?  (cf .  also  Jer.  vii  4). 

HOMILIES  OJSr  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  15-17.  Brotherly  love  in  dealing  hast  gained  thy  brother."     If  a  man 

with  injuries. — "  If  thy  brother  shall  sets  out  with  the  object  of  gaining  his 

trespass  against   thee," — what  ?     Pay  cause  or  getting   satisfaction,  he  had 

no  heed  to  it  ?     Since  it  takes  two  to  better  let  it  alone ;  but  if  he  wishes 

make  a  quarrel,  is  it  best  simply  to  let  not  to  gain  a  barren  triumph  for  him- 

him   alone?     That  might  be  the  best  self,  but  to  gain  his  brother,  let  him 

way  to  deal  with  offences  on  the  part  proceed  according  to  the  wise  instruc- 

of   those   that    are    without ;    but    it  tions  of  our  Lord  and  Master. — J.  M. 

would  be  a  sad  want  of  true  brotherly  Gibson,  D.D. 
love   to   take    this   easy   way   with   a 

fellow-disciple.     It  is  certainly  better  Ver.  17.  The  offender  and  the  church. 

to  overlook  an  injury  than  to  resent  — 1.  When  more  private  means  avail 

it ;    yet  our   Lord   shows  a  more  ex-  not  to  remedy  a  scandal,  Christ  hath 

cellent  way.     His  is  not  the  way  of  appointed  more  and  more  public  cen- 

selfish    resentment,     nor    of    haughty  sure    and    discipline   in    His    church, 

indifference,  but  of  thoughtful  concern  2.    Christ    hath    appointed   a   church 

for  the  welfare  of  him  who  has  done  of   governors    or   rulers    over   congre- 

the  injury.     That  this  is  the  motive  in  gations,  and  over  all  particular  persons 

the  entire  proceeding  is  evident  from  within  the   same,  which  must  attend 

the  whole  tone  of  the  paragraph,  in  the   complaints   of    the   offended   and 

illustration  of  which  reference  may  be  remove  scandals,  and  who  have  power 

made  to  the  way  in  which  success  is  to  call  before  them   and   to   examine 

regarded  :  "  If  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  and  censure  the  offender  for  that  end, 

437 


CHAP.  xvni.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


3.  The  church  hath  means  and  power 
to  remove  pubhc  scandal,  which,  being 
employed  by  the  church  and  obeyed 
by  the  offender,  excommunication  is 
not  to  be  used  ;  for  neglecting  to  hear 
the  church  presupposeth  the  church's 
direction  and  order  to  be  given  forth 
for  amendment  of  the  offender  and 
removing  of  the  scandal.  4.  When 
the  church  hath  given  sentence  upon 
the  offender  and  hath  appointed  the 
way  to  remove  the  scandal,  then  the 
offender  should  obey  in  the  Lord,  for 
Christ  declareth  it  a  censurable  fault 
to  neglect  to  hear  the  church.  5.  If 
the  offender  disobey  the  church's 
direction  for  removing  the  scandal, 
then  the  church  may  and  should 
excommunicate  the  obstinate,  i.e. 
declare  him  to  be  deprived  of  the 
honour  of  a  Christian  till  he  repent, 
and  to  be  holden  in  such  disrespect 
as  the  heathen  and  publicans  were  by 
the  Jewish  church  in  those  days. 
6.  When  the  church  declareth  an 
offender  contumacious  or  excommuni- 
cateth  him  as  unworthy  of  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  saints  for  his  present 
abominable  condition,  then  every  be- 
liever must  carry  himself  toward  the 
excommunicate  as  toward  a  man  dis- 
graced and  cast  out  of  church-honour, 
to  the  intent  the  offender  may  be 
ashamed  of  his  sin  and  repent. — 
David  Dickson. 


stand  for  a  spiritual  principle,  that 
wherever  men,  whatever  their  form  of 
creed,  their  method  of  worship,  their 
organisation,  come  together,  animated 
by  a  Christian  purpose,  there  Christ  is 
and  there  is  a  part  of  Christ's  church. 

II.  In  this  declaration  is  the  secret 
and  the  inspiration  of  our  faith  in 
catholicity. — There  are  but  two  con- 
ditions to  the  promise  —  gathered 
together,  and  gathered  together  in 
My  name.  Go  with  me  and  take  the 
round  of  the  Brooklyn  churches. 
Their  creeds  are  not  all  correct. 
Possibly  none  of  them  are  quite 
correct.  Their  formularies  are  not 
all  correct,  possibly.  Not  one  of  them 
is  essential.  But  they  are  united  in 
a  common  purpose,  and  they  are 
united  around  a  common  Lord. 

III.  This  text  gives  to  us  the  secret 
of  the  power  of  the  church. — It  is  the 
power  of  Christ  in  His  church — not  in 
a  hierarchy,  not  in  a  definitely  organ- 
ised and  established  body,  but  in  every 
body  of  faithful  disciples  united  to 
worship  Him  and  to  work  for  Him. — 
L.  Abbott,  D.D. 

Christ  in  the  church. — The  living 
presence  of  Christ  in  His  church  is  : — 

I.  The  bond  of  its  union. 

II.  The  soul  of  its  worship. 

III.  The  power  of  its  ministry. — 
J.  Branwhite  French. 


Ver.  20.  Chrisfs  church. — This  is 
the  principle  of  the  text — ^wherever 
men  come  together  for  a  common 
purpose,  and  that  purpose  represented 
by  the  name  of  Christ,  there  is  in 
them  a  more  than  human  power — the 
power  of  an  indwelling  Christ,  wise  to 
guide,  patient  to  endure,  strong  to 
achieve.  I  wish  to  apply  this  principle 
to  three  aspects  of  church  life. 

I.  This  is  the  principle  which 
underlies  and  gives  its  chief  value 
to  ecclesiastical  independency. — We 
stand  as  Congregationalists,  not  for 
the  principle  that  we  will  be  free  to 
do  what  we  please,  not  merely  for  the 
principle  that  no  other  ecclesiastical 
organisation    shall    dominate    us;    we 

438 


The  power  of  combination.  —  The 
chemist  mixes  his  various  elements 
together  in  the  battery,  and  when 
they  are  brought  together,  and  the 
conditions  are  fulfilled,  electricity  is 
there.  He  does  not  summon  electric- 
ity from  some  remote  distance ;  but 
already  dormant  in  those  elements  was 
the  electric  power,  and  when  they  are 
combined,  instantly  the  electric  power 
springs  into  existence.  So  Christ  says, 
*'  In  each  one  of  you  Christians  there 
is  a  dormant  power."  I  am  in  you, 
but  there  is  more  of  Me  in  all  of  you 
together  than  there  is  in  any  one  of 
you  separate  and  individually  ;  and 
when  you  have  combined  around  My 
banner  and  My  name  to  do  My  will, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.   MATTHEW,    chap,  xviii. 


there  springs  into  existence,  not  merely  organisation,  the    spirit   that  inspires 

the  strength  that  comes  from  union,  the  body.     It  becomes  at  once  more 

but  the  Diviner  help  that  comes  from  than  human — it  becomes  Divine — the 

this,  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  that  body  of  Christ. — L.  Abbott j  T).B, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—35. 

Quousque  ? — The  Rabbis  are  said  to  have  taught  men  to  forgive  their  neigh- 
bours three  times,  but  no  more.  Even  this  advice,  however,  they  are  also  said 
to  have  quahfied  so  greatly  as  to  amount,  practically,  to  hardly  recommending 
any  forgiveness  at  all.  Doubtless,  therefore,  in  the  question  he  asks  (ver.  21) 
Peter  thought  himself  to  be  even  conspicuously  nearer  the  spirit  of  Christ.  The 
Saviour's  reply  showed  him  plainly  that  he  was  yet  very  far  off.  Showed  him, 
in  fact,  that  there  was  hardly  any  limit  to  the  question  he  asked  (ver.  22). 
Amongst  many  things  confessedly  difficult;;in  the  parable  which  follows,  there  are 
two  things  bearing  on  this  question  of  forgiveness  which  it  makes  very  plain. 
It  shows,  first,  the  real  character  of  man's  relation  to  God;  and  therefore, 
secondly,  the  real  meaning,  on  man's  part,  of  a  distinct  refusal  to  forgive. 

I.  Man's  relation  to  God. — Generally  speaking,  this  is  that  of  a  debtor  to 
his  creditor.  We  have  not  done  to  God  as  we  ought.  In  this  broad  way  of 
speaking  there  is  "  no  difference  "  between  one  man  and  another.  We  have  "  all 
sinned  and  come  short "  in  this  most  vital  respect  (Rom.  iii.  22,  23).  We  have 
all  unquestionably  withheld  that  from  God  which  is  just  as  unquestionably  His 
legitimate  due.  We  have  done  so,  also,  to  an  extent  which  it  is  quite  impossible 
to  compute.  This  is  signified  by  the  ten  thousand  talents  of  which  the  parable 
speaks.  In  2  Kings  v.  26,  we  see  how  much  Gehazi  thought  of  doing  with  only 
two  "talents  of  silver";  and  may  judge,  therefore,  what  would  have  been  the 
purchasing  power  of  five  thousand  times  as  many  talents ;  and  these,  moreover, 
not  impossibly,  talents  of  "  gold."  It  is  just  one  of  those  sums,  in  short,  which 
is  so  great  that  we  cannot  really  reckon  it  up.  And  yet  it  is  that,  be  it  observed, 
to  which  our  Saviour  Himself  compares  our  "  owings  "  to  God.  It  follows,  next, 
therefore,  that  the  debt  in  question  is  what  we  can  never  discharge.  It  is  true, 
no  doubt,  that  the  servant  here  spoken  of,  when  called  to  account,  and  in 
imminent  danger,  promised  to  discharge,  and  that  in  full,  what  was  owing  by 
him  ;  but  that  we  may,  perhaps,  look  upon  as  being  simpl}^  in  keeping  with  the 
general  unscrupulousness  of  his  character.  And  that  is  certainly  in  keeping 
with  what  we  see  daily  of  the  utterly  unreliable  arithmetical  reckonings  of  most 
persons  in  debt.  Those  who  never  have  saved  as  yet  always  think  that  they  can. 
Those  who  attribute  all  the  evil  of  the  past  to  infirmity,  always  hope  to  be  not 
only  strong,  but  doubly  strong  in  the  future.  What  we  know  of  such  "  hopes" 
is  that  they  are  not  believed  in  by  any  one  else ;  and,  in  fact,  that  the  very 
expression  of  them  only  increases  the  mistrust  of  every  one  else.  Just  so  is  it 
of  all  those  who  think  of  making  up  for  themselves  and  by  their  own  efforts 
what  is  owing  from  them  to  God.  It  only  shows  that  they  have  no  adequate 
conception  either  of  themselves  or  of  it.  And  yet,  for  all  this,  observe,  lastly, 
that  we  are  none  of  us,  at  present,  as  it  were,  paying  the  penalty  of  that  debt. 
God  may,  indeed,  have  begun  to  "  reckon  with  us  "  about  it,  as  was  done  with 
the  man  in  this  story.  He  may  be  causing  us  thereby  to  feel  something  of  its 
weight  and  enormity.  But  He  is  not  as  yet  exacting  from  any  of  us  in  this 
world,  that  heavy  and  terrible  *'  satisfaction  "  for  it,  which  is  required  by  His 
law.  In  this  sense  we  are  all  of  us — even  the  most  unbelieving  among  us — 
*'  forgiven  "  souls /or  the  time,  and  the  sentence  against  us,  if  not  yet  in  all  cases 
reversed,  is  yet,  in  all  cases,  suspended.  So  that  to  every  living  soul  we  may  say 
as  was  said  of  old  in  the  latter  part  of  Job  xi.  6. 

439 


CHAP.  XVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW. 


II.  The  true  meaning,  therefore,  on  man's  part,  of  a  distinct  refusal  to 
forgive. — We  see,  in  the  first  place,  the  intrinsic  iniquity  and  wickedness  of  so 
doing.  For  it  is  exacting  that  from  our  neighbour  which  is  not  being  exacted 
from  us.  It  is  taking  him  "  by  the  throat "  when  we  have  been  allowed  to  go 
free.  It  is  saying  to  him  just  that  which  has  not  been  said  to  ourselves.  And 
using  the  hand,  as  it  were,  which  has  been  released  from  prison  to  close  it  upon 
him.  A  most  outrageous  and  crying  injustice,  if  ever  there  was  one  in  the 
world  !  Also,  it  is  an  injustice  which  is  greatly  aggravated  by  every  difierence 
in  the  two  cases.  What  are  one  hundred  pence  to  ten  thousand  talents  ?  What 
are  my  brother's  few  slqs  against  me  compared  to  my  numberless  sins  against 
God  ?  What  my  rights,  also,  against  him  as  my  fellow-servant  compared  with 
God's  rights  over  me  as  His  creature  1  Even  if  the  cases  had  been  similar,  the  injus- 
tice of  not  doing  as  I  have  been  done  by  would  be  at  once  gross  and  complete.  As 
things  are,  it  is  even  more — it  is  beyond  expression  in  words.  Lastly,  we  are  to 
notice  here  the  exceeding  audacity  of  this  description  of  conduct.  We  are  told 
(ver.  31)  that  when  the  man's  "fellow-servants  saw  what  was  done,  they  were 
exceeding  sorry,  and  came  and  told  unto  their  lord  all  that  was  done."  This  is 
not  an  inapt  description  of  the  real  meaning  of  such  an  action  as  that. 
It  is  doing  that  which  is  sure  to  come  under  the  notice  of  God.  It  is 
an  appeal  to  God,  in  fact,  on  such  an  ofiender's  part,  against  that  offender 
himself.  Other  sins  may  be  described  as  simply  so  many  violations  of  His  law — 
and  they  bad  enough  in  all  conscience.  But  this  is  very  much  more ;  it  is  a 
direct  perversion  of  it,  it  is  an  open  defiance  of  it  as  well.  How  can  God  be 
omniscient  and  not  know  of  such  things  1  How  can  He  be  holy  and  not  abomi- 
nate such  cruelty?     How  can  He  be  just  and  not  punish  such  injustice? 

See,  in  conclusion,  how  the  close  of  this  parable  carries  us  hack.  The  Kabbis 
and  Peter  (ver.  21)  had  treated  forgiveness  as  an  exceptional  thing  ;  a  thing 
to  be  granted,  as  it  were,  under  compulsion,  and  only  so  far.  The  issue  of 
this  teaching  of  Christ  is  on  just  the  opposite  line.  According  to  Him  we  should 
not  be  reluctant  but  glad  to  forgive.  Let  your  forgiveness  be  "  from  the  heart " 
(ver.  35).  This  is  the  true  mark  of  belonging  to  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  3).  Compare  also 
the  saying  about  Archbishop  Cramner  :  *'  Do  my  Lord  of  Canterbury  an  ill-turn, 
and  you  have  made  him  your  friend  for  life."  Also  how  t\iQ  whole  parable  carries 
us  upward.  Why  were  these  other  teachers  so  radically  wrong  as  to  their  duty 
towards  their  neighbour  ?  Because  they  were  wrong  to  an  equal  degree  about 
their  relation  to  God.  This  is  always  true  of  the  unregenerate  heart  (see 
Ps.  ix.  17,  X.  4).  The  opposite  is  the  unfailing  sign  of  the  regenerate  heart 
(Ps.  li.  4 ;  Gen.  xxxix.  9,  perhaps  Ps.  xvi.  8).  How  wise,  therefore,  the  words  of 
the  Saviour  in  John  xvii.  3. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  21-35.  The  duty  of  forgiveness  Our    fellow   servant    needs   what   we 

wrged. — Forgiveness  is  urged: —  sought.     The  unforgiving  is  "wicked," 

I.  By  a  consideration  of  the  great-  evil-disposed.  He  invades  the  right 
ness  of  God's  mercy  to  us. — How  can  of  his  Lord. 

we  behold  the  great  mercy  of  God  to  III.    By    a    consideration    of    the 

us  and  yet  be  unforgiving  to  others  ?  terrible  consequences  of  indulging  an 

II.  By  a  consideration  of  the  little-  unforgiving  spirit. — Lord  not  wroth 
ness  of  our  brother's  sins. — Our  on  account  of  debt.  Punishment  is 
brother's  trespass  was  an  error,  a  greater  than  before  for  sin  is  greater ; 
fault,  a  mishap,  result  of  ignorance  hard,  unforgiving  spirit  is  added  to 
or  inadvertence,  small  in  comparison  debt.  The  ofiender  has  not  caught 
of  our  grave  and  multiplied  offences,  the   spirit   of   his   Lord.     He  says  in 

440 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xvin. 


effect :  The  Lord  was  in  error  in  for- 
giving me;  He  is  excised  from  the 
kingdom  of  God,  for  he  has  not  the 
spirit  of  the  kingdom.  He  only  can 
really  understand  forgiveness  who 
practises  it.  Forgiveness  vain  if  we 
be  not  cleansed  from  all  unrighteous- 
ness.— Anon. 

Ver.  21.  Forgiving  injuries. — 1.  We 
are  always  in  our  heart  to  forgive,  I 
take  it,  though  until  forgiveness  is 
craved,  it  is  neither  wise  nor  necessary 
to  express  it.  2.  When  we  think  of 
injuries,  debts,  offences,  it  is  always  well 
to  recollect  that  self-love  is  very  apt 
to  exaggerate  such  things,  and  that  a 
day  or  two's  calm  reflection  will  often 
convince  us  that  we  have  made  too 
much  ado  about  nothing ;  and  that 
the  sensible  as  well  as  the  right  thing 
to  do  is  to  treat  the  matter  as  if  it 
had  never  happened.  3.  Especially 
is  this  the  case  with  hot  and  un- 
premeditated words,  spoken  when  our 
friend  was  off  his  guard,  or  repeated 
to  us  by  some  one  who  ought  to  have 
known  better.  "  Also  take  no  heed 
to  all  words  that  are  spoken,  lest 
thou  hear  thy  servant  curse  thee." 
4.  Bishop  Butler  has  taught  us  that 
resentment  is  a  moral  faculty  bestowed 
on  the  human  soul  for  its  protection 
and  self-assertion.  Not  all  anger  is 
sinful.  Sometimes  not  to  be  angry 
is  the  basest  and  most  cowardly  of 
sins.  St.  Paul  does  not  tell  us  not 
to  be  angry ;  only  not  to  harbour  and 
cherish  our  resentment.  '*Be  ye 
angry,  and  sin  not.  Let  not  the  sun 
go  down  upon  your  wrath."  Our 
Blessed  Lord,  we  read,  was  sometimes 
angry  ;  and  it  was  a  holy  anger.  The 
Revelation  tells  us  of  *'  the  wrath  of 
the  Lamb."  5.  There  are  offences  and 
offences.  Some,  let  us  confess,  while 
they  ought  always  to  be  forgiven, 
make  the  restoration  of  love  and  the 
rekindling  of  friendship  impossible. 
"  There  is  a  sin  unto  death,"  says 
St.  John ;  and  this  is  true  of  man,  as 
well  as  of  God,  in  the  sense  that  some 
sins,  such  as  repeated  ingratitude, 
constant     deceit,    and     flagrant     dis- 


honesty, make  love,  in  the  fullest 
sense  of  the  word,  not  only  impossible 
but  unjustifiable.  Did  Christ  love 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  not 
only  would  not  enter  the  kingdom  of 
God  themselves,  but  also  prevented 
others  from  entering  in?  Did  He 
love  the  "  fox "  Herod,  or  the  self- 
blinded  Caiaphas  ?  We  need  not 
think  or  try  to  love  better  than  the 
Saviour  loved.  But  this  moral  im- 
possibility of  loving  those  who  have 
proved  themselves  utterly  unworthy 
of  it  must  not,  need  not,  hinder  our 
doing  them  a  kindness  whenever  it  is 
in  our  power  to  do  so,  or  fulfilling  the 
reasonable  claims  of  vicinage,  or 
affinity,  or  relationship.  In  our 
hearts  we  can  wish  them  well ;  before 
God  we  sometimes  remember  them, 
though  we  do  not  tell  them  so. — Bishop 
Thorold. 

Vers.  23-35.  Forgiveness  and  after. — 
Our  Lord  proceeds  to  lay  before  us 
something  like  a  complete  outline  of 
the  moral  politics  of  God's  kingdom. 

I.  The  fundamental  moral  principle 
in  God's  kingdom  is  righteousness. — 
"  A  certain  king  would  take  account 
of  his  servants."  There  are  many 
who  have  failed  to  notice  that  the 
gospel  comes  to  us,  first  of  all,  as  the 
news  of  inquisition  and  of  judgment, 
the  institution  of  a  strict  account 
between  God  and  matn.  The  gospel  is 
popularly  identified  with  pity  and 
compassion,  and  the  eager  welcome 
that  it  gets  from  many  is  due  to  the 
belief  that  it  dispenses  with  the 
reckoning  of  judgment  by  the  message 
of  a  mercy  which  is  so  soft  and  gentle 
that  it  hardly  makes  mention  of  our 
sin.  This  common  notion  is  superficial 
and  mistaken.  God  never  comes  to 
men  with  a  fresh  revelation  without 
awakening  in  their  souls  a  sharper 
sense  of  righteousness  and  sin. 
'^  When  the  Spirit  is  come  He  shall 
convince  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteous- 
ness, and  of  judgment."  A  solemn  sense 
of  God's  awful  righteousness  looking 
with  a  searching  eye  upon  our  sin  is 
needed  as  the  forerunner  of  salvation  ; 

441 


CHAP.  XVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


for  until  we  feel  our  guilt  and  confess  Yers.  23-35.  The  unforgiving  temper. 

the  justice  of  God's  condemnation,  we  — There  is  a  fine  story  illustrative  of 

are  in  no  condition  either  to  desire  or  this   parable,    told    by   Fleury    {Hist. 

to    receive    the    mercy   that    God    is  Eccles.,  v.  2,  p.  334).    It  is  briefly  this: 

willing  to  bestow.     It  is  the  same  all  Between   two   Christians    at    Antioch 

through  the  Christian  life.     From  the  enmity  and  division   had   fallen   out ; 

converted  man  God  demands  not  less,  after  a  while  one  of  them  desired  to  be 

but  more.     No  moment  in  his  life  is  reconciled,  but  the  other,  who  was  a 

free  from  the  burden  of  responsibility.  priest,   refused.       While   it   was   thus 

We   are   always   sowing,    and   behind  with  them,  the  persecution  of  Valerian 

every  seed-time  comes  a  harvest.     This  began ;     and     Sapricius,     the     priest, 

thought    should    give    solemnity    and  having     boldly    confessed     himself     a 

depth  of  tone  to  every  hour  of  life.  Christian,  was  on  the  way  to  death. 

II.  In  God's  kingdom  the  demand  Nicephorus  met  him,  and  again  sued 
for  righteousness  is  accompanied  by  for  peace,  which  was  again  refused, 
the  needful  mercy. — While  the  gospel  While  he  was  seeking,  and  the  other 
demands  that  the  righteousness  of  the  refusing,  they  arrived  at  the  place  of 
law  shall  be  fulfilled  in  us,  it  is  quite  execution.  He  that  should  have  been 
as  essentially  the  message  of  heaven's  the  martyr  was  here  terrified,  offered 
mercy.  The  servant  in  this  parable  is  to  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  and,  despite 
no  sooner  humbled  by  the  demands  of  the  entreaties  of  the  other,  did  so, 
justice  than,  upon  the  confession  of  making  shipwreck  of  his  faith  ;  while 
his  helplessness  and  desire  to  make  Nicephorus,  boldly  confessing,  stepped 
amends,  he  is  abundantly  forgiven.  It  in  his  place,  and  received  the  crown 
is  no  hard  task  for  a  sinful  man  to  which  Sapricius  lost.  This  whole  story 
obtain  forgiveness  from  his  God.  This  runs  finely  parallel  with  our  parable, 
servant's  repentance  was  neither  very  Before  Sapricius  could  have  had  grace 
broad  nor  very  radical.  The  man  was  to  confess  thus  to  Christ,  he  must  have 
by  no  means  a  noble  specimen  of  his  had  his  own  ten  thousand  talents  for- 
race.  There  was  in  him  no  con-  given ;  but,  refusing  to  forgive  a  far 
spicuous  merit  to  make  him  worthy  of  lesser  wrong,  to  put  away  the  dis- 
such  generous  treatment  as  to  have  his  pleasure  he  had  taken  up  on  some 
debt  of  nigh  two  million  pounds  frankly  infinitely  lighter  grounds  against  his 
and  at  once  forgiven.  Therefore  the  brother,  he  forfeited  all  the  advantages 
picture  is  expressly  intended  to  convey  of  his  position,  his  Lord  was  angry, 
the  fact  that  in  the  heart  of  God  took  away  from  his  grace,  and  suffered 
there  is  no  reluctance  to  forgive,  and  him  again  to  fall  under  those  powers 
that  man's  honest  appeal  to  be  for-  of  evil  from  which  he  had  once  been 
given  is  met  by  an  immediate  and  delivered.  It  comes  out,  too,  in  this 
most  generous  response.  story,  that  it  is  not  merely  the  outward 

III.  In  God's  kingdom  man's  in-  wrong  and  outrage  upon  a  brother, 
humanity  stultifies  God's  mercy. —  which  constitutes  a  likeness  to  the 
The  most  serious  block  to  your  salvation  unmerciful  servant,  but  the  unfor- 
may  emerge  after  your  forgiveness  giving  temper,  even  apart  from  all 
rather   than    before    it.       After    you  such. — Archbishop  Trench. 

have  received  forgiveness  you  enter  on 

a    new    probation.       What    are    you  Yer.  28.   The  weakness  and  strength 

going  to  do  with  it  ?     When  you  know  of    example. — Every    moralist     extols 

that  Christ  has  died  for  you,  and  that  the  beauty  and  value  of  good  example. 

God  forgives  you,   what  influence  are  In  an  age  of  abounding  hypocrisy,  it 

these  facts  going  to  have  upon  your  life  ?  would   ill   become    us    to    say    aught 

— that  is  the  question  on  which  your  against  the  habit,  if  it  were  not  that 

ultimate  salvation  hangs. — Alexander  the  language  used  sometimes  runs  into 

Brown.  [perilous  exaggeration.     From  the  im- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xix. 


moderate  eulogy  of  the  good  example, 
you  might  sometimes  infer  that  nothing 
more  was  needed  for  the  awakening 
of  men's  consciences  and  their  guidance 
into  peace  than  the  consistent  lives  of 
some  God-fearing  men.  It  is  bad 
theology.  It  is  flatly  contradicted  by 
human  experience. 

I.  The  impotence  of  example. — Lest 
we  should  over-estimate  the  power  of 
example,  Christ  has  given  us  here  a 
picture  which  illustrates  its  utter  im- 
potence over  some  minds.  Mercy  for 
himself  is  well  enough ;  mercy  from 
himself  is  out  of  the  question.  What 
had  example  done  for  him  1     Nothing. 

II.  Its  causes. — How  is  it  that,  in 
the  frailty  of  our  nature,  example  is 
lost  on  some?  1.  The  example  we 
expected  to  be  so  potent  may  be  taken 
as  a  matter  of  course.  2.  A  high 
example  often  produces  in  the  onlooker 
a  sense  of  annoyance.  3.  We  have  to 
face  to-day  a  strong  conviction  in  many 
minds  that  all  professors  of  religion  are 
more  or  less  i7isincere.  It  is  a  revolting 
proof  of  the  depth  to  which  some 
natures  have  fallen  that  purity,  sin- 
cerity, other-worldliness  are  to  them 
incredible.  4.  We  are  familiar,  too, 
with  another   way  of   regarding  high 


examples;  it  is  the  way  of  regretful 
admiration.  The  observer  finds  such  a 
character  very  noble,  very  impressive ; 
he  does  not  challenge  its  sincerity  or 
detract  from  its  beauty.  But  in  effect 
he  says  "  It  is  above  me,  I  cannot 
reach  such  a  level ;  I  need  not  try." 
But  how  can  we  feel  any  surprise  at 
the  frequent  impotence  of  example  ] 
Lot's  acquaintance  with  Abraham  did 
not  keep  him  from  stupendous  blunders. 
Gehazi's  daily  service  of  Elisha  could 
not  control  his  greed.  The  companion- 
ship of  St.  Paul  did  not  keep  Demas 
faithful.  Nay,  most  striking  warning 
of  all,  from  the  society  of  those  who 
daily  looked  on  the  example  of  Jesus, 
went  the  man  who  for  thirty  pieces  of 
silver  betrayed  Him.  As  it  was  then, 
so  it  is  now  ;  the  very  noblest  example 
will  not  of  itself  quicken  a  single  con- 
science. Example  is  of  value ;  but 
for  its  efficacy  it  depends  upon  an  ex- 
ternal influence — even  the  Holy  Spirit. 
He  who  would  serve  Christ  must 
believe  in  his  own  ministry  and  watch 
his  own  example.  But  he  who  would 
have  hearts  to  be  touched  and  lives  to 
be  changed  must  look  beyond  the  wit- 
ness of  man. — A.  R.  Buckland,  M.A, 


CHAPTEB  XIX. 


CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  He  departed  from  Galilee. — This  marks  a  very  solemn  period  in  our  Lord's  public 
ministry.  It  was  His  farewell  to  Galilee  (Brown).  Came  into  the  coasts  of  Judaea  beyond 
Jordan. — From  the  parallel  passage  in  Mark  (Mark  x,  1)  we  learn  that  this  means  :  Came  into 
Judaea  by  the  trans- Jordanic  route  through  Peraea.  It  does  not  mean  that  any  portion  of 
Judaea  lay  beyond  Jordan  (Carr).  St.  Matthew  here  omits  various  particulars,  of  which 
some  are  to  be  supplied  from  Luke  ix.  51 — xvii.  11 ;  others  from  John — two  visits  to 
Jerusalem  (John  vii.  8-10,  and  x.  22-39)  ;  the  raising  of  Lazarus  (John  xi.  1-46)  ;  the 
retirement  to  Ephraim  (John  xi.  54). 

Ver.  3.  The  Pharisees. — The  article  is  omitted  in  R.V.  Persea  was  removed  from  the 
great  centres  of  Jewish  hierarchism,  but  even  there  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees  was  represented. 
Tempting  him. — To  know  how  entangling  the  question  was  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that 
there  was  a  dispute  at  the  time  between  two  rival  schools  of  Jewish  theology — the  school  of 
Hillel  and  that  of  Shammai — in  regard  to  the  interpretation  of  Deut.  xxiv.  1.  The  one 
school  held  that  divorce  could  be  had  on  the  most  trivial  grounds ;  the  other  restricted  it 
to  cases  of  grievous  sin  (  Gibson). 

Ver.  4.  Answered. — The  answer  Jesus  gives  is  remarkable,  not  only  for  the  wisdom  and 

443 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


courage  with  which  He  met  their  attack,  but  for  the  manner  im  which  He  availed  Himself 
of  the  opportunity  to  set  the  institution  of  marriage  on  its  true  foundation  (ibid.).  Have 
ye  not  read  1  etc. — It  is  noteworthy  that  the  answer  to  the  question  is  found  not  in  the 
words  of  a  code  of  laws,  but  in  the  original  facts  of  creation.  That  represented  the  idea  of 
man  and  woman  as  created  for  a  permanent  relationship  to  each  other,  not  as  left  to  unite 
and  separate  as  appetite  or  caprice  might  prompt  (Pluinptre). 

Ver.  5.  And  said. — Through  Adam  (Gen,  ii.  24).  The  words  "  embody,  not  Adam's 
opinion,  conjecture,  or  imagination,  but  God's  own  marital  law  for  universal  man" 
(Morison). 

Ver.  7.  Why  did  Moses  then  command,  etc.  ? — Our  Lord's  answer  exposes  the  double 
fallacy  lurking  in  the  question,  "  Why  did  Moses  command  ? "  He  did  not  command,  he 
only  suffered  it ;  it  was  not  to  further  divorce  but  to  check  it,  that  he  made  the  regulation 
about  the  "  writing  of  divorcement."  And  then,  not  only  was  it  a  mere  matter  of  sufferance 
— it  was  a  suiferance  granted  "because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts."  Since  things  were 
so  bad  among  your  fathers  in  the  matter  of  marriage,  it  was  better  that  there  should  be  a 
legal  process  than  that  the  poor  wives  should  be  dismissed  without  it  (  Gibson). 

Ver.  10.  It  is  not  good  to  marry. — Nothing  could  prove  more  clearly  the  revolution  in 
thought  brought  to  pass  by  Christ  than  this.  Even  the  disciples  feel  that  such  a  principle 
would  make  the  yoke  of  marriage  unbearable  (Car?'). 

Ver.  11.  All  men  cannot  receive  this  saying.— It  is  as  if  the  Saviour  had  said  :  True,  so  far; 
it  is  expedient  in  some  respects,  and  indeed  in  many,  not  to  marry.  Not  a  few  incon- 
veniences, annoyances,  difficulties,  and  trials  would  thus  be  avoided.  But  then,  that  would 
be  only  one  side  of  the  case.  And  it  is  by  no  means  all  men  who  could  easily,  or  wisely, 
receive  this  saying  as  the  rule  of  their  life,  and  reduce  it  to  practice  (^lorison).  The  saying 
was  that  of  the  disciples  as  virtually  re-iterated,  and  partially  accepted  by  our  Lord  (ibid.). 
They  to  whom  it  is  given.— Who  are  these  ?  the  disciples  would  naturally  ask  ;  and  this  our 
Lord  proceeds  to  tell  them  in  three  particulars  (Brown). 

Ver.  12.  Eunuchs. — See  Dr.  Schaff's  remarks  (p.  448). 

Ver.  13.  Then. — The  concurrence  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  seems  to  show  that  this 
occurrence  is  immediately  connected  in  point  of  time  with  that  narrated  in  the  preceding 
verses.  If  so,  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  action  of  our  Lord,  in  blessing  little  children, 
and  thus  sanctifying  the  marriage-tie  and  its  offspring,  should  have  followed  a  saying  which 
His  disciples  erroneously  understood  as  involving  the  consequence  that  it  is  not  good  to 
marry,  and  in  which  the  perverse  ingenuity  of  a  modern  critic  (see  Strauss'  Life  cf  Jesus, 
§  79)  has  attempted  to  discover  a  trace  of  the  asceticism  of  the  Essenes  (Manuel).  Little 
children  (Traidia). — Not  only  little  boys  and  girls,  but  also  infants  or  babes,  as  is  evident  from 
the  term  ^pe<p7)  of  Luke  xviii.  15  (Schajf).  Put  His  hands  on  them,  and  pray. — It  appears 
that  it  was  customary  for  Jewish  infants  to  be  taken  to  the  synagogue  to  be  blessed  by  the 
Kabbi  (Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  article  "  Synagogue,"  note  E).  Rebuked  them. — As 
also  those  who  brought  them  (Mark  x.  13).  Bengel  supposes  the  greater  part  of  the  disciples 
to  have  been  unmarried. 

Ver.  14.  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — That  is,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  belongs  to  such 
as  these,  is  theirs  as  by  inheritance  (Plumptre). 

.  Ver.  15.  Laid  His  hands  on  them. — No  unmeaning  act,  therefore  infants  are  capable  of 
receiving  a  blessing,  though  not  conscious  of  an  obligation  (Carr). 

Ver.  16.  Good  Master. — The  better  MSS.  omit  the  adjective,  and  it  has  probably  been 
added  here  by  later  copyists  to  bring  the  passage  into  a  verbal  agreement  with  the  narrative 
of  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke.  From  the  prominence  given  to  it  in  the  form  of  our  Lord's 
answer,  as  reported  by  them,  we  may  reasonably  believe  that  it  was  actually  uttered  by  the 
questioner  (PliLinptre). 

Ver.  17.  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ? — Here  again  the  older  MSS.  give  a  different  form  to 
our  Lord's  answer  (See  K.V.).  Keep  the  commandments. — The  questioner  is  answered  as 
from  his  own  point  of  view.  If  eternal  life  was  to  be  won  by  doing,  there  was  no  need  to 
come  to  a  new  Teacher  for  a  new  precept  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  20.  From  my  youth  up.— Omitted  in  R.V.,  as  in  oldest  MSS.,  but  not  in  the  parallel 
passages. 

Ver.  21.  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect. — If  thou  wishest  to  be  characterised  by  full-orbed 
"goodness  "  (Morison). 

Ver.  23.  Hardly.— 7.e.,  with  difficulty  (see  E.V.). 

Ver.  24.  It  is  easier  for  a  camel,  etc. — It  has  been  suggested  that  the  needle's  eye  was  an 
expression  in  common  use  for  a  narrow  gate  into  a  city  intended  for  foot-passengers  only, 
and  through  which,  if  a  camel  could  squeeze  at  all,  it  would  first  need  to  be  unladen  and 
entirely  stripped  of  trappings  and  encumbrances.  Very  possibly  this  explanation  may  be 
right,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  scrutinise  closely  what  is  so  obviously  the  language  of 
hyperbole.  The  object  is  to  stamp  on  the  mind  and  memory  the  idea  of  extreme  difficulty, 
and  it  has  been  shown  by  Dr.  John  Lightfoot  that  a  Talmudist  used  for  the  same  purpose 

444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xix. 


a  phrase  still  more  hyperbolical :  "  an  elephant  going  through  the  eye  of  a  needle " 
{Eraser). 

Ver.  25.  Wlio  then  can  be  saved  ? — Since  everyone  has  more  or  less  of  the  same  love  of 
the  world  {De  Wette).  The  question  shows  that  the  disciples  took  their  Master  to  be 
referring  not  to  men  of  great  wealth  alone,  but  to  a  much  larger  class  {Canon  BuchwortK). 

Ver.  27.  What  shall  we  have  therefore  1 — There  is  something  in  Peter's  question  that 
abundantly  betrays  his  spiritual  imperfection.  There  was  too  great  eagerness  for  reward. 
Arnot  somewhat  plainly  says,  "  His  eye  was  on  the  main  chance."  But  still  there  was 
transparency  of  character  and  ingenuousness  manifested  by  the  question  which  he  put. 
And  then,  too,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  regard  to  reward  is  right  in  its  own  place  ; 
although,  assuredly,  its  place  ever  has  been,  and  must  for  ever  be,  as  it  deserves  to  be,  in  a 
very  subordinate  sphere  of  moral  motives  {Morison).  The  answer  of  Christ  shows  that  all 
true  sacrifice  shall  have  its  reward,  but  all  that  looks  like  sacrifice  is  not  really  such; 
therefore  "many  that  are  first  shall  be  last."  Among  the  Twelve  there  was  a  Judas 
(  Carr). 

Ver.  28.  The  regeneration.-^"  The  renewal  of  things,"  "  the  return  to  a  perfect  state," 
otherwise  called  "  the  restitution  of  all  things,"  nearly  =  the  kingdom  of  God  (cf.  xvii.  11) 
{Carr).  There  is  to  be  a  "  new  birth  "  for  mankind  as  well  as  for  the  individual  {Plumptre). 
Ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones. — What  approximations  to  a  literal  fulfilment  there 
may  be  in  the  far-off  future  lies  behind  the  veil  {ibid.).  In  at  least  one  instance  the  words, 
absolute  as  they  were  in  their  form,  failed  of  their  fulfilment.  The  guilt  of  Judas  left  one 
of  the  thrones  vacant.  The  promise  was  given  subject  to  the  implied  conditions  of 
faithfulness  and  endurance  lasting  even  to  the  end  {ibid.). 

Ver.  30.  Many  that  are  first,  etc. — See  on  ver.  27. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  \— 12, 

The  law  of  marriage. — The  Saviour  has  left  Galilee,  and  is  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Jordan,  preparatory  to  crossing  to  Jericho  and  going  up  to  Jerusalem 
(ver.  1.  XX.  17).  Those  who  are  in  need  of  Him  find  Him  out  there  in  great 
multitudes ;  and  find  Him  also  to  be  all  that  He  had  ever  been,  both  in  word 
and  in  deed  (ver.  2,  Mark  x.  i).  Those  who  are  opposed  to  Him  find  Him  out 
too  (ver.  3).  They  come  to  Him  with  an  insidious  question  on  the  subject  of 
divorce.  In  what  cases  did  He  hold  it  "lawful"  for  a  man  to  "  put  away  his 
wife  ?  "  In  their  own  teaching  there  were  many  '*  causes  "  which  were  held  to 
justify  a  man  in  so  doing.  What  did  He  say  on  the  matter  ?  In  reply  to  this 
question  the  Saviour  first  lays  down  an  absolute  rule ;  then  qualifies  it  by  a 
certain  necessary  exception ;  and  finally  fortifies  it  by  a  further  word  of 
considerate  caution. 

I.  An  absolute  rule. — A  rule  which  is  absolute,  first,  in  regard  to  its  authority. 
It  is  so,  on  the  one  hand,  on  the  question  of  time.  It  goes  back  at  once  to  "  the 
beginning  "  of  all  (ver.  4).  Let  that  be  which  has  always  been.  This  is  what 
it  first  says.  It  is  so,  on  the  other  hand,  on  the  question  of  source.  There  can 
be  no  greater  authority  on  this  subject  than  the  authority  of  the  Creator 
(ver.  4).  Only  He  who  made  man  can  know  fully  what  man  is.  Only  He, 
therefore,  can  either  rightly  or  wisely  decide  ultimately  what  man  ought  to  do. 
Not  less  absolute  is  this  rule,  in  the  second  place,  in  regard  to  its  nature.  Its 
nature,  on  the  one  hand,  in  recognising  so  clearly  in  the  marriage  relation  the 
idea  of  "  duality,"  and  of  duality  only,  of  nothing  beyond.  That  original  and 
first  marriage  to  which  the  rule  in  question  refers  us,  being  one  which  was  both 
brought  about  and  expressly  sanctioned  by  God  Himself,  is  therefore  a 
"  pattern "  instance  to  all.  That  same  instance,  however,  as  is  so  expressly 
taught  us,  was  one  of  this  kind — a  dual  instance — a  case  of  "  male  and  female  " 
— one  of  "man  and  wife" — one  of  nothing  beyond.  Its  nature,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  recognising  just  as  clearly  the  idea  of  "  unity"  also.  These  "two"  in 
one  sense — so  it  was  also  declared  by  that  original  and  authoritative  instance — 
were  to  be  "  one  "  in  another.  "  One "  so  intimately  that  in  this  respect  no 
other  human  relation  was  to  be  put  in  comparison  with  it  (ver.  5).      One  so 

445 


CHAP.  XIX.    HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


intimately,  also,  that  these  *'  two,"  in  a  certain  sense,  ceased  to  be  "  two  "  any- 
more (ver.  6).  That,  in  short,  is  the  primary  idea — that  is  Grod's  conception — 
of  marriage.  The  rule  to  be  observed  is  to  keep  strictly  to  that  conception  in 
practice — a  rule  which,  of  course,  precludes  the  idea  of  setting  that  bond  on  one 
side  (end  of  ver.  6). 

II.  A  necessary  exception. — This  exception  is  brought  out,  in  part,  by  a  further 
question  on  the  part  of  the  adversaries  of  the  Saviour.  Unable  to  dispute  the 
answer  He  has  given  in  a  general  way,  they  are  yet  not  satisfied  with  it  in  full. 
It  leaves  untouched,  they  think,  what  Moses  has  said  in  another  part  of  his 
writings ;  as,  for  example,  where  he  implies,  that  there  are  cases  in  which  men 
might  be  allowed  to  "  put  away  "  their  wives,  by  stipulating,  if  they  do  so,  that 
the  dissolution  of  the  marriage  should  take  place  in  as  formal  and  open  and 
valid  a  manner  as  the  original  contract  did  at  the  first  (ver.  7).  What 
did  He  say  about  this?  Did  He  allow  at  all — and,  if  so,  in  what  cases  did 
He  allow — of  such  exceptions  1  Our  Saviour's  answer  is  twofold.  First,  He 
shows  that  their  inference  from  Moses  was  not  correct  as  it  stood.  The 
stipulation  he  insisted  on  did  not  prove  that  the  exceptions  it  pointed  to  were 
lawful  in  His  judgment.  All  it  showed  was  that  they  could  not  be  avoided  in 
the  circumstances  of  the  case.  Not  even  Moses  could  always  do  all  that  should 
be  done  with  the  materials  at  his  disposal.  With  such  blinded  minds  and 
perverse  wills  and  hardened  hearts  as  he  had  to  deal  with,  he  could  sometimes 
only  seek  so  to  regulate  an  evil  as  to  keep  it  within  bounds.  But  this  was  no 
proof  that  he  looked  on  it  as  being  a  good.  To  regulate  that  which  for  the  time 
being  could  not  be  removed,  was  not  to  wish  it  to  remain.  To  supply  a  man 
with  crutches  when  he  is  lame  is  not  to  say  that  lameness  is  a  good  thing  in 
itself.  Neither  was  it  difiicult,  in  the  next  place,  to  see,  even  so,  where  the  only 
exception  should  be.  The  essence  of  marriage  was  in  being  "  one  flesh."  There 
were  casey — only  too  common  cases — where  this  essence  had  gone.  The  marriage 
contract,  in  all  such  cases,  had  been  already  broken  de  facto.  In  such  cases  to 
declare  it  also  broken  dejure,  and  to  treat  it  as  such  by  granting  a  divorce  was 
not  out  of  keeping  with  the  original  institution  and  purport  of  marriage ;  and, 
therefore,  might  be  allowed  (ver.  9).  That  very  statement,  however,  seems  to 
shut  out  all  other  "  causes  "  besides. 

III.  A  faithful  caution. — On  hearing  this  the  disciples  say  to  the  Saviour  as 
related  in  ver.  10.  The  spirit  of  His  answer  to  them  may  be  given  in  very  few 
words.  In  certain  exceptional  cases  and  times  it  might  be  as  they  said  (see 
1  Cor.  vii.  26).  It  might  be  better,  in  such  circumstances,  not  to  enter  at  all 
into  the  marriage  relation  ;  on  that  point,  to  a  great  extent,  men  must  judge  for 
themselves.  If  they  felt  they  could  do  so,  let  them  do  so.  It  would  not  be 
displeasing  to  God.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  no  doubt  that  this  view  of 
that  relation  might  cause  it,  in  some  cases,  to  become  a  very  considerable  burden 
and  trial  to  those  who  had  entered  upon  it.  In  no  case,  however,  but  that 
mentioned,  were  they  to  regard  this  as  a  sufiicient  reason  for  attempting  to 
dissolve  it.  For  such  a  remedy  would  involve  more  evils  than  those  it  attempted 
to  cure.  If  He  has  allowed  such  troubles  to  come  upon  us  in  that  connection 
(Rom.  viii.  28)  He  will  help  us  to  bear  them.  He  will  even  cause  them,  if  we 
look  to  Him  for  it,  to  work  for  our  good  (Kom.  viii.  28).  Anything  is  better 
than  unlawfully  seeking  to  set  asunder  what  God  hath  once  joined. 

From  all  this  we  may  see,  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  How  holy  a  thing  marriage  is. — Of  few  other  human  relations  can  we  say 
as  of  this,  that  it  was  "  instituted  of  God."  It  is  not  be  terminated,  it  is  not  to 
be  entered  into,  apart  from  God's  will. 

2.  How  naturally,  there/ore,  it  leads  our  thoughts  on  to  what  is  holier  still 
(Eph.  V.  23,  etc.). 

446 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xix. 


3.  How  well  we  may  rejoice,  therefore,  to  find  it  spoken  of  here  as  that  which 
must  not  he  dissolved. — How  glorious  to  think  that  in  this  also  it  sets  forth  the 
union  of  Christ  and  His  church  !  If  the  less  sacred  much  more  the  more  so — if 
the  earthly  much  more  the  heavenly— if  the  type  much  more  the  antitype — is 
something  which,  once  entered  in,  is  not  to  be  lightly  dissolved ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Yers.  3-6.  Divorce, — Christ  proves 
by  divers  arguments  that  for  every 
cause  a  divorce  is  not  lawful. 

I.  From  the  authority  of  the  In- 
stitutor  of  marriage,  viz.  God. 

II.  From  the  antiquity  of  the  in- 
stitution of  marriage. — "From  the 
beginning." 

III.  From  the  manner  of  the  con- 
junction and  union  (ver.  5). 

IV.  From  the  excellency  of  the 
conjugal  bond  and  tie. — "A  man 
shall  leave  father  and  mother,"  etc. 
— Richard   Ward. 

Ver.  6.  A  happy  marriage. — Rev. 
Robert  Newton,  the  Wesleyan  pulpit 
orator,  and  his  bride,  began  their  married 
life  by  retiring  twice  each  day  to  pray 
with  and  for  each  other.  This  practice 
they  kept  up,  when  opportunity  served, 
to  the  end  of  life.  When  an  old  man 
Mr.  Newton  remarked,  "  In  the  course 
of  a  short  time  my  wife  and  I  shall 
celebrate  the  jubilee  of  our  marriage ; 
and  I  know  not  that,  during  the  fifty 
years  of  our  union,  an  unkind  look  or 
an  unkind  word  has  ever  passed  between 
us." 

Vers.  3-9.  Marriage  and  divorce 
among  the  Jews. — Their  highest  stand- 
ard [was]  represented  in  this  case  by 
the  school  of  Shammai,  while  that  of 
Hillel,  and  still  more  Rabbi  Akiba, 
presented  the  lowest  opposite  extreme. 
But  in  reply  to  the  Pharisees  our  Lord 
placed  the  whole  question  on  grounds 
which  even  the  strictest  Shammaite 
would  have  refused  to  adopt.  For  the 
farthest  limit  to  which  he  would  have 
gone  would  have  been  to  restrict  thq 
cause  of  divorce  to  "  a  matter  of  un- 
cleanness"  (Deut.  xxiv.  1),  by  which 
he  would  probably  have  understood 
not   only   a   breach   of    the   marriage 


vow,  but  of  the  laws  and  customs  of 
the  land.  In  fact,  we  know  that  it 
included  every  kind  of  impropriety, 
such  as  going  about  with  loose  hair, 
spinning  in  the  street,  familiarly 
talking  with  men,  ill-treating  her 
husband's  parents  in  his  presence, 
brawling,  that  is  "  speaking  to  her 
husband  so  loudly  that  the  neigh- 
bours could  hear  her  in  the  adjoining 
house  "  (Chetub.,  vii.  6),  a  general  bad 
reputation,  or  the  discovery  of  fraud 
before  marriage.  On  the  other  hand 
the  wife  could  insist  on  being  divorced 
if  her  husband  were  a  leper  or  afiected 
with  polypus  or  engaged  in  a  disagree- 
able or  dirty  trade,  such  as  that  of  a 
tanner  or  coppersmith.  One  of  the 
cases  in  which  divorce  was  obligatory 
was  if  either  party  had  become  here- 
tical, or  ceased  to  profess  Judaism. 
But  even  so,  there  were  at  least  checks 
to  the  danger  of  general  lawlessness, 
such  as  the  obligation  of  paying  to  a 
wife  her  portion,  and  a  number  of 
minute  ordinances  about  formal  letters 
of  divorce,  without  which  no  divorce 
was  legal,  and  which  had  to  be  couched 
in  explicit  terms,  handed  to  the  woman 
herself,  and  that  in  presence  of  two 
witnesses,  etc. — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Facilities  of  divorce  among  the  Jews. 
— The  facility  of  divorce  among  the 
Jews  had  become  so  great  a  scandal, 
even  among  their  heathen  neighbours, 
that  the  Rabbis  were  fain  to  boast  of 
it  as  a  privilege  granted  to  Israel,  but 
not  to  other  nations. — C.  Geikie,  D.D. 

Vers.  4-6.  Christianity  superior  to 
other  systems. — It  ought  to  increase 
our  esteem  for  Christianity  that  it 
takes  such  a  particular  care,  above 
all  other  religions  in  the  world,  of 
regulating  that  brutish  passion  of  lust, 

447 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST,  MATTHEW. 


and  for  the  procreation  of  children  in  Ver.  10.  Is  it  good  to  marry  ? — The 

a  way  so  sacred,  by  making  the  Chris-  disciples  think  this  doctrine  hard,  for 

tian  marriage  a  covenant  of  pei'petual  in  case  divorcement  were  not  lawful, 

chastity  and  friendship.     It  is  plain  to  they  say  it  were  better  not  to  marry 

any  wise,  considering  man  how  much  than  to  be  straitly  bound  in  marriage, 

the  Christian  religion,  in  this  respect,  In  whom  we  see  :    1.    How  impatient 

is  preferable  both  to  Paganism,   Ma-  our  nature  is  of  all  restraint,  and  ho-^ 

hometanism,    and   Judaism.      As    for  much  we  love  to  be  at  liberty,  even 

Paganism,  the  generality  of  those  of  from  the  bands  of  God.      2.    Sudden 

that   religion   were   so  far  from   con-  resolutions  and   sentences  are  readily 

triving  anything  on  this  subject  that  full   of   folly ;    for  here   the   disciples 

was  wise  or  useful  to  mankind,  that  neither  do  look  unto  their  own  strength, 

their  religion  abounds  with  fables  of  or  rather  inability,  to  live  in  a  single 

the  whoredoms  and  adulteries  of  their  life,  nor  do  they  consider  the  incom- 

very  gods ;  and  by  their  example  they  modities  of  an  unmarried  life,  nor  the 

encouraged  themselves  in  all  manner  commodities  of  marriage,  where  God 

of   lewdness,  not   excepting  the   most  giveth  a  blessing. — David  Dickson. 
unnatural  mixtures,  such  as  tho  very 

brute  creatures  abhor.      Some  of  the  Milton  on  divorce. — It  is  instructive 

learned    Greek    philosophers    were   so  to  remember  that  one  of  the  greatest 

brutal  in  their  notions  of  these  things  of  English  writers  has  taken  the  same 

that  they  recommended  a  promiscuous  line   of   thought  in  dealing  with  the 

use  of  the  female  sex  and  gave  loose  question.     Milton's  Doctrine  and  Dis- 

reins  to  men's  lusts  ;  so  that  of  a  whole  cipline  of  Divorce,  and  the  treatises  that 

country  they  made  a  general  house  of  followed  it,  are  but  an  elaborate  and 

debauchery,  by  this  means  not   only  eloquent   expression  of   the   words   of 

corrupting  the  minds  and  manners  of  the  disciples,  "  If  the  case  of  the  man 

men,  but  hindering  both  the  procrea-  be  so  with  his  wife  it  is  not  good  to 

tion  and  good  education  of   children.  marry." — E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D. 
Indeed,  they  had  so  little  love  to  their 

children  that  it  was  a  common  thing  Ver.  12.  Eunuchism. — As  I  under- 
most unnaturally  to  expose  them  to  stand  the  mysterious  passage  the 
perish.  The  Jewish  religion,  it  is  true.  Saviour  distinguishes  three  kinds  of 
rectified  a  great  many  of  those  abuses,  eunuchism:  1.  Congenital,  which  im- 
yet  gave  great  indulgences  to  the  plies  neither  merit  nor  guilt.  ^.Forced, 
irregular  appetites  of  mankind ;  for  which  implies  misfortune  on  the  one 
it  allowed  them,  because  of  the  hard-  hand  and  guilt  on  the  other.  3.  Volun- 
ness  of  their  hearts,  both  a  plurality  tary,  which  has  moral  value  and  merit 
of  wives  at  one  time,  and  the  power  if  it  proceeds  from  faith  and  love  to 
of  putting  away  their  wives  by  a  bill  Christ,  but  no  merit  superior  to  chastity 
of  divorce  for  every  trivial  cause,  and  in  the  married  state.  The  first  and 
so  does  Mahometanism  at  this  day.  third  are  only  improperly  called  eunuch- 
But  the  Christian  religion  goes  to  the  ism.  To  speak  more  fully,  the  first 
root  of  all  these  evils  and  digs  them  class  of  eunuchs  embraces  the  com- 
up.  It  forbids  wandering  lust  in  the  paratively  small  number  of  those  who 
very  heart  and  thoughts,  so  far  is  it  are  constitutionally  either  incapable 
from  approving  the  practice  of  it.  It  of,  or  averse  to,  marriage ;  the  second 
sets  up  a  sacred,  lasting  friendship  class,  the  eunuchs  proper,  or  mutilated 
between  man  and  wife,  as  much  more  persons,  who  at  that  time  were  quite 
becoming  the  higher  degree  of  Christian  numerous,  especially  at  courts,  and 
holiness,  and  forbids  the  dissolution  of  are  still  found  in  eastern  countries, 
marriage  by  anything  else  but  in-  among  heathens  and  Mohammedans 
fidelity  to  the  marriage  covenant. —  (yea,  even  in  the  choir  of  the  papal 
Jas.  Blair,  31. A.  Sixtine  chapel  in  Rome,  the  famous 

448 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  XIX. 


Miserere  being  sung  by  the  clear,  pious  laymen,  sisters  of  charity,  virgins 
silver  voices  of  these  unfortunate  and  widows  in  all  ages  and  among 
victims  of  sacred  art)  -,  the  third  class,  Protestants  as  well  as  Catholics.  The 
those  who  deliberately  abstain  from  great  and  serious  error  of  the  Komish 
marriage  either  altogether  or  from  Church  consists  in  making  a  law  for 
second  marriage  after  the  death  of  the  whole  clergy  of  what  the  Saviour 
their  first  husband  or  wife,  not,  left  to  free  choice  on  the  basis  of  a 
however,  for  the  purpose  of  thereby  special  calling  and  gift  of  God  (ver.  11), 
gaining  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  and  in  attaching  a  superior  merit  to 
for  the  purpose  of  working  for  the  celibacy  at  the  expense  of  the  holy  and 
kingdom  of  heaven  from  pure  and  normal  state  of  marriage.  From  a 
disinterested  love  to  Christ,  believing  grossly  literal  misunderstanding  of 
that  they  can  serve  Him  more  un-  ver.  12,  Origen,  in  the  youthful  ardour 
reservedly  and  effectually  in  the  single  of  enthusiasm  for  Christ,  and  mis- 
state, or  remain  more  steadfast  in  guided  by  the  ascetic  notions  of  his 
times  of  pecuHar  trial  and  persecution  age,  committed  the  unnatural  deed 
(1  Cor.  vii.  26).  To  this  class  belong  which  forever  disqualified  him  for 
St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  vii.  7,  26),  Barnabas  marriage.  But  this  was  justly  con- 
(1  Cor.  ix.  5,  6),  probably  also  St.  John  demned  in  the  ancient  church,  and 
(who  in  the  Greek  Church  bears  the  was  made  subsequently  a  reason  for 
standing  title,  6  TrapBevo's,  with  reference  his  excommunication  from  the  church 
to  his  virgin  purity),  and  thousands  of  of  Alexandria. — P.  Schaff,  D.D. 
missionaries,    divines,     ministers    and 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—15. 

The  rights  of  infants. — We  are  not  told  why  the  disciples  tried  to  prevent  these 
little  ones  from  being  brought  to  the  Saviour ;  but  we  have  reason  to  believe  that 
there  were  not  a  few  others  who  shared  in  their  views.  It  is  certainly  singular 
that  this  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  we  read  of  any  marked  attempt  of  the 
kind,  and  that  this  occurred  so  late  in  the  coiu-se  of  His  ministry  and  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Jordan.  Nor  does  it  seem  easy  to  point  to  any  other  great 
teacher  of  men  who  showed  himself  so  specially  ready  as  the  Saviour  did  here  to 
teach  and  welcome  the  young.  How  this  came  to  be  so,  therefore,  in  His  case,  is 
a  very  natural  point  of  inquiry.  How  came  He  to  be  so  seriously  angry,  as  it 
is  evident  that  He  was,  with  those  who  would  have  kept  these  children  away? 
(Mark  x.  14).  Partly,  we  think,  because  of  that  which  is  usually  true  of  little 
children  themselves,  and  partly  because  of  that  which  is  always  true  of  the  Saviour 
Himself 

I.  About  little  children. — There  is  that,  first,  in  their  nature  which  makes 
them  suitable  for  being  brought  to  the  Saviour.  Far  from  being  unfit  for  this, 
as  the  disciples  seem  to  have  considered,  there  are  no  others  so  fit,  as  a  matter  of 
fact.  "  Of  such  " — of  such  primarily — of  such-like  exclusively — "  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven"  (see  Mark  x.  15).  This  is  true,  on  the  one  hand,  with  regard  to  the 
docility  of  their  nature.  Older  persons  too  often  think  that  they  know  ;  and  so 
are  unwilling  to  learn.  The  only  thing  little  children  do  know  is,  that  they 
require  to  be  taught.  True,  also,  in  regard  to  the  general  trustfulness  of  their 
nature.  They  have  not  yet  learned  to  believe  only  the  half  of  what  is  told  them. 
True,  once  more,  in  regard  to  the  comparative  innocence  of  their  age.  In  many 
things  they  are  not  as  yet  committed  to  wrong  ;  not  "  accustomed  "  yet  "  to  do 
evil."  All  these  things  make  it  a  comparatively  hopeful  enterprise  to  bring 
infants  to  the  Saviour.  How  few  there  are  of  them  who  do  not  smile  upon  those 
whom  they  find  smiling  upon  them  !  How  likely  they  are,  therefore,  to  be  at 
least  "  responsive "  to  the  love  of  the  Saviour  Himself.     41so,  it  may  be,  there 

G  G  449 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


was  that  in  their  age  itself  which  drew  the  Saviour  to  these.  When  you  have 
really  gained  a  babe,  you  may  hope  that  you  have  done  so  for  the  rest  of  its  life. 
That  you  have  "  prevented  "  both  evil  and  its  consequences,  therefore,  in  such  a 
case,  in  an  almost  incalculable  degree ;  and  have  shut  the  door  against  innumer- 
able heart-aches  and  reproaches  and  pangs  and  approaches,  at  least,  to  despair. 
And  you  may  also  hope,  therefore,  that  you  have  set  up  an  influence  for  good 
which  shall  do  the  same,  during  its  course,  for  many  others  beside.  A  saved 
infaut,  in  short,  may  mean  a  saved  nation ;  a  rescued  germ,  a  whole  succession  of 
harvests,  in  process  of  time.  Well,  therefore,  may  we  understand  the  Saviour 
wishing  to  have  such  at  His  feet.  Nothing  more  hopeful,  nothing  more  probably 
helpful,  could  there  very  well  be  ! 

II.  About  the  Saviour  Himself. — The  considerations  we  have  named  have  had 
to  do  principally  with  the  work  of  the  Saviour.  Humanly  speaking,  little 
children  are  the  most  likely  to  be  gained  ;  and  the  most  likely,  also,  when  so 
gained,  to  lead  to  other  gains  too.  But  even  apart  from  this,  there  would  be 
that  in  Himself,  we  think,  which  would  make  Him  yearn  over  them  much.  His 
native  holiiiess,  for  example,  would  make  their  comparative  innocence  especially 
attractive  in  His  eyes.  How  charming  to  all  of  us  is  the  absolute  ignorance  of 
the  little  ones  about  certain  descriptions  of  evil  !  How  delightful  to  see  things 
which  tempt  more  developed  natures  to  what  is  vile  and  unworthy  passing  over 
their  baby  natures  without  a  suggestion  of  wrong  !  And  how  especially  delight- 
ful, therefore,  to  Him  as  the  Holy  One  of  God  would  be  this  sweet  incapacity  on 
their  part  even  for  thinldng  amiss  in  this  way  !  In  their  childish  company  He 
would  be  away  from  much  from  which  He  was  never  far  away  among  men.  So, 
on  the  other  hand,  would  it  be  in  connection  with  the  overflowing  compassion  of 
His  nature.  How  touching  a  sight  to  all  pitying  eyes  is  the  comparative  help- 
lessness of  the  little  ones  !  How  urgent  an  appeal  to  all  feeling  hearts  is  their 
cry  for  assistance  !  The  very  anger  it  sometimes  arouses  is  itself  a  testimony  to 
its  potency.  How  deeply  would  it  tell,  therefore,  though  in  an  opposite  direction, 
on  the  blessed  Saviour  Himself.  Amongst  the  many  famishing  ones  around  Him 
on  one  memorable  occasion,  He  specially  remembered  those  wKo  were  probably 
most  weary  as  having  come  "  from  afar "  (Mark  viii.  3).  Amongst  the  many 
weak  ones  at  the  Pool  of  Bethesda,  He  selected  one  who  appears  to  have  suffered 
most  and  longest  of  all  (John  v.  5-7).  How  would  He  be  drawn,  therefore,  on 
similar  grounds  to  the  case  of  these  babes.  And  how  His  every  word,  therefore, 
as  well  as  every  action  recorded,  showed  the  tenderness  of  His  love  in  this  case  ! 
(Mark  X.  16). 

Let  us  take  care,  therefore,  if  we  would  be  His  disciples  indeed,  that 
there  is  a  like  tenderness  in  ourselves.  Let  us  love  the  little  ones  both  for 
their  own  sake  and  for  that  of  the  church.  Let  us  love  them  for  His  sake  as 
well  as  their  own.  It  is  one  of  the  marks  of  the  true  gospel  that  it  is  preached 
to  the  poor  (xi.  5;  Luke  iv.  18).  It  is  another  mark  that  it  has  a  special 
welcome  for  the  lambs  of  the  flock  (Isa.  xl.  11 ;  Matt.  xx.  15,  16).  Happy  those 
on  whose  hearts  this  double  attestation  is  found  ! 

HOMILIES   OJSr  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  13-15.  Christ  blessing  the  chil-  Love    of  children. — I   am    fond    of 

dren. — A  picture  : —  children.      I   thiilk   them   the   poetry 

I.  Of  Godly  parents.  of  the  world,  the  fresh  flowers  of  our 

II.  Of  narrow  religionists.      ,  hearths   and    homes,    little    conjurers 

III.  Of  a  loving  Christ.  with  their  natural  magic,  evoking  by 

IV.  Of     a    beautiful    heaven. — D.  their  spells  what  delights  and  enriches 
Thomas^  D.D.  all  ranks. — Thomas  Binney^  D.D^ 

450 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xix. 


Ver.  13.  The  relation  of  children  to 
the  history  of  Jesus  Christ. — 1.  There 
were  children  in  the  time  of  Christ. 

2.  These  children  heard  and  saw  Ohiist. 

3.  Children  were  the  objects  of  His 
merciful  and  miraculous  interposition. 

4.  Children  were  the  objects  of  His 
sincere  affection.  5.  The  Saviour  em- 
ployed children  to  illustrate  great 
principles.  6.  Christ  uttered  concern- 
ing children  great  and  important  truths. 
— /.  Viney. 

Ver.  14.  The  children's  Christ. — 
Jean  Paul  Kichter  is  said  to  have 
summed  up  his  creed  in  the  words  :  "  I 
love  God  and  every  little  child."  Such 
words  are  but  a  faint  echo  of  a  greater 
than  E/ichter,  who  said  :  "  Suffer  little 
children,"  etc.  Christ  threw  a  glorious 
halo  around  the  head  of  childhood,  and 
threw  wide  open  to  them  the  gates  of 
His  kingdom.  There  is  no  incident 
in  the  life  of  Christ  so  tender  and 
beautiful  as  that  of  blessing  the  chil- 
dren on  His  last  journey. 

I.  Christ's  conception  of  the  capacity 
of  children  for  religion. — His  words 
are  as  wonderful  as  the  act  was 
beautiful.  He  declares  that  instead 
of  these  being  shut  out,  the  very  king- 
dom is  made  up  only  of  such.  And  if 
grown-up  pieople  enter,  it  is  only  by 
being  converted ,  and  made  again  as 
little  children.  All  children  are  born 
in  the  kingdom.  By  a  strange  per- 
versity we  have  been  taught  the 
reverse :  that  all  children  were  the 
children  of  wrath  and  corruption  until 
the  saving  grace  of  God  made  them  of 
the  household  of  faith.  Original  sin 
has  loomed  so  largely,  that  original 
grace  has  been  quite  forgotten.  Yet 
we  are  plainly  told  that  ''as  by  the 
offence  of  one  judgment  came  upon 
all  men  to  condemnation  ;  even  so  by 
the  righteousness  of  One  the  free  gift 
came  upon  all  men  unto  justification 
of  life"  (Rom.  v.  18).  And  because 
of  Christ's  atonement,  no  child  is  ever 
born  a  child  of  the  devil.  The  taint 
of  sin  has  entered  our  soul,  and  we 
inherit  terrible  tendencies  and  possi- 
bilities  of   evil.      But   there    is    also 


given  a  measure  of  the  Spirit  to  every 
man  born  into  the  world,  and  all  are 
born  under  the  covenant  of  reconcilia- 
tion and  grace.  Some  will  ask,  where 
then  comes  the  need  of  conversion] 
In  children  conversion  is  the  voluntary 
acceptance  of  the  relationship  into 
which  the  death  of  Christ  has  placed 
them.  There  is  no  condemnation 
where  there  is  no  power  of  choice.  Sin 
is  in  the  will.  And  there  comes  a 
time  when  the  will  must  assert  itself — 
on  one  side  or  the  other.  Then  the 
choice  is  made ;  and  when  made  for 
righteousness  the  child  puts  its  name 
to  the  covenant  in  Christ  Jesus.  There 
may  or  may  not  be  excitement.  The 
great  point  is  the  surrender  of  the 
will  to  Christ.  Convulsion  is  no  neces- 
sary part  of  conversion. 

II.  Their  place  in  the  church. — 
Christ's  rebuke  in  the  temple  declares 
their  right  to  a  place  in  His  church. 
If  His  kingdom  is  "  of  such,"  surely 
they  cannot  be  shut  out  of  the  privi- 
leges of  His  church.  And  I  take  it 
they  have  a  place  all  their  own,  both 
in  its  worship  and  its  service.  Having 
underestimated  their  capacity,  it  was 
only  to  be  expected  their  claims  would 
be  overlooked.  A  Httle  while  ago  the 
students  of  a  theological  college  sent  to 
every  church  of  their  denomination  a 
neat  little  card  to  be  hung  in  the  pulpit, 
in  a  place  likely  to  catch  the  preacher's 
eye,  with  the  exhortation,  "  Remember 
the  children,"  a  request  by  no  means 
uncalled  for.  The  Society  for  the 
Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Children  might 
find  ample  scope  for  its  mission  in  many 
of  our  churches. 

III.  In  the  teaching  of  Christ  the 
child-life  is  the  ideal  life. — (Matt. 
xviii.  3;  Luke  ix.  46,  etc.)  Such  a 
standard  is  unique.  The  world  exalts 
strength,  bravery,  majesty,  wisdom, 
wealth.  Gentleness  is  the  truest 
strength;  humility  the  path  to  exal- 
tation ;  simplicity  the  truest  wisdom ; 
trust  the  greatest  safeguard  ;  and  love 
the  key  that  opens  the  treasures  of  the 
world. — S.  Chadwick. 

The  claims  of  children. — I.  Christian 

451 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


economy  calls  upon  us  to  expend  the  they  will  be  apt  to  say  they  have  no 

greater  part  of  our  time  and  attention  pleasure  in  Him.     It  is  a  sad  thing  to 

on  the  young,  under  the  consideration  think   how  soon   the   susceptibility  of 

that  there  is  a  higher  probability  that  the  child-nature  may  harden  into  the 

our  eiForts  shall  be  successful. — Com-  impenetrability    which    is    sometimes 

paratively  few  persons  are  converted  found  even  in  youth.     Is  there  not  a 

after  twenty  years  of  age.     The  vast  suggestion  of  this  in  the  story  of  the 

majority  of  those  in  our  churches,  in  young  man  which  mmediately  follows  ? 

whom  we  have  any  confidence,  were  — J.  M.  Gibson^  D.D. 
subjects  of   serious  impression  by  the 

time  they  were  fifteen  years  of  age ;  Tenderness  to  children. — Dr.  Stalker, 

many  of  them  before  they  were  twelve.  in  his  lectures  on  preaching,  tells  us  that 

II.  Christian  economy  counsels  us  to  when  Dr.  Wilson,  of  Edinburgh,  wa,s 
expend  our  principal  exertions  on  the  leaving  home  for  the  work  of  the 
young,  under  the  consideration  that  we  ministry,  a  ministry  which  has  been 
shall  obtain  a  better  piety  out  of  them,  greatly  blessed  to  the  young,  his  mother 
for  the  glory  of  God.  told  him  she  had  not  much  advice  to 

III.  The  church  is  more  dependent  give  him,  but,  said  she,  remember  this 
for  prosperity  on  the  conversion  of  the  — "  Whenever  you  put  your  hand  on  a 
young  than  on  that  of  the  aged.  child's  head  you  put  it  on  a  mother's 

IV.  The  education  of  children  is  heart." 
both  more  agreeable  and  more  profit- 
able  to   the   teacher   himself.  —  Wm.  Children's    voices    in    heaven.  —  In 
Anderson,  LL.D.  "  Women   Workers    of    the    Past    in 

Bristol,"    Mrs.    Marshall    writes   that 

Childhood    and    youth. — An    infer-  when     Mrs.     Schimmelpenninck    was 

ence    from    these    precious    words    of  dying,  she   exclaimed,  as   if   listening 

Christ  is  the  importance  of  seeking  to  with  delight  to  music,   "  Do  you  not 

win  the  children  for  Christ  while  yet  hear    the   voices?    and   the   children's 

they   are   children,   ere  the   evil  days  are  the  loudest." 
come,  or  the  years   draw  nigh,  when 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  16—30. 

The  perils  of  wealth. — Long  as  this  passage  is,  it  will  be  found  to  turn  on  one 
topic  throughout,  viz.,  on  that  "  love  of  money  "  of  which  the  Apostle  tells  us  that 
it  is  the  possible  "  root "  of  all  ill.  It  will  be  found  also  to  tell  us,  in  regard  to 
this  evil,  almost  all  we  require — its  special  malignity^  e.g.  on  the  one  hand,  and 
its  only  cure,  on  the  other. 

I.  Its  special  malignity. — We  may  see  this,  first,  in  the  kind  of  cases  attacked 
by  this  evil.  They  are  often  such  as  appear  to  be  proof  against  everything  else. 
See  this  exemplified  in  the  "  young  man  "  who  here  comes  to  the  Saviour  (ver.  16). 
How  earnest  and  right  his  desires  !  How  perfect  his  aim  !  "  That  which  was 
good"  (ver.  16).  How  well  ordered  his  life  !  Even  if  we  suppose  his  testimony 
about  himself  (ver.  20)  to  refer  only  to  externals,  what  a  record  it  was  !  No 
impurity,  no  falsehood,  no  dishonesty,  no  failure  in  duty  towards  his  parents ; 
nothing,  in  short,  for  which  even  the  Saviour  could,  so  far,  reprove  him  !  How 
simply  lovely,  in  short,  such  a  life  !  We  can  hardly  wonder  at  what  we  are  told 
about  it  in  Mark  x.  21.  What  we  do  wonder  at  is  that  there  was  yet  "  one  " 
form  of  excellence  in  which  this  young  man  was  "  lacking  "  (ver.  21) — one  form 
of  evil  before  which  he  was  found  to  succumb.  How  deadly  an  evil,  therefore, 
this  form  of  evil  must  be  in  itself  !  We  may  see  this,  also,  in  the  next  place,  in 
the  kind  of  results  it  produced.     Consider  what  was  actually  done  by  this  subtle 

452 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xiX. 


evil  in  this,  so  far,  eminent  case.  This  is  very  soon  told.  When  things  were  put 
here  to  the  test — when  this  most  exemplary  youth  (in  so  many  respects)  was  invited 
to  be  "  perfect "  indeed,  and  to  show  that  he  was  ready  to  do  anything  rather 
than  fail  in  his  aim  in  any  direction — then  he  fell  at  a  stroke.  Then  his 
inward  faith  in  the  all-sar passing  importance  of  worldly  gain  came  out  of  its 
secret  hiding  place,  and  stood,  as  it  were,  in  his  way  (ver.  22).  From  one  point 
of  view,  he  was  asked,  no  doubt,  to  do  much.  But  he  was  promised  still  more. 
He  was  to  part  with  treasure  on  earth.  But  he  was  to  gain  treasure  in  heaven. 
He  was  asked  to  do,  therefore,  what  he  knew  in  his  heart  to  be  both  the  "  good  " 
and  the  "  wise."  But  he  was  unable  to  do  it.  The  "  deceitfulness  of  riches  " 
bewildered  his  judgment  and  benumbed  his  desires,  so  that  he  could  not  do,  there- 
fore, what  it  yet  made  him  bitterly  "  sorrowful "  to  be  unable  to  do.  See  the 
effect,  therefore,  in  this  most  pitiable  sorrow,  of  this  wide  fountain  of  evil. 
Never,  surely,  were  fairer  hopes  more  disastrously  shattered.  Never,  surely, 
goodlier  vessel  wrecked  so  near  to  its  port  !  What  evil,  therefore,  can  be  greater 
than  that  which  brought  about  such  an  end  ? 

II.  The  only  cure  of  this  evil. — Where  alone,  for  example,  on  the  one  hand, 
an  available  remedy  can  he  found,  viz.,  in  something,  of  course,  which  should  be 
of  greater  strength  than  the  greatest  strength  of  mankind.  The  Saviour  will  be 
found  to  bring  His  disciples  to  this  conclusion  by  degrees.  How  hard  it  is.  He 
says  first,  for  those  who  have  ri^^ies- -at  all  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
(ver.  23).  How  hard  it  is  because  of  the  fact  that,  where  this  is  the  case,  the 
man  who  has  once,  in  consequence,  tasted  their  sweetness  and  seen  their  efiect  is 
always  tempted  to  "  trust "  in  them  too  (Mark  x.  24) ;  and  to  think  of  them, 
therefore,  as  this  "  young  man  "  did,  as  though  nothing  could  stand  in  their  place. 
In  which  case,  of  course,  it  becomes  "  impossible  "  for  him  to  suppress  the  love  of 
them  in  his  heart  (ver.  24).  How  should  a  man  be  able  to  give  up  that  which  he 
believes  to  be  all  ?  Only  God  Himself  can  bring  his  bewitched  steps  into  the  path- 
way of  life  (ver.  26).  How  alone,  next,  the  benefits  of  the  remedy  in  question  can 
be  secured  by  ourselves.  We  see  this  by  the  way  in  which,  in  this  passage,  in  the 
case  of  some  who  had  overcome  the  evil  in  question  (ver.  27),  the  Saviour 
strengthens  them  in  their  decision.  He  does  so,  on  the  one  hand,  by  solemnly 
assuring  them  that  all  shall  be  well  with  such  in  the  end ;  that  a  time  is  coming 
in  which  there  shall  be  a  wholly  altered  condition  of  things  on  the  earth,  in  which 
He  Himself  shall  be  seated  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  and  all  those  who  have 
truly  followed  Him  shall  have  their  share  in  the  same  (ver.  28).  He  does  so,  on 
the  other  hand,  by  assuring  them  that,  even  meanwhile,  things  shall  be  for  their 
real  good  in  a  most  pre-eminent  way,  all  that  they  may  so  have  to  lose  in  this  life 
for  His  sake  being  made  up  to  them  a  "  hundredfold"  more  (ver.  29).  This  is, 
therefore,  how  He  would  have  us  resist  this  temptation,  viz.,  by  working  at  these 
counterbalancing  gains.  To  avoid  thinking  too  much  of  the  present  and  transi- 
tory, think  more  of  the  future  and  permanent.  To  avoid  being  deceived  by 
earthly  riches,  fix  your  eyes  on  the  true.  "  Set  your  affections,"  in  a  word,  "  on 
things  above,"  where  they  "  ought  to  be  fixed."  Nothing  else  is  so  sure  ! 
Nothing  else  so  safe  !  Nothing  else  so  transcendently  gainful  in  the  very  best 
sense  !  And  nothing  else,  therefore,  so  able  to  deliver  us  from  this  most  insidious 
and  most  fatal  of  snares  ! 

One  other  thought,  to  conclude.  These  solemn  cautions  are  ,not  addressed 
to  rich  men,  but  to  poor.  The  love  of  money  is  not  a  danger  to  those  only 
who  possess  it.  To  no  men,  probably,  does  affluence  sometimes  seem  more 
alluring  than  to  those  who  see  it  afar  ofi".  Does  not  the  last  commandment 
also  teach  us  the  same  ?  It  is  not  to  those  who  have,  but  to  those  who  desire 
to  have,  that  its  language  is  addressed.  Let  all  men,  therefore,  beware  of 
covetousness,  whoever  they  are  ! 

453 


CHAP.  XIX.     MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  16-22.  A  sad  story. — We  have 
here  one  of  the  saddest  stories  in  the 
Gospels.  It  is  a  true  soul's  tragedy. 
The  young  man  is  in  earnest,  but  his 
earnestness  has  not  volume  and  force 
enough  to  float  him  over  the  bar.  He 
wishes  to  have  some  great  thing  bidden 
him  to  do,  but  he  recoils  from  the 
sharp  test  which  Chiist  imposes.  He 
truly  wants  the  prize,  but  the  cost  is 
too  great ;  and  yet  he  wishes  it  so 
much  that  he  goes  away  without  it  in 
deep  sorrow,  which  perhaps,  at  another 
day,  ripened  into  the  resolve  which 
was  too  high  for  him  then.  There  is 
a  certain  severity  in  our  Lord's  tone, 
an  absence  of  recognition  of  the  much 
good  in  the  young  man,  and  a  naked 
stringency  in  His  demand  from  him, 
which  sound  almost  harsh,  but  which 
are  set  in  their  true  light  by  Mark's 
note,  that  Jesus  ''  loved  him,"  and 
therefore  treated  him  thus.  The  truest 
way  to  draw  ingenuous  souls  is  not  to 
flatter  nor  to  make  entrance  easy  by 
dropping  the  standard  or  hiding  the 
requirements,  but  to  call  out  all  their 
energy  by  setting  before  them  the  lofty 
ideal.  Easy-going  disciples  are  easily 
made — and  lost.  Thorough- going  ones 
are  most  surely  won  by  calling  for 
entire  surrender. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  16-26.  The  requirements  of  the 
King. — I.  We  have  the  picture  of  a 
real  though  imperfect  moral  earnest- 
ness, and  the  way  Christ  dealt  with 
it. — Matthew  tells  us  that  the  ques- 
tioner was  young  and  rich.  Luke  adds 
that  he  was  a  ruler, — a  synagogue 
official,  that  is — which  was  unusual 
for  a  young  man,  and  indicates  that 
his  legal  blamelessness  was  recognised. 
Mark  adds  one  of  his  touches,  which 
are  not  only  picturesque,  but  charac- 
ter-revealing, by  the  information  that 
he  came  "  running  "  to  Jesus  in  the 
way,  so  eager  was  he,  and  fell  at  His 
feet,  so  reverential  was  he.  1.  His 
first  question  is  singularly  compacted 
of  good  and  error.  The  fact  that  he 
came  to  Christ  for  a  purely  religious 

464 


purpose,  not  seeking  personal  ad- 
vantage for  himself  or  for  others,  like 
the  crowds  who  followed  for  loaves  and 
cures,  nor  laying  traps  for  Him  with 
puzzles  which  might  entangle  Him  with 
the  authorities,  nor  asking  theological 
questions  for  curiosity,  but  honestly 
and  earnestly  wanting  to  be  helped  to 
lay  hold  of  eternal  life,  is  to  be  put 
down  to  his  credit.  He  is  right  in 
counting  it  the  highest  blessing.  W^here 
had  he  got  hold  of  the  thought  of 
"  eternal  life  "  1  It  was  miles  above 
the  dusty  speculations  and  casuistries 
of  the  Eabbis.  Probably  from  Christ 
Himself.  He  was  right  in  recognising 
that  the  conditions  of  possetr^sing  it 
were  moral,  but  his  conception  of 
"  good  "  was  surface,  and  he  thought 
more  of  doing  than  of  being  good,  and 
of  the  desired  life  as  payment  for 
meritorious  actions.  In  a  word,  he 
stood  at  the  point  of  view  of  the  old 
dispensation.  "  This  do,  and  thou 
shalt  live,"  was  his  belief ;  and  what  he 
wished  was  further  instruction  as  to 
what  "  this "  was.  He  was  to  be 
pi'aised  in  that  he  docilely  brought  his 
question  to  Jesus,  even  though,  as 
Christ's  answer  shows,  there  was  error 
mingling  in  his  docility.  Such  is  the 
character — a  young  man,  rich,  in- 
fluential, touched  with  real  longings 
for  the  highest  life,  ready,  so  far  as  he 
knows  himself,  to  do  whatever  he  is 
bidden,  in  order  to  secure  it.  We 
might  have  expected  Christ,  who 
opened  His  arms  wide  for  publicans 
and  harlots,  to  have  welcomed  this 
fair,  ingenuous  seeker  with  some  kindly 
word.  But  He  has  none  for  him. 
We  adopt  the  reading  of  the  Authorised 
Version,  in  which  our  Lord's  first  w^ord 
is  repellent.  It  is  in  effect,  "  There  is 
no  need  for  your  question,  which 
answers  itself.  There  is  one  good 
Being,  the  Source  and  Type  of  every 
good  thing,  and  therefore  the  good, 
which  you  ask  about,  can  only  be 
conformity  to  His  will.  You  need  not 
come  to  Me  to  know  what  you  are  to 
do."     He  relegates  the  questioner,  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xix. 


to  his  own  conscience,  but  to  the 
authoritative  revealed  will  of  God  in 
the  law.  On  another  occasion  He 
answered  a  similar  question  in  a  differ- 
ent manner  (see  John  vi.  28,  29).  Why 
did  He  not  answer  the  young  ruler 
thus  ?  Only  because  He  knew  that  he 
needed  to  be  led  to  that  thought  by 
having  his  own  self-complacency  shat- 
tered, and  the  cHnging  of  his  soul  to 
earth  laid  bare.  The  whole  treatment 
of  him  here  is  meant  to  bring  him  to 
the  apprehension  of  faith  as  preceding 
all  truly  good  work.  2.  The  young 
man's  second  question  says  a  great  deal 
in  its  one  word.  It  indicates  astonish- 
ment at  being  remanded  to  these  old, 
well-worn  precepts,  and  might  be  ren- 
dered, '•  What  sort  of  commandments  ?  " 
as  if  taking  it  for  granted  that  they 
must  be  new  and  peculiar.  The  crav- 
ing for  more  than  ordinary  "  good 
works "  shows  a  profound  mistake  in 
the  estimate  of  the  ordinary,  and  a 
fatal  blunder  as  to  the  relation  between 
/'goodness"  and  "eternal  life."  So 
Christ  answers  the  question  by  quoting 
the  second  half  of  the  Decalogue,  which 
deals  with  the  homeliest  duties,  and 
appending  to  it  the  summary  of  the 
law,  which  requires  love  to  our  neigh- 
bour as  to  ourselves.  Why  does  He 
omit  the  earlier  half  ?  Probably  be- 
cause He  would  meet  the  error  of  the 
question  by  presenting  only  the  plainest, 
most  familiar  commandments,  and 
because  He  desired  to  excite  the  con- 
sciousness of  deficiency,  which  could  be 
most  easily  done  in  connection  with 
these.  3.  There  is  a  touch  of  im- 
patience in  the  rejoinder,  "  All  these  I 
have  kept,"  with  more  than  a  touch  of 
self-satisfaction.  The  law  has  failed 
to  accomplish  one  of  its  chief  purposes 
in  the  young  man,  in  that  it  has  not 
taught  him  his  sinfulness.  Still  he 
was  not  at  rest.  4.  His  last  question 
is  a  plaintive,  honest  acknowledgment 
of  the  hungry  void  within,  which  no 
round  of  outward  obedience  can  ever 
fill. 

II.  Now  comes  the  sharp-pointed 
test,  which  pricks  the  brilliant  bubble. 
Mark  tells  us  that  Jesus  accompanied 


His  words  with  one  of  those  looks 
which  searched  the  soul,  and  bore  His 
love  into  it.  '*  If  thou  wouldst  be 
perfect "  takes  up  the  confession  of 
something  ''lacking"  and  shows  what 
that  is.  The  principles  involved  in  the 
precept  is  medicine  for  all,  and  the 
only  way  of  healing  for  any. 

III.  Then  comes  the  collapse  of  aU 
the  enthusiasm. — His  earnestness  chills 
at  the  touch  of  the  test.  One  sign  of 
grace  he  does  give,  in  that  he  went 
away  "  sorrowful."  He  is  not  angry 
nor  careless.  He  cannot  see  the  fair 
prospect  of  the  eternal  life,  which  he 
had  in  some  real  fashion  desired,  fade 
away,  without  a  pang.  If  he  goes 
back  to  the  world,  he  goes  back  feeling 
more  acutely  than  ever  that  it  cannot 
satisfy  him.  He  loves  it  too  well  to 
give  it  up,  but  not  enough  to  feel  that 
it  is  enough.  Surely,  in  coming  days, 
that  godl}^  sorrow  would  work  a  change 
of  the  foolish  choice,  and  we  may  hope 
that  he  found  no  rest  till  he  cast  away 
all  else  to  make  Christ  his  own.  A 
soul  which  has  travelled  so  far  on  the 
road  to  life  eternal  as  this  man  had 
done,  can  scarcely  thereafter  walk  the 
broad  road  of  selfishness  and  death 
with  entire  satisfaction. 

IV.  Christ's  comment  on  the  sad 
incident. — He  has  no  word  of  con- 
demnation, but  passes  at  once  from 
the  individual  to  the  general  lesson,  of 
the  difiiculty  which  rich  men  (or,  as  He 
explains  it  in  Mark,  men  who  "  trust 
in  riches  ")  have  in  enteiing  the  king 
dom.  The  reflection  breathes  a  tone 
of  pity,  and  is  not  so  much  blame  as  a 
merciful  recognition  of  special  tempta- 
tions which  affect  His  judgment,  and 
should  modify  ours. — Ibid. 

Ver.  17.  The  goodness  of  God. — Th(^ 
notion  of  goodness  is  inseparable  from 
the  notion  of  a  God.  We  cannot  own 
the  existence  of  God,  but  we  must  con- 
fess also  His  goodness. 

I.  What  this  goodness  is. — 1.  The 
bounty  of  God.  2.  The  goodness  of 
God  comprehends  all  His  attributes. 
All  the  acts  of  God  are  nothing  else 
but  the  effluxes  of  His  goodness,  dis- 

455 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


tinguished  by  several  names,  according 
to  the  objects  it  is  exercised  about; 
as  the  sea,  though  it  be  one  mass  of 
water,  yet  we  distinguish  it  by  several 
names,  according  to  the  shores  it 
washes  and  beats  upon.  When  He 
confers  happiness  without  merit,  it  is 
grace ;  when  He  bestows  happiness 
against  merit,  it  is  mercy;  when  He 
bears  with  provoking  rebels,  it  is  long- 
suffering  ;  when  He  performs  His 
promise,  it  is  truth ;  when  He  com- 
miserates a  distressed  person,  it  is 
pity;  when  He  supplies  an  indigent 
person,  it  is  bounty  ;  when  He  succours 
an  innocent  person,  it  is  righteousness ; 
and  when  He  pardons  a  penitent 
person,  it  is  mercy ;  all  summed  up  in 
this  one  name  of  goodness. 
•    II.  The  nature  of  this  goodness. 

1.  He  is  good  hy  His  own  essence. 

2.  He  is  the  prime  and  chief  good- 
ness. 

3.  This  goodness  is  communicative. — 
Without  goodness  He  would  cease  to 
be  a  Deity,  and  without  diffusiveness 
He  would  cease  to  be  good  (Ps. 
cxix.  68). 

4.  God  is  necessarily  good. 

5.  He  is  also  freely  good. — It  would 
not  be  a  supreme  goodness,  if  it  were 
not  a  voluntary  goodness.  It  is  agree- 
able to  the  nature  of  the  hio:hest  good 
to  be  absolutely  free,  to  dispense  His 
goodness  in  what  methods  and  measures 
He  pleaseth. 

6.  This  goodness  is  communicated 
with  the  gy^eatest  pleasure  (Ps.  xxi.  3). — 
It  is  the  nature  of  His  goodness  to  be 
glad  of  men's  solicitations  for  it. 

III.  The  manifestations  of  this 
goodness. 

Conclusion  :  1 .  If  God  be  so  good,  how 
unworthy  is  the  contempt  or  abuse  of  His 
goodness  (Jer.  ii.  5).  2.  It  is  matter  of 
comfort  in  afflictions.  3.  Imitate  this 
goodnessofGod{Matt.v.44,45). — Anon. 

Ver.  21.  Christ's  demand  of  the  young 
ruler. — Commentators  stumble  over  the 
difficulty  of  this  command.  But  it  came 
to  others,  and  they  stood  the  test.  It 
came  to  Peter,  and  James,  and  John, 
and  Andrew,  when  Christ  bade  them 

456 


leave  all  to  follow  Him,  to  become 
fishers  of  men.  It  came  to  Paul,  when 
Christ  bade  him  crucify  his  pride,  and 
go  into  Damascus,  and  take  his  in- 
structions from  one  of  the  despised 
and  persecuted  Christians,  who  would 
tell  him  what  he  should  do.  It  came 
to  Luther,  when  Christ  bade  him  for- 
sake the  church  of  his  fathers  and  of 
his  childhood ;  to  Coligny,  when  Christ 
bade  him  abandon  wife  and  home  and 
peace ;  to  William  of  Orange ;  to  the 
Puritans ;  to  John  Howard ;  to  David 
Livingstone.  In  one  form  or  another 
it  comes  to  every  Christian ;  for  to 
every  would-be  Christian  the  Master 
says :  "  Give  up  your  property,  your 
home,  your  life  itself,  and  take  them 
back  as  Mine,  and  use  them  for  Me 
in  using  them  for  your  fellow -men. 
He  who  cannot,  does  not,  do  this,  is  no 
Christian.  He  can  do  naught  but  go 
away  sorrowful:  in  this  life,  if  he  is 
keen  of  conscience ;  in  the  life  to 
come,  if  a  false  education  has  lulled 
his  conscience  into  uneasy  slumber, 
but  slumber  so  deep  that  only  the 
judgment  day  can  awaken  it. — 
L.  Abbott,  D.D. 

Christ's  demand. — There  seems  to 
be  a  twofold  danger.  1.  On  the  one 
hand,  lest  while  trying  to  explain  the 
words  of  Christ,  we  should  find  our- 
selves to  be  only  explaining  them 
away.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  lest 
by  insisting  on  their  literal  and 
universal  application,  we  should  destroy 
Christian  Hberty,  should  put  the  letter 
for  the  spirit,  rules  for  principles,  and 
so  degrade  the  gospel  into  a  system  of 
purchase  in  which  a  certain  outlay 
secures  unfailing  return. — Canon 
Duckworth. 

A  surgical  case. — Clearly  it  is  a 
surgical  case ;  the  medicine  of  the 
commandments  will  not  do ;  there 
must  be  the  insertion  of  the  knife, 
**Go  and  sell,"  etc. — J.  M.  Gibson, 
D.D. 

St.  Anthony. — It  was  from  the  story 
of  the  rich  young  man  in  the   gospel 


HOMiLElIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xijt. 


that  the  famous  Anthony,  the  very 
patriarch  of  Monachism,  inferred  that 
it  was  his  duty  to  abandon  his 
ancestral  estate  and  live  in  solitude 
and  poverty.  There  is  no  question  of 
the  ardour  and  sincerity  of  the  man ; 
but  as  we  read  what  history  has  to 
tell  of  the  moral  and  social  effects  of 
Monachism,  we  cannot  but  reflect  how 
much  better  it  would  have  been  for 
all  Christendom  if  Anthony  had  lived 
on  the  estate  which  he  inherited,  and 
used  his  means  and  position  for  the 
honour  of  Christ  and  the  gospel  among 
the  ignorant  peasantry  around,  rather 
than  have  passed  his  life  in  the  desert, 
injuring  his  own  body  by  gratuitous 
hardships,  maintaining  mysterious  com- 
bats with  fiends,  and  so  leading 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  misguided 
men  into  a  similar  pursuit  of  an  illusive, 
ascetic  perfection. — D.  Eraser,  D.D. 

Hindered  hy  one  thing. — It  is  the 
things  which  are  apparently  the 
smallest  that  prevent  the  greatest 
results.  A  slight  defect  in  the  finest 
bell  and  it  ceases  to  sound,  a  lost  key 
and  the  richest  money-chest  is  useless. 
The  day  of  battle  has  arrived,  the 
troops  are  admirably  disposed,  the 
despatches  of  the  general  fly  here  and 
there ;  suddenly  the  horse  of  the 
adjutant  stumbles  on  a  stone ;  he 
arrives  a  quarter  of  an  hour  too  late, 
and  the  battle  is  lost.  So  it  is  in 
spiritual  matters.  Many  a  man  who 
has  got  safely  over  the  Khine  has 
been  drowned  in  a  little  brook.  Sin 
has  no  more  dangerous  delusion  than 
to  convince  a  man  that  he  is  safe  if 
only  he  avoids  the  so-called  flagrant 
transgressions. — A.  Tholuck,  D.D, 

Yers.  20,  21.  Christ's  test.—ThQ 
rich  young  ruler  presented  fine  certifi- 
cates— of  his  own  composition.  Christ 
didn't  tear  them  up,  but  He  did  what 
you  tradesmen  do  with  an  applicant 
for  a  vacancy;  He  gave  him  a  bit 
of  work  to  try  his  hand  on.  The 
gentlemanly  commandment-keeper 
wrote  no  more  certificates. — John 
McNeill. 


Ver.    22.     Self-inflicted      sorrow. — 

1.  Who  was   He? — 1.  A  young  man. 

2.  A  well-to-do  young  man.  3.  A 
young  man  of  considerable  mark. 
4.  A  pre-eminently  virtuous  young 
man.  5.  A  young  man  who  was 
anxious  about  the  life  to  come. 

II.  Where  had  he  been  of  late  ?— 
He  went  away.  From  whom,  or  from 
what  place  ?  Christ  has  answered  the 
man's  interrogation ;  Christ  has  res- 
ponded to  his  entreaty ;  Christ  has 
given  him  a  definite  and  conclusive 
answer.  He  came  running,  he  goes 
lagging.  He  came  complacently ;  he 
goes  resentfully.  He  came  as  one  who 
would  lay  a  giant's  hold  upon  eternal 
life ;  he  goes  with  no  shadow  of  a  hold 
upon  eternal  life.  He  was  sorrowful 
as  he  went  away ;  but  go  away  he  did, 
right  clean  away.  And  Jesus,  looking 
intently  after  him,  as  he  went,  inti- 
mated to  His  disciples  that  he  was 
gone  for  good  and  all ;  that  of  his  ever 
entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
there  was  little  hope  now.  In  vain 
his  acknowledged  moral  excellence. 
In  vain  his  religious  anxiety.  In  vain 
his  fellowship  with  the  good  Master. 
In  this,  the  momentous  crisis  of  his 
being,  something  had  interposed  which 
had  marred  and  ruined  all.  What 
could  it  be  ? 

III.  Why  had  he  gone  away? — 
1.  Had  Christ's  behaviour  to  him  been 
unkindly?  Some  teachers  are  morose, 
ungenial,  supercilious,  austere.  2.  Had 
Christ's  treatment  of  the  case  been 
inconsiderate?  3.  Had  Christ's 
direction  to  him  been  unreasonable  % 
Then,  why  did  he  go  away  ?  Alas  ! 
he  loved  his  possessions  more  than  he 
loved  his  soul !  He  would  not  forego 
the  present  for  the  future.  He  would 
not  cease  to  be  what  he  was  that 
he  might  become  something  better. 
Whatever  his  solicitude  about  eternal 
Ufe,  that  solicitude  was  secondary,  not 
supreme.  And  what  a  thing  it  was  to 
let  go  !  what  a  thing  it  was  to  deter- 
mine to  let  go  !  You  are  struck  with 
the  infatuation  of  the  man  !  But 
mind  that  you  are  not  infatuated 
too !    Think   now.      1.    In    character 

457 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


you  resemble  him.  2.  In  procedure 
you  resemble  him.  3.  In  disposition  you 
resemble  him. — W.  Brock,  D.D. 

Going  away  from  Christ. — *'  He 
went  away."  What  more,  what  else 
could  he  do?  He  faced  alternatives 
stubborn  and  fixed  when  that  reply 
came  to  him  from  Jesus.  He  must 
decide  for  himself  now.  He  did 
decide. 

I.  Why  did  he  go  ?  He  had  great 
riches,  and  the  alternative  seemed 
hard.  But  this  was  not  a  reason  ;  it 
was  only  a  test.  Jesus  did  not  want 
his  money.  He  said,  "  And  give  to 
the  poor."  No,  there  were  two  reasons 
why  the  young  man  failed.  1.  What 
Jesus  required  involved  the  entire 
revolution  of  his  life.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  Sanhedrin  ;  he  must 
now  become  instantly  a  true  Christian. 
He  must  immediately  avow  Jesus  as  the 
Messiah,  and  become  a  defender  of  the 
faith  which  that  whole  nation  hated. 
All  this  involved  a  sudden  change  in 
his  history.  He  was  not  ready  for  it. 
2.  The  other  reason,  however,  was 
probably  the  critical  one ;  it  was  his 
unregenerate  heart  that  lay  at  the 
bottom  of  the  refusal. 

II.  How  did  he  go  ?  1.  In  low  dejec- 
tion of  heart.  This  young  ruler,  under 
pressure  of  spiritual  need,  had  come 
to  find  a  path  out  from  his  sense  of 
guilt  and  leading  to  eternal  salvation. 
He  only  met  heavier  admonitions  laid 
on  his  already  sore  conscience.  For- 
merly he  imagined  he  had  done  his  entire 
duty,  and  still  he  had  wondered  why 
he  was  not  safe  and  easy  in  his  mind ; 
now  he  saw  that  he  was  as  hollow  as 
a  hypocrite,  and  his  trouble  of  heart 
was  explained  by  the  fact  that  he 
might  have  known  better ;  so  the 
trouble  was  worse.  2.  He  went  away 
thoroughly  unsettled  as  to  his  future. 
There  remains  for  him  nothing  possible 
except  a  religious  compromise,  and 
that  will  never  give  him  rest.  3.  He 
went  away  pitied  and  mourned  by 
those  who  loved  him. 

III.  Where  did  the  young  ruler  go  ? 
1.  He  went    back   to   the   world.     It 

458 


would  be  a  question  whether  he  idol- 
ised his  old  treasures  as  he  once  did, 
whether  he  was  as  amiable  or  as 
popular  as  he  had  once  been.  Men 
who  stifle  their  best  emotions,  and  try 
to  hush  their  noblest  convictions,  ai  e 
sure  to  get  soured  after  a  while,  and 
grow  unhappy  and  cynical ;  and  then 
they  are  not  agreeable.  He  went 
back  to  his  old  companions.  It  would 
be  likely  to  sting  in  his  mind  a  little, 
this  recollection  of  the  time  when  he 
went  forth  to  find  Jesus,  and  actually 
kneeled  down  in  the  road  before  Him. 
Some  of  his  Jewish  comrades  would 
taunt  him,  too,  with  having  once  set 
out  to  become  a  Nazarene.  2.  He 
went  on  to  his  grave.  It  was  to  be 
expected  that  there  should  be  a  proud 
funeral  at  his  abode  some  while  after 
this,  and  that  he  should  be  laid  with 
his  fathers  ostentatiously,  with  much 
pomp    and   attention   of   social   show. 

3.  He  went  on  to  the  judgment.  The 
will  that  refused,  the  heart  that  was 
hard,  the  pride  that  was  unsubdued, 
the  avarice  that  was  imperious,  the 
determination  which  fixed  his  future 
destiny  where  he  is  now,  never  were 
put  into  his  coffin  for  a  moment,  never 
had  any  place  whatsoever  in  the  ashes 
of  his  tomb.  4.  He  went  "  to  his  own 
place."  Character  decides  destiny. 
If  any  one  is  ready  to  turn  away  from 
the  Lord  where  is  he  going  next  ? — 
C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D. 

Christ  left  sorrowfully. — It  was,  we 
may  suppose:  1.  The  sadness  of  loss. 
"  And  cannot  I  have  eternal  life  ?  Is 
the  way  so  hard  ?  Are  the  terms  so 
difficult  ?  Must  I  relinquish  so  great 
a  prize,  bear  so  heavy  a  cross  1 " 
2.  The  sadness  of  disappointment. 
"  Must  all  I  sought  and  thought  I 
saw  in  prospect  vanish  thus  1 "  3.  The 
sadness  of  self -conviction.  "  Ah  !  He 
is  right.  I  did  not  know  myself.  It 
is  I,  not  He,  that  is  to  blame,"  etc. 

4.  The  sadness  of  shame.  "  And  I 
have  gone  to  Him,,  and  He  has  seen 
me  through.  Oh  !  that  look  of  gentle 
pity ;  those  tender  tones ;  that  hard 
but   loving  invitation.      He  said   not 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap  xix. 


*'  go,"  but  "  come."  And  I  have  left 
Him.,  declined  His  offer,  spurned  His 
precepts,"  etc.  But  the  sorrow  did 
not  prevent  his  going ;  did  not  make 
Christ  relent ;  did  not  keep  Him  from 
saying,  "  How  hardly,"  etc.  There 
are  special  times  when  we  may  be 
said  to  leave  Christ ;  when  we  are 
brought  very  near  to  Him,  and  have 
to  make  an  election,  and  perhaps  for 
ever.  Such  a  time  is  that  of  deep 
religious  conviction.  Such  a  time  is 
that  when  we  are  obliged  by  outward 
circumstances  to  take  a  stand.  A  new 
position  in  life  compels  us  to  come  out 
afresh,  and  either  as  His  servants  or 
His  foes.  Some  painful  enterprise  of 
sin  forces  on  conscience  a  decision.  A 
companionship  promising  pleasure  and 
advantage,  requires  by  its  rejection 
that  we  honour,  or  by  its  acceptance 
that  we  renounce,  the  Saviour.  It 
matters  not  what  we  leave  Him  in 
spite  of,  if  we  leave  Him.  The  greater 
the  difficulties  in  leaving  Him  the 
more  sad  and  fearful  the  forsaking. 
And  in  leaving  Christ  we  leave  all. 
— A  4  J.  Morris. 

Hindrances  to  inauirers. — Sometimes 
the  inquirer  may  not  himself  suspect 
just  what  the  hindrance  is  until  he 
is  probed.  In  some  cases  it  is  a 
besetting  sin  that  has  got  a  mastery 
of  the  heart.  In  other  cases  it  is 
an  evil  habit,  or  a  course  of  sinful 
practices  or  secret  sensualities,  or  dis- 
honest methods  in  business,  or  some- 
thing else  that  must  go  out  before 
Jesus  Christ  will  come  in.  Dr.  Charles 
G.  Finney  tells  us  that  he  once  had  a 
man  on  his  knees  beside  him,  and  the 
man  promised  to  surrender  everything 
to  God  until  it  came  to  his  "  business." 
The  man  bolted  at  that  test  point,  and 
said  :  "I  can't  give  that  to  God,  for  I 
am  a  liquor  seller." — T.  L.  Cuyler^  D.D. 

Ver.  23.  The  perils  of  wealth. — 
"  Who  ever  heard,"  exclaims  PauluS 
de  Palacio,  "such  theology?  It  was 
unknown,"  he  adds,  "  to  the  Stoics. 
It  was  unknown  to  the  Platonics.  It 
was  unknown  to  the  Peripatetics."     It 


is  true  theology,  nevertheless.  It  is 
one  of  the  most  difficult  things  in  the 
world  to  deal  conscientiously  with 
riches — that  is,  to  keep  a  good  con- 
science and  be  rich.  It  is  easy  to  be 
rich  and  honest  in  the  human  plane  of 
things.  But  to  take  up  riches  to  the 
higher  plane,  in  which  the  will  and 
wish  of  God  are  recognised  and  adopted 
as  the  rule  of  life,  and  consequently  as 
the  rule  of  giving  and  of  keeping,  is 
one  of  the  severest  possible  tests  to 
which  the  human  heart  can  be  sub- 
jected. Happy  is  the  man  of  opulence 
who  does  not  shrink  from  ascending  to 
that  platform. — J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Ver.  25.  The  great  question. — "  Who 
then,"  etc.  1  an  admission  that  all  men 
share  the  same  guilt  and  love  of  the 
woi'ld.  How  may  a  rich  man  enter 
heaven  ? 

I.  It  is  always  difficult  in  his  peculiar 
circumstances. 

II.  It  is  impossible,  if  in  mind  and 
heart  he  cleaves  to  his  wealth — the 
Pharisees. 

III.  It  becomes  possible  by  a  miracle 
of  Divine  grace — Joseph  of  Arimathea. 
— J.  P.  Lange^  D.D. 

Vers.  27-29.  "  What  shall  we  have 
therefore?^' — 1.  Albeit  it  be  little  that 
we  suffer  for  Christ,  yet  we  think  much 
of  it.  2.  Howsoever  it  be  not  worthy 
to  speak  of  what  we  do  or  suffer  for 
Christ,  yet  the  least  thing  done  in 
sincerity  is  not  despised  by  Christ,  but 
highly  esteemed  and  richly  rewarded, 
for  Christ  promiseth  a  reward.  3.  C-hrist 
doth  not  narrowly  mark  the  infirmities 
of  His  own,  but  doth  cherish  the 
!<mallest  beginnings,  and  fomenteth  the 
smoking  flax,  as  here  may  be  seen  in 
His  answer  to  Peter.  Peter's  speech 
smelleth  of  pride,  yet  He  passeth  it 
over,  saying,  "  Verily  I  say  unto 
you,"  etc.  4.  Although  Christ  doth 
not  always  answer  His  people's  ex- 
pectation by  giving  them  the  very 
thing  which  they  look  for,  yet  He 
will  not  fail  to  give  them  a  better 
thing ;  as  here  the  Apostles  dreamed 
of  an  earthly  kingdom  and  of  earthly 

459 


CHAP.  XIX.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .^   ST.  MATTHEW. 


honours  to  be  given  unto  Christ  and  His  sake. — Houses  and  lands,  kinsfolk 

themselves.      This    He   will   not   give  and  friends,  are  intended  for  our  culture 

them,   but    He   leadeth   them  higher,  in  virtue  and  righteousness  and  charity; 

showing  them  that  what  they  loved  to  they   are   also    the    express   types   of 

have  in  this  life  should  be  given  them  higher  kinships  which  are  open  to  us, 

in  substance,  and  in  a  more  eminent  and  of   more   enduring  riches.     From 

way,  in  the  life  to  come.     5.  The  day  the  father  of  our  flesh  we  derive  our 

of  judgment  shall  be  a  sort  of  regenera-  first  and  best  conception  of  the  Father 

tion,  wherein  our  bodies  and  souls  shall  of   our   spirits.      The   love   of   woman 

be   renewed   perfectly,    for    glory  and  helps  us  to  apprehend  and  trust  the 

immortality.     6.  At  that  day  Christ,  love   of   Christ.      The    obedience   and 

even  in  His  human  nature,  shall  be  simplicity  of  childhood  speak  to  us  of 

seen  to  reign  in  glory,  suitable  to  His  the  wiser  simplicity  and  nobler  obedi- 

Divine  majesty.      7.    Such    as   follow  ence  of  discipleship.     The  corruptible 

Christ   must   be  resolved  for   Christ's  treasure  on  earth  symbolises,  in  many 

sake  to  be  deprived  of  what  is  dear  ways,  the  immortal  treasure  in  heaven, 

unto  them  in  this  life,  if  He  shall  be  And  if  we  leave,  or  lose,  any  of  these 

pleased  to  put  them  to  trial.     That  is  typical   relationships   and    possessions 

imported  in  ''  Every  one  that  forsakes  for  Christ's  sake,  we  gain  that  which 

houses,"  etc.      8.    What  men  do  lose  they  typify. 

for   Christ   shall   breed   them   gain   a  III.  In  virtue  of  our  oneness  with 

hundredfold  even  in  this  life,  because  Christ  we  possess  all  things  and  per- 

the  comforts  and  privileges  of  Christ's  sons  in  a  deeper,  truer  way. — Strictly 

kingdom    are    a    hundredfold    better  speaking,  a  man's  property  is  exactly 

than  anything  they  can  be  deprived  what   he  can  appropriate ;    that,   and 

of.     9.   Besides  what  spiritual  gain  is  not   a   jot  more.     But   on  what  does 

gotten  in  this  life  to  such  as  sufier  for  the   power   of   appropriation   depend  ? 

the  gospel,  life  eternal  is  also  given  Obviously  on  the  kind  of  life  that  is  in 

for   an   inheritance    in   the   world   to  us,  on  its  volume  and  quality,  on  the 

come,   which  is  able  to  make  up  all  vigour  and  variety  of  its  faculties,  and 

losses    sustained    for    Christ. — David  on  the  manner  in  which  these  faculties 

Dickson.  have  been  trained  and  developed.     He 

who  has  most  life  in  him,  and  in  whom 

Ver.  29.  The  hundredfold. — What  is  this  life  has  been  best  cultivated,  will 

the  meaning  of  the  promise,  that  which  infallibly  possess  himself  of  most  that 

gathers  into  itself  all  its  various  senses  is  really  valuable  and  enduring.     He 

and    aspects,    and    reconciles    them  ?  will  see  farther  into  men,  and  be  able 

Perhaps   it  may  be   summed  up  and  both  to  do  more  for  them  and  to  get 

expressed  under  these  three  heads  : —  more  from  them,  than  those  can  do  in 

I.  We  find  in  Christ,  in  loving  and  whom  there  is  less  life,  or  a  life 
serving  Him,  all  that  makes  our  less  cultivated  and  accomplished.  All 
natural  kinships  and  our  possessions  events  and  all  changes,  all  kinships 
of  real  worth  to  us. — Our  kinships  and  and  possessions,  will  have  more  to  say 
possessions  are  valuable  to  us  and  to  him,  and  will  more  variously  and 
reach  their  true  end  only  as  they  profoundly  minister  to  his  culture  and 
minister  to  our  welfare  and  culture,  to  his  welfare.  And  it  is  precisely 
as  they  develop  our  various  faculties  this  great  blessing  which  the  Lord 
and  powers,  as  they  furnish  us  with  Jesus  offers  to  us.  He  offers  us  life  of 
opportunities  of  serving  our  fellows,  the  highest  quality,  in  the  richest 
and  both  enable  and  incline  us  to  avail  abundance. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 
ourselves  of  them. 

II.  We  find  in  Christ  corresponding,  Self-denial  and  its  reward. — I  beg 
yet  superior,  relationships  and  pos-  leave  to  think  that  only  a  hearty  re- 
sessions  to  those  which  we  resign  for  cognition  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ 

460 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xix. 


can   save  both    the    claims    and    the  the  ordinary   interpretation   given   to 

promises  from  the  charge  of  absurdity  such  a  promise   as   that  is  something 

and  blasphemy.  like  this,  which  is  perfectly  true  and 

I.  What  Christ  demands  from  us. —  very  beautiful— to  point  out  how  after 

He  seems  to  divide  the  thing  into  two,  a  man  does  keep  earthly  brethren  or 

and  between  them  He  places  all  the  earthly  love  second,  and  make  Christ 

more  sacred  and  precious  things  of  life  first,  all  the  things  He  so  gives  away 

— family  ties,  brother  and  sister,  wife  become   more   precious ;    how   religion 

and  children,  and  all  these  He  says  we  puts  a  new  spirit  into  everything ;  how 

are  to  surrender — for  His  sake.     Well,  the  love  of  home  held  in  subordination 

if  there  is  any  one  thing  that  modern  to  the  love  of  Christ,  and  all  illumi- 

Christianity  does  not  need  to  be  taught  nated   and    irradiated    by    that    love, 

it  is  that  the  New  Testament  is  not  to  derives  a  higher  sweetness  than  under 

be  translated  literally,  as  people  say.  any  other  circumstances,  etc.     And  in 

It  is  a  vast  deal  easier  for  a  man  out-  like   manner   outward   things — houses 

wardly  to  abandon  than  to  abandon  in  and  lands  and  so  on,  held  as  from  Him 

his  heart  and  desire.     Christ  explains  and  subordinated  to  Him,  used  accord- 
the  words  of  my  text  in  another  of  His  '  ing  to  His  will  and  for  His  sake — how 

sayings.     If  any  man  loves  so  and  so  they  all  become  to  be  enjoyed  with  a 

more  than  Me  he  is  not  My  disciple.  higher  power  and  blessedness,  and  how 

As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  better  is  the  dinner  of  herbs  with  God 

he.     The  life  is  the  man.  there    than    great    revenues    without 

1.  The  inward  abandonment  of  every-  Him;  and  all  that  is  wonderfully  and 
thing  we  possess. — That  is  to  say  that  beautifully  true.  But  that  I  do  not 
honestly  we  shall  put  all  these  things  of  think  goes  to  the  bottom  of  the  words 
which  we  can  say,  "  I  have  them " —  here,  and  it  would  be  a  self -con  tradic- 
houses,  lands,  mills,  factories,  balances  tory  assertion  to  a  man  to  say,  "  Do 
at  our  bankers,  pictures,  home,  honestly  not  care  so  much  about  the  world, 
we  shall  put  all  these  second,  and  put  because  if  you  will  only  do  that  you 
Jesus  Christ  first.  will  make  a  great  deal  more  out  of  it." 

2.  An  inward  ahandonment  of  all  the  I  think,  therefore,  we  must  go  a  great 
people  that  we  love  is  as  imperative  deal  deeper  than  that  thought  and  see 
as  an  inward  abandonment  of  all  the  what  is  the  hundredfold  compensation 
possessions  that  we  have,  and  just  in  that  the  text  promises  to  us.  What  ? 
the  same  position  as  in  regard  to  the  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  will  give  up 
former  so  in  regard  to  this.  A  mother's  houses  and  lands  for  Me,  you  will  get 
tenderness ;  a  father's  care ;  a  wife's  Me,  and  I  am  a  hundredfold  or,  as 
self-sacrifice ;  childreji's  love ;  all  these  it  is  in  some  places,  manifold,  I  am 
are  to  be  rigidly  subordinated  to  the  infinitely  more  than  you  would  give  up. 
supreme  love  of  Christ  and  all  these  2.  And,  "shall  inherit  everlasting 
are  to  be  put  aside,  to  be  put  aside  life.^' — As  I  take  it,  the  language  of 
gently  and  tenderly,  with  a  very  loving  my  text  points  rather  to  the  everlasting 
hand,  but  yet  with  a  very  firm  one,  to  ages  inherited  beyond  the  grave.  There 
be  put  aside  if  they  would  at  all  avail  is  one  point  that  strikes  me  as  signifi- 
to  cross  the  path  along  which  our  eye  cant,  and  that  is  the  variety  of  the 
should  travel,  and  our  heart  with  our  expressions  of  these  two  clauses,  "  shall 
eye,  unto  Him.  receive    a    hundredfold ;    shall   inherit 

II.  The  great  and  wonderful  pro-  everlasting   life."     "  Receive,"   as   the 

mise  which  our  Lord  sets  forth. — It  result  of  a  certain  course  of  conduct, 

falls  into  two  parts.     A    hundredfold  "  inherit,"  not  as  the  result  of  a  certain 

they  shall  receive ;    eternal  life  shall  course   of    conduct.      The    Bible   does 

inherit.  not  represent  that  eternal  life  is  given 

1.  How,  in  regard   to  the  thought  to  a  man  by  reason  of  anything  that 

shall  receive  a  hundredfold  1 — I  suppose  he  does.     The   Bible  represents  to  us 

461 


CHAP.  XIX.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


that  eternal  life  is  given  to  us  by  reason 
simply  and  solely  of  God's  great  love  in 
Jesus  Christ,  and  that  all  we  have  to 
do  is  simply  to  take  the  gift  which  is 
freely  given  to  us. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  joy  of  giving  up  all  j or  Christ. — 
A  friend  once  told  me  what  had  been 
the  happiest  time  in  his  life.  It  was 
soon  after  his  conversion  from  infidelity; 
but  that  conversion  involved  the  loss 
of  friends  and  fortune.  For  all,  how- 
ever, he  found  amends  in  Christ ;  in 
Christ  who  had  saved  his  soul,  who 
had  awakened  in  him  the  hope  full  of 
immortality,  and  with  whom  he  could 
walk  and  talk  the  live-long  day,  telling 
Him  all  that  was  in  his  heart,  and 
feeling  his  own  being  refined  and 
exalted  by  the  ennobling  fellowship. 
And  the  happiest  hour  was  in  the  city 
of  Paris,  when  he  sat  down  on  a  stone 
in  the  Champs  Elysees,  with  no  friend 
in  all  the  place,  and  with  just  two 
sous  in  his  pocket.  "  For  now,"  he  felt, 
"  Christ  is  all  to  me.  I  have  no  other 
friend ;  I  have  no  other  joy."  The 
equipages  rolled  past ;  the  gay  people 
shouted  and  laughed,  but  none  of  them 
all  felt  so  rich  or  so  happy  as  the 
stranger  who,  there  on  the  stone,  sat 
under  Christ's  shadow  with  great  de- 
light; not  another  friend  in  all  the 
place,  but  the  Saviour  at  his  side ;  just 
a  penny  in  his  pocket  but  so  rich  in 
his  new  friendship,  that  happiness 
flowed  from  every  feature,  and  he  felt 
"  I  have  all  and  abound." — The  Church. 

The  power  of  supreme  love  to  Christ. 
— There  is  no  way  of  getting  aw^ay 
from  the  tyrannous  dominion  of  the 
world  except  by  having  given  ourselves 
to  our  dear  Lord  and  letting  His  love 
rise  up  in  our  souls,  and  then  just  as 
the  electric  light  in  our  streets  makes 
the  gas  we  thought  to  be  so  bright  look 
red  and  smoky  and  dim,  so  this  better 
Hght  in  our  hearts  will  dwarf  the  beauty 
and  dim  the  brightness  of  all  other 
lights  by  reason  of  its  purity  and 
strength. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


Ver.  30.  Reversals. — I.  Enforce  this 
saying  with  respect  to  the  final  judg- 
ment.— 1.  In  the  judgment  of  reason 
many  things  that  were  first  come  to 
be  last,  and  the  last  first.  2.  The 
judgment  of  life  also  illustrates  the 
text.  3.  Our  text  is  still  more  con- 
firmed by  the  judgment  of  history. 
4.  We  turn  for  the  chief  illustration 
of  our  text  to  the  judgment  of  eternity. 
The  final  judgment  will  in  many  cases 
be  the  opposite  of  human  judgment, 
because  of  the  difference  of  its  rule, 
and  because  of  the  difference  of  its 
manner  of  judgment. 

II.  A  few  practical  inferences. — 
1.  In  view  of  this  first  judgment,  we 
may  be  patient  in  the  midst  of  the 
inequalities  and  injustice  of  the  present 
time.  2.  Let  us  be  prepared,  through 
Christ,  for  this  strict  and  just  judg- 
ment. 3.  In  view  of  such  a  judgment 
how  intensely  true  we  should  be. 
4.  Let  us  beware  how  we  seek  to  be 
first  at  that  day.  He  is  most  likely 
to  be  first  who  seeks  not  to  be  first, 
who  forgets  such  seeking  in  the  anxiety 
of  his  desire  to  be  and  to  do  good. — 
A.  Goodrich,  D.D. 

The  last  shall  he  first. — I.  Consider 
some  illustrations  of  this  truth. 

1.  Historical. —  Jews  cast  out,  etc. 

2.  From,  social  life. — Those  with 
rehgious  disadvantages  often  go  to  the 
front. 

3.  With  regard  to  mental  acquisitions. 
— The  last  in  Bible  knowledge  often 
the  first  in  rich  experience  and 
Christian  usefulness. 

4.  From  human  character.  —  The 
worst  become  the  best,  while  the  good 
often  make  but  little  progress. 

.      II.    Make  an    application   of   this 
'  truth. 

1.  It  may  check  presumption. — Let 
not  those  boast  who  think  themselves 
first  now. 

2.  It  m,ay  prevent  despair. — Let  those 
who  feel  themselves  among  the  last 
persevere. — J.  C,  Gray. 


462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.      chap.  xx. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  For,  etc. — The  division  of  the  chapters  is  here  singularly  unfortunate,  as  separating 
the  parable  both  from  the  events  which  gave  occasion  to  it  and  from  the  teaching  which  it 
illustrates.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  we  can  scarcely  understand  it  at  all  unless  we 
connect  it  with  the  history  of  the  young  ruler  who  had  great  possessions,  and  the  claims 
which  the  disciples  had  made  for  themselves  when  they  contrasted  their  readiness  with  his 
reluctance  {Pluviptre). 

Ver.  2.  A  penny.  —The  foreign  term  ought  to  have  been  retained  in  English,  as  Matthew 
retained  the  Latin  denarius  in  Greek,  The  English  version  is  here  peculiarly  unfortunate, 
and  makes  a  false  impression  on  the  common  reader.  A  penny  would  be  a  poor  reward 
indeed,  but  a  denarius  is  worth  more  than  seven  English  pence  or  fifteen  American  cents, 
and  was  a  liberal  day's  wages  at  that  time.  About  two-thirds  of  a  Roman  denary  (not  a  full 
denary,  as  generally  stated)  was  the  daily  pay  of  the  Roman  soldier.  Cf.  Tacitus, 
Annal.,  i.  17.  Polybius  (ii.  15)  mentions  that  the  charge  for  a  day's  entertainment  in  the 
inns  of  Cisalpine  Gaul  was  only  half  an  ass,  or  one-twentieth  of  a  denarius.  Shillmg  would 
be  a  far  better  popular  equivalent  for  denarius  t\\din  penny  (Sehaff).  The  purchasing  power 
of  the  coin  must  be  taken  into  account.  Plumptre  says  it  may  fairly  be  reckoned  as  equal 
to  about  half-a-crown  of  our  present  currency. 

Ver.  3.  The  third  hour. — The  Jewish  day  began  with  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  ended  with 
sunset.  It  always  consisted  of  twelve  hours,  whether  the  day  was  at  its  longest,  as  in  mid- 
summer, or  at  its  shortest,  as  in  mid- winter.  Hence  the  hours  varied  a  little  in  length  at 
the  different  seasons  of  the  year;  and  thus  the  "third  hour" — the  conclusion  of  the  first 
quarter  of  the  day — would  correspond  to  nearly  our  eight  or  nine  o'clock  a.m.,  according  as 
it  might  be  summer  or  winter  (Morison). 

Ver,  6.  The  eleventh  hour.— The  various  hours  may  he  referred  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
call  of  a  Paul,  a  Barnabas,  or  a  Timothy,  who  adopted  the  cause  later  than  the  Twelve.  In 
a  secondary  and  less  immediate  sense  they  seem  to  indicate  the  successive  periods  at  which 
the  various  nations  were  admitted  to  the  church  of  Christ,  Was  it  unjust  that  European 
nations  should  have  equal  privileges  with  the  Jews  in  the  church  of  Christ,  or  that  Paul 
should  be  equal  to  Peter  ?  (Carr). 

Ver.  8.  When  even  was  come. — It  was  one  of  the  humane  rules  of  the  Mosaic  law  that  the 
day-labourer  was  to  be  paid  by  the  day,  and  not  made  to  wait  for  his  wages  (Deut.  xxiv.  15) 
(Plumptre). 

Ver.  11.  The  goodman  of  the  house.— The  householder  (R.V.).  Same  word  in  the  Greek  as 
in  ver.  1. 

Ver.  12.  Heat  of  the  day. — The  scorching  heat  (R,V,).  Workmen  who  live  in  so  temperate 
a  climate  as  that  of  Great  Britain  can  have  but  little  conception  of  the  furnace-like  fervour 
of  heat  to  which  workmen  in  Palestine  are  exposed  when  the  sun  is  overhead.  The  eleventh 
hour  workmen  would  be  employed  only  in  "  the  cool  of  the  day " — the  comparatively 
delightful  coolness  of  the  approaching  evening  (^Morison'). 

Ver.  13.  Friend. — Is  almost  too  strong  for  the  Greek  eratpe  (comrade,  companion,  fellow), 
while  "  fellow,"  as  now  used,  would  be  too  disrespectful.  It  is  here  used  as  a  term  of  cautious 
respect,  with  reproving  import  (Schaff).     Cf.  xxii,  12,  xxvi.  50, 

Ver.  15.  Is  thine  eye  evil  1 — The  belief  in  the  evil  eye  still  prevails  in  the  East.  The 
envious  or  malevolent  glance  is  thought  to  have  an  injurious  effect.  Here  the  sense  is :  Art 
thou  envious  because  I  am  just  ?  {Carr). 

Ver.  16.  Many  be  called,  etc.— See  xxii.  14.  Omitted  here  in  better  MSS.  and  R.V. 
"  If  we  accept  it  as  the  true  reading,  it  adds  something  to  the  warning  of  the  previous 
clause.  The  disciples  had  been  summoned  to  work  in  the  vineyard.  The  indulgence  of  the 
selfish,  murmuring  temper  might  hinder  their  '  election  '  even  to  that  work.  Of  one  of  the 
disciples,  whose  state  may  have  been  specially  present  to  our  Lord's  mind,  this  was,  we  know, 
only  too  fatally  true.  Judas  had  been  '  called,'  but  would  not  be  among  the  '  chosen  '  either 
for  the  higher  work  or  for  its  ultimate  reward"  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  17,  Jesus  going  up  to  Jerusalem. — The  narrative  is  not  continuous,  and  in  the  interval 
between  vers.  16  and  17  we  may  probably  place  our  Lord's  "abode  beyond  Jordan" 
(John  x.  40),  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  and  the  short  sojourn  in  the  city  called  Ephraim 
(John  xi.  54)  (ibid.). 

Vers.  18, 19.  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  etc.— Observe  the  exactness  of  the  predic- 

463 


CHAP.  XX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


tion  ;  the    Sanhedrin  shall  condemn  but  not  kill,  the  Gentiles  shall   scourge  and  crucify 
(  Carr). 

Ver.  20.  The  mother  of  Zebedee's  children.— /SoTi*  (R.V.).  Salome.  Cf.  xxvii.  56  with 
Mark  xv.  40.  Worshipping. — Rendering  such  obeisance  as  was  appropriate  towards  One  who 
was  expected  shortly  to  occupy  a  throne. 

Ver.  21.  Grant. —  Command  (R.V.).  Salome  desired  that  the  Lord  should  utter  a  word  of 
authority  on  the  subject,  in  order  that  all  disputings  among  the  disciples  might  be  fore- 
closed, and  her  sons'  future  pre-eminence  secured  (Morison).  One  on  Thy  right  hand,  etc. — 
The  first  place  of  honour  was  the  right  hand  of  the  sovereign  ;  the  second  the  left  band. 
See  Josephus,  Ant.,  VI.,  xi.  9  {ibid.).  The  sternness  of  our  Lord's  words  to  St.  Peter 
(xvi.  23)  might  almost  justify  the  thought  that  his  position  had  been  forfeited 
{Plnmptre).  In  Thy  kingdom — Salome  was  probably  expecting,  like  so  many  others,  that 
the  Lord  was  about  to  establish  His  kingdom  "  with  observation  "  and  in  worldly  pomp 
(Morisoji).  Possibly  our  Lord's  words  in  xix.  28  had  influenced  Salome  and  her  sons 
in  presenting  their  request. 

Ver.  22.  Ye. — Salome  represented  her  sons,  so  Jesus  addresses  Himself  directly  to  them. 
Are  ye  able,  etc.  ? — That  nearness  to  Him  in  His  glory  could  be  obtained  only  by  an  equal 
nearness  in  suffering.  Had  they  counted  the  cost  of  that  nearness  ?  (  Plumptre).  Baptised 
with  the  baptism,  etc. — Omitted  in  best  MSS.  and  R.V.  Added  probably  to  bring 
St.  Matthew's  narrative  into  harmony  with  St.  Mark's. 

Ver.  23.  Drink  indeed  of  My  cup. — James  was  slain  by  the  sword  of  Herod  Agrippa  I. 
(Acts  xii.  2).  Joha  suffered  many  persecutions,  but  died  a  natural  death.  The  rebuke  of 
Jesus  is  very  gentle  ;  His  soul  knew  what  suffering  was  in  store  for  the  two  brothers  {Carr). 
Is  not  Mine  to  give,  etc. — The  words  in  italics  are,  of  course,  not  in  the  Greek,  and  they 
spoil  the  true  construction  of  the  sentence.  Our  Lord  does  not  say  that  it  does  not  belong 
to  Him  to  give  what  the  disciples  asked,  but  that  He  could  only' give  it  according  to  His 
Father's  will  and  the  laws  which  He  had  fixed.  So  taken,  the  words  present  a  striking 
parallel  to  John  v.  19  {Plumptre).  To  them  for  whom  it  is  prepared. — Hath  been  prepared 
(K.V.).  He  does  not  say  who  these  are ;  but  the  reappearance  of  the  same  words  in 
XXV.  34  throws  some  light  on  their  meaning  here.  The  kingdom  is  reserved  for  thos*^ 
who  do  Christ-like  deeds  of  love ;  the  highest  places  in  the  kingdom  must  be  reserved  for 
those  whose  love  is  like  His  own,  alike  in  its  intensity  and  its  width  {ibid.). 

Ver.  24.  The  ten. — Amongst  these  was  the  candid  Evangelist  himself  {Bengel).  Moved 
with  indignation. — Not  in  the  sense  of  holy  indignation,  but  as  partaking  of  the  same  spirit 
of  ambition  which  had  prompted  the  request  {Lange). 

Ver.  25.  The  princes  of  the  Gfentiles. — The  popular  Jewish  expectations,  shared  by  the 
disciples,  were  really  heathen  in  their  character,  substituting  might  for  right,  and  ambition 
for  the  true  majesty  of  service  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  26.  It  shall  not  be  so  among  you. — The  order  and  succession  in  His  kingdom  was  not 
to  be  settled  according  to  any  legal  determination.  Jesus  had  introduced  a  new  and 
spiritual  life,  in  direct  opposition  to  secular  monarchies  and  hierarchies  {Lange).  Whosoever 
will  be  great. —  Whosoever  would  become  great  (R.V.).  "  Whosoever  wisheth  to  be  great." 
The  man  who  was  conscious,  as  the  disciples  were,  of  the  promptings  of  ambition,  was  at 
once  to  satisfy  and  purify  them  by  finding  his  greatness  in  active  service ;  not  because  that 
service  leads  to  greatness  of  the  type  which  natural  ambition  seeks  for,  but  because  it  is  in 
itself  the  truest  and  highest  greatness  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  28.  For. — a.vrX  =  instead  of,  in  the  place  of.  Many. — The  word  *'  many"  is  not  put 
definitely  for  a  certain  number,  but  for  a  large  number,  for  the  Saviour  contrasts  Himself 
with  all  the  rest  of  men.  And  in  this  sense  the  word  is  used  in  Rom.  v.  15,  where  Paul  does 
not  speak  only  of  a  portion  of  men,  but  of  the  whole  human  race  ( Calvin). 

Ver.  29.  Jericho.— See  p.  480. 

Ver.  30.  Two  blind  men. — Here  occurs  one  of  the  most  marked  of  the  apparent  dis- 
crepancies of  the  Gospels.  According  to  Matthew,  Jesus  healed  two  blind  men  on  departing; 
according  to  Mark,  one  blind  man  on  departing ;  according  to  Luke,  one  blind  man  on 
entering  the  city.  The  older  Harmonists  assumed  that  there  were  two  miracles ;  that  one 
blind  man  was  healed  at  the  entrance,  and  two  at  the  departure,  of  Christ ;  and  that  Mark 
gave  prominence  to  Bartimaeus  as  the  better  known  of  the  two  persons.  Ebrard  thinks  that 
Matthew  combined  the  two  accounts  of  Mark  and  Luke,  and  placed  them  in  the  departure 
from  the  city.  (So  also  Wieseler.)  It  may  simplify  the  matter  if  we  consider  that  Jesus 
did  not  enter  Jericho  by  the  Jordan  gate  from  Perasa,  but  came  from  Ephraim,  and  therefore 
probably  made  His  exit  by  the  same  gate  through  which  He  entered.  The  blind  man  cried 
out  upon  Jesus,  was  threatened  and  restrained ;  he  cried  louder,  and  Jesus  then  regarded 
and  healed  him.  But  the  Lord  might  have  kept  the  blind  man  waiting  till  His  return, 
to  test  him ;  and  thus  the  Evangelists  record  the  same  event — the  one,  however,  con- 
necting it  with  the  entrance,  the  other  with  the  exit.  Further,  it  is  not  difficult  to  suppose 
that  in  the  interval  another  blind  man  joined  company  with  the  first,  Bartimaeus  ;  and  that 

•   464 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xx. 


both  encouraged  each  other  in  the  louder  cry  QLange^.  The  discrepancy  does  not  in  the 
slightest  degree  affect  the  credibility  of  any  of  the  witnesses  ;  it  only  serves,  together  with 
the  other  variations,  to  show  the  independence  of  the  different  accounts  (  Gibson). 

Ver.  31.  The  multitude. — The  caravan  of  Galileans  and  others  going  up  to  Jerusalem  for 
the  passover  (  Carr). 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—16. 

The  kingdom  of  grace. — Two  things  may  help  to  guide  us  in  attempting  to  deal 
with  this  confessedly  difficult  parable.  One  is  of  a  negative  kind.  Those  who 
have  undertaken  to  explain  and  apply  its  many  minutiae  differ  from  each  other 
so  widely  and  hopelessly  as  to  warn  us  against  ourselves  attempting  so  apparently 
hopeless  a  task.  The  other  is  to  bs  found  in  the  fact  that  the  parable  as  it 
stands  is  both  headed  and  followed  by  the  very  same  words  (xix.  30,  xx.  16). 
Fiom  this  we  see  that  the  truth  there  expressed  was  in  the  Saviour's  mind  both 
when  He  began  and  when  He  concluded  this  piece  of  instruction  ;  and,  therefore, 
apparently,  was  not  far  from  it  all  the  way  through.  We  would  use  this  infer- 
ence as  a  probable  key  to  its  true  meaning  all  the  way  through  ;  and  would  apply 
it  so,  first,  to  those  general  terms  of  agreement  of  which  it  speaks,  to  begin  j  and, 
secondly,  to  that  broad  method  of  settlement  of  which  it  afterwards  tells  us. 

I.  The  terms  of  agreement. — These,  in  the  main,  were  but  two.  On  the  one 
hand,  there  was  the  agreement  made  with  the  labourers  hired  at  the  beginning 
of  the  day.  This  agreement  was  formal,  legal,  precise.  The  labourers  on  their 
part  were  to  work  for  so  long.  The  householder  on  his  part  was  to  pay  them  so 
much.  Also,  the  exact  amount  both  of  time  and  wages  was  specified  in  each 
case  (ver.  2).  Nothing  could  be  at  once  clearer  to,  or  more  binding  on,  both. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  were  the  ag7'eements  made  with  the  different  relays  of 
labourers  hired  at  later  hours  of  the  day.  These,  in  substance,  were  all  exactly 
alike.  What  the  householder  did  in  this  matter  of  hiring  with  the  third-hour 
labourers  he  is  said  to  have  done  with  the  sixth-hour  and  the  ninth-hour 
labourers  too  (ver.  5).  As  much  is  implied,  also,  about  those  sent  into  the  vine- 
yard at  the  "  eleventh  hour "  of  the  day.  These  successive  agreements  in 
substance  y^erQ  all  similar  to  that  made  with  those  hired  at  the  first.  Practically, 
what  was  promised  to  the  first  labourers  was  a  usual  day's  wage  (a  penny  a  day) 
for  a  usual  day's  work  ;  in  other  words,  such  an  amount  as  was  felt,  on  all  hands, 
to  be  "  right."  Practically,  also  (see  ver.  4,  etc.),  this  was  what  the  house- 
holder promised  in  all  subsequent  cases.  The  great  difference,  therefore,  if  not 
the  only  difference,  between  that  earliest  and  these  later  agreements,  lay  in  the 
matter  of  expression.  What  was  clearly  defined  in  the  one  case  was  only  implied 
in  the  others.  First  a  clear  ''  compact  " — then  a  succession  of  "  understandings  " 
— at  the  rate  of  so  much  a  day. 

II.  The  method  of  settlement  adopted. — The  great  thing  to  be  noted  about 
this — looking  at  it  in  the  same  general  way — is  that  it  went  beyond  almost  all 
the  preceding  agreements.  This  comes  out,  very  clearly,  in  the  case  of  those 
labourers  who  were  last  called  but  first  paid  ;  and  it  seems,  indeed,  to  have  been 
with  the  view  of  bringing  this  out  thus  plainly,  that  the  order  in  question  was 
decided  on.  These  men,  it  is  evident,  according  to  that  "  which  was  right," 
having  only  laboured  for  one  hour  in  the  day,  had  only  earned  something  like 
Qne  twelfth  part  of  the  stipulated  denarius.  Yet  they  each  and  all  received  the 
whole  of  it  from  the  hands  of  the  steward.  So,  also,  of  course,  in  varying  pro- 
portion, of  all  except  the  first  called.  All  of  them  in  turn  received  more  than 
they  had  actually  earned.  The  same  is  shown,  also,  in  a  kind  of  back-handed 
way,  by  the  very  murmurs  of  those  earliest-called  ones  when  they  came  at  last 
to  be  paid.  What  they  murmured  at,  it  seems  very  noticeable,  was  the  bounti- 
fulness  of  their  master.     His  justice,  indeed,  they  could  scarcely  complain  of. 

H.HL  465 


CHAP  XX.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


He  had  done  nothing  unjust — not  e\'en  to  them  (ver.  13).  What  they  com- 
plained of  was  that  he  had  paid  so  much  in  excess  of  their  due  to  so  many  beside 
(ver.  12).  Even  their  very  complaints,  therefore,  were  an  acknowledgment  of 
the  fact  that  he  knew  how  to  be  hberal  when  he  thought  fit.  Lastly,  we  see 
the  same  in  the  way  in  which  the  householder  himself  answered  those  who 
murmured  against  his  way  of  proceeding.  There  is  nothing  injurious  to  thee  in 
what  I  am  doing.  I  am  not  giving  less  to  thee  because  I  give  more  to  "  this 
last  "  (ver.  14).  Neither  is  there  anything  "  unlawful  "  or  contrary  to  right  in 
what  I  am  doing.  No  one  can  complain  if  I  take  of  "  mine  own  "  to  give  unto 
him  (ver.  15).  R-ather,  in  doing  so,  I  am  acting  on  a  principle  which  is  un- 
doubtedly "good"  ;  the  principle,  viz.,  of  giving  more  than  has  been  in  any  way 
earned.  There  is  more  than  no  injustice — there  is  kindness  in  this.  Why 
shouldest  thou  complain  of  my  showing  "  mercy  "  to  any  ? 
Taken  thus  broadly,  we  seem  to  see  here,  in  conclusion : — 

1.  A  picture  of  Israel  under  the  law  of  Moses. — Understood  in  the  letter,  very 
definite  and  precise  was  its  compact  with  them.  "  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live  " 
(Ezek.  XX.  11).  "  The  man  that  doeth  these  things  shall  live  in  them  "  (Rom.  x.  5). 
For  his  day's  work  a  day's  wage  as  it  were, — permission  to  live.  Nothing  more 
formal,  nothing  more  "  legal,"  could  very  well  be.  So  we  may  understand, 
therefore,  of  those  labourers  "  first  called  "  into  the  vineyard. 

2.  A  picture  of  the  Gentiles  under  the  law  of  nature. — "  These  having  no  law 
were  a  law,  it  is  said,  to  themselves"  (Rom.  ii.  14).  In  one  sense  they  were 
dvo/xot — men  without  law  (Rom.  ii.  14).  They  were  without  the  advantage 
possessed,  in  this  respect,  by  the  Jew  (Rom.  iii.  1,  2).  But  they  had  that  in  their 
consciences,  and  in  the  teachings,  perhaps,  of  some  of  their  teachers,  which  was 
a  kind  of  unwritten  law — an  unspoken  "  call "  to  them  to  obey  and  serve  God — 
a  law  which  in  its  essence  went  on  the  same  principle  as  the  written  law  of  the 
Jews,  viz.,  that  of  obtaining  righteousness  by  their  works;  in  other  words,  shall 
we  say,  of  being  paid  at  the  rate  of  a  penny  a  day.  These  seem  to  correspond, 
therefore,  to  those  various  later  labourers  of  whom  we  read  here. 

3.  Of  the  church  under  the  gospel. — How  revolutionary  its  proceedings  !  (ver.  16, 
viii.  11,  xxi.  31).  How  loud  the  complaints  they  give  rise  to!  (ix.  10,  11; 
Luke  xix.  7,  etc.).  How  blessed  the  principle  by  which  they  are  justified  ! 
(Rom.  iv.  4,  5,  etc.).  These  are  the  points  which  seem  to  come  out  in  the  settlement, 
points  precious  indeed  to  all  those  who  know  their  true  state  before  God  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.    1-16.     The   labourers   in   the  motive  is  sound.     That  we  are  meant 

vineyard.   —   I.  The    hiring    of    the  to  see  this  difference  of  spirit  in  the 

labourers.  labourers  is  obvious  : — 

II.  The  times  of  the  hiring.  I.  From  the  terms  of  their  respec- 

III.  The  payment  which  they  re-  tive  engagements. — Those  who  were 
ceive. — W.  Sanday,  D.D.  hired  early  in  the  day  made  an  a,gree- 

ment  to  work   for   a   stipulated   sum. 

First    last    and    last    first.  —  The  This  sum  was  the  usual  day's  wage  of 

parable   is   intended  to   show   us   the  the  period ;  a  fair  wage,  which  of  itself 

difference    between    work    done   in   a  was   sufficient    inducement    to    work, 

bargaining  spirit   and   work   done   in  These  men  were  in  a  condition  to  make 

trust;    between  the  reward   given  to  their  own  terms.     They  ruled  in  the 

work  which  in  quantity  may  be  very  market.     But  in  the  evening  the  tables 

great,  but  in  motive  is  mercenary,  and  are  turned.     The  masters  now  have  it 

the   reward   given   to  work  which  in  all  their  own  way.     "Go  ye  also  into 

quantity    may   be  very  small,  but   in  my  vineyard,  and  whatsoever  is  rightj 

466 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,       chap.  XX. 


that  shall  ye  receive."  In  no  condition 
to  make  a  bargain,  they  most  gladly 
trust  themselves  to  one  whose  words 
have  the  ring  of  truth. 

II.  From  the  distribution  of  the 
wages.  —  Those  who  had  barely  got 
their  work  begun  were  first  paid,  and 
were  paid  a  full  day's  wage.  There 
must,  of  course,  have  been  a  reason  for 
this.  It  was  not  mere  caprice,  but 
was  the  result  and  expression  of  some 
just  idea.  We  are  thrown  back  for  the 
explanation  on  the  hint  given  in  the 
hiring — viz.,  that  those  who  wrought 
merely  for  the  sake  of  pay  received  the 
pay  they  looked  for,  while  they  who 
came  to  the  vineyard  conscious  that 
they  had  wasted  their  day,  and  not 
daring  to  stipulate  for  any  definite 
wage,  but  leaving  themselves  con- 
fidently in  the  hands  of  a  master  they 
believed  in,  were  gladdened  by  the  un- 
merited reward  of  the  fullest  wage. 

III.  From  the  temper  shown  by  the 
last  paid  men. — Peter  must  have  felt 
himself  gravely  rebuked  by  the  picture 
here  drawn  of  the  man  who  had 
listened  to  the  first  call  of  Christ,  but 
who,  after  a  full,  honest  day's  work, 
was  found  to  be  possessed  of  a  selfish, 
grudging  spirit  that  filled  him  with 
discontent  and  envy.  It  was  now 
plain  that  this  early-hired  labourer 
had  little  interest  in  the  work,  and 
that  it  was  no  satisfaction  to  him  to 
have  been  able  to  do  twelve  times  as 
much  as  the  last-hired  labourer.  Pie 
had  the  hireling's  spirit,  and  had  been 
longing  for  the  shadow  and  counting 
his  wages  all  day  long.  The  difference 
in  the  spirit  of  the  workers  which  is 
thus  brought  out  in  the  parable  will 
be  found,  says  our  Lord,  in  the  church, 
and  it  will  he  attended  with  like  re- 
sults at  the  time  of  judgment  and 
award.  Here,  also,  ''  Many  that  are 
first  shall  be  last."  This  parable,  read 
rightly,  gives  no  encouragement  to  late 
entrance  into  the  Lord's  service.  To 
think  of  this  service  as  that  which  we 
can  add  at  any  convenient  time  to  the 
other  work  of  life  is  to  mistake  it 
altogether.  The  service  of  Christ 
should  cover  the  whole  of  life ;   and 


what  is  not  done  as  a  part  of  His  work 
may,  in  some  resptcts,  as  well  not  be 
done  at  all.  All  outside  His  vineyard 
is  idleness. — M,  Dods,  D.D. 

Vers.  1-7.  The  hiring  of  the  la- 
bourers.— I.  Who  hires  them  ? — God  is 
the  great  Householder,  "whose we  are, 
and  whom  we  serve."  As  a  householder 
He  has  work  that  He  will  have  to  be 
done,  and  servants  that  He  will  have 
to  be  doing.  God  hires  labourers,  not 
because  He  needs  them  or  their  services, 
but  as  some  charitable,  generous  house- 
holders keep  poor  men  to  work — in 
kindness  to  them. 

II.  Whence  are  they  hired  ?— Out  of 
the  market-place,  where,  till  they  are 
hired  into  God's  service,  they  stand 
idle  (ver.  3),  all  the  day  idle  (ver.  6). 

1.  The  soul  of  man   stands  ready  to 
be  hired  into  some   service  or  other. 

2.  Till  we  are  hired  into  the  service  of 
God  we  are  standing  all  the  day  idle. 

3.  The  gospel  call  is  given  to  those  who 
stand  idle  in  the  market-place. 

III.  What  are  they  hired  to  do?— 
To  labour  in  His  vineyard.  1.  The 
church  is  God's  vineyard ;  it  is  of  His 
planting,  watering,  and  fencing,  and 
the  fruit  of  it  must  be  to  His  honour 
and  praise.  2.  We  are  called  upon  to 
be  labourers  in  this  vineyard.  The 
work  of  religion  is  vineyard  work — 
pruning,  dre>sing,  digging,  watering, 
fencing,  weeding.  We  have  each  of 
us  our  own  vineyard  to  keep,  our  own 
soul ;  and  it  is  God's,  and  to  be  kept 
and  dressed  for  Him.  In  this  work 
we  must  not  be  slothful,  not  loiterers 
but  labourers,  working  and  working 
out  our  own  salvation.  Work  for  God 
will  not  admit  of  trifling.  A  man  may 
go  idle  to  hell,  but  he  that  will  go  to 
heaven  must  be  busy. 

IV.  What  shall  be  their  wages? — 
Whatsoever  is  right.  Never  any  lost 
by  working  for  God. — M.  Henry. 

Vers.  1-16.  Equality  and  differences. 
— The  equality  and  the  difference  in 
the  outward  form  of  the  kingdom  of 
God:— 

I,  The  equality  and  the  difference  of 

467 


CHAP.  XX.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


the  labourers. — All  are  called  to  be 
servants  in  the  kingdom  j  but  one  class 
consists  of  those  who  are  merely  called, 
or  who  are  external  and  legal  labourers, 
while  the  others  are  also  chosen,  their 
labour  being  internal  and  free. 

II.  The  equality  and  the  difference 
of  their  work. — Their  service  is  one  of 
simple  obedience  ;  but  in  the  one  case 
there  was  the  advantage  of  priority, 
while  at  the  same  time  some  (not  all 
of  them)  seem  to  have  felt  the  service 
a  burden.  The  others  were  engaged 
for  a  shorter  period,  but  laboured  in 
confidence  and  joy. 

III.  The  equality  and  difference  of 
the  reward. — All  received  the  shilling. 
The  external  blessing  attaching  to 
service  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  re- 
mains the  same.  All  have  part  in 
the  church,  in  its  fellowship  and  its 
privileges.  But  to  some  this  appears 
a  scanty  hire,  if  not  a  kind  of  punish- 
ment ;  while  to  those  who  receive  it  in 
faith  it  is  a  sign  of  infinite  grace. — 
J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  6.  The  life  of  Christianity. — 
Idleness  is  a  crime  against  the  Chris- 
tian conscience,  against  the  laws  of 
the  kingdom,  and  is  for  several  reasons 
peculiarly  anti-Christian. 

I.  Idleness  defeats  the  object  of  the 
kingdom  here  on  earth. — For  that  king- 
dom is  come  here  to  sift  and  test  us 
for  our  place  in  its  further  development 
hereafter,  and  that  place  is  determined 
by  one  decisive  standard — character — 
and  character  is  evoked  and  proved 
and  established  only  under  the  pres- 
sure of  work  ;  character  discloses  itself 
in  face  of  obligations  that  it  has  to 
satisfy,  tasks  that  it  must  fulfil,  i-espon- 
sibilities  that  it  is  bound  to  face. 

II.  Idleness  is  a  sin  against  love  — 
Love  perishes  in  inactivity ;  it  cannot 
be  love  and  not  be  busy,  for  love  is  the 
energy  of  service ;  it  exists  only  in 
ministering.  Love  must  go  out  of  itself 
and  spend  itself  in  labour  for  others — 
only  in  work  can  it  breathe  freely  and 
move  in  gladness.  God  is  love.  God 
therefore  is  the  energy  of  work  ;  God 
is  the  great  workman. 

468 


III.  Idleness  is  a  sin  against  God 
and  against  the  body  of  Christ,  the 
body  of  the  new  manhood,  of  which 
the  brotherhood  of  believers  is  the 
realised  pledge  of  that  prophetic  first- 
fruit.  In  Christ  we  are  all  recognised 
as  members  one  of  another,  through 
membership  in  Him  who  wore  the 
flesh  of  all.  And  such  membership 
involves  us  in  endless  intimacies  of 
brotherly  activity  by  the  sheer  neces- 
sity of  our  bond  in  Christ  through  the 
Spirit.  We  cannot  be  in  Christ  and 
not  be  implicated  in  these  respon- 
sibilities. For  every  limb,  organ,  fibre, 
nerve  of  the  body  is  concerned  in  the 
health  and  life  of  the  whole ;  and 
if  one  of  the  members  suffer,  all  the 
members  suffer.  If  one  member  is 
idle,  all  feel  it ;  his  debt,  due  to  the 
general  well-being,  is  unpaid;  his 
sluggishness  is  a  weight  of  which  others 
feel  the  burden. — Canon  Scott- Holland. 

Spiritual  idleness. — Voluntary  idle- 
ness or  sloth  is  one  of  the  most 
shameful  of  vices,  so  much  so  that 
the  world  censures  and  scorns  it  with 
more  severity  than  it  awards  to  some 
others  which  are  essentially  more 
heinous  Avarice,  e.g.  is  more  criminal, 
but  sloth  is  usually  treated  with  more 
contempt  and  reprobation. 

I.  I  press  the  remonstrance  of  our 
text  on  the  unconverted. — 1.  Your 
idleness  does  not  arise  from  your 
having  no  need  of  that  wealth  which 
spiritual  industry  secures.  2.  Nor 
that  you  have  no  opportunity  to  work, 
or  that  it  would  be  vain  for  you  to 
begin  now,  since  the  day  has  declined 
so  far  and  the  night  is  so  near — "  the 
eleventh  hour."  3.  The  reason  of  your 
idleness  cannot  rationally  be  that  there 
is  yet  plenty  of  time — that  you  need 
not  be  in  a  hurry — that  you  are  young, 
with  many  hours  for  amusing  yourself 
before  the  eleventh.  4.  Your  reason 
for  persistent,  reckless  idleness  would 
not  be  reasonable  should  you  plead 
that  you  are  not  qualified,  and  through 
inveterate  habits  in  sin  and  unescap- 
able  companionships  which  you  cannot 
shake  off,  and  various  other  circum- 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xx. 


stances,  are  disabled  for  such  spiritual 
work.  The  effectual  aid  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  provided  for  every  humble 
petitioner.  Positive  reasons  for  it : 
(1)  That  you  are  so  busy  with  other 
work  that  you  have  no  time  for 
this.  (2)  That  you  do  not  rehsh 
the  work,  but  have  a  strong  dislike 
of  it. 

II. "  I  turn  to  remonstrate  with  those 
who,  although  not  entirely  idle  in  the 
spiritual  work,  do  it  but  partially  and 
with  no  animation  or  zeal. — Why  so 
slow  ?  1 .  It  cannot  be  because  you 
are  finding  much  satisfaction  in 
those  worldly  engagements  which  con- 
sume so  much  of  your  time  and 
attention,  and  leave  so  little  for  the 
honour  of  God  and  the  interest  of 
your  precious  soul.  2.  Nor  because 
you  think  you  have,  cultivated  your 
heart  already  as  much  as  is  necessary. 
3.  Is  it  because  you  think  you  are 
doing  enough  for  the  Master?  4.  It 
cannot  be  because  you  calculate  that 
anything  you  might  do  Christward 
and  heavenward  above  what  you  con- 
sider to  be  the  measure  of  your 
necessity  would  be  profitless.  Why 
then  so  slow  ?  I'll  tell  you.  It  is 
because  of  an  insidious  unbelief ;  a 
want  of  a  clear  realisation  of  the 
heavenly  hope ;  a  seeing  of  the  king- 
dom only  dimly  through  the  fog  and 
haze  of  the  cares  and  pleasures  of  this 
world ;  yea,  in  many  cases,  a  secret 
misgiving  of  heart  that  after  all  there 
is  any  reality  in  this  heavenly  kingdom ; 
a  mingling  with  faith  of  suspicions,  of 
myths  and  antiquated  traditions,  and 
fancies  of  enthusiastic  prophets. — 
Wm.  Anderson  J  LL.D. 

Yers.  8-16.  Eventide. — The  signs  of 
a  sad  evening-time  : — 

I.  Murmuring  on  looking  back  on 
the  labour  and  its  results. 

II.  An  evil  eye  with  reference  to 
our  neighbour  and  his  success. 

III.  Self-contradiction  and  the 
merited  rebuke. 

IV.  The  loss  of  the  capacity  of 
enjoying  the  blessing  in  ptace  and 
gratitude. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 


Ver.  10.  Spiritual  rewards. — "  And 
they  likewise  received  every  man  a 
penny."     Observe  : — 

I.  In  the  kingdom  of  God  the  work 
and  the  wages  are  the  same  thing. 

II.  In  the  kingdom  cf  God  there 
can  be  no  such  thing  as  competition. 
The  enriching  of  one  never  impoverishes 
another. — D.  Strong^  M.A. 

Ver.  12.  The  justice  of  the  award. — 
Man  does  not  here  acquiesce  in  the 
Judge's  decision,  as  in  the  parable  of 
the  debtors  (xviii.).  What  is  just  does 
not  at  first  seem  just,  but,  as  in  science 
many  things  that  seemed  untrue  are 
proved  to  be  true,  what  seems  unjust 
will  be  proved  just  when  we  know  all. 
Further,  time  is  not  the  only  element 
in  service.  An  act  of  swift  intelligcDce 
or  of  bravery  wrought  in  the  space  of 
a  single  minute  has  saved  an  army  or 
a  people,  and  merited  higher  reward 
than  a  lifetime  of  ordinary  service. — 
A.  Carr,  M.A. 

Ver.  15.  The  evil  eye. — I.  The  nature 
of  envy. — It  is  an  evil  eye.  The  eye 
is  oftentimes  both  the  inlet  and  outlet 
of  sin  (1  Sam.  xviii.  9,  15).  What 
can  have  more  evil  in  it  ?  It  is  grief 
to  ourselves,  anger  to  God,  and  ill-will 
to  our  neighbour ;  and  it  is  a  sin  that 
has  neither  pleasure,  profit,  nor  honour 
in  it. 

II.  The  aggravation  of  envy. — It  is 
'*  because  I  am  good."  Envy  is  un- 
likeness  to  God,  who  is  good,  and  doeth 
good,  and  delights  in  doing  good  ;  nay, 
it  is  an  opposition  and  contradiction  to 
God ;  it  is  a  dislike  of  His  proceedings, 
and  a  displeasure  at  what  He  doth 
and  is  pleased  with.  It  is  a  direct 
violation  of  both  the  two  great  com- 
mandments at  once ;  both  that  of 
love  to  God,  in  whose  will  we  should 
acquiesce,  and  love  to  our  neighbour, 
in  whose  welfare  we  should  rejoice. 
Thus  man's  badness  takes  occasion 
from  God's  goodness  to  be  more  ex- 
ceeding sinful. — M.  Henry. 

Ver.  16.  The  last  first  and  the  first 
last. — The  meaning  of  the  interpreting 

469 


CHAP.  XX.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


utterance,   ver.    16,   is    as   follows: —  sphere   of   influence,    great    or  small, 

1.    Those  labourers  in  Grod's  kingdom  allotted  to  him. — S.  Goebel. 
to  whom,  by  the  peculiarity  of  their 

calling,  only  a  relatively  insignificant  The  service  that  God  regards. — One 
work  was  assigned  on  earth,  will  in  hour  of  trustful,  humble  service  is  of 
God's  future  kingdom  be  treated  in  greater  value  to  God  than  a  lifetime 
the  matter  of  reward  as  if  the  greatest  of  calculating  industry  and  self-regard- 
work  had  been  assigned  them.  2.  They  ing  zeal.  A  gift  that  is  reckoned  by 
who  were  above  all  the  rest  in  respect  thousands  of  pounds,  an  ecclesiastical 
of  the  magnitude  and  weight  of  the  endowment  that  makes  a  noise  through 
work  assigned  them  on  earth  by  Divine  a  whole  generation,  a  busy,  unflagging, 
calling,  will  not  on  that  account  merely,  obtrusive  zeal  which  makes  itself  seen 
be  treated  differently  in  the  matter  of  and  felt  throughout  a  whole  land, 
reward  from  those  standing  farthest  these  things  make  a  great  impression 
below  them  in  this  respect.  This  by  upon  men — and  it  is  well  if  they  do  not 
no  m^ans  implies  that  despite  great  make  a  great  impression  on  the  parties 
diversity  in  service  all  labourers  in  themselves  who  do  them,  and  prompt 
God's  kingdom  will,  as  respects  reward,  them  inwardly  to  say,  "  What  shall  we 
be  placed  on  a  level  in  the  next  world,  have  therefor  ?  " — but  they  make  no 
On  the  contrary,  the  presupposition  in  impression  upon  God  unless  animated 
the  utterance  of  Jesus  is  that  in  God's  by  a  really  devoted  spirit.  While  men 
kingdom  of  the  future  there  is  a  mani-  are  applauding  the  great  workers  who 
foldly  diverse  reward  for  service  of  ostentatiously  wipe  the  sweat  from 
diverse  worth  in  this  life.  But,  this  their  brows  and  pant  so  that  you  can 
presupposition  being  understood,  it  is  hear  them  across  the  whole  field,  God 
affirmed  that  the  standard  for  deter-  is  regarding  an  unnoticed  worker,  who 
mining  the  difference  in  the  reward  feels  he  is  doing  little,  who  is  ashamed 
will  not  be  the  difference  among  the  that  anyone  should  see  his  work,  who 
labourers  of  God's  kingdom- first  striking  bitterly  regrets  he  can  do  no  more, 
the  eye  in  this  life,  namely,  the  differ-  who  could  not  name  a  coin  small 
ence  in  the  magnitude  and  weight  of  enough  to  pay  him,  but  who  is 
the  different  functions  to  which  indi-  perfectly  sure  that  the  Master  he 
viduals  are  assigned  in  this  life  by  a  serves  is  well  worth  serving.  It  is 
different  Divine  calling,  and  the  conse-  thus  that  the  first  become  last  and 
quent  difference  in  the  outward  amount  the  last  first. — M.  DodSj  B.D. 
of  service.     Of  those  who  in  this  respect 

were  the  last  or  first  it  is  said  that  in  Unselfishness  of  true  Christian  service. 

the  matter  of  future  reward  neither  — English  sailors  have  been  known  to 

the  one  will  be  injured  nor  the  other  be  filled  with  pity  for  their  comrades 

privileged  by  their  position  in  this  life,  whose  ships  only  hove  in  sight  in  time 

The  future  reward  of  grace,  instead  of  to  see  the  enemy's  flag  run  down  or  to 

being  adjudged  to  each  according  to  fire  the  last  shot  in  a  long  engagement, 

the  difference  in  the  outward  amount  They  have  so  pitied  them  for  having 

of  service,  obvious  to  human  eyes  and  no  share  in  the  excitement  and  glory 

open  to  human  calculation,  will  rather,  of  the  day  that  they  would  willingly 

as  may  here  be  supplementarily  added,  give  them  as  a  compensation  their  own 

be  adjudged  according  to  the  difference  pay  and  prize-money.     And  the  true 

in    the    inner    worth    of    the    service  follower  of  Christ,  who  has  listened  to 

known  only  to  God — i.e.  according  to  the  earliest  call  of  his  Master  and  has 

the  different  degree  of  self-sacrificing  revelled  in  the  glory  of  serving  Him 

fidelity    with    which    every    one    has  throughout  life,  will  from  the  bottom 

laboured  in  the  function  assigned  to  of  his  heart  pity  the  man  who  has  only 

him,  whether  small  or  great,  and  has  late  in  life  recognised  the  glory  of  the 

borne  corresponding  fruit   within  the  service,  and   has  had  barely  time  to 

470 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  xx. 


pick  up  his   tools   when  the  dusk  of  done   mu^h   less  than   himself.      The 

evening  falls   upon    him.       It   is   im-  very  fact  that  a  man  snvies  another 

possible  that  a  man  whose  chief  desire  his  reward  is  enough  of  itself  to  convict 

was    to   advance   his    Master's    work  him   of   self-seeking  in   his   service. — 

should  envy  another  labourer  who  had  M.  Dods,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  17—28. 

A  twofold  study. — This  portion  of  Scripture  may  be  compared  to  an  act  in  a 
drama.  In  the  first  scene  (vers.  17-19)  we  see  the  Saviour  taking  His  disciples 
apart,  and  teaching  them  what  to  expect  about  Himself  in  the  end.  Next 
(vers.  20-23)  we  see  two  of  those  disciples,  with  their  mother,  presenting  a  request 
to  Him  which  has  to  do  with  their  view  of  the  end.  In  the  last  scene 
(vers.  24-28)  we  see  the  Saviour  giving  instruction  and  admonition  to  all.  The 
whole  shows  us,  in  various  waj^s,  first,  what  were  their  thoughts  ;  and,  secondly, 
what  were  His  thoughts — at  this  particular  time. 

I.  The  thoughts  of  the  disciples. — How  far  they  were,  first,  at  this  time, 
from  even  understanding  His  words!  Some  time  before  (xvi.  21)  He  had 
"  begun  "  to  "  show  "  them  that  He  was  to  sufier  and  die.  He  had  repeated  this 
warning  to  them  soon  after,  wben  they  had  come  down  from  the  **  mount " 
(xvii.  12).  Again,  when  in  Galilee  (xvii.  22)  He  had  added  the  momentous 
and  afiecting  particular  that  this  was  to  be  brought  about  by  "  betrayal." 
Now  He  has  gone  further  still  (vers.  18,  19)  in  letting  them  know  that  He  was 
to  suffer,  as  already  foretold,  by  the  hands  of  the  "  Gentiles,"  and  with  every 
circumstance  of  anguish  and  shame.  Yet  see  how  far  some  two  at  least  of  them, 
and  those  two  men  who  thought  themselves  qualified  to  be  leaders  of  all,  seem  to 
have  been  from  attaching  any  definite  meaning  to  what  He  has  said.  "  I  am 
about  to  die,"  so  He  has  virtually  said,  "  as  a  malefactor."  They  address  Him 
as  about  to  reign  as  a  king.  He  has  spoken  of  shame.  They  want  to  share  in 
His  "glory"  (Mark  x.  37).  Evidently  His  words  have  been  little  more  than 
"  idle  tales "  in  their  ears.  How  far,  again,  were  the  thoughts  of  the  other 
disciples  from  being  in  the  spirit  of  Christ  !  When  the  "  ten  "  heard  of  what  the 
"  two "  had  been  doing,  they  were  greatly  aggrieved  (ver.  24).  Aggrieved 
partly,  in  all  probability,  because  of  the  apparently  clandestine  and  secret  way 
in  which  the  two  had  made  known  their  request.  Going  as  they  did,  with  the 
intervention  of  their  mother,  and  without  the  knowledge  of  any  one  else,  was 
like  trying  to  steal  a  march  on  the  rest.  They  were  aggrieved  also,  it  can  hardly 
be  doubted,  because  of  the  fact  that  their  own  hearts  were  secretly  set  on  much 
the  same  thing.  The  earnest  way,  in  fact,  in  which  the  Saviour  afterwards 
warns  the  whole  body  of  His  disciples  on  the  subject  of  worldly  ambition  seems 
to  prove  this  of  itself.  All  must  have  been  in  need  of  the  two-fold  caution  which 
He  proceeds  to  give  to  them  all.  Be  not.  He  says  to  them,  like  the  "  Gentiles," 
to  whom  "  lordship  "  and  "  authority  "  over  other  men  are  such  special  objects  of 
desire  (ver.  25).  Be  rather.  He  says  unto  them,  like  unto  Me,  whose  great 
ambition  it  is  to  be  of  service  to  others,  even  at  the  cost  of  My  life  (vers.  26-28). 
Wonderfully  striking,  therefore,  is  the  contrast  here  between  them  and  Himself. 
It  is  the  Master  here  who  is  desirous  of  serving.  It  is  the  servants  here  who 
are  ambitious  of  ruling.  In  other  words,  what  is  farthest  from  His  wishes  is 
nearest  to  theirs. 

II.  The  thoughts  of  the  Saviour. — These  can  be  described  generally,  as  they 
were  at  this  time,  in  a  very  few  words.  They  were  full  of  the  cross.  Full,  on 
the  one  hand,  of  what  He  saw  in  it.  Of  its  exceeding  indignity,  to  begin. 
Being  condemned  by  His  own,  being  delivered  by  them  to  strangers,  being 
treated  by  them  as  a  malefactor,  and  that  of  the  worst  (vers.  18,  19).     Of  its 

471 


CHAP.  XX.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


unspeakable  bitterness,  next.  ♦"  Can  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  am  to  drink  of  ?  " 
How  much  is  implied  in  that  question  !  As  though  the  drinking  it  fully  were 
something  more  than  mere  human  nature  could  bear.  See  also  xxvi.  38,  39. 
Of  its  wonderful  power,  in  the  last  place.  How  it  was  to  be  followed  by  His 
"rising  again"  (end  of  ver.  19).  How  it  was  to  "minister"  to  the  service  of 
mankind  !  How  it  was  to  be  a  "  ransom  for  many "  (ver.  28).  Full  on  the 
other  hand,  of  what  He  distinguished  behind  it.  This  was,  first,  the  hand  of  His 
Father.  Behind  the  hatred  of  man,  behind  the  priests,  behind  the  betrayer, 
behind  the  Gentiles,  behind  all  the  instruments  in  this  matter,  there  was  the 
appointment  of  His  Heavenly  Father.  This  signified  by  the  mention  made  of  it 
as  a  ''  cup  "  (ver.  22  ;  also  John  xviii.  11 ;  Acts  ii.  23).  This  an  awful  mystery 
indeed  !  But  not  out  of  place,  if  we  think  of  it,  in  that  most  mysterious  region 
in  which  it  is  found.  This  partly  explained,  also,  by  what  He  here  shows  us 
behind  His  cross,  viz.,  His  own  resolute  will.  This  death  of  His  was  what  He 
"  came  for  "  into  the  world — what  He  had  made  up  His  mind  for — from  which 
nothing  could  turn  Him — which  He  meant  to  endure.  Closer  now  than  ever 
before  to  His  cross,  this  thought  of  a  "  ransom "  still  carries  Him  on  (see 
Heb.  xii.  3). 

These  pictures  may  show  us  yet  further  : — 

1.  How  completely  alone  the  Saviour  was,  so  far  as  man  is  concerned,  in  His 
work  of  atoning  for  man. — Of  all  He  foresaw  in  His  death  His  disciples  saw 
nothing.  Even  His  repeated  announcement  of  it  was  not  taken  in  by  their 
minds.  And  so  far  from  being  a  help  to  Him  in  regard  to  it,  they  were  rather 
a  hindrance,  so  far  as  they  went.  Never,  at  this  time,  absent  from  His  mind,  it 
seems  to  have  been  never  present  to  theirs.  Nothing  is  more  profoundly  solitary 
than  companionship  such  as  that  ! 

2.  How  exclusively  He  is  to  be  looked  to  in  regard  to  salvation. — These, 
though  of  all  men  nearest  to  Him,  never  shared  in  working  it  out.  How,  there- 
fore, should  they  help  in  it  afterwards  except  by  pointing  to  Him  1  How  much 
less  should  any  do  so  who  are  farther  ofi"  than  they  were  ? 

3.  How  completely  He  may  be  trusted  to  complete  our  salvation.  —  What 
devotion,  what  perseverance,  what  sufficiency,  can  be  greater  than  His  ? 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  17-19.  Christ  foretelling  His 
death  and  resurrection. — In  Christ's  fore- 
warning the  disciples  of  His  sufferings 
and  that  in  the  way  while  He  went  the 
last  time  to  Jerusalem,  learn  :  1.  How 
necessary  it  is  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
cross  be  often  inculcated,  that  being 
provided  for  before,  it  may  trouble  us 
less  when  it  shall  come  ;  for  this  is  it 
which  in  sundry  times  before  Christ  had 
told  them.  2.  The  often  foretelling  of 
our  Lord's  passion  doth  serve  to  confirm 
us  of  the  resolute  willingness  of  the 
Kedeemer  to  suffer  for  us,  for  He  knew 
all  that  He  had  to  suffer  and  was 
never  dashed.  3.  It  is  necessary  that 
we  never  separate  the  consideration  of 
the  cross  from  the  issue,  nor  Christ's 
death    from    His    resurrection   which 

472 


followed,  lest  we  be  overcome  and 
stumble  at  the  cross ;  for  Christ  doth 
always  join  the  mentioning  of  both 
together. — David  Dickson. 


Christ    foretelling     His 
-  He    still     brings    this 


Yer.  19. 
resurrection. 
in : — 

I.  To  encourage  Himself  in  His 
sufierings  and  to  carry  Him  cheerfully 
through  them  (Heb.  xii.  2). 

II.  To  encourage  His  disciples  and 
comfort  them,  who  would  be  over- 
whelmed and  greatly  terrified  by  His 
sufferings. 

III.  To  direct  us,  under  all  the 
sufierings  of  this  present  time,  to  keep 
up  a  believing  prospect  of  the  glory  to 
be  revealed. — M.  Henry. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW.       chap.  xx. 


Vers.  20-28.  Intelligent  prayer. — 
It  is  important  that  we  know  what  we 
mean  by  the  terms  used  in  the  study 
or  discussion  of  any  subject ;  that  we 
know,  too,  what  our  aim  or  object  is  in 
any  such  study  or  discussion  or  inquiry ; 
and  further,  that  we  know  the  condi- 
tions and  limitations  of  knowledge, 
method,  and  success.  In  like  manner, 
it  is  most  important  that  we  should,  as 
far  as  possible,  have  clear  notions  of 
our  meaning,  objects,  and  possible 
success  in  all  religious  study,  discussion, 
inquiry,  and  effort.  This  passage 
furnishes  a  most  striking  illustration 
of  what  has  been  now  laid  down. 
Learn  : — 

I.  That  we  should  know  what  we 
ask. — 1.  These  petitioners  thought  they 
knew  what  they  asked.  In  an  imper- 
fect sense  they  did  know,  but  it  was 
not  so  as  our  Lord  would  have  them 
know.  2.  His  putting  the  question, 
"  What  wilt  thou  ?  "  is  fitted  to  set  the 
petitioner  thinking  what  the  precise 
meaning  of  the  prayer  is  or  is  to  be. 

3.  The  prayer  should  be  definite, 
clearly  conceived  in  the  mind,  simply 
expressed    in    words    (Eccles.    v.    2). 

4.  God  is  not  vague  or  confused  in  His 
thoughts  and  words :  His  Holy  Spirit 
(who  "  helpeth  our  infirmities  ")  will 
clear  our  thoughts  and  words,  making 
them  orderly  and  precise. 

II.  That  we  should  know  why 
we  ask. — 1.  The  motives  more  import- 
ant than  the  words  and  actions  in  the 
sight  of  God,  who  searcheth  the  heart. 
2.  The  motives  in  the  case  of  James 
and  John  appear  to  have  been  more  or 
less  earthly  and  vainglorious;  this  is 
to  be  inferred  from  the  Lord's  warning 
in  vers.  25,  26,  27.  3.  The  motives 
of  the  Son  of  man  are  our  perfect 
examples  :  lowliness,  service  in  love, 
glorifying  God  therein — these  imitated 
will  make  us  like  Him.  4.  Great 
petitions  may  be  offered  in  earnest 
prayer  from  little  and  unworthy 
motives ;  on  the  other  hand,  small 
things  may  be  asked  of  God  from  high 
and  holy  motives.  5.  Our  prayers  for 
others  should  be  prompted  by  love  for 
our  neighbour ;    our  prayers  for  our- 


selves should  be  in  trust  that  our 
Father  in  heaven  knows  and  is  willing 
to  give  us  what  is  best  for  us  ;  all  our 
prayers  should  be  offered  to  God  in  the 
love  of  God. 

III.  That  we  should  know  of  whom 
we  ask. — 1.  God  has  promised  to  give 
what  we  ask,  believing  and  through 
His  Son.  2.  But  He  has  many  purposes 
to  carry  out,  many  petitions  to  grant, 
many  other  things  to  do,  beside  what 
we  ask  for.  3.  His  promise  to  grant 
our  prayers  is  limited  by  the  condition, 
*'  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  His 
will  He  heareth  us"  (1  John  v.  14). 
4.  He  loves  best  to  give  what  in  His 
love  He  knows  to  be  best  for  our 
spiritual  good.  5.  "  God  is  a  Spirit," 
God  is  holy.  The  best  prayers  are 
those  which  ask  definitely  for  spiritual 
and  holy  blessings.  (1)  The  sons  of 
Zebedee  knew  not  aright — what,  or 
why,  or  of  whom  they  asked.  (2)  Yet 
they  were  of  Christ's  chosen  and 
beloved  ones.  (3)  Christians,  indeed, 
may  err  as  these  disciples  erred,  but 
they  should  go  on  to  full  spiritual 
knowledge.  6.  We  can  never  err  in 
asking  for  greater  faith,  love,  hope, 
grace  for  bringing  forth  more  fruit ; 
for  perfect  pardon  thi-ough  the  perfect 
sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God ;  for 
perfecting  holiness  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  indwelling,  working,  transforming 
into  the  likeness  of  the  perfect  Son. — 
Flavel  Cook. 

Vers.  20-23.  Salome^ s  request. — Com- 
paring St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark's 
accounts  we  see  that  it  was  the  mother 
and  sons  together  who  made  the 
request. 

I.  It  is  a  homely  human  picture  of 
ambition. — Hers  for  them  and  herself 
in  them  ;  theirs  for  themselves  though 
with  an  eagerness,  stimulated,  it  may 
be,  by  the  desire  to  delight  and  elevate 
her.  The  childlike  simplicity  with 
which  the  request  is  made,  in  evident 
unconsciousness  of  its  deep  and  solemn 
connections,  is  very  notable  and  attrac- 
tive. They  wanted  the  promise  before- 
hand. They  wanted,  as  it  might  seem, 
to  surprise    Him  into  granting  their 

473 


CHAP.  XX.        HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


request,  as  a  confiding  child  may  seek, 
half  in  earnest,  half  in  sport,  to  entrap 
a  tender  and  indulgent  parent.  They 
knew  not  what  they  asked,  but  there 
is  a  charm,  there  is  even  something  of 
example,  in  the  freedom  of  their  asking. 

II.  There  is  no  favouritism,  no 
partiality,  no  promotion  by  interest 
in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. — The  in- 
heritance belongs  to  a  certain  character, 
so  does  the  precedonce  ;  every  single 
citizen  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  has 
his  place  prepared  for  him,  not  only 
for  what,  but  by  what  he  is.  There 
is  a  character  now  forming  amid  the 
turmoil  and  conflict  of  this  lower  world, 
for  which  eternal  precedence  is  prepared 
by  the  necessary  self -executing  law  of 
spiritual  life  in  which  the  will — that  is 
the  character — of  the  Father  of  spirits 
is  reflected.  The  nearest  to  Christ  in 
His  glory  will  be  those  who  are  nearest 
Him  in  action  and  character. 

III.  This  incident  as  a  whole  contains 
no  condemnation  of  ambition. — There 
is  an  ambition  which  belongs  to  the  true 
disciple,  which  exercises  the  Christian 
virtues  and  does  Christ's  work  in  the 
world.  It  is  an  ambition  not  for  place, 
but  for  character.  It  aspires  not  to 
have,  but  to  be  ;  and  to  be  that  it  may 
work,  that  it  may  serve,  that  it  may 
impart  even  of  its  very  self.  If  it  be 
the  case  that  many  of  us  are  wanting 
in  this  ambition,  if  aspiration  after  the 
closest  possible  nearness  to  Christ, 
under  the  sense  that  nearness  means 
likeness,  be  almost  unknown  to  us,  if 
we  are  satisfied  with  the  hope  of 
freedom  from  suffering  and  enjoyment 
of  happiness,  this  will  go  far  to  account 
for  the  insufficient  power  of  Christianity 
to  leaven  society,  as  well  as  for  the 
poverty  of  individual  Christian  life. — 
W.  Romanes. 

Vers.  20-23  Sharing  Chrisfs  throne. 
— Now  comes  the  question,  in  the  light 
of  the  answer  to  which,  must  be  read 
all  that  our  Saviour  said  to  James  and 
John  on  the  present  occasion.  What 
is  it  to  participate  with  Him  in  His 
throne  1  He  neither  denies  that  He 
Himself  was  destined  to  occupy  a  throne, 

474 


nor  that  there  would  be  those  to  whom 
it  should  be  given  to  share  the  occupa- 
tion. He  assents,  in  fact,  to  both 
these  ideas,  but  intimates  that  the 
subject  was  not  understood  by  the 
Apostles  ;  that  in  asking  to  have  seats 
awarded  them  beside  Him  when  He 
came  in  His  glory,  they  knew  not 
what  it  really  meant  that  they  asked. 
And  do  we  know  what  it  means  ?  We 
ought.  In  the  light  of  such  declarations 
concerning  Christ,  as  that  He  is 
"  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  Saviour, 
to  give  repentance  and  remission  of 
sins,"  that  power  is  His  "  to  give 
eternal  life  "  to  men,  that  being  made 
perfect  He  has  become  "  the  author  of 
salvation  "  and  is  "  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,"  that  He  has  been  "  raised 
up  to  bless  us  in  turning  away  every 
one  of  us  from  his  iniquities  " — in  the 
light  of  such  declarations  as  these  we 
must  perceive  that  the  throne  to  which 
He  looked  forward  for  Himself,  and 
which  He  has  acquired,  is  the  throne- 
of  moral  influence,  of  the  highest  and 
most  beneficent  moral  influence.  We 
are  enthroned  then,  together  with  Him, 
according  to  the  measure  in  which  we 
grow  capable  of  quickening,  guiding, 
or  helping  toward  righteousness,  accord- 
ing as  we  become  powerful  in  minister- 
ing to  the  rectification  and  purification 
of  others,  powerful  to  assist,  inspire,  or 
stimulate  them  in  the  direction  of  the 
good  and  true.  There  is  no  throne 
like  that.  There  is  no  other  royal 
throne.  He  is  a  king,  and  He  only,  who 
is  able  in  some  degree  to  promote  the 
progress  of  human  souls  on  the  road  to 
everlasting  blessedness  and  perfection, 
who  is  exerting  some  healthy,  useful, 
gracious  influence  in  human  hearts  and 
lives  around  him,  who  is  contributing 
in  one  way  or  another,  to  redeem  men 
from  evil,  and  to  bring  them  nearer  to 
God  and  His  ideal.  If  to  any  extent 
it  be  thus  with  us,  we  are  now  already, 
to  such  extent,  seated  with  Christ 
upon  His  throne.  We  have  known 
poor,  sick,  bedridden  people  with  whom 
it  was  thus ;  whose  constant  smiling 
patience,  and  simple  childlike  faith 
told  healingly,  purifyingly,  refiningly 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  XX. 


upon  the  whole  house,  aud  to  visit 
whose  chamber  was  to  have  the  better 
soul  in  you  stirred  up  and  nourished, 
to  be  spiritually  strengthened  and 
refreshed.  We  have  known  mothers 
and  elder  sisters  with  whom  it  was 
thus ;  whose  daily  personal  expression 
had  a  beautifully  controlling,  inspiring, 
elevating  effect  upon  all  the  family, 
whose  very  presence  and  breathing 
were  always  helpful  to  keep  you  right, 
to  constrain  you  onward  and  upward, 
to  make  you  ashamed  of  acting  un- 
worthily, and  strong  to  resist  tempta- 
tion ;  to  live  with  whom  was  to  be  gently 
educated  out  of  selfishness  and  weakness, 
and  taught,  almost  imperceptibly,  to 
be  brave,  loving,  and  generous.  We 
have  known  friends  with  whom  it  was 
thus ;  intercourse  with  whom  seemed 
ever  to  set  you  aspiring  more  loftily, 
to  give  you  higher  and  more  earnest 
views  of  life,  to  enable  you  to  bear 
your  burdens  more  manfully  and 
meekly,  and  to  feel  the  heavens  more 
nigh.  These,  and  such  as  these,  are 
sitting  with  Christ  in  His  kingdom. — 
JV.  B.  Wood. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Law  and  prayer. — 
I.  From  these  words  of  our  Lord  we 
get  a  principle  which  the  students  of 
physical  phenomena  are  perpetually 
asserting  as  though  it  were  their 
peculiar  discovery,  that  the  Almighty 
has  chosen  to  proceed  in  His  dealings 
with  His  creatures  according  to  a 
regular  and  uniform  order;  that  He 
does  not  break  this  order  or  interfere 
with  this  method  or  give  up  His  will 
simply  because  a  frail,  foolish  mortal 
may  ask  Him  to  do  so. 

II.  The  question  is  not  of  God's 
omnipotence  but  of  His  will. — The 
existence  of  God  being  granted,  every 
man,  whether  he  be  a  Christian  or  not, 
makes  no  doubt  that  God  can  do  what- 
soever pleaseth  Him.  In  our  ignor- 
ance we  often  make  the  mistake  which 
was  made  by  Salome,  and  ask  for  that 
which  may  not  be  ours.  If  our  ignor- 
ance be  our  misfortune  and  not  our 
fault,  He  who  looks  "  with  larger, 
other  eyes  than  ours,"  to  make  allow- 


ance for  us  all,  will  not  treat  us 
sternly  because  we  have  made  a  child's 
blunder. 

III.  Prayer  is  not  a  mere  piece  of 
mental  machinery  for  obtaining  some 
temporal  advantage  for  which  material 
appliances  are  insufficient.  The  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  not  a  mere  union- 
house,  from  which  the  idle  and  the 
improvident,  and  indeed  all  comers, 
may  get  a  passing  relief.  Prayer  is 
the  communion  of  the  soul  with  God, 
its  repose  upon  infinite  love. — W.  Page 
Roberts,  B.A. 

Ver.  22.  Undue  self-assertion. — 
1.  When  the  ministers  of  the  gospel 
hunt  for  high  places  in  the  world  they 
wot  not  what  they  are  doing,  nor  how 
foolish  they  are  in  so  doing.  "  Ye 
know  not  what  ye  ask."  2.  The 
preferment  and  kingdom  which  we 
should  afiect  is  in  another  world,  and 
we  must  prepare  us  for  the  cross  with 
Christ,  ere  we  come  to  the  kingdom 
with  Him.  "  Are  ye  able  to  drink  ?  " 
etc.  3.  From  the  two  disciples'  under- 
taking learn  that  men  least  acquainted 
with  the  cross  are  most  confident 
undertakers,  for  they  say  "  We  are 
able." — David  Dickson. 

"Ver.  23.  Suffering  for  Christ.— 
It  is  but  a  cup,  not  an  ocean  ;  it  is  but 
a  draught,  bitter  perhaps,  but  we  shall 
see  the  bottom  of  it ;  it  is  a  cup  in  the 
hand  of  a  Father  (John  xviii.  11).  It 
is  but  a  baptism  ;  if  dipped,  that  is  the 
worst  of  it,  not  drowned  ;  perplexed, 
but  not  in  despair. — M.  Henry. 

Vers.  25-27.  The  Christian  ideal.  — 
What  a  revolution  of  thought  is  in- 
volved in  this  simple  contrast  !  Of  how 
much  that  is  great  and  noble  has  it  been 
the  seed  !  The  dignity  of  labour,  the 
royalty  of  service,  the  pettiness  of 
selfish  ambition,  the  majesty  of  self- 
sacrificing  love ;  the  utter  condemnation 
of  the  miserable  maxim  "  Every  man 
for  himself  " ;  the  world's  first  question, 
"  What  shall  we  have  ?  "  made  the 
last ;  and  its  last  question,  *'  What 
shall  we  give  ?  "  made  the  very  first — 

475 


CHAP.  XX.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


•such  are  some  of  the  fruits  which  have 
grown  from  the  seed  our  Lord  planted 
in  so  ungenial  soil  that  day.  We 
are,  alas,  still  very  far  from  realising 
that  great  ideal  ;  but  ever  since  that 
day,  as  an  ideal,  it  has  never  been 
quite  out  of  sight.  Early  Christianity, 
under  the  guidance  of  the  Apostles, 
strove,  though  with  all  too  little 
success,  to  realise  it ;  the  chivalry  of 
the  middle  ages,  with  its  glorification 
of  knighthood,  (the  knight  was  origin- 
ally a  Knecht,  a  servant,  or  slave),  was 
an  attempt  to  embody  it ;  and  what  is 
the  constitutionalism  of  modern  times 
but  the  development  of  the  principle 
in  political  life,  the  real  power  being 
vested  not  in  the  titular  monarch,  who 
represents  ideally  the  general  weal, 
but  in  a  ministry,  so  designated  to 
mark  the  fact  that  their  special 
function  is  to  minister  or  serve,  the 
highest  position  in  the  realm  bearing 
the  humble  title  of  Prime  Minister,  or 
first  servant  of  the  state  ?  It  is  of 
value  to  have  the  principle  before  us 
as  an  ideal,  even  though  it  be  buried 
under  a  tombstone  of  a  name,  the 
significance  of  which  is  forgotten  ;  but 
when  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be 
fully  established  on  the  earth,  the 
ideal  will  be  realised,  not  in  political 
life  only,  but  all  through  society.  If 
only  the  ambition  to  serve  our  gener- 
ation according  to  the  will  of  God  were 
to  become  universal,  then  would  God's 
kingdom  come  and  His  will  be  done  on 
earth  even  as  it  is  in  heaven. — J.  M. 
Gibson,  D.D. 

Vers.  26-28.  True  greatness. — I.  The 
nature  of  true  greatness. — Though 
Christ  does  not  ignore  intellects,  or 
even  riches.  He  yet  regards  these 
things,  and  all  things  like  these,  as  but 
instruments ;  and  he  is,  in  the  gospel 
sense  of  the  word,  the  greatest  who 
uses  all  such  gifts  or  possessions  in  the 
service  of  mankind.  If  this  view  of 
the  case  be  correct,  one  or  two  infer- 
ences of  importance  follow  from  it. 
1 .  He  who  wins  this  greatness  does  not 
win  it  at  the  expense  of  others.  2.  We 
may    win     this     greatness     anywhere. 

476 


3.  This   greatness  is   satisfying   to  its 
possessor. 

II.  The  model  of  true  greatness. — 
*'  Even  as  the  Son  of  man,"  etc.  In 
one  point  of  view  the  greatness  of  God 
is  that  of  service.  The  highest  of  all 
is  the  servant  of  all.  But  striking  as 
the  nobleness  and  the  Divinity  of 
service  appear,  when  we  look  thus  at 
the  universal  ministry  of  God  we  have 
a  more  impressive  illustration  of  the 
same  thing  in  the  mission  and  work 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  creation  and 
providence  God  lays  nothing  aside. 
But  in  redemption  it  was  diflferent. 
To  deliver  man  from  the  guilt  and 
power  of  sin  it  was  needed  that  the 
Son  of  God  should  become  a  man,  and, 
after  a  life  of  obedience  should  submit 
to  a  death  of  shame ;  and  the7^e  was 
sacrifice.  When  that  was  done 
Jehovah  rendered  the  highest  service 
to  humanity  and  gave  a  pattern  of  the 
loftiest  greatness. 

III.  The  motive  of  true  greatness. 
— The  reference  which  Christ  makes 
to  His  death,  as  an  example,  brings 
before  every  Christian's  mind  the 
magnitude  of  the  obligation  under 
which  He  has  laid  him. — W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D. 

Yer.  28.  The  purpose  of  Chrisfs  life 
and  death. — I.  The  name  by  which 
Christ  calls  Himself.— "  The  Son  of 
man." 

II.  His  pre-existence  and  voluntary 
entrance  into  human  conditions. — 
"  Came." 

III.  The  broad  distinction  between 
the  merciful  ministering  of  His  life 
and  the  mysterious  ransom  of  His 
death. 

IV.  His  death  as  the  price  paid 
for  our  liberty,  purchasing  us  for  His 
own. — *'  Ransom." 

V.  His  death  as  substitutionary. — 
*'  For,"  i.e.  instead  of. 

VI.  The  wide  sweep  of  the  purpose 
of  His  death. — "  Instead  of  many," 
contrasting  the  one  offering  with  the 
great  multitude  which  no  man  can 
number,  who  are  actually  redeemed 
to  God  thereby.     The  ''many"  in  so 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xx. 


far  as  the  purpose  and  scope  of  His 
death    are    concerned    might    be   the 
**  all.' — A  Madaren,  D.D. 

Christ  a  Servant. — I.  The  title  He 
assumed. — "  Son  of  man." 

II.  The  homage  He  declined. — "Not 
to  be  ministered  unto."  1.  Not  the 
utterance  of  disappointment.  2.  Man 
usually  desires  power. 

III.  The  character  of  the  service 
He  rendered. — "  To  give  His  life,"  etc. 

1.  Its  beginning  in  the  distant  past. 

2.  Its  progress  through  the  eventful 
present.  3.  Its  consummation  in  the 
glorious  future ;  when  He,  "  the 
servant  of  all,"  shall  reign  as  Lord  and 
King. — /.  C.  Gray. 

The  death  of  Christ. — According  to 
the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament, 
dogmatically  regarded,  there  are  five 
propositions  concerning  the  death  of 
Christ  which  are  again  and  again 
repeated. 

I.  It  is  declared  that  the  death  of 
Christ  is  not  of  small  concern  as  com- 
pared with  His  life. 

II.  That  it  is  in  some  way  a  death 
for  the  human  race. 

III.  That  it  is  in  some  way  a  death 
for  the  sin  of  the  human  race. 

lY.  That  it  in  some  way  obtains 
the  forgiveness  of  the  sins  of  the 
human  race. 

V.  That  it  in  some  way  neutralises 
the  effects  of  the  sins  of  the  human 
race. — Principal  Cave^  D.D. 

Christ  a  ransom. — This  word  ransom 
or  redemption  was  familiar  to  every 
Jew.  Under  the  law,  the  method  of 
commutation  by  the  payment  of  a 
ransom  was  employed  in  all  cases 
where  things  were  due  to  God  which 
from  some  ineligibility  could  not  be 
themselves  presented.  Sometimes  this 
ransom  was  a  payment  in  money  and 
sometimes  in  kind.  The  male  first- 
born, who  had  been  spared  in  Egypt, 
and  whose  lives  were  therefore  forfeited 
to  God,  were  "  ransomed,"  "  redeemed," 
by  silver  shekels ;  the  first-born  of 
unclean  cattle,  which  were  legally  un- 


qualified for  sacrifice,  were  "ran- 
somed "  by  the  payment  of  their  value 
or  by  the  substitution  of  a  clean 
animal.  There  were  also  instances  of 
the  ransoming  of  human  lives  under 
the  law  ;  and  when  our  Lord  spoke  of 
the  ransoming  the  lives  of  many  by  a 
gift  of  life,  His  hearers  would  under- 
stand His  words  by  the  analogy  of 
those  national  customs  in  which  they 
had  been  born  and  bred.  However 
difficult  the  application  of  Christ's 
words,  and  the  comprehension  of  their 
mysterious  suggestions,  the  meaning  of 
them  would  be  clear  enough  to  the 
disciples.  They  would  understand 
that  there  were  many  first-born 
whose  lives  would  be  spared  because 
His  life  would  be  surrendered,  or,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  man  whose  ox  had 
gored  a  Hebrew  to  death  (Ex.  xxi.  30), 
there  were  many  forfeited  lives  which 
should  be  restored,  because  His  life 
should  vicariously  bear  their  punish- 
ment and  be  taken  away. — Ibid. 

Vers.  26-28.  The  joy  of  ministry. — 
The  least  complicated  and  shortest  rule 
of  morals  is  this  :  Get  others  to  work 
for  you  as  little  as  possible  and  work 
yourself  as  much  as  possible  for  them ; 
make  the  fewest  calls  upon  the  services 
of  your  neighbours  and  render  them 
the  maximum  number  of  services  your- 
self. The  observance  of  this  rule  gives 
coherence  to  our  acts,  imparts  a  mean- 
ing to  our  lives,  confers  a  blessing  on 
our  persons,  solves  all  doubts  and 
difficulties  that  perplex  us,  and  causes 
all  the  factors  of  our  existence,  includ- 
ing intellectual  activity,  science,  and 
art,  to  fall  naturally  into  their  proper 
places.  This  is  why  I  never  feel  happy 
or  even  content,  unless  when  quite 
certain  that  my  work  is  helpful  to 
others.  As  for  the  satisfaction  of  those 
for  whose  behoof  I  labour,  I  take  no 
thought  of  that  j  it  is  a  superfluity,  a 
satiety  of  bliss,  which  does  not  enter 
into  my  calculations,  and  is  utterly 
powerless  to  influence  the  choice  of  my 
actions.  My  firm  conviction  that  the 
work  I  am  spending  myself  in  is  not 
harmful  nor  worthless   but   beneficial 

477 


CHAP.  XX.        HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


to  others,  is  the  taproot  of  my  happi-  There  was  a  pause.     Suddenly  one  of 

ness.     And  this  is  precisely  the  reason  the  most  celebrated  physicians,  a  man 

why  the  genuinely  moral  man  instinc-  in  the  prime  of  life,  rose  and  said — 

tively  puts  physical  toil  above  scientific  **  Be   it   so;    I   devote   myself   to   the 

and  artistic  work. — Count  Tolstoi.  safety  of  my  country.     I  swear,  in  the 

<     ,  name  of  humanity  and  religion,  that 

■HK  Ver.  28.  Giving  life  for  others. — The**  to-morrow  at  the  break  of  day,  I  will 

city  of  Marseilles  was  once  visited  by  dissect  a  corpse,  and  write  down  as  I 

the  plague.     The  ravages  were  fearful.  proceed   what   I   observe."     He   went 

Parents   deserted   their   children,   and  home,  made  his  will  (for  he  was  a  rich 

children  forgot  their  parents,  to  take  man),  and  spent  that  evening  in  religi- 

care  of  themselves.     The  city  became  a  ous   exercises.       During    the   night   a 

desert.     Everyone  who  remained  was  man  died  of  the  plague.     Guyon,  the 

sad,  for  no  one  could  stop  the  ravages  physician,  entered  the  room  next  morn- 

of  the  plague.     The  doctors  consulted  ing,  and  made  the  examination.     As 

together,  but  they  could  find  no  remedy,  he  went  on  he  wrote  down  all  he  saw, 

They  agreed  that  it  was  necessary  for  then  left  the  room  and  put  the  paper 

one  of  them  to  open  the  body  of  some-  into   vinegar,   so    that    it   would   not 

one  who  had  died  to  find  out  the  nature  convey  the  plague  to  others.     He  then 

of  the  plague.     But  who  would  do  this,  went  to  a  convenient  place,  where  he 

for  it  was  certain  that  the  one  who  died  within  twelve  hours. — "  Huntiios." 
did  it  would  himself   die  soon  after  ? 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  29—34. 

A  lesson  in  prayer. — Much  has  been  written  on  some  of  the  minor  details  in 
which  this  story  and  the  parallel  stories  of  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  appear,  at  first 
sight,  to  difier.  Judging  from  what  has  happened  in  regard  to  other  parts  of 
the  Bible,  we  are  content  to  believe  that,  if  only  our  information  on  the  subject 
were  fuller  than  it  is,  we  should  find  these  to  be  points  on  which  their  agreement 
was  only  concealed  for  a  time.  2  Kings  v.  7 ;  Dan.  v.  end  of  ver.  16 ;  and  Luke  ii.  2, 
are  cases  in  point.  What  was  supposed  in  these  passages,  at  first  sight  to  be  proofs 
of  inaccuracy,  have  since  been  seen,  with  fuller  light  on  the  subjects  discussed, 
to  be  evidences  of  correctness.  It  is  certainly  not  unfair,  therefore,  to  suppose 
something  similar  to  be  true  in  this  case ;  and,  if  we  do  nothing  more,  at  least  to 
suspend  our  judgment  till  all  the  evidence  has  been  heard.  Passing,  therefore, 
to  those  more  important  features  in  regard  to  which  all  the  stories  are  found 
visibly  to  agree,  we  shall  find  that  they  teach  us  the  three  following  great  lessons 
as  to  the  gi-eat  duty  of  prayer — that  it  must  be  believing  in  its  origin  ;  urgent  in 
its  character  ;  specific  in  its  aim. 

I.  Believing  in  its  origin. — This  was  evidently  so  in  the  case  of  the  first 
prayer  recorded  in  this  story.  As  they  sit  by  the  wayside,  near  the  city  of 
Jericho,  the  blind  men  hear  sounds  which  greatly  excite  their  attention.  Many 
voices  are  heard  speaking,  multitudes  of  feet  are  heard  passing,  as  they  sit  there. 
Naturally,  they  ask  some  among  those  passers-by  to  tell  them  what  it  all  means. 
When  they  learn  what  it  is,  they  are  naturally  excited  very  much  more. 
Evidently  they  had  heard  before  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth — of  His  character,  as  full 
of  mercy — of  His  greatness,  as  full  of  power — of  His  claims,  as  Son  of  David. 
Evideutly  they  believe,  also,  in  what  they  have  heard.  "  Faith,"  in  their  case, 
has  come  by  ''  hearing"  (Bom.  x.  17),  and  therefore  it  is  that  they  cry  out  in  the 
manner  they  did — appealing  to  Christ  for  that  mercy  of  which  they  have  heard — 
relying  on  Him  to  display  that  power  of  which  they  have  heard — calling  upon  Him 
by  that  title  which  they  hear  He  has  claimed  (ver.  30).  In  every  way,  therefore, 
we  see  that  their  prayer  proceeded  from  faith.     How,  indeed,  if  we  think  of  it, 

478 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xx. 


can  any  true  prayer  do  anything  else  1  As  the  Scripture  has  said  (Heb.  xi.  6), 
*'  He  that  Cometh  to  God  "  at  all  "  must  believe  that  He  is,  and  that  He  is  the 
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him."  Much  more  is  this  true  of  those 
who  come  in  supplication.  How  can  they  think  of  praying  except  to  One  whom 
they  believe  able  to  hear  it  ?  How  are  they  likely  to  do  so  except  to  One  whom 
they  believe  willing  as  well?  And  why  should  they  do  so  unless  they  also 
believe  that  He  can  do  what  they  ask?  This  is  prayer,  therefore — this  is  the 
root  of  it- — asking  in  faith. 

II.  Urgent  in  character. — It  is  with  prayer  as  it  is  with  a  stream.  There  are 
sure  to  be  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  stream,  wherever  it  flows.  But  these  obstacles 
never  do  more  than  check  its  flow  for  a  time.  The  continual  weight — the 
continually  increasing  weight — of  the  water  behind,  continually  tends  to  press 
forward  the  water  before.  The  greater,  in  fact,  the  obstacles  in  its  way,  the 
gieater  is  the  increase  in  the  amount  of  water  behind  ;  and  the  greater,  there- 
fore— ever  increasingly  greater — its  consequent  pressure  and  weight.  The  more 
you  check  it,  in  fact,  the  more  strong  it  becomes.  Even  if  not  much  at  first,  by 
trying  to  stop  it,  you  make  it  formidable  indeed  in  the  end.  Just  so  it  is  with 
that  true  prayer  which  has  its  source  in  true  faith.  That  there  will  be  obstacles, 
sometimes,  in  the  way  of  its  immediately  succeeding,  follows,  as  it  were,  from  the 
mere  fact  that  it  is  offered  in  faith.  There  would  be  no  call  for  faith  if  there 
were  no  difficulties,  no  hindrances,  in  the  way.  But  such  hindrances  never 
eventually  check  the  flow  of  true  faith.  They  only  arouse  in  the  heart  that  offers 
it  a  greater  sense  of  its  need,  a  deeper  perception  of  the  nature  of  the  emergency, 
a  profounder  conviction  that  the  only  way  out  of  it  is  by  perseverance  in  prayer. 
And  they  only,  as  it  were,  therefore,  by  the  increasing  pressure  of  these  feelings, 
give  greater  strength  to  its  flow.  This  is  strikingly  exhibited  in  the  next  thing 
to  be  noticed  in  the  story  before  us.  The  multitude  try  to  stop  the  blind  men 
from  pressing  their  request  upon  Jesus.  They  even  go  so  far  as  to  rebuke  them 
for  applying  to  Him  at  all.  But  it  has  no  effect  in  the  way  of  stopping  them — 
none  in  the  least.  They  do  not  pray  less,  they  pray  more,  than  before.  If  the 
multitude  will  not  listen,  all  the  more  reason  for  still  appealing  to  Jesus.  If 
others  will  not  assist  them,  all  the  more  reason  for  exerting  themselves.  If 
others  bid  them  be  silent,  all  the  more  reason  for  *' crying  out  "  more  (ver.  31). 
We  see  what  it  is.  "  They  know  in  Whom  they  have  believed  " — where  their 
only  help  is,  their  only  hope,  their  only  prospect  of  good.  Greater,  therefore, 
is  the  energy  behind  than  all  the  impediments  in  their  path. 

III.  Specific  in  aim. — For  success  in  prayer  this  is  just  as  essential  as 
perseverance  and  faith.  There  must  be  a  correct  aim  as  well  as  a  strong  bow  if 
the  arrow  is  to  arrive  at  its  mark.  Where  we  have  a  definite  need  there  must 
be  a  definite  description  of  it  if  we  are  to  obtain  our  desire.  It  pleases  God,  as 
a  general  rule,  to  be  inquired  of  by  us  before  He  grants  our  requests.  This  is 
brought  out  strongly  in  the  last  thing  of  which  we  are  told  in  this  story.  There 
was  everything  in  the  case  and  attitude  and  behaviour  of  these  men  to  show  what 
it  was  they  desired.  Their  evident  blindness — their  well-known  helplessness, 
their  sightless  eyeballs,  their  eager  countenances,  their  persevering  outcries,  told 
this  plainly  enough.  But  for  all  this,  before  Jesus  grants  it  to  them,  they  must 
express  it  in  words.  They  have  come  up  to  Him.  They  are  standing  before 
Him.  The  multitudes  also  far  and  near  are  standing  around.  All  are  listening, 
all  looking  on,  all  awaiting  the  issue.  Then,  before  them  all,  and  in  the  hearing 
of  all,  the  Saviour  makes  His  inquiry  :  "  What  will  ye  that  I  should  do  unto 
you  ? "  Then,  in  the  same  silence,  and  the  same  hearing,  they  make  their 
reply.  "Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be  opened."  And  then  at  last,  and  then 
immediately,  their  desire  is  fulfilled  (ver.  34).  Why  so  ?  Because  now  nothing 
more  is  required.     To  their   faith   they   have   added  perseverance.      To   their 

479 


CHAP.  XX.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


perseverance  they  have  added  definiteness.  There  is  nothing  more  to  be  done. 
It  is  like  a  man  who  has  succeeded  in  finding  the  right  key  to  a  door  ;  and  who 
has  subsequently  made  his  way  with  much  expenditure  of  time  and  trouble  to  the 
door  of  that  house ;  and  has  finally  put  the  key  into  the  lock  of  that  door,  and 
shot  back  its  bolt.     He  has  nothing  to  do  now  but  go  in  ! 

What  is  that  we,  individually,  desire  and  need  at  Christ's  hands?  Let  us 
think  of  it  now  in  the  light  of  these  truths.  Let  us  think  of  it  in  faith.  Do 
we  believe  Him  to  be  willing  and  able  to  grant  it  ?  To  grant  it  exactly  in  the 
shape  that  we  ask  ?  Or  in  some  other  equivalent  and  perhaps  much  better 
shape  ?  Have  we  asked  for  it  as  long  and  as  earnestly  and  in  the  face  of  as 
many  difficulties  as  the  men  in  this  story  ?  And  have  we  as  yet  succeeded 
in  putting  our  request  into  as  definite  and  clear  a  shape  as  they  finally  did 
with  their  prayer?  Perhaps  if  we  think  of  these  questions,  and  the  lessons 
they  involve,  and  try  to  put  them  into  practice,  we  too  shall  be  able,  as  was 
done  by  these  men,  to  turn  delay  into  promptness,  and  hindrances  into  helps, 
and  disappointment  into  hope,  and  hope  into  fruition,  and  darkness  itself  into 
light. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  29-34.  The  cure  of  two  blind  2.  He  inquired  further  into  their  case, 
beggars. — I.  Their  address  to  Christ  — "  What  will  ye,  etc.  ?"  Which  speaks: 
(vers.  29,30).  1.  The  circumstances  of  (1)  A  very  fair  offer.  *' Here  I  am; 
it  are  observable.  As  Christ  and  His  let  Me  know  what  you  would  have, 
disciples  were  departing  from  Jericho,  and  you  shall  have  it."  (2)  A  con- 
in  the  presence  of  a  great  multitude.  dition  annexed  to  this  offer,  which  is 
Two  blind  men  concurred  in  the  request ;  a  very  easy  and  reasonable  one,  that 
these  joint  sufferers  were  joint  suitors,  they  should  tell  Him  what  they  would 
etc.  2.  The  address  itself  is  more  obser-  have  Him  do  for  them, 
vable.  "  Have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord,  3.  He  cured  them. — He  did  not  say, 
Thou  Son  of  David "  ;  repeated  again  "  Seek  in  vain."  What  He  did  was 
(ver.  31).  (1)  Here  is  an  example  of  an  instance  of  (1)  His  pity;  (2)  His 
importunity  in  prayer ;  they  cried  out  power.  "  They  followed  Him."  None 
as  men  in  earnest.  Cold  desiies  do  follow  Christ  blindfold ;  He  first  by 
but  beg  denials.  (2)  Of  humility  in  His  grace  opens  men's  eyes,  and  so 
prayer.  Only  have  mercy  ;  they  ask  draws  their  hearts  after  Him.  They 
not  for  silver  or  gold,  though  they  were  followed  Christ  as  His  disciples,  to 
poor;  but  mercy,  mercy.  (3)  Oi faith  learn  of  Him;  and  as  His  witnesses, 
in  prayer.  It  is  of  excellent  use  in  eye-witnesses,  to  bear  their  testimony 
prayer  to  eye  Christ  in  the  grace  and  to  Him,  and  to  His  power  and  good- 
glory  of  His  Messiahship  ;  remember  ness. — M.  Henry. 
that  He  is  the  Son  of  David,   whose 

office  it  is  to  help  and  save  ;  and  plead  Ver.    29.   Jericho. — On   the  way  to 

it  with  Him.     (4)    Of  perseverance  in  Jerusalem   lay   the    beautiful   city   of 

prayer,     notwithstanding     discourage-  Jericho.     The  place  now  called  by  that 

ment  (ver.  31).  name  is  such  a  wretched  assemblage  of 

II.  The   answer   of  Christ   to   this  miserable  hovels  that  it  is  difficult  for 

address  of  theirs.     Tlie  multitude  re-  the  traveller  to  realise  that  the  Jericho 

buked   them  ;    but  Christ  encouraged  of  the  days  of  our  Lord  was  not  only 

them.     It  were  ill  for  us  if  the  Master  the  most  luxurious  place  of  resort  in 

were  not  more  kind  and  tender  than  Palestine,  but  one  that  might  vie  with 

the  multitude.  its  fashionable  rivals   throughout  the 

1.   He  ^^  stood  still  and  called  them^^  Roman  Empire.      Since   the   days   of 

(ver.  32).  Herod  the  Qreat  it  had  been  the  winter 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,       chap.  xx. 


residence  of  the  Court.  Jerusalem 
being  on  the  cold  hill-top,  it  was  con- 
venient to  have  within  easy  reach  a 
warm  and  sheltered  spot  in  the  deep 
valley  of  the  Jordan;  and  with  a 
delightful  winter  climate  and  a  rich 
and  fertile  soil,  Jericho  needed  only 
the  lavish  expenditure  of  money  to 
make  it  into  "  a  little  Paradise,"  as 
Josephus  calls  it.  With  its  gardens  of 
roses  and  groves  of  palm,  it  was,  even 
before  the  time  of  Herod,  so  beautiful 
a  place,  that,  as  a  gem  of  the  East, 
Antony  bestowed  it  on  Cleopatra  as  an 
expression  of  his  devotion ;  after  it 
passed  into  the  hands  of  Herod,  a 
theatre  was  erected  and  an  amphi- 
theatre and  many  other  noble  and 
costly  buildings ;  and  during  the  season 
it  was  thronged  by  the  rich  and  the 
great  of  the  land,  among  whom  would 
be  distinguished  visitors  from  foreign 
parts.  What  effect  would  all  this 
grandeur  have  on  Christ  and  His  dis- 
ciples as  they  passed  through  it  on 
their  way  to  Jerusalem  1  We  are  not 
told.  Two  things  only  are  noted  as 
worthy  of  record  ;  the  salvation  of  a 
rich  publican  (Lukexix.  1-10),  and  the 
healing  of  two  poor  blind  men.  Not 
the  gardens  and  palaces  of  the  city, 
but  its  sins  and  sorrows,  engage  the 
Saviour's  thoughts  and  occupy  His 
time. — /.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

Yer.  31.  Crowds  around  Christ. — 
Crowds  gathered  daily  around  Jesus 
Christ.  He  was  thronged,  pressed, 
almost  persecuted,  by  the  ever-accumu- 
lating multitudes.  It  is  evident  that 
this  was  not  always,  if  it  was  ever,  an 
advantage.  The  crowd  was  rather 
hindersome  than  helpful. 

I.  What  of  the  crowds  around  Jesus 
Christ  to-day? — Who  are  they,  and 
what  is  their  social  effect  ?  There  is  a 
crowd:  1.  Of  nominal  followers.  2.  Of 
bigots.  3.  Of  controversialists.  4.  Of 
ceremonialists. 

II.  See  how  difficult  it  is  for  a 
simple-minded  and  earnest  inquirer  to 
find  his  way  to  Jesus  Christ  through 
such  throngs. — 1.  As  a  question  of 
mere  time    they    make     it    difficult. 


2.  They  distract  the  inquirer's  thoughts. 

3.  They  chill  the  inquirer's  love. 
III.    Against    this  set  the  glorious 

fact  that  there  is  no  crowd,  how  dense 
or  turbulent  soever,  through  which  an 
earnest  inquirer 'may  not  find  his  way. 
— There  is  a  way  to  the  Master ;  seek 
and  thou  shalt  find;  the  Master,  not 
the  crowd,  must  redeem  and  pardon 
the  sons  of  men. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Vers.  30-34.  Jesus  gives  sight  (A 
children's  sermon). — I.  Let  us  talk 
about  these  two  men. — Notice  three 
things  concerning  them.  1.  They  were 
blind.  Many  ways  in  which  people 
lose  their  sight  :  accident,  sickness, 
etc.  Yery  likely  these  men  had  been 
born  blind.  Better  to  be  born  blind 
than  to  lose  one's  sight  afterwards. 
I  think  such  people  are  happier  because 
they  really  do  not  know  what  they  lose 
in  not  having  sight.  Although  these 
men  were  blind  they  were  not  dumb. 
They  used  their  tongues  in  order  to 
get  eyes.  2.  They  were  not  only 
blind,  but  poor.  Some  blind,  but  not 
poor ;  e.g.  late  Professor  Fawcett. 
3.  They  were  not  only  blind  and  poor, 
but  beggars.  Luke  tells  us  that  one 
was  a  beggar  (Luke  xviii.  35),  and  I 
think  we  may  conclude  that  his  com- 
panion was  a  beggar  also. 

II.  The  Person  to  whom  they  spoke. 
— Jesus.     The  right  Person. 

III.  They  asked  the  right  Person  at 
the  right  time. — When  a  life-boat 
comes  out  to  a  vessel  that  is  sinking 
in  the  sea  the  poor  sailors  who  are 
clinging  to  the  rigging  feel  that  now 
or  never  they  must  leap  on  board. 
What  was  it  that  made  these  blind 
men  cry  out  so  loudly,  "  Have  mercy 
on  us,"  etc.  ?  Was  it  not  because  they 
felt  that  if  they  did  not  get  their  sight 
now  they  might  be  blind  all  their 
days  ? 

I Y.  They  would  not  leave  off  crying 
to  Jesus  until  He  noticed  them. — The 
people  told  them  to  be  quiet. 

Y.  Let  me  now  speak  to  you  about 
the  power  of  these  men's  prayers  upon 
the  Lord  Jesus. — They  made  Jesus 
stand  still.    He  touched  their  eyes,  etc. 

n  481 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW, 


Learn  :  1.  Whatever  your  trouble  may 
be,  Jesus  is  the  right  Person  to  whom 
to  go  for  help.  2.  Now  is  the  time  to 
go  to  Jesus.  3.  Never  leave  off  pray- 
ing because  somebody  tells  you  to  do 
so.  4.  Make  the  same  use  of  your 
eyes  as  the  blind  men  did.  They 
"followed  Jesus  in  the  way."  We 
follow  people  when  we  try  to  do  as 
they  do. — W.  Harris. 

Vers  32-34.  The  compassionate 
Christ. — 1.  Christ  taketh  notice  of 
such  suppliants  as  the  multitude  doth 
despise.  He  standeth  still  to  hear 
these  blind  men's  suit.  2.  Where 
there  is  faith  and  sincerity  the  Lord 
will  draw  it  forth  to  open  view,  for 


His  own  glory  and  the  good  of  the 
believer;  therefore  He  asketh  what 
they  would  have,  that  it  might  be 
known  that  they  did  not  seek  money, 
but  the  fruit  of  His  Divine  power. 
3.  When  misery  is  laid  forth  in  faith 
before  Christ,  He  meeteth  it  with 
compassion,  as  here  in  these  blind 
men.  4.  It  is  easy  for  Christ  to  do 
every  greatest  work,  as  here,  to  open 
the  eyes  of  the  blind,  and  to  give  sight 
to  them  j  for  He  touched  their  eyes 
and  they  immediately  received  sight. 
5.  It  is  reason  that  what  gift  we  get  of 
Christ,  we  employ  it  for  His  honour, 
for  their  eyes  received  sight,  and  they 
followed  Him. — David  Dickson, 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


CRITICAL  NOTES. 


We  now  enter  upon  the  crowded  and  peculiarly  solemn  events  of  the  great  week  of  our 
Saviour's  career,  His  last  week — the  passion  week  (Morison). 

Ver.  1.  Jerusalem. — The  Jerusalem  of  that  day,  with  "its  imperial  mantle  of  proud 
towers,"  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world.  Tac.,  Hist.,  v.  8  {Earrar).  In 
every  respect  this  city  is  the  mysterious  and  wonderful  flower  of  history ;  in  its  situation, 
in  its  history,  in  its  religious  position,  and  especially  in  its  symbolical  character.  The  city 
lay  high ;  and  the  hills  around  came  first  into  view,  over  which  it  spread  gradually  into  the 
higher  and  lower  city ;  the  hill  of  Zion  being  the  centre — Zion,  Moriah,  Bezetha,  Akra.  Then 
the  valleys,  which  made  it  a  natural  fortress :  toward  the  west  the  Valley  of  Gihon  ;  toward 
the  south-west  and  south,  Ge-hinnom ;  toward  the  east,  the  Valley  of  Kidron,  bounded  by 
the  low  hill  of  Gihon,  the  Mount  of  Evil  Counsel,  and  the  Mount  of  Olives  with  its  three 
peaks.  The  city  belonged  to  the  inheritance  of  Benjamin,  but  was  for  the  most  part 
inhabited  by  the  tribe  of  Judah  {Lange).  Bethphage. — Is  by  some  supposed  to  have  been 
close  to  Bethany ;  others  place  it  on  the  summit  of  Olivet,  where  the  Arab  hamlet  of  Et 
Tor  now  stands.  A  third  possible  site  is  the  present  village  of  Silwan,  especially  if  we  may 
suppose  the  name  to  be  a  corruption  of  Beth-Aphek,  and  to  mean  "  House  of  tie  Fountain" 
(En  Rogel).  The  position  and  the  name  are,  however,  alike  doubtful  (6*.  R.  Conder,  R.E.). 
The  Mount  of  Olives. — Bounds  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and  rises  considerably  higher  than  Mount 
Zion.  It  is  the  only  one  of  all  the  "  mountains  standing  round  about  Jerusalem "  which 
comes  quite  close  to  the  city.  It  is  more  of  a  ridge  than  a  mountain,  and  has  four  distinct 
summits,  from  the  loftiest  of  which  a  magnificent  view  is  commanded  at  once  of  the  city  on 
the  western  side,  and  of  the  wilderness  of  Judaea,  the  course  of  the  Jordan,  and  the  towering 
mountains  of  Moab  on  the  other  or  eastern  side  (Morison).  The  olives  and  olive-yards,  from 
which  it  derived  its  name,  must  in  earlier  times  have  clothed  it  more  completely  than  at 
present  (Stanley). 

Ver.  2.  The  village. — Probably  either  Bethphage  or  Bethany.  An  ass. — Oriental  travellers 
describe  the  high  estimation  in  which  the  ass  is  held  in  the  East  {Carr). 

Ver.  3.  He  will  send  them. — The  owner  was  probably,  in  some  sense,  a  disciple  of  Jesus. 

Ver.  4.  Spoken  by  the  prophet. — The  passage  referred  to  is  quoted  from  Zech.  ix.  9.  It  is 
quoted  freely,  however,  and  in  a  condensed  form.  And  the  Evangelist,  while  quoting  it,  had 
been  thinking  on  another  Messianic  oracle,  which  goes  delightfully  abreast  with  it,  and 
which  is  contained  in  Isa.  Ixii.  11.  From  this  other  oracle  he  adopts  the  introductory 
expression.  "  Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Zion  "  (^Morison). 

482 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxi. 


Ver.  5.  Thy  King.  —This  was  the  first  occasion  on  which  our  Lord  distinctly  put  forth 
His  claim  to  royalty  {Gibson). 

Ver,  8.  A  very  great  multitude. — The  most  part  of  the  multitude  (R.V.).  Part  of  the  crowd 
had  come  with  Him  from  Galilee,  part  streamed  from  Bethany,  excited  by  the  recent  resur- 
rection of  Lazarus  (John  xii.  17).  Some  went  before  Him,  some  followed.  As  they  advanced 
they  were  met  by  a  fresh  crowd  pouring  forth  from  Jerusalem.  Of  the  latter,  St.  Jolm 
records  that  they  came  out  with  palm-branches  in  their  hands,  as  if  to  sakite  a  King  with 
their  symbols  of  triumph.  Cf.  Rev.  vii.  9  (Plum_ptre).  Spread  their  garments. — 
Oriental  mark  of  honour  at  the  reception  of  kings  on  their  entrance  into  cities  (2  Kings 
ix.  13)  {Langd). 

Ver.  9.  Hosanira. — It  was  a  kind  of  holy  hurrah.  The  word  "  hosanna  "  is  the  Greek  form 
of  a  Hebrew  phrase  occurring  in  Ps.  cxviii.  25,  and  meaning  "  O  save  1 "  It  is  thus 
remarkably  like  the  aspiration  or  petition  that  is  breathed  in  our  national  anthem,  "  God 
save  the  Queen !  "  And  as  salvation,  in  its  fulness,  is  just  life,  or  eternal  life,  the  petition 
breathed  is  equivalent  to  Live  !  or  Live  for  ever  1  and  is  thus  tantamount,  in  the  original 
import,  to  the  French  Vive  !  and  the  Italian  Viva  !  While,  however,  the  original  import  of 
the  Hebrew  word  is  O  save !  the  term  lost,  in  its  current  usage,  its  precise  primary  idea,  and 
came,  like  its  modern  equivalents,  to  be  just  a  peculiar  form  of  a  hearty  acclamation, 
expressive  of  a  mingled  combination  of  approbation,  admiration,  and  deep  desire  (Morison). 
He  that  cometh  (Zra&J^)  was  a  recognised  Messianic  title  {Carr).  In  the  highest.— There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  expression  means  in  the  highest  places,  i.e.  in  the  heavens  ;  and  this 
is  generally  admitted  by  critics.  But  the  import  of  the  entire  acclamation,  "  Hosanna  in 
the  heavens,"  is  a  matter  of  much  dispute.  We  could  not  say,  "  Hurrah  in  the  heavens  I  " 
But  the  Hebrews  could  say,  most  appropriately  and  beautifully,  "  Hosanna  in  the  heavens  !  " 
They  could  use  such  a  complex  acclamation  because  :  1.  Hosanna  originally  means  0  save  ! 
and :  2.  The  highest  salvation  possible  is  consummated,  and  must  be  consummated,  in  the 
heavens.  But  when  the  word  hosanna,  losing  its  original  supplicatory  force,  came  to  be 
used  as  a  mere  acclaiming  expression  of  the  highest  good  feelings,  the  appended  phrase, 
which  owed  its  peculiar  appropriateness  to  the  primary  import  of  the  exclamation,  just 
served  to  intensify,  to  the  highest  degree  possible,  the  expression  of  good  wishes.  3Iay  the 
richest  Messing s  of  heaven  be  showered  upon  thy  head  I  Grotius  thus  was  not  so  very  far 
wrong  when  he  interpreted  the  expression  as  meaning — in  a  holy  kind  of  way — three  times 
three  !  (3Ioriso7i.)     The  parallel  passages  in  Mark  xi.  and  Luke  xix.  should  be  studied. 

Ver.  10.  All  the  city. — By  a  census  taken  in  the  time  of  Nero  it  was  ascertained  that  there 
were  2,700,000  Jews  present  at  the  Passover.  We  may  picture  the  narrow  streets  of  Jerusalem 
thronged  with  eager,  inquisitive  crowds  demanding,,  with  Oriental  vivacity,  in  many  tongues 
and  dialects,  "  who  is  this  V  (Carr).  Was  moved. — The  word  in  the  original  is  forcible, 
"  convulsed "  or  "  stirred  "  as  by  an  earthquake,  or  by  a  violent  wind.  Cf .  xxvii.  51  and 
Eev.  vi.  13,  where  the  same  verb  is  used  (ibid.). 

Ver.  12.  Cast  out. — Apparently  a  second  cleansing  of  the  temple.  See  John  ii.  15-17. 
Them  that  sold  and  bought  in  the  temple. — The  first  person  to  introduce  this  sacrilegious 
custom  was,  according  to  the  Talmud,  one  Babha  Ben  Buta,  who  brought  three  thousand 
sheep  of  the  flocks  of  Kedar  into  the  Mountain  of  the  House,  i.e.  into  the  court  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  so  within  the  consecrated  precincts.  The  practice  grew  out  of  the  desire  to 
meet  the  convenience  of  the  foreign  Jews,  who  visited  the  Holy  City  at  the  feasts,  and  were 
glad  to  purchase,  close  at  hand,  the  beasts  they  desired  to  ofiEer  in  sacrifice,  and  to  exchange 
their  foreign  money  for  the  orthodox  Jewish  shekel  (Tuck). 

Ver.  17.  Bethany. — A  village  "standing  in  a  shallow  ravine  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  to  the  south-east  of  the  central  summit  "  (Thrupp's  Ancisnt  Jerusalem').  It 
is  now  called  El-'Azireyeh,  from  El-'Azir,  the  Arabic  form  of  the  name  Lazarus. 

Ver.  18.  He  hungered. — His  hungering  is  pretty  good  evidence  that  He  had  not  been 
staying  in  the  house  of  Martha  and  Mary.  Most  likely  He  had  been  much  with  Himself  and 
with  His  Father,  wrapped  up  in  meditation,  rapt  up  in  supplication  (Morison). 

Ver.  19.  A  fig  tree. — Rather,  a  single  fg  tree. — In  the  way. — By  the  n'ay -side  (R.V.).  It  was 
often  planted  by  the  way-sides,  because  the  dust  of  the  road  was  an  absorbing  counteraction 
to  the  strong  flow  of  the  sap— so  hindering  a  too  great  development  of  leaves,  and  promoting 
its  fruitfulness  {Lajige).  Found  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  only. — The  fig-tree  loses  its 
leaves  in  the  winter  ;  indeed  it  looks  particularly  bare  with  its  white  naked  branches.  One 
species,  however,  puts  forth  fruit  and  leaves  in  the  very  early  spring,  the  fruit  appearing 
before  the  leaves.  It  was  doubtless  a  fig  tree  of  this  kind  that  Jesus  observed,  and  seeing 
the  leaves  expected  to  find  fruit  thereon.  At  the  time  of  the  Passover  the  first  leaf-buds 
would  scarcely  have  appeared  on  the  common  fig.  tree,  while  this  year's  ripe  fruit  would  not 
be  found  till  four  months  later.  The  teaching  of  the  incident  depends  on  this  circumstance 
(cf.  Luke  xiii.  6-9).  The  early  fig  tree,  conspicuous  among  its  leafless  brethren,  seemed 
alone  to  make  a  show  of  fruit  and  to  invite  inspection.  So  Israel,  alone  among  the  nations 
of  the  world,  held  forth  a  promise.    From  Israel  alone  could  fruit  be  expected ;  but  none 

483 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


was  found,  and  their  harvest-time  was  past.  Therefore  Israel  perished  as  a  nation,  while 
the  Gentile  races,  barren  hitherto,  but  now  on  the  verge  of  their  spring-time,  were  ready  to 
burst  into  blossom  and  bear  fruit  {Carr). 

Ver.  21.  Be  thou  removed,  etc. — See  note  on  xvii.  20. 

Ver.  23.  The  chief  priests  and  the  elders.— St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  add  "the  scribes,"  thus 
including  representatives  of  the  three  constituent  elements  of  the  Sanhedrin  {Plumptre), 
By  what  authority,  etc. — Their  inquiry  was  hostile  in  its  design;  His  opponents  would 
oppress  Him  at  once  by  their  authority,  and  therefore  they  interrupted  Him  even  in  the  midst 
of  His  teaching.  But  the  form  of  their  inquiry  was  ofl&cial,  and  according  to  theocratical  rule  ; 
the  Jewish  rulers  had  the  right  to  demand  of  a  man  who  exercised  prophetic  functions  the 
warranty  of  his  prophetical  character.  But,  as  Jesus  bad  already  abundantly  authenticated 
Himself  by  various  miracles,  their  seemingly  justifiable  act  was  only  a  shameless  avowal  of 
unbelief  (Lange). 

Ver.  25.  The  baptism  of  John. — Meaning  his  whole  mission  and  ministry,  of  which  baptism 
was  the  proper  character  {Brown).  They  reasoned  with  themselves. — They  reasoned  aside 
among  themselves.  They  turned  aside  to  one  another,  and  privately  conferred  together  on 
the  Saviour's  question  {Moriso7i). 

Ver.  27.  We  cannot  tell. —  We  hnow  not  (R.V.).  Before  such  a  tribunal  the  Prophet  whom 
they  called  in  question  might  well  refuse  to  plead  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  32.  In  the  way  of  righteousness. — The  term  seems  used  in  a  half-technical  sense,  as 
expressing  the  aspect  of  righteousness  which  the  Pharisees  themselves  recognised  (vi.  1), 
and  which  included,  as  its  three  great  elements,  the  almsgiving,  fasting,  and  prayer,  that 
were  so  conspicuous  both  in  the  life  and  in  the  teaching  of  the  Baptist  (ibid.). 

Ver.  33.  A  vineyard. — Was  regarded  as  the  most  valuable  plantation,  which  yielded  the 
largest  harvest,  but  required  also  the  most  constant  labour  and  care  (Sehaff).  A  winepress. — 
The  winepress  was  often  dug  or  hewn  out  of  the  limestone  rock  in  Palestine.  There  were 
two  receptacles  or  vats.  The  upper  one  was  strictly  the  press  or  \7)v6s  (Matthew),  the  lower 
one  the  winefat  or  viroK-qvLov  (Mark)  into  which  the  expressed  juice  of  the  grape  passed. 
The  two  vats  are  mentioned  together  only  in  Joel  iii.  13,  "  The  press  igatK)  is  full,  the  fats 
{yekahini)  overflow ''  ( Carr).  A  tower. — Which  would  serve  partly  as  a  watch-tower,  and 
partly  as  a  storage  for  the  wine,  and  partly,  also,  as  a  residence  for  the  workmen,  in  the 
season  when  their  attendance  would  be  required  {Morison).  Let  it  out  to  husbandmen. — 
This  kind  of  tenancy  prevails  in  many  parts  of  Europe.  It  is  known  as  the  metayer  system, 
the  arrangement  being  that  the  occupier  of  the  land  should  pay  to  the  landlord  a  portion — 
originally  half — of  the  produce  {Carr). 

Ver.  38.  Let  us  seize  on  his  inheritance.— This  would  be  impossible  in  real  life,  but  not 
more  impossible  than  the  thought  of  the  Pharisees  that  by  the  death  of  Jesus  they  would 
gain  the  spiritual  supremacy  (ibid.). 

Ver.  44.  Grind  him  to  powder. — Scatter  him  as  dust  (R.V.).  Literally,  it  will  winnow 
him.  The  Saviour's  idea  is  compressed  and  pregnant.  If  the  stone  fall  on  anyone,  it  will 
pound  him  into  atoms,  and  thus  dissipate  him  as  effectually  as  if  he  were  the  dust  of  the 
threshing-floor  that  needed  to  be  driven  away  (3Iorison). 

Ver.  46.  When  they  sought  to  lay  hands  on  Him. — The  Sanhedrin  aimed  at  two  things : 

1.  To  seize  Jesus  quickly,  for  the  Passover  (during  which  no  hostile  measures  could  be  taken) 
was  close  at  hand  ;  and  because  Jesus  might  be  expected  to  quit  Jerusalem  after  the  feast. 

2,  To  seize  Him  apart  from  the  people  ;  for  the  Galilseans  would  suffer  no  one  to  lay  hands 
on  their  King  and  Prophet.     Treachery  alone  enabled  the  Jews  to  secure  their  end  (Carr). 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—11. 

The  kingdom  claimed. — We  see  the  Saviour  here  in  an  attitude  of  a  novel  des- 
cription. He  goes  back,  as  it  were,  to  what  was  claimed  for  Him  soon  after  His 
birth,  when  the  wise  men  came  to  worship  Him  as  born  King  of  the  Jews 
(ii.).  He  does  so,  also,  in  much  the  same  way  as  was  done  for  Him  then. 
The  wise  men  did  not  find  their  King  in  circumstances  of  power  and  display. 
Neither  does  this  King  appear  now,  as  it  were,  in  the  purple,  notwithstanding 
the  marked  explicitness  of  all  that  He  does.  Nothing  is  meeker,  indeed,  as 
nothing  is  plainer  than  the  claim  that  He  makes.  This  two-fold  character  may 
be  traced — first,  in  the  preparation  He  makes  for  entering  Jerusalem ;  secondly, 
in  the  homage  He  accepts  when  so  doing  ;  and,  thirdly,  in  the  prophecy  He  fulfils. 

I.  Preparation  for  entry. — How  noticeable  the  fact,  in  His  case,  that  there 
should  be  such  preparation  at  all  I     Such  careful  choice  of  messengers !     Such 

484 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxi. 


specific  directions  !  Such  thought  for  contingencies  !  Such  a  general  and  unusual 
appearance  of  "state"  (vers.  2,  3).  How  still  more  noticeable  the  special  method 
by  which  this  preparation  is  effected.  As  Artaxerxes  did  for  Ezra  (Ezra 
vii.  8,  9),  as  the  Roman  Legionaries  afterwards  did  when  they  "  impressed  " 
(xxvii.  32,  R.Y.,  margin)  Simon  the  Cyrenian  to  "  bear  the  cross,"  so  did  the 
Saviour  do  in  this  case.  '*  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them  "  (ver.  3).  That  is  how 
He  then  "  requisitioned  "  what  was  necessary  for  His  service.  Was  there  not, 
also,  a  touch  of  the  same  in  the  choice  of  animal  made  ?  As  became  a  king  it 
was  to  be  one  which  had  never  before  been  employed  in  that  way.  So  Mark 
xi.  2  ;  Luke  xix.  30  (cf.  John  xix.  41).  So,  perhaps,  Matthew  also  (undesignedly), 
in  noticing  the  fact  that  the  animal  employed  was  accompanied  by  its  "  mother  " 
(xxi.  2,  7).  Yet,  when  it  came,  it  was  but  a  lowly  creature  at  best ;  not  such  as 
had  been  half  promised  once  in  connection  with  that  place  (Jer.  xxii.  4);  and 
only  such  as  a  peaceful  sovereign  (so  Wordsworth)  would  employ.  Altogether, 
therefore,  so  far,  about  as  unassuming  an  entry  as  a  royal  entry  could  be  ! 

II.  Homage  accepted. — This  also  was  marked  by  that  double  character  of 
which  we  have  spoken.  It  was  so,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  way  of  action  and 
deed.  The  animal  ridden  on  was  caparisoned  by  the  garments  of  the  disciples — 
the  best  that  they  had  for  the  purpose  on  hand.  The  way  was  strewn  by  the  mul- 
titudes with  branches  cut  down  from  the  neighbouring  trees — the  best  they  could 
obtain  for  that  purpose.  All,  therefore,  in  its  significance  was  befitting  a  king. 
And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  in  its  nature,  how  unlike  that  which  most  kings 
would  expect !  What  were  the  garments  of  the  disciples  and  the  branches  of  the 
multitude  to  the  purple  hangings  and  gorgeous  trappings  and  costly  array  with 
which  other  sovereigns  would  have  come  in  ?  So,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the 
homage  paid  now  in  the  way  of  language  and  voice.  The  royal  lineage  of  the 
Saviour,  the  more  than  royal  dignity  of  His  mission,  the  fitness  of  the  occasion 
for  the  very  highest  of  praises  (ver.  9),  are  all  expressly  and  loudly  acclaimed ; 
and  the  Holy  "  City  "  itself,  also,  is  therefore  "  stirred  "  to  its  depths,  because 
understanding  all  this  (ver.  10).  It  feels  as  it  listens  that  it  is  listening,  indeed, 
to  the  "shout  of  a  King  "  (cf.  Numb,  xxiii.  21).  And  yet,  at  the  same  time,  as 
in  those  previous  cases,  how  different  a  note  can  be  easily  heard  !  "  Who  is 
this  ?  "  the  city  cries  out  as  it  catches  the  sound  of  this  manifestly  royal  approach. 
"  This  is  Jesus,  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  in  Galilee,"  is  the  reply  it  receives.  A 
mere  "  provincial,"  therefore,  though  thus  coming  to  this  metropolis  !  A  despised 
provincial,  though  entering  it  as  a  King  !  And  One  who  is  more  at  present  of  a 
conspicuous  Teacher,  when  all  is  said,  than  of  a  sceptred  Ruler  of  men  !  (ver.  11). 

III.  The  prophecy  fulfilled. — Long  before  this,  "in  visions  to  His  saints" 
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  20,  so  one  version),  it  had  pleased  God  to  show  something  of  this. 
Something,  in  the  first  place,  of  its  peculiar  glory  and  joy.  How  it  should  be 
something  to  "  tell  "  to  "  Zion  "  as  good  tidings  indeed — even  the  good  news  of 
being  ''  visited  "  by  her  King — and  that,  above  all,  and  unlike  the  experience  of 
centuries,  by  a  King  of  her  own  (ver.  5).  Something,  in  the  next  place,  of  the 
singularly  unassuming  character  of  that  visit,  and  of  the  singularly  gracious 
meekness  of  demeanour  and  the  equally  similar  lowliness  of  equipage  by  which 
that  visit  of  royalty  would  be  marked  (ver.  5  again).  And  something,  therefore, 
in  the  last  place,  of  the  remarkable  deliberation  as  well  as  remarkable  definiteness 
which  we  are  taught  to  see  in  this  scene.  Just  so  exactly  had  the  Lord  Jesus 
always  meant  to  enter  Jerusalem  at  this  time.  Just  so  exactly  had  the  Eternal 
Father  meant  that  He  should.  And  just  so  exactly,  generations  before,  had  He 
declared  that  He  would.  "All  this  was  done  "  that  that  prophecy  might  thus 
"be  fulfilled"! 

What  is  thus  presented  to  us  is  of  yet  further  importance  because  of  its  con- 
nection : — 

485 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


1.  With  what  immediately  followed. — It  is  the  key  to  much  that  ensued.  As 
the  Saviour  now  began,  so  He  went  on — advancing  so  far,  but  not  for  the  time 
any  farther ;  asserting  His  rights  as  a  King,  but  not  yet  acting  upon  them ; 
never  foregoing,  but  never  enforcing  them  ;  not  flinching  from  truth,  not  inflict- 
ing punishment ;  wearing  the  crown,  but  not  using  the  sword.  The  time  for 
that  was  not  yet. 

2.  With  the  present  condition  of  things. — What  He  claimed  then  is  what  He 
wields  now — the  kingdom  only  of  grace.  He  asks  our  submission.  He  does  not 
enforce  it.  He  rebukes  our  transgressions,  but  gives  us  time  to  repent.  He 
claims  our  obedience.  He  does  not  compel  it.  Rather  He  desires  to  win  it  by 
not  yet  visiting  our  transgressions.     See  Rom.  ii.  4  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9, 15  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4. 

3.  With  what  is  yet  to  appear. — This  almost  anxious,  this  carefully  maintained, 
this  long  protracted  postponement  of  punishment  only  makes  it  the  more  sure  in 
the  end.  And  the  more  terrible  also.  Nothing  is  worse  than  not  punished,  yet 
not  repented  of,  sin  !  Every  succeeding  moment  of  time  makes  it  both  greater 
and  worse  !  (Rom.  ii.  5). 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1-9.    The  King  and  the  king-  (ver.    2) ;    He   has   power   over    men 

dom. — Not  only  did  the  means  adopted  without   a   soldier  (ver.   3) ;    He  has 

by  our  Lord  rise  naturally  out  of  the  simply  to  say,  "  The  Lord  hath  need," 

circumstances   in   which   He  and   His  and   immediately    His    royal    will    is 

followers  were  placed,  but  they  were  loyally   fulfilled  !     Evidently    He   has 

specially  suited  to  suggest  important  the  mind  of  a  king  and  the  will  of  a 

truths    concerning    the   kingdom    He  king ;  has  He  not  also  the  heart  of  a 

claimed    as   His    own.       If    He    had  king,  of  a  true  shepherd  of  the  people  ? 

entered   the   city   in  regal  pomp  and  See  how  he  bears  the  burden  of  their 

splendour  it  would  have  conveyed  an  future  on  His  heart — a  burden  which 

entirely   false    idea   of   the   kingdom.  weighs  so  heavily  upon  Him  that  He 

The  method  He  did  adopt  was  such  as  cannot  restrain  His  tears  (Luke  xix. 

to  give  a  true  idea  of  it.  41-44).     There  is  no  kingly  state  ;  but 

I.  It  strikingly  suggested  the  king-  was  not  His  a  kingly  soul  who  in  such 

liness  of  lowliness,  which  was  one  of  its  humble  guise  rode  into  Jerusalem  that 

great    distinctive    principles.       As    we  day  ? 

look  back  over  His  recent  instructions  IT.  Not  less  than  lowliness  is  peace 

to  His  disciples  we  see  how  very  much  suggested    as     characteristic     of    His 

this  thought  was   in  His   heart,   and  kingdom.     1.  By  the  manner  of  His 

how    great   was    the    importance    He  entrance ;  for  while  the  horse  and  the 

attached  to  it.     He  had  just    taught  chariot  were  suggestive  of  war,  the  ass 

them  that  the  Son  of  man  had  come,  was  the   symbol   of   peace.     2.    Then, 

not   to    be    ministered    unto,    but    to  the  prophecy  is  one  of  peace.     Imme- 

minister  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  diately  after  the  words  quoted  by  the 

for  many ;  and  His  manner  of  entering  Evangelist  there  follows  this  remark- 

into  His  capital  must  be  in  harmony  able    promise :    "  I    will    cut   off   the 

with  the  lowly,  self-renouncing  work  chariot  from  Ephraim,  and  the  horse 

He  had  come  to  do.     Thus  He  shows  from  Jerusalem,  and   the  battle   bow 

in  the  most  impressive  way  that  His  shall  be  cut  off;  and  He  shall  speak 

kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.     There  peace    unto    the    heathen ;    and    His 

is  no  suggestion  of  rivalry  with  Caesar,  dominion  shall   be   from  sea  even   to 

yet   to    those    who   look    beneath   the  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  to   the 

surface    He   is  manifestly  more  of    a  ends  of  the   earth."     It   would  seem, 

king  than  any  Csesar.     He  has  know-  indeed,   that   some,    at    least,   in    the 

ledge   of    everything    without   a    spy  multitude   realised   that   through   the 

486 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxi. 


Messiah  was  to  be  expected  a  deeper  man,  and  so  has  need  of  the  loyalty, 

peace   than   that    between   man    and  activity,  gifts,  examples  of  men.     This 

man.      This   deeper   peace   may  have  is  an  illustration  of  Divine  goodness  in 

been  suggested  to  their  minds  by  the  putting  honour  on  man,  for  it  might 

words  following  next  in  the  prophecy,  have   been  otherwise.      For   instance, 

which  goes  on  to  speak  of  prisoners  of  (1)    God    might   have   sent   successive 

hope  rescued  from  the  pit,  and  turning  choirs  of  angels  to  continue  the  anthem 

to  the  stronghold ;  or   by    the  Psalm  of  the  evangel  that  broke  the  stillness 

from   which   their   cry,  "  Hosanna  in  of  the  fields  over  Bethlehem ;  or  (2)  the 

the  highest,"  was  taken  (Ps.  cxviii.).  skies   might   have  been   a   scroll   and 

Certain  it  is  that  their  minds  did  rise  the  stars  the  alphabet  of   the    Divine 

to  a  higher  conception  of  the  work  of  writing.     So  Constantino's  myth  about 

the  Messiah  than  they  had  given  token  seeing   the   cross  might  have    been    a 

of  before  ;  for  the  cry  of  some  of  them,  fact ;  or  (3)  a  direct  revelation  to  each 

at  least,   was  "  Peace  in  heaven  and  individual  man  might  have  been  given 

glory  in  the  highest "  (Luke  xix.  38).  from  G-od. 

A  striking  proof  this  of  the  fitness  II.  The    dignity    of  His    claim. — 

of  His  manner  of  entering  into   His  *'  Thy  King  cometh   to   thee."    "  The 

capital  to  suggest  the  purest,  highest.  Lord."     There  were  indications  of  His 

and  best  thoughts  concerning  the  king-  right  here  in  His  supernatural  know- 

dom  which  He  claimed  as  His  own. —  ledge.     He  knew  exactly  where  the  ass 

J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.  and  colt   were   to   be  found.     So  He 

knows  all  about  our  money,  every  coin 

Yers.  1-5.  Christ's  journey  to  Jeru-  of  it ;  about  our  time,  every  hour  of  it ; 

salem. — What  do  we  see  ?  about  our  power,  every  element  of  it. 

I.  The  superhuman  under  the  garb  And  yet  there  is  another  resemblance 
of  the  human.  in  this ;   the  ass  and  colt  were  tied. 

II.  The  majestic  under  the  garb  of  So  many  men's  possessions  are  '*  tied  " 
the  mean.  by  pleasure,  or  greed,  or  gain,  or  habit, 

III.  The  eternal  under  the  garb  of  or  the  gordian-knot  of  selfishness.  So 
the  incidental.  we  are  bidden  "  Loose  them  and  bring 

lY.  Truth  enunciated  by  an  erring  them  unto  Me." 

crowd. — D,  Thomas,  D.D.  III.  The  condescension  of  His  claim. 

— Though   the   ass   was  the  ordinary 

Yer.  3.  A  Pahn  Sunday  sermon. —  beast  of  burden  of  the  Jews,  it  was  the 
As  in  a  picture,  the  memorable  entry  scorn  of  the  Romans.  Asinarii  was 
of  Jesus  into  Jerusalem  indicates  the  then  a  term  of  contempt  for  Christians, 
way  in  which  our  blessed  Lord  goes  And  in  fulfilment  of  Zechariah's  pro- 
through  the  world  now.  Now,  as  then  :  phecy  that  the  King  of  the  Jews  should 
1.  His  purpose  is  to  bless.  2.  His  be  lowly,  Christ  thus,  by  dramatic 
contact  with  men  awakens  their  life,  teaching — for  the  Greek  and  Latin 
3.  Much  excitement  about  Him  is  supply  no  adequate  word — rode  on  an 
transient.  4.  Men's  possessions  are  ass.  So  this  Prince  of  peace  enters 
claimed  by  Him  to  further  His  progress,  the  city  of  peace  in  a  manner  that 
We  are  to  observe  : —  should   for    ever    emphasise  His   own 

I.  The  strangeness  of  His  claim.—  teaching,  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,"  etc, 

"  The  Lord  hath  need."  In    His   meekness    and    condescension 

1.  The  greater  has  need  of  the  less. —  He  chooses  to  win  His  way,  the  way 
A  universal  law.  The  rich  have  need  of  blessing  and  saving  men,  through 
of  the  poor ;  the  strong  have  need  of  the  world  now,  by  employing  humble, 
the  sick ;  the  parents  have  need  of  the  disdained,  despised  means.  If  the  swift 
child.  dromedary  or  the  splendid  war-horse 

2.  The  Divine  has  need  of  the  hwman.  were  the  symbol  of  the  agency  He 
— E.g.  Jesus  Christ  is  saving  man  by  employs,  but  few  of  the  vast  world  of 

487 


CHAP.  XXL      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


mediocre  men  could  hope  to  have  any 
part  or  lot  in  the  matter.  But  "  God 
hath  chosen  the  weak  things,"  etc. 
He  has  need  of  the  most  ordinary  of 
our  powers,  the  most  obscure  of  our 
hours,  the  most  commonplace  of  our 
days.  He  can  use  us  and  ours  in  His 
great  tiiumphal  entry  into  the  hearts 
and  nations  of  the  world. —  U.  K. 
Thomas^  B.A. 

Yer.  5.  Christ  the  King. — I.  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  church's  King. — One  of  our 
brethren,  like  unto  as,  according  to  the 
law  of  the  kingdom  (Deut.  xvii.  15), 
He  is  appointed  King  over  the  church 
(Ps.  ii.  6).  He  is  accepted  King  by  the 
church;  the  daughter  of  Zion  swears 
allegiance  to  Him  (Hos.  i.  11). 

II.  Christ,  the  King  of  His  church, 
came  to  His  church,  even  in  this  lower 
world.  "  He  comes  to  thee,  to  rule 
thee,  to  rule  in  thee,  to  rule  for  thee ; " 
He  is  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the 
church."  He  came  to  Zion  that  out  of 
Zion  the  law  might  go  forth. 

III.  Notice  was  given  to  the  church 
beforehand  of  the  coming  of  her  King. 
"Tell  the'  daughter  of  Zion."— if. 
Henry. 

Ver.  7.  Honouring  Christ. — 1.  When 
we  have  a  clear  call  ready  obedience  is 
our  part,  without  troubling  ourselves 
what  may  be  the  success.  2.  It  is  our 
part  to  honour  Christ,  so  far  as  we  can, 
and  to  lay  aside  our  ornaments  to 
glorify  Him.  3.  Christ  contenteth 
Himself  for  any  state  which  is  to  keep 
in  His  kingdom  here  on  earth  with 
what  His  disciples  can  furnish  Him. — - 
David  Dickson. 

Ver.  9.  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David. 
— The  hosannas  with  which  Christ  was 
attended  speak  two  things  : — 

I.  Their  welcoming  His  kingdom. 
— Hosanna  speaks  the  same  with 
"  Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  "  (see  Ps.  Ixxii.  17). 
Notice:  1.  Jesus  Christ  comes  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  He  is  sanctified, 
and  sent  into  the  world  as  Mediator ; 
"  Him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed." 

488 


2.  The  coming  of  Christ  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  is  worthy  of  all  acceptation. 
We  ought  all  to  say,  "  Blessed,"  etc. 

II.  Their  wishing  well  to  His  king- 
dom. —  "  Send  now  prosperity  "  to 
that  kingdom.  If  they  understood  it 
of  a  temporal  kingdom,  it  was  a  mis- 
take, which  a  little  time  would  rectify ; 
however,  their  goodwill  was  accepted 
(Ps.  Ixxii.   15). — M.  Henry. 

Yer.  \0.—Who  is  this  ?—I.  The 
question : — 

1.  As  asked  then. — All  the  city  was 
moved,  saying,  "  Who  is  this  ? " 
Thronged  for  feast ;  saw  strange  pro- 
cession sweep  towards  temple. 

2.  As  asked  now. — All  the  world  is 
moved,  saying,  ^'  Who  is  this  ?  "  Pro- 
cession passed,  but  procession  of  events 
went  on.  Crucified,  dead,  and  buried. 
Then  news  of  a  resurrection,  an  ascen- 
sion, a  gift  of  the  Spirit,  and  a  call  on 
all  men  to  believe.  The  story  a  nine 
days'  wonder?  No.  It  spread  from 
land  to  land,  from  age  to  age ;  sur- 
vived three  hundred  years  of  persecu- 
tion ;  rose  fresh  from  wreck  of  the 
empire;  changed  all  currents  of  thought, 
created  new  institutions,  formed  fore- 
most nations,  possesses  civilised  world. 
Its  best  effects  deeper  down,  in  prin- 
ciples, characters,  works,  lives,  deaths, 
"  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  has 
become  a  universal  presence;  a  vast 
mysterious  power.  What  account  shall 
be  given  of  it  ?  Who  is  this  ?  Ques- 
tion ever  reopened.  Comes  up  fresh 
from  time  to  time,  especially  now.  Talk 
of  worn-out  creeds  and  new  accounts 
attempted.  You  are  as  if  this  Jesus 
met  you,  "  Whom  do  men  say  that  I 
am?"  and  you  can  tell  what  is  said. 
"  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ? " 
Everything  hangs  on  : — 

II.  The  answer.— As  given  by  Scrip- 
ture, in  the  Catholic  Church,  and 
according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect, 
it  is  reached  by  four  steps,  each  neces- 
sitating the  next. 

1.  This  is  Jesus  the  Prophet ,  etc.— 
First  impression  of  rudimentary  dis- 
ciples. The  prophetic  mission  evident, 
certain      *'  We  know  that  Thou  art  a 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxi. 


Teacher  sent  from  God,"  etc.  "  A  great 
Prophet  has  risen,"  etc.  "  This  is  of  a 
truth  that  Prophet,"  etc.  If  so,  His 
witness  of  Himself  is  true,  and  higher 
conclusions  follow. 

2.  This  is  the  Christ. — I.e.  the  fore- 
ordained One,  bearing  the  office,  achiev- 
ing the  work  described  in  prophecy; 
the  Redeemer  ;  the  Hope  of  Israel  and 
<  f  mankind.  This  the  first  Christian 
conviction  and  proclamation.  "  God 
has  made  this  same  Jesus  both  Lord  and 
Christ."     If  so  : — 

3.  This  is  the  Son  of  God.— The 
Christ  is  declared  to  be  so  (Ps.  ii.  7). 
Understood  to  be  so  (John  vi.  69 ; 
Matt.  xxvi.  63).  Witnessed  (iii.  17). 
Preached  (Acts  ix.  20;  John  xx.  31). 
If  so,  in  what  sense  1 

4.  This  is  the  Word  who  was  with 
God,  and  was  God.  One  with  the  Father 
— by  whom  all  things  were  made — all 
things  consist — over  all  God  blessed 
for  ever — originally  the  life  and  light 
of  men — therefore  their  Redeemer  and 
eternal  life.  This  answer  one.  First 
step  involves  second — and  so  on  to  last. 
Its  vital  importance  to  each  separate 
soul.  What  He  is  to  you  depends  on 
what  He  is  in  Himself.  What  you 
find  Him  to  be  to  you  must  depend 
upon  what  you  take  Him  to  be  in 
Himself. — T.  D.  Bernard^  M.A 

The  King  entering  Jerusalem. — 
1.  When  it  pleaseth  Christ  to  take  unto 
Him  a  kingdom,  He  will  avow  Himself 
King  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  as 
now  He  rideth  in  this  glory  into 
Jerusalem.  2.  Where  greatest  show 
of  religion  is,  it  is  no  new  thing  to  see 
Christ  to  be  least  known,  for,  •'  Who  is 
this  ? "  say  they.  3.  Where  He  hath 
a  mind  to  honour  Himself  in  suffering, 
He  will  show  Himself  so  evidently  as 
He  may  be  taken  notice  of  by  His 
enemies.  All  the  city  is  moved,  saying 
"  Who  is  this  1 " — David  Dickson. 

What  think  ye  of  Christ?—!.  The 


merely    humanitarian    view    of    the 
person  of  Christ  involves  in  it : — 

1.  The  gra.Y est  intellectual  difficulties. 
There  was  something  peculiar  in  His 
intellectual  solitude ;  the  difference 
between  Him  and  other  thinkers  was 
not  such  as,  for  example,  between 
Shakespeare  and  other  authors.  You 
know  all  through  that  Shakespeare 
belongs  to  the  same  species  as  the 
others ;  but  Christ  constitutes  an  entire 
genus  by  Himself. 

2.  But  the  difficulties  which  beset 
the  humanitarian  view  of  the  Saviour's 
person  from  the  intellectual  side  are  as 
nothing  compared  with  those  which  it 
has  to  encounter  on  the  moral.  Re- 
member the  honesty  and  integrity  by 
which  He  was  characterised,  and  then 
say  how  these  qualities  are  to  be 
reconciled  with  the  claims  which  He 
put  forth  as  One  who  had  come  down 
from  heaven  for  the  express  purpose  of 
teaching  celestial  things,  if  these  claims 
were  not  well  founded. 

3.  Note  the  testimony  of  history  to 
the  Deity  of  Christ.  It  is  the  nature 
of  moral  evil  to  propagate  itself. 
Christ  turned  the  tide  for  all  after- 
time,  and  to-day  the  sole  corrective 
agents  at  work  upon  the  moral  and 
spiritual  condition  of  men  may  be 
traced  to  Christianity. 

II.  What  is  involved  in  the  recep- 
tion of  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  ? — It 
involves  : — 

1.  That  we  should  implicitly  believe 
His  teachings.  It  is  a  mockery  for  one 
to  say  that  he  believes  in  the  Deity  of 
Christ,  and  then  to  cavil  at  His  words 
or  to  deny  their  truth. 

2.  An  obligation  to  rely  alone  on 
His  atoning  work  for  our  salvation. 

3.  An  obligation  to  obey  His  com- 
mandments. The  practical  rejection  of 
our  Lord's  Divinity  by  the  disobedience 
of  our  lives  is  a  more  prevalent  heresy 
than  the  theoretic  denial  of  His  Deity, 
and  it  is  far  more  insidious  and  pesti- 
lential.—TT.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. 


489 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PAE AGRA  PH.— Verses  12—17. 

Visitatorial  action. — As  the  Saviour  did  on  His  entering  into  Jerusalem, 
so  He  began  to  do  when  inside  it.  The  same  remarkable  combination  of 
authority  and  meekness — the  same  clear  vindication  of  His  rights  and  position, 
and  the  same  manifest  forbearance  in  making  use  of  them — are  still  to  be 
seen  in  His  conduct.  Jn  two  ways,  especially,  may  this  combination  be  seen  at 
this  time,  viz.,  in  noticing  first,  what  he  beheld;  and  secondly,  what  He  heard, 
when  coming  now  to  the  temple  of  God. 

I.  What  the  Saviour  beheld. — Its  nature,  on  the  one  hand.  A  great  scandal ! 
A  crying  offence  !  Apparently,  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  was  the  scene  of  this 
evil.  Originally  meant  for  their  accommodation  when  admitted  to  worship,  it 
had  been  encroached  on  for  the  transaction  of  business  connected  with  the 
worship  of  God.  Animals  for  sacrifice  were  brought  there  for  sale.  Changers 
of  money  had  established  themselves  in  it.  And  all  this,  it  is  thought  with  great 
reason,  with  the  interested  connivance  of  the  temple  authorities  themselves. 
The  scandal  was  one,  therefore,  which  affected  all  classes  alike,  and  that  in  a  way 
which  was  peculiarly  offensive  because  of  its  connection  with  the  worship  of  God 
(1  Sam.  ii.  17).  Its  results,  on  the  other  hand.  Very  deliberate,  very  thorough, 
and  very  faithful  was  the  Saviour's  consequent  action.  Very  deliberate  (see 
Mark  xi.  11).  Very  thorough — all  who  had  trespassed  there  being  made  to  go 
out  (ver.  12) ;  others  who  wished  to  do  so  being  debarred  from  entering  (Mark 
xi.  16).  Very  faithful — the  action  being  accompanied  by  language  which  ex- 
pressed its  meaning  in  full  (ver.  13).  And  yet,  at  the  same  time,  being  un- 
accompanied  by  much  that  might  have  been  justly  done  in  such  case.  The 
dealers,  for  example,  are  "  cast  out,"  but  their  goods  are  not  otherwise  touched. 
The  offence  is  stopped  and  the  offenders  rebuked,  but  they  are  not  punished  because 
of  it.  Not  the  sword  of  the  judge,  indeed,  but  the  touch  of  the  healer  (ver.  14), 
is  what  we  read  of  instead.  That  polluted  "  court,"  by  such  works  of  mercy,  is 
as  it  were,  re- consecrated  to  God.  In  every  way,  therefore,  the  previously 
existing  offence  is  witnessed  against  and  rebuked.  But  nothing  more  than  this, 
by  this  kingly  *'  Visitor  "  is  done  at  this  time.  As  before  and  as  we  shall  see 
afterwards,  there  was  the  "hiding  of  His  power"  (Hab.  iii.  4). 

II.  What  the  Saviour  heard. — Its  nature  and  purport,  on  the  one  hand.  A 
cry  of  worship !  A  shout  of  praise  !  All  that  the  multitude  had  previously 
acknowledged  (ver.  9),  of  His  royal  lineage  and  more  than  royal  mission  is  here 
repeated  again  (ver.  15).  Repeated  (apparently)  with  greater  fervour  than  ever 
after  seeing  His  works  (ibid.).  Kepeated  by  those  who  are,  perhaps,  the  last  of 
all  to  be  reached  by  such  things.  Fame  is  fame  indeed,  when  it  has  penetrated 
to  the  cradles  of  the  land.  Its  reception  on  the  other.  Its  reception  first,  in 
the  way  of  silence.  Exactly  contrary  to  what  was  expected  by  some — by  some  who 
doubted  in  consequence,  whether  the  Saviour  could  have  truly  noted  the  language 
He  heard — all  this  worship  was  listened  to  by  Him  without  a  word  of  rebuke — 
as  though  not  only  in  His  judgment  a  matter  of  right,  but  a  matter  of  course, 
as  it  were  (cf.  Luke  xix.  40).  Its  reception,  next,  in  the  way  of  defence.  To 
His  tacit  acquiescence  in.  He  adds  express  approval  of,  the  homage  now  paid. 
Far  from  being  a  blameworthy  thing,  only  those  are  so  who  would  condemn 
it  as  such.  Had  they  known  more,  as  they  ought  to  have  known — had 
they  remembered  what  they  had  "  read "  in  the  writings  they  professed  to 
teach  and  revere — they  would  have  called  to  mind  what  justified  fully  all  that 
was  now  being  done.  God  is  never  more  praised  than  when  He  is  praised  by 
the  lips  of  sucklings  and  babes  (ver.  16).  Even  such  praise,  therefore,  is  the 
full  right  of  Him  who  has  come  to  that  house  as  its  King.  Its  reception, 
finally,   in  the  way  of  forbearance.     Forbearance  in  drawing  the  line  at  this 

490 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xXL 


necessary  word  of  rebuke.  The  Saviour  defends  His  friends.  He  confutes  His 
adversaries.  He  does  both  effectually.  But,  having  so  done,  He  stops  short. 
He  does  not  now  "  visit "  for  sin.  What  an  unexpected  sequel,  from  this  point  of 
view,  is  the  close  of  this  passage  !  See  all  He  does,  now,  with  that  *'  den  of 
thieves  " — that  nest  of  conspirators — which  He  has  just  exposed  and  denounced 
(ver.  17).     Where,  in  all  this,  was  *.*  the  rod  of  His  power  \  " 

It  is  to  be  noticed,  in  conclusion,  that  even  this  "  combination  "  did  not  tell  on 
these  men. 

1.  This  display  of  authority  did  not  tell  on  their  wills. — They  "  heard  "  and 
"  feared  "  Him,  but  went  on  as  before  (Mark  xi.  18  ;  see  Eccl.  viii.  11). 

2.  This  display  of  mercy  did  not  tell  on  their  hearts. — All  they  did  in  return 
was  to  seek  to  "  destroy  "  Him  (Mark  xi.  18,  again ;  see  also  Isa.  xxvi.  10). 

3.  This  double  failure   abundantly  explained  and   so  justified  the   subsequent 
punishment  of  that  people  (Jer.  ix.  9). 

4.  And  is,  therefore,  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  double  warning  to  all. — How  are  wq 
dealing  with  the  mingled  "  mercy  and  judgment"   (Ps.  ci.   1)  of  God? 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 


Vers.  12-15.  The  righteousness,  peace, 
and  joy  of  the  kingdom. — The  casting 
out  of  the  traders  illustrated  the 
righteousness  of  the  kingdom,  the 
healing  of  the  blind  and  lame  its 
peace,  and  the  shouts  of  the  children 
Which  followed,  its  joy. — J.  M.  Gibson, 
D.D. 

Vers.  12-14.  The  ancient  prophecy 
fulfilled. — What  the  King  did  on  enter- 
ing the  temple  admirably  illustrates 
the  prophecy.  For  what  saith  the 
prophet  ?  "  Behold  thy  King  cometh 
unto  thee ;  He  is  just  and  having 
salvation."  "  He  is  just  " — therefore 
He  will  not  tolerate  the  unholy  traffic 
in  the  temple,  but  "  cast  out  all  them 
that  sold  and  bought "  etc. ;  "  and 
having  salvation'' — accordingly,  when 
He  sees  the  blind  and  the  lame  in  the 
temple  He  does  not  turn  them  out, 
He  does  not  turn  away  from  them, 
"  He  healed  them.''— Ibid. 

Vers.  12,  13.  Cleansing  the  temple. — 
This  cleansing  reminds  us : — 

I.  Of  the  holiness  which  the  temple 
had  in  Christ's  eyes. 

II.  Of  the  g^ilt  of  all  who  desecrate 
God's  house  and  day. 

III.  Of  our  duty  to  do  all  we  can 
to  maintain  their  sanctity. — Heubner, 

Ver.    12.    The   King  purify irtg   the 


temple. — 1.  It  is  the  work  of  King 
Jesus  to  take  notice  of  religion,  and  to 
purge  it  where  He  mindeth  to  reign ; 
therefore  He  went  into  the  temple  of 
God,  to  purge  it.  2.  Horrible  abuses 
may  creep  into  the  place  of  God's 
service,  while  men,  under  pretence  of 
furthering  religion,  do  follow  courses 
for  their  own  gain ;  as  here, merchandise 
and  money-getting  are  set  up  in  the 
place  where  religion  only  was  to  be 
exercised.  3.  In  this  extraordinary  way 
of  reformation  of  His  temple.  He 
showeth  Himself  to  be  God,  able  to 
compass  the  most  difficult  works,  by 
what  means  He  pleaseth,  and  to  terrify 
His  adversaries.  4.  Outward  abuses, 
albeit  not  so  great  as  inward,  yet  may 
they  be  begun  at  in  reformation,  as 
here  Christ  doth. — David  Dickson. 

The  majesty  and  authority  of  Jesus. 
—  The  silent  submission  of  these 
buyers  and  vendors,  who  by  their 
physical  force  might  easily  have  over- 
powered Jesus,  conclusively  proves  the 
sublime  moral  majesty  and  power  with 
which  our  Saviour  performed  this  act, 
and  silences  the  objection  of  some 
modern  sceptics,  who  see  in  it  an 
outbreak  of  violent  passion,  which  is 
always  a  sign  of  weakness.  It  was  a 
judicial  act  of  a  religious  reformer, 
vindicating  in  just  and  holy  zeal  the 
honour  of  the  Lord  of  the  temple,  and 

491 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


revealed  the  presence  of  a  superhuman 
authority  and  dignity,  which  filled 
even  these  profane  traffickers  with  awe, 
and  made  them  yield  without  a  murmur. 
Jerome  regards  this  expulsion  of  a 
multitude  by  one  individual  as  the 
most  wonderful  of  the  miracles,  and 
supposes  that  a  fiame  and  starry  ray 
darted  from  the  eyes  of  the  Saviour, 
and  that  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead 
was  radiant  in  His  countenance. — 
P.  Schaf,  D.D. 

The  desecration  of  GodJs  house. — The 
history  of  Christian  churches  has  not 
been  altogether  without  parallels  that 
may  help  us  to  understand  how  such 
a  desecration  came  to  be  permitted. 
Those  who  remember  the  state  of  the 
great  cathedral  of  London,  as  painted 
in  the  literature  of  Elizabeth  and 
James,  when  mules  and  horses  laden 
with  market  produce  were  led  through 
St.  Paul's  as  a  matter  of  every-day 
occurrence,  and  bargains  were  struck 
there,  and  burglaries  planned,  and 
servants  hired,  and  profligate  assig- 
nations made  and  kept,  will  feel  that 
even  Christian  and  Protestant  England 
has  hardly  the  right  to  cast  a  stone  at 
the  priests  and  people  of  Jerusalem. — 
E,  H.  Plumptre,  D.D. 

Ver.  13.  The  house  of  prayer. — 
1.  Keformation  of  religion  is  to  be 
done  according  to  Scripture,  by  reducing 
abused  ordinances  unto  their  first 
institution.  2.  All  the  ceremonial 
service  appointed  at  the  temple  was 
subservient  to  the  moral  and  spiritual 
duties  ;  for  it  is  said,  "  My  house  shall 
be  called  a  house  of  prayer."  3.  All 
the  worship  of  God  may  be  comprised 
in  prayer,  as  it  comprehendeth  praises 
and  thanksgiving,  because  the  end  of 
the  ordinances  is  to  make  men  know 
how  to  carry  themselves  towards  God 
in  praises  and  prayer.  4.  Vilest  sins 
seek  shelter  under  the  pretext  of 
religion,  and  there  think  to  work ; 
therefore  this  is  the  challenge,  "  Ye 
have  made  My  house  a  den  of  thieves." 
— David  Dickson. 

Vers.  14-16.  A  picture  of  the  temple 
492 


as  it  should  he. — I.  Christ  the  centre 
of  attraction  in  the  temple. 

II.  The  spiritually  inirm  seeking 
Him  in  the  temple,and  not  the  preacher, 
or  the  mere  form  of  worship. 

III.  The  spiritually  infirm  healed 
by  Christ  in  the  temple. — J.  G.  Gray. 

Vers.  15,  16.  The  children  in  the 
temple  (Palm  Sunday). — Let  us  consider 
this  remarkable  incident  with  respect 
to  the  three  principal  classes  of  persons 
concerned  in  it : — 

I.  The  conduct  of  the  children. — 
When  all  others  were  silent,  why  did 
children  alone  sing  their  "  Hosannas  " 
to  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  David  ?  1.  They 
were  unprejudiced.  2.  They  were 
especially  attracted  to  Christ.  3.  They 
were  inspired  by  the  enthusiasm  of 
youth. 

II.  The  complaint  of  the  scribes 
and  priests. — 1.  As  offenders  themselves 
they  were  enraged  at  the  rebuke  they 
had  just  received  from  Christ.  2.  As 
officials  they  were  horrified  at  the 
indecorum  of  the  children.  3.  As  men 
of  rank  and  dignity  they  were  disgusted 
at  the  freedom  of  the  children's 
utterances.  4.  As  unbelievers  they 
were  indignant  at  the  public  recognition 
of  the  Messianic  claims  of  Jesus. 

III.  The  reply  of  our  Lord. — 1.  He 
approved  of  children's  worship.  2.  He 
admitted  the  truth  of  the  children's 
testimony.  3.  He  accepted  personal 
adoration  offered  to  Himself. — W.  F, 
Adeney,  M.A. 

Ver.  17.  Jesus  withdrawing. — 1.  He 
had  His  own  intended  work  in  Bethany, 
yet  by  His  leaving  His  adversaries. 
He  teacheth  us  to  cease  from  contention 
before  it  grow  hot,  and  to  cut  short 
with  our  enemies,  using  as  few  speeches 
as  may  be ;  therefore  it  is  said,  "  He 
left  them."  2.  In  that  by  His  going 
off"  the  town,  occasion  of  tumults  and 
uproars  was  eschewed,  we  learn  to 
eschew  needless  dangers,  and  to  reserve 
ourselves  unto  the  time  wherein  God 
calleth  us  to  glorify  Him  by  suffering. 
David  Dickson,  ' 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxi. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  18—22. 

Plenary  powers. — All  commentators  seem  agreed  in  regarding  this  "  fig  tree  " 
as  emblematical  of  the  then  condition  of  the  Jewish  people  and  church.  We  can 
all  of  us  see,  also,  how  specially  its  brief  story  was  connected  with  the  disciples 
of  the  Saviour.  They  alone  hear  the  sentence  on  it.  They  alone  note  its  result. 
They  alone  hear  what  their  Master  afterwards  says  on  the  subject.  It  is  in  its 
relative  bearing,  therefore,  on  both  them  and  the  Jews,  that  we  shall  endeavour 
to  consider  this  story.  How  does  it  illustrate  the  Saviour's  aspect  towards 
Jerusalem — how  does  it,  therefore,  illustrate  His  aspect  towards  His  disciples — at 
this  particular  time  ? 

I.  Towards  Jerusalem  and  the  Jews. — Under  this  head  what  illustration 
there  is,  first,  of  His  power  !  The  fig  tree  is  said  to  be  the  most  succulent  of  all 
trees.  Amongst  such  trees,  also,  none  could  be  so  more  visibly,  than  one  so 
covered  with  leaves  as  to  be  a  conspicuous  object  a  long  way  off  (Mark  xi.  13). 
Yet  this  very  tree  we  see  now,  at  the  simple  word  of  Jesus,  losing  all  this  in  a 
moment  (ver.  19).  Conspicuous  one  moment  for  the  abundance  of  its  moisture, 
it  is  as  conspicuous  the  next  for  its  lack  of  moisture,  in  the  eyes  of  those  who 
look  on  (ver.  20).  So  with  that  Jewish  church  which  so  visibly  abounded  then 
with  the  showy  leaves  of  "  profession."  How  they  boasted  in  their  "  temple," 
and  "  holy  city,"  and  "  law"  (John  ii.  20  ;  Mark  xiii.  1 ;  Rom.  ii.  17,  etc.,  iii.  1,  2  ; 
Matt.  V.  35,  xxvii.  53).  Yet  the  word  of  Jesus  could  strip  them  of  all,  and 
wither  the  whole  of  their  pride — and  would  do  so  before  long.  This  was  what 
the  effect  of  that  word  on  the  fig  tree  was  meant  to  make  plain.  His  doing  thus 
was  also  an  illustration  of  His  justice.  That  abundant  foliage  on  that  particular 
fig  tree  was  a  "  profession  "  of  much.  None  of  the  fig  trees  of  the  neighbourhood 
had  got  so  far  at  that  season  as  the  production  of  figs  (Mark  xi.  end  of  ver.  13). 
This  fig  tree  had  reached  a  stage  which  usually  foUov^ed  that  stage.  It  had 
clothed  itself  (abnormally)  with  such  a  mantle  of  leaves  as  was  generally  an 
indication,  that,  underneath  them,  there  was  a  like  abundance  of  fruit.  Hence 
it  was  that,  in  His  extremity,  the  Saviour  came  to  it  with  that  hope  (Mark 
xi.  13  again).  And  hence  it  was,  also — being  disappointed  with  it — that  He 
bade  it  be  barren  for  ever  (xxi.  19  ;  Mark  xi.  14).  An  apt  figure,  there- 
fore, of  what  was  then  true  of  the  Jewish  people  and  church  ;  and  so,  also,  of 
that  awful  sentence,  for  which,  being  such,  they  were  then  ready  and  ripe.  In 
their  case,  also,  with  much  profession,  there  was  "  nothing  but  leaves  "  (xv.  3, 
xxiii.  3  ;  Horn.  ii.  23,  24  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  end  of  ver.  15,  etc.).  In  their  case,  also, 
therefore,  a  similar  sentence  to  that  pronounced  on  the  fig  tree  would  be  only 
equal  and  just.  And  yet,  lastly,  in  this  incident,  we  see  illustrated,  as  previously, 
the  then  forbearance  of  Christ.  What  is  said  of  the  fig  tree,  is  not  here  said  yet 
of  what  is  represented  thereby.  For  the  present  that  spiritual  "  tree  "  remains 
in  all  its  greenness  of  leaf.  All  its  prodigality  of  profession,  all  its  lack  of 
obedience,  all  its  contradiction  in  practice,  remain  wrivisited  yet.  In  this  respect 
the  symbol  is  instructive  in  the  way  of  contrast  alone.  Nothing  is  shown  here, 
in  the  matter  of  punishment,  but  that  which  is  ready  to  be  ! 

II.  The  Saviour's  aspect  at  this  time  towards  the  disciples  themselves. — We 
may  judge  of  this,  in  some  measure,  from  the  speciality,  now,  of  His  manner. 
Why  did  He  go  up  now,  in  their  sight,  to  this  tree  ?  Why  with  such  evident 
hope,  to  begin  ;  and  such  similar  disappointment,  to  follow  ]  Why,  also,  were 
both  His  words  and  their  consequences  made  so  perceptible  now  to  their  senses  ? 
Evidently,  we  may  infer,  to  impress  them,  first,  with  a  sense  of  His  power,  to 
show  what  He  could  do  if  He  would.  Also  to  impress  them,  next,  with  a  sense 
of  His  justice — to  show  that,  in  what  He  was  now  doing  before  them.  He  was 
not  acting  without  cause.     And  also,  finally,  and  in  proportion  as  the  flight  of 

493 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MATTHEW, 


time  should  explain  to  them  the  meaning  and  application  of  the  parable,  to 
impress  them  with  a  sense  of  His  forbearance  and  mercy.  To  impress  these 
things,  we  say,  in  this  special  manner,  upon  their  own  minds ;  and  so,  by  this 
means,  to  increase  within  them  their  faith  in  Himself.  And  nothing,  surely, 
could  be  more  conducive  to  this  than  the  very  combination  just  named.  Irre- 
sistible power,  unimpeachable  justice,  untiring  mercy,  form  ground  for  con- 
fidence, when  taken  together,  if  anything  does.  Also,  and  further,  we  are 
taught  the  same  by  the  speciality  of  the  Saviour's  words  at  this  time.  "  Having 
faith  in  God  "  is  just  the  application  to  which  He  here  points  them  Himself 
(ver.  21 ;  Mark  xi.  22).  This,  He  gives  them  to  understand,  is  what  He  would 
have  that  withered  fig  tree  teach  them  above  all.  Have  faith  in  "  God  "  as  able 
to  accompUsh  things  greater  by  far  (ver.  21).  Have  faith  in  "  prayer"  as  able 
to  move  Him  to  do  things  of  that  kind  (ver.  22).  Have  faith,  therefore,  in  your 
own  position  as  believers  in  Me  ! 

The  especial  suitability  of  such  a  lesson,  and  of  such  a  method  of  conveying  it 
also,  to  the  disciples  at  that  particular  juncture,  may  be  noted,  to  conclude. 
This  would  be  true  in  regard  : — 

1.  To  the  probable  perplexities  of  the  moment. — To  those  disciples,  with  what  we 
know  of  their  then  expectations  and  knowledge  (xx.  20,  21),  that  clearly  defined 
line  of  conduct,  now  so  plainly  adopted  and  afterwards  so  strictly  adhered  to  by 
the  Saviour,  would  appear  astonishing  in  the  last  degree.  Why  thus  openly 
claim  the  sceptre,  and  yet  just  as  openly  refrain  from  using  it  ?  Was  it  secret 
lack  of  power  to  inflict  punishment,  or  secret  indifierence  about  the  existence  of 
evil  ?  That  withered  fig  tree  would  silence  both  surmises  at  once,  and,  by  so 
doing,  in  time  would  point  to  the  Saviour's  mercy  as  the  true  answer  to  both. 
The  disciples  would  bear  with  this  "  mystery  "  as  they  thus  learned  that  the 
Saviour's  "  mercy  "  lay  at  its  root  ! 

2.  To  the  certain  impediments  of  the  future. — After  the  Saviour's  departure 
what  formidable  obstacles  there  would  be  in  their  way  !  (see  Acts  v.  27,  etc.,  etc.). 
How  helpful  to  them,  therefore,  to  have  such  recollections  as  thig  of  "  the 
withered  fig  tree  "  to  fall  back  upon  in  such  circumstances  !  How  helpful  to 
them  also  (for  some  time  afterwards  1)  to  have  the  sight  of  it  within  reach  !  And 
how  equally  helpful  to  have  the  recollection  also  of  those  words  of  the  Saviour's 
(end  of  ver.  21)  in  their  thoughts  !  Everything  might  be  hoped  for  in  the  way 
of  help  by  those  who  had  such  a  task  as  theirs  on  their  hands.  The  greenest 
would  be  withered — the  largest  removed  (Zech.  iv.  7)  if  it  stood  in  their  way. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yers.   18-22.  The  fig  tree  cursed. —  3.  He  trained  His  disciples  by  His  own 

1.  Our  Lord  was  never  so  hungry  for  example  unto  all  duties  which  he  put 
meat  and  drink,  but  He  could  forbear  them  unto,  and  here  He  traineth  them 
it  till  a  fit  time,  and  make  it  His  meat  unto  the  exercise  of  the  gift  of  miracles, 
and  drink  to  be  doing  good,  and  ful-  4.  The  gift  of  miracles  was  never  to  be 
filling  the  Father's  will ;  for  He  loveth  exercised  in  particular,  but  upon  a 
to  edify  and  feed  His  disciples  here  ground  of  faith,  i.e.  upon  a  warrant 
more  than  to  feed  His  natural  hunger,  given  from  Christ's  Spirit,  for  doing  of 

2.  Albeit  our  Lord  did  never  harm  to  that  work  in  particular ;  and  it  was 
any  man  by  any  of  His  miracles,  yet  necessary  for  him  who  had  the  gift 
had  He  power  to  curse,  and  miracu-  and  warrant  for  doing  a  miracle  to 
lously  to  destroy,  as  well  as  to  save,  if  strengthen  his  faith  on  the  warrant, 
He  had  pleased  to  put  forth  His  power  or  else  to  miss  of  his  intent,  as  in 
in  justice ;  for  the  fig  tree  was  not  Peter's  sinking  did  appear.  Therefore, 
able   to  stand  when  He  did  curse  it.  saith  He,  "  If  ye  have  faith  and  doubt 

494 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxi. 


not."  5.  The  Lord  requireth  faith  in 
prayer  for  obtaining  promised  mercies, 
or  else,  if  we  come  short,  to  blame 
our  misbelief.  Therefore,  saith  He, 
"  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer, 
believing,  ye  shall  receive  it." — David 
Dickson. 

The  vnthering  of  the  fruitless  fig 
tree. — This  incident  stands  entirely 
alone  among  the  miracles  as  the  only 
one  which  is  not  of  a  beneficent  or 
merciful  character.  Long  custom  has 
made  all  readers  familiar  with  the 
designation  of  it  as  a  miracle  of 
judgment.  The  expression  is  mislead- 
ing. It  was  a  symbol  or  prediction  of 
judgment.  The  burden  it  bore  in  act 
and  sign  was  doom  for  that  which  the 
fruitless  fig  tree  represented.  But  so 
far  as  concerns  the  literal  object  upon 
which  the  word  fell,  the  expression  is 
too  large.  It  is  out  of  all  just  propor- 
tion of  thought  and  language  to  place 
the  blasting  of  a  way-side  tree  over 
against  Christ's  numberless  miracles 
of  mercy,  and  note  it  as  a  judgment 
miracle.  Indeed,  the  incident  barely 
falls  within  the  class  of  miracles.  The 
supernatural  element  in  it  is  predictive 
rather  than  directly  miraculous.  The 
word  spoken  against  the  tree  was  ful- 
filled in  a  way  so  notable  and  immediate 
as  to  mark  a  Divine  hand.  But  in  its 
proper  object  and  scope  it  was  really 
an  acted  parable,  like  those  symbolic 
actions  or  prophecies  "  without  words  " 
of  which  the  ancient  seers,  Jeremiah 
and  Ezekiel,  furnish  plenty  of  in- 
stances.— Prof.  Laidlaio,  D.D. 

Ver.  19.  Hypocrites  and  their  doom. 
— This  cursing  of  the  barren  fig  tree 
represents  the  state  of  hypocrites  in 
general ;  and  so  it  teacheth  us  : — 

I.  That  the  fruit  of  fig  trees  may 
justly  be  expected  from  those  that 
have  the  leaves. — Christ  looks  for  the 
power  of  religion  from  those  that  make 
profession  of  it. 

II.  Christ's  just  expectations  from 
flourishing  professors  are  often  frus- 
trated and  disappointed. — Many  have  a 
name  to  live,  and  are  not  alive  indeed. 


III.  The  sin  of  barrenness  is  justly 
punished  with  the  curse  and  plague 
of  barrenness. 

IV.  A  false  and  hypocritical  pro- 
fession commonly  withers  in  this  world. 
— The  gifts  wither,  common  graces 
decay,  the  credit  of  the  profession 
declines  and  sinks,  and  the  falseness 
and  folly  of  the  pretender  are  mani- 
fested to  all  men. — Matt.  Henry. 

The  withering  of  the  fig  tree  symbolic. 
— To  understand  Christ's  act  aright, 
we  must  not  conceive  that  He  at  once 
caused  a  sound  tree  to  wither.  This 
would  not  be  in  harmony  with  the 
general  aim  of  His  miracles  ;  nor  would 
it  correspond  to  the  idea  which  He 
designed  to  set  vividly  before  the 
disciples.  A  sound  tree,  suddenly 
destroyed,  would  certainly  be  no  fitting 
type  of  the  Jewish  people.  We  must 
rather  believe  that  the  same  cause 
which  made  the  tree  barren  had 
already  prepared  the  way  for  its 
destruction,  and  that  Christ  only 
hastened  a  crisis  which  had  to  come  in 
the  course  of  nature.  In  this  view  it 
would  correspond  precisely  to  the  great 
event  in  the  world's  history  which  it 
was  designed  to  prefigure ;  the  moral 
character  of  the  Jewish  nation  had 
long  been  fitting  it  for  destruction  ; 
and  the  Divine  government  of  the 
world  only  brought  on  the  crisis. — 
Neander. 

The  fig  tree  destroyed. — Why  might 
not  the  Lord,  consistently  with  His  help 
and  His  healing,  do  that  in  one  instance 
which  His  Father  is  doing  every  day  ?  In 
the  midst  of  the  freshest  greenery  of 
summer,  you  may  see  the  wan  branches 
of  the  lightning-struck  tree.  As  a 
poet  drawing  his  pen  through  syllable 
or  word  that  mars  his  clear  utterance 
or  musical  comment,  such  is  the  des- 
truction of  the  Maker.  It  is  the 
indrawn  sigh  of  the  creating  Breath. — 
G.  Macdonald,  LL.D. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Faith  and  prayer. — 
I.  The  description  of  this  wonder- 
working faith.  "  If  ye  have  faith  and 
doubt  not." 

495 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 

II.  The  power  and  prevalency  of  it,  is  to  be  done  by  it.  "All  things, 
expressed  figuratively.  "  Ye  shall  say  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,"  etc. 
unto  this  mountain,"  etc.  Faith  is  the  soul,  prayer  is  the  body  ; 

III.  The  way  and  means  of  exercis-  both  together  make  a  complete  man 
ing  this  faith,  and  of  doing  that  which      for  any  service. — M.  Henry. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—32. 

A  twojold  answer. — The  question  asked  in  ver.  23  was  very  natural  in  its 
way.  Although  the  Saviour  had  hitherto  done  nothing  of  a  strictly  punitive 
kind.  He  had  acted  recently  with  a  degree  of  authority  previously  unusual  with 
Him  (see  vers.  1-17).  Naturally,  therefore,  those  who  sat  in  the  seat  of 
authority  (xxiii.  2)  were  stirred  up  by  such  doings ;  and  naturally,  therefore,  came 
to  inquire  into  their  nature  and  source  (ver.  23).  They  were  almost  bound, 
indeed — from  their  point  of  view — to  do  something  of  the  kind.  The  Saviour 
answers,  first,  by  asking  another  question  in  turn  ;  and,  secondly,  when  that  was 
not  answered,  by  asking  another  one  yet. 

I.  The  first  question  had  to  do  with  the  mission  and  ministry  of  John  the 
Baptist. — Connected  with  this  we  see,  first,  a  7nost  legitimate  challenge.  Next  to 
the  appearance  of  the  Saviour  Himself,  the  appearance  of  John,  as  a  spiritual 
phenomenon,  had  been  the  most  important  one  of  the  day.  In  a  manner 
unknown  for  centuries  past,  it  had  agitated  the  faith  of  the  day ;  and  had 
afterwards  left  behind  it  an  impression  of  the  deepest  and  widest  description 
(see  ver.  26,  iii.  5,  6 ;  Acts  xix.  3).  Also,  it  had  been  connected  intimately 
with  the  Person  and  work  of  the  Saviour  Himself.  John  may  almost  be  said,  in 
fact,  to  have  effaced  himself  in  pointing  to  Jesus  (iii.  11,  12  ;  John  i.  19-27,  29, 
etc.).  It  was  only  to  be  expected,  therefore,  that  professed  teachers  in  religion 
(John  iii.  10),  such  as  these  questioners  of  the  Saviour,  should  have  made  up 
their  minds  about  John  ;  and  .only  right,  therefore,  that  they  should  be  asked 
about  him  by  the  Man  whom  they  questioned.  "  John  the  Baptist  continually 
pointed  to  Me.  Tell  Me,  therefore,  if  you  wish  to  know  about  Me,  what  you  say 
about  him."  In  anwer  to  this  challenge  we  see,  next,  a  pitiful  evasion.  That 
apparently  simple  question  was  not  so  simple  as  it  looked  from  their  point  of 
view.  If  they  said  in  reply  what  was  certainly  true,  viz.,  that  the  mission  of 
John  was  from  above,  they  feared  the  Saviour.  He  would  say  at  once  as  in 
ver.  25  ;  and  so  would  expose  them  before  all  as  the  false  guides  that  they  were. 
If  they  said  what  was  false  and  declared  it  to  be  only  "  of  men,"  they  feared  the 
people,  who  would  then  listen  to  them  no  more.  So  all  they  could  think  of  was 
— in  a  most  clumsy  manner — to  try  and  leave  the  question  alone.  "  The  point 
asked  about  is  not  one  on  which  we  can  give  an  opinion  "  (ver.  27).  An  answer 
in  which,  therefore — so  we  see  finally — they  completely  answered  themselves. 
"  How  can  the  question  you  ask  be  discussed  at  all  unless  this  necessary 
preliminary  to  it  has  been  considered  at  least  ?  How  can  you  learn  about  Me  if 
you  are  thus  ignorant  about  him  1  How  can  you  possibly  know  what  you 
profess  to  want  to  know,  in  such  circumstance  as  yours  ? "  Thus  it  was,  in  effect, 
that  the  Saviour  covered  them  with  shame  for  having  asked  their  question 
at  all ! 

II.  The  second  question  went  deeper  than  this. — In  it  the  Saviour  not  only 
/     silenced  His  adversaries ;  He  convicted  them  too.     He  aims  at  this  result,  in  the 

first  place,  by  putting  a  case.  After  a  method  not  unusual  with  Him,  He  sets 
forth  a  parable  touching  the  matter  in  hand.  A  certain  man  with  two  sons 
commanded  them  both  to  go  and  work  in  his  vineyard  (ver.  28).  One  refused  at 
first,  but  afterwards  went.  The  other  consented  at  first,  but  that  was  all. 
Obedient  in  word,  this  son  was   wholly  disobedient   in   work   (vers.    29,    30). 

496 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST    MATTHEW,      chap.  xxi. 

Which  did  they  think,  of  two  such  sons,  should  be  looked  upon  as  obedient  ? 
(ver.  31).  They  answered — they  could  but  answer — that  it  was  the  one  spoken 
of  first,  he  that  "afterwards  repented  and  went."  The  Saviour  reaches  the 
result  He  aimed  at,  in  the  next  place,  by  explaining  this  parable  and  applying  its 
moral.  The  message  of  God  to  His  people  through  the  ministry  of  the  Baptist 
was  the  "  command  "  of  this  parable.  The  "  priests  and  elders  "  who  had  gone 
out  with  others  to  hear  the  teaching  of  John,  and  could  not  but  own  that  he  had 
come  "  in  the  way  of  righteousness"  (ver.  32)  and  yet  had  refused  to  do  as  he 
taught,  were  like  the  "  second  son  "  in  the  parable.  The  ''  publicans  and  harlots  " 
who  had  believed  in  him,  though  notoriously  impenitent  and  disobedient  at  first, 
were  like  the  "first  son"  in  the  parable.  It  followed,  therefore,  that  what 
these  priests  and  elders  had  said  of  the  "  first  son  "  was  true  about  these.  Of  the 
two  sets,  they  would  go  first  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  followed,  also,  that 
what  these  same  men  had  implied  of  the  second  son  was  true  of  themselves. 
They  had  never  really  done  the  will  of  their  Father.  They  had  not  dealt 
faithfully  with  the  requirements  of  His  kingdom  as  coming  through  John.  More 
than  this,  they  had  seen  others  repenting  and  going  in ;  yet  had  never  done  so 
themselves.     They  were,  therefore,  all  of  them,  outside  of  it  still  (ver.  32). 

Besides  the  wonderful  wisdom  and  dialectical  skill  of  the  Saviour,  we  see  in 
this  passage : — 

1.  How  great  is  the  danger  of  hypocrisy  ! — These  men  had  dealt  treacherously 
with  the  light  that'Hhey  had.  Even  notorious  sinners  in  the  end  are  in  less 
darkness  than  they.     (Cf.  John  v.  46  ;  Luke  xvi.  31 ;  Matt.  vi.  23.) 

2.  How  greater  yet  is  the  mercy  of  Christ  ! — Even  of  such  He  does  not  speak  so 
as  to  bid  them  despair.  If  others  are  spoken  of  as  going  in  "  before  "  them,  it 
is  not  said  of  them  that  they  go  in  alone  (ver.  32). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  24-26.  Christ  and  the  cavillers.  they  are  unlawful.    4.  The  Sacraments, 

1.  When  cavillers  come  to  tempt  us  and  all  religious  service  and  worship, 

and  to  take  advantage  of  our  speeches,  must  have  the  same  authority  with  the 

we  ought  to  be  circumspect,  that  neither  doctrine,  to  wit,  Divine ;  for  the  ques- 

the  truth  be  damnified  by  us,  nor  our  tion   is    moved   about   John's   baptism 

adversaries  get  advantage  against  us.  instead  of  John's  doctrine,  or  John's 

Therefore  here  Christ  asketh  a  question  commission    or   calling.       5.    Men   of 

instead  of  giving  an  answer.     2.  The  corrupt  minds  do  seek,  not  the  verity 

Lord    can   catch   the   crafty   in   their  but  the  victory  in  dispute  ;  they  do  not 

craftiness,    and  can  decipher  the  folly  look  what  is  true  or   false,    right   or 

of  them  who  seek  to  cloak  wickedness  wrong,  but  what  is  most  for  their  own 

under  colours,    for   this  question  both  corrupt    ends    and    purpose,    as    the 

answered    the   former,    and    convinced  reasoning  of  these  men  doth  show  ;  for 

the  adversaries  of    wilful   wickedness,  the  verity  which  they  knew  of  John 

for  they  knew  John's  calling  and  doctrine  they  will  not  confess  for  shame,  nor 

to   be    Divine,    and    that     John    bare  dare  they  flatly  deny  it,  for  fear  the 

witnessuntoChrist,  and  so  they  behoved  people  sLould  fall  on  them.     6.  Who- 

to  know  Christ   to   be   the    Messiah ;  soever  confess  a   doctrine  to  be  from 

therefore,    pertinently   doth    He   ask,  l;ieaven,  and  yet  do  not  believe  it,  are 

John's      baptism,     whence     was     it  ?  inexcusable,   and  condemned  by  their 

3.  Callings    unto    the    holy    ministry  conscience ;  for,  say  they,  "  If  we  say 

must  either  be  from  God,  and  so  they  from    heaven,    He    will    say,    Why," 

are  lawful,  or  from  men  only,  and  so  etc.  ? — David  Dickson. 

KK  497 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  27.  Evading  the  truth. — 1.  The 
Lord's  enemies  at  last  are  confounded 
and  put  to  silence.  "  We  cannot  tell," 
say  they.  2.  One  sin  ensnareth  and 
draweth  a  man  into  another  sin,  for 
they  refuse  to  tell  the  truth,  and  in 
refusing  they  fall  into  a  lie,  saying, 
*'  We  cannot  tell."  3.  Such  as  capti- 
vate the  knowledge  they  have,  and 
make  no  use  of  it,  are  justly  deprived 
of  what  further  knowledge  they  pretend 
to  seek,  for  "  Neither  will  I  tell  you  " 
is  Christ's  last  answer  to  such. — David 
Dickson. 

^Yers.  28-32.  The  two  sons.— J.  The 
two  distinct  and  opposite  answers. — 

1.  That  of  the  first  son,  "  I  will  not," 
was  evil,  and  only  evil.  It  is  of  first- 
rate  practical  importance  to  make  this 
plain  and  prominent.  Looking  to  the 
son  in  the  story,  we  see  clearly  that 
the  answer  was  outrageously  wicked : 
it  was  an  evil  word  flowing  from  its 
native  spring  in  an  evil  heart.  Look- 
ing next  to  the  class  of  persons  whom 
that  son  represents,  we  find  they  are 
the  openly  and  daringly  ungodly  of 
every  rank  in  every  age.  They  neither 
fear  God  nor  pretend  to  fear  Him. 
At  this  point,  among  certain  classes,  a 
subtle  temptation  insinuates  itself.  In 
certain  'circumstances  ungodly  men 
take  credit  for  the  distinct  avowal  of 
their  ungodliness,  and  count  on  it  as  a 
merit.  The  frank  confession  that  they 
are  not  good  seems  to  serve  some  men 
as  a  substitute  for  goodness.  What 
comfort  will  it  afibrd  to  the  lost  to 
reflect  that  they  went  openly  to  per- 
dition, in  broad  daylight,  before  all 
men,  and  did  not  skulk  through  by- 
ways under  pretence  that  they  were 
going  to  heaven  ?  2.  The  answer  of 
the  other  son  was  evil,  too,  if  you  look, 
not  to  its  body,  but  to  its  spirit.  His 
smooth  language  was  a  lie ;  and  his 
subsequent  conduct  showed,  not  that 
he  had  changed  his  mind  when  his 
father  was  out  of  sight,  but  that  he 
concealed  it  while  his  father  was 
present.  The  expression  of  the  lips 
was  like  a  glittering  ripple  caused  by 
a  fitful  breeze,  running  upward  on  the 

498 


surface  of  the  river,  while  the  whole 
volume  of  its  water  rolls,  notwith- 
standing, the  other  way.  Thus  is 
even  the  worship  of  hypocrites  worth- 
less. ^'  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto 
Me,  Lord,  Lord,"  etc.  Thus,  at  first, 
both  these  sons  were  in  a  false  and 
unsafe  position.  Their  characters  were 
not  the  same — were  not  similar ;  they 
differed  in  thought  and  word ;  but  the 
difference,  in  as  far  as  their  answers 
were  concerned,  indicated  only  varieties 
of  sin.  Legion  is  the  name  of  the 
spirits  that  possess  and  pollute  the 
fallen ;  but  all  the  legion  do  not  dwell 
in  every  man.  At  the  time  when  the 
father  uttered  his  command,  the  char- 
acter of  the  first  son  was  bold,  un- 
blushing rebellion  ;  the  character  of  the 
second  was  cowardly,  false  pretence. 

II.  The  two  distinct  and  opposite 
acts. — 1.  The  first,  after  flinging  a 
blunt  refusal  in  his  father's  face,  re- 
pented of  his  sin.  The  turning-point 
is  here.  His  heart  was  first  turned 
and  then  his  history.  The  grieved 
father  would  weep  for  joy,  as  he  looked 
up  the  precipitous  hill-side  on  which 
the  terraced  vineyard  hung,  and  saw 
there  the  head  and  hands  of  his  son 
glancing  quickly  from  place  to  place 
among  the  vine  plants.  Thus  there  is 
joy  in  heaven — deep  in  the  heart  of 
heaven's  Lord — over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth.  Among  the  vines  that  day 
work  was  worship  ;  the  resulting  act  of 
obedience — fruit  of  repentance  in  the 
soul,  was  an  offering  of  a  sweet-smelling 
savour  unto  God.  2.  The  other  son 
promptly  promised,  but  failed  to  per- 
form. The  first  was  changed  from  bad 
to  good,  but  the  second  was  not  changed 
from  good  to  bad.  No  change  took 
place  in  this  case,  and  none  is  recorded. 
This  son  represents,  in  the  first  instance, 
those  Pharisees  who  were  then  and 
there  compassing  the  death  of  Jesus. 
They  ostentatiously  professed  that  they 
were  doing  God  service  ;  yet  they  were 
spreading  a  net  for  the  feet  of  the 
innocent,  and  preparing  to  shed  His 
blood,  It  is  meant  that  in  this  glass  \ 
all  the  self-righteous  to  the  end  of  the 
world    should   see    themselves;    their 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxi. 


profession  is  fair,  but  their  life  is  for 
self,  and  not  for  God. — W.  Arnot,  D.D. 

Vers.  28-31.  The  last  first.— 1.  Men 
will  more  readily  acknowledge  their 
fault  in  another  man's  person  than  in 
their  own  ;  therefore  doth  Christ  draw 
forth  these  men's  judgment  by  a 
parable.  2.  He  will  have  the  con- 
science of  the  wicked  subscribing  to 
the  righteousness  of  God's  judgment 
against  themselves,  as  will  appear  by 
"  What  think  ye  ? "  compared  with 
their  answer.  3.  The  most  odious 
and  despised  sinners,  repenting  and 
believing  in  Jesus,  do  find  grace  and 
place  both  in  the  church  and  in  heaven 
above ;  but  such  as  confide  in  their 
own  righteousness  are  debarred,  for 
''  harlots,"  saith  Christ,  *'  go  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  before  you." — 
David  Dickson. 

Ver.  28.  Cultivating  the  Lord's  vine- 
yard.— I.  Our  Heavenly  Father  calls  us 
to  work  for  Him. — We  may  take  the 
Lord's  vineyard  to  represent :  1.  Our 
own  natures.  2.  Our  own  households. 
3.  The  Christian  church.  4.  The  whole 
earth. 

II.  Our  Heavenly  Father  calls  us  to 
work  for  Him  as  sons. — As  recognising 
the  filial  relation  and  breathing  the 
filial  spirit — i.e.  working  cheerfully, 
prayerfully,  hopefully. 

III.  Our  Heavenly  Father  calls  us  to 
work  for  Him  at  once,  "  to-day."  — 
John  Morgan. 

"  /  will"  and  "  /  wonHJ'' — a  story 
of  two  brothers  (For  children). — We  do 
not  know  the  names  of  these  two 
brothers,  so  we  will  call  them  "  I 
Will"  and  "I  Won't."  They  evi- 
dently lived  with  their  father,  who 
owned  a  vineyard. 

I.  Two  brothers  very  much  unlike. 
— I  think  "■  I  will "  was  the  elder  of 
the  two,  and  in  some  versions  of  the 
story  he  is  put  first.  He  was  a  very 
promising  young  man  ;  indeed,  he  was 
all  promise,  as  we  shall  see,  and  little 
performance.  He  found  it  so  much 
easier  to  say  "  Yes"  than  "  No,"  that 


he  often  said  "  Yes  "  when  he  did  not 


\ 


mean  it.  Brothers  are  often  unlike 
each  other.  Instance  Jacob  and  Esau, 
Moses  and  Aaron,  Peter  and  Andrew, 
James  and  John.  No  need  for  brothers 
to  be  exactly  alike.  Nature  is  full  of 
variety  and  character  is  full  of  variety. 
Tastes,  habits,  acquirements,  all  make 
us  different,  even  as  our  faces  are 
different. 

II.  A  reasonable  request. — 1.  Their 
father   asked    them  kindly.     "  Son,   go 

work  in  my  vineyard."  Not  "  slave," 
not  "  servant,"  not  even  "  go,"  but 
"  son." 

2.  He  asked  what  each  had  the  power 
to  perform. — "  Go  work."  Idleness  is 
a  disgrace.  Work  is  pleasant,  manly, 
profitable,  honourable. 

3.  His  request  involved  no  hardship. 
—Did  not  say,  "  Go  work  in  my  coal 
mine,"  but  "  work  in  my  vineyard." 

4.  It  was  a  rightful  request. — He 
was  their  father. 

III.  The  two  answers. — "  I  Won't  " 
at  once  refused.  He  was  a  hasty  boy  ; 
did  not  think  about  it ;  made  up  his 
mind  in  a  moment.  He  was  blunt. 
He  had  no  right  to  have  spoken  so 
curtly  to  a  father.  His  answer  would 
grieve  his  father.  *'  I  Will  "  promised 
at  once.  He  also  was  hasty.  It  was 
not  the  promptness  of  a  grateful  and 
ready  mind,  but  the  utterance  of  a 
glib  tongue.  It  was  insincere.  He 
said  what  he  did  not  mean.  Words 
and  intentions  should  go  together.  He 
was  thoughtless.  As  soon  as  his  father 
was  out  of  sight  he  foigot  his  promise, 
and  went  on  with  his  pastime. 

IV.  A  youth  who  changed  his  mind. 
— It  is  said  the  boy  who  changes  his 
mind  proves  that  he  has  a  mind  to 
change ;  but  he  must  beware  of  fickle- 
ness.    "  He  ropented." 

1.  His  repentance  did  not  come 
immediately. — It  was  *'  afterwards  he 
repented." 

2.  His  repentance  implies  that  he  was 
sorry. — There  was  a  true  heart  under 
a  rough  exterior.  "  Some  men  seem 
to  imagine  they  will  be  forgiven  for 
being  sinners  because  they  have  never 
pretended  to  be  saints;  but  is  a  man     , 

499  \^ 


/ 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


\ 


less  the  enemy  of  God  because  he  is 
outspoken  1  " 

3.    His   repentance  was  immediately 

followed  by  work. — It  is  very  easy  to 

express   regret — to  say  we  are  sorry ; 

but  this  boy  "  went  and  did  the  will  of 

his  father." 

V.  Which  brother  are  we  like? — 
1.  Do  not  be  too  ready  to  say,  "  I  will ; " 
mean  it  first  and  then  say  it.  2.  Culti- 
vate courtesy,  and  before  refusing  a 
reasonable  request  be  sure  that  you 
have  good  reasons  for  refusing.  3.  Look 
upon  this  little  parable  as  a  picture  of 
our  Heavenly  Father's  call.  To  every 
son  He  says,  "  Go  work  in  My  vine- 
yard," and  He  says,  Do  it  "  to-day." 
Is  my  name  "  /  will"  or  *' /  won't ? " 
— Preparation. 

The  temptations  of  work. — Work  has 
its  temptations,  more  subtle  than  the 
temptations  of  idleness.  There  are 
two  great  formulas  :  the  formula  of 
the  world  and  the  formula  of  Christ. 
The  formula  of  the  world  is  :  Not  you, 
but  yours;  not  what  you  are,  but 
what  you  do,  is  the  thing  sought  for. 
The  formula  of  Christ  is  :  Not  yours, 
but  you  ;  your  life  is  greater  in  God's 
sight  than  your  life-work.  The  formula 
of  the  world  finds  its  practical  and  its 
powerful  ally  in  the  temptations  of 
work.  The  formula  of  Christ  means 
the  protection  and  the  development  of 
your  spiritual  life.  The  temptations 
of  work,  what  are  they  1 

I.  To  self-deception. — The  more  you 
love  your  work,  and  the  greater  your  suc- 
cess in  your  work,  the  more  are  you  ex- 
posed to  the  temptation  of  self-deception. 
If  you  love  your  work  the  performance 
of  it  gives  you  pleasure  and  satisfaction, 
and  weaves  into  your  thought  the  subtle 
idea  that  work  is  the  ultimate  thing, 
and  that  success  in  work  means  com- 
pleteness. What  you  do  becomes  more 
to  you  than  what  you  are,  and  every 
tim9  you  do  well,  and  the  world  tells 
you  you  do  well,  that  illusive  sense  of 
ultimateness  gains  power  over  you,  and 
your  life-work  overtops  your  life. 

II.  To  unspirituality. — It  grows  out 
of  the  first.     We  are  not  promised  that 

500 


the  Spirit  of  God  shall  dwell  in  our 
work,  except  in  so  far  as  He  first 
dwells  in  our  life.  When  ambition, 
the  appetite  for  power,  or  when 
activity,  the  appetite  for  work, 
becomes  the  ruling  idea  of  existence, 
when  we  live  for  effect,  or  when  we 
attempt  to  find  ultimateness  in  being 
busy,  it  is  amazing  to  see  how  a  wall 
seems  built  up  between  our  life  and 
our  work ;  and  how  the  nobleness,  even 
the  spirituality,  of  our  calling  com- 
municates no  blessing  to  our  neglected 
and  depleted  spiritual  life.  Do  you 
ask  me,  "  What  is  the  proper  food 
of  the  spiritual  life  ? "  I  answer  by 
naming  a  trinity  of  truths,  upon 
which,  if  you  feed  day  by  day,  you 
will  ever  keep  greater  and  holier  than 
your  life-work  ;  great  and  holy  as,  for 
some  of  you,  that  life-work  may  be. 
Christ's  work  for  you,  Christ's  presence 
in  you,  Christ's  purpose  through  you. 
— Charles  Cuthhert  Hall. 

Work. — Observe  : — 

I.  The  command. — "  Go."  Some 
Christians  would  always  be  with 
Christ.  They  love  emotion  —  contem- 
plation ;  like  Mary  they  would  never 
move  from  His  feet.  To  such  He 
says.  Go ;  you  must  tear  yourself 
away  from  the  ideal  of  religion  to 
the  practical.  The  society  of  your 
Master  is  to  come  after. 

II.  The  labour.— ''Work."  Religion 
is  toil.  Toil  in  self  culture.  Toil  in 
converting  souls.  Toil  in  perfecting 
and  carrying  out  God's  plans. 

III.  The  time.—"  To-day."  Divine 
things  admit  no  delay. 

IV.  The  place. — *'  In  My  vineyard." 
It  is  all  God's  vineyard.  Though  the 
world  is  reeking  with  sin,  though  the 
soul  is  fouled  with  sin,  though  Satan 
is  riding  roughshod  over  fallen  creation, 
it  is  all  God's.  Consider  :  1.  How  vast 
the  sphere  of  duty.  2.  How  great 
the  requirements  of  service.  3.  How 
intense  the  responsibility.  4,  How 
great  the  privilege.  5.  How  sure  the 
reward.  — A  non. 

Ver.  29.   Wisdom  of  complying  with 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxi. 


/ 


the  gospel-call — I.  What  is  the  work 
to  which  the  gospel  calls,  and  with 
which  sinners  will  not  comply  ?  It  is 
the  work  of  practical  godliness.  It  is 
a  large  work,  as  extensive  as  the 
commandment,  which  is  exceeding 
broad. 

II.  Why  is  it  that  sinners  will  not 
comply  with  this  work? — 1.  Because 
it  is  the  work,  to  which  of  all  works, 
their  hearts  are  most  averse  (Kom.  viii 
7).  2.  Because  of  the  prevailing  love  of 
carnal  ease.  Fighting,  running,  pray- 
ing, striving,  wrestling,  taking  heavenly 
violence  and  the  like,  they  cannot  away 
with.  3.  Because  Satan  furnishes 
them  with  work  (John  viii.  44).  They 
are  busy  doing  nothing,  or  hatching 
the  cockactrice's  egg  ;  doing  worse  than 
nothing,  they  have  much  to  do  having 
the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  mind  to 
fulfil. 

III.  Why  this  reason  should  be 
retracted  ? — 1.  Because  this  refusal  is 
against  the  respect  and  duty  which 
you  owe  to  Him  who  calls  you  to  the 
work  (Mai.  i.  6).  2.  Because  this 
refusal  is  full  of  the  basest  ingratitude. 
3.  It  is  the  most  foolish  and  unreason- 
able refusal  that  can  be ;  and  if  the 
sinner  were  not  out  of  himself,  he 
could  not  be  capable  of  it.  4.  You  are 
ruined  if  you  stand  to  your  refusal. — 
Anon. 

"Vers.  31,  32.  The  apj^lication  of  the 
parable. — The  application  of  the  parable 
to  those  to  whom  our  Lord  was  speak- 
ing could  not  be  misunderstood. 

I.  The  first  son,  the  man  who  at 
first  said  he  would  not  go,  but  after- 
wards repented  and  went,  was  the 
representative  of  the  publicans  and 
harlots. — They  had  lived  in  open  sin, 
and  were  not  surprised  that  men  should 
denounce  them  as  hopelessly  corrupt. 
But  John's  preaching  went  to  their 
hearts,  because  he  assured  them,  that 
even  for  them  there  was  an  open  gate 
into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

II.  The  priests  and  elders. — The 
men  who  represented  all  that  was 
respectable  and  religious  in  the  country, 
were  depicted  in  the  second  son  who 


promptly  said  he  would  go  and  work 
for  his  father,  but  did  not  do  so. 
These  priests  and  elders  spent  their 
time  in  professing  to  be  God's  people. 
Their  day  was  filled  with  religious 
services.  They  had  no  secular  business 
at  all  ;  they  were  identified  with 
religion  ;  their  whole  life  was  a  procla- 
mation that  they  were  God's  servants, 
and  a  profession  of  their  willingness  to 
obey.  And  yet  they  failed  to  do  the 
one  thing  they  were  there  to  do.  They 
heard  John's  teaching,  they  knew  it 
was  the  voice  of  God,  but  they  refused 
to  prepare  their  hearts  and  under- 
standings, as  he  taught  them,  that 
they  might  recognise  Christ.  Their 
whole  profession  collapsed  Hke  a  burst 
bubble  ;  they  were  proved  to  be  shams, 
to  be  dealing  in  mere  words  with  no 
idea  of  realities. — M.  Dods,  D.D. 

Yer.  31.  Grace  manifested  in  flagrant 
sinne7's.  —  The  manner  of  working 
grace  in  profane  persons,  and  great 
sinners,  for  the  most  part  is  this :  they 
see  two  things : — 

I.  Their  own  misery. — They  ascend 
to  a  sight  of  their  misery  by  these 
steps.  1.  They  see  their  own  sins, 
which  they  have  committed  against 
God.  2.  They  see  the  severity  of  that 
law  which  they  have  transgressed,  and 
of  that  Lord,  whom  they  have  offended, 
into  whose  hands  it  is  a  fearful  thing 
to  fall.  3.  They  tremble  and  fear  by 
reason  of  the  righteous  judgments  of 
God.  4.  They  grieve  and  mourn  that 
by  their  sins  they  have  roused  a  sleep- 
ing lion,  and  incensed  and  stirred  up 
against  them  so  potent  a  foe.  5.  They 
confess  and  acknowledge  that  they  are 
unworthy  to  come  unto  God,  or  to 
receive  mercy  fi-om  Him. 

II.  God's  mercy. — They  attain  unto 
the  sight  thereof  by  these  degrees. 
1 .  They  see  the  promises  of  the  gospel 
and  the  condition  of  repentance  ex- 
pressed in  the  gospel.  2.  They  come 
humbly  to  Christ.  3.  They  accept  of 
the  conditions  which  the  gospel  re- 
quires. 4.  They  come  unto  the  holy 
Eucharist,  as  a  symbol  and  confirma- 
tion of  aU  these. — Richard  Ward, 

501 


\ 


CHAP.  XXI.      EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Ver.  32.  Reason /or  condemnation. —  it  shall  stand  as  a  witness  against  us, 

1.  The  more   blameless    and  holy  the  to  aggravate  our  sin  and  condemnation ; 

preacher  of  repentance  and  righteous-  therefore,   saith  He,  "  And  ye,  when 

ness  by  Christ  be  found,  the  greater  is  ye    had    seen    it,    ye    repented    not." 

the  sin  of  those    who   do   not  receive  4.    Remorse   for   not   believing   God's 

the  message,  for  so  Christ  aggravateth  word  in  His  servant's  mouth,  in  time 

these  men's  sins  saying,  ''John  came  in  bygone,  is  a  special  spur  and  prepara- 

the  way  of  righteousness,and  ye  believed  tive  to  believe  it  the  more  solidly  for 

him    not."      2.    Albeit   self -conceited,  time   to   come;    therefore    saith    He, 

righteous    people    do  not   believe   the  "  Ye    repented    not,    that    ye   might 

doctrine   of   righteousness    by    Christ,  believe  him,"  that  is,  "  When  you  saw 

yet  God  will  manifest  the  power  of  His  that  the  publicans  had  outstripped  you 

truth    in   the   conversion  of    despised  in  the  way  of  righteousness  by  believ- 

sinners ;     for    "  the    harlots     believed  ing  John's  testimony  of  Me,  ye  did  not 

John  "   albeit  the  Pharisees    did    not.  lament  your  unbelief,  that  you  might 

3.    The   sight    and   example  of    other  give  him  so  much  the  more  credit  for 

folks  believing  and  repenting  in  Christ,  time  to  come,  and  so  recover  your  loss 

if  it  do  not  move  us  unto  acknowledg-  by  faith  in  Me." — David  Dickson, 
ing  our  sins  also  and  flying  unto  Christ, 

s. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  33—46. 

Further  answers. — It  is  one  mark  of  a  well-equipped  teacher  to  exhibit 
variety  in  his  teaching.  So  this  Greatest  of  teachers  had  previously  taught 
His  disciples  (xiii.  52).  So  He  exemplifies  here.  In  dealing  further  with 
those  who  had  just  questioned  His  authority  (ver.  23),  He  first  tells  them  of 
that  which  is  "  new  " — "  hear  another  parable."  In  the  prophecy  which  He 
afterwards  quotes  as  being  one  with  which  His  hearers  ought  long  ago  to  have 
been  acquainted  (ver.  42),  He  tells  them  of  that  which  is  "old."  But  in  both 
we  shall  find  He  refers  to  the  same  subject  as  that  of  which  He  had  been 
previously  speaking,  viz.,  the  character  and  destiny  of  that  body  of  teachers 
and  religious  leaders  of  whom  His  present  opponents  were  representatives  and 
samples. 

I.  The  parable. — This,  although  here  spoken  of  as  "  another,"  was  not  fresh  in 
every  respect.  In  its  general  character,  on  the  contrary,  and  in  some  of  its  leading 
featuresj  there  was  much  that  was  "  old."  Long  before,  e.g.  the  church  and  people 
of  Israel  had  been  compared,  as  here,  to  a  "  vine  "  (ver.  33  ;  Ps.  Ixxx. ;  Isa.  v.  1,7, 
etc.).  Something  had  been  said  also  before  of  the  measures  taken  for  their 
separation  and  protection  under  the  figure  of  a  "  hedge  "  (ver.  33 ;  Isa.  v.  2,  5). 
And  something  also,  of  an  expectation  on  the  owner's  part  of  finding  "  fruit  "  on 
this  vine  (Isa.  v.  2,  4).  On  the  other  hand,  in  this  "  version  "  of  the  similitude, 
there  was  much  that  was  new.  Such  was  the  idea  of  "  letting  out  "  this  vine- 
yard to  certain  of  the  owner's  servants  and  leaving  it  in  their  charge.  Also,  the 
idea  of  a  certain  proportion  of  its  "fruits"  being  his  clearly  recognised  due 
(end  of  ver.  34,  R.V.).  Also,  the  refusal  of  those  in  charge  to  pay  this,  and 
their  subsequent  ill-treatment  in  various  ways,  and  to  the  extremest  lengths  and 
that  several  times  over,  of  those  commissioned  to  ask  it  (vers.  35,  36).  Also, 
and  above  all,  the  introduction  of  the  owner's  son  on  the  scene  (ver.  37),  of  the 
hopes  that  that  introduction  seemed  fitted  to  encourage  [ibid.),  and  of  the 
robber-like  conspiracy,  with  its  murderous  sequel,  which  it  led  to  instead.  Nor 
was  there  less,  finally,  of  the  previously  unheard  of  in  that  which  we  may  speak  of 
as  the  verdict  of  this  parable.  In  the  quarter,  first,  from  which  it  was  elicited ; 
those  who  heard  the  parable  and  of  whom  it  was  speaking,  being  just  those, 
through   the  question   asked  of  them,  to  declare  its  result.     In  the  tone  of 

502 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxi. 


certainty,  next,  with  which  they  speak  of  it.  To  the  question  asked  there  is 
but  one  answer  to  give  (ver.  41).  In  the  manifest  equity,  lastly,  which  they 
recognise  in  it.  In  was  only  right  that  such  "  miserable  "  men  should  be  thus 
**  miserably "  destroyed  (R.V.).  It  was  only  right  that  there  should  be  others 
to  "  render  "  what  had  been  "  withheld  "  by  themselves. 

II.  The  prophecy  quoted. — How  this  is  connected  with  what  has  gone  before 
may  be  seen  by  considering,  first,  in  what  respects  the  prophecy  tallies  with  the 
parable  and  its  verdict.  It  does  so,  e.g.  in  the  prominence  given  by  it  to  the 
same  persons  as  before,  the  *' builders"  and  "stone"  of  the  one  corresponding 
closely  with  the  "husbandmen"  and  the  "  heir"  of  the  other.  Also,  in  the  kind 
of  action  attributed  to  the  persons  so  named  ;  the  "  rejection  "  of  the  "  stone  "  in 
the  one  case  corresponding  exactly  to  the  "  killing  and  casting  out "  of  the  "  heir  " 
in  the  other.  Also,  once  more,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  regard  to  the  punishment 
inflicted,  and  the  reason  given  for  it,  in  the  two  cases  referred  to  (cf.  vers.  41  and 
43).  The  connection  in  question  maybe  seen  next,  by  observing  in  what  respects 
the  teaching  of  the  prophecy  yb/^o«^5  up  that  of  the  parable.  How  it  tells,  on 
the  one  side,  of  the  wonderful  subsequent  glorification  of  that  which  had  been 
"  rejected  "  by  the  builders  and  cast  out  by  the  "  husbandmen,"  the  once  despised 
"  stone  "  becoming  nothing  less,  in  the  end,  than  "  the  head  of  the  corner,"  and 
that  in  so  "  marvellous "  a  way,  as  only  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  direct 
operation  of  God  (ver.  42).  How  it  tells  on  the  other,  of  a  singularly  discrimina- 
ting and  so  confirmatory  fate  as  being  reserved  for  these  rejecters  thereof — those 
who  merely  "  stumble  "  at  that  Divine  stone  being  "  broken  "  thereby,  but  not 
necessarily  (so  it  appears)  in  an  irrecoverable  manner,  whilst  those  who  go 
further  and  wilfully  cause  others  besides  to  stumble  at  it,  are  broken  thereby 
beyond  hope  (ver.  44).  And  how  this  brings  us,  therefore,  to  that  final 
catastrophe  which  the  Lord  then  had  in  His  mind,  even  the  utter  approaching 
destruction  of  those  persons  who  were  opposing  Him  then.  Something  of  all 
this,  indeed,  with  all  their  blindness,  they  appear  to  have  understood  at  this 
time  (ver.  45). 

The  words  thus  addressed  to  them  may  teach  us  in  our  turn  : — 

1.  The  true  nature  of  the  sin  of  the  world. — It  is  opposing  God's  will.  It  is 
doing  so,  more  especially,  in  regard  to  His  Son.  Casting  out  and  killing  the 
appointed  "  Heir."  Rejecting  the  "  chosen  Stone."  (See  Ps.  ii.  passim  ;  John 
xvi.  9,  XV.  22,  23,  vi.  29 ;  1  John  iii.  23,  also  Matt.  xxv.  40,  45). 

2.  The  true  secret  of  the  life  of  the  church. — Kecognising  the  "Only  begotten" 
as  at  once  the  foundation  and  consummation  of  all,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega, 
the  beginning  and  the  ending,  the  first  and  the  last.  Had  these  men  "  known 
this  they  would  not  have  crucified,  the  Lord  of  glory  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  7,  8 ;  Acts 
iii.  17  ;  see  also  John  xvii.  3  ;  John  i.  1,  etc. ;  Heb.  i.  1,  etc. ;  Col.  ii.  3). 

HOMILIES    ON   THE    VERSES, 

Vers.  33-46.  The  vineyard  and  its  wisdom  and  love  which  poured  out  all 
keepers. — This  parable  was  apparently  this  !  The  pungent  severity  of  this 
spoken  on  the  Tuesday  of  the  Passion  parable,  with  its  transparent  veil  of 
week.  It  was  a  day  of  hand-to-hand  narrative,  is  only  appreciated  by  keep- 
conflict  with  the  Jewish  authorities  ing  clearly  in  view  the  circumstances 
and  of  exhausting  toil,  as  the  bare  and  the  listeners.  They  had  struck  at 
enumeration  of  its  incidents  shows.  Him  with  their  question  of  His  author- 
It  included  all  that  Matthew  records  ity,  and  He  parries  the  blow.  Now  it  is 
between  ver.  20  of  this  chapter  and  His  turn,  and  the  sharp  point  goes  home, 
the  end  of  the  twenty-fifth  chapter.  I.  The  first  stage  is  the  preparation 
What  a   day !     What  a  fountain  of  of  the  vineyard,  in  which  three  steps 

503 


CHAP.  XXL      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


are  marked. — 1.  It  is  planted  and 
furnished  with  all  appliances  needful 
for  making  wine,  which  is  its  great 
end.  The  direct  Divine  origin  of  the 
religious  ideas  and  observances  of 
"  Judaism  "  is  thus  asserted  by  Christ. 
The  only  explanation  of  them  is  that 
God  enclosed  that  bit  of  the  wilderness, 
and,  with  His  own  hands,  set  grow- 
ing there  these  exotics.  Neither  the 
theology  nor  the  ritual  is  of  man's 
establishing.  2.  Thus  furnished,  the 
vineyard  is  next  handed  over  to  the 
husbandmen,  who,  in  Matthew,  are 
exclusively  the  rulers,  while  in  Luke 
they  are  the  people.  No  doubt  it  was 
"like  people,  like  priest."  3.  Having 
installed  the  husbandmen,  the  owner 
goes  into  another  country.  Centuries 
of  comparative  Divine  silence  followed 
the  planting  of  the  vineyard.  Having 
given  us  charge,  God,  as  it  were,  steps 
aside  to  leave  us  room  to  work  as 
we  will,  and  so  to  display  what  we 
are  made  of.  He  is  absent  in  so  far  as 
conspicuous  oversight  and  retribution 
are  concerned.  He  is  present  to  help, 
love,  and  bless. 

II.  Then  comes  the  habitual  ill- 
treatment  of  the  messengers. — 1.  These 
are,  of  course,  the  prophets,  whose  office 
was  not  only  to  foretell,  but  to  plead 
for  obedience  and  trust,  the  fruits 
sought  by  God.  There  is  no  more 
remarkable  historical  fact  than  that 
of  the  uniform  hostility  of  the  Jews  to 
the  prophets.  That  a  nation  of  such 
a  sort  as  always  to  hate,  and  generally 
to  murder,  them  should  have  had  them 
in  long  succession  throughout  its  his- 
tory, is  surely  inexplicable  on  any 
naturalistic  hypothesis.  Such  men 
were  not  the  natural  product  of  the 
race,  nor  of  its  circumstances,  as  their 
fate  shows.  No  "  philosophy  of  Jewish 
history"  explains  the  anomaly  except 
the  one  stated  here,  "  he  sent  his 
servants."  2.  The  hostility  of  the 
husbandmen  grows  with  indulgence. 
From  beating  they  go  on  to  killing, 
and  stoning  is  a  specially  savage  form 
of  kilhng.  The  more  God  pleads  with 
men,  the  more  self-conscious  and  bitter 
becomes  their  hatred;   and  the  more 

504 


bitter  their  hatred,  the  more  does  He 
plead,  sending  other  messengers,  more, 
perhaps,  in  number,  or  possibly  of 
more  weight,  with  larger  commission 
and  clearer  light.  Thus  the  antagon- 
istic forces  both  grow,  and  the  worse 
men  become,  the  louder  and  more 
beseeching  the  call  of  God  to  them. 
That  is  always  true ;  and  it  is  also  ever 
true  that  he  who  begins  with  "  I  go, 
sir,"  and  goes  not,  is  in  a  fair  way 
to  end  with  stoning  the  prophets. 
3.  Christ  treats  the  whole  long  series 
of  violent  rejections  as  the  acts  of  the 
same  set  of  husbandmen.  The  class  or 
nation  was  one,  as  the  stream  is  one, 
though  all  its  particles  were  different ; 
and  the  Pharisees  and  scribes,  who 
stood  with  frowning  hatred  before  Him 
as  He  spoke,  were  the  living  embodi- 
ment of  the  spirit  which  had  animated 
all  the  past. 

III.  The  mission  of  the  Son  and  its 
fatal  issue  (vers.  37-39). — Three  things 
are  here  prominent.  1.  The  unique 
position  which  Christ  claims.  2.  The 
owner's  vain  hope  in  sending  his  son. 
Christ  knew  Himself  to  be  God's  last 
appeal,  as  He  is  to  all  men,  as  well  as 
to  that  generation.  He  is  the  last 
arrow  in  God's  quiver.  When  He  has 
shot  that  bolt,  the  resources  even  of 
Divine  love  are  exhausted,  and  no  more 
can  be  done  for  the  vineyard  than  He 
has  done  for  it.  3.  The  vain  calcula- 
tion of  the  husbandmen.  Christ  puts 
hidden  motives  into  plain  words,  and 
reveals  to  these  rulers  what  they 
scarcely  knew  of  their  own  hearts. 
With  what  sad  calmness  does  Jesus 
tell  the  fate  of  the  son,  so  certain  that 
it  is  already  as  good  as  done  !  It  was 
done  in  their  counsels,  and  yet  He  does 
not  cease  to  plead,  if  perchance  some 
hearts  may  be  touched,  and  withdraw 
themselves  from  the  confederacy  of 
murder. 

IV.  The  self-condemnation  from  un- 
willing lips. — Our  Lord  turns  to  the 
rulers  with  startling  and  dramatic 
suddenness,  which  may  have  thrown 
them  oft'  their  guard,  so  that  their 
answer  leaped  out  before  they  had 
time  to  think  whom  it  hit. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  XXI. 


Y.  Then  comes  the  solemn  applica- 
tion and  naked  truth  of  the  parable. 

— Who  can  venture  to  speak  of  the 
awful  doom  set  forth  in  the  last  words 
here  ?  It  has  two  stages  :  one  a  lesser 
misery,  which  is  the  lot  of  him  who 
stumbles  against  the  stone,  while  it 
lies  passive,  to  be  built  on  ;  one  more 
dreadful,  when  it  has  acquired  motion 
and  comes  down  with  irresistible  im- 
petus.— A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  33-41.  The  efforts  of  mercy  to 
redeem. — I.  Abundant.  —  Vineyard 
planted,  fenced,  guarded,  tilled. 

II.  Outraged. — Messengers  despised, 
ill-treated,  slain. 

III.  Persevering. — One  messsenger 
after  another,  and  last  of  all  the 
greatest,  wisest,  best — "  His  Son." — 
J.  C.  Gray. 

Ver.  37.  Christ  the  Messenger  of  His 
own  gospel. — I.  The  dignity  of  the 
person  whom  God  employed  to  preach 
the  gospel.  "  His  Son." — 1.  A  superior 
person  to  Moses,  the  prophets,  and 
infinitely  superior  to  every  other 
messenger  of  God.  2.  The  sublimest 
titles  are  bestowed  on  this  person  both 
in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

II.  That  this  is  the  final  interposi- 
tion of  God  in  our  favour. — "  Last  of 
all."  1.  As  He  is  infinitely  superior 
to  all  that  were  before  Him,  so  it  may 
well  be  presumed  that  none  will  come 
after  Him ;  and  that  the  message  He 
brings  seals  and  finishes  God's  revela- 
tion to  the  children  of  men.  2.  This 
is  the  reason  why  the  predictions 
relating  to  the  Messiah,  refer  His 
coming  to  the  last  days  (Isa.  ii.  2). 

III.  Our  duty  in  relation  to  this 
sacred  Messenger  of  heaven. — To  rever- 
ence Him.  1.  By  attending  to  the 
proofs  of  His  Divine  mission.  This  He 
requires  (John  v.  31—38).  2.  By 
receiving  Him  in  that  capacity  with 
gratitude,  love,  hope,  joy.  3.  By 
embracing  the  holy  errand  on  which 
He  was  sent,  and  complying  with  the 
practical  purposes  of  His  mission : 
*'  God  raised  up  His  Son  to  bless  us." 
How  ?       "In   turning    us    from    our 


iniquities,"  and  teaching  us  "  to  deny 
ungodliness,"  etc.  (Tit.  ii.  12).  4.  By 
forming  ourselves  according  to  that 
sacred  model  He  exhibited  to  mankind. 
5.  By  receiving  pardon  and  sanctifica- 
tion  through  that  awful  method  which 
God  has  appointed,  the  blood  of  His 
Son  (Col.i.  14;  1  John  i.  7).  6.  By 
daily  acts  of  worship  and  adoration ; 
honouring  the  Son  as  we  honour  the 
Father  (John  v.  23;  Rom.  xiv.  11). — 
Anon. 

Ver.  42.  Chj'istj  rejected  of  men, 
exalted  of  God. — Biblical  scholars  and 
critics  are  of  opinion  that  the  words  in 
Ps.  cxviii.  22  refer  to  an  historical 
event,  a  literal  transaction.  "  There 
is  every  presumption,"  says  one  of 
them,  "  that  the  Psalmist  here  refers 
to  a  stone  that  was  rejected  by  the 
builders  of  the  temple,  and  which  was 
afterwards  made  the  chief  stone  of  the 
corner.  The  presumption  is  supported 
by  what  is  stated  in  the  fifth  and  sixth 
chapters  of  the  first  Book  of  Kings." 
All  the  stones  of  the  temple  were  pre- 
pared at  a  distance  from  the  temple, 
and  so  prepared  that  there  was  neither 
hammer  nor  axe  nor  any  tool  of  iron 
heard  in  the  building  on  Mount 
Moriah.  Before  the  builders  could 
say  that  their  work  was  done  they  had 
to  lift  the  stone  which  they  had 
rejected  and  place  it  in  the  corner 
for  which  it  had  been  designed.  They 
then  admitted  that  it  was  indeed  the 
chief  stone  of  the  corner  and  the  glory 
of  their  seven  years'  labour.  The 
truths  suggested  by  the  words  of  the 
text  may  be  considered  in  at  least  four 
aspects : — 

I.  The  metaphorical  aspect.  —  A 
stone  has  a  unity  of  substance,  a 
solidity  and  durability  of  character, 
which  give  it  incomparable  renown  as 
a  foundation,  or  as  a  thing  of  strength 
and  resistance.  There  are  rocks  and 
stones  of  which  it  may  be  said.  Who 
hath  declared  their  generation?  What- 
ever mystery  there  may  be  connected 
with  the  stone  which  the  builders 
rejected,  it  is  most  certain  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  all-sufficient  foundation 

505 


CHAP.  XXI.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


of  the  church,  the  supreme  reason  of 
her  continned  existence  and  power  in 
the  world.  He  is  to  the  church,  past 
and  present,  visible  and  invisible,  what 
the  keystone  is  to  the  bridge,  and  the 
corner-stone  to  a  building. 

II.  The  doctrinal  aspect.  —  The 
doctrine  of  the  text  is  that  of  might 
against  right  in  a  stern  and  continu- 
ous struggle.  We  see  the  tiny  begin- 
nings of  might  against  right  in  the 
histories  of  Cain  and  Abel,  Isaac  and 
Ishmael,  Jacob  and  Esau,  and  we  see 
evidences  of  it  all  through  the  ages. 
But  what  are  all  these  but  the  faint 
glimmerings  of  the  more  awful  conflict 
referred  to  in  the  text  ?  That  conflict 
was  not  the  result  of  mere  ignorance 
or  mental  inertia.  It  was  the  outcome 
of  direct  repugnance  to  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel. 

III.  The  historical  aspect. — There 
is  nothing,  perhaps,  so  remarkable  in 
the  history  of  nations  as  the  difference 
made  by  the  presence  or  the  absence  of 
Christianity.  "  Where  is  that  place," 
says  a  distinguished  statesman  (Russell 
Lowell),  "  where  age  is  revered,  infancy 
respected,  womanhood  honoured,  and 
human  life  held  in  due  regard ;  where 
is  that  place,  ten  miles  square  in  this 
globe,  where  the  gospel  of  Christ  has 
not  gone  and  cleared  the  way  and  laid 
the  foundation  ?  "  We  challenge  the 
sceptical  world  to  show  us  such  a  place. 
From  the  day  that  the  Jews  rejected 
Christ,  Christianity  has  been  to  us 
Gentiles  as  life  from  the  dead. 

lY.  The  practical  aspect  of  the 
text  suggests  the  doctrine  of  man's 
responsibility  to  Christ.  All  men  aie 
builders.  Every  building  must  rest  on 
some  foundation,  or  have  some  reason, 
good  or  bad,  for  its  existence.  That 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  and  all- 
sufl&cient  foundation  of  the  church  is 
beyond  dispute.  The  rulers  of  a 
nation  are  also  builders,  and  are 
equally  responsible  to  Him  by  whom 
all  things  consist.  Of  church  and 
state  He  is  emphatically  the  chief 
corner-stone. — Dr.   J.  Kerr   Campbell. 

Ver.  43.  Privileges  forfeited. — 1.  The 
606 


gospel,  or  the  means  of  grace  in  a 
visible  face  of  a  church,  is  God's  king- 
dom on  earth,  and  the  greatest  benefit 
that  can  be  bestowed  on  a  land. 
2.  The  nation  which  doth  not  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  the  gospel  may 
justly  be  deprived  of  that  privilege,  as 
here  is  threatened,  "  The  kingdom  of 
God  shall  be  taken  from  you."  3.  The 
church  may  be  flitted  from  one  nation 
to  another,  but  shall  not  cease  to  be 
among  some  people ;  for,  "  It  shall  be 
given  to  another,"  saith  Christ.  Thus, 
He  foretelleth  them  of  the  rejection  of 
the  Jews  and  the  inbringing  of  the 
Gentiles.  — David  Dickson. 

Yer.  44.  Neglecting  and  opposing 
Christ. — I.  The  first  case  is  that  in 
which  Christ  is  a  stone  of  stumbling  to 
those  to  whom  He  is  presented.  God 
lays  this  stone  everywhere  in  our  way 
that  we  may  build  upon  it  or  set  it 
high  in  the  place  of  honour,  and  we 
cannot  simply  walk  on  as  if  God  had 
done  no  such  thing.  Whatever  else 
Christ  is.  He  is  substantial,  a  reality 
as  solid  as  the  stone  against  which 
your  foot  is  jarred.  The  gospel  once 
heard  is  "  henceforward  a  perpetual 
element  in  the  whole  condition,  char- 
acter, and  destiny  of  the  hearer."  No 
man  who  has  heard  can  be  as  if  he 
had  not.  Though  he  may  wish  to  pass 
on  as  if  he  had  not  seen  Christ  at  all, 
he  is  not  the  same  man  as  he  was 
before,  his  spiritual  condition  is  altered, 
possibilities  have  dawned  upon  his 
mind,  openings  into  regions  which  are 
new  and  otherwise  inaccessible  ;  he  is 
haunted  by  unsettled  perplexities, 
doubts,  anxieties,  thoughts.  This  atti- 
tude of  mind  must  have  been  very 
common  in  Christ's  own  time,  many 
persons  must  have  shrunk  from  the 
responsibility  of  determining  for  them- 
selves what  they  ought  to  think  of  Him. 
Many  now  do  the  same.  They  wish  to 
overlook  Him  and  pass  on  into  life  as  if 
He  were  not  in  their  path.  But  how 
foolish  if  He  be  the  one  foundation  on 
whom  a  life  can  safely  be  built.  Those 
who  thus  overlook  Christ  and  try  to 
pass  on  into  life  as  if  He  were  not. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxil. 


damage   their  own  character  because  statement    of    fact.      Things    are    to 

they  know  He  is  there,  and  until  they  move  on  eternally  in  fulfilment  of  the 

make  up  their  minds  about  Him,  life  will  of  Christ.     He  is  identified  with 

a   mere   make-believe.       It  is  thus  all  that  is  righteous,  all  that  is  wise, 

they  are  bruised  on  this  stone  of  stum-  all  that  is  ultimately  successful.      To 

bling.    This  bruised  condition,  however,  oppose    His    course,    to   endeavour   to 

is  remediable.  defeat  His  object,  to  attempt  to  work 

II.  The  second  action  of  the  stone  out  an  eternal  success  apart  from  Him 

on  the  builder  is  described  as  final. —  is  as  idle  as  to  seek  to  stop  the  earth  in 

At  once  slain  and  buried,  those  who  its  course,  or  to  stand  in  the  path  of  a 

determinedly   opposed   Christ   lie    op-  stone  avalanche  in  order  to  stem  it. — 

pressed   by   that    which    might    have  M.  Dods,  D.D. 
been   tkeir   joy.     Their   dwelHng  and 

refuge    becomes    their    tomb.     Every  Vers.  45,  46.    Understanding  but  not 

excellence  of  Christ  they  have  leagued  profiting. — 1.   Threatenings  profit  not, 

against  themselves.     It  is  their  ever-  but    rather     do     irritate    desperately 

lasting  shame  that  they  were  ashamed  wicked  men,  as  here  they  desire  to  lay 

of  Him.     The  faithfulness,  truth,  and  hands    on    Him.       2.     Christ's    most 

love   of   Christ,   that   is    to    say,   the  malicious  adversaries,  though  they  be 

qualities   whose   existence   is  all  that  set  for  blood,  yet  can  do  no  more  than 

any   saved   man  ever  had   to   depend  God   will   suffer  them  to  do.      3.  As 

upon,  the  qualities  in  the  knowledge  long   as   the   body   of   the   people   do 

and  faith  of  which  the  weakest  and  favour  Christ's  cause,  persecutors  will 

most  heartless  sinner  sets  out  boldly  not    vent    all   their    designs    against 

and   hopefully   to   eternity,   these    all  Christ  and  His  followers.     4.  The  least 

now  torment   with   crushing   remorse  good  opinion  of  Christ  will  serve  for 

those   who  have  despised  them.      Do  some   use;   albeit  not  to  the   parties' 

not   suppose   this    is   an    extravagant  salvation,    yet    to   the   advantage    of 

figure  used  by  our  Lord  to  awe  His  Christ's  cause,  as   here  it  served  for 

enemies,  and  that   no   man   will  ever  some  use,  that  they  took  Him  for  a 

suffer   a   doom    which   can    be    fairly  prophet. —  David  Dickson. 
represented  in   these  terms.      It  is  a 


CHAPTER  XXTI. 

CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Answered. — What  ?  Obviously  the  unspoken  murderous  hate,  restrained  by  fear, 
which  had  been  raised  in  the  rulers'  minds  and  flashed  in  their  eyes,  and  moved  in  their 
gestures  (^Maclaren).  The  use  of  this  word  would  rather  suggest  the  idea  that  some  conversa- 
tion not  reported  had  intervened  (Gibson). 

Ver.  3.  Sent  forth  his  servants. — It  is  still  customary  in  the  East,  not  only  to  give  an 
invitation  some  time  beforehand,  but  to  send  round  servants  at  the  proper  time  to  inform  the 
invited  guests  that  all  things  are  ready  (Xitto).     Cf.  Esther  vi.  14. 

Ver.  4.  Dinner. — The  introductory  meal  which  opened  the  series  of  wedding  feasts ;  an 
early  meal  toward  mid-day,  not  the  same  as  the  deliruov  "  supper"  (Lange).  Fatlings.— All 
the  animals  smaller  than  the  oxen,  that  had  been  specially  fed  for  the  occasion  (Morison). 

Ver.  5.  His  farm. — Bis  own  farm  (R.V.).  It  was  his  own  concerns,  and  not  the  gratifica- 
tion or  honour  of  his  sovereign,  in  which  he  was  interested  {Morison).  Egoism  Q*  suitas"\ 
says  Bengal. 

Ver.  7.  Burned  up  their  city. — As  the  Saviour's  mind  was  running  on  the  thing  signified, 
He  parabolically  supposes  that  the  originally  invited  guests  were  the  inhabitants  of  a  certain 

507 


CHAP.  XXII.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


city.  He  was  thinking  of  Jerusalem,  and  parabolically  predicted  its  destruction  by  the  hands 
of  the  Komans  (^Morisoii). 

Ver.  9.  The  highways. — The  partings  of  the  highways  (R.  V.).  Strictly,  into  the  places  where 
difEerent  roads  branch  off.  The  "  servants  "  are  the  earliest  Christian  missionaries,  who  went 
in  their  journeys  to  such  meeting-places  of  the  nations  as  Rome,  Antioch,  and  Corinth 
{Carr). 

Ver.  12.  Friend. — See  note  on  xx.  13. 

Ver.  13.  Outer  darkness. — See  note  on  viii.  12. 

Ver.  14.  For  many  are  called,  etc. — See  xx.  16.  The  "  calling  "  answers,  both  verbally  and 
in  substance,  to  the  "bidding"  or  invitation  of  the  parable.  The  "chosen"  are  those  wLo 
both  accept  the  invitation  and  comply  with  its  condition ;  those  who,  in  the  one  parable, 
work  in  the  vineyard,  and  in  the  other,  array  themselves  with  the  wedding  garment  of 
holiness.  The  "  choice,"  as  far  as  the  parable  is  concerned,  appears  as  dependent  upon  the 
answer  given  to  the  calling  {Pluniptre^. 

Ver.  15.  "Entdi.u^lB.  —  Ensnare  (R.V.),  as  a  fowler  ensnares  a  bird.  The  Pharisees  "set  a 
trap  "  for  Jesus. 

Ver.  16.  Their  disciples. — The  old  Pharisees  who  had  challenged  His  authority  keep  in  the 
background,  that  the  sinister  purpose  of  the  question  may  not  appear ;  but  they  are  repre- 
sented by  some  of  their  disciples,  who,  coming  fresh  upon  the  scene,  and  addressing  Jesus  in 
terms  of  respect  and  appreciation,  may  readily  pass  for  guileless  inquirers  {Gibson).  With 
the  Herodians. — Whose  divergence  of  view  on  the  point  made  it  all  the  more  natural  that  they 
should  join  with  Pharisees  in  asking  the  question  ;  for  it  might  fairly  be  considered  that  they 
had  been  disputing  with  one  another  in  regard  to  it,  and  had  concluded  to  submit  the 
question  to  His  decision,  as  to  one  who  would  be  sure  to  know  the  truth  and  fearless  to  tell 
it  (ibid.).  The  party  thus  described  are  known  to  us  only  through  the  Gospels  of  St. 
Matthew  and  St.  Mark ;  and  their  precise  relation  to  the  other  sects  or  schools  among  the 
Jews  are  consequently  matters  of  conjecture.  The  Herodians  were  known,  first  to  the 
Romans,  and  then  to  the  people,  as  adherents  of  the  house  of  the  Herods.  In  what  sense 
they  were  adherents,  and  why  they  now  joined  with  the  Pharisees  is  less  clear ;  and  two 
distinct  theories  have  been  maintained  :  1.  Tha,t,  as  it  was  the  general  policy  of  all  the 
princes  of  the  Herodian  family  to  court  the  favour  of  Rome,  their  partisans  were  those  who 
held  that  it  was  lawful  to  "  give  tribute  to  Caesar."  On  this  supposition  the  narrative  brings 
before  us  the  coalition  of  two  parties  usually  opposed  to  each  other,  but  united  against  a 
common  foe,  2.  That  they  were  partisans  of  the  Herods,  in  the  sense  of  looking  to  them 
to  restore  the  independence  of  the  nation,  and  were  therefore  of  one  mind  with  the  Pharisees 
on  the  tribute  question,  though  they  differed  from  them  on  most  other  points  {Plumptre'). 
We  know  that  Thou  art  true. — Nothing  could  exceed  the  insidious  hypocrisy  of  this  attack 
on  Jesus.     His  enemies  approach  Him  as  a  teacher  whom  they  trust  (Carr). 

Ver.  17.  Tribute. — The  word  rendered  "  tribute  "  (ktjvo-os)  is  properly  the  Roman  word 
"  census."  It  denoted,  as  used  by  the  Jews,  the  annual  poll-tax  which  was  levied  on  the 
people,  for  the  treasury  of  the  Roman  emperor.  The  publicans  collected  it,  and  were  obliged 
to  transmit  to  the  Roman  treasury  as  much  as  accorded  with  the  official  census  of  the 
population.     Hence  the  designation  of  the  tax  {Morison). 

Ver.  19.  A  penny. — A  denarius  bearing  probably  the  image  of  Tiberius.  The  Jewish  coins 
were  not  impressed  with  the  effigy  of  their  kings.  Herod  Philip,  alone  of  his  family,  out  of 
flattery  to  the  emperor,  had  caused  his  coins  to  be  stamped  with  the  likeness  of  Caesar 
{Carr). 

Ver.  20.  Superscription. — Or  inscription.     Sir  John  Cheke  renders  the  word  "onwriting." 

Ver.  21.  Render,  therefore,  unto  Caesar,  etc. — One  of  the  wisest,  deepest,  and  yet  simplest 
maxims  ever  uttered  in  human  language  {Morison).  The  Jewish  doctors  laid  down  the 
principle  that  "He  is  king  whose  coin  passes  current"  (^Carr). 

Ver.  23.  The  Sadducees.  —The  article  is  properly  omitted  in  the  R. V.  See  note  on  iii.  7. 
That  the  Pharisees  had  an  understanding  with  them  also  seems  likely  from  what  is  said  both 
in  ver,  15,  which  seems  a  general  introduction  to  the  series  of  questions,  and  in  ver.  34,  from 
which  it  would  appear  that  they  were  somewhere  out  of  sight  waiting  to  hear  the  result  of 
this  new  attack.  Though  the  alliance  seems  a  strange  one,  it  is  not  the  first  time  that 
common  hostility  to  the  Christ  of  God  has  drawn  together  the  two  great  rival  parties 
(see  xvi.  1).  If  we  are  right  in  supposing  them  to  be  in  combination  now,  it  is  a  remarkable 
illustration  of  the  deep  hostility  of  the  Pharisees  that  they  should  not  only  combine  with  the 
Sadducees  against  Him,  as  they  had  done  before,  but  that  they  should  look  with  complacency 
on  their  using  against  Him  a  weapon  which  threatened  one  of  their  own  doctrines  {Gibson). 

Ver.  24.  Moses  said. — See  Deut.  xxv.  5-10.  These  were  called  levirate  marriages,  from  the 
Latin  word,  levir,  "  a  brother-in-law."  His  brother  shall  marry  his  wife. — The  root  of  the 
obligation  here  imposed  upon  the  brother  of  the  deceased  husband  lies  in  the  primitive  idea 
of  childlessness  being  a  great  calamity,  and  extinction  of  name  and  family  one  of  the 
greatest   that   could   happen  {Speaker's    Commentary').     The  law    on  this  subject  is    not 

508 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


peculiar  to  the  Jews,  but  is  found  amongst  various  Oriental  nations,  ancient  and  modem  (ibid.). 
Raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother.— This  indicates  that  the  child,  which  might  be  the  issue  of 
the  second  marriage,  would  be  entered  in  the  genealogical  register  as  the  child,  not  of  the 
natural  father,  but  of  the  deceased  brother,  and  would  thus  become  his  heir  {MoHsoti). 

Ver.  28.  In  the  resurrection.— The  puzzle  of  the  Sadducees  had  no  special  relation  to  what 
may  be  involved  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  as  contra-distinguished  from  what  is 
involved  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Their  objection  was,  generically,  against  the  idea 
that  men  are  to  exist  at  all  in  the  future.  "  The  doctrine  of  the  Sadducees  "  says  Josephus, 
"  is,  that  souls  die  with  the  bodies  "  (Antiq.,  XVIII.  i.  4)  {Morison).  Whose  wife  shall  she  be  % 
—  Stress  is  laid  on  the  childlessness  of  the  woman  in  all  the  seven  marriages,  in  order  to 
guard  against  the  possible  answer  that  she  would  be  counted  in  the  resurrection  as  the  wife 
of  him  to  whom  she  had  borne  issue  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  29.  Ye  do  err. — This  is,  it  may  be  noted,  the  one  occasion  in  the  Gospel  history  in 
which  our  Lord  comes  into  direct  collision  with  the  Sadducees.  On  the  whole,  while  strictly 
condemning  and  refuting  their  characteristic  error,  the  tone  in  which  He  speaks  is  less  stern 
than  that  in  which  He  addresses  the  Pharisees.  They  were  less  characterised  by  hypocrisy, 
and  this  was  that  which  called  down  His  sternest  reproof  (ibid.). 

Ver.  31.  Spoken  unto  you  by  God.— In  Ex.  iii.  6.  The  Sadducees  while  recognising  the 
authority  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  generally,  seem  to  have  attached  supreme  importance  to 
the  Pentateuch.  Dean  Alford  says,  "  The  assertion  of  the  resurrection  comes  from  the  very 
source  whence  their  difficulty  had  been  constructed." 

Ver.  32.  The  dead. — The  word  has  here  its  lowest  Sadducean  import,  denoting  those  who 
have  ceased  to  be  (Morison). 

Ver.  35.  A  lawyer.— The  precise  distinction  between  the  *•  lawyer  "  and  the  other  scribes 
rested,  probably,  on  technicalities  that  have  left  little  or  no  trace  behind  them.  The  word 
suggests  the  thought  oE  a  section  of  the  scribes  who  confined  their  attention  to  the  law, 
while  the  others  included  in  their  studies  the  writings  of  the  prophets  or  the  traditions  of 
the  elders  also  (Plurnptre).  Tempting  Him. — We  are  not  to  impute  the  same  sinister  motives 
as  actuated  those  who  sent  him.  He  also  was,  in  a  certain  sense,  tempting  Jesus,  i.e.  putting 
Him  to  the  test,  but  with  no  sinister  motive  (Gibson).     (See  Mark  xii.  34). 

Ver.  36.  Which  ?— The  original  term  is  qualitative.  It  draws  attention  to  the  distinctive 
quality,  nature,  or  essence  of  the  great  commandment.  Of  what  nature  is  the  great  command- 
ment in  the  law  ?     What  is  the  essence  of  the  great  commandment  in  the  law  ?  (Morison). 

Ver.  37.  Heart  .  .  .  soul  .  .  .  mind.— St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  add  "strength."  In 
Deut.  vi.  5,  the  words  are  heart,  soul,  might.  "  The  words  represent  different  aspects 
of  one  substantive  entity  "  (Morison).  This  great  commandment  was  written  on  the 
phylactery  which  the  lawyer  was  probably  wearing  (Carr). 

Ver.  44.  Sit  thou  on  My  right  hand. — As  having  gloriously  finished  the  work  which  was 
given  Thee  to  do,  and  in  which  I  rest  satisfied  and  well  pleased  (Morison),  As  My  co-regent, 
having  power  equal  to  Mine  (Carr). 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—14. 

The  calling  of  the  Gentiles. — In  this  passage  the  same  persons  are  addressed  by 
the  same  Speaker  in  much  the  same  way  as  before.  Jesus  '*  again  "  "  answers  " 
(ver.  1)  the  murderous  thoughts  of  those  who  were  before  Him  (xxi.  46)  by 
speaking  to  them  in  "  parables  "^ — in  two  (1-10,  11-14)  at  the  least.  In  these  He 
both  takes  up  and  follows  up  what  He  had  previously  said  in  three  principal 
ways;  showing  us  a  picture:  1.  Of  a  singularly  rebellious  people.  2.  Of  a 
singularly  mixed  assembly.     3.  Of  an  absolutely  indispensable  requirement. 

I.  A  singularly  rebellious  people.— This  rebelliousness  is  exhibited,  first,  by 
the  treatment  given  by  the  people  described,  to  the  first  message  of  their  king. 
This  message  is  one  of  special  bounty  and  grace.  The  king  is  purposing  to  give 
a  great  banquet  in  celebration  of  the  marriage  of  his  son.  He  sends  out 
his  servants  to  proclaim  this  abroad,  and  invite  his  people  to  come.  The 
interpretation  put  on  a  previous  parable  (xxi.  45)  teaches  us  to  understand 
this  of  the  giving  of  the  law  to  Israel,  and  of  the  purport  of  that  law 
as  a  means  of  preparing  men  for  the  ihen  coming  grace  of  the  gospel  (Gal. 
iii.  24,  and  references).  In  other  words  it  was  a  preliminary  "  invitation  " 
to  Christ.  How  that  invitation  was  received  is  told  us  here  in  very  few 
words  in  the  end  of  ver.  3 ;  and  is  related  at  length  in  the  long  story  of  the 

509 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MATTHEW. 


murmurings  of  the  wilderness,  and  of  the  consequent  almost  withdrawal,  more 
than  once,  of  the  favour  of  God  (Ps.  xcv.  8-11,  and  references) ;  and  is  shown 
to  us,  yet  further,  in  the  sad  retrospect  of  E,om.  x.  21.  Up  to  the  coming  of 
Christ,  indeed,  this  was  the  true  attitude  of  Israel  as  a  nation.  They  refused 
the  preliminary  message  of  God.  The  same  attitude  was  shown  still  more  in 
regard  to  the  second  message  He  sent.  After  a  time — "  again  " — He  sent  forth 
"  other  servants  "  to  Israel — other  servants  with  a  new  message  to  tell,  viz.,  not 
only  as  before  to  proclaim  His  purpose  of  giving  a  banquet,  but  to  say,  rather, 
that  now  the  banquet  was  spread  (ver.  4).  This  seems  to  refer  to  such  passages 
as  iv.  17;  Acts  iii.  22-26;  Heb.  vii.  19,  etc.  Also,  the  even  worse  recep- 
tion given  by  them  to  this  message,  as  shown  partly  by  their  giving  preference 
to  almost  anything  else  (ver.  5),  and  partly  by  their  putting  to  death  the  persons 
who  brought  it  (ver.  6),  seems  to  refer  us  for  fulfilment  to  such  passages  as  John 
xviii.  40;  Acts  xxii.  22,  xxiii.  21,  etc.  While,  finally,  the  awful  result  of  this 
rejection  and  persecution  of  Christ  and  His  Apostles,  as  described  in  ver.  7,  seems 
to  refer  to  that  destruction  of  the  "  city  "  of  Jerusalem  and  that  utter  "  casting 
away "  of  Israel  both  as  a  nation  and  church  which  afterwards  came  to  pass. 
Israel,  in  short,  is  thus  shown  to  be  ''  rebellious  "  till  its  "  casting  away." 

II.  A  singularly  mixed  assembly. — Something  of  this  had  been  shown 
previously  in  that  application  of  another  parable  which  is  given  us  in  xxi.  41-43. 
But  several  important  additional  particulars  are  vouchsafed  in  this  place.  We 
are  not  only  told,  e.g.  that  there  shall  be  a  fresh  "  nation  "  or  gathering,  in  place 
of  the  old  nation  or  congregation ;  but  we  are  told,  also,  why  it  was  that  those 
first-invited  guests  had  been  rejected,  viz.,  because  they  had  shown  themselves 
not  "  worthy  "  (ver.  8)  of  the  invitation  received.  See  Acts  xiii.  46.  We  are  also 
shown  whither  the  servants  are  bid  to  go  to  seek  for  fresh  guests,  viz.,  to  the 
"highways"  (vers.  9,  10),  or,  in  other  words,  to  wherever  men  are  most  to  be 
found  (cf.  xxviii.  19,  20).  Further,  we  are  shown  of  what  sorts  the  guests  so 
collected  will  naturally  turn  out  to  be  (ver.  10),  viz.,  of  those  who  were  reckoned  as 
"  evil  "  (see  Acts  x.  14,  28)  as  well  as  of  those  who  were  regarded  as  "  good."  Lastly, 
we  are  shown  yet  both  how  numerous  and  how  suitable  would  be  the  persons 
thus  collected  together.  The  "  wedding  "  would  be  "  furnished  with  guests." 
There  would  be  enough — enough  of  the  proper  sort — for  the  purpose  in  view  ! 
There  would  be  a  collection  of  guests  representative  (finally)  of  all  parts  of  the 
world ;  a  nation  made  up  of  all  nations,  partly  in  place  of  and  partly  in  addition 
to  the  nation  invited  before  (Gal.  iii.  28,  iv.  26;  Rom.  xi.  11,  5).  No  more 
mingled  no  greater  gathering  could  very  well  be  (cf.  Rev.  vii.  9). 

III.  An  indispensable  requirement. — The  mention  of  this  grows  immediately 
out  of  that  spoken  of  last.  In  so  "  mixed  "  an  assembly  would  every  man  present 
be  of  the  right  sort  ?  Would  there  be  7ione  there  to  bring  discredit  on  him  who 
had  invited  them  there  1  This  is  the  point  which  the  king  is  next  described  as 
looking  into  himself.  "He  came  in  to  see  the  guests"  (ver.  11).  What  is 
represented  by  this  ?  We  take  it  as  representing  the  way  in  which  He  "  whose 
eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire "  is  described  in  Rev.  ii.,  iii.  as  examining  the 
"  churches  "  and  those  who  compose  them  ;  and  as  showing  us,  therefore,  that  if 
there  is  no  manner  of  scrutiny  about  men  (vers.  9,  10)  before  they  are  invited  to 
partake  of  the  fulness  of  the  gospel,  there  is  very  much  indeed,  and  that  fi-om 
the  highest  quarter,  when  they  have  professed  to  accept  it.  And  we  see  in  that 
mentioned  next,  therefore,  the  chief  point  on  which  this  examination  will  turn. 
A  wedding  guest,  in  the  nature  of  things,  should  be  clad  in  wedding  apparel. 
Especially  is  this  the  case  where  such  apparel  has  been  previously  offered  him 
(as  is  assumed  by  all  here)  by  his  host.  This  is  that,  therefore,  for  which  above 
all  that  host  will  inquire,  "  How  camest  thou  in  hither  not  having  on  a  wedding 
garment  1 "    This  is  that,  also,  for  the  absence  of  which  no  excuse  can  be  offered  on 

510 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


the  one  hand  (end  of  ver.  12),  and  no  punishment,  on  the  other,  be  considered  too 
harsh  (ver.  13).  "  Take  him  away  "  from  this  light  to  where  there  is  nothing  but 
darkness  !  From  this  feast  to  where  is  nothing  but  sorrow  !  In  such  a  condition, 
also — "  bound  hand  and  foot " — that  he  can  never  come  back  ! 

In  regard  to  the  warning  to  which  this  series  of  verses  thus  brings  us  at  last, 
we  may  note,  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  Its  precise  practical  meaning. — The  "  wedding  garment  "  is  that,  which, 
whatever  its  exact  condition  and  texture  (of  which  nothing  is  said),  serves  to 
distinguish  those  who  are  "  wedding  guests  "  from  those  who  are  not.  It  seems 
to  represent,  therefore,  that  "  newness  of  life  "  (or  true  desire  for  it)  which 
serves  at  least  to  distinguish  the  true  guests  of  the  kingdom  as  well  from  others 
as  from  themselves  in  the  past.  For  a  professed  disciple  not  to  "  put  on  "  this 
(Col.  iii.  10,  12,  etc.)  is  indeed  to  trifle  with  God  ! 

2.  Its  abounding  mercy. — Mercy  in  requiring  from  us  this  "  newness  of  life." 
We  cannot  have  anything  better  (Rom.  vi.  21,  22).  Mercy  in  offering  it  to  us. 
We  cannot  otherwise  have  it  at  all. 

3.  Its  deep  solemnity. — Such  is  the  profound  deceitfulness  as  well  of  sin,  as  of 
the  great  deceiver,  and  of  our  own  hearts,  that  there  is  nothing  in  which  we  are 
more  likely  to  be  deceived,  or  to  fancy  ourselves  "  chosen  "  where  we  have  only 
been  "called"  (ver.  14).  Let  *'him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  " — on  that  very 
account — "  take  heed  "  all  the  more. 


HOMILIES    ON-   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1-14.  Two  ways  of  despising 
God's  feast. — I.  The  judgment  on  those 
who  refuse  the  offered  joys  of  the 
kingdom. — In  the  previous  parable  the 
kingdom  was  presented  on  the  side  of 
duty  and  service.  That  is  only  half 
the  truth,  and  the  least  joyful  half. 

1.  So  this  parable  dismisses  all  ideas 
of  work,  duty,  service,  requirement, 
and  instead  gives  the  emblem,  of  a 
marriage  feast  as  the  picture  of  the 
kingdom. — It  therein  unites  two  fami- 
liar  prophetic  images  for  the  Messianic 
times — those  of  a  festival  and  of  a 
marriage.  How  pathetic  this  designa- 
tion of  His  kingdom  is  on  Christ's  lips, 
when  we  remember  how  near  His  bitter 
agony  He  stood,  and  tasted  its  bitter- 
ness already  ! 

2.  The  invitations  of  the  king. — 
There  had  been  an  invitation  before 
the  point  at  which  the  parable  begins, 
for  the  servants  are  sent  to  summon 
those  who  had  already  been  "  called." 
That  calling,  which  lies  beyond  the 
horizon  of  our  parable,  is  the  whole 
series  of  agencies  in  Old  Testament 
times.  So  this  parable  begins  almost 
where  the  former  leaves  off.  They  only 
slightly  overlap. 


3.  The  two  classes  of  rejecters. 

4.  The  fatal  issue  is  presented,  as  in 
the  former  parable,  in  two  parts  :  the 
destruction  of  the  rebels,  and  the 
passing  over  of  the  kingdom  to  others. 
But  the  differences  are  noteworthy. 
Here  we  read  that  "  the  king  was 
wroth."  The  insult  to  a  king  is  worse 
than  the  dishonesty  to  a  landlord.  The 
refusal  of  God's  proffered  grace  is  even 
more  certain  to  awake  that  awful 
reality,  the  wrath  of  God,  than  the 
failure  to  render  the  fruits  of  the  good 
possessed.  Love  repelled  and  thrown 
back  on  itself  cannot  but  become 
wrath. 

5.  The  command  to  gather  in  others 
to  fill  the  vacant  places. 

II.  The  judgment  of  the  unworthy 
accepters  of  the  invitation. — There 
are  two  ways  of  sinning  against  God's 
merciful  gift  :  the  one  is  refusing  to 
accept  it ;  the  other  is  taking  it  in 
outward  seeming,  but  continuing  in  sin. 
The  former  was  the  sin  of  the  Jews  ; 
the  latter  is  the  sin  of  nominal  Chris- 
tians. Note,  that  there  is  one  man 
only  without  the  dress  needed.  That 
may  be  an  instance  of  the  lenity  of 
Christ's     charity,    which    hopeth    all 

511 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.   MATTHEW. 


things ;  or  it  may  rather  be  intended  of  the  servants  to  the  class  who  were 

to  suggest  the  keenness  of  the  king's  originally  invited,  may  be  understood 

glance,    which,    in    all    the    crowded  to  point  to  the  ministry  of  the  Lord 

tables,  picks  out  the  one  ragged  losel  and  the  Seventy  until  the  time  of  the 

who    had    found    his    way   there — so  crucifixion,  and  the  second  mission  of 

individual  is  His  knowledge,  so  impos-  the  Apostles  after  the  Pentecost,  and 

sible  for  us  to  hide  in   the   crowd. —  under  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit. 

A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  III.  Significant  are  the  differences 

in  the  treatment  which  the  message 

Vers.     1-10.     The    parable     of    the  and    the    messengers     received    from 

marriage  feast, — I.    The    undeserved  different  classes  within  the  privileged 

goodness   of  the   invitation.  circle  of  the  first  invited.     We  learn 

II.  The   well-deserved   severity   of  here  the  solemn   lesson  that  though 

the    exclusion. — Sir  E.  Bayley^  Bart.,  there  is  much  diversity  in  the  degrees 

B.D.  of  aggravation  with  which  men  accom- 
pany their  rejection  of  the  Saviour,  all 

The  royal  marriage  feast :  the  wedding  who  do  not  receive  Him  perish  in  the 

guests.  —  I.     The     marriage    festival  same  condemnation.     At  first,  no  dis- 

made  by  the  king  in   honour  of  his  tinction    is    made   between   class   and 

son,  points  manifestly   to  redemption  class  of  unbelievers ;  of  all,  and  of  all 

completed  in  the  incarnation,  ministry,  alike,  it  is  recorded,  "  they  would  not 

death,     and     resurrection    of    Christ.  come."     But   when   the   offer   became 

Banquets  had  before  this  period  been  more  pressing  and  more  searching,  a 

provided  by  the  King,  and  enjoyed  by  difference  began  to  appear,  not  as  yet 

the  favoured  circle  of  His  guests ;  much  the   difference   between   the   believing 

advantage  was  possessed  by  the  Jews  and  the  unbelieving,  but  a  difference  in 

over  the  Gentiles  in  every  way,  but  the  manner   of   refusing,  and   in   the 

especially  in  that  to  them  were  com-  degrees  of  courage  or  of  cowardice  that 

mitted  the  oracles   of   God.     But  the  accompanied    the    act.      The    greater 

feast   depicted    in    this    parable    was  number  treated   the  message   lightly, 

the  last  and  best ;  it  was  the  way  of  and   preferred   their   own  business  to 

salvation  in  its  completed  state.  the  life  eternal  which  was  offered  to 

II.  When  the  fulness  of  time  had  them  in  Christ ;  while  a  portion,  not 
come,  the  Lord  Himself  undertaking  content  with  spurning  away  the  offer, 
the  work,  as  well  as  assuming  the  persecuted  to  the  death  the  ambas- 
form,  of  a  servant,  carried  to  the  sadors  who  bore  it. 
chosen  people  the  message,  *'  Come,  III.  Although  those  privileged 
for  all  things  are  now  ready."  His  Hebrews  rejected  Him,  Christ  did 
immediate  followers  and  their  sue-  not  remain  a  king  without  subjects, 
cessors  repeated  and  pressed  the  invita-  a  shepherd  without  a  flock.  In 
tion.  The  servants  when  they  went  the  exercise  of  the  same  sovereignty 
out  with  the  commission  of  the  king,  through  which  He  chose  Abraham  at 
did  not  announce  the  feast  as  a  new  first.  He  passed  over  Abraham's  de- 
thing,  then  for  the  first  time  made  generate  posterity,  and  called  another 
known ;  they  spoke  of  it  as  that  which  family.  This  family  was  Abraham's 
was  promised  before,  and  actually  seed,  not  by  natural  generation,  but  in 
offered  them  ;  they  summoned  those  the  regeneration  through  faith.  Peter 
who  had  previously  been  fully  in-  went  to  the  house  of  Cornelius,  and  in 
formed  that  the  feast  was  provided  for  that  lane  of  the  world's  great  city 
their  use.  These  favoured  but  un-  found  a  whole  household  willing  to 
thankful  people  were  not  taken  at  follow  him  to  the  feast  his  royal 
their  word ;  after  the  first  refusal.  Master  had  prepared.  Soon  there- 
another  and  more  urgent  invitation  is  after  Paul  and  Barnabas,  Silas,  Titus, 
sent.    The  successive  reiterated  mission  Timothy,  and  others  traversed  the  con- 

512 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxii. 


tinents  of  Europe  and  Asia,  briDging 
multitudes  of  neglected  outcasts  into 
the  presence  and  the  favour  of  the  King. 
"They  brought  in  good  and  bad." 
This  is  a  cardinal  point  in  the  method 
of  Divine  mercy,  and  therefore  it  is 
articulately  inserted  in  the  picture. 
The  thought  and  the  style  of  ordinary 
life  are  adopted  in  the  parable,  and 
every  reader  understands  easily  what 
is  meant.  The  invitations  of  the  gospel 
come  to  fallen  human  kind,  and  to  all 
without  respect  either  of  persons  or  of 
characters. —  W.  Arnot,  D.D. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Different  treatment  of  the 
gospel  message. — There  are  two  differ- 
ent classes  of  unbelievers: — 1.  The 
indifferent.  2.  The  absolutely  hostile. 
Or  :  1.  Contemptuous  scorners.  2.  Bit- 
ter persecutors. — D.  Brovjn,  D.D. 

Yer.  7.  Anger  in  God. — Our  Lord's 
parable  has  fulfilled  itself  again  and 
again  in  history,  and  will  fulfil  itself 
as  long  as  foolish  and  rebellious  persons 
exist  on  eaith.  This  is  one  of  the 
laws  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It 
must  be  so,  for  it  arises  by  necessity 
out  of  the  character  of  Christ,  the 
King  of  heaven — infinite  bounty  and 
generosity ;  but  if  that  bounty  be 
despised  and  insulted,  or  still  more,  if 
it  be  outraged  by  wanton  tyranny  or 
cruelty,  then — for  the  benefit  of  the 
rest  of  mankind — awful  severity.  So 
it  is,  and  so  it  must  be,  simply  because 
God  is  good.  The  king  in  the  parable 
was  very  angry,  as  he  had  a  right  to 
be.  Let  us  lay  that  to  heart,  and 
tremble,  from  the  very  worst  of  us  all 
to  the  very  best  of  us  all.  There  is 
an  anger  in  God.  There  is  indig- 
nation in  God.  An  awful  thought, 
and  yet  a  blessed  thought.  Under 
God's  anger  or  under  God's  love  we 
must  be,  whether  we  will  or  not.  We 
cannot  flee  from  His  presence.  We 
cannot  go  from  His  Spirit.  If  we  are 
loving,  and  so  rise  up  to  heaven,  God 
is  there — in  love.  If  we  are  cruel  and 
wrathful,  and  so  go  down  to  hell,  God 
is  there  also — in  wrath.  With  the 
clean  He  will  be  clean ;  with  the  fro- 


ward  man  He  will  be  froward.  On 
us,  and  us  alone,  it  depends  whether 
we  shall  live  under  God's  anger  or  live 
under  God's  love. — C.  Kingsley,  M.A. 

Vers.  11-13.  Profession  tried. — I.  A 
visit. — "  When  the  king  came." 

II.  A  scrutiny. — "  He  saw  a  man." 

III.  An     interrogation.  —  *'  How 
camest  thou  in  1  " 

IV.  Conviction. — "  He  was  speech- 
less." 

V.  Bondage. — "  Bind  him  hand  and 
foot." 

VI.  Exclusion. — "  Cast     him    into 
outer  darkness." 

VIL    Torment.— '' There    shall    be 
weeping,"  etc.^ — W.  W.  Why  the. 

The   wedding  garment. — Some   cus- 
toms and  allusions  connected  with  the 
scene  remain  obscure  to  us,  after  all 
that   modern    research    has    done    to 
illustrate  them,  but  the  lesson  which 
our   Lord   intended    to    teach   stands 
relieved  in  clearest  light  and  sharpest 
outline,   like   distant    mountain    tops 
when  the   sun   has  newly  set  behind 
them.     1.  The  wedding  garment  was 
something  conspicuous  and   distinctive. 
2.  It  was  not  a  necessary  part  of  a 
man's  clothing,   but  rather  a  signifi- 
cant    badge    of    his    loyalty.     3.  The 
want    of    it    was,    and    was    under- 
stood to   be,   a  decisive  mark  of  dis- 
loyalty.    The   man  who   came  to  the 
feast  without  a  wedding- garment  en- 
dorsed substantially  the  act  of  those 
who  had   proudly  refused   to   comply 
with  the  king's  invitation.     It  was  the 
same   heart-disobedience    accompanied 
by  a  hypocrisy  that  would  fain  commit 
the  sin  and  yet  escape  the  consequences. 
4.    The    question    whether    a    wedding 
garment  was  prof  erred  to  every  guest  as 
he  entered,    out   of  the  royal  store,   is 
attended    with    some   difficulty.      The 
preponderance  of  probability  seems  to 
lie  with    those  who  think   that  these 
decorations  were  freely  distributed  in 
the  vestibule  to  every  entrant,  in  some 
such  way  as  certain  badges  are  some- 
times given  to  every  one  of  a  wedding- 
party  amongst  ourselves  in  the  present 

LL  513 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


day.  But  the  point  is  not  of  primary 
importance.  From  what  is  tacitly 
assumed  in  the  narrative  it  may  be 
held  as  demonstrated  alternatively, 
that  either  the  king  gave  every  guest 
the  necessary  garment,  or  it  was  such 
that  every  guest,  even  the  poorest, 
could  on  the  shortest  warning  easily 
obtain  it  for  himself.  Two  silences 
become  the  two  witnesses  out  of  whose 
mouths  the  conclusion  is  established — 
the  silence  of  the  king  as  to  the 
grounds  of  his  sentence,  and  the 
silence  of  the  culprit  when  judgment 
was  pronounced.  The  judge  does  not 
give  any  reason  why  sentence  should 
be  executed,  and  the  criminal  does  not 
give  any  reason  why  it  should  not. 
On  both  sides  it  is  confessed  and 
silently  assumed  that  the  guest  had 
not,  but  might  have  had,  the  wedding- 
garment  on.  If  there  had  been  any 
hardship  in  the  case,  the  king  would 
have  vindicated  his  own  procedure, 
and  the  condemned  guest  would  not 
have  remained  speechless  when  he 
heard  his  doom. — W.  Arnot,  D.D, 

Yer.  12.  ^^  I  am  too  well  dressed  for 
that." — At  one  of  the  Paris  stations  of 
the  McAll  Mission  an  aged  woman 
who  had  learned  by  heart  many  of  the 
hymns,  and  seemed  to  find  all  her 
delight  in  them,  came  to  the  meeting 
leaning  on  a  crutch,  and  evidently  very 
feeble.  The  subject  of  discourse  that 
night  was  "Dress" — the  robe  of 
righteousness,  the  wedding  garment. 
At  the  close  she  said  to  the  preacher, 
*'  I  beUeve  this  is  my  last  visit  to  the 
hall ;  if  I  can  never  come  again,  you 
will  know  where  I  have  gone.  My 
infirmities  increase  rapidly." — "  I  will 
come  to  see  you,"  said  the  preacher  ; 
"  but  if  God  called  you  meanwhile, 
have  you  any  fear  of  appearing  before 
Him  ?  "— "  Oh,  no  !  "  she  replied,  "  I 
am  too  well  dressed  for  that — too  well 
dressed  to  dread  the  judgment.  He 
hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of. 
salvation ;  He  hath  covered  me  with 
the  robe  of  righteousness." — Quiver. 

Loyalty  a  question  of  will. — It  was 
514 


not  the  inherent  worth  of  the  material, 
but  the  meaning  of  the  symbol  that 
bulked  in  the  estimation  of  both  the 
entertainer  and  his  guests.  It  may, 
from  analogous  cases,  be  shown  to  be 
probable  that  a  loyal  heart  could  have 
easily  extemporised  the  appropriate 
symbol  out  of  any  material  that  lay 
next  at  hand.  Where  there  is  a  will 
there  is  a  way.  Italian  patriots,  at 
the  crisis  of  their  conflict  with  multi- 
form oppression,  and  while  the  strong 
yoke  of  the  despot  was  still  upon  their 
necks,  contrived  to  display  their  dar- 
ling tricolour  by  a  seemingly  accidental 
arrangement  of  red,  white,  and  green 
among  the  vegetables  which  they 
exhibited  in  the  market  or  carried  to 
their  homes.  Nay,  more,  the  loyalty 
of  a  loyal  man  may,  in  certain  circum- 
stances, be  more  emphatically  ex- 
pressed by  a  rude,  extemporaneous 
symbol,  hastil}  constructed  of  intract- 
able materials,  than  by  the  most 
elaborate  and  leisurely  products  of  the 
needle  or  the  loom.  In  such  cases, 
the  will  of  the  man  is  everything ;  the 
wealth  of  the  man  nothing.  The 
meanest  rag  suddenly  thrown  across 
the  shoulders,  arranged  so  as  unequivo- 
cally to  express  the  wearer's  faith  may 
be  a  better  evidence  of  loyalty  than  the 
richest  silks  of  the  East. — W.  Arnot, 
D.D. 

What  does  the  "  wedding-garment " 
signify  ? — I  do  not  attach  much  value 
to  the  question  which  has  been  much 
canvassed  here,  whether  the  wedding 
garment  specifically  signifies  Faith  or 
Charity,  whether  it  points  to  what  the 
saved  get  from  God,  or  what  they  do 
in  His  service.  To  wear  the  garment 
at  the  feast  means  that  the  wearer 
takes  God's  way  of  salvation  and  not 
his  own ;  to  want  it,  means  that  the 
wanter  takes  his  own  way  of  salvation 
and  not  God's.  This  is  the  conclusion 
of  the  whole  matter.  If  you  suppose 
that  the  garment  means  evangelical 
obedience,  you  must  assume  that  faith 
in  Christ  is  the  root  on  which  obedience 
grows ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  you 
suppose  that  the  garment  means  faith 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


in  Christ,  you  must  assume  that  it  is  a 
liviug,  not  a  dead  faith,  a  faith  that 
will  work  by  love  and  overcome  the 
world. — Ibid. 

The  wedding  garment. — This  right- 
eousness we  so  appropriate  by  faith  as 
to  make  it  ours,  so  that  it  becomes,  in 
that  singularly  expressive  term,  our 
habit. — Archbishop  Trench. 

Royal  wardrobes. — Horace  tells  of 
Lucullus  (Epist.,  1.  vi.  40),  that  he  had 
not  less  than  five  thousand  mantles  in 
his  wardrobe.  Chardin  says  of  the 
king  of  Persia  that  he  gave  away  an 
infinite  number  of  dresses.  Dr.  Owen 
says  we  have  abundant  evidence  that 
kings  were  provided  with  extensive 
wardrobes,  from  which  each  invited 
guest  was  furnished  with  a  suitable 
garment. — P.  Schaff,  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  The  called  and  the  chosen. — 
We  have  to  do  in  the  text  not  with  an 
arbitrary  call  and  an  arbitrary  choice, 
as  if  God  called  many  in  mockery, 
meaning  to  choose  out  of  them  only  a 
few,  and  making  His  choice  inde- 
pendently of  any  exertion  of  theirs. 
The  picture  is  very  different  ;  it  is  a 
gracious  call  to  us  all  to  come  and 
receive  the  blessing ;  it  is  a  reluctant 
casting  out  the  greatest  part  of  us, 
because  we  would  not  render  ourselves 
fit  for  it. 


I.  We  have  all  been  called,  in  a 
Christian  sense. — We  have  been  called 
to  enter  into  Christ's  kingdom ;  we 
have  been  called  to  lead  a  life  of 
holiness  and  happiness  from  this  time 
forth  even  for  ever. 

II.  Now,  if  this  be  the  prize  to 
which  we  are  called,  who  are  they  who 
are  also  chosen  to  it  ? 

1.  In  the  first  and  most  complete 
sense,  no  doubt,  those  who  have  entered 
into  their  rest ;  who  are  in  no  more 
danger,  however  slight ;  with  whom 
the  struggle  is  altogether  past,  the 
victory  securely  won. 

2.  Those  who,  having  heard  their 
call,  have  turned  to  obey  it.,  and  have 
gone  on  following  it. 

3.  Those  who,  having  found  in  them- 
selves the  sin  which  did  most  easily  beset 
them,  have  struggled  with  it,  and 
wholly,  or  in  a  great  measure,  have 
overcome  it. 

III.  What  is  the  proportion  be- 
tween those  who  are  chosen  and  those 
who  are  called  only  ? — This  I  dare  not 
answer  ;  there  is  a  good  as  well  as  an 
evil  which  is  unseen  by  the  world  at 
large,  unseen  even  by  all  but  those 
who  watch  us  most  nearly  and  most 
narrowly.  All  we  can  say  is,  that 
there  are  too  many  who,  we  must  fear, 
are  not  chosen ;  there  are  too  few  of 
whom  we  can  feel  sure  that  they  are. — 
T.  Arnold,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—22. 

A  political  snare. — The  direct  attacks  of  the  Jewish  rulers  on  the  authority  of 
Jesus  having  only  succeeded  in  shaking  their  own  (xxi.  46),  they  next  betake 
themselves  to  indirect  modes  of  assault.  The  Pharisees  are  the  first  to  try  their 
hands  in  this  line.  They  have  seen  how  ready  He  is  in  instructing,  how  prompt 
in  replying,  how  faithful  in  rebuking.  They  will  turn  these  qualities  to  His 
ruin.  They  will  "  entangle  Him  in  His  talk  "  (ver.  15).  Most  subtle  and 
promising  was  the  scheme  of  attack.  Most  simple  and  triumphant  the  plan  of 
defence. 

I.  The  scheme  of  attack. — The  general  idea  of  this  was  that  of  putting  the 
Saviour  into  a  position  from  which,  with  His  known  antecedents  and  recent 
utterances,  it  would  be  impossible  for  Him  to  escape.  Two  opposite  powers 
were  then  in  existence — "Caesar  "  on  the  one  side  and  the  "  multitude"  on  the 
other — both  feared  by  them  much.  Here  was  one  claiming  to  be  a  third  power 
still.  They  would  embroil  Him  with  one  of  these  two.  The  special  question  by 
which  they  hoped  to  do  this  was  well  adapted  (seemingly)  for  this  purpose.     It 

515 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


was  so,  first,  in  its  purport.  *'  What  thinkest  Thou  ?  Is  it  lawful  to  give 
tribute  to  Csesar  or  not?"  (ver.  17).  Only  two  answers  seem  possible  to  this 
question.  If  He  says  Yes,  He  will  outrage  the  multitude.  If  He  says  No, 
He  will  have  the  Komans  upon  Him.  This  seems  the  more  sure,  also,  because  of 
the  persons  chosen  to  propound  this  question.  The  Pharisees  on  this  occasion 
are  not  by  themselves.  They  have  some  of  the  Herodians  also  with  them.  This 
would  greatly  emphasise,  of  course,  the  difficulty  of  the  question.  Whichever 
side  He  took  there  were  some  present  who  would  denounce  Him  at  once. 
Finally,  being  such  as  He  was — such  as  He  was  known  to  be  by  all  who  knew 
Him  at  all — He  could  not  take  the  third  course  of  avoiding  this  question  without 
absolute  ruin.  "  Master,  we  know  that  Thou  art  true,  and  teachest  the  way  of 
God  in  truth,  and  carest  not  for  any  one ;  for  Thou  regardest  not  the  person  of 
men."  How  was  He  to  be  silent  when  challenged  to  speak  on  grounds  such  as 
these  1  That  would  be  worse  even  than  embroiling  Him  with  one  side  or  the 
other ;  for  it  would  utterly  degrade  Him  with  both.  Altogether,  therefore,  the 
question  seemed  to  involve  a  snare  from  which  there  was  no  way  of  escape. 

II.  The  plan  of  defence. — The  first  step  was  to  expose  the  flattery  involved  in 
this  question;  to  show  that  its  treachery  was  seen  through.  "  Why  tempt  ye 
Me,  ye  hypocrites  ? "  From  one  point  of  view  this  question  itself  was  a  sufficient 
answer  to  theirs.  You  are  not  asking  for  information.  You  are  asking  only  to 
*'  tempt."  To  ''  asking "  of  that  kind  I  am  not  bound  to  give  a  reply.  No 
answer  at  all  is  sufficient  answer  to  so  dishonest  an  inquiry.  Why  should  I 
part  with  anything  whatever  in  exchange  for  such  counterfeit  coin  ?  The  next 
step  was  to  expose  the  fallacy  of  the  question  propounded.  Asking  from  His 
questioners  (what  they  could  not  refuse)  a  specimen  of  the  tribute  money,  they 
hand  Him  a  Roman  penny  or  denarius.  Asking  again — what  again  they  could 
not  refuse  to  say — whose  "  image  and  superscription  "  it  bears,  they  say  unto 
Him,  '*  Caesar's."  In  that  one  fact  lay  the  two-fold  answer  to  the  question  they 
asked.  For  what  was  that  fact  but  a  token  and  evidence  that  God  had  allowed 
them  to  be  under  Caesar's  yoke,  and  that  they  themselves  also  were  practically 
acquiescing  in  it  for  the  time  %  Obvious  was  the  inference,  therefore,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  they  ought  to  give  to  Caesar  what  God  had  thus  given  to  Caesar  for 
the  time.  And  equally  obvious  the  inference,  on  the  other,  that  they  ought  to 
give  to  God  whatever  God  had  still  reserved  to  Himself.  Instead,  in  short,  of 
there  being  any  contradiction,  as  assumed  by  them,  between  these  two  things, 
both  God's  appointment  and  their  own  behaviour  proved  that  they  ought  to  do 
both. 

Here  we  learn,  therefore,  for  ourselves  : — 

1.  A  lesson  in  politics. — Notwithstanding  all  the  difficulties  and  differences  and 
contentions  which  beset  this  subject,  here  is  a  rule  about  it  in  which  all  Christian 
folk  may  safely  agree.  To  render  unto  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's  is  to 
render  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's  (cf.  Rom.  xiii.  1,  6,  7).  Remember 
also  that  the  Saviour  spake  as  He  does  here  "  imperante  Tiber io."  St.  Paul,  also, 
not  improbably,  "  imperante  N'erone." 

2.  A  lesson  in  science. — How  forcibly  the  contrasted  examples  and  experience  of 
Christ  and  the  Pharisees  in  this  case  illustrate  His  own  words  in  vi.  22,  23. 
Truth  of  all  kinds  only  comes  to  the  true.  No  sinister  motives  can  help  vis  to 
know.  No  amount  of  ingenuity,  no  depth  of  subtlety  can  help  the  lover  of 
darkness  to  discover  the  light. 

3.  A  lesson  in  trust. — How  truly  the  Lord  Jesus  was  all  that  these  men  said 
of  Him  here  !  (ver.  16).  How  much  more  He  proved  Himself  to  be  by  His 
answer  to  them  !  How  fitted,  therefore,  in  every  way  to  be  a  Leader  and  Guide  ! 
Who  can  be  trusted  more  to  know  what  is  truth  ?  Who  can  be  trusted  more  to 
impart  it  in  turn  ? 

516 


BOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


HOMILIES  OJSr  THE  VERSES. 


Yers.  15-21.  Christ^ s  victory  over 
cunning. — I.  They  take  counsel. — He 
is  thoroughly  armed. 

II.  They  would  entangle  Him. — He 
seeks  to  deliver  them  out  of  their  own 
snare. 

Ill  They  praise  Him  in  order  to 
His  destruction. — He  rebukes  them 
for  their  awakening  and  salvation. — 
J.-  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  16.  Christ  true. — This  is  the 
testimony,  not  of  friends,  but  of 
enemies ;  they  are  the  words  of  the 
Pharisees  and  the  Herodians.  But 
even  the  enemies  of  Christ  are  bound 
to  give  this  testimony.  Whatever  the 
theoretical  beliefs  or  moral  characters 
of  men  may  be  they  are  bound  to  say, 
"  We  know  Thou  art  true." 

I.  Philosophically. — 1.  In  all  Thou 
sayest  about  God.  Thou  hast  revealed 
Him  as  a  Person,  a  Spirit,  a  Father, 
and  the  sole  Author  of  the  universe ; 
and  our  reason  binds  us  to  accept  all 
this.  2.  In  all  Thou  sayest  about  the 
universe.  Thou  hast  taught  us  that  it 
had  a  beginning,  that  it  originated 
with  one  Being  who  is  eternal,  etc. 
3.  In  all  Thou  hast  said  concerning 
man. 

II.  Ethically.— 1.  In  all  that  Thou 
hast  said  concerning  our  duty  to  God. 
2.  Concerning  our  duty  to  others. 

III.  Personally.— We  look  at  Thy 
life  and  it  illustrates  and  confirms  the 
doctrine  Thy  lips  declare.  Thou  art 
the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the  good. 
— Homilist. 

Ver.  21.  Public  opinion  and  God. 
— 1.  The  only  Csesar  which  we  have  to 
fear  nowadays  is  called  public  opinion 
— the  huge,  anonymous  idol  which  we 
ourselves  help  to  make,  and  then 
tremble  before  the  creation  of  our  own 
cowardice  ;  whereas,  if  we  will  but  face 
him,  in  the  fear  of  God  and  the  faith 
of  Christ,  determined  to  say  the  thing 
which  is  true,  and  do  the  thing  which 
is  right,  we  shall  find  the  modern  Caesar 
but  a  phantom  of  our  own  imagination 


— a  tyrant,  indeed,  as  long  as  he  is 
feared,  but  a  coward  as  soon  as  he  is 
defied.  To  that  Caesar  let  us  never 
bow  the  knee.  Render  to  him  all  that 
he  deserves — the  homage  of  common 
courtesy,  common  respectability,  com- 
mon charity — not  in  reverence  for  his 
wisdom  and  strength,  but  in  pity  for 
his  ignorance  and  weakness.  But 
render  always  to  God  the  things  which 
are  God's. 

II.  There  are  three  sacrifices  which 
every  man,  woman,  and  child  can  ofier, 
and  should  ofier,  however  lowly,  how- 
ever uneducated  in  what  the  world 
calls  education  nowadays. 

1.  The  sacrifice  of  repentance. — Of 
which  it  is  written  :  ''  The  sacrifice  of 
God  is  a  broken  spirit ;  a  broken  and 
a  contrite  heart,  O  God,  Thou  wilt  not 
despise." 

2.  The  sacrifice  of  thankful/aess. — Of 
which  it  is  written  :  "I  will  offer  to 
Thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving, 
and  will  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord." 

3.  The  sacrifice  of  righteousness. — Of 
which  it  is  written :  "  Present  your 
bodies  a  Hving  sacrifice,  holy,  accept- 
able to  God,  which  is  your  reasonable 
service." — C.  Kingsley,  M.A. 

Politics  for  Christians. — I.  The 
duties  which  we  owe,  as  citizens,  to 
God.— It  is  due  to  God  :  1.  That  the 
claims  of  His  everlasting  kingdom 
should  stand  first  in  all  our  plans  and 
efibrts.  2.  That  a  sense  of  our  ac- 
countability to  Him  should  control  us 
in  regard  to  our  civil  duties.  3.  That 
we  should  practically  acknowk  dge  the 
supremacy  of  His  Word  as  the  rule  of 
right. 

II.  The  duties  which,  as  citizens,  we 
owe  to  the  state. — Every  citizen  is 
bound :  1.  To  perform  his  part  in  the 
support  and  direction  of  the  govern- 
ment under  which  he  lives.  2.  To  cul- 
tivate friendly  feelings  towards  all  his 
fellow-citizens.  3.  To  render  a  peaceful 
^l»b mission  to  the  exercise  of  lawful 
authority, — H.  J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D. 

517 


CHAP.  XXII.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW 


Duties  to  our  earthly  and  our  heavenly  of  God's  requirements.  2.  The  harmony 

King. — I.  The  wisdom  of  this  answer,  of  them.     Recommend  to  all :  (1)  In- 

as  a  reply  to  the  question  proposed.  tegiity  in  the  discharge  of  your  duty  to 

II.  The  importance  of  it,  as  a  precept  man.     (2)  Spirituality  in  the  discharge 

for  general  observance.     1.  The  extent  of  your  duty  to  God. — (7.  Simeon^  M.A. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—33. 

A  sceptical  snare. — After  the  Pharisees  have  been  disposed  of,  the  Sadducees 
appear  on  the  scene.  They  also  have  a  question  to  ask.  It  is  one  connjcted 
with  their  avowed  disbelief  in  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  (Acts  xxiii.  8), 
and  calculated,  as  they  hope,  to  bring  equal  discredit  both  on  that  doctrine  and 
on  Christ.  It  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  consider,  first,  the  exact  nature  of  the 
question  propounded ;  and  so  to  pass,  secondly,  to  the  exact  nature  of  the  reply 
it  received. 

I.  The  question  propounded. — This  turned,  in  the  first  place,  on  three  separate 
points  connected  with  the  question  of  marriage.  The  first  of  these  was  that 
well-known  Mosaic  enactment  on  this  subject  which  pronounced  the  marriage 
tie  to  come  to  an  end  on  the  death  of  either  party  concerned ;  and  therefore  fully 
allowed  the  survivor,  if  so  disposed,  to  contract  marriage  again.  The  second 
was  the  injunction,  in  the  same  quarter,  which  commanded  any  man  whose 
married  brother  should  have  died  without  issue  to  take  that  brother's  widow  to 
wife.  And  the  third  was  the  alleged  occurrence  among  them  of  a  most 
remarkable  and  highly  exceptional  contingency  of  this  kind ;  even  of  a  case  in 
which  it  came  to  pass  that  as  many  as  seven  brothers  in  succession,  under  this 
rule,  had  the  same  woman  to  wife  (vers.  24-27).  On  these  three  points,  three 
inferences  were,  next,  drawn  virtually  by  these  Sadducean  inquirers.  The  first, 
that  each  of  those  seven  brethren  had  really  and  truly,  in  his  life-time,  been 
married  to  that  woman.  The  next,  that  each  of  them — in  the  resurrection — 
could  therefore  claim  her  for  his.  And  the  last  was  this,  that,  such  being  so, 
there  could  not  possibly  be  a  resurrection  at  all.  That  was  the  only  way, 
according  to  them,  of  solving  the  difiiculty  involved  (ver.  28).  How  could  a 
doctrine,  therefore,  which  led  to  so  absurd  a  result  be  a  doctrine  of  truth  ?  At 
any  rate,  if  there  was  another  solution,  let  that  solution  be  given.  They  had  the 
right  to  ask  this  from  such  a  teacher  as  Jesus  was  now  professing  to  be. 

II.  The  Saviour's  answer  to  this  subtle  and  insidious  question  was  of  a  three-, 
fold  description.  In  the  first  place,  it  completely  disposed  of  the  difficulty 
advanced:  There  was  another  and  better  solution  than  that  insinuated  by 
them.  In  that  higher  and  better  sphere  to  which  their  inquiry  referred,  there 
was,  in  reality,  no  room  for  putting  such  a  question  at  all.  And  it  was  simple 
ignorance  on  their  part  to  suppose  anything  else  (vers.  29,  30).  The  question, 
therefore,  "  Whose  wife  shall  she  be  ?  "  was  so  far  from  being  insoluble,  that  it 
was  only  unnecessary,  and  such  as  ought  not  be  asked.  In  the  next  place,  the 
Saviour's  answer  fully  vindicated  the  doctrine  disputed.  Taking  the  Sadducees 
on  their  own  ground,  referring  only  to.  those  Books  of  Moses  in  which  alone  they 
professed  to  believe,  and  dealing  only  with  one  of  the  names  of  God  ascribed  to  ' 
Him  there,  there  was  proof  enough  of  its  truth.  What  did  God  mean  when  He 
described  Himself  there  as  the  God  of  certain  men  who  were  dead  ?  (ver.  32). 
Did  He  not  mean  that  these  men  were  still  "alive"  unto  Him?  "Still  alive," 
that  is  to  say — though,  for  a  time  it  may  be — in  a  different  way  from  before? 
And  therefore,  further,  to  he  alive  again  afterwards  in  the  same  way  as  before  ? 
Where  would  be  the  comfort,  where  the  value,  where  the  sense,  of  meaning  any- 
thing less  ?  Why  should  these  men  have  been  named  at  all  if  they  had  ceased 
to  exist  ?     The  "  living  God,"  in  a  word,  was  the  God  of  the  living,  and  not  of 

518 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


the  dead  (end  of  ver.  32).  Finally,  the  answer  thus  given  fully  vindicated  the 
Teacher  Himself.  All  who  heard  His  answer  acknowledged  it  by  their  conduct 
to  be  of  a  simply  unanswerable  description.  The  "  multitude  "  were  "  astonished," 
the  "  Sadducees"  silenced,  by  such  flashes  of  truth  (vers.  33,  34). 

This  old-world  battle  may  teach  us  much  in  these  new-world  times.  It  may 
show  us : — 

1 .  How  great  was  the  authority  in  old  days  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  ! — 
How  great  especially  of  that  portion  of  them  which  by  some  in  these  days  is 
cavilled  at  most.  Is  it  not  worthy  of  notice  that  the  most  wr^believing  of  men 
in  those  days  believed  in  this  portion  to  the  full  ?  Also  that  the  Saviour,  in 
answering  them,  appealed  to  this  only  ?  Also  that,  before  then,  in  dealing  with 
a  still  greater  adversary,  He  had  done  the  same  thing  (iv.  1-11)  ?  Also  yet,  that, 
in  this  way.  He  silenced  them  all ! 

2.  How  grea,t  their  fulness  and  depth! — See  here  how  much  is  covered  by  one 
single  expression  !  How  much  can  be  learaed  from  it,  as  it  were,  "by  the 
way  ! "     Little  less,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  than  the  whole  world  of  the  unseen  ! 

3.  How  equally  great,  therefore,  the  evidence  given  of  the  fulness  and  wisdom  of 
Christ ! — Ages  of  study  and  strife  had  never  shown  previously  in  these  words  of 
Moses  what  He  sees  in  them  at  a  glance.  No  "  contradiction  of  sinners,"  also, 
can  help  seeing  it  when  once  it  is  shown  !  Is  it  possible,  in  the  way  of  teaching, 
to  surpass  this  double  success  ? 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES.    > 

Vers.  25-28.  Christ  and  the  Sadducees.  nor  drink  nor  marriage,  but  shall  be 

— 1.  The  conceiving  of  spiritual  things  upholden  immediately  of  God,  without 

in  a  fleshly  manner  is  the  ground  of  means,    as   angels   are,    and   shall    be 

mistaking  the  truth  and  setting  up  of  employed  only  in  the  immediate  service 

errors  and  heresies,    as   appeareth   in  of  God. — Ihid. 
these  Sadducees ;  they  apprehend  the 

doctrine  of  eternal  life  to  be  this,  that  Chrisfs  reply  to  the  Sadducees, — I.  He 

the    course    of     this    temporary    Ufe  charges  them  with  error. —  Concerning: 

shall  be  renewed  and  made  perpetual.  1.  The  fact  of  the  resurrection.    2.  The 

2.  No  man  seemeth  wiser  in  his  own  nature  of  the  future  state, 

eyes   than   the   blindest   heretics    do ;  II.  He  corrects  their  mistake. — Im- 

they  conceive  that  Christ  Himself  can-  plying  :  1.  The  existence  of  a  high  order 

not  answer  their  objections  against  the  of  intelligences.     2.  Social  elevation  of 

truth ;     and   this    emboldeneth    these  humanity  in  the  future  state. 

Sadducees  to  dispute. — David  Dickson.  III.  He  convicts  them  out  of  their 

own    Scriptures.— Showing :    1.    That 

Vers.  29,  30.  The  Sadducees  coiifuted.  the    highest    property   an    intelligent 

-^1.  If  the   Scriptures  be  not  under-  being    can   possess   is    God,    and   this 

stood  and  believed,  it  cannot  miss  but  property    is    possessed   by    the    good, 

errors  will  arise,  for  nothing  else  but  2.    Its    possession      implies     conscious 

this  light  can  prevent  or  remove  errors,  existence.      3.  The    Scripture    teaches 

They  erred,  "  not  knowing  the  Scrip-  that  this  highest  property  is  possessed 

tures."     2.  It  is  necessary  for  quieting  by  departed  men. — D.  Thomas,  D.D. 
of   our   minds   in   the  truth  of  God's 

word  that  we  look  only  to  the  promise  Ver.    29.     Sources     of     unbelief. — 

of  God,  and  to  His  ability  to  perform  I.  Want  of  Scriptural  knowledge, 

all  He  hath  promised.     3.  After  the  II.  Want  of  spiritual  experience  — 

resurrection  we  shall  be  set  free  from  J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 
the  infirmities  whereunto  now  we  are 

subject ;  and  shall  neither  need  meat  Ver.  30.  The   beautiful  idea   of  the 

519 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


future   life. — I.    Elevated   above   tem-  can  be  till  the  contrary  truth  be  made 

poral  transitoriness.  clear  by  Scripture.     2.  Whatsoever  is 

II.  Like  the  angels  of  God.  said  in  the  Scripture  should  be  taken 

III.  A  life  in  heaven. — J.  P.  Lange,  as  spoken  unto  us,  and  that  by  God. 
D.D.  3.  Whatsoever  the  Scripture  doth  im- 
port,   by   good   consequence   is   to    be 

Life  in  heaven. — Will  there,  we  ask,  accounted  for  God's  speech.  *'  Con- 
be  no  continuance  there  of  the  holiest  corning  the  resurrection,  have  ye  not 
of  the  ties  of  earth  ?  Will  the  read  ? "  saith  He ;  for  the  Scripture 
husband  and  the  wife,  who  have  loved  doth  not  stand  in  letters  or  syllables, 
each  other  until  death  parted  them  but  in  the  sense  of  the  words,  and  in 
be  no  more  to  each  other  than  any  the  truly  inferred  consequences  from 
others  who  are  counted  worthy  to  thence.  4.  Whosoever  are  within  the 
obtain  that  life  ?  Will  there  be  no  covenant  of  grace,  whose  God  the  Lord  is 
individual  recognition,  no  continuance  by  covenant,  are  sure  to  live  in  heaven 
of  the  love  founded  upon  the  memories  with  God  after  this  life,  and  to  have 
of  the  past  ?  The  answer  to  all  such  their  bodies  raised  at  last  unto  immortal 
questionings  is  found  in  dwelling  on  life  ;  because  God  is  the  Saviour  and 
the  "  power  of  God."  The  old  relations  Redeemer  not  of  the  soul  of  His  elect 
may  subsist  under  new  conditions,  only,  but  also  of  the  body.  Therefore 
Things  that  are  incompatible  here  may  there  must  be  a  resurrection  of  the  body, 
there  be  found  to  co-exist.  The  saintly  for  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead, 
wife  of  two  saintly  husbands  may  love  but  of  the  living." — David  Dickson. 
both  with   an   angelic,    and   therefore 

a  pure  and  unimpaired  affection.     The  Ver.  32.  God  and  Immortality. — Our 

contrast  between  our  Lord's  teaching  Lord's  answer  suggests  the    best  way 

and  the  sensual  paradise  of  Mahomet,  of  assuring  ourselves  of  this  glorious 

or  Swedenborg's  dream  of  the  marriage  hope.     Let  God  be  real  to  us,  and  life 

state   perpetuated   under    its    earthly  and  immortality  will  be  real  too.     If 

conditions,  is  so  obvious  as  hardly  to  we   would   escape   the   doubts   of   old 

call  for  notice. — E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.  Sadducee  and  new  Agnostic,  we  must 

be   much   with   God,    and   strengthen 

Vers.  31,  32.  Interpreting  Scripture.  more  and  more  the  ties  which  bind  us 

— 1.  No   sufficient   silencing   of   error  to  Him. — J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  34—40. 

A  "  legal "  snare. — Once  more  we  find  the  Pharisees  laying  a  word-trap  for 
the  Saviour.  They  appear  to  have  been  stimulated  to  this  fresh  effort  by 
hearing  that  the  Sadducees  have  been  silenced  (ver.  34).  How  sweet  the  hope 
of  at  once  confounding  Him  and  distancing  them !  They  appear  also  to  have 
learned  wisdom  by  their  previous  experience.  Not  now  about  the  rule  of  tEie 
Komans  (ver.  17),  but  about  the  law  of  God  do  they  ask.  Not  this  time  in  the 
doubtful  company  of  the  Herodians,  but  by  the  lips  of  one  of  themselves — and 
he,  apparently  (Mark  xii.  32,  34),  a  man  of  well-deserved  repute  as  an  interpreter 
of  that  law — do  they  speak.  Very  profound,  accordingly,  and  unusually  difficult 
is  the  question  they  ask.  Equally  complete,  however,  for  all  this,  the  reply  they 
receive. 

I.  The  special  difficulty  of  the  question  asked  seems  to  have  lain  in  more 
matters  than  one.  It  lay,  first,  in  the  extreme  width  of  its  scope.  "  Which  is 
the  great  commandment  in  the  law  ? "  How  exceedingly  ample  the  field 
surveyed  by  that  question  !  Who  can  take  it  all  in  at  one  time  1  It  is  like 
asking  a  man  to  point  out  off-hand  the  most  important  star  in  the  midnight 
sky.     If  he  is  looking  to  the  north,  he  is  turning  his  bacjk  on  the  south.     If  he 

520 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST,  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


is  giving  special  attention  to  this  portion  he  is  giving  none  at  all  to  all  others. 
Who  but  God  can  "  count  the  number  of  the  stars  ? "  (Ps.  cxlvii.  4  ;  see  also 
Numb,  xxiii.  10).  Not  less,  next,  is  the  difficulty  involved  in  the  exceeding 
variety  of  this  field.  "One  star  diftereth  from  another  star  in  glory  "  (1  Cor. 
XV.  41).  So  also  do  the  difierent  groups  of  enactments  to  be  found  in  God's  law. 
On  how  many  sides,  and  in  how  many  ways,  do  they  affect  the  duty  of  man  % 
Political  and  ecclesiastical,  ceremonial  and  moral,  domestic  and  foreign,  private 
and  public,  social  and  civil — these  are  only  some  of  the  aspects  under  which  they 
look  at  our  life.  Who  can  arrange  them  so  that  they  can  all  of  them  be,  as  it 
were,  looked  at  at  once  1  And  who,  without  doing  that,  shall  be  sure  of  being 
able  to  distinguish  and  sever  from  amongst  the  whole  manifold  multitude, 
the  very  greatest  of  all?  The  bewilderment,  in  short,  is  hardly  less  than  the 
magnitude  of  the  task.  Lastly,  the  question  is  difficult — most  difficult  of  all 
indeed — because  of  the  peculiar  sanctity  of  this  field.  However  varied  these 
many  enactments  in  some  respects,  there  was  one  vital  point  in  regard  to  which 
they  were  all  exactly  alike.  By  the  pious  Israelite  they  were  all  rightly 
regarded  as  having  the  same  supreme  majesty  behind  them.  Whether  greater 
or  less  in  man's  fallible  judgment,  they  were  all  spoken  by  God.  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,"  "  I  am  the  Lord,"  are  declarations  to  be  found  repeatedly  in  the 
letter,  and  always  in  spirit,  in  every  page  of  that  "  law."  Who,  therefore, 
can  undertake  safely  to  point  out  differences  between  its  enactments  ?  And  who, 
above  all,  shall  so  do  this  as  to  put  his  finger  on  that  which  is  greatest  of  all  1 
The  very  attempt  to  do  it  involves  peril  of  the  direst  possible  kind.  Hence,  not 
improbably,  indeed,  one  principal  reason  of  proposing  it  to  the  Saviour.  With 
His  pretensions  He  ought  to  be  able  to  settle  even  such  a  difficulty  as  this. 

II.  The  Saviour's  reply  to  this  insidious  and  perilous  question  consisted  of  two 
principal  steps.  In  the  first  of  these  He,  practically,  narrowed  the  field  of 
inquiry.  And  did  so,  most  wisely,  by  showing  simply  how  God  Himself  had 
done  so  already.  As  the  **  lawyer "  who  had  asked  this  question  very  well 
knew,  God  had  put  one  portion  of  that  multitudinous  and  manifold  collection  of 
statutes  and  ordinances  known  by  the  name  of  the  law,  as  it  were  by  itself.  He 
had  done  so,  partly,  by  the  special  place  and  manner  of  its  original  promulgation 
(Exod.  XX.  1-18) ;  partly  by  the  special  care  taken  by  Him  on  that  occasion  to 
restrain  His  utterance  to  that  portion  alone  (Deut.  v.  22)  ;  and  partly  by  the 
fact  that  He  Himself  had  then  written  that  portion  alone  with  His  own  finger 
on  two  tables  of  stone  (ibid.).  This  being  so,  the  Saviour  will  now,  as  it  were, 
follow  this  lead.  What  God  Himself  has  thus  visibly  exalted  above  the  rest  of 
His  law,  He  will  treat  as  so  being.  And  will  confine  Himself,  therefore,  to 
searching  in  it  for  that  which  is  greatest  of  all.  In  the  next  place,  the  Saviour, 
taking  up  this  portion  alone,  proceeds  to  explain  its  structure  and  force.  Briefly, 
its  "  structure  "  is  this :  that  it  consists  of  two  groups.  That  the  first  group 
teaches  man  as  a  creature  to  love  his  Creator  ;  and  teaches  him  also  that  he 
cannot  do  this  too  much.  That  the  second  group  is  also  a  commandment  to 
"  love,"  and,  therefore,  *'  like  "  to  the  *'  first."  That  it  differs  from  it,  howe\^er, 
in  teaching  man,  as  God's  creature,  to  love  his  brother  man  as  being  the  same ; 
and  to  do  so,  therefore,  with  just  the  same  degree  of  love  as  he  bears  to  himself. 
The  "  force  "  of  this  analysis,  it  will  be  seen,  therefore,  is  of  a  two-fold  description. 
On  the  one  hand  it  shows  us  that  one  of  these  tables  or  groups  of  command- 
ments does  necessarily  and  from  its  very  nature  come  before  the  other,  both  as  to 
order  and  importance ;  and  is,  consequently,  so  far  the  "  greater."  On  the  other 
hand,  it  shows  us  that  the  second  of  these  is  so  essentially  a  sequel  of,  as  to  be 
almost  a  part  of,  the  former  ;  and,  therefore,  is,  so  far,  not  to  be  regarded  as  "  less." 
And  so,  on  the  whole,  therefore,  that  in  these  two  in  combination,  we  have  the 
greatest  of  all.     And  this  is  the  true  teaching,  moreover — so  the  Saviour  adds 

521 


CHAP.  xxii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


in  conclusion — of  all  teachers  who  have  ever  been  sent  from  God  to  teach  on  this 
point.  Judge  for  yourselves  if  either  *'  Moses  or  the  prophets  "  have  taught 
other  or  more!  (ver.  40). 

See  therefore  here,  in  conclusion  : — 

1.  The  wisdom  of  Moses  as  a  teacher. — Was  there  ever  such  a  summary  of  duty 
as  that  given  through  him  ? 

2.  The  wisdom  of  Christ  as  a  Teacher. — ^Was  there  ever  any  one  who  fathomed 
that  summary  as  it  was  fathomed  by  Him  1 

3.  The  perfection  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour. — "  By  the  obedience  of  One  many 
were  made  righteous  "  (Rom.  v.  19).  See  here  how  well  that  "  One  "  understood 
what  He  undertook  to  obey.  We  may  well  believe,  therefore,  that  He  honoured 
it  in  practice  to  an  equal  degree.  Could  He,  indeed,  have  understood  it  so 
perfectly  if  He  had  not  obeyed  it  in  full  ? 

HOMILIES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  36.  The  law  of  love  a  natural  shall  you  love  God.     Then  reason  shall 

force  of  humanity. — It  will  help  us  to  be   linked    to    heaven,    and    affection 

understand   this  principle   if   we  first  linked  to  heaven,  and  conscience  Hnked 

distinguish  it  from  some  other  principles  to  heaven,  and  idea   and  imagination 

of  our  nature.  and  all  the  powers  of  mind  and  soul 

I.  It  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  linked  to  heaven  by  the  eternal  principle 
principle  of  will,  and  in  some  regards  of  love. — Archdeacon  Watkins. 

is   indeed   to   be    opposed   to   it.     All 

human   lives   that   are    following   the  Vers.  37-40.  Love  to  God  and  man. — 

law  of  will,  of  self,  of  individualism,  I.  These  two  principles  from  which' 

are  breaking  life's  true  law,  and  missing  our  Lord  tells  us  all  religion  flows, 

life's  true  aim.  must  be  consistent  with  one  another ; 

II.  The  law  of  love  is  to  be  dis-  otherwise  they  could  not  both  be 
tinguished  from  the  principle  of  know-  principles  of  the  same  religion. 
ledge.  Knowledge  is  not  a  primary  II.  Nothing  is,  or  ought  to  be, 
fact,  and  can  never  become  an  ultimate  esteemed  religion  that  is  not  reducible 
law,  of  life.  "  Knowledge  shall  vanish  to  one  or  other  of  these  principles. — 
away,  but  love  never  faileth."  Bishop  Sherlock. 

III.  The  law  of  love  is  wholly  op- 
posed to  the  spirit  of  fear.  Fear  is  Vers.  37,  38.  The  first  and  great 
not  natural  to  man.  Fear  only  came  commandment. — Our  Lord  having  to 
to  man  when  tempted  by  knowledge.  do  with  a  proud  hypocrite,  pufied  up 
He  transgressed  the  obedience  of  with  a  conceit  of  his  own  righteousness, 
love,  and  having  transgressed  he  hid  doth  so  answer  him,  as  He  layeth  out  the 
himself  from  the  presence  of  God.  spiritual  meaning  of  the  law,  that  the 
And  Adam  represents  us  all.  We  man  might  see  how  short  he  came  in 
hide  from  God  because  we  have  sinned.  the  obedience  thereof,  and  so  doth  teach 
When  we  knee'l  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  us:  1.  That  the  commandments  are 
and  feel  that  because  God  loves  us  we  not  obeyed  except  the  obedience  spring 
must  love  God,  we  learn  again  the  law  from  love.  2.  The  commandments  are 
of  life,  the  law  of  being  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  satisfied  except  the  whole  man, 
love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc.  God  has  wholly,  in  all  things,  obey  with  his 
made  you  to  love  Him,  to  have  com-  whole  mind,  affections,  and  the  strength 
munion  with  Him.  And  in  that  of  all  the  powers  of  soul  and  body, 
perfect  communion  the  law  of  God  is  3.  To  love  God  is  the  greatest  com^ 
not  broken.  And  that  law  is,  that  mandment,  because  it  is  the  fountain 
with  all  your  heart,  with  all  your  being,  of  the  obedience  of  all  the  commands, 
with  all  the    powers   that  you   have,  and  also  because  all  the  commands  of 

522 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


the  first  table  are  but  branches,  and 
evidences  in  part  of  our  love  to  God, 
4.  The  great  commandment  is  not 
fulfilled  except  a  man  in  the  sense  of 
his  shortcoming  in  love  to  God,  seek 
for  reconciliation  with  Him,  enter  into 
a  covenant  of  grace  with  Him,  and 
make  use  of  His  friendship,  as  of  a 
reconciled  God.  5.  The  commandment 
of  loving  God  with  all  our  might  and 
adhering  to  Him  as  reconciled  unto  us 
and  made  ours  by  covenant,  is  first  to 
be  looked  unto,  as  being  of  greatest 
consequence  (ver.  38). — David  Dickson. 

Why  men  do  not  love  God. — There 
are  two  reasons  why  men  do  not 
love  God.  For  one  of  them  there  are 
great  excuses ;  for  the  other  there  is 
no  excuse  whatsoever. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  too  many  find 
it  difficult  to  love  God  because  they 
have  not  been  taught  that  God  is 
lovable,  and  worthy  of  their  love. — 
They  have  been  taught  dark  and  hard 
doctrines,  which  have  made  them  afraid 
of  God.  Our  love  must  be  called  out 
by  God's  love. 

II.  If  we  do  not  wish  to  do  what 
God  commands  we  shall  never  love 
God. — It  must  be  so.  There  can  be 
no  real  love  of  God  which  is  not 
based  upon  the  love  of  virtue  and 
goodness,  upon  what  our  Lord  calls  a 
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness. — 
C.  Kingsley,  M.A. 

"Ver.  37.  The  great  commandment. — 

1.  Who  is  the  Christian's  God?— We 
must  know  God  before  we  can  love  Him. 

II.  Our  duty  towards  God. — We 
must  not  only  love  Him,  but  our  love 
must  be — 1.  Supreme.  2.  Abiding. 
3.   Operative. 

III.  Why  that  duty  is  called  <<  the 
first  and  great  commandment." — 1.  It 
is  the  noblest  exercise  of  our  faculties. 

2.  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  other 
duties. — G.  Simeon,  M.A . 

The  mind^s  love  for  God. — I.  Is  it 
not  manifestly  true  that  besides  the 
love  of  the  senses,  and  the  love  of  the 
heart,   and  the  love  of  the  soul,  and 


the  love  of  the  strength,  there  is  also 
a  love  of  the  mind,  without  whose 
entrance  into  the  completeness  of  the 
loving  man's  relation  to  the  object  of 
his  love,  his  love  is  not  complete  ?  Is 
your  greatest  friend  contented  with 
your  love  before  you  have  come  to  love 
him  with  all  your  mind  ?  Everywhere 
we  find  our  assurances  that  the  mind 
has  its  affections  and  enthusiasms,  that 
the  intellect  is  no  cold-hearted  monster 
who  only  thinks  and  judges,  but  that 
it  glows  with  love,  not  merely  perceiv- 
ing, but  delighted  to  perceive,  the 
beauty  of  the  things  with  which  it  has 
to  do. 

II.  Christ  bids  His  disciples  to  love 
God  with  all  their  minds. — "  Under- 
stand Me,"  He  seems  to  cry,  "  I  am 
not  wholly  loved  by  you  unless  your 
understanding  is  searching  out  after 
My  truth,  and  with  all  your  powers  of 
thoughtfulness  and  study  you  are  try- 
ing to  find  out  all  you  can  about  My 
nature  and  My  ways." 

III.  There  are  ignorant  saints  who 
come  very  near  to  God,  and  live  in  the 
rich  sunlight  of  His  love,  but  none  the 
less  for  that  is  their  ignorance  a  de- 
traction from  their  sainthood. — There 
are  mystics  who,  seeing  how  God  out- 
goes human  kaowledge,  choose  to 
assume  that  God  is  not  a  subject  of 
human  knowledge  at  all.  Such  mystics 
may  mount  to  sublime  heights  of  un- 
reasoning contemplation,  but  there  is 
an  uncompleteness  in  their  love,  be- 
cause they  rob  one  part  of  their  nature 
of  all  share  in  their  approach  to  God. 
Love  God  with  all  your  mind,  because 
your  mind,  like  all  the  rest  of  you, 
belongs  to  Him  ;  and  it  is  not  right 
that  you  should  give  Him  only  a 
part  to  whom  belongs  the  whole.  Give 
your  intelligence  to  God.  Know  all 
that  you  can  about  Him. — Phillips 
Brooks. 

Love  to  God. — The  measure  of  loving 
God  is  to  love  Him  without  measure. 
— W.  Burkitt. 

A  comprehensive  laiv. — When  Thomas 
Paine  resided  in  Bordentown,   in  the 

523 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


state  of  New  Jersey,  he  was  one  day 
passing  the  residence  of  Dr.  Staughton, 
when  the  latter  was  sitting  at  the 
door.  Paine  stopped,  and  after  some 
remarks  of  a  general  character,  ob- 
served, "  Mr.  Staughton,  what  a  pity 
it  is  that  a  man  has  not  some  com- 
prehensive and  perfect  rule  for  the 
government  of  his  life."  The  doctor 
replied,  "  Mr.  Paine,  there  is  such  a 
rule."  **What  is  that?"  Paine  in- 
quired. Dr.  S.  repeated  the  passage, 
"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God 
with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself."  Abashed  and  confounded, 
Taine  replied,  "  Oh,  that's  in  your 
Bible,"  and  immediately  walked  away. 
— Biblical  Museum. 

Ver.  38.  The  great  and  first  com- 
fnandment. — Love  is  the  great  and  first 
commandment : 

I.  In  antiquity. — Being  as  old  as  the 
world,  and  engraven  in  our  nature. 

II.  In  dignity. — As  directly  respect- 
ing God. 

III.  In  excellence. — Being  the  com- 
mandment of  the  new  covenant. 

lY.  In  justice. — ^As  preferring  God 
above  all  things,  and  rendering  to  Him 
His  due. 

V.  In  sufficiency. — In  making  of 
itself  man  holy  in  this  life,  and  blessed 
in  that  which  is  to  come. 

VI.  In  fruitfulness. — In  being  the 
root  of  all  other  commandments. 

VII.  In  virtue  and  efficacy. 

VIII.  In  extent. 

IX.  In  necessity. 

X.  In  duration. — As  continuing  for 
ever  in  heaven. — Quesnel. 

Ver.  39.  The  second  great  command- 
ment.— 1.  So  many  as  profess  love  to 
God  must  set  themselves  to  love  their 
neighbour  also,  at  His  command  ;  for 
he  cannot  love  God  who  will  not  love 
his  neighbour.  2.  It  is  lawful  to  love 
ourselves,  yea,  it  is  a  commanded  duty 
after  our  love  to  God,  and  with  our  love 
to  God,  and  from  our  love  to  God ; 
that  is  to  say,  so  as  our  love  to  our- 
selves be  not  in  the  first  room,  which 

524 


belongeth  to  God,  so  as  our  love  of 
ourselves  be  subordinate  unto  the  love 
of  God,  and  may  make  us  forthcoming 
to  the  honour  of  God,  and  doth  not 
prejudge  our  love  to  God,  but  further 
the  same ;  for  the  command  which 
saith,  "  Love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself," 
saith  "  Love  thyself,"  by  a  second  and 
like  command,  depending  on,  and  flow- 
ing from,  the  first.  3.  A  right  ordered 
and  measured  love  to  ourselves  is  the  rule 
and  measure  of  our  love  to  our  neigh- 
bour ;  the  love  of  God  must  be  preferred 
both  to  ourselves  and  neighbour,  so  as  we 
must  not  please  ourselves  or  our  neigh- 
bour by  displeasing  God  ;  but  our  love 
to  God  being  fixed  in  its  own  place, 
then,  in  reason,  as  w^e  would  have  others 
do  unto  us,  do  we  also  unto  them  ;  for 
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself,"  that  is,  sincerely  and  con- 
stantly.— David  Dickson. 

Ver.  39.  Love  to  our  neighbour. — In 
canvassing  the  duty  here  enjoined,  I 
shall  consider  : — 

I.  Its  nature.  —  An  attendant  of 
regeneration.  Disinterested.  "  As 
thyself." 

II.  Its  extent. — 1.  It  extends  to  our 
famjilies,  friends  and  countrymen.  2.  To 
our  enem.ies.  3.  To  all  mankind.  4.  It 
extends  in  its  operations  to  all  the  good 
offices  which  we  are  capable  of  rendering 
to  others.  (1)  The  love  required  in  this 
precept  will  prevent  us  from  voluntarily 
injuring  others.  (2)  Among  the  posi- 
tive acts  of  beneficence  dictated  by  the 
love  of  -the  gospel,  the  contribution  of 
our  property  forms  an  interesting  part. 
(3)  Love  to  our  neighbour  dictates  also 
every  other  ofiice  of  kindness  which  may 
promote  his  present  welfare.  (4)  Love 
to  our  neighbour  is  especially  directed 
to  the  good  of  his  soul. 

Conclusion.  1.  From  these  observa- 
tions it  is  evident  that  the  second  great 
commandment  of  the  moral  law  is 
'*  like  the  jirstr  2.  Piety  and  morality 
are 'here  shown  to  be  inseparable.  3.  The 
religion  of  the  Scriptures  is  the  true  and 
only  source  of  all  the  duties  of  life. — 
T.  Dwight,  LL.D. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


Self  love. — There  is  no  express  com- 
mand in  Scripture  for  a  man  to  love 
himself,  because  the  light  of  nature 
directs,  and  the  law  of  nature  binds 
and  moves  every  man  so  to  do.  God 
has  put  a  principle  of  self-love  and  of 
self-preservation  into  all  His  creatures, 
but  especially  in  man. — W.  Burkitt. 

Ver.  40.  What  is  religion  ?  —  The 
answers  to  the  question  are  various, 
some  of  them  wide  enough  of  the  mark, 
and  others  hitting  it  more  or  less  nearly. 
Even  where  the  answers  are  within 
sight  of  the  truth  there  is  a  tendency 
to  overlook  the  kernel  of  religion,  and 
lay  undue  stress  upon  its  husk.  It  was 
Christ's  function  to  remind  a  genera- 
tion, blighted  by  formalism,  where  true 
reUgion  lay.  He  pierced  beneath  all 
outward  forms,  laid  bare  the  essence 
of  religion,  and  set  it  forth  before  men's 
eyes  in  the  clear  light  of  His  own 
Divine  wisdom  :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and 
with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
mind."  *'  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh- 
bour as  thyself."  On  these  two  com- 
mandments hang  all  the  law  and  the 
prophets.  That  is  an  account  of  re- 
ligion worth  meditating  upon. 

I.  How  simple  it  is  ! — There  is  no 
mistaking  what  it  means.  Religion  is 
in  many  ways  a  perplexnig,  complicated 
phenomenon.  It  touches  us  at  so  many 
points,  it  is  so  interwoven  with  the 
whole  world  of  thought  and  feeling  and 
conduct ;  it  has  so  many  different  ways 
of  expressing  itself  ;  it  is  so  many-sided, 
and  on  some  of  its  sides  so  profoundly 
mysterious,  that  it  is  natural  enough 
to  find  variety  and  confusion  and  be- 
wilderment in  the  conceptions  men 
have  entertained  of  it.  Here,  as  else- 
where in  human  affairs,  it  is  only  those 
who  have  mastered  a  subject  who  can 
show  us  its  simplicity.  It  was  the 
genius  of  Newton  that  discovered  the 
simplicity  of  the  one  all-pervading  law 
of  gravitation,  which  accounts  at  once 
for  the  falling  of  an  apple  and  the 
movements  of  sun  and  planets.  So 
the  Divine  insight  of  Christ  into  human 
life,  and  its  relations  with  the  life  of 


God,  has  issued  in  the  simplicity  of 
His  account  of  religion  as  love  to  God 
and  love  to  man.  Thought  is  a  great 
element  in  human  life,  and  belief  has  a 
large  part  to  play  in  religion.  Conduct, 
we  are  told,  constitutes  three- fourths 
of  human  life,  and  there  can  be  no 
right  religion  without  right  conduct. 
Emotion  is  the  source  of  much  of  the 
interest  of  life,  and  is  deeply  inwrought 
with  religion.  But  Christ  goes  behind 
all  that,  behind  thought  and  conduct 
and  emotion,  and  fixes  upon  the  moral 
will,  expressing  itself  in  love  to  God  and 
man,  as  the  deepest  seat  of  religion. 

II.  Notice  also,  in  Christ's  answer, 
how  He  has  seized  upon  and  emphasised 
the  permanent  element  in  religion. — The 
accidents  of  religion  may  change.  But 
amid  all  changes  in  religious  activity,  or 
worship,  or  creed,  there  is  one  thing  at 
least  which  is  unchangeable — that  on 
which  Christ  has  laid  the  chief  stress. 
The  inner  pith  of  religion  can  never  be 
elsewhere  than  where  He  has  put  it — 
in  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  It  is 
a  simple  account  of  religion  Christ 
gives ;  but  if  we  are  in  earnest  with 
His  answer,  and  honestly  strive  to  work 
it  out  in  our  daily  life,  its  simplicity 
will  seem  to  us  to  be  something  else 
than  we  often  take  it  to  be.  Simplicity 
does  not  mean  easiness.  No.  To  love 
God  with  all  our  heart,  and  our  neigh- 
bour as  ourself,  that  is  a  demand  than 
which  none  else  can  be  harder,  which 
penetrates  into  the  deepest  deep  of  our 
being,  and  embraces  the  widest  reaches 
of  our  thought  and  activity.  To  give 
God  the  supreme  devotion  of  our  hearts, 
to  merge  our  wills  in  His,  to  yield  to 
Him  the  complete  mastery  of  our  life, 
to  let  the  current  of  our  affection  go 
out  towards  Him — that  is  not  easy. 
To  love  our  neighbour  as  Christ  loved, 
to  go  about  the  world  with  sympathy 
ready  to  take  upon  itself  others' burdens, 
so  to  identify  ourselves  with  others 
that  we  learn  to  regard  their  welfare 
as  one  with  our  own,  to  keep  down  all 
envy  and  jealousy  and  narrow- hearted- 
ness,  and  to  be  willing  to  deny  our- 
selves for  the  good  of  our  neighbour — 
that  is  not  easy. 

525 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW. 


III.  Christ  links  the  two  together. — 

Devotion  to  our  Heavenly  Father  and 
devotion  to  our  fellows.  They  were 
linked  together  in  that  life  of  His 
which  He  lived  beneath  the  Syrian 
skies,  and  where  Christ's  religion  is 
truly  grasped  they  cannot  be  divorced. 
Love  is  a  unity  where  it  exists ;  it 
must  go  forth  at  once  to  God  above 
us  and  to  our  fellows  around  us.  Now 
notice  that  the  demand  is  for  love,  not 
for  mere  awe,  or  zeal,  or  outward 
homage.  You  can  test  whether  your 
relation  to  God  is  founded  in  love  or 
in  some  less  noble  sentiment.  You 
can  test  that  by  the  effect  it  produces 
on  your  relation  to  your  fellows.  Love 
to  God  will  show  itself  in  love  to  man. 
On  the  other  hand,  you  can  reverse  the 
process  and  test  your  love  to  man  by 
your  love  to  God.     You  cannot  rightly 


love  your  brother  without  loving  his 
Father  and  your  Father.  I  do  not 
say  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
philanthropy,  which  is  supposed  to 
be  dissociated  from  all  reference  to 
God — though  even  that  kind  of  philan- 
thropy is  more  closely  linked  with 
God  than  is  sometimes  thought. 
But  this  I  say,  that  you  have  not 
elevated  your  philanthropy  to  a  worthy 
enough  level  till  you  love  your  brother 
as  a  man  who  is  linked  with  God,  and 
destined  for  life  in  God. 

IV.  These  words  of  Christ  form  a 
noble  guide  for  the  religious  life. — 
Forget  not  what  religion  according  to 
Christ  means.  Take  heed  lest  you  be 
so  engrossed  with  its  mere  accidents 
that  you  lose  sight  of  its  substance. 
Strive  that  you  may  grow  in  love  to 
God  and  man. — D.  M.  Ross,  M.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH. —  Verses  41—46. 

A  counter-attack. — Hitherto  various  bodies  of  conspirators  have  put  their 
questions  to  Christ.  Now  the  case  is  reversed.  Before  the  discomfited 
Pharisees  have  retired — w^hilst  they  still  remain  gathered  together — in  the 
deep  silence  which  follows — He  puts  a  question,  or  rather,  two  questions,  to 
them.  In  the  passage  before  us  we  see:  I.  The  hasis  these  questions  stood  on. 
2.  The  difficulties  they  presented.     3.  The  effects  they  produced. 

I.  The  basis  they  stood  on. — This  was  to  be  found  in  the  common  convictions 
of  both  the  Pharisees  and  the  Saviour.  Their  convictions,  on  the  one  hand,  as 
to  the  sco'pe  of  those  Scriptures  which  they  held  in  those  days  in  their  hands. 
Both  sides  believed  that  these  pointed  unmistakably  to  the  Messias  or  Christ. 
Some  thirty  years  before,  when  these  same  or  other  scribes  and  Pharisees  had 
been  asked  by  Herod  the  Great  to  tell  him  where  this  Christ  should  be  born, 
they  had  referred  him  at  once  to  the  Scriptures  in  question  (ii.  4,  5). 
Just  the  same,  here,  tacitly,  in  asking  like  information  about  this  Messias  or 
Christ,  the  Saviour's  first  question  assumes.  Just  so  here,  is  assumed  also,  in 
the  reply  of  the  Pharisees  to  it.  It  is  taken  for  granted  by  both  that  that 
question  can  only  be  answered  by  a  reference  to  the  writings  of  the  prophets.  It 
is  to  them  alone  you  must  go  if  you  want  to  know  what  to  believe  of  the  Christ. 
Their  convictions,  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  Scriptures  in 
question.  On  this  point,  also,  we  find  the  Saviour  and  the  Pharisees  to  be 
absolutely  of  one  mind.  Whatever  those  Scriptures  can  be  shown  to  teach  must 
be  accepted  as  true.  Clearly,  on  either  side,  there  is  no  idea  here  of  anything 
else.  It  is  just  as  certain  to  both  that  the  Scriptures  are  true  as  that  they  speak 
about  Christ.  No  one  cares  to  prove  this  because  it  is  what  no  one  denies.  No 
one  ever  goes  so  far  as  to  assert  it.     It  is  already  believed. 

II.  Hence  therefore,  next,  the  peculiar  difficulty  of  the  second  question  pro- 
pounded.— The  authorities  referred  to  had  spoken  in  more  places  than  one  on  the 
matter  in  hand.  In  some  of  these  places  they  had  spoken  of  the  Christ  (as 
already  acknowledged)  as  the  "  Son  of  David."  In  another  place  they  are  found 
speaking  of  Him  in  a  variant  way.     In  words  which  were  believed  by  all  to  be 

526 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


those  of  David  himself  speaking  under  the  direct  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
he  speaks  of  Christ  as  his  Lord.  "  The  LORD  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  Thou  on»my 
right  hand,  until  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy  footstool  "  (ver.  44).  The  difficulty, 
therefore,  is  patent  and  great.  "  If  David  call  Him  Lord,  how  is  He  then  his 
Son  ?  "  How  can  the  same  person  be  both  at  one  time ;  both  above  and  below ; 
both  Son  and  Lord ;  both  subject  and  sovereign  ;  both  under  another  man  and  on 
^a  level  with  God?  The  difficulty  is  not  to  be  solved  by  a  supposed  misinterpreta- 
tion of  either  Scriptures  referred  to.  The  language  of  both  is  too  plain.  Neither 
is  it  to  be  got  rid  of  by  attributing  incorrectness  to  either.  From  any  supposition 
of  that  kind,  as  we  have  seen  already,  all  are  wholly  debarred. 

III.  The  eiFects  of  these  questions. — Or,  rather,  of  this  latter  one — were  of  two 
principal  kinds.  One  was  on  the  spot  and  immediate.  The  men  that  heard  it 
had  nothing  to  say.  They  could  not  suggest  any  explanation  of  the  difficulty 
propounded.  They  could  not  think  even  of  any  pretext  to  offer  in  lieu. 
Practised  in  evasion,  skilled  in  subterfuge,  masters  in  concealment,  they  could  not 
conceal  the  true  state  of  the  case.  They  said  nothing  because  they  had  nothing 
to  say.  The  other  effect  was  subsequent  and  remote.  The  men  who  heard  of  this 
question  were  affected  by  it  in  the  same  manner  and  to  the  same  extent  as  those 
on  the  spot.  They  also  had  nothing  to  say  to  it  in  the  way  of  reply.  JSTot  only 
so,  they  had  nothing  further,  so  far  as  this  Man  was  concerned,  to  propound. 
Taken  in  conjunction  with  the  wonderful  ease  and  success  with  which  He  had 
previously  answered  their  subtlest  inquiries,  this  insoluble  question  of  His  silenced 
all  of  them  all  the  rest  of  His  days  (ver.  46).  As  an  "  attacking  "  army  they 
had  ceased  to  exist. 

So  complete  a  reversement  may  teach  us  much  as  to  the  difficulties  of 
Scripture.     It  may  teach  us  : — 

1 .  To  expect  them,. — The  more  truly  Scripture  is  Holy  Scripture,  the  more  likely 
it  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  to  present  difficulties  sometimes  to  our  minds.  The 
more  truly  it  is  above  man  in  its  origin  the  more  certain  it  is  to  be  occasionally 
above  man  in  its  thoughts.  How  could  so  deep  a  truth  as  that  which  we  know 
to  have  lain  at  the  root  of  the  difficulty  here  presented  to  the  Pharisees,  have 
been  presented  to  their  shallow  human  intelligences  so  as  not  to  perplex  them  at 
first,  and  in  part  ?  It  is  impossible  for  an  eye  accustomed  to  the  darkness  of 
earth  to  see  at  first  quite  clearly  in  the  noon-light  of  heaven  !  At  first,  at  any 
rate,  it  is  simply  ''  blinded  "  with  "  excess  of  light." 

2.  To  endure  them. — If  thus  things  must  be  we  must  simply  let  them  be, 
as  reasonable  inquirers.  Never,  in  any  case,  must  we  regard  any  of  them,  as 
being  calls  to  despair.  Not  even  these  Pharisees,  in  their  imperfect  faith,  appear 
to  have  been  tempted  to  this.  Because  they  could  not  possibly  account  for  what 
they  found  foretold  about  the  Messias,  they  did  not  therefore  say  there  was 
none.  What  we  ought  rather  to  learn  here,  therefore,  with  our  fuller  know- 
ledge, is  a  lesson  in  hope.  What  was  perplexity  to  those  Pharisees  has  become 
confirmation  to  us !  What  was  darkness  to  them  is  a  pillar  of  light  to  us  ! 
Believing,  as  we  do,  in  a  Christ  who  is  both  perfect  God  and  perfect  man,  we  see 
easily  how  He  could  be  both  David's  Lord  and  David's  Son,  and  have  learned  to 
rejoice,  therefore,  in  the  juxtaposition  of  those  very  Scriptures  which  were  such 
utter  bewilderment  in  their  eyes.  So  let  us  learn  to  hope,  therefore,  of  other 
like  sources  of  bewilderment  in  their  turn.  Time  and  truth  will  know  how  to 
transform  them  also  into  sources  of  light ! 

HOMILIES    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  41-45.  David^s  Son  and  David's  the  law,  so  it  is  necessary  to  know  the 
Lord. — L  As  it  is  good  to  be  zealous  of      Messiah,  who  redeemeth  men  from  the 

527 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW. 


curse  of  the  law.  So  our  Lord,  having 
answered  the  Pharisees'  question  about 
the  law,  asketh  them,  "  What  think 
5^e  of  Christ  ? "  2.  Christ  is  a  very 
man,  lineally  descended  of  David,  for 
He  is  David's  Son ;  so  say  even  the 
Pharisees.  3.  Christ  is  also  very  God, 
for  He  is  David's  Lord,  equal  with 
the  Father.  4.  The  Son  of  David 
and  David's  Lord,  distinguished  from 
the  Father,  as  one  of  the  persons 
of  the  Godhead,  is  but  one  person ; 
for  David's  God  and  David's  Son 
is    here    spoken    of    as    one   person. 

5.  Christ  is  fellow-partner  of  Divine 
glory  with  the  Father,  for  "  Sit  Thou 
at  My  right  hand  "  saith  the  Father. 

6.  Christ  shall  not  want  enemies  who 
shall  oppose  His  kingdom.  7.  Christ's 
enemies  shall  be  put  under  His  power. 

8.  There  is  but  one  Divine  power  of  the 
Son  and  Father,  for  as  the  Son  reigneth 
in  majesty  over  His  enemies,  so  the 
Father  putteth  them  down  also;  for 
"Sit  Thou  till  I  put  them  down" 
is   "  Peign   Thou "   till  this   be   done. 

9.  None  can  reconcile  the  speeches  in 
Scripture  concerning  Christ,  except  he 
who  belie veth  and  acknowledgeth  Him 
to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person ;  for 
if  David  call  Him  Lord,  how  is  He 
then  his  Son  ?  hath  no  answer  but  He 
is  both  God  and  man. — David  Dickson. 

Yer.  42.  The  Mediator,  the  Guarantee 
of  religious  life. — Jesus  Christ  is  a 
name  around  which  a  vast  accumula- 
tion of  histories,  ideas,  beliefs  have 
gathered.  Christianity  has  many 
aspects  ;  literary,  philosophical,  moral, 
historical,  political,  theological,  spiri- 
tual, practical.  What  is  the  religious 
aspect  of  Christianity  and  of  Christ? 
What  is  the  aspect  which  exhibits  our 
Lord's  relation  to  religion,  considered 
as  the  bond  between  God  and  the 
human  soul  1 

I.  Nothing  is  more  certain  in  the 
annals  of  mankind  than  this,  that 
Jesus  Christ  lived  in  Palestine,  and 
was  put  to  death  eighteen  centuries 
and  a  half  ago.  If  this  be  admitted. 
His  life  and  death  must  possess  for  any 
intelligent   man    the   highest   possible 

528 


degree  of  interest.     No  doubt,  at  the 
time,  the  Csesar  Tiberius  was   every- 
where on  the   lips   and  in  the  minds 
of   men ;    while  the   retired    religious 
Teacher,    as    He    seemed    to    be,    in 
Palestine,   was  by   His  teaching.   His 
acts,  and   the   opposition   which   they 
aroused,  only  fuinishing  a  little  con- 
versation and  excitement  to  the  peas- 
antry and  to  the  officials  of  a  remote 
province.     But  if  the  importance  of  a 
life  is  to  be  measured   by   its   results 
in    history   and    to   civilization,    even 
although   we  should  put  all   religious 
and   even  moral  considerations   aside, 
who  would  think  most  of  the  emperor  ? 
Who  can  deny  that,   at  this  moment, 
explain   it   how  he  will,   Jesus  Christ 
lives  in  the  hearts  of  multitudes  as  the 
object  of  most  cherished  and  devoted 
homage ;    that  He  governs  the  ideas, 
the  aspirations,  the  social  and  political 
action  of  millions  of  mankind ;    that 
the  most  active  and  enterprising  section 
of  the  human  family,  still,  in  various 
senses,  places  itself  under  the  shadow 
of  His  name  and  patronage  ;  and  that, 
if  He  has   many  opponents,   there  is 
no   serious   probability   of    His   being 
spiritually  or  intellectually  dethroned  1 
II.     But   the   question   must  occur, 
What  was  it  in  Jesus  Christ  which 
gave  Him,  in  spite  of  social  and  poli- 
tical  insignificance,   so  commanding, 
so  unrivalled  a  position  in  history? 
The  least  answer  that  can  be  given  is 
that  His  character  made  a  profound, 
an   ineffaceable   impression    upon   His 
contemporaries  ;  an  impression  so  deep 
and    abiding     that    it    moved    them, 
peasants  and  paupers  as  they  were,  to 
achieve  the  moral   revolution   of   the 
civilised   world.     But   the   bearing   of 
Jesus  Christ  is  that  of  One  who  claims 
to  be  the  First  of  all,  the  Centre  of  all, 
with  entire  simplicity  indeed,  but  also 
with  unhesitating  decision.     His  words 
are  familiar  to  our  ears  ;  but  do  we  dwell 
upon  their  real  and  awful  meaning? 
What  should  we  think  of  a  religious 
teacher  now  who  could  permit  himself 
to  say  that  eternal  life  consisted  in  the 
knowledge   of    himself   as  well    as   in 
the  knowledge  of  the  Father,  etc.  ?    The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxii. 


question  arises,  how  to  account  for  this 
earnest  self-assertion  on  the  part  of 
Jesus  Christ?  Is  our  Lord's  language 
imposture?  The  suggestion  can  only 
be  mentioned  to  be  condemned  by  the 
entire  drift  and  atmosphere  of  His  life. 
Is  it  the  hallucination  of  an  enthusiast  ? 
**  That  a  Jew  should  fancy  himself  the 
Messiah,  and  at  the  same  time  should 
strip  that  character  of  all  the  attributes 
that  fired  his  youthful  imagination  and 
heart ;  that  he  should  start  aside  from 
all  the  feelings  and  hopes  of  His  age, 
and  should  acquire  a  consciousness  of 
being  destined  to  a  wholly  new  career, 
and  one  as  unbounded  as  it  was  new — 
this  is  exceedingly  improbable  "  (Chan- 
ning).  Was  it,  then,  only  the  natural 
manner  of  an  Oriental  mind ;  the  habit 
of  seizing  truth  intuitively  and  enun- 
ciating it  authoritatively,  in  contrast 
with  our  western  methods  of  demon- 
stration and  argument?  But  this 
explanation,  even  if  on  other  accounts 
it  could  be  admitted,  does  not  cover 
the  ground  required.  It  does  not 
justify  the  actual  substance  and  con- 
tents of  our  Lord's  language  about 
Himself.  It  does  not  explain  the  fact 
that  His  language  about  Himself  is 
unlike  anything  which  we  find  in  the 
Hebrew  prophets.  The  prophets,  if 
you  will,  announce  truth  in  the  intui- 
tive manner;  but  they  do  not  make 
themselves  the  subjects  and  centres  of 
the  truth  which  they  announce.  The 
relation  in  which  Christ  claims  to 
stand,  both  towards  the  Father  and 
towards  mankind,  is  utterly  unantici- 
pated by  anything  that  can  be  traced 
in  the  prophetic  literature  of  Israel. 
Our  Lord's  language  about  Himself  is 
entirely  in  harmony  with  the  character 
of  His  miracles  of  power.  Also  with 
another  phenomenon.  He  was  sinless. 
The  most  startling  moral  feature  in 
this  life  is  that  we  can  trace  nowhere 
in  it  any,  the  faintest  consciousness  of 
guilt.  If  we  bow  before  the  general 
impression  produced  by  Christ's  char- 
acter, and  He  be  taken  at  His  word. 
He  must  be  believed  to  be,  in  the 
absolute  sense,  Divine. 

III.  In  Jesus  Christ,  then,  we  have 


the  guarantee  or  bond  of  religion.    He 

is  the  means  of  an  actual  communica- 
tion between  the  soul  of  man  and  the 
Eternal  God. — Canon  Liddon. 

Yer.  42.  Jesus  :  what  do  we  think  of 
Him  ?  (For  children). — I.  Jesus  ought 
not  to  be  despised. — It  is  said  of 
Handel,  the  great  musician,  that  while 
composing  the  well-known  oratorio  of 
"  The  Messiah,"  he  was  frequently 
found  in  tears,  and  that  one  day,  while 
sobbing  bitterly,  it  was  found  that  the 
words  which  had  broken  down  his 
spirit  were  these  three  words  of  the 
prophet  Isaiah,  "  He  was  despised." 
And  yet  this  short  saying  was  abun- 
dantly fulfilled  when  Jesus  came  to 
show  us  His  great  love.  Bishop  Villiers 
tells  us  the  following  story :  "  I  once," 
says  he,  '^  happened  to  be  on  a  visit  to 
a  great  castle,  situate  on  the  top  of  a 
hill.  There  was  a  steep  cliff",  at  the 
bottom  of  which  was  a  rapid  river. 
Late  one  night  there  was  a  person 
anxious  to  get  home  from  that  castle, 
in  the  midst  of  a  thunderstorm.  The 
night  was  blackness  itself.  The  woman 
was  asked  to  wait  till  the  storm  was 
over,  but  she  declined.  Next  they 
begged  her  to  take  a  lantern,  that  she 
might  be  able  to  keep  upon  the  road 
from  the  castle  to  her  home.  She  said 
she  did  not  require  a  lantern,  but  could 
do  very  well  without  one.  She  left. 
Perhaps  she  -was  frightened  by  the 
storm,  but  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness 
she  wandered  from  the  path  and  fell 
over  the  cliff".  The  next  day  the 
swollen,  river  washed  to  the  shore  the 
poor  lifeless  body  of  that  foolish 
woman."  Even  so  there  are  many 
persons  in  our  beautiful  island  home 
to-day  who  refuse  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  perish. 

II.  Jesus  ought  not  to  be  received 
with  coldness  or  delay. — Jesus  com- 
plains very  much  that  many  persons 
do  so  receive  Him.  Have  you  ever 
read  those  tender  words  in  Rev.  iii.  20, 
"  Behold  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock  "  ?  Learned  men  tell  us  that  it 
means,  *'  I  have  been  long  standing  at 
the   door."      Jesus    is    kept    waiting. 

MM  529 


CHAP.  XXII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW, 


What  a  difference  there  is  in  the  way 
we  go  to  answer  knocks  at  the  door. 
The  postman's  loud  double  knock 
makes  us  run,  for  who  is  not  pleased 
to  receive  letters  from  friends  ?  And 
sometimes  there  comes  a  timid  knock 
at  the  back  door,  which  nobody  cares 
to  answer.  "  It's  only  a  beggar  !  " 
some  one  says,  and  if  the  door  is  not 
opened,  the  footsteps  turn  sadly  away. 
How  differently  we  welcome  those  we 
love. 

Ill  Jesus  is  worthy  of  our  highest 
reverence  and  of  our  best  love  and 
obedience. — There  are  two  words 
uttered  by  the  patriarch  Job  a  great 
many  years  ago,  that  we  may  all  use 
in  reference  to  Jesus  Christ.  The 
words  are,  *'  My  Redeemer "  (Job 
xix.  25).  Will  you  each  say  of  Him 
just  now,  "  Jesus  is  my  Redeemer." 
Ah  !  that  is  why  I  feel  that  I  ought 
to  love  Him.  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave 
Himself  for  me." — Robert  Brewin. 

*'  What  think  ye  of  Christ  V'—\.  As 
to  His  origin. 

1.  Son  of  man. — The  ideal  of 
humanity. 

2.  Son  of  God. — The  Divine  essence. 

II.  As  to  His  character. — 1.  Ahso- 
lutely  perfect  as  human. — Immaculate, 
unique,  complete. 

2.  The  embodiment  of  the  Divine 
perfections. 

III.  As  to  His  offices. — 1.  Teacher. 
2.  Saviour.     3.  King. —  W.  W.  Why  the. 

Admiration  of  Christ. — Cyrus,  in  one 
of  his  wars,  captured  an  Armenian 
princess,  and,  according  to  the  cruel 
la.ws  of  ancient  warfare,  condemned 
her  to  death.     Her  husband,  hearing 


of  her  peril,  came  at  once  into  the 
camp  of  the  conqueror,  and  offered 
to  redeem  her  life  with  his  own. 
Cyrus  was  so  struck  with  the  man's 
magnanimity  that  he  released  them 
both,  and  declared  his  purpose  to  re- 
instate them,  with  great  power  and 
riches,  in  their  own  country.  And 
now,  while  all  the  courtiers  and  captains 
are  praising  the  generosity  of  the  great 
king,  the  woman  stands  silent  and 
weeping.  And  when  the  question  was 
asked  of  her,  "And  what  do  you  think 
of  Cyrus?"  "I  was  not  thinking  of 
him  at  all,"  she  replied.  "  Of  whom 
were  you  thinking  ?  "  "I  was  think- 
ing," said  she,  fixing  her  eyes  all 
lustrous  with  love,  shining  through 
her  tears,  upon  her  husband,  "of  the 
noble  man  who  redeemed  my  life  by 
offering  to  sacrifice  his  own."  Is  not 
this  the  true  attitude  of  a  Christian  ? 
Amid  the  adulation  of  the  world,  should 
we  not  think  most  tearfully  and  ten- 
derly of  the  Divine  Man  who  re- 
deemed our  lives,  not  by  the  offer,  but 
by  the  actual  sacrifice  of  Himself?  — 
Christian  Wwld  Pulpit. 

Ver.  46.  Silenced  ! — The  issue  of  this 
disputation  is  set  down  to  teach  us  : 
1.  That  all  Christ's  enemies  will  be 
beaten  in  disputation  and  put  to  silence. 
The  force  of  Divine  truth  prudently  put 
forth,  is  irresistible.  2.  The  conviction 
of  God's  enemies  may  be  expected,  but 
the  conversion  of  all  the  convicted  can 
hardly  be  expected ;  for  they  could 
not  answer,  and  they  durst  ask  no  more 
questions ;  there  is  all ;  we  hear  of  no 
good  use  they  made  of  this. — David 
Dickson. 


530 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiii. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

* 

CRITICAL     NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Then  spake  Jesus. — The  day  of  grace  is  over  for  the  leaders  of  the  people ;  but  for 
the  people  themselves  there  may  still  be  hope ;  so  the  Lord  of  the  temple  turns  to  the  mul- 
titude, the  general  tbrong  of  worshippers,  mingled  with  whom  were  several  of  His  own 
disciples,  and  solemnly  warns  them  against  their  spiritual  guides.  There  is  every  reason  to 
suppose  that  many  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  within  hearing ;  for  when  He  has 
finished  what  He  has  to  say  to  the  people,  He  turns  round  and  addresses  them  directly  in 
that  series  of  terrible  denunciations  which  follow. — (Gibson). 

Ver.  2.  In  Moses'  seat. — That  is,  as  interpreters  of  the  law  given  by  Moses  {Brown). 

Ver,  3.  Do,  but  do  not. — (See  R.V.).  His  warning  is  couched  in  such  a  way  as  not  in  the 
least  degree  to  weaken  their  respect  for  Moses,  or  for  the  sacred  Scriptures,  the  exposition  of 
which  was  the  duty  of  their  spiritual  guides.  He  separates  sharply  between  the  office  and 
the  men  who  hold  it  {Gibson). 

Ver.  5.  To  be  seen  of  men. — They  did  works,  many  works  ;  but  they  did  them  theatrically 
(Morison).  Phylacteries. — Passages  of  the  law  upon  leaves  of  parchment  which  the  Jews  at 
the  time  of  prayer  bound,  one  on  the  left  arm,  one  on  the  forehead,  to  show  that  the  law 
should  be  in  the  heart  and  in  the  head.  At  first,  they  were  simply  remembrancers  of  the 
law  ;  the  heathen  notion,  that  they  were  personal  means  of  defence  against  evil  spirits,  did 
not  arise  till  afterward.  It  is  probable  that  the  perversion  was  not  perfect  at  the  time  of  our 
Lord  ;  otherwise  He  would  have  done  more  than  condemn  their  enlargement  of  these 
phylacteries,  i.e.  hypocrisy  and  boastfulness  in  matters  of  religion  {Lange).  The  borders  of 
their  garments. — The  wearing  of  memorial  fringes  on  the  borders  of  the  garments  rested  on 
a  Divine  ordinance  (Numb.  xv.  37-40 ;  Deut.  xxii.  12).  In  Scripture  these  fringes  are  pre- 
scribed to  be  of  blue,  the  symbolical  colour  of  the  covenant ;  but  the  Mishnah  allows  them 
also  to  be  white  {Ederslieim). 

Ver.  6.  Uppermost  rooms. —  Chief  place  (R.V.).  The  Jews,  like  the  Romans,  reclined  at  meals 
on  couches,  called  triclinia — each  seat  containing  three  seats;  and  each  seat  having  its 
special  dignity  {Carr).  Chief  seats  in  the  synagogues. — These  were  at  the  upper  or  Jerusa- 
lem end  of  the  synagogue,  where  was  the  ark,  or  chest  that  contained  the  law.  These  were 
given,  either  by  common  consent,  or  by  the  elders  of  the  synagogue,  to  those  who  were  most 
conspicuous  for  their  devotion  to  the  law,  and,  as  such,  were  coveted  as  a  mark  of  religious 
reputation  {Plumptre). 

Ver,  7.  Rabbi. — The  word  Rabbi  was  just  budding  into  common  use  about  our  Saviour's 
time.  It  is  a  Hebrew  word,  properly  meaning  "  my  Master,"  and  was  originally  used  not  in 
speaking  of  a  master,  but,  vocatively,  in  speaking  to  a  master  {Morison).  The  true  teaching 
on  this  point  is  found  in  the  Talmud,  "  Love  the  work,  but  hate  the  title  "  {Carr). 

Ver,  8,  Master. — Teacher  (R,V.).  Even  Christ. — Wanting  in  best  MSS,  and  omitted  in  R.V. 
Probably  crept  into  the  text  from  a  marginal  explanatory  note,  completing  the  sense  as  in 
ver,  10, 

Ver.  9,  Father. — Abba  (father)  is  a  name  of  honour  corresponding  to  Rabbi  {Juchasin, 
fol.  31,  2),  To  understand  and  follow  such  commands  in  the  slavery  of  the  letter,  is  to  fall 
into  the  Pharisaism  against  which  our  Lord  is  uttering  the  caution  {Alford). 

Ver,  10.  Masters. — The  word  is  not  the  same  as  in  verse  8,  and  signifies  "guide"  or 
*'  leader " ;  the  "  director "  of  conscience  rather  than  the  teacher.  Cf,  Rom,  ii.  19 
{Plumptre). 

Ver.  11.  Shall  be  your  servant. — This  plainly  means,  "  shall  show  that  he  is  so  (greatest) 
by  becoming  your  servant "  ;  as  in  xx.  27,  compared  with  Mark  x.  44  {Brown). 

Ver,  13.  Woe  I — There  is  indignation  in  the  word,  and  just  denunciation  ;  but,  as  Vatable 
long  ago  remarked,  there  is  "  deploration  "  too.  There  is  wailing  in  it.  It  is  rendered 
'•alas  I  "in  Rev.  xviii.  10,  \Q,  I'd  {Morison).  Hypocrites. — See  note  on  vi,  2,  Shut  up  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. — "  Up  "  omitted  in  R.V.  In  allusion  to  the  symbolic  "  key  of  knowledge  " 
given  to  the  scribe  on  admission  to  the  order.  They  use  their  keys  to  shut  rather  than  to 
open  the  doors  of  the  kingdom  (  Carr). 

Ver.  14.  Wanting  in  many  MSS.,  including  the  Vatican  and  Sinaitic.  Omitted  in  R.V. 
Seems  to  have  been  transferred  from  Mark  xii.  40  and  Luke  xx.  47,  in  both  of  which  places 
it  is  genuine. 

Ver.   15.  Twofold  more   the  child  of   hell,— Lit.    '•  a   son   of  Gehenna,"  or,  as  Sir  John 

531 


CHAP.  XXIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Cheke  has  it,  in  most  expressive  slang,  "  a  hell-imp,"  i.e.  one  who  derives  his  peculiarity  of 
character  from  beneath  {Morison).  Out  of  bad  heathens  they  were  made  worse  Jews 
{Erasmus). 

Ver.  16.  Gold  of  the  temple. — The  exact  meaning  of  this  expression  is  uncertain ;  but  the 
probability  is  that  it  refers  to  money  ofEered  as  a  gift  to  God,  to  which  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  ascribed  peculiar  sanctity  {Mansel).     See  R.V.,  margin. 

Ver.  18.  Guilty.— J  debtor  (R.V.)  as  in  ver.  16. 

Ver.  23.  Ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and  cummin. — The  language  of  Deut.  xii.  17  seems 
to  recognise  only  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  among  the  produce  of  the  earth,  as  subject  to  the  law 
of  tithes.     The  Pharisee,  in  his  minute  scrupulosity  (based,  it  may  be,  on  the  more  general 
language  of  Lev.  xxvii.  30),  made  a  point  of  gathering  the  tenth  sprig  of  every  garden  herb, 
and  presenting  it  to  the  priest.     So  far  as  this  was  done  at  the  bidding  of  an  imperfectly 
illumined  conscience  our  Lord  does  not  blame  it.     It  was  not,  like  the  teaching  as  to  oaths 
and  the  Corban,  a  direct  perversion  of  the  law.     What  He  did  censure  was  the  substitution 
of  the  lower  for  the  higher  (Plumptre).     Mint  was  grown  for  its  pleasant  odour ;  anise,  or/ 
dill,  and  cummin  for  their  aromatic  flavour.     These  were  cultivated,  not  for  food,  but  fors 
scents  and  relishes  ;  and  only  a  small  quantity  of  each  would  be  grown  in  a  private  garden  ) 
for  the  use  of  a  household  {Fraser). 

Ver.  25.  Full  of  extortion  and  excess. — From  (R.  V.).  The  two  words  point  (1)  to  the  source 
from  which  the  viands  and  the  wine  came — the  cup  and  the  platter  were  filled  with,  or  out 
of.  the  proceeds  of,  extortion  ;  (2)  that  to  which  they  tended — they  overflowed  with  unre- 
strained self-indulgence  {Plumjjtre). 

Ver.  29.  Build  the  tombs,  etc.  — See  R.V.  A  portion  of  the  temple  offerings  were  devoted 
to  this  purpose. 

Ver.  31.  The  children. — You  inherit  their  wickedness  in  compassing  the  death  of  the  prophet 
of  the  Lord  (  Carr). 

Ver.  32.  Fill  ye  up,  etc. — Or,  more  literally,  "  And  ye !  fill  ye  up  the  measure  of  your 
fathers ! "  The  Saviour's  heart  was  heaving,  and  He  felt  the  inadequacy  of  all  common 
modes  of  expression  to  convey  the  commotion  of  His  emotions.  Hence  the  brokenness, 
abruptness,  and  boldness  of  His  phraseology  {Morison). 

Ver.  33.  Generation. —  Off  spring  (^.N  .y  Damnation  of  hell,  or,  judgment  of  Gehenna.  This 
expression,  the  "  judgment  of  hell"  was  not  invented  by  our  Saviour.  It  was  current  among 
the  Rabbis.     See  Wttstein  in  loc. 

Ver.  34.  Wherefore. — Therefore  (R,V.).  That  solemn  "therefore"  looks  back  to  the  whole 
preceding  context,  and  forward  to  the  whole  subsequent.  Because  the  rulers  professed 
abhorrence  of  their  father's  deeds,  and  yet  inherited  their  spirit,  they,  too,  would  have  their 
prophets,  and  would  slay  them.  Christ's  desire  is  that  all  should  find  in  His  gospel  the 
savour  of  life;  but  His  purpose  is  that,  if  it  be  not  that  to  any,  it  shall  be  to  them  the 
savour  of  death  {Maclaren).  Prophets. — Under  direct  inspiration,  like  those  of  old,  which 
may  especially  refer  to  the  Apostles. — Wise  men. — Like  a  Stephen  or  an  ApoUos.  Scribes. — 
Such  as  Mark  and  Luke,  and  many  a  faithful  man  since,  whose  pen  has  loved  to  write  the 
Name  above  every  name  {ibid?). 

Ver.  35.  Zacharias.— If  the  reading  "  son  of  Barachias  "  be  retained  (it  is  omitted  in  the 
Sinai  tic  MS.)  a  difficulty  arises;  for  the  Zacharias,  whose  death  "in  the  court  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord  "  is  recorded  2  Chron.  xxiv.  20-22,  was  the  son  of  Jehoiada.  The  words,  how- 
ever, do  not  occur  in  Luke  xi.  51,  and  are  possibly  interpolated.  Zechariah  the  prophet  was 
a  son  of  Barachias :  but  of  his  death  no  record  is  preserved.  Another  explanation  has  been 
offered.  At  the  commencement  of  the  Jewish  war  with  Vespasian  a  Zacharias,  son  of 
Baruch,  was  slain  in  the  temple  by  two  zealots  (Jos.,  B.  «/.,  IV.  v.  4).  Accordingly,  many 
commentators  have  thought  that  Jesns  spoke  prophetically  of  that  event.  The  coincidence 
is  remarkable,  but  the  explanation  is  hardly  probable  {Carr).  We  need  not  wriggle  and 
twist  to  try  to  avoid  admitting  that  the  calling  of  the  martyred  Zacharias,  "  the  son  of 
Barachias,"  is  an  error  of  some  one's,  who  confused  the  author  of  the  prophetic  book  with  the 
person  whose  murder  is  narrated  in  2  Chron.  xxiv.  We  do  not  know  who  made  the  mistake, 
or  how  it  appears  in  our  text,  but  it  is  not  honest  to  try  to  slur  it  over  {Maclare7i).  Dr. 
Plumptre  says  that  the  omission  of  the  words  "  son  of  Barachiah  "  in  the  Sinaitic  MS.  betrays 
the  hand  of  a  corrector  cutting  the  knot  of  the  difficulty.  Altar. —  Viz.,  of  burnt-offering 
before  the  temple. 

Ver.  36.  All  these  things  shall  come. —  Viz.,  in  their  penalty. 

Ver.  37.  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  ! — See  R.V.  In  the  original  Jerusalem  is  not  spoken  to,  but 
spoken  of ;  and  therefore  if  any  interjection  should  be  desired,  ah  !  would  be  better  than  0  ! 
{Morison').  I. — He  is  a  young  man  of  little  more  than  thirty  ;  but  His  personal  conscious- 
ness runs  back  through  all  the  ages  of  the  past,  through  all  the  times  of  the  killing  of  the 
prophets  and  stoning  of  the  messengers  of  God,  from  Abel  on  to  Zechariah  :  and  not  only  so, 
but  this  Son  of  Israel  speaks  in  the  most  natural  way  as  the  brooding  mother  of  them  all 
through  all  their  generations  ( Gibson). 

532 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiil. 


Ver.  38.  Your  house. — The  temple,  whicli  Jesus  was  leaving  (xxiv.  1).  It  was  no  longer 
"  My  Father's  house." 

Ver.  39.  Till  ye  shall  say. — In  the  future  general  conversion  of  Israel  (Rom.  xi. ;  Zech.  xii.  10  ; 
Isa.  ixvi.  20)  (Lange).  Blessed,  etc. — Ps.  cxviii.  26.  They  would  say  so  when  reciting  the 
Hallel  at  the  Passover,  but  without  applying  the  words  to  Jesus  {BengeV). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

The  rights  of  enemies. — In  the  temporary  confusion  which  follows  that  over- 
throw of  His  enemies  which  we  described  in  our  last,  how  does  Jesus  behave 
Himself  towards  them  ?  In  what  language  does  He  speak  concerning  them  to 
those  that  stand  by  ?  This  we  are  told  in  the  verses  before  us.  He  speaks,  on 
the  one  hand,  in  the  language  of  testimony.  He  speaks,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the 
language  of  caution. 

I.  In  the  way  of  testimony. — Testimony  which  is  not  a  little  striking  regarded 
in  itself.  "  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat "  (ver.  2).  Their  duty 
is  to  explain  and  enforce  that  which  Moses  has  taught.  To  obey  them,  therefore, 
when  they  do  this  faithfully,  is  to  obey  Moses  himself.  It  is  also,  He  implies, 
and  that  with  much  emphasis,  to  do  what  is  pleasing  to  Him.  "  Whatsoever  they 
bid  you"  in  this  manner,  that  "  do  and  observe  "  (ver.  3,  K.V.).  Testimony  which 
is  still  more  striking  when  taken  in  connection  with  certain  previous  words  and 
actions  of  His  own.  Long  before  He  had  made  the  announcement,  "  I  am  not 
come  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil  it"  (v.  17).  Here  He  upholds  the  authority 
of  those  undertaking  to  explain  it.  Some  time  before  He  Himself  had  shown 
respect  to  this  kind  of  authority  by  directing  Peter  to  pay  for  both  of  them  the 
temple- tribute  at  Capernaum  (xvii.  24-27).  Now  He  goes  farthest  of  all  and 
openly  enjoins  on  all  who  listen  to  Him  to  pay  similar  deference  too.  Most 
striking  of  all  is  this  testimony  when  considered  in  connection  with  what  has  just 
been  spoken  to  Him.  What  a  juncture  is  that  chosen  by  Him  for  this  declara- 
tion of  His  will !  Just  after  these  scribes  and  Pharisees  have  been  most 
unscrupulously  plotting  against  His  authority,  He  is  thus  scrupulous  about 
theirs  !  Just  when  they  have  most  disgraced  their  office,  He  honours  it  most !  In 
the  time  of  their  confidence  He  had  withstood  them.  In  this  time  of  their  dis- 
comfiture He  upholds  them.  What  forbearance — what  mercy — what  meekness, 
are  here  ! 

II.  In  the  way  of  caution. — While  it  is  thus  important  to  both  the  ''  multi- 
tude" and  the  "disciples"  alike  (ver.  1)  that  they  should  honour  every  one  to 
whom  honour  is  due,  it  is  equally  important  that  they  should  not  be  seduced 
thereby  into  the  commission  of  sin.  Hence  the  counsels  which  follow.  Counsels 
to  all  (apparently)  about  these  teachers.  Distinguish  carefully  between  their 
teaching  and  their  example.  Their  practice  is  faulty,  even  when  their  precepts 
are  right.  On  the  one  hand,  they  "  say  and  do  not "  (ver.  3).  The  more  onerous 
and  irksome  the  precepts  of  Moses,  the  greater  their  eagerness  in  laying  these 
requirements,  not  on  themselves,  but  on  others.  On  the  other  hand,  in  all  such 
outward  obedience  as  they  themselves  render  to  Moses  there  is  an  evil  motive  at 
work.  To  appear  pious  before  men  in  their  dress  and  demeanour,  and  to  receive 
honour  from  men  when  appearing  before  them,  are  the  real  aims  they  pursue. 
Hence,  even  when  they  attain  to  success,  their  success  is  a  loss.  Special  counsels 
next,  on  account  of  these  things,  to  the  disciples  themselves.  Do  you  who  wish  to 
be  My  disciples  indeed,  look  to  yourselves  on  these  points.  Look  on  one  another 
only  as  brethren  in  Me  (ver.  8).  Call  no  man  your  father  (except  in  a  subor- 
dinate sense)  upon  earth  (ver.  9).  To  you  there  must  be  but  one  ultimate  Object 
of  trust  and  source  of  command  (vers.  8-10).  Amongst  yourselves  let  your 
great  object  be  not  to  be  great.  Pride,  in  short,  is  the  object  of  those  teachers. 
Humihty  must  be  yours.     Wisely  so,  too  (ver.  12). 

633 


CHAP.  XXIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


How  insidious  a  thing  is  the  love  of  human  applause  !  This  seems  the  great 
lesson  to  be  learned  here  by  ourselves.  Our  Saviour  had  dwelt  on  this  much,  at 
the  beginning  of  His  ministry,  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (vi.  1-18).  And 
here  again,  towards  its  close,  when  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  and  not  far  from  the 
cross,  He  does  the  same  thing.  This  love  of  men's  praise — this  desire  to  be 
"  seen  "  (ver.  5)  —this  anxiety  to  be  "  chief  "  (ver.  6) — was  the  thing  which  lay 
at  the  root  of  all  the  evil  traceable  in  those  teachers  who  were  now  seeking  His 
death.  It  was  to  be  specially  avoided,  therefore,  by  those  other  teachers  who 
were  about  to  go  forth  in  His  ISTame.  What  had  ruined  those  who  sat  in  Moses' 
seat  would  be  equally  ruinous,  if  not  avoided,  to  those  who  should  stand  in  His 
place.  It  would  be  so  because  of  the  insidious  and  subtle  manner  in  which  it 
wrought  on  men's  minds.  One  principal  peril  of  physical  stimulants  is  to  be 
found  in  the  fact  that  they  create  a  thirst  for  themselves.  The  more  a  man 
takes,  the  more  he  desires.  The  more,  also,  he  thinks  he  requires.  The  like  is 
true  of  that  spiritual  intoxicant — the  love  of  distinction  and  praise.  Therefore 
it  is  that  the  wise  man  has  said,  as  in  Prov.  xxvii.  21.  Equally  mischievous 
is  it  also  in  shutting  out  the  love  of  that  which  is  better  (John  v.  44).  There 
are  few  things,  therefore,  which  the  true  follower  of  Jesus  must  be  more  careful 
to  avoid. 

HOMILIES   ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  1-3.     The  attitude  to  he  taken  do  not."     5.    Whatsoever  commanded 

towards    the     Pharisees. — Our     Lord,  works  a  man  doth,  and  not   for   the 

having  put  His  adversaries  to  silence,  commanded  ends  before  God,  it  is  as 

endeavours   to  save  His  people   from  good  as  no  doing  ;  therefore,  albeit  the 

their  ways.      1.    The  people  must  be  Pharisees  did  many  works  commanded 

warned  to  beware  of  the  contagion  of  in  the  law,  yet  because  they  did  them 

corrupt  teachers,  when  they  will  not  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  as  works  meri- 

amend  their  doings ;    for  this   is   the  torious  to  oblige  God,  and  were  more 

course  which  Christ  taketh  about  the  careful   of  the  outward  ceremonies  of 

Pharisees  and  scribes.      2.  Albeit  the  the   law   than   to   observe   the   moral 

faults  of  teachers  must  not  be  spared,  duties  of  justice  and  mercy ;  therefore 

yet  their  authority  and  office  must  be  what  they  did  was  counted  as  if  they  did 

guarded,  lest  the  message  of  God  by  their  it  not.   "  They  say  and  do  not." — David 

mouth  be  marred  ;  their  office  must  be  Dickson. 

defended,  albeit  their  persons  be  corrupt.  m      i      i    -            i     ?          t    t*  • 

Therefore  saith  He,  They  sit  in  Moses'  Q^f  «^  relation  to  the  law.— I.  It  IS 

seat,  i.e.  they  succeed  to  Moses  in  the  Possible  to   know   the   law,   and   not 

ordinary  office  of  teaching  the  Word  of  0"6y  it. 

God.       3.     What    Moses'     successors  ^I-  ^^  ^^  possible  to  teach,  and  not 

teach,    as  Moses'  successors,   must  be  ODey;  hence:         ^          •.      j     .j    i  -. 

obeyed ;  that  is,  the  truth  which  from  J^}'  ^ur  duty  is  to  be  decided  by 

the  warrant  of  God's  word  is  recom-  ^^^  law,  and  not  by  the  example  of 

mended  unto  us  from  corrupt  teachers,  "^  teacners.                                 n    j_  , 

clad  with  lawful  authority  to  teach,  I^-  J^  ^^sus  alone  is  perfect  har- 

we  ought  to  obey,  because  the  message  ^ony  between  the  teacher  and  the 

is     the    doctrine   of   God,   albeit   the  teaching.— J^.  0.  Gray. 

messenger  be  corrupt.     4.  People  are  Yej.g^    4.7      ^^^^    traditionalism.— 

in  danger  of  following  the  example  of  j    j^g  hardness, 

the  evil  life  of  corrupt  teachers  rather  jj    j^g  falsehood 

than  the  command  of  God  dehvered  in  jjj'  j^g  selfishness.— J".  P.  Lange,  D,D. 
their  doctrine,  and  therefore  have  need 

to  be  warned.      "  After   their   works  Yer.  5.  Phylacteries. — If  the  practice 

534 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiii. 


of  wearing  borders  with  fringes  had 
Scriptural  authority,  we  are  well  con- 
vinced that  no  such  plea  could  be 
urged  for  the  so-called  "  phylacteries." 
The  observance  arose  from  a  literal 
interpretation  of  Exod.  xiii.  9,  to  which 
even  the  later  injunction  in  Deut.  vi.  8 
gives  no  countenance.  This  appears 
even  from  its  repetition  in  Deut.  xi.  18, 
where  the  spiritual  meaning  and  pur- 
port of  the  direction  is  immediately 
indicated,  and  from  a  comparison  with 
kindred  expressions,  which  evidently 
could  not  be  taken  literally — such  as 
Prov.  iii.  3,  vi.  21,  vii.  3 ;  Cant, 
viii.  6  ;  Isa.  xlix.  16.  The  very  term 
used  by  the  Rabbis  for  phylacteries — 
"  tephillin,"  prayer-fillets — is  of  com- 
paratively modern  origin,  in  so  far  as 
it  does  not  occur  in  the  Hebrew  Old 
Testament.  The  Samaritans  did  not 
acknowledge  them  as  of  Mosaic  obliga- 
tion, any  more  than  do  the  Karaite 
Jews,  and  there  is,  what  seems  to  us, 
sufiicient  evidence,  even  from  Kab- 
binical  writings,  that  in  the  time  of 
Christ  phylacteries  were  not  universally 
worn,  nor  yet  by  the  priests  while 
officiating  in  the  temple.  Although 
the  words  of  our  Lord  seem  only  ex- 
pressly to  condemn  the  making  broad 
of  the  phylacteries  for  purposes  of 
religious  ostentation,  it  is  difficult  to 
believe  that  He  Himself  had  worn 
them.  At  any  rate,  while  any  ordinary 
Israelite  would  only  put  them  on  at 
prayer  or  on  solemn  occasions,  the 
members  of  the  Pharisaic  confraternity 
wore  them  all  day  long.  The  "  tephil- 
lin" were  worn  on  the  left  arm,  to- 
wards the  heart,  and  on  the  forehead. 
They  consisted — to  describe  them 
roughly — of  capsules,  containing,  on 
parchment  (that  for  the  forehead  on 
four  distinct  parchments),  these  four 
passages  of  Scripture:  Exod.  xiii.  1-10, 
xiii.  11-16 ;  Deut.  vi.  4-9  and  xi.  13-21. 
The  capsules  were  fastened  on  by 
black  leather  straps,  which  were 
wound  round  the  arm  and  hand 
(seven  times  round  the  former,  and 
three  times  round  the  latter),  or  else 
fitted  to  the  forehead  in  a  prescribed 
and    mystically    significant     manner. 


The  wearer  of  them  could  not  be  mis- 
taken. But  as  for  their  value  and 
importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  Rabbis, 
it  were  impossible  to  exaggerate  it. 
They  were  reverenced  as  highly  as  the 
Scriptures,  and,  like  them,  might  be 
rescued  from  the  flames  on  a  Sabbath, 
although  not  worn,  as  constituting  "  a 
burden  !  "  It  was  said  that  Moses 
had  received  the  law  of  their  observance 
from  God  on  Mount  Sinai;  that  the 
"  tephillin  "  were  more  sacred  than  the 
golden  plate  on  the  forehead  of  the 
high-priest,  since  its  inscription  em- 
bodied only  once  the  sacred  name  of 
Jehovah,  while  the  writing  inside  the 
"  tephillin  "  contained  it  not  less  than 
twenty- three  times ;  that  the  command 
of  wearing  them  equalled  all  other 
commands  put  together;  with  many 
other  similar  extravagances.  How  far 
the  profanity  of  the  Rabbis  in  this 
respect  would  go,  appears  from  the 
circumstance,  that  they  supposed  God 
Himself  as  wearing  phylacteries  (Ber.j 
6  a). — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Ver.  8.  Christ  Lord:  Christians 
brethren. — I.  The  Lordship  of  Christ. 
— 1.  Why  is  Christ  our  moral  Master? 
His  is  no  arbitrary  pre-eminence,  but 
in  harmony  with  Reason,  Conscience, 
Fact.     Recall : 

(1)  What  He  is. — His  nature  is 
Divine,  His  character  perfect,  His 
teaching  complete. 

(2)  What  He  has  done. — He  has 
ransomed    us.       He   has   renewed  us. 

2.  How  is  Christ  our  moral  Master  ? 
(1)  He  regulates  our  conduct.  (2)  He 
enlightens  our  intellect.  (3)  He  con- 
trols our  afiections. 

II.  The  brotherhood  of  Christians. 
— 1.  Why  are  Christians  brethren  1 
Not  alone  on  the  ground  of  mere 
humanity.  Nor  merely  through  ac- 
ceptance of  a  comTYion  creed.  Nor 
merely  through  union  with  a  common 
society.  Common  relationship  to  Christ 
creates,  and  constant  communion  with 
Christ  sustains,  the  brotherhood  of 
Christians.  2.  How  do  Christians 
show  that  they  are  brethren  ?  Among 
the  members  of  a  home  there  is :  (1)  A 

535 


CHAP,  xxiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


family  interest.     (2)  A  family  likeness. 
(3)  A  family  life.  — f/".  E.  Thomas,  B.A. 

True  churchmanshi'p. — The  principles 
of  church  organism,  arising  from  the 
two  facts  of  the  Lordship  of  Christ  and 
the  brotherhood  of  Christians  are  : — 

I.  The  church  must  consist  of 
Christian  men. — Membership  cannot 
consist  in: — 

1.  Local  residence. — He  only  is  a 
Christian  man  who  calls  Christ 
"  Master,"  and  who  feels  a  brother 
to  Christ's  disciples. 

2.  Ceremonial  observance.  — The  pass- 
ing through  any  form  of  church 
membership  fails  to  unite  to  the  true 
church. 

3.  Any  money  relationship. 

IT.  The  church  must  promote  the 
brotherhood  of  Christians. — There  are 
three  great  errors  at  whose  root  our 
Saviour's  words  here  lay  an  axe ; 
errors  that  seem  greatly  to  hinder  the 
brotherhood  of  Christians. 

1.  The  social  error  of  caste  and  class 
feeling. 

2.  The  sectarian  error  of  denomi- 
nationalism. 

3.  The  ecclesiastical  error  of  hier- 
archism. 

Here  is  a  protest  on  behalf  of 
Christian  brotherhood.  (1)  To  those 
who  might  be  tempted  to  haughtiness. 
To  all  such  as  claim  infallibility,  or  the 
exclusive  righc  of  teaching,  or  absolute 
power  of  discipline,  Christ  says,  "  Be 
not  called  masters;  all  ye  are  brethren." 
"  None  by  office  or  precedence  is 
nearer  to  God  than  another,  none 
stands  between  his  brother  and  God" 
(Alford).  (2)  To  those  in  danger  of 
servility.  Lest  the  spiritual  Israel 
should  repeat  the  error  of  their  great 
type  and  cry  "  Give  us  a  king,"  Christ 
enjoins  '*  Call  no  man  master."  The 
gospel  promotes  social  freedom,  mental 
independence,  spiritual  liberty. 

III.  The  church  must  testify  to 
the  supremacy  of  the  living,  personal 
Christ.  —  To  the  churches  still,  in 
authority,  oversight,  discipline,  this  one 
Master  remains ;  for  did  He  not  say, 
**  I  am  with  you  alway  "  1  etc. — Ibid. 

536 


Christ  the  Master  of  life.  —  On  the 
walls  of  the  chapel  in  Yale  College, 
America,  there  is  the  following  in- 
scription about  Christ :  "  Dux,  Lux, 
Lex,  Rex  " — Leader,  Light,  Law,  King. 

Jesus  is  absolute  Master  in  the  sphere 
of  religion,  which  is  a  science  dealing, 
not  with  intellectual  conceptions,  but 
with  spiritual  facts.  His  ideas  are 
not  words,  they  are  laws ;  they  are  not 
thoughts,  they  are  forces.  He  did  not 
suggest,  He  asserted  what  He  had 
seen  at  first  sight.  He  did  not  pro- 
pose. He  commanded  as  one  who  knew 
there  was  no  other  way.  One  of  His 
chief  discoveries  was  a  new  type  of 
character,  His  greatest  achievement 
its  creation.  It  is  now  nineteen 
centuries  since  He  lived  on  earth,  but 
to-day  in  every  country  of  the  Western 
world  there  are  men  differing  from' 
their  neighbours  as  Jesus  did  from  His 
contemporaries.  Jesus  was  a  type  by 
Himself,  and  they  are  of  the  same 
type.  He  presented  to  the  world  a 
solitary  ideal,  and  in  innumerable  lives 
has  made  it  real. — John  Watson,  M.A., 
in  "  Expositor." 

Vers.  8-10.  Titles  of  honour. — ^Not 
that   deserved   honour   is   to    be    dis- 
esteemed  and  eschewed.    Far  from  that. 
We    are    expressly    commanded    ''  to 
render  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due  " 
(Rom.  xiii.  7).     We  are  to  honour  the 
king  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).    And  in  whomso- 
ever we  find  any  true  kingliness  of  soul, 
him  assuredly  we  should  honour.     We 
are  to  "  honour  all  men"  (1  Pet.  ii.  17), 
for  when  we  consider  the  Godlike  make 
of  man  (see  Ps.  viii.  5  in  the  Hebrew), 
and  how  God  Himself  has  "  crowned  him 
with  glory  and  honour,"  we  cannot  but 
find,  even  underneath  a  mass  of  most  dis- 
honouring wickedness,  much  to  honour. 
And  in  the  more  honourable  of  men, 
there  will  be  still  more  that  is  worthy 
of  honour.     Nevertheless,  the  mind  is 
bent  in  a  totally  wrong  direction  when 
it    is   preponderatingly    ambitious    of 
honour.     It   should  be  far  more  am- 
bitious of  doing  honour,  than  of  getting 
it.     And,  as  to  honorary  titles — if  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiii. 


man  loves  them  for  their  own  sake,  or 
for  the  sake  of  thereby  strutting  before 
his  fellow-men,  or  of  uplifting  himself 
above  his  peers,  he  is  altogether  un- 
worthy of  them,  and  will  be  injured, 
not  benefited,  by  receiving  them.  In 
so  far  as  they  are  coveted,  or  sought 
for,  and  especially  if  sought  for  as 
means  of  self-glorification,  and  very 
especially  if  sought  for  by  means  that 
are  dishonourable,  they  are  to  be 
utterly  deprecated.  But  if  they  be 
modest  and  truthful  in  their  import, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  meted  out  im- 
partially, on  the  other,  then  they  will 
but  express  facts  of  inward  conviction, 
which  facts  must  have  names  of  one 
kind  or  another.  If  a  man  is  really 
worthy  of  being  honoured,  not  merely 
as  a  man,  but  in  some  particular  out- 
come or  effort  of  his  manhood,  and  if 
he  is  in  fact  honoured  according  to  his 
worthiness,  then  there  can  be  no  harm 
in  giving  expression  to  the  fact  in  a 
name.  The  name,  however,  ought  to 
be  truthful  and  modest.  And  hence 
there  was  reason  to  object  to  Rabbi, 
"  My  great  One,  *'  Your  Highness,"  as 
it  were.  No  wonder  that  our  Saviour, 
at  the  time  of  which  He  spoke — when 
the  title  was  just  pushing  its  way  into 
currency — proscribed  its  use  among 
His  disciples.  It  should  never  have 
been  used.  But  it  has  now  lost,  we 
presume,  its  original  immodesty  of 
import,  and  is  tantamount  to  a  mere 
designation  of  office.  We  must  ever 
bear  in  mind  that  there  are  conven- 
tionalisms in  words,  and  that  these 
conventionalisms  may  change  ;  so  that, 
in  a  living  language,  the  associations 
and  acceptations  of  a  word  may  change. 
Barnes  objects  to  the  title  "  Doctor  of 
Divinity,"  and  thinks  that  '*  the  spirit 
of  our  Saviour's  command  is  violated 
by  the  reception  of  it."  But  he  over- 
looks the  fact  that  the  title  is  modest 
in  its  meaning,  '*  Teacher  of  Theology  " ; 
and  he  also  fails  to  note  that,  if  it  be 
really  deserved,  there  is  no  reason  why 
men  should  not  think  so,  and  say  so. — 
J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Ver.  9.   '*  Pope  "  and  '*  Father."— It 


would  seem  to  be  almost  in  open  de- 
fiance of  His  (the  Saviour's)  injunction, 
that,  within  the  limits  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  this  designation  is 
universally  given  to  their  chief  bishop 
—the  "  Pope."  The  word  "  Pope  "  is 
our  corrupted  way  of  pronouncing  what 
the  French  call  Pape,  and  the  Italians 
Papa,  or  Father.  How  strange  the 
designation,  as  given  to  the  Roman 
bishop  !  Strange,  when  we  look  at 
the  subject  in  the  light  of  our  Saviour's 
injunction  !  It  is  strange,  too,  that 
every  priest,  or  parish  minister,  in  the 
Greek  Church,  is  called  Papa,  or  Pope, 
or  Father  (TraTra?).  There  are,  be- 
sides, in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church, 
many  professed  or  professional  Fathers 
under  the  one  great  Papa.  In  some 
other  churches,  likewise,  there  are  too 
many  of  these  professional  Fathers; 
for,  as  Bishop  Wilkins  observes, 
"  Father "  is  a  title  which  assuming 
priests  of  all  religions  have  greatly 
affected  (see  Doddridge  in  loc).  And 
now,  though  the  designation  has  in 
great  measure  got  rubbed  down  into 
a  mere  discriminative  appellation, 
marking  out  a  definite  ecclesiastical 
position  or  office,  still  its  use  is  un- 
happy, and  has  something  to  do  with 
a  wide -spread  confusion  of  ideas  on 
things  moral  and  spiritual.  Already, 
in  our  Saviour's  time,  an  element  of 
popery  was  stealthily  lurking,  and 
vigorously  germinating,  in  the  use  of 
the  designation  ;  and  it  was,  we  doubt 
not,  because  of  this  element  that  the 
title  was  greedily  courted  on  the  one 
hand,  and  too  readily  accorded  on  the 
other,  while  at  the  same  time,  and  in 
the  third  place,  it  was  earnestly  re- 
pudiated by  our  Saviour.  It  is  our 
Father  in  heaven  who  alone  has  an 
absolute  paternal  authority  in  all 
things  sacred. — Ibid. 

Ver.  10.  Christ  our  Master. — 
1.  There  is  no  need  of  any  other 
dominion  over  conscience  than  Jesus 
Christ  exercise th.  2.  The  exercise  of 
this  Christian  liberty  cannot  possibly 
be  an  injury  to  other  Christians. 
3.  Free  inquiry  in  religion  is  essential 

537 


CHAP.  xxm.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW. 


to    the   virtue  of  a  character.     4.  A  let  these  by  thy  paymaster  !  "     And 

Christian,    who    takes    Christ   for   his  so,  if  our  good  works  are  done  that  we 

only  sufficient    Governor,  in    religion,  ourselves  may  have  praise  of  men,  they 

is  supported  by   the    examples   of  all  will  count  no  more  in  God's  sight  than 

genuine  Christians,  from  the  days  of  utter  barrenness  and  neglect. — J.  JV. 

Christ. — Anon.  Norton. 


Yer.  12.  Self -exaltation. — A  certain 
king  had  a  gifted  minstrel  whom  he 
commanded  to  play  before  him;  and 
while  the  cups  were  flowing  with  merry 
wine,  the  harp  was  tuned  to  its  sweetest 
melodies.  But  the  vain  minstrel  cele- 
brated his  own  exploits ;  and  when,  at 
the  end  of  the  feast,  he  asked  the  king 
for  his  reward,  the  stern  answer  was, 
*'  Thine  own  praises  were  thy  theme  ; 


The  humble  exalted. — "Whosoever 
shall  humble  himself  shall  be  exalted." 
By  Me,  and  by  My  Father,  and,  in  the 
end,  by  the  intelligent  universe  at 
large.  The  lowliest  will  be  the  loftiest. 
But  he  who  seeks  to  be  the  loftiest 
will  be  the  lowest.  The  way  up  leads 
down.  The  way  down  leads  up.  Jesus 
Himself  ascended  by  a  descending  way. 
— J.  Morison,  D.D. 


MAIN    HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  13—15. 

The  results  of  hypocrisy. — After  the  misled,  the  misleaders — after  the  too- 
confiding  followers,  the  faithless  guides — are  admonished.  And  that,  of  course, 
as  with  greater  cause,  so  with  more  manifest  force.  In  the  two  verses  before 
us  now — for  we  follow  the  B.Y.  and  other  leading  authorities  in  regarding 
verse  14  as  not  really  part  of  the  text — this  is  done  in  two  principal  ways. 
These  self -deceivers  are  denounced,  first,  as  being  great  preventers  of  good ; 
secondly,  as  being  great  aggravaters  of  evil. 

I.  Preventers  of  good. — Hypocrisy  prevents  men  of  all  classes  from  learning 
the  truth.  As  it  were,  it  shuts  the  door  of  truth — the  very  way  of  access  thereto 
— the  beginning  of  that  way — in  their  faces  (ver.  13).  This  is  true,  first,  of 
such  self  deceivers  themselves.  How  can  any  one  who  begins  with  deception  finish 
with  truth  ?  He  is  wrong  from  the  first.  This  seems  to  be  why  the  Saviour 
said  before  (v.  20)  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
Such  "  righteousness "  being  really  w?irighteousness,  can  only  effect  what 
wr^righteousness  does.  It  cannot  help  a  man  to  find  the  way  in.  Bather,  it  is 
like  shooting  the  bolt  of  a  door  the  wrong  way ;  a  thing  which  necessarily, 
instead  of  opening,  fastens  it  up.  Hypocrisy  also  prevents  other  men  from 
learning  the  truth.  Even  so  far  as  such  self- deceivers  do  point  to  the  right 
door — and  that  this  is  true  of  them  to  some  extent  seems  implied  in  verse  3 — 
they  do  so  in  such  a  way  as  to  deter  those  who  look  on.  For  what  is  it  that 
such  inquirers  behold  when  they  do  ?  They  see  the  manifest  inconsistencies  of 
these  professed  dealers  in  truth — how  they  "  say  and  do  not "  (vers.  3,  4). 
They  see  also  the  real  motives  by  which  such  men  are  moved  (vers.  5-7).  And 
they  judge  of  truth,  therefore,  by  these  professors  of  it,  and  feel  equal  objection 
to  both.  In  the  case  of  men  not  really  desirous  of  learning  the  truth,  the 
process  is  swift  and  direct.  Even  the  semblance  of  an  obstacle  is  quite  sufficient 
to  keep  such  reluctant  ones  off.  In  other  cases,  if  more  roundabout,  it  is  none 
the  less  sure.  Those  who  desire  the  truth  are  repelled  by  seeing  the  manifest 
untruthfulness  of  such  teachers.  Consequently  they  are  led  to  reject  the  truth, 
even  when  it  does  fall  from  their  lips.  The  other  set  never  see  the  door,  and  so 
never  go  in.  These  men  do  see  it  indeed,  but  do  not  know  what  it  is;  and 
so  are  prevented  just  as  effectually  from  availing  themselves  of  its  good. 

II.  Aggravaters  of  evil. — Hypocrisy  leads  to  this,   first,  by  means  of  the 

538 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiii. 


great  effoi'ts  which  it  induces  men  to  put  forth.  Those  who  follow  such  self- 
deceiving  ways  must  sometimes  surely  have  some  misgivings  about  them.  To 
gain  others  over  to  the  same  ways  is  a  sort  of  testimony  in  their  favour — 
sufficiently  like  it,  in  any  case,  to  pass  muster  with  such,  and  make  them  crave 
it  with  eagerness.  On  the  other  hand,  to  secure  such  gains  is  to  gain  also  what 
such  persons  so  especially  value,  namely,  distinction  and  praise  (vers.  5,  etc.). 
To  such  truly  "  sectarian  "  victors,  at  all  sectarian  "  feasts,"  the  very  *'  upper- 
most rooms  "  (ver.  6)  are  assigned.  Any  one  such  conquest,  therefore,  is  thought 
worthy  of  any  amount  of  exertion,  by  those  whose  innermost  hearts  are  set  on 
such  small  glories  as  these  (ver.  15).  Secondly,  by  means  of  the  especially  evil 
effects  which  result  from  such  effi)rts.  See,  e.g.,  what  such  "  proselytes  "  are 
brought  to  !  To  the  same  level,  of  course,  as  is  occupied  by  those  by  whom  they 
are  brought.  To  the  same  hypocrisy,  therefore,  and  self-deception ;  the  same 
grievous  errors  both  in  doctrine  and  life ;  the  same  wilful  darkness  and  guilt. 
See,  on  the  other  hand,  from  what  they  are  brought.  From  a  condition,  at 
any  rate,  in  which  they  were  not  committed  to  wrong;  where  they  were  at 
least  open  to  influences  for  good  ;  where  the  sunshine  could  reach  them,  if  it 
happened  to  shine ;  where  their  moral  constitution  had  not  been  damaged  by 
the  experience  of  a  "  fall."  These  were  the  things  which  gave  "  twofold " 
(ver.  15)  seriousness  to  their  condition  and  case ;  and  which  caused  such  perverts 
to  go  even  beyond  those  who  perverted  them  in  wrong-doing.  Thus  using  one's 
liberty  to  turn  it  into  bondage  is.  bondage  indeed  !  What  abuse  of  it  can  be 
worse  ? 

These  considerations  help  to  account  for  the  peculiar  severity  of  the  language 
before  us.  Nothing  was  nearer  the  Saviour's  heart  than  the  salvation  of  sinners. 
He  came  into  the  world — He  gave  His  whole  life — He  submitted  to  death — He 
endured  the  cross — for  this  end.  How  grievous  to  Him,  therefore,  to  see  this 
work  of  His  heart  thus  doubly  opposed  !  To  see  those  inquiring  for  saving 
truth  either  denied  it  entirely,  or  else  taught  deadly  error  instead  !  And  to  see 
this  done,  also,  by  the  very  hands  which  were  commissioned,  in  their  way,  to  do 
the  very  reverse  !  Can  we  wonder  at  His  denouncing  such  conduct  when  He 
thought  of  those  whom  it  ruined  ?  Can  we  be  surprised  at  the  very  depth  of 
His  mercy  making  Him  severe  on  such  hands  ?  "  Woe  is  me,"  said  the  Apostle, 
*' if  I  preach  not  the  gospel."  Why  so?  Partly  because  of  the  disobedience 
involved  in  such  a  refusal.  Partly,  also,  because  of  the  exceeding  cruelty 
involved  in  such  silence.  Something  the  same  as  would  have  been  true  of  him 
in  that  case  was  true  of  the  men  described  here.  In  their  way,  they  were  the 
pests  of  their  day.  Had  He  spoken  of  them  otherwise.  He  would  have  been 
as  cruel  and  as  false  as  themselves. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  13.  Our  power  to  help  or  harm  it.     They  were  shutting  Him  out,  not 

religion. — We  cannot  get  the  full  force  merely  as  any  part  of  the  wall  might 

of  these  words  of  Jesus  unless  we  remem-  shut    a    man   out,    by    mere    passive 

ber  that  they  were  spoken  to  those  who  obstinacy  and  hardness,  but  as  only  a 

called   themselves,   and   who,   in   some  door  can   shut  a   man  out  by  a  bolt, 

true  sense  were,  religious  men.     They  deliberately  drawn   across  the  leaves, 

were  hindering  His  work,  not  merely  The  words  of  Christ  suggest  one  truth 

as  any  man  might  have  hindered  it,  which  evidently  lies  at  the  root  of  the 

but  also  in  a  special  way  in  which  none  whole   subject,    which    is    that    every 

but  religious  men,  none  but  recognised  hindrance  which   any   Christian    puts 

religious  teachers,  could  have  hindered  in  the  way  of  other  men's  becoming 

539 


CHAP.  XXIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


Christians  is  associated  witli  an  imper- 
fection in  his  own  Christian  life.  "  Ye 
neither  go  in  yourselves,"  etc. 

I.  I  mention  the  look  of  unreason- 
ableness which  much  of  the  way  in 
which  Christians  deal  with  Christianity 
gives  to  their  faith  in  the  eyes  of  their 
fellow-men.  Christian  faith  is  made 
by  many  Christians  to  seem  fantastic 
and  unreasonable,  something  wholly 
distinct  and  apart  from,  and  even 
contradictory  to,  the  ordinary  laws  of 
thought  and  life,  something  that  cannot 
be  understood  except  by  a  special 
initiation  and  the  use  of  wholly  different 
faculties  besides  those  which  men  use 
on  other  things. 

II.  The  lack  of  connection  that  there 
often  is  between  our  faith  and  the  facts 
and  duties  of  our  daily  life.  The  facts 
and  duties  of  life  are  hard  but  precious 
tests  of  the  unseen  life  of  character 
which  lies  behind  them. 

III.  The  lack  of  sympathy  with  the 
life  and  activity  of  men  into  which 
some  Christians  seem  to  be  thrown  by 
their  Christian  faith.  If  that  new  life 
of  yours  is  really  life,  it  ought  to  quicken 
a  hundredfold  your  interest  in  all  the 
forms  of  life  which  are  to  be  found  in  all 
the  struggling  degrees  of  living  men. 

IV.  Another  of  the  dangers  of 
Christians  is  lest  they  lose  the  essential 
loftiness  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
make  it  seem  to  other  men  a  sordid 
and  unworthy  thing.  Have  you  never 
been  tempted  to  value  the  service  of 
Christ  for  the  merely  temporal  ad- 
vantages which  it  might  bring  you  ? 
Have  you  never  made  your  religion  a 
mere  insurance  against  future  punish- 
ment 1  etc. 

V.  I  hesitate  to  speak  of  the  doctrinal 


obstacle  which  many  Chiistian  people 
put  in  the  way  of  other  men  becoming 
Christians,  lest  I  may  seem  to  fall  in 
with  the  vulgar  and  thoughtless  denial 
of  the  importance  of  religious  dogma 
which  we  hear  on  every  side.  But  one 
may  value  doctrine  very  highly  indeed, 
and  yet  insist  that  the  making  of 
Christianity  to  be  a  system  of  doctrine  is 
very  false  to  the  first  intention  of  Jesus, 
and  very  harmful  to  men's  souls. 

VI.  The  effort  to  be  Christians  in 
silence,  without  making  any  profession 
of  faith. — Phillips  Brooks,  D.D. 

Ver.  15.  Thehlind  zealof  the  Pharisees. 
— 1.    Seducers  will    be  more   busy  to 
draw  others  to  their  err  or  than  teachers 
of  the  truth  are  for    drawing  others 
to  the  truth.      2.  The   more  pains  in 
false  zeal,  and  the  more   speed  a  man 
cometh  in  perverting  others,  the  more 
measure  of  vengeance  abideth  on  him. 
3.    The  more  a  man    do  profit  in  the 
school  of   error  and    superstition,   the 
more  he  is  the  child  of    hell  and  Satan, 
for  the  original  of  errors  is  from  hell,  and 
Satan  is  the  father  of  error,  .superstition, 
and    heresy.       4.    Young     proselytes, 
who  drink  in  superstition  at   the  per- 
suasion  of   learned   seducers,    are   far 
more  taken    with   the  false    opinions, 
and  more  addicted  to  these  false  super- 
stitions, than  their  teachers  are,  con- 
ceiving them  to  be  truth,  when  these 
old  deceivers  do  but  laugh  to  see  the 
credulity  of  the  deluded.     *'  You  make 
them  twofold  more  the  children  of  hell 
than  yourselves,"  to  wit,  in  respect  of 
believing  these  errors  which  you  teach 
them,  for  in  other  respects  the  deceivers 
were  the  elder  sons  of  Satan. — David 
Dickson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—28. 

The  blindness  of  error. — Five  times  in  succession  in  these  verses  we  find  the 
epithet  "  blind "  ;  and  every  time  as  a  description  of  those  professed  "  guides  " 
whom  the  Saviour  is  addressing.  In  justifying  this  application  of  the  term,  the 
Saviour  confines  Himself  to  one  general  line.  These  men  are  thus  "  blind,'' 
according  to  Him,  because  they  begin  in  their  teaching  where  they  ought  to 
conclude ;  and  treat  the  important,  for  the  sake  of  the  unimportant,  as  though 
it  did  not  exist.  In  three  directions  especially.  He  goes  on  to  show  that  this 
description  holds  good.     It  does  so,  first,  in  the  way  of  reverence  and  worship ; 

540 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiii. 


secondly,  in  the  way  of   duty  and   observance ;   and,   thirdly,   in  the   way  of 
holiness  and  sanctijication. 

I.  In  the  way  of  reverence  and  worship. — The  true  state  of  things  in  regard 
to  this  part  of  the  question  is  manifestly  as  follows.  God  Himself  is  to  be 
reverenced  first  and  most;  then  that,  of  course — according  to  its  nearness — 
which  is  nearer  to  Him.  Amongst  such  "  nearer  "  things,  up  above,  is  heaven 
itself  as  His  throne  (ver.  22).  Amongst  such  "  nearer  "  things,  here  below,  are 
His  temple  and  altar.  The  one  of  these  last  having  been  appointed  by  Himself  as 
His  special  "  dwelling  "  on  earth,  and  the  other  as  a  means  of  enabling  men  to 
approach  Him  in  worship,  they  both,  in  consequence,  had  about  them  a  certain 
derivative  glory  and  awe.  Full  of  the  thoughts  of  God,  they  were,  in  their  way, 
full  of  His  majesty  also.  Even  that,  also,  which  appertained  to  them — such  as 
the  "gold,"  for  example,  which  adorned  the  one,  and  the  "gifts"  which  were 
placed  on  the  other — had  a  certain  sacredness  in  their  turn.  They  also  were  to 
be  treated  with  reverence  because  of  the  reverence  due  to  that  which  they 
touched.  First,  the  Source,  in  fact ;  then  that  which  grew  out  of  it ;  then  what 
grew  out  of  that.  This  was  the  reasonable — this,  apparently,  the  only — way  to 
compute.  Yet  this,  at  the  same  time,  was  the  exact  opposite  of  that  adopted  by 
these  guides  (ver.  16).  Anything  bound  by  the  stronger,  according  to  them, 
need  not  be  kept.  Anything  bound  by  the  weaker  must  not  be  loosed.  So  they 
said  in  effect  (vers.  16,  18). 

II.  In  the  way  of  observance  and  duty. — Here  again  the  true  order  of  value 
is  not  difficult  to  perceive.  The  moral,  e.g.,  was  before  the  ceremonial ;  matters 
of  conscience  before  those  of  ritual ;  and  that  by  a  very  long  way.  Also,  amongst 
questions  of  conscience,  some  are  of  greater  importance  than  others.  What  will 
make  a  difference  is  of  more  consequence  than  what  will  make  none.  What 
God  expressly  requires  of  us  (ver.  23,  Micah  vi.  8 ;  Ps.  xv.)  than  what  we  devise 
for  ourselves.  Discrimination  of  His  will,  imitation  of  His  love,  belief  in  His 
existence — in  other  words,  "  judgment,  mercy,  and  faith  " — cannot  be  made  up 
for  by  any  amount  of  scrupulosity  as  to  "  the  dust  of  the  balance."  So  it  is 
that  both  wisdom  and  sincerity  teach — both  truth  of  discernment  and  truth  of 
aim.  But  so  it  was,  exactly,  that  these  teachers  not  only  did  not  teach,  but 
denied.  As  one  has  quaintly  said,  they  thought  more  of  the  "condiment than  of 
the  dish  " ;  they  "  magnified  the  little  and  belittled  the  great "  ;  they  treated  the 
non-essential  as  though  it  were  all ;  they  "  strained  out  "  the  "  gnat  "  and  left  the 
"  camel "  behind  (ver.  24).  What  could  be  worse  than  such  double  blindness 
as  this  ?     Only  to  see  what  was  insignificant ;  not  to  see  what  was  huge  1 

III.  In  the  way  of  sanctification  and  holiness. — Who  cannot  see  here,  as  in 
the  other  verses,  where  this  process  begins  ?  It  begins,  of  course,  where  the 
thoughts  begin,  and  whence  they  come  out.  Be  clean  there  ;  and  it  will  be 
hardljT'necessary  to  clean  the  outside.  Be  foul  there  ;  and  it  will  not  be  possible 
to  clean  the  outside.  On  the  contrary,  to  pretend  to  it  while  leaving  the  inside 
impure,  will  be  to  be  foul  throughout,  as  it  were ;  and  to  the  original  foulness  of 
guilt  to  add  that  of  hypocrisy,  which  is  very  much  worse.  All  this  is  so  plain 
that  one  wonders  that  any  one  should  have  ever  thought  the  reverse.  Yet  that 
these  Pharisees  did  so,  is  only  too  plain  from  what  the  Saviour  says  of  them 
here.  He  describes  them  here  (ver.  25,  R.V.)  as  being  ''  full  from  extortion  and 
excess  "  ;  that  is  (apparently),  "  from  "  the  results  of  injury  to  others,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  of  indulgence  to  themselves,  on  the  other.  He  describes  them,  again 
(vers.  27,  28),  as  being  like  "  whited  sepulchres  " — outwardly  righteous,  but 
inwardly  guilty — outwardly  "  beautiful,"  but  inwardly  vile — and  as  being  so 
"  blind,"  therefore,  as  to  make  this  lowest  depth  of  iniquity  the  highest  peak  of 
their  aim.  To  look  upon  evil  as  good,  in  any  case,  is  not  to  see  very  well.  To 
regard  the  worst  as  being  the  best  is  to  see  nothing  at  all  as  it  is. 

541 


CHAP.  XXIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


It  is  important  to  note,  in  conclusion,  how  such'  blindness  as  this  was  produced. 
These  blind  leaders  were  thus  blind  because  they  were  hypocrites  first.  This 
is  why  the  Saviour  uses  this  apparently  harsh  term  so  many  times  over. 
It  is  really  a  very  merciful  one,  because  it  points  to  the  secret  of  all.  A  hypocrite 
is  a  man  who  knowingly  blinds  himself  to  some  aspect  of  truth.  In  some 
particular  he  deliberately  refuses  to  see  things  as  they  are.  So  far — in  other 
words — and  in  that  direction,  he  behoves  in  deceit.  Afterwards  the  instrument 
employed  by  him  turns,  as  it  were,  on  himself.  Invented  originally  to  hide  from 
him  what  he  did  not  wish  to  perceive,  afterwards — without  his  knowing  it — it 
hides  from  him  what  he  does  wish  to  perceive.  Afterwards  still,  therefore, 
there  is  no  saying  how  much  it  may  hide^  or  how  far,  consequently,  in  the  way  of 
foolishness  and  error  such  a  self-deceiver  may  ultimately  go,  and  yet  suppose 
himself  right.  There  is  nothing  more  perilous,  in  fact,  and  nothing  more 
criminal,  than  trifling  with  truth.  It  would  ruin  the  universe,  if  allowed  to 
prevail. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  16.  Hypocritical  teaching  as  to  consecration  than  the  fabric,  and  in- 
oath- taking. — 1.  Corrupt  churchmen  volved,  therefore,  a  higher  obligation, 
do  corrupt  religion  and  mislead  the  when  used  as  a  formula  jurandi^ 
people  fearfully.  They  become  blind  than  the  temple  or  the  altar.  Some- 
guides,  whose  office  require th  that  thing  of  the  same  feeling  is  seen  in  the 
they  should  be  wise  and  seeing  guides ;  popular  casuistry  which  makes  the 
in  which  case  woe  to  the  people,  but  binding  force  of  an  oath  depend  on 
chiefly    woe     to     the     blind     guides.  "  kissing     the    Book " ;     or     that    of 

2.  Swearing  by  the  creature  is  no  new  mediaeval  Christendom,  which  saw  in 
sin,  for  these  corrupt  hypocrites  did  the  relics  of  a  saint  that  which  was 
foster  swearing  by  the  creatures,  as  by  more  sacred  than  the  Gospels.  The 
the    temple,    altar,    gold,    and    gifts,  principle  involved  in  our  Lord's  teach- 

3.  Corrupt  churchmen  make  things  to  ing  goes  farther  than  its  immediate 
be  sin  or  no  sin,  as  it  serveth  their  apphcation,  and  sweeps  away  the 
purpose  :  as  here,  they  make  an  oath  arbitrary  distinction  of  difierent  degrees 
by  the  temple  to  be  none,  and  an  oath  of  sanctity  in  the  several  parts  of  the 
by  the  gold  of  the  temple  to  oblige.  same   structure.       Here    the    line    of 

4.  To  make  light  of  any  oath  by  the  reasoning  is,  as  in  v.  33-37,  that  the 
creature,  as  not  obligatory,  doth  open  temple  includes  the  altar,  that 
a  door  to  superstition  and  perjury ;  the  altar  includes  the  gift,  that  the 
for  to  swear  by  the  temple,  they  said,  heaven  includes  "the  Throne,  and  that 
it  was  nothing,  and  Christ  asketh,  thus  every  oath-formula  runs  up, 
"  Whether  is  greater,  the  gold  or  the  explicitly  or  implicitly,  into  the  great 
temple  which  sanctifieth  the  gold  ? "  thought  of  God.  —  E.  H.  Plumptrej 
— David  Dickson.  D.D. 

A  corrupt  casuistry. — It  is  not  easy  Vers.  23,  24.  The  gnat  and  the  camel. 

to  trace  the  currents  of  thought  that  — A  most  effective  illustration  this  of 

run  through   a  corrupt  casuistry,  but  a  scrupulousness  which  is  extreme  and 

probably  the  line  of  reasoning  that  led  inconsistent.     "  Ye  strain  out  the  gnat 

to  this  distinction  was  that  the  "  gold  and    swallow   the    camel."      We    are 

of  the  temple  " — not  the  gold  used  in  supposed  to  look  at  one  drinking  water 

its  structural  ornamentation,  but  that  or  wine  from  an  open  vessel.     A  gnat 

which    in    coin    or   bullion   was   part  or  small  fly  has  got  into  the  liquor — 

of    the    Corban,    or    sacred    treasure  a  thing  that  will  occur  in  hot  weather 

(xv.   5) — had   received  a  more  special  among  ourselves,  and  that  is  sure  to 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxiii. 


occur  in  the  East  if  a  vessel  containing 
any  sweet  liquor  is  left  uncovered.  He 
who  would  drink  notices  the  small 
insect,  and  passes  the  sweetened  water 
or  wine  through  a  fine  cloth  in  order  to 
strain  it  out.  With  gross  inconsistency, 
however,  he  takes  no  notice  of  a  far 
larger  object,  but  gulps  down  the  camel. 
The  mention  of  this  unwieldy  creature 
is  of  course  an  instance  of  hyperbole, 
as  in  the  other  metaphor  of  a  camel 
going  through  the  eye  of  a  needle. 
The  Lord  implied  no  censure  on  the 
pains  taken  to  strain  out  the  gnat. 
No  person  of  nice  habits  could  act 
otherwise.  Indeed,  a  Jew  had  a  special 
reason  for  being  scrupulous  in  such  a 
matter,  for  insects,  as  '*  flying,  swarm- 
ing things,"  were  unclean  under  his 
law.  But  then,  the  camel  was  unclean 
also.  The  point  of  the  reproof  lay  in 
the  incongruity  or  inconsistency  evinced 
by  one  who  was  extremely  scrupulous 
in  a  small  thing,  and  extremely  un- 
scrupulous in  a  great  matter.  Such 
was  the  charge  which  Christ  brought 
against  the  Pharisees  ;  and  it  must  be 
brought  still  against  those  who  com- 
bine a  very  punctilious  Chiistian  pro- 
fession with  a  lax  or  unprincipled 
morality.  It  appears  that  the  Pharisees 
were  very  punctilious  about  paying 
tithes  of  seeds  which  were  grown  in 
small  quantities,  and  were  of  com- 
paratively little  value.  A  parallel 
case  now  would  be  for  a  Christian  in 
good  circumstances  to  present  to  the 
church  one-tenth  of  the  value  of  the 
parsley,  pepper,  and  mustard  used  in 
his  household.  Now  the  Pharisees  were 
observing  the  letter  of  the  law 
(Lev.  xxvii.  30).  And  the  Master 
recognised  this  when  He  said  that 
these  minute  tithings  should  not  be 
left  undone.  But  the  chief  matters  of 
obligation  should  be  placed  first.  The 
weightier  matters  of  obligation  were, 
and  continue  to  be,  these  three :  — 
1.  Judgment,  including  equity  in  judg- 
ing and  rectitude  in  performing  the 
duties  of  life.  2.  Mercy  in  unison  with 
justice,  as  it  is  in  God  Himself.  The 
Pharisees  gave  alms  with  a  blowing  of 
trumpets,  but  they  did  not  love  mercy. 


3.  Faith  or  faithfulness,  shown  in 
honest  dealing  and  in  adherence  to 
truth.  Our  Lord's  treatment  of  this 
grave  error  suggests  two  points  for 
emphatic  consideration  in  Christian 
doctrine  and  morals  : — 

I.  Inward  qualities  count  for  more 
than  outward  observances. — Strange 
to  read  of  those  rough-handed  Christians 
in  the  past  who  were  unjust  and 
rapacious,  and  yet  imagined  that  by 
paying  tithes,  or  taking  sacraments,  or 
endowing  monasteries  at  death,  they 
could  secure  the  favour  of  God.  But 
just  as  delusive  the  modern  assumption 
that  one  may  be  false  to  his  word, 
unkind  in  his  family,  unfair  in  his 
dealings,  and  yet  by  attention  to 
Christian  rites  and  ceremonies  may  find 
his  way  to  heaven. 

II.  A  just  sense  of  proportion  is 
essential  to  a  well-regulated  Christian 
mind.— It  must  be  recognised  that, 
even  among  things  which  are  right, 
some  are  greater  and  some  less.  Some 
are  to  be  done  first  and  foremost,  and 
come  what  will ;  others  are  to  come 
behind,  and  not  to  be  left  undone.  If 
the  Pharisees  had  not  lacked  this  sense 
of  proportion,  they  could  never  have 
preferred  the  tithing  of  mint  to  justice, 
tithing  of  dill  to  mercy,  and  tithing 
of  cummin  to  faith ;  nor  would  they 
have  condemned  the  righteous  and 
merciful  Saviour  because  He  led  His 
disciples  along  a  path  through  a  corn- 
field or  healed  poor  people  on  the 
Sabbath.  It  is  no  infrequent  thing  to 
find  a  person  who  seems  to  be  very 
religious  curiously  deficient  in  the  sense 
of  proportion.  He  cannot  quite  see 
what  is  great  or  what  is  small.  If  he 
be  disposed  to  obstinacy  and  bigotry, 
he  simply  regards  all  that  is  plain  to 
him  as  great ;  and  all  his  tenets  and 
regulations  as  equally  great.  If  he  be 
merely  small-minded,  by  natural  affinity 
he  fastens  keenly  on  small  points. 
These  are  of  the  proper  size  for  him  ; 
and  he  takes  them  to  be  quite  large. 
Or  if  he  be  of  a  self-regarding  mind, 
considering  religion  simply  with  re- 
ference to  his  own  safety,  he  lays  all 
the  stress  on  the  truths  which  are  near 

543 


CHAP,  xxiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


himself,  and  has  but  a  faint  appreciation  it   was   an  old  custom  with  them  to 

of  those  which  are  much  more  vast  but  wash  sepulchral  stones  once  a  year.    A 

more  remote.     It  marks  the  wisdom  of  day  was  fixed  for  the  purpose  in  the 

Jesus    Christ  that   He   saw   the   just  month  Adar ;    and  at  the  time  when 

proportion  of   things,  and,  when   He  our     Lord    used    this     metaphor     to 

spoke  of  duty,  distinguished  the  greater  characterise  the  scribes  and  Pharisees, 

elements  of  godly  obedience  from  the  the  tombs  about  Jerusalem  had  been 

less.     And  as  He  taught  so  He  lived,  recently    whitewashed,    and    so    were 

entering  into  no  competition  with  the  beautified  for  a  season.     As  He  spoke 

Pharisees   regarding   the   minutiae    of  in  the  open  air,  the  white  stones  must 

ceremonial  and  tradition,  but  exhibiting  have  been  conspicuous  on  every  side, 

a  righteousness  far  exceeding  that  of  The  object  of  this  whitewashing,  how- 

the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  a  merciful-  ever,  was  not  to  embellish,  but  to  point 

ness  with  which  their  haughty  temper  out  the   gravestone  to  the   passer-by, 

had  no  sympathy,  and  a  fidelity  to  God  that  he  might  not  tread  on  it  or  touch 

and  to  His  own  Divine  mission  from  it.    The  law  which  pronounced  unclean 

which  no  temptation  could  beguile  or  him  who  touched  a  dead  body,  or  even 

threat  deter  Him. — D,  Eraser,  D.D.  a  dead  bone,  unwittingly,  was  extended 

by  the  later  casuistry  so  as  to  count 

Vers.  25,  26.  Sanctified  meat. —  one  ceremonially  defiled  who  even 
1.  Such  as  get  their  meat  by  extortion,  stepped  unintentionally  over  a  grave 
and  use  it  intemperately  unto  excess,  or  touched  a  tombstone.  The  object 
can  never  sanctify  their  table,  whatso-  of  Jesus  was  to  mark  with  emphatic 
ever  ceremonies  they  use ;  for  the  censure  the  contrast  between  the  out- 
saying  grace  at  meat  by  such  men  is  ward  religious  profession  of  those  hypo- 
no  better  than  if  a  man  should  wash  the  crites  and  their  inward  wickedness, 
outside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  and  eat  For  this  end  the  illustration  was  most 
of  the  fiithiness  of  the  inside.  2.  The  apposite.  The  Pharisees,  like  the 
way  to  eat  our  bread  with  God's  bless-  newly- washed  tombs  around  the  city, 
ing  is  to  sanctify  our  hands  in  our  were  fair  and  white  on  the  surface,  but 
conquering,  and  our  hearts  in  a  wise  unclean  and  corrupt  within. — D, 
and  moderate  using  the  creatures,  for  Eraser,  D.D. 
the  right  end,  and  so  our  feeding  shall 

be  sanctified. — David  Dickson.  Yer.  27.  Mcyral  whitewash.  — Nothing 

is   gained   by   whitewash   or    varnish. 

Vers.  27,  28.   Whitewashed  tombs. —  God  is  not  mocked,  and  even  man  is 

Graves  lie  thick  about  Jerusalem.     In  not  long  imposed  on  by  a  vain  show  of 

the  valleys  and  on  the  hilly  slopes  about  devotion.       We     once    heard     Father 

the  modern  city  they  everywhere  meet  Taylor,  a  noted  preacher  to  sailors  in 

the   eye.      Jews   have   always   buried  America,  pray  that  men  who  thought 

their  dead  without,  however,  lavishing  themselves  good,  and  were  not,  might 

on  their  tombs  such  signs  of  honour  be  undeceived ;   and  he  cried,  "  Lord, 

and  affection  as  are  increasingly  con-  take  off  the  whitewash  !  " — Ibid. 
spicuous  in  Christian  cemeteries.     But 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  29—39. 

Cumulative  transgression. — This  last  accusation  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
is  one  which  stands  by  itself.  Probably,  because  in  some  respects  it  is  also  the 
worst.  Just  there  when  their  true  spirit  was  worst,  they  declare  it  to  be  best 
(ver.  30).  It  is  with  this  assertion  the  Saviour  now  deals.  His  way  of  doing  so 
is  marked,  first,  by  great  wisdom ;  secondly,  by  great  faithfulness ;  thirdly,  by 
tenderest  love. 

I.  Great  wisdom. — This  is  shown,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  way  of  insight.    He 

544 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap,  xxiii. 


sees  at  once  the  true  value  of  this  idle  respect  for  the  dead.  On  the  one  hand, 
there  is  nothing  to  be  lost  by  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  scribes.  A  dead 
prophet,  in  some  senses,  is  a  prophet  no  more.  He  can  no  longer  disturb  such 
men  as  the  Pharisees  by  the  holiness  of  his  life,  or  the  faithfulness  of  his  re- 
proaches, or  the  success  of  his  mission.  There  is  no  reason  to  thejUy  therefore, 
against  making  much  of  his  memory.  There  is  much  reason  rather,  for  doing  so, 
with  their  views  and  desires.  The  names  in  question,  by  this  time,  have  become 
popular  names.  It  would  cause  these  men,  therefore,  to  become  popular  also,  if 
they  took  up  the  same  line.  And  that,  as  we  know,  was,  above  all  things,  the 
thing  they  desired  (vers.  5-7,  etc.).  In  reality,  therefore,  they  were  the 
same  kind  of  men  as  their  fathers  had  been  ;  animated  by  the  same  spirit, 
though  in  dijQTerent  ways,  because  under  a  different  set  of  conditions  (ver.  31). 
On  the  other  hand,  hj  great  foresight.  The  Saviour  beheld,  only  too  clearly,  all 
that  was  about  to  be  done.  Who  were  to  come  in  His  name,  even  men  equal  in 
every  way  (ver.  34)  to  any  before.  How  they  would  be  dealt  with,  even  with  at 
least  equal  cruelty  (ibid.)  to  any  before ;  and  so  with  even  greater  pertinacity 
("  city  to  city,"  etc.)  than  ever  before.  And  in  this,  therefore,  would  appear  to 
be  the  full  answer  to  the  preceding  assertion  of  change.  If  they  were  honouring 
those  dead  witnesses,  as  affirmed,  they  were  not  treating  living  witnesses  in 
that  way.  If  they  had  not  used  their  fangs  for  a  time,  it  would  soon  be  seen 
that  they  were  very  far  from  being  without  them.  Both  true  "serpents" 
themselves,  in  short,  and  the  "  offspring  of  vipers  "  as  well,  Jesus  here  both  sees 
and  foresees  them  to  be  (ver.  33,  R.V.). 

II.  Great  faithfulness. — Things  being  so,  these  men  must  be  taught  clearly 
all  that  was  implied  on  their  part.  All  that  was  implied,  on  the  one  hand,  in 
regard  to  their  guilt.  Continuance  in  evil  implies  not  only  progression — it 
implies  rapid  progression — in  sin.  To  disobey,  and  be  warned,  and  punished — 
and  then  to  be  delivered  and  spared  for  a  time — and  then  to  be  guilty  over  again 
of  that  same  disobedience — is  to  do  more,  very  much  more,  than  twice  as  bad  as 
before.  And  this  is  true  even  where  the  repetition  may  be  regarded  as  being  of 
a  representative  kind,  as  where  the  children,  e.g..,  have  been  warned  in  the  person 
of  their  fathers  ;  and  where  the  sin  of  the  fathers  has  been  repeated,  as  it  were,  in 
the  person  of  their  offspring.  Such  children  are  more  responsible,  and  therefore, 
when  they  do  sin,  are  also  more  guilty,  than  they  would  have  otherwise  been. 
Hence,  therefore,  the  fulness  of  the  guilt  resting  on  the  "  generation  "  before 
Him  (ver.  31).  Hence,  therefore,  what  He  tells  them,  next,  of  the  awful  severity 
of  its  doom.  The  true  inheritor  (as  He  has  shown)  of  the  spirit  of  the  past,  it 
is  also  the  heir  of  its  judgments.  Of  all  overt  sin  nothing  is  like  the  persecution 
of  God's  i-epresentatives  in  proving  enmity  against  Him.  In  regard  to  nothing, 
consequently,  is  He  wont  to  exact  a  stricter  account.  Never  yet  had  there  been 
a  generation  which  inherited  so  large  an  amount  of  responsibility  on  this  score. 
Never  yet  a  generation  which  added  to  it  so  much  responsibility  of  its  own.  So 
the  event  would  only  too  fully  make  plain.  Upon  it,  therefore,  is  to  descend,  in 
all  its  fulness,  what  had  been  held  back  for  so  long.  This  is  the  rule  with  the 
long-suffering  judgment  of  God.  The  "  generation  "  which  finally  "  fills  "  the 
cup  (ver.  32)  has  to  exhaust  it  as  well. 

III.  Tenderest  love. — As  this  meekest  of  Kings  foresees  these  terrible  griefs 
and  foretells  them,  a  sorrow  of  almost  equal  intensity  seizes  on  Himself.  What 
a  sight  is  here  of  the  past  !  What  a  sight,  on  His  side,  to  begin  !  Often  and 
often  in  bygone  ages,  with  yearning  affections — see  how  much  is  revealed  here  of 
the  mysterious  depths  both  of  His  nature  and  heart ! — would  He  have  gathered 
together  the  "  children  "  of  "  Jerusalem  "  under  His  wings.  What  a  sight  on 
their  side  as  well !  Just  as  often,  with  invincible  aversion,  had  His  love  been 
rejected  !    What  a  sight,  therefore,  in  both  respects,  of  the  future  !    Never,  now. 


CHAP.  xxm.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


can  He  make  such  offers  again.  Never,  either,  as  things  are,  will  they  see 
Him  again.  When  He  does  come  (for  come  He  will),  nothing  shall  be  as  it  was. 
Their  *'  house  "  will  be  gone  !  Their  spirit  changed  !  And  this  cry  in  His  ears  : 
*'  Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  (vers.  38,  39). 

See,  therefore,  at  the  last,  what  it  is  that  Jesus  asks  from  the  worst !  That  they 
should  accept  His  love  as  it  is  !  Here  is  the  great  lesson  of  all !  Here,  where 
the  Saviour  is  the  severest.  He  is  also  most  loving  of  all.  On  the  other  hand, 
however,  we  must  not  cancel  the  obverse  side  of  this  coin.  Here,  where  He  is 
most  loving,  He  is  also  severest  of  all  (Ps.  ci.  1  ;  Rom.  xi.  22).  Let  no  man 
dream,  because  of  Christ's  love,  that  it  is  good  to  continue  in  sin.  Not  even  that 
love  can  cause  this  to  be  true  ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  29-32.  The  penalty  of  prophesy- 
ing.— It  must  have  appeared  to  be  in 
itself  a  very  seemly  thing,  this  honour- 
ing of  the  great  and  good  men  of 
former  generations,  to  whom  the 
religion  of  Israel  owed  so  much.  It 
must,  therefore,  have  been  startling  to 
such  men  to  hear  Christ's  sarcastic 
comment  upon  this  apparently  praise- 
worthy movement,  and  to  find  Him 
denouncing  it  as  an  aggravation  of  the 
sin  of  those  who  were  promoting  it, 
and  basing  on  it  a  charge  against  them 
of  insincerity  and  hypocrisy.  It  was 
true,  doubtless,  as  any  cynic  in 
Jerusalem  might  have  pointed  out  to 
them,  that  those  prophets,  whom  they 
were  so  eager  to  honour  now  that  they 
were  dead,  had  met  with  very  different 
treatment  while  they  were  living.  But 
their  answer  would  have  been,  "  We 
sorrowfully  confess  it.  That  is  the 
very  reason  for  this  zeal  in  sepulchre 
building.  We  mean  by  this  to  dis- 
sociate ourselves  froni  the  conduct  of 
our  fathers.  It  is  our  way  of  putting 
on  permanent  record  our  protest  against 
their  sin,  and  our  conviction  that  if  we 
had  been  in  the  day  of  our  fathers,  we 
would  not  have  been  partakers  with 
them  in  the  blood  of  the  prophets.  It 
expresses  a  genuine  national  repentance 
and  desire  to  make  reparation."  And 
there  were  obvious  and  indisputable 
facts  which  seemed  to  go  a  considerable 
way  to  justify  such  an  attitude.  They 
were  fairly  entitled  to  say,  "  Is  there 
not  an  immense  difference  between  our 
religious  condition  to-day  and  that  of 
our     fathers      who      persecuted    the 

546 


prophets  ?  What  were  the  sins  which 
the  prophets  rebuked?  Were  they 
not  idolatry,  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
fearfully  corrupted  by  the  admixture 
of  polluted  rites  adopted  from  the 
Canaanite  and  Phoenician  religions, 
altars  on  high  places  and  in  sacred 
groves,  associated  with  gross  licentious- 
ness 1  Have  we  not  changed  all  that  ? 
If  the  prophets  were  to  come  back  to- 
day, is  there  a  single  one  of  these  points 
on  which  they  could  challenge  our 
conduct  ?  Are  not  their  demands 
carried  out  by  us  most  scrupulously  ? 
Where,  then,  is  the  insincerity  in  our 
honouring  them,  since  we  are  obeying 
them  ?  "  And  so  far  the  defence  would 
have  been  plausible.  Yet  our  Lord 
sets  it  aside.  He  tells  them,  "  You  are 
labouring  under  a  self-complacent 
delusion.  You  have  no  sympathy  with 
the  spirit  of  those  you  are  professing  to 
honour ;  you  have  no  true  sense  of  the 
moral  grandeur  of  those  men  and  of 
their  protest ;  your  reverence  is  taught 
by  the  precept  of  men,  not  by  the 
prompting  of  your  own  hearts.  Your 
homage  is  merely  conventional.  You 
are  manifesting  the  very  same  spirit  as 
your  fathers,  and  in  this  very  matter 
of  monument-building,  instead  of 
severing  yourselves  from  them  you  are 
in  reality  serving  yourselves — heirs  to 
their  sin."  With  biting  irony  He 
says,  "  There  is  a  peculiar  propriety  in 
your  building  the  tombs  of  those  whom 
your  fathers  slew.  You  are  completing 
their  work.  They  killed,  and  you  bury ; 
the  spirit  is  the  same."  Christ  does 
not  here  state  explicitly  the  ground  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap,  xxiii. 


this  condemnatory  judgment.    But  we  reaction  of  feeling  towards  the  prophets, 

know  the  principle  on    which  it  was  A  dead   prophet   is   no   longer   to  be 

based.     Apart   from  that   sure  moral  dreaded.     He  is  no  longer  dangerous 

insight  by  which  He  discerned  beneath  in  the  way  of  drawing  attention  to  the 

the   smooth   and   decorous   surface   of  existing  evils  or  stirring  men's  minds  to 

their    life   the   working  of    the  same  ask  inconvenient  questions.    Truth  and 

spirit — the  same  tempers  and  vices,  the  real  greatness   have   in  them  vitality 

same    outwardness    and    formalism —  and  permanence  which  compel  men  at 

which      had     characterised      ancient  last  to  recognise  them.     The  true  poet 

Israel,  His  condemnation  was  justified  sometimes,  despite  the  depreciation  of 

by      their     attitude     towards      Him-  contemporary  critics,  becomes  a  classic, 

self.     The  way  in  which  they  treated  and  then   he  is  awarded  the  conven- 

Him,    the    living    Prophet,    was    an  tional  admiration  of  those  who  could 

infallible     indication   of    the   way   in  never  of  themselves  have  discovered  in 

which   they  would  have    treated    the  him   anything  to  admire.     So  it  was 

prophets,     whom     they    professed    to  with   the   prophets   of    Israel.      Men 

honour,  if  they  had  been  in  their  day.  inspired    by   the    same    Spirit   which 

The  spirit  and  conduct  which  Christ  spoke  in  the  prophets  and  in  Christ 

thus  reprobated  is  not  confined  to  the  may  come  to  us,  and  we  may  prove  as 

Pharisees     of    Jerusalem.       It   is    an  blind  to  every  token  of  the  Divine  in 

exemplification  of  a  constant  tendency  them,  and  as  deaf  and  unresponsive  to 

of  human  nature.  their  message,  as  did  the  Israelites  in 

1.  Why  were  the  prophets  hated  in  Old  Testament  history,  or  the  Pharisees 
their  own  day? — 1.  They  proclaimed  in  the  time  of  Christ.  Our  reverence 
new  and  unpopular  truth. — Mr.  John  for  the  past  will  be  proved  not  by  our 
Morley  remarks  that  the  popular  being  mere  imitators  of  those  who  were 
teacher  *in  any  department  is  he  who  is  great  because  they  imitated  none,  not 
most  in  accord  with  the  average  senti-  by  standing  immovably  on  their 
ment  of  his  day,  who  happens  to  chime  position  and  repeating  their  phrases, 
in  most  harmoniously  with  its  pre-  but  by  going  forward  in  their  spirit, 
possessions,  or  most  effectually  to  nurse  welcoming  all  fresh  light,  proving  all 
and  exaggerate  them.  That  is  precisely  things,  and  holding  fast  that  which  is 
what  the  prophets  were  not.  good. — A.  0.  Johnston,  M.A. 

2.  They  made  powerful  application  oj 

moral  arid  religious  truth  to  human  life.  Vers.  31,  32.  Judicial  abandonment. 
— If  it  is  a  thankless  and  dangerous  — 1.  Christ's  enemies  shall  not  want  a 
task  to  attack  men's  traditional  pre-  vritness  of  their  malicious  opposing  of 
conceptions,  it  is  still  more  dangerous  to  Him ;  yea,  from  their  own  words  and 
touch  their  selfish  interests.  And  that  purposes  He  shall  bring  matter  of 
is  what  the  prophets  did,  not  in  mere  conviction  against  them — their  never- 
harmless  generalities  which  hurt  no-  dying  worm  shall  breed  in  their  own 
body,  but  with  definite  pointed  applica-  bosom.  "  Ye  are  against  yourselves 
tion  to  particular  prevalent  sins  and  witnesses."  2.  Christ  will  give  over 
social  wrongs.  desperate     enemies      to     their     own 

3.  The  true  prophet  of  God  h&re  no  malicious  disposition,  and  will  defy 
outward  sign  by  which  he  could  be  them,  as  here  He  saith,  *'  Fill  ye  up 
recognised  as  su^h. — It  needed  a  heart  the  measure  of  your  fathers."  3.  There 
in  sympathy  with  God  to  discern  a  true  is  a  measure  set  to  be  filled  up  with 
prophet.  the      transgressions     of      the     Lord's 

II.  Why  were    they  honoured  by  enemies,  and  till  this  cup  be  full  to 

later   generations  ? — That,   too,   is   in  the  lip,  they  shall  be  suffered  to  go  on  ; 

accordance  with  human  nature.      It  is  but  when   this   cup  is  full,  then   the 

not  only  that  death  softens  all  animosi-  cup  of  God's  wrath  shall  be  full  also, 

ties.     There  was  more  than  that  in  the  and    run   over   upon    them    to    their 

547 


CHAP.  XXIII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


destruction.  Therefore  saith  He,  "  Fill 
ye  up  the  measure  " ;  that  is,  Go  on  till 
you  kill  Me,  as  your  fathers  did  the 
prophets.  — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  32.  A  terrible  com^mand  ! — Then 
come  the  awful  words  bidding  that 
generation  "  fill  up  the  measure  of  the 
fathers."  They  are  like  the  other 
command  to  Judas  to  do  his  work 
quickly.  They  are  more  than  per- 
mission, they  are  command ;  but  such 
a  command  as,  by  its  laying  bare  of 
the  true  character  of  the  deed  in  view, 
is  love's  last  effort  at  prevention. — 
A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

Yer.  33.  The  sin  that  hath  never 
forgiveness. — I  think  that  the  most 
awful  word  which  has  ever  been 
written  by  a  human  pen  is,  "the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb."  There  is  some- 
thing which  always  soems  very  terrible 
when  I  open  this  chapter.  These 
words  are  doubly  awful  on  the  lips  of 
the  patient  and  forgiving  Christ. 
There  is  a  sin  which  remains  uncon- 
querable, even  by  the  love  and  pity  of 
the  Incarnate  Word ;  which  remains 
insoluble  even  in  the  menstruum  of 
the  grace  of  Christ ;  and  which  defies 
every  effort  of  the  Redeemer  to  trans- 
figure its  hideous  form  and  make  it, 
transformed,  the  attendant  and  minister 
of  the  eternal  triumph  of  His  cross. 
There  is  a  sin  which  can  draw  down  on 
a  man,  even  from  the  Divine  lips,  the 
sentence,  "  It  had  been  better  for  that 
man  if  he  had  never  been  born." 

I.  We  will  endeavour  to  identify 
the  spiritual  condition  on  which  this 
hateful  epithet  is  branded  by  John  the 
Baptist  and  by  the  Lord.  In  each 
case  the  term  is  aimed  expressly,  by 
name,  at  the  same  class,  and  presents 
a  vivid  image  of  the  same  sin.  This  is 
surely  a  very  important  indication  to 
guide  us  in  determining  what  this  un- 
pardonable sin  may  be.  It  is  the  sin 
of  these  vipers,  be  they  who  they  may. 
It  is  the  spirit  which  searches  for  love 
that  it  may  wound  it,  for  grace  that  it 
may  poison  it,  for  life  that  it  may  kill 
it,  lest   the  world  should  live  anew  by 

548 


grace,  be  comforted  and  cherished  by 
love,  and  link  itself  on  by  hope  to  the 
bliss  and  glory  of  heaven.  It  is  the 
spirit  which,  seeing  this  love  incarnate 
on  its  Divine  errand,  seeing  the  world's 
death-pallor  tinged  with  the  rosy  glow, 
and  the  rigid  limbs  stirring  under  the 
currents  of  a  new-born  life,  said 
straightway,  *'  This  is  of  the  devil "  ; 
and  stung  the  Divine  One — though  it 
could  not  touch  the  fountain  of  His 
power,  the  love  which  drew  Him  from 
heaven  to  Calvary — even  unto  death 
(see  iii.  7,  xii.  10-14,  22-24,  34, 
xxiii.  13-15).  "Then  the  Pharisees 
went  out,  and  held  a  council  against 
Him,  that  they  might  destroy  Him  " 
(xii.  14).  Mark  the  occasion.  A  man 
made  whole  on  the  Sabbath  day — a 
great  healing  accomplished,  a  great 
burden  lifted,  a  great  joy  poured  into 
a  sad,  weary  heart,  a  great  ray  of  the 
love  of  God  sent  streaming  into  the 
darkness  of  the  world.  But  a  Phari- 
saic regulation  had  been  broken. 
Perish  the  healing,  perish  the  Healer, 
but  let  the  rule  of  the  Pharisees  live  ! 
Do  you  wonder  at  the  sequel  ? 
"  Wherefore  I  say  unto  you,  all 
manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall 
be  forgiven  unto  men,"  etc.  In  this 
chapter  it  is  precisely  the  same.  It  is 
the  wrongs  and  miseries  of  others,  of 
hearts  bruised  under  the  heel  of  the 
Pharisees'  insolence,  and  bleeding  from 
the  strokes  of  their  rods,  which  stir 
the  Saviour's  indignation. 

II.  What  lies  at  the  root  of  this 
state  of  mind  and  spirit?  Whence 
does  it  spring?  Not  from  the  per- 
versities, infirmities,  lusts,  and  vices 
which  belong  to  the  prodigal's  charac- 
ter, and  are  unveiled  in  the  prodigal's 
life  (cf.  1  John  i.  5-10  with  the 
spirit  of  the  Pharisee  in  Luke  xviii. 
10-14).  The  sin  which  saith,  "  I  have 
no  sin,"  remaineth.  Even  against  God's 
love  it  is  hard  as  adamant  and  cold  as 
death.  The  Pharisee's  spirit,  which 
would  dash  fiercely  the  cup  of  life 
from  the  lips  of  a  dying  world,  lest  its 
own  privilege  should  perish ;  which 
would  brand  the  spirit  of  the  Divine 
Healer,  Teacher,  and  Saviour  of  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxm. 


world,  as  devilish,  and  hunt  it  from 
the  earth,  stung  to  death  with  its 
viperous  fang  ;  which  holds  every  wide 
gospel  proclamation  an  intolerable 
insult,  and  every  healing  touch  of 
Divine  love  a  bitter  pain — it  is  this, 
and  nothing  which  a  poor  lost  soul  can 
brood  over  in  its  anguish,  which  is  the 
unpardonable  sin.  This  was  the  python 
on  which  the  sun-bright  Saviour 
rained  the  arrows  of  His  indignation 
and  hate.  "  Ye  serpents,"  etc. — 
J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A . 

Holy  indignation. — I  heartily  sym- 
pathise with  Adam  Smith,  who  said, 
as  a  man  who  had  made  excuses  for  a 
bad  character  left  the  company,  *'  I 
can  breathe  more  freely  now.  I  cannot 
bear  that  man ;  he  has  no  moral 
indignation  in  him."  The  mind  of 
Christ  is  far  too  seldom  followed  in  the 
conduct  of  our  social  relations. — United 
Presbyterian  Magazine. 

Faithful  preaching. — Said  Robert 
Morris  to  Dr.  Rush,  "  I  Hke  that 
preaching  best  which  drives  a  man 
into  the  corner  of  his  pew  and  makes 
him  think  the  devil  is  after  him." — 
Thwing. 

Vers.  34,  35.  The  process  of  condem- 
nation.— 1.  Our  Lord,  in  the  face  of 
His  enemies,  avowed  Himself  to  be 
God,  having  authority  to  send  out 
prophets,  and  to  bestow  gifts  on  men. 
2.  Our  Lord  knoweth  how  His  ser- 
vants will  be  served  in  every  place 
they  come  unto,  and  what  measure  of 
sufferings  each  of  them  will  meet  with 
from  the  wicked.  3.  The  Lord's 
servants  (albeit  they  know  that  suffer- 
ings abide  them)  must,  notwithstanding, 
go  on  in  their  message ;  for  this  is  the 
forewarning  given  unto  His  servants 
also,  "  I  send  you  prophets,  and  some 
of  them  ye  shall  kill,"  etc.  4.  They 
who  go  on  in  the  course  of  any  sin,  do 
subscribe  unto  the  sins  of  such  as 
before  them  did  follow  that  sort  of 
sin,  and  justly  may  be  condemned  and 
punished  as  guilty  of  the  sin  of  others, 
which  they  do  approve ;  for  so  Christ 


reckoneth,  saying,  "  That  on  you  may 
come  all  the  blood,"  etc.  5.  The 
sufferers  for  righteousness,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world,  are  all  in  the 
rank  of  martyrs,  and  their  sufferings 
are  kept  in  fresh  remembrance.  "  From 
righteous  Abel  unto  Zacharias,"  etc. 
6.  Raging  persecutors  look  neither  to 
place  nor  person  nor  consequence  of 
their  cruelty,  but  as  blind  beasts  do 
follow  forth  their  own  fury ;  for 
"  betwixt  the  porch  and  the  altar " 
was  Zacharias  slain. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  35.  Nemesis  ! — In  whose  mind 
was  the  intent  or  design  that  is 
referred  to  when  it  is  said,  ''That 
upon  you  might  come  all  the  righteous 
blood  shed  upon  the  earth "  ?  If  we 
view  the  subject  philosophically,  and 
as  regards  the  theological  substrate 
that  underlies  the  free-and-easy 
phraseology,  we  must  at  once  answer, 
with  Calvin,  In  the  mind  of  God.  It 
would  be  contrary  to  sound  theology, 
and  to  sound  philosophy,  to  ignore  the 
agency  of  God  in  the  matter — His 
intentional  agency,  and  thus  His 
intent.  He  "  suffered "  them  to  walk 
in  their  own  ways  (Acts  xiv.  16).  He 
did  not  deem  it  right  to  break  in  upon 
the  mental  and  moral  constitution 
He  had  given  them,  that  He  might 
arrest  the  murderous  strokes  tliat 
were  about  to  fall.  On  the  contrary, 
He  had  long  continued  to  maintain, 
and  He  intended  still  to  maintain, 
that  constitution ;  and  when  He  fore- 
saw that  they  would  madly  persist  in 
abusing  it,  and  bid  defiance  to  His 
righteousness  and  grace,  He  resolved 
that  by  "  suffering  "  them  meanwhile, 
as  long  as  wisdom  would  permit,  and 
then  by-and-by  bringing  on  them, 
after  their  cup  of  iniquity  was  full,  the 
consummation  of  the  doom  which  was 
their  due,  He  would  turn  them  to 
account,  as  beacons  in  His  universe. 
There  is,  however,  nothing  in  all  this 
of  the  nature  of  unconditional  intent, 
purpose,  or  decree.  And  it  is  note- 
worthy, besides,  that  in  the  connection 
of  verses  34  and  35  the  reference  to  the 
action  of  God  is  only  theologically  and 

549 


CHAP.  XXIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


philosophically  implied,  not  formally 
expressed.  There  is,  instead,  express 
reference  to  the  action  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees  themselves.  They  acted 
in  their  own  infatuated  way,  in  order 
that  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  on 
the  §arth  might  come  upon  them ; 
that  is,  they  acted  as  if  they  were 
intending  and  desiring  that  the  blood 
might  come  on  them.  They  were  like 
those  who  "  love  death  "  and  "  seek  " 
it — "  seek  destruction  "  (Prov.  viii.  36, 
xvii.  19,  xxi.  6).  They  did  not,  indeed, 
"  formally  " — as  logicians  speak — love, 
seek,  and  intend  their  own  death  and 
destruction.  But  they  "  formally " 
loved,  sought,  and  intended  that  which 
God  had  connected  with  death  and 
destruction.  And  thus,  while  dashing 
along  in  their  loved  career,  they 
"  materially  " — as  logicians  phrase  it — 
and  "virtually"  rushed  voluntarily 
upon  their  deserved  retribution. — /. 
Morison,  D.D. 

Yer.  36.  Forewarned  ! — It  is  a  special 
motive  unto  repentance  to  tell  men  of 
the  propinquity  of  judgment. — David 
Dickson. 

National  catastrophes. — It  takes  cen- 
turies for  the  mass  of  heaped-up  sin 
to  become  top-heavy ;  but  when  it  is, 
it  buries  one  generation  of  those  who 
have  worked  at  piling  it  up,  beneath  its 
down-rushing  avalanche. 

"  The  mills  of  God  griud  slowly, 
But  they  grind  exceeding  small." 

The  catastrophes  of  national  histories 
are  prepared  for  by  continuous  cen- 
turies. The  generation  that  laid  the 
first  powder-horn-full  of  the  train  are 
dead  and  buried  long  before  the  ex- 
plosion which  sends  constituted  order 
and  institutions  sky-high.  The  misery 
is  that  often  the  generation  which  has 
to  pay  the  penalty  has  begun  to  wake 
to  the  sin,  and  would  be  glad  to  mend 
it,  if  it  could.  England  in  the  seven- 
teenth century,  France  in  the  eight- 
eenth, America  in  the  nineteenth, 
had  to  reap  harvests  from  sins  sown 
long  before.  Such  is  the  law  of  the 
judgment  wrought  out  by  God's  provi- 
dence in  history.     But  there  is  another 

550 


judgment,  begun  here  and  perfected 
hereafter,  in  which  fathers  and  sons 
shall  each  bear  their  own  burden,  and 
reap  accurately  the  fruit  of  what  they 
have  sown.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth, 
it  shall  die." — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  37.  The  Saviour's  sorrow  over  a 
sinful  world. — These  words  form  the 
concluding  portion  of  our  Saviour's  last 
public  discourse.  They  were  the  last 
utterances  from  His  lips  in  the  temple 
— they  mark  the  end  of  His  ministry. 
His  subject  has  been  the  wickedness 
of  the  Pharisees,  and  His  words  have 
risen  into  a  vehement  and  terrible  in- 
vective. But  this  stern  work  is  hard 
for  the  gentle  Christ.  He  cannot, 
without  pain,  go  on  with  this  denounc- 
ing of  doom  upon  His  chosen  people. 
All  at  once  He  breaks  down ;  the  pent- 
up  pity,  the  infinite  compassion,  leapt 
from  His  aching  heart,  and  the  language 
of  His  spurned  affection,  the  ineffable 
sadness  of  His  sympathising  spirit, 
came  wailing  forth  in  the  melting 
tenderness  of  this  most  sorrowful  apos- 
trophe, "  O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  ! 
thou  that  killest  the  prophets,"  etc. 
The  text  reveals  the  heart  of  Christ. 

I.  See  how  earnestly  Jesus  desires 
to  save  the  guilty. — Jerusalem  is  under 
the  shadow  of  death.  But  she  does 
not  realise  it ;  she  does  not  know  her 
danger.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  warn 
men  of  their  peril.  Jerusalem  had 
been  warned ;  the  Son  of  God  had 
pleaded  with  her.  He  had  wept  over 
her,  He  had  invited  her  to  repent; 
and  the  end  of  all  is  this  confession  of 
defeat :  "  I  would  .  .  .  and  ye  would 
not."  You  will  see  how,  in  His  opening 
words,  *'  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  !  " 
His  love  shines  out. 

1.  It  is  not  diminished  by  any  wicked- 
ness. 

2.  It  is  not  chilled  by  perversity. 

3.  It  is  not  outwearied  by  delay. — At 
this  very  hour  if  Jerusalem  had  re- 
pented, all  heaven  would  have  been 
jubilant. 

II.  See  how  tenderly  He  gives 
shelter  and  rest  to  those  who  come. — 
"  Even  as  a  hen,"  etc. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTEEn\      chap,  xxiii. 


III.  See  how,  in  spite  of  all  the 
love  of  God  and  Christ,  some  men  wiU 
perish. — "  I  would  .  .  .  and  ye  would 
not,"  and  you  have  your  way.  I  some- 
times think  this  is  the  saddest  and 
darkest  word  in  all  the  Book.  Oh ! 
the  awful  dignity  of  the  human  will — 
this  great  and  dreadful  power  in  me 
that  can  flaunt  itself  in  the  face  of  a 
gracious  God  and  defeat  His  purpose. — 
W.  J.  Woods,  B.A. 

Christ  a  Shelter. — I.  The  first  thing 
suggested  by  this  symbol  is  the  idea  of 
danger. — Great  as  was  the  political 
calamity  that  menaced  them,  their 
greatest  danger  was  spiritual ;  the 
danger  shared  by  all,  in  every  age, 
who  have  broken  the  law,  but  have 
not  accepted  the  Saviour.  Infraction 
of  law  must  be  followed  by  infliction  of 
penalty. 

II.  The  symbol  of  a  shelter  is  so 
presented  as  to  set  forth  the  glory  of 
Him  who  is  thus  revealed. — The  over- 
shadowing wing  of  omnipotence  is 
spread  in  your  defence. 

III.  This  symbol  of  a  shelter  illus- 
trates in  the  highest  degree  the  con- 
descending tenderness  of  Christ. — It 
does  so  by  its  homely  simplicity,  as 
well  as  by  its  ineffable  pathos. 

IV.  This  symbol  of  Christ  is  so  set 
forth  as  to  suggest  the  idea  of  a  shelter, 
afforded  by  one  who  interposes  His  own 
life  between  us  and  danger. — Christ  is 
a  shelter  to  trusting  souls  only  by 
interposing  His  own  life  between  them 
and  the  shock  of  doom. 

Y.  Note  the  ends  to  he  attained  by 
the  sinner's  flight  to  the  Saviour. — It 
is  obvious  that  the  immediate  result  is 
safety.  But  it  would  be  a  radical  mis- 
take to  suppose  that  the  gospel  urges 
men  to  seek  safety  only  for   safety's 


sake.     Safety  in  Christ  is  the  first  step 
to  practical  godliness. 

YI.  This  symbol  of  Christ  is  drawn 
in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that  man  is 
responsible  in  the  matter  of  his  own 
salvation. — C.  Stanford,  D.D. 

Yer.  38.  The  departure  of  Christ  from 
the  temple. — I.  The  close  of  a  mournful 
past. 

II.  The  sign  of  a  miserable  present. 

III.  The  token  of  a  sad  futurity. — 
J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

The  desolate  temple. — Every  Christian 
temple  in  which  Christ  is  not  preached, 
is  empty ;  so  is  every  heart  in  which 
He  does  not  live. — Heuhner. 

Yer.  39.  Christ  hiding  Himself — 1. 
It  is  righteousness  with  Christ  to  smite 
them  with  judicial  blindness  who  refuse 
obstinately  to  acknowledge  Him  when 
He  offers  Himself  unto  them ;  as  here 
He  saith,  "  Ye  shall  not  see  Me  hence- 
forth "  ;  that  is,  you  shall  not  perceive 
Me  to  be  the  Messiah  ;  for  otherwise 
bodily  they  did  see  Him,  and  did 
crucify  Him,  but  they  saw  not  who 
He  was ;  for  had  they  known,  they 
would  not  have  crucified  the  God  of 
glory.  2.  At  last,  Christ's  most  cruel 
enemies  shall  see  and  know  and  ac- 
knowledge Him  to  be  that  blessed 
Messiah  ;  for  all  knees  shall  bow  to 
Him,  and  all  tongues  shall  confess  to 
Him,  and  these  His  adversaries  among 
the  rest  shall  say.  Now  we  see  that 
Jesus  is  the  blessed  Son  of  God,  and 
the  true  Lamb  of  God,  hills  and  moun- 
tains fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb;  yonder  is  the 
blessed  Saviour,  who  came  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord. — David  Dickson. 


551 


CHAP  XXIV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 
CRITICAL    NOTES 

Ver.  1.  To  show  Him  the  buildings  of  the  temple. — Was  that  glorious  house  indeed  t©  be 
left  "  desolate  "  ?  Would  not  the  sight  of  its  glories  lead  Him  to  recall  those  words  of  evil 
omen  ? 

Ver.  2.  See  ye  not  all  these  things  ? — The  expression,  "  all  these  things,"  does  not  refer 
definitely  to  the  buildings  of  the  temple.  It  refers  to  these  buildings  only  in  so  far  as  they 
were  contingently  connected  with  a  more  generic  class  of  things,  the  things  of  dread  signifi- 
cance to  which  our  Saviour  had  been  referring  in  some  of  His  concluding  remarks  within  the 
courts  of  the  Gentiles.  See  xxiii.  36,  where  the  same  expression  occurs.  It  is  as  if  He  had 
said,  "  Are  ye  yet  in  the  dark  1  Do  ye  not  yet  understand  that  Judaism  is  doomed,  as  a  thing 
thoroughly  effete  and  incurably  corrupt  ?  "  etc.  {Morisoii).  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one 
stone  upon  another. — The  remains  which  recent  explorations  have  disinterred  belong,  ail  of 
them,  to  the  substructures  of  the  temple — its  drains,  foundations,  underground  passages, 
and  the  like  (JPlumptre). 

Ver.  3.  End  of  the  world. — Consummation  of  the  age  (R,V.  margin).  When  the  "  end  of  the 
world "  is  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament,  the  term  al(hv,  the  present  dispensation  or 
order  of  things,  is  used,  and  not  k6<tij.os,  the  planetary  system,  the  created  universe  {Schaff). 
It  is  evident  that  the  coming  of  Christ  and  the  end  of  the  world  were  closely  connected  in 
the  disciples'  minds  with  the  judgment  that  was  about  to  come  upon  the  temple  and  the 
chosen  people — a  connection  which  was  right  in  point  of  fact,  though  wrong  in  point  of  time 
(  Gibson).    The  near  as  well  as  the  distant  event  is  viewed  as  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man. 

Ver.  5.  Deceive  many. — Lead  many  astray  (R.V.).  No  direct  fulfilments  of  this  prediction 
are  recorded,  either  in  the  New  Testament,  or  by  Josephus  or  other  historians.  In  the  ex- 
cited fanaticism  of  the  time,  however,  it  was  likely  enough  that  such  pretenders  should  arise 
and  disappear,  after  each  had  lived  oat  his  little  day,  and  fill  no  place  in  history  {Plumptre). 
See  1  John  ii.  18. 

Ver.  6.  Wars  and  rumours. — The  forty  years  that  intervened  before  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  were  full  of  these  in  all  directions  ;  but  we  may  probably  think  of  the  words  as 
referring  specially  to  wars,  actual  or  threatened,  that  affected  the  Jews — such,  e.g.,  as  those 
of  which  we  read  under  Caligula,  Claudius,  and  Nero  (ibid.). 

Ver.  7.  Nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  etc. — "  Pestilences  "  omitted  in  R.V.  Perhaps 
originally  inserted  in  the  margin,  by  some  harmonist,  from  Luke  xxi.  11.  Occurrences  of  the 
character  here  indicated  are  recorded  by  contemporary  historians.  But  "  the  passage  com- 
bines in  one  view  the  whole  of  the  various  social,  physical,  and  climatic  crises  of  develop- 
ment in  the  whole  New  Testament  dispensation  "  {Lange). 

Ver.  11.  False  prophets. — At  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  "  false  prophets  suborned  by  the 
Zealots  kept  the  people  in  a  state  of  feverish  excitement,  as  though  the  appointed  Deliverer 
would  still  appear  "  QMilman).     See  also  Acts  xx.  29 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1 ;  1  John  iv.  1. 

Ver.  15.  The  abomination  of  desolation. — I.e.  "  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate," 
"the  act  of  sacrilege,  which  is  a  sign  and  a  cause  of  desolation."  What  special  act  of 
sacrilege  is  referred  to  cannot  be  determined  for  certain.  The  expression  may  refer  (1)  To 
the  besieging  army.  Cf .  the  parallel  passage  in  Luke,  "  When  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  com- 
passed with  armies."  Lightfoot,  Hot.  Rebr.,  translates  Dan.  ix.  27  in  this  sense  :  "  Until  the 
wing  (or  army)  of  abominations  shall  make  desolate."  (2)  The  Roman  eagles ;  the  E.V. 
margin,  Dan.  ix.  27  reads  :  "  Upon  the  battlements  shall  be  the  idols  of  the  desolator." 
(3)  The  excesses  of  the  Zealots.  See  Jos.,  B.  J.,  IV.  vi.  3  (Carr).  The  holy  place. — The 
temple.  Whoso  readeth,  etc. — See  R.V.  Evidently  the  words  of  the  Evangelist  and  not  of 
the  Lord. 

Ver.  16.  Flee  into  the  mountains. — The  great  body  of  Christians  took  refuge  at  Pella  in 
Peraea.     Eusebius,  H.  M,  III.  5. 

Ver.  17.  Not  come  down. — A  person  could  make  his  escape,  passing  from  roof  to  roof,  till 
at  the  last  house  he  would  descend  the  stairs  that  led  down  its  outside,  without  having 
entered  any  building  (Edersheim). 

Ver.  18.  Clothes. — Cloke  (R.V.).  The  outer  garment ;  the  field  labourer  would  work  in  the 
short  tunic  only. 

Ver.  20.  The  Sabbath  day. — Living  as  the  Christians  of  Judasa  did  in  the  strict  observance 
of  the  law,  they  would  either  be  hindered  by  their  own  scruples  from  going  beyond  a 
Sabbath  day's  journey  (about  one  English  mile),  which  would  be  insuflacient  to  place  them 

552 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxiv. 


out  of  the  reach  of  danger,  or  would  find  impediments — gates  shut,  and  the  like — from  the 
Sabbath  observance  of  others  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  21.  Great  tribulation. — No  words  can  describe  the  unequalled  horrors  of  this  siege. 
1,100,000  Jews  perished  ;  100,000  were  sold  into  slavery.  With  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  Israel 
ceased  to  exist  as  a  nation.    It  was  truly  the  end  of  an  ceon  (  Carr). 

Ver.  22.  No  flesh. — The  warfare  with  foes  outside  the  city,  and  the  faction- fights  and 
massacres  within,  would  have  caused,  had  they  been  protracted  further,  an  utter  depopula- 
tion of  the  whole  country  {Plumptre).  For  the  elect's  sake. — Those  who,  as  believers  in 
Jesus,  were  the  "  remnant "  of  the  visible  Israel,  and  therefore  the  true  Israel  of  God.  It  was 
for  the  sake  of  the  Christians  of  Judaea,  not  for  that  of  the  rebellious  Jews,  that  the  war  was 
not  protracted  (ibid.}.  Shall  be  shortened. — Several  circumstances  concurred  to  shorten  the 
duration  of  the  siege,  such  as  the  scanty  supply  of  provisions,  the  crowded  state  of  the  city, 
the  internal  dissensions,  and  the  abandonment  of  important  defences  (  Carr). 

Ver.  27.  As  the  lightning. — The  idea  is  that  of  universal  self-manifestation  (Morison). 

Ver.  28.  Carcase  .  .  .  eagles. —  Vultures  (R.V.  margin).  As  the  carcase  everywhere 
attracts  the  carrion-eaters,  so  do  moral  corruption  and  ripened  guilt  everywhere  demand  the 
judgment  {Lange). 

Ver.  29.  Immediately. — But  immediately  (R.V.).  A  prophecy  resembles  a  landscape 
painting,  which  marks  distinctly  the  houses,  paths,  and  bridges  in  the  foreground,  but  brings 
together,  into  a  narrow  space,  the  distant  valleys  and  mountains,  though  they  are  really  far 
apart  {BengeV).  Sun  .  .  .  moon  .  .  .  stars  .  .  .  powers. — The  solar  light  of  Christ's  truth 
shall  be  dimmed,  the  lunar  orb  of  the  church  shall  be  obscured  by  heresy  and  unbelief,  and 
some  who  once  shone  brightly  as  stars  in  the  firmament  of  the  church  shall  fall  from  their 
place  (  Wordswortli).  Our  liord  speaks  here  in  language  as  essentially  apocalyptic  as  that  of 
the  Revelation  of  St.  John  (Rev.  viii.  12),  and  it  lies  in  the  very  nature  of  such  language  that 
it  precludes  a  literal  interpretation.  The  words  are  better  left  in  their  dim  and  terrible  vague- 
ness (^PlumjJtre). 

Ver.  30.  The  sign  of  the  Son  of  man. — Some  say  a  visible  cross  ;  others  the  presence  of  the 
Son  of  man  Himself  (Dan.  vii.  13).  Lange  says,  •'  It  is  the  shining  glory  of  the  manifestation 
in  general  as  distinct  from  the  personal  manifestation  itself."  Whatever  it  shall  be  "  when 
it  appears,  its  import  will  be  instantly  recognised  by  the  faithful"  {Carr). 

Ver.  31.  A  great  sound  of  a  trumpet. — Omit  "  sound  "  on  high  MS.  authority,  translate  : 
with  a  great  trumpet.  The  image  would  be  suggestive  to  the  Jews,  who  were  called  together 
in  the  camp  by  silver  trumpets  (Numb.  x.  2  fol.).  Moreover,  the  great  festivals,  the  com- 
mencement of  the  year,  and  other  celebrations,  were  announced  by  trumpets  {Carr). 

Ver.  34.  Be  fulfilled. — The  words  do  not  necessarily  imply  more  than  the  commencement 
of  a  process,  the  first  unrolling  of  the  scroll  of  the  coming  ages  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  36.  But  of  that  day  and  hour,  etc. — "  Neither  the  So7i "  is  introduced  in  the  R.V.  Dr. 
Morison  says,  that  though  not  in  the  great  body  of  the  MSS.,  these  words  were  probably  in 
the  autograph  of  Matthew.  They  are  found  in  the  three  oldest  MSS.,  the  Sinaitic,  the  Vatican, 
and  Cambridge,  and  in  many  copies  of  the  Old  Latin  Version ;  as  also  in  the  Harclean  Syriac, 
and  the  iEthiopic  and  Armenian  Versions.  "  The  eternal  Word  in  becoming  flesh  *  emptied 
Himself '  (Phil.  ii.  7)  of  the  infinity  which  belongs  to  the  Divine  attributes,  and  took  upon 
Him  the  limitations  necessarily  incidental  to  man's  nature,  even  when  untainted  by  evil  and 
in  fullest  fellowship,  through  the  Eternal  Spirit,  with  the  Father  "  {Plvmptre). 

Ver.  40.  The  one  shall  be  taken,  etc. — See  R.V.  The  day  of  judgment  will  be,  as  by  an 
inevitable  law,  a  day  of  separation,  according  to  the  diversity  of  character  which  may  exist 
in  the  midst  of  the  closest  fellowship  in  outward  life  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  41.  Grinding  at  a  mill. — Two  women  sit  at  the  mill  facing  each  other;  both  having 
hold  of  the  handle  by  which  the  upper  is  turned  round  on  the  nether  millstone  {Thomson). 

Ver.  43.  Broken  up. — Broken  through  (R.V.).    The  houses  were  built  largely  of  mud. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.^Verses  1—14. 

Until  the  end. — When  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  disciples  come  away  from  the 
temple  (ver.  1),  that  conspicuous  building  is  much  in  their  thoughts,  but  in 
different  ways.  They  are  thinking  of  its  beauty  and  grandeur.  He  is  thinking, 
and  tells  them  so,  of  its  approaching  destruction  (ver.  2).  That  leads  them  to 
think  and  inquire  in  turn  about  other  things  in  the  future  (see  ver.  3).  To  these 
questions  the  Saviour  replies  by  a  word  of  vmrningj  in  the  first  place  ;  a  word  of 
explaTiation,  in  the  second  place;  a  word  of  hope^  in  the  end. 

I.  A  word  of  warning. — The  subject  they  ask  about  is  not  by  any  means  an 
easy  one.     It  is  one,  on  the  contrary,  in  regard  to  which  they  will  do  specially 

553 


CHAP.  XXIV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


well  to  "  take  heed."  That  is  His  first  word  on  the  point  (ver.  4).  "  Take  heed 
that  no  man  lead  you  astray  "  on  this  subject.  Take  heed  of  this,  because  there 
will  always  be  a  number  of  false  guides  in  existence.  Take  heed  of  this,  because 
such  misleading  teachers  will  usually  be  of  very  plausible  bearing  and  look. 
Take  heed  of  this,  because  they  will  succeed  often  in  persuading  men  to  believe 
them  (ver.  5).  Such,  in  brief,  will  be  the  character  of  the  days  preceding  the 
end  !  Such  the  state  of  things  on  earth  until  the  "  coming  "  or  "  appearing  "  of 
Christ.  "  Deceivers,"  and  "  being  deceived."  Many  teaching  what  is  erroneous. 
Many  accepting  it  as  correct.  Those,  therefore,  who  are  in  the  midst  of  such 
will  do  well  indeed  to  "  take  heed." 

II.  A  word  of  explanation. — Why  is  it  that  there  will  always  be  these  many 
mistakes  on  this  matter  ?  Partly,  of  course,  because  of  the  usual  folly  and 
presumption  of  men.  These  will  account,  in  most  subjects,  for  almost  any 
amount  of  both  gullibility  and  conceit.  It  is  never  quite  wise,  therefore,  in  any 
subject,  to  accept  all  that  one  hears ;  or  to  take  for  granted  that  all  things  will 
always  turn  out  eventually  as  they  appear  to  be  at  the  first.  But  still  more,  of 
course,  will  things  tend  to  be  thus  in  regard  to  that  very  novel  and  all  but 
unexampled  phenomenon  here  described  as  "  the  end."  That  very  title  implies 
that  it  will  be  something  such  as  never  happened  before.  And  that  very  fact, 
therefore,  implies  further  that  there  will  be  unusual  difficulty  in  discriminating 
(in  connection  with  it)  between  the  false  and  the  real.  Hence,  therefore,  what 
our  Lord  says  here,  first,  in  regard  to  the  world.  At  one  time  the  world  will  be 
full  of  cries  of  alarm ;  a  general  break-up  will  appear  imminent ;  the  '"'  end  "  will 
seem  close.  Instead  of  which  these  signs  will  be  signs  only  that  the  world  is  on 
the  way  to  the  "  end  "  (ver.  6).  At  another  time  there  will  be  more  than  alarm 
— there  will  be  actual  conflict  and  strife,  families  of  men  against  other  families, 
and  nature,  apparently,  against  all.  This  is  surely  the  very  eve  of  the  end 
(ver.  7).  Not  at  all ;  it  is  only  a  beginning,  a  first  battle  out  of  very  amany,  the 
suffering  which  marks  the  first  stage  in  development,  and  which  is  to  be  followed, 
naturally,  by  still  more  (ver.  8).  So,  also,  of  what  the  Saviour  appears  to  say, 
next,  of  the  church.  Many  outward  assailants,  much  bitter  persecution — no 
friendliness  to  it  anywhere — will  sometimes  mark  its  surroundings  (ver.  9). 
Also,  much  inward  treachery — false  teachers  and  disciples  in  abundance,  evil- 
doing  abounding,  good-doing  discouraged — will  mark,  at  the  same  time,  its  con- 
dition (vers.  11,  12).  Altogether,  in  short,  things  will  look  as  though  they  could 
no  longer  be  "  endured  "  ;  and  even  faith  itself  will  be  inclined  to  say  of  them 
that  they  can  no  longer  go  on.  Not  so,  however,  even  then  must  true  faith  con- 
clude. These  things  are  but  reasons  for  further  patience ;  not  for  giving  all  up. 
More  still  has  to  be  "  endured " — perhaps  a  good  deal  more— before  the  final 
closing  of  all.  Happy  he  who  knows  this,  and  is,  so,  able  to  "  wait  "  (ver.  13  ; 
see  also  Rev.  vi.  10,  11,  xiii.  10,  xiv.  12). 

III.  A  word  of  hope. —  Is  there,  then,  no  reliable  way  of  ascertaining  the 
approach  of  the  "  end  "  ?  There  is ;  but  it  is  to  be  sought  by  faith  in  quite 
another  direction.  Such  hope  is  to  be  sought  for,  in  the  first  place,  in  the 
continuance  of  the  Word.  Whatever  may  be  the  opposition  to  it  on  the  part  of 
the  world,  whatever  the  disloyalty  to  it  on  the  part  of  organisations  and 
"churches,"  the  preaching  of  the  "gospel"  (ver.  14)  shall  never  wholly  cease  in 
this  "age."  Always  there  shall  be  some  to  know  it — and  some  to  teach  it — in 
truth.  Hope  is  to  be  sought  for,  in  the  next  place,  in  the  spread  of  the  Word. 
The  "  whole  world  "  is  ultimately  to  be  penetrated  thereby.  "  All  the  nations  " 
are  to  hear  in  turn  of  the  message  of  the  "  kingdom."  And  the  more  there  is 
seen  of  this,  therefore,  the  more  evidence  there  will  be,  as  well  of  the  certainty  as 
of  the  near  approach,  of  the  "end."  And  especially  will  this  be  felt,  therefore, 
when  we  consider,  finally,  what  is  said  here  about  the  purpose  of  thus  spreading 

554 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxiv. 


the  Word.  It  is  in  order  that  the  sound  of  its  message  may  come  as  a 
''  testimony  "  to  all  (ver.  14).  Every  separate  land  is  to  hear  those  tidings  which 
were  meant  for  all  from  the  first.  No  nation  is  to  be  left  without  this  "  witness  " 
of  the  love  and  mercy  of  God ;  no  nation  to  be  without  its  opportunity  of  hearing 
of  salvation  through  Christ.  The  inference  seems  irresistible.  When  the  last 
nation  has  had  its  opportunity,  the  day  of  opportunity  will  be  over.  When  the 
day  of  grace  has  been  thus  extended  to  all,  it  will  not  be  far  from  its  close. 
This,  we  say,  is  the  natural  inference.  The  Saviour  Himself  also  here  solemnly 
tells  us  the  same.  "  Then  shall  the  end  come  ! "  *'  Then  shall  the  end  have 
come!^     So  it  might  be  translated. 

This  view  of  the  "  age  "  sets  before  us  : — 

1.  The  sad  depravity  of  mankind. — What  a  succession  of  pictures — of  apparent 
disappointments — is  here  !  What  opposition  and  rebellion  on  the  one  side ! 
Centuries  of  appeal,  centuries  of  contempt,  on  the  part  of  the  world.  What 
weakness  and  unwisdom  on  the  other  !  Centuries  of  trust,  centuries  of  coming 
short  of  it,  to  say  nothing  more,  on  the  part  of  the  church  !  The  very  "  salt  of 
the  earth  "  continually  tending  to  corruption  and  death  ! 

2.  The  wonderful  patieTice  of  God. — Bearing  with  all  this  so  as  to  call  forth  (as 
we  have  seen  from  the  descriptions  given  and  the  passages  quoted)  the  continual 
astonishment  of  the  church.  Earely,  indeed,  would  even  the  people  of  God 
have  been  as  God  Himself  in  this  matter. 

3.  The  absolute  certainty  of  the  end. — This  miracle  of  forbearance,  in  the  nature 
of  things,  cannot  always  go  on.  The  longer  it  endures,  on  the  contrary,  the 
surer,  evidently,  its  close.  How  can  God  allow  His  own  designs  always  to  be 
thwarted  ?  Or  His  own  people  always  to  be  oppressed  ?  Or  His  own  Son  always 
to  be  disappointed,  waiting  for  His  crown  ?  Such  never-ending  delay,  in  a  word, 
would  differ  little  from  falseness  itself  A  thing,  here,  not  to  be  thought  of 
(Titus  i.  2). 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Yer.  2.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalmn. 
— It  was  not  merely  the  destruction  of 
a  city,  but  the  close  of  a  cLispensatioo — 
the  end  of  that  great  ago  which  began 
with  the  call  of  Abraham  to  come  out 
from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  and  be  the 
father  of  a  people  chosen  of  the  Lord. 
It  was  "the  end  of  the  world"  (cf. 
R.V.,  ver.  3,  margin)  to  the  Jews,  the 
end  of  the  world  which  then  was,  the 
passing  away  of  the  old  to  give  place 
to  the  new.  It  was  the  event  which 
bore  the  same  relation  to  the  Jews  as 
the  Flood  did  to  the  antediluvians, 
which  was  emphatically  the  end  of  the 
world  to  them.  If  we  bear  this  in 
mind,  it  will  enable  us  to  appreciate 
the  tremendous  importance  assigned  to 
this  event  wherever  it  is  referred  to  in 
the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  especially 
in  this  momentous  chapter. — /.  M. 
Gibson,  D.D. 


Ver.  6.  Consolation  during  pestilence. 
— "  See  that  ye  be  not  troubled,"  for  : — 

I.  National  calamities  work  out 
God's  purposes. 

II.  Ye  are  in  God's  hands. — "  It  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die."  "  All 
the  days  of  my  appointed  time,"  etc. 
"  Every  man  is  immortal  until  his 
work  is  done."  Not  fatalism  but 
Providence  is  the  doctrine  of  the  New 
Testament. 

III.  Trouble  does  no  good,  but  much 
harm  (Ps.  xci.  6). 

IV.  God  gives  you  the  means  of 
safety. — T.  R.  Stevenson. 

Ver.  11.  False  teachers. — 1.  Christ- 
ians may  be  tempted  to  defection  by 
their  own  teachers,  who,  ere  people  be 
aware,  may  make  defection  themselves, 
and  then  fall  to  seduce  the  people. 
"  Many    false    prophets  shall    arise." 

055 


CHAP.  XXIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


2.  This  sort  of  temptation  is  ready- 
to  prevail  with  people,  and  to  draw 
such  away  whom  open  persecution 
could  not  drive  from  the  truth ;  for,  it 
is  said,  "  They  shall  deceive  many," 
because  disputation  and  opposition 
against  the  truth  (for  which  we  are 
called  to  sufi'er),  by  our  own  teachers, 
when  they  begin  to  swerve  from  the 
truth,  is  a  harder  onset  against  a  man's 
faith  than  when  fire  and  sword  are 
threatened,  in  the  case  of  a  cause  clear 
and  not  questioned  by  our  teachers. — 
David  Dickson. 

Ver.  12.  The  weakening  of  love. — 
1.  Honest  men  do  suffer  much  in  their 
estimation,  when  the  hypocrisy  of 
hypocrites  is  discovered  ;  for  iniquity 
abounding  breedeth  mutual  suspicion 
of  one  another's  sincerity,  a  man  not 
knowing  whom  to  trust,  when  by 
outbreaking  of  much  iniquity  he  findeth 
many  to  be  false.  2.  When  abound- 
ing iniquity  breedeth  much  jealousy, 
as  mutual  esteem  and  confidence  are 
weakened,  so  is  mutual  love  diminished. 

3.  This  is  a  sore  trial  when,  beside  the 
common  adversary,  the  godly  do  grow 
suspicious  one  of  another,  and  dare 
not  trust  one  another,  and  so  do  grow 
cold  in  their  love  to  one  another. — 
Ibid. 

Ver.  13.  Final  perseverance  not  in- 
evitable.— When  our  Lord  says  that 
none  can  pluck  from  the  Father's  hand 
those  who  are  His,  He  does  not  say  that 
they  who  are  His  may  not  themselves 
break  or  fall  away  from  Him.  The 
grace  of  God  does  not  make  our  final 
perseverance  inevitable.  It  makes  it 
possible,  probable,  morally  certain  if 
you  will,  but  morally  and  not  mechani- 
cally certain.  God  who  has  made 
us  free  respects  the  freedom  which  He 
has  given  us.  He  does  not  crush  it 
even  by  His  own  merciful  gifts ;  and 
grace  no  more  absolutely  assures 
heaven  than  does  natural  \v^ll  or 
the  force  of  habit  conquer  the  road  to 
it.  What  are  the  causes  which  make 
endurance  to  the  end  difiicult  in  so  very 
many  Christian  lives? 

656 


I.  "The  persecution  that  ariseth 
because  of  the  Word." — Persecution  is 
in  any  case  friction ;  and  friction,  if 
only  it  be  continued  long  enough, 
brings  movement  to  a  standstill,  until 
there  be  a  new  supply  of  the  impelling 
force. 

II.  The  false  Christs  and  the  false 
prophets. — Our  faith  is  undermined  by 
people  who  talk  and  write  in  the  very  best 
English,  and  who  have  so  much  about 
them  that  is  winning  and  agreeable 
that  we  cannot  believe  what  is  really 
going  on.  We  cannot  go  on  breathing 
a  bad  air,  and  be  as  we  were  when  we 
lived  high  up  on  the  mountain,  unless 
we  take  very  great  precautions. 

III.  Then  there  is  the  weariness 
which  steals  over  thought  and  heart 
with  the  lapse  of  time. — Human 
faculties,  after  all,  are  finite.  They 
spend  themselves  and  they  fall  back 
into  lassitude  and  exhaustion.  After 
great  experiences,  there  is — I  do  not 
say  a  relapse,  but  a  condition  of  less 
keenness  of  insight,  less  tension  of  will, 
less  warmth  of  affection,  less  conscious 
effort  of  intelligence  and  of  sanctified 
passion ;  and  lookers-on  say  that  the  ex- 
citement has  passed,  and  that  common- 
sense  has  resumed  its  sway,  and  the 
soul,  too,  knows  that  something  has 
passed  from  it — inevitably,  no  doubt, 
from  the  nature  of  the  case.  And  with 
this  knowledge  there  comes  depression ; 
and  this  depression  is  in  its  way  a 
trial,  permitted,  as  we  may  believe,  in 
order  to  make  our  service  of  God  more 
unselfish  than  it  would  be  if  it  were 
sustained  throughout  life  by  an  uninter- 
rupted sense  of  ecstasy.  But  it  is  a 
trial  under  which  some  men  have 
failed.  And  then  it  may  be  the  case 
that  all  is  lost,  and  that  perseverance 
is  forfeited. 

IV.  And  once  more  there  is  the 
trifling  with  conscience,  not  necessarily 
in  great  matters,  but  in  a  number  of 
little  matters — omission  of  morning 
and  evening  prayers,  or  their  curtail- 
ment ;  neglect  of  a  regular  review  of 
conscience;  carelessness  as  to  the  objects 
upon  which  money  is  spent,  and  as  to 
the  proportion  in  which  it  is  given  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,     chap.  xxiv. 


works  of  religion  and  mercy ;  reckless- 
ness in  intercourse  with  others,  especially 
if  they  are  younger  or  less  well  informed. 
These  and  like  matters  help  forward 
and  dull  the  inoperative  condition  of 
conscience,  which  is  in  itself  prepara- 
tory to  a  great  failure.  Perseverance 
is  likely  to  be  secured  by  three  things 
especially  :  (1)  by  a  sense  of  constant 
dependence  on  God ;  (2)  by  prayer  for 
perseverance  ;  (3)  by  keeping  the  mind 
fixed  as  much  as  possible  on  the  end  of 
life  and  on  that  which  follows  it. — 
Canon  Liddon. 

Ver.  14.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
— T.  It  is  called  the  ''gospel  of  the 
kingdom,"  because  it  reveals  the  king- 
dom of  grace,  which  leads  to  the  king- 
dom of  glory  ;  sets  up  Christ's  kingdom 
in  this  world,  and  secures  ours  in  the 
other  world. 

II.  This  gospel,  sooner  or  later,  is  to 
be  preached  in  all  the  world,  to  every 
creature,  and  all  nations  discipled  by 
it ;  for  in  it  Christ  is  to  be  salvation  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  for  this  end  the 
gift  of  tongues  was  the  first-fruits  of 
the  Spirit. 

III,  The  gospel  is  preached  "  for  a 


witness  unto  all  nations " ;  that  is,  a 
faithful  declaration  of  the  mind  and 
will  of  God  concerning  the  duty  which 
God  requires  from  man,  and  the  re- 
compense which  man  may  expect  from 
God.  It  is  a  record  (1  John  v.  11); 
it  is  a  witness  for  those  who  believe, 
that  they  shall  be  saved  ;  and  against 
those  who  persist  in  unbelief,  that 
they  shall  be  damned. — M.  Henry. 

The  emZ.— "Then  shall  the  end 
come."  I.  When? — 1.  When  the  gospel 
has  been  preached  to  all  the  world. 
(1)  As  a  witness  unto  it.  (2)  As  a 
witness  against  it :  a  savour  of  life  or 
death. 

2.  When  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is 
come  in. 

II.  Why  ? — 1.  God's  faithfulness 
demands  it,  in  aid  of  His  church, 
endangered  by  worldliness  (ver.  12). 

2.  Iniquity  demands  it. — "  Lawless- 
ness "  shall  abound.  "  Where  the 
carcase  is,"  etc. 

III.  How? — 1.  Suddenly,  as  a  thief 
in  the  night. 

2.  By  cosmic  irregularities ;  powers 
of  nature  shaken. — Proctors  "  Gems  of 
Thought." 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  n— 2%. 

A  partial  ending. — "The  end  is  not  yet."  "The  end  "cannot  come  till  all 
nations  have  heard  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  (vers.  6,  14).  This  is  certainly 
true  in  the  wddest  sense  of  the  words.  It  is  not  an  argument,  all  the  same, 
against  the  possibility  of  a  narrower  and  preliminary  interpretation  thereof. 
There  is  an  expression,  on  the  contrary,  towards  the  beginning  of  the  present 
passage  ("  Let  him  that  readeth  understand "),  which  seems  to  indicate  the 
reverse.  In  the  details  of  the  passage  itself,  also,  there  are  certain  things 
which  look  the  same  way.  Some  of  these  do  so,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the 
apparent  exclusiveness'ioi  their  character.  Others  do  so,  on  the  other  hand,  by 
the  apparent  conclusiveness  of  their ^^. 

I.  Their  singular  exclusiveness. — This  is  noticeable,  in  the  first  instance,  in 
regard  to  the  question  of  plaice.  That  which  is  now  in  view,  e.g.,  affects 
"Judaea,"  but  not  the  neighbouring  "mountain"  (ver.  16,  R.V.).  Also  the 
"  house,"  but  not  the  "  house-top,"  nor  yet  the  neighbouring  "  field."  Also, 
apparently,  only  that  part  of  Judaea  which  is  within  actual  sight  or  easy  report 
of  Jerusalem  (ver.  15;  cf.  Luke  xxi.  20).  Everything,  in  short,  appears  to  be 
even  studiously  limited  from  the  point  of  view  of  locality.  Much  the  same  seems 
true,  next,  from  the  standpoint  of  nearness  of  time.  The  things  about  to  be 
hereafter  in  that  restricted  locality,  are  spoken  of  as  being  much  as  they  were  at 
that  time  when  the  Saviour  was  speaking.  Just  the  same  questions,  e.g.,  which 
then  affected  the  men  of   Judaea — questions  of  family  life,  of  the  nature  and 

557 


CHAP.  XXIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


character  of  the  seasons,  of  Sabbath-day  observance — would  be  affecting  them 
then ;'  ^.wA-  affecting  themselves  also,  to  whom  He  was  speaking,  in  their  own 
persQj>s  .*nd  lives — so  the  language  seems  to  imply  (vers.  19,  20).  The  same 
appealio  t^?  be  true,  lastly,  as  to  the  question  of  duration.  For  one  thing,  the 
"  tribulation  "  in  prospect  was  not  to  go  on  for  ever.  Not  to  go  on  even  to  its 
natural  term — so  it  seems  to  be  implied.  That  fearful  trial,  on  the  contrary, 
was  to  be  "  cut  short  "  on  account  of  the  very  fearfulness  of  its  nature  (ver.  22). 
For,  had  it  gone  on,  it  would,  necessarily,  on  that  very  account,  have  wrought 
a  "  full  end."  And  that  was  not,  by  any  means,  what  was  intended  at  present. 
Not  a  "full  end"  of  the  "age."  Not  a  "full  end"  of  that  "elect"  race  so 
specially  visited  by  it  (ver.  22 ;  Ps.  cv.  6,  cvi.  5).  Not  of  that  elect  "  race,"  for 
the  sake  of  that  "  elect  remnant "  of  it,  which  was  never  wholly  to  perish 
(Kom.  ix.  27,  xi.  5,  28).  In  all  these  ways,  therefore,  this  part  of  the  chapter 
seems  to  take  us  away  from  what  is  broadest,  and  to  confine  our  attention  to 
that  which  is,  in  every  way,  on  a  limited  scale.  Not  far  off  in  place — not  far  off 
in  time — not  loDg  in  duration,  because  of  its  very  intensity  :  these  seem  to  be  the 
three  principal  lines  of  the  tribulation  it  describes. 

II.  The  singular  conclusiveness  of  some  of  these  future  details.  Though  plainly 
thus  on  a  much  smaller  scale,  this  preliminary  "  ending  "  will  nevertheless  show 
itself  to  be  an  ending,  by  having  in  it  many  of  the  same  features  as  the  great 
ending  itself.  One  of  these  has  to  do  with  the  concomitants  of  the  visitation 
in  question.  In  certain  latitudes  and  states  of  the  atmosphere  the  appearance 
of  the  sun  is  usually  marked  by  the  appearance  of  mock-suns  as  well.  Something 
the  same  is  true  in  connection  with  every  special  "  appearing  "  of  the  Light  of 
the  world.  Men  think  they  see  Him,  when  He  is  about  to  appear,  even  where 
He  is  not  (vers.  23,  24  ;  cf.  Luke  iii.  15).  Another  detail  has  to  do  with  the 
special  manner  of  manifestation  described.  Here  we  are  looking  at  it  from  the 
side  of  its  glory.  The  visitation  spoken  of,  whatever  its  limitations  and  nature 
in  other  respects,  is  not  to  be  a  thing  "  in  a  corner."  It  is  not  to  be  seen  only 
by  those  afar  off,  where  few  men  are  to  be  found.  Not  to  be  discovered  only  by 
those  within  walls,  like  so  many  of  the  discoveries  of  science.  It  is  rather  to  be 
like  that  flash  of  the  lightning,  which  even  the  least  observant,  be  they  where 
they  may,  cannot  prevent  themselves  from  observing  (vers.  25,  27;  also  Luke  xvii. 
20).  And  another  feature  yet  has  to  do  with  the  occasion  of  the  manifestation 
now  meant.  Here  we  are  looking  at  it  from  the  side  of  judgment.  It  is  when 
the  "  transgressors  have  come  to  the  full  "  ;  when  "the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites" 
is  complete;  when  Noah  has  stepped  into  the  ark;  when  Lot  has  left  Sodom  be- 
hind him,  that  God  is  found  to  visit  in  judgment  (See  Dan.  viii.  23 ;  Gen  xv.  16  ; 
Luke  xvii.  27,  29).  The  same  rule  exactly  is  to  hold  good  in  the  kind  of  ending 
meant  here.  Only  where  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  dead  body  already,  will  the 
birds  that  feed  on  it  come  (ver.  28). 

From  the  points  thus  noted  we  may  see,  in  conclusion : — 

\.  That  there  is  TrhVA^h  reason  for  putting  a  specially  Jewish  interpretation  on 
this  part  of  the  chapter,  and  regarding  it  as  predicting  that  visitation  of 
judgment  which  brought  about  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  some  forty  years 
from  this  date.  Certainly  this  would  answer  to  what  we  have  seen  as  to  express 
narrowness  of  locality,  nearness  of  time,  and  limitation  of  duration.  Certainly, 
also,  we  know  that  there  were  false  Christs  enough  about  then ;  and  that  the 
visitation  was  conspicuous  enough  in  its  character ;  and  that  Judaea  and 
Jerusalem,  when  the  Christians  had  fled  from  them,  had  become  like  a  "  dead 
body  "  indeed  from  a  spiritual  point  of  view.  So  far,  therefore,  it  may  very  well 
be  that  the  Saviour  had  this  in  view  in  this  place. 

2.  That  there  is  some  reason  for  not  strictly  confining  the  passage  to  this.  In 
looking  at  the  nearer  the  eye  can  hardly  avoid  seeing  something  of  the  farther 

558 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxiv. 


as  well.  The  like  will  be  true  of  the  tongue  which  attempts  to  describe  it.  As 
a  rule,  it  will  say  that  which  applies  to  the  nearer  alone.  As  an  oxcf^ption,  it 
may  say  some  things  which  apply  to  the  farther  as  well — perhaps,  we  may  add, 
in  all  their  fulness,  to  the  farther  alone.  If  this  appear  true  in  +hc  ^resent 
instance,  the  patient  student  will  not  consider  it  an  argument  for  rejecting 
either  interpretation,  but  for  combining  the  two  in  their  way.  And  this,  even 
though  there  may  still  be  some  uncertainty  with  regard  to  that  "  way." 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 


Ver.  15.  The  abominatiwi  of  desola- 
tion in  the  Holy  Place. — 1.  God  hath 
instruments  at  His  pleasure  to  destroy 
strongest  cities,  and  can  make  those 
whom  men  abhor  most  to  be  the  instru- 
ment of  their  destruction.  2.  Lest 
the  faithful  should  still  dote  upon  the 
ceremonies  of  the  law,  and  figurative 
shadows,  after  the  Messiah's  coming, 
it  was  very  needful  that  the  city  and 
temple  both,  whereunto  the  sacrifices 
and  chief  ceremonies  were  restricted, 
should  be  destroyed  and  abolished,  as 
the  prophet  Daniel  had  foi'etold.  3. 
For  understanding  the  Word  of  God 
when  it  is  read,  careful  attention,  and 
all  means  of  knowledge  must  be  used. 
"  Let  him  that  readeth  understand." 
— David  Dickson. 

Vers.  16-22.  Counsels  and  warnings. 
— 1.  When  the  Lord  is  to  pour  out  His 
wrath  on  a  place,  if,  all  circumstances 
being  considered,  a  man  shall  find  it 
both  lawful  and  possible  to  withdraw 
himself  from  that  place,  it  is  wisdom 
to  be  gone  (ver.  16).  2.  If  the  judg- 
ment overtake  a  man  so  suddenly  as 
there  is  no  time  nor  means  given  to 
escape,  then  let  men  lay  by  all  thought 
of  worldly  goods,  and  iDestow  their 
minds  and  time  on  that  which  is  most 
needful ;  that  is,  for  preparation  unto 
death  (ver.  17).  3.  In  such  a  case,  if 
a  man  with  the  loss  of  all  he  hath 
can  have  his  life  for  a  prey  he  fareth 
well  (ver.  18).  4.  In  the  time  of 
general  calamities,  God's  ordinary 
benefits  make  a  man  more  miserable 
than  if  he  wanted  them,  as  children, 
riches  and  honour ;  when  they  must 
now  be  gone,  and  can  give  no  more 
comfort  unto  us,  then  are  they  matter 
of   our   woe    (ver.    19).      5.    Troubles 


may  be  mitigated  by  prayer  unto  God, 
who  can  dispose  means  of  deliverance, 
and  can  mix  the  cup  of  our  grief,  so  as 
our  misery  may  be  more  endurable 
(ver.  20).  6.  God's  judgment  upon 
despisers  of  the  gospel,  and  rejecters  of 
mercy  offered  in  Christ  are  most  severe; 
therefore  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
was  of  all  calamities  that  ever  came 
upon  a  people  the  most  lamentable 
(ver.  21).  7.  In  most  confused  and 
calamitous  times  the  Lord  hath  a  care 
of  His  own  elect,  and  remembereth 
mercy  towards  them  in  the  midst  of 
wratb  (ver.  22). — Ibid, 

Ver.  23.  Warnings  against  false 
guides. — 1.  As  the  main  danger  of  the 
church  is  from  seducers,  who  shall 
strive  to  divert  men  from  the  true 
Christ,  so  their  main  care  should  be  to 
see  that  their  faith  do  not  miscarry. 
Therefore,  saith  Chiist,  "believe  it  not" 
if  another  Christ  be  offered  unto  you. 
2.  As  at  all  times,  so  chiefly  in  times 
of  trouble,  Satan  studies  to  delude  men 
with  pretences  of  saviours  andsalvation, 
which  are  not  real,  because  in  time  of 
trouble  men  are  most  ready  to  receive 
anything  which  doth  promise  relief  or 
release,  and  so  to  embrace  delusions 
instead  of  Divine  help.  Therefore  it  is 
said,  "Then" — that  is,  when  the  trouble 
is  great — will  it  be  said,  "  Lo,  here  is 
Christ."  3.  After  our  Lord's  ascension 
neither  is  another  Christ  to  be  expected, 
nor  the  true  Christ  to  be  found  bodily 
and  locally  present  in  any  place  on  the 
earth. — Ibid. 

Ver.  25.  Warniifigs  must  be  heeded. 
— 1.  The  Lord's  forewarning  of  the 
danger  from  false  prophets  should  stir 
up  all  to  be  the  more  watchful,  and  it 

659 


CHAP.  XXIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


shall  make  men  inexcusable  if  they  I.  The  suddenness,  the  usefulness, 
shall  be  seduced.  2.  The  doctrine  of  and  the  necessity  of  judgment. — In- 
election  doth  not  give  warrant  unto  evitable,  swift,  unerring  as  the  vulture's 
security,  but  should  be  made  use  of  for  descent  on  the  carcase,  is  the  judgment- 
diligence  and  watchfulness.  3.  This  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  to  corrupt 
forewarning  showeth  that,  albeit  the  communities  and  corrupted  men. 
elect  shall  not  be  altogether,  and  with-  II.  The  law  of  judgment. — It  is 
out  recovery,  deceived,  yet  they  may  this  :  Wherever  there  is  entire  moral 
be  so  far  mistaken,  as  it  had  been  good  corruption,  there  is  final  punishment ; 
they  had  watched.  Much  sin  and  wherever  there  is  partial  corruption 
misery  may  befall  a  man  by  not  there  is  remedial  punishment.  God 
watching,  albeit  at  length  he  may  be  in  His  capacity  as  Governor  of  the 
brought  forth  of  it.  "  Behold,  I  have  world,  as  Educator  of  mankind,  is 
told  you  before  "  maketh  the  Lord  free  bound  to  destroy  corruption.  It  is 
of  what  ill  un watchfulness  may  let  in.  necessary  that  the  vultures  should 
— David  Dickson.  devour  the  carcase,  lest  it  pollute  the  air 

■XT       c^c,    rm                      1.1        7^  and  breed  a  pestilence.    It  is  necessary 

Ver.  28.  The  carcase  and  the  vultures  ^^^^  corrupted  nations  should  be  blotted 

--The   figure   gives   a    profound    and  ^^^    j^^^   ^^       .^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^   ^^^^ 

strong  expression  of :-  ^^^1  ^^^^^            ^^^       ^^^  ^^^^^ 

I.  The  necessity  of  judgment.  ^^  mankind.     And  our  sense  of 

II.  The  inevitableness  of  judgment.  -^3^^^^         ^^^h  the  destruction.    Nor, 

III  The  universality  of  judgment.  '^^^^  ^  ^^^  ^i^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^^^  ^^J^ 

—J.  F.  Lange,  D.D.  ^^^y^   justice   shows    want    of    love.— 

The  law  of  Divine  judgment.— T\n&  ^-  ^.  Brooke,  D.D. 
illustrates : — 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PABAGRAPH.— Verses  29-31. 

A  wider  ending. — "  After  the  tribulation  of  those  days  "  there  ariseth  another. 
This  seems  to  signify  that  that  other  tribulation  shall  be  of  a  difierent  kind. 
The  description  which  follows  carries  out  that  idea.  The  "  appearing "  or 
"  coming  "  of  which  it  speaks  is  to  be  unlike  that  spoken  of  before  in  two 
cardinal  ways.  Unlike,  first,  in  regard  to  the  signs  which  precede  it.  Unlike, 
secondly,  in  regard  to  the  effects  which,  follow  it  up. 

I.  The  signs  which  precede. — This  is  true,  on  the  one  hand,  in  regard  to  the 
place  of  their  appearance.  The  sign  spoken  of  in  the  former  case,  was  a  sign 
upon  earth — something  standing  where  it  ought  not  in  the  temple  on  earth 
(ver.  15).  All  the  signs  spoken  of  in  this  case  are  connected  with  "heaven." 
The  one,  therefore,  had  to  do  only  with  the  "place  of  God's  feet"  (Isa.  Ix.  13). 
The  others  were  concerned  with  what  He  speaks  of  as  His  "throne"  (Acts 
vii.  49).  Also,  these  latter  "  signs  "  are  to  be  connected  with  all  that  is  specially 
great  in  the  heavens — the  "  sun  "  that  gives  us  our  days  ;  the  "  moon  "  by  which 
we  measure  our  seasons ;  the  "  stars "  which  guide  us  at  night.  Also,  once 
more,  in  these  signs,  these  glories  are  shown  us  with  all  their  glory  gone,  as  it 
were.  The  sun  is  shorn  of  its  brightness,  the  moon  is  deprived  of  its  beauty ; 
the  stars  are  losing  their  place.  Everything  in  heaven,  in  a  word,  which  had 
previously  spoken  to  men  of  stability  and  rule  (Ps.  cxix.  89-91),  shall  then  be 
speaking  of  disorder  and  ruin.  There  was  even  greater  difierence,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  regard  to  the  significance  of  these  signs.  The  "  abomination  of  desolation 
in  the  Holy  Place  "  (ver.  15),  meant  very  much — even  the  presence  of  that  which 
was  detestable  instead  of  that  which  was  acceptable,  and  of  that  which  destroyed 
instead  of  that  which  protected  and  blessed.    But  the  "  sign  of  the  Son  of  iiian  in 

560 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxiv. 


heaven  "  (ver.  30),  must  mean  very  much  more.  More  in  the  way  of  direction — 
it  points  to  that  great  One  Himself,  who  is  to  be  the  Judge  of  mankind  (John  v. 
22  ;  Acts  xvii.  31,  etc.).  More  in  the  way  of  distinction — it  is  so  connected  with 
that  great  One  as  nothing  else  had  previously  been,  and  so  is  to  be  seen  by  all, 
and  also  understood  by  all,  as  ^^  the  sign"  of  Himself.  Its  nature  now,  in  a  word, 
it  is  difficult  to  surmise.  Its  significance  then,  it  will  be  impossible  either  to 
overrate  or  to  miss.  Evidently,  therefore,  in  regard  to  this  "  coming, "  we  are,  on 
all  these  accounts,  in  a  far.  higher  atmosphere  than  in  that  contemplated 
before. 

II.  The  effects  which  follow. — These  are  such  as  to  correspond  in  every  way 
to  the  comparative  greatness  of  the  signs.  In  the  way,  first,  of  extent.  The  sign 
in  the  temple  was  a  sign  to  one  people  and  creed  ;  only  therefore,  to  those,  and 
not,  even  so,  to  them  all.  These  other  signs,  being  signs  in  "  heaven,"  are  signs  to 
mankind ;  and  all,  therefore,  who  belong  to  mankind,  are  affected  thereby.  "  All 
the  tribes  of  the  earth,"  and  not  one  tribe  only,  know  of  them  now  (ver.  30).  In 
the  way,  next,  of  emotion.  All  are  "  mourning  "  (ibid.) ;  and  mourning  openly,  so 
the  description  implies,  as  though  *'  cutting  "  themselves  in  their  sorrow.  In  the 
way,  after  that,  of  manifestation.  The  Lord  Himself  (cf.  1  Thess.  iv.  16) — the 
face  and  form  of  the  evident  Representative  of  the  whole  of  mankind — in  those 
*'  clouds "  which  are  the  "  dust  of  His  feet "  (Nahum  i.  3),  and  with  every 
accompaniment  that  tells  of  greatness  and  majesty — shall  be  seen  then  by  all  eyes 
(ver.  30).  In  the  way,  finally,  of  division.  Up  till  then,  the  good  fish  and  the 
bad,  the  tares  and  the  wheat,  the  believers  and  the  hypocrites,  will  be  more  or 
less  mingled,  if  not  in  God's  sight,  in  the  eyes  of  mankind  (2  Tim.  iii.  16-19). 
From  that  time,  when  this  Judge  of  all  is  thus  manifested,  that  condition  of  things 
is  no  more.  Now  the  "angels"  go  forth  with  another '' trumpet "  than  that 
of  the  gospel.  Now  where  those  other  messengers  had  gone  previously  to  bear 
*' witness"  (ver.  14)  these  come  to  divide.  And  that,  moreover,  as  also  those 
others  previously,  in  all  parts  of  the  world  (ver.  31).  In  a  word,  universal 
separation — total  separation — final  separation — is  the  last  "  effect  "  that  follows 
these  "signs."  And  the  last  argument,  therefore,  that  goes  to  prove  this 
"  ending  "  to  be  the  ending  of  all. 

In  all  this  we  see  much  ground,  on  the  one  hand,  for  comfort  and  hope.  When 
"  the  end  "  comes,  we  see,  plainly,  what  an  end  it  will  be  !  How  clear  its 
tokens  !  How  wide  its  influence  !  How  penetrating  its  power  !  How  total  its 
changes !  How  abiding  its  issues  !  "  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new  !  " 
What  hope  can  be  better  than  this,  if  that  which  is  "  old  "  be  as  described  in 
this  chapter?     See  before  vers.  1 — 14. 

Much  ground,  on  the  other  hand,  for  patience  cmd  modesty.  For  patience. 
Those  who  have  such  a  future  before  them  can  well  afford  to  wait.  In  this 
sense,  as  well  as  others,  "  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  For  modesty — 
in  not  attempting  to  forecast  all  that  shall  follow  the  end.  The  very  glory  of 
the  prospect  before  us  prevents  us  from  foreseeing  it  clearly.  Who  can  possibly 
imagine  what  is  to  be  when  "  all  "  things  are  made  "  new  "  ?  Will  it  not  most 
likely  be  different  from  anything  ever  dreamed  of  before  ?  And  none  the  less 
desirable,  but  all  the  more  so,  on  that  very  account  ? 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  30.  Christ^s  glorious  appeanrin^g  own  glory^   as    Mediator,   which    He 

at  the  end  of  the  wwid. — Consider  : —  entered  into  when  He  ascended,  as  the 

I.  What   the    glory    is    in     which  reward   of    His  sufferings  and    death 

the   Lord    Jesus    Christ   will   appear  (Eph.   i.  20-23).     In  His  own  glory, 

at  the   end  of  the  world. — 1.  In  His  as  Judge  of  all,  unto  whom  they  must 

0  0  561 


CHAP.  XXIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


bow,  and  from  whom  they  must  receive  was  transfigured !     When  He  appeared 

their  final  doom  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  to  Paul  on  His  way  to  Damascus  ! 

2.  In  the  glory  of  His  Father. — That  III.  Why  the  Lord  Jesus  will  come 
is,  in  the  glory  of  the  Godhead.  His  the  second  time  in  so  great  glory. — 
Father  and  He  are  one,  and  so  their  1.  As  a  recompense  to  Him  for  His 
glory  is  one.     This  glory  was  veiled  in  abasement. 

His  humiliation,  by  His  human  nature.  2.  To  beget  a  great  reverence  and  awe 

3.  In   the    glory   of  all   the   mighty  in  all  who  are  to  be  judged  by  Him. 
angels. — (xxv.   31).     The   whole   court  3.    That   all    the  world  may    see  it, 
of  heaven  shall  attend  upon  the  Judge  and  His  people  thereby  be  made  glad 
of  the  world,  that  they  may  be  present  with  exceeding  joy  (1  Pet.  iv.  13),  and 
with  Him  at  this  great  act.  that  His  enemies  may  see  what  they 

II.  Some  things  which  evidence  the  have  lost  by  being  shut  out  from  the 

greatness  of  this  glory  in  which  Jesus  sight  and  enjoyment  of  this  glory. 
Christ  will  come. — You  may  form  some  4.    That   He   may   carry   home   His 

idea  of  it,  from  some  preceding  appear-  saints  as  His  bride  with  greater  state  and 

ances    upon    lesser     occasions.      How  solemnity,    unto    His    Father's   house, 

great  was  the  glory  He  appeared  in  where  He  hath  prepared  mansions  for 

when  He  gave  the  law  upon   Mount  them. — Anon. 
Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16-18)  !     When  He 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  S2— 35. 

The  certainty  of  the  end. — The  more  wonderful  the  character  of  any  announce- 
ment, the  greater  the  demand  it  makes  on  our  faith  ;  and  the  greater  the  degree, 
therefore,  to  which  our  faith  in  it  stands  in  need  of  support.  Our  Saviour 
seems  to  recognise  this  in  the  passage  before  us.  Wonderful  is  that  great  con- 
summation of  change  of  which  He  had  just  spoken.  All  things  are  to  become 
different  from  what  they  are  now  (vers.  30,  31).  This  is  difiicult  to  believe — 
the  more  difficult  because  of  the  length  of  time  in  which  they  have  gone  on  as 
they  are  (cf.  2  Pet.  iii.  4).  To  meet  this  thought  the  Saviour  speaks  the 
parable  now  before  us — in  which  He  will  be  found  to  draw  our  attention,  after 
the  manner  of  parables,  fiist,  to  certsim  familiar  natural  facts ;  and,  secondly,  to 
certain  important  spiritual  verities  which  are  illustrated  thereby. 

I.  The  natural  facts. — These  are  found  in  the  general  region  of  vegetable 
life  and  development.  "  Behold  the  fig-tree  and  all  the  trees  "  (Luke  xxi.  29). 
See  how  things  are  among  them.  These  are  exemplified,  next,  in  the  region  in 
question,  in  one  particular  distance.  *'  From  the  fig-tree  learn  her  parable " 
(ver.  32,  R.V.).  Few  trees  are  better  known  or  more  valued  than  this.  In  this, 
therefore,  you  may  see,  as  well  with  ease  as  with  especial  significance,  what  I  ask 
you  to  note.  Also,  in  this  example,  see,  next,  the  special  phenomena  which  I  ask 
you  to  note— how  the  fig-tree,  as  the  seasons  come  round,  changes  in  appear- 
ance and  condition,  and  puts  forth  its  leaves  and  its  buds,  and  then  produces  its 
pleasant  fruits.  Also,  how  she  begins  to  do  this — when  summer  is  near — even 
before  we  see  other  indications  of  summer's  approach,  arid  so  proves,  to  those  who 
observe  this,  that  the  breath  of-  summer  is  already  stirring  within  her ;  and  that 
summer  itself,  therefore,  is  on  its  way  to  us  already,  and  will  be  fully  amongst  us 
before  very  long.  And  this  we  argue,  be  it  observed  yet  further,  because  of  what 
we  know  of  the  year  and  its  seasons,  and  of  the  unvarying  order  and  regularity 
with  which  God  has  long  ago  appointed — and  still  brings  about — the  successions  of 
day  and  night,  and  summer  and  winter,  and  seed-time  and  harvest  (Gen.  viii.  22). 
On  this  same  order,  indeed,  we  rely  with  such  certainty,  that  we  speak  with 
certainty  of  all  it  implies — of  the  speedy  coming  of  summer ;  of  its  effects  on  the 
trees ;  of  the  sequence  of  these  effects ;   of  those  to  come   first ;  of  those  to 

562 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap  xxiv. 


succeed  ;  of  the  whole  procession  of  events,  in  a  word.  Insomuch  that  when  we 
see  the  first  of  them,  we  feel  as  sure  of  the  rest  of  them  as  though  we  eaw  them 
as  well.  Also,  sure  of  them,  yet  further  and  finally,  within  a  very  brief  time. 
"  We  k7iow  that  summer  is  nighy 

II.  The  spiritual  verities  to  which  these  familiar  facts  are  applied.  First  of 
all,  in  the  direction  of  sphere.  The  God  of  nature  is  the  God  of  history  too.  As 
He  does  in  the  one  case,  so  in  the  other  as  well.  As  He  orders  the  fields  and  the 
gardens,  so  He  administers  nations  and  churches.  As  with  the  fig-tree,  so  with 
higher  growths  also.  Next,  in  the  direction  of  the  causes  at  v)ork.  These  are 
as  secret  to  us  in  the  one  case  as  they  are  in  the  other.  We  cannot  see  the 
influences  which  are  operating  in  the  trees,  in  the  spring-time,  to  alter  their  con- 
dition and  look.  Neither  can  we  see  the  forces  at  work,  in  certain  stages  of  the 
history  of  communities  of  mankind,  to  change  their  condition  and  look.  W"e  see 
the  results  only,  not  their  origins ;  what  is  external  only,  not  what  is  working 
within.  At  the  same  time,  in  these  external  consequences  we  see,  in  both  cases, 
on  this  very  account,  what  are  tokens  and  signs.  Such  a  change,  for  example,  in 
the  one  case,  as  the  appearance  of  buds  on  a  fig-tree  is  a  sign  that  forces  are  at 
work  there  which  will  bring  about  other  like  changes  of  greater  magnitude  before 
long.  In  other  words,  they  are  the  results  of  the  agitation  of  nature  at  the 
nearer  approach  of  the  sun.  So  with  those  changes  in  the  appearance  of  human 
societies  at  certain  critical  seasons  in  their  experience  of  those  things  of  which 
the  Saviour  had  spoken  above  (vers.  29,  30).  That  obscuring  of  the  bright,  and 
displacing  of  the  high,  and  unsettling  of  what  had  long  been  stable,  of  which  He 
there  speaks,  are  things  which,  when  they  come  to  pass,  mean  much  more  than 
themselves.  They  are  evidences  of  forces  at  work  which  will  produce  greater 
results  in  their  turn.  In  one  word,  they  are  the  unconscious  agitations  of  society 
at  the  approach  of  its  Maker.  Consequently,  as  before,  they  are  not  only 
assurances  of  certainty,  but  of  swiftness  as  well.  The  season  that  sees  the 
"bud"  sees  also  the  "fruit."  The  " generation "  that  sees  the  beginning  sees 
also  the  *'  end  "  (vers.  33,  34).  When  the  Son  of  man  is  thus  "  at  the  doors," 
He  will  soon  be  inside  them.  When  once  inside  them  He  will  soon  finish  His 
work.    Of.  Rom.  ix.  28  ;   1  Sam.  iii.  12  ;  Prov.  xxix.  1,  etc.,  etc. 

We  see  from  these  things,  in  conclusion,  and  that  in  an  eminently  cogent  and 
striking  manner  : — 

1 .  Hov^  to  look  on  this  world. — The  present  condition  of  things  around  us  is  a 
mere  interregnum— a  period  of  transition— having  the  seeds  in  it  of  its  own  passing 
away — something  as  "  mortal "  as  we  ourselves.  That  very  feature  in  it  which 
leads  some  to  think  otherwise  is  the  strongest  proof  of  this  truth.  *'  All  things  " 
for  the  present  "  continue  as  they  were  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  4),  because  the  "  season  "  for 
changing  them  has  not  arrived.  As  it  were,  it  is  "  winter  "  with  them  at  present ; 
the  Sun  is  away.  There  could  not  be  a  better  proof  that  they  will  begin  to  be 
altere  d  the  moment  the  Sun  begins  to  approach  ;  and  that  they  will  be  altered 
indeed  then,  and  altered  swiftly ;  and  altered  finally  too. 

2.  How  to  look  on  Christ's  wc/rd. — As  the  only  stable  thing  we  know  of  ;  stable 
indeed  ;  stable  for  ever,  immovable  itself,  and  therefore  moving  everything  else. 
See  Isa.  xl.  6-8  ;  1  Pet.  i.  23-25.  Hence  also  the  derived  stability  of  those  who 
are  conformed  to  that  will  (1  John  ii.  17). 

HOMILIES  OF  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.   32,  33.  Signs  in  the  kingdoms  II.    He    sends    sig^S     of    natural 

of  nature  and  grace. — I.  One  God  who     changes  and  of  moral  events, 
is  King  of  both.  III.  At  signs  in  nature  men  pre- 

563 


CHAP.  XXIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


pare ;  much  more  should  they  make 
spiritual  preparation  for  the  greater 
event. 

IV.  The  natural  sign  speaks  of  the 
faithfulness  of  the  God  of  nature ;  so 
the  moral  sign  speaks  of  His  faithful- 
ness as  God  of  grace  and  King  of 
glory. — /.  G.  Gray. 

Ver.  35.  The  perpetuity  of  the  words 
of  Ghrist. — I.  Here  we  have  a  fair  and 
bold  comparison  of  two  things :  one 
which  seems  the  slightest  and  most 
evanescent  you  can  think  of  ;  another 
which  seems  the  very  ideal  of  all  that 
is  substantial  and  durable.  Here  are 
on  the  one  side  a  few  words,  and  on  the 
other  side  the  great  solid  world.  Yet 
the  Saviour  dares  the  comparison. 
He  invites  the  comparison  between  the 
endurance  of  the  words  He  utters  and 
the  endurance  of  the  stars,  the  earth, 
and  the  ocean. 

II.  It  is  approaching  towards  two 
thousand  years  since  the  days  of 
Christ's  three  years'  ministry  on  earth. 
— Though  no  magic  was  impressed  on 
the  syllables  which  flowed  from  the 
lips  of  the  Redeemer  to  arrest  their 
natural  passing  away,  still  it  is  true 
and  certain  that  they  ha/e  not  passed 
away,  and  cannot  pass  away  while  the 
world   stands.      For  one   thing,    they 


have  not  passed  away,  in  this  sense — 
that  when  they  were  spoken  the  simple 
narrative  of  the  Evangelists  took  and 
perpetuated  them  ;  and  in  these  four 
Gospels  we  have  the  words  of  Christ 
preserved. 

III.  But  it  is  a  little  thing  to  say 
that  Christ's  words  were  perpetuated 
on  paper. — We  should  not  set  much 
store  by  the  fact  that  upon  printed 
pages  by  millions  and  millions  the 
words  of  our  Redeemer  have  outlived 
the  storms  and  the  wear  of  ages;  we 
should  not  mind  much  about  that  if  it 
stood  by  itself ;  but  take  it  with  this, 
that  these  words  are  so  marvellously 
adapted  to  the  needs  of  our  immortal 
nature  that  those  who  have  once  felt 
their  power  would  feel  it  was  parting 
with  life  to  pait  with  them.  Earth- 
quakes, deluges,  might  sweep  this 
world,  but  you  must  unpeople  it  before 
the  words  of  Christ  could  pass  away 
from  it. 

IV.  Though  the  last  Bible  perished, 
as  perish  it  may  in  the  wreck  and  ruin 
of  this  world,  though  the  blessed 
words  of  Jesus  were  to  do  what  they 
never  can — fade  away  utterly  from  the 
remembrance  of  the  glorified  soul — 
even  then  these  words  would  live  on 
in  the  effects  they  had  produced. — 
A.  Boyd,  D.D, 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  36—51. 

The  uncertainty  of  the  end. — We  ought  to  know  the  season,  we  cannot  know 
the  moment,  of  the  "  appearing "  of  Christ.  So  the  Saviour  teaches  us  here. 
"Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  one,  not  even  the  Son  Himself,"  in  a  sense 
(ver.  36).  How  will  the  appearing  of  Christ,  in  consequence,  come  on  the  world  ? 
How  should  the  thought  of  it,  meanwhile,  tell  on  the  church  ? 
/  I.  How  it  will  come  on  the  world. — It  will  come  on  it,  first,  while  men,  as  a 
rule,  are  thinking  of  everything  else.  The  story  of  Noah  and  the  deluge  is  an 
^illustration  of  this.  Coming  on  men  as  that  did  in  almost  total  disbelief  of  his 
warnings  (we  lead  of  no  one  outside  his  own  family  believing  in  them  at  all)  it 
found  the  men  of  that  day  thinking  of  everything  else.  They  were  full  of 
engagements  which  all  took  for  granted  that  there  was  nothing  to  interrupt 
them  at  hand  (vers.  38,  39  ;  cf .  also  Luke  xvii.  28,  "  they  planted,  they 
builded  ").  And  they  were  doing  this  to  the  very  verge  of  the  visitation  itself. 
They  did  not  believe  in  the  flood  till  they  found  it  had  come,  and  never 
thought  of  it  until  it  swept  them  away.  Even  so  would  it  be,  the  Saviour 
declares  here,  with  regard  to  His  "  coming."  What  had  been  true  of  the  type 
would  be  true  of  the  antitype  also.  What  had  happened  in  Noah's  day  would 
Happen  also  in  His.     Not  till  that  "door,"  also,  was  being  "  shut"  (Gen.  vii.  16; 

564 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxiv. 


Matt.  XXV.  10)  would  men  see  it  was  open.  That  day  when  it  comes  will  find 
men,  also,  as  they  are  to  remain.  Men  will  be  found  differing  then,  as  they 
differ  now,  about  the  things  of  the  kingdom.  Although  as  a  rule  then  they  will 
not  be  thinking  of  the  approaching  appearing  of  Christ,  there  will  be  some 
among  them  who  do.  There  will  be  some,  then,  in  short,  who  "love  His 
appearing,"  although  most  others  do  not.  These  differing  classes,  also,  will  be  found 
at  that  time,  even  as  they  are  now,  much  mingled  together.  Just  as  now,  in  one 
"  field"  there  may  be  "  two  men,"  or,  now,  at  ''  one  mill  "  there  may  be  *'  two 
women,"  who  are  as  far  asunder  in  heart  on  this  question  of  Christ's  appearing 
as  they  are  near  together  in  person,  so  will  it  also  be  then.  But  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  on  that  day  of  days,  it  will  not  continue  to  be  any  longer.  That 
day,  on  the  contrary,  shall  for  ever  separate  these  "  unequally  yoked  "  ones. 
And  shall  separate  them  also,  be  it  further  observed,  to  wholly  separate  lots. 
Those  who  are  "  left "  are  not  left  to  be  saved  !  Only  those  "  taken  "  are  taken 
to  life.     There  is  no  intermingling,  there  is  no  re-arrangement,  after  that  date  ! 

II.  How  the  knowledge  of  these  things  should  tell  on  the  church. — How  it 
should  tell  on  them,  fiist,  as  to  what  they  should  do.  They  should  use  the 
information  thus  given  them  about  the  end  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  it  when 
it  comes.  It  was  even  so,  of  course,  that  in  regard  to  all  things  of  importance, 
all  men  of  sense  would  proceed.  No  householder,  e.g.,  who  had  received  informa- 
tion as  to  the  time  when  the  houstbreaker  intended  to  visit  him,  would  fail  to 
make  use  of  it  in  getting  thoroughly  prepared  for  his  visit  (ver.  43).  Even  so 
must  they  act  in  regard  to  that  day  which  was  to  "  come  as  a  thief."  Having 
been  so  expressly  told  this  they  must  make  use  of  this  knowledge  so  as  to  be 
"  prepared "  for  that  day.  And  since  it  might  come  any  day  they  must  be 
prepared  for  it  every  day,  as  the  only  way  to  make  sure  (ver.  44).  This  same 
knowledge  should  show  them,  next,  why  they  ought  to  do  thus.  They  ought  to  do 
so,  on  the  one  hand,  as  a  question  of  duty.  The  knowledge  thus  imparted  to 
them,  and  the  capacity  bestowed  on  them  by  means  of  which  they  were  enabled 
to  realise  both  its  importance  and  truth,  were  not  things  given  them  for  their 
own  advantage  alone.  They  were  more  than  a  privilege.  They  were  also  a 
trust.  And  they  were  bound,  therefore,  to  use  these  things  for  the  benefit  of 
others  as  well  (ver.  45  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10).  And  nothing,  they  might  rely  on  it, 
would  be  more  pleasing  to  their  Master,  and  therefore  more  "  blessed "  for 
them,  than  to  be  found  doing  so  at  the  end.  Let  them  be  always  ''ready," 
therefore,  if  they  would  be  ever  doing  what  was  best  for  themselves  (vers.  46,  47). 
Let  them  think  of  this  also,  on  the  other  hand,  even  as  a  question  of  life.  This 
duty  was  one  which  could  only  be  neglected  by  them  at  their  uttermost  peril. 
Not  thus  to  do  was  to  do  the  opposite  in  effect.  Not  to  impart  thus  to  others 
was  in  practice  to  rob  them.  Not  to  argue  from  the  uncertainty  of  the  hour  of 
Christ's  coming  in  the  way  of  obedience  was  to  go  in  the  way  of  rebellion 
(ver.  48).  It  were  hard  to  say,  therefore,  whether  there  was  more  of  treachery 
or  of  presumption  in  such  conduct ;  or  anything  more  truly  deserving  the  worst 
doom  of  which  we  hear  in  God's  Word.  It  would  almost  seem,  in  a  word,  as 
though  not  to  be  hoping  for,  and  so  not  to  be  ready  for,  the  appearing  of  Christ, 
was  to  be  in  a  position  in  which  we  can  expect  nothing  from  it  but  ill. 

How  worse  than  valueless  are  the  predictions  of  men  ! — Practically  the  voice  of 
the  antediluvian  world  was  a  prophecy  in  opposition  to  the  preaching  of  Noah. 
The  like  is  true  of  the  voice  of  the  world  since,  in  regard  to  the  preaching  of 
Christ.  We  know  what  became  of  that  earlier  *'  voice."  We  know  what 
is  to  become  of  the  other.  The  louder  it  cries,  and  the  longer  it  lasts,  and  the 
more  "  prophets"  it  comes  from,  only  the  more  manifest,  at  the  last  day,  will  be 
its  falseness  and  shame.  The  revelation  of  this  truth  is  almost  as  old  as  our 
race  (Jude  14,  15;  see  also  Rom.  iii.  4,  19). 

665 


CHAP.  XXIV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  37-39.  The  Flood.— 1.  How 
universal  the  doom. 

II.  How  marvellous  the  general 
apathy. 

III.  Safety  only  in  the  ark. 

IV.  Christ  our  ark. — J.  C.  Gray. 

Vers.  40,  41.  Diversity  in  character. 
— The  world's  work  will  be  going  on 
then  as  now ;  there  is  also  the  thought 
of  a  real  separation  in  this  life  beneath 
an  external  sameness. — A.  Carr,  M.A. 

Ver.  42.  Chnstian  watching. — I.  In 
Christian  watching  there  is  implied 
a  vigorous  exercise  of  a  Christian 
conscience. — 1.  When  we  wish  to 
quicken  and  increase  the  power  of  con- 
science, we  must  do  so  by  teaching  it 
to  be  more  and  more  keen  in  percej^tion. 
Conscience  must  stand  before  us,  as  a 
watcher  on  a  ship  stands,  guiding  the 
bark  of  the  soul  through  the  wild  waves 
and  the  thick  darkness  of  this  deep 
night  of  life,  and  crying  out  to  us,  from 
moment  to  moment,  in  the  voice  of  the 
great  Lord  whose  echo  it  is,  "  What  I 
say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  Watch." 
2.  But  conscience  requires  also  to  be 
wide  in  its  range  of  vision — it  must 
omit  nothing.  It  must  not  fret  over 
trifles,  but  it  must  not  leave  them  out ; 
it  must  recollect,  it  must  learn  increas- 
ingly to  recollect,  that  attention  to  the 
little  things  of  every  day  is  an  element 
in  that  attitude  of  a  Christian  which 
the  Lord  calls  vjatching.  3.  You  must 
exercise  conscience  to  assist  you  in  wise 
decision.  4.  Conscience  must  also, 
finally  and  above  all  things,  be 
pey^emptory  in  command.  Conscience 
may  be  wrong,  it  may  make  mistakes, 
but  it  must  never  be  disobeyed.  To 
disobey  conscience  is  to  commit  the 
last  disloyalty — it  is  to  learn  to  be 
untrue  to  yourselves.  5.  Conscience 
needs  illumination.  It  needs  the 
illumination  that  comes  from  prayer, 
from  the  Scripture,  from  the  wise 
advice  of  patient  and  experienced 
friends.  6.  It  needs  more,  it  needs 
reinforcement ;  it  needs  the  presence  of 

566 


the  Lord  of   conscience;   it   needs  to 
feed  upon  the  power  of  Christ. 

II.  There  is  another  point  in  Christ- 
ian watching  which  I  must  note.  It 
is  not  only  by  the  exercise  of  conscience, 
it  is  by  a  patient  practice  of  thought- 
fulness. — To  take  thought  and  make  it 
pass  into  a  permanent  form ;  to  lay 
hold  upon  will  and  make  it  act  in  one 
definite  direction  ; — to  do  that  is  to  set 
the  life  sweeping  onward,  like  a  resist- 
less current,  in  one  direction ;  it  is  to 
place  the  whole  soul  in  one  steady 
attitude  ;  and  this  definite  directing  of 
the  current  of  life,  and  this  steady  fixing 
of  the  attitude  of  soul — this  and  nothing 
else  is  what  our  blessed  Redeemer  calls 
watching. — W.  J.  Knox- Little,  M.A. 

Watching  for  the  Lord^s  coming. — The 
idea  is.  Ye  know  not  whether  the  day 
or  hour  of  the  Lord's  coming  be 
characterised  by  the  quality  of  com- 
parative immediacy  or  of  comparative 
remoteness.  And  yet  the  Lord  had 
told  His  disciples  that  many  events 
would  occur  before  this  glorious  appear- 
ing. Wherein,  then,  the  consistency 
of  the  injunction  of  this  verse  ?  It  is 
found  in  a  combination  of  two  assump- 
tions. 1.  That  the  Lord  was  speaking, 
not  merely  to  and  for  His  Apostles, 
but  to  and  for  His  disciples  in  all 
places  and  times.  2.  That  He  took  a 
broad  view  of  spiritual  realities,  and 
the  bearing  of  the  great  events  con- 
nected with  His  kingdom  on  individual 
souls.  So  far  as  the  soul's  real  interests, 
and  its  great  duties,  are  concerned,  it 
is  of  no  real  moment  whether  it  shall 
remain  incarnate  till  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  or  be  "  absent  fi'om  the  body " 
long  before  that  event.  Spiritual 
watchfulness  in  either  case  is  equally 
needed. — J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Vers.  43,  44.  The  uncertainty  of  life 
the  great  reason  for  holiness. — I.  The 
character  of  the  existing  dispensation 
would  be  altogether  changed  were  we 
enabled  to  foresee  whatever  could 
happen. — It    would    no    longer  be  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,      chap.  xxrv. 


dispensation  of  faith,  but  a  dispensa- 
tion of  sight.  We  find  it  intensely- 
difficult  in  our  ignorance  to  submit 
ourselves  to  God,  in  whose  hands  we 
are.  What  would  it  be  if  we  had 
acquaintance  with  the  future,  and  so 
were  in  a  measure  independent ;  and 
could  make  our  plans  with  certainty 
as  to  their  issue.  The  wife  would  be 
a  widow  while  her  husband  lived,  the 
child  would  be  an  orphan  while  yet 
blessed  with  parents,  if  the  funeral 
were  foreknown  and  the  day  of  separa- 
tion clearly  revealed. 

II.  It  is  practically  of  very  little 
importance  whether  we  can  give 
satisfactory  reasons  why  the  future 
should  be  hidden,  and  for  the  declara- 
tion that  the  unveiling  it  would 
produce  far  greater  preparedness  for 
the  termination  of  life.  It  might,  on 
the  whole,  be  advantageous,  or  it 
might  on  the  whole  be  disastrous,  that 
the  day  of  death  should  be  known ;  but 
the  arrangement  to  which  we  are  to 
conform  is  one  in  which  the  day  is 
absolutely  unknown ;  and  it  must  be 
our  business  rather  to  labour  at  acting 
agreeably  to  the  circumstances  in 
which  we  are  placed,  than  to  determine 
what  effect  would  be  wrought  were 
those  circumstances  changed.  —  H. 
Melvill,  B.D. 

Vers.  45-51.  The  faithful  servant  and 
the  wicked  one. — I.  Their  opposite 
spirit. — The  one  waits  for  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  ;  the  other  puts  no  faith 
in  that  coming. 

II.  Their  acts. — The  one  takes  care 
of  the  household's  nourishment ;  the 
other  makes  himself  a  despotic  lord, 
who  abuses  the  faithful,  and  wastes 
the  goods  of  the  house  in  riotous 
Uving. 

III.  Their  recompense.  —  Blessed 
and  miserable  surprise  at  the  advent 
of  the  Lord.  The  one  is  elevated  to 
the  highest  dignity,  the  other  is  con- 
demned and  destroyed  on  the  spot.- — 
J.  P.  LaTige^  D.D. 

Vers.  45-47.  The  Lord's  true  steward. 
— I.  Characteristics. 


1.  Faithful.— To  his  Lord.  To  the 
end  (ver.  46). 

2.  Wise  or  prudent,  for  himself,  and 
in  relation  to  those  under  his  care. 
The  "  word  in  the  Greek  is  that  which 
ethical  writers  had  used  to  express  the 
moral  wisdom  which  adapts  means  to 
ends,  as  contrasted  with  the  wisdom  ©f 
pure  contemplation,  on  the  one  hand, 
or  technical  skill  on  the  other" 
(Plumptre). 

II.  Function. — "  To  give  them  meat 
(their  food,  H.V.)  in  due  season."  The 
daily  or  monthly  allowance.  *'  This 
imagery,  drawn  from  a  large  Roman 
estate,  has  given  rise  to  the  oft-recur- 
ring thought  of  the  stewardship  of  the 
Apostles  and  ministers  of  Christ."  1  Cor. 
iv.  1  ;  Titus  i.  7  (Cambridge  Bible  for 
Schools).  "  There  is  an  art,  as  it  were, 
of  spiritual  dietetics,  which  requires 
tact  and  discernment  as  well  as  faith- 
fulness. The  wise  servant  will  seek  to 
discover  not  only  the  right  kind  of  food, 
but  the  right  season  for  giving  it " 
(Plumptre). 

III.  Reward. — "  He  will  set  him 
over  all  that  he  hath  "  (KV.) ;  <*  thus 
conferring  upon  him  the  highest  honour 
and  reward  of  which  he  is  susceptible  " 
(Morison).— ^.  M.  Booth. 

Vers.  48-51.  The  unfaithful  steward. 
— I.  His  conduct. 

1.  Presumptuous. — "My  Lord  de- 
layeth  His  coming." 

2.  Self-assertive. — "Smite  his  fellow- 
servants."  More  than  neglect ;  "  abus- 
ing them  in  the  spirit  of  a  petty  tyrant " 
(Morison). 

3.  Self-indulgent. — "  Eat  and  drink 
with  the  drunken." 

II.  His  punishment. 

1.  Absolutely/  certain. — "  Shall  come." 
"  Our  putting  off  the  thoughts  of 
Christ's  coming  will  not  put  off  His 
coming  "  (M.  Henry). 

2.  Surprisingly  sudden. — "  In  a  day 
when  he  looketh  not  for  Him." 

3.  Terribly  severe  (ver.  51).  *'  Some 
have  felt  surprised  that  our  Lord  did 
not  shrink  from  the  horror  of  the  word 
('cut  him  asunder').  Ah !  but  it  was  the 
horror  of  the  thing  which  He  dreaded, 

567 


CHAF.  XX 7.      EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


and  wished  to  avert.     It  was  the  in-  duplicity  of  such  conduct.     By  office  in 

finite  pity  of  His  heart  that  led  Him  the  church,  '  exalted  unto  heaven  ' ;  by 

to  use  a  word  which  might  prove  the  practice,  '  brought  down  to  hell ' !    That 

very  strongest  deterrent.    Besides,  how  unnatural     combination    cannot    last, 

significant  it  is  !     Think  of  whom  He  These  monsters  with  two  faces  and  one 

is    speaking, — servants   set    over    His  black  heart  cannot  be  tolerated  in  the 

household  to  give  food  in  due  season,  universe  of  God.     They  shall  be  '  cut 

who,    instead  of   doing  this,  maltreat  asunder';  and  then  it  will  appear  which 

their  fellow-servants  and   ruin   them-  of  the  two  faces  really  belongs  to  the 

selves    with    excess.      Think    of    the  man"  (Expositor's  Bible), — H.  M.  Booth. 


CHAPTER   XXV. 
CRITICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — The  three  parables  of  this  chapter  appear  here 
as  in  closest  sequence  to  the  great  discourse  of  chap,  xxiv.,  and  are  as  its  natural  conclusion 
{Plumptre).  Ten  virgins  which  took  their  lamps.— According  to  Eabbinical  authority,  such 
lamps  carried  on  the  top  of  staves  were  frequently  used,  while  ten  is  the  number  always  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  public  solemnities  {Edersheim).  To  meet  the  bridegroom. — The  usual 
Jewish  custom  was  for  the  "friends  of  the  bridegroom"  to  conduct  the  bride  to  her  husband's 
home  ;  and  when  the  procession  arrived,  the  bridegroom  went  forth  to  lead  the  bride  across 
the  threshold.  The  imagery  of  the  parable,  however,  implies  that  the  bridegroom  himself 
went  to  fetch  his  bride,  perhaps  from  a  great  distance,  while  a  group  of  maidens  await  his 
return,  ready  to  welcome  him  in  Oriental  fashion  with  lamps  and  flambeaux  i^Carf). 

Ver.  5.  Slumbered,  nodded,  and  then  slept. —The  idea  intended  is,  that  they  did  not 
continue  merely  nodding  ;  but,  falling  into  deep  sleep,  they  continued  sleeping  (J^IorisoTi). 

Ver.  13.  Wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh. — Omitted  in  R.V.  The  evidence  against  the 
genuineness  of  these  words  is  decisive  {Btowti). 

Ver.  14.  For  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  etc.— See  R.V.  Servants. — Slaves.  Delivered  unto 
them  his  goods.— The  outward  framework  of  the  parable  lies  in  the  Eastern  way  of  dealing 
with  property  in  the  absence  of  the  owner.  Two  courses  were  open  as  an  approximation  to 
what  we  call  investment.  The  more  primitive  and  patriarchal  way  was  for  the  absentee 
to  make  his  slaves  his  agents.  They  were  to  till  his  land  and  sell  the  produce,  or  to  use  the 
money  which  he  left  with  them  as  capital  in  trading.  In  such  cases  there  was,  of  course, 
often  an  understanding  that  they  should*  receive  part  of  the  profits,  but  being  their  master's 
slaves,  there  was  no  formal  contract.  The  other  course  was  to  take  advantage  of  the  bank- 
ing, money-changing,  money-lending  system,  of  which  the  Phoenicians  were  the  inventors, 
and  which  at  the  time  was  in  full  operation  throughout  the  Roman  empire.  The  bankers 
received  money  on  deposit  and  paid  interest  on  it,  and  then  lent  it  at  a  higher  percentage, 
or  employed  it  in  trade,  or  (as  did  the  pithlicani  at  Rome)  in  farming  the  revenues  of  a 
province.  This  was  therefore  the  natural  resource,  as  investment  in  stocks  or  companies 
is  with  us,  for  those  who  had  not  energy  to  engage  in  business  {Plwniptre). 

Ver.  15.  Talents. — Value  uncertain. — See  note  on  chap,  xviii.  24. 

Ver.  24.  An  hard  man. — The  word  "hard"  points  to  stiffness  of  character  {Plumptre). 
Reaping  where  thou  hast  not  sown. — The  sense  is  obvious :  "  I  knew  thou  wast  one  whom  it 
was  impossible  to  serve,  one  whom  nothing  would  please ;  exacting  what  was  impracticable, 
and  dissatisfied  with  what  was  attainable  "  (Broion).  But  Dr.  Morison  paraphrases  thus  : 
"  Not  only  reaping  thine  own  fields,  and  leaving  no  gleanings  for  the  poor  behind,  but 
unscrupulously  passing  the  boundary  line  that  separates  thy  fields  from  the  fields  of  thy 
neighbours,  and  thrusting  thy  sickle,  whenever  thou  hast  an  opportunity,  into  their  standing 
corn.  Sir,  thou  art  so  hard  as  to  be  not  only  ungenerous,  but  positively  unjust."  Gathering 
where  thou  hast  not  strawed. —  Where  thou  didst  not  scatter  (R.V.).  Gathering  into  the  garner 
from  another's  threshing-floor,  where  thou  hast  not  winnowed  (Meyer). 

Ver.  26.  Thou  knewest  that  I  reap,  etc. — We  must  suppose  the  infusion  of  such  tones  as 
would  express  the  most  indignant  querying  or  amazement  {Morison). 

568 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW.       cHAP.  XXV. 


Ver.  27.  Exchangers. — Bankers  (E.V.).  Literally,  "  to  those  who  stand  at  tables,"  because 
the  bankers  had  tables  before  them  {Carr).  Usury. — Of  old  just  meant  mterest,  and  was  an 
unexceptionable  term.  It  denoted  the  commission  that  was  given  for  the  use  of  borrowed 
money  (^Morisoii). 

Ver.  29.  Unto  every  one  that  hath,  etc.— See  note  on  chap.  xiii.  12. 

Ver.  30.  Outer  darkness,  etc. — See  note  on  chap,  viii.  12. 

Ver.  31.  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come,  etc. — The  paragraph,  vers.  31-46,  is  not  a  parable, 
as  some,  inclusive  of  Townsend  and  Olsbausen,  have  supposed,  but  a  prophecy.  It  is  a 
prophecy,  however,  which  is  largely  imbued  with  parabolic  and  dramatic  symbolisms  ;  and 
which,  consequently,  requires  for  its  interpretation  the  careful  discrimination  of  substance 
and  form,  essence  and  accident  {Morison).  His  glory. — His  personal  glory.  The  throne  of  His 
glory. — The  glory  of  His  judicial  authority  {Brown). 

Ver.  32.  All  nations. — Either  (1)  all  the  nations  of  the  world,  including  the  Jews;  or 
(2)  all  the  Gentiles.  The  almost  invariable  use  of  rd  'iQvt]  to  signify  the  Gentiles ;  the 
unconsciousness  of  service  to  Christ  shown  by  just  and  unjust  alike ;  the  simplicity  of  the 
standard  proposed  by  the  Judge,  favour  the  second  interpretation.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  special  warning  to  the  Apostles,  and  to  the  Jewish  race,  in  the  previous  parts  of  the 
discourse  render  it  probable  that  Jews  and  Christians  are  not  excluded  from  this  picture  of 
the  judgment.  The  unconsciousness  of  the  judged  may  be  referred,  not  to  ignorance  of 
Christ,  but  to  unconsciousness  that  in  relieving  the  distressed  they  were  actually  relieving 
Christ.  The  simplicity  of  the  standard  may  be  intended  to  include  what  is  called  "  natural " 
religion,  as  well  as  revealed  religion.  The  nations  are  judged  by  a  standard  of  justice  which 
all  recognise.  Eead  Rom.  i.  18-20,  ii.  9-16  {Carr).  As  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from 
the  goats. — The  sheep  and  goats  are  always  seen  together  under  the  same  shepherd  and  in 
company  ;  yet  they  never  trespass  on  the  domain  of  each  other.  .  .  .  When  folded  together 
at  night  they  may  always  ibe  seen  gathered  in  distinct  groups  ;  and  so,  round  the  wells 
they  appear  instinctively  to  classify  themselves  apart,  as  they  wait  for  the  troughs  to 
be  filled  (^Tristram).  The  goat  was  not  in  evil  repute  in  the  East,  as  contrasted  with  the 
sheep  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  he-goat  was  a  symbol  of  dignity,  so  that  the  point  of  analogy  is 
merely  the  separation  between  the  sheep  and  the  goats  {Carr). 

Ver.  41.  Ye  cursed. — Through  their  own  fault  penetrated  by  the  curse  of  God  {Lange). 

Ver.  46.  Everlasting  punishment  .  .  .  life  eternal. — Eternal  punishment  .  .  .  eternal  life 
(R.V.).  The  two  adjectives  represent  one  and  the  same  Greek  word,  aiwfios,  and  we  ought, 
therefore,  to  have  the  same  word  in  both  clauses  in  the  English.  Of  the  two  words 
"eternal"  is  philologically  preferable,  as  being  traceably  connected  with  the  Greek,  the 
Latin  ceternus  being  derived  from  cetas,  and  that  from  (svum,  which,  in  its  turn,  is  but  another 
form  of  the  Greek  al(ji)u  {ceon)  (Plumptre). 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAR  AGRA  PH. -Verses  1—13. 

Watchfulness. — The  first  word  of  this  passage  connects  it  with  the  preceding 
one  in  the  matter  of  time.  "  Then  " — at  the  season  just  spoken  of — when  there 
are  reasons  for  believing  that  the  Saviour  is  near,  but  when  it.  is  as  impossible 
as  ever,  for  all  that,  to  fix  the  hour  and  day  of  His  coming — that  is  the  season 
referred  to  here.  The  last  words  of  the  passage  show  us  that  its  great  lesson  is 
also  connected  with  that  fact  (ver.  13).  We  may  look  at  the  parable  it  contains, 
therefore,  as  probably  intended  on  the  one  hand  to  explain  moo^e  dearly,  and,  on 
the  other,  to  enfwxe  more  strongly,  that  lesson  itself. 

I.  The  duty  explained. — What  is  exactly  meant  by  this  "watching"  thus 
twice  impressed  on  us  here  (xxiv.  42,  xxv.  13)?  Let  this  parable  teach  us.  In 
it  those  professing  to  "  watch  "  are  represented  to  us  under  the  figure  of  *'  ten 
virgins,"  who,  knowing  that  the  bridegroom  was  expect(  d  shortly,  but  not 
knowing  when  exactly,  "  took  their  lamps" — after  .the  usual  custom  of  marriage 
feasts— and  "went  forth  to  meet  him."  Of  these,  it  is  added  that  "  five  were 
wise  "  and  "  five  were  foolish."  In  other  words,  therefore,  that  five  of  them  were 
watching  in  a  way  that  was  wise  and  sensible,  and  five  in  a  way  that  was  not. 
Where  did  the  difference  lie  ?  We  can  see,  on  the  one  hand,  where  it  did  not.  It 
did  not  turn,  e.g.,  on  the  question  of  skf  p  (ver.  5).  By  "  watching,"  therefore, 
we  are  not  to  understand  something  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  accomplish — 
such  as  being  always,  as  it  were,  on  the  stretch,  aad  always,  as  it  were,  having 

569 


CHAP.  XXV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


the  attention  consciously  fixed  on  that  which  was  looked  for.  Neither,  we  see, 
does  "  watching  "  necessarily  mean  being  always  ready  for  it  in  look.  It  was, 
essential,  indeed,  that  this  should  be  so  by  the  time  of  its  occurrence.  All 
"  lamps "  had  to  be  '^  trimmed  and  burning "  by  the  time  the  bridegroom 
"  appeared."  But  it  was  not  necessary  that  they  should  be  in  this  condition 
whilst  those  who  carried  them  were  only  waiting  his  approach;  or  even  that 
they  should  be  so  when  the  announcement  of  it  was  first  heard  in  the  streets. 
Both  foolish  and  wise,  on  the  contrary,  are  described  as  "  arising  and  trimming 
their  lamps "  when  that  message  falls  on  their  ears  (ver.  7).  "  Watching " 
wisely,  therefore,  we  may  say,  does  not  mean  openly  professing  to  watch  at  all 
seasons  and  times.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  what  is  the 
positive  side  of  this  case.  What  was  required  was  the  power  of  getting  ready 
the  moment  the  necessity  for  it  arose.  Some  of  these  watchers  had  previously 
taken  the  measures  necessary  for  this.  They  had  "  oil  in  their  vessels  "  ;  and  so, 
soon,  in  their  "  lamps  " ;  and  so,  therefore,  with  a  little  care  and  attention,  and 
no  great  consumption  of  time,  had  these  burning  and  bright.  Such,  of  course, 
were  the  "  wise."  On  the  other  hand,  there  were  those  who  are  said  to  have  taken 
"  no  oil  "  in  their  vessels.  These,  of  course,  were  the  "  foolish  " — foolish  indeed — for 
they  were  not  able  to  get  ready  when  the  cry  of  the  bridegroom  was  heard. 
They  could  only  attempt  it,  indeed,  by  leaving  their  posts ;  they  had  no  other 
resource  (vers.  8,  9).  This,  therefore,  was  being  w^iwatchful  in  the  sense  of  our 
text — being,  viz.,  unpreparable — if  we  may  use  such  a  word. 

II.  The  duty  enforced. — This  being  the  thing  meant,  why  is  it  asked  ?  Rather, 
perhaps,  why  should  it  be  done  ?  Three  reasons  are  given.  First,  because  of 
the  simplicity  of  its  nature.  Few  things  could  well  be  easier  of  accomplishment 
than  the  precaution  enjoined.  The  foolish  virgins,  as  well  as  the  wise  ones,  had 
the  requisite  ''  vessels  "  for  the  purpose.  It  was  always  as  open  to  them,  also, 
as  it  was  to  the  others — ^according  to  the  parable  (ver.  9) — to  obtain  the 
requisite  "  oil."  All  else  that  was  needed,  on  any  one's  part,  was  the  requisite 
forethought  and  care.  Who  could  object  to  being  called  upon  for  so  little  as 
that  ?  Who  ought  not,  rather,  to  be  full  of  alacrity  in  complying  therewith 
(cf.  2  Kings  V.  13)?  Next,  because  of  the  importance  of  observing  it.  Though 
thus  utterly  simple,  the  precaution  in  question  was  by  no  means  to  be  despised 
on  that  ground.  On  the  contrary,  like  the  operation  of  breathing  and  the  act 
of  partaking  of  food,  it  was  just  one  of  those  exceedingly  simple  things  which  are 
absolutely  essential  to  life.  The  thing  required  of  the  watchers  of  the  parable 
was  to  bes  ready  for  going  in  with  the  bridegroom  when  he  appeared  (ver.  10). 
Those  without  oil  in  their  vessels  could  not  be  so  prepared  in  the  nature  of  things. 
Watchers  of  this  kind,  therefore,  were  no  watchers  at  all  in  the  eyes  of  the 
bridegroom.  Virgins  without  lamps  at  all  shone  as  brightly,  and  were  as  useful 
as  they.  And  all  else  that  they  had  done  simply  came  to  nothing  with  this 
precaution  left  out.  Lastly,  and  most,  because  of  the  consequences  of  neglecting  it. 
These  follow,  on  the  one  hand,  as  a  matter  of  reason.  What  is  to  be  thought  of 
any  who  deliberately  neglect  a  precaution  at  once  so  easy  and  essential?  Of 
tiieir  earnestness  ?  Their  sincerity  ?  Their  obedience  ?  Their  faith  ?  Why 
should  such  despisers  be  allowed  afterwards,  as  it  were,  to  purge  their  contempt  ? 
Would  it  be  fair  to  others — would  it  be  consistent  with  rule — would  it  be  right 
in  itself — to  allow  such  to  come  in  ?  Is  it  easy,  indeed,  to  believe  of  such  pre- 
tended watchers  that  they  are  even  fit  to  come  in  ?  The  very  contrary,  at  any 
rate,  is  that  which  is  taught  us  when  we  consider  this  point,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  a  matter  of  revelation.  What  the  bridegroom  is  here  represented  as  saying  to 
these  late  ones  when  they  ask  to  come  in  amounts  fully  to  this  :  '*  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  I  know  you  not"  (ver.  12).  In  other  words,  You  have  never  really 
been  mine ;  you  have  only  seemed  to  be  such. 

570 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxv. 


Two  things  seem  to  come  out  clearly,  in  conclusion,  as  to  the  watchfulness 
enjoined  on  us  here. 

1.  It  is  to  be  sought  for  in  the  spii'it  of  man. — It  is  not  a  thing  of  the  lip — 
nor  yet  of  the  look — nor  yet,  again,  of  the  limbs.  It  is  that,  instead,  on  which, 
in  secret,  all  these  externalities  turn.  It  is  a  thing  of  the  heart.  There  are 
those  who  are  "  looking  for  and  hasting  unto"  the  day  of  the  Saviour  (see  also 
2  Tim.  iv.  8).  There  are  those,  in  other  words,  who  have  that  within  them 
which  will  make  them  able  to  welcome  Christ  when  He  comes.  The  true 
watcher — the  man  who  has  "  oil "  in  his  vessel — is  a  man  who  (at  least)  seeks 
this  above  all ! 

2.  It  is  to  be  sought  for  from  the  Spirit  of  God. — Nothing  was  more  foolish  in 
these  foolish  ones  than  their  ignorance  of  tbis  truth.  None  but  the  most  in- 
fatuated could  have  said  to  their  fellows,  "  Give  us  of  your  oil."  "  The  anointing 
from  the  Holy  One  "  (1  John  ii.  20)  must  not  be  sought  from  any  one  else.  No 
one  who  so  seeks  it  has  truly  tasted  it  yet ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-13.  Miscellaneous  lessons 
from  the  parable.  1.  The  foolish  virgins 
are  a  warning  to  all  who  are  tempted 
to  make  conversion  everything,  edifica- 
tion nothing ;  who  cultivate  i  eligion 
for  a  season  and  then  think  they  have 
done  enough.  The  wise  are  those  who 
recognise  that  they  must  have  within 
them  that  which  shall  enable  them  to 
endure  to  the  end — not  only  impres- 
sions, right  impulses,  tender  feelings, 
but  ineiadicable  beliefs  and  principles 
which  will  at  all  times  produce  all 
right  impulse  and  feeling.  2.  There 
must  be  regard  paid  both  to  the  out- 
ward and  inward  life.  The  vessel  of 
oil  is  not  enough  without  the  burning 
lamp ;  nor  the  lamp  merely  lighted 
and  with  no  supply  of  oil.  3.  That 
which  brings  to  light  the  distinction 
between  the  wise  and  foolish  virgins  is 
that  the  bridegroom  did  not  come 
while  all  the  lamps  were  yet  burning, 
and  that  during  his  delay  they  all 
slumbered  and  slept.  This  seems  to 
mean  no  more  than  that  all,  having 
made  such  preparation  as  they  judged 
sufficient,  "calmly  and  securely  waited 
the  approach  of  the  bridegroom."  But 
the  security  which  is  excusable,  and 
the  repose  which  is  necessary,  to  one 
condition,  is  in  another  utter  madness. 
Unconstrained  mirth,  eager  pursuit  of 
business,  is  one  thing  in  the  man  who 
has  just  examined  his  books  and  made 
arrangements  to  meet  all  claims,  but  it 


is  quite  another  thing  in  him  who  has 
made  no  such  arrangements  and  does 
not  know  whether  he  can  meet  his 
engagements.  4.  We  may  learn  from 
the  slumber  of  the  wise,  as  well  as  from 
the  rash  sleep  of  the  foolish.  There  is 
a  kind  of  sleep  in  which  the  sense  of 
hearing,  at  least,  is  on  the  alert,  and 
when  by  a  skilful  discrimination,  un- 
attainable when  awake,  the  sense  takes 
note  only  of  the  one  sound  it  waits  for, 
so  that  the  sound  of  a  distant  and 
watched-for  footstep  arouses  to  the 
keenest  watchfulness.  If  you  look  on 
these  weary,  slumbering  virgins,  you 
see  the  lamps  firmly  grasped,  and  when 
you  try  to  unclasp  the  slumbering  but 
faithful  fingers,  every  faculty  is  at  once 
on  the  alert.  So  should  it  be  with  us  ; 
whatever  necessary  occupation,  what- 
ever necessary  saturation  of  our  minds 
with  the  thoughts  of  this  world's  proper- 
ty, turns  our  direct  attention  from  the 
approach  of  our  Lord,  there  should 
still  be  an  openness  of  sense  in  His 
direction.  5.  While  they  are  thus  all 
slumbering,  and  when  their  sleep  is 
deepest,  when  the  fatigue  of  watching 
is  most  felt,  when  things  are  stillest, 
and  men  count  upon  a  few  hours'  quiet 
and  deliverance  from  care,  **at  mid- 
night "  the  cry  is  heard,  "  Behold,  the 
bridegroom  cometh  !  "  And  now  the 
difference  between  the  really  and 
apparently  prepared  is  manifested. 
There  is  something    terrible    in    the 

571 


CHAP.  XXV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


security  of  the  foolish,  maintained  up 
to  the  last.  They,  too,  arise  and  trim 
their  lamps ;  even  though  there  is 
nothing  but  a  quenched,  foul  wick, 
yet  they  seem  to  think  still  that 
matters  are  not  so  bad.  They  have 
but  to  ask  oil  of  their  pleasant  com- 
panions. Not  yet  are  they  aware  that 
their  fate  is  already  sealed.  And  this 
sudden  and  appalling  reversal  of  their 
hopes,  this  mingling  at  a  marriage- 
feast  of  exultant  joy  and  the  most 
melancholy  and  calamitous  ruin,  seems 
intended  to  fix  in  our  minds  an  idea 
opposite  to,  and  that  should  extirpate 
the  idle  fancy  that  things  somehow 
will  come  all  right ;  that  there  is  no 
real  need  of  all  this  urgent  warning 
and  watching;  that  in  a  world  gov- 
erned by  a  good  and  loving  God,  and 
where  things  are  going  on  now  pretty 
tolerably  and  so  very  prosaically,  there 
cannot  occur  those  startling,  unnatural, 
desolating  events  predicted  in  God's 
Word.  6.  In  these  words  ("  the  door 
was  shut")  one  seems  to  hear  the 
decisive,  final  doom  of  the  lost.  The 
time  comes  when  whosoever  will  shall 
not  be  saved  ;  when  it  will  be  vain 
pointing  men  to  the  door  ;  when  who- 
soever is  outside,  there  remains.  7.  It 
is.  foolishness,  not  wickedness,  that  is 
represented  in  these  virgins — ^that  is  to 
say,  in  those  who  are  represented  by 
them.  The  wise  man  is  he  who  shapes 
his  conduct  in  accordance  with  the 
truth  of  things  and  with  actual  facts  ; 
the  foolish  man  is  he  who  shuts  his 
eyes  to  wbat  he  does  not  wish  to  see, 
and  fancies  that  somehow,  though  he 
can't  tell  how,  things  will  go  all  right 
with  him.  He  is,  in  fact,  like  the  ostrich 
who  buries  his  head  in  the  sand  and 
fancies  he  has  escaped,  because  ho  has 
shut  his  eyes  to  what  is  hostile. — 
M.  Dods,  D,D. 

The  lesson  of  the  parable. — Some 
expositors  torment  themselves  greatly 
in  explaining  the  lamps,  and  the  vessels, 
and  the  oil;  but  the  simple  and 
genuine  meaning  of  the  whole  is  just 
this,  that  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a 
lively  zeal  for  a  while.    We  must  have 

072 


in  addition  a  perseverance  that  never 
tires. — John  Calvin. 

Ver.  6.  The  midnight  summons. — 
I.  "At  midnight  there  was  a  cry 
made.  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh." 
What  does  this  mean?  It  means,  I 
think,  that  the  indications  of  the 
approach  of  the  Second  Advent  have 
become  so  striking  and  so  numerous, 
that  they  cannot  possibly  be  misinter- 
preted or  mistaken.  The  Christian 
may  not,  indeed,  be  able  to  tell  you 
precisely  what  these  signs  may  be,  but 
he  will  be  ready  to  recognise  them 
when  they  appear. 

II.  Bat,  in  addition  to  the  cry, 
there  is  a  summons — "  Go  ye  out  to 
meet  him."  What  does  this  mean? 
It  means.  Go  forth  to  receive  the 
recompense  of  your  doings.  As  the 
great  final  coming  of  Christ  was 
typified  and  prefigured  by  His  coming 
in  judgment  against  the  devoted  city 
of  Jerusalem,  so  there  occur  in  our 
own  individual  experiences  events 
which  foreshadow  the  Advent,  and 
warn  us  to  keep  our  loins  girt  about, 
and  our  lamps  burning.  And  we  can 
easily  understand  that,  when  the  end 
draws  nigh  ;  when  the  signs  of  the 
Second  Advent,  hitherto  disregarded, 
hang  in  the  heavens  with  the  menacing 
glare  of  an  unmistakable  portent ; 
the  true  child  of  God,  who  has  watched 
and  waited  for  the  coming  of  his  Lord, 
will  cast  a  glance  over  his  spiritual 
condition,  and  begin  to  trim  his  lamp. 
— G.  Galthrop,  M.A.     - 

Vers.  10-12.  The  foolish  virgins  ex- 
cluded.— I.  In  the  words,  "  the  door 
was  shut,"  considered  in  reference  to 
those  persons  who  are  represented  by 
the  *'  foolish  virgins,"  we  have  the  inti- 
mation of  a  most  solemn  truth  :  that 
to  all  whose  hearts  are  not  truly  given 
to  God — to  all  who  are  not  united  to 
Christ  by  a  living,  saving  faith — there 
comes  a  period  after  which  change  is 
impossible. — 1.  In  some  cases  that 
period  is  death.  2.  In  other  cases 
(though  these,  we  trust,  are  exceed- 
ingly few),  there  seems  too  much  reason 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xxv. 


to  believe  that  the  day  of  hopeless,  But  the  fact  is,  that  in  the  approach 
irretrievable  hardness  comes  before  the  of  the  foolish  virgins  after  the  door 
termination  of  the  naturallife.  3.  The  was  shut,  we  have  a  sure  indication 
Second  Advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  that  preparation  of  the  heart  is 
To  this  period  especially  the  parable  lacking  in  them,  which  alone  could  fit 
refers.  As  the  Lord  finds  us,  so  we  them  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  presence 
remain  for  ever.  of  the  Lord.  They  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord, 
II.  Note,  not  only  the  fruitless  open  to  us."  But  why  ?  Not  because 
appeal  of  the  virgins — "Lord,  Lord,  their  hearts  are  at  one  with  their 
open  to  us,"  but  also  the  reason  Master,  and  they  cannot  be  happy  if 
assigned  for  their  utter  rejection :  they  are  separated  from  Him  whom 
"  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  they  love.  No ;  but  because  they 
not."  It  is  not,  then,  merely  that  shrink  from  the  outer  darkness  of  the 
they  have  come  a  moment  or  two  too  exclusion,  and  the  reproach  of  con- 
late, — but  it  is  that  their  coming  science  to  which  they  find  themselves 
late  proves  that  there  is  an  estrange-  condemned. — Ihid. 
ment  of  heart  which  separates  them 

from   the    Saviour,       It    might    seem  Ver.     10.     The    foolish     virgins. — 

somewhat    hard    that    the    diflference  I.  Their  neglect, 

of  a    few   minutes    more,   or  a    few  11.  Their  unreadiness. 

minutes    less,   should    make    all    the  III.  Their  irretrievable  loss. — S.  A. 

tremendous     difference     between     an  Tipple. 
eternity  of  bliss  and  an  eternity  of  woe. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  14—30. 

Diligence. — There  is  one  striking  point  of  resemblance  between  this  portion  of 
Scripture  and  that  which  goes  before  it.  Both  speak  in  the  same  awful  way  of 
what  follows  "  the  end  "  (cf.  ver.  30  with  xxiv.  51).  There  is  one  striking  point 
of  difference  also.  Nothii)g  is  said  here,  as  so  often  before  (xxiv.  36,  42,  44,  60, 
xxv.  13),  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  exact  time  of  "  the  end."  Accordingly,  it  is 
not  so  much  watchfulness  in  waiting  for  the  end,  as  diligence  in  preparing  for  it, 
that  seems  insisted  on  here.  *'  The  end  being  such  as  it  is,  do  you  work  mean- 
while as  men  ought  to  work  with  such  an  issue  in  view."  How  this  should  be 
(lone  is  then  shown  us  by  showing  us,  first.  How  Christ  and  His  church  are  really 
related  meanwhile ;  secondly.  How  some  men  fancy  they  are ;  and  thirdly.  What 
this  proves  of  themselves. 

I.  The  real  relation  (during  the  Saviour's  absence)  between  Himself  and  His 
church. — It  is  one  on  His  part,  in  the  first  place,  of  absolute  sovereignty  and 
authority.  God  has  appointed  Him  to  be  "  Head  over  all."  Therefore,  especially 
so  "to  His  church"  (Eph.  i.  22).  Sooner  or  later,  "  all"  must  bow  before  Him 
(Phil.  ii.  10).  His  "  people  "  are  expected  to  acknowledge  this  now.  They  are 
not  only  His  servants — they  are  "  His  own  servants"  (ver.  14) — known  to  be 
His.  His  by  creation — His  by  redemption — His  by  inheritance,  too.  His 
very  "  bondmen,"  in  short.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  relation,  on  their  part,  is 
one  of  corresponding  honour  and  responsibility.  This  sovereign  Lord  puts  these 
His  servants  into  a  position  of  trust.  He  puts  "  His  goods  "  in  their  charge 
(ver.  14).  He  does  so,  which  is  very  much  more,  during  His  own  absence  from 
home  {ibid.f  and  end  of  15).  Also,  He  does  this  with  a  marked  amount  of  dis- 
crimination and  care.  Nothing  whatever  is  laid  on  any  servant  beyond  his 
power  to  discharge.  He  is  too  good  a  Master  to  desire  anything  else  ;  too  wise 
to  do  it.  "  To  every  man  according  to  his  several  ability  " ;  some  more,  some 
less;  none  more  than  enough  (ver.  15;  cf.  Rev.  ii.  24;  John  xvi.  12,  etc.). 
Hence,  therefore,  the  relation  is  one  involving,  next,  a  solemn  day  of  account.     It 

573 


CHAP.  XXV.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


may  be  "  a  long  time  "  before  their  Master  comes  back.  That  is  a  question  with 
which  they  have  little  to  do.  Matters  much  too  deep  for  their  consideration 
have  to  determine  that  point.  What  they  may  be  sure  of  is,  that,  when  He 
does  come,  it  will  be  with  that  object  in  view.  What  more  befitting,  indeed,  on 
both  sides  of  the  case,  when  he  who  trusts  meets  those  whom  he  has  trusted,  than 
that  they  should  go  into  the  case "?  And  hence,  once  more,  if  the  issue  be 
favourable,  a  day  of  special  triumph  and  joy.  The  confidence  that  has  been 
responded  to  loyally  is  treated  with  greater  confidence  still.  The  honour  that 
has  been  honourably  dealt  with  is  crowned  with  more  honour  still  (vers.  21,  23). 
How  vividly  the  parable  puts  this  before  us  !  Most  of  all,  perhaps,  in  the  words 
with  which,  in  all  such  cases,  the  Master's  recognitioD  concludes.  "  Enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord.'"  Hitherto  thou  hast  found  joy  in  serving  Me  faith- 
fully. Find  it  now  in  taking  thy  place  by  My  side.  What  faithful  "  bondman  " 
can  even  imagine  anything  better  than  this  ? 

II.  What  is  thought  aljout  this  same  relation  by  some — by  some,  even,  who 
yet  regard  themselves  as  loyal  servants  and  true.  One  such  only — as  though 
even  one  such  were  more  than  enough — is  pourtrayed  to  us  here.  His  thoughts 
are  shown  us,  on  the  one  hand,  hy  that  which  he  did.  Heceiving,  as  he  had,-  onl}^  a 
fractional  part — one-half  in  one  case  and  one-fifth  in  the  other — of  the  amount 
received  by  his  fellow-servants,  he  did  not  make  use  even  of  that  which  he  had. 
Instead  of  this,  he  simply  treated  it  as  though  it  were  wholly  his  own,  and  not 
"  his  lord's  money  "  at  all  (see  ver.  18).  A  line  of  action  significant,  of  course,  of 
equal  hate  and  mistrust.  "  I  wish  that  the  trust  had  never  been  mine.  I  desire 
to  forget  it  as  far  as  I  can.  In  any  case,  let  it  be  out  of  my  sight."  This  evil 
servant's  thoughts  are  shown  us,  on  the  other  hand,  and  that  even  more  forcibly, 
by  that  which  he  said.  See  from  his  words,  for  example,  what  he  thought  of  his 
master,  and  his  relation  to  himself — viz.,  as  a  ''  hard  master  "  and  an  unjust  one, 
asking  more  than  he  ought  (ver.  24) ;  and  not  only  so,  but  as  being  so  much  in 
the  habit  of  doing  so,  that  nothing  better  was  to  be  looked  for  at  his  hands 
(ver.  25).  What  he  thought,  on  the  other  hand,  of  his  relation  to  his  master,  and 
of  what  was  due  in  consequence  from  himself  :  "  Lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  thine." 
In  other  words,  "  Thou  expectedst  me  to  increase  the  deposit.  I  consider  that  I 
ought  to  be  thanked  for  not  making  it  less." 

III.  What  all  this  proves  about  such. — How  it  shows,  first,  what  such 
*'  servants  "  are.  How  wicked  in  action  ! — really  "  robbing  "  their  Lord,  because 
preventing  Him  from  obtaining  what  was  really  His  due,  and  what,  also.  He 
would  have  otherwise  gained  (ver.  27,  where  observe  expression  avv  to/cw,  ajid 
of.  1  Cor.  ix.  7).  How  wicked  in  heart  ! — their  secret  slothfulness  being  really  in 
contempt  of  their  Lord's  interests  and  welfare  and  will,  and  due,  in  fact, 
to  bitter  dislike  of  Himself.  How  it  shows,  next,  what  kind  of  treatment  such 
servants  must  expect  to  receive — how  they  must  expect  to  be  classed,  on  the 
one  hand,  with  open  transgressors  and  opponents,  and  to  share  the  same  doom 
(beginning  ver.  30,  xiii.  41,  42).  Also,  how  awful  a  doom  that  is  !  What 
terrible  loss  in  it,  on  the  one  side  (vers.  28,  29)  !  What  terrible  pain  on  the 
other  (end  of  ver.  30)  !  And  yet,  for  all  that,  having  a  certain  awful  symmetry 
and  proportion  about  it !  Can  even  the  worst  fate  be  too  bad  for  those  who  thus, 
practically,  charge  unrighteousness  upon  God  ? 

From  these  considerations  observe  : — 

1.  How  serious  a  thing  it  is  for  those  who  name  the  name  of  the  Saviour  not 
to  be  "  abounding  "  in  His  work.  What  blindness  of  judgment,  what  perversion 
of  will,  what  blasphemous  thoughts,  what  an  awful  end,  it  implies  !  "  She  that 
liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth." 

2.  How  great  a  privilege  it  is  for  us  to  be  permitted  to  do  anything  for  Him  ! 
To  be  trusted  by  Him  at  all,  being  such  as  we  are  !     To  have  the  opportunity,  in 

574 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.      chap.  xxv. 


any  manner,  of  "adorning"  His  "doctrine"  !  To  be  enabled  to  do  so  in  any 
degree  !  And  to  have  the  prospect  of  hearing  the  least  done  in  this  way  fully 
acknowledged  at  last  !  Is  not  this  the  utmost  that  any  faithful  "  bondservant  " 
can  really  desire  ?     Or  any  prince,  indeed,  for  the  matter  of  that  ? 

3.  How  wise  it  is  to  seek  for  the  guidance  of  Christ  Himself  on  this  point  ! 
"  Lord,  what  wouldest  Thou  have  me  to  do  1  The  direction  of  our  "  diligence  " 
is  not  less  important  than  either  its  zeal  or  amount. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  14-30.  The  talents.— T\i\& 
parable  illustrates  the  great  principle 
which  regulates  the  distribution  of 
rewards  and  punishments  in  the  king- 
dom of  God — the  principle  that  men 
shall  be  judged  according  to  the  means 
at  their  disposal.  1.  The  "  talents  " 
represent  everything  over  and  above 
natural  ability,  by  which  men  can 
advance  the  interests  of  the  kingdom ; 
position,  opportunities,  and  especially 
the  measure  of  grace  j^iven  to  each 
man.  All  the  interests  of  Christ 
upon  earth  are  entrusted  to  His  people. 
And  every  servant  of  His  is  endowed 
with  means  enough  to  accomplish  his 
own  share  in  Christ's  work.  2.  In 
order  that  the  judgment  may  be  fair, 
the  reckoning  is  not  made  until  "  after 
a  long  time."  We  are  not  called  upon 
to  show  fruit  before  autumn.  The 
Lord  does  not  quickly  return  in  a 
captious  spirit,  but  delays  till  the  wise 
have  had  time  to  lay  up  great  gains, 
and  even  the  foolish  to  have  learnt 
wisdom.  So  with  ourselves ;  we  cannot 
complain  if  strict  account  be  taken  at 
the  end,  because  we  really  have  time 
to  learn  how  to  serve  our  Lord.  We 
have  time  to  repair  bad  beginnings,  to 
take  thought,  to  make  up  in  some 
degree  for  lost  time.  3.  It  is  not 
without  significance  that  the  servant 
who  did  nothing  at  all  for  his  master 
was  he  who  had  received  but  one 
talent.  No  doubt  those  who  have 
great  ability  are  liable  to  temptations 
of  their  own ;  they  may  be  more 
ambitious,  and  may  find  it  difficult  to 
serve  their  Master  with  means  which 
they  see  would  bring  in  to  themselves 
profits  of  a  kind  they  covet.  But  such 
men  are,  at  all  events,  not  tempted  to 
bury  their  talent.     This  is  the  peculiar 


temptation  of  the  man  who  has  little 
ability,  and  sullenly  retires  from  a 
service  in  which  he  cannot  shine  and 
play  a  conspicuous  part.  4.  The 
insolence  of  this  man's  words  is  not 
intentional.  He  reads  oif  correctly 
his  own  state  of  mind,  and  fancies  that 
his  conduct  was  appropriate  and  inno- 
cent. All  wrongness  of  conduct  is,  at 
bottom,  based  on  a  wrong  view  of  God. 
5.  But  this  view  of  God  is  unpardonably 
narrow,  and  the  action  flowing  from  it 
is,  after  all,  inconsistent.  It  is  unpar- 
donably wi^ong,  and  the  very  heartiness 
with  which  these  other  servants  were 
greeted  refutes  it.  You  hear  the 
hearty  "  Well  done  ! "  ringing  through 
the  whole  palace — there  is  no  hesitating 
scrutiny,  no  reminding  them  they  had, 
after  all,  merely  done  what  it  w^as  their 
duty  to  do.  Not  at  all — it  is  the  genial, 
generous  outburst  of  a  man  who  likes 
to  praise,  and  hates  to  find  people  at 
fault.  6.  There  are  numberless  ways  in 
which  the  most  slenderly  equipped 
among  us  can  fulfil  the  suggestion  here 
given,  and  put  our  talent  to  the  ex- 
changers, into  the  hands  of  men  who 
can  use  it.  There  is  no  lack  of  great 
works  going  on  for  our  Lord  to  which 
we  may  safely  attach  ourselves,  and  in 
which  oui'  talent  is  rather  used  by  the 
leaders  of  the  work,  invested  for  us, 
than  left  to  our  own  discretion.  7. 
The  law  which  is  exhibited  in  this 
parabolic  representation  is  also  ex- 
plicitly announced  in  the  words  :  "  For 
unto  every  one  that  hath,"  etc.  This 
may  be  called  the  law  of  spiritual 
capital. — M.  Dods^  D.D. 

The  relation  between  this  parable  and 
the  preceding  one. — The  first  represents 
the  church  as  waiting,  the  second  as 

5/5 


CHAP.  XXV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MATTHEW. 


working,  for  her  Lord ;  the  first  shows 
the  necessity  of  a  constant  supply  of 
inward  grace,  the  second  the  need  of 
unremitting  outward  activity ;  the 
teaching  of  the  first  is,  "  Keep  thy 
heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it 
are  the  issues  of  Hfe  " ;  of  the  second, 
''  Do  good  as  ye  have  opportunity  ; " 
"  Be  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will 
give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  The  parable 
of  the  Viigins  comes  appropriately 
before  that  of  the  Talents,  inasmuch 
as  a  Christian's  inner  life  should  be  his 
first  care,  the  outer  life  being  wholly 
dependent  on  it.  "  Keep  thy  heart 
with  all  diligence  "  is  the  first  command, 
*'  Do  thy  work  with  all  diligence  "  the 
second.  The  first  parable  calls  aloud 
to  every  member  of  the  church  "  Be 
wise " ;  the  second  follows  it  with 
another  call,  as  urgent  as  the  first, 
"  Be  faithful."— J^.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

Is  this  another  version  of  the  parable 
of  the  Founds  (Luke  xix.  11-27)? — 
It  is  a  strange  instance  of  superficial 
reading  that  it  should  ever  have  been 
supposed  to  be  but  another  version  of 
Luke's  parable  of  the  pounds.  The 
very  resemblances  of  the  two  are 
meant  to  give  force  to  their  differences, 
which  are  fundamental.  They  are  the 
converse  of  each  other ;  that  of  the 
pounds  teaching  that  men  who  have 
the  same  gifts  entrusted  to  them  may 
inake  a  widely  different  use  of  these, 
and  will  be  rewarded  differently,  in 
strictly  graduated  proportion  to  their 
unlike  diligence.  The  lesson  of  the 
parable  before  us,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  that  men  with  dissimilar  gifts  may 
employ  them  with  equal  diligence ; 
and  that,  if  they  do,  their  reward  shall 
be  the  same,  however  great  the  endow- 
ments of  one,  and  slender  those  of 
another.  A  reader  who  has  missed 
that  distinction  must  be  very  short- 
sighted, or  sworn  to  make  out  a  case 
against  the  Gospels. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  16,  17.  Industry. — I.  Its  high 
importance  rests  on  the  fact  that  it  is 
SO  plain  a  duty. 

II.  It  is  a  duty  which  is  the  Divine 

576 


remedy  and  safeguard  against  an 
infinite  amount  of  evil. 

III.  It  is  a  duty,  with  a  far-reaching 
purpose  and  reward. — E.  C.  Wickham. 

Business. — The  busiest  are  the 
happiest.  "  Employment  so  certainly 
produces  cheerfulness,"  says  Bishop 
Hall,  "that  I  have  known  a  man  come 
home  in  high  spirits  from  a  funeral 
because  he  had  the  management  of  it." 
"  Work  is  the  salt  of  life." — Thwing. 

Ver.  18.  Omitting  small  duties. — He 
who  waits  to  do  a  great  deal  at  once 
will  never  do  anything. — 5!  Johnson. 

God  can  bring  large  results  from 
small  beginnings. — You  may  count  the 
apples  on  a  tree,  but  you  can  never 
count  the  trees  in  an  apple.  You  may 
count  the  acorns  on  an  oak,  but  not 
the  oaks  in  an  acorn.  Let  no  one 
despise  the  day  of  small  powers.  The 
clock  that  will  not  strike  one  shall  not 
strike  twelve. — Dr.  Hurlbut. 

Ver.    19.    Perso7ial   responsibility.— 

1.  Nature  and  extent  of  responsi- 
bility.— 1.  Proportioned  to  natural 
endowments.  2.  Its  extent  determined 
by  possessions.  3.  Affected  by  our 
relations  in  life.  4.  Is  equal  to  our 
oppoitunities. 

II.  Reckoning  with  the  faithful 
servant. — 1.  Talents  the  gift  of   God. 

2.  Immediate  and  faithful  improve- 
ment. 3.  Happy  account  rendered. 
4.  Approved  and  rewarded. 

III.  Reckoning  with  the  unfaithful 
servant. — 1.  His  false  reasoning.  2. 
No  improvement  of  the  talent.  3. 
Account  rendered  with  shame  and 
guilt.  4.  He  was  dispossessed  and 
punished. — Homiletic  Review. 

Vers.  20,  21.  Fidelity  and  recompense. 
— The  teaching  of  this  parable  is  for 
us  all. 

I.  It  implies  a  common  responsibility 
for  the  use  of  talents  which  have  been 
universally  distributed,  although  not 
in  equal  measure. 

II.  This  responsibility    is  all-per- 


/ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xxv. 


vading^ ;  it  extends  to  the  whole  man 
and  to  the  whole  life. 

III.  The  recompense  of  fidelity. — 
Faithfulness  is  rewarded  :  1.  By  in- 
creased power — every  duty  performed 
makes  futures-duty  easier.  2.  By  in- 
creased responsibility — found  faithful 
in  a  farthing,  the  man  is  made  "  ruler 
over  many  things."  And  this  is  God's 
law  of  recompense,  to  reward  work 
well  done  by  more  and  greater  work. 
— W.  M.  Punshon,  LL.D, 

Ver.  21.  The  joy  of  the  Lord. — I. 
The  character. — 1.  A  servant,  2.  A 
good  servant.      3.  A  faithful  servant. 

4.  A  diligent  servant.  5.  A  perse- 
vering servant. 

II.  The  reward.— 1.  The  joy  of 
rest.  2.  The  joy  of  conquest.  3.  The 
joy  of  home.     4.    The   joy  of  society. 

5.  The  joy  of  discovery.  6.  The  joy 
of  his  Lord.  Joy  (1)  procured,  (2) 
bestowed,  (3)  possessed,  (4)  arising 
from  the  vision  and  fruition  of  his 
Lord,  (5)  issuing  in  the  glory  of  his 
Lord.  7.  Proportionate  joy,  (Luke 
xix.    16,  etc.).     8.    Uninterrupted  joy. 

9.  Eternal  joy. — D.  in  Wesley  Banner, 

The  faithful  servants  reward, — 
— "Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 
Lord."  The  words  are  almost  too 
strong  for  the  framework  of  the  parable. 
A  human  master  would  hardly  use 
such  language  to  his  slaves.  But  here, 
as  yet  more  in  the  parable  that  follows, 
the  reality  breaks  through  the  symbol, 
and  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Divine 
Master  speaking  to  His  servants  and 
He  bids  them  share  His  joy,  foi  that 
joy  also  had  its  source  (as  He  told  them 
but  a  few  hours  later)  in  loyal  and 
faithful  service,  in  having  *'  kept  His 
Father's    commandments "    (John   xv. 

10,  11).—^.  H,  Plumptre,  D.D, 

Vers.  22,  23.  Small  capabilities. — 
I.  God  gives  to  some  but  small  capar 
bilities. 

II.  The  purpose  which  is  served  in 
this  unequal  distribution  of  gifts. 
1.  Variety  is  one  great  characteristic 
of  God's  workmanship.     2.  The  work 


for  one  to  do  requires  the  exercise  of 
five  talents,  the  work  for  another  the 
exercise  of  only  two,  and  for  another 
the  exercise  of  only  one. 

III.  We  must  account  to  God  for 
the  use  of  our  two  talents,  or  for  the 
exercise  of  our  one  talent,  as  much  as 
others  must  account  for  the  exercise  of 
their  five  talents. 

IV.  When  two  talents  are  faithfully 
used  there  is  the  same  commendation 
and  reward  as  when  five  talents  are 
faithfully  used. — S.  G.  Matthews,  B.A, 

Ver.  23.  The  joy  of  the  Lord.— 
I.  The  state  of  the  blessed  is  a  state  of 
joy. — Not  only  because  all  tears  shall 
then  be  wiped  away,  but  all  the  springs 
of  comfort  shall  be  opened  to  them, 
and  the  fountains  of  joy  broken  up ; 
where  there  is  the  vision  and  fruition 
of  God,  a  perfection  of  holiness,  and 
the  society  of  the  blessed,  there  cannot 
but  be  a  fulness  of  joy. 

II.  This  joy  is  the  joy  of  our  Lord — 
the  joy  which  He  Himself  has  pur- 
chased and  provided  for  them — the  joy 
of  the  redeemed,  bought  with  the 
sorrow  of  the  Redeemer ;  it  is  the  joy 
which  He  Himself  is  in  the  possession 
of,  and  which  He  had  His  eye  upon 
when  He  endured  the  cross,  and  despised 
the  shame ;  it  is  the  joy  which  He 
Himself  is  the  fountain  and  centre  of ; 
it  is  the  joy  of  our  Lord,  for  it  is  joy 
in  the  Lord,  who  is  our  exceeding  joy. 

III.  Glorified  saints  shall  enter  into 
this  joy  ;  that  is,  shall  have  a  full  and 
complete  possession  of  it.  Here  the 
joy  of  the  Lord  enters  into  His  saints, 
in  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit ;  shortly 
they  shall  enter  into  it,  and  shall  be  in 
it  to  eternity,  as  in  their  element. — 
M,  Henry. 

Vers.  24-30.  Trifling  with  talents. — 
The  unprofitable  servant. — I.  His  char- 
acter. 

II.  His  condemnation. — Wickedness 
does  not  consist  in  gross  sins  only. 
Negative  evil  is  as  much  a  sin  as 
positive,  and  the  sins  are  more 
dangerous. 

1.   Because  there  is  less  hope  of  refer- 

PP  577 


CHAP.  XXV.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


mation. — They  are  mostly  fixed  with 
self-conceit. 

2.  Because  they  are  most  numerous, — 
Every  moment  unemployed  for  God  is 
a  sin. 

3.  Because  they  are  hardest  to  repair. 
— A  lost  opportunity  never  returns. 

III.  His  sentence.  —  1.  Severe. 
2.  Merited.  3.  A  greater  loss,  for  he 
had  to  give  up  what  he  had. — B.  in 
Homilist. 

Slothfulness  linked  with  a  desire  to  he 
honest. — There  was  in  this  man  some 
sense  of  right  governed  by  the  principle 
of  honesty.  But  this  was  not  strong 
enough  to  conquer  the  prevailing 
passion  of  his  life — namely,  his  sloth- 
fulness. 

I.  His  honesty  is  seen  in  the  fact 
that  he  considers  himseK  responsible 
to  his  master  for  the  talent  that  had 
been  given  him. — If  he  did  not  seek  to 
improve  his  talent,  he  evidently  desired 
to  give  it  back  having  the  same  value 
as  when  he  got  it.  This  man  is  the 
type  of  the  person  whom  we  all  know — 
the  easy-going,  the  inoffensive,  and  the 
well  meaning  man.  He  is  one  who 
does  not  care  to  be  troubled  much 
about    any    religious    duty,    however 


pressing  it  may  be.     He  will  place  no' 
obstacle  in  the  way  of   others  to  do 
good,  but  he  himself  will  not  move  one 
foot  in  that  direction. 

II.  His  honesty  can  be  seen  also  in 
the  care  that  he  took  not  to  lose  his 
talent. — He  was  too  fond  of  ease,  idle- 
ness had  too  great  a  charm,  for  him,  to 
think  of  making  any  use  of  his  talent. 
He  wanted  to  go  to  heaven,  but  he 
would  take  no  yoke,  he  would  bear  no 
burden. 

III.  Thus  far  the  honesty  of  this 
man's  conscience  has  exerted  some 
influence  over  his  life;  but  the  in- 
fluence has  been  that  of  fear,  and  not 
of  love. — If  our  religion  be  a  religion 
of  fear  merely,  it  will  be  barren  as  this 
man's  was. 

IV.  This  man  unwittingly  con- 
demns himself  in  giving  in  his  account. 
— And  so  will  every  man  who  sins  in  a 
similar  manner  condemn  himself,  for 
the  excuse  framed  to  shield  his  sloth- 
fulness  can  never  be  a  valid  one. 

V.  This  man  is  reproved  and  con- 
demned, not  for  being  a  robber, 
blasphemer,  or  unbeliever,  but  for 
doing  nothing.  —  Slothfulness  in 
spiritual  matters  is  a  sin  in  the  sight 
of  God. — W.  Collins  Bavies,  B.A, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  31—46. 


The  end  itself. — Respice  finem.  Look  to  the  end.  Call  no  man  happy  till 
death.  Children  and  fools  should  not  be  allowed  to  see  half-done  deeds.  All 
these  express  what,  on  a  far  grander  scale,  is  expressed  in  this  passage.  Its 
whole  structure  is  eschatological  in  the  highest  degree.  The  Son  of  man  has 
come  in  His  glory ;  all  the  holy  angels  are  with  Him  ;  all  nations  are  assembled 
before  Him ;  all  the  ages  of  Time  are  over ;  nothing  remains  but  to  pass 
sentence  on  all.  What  do  we  learn  from  it  all  1  Principally,  that  the  end  of  all 
things  will  show  all  things  in  a  light  of  its  own.  This  is  shown,  first,  in  the 
view  it  gives  of  menJs  lives ;  secondly,  in  the  view  it  gives  of  m^en^s  m^otives. 

I.  The  view  it  gives  of  men's  lives. — To  us,  now,  there  appear  to  be  many 
differences — many  in  number  and  in  importance  as  well — between  one  man's 
life  and  another's.  To  us,  even  the  same  life  appears  at  times  to  differ  much 
from  itself.  "  The  end "  will  show  us  that  each  individual  life  should  be 
regarded  rather  as  one.  As  we,  then,  "  look  back  "  upon  it,  we  shall  see  this  to 
be  true.  In  much  the  same  way  soldiers  both  see  and  reckon  when  the  day  of 
battle  is  over.  Either  the  enemy's  position  has  been  captured,  or  it  stands 
where  it  did.  Either  we  are  in  possession  of  it,  or  we  are  not.  If  not  the  former, 
then,  whatever  the  vicissitudes  of  the  interim — not  only  so,  but  whatever,  also,  its 
gains — the  day  has  been  one  of  defeat.     That  is  its  character  as  a  whole.     Very 

578 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xxv. 


similar  to  this  will  it  be  with  us  all  when  the  individual  battle  of  life  is  seen  in 
the  "  perspective"  of  its  end.  All  other  differences  and  passing  distinctions  will 
be  lost,  then,  in  this  one.  All  other  dissimilarities  between  man  and  man  will  be 
obliterated  in  this.  The  mere  "  accidents  "  of  comparative  wealth  and  personal 
advantages  and  reputation  and  dignity,  will  be  seen,  then,  to  be  such.  Did  the 
man  succeed,  or  did  he  fail,  in  that  which  was  all-important  to  his  destiny  1 
Did  he  win  the  day,  or  did  he  lose  it,  from  his  point  of  view  as  a  soldier  ?  That 
is  the  distinction — the  only  distinction — which  will  be  of  any  weight  then.  The 
present  parable  expresses  this  with  singular  force.  Its  whole  final  issue  is  made 
to  depend  on  the  single  word  "not."  There  are  those  who  "did."  There  are 
those  who  "  did  not  "  (cf.  34-36,  42,  43).  Nothing  whatever,  in  distinguishing 
between  them,  is  mentioned  beside  of  an  external  description. 

II.  The  view  it  gives  of  men's  motives. — Why  will  so  much  be  then  made 
of   that   outward  difference  of  which  we  have  spoken?     Because  of  the   still 
greater  inward  difference  which   it  betokens.     This  is  easily  seen,  on  the  one 
hand,  in  a  general  loay.     Why  is  it  that  some  succeed,  and  others  do  not,  in  the 
battle  referred  to?     That  some  "  do,"  and  others  "  do  not,"  the  things  mentioned 
by  Christ  ?     The  answer  is  to  be  found,  in  part,  in  the  respective  state  of  their 
hearts.     One  man  has  chosen  the  will  of  God  before  everything  else.     The  other 
has  chosen  something  else — be  this  what  it  may — in  its  stead.      Naturally, 
therefore,  this  latter  man  has  not  succeeded  in  doing  God's  will.    How  should  he, 
indeed,  if  he  has  only  desired  it,  at  best,  with  part  of    his  heart?      Equally 
naturally,  therefore,  the  other  man  has  been  (at  least)  in  the  way  of  success,  and 
has  won  the  day,  in  short,  because,  in  comparison  with  the  former  man,  he  has 
given  his  heart  to  that  task.     This  is,  therefore,  one  great  secret  which  will  be 
brought  out  thus  at  the  "  end."     The  man  who  did  not  win  will  be  shown,  then, 
to  have  never  really,  because  never  fully,  intended  to  win.     But  there  is  another 
secret,  and  that  a  deeper  one,  which  will  be  brought  out  at  that  time.     There  is, 
if  we  may  call  it  so,  a  highly  sj^ecialised  way  of  proving  the  point  we  are  on.     On 
one  thing,  as  it  were,  above  all  other  things,  God  has  set  the  stamp  of  His  will ; 
and  that  is  that  the  fulness  of  honour  should  be  paid  by  all  to  His  Son.     This 
will  of  His  has  been  proclaimed,  on  the  one  hand,  in  heaven  above.     "  Worship 
Him,  all  ye  gods  "  (Ps.  xcvii.  7 ;  Heb.  i.  6).     This,  therefore,  by  implication,  is 
what  we  are  taught  to  pray  for  on  earth  (vi.  10).     Also,  and  that  as  expressly 
as  may  be,  by  Jesus  Himself  (John  v.  23).     Yet  this  is  just  the  point,  again, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  which  men  are  most  opposed  to  God's  will ;  as  is  shown 
by  the  way  in  which  they  treat  the  representatives  of  Christ  in  the   world 
(see  Acts  ix.  5  ;  Ps.  cv.  15,  Jerome's  translation — Nolite  tangere  meos  Christos") ; 
and  as  is  also  implied,  on  both  sides,  with  great  clearness  here  in  vers.  40,  45. 
Not,  however,  that  this  truth  is  now  seen  as  it  should  be  on  either  side  of  the 
case.     Neither  those  who  do  minister,  nor  those  who  refuse  to  minister,  to  these 
persons  are  aware  now  of  the  extent  to  which  they  are  influenced  in  their  con- 
duct by  what  they  discover  and  perceive  in  these  persons  of  the  image  of  Christ, 
and  so,  therefore,  of  the  will  of  Him  whom  Christ  alone  can  fully,  and  does  fully, 
set   forth    (John  xiv.  8,   9).     That,  on  the  contrary,   is   what  the  day  which 
"  declares  "  all  things  will  alone  fully  make  known ;  and  will  make  known,  also, 
in  such  a  way  as  to  be  an  astonishment  then  unto  all  (vers.   37-39,  44),  and 
so,  therefore,   "  reveal  "  to  all  men  the  true  character  of  their  lives,  and  the 
full  extent  to  which  they  were  opposed  to  or  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  as 
declared  to  men  in  His  Son.     "  Ye  did  it  to  Me"     "  Ye  did  it  not  to  Me  J* 
That  is  the  summary  of  the  whole.     That  is  what  will  be  shown,  then,  of  the 
thoughts  of  us  all.     Utterly  unperceived  by  most,  and  only  dimly  seen  by  any, 
before  the  time  of  the  end,  this  is  one  of  the  first  things  which  the  end  itself  will 
make  at  once  permanently  and  undeniably  clear. 

579 


CHAP.  XXV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


These  things  may  prepare  us,  therefore,  for  what  we  read  finally  here  about 
the  character  of  the  "  end  "  ;  how  it  is  marked : — 

1.  By  the  idea  of  separation. — Men  will  be  shown  then  to  have  been 
either  with  God  or  else  against  God,  in  that  which  was  nearest  His  heart. 
How  inevitable,  therefore,  in  the  '*  day  "  which  is  to  put  all  things  right,  that 
such  as  these  should  be  "  divided  "  asunder  (vers.  32,  33)  !  How  fitting,  also, 
that  what  is  said  to  them  respectively  should  be  the  words  "  come  "  and 
"  depart  "  (vers.  34,  41).  And  how  necessary,  once  more,  that  the  issues  following 
these  should  be  things  as  far  apart  as  they  can  be !  Even  as  far  as  between 
a  throne  (ver.  34),  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  prison-house  (ver.  46)  on  the  other. 

2.  By  the  idea  of  duration. — On  this  most  solemn  of  subjects  there  seem 
to  be  two  things  to  be  equally  shunned.  Over-pressing  the  language  employed, 
on  the  one  hand.  Wresting  it,  on  the  other.  That  the  idea  of  duration  is 
emphatically  present  cannot  be  denied  (ver.  46).  That  there  is  nothing  in  the 
nature  of  what  is  told  us,  and  nothing  also  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  told  us, 
to  suggest  the  idea  of  termination,  seems  equally  plain.  May  it  not  be  wisest  to 
leave  the  subject  in  that  negative  form  ?     Even  so,  it  is  awful  enough  ! 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  31-46.  The  general  judginent. 
— The  following  are  the  prominent 
dogmatic  points. 

I.  Christ  is  the  Judge  of  the  world. 
— Cf.  Acts  X.  42,  xvii.  31. 

II.  The  judgment  shall  be  exercised 
by  Him  upon  all  mankind. — The 
general  resurrection  is  included,  so  that 
all  nations  may  be  assembled. 

III.  The  standard  of  judgment  will 
be  the  question,  how  they  reputed  and 
dealt  with  Christ  in  the  world ;  how 
they  regulated  their  conduct  toward 
Him  in  His  own  person,  and  in  His 
unseen  life  in  humanity  as  the  Logos  ; 
how,  therefore,  they  honoured  or  dis- 
honoured the  Divine  in  themselves  and 
in  their  fellow  men  ;  how  they  showed 
christological  piety  in  christological 
humanity ;  or  how,  in  short,  they  be- 
haved toward  Christ  in  the  widest 
sense  of  the  word. 

lY.  The  demand  of  the  judgment 
will  be  the  fruit  of  faith  in  Christian 
love  of  men,  or  human  love  of  Christ. 
Thus  not  merely  (1)  doctrinal  faith,  or 
(2)  external  works  without  a  root  of 
faith,  or  (3)  merely  individual  evidences 
of  good.  But  decided  goodness  in  its 
maturity  and  consistency,  as  it  acknow- 
ledged Christ  or  felt  after  Him,  in  all 
His  concealments,  with  longing  antici- 
pations. 

V.  The  specific  form  of  the  require- 

580 


ment  will  be  the  requirement  of  the 
fruit  of  mercy  and  compassion  ;   for 

the  foundation  of  redemption  is  grace, 
and  faith  in  redeeming  grace  must 
ripen  into  the  fruits  of  compassion. 
Sanctified  mercy,  however,  is  only  a 
concrete  expression  for  perfected  holi- 
ness generally,  or  the  sanctification  of 
Christ  in  the  Hfe. 

VI.  The  finished  fruit  of  faith  and 
disposition  is  identical  with  the  man 
himself,  ripe  for  judgment. 

VII.  The  judgment  appears  to  be 
already  internally  decided  by  the 
relation  which  men  have  assumed 
toward  Christ,  or  the  character  which 
they  have  borne;  but  it  is  published 
openly  by  the  separation  of  those  who 
are  unlike,  and  the  gathering  together 
of  all  who  are  like ;  it  is  continued  in 
the  sentence  which  illustrates  the 
judgment  by  words,  and  confirms  it  by 
the  extorted  confession  of  conscience ; 
it  is  consummated  by  the  fact  of  the 
one  company  inheriting  the  kingdom, 
and  the  other  departing  to  the  ever- 
lasting fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels. 

VIII.  This  perfected  separation 
implies  also  the  total  change  of  the 
earth ;  on  the  one  side  the  view  opens 
upon  the  finished  kingdom  of  God ;  on 
the  other  the  view  opens  upon  hell,  now 
unsealed  for  the  lost. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xxv. 


IX.  The  time  of  the  judgment  is  the 

final  and  critical  period  in  which  all 
preparatory  judgments  are  consum- 
mated. 1.  The  judgments  of  human 
history  in  this  world.  2.  The  judg- 
ments in  Hades  in  the  other  world. 
See  Luke  xvi.  19.  3.  The  great 
judgments  which  will  begin  at  the 
manifestation  of  Christ. — J.  P.  Lange, 
D.D. 

Ver.  31.  The  glory  of  Christ  in  the 
judgment. — He  will  be  glorious : — 
I.  In  His  power. 
II.  In  His  omniscience. 

III.  In  His  righteousness. 

IV.  In  His  grace. — Niemann. 

Ver.  32.  The  twofold  classification. 
— "  I  can  understand  what  is  to  become 
of  the  sheep,  and  1  can  understand 
what  is  to  become  of  the  goats ;  but 
how  are  the  alpacas  to  be  dealt  with  ?  " 
These  words,  quoted  by  a  writer  in 
The  Nineteenth  Century,  touch  one 
of  the  difficulties  of  the  last  judgment 
that  has  probably  occurred  at  some 
time  or  other  to  most  of  us.  The 
alpaca  is  a  half-domesticated  animal 
that  is  pastured  in  large  Hocks  on  the 
upper  ranges  of  the  Andes  in  Chili  and 
Peru.  It  has  long,  lustrous  hair,  and 
in  many  respects  is  not  unlike  the  sheep. 
An  untravelled  Eastern  shepherd 
would  probably  call  it  a  sheep.  At  the 
same  time  it  possesses  some  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  goat.  After  all, 
however,  it  is  neither  sheep  nor  goat, 
but  a  species  of  small  camel.  By  the 
"  alpaca  "  I  suppose  the  writer  meant 
the  man  who  has  admirable  and  attract- 
ive social  qualities,  but  who  seems  to 
be  almost  destitute  of  religious  interest 
and  sympathy  and  leaning.  We  do 
meet  with  that  type  of  man  at  times. 
Now  the  question  arises.  Is  theie  a 
nondescript  type  in  character,  corre- 
sponding to  the  alpaca  in  animal  life — 
a  type  for  which  the  classification  set 
up  in  the  text  provides  no  appropriate 
place?  A  little  reflection  will  enable 
us  to  see  that  Christ's  twofold  classifi- 
cation— rigid,  narrow,  unsympathetic, 
as  some   men   may   pronounce   it — is 


sufficiently  comprehensive  to  embrace 
all  stages,  and  growths,  and  varieties,  of 
human  character. 

I.  A  man  cannot  live  out  his  span 
of  destiny  upon  earth,  be  it  long  or 
short,  without  acquiring  for  himself 
clear  moral  determination  in  one 
direction  or  another. — All  supposed 
alpacas,  upon  careful  examination,  will 
be  found  to  be  either  slightly -disguised 
sheep  or  slightly-disguised  goats.  High, 
unselfish,  deep-rooted,  inward  morality 
is  one  with  the  most  exalted  religion. 
"  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one 
of  the  least,"  etc.  The  working  out  of 
that  principle  will  scarcely  leave  you 
room  for  the  alpaca,  the  unspiritual 
moralist,  the  irreproachable  worldling, 
the  man  who  is  too  good  for  the  left 
hand,  and  not  quite  qualified  to  take  a 
place  on  the  right. 

II.  The  elements  that  make  and 
keep  a  man  right  in  his  earthly  rela- 
tionships are  essentially  one  with  the 
elements  that  make  and  keep  a  man 
right  in  his  heavenly  relationships. — 
The  same  qualities  that  will  harmonise 
a  man  with  the  demands  of  his  fellow- 
men  will  harmonise  him  likewise  with 
the  law  and  character  of  the  great 
God.  Faith,  love,  reverence,  justice, 
rectitude,  enthusiasm  for  goodness, 
steadfast  longing  and  striving  to  bring 
benediction  into  the  lives  we  touch  and 
sway — these  are  the  things  needed  to 
make  a  man  all  he  should  be  in  his 
relations  with  his  fellow-man,  and  these 
are  the  things  needed  no  less  to  make . 
a  man  all  he  should  be  in  his  relations 
with  his  God  and  Father,  and  Saviour 
and  King. 

III.  These  moral  and  religious  dis- 
tinctions exist  amongst  those  whose 
education  in  spiritual  things  has  been 
superficial  and  defective. — The  man 
\^ho  has  the  minimum  of  religious 
knowledge  may  sometimes  be  a  latent 
Christian.  And  the  other  side  of  the 
lesson  is  equally  true,  a  side  enforced 
in  the  closing  sentences  of  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mountj — the  man  who  has  the 
maximum  of  religious  knowledge  may 
be  a  Christian  in  nobody's  judgment 
but  his  own. — T,  G.  Selhy. 

581 


CHAP.  XXV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Vers.  34-46.  Will  the  final  Assize  be 
held  on  faith  or  on  character  ? — As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  best  public  mind 
under  all  religions  has  judged  by 
character,  and  has  done  so  with  a  keen 
sense  of  justice  and  a  conviction  of 
paramount  authority.  When  the  in- 
dividual has  to  form  an  estimate  of  his 
neighbour  in  critical  circumstances,  he 
ignores  his  opinions  and  weighs  his 
virtues.  No  one,  for  instance,  would 
leave  his  wife  and  children  to  a  trustee 
because  he  happened  to  be  a  Trinitarian, 
but  only  because  his  friend  was  a  true 
man  before  God.  It  is  a  working 
principle  of  life  that  judgment  goes  by 
character,  and  if  in  the  end  it  should 
go  by  faith,  it  might  be  in  keeping 
with  some  higher  justice  we  know  not 
here  ;  but  it  would  cover  our  moral 
sense  with  confusion  and  add  another 
to  the  unintentional  wrongs  men  have 
endured,  in  this  world,  at  their  fellows' 
hands.  It  were  useless  to  argue  about 
a  matter  of  which  we  know  nothing, 
and  where  speculation  is  vain.  We 
must  simply  accept  the  words  of  Jesus, 
and  it  is  an  unspeakable  relief  to  find 
our  Master  crowning  His  teaching  on 
character  with  the  scene  of  the  Last 
Judgment.  The  prophecy  of  conscience 
will  not  be  put  to  shame,  nor  the  con- 
tinuity of  this  life  be  broken.  When 
the  parabolic  form  is  reduced  and  the 
accidental  details  laid  aside,  it  lemains 
that  the  Book  of  Judgment  is  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  that  each 
soul  is  tried  by  its  likeness  to  the  Judge 
Himself.  Jesus  has  prepared  the 
world  for  a  startling  surprise,  but  it 
will  not  be  the  contradiction  of  our 
present  moral  experience;  it  will  be 
the  revelation  of  our  present  hidden 
character. — John  Watson,  M.A. 

Vers.  34-40.  The  surprise  of  the  right- 
eous.— I.  The  special  peculiarity  of  the 
persons  of  whom  our  Lord  here  speaks, 
is  that  they  did  not  know,  that  they 
had  no  suspicion,  that  in  showing  kind- 
ness to  men,  they  were  showing  kind- 
ness to  Christ.  "  Lord,"  they  answer, 
"  when  saw  we  Thee  ?  "  It  is  a  reve- 
lation to   them,   in   the  strictest  and 

582 


deepest  sense  of  the  word.  But  who 
are  they  ?  I  think  we  must  agree  with 
some  of  the  best  commentators,  that 
they  are  persons  who,  till  the  Day  of 
Judgment,  have  never  heard  of  Christ ; 
but  who  then,  for  the  first  time,  as 
Dean  Alford  says,  ''  are  overwhelmed 
with  the  sight  of  the  grace  which  has 
been  working  in  upon  them  and  the 
glory  which  is  now  their  blessed 
portion." 

II.  If  this  be  the  true  meaning  of 
our  Lord's  words,  what  comfort  and 
hope  they  may  give  us,  when  we  think, 
as  we  are  bound  to  think,  if  we  have  a 
true  humanity  in  us,  of  the  hundreds 
of  millions  of  heathens  now  alive,  and 
of  the  thousands  of  millions  of  heathens 
who  have  lived  and  died  !  The  wages 
of  sin  are  death,  and  can  be  nothing 
else.  But  may  not  Christ  have  His 
elect  among  them?  May  not  His 
Spirit  be  working  in  some  of  them? 
They  are  Christ's  lost  sheep,  but  they 
are  still  His  sheep  who  hear  His  voice. 

III.  How  shall  we  know  Christ's 
sheep  when  we  see  them  ?  How,  but 
by  the  very  test  which  Christ  has 
laid  down  in  this  very  parable  ? — C. 
Kingsley,  M.A. 

Ver.  34.  The  public  adoption. — The 
Romans  had  two  forms  of  adoption : 
one  private,  the  other  public.  One  was 
at  home  in  the  adopter's  house.  This 
was  the  agreement  and  union  between 
the  adopter  and  the  adopted.  The 
other  form  was  in  public,  in  the  forum, 
where,  in  presence  of  the  people,  the 
adopter  took  the  adopted  for  his  son 
and  heir.  Thus  God  by  His  Spirit, 
when  we  believe  in  Jesus,  receives  us 
and  seals  us  as  His  children.  The 
public  adoption  is  to  come.  "  We  wait 
for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption 
of  the  body."  When,  at  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  just,  Jesus  will  say,  "  Come, 
ye  blessed  children  of  My  Father,"  etc. 
our  adoption  shall  be  manifested. — G. 
Graham. 

Vers.  37-39.  Ghrist  the  Interpreter 
of  conduct. — It  is  not  simply  the  idea 
of  xnodesty  that  is  expressed.     Some- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW.       chap.  xxv. 


thing  profounder  is  suggested.  There 
is  a  mystery  in  many  of  the  actions  of 
men  which  needs  the  interpretation  of 
the  Master. — J.  Morison,  B.D. 

Yer.  40.  Our  suffering  brethren. — 
Some  four  days  before  these  words 
were  spoken,  one  of  our  Lord's 
adherents  had  attempted  to  set  up  a 
rivalry  betwixt  the  claims  of  his 
Master  and  those  of  the  poor,  when 
a  warm-hearted  woman,  moved  with 
gratitude,  broke  over  the  feet  of  Jesus 
costly  spikenard.  Judas  thought  that 
better  use  could  have  been  found  for 
the  money  had  it  been  given  in  charity. 
It  was  then,  and  it  is  still,  a  very  false 
sentiment  which  would  attempt  to 
make  competing  claims  out  of  what  is 
due  to  God's  worship  on  the  one  hand 
and  to  the  service  of  suffering  humanity 
on  the  other.  Such  an  unseemly  com- 
petition as  this  has  no  real  existence. 
Edward  Irving  had  it  engraved  on  the 
silver  plate  of  his  congregation  that 
when  the  offerings  of  the  people  no 
longer  sufficed  for  the  wants  of  God's 
poor  ones,  the  sacred  vessels  were  to 
be  melted  down  to  supply  the  deficiency. 
And  he  was  right;  it  is  the  mind  of 
the  Master.  Christ  has  expressly 
transferred  to  the  honest  and  suffering 
poor  His  own  claims  on  the  devotion 
of  His  people. 

I.  Our  suffering  brothers  are  to  us 
in  the  room  of  Christ. — Why  does 
Christ  thus  find  His  true  represent- 
atives in  men  who  suffer  ?  It  is  not  a 
question  very  easy  to  answer.  If  He 
meant  these  words  to  be  strictly  con- 
fined to  the  pious,  then  that  would  be 
enough — we  should  not  need  to  inquire 
further ;  but  I  am  not  at  all  satisfied 
that  we  are  entitled  to  limit  His  words 
so  narrowly.  Am  I  to  ask,  *'  Is  this 
poor  creature  a  Christian  1  "  before  I 
relieve  him  for  Christ's  sake  1  Or  does 
Jesus  not  care  to  reward  your  kindness 
if  you  show  it  to  the  unbeliever  ? 
We  must  try  to  understand  on  what 
ground  it  is  that  the  great  Lord 
of  men,  the  Saviour  and  Friend  of 
all  men,  identifies  Himself  with 
every  human   being,  and   with   those 


human  beings  most    of  aU  who  are 
afflicted. 

1.  He  chose  to  he  Himself  a  mfferer, 
poor,  and  "  acquainted  with  grief  "  ; 
and,  I  suppose,  the  recollection  of  His 
own  straitened  lot  will  teach  Him  to 
care  most  for  those  who  are  in  like 
case. 

2.  Our  Saviour's  design  in  coming 
here  at  all  was  to  he  a  healer,  a  rescuer, 
a  comforter  for  mankind. — He  is  the 
ideal  Man,  the  representative  Sufferer 
for  all  mankind.  "  Do  it  to  any  of 
them,  you  do  it  unto  Me." 

II.  The  advantage  of  this  arrange- 
ment.— 1.  To  Christ's  people. — More  or 
less  in  the  case  of  every  Christian  who 
fairly  comes  within  the  spell  of  it,  the 
love  of  Christ  has  become  the  master 
passion,  and  the  most  effective  and 
enduring  of  all  inducements  known  to 
human  history.  Now  consider  how 
great  the  misfortune  would  have  been 
if  Jesus,  after  evoking,  creating  such  a 
tremendous  force  as  this,  had  not  yoked 
it  to  any  practical  service  or  utility. 
Like  all  wasted  religion  of  enthusiasm, 
it  must  have  spent  itself  in  a  mis- 
chievous asceticism  or  a  mischievous 
fanaticism.  Christ  does  not  bid  you 
spend  your  strength  in  building 
cathedrals,  or  chanting  Te  D^ums. 
No ;  you  may  quite  lawfully  do  all 
that  if  you  like,  and  more,  in  His 
honour ;  but  if  you  really  want  to 
please  Him,  then  His  directions  are 
very  simple.  He  bids  you  feed  the 
hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  and  heal  the 
sick. 

2.  To  the  afflicted  members  of  the 
race. — Are  you  surprised  that  Christ 
should  champion  so  magnificently  the 
classes  whom  society  is  wont  to  hustle 
out  of  sight  ?  I  am  not :  it  is  just  like 
Him  !  But  it  surprises  me  exceedingly 
that  the  very  classes  for  whom  He 
claims  everything  that  He  might  have 
claimed  for  Himself  are  grown  in  a 
large  measure  to  forget  Christ  and  to 
despise  His  name. — J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D, 

Ver.  46.  Everlasting  punishment. — 
I.  Man's  conscience,  until  ho  deadens 
it.  spenks  out  clearly,  that  punishment 

583 


CHAP.  xxvi.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


is  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds.— But  And  it  may  be  an  equal  law  of  our 

of  what  duration  ?     All  knowledge  as  moral   nature   that   those  who   reject 

to    eternity    must     come     from     the  God  in  time,  even  to  the  end,  will,  by 

Eternal,  whose  it  is.     It  is  a  common  a  continuance  of  that  same  fixed  will, 

formula  of  those  who  venture  to  object  reject  Him  everlastingly, 
anything    to   God's    revelation — it    is  III.  Place    alone    does    not    make 

inconceivable    that    God   should   visit  heaven  or  hell. — Hell,  with  the  love 

passing  acts  of  sin  with  an  eternity  of  of  God,  were  as  heaven  :  without  the 

misery.     But  who  so   revealed   to   us  love  of  God,  it  may  be,  it  seems  even 

that  sin  ceases  in  the  evil,  when  life  probable,  that  heaven   would   be   the 

ceases?     Never  do  men  abandon  sin,  worst  hell.     As  we  see  in  Satan,  the 

except  by  receiving  God's   converting  sinner,  even  apart  from  God's   judg- 

grace.    To  sin  on  is  nature.     It  grows,  ments  on  sin,  carries  about  within  him 

deepens,   hardens,  becomes  more   ma-  his  own  hell. 

lignant,  more  ingrained,  more  a  part  IV.  Never  will  you  know  anything 

of  man's  self  until  the  hour  of  death.  of  the  depth  of  sin,  or  of  the  deeper 

Why,  unless  changed  even  then  by  the  depth  of  the  love  of  Christ  or  of  God, 

grace   of   God,    should    it    change    in  until    you    not    only   believe    in    the 

eternity?  abstract,  but  accustom  yourselves  to 

II.  TJnchangeableness  may  be,  for  think  of  that  awful  doom,  to  which 

what  we  know,  one  of  the  laws  of  each  wilful  rejection  of  God's  voice  in 

eternity. — We  know  that  it  shall  be  your  conscience,  was  dragging  you. — 

of  the  blessed.     Heaven  could  not  be  E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D, 
heaven  unless  they  were  fixed  in  good. 


CHAPTEK  XXYI. 
CRITICAL    NOTES. 


Ver.  2.  The  feast  of  the  Passover  commemorated  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  Egyptian 
bondage.  The  ordinances  of  the  first  Passover  are  narrated  Exod.  xii.  1-14,  but  some  of 
those  were  modified  in  later  times.  The  regular  celebration  of  the  Passover  was  part  of  the 
religious  revival  after  the  return  from  captivity  (  Carr). 

Ver.  3.  The  chief  priests,  etc. — The  meeting  now  assembled  may  have  been  either  a  formal 
session  of  the  Sanhedrin  or  an  informal  conference  of  its  chief  members,  prior  to  the  regular 
meeting.  The  former  seems,  on  the  whole,  the  more  probable  {Plumptre).  Scribes. — 
Wanting  in  the  most  important  MSS.  and  omitted  in  the  R.V.  "  It  is  certain,  nevertheless, 
that  the  scribes  would  be  present.  See  Mark  xiv.  1 ;  Luke  xxii.  2  "  (JSIorisoTi).  Palace. — 
Court  (R.V.).  The  word  properly  means  the  open  court  which  constituted  the  centre  of  an 
Oriental  house  of  repectable  dimensions,  and  around  which  the  respective  apartments  of  the 
dwelling  were  built  (ibid.).  Caiaphas. — Joseph  Caiaphas,  the  son-in-law  of  Annas,  was 
appointed  high  priest  by  the  Procurator  Valerius  Gratus  a.d.  26,  and  was  deposed  a.d.  38. 
The  high  priesthood  had  long  ceased  to  be  held  for  life  and  to  descend  from  father  to  son ; 
appointments  were  made  at  the  caprice  of  the  Roman  government.  Annas,  who  had  been 
high  priest,  was  still  regarded  as  such  by  popular  opinion,  which  did  not  recognise  his 
deposition.     St.  Luke  says,  "Annas  and  Caiaphas  being  the  high  priests  "  (iii.  2)  (^Carf). 

Ver.  5.  Not  on  the  feast  day. — Not  during  the  feast  (R.V.).  Including  the  seven  days  of 
unleavened  bread.  Neander,  Ewald,  Pressense,  and  others,  suppose  that  they  resolved  to 
arrest  Him  before  the  feast.  But  there  is  force  in  Dr.  Morison's  objection  to  this:  "  The  whole 
city  and  suburbs  were  already  swarming  with  the  multitudes  who  were  anticipating  the 
feast.  Caravans  were  hourly  arriving,  increasing  the  throng.  All  was  excitement.  Great, 
too,  was  the  interest  attaching  to  the  wonderful  Nazarene."  Chrysostom,  Calvin,  Lange, 
Meyer,  Wordsworth,  and  many  besides  assume  that  the  Sanhedrin  intended  to  crucify  Him 
after  the  feast,  when  the  crowds  of  strangers  sliould  have  left.     The  unexpected  treachery 

584 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap,  xxvl 


of  Judas  seems  to  have  hastened  the  crisis.     Lest  there  be  an  uproar. — As  in  connection 
with  other  Passovers  (Josephus,  Antiq.,  XVII.  ix.  3 ;  XX.  v.  3.     See  also  XVII.  x.  2). 

Ver.  6.  When  Jesus  was  in  Bethany. — The  narrative  is  given  out  of  its  proper  order,  on 
account  of  its  connection  (as  indicated  in  St.  John's  record)  with  the  act  of  the  traitor. 
St.  John  fixes  it  (xii.  1)  at  six  days  before  the  Passover,  i.e.  on  the  evening  that  preceded  the 
entry  into  Jerusalem  {Pluniptre).  Simon  the  leper. — Probably  not  an  actual  leper,  but  one 
who  had  been  so  ;  perhaps  one  who  had  been  healed  by  our  Lord.  From  John  xii.  2  it  has 
been  conjectured  that  Simon  was  the  husband  of  Martha,  who  appears  to  have  acted  as 
mistress  of  the  house.  Another  conjecture  is  that  Simon  was  the  father  of  the  family,  who 
was  now  dead,  though  the  house  was  still  called  by  his  name  (JSIanseV). 

Ver.  7.  Alabaster. — A  beautiful  calcareous  spar,  softer  than  marble,  and  therefore  easily 
scooped  or  fashioned  into  ornamental  boxes,  bottles,  vases,  and  jars  (Morison).  Box. —  Cruse 
(R.V.)  There  is  no  word  corresponding  to  "  box"  in  the  original.  The  expression  is  simply 
and  unspecifically  "  an  alabaster  " ;  and  the  reference  would  be,  not  to  an  alabaster  box  or 
casket,  such  as  the  Roman  ladies  kept  on  their  toilet-tables  for  holding  their  cosmetics,  but 
to  some  kind  of  small  and  elegantly-shaped  alabaster  bottle  or  cruet  {ibid.).  Very  precious 
ointment. — Spikenard  (Mark  xiv.  3).  The  ointment  of  nard  was  highly  esteemed  in  antiquity 
as  a  precious  aromatic  and  a  costly  luxury.  It  was  brought  chiefly  from  Asia  Minor  in 
alabaster  flasks  ;  and  the  best  were  to  be  had  in  Tarsus  (  Wine?'). 

Ver.  10.  A  good  work. — The  word  translated  "good"  has  prominent  in  it  the  thought  of 
beauty  (Gibson). 

Ver.  12.  For  My  burial. — To  prepare  Me  for  burial  (R.V.).  See  2  Chron.  xvi.  14.  Not  that 
she  consciously  intended  it  as  equivalent  to  an  embalmment  of  the  body.  But  Jesus  inter- 
preted her  act  according  to  His  own  anticipation  of  the  solemn  event  that  was  at  hand 
\Morison). 

Ver.  15.  Covenanted  with  him. — Weighed  unto  Mm  (R.V.).  After  the  old  custom.  There  had 
been  in  the  land  a  coined  shekel  since  the  time  of  Simeon,  143  B.C. ;  but  weighing  seems  to 
have  still  been  customary  in  the  temple  treasury  {Meyer).  Or  "  weighed "  may  be  simply 
equivalent  to  "paid."  Thirty  pieces  of  silver. — I.e.  thirty  silver  shekels.  G.  C.  William- 
son, D.Lit.,  in  ''  The  Money  of  the  Bible,"  says,  "  In  the  time  of  our  Lord  there  were  no  shekels 
current  (save,  perhaps,  a  few  of  the  old  ones),  although  money  was  reckoned  in  shekels,  very 
much  as  in  the  present  day  reckonings  are  made  in  guineas,  although  no  coin  of  the  value  of 
a  guinea  is  in  use."  Judas  may  have  been  paid  in  Syrian  or  Phoenician  tetradrachms,  which 
were  of  the  same  weight  {Madden^.  A  shekel  was  between  two  and  three  shillings  sterling. 
Perhaps  this  was  but  an  earnest  of  a  larger  sum. 

Ver.  17.  The  first  day  of  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread.—  "  The  feast  of"  omitted  in  R.V. 
The  14th  of  Nisan,  which  commenced  after  sunset  on  the  13th.  Dr.  Edersheim  says : 
"  Properly  speaking,  these  two  "  [the  "  Passover  "  and  "  Feast  of  unleavened  bread  "J  "  are  quite 
distinct,  the  '  Passover '  taking  place  on  the  14th  of  Nisan,  and  the  '  Feast  of  unleavened 
bread  '  commencing  on  the  15th,  and  lasting  for  seven  days,  to  the  21st  of  the  month.  ^  But 
from  their  close  connection  they  are  generally  treated  as  one,  both  in  the  Old  and  in  the  New 
Testament ;  and  Josephus,  on  one  occasion,  even  describes  it  as  'a  feast  for  eight  days.' " 

Ver.  18.  To  such  a  man. — The  Greek  word  is  that  used  when  the  writer  knows,  but  does 
not  care  to  mention,  the  name  of  the  man  referred  to  (JPlumptre).  The  Master  saith. — 
Therefore  the  host  in  question  was  a  disciple,  but  not  one  of  the  Twelve  (BeTigel).  My  time 
is  at  hand. — For  the  disciples  the  "  time  "  may  have  seemed  the  long-expected  season  of  His 
manifesting  Himself  as  King  (Plumptre).  I  will  keep. — /  keep  (R.  V.).  The  arrangements  had 
been  previously  made.  It  was  usual  for  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  lend  guest-chambers 
to  the  strangers  who  came  to  the  feast  (Carr). 

Ver.  20.  He  sat  down  with  the  Twelve. — See  R.V. :  sitting  =  reclining.  The  Paschal  cere- 
monial, so  far  as  it  bears  on  the  Gospel  narrative,  may  be  described  as  follows : — (a)  The 
meal  began  with  a  cup  of  red  wine  mixed  with  water:  this  is  the^r^^  cup  mentioned, 
Luke  xxii.  17.  After  this  the  guests  washed  their  hands.  Here  probably  must  be  placed 
the  washing  of  the  disciples'  feet  (John  xiii.).  (b)  The  bitter  herbs,  symbolic  of  the  bitter 
bondage  in  Egypt,  were  then  brought  in,  together  with  unleavened  cakes,  and  a  sauce  called 
charoseth,  made  of  fruits  and  vinegar,  into  which  the  unleavened  bread  and  bitter  herbs  were 
dipped.  This  explains  John  xiii.  26.  (c)  The  second  cup  was  then  mixed  and  blessed  like 
the  first.  The  father  then  explained  the  meaning  of  the  rite  (Exod.  xiii.  8).  The  first  part 
of  the  "  hallel  "  (Psalms  cxiii.  and  cxiv.)  was  then  chanted  by  the  company,  (d)  After  this 
the  paschal  lamb  was  placed  before  the  guests.  This  is  called  in  a  special  sense  "  the 
supper,"  But  at  the  Last  Supper  there  was  no  paschal  lamb.  There  was  no  need  now  of 
the  typical  lamb  without  blemish,  for  the  antitype  was  there  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  At  this  point,  when, 
according  to  the  ordinary  ritual,  the  company  partook  of  the  paschal  lamb,  Jesus  "  took  bread 
and  blessed  it,  and  gave  it  to  His  disciples  "  (ver.  26).  (e)  The  third  cup,  or  "  cup  of  blessing," 
so  called  because  a  special  blessing  was  pronounced  upon  it,  followed  :  "  after  supper  He 
took  the  cup"  (Luke).      "He  took  the  cup  when  He  had  supped'*  (Paul).      This  is  the 

585 


CHAP.  XXVI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


"  cup  "  named  in  ver.  27.     (/)  After  the  fourth  cup  the  company  chanted  (see  ver.  30)  the 
second  part  of  the  "  hallel  "  (Ps.  cxv. — cxviii.)  (Carr.). 

Ver.  25.  Thou  hast  said. — A  Hebrew  form  of  affirmation. 

Ver.  28.  New. — Omitted  in  K.V.,  on  the  authority  of  the  best  MSS.  Testament. — Covenant 
(K.V.).  The  term  dLadrjKT)  is  here  of  peculiar  importance.  It  does  not  mean  either  a  covenant 
in  the  sense  of  contract  or  agreement,  or  a  testament  in  the  sense  of  a  will,  but  it  has  a 
meaning  which  combines  ideas  distinctive  of  both.  In  dLadrjKr)  there  are  the  conditional 
elements  necessary  to  a  covenant,  and  the  absolute  elements  necessary  to  a  testament: 
the  first,  so  far  as  it  denotes  conditions,  revealed  and  established  by  God,  which  man  must 
accept  and  obey  before  he  can  stand  in  right  relation  with  Him ;  the  second,  so  far  as  it 
denotes  these  conditions  as  the  direct  and  independent  and  absolute  expressions  of  the 
Divine  will.  We  may  define  the  kulvt]  hadrjKr)  ("  new  covenant  ")  as  the  revelation  of  a  new 
relation  on  God's  part,  with  the  conditions  necessary  to  the  realisation  of  a  new  and  corre- 
spondent relation  on  man's.  The  founding  of  the  old  had-qKt]  had  been  ratified  by  blood 
(Exod.  xxiv.  6-8) :  the  founding  of  the  new  must  be  the  same  {A.  M.  Fairbaim).  For  the 
remission  of  sins, —  Unto  remission  of  siris  (R.V.).  I.e.  with  a  view  to  remission  of  sins. 
"  Remission  of  sins "  is  a  condensed  way  of  expressing  remission  of  the  penalty  of  sin 
{3lorison^. 

Ver.  29.  Until  that  day. — In  the  kingdom  of  God,  completed  and  perfected,  He  would  be 
with  them  once  again,  and  then  Master  and  disciples  would  be  alike  sharers  in  that  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  of  which  wine — new  wine — was  the  appropriate  symbol  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  32.  I  will  go  before  you. — As  a  shepherd.  A  pastoral  expression  (^Bengel).  See 
preceding  verse. 

Ver.  34.  Before  the  cock  crow. — The  crowing  of  cocks  during  the  stillness  of  the  night  is 
quite  a  feature  in  Oriental  life,  and  nowhere  more  so  than  in  and  around  Jerusalem.  The 
great  time  for  cock-crowing  was,  and  is,  in  the  third  watch  of  the  night.  See  Mark  xiii.  35 
(^MoTison). 

Ver.  36.  Gethsemane  =  "  the  oil  press." — On  the  slope  of  the  Mount  of  Olives.  Probably 
there  was,  or  had  been,  in  it  a  press  for  the  manufacture  of  olive  oil.  The  identity  of  this 
garden  with  the  traditional  spot  is  disputed. 

Vers.  45,  46.  Sleep  on  now.  .  .  .  Kise,  let  us  be  going. — The  sudden  transition  may  be 
explained  either  (1)  by  regarding  the  first  words  as  intended  for  a  rebuke,  or  else  (2)  at  that 
very  moment  Judas  appeared,  and  the  time  for  action  had  come.  The  short,  quick  sentences, 
especially  as  reported  by  St.  Mark,  favour  the  second  suggestion  ( Carr). 

Ver.  47.  A  great  multitude. — See  John  xviii.  3  (R.V.)  ;  Luke  xxii.  52.  The  body,  guided 
by  Judas,  consisted  of  (1)  a  company  of  Roman  soldiers  ;  (2)  a  detachment  of  the  Levitical 
temple-guard;  (3)  certain  members  of  the  Sanhedrin  and  Pharisees  {ibid.).  Staves. — I.e. 
clubs.    Not  the  same  word  as  in  chapter  x.  10. 

Ver.  51.  One  of  them. — See  John  xviii,  10.  When  the  Evangelical  tradition  first  assumed 
shape  and  form,  prudence  required  that  the  name  of  Peter  should  not  be  publicly  mentioned. 
Hence  the  indefinite  expression  in  the  Synoptists,  But  this  necessity  did  not  exist  when 
John  wrote  his  Gospel ;  therefore  he  gives  the  name  {Lange). 

Ver.  53.  Twelve  legions, — In  the  Roman  army  a  legion  numbered  about  six  thousand. 
Note  the  contrast  to  the  "  twelve  weak  men,  one  a  traitor,  and  the  others  timorous  "  ;  also 
to  the  company  with  Judas. 

Ver.  56.  But  all  this  was  done,  etc. — A  continuation  of  the  address  of  Jesus.     See  R.V. 

Ver.  57.  To  Caiaphas. — Apparently  after  a  preliminary  examination  before  Annas  (John 
xviii,  13,  19-24).  Where  the  scribes  and  the  elders  were  assembled. — It  was  against  the  rules 
of  Jewish  law  to  hold  a  session  of  the  Sanhedrin  or  Council  for  the  trial  of  capital  offences 
by  night.  Such  an  assembly  on  the  night  of  the  paschal  supper  must  have  been  still  more 
at  variance  with  usage,  and  the  fact  that  it  was  so  held  has,  indeed,  been  urged  as  a  proof 
that  the  Last  Supper  was  not  properly  the  Passover.  The  present  gathering  was  therefore 
an  informal  one  {Plumptre). 

Ver.  58.  Sat  with  the  servants. —  Officers  (^.Y.).  They  would  be  clustering  about  in  the 
outer  part  of  the  court,  which  was  open  to  the  sky,  while  the  Sanhedrin  would  be  meeting  in 
the  inner  or  canopied  compartment,  which  would  be  partially,  or  almost  completely, 
separated  from  the  outer  part  by  drawn  drapery.  Certain  officers  would  be  privileged, 
no  doubt,  to  be  moving  inward  and  outward  on  duty,  or  at  discretion  (Morison). 

Ver.  61.  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God. — The  actual  words  of  Jesus  spoken  (John 
ii.  19)  in  the  first  year  of  His  ministry  were,  "  Destroy  "  (a  weaker  Greek  verb,  and  not  "I  am 
able  to  destroy  ")  "  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up."  (The  word  is  appropriate 
to  raising  from  the  dead,  and  is  quite  different  from  the  verb  "  to  build.")  The  attempt 
was  to  convict  Jesus  of  blasphemy  in  asserting  a  superhuman  power  {Carr). 

Ver.  63.  I  adjure  thee. — When  such  a  formula  of  adjuration  was  employed,  a  simple 
affirmation  or  negation  was  regarded  in  law  as  sufficient-  to  constitute  a  regular  oath 
(^Lan^e.) 

586 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST,   MATTHEW,     chap.  XXvi. 


Ver.  64.  Power. — The  Hebrews  often  called  God  "  Power  "  (JBengeV). 

Ver.  65.  Rent  his  clothes, — This  act  was  enjoined  by  the  Rabbinical  rules.  When  the 
charge  of  blasphemy  was  proved,  "  the  judges  standing  on  their  feet  rend  their  garments 
and  do  not  sew  them  up  again."  "  Clothes  "  in  the  plural,  because  according  to  Rabbinical 
directions  all  the  under- garments  were  to  be  rent,  "  even  if  there  were  ten  of  them  "  {Carr). 

Ver.  67.  Spit  in  his  face. — Among  the  Jews  an  expression  of  the  greatest  contempt 
(Deut.  XXV.  9 ;  Num.  xii.  14).  Buffeted. — Struck  Him  with  clenched  fist.  We  learn  from 
St.  Mark  (xiv.  65)  and  St.  Luke  (xxii.  63)  that  these  acts  of  outrage  were  perpetrated,  not 
by  the  members  of  the  Sanhedrin,  but  by  the  officers  who  had  the  accused  in  their  custody, 
and  who,  it  would  seem,  availed  themselves  of  the  interval  between  the  two  meetings  of  the 
Council  to  indulge  in  this  wanton  cruelty  {Plumpire). 
■    Ver.  68.  Saying,  Prophesy.— They  had  blindfolded  Him  (Mark  xiv.  65). 

Ver.  71.  Porch. — The  dim,  over-arched  passage,  leading  outward  from  the  area  of  the  «ourt 
to  the  entrance  gate  {MorisoTi). 

Ver.  73.  Thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee. — Peter  was  discovered  by  his  use  of  the  Galilaean  dialect. 
The  Galileeans  were  unable  to  pronounce  the  gutturals  distinctly,  and  they  lisped,  pronouncing 
sh  like  th.  Perhaps  Peter  said,  *'  I  know  not  the  ith,''  instead  of,  "  I  know  not  the  ish  "  (man) 
(^Carr).  To  'bewray,  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  wreian,  to  accuse,  then,  to  point  out,  make 
evident, — the  literal  meaning  of  the  Greek  words  {Bible  Word-Book). 

MAIN  ROMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—13. 

The  eve  of  betrayal.— From,  speaking  of  His  own  coining  in  glory  and  of  things 
very  far  off,  the  Saviour  proceeds  to  speak  here  of  things  very  near  :  "  Ye  know 
that  after  two  days  is  the  feast  of  the  Passover,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed 
to  be  crucified  "  (ver.  2).  We  are  come,  in  fact,  to  the  very  eve  of  the  Passion 
of  Christ.  And  what  we  read  of  here  is  of  the  doings  of  unbelief,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  of  the  doings  of  faith,  on  the  other,  during  that  eve. 

I.  The  doings  of  unbelief. — In  what  condition  do  we  find  the  chief  representa- 
tives of  unbeHef  in  Christ  at  this  time?  We  find  them,  first,  assembled  in  force. 
All  classes  of  them,  with  their  usual  president  over  them,  are  met  in  his  house 
(ver.  3).  Nothing  is  wanting  to  make  plain  how  much  they  are  stirred.  It  is 
plain,  also,  in  the  next  place,  that  they  are  assembled  in  malice.  They  are  not 
there  to  debate  as  to  the  object  which  they  shall  undertake  to  pursue.  Neither 
are  they  there  to  resolve  only  on  preventive  measures ;  or  on  merely  half- 
measures  of  hatred.  On  these  points,  and  all  like  them,  their  minds  are  made 
up.  They  do  not  mean  to  stop  a  step  short  of  putting  Jesus  to  death  (ver.  4). 
In  the  third  place,  these  unbelieving  ones  are  also  assembled  in  craft.  They  are 
fully  aware  of  the  difficulties  which  lie  in  their  way ;  difficulties  arising  from 
the  high  esteem  in  which  the  Saviour  is  held,  as  also  from  the  fact  of  such  vast 
multitudes  being  then  gathered  at  Jerusalem.  But  these  considerations  do  not 
affect  either  their  consciences  or  their  wills.  They  only  lead  them  to  think  how 
they  can  do  safely  what  they  are  thinking  of  doing  ;  how,  in  a  word,  they  can  take 
Christ's  life  without  risking  their  own  (vers.  4,  5).  If  nothing,  therefore,  is 
more  prudent,  nothing  is  more  unscrupulous  than  their  conduct.  The  thing 
they  are  resolved  on  is  to  put  Jesus  to  death.  We  may  consider  the  holding  of 
this  ''council,"  therefore.  His  first  actual  contact  with  the  shadow  of  death. 
Before,  He  has  been  in  danger.     Now,  He  is  doomed. 

II.  The  doings  of  faith. — For  such  we  believe,  with  many  authorities,  that  we 
see  in  the  incident  which  comes  next.  We  believe  the  "  woman  "  spoken  of  here 
to  have  been  Mary,  the  sister  of  Martha  and  Lazarus ;  and  the  action  ascribed 
to  her  to  be  the  same  as  that  spoken  of  in  John  xii.  1-9,  in  connection  with  the 
"  supper  "  made  for  Jesus  at  the  house  of  Lazarus,  probably  some  days  after  His 
coming  there,  as  described  in  the  first  verse  of  that  chapter.  And  believing  this, 
we  think  we  see  here,  on  the  one  hand,  what  she  thought  then  of  the  Saviour  Him- 
self The  exceeding  costliness  of  the  gift  given  (ver.  7)  shows  this  to  begin. 
Nothing,  in  her  eyes,  was  too  precious  for  Him.     Thp  ijidignation  thus  aroused, 

587 


CHAP.  XXVI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


and  the  consequent  computation  of  the  numbers  that  might  have  been  benefited 
by  it  if  used  in  a  different  way,  tell  in  much  the  same  line.  No  others  whatever 
— no  number  of  others — were  equal  to  Him  in  her  eyes.  So  also  does  the 
extraordinary  lavishment  with  which  she  expended  her  gift — breaking  the  box 
so  as  to  keep  back  nothing  of  its  precious  contents,  and  pouring  these  over  the 
whole  person  of  the  Saviour  Himself  (cf.  ver.  7  with  John  xii.  3).  Nor  was 
less  spoken,  or  spoken  less  openly,  by  the  marked  publicity  of  her  gift,  given  to 
Jesus,  as  it  was,  as  He  "  sat  at  meat "  at  such  a  special  "  supper,"  and  with  His 
disciples  around  Him,  and  evidently  "  taken  "  (John  xii.  3)  from  elsewhere,  and 
brought  to  (Matt.  xxvi.  7)  Jesus  with  much  deliberation  of  purpose  and 
determination  of  manner.  She  wished  all  present  to  know  by  this  "  fragrance  '* 
what  she  thought  of  her  Lord.  As  it  were,  she  wished  the  "  whole  house  "  to  be 
filled  with  her  thoughts.  Possibly — the  idea  is  permissible  when  we  note  care- 
fully the  significant  manner  of  her  testimony — with  her  thoughts  of  Him  as  the 
Christ  !  Also,  we  think  we  see  here,  on  the  other  hand,  what  this  woman 
thought  and  knew  of  the  approaching  fate  of  the  Saviour.  Sitting  constantly  and 
almost  irremovably  at  His  feet  to  hear  His  word  (Luke  x.  39,  40),  we  can  well 
believe  that  she  had  taken  in  more  of  the  true  meaning  of  His  language  than 
His  other  disciples,  and  so  had  begun  to  realise  that,  as  a  matter  of  factj  He 
was  a  dying  man  at  that  time.  Certainly  the  pathos  of  this  knowledge  would 
account  exactly  for  the  remarkable  courage  and  determination  of  her  conduct. 
"  Now  or  never  must  this  thing  be  done."  So  she  would  be  led  by  it  to  say  in  her 
heart.  Certainly  also  the  light  of  this  knowledge  would  account  exactly  for  the 
direction  of  her  efibrt.  What  she  would  do  by  Jesus  should  be  just  that  which 
others  did  by  their  dead.  And  this,  indeed,  was  exactly  the  interpretation  which 
the  Saviour  Himself  put  on  her  deed.  He  recognised  and  defended  it  as  an 
exceptional  thing,  fitting,  therefore,  all  the  better  that  exceptional  juncture  and 
case  (vers.  10,  11).  He  recognised  it,  also,  as  being  done  in  connection  with  the 
close  approach  of  His  death  (ver.  12).  And  He  described  it,  further,  being  thus 
done  in  faith,  as  a  work  that  was  "  good  "  (ver.  10) ;  and  even  such  as  should  in 
time  be  proclaimed  everywhere,  as  an  example  to  all  (ver.  13).  An  example  of 
the  "  faith  "  which  cometh  by  "  hearing  "  !  An  example  of  the  way  in  which 
one  disciple,  at  least,  knew  what  was  then  coming  on  Christ. 

Note,  therefore,  in  conclusion,  how  we  see  the  Saviour  Himself  at  this  moment, 
when  the  lip  of  the  cup  to  be  drunk  by  Him,  as  it  were,  first  touches  His  lips. 

1.  How  full  of  consideration  for  others  ! — His  leading  enemies  have  now 
resolved  on  His  death.  The  most  enlightened  and  attached  of  His  disciples  has 
reminded  Him,  in  the  most  vivid  manner,  both  of  its  certainty  and  nearness ; 
has  treated  it,  in  fact,  as  in  one  way  begun.  Even  so  He  will  not  allow  her  to 
be  unjustly  reproached.  Whatever  is  coming  on  Him,  that  shall  not  come  upon 
her.  Instead  of  that.  He  will  cover  her  with  honour  and  thanks.  With  honour 
then,  and  thereafter  as  well.  With  honour  there,  and  everywhere  else.  See 
what  it  is  to  confess  Him  before  others.  It  is  to  be  confessed  by  Him  before  all. 
Confessed  by  Him  even  when  entering  into  the  shadow  of  death  ! 

2.  How  full  of  confidence  in  His  work. — The  prediction  of  verse  13  was  remark- 
able in  itself.  It  was  still  more  so  in  connection  with  the  time  at  which  it  was 
uttered.  Although  Himself  about  to  die,  nothing  of  that  kind  was  contemplated 
by  Jesus  in  regard  to  His  ^'gospel."  That,  rather,  w^s  to  become  the  more 
widely  known  and  believed  in  and  honoured  by  means  of  His  death ;  so  much  so 
as  thereby  to  bring  special  honour  upon  this  anticipation  of  that  death.  This 
saying  was  almost  more  than  the  prediction  of  a  prophet.  It  was  the  decree  of 
a  King  !  The  decree  of  a  King,  also,  who  knew  Himiself  at  that  moment  to  be 
under  sentence  of  death  1 

588 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST,  MATTHEW,    chap  xxvi. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  3,  4.  A  wicked  council. — I.  A 
council  without  counsel,  devoted  to 
subtilty  (ver.  5). 

II.  A  shameless  council,  devoted  to 
lying  and  calumniation  (xxvii.  1). 

III.  A  profligate  council,  devoted  to 
hypocrisy  (xxvii.  7). 

IV.  A  blind  council,  devoted  to 
bribery  (xxviii.  12). — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Jesus  in  the  house  of 
Simon  the  leper. — 1.  In  little  Bethany, 
as  well  as  in  great  Jerusalem,  God 
hath  His  own.  2.  The  man  who  is 
sensible  of  his  cleansing  by  Christ  will 
love  Him  aU  his  life  long  after.  Simon 
the  leper  here  receiveth  and  enter- 
taineth  Christ  and  His  disciples. 
3.  When  our  by-past  infirmities  may 
glorify  Christ,  it  is  no  shame  to  bear 
the  memorials  thereof.  Here  the 
Evangelist  calleth  Simon  "the  leper," 
though  now  whole.  4.  Love  spares 
no  cost ;  where  love  is  hot,  there  nothing 
is  dear. — David  Dickson. 

Ver.  8.  The  "  wastefulness  "  of  Christ- 
ian love. — Consider  the  objection  : — 

I.  In  relation  to  economy. — Christ 
teaches  us  that — 

1.  Love  transcends  economy. — Thrift 
which  forbids  the  demonstrations  of 
love,  which  forbids  the  observance  of 
holidays,  birthdays,  etc.,  which  denies 
leisure  either  to  love  or  to  express  it,  is 
a  bane,  not  a  boon.  Keep  love  alive 
at  every  cost*  is  Christ's  teaching. 

2.  Religion  trayiscends  economy. — 
Religion  should  be  the  last  cause  on 
which  tfc)  practise  economy,  yet  often 
the  first. 

II.  In  relation  to  the  poor. — Some 
say,  "  We  do  not  object  to  generosity, 
but  deem  it  better  shown  to  the  poor 
than  to  the  church,  to  Christ's  body, 
to   religion."      So   some    disciples  and 


others.     Both  plausible  and  popular. 
But  mark : — 

1.  These  are  not  the  best  friends  to  the 
poor. — See  John  xii.  6.  Judas  the 
spokesman.  He  was  not  a  friend  to 
the  poor.  This  objection  made  in  their 
own  interest,  not  that  of  the  poor.  He 
who  begrudges  to  the  church  generally 
begrudges  also  to  the  poor.  History 
proves  that  the  best  friends  of  the 
poor  have  ever  been  the  religious. 
They  still  are.  Non-religious  philan- 
thropy a  small  and  feeble  thing. 

2.  Religion  transcends  philanthropy. 
— Christ  knows  their  hearts,  but  meets 
their  objection.  His  boldness.  "The 
poor  with  you  always."  (1)  Not  a  con- 
demnation of  social  Christianity.  Some 
would  make  Christ's  saying  equivalent 
to  "  poverty  is  permanent,"  and  would 
quote  it  against  every  efibrt  to  abolish 
poverty.  Keference  purely  personal 
and  local.  "  Poor  with  you  when  I  am 
not."  This  quite  true.  Not  that  we 
are  to  have  always  with  us  the  hideous 
injustice  of  modern  poverty  !  Words 
really  teaching — (2)  That  spiritual 
Christianity  transcends  social  Christ- 
ianity. Mary  lives  on  a  higher  plane 
of  being  than  Martha  or  the  disciples. 
We  must  not  permit  social  questions  to 
secularise  us,  or  drive  God  from  our 
thoughts. 

III.  In  relation  to  Christ. — 1.  It  is 
sanctioned  by  Christ^ s  express  approval. 

2.  It  is  sanctioned  by  Christ's  great 
example. — Mary's  action  really  akin  to 
Christ's  great  "  waste  of  love  "  about  to 
be  consummated  on  the  cross.  Applica- 
tion :  1,  Let  us  lavish  our  love  on 
Christ,  in  emotional  and  in  concrete 
ways  remembering  His  waste  of  love 
to  us.  2.  Let  us  lavish  it  upon  others. 
Emulate  Christ — "  waste  "  your  love  on 
the  unworthy  and  the  unlovely.— >S'.  E, 
Keeble. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAR AGRAPH. —Verses  14—25. 

The  guilt  of  betrayal. — This  portion  of  Scripture  begins  (vers.  14-16),  and  concludes 
(vers.  23-25)  with  the  mention  of  Judas  Iscariot.  Also  in  the  middle  (in  ver.  21) 
our  Saviour  has  him  in  mind.     We  may  rightly,  therefore,  use  the  whole  passage 

589 


CHAP.  XXVI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


as  turning  on  Judas,  and  serving  to  show  us  the  true  nature  of  that  which  he  did. 
It  does  so,  in  particular,  by  showing  us,  first,  how  much  evil  his  purpose  involved ; 
and,  secondly,  how  many  obstacles  his  pertinacity  overcame. 

I.  The  evil  involved. — What  utter  treachery,  to  begin.  "  Judas  Iscariot,  which 
also  betrayed  Him."  That  is  the  first  note  in  the  case.  Treachery  towards  One 
who  had  favoured  him  much.  This  Judas,  it  is  also  noted,  was  "  one  of  the 
Twelve "  (ver.  14).  One  of  those,  i.e.,  who  had  been  admitted  to  the  special 
intimacy  of  the  Man  he  betrayed.  But  for  this  honour  he  could  not — as,  but  for 
his  falseness,  he  would  not — have  done  that  which  he  did.  Treachery  also  towards 
One  who  had  trusted  him  much  ;  in  one  respect,  apparently  (John  xii.  6),  the 
most  of  the  Twelve.  Twofold,  therefore,  was  the  treachery  of  which  he  was 
guilty.  He  was  false  to  kindness,  and  false  to  confidence  too.  Wholly  spontaneous 
also,  in  the  next  place,  his  treachery  seems  to  have  been.  It  does  not  appear, 
from  what  we  are  told,  that  temptation  assaulted  him,  as  it  were.  It  rather 
appears  that  he  went  after  it,  and  sought  it  himself.  "  He  went  to  the  priests," 
it  is  said  (ver.  14).  Probably  the  idea  of  the  Saviour  being  betrayed  by  one  of 
His  disciples  had  never  occurred  to  them  as  a  possible  thing.  And  therefore, 
it  was,  probably,  that  they  had  never  thought  of  making  any  attempt  in  that 
line.  Probably,  also,  this  accounts  for  the  peculiar  satisfaction  (Mark  xiv.  11) 
with  which  they  seemed  to  have  welcomed  the  communication  of  Judas.  "  Who 
would  ever  have  thought  of  our  receiving  such  an  offer  as  this  ? "  Certain  it  is 
that  his  treachery,  next,  was  of  a  very  wanton  description.  It  was  not  as  though 
he  had  been  influenced  by  the  prospect  of  making  any  great  gain  by  his  baseness. 
Merely,  it  is  said,  the  price  of  a  slave  (see  also  Zech.  xi.  13) — a  sum  about  large 

•enough  to  purchase  a  plot  of  ground  of  which  all  the  value  appears  to  have 
gone,  and  which  only  afterwards  could  be  turned  to  use  in  the  way  of  contempt 
(xxvii.  7) — was  all  he  looked  for  from  his  sin.  Yet,  last  and  worst,  his  resolve 
to  commit  it  was  of  the  most  deliberate  kind.  This  wretched  bribe  was  his  ruling 
thought — the  thing  he  longed  for — the  thing  he  lived  for — at  that  time.  What 
a  picture  we  have  in  verse  16  of  one  bent  upon  evil  !  Happen  what  may,  and 
come  what  might,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  this  consummate  wrong  shall  be  done. 

II.  The  obstacles  overcome. — In  the  case  of  this  sin,  as  of  so  many  others, 
there  was  nothing  less  than  a  whole  array  and  succession  of  influences,  which 
ought  to  have  told  in  the  opposite  line.  The  holiness  of  that  special  season  was 
one  thing  of  this  kind.  Was  the  Passover  (ver.  17),  the  great  feast  of  the  year, 
a  time  for  such  deeds  ?  Was  such  a  Passover,  also,  of  all  Passovers  (see  ver.  18), 
a  time  for  such  deeds  ?  How  vividly,  also,  at  that  feast  itself,  were  the  claims  of 
the  intimacy  to  which  the  Saviour  had  admitted  Judas  brought  home  to  his 
notice  !  He  was  at  the  same  table — he  was  partaking  of  the  same  food — he  was 
doing  so  at  the  same  time — with  his  Benefactor  (ver.  23).  What  was  he  about  to 
take  with  that  same  hand  with  which  he  had  just  taken  that  "  sop  "  ?  Was 
there  not  something  in  such  a  thought  which  should  have  made  him  draw  back  ? 
Also,  at  that  supper,  in  its  general  sorrow,  and  in  that  which  produced  it,  was 
there  not  much  which  ought  to  have  been  of  an  equally  adversative  kind  ? 
''  Verily  I  say  unto  you,"  the  Saviour  says  to  all,  "  that  one  of  you  shall  betray 
Me."  The  very  suggestion  is  too  much  for  every  one  else.  Every  one  else  is 
"  exceeding  sorrowful  "  at  the  very  idea.  Every  one  else  can  think  of  nothing 
worse  as  being  possible  for  himself  (ver.  22).  What  an  object-lesson,  therefore, 
as  to  the  enormity  of  his  sin  for  Judas  himself.  In  the  intensity  of  their  grief, 
he  could  see  what  they  all  thought  of  that  which  he  was  secretly  thinking  of 
doing.  If  they  had  all  known  it,  and  stood  up  and  adjured  him  with  tears  not 
to  think  of  doing  so,  they  could  not,  virtually,  have  said  any  more.  And,  lastly, 
there  was  the  special  grief  oi  the  Master  Himself.  What  a  burst  of  sorrow  was 
His !      How    significant    its   direction — over    Judas    himself !      How   equally 

590 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,     chap.  XXM. 


significant  the  time  of  its  expression — even  when  inexpressible  suffering  was 
approaching  Himself  !  How  beyond  description  its  depth — "  good  were  it  for  that 
man  if  he  had  not  been  born  "  (ver.  24)  !  Can  any  one  imagine  a  stronger  appeal, 
whether  to  love  or  to  fear  ? 

How  exceedingly  great,  therefore,  we  see,  in  conclusion,  is  the  deceitfulness  of 
sin  !  What  was  it  that  this  unhappy  man  promised  himself  by  his  sin  ?  For 
which  he  condescended  to  such  baseness  ?  For  which  he  gave  up  so  much  ?  For 
which  he  rushed  over  such  obstacles  1  For  which  he  resisted  such  appeals  ? 
For  which  he  lost  his  all?  What  strikes  one  so  much,  on  this  side  of  the 
question,  is  the  amazing  folly  of  sin  !  How  it  blinds  men  to  truth — to  afiection 
— to  honour — to  all  but  itself  !  See  such  passages  as  xiii.  22  ;  Heb.  iii.  13  ; 
Isa.  xliv.  20,  etc.,  etc.  Hence  the  wisdom  of  that  prayer  of  the  Psalmist's 
(Ps.  cxix.  37),  and  of  the  advice  given  us  in  Heb.  xii.  2,  to  "look  off  unto 
Jesus."  The  only  safety  against  that  which  thus  bewitches  men  in  the  wrong 
direction,  is  to  fix  the  attention  on  that  which  fascinates  in  the  right. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  14  -  16.  Judas  the  covetous. — 
This  incident  reveals  Judas  Iscariot. 
If  he  had  intended  to  compel  Christ  to 
commit  Himself,  and  begin  at  once  His 
kingdom,  the  very  last  thing  he  could 
have  thought  of  would  be  making 
money  for  himself  out  of  such  a  trans- 
action. We  should  divest  our  minds 
altogether  of  the  idea  that  the  case  of 
Judas  was  an  exceptional  one.  We  are 
warranted  in  looking  at  Judas  exactly 
as  we  look  at  any  other  man.  He  had 
to  be  exposed  to  temptation,  but  was 
capable  of  resistance.  He  was  liable  to 
err,  to  falter,  to  fall,  but  there  was 
provided  for  him  adequate  and  oppor- 
tune help.     Notice  : — 

I.  A  strand  of  weakness  in  his 
natural  disposition. — The  question  set 
before  each  one  of  us  is  this  :  What 
can  you  become  under  the  burden  of 
your  particular  bias  and  disability? 
Some  men  are  inclined  to  pride,  some 
to  sensualities,  some  to  drink,  and  some 
to  covetousness.  The  strand  of  weak- 
ness in  Judas  was  the  "  love  of  money." 
We  are  as  gardens  filled  with  various 
seeds,  of  weeds  and  of  flowers.  We 
can  nourish  the  weeds,  if  we  please. 
But  we  can  cut  down  their  growths 
and  pluck  them  out  if  we  will.  Judas 
nourished  the  weed. 

II.  A  dividing  line  in  his  history. 
— And  there  is  such  a  line  in  every 
personal  history.  A  time  when  it 
is  settled  whether  the  evil  or  the  good 


is  to  be  the  stronger  force  in  the  life. 
It  may  be  difiicult  to  fix  such  a  time  in 
the  case  of  Judas,  and  yet  many  think 
they  find  it  in  connection  with  our 
Lord's  very  spiritual  address  on  the 
"Living  Bread"-  (John  vi.).  At  the 
close  of  that  address,  the  Evangelist 
brings  Judas  in.  "  For  Jesus  knew 
from  the  beginning  who  they  were 
that  believed  not,  and  who  should 
betray  HimJ^  That  day  "  many  of  His 
disciples  went  back,  and  walked  no 
more  with  Him  " ;  and  it  is  not  un- 
reasonable to  assume  that,  though 
Judas  did  not  then  break  away  from 
the  apostolic  company,  the  conviction 
then  came  to  him  that  all  his  hopes 
were  doomed  to  disappointment,  and 
Jesus  was  no  such  Messiah  as  he  had 
desired.  Let  us  not  fail  to  observe 
that  Christ's  efforts  to  spiritualise  the 
thoughts  and  ideas  of  the  Apostles 
might  have  influenced  Judas,  as  they 
did  influence  the  others.  They  would 
have  done  so,  but  for  the  self-seeking, 
and  money-loving,  which  made  him 
insincere,  and  turned  him  into  the 
clay  which  the  warm,  life-giving  sun- 
shine can  but  harden. 

III.  The  motives  of  the  betrayal. — 
He  was  disappointed  in  the  thing  that 
had  grown  to  be  the  ruling  power  in 
his  nature — his  love  of  money  j  and  the 
disappointed  man  only  too  easily  can 
become  the  revengeful  man.  Such  a 
man  only  awakens  to   behold  himself 

591 


CHAP.  XXVI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


when  the  consequences  of  his  ill-doing 
are  fully  before  him.  Then  such  a 
man  may  feel  remorse — he  will  not  rise 
to  healthy  repentance.  Judas  let  money 
rule  him,  and  money  brought  him  down 
to  a  woe  unspeakable. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

Yer.  17.  Preparation  J  or  the  Passover. 
— 1.  It  is  commendable  to  remember 
God's  ordinances  in  due  time,  and  to 
prepare  for  them.  2.  Our  Lord  made 
Himself  so  poor  that  He  had  not  a 
house  of  His  own,  albeit  He  was 
Owner  of  all  the  earth.  3.  Our  Lord 
subjected  Himself  unto  the  law,  and 
did  keep  exactly  both  the  moral  and 
ceremonial  law,  that  He  might  deliver 
us  from  the  yoke  of  the  one,  and  from 
the  curse  for  breaking  of  the  other. 
4.  The  terms  of  sacramental  speech 
were  well  understood  by  Christ's 
disciples,  as  to  put  the  thing 
signified  for  the  sign ;  by  this  phrase, 
"to  eat  the  passoyer,"  they  mean 
"  to  eat  the  lamb,"  the  sacramental 
memorial  of  the  angel's  passing  over 
the  houses  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt. 
— David  Dickson. 

Vers.  18,  19.  "  ^  worthy  man  for  so 
holy  a  service." — 1.  The  Lord  will  not 
want  friends,  wheresoever  He  is.  Here 
in  Jerusalem  He  hath  friends,  as  He 
had  also  in  Bethany.  2.  He  hath 
such  control  of  the  spirits  of  men,  as 
He  can  bow  their  will  to  do  what 
service  He  pleaseth.  3.  Christ  hath 
taken  on  Him  to  be  our  Teacher  and 
to  Him  only  the  dignity  of  Master  is 
due ;  therefore  He  calleth  Himself 
*Hhe  Master."  4.  It  is  of  His  own 
free  choice  that  our  Lord  doth  employ 
any  man  more  than  another.  5.  The 
more  near  our  time  to  depart  this  life 
doth  draw,  the  more  careful  should  we 
be  to  have  all  things  done  by  us  which 
should  be  done ;  therefore  saith  He, 
"  My  time  is  at  hand,  I  will  keep  the 
Passover."  6.  It  is  the  part  of  true 
disciples  to  follow  Christ's  direction  in 
all  things,  and,  being  clear  in  the 
command,  to  go  about  the  obedience  of 
it. — Ibid. 

Ver.  20.  Christ  sitting  with  the  Twelve. 
592 


— 1.  Neither  is  the  sacrament  the 
worse,  nor  are  the  communicants 
polluted,  albeit  an  undiscovered  hypo- 
crite be  in  company  with  them  at  the 
Lord's  Table.  2.  The  Lord  will  not 
discover  hypocrites  till  they  by  their 
own  deed  discover  themselves,  but  will 
suffer  them  to  lurk  among  the  saints, 
till  His  own  time  come ;  as  here  He 
suffereth  Judas  to  lurk  and  to  eat  the 
Passover.  3.  Social  sitting  at  table  is 
a  very  fit  posture  for  a  religious  feast. 
— Ibid. 

The  positive  and  the  permanent. — 
God  had  commanded  the  attitude  of 
standing  in  the  reception  of  the  paschal 
meal :  the  Jewish  church  having  come 
to  the  land  of  promise,  and  being  there 
at  rest,  reclined  at  the  festival,  and  our 
Lord  conformed  to  that  practice — a 
proof  that  positive  commands  of  a  cere- 
monial kind,  even  of  Divine  origin,  are 
not  immutable,  if  they  are  not  in  order 
to  a  permanent  end. — (7.  Wordsworth, 
D.D. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Our  Lord  forewarning 
His  disciples. — 1.  It  is  possible  that 
a  man  may  come  to  the  Lord's  Table 
the  one  day  and  betray  Him  shortly 
after.  2.  The  possibility  that  a 
communicant  may  become  a  traitor 
should  put  all  men  to  search  them- 
selves. 3.  Sincerity  and  charity  will 
make  men  search  and  suspect  them- 
selves rather  than  another ;  as  here  the 
Apostles  say  not,  "Is  it  Judas ?  "  but 
"  Is  it  I  ] "  4.  The  sincere  man  dares 
not  trust  the  deceitfulness  of  his  own 
heart,  but  bringeth  it  to  the  Searcher 
thereof,  and  relieth  upon  His  testimony, 
as  here  the  Apostles  do,  saying  to 
Christ,  "  Is  it  I  ?  ''—David  Dickson. 

Ver.  22.  "/s  it  //"—Consider:-- 
I.  The  sorrow  of  the  disciples. — 1.  They 
were  sorrowful  that  He,  of  all  others, 
should  be  betrayed.  2.  But  the  circum- 
stance that  affected  them  the  most 
acutely  was  this :  that  their  Master 
should  be  betrayed  by  one  of  them 
whom  He  was  honouring  by  His  pre- 
sence and  exalting  by  His  fellowship. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvi. 


II.  The  inquiry  of  the  disciples. — 
"Is  it  I  ? "  Various  feelings,  no  doubt, 
prompted  this  inquiry : — 

1.  Aversion  to  the  crime  itself. 

2.  Apprehension  of  the  punishment 
due  to  such  a  crime. 

3.  Self -distrust. 

4.  Hypocrisy. — Judas,  also,  with  the 
faithful  ones,  said,  "Is  it  IV'—H. 
Ashbery. 

Yer.  24.  Judas  Iscariot. — It  has 
been  observed  that  our  Lord  Himself 
says  the  sternest  as  well  as  the  most 
tender  things  that  are  recorded  in  the 
gospel.  It  is  the  Most  Merciful  Him- 
self who  says,  "  It  were  good  for  that 
man  if  he  had  not  been  born."  As  we 
think  over  the  piercing  words,  we  see 
how  they  close  for  ever  the  door  of 
hope,  since,  if  in  some  remotely  distant 
age  there  were  in  store  for  Judas  a 
restoration  of  his  being  to  light  and 
peace,  beyond  that  restoration  there 
would  still  be  for  him  an  eternity,  and 
the  balance  of  good  would  at  once 
preponderate  immeasurably  on  the  side 
of  having  been  born.  It  must  be  good 
for  every  human  being  to  thank  God 
for  his  creation,  for  the  opportunity  of 
knowing  and  loving  the  great  Author 
of  his  existence,  unless  such  love,  such 
knowledge,  has  been  made  of  his  own 
act  for  ever  impossible. 

I.  There  are  sayings  about  Judas 
which  might  seem  to  imply  that  his 
part  in  life  was  forced  on  him  by  some 
inexorable  destiny. — St.  John  says  that 
Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning  who 
should  betray  Him.  Our  Lord  asked 
the  assembled  Apostles,  "  Have  not 
I  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is 
a  devil  ? "  In  His  great  intercession 
He  addresses  the  Father,  "  Them  that 
Thou  gavest  Me  I  have  kept,  and  none 
of  them  is  lost  save  the  son  of  perdition." 
And  at  the  election  of  Matthias  St. 
Peter  points  to  the  destiny  of  Judas  as 
marked  out  in  prophecy — "  His  bishopric 
let  another  take  " — and  he  speaks  of 
Judas  as  having  gone  to  his  own  place. 
This  and  other  language  of  the  kind 
has  been  understood  to  represent  Judas 
as  unable  to  avoid  his  part  as  betrayer. 


and  the  sympathy  and  compassion 
which  are  thus  created  for  him  is 
likely  to  blind  us  to  a  true  view  of  his 
unhappy  career.  The  truth  is  that  at 
dilierent  times  the  Bible  looks  at 
human  life  from  two  very  different — 
and,  indeed,  opposite — points  of  view. 
Sometimes  it  regards  men  as  factors 
in  the  Divine  plan  for  governing  the 
world,  for  bringing  about  results  deter- 
mined in  the  Divine  counsels.  At  other 
times  it  regards  men  as  free  agents, 
endowed  with  a  choice  between  truth 
and  error,  between  right  and  wrong, 
between  a  higher  and  a  lower  line  of 
conduct ;  and  then  it  enables  us  to 
trace  the  connection  between  the  use 
each  man  makes  of  his  opportunities 
and  his  final  destiny.  Both  ways  of 
looking  at  life  are,  of  course,  strictly 
accurate.  It  is  no  doubt  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  with  our  present  limited 
range  of  knowledge,  to  reconcile  the 
Divine  sovereignty  in  the  moral  world 
with  the  moral  freedom  of  each  indi- 
vidual man.  Some  of  the  great  mis- 
takes in  theology  are  due  to  an 
impatience  of  this  difficulty.  If  our 
ordL,  looking  down  upon  onr  life  with 
His  Divine  intelligence,  speaks  of  Judas 
once  and  again  as  an  instrument  who 
would  contribute  to  the  worldng  out 
of  the  redemption  of  the  world,  the 
gospel  history  also  supplies  us  with 
materials  which  go  to  show  that  Judas 
had  his  freedom  of  choice,  his  opportuni- 
ties, his  warnings,  and  that  he  became 
the  betrayer  because  he  chose  to  do  so. 
II.  For  Judas'  career  illustrates, 
secondly,  the  power  of  a  single  passion 
to  enwrap,  enchain,  possess,  degrade, 
a  man's  whole  character. — Judas,  we 
must  suppose,  had  his  good  points,  or 
he  never  would  have  become  of  his  own 
act  a.  disciple  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
But  Judas  had  one  vice  or  passion,  the 
love  of  money,  carried  to  a  point  which 
filled  his  thoughts  and  controlled  the 
action  of  his  will.  Just  as  there  are 
bodily  diseases  which,  at  first  unobtru- 
sive and  unnoticed  and  capable  of  being 
extirpated,  if  not  taken  in  time  will 
spread  and  grow,  until  first  one  and 
then  another  limb  or  organ  is  weakened 

Q  593 


CHAP.  XXVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


or  infected  by  them,  so  that  a't  the  last 
the  whole  body  is  but  a  habitation  for 
the  disease  which  is  hurrying  it  to  the 
grave :  so  in  the  moral  world  one  un- 
resisted propensity  to  known  wrong  may 
in  time  acquire  a  tyrannical  ascendency 
that  will  make  almost  any  conceivable 
crime  possible  in  order  to  gratify  it. 

III.  The  history  of  Judas  shows  us 
that  great  religious  privileges  do  not 
of  themselves  secure  men  against  utter 
spiritual  ruin.  —  Religious  privileges 
only  do  their  intended  work  when  they 
are  responded  to  on  our  part  by  the  dis- 
positions which  make  the  most  of  them, 
by  sincerity  of  purpose,  by  a  humble — 
that  is  to  say,  a  true — estimate  of  self, 
by  sorrow  for  past  sin  and  by  watchful- 
ness over  present  conduct,  by  an  especial 
care  not  to  let  any  one  passion  acquire 
that  preponderance  and  supreme  place 
in  the  soul  which  may  render  all  helps 
to  holiness  useless,  which  may  forfeit 
all  prospect  of  eternal  peace.  Judas 
lived  in  the  closest  intimacy  with 
Jesus ;  but  this  intimate  relation  with 
Jesus  did  not  save  Judas  from  a  crime 
compared  with  which  that  of  the  Jewish 
Rabbis,  and  the  Roman  soldiers,  and 
Pontius  Pilate,  and  the  chief  priests, 
and  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  was 
venial ;  it  did  not  save  him  becoming 
the  betrayer.  Observe,  too,  in  the 
betrayal  of  our  Lord,  the  survival  of 
rehgious  habit  when  the  convictions 
and  the  feelings  which  make  religion 
real  have  passed  away.  Judas  be- 
trayed the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss. 
The  kiss  was  a  customary  expression 
of  mingled  affection  and  reverence  on 
the  part  of  the  disciples  when  they  met 
their  Master.  To  suppose  that  Judas 
deliberately  selected  an  action  which 
was  as  remote  as  possible  from  his  then 
true  feelings  is  an  unnecessary  sup- 
position. It  is  more  true  to  human 
nature  to  suppose  that  he  endeavoured  to 
appease  whatever  there  may  have  been 
in  the  way  of  lingering  protest  in  his 
conscience  by  an  act  of  formal  reverence 
that  was  dictated  to  him  by  long  habit, 
and  that  served  to  veil  from  himself  the 
full  enormity  of  his  crime  at  the  moment 
of  his  doing  it. — Canon  Liddon. 

594 


Ver.  25.  Betraying  Christ. — There 
are  other  ways  of  betraying  the  Lord 
than  by  selling  Him  for  a  definite  sum 
of  money,  and  by  sealing  the  hateful 
bargain  with  the  kiss  of  treachery.  I 
shall  speak  of  three  ways  of  betraying 
Christ,  to  which  we  seem  specially 
liable  in  our  own  day. 

1.  The  betrayal  on  the  side  of  the 
intellect. — The  popular  intellectual 
position  of  our  day  is  one  of  antagonism 
to  Christ.  The  men  who  profess  to 
be  the  leaders  of  our  thought  are  never 
tired  of  telling  us  that  the  story  of 
Jesus  is  a  myth,  and  that  the  life  of 
Christ  in  us  is  the  result  of  a  delusion. 
I  want  you  not  to  betray  your  Lord 
until  you  are  sure  that  He  is  not  your 
Lord.  I  want  you  not  to  betray  Christ 
because  men  say  that  He  is  disproved, 
but  look  for  yourselves  whether  He  is 
disproved. 

II.  The  betrayal  through  the  sins 
of  our  own  nature. — 1.  Animal  ap- 
petites. 

2.  Covetousness. — It  sometimes  calls 
itself  thrift ;  it  sometimes  calls  itself 
economy ;  sometimes  it  is  even  on  the 
plea  of  benevolence. 

3.  Unbelief. 

4.  Want  of  truth. 

III.  The  betrayal  by  silence. — We 
are  tempted  to  betray  our  Lord  by 
silence  amongst  His  people,  and  in  the 
world  where  His  people  are  not.  St. 
Chrysostom  tells  us  of  one  of  the  early 
martyrs,  St.  Lucian,  who  was  brought 
before  the  tribunal  of  the  judge  to  be 
condemned  to  death,  and  the  judge  said 
to  him,  "  What  is  your  name  1  "  and 
he  answered,  ''  I  am  a  Christian." 
*'  And  what  is  your  country  1 "  and  he 
answered,  "  I  am  a  Christian."  "  And 
what  is  your  business  ? "  and  he 
answered,  "  I  am  a  Christian."  And 
to  every  question  of  the  judge  he  had 
but  one  answer :  "  I  am  a  Christian." 
The  man's  life  had  got  absorbed  in  his 
Redeemer.  He  had  no  family,  no 
country,  no  trade,  except  to  be  Christ's 
and  to  confess  Christ  before  men.  We 
want  Christians  of  that  sort  in  the 
present  day. — R.  F.  Horton^  M.A, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST,  MATTHEW,     chap.  xxvi. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  26—30. 

Sacrifice  and  thanksgiving. — "■  As  they  were  eatmg."  The  Passover  meal 
had  been  interrupted  before  (ver.  21)  for  the  announcement  of  the  betrayal.  It 
is  now  interrupted  for  another  announcement.  Taking  of  the  bread  and  wine 
that  were  then  on  the  table — breaking  the  one  and  pouring  out  the  other — 
declaring  them  also  to  be  identified  respectively  with  His  ov^n  body  and  blood — 
the  Saviour  commanded  all  His  disciples  to  partake  in  common  of  both.  Much 
was  meant  by  these  actions  and  words — much,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  way  of 
institution  and  doct7nne ;  much,  on  the  othei',  in  the  way  of  prediction  and  hope. 

I.  In  the  way  of  institution  and  doctrine. — These  things  were,  in  the  first 
place,  a  symbolical  rehearsal  of  the  Saviour's  then  imminent  death.  As  had  now 
been  done  with  that  bread  and  wine,  so  was  to  be  done  almost  immediately  with 
His  body  and  blood.  The  way  in  which  He  had  just  united  these  things  in 
thought,  could  mean  nothing  else.  The  use  He  had  made  of  these  elements — as 
the  Apostle  afterwards  said  of  it  (1  Cor.  xi.  26) — had  ** shewed  forth"  His  own 
*'  death  "  :  its  near  approach,  its  exact  manner,  its  inevitable  certainty  also.  In 
a  similar  manner,  in  the  next  place,  these  words  and  actions  were  meant  to  set 
forth  the  purpose  of  His  death.  That  death  was  intended,  for  example,  to  put 
away  guilt.  It  was  "  for  the  remission  of  sins."  It  was  to  do  this,  also,  for 
**  many  "  ;  even  as  many  as  willed.  Once  more,  it  was  able  to  do  all  this,  partly 
because  of  its  preciousness — blood-shedding  doing  away  with  "  blood-guiltiness  " 
(Ps.  li.  14;  Gen.  iv.  )  ;  life  being  given  for  life  ;  and  that.  His  life,  most  precious 
of  all.  And  partly  because  it  had  been  so  agreed  on,  in  the  mercy  of  God,  from  of 
old  :  that  blood  being  here  spoken  of,  therefore,  as  the  "  blood  of  the  covenant  " 
(ver.  28),  and  as  having,  in  consequence,  a  power  of  its  own.  Further,  these 
symbols  set  forth,  in  the  last  place,  how  and  in  what  manner  the  immense 
advantage  spoken  of  could  effectually  he  made  ours.  Just,  in  short,  as  we  do 
always  with  bread  and  wine  for  our  natural  life,  so  exactly  must  we  do  for  our 
spiritual  life  with  that  which  they  represent  here.  Even  bread  "  broken  "  and 
ready  for  eating  does  not  sustain  us  of  itself ;  even  wine  "  poured  out  "  and  ready 
for  drinking  does  not  cheer  life  of  itself.  Both  must  be  actually  partaken  of  if 
they  are  to  tell  indeed  on  our  lives.  Just  so  of  that  priceless  blessing  spoken  of 
here.  We  must  make  it  ours  by  our  faith.  In  other  words,  that  bread  of 
heaven,  that  wine  of  agony,  must  be  "  eaten  "  and  "  drunk  "  (John  vi.  53,  etc.). 
All  this,  in  jSgure,  but  with  deepest  significance,  did  this  *'  institution  "  proclaim. 

II.  In  the  way  of  prediction. — There  is  a  nearer  horizon,  and  a  farther  one — 
much  sadness  and  more  gladness — in  the  words  which  come  next.  They  seem 
intended  to  teach  the  disciples — in  connection  with  the  Ordinance  just  appointed 
— what  to  expect  in  the  future.  You  are  to  expect,  in  the  first  place — so  the 
Saviour  seems  to  say  to  them — both  separation  and  union ;  being  without  Me  at 
first,  being  with  Me  at  last.  While  we  are  separated  you  will  need  something 
to  remind  you  of  Me  ;  something  also  to  be  a  kind  of  pledge  of  our  being  united 
again.  Let  the  repetition  of  this  ordinance  answer  these  ends  (cf.  1  Cor.  xi., 
end  of  vers.  24,  26,  which  express  exactly  the  spirit  of  what  our  Saviour  says 
here).  You  must  expect,  next,  in  consequence  of  things  being  thus,  both  imper- 
fection and  perfection — the  one  first,  the  other  to  follow.  Much  as  these 
symbols  will  do  for  you  if  rightly  employed,  they  must  not  be  supposed  capable 
of  obliterating  the  difference  between  separation  and  union.  They  will  not  do  so 
to  Myself.  I  shall  be  only  as  the  master  of  a  feast,  who,  because  of  the  absence 
of  certain  much-honoured  and  mTTch-beloved  guests,  will  not  permit  himself  to 
taste  yet  of  the  wine  of  the  feast  (ver.  29).  And  you  will  be  as  those  guests  who 
cannot  do  so,  because  they  are  not  present  as  yet.  Not  so,  however,  is  it  to  be 
at  all  when  the  time  of  separation  is  over.     The  very  best  of  the  wine,  then — 

595 


CHAP.  XXVI.     IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


even  wine  "  new "  indeed,  and  such  as  never  before — shall  be  our  common 
delight :  delightful  most  on  that  ground  !  You  must  expect,  lastly,  in  the  future 
before  you,  both  trial  and  triumph.  Trial,  at  first,  and  not  a  little  of  it. 
Triumph  afterwards,  and  very  much  more.  Until  then,  though  kings  and  priests 
in  reality,  and  proved  to  be  such  by  being  guests  at  My  table,  the  fact  will  be 
hidden  from  most.  After  then  it  will  be  hidden  from  none  (cf.  xiii.  43; 
Rom.  viii.  19  ;  1  John  iii.  2,  etc.).  How,  indeed,  should  it  be  when  this  feast  of 
"  remembrance  "  has  given  place  to  that  "marriage  supper"  itself  (Rev.  xix.  7-9), 
and  you  sit  the7'e  as  guests  ? 

Our  prevailing  feeling,  as  we  look  back  on  this  beginning,  should  be  the  feeling 
of  praise.  It  appears  from  the  story  that  this  beginning  itself  was  followed  by 
praise  (ver.  30).  Even  in  the  gloom  of  that  most  solemn  occasion  the  Saviour 
and  His  disciples  joined  in  a  "  hymn."  As  we  think  of  the  ordinance  of  that 
night  of  betrayal ;  of  the  love  it  displays  ;  of  the  blessings  it  seals ;  of  the  hopes 
it  predicts ;  of  the  comfort  it  assures  ;  of  the  strength  it  has  given ;  we  may 
well  do  the  same  thing.  Practically,  where  we  observe  it  rightly,  we  do  so  in 
effect.  We  always  sing  a  ''  hymn  " — we  always  sing  the  *'  hymn  " — when  we 
thus     show  forth  the  Lord's  death."     It  is  the  Eucharist — the  giving  of  thanks. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.   26-30.    The  LordJs  Supper. —  2.  The  Lord's  Supper  also  anticipates 

I.  The  Author, — Jesus  took  bread,  etc.  the  eternal  communion  which  believers 

II.  The  time  of  the  institution.  The  will  enjoy  with  Christ  in  heaven  (ver.  29). 
night  before  He  was  betrayed.  P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D. 

III.  The  sacramental    elements. — 

Bread  and  wine.  Ver.  26.  The  New  Testament  Pass- 

IV.  The  ministerial  action. — The  over. — "As  they  were  eating."  The 
breaking  of  the  bread  and  the  blessing  Lord's  institution  of  His  supper  was  in 
of  the  cup.  connection   with   the   Passover   which 

V.  The  object. — "Dothisin  remem-  He  kept  with  His  disciples,  before 
brance  of  Me,"  etc.  concluding  it  with  the  "Aa^^e^."    By  this 

VI.  Thanksgiving  after  communion,  means  He  intimated  that  He  would 
— W.  Burkitt.  have  His  Supper  regarded  as  the  New 

Testament  Passover.     What,  then,  was 

Vers.   26-29.    The  Lord's  Supper. —  the  Passover? 

I.    The  nature  of  the  Lord's  Supper  I.  The  Passover  was  a  feast,  not  a 

as  seen  in  its  reference  to  the  past. —  sacrifice. — The   sacrifice   was   presup- 

It  is  a  memorial  or  commemoration  of  posed  in  the  feast.     So  with  the  Lord's 

the  death  of  Christ.     The  greatness  of  Supper.     He  offered  the  sacrifice  :  we 

the  fact,  of  which  it  is  the  commemora-  keep  the  feast. 

tion,     invests    it    with    unspeakable  II.  The  Passover  was  the  feast  of  a 

dignity.  sacrifice. — So  with  the  Lord's  Supper. 

II.  The  nature  of  the  Lord's  Supper  He  sacrificed  His  body  and  blood. 
as  seen  in  its  reference  to  the  present.  This  sacrifice  we  receive  and  enjoy  in 
— We  regard  it  as,  perhaps,  the  most  the  Lord's  Supper. 

efficacious  of  all  the  means  of  grace.  III.  In  the   Passover  Israel   cele- 

designed  to  nourish  religion    in  our  brated  its  present  saving  fellowship 

souls,  and  to  promote  brotherly  love  with  Jehovah,  and  looked  forward  to 

toward  our  fellow-believers.  its  future  consummation. — So  in  the 

III.  The  nature  of  the  Lord's  Supper  Lord's  Supper  we  celebrate  not  merely 
as  seen  in  its  reference  to  the  future. —  the  memory  of  a  past  fact,  but  that 
1.  We  are  reminded  of  the  second  coming  salvation  of  the  present  in  the  fellow- 
of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xi.  26.)  ship   of   which  we   stand,  and  which 

696 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvi. 


looks  forward  to  its  future  consumma- 
tion.— C.  E.  Luthardt^  D.D. 

Absurdities  of  the  dogmas  of  tran- 
substantiation  and  consubsta^ntiation. 
— "This  is  My  body."  Almost  a 
worldful  of  super-refined  absurdities 
has,  unhappily,  been  heaped  on  this 
simple  affirmation.  A  nd  if  Christianity 
had  not  been  really  Divine,  its  life 
would  have  long  ago  been  utterly 
crushed  out  of  it  under  the  immensity 
of  the  load.  Rhetoric,  as  Selden 
remarks,  has  been  mistaken  for  logic  ; 
and  the  "is"  has  been  insisted  upon 
as  demonstration  that  the  thing  given 
by  the  Lord  into  the  hands  of  His 
disciples  was  not  bread  at  all,  but — 
literally — His  own  body.  Hence  the 
doctrine  of  t^'ansubstantiation.  Others 
have  insisted  that  if  the  thing  given 
was  really  bread,  it  was  also,  at  one 
and  the  same  time,  the  literal  body  of 
the  Lord.  This  is  the  doctrine  of 
consubstantiation.  The  substantive  verb 
"is,"  it  has  been  contended,  must  be 
taken  as  the  copula  of  substantive 
existence.  All  this  is  sad ;  for  it 
would  hence  follow  : — 

1.  Thctt  one  siibstance  is  another. 

2.  That  a  thing  is  not  itself — Christ's 
body,  for  instance.  At  the  time  that 
He  uttered  the  words  of  the  institution, 
He  was  in  His  body ;  and  therefore 
He  did  not  hand  it,  in  His  hand,  to 
His  disciples.     It  would  follow  : — 

3.  That  a  part  of  the  whole  is  yet  the 
whole  of  which  it  is  a  part. — If  the 
whole  cake  is  the  body,  and  the  broken 
cake  is  the  broken  body,  and  if  yet 
every  morsel  of  the  broken  cake  is  also 
the  body,  then  a  part  of  the  body  is  the 
whole  of  the  body.    It  would  follow  : — 

4.  That  a  thing  which  is  one,  and 
but  one,  is  yet  more  than  one ;  for  if 
the  cake  be  the  one  body,  and  yet  each 
morsel  of  the  cake  be  also  the  one 
body,  then  Christ's  one  body  is  many 
bodies.     It  would  follow  : — 

5.  That  a  thing  which  is,  by  its  very 
essence,  limited  to  a  certain  spot  in  space, 
is  yet  not  limited  to  that  spot — Christ's 
body,  for  instance,  when  with  His  own 
hand  He  gave  it  into  the  hands  of  His 


disciples,  while  yet  it  remained  where 
it  was  before,  at  an  appreciable  distance 
from  His  disciples'  hands.  It  would 
follow  : — 

6.  That  the  percipiency  of  the  soul, 
operating  through  the  senses  of  the  body, 
while  these  senses  are  perfectly  awake, 
and  perfectly  sound,  m,ay  yet  be  absolute- 
ly and  hopelessly  deceived. — If  the  per- 
cipiency of  the  soul,  operating  through 
sight,  touch,  and  taste,  and  equipped 
with  all  the  adjuncts  of  scientific 
analysis,  finds  bread,  and  bread  only,  in 
the  morsel  of  the  sacramental  cake, 
and  if  yet  that  morsel  be  physically 
transubstantiated  into,  or  consub- 
stantiated  vdth,  the  living  body  of 
Christ,  then  all  the  senses  appealed 
to  must  be  liars,  and  everything  that 
we  see  and  hear  and  touch  and  taste, 
may  be  a  lie.  The  culminating  act  of 
religion  would  thus  be  the  copestone 
of  universal  and  inseparable  scepticism. 
But  this  will  not  do.  We  must  take 
a  dififerent  view  of  the  words  of  the 
institution.  The  "is,"  in  the  expression 
"  is  My  body,"  must  be  understood,  not 
as  the  copula  of  substantive  existence, 
but  as  the  copula  of  symbolical  or  repre- 
sentative relationship.  Why  not  ? 
Compare,  for  instance,  xiii.  38,  39, 
"  The  field  is  the  world  ;  the  good  seed 
are  the  children  of  the  kingdom,"  etc. 
Parabolism,  or  symbolism,  or  repre- 
sentativism  of  some  kind  must  be 
admitted  (cf.  Gen.  xl.  12,  18 ; 
Ezek.  xxxvii.  11  ;  Dan.  ii.  38,  vii.  17, 
24,  viii.  21  ;  Matt.  xiii.  37  ;  Luke  xv. 
26,  XX.  17;  Acts  x.  17;  Gal.  iv.  24,  25; 
Eph.  V.  9  ;  Heb.  vii.  2  ;  Rev.  i.  20). 
Indeed,  the  parabolic  element  in  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  the  true  key  to  its  in- 
terpretation. The  supper  is  a  parable 
to  the  eye,  the  touch,  the  taste.  And 
when  our  Saviour  said  of  the  morsel 
of  bread,  "  This  is  My  body,"  He  but 
interpreted  the  figurative  or  repre- 
sentative significance  of  one  of  the 
elements  of  the  parable.  If  we  would 
get  the  spiritual  blessing,  when  we 
communicate,  we  must  mentally  trans- 
figure the  figure.- 


Morison,  D.D. 


Ver.   29.  Christ  a  Fellow-banqueter, 

597 


CHAP.  XXVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


— 1.  Our  Lord,  beside  all  other  relations  Yer.  30.  Spiritual  song. — Observe : — 

which  He  hath  to  the  sacrament,  as  I.  On   the    threshold    of    suffering 

the  Instituter  thereof,  the  End  thereof,  Christ  with  men  sings  a  triumphant 

the  Thing  signified  thereby,  the  Minis-  psalm. — Teaches  entire  consecration  to 

ter   in    the   first   celebration    thereof,  God,    creates    calm    trustfulness    and 

is  also  a    Fellow-banqueter,  and  com-  fortitude  in  trial.      To  sing  thus  we 

municant  with  us  in  His  own  way  ;  must  have  unbroken  fellowship  with 

for  He  did  drink  of  the  sacramental  God.     Illustrated  in  the  lives  of  Paul, 

wine,    as    it    signified    communion    of  Luther,  Wesley, 
life    and    joy    with    us    in    heaven.         II.  Christ's  kinship  and  sympathy 

2.  Whatsoever  change  is  put  upon  the  with  the  disciples. — Hymn  used  to 
wine  in  the  sacrament,  by  instituting  cheer,  strengthen,  and  inspire  con- 
that   it   should    signify   and    seal    up  fidence  in  God. 

spiritual  life  and  joy,  yet   after  the         III.  Teaches  simplicity  of  Christian 

sanctifying  of   it,  and  in  the  time  of  worship. — No   robed   choristers.      No 

drinking  of  it  by  the  communicants,  it  mystical  chanting.  This  service  parallel 

remaineth  wine,  in  its  own  natural  pro-  with  Christ's  prayer-meeting — two  or 

perties,  without  being  transubstantiate,  three  met  in  His  name.     Thus  possible 

3.  The  drinking  of  the  sacramental  wine  for  all  to  worship  (accessories  not  f or- 
is a  sign  and  pledge  of  our  spiritual  bidden).  God  the  Author  of  music, 
and  new  communion  in  life  and  joy  in  The  harp  and  psaltery  not  to  be  broken 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  Christ  or  destroyed.  Convert  the  player,  and 
expoundeth  it,  saying,  "  Until  the  day  the  music  will  be  heavenly. 

that  I  shall  drink  it  new,"  etc.   4.  Christ  Practical     lessons. — Spiritual      song 

will  not  be  content  to  be  without  His  should  be  used  to  bring  men  nearer  to 

disciples  in  heaven.     "I  will  drink  it  Ood.    Kingsley  says  that  in  heaven  "  all 

new  with  yjQU." — David  Dickson.  speech  will  be  song." — /.  E.  Douglas. 


MAIN  EOMILETIGB  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  51—35. 

Foresight  and  blindness. — When  the  disciples  follow  their  Master  from  the 
Passover-chamber  to  the  Mount  of  Olives  (ver.  30),  they  share  His  company, 
but  hardly  His  thoughts.  Much  is  seen  by  Him  which  is  hidden  from  them. 
This  is  brought  out  here  in  two  principal  ways :  in  connection,  first,  with  the 
general  warning  which  He  addresses  to  them  all ;  in  connection,  secondly,  with 
the  special  wariiing  which  He  addresses  to  St.  Peter  alone. 

I.  The  warning  to  all. — His  words  in  this  way  show,  first,  how  much  He  knew 
of  what  was  to  happen  that  night.  *'  All  ye  shall  be  offended  in  Me  this  night  " 
(ver.  31).  Nothing  looked  less  like  this  than  things  did  when  He  spoke.  Had 
not  these  disciples  followed  Him  long*?  Through  many  vicissitudes  (Luke  xxii.  28)  ? 
At  very  great  cost  (Matt.  xix.  27)  ?  Had  they  not  also  joined  iu,  if  not  actually 
started,  the  acclamations  which  accompanied  His  entry  into  Jerusalem  (xxi.  6-9)  1 
And  been  with  Him  in  all  His  subsequent  word-encounters  and  triumphs 
(xxii.  15-46)  ?  How  strange,  therefore,  the  announcement,  that  in  a  few  hours, 
they  would  be  acting  inconsistently  with  all  this !  Ashamed  to  be  seen  in  His 
company  !  Scandalised  at  the  accusation  (!)  of  belonging  to  Him  at  all !  Still 
more  strange,  therefore,  to  hear  it  said  that  this  had  been  predicted  of  old ;  and 
that  the  reason  of  it  all  was  to  be  found  in  that  which  had  also  been  predicted 
of  Him.  He  was  to  be  "  smitten,"  and  they  were  to  be  "  scattered"  (ver.  31  ; 
Zech.  xiii.  7  :  see  also  1  Kings  xxii.  17).  All  this,  though  incredible  to  them, 
was  foreseen  by  Him  as  quite  close.  Much  the  same  was  it,  in  the  next  place, 
with  what  was  to  follow  that  night.  Most  significant,  most  profound,  are  His 
words  on  this  point.     As  to  Himself,  on  the  one  hand ;   that  He  was  to  die, 

598 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvr. 


and  yet  live  ;  to  need  "  raising  again  "  ;  to  attain  to  it  also  ;  and  to  follow  it  up 
by  departing  for  Galilee  with  a  view  to  their  good  (ver.  32).  As  to  them,  on 
the  other  hand :  that,  though  they  were  to  be  scattered,  they  were  not  to  be 
so  for  ever ;  that,  if  presently  ^'  offended  "  with  Him,  they  should  confess  Him 
afterwards,  and  follow  Him  as  before.  All  this,  again,  though  thus  fore 
proclaimed  by  Him,  was  past  believing  to  them.  This  is  shown  very 
plainly  by  the  language  of  the  most  forward  among  them.  To  him  there  is  no 
need  whatever  of  the  language  they  have  heard ;  of  the  primary  warning ;  of 
the  subsequent  re-assurance ;  least  of  all,  of  the  first.  Things  in  the  future, 
in  his  judgment,  will  not  be  as  they  have  heard  them  described.  He,  at  any 
rate,  whatever  others  do,  is  ijot  going  to  do  as  is  said  (see  verse  33).  He  is  as 
confident,  in  a  word,  in  his  ignorance  as  Christ  is  in  His  light. 

II.  The  special  warning  to  one. —  See  here,  again,  on  the  one  side,  how  clear 
was  the  pre- vision  of  Christ !  How  definite,  also.  His  words  !  He  declares  that 
this  confident  Peter  himself  shall  be  an  example — a  leading  example — of  what 
He  has  said.  That  he  shall  not  only  be  "  offended  "  with  Him,  but  **  offended  " 
so  much  as  to  "  deny  "  that  he  had  ever  known  Him  at  all^  That  he  shall  do 
this  three  times  in  succession.  That  he  shall  do  it  also,  before  the  departed  sunlight 
shall  shine  again  on  the  world.  And  this  He  declares,  also — if  such  a  thing  can 
be — with  even  greater  solemnity  than  before  ;  almost  implying,  in  fact,  that  He 
is  never  to  be  trusted  again  if  not  trusted  in  this  (ver.  34).  See,  on  the  other 
hand,  how  this  second  warning  was  met.  How  it  was  met  by  St.  Peter  himself. 
With  a  stronger  defiance  than  ever.  Stronger  in  substance.  Even  if  I  have 
to  stand  alone,  he  had  said  before  in  effect,  I  will  never  deny  Thee  (ver.  33). 
What  he  says  now  is,  that  he  will  never  do  so,  even  if  he  has  to  die  for  it  with 
Jesus  (ver.  35).  Not  even,  he  says,  if  denial  is  death,  will  I  stoop  to  such  depth. 
Stronger,  also,  in  form.  Such  a  second  defiance  is,  on  that  very  account,  a  more 
significant  thing  in  itself.  Such  a  second  defiance  as  this,  also,  being  in  reply 
to  such  a  second  and  closer  and  more  earnest  remonstrance,  is  more  significant 
still.  The  lips  that  do  this  will  do  anything  in  that  unconvincable  line.  How 
it  was  met,  also,  by  the  other  disciples !  They,  too,  are  as  much  proof  as  was 
Peter  himself  to  this  second  warning  of  Christ.  Instead  of  being  moved  by  it 
to  side  with  the  Saviour  against  His  disciple,  they  side  with  him  against  Christ ; 
and  proceed,  as  it  were,  in  a  kind  of  chorus,  to  add  their  *'  nays  "  unto  his  (end 
of  ver.  35).  "  The  Teacher  is  wrong,"  they  say,  "  and  the  disciple  is  right. 
None  of  us  stand  in  need  of  the  warning  on  which  He  has  thus  doubly  insisted. 
None  of  us  are  really  going  to  act  in  the  manner  described."  Was  there  ever 
such  a  close  juxtaposition  of  darkness  and  light  ?  Of  light  which  exceeded  all 
the  light  of  mankind  ?     Of  darkness  which  thought  itself  light  ? 

1.  How  affecting  is  this  scene,  on  the  one  hand  !  The  Saviour  knows,  the 
Saviour  feels,  all  that  is  coming  upon  Him  !  He  may  be  almost  said,  therefore, 
to  be  crucified  in  anticipation,  as  well  as  in  fact !  Yet  He  is  so  far,  in  all  this, 
from  having  the  sympathy  of  His  own  disciples,  that  He  cannot  even  persuade 
them  that  there  is  any  necessity  for  it.  None  needed  it  more,  none  was  farther 
from  it,  than  He  was  at  this  time. 

2.  How  instructive  is  this  story  ! — How  great  is  the  difference  between  true 
courage  and  the  mere  absence  of  fear  !  How  difficult  it  is  to  teach  those^-'who 
think  that  they  know  (Prov.  xxvi.  12)  !  And  how  ready  such  persons  are  to 
set  about  teaching  those  by  whom  they  profess  to  be  taught  !  Of  all  things 
to  be  distrusted,  is  trust  in  ourselves  1  Of  all  gifts  to  be  coveted,  that  of  a  teachable 
heart ! 


599 


CHAP.  XXVI.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  31.  Christ  deserted  by  His  heed  at  any  time  to  strengthen  his 
disciples. — 1.  The  great  events  of  time  nature  has  no  right  to  plead  its  weak- 
developed  according"  to  Divine  pre-  ness ;  he  who  is  the  slave  of  all  common 
diction.  temptations  has  no  right  to  say  that 

II.  The  loneliness  of  Jesus  Christ  in  this  one  temptation  overcame  him 
the  final  scene,  an  incidental  proof  of  because  of  its  greatness. 

His  Divine  mediation.  II.  Yet  the  acts  of  Peter  and  of 

III.  Christ's  Divine  power  of  looking  Judas  were  in  themselves  different. — 
beyond  the  process  to  the  great  result.      The  act  of  Peter  was  done  without 

lY.  Though  Jesus  was  deserted  by  premeditation.     Assuredly  had  he  felt 

His  disciples,  yet  the  disciples  were  himself  in  any  danger  of  denying  his 

not  deserted  by  Him. — J.  Parker^  D.D.  Lord,  he  would  have  gone  away  to  his 

own   home   rather   than   have  sought 

Yer.  34.  Peter  and  Judas. — What  is  admission  to  the  palace  of   the   high 

the  difference  between  the  sin  of  Peter  priest.    But  Judas'  sin  was  deliberate; 

and  the  sin  of  Judas  1  it  had  been  resolved    upon,  not  some 

I.  Let  us  see  what  was  the  difference  minutes  only  before  it  was  committed, 

of  their  general  lives. — We  know  that  but  some  hours,  and  even  some  days. 
Peter  loved   our   Lord   sincerely,  and  III.  And  so,  after  the  two  sins  were 

that   he   followed    Him    with   a   real  committed,    what   followed   in   either 

desire  to  do  His  will ;  whereas,  what  case  ? — One  look  at  our  Lord  recalled 

we   know   of   Judas,    even   before   his  Peter  to  himself,  to  that  very  self,  that 

great   sin,    is   unfavourable.     It  is  of  better    and   habitual   self,    which   our 

importance  to  observe  this,  because,  in  Lord  had  pronounced  to  be  clean.     He 

fact,    our    particular   sins   take   their  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.    But  of  all 

colour  from  the  general  character  of  this   in   the   case   of    Judas   we   hear 

our  lives.      What   we  call  sin   of   in-  nothing  :  with  him  there  was  remorse 

firmity,  a  sudden  yielding  to  some  very  indeed,   but   not    repentance — an   un- 

strong  temptation,  can  hardly  be  said  blessed  sorrow,  working  an  unblessed 

to  exist  in  a  man  whose  life  is  generally  death. — T.  Arnold,  D.D. 
careless  or  sinful.     He  who  takes  no 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  36—46. 

De  profundis. — One  chief  characteristic  of  this  part  of  the  story  of  Jesus  is  its 
unapproachable  grief.  The  disciples  see  this  in  the  demeanour  of  the  Saviour. 
He  is  "  sorrowful  and  very  heavy "  (ver.  37).  The  Saviour  confesses  it  of 
Himself  (ver.  38).  We  hear  it  in  the  character  of  the  prayer  He  puts  up.  He 
asks,  "  if  possible"  (ver.  39),  to  be  heard.  Also,  in  the  urgency  with  which  He 
presents  it,  viz.,  three  times  (ver.  44),  in  the  same  words,  in  succession. 
Evidently,  something  which  is  the  profoundest  of  horrors  possesses  His  soul. 
Another  account,  indeed  (Luke  xxii.  44),  describes  Him  as  being  convulsed  by  its 
depth.  We  shall  do  well  to  contemplate,  this  being  so,  first,  the  mysteriousness, 
and,  secondly,  the  instructiveness,  of  this  astonishing  grief. 

I.  Its  mysteriousness. — This  is  to  be  found,  to  begin,  by  inquiring  into  its 
special  occasion  and  cause.  To  what,  in  reality,  was  this  fearful  dread  to  be 
traced  ?  What  was  this  evil,  the  mere  anticipation  of  which  had  such  almost 
deadly  effect  1  It  could  hardly  have  been  that  very  ordinary  evil  which  we 
commonly  speak  of  as  "  death."  Thousands  of  men  far  inferior  on  any  showing 
to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  have  met  this  with  composure,  some  even  with  joy. 
Neither  could  it  have  been  merely  the  ignominious  manner  and  extreme 
shame  of  the  kind  of  death  which  the  Saviour  knew  to  be  awaiting  Him  so 

600 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvi. 


shortly.  That  were  to  make  Him  inferior  to  the  two  malefactors  who  afterwards 
died  by  His  side ;  one  of  whom,  at  any  rate,  was  above  complaining  of  the 
undoubted  disgrace  of  his  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  41).  Evidently,  what  Christ  had  in 
view  was  something  deeper  by  far — something  which  appears  to  have  been  fully 
known  only  to  God  and  Himself.  Spare  Me  "  this  cup  " — this  cup,  with  which 
no  other  "  cup  "  is  j&t  to  compare.  Who  amongst  men  shall  say  what  that  was  ? 
Just  as  mysterious,  next,  is  the  consideration  of  the  Person  to  whom  this  cup  was 
delivered.  We  read  of  Him,  e.g.,  as  one  who,  in  the  very  highest  sense,  could 
address  God  as  His  "  Father  "  (vers.  39,  42).  Also,  as  one  whom  God  Himself 
had  acknowledged  in  the  same  sense,  not  long  before,  as  His  Son ;  and  as  the 
Son,  moi-eover,  as  well  of  His  love,  as  of  His  fullest  approval  and  trust  (xvii.  5). 
Further,  we  find  Him  now,  in  His  capacity  of  a  Son,  showing  the  perfection  of 
love  to  His  friends.  It  was  not  much  that  He  asked  of  His  disciples  at  this 
crucial  hour  of  His  life — little  more,  in  fact,  than  some  token  of  sympathy  in  the 
extremity  of  His  anguish  (ver.  38).  When  this  little  was  refused  Him,  as  we 
find  that  it  was;  when,  instead  of  watching  with  Him,  they  are  found  buried  in 
sleep  ;  how  tenderly  considerate,  yet  how  anxiously  merciful,  is  the  excuse  which 
He  makes — ^which  He,  the  injured  one,  makes  (vers.  40,  41).  Further,  yet,  we 
find  Him,  now,  in  the  same  capacity,  showing  the  like  perfectness  towards  God. 
What  entire  confidence — what  profound  submission — what  burning  loyalty — 
what  utter  devotion — we  find  here  in  His  words  (ver.  39)  !  Never,  in  fact,  do  we 
see  all  His  excellences  brighter  than  they  are  seen  to  be  at  this  time.  Here  is 
the  mystery  presented  to  us  by  this  side  of  the  case  !  Never  such  a  brother — 
never  such  a  Son — as  when  about  to  be  treated  as  neither  !  Nor  less  mysterious, 
once  more,  is  the  consideration  of  the  Hand  v:hich  inflicted  this  on  Him.  Whom 
does  the  Saviour  appeal  to  on  the  subject  ?  From  whose  "  will  "  does  He  ask  for 
the  favour  of  exemption  (ver.  39)  ?  Is  it  not  from  the  will  of  that  "  Father  "  of 
whom  He  afterwards  said,  "  The  cup  which  My  Father  hath  given  Me,  shall  I 
not  drink  it  1 "  Here  is,  therefore,  on  the  whole,  the  sum  of  the  mystery  involved 
in  this  case.  It  is  wonderful  that  there  should  ever  have  been  an  occasion  for  a 
prayer  of  this  kind  !  Wonderful  that  such  a  Son  should  ever  find  Himself  in 
such  case  !  Wonderful  that  He  Himself  should  have  been  willing  to  be  in  that 
case  !  Wonderful  that  such  a  Father  should  have  ever  put  Him  in  that  case  ! 
More  wonderful  still  that  He  should  have  finally  left  Him  in  it  in  reply  to  that 
prayer — that  thrice -repeated  entreaty — that  urgent  entreaty — that  agonised 
entreaty — of  the  Son  of  His  love  !  Never  was  there  anything,  to  our  eyes,  of  a 
more  mysterious  kind  !  The  whole  story,  in  fact,  is  full  of  absolute  bewilderment 
to  our  natural  thoughts. 

II.  Its  instructiveness,  all  the  same. — How  it  teaches  us,  e.g.,  on  this  very 
account,  to  accept  the  darkness  which  marks  it.  Why  should  we  expect  things, 
in  such  a  matter,  to  be  of  a  difierent  kind  ?  Why  should  we  ever  have  supposed, 
in  such  an  arena,  that  there  should  have  been  nothing  obscure  to  our  eyes  ?  The 
very  nature  of  that  arena,  on  the  one  hand,  peremptorily  forbids  such  a  thought. 
How  should  any  inquiry  be  all  light  to  us  which  turns,  as  this  does,  on  the 
nature  of  God  ?  On  the  relations  existing  between  those  Three  who  are  One  ? 
And  on  the  doings  of  the  Man  who  represents  our  race  at  the  most  critical  period 
alike  of  His  life  and  our  age?  The  nature  of  our  "eyes,"  on  the  other  hand, 
forbids  it  no  less — one  might  almost  say  even  more.  We  have  neither  the 
faculties  nor  the  experience  for  measuring  things  of  this  kind.  It  is  doubtful, 
indeed,  whether  any  created  intelligence  of  any  kind  can  understand  them  in 
full  (see  1  Pet.  i.,  end  of  var.  12).  It  is  certain  that  our  intelligence  can  only 
discern  them  in  part.  Hardly  even  a  microscope  turned  on  the  sun  is  less  com- 
petent for  its  task.  It  is  our  wisdom,  therefore,  it  is  even  the  best  use  of 
our  powers,  to  see  in   the  obscurity  of  what  we   look   upon  one   proof  of  its 

601 


CHAP.  XXVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 

truth.  On  the  other  hand,  in  such  a  matter,  we  are  taught  here  equally  to 
embrace  the  light  that  there  is.  The  light  that  shines  out  on  us,  for  example, 
from  the  very  obscurity  of  the  words  which  our  Saviour  addresses  here  to  His 
Father.  With  all  that  is  dark  in  them,  is  it  not  clear  from  them  that  He  had 
some  purpose  in  view  when  He  spake  them  ?  Something  of  transcendent 
importance,  both  in  God's  eyes  and  His  own  ?  Something  that  somehow  could 
not  be  accomplished  unless  He  accepted  that  cup  ?  Something  of  such  a  nature 
that  if  He  had  been  spared  from  it,  God  could  not  have  spared  us  ?  Something, 
this  being  so,  which  God  would  not  take  away — and  which  He  did  not  refuse — 
on  that  very  account  ?  All  this,  with  all  the  concomitant  darkness,  is  as  clear  as 
the  sun.  And  all  this,  therefore,  is  to  be  embraced  by  us  with  all  wonder  and 
praise.  Jesus  thereby  shown  to  be  a  Saviour — and  God  a  Father — indeed  ! 
Beautifully  confirmatory  of  this  is  what  we  read  last  in  this  place.  What  a 
contrast  there  is  between  our  Saviour's  words  in  verses  38,  39,  and  those  in 
verses  45,  46  !  What  a  ring  of  fortitude — of  tranquil  intrepidity — there  is  in 
these  last !  Now  He  faces,  now  He  goes  to  meet,  what  He  could  hardly  think 
of  previously.  Clearly,  His  Father  has  answered  His  prayer  (cf.  Luke  xxii. 
43  ;  Heb.  v.  7),  though  in  a  way  of  His  own.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  will  of  both 
is  the  same.  Clearly,  also,  that  will  is  nothing  less  than  the  salvation  of  man. 
With  that  object  in  view,  that  "  cup  "  was  prepared — was  given — was  not  taken 
away — was  accepted — was  put  to  the  lip.  With  that  in  view  He  who  thus  took 
it  received  strength  for  it  from  above.  Here  is  the  final  "  light "  out  of  this 
"  darkness."     Is  it  anything  less  than  " the  Light  of  the  world" ? 

HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  36-44.    The  human   Christ  in  The  conflict  in  Gethsemane. — I.  The 

Gethsemane. — I.  Like  US,   He    sought  place  of  the  conflict. — There  are  two 

sympathy  in  the  time  of  sorrow.  rival   Gethsemanes,   and   rival   guides 

II.  Like  us,  He  gave  expression  wrangle  about  the  truth  of  this  and 
to  His  grief  when  only  few  could  that  local  identification.  One  place, 
hear.  called  the  true  Gethsemane,  is  walled 

III.  Like  us,  in  trouble  and  dark-  round  by  the  Latins.  Another,  a 
ness  He  wished  His  friends  to  keep  little  more  to  the  north,  is  walled 
awake.  round  by  the  Greeks ;  both  enclosures 

IV.  Like  us,  He  dreaded  calumny  being  under  lock  and  key.  The  New 
more  than  death. — What  was  the  cup  ?  Testament  lends  no  help  to  inquiries 
Not  death,  but  the  death  of  a  criminal.  that  have  reference  to  sanctity  of 
— Evan  Lewis,  B.A.  places. 

II.  The  story  of  the  conflict. — 1.  Its 

Ver.  36.    Christ    in    Gethsemane. —  intensity  is  the  first  fact  in  the  story 

1.  As  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  so  the  that  strikes  us. 

right  way  of  sufiering  for  the  truth,  2.  This   awful  inward  conflict   was 

must  be  learned  from  Christ ;  therefore  in  a  scene  of  outward  peace. 

our  Lord  taketh  with  Him   His   dis-  3.  The    conflict    wrung    from    the 

ciples  unto  Gethsemane — a  garden  and  Saviour  a  great  cry  :  "  O,  My  Father," 

place  where  He  is  to  begin  His  last  etc.     We  have  a  glimpse  here  of  the 

sufierings — that  they  might  see    how  conflict   carried   on  by  Christ  for  us, 

voluntarily  and   holily   He   addressed  single-handed. 

Himself  unto  that  service.     2.  As  we  4.  Under  all  the  sorrows  of  the  Man 

should  not  make  ostentation  of  going  of   sorrows,  in  this  night   of  conflict, 

to  private  prayer,  so  neither  need  we  there  was  tender  personal  thought  about 

scrupulously  conceal  our  purpose  when  His  disciples. 

it  may  edify. — David  Dickson.  TIL  The  sleep  of  the   disciples. — 

602 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvi. 


There  was  tender  remonstrance,  but 
not  severe  reproof.  It  was  treated  by- 
Jesus  only  as  a  symptom  of  mortality. 
This  quick  apology  of  love  for  weak- 
ness is  set  on  record  for  all  who  need 
it.— a.  Stanford,  D.D. 

Ver.  38.  Intensified  sorrow. — Christ's 
sufferings  were  intensified  by  various 
reasons  : — 

I.  From  His  perfect  foreknowledg^e 
of  all  the  complication  and  bitterness 
of  His  agonies. — "  Knowing  all  things 
that  should  come  upon  Him." 

II.  From  the  length  of  time  -within 
which  they  were  compassed. — We 
might  speak  of  His  whole  life  as  a  scene 
of  suffering ;  but  His  last  sufferings 
were  crowded  and  pressed  together  in 
an  extraordinary  degree.  It  will  be 
found  that  a  space  of  nearly  twenty- 
four  hours  was  occupied  with  His 
death. 

III.  From  His  deep  sense  of  the 
evil  of  sin  which  occasioned  those 
sufferings. — Tertius. 

Ver.  39.  Our  LordJs  Gethsemane- 
prayer. — Three  elements  are  distin- 
guishable in  our  Lord's  prayer  : — 

I.  The  sense  of  sonship,  which  under- 
lies all,  and  was  never  more  clear  than 
at  that  awful  moment. 

II.  The  recoil  from  the  cup,  which 
natural  instinct  could  not  but  feel, 
though  sinlessly.  The  flesh  shrank 
from  the  cross,  which  else  had  been  no 
suffering ;  and  if  no  suffering,  then 
had  been  no  atonement.  His  manhood 
would  not  have  been  like  ours,  nor  His 
sorrows  our  pattern,  if  He  had  not 
thus  drawn  back,  in  His  sensitive 
humanity,  from  the  awful  prospect  now 
so  near.  But  natural  instinct  is  one 
thing,  and  the  controlling  will  another. 
However  currents  may  have  tossed  the 
vessel,  the  firm  hand  at  the  helm  never 
suffered  them  to  change  her  course. 
The  will,  which  in  this  prayer  He 
seems  so  strangely  to  separate  from  the 
Father's,  even  in  the  act  of  submission, 
was  the  will  which  wishes,  not  that 
which  resolves.  His  fixed  purpose  to 
die  for  the  world's  sin  never  wavered. 


The  shrinking  does  not  reach  the  point 
of  absolutely  and  unconditionally  ask- 
ing that  the  cup  might  pass.  Even  in 
the  act  of  uttering  the  wish  it  is  limited 
by  that  ''if  it  be  possible,"  which  can 
only  mean  :  possible,  in  view  of  the 
great  purpose  for  which  He  came. 
That  is  to  be  accomplished,  at  any 
cost ;  and  unless  it  can  be  accomplished, 
though  the  cup  be  withdrawn,  He  does 
not  even  wish,  much  less  will,  that  it 
should  be  withdrawn.  So  the  third 
element  in  the  prayer  is  : — 

III.  The  utter  resignation  to  the 
Father's  will,  in  which  submission  He 
found  peace,  as  we  do. — A.  Maclaren, 
D.D. 

Jesus  in  Gethsemane. — 1 .  The  struggle 
in  Gethsemane  was  the  completion  of 
that  in  the  wilderness,  and  prepared,  the 
way  for  the  suffering  of  Golgotha. — The 
devil  uses  two  ways  of  turning  men 
from  the  path  of  righteousness :  he 
offers  them  pleasures  such  as  God  does 
not  approve,  and  urges  them  to  avoid 
the  hardships  to  which  God  calls  them. 
By  these  same  two  means  he  tried  to 
force  the  Lord  Jesus  also  to  deviate 
from  the  line  of  obedience,  from  fidelity 
to  His  mission.  It  is  true,  Satan  is 
not  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  narratives 
when  this  scene  is  related.  But  it  was 
of  this  very  moment  that  Luke  was 
thinking  when  he  finished  the  narration 
of  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness  by 
these  words :  "  The  devil  departed  from 
Him  for  a  season"  (Luke  iv.  13),  or, 
more  exactly,  "until  a  favourable 
time."  Jesus  Himself,  when  He  saw 
this  moment  approaching,  expressed 
Himself  thus :  "  The  prince  of  this 
world  cometh  "  (John  xiv.  30). 

2.  After  a  man  has  overcome  the 
attractions  of  pleasure,  it  only  remains 
to  him  to  rise  above  the  instinctive  fear 
of  pain  in  order  that  he  may  be  faith- 
ful unto  the  end. 

3.  Jesus,  in  His  prayer,  puts  His  will 
and  that  of  the  Father  over  against  each 
other:  "Not  My  will,  but  Thine,  be 
done."  How  can  that  be?  Had  He 
a  different  will  from  that  of  God? 
Jesus  took  our  nature  when  He  entered 

603 


CHAP.  XXVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


into  human  life.  He  consequently 
possessed  all  our  legitimate  instincts, 
particularly  that  of  the  fear  of  suffer- 
ing. It  was  this  fear  above  which  it 
was  now  His  concern  to  rise  by  sacri- 
ficing it  to  His  mission,  as  He  had  given 
up  the  desire  for  enjoyments  when  in 
the  wilderness.  By  the  third  act  of 
wrestling  and  prayer  He  subordinates 
the  voice  of  nature  to  the  voice  of  the 
Spirit  unreservedly. 

4.  This  is  not,  as  is  often  believed,  the 
beginning  of  the  atonement ;  it  is  only 
the  condition  of  the  atonement.  In 
fact,  the  atonement  does  consist  not 
only  in  a  certain  amount  of  suffering 
to  be  endured.  It  consists  in  the  suffer- 
ing humbly  accepted  and  righteously 
endured. 

5.  Victor!/  should  properly  precede 
combat. — Jesus  had  already  conquered 
when  the  time  of  suffering  came.  It 
is  properly  at  Gethsemane  that  these 
words  in  the  priestly  prayer  were 
accomplished :  *'  And  for  their  sakes 
I  sanctify  myself"  (John  xvii.  19). — 
Prof.  F.  Godet,  D.D, 

Ver.  41.  Temptation. — In  the  pre- 
cept, *'  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter 
not  into  temptation,"  there  is  enjoined 
a  feeling  of  apprehension  and  alarm. 
It  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "  Do  not 
suffer  yourself  to  be  at  ease."  Beware 
of  quietly  enjoying  your  life.  You  are 
lost  if  you  live  without  fear.  As  to 
moral  and  spiritual  dangers,  the  greater 
number  seem  to  have  determined  to 
indulge  in  a  careless  and  almost  un- 
limited confidence.  As  a  natural  con- 
sequence, they  are  overrun  and  spoiled 
and  ruined  by  what  they  so  little  dread 
and  guard  against — that  is  to  say,  by 
temptations.  "  That  ye  enter  not  into 
temptation."  The  words  seem  to  say 
very  pointedly : — 

I.  Beware  of  the  beginning. — And 
since  temptation  is  sure  to  be  early 
with  its  beginnings,  so,  too,  should 
watching  and  praying :  early  in  life ; 
early  in  the  day ;  early  in  every 
undertaking. 

II.  Be  quickly  alarmed  at  the  in- 
dications   that    a   thing   is   becoming 

604 


temptation.  "  Here  a  questionable 
effect  is  beginning  upon  me  ;  nay,  it  is 
a  bad  effect.  Certain  principles  of 
truth  and  duty  are  beginning  to  slacken 
their  hold  on  me."  Be  cautious  of 
pursuing  an  evident  good  in  a  way  in 
which  there  must  be  temptation. 
Beware  of  the  kind  of  companionship 
that  directly  leads  into  temptation. — 
John  Foster. 

Preservatives  from  sin.  —  1.  The 
advice  given. — "  Watch  and  pray." 
The  Christian  in  danger  : — 

1 .  From  the  world.  —  Its  spirit, 
frowns,  smiles. 

2.  From  the  devil. — As  a  person, 
his  influence,  subtilty,  etc. 

3.  From  the  flesh. — The  deification 
or  degradation  of  reason  ;  indulging  in 
passion,  constitutional  sin,  etc. 

II.  The  reason  on  which  the  advice 
is  founded. — "  That  ye  enter  not,"  etc. 

1.  It  is  possible  to  be  overcome. — 
David,  Peter,  etc. 

2.  To  be  overcome  deprives  of  spiritual 
enjoyment. 

3.  Endangers  spiritual  interests. 

4.  Not  watchfulness  alone,  or  prayer 
alone,  but  both  conjoined^  render  the  soul 
invulnerable. — J.  C.  Gray. 

The  spirit  willing,  the  flesh  weak. — 
We  ought  to  take  this,  not  as  an  excuse 
for  torpor,  but  as  an  incentive  to 
watchfulness. — Bengel. 

Ver.  45.  Too  late. — In  these  words 
our  Lord  means,  "  It  is  too  late.  The 
opportunity  is  lost  and  gone.  The  time 
for  watching  and  praying  is  over ;  you 
have  let  it  escape  you.  You  may  as 
well  sleep  now.  Alas  !  there  is  now 
nothing  to  be  done ;  you  must  now 
enter,  as  you  may,  into  temptation." 
If  this  be  the  true  account  of  the  words 
as  first  spoken,  we  shall  readily  think 
of  ways  in  which  they  come  home  to 
us. 

I.  They  have  a  direct  bearing  upon 
the  whole  subject  of  temptation. — This 
is  the  time  for  watching  and  praying 
— before  the  temptation  comes.  Mark 
that  well.    It  is  the  moral  of  the  whole. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvi. 


Remember  there  is  a  prayer  which 
comes  too  late  ;  there  is  a  prayer  which 
even  contradicts  itself  in  the  asking ; 
there  is  a  prayer  which  asks  to  be  kept 
safe  under  the  temptation  which  we 
are  going  in  quest  of. 

II.  The  words  have  a  meaning  also 
as  respects  opportunity. — There  is  not 
a  relation  in  which  we  stand  one  to 
another,  which  may  not  be  taken  as  a 
selfishness  and  refused  as  an  oppor- 
tunity. One  by  one,  these  are  with- 
drawn.    He  who  once  said,  "  Watch 


and  pray,"  says  at  last,  "  Sleep  on  now, 
and  take  your  rest." 

III.  This  saying  is  not  less  true  in 
its  bearing  upon  that  total  sum  of  all 
opportunities  which  is  the  life. — When 
Christ  at  last  comes,  and  finds  us  still 
sleeping ;  then  He  is  compelled  to  say 
— else  He  could  be  trifled  with,  else  He 
were  not  the  Judge,  He  were  not  the 
Faithful  One  and  the  True — He  is 
compelled  to  say,  "  Sleep  on  now,  and 
take  your  rest."  *'  The  harvest  is  past " 
etc. — C»  «/.  Vaughauj  D.D. 


MAIN  EOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  47—56. 

Forbearance. — What  the  Saviour  had  just  spoken  of  (ver.  46),  now  comes  to 
pass.  "  Lo,  Judas,"  and  a  "  great  multitude  "  "  with  him  "  (ver.  47).  This  is  the 
beginning  of  this  part  of  the  story.  The  end  corresponds.  Jesus  is  seen  as  a 
captive — and  by  Himself — in  the  hands  of  His  enemies  (vers.  50,  56).  How  has  all 
this  come  to  pass  1  Through  His  own  action — His  own  maction,  rather — in  very 
great  part.  What  He  has  refrained  from  doing  is  the  chief  cause  of  these  things 
being  done.  We  may  contemplate  this  forbearance  of  His,  first,  in  His  way  of 
dealing  with  treachery ;  secondly,  in  His  way  of  dealing  with  insult ;  thirdly,  in 
His  reasons  for  both. 

I.  His  way  of  dealing  with  treachery. — This  was  remarkable,  first,  because 
of  the  nature  of  the  treachery  in  question.  It  was  something,  even  for  treachery, 
exceedingly  base.  Base,  as  noted  before  (ver.  14),  but  noted  again  here  (ver.  47),  as 
though  a  feature  which  should  never  be  forgotten  in  telling  the  story,  because  of 
the  position  of  the  traitor  himself.  What  he  was  doing  was  to  betray  the  Man 
whom  he  had  professed  to  follow  and  love  in  a  specially  eminent  way  !  Wrong- 
ing his  Master  !  Selling  his  Friend  !  Base  still  more  because  of  the  nature  of 
the  "sign"  which  he  fixed  upon  with  this  view.  Was  there  no  other  way 
of  effecting  betrayal  than  by  a  protestation  of  loyalty  ?  "  Whomsoever  I  shall 
kiss,  that  same  is  He."  You  may  know  whom  I  am  injuring  by  my  pretending 
to  love  Him.  Baser  yet  becavise  of  the  wholly  unnecessary  effusion  with  which 
this  vile  purpose  was  effected.  "  He  said,  Hail  Babbi,  and  kissed  Him ; " 
"kissed  Him  much  "  (so  B.V.) ;  did  more  than  was  needed  for  the  evil  object  in 
view  y  over-acted  his  affectation  of  friendship  ;  went  out  of  his  way,  as  it  were, 
to  indulge  in  falseness.  Basest  of  all  because  of  the  character  of  the  Master 
whom  he  was  treating' with  this  baseness — even  the  Truth  itself — the  Incarnation 
of  Love — and  the  very  last  of  men,  therefore,  to  be  treated  thus,  even  if  any  man 
ought.  Equally  remarkable,  therefore,  in  the  next  place,  was  the  Saviour^s 
reply  to  this  baseness.  "  Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come  ?  "  This  is  all,  according 
to  one  version,  that  He  says  in  reply  ;  as  though  He  would  thereby  merely  let  the 
traitor  know  that  His  design  was  seen  through.  "  Friend,  do  that  for  which 
thou  hast  come."  So  we  find  given  in  another  version  of  the  Saviour's  reply,  as 
though  He  would  not  only  show  to  the  traitor  that  He  understood  his  design, 
but  that  He  did  not  intend  to  resist  or  oppose  it,  even  by  so  much  as  a  word. 
In  any  case,  there  is  not  a  trace  of  bitterness  or  sign  of  anger  in  any  one  of  His 
words.  Never,  perhaps,  was  any  man  more  cruelly  wronged.  Never,  surely, 
did  any  wrong  elicit  less  wrath  in  return. 

II.  His  way  of  dealing  with  insult. — How  much  there  was  of  this  here,  on  the 
one  side,  is  shown  in  two  ways.     Partly,  by  what  we  read  of  those  who  had  now 

605 


CHAP.  XXVI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENIARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


come  with  the  traitor.  They  were  carrying  "  swords  "  some  of  them  (vers.  47,  55), 
and  appear,  therefore,  to  have  been  Roman  legionaries  engaged  for  this  work. 
Others  had  '^  staves  "  (see  as  before),  so,  probably,  came  from  the  priests.  Either 
way  they  had  all  come  against  the  Saviour  as  against  one  of  the  dregs  of  man- 
kind— a  double  insult  to  One  who  had  recently — and  so  openly — claimed  to  be  a 
leader  of  men.  (See  especially  xxi,  1-11,  12,  23).  Partly,  by  what  we  read  here 
of  the  Saviour  Himself,  and  by  the  express  way  in  which  He  showed  that  He  felt 
what  their  conduct  involved  (ver.  55).  And  partly,  once  more,  by  what  is 
related  here  of  the  conduct  of  one  of  His  disciples.  To  the  Apostle  Peter 
(John  xviii.  10),  the  indignity  offered  appeared  absolutely  beyond  endurance. 
Drawing  his  sword  (Luke  xxii.  38),  he  struck  violently  at  one  of  those  on  the 
opposite  side ;  not  impossibly  at  one  of  the  foremost  of  them,  and  one  forward,there- 
fore,  both  with  staff  and  gesture,  to  threaten  the  person  of  Christ.  At  any  rate, 
in  Peter's  judgment  the  insult  offered  warranted  even  the  shedding  of  blood  in 
return.  Hence,  therefore,  on  the  other  side,  the  exceeding  wonder  of  Chrisfs  view 
of  the  same.  What  the  disciple  could  not  endure  for  His  sake.  He  submits  to 
with  patience.  More  than  that,  what  the  disciple  had  done,  He  undoes,  as  it 
were.  So  we  are  told,  be  it  observed,  by  the  physician  St.  Luke  (xxii.  51). 
He  even  goes  so  far  as  to  lay  down  a  law  against  the  adoption,  by  those  who  are 
His,  of  any  remedy  of  this  kind,  declaring  it  to  be  a  remedy  which  could  only  in 
the  end  be  productive  of  more  harm  (ver.  52).  It  is  not  for  Me,  He  says — it  is 
not  for  any  of  Mine — to  have  recourse  to  the  *'  sword."  What  a  way  of  meeting 
all  the  violence  with  which  He  was  threatened  !  Not  even  a  breath  of  it  in 
return  ! 

III.  The  Saviour's  reasons  for  this  twofold  forbearance. — Not  want  of 
feeling,  as  we  have  seen  (see  again  verse  55 ;  also  compare  the  use  of  the  word 
"friend"  (=  companion,  or  mate)  in  verse  50  with  Ps.  xli.  9,  Iv.  12,  13).  Nor 
yet  want  of  capacity  to  take  vengeance,  had  He  so  willed.  The  Saviour  shows 
here,  on  the  contrary,  that  what  He  had  to  do  now  lay  in  the  exactly  opposite 
line.  Not  to  exert  power,  but  to  restrain  it ;  not  to  call  for  help,  but  to  forbid 
it ;  not  to  summon  "  legions,"  but  to  prevent  them  from  coming;  not,  in  a  word, 
to  speak  the  word  which  would  have  destroyed  all  His  enemies  at  one  stroke 
(cf.  John  xviii.  6) — was  what  lay  now  upon  Him  (ver.  53).  Why,  then,  did  He 
restrain  Himself  thus  ?  Why  restrain  others — why  such  others — as  well  ?  His 
own  answer  is  of  the  simplest  and  most  definite  kind.  Because  the  Scriptures,  if 
He  had  done  otherwise,  would  have  been  set  on  one  side.  It  is  very  observable 
that,  even  in  this  mere  summary  of  the  story,  this  is  specified  twice  (see  vers.  54, 
56).  It  is  equally  observable  that  no  other  reason  is  mentioned  beside.  Allowx^ 
attention  is  concentrated  by  the  Saviour — and  by  the  Evangelist  also — on  this 
one  reason  alone.  Whatever  other  reasons  there  were  in  the  background — and 
we  can  well  believe  there  were  not  a  few — they  are  all  hidden  here  behind  this. 
Christ  meets  these  marvellous  wrongs  in  this  marvellous  manner  because  it  was 
prophesied  that  He  should  !    That  is  what  He  Himself  leaves  last  on  our  minds  ! 

1.  How  full  of  awe,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  are  the  Scriptures  of  truth  !  By 
them  even  the  King  of  kings  holds  Himself  bound.  Not  even  the  Holy  One  of 
God  will  allow  Himself  to  set  them  aside  (cf.  Ps.  xl.  7)  ! 

2.  How  full  of  grace,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  Scriptures  of  truth  !  For  to 
what  is  it,  when  we  come  to  inquire,  that  they  thus  bind  the  Messiah  ?  Is  it  not 
to  do  that  which  had  been  predicted  of  Him  of  old  ?  Even  to  "  bring  in  ever- 
lasting righteousness,"  and  *'  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity  "  and  provide  a 
ransom  for  all  ?  The  more  binding,  therefore,  the  more  gracious,  on  this  view  of 
the  case  !  The  more  stringent,  the  better  !  What  can,  indeed,  be  better  for  us 
than  that  such  a  Saviour  should  have  thus  hound  Himself  not  to  fail  in  His 
work? 

606 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xx    vi. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 


Ver.  49.  The  ti^aitor's  kiss. — 1.  Holy- 
things  may  be  prostituted  to  basest 
uses.  2.  Symbols  of  friendship  may 
become  signals  of  treason.  3.  Deeds 
receive  their  moral  worth  from  underly- 
ing motives.  4.  Men  betray  Christ  with 
a  kiss,  when  they  mask  a  hatred  of  His 
disciples  beneath  false  shows  of  friend- 
ship. 5.  When  they  mingle  with  His 
disciples,  to  make  themselves  familiar 
with,  and  then  laugh  over  their  defects. 
— J.  C.  Gray. 

"Ver.  50.  An  important  question. — 
St.  Bernard  used  often  to  ask  himself 
the  question  which  our  Lord  put  to 
Judas,  *'  Friend,  wherefore  art  thou 
come?  "Why  hast  thou  been  created 
and  placed  in  this  world  at  all  ?  Why 
hast  thou  been  made  a  member  of 
Christ  in  baptism?  Why  hast  thou 
been  led  by  Providence  to  this  or  that 
state  of  life?  Art  thou  here  to  do 
thine  own  will?  Or  wouldst  thou 
indeed  serve  God,  and  by  labour  and 
suffering  such  as  He  may  appoint  pre- 
pare for  thine  everlasting  aim  ?  Friend, 
wherefore  art  thou  come  ? "  If  we 
would  sincerely  press  that  question 
home,  how  different  would  be  the  aim 
and  the  perfectness  of  our  work 
through  each  day  ? — Canon  Liddon. 

Ver.  52.  Chnsfs  condemnation  of 
war. — I.  The  evils  of  war  are  the  very 
evils  Christ  came  to  remove. — What 
are  they?  1.  Reign  of  brute  force. 
2.  Carelessness  about  cruelty.  3.  Neg- 
lect of  the  interest  of  individual  souls. 
4.  Stubborn  hindrance  of  progress  and 
brotherhood.  5.  Setting  up  wrong  stan- 
dards of  character ;  such  as  Roman 
honour  of  Mars  and  Hercules,  and 
Scandinavian  honour  of  Thor,  rather 
than  Christian  honour  of  the  Christ. 
The  beatitudes  are  reversed,  and  a 
glamour  is  thrown  around  soldiery. 

II.  The  advantages  of  war  are  only 


apparent  gains. — 1.  War  leads  to  war. 
The  seeds  of  revenge  are  sown  in  the 
scars  of  the  conquered.  2.  There  has 
to  be  recourse  to  arbitration  at  the  end, 
as  there  might  have  been  at  the 
beginning.  3.  If  there  is  acquiescence 
in  victory,  it  is  a  wicked  confession  that 
Providence  is  on  the  side  of  the  strongest 
battalions. —  U.  R.  Thomas,  B. A. 

Vers.  53,  54.  Christ's  apprehension. 
— I.  How  easily  our  Lord  could  have 
rescued  Himself. — 1.  God  is  pleased  to 
work  by  the  ministry  of  angels.  2.  Our 
Lord  might  have  had  any  number. 

II.  Why  He  forbore  to  rescue  Him- 
self.— That  the  Scriptures  might  be 
fulfilled. 

III.  Practical  observations. — 1. 
Prayer  will  extricate  us  from  trouble. 
2.  Be  content  to  go  to  heaven  in  God's 
way.  3.  Christ's  solicitude  for  the  ful- 
filment of  the  Scriptures  was  a  pledge 
of  His  anxiety  for  their  accomplish- 
ment in  all  that  relates  to  our  salva- 
tion.— C.  Simeon,  M.A. 

Ver.  56.  The  fickleness  of  friends. — 
"Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  Him 
and  fled." 

I.  The  cruelty  of  this  it  would  be 
hard  to  exaggerate. — For  three  years 
and  upwards  their  Divine  Master  had 
been  building  up  their  faith  and  bind- 
ing them  to  Himself  by  a  thousand 
heavenly  acts. 

II.  A  lesson  of  patience  towards 
one  another. — Be  more  patient,  more 
long-suffering  and  less  ready  to  take 
offence  and  rail  against  the  world  and 
its  ways  ;  remembering  that  thou  hast 
bound  no  one  on  the  earth's  surface  to 
thee — nor  canst  bind — as  Christ  bound 
the  eleven,  who,  when  they  beheld  Him 
apprehended  in  the  garden,  at  once 
forsook  Him  and  fled. — J.  W.  Burgon, 
D.D. 


607 


CHAP.  XXVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  hi— ^^. 

Meekness. — We  are  brought,  in  this  part  of  the  story,  to  the  house  of  Caiaphas, 
the  high  priest,  with  its  inner  and  outer  courts  (vers.  58,  69),  and  its  outermost 
"porch."  In  the  inner  court  are  the  scribes  and  elders,  gathered  together 
irregularly  and  in  haste  (so  is  the  opinion  of  some),  under  the  presidency  of 
Caiaphas,  and  with  our  Blessed  Lord  in  the  midst.  In  the  outer  court  are  the 
officers  and  servants  of  Caiaphas  and  some  others  beside  (ver.  58).  If  we  suppose 
ourselves  looking  on  with  these  last  at  what  takes  place  farther  in,  there  are 
three  things  we  shall  see.  We  shall  see  the  Saviour,  first,  unjustly  accused ; 
secondly,  more  unjustly  exami7ied  ;  and  thirdly,  most  unmercifully  insulted. 

I.  Unjustly  accused. — The  conduct  of  His  judges  was  unjust,  first,  in  its  object 
and  aim.  "  Witness"  is  said  to  have  been  sought  by  them  for  the  foregone  purpose 
of  "putting  Jesus  to  death"  (ver.  59).  Practically,  therefore,  they  had  settled 
the  case  before  it  was  opened;  and  were  pre-judges,  therefore,  instead  of  judges, 
if  so  we  may  speak.  They  seem  to  have  been  unjust,  next,  in  regard  to  the 
kind  of  witness  which  they  were  ready  to  take — which  tLey  seem,  indeed,  to  have 
"  sought  "  (ver.  59  again).  At  any  rate,  it  is  clear  that  they  did  not  concern  them- 
selves much  as  to  where  it  came  from.  Good  or  bad,  it  was  acceptable  to  them 
if  it  promised  to  answer  their  end.  It  is  observable,  also,  that  in  regard  to  this 
unscrupulousness,  they  seem  to  have  been  all  of  one  mind.  The  "whole  council" 
(see,  however,  John  xix.  39,  iii.  2  ;  Luke  xxiii.  51)  interested  themselves  in  this 
infamous  search.  The  whole  council  did  so,  moreover,  with  equal  obstinacy  and 
hate.  They  had  "  many  "  disappointments,  even  from  their  standard  (ver.  60),  but 
were  not  to  be  put  off  on  that  ground.  They  only  sought  for  more  still.  Once 
more  they  showed  themselves  unjust  by  acting,  finally,  on  what  was  notoriously 
inadequate  ground  for  their  purpose.  According  to  the  law  which  they  sat  to 
administer,  no  accusation  was  to  be  held  valid — least  of  all  in  a  case  like  this, 
w^hich  was  of  a  capital  kind — unless  there  were  at  least  two  consentient  witnesses 
to  the  matter  in  hand  (Deut.  xvii.  6,  xix.  15 ;  cf.  John  viii.  17  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 ; 
1  Tim.  V.  19).  What  they  actually  did  was  to  act  on  testimony  which  was 
fatally  short  of  this  mark  ;  which  was  visibly  short  of  it,  so  it  seems  to  be  meant 
(see  Mark  xiv.  59,  and  compare  ver.  61  here  with  John  ii.  19).  "  Answerest  thou 
nothing " — so  Caiaphas  said  in  effect — "  to  all  this  accumulation  of  witness 
(ver.  62)  ?  Why  art  thou  treating  all  that  these  witness  against  Thee  as 
undeserving  of  reply  "  1  For  so,  in  reality,  the  Saviour  did  by  not  replying  at 
all.  And  in  this,  moreover,  to  put  it  otherwise,  was  all  the  reply  that  He  gave. 
To  all  this  storm  of  accusation — this  mockery  of  justice — this  perversion  of  law — 
this  subornation  of  perjury — He  answers  by  His  silence.  "  Jesus  held  His  peace." 
It  was  at  once  the  most  dignified  and  the  meekest  thing  He  could  do.  And 
so  aggravated,  finally,  the  exceeding  unseemUness  of  their  violent  desire  to'  do 
wrong. 

II.  More  unjustly  examined. — So  far,  we  may  say  that,  practically,  the 
"  prosecution  "  had  failed.  Jesus  had  treated  the  witness  brought  against  Him 
as  unworthy  of  reply ;  and  they  had  not  been  able  on  their  part,  to  prove  it  any- 
thing more.  Another,  therefore,  and  most  unfair,  proceeding,  is  resorted  to  next. 
The  Saviour  is  known  as  a  preacher  of  truth.  They  will  appeal  to  His  truth. 
In  God's  Name  they  will  require  Him  to  tell  them  who  He  really  professes  to  be 
(see  ver.  63).  In  this  way  it  was  hoped  to  entrap  Him  into  some  fatal  admission 
or  snare,  and  so,  as  it  were,  to  cause  His  very  integrity  to  furnish  the  kind  of 
evidence  they  desired.  The  whole  stratagem  was  utterly  unworthy  of  any  one 
who  sat  as  a  judge — most  unworthy  of  such  a  judge  as  the  high  priest  of  God's 
people.  Yet  see,  on  the  other  side,  how  the  true  High  Priest,  the  Lord  of  Glory, 
replied.     In  the  first  place,  with  truest  respect  for  God's  appointed  officer  and 

608 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  XXVI. 


deputy.  Silent  to  the  witnesses,  He  will  not  be  silent  to  him.  On  the  contrary, 
to  his  solemn  adjuration  He  gives  an  equally  solemn  reply  (contrast  Acts  xxiii.  3). 
With  deepest  respect,  in  the  next  place,  for  the  requirements  of  truth.  Being 
thus  asked  for  the  truth,  He  will  give  it,  at  whatever  cost  to  Himself.  He  will  give 
it  even  when  asked  for,  as  now,  in  the  interest  of  falsehood  and  wrong.  **  Am  I  the 
Christ?  Yes,  I  am."  In  calling  Me  so  "  thou  hast  said  "what  is  true  (ver.  64). 
In  the  spirit,  lastly,  of  the  truest  faithfulness  towards  all  who  are  there.  **  Never- 
theless," notwithstanding  your  purpose  of  evil,  notwithstanding  your  unbelief  and 
contempt — I  say  now  to  "  you  "  all  ("  a  tous  vous  qui  etes  ici,"  Lasserre), — that 
there  will  be  a  day — and  that  an  early  day  (*'  henceforth  ")  which  shall  prove  all 
that  I  say  ;  and  when,  in  fact,  instead  of  My  standing  at  your  judgment-seat  you 
will  be  standing  at  Mine  (ver.  64).     Be  warned,  therefore,  in  time. 

III.  Most  unmercifully  insulted. — On  the  part  of  Caiaphas  himself.  With 
much  affectation  of  grief  at  having  obtained  that  which  he  wished,  and  which, 
according  to  him,  rendered  unnecessary  any  "further"  calling  of  "witness" 
(ver.  65).  Also  with  much  simulation  of  anxiety  to  be  truly  just  in  this  case.  Let 
those  who  are  his  assessors  say  exactly  what  they  think  of  such  words.  Let  the 
sentence  due  to  the  Man  before  them  be  declared  by  them,  rather  than  him  (ibid.). 
No  one  would  think,  from  the  manner  of  any  of  them,  that  they  had  come  there 
resolved  on  His  death.  Nothing,  He  is  to  understand,  but  the  height  of  horror 
could  have  brought  them  to  that  pass.  He  is  simply  to  be  looked  on — this  is 
what  it  all  comes  to — as  beyond  the  reach  of  defence  !  On  the  part,  next,  of  all 
that  stand  by.  With  their  coarse  natures  they  carry  out  in  action  what  the 
others  have  expressed  by  their  words.  And  that  with  such  outrageous  coarseness, 
that  one  hardly  likes,  even  now,  to  express  it  plainly  in  words.  Suffice  it  to  note, 
on  the  one  hand,  that  it  was  with  the  deepest  contempt  for  His  person.  Even  if 
the  accused  did  deserve  to  be  smitten,  why  do  so  on  His  head  ?  Even  if  He  ought 
to  be  shamed,  why  so  in  the  loathsome  way  specified  here  ?  Also,  with  the 
deepest  contempt  for  His  office.  If  thou  be  the  "Christ,"  at  least  tell  us  who  it 
is  "  that  strikes  Thee."  Think  of  a  prophet  who  cannot  "  prophesy"  this  !  Such 
language  may  be  described  as  "spitting"  on  His  honour  itself. 

Do  wo  not  see  a  picture  in  this  sad  story  : — 

1.  Of  the  worst  of  our  race. — See  what  human  nature  can  descend  to  when 
influenced  by  envy  (xxvii.  18)  and  hate  !  What  injustice  !  What  cruelty  ! 
What  hypocrisy  !  What  effrontery  !  And  this,  moreover,  on  the  part  of  men 
so  privileged  as  these  were  !  And  all,  also,  in  hatred  of  One  against  whom  no 
witnesses  of  any  kind  could  be  found  ! 

2.  Of  the  Best  of  our  race. — How  wonderful  the  meekness  which  bore  all  this 
without  a  word  of  reproach  !  And  that  notwithstanding  the  countless  other 
excellences  with  which  that  meekness  was  joined.  Such  was  the  height  to  which 
this  "  Man  "  attained  !  To  this,  also,  in  some  measure.  He  has  helped  some  of 
His  to  attain  (see  Acts  vii.  60  ;  Eom.  ix.  3)  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Ver.  58.  Peter's  fall. — "  To  see  the  oiF,  as  one  who  would  disguise  even 

end ! "      It    is  one   of    those   natural  while  he  yields  to  the  impulse. — In 

expressions   which   make  the  Bible  so  the   very   midst   of   the   high   priest's 

human.  servants  he  seats  himself,  hoping  by 

I.    Like    the  rest   of   the  disciples,  the   parade   of    confidence    to   disarm 

Peter  no   sooner   saw  the  capture  of  suspicion.     But   he  had  miscalculated 

the   Lord   than   he  forsook  Him  and  his  own  powers.     He  was  too  good  a 

fled.      He  has  scarcely  fl^d  when  he  man  to  be  a  good  actor.      The  part 

turns  to  follow— but  he  follows  afar  was  overplayed.     He  had  rushed  into 

R  R  609 


CHAP.  XXVI.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


unnecessary  danger,  and  he  could 
neither  tell  the  truth  bravely  nor  utter 
a  falsehood  quietly.  He  had  come  to 
see  the  end,  and  yet  that  natural 
impulse  was  dangerous  for  him.  It 
had  temptation  m  it.  It  brought  him 
to  the  edge  of  that  fall  which  might 
have  been  his  ruin.  But  for  that 
determination  to  see  the  end  Peter 
might  have  been  as  Matthew,  might 
have  been  as  Andrew,  almost  as  Thomas 
— doubter,  not  denier ;  if  deserter,  yet 
not  rebel.  It  was  the  sight  of  Christ 
on  His  trial  which  gave  possibility  to 
the  blasphemy :  "I  know  not  the 
man." 

II.  There  is  responsibility  in  seeing 
the  end  to  us,  as  well  as  for  Peter. — It 
is  possible  so  to  see  as  to  see  not  for 
the  better,  but  for  the  worse.  This  is 
so  when  we  either  contemplate  the 
cross  carelessly  or  turn  its  very  grace 
into  a  licence  for  sin. — C.  J.  Vaugha7i, 
D.D, 

Vers.  63,  64.  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God. 
— Let  me  read  you  the  words  of  the 
late  Judge  Greenleaf,  at  the  time  of 
his  death  Law  Professor  in  Harvard 
Law  School :  "If  we  regard  Jesus 
simply  as  a  Jewish  citizen,  and  with 
no  higher  character.  His  conviction 
seems  substantially  right  in  point  of 
law,  though  the  trial  were  not  legal  in 
all  its  foi'ms.  For,  whether  the  accusa- 
tions were  founded  on  the  first  or 
second  commands  in  the  Decalogue, 
or  on  the  law  laid  down  in  the  13tli 
chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  or  that  in 
the  18th  chapter  and  20th  verse,  He 
had  violated  them  all  by  assuming 
to  Himself  powers  belongiug  alone  to 
Jehovah  ;  and,  even  if  He  were  recog- 
nised as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  He 
was  still  obnoxious  to  punishment, 
under  the  decision  in  the  case  of  Moses 
and  Aaron  before  cited.  It  is  not 
easy  to  perceive  on  what  ground  His 
conduct  could  have  been  defended 
before  any  tribunal,  unless  upon  that 
of  His  superhuman  character.  No 
lawyer,  it  is  conceived,  would  think  of 
placing  his  defence  on  any  other  basis  " 
{Exmnination  of  the  Testimony  of  the 

010 


Four  Evangelists  ;  with  an  Account  of 
the  Trial  of  Jesus.  By  Simon  Green- 
leaf,  LL.D.).  This  is  the  ground  of 
our  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Divine  Son  of 
God.  In  this  supreme  hour  of  His  life, 
when  the  claim  meant  death  to  Himself, 
when,  if  it  were  false,  it  meant  falsity 
running  through  all  human  history 
and  to  all  time,  He  claimed  Divinity 
under  the  solemn  sanction  of  His  oath 
and  in  the  presence  of  eternity.  There 
is  no  room  to  build  a  tomb  to  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  beside  the  tomb  of  Confucius 
of  China,  Buddha  of  India,  Socrates  of 
Greece.  He  was  either  less  than  a 
philosopher  or  more  than  a  man.  He 
was  either  the  Son  of  God  or  to  be 
acquitted  of  blasphemy  only  by  being 
regarded  as  an  enthusiast.  He  was 
either  deserving  of  condemnation  or 
He  is  entitled  to  the  highest  loyalty 
and  allegiance  that  human  hearts  can 
give  Him. — Lyman  Abbott,  D.D. 

Ver.  64.  Christ^ s  reply  to  the  high 
priest. — 1.  That  Christ  is  the  Son  of 
God  is  a  truth  judicially  deponed  by 
Himself,  being  adjured  to  answer  upon 
His  oath,  and  being  now  ready  to  die. 
"  Thou  hast  said,"  saith  He ;  or,  I 
am  the  same  whom  thou  inquirest  for. 
2.  Such  as  will  not  receive  Christ's 
word  as  Divine  shall  be  forced  to 
acknowledge  His  power  to  be  Divine, 
for  thus  saith  He  :  "  Nevertheless  "  (or 
though  ye  believe  Me  not),  ''yet  ye  shall 
see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right 
hand  of  power " ;  and  this  came  to 
pass — (1)  In  His  resurrection ;  (2)  in 
His  Spirit  poured  forth  on  the  Apostles; 
(3)  in  the  conversion  of  multitudes  of 
souls  ;  (4)  in  the  overthrow  of  the 
Jewish  church  and  nation  in  their 
own  time,  not  long  after.  3.  Such  as 
will  not  acknowledge  Jesus  to  be  the 
Son  of  God,  for  their  salvation,  shall 
see  Him  come  to  judge  them  at  the 
last  day. — David  Dickson. 

Vers.  65-68.  Chrisfs  good  confession 
counted  blasphemy. — 1.  A  man  given 
over  to  unbelief,  though  he  pretend  to 
desire  to  know  truth,  yet  will  he  not 
believe  when  truth   is   told  him  (no, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,  MATTHEW,    chap.  XXVL 


not  when  it  is  confirmed  by  the  oath 
of  Him  who  cannot  lie,  and  when  it  is 
proved  by  many  miracles),  but  he  will 
affront  his  own  conscience  in  all  this. 
>*  He  hath  spoken  blasphemy,"  said 
the  high  priest  when  Christ  had  told 
the  truth  which  before  was  proved  by 
His  works,  and  was  undertaken  to  be 
proved  yet  more.  2.  Profane  and 
graceless  hypocrites,  when  it  may  serve 
their  turn,  will  put  on  the  mask  of 
marvellous  zeal  to  the  glory  of  God. 
The  high  priest  doth  rend  his  clothes 
and  saith,  *'You  have  heard  His 
blasphemy."  3.  Partiality  and  malice, 
in  Christ's  cause  especially,  can  hardly 
be  hid ;  for  the  high  priest,  even  when 


he  will  seem  to  do  justice,  doth  first 
condemn  Christ  of  blasphemy  and  then 
asketh  the  voices  of  the  Council. 
4.  Assemblies  and  councils  may  err 
so  far  as  to  agree  in  one  to  condemn 
Christ  to  death  (ver.  66).  5.  Albeit 
Christ  be  most  free  of  blasphemy,  yet, 
because  they  in  whose  room  He  did 
stand  are  guilty  of  it  and  of  all  sorts 
of  sin,  therefore  it  is  provided  by  Divine 
Justice  that  Christ  shall  be  condemned 
for  our  cause  and  sentence  given  thus  : 
"•  He  is  guilty  of  death."  6.  What 
must  we  be  worthy  of  when  Christ  is 
spit  upon,  buffeted,  blindfolded,  and 
mocked  for  our  cause  ? — Ibid, 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  69—75. 

Desertion. — Where  were  the  followers  of  the  Saviour  during  the  time  that  He 
stood  before  the  high  priest,  as  described  in  the  previous  verses  ?  As  a  rule  they 
were  wholly  away  from  the  scene.  When  He  had  seemed  in  their  eyes  to  have 
forsaken  Himself  (vers.  51-54),  they  forsook  Him  as  well  (ver.  56).  Only  the 
Apostle  John,  as  one  known  to  the  high  priest  (John  xviii.  15),  and  the  Apostle 
Peter,  as  introduced  by  him  {ibid.,  ver,  16),  were  sufficiently  near,  in  the  outer 
court,  to  be  witnesses  of  the  scene.  What  befell  this  last-named  Apostle,  in  con- 
sequence of  his  being  there  at  this  time,  is  the  subject  of  the  verses  before  us. 
Their  contents  may  be  regarded  as  describing  to  us,  in  the  first  place,  a  great 
opportunity  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  a  sad  misuse  of  it. 

I.  A  great  opportunity. — Had  St.  Peter  so  wished,  here  was  an  opening  for 
him  to  stand  up  for  Christ  and  confess  Him.  There  was  everything  in  the  place 
where  he  was  (as  we  say)  to  give  him  this  *'  chance."  It  was  within  sight  of  all 
that  occurred  (Luke  xxii.  61).  It  was  filled  with  those  who  looked  on.  Most  of 
them  were  enemies  of  the  Saviour.  Here  was  the  occasion,  therefore,  for  His 
friends  to  speak  for  Him.  Also,  Peter  s  position  there  was  such  as  to  call  him 
specially  to  undertake  this  duty.  He  was  a  marked  man  in  that  place.  He 
had  been  introduced  there,  to  begin,  as  a  stranger  ;  a  thing  which  would  naturally 
attract  attention  to  him,  as  well  from  the  doorkeeper  as  from  others.  Also,  he  had 
been  a  prominent  figure  in  the  garden  at  the  apprehension  of  Jesus,  a  procedure 
in  which  some  of  his  present  companions,  the  high  priest's  servants,  had  taken 
their  part.  Probably,  also,  there  would  be  something  in  his  appearance,  corre- 
sponding to  the  conflict  of  feelings  then  raging  within  him  on  account  of  his 
previous  boldness  (John  xviii.  10)  but  later  timidity  (Mark  xiv.  54),  which  would 
draw  special  attention  to  him.  We  know  that  there  was  something  in  the 
provincial  character  of  his  dialect  which  would  do  the  same  thing.  And  we  can 
well  understand  that  the  position  he  took  up,  near  the  "  fire  "  (John  xviii.  18) 
would  make  doubly  visible  whatever  of  strangeness  there  was  to  be  seen  in  his 
looks.  All  these  things  of  themselves  would  be  a  kind  of  challenge  to  him  to  say 
who  he  was,  and  so,  at  least,  acknowledge  his  Lord  and  Master.  Lastly,  there 
was  not  a  little  to  be  found  in  the  man's  natural  character  which  would  itself  be 
a  qualification  for,  and  so  a  stimulus  to,  this  duty.  When  we  remember  what 
he  had  said  previously  (ch.  xvi.  16);  as  also  what  is  said  of  him  afterwards 
(Acts  iv.  13) ;  as  also  yet  that  he  must  have  been  in  heart  in  all  the  time 

611 


CHAP.  xxvi.     HOjHLETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


intervening  what  he  was  on  the  occasions  referred  to  ; — we  shall  see  that  there 
must  have  been  (at  least  to  one  part  of  him)  in  his  present  circumstances,  a  great 
call  to  speak  out.  "  Why  do  you  not  confess  Jesus  now  ?  Why  not  do  so,  as  you 
said  that  you  would  ?  Here  is  a  fitting  time  for  so  doing  !  Here  are  those  ready 
to  listen  to  you,  and  wanting  to  know,  in  fact,  who  you  are  !  Why  not  tell 
them  at  once,  and  have  done  with  it  1 "  So  his  heart,  surely,  would  say  then  to 
itself.     "  Forward  in  other  things,  be  forward,  also,  in  this." 

II.  A  sad  misuse. — A  sad  misuse,  in  the  first  place,  in  a  negative  way — letting 
the  opportunity  pass.  Instead  of  dealing  with  that  to  which  he  was  invited,  the 
Apostle,  at  first,  tried  merely  to  get  out  of  its  way.  He  did  so,  partly,  in  words. 
Even  when  one  who  was  present,  by  the  language  she  employed,  pressed  the 
opportunity  then  before  him  home  on  his  heart,  this  was  all  that  he  did.  *'  Thou 
also,"  she  said  to  him — thou  as  well  as  this  John  whom  we  all  know  here  so 
well  (?) — "  wast  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  To  this  question — for  such  it  really 
was — he  returns  what  is  really  no  "answer  "  whatever.  He  merely  professes  to 
have  no  knowledge  at  all  on  the  matter  in  hand  (ver.  70).  Also,  he  follows  this 
word  up  by  action  of  a  similar  purport;  going  out  into  the  "porch"  (ver.  71), 
as  though  he  were  one  having  other  business  just  then  requiring  his  presence. 
The  whole  signifies  that  he  does  not  wish  at  present  to  commit  himself  on  the 
subject.  He  desires  at  present  to  be  merely  neutral  about  it.  He  dare  not  say, 
Yea,  but  he  will  not  say.  Nay,  at  this  stage  of  the  proceedings ;  thus,  in  fact, 
in  such  circumstances,  by  not  confessing,  denying  his  Lord.  A  sadder  misuse,  in 
the  next  place,  in  a  positive  way.  Having  begun  thus  badly,  in  other  words, 
he  goes  on  to  still  worse.  Questioned  again  by  another  one  there,  and  finding, 
in  consequence,  that  he  cannot  take  refuge,  as  he  had  hoped,  in  avoiding  the 
subject,  he  goes  on  now,  in  so  many  words,  to  deny  all  knowledge  of  Christ. 
*'  So  far  from  belonging  to  Him  " — so  his  words  mean — *'  I  do  not  know  who  He 
is."  This  he  says,  too,  "  with  an  oath  "  (ver.  72).  Lastly,  *'  after  a  little,"  when 
the  effect  of  this  solemnly  uttered  and  distinct  asseveration  had  somewhat  worn 
off,  as  it  were — and  when  some  of  those  who  had  heard  it,  noting  the  peculiar 
dialect  of  the  man  who  had  made  it,  began,  in  consequence,  to  question  the 
possibility  of  its  truth — he  is  given  a  further  and  last  opportunity  of  retracing 
his  steps.  "  Surely,  thou  dost  belong  to  the  company  of  this  Jesus ;  thy  very 
speech  proves  that  thou  dost ;  why  not  confess  it  thyself  ?  "  So  they  in  effect 
(ver.  73).  He,  on  the  other  hand,  thus  driven  to  bay,  becomes  desperate  in  his 
denial.  "  Then  began  he  to  curse  and  to  swear  saying,  I  know  not  the  Man."  What 
c^  the  words  mean  ?  "  To  curse."  To  curse  whom?  What  for  ?  How  far?  "To 
swear."  To  swear  by  whom  ?  By  his  Maker  ?  In  attestation  of  his  falsehood  ? 
To  ask  attention  to  his  crime  ?  There  is  no  need  to  inquire.  What  the  words 
do  show  is  that  he  has  become  utterly  lost  in  his  ever-growing  iniquity,  and  has 
put  the  opportunity  now  given  him  to  the  worst  use  that  he  could. 

1.  How  extreme  is  the  weakness  of  man  when  left  to  himself! — Such  is  the  first 
lesson  which  this  memorable  story  has  ever  taught  to  the  church.  Here  is  the 
most  eminent  of  the  then  disciples  of  Christ — apparently  the  first  stone  in  His 
church  (xvi.  18) — the  most  forward  ever  and  boldest  of  all — doing  the  very 
thing  which  he  had  thought  wholly  impossible  a  few  moments  before.  It  almost 
reads  like  a  dream.  The  true  Peter  seems  standing  by,  and  watching  a  counter- 
feit one  in  his  place.  Who,  after  that,  shall  put  trust  in  himself  ?  Who  shall 
say,  after  that,  of  any  wickedness,  that  he  may  not  be  tempted  to  do  it  ?  Or, 
that  the  best  of  men  may  not  be  found  in  action  what  is  most  abhorrent  to  them 
in  thought  ? 

2.  How  supreme^  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  strength  of  all  who  are  true  believers 
in  Christ  ! — We  do  not  see  here  the  end  of  this  Peter,  or  of  the  effect  of  grace  on 
his  heart.     Even  immediately,  on  the  contrary,  we  see  him  brought  to  repent 

612 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxvi. 


(ver.  75)  ;  and  that  by  a  look  (Luke  xxii.  61).  Afterwards  we  find  him  opening 
the  door  of  faith  alike  to  Gentile  (Acts  xv.  7)  and  Jew  (Acts  ii.  36-41).  After- 
wards we  find  even  the  Apostle  Paul  speaking  of  Him  as  a  *'  pillar  "  (Gal.  ii.  9), 
as  in  the  implied  prediction  of  Christ  (Luke  xxii.  32).  To  so  great  height  from 
so  great  depth  did  his  faith  bring  him  in  time.  And  after  just  such  fashion, 
therefore,  may  all  those  hope  who  have  in  them  the  same  "seed  "  (1  Pet.  i.  25  ; 
1  John  iii.  9).  If  there  is  nothing  weaker,  there  is  nothing  stronger  than  a 
believer  in  Christ.  If  there  is  nothing  he  cannot  do,  there  is  nothing  he  cannot 
undo,  by  dependence  on  Him. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE   VERSES, 


Vers.  69-75.  Peter's  sin. — I.  The  sin. 
L  A  lie. 

2.  An  oath  (perjury). 

3.  An  anathema  and  curse. 

II.  The  occasion  of  the  sin. — 1.  Peter 
followed  Christ  afar  off,  from  fear  and 
frailty. 

2.  He  kept  had  company. — With  the 
enemies  of  Christ. 

3.  Presumptuous  confidence. — In  his 
own  strength  and  standing. 

III.  The  repetition  of  the  sin. — If 
we  yield  to  one  temptation,  Satan  will 
assault  us  with  more  and  stronger ; 
progress  from  bare  denial  to  perjury 
and  thus  to  imprecation. 

IV.  The  aggravating  circumstances. 
— 1.  The  person  thus  falling. — A  dis- 
ciple, an  Apostle,  the  chief  Apostle,  a 
special  favourite  with  Christ. 

2.  The  Person  denied. — His  Master, 
his  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  who  just 
before  had  washed  his  feet  and  given 
him  the  sacrament. 

3.  The  company  of  high  priests,  and 
scribes,  and  elders,  and  their  servants, 
before  whom  Peter  denied  his  Master. 

4.  The  time  of  the  denial. — But  a  few 
hours  after  the  communion. 

5.  The  smallness  of  the  temptation. — 
A  mere  question  of  a  servant  girl,  a 
door-keeper. — W.  Burkitt. 

Denial.  —I.  The  precursors  of  Peter's 
faU. 

1.  Self-confidence. 

2.  Rashness. — Peter  had  cut  off  the 
ear  of  Malchus.  Misplaced  bravery  is 
very  often,  as  in  this  instance,  the 
forerunner  of  cowardice.  If  by  our 
folly  we  put  ourselves  in  jeopardy,  we 


are  on  the  highway   to   falsehood  in 
order  to  get  ourselves  out  again. 
3.  Distance  from  the  Lord. 

II.  The  aggravations  of  these 
denials. — These  were  many. 

1 .  Peter  had  been  well  warned  of  his 
danger. 

2.  The  time  at  which  they  were  uttered. 
— It  was  with  Jesus  Himself  the  hour 
and  power  of  darkness. 

3.  The  Lord  had  given  him  many 
special  tokens  of  His  regard. 

4.  The  manner  in  which  they  were 
made. 

III.  The  sequel  of  the  denials. — 
"  The  Lord  turned  and  looked  upon 
Peter."  What  a  look  that  was !  It 
was  a  mingling  of  reproof,  of  tender- 
ness, and  of  entreaty.  It  reminded 
Peter  of  the  warnings  he  had  received, 
of  the  kindness  he  had  so  ungratefully 
met,  and  especially  of  the  words  of  love 
which  had  been  so  recently  addressed 
to  him :  "  Simon,  Simon  !  behold  Satan," 
etc.  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  He  saw  then 
what  he  had  done,  and  in  a  moment 
the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  within 
him  were  broken  up.  He  lived  on  that 
look  till  the  Master  met  him  after  the 
resurrection  ;  and  the  thought  of  that 
prayer  kept  him  from  falling  into 
despair.  Had  it  not  been  for  these 
things,  he,  too,  might  have  gone,  like 
Judas,  and  hanged  himself.  Note  one 
or  two  important  inferences  from  this 
subject:  (1)  Great  prominence  in 
Christ's  service  does  not  keep  us  from 
peril.  (2)  Our  greatest  danger  does 
not  always  lie  where  we  are  weakest, 
but  is  sometimes  where  we  are  usually 
strongest.      Peter's   characteristic  was 

613 


cflAP.  XXVII.    BOMILETIC  C0M3IENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


honesty  :  yet  he  fell  into  deceit.  Peter's 
nature  was  courageous :  yet  here  he 
manifests  cowardice.  (3)  If  Peter's 
fall  is  a  warning  against  over-con- 
fidence, his  restoration  ought  to  be  an 
antidote  to  all  despair. — W.  M.  Taylor, 
D,D, 

Ver.  73.  Speech  betraying  chara>cter. 
— "  Thy      speech     bewrayeth     thee." 
Varieties  of  moral  character,  as  well  as 
country,  are  betrayed  by  speech  : — 
I.  The  babbling  fool. 
II.  The  censorious  fault-finder. 

III.  The  malicious  slanderer. 

IV.  The  oily  flatterer. 
V.  The  ingenious  liar. 

VI.  The  profane  swearer. 
VII.  The  timid  apostate. 
VIII.  The    bold   confessor.—/.   C. 
Gray. 

Ver.  74.  Peter's  guilt. — His  guilt  was 
the  more  flagrant  because  the  ordeal 
was  not  compressed  into  a  short  com- 
pass. The  questions  did  not  roll  in 
upon  him  so  quickly  as  to  leave  no 
time  for  reflection  and  recovery  ;  on  the 
contrary,  they  seem  to  have  been  spread 
over  a  space  of  an  hour  at  the  least ; 


and  yet  he  deliberately  forced  his  soul 
thrice  to  the  denial. — C  E.  B.  Reed, 
M.A. 

Ver.  75.  Peter's  tears. — A  man  may 
be  conscious  of  God's  forgiveness,  as 
Peter  was  of  the  Saviour's  when  He 
gave  him  that  "  look,"  and  still  be 
unable  to  forgive  himself ;  and  as  he 
remembers  the  past  the  floodgates  are 
opened  again  and  again.  This  was  the 
case  with  Peter  :  the  deed  was  done ; 
it  had  been  obliterated  from  the  heart 
of  Christ,  but  it  pressed  heavily  upon 
his  own ;  and  the  consciousness  of 
having  committed  a  base  act  blinded 
his  eyes  with  tears.  What  had  he 
done? 

I.  He  had  denied  his  Lord. — In  doing 
so : — 

1.  He  denied  the  greatest  Teacher. — 
"  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man." 

2.  He  denied  the  kindest  Friend. 

3.  He  denied  Him  at  a  very  critical 
period.     He  wept  bitterly  because  of — 

II.  His  likeness  to  the  world. — 1.  In 
his  language. — "  He  beg?  n  to  curse  and 
to  swear." 

2.  In  his  shame. 

3.  In  his /ear. — Cymro, 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


CRITICAL    NOTES, 


Ver.  2.  Pontius  Pilate. — Must  have  belonged,  by  birth  or  adoption,  to  the  gens  of  the 
Pontii,  one  of  whom,  C.  Pontius  Telesinus,  had  been  the  leader  of  the  Samnites  in  their 
second  and  third  wars  against  Rome,  B.C.  321 — 292.  The  cognomen  Pilatus  means  "armed 
with  the  pilum  or  javelin,"  and  may  have  had  its  origin  in  some  early  military  achievement. 
When  Judaea  became  formally  subject  to  the  empire,  on  the  deposition  of  Archelaus,  a 
procurator,  or  collector  of  revenue,  invested  with  judicial  power,  was  appointed  to  govern  it, 
subject  to  the  Governor  of  Syria  (Luke  ii.  2),  and  resided  commonly  in  Csesarea.  Pontius 
Pilate,  of  whose  previous  career  we  know  nothing,  was  appointed,  A.D.  25 — 26,  as  the  sixth 
holder  of  that  office.  His  administration  had  already,  prior  to  our  Lord's  trial,  been  marked 
by  a  series  of  outrages  on  Jewish  feelings.  (1)  He  had  removed  the  headquarters  of  his 
army  from  Caesarea  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  troops  brought  their  standards  with  the  image  of 
the  emperor  into  the  Holy  City.  The  people  were  excited  into  frenzy,  and  rushed  in  crowds 
to  Caesarea  to  implore  him  to  spare  them  this  outrage  on  their  religion.  After  five  days  of 
obstinacy  and  a  partial  attempt  to  suppress  the  tumult,  Pilate  at  last  yielded  (Jos.,  Ant , 
XVIII.  iii.  1,  2 ;  B  .J.,  II.  ix.  2-4).  (2)  He  had  hung  up  in  his  palace  at  Jerusalem  gilt 
shields  inscribed  with  the  names  of  heathen  deities,  and  would  not  remove  them  till  an 
express  order  came  from  Tiberius  (Philo.  Leg.  ad  Caium,  c.  38).     (3)  He  had  taken  money 

6U 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


from  the  Corban,  or  treasury  of  the  temple,  for  the  construction  of  an  aqueduct.  This  led 
to  another  tumult,  which  was  suppressed  by  the  slaughter,  not  of  the  rioters  only,  but  also 
of  casual  spectators  (Jos.,  B.  J.,  II.  ix.  4).  (4)  Lastly,  on  some  unknov/n  occasion  he  had 
slain  some  Galileans  while  they  were  in  the  very  act  of  sacrificing  (Luke  xiii.  1),  and  this 
had  probably  caused  the  ill-feeling  between  him  and  the  tetrarch  Antipas  mentioned  in 
Luke  xxiii.  12.  It  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  these  antecedents  of  the  man,  as  notes  of  character, 
as  we  follow  him  through  the  series  of  vacillations  which  we  now  have  to  trace  {Plumptre). 
The  wish  of  the  Sanhedrin  in  delivering  Jesus  to  Pilate  was  to  have  their  sentence  confirmed 
without  inquiry.     See  xxvi.  66  {Carr). 

Ver.  3.  Repented  himself. — It  is  worth  while  to  mark  in  the  translation  the  difference 
between  /xeTa/n^Xofjiai,  to  change  one's  care,  and  fxeravo^o},  to  change  one^s  mind  or  purpose, 
and  thus  between  the  repentance  of  Peter,  who  abhorred  the  cause  of  his  sin,  and  the  remorse 
of  Judas,  who  shrank  back  from  the  effect ;  or  the  godly  sorrow  which  leads  to  life,  and  the 
worldly  regret  which  leads  to  death  (Schaff). 

Ver.  5.  In  the  temple. — Into  the  sanctnary  (R.V.).  "  The  holy  place,"  into  which  only  the 
priests  might  enter.  How  is  this  to  be  explained  1  Perhaps  he  flung  the  money  in  after 
them.     But  thus  were  fulfilled  the  words  of  the  prophet  (Zech.  xi.  13)  {Brown). 

Ver.  6.  The  treasury. — The  temple  free-will-offering  treasury,  called  "Corbanas"  (Jos., 
B.  J.,  II.  ix.  4),  into  which  the  corbans,  or  gifts  of  the  people,  were  cast  (Morison).  The  price 
of  blood. — See  Deut,  xxiii.  18.  By  parity  of  reasoning,  the  priests  seem  to  have  thought  that 
the  blood-money  which  was  thus  returned  was  excluded  also  (^Flumptre). 

Ver.  7.  The  potter's  field. — Tradition  places  this  (Aceldama,  Acts  i.  19)  in  the  valley  of 
Hinnom,  south  of  Jerusalem.  To  bury  strangers  in. — That  is,  say  Grotius,  Fritzsche,  and 
Meyer,  for  such  stranger-Jews  as  might  die  while  visiting  the  city  on  occasion  of  any  of  the 
great  festivals.  It  is  more  likely,  however,  that  the  reference  is  to  foreigners,  such  as  Greeks 
and  Komans,  whose  ashes  v.^ould  be  regarded  as,  in  a  special  sense,  unclean.  So  Beza. 
There  would  thus  be  a  compromise  of  feelings.  The  money  would  be  treated  as  unclean,  and 
yet  it  would  be  laid  out  for  a  charitable  purpose  (^Morison). 

Ver.  8.  Wherefore. — St.  Luke  (Acts  i.  19)  assigns  the  death  of  Judas  in  a  field  which  he 
had  bought  as  the  origin  of  the  name.  It  is  possible  that  two  spots  may  have  been  known 
by  the  same  name  for  distinct  reasons,  and  the  fact  that  two  places  have  been  shown  as  the 
Field  of  Blood  from  the  time  of  Jerome  downwards  is,  as  far  as  it  goes,  in  favour  of  this 
view.  It  is  equally  possible,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Judas  may  have  gone,  before  or  after 
the  purchase,  to  the  ground  which,  bought  with  his  money,  was,  in  some  sense,  his  own,  and 
there  ended  his  despair,  dying  literally  in  Gehenna,  and  buried,  not  in  the  grave  of  his  fathers 
at  Kerioth,  but  as  an  outcast,  with  none  to  mourn  over  him,  in  the  cemetery  of  the  aliens 
(Pluniptre). 

Ver.  9.  Jeremy  the  prophet. — The  citation  is  from  Zech.  xi.  13,  but  neither  the  Hebrew  nor 
the  LXX.  version  is  followed  exactly.  Among  the  explanations  of  the  prophecy  being  attri- 
buted to  Jeremiah  rather  than  Zechariah  are  the  following  :  (1)  "Jeremiah,"  who  begins  the 
Book  of  the  Prophets  in  the  Hebrew  Canon,  is  intended  to  indicate  the  whole  of  that  division 
of  the  Scriptures.  This  was  the  view  of  Lightfoot  (^Ilor.  Ifebr.),  and  is  favoured  by 
Scrivener,  David  Brown,  and  others.  (2)  This  is  an  error  on  the  part  of  an  early  transcriber. 
(3)  This  is  a  slip  of  the  pen  or  a  slip  of  the  memory  on  the  part  of  the  Evangelist  himself. 

Ver.  11.  The  governor  asked  him. — Pilate,  true  to  the  Roman  sense  of  justice,  refused 
merely  to  confirm  the  sentence  of  the  Sanhedrin  {Carr). 

Ver.  16.  Barabbas. — "  Son  of  Abba,"  i.e.  Son  of  Father  (so-and-so).  The  name  would 
originally  be  given  to  one  who  was  the  son  of  some  Rabbi  who  had  been  known  in  his  locality  as 
Father  (so-and-so).  Not  unlikely  Barabbas  would  thus  be  a  person  of  respectable  parentage, 
though  for  long  he  had  gravitated  toward  the  lowest  stratum  of  society  (Morison). 

Ver.  19.  When  he  was  set  down. —  While  he  wassittiiig  (R.V.).  His  wife. — Claudia  Procula 
or  Procla.  Traditions  state  that  she  was  a  proselyte  of  the  gate,  which  is  by  no  means 
unlikely,  as  many  of  the  Jewish  proselytes  were  women.  By  an  imperial  regulation  pro- 
vincial governors  had  been  prohibited  from  taking  their  wives  with  them.  But  the  rule 
gradually  fell  into  disuse,  and  an  attempt  made  in  the  Senate  (a.d.  21)  to  revive  it  completely 
failed  (Carr). 

Ver.  21.  They  said,  Barabbas. — Pilate's  expedient  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  pronouncing 
sentence  is  here  set  forth  at  length,  probably  because  it  brings  into  strong  relief  the  absolute 
rejection  of  their  Messiah  alike  by  the  rulers  and  by  the  people  {Gibson). 

Ver.  24.  Washed  his  hands.— See  Deut.  xxi.  6.  Cf.  Ps.  xxvi.  6.  See  ye  to  it.—*'  Ye  shall 
see  to  it ;  I  presume  that  ye  take  to  yourselves  the  whole  responsibility  of  the  deed " 
{Morison). 

Ver.  27.  The  common  hall. — Literally,  the  Prcetorivan,  a  word  which,  applied  originally  to 
the  tent  of  the  praetor,  or  general,  and  so  to  the  headquarters  of  the  camp,  had  come  to  be 
used  with  a  somewhat  wide  range  of  meaning,  (1)  for  the  residence  of  a  prince  or  governor; 
or  (2)  for  the  barracks  attached  to  such  a  residence  (as  in  Phil.  i.  13)  ;  or  (3)  for  any  house 

615 


CHAP,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


as  stately.  Here  (as  in  Acts  xxiii.  35)  it  appears  to  be  used  in  the  first  sense.  Pilate's 
dialogue  with  the  priests  and  people  had  probably  been  held  from  the  portico  of  the  Tower 
of  Antony,  which  rose  opposite  the  temple  court,  and  served  partly  as  a  fortress,  partly 
as  an  official  residence.  The  soldiers  now  took  the  prisoner  into  their  barrack-room  within 
(^Plumptre).  The  whole  band. — The  word  used  is  the  technical  word  for  the  cohort,  or 
subdivision  of  a  legion  (ibid.), 

Ver.  28.  A  scarlet  robe. — A  soldier's  scarf ;  Lat.  chlamys.  It  was  generally  worn  by  superior 
officers,  but  its  use  was  not  confined  to  them.  This  may  have  been  a  worn-out  scarf 
belonging  to  Pilate  ;  it  is  different  from  "  the  gorgeous  robe  "  (Luke  xxiii.  11),  which  Herod's 
soldiers  put  on  Jesus.  Scarlet  was  the  proper  colour  for  the  military  chlamys.  St.  Mark 
has  the  less  definite  "purple,"  St.  John,  "a  purple  robe."  Purple,  however,  is  used  by  Latin 
writers  to  denote  any  bright  colour  {Carr). 

Ver,  29.  A  crown  of  thorns. — It  cannot  be  known  of  what  plant  this  acanthine  crown  was 
formed.  The  mibk  {zizyphus  lotus)  struck  me,  as  it  has  struck  all  travellers  in  Palestine, 
as  being  most  suitable  both  for  mockery  and  pain,  since  its  leaves  are  bright,  and  its  thorns 
singularly  strong ;  but  though  the  nuhk  is  very  common  on  the  shores  of  Galilee,  I  saw  none 
of  it  near  Jerusalem.  There  may,  however,  have  been  some  of  it  in  the  garden  of  Herod's 
palace,  and  the  soldiers  would  give  themselves  no  sort  of  trouble,  but  merely  take  the  first 
plant  that  came  to  hand  {Farrar). 

Ver.  32.  Cyrene, — A  city  in  north-eastern  Africa.  A  large  colony  of  Jews  had  settled 
there,  as  in  other  African  and  Egyptian  cities,  to  avoid  the  oppression  of  the  Syrian  kings 
( Carr).  Simon.  — Why,  we  ask,  out  of  the  whole  crowd  that  was  streaming  to  and  fro,  on 
the  way  to  the  place  of  execution,  did  the  multitude  seize  on  him  ?  St.  Mark's  mention 
of  him  as  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rufus  (see  Mark  xv.  21),  suggests  the  thought  that 
his  sons  were  afterwards  prominent  as  members  of  the  Christian  community.  May  we  not 
infer  that  he  was  suspected  even  then  of  being  a  secret  disciple,  and  that  this  led  the 
people  to  seize  on  him,  and  make  him  a  sharer  in  the  humiliation  of  his  Master  ?  iPlumptre). 

Ver.  33.  Golgotha. — The  site  is  not  certainly  known,  though  Major  Conder,  R.E.,  who  com- 
manded the  survey  parties  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund,  between  1872  and  1882,  says : 
"  It  may  be  said  to  be  generally  agreed  that  the  tradition  preserved  by  the  Jerusalem  Jews  is 
worthy  of  belief.  This  tradition,  discovered  by  Dr.  T.  Chaplin,  places  the  old  "  House  of 
Stoning,"  or  place  of  public  execution  according  to  the  law  of  Moses,  on  the  top  of  the 
remarkable  knoll  outside  the  Damascus  Gate,  on  the  north  side  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  from 
this  cliff  that  the  criminal  used  to  be  flung  before  being  stoned  (according  to  the  Talmud), 
and  on  it  his  body  was  afterwards  crucified ;  for  the  spot  commands  a  view  all  over  the 
city,  and  from  the  slopes  all  round  it  the  whole  population  of  the  town  might  easily  witness 
the  execution.  Here,  then,  was  the  Hebrew  place  of  crucifixion,  and  here,  in  all  human 
probability,  once  stood  the  three  crosses  bearing  the  Saviour  of  men  between  the  two 
thieves  "  (^Primer  of  Bible  Geograjjhy). 

Ver.  34.  Vinegar. —  TFm<?  (R.V.). — The  ordinary  military  wine,  ^osca.  Gall. — Some  bitter 
ingredient  fitted  to  stupefy.       , 

Ver.  35.  That  it  might  be  fulfilled,  etc. — Omitted  in  R.V.  It  ought  not  to  be  questioned 
that  the  words  were  interpolated  by  the  copyists,  from  John  xix.  24  {Scrivener). 

Ver.  36.  They  watched  Him  there. — See  R.V.     They  remained  on  guard  over  Him. 

Ver.  37.  His  accusation. — This  was  what  was  technically  known  as  the  titulus—thQ  bill, 
or  placard,  showing  who  the  condemned  person  was,  and  why  he  was  punished  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  45.  From,the  sixth  hour. — The  first  three  Gospels  agree  as  to  time  and  fact.  Assuming 
them  to  follow  the  usual  Jewish  reckoning  (as  in  Acts  ii.  15,  iii.  1,  x.  3,  9)  this  would  be 
noon.  St.  John  names  the  "  sixth  hour  "  as  the  time  of  our  Lord's  final  condemnation  by 
Pilate,  following  apparently  (though  this  is  questioned  by  many  interpreters)  the  Roman 
or  modern  mode  of  reckoning  from  midnight  to  noon.  Looking  to  the  facts  of  the  case, 
it  is  probable  that  our  Lord  was  taken  to  the  high  priest's  palace  about  3  a.m.  (the  "  cock- 
crow "  of  Mark  xiii.  35).  Then  came  the  first  hearing  before  Annas  (John  xviii.  13),  then 
the  trial  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrin,  then  the  formal  meeting  that  passed  the 
sentence.  This  would  fill  up  the  time  probably  till  6  a.m.,  and  two  hours  or  so  may  be 
allowed  for  the  proceedings  before  Pilate  and  Herod.  After  the  trial  was  over  there  would 
naturally  be  an  interval  for  the  soldiers  to  take  their  early  meal,  and  then  the  slow  procession 
to  Golgotha,  delayed,  we  may  well  believe,  by  our  Lord's  falling,  once  or  oftener,  beneath 
the  burden  of  the  cross ;  and  so  we  come  to  9  a.m.  for  His  arrival  at  the  place  of  crucifixion 
(Pluviptre).  Darkness. — Not  an  ordinary  eclipse  of  the  sun,  inasmuch  as  the  Passover  was 
celebrated  at  the  time  of  full  moon.  Over  all  the  land. — The  Evangelist  was  thinking, 
indefinitely  and  indeterminately,  of  the  terrestrial  region  of  which  Jerusalem  was  the  centre 
(Morison). 

Ver.  47.  Calleth  for  'EliB.s.—  Calleth  Elijah  (R.V.).  A  blasphemous  Jewish  joke,  by  an 
awkward  and  godless  pun  upon  Eli  {Meyer).  If  we  conceive  to  ourselves  the  state  of  matters, 
we  may  easily  assume  that  joking  and  mockery  were  now  past  (see  Luke  xxiii.  48).    It  may 

616 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,   chap,  xxvii. 


be  supposed  that  the  loud  cry,  "  Eli,  Eli  1 "  wakened  up  the  consciences  of  the  onlooking 
Jews,  and  filled  them  with  the  thouglit,  "  Perhaps  the  turning-point  may  now  actually  have 
come,  and  Elijah  may  appear  to  bring  in  the  day  of  judgment  and  vengeance ; "  and,  occupied 
thus,  they  may  not  have  heard  the  remaining  words  (Lange). 

Ver.  48.  Sponge. — Which,  perhaps,  served  as  a  cork  for  the  vessel  containing  the  vinegar. 
Gave  Him  to  drink. — Christ  drank  this  draught — 1.  Because  the  wine  was  unmixed. 
2.  Because  now  the  moment  of  rest  had  come  (Lange). 

Ver.  54.  The  centurion. — See  on  viii.  5.  He  was  the  "military  superintendent  of  the 
execution  "  (Brown).  They  that  were  with  him. — The  quaternion  of  soldiers  (see  John 
xix.  23). 

Ver.  55.  Ministering. — See  Luke  viii.  3. 

Ver.  56.  Mary  Magdalene. — A  native  of  Magdala,  a  very  warm-hearted  disciple  of  Jesus, 
out  of  whom  He  had  cast  seven  devils  (Luke  viii.  2).  There  is  not  the  slightest  ground 
in  the  ISew  Testament  history  for  the  popular  identification  of  the  Magdalene  with  the  great 
sinner  of  Luke  vii.  36.  It  had  its  origin,  probably,  from  the  proximity  of  the  two  passages 
(Macpherson).  Mary,  the  mother  of  James  and  Joses.— James  had  been  apparently  small 
in  stature,  and  hence,  to  distinguish  him,  either  from  some  other  James  in  the  same  circle, 
or  from  the  various  other  Jameses  in  inter-related  circles,  he  was  often  called  "  James  the 
little  "  (see  Mark  xv.  40).  Mary,  their  mother,  need  not  be  confounded  with  the  sister 
of  our  Lord's  mother,  for  it  is  probable  that  in  John  xix.  25  four  persons,  not  three,  are 
referred  to,  and  it  is  unlikely  that  our  Lord's  mother  and  her  sister  would  each  be  simply 
called  Mary  (Morison).  She  may  have  been  identical  with  the  wife  of  Clopas  (possibly 
another  form  of  Alphaeus)  mentioned  in  John  xix.  25  as  standing  near  the  cross  with  the 
mother  of  the  Lord  (Pluniptre). 

Ver.  57.  Even, — The  first  or  early  evening.  See  Deut.  xxi.  23;  Jos.,  B.  J.,  IV.  v.  2. 
Arimathsea. — Generally  identified  with  Kamathaim-zophim,  on  Mount  Ephraim,  the  birth- 
place of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  i.  1),  the  site  of  which  is  not  certainly  known.  Joseph. — A  member 
of  the  Sanhedrin  (Luke  xxiii.  50).  Disciple. — He  must  undoubtedly  have  absented  himself 
from  the  meetings  of  the  Sanhedrin  when  Jesus  was  condemned.  See  Luke  xxiii.  51 
(Carr). 

Ver.  58.  Begged  the  body. — It  was  the  Roman  custom  to  allow  the  bodies  to  hang  upon 
the  cross  till  they  wasted  away,  or  were  consumed  by  the  birds  of  prey.  But  should  friends 
request  the  bodies  to  be  taken  for  interment,  the  request  could  not  be  refused  (Meyer').  A 
concession  was  made  in  favour  of  the  Jews,  whose  law  did  not  suffer  a  man  to  hang  all 
night  upon  a  tree  (Deut.  xxi.  23)  (Carr). 

Ver.  61.    The  other  Mary. — The  mother  of  James  and  Joses  (ver.  56). 

Ver.  62.  The  next  day. —  On  the  morrow  (R.V.).  After  sunset  on  Nisan  14.  Preparation. 
— The  "  preparation  "  (Paraskeue)  was  a  technical  term,  not,  as  is  sometimes  said,  in  refer- 
ence to  preparing  foi  the  Passover,  but,  as  in  Mark  xv.  42,  to  a  preparation  for  the  Sabbath. 
Josephus,  Ant.,  XVI.  vi.  2,  is  decisive  on  this  point  (Plumptre).  Several  reasons  have  been 
assigned  for  this  roundabout  way  of  describing  the  Sabbath  day.  Bengel  suggests,  because 
St.  Matthew  did  not  choose  to  call  the  Jewish  Sabbath  any  longer  "the  Sabbath." 

Ver.  64.  Until  the  third  day. — The  phrase  is  worth  noting,  as  indicating  the  meaning 
which  the  priests  attacled  to  the  words  "after  three  days."  They  were  looking  for  the 
fraud  which  they  anticipated  as  likely  to  be  attempted  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  day 
from  the  death  (Plumptre.)  By  night. — Omitted  in  E.V.  Error. — Better,  deceit,  to  connect 
the  word,  in  English  as  in  the  Greek,  with  the  "  deceiver  "  of  verse  63  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  65.  Ye  have  a  watch. — A  guard  (R.V,).  See  also  RV.  margin.  The  verb  may  be  either 
indicative  or  imperative.  "  The  guards  had  already  acted  under  orders  of  the  Sanhedrin, 
with  Pilate's  consent ;  but  probably  they  were  not  clear  about  employing  them  as  a  night 
watch  without  Pilate's  express  authority  "  (Brown). 

Ver.  66.  Sealing. — Probably  effected  by  drawing  one  or  more  ropes  across  the  stone  and 
fastening  either  end  to  the  rock  with  wax  or  cement  of  some  kind  (Plumptre).  Setting  a 
watch.— T//e  guard  being  icith  them  (R.V.).  What  is  meant  is  that  the  priests  were  not 
content  to  leave  the  work  to  the  soldiers,  but  actually  took  part  in  it  themselves  (ibid.). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1—10. 

The  homage  of  guilt. — "  When  the  morning  was  come,"  it  appears  to  have 
been  thought  by  those  who  had  condemned  the  Saviour  to  death  that  the  time 
had  arrived  for  carrying  out  the  resolution  they  had  come  to.  They  therefore, 
it  is  said,  "  took  counsel  "  as  to  the  best  way  of  so  doing.  Two  things  seem  to 
have  determined  them  in  the  line  they  adopted.  One  was  that  the  power  of  life 
and  death  was  now  out  of  their  hands  (John  xviii.  31,  32).     The  other  that  the 

617 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


Roman  governor,  in  whose  hands  it  lay,  would  soon  be  taking  his  morning  seat 
for  the  administration  of  justice.  To  him,  therefore,  they  lead  the  Saviour 
forthwith,  taking  Him ''  bound"  (ver.  2)  as  one  already  condemned,  and  going  in 
a  body  (Luke  xxiii.  1),  as  though  to  show  that  the  condemnation  was  the  act  of 
them  all.  None  that  looked  on,  therefore,  could  fail  seeing  all  that  was  meant. 
Jesus  is  now  "  seen"  to  be  ''condemned  (ver.  3).  The  effect  of  this  sight  on  the 
man  who  had  betrayed  Him,  and  the  effect  of  this  effect  on  those  who  had 
condemned  Him,,  are  told  to  us  next. 

I.  The  effect  on  Judas. — We  see  this,  first,  in  that  which  he  says.  When  he 
"  sees  "  that  Jesus  is  "  condemned  "  (ibid.),  he  sees  also  what  has  been  said  of  Him 
by  the  priests,  viz.,  that  He  is  guilty,  and  so  worthy  of  death.  What  he  says 
in  reply,  seeing  this,  is,  that  He  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  To  shed  His  blood,  on 
the  contrary,  will  be  to  shed  *'  innocent  blood."  That  is  the  first  thing  he 
declares.  He  declares,  also,  what  is  implied  in  this,  that  he  had  his  own  share 
in  the  matter.  "  I  have  sinned  "  in  that  I  have  betrayed  this  innocent  blood. 
And  he  showed,  yet  further,  how  strongly  he  felt  this  by  the  peculiar  emphasis 
of  his  words :  Here,  take  this  money  which  you  gave  me  for  betraying  Him,  for 
I  desire  to  have  it  no  more  (ver.  3).  A  marvellous  result  on  the  part  of  one 
who  is  spoken  of  as  a  "thief"  (John  xii.  6),  that  he  should  thus  deny,  as  it 
were,  his  own  nature,  on  account  of  the  depth  of  his  feelings.  The  same  effect 
is  shown  still  more  in  that  which  he  does.  In  this  we  find  him  resolved,  at  all 
costs,  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  that  bribe.  If  they  will  not  accept  it, 
he  will  not  retain  it,  be  the  result  what  it  may.  In  no  sense  shall  it  be  his  any 
more.  It  shall  not  even,  as  it  were,  be  any  more  in  his  hands.  As  something, 
therefore,  now  utterly  hateful  to  him,  "  he  flings  it  down "  in  the  temple,  and 
then  goes  away,  and,  in  a  similar  manner,  flings  away  his  own  life  (ver.  5). 
The  whole  tragedy,  in  short,  is,  in  every  way,  a  most  striking  testimony  to  the 
innocency  of  Jesus.  Even  this  man  of  covetousness  cannot  bring  himself  to 
keep  the  price  of  His  life.  What  a  revelation  of  the  real  nature  of  his 
convictions  about  Him  !  With  all  the  almost  certain  suspiciousness  of  his 
nature  (see  John  xii.  4,  5) ;  with  all  the  length  and  depth  of  his  past  intimacy 
with  Jesus ;  he  remembers  nothing  of  Him  but  that  which  is  good  !  No  more 
competent  witness,  no  more  reliable  witness,  no  louder  witness,  to  the  innocency 
of  Jesus,  could  possibly  be.     Even  Judas  cannot  live  and  see  it  denied  ! 

II.  The  effect  of  this  effect  on  the  priests. — This  was  very  significant 
in  itself  Carefully  gathering  together  the  pieces  of  silver  thrown  down,  all  they 
think  of  is  how  to  invest  them  in  the  most  politic  way.  As  the  price  of  blood, 
it  would  never  do  to  return  them  to  the  treasury  of  the  temple.  On  the  other 
hand,  to  them  it  would  be  just  as  inadmissible  not  to  use  them  at  all.  What 
they  resolve  on,  therefore,  is  to  employ  them  in  purchasing  a  piece  of  ground 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  once  used  by  a  potter,  but  now  probably 
exhausted,  and  so  to  be  had  (probably)  for  the  exact  modicum  of  money  of 
which  they  wished  to  dispose.  Not  impossibly  they  had  learned  this 
through  Judas  himself.  Not  impossibly,  also,  this  is  how  that  exact  sum 
had  come  to  be  agreed  on  between  them.  Anyhow,  if  the  transaction  was 
begun  by  him,  it  was  completed  by  them.  Thinking  the  place  a  convenient  one 
to  "  bury  strangers  in  " — and  looking  on  it,  doubtless,  as  quite  good  enough  for 
that  purpose — they  purchased  it  for  that  end.  Herein,  therefore,  we  see  the 
whole  effect  upon  them  of  what  Judas  had  done.  The  further  question,  whether 
or  not  they  were  really  shedding  "  innocent  blood,"  as  he  said,  was,  in  their 
judgment,  no  business  of  theirs  (ver.  4).  Even  more  significant,  next,  was  this 
action  of  theirs  in  regard  to  the  future.  That  purchased  field  became  one  of 
immense  notoriety  before  long.  Bought  with  the  money  of  perishing  Judas,  it 
became  inseparably  linked  with  that  fact.     It  became  known,  therefore,  for  all 

618 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap.  xxviJ. 


future  time,  as  the  "  field  of  "  (innocent)  *'  blood,"  because  bought  with  money 
which  the  betrayer  himself,  with  his  dying  lips,  had  declared  to  be  the  price  of 
such  blood.  Who  could  see  that  field  afterwards  without  thinking  of  the  two 
lives  it  had  cost  ?  And  without  remembering  also  what  the  one  of  those  lives 
had  virtually  said  of  the  other,  viz.,  that  it  was  a  life  without  sin  ?  Quite 
as  significant,  lastly,  was  this  action  of  the  priests  in  connection  with  the  past. 
Either  as  a  thing  of  vision,  or  else  of  equally  instructive  typical  history,  there 
was  language  on  record  in  one  of  the  prophets — it  does  not  really  matter  in 
which — which  relates  the  purchase  of  an  exactly  similar  field  at  an  exactly 
identical  price ;  and  describes  that  price  also  as  being,  in  some  way,  the  value 
set  on  a  life  (vers.  9,  10).  So  plainly,  although  so  mysteriously ;  so  fitly,  and 
therefore  so  forcibly,  had  this  step  been  foretold.  Whatever  else  is  doubtful, 
this  is  clear  about  that  mysterious  word.  It  was  the  crowning  element  in 
lending  importance  to  this  nefarious  transaction.  Long  prophecy,  in  a  word, 
had  foreseen,  what  all  posterity  has  since  verified,  of  the  significance  of  that  field 
as  an  unconscious  but  eternal  testimony  to  the  innocency  of  the  Saviour. 

1.  See,  therefore,  finally,  on  the  one  hand,  the  real  origin  of  this  testiimony. 
— We  have  called  it  the  homage  of  guilt.  Judas  designedly — the  priests  un- 
designedly— proclaim  Christ  here  to  be  guiltless.  Like  so  many  Balaams,  these 
later  witnesses,  intending  to  curse,  are  found  blessing  instead.  But  what  has 
brought  this  about  ?  Whose  hand  is  it  that  is  working  in  reality  behind  both 
Judas  and  them  ?  And  whose  voice  is  it,  therefore,  that,  as  well  by  his  lips  and 
their  actions  as  by  the  voice  of  prophecy  about  both,  is  thus  testifying  to  Jesus  ? 
No  devout  heart  can  help  seeing  that  it  is  the  voice  of  His  Father  Himself. 
Practically,  in  short,  it  is  iii.  17,  xvii.  5  over  again. 

2.  See,  in  consequence,  on  the  other  hand,  the  peculiar  timeliness  of  this 
testimony. — Just  after  Judas  has  treated  the  Saviour  as  guilty,  he  is  compelled 
to  testify  to  the  exact  opposite  in  the  most  irresistible  way.  Just  after  the 
priests  have  condemned  the  Saviour,  they  are  made  to  condemn  themselves  for 
so  doing.  In  other  words  and  finally,  just  when  Jesus  has  been  delivered  up 
to  the  Gentiles  as  guilty,  God  declares  Him  thus  to  be  His  **  Holy  One  "  still. 
Perhaps  never  more  so  than  then  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Christ  sent  to  Pilate. —  against  Jesus   violated   both   (1)    the 

1.  The  wicked  are  exceeding  watchful  spirit,   and   (2)   the   express    rules   of 

to   accomplish   an   ill  turn,  especially  Hebrew  jurisdiction,  the  general  ten- 

against  Christ;  for  late  at  night  and  dency     of     which     was     to     extreme 

early   in   the   morning   are   the   chief  clemency. 

priests  and  others  busy  to  have  Christ  I.  The  Talmud  states  :  "  The  Sanhe- 
put  to  death.  2.  It  is  no  new  thing  to  drin  is  to  save,  not  to  destroy  life." 
see  corrupt  church  governors  abuse  No  man  could  be  condemned  in  his 
the  civil  magistrate  in  execution  of  absence,  or  without  a  majority  of  two 
their  unjust  and  cruel  conclusions,  as  to  one ;  the  penalty  for  procuring 
here  the  priests  and  elders  deliver  false  witnesses  was  death ;  the  con- 
Christ  bound  to  Pilate  the  governor. —  demned  was  not  to  be  executed  on  the 
David  Dickson.  day  of  his  trial.     This  clemency  was 

violated  in  the  trial  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Was  Jesus  dealt  with  legally  ? — The  II.   But    even    the    ordinary    legal 

question  is  sometimes  asked,  Was  the  rules  were  disregarded  in  the  following 

trial  of  Jesus  fair  and  legal  according  particulars:    (1)  The  examination  by 

to   the    rules    of    Jewish    law?     The  Annas    without    witnesses;      (2)  The 

answer  must  be  that  the  proceedings  trial  by  night;     (3)  The  sentence  on 

619 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


the  first  day  of  trial ;  (4)  The  trial  of 
a  capital  charge  on  the  day  before  the 
Sabbath ;  (5)  The  suborning  of  wit- 
nesses ;  (6)  The  direct  interrogation  by 
the  high  priest. — A.  Carr,  M.A. 

Vers.  3-5.  Judas  I  scar  lot. — In  the 
story  of  Judas  Iscariot  we  have  the 
prominent  tragedy  of  the  Gospels. — 
I.  The  character  of  Judas. 

II.  The  history  of  his  scheme. 

III.  The  efforts  to  save  him. — 
Judas  did  not  fall  at  once  and  un- 
warned. He  had  the  same  chances  of 
better  things  which  his  brother  Apostles 
had.  He  thrust  away  from  himself 
the  helping  hand  which  Christ's  love 
extended  to  him.  From  the  earliest 
time  to  the  latest  moment,  Christ 
sought  to  save  the  traitor  from  him- 
self. Recall  Christ's  method.  He  did 
not  receive  recruits  without  caution. 
There  were  after-warnings  also. 
Generally,  the  tone  of  our  Lord's 
teaching  respecting  worldliness  was 
one  constant  warning.  To  a  man  like 
Judas,  trying  to  secure  his  own  in- 
terest, and  making  this  the  prime 
object  of  his  thoughts,  the  words,  "  Ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon," 
came  like  a  trumpet-toned  note  of 
alarm.  But  besides  general  language 
like  this,  there  were  utterances  of  our 
Lord's  which,  in  the  light  of  Judas' 
character,  sound  like  direct  and  special 
efforts  to  awake  him  from  his  dream 
of  self.  Read  in  the  light  of  Judas' 
designs  the  parable  of  the  unjust 
steward.  Or,  again,  the  parable  of 
the  wedding-garment  had  its  message 
for  the  traitor.  As  the  crisis  draws 
near,  Christ  puts  forth  fresh  and  final 
attempts  to  save  him.  "  Ye  are  not 
all  clean,"  He  said,  at  the  time  when  it 
was  not  yet  too  late  for  the  traitor  to 
cleanse  his  fault.  Christ  still  stood 
near  at  hand  in  the  garb  of  service, 
stooping  to  wash  the  earth  stains  from 
His  disciples'  feet.  One  more  effort 
Christ  will  make.  At  the  supper  table 
He  quotes  the  words,  "  He  that  eateth 
My  bread  lifted  up  his  heel  against 
Me  "  (John  xiii.  18).  Later  still  more 
explicitly,   "  One  of  you  shall   betray 

620 


Me"  (John  xiii.  21).  Even  then  it 
was  not  too  late.  The  last  step  had 
not  been  taken  by  Judas.  But,  as 
with  a  man  sliding  down  a  steep  place, 
the  impetus  of  temptation  was  too 
strong.  He  takes  the  food  from  the 
hand  of  Christ.  With  treason  in  his 
heart,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  take  that 
pledge  of  affection  and  loyalty.  There 
is  a  treachery  in  the  doing  so;  the 
Nemesis  of  base  acts  is  further  baseness. 
"  After  the  sop  Satan  entered  into 
him "  (John  xiii.  27).  The  crisis  is 
passed  at  that  moment.  He  will  not 
turn  back  now.  "  That  thou  doest,  do 
quickly"  (John  xiii.  27).  "He  went 
out  straightway  ;  and  it  was  night." 
An  hour  later  his  treason  was  an 
accomplished  fact. 

IV.  The  catastrophe. — The  inward 
story  of  Judas'  life  is  a  story  of  help 
refused  and  warning  disregarded. — 
Bishop  W.  B.  Carpenter. 

Judas'  remorse. — Having  uttered 
these  words  of  anguish  to  the  chief 
priests  (ver.  4),  probably  as  they  led 
the  procession  on  the  way  back  from 
Herod's  court  to  Pilate's,  and  having 
suffered  the  coarse,  ungrateful,  cruel 
rebuff  that  drove  him  to  desperation, 
he,  with  hell  in  his  heart  and  the  price 
of  innocent  blood  in  his  hand,  rushed 
headlong  through  the  Court  of  the 
Gentiles,  the  Court  of  the  Women,  and 
up  the  fifteen  steps  where  the  Levites 
were  wont  to  sing  the  Songs  of  Degrees. 
There,  because  able  to  proceed  no 
farther,  he  stood  madly  at  the  Gate 
Nicanor — where  penitents  had  received, 
a  thousand  times,  those  words  of  for- 
giveness and  blessing  which  he  should 
never  hear,  and  where,  thirty-three 
years  before,  Mary  had  presented  the 
Holy  Child  whose  blood  he  had  be- 
trayed— and,  with  the  might  of  despair 
and  the  bitter  vengeance  of  a  lost 
man,  threw  the  thirty  accursed  coins 
over  the  Court  of  the  priests,  over  its 
altar  of  burnt  offering  and  its  brazen 
laver,  over  the  steps  of  the  priests ;  so 
that,  having  gone  hissing  through  the 
air,  they  rang  the  knell  of  doom  upon 
the  marble  fioor  of  the   Holy   Place. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


After  this  act  of  burning  insanity  he  the  evil  of  sin  is  discovered,  then  is  the 

rushed   down  the  valley   of    Hinnom,  naughtiness  of  every  inducement  unto 

climbed  its  slippery  slopes  on  yonder  it  discovered  also,  and  the  grief  is  more 

side,  and  on  the  summit  hanged  him-  than   any   gain    or   pleasure  inducing 

self— hanged  himself  probably  with  the  unto  it  can  counterbalance  ;  for  Judas 

girdle  in  which  he  had  carried  the  price  now  counteth  little  of  the  thirty  pieces 

of  blood  ;  but  the  girdle  that  could  not  of  silver,  bringeth  back  the  price,  and 

carry  the  price  of  betrayal  could  not  casteth  it  down  in  the  temple.     3.  Such 

bear  the  betrayer,  and  so  it  snapped,  as   sin   by  the   inducement   of   others 

letting  fall  its  burden  over  the  rocky  need   not   look  for   comfort  from  the 

steeps,  down,  down,  into  the  valley  of  enticers  of  them  unto  it,  but  must  bear 

Gehenna — "  bis    own     place." — David  the  guilt  of  it  alone.    4.  When  Justice 

Davies.  pursueth  the  sinner,  and  he  flieth  not 

to  God's  mercy  in  Christ,  there  needeth 
Conscience-stricken  Judas. — 1.  Though  no  other  judge,  or  witness,  but  his  own 
before  a  sin  be  committed  the  bait  and  conscience  only ;  it  is  sufficient  to  con- 
allurement  is  only  seen,  and  the  con-  vict,  condemn,  and  torture  him,  so  as  he 
science  blindfolded,  kept  captive  and  will  choose  to  strangle  himself  rather 
benumbed  ;  yet  after  sin  is  committed  than  endure  the  vexation  of  it. — David 
it  shall  be  wakened  at  last,  and  see  the  Dickson. 
ugliness  of  sin   discovered.     2.   When 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11—26. 

The  homage  of  power. — Jesus  is  now  standing  before  the  Roman  governor 
(ver.  11);  in  the  presence,  therefore,  of  the  representative  of  the  then  highest 
power  upon  earth.  To  what  conclusion  does  this  Imperial  delegate  come  about 
Him  ?  And  how  far  does  he  give  evidence  of  the  nature  of  his  thoughts  ?  A 
threefold  answer  seems  discoverable  in  the  passage  before  us.  Notwithstanding 
the  many  accusations  (ver.  12)  to  which  he  is  listening,  we  find  Pilate  first 
suspecting,  then  convinced  of,  and  finally  pi'oclaiming,  the  complete  innocency  of 
the  Accused. 

I.  Suspecting  the  truth. — First,  we  may  believe  that  the  appearance  of  the 
Saviour  Himself  had  not  a  little  effect  in  this  way.  One  of  the  accusations 
brought  against  the  Saviour — even  a  leading  one,  it  would  seem  (Luke  xxiii.  2 ; 
John  xix.  12,  15) — was  that  of  (constructively)  impairing  the  supreme  authority 
of  "  Caesar."  No  Roman  governor  could  think  lightly  of  such  an  accusation. 
No  Roman  emperor  made  more  of  it  than  the  Roman  emperor  of  that  day. 
Many  men  of  the  highest  rank  were  being  put  to  death  by  him  yearly  on  the 
mere  suspicion  of  such  a  charge  (see  Tacitus).  Naturally,  therefore,  when  Pilate 
heard  of  it  here,  he  would  look  with  special  closeness  of  attention  on  the  Man 
charged  with  such  guilt,  and  would  expect  to  find  something  at  least  in  Him  to 
correspond  with  so  very  lofty  an  aim.  There  should  be  something  Caesar-like — 
palpably — in  any  one  who  thought,  however  distantly,  of  being  in  rivalry  with  him. 
It  would  appear  from  the  story,  however,  that  Pilate  found  nothing  like  it  in  the 
appearance  of  Christ ;  no  marks  of  pride  ;  no  sign  of  ambition  ;  nothing,  in  fact,  to 
betoken  a  desire  to  be  great  upon  earth,  in  the  heavenly  meekness  of  that  sorrow- 
lined  face.  Hence  the  peculiar  and  marked  emphasis  of  the  question  he  asks 
(ver.  11),  "  Art  Thou  "—Thou,  being  such  as  Thou  art—"  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  " 
As  much  as  to  say,  "  Never  yet  did  I  see  any  one  with  less  of  earthly  royalty  in  his 
look."  The  Saviour's  demeanour,  in  the  next  place,  seems  to  have  confirmed  this 
idea.  How  utterly  unmoved  He  stands  by  the  accusations  He  hears  !  How  many 
these  are  !  How  silent  Himself !  Does  He  hear  them,  in  fact  (ver.  13)?  And,  if  so, 
why  is  it  that  He  takes  no  notice  of  them  whatever?   This  does  not  look  like  guilt,  or 

621 


CHAP,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.    MATTHEW. 


a  fear  of  the  consequences,  or  an  anxiety  to  escape  them  (see  John  xix.  10).  At  any 
rate,  it  is  clear  evidence  that  there  is  something  strange  indeed  in  this  case  (ver.  14). 
Lastly,  we  may  well  believe  that  there  was  something  in  the  demeanour  q/  the 
Saviour's  accusers  which  added  strength  to  this  thought.  Their  accusations  were 
such  as  could  easily  be  accounted  for  without  supposing  them  to  be  valid.  There 
was  that  about  their  reproaches  which  showed  how  highly  they  valued  the  praises 
of  men  (cf.  xxiii.  5-7 ;  Luke  xx.  45-7),  as  also  how  greatty  this  meek  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  had  interfered  with  them  in  this  matter.  Pilate  saw  in  this, 
therefore,  what  was  the  real  root  of  all  their  clamour  and  hate  (ver.  18; 
Mark  xv.  10),  and  so  was  struck,  most  probably,  rather  by  the  weakness  than  by 
the  strength  of  their  case.  "  Is  this  the  worst  that  even  such  consummate  *  envy ' 
can  lay  to  His  charge  ?  If  so,  there  cannot  be  much  in  Him  that  is  worthy  of 
death ! " 

II.  Ascertaining  the  truth. — Two  things  especially  seem  to  have  brought  this 
about.  One  was  connected  with  a  remarkable  message  which  came  to  him  at  that 
time.  During  the  previous  night,  or  early  that  morning,  his  wife  had  dreamed  about 
Christ.  The  details  are  not  told  us,  but  its  efi'ects  speak  for  themselves.  She 
has  been  so  scared  thereby  that  she  sends  her  husband  word  of  it,  even  while  seated 
in  court,  and  earnestly  entreats  him,  in  consequence,  to  beware  how  he  allows 
himself  to  deal  with  Jesus  as  other  than  *'  just"  (ver.  19).  A  somewhat  similar 
warning,  in  consequence  of  a  dream,  is  said  to  have  been  sent  to  Julius  Caesar  by 
his  wife  on  the  morning  of  his  death.  If  Pilate  was  such  a  believer  in  dreams 
and  omens  as  most  Romaus  were  in  his  day,  the  recollection  of  that  dream  would 
make  this  one  seem  to  him  a  message  from  Heaven  itself,  and  so  would  help  to 
make  him  believe  that  what  he  had  suspected  before  was  nothing  indeed  but  the 
truth.  Another  thing  telling  on  him  in  the  same  direction  was  the  behaviour  of 
the  *'  multitude  "  which,  by  this  time,  had  collected  together.  Some  time  previously 
he  had  thought  that  he  saw  in  their  presence  and  apparent  disposition  a  way  of 
settling  this  case.  With  this  idea  he  would  take  advantage  of  a  custom  they 
observed  at  that  *'  feast "  (ver.  15).  He  would  give  them  the  choice,  in  accord- 
ance with  that  custom,  between  this  Man  who  seemed  to  be  in  favour  with  them 
(though  not  with  the  priests)  and  another  man  who  was  then  in  prison  and 
notorious  for  his  crimes  (ver,  16;  John  xviii.  40).  The  result  turned  out  exactly 
contrary  to  what  he  had  expected  and  hoped.  *' Persuaded  "  by  the  "priests" 
(ver.  20),  the  "multitude  "  asked  the  release,  not  of  Jesus,  but  of  the  other. 
IsTot  only  so,  the  more  he  pleads  with  them  in  opposition  to  this  the  worse  they 
become.  They  ask  now,  not  only  that  Jesus  should  not  be  released,  but  that.  He 
should  die  the  death  of  the  cross.  And  they  ask  it  the  more,  the  more  he 
challenges  them  to  give  a  reason  for  so  doing.  And  this,  in  fact,  is,  so  far,  the 
end.     He  asks  them  to  say,  and  they  cannot  say,  "  what  evil  "  Jesus  "  hath  done." 

III.  Proclaiming  the  truth. — Finding  that  all  appeal  is  in  vain,  hearing 
nothing  further  in  the  way  of  testimony  or  evidence,  and  fearing  that  the  only 
result  of  further  effort  to  deliver  Him  would  be  a  "  tumult "  for  which  he  would 
have  to  answer  at  Home,  Pilate  contents  himself  with  openly  declaring  his  own 
thoughts  about  Christ.  This  he  does,  first,  in  the  most  deliberate  way — "taking 
water,"  and  having  it  brought  to  him  (as  we  may  infer)  for  this  end.  Next,  in 
a  most  public  way,  "before  the  multitude" — in  their  sight.  Further,  in  the 
most  significant  way,  viz.,  by  using  the  water  brought  him  for  washing  his  hands. 
Once  more,  in  the  most  explicit  way,  by  explaining  verbally  what  he  meant  by 
that  sign  (ver.  24).  And,  lastly,  in  a  way  which  the  answer  of  the  multitude 
(ver.  25)  showed  that  they  perfectly  understood.  Miserable,  in  short,  as  the 
effort  was  in  the  way  of  exonerating  himself,  it  was  trumpet-tongued  and  beyond 
capability  of  mistake  in  proclaiming  the  innocence  of  the  Saviour ! 

This  "  proclamation  "  was  specially  important : — 

622 


JTOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvil. 


1.  Because  of  the  character  of  the  man, — As  we  learn  from  Luke  xiii.  1  and 
other  sources,  he  was  by  no  means  unwilling  to  be  a  shedder  of  blood.  Few 
Roman  governors  were.  Pilate,  probably,  as  little  unwilling  as  any.  How 
striking,  therefore,  in  this  case,  to  see  him  fighting  against  it  so  long,  and  doing 
all  that  he  thought  he  could  do,  in  order  to  avoid  it  !  There  must  have  been 
something  in  his  eyes  peculiarly  dazzling  in  the  lustrous  innocence  of  this  Jesus. 
He  was  prepared  for  anything,  short  of  losing  his  life,  rather  than  treat  it  as 
guilt. 

2.  Because  of  the  nationality  and  rank  of  the  man. — This  Pilate  was  not  only  a 
Gentile,  he  was  a  representative  Gentile  as  well.  He  spoke  for  Osesar,  who  spoke  in 
turn  for  the  world.  The  whole,  in  short,  of  the  world's  non-Judaic  faith  may  be 
said  to  have  culminated  then  in  Tiberius.  This  fact,  therefore,  gives  to  the  pro- 
clamation in  question  a  kind  of  ''oecumenical"  ring;  the  heathen  world,  as  it 
were,  following  up  the  Jewish  world  in  virtual  vindication  of  Christ. 

3.  Because  of  the  exceedingly  critical  character  of  the  juncture. — This  final  vindi- 
cation is  uttered  at  the  very  moment  of  finally  consigning  Christ  to  the  cross. 
Also  by  the  very  same  lips.  The  very  same  power  which  says  He  is  to  die  also 
says  He  ought  not ;  and  that  in  the  very  same  breath.  Thus  at  once  acquitting 
Him  and  condemning  itself.  Thus  at  once,  also,  treating  Him  as  guilty  and  pro- 
nouncing Him  guiltless — the  very  marrow  of  the  gospel  of  Christ ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  12-14.  The  silence  of  Jesus  at  more  impressive  and  suggestive.      In 

the    bar    of    Pilate. — The    predictions  seeking   to   account  for  it,  we  would 

which  we  find  in  the  Old  Testament  in  observe  : — 

relation  to  the  Messiah  seem  to  have         I.    That   at   those   times  when  He 

been  all  fulfilled  ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  became  silent  it  was  not  necessary  to 

bring  them  and  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  speak. — After    Pilate    had    heard  all 

into  juxtaposition,  and  resist  the  con-  that  the  chief  priests  and  elders  had 

elusion   that    He    was    the    promised  to  say  against  Him,  he  felt  constrained 

Saviour.    It  was  predicted  that  toward  to  acknowledge  that  they  had  not  made 

the  close  of  His  beneficent  career.  He  good  a  solitary  charge.     He,  as  judge, 

would  not  so  much  as  open  His  mouth  declared  that  in  his  opinion  there  was 

in  certain  circumstances,  and  this  pre-  no  fault  in  Him,  and  with  this  view 

diction,  like  all  the  rest,  was  literally  Herod  coincided.     Had  they  substan- 

verified.     Before  the  Sanhedrin,  before  tiated  their  charges,  Jesus  might  have 

Herod,  before  Pilate,  He  "retired  into  spoken.      Since   no   tangible   proof   of 

the  great  empire  of  silence."      Before  political  guilt  was  adduced.  He  stood 

Pilate  He  was  not  absolutely  silent.    He  before  Pilate  with  sealed  lips ;  and  His 

appears   to   have    replied   to   most   of  silence  was  more  condemnatory  of  His 

Pilate's  queries,  and  to  have  given  him,  accusers  than  a  score  of  speeches  would 

in  the  capacity  of  judge,  all  the  infer-  have  been.    It  frequently  happens  that 

mation  that  was  really  necessary  to  a  silence  is  the  best  answer  that  can  be 

right  decision  in  the  case ;  and  the  fact  given. 

that  He  spoke  when  He  conceived  that         II.  That  it  would  have  served  no 

there   was  occasion   shows    that    His  practical  purpose  for  Christ  to  have 

silence  was  not  exactly  premeditated.  spoken. — Suppose  that  Jesus  had  with 

There  was  no  obstinacy  about  it.     In  the  breath  of  His  mouth  blown  away 

prospect  of  the  trial  He  did  not  rashly  the  accusations  brought  against  Him 

or  cunningly  resolve  that  He  would  not  by  His   enemies,  as   smoke   is   driven 

in  any  way  commit  Himself  by  speak-  away  by  the  wind,  would  Pilate  have 

ing.      His    silence    was    spontaneous,  acquitted  Him  and  not  have  delivered 

natural,  and  on  that  account  all  the  Him  to  the  Jews  ?     No.     He  had  not 

623 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


the  courage  to  set  Jesus  at  liberty,  and 
dare  the  Jews  to  lay  a  finger  on  Him. 
His  silence  did  not  make  against  Him, 
and  He  was  certain  that  it  would  not. 
It  may  be  asked,  Was  speech  not 
needed  for  His  vindication  in  the  eyes 
of  posterity  ?  No.  His  silence  notwith- 
standing, posterity  has  decided  that 
Jesus  was  all  that  He  professed  to  be ; 
and  this  will  become  more  and  more  its 
belief. 

III.  That  Jesus  came  into  the  world 
expressly  to  die. — In  the  light  of  this 
fact,  what  is  there  in  the  silence  of 
Christ  to  perplex  us  1  Nothing  what- 
ever. 

Lessons. — 1.  There  was  not  in  Jesus 
a  morbid  love  of  life.  2.  The  innocence 
of  Christ.  3.  In  Jesus  there  was  any 
amount  of  self-control. — G.  Cron. 

Ver.  19.  The  dream  of  Pilate's 
wife. — We  inquire  reverentially  : — 

I.  Why  the  dream  in  question  was 
sent. — Among  all  the  absurdities  that 
have  been  uttered  and  believed  about 
dreams,  the  following  things  seem  quite 
clear,  viz.,  that  we  cannot  order  our  own 
dreams ;  that  no  other  men  can  order 
them  for  us  ;  that  God  sometimes  does 
(or  has,  at  the  least)  ;  that  no  other 
beings  ever  have,  that  we  know  of, 
except  Him ;  and,  consequently,  that 
however  uninterpretable  and  unimpor- 
tant such  things  in  general  are,  those 
which  have  a  special  significance  and 
bearing  may  be  reasonably  traced  to 
God's  hands.  In  the  case  of  this 
dream,  moreover,  the  fact  of  its  relation 
by  the  Evangelist  is  an  additional 
argument  on  this  side.  And  if  so, 
then  the  dream,  in  reality,  was :  1.  A 
Divine  preaching  of  Christ  to  the  mind 
of  the  sleeper.  It  had  the  effect  of 
concentrating  her  waking  attention, 
not  only  on  Christ  in  His  innocence, 
but  on  Christ  in  His  death — that  same 
marvellous  combination  which  seems 
to  have  converted  the  penitent  thief. 
Had  she,  therefore,  thought  of  these 
things  as  he  did  ;  had  she  followed  up 
these  first  truths,  as  she  ought;  had 
she  inquired,  and  so  heard  of  the 
wonders  accompanying  His  crucifixion, 

624 


and   of   the   truth   and   glory   of   His 
resurrection;  who  can  exaggerate  the 
result  ?     Her  dream  placed  the  key  of 
heaven   in   her   hands ;  something    as 
was   done   for   Cornelius   by   his  own 
vision  and  that  of  Peter,  and  something 
as  was  done  for  Saul  by  the  vision  of 
Ananias.      2.    Another    merciful    ob- 
ject was  to  warn  another  sinner  of  the 
extreme  peril  of  his  position  at  that 
particular   time.      Pilate,    of  himself, 
could   know    next   to   nothing   of   the 
unparalleled  position  he  stood  in.     But 
to  warn  him  of  the  excessive  peril  of 
his   position  was  the  purport   of   the 
dream  and  message  of  his  wife.     May 
we  not  consider  that  dream,  then,  a 
final  warning  to  him  to  beware  ?     This 
would  be  quite  in  keeping  with  God's 
dealings.     Judas  had  received  such  a 
warning  from  Christ  (xxvi.  24)  and  had 
conveyed  one  to  the  priests  (xxvii.  5). 
So  did  Pilate  himself  afterwards  to  the 
Jews  at  large  (xxvii.  24).     And  if  so, 
how  afiecting  an  illustration  of  1  Tim. 
ii.  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9,  etc. ! 

II.  Why  the  dream  is  related. — 
Partly,  it  is  possible,  as  an  illustration 
of  God's  power,  mysteriously  control- 
ling even  those  innermost  thoughts 
which  are  so  uncontrollable  by  our- 
selves. Partly,  too,  by  way  of  illustra- 
tion of  God's  mercy,  and  as  opening 
out,  by  the  case  of  Pilate  and  Pilate's 
wife,  an  almost  boundless  prospect 
of  the  opportunities,  strivings,  and 
warnings  vouchsafed  to  our  race.  But 
neither  of  these  would  appear  to  be 
the  chief  purpose  of  the  history.  The 
prosecution  had  broken  down.  In 
such  a  case,  however,  "not  proven" 
is  not  enough.  God  would  have  the 
innocence  of  His  Son  beyond 
doubt.  Two  independent,  consistent 
witnesses  (as  required  by  the  law) 
"established"  this  great  point — the 
false  disciple  and  the  judge,  the  un- 
scrupulous and  unpopular  judge  who 
would  lose  nothing  and  gain  much 
(as  he  judged)  by  condemning,  and  the 
suspicious,  yet  intimate  companion  who 
would  certainly  have  detected  evil  if 
there  had  been  any  to  detect.  Thus 
far  the  testimony  of  man.     But  in  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


case  such  as  this,  virtually  tried  in  the 
presence  of  the  universe,  greater 
testimony  still  is  required.  This  we 
have,  therefore,  in  prophecy,  in  the 
subsequent  inspired  declarations  of 
Apostles,  in  voices  from  heaven  during 
life,  and  now,  at  last,  just  previous  to 
death,  in  this  mysterious  dream. 
Thus  strikingly,  thus  almost  dramatic- 
ally, at  the  very  crisis  of  the  Saviour's 
fate,  is  He  declared  without  sin.  The 
whole  subject  is  a  signal  evidence  of 
the  importance  attached  to  the  Atone- 
ment. The  perfect  innocence  of  the 
Saviour  is  an  essential  feature  in  that 
doctrine.  See  how  carefully,  how 
profoundly,  how  anxiously,  and  so  to 
speak,  reconditely,  the  point  is  esta- 
blished.— Mathematicus  in  "  Homilist." 

Ver.  21.  Rejecting  Christ. — One 
evening,  at  a  small  literary  gathering 
at  which  Carlyle  was  present,  a  lady, 
who  was  somewhat  noted  for  her 
"muslin  theology,"  was  bewailing 
the  wickedness  of  the  Jews  in 
not  receiving  Christ,  and  ended 
her  diatribe  against  them  by  express- 
ing her  regret  that  He  had  not 
appeared  in  our  own  time.  "  How 
delighted,"  said  she,  "  we  should  all  have 
been  to  throw  our  doors  open  to  Him, 
and  listen  to  His  Divine  precepts  ! 
Don't  you  think  so,  Mr.  Carlyle  ? " 
Thus  appealed  to,  Carlyle  said,  "No, 
madam,  I  don't.  I  think  that,  had 
He  come  very  fashionably  dressed, 
with  plenty  of  money,  and  preaching 
doctrines  palatable  to  the  higher 
orders,  I  might  have  had  the  honour 
of  receiving  from  you  a  card  of  invita- 
tion, on  the  back  of  which  would  be 
written,  *  To  meet  our  Saviour';  but 
if  He  had  come  uttering  His  sublime 
precepts,  and  denouncing  the  Phari- 
sees, and  associating  with  the  publicans 
and  lower  orders,  as  He  did,  you  would 
have  treated  Him  much  as  the  Jews 
did,  and  have  cried  out,  '  Take  Him  to 
Newgate,  and  hang  Him  ! '  " — Tools 
for  Teachers. 

Ver.     22.     Christ     before     Pilate — 
Filate  before  Christ, 


I.  Let  us  try  to  account  for  the 
hesitation  of  Pilate  to  give  up  the 
Lord,  and  then  for  his  final  yielding 
to  the  clamour  of  the  people. — Where- 
fore this  unwonted  squeamishness  of 
conscience  ?  It  was  the  result  of  a 
combination  of  particulars,  each  of 
which  had  a  special  force  of  its  own, 
and  the  aggregate  of  which  so  wrought 
on  his  mind  that  he  was  brought  there- 
by to  a  stand.  There  was  1.  The 
peculiar    character    of    the    prisoner. 

2.  The  singular  message  of  his  wife. 

3.  The  fatality  that  there  seemed 
about  the  case.  He  had  tried  to  roll 
it  over  on  Herod,  but  that  wily 
monarch  sent  the  prisoner  back  upon 
his  hands.  The  deeper  he  went  into 
the  case  he  discovered  only  the  more 
reason  for  resisting  the  importunity  of 
the  Jews,  and  however  he  looked  at  it, 
his  plain  duty  was  to  set  the  prisoner 
free.  Why,  then,  again  we  ask,  was 
his  perplexity  ?  The  answer  is 
suggested  by  the  taunt  of  the  Jews, 
"  If  thou  let  this  man  go,  thou  art  not 
Caesar's  friend."  He  foresaw  that  if 
he  resisted  the  will  of  the  rulers,  he 
would  make  them  his  enemies,  and  so 
provoke  them  to  complain  of  him  to 
the  emperor,  who  would  then  institute 
an  inquiry  into  his  administration  of 
his  of&ce ;  and  that  he  was  not  prepared 
to  face.  His  past  misdeeds  had  put 
him  virtually  into  the  power  of  those 
who  were  now  so  eager  for  the  con- 
demnation of  the  Christ.  His  guilty 
conscience  made  him  a  coward  at  the 
very  time  when  most  of  all  he  wanted 
to  be  brave. 

II.  The  question  of  the  text  is  pre- 
eminently the  question  of  the  present 
age. 

III.  What  is  true  of  the  age  is  true 
also  of  every  individual  to  whom  the 
gospel  is  proclaimed. — W.  M.  Tayloi\ 
D.D. 

Christ  still  on  His  trial. — Jesus 
Christ  is  on  His  trial  again  before  the 
research  and  culture  of  the  nineteenth 
century.  The  controversies  which 
once  raged  round  His  miracles  have 
now  gathered  about  His  Person.     For 

ss  625 


CHAP,  xxvii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


acute  thinkers  saw  it  was  useless  to 
deny  the  supernatural,  so  long  as 
Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  great  central 
miracle  in  history,  passed  unchallenged. 
And  now,  in  this  age,  thoughtful  man 
must,  sooner  or  later,  ask  himself  the 
question  which  Pilate  put  to  the  Jews : 
"  What  shall  I  do,  then  1 "  etc.  And 
from  the  motley  crowd  of  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  of  friends  or  foes,  grouped 
round  that  calm,  majestic  Figure,  come 
the  three  chief  answers  that  the 
human  heart  can  give. 

I.  The  answer  of  rejection. — The 
fickle  crowd  cried,  "  Let  Him  be 
crucified."  It  was  the  cry  of  pre- 
judice, of  thoughtlessness,  of  conscious 
guilt.  That  cry  finds  an  echo  to  day. 
It  is  couched  in  less  offensive  language. 
It  is  clothed  in  the  garb  of  poetry  and 
philosophy,  of  the  highest  culture ;  the 
form  is  changed,  the  spirit  is  unaltered. 
It  is  still  the  answer  of  rejection. 

II.  From  Pilate  comes  the  answer 
of  indifference. — He  represented  the 
Roman  society  of  his  age,  which  had 
lost  faith  in  religion  and  morality,  and 
yet  was  troubled  by  dreams ;  which 
was  at  once  sceptical  and  superstitious  ; 
whose  creed  had  been  summed  up  by 
one  of  its  own  writers  in  a  notable 
saying  :  "  There  is  no  certainty  save 
that  there  is  nothing  certain,  and 
there  is  nothing  more  wretched  or 
more  proud  than  man  " — a  nerveless, 
hopeless,  sorrowful  creed,  the  parent 
of  apathy,  cynicism,  and  unrest.  Pilate 
is  a  picture  of  that  vain  and  shallow 
indifference  which  is  too  weak  to  believe 
in  the  truth,  and  yet  too  fearful  to 
deny  it  altogether. 

III.  The  answer  of  faith. — There 
were  some  in  that  crowd  insignificant 
in  number,  in  wealth,  in  influence  — 
often,  alas  !  untrue  to  their  own  convic- 
tions— who  could  give  a  very  different 
answer  to  Pilate's  question.  One  of 
thein  the  previous  night  had  acted  as 
the  spokesman  of  his  brethren,  when 
he  said,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee 
to  prison  and  to  death."  They  were 
brave  words,  the  language  of  a  faith- 
ful and  loving  heart — forgotten  and 
broken  at  the  first  blush  of  trial,  but 

62§ 


nobly  fulfilled  in  after  years  ;  and  they 
are  the  answer  of  faith. — F,  J.  Cha- 
vasse,  M.A. 

Pilate's  question. — I.  In  this  day 
Jesus  is  on  His  trial,  and  it  has 
reached  the  phase  marked  by  the 
text.  The  question  to-day  is,  "  But 
if  we  accept  this  deliverance  of 
science  or  that  dictum  of  criticism, 
what  shall  we  do,  then,  with  Jesus 
which  is  called  Christ  1  How  shall  we 
judge  Him  ? "  All  great  questions 
pass  through,  say,  four  stages,  viz., 
neglect,  opposition,  attention,  decision. 
The  question  of  the  Christ  has  in  these 
days  come  to  the  last  stage  when  it 
must  be  decided. 

II.  Some  of  the  present  forms  of  the 
phase  of  the  trial  of  Jesus. — Take  two 
— agnostic  secularism  and  evolution. 

III.  The  gravity  of  the  present 
phase  of  the  trial  of  Jesus. — To 
Pilate's  question  the  answer  came,  "Let 
Him  be  crucified."  The  gravity  lies 
here :  the  trial  of  Jesus  in  this  day 
has  developed  to  this  crisis ;  we  must 
either  accept  Him  as  the  Christ,  or 
deliver  Him  to  be  crucified.  No  middle 
course  possible. — A,  Goodrich^  D.D. 

Ver.  24.  Pilate. — The  power  of  con- 
science in  Pilate  was  strong  enough  to 
protest,  but  it  was  not  strong  enough 
to  resist. 

I.  We  are  compelled  to  look  into  the 
man  himself  for  the  explanation  of  his 
conduct. — 1.  He  had,  by  his  injustice 
and  selfishness  in  the  administration  of 
his  province,  put  himself  already  at  the 
mercy  of  the  Jews.  2.  He  had  no  sure 
moral  standard  for  the  regulation  of 
his  conduct.  3.  He  held  low  views  of 
responsibility.  Was  there  ever  such  a 
display  of  silliness  as  this  washing  of 
his  hands  before  the  people  ? 

II.  Practicallessons. — 1.  Be  on  your 
guard  against  fettering  yourself  for  the 
future  by  the  conduct  of  the  present. 

2.  Remember  there  is  a  higher  rule  of 
life     than     mere    selfish    expediency. 

3.  Learn  that  sin  is  a  voluntary  thing. 

4.  Do  not  forget  that  it  is   not   the 
washing  of   hands  in  water^  but  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MATTHEW,   chap,  xxvii. 


cleansing  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ  our  own  because  somebody  else  is  im- 

alone,  that  can  take  away  guilt. — W.  plicated.    This  should  be  borne  in  mind 

M.  Taylor,  D.D.  when  positions  are  offered  us  respecting 

which    we    have    conscientious    mis- 

Pilate    disclaiming    respoTisihility. —  givings. 

^'See  ye  to  it."     Pilate  forgot  that  in  II.  That  guilt  knowingly  contracted 

things   moral   men   cannot  clear  one  admits  of  no  honourable  excuse. 

another  by  a  mere  act  of  will.     Still  III.  That  guilt  may  be  contracted 

less  can  they,  in  their  individual  actions,  by  not  preventing  evil,  as  well  as  by 

be  like  the  rowers  in  our  British  waters,  committing  it. 

who  look  one  way  and  go  another. —  IV.  That  guilt,  however  contracted, 

J.  Morison,  D.D.  cannot  be  removed  by  any  mere  form 

or    ceremony. — "  Pilate    washed     his 

Sinning  in  the  light  of  the  clearest  hands,"  etc.     It  was  customary  among 

evidence.  —  Pilate's     conduct     plainly  the  Greeks,  Romans,  and  Hebrews,  to 

shows  that  it  is  possible  to  sin  against  wash   their   hands   in   token  of   their 

the    conviction    of     our     own    mind,  innocency    from    any   imputed    guilt. 

Learn  : —  But  no  ceremony  can  of  itself  cleanse 

I.  That  guilt  may  be    contracted  away  our  guilt.    "  The'blood  of  Jesus 

through  others. — Guilt  is  none  the  less  Christ,"  etc. — A.  Hilittch. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  27—34. 

Via  crucis. — In  verse  26  of  this  chapter  we  are  told  of  our  Saviour's  being 
handed  over  to  the  Roman  soldiery,  for  the  purpose  of  crucifixion.  In  verse  35, 
and  what  immediately  follows,  we  have  the  crucifixion  itself.  In  these  interven- 
ing verses  we  are,  therefore,  shown  Jesus  on  His  way  to  the  cross,  and,  in  that 
connection,  are  asked  to  observe,  on  the  one  hand,  how  much  He  had  to  endure 
just  previously  to  His  death ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  how  far  He  was  affected 
thereby. 

I.  How  much  He  had  to  endure. — Much,  obviously,  in  the  first  place,  in  the 
way  of  acute  bodily  pain.  If  the  ''scourging  "  then  inflicted  (ver.  26)  by  order 
of  Pilate,  was  at  all  like  what  was  usual  in  such  cases — it  must  have  been  a 
most  terrible  thing.  Terrible,  because  of  the  instrument  used — a  thing  of  leather 
thongs,  armed  with  many  points  of  cruel  metal  or  bone.  Terrible,  because  of  the 
manner  of  infliction,  viz.,  straight  down  on  the  unprotected  frame  of  the  victim, 
as  he  stood  quivering  and  naked- shouldered,  with  his  hands  fastened  to  a  pillar 
in  front.  Terrible,  because  there  was  no  merciful  limit,  as  in  the  law  of  Moses, 
to  the  number  of  strokes.  If  one  could  describe,  therefore,  one  would  not  like  to 
describe,  the  amount  and  depth  of  laceration  produced,  and  the  consequently 
increasing  agony  caused  by  each  successive  descent  of  those  thongs.  We  must 
simply  remember,  on  this  point,  that  what  we  can  thus  hardly  bear  to  think  of, 
the  Master  had  to  endure,  and  that  the  living  body  of  the  man,  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
was  actually  put  to  the  torture  described.  Secondly,  there  must  have  been,  at 
least,  as  much  suffering  of  a  mental  description.  These  brutal  legionaries 
evidently  took  no  little  delight  in  their  task.  To  them  it  was  a  kind  of  sport,  in 
which  the  whole  cohort  must  join  (ver.  27).  First,  therefore,  they  deprive  their 
unresisting  Prisoner  of  His  usual  outermost  garment,  and  then  invest  Him,  in 
bitter  mockery,  with  a  scarlet  one  in  its  stead  (ver.  28).  In  the  same  spirit, 
they  either  weave  together  a  crown  of  thorns  (ver.  29),  or  take  one  already 
woven  (John  xix.  5),  and  thrust  it  on  to  His  head.  After  this,  they  place  in  His 
hand  a  feeble  sceptre  of  **  reed  "  (ver.  29),  and  offer  Him,  in  contempt,  the  out- 
ward homage  of  body  and  lip — "  bowing  the  knee  and  saying  to  Him,  Hail, 
King  of  the  Jews  !  "     VVhat  a  pleasure  it  is — what  a  safe  pleasure — to  mock 

627 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


that  silent  Man  thus  !  Who  ever  saw  such  a  King — such  a  sceptre — before  ? 
Soon,  however,  even  these  gross  insults  begin  to  weary  upon  them ;  probably 
because,  in  this  instance,  they  are  found  to  fail  of  their  mark.  Other,  therefore, 
and  even  grosser  outrages  are  resorted  to  next.  Some  present  even  go  so  far  as 
to  "  spit "  on  that  Holy  One's  face.  Others,  again,  with  like  wantonness  of  insult, 
"  smite  Him  on  the  head  "  with  the  "  reed  "  (ver.  30).  In  every  way  He  is 
despised  and  rejected  by  these  hangman-like  souls.  Nothing  do  they  shrink  from 
which  seems  to  them  fitted  to  heap  indignity  on  His  head. 

II.  How  far  the  Saviour  was  affected  thereby. — In  one  way.  He  was  so 
overv^helminghj ,  viz.,  as  to  His  bodily  strength.  Very  affecting  is  the  evidence 
which  is  supplied  us  of  this.  It  is  said  to  have  been  the  ordinary  rule,  in  cases 
of  crucifixion,  that  the  instrument  of  crucifixion  should  be  carried  by  the  victim 
who  was  about  to  suffer  thereon.  It  was  part  of  such  a  man's  punishment  in 
this  way  to  carry  his  punishment  with  him.  We  find,  accordingly,  in  one 
account  (John  xix.  17)  that  this  method  of  procedure  was  attempted  at  first  with 
our  Lord.  But  we  also  find,  from  other  accounts  (ver.  32 ;  Mark  xv.  21  ; 
Luke  xxiii.  26),  that  it  was  found  impossible  to  go  on  with  it.  Another  man's 
strength,  therefore,  had  to  be  "  impressed  "  to  carry  the  cross  of  the  Saviour. 
Evidently  this  was  because  His  own  strength  was  found  unequal  now  to  the  task. 
We  say  this,  on  the  one  hand,  because  of  the  well-known  utter  impossibility  of 
resisting  the  strength  of  utter  bodily  weakness.  The  most  iron  will,  the  hardest 
heart,  has  to  submit  to  its  strength.  And  we  say  it,*  on  the  other  hand,  because 
we  believe  that  the  men  concerned  in  this  instance  would  have  given  way  to 
nothing  less  than  such  irresistible  strength.  Evidently  they  see  that  Jesus  cannot 
carry  His  cross.  Evidently  we  see,  therefore,  how  His  previous  sufferings  have 
told  on  His  frame.  Though  He  has  never  complained  of  them,  never  resented 
them,  never  deprecated  them  for  a  moment,  they  have  succeeded  in  penetrating 
to  the  very  spring  of  His  bodily  life.  So  far  as  that  is  concerned,  in  fact,  we 
may  almost  say  of  Him  that  He  is  already  half  dead.  On  the  other  hand,  those 
sufferings,  so  far  as  His  will  is  concerned,  have  not  told  on  Him  at  all.  Very 
significant  and  marked,  in  this  connection,  is  the  contrast  we  find  here.  Roman 
custom  appears  to  have  allowed  one  mitigation  only  in  regard  to  the  torture  of 
crucifixion.  The  man  about  to  die  by  it  was  allowed  to  partake  of  a  mixture 
which  was  believed  to  have  the  power  of  making  its  torture  more  easy  to  bear. 
When  those  who  brought  Jesus  to  the  place  of  crucifixion  found  themselves  there, 
some  among  them  offered  Him  a  "  cup  "  of  this  kind  (vers.  33,  34).  But  such 
an  offer  is  not  one  which  He  will  allow  Himself  to  accept.  While  He,  therefore, 
so  far  respects  it  as  to  *'  taste  "  the  mixture  in  question — and  so,  perhaps,  make 
sure  of  its  nature — He  will  not  avail  Himself  of  its  help.  The  distinction 
seems  plain.  In  that  other  matter,  where  He  was  called  upon  to  make  use  of  His 
strength,  having  no  strength  to  make  use  of.  He  submitted  to  be  helped.  In 
this  case,  where  He  only  has  to  endure,  He  refuses  help,  because  He  is  able  to  do 
what  is  asked.  The  meaning,  also,  seems  plain.  Nothing  shall  be  done  by  Him 
to  diminish  the  bitterness  of  what  He  has  to  go  through.  On  this  point  His 
will  is  as  strong  as  though  He  had  not  suffered  at  all ! 

How  admirable,  therefore,  and  how  affecting,  also,  is  the  picture  before  us  ! 
So  much  so  in  both  ways,  that  one  can  hardly  determine  in  which  way  the  most ! 
Perhaps,  however,  the  story  is  most  affecting  when  we  look  back  at  it  from  this 
point.  For  then  we  see,  as  we  have  said,  how  much  the  Saviour's  previous 
sufferings  must  have  told  on  His  strength,  and  what  a  long  and  wearying  fever 
of  torture  He  must  have  already  gone  through.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is, 
perhaps,  most  to  admire  here  when  we  look  forward  from  this  point.  Much  of 
His  previous  suffering,  if  we  may  not  say  most,  was  in  the  way  of  anticipation. 
The   worst  of  all,  however,  in  that  way  remains  still  to  be  faced ;  and  faced, 

628 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


moreover,  in  that  extreme  bodily  weakness  which  has  Him  now  in  its  grasp.  Yet 
He  neither  shrinks  from  it  now,  nor  allows  it  to  be  mitigated  in  any  degree. 
The  less  He  is  physically  able,  the  more  He  is  morally  determined,  to  encounter 
it  all.  Never,  it  is  said,  was  there  any  sorrow  like  that  coming  then  upon  Him  ! 
Never  any  human  being  at  once  less  fit,  and  more  ready,  to  face  it !  Is  there 
anything  in  the  way  of  fortitude  to  go  beyond  this  ? 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  29.  The  crown  of  thorns. — Re- 
flect on  : — 

I.  The  fact. — 1.  He  was  and  is  a 
King.  2.  His  Kingship  was  attained 
through  sorrow.  3.  His  reign  was 
begun  in  sorrow. 

II.  The  explanation. — This  may  be 
reached  in  some  degree  by  observing 
three  things  : — 

1.  The  nature  of  Christ's  sorrow. — 
(1)  In  His  Divine  nature  He  was  holy, 
and  He  came  into  a  world  of  sin.  (2) 
In  His  human  nature  He  was  one  with 
His  fellow-men  without  sharing  their 
love  of  sin  and  bluntness  of  conscience. 
He  bore  the  world's  sin,  and  it  broke 
His  heart. 

2.  The  spirit  in  which  Christ  bore 
sorrow. — His  suffering  was  a  supreme 
act  of  sacrifice.  In  it  He  offered 
Himself  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  14). 

3.  The  purpose  of  Christ's  sorrow. — 
He  suffered  from  sin  that  He  might 
destroy  sin. 

Practical  lessons. — 1.  Eepentance. 
2.  Grateful  reverence.  3.  Submission. 
— W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A. 

The  mockery  of  Christ. — The  Jews 
mocked  Christ's  offices. 

I.  His  prophetical  office. — ''Prophesy 
who  smote  Thee." 

II.  His  priestly  office. — "  He  saved 
others,"  etc. 

III.  His  kingly  office. — *'  Hail,  King 
of  the  Jews." — Riclmrd  Ward. 

Ver.  32.  The  cross  enforced  or  chosen. 
— Here  we  have  Simon  and  Christ : 
one  compelled  to  bear  the  cross,  the 
other  choosing  to  bear  it.  And  I  want 
you  to  notice  that  whilst  it  is  probable 
there  is  some  cross  or  other  which  every 
one  of  us  is  compelled  to  carry,  there 


is  a  cross  which  we  may  choose  to 
carry;  and  there  are  a  few  simple 
lessons  "which  may  be  learnt  from  the 
contrast. 

I.  There  is  always  something  acci- 
dental about  the  cross  which  one  is 
compelled  to  carry. — We  name  one  or 
two  of  these  crosses,  and  we  find  they 
bring  to  view  the  mere  accidents  of 
life. 

1.  Sickness. 

2.  A  hsence  of  success  in  the  work  of 
life,  or  in  some  special  work  which  has 
been  undertaken. 

3.  The  powers  of  their  life  are  felt  hy 
some  to  he  so  limited^  that  it  is  the  very 
smallness  of  faculty  which  seems  to  be 
a  cross,  and  a  great  cross. 

4.  How  many  men  are  not  content 
with  the  position  they  occupy  ! 

II.  When  we  have  now  to  speak  of 
the  cross  which  may  be  chosen,  we  are 
coming  to  the  life  indeed,  getting  below 
the  mere  surface  of  things.  We  may 
see  three  principles,  learning  from  the 
life  of  our  Saviour,  in  such  a  cross. 

1 .  It  is  one  chosen  from  love  to  some 
others  than  ourselves. 

2.  It  is  home  in  quiet  submission  to 
the  will  of  the  Father. 

3.  It  spinngs  froTYi  hatred  of  sin  and 
soQ^row  for  sin. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sometimes  the  cross 
which  is  not  compelled  to  be  borne 
may  be  put  down.  There  is  no  merit 
in  bearing  a  cross,  so  far  as  the  mere 
bearing  is  concerned.  2.  The  cross, 
which  we  are  really  compelled  to  carry 
we  may  choose  to  carry.  3.  The  cross 
goes  with  the  bearing  of  it.  We 
choose  it,  would  rather  not  have  it 
away,  and  it  gradually  ceases  to  be 
a  cross.  The  cross  of  Christ  becomes. 
His  throne. — T,  Gasqimne,  B.A, 

629 


CttAP.  xXVii.    ffOMlLETiC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—Verses  35—44. 

On  the  cross, — After  a  long  approach  to  the  cross,  we  stand,  in  this  passage, 
as  it  were,  at  its  foot.  What  is  the  real  nature — what  was  the  supposed  nature 
— of  the  Sight  we  see  there  1 

I.  Its  true  nature  and  force. — On  the  one  side,  this  is  almost  too  plain.  The 
cross  itself,  for  example,  tells  of  nothing  but  shame.  It  was  the  death  of 
the  outlaw,  the  villain,  the  slave.  No  Roman  citizen,  do  what  he  might, 
could  be  put  to  death  in  that  way.  Every  one  recognised  it  as  involving 
a  "  curse"  (Gal.  iii.  13).  What  was  seen  in  front  of  the  cross  also  testified  the 
same  thing.  The  garments  belonging  to  a  crucified  man  were  the  usual 
perquisites  of  those  who  put  him  to  death.  This  mark  of  shame  also  was  not 
omitted  in  the  case  of  our  Lord.  As  prophecy  had  noted  of  Him  beforehand  in 
this  particular  as  in  so  many  others,  so  it  was  done  (ver.  35).  Nor  was  there 
wanting  testimony  of  the  same  kind  on  each  side  of  His  cross.  On  either  side 
of  Him  there  hung  those  who  were  known  to  be  guilty  of  crime  (ver.  38)  ;  and 
guilty  of  such  crime,  moreover,  as  made  them  fully  worthy  even  of  that  infamous 
death  (Luke  xxiii.  41).  So  plain  was  it  so  far  that  He  was  being  treated  then 
as  one  of  the  worst  of  mankind.  On  the  other  side,  however,  there  was  that  in  this 
sight  which  was  correspondingly  dark  and  occult.  What  was  the  meaning,  e.g.,  of 
that  conspicuous  "  title  "  which  stood  over  His  head  1  The  usual  purport  of  such 
inscriptions  was  an  affirmation  of  guilt.  They  set  forth  in  plain  language  the 
particular  enormity  for  which  the  culprit  beneath  them  had  been  condemned  to 
that  death.  In  this  case,  however,  there  was  in  reality  (ver.  37)  no  "  accusa- 
tion" at  all.  The  chief  priests,  we  are  told  (John  xix.  21),  had  noted  this  with 
no  little  concern.  They  had  even  besought  Pilate  in  consequence — but  besought 
him  in  vain — to  have  that  "  title  "  changed  in  some  way  (ibid.,  ver  22).  So  signi- 
ficant did  this  peculiarity  seem  as  well  in  his  eyes  as  in  theirs.  It  was  simply 
repeating  what  he  had  said  all  along  (vers.  23,  24).  That  is  why  he  kept  to  it 
still.  Nor  does  it  seem  to  have  been  less  important,  it  is  to  be  noticed  next,  in 
the  eyes  of  all  who  tell  us  the  tale.  The  precise  words  objected  to  and  yet 
retained,  are  put  down  as  these :  "  This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews."  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  all  the  four  Evangelists,  comparatively  brief  as  all  their 
accounts  are,  tell  us  of  this  title.  It  is  as  worthy  of  note  that  no  two  of  them 
do  so  in  quite  the  same  words.  It  is  more  worthy  of  note  that,  notwithstanding 
these  obvious  dissimilarities  between  them,  they  all  agree  in  comprising  in  their 
descriptions  of  the  title,  the  above-specified  words.  In  all  these  ways,  therefore, 
we  are  pointed  to  them  as  specially  worthy  of  note.  And  we  can  see,  also,  for 
ourselves,  that  they  are  so  in  a  kind  of  mysterious  way,  when  we  compare  them 
with  those  other  plain  points  which  we  noted  before.  Taken  in  combination  with 
these,  how  surprising  indeed  is  the  language  spoken  by  this  virtual  acquittal  of 
Christ  !  How  extraordinary  and  perplexing  the  announcement  it  makes  !  An 
acknowledged  King  numbered  with  malefactors  !  Perfect  innocence  dying  as 
guilt  !     God's  Holy  One  in  the  position  of  the  worst  of  mankind  ! 

II.  Its  supposed  nature,  as  seen  at  the  time. — What  was  thought  of  it,  in  the 
first  place,  hy  the  ordinary  observer  2  Such  would  be  those  mere  "passers-by" 
of  whom  we  read  in  verse  39 — men  who  had  taken  no  special  part  in  bringing 
about  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus,  but  had  heard  something  of  the  particulars  of  the 
case  from  common  report,  and  had  connected  these  with  what  they  now  saw.  To 
them  the  contrast  would  be  so  violent  as  to  be  even  a  matter  of  jest  (see  ver.  40). 
That  is  all  that  they  would  see  in  that  sight ;  a  pretentious  career,  brought 
to  an  ignominious — not  to  say  a  ridiculous — end.  Not  unlike  this  were  the 
thoughts  of  those  who  were  most  accountable  for  that  sight.  To  them  what  they 
saw  was  only  convincing  proof  of  what  they  bad  all  along  said.     A  complete 

630 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvir. 


answer,  e.g.,  to  all  the  miracles  which  were  said  to  have  been  wrought  by  His 
power.  Even  if  such  things  were  true,  they  were  fully  disposed  of  as  proofs  of 
His  mission  by  this  total  absence  of  miraculous  power  at  a  time  like  the  present, 
which  clearly  called  for  it  most.  So  also  of  His  recent  pretension  (ch.  xxi.,  etc.) 
to  be  King  of  the  Jews.  That  was  equally  disposed  of  by  His  present  inability 
to  come  down  from  the  cross.  And  so,  finally,  even  of  the  very  piety  that  had 
been  heard  in  His  words.  Tf  that  were  a  real  thing,  why  did  God  now  let  Him 
remain  on  that  cross  (see  vers.  42,  43)  ?  All  that  they  saw,  in  short,  was,  in 
their  judgment,  simply  condemnation  of  Plim  !  And  even  those,  lastly,  who 
were  suffering  with  Him  saw  nothing  more  in  that  sight ;  nothing  more,  at 
first,  although  one  of  the  two  saw  much  more  indeed  in  the  end  (Luke  xxiii. 
39-43).  But,  for  the  time  present,  in  the  eyes  of  both  of  them,  there  was 
nothing  but  despair  in  that  "  sight."  Even  these  miscreants  only  saw  in  it 
evidence  that  He  was  as  bad  as  themselves  !  Did  they  not  imply,  indeed,  by 
the  "  reproaches "  they  '*  cast  on  Him,"  that  He  was  even  worse  than 
themselves  ] 

The  story  furnishes  us  with  illustrations  : — 

1.  Of  the  utter  blindness  of  sin. — Two  vivid  truths,  as  we  have  seen,  were 
inscribed  on  that  cross  :  innocence,  on  the  one  hand  ;  guilt,  on  the  other.  All 
the  eyes  of  all  the  sinners  who  gazed  on  it,  saw  only  the  latter.  The  light  of  the 
former  was  but  darkness  to  them. 

2.  Of  the  partial  blindness,  even  of  faith. — How  many  Christians  there  are  who 
do  not  see  to  this  day  the  full  "  guilt  "  of  the  cross  !  The  guilt  implied  in  the 
fact  that  Christ '  ever  came  to  that  cross  !  And  that,  being  there,  He  was 
allowed  to  remain  there,  both  by  God  and  Himself  ?  Why  else  was  it  that  He 
did  not  reply  to  His  enemies  by  coming  down  from  the  cross  1  Surely  it  was 
sin,  though  not  His  own  sin,  which  kept  Him  up  there ! 

HOMILIES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  35.   Chrises  sufferings  unique. —  least  motion  produced  the  most  painful 

The  unique  character  of  Christ's  suffer-  sensation  all  over  the  body,  but  especial - 

ings  lies — 1 .  In  the  contrast  between  His  ly  on  the  lacerated  back  and  the  pierced 

heavenly  healthiness  and  sensibility  and  members.  2.  The  nails  caused  constantly 

this  hellish  torture.    2.  In  the  contrast  increasing  pain  on  the  most  sensitive 

between  His  holiness,  innocence,   phil-  parts  of  the  hands  and  feet.     3.  In- 

anthropy  and  Divine  dignity,  and  this  flammation    set    in    at    the    pierced 

experiencing  of   human  contempt,  re-  members  and  wherever  the  circulation 

jection,  and  of  apparent  abandonment  of   the   blood   was   obstructed   by  the 

by  God.    Above  all,  3.  In  His  sympathy  violent   tension  of   the  body,   and  in- 

with   humanity,    which    changes    this  creased  the  agony  and  an  intolerable 

judgment  to  which  the  world  was  sur-  thirst.      4.  The  blood   rushed   to  the 

rendered  into  His  own,  and  so  trans-  head   and   produced  the  most  violent 

forms  it  into  a  vicarious  suffering. —  headache.     5.  The  blood  in  the  lungs 

J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.  accumulated,  pressing  the  heart,  swell- 
ing all  the  veins,  and  caused  nameless 

Crucifixion. — Dr.    Christian    F.    G.  anguish.     Loss  of   blood  through  the 

Richter,    a    pious    physician    of    the  open    wounds    would    have    shortened 

Orphan    House   in    Halle,    who    died  the  pain;    but  the  blood  clotted  and 

in    1711,  thus   describes   the   physical  ceased  flowing.      Death   generally  set 

sufferings  of  the  crucifixion:     1.    On  in    slowly,    the    muscles,    veins,    and 

account    of    the    unnatural    and   im-  nerves    gradually   growing    stiff",   and 

movable    position    of    the    body    and  the  vital  powers  shrinking   from  ex- 

the  violent  extension  of  the  arms,  the  haustion. 


CHAP.  XXVII.    BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


Gambling. — Look  upon  the  picture 
presented  in  this  verse,  and  endeavour 
to  realise  its  frightful  significance.  There 
is  nothing  that  can  subdue  the  passion 
of  the  hardened  gambler.  Never, 
perhaps,  did  the  hideousness  of  the 
gambling  mania  receive  a  more  tragic 
illustration.  We  are  apt  to  think  that 
the  more  frantic  forms  of  gambling  are 
past  incidents  in  the  world's  history. 
Whenever  we  wish  to  glorify  the  nine- 
teenth century  we  choose  the  eighteenth 
as  a  convenient  preface.  The  picture 
of  gambling  in  the  eighteenth  century 
is  as  bad  as  it  is  possible  to  conceive. 
It  was  the  century  in  which  Charles 
James  Fox  ruined  himself  with  gambling 
debts,  the  century  in  which  family  after 
family  with  historic  names  were  dis- 
honoured, broken  up,  destroyed,  by 
gambling  follies.  Gambling,  no  doubt, 
at  the  present  day  is  more  decorously 
conducted,  but  it  is  even  more  uni- 
versally practised  now  than  in  the 
eighteenth  century.  But  what  is 
gambling?  Here  is  the  definition  of 
it  which  is  given  us  by  the  first  philo- 
sopher of  our  time ;  and  you  who  do  not 
respect  the  Bible  will  at  least  respect, 
perhaps,  the  intellectual  thoughts  of 
Herbert  Spencer.  "  Gambling  is  a  kind 
of  action  by  which  pleasure  is  obtained 
at  the  cost  of  pain  to  another.  It 
afibrds  no  equivalent  to  the  general 
good ;  the  happiness  of  the  winner 
implies  the  misery  of  the  loser."  The 
desire  to  possess  money  is  a  natural 
and  not  necessarily  a  pernicious  desire. 
But  two  things  must  be  remembered : 
first,  to  get  money  by  honourable 
means ;  and  second,  that  any  possession 
of  money  which  does  not  contribute  to 
the  common  social  good  is  infamous 
and  evil.  This  is  the  indictment  that 
I  would  bring  against  gambling  : — 

I.  It  renders  men  morally  callous. — 
hardens  them  as  no  other  vice  does ; 

it  shuts  their  eyes  to  almost  all  the 
things  that  are  beautiful  in  life;  it 
fills  them  with  a  frantic  passion  for 
gain. 

II.  It  destroys  the  very  radical 
principles  of  honour  and  honesty. — 
There  is  a  form  of  business — if  it  may 

632 


be  called  by  that  honoured  name — on 
the  Stock  Exchange,  which  is  nothing 
but  gambling. 

III.  It  excites  the  fatal  passion  of 
cupidity. 

Conclusion. — To  get  money  without 
work  is  always  a  perilous  thing.  You 
see  it  in  the  spendthrift  who  inherits 
money  from  a  penurious  father,  and 
who  gets  rid  of  it  with  all  the  rapidity 
he  can.  There  is  a  proverb  in  Lancashire 
that  'Trom  shirt-sleeves  to  shirt-sleeves 
is  only  three  generations,"  and  it  is  a 
proverb  which  applies  to  many  places 
besides  Lancashire.  But  it  is  far 
worse  to  get  money  by  gambling.  All 
sense  of  pleasure  or  value  in  the  posses- 
sion of  money  is  lost  when  it  is  got  by 
gambling,  when  a  man  finds  by  a  little 
craft  and  cunning  it  is  possible  for  him 
to  float  like  scum  on  the  surface  of 
society  and  to  have  no  root  down  in 
anything.  It  unsettles  the  mind,  it 
destroys  intellectual  taste.  I  defy  any 
youth  who  has  once  acquired  a  passion 
for  gambling  to  apply  his  mind  to  any 
study,  any  hard  task  that  will  better 
him  in  mind  and  which  will  raise  him 
in  society.  It  destroys  self-respect.  It 
renders  you,  sooner  or  later,  morally 
callous,  spiritually  deaf.  And  it  is  not 
surprising  that  it  does  all  this  when 
we  recollect  that  in  the  light  of  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  it  is  a  pro- 
foundly immoral  act ;  for  the  teaching 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  that  money  is  a 
stewardship. — W,  J.  Dawson. 

The  degradation  of  gambling. — 
Charles  Dickens  was  not  a  Puritanical 
or  Pharisaical  writer,  was  he?  Bead 
what  he  has  to  say  upon  Doncaster 
races  as  he  saw  them.  George  Eliot 
was  not  a  Puritanical  or  a  Pharisaical 
writer.  Bead  her  description  of  the 
gambling  tables  which  you  will  find 
in  Daniel  Deronda.  Bobert  Louis 
Stevenson  and  Thomas  Hardy  are 
novelists  who  have  not  yet  been  accused 
of  being  Puritanical  or  Pharisaical.  Two 
of  the  most  extraordinary  chapters  in 
the  greatest  books  of  these  artists  are 
chapters  which  describe  what  Stevenson 
calls  "  the  disgusting  vice  of  gambling." 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


And  the  daily  papers  are  not  over  Puri- 
tanical   or   Pharisaical ;     they   simply 
chronicle  the  time.    But  even  the  Press 
has    become   frightened   at   last   with 
the  horrible  growth  of  cupidity  which 
is  being  fostered  at  the  present  hour 
by  those  who  ought  to  know  better,  for 
they  profess  to  provide  journals  which 
elevate  and  instruct  and  amuse.     Or, 
if  you  do  not  care  to  take  evidence  of 
this  kind,   go  and  see  for  yourselves. 
Look  at  the  sort  of  faces  that  one  sees 
on  the  racecourse — the  bestial,  the  foxy, 
the  degraded.    Travel  in  the  same  rail- 
way-carriage with    habitual   gamblers 
and  hear  what  their  talk  is  like.     I 
stayed,  some  time  ago,  in  one  of  the 
fairest    of    English    cathedral    cities. 
My   fi'iend,    who    is    certainly   not   a 
Puritan,  looking  at  the  broad  stretch 
beyond  the  city  wall,  said,  "  In  a  few 
weeks  that  green  turf  will  be  covered 
with  the  scum  of  the  earth,  with  faces 
which  haunt   you   afterwards   like    a 
dream  of  hell."  Is  that  strong  language? 
No  stronger  than  the  language  which 
Charles  Dickens  used  about  Doncaster 
racecourse.      I  have  known  such  mad 
debauches  after  races,  such  diabolical 
impurities,  that  they  are  unnameable ; 
they   are   all   but   unutterable.      The 
gambling  passion  is  the  most  insensate 
of  all  passions ;  it  does  more  to  render 
the  heart  callous  than  any  other;    it 
does  not  end  with  itself,  but  incites  into 
diabolical  activity  every  lust  and  passion 
of  depravity  ;  and  the  soldiers  gambling 
at  the  feet  of  the  dying  Christ  afford  us 
just  the  type  of   moral  deformity  to 
which  the  lust  of  unearned  gain  reduces 
men. — Ihid, 

Vers.  34,  35.  The  inhumanity  of 
rfYian. — The  Roman  soldiers  sat  down 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  Some  one  of 
them  took  the  dice  out  of  his  pocket, 
which  was  carried  commonly  by  all 
Romans*  of  that  class.  Another  pro- 
duced a  bottle  of  cheap  sour  wine. 
There,  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  cross, 
with  the  blood  trickling  down  from  the 
burning  arms  and  feet  of  the  Crucified, 
they  drank  and  gambled  for  the  gar- 
ments of  the  One  that  died  to  save  them. 


I  know  jiot  where  you  will  find  in  history 
a  more  striking  illustration  of  the  in- 
humanity of  man  than  in  that  scene — 
the  drinking  and  the  gambling  at  the 
foot  of  Christ's  cross. — L,  Abbott,  D.D. 

Ver.  36.  The  Roman  soldiers  on 
guard. — They  were  a  little  tired  with 
their  march  and  their  work,  and  they 
had  to  stop  there  on  guard  for  an  in- 
definite time,  with  nothing  to  do  but 
two  more  prisoners  to  crucify ;  so  they 
take  a  rest,  and  idly  keep  watch  over 
Him  till  He  shall  die.  How  possible  it 
is  to  look  at  Christ's  sufferings,  and  see 
nothing  !  These  rude  legionaries  gazed 
for  hours  on  what  has  touched  the 
world  ever  since,  and  what  angels 
desired  to  look  into,  and  saw  nothing 
but  a  dying  Jew.  They  thought  about 
the  worth  of  the  clothes,  or  about  how 
long  they  would  have  to  stop  there, 
and,  in  the  presence  of  the  most  stu- 
pendous fact  in  the  world's  history, 
were  all  unmoved.  We,  too,  may  gaze 
on  the  cross,  and  see  nothing. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

Ver.  37.  The  inscription  on  the 
cross. — A  better  inscription  for  the 
cross  the  Apostles  themselves  could  not 
have  devised.  "This  is  Jesus"  the 
Saviour — the  Name  above  every  name. 
How  it  must  have  cheered  the  Saviour's 
heart  to  know  that  it  was  there! 
"  This  is  Jesus,  the  King,'^  never  more 
truly  King  than  when  this  writing  was 
His  only  crown.  "This  is  Jesus,  the 
King  of  the  Jews,'  despised  and  rejected 
of  them  now,  but  Son  of  David  none 
the  less,  and  yet  to  be  claimed  and 
crowned  and  rejoiced  in,  when  at  last 
"all  Israel  shall  be  saved." — J.  M, 
Gibson,  D.  D. 

Vers.  39-43.  The  scoffing  wayfarers. — 
The  passers- by  were  representative  men. 
— I.  Reason  of  their  conduct. — 1.  Christ 
was  unpopular — they  went  with  the 
stream.  2.  It  gratified  their  vanity — 
"  we  are  wise,  open-eyed  men."  3.  They 
felt  the  bitterest  hatred — practical 
Christianity  always  repulsive. 

II.  The  heinousness  of  their  con- 

633 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


duct. — 1.  They  misrepresented  His 
words.  2.  They  derided  His  claims. 
3.  They  jested  at  His  agonies. 

III.  The  folly  of  their  conduct. — 
1.  Thought  there  was  force  in  their 
argument.  2.  Imagined  themselves 
secure.     3.  What  did  they  gain  ? 

IV.  Treatment  their  conduct  re- 
ceived.— Silence.  1.  The  disciples  did 
not  denounce  them.  2.  Nor  did  the 
crowd  protest.  3.  Nor  did  Jesus  speak 
— His  public  sayings  were  ended ;  He 
is  silent,  but  observant  (see  xii.  36.) — 
Stems  and  Tioigs. 

Ver.  39.  Running  with  the  stream  ! — 
How  many  of  these  scoffers,  to  whom 
death  cast  no  shield  round  the  Object 
of  their  poor  taunts,  had  shouted  them- 
selves hoarse  on  the  Monday,  and  waved 
palm  branches  that  were  not  withered 
yet !  What  had  made  the  change  ? 
There  was  no  change.  They  were  run- 
ning with  the  stream  in  both  their 
hosannas  and  their  jeers,  and  the  one 
were  worth  as  much  as  the  other. 
They  had  been  tutored  to  cry,  "  Blessed 
is  He  that  cometh !  "  and  now  they 
were  tutored  to  repeat  what  had  been 
said  at  the  trial  about  destroying  the 
temple.  The  worshippers  of  success 
are  true  to  themselves  when  they  mock 
at  failure. — A.  Madaren^  D.D. 

Ver.  40.  The  first  prayer  to  the 
Crucified  One. — I.  Think  of  the  speech 
as  spoken  by  those  who  were  passing 
by. — Their  complete  phrase  was,  "  If 
Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down 
from  the  cross."  It  was  no  easy  thing 
for  these  men  to  believe  that  Christ 
was  the  Son  of  God. 

II.  Think  of  this  challenge  as  spoken 
by  the  leaders  of  the  people. — It  is 
plain  that  their  minds  were  not  easy. 
The  mental  questions  would  arise : 
"  Have  we  gone  too  far  ?  Is  it  possible 
that  we  have  made  a  tremendous 
mistake?  What  if,  after  all,  this 
should  be  the  Christ  of  God,  the  King 
of  Israel  ?  "  To  keep  down  their  do\ibts, 
to  keep  up  their  courage,  they  drew 
together  in  close  conference,  and  talked 
one  to  another  in  answer  to  unspoken 

034 


language  of  horrible  misgiving  and 
surmise.  "  Is  that  the  Saviour  ?  He 
cannot  save  Himself — that  the  King  ! 
He  is  not  even  King  over  that  cross." 

III.  Think  of  the  cry  as  spoken  by 
the  soldiers. — For  them  the  word 
"  Christ "  was  jargon ;  the  word 
"  Israel "  had  no  meaning ;  but  the 
word  ''  King  "  roused  them  to  a  rough 
and  terrible  play.  To  them  it  was  rare 
sport  to  make  believe  that  this  was  a 
coronation  day,  and  grimly  ridiculous 
to  speak  of  a  king  crowned  with  thorns, 
and  nailed  upon  his  throne ;  and  they, 
therefore,  caught  up  the  banter,  and 
joined  in  the  chorus  of  infamy. 

IV.  Think  of  this  cry  as  joined  in  by 
one,  if  not  both,  of  the  malefactors. — It 
is  at  least  certain  that  one  of  the 
dying  men  struck  in  with  the  cruel  cry. 

A  storm  of  voices  rang  out  the  call, 
"  Come  down  from  the  cross."  The 
only  answer  to  this  exasperating  de- 
mand was  a  kingly,  expressive  silence. 
1.  It  was  the  silence  of  power.  2.  The 
silence  of  intensity  in  resistance  of 
temptation.  3.  He  was  silent  because 
it  was  a  moral  impossibility  that  He 
should  have  come  down  from  the  cross. 
4.  It  was  the  silence  of  One  who  was 
doing  a  great  work,  and  who  would  not 
stop  to  answer  trivial  words  about  it. — 
G.  Stanford,  D.D. 

Ver.  42.  Chrisfs  enemies  condemned 
out  of  their  own  mouth. — I.  Their 
affirmation. — Sublimely  true,  and  it 
condemns  them.  *'  He  saved  others." 
This  testimony  condemns  them : — 
1.  For  their  base  ingratitude.  2.  For 
their   daring    impiety. 

II.  Their  denial. — Gloriously  true, 
and  it  condemns  them.  "  Himself  He 
cannot  save."  In  the  Divinest  sense 
He  could  not  save  Himself.  His 
moral  weakness  here  is  His  glory.  He 
could  not,  because  He  had  undertaken 
to  die,  and  He  could  not  break  His 
word.  He  could  not,  because  the 
salvation  of  the  world  depended  upon 
His  death.  The  greatest  man  on  earth 
is  the  man  who  cannot  be  unkind,  etc. 
The  glory  of  the  omnipotent  God  is  that 
He  cannot  lie.     Learn :  1.  The  worst 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvil. 


men  may  give  utterance  to  the  greatest 
truths.  These  murderers  of  Christ  here 
proclaim  (1)  Christ  as  a  Saviour  :  "  He 
saved  others  "  ;  (2)  Christ  as  a  Sacrifice  : 
"  Himself  He  cannot  save."  Not  a 
coerced  sacrifice,  but  a  voluntary  one. 
2.  The  best  men  are  often  most  glorious 
in  their  weakness.  "  Himself  He  can- 
not save."  Godly  tradesmen  are  too 
weak  to  make  fortunes  at  the  expense 
of  honesty,  etc.  The  grandest  man  on 
earth  is  the  man  who  is  too  weak  to  be 
untrue,  ungenerous,  and  self-seeking. 
— Homilist. 

The  cross  a  throne. — 0  blind  leaders 
of  the  blind  !  that  death  which  seemed 
to  them  to  shatter  His  royalty  really 
established  it.     His  cross  is  His  throne 


of  saving  power,  by  which  He  sways 
hearts  and  wills,  and  because  of  it  He 
receives  from  the  Father  universal 
dominion,  and  every  knee  shall  bow  to 
Him.  It  is  just  because  He  did  not 
come  down  from  it  that  we  believe  on 
Him.  On  His  head  are  many  crowns  ; 
but,  however  many  they  be,  they  all 
grow  out  of  the  crown  of  thorns.  The 
true  kingship  is  absolute  command  over 
willingly  submitted  spirits ;  and  it  is 
His  death  which  bows  us  before  Him  in 
raptures  of  glad  love ;  which  counts 
submission,  liberty,  and  sacrifice  blessed. 
He  has  the  right  to  command  because 
He  has  given  Himself  for  us,  and  His 
death  wakes  all-surrendering  and  all- 
expecting  faith. — A.  Maclaren,  D.B. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  45—56. 

**  Articulo  mortis^ — In  the  last  passage  we  found  ourselves  in  front  of  the 
cross  of  the  Redeemer.  In  this,  we  are  witnesses  of  His  actual  death — that  most 
momentous  of  all  mundane  events.  The  chief  characteristics  of  the  passage  are 
something  like  those  of  the  passage  before.  There  is  profound  obscurity,  on  the 
one  hand ;  there  is  marvellous  light,  on  the  other. 

I.  Very  gpreat  darkness. — Darkness,  e.g.,  in  the  very  atrfiosiiihere  in  which  the 
portent  occurred.  A  kind  of  pall  hung  over  the  whole  of  the  "  land  "  (ver.  45). 
Darkness,  again,  with  regard  to  the  time — the  exact  time — of  Christ's  death. 
When  events  are  in  progress  of  such  a  nature  as  to  wholly  absorb  the  attention 
and  dominate  the  emotions  of  those  who  behold  them,  they  lose  their  count  of 
the  hours.  Either  they  are  surprised  to  find  it  so  late,  or  else  they  thought  the 
time  hiid  long  gone.  It  is  possible  also,  that,  in  this  case,  the  very  atmospheric 
darkness  just  spoken  of  had  made  it  impossible,  by  means  of  the  then  usual 
appliances,  to  determine  the  exact  hour  of  the  day.  At  any  rate,  it  is  as  one 
not  certain  about  it  that  the  Evangelist  speaks.  He  describes  the  time  of  death 
as  being  simply  "  about  the  ninth  hour  "  (ver.  46).  Apparently  both  his  igno- 
rance and  his  accuracy  will  not  let  him  say  more.  How  much  obscurity  there  is, 
once  more,  in  the  Redeemer' s  first  cry  at  that  time.  That  cry  itself  seems  to  have 
left  an  eternal  impression  on  many  who  heard  it.  Through  them  the  very  sounds 
of  the  language  in  which  it  was  spoken — apparently  a  most  unusual  thing  and 
connected  always  with  occurrences  in  which  life  and  death  or  something  as 
wonderful  were  at  issue  (see  Mark  v.  41,  vii.  34,  37,  etc.)  have  been  bequeathed  to 
the  world  (ver.  46).  Yet,  for  all  that,  and  for  all  the  translation  here  given  of  the 
words  in  question,  how  much  there  is  in  them  that  is  dark  !  Why  is  that  "  Holy 
One  "  "  forsaken  "  at  all  ?  Why  forsaken  of  "  God  "  ?  Most  emphatic  and  most 
astounding  is  that  "  Me"  !  Scarcely  less  so  that  "  Thou  "  !  How  far,  also,  does 
that  "  forsaking  "  extend  %  Why  does  not  our  Saviour  now  (cf.  His  language 
even  a  few  hours  before  in  the  garden,  ,ch.  xxvi.  39,  42  ;  also  John  xvii.  passim), 
address  God  as  His  Father  ?  Why  does  He,  yet,  so  emphatically  claim  God  as 
His  own  1  (ver.  46).  Also,  can  we  here  be  certain  even  as  to  the  duration  of 
this  forsaking  ?  Is  it  over  now  ?  Or  still  on  ?  Does  the  Saviour  ask  "  Why 
hast  Thou,"  or  "  Why  didst  Thou  "  forsake  Me  ?     Is  He  thus  crying  out  as  men 

635 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOUILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


do  when  they  feel  the  utmost  severity  of  a  trial  all  but  crushing  them  as  it 
passes  ?  Or,  as  men  do  when  they  look  back  on  the  immensity  of  what  has 
passed  over  their  heads  1  What,  in  fact,  is  being  done — what,  in  fact,  is  being 
endured — to  call  forth  this  complaint,  this  solitary  complaint  (is  it  not  so  ?), 
from  that  long-suffering  Heart  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions  is  not  given  us 
here.  We  can  only  ask  them — afar— in  wonder  and  grief.  Finally,  what  marks 
of  obscurity  there  are  in  the  effect  of  this  cry  on  those  vjho  stand  hy.  Some 
mistake  its  very  direction,  and  think  it  a  call  on  "  Elijah."  One  who  is  near 
sees  in  it  simply  an  expression  of  the  in  tensest  bodily  pain,  and  "  runs,"  there- 
fore, to  do  what  he  can  in  the  way  of  instant  assuagement  (ver.  48).  In  others 
it  arouses  little  more  than  curious  wonder  and  doubt.  Can  there  be — is  there — 
anything  in  that  singular  cry  ?  We  can  but  wait  the  result  (ver.  49).  Thus 
they,  at  that  time,  understood  little  more  than  that  they  did  not  understand 
what  they  beheld.  Thus  we  also,  at  this  distance,  so  far  in  the  story,  not 
seeing  much  more  ! 

II.  Wonderful  light. — Wonderful  light,  in  the  midst  of  this  very  darkness  and 
doubt.  We  find  this,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  second  cry  of  the  Saviour  (ver.  50). 
What  a  revelation  of  strength,  and  that  in  the  very  act  of  departure,  there  is  in 
its  character  !  "  Jesus  cries  with  a  loud  voice."  What  a  revelation  of  authority 
in  its  language  !  "  Jesus  dismisses  "  (so  some)  "  His  spirit  "  (cf.  John  x.  18  ;  Heb. 
ix.  14).  Not  less  light  is  there,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  replies  to  this  cry. 
There  is  one  such  from  the  neighbouring  temple  of  God  (ver.  51).  The 
jealous  privacy  of  long  generations  is  suddenly  gone.  The  heavy  *'  veil " 
which  for  ages  past  had  only  just  permitted  the  annual  passage  of  the 
blood-besprinkled  high  priest  to  the  glory  beyond  it,  is  a  means  of  separation  no 
longer.  Like  the  body  of  Jesus,  it  is  "  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom."  There  is  another  reply  from  the  rocks  of  the  earth  {ibid.).  Their 
solid  strength  is  torn  asunder  by  the  power  of  that  Voice.  A  third  reply  comes 
next  from  the  homes  of  the  dead  (vers.  52,  53).  The  graves  are  opened,  and 
many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  are  sleeping  there  arise,  and  come  (afterwards) 
into  the  holy  city,  and  appear  unto  many.  A  final  and  most  explicit  reply 
comes  from  the  hearts  of  the  living.  Earlier  in  that  day  numberless  voices  had 
scouted  the  very  idea  of  that  crucified  Man  being  God's  Son  (ver.  43).  Later  on 
it  had  almost  seemed  (ver.  46,  supra)  as  though  He  had  begun  to  doubt  it 
Himself.  Now  it  is  proclaimed  virtually  by  the  very  voice  which  had  commanded 
His  death.  Caesar  it  was,  in  the  person  of  Pilate,  who  had  really  ordered  that 
death.  Caesar  it  is  now,  by  Pilate's  deputy,  who  confesses  this  truth.  "  Truly 
this  was  the  Son  of  God  "  (ver.  54).  Thus  does  Pome  itself  do  homage  to  that 
dead  "  King  of  the  Jews." 

Even  this  light,  however,  in  one  sense,  only  increases  the  darkness.  If  it  be 
marvellous,  as  indeed  it  is,  to  see  such  innocence  delivered  to  death,  it  is  at  least 
as  marvellous  to  see  such  omnipotence  (is  this  saying  too  much?)  submitting 
thereto.  What  amazing  majesty,  what  more  than  kingly  authority,  what 
superhuman  power,  have  been  nailed  to  that  cross  !  Possibly  there  may  have 
been  some  such  thoughts  in  the  minds  of  those  faithful  ones  who  are  described 
here  (vers.  55,  56)  as  having  seen  these  things  "  afar  off."  We  who,  in  one  sense 
but  not  in  another,  stand  farther  off  still,  cannot  banish  them  from  our  minds. 
What  commanding  weakness ;  what  awe-inspiring  meekness ;  what  dying 
energy,  we  see  here  !  Who  is  this  that,  in  submitting  to  death,  overcomes  it  as 
well  %  Who  is  this  that  restores  life  to  others  by  the  act  of  "  dismissing  "  His 
own  ?  The  Evangelist  does  not  directly  inform  us  how  to  answer  these  questions. 
He  simply  bids  us  behold — in  this  death  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth — at  once  the 
most  significant  and  the  most  mysterious  of  all  human  events. 

636 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  45,  46.  The  cry  from  the  depths. 
— I.  We  have  to  speak  about  the 
darkness. — Note : — 

1.  That  it  was  a  darkness  lohich 
science  is  unable  to  explain. 

2.  The  darkness  was  in  keeping  with 
the  cry  which  at  this  time  hung  over  the 
Redeemer^  spirit. — God  was  pleased  to 
make  Nature  visibly  sympathise  with 
the  passion  of  His  Son. 

3.  Regard  the  darkness  at  the 
Crucifixion  as  a  sign  from  God,  intended 
not  only  to  mark  the  importance  of 
the  event  transpiring,  but  to  work 
upon  the  consciences  of  the  crucifiers 
before  the  deed  was  done. 

II.  We  have  now  to  speak  about 
the  cry. — 1.  What  was  there  in  this  cry 
different  from  any  other  dying  cry  ? — 
We  must  take  choice  of  two  alter- 
natives ;  one  is  that  the  cry  came  from 
a  faintness  of  heart  that  was  unworthy 
of  a  man,  the  other  that  it  came  from 
feeling  a  mystery  of  sin -bearing,  un- 
fathomable and  Divine.  That  was  the 
cup  *'  tasted,"  the  cup  for  the  passing 
away  of  which  from  Him,  if  it  were 
possible,  He  prayed,  and  to  the  drinking 
of  which,  if  the  Will  required  it,  He 
solemnly  devoted  Himself. 

2.  The  cry  had  been  foretold. — The 
exclamation,  "  My  God,  My  God,  why 
hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  is  the  first 
verse,  and  sounds  the  very  key-note,  of 
the  22nd  Psalm.  Regarding  that  psalm 
as  a  prophecy  of  Christ's  thoughts 
while  on  the  cross,  we  may  fairly 
regard  this  verse  as  indicating  the 
thought  that  would  then  have  first 
place  and  power  in  the  great  Atoner's 
mind. 

3.  In  this  cry  we  have  the  perfect 
example  of  trust  in  trial.  —  (7. 
Stanford,  D.D. 

Vers.  46-49.  "  Eli,  Eli,  lamia  sabach- 
thani  !  " — We  have  here  : — 

I.  The  most  wonderful  misconstruc- 
tion put  upon  a  cry  of  anguish.— 
"This  man  calleth  for  EUas."  No 
man  has  been  doomed  to  have  his  acts, 
and    even   his   very   words,    misinter- 


preted like  Christ.  Still,  we  find  in  their 
mistake  a  common  fault  on  the  part  of 
the  world.  In  the  deepest  longings 
and  bitterest  cries  of  your  soul,  they 
are  always  liable  to  misunderstand 
you.  You  are  in  bereavement,  you  feel 
lonely,  and  utter  a  wailing  lament ; 
and  they  say,  ''It  is  unbelief."  You 
are  cast  down  by  misfortune.  Nothing 
that  you  have  set  your  hand  to  has 
prospered.  You  have  lost  all,  and  you 
utter  a  cry  of  despair ;  and  they  say, 
"  You  are  com^plaining  against  God^ 
You  are  cast  down  by  doubts,  feeling 
your  way  after  truth,  seeking  to  have 
a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  you  ; 
and  they  say,  "  You  are  a  sceptic,"  etc. 
All  this  may  be  hard  to  bear.  Re- 
member David,  Job,  and  Christ,  "  My 
God,  My  God,"  etc. 

II.  A  most  inadequate  relief  offered 
to  a  spiritual  want. — "■  And  straight- 
way one  of  them  ran,"  etc.  If  in- 
tended as  an  opiate,  it  could  not  touch 
the  cause  of  His  complaint,  could  not 
reach  the  seat  of  His  suffering.  Inten- 
tionally or  not,  it  was  an  insult,  a 
mockery,  to  offer  it.  This,  however,  is 
another  fault  of  the  world.  "  If  a  son 
shall  ask  bread  of  any  of  you  that  is  a 
father,  will  he  give  him  a  stone  ?  "  etc. 
No  !  Yet,  when  the  mind-afflicted  is 
hungering  for  rest,  and  the  heart- 
wearied  is  thirsting  for  the  Divine,  the 
world  has  nothing  better  to  offer.  No 
narcotic  can  finally  quiet  a  soul  in 
search  after  God.  All  the  opiates  of 
earth  cannot  still  its  cry. 

III.  The  most  heartless  indifference 
shown  towards  helpless  suffering. — 
"  The  rest  said.  Let  be,"  etc.  1.  They 
were  heartless  in  their  own  inactivity. 
2.  They  were  heartless  in  their  inter- 
ference. They  try  to  prevent  this 
soldier  from  administering  what  would 
give  Him  relief. — T.  Davis. 

Ver.  50.  Christ  yielding  up  His 
spirit. — The  loud  cry  of  the  dying 
Christ  is  worthy  of  record ;  for  cruci- 
fixion ordinarily  killed  by  exhaustion, 
and  this  cry  was  evidence  of  abundant 

^37 


CHAP.  XXVII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW. 


remainmg  vitality.  In  accordance 
therewith,  the  fact  of  death  is  expressed 
by  a  phrase,  which,  though  used  for 
ordinary  deaths,  does  yet  naturally 
express  the  voluntariness  of  Christ. 
"  He  sent  away  His  spirit  " — as  if  He 
had  bid  it  depart,  and  it  obeyed. 
Whether  the  expression  may  be  fairly 
pressed  so  far  or  no,  the  fact  is  the 
same,  that  Jesus  died,  not  because  He 
was  crucified,  but  because  He  chose. 
He  was  the  lord  and  master  of  death ; 
and  when  He  bade  His  armour-bearer 
strike,  the  slave  struck,  and  the  King 
died,  not  like  Saul  on  the  field  of  his 
defeat,  but  a  victor  in  and  by  and 
over  death. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  51-54.  The  language  of  the  signs. 
— I.  The  earthquake. — This  was : — 

1.  A  sign  wrought  hy  the  direct  and 
unusual  interposition  of  the  Creator. 

2.  A  sign  to  alarm  men,  on  account 
of  the  capital  crime  which  they  had  just 
committed. — To  shake  the  hearts,  to 
shake  the  conscience,  to  shake  up  men 
from  the  dull  dream  of  a  sense- bound 
existence,  did  God  shake  the  earth,  in 
the  moment  when  man  had  just 
crucified  His  Son. 

3.  A  sign  hy  which  God  called  atten- 
tion to  the  Divine  work,  which,  through 
the  medium  of  the  human  work,  had 
just  hee7i  done. 

4.  A  sign  through  which  God  caused 
the  earth  to  pay  royal  honour  to  Jesus, 
when  Jesus  died. 

5.  The  earthquake  may  furnish  an 
illustration  of  the  power  that  is  to  work 
vjonders  in  connection  with  the  cross  of 
Christ. 

11.  The  rent  veil. — 1.  The  rending 
of  the  veil  was,  as  it  was  intended  to 
be,  the  sign  which  the  Jews  noticed  first. 
To  them,  as  Jews,  the  earthquake,  in 
comparison,  was  a  mere  nothing  ;  they 
forgot  the  earthquake  when  they 
thought  of  the  veil. 

2.  A  sign  that  the  Jewish  dispensa- 
tion was  now,  hy  God's  own  act, 
aholished. 

3.  A  sign  showing  that  now,  hy  the 
death  of  Christ,  there  was  a  revelation 
of  the  mystery  hid  from  ages. 

e?8 


4.  A  sign  hy  which  God  declared  that 
a  free  right  of  way  into  the  Holiest  was 
henceforth  open  to  all. 

III.  The  opening  of  the  graves  and 
the  rising  of  the  dead. — Who  were 
these  that  were  raised  ?  What  was  it 
precisely  that  happened  at  the  moment 
of  the  Lord's  death  1  It  is  vain  to 
conjecture,  but  at  least  the  miracle 
teaches  how,  by  the  work  of  Calvary, 
Christ  has  power  and  authority  to 
reconquer  from  the  grasp  of  death  the 
life  that  He  once  created. 

IV.  The  effect  of  these  foregoing 
signs  on  the  centurion  and  his  com- 
panions.— The  only  man  who  dared  to 
give  Jesus  His  Divine  title  was  one 
of  the  soldiers  who  were  the  first 
sinners  for  whom  He  had  offered  the 
prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  etc. 
—C.  Stanford,  D.D. 

Vers.  52,  53.  The  reswi'ection  of 
many  hodies  of  the  saints  which  slept. — 
The  fact  is  expressive  of  : — 

I.  The  supernaturalness  of  Christ's 
death. — Untold  millions  of  men  have 
died.  Thousands  have  died  the  death 
of  crucifixion,  and  tens  of  thousands 
of  noble  and  Godlike  men  have  died  as 
martyrs  for  the  truth.  But  there  is 
not  a  single  death  found  in  all  history 
attended  by  such  marvels  as  those 
connected  with  the  death  of  Christ. 
No  wonder  that  the  ce  nturion  and  those 
that  stood  watching  with  him  ex- 
claimed, "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of 
God."  His  death  had  a  power  over 
the  graves  of  the  departed.  It  also 
penetrated  Hades.  The  goodly  army 
of  the  patriarchs  that  saw  His  day  in 
the  distance  and  rejoiced,  the  illustrious 
line  of  the  prophets  who  pointed  Him 
out  to  their  contemporaries,  and  the 
holy  priests  who  typified  Him  in  their 
sacerdotal  functions,  would  all  in  the 
spirit  world  feel  the  moral  vibrations 
of  His  cross.  But  this  opening  of  the 
graves  and  attracting  the  spirits  of  the 
holy  dead  is  but  a  single  specimen  of 
the  supernatural  power  of  His  death. 
The  moral  wonders  it  has  wrought  are 
far  greater  than  the  material  ones 
which  attei:ided  His  crucifixion. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST,  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


II.  The  conditions  of  the  holy  dead. 

— 1.  Best.  "Slept."  No  terror  in 
sleep.  Nothing  injurious  in  sleep. 
No  permanency  in  sleep. 

2.  Deep  interest  in  Christ. 

3.  Not  permanent. — There  was  an 
alteration  now  in  their  condition.  A 
resurrection  day  to  come. 

III.  The  secrecy  of  the  heavenly 
world. — The  fact  that  we  have  no 
record  of  any  communications  made  by 
those  saints  that  arose  and  went  to 
Jerusalem  concerning  the  celestial 
world  in  which  they  had  been  living, 
is  very  remarkable.  This  strange 
omission  suggests  the  fact  that  the 
particulars  of  heaven  are  to  be  kept 
secret  from  men  on  earth.  This  truth 
is  supported  by  the  fact  that  other 
tenants  of  the  celestial  world  who  have 
visited  this  earth  have  maintained  the 
same  silence.  Why  this  secrecy  about 
heaven?  Two  reasons  may  be  sug- 
gested : — 

1.  Impossibility. — Heaven,  both  as 
a  place  and  a  feeling,  may  be  altogether 
SO'  different  to  men's  experiences  of 
places  and  emotions  on  earth,  that 
for  the  want  of  comparison  human 
language  would  be  utterly  incompetent 
to  convey  any  information. 

2.  Impropriety. — A  graphic  repre- 
sentation   of    the    minute    details   of 


heaven  to  men  on  earth  would  not  only 
have  been  an  inconvenience,  but  an 
injury.  Heaven  has  in  mercy  con- 
cealed from  us  all  the  coming  periods 
of  our  life,  that  we  may,  by  attending 
rightly  to  the  present,  be  prepared  for 
all  the  future. — I).  Thomas^  D.D. 

Vers.  52-56.  Effects  of  the  atoning 
death  of  Jesus. — I.  Upon  the  realm  of 
the  dead;  beginning  of  the  resurrection. 

II.  Upon  the  Gentile  world  ;  begin- 
ning of  confessions  (ver.  54). 

III.  Upon  the  world  of  the  op- 
pressed classes,  viz.,  of  women.  Free 
communion  with  Christ  in  spirit, 
suffering,  and  victory. — J.  P.  Lange, 
D.D. 

Ver.  56.  Mary  of  Magdala. — She 
was : — 

I.  A  great  suiferer  healed  by  Christ 
(Luke  viii.  2). 

II.  A  grateful  ministrant  to  Christ 
(liuke  viii.  2,  3  ;  Mark  xv.  41). 

III.  A  faithful  adherent  to  Christ 
(Mark  xv.  40  ;  John  xix.  25). 

IV.  A  sincere  mourner  for  Christ 
(cf.  xxvii.  61  ;  Mark  xv.  47 ;  John 
XX.  1,  2,  11-18). 

V.  An  honoured  messenger  of  Christ 
(John  XX.  17,  18;  Mark  xvi.  10).— 
T,  S.  Dickson,  MA. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  57—66. 

Total  eclipse. — The  mystery  attaching  to  the  death  of  the  Saviour  does  not 
interfere  with  its  truth.  Dijfficult  indeed  to  account  for,  it  is  a  fact  impossible 
to  deny.  This  is  shown  us  very  convincingly  in  the  words  which  come  next. 
Alike  in  the  behaviour  of  His  friends^  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  the  conduct  of  His 
enemies,  on  the  other,  ample  evidence  is  given  us  here  of  the  absolute  certainty 
of  His  death. 

I.  The  behaviour  of  His  friends. — The  behaviour,  in  the  first  place,  of  one 
special  frie7id  at  this  time.  A  certain  man  of  substance  (ver.  57)  and  standing 
(Mark  xv.  43),  known  as  Joseph  o.f  Arimathaea,  was  in  Jerusalem  at  this  time. 
A  sincere  disciple  of  the  now  crucified  Jesus  (ver.  57),  he  appears  yet  to  have  been 
in  such  a  position  (Mark  xv.  43)  as  to  have  had  ready  access  to  the  governor's 
presence.  He  goes  to  him  accordingly,  and  asks  permission  to  take  down  the  body 
of  Jesus.  After  due  investigation  by  the  centurion  (Mark  xv.  44,  45),  Pilate  con- 
sents, and  gives  the  requisite  orders  for  having  the  body  committed  to  Joseph's  care. 
Convincing  proof,  therefore,  that  in  the  eyes  of  all  three,  it  is  now  a  body  without 
life.  Neither  would  the  centurion  have  certified,  nor  Joseph  asked,  nor  Pilate 
consented,  had  any  one  of  them  had  any  doubt  on  this  point.  The  behaviour,  next, 
of  those  who  assisted  this  chief  Jriend  at  this  time.     Under  his  supervision  these 

639 


HAP.  XXVII.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW, 


(doubtless)  willing  assistants  wrap  a  fair  linen  cloth  with  reverent  care  round 
the  body  of  Jesus.  With  equal  reverence  and  care  they  next  lay  it  in  a  new 
sepulchre  (ver.  60),  which  Joseph  had  caused  to  be  prepared  for  himself  in  the 
solid  rock  of  that  spot.  After  which  they  proceed,  with  at  least  as  much  care, 
to  close  that  sepulchre  up ;  a  stone  of  such  apparently  unusual  magnitude  being 
used  for  that  purpose,  that  it  had  to  be  "  rolled  "  to  its  place  notwithstanding  the 
lateness  of  the  hour  (ver.  57),  and  the  consequent  need  of  the  most  urgent 
despatch  (ver.  60;  Luke  xxiii.  54).  In  all  these  steps,  therefore,  they  give 
us  both  indubitable  and  progressive  evidence  of  two  things  of  capital  importance 
in  connection  with  the  reality  of  His  death ;  the  one  being  that  these  persons 
were  all  themselves  convinced  of  the  reality  of  that  death,  and  the  other  that  no 
appearance  whatever  in  a  contrary  direction  (had  there  been  such  in  existence), 
could  possibly  have  escaped  their  notice  whilst  taking  such  steps.  To  them, 
in  a  word,  if  He  had  not  been  dead,  the  fact  must  have  come  out.  By  them, 
notwithstanding.  He  is  treated  as  dead  in  everything  that  they  do.  The 
behaviour,  lastly,  of  certain  other  friends  who,  in  all  this,  sat  hy  (ver.  61).  If 
they  have  not  personally  assisted,  they  have  fully  acquiesced,  in  all  they  see 
done.  They  go  away,  indeed,  to  show  this  (see  Luke  xxiii.  56)  in  a  way  of 
their  own.  To  them  also,  therefore,  the  proper  place  now  for  the  body  of  Jesus 
is  the  place  of  the  dead.  Their  breaking  hearts,  also,  that  would  have  hoped 
if  they  could,  have  no  doubt  of  His  death. 

II.  The  conduct  of  His  enemies. — Their  conduct,  first,  in  waiting  on  the 
governor.  After  the  burial  of  Jesus,  on  "  the  next  day,"  the  ''  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees "  (ver.  62)  "  came  together  "  to  speak  to  Pilate  about  Jesus.  But 
their  manner  of  doing  so  is  widely  different  from  what  it  had  been  only  a  short 
time  before.  To  their  apprehension  little  is  now  left  of  Jesus  but  the  memory  of 
His  words  (see  ver.  63).  And  even  this  memory  appears  to  them  to  be  deserving 
of  attention  only  in  connection  with  other  men's  acts.  Only  if  the  disciples  of 
Jesus  were  to  adventure  on  ^'  stealing  His  body  away,"  and  on  "  saying  "  after- 
wards "to  the  people  "  that  "  He  had  risen  from  the  dead  "  would  there  be  cause 
for  alarm.  In  that  case,  no  doubt,  the  "  last  error  " — as  they  spake  of  it — would 
be  "worse  than  the  first."  But,  excepting  that,  they  know  of  nothing  now 
which  has  to  be  feared.  As  one  so  undeniably  dead  do  they  now  speak  of  Jesus 
in  the  governor's  ears !  Their  conduct,  next,  in  watching  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus 
proclaims  just  the  same  thing.  Pilate's  almost  contemptuous  reply  to  their 
request  for  a  "  guard  "  is  all  they  wish  for  in  other  respects.  "  Take  the  guard 
you  desire.  Go  to  the  sepulchre.  Make  everything  safe "  (ver.  65).  They  go 
accordingly,  and  endeavour  to  do  so  in  every  conceivable  way.  To  the  security 
of  the  huge  stone  already  closing  its  mouth,  they  add  that  of  a  seal.  To  this 
security  they  add  a  third,  securer  than  both.  A  company  of  Roman  soldiers  is 
stationed  there  as  a  guard.  A  guard  to  do  what?  To  prevent  that  "seal"  from 
being  tampered  with ;  that  stone  from  being  removed ;  that  dead  man's  body 
being  taken  away.  Could  there  well  be  a  louder  proclamation  of  the  undoubted 
reality  of  Christ's  death  ?  Verily,  if  these  things  do  not  mean  this,  they  mean 
nothing  at  all ! 

In  this  remarkable  succession  of  proofs  we  seem  to  see  not  a  little  : — 
1.  Of  the  hand  of  God  in  the  covrse  of  events. — We  know  what  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  now  is  to  the  church.  On  that  great  reversal  depends  the  reversal  of 
all  that  we  grieve  over  or  fear.  Without  assurance  of  this  there  is  neither  faith 
nor  hope  for  the  believer  in  Christ.  See  such  passages  as  Acts  i.  22,  xxv.  19; 
1  Cor.  XV.  14,  17 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21,  etc.  But  how  can  there  be  certainty  of  the 
reversal  of  an  evil,  without  previous  certainty  concerning  the  evil  itself  ?  How 
recovery  without  previous  loss  ?  How  restoration  without  previous  destruction  ? 
How  rising  again,  except  out  of  the  grave  ?     And  how  could  proof  of  tjiis  be  better 

640 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxvii. 


accomplished  than  by  that  singular  accumulation  and  clearness  and  variety  of 
evidence  of  which  we  have  now  taken  note  1  Who  could  deny  what  Pilate,  and 
the  centurion,  and  Joseph  and  his  companions,  all  knew  to  be  true  ?  Or  how 
could  even  the  priests  dispute  what  they  had  so  loudly  proclaimed  ?  And  is  it 
not  reasonable  to  think,  therefore,  yet  further,  that  in  such  a  condition  of  things, 
the  hand  of  God  may  be  traced  1  We  certainly  believe  as  much  in  regard  to  the 
superstructure  of  the  resurrection  ?  Why  not,  therefore,  in  these  circumstances, 
of  this  its  foundation  as  well  ? 

2.  Of  the  hand  of  God  in  the  structure  of  Scripture. — Not  only  did  the  things 
noted  prevent  denial  for  the  time.  The  record  we  have  of  them  was  also  such  as 
to  prevent  it  for  the  future.  We  ourselves  now  can  see  from  this  account  of 
them  the  absolute  certainty  of  Christ's  death,  and  so,  as  it  were,  the  stability 
of  that  foundation  on  which  our  whole  hope  is  erected.  And  this  evidence  we 
have,  also,  which  is  very  much  more,  in  the  most  natural  possible  way.  If  there 
is  everything  forcible  from  this  point  of  view,  there  is  nothing  forced,  in  the 
story  before  us.  No  one  can  suspect  the  writer,  any  more  than  in  the  parallel 
cases  of  ix.  24  ;  Luke  vii.  12  ;  John  xi.  17,  39,  of  having  put  this  evidence  in. 
All  the  more  reason,  therefore,  is  there  for  believing  that  it  has  come  in  through 
a  greater  Hand  than  his  own. 


HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yer.  57.  The  rich  disciple. — He  is 
rich : — 

I.  In  means. — Some  are  rich  in 
money  only.     How  poor  are  they  ! 

II.  In  silence. — Had  the  courage  to 
hold  his  tongue.  How  few  regret  that 
they  kept  silence  ! 

III.  In  patience.  —  Valuable  the 
hostihty  and  salutary  the  fear  which 
leads  a  man  in  silence  to  spin  the 
silken  thread  of  patience,  waiting  for 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

IV.  In  courage. — Mark  says  he  went 
boldly  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus. 
The  result  of  silent  patience  is  surprising 
might. 

V.  In  service.  —  Timely,  distin- 
guished, unique,  essential,  personal. 
Did  he,  unaided,  draw  the  nails,  wrap 
the  body,  carry  it  to  rest  ?  Nicodemus 
carrying  his  hundred  pounds  of  myrrh 
and  aloes.  Heroic  burden- bearers.  He 
is  rich : — 

VI.  In  praise. — Thy  daring  devo- 
tion in  the  darkest  hour  has  brought 
thee  imperishable  renown. — H.  T. 
Miller. 

Joseph  of  Arimathoea. — I.  Cared  more 
about  the  sepulchre  for  the  dead  Christ 
than  service  to  the  living  Saviour.— 
Nothing  heard  of  Him  till  now.     Rich 


Christians  often  more  careful  about 
ceremonies  than  true  work  and  the  true 
spirit. 

II.  Cared  more  about  the  silent 
body  than  the  speaking  lips  of  Jesus. 
— Hence  did  not  confess  and  follow  the 
hving  Redeemer. 

III.  Though  late  in  the  field  as  a 
public  confessor,  His  influence  was 
exerted  most  usefully  for  the  church. 
— A  poor  and  influential  suppliant 
would  have  been  spurned  by  Pilate. 
The  wealth  of  Joseph  was  his  shield. 
The  rich  man's  well-constructed  tomb 
furnished  opportunities  to  both  foes 
and  friends  for  testing  the  reality  of 
the  resurrection. 

IV.  Rich  Christians  have  their  uses. 
— Their  influence  often  protective,  and 
their  wealth  sustaining  to  Christian 
institutions,  etc. — J.  C.  Gray. 

Vers.  59, 60.  Christ's  deep  humiliation. 
— I.  The  deep  humiliation  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  from  the  time  of  His  death  to 
His  resurrection.  He  continued  in  the 
state  of  the  dead  for  a  time,  which  was 
the  lowest  step  of  His  humiliation,  and 
the  deepest  abasement  of  the  Son  of 
God. 

II.  Why  our  Lord  continued  in  the 
state  of  the  dead,  and  under  the  power 

T  T  641 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


of  it,  for   a  time. — 1.  That  the  types  Vers.  62-66.  The  guarded  sepulchre. 

and  prophecies  relative  thereto  might  — I.  The   precautions  used  to  secure 

have    their    accomphshment.       2.    To  the  tomb. 

ascertain  the  reality  of  His  death  and  II.  The  advantages  derived  thence 

resurrection  from  the  dead.      3.  That  to  the  cause  of  Christ. 

lie  might  fully  satisfy  the  demands  of         III.  Some  general  deductions  from 

the  law  and  justice  of  God  for  our  sins,  the  subject. — 1.  How  vain  the  counsels 

4.  That  He  might  conquer  death  and  of  the   ungodly  !     2.  How  happy  are 

the    grave    in    their    own   territories  they  who  have  God   on  their  side ! — 

(Hosea  xiii.  14). — Anon.  G,  Simeon^  M.A. 


OHAPTEK    XXVIII. 
CRITICAL    NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  In  the  end  of  the  Sabbath. — Late  on  the  Sahhath  day  (R.V.). — We  must  assume, 
with  Meyer,  Lange,  and  Alford,  that  Matthew  here  follows  the  natural  division  of  the 
day  from  sunrise  to  sunrise,  which  seems  to  be  favoured  by  the  following  definition  of 
time  :  "  As  it  began  to  dawn,"  etc.  ...  It  is  certain  and  agreed  on  all  hands  that  Matthew 
means  the  time  after  the  close  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  the  time  before  daybreak  on  the 
first  day,  of  the  week,  or  the  Christian  Sunday  (Schaff).  Cf.  Mark  xvi.  2 ;  Luke  xxiv.  1 ; 
John  XX.  1.     The  other  Mary. — The  mother  of  James  and  Joses  (xxvii.  56). 

Ver.  2.  From  the  door. — Omitted,  on  good  authority,  in  the  R.V. 

Ver.  3.  Countenance. — Appearance,  R.V.  Like  lightning.— As  regards  the  intensity  of 
effulgence  or  radiance  (^Morison). 

Ver.  5.  Fear  not  ye. — The  "  ye  "  here  is  emphatic,  to  contrast  their  case  with  that  of  the 
guards. 

Ver.  7.  Into  Galilee. — To  which  these  women  belonged  (xxvii.  55). 

Ver.  9.  As  they  went  to  tell  His  disciples. — Omitted  in  best  MSS.  and  in  R.V.  All  hail ! — 
Lit.,  Rejoice  !     The  Greek  salutation,  both  on  meeting  and  on  parting  (^Carr). 

Ver.  10.  My  brethren. — The  general  view  is  that  the  Lord  referred  to  His  brethren  by 
spiritual  relationship.     See  xii.  49  ;  cf.  John  xx.  17 ;  Heb.  ii.  11. 

Ver.  13.  Say  ye,  etc — In  addition  to  all  the  judgments  of  impotency,  embarrassment,  and 
rejection,  they  are  now  subjected  to  the  judgment  of  stupidity  (^Lange).  Let  the  critic  say 
what  better  expedient  they  could  have  thought  of,  before  he  assigns  its  poverty  as  a  reason 
for  discrediting  the  story.  That  St.  Matthew,  and  he  alone,  records  it,  is  sufficiently 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that,  his  being  the  first  written  Gospel,  and,  moreover,  the  Gospel 
for  the  Jew,  it  behoved  him  to  deal  with  a  saying  "commonly  reported  among  the  Jews 
until  this  day  " ;  while  its  being  recorded  by  him  was  a  sufficient  reason  why  no  further 
notice  should  be  taken  of  it,  when  there  was  so  much  of  greater  importance  to  tell  {Oihsoii). 

Ver.  14.  If  this  come  to  the  governor's  ears. — See  R.V.  marg.  "If  this  come  before  the 
governor" — i.e.,  not  in  the  way  of  mere  report,  but  for  judicial  investigation  {Browri). 
Persuade. — The  word  meant  more  than  it  would  have  been  quite  polite  to  have  expressed 
{Mori.wn).  "  They  say  that  gifts  persuade  even  gods  "  (Euripides,  Medea,  964).  Secure  you. 
— Rid  you  of  care  (R.V.).  The  only  other  place  where  the  word  occurs  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  1  Cor.  vii.  32. 

Ver.  15.  This  saying  is  commonly  reported,  etc.— See  R.V.  "  Until  this  day" — to  the  date 
of  the  publication  of  this  Gospel.  Justin  Martyr,  who  flourished  about  A.D.  170,  says  in  his 
"  Dialogue  with  Trypho  the  Jew,"  that  the  Jews  dispersed  the  story  by  means  of  special 
messengers  sent  to  every  country  {Brown). 

Ver.  16.  Then. — But  (R.V.).  Certainly  not  before  the  second  week  after  the  resurrection, 
and  probably  somewhat  later  (Brown).  The  eleven  disciples. — They  come  forward  here  as 
the  representatives  of  the  entire  band  of  disciples,  and  not  as  the  select  apostolic  college  of 
the  Twelve,  which  makes  its  first  appearance  after  the  selection  of  Matthias.  This  distinc- 
tion is  to  be  found  in  the  remark  that  "some  doubted,"  which  cannot  apply  to  the  Eleven. 
Reference  is  made  to  many  witnesses  in  1  Cor.  xv.  6  (Lange).  A  mountain. — T/te  (R.V.). 
As  Galilee  was  the  most  convenient  place  for  a  large  public  gathering  of  disciples,  so  a 

642 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxviii. 


mountain  was  the  most  convenient  spot,  not  only  because  of  its  seclusion,  but  because  it  would 
give  the  bebt  opportunity  for  all  to  see  and  hear.  What  mountain  it  was  we  can  only  con- 
jecture {Gibson). 

Ver.  17.  Some  doubted. — "  Certainly,"  says  Dr.  Brown,  "  none  of  the  Eleven,  after  what  took 
place  at  previous  interviews  in  Jerusalem.  But  if  the  five  hundred  were  now  present,  we 
may  well  believe  this  of  some  of  them."  See  also  Lange's  note  above  (ver.  16).  But 
Dr.  Plumptre's  remarks  are  important :  "  The  narrative  of  John  xxi.  4  tlirows  some  light 
upon  it.  There  was  something  mysterious  and  supernatural  in  the  manifestation  of  the 
glorified  body— outlines,  at  first  indistinct  and  scarcely  recognised,  and  then  the  whole  form 
seen  as  it  had  been  seen  in  life.  The  more  devoted  and  loving  disciples  were  probably,  here 
as  before,  the  first  to  recognise  their  Lord." 

Ver.  18.  Came. — To  them  (K.V.).     I.e.,  up  to  them,  near  to  them. 

Ver.  19.  In  the  name. —  Into  the  name  (R.V.).  The  difference  is  considerable.  "In  the 
name  "  might  imply  that  baptism  was  to  be  administered  by  church  ministers  acting  in  the 
name  of  the  Almighty.  "  Into  the  name  "  means  that  converts  are  pledged  by  baptism  to 
a  faith  which  has  for  its  object  the  Being  designated  by  that  name,  and  which  brings  them 
into  union  with  Him.  The  word  "name"  has  a  wide  and  deep  meaning;  it  implies  a  living 
reality,  a  power,  and  in  Scripture,  when  applied  to  God,  is  equivalent  to  the  Godhead 
(F.  C.  Cook).  Of  the  Father  .  .  .  Holy  Ghost. — The  twofold  truth  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity  is  thus  distinctly  stated — (1)  Identity  in  essence.  The  Three  have  one  Name ;  no 
Being,  however  glorious,  not  being  God,  could  be  included  in  one  Name  ;  (2)  The  order  is 
equally  clear ;  first,  He  from  Whom  all  proceeded  ;  second.  He  through  Whom  all 
proceedeth ;  third.  He  by  Whom  all  proceedeth.  Co-ordination  as  to  essence  and  name, 
subordination  as  to  mutual  relation  and  office  (ibid.). 

Ver.  20.  To  observe. — Then  our  Lord's  precepts  given  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and 
through  the  whole  course  of  His  ministry,  were  not  simply  to  be  admired,  but  to  be  kept. 
The  end  of  the  world.— See  R.V.  marg.  Amen. — Omitted  in  the  leading  MSS.  and  in 
the  K.V. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTE. 

The  peculiarities  of  Matthew's  last  chapter  are  largely  -due  to  the  purpose  of  his 
Gospel.  Throughout  it  has  been  the  lecord  of  the  Galilean  ministry,  the  picture  of 
the  King  of  Israel,  and  of  His  treatment  by  those  who  should  have  been  His  subjects. 
This  chapter  establishes  the  fact  of  His  resurrection ;  but,  passing  by  the  Jerusalem 
appearances  of  the  risen  Lord,  as  being  granted  to  individuals,  and  having  less  bearing 
on  His  royalty,  emphasises  two  points :  His  rejection  by  the  representatives  of  the 
nation,  whose  He  is  endorsed  by  popular  acceptance  ;  and  the  solemn  assumption,  in  the 
Galilee  so  familiar  to  the  reader,  of  universal  dominion,  with  the  world-wide  commission  in 
which  the  kingdom  bursts  the  narrow  national  limits  and  becomes  co-extensive  with 
humanity.  It  is  better  to  learn  the  meaning  of  Matthew's  selection  of  his  incidents,  than  to 
wipe  out  instructive  peculiarities  in  the  vain  attempt  after  harmony. — A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—10. 

A  double  dawn. — Three  successive  and  well-defined  stages  mark  the  literal 
dawn  :  that  greatest  darkness  which  concludes  the  night ;  the  "  scattering "  of 
that  darkness  which  we  call  the  twilight ;  the  sunrise  itself.  In  the  figurative 
sunrise  of  the  passage  before  us,  three  similar  steps  may  be  noted.  There  is  utter 
darkness,  in  the  first  place ;  waning  darkness,  in  the  second  place ;  unshadowed 
light,  in  the  last. 

1.  Utter  darkness. — What  else,  on  the  one  hand,  do  we  read  of  here,  as  things 
were  at  first,  in  the  way  of  expectation  1  The  "  women  "  spoken  of  in  verse  1  have 
evidently  been,  for  some  time,  in  a  condition  of  waiting.  Thev  had  seen  the 
Saviour  placed  in  the  sepulchre  just  before  the  sunset  beginning  of  the  first 
day  of  the  week.  After  that,  the  sanctity  of  the  Sabbath  and  the  darkness 
of  night  had  prevented  them  from  returning  to  see  it.  But  now,  at  the 
first  opportunity,  they  are  coming  to  do  so  ;  starting  for  the  place,  in  all  pro- 
bability (John  XX.  1),  before  the  darkness  had  gone.  So  much  are  their  hearts 
set  on  the  obj(  ct  in  view !  And  yet  how  sorrowful,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the 
object  in  view  !    What  are  they  looking  for  except  to  see  the  "  place,"  and  perhaps 

643 


CHAP,  xxviii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW. 


the  face,  of  the  "  dead  "  (ver.  1 ;  Mark  xvi.  3)1  And  what  are  they  hoping  to 
do,  at  the  best,  except  that  which  is  usually  done  for  the  "  dead  "  (Mark  xvi.  1)  1 
Of  the  presence  of  "  life,"  of  any  hope  of  it,  they  have  not  a  thought.  Much  the 
same  is  true,  next,  in  the  way  of  experience.  It  seems  most  natural  to  suppose  of 
what  is  told  us  next,  in  verses  2-4,  that  the  descent  of  the  angel  and  removal  of 
the  stone  were  over  before  the  women  arrived  at  the  place,  and  that  what  they 
beheld  (and  afterwaids  described  to  the  disciples)  was  the  form  of  the  angel 
seated  on  the  stone,  and  the  effect  of  his  presence  as  manifested  so  terribly  in 
the  fainting  forms  of  the  guard  (Mark  xvi.  4  ;  Luke  xxiv.  2  ;  John  xx.  1).  Most 
probably,  also,  they  were  near  enough  to  the  place  to  have  felt  something  of  that 
accompanying  "  earthquake  "  of  which  we  are  told  (ver.  2).  Altogether,  therefore, 
there  must  have  been  everything  to  fill  them,  at  first,  with  the  very  direst  alarm. 
What  with  the  terror  of  the  earthquake  (and  nothing  physical  is  said  to  be 
worse)  ;  and  the  greater  terror  of  the  supernatural ;  and  the  almost  irresistible 
terror  of  seeing  the  terror  of  courage  itself  (ver.  4), — awful  indeed  in  this  respect 
must  their  condition  have  been,  even  banishing  the  thought,  for  the  moment,  of 
that  exceedingly  sorrowful  comfort  in  hope  of  which  they  had  come.  Could  any 
*'  darkness  "  be  worse  ? 

II.  Waning  darkness. — This  we  find  brought  about  entirely  by  what  the 
angel  here  says  to  the  women  (vers.  5-7).  By  what  he  says  to  them,  first,  in 
regard  to  the  present.  How  encouraging  his  words  on  this  point !  "  Fear  not " 
— be  not  afraid  ;  things  are  not  so  bad  as  they  seem.  How  discriminating  also  ! 
How  clear  and  direct  !  "  Fear  not  ye  " — ye,  to  whom  I  am  speaking.  Be  assured 
that  ye  have  no  cause  for  alarm.  How  full,  again,  of  sympathy  and  approval 
(end  of  ver.  5) !  Your  object  is  mine  as  well.  Ye  honour  Jesus.  So  do  I  too. 
Infallibly  and  sensibly  would  the  inward  darkness  of  these  trembling  women 
begin  to  lessen  under  words  such  as  these !  And  that,  of  course,  all  the  more, 
because  of  the  quarter  they  came  from !  Nothing  is  more  assuring  than  the 
assurances  of  authority  !  Nothing  more  gracious  than  the  graciousness  of  the 
great !  The  angel's  language,  next,  with  regard  to  the  past.  See  how  his  opening 
words  on  this  point  prepare  the  way  for  the  rest !  "  He  is  not  here "  where 
you  saw  Him  laid.  Something  has  happened  meanwhile  of  vast  importance. 
How  his  next  words  follow  this  up  !  That  which  has  happened  is  this  ;  "  He  has 
risen  again."  How  the  words  that  then  follow  fortify  these !  This  is  only  what 
He  Himself  used  to  tell  you.  Remember  how  often  He  said  so.  How  the 
angel's  yet  further  words  do  this  still  more  !  How  they  give  actual  proof,  in 
part,  of  the  truth  of  his  language  !  "  See  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay."  See, 
therefore,  that  He  is  certainly  gone,  as  I  said.  In  these  successive  utterances 
there  would  be  a  still  further  lessening  of  the  gloom  of  these  women.  Most 
surprising,  no  doubt,  was  the  purport  of  these  utterances.  Hardly  less  so  would 
be  their  utter  falseness.  With  such  assurances,  and  such  recollections,  and  such 
tangible  proofs,  they  might  begin  to  believe.  The  angel's  language,  lastly,  with 
regard  to  the  future.  How  it  confirms  what  he  has  told  them  before  !  It  is  all  so 
sure — so  he  tells  them  now — that  they  may  safely  tell  it  in  turn.  So  joyful, 
also,  that  they  cannot  do  it  too  soon  (beginning  of  ver.  7).  How  it  supplements 
what  he  has  told  them  before  !  The  Saviour  is  not  only  risen.  He  is  still  upon 
earth ;  He  is  going  to  where  they  have  often  seen  Him  before,  and  where  also, 
before  long,  they  shall  see  Him  again  (middle  of  ver.  7).  How  his  language, 
finally,  seals  all  he  has  told  them  before.  Tbey  have  his  full  authority  for 
all  they  have  heard.  His  having  uttered  it  once,  he  reminds  them,  is 
sufficient.  It  would  not  only  be  foolish,  it  would  be  wrong,  to  doubt  him.  Let 
the  last  remnant  of  unbelief  cease  at  that  thought  (end  of  ver.  7). 

III.  Unshadowed  light. — This,  first  of  all,  in  their  faith.     There  is  still  about 
them,  very  naturally,  a  certain  awe  and  solemnity ;  but  there  is  no  shadow  of 

644 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,   chap,  xxviii. 


doubt  now  to  interfere  with  their  "  joy,"  or  to  make  them  hesitate  about  making 
it  known  (ver.  8).  Oh  !  what  tidings  they  feel,  rather,  they  have  to  com- 
municate !  Oh  !  for  wings  to  reach  those  they  desire  !  Oh  !  for  breath  to  tell 
all  !  Similar  "  light,"  in  the  next  place,  in  their  experience.  Suddenly,  as  they 
fly,  they  are  standing  transfixed.  Can  it  be?  Yes,  it  must  be.  It  is  the 
Master  Himself !  His  own  aspect  !  His  own  voice  !  His  own  greeting  once 
more  (beginning  of  ver.  9)  !  And  yet,  withal,  is  He  quite  the  same  as  He  had 
been  to  them  of  old  ?  Why,  if  so,  do  we  behold  them  now  "  worshipping  "  Him 
on  their  faces?  Why  embracing  His  "  feet  "  (end  of  ver.  9  ;  contrast  xxvi.  7)? 
Evidently,  with  no  less  afiection,  there  is  even  deeper  awe  than  before.  The 
reason  seems  plain.  Not  only  now  are  they  seeing  the  Saviour.  They  are  seeing 
the  '*  risen  "  Saviour  as  well.  All  that  they  used  to  admire  in  Him  is  there  still. 
All  the  old  consideration  for  those  to  whom  He  is  speaking.  "  Be  not  afraid  " 
(cf.  xiv.  27  ;  Mark  v.  36).  All  the  old  gentleness  to  the  fallen  and  weak. 
"  Go,  tell  my  brethren  (see  xxvi.  56  ;  and  Mark  iii.  34,  35).  What  they  see 
further  is  what  has  Been  added  thereto.     This,  at  last,  is  fulness  of  light ! 

In  this  story  of  these  first  witnesses  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  there  is  much 
which  is  characteristic  of  the  gospel :  — 

1.  In  the  persons  selected. — Not  the  world  at  large,  as  represented  by  the 
heathen  guard.  Nor  yet  the  general  body  of  believers,  as  represented  by  the 
disciples.  But  those  faithful  women  who  were  both  last  and  first  at  the  sepulchre 
of  Jesus  (cf.  Luke  xxiv.  22-24 ;  also  Acts  x.  40,  41).  It  was  not  necessary, 
neither  was  it  ever  meant,  that  the  risen  Saviour  should  appear  to  more  than  a 
few.     If  any  have  seen  Him,  that  is  proof  enough  to  the  rest  (cf.  John  xx.  29). 

2.  In  the  method  pursued. — Cf.  Mark  viii.  22-25,  iv.  33;  John  xvi.  12; 
Pro  v.  iv.  18. 

HOMILIES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.   1-10.    Christ's  resurrection. —  The  resuri-ection  :  the  victory  won. — 

I.  The  place.  I.  The  seeming  defeat. — 1.  Jesus  dead. 

II.  The    time. —  The    day    is    im-  2.  Jesus  buried, 
portant,    for   it   was  the  first   Easter  II.  Victory. 

Sunday,  and  the  event  of  that  morn-  III.  Victory    proclaimed.  —  1.  By 

ing  has  caused  Sunday  to  be  observed  the  angels.     2.   By  the  disciples. 
as  a  holy  day  throughout  the  Christian  IV.  The  results  of  Christ's  victory, 

world.  — 1.  It  is   a  pi'oof  of  His   being   the 

III.  The  visitors.  —  What  motive  Son  of  God  (Rom.  i.  4).  2.  It  is  a 
led  them  to  this  act  ?  It  was  love,  pledge  that  salvation  is  finished 
the  mightiest  power  in  the  universe.  (Rom.  iv.  25).     3.  It  is  a  pattern  for 

IV.  The  messenger. — We  know  but  our  changed  lives  (Rom.  vi.  4,  13). 
little  concerning  angels,  but  their  4.  It  is  a  promise  that  our  bodies  will 
mission  is  stated  in  Heb.  i.  14.  Never  rise  too  (1  Cor.  xv.  20,  49).  —  /.  L. 
did    celestial    messenger   bring    more  Trotter. 

joyful  news  than  fell  from  the  lips  of 

the  angel  on  that  morning  !  Vers.     1-6.    The       women     at      the 

V.  The  meeting. — A  few  moments  sepulchre.  —  I.  Great  courage  where 
before   Jesus   had   appeared   to  Mary  least  expected. 

Magdalene ;  now   He   appears  to   the  II.  Heavenly     light    breaking    on 

other    women. — 1.  A   living    Saviour,  earthly  gloom. — Anon. 

not  the  ghost  of  a  dead  man.     2.  A 

comforting,  encouraging  Saviour.     "  Be  Vers.    5,   6.    The    angeVs   comforting 

not   afraid."      3.  A    brotherly    Saviour  words. — 1.   By    the    same    means    the 

(ver.  10). — J.  L.  Hurlhut,  D.D.  Lord  can  terrify  His  adversaries,  apd 

645 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTAHY :    ST.  MATTHEW. 


comfort  His  people ;  those  He  sufFereth 
to  lie  still  in  their  terror,  these  He 
comforteth.  2.  Such  as  are  seeking 
after  Jesus  may  take  comfort,  what- 
soever come  ;  for  upon  this  ground  the 
angel  saith,  *'  Fear  not,  I  know  ye  are 
seeking  Jesus."  3.  We  have  no 
reason  to  be  ashamed  of  Christ's  cross, 
when  the  angels  avow  Christ  crucified 
to  be  the  Lord.  4.  If  God  should  use 
kings  and  emperors  to  be  preachers 
of  Christ's  cross  and  resurrection,  it 
should  be  no  disparagement  to  their 
high  place,  for  this  message  is  worthy 
of  such  an  angel  as  tJiis  to  be  messenger, 
and  even  the  angels  do  not  so  much 
honour  the  message  as  they  are 
honoured  by  it ;  and  who  is  he  who 
thinketh  himself  too  good  to  be  a 
preacher  of  the  gospel?  5.  Christ's 
body  after  His  resurrection  retaineth 
the  natural  properties  of  a  body ;  it  is 
in  one  place  and  not  in  another ;  the 
Scripture  knoweth  no  ubiquity  of  His 
body.  "  He  is  not  here  ;  He  is  risen." 
6.  No  rest  for  our  faith  save  in  our 
Lord's  word ;  if  it  be  once  received, 
then  other  things  serve  to  confirm 
^aith ;  for  first,  "  He  is  risen,  as  He 
said,"  saith  the  angel,  and  then  biddeth 
them  "  Come,  sea  the  plage  where  the 
Lord  lay."  7.  It  is  a  sufficient  argu- 
ment to  prove  that  Christ's  body  is  not 
present  in  a  place,  if  sense  perceive  it 
not  present,  for  the  angel  pro  vet  h  that 
Christ  is  not  in  the  sepulchre  by  this 
reason,  "  Come,  see  the  place  where  the 
Lord  lay  ;  He  is  not  here." — David 
Dickson. 

Yer.  6.  The  place  where  the  Lord  lay. 
— The  angel  here  appeals  to  the  senses 
of  those  who  stand  about  the  tomb  to 
attest  the  truth  of  Christ's  actual 
resurrection  from  the  dead. 

I.  The  empty  tomb  at  once  pro- 
claimed the  actual  resurrection  of  the 
Saviour.  —  The  resurrection  is  pro- 
claimed to  be  a  fact  —  1.  By  the 
testimony  of  human  witnesses.  The 
disciples  were  men  of  probity,  and  had 
no  worldly  advantage  to  acquire  from 
the  publication  of  such  a  circumstance, 
but   quite   the    opposite.      They   had 

646 


known  Christ,  surely,  long  enough  to 
recognise  Him  again  when  He  ap- 
peared amongst  them ;  and  with  one 
concurrent  voice  they  testify,  "  He  is 
risen  from  the  dead."  2.  This  is 
strengthened  by  the  testimony  of  angels, 
and  by  their  various  appearances  as 
bearers  of  the  news.  3.  The  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  was  not  denied,  even  by 
His  enemies,  but  was  covertly  recog- 
nised and  admitted,  even  while  the 
Jews  agreed  to  a  traditional  falsehood 
to  conceal  from  their  posterity  that 
which  they  knew  to  be  a  fact.  4.  The 
Apostles  constantly  attested  the  fact,  as 
also  did  the  Fathers  of  the  primitive 
Christian  Church — Ignatius,  Polycarp, 
and  the  other  venerable  custodians  of 
the  truth.  5.  Christ  rose,  likewise, 
in  precise  accordance  with  Scriptural 
types  and  predictions,  and  with  the 
same  body  as  that  in  which  He  had 
lived  and  died. 

II.  The  language  of  the  text  ex- 
presses the  great  humiliation  of  Jesus 
Christ. — "  Come,  see  the  place  where 
the  Lord  lay." 

III.  We  cannot  meditate  beside  the 
place  where  the  Lord  lay  without 
learning  something  of  the  infinite  love 
of  God. 

IV.  Neither  can  we  look  upon  His 
empty  tomb  without  being  convinced 
of  the  Divine  faithfulness. — Faithful- 
ness as  to  promises,  types,  shadows,  and 
predictions. 

Y.  This  visit  to  the  place  where  the 
Lord  lay  must  bring  with  it,  too,  a 
striking  evidence  of  His  Divine 
sovereignty. —  "  I  have  power  to  lay 
down  My  life,  and  I  have  power  to 
take  it  again."  And  if  He  thus  held 
in  His  sovereign  hand  the  issues  and 
the  destinies  of  His  own  career,  He 
can,  in  like  manner,  overrule  and  con- 
trol the  destinies  of  His  people. 

VI.  Is  not  this  vacant  tomb  an 
almost  satirical  evidence  of  His 
triumph  over  His  enemies  and  ours  ? 

YII.  "  Come,  see  the  place  where 
the  Lord  lay,"  that  you  may  behold 
in  it  the  certain  and  the  glorious 
pledge  of  a  perfected  salvation. — 
A.  Mursell. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxviii. 


The  resw^^ection  of  Christ  and  the 
inspiration  of  the  Bible.  —  I.  The  re- 
surrection of  Christ  is  an  historical 
fact,  and,  as  such,  it  can  be  proved 
like  any  other  fact  in  history. 

II.  The  resurrection  of  Christ,  once 
established,  carries  with  it  other  great 
truths,  such  as  His  divinity  and  the 
infallibility  of  His  teaching^. 

III.  Having  established  His  divinity 
and  the  infallibiHty  of  His  teaching, 
we  have  a  short  and  easy  method  to 
prove  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of 
God,  and  the  expression  of  the  will  of 
God.  Christ,  possessing  Divine  wisdom 
and  never  erring  in  a  single  state- 
ment, declares  that  the  Old  Testament 
prophets  spoke  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  or 
that  God  spoke  through  them.  He 
quoted  "  the  Law,  the  Prophets,  and 
the  Psalms"  —  which  included  the 
whole  Old  Testament  as  we  now  have 
it — as  the  Word  of  God.  This  stamps 
the  whole  Old  Testament  with  Divine 
authority.  He  also  promised  to  guide 
the  Apostles  in  what  they  were  to 
record  (John  xiv.  26,  xvi.  13).  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  this  promise  was 
fulfilled  when  they  received  the  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  and  "spake  with  other 
tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utter- 
ance." The  fulfilment  of  this  promise, 
confirmed  as  it  w^as  by  signs  and 
miracles,  stamps  the  teaching  of  the 
Apostles  with  the  imprimatur  of  God. 
Thus  we  see  that  in  dealing  with  doubt 
and  difi&culty  respecting  doctrine  and 
belief,  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to 
satisfy  the  intellect  about  the  historical 
Christ  and  the  great  facts  of  His  life. 
Once  establish  the  resurrection  of 
Christ  as  an  historical  fact,  and  you 
have  also  established  His  divinity  and 
the  inspiration  of  the  Bible. — aS'.  Mac- 
naughton,  M.A. 

Ver.  7.  The  risen  Christ  in  Galilee. — 
Why  did  Christ  make  an  appointment 
with  Hls  disciples  in  Galilee?  Why 
did  He  make  that  distant  place  the 
scene  of  the  main  evidence  of  His 
resurrection?  Why  not  here  in 
Jerusalem  ?     Whether  they  were  coji- 


sciously  aimed  at  or  not,  certain  results 
were  secured  that  could  not  have  been 
gained  had  His  appearance  been  con- 
fined to  Jerusalem. 

I.  His  resurrection  was  thus  separ- 
ated from  all  those  superstitions 
known  as  ghosts  or  apparitions. — 
These,  men  have  always  believed  in ; 
but  they  are  an  indirect,  left-handed 
witness  to  a  consciousness  in  man  that 
he  is  more  than  he  seems  to  be,  and 
that  death  is  not  what  it  appears  to  be. 
The  ghost  haunts  its  former  scenes ;  it 
is  seen  where  the  body  was  buried. 
The  action  of  the  mind  in  this  respect 
is  singular,  and  is  governed  by  a  sort 
of  logic ;  it  feels  that  the  other  life 
lies  close  to  this,  and  that  the  two 
lives  of  men  cannot  be  far  divorced 
from  each  other.  But  these  beliefs  are 
superstitions,  and  they  were  rife  at  the 
time  of  Christ.  The  one  thing  to  be 
feared  in  connection  with  the  resurrec- 
tion was  that  it  would  be  regarded  as 
an  ordinary  ghost  story.  It  has  been 
so  interpreted  in  later  days — as  a  part 
of  a  great,  common  superstition.  But, 
as  if  to  meet  in  advance  this  interpre- 
tation, and  to  separate  it  in  the  minds 
of  the  disciples  from  everything  of  the 
sort,  it  is  made  under  conditions  utterly 
unlike  those  of  apparitions. 

II.  This  appointment  in  Galilee  was 
a  testing  lesson  in  faith. — Is  it,  after 
all — we  can  imagine  them  saying — 
worth  the  while  to  make  the  journey 
to  Galilee?  Can  He  who  died  on  the 
cross,  whose  feet  were  pierced  with 
nails,  journey  thither  ?  That  He 
should  appear  here  is  possible ;  we 
have  heard  the  like  before ;  but  will 
He  appear  in  Galilee  ?  So  their  minds 
may  have  acted ;  and  as  they  made 
the  journey,  every  step  and  every  hour 
must  have  tended  to  throw  them 
out  of  their  belief  and  hope.  For  there 
is  nothing  that  so  tests  our  faith  in  an 
event  difficult  of  belief  as  to  get  out  of 
the  atmosphere  of  it.  The  wonder 
lessens  as  we  go  away  from  it.  But  if 
this  experience  of  the  disciples  was  a 
trial  of  their  faith,  it  also  strengthened 
it.  For  faith  is  not  hurt  by  doubt 
until  it  yields  to  it.     The  very  weak- 

G47 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILEfIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


ness  and  faltering  of  faith  may  be 
turned  into  strength  by  pressing  on  in 
its  path,  fighting  doubt,  and  resisting 
the  appeals  of  the  world.  This  journey 
of  simple  trust  and  stout  adherence  to 
hope  was  a  fine  preparation  for  harder 
experiences  soon  to  follow.  There 
would  come  times  when  not  merely 
the  faltering  of  their  own  hearts  was 
against  them,  but  all  the  powers  of 
the  world;  times  when  their  only 
refuge  would  be  their  faith  in  the  risen 
and  ascended  Lord.  Then  the  memory 
of  this  experience,  crowned  by  actual 
sight  of  their  Master,  would  come  to 
their  rescue. 

III.  We  find  another  explanation  of 
this  meeting  in  Galilee  in  the  fact  that 
Christ  saw  fit  to  give  them  their  great 
commission  on  the  scene  of  their 
common  labours. — For  it  was  in  Gali- 
lee that  they  had  been  called  and  set 
to  their  work.  It  was  in  Galilee  that 
the  great  sermon  had  been  spoken 
which  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  gospel ; 
and  here  His  mighty  works  were  chiefly 
done.  His  presence  in  Jerusalem  was 
incidental  to  His  life,  and  not  the  main 
field  of  it.  Nor  did  Jerusalem  so  well 
represent  the  world  that  was  to  be 
discipled  as  the  northern  province.  It 
is  not  improbable,  also,  that  He  thus 
intended  to  convey  to  the  disciples 
some  further  and  closer  conception  of 
the  nature  of  their  work.  "Go  ye, 
and  make  disciples  of  all  nations." 
"  How  ?  "  they  may  have  asked.  "  As 
I  have  done  in  these  fields  and  villages 
before  your  eyes.  There  I  turned 
water  into  wine :  go,  turning  the 
common  and  dull  things  of  earth  into 
glorious  and  inspiring  reahties.  There 
I  fed  the  multitude  :  go,  taking  the 
Bread  of  life  to  the  multitudes'of  earth 
— Bread  that  shall  also  become  literal 
bread  to  all  the  poor  and  starving  of 
the  world.  There  I  stilled  the  storm  : 
go,  carrying  the  all-conquering  peace 
of  God  to  the  stormy  and  warring 
nations.  On  that  hillside  and  by  those 
shores  I  preached  the  gospel  to  the 
poor  :  go,  carry  everywhere  the  same 
gospel  of  consolation.  In  all  these 
villages  I  cured  the  sick  and  the  lame 

648 


and  the  blind  in  answer  to  their  faith. 
Take  My  words  to  them  again,  and  tell 
them  that  by  faith  in  Me  they  will 
be  delivered  from  all  their  groaning 
miseries.  Teach  them  that  there  is  a 
Divine,  delivering  power  at  work  in  the 
world ;  that  God  is  the  Father,  and 
that  He  has  sent  His  Son  into  the 
world  to  save  it,  and  to  restore  to  Him 
all  who  believe  on  Me."  More  vividly 
still  He  was  able  to  impress  upon  their 
minds  His  comforting  assurance  :  "  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world."  *'  I  was  with  you  as 
we  trod  all  these  paths  from  city  to 
city  ;  I  never  failed  you ;  I  taught  and 
cheered  and  inspired  you  by  My  con- 
stant presence.  So  it  will  be  to  the 
end."  These  things  are  for  us  also. 
We  have  a  Leader  who  is  also  a  sharer 
in  our  life. — 2\  T.  Munger,  D.D. 

Yer.  8.  Believing  and  testifying. — 
L  Such  as  know  what  a  heart  grieved 
for  want  of  Christ  meaneth,  will  be 
very  ready  to  comfort  such  as  are  in 
such  a  grief,  as  these  holy  women  are 
glad  to  carry  good  news  to  the  heart- 
broken disciples.  2.  Mixed  affections, 
fear  and  joy,  at  one  time,  may  well 
consist  in  the  heart  of  a  believer.  One 
may  tremble  at  the  majesty  of  God, 
and  rejoice  in  His  friendship,  mani- 
fested by  any  means  which  He  pleaseth, 
for  thus  are  these  godly  souls  affected. 
3.  It  is  a  choice  good  disposition  to 
believe  the  Lord's  word,  and  diligently 
to  go  about  the  obedience  of  it,  in  fear 
and  trembling,  such  as  here  is  to  be 
seen  in  these  women  ;  having  believed 
the  glad  tidings,  they  run  quickly,  with 
fear  and  joy,  to  bring  the  disciples 
word. — David  Dickson. 

Woman  witnessing  to  Chrisfs  resur- 
rection.— I.  The  false  message  which 
brought  sin  into  the  world,  and  all  our 
woe,  was  given  first  to  woman,  and  by 
her  was  communicated  to  the  man. 
The  resurrection  of  the  Lord,  the 
healing  of  that  early  death-wound, 
was  communicated  in  the  same  way. 
From  an  angel  to  woman,  and  from 
woman  to  man,  and  from  man  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxviil 


world,  came  death.  From  an  evil 
angel,  through  the  link  of  woman  to 
mankind,  the  evil  tidings  spread  and 
covered  the  earth.  From  a  good  angel 
to  woman,  and  from  women  to  men, 
and  from  men  to  the  world  came  life, 
the  life  of  the  world. 

II.  It  is  not  much  preaching  we  get 
from  angels'  lips  ;  but  there  is  a  little 
here,  and  that  little  very  precious. 
The  angel  gave  their  spirits  the  cordial 
before  he  imposed  the  race  upon  their 
limbs.  The  angel  knew  his  part  well, 
for  the  whole  theory  of  missions  is 
here. 

III.  "They  did  run  to  bring  the 
disciples  word." — It  was  the  word 
within  them  that  impelled  them  to 
hasten  ;  it  was  the  word  in  their  heart 
that  made  them  run  with  the  word  on 
their  lips.  I  detect  a  grand  key-note 
here.  It  is  not  only  the  message, 
carefully  learned  and  correctly  told  ;  it 
is  not  only  the  faithful  witness-bearing, 
whatever  danger  may  be  incurred. 
Over  and  above  all  this  there  are  an 
eagerness,  an  enthusiasm,  and  a  haste, 
in  bearing  the  message  of  redemption, 
which  are  in  keeping  with  the  case, 
and  mark  the  conduct  of  true  disciples 
in  all  places  and  at  all  times. — W. 
Arnotf  D.D. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Meeting  Jesus. — 1.  Such 
as  obey  the  directions  of  God's  servants. 


and  do  use  prescribed  means  that  they 
may  meet  with  Christ,  shall  find  Him 
ere  they  be  aware.  These  women  meet 
Christ  before  they  looked  for  Him ;  as 
they  went  on  His  errand,  Jesus  met 
them.  2.  Joyful  is  the  meeting  which 
a  soul  hath  with  Christ.  3.  A  humble 
sinner  may  be  homely  with  Christ. 
4.  Such  as  believe  God's  word  in  the 
mouth  of  His  messengers  shall  find 
confirmation  of  it  by  Christ  Himself ; 
for  here  the  Lord  bids  them  do  the 
same  things  which  the  angel  had 
commanded  before — to  carry  news  to 
the  Apostles.  5.  For  all  that  can  be 
said  unto  us,  our  faith  is  still  mixed 
with  some  doubtings,  which  breed  fear, 
and  Christ  only  can  remove  them ; 
therefore  saith  He  here,  "  Be  not 
afraid."  6.  The  weakest  of  believers 
are  much  beloved  and  esteemed  by 
Christ.  "Go,  tell  My  brethren." 
7.  The  place  wherein  Christ  is  most 
welcome  to  preach  shall  be  most 
honoured  by  His  presence.  "  In  Gali- 
lee shall  they  see  Me."  8.  Howsoever 
our  Lord  be  purposed  to  give  sensible 
satisfaction  to  His  people  in  due  time, 
yet  doth  He  ever  require  some  belief  of 
His  word  in  the  mouth  of  His  servants, 
and  some  obedience  of  faith  to  go  before 
it ;  therefore  saith  He,  "  Tell  them 
that  they  go  to  Galilee,"  and  addeth, 
"There  shall  they  see  Me." — David 
Dickson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11—15. 

Unwilling  witnesses. — In  the  earlier  verses  of  this  chapter  we  have  a  brief 
account  of  the  first  effects  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  on  His  friends.  The 
present  verses  describe  the  same  in  regard  to  His  foes.  They  show  us  how  dire 
was  the  consequent  perplexity,  and  how  utterly  desperate  the  ultimate  decisions  of 
those  who  had  been  chiefly  instrumental  in  effecting  His  death. 

I.  Dire  perplexity. — We  find  this,  on  the  one  hand,  on  the  part  of  the  guard. 
When  the  angel  had  gone,  and  the  catastrophe  was  over,  and  they  at  last  had 
recovered,  they  would  dare  to  look  round.  We  know  what  they  would  see — the 
seal  broken,  the  stone  removed,  the  sepulchre  open,  its  Inmate  gone !  What 
were  they  to  do  ?  Some,  it  would  appear,  were  too  perplexed  to  do  anything  but 
stand  still.  Others  among  them — a  portion  only — went  their  way  to  the  priests 
(ver.  11).  Probably  they  thought  that  these  would  certainly  hear  something  of 
what  had  occurred,  and  that  it  would  be  best,  on  the  whole,  for  the  story  of  it  to 
be  told  by  themselves.  In  any  case,  what  they  had  to  say  would  reflect  much  on 
themselves.  In  any  case,  it  would  seem  to  those  who  heard  it  very  hard  of  belief. 
It  was  hard  to  say,  therefore,  whether  telling  it  in  person  would  be  of  any  avail. 

649 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW, 


Yet,  what  else  could  be  done?  The  point  is  one  which  divides  them  in  an 
irreconcilable  way.  Evidently,  as  a  body,  they  were  at  their  wits'  end  as  to 
what  ought  to  be  done.  We  find  similar  perplexity,  on  the  other  hand,  on  the 
part  of  the  priests.  It  is  very  observable  that  they  never  seem  to  have  thought 
for  a  moment  of  asking  for  the  punishment  of  the  guard.  It  seems  evident,  there- 
fore, that  they  did  not  doubt  their  story  so  far  as  it  went.  We  may  well  believe, 
indeed,  that  there  was  something  in  the  still  terrified  looks  of  these  men,  and 
in  the  very  tone  and  manner  of  their  speech  in  telling  their  story,  which  vouched 
irresistibly,  so  far,  for  its  truth.  And  we  can  well  understand,  also,  how  that 
story,  if  believed  in,  would  shut  out  the  idea  above  named.  Even  Roman  soldiers 
could  not  be  expected  to  fight  against  supernatural  force.  On  that  side,  there- 
fore, and  in  that  way,  there  was  clearly  nothing  to  be  done.  Could  anything  be 
done,  in  any  way,  on  the  other  side  of  the  case  ?  Could  anything  be  done 
in  the  direction  of  explaining  away  the  undoubted  facts  of  the  case?  To 
answer  this  question — early  in  the  day  as  it  was,  and  many  as  had  been  their 
recent  assemblings — they  call  another  one  yet  (ver.  12);  an  assembly  of  their 
whole  body,  so  the  words  (vers.  11,  12)  seem  to  imply;  an  assembly  also  (see 
vers.  12,  13)  having  the  soldiers  still  within  call.  An^  advice  from  any  one 
opposed  to  Jesus  would  be  welcome  to  them  in  that  emergency.  What  a  picture, 
again,  of  a  set  of  men  at  their  very  wits'  end  ! 

II.  Desperate  decisions. — What  these  many  counsellors  finally  resolve  on  is 
of  a  twofold  desciiption.  The  soldiers  are  never  to  repeat  again  the  story  told 
by  them  that  day.  They  are  to  say,  instead,  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus  had 
come  by  night  and  stolen  Him  away  while  they  slept  (ver.  13).  How  desperate 
a  plan  this  was  felt  to  be,  on  the  one  hand,  may  be  seen  from  what  we  are  told  of 
the  conduct  of  all  the  parties  concerned.  The  conduct  of  the  "  soldiers."  Unless 
"  large  money  "  is  given  to  them  they  will  not  consent  to  adopt  it.  Better,  even, 
to  be  reported  to  the  governor  for  not  discharging  their  trust.  The  conduct  of 
the  authorities,  in  willingly  consenting,  with  all  their  notorious  covetousness 
(xxiii.  14,  etc.),  to  hand  over  the  "  large  "  amount  demanded  of  them,  and  in  being 
ready,  also,  to  spend  more  still  (so  some  consider  to  be  implied  in  their  language  in 
verse  14)  if  required.  Anything  was  better  to  them,  than  that  what  they  had  heard 
should  be  heard  by  others  as  well.  Equally  desperate  will  the  plan  appear  when 
looked  at  in  itself.  See  what  it  assumed,  on  the  one  hand,  about  the  disciples  of 
Jesus.  First,  that  they  were  the  kind  of  men  to  think  of  so  daring  a  deed,  and 
that  in  spite  of  the  precautions  taken  to  prevent  such  an  attempt  (xxvii.  63-66). 
Next,  that  they  were  more  faithful  to  the  body  of  Jesus  than  they  had  been  to 
Himself.  Lastly,  that  such  courage  as  was  possessed  by  them  had  been  increased 
by  His  death  !  Assumptions  all,  which  none  who  knew  them  would  find  easy  to 
believe.  See,  also,  what  this  plan  assumed  on  the  part  of  the  guard.  First, 
that  such  sentinels  as  they  were — amongst  the  best  in  the  world — should  have 
been  asleep  at  their  posts  !  And,  next,  that  they  should  know,  being  so,  what 
was  done  during  their  sleep !  The  whole  explanation,  in  short,  is  more 
difiicult  far  than  what  it  sought  to  explain.  In  itself,  there  is  no  difficulty  in 
believing  that  these  men  had  been  overpowered  by  a  greater  power  than  their 
own.  There  is  every  difficulty  in  believing  that  they  had  allowed  a  far  inferior 
and  greatly  discouraged  power  to  bring  about  the  very  thing  which  they  had 
undertaken  to  prevent ;  and  so,  to  do  that  of  which  the  priests  had  thought 
previously  that,  in  such  circumstances,  it  could  never  be  done.  To  go  and  say 
now  of  this  that  it  had  been  done  was  to  declare  themselves  equally  foolish  and 
false.  And  yet  to  say  this  was  all — be  it  observed  lastly — that  could  be  said 
then  on  that  side.  Years  afterwards  (end  of  ver.  15)  those  who  denied  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  had  found  nothing  better  to  say.  They  could  only  explain,  even 
then,  what  was  undoubtedly  true  by  what  was  impossible  to  believe  ! 

650 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,   chap,  xxviii. 


1.  How  striking  a  proof,  therefore,  we  Lave  here,  in  the  first  place,  of  the 
truth  of  Christ's  resurrection  !  It  is  the  testimony  of  enemies.  Of  enemies 
driven  to  bay.  Of  enemies  doing  their  worst.  We  account  for  what  the  soldiers 
have  seen,  for  the  empty  sepulchre,  for  the  absent  body  of  Jesus,  by  saying  that 
He  has  risen  again.  All  that  His  cotemporary  enemies  can  offer  to  us  instead 
of  this  is  that  which,  on  the  face  of  it,  is  self -contradictory.  At  least,  therefore, 
they  leave  the  field  clear  for  our  view  of  the  subject.  Better,  in  such  circum- 
stances, to  consider  the  miraculous  than  to  accept  the  absurd.  This  is  saying 
the  least. 

2.  How  cogent  a  proof  we  have,  in  the  next  place.  Cogent,  because  it  does 
not  stand  by  itself,  but  follows  up  that  already  furnished  us  in  the  earlier  part 
of  this  chapter.  Difficult  to  dispute  in  itself,  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  dispose  of 
with  that  other  evidence  by  its  side.  Cogent,  also,  because  the  evidence  it  is 
thus  combined  with  is  of  so  widely  different  a  description.  That  other  was 
negative.  This  is  positive.  That  was  from  friends.  This,  from  enemies.  The 
first,  through  those  afraid  to  believe.  This,  by  those  who  longed  to  dispute. 
The  two,  therefore,  are  as  independent  of  each  other  as  they  could  very  well  be. 
The  two  in  combination,  therefore,  are  about  as  strong  as  they  could  very  well 
be.  It  would  be  a  miracle,  indeed,  if  two  stLch  sets  of  opponents  had  invented  the 
same  myth  ! 


HOMILIES  ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  11-15.  The  resmTection  of 
Christ ;  an  argument  drawn  from  the 
explanation  of  enemies. — There  are 
three  impossibilities  developed  in  this 
narrative,  which  go  a  great  way  to 
show  the  impossibih'ty  of  denying  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead. 

I.  It  was  impossible  for  these 
enemies  to  deny  that  Christ  had,  by 
some  means  or  other,  left  the  grave. 

II.  It  was  impossible  for  them  to 
give  any  other  explanation  than  that 
which  they  now  invented. — Their 
grand  object  was  to  deny  that  He  rose 
Himself  from  the  dead;  and  how 
could  they  explain  His  absence  from 
the  grave  in  any  other  way  than  they 

did? 

III.  It  was  impossible  for  this,  the 
only  explanation  they  could  give,  to 
be  credited. — D.  Thomas,  I)  D. 

Yer.  12.  Bearing  down  the  truth. — 

1.  Christ's  malicious  enemies  are  of 
the  devil's  nature;  they  will  never 
cease  to  oppose  Him,  though  they 
know   Him    to   be   the    Son   of    God. 

2.  The  madness  of  malicious  adver- 
saries of  the  gospel  and  the  slavery  of 
Satan's  captives  are  wonderful,  as  here 
is  seen ;   for  after  they  are  assembled, 


they  resolve  to  corrupt  the  witnesses 
against  the  light  of  their  conscience. 
3.  Money  is  a  great  blot  in  the  woild. 
The  priests  and  elders  think  it  may 
overbalance  the  most  precious  truth, 
and  are  confident  for  gain  to  make  the 
soldiers  tell  a  lie  against  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  known  Messiah.  4.  The 
more  men  be  engaged  in  a  sin,  they 
are  the  more  forward  to  go  on  in  it, 
and  will  spare  no  cost  to  gain  their 
point.  These  priests  and  elders  gave 
but  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  have 
Christ  crucified,  but  here  they  gave 
large  money  to  keep  down  the  report 
of  His  resurrection. — David  Dickson. 

Vers.  12-15.  Judicial  blindness. — 
This  last  appearance  of  the  rulers  in 
the  Gospel  is  full  of  tragic  significmce, 
and  is  especially  important  to  Matthew, 
whose  narrative  deals  especially  with 
Jesus  as  the  King  and  Messiah  of 
Israel.  This  is  the  end  of  centuries  of 
prophecy  and  patience  !  This  is  what 
all  God's  culture  of  His  vineyard  has 
come  to  !  The  husbandmen  cast  the 
heir  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew  him. 
There  was  a  deeper  depth  than  even 
that.  They  would  not  be  persuaded 
when  He   rose  again  from  the  dead. 

651 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


They  entrenched  themselves  in  a  lie,  service  of  ungodly  masters  can  hardly 
which  only  showed  that  they  had  a  win  out ;  still  new  and  worse  employ- 
glimmering  of  the  truth  and  hated  it.  ment  is  furnished  unto  them.  3.  The 
And  the  lie  was  willingly  swallowed  by  wicked  care  not  what  shame  they  do 
the  mass  of  the  nation,  who  thereby  put  upon  themselves,  and  one  upon 
showed  that  they  were  of  the  same  another,  to  gain  their  point.  4.  Such 
stuff  as  they  who  made  it.  A  con-  as  do  tempt  unto  sin,  labour  to  make 
spiracy  or  falsehood,  which  knew  itself  the  sinner  secure  from  worldly '  in- 
to be  such,  was  the  last  form  of  that  conveniences,  but  cannot  secure  him 
august  council  of  Israel.  It  is  an  against  God's  justice.  The  priests  here 
awful  lesson  of  the  penalties  of  un-  do  undertake  to  secure  the  soldiers  at 
faithfulness  to  the  light  possessed,  an  the  governor's  hands,  but  no  further, 
awful  instance  of  "  judicial  blindness."  5.  A  profane  person  will  make  sale 
So  sets  the  sun  of  Israel.  And  there-  of  conscience  and  tongue,  and  all  for 
fore  our  Gospel  turns  away  from  the  money.  6.  Such  as  can  be  content 
apostate  nation,  which  has  rejected  its  to  be  silent,  and  to  keep  up  truth  for 
King,  to  tell,  in  its  last  words,  of  His  any  earthly  gain,  will  yield  also  to 
assumption  of  universal  dominion,  and  speak  contrary  to  known  truth  for 
of  the  passage  of  the  glad  news  from  gain.  7.  Such  as  do  not  apprehend 
Israel  to  the  world. — A .  Maclaren,  D.D.  any  wrath  from  God  for  sin,  do  seek 

no  guard  against  it,   but  do  think  it 

Yers.   13-15.  Bribing  the  soldiers. —  suiSicient  to  be  secure  at  men's  hands. 

1.  Calumnies     and     lies    devised    by  8.  He  that  taketh  the  bait  of  sin,  will 

Christ's    adversaries    are   the    special  also  swallow  the  hook ;  for  so  soon  as 

engine   which   they   use    against   the  these  men  took  the  money  they  did  as 

gospel.     When    all   other    devices   do  they  were  taught.     9.  Where  truth  is 

fail,  they  make  service  to  Satan  by  this  rejected,  a  lie  will  be  received,   were 

means.     2.  They  who  are   entered  in  it  never  so  incredible. — David  Dickson. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—20. 

An  abiding  work. — The  resurrection  of  Christ  being  now  an  established  fact, 
what  are,  and  what  are  to  be,  its  effects  ?  A  brief  summary  of  the  answer  to 
these  questions  is  given  us  here.  According  to  a  promise  of  which  we  have 
heard  before  more  than  once  (ver.  7  ;  xxvi.  32),  on  a  "  mountain  "  in  "  Galilee,'* 
which  also  appears  (see  R.V.  "  the  mountain")  to  have  been  previously  specified 
by  name,  and  in  a  manner,  therefore,  of  special  solemnity  and  significance,  the 
risen  Saviour  here  meets  His  (now)  "  eleven  disciples "  (ver.  16).  The 
Evangelist's  account  of  that  meeting  will  be  found  very  instructive  on  both  the 
points  named.  It  shows  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  had  already  brought 
about  a  great  change  in  Himself.  It  shows,  also,  that  that  change  involved 
corresponding  changes  of  great  moment  in  His  disciples. 

I.  In  the  Saviour  Himself.  — In  His  appearance,  to  begin.  Evidently,  He  is 
not  quite  now  what  He  had  been  before.  Evidently,  all  the  same.  He  is  not 
wholly  different  from  what  He  had  been  before.  Some  recognise  Him,  if  others 
do  not.  Even  of  these  others,  also,  it  is  only  said  that  they  "  doubt "  (ver.  1 7). 
They  do  not  therefore  deny.  What  they  ask  is.  Can  this  really  be  He? 
Evidently,  also,  we  can  here  trace  the  direction  in  which  His  appearance  has 
been  altered.  It  is  in  the  direction  of  greater  majesty — of  more  visible  glory, 
more  outshining  of  light.  Can  this,  they  think,  be  that  suffering  Jesus  with 
whom  we  were  acquainted  so  long  ?  Can  this,  yet — so  they  seem  to  say  after- 
wards— be  any  one  else  ?  With  all  His  present  glory,  is  there  not  yet  in  His 
looks  the  same  sympathy,  the  same  tenderness,  the  same  unparalleled  love 
as  before]     Alike,  therefore,  by   their   knowledge   and  doubt,  alike  by  their 

652 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxviii. 


recollections  and  their  experience,  they  are  brought,  as  we  read  here,  to  His  feet 
(ver.  17  again  ;  see  also  ver.  9).  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  so  little  change  that 
they  are  drawn  to  Him  in  love.  On  the  other,  there  is  so  much  change  that 
they  come  to  Him  in  awe.  It  is  a  dazzlingly  brighter — not  a  different — sun. 
There  is  an  equal  change  now,  in  the  second  place,  in  the  position  of  the  Saviour. 
Of  this  He  now  assures  them  Himself ;  both  by  His  presence  and  speech 
(beginning  of  ver.  18).  He  "comes"  Himself  and  tells  them  of  what  is  true 
now  of  Himself.  Vast  is  the  difference,  in  this  respect,  between  the  present  and 
past.  Before  then.  He  had  been  with  them,  if  not  exactly  in  weakness 
(cf.  Acts  X.  38),  yet  in  subjection  and  shame.  As  He  had  said  Himself,  and  as 
all  His  history  then  had  made  plain.  He  had  come  "  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but 
to  minister,"  and  even  to  be  subject  to  others  so  far  as  "  to  give  His  life,  a  ransom 
for  many "  (xx.  28).  But  now  that  He  has  "  risen  again  "  from  the  dead, 
there  is  a  perpetual  end  of  that  condition  of  things.  That  marvellous  reversal 
of  death  has  proved  incontestably  that  the  ransom  for  sin  which  He  had  offered 
by  dying,  had  been  accepted  in  full  (1  Cor.  xv.  14-20,  etc.).  Now,  therefore.  He  is 
not  to  stand  as  a  "  servant,"  but  as  a  crowned  Ruler  and  Judge.  This  is  the 
point  which  He  wishes  them  now  to  understand  to  the  full.  Everything 
requisite  for  this  truly  commanding  position — everything,  both  above  and  below, 
has  been  laid  now  on  His  "shoulder  "  (Isa.  ix.  6,  xxii.  22).  *'  All  authority  has 
been  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  This  is  the  result — the  natural 
result — of  My  "rising  again"  (cf.  Rom.  i.  4;  Acts  xvii.  31;  Rev.  i.  8; 
1  Peter  iii.  21,  22). 

II.  In  the  Saviour's  disciples.  —Great  was  the  consequent  change,  in  the  first 
place,  in  their  position.  They  are  to  be  the  messengers  now — "  Apostles  "  indeed 
— rather  than  the  companions  of  Christ.  Therefore  it  is  that  they  are  not  now 
invited  to  come — not  told  only  to  wait — but  commanded  to  "go."  Also,  they 
are  to  do  this  and  be  thus  because  of  the  "  authority "  now  vested  in  Him. 
"  Go  ye,  therefore" — because  of  this  change  in  Myself  (ver.  19).  So  it  is  I  now 
employ  this  my  fuller  authority.  I  solemnly  send  you  out  in  My  Name  ! 
There  was  to  be  a  corresponding  change,  in  the  next  place,  in  the  character 
of  their  message.  It  was  to  be  a  message  communicating  much  more  than  before. 
They  are  to  tell  now  of  His  rising  again  (Acts  i.  22);  and  of  all  that  that 
means  (Acts  iv.  33,  v.  30-32,  xiii.  34-39).  It  was  to  be  a  message,  also, 
demanding  much  more  than  before.  It  was  to  claim  men  as  His  "  disciples," 
to  bring  them  into  His  net  (Matt.  iv.  19  ;  xiii.  47) — to  do  this  among  all  men 
(ver.  19),  and  to  gather  for  Him  in  this  way  out  of  "all"  the  "nations,"  a 
"nation"  of  His  own  (cf.  Acts  xv.  14).  Lastly,  there  was  to  be  yet  another 
change,  a  change  in  the  cimracter  of  their  plans.  What  are  the  messengers 
sent  forth  in  these  new  circumstances,  to  teach  men  to  believe?  The  answer 
is  equally  simple  and  deep,  and  corresponds  accurately,  if  somewhat  mysteriously, 
with  the  new  position  of  the  Sender.  They  are  to  "  baptize  "  men  "  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  other  words,  only 
those  are  to  be  enrolled  as  "  disciples  "  who  accept  the  truths  enshrined  in  these 
words  (end  of  ver.  19).  That  is  the  epitome  of  their  faith.  "What  are  these 
messengers,  in  the  next  place,  to  teach  men  to  observe?  The  answer,  again, 
accords  admirably  with  the  new  position  of  Christ.  "  Teach  men  to  observe 
all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you."  In  other  words,  the  "  disciples  " 
of  Christ  are  to  rule  themselves  by  the  precepts  of  Christ.  That  is  the  com- 
pendium of  their  duty.  Lastly,  what,  are  these,  thus  engaged  in  "making 
disciples  of  "  others,  to  expect  for  those  others  and  for  themselves  1  In  the 
exceedingly  arduous  and,  not  impossibly,  exceeding  protracted  endeavour  before 
them,  it  is  clear,  on  the  one  hand,  that  they  cannot  reckon  on  the  visible 
presence  of  Christ.     That  very  word  "  go,"  before  adverted  to,  implies  this  of 

653 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MATTHEW. 


itself.  Yet,  for  all  this,  they  may  expect  His  effectual  presence  to  be  with  them 
throughout.  To  be  with  them,  in  fact,  till  His  glorious  visible  presence  shall  be 
with  them  again.  So  He  expressly  declares.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even 
to  the  consummation  of  the  age."     That  is  the  summary  of  their  hopes. 

1.  How  Jit  a  close  this  is,  therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  earthly  story  of 
Christ  I — All  that  we  have  read  about  Him  before — about  the  circumstances 
and  mystery  and  significance  of  His  birth  ;  about  His  solemn  call  to  His  work ; 
about  the  authority  and  power,  the  wisdom  and  mercy,  the  forbearance  and 
faithfulness  which  marked  His  course  as  a  Teacher ;  and  about  the  final  mystery 
of  His  awful  passion  and  death — are  here,  as  it  w;ere,  brought  to  a  point.  Now 
we  see  fully,  in  this  re-appearance  of  Jesus,  what  they  all  of  them  meant. 
Now,  in  consequence,  we  see  Him  at  last  as  He  is  shown  to  us  here — the  perfected 
Saviour,  the  abounding  Life  (John  x.  10),  the  supreme  R,uler  of  all.  "  Finis 
coronat  opus."     Never  was  that  true  saying  visibly  truer  than  here  ! 

2.  How  fit  a  'prelude  this  is,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  earthly  history  of  His 
church! — What  those  listening  "  eleven  "  were  commissioned  to  do;  what  they 
began  to  do  in  person  not  very  long  after ;  what  has  been  done  since  by  the 
successive  generations  of  disciples  who  have  risen  up  through  their  labours  and 
in  their  stead  ; — how  in  this  way  there  has  been  perpetually  gathered  out  and  kept 
together  a  people  to  His  name,  and  how  this  has  been  evidently  effected  among 
and  by  them,  with  their  many  failures  and  drawbacks,  by  the  continual  and 
never  withdrawn  presence  among  them  of  greater  Help  than  their  own,  is  here 
shown  us,  as  it  were,  as  the  .prophetic  foret^^hortening  of  this  farewell  decree. 
It  is,  in  short,  but  a  fulfilment  of  that  of  which  He  had  Himself  spoken  before. 
When  the  *'  nobleman "  of  the  Parable  of  the  Pounds  is  going  away,  he  is 
described  by  the  Saviour  Himself  as  saying  to  those  whom  he  leaves,  "  Occupy 
till  I  come"  (Luke  xix.  13).  Just  so  it  is  that  the  risen  Jesus  here  says  in 
effect,  "  Occupy  till  I  come."  Do  this  for  Me  while  I  am  away  from  you,  and 
yet  with  you  as  well.  Do  this  for  Me  until  I  return  to  you  in  even  greater 
glory  than  now.     What  a  charge  !     What  a  privilege  !     What  a  prospect  ! 

HOMILIES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    16,    17.    Christ   meeting   His  such   difficulties   as  these.       The  first 

disciples. — 1.  Let  the  Lord  show  Him-  step,  doubtless,  towards  meeting  them 

self  to  us  as  He  pleaseth,  it  is  our  duty  is   to    show    how   irrefragable   is   the 

to  attend  and  keep  what  means  and  literary  proof  that   His   disciples   be- 

meetings  He  hath  appointed.    2.  Christ  lieved  in  Christ's  resui-rection ;  and  how 

loveth  the  assembly  of  His  saints,  and  ample  were  the  opportunities  they  had 

doth  not  disappoint  the  expectation  of  of  judging  of  the  reality  of  that  resur- 

those  that  wait  upon  Him  in  the  ap-  rection  ;  and  how  cautious  some  at  least 

pointed  means.      3.  The  faith  of  be-  were  in  accepting  the  evidence  offered 

lievers  is  not  always  alike  vigorous  and  to   them  !      I    propose   to   go    a   step 

active,  neither  in  comparison   one   of  farther  and  to  consider   some   of   the 

another,  nor  in  comparison  of  a  man  difficulties   inherent   in    the   narrative 

with  himself  at   divers  times.     4.  As  itself,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us. 

faith  is  clear  and  vigorous,  so  doth  it  I.  The    manifestations    were   frag- 

see  Christ  to  be  God,  and  bringeth  the  mentary  and  partial. — We  are  tempted 

soul  down    before  Him   to  worship. —  to  ask,  How  was  it  that  Christ  did  not 

David  Dickson.  show  more  of  Himself  after  that  Easter 

day?      If   for   the   forty   days   which 

Ver.  17.  Early  doubters. — As  there  elapsed  between   the   resurrection  and 

were  honest  doubters  then,  so  it  is  now.  ascension  Christ  had  manifested  Him- 

It  is  right  that  we  should  try  to  meet  self  openly,  would  not  the  proof  of  His 

651 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW,    chap.  XX v ill. 


divinity    have    been     placed     beyond 
doubt  ?      Yet  how   different   was   the 
course  Christ  actually  pursued  !     His 
intercourse  was  not  of  the  old  familiar 
kind ;  the  time  He  stayed  was  brief  ; 
the  words  He  spoke  were  few ;  and  it 
was  only   in    private    places   like   the 
upper  room  with  its  closed  doors,  or  in 
lonely  spots  like  the  Galilean  mountains 
or  the  lake  side,  that  He  appeared  at 
all.     We  need  not  be  surprised  if   a 
consideration  of  these  facts  has  caused 
perplexity  to  many.     And  yet,  a  little 
further  thought  will  remove  much  of 
this   perplexity.     If  the   facts  of   the 
resurrection  are  contrary  to  what  one 
would  naturally  have  expected,  that  is 
only    in    keeping    with    the    rest    of 
revelation.     The  first  advent  of  Christ 
took  place  in  a  manner  quite  contrary 
to  all  previous  expectation,  though  that 
expectation    was   based   on   authentic 
prophecies.     The  redemption  of   man, 
again,  through   Christ's  death   on  the 
cress,  took  place  in  a  manner   which 
man   could   never   have   conceived   or 
dreamt  of  as  possible.      Nor  is  it  as 
certain  as  it  seems  at  first  that  belief, 
even    intellectual    belief,   would   have 
followed  Christ's  public  appearance  in 
the   streets   of    Jerusalem    after    His 
resurrection.      Do   not   let   us    forget 
that  some  had  already  been  restored 
from    the    dead.       There   was   Jairus' 
daughter,  the  widow's  son  at  Nain,  and 
Lazarus.     Y«  t  the  great'  majority  of 
the  people  remained  unbelieving.     But 
even     suppose    Christ's    enemies    had 
believed  that  Christ  liad  died  and  risen 
again,    what   would    such   belief   have 
been  worth  ?     It  would  have  produced 
on  them  a  shock  of  surprise  and  wonder, 
and  there  it  would  have  ended,  and  it 
would  have  had  no  more  moral  signifi- 
cance than  would  a  shock  of  galvanism. 
Of  course  God  could  have  forced  upon 
them   overwhelming  evidence,    and  so 
have   compelled   an  intellectual   faith. 
But,  in  the  first  place,  God  never  does, 
and    never   will,    force   faith    on    any 
man ;    and,    secondly,    we   cannot    too 
often  remind    ourselves    that    a    mere 
intellectual  faith  is  absolutely  valuelee-s 
— the  devils  believe  and  tremble.     Re- 


member, these  men  had  had  every 
opportunity  of  hearing  the  truth.  If 
the  teaching  of  Christ,  which  appealed 
to  their  moral  nature,  did  not  move 
them.  His  resurrection  certainly  would 
not. 

II.  Christ's  appearances  were  vague 
and  mysterious. — It  was  the  same 
Christ,  and  yet  not  the  same.  Before 
we  decide  that  this  does  introduce  an 
element  of  doubt,  let  us  pause  and 
think  what  shape  our  own  hopes  of  the 
Hfe  beyond  the  grave  are  accustomed 
to  take.  If  we  do  this  we  shall  find 
how  exquisitely  these  recorded  appear- 
ances of  our  Lord  fit  in  with  all  our 
aspirations  and  longings.  Man  hopes 
for  two  things  beyond  the  grave  which 
are  humanly  incompatible  and  irre- 
concilable. First,  he  hopes  to  preserve 
his  human  identity  and  personality ; 
he  wishes  to  believe  in  the  resurrection 
of  the  body,  he  wishes  to  believe  that 
he  will  be  able  in  the  future  state  to 
identify  those  whom  he  has  loved  and 
lost  on  earth ;  he  trusts  that  the 
conditions  of  the  world  to  come  will 
not  be  so  utterly  changed  as  to 
render  useless  all  the  training  and  ex- 
perience so  painfully  acquired  in  this 
life.  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
feels  with  St.  Paul  that  flesh  and  blood 
cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
he  feels  that  it  is  necessary  to  throw 
off  the  limitations  of  this  life;  he  ft  els 
that  it  would  be  an  intolerable  burden 
to  be  shackled  again  with  the  weak- 
nesses, and  pains,  and  disfigurements 
which  form  part  of  our  mortal  body  on 
earth.  How  are  these  two  sets  of 
desires  to  be  reconciled  1  We  see 
them  reconciled  in  the  body  of  the 
risen  Christ. 

In  conclusion,  note  how  Christ  dealt 
with  these  doubters.  "  Some  doubted. 
And  Jesus  came  to  them  and  spake 
unto  them,  saying,  All  authority 
hath  been  given  unto  Me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth.  Go  ye  therefore,"  etc. 
,  Yes,  that  is  the  way  to  solve  all 
difficulties :  let  us  put  our  hands  to 
some  work  for  Christ,  and  doubts  will 
soon  melt  away,  like  mists  before  the 
sun.     If  any  man  will  do  the  works, 

655 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MATTHEW, 


he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine. — A.  M. 
Mackay,  B.A. 

Scepticism. — There  are  three  kinds  of 
scepticism  : — 

I.  The  scepticism  of  indolence. — 
Thousands  of  men  say  they  doubt,  who 
have  never  thought.  Their  doubt  is 
but  a  mental  yawn. 

II.  The  scepticism  of  perversity. — 
They  dislike  religious  subjects  so  far  as 
they  know  them,  and  they  wish  them 
to  be  untrue. 

III.  The  scepticism  of  inquiry. — 
This  scepticism  is  wholesome ;  it  is 
the  condition  of  all  true  progress. — 
Homilist. 

"  But  some  doubted'' — These  words — 
1.  Illustrate  the  scrupulous  truthful- 
ness of  the  writers  of  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures. 2.  Prove  that  the  ear  her 
witnesses  to  Christianity  were  not  men 
of  great  credulity,  but  men  who  were 
really  slow  of  heart  to  believe.  3.  Illus- 
trate our  Lord's  tenderness,  compassion, 
and  long-suffering  towards  doubting 
souls.  4.  Remind  us  that  the  most 
honest  doubts  as  to  the  truth  of  Christ- 
ianity are  unwarranted,  and  should 
not  be  encouraged.  5.  Should  lead  us 
to  reduce  Christianity  to  the  test  of 
personal  experience  and  consciousness 
(John  vii.  17  ;  1  John  v.  10).— J.  Stock, 
LL.D. 

Vers.  18-20.  Our  LcyrdJs  glorious 
commission. — This  glorious  commission 
embraces  two  primary  departments, 
the  Missionary  and  the  Pastoral,  with 
two  sublime  and  comprehensive  en- 
couragements to  undertake  and  go 
through  with  them. 

I.  The  missionary  department. — 
*'  Go,  make  disciples  of  all  nations." 
In  the  corresponding  passage  of  Mark 
(xvi.  15),  it  is  "Go  ye  into  all  the 
world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature."  The  only  difference  is,  that 
in  this  passage  the  sphere,  in  its  world- 
wide compass  and  its  universality  of 
objects,  is  more  fully  and  definitely 
expressed ;  while  in  the  former  the 
great  aim  and  certain  result  is  delight- 

656 


fully   expressed   in   the    command    to 
"  make  disciples  of  all  nations." 

II.  The  pastoral  department. — 
"Teach  them  to  observe  all  things/' 
etc.  What  must  have  been  the  feel- 
ings which  such  a  commission  awakened ! 
"  We  conquer  the  world  for  Thee,  Lord, 
who  have  scarce  conquered  our  own 
misgivings — we,  fishei-men  of  Galilee, 
with  no  letters,  no  means,  no  influence 
over  the  humblest  creature  ?  Nay, 
Lord,  do  not  mock  us." 

III.  The  encouragements  to  under- 
take and  go  through  with  this  work. — 
These  are  two :  one  in  the  van,  the 
other  in  the  rear  of  the  commission 
itself.  1.  "  AU  power  in  heaven'^ — the 
whole  power  of  Heaven's  love  and 
wisdom  and  strength,  "  and  all  power 
in  earth  " — power  over  all  persons,  all 
passions,  all  principles,  all  movements — 
to  bend  them  to  this  one  high  object, 
the  evangelisation  of  the  world :  all 
this  "  is  given  unto  Me^"  as  the  risen 
Lord  of  all,  to  be  by  Me  placed  at 
your  command.  "  Go  ye  therefore." 
2.  "  And  lo  !  I  am  with  you  all  the 
days " — not  only  to  perpetuity,  but 
without  one  day's  interruption,  "even 
to  the  end  of  the  world." — D.  Brmjon, 
D.D. 

Ver.  18.  Christ's  universal  claim. — 
Consider : — 

I.  The  universal  claim  of  Christ. — 
It  includes — 1.  Authority  over  all  the 
forces  of  nature  as  well  as  over  all 
spiritual  powers.  2.  All  power  of 
revelation.  3.  The  power  of  absolutely 
forgiving  sin  when  repented  of. 
4.  Power  over  death.  5.  All  power  of 
judgment.  6.  Power  over  things  be- 
yond the  natural  sphere. 

II.  Let  us  try  and  ascertain  how  far 
the  claim  has  been  verified. — 1.  See 
what  Christ  has  accomplished  in  the 
world.  2.  Think  of  the  many  good 
institutions  and  useful  works  which 
have  had  their  beginnings  in  love  of 
Him  who  was  the  Good  Samaritan  of 
our  race.  3.  The  stimulus  given  to 
human  thinkings  by  the  advent  of 
Christianity.  4.  The  great  inventions 
which  have  been  subordinated  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxviit. 


spread  of  Christ's  truth  and  power. 
5.  See  how  the  operations  and  events 
intended  to  check  the  spread  or  subvert 
the  power  of  Christ's  kingdom  have 
been  made  to  tell  on  its  advance  and 
establishment.  6.  In  the  present 
power  of  Christianity.  7.  A  great 
future  opens  out  for  Christ's  truth. — 
''Tertius" 

Authority  in  heaven. — I.  Here  is  the 
mystery  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom. — 
Christ,  the  God-man,  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth,  to  the  glory  of  the  Father. 
All  power  is  given  unto  Him  in 
heaven. 

II.  Jesus  has  all  power  in  heaven, 
in  order  that  the  church  on  earth 
should  constantly  and  steadfastly  look 
away  from  aU  that  is  human  and 
temporal,  and  know  of  no  other  media- 
tion, strength,  guidance,  and  comfort, 
but  the  power  and  love,  the  wisdom 
and  faithfulness  of  her  one  only  Master 
and  Head. 

III.  Behold  Him,  the  Son  of  man, 
seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
and  in  His  majestic  rest  and  peaceful 
dignity  behold  the  perfect  assurance  of 
our  acceptance  and  of  our  blessedness. 

IV.  Behold  Jesvis  in  heaven,  and 
remember  that  in  Him  Divine  omnipo- 
tence is  united  with  the  tender 
sympathy  of  perfect  humanity. 

V.  Behold  Jesus  in  heaven,  to  bless 
His  people. — The  Father  Himself 
loveth  us,  but  it  is  in  and  through 
Christ  that  the  love  of  the  Father 
rests  on  believers. 

VI.  Behold  Jesus  in  heaven,  and 
seek  the  things  which  are  above. — 
From  Him  descend  all  healthful  influ- 
ences, all  spiritual  gifts,  all  quickening 
and  renewing  power,  all  true  and  ever- 
lasting consolation. 

VII.  Behold  Jesus  in  heaven,  and 
be  of  good  comfort. — He  presents  unto 
the  Father  all  the  petitions  and  thanks- 
givings, all  the  labours  and  sufferings, 
all  the  words  and  works  of  His  people, 
and  they  are  accepted  and  well-pleasing 
in  His  sight. — A,  Saphir,  D,D, 

Ver.     19.    Missions. — ^I,    Heathen 


nations  need  the  gospel  of 
Christ. — 1.  In  all  heathen  lands 
dreadful  sins  prevail.  2.  In  many 
heathen  countries  cruelty  to  children 
is  very  common.  3.  Wars  are  common. 
4.  Slavery  in  many  places.  5.  Ignor- 
ance, hopelessness  in  death,  and 
unsoothed  sorrow,  prevail. 

II.  It  is  possible  to  send  the  gospel 
to  all  nations. — 1.  Thousands  of  men 
and  women  are  waiting  to  go.  2.  In 
a  few  weeks  the  most  distant  countries 
can  be  reached  by  steamer — India, 
Africa,  China,  Japan,  South  Sea 
Islands,  etc.  3.  Only  £2,000,000  per 
year  is  spent  on  missions,  though 
£12,000,000  is  spent  on  amusements, 
£11,000,000  on  tobacco  smoking,  and 
£140,000,000  on  strong  drink,  in  Great 
Britain  alone. 

III.  We  ought  to  send  the  gospel 
to  all  nations. — 1.  Christ  commands 
it.  2.  It  belongs  to  them.  3.  They 
are  ready  to  listen  to  it.  4.  We  shall 
be  condemned  if  we  keep  it  back  from 
them. — B.  Brewin. 

Heathenism. — I.  With  regard  to  the 
times  of  ignorance,  there  are  three 
elements  which  modify  the  dense  dark- 
ness which  covers  the  earth. — 1.  There 
is  the  reminiscence  of  the  primeval  re- 
velation. 2.  "  There  are  the  unwritten 
laws  of  Heaven  in  the  hearts  of  men, 
which  are  not  of  to-day  or  yesterday, 
whose  birth -tide  is  not  known  to  any 
man"  (Sophocles).  3.  God,  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  bloweth  where  He 
listeth,  had  His  work  among  the 
Gentile  nations  (Melchizedek,  Job,  the 
men  of  Nineveh). 

II.  We  must  not  regard  the  judg- 
ments that  are  denounced  in  Scripture 
against  heathenism  and  the  nations 
that  forget  God  as  unjust  and  hard. — 
Nothing  in  the  Bible  is  harsh  and 
severe.  The  Hght  in  which  heathenism 
is  revealed  in  Scripture,  although  it  is 
truthful,  is  also  affectionate.  What- 
ever there  is  pure,  and  lovely,  and  ideal 
among  the  heathen  nations,  think  not 
that  it  is  our  interest,  or  that  it  is  the 
spirit  of  Christianity  and  Scripture,  to 
ignore  it  or  make  little  of  it.     God  is 


UU 


657 


CHAP.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MATTHEW. 


the  God  of  all,  and  there  is  nothing 
good  or  beautiful  but  it  has  its  origin 
in  God's  Spirit. 

III.  When  we  think  of  heathenism 
we  are  overwhelmed  and  appalled. — 
li  Think  of  its  antiquity.  2.  Think 
of  the  extent  of  its  territory.  3.  Think 
of  the  wonderful  minds  which  have 
been  captivated  and  enslaved  by 
heathenism.  4.  Think  of  the  evil  of 
idolatry.  5.  Think  of  the  wretched- 
ness and  misery  of  the  heathen.  It 
is  a  very  superficial  view  of  antiquity 
when  people  talk  of  the  bright  days  of 
sunshine  and  joy  in  ancient  Hellas. 
There  were  brightness  and  beauty; 
that  people  were  gifted  with  a 
marvellous  sense  of  the  beautiful ;  but 
those  who  are  well  acquainted  with 
antiquity  know  the  deep-seated 
melancholy,  the  gloom,  the  cloud  of 
darkness,  which  was  only  temporarily 
and  superficially  dispersed. 

IV.  Let  us  remember  the  only 
antidote  of  idolatry ;  it  is  to  "  know 
God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath 
sent." — A.  Saphir,  D.D. 

The  trinal  unity  of  the  Godhead. 
— Consider  : — 

I.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  as  it 
appears  to  have  been  part  of  the 
earliest  revelations  which  were  given 
to  the  world. — Though  not  revealed 
distinctly  and  dogmatically,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Holy  Trinity  is  conveyed 
in  the  Old  Testament  by  implication 
and  inference.  Thus,  the  very  first 
sentence  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  runs, 
"  In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth."  That  which 
is  implied,  though  it  cannot  be  shown 
in  the  translation,  is  that  while  the 
Agent  is  plural  in  this  passage,  the 
verb  with  which  it  is  connected  is  in 
the  singular  number.  And  this 
strange  form  of  expression  is  used  by 
Moses  about  five  hundred  times,  when 
speaking  of  God,  and  it  is  so  used 
by  none  else.  And  Jewish  writers 
confess  that  this  frequently  recurring 
phrase  is  indicative  of  some  mystery  in 
the  Divine  Being,  though  they  do  not 
attempt  to  define  its  nature.     But  the 

65& 


Jews  are  not  our  only  witnesses  to  the 
fact  of  this  great  doctrine  being  a  part 
of  God's  earliest  communications  to 
the  human  family.  The  truth,  in 
some  disguised  and  distorted  form, 
will  be  found  to  have  entered  into 
almost  all  the  fabulous  theologies  of 
the  world,  and  this  the  more  distinctly 
the  more  remote  their  antiquity. 

II.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity 
forms  the  subject  of  controversy  in 
the  earliest  ages  of  the  Christian 
church. 

III.  To  the  humble  Christian  this 
doctrine  is  embraced  for  the  peace 
and  salvation  of  his  so  ul. — In  all  its 
searchless  mystery  the  doctrine  of 
Three  Persons  sharing  equally  and 
alike  the  attributes  of  underived  and 
inherent  Godhead,  and  yet  these  Three 
all  One  in  nature.  One  in  essence.  One 
in  purpose  and  mind  and  will,  is  the 
only  doctrine  which  meets  the  necessi- 
ties of  our  lapsed  race,  or  provides  for 
our  being  brought  back  to  a  state  of 
innocence  and  peace. — D.  Moore,  M.A. 

Ver.  20.  The  new  obedience. — 
I.  There  is  a  twofold  element  in 
the  law.  —  Condemnation  and  the 
promise,  type  and  instalment  of 
redemption.  Both  elements  were 
given  in  love;  in  both  the  purpose 
was  one  of  mercv.  But  when  the 
primary  object  of  the  law  had  failed, 
when  men  remained  proud,  self-satisfied, 
cherishing  and  excusing  sin  without 
humility  and  repentance,  men  failed 
also  to  see  and  enjoy  the  comfort  of 
this  promise,  the  meaning  and  sub- 
stance of  the  type.  Thus  they  who 
walked  in  all  the  commandments  and 
ordinances  of  the  Lord  blameless  were 
the  very  Israelites  who  waited  for  the 
redemption  in  Jerusalem  ;  they 
honoured  the  law,  and  therefore 
longed  for  the  gospel. 

II.  Christ  is  come,  and  now,  instead  of 
condemnation  behold  grace. — Instead 
of  shadow  and  type,  behold  perfection 
and  fulfilment,  that  is,  truth.  1.  Let  us 
remember  that  in  Christ  only  the  law 
of  God  found  its  realisation  and  fulfil- 
ment.    It  had  hitherto  been  only  axi 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MATTHEW,    chap,  xxviii. 


idea  seeking  embodiment,  a  problem 
awaiting  its  solution,  an  outline  look- 
ing for  substance  and  life.  2.  All 
men  are  under  the  law,  till  through 
the  death  of  Christ  they  are  freed 
from  it.  Love  is  the  fulfilment  of 
the  law.  And  as  the  law  could  not 
attain  it,  so  the  love  which  our  Lord 
gives  us  is  something  higher  and 
deeper  than  the  law  demanded  or 
foreshadowed.  3.  The  commandments 
of  Christ  maybe  summed  up  according 
to  the  various  aspects  of  the  inner  and 
outer  life.  If  we  look  at  the  heart, 
the  source  and  root  of  life  and  action, 
all  Christ's  commandments  are  con- 
tained in  His  most  touching  appeal, 
^^  Abide  in  J/e."  If  we  look,  again,  at 
the  manifestations  of  life,  all  Christ's 
commandments  are  summed  up  in  His 
simple  words,  "  Follow  Me^  If  we 
look  at  our  relation  to  God,  prayer, 
meditation,  and  communion,  Jesus' 
commandments  may  be  summed  up  in 
one  word — in  secret.  **  Enter  into  thy 
closet,  and  shut  the  door."  If  we 
consider  our  relation  to  the  world,  the 
commandments  of  Christ  are  summed 
up  in  one  word — mission.  If  we  look, 
again,  at  the  aim  and  purpose  of  our 
energies  and  lives,  it  is  summed  up  in 
one  word — heaven.  "  Set  your  affection 
on  things  that  are  above." — A.  Saphir, 
D.D. 

The  friendship  of  the  living  Christ — 

I.  Can  mature  the  inner  life  of  the 
soul. 

II.  Can  Christianise  every  action  of 
man's  life. 

III.  Can  hallow  the  discipline  of 
trouble. 

IV.  Unites  the  present  with  the 
future  world. — E.  L.  Hull,  B.A. 

The  real  presence. — I.  Jesus  is  with 
us  as  individuals. — Here  is  our 
strength.     Jesus  is  with  us  : — 

1.  In  the  days  of  prosperity  and  joy. 

2.  In  our  ajffliction. 

3.  When  th^  soul  feels  deserted. 

4.  When  we  are  slow  of  heart  and 
cannot  believe  that  He  is  risen,  and  when 
we  walk  in  sadness.     If  Jesus  is  with 


us,  then  (1)  We  have  all  things;  (2)  We 
can  do  all  things  ;  (3)  This  is  the  secret 
of  our  influence ;  (4)  Heaven  itself  is 
begun,  for  to  be  with  the  Lord  is 
eternal  life  and  blessedness.  Jesus 
shall  throughout  all  eternity  be  our 
All. 

II.  The  words  of  the  Lord  refer  also 
and  primarily  to  the  whole  church. — 
A.  Saphir,  B.D. 

Vers.  16-20.  The  evidential  value  of 
the  incident. — The  words  of  the  Lord 
on  this  last  occasion  are  worthy  of  all 
that  has  gone  before.    Let  all  doubters 
ponder  well  the  significance   of   this. 
Suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  story 
of    the    resurrection    had    been    only 
"  the  passion  of  a  hallucinated  woman," 
as  Renan  puts  it,  and  then  consider  the 
position.      No   one,   of  course,  denies 
that,  up  to  the  moment  of  death,  there 
was  a  veritable  Jesus,  whose  sayings 
and  doings  supplied  the  material  for 
the  history ;  but,  now  that  the  Hero  is 
dead  and  gone,  where  are  the  materials  ? 
The   fishermen  and  publicans  are  on 
their  own  resources  now.     They  have 
to   make   everything   out  of   nothing. 
Surely,  therefore,  there  must  be  now 
a  swift  descent ;  no  more  of  those  noble 
utterances    to   which   we    have    been 
accustomed   hitherto — only  inventions 
of  the  poor  publican  now.     No  more 
breadth  of  view — only  Jewish  narrow- 
ness now.    It  was  about  this  very  time 
that  the  disciples  asked,    *  Lord,  wilt 
Thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom 
to  Israel  ?  "     Suppose,  then,  these  men 
obliged  themselves  to  invent  a  Great 
Commission,  how  narrow  and  provincial 
will  it  be  !    Is  there,  then,  such  a  swift 
descent  ?     A  re  not  the  reported  words 
of  the  risen  Lord — not  in  this  Gospel 
merely,    but    in    all    the   Gospels — as 
noble,  as  impressive,  as  Divine,  as  any 
that  have  been  preserved  to  us  from 
the   years   of    His   life   in    the   flesh? 
Search  through  this  Gospel,  and  say  if 
there  can  be  found  anywhere  an  utter- 
ance that  has  more  of  the  King  in  it, 
that  is  more  absolutely  free  from  all 
Jewish  narrowness  and  from  all  human 
feebleness,  than  this  great  commission 

659 


CHAP, 


.  XXVIII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MATTHEW. 


which  forms  its  magnificent  close.     It  finished  his  Gospel  with  the  ascension 

IS  very  plain  that  these  simple  artists  the  last  impression  left  on  the  Ser's 

have  their  subject  still  before  them,  mind  would   have  been  of  ChTst  in 

Manifestly  they  are  not  drawing  from  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  G,S-a 

STnZ^w    VTr^r'^'n  n'^  «'''™"^  thought. 'indeed,  but  noTthe 

Heard  and  saw.— ^.  M.  Gxhsom,  D.D.  one  it  was  his  special  aim  and  object 

Wly    r.    reec^aof   tl.  Ascend,  TCZJ\^^s^t''lC''Z^^i 

-Why    ,s     It    that    St.     Matthew  mind  is  of  Christ  abiding  on  the  earth 

gives  no  record  of  the  ascension,  and  and  with  all  His  peopl!,  even  to  the 

does  not  even  hint  what  became  of  the  end  of  the  world-am'ost    charing 

risen   Christ   after   this   last  recorded  comforting,  and  stimulating    thou^t 

nterview  with  His  disciples  1   It  seems  To  the  del^ut  reader  of  thif  Gospel  it 

to  us  that  a  sufficient  reason  is  found  is  as  if  his  Lord  had  never   iT  the 

in  the  object  which  St.  Matthew  had  earth  at  all,  but  had  suSy  Ithed 

m   view   which  was  to  set  forth  the  Himself  with  omnipresence    so    that 

establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  however  far  apart  H^s  d'scTpJ  mtlt 

upon  earth  as  foretold  by  the  prophets  be  scattered  in  His  service,  ^ch  TJoi 

and  expected    by    the   saints    of  old;  them  might  at  any  moment    see  His 

and  >nasmuch  as  it  is  Christ's  kingdom  face,  hea?  His  voice-^of  cheer,  f^e^  SS 

on  earth  which  he  has  mainly  in  view,  touch  of  sympathy,  and  draw   on  His 

he  does  not  call  special  attention  to  reserve  of  power.     Thus  was   it  made 

+W  111^  ^  .  TT'  t"*/^*,^^^'-  to  quite  plain,  how  they  could    keep  in 

that  earthly  fact  which  was  the  glorious  closest  touch  with  Him  to  whom  was 

result  ot  It,  VIZ.,  His  abiding  presence  given  all  authority  in  heaven  and  on 

with  His  people  on  the  earth.    Had  he  earth— iJirf. 


660 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H.  =  Homily  ;  I.  =  Illustration  ;  N  =  Note.] 


Abandoning  darling  sins,  H.  Ill 

Abandonment,  judicial,  H.  547 

Abide,  N.  249 

Abiding  work,  H.  652 

Abomination  of  desolation   in  holy  place, 

H.  559 
Abroad,  Christian  work  at  home  and,  H.  421 
Absent  friends,  H.  275 
Absurdities  of  dogmas  of  transubstantiation 

and  consubstantiation,  H.  597 
Abundance  of   harvest  and  scarcity  of   la- 
bourers, H.  241 
Achieving  the  impossible,  H.  300 
Acquiescence,  how  far  is  it  to  be  carried  ? 

N.  136 
Acquiescent  yet  persistent,  H.  385 
Action,  visitatorial,  H.  490 
Admiration  of  Christ,  I.  530 
Adoption,  public,  N.  582 
Advent  final,  of  Christ,  H.  412 
Adversary,  agreeing  with  one's,  H.  109 
Affliction,  Christ  and,  N.  206 
Affronting,  slight,  words,  H.  108 
Agreeing  with  one's  adversary,  H.  109 
Aim  and  motive.  Christian,  H.  1*21 

definite,  H.  100 

singleness  of,  in  kingdom  of  God,  H.  1^0 
All  for  Christ,  I.  63 

joy  of  giving  up,  I.  462 
Almsgiving  and  righteousness,  N.  127 

ostentation  in,  H.  126 

prayer,  and  fasting,  H.  125 
Alone,  Jesus,  H.  368 
Ambassadors,  King's,  H.  245,  256 
Amen,  H.  144 
Analogies  of  light,  H.  98 
Ancestry,  reliance  on,  N.  42 
Ancient  prophecy  fulfilled,  N.  491 
Angel's  comforting  words,  H.  645 
Anger  in  God,  N.  513 
Another  Christ,  looking  for,  H.  270 
Answer,  twofold,  H.  496 
Answers,  further,  H.  502 

succes&ion  of,  H.  229 
Antagonisms,  wnhely,  H.  381 


Anthony,  St.,  I.  456 
Anxiety,  distrustful,  H.  155 

for  morrow  forbidden,  H.  161 

hurtful  to  life  and  youth,  H.  157 
Apostles,  our  Lord's,  H.  246 

wisdom  in  our  Lord's  choice  of.  H.  246 
Apparent  indifference,  Christ's,  N.  385 

reversal,  H.  26 
Appearing,  Christ's  glorious,  at  end  of  world, 

H.  561 
Apprehension,  Christ's,  H.  607 
Arimathaea,  Joseph  of,  H.  641 
Arithmetic,    geography,   and  grammar,   H. 

159 
Art  of  hearing,  H.  a29 
Articulo  mortis,  H.  635 
Ascension,  why  no  record  of  the  ?  N.  660 
Asking,  N.  173 

Assize,  will  final,  be  held  on  faith  or  char- 
acter ?  N.  582 
Assurance  and  command,  H.  366 
Atoning  death  of  Jesus,  effects  of,  H.  639 
Attention  and  obedience,  H.  278 
Attitude  to   be    taken    towards   Pharisees, 

H.  534 
Attracting  and  repeHing,  Christ,  H.  209 
Authority  and  majesty  of  Jesus,  N.  491 

in  heaven,  H.  657 

of  Law,  N.  104 
Avoiding  strife,  H.  300 
Award,  justice  of,  N.  469 

Babe,  Jesus  wonderful,  H.  21 
Ball-room,  Herod's,  H.  360 
Banishment,  Jesus  in,  H,  383 
Baptism,  Christ's,  mode  of,  N.  45 

of  Jesus,  N.  34 
Baptist,  ministry  of,  H.  36 
Bar  of  Pilate,  silence  of  Jesus  at,  H.  623 
Be^m,  chip  and,  H.  168  ;  N.  169 
Bearing  down  truth,  H.  651 
Beatitude  of  unfaltering  faith,  H.  272 

unappreciated,  H.  80 
Beatitudes,  N.  73 

tests,  N.  73 

661 


// 


INDEX. 


Beautiful  idea  of  future  life,  H.  519 

murderous  though,  I.  361 
Beggars,  two  blind,  cure  of,  H.  480 
Beginning  to  preach,  H.  59 

unobtrusive,  H.  55 
Believing  and  testifying,  H.  648 
Benediction,  singular,  H.  71 
Benefactor,  supreme  social,  H.  268 
Bethlehem,  Magi  led  to,  H.  25 
Betraval,  eve  of,  H.  587 

guilt  of,  H,  589 
Betraying  Christ,  H.  594 
Better  than  sought,  finding  something,  N.  345 
Bible,  inspiration   of,   and    resurrection   of 
Christ,  H.  647 

value  of,  N.  366 
Binding  and  loosing,  N.  404 
Birth,  great  exceptional,  H.  13 

mysterious,  H.  11 

of  Jesus,  H.  21 
Blasphemy,  Christ's  good  confession  counted, 
H.  610 

encountering,  H.  304 
Blessedness  of  meek,  H.  78 
Blessing,  character  and,  H.  319 

of  hungry,  H.  83 
Blind  and  dumb,  H.  306 

beggars,  cure  of  two,  H.  480 

leaders  of  blind,  N.  382 

zeal  of  Pharisees,  H.  540 
Blindness  and  foresight,  H.  598 

judicial,  N.  651 

of  error,  H.  540 
Blood,  issue  of,  woman  with,  H.  231-3 
Body,  mastery,  H.  110 
Bodies  of  saints  which  slept,  resurrection  of 

many,  H.  638 
Bounty,  Jesus  and  His,  H.  366 
Branch,  root  and,  H.  106 
Bread,  daily,  H.  137,  138 
Brethren,  Christians :  Christ  Lord,  H.  535 

our  suffering,  H.  583 
Bribing  soldiers,  H.  652 
Bridge,  crossing,    before    vou   come   to    it, 

H.  161 
Broad  and  narrow  ways,  H.  177 
Brotherhood,  true,  H.  163 
Brotherly   love    in    dealing    with    injuries, 

N.  437 
Bruised  reed  and  smoking  flax,  H.  303 
Builder  and  safety  of  Church,  H.  401 
Builders  in  kingdom — a  contrast,  H.  189 

wise  and  foolish,  H.  188 
Burden  and  yoke  of  Christ,  H.  289 
Burial,  John's,  H.  363 
Bury  my  father,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and, 

N.  210 
Business,  N.  576 
But  some  doubted,  H.  656 

C^SAREA  Philippi,  Jesus  at,  N.  401 
Call,  Christ's,  H.  60,  63 

of  Matthew,  H.  223 

to  preach,  John  Baptist's,  H.  38 

to  weary,  Christ's,  H.  287 
Called  and  chosen,  H.  515 

662 


Calling,  Church's,  H.  28 

of  Gentiles,  H.  509 
Camel  and  gnat,  H.  542 
Capabilities,  small,  H.  577 
Capernaum  and  Sodom,  H.  283 
Captain  of  Lord's  host,  centurion  and  the, 

H.  200 
Carcase  and  vultures,  H.  560 
Care  and  greed,  N.  154 

of  multitude,  Christ's,  H.  238 
Carpenter's  Son,  H.  352 
Casting  out  devils,  Christ,  H.  215 

out  mote,  N.  169 
Casuistry,  corrupt,  N.  542 
Catastrophes,  national,  N.  550 
Caution  against  false  doctrines,  H.  397 
Cautions  against  rash  judgments,  H.  164,  165 

further,  H.  254 

special,  H.  250 
Cavillers,  Christ  and,  H.  497 
Central  and  alone,  Christ,  H.  417 
Centurion  and  the  Captain  of  Lord's  host, 

H.  200 
Centurion's  faith,  H.  202 

regard  for  his  servant,  N.  202 

servant,  Christ  and,  H.  202 
Certainty  of  end,  H.  562 
Citizens  of  kingdom  as  light  of  world,  H.  97 

as  salt  of  earth,  H.  96 
City  on  hill,  H.  99 
Chaff ;  wheat ;  fan,  H.  43 
Change,  preparing  for,  H.  239 
Character  and  blessing,  H.  319 

diversity  in,  N.  566 

holy,  influence  of,  N.  15 

of  Peter,  N.  403 

or  faith,  will  final   assize   be   held   on  ? 
N.  582 

speech  betraying,  H.  614 

true  test  of,  in  kingdom  of  God,  H.  181 
Character-building,  H.  188 
Charge,  King's,  to  His  ambassadors,  H.  256 
Charity  in  thought  and  speech,  H.  167 
Chief  good   urged,   and  undue   anxiety  re- 
proved, in  kingdom  of  God,  H.  156 

object  of  pursuit,  H.  160 
Child  in  midst,  H.  429 

little,    receiving    kingdom    of    God    as, 
H.  431 
Child-Saviour,  H.  22 
Childhood  and  youth,  N.  452 
Children,  a  parable  of  kingdom  of  heaven, 
H.  430 

Christ  blessing,  H.  450 

claims  of,  H.  451 

God's,  and  the  fowls,  H.  157 

in  temple,  H.  492 

interest  in,  H.  433 

little,  love  of  God  for,  H.  435 

love  of,  N.  450 

ministry  of,  H,  429 

relation   of,  to  history  of  Jesus  Christ, 
H.  451 

tenderness  to,  I.  452 

wisdom  justified  of  her,  H.  280,  281 
Children's  Christ,  H.  451 


INDEX. 


Children's  voices  in  heaven,  I.  452 

Christ  Messenger  of  His  own  gospel,  H.  506 

Chip  and  beam,  H.  168 

mockery  of,  H.  629 

Choice,  great,  I.  180 

neglecting  and  opposing,  H.  606 

of     apostles,    our     Lord's,    wisdom    in. 

offended  in,  H.  272 

H.  246 

on  His  trial,  H.  625 

Chosen,  called  and,  H.  515 

our  Rest,  N.  288 

Christ  a  Fellow-banqueter,  H.  597 

paying  tribute,  H.  424 

a  ransom,  N.  477 

position  of,  fl.  420 

a  servant,  H.  477 

power  of  supreme  love  to,  N.  462 

a  shelter,  H.  551 

preaching,  H.  58,  66 

admiration  of,  I.  530 

rejected  of  men,  exalted  of  God,  H.  505 

all  for,  I.  63 

rejecting,  I.  626 

and  affliction,  N.  206 

repelling  and  attracting,  H.  209 

and  cavillers,  H.  497 

risen,  in  Galilee,  H.  647 

and  centurion's  servant,  H.  202 

sent  to  Pilate,  H.  619 

and  Epictetus,  N.  119 

sitting  with  twelve,  H.  592 

and  His  disciples,  H.  369,  397 

stilling  tempest,  H.  212 

and  humanity,  H.  66 

sufEering  for,  N.  475 

and  Judas,  N.  248 

tempted,  H.  51 

and  Sadducees,  H.  519 

the  compassionate,  H.  482 

and  survival  of  fittest,  N.  75 

the  healing,  H.  205 

and  the  commercial  spirit,  H.  216 

the  King,  H.  488 

another,  looking  for,  H.  270 

the  Revelation,  H.  341 

as  Physician,  H.  238 

the  satisfying,  H.  366 

bearing  our  sicknesses,  N,  205 

the  true,  N.  386 

before     Pilate— Pilate     before     Christ, 

true,  H.  517 

H.  625 

what  men  say  of,  H.  400 

betraying,  H.  594 

what  think  ye  of  ?  H.  399,  489 

blessing  children,  H.  450 

who  is?  H.  400 

casting  out  devils,  H.  215 

words  of,  perpetuity  of,  H.  564 

central  and  alone,  H.  417 

world's  offence  in,  H.  352 

children's,  H.  451 

yielding  up  His  spirit,  N.  637 

confessing,  H.  257 

Christ's  apparent  indifference,  N.  385 

crowds  around,  H.  481 

apprehension,  H.  607 

death  of,  H.  477 

baptism,  mode  of,  N.  45 

departure  of,  from  temple,  H.  551 

call.  H.  60,  63 

deserted  by  His  disciples,  H.  600 

to  weary,  H.  287 

dictating  to,  H.  313 

care  of  multitude,  H.  238 

Divine,  confessed,  H.  399 

choice  of  apostles,  N.  247 

enemies  of,  Herod  type  of,  H.  23 

of  workers,  H.  60 

final  advent  of,  H.  412 

Church,  H.  438 

following,  H.  209 

claims,  exclusiveness  of,  H.  261 

foretelling  His  death  and   resurrection. 

coming  to  be  baptised,  H.  45 

H.  407,  472 

commendation    of    Peter's     confession, 

found  and  worshipped,  H.  25 

N.  403 

genealogy  of,  H.  10 

condemnation  of  war,  H.  607 

glorified,  H.  372 

deep  humiliation,  H.  641 

glory  of,  in  judgment,  H.  581 

demand  of  young  ruler,  N.  456 

going  away  from,  H.  458 

enemies    condemned  out  of    their  own 

great  encourager  of  good  morals,  H.  103 

mouth,  H.  634 

greater  than  teraple,  H.  296 

example  as  Healer,  H.  67 

hiding  Himself,  N.  551 

first  temptation,  reflections  on,  H.  53 

honouring,  H.  488 

glorious    appearing    at    end    of    world, 

imitation  of,  H.  409 

H.  561 

in  Church,  H.  438 

good     confession    counted    blasphemy, 

in  Gethsemane,  H.  602 

H.  610 

in  His  humiliation,  H.  45 

grace,  H.  388 

Interpreter  of  conduct,  N.  582 

itinerant  preachers,  H.  249 

Isaiah  and,  H.  381 

journey  to  Jerusalem,  H.  487 

joy  of  giving  up  all  for,  I.  462 

law  ignored,  N.  120 

kinsmanship  of,  H.  318 

life  and  death,  purpose  of,  H.  476 

left  sorrowfully,  H.  458 

method  of  teaching,  reason  of,  H.  327 

likeness  to,  H.  255 

missionaries,  work  of,  H.  248 

Lord  :  Christians  brethren,  H.  535 

originality,  H.  192 

Master  of  life,  N.  536,  537 

Pharisees'  sabbath,  and,  H.  294 

meeting  His  disciples,  H.  654 

reply  to  high  priest,  H.  610 

663 


INDEX. 


Christ's  reproof  of  Peter,  H.  407 

Coin  in  fish's  mouth,  H.  424 

resurrection,  H.  645 

Collective  grace,  H.  435 

retirement  from  His  enemies,  H.  302 

Combination,  power  of,  N.  438 

sake,  for,  N.  93 

Comforting  words,  angel's,  H.  645 

sayings,  right  hearers  of,  H.  189 

Coming,  Lord's,  watching  for,  H.  566 

seasons  of  special  prayer,  N.  368 

Command,  assurance  and,  H.  366 

separating  fan,  H.  42 

terrible,  N.  548 

sufferings,  H.  407 

Commandment,  first  and  great,  H.  522,  524 

unique,  631 

second  great,  H.  524 

teaching  on  oaths,  N.  115 

Commandments   of   God,  and  traditions   of 

test,  N.  457 

men,  H.  380 

temptation,  and  the  pastoral  office,  H.  52 

Commendation,   Christ's,  of  Peter's   confes- 

thanksgiving, H.  285 

sion,  N.  403 

throne,  sharing,  N.  474 

Commercial  spirit,  Christ  and  the,  H.  216 

universal  claim,  H.  656 

Commission,  John  Baptist's  fitness  for  his, 

invitation,  H.  286 

H.  39 

unpopularity,  elements  of,  H.  260 

our  Lord's  glorious,  H.  656 

vicarious  sufferings,  N.  206 

Commonness  of  temptation,  N,  54 

victory,  H.  54 

Companion  of  wicked,  constant,  fear,  H.  23 

over  cunning,  H.  517 

Compassion  for  multitude,  H.  240 

voice,  H.  283 

Compassionate  Christ,  the,  H.  482 

wonderful  Incarnation,  H.  13 

Complete,    yet    lost !    maimed,   yet    saved ! 

word  understood  by  faith,  N.  385 

N.  433 

yoke  and  burden,  H.  289 

Comprehensive  law,  I.  523 

Christian  aim  and  motive,  H.  121 

Condemnation  of  war,  Christ's,  H.  607 

and  Pharisaical  righteousness,  H,  104 

process  of,  H.  549 

doctrine  concerning  divorce,  H.  Ill 

reason  for,  H.  502 

ideal,  the,  N.  475 

Condemning  words,  H.  311 

life,  principle  of,  H.  135 

Conduct,  Interpreter  of,  Christ,  N.  582 

love,  wastefulness  of,  H.  589 

Confession,  Christ's  good,  counted  blasphemy, 

perfection,  H.  120 

H.  610 

reform,  H.  42 

Peter's,  Christ's  commendation  of,  N.  403 

watching,  H.  566 

Confessing  Christ,  H.  257 

work,  H.  308 

Confidence,  the  model  prayer  fosters,  H.  130 

at  home  and  abroad,  H.  421 

Conflict  in  Gethsemane,  H.  602 

Christians  as  light  of  world,  H.  98 

Conscience,  gailty,  miseries  of,  H.  360 

as  salt,  H.  96 

world  of,  Peace-bringer  in,  H.  220 

brethren :  Christ  Lord,  H.  535 

Conscience-stricken  Judas,  H.  621 

politics  for,  H.  517 

Consecration  and  no  consecration,  H.  25 

Christianity,  domestic  and  public,  H.  99 

Consolation  during  pestilence,  H.  555 

genius  of,  H.  62 

respecting  little  ones,  H.  433 

inwardness  of,  I.  127 

Consubstantiation    and    transubstantiation, 

leaven  as  symbol  of,  H.  339  ;  N.  340 

absurdities  of  dogmas  of,  H.  597 

life  of,  H.  468 

Continuance  in  well-doing,  H.  236 

producing  social  divisions,  H.  259 

Contrast,  sharp,  H.  234 

purpose  of,  N.  121 

Controversy,  Jesus  in,  H.  378 

superior  to  other  systems,  N.  447 

Conversation,    simplicity    and    veracity   in, 

true  evidence  of,  H.  306 

H.  114 

Church  and  humanity,  H.  420 

Corban,  release  by,  N.  378 

Christ's,  H.  438 

Coronation  of  King,  H.  45 

its  Buijder  and  its  safety,  H.  401 

Corrupt  casuistry,  N.  542 

offender  and,  H.  437 

Council,  wicked,  H.  589 

responsibility,  I.  99 

Counsels  and  warnings,. H.  559 

rise  and  progress  of,  H.  337 

final,  H.  257 

seed  of,  H.  245 

of  perfection,  H.  116 

Church's  calling,  H.  28 

Counter-attack,  H.  526 

Churchmanship,  true,  H.  536 

Covetous,  Judas  the,  H.  591 

Claim,  Christ's  universal,  H.  656 

Covetousness,  evils  of,  H.  147 

Claims,  Christ's,  exclusiveness  of,  H.  261 

Crime  in  germ,  N.  382 

of  children,  H.  451 

Critic,  cynical,  N.  168 

of  parents,  H.  380 

Cross,  N.  409 

Classification,  twofold,  H.  581 

a  throne,  N.  635 

Cleansing  of  leper,  H.  196,  197 

enforced  or  chosen,  H.  629 

of  temple,  H.  491 

inscription  on,  N.  633 

Clearest  evidence,  sinning  in  light  of,  H.  627 

on  the,  H.  630 

Climax,  K.  189 

Crossing  bridge  before  you  come  to  it,  H.  161 

664 


INDEX. 


Crowds  around  Christ,  H.  481 
Crown  of  thorns,  H.  629 
Crucified  One,  first  prayer  to,  H.  634 
Crucifixion,  H.  631 
Crucis,  via,  H.  627 
Cruelty  of  disappointed  king,  H.  29 
Cry  from  depths,  H.  600,  637 
Culminating  point,  H,  398 
Cultivating  Lord's  vineyard,  H.  499 
Cumulative  transgression,  H.  544 
Cunning,  Christ's  victory  over,  H.  517 
Cure  of  two  blind  beggars,  H.  480 

soul's  malady  and,  H.  225 
Custom,  spiritual  life  more  authoritative  than. 

H.  228 
Cutting    ofE    hand  and   plucking  out    eye, 

H.  Ill 
Cynical  critic,  N.  168 

Daily  bread,  H.  137,  138 
Dancing,  N.  362 
Danger,  approach  of,  H.  357 
Darkness  and  light,  H.  57 

powers  of,  H.  213 
Darling  sins,  abandoning,  H.  Ill 
David,  Son  of,  Hosanna  to,  H.  488 
David's  Son  and  Lord,  H.  527 
Dawn,  double,  H.  643 
De  profundis,  H.  600,  637 
Dead  traditionalism.  H.  534 
Death   and  resurrection,   Christ   foretelling 
His,  H.  407,  472 

is,  the  end  ?  H.  255 

of  Christ,  H.  477 

of  John  Baptist,  H.  360 

solitary  ;  great  sorrow,  H.  363 
Debts,  forgive  us  our,  H.  140 
Defilement,  imaginary,  N.  380 
Definite  aim,  H.  100 
Degradation  of  gambling,  N.  632 
Degrees    of    punishment     in    other    world, 

H.  109 
Deliver  us  from  evil,  H.  143 
Delivered,  preserved  and,  H.  142 
Demand,  Christ's,  of  young  ruler,  N.  456 
Denial,  H.  613 
Departure,  new,  H.  244 

of  Christ  from  temple,  H.  551 
Depth,  lowest,  H.  233 
Depths,  cry  from,  H.  600,  637 
Descent,  sudden,  H.  405 
Desecration  of  God's  house,  N.  492 
Desert,  Jesus  in,  H.  363 
Desertion,  H.  600,  611 
Desolate  temple,  N.  551 
Desolation,  abomination  of,  in  holy  place, 

H.  559 
Destruction  of  Jerusalem,  N.  555 
Devil,  N.  342 

Devils,  Christ  casting  out,  H.  215 
Dictating  to  Christ.  H.  313 
Differences,  equality  and,  H.  467 
Different     treatment    of    gospel     message, 

H.  513 
Difficult  yet  practicable,  I.  122 
Dignity  of  human  nature,  H.  298 


Diligence,  H.  573 

Disappointed  king,  cruelty  of,  H.  29 

Disciple,  rich,  H,  641 

Disciples  and  householder,  H.  348 

Christ  and  His,  H.  369,  397 
deserted  by  His,  H.  600 
meeting  His,  H.  654 

in  storm,  N.  370 

our  Lord  forewarning  His,  H.  592 

untaught,  H.  265 
Discipleship,  true,  H,  175 
Disclosure  to  Joseph,  H.  14 
Discouragement  and  victory  of  faith,  H.  385 
Discretion,  reverence  and,  H.  170 
Distinguished  lineage,  H.  9 
Distressing    interruption     wisely     utilised, 

H.  317 
Distrustful  anxiety,  H.  155 
Diversity  in  character,  N.  566 
Divine  and  human  perfection,  N.  122 

Christ  confessed,  H.  399 

Infant  sent  away,  H.  28 

judgment,  law  of,  H.  560 

patience,  human  intolerance  and,  H.  335 

regulation  of  time,  H.  11 

Teacher,  H.  190 
Divisions,    social,    Christianity    producing, 

H.  259 
Divorce,  H.  447 

and  marriage  among  Jews,  N.  447 

Christian  doctrine  concerning,  H.  Ill 

Milton  on,  N.  448 
Doctrine,    Christian,     concerning    divorce, 

H.  Ill 
Doctrines,  false,  caution  against,  H.  397 
Dogmas  of  transubstantiation  and  consub- 

stantiation,  absurdities  of,  H.  597 
Dogs  and  swine,  N.  169 
Doing  well  on  sabbath  day,  I.  299 
Domestic  and  public  Christianity,  H.  99 
Doom  of  Herod,  H.  20 

of  hypocrites,  H.  495 
Dormant  power,  H.  211 
Double  dawn,  H.  643 
Doubters,  early,  H.  654 
Doubting  message  to  Jesus,  John's,  H.  266 
Dove,  like  a,  H.  45 
Doves  and  serpents,  H.  251 
Draw-net,  H.  346 
Dream  of  Pilate's  wife,  H.  624 
Dumb  and  blind,  H.  306 
Dumbness,  spiritual,  H,  238 
Duty  of  forgiveness  urged,  H.  440 

of  pondering  signs  of  times,  N.  395 

our,  to  Him,  God's  love  to  us  and,  H.  173 

to  our  neighbour,  sum  of  our,  H.  175 
Duties    to   our    earthly  ^nd    our    heavenly 
King,  PI.  518 

Early  doubters,  H.  654 
Earth,  iniieriting,  H.  81 

on,  and  in  heaven,  N.  404 
East,  wise  men  from,  H.  22 
Eating  with  unwashed  hands,  I.  380 
Eclipse,  total,  H.  6H9 
Effects  of  atoning  death  of  Jesus,  H.  639 

665 


INDEX. 


Efficacy  of  prayer,  N.  172 

Efforts  of  mercy  to  redeem,  H.  505 

Elements  of  Christ's  unpopularity,  H.  260 

Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani !  H.  637 

Emmanuel,  H.  15 

Encourager  of    good  morals,   Christ  great, 

H.  103 
End,  certainty  of,  H.  562 

is  death  the  ?  H.  255 

itself,  the,  H.  578 

of  world,  Christ's  glorious  appearing  at, 
H.  561 

uncertainty  of,  H.  564 

until  the,  H.  553,  557 
Ending,  partial,  H.  557 

wider,  H.  560  « 

Enemies,  Christ's,  condemned  out  of  their 
own  mouth,  H.  634 
retirement  from  His,  H.  302 

kindness  to,  N.  120 

love  of,  H.  119  ;  I.  120 

of  Christ,  Herod  type  of,  H.  23 

rights  of,  H.  533 

subduing,  I.  120 
Epictetus,  Christ  and,  N.  119 
Equality  and  differences,  H.  467 
Error,  blindness  of,  H.  540 

seeds  of,  H.  331 
Eunuchism,  N.  448 
Evading  truth,  H.  498- 
Eve  of  betrayal,  H.  587 
Eventide,  H.  469 
Everlasting  punishment,  H.  583 
Every  one  has  place  to  fill  in  life,  I.  62 
Everything  more  than  it  seems,  H.  61 

no  parable  teaches,  N.  326 
Evidence,    clearest,    sinning     in    light    of, 
H.  627 

true,  of  Christianity,  H.  306 
Evil  consequences  of  parting  man  and  wife, 
H.  112 

deliver  us  from,  H.  143 

doing  good  for,  H.  119 

eye,  H.  469 

single  and,  H.  151,  152 

God  and,  H.  140 

repeating  itself,  H.  393 

spirit  of,  H.  315 
Evils  of  covetousness,  H.  147 
Evolution,  spiritual,  H.  209 
Example  of  Queen  of  Sheba,  H.  314 

weakness  and  strength  of,  H.  442 
Excelling  righteousness,  H.  105 
Exceptional  birth,  great,  H.  13 
Excitement,  religious,  N.  277 
Exclusiveness  of  Christ's  claims,  H.  261 
Exemplary  maternal  Jove,  H.  385 
Exile,  King  in,  H.  27 
Expectancy  and  success,  H.  235 
Exposition,  spiritual,  of  sixth  commandment, 

H.  107 
'Eye,  evil,  H.  469 

plucking  out,  and  cutting  off  hand,  H.  Ill 

single  and  evil,  H.  151,  152 

F^CB,  before  His,  H.  35 
666 


Facilities  of  divorce  among  Jews,  N.  447 
Failure  of  Peter's  faith,  H.  370 ;  N.  371 
Faith,  N.  236 

and  prayer,  H.  495 

centurion's,  H.  202 

Christ's  word  understood  by,  N.  385 

discouragement  and  victory  of,  H.  385 

lesson  in,  H.  419 

or  character,  will  final  assize  be  held  on  ? 
N.  582 

Peter's,  failure  of,  H.  370 ;  N.  371 

undiscerning,  H.  274 

unfaltering,  beatitude  of,  H.  272 
Faithful  preaching,  I.  549 

servant  and  wicked  one,  H.  567 

servant's  reward,  N.  577 
Fall,  Peter's,  H.  609,  613,  614 
False  and  true  goodness,  N.  125 
judging,  H.  169 

doctrines,  caution  against,  H.  397 

guides,  warnings  against,  H.  559 

teachers,  H.  555 
Fame,  sudden,  H.  64 
Fan,  Christ's  separating,  H.  42 

wheat ;  chaff,  H.  43 
Far-reaching  principle,  N.  41 
Fasting,  law  of,  H.  226 

prayer,  almsgiving,  H.  125 
and,  H.  422 

right  manner  of,  H.  146 
Father  and  King,  I.  132 

and  "  Pope,"  N.537 

bury  my,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and,  N.  210 

God  our,  H.  130 

in  heaven,  our,  H.  130,  131 
Father's  kingdom  and  Father's  will,  H.  136 
Fault,  Peter's,  H.  371 
Fault-finding,  technical,  H.  380 
Fear,  constant  companion  of  wicked,  H.  23 

Joseph's  new,  H.  31 
Feast,  God's,  two  ways  of  despising,  H.  511 

Matthew's,  H.  224 
Feet  of  Jesus,  at,  H.  388 
Feeding  four  thousand,  H.  390 
Fellow-banqueter,  Christ  a,  H.  597 
Festival,  high,  remarkable  days  of,  N.  362 
Fever,  sin  as,  H.  204 
Fickleness  of  friends,  H.  607 
Fidelity  and  recompense,  H.  576 
Field,  treasure  hid  in,  H.  344 
Fifth  petition  of  Lord's  Prayer,  H.  139 
Fig  tree  cursed,  H.  494 ;  N.  495 
Final  advent  of  Christ,  H.  412 

assize,  will,  be  held  on  faith  or  character? 
N.  582 

counsels,  H.  257 

perseverance  not  inevitable,  H.  556 
Finding  something  better  than  sought,  N.  345 
Finem,  respice,  H.  578 
Fireside  preaching,  N.  249 
First  and  great  commandment,  H.  522,  524 

home !  H.  248 

last  shall  be,  H.  462,  466,  499  ;  N.  469 

law  of  grace,  self-denial,  I.  409 

petition  in  Lord's  Prayer,  H.  133 
prayer  to  Crucified  One,  H.  634 


INDEX. 


First    temptation,    reflections    on    Christ's, 

H.  53 
First-fruits  of  Gentiles,  H.  19 
Fish's  mouth,  coin  in,  H.  424 
Fishes,  loaves  and,  miracle  of,  H.  365,  390 
Fisher-folk,  lessons  from,  H.  61 
Fittest,  survival  of,  Christ  and,  N.  75 
Flagrant  sinners,  grace  manifested  in,  H.  501 
Flax,  smoking,  bruised  reed  and,  H.  303 
Flesh  weak,  spirit  willing,  H.  604 
Flood,  H.  566 
Flowers,  H.  158 
Following  Christ,  H.  209 

up,  H.  195 
Foolish  and  wise  builders,  H.  188 
hearers,  H.  187 

virgins  excluded,  H.  572,  573 
Forbearance,  H.  605 

Force,  kingdom  of  heaven  taken  by,  H,  276 
Foresight  and  blindness,  H.  598 
Forewarned,  N.  550 
Forgive,  give  and,  H.  138 

us  our  debts,  H.  140 
Forgiveness  and  after,  H.  441 

duty  of,  urged,  H.  440 

gospel  of,  H.  221 

sin  and,  H.  110 

sin  that  hath  never,  H.  648 
Forgiving  injuries,  H.  441 
mercy  in,  H.  144 

spirit,  N.  140 
Forsake  all  and  follow  Me,  N.  63 
Four  thousand,  feeding,  H.  390 
Fowls,  God's  children  and  the,  H.  157 
Frame,  unlovely,  lovely  portrait  in,  N.  30 
Friends,  absent,  H.  275 

fickleness  of,  H.  607 

pretended,  H.  311 
Friendship  of  living  Christ,  H.  659 
Fruit,  test  of,  H.  182 

trees  and  their,  H.  180 
Fruits,  by  their,  H.  182 
Fruitless  fig  tree,  withering  of,  N.  495 
Future  life,  beautiful  idea  of,  H.  519 

Gain,  sacrifice  for,  N.  346 
Gaining  life  by  losing  it,  N.  409 
Galilee,  risen  Christ  in,  H.  647 
Gambling,  H.  632 

degradation  of,  N.  632 
Garment,  wedding,  H.  513;  N.  514,  515 
Garments  and  wine-skins,  N.  229 
Gate,  wicket,  H.  179 

Gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail   against  it, 
N.  403 

two,  and  two  ways,  H.  177 
Genealogical   table — its   moral   suggestions, 

H.  11 
Genealogy  of  our  Lord,  H.  10 
General  judgment,  H.  580 
Generation  of  vipers,  H,  40 
Genius  of  Christianity,  H.  62 
Gentiles,  calling  of,  H.  509 

first-fruits,  H.  19 
Gentle  Servant  of  Jehovah,  H.  302 
Geography,  arithmetic,  and  grammar,  H.  159 


Germ,  crime  in,  N.  382 
Getbsemane,  Christ  in,  H.  602 
Gethsemane-prayer,  our  Lord's,  H,  603 
Give  and  forgive,  H,  138 

and  take  of  life,  H.  168 

receiving  to,  H.  249 
Giving  life  for  others,  L  478 

occasions  of  stumbling,  H.  431 
Glimpse  of  glory,  H.  414 
Glorious  commission,  our  Lord's,  H.  666 
Glory,  glimpse  of,  H,  414 

of  Christ  in  judgment,  H.  581 
Gnat  and  camel,  H.  542 
God  and  evil,  H.  140 

and  immortality,  N.  520 

and  man,  love  to,  H.  522 

and  public  opinion,  H.  517 

anger  in,  N.  513 

as  Uprooter,  H.  382 

can  bring  large  results  from  small  be- 
ginnings, N.  576 

commandments  of,  and  traditions  of  men, 
H.  380 

goodness  of,  H.  455 

kingdom  of,  singleness  of  aim  in,  H.  160 

love  of,  for  little  children,  H.  435 

nature  and  nature's,  H.  156 

our  Father,  H.  130 

providential  care  of,  H.  256 

regards,  service  that,  N.  470 

Son  of,  Jesus,  N.  610 

vision  of,  N.  88 

with  us,  H.  15 
God's  children  and  the  fowls,  H.  157 

feast,  two  ways  of  despising,  H.  511 

love  to  us,  and  our  duty  to  Him,  H.  173 

notice  of  little  things,  H.  263 

opportunity,  man's  extremity,  N.  14 

work  perfect,  I.  137 
Godhead,  triunal  unity  of,  H.  658 
Going  away  from  Christ,  H.  458 
Golden  rule  in  kingdom,  H.  174 
Good    confession,    Christ's,    counted    blas- 
phemy, H.  610 

for  evil,  doing,  H,  119 

men,  mistaken  views  of,  H.  407 

news,  H.  74 

on  doing,  H.  99 

works,  H.  100 

vainglory  to  be  avoided  in  our,  H.  125 
Goodly  pearls,  H.  345 
Goodness  of  God,  H.  455 

true  and  false,  N.  125 

versus  selfishness,  H.  29 
Gospel  and  poor,  H.  271 

call,  wisdom  of  complying  with,  H.  500 

Christ  Messenger  of  His  own,  H.  505 

intolerance  of,  H.  307 

message,  different  treatment  of,  H.  613 

narrowness  of,  H.  179 

of  forgiveness,  H.  221 

preaching  of  the,  H.  567 

revealment  of,  H.  326 
Grace  and   nature,   signs   in   kingdoms   of, 
H.  563 

Christ's,  H.  388 

667 


INDEX. 


Grace,  collective,  H.  435 

first  law  of,  self-denial,  I.  409 

kingdom  of,  H.  466 

manifested  in  flagrant  sinners,  H.  501 
Grammar,  geography,  and  arithmetic,  H.  159 
Great  choice,  I.  180 

exceptional  birth,  H.  13 

first  and,  commandment,  H.  522,  523,  524 

Healer,  H.  220,  374 

Physician,  I.  67 

Preacher,  H.  66 

price,  pearl  of,  H.  344 

question,  H.  459 

second,  commandment,  H.  524 

test,  N.  184 

transformation,  H.  202 
Greatest,  N.  275 

in  kingdom,  H.  430 
Greatness  of  John  Baptist,  H.  275 

true,  H.  427,  476 
Greed  and  care,  N.  154 

warning  against,  H.  148 
Group  of  warnings,  H.  123 
Growth  of  truth,  H.  335 
Guarantee   of  religious   life,   the   Mediator, 

H.  528 
Guard,  Roman  soldiers  on,  N.  633 
Guarded  sepulchre,  H.  642 
Guilt,  homage  of,  H.  617 

of  betrayal,  H.  589 

Peter's,  N.  614 
Guilty  conscience,  miseries  of,  H.  360 

Habit,  law  of,  N.  328 

Hallowed  be  Thy  Name,  H.  132 

Hand,   cutting   off,  and  plucking    out   eye, 

H.  Ill 
Hands,  eating  with  unwashen,  I.  380 
Hand-washing,  N.  380 
Happy  marriage,  I.  447 

Harvest,    abundance    of,    and     scarcity    of 
labourers,  H.  241 

Lord  of,  H.  241 
Hasty,  too,  and  too  slow,  H.  208 
Hatred,  inward,  H.  108 
Healer  and  healed,  H.  231 

Christ's  example  as,  H.  67 

great,  H.  220,  374 
Healing,  Christ  preaching  and,  H.  66 

Christ,  the,  H.  205 

of  Peter's  wife's  mother,  H.  204 

on  sabbath,  H.  298 
Hearers,  H.  342 

right,  of  Christ's  sayings,  H.  189 

wise  and  foolish,  H.  187 
Hearing,  N.  342 

art  of,  H.  329 
Heart  and  treasure,  N.  150 
Heart-purity,  H.  86,  87,  88 
Heafthenism,  H.  657 
Heaven,  authority  in,  H,  657 

children's  voices  in,  I.  452 

kingdom  of,  H.  59.     See  Kingdom. 
Matthew's  use  of  expression,  N.  34 
one  Master  only  in,  H.  152 

life  in,  N.  820 

668 


Heaven,  on  earth  and  in,  N.  404 

our  Father  in,  H.  130,  131 

treasures  in,  H.  149 
Heirs  of  kingdom,  H.  74 
Hell,  gates  of,  shall  not  prevail  against  it, 

N.  403 
Herald  of  King,  H.  37 

Herod  an  example   of  alleged  necessity  of 
sinning,  H.  362 

and  Jews  troubled,  H.  22 

doom  of,  H.  20 

type  of  enemies  of  Christ,  H.  23 
Herod's  ball-room,  H.  360 

oath,  H.  363 

plot,  H.  23 

sacrifice  of  John  Baptist,  H.  360 
Hesitancy  and  impulsiveness,  H.  209 
Hidden  treasure,  parable  of,  H,  344 
High  festival,  remarkable  days  of,  N.  362 

priest,  Christ's  reply  to,  H.  610 
Hill,  city  on,  H.  99 
Hindered  by  one  thing,  N,  457 
Hindrance  to  miracle,  unbelief,  H.  354 
Hindrances  to  inquirers,  N.  459 
Hiring  of  labourers,  H.  467 
Historical  allusion,  N.  119 
History  of  Jesus  Christ,  relation  of  children 

to,  H.  451 
Hoarding,  passion  for,  I.  150 
Holiness,  uncertainty  of  life  great  reason  for, 

H.  566 
Holy  character,  influence  of,  N.  15 

Ghost,  sin  against,  N.  292 ;  H.  308,  309 

indignation,  N,  549 

Mount,  on  the,  H.  416 

place,    abomination    of     desolation     in, 
H.  559 

service,  worthy  man  for,  H.  592 

things,  perversion  of,  H.  53 

Trinity,  N.  46 
Homage,  doing,  H.  23 

of  guilt,  H.  617 

of  power,  H.  621 

of  wise  men,  H.  25 
Home  and  abroad,  Christian  work  at,  H.  421 

first  I  H.  248 

Jesus  still  from,  H.  387 

striking,  H.  185 
Honest,  slothfulness  linked  with  desire  to 

be,  H.  578 
Honey,  wild,  locusts  and,  N.  39 
Honour,  titles  of,  N.  536 
Honoured,  tested  and,  H.  366 
Honouring  Christ,  H.  488 
Hosanna  to  Son  of  David,  H.  488 
House  of  God,  desecration  of,  N.  492 

of  prayer,  H.  492 
Household  trouble,  H.  420 
Householder  and  disciples,  H.  348 
Human  and  Divine  perfection,  N.  122 

Christ  in  Gethsemane,  H.  602 

intolerance  and  Divine  patience,  H.  335 

nature,  dignity  of,  H.  298 
Humanity,  Christ  and,  H.  66 

Church  and,  H.  420 

law  of  love  a  natural  force  of,  H.  522 


INDEX. 


Humble  exalted,  N.  538 
Humiliation,  Christ  in  His,  H.  45 

Christ's  deep,  H.  641 
Humility,  I.  431 
Hundredfold,  H.  460 
Hunger,  moral,  H.  83 

soul's,  for  truth,  H.  397 
Hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness, 

H.  82,  83 
Hungry,  blessing  of,  H.  83 
Hypocrisy,  H.  23 

in  praying,  H.  127 

results  of,  H.  538 
Hypocrite,  H.  381 
Hypocrites  and  their  doom,  H.  495 
Hypocritical  repentance,  I.  41 

teaching  as  to  oath-taking,  H.  542 

I,  I.  288 

I  will  and  I  won't,  H.  499 

Ideal,  the  Christian,  N.  475 

Idle  words,  H.  310,  311 

Idleness,  spiritual,  H.  468 

Idols,  mammon  greatest  of  all,  H.  154 

Incarnation,  Christ's  wonderful,  H.  13 

Indifference,  Christ's  apparent,  N.  385 

Indignation,  holy,  N.  549 

Industry,  H.  576 

Influence  of  holy  character,  N.  15 

of  women  on  kings,  I.  360 

Inheriting  earth,  H.  81 

Illustrative    teaching,    importance    of.    N 
328  1-  ,       . 

Imaginary  defilement,  N.  380 
Imitation  of  Christ,  H.  409 
Immortahty,  God  and,  N.  520 
Importance  of  illustrative  teaching,  N.  328 
Important  question,  N.  607 
Importunity  in  prayer,  H.  171 
Impossible,  achieving  the,  H.  300 

doing,  N.  371 
Impulsiveness  and  hesitancy,  H.  209 
Infant,  Divine,  sent  away,  H.  28 
Infants,  rights  of,  H.  449 
Inhumanity  of  man,  N.  633 
Injunction,  Saviour's,  H.  198 
Injuries,   brotherly    love    in    dealing   with 
N.  437 
forgiving,  H.  441 
mercy  in  forgiving,  H.  144 
Injuring  others,  N.  431 
Inquirers,  hindrances  to,  N.  459 
Inquiry  of  wise  men,  H.  22 
Inscription  on  cross,  N.  633 
Inspiration   of    Bible    and    resurrection    of 

Christ,  H.  647 
Intelligent  prayer,  H.  473 
Intensified  sorrow,  H.  603 
Interest  in  children,  H.  433 
Interpreter  of  conduct,  Christ,  N.  582 
Interpreting  Scripture,  H.  520 

the  Law,  H.  296 
Interruption,    distressing,    wisely    utilised 

H.  317 
Intolerance,   human,   and    Divine   patience 
H.  336 


Intolerance  of  gospel,  H.  307 
Invincible  meekness,  H.  284 

unbelief,  H.  281 
Invitation,  Christ's  universal,  H.  286 
Inward  hatred,  H.  108 
Inwardness,  N.  340 

of  Christianity,  1. 127 
Is  it  I  ?  H.  592 
Isaiah  and  Christ,  H.  381 
Issue  of  blood,  woman  with,  H.  231-233 
Itinerant  preachers,  Christ's,  H.  249 

Jehovah,  gentle  Servant  of,  H.  302 
Jericho,  N.  480 

Jerusalem,  Christ's  journey  to,  H.  487 
destruction  of,  N.  555 
King  entering,  H.  489 
Jesus,  N.  15.    See  Cheist. 
absolute  Master,  N.  536 
alone,  H.  368 
and  His  bounty,  H.  366 
at  Caesarea  Philippi,  N.  401 
at  feet  of,  H.  388 
at  Nazareth,  N.  31 
atoning  death  of,  effects  of,  H.  639 
baptism  of,  N.  34,  45 
birth  of,  H.  21  ^ 

departing,  John  imprisoned,  H.  57 
gives  sight,  H.  481 
in  banishment,  H.  383 
in  controversy,  H.  378 
in  desert,  H.  363 
in  Gethsemane,  H.  603 
in  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  H.  589 
in  Nazareth,  H.  3.00 
John's  doubting  message  to,  H.  266 
majesty  and  authority  of,  N.  491 
meeting,  H.  649 
miracles  of,  H.  196 
on  land,  H.  372 
on  waters,  H.  366 
only,  H.  418 
originality  of,  N.  352 
prejudice  against,  I.  353 
repeating  Himself,  H.  388 
Saviour  from  sin,  H.  14 
silence  of,  at  bar  of  Pilate,  H.  623 
Son  of  God,  N.  610 
still  from  home,  H.  387 
telling,  H.  363 

was,  dealt  with  legally  ?  H.  619 
what  do  we  think  of  Him  ?  H.  529 
what  temptation  did  for,  N.  48 
with  sinners,  H.  225 
withdrawing,  H.  492 
wonderful  Babe,  H.  21 
Jews  and  Herod  troubled,  H.  22 
and  Ninevites,  N.  314 
marriage  and.  divorce  among,  N.  447 
Jewish  people,  H.  315 
Johannine    character    of    Matt.    xi.    25-30 

N.  286 
John  Baptist,  H.  37 
greatness  of,  H.  275 
imprisoned,  Jesus  departing,  H.  57 
martyrdom  of,  H.  358 

669 


INDEX. 


John      Baptist,    Pharisees    and    Sadducees 

coming  to,  H.  39,  40 
John  Baptist's  burial,  H.  363 

call  to  preach,  H.  38 

death,  H.  360 

doubting  message  to  Jesus,  H.  266 

fitness  for  his  commission,  H.  39 

question,  H.  269 
Jonas  a  sign,  H.  314 
Joseph,  H.  31 

disclosure  to,  H.  14 
Joseph's  new  fear,  H.  31 

obedience,  H.  16,  28 
Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  H.  641 
Journey  to  Jerusalem,  Christ's,  H.  487 
Joy  of  giving  up  all  for  Christ,  I.  462 

of  Lord,  H.  577 

of  ministry,  N.  477 

pledge  of,  sorrow,  H.  78 

righteousness,   and    peace    of    kingdom, 
N.  491 
Judas  Iscariot,  H.  593,  620 

and  Christ,  N.  248 

and  Peter,  H.  600 

conscience-stricken,  H.  621 

the  covetous,  H.  591 
Judas'  remorse,  N.  620 
Judging,  knowing  and,  H.  296 

on,  H.  166 

true  and  false,  H.  169 
Judgment,  Divine,  law  of,  H.  560 

general,  H.  580 

glory  of,  Christ  in,  H.  581 
Judgments,  perverted,  H.  170 

rash,  cautions  against,  H.  164,  165 
Judicial  abandonment^  H.  547 

blindness,  N.  651 
Justice  of  award,  N.  469 

Keepers  of  vineyard,  H.  503 
Key,  prayer  a,  H.  173 
Keys,  H.  403 

Kindness  to  enemies,  N.  120 
King  and  Father,  I.  132 

and  kingdom,  H.  486 

Christ  the,  H.  488 

coronation  of,  H,  45 

disappointed,  cruelty  of,  H.  29 

duties  to  our  earthly  and  our  heavenly, 
H.  618 

early  welcome    and    first    ministers    of, 
H.  58 

entering  Jerusalem,  H.  489 

herald  of,  H.  37 

in  exile,  H.  27 

proclaimed,  H.  18 

purifying  temple,  H.  491 

requirements  of,  H.  454 

victory  of,  H.  50 

world's,  H.  267 
King's  ambassadors,  H.  245,  256 
Kings,  influence  of  women  on,  I.  360 
Kingdom,  builders  in — a  contrast,  H.  189 

citizens  of,  as  light  of  world,  H.  97 
as  salt  of  earth,  H.  96 

claimed,  H.  484 

670 


Kingdom  come.  Thy,  H.  133,  134 
Father's,  and  Father's  will,  H.  136 
golden  rule  in,  H.  174 
greatest  in,  H.  430 
heirs  of,  H.  74 

of  God,  receiving,  as  little  child,  H,  431 
singleness  of  aim  in,  H.  150 
true  test  of  character  in,  H.  181 
undue  anxiety  reproved  and  chief  good 

urged  in,  H.  156 
with  men,  H.  249 
of  grace,  H.  465 
of  heaven,  H.  59 

children  a  parable  of,  H.  430 
-  Matthew's  use  of  expression,  N.  34 
meetness  for,  H.  430 
one  Master  only  in,  H.  152 
taken  by  force,  H.  276 
theirs  is,  N.  76 
pressing  into,  N.  277 
righteousness  of,  H.  160 

peace,  and  joy  of,  N.  491 
storming  of,  H.  275 
strait  gate  and  narrow  way  to,  H.  178 
true    qualification    for    admission    into, 

H.  183 
within,  I.  134 

word  of,  diversely  received,  H.  325 
Kingdoms   of  nature   and  grace,   signs   in, 

H.  563 
Kinsfolk,  true,  H.  316 
Kinsmanship  of  Christ,  H.  318 
Kiss,  traitor's,  H.  607 
Knowing  and  judging,  H.  296 

Labourers,  hiring  of,  H.  467 

in  vineyard,  H.  466 

scarcity  of,  abundance   of  harvest  and, 
H.  241 
Lamps,  lighted,  H.  99 
Land,  Jesus  on,  H.  372 
Language  of  signs,  H.  638 
Large   results  from  small  beginnings,  God 

can  bring,  N.  576 
Last  shall  be  first,  H.  462,  466,  499 ;  N.  469 
Late,  too,  H.  604 
Law  and  prayer,  H.  475 

authority  of,  N.  104 

Christ's,  ignored,  N.  120 

comprehensive,  I.  523 

interpreting  the,  H.  296 

moral,  unity  and  perpetuity  of,  H.  102 

of  Divine  judgment,  H.  560 

of  fasting,  H.  226 

of  habit,^N.  328 

of  love    a    natural  force    of   humanity, 
H.  522 

of  marriage,  H.  445 

ofl&cial  relation  to,  H.  534 
Leaders,  blind,  of  blind,  N.  382 
Learners,  unlearned,  H.  395 
Leaven    and    mustard    seed,    parables    of, 
H.  B37,  338 

as  symbol  of  Christianity,  H.  339 ;  N.  340 
Legal  snare,  H.  520 
Legally,  was  Jesus  dealt  with  ?  H.  619 


INDEX. 


Leper,  cleansing  of,  H.  196,  197 

Lost  condition,  salvation  for,  H.  434 

Leprosy  of  Scripture,  N.  197 

was,  N.  435 

type  of  sin,  H.  198 

Love,   brotherly,   in  dealing   with    injuries, 

Lesson  in  faith,  H.  419 

N.  437 

in  prayer,  H.  478 

Christian,  wastefulness  of,  H.  589 

Lessons  of  lilies,  H.  158 

law    of,  a   natural    force    of    humanity, 

Letter,  spirit  not,  N.  296 

H.  522 

Liar,  Satan  a,  I.  55 

maternal,  exemplary,  H.  385 

Life  and  youth,  anxiety  hurtful  to,  H 

.  157 

of  children,  N.  450 

Christ  Master  of,  N.  536 

of  enemies,  H.  119  ;  I.  120 

every  one  has  place  to  fill  in,  I.  62 

of  God  for  little  children,  H.  435 

gaining,  by  losing  it,  N.  409 

perfection  of,  N.  121 

give  and  take  of,  H.  168 

to  God  and  man,  H.  522,  523 ;  N.  523 

giving,  for  others,  I.  478 

to  our  neighbour,  H.  524 

in  heaven, N,  520 

to  us,  God's,  and  our  duty  to  Him,  H.  173 

of  Christianity,  H.  468 

weakening  of,  H.  556 

spiritual,  more  authoritative  than  custom, 

Lovely  portrait  in  unlovely  frame,  N.  302 

H.  228 

Lowest  depth,  H.  233 

uncertainty  of,  great  reason  for  holiness. 

Lowly  Teacher,  H.  288 

H.  566 

Loyalty  a  question  of  will,  N.  514 

Light,  analogies  of,  H.  98 

and  darkness,  H.  57 

Magdala,  Mary  of,  H.  639 

must  shine,  I.  100 

Magi  led  to  Bethlehem,  H.  25 

of  world,  citizens  of  kingdom  as,  H.  97,  98 

Maimed,    yet    saved ;    complete,    yet    lost  1 

to  be  seen,  H.  99 

N.  433 

true,  N.  57 

Majesty  and  authority  of  Jesus,  N.  491 

Lighted  lamps,  H.  99 

Malady  and  cure,  soul's,  H.  225 

Likeness  to  Christ,  H.  255 

Mammon,  greatest  of  all  idols,  H.  154 

Lilies,  lessons  of,  H.  158 

Man  and  wife,  parting,  e\i\  consequences  of, 

Limit,  sunset,  N.  162 

H.  112 

Lineage,  distinguished,  H.  9 

better  than  sheep,  H.  298 

Little  child,  receiving  kingdom  of  ( 

Grod  as. 

dignity  of,  N.  299 

H.  431 

inhumanity  of,  N.  633 

ones,  consolation  respecting,  H.  433 

love  to  God  and,  H.  522 

things,  God's  notice  of,  H.  263 

Man's  extremity,  God's  opportunity,  N.  14 

Living  Christ,  friendship  of,  H.  659 

morality   not   affected   by   man's   recep- 

Loaves and  fishes,  miracle  of,  H.  365, 

390 

tivity,  H.  382 

how  many,  have  ye  ?  H.  390 

needs,  sacredness  of,  H.  295 

Locusts  and  wild  honey,  N.  39 

power  of  volition,  H.  299 

Looking  for  another  Christ,  H.  270 

Market-place,  playing  in,  H.  280 

Loosing,  binding  and,  N.  404 

Marriage  and  divorce  among  Jews,  N.  447 

Lord  and  Son,  David's,  H.  527 

feast,  parable  of,  H.  512 

joy  of,  H.  577 

happy,  I.  447 

lay,  place  where  the,  H.  646 

law  of,  H.  445 

of  harvest,  H.  241 

Marry,  is  it  good  to  ?  H.  448 

our,  forewarning  His  disciples,  H. 

592 

Martyrdom  of  John,  H.  358 

our,  genealogy  of,  H,  10 

Mary  of  Magdala,  H.  639 

Lord's  apostles,  our,  H.  246 

Master  and  His  disciples,  H.  369,  397 

choice  of  apostles,  wisdom  in  our, 

H.  246 

of  life,  Christ,  N.  536,  537 

coming,  watching  for,  H.  566 

one,  only  in  kingdom  of  heaven,  H.  152 

Gethsemane-prayer,  our,  H.  603 

Mastery  of  body,  H.  110 

glorious  commission,  our,  H.  656 

Maternal  love,  exemplary,  H.  385 

host,  centurion  and  the  Captain  of,  H.  200 

Matthew,  call  of,  H.  223 

object-lesson,  our,  N.  429 

Gospel  of — 

Prayer,  H.  130 

author,  N.  1 

first  petition  in,  H.  133 

Gospel,  N.  3 

fifth  petirion  of,  H.  139 

peculiarities  of  last  chapter,  N.  643 

conclusion  of,  H.  144 

why   no    record    of    the    Ascension? 

second  temptation,  our,  H.  53 

N."  660 

Supper,  H.  596 

Matthew's  feast,  H.  224 

teaching,  our,  significance  of,  II.  103 

promotion,  words  that  came  of,  H.  224 

true  steward,  H.  567 

Meat,  sanctified,  H.  544 

vineyard,  cultivating,  H.  499 

Mediator,  guarantee  of  religious  life,  H.  528 

Loss,  profit  and,  H.  411 

Meek,  blessedness  of,  H.  78 

Lost,  complete,  yet;    maimed,  yet 

saved  1 

teacher  should  be,  I.  289 

N.  433 

Meekness,  H.  608 

671 


INDEX. 


Meekness  invincible,  H.  284 
Meeting  Jesus,  H.  649 
Meetness  for  kingdom  of  heaven,  H.  430 
Men,    Christ  rejected   of,    exalted   of    God, 
H.  505 

kingdom  of  God  with,  H.  249 

restoration  of,  H.  420 

traditions  of,  and  commandments  of  God, 
H.  380 

what,  say  of  Christ,  H.  400 
Mental  uncleanness,  H.  Ill 
Merciful,  H.  85,  86 

why  must  we  be  ?  H.  296 
Mercifulness,  H.  84 
Mercy  and  sacrifice,  I.  296 

efforts  of,  to  redeem,  H,  505 

in  forgiving  injuries,  H.  144 

sabbatical,  H.  297 
Message,  gospel,  different  treatment  of,  H.  513 
Messenger,  Christ,  of  His  own  gospel,  H.  505 
Messiah  Himself,  H.  43 
Metaphor  of  salt,  N.  95  ;  H.  96 
Method  of  teaching,  Christ's,  H.  327 
Midnight  summons,  H.  572 
Midst,  child  in,  H.  429 
Mighty  works,  H.  283 
Milton  on  divorce,  N.  448 
Mind's  love  for  God,  H.  623 
Ministerial  watchfulness,  H.  334 
Ministers,  first,  early  welcome  and,  of  King, 

H.  58 
Ministry,  joy  of,  N.  477 

of  Baptist,  H.  36 

of  children,  H.  429 
Miracle  of  loaves  and  fishes,  H.  365,  390 

unbelief  hindrance  to,  H.  354 
Miracles  by  wholesale,  H.  374 

of  Jesus,  H.  196 
Miseries  of  guilty  conscience,  H.  360 
Mission,  prophet's,  H.  31 
Missions,  H.  657 

Missionary  work,  motives  to,  H.  240 
Missionaries,  Christ's,  work  of,  H.  248 
Mistake,  terrible,  H.  411 
Mistaken  views  of  good  men,  H.  407 
Mockery  of  Christ,  H.  629 
Mode  of  Christ's  baptism,  N.  45 
Model  prayer,  the,  fosters  confidence,  H.  130 
Modern  classes,  old  types  of,  H.  19 
Moral  hunger,  H.  83 

law,  unity  and  perpetuity  of,  H.  102 

pollution,  H.  381 

suggestions  oE  genealogical  table,  H.  11 

whitewash,  N.  544 
Morals,   good,   Christ  great  encourager  of, 

H.  103 
Morality,  man's,  not  affected  by  man's  recep- 
tivity, H.  382 
Morrow,  anxiety  for,  forbidden,  H.  161 
Mortis,  arliculo,  H.  635 
Mote  and  beam,  N.  169 
Mother,  Peter's  wife's,  healing  of,  H.  204 
Motive  and  aim.  Christian,  H.  121 
Motives  to  missionary  work,  H.  240 
Mount,  Sermon  on,  N.  67  ;  H.  72 
Mourners  blessed,  H.  77 

672 


Mourners  comforted,  H.  77 

Mourning,  H.  76 

Mouth,  Christ's  enemies  condemned  out  of 

their  own,  H.  634 
Multitude,  Christ's  care  of,  H.  238 

compassion  for,  H.  240 

fed,  H.  365,  390 
Multitudes,  H.  241 
Murderous  though  beautiful,  I.  361 
Mustard  seed  and  leaven,  parables  of,  H.  337 
Mysterious  birth,  H.  11 

Name,  hallowed  be  Thy,  H.  132 
Narrow  and  broad  ways,  H.  177 

way  and  strait  gate  to  kingdom,  H.  178 
Narrowness  of  gospel,  H.  179 
National  catastrophes,  N.  550 
Natural   force    of    humanity,   law    of  love, 

H.  522 
Nature  and  grace,   signs    in  kingdoms   of, 
H.  563 

and  nature's  God,  H.  156 
Nazareth,  Jesus  at,  N.  31 

Jesus  in,  H.  350 
Necessity  of  self-denial,  H.  261 
Needs,  man's,  sacredness  of,  H.  295 

sabbatical,  H.  292 
Neglecting  and  opposing  Christ,  H.  506 
Neighbour,  love  to  our,  H.  524 

sum  of  our  duty  to  our,  H.  175 
Nemesis,  N.  549 
Net,  H.  346 

and  tares,  parables  of,  N.  347 
Neutrahty,  H.  153 
New  and  old,  things,  H.  348 

departure,  H.  244 

obedience,  H.  658 

Testament  Passover,  H.  596 

truth  bewildering  to  some,  N.  329 
News,  good,  H.  74 
Ninevites  and  Jews,  N.  314 
No  consecration  and  consecration,  H.  25 
Notice,  God's,  of  little  things,  H.  263 

Oath,  Herod's,  H.  363 
Oaths,  H.  113 

Christ's  teaching  on,  N.  115 

rash  and  superfluous,  H.  114 
Oath-taking,   hypocritical    teaching    as    to. 

H.  542 
Obedience,  attention  and,  H.  278 

Joseph's,  H.  16,  28 

new,  H.  658 
Obscurity,  settled,  H.  29 
Observations,  general,  from  Sermon  onMount 

H.  186 
Object  of  pursuit,  chief,  H.  160 
Object-lesson,  our  Lord's,  N.  429 
Occasions  of  stumbling,  giving,  H.  431 
Offence,  world's,  in  Christ,  H.  352 
Offended  in  Christ,  H.  272 
Offender  and  Church,  H,  437 
Official  relation  to  Law,  H.  534 
Old,  things  new  and,  H.  348 

types  of  modern  classes,  H.  19 
Omitting  small  duties,  N.  576 


INDEX. 


One  and  all,  H.  202 

Perversion  of  holy  things,  H.  53 

Master  only  in  kingdom  of  heaven,  H 

152 

Perverted  judgments,  H.  170 

thing,  hindered  by,  N.  457 

Pestilence,  consolation  during,  H.  555 

Open  war,  H.  48 

Peter  and  Judas,  H.  600 

Opposing  and  neglecting  Christ,  H.  506 

character  of,  N.  403 

Opposite  senses,  similitudes  used  in,  N.  ; 

539 

Christ's  reproof  of,  H.  407 

Originality,  Christ's,  H.  192 

Peter's  confession,   Christ's    commendation 

of  Jesus,  N.  352 

of,  N.  403 

Ostentation  in  almsgiving,  H.  126 

faith,  failure  of,  H.  370;  N.  371 

Overlooking  signs  of  times,  H.  395 

fall,  H.  609,  613,  614 

Ownership,  true,  N.  81 

fault,  H.  371 

sin,  H.  609,  613,  614 

Palm  Sunday  sermon,  H.  487 

tears,  H.  614 

Parable,  no,  teaches  everything,  N.  326 

wife's  mother,  healing  of,  H.  204 

of  hidden  treasure,  H.  344 

Pharisaical    and     Christian     righteousness. 

of  kingdom  of  heaven,  children  a,  H. 

430 

H.  104 

of  marriage  feast,  H.  512 

Pharisaism,  H.  295 

of  sower,  H.  323-326  ;  N.  323-326 

Pharisee-spirit,  N.  300 

of  talents,  H.  575 

Pharisees  and  Sadducees  coming  to  John, 

of  tares,  H.  332-334 

H.  39,  40 

of  ten  virgins,  H.  571,  572 

special  sermon  to,  H.  39 

Parables,  N.  328 

attitude  to  be  taken  towards,  H.  534 

of  mustard  seed  and  leaven,  H.  337 

blind  zeal  of,  H.  540 

of  net  and  tares,  N.  347 

sin  of,  H.  104 

Pardon  of  sin,  H.  218 

Pharisees'  sabbath  and  Christ's,  H.  294 

Parents,  claims  of,  H.  380 

Phylacteries,  N.  534 

Partial  ending,  H.  557 

Physician,  Christ  as,  H.  238 

Parting  man  and  wife,  evil  consequences  of, 

great,  I.  67 

H.  112 

Picture  of  temple  as  it  should  be,  H.  492 

Passion  for  hoarding,  I.  150 

Pilate,  H.  626 

Passover,  New  Testament,  H.  596 

before     Christ—  Christ     before     Pilate, 

preparation  for,  H,  592 

H.  625 

Pastoral  office,  Christ's  temptation  and  the. 

Christ  sent  to,  H.  619 

H.  52 

disclaiming  responsibility,  N.  627 

Patience,   Divine,   human   intolerance 

and. 

silence  of  Jesus  at  bar  of,  H.  623 

H.  335 

Pilate's  question,  H.  626 

Pause,  significant,  H.  206 

wife,  dream  of,  H.  624 

Peace  by  power,  H.  276 

Pity,  N.  241 

not,  but  a  sv/ord,  H.  259 

Place  to  fill  in  life,  every  one  has,  I.  62 

righteousness  and  joy  of  kingdom,  N. 

491 

where  the  Lord  lay,  H.  646      ^ 

Peace-bringer  in  world  of  conscience,  H. 

220 

Playing  in  market-place,  H.  280 

Peacemaker,  I.  90 

Pledge  of  joy,  sorrow,  H.  78 

Peacemakers,  H.  89,  90 

Plenary  powers,  H.  493 

Pearl  of  great  price,  H.  344 

Plot,  Herod's,  H.  23 

Pearls,  goodly,  H.  345 

Plotting  and  persevering,  H.  302 

Penalty  of  piopiiesying,  H.  546 

Plucking    out    eye    and   cutting   off    hand. 

Perceiving,  seeing  but  not,  N.  329 

.       H.  Ill 

Perfect,  God's  work,  I.  137 

Point,  culminating,  H.  398 

Perfection,  counsels  of,  H.  116,  120 

Political  snare,  H.  515 

Divine  and  human,  N.  122 

Politics  for  Christians,  H.  517 

of  love,  N.  121 

Pollution,  moral,  H.  381 

sign  of,  N.  122 

Pondering  signs  of  times,  duty  of,  N.  395 

Perils  of  prudence,  H.  154 

Poor,  gospel  and,  H.  271 

of  wealth,  H.  452,  459 

in  spirit,  H.  73  ;  I.  76 

Perjury,  great  sin  of,  H.  113 

Pope  and  Father,  N.  537 

Permanent  and  positive,  N.  592 

Portrait,  lovely,  in  unlovely  frame,  N.  302 

Perpetuity  and  unity  of  moral  law,  H.  102 

Positive  and  permanent,  N.  592 

of  words  of  Christ,  H.  564 

Pounds,   parable   of,   is   parable   of   talents 

Persecuted,  H.  90,  93 

another  version  of  ?  N.  576 

prophets,  H.  94 

Poverty  of  spirit,  I.  76 

Persecution,  rejoicing  under,  H.  93 

Power,  dormant,  H.  211 

Perseverance,  final,  not  inevitable,  H.  556 

homage  of,  H.  621 

Persevering,  plotting  and,  H.  302 

man's,  of  volition,  H.  299 

Persistent,  acquiescent  yet,  H.  385 

of  combination,  N.  438 

Personal  responsibility,  H.  576 

of  supreme  love  to  Christ,  N.  462 

Perverseness,  wilful,  H.  278 

peace  by,  H.  276 

XX 


673 


INDEX. 


Power  to  help  or  harm  religion,  our,  H.  539 
Powers  of  darkness,  H.  213 

plenary,  H.  493 
Practicable,  difficult  yet,  I,  122 
Pray,  how  to,  H.  173 
Prayer,  H.  172 

a  key,  H.  173 

against  temptation,  H.  141 

and  faith,  H.  495 

and  fasting,  H.  422 

and  law,  H.  475 

fasting,  almsgiving,  H.  125 

first,  to  Crucified  One,  H.  634 

house  of,  H.  492 

importunity  in,  H.  171 

intelligent,  H.  473 

lesson  in,  H.  478 

Lord's,  H.  130 

secret,  H.  127 

special,  Christ's  seasons  of,  K  368 

true,  N.  381 

vain  repetitions  and  length  in,  H.  129 
Praying,  hypocrisy  in,  H.  127 
Preach,  call  to,  John  Baptist's,  H.  38 
Preacher,  great,  H.  66 
Preachers,  Christ's  itinerant,  H.  249 
Preaching,  Christ,  H.  58,  66 

faithful,  I.  549 

fireside,  N.  249 

of  the  gospel,  H.  557 
Precept,  and  a  reason  for  it,  H.  253 
Preciousness  of  soul,  H.  410 
Precipitancy  and  procrastination,  H.  209 
Prejudice,  I.  354 

against  Jesus,  I.  353 
Preparation  for  Passover,  H.  592 
Preparing  for  change,  H.  239 
Presence,  real,  H,  659 
Preservation  from  sin,  H.  604 
Preserved  and  delivered,  H.  142 
Pressing  into  kingdom,  N.  277 
Pretended  friends,  H.  311 
Price  of  truth,  H.  342 
Principle,  far-reaching,  N.  41 

of  Christian  life,  H.  135 

or  rule?  I.  118 
Privilege  of  peacemakers,  H.  90 

of  repentance,  H.  59 
Privileges  forfeited,  H,  506 
Process  of  condemnation,  H.  549 
Proclaimed,  revealed  and,  N.  255 
Procrastination  and  precipitancy,  H.  209 
Profession  tried,  H.  513 
Profit  and  loss,  H.  411 
Profiting,  understanding  but  not,  H.  507 
Profundis,  de,  H.  600,  637 
Progress,  rise  and,  of  Church,  H.  337 
Prophecy,  H.  31 

ancient,  fulfilled,  N.  491 
Prophesying,  penalty  of,  H.  546 
Prophet's  mission,  H.  31 

reward,  H.  262 
Prophets,  persecuted,  H.  94 
Providential  care  of  God,  H.  256 
Prudence  and  zeal,  N,  171 

perils  of,  H.  154 

674 


Public  adoption,  N.  582 

and  domestic  Christianity,  H.  99 

opinion  and  God,  H.  517 
Pulpit  power,  sources  of,  H.  191 
Punishment,    degrees    of,  in    other   world, 
H.  109 

everlasting,  H.  583 
Purity  of  heart,  H.  86,  87,  88 

strength  of,  H.  87 
Purpose  of  Christ's  life  and  death,  H.  476 

of  Christianity,  N.  121 
Pursuit,  chief  object  of,  H.  160 

Qualification,   true,  for  admission  into 

kingdom,  H.  183 
Queen  of  Sheba,  example  of,  H.  314 
Question,  great,  H.  459 

important,  N.  607 

John  Baptist's,  H.  269 

Pilate's,  H.  626 
Quousque  ?  H.  439 

Kansom,  Christ  a,  N.  477 

Rash  and  superfluous  oaths,  H.  114 

judgments,  cautions  against,  H.  164,  165 
Real  presence,  H.  659 
Reaping-time,  H.  341 
Reason  for  condemnation,  H.  502 

of  Christ's  method  of  teaching,  H.  327 
Reasoning,  sound,  H.  306 
Receiving  kingdom  of  God  as  little  child, 
H.  431 

to  give,  H.  249 
Receptivity,    man's,     man's     morality     not 

affected  by,  H.  382 
Recompense,  fidelity  and,  H.  576 
Reconciliation,  worship  and,  H.  109 
Record  of  the  Ascension,  why  no  ?  N.  660 
Reed,  bruised,  and  smoking  flax,  H.  303 
Reflections     on    Christ's    first    temptation, 

H.  53 
Reform,  Christian,  H.  42 
Reformation  from  within,  I.  340 
Rejecting  Christ,  I.  625 
Rejoicing  under  persecution,  H.  93 
Relation   of    children    to   history   of    Jesus 

Christ,  H.  451 
Release  by  corban,  N.  378 
Reliance  on  ancestry,  N.  42 
Religion,  our  power  to  help  or  harm,  H.  539 

surface,  N.  326 

what  is  ?  H.  525 
Religious  excitement,  N.  277 

life,  the  Mediator  guarantee  of,  H.  528 
Remarkable  days  of  high  festival,  N.  362 
Remorse,  Judas',  N.  620 
Repeating  type,  H.  199 
Repelling  and  attracting,  Christ,  H.  209 
Repentance,  H.  41 

beginning  of,  H.  59 

hypocritical,  I.  41 

restitution  proof  of,  I.  41 
Repetitions,    vain,    and    length    in    prayer, 

H.  129 
Reply,  Christ's,  to  high  priest,  H.  610 
Reproof,  Christ's,  of  Peter,  H.  407 


INDEX. 


Requirements  of  King,  H.  454 
Respice  finem,  H.  578 
Responsibility,  Church,  I.  99 

for  idle  words,  H.  311 

for  wrong-doing,  N.  432 

personal,  H.  576 

Pilate  disclaiming,  N.  627 
Rest,  Christ  our,  N.  288 
Restitution  proof  of  repentance,  I.  41 
Restoration  of  men,  H.  420 
Resurrection,  Christ's,  H.  645 

argument  drawn  from  explanation  of 

His  enemies,  H,  651 
women  witnessing  to,  H.  648 

death  and,  Christ  foretelling  His,  H.  407, 
472 

of  Christ  and  inspiration  of  Bible,  H.  647 

of  many  bodies   of  saints  which  slept, 
H.  638 

victory  won,  H.  645 
Retaliation,  H.  118 
Retirement,    Christ's,    from    His    enemies, 

H.  302 
Revealed  and  proclaimed,  N.  255 
Revealment  of  gospel,  H.  326 
Revelation,  Christ  the,  H.  341 
Reverence  and  discretion,  H.  170 
Reversal,  apparent,  H.  26 
Reversals,  H.  462 
Reward,  faithful  servant's,  N.  577 

of  righteousness,  N.  84 

of  self-denial,  H.  460 

prophet's,  H.  262 
Rewards,  spiritual,  H.  469 
Rich  disciple,  H.  641 
Right  hearers  of  Christ's  sayings,  H.  189 

manner  of  fasting,  H.  146 
Rights  of  enemies,  H.  533 

of  infants,  H.  449 
Righteous,  surprise  of,  H.  582 
Righteousness  and  almsgiving,  N.  127 

excelling,  H.  105 

filled  with,  N.  84 

hungering  and  thirsting  after,  H.  82,  83 

of  kingdom,  H.  160 

peace,  and  joy  of  kingdom,  N.  491 

Pharisaical  and  Christian,  H.  104 

reward  of,  N.  84 

sufferers  for,  H.  92 
Rise  and  progress  of  Church,  H.  337 
Risen  Christ  in  Galilee,  H.  647 
Roman  soldiers  on  guard,  N.  633 
Root  and  branch,  H.  106 
Royal     marriage    feast :     wedding    guests, 
H.  512 

wardrobes,  I.  515 
Rule  or  principle?  I.  118 
Ruler,  young,  Christ's  demand  of,  N.  456 
Rulership,  H.  23 
Running  with  stream,  N.  634 

Sabbath  day,  doing  well  on,  I.  299 

healing  on,  H.  298 

Pharisees',  and  Christ's,  H.  294 
Sabbath-service,  N.  296 
Sabbatical  mercy,  H.  297 


Sabbatical  needs,  H.  292 
Sacredness  of  man's  needs,  H.  295 
Sacrifice  and  thanksgiving,  H.  595 

for  gain,  N.  346 

Herod's,  of  John  Baptist,  H.  360 

mercy  and,  I.  296 
Sad  story,  N.  454 

Sadducees   and  Pharisees  coming  to  John, 
H.  39,  40 
special  sermon  to,  H.  39 

Christ  and,  H.  519 

confuted,  H.  519 
Safety  of  Church,  Builder  and,  H.  401 
Saints   which    slept,    resurrection   of  many 

bodies  of,  H.  638 
Salome's  request,  H.  473 
Salt  losing  its  savour,  H.  96 

metaphor  of,  N.  95  ;  H.  96 

of  earth,  citizens  of  kingdom  as,  H.  96 
Salvation  from  sin,  H.  14 

for  lost  condition,  H.  434 
Sanctified  meat,  H.  544 
Satan  a  liar,  I.  55 
Satisfying  Christ,  the,  H.  366 
Saved,   maimed    yet ;    complete,    yet    lost  1 

N.  433 
Saviour  from  sin,  Jesus,  H.  14 

not  tormentor,  H.  215 

sea  and,  H.  369 
Saviour's  injunction,  H.  198 

sorrow  over  sinful  world,  H.  550 

temptation,  H.  52 
Savour,  salt  losing  its,  H.  96 
Scarcity  of  labourers,  abundance  of  harvest 

and,  H.  241 
Scatter  it,  N.  97 
Sceptical  snare,  H.  518 
Scepticism,  H.  656 
Scoffing  wayfarers,  H.  633 
Scripture,  interpreting,  H.  520 
Sea  and  Saviour,  H.  369 
Seasons  of  special  prayer,  Christ's,  N.  368 
Second  great  commandment,  H.  524 

temptation,  our  Lord's,  H.  53 
Secret  prayer,  H.  127 
Seed  of  Church,  H.  245 
Seeds  of  error,  H.  331 
Seeing  but  not  perceiving,  N.  329 
Seeking  wanderer,  H.  435 
Self-assertion,  undue,  H.  475 
Self-deception,  H.  184 
Self-denial,  H.  407,  408 

and  its  reward,  H.  460 

first  law  of  grace,  I.  409 

necessity  of,  H.  261 
Self -exaltation,  N.  538 
Self-inflicted  sorrow,  H.  457 
Self-injury,  H.  432 
Selfishness  versus  goodness,  H.  29 
Self-love,  N.  525 

Self-sacrifice,  self-regard  involves,  N.  432 
Self-taxation,  H.  422 
Sepulchre,  guarded,  H.  642 

women  at,  H.  645 
Sermon  on  Mount,  H.  72  ;  N.  67 

general  observations  from,  H.  186 

675 


INDEX. 


Sermons,  special,  to  Pharisees  and  Sadducees, 

H.  39 
Serpents  and  doves,  H.  251 
Servant,  centurion's  regard  for  his,  N.  202 

Christ  a,  H.  477 

faithful,  and  wicked  one,  H.  567 

gentle,  of  Jehovah,  H.  302 

reward  of  faithful,  N.  577 
Service,  holy,  worthy  man  for,  H.  592 

that  God  regards,  N.  470 

true  Christian,  unselfishness  of,  N.  470 
Settled  obscurity,  H.  29 
Sharing  Christ's  throne,  N.  474 
Sharp  contrast,  H.  234 
Sheba,  Queen  of,  example  of,  H.  314 
Sheep,  man  better  than,  H.  298 
Shelter,  Christ  a,  H.  551 
Shine,  light  must,  1.  100 
Sicknesses,  Christ  bearing  our,  N.  205 
Sight,  Jesus  gives,  H.  481 
Sign,  Jonas  a,  H.  314 

of  perfection,  N.  122 
Signs  in  kingdoms  of  nature  and  grace,  H.  563 

language  of,  H.  638 

of  times,  H.  394,  395 
Sign-seeking,  N.  313 

Significance  of  our  Lord's  teaching,  H.  103 
Significant  pause,  H.  206 
Silence  of  Jesus  at  bar  of  Pilate,  H.  623 
Silenced,  H.  530 
Silent,  time  to  be,  H.  236 
Similitudes  used  in  opposite  senses,  N.  339 
Simon  the  leper,  Jesus  in  house  of,  H.  589 
Simon's  wife's  mother,  H.  204 
Simplicity    and    veracity    in    conversation, 
H.  114 

true,  H.  251 

with  wisdom,  H.  252 
Sin  against  Holy  Ghost,  N.  292 ;  H.  308,  309 

and  forgiveness,  H.  110 

as  fever,  H.  204 

leprosy  type  of,  H.  198 

of  perjury,  great,  H.  113 

of  Pharisees,  H.  104 

pardon  of,  H.  218 

Peter's,  H.  609,  613,  614, 

salvation  from,  H.  14 

temptation  and,  N.  and  I.  54 

that  hath  never  forgiveness,  H.  548 
Sins,  darling,  abandoning,  H.  Ill 
Sinful  world,  Saviour's  sorrow  over,  H.  550 
Single  and  evil  eye,  H.  151 
Singleness  of  aim  in  kingdom  of  God,  H.  150 
Singular  benediction,  H.  71 
Sinners,  flagrant,  grace  manifested  in,  H.  501 

Jesus  with,  H.  225 

treatment  of,  H.  222 
Sinning,  Herod  an  exa  mple  of  alleged  neces- 
sity of,  H.  362 

in  light  of  clearest  evidence,  H.  627 
Sixth  commandment,  spiritual  exposition  of, 

H.  107 
Slander,  N.  94 
Slothfulness  linked  with  desire  to  be  honest, 

H.  578 
Slow,  too  hasty  and  too,  H.  208 

676 


Small  beginning,  God  can  bring  large  results 
from,  N.  576 

capabilities,  H.  577 

duties,  omitting,  N.  576 
Smoking  flax,  bruised  reed  and,  H.  303 
Snare,  legal,  H.  520 

political,  H.  515 

sceptical,  H.  518 
Social  Benefactor,  supreme,  H.  268 

divisions,  Christianity  producing,  H.  259 
Sodom  and  Capernaum,  H.  283 
Soldiers,  bribing,  H.  652 

Roman,  on  guard,  N.  633 
Solemn  warnings,  H.  184 
Solitary  death  ;  great  sorrow,  H.  363 
Son  and  Lord,  David's,  H.  527 

Carpenter's,  H.  352 

of  David,  Hosanna  to,  H.  488 

of  God,  Jesus,  N.  610 

of  man,   sin  against,  and  against  Holv 
Ghost,  H.  308 
Sons,  two,  H.  498 
Song,  spiritual,  H.  598 
Sorrow,  great ;  solitary  death,  H.  363 

intensified,  H.  603 

Saviour's,  over  sinful  world,  H,  550 

self-inflicted,  H.  457 

the  pledge  of  joy,  H.  78 
Sorrowfully,  Christ  left,  H.  458 
Soul,  preciousness  of,  H.  410 
Soul's  hunger  for  truth,  H.  397 

malady  and  cure,  H.  225 
Soul-hunger,  H.  82 
Sound  reasoning,  H.  306 
Sources  of  pulpit  power,  H.  191 

of  unbelief,  H.  519 
South's,  Dr.,  sermon,  I.  150 
Sower,  parable  of,  H.  323-326  ;  N.  323-326 
Sowing  tares  among  wheat,  I.  334 
Special  cautions.  H.  250 

prayer.  Christian's  seasons  of,  N,  368 
Speech  and  thought,  charity  in,  H.  187 

betraying  character,  H.  614 
Spirit,  Christ  yielding  up  His,  N.  637 

commercial,  Christ  and  the,  H.  216 

forgiving,  N.  140 

not  letter,  N.  296 

of  evil,  H.  315 

poor  in,  H.  73  ;  I.  76 

willing,  flesh  weak,  N.  604 
Spiritual  dumbness,  H.  238 

evolution,  H.  209 

exposition  of  sixth  connmandment,  H.  107 

idleness,  H.  468 

life    more    authoritative    than    custom, 
H.    228 

rewards,  H.  469 

song,  H.  598 
Steward,  Lord's  true,  H.  567 

unfaithful,  H.  567 
Stilling  tempest,  Christ,  H.  212 
Storm,  disciples  in,  N.  370 
Storming  of  kingdom,  H.  275 
Story,  sad,  N.  454 

Strait  gate  and  narrow    way  to    kingdom, 
H.  178 


INDEX. 


Stream,  running  with,  N.  634 

Strength  and  weakness  of  example,  H.  442 

of  purity,  H.  87 
Strife,  avoiding,  H.  300 
Striking  home,  H.  185 
Study,  twofold,  H.  471 
Stumbling,  giving  occasions  of,  H.  431 
Subduing  enemies,  I.  120 
Subtle,  temptation  sometimes,  I.  65 
Success,  expectancy  and,  H.  235 

true  test  of,  H.  283 
Succession  of  answers,  H.  229 
Sudden  descent,  H.  405 

fame,  H.  64 
Suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father, 

N.  210 
Sufferers  for  righteousness,  H.  92 
Suffering  brethren,  our,  H.  583 

for  Christ,  N.  475 

for  truth's  sake,  H.  91 
Sufferings,  Christ's,  H.  407 

Christ's,  unique,  H.  631 
vicarious,  N.  206 
Summons,  midnight,  H.  572 
Sunset  limit,  N.  162 
Superfluous  and  rash  oaths,  H.  114 
Supper,  Lord's,  H.  596 
Supreme  love  to  Christ,  power  of,  N.  462 

social  Benefactor,  H.  268 
Surface  religion,  N,  326 
Surgical  case,  N.  456 
Surprise  of  righteous,  H.  582 
Survival  of  fittest,  Christ  and,  N.  75 
Swine  and  dogs,  N.  169 
Sword,  not  peace  but  a,  H.  259 
Symbol  of  Christianity,  leaven  as,  H.  339  ; 

N.  340 
Syro-phcenician  woman's  great  faith,  H.  386 
Systems,    Christianity    superior    to     other, 
N.  447 

Take,  give  and,  of  life,  H.  168 
Talents  and  virgins,  relation  between  par- 
ables of,  N.  575 

parable  of,  H.  575 

trifling  with,  H.  577 
Tares  and  net,  parables  of,  N.  347 

parable  of,  H.  332-334 
Teacher,  Divine,  H.  190 

lowly,  H.  288 

should  be  meek,  I.  289 
Teachers,  false,  H.  555 

Teaching,    Christ's    method  of,    reason    of, 
H.  327 

hypocritical,  as  to  oath-taking,  H.  542 

illustrative,  importance  of,  N.  328 

our  Lord's,  significance  of,  H.  103 

timely,  H.  321 
Tears,  Peter's,  H.  614 
Technical  fault-finding,  H.  380 
Telling  Jesus,  H.  363 
Temper,  the  unforgiving,  N.  442 
Tempest,  Christ  stilling,  H.  212 
Temple,  children  in,  H.  492 

Christ  greater  than,  H.  296 

cleansing,  H.  491 


Temple,  departure  of  Christ  from,  H.  551 

picture  of,  as  it  should  be,  H.  492 
Temptation,  H.  604 

and  sin,  N.  and  I.  54 

Christ's,  and  the  pastoral  office,  H.  62 

commonness  of,  N.  54 

first,  reflections  on  Christ's,  H.  63 

prayer  against,  H.  141 

second,  our  Lord's,  H.  53 

sometimes  subtle,  I.  55 

third,  H.  53 

what,  did  for  Jesus,  N.  48 
Temptations  of  work,  H.  500 
Ten  virgins,  parable  of,  H.  571,  572 
Tenderness  to  children,  I.  452 
Terrible  command,  N.  548 

mistake,  H.  411 
Test,  Christ's,  N.  457 

great,  N.  184 

of  character,  true,  in  kingdom  of   God, 
H.  181 

of  fruit,  H.  182 

true,  of  success,  H.  283 
Tests,  Beatitudes,  N.  73 
Tested  and  honoured,  H.  366 
Testifying,  believing  and,  H.  648 
Thanksgiving,  Christ's,  H.  285 

sacrifice  and,  H.  595 
Things  new  and  old,  H.  348 
Third  temptation,  H.  53 
Thirsting,  hungering  and,  after  righteousness, 

H.  82,  83 
Thorns,  crown  of,  H.  629 
Thought  and  speech,  charity  in,  H.  167 
Thoughts,  H.  306 
Throne,  sharing  Christ's,  N.  474 

cross  a,  N.  635 
Time,  Divine  regulation  of,  H.  11 

to  be  silent,  H.  236 
Times,  signs  of,  H.  394,  395 
Timely  teaching,  H.  321 
Titles  of  honour,  N.  536 
Tombs,  whitewashed,  N.  544 
Too  late,  H.  604 

well  dressed,  I  am,  for  that,  I.  614 
Tormentor,  Saviour  not,  H.  215 
Total  eclipse,  H.  639 
Traditionalism,  dead,  H.  534 
Traditions,  H.  379 

of    men   and    commandments    of    God, 
H.  380 
Traitor's  kiss,  H.  607 
Transfiguration,  H.  415,  417 
Transformation,  great,  H.  202 
Transgression,  cumulative,  H.  544 
Transubstantiation     and    con  substantiation, 

absurdities  of  dogmas  of,  H.  597 
Treasure,  H.  150 

and  heart,  N.  160 

hid  in  field,  H.  344 
Treasures  in  heaven,  H.  149 
Treatment  of  sinners,  H.  222 
Trees  and  their  fruit,  H.  180 
Trial,  Christ  on  His,  H.  625 
Tribute,  Christ  paying,  H.  424 
Tribute-money,  H.  424 

677 


INDEX, 


Trifling  with  talents,  H.  577 
Trinal  unity  of  Godhead,  H.  658 
Trinity,  Holy,  N.  46 
Triumph  of  truth,  H.  340 
Trouble,  household,  H.  420 
True  and  false  goodness,  N.  125 
judging,  H.  169 

brotherhood,  H.  163 

Christ,  H.  517 
the,  N.  386 

Christian  service,  unselfishness  of,  N.  470 

Churchmanship,  H.  536 

discipleship,  H.  175 

evidence  of  Christianity,  H.  306 

greatness,  H.  427,  476 

kinsfolk,  H.  316 

light,  N.  57 

ownership,  N.  81 

prayer,  N.  381 

qualification  for  admission  into  kingdom, 
H.  183 

simplicity,  H.  251 

test   of    character  in   kingdom  of   God, 
H.  181 
of  success,  H.  283 

wisdom,  H.  251 
Truth,  bearing  down,  H.  651 

evading,  H.  498 

growth  of,  H.  335 

new,  bewildering  to  some,  N.  329 

price  of,  H.  342 

soul's  hunger  for,  H.  397 

triumph  of,  H.  340 
Truth's  sake,  suffering  for,  H.  91 
Twelve,  Christ  sitting  with,  H.  592 
Two  blind  beggars,  cure  of,  H.  480 

gates  and  two  ways,  H.  177 

sons,  H.  498 

ways,  H.  177 

of  despising  God's  feast,  H.  511 
Twofold  answer,  H.  496 

classification,  H.  581 

study,  H.  471 

warning,  H.  165 
Type  of  sin,  leprosy,  H.  198 

repeating,  H.  199 

Unappkeciatbd  beatitude,  H,  80 
Unbelief  hindrance  to  miracle,  H.  354 

invincible,  H.  281 

sources  of,  H.  519 
Uncertainty  of  end,  H.  564 

of  life  great  reason  for  holiness,  H.  566 
Uncleanness,  mental,  H.  Ill 
Understanding  but  not  profiting,  H.  507 

word,  H.  350 
Undiscerning  faith,  H.  274 
Undue  anxiety    reproved,   and   chief    good 
urged,  in  kingdom  of  God,  H.  156 

self-assertion,  H.  475 
Unfaithful  steward,  H.  567 
Unfaltering  faith,  beatitude  of,  H.  272 
Unforgiving  temper,  the,  N.  442 
Unholy  antagonisms,  H.  381 
Unique,  Christ's  sufferings,  H.  631 
Unity  and  perpetuity  of  moral  law,  H.  102 

678 


Unity  of  Godhead,  trinal,  H.  658 
Universal  claim,  Christ's,  H.  656 

invitation,  Christ's,  H.  286 
Unlearned  learners,  H.  395 
Unlovely  frame,  lovely  portrait  in,  N.  302 
Unobtrusive  beginning,  H.  55 
Unpopularity,  Christ's,  elements  of,  H.  260 
Unreason,  H.  280 
Unreasonable  prejudice,  I.  354 
Unseen  virtues,  I.  167 
Unselfishness    of    true     Christian    service, 

N.  470 
Untaught  disciples,  H.  265 
Until  the  end,  H.  553,  557 
Unwashen  hands,  eating  with,  I.  380 
Unwilling  witnesses,  H.  649 
Uprooter,  God  as,  H.  382 

Vain  repetitions  and  length  in  prayer,  H.  129 
Vainglory  to  be  avoided  in  our  good  works, 

H.  125 
Veracity    and    simplicity    in    conversation, 

H.  114 
Via  crucis,  H.  627 
Vicarious  suffering,  Christ's,  N.  206 
Victory,  Christ's,  H.  54 

over  cunning,  H.  517 

discouragement  and,  of  faith,  H.  385 

of  King,  H.  50 

won  :  resurrection,  H.  645 
Vineyard  and  its  keepers,  H.  503 

labourers  in,  H.  466 

Lord's,  cultivating,  H.  499 
Vipers,  generation  of,  H.  40 
Virgins  and  talents,  relation   between  par- 
ables of,  N.  575 

foolish,  excluded,  H.  572,  573 

ten,  parable  of,  H.  571,  572 
Virtues,  unseen,  I.  167 
Vision  of  God,  N.  88 
Visitatorial  action,  H.  490 
Voice,  Christ's,  H.  283 
Voices,  children's,  in  heaven,  I.  452 
Volition,  man's  power  of,  H.  299 
Vultures  and  carcase,  H.  560 

Walk  upon  the  waters,  H.  369 

Wanderer,  seeking,  H.  435 

War,  Christ's  condemnation  of,  H.  607 

open, H.  48 
Wardrobes,  royal,  I.  515 
Warning  against  greed,  H.  148 

twofold,  H.  165 
Warnings  against  false  guides,  H.  559 

and  counsels,  H.  559 

group  of,  H.  123 

solemn,  H.  184 
Wastefulness  of  Christian  love,  H.  589 
Watchfulness,  H.  569 

ministerial,  H.  334 
Watching,  Christian,  H.  566 

for  Lord's  coming,  H.  566 
Waters,  Jesus  on,  H.  366,  369 
Wayfarers,  scoffing,  H.  633 
Ways,  broad  and  narrow,  H.  177 

two,  H.  177 


INDEX. 


Wayside,  N.  326 

Weakening  of  love,  H.  556 

Weakness  and  strength  of  example,  H.  442 

Wealth,  perils  of,  H.  452,  459 

Weary,  Christ's  call  to,  H.  287 

Wedding  garment,  H.  513  ;  N.  514,  515 

guests  :  royal  marriage  feast,  H.  512 
Welcome,  early,  and  first  ministers  of  King, 

H.  58 
Well-doing,  continuance  in,  H.  236 
What  do  ye  more  than  others  ?  H.  120 

is  religion  1  H.  525 

men  say  of  Christ,  H.  400 

shall  we  have  therefore  ?  H.  459 

think  ye  of  Christ  ?  H.  399,  489,  529,  530 
Wheat ;  chaff ;  fan,  H.  43 

sowing  tares  among,  I.  334 
Whitewash,  moral,  N.  544 
Whitewashed  tombs,  N.  544 
Who  is  Christ  ?  H.  400 

is  this  ?  H.  488 
Wholesale,  miracles  by,  H.  374 
Why  men  do  not  love  God,  H.  523 

no  record  of  the  Ascension  ?  N.  660 
Wicked  council,  H.  589 

fear  constant  companion  of,  H.  23 

one,  faithful  servant  and,  H.  567 
Wicket  gate,  H.  179 
Wider  ending,  H.  560 

Wife,  parting  man  and,  evil  consequences  of, 
H.  112 

Pilate's,  dream  of,  H.  624 
Wild  honey,  locusts  and,  N.  39 
Wilful  perverseness,  H.  278 
Will  be  done,  Thy,  H.  134 

Father's,  and  Father's  kingdom,  H.  136 

loyalty  a  question  of,  N.  514 
Wine-skins  and  garments,  N.  229 
Winnower,  great,  H.  42 
Wisdom  in  our  Lord's   choice  of    apostles, 
H.  246 

justified  of  her  children,  H.  280,  281 

of  complying  with  gospel  call,  H.  500 

true,  H.  251 

with  simplicity,  H.  252 
Wise  and  foolish  builders,  H.  188 
hearers,  H.  187 


Wise  men  from  East,  H.  22 
homage  of,  H.  25 
inquiry  of,  H.  22 
Withdrawing,  Jesus,  H.  492 
Withering  of  fruitless  fig  tree,  N.  495 
Within,  kingdom,  I.  134 

reformation  from,  I.  340 
Witnesses,  unwilling,  H.  649 
Woman  with  issue  of  blood,  H,  231-233 
Women  at  sepulchre,  H.  645 

influence  of,  on  kings,  I.  360 

witnessing  to  Christ's  resurrection,  H.  648 
Wonderful  Babe,  Jesus,  H.  21 
Word  of  kingdom  diversely  received,  H.  325 

understanding,  H.  350 
Words,  angel's  comforting,  H.  645 

condemning,  H.  311 

idle,  H.  310,  311 

of  Christ,  perpetuity  of,  H.  564 

slight  affronting,  H.  108 

that  came  of  Matthew's  promotion,  H.  224 
Work,  H.  500 

abiding,  H.  652 

Christian,  H.  308 

God's,  perfect,  I.  137 

of  Christ's  missionaries,  H.  248 

temptations  of,  H.  500 
Works,  good,  H.  100 

mighty,  H.  283 
Workers,  Christ's  choice  of,  H.  60* 
World,  end  of,  Christ's  glorious  appearing  at, 
H.  561 

of  conscience,  Peace-bringer  in,  H.  220 

other,  degrees  of  punishment  in,  H.  109 
World's  King,  H.  267 

offence  in  Christ,  H.  352 
Worship  and  reconciliation,  H.  109 
Worthy  man  for  holy  service,  H.  592 
Wrong-doing,  responsibility  for,  N.  432 

Yoke  and  burden  of  Christ,  H.  289 
Young  ruler,  Christ's  demand  of,  N.  456 
Youth  and  childhood,  N.  452 

and  life,  anxiety  hurtful  to,  H.  157 

Zeal  and  prudence,  N.  171 
of  Pharisees,  blind,  H.  640 


HOMILIES    FOR    SPECIAL    OCCASIONS. 

Chv/rch  Seasons :  Advent  and  Christmas,  ch.  i.  18-25 ;  ii.  1 ;  xvi.  27 ;  xxv.  6.     Lent,  ch.  vi. 

16-18;  ix.  14-17;  xvii.  21.     Palm  Sunday,  ch.  xxi.  1-11;  3;  9.     Good  Friday,  ch.  xxvii. 

27-34 ;  29  ;  32 ;  35-44.     Easter,  ch.  xxviii.  1-10  ;  G  ;  11-15  ;  17.     John  Baptist's  Day,  ch.  iii. 

1-12.     St.  Matthew's  Day,  ch.  ix.  9.     Sabbath,  ch.  xii.  1-8  ;  9-12. 
Holy  Covimunion  :  ch.  xxvi.  28-30 ;  26. 
Missians  to  Heathen:  ch.  ix.  36-38  ;  xxviii.  18-20  ;  18;  19. 
Evangelistic  Services:  ch.  vii.  13,  14;  ix.  1-8;  9-13;  11  ;  12;  xi.  28;  xii.  40;  41;  42;  xiii. 

45,  46;  xiv.  36;  xvi.  13-17;  xvi.  26;  xviii.  11,  12;  xxi.  10;  xxii.  1-10;  42;  xxv.  10. 
Special:  Ordination,  ch.  x.  1-15;  1-8;  2-4  ;  7-10.,    Workers,  ch.  iv.  21,22;  v.  13;  14;  20; 

ix.  29;  32-35;  x.  38;  42;  xii.  30;  xiii.  27;  xvi.  18;  xviii.  2;  xix.  29;  xx.  1-7;  xxi.  28; 

xxv.  14-30.     Hospital  Sunday,  ch.  viii.  14-17;    17;  ix.  35;   xiv,  36.     Harvest  Festival, 

ch.  vi.  11  ;  xiii.  39.     Flower  Service,  ch.  vi.  28.     Children,  ch.  ii.  1  ;   vi.  33  ;  vii.   13; 

ix.  11,  12;  XV.  4-6;  xviii.  2;  10;  14;  xix.  13-15;  14;  xx.  80-34;  xxi.  29,  30;  xxii.  42. 

Young  Men,  ch.  iv.  1-11;  xvi.  26.     Marriage,  ch.  v.  31,  32;  xix.  1-12;  3-6.     Political, 

ch.  xxii.  21.     Socialistic,  ch.  xii.  12 ;  xvii.  14-18.     Almsgiving,  ch.  vi.  19-21 ;  xxv.  40. 

679 


''I'lllli: 


31197  11969  5689 


DATE  DUE 

1 

m  1  7  ,98 

i 

-i 

;    -^  . 

DEC  1  0  19 

7 

'.I,-,,.,.      f\  R  IftflS 

jjgj  0J5  W» 

rr.r'i   .:   : 

4 

i 

: 

DEMCO  38-297 

^- 


