THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


MORRISON AND GIBB, EDINRUROR, 
PRINTERS TO BER MAJESTY 8 STATIONERY OFFIOE, 


CHILDREN FOR OHRIST: 
Consecration of the Home Life. 


BY THE 


4 d v 
REV. ANDREW MURRAY, 
AUTHOR OF ‘ABIDE IN CHRIST,’ ‘LIKE cunisr, twits CHRIST IN THE 
SCHOOL OF PRAYER.’ 


Thoughts for Christian Parents on the 


, Now are your children holy. 


TORONTO: 
S. R. BRIGGS, WILLARD TRACT DEPOSITORY 
COR, YONGE AND TEMPERANCE STREETS, 
1887, 


PREFACE. 


OD is awakening in many hearts the longing 

to live a truly consecrated life, to be and 

do all that He would have of us. No sooner has 
the surrender to such a life taken place, but the 
desire comes to have all who belong to us partake 
of the blessing, specially to have our home life, 
with all its affections, its intercourse, its duties, 
sanctified too. Many a parent finds this a hard, 
almost a hopeless task. In the days when their 
own Christian life was half-hearted and feeble, the 
spirit of the world was allowed to come in and get 


- possession, With a partner or children who do 


not entirely sympathize, where the help and hearty 

response of spiritual fellowship is wanting, the 

consecrated one finds it difficult to maintain the 
5 


FAY yg 
0352 


6 Preface. 


personal life. How much more to influence the 
whole circle, and lift them up to the more blessed 
life that has been entered on! 

To parents who are in this position, to all 
parents who long to have their homes truly con- 
secrated by God’s presence and service, God’s 
Word has a message of comfort and strength. It 
is this: that God is willing to be the God of their 
house, and with His Divine power to do for it 
more than they can ask and think. If they will 
but open their hearts in faith to rest in the promise 
and the power of God, He will prove Himself to 
be for their house what He has been to them- 
selves. The one thing needful is that they should 
know and believe what He has undertaken to be 
and to do as the God of their seed. They will 
find that the lesson they learnt in entering upon 
a life of entire consecration is just what is needed 
here again. There all was comprehended in the 
one word, surrender,—the surrender of faith and 
obedience,. They surrendered themselves to expect 
and accept all God had promised, and to do all 
that He commanded. This surrender of faith 
must take place definitely with regard to the 


——$———— 


3 the 
essed 


o all 
- con- 
God’s 
1 It 
their 
for it 
y will 
‘omise 
self to 
them- 
should 
to be 
y will 
upon 
reeded 
n the 
h and 
>xpect 
do all 

faith 
o the 


Preface. 7 


family. As a parent I put myself and my 
children into God’s hands, believing that He will 
fulfil His promise, yea, that He does at once accept 
and take charge. I confess the sins by which I 
have prevented God from working through me as 
He would for my home. I yield myself to be His 
humble, holy witness, His loving, obedient servant, - 
and humbly but trustingly I say,‘O when wilt 
Thou come unto me? I will walk within my: house | 
with a perfect heart.’ 3 

A parent’s faith needs just what the faith of 
every believer does, —to understand, to get an 
insight into, what God has undertaken to do. ‘ By 
faith we understand ;’ when faith has seen God 
planning and undertaking, it is a simple thing for 
it to rest and trust, to praise and act. I trust that 
this little book may help believing parents to 
meditate on God’s revelation of His purpose with 
the family, and to see what abundant ground 
there is for their expecting Him to fulfil their 
desire to have their house holy to the Lord. It 
is as we get into the mind and plan of God, that 
faith will grow, and its power be manifest both in 
ourselves and those for whom we are believing. 


In a note at the close of this volume, on the 
Church’s duty to parents, I have explained the 
origin and the object of the book. I send it forth 
with the prayer that it may be blessed to make 
our glorious God better known, as He would fain 

i be known and honoured, as the God of the families 
of Israel, and that this knowledge may strengthen 
many a parent’s heart to a larger faith and a more 
cutire consecration of home life to their God. 


A. M. 


CON AMNBR HOP HF 


CONTENTS. 


—, 


OLD TESTAMENT. 


. The Family as God created it, Gen. i. 27, 28. 
. The Family as Sin made it, Gen. v. 1, 3. . 

. The Family as Grace restores it, Gen. vii. 1. 
. The Child of the Covenant, Gen. xv. 4, 6. 


The Promise of the Covenant, Gen. xvii. 7. 


. The Seal of the Covenant, Gen. xvii. 11, 12. 
. Keeping the Covenant, Gen. xviii. 19. 
. The Child’s Surety, Gen. xliii. 8, 9. 

. Faith hiding the Child, Ex. ii. 2. . 

. A Lamb for an House, Ex. xii. 3, 23. 
. The Father Priest and Prophet, Ex, xii. 26, 


Sanctify the First-born, Ex, xiii. 1, 18-15. 


. The Sabbath and the Children, Ex. xx. 10. 
. The Children’s Commandment, Ex. xx. 12. 
. Parental Instruction, Deut. vi. 1, 2, 5-7. . 
. A Consecrated Home, Josh. xxiv. 15. 
. Consecrated Parents, Judg. xiii. 12. 
. A Consecrated Child, 1 Sam. i. 27,28. . 
. Parental Weakness, 1 Sam. ii. 29,30. . 
. The Father as Intercessor, Job i, 5, ° 
. The True Good, Ps, xxxiv. 11-14. . 

. Training, Prov. xxii. 6. . 

. The Child choosing the Good, ba vii. 15. 
. God’s Spirit in our Children, Isa. xliv. 3, 5. 
. From Generation to Generation, Isa. li. 8, 
. The Crowning Blessing, sa ii, 28, 


Contents. 


NEw TESTAMENT. 


. The Heave..ly and the Karthly Father, Matt. vii. 11. 
» Children of the Kingdom, Matt. viii. 12. . 
. A Mother's Persevering Prayer, Matt. xv. 22, 28, . 
. The Heavenliness of a Little Child, Matt. xviii. 4, 5. 
. Suffering Children to come to Jesus, Matt. xix. 14. 
. A Father’s Tears, Mark ix. 24. é 
The Sacredness of Motherhood, Luke i. 15. 
. A Mother's Surrender, Luke i. 38, . ‘ 
» A Mother’s Thankagiving, Luke i. 46-48. . 
. vesus the Children’s Surety, Luke ii. 22-24. 
Baptism with Water snd Spirit, Luke iii. 16. 
A Faith Home, Luke viii, 49, 50. . 
The Chamber of Death, Luke viii. 52. 
» The Widow's Child, Luke vii. 12, 18. 
» The Sick Child, John iv. 46, 47. . 
. Feed My Lambs, John xxi. 15. 
» The Holy Spirit in the Family, Acts ii. 39. 
. Parental Self-culture, Rom. ii, 21. . 
. Baptized into Christ, Rom. vi. 3, 4. é 
The Heritage of Holiness, 1 Cor. vii. 14. . 
» The Reign of Love, Eph. vi. 4. 
. The Nurture of the Lord, Eph. vi. 4. 
Home Rule, 1 Tim. iti, 4, 12, : 
Children and Scripture, 2 Tim. i. 5. 
. Belioving Children, Tit. 1. 6. ‘ 
62, I and the Children, Heb, fi. 13. . 


NOTES. 


On the Church’s Duty to Parents, 
Baptism, Adult or Infant, 

A. Twenty-Second Day. ° 
B, Thirtleth Day, : 

C. Fortieth Day, . 


PAGE 


210 
218 
226 
233 
241 
248 
255 
262 
271 
280 
288 
296 
304 
312 
320 
828 
837 
345 
353 
361 
369 
377 
385 
398 
402 
411 


419 
435 


440 
442 


The Family as Gow created it. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


First DAY. 


The Family as God created it. 


‘God created man in His own image: in the image of God 
created He him; male and female created He them. And God 
blessed them; and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and 
multiply, and replenish the earth.’—GEN. i, 27, 28. 


OD'S purpose in the creation of man was to 

show forth and make visible to the universe 

His own unseen glory and perfection. He was 

not only to have single points of resemblance to 

God; in all he was and did upon earth he was 

to prove that he was indeed created in God’s 
image and after His likeness. 

The traits of that likeness were very varied and 
most wonderful. In the dominion he was to have 
over the earth, he was to exhibit the power of 
God as King and Ruler of the universe. In the 
wondrous mental powers with which he was 
endowed, fitting him for this work, there was to 
be seen the image of God as the All-wise. In his 


12 The Children for Christ : 


moral powers there was to be some reflection of the 
light that is inaccessible and full of glory: God’s 
righteousness and holiness were to be revealed. 

But then there still remained one trait of the 
Divine perfection, the very highest, to be set forth. 
God is love. As Infinite Love He lives not for 
Himself alone, but finds all His blessing in im- 
parting His own life. In His bosom He has the 
Son of His love, begotten of the Father from 
eternity. In the Son He hath peopled the 
universe with living beings, that upon them the 
fulness of His love might flow out. As the 
Loving One He is the fountain of life; as the 
Living One He is the fountain of love. It was 
that in this, too, man might bear the image of 
God, that his whole life might be a life of love, 
and that in loving he might give life to those on 
whom his love might flow forth, that God created 
man in His image, male and female. In the 
home on earth, in the love of husband and wife, 
of parent and child, were to be reflected the 
love and the blessedness of the Father’s home in 
heaven, were to be imaged forth the deepest secrets 
of the life of Godhead in the fellowship of the 
Father and the Son by the Holy Spirit. 

It is to this last and highest trait of the image of 
Divine perfection—man’s creation, to shadow forth 
the mystery and to enjoy the blessedness of a life 
in love—that we want specially to draw attention. 


The Family as God created it. 13 


In undertaking the study of God’s Word for the 
sake of discovering what it teaches us of the 
parental relation, we must ascend the true Mount 
of Sources, and follow up the stream of Divine 
truth to those hills of paradise whence they all 
take their rise. We shall find the sure foundation 
of the family constitution, its purpose, its law, and 
its glory, in the teaching of God’s Word: ‘God 
created man in His own image: in the image of 
God created He him; male and female created 
He them.’ 

Let us think of it for a moment. In God’s 
love, and the Fatherhood which sprang from that 
love, we have at once the highest glory and the 
deepest mystery of Godhead. Because God is 
Love, He must needs have some worthy object on 
whom His love can rest, in whose fellowship His 
love can find its blessedness. Because He is God, 
the only and all-perfect One, that Son must be 
the only One, the Father’s image, and the Heir of . 
all things. Before the world began, from eternity, 
God was in Him the Most Blessed One. In 
God’s Fatherhood of Christ is His perfection and 
His blessedness, 

Man was created after that image of God which 
was seen in Christ. When man had fallen, Christ 
came to take us up into fellowship with Himself, 
to give us a share in His Sonship and Heirship, to 
make us too the children of God. In Him, and 


14 The Children for Christ: 


His life given us in regeneration, we too become 
the sons of God. God’s Fatherhood of believers 
is the deepest mystery, the highest glory, the 
perfect. blessedness of redemption. The Father- 
hood of God is the summing up of the incompre- 
hensible mystery and glory of the Divine Being. 

And of this Fatherhood the father of the family 
on earth is to be the image and the likeness. In 
the life he imparts to his child, in the image he 
sees reflected, in the unity of which he is conscious, 
in the loving care he exercises, in the obedience 
and the trust he sees rendered to himself, in the 
love in which family life finds its happiness, the 
home and the fatherhood of earth are the image 
of the heavenly. 

What a solemn and what a blessed ‘view this 
truth gives us of the parental relation! What a 
sanctifying influence the right apprehension of it 
would have upon its privileges and its duties! How 
much better, in the light of this Divine origin and 
purpose of the family, we can understand and 
value our relation to our children! And how, on 
the other hand, all our intercourse with them 
would strengthen our obedience and our confi- 
dence towards the Father in heaven! We should 
see how the action of the heavenly and the earthly 
home on each other is reciprocal. Every deeper 
insight into the Father's love and the Father’s 
home would elevate the intercourse in the home 


The Family as God created ‘t. 15 


on earth, and enlarge our expectations as to the 
blessing the God who appointed it will certainly 
bestow upon it. And every experienc? of what 
the love and blessing of a home on earth can be 
would again be a ladder by which to rise up and 
get nearer the great Father-heart in heaven. ‘In 
the beginning God created the heavens and the 
earth:’ the two in correspondence with each 
other—the home in heaven, with the Father 
there, the original of the home on earth, and 
the father. there. 

How terrible the curse and the power of sin! 
Fatherhood in the likeness of God, the communi- 
cation to another being of a life that was to be 
immortal and ever blessed, and the establishment 
of a home of love like that in heaven, was to have 
been the high privilege of man, as God created 
him. But alas! sin came in, and wrought a 
fearful ruin, The father makes the child par- 
taker of a sinful nature ; the father feels himself too 
sinful to be a blessing to his child; and the home, 
alas! is too often the path not te heaven, but to 
hell, But, blessed be God! what sin destroyed 
grace restores. And as in these meditations we 
follow God’s revelation in regard to the family, 
we shall find that all the purpose and provision of 
God’s grace point back to the restoration of what 
at creation was intended—-the fatherhood and 
the motherhood of earth, with its love and its 


Rene eg Le oa ssihaodachunsenalinbieniauanigeninaseumnangaosimeinabaeeaaemantanaaaaen AST 
Ta Bie senate , . . 


16 The Children for Christ: 


ee —— 


home, its care and its training of the children, the 


reflection and the fellowship of the home and the lov 
love of the Father in heaven. wl 

Let every parent who feels conscious of his wl 
own shortcoming, and longs for wisdom and grace ing 
to do aright the work entrusted him, look’ back in 
faith and hope to the heavenly origin of family wc 
life. The God who created it has redeemed it | loy 
too, and creates it anew. He watches over it be 
with tender interest, and meets with His own He 
Father-love and blessing every parent who desires tru 
to be. the minister of His holy purpose. Would me 


you truly be this, begin by making God’s 
thought your thought; the fatherhood and the 
family on earth the image and the likeness of a 
heavenly original. Look. to God as the Author / 
of your family life; count upon Him to give all a 
that is needed ‘to make it what it should be. Let 

His Father-heart and His Father-love be your 

study and your stay; as you know and trust it in 

adoring love, the assurance will grow that He 

will fit you for making your home, in ever- 
increasing measure, the bright reflection of His 

own. 


O Thou great and holy Creator of men! Thou 
hast placed me, too, in the wondrous relation of 
parent with a child owing its life tome. Thou 
wouldst give me, too, the happiness of living a 


The Family as God created it. 17 


life of love, the Divine joy of loving and being 
loved. Thou hast placed me, too, in a home 
which is to be the image of the home in heaven, 
where the Father and the Son dwell in everlast- 
ing love. 

O my God! I humbly confess that I utter these 
words with shame. How little have the perfect 
love and joy, the purity and brightness of heaven, 
been reflected in the home given to my charge! 
How little I have even understood my calling, or 
truly aimed at the high ideal Thou hast set before 
me! Father, forgive us, for Jesus’ sake ! 

And hear me, when I beseech Thee to guide 
my meditations, and to help me in the study of 
Thy Holy Word, that I may learn more fully to 
realize what Thy purpose is with the fatherhood 
and the motherhood of this earth, and with what 
interest and love Thou lookest on each home 
given up to Thy protection and guidance. Teach 
me to know Thee in Thy infinite Fuatherliness, that 
the study and the experience of that Divine 
Original, after which the parent’s heart was 
created, may fit me to be a true parent to my 
child. And let a Father’s love and blessing rest 
on our home. Amen. 


The Children for Christ: 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


SECOND DAY. 


eee, 


The Family as Sin made it. 


‘In the day that God created man, in tlie likeness of God 
made He him. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty 
years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image ; 
and called his name Seth.’—GeEn. v. 1, 3. 

‘Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.’— 
GEN. iv. 8, 

OD created man in His own likeness ; Adam, 
the fallen, begat sons in his own likeness, 

after his image. As in the former expression, 
telling us of man’s high origin and destiny, we 
have the key to the mystery of the incarnation, 
and redemption to eternal glory; so in the 
latter we have the light that shows us whence 
sin has such fearful and universal power. It was 
one of the wonderful traits of God’s likeness that 
man had the power to give life to others. When 
sin got the mastery, that likeness was not extin- 
guished, but terribly defaced; he still had the 
power to bring forth, alas! in his own likeness, 


33 of God 
id thirty 
is image ; 


y him.’— 


Adam, 
likeness, 
pression, 
jiny, we 
ination, 
in the 
whence 
It was 
ness that 
When 
ot extin- 
had the 
likeness. 


The Family as Sin made it. 19 


By one fell blow sin, in conquering Adam, had 
conquered the race. If ever the race is again to 
be delivered from the power of sin, it will doubt- 
less be by this power of man’s bringing forth in 
his own likeness being regained and renewed to 
be the power for re-establishing God’s kingdom. 
The parental relation has become the strength of 
sin; when God restores it, it will be the strength 
of grace. 

If we want to realize the full significance of this 
word, ‘ Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after 
his image,’ we have only to study the story of 
his family at the gates of Paradise. It will teach 
us lessons of the deepest importance in regard to 
the family as sin has made it. 

Let us mark how the father’s sin reappears and 
ripens in that of the child. ‘Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neigh- 
bour as thyself.’ In these two great command- 
ments we have the sum of God’s will concerning us. 
Adam had transgressed the first, and in sinning 
had cast off the love of God. His first-born refuses 
subjection to the second, and becomes the hater 
and the murderer of his brother. Had Adam con- 
tinued in the love of God, Cain had certainly 
loved his brother. With Adam’s sin his nature 
had become corrupted; that nature had been 
imparted to the son in his likeness. The child’s 
sin was the fruit of the father’s. 


20 The Children jor Christ : 

This first picture of family life God gives us in 
' His Word, what a sombre light it casts on our 
homes! How often parents can trace in the sins 
and evil tempers of their children their own short- 
comings and transgressions! How the remem- 
brance that their children have inherited their 
evil natures from themselves ought to humble 
them, make them very patient and gentle, as well 
as very earnest and wise, in dealing with the 
offenders, and lead them to seek what alone can 
cure and conquer this evil power—the grace and 
the life that comes from above! Let parents not 
be afraid of realizing fully that God visits the sins 
of the fathers on the children; it will urge and 
encourage them to believe that He will no less 
remember the mercy to the fathers, and make the 
children partakers of that too. 

Let us note further how in that first child’s sin 
we have the root and type of all children’s sins. 
The family had been destined of God to be the 
image of the bliss of heaven, the mirror of the life 
of love that reigns there. Sin enters, and the first 
family, instead of being the emblem and the gate 
of heaven, becomes the type and the portal of hell. 
Instead of the love and help and happiness for 
which God had appointed our social relation, 
envy and anger and hatred and murder render 
it a scene of terrible desolation. 

The root of all sin is selfishness,—separating 


us in 
ym our 
1e sins 
short- 
emem- 


1 their | 


1umble 
as well 
ith the 
ne can 
ce and 
nts not 
she sins 
ge and 
no less 
ake the 


ld’s sin 
n’s sins. 
be the 
the life 
he first 
e gate 
of hell. 
ess for 
elation, 
render 


barating 


The Family as Sin made it. 21 
first from God and then from man. How early 
in the little ones in the nursery does it manifest 
itself! How continually does it come up in the 
intercourse with companions in school or play! 
How often it rises even against the parent, and 
refuses the love or obedience that is due! Let 
believing parents study with care what Holy 
Scripture reveals of love as the new and great 
commandment, as the fulfilling of the whole law, 
as the way to our dwelling in God and God in us, 
and seek for nothing so earnestly as this: the reign 
of love in their home. Let them watch over every 
manifestation of a selfish or unloving spirit, as a 
seed of the tree that bore such bitter fruit in Cain, 
and count no care or prayer too great to have it 
banished. Let them not be content, as long as 
there are no striking outbreaks of the evil; let 
them fear and root out the seeds which often ripen 
so terribly in after life. Let nothing less content 
them than to make it their aim that grace should 
restore their family life to what God created it 
to be,—a mirror and a foretaste of the love of 
heaven. 

Let us not in this too forget the influence of the 
parent’s life, as set before us here: ‘In his own 
image, after his likeness.’ These words refer not 
only to a blessing lost in Paradise, and to a curse 
that came with sin, but as much to a grace that 
comes with redemption. Not, it is true, by 


22 The Children for Christ: 

natural birth in the flesh can a believer beget a 
child in his likeness, now renewed again after the 
image of God. But what nature cannot accom- 
plish, the prayer and the life of faith can obtain, 
in virtue of the promise and the power of God. 
As we proceed in our inquiries into the teaching 
of Holy Scripture concerning the family life, we 
shall find nothing come out more clearly than the 
blessed truth that to believing parents the promise 
is given that their child may be begotten again 
after their likeness, and that God will to this end 
use them as the instruments of His grace. To the 
prayer of faith, manifesting itself in the godly 
training of the child, the blessing has been secured 
in covenant,—‘ I will be a God to thee and to thy 
seed. As faith and prayer claim the promise 
and the power of God, the influence of the daily 
intercourse will make itself felt, and there will 
go forth from the consecrated lives of father and 
mother a secret but mighty power to mould the 


lives of the children, either preparing them as 


vessels of grace, or establishing and perfecting 
them in it. 

And so we come to the blessed but solemn 
dtruth: Let parents be what they want their chil- 
ren to be, If they would keep them from the 
sin of Cain, who loved not his brother, let them 
beware of the sin of Adam, who loved not the 


commandment of his God. Let father and mother - 


get a 
er the 
ccom- 
ybtain, 
’ God. 
ching 
ife, we 
an the 
romise 
again 
jis end 
To the 
godly 
ecured 
to thy 
romise 
> daily 
re will 
ler and 
ld the 


lem as 


fecting 


solemn 
ir chil- 
‘om the 
t them 
not the 


mother - 


The Family as Sin made it. 23 


lead a life marked by love to God and man ; this 
is the atmosphere in which loving children can be 
trained. Let all the dealings with the children be 
in holy love. Cross words, sharp reproof, impatient 
answers, are infectious. Love demands and fears 
not self-sacrifice; it needs time and thoughtful 
attention and patient perseverance to train our 
children aright. In all our children hear us 
speak of others, of friends or enemies, of the low, 
the vulgar, the wicked, let the impression they 
receive be, the love of Christ we seek to show. 
In all the intercourse of father and mother 
with each other, let mutual esteem and respect, 
tender considerateness and willing self-forgetful- 
ness, prove to the children that love is possible 
and blessed. 

Above all, let us remember that it is the love of 
God that is the secret of a loving home on earth. 
It is where parents love the Lord their God with 
all their heart and strength that the human love 
will be strengthened and sanctified. It is only 
parents who are willing to live really consecrated 
lives, entirely given up to God, to whom the 
promise and the blessing can come fully true. - To 
make our home the nursery and the type and the 
foretaste of heaven, the ordinary half-hearted 
religion will not suffice. The love of God shed 
abroad in the heart and the home and the life by 
the Holy Ghost,—it is this, this alone, will trans- 


24 | The Children for Christ : 


plant our home from the gates of Paradise Lost, 
' where Adam dwelt with Cain, to within the 
Paradise Regained, where even ainid the weakness 
of earth the image of the heavenly is seen, and 
the honie on earth is in the likeness of the home 
above. 


Blessed Lord God ! we bow before Thee in deep 
humility, We desire to feel more deeply the 
terrible power of sin in ourselves and our children, 
and the danger to which it exposes our beloved 
home. We come to confess how far as parents we’ 
have come short in that pure and holy love which 
Thou didst mean to be the beauty and the blessed- 
ness of family life. In our intercourse with Thee, 
and each other, and our children, and fellow-men— 
O God, forgive us the want of love! And oh! let 
not our children suffer through us, as they grow 
up in our likeness, Deliver us, we pray Thee, 
from the power of selfishness, and shed, oh! 
shed abroad Thy love in our hearts by the Holy 
Ghost. 

And, O God! bless our children with the Spirit 
of love. Give us so to walk before them in love, 
that Thy Spirit may use our example and our like- 
ness to form them to Thy Holy Likeness, Give 
us a deep sense of our holy calling to train their 
immortal spirits for Thee and Thy glory. Inspire 
us with faith, with patience, with wisdom to train 


Lost, 
1 the 
.kness 
1, and 

home 


1 deep 
y the 
dren, 
eloved 


nts we” 


which 
essed- 
Thee, 
nen— 
h! let 
grow 
Thee, 
, oh! 


Holy 


Spirit 
love, 
r like- 
Give 
their 
ispire 
train 


The Family as Sin made it. 25 
them aright. Oh that our home on earth might 
be to them the pathway, and the gate, to the 
Father’s home in heaven ! 

Blessed. Father! let us and our children be 
Thine wholly and for ever. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


mm en 


TITE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


ee 


THIRD DAY. 


The Family as Grace restores it. 


‘And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou, and all thy 
house, into the ark : for thee have I seen righteous before me in 
this generation.’-——GEN. vii, 1. 


‘DY faith Noah prepared an ark for the saving 

of his house, and was made a witness to 
future ages that the faith of a believing, righteous 
parent obtains a blessing, not for himself only, but 
for his children too. The New Testament teaching, 
‘ By faith he saved his house,’ is in perfect accord- 
ance with what is recorded in the Old Testament 
history: ‘I have seen thee righteous before me: 
come thou, and all thy house, into the ark.’ Even 
Ham, who, as far as his personal character was 
concerned, manifestly deserved to perish with the 
ungodly world, was saved from the flood for his 
father’s sake and by his father’s faith. It is the 
proot that in God’s sight the family is regarded 


Lec} 


Wroocne 


h 


ll thy 


me in 


ving 
ss to 
feous 
, but 
hing, 
cord- 
ment 
me: 
Even 
r was 
1 the 
r his 
s the 
urded 


The Family as Grace restores tt. 27 
as a unity, with the father as head and represent- 
ative; that parents and children are one, and that 
in the dispensation of grace, even as in the minis- 
tration of condemnation, it is on this principle 
that God will deal with the families of His people. 

We know how it was this fact, of parents and 
children being one, that had given sin its terrible 
power in the world. Or was it not in virtue of 
this that, when Adam had sinned, his whole 
posterity-had been made subject at one blow, as 
it were, to sin and death? Was not the flood, as 
well as the fall, a proof of it? We see the child- 
ren of Seth sunk as deep as the children of Cain, 
because Seth too was a son whom Adam had 
begotten in his likeness, with a sinful nature to 
be handed to his children too. Was it not this 
that gave sin such universal empire to thousand 
generations? The family was sin’s greatest strong- 
hold; children inherited the evil from their 
parents. The unity of parents and children was 
the strength of sin. 

Noah’s deliverance from the flood was to be the 
introduction of a new dispensation,—the first 
great act of God’s redeeming grace on behalf of a 
sinful world. In it God manifested what the 
great principles of the economy of grace were to 
be. These were: mercy in the midst of judgment; 
life through death ; faith as the means of deliver- 
ance, the one channel through which the blessing 


28 The Children for Christ: 


comes. And further, it was now to be revealed 
whether the family was to be one of the means of 
grace. There was every reason to expect it would 
be. It had been sin’s mightiest ally, the chief 
instrument through which it had acquired such 
universal dominion. This principle was now to 
be rescued from the power of sin, to be adopted 
into the covenant of grace, to be consecrated and 


made subservient to the establishment of God’s ~ 


kingdom. How otherwise could the declaration 
be verified, ‘ Where sin abounded, there did grace 
much more abound,’ if sin alone had the power 
through the parents to secure dominion over the 
children? Nay, in this very thing we are to 
have one of the brightest displays of redeeming 
grace,—that the relation of parents and children, 
which had become the great means for the trans- 
mission and establishing the power of sin, was 
much more to become the vehicle for the extension 
of the kingdom of God’s grace. And though many 
ages would have to pass ere the promised Seed of 
the woman should be born, yet in anticipation of 
that holy birth the seed of God’s people were to 
share in the blessing of their parents, It was on 
the strength of this hope that the children of 
righteous Noah were blessed with their father. 

Let believing parents understand and remember 
this, The man who is righteous in God's sight is 
not dealt with only as an individual, but in his 


The Family as Grace restores it. 29 


relation as parent. When God blesses He loves 
to bless abundantly ; the blessing must overflow 
the house of His servant. It is not only for this 
temporal life, and the supply of its many needs, 
that the father must regard himself as the 
appointed channel through whom the blessings of 
nature and providence must reach the child, and 
that he may count upon God’s help. The parental 
relation has a nobler destiny: for the eternal life, 
too, with its blessings, the believing father is to 
regard himself as the appointed channel and 
steward of the grace of God. 

When once we understand this blessed truth, 
and in its fulness of promise by faith accept God’s 
word, ‘Thee have I seen righteous before me in 
this generation,’ we shall know to value the word 
that follows: ‘Go thou, and thy whole house, 
into the ark.’ The seed of the righteous shall be 
blessed ; the house of His servant God will bless. 
God gives the assurance that the ark in which the 
parent is to be saved is meant for his children 
too; for his sake, it is for them as much as for 
him; the ark is to be the house of the family. 

And as the blessing is'to come for his sake, so 
through his instrumentality too. It is not only a 
promise, but acommand : ‘Go thou, and thy house, 
into the ark.’ It is to him the charge is given to 
see to it that just as, and when, he enters in, they 
too. God will not deal with the house separate 


30 The Children for Christ : 

and apart from him; the parent has to bring the 
children into the ark. 

And if the question comes up as to the power 
of a parent thus to lead his children into the ark 
as certainly as he himself goes in, the answer is 
simple and clear: ‘By faith Noah prepared an 
ark for the saving of his house.’ Let us believe 
that God always gives grace proportioned to the 
duty He imposes. Let the believing parent live, 
and act, and pray with and for his children, as one 
to whom the ark and its salvation is indeed the 
one aim and joy of life, and who is assured that 
his children are meant of God to be there with 
him. Let him confidently trust God for the 
salvation of every child. Let him in that spirit in- 
struct and inspire his children. Let them grow up 
under the consciousness that to be with the father 
is to be with one who is in the ark—the blessing 
cannot be missed. This it is that baptism—the 
figure of the ark with its resurrection out of the 
waters of the deluge—seals to us in the blood of 
Jesus. 

Beloved parents ! listen to the blessed tidings of 
which Noah is God’s messenger to you: there is 
room for your child in the ark; the God who 
saves you expects you to bring your child with 
you. Oh, let it no longer be enough to pray and 
hope that your child may be saved, but accept in 
faith the assurance that he can be, and act out in 


the 


pwer 
ark 
er is 
h an 
lieve 
> the 
live, 
5 one 
1 the 
that 
with 

the 
“it in- 
Ww up 
‘father 
Ssing 
—the 
f the 
0d of 


ngs of 
1ere 1S 
1 who 
| with 
y and 
ept in 
out in 


The Family as Grace restores it. 31 


obedience the command that you are to bring 
him in! And to each question as to how, let the 
answer be taken deeper to heart, ‘ Go thou, and thy 
house. Go in and live in the ark; bring up and 
train thy little children there, as one wholly 
separated from the world and dwelling there; 
God’s blessing will use thy training for their 
salvation. Abide in Christ, and let the child feel 
that to be near thee is to be near Christ ; live in 
the power of the love and the redemption and the 
life of Christ; thy house will be to the child the 
ark where Christ is known and found. Oh, if 
thou hast indeed heard that most blessed word, 
‘I have seen thee righteous, let it teach thee in 
the obedience of a joyous faith to fulfil the precept,’ 
‘Come thou, and all thy house, into the ark.’ 

‘ Thou, and all thy house ’—may the word live in 
the heart of each believing parent ! 


O Lord my God! I have heard Thy message, 
telling me that, since Thou hast accepted me as 
righteous in Thy Son, Thou wouldst have my 
children saved too. I have heard Thy voice of 
grace, ‘Come thou into the ark, and thy house.’ 
Blessed be Thy name for the assurance of the 
salvation of his children it offers a parent’s heart ! 

Lord! do Thou Thyself open my eyes to sec 
what Thy Word sets before me. Let me see in 
Noch the picture of a believing parent,—walking 


32 The Children for Christ : 


with Thee, believing Thy word, obedient to Thy 
command. Let me see in the ark the type of my 
blessed Lord Jesus, a sure and a safe hiding-place 
for me and my child, Let me see in the saving of 
Noah’s house the sure pledge of what will be given 
to every parent who trusts Thee for his children, 
and obeys Thy voice to bring them in. 

O my God! give me grace, like Thy servant 
Noah, so to walk with Thee that Thou mayest see 
me righteous before Thy face, so to believe the 
promise of Thy grace, so to obey Thy command 
and perform the work entrusted to me, that Thy 
blessing may abide on me and my children. And 
may it all be to the glory of Thy Holy Name. 
Amen. 


The Child of the Covenant. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


Scammed 


FourTH Day. 


The Child of the Cobenant. 


‘And, behold, the word of the Lord came to Abraham, saying, 
He that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine 
heir. And he believed in the Lord ; and He counted it to him 
for righteousness, ’—GEN, xv. 4, 6, 

‘Ye are the children of the covenant.’— Acts iii. 25. 


HREE times had God already given to Abra- 
ham the promise that He would make of him — 
a great nation, as the sand of the seashore in multi- 
tude. When God appeared to him the fourth 
time, Abraham poured -out his complaint before 
God : ‘ Behold, I go childless. Behold, to me Thou 
hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house 
is my heir.’ In answer the word of the Lord came 
to him, saying, ‘ Lo, this shall not be thine heir ; 
but he that cometh forth out of thine own bowels 
shall be thine heir. And then follow the memor- 
able words, ‘Abraham believed God, and He 
counted it to him for righteousness,’ 

C 


SUI cel hei asdhdandies hepeseadblonanbiioas ebloaidtatensdlbcasneda.com endtebediaenasn te dal maaeasaemtette Cee ee 
4 ger: ‘ued 


34 The Children for Christ : 


The great truth which this narrative sets before 
us is this—that the longing and asking for, the 
promise and the gift on God’s part, and on our 
part the reception and the birth of our children, is 
a matter of faith; a matter in which God takes 
the deepest interest; in which He holds com- 
munion with men; and in which faith must 
operate and will assuredly be blest. It is espe- 
cially as a parent, and in reference to the pro- 
mise of a child, that Abraham’s faith is exercised 
and found well pleasing to God. In the power. 
of faith the natural longing for a child becomes 
the channel of most wonderful fellowship with 
God, and the natural seed becomes the heir of 
God’s promise and the spiritual blessing. 

The reason and meaning of all this is easily 
found. In Noah God had begun to acknowledge 
the validity of the oneness of parents and children 
in the dealings of grace. 

But it had been of little avail. Immediately 
after the flood Ham’s wickedness burst out, and it 
was not many years before the whole world had 
sunk into idolatry. It is ever God’s way by 
degrees and gradually to reveal the ways and the 
purposes of His grace, and so He resolves to deal 
differently with Abraham. The children of Noah 
had been born after the flesh. Before their birth 
God had not entered into covenant on their behalf. 
In character they had become independent men 


——$— 


efore 
, the 
. our 
en, 18 
takes 
com- 
must 
espe- 
3 pro- 
rcised 
power. 
comes 
» with 
ieir of 


easily 
wledge 
hildren 


diately 
and it 
ld had 
way by 
snd the 
to deal 
yf Noah 
ir birth 
» behalf. 
nt men 


' 


The Child of the Covenant. 35 


ere God made them partakers of Noah’s blessing. 
With Abraham He will deal otherwise ; His way of 
dealing in covenant with His servants is to be 
advanced a distinct stage forward. The child, 
who was to be taken up into the covenant, was from 
before his birth to be the object of God’s care and 
the parent’s faith, The very birth of the child 
God takes charge of, to watch over and to sanctify 
by His word and by faith. Everything connected 
with Isaac’s birth is to be a matter of God’s 
revelation and man’s faith. Against nature and 
against hope God Himself by His promise awakes 
the faith and expectation of a child. For twenty- 
five years this faith is tried and purified, till 
Abraham’s whole soul is filled with believing 
expectancy, that so the child may in truth be the 
child of faith and prayer; a gift of God received 
by faith. Before the birth Abraham is circum- 
cised, once again sealed for God in the covenant 
of circumcision, that so full and clear proof may 
be given that the birth of the seed of His people 
is holy in His sight, a matter to Him of special 
interest, the object of His promises and His 
blessing. In all this God would teach us that 
it is not only in their individual capacity, but 
especially as parents, and that from before the 
first hope of having children, that His saints are 
taken into covenant with Him, are called to exer- 
cise Abraham’s faith, and to receive their children 


Seseteneetnaoeantiisids camteasts apsune ‘ “i 
2 senses a ieeaageana 
RT 
nee 


36 The Childien for Christ : 


fron His hands. Not only are the children 
when grown up, but even from the birth, to be 
partakers of the covenant. Yea, from before the 
birth, in the very first rising of hope, would God, 
by the power of His promises given to faith by 
Ilis Spirit, begin the great work of redeeming 
love. He would thus reveal to us how that 
wondrous power with which He had endowed 
man, of bringing forth and giving life to a child 
after his own image, and which by sin had be- 
come the great strength of Satan’s kingdom, was 
again to be consecrated, and under God’s .ow~ eye 
to be rendered subservient to the extension of His 
kingdom and glory. 

Hence it is that the Bible is so full of what 
cannot otherwise be understood,—of Divine promise 
and interposition, of human activity and expecta- 
tion, connected with the birth of children. Every- 
thing concentrates on that one great lesson,—the 
fatherhood and the childhood of this earth hath a 
Divine and heavenly promise, and everything con- 
nected with it must with us be a matter of faith, 
a religious service holy to the Lord and well 
pleasing in His sight. I must not only believe 
for myself ; if I would fully honour God, my faith 
must reach forth and embrace my children, grasp- 
ing the promises of God for them too. If I would 
magnify the riches of God’s grace, if I would with 
my whole nature and all my powers be consecrated 


——— 


lren 
» be 
| the 
God, 
1 by 
ming 
that 
owed 
child 
1 be- 
1, Was 
7, eye 
of His 


- what 
omise 
pecta- 
very- 
N ,—the 
ath @ 
ng cone 
f faith, 
ha well 
believe 
ny faith 
, grasp- 
L would 
ld with 
gecrated 


The Child of the Covenant. 


to God's service, and if I would accomplish the 
utmost possible within my reach for the ddvance- 
ment of His kingdom, it is especially as parent 
that I must believe and labour. 

And what I see in Abraham, that God thought 
so long time needful for the strengthening and 
ripening of faith before he might receive the pro- 
mised child, teaches me that this grace is a gift of 
high value, and cannot be attained but by a close 
walk with God, and whole-hearted surrender to 
His teachings and leadings. The faith which was 
sufficient to justify Abraham was not sufficient to 
receive the blessing for his seed; it had to be 
further strengthened and purified: faith must ever 
be in proportion to the extent of the promise. 
And believing parents will experience that there 
is nothing that so mightily quickens the growth of 
their faith as the reaching out after this blessing 
for their children, They will feel in it the 
mightiest stimulus to a life of entire devotion 
and unmixed faith, that they may have nov only 
enough for themselves, but to impart to children, 
in harmony with that law of the kingdom: 
‘ According to your faith be it unto you.’ 

But with this solemn lesson Abraham’s story 
gives us the comforting assurance that God will 
give the grace to attain what we need. With what 
patience and long-suffering did He lead Abraham 
and Sarah until they were fitted to accomplish His 


38 The Children for Christ : 
purposes, and it could be said of them, ‘ Abraham 
beiieved that he might become the father of many 
nations ;’ and, ‘¢irough faith Sarah received strength 
to conceive seed and was delivered of a child.’ 
Even now stili will that God, who has undertaken 
to sanctify His people soul and body, and to fill 
them with His Spirit, Himself train them for the 
holy calling of believing parents. He will teach 
us how the birth of our children can become the 
highest exercise of a faith that gives glory to God, 
and the truest means of advancing our spiritual 
life and the interests of His kingdom. 

With us, too, the promise of God and the power 
of faith are the wondrous links by which the 
natural seed becomes the hein of the spiritual 
blessing, and the parental relationship one of the 
best schools for the life of faith. It is specially 
in a believing fatherhood that we can become 
conformed to the image not only of faithful Abra- 
ham, but of the Father in heaven Himself. 


O our blessed God and Father! what thanks 
shal! we render to Thee for the wondrous revela+ 
tion of Thy will in Thy servants Abraham and 
Sarah, The fatherhood and motherhood of earth 
Thou didst take into Thy covenant charge and 
keeping, didst sanctify and bless, that the seed of 
Thy people might indeed be holy to the Lord. 
Where sin had abounded, and manifested its 


raham 
many 
ength 
child.’ 
taken 
to fill 
for the 
teach 
ne the 
o God, 
iritual 


‘power 
sh the 
viritual 
of the 
ecially 
become 
| Abra- 


thanks 


revela+ 


The Child of the Covenant. 39 


i a 


terrible power, Thou dost make grace much more 
to abound ; and Abraham’s child, the heir of sin 
and misery, Thou didst make the heir of the 
promise and its blessing. Blessed be Thy name! 

Gracious God! open the eyes of Thy servants to 
see how, through the birth o:1 Thine own Isaac, 
Thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in our flesh, the 
birth of our children hath indeed been redeemed 
from the power of sin, and Thy promise comes 
to us larger and fuller than ever Abraham could 
understand. Teach us, teach all Christian parents, 
to realize that if there is one thing in which Thou 
hast an interest, in which Thou zivest abundant 
erace, in which Thou askest and aidest faith, it 
is for a believing fatherhood, for our receiving 
our children from Thee and for Thee. O God! 
enlighten and sanctify our hearts to realize it: 
the fruit of our body is to be the heir of Thy 
promise. And let our parentage, like Abraham, be 
what binds us to Thee in worship and in faith. 
Amen, 


40 The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FieTH Day. 


The Promise of the Cobenant. 


‘ And I will establish My covenant between me and thee, and 
thy sced after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting 
covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.’— 


GEN. xvii. 7. 
‘ The children of the flesh, they are not the children of God, 


but the children of the promise.’—Rom. ix. 8, 


EK have here the first full revelation of the 
terms of God’s covenant, of God’s dealing in 

grace, with Abraham, the father of all who believe ; 
the great foundation promise of what God calls ‘ an 
everlasting covenant.’ God had already revealed 
Himself to Abraham as his God, and the God 
who would give him a child. The thing that is 
new and remarkable here is the assurance that the 
covenant now to be established was to be with his 
seed as much as with himself: ‘a God unto thee, 
and thy seed after thee.” It is this promise that 
has invested these words, through all the genera- 
tions of God’s Church, with an imperishable 


int 
the 


eac 
be f 
It 
tio1 
pare 
the 
poss 
fron 
wou 
pare 
guid 
chil 
Tl 
rests 
His 
seed 
is e\ 
here 
meri! 


sinne 


The Promise of the Covenant. 41 


— ee 


interest. Let us see how entirely the same 
the promise is for the child as for the parent. 

The matter of the promise is the same in 
each case: ‘J will establish My covenant ;’ ‘I will 
be aw God unto thee and to thy seed after thee.’ | 
It is God’s purpose to stand in the same rela- 
tion to the child as the father; the believing 
parent and the unconscious child are to have 
the same place before Him. God longs to take 
possession of the children ere sin gets its mastery; 
from the birth, yea, from before the birth, He 
would secure them as His own, and have the 
parent’s heart and the parent’s love sanctified and 
guided and strengthened by the thought that the 
child is His, ‘A God unto thee, and to thy seed.’ 

The certainty of the promise is the same. It 
rests on God’s free mercy, on His almighty power, 
His covenant faithfulness. The election of the 
seed is as free as of the parent himself, or rather, 
is even more manifestly of free grace alone, for 
here at all events there is no possibility of either 
merit or worthiness. God’s faithfulness to His 
purpose is in either case the ground on which the 
promise rests, and its fulfilment may be expected. 

The condition of the promise is in each case 
the same. In its twofold blessing it is offered to 
the faith of the parent, and has to be accepted by 
faith alone. If the promise that comes to a 
sinner in the gospel, ‘J will be thy God, be not 


terme 


42 The Children for Christ : 


——_ 
ee 


believed, that unbelief makes the promise of none 
effect. God is true, His promise faithful, His 
offer. of mercy real, but it finds no entrance 
through unbelief, and the blessing is lost. Not 
otherwise with the other half, ‘a God to thy seed ;’ 
if the parent’s faith accept this for his child, God 
will see to it that that faith is not disappointed. 

The recipient of the promise is the same. It is 
not as if the first half of the promise is given to 
the father, the second half to the child. No, but 
it is the same person to whom the two parts of 
the promise come. In the one half the individual 
accepts it for himself, in the other half as a father 
for his child, but it is one act. The promise is 
not held in abeyance to wait for the child’s faith ; 
but is given to the father’s faith in the assurance 
that the child's faith will follow. With Abraham, 
as with each believing parent, the same faith 
accepts the personal and the parental blessing. 
The blessing is in either case equally sure, if 
faith equally holds it fast. 

But here a difficulty arises with many persons. 
They see that God’s promises of mercy to sinners 
are free and sure, and have found, in believing 
them, that they have come true; they know that 
they have been accepted. But it is as if the pro- 
mise with regard to the children is not equally 
siinple and certain. They cannot well understand 
how one can so confidently believe for another. 


EM i rt co GY eek — RN ae EE RES NS mee las Un 


—— 


none 
His 
rance 
Not 
eed 5” 
, God 
ted. 

It is 
en to 
o, but 
rts of 
vidual 
father 
lise is 
faith ; 
urance 
raham, 
. faith 
essing. 
sure, if 


yersons. 
sinners 
slieving 
yw that 
the pro- 
equally 
lerstand 
another. 


The Promise of the Covenant. 


They know thas the ‘oni sure iced for faith i is 
God’s word; but they have not yet been able to 
realize that the word of God really means this, 
that they are definitely to believe that He is the 
God of their seed. Their impressions are in aceord- 
ance with views that are ordinarily held, and that 
may be expressed thus: ‘God has established a 
general connection between seedtime and harvest, 
between faithful parental training and the salva- 
tion of the children. In neither case, the seed- 
time, nor the training, is absolute certainty of 
success secured, or God’s sovereignty excluded. 
It is enough that the promise expresses the 
tendency and ordinary result of proper training, 
though not what is to be the issue in every par- 
ticular case.’ It is evident that such a general 
principle, with its possible exceptions, cannot give 
the rest of faith the parent longs for, Faith needs 
the assurance that God’s purpose and promise are 
clear and unmistakeable; then alone can it ven- 
ture all upon His faithfulness. 

Such was the promise given to Abraham; 
such is the promise to every believing prrent. It 
is not in the general law of seedtime and harvest 
that I am to find the parallel for my ground 
of hope on behalf of my child, but in that other 
very distinct and definite promise with which 
God Himself has linked it.. The first half, ‘I will 
be a God unto thee,’ is the Divine pattern and 


44 The Children for Christ : 


pledge of the second, ‘a God to thy seed.” When 
as a struggling sinner I first sought for mercy, it 
was not to some gencral principle that seeking is 
generally followed by finding that I trusted, but 
to the very definite Divine assurance, ‘ Every one 
that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth.’ 
I believed the promise ; I came and was accepted ; 
I found the promise true: ‘I will be thy God.’ 
So the promise is now brought that He is willing 
to be the God of my seed too. Wherever God 
comes with a promise, He expects faith to accept 
it at once. The promise was not conditional on 
Isaac’s believing, it was intended to be its 
source and security. And so, as I stand in 
covenant with God as my God, and see how He 
offers to be the God of His people’s seed, I have 
the right in faith to claim this promise, and to be 
assured of my child’s salvation as firmly as my 
own, through faith in the God of truth. The 
analogy between the two halves of the promise is 
complete. In the first it was the question, Could 
I trust the love and power and faithfulness of 
God to accept and renew and keep such a sinner 
asIam? Faith gave the answer, and secured the 
blessing. And now with the other question, Can 
I trust the love and the power and faithfulness 
of God to accept and renew and keep my child? 
Faith can again give the answer, and this blessing 
too is secured. 


hen 
y, it 
g is 
but 
one 
eth.’ 
ted ; 
30d.’ 
lling 
God 
cept 
il on 
> its 
d in 
v He 
have 
to be 
gs my 
The 
ise is 
Could 
gs of 
sinner 
ad the 
, Can 
ulness 
child ? 
essing 


The Promise of the Covenant. 45 


And if the thought still come up, as it has come 
and troubled many, How about election? low 
can I be sure that my child is one of the elect? 
the first half of the promise again gives the 
solution. When I believed to the saving of my 
own soul, it was not the secret things which 
belong to the Lord our God that I had to do with, 
but the things revealed in His Word, His invita- 
tion, and promise. I was sure the election and 
the promise of God never could be at variance 
with each other. Even so with my child. No 
believer in God’s promise ever had to complain 
that God’s sovereignty had hindered its fulfilment. 
‘They which are the children of the flesh, these are 
not the children of God, but the children of the 
promise. Not the fleshly descent from a believer 
can secure grace for the child, but only this, but 
this most certainly, that God’s free promise, given 
for the seed of His people, had been claimed and 
held in faith. The promise is definite, ‘a God 
unto thee and to thy seed.’ Oh, let us, like 
Abraham, not stagger at the promise through 
unbelief, but be strong in faith, giving glory to 
God, and be confident that what He hath spoken 
He is able and faithful to perform. Let us look 
upon our children, let us love them and train them 
as children of the covenant and children of the 
promise—these are the children of God. 


46 The Children for Christ : 

O my God! how shall I sufficiently adore Thee 
for the grace Thou hast revealed in the promise of 
the covenant? As if it was not enough to take 
such unworthy sinners and make them Thy 
children, Thou dost offer to provide for their 
children too, and make the house of Thy servants 
the home of Thy favour and blessing. Thou 
meetest them with the sure promise once given to 
Thy servant Abraham: ‘I will be a God unto thee 
and to thy seed after thee. Blessed be Thy Holy 
Name! | 

And now, Lord! I beseech Thee, give me grace 
to take this promise and trust it with my whole 
heart. I desire to believe that as sure as is the 
confidence I have that Thou hast accepted me and 
art my God, so confident may I be that Thou art 
the God of my seed. As I yielded myself all 
sinful to Thee, and Thou didst take me as Thine 
own, I give them, all sinful too, tc Thee, and 
believe Thou dost take them as Thine own. As 
I accepted Thy promise for myself, I accept it for 
them. Give me grace now to look upon them as 
Thou dost, as children of the promise, May this 
be what gives me courage and hope for their 
training on earth and their portion in heaven. 
They are the children of the covenant, children of 
the promise. Faithful is He who hath promised, 
who also will do it. . Amen. 


hee 
e of 
ake 
Thy 
heir 
ants 
hou 
bn to 
thee 
Holy 


pTAace 
vhole 
is the 
e and 


Nf this 

their 
eaven. 
lren of 
mised, 


The Seai of the Covenant. 


a a a ee 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST 


SixTH DAY. 


The Seal of the Cobenant. 


‘Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin ; and it shall 
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. And he that 
is eight days old shall be circumcised, every man child in your 
generations,’—GEN. xvii. 11, 12. 


' E received the sign of circumcision, a seal of 

the righteousness of faith. Such was, 
according to the teaching of the Holy Spirit, the 
meaning of the ordinance of circumcision given 
to Abraham. And yet there are many who speak 
of it as if it were only the initiatory rite into the 
temporal privileges of the Jewish people. As if it 
could be meant as one thing to him, something 
deeply spiritual and sacred, and another to his 
descendants! As if the whole argument of the 
Epistle to the Romans did not reprove the Jews 
for looking at it in so carnal a light, and degrading 
it from what it originally was—the holy sacrament 
of friendship and fellowship with God, the seal of 


pow 


48 The Children for Christ : 


the righteousness of faith, the emblem of the 
covenant of the spirit in which God would cir- 
cumcise the heart, the sure sign of God’s faith- 
fulness to him and to his seed. It is only this 
spiritual aspect of circumcision which justifies the 
Chureh in grounding upon it the baptism of the 
infants of believers. But in this light it is the 
glorious type of the later ordinance, and its best 
exposition, when we understand how there was no 
need in the New Testament for repeating in express 
words the truth so deeply inwrought into the life 
of God’s people, that their children were as truly 
in the covenant, and had as sure a right to its 
sign, as they themselves. May the Holy Spirit 
lead us to know the mind of our God." 

We are taught that circumcision was a seal of 
the righteousness of faith. A seal is the confirma- 
tion of something that has been settled and 
transacted, the securing of privileges that have 
already been secured. Abraham had believed, 
God had counted his faith to him for righteous- 
ness, and had taken him into a covenant of friend- 
ship. Circumcision was to him a Divine seal and 
assurance of this. But it was also a sign, and that 
no arbitrary one, but with a spiritual meaning. 
It was a sign of that purity and holiness which 
was to be the mark of God’s people. The most 
remarkable feature of the covenant was its passing 


1 Sce close of volume for a note on Baptism, Adult or Infant. 


ee 


Co ee i te Sir es a ae i ae 


——<—<_ 


the 

cir- 
aith- 
this 
s the 
f the 
3 the 
: best 
as no 
press 
e life 
truly 
to its 
Spirit 


eal of 
rma- 

and 
have 
ieved, 
e0us- 
‘iend- 
ul and 
I that 
Aning. 
vhich 
most 
assing 
nfant. 


The Seal of the Covenant. 49 


—_————. ee ee 


on the blessing from generation to generation, its 
taking possession for the service of God’s kingdom 
of the very power of generation. Of this power 
sin had taken possession ; the very first sign of sin 
with Adam and Eve was that they knew that they 
were naked and were ashamed. The very fountain 
of life was defiled, and had to be cleansed. And 
so, when the little child of eight days old had to 
suffer the taking away of the foreskin of his flesh, 
it was in token of the defilement there is in our 
natural birth, a foreshadowing of that Holy One 
who should be begotten of the Holy Ghost, and 
of that second birth in Him, not of the will of the 
flesh, but of God, which was to be the blessing of 
the new covenant. It was a type of the circum- 
cision not made with hands, in the putting off of 
the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of. Christ, 
being buried with Him in baptism. The seal of 
the righteousness of fa.th under the Old Testa- 
ment was the sign of the need of regeneration, a 
sign for the quickening and instruction of Abra- 
ham’s faith, and the setting him apart as a father 
for the service of God. 

Circumcision could not be to the infant Isaac 
essentially different from what it was to Abraham. 
It was to him too a seal of his participation in 
that spiritual covenant of which God’s promise 
and man’s faith were the two marks. All un- 


knowing, he had been taken, with his father, and 
D 


50 The Children for Christ: 


a ee ee OS eee 


for his father’s faith, into the favour and covenant 
of God. It was to him, as to Abraham, a seal of 
faith —faith already existing and accepted. Not 
his own, but his father’s; for Abraham’s sake the 
blessing came on him. We find this distinctly 
stated later on (Gen. xxvi. 3, 5): ‘I will bless thee, 
because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept 
my charge, my commandments, and my statutes, 
and my laws.’ And again (ver. 24): ‘I am the God 
of Abraham thy father; fear not, for I am with 
thee, and will bless thee, for my servant Abraham’s 
sake.’ Abraham had not believed for himself 
alone, but for his child; the faith that was counted 
for righteousness had entirely reference to God’s 
promise about his child; as a father he had 
believed and received the child in faith from God ; 
the sign of circumcision in the child was the seal 
to the child of the father’s faith. God dealt with 
I father and child as one; the father believed for 
- himself-and his child as one; the child had the same 
| place in the covenant, and the same claim on the 
seal of the covenant, as the father. And as he 
grew up it would be to him a seal not only of the 
faith his father had, but of God’s promise waiting 
for his faith too, the remembrancer of the one thing 
required by God, the one thing counted righteous- 
ness by Him, the one thing well-pleasing to Him, 
and by which he in turn could pass the blessing 
on to his seed again. 


ssing 


The Seal of th the Covenant. 51 


reece queeun “ ee —_———— ee 


What circumcision was to Abpibiien, ind Salis 
baptism is still to believers and their children. 
It, too, is a sign, only far clearer and brighter. If 
circumcision spoke of the shedding of blood and 
the purifying of the very fountain of life, the water 
in baptism witnesses of the blood that has been 
shed and the Spirit that has been given, with their 
cleansing and renewing. ‘There are three who 
bear witness: the Spirit, and the water, and the 
blood.’ Of all these blessings it is a sign, and also 
a seal—a seal from God of the righteousness of 
faith, that faith in His promise is well-pleasing to 
Him, and is counted as righteousness. 

And baptism is all this not only to the believing 
adult, but to his infant too. It were indeed strange 


‘if Abraham and every father of his race should, 


under the Old Testament, have had the privilege 
of knowing, My child has the same place in the 
covenant as I have; and of having this sealed to 
him by the child’s receiving the sign of the cove- 
nant, and the Jew, on becoming a Christian, should 
at once have forfeited the privilege. It need not 
for a moment surprise us that our Lord, in giving 
the command to baptize, said nothing of the little 
ones. So deep had this foundation truth, ‘My 
covenant with thee and thy seed,’ and therefore 
the sign of the covenant for the father and the 
child too, been laid in the very first establishment 
of the covenant, and so completely had it become 


- 4 
toe er " we 
a I re colle 


P . - . . 
eee ee rea ecigeneenenre-tiruepeneerenseee cnet 


fa 
ate in att na art sah Ln ae ee 


52 The Children for Christ : 


inwrought during two thousand years in the life of 
God’s people, that only the very express revocation 
of the principle could lead us to believe that the 
New Testament sign of the covenant is for the 
adult only. No; in this dispensation of larger 
love and more abounding grace, this beautiful 
provision of the »verlasting covenant shines with 
new glory, the covenant and the sign of the 
covenant for parents and children alike. 

But then, let us remember, almost more than in 
the old, in this dispensation of the Spirit, the one 
condition of blessing, without which the covenant 
and its sign are of no value, is faith. It is on this 
that the blessing of infant baptism depends. The 
parent must meet God as Abraham did, as a 
believer. It is faith and faith alone that can 
enter into the covenant, that pleases God, that 
obtains the reward, He must believe for himself 
in that Christ who is the surety of the covenant, 
who is Himself the covenant. He must believe 
for his child, ‘Thy God and the God of thy 
seed ;’ these are the unchangeable terms of an 
everlasting covenant, The faith that claims the 
first may claim the second too, It has the same 
warrant—God’s word, It has the same hope— 
God’s faithfulness. It obtains the same blessing 
of free grace—the salvation of my child as surely 
as my own, And it has the same sign as its seal— 
baptism for the infant ag well as the adult. 


ae en ee oo ee oo ee he ee, 


c> =—_ —= © 4 pw 


=e er Fh SY A cP 


aes 


The Seal of the Covenant. 53 


? * O my God! we do thank Thee for the condescen- 
aah sion to our weakness, manifested in giving us, in 
A visible sign, a Divine seal of spiritual and unseen 
as blessings. Thou knowest our frame, and remem- 
rect berest that we are dust. Thou art the Creator of 
Ok our bodies, not less the Father of our spirits; 
on | Thou hast redeemed them to be the temple of 
4 Thy Holy Spirit. In the body Thou dost set the 
seal of Thy acceptance of us and Thy right over us. 
matt Lord, teach us to understand this; and let holy 
ei baptism, the seal of the New Testament faith and 
oe life, be indeed to Thy people the sign that they are 
tig | baptized into the deatn of Christ. 
seh And grant, most gracious God! that where Thy 
Gees people cannot yet see eye to eye in the dispensation 
ing: of this ordinance, it may still be, not the symbol 
self e division, but the bond of unity in the Spirit of 
ove. 
1a And teach us, who believe that Thou Thyself 
thy hast meant this seal of the covenant for our children 
wee too, to recognise its deep’ spiritual meaning, and 
he to live ourselves as baptized into the death of 
Link Christ, and circumcised with a circumcision not 
i made with hands. Teach us in faith to claim the 
re full spiritual blessing for our children too, and to 
ie train them for it. And so fulfil to us, O our God! 
and in full measure the promise of the covenant: ‘A 


God unto thee, and to thy seed.’ Amen. 


‘ 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


ee 


SEVENTH DAY. 


Keeping the Cobenant. 


‘I. have known Abraham, to the end that he may command 
his household and his childven after him, that they may keep 
the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment ; to the end 
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which He hath 
spoken of him.’—GEN, xviii. 19. 


AITH without works is dead. Saving faith is 

an energy, the power of a new life, manifest- 

ing itself in conduct and action. In true faith the 
soul becomes united to God, and seeks to enter into 
the Divine will, as the surest way of becoming one 
with Himself. As faith grows clearer and stronger, 
it always sympathizes more fully with God’s plans; 
it understands Him better, and becomes more 
conformed to His likeness, This is true not only 
of individual but also of parental faith. The 
higher the faith of the parent rises, the more the 
ainily will come under its power, and be per- 
meated by the spirit of godliness, Parental faith 


OQ _~ =< ee LS mM et 


nand 
keep 
y end 
hath 


h is 
est- 
the 
into 
one 
ger, 

ns ; 
nore 
D nly 
The 

the 


per- 
aith 


Keeping the Covenant. 55 
in God’s promise will always be known by parental 
faithfulness to God’s will. 

Abraham is a remarkable illustration of this. 
As distinctly as God’s Word speaks of his faith, it 
tells, too, of his faithfulness as a father. In assign- 
ing the reason why. God’s purpose in regard to 
Sodom should not be kept secret from him, God 
grounds it upon this part of his character. Not as 
an eminent believer, not even as the father of the 
promised seed, but as one called to be the faithful 
leader of his children and household in the ways of 
the Lord, God confers on him the high distinction 
of having His secret counsel revealed to him. 
Faithfulness in his household gave him access to 
God’s secrets and to God’s presence as intercessor 
for Sodom. Let us try to understand what this 
means, and why God puts such honour upon 
parental faithfulness. Let us look to its need, its 
character, its blessing, its power. 

Think what need there is of it. Without it the ~ 
blessing offered to parental faith is lost, and the 
purpose of God made void. Were God by direct 
interposition, or by special agents, to seek the 
salvation of the little ones, there would be no 
reason for the part the parent is allowed to take 
in the covenant, God’s object in thus honouring 
him is distinctly that he, to whose influence the 
helpless babe is committed, should train it for God. 
God seeks a people on earth. The family is the 


56 The Children for Christ : 
great institution for this object; a believing and 
God-devoted fatherhood one of the mightiest 
means of grace. (God’s covenant and the parent’s 
fxith are but preliminary steps; it is by the g«.ly 
upbringing by the parents that the children are 
led realiy to enter upon and possess the blessings 
secured in the covenant. They must learn to know, 
and choose, and love the God who has |; ven Him- 
self tothem. The most precious promises on God’s 
part will not avail unless the child is brought up, 
in the course of patient and ioving training, to 
desire and accept the proffered friendship of the 
Holy One, to obey Him and keep His command- 
ments. God establishes His covenant with parents 
not only for their comfort, to assure them of what 
He will do, but also to strengthen them for what 
they must do, whom He makes His fellow-workers 
in securing the children for Him. The sure 
covenant does not dispense with, the better it is 
understood, the more it reveals the indispensable 
need of, parental faithfulness. 

What God says of Abraham further gives us an 
insight into the true character of this grace: ‘I 
have known Abraham to the end he may com- 
mand his children and his household after him.’ 
The spirit of modern so-called liberty has pene- 
trated even into our family life; and there are 
parents who, some from a mistaken view of duty, 
some from want of thought as to their sacred 


Keeping the Covenant. 57 


calling, some from love of ease, have no place for 
such a word as ‘command,’ which God here uses, 
in their family religion. They have seen nought 
of the heavenly harmony between authority and 
love, between obedience and liberty. Parents are 
more than friends and advisers: they have been 
clothed by God with a holy authority, to be 
exercised in leading their children in the way of 
the Lord. There is an age when the will of the 
chilc is to a great. extent in their hands, and when 
the quiet, loving exercise of that authority will 
have mighty influence. We speak here not so 
much of commanding in the sense of specific 
injunctions; we speak of what we see in the 
heavenly Father; the tenderness of affection com- 
bined with an authority not to be despised. It is 
the silent influence of example and life which also 
exercises its commanding power, which makes 
the child often unconsciously bow to the stronger 
will, and makes it happy in doing so. 

The blessing of such parental faithfulness is sure 
and large. God says: ‘That the Lord may bring 
upon Abraham that which He hath spoken con- 
cerning him.’ It was in the way of a godly 


education that the blessings of the covenant were 


to come true. God’s faithfulness and man’s in 
the covenant are linked by indissoluble ties. If 
Abraham was to be blessed, and his seed with 
him, and all nations again in his seed, it was only 


58 The Children for Christ : 


thus—he must, as a faithful parent, pass on to 
others what he knew himself of God. It is only 
as the children become partakers of the parent’s 
spirit that they can share his blessing. The child 
is to be identified with the parent, not merely in 
an imputation in which God looks on it for the 
parent’s sake, but in a similarity of disposition 
and conduct; so, and not otherwise, would God 
bring upon Abraham what He had spoken. As 
it is written: ‘Thou seest that faith wrought with 
his works, and by works was faith made perfect, 
and he was called the friend of God.’ In a way 
that passes all comprehension, but that fills us 
with adoring wonder at the place given to His 
servants in the fulfilling of His counsel, the 
faithfulness of God and man, each in his per- 
formance of the covenant obligation, are insepar- 
ably and eternally interwoven. 

The solemn responsibility may well make us 
tremble. But God’s word meets us with Divine 
comfort. The power is provided in the purpose of 
God. The words of the text are most remarkable: 
‘I have known Abraham, to the end that he may 
command his children and his home.’ It was 
with this very purpose that God had chosen him 
and revealed Himself; God Himself was the 
security that His own purposes should be carried 
out. It was because God had known, and he 
truly known God, that he could do it. And so 


Keeping the Covenant. 59 


every believing parent has, in the very fact of his 
being taken into this relation with God, the 
guarantee that God will give the grace of faithful- 
ness to prepare for the blessing, as well as the 
reward upon it. In the covenant we have not to 
trust our God for every other blessing, but look to 
ourselves for the faithfulness that receives it; no, 
as for every other, so for this, most of all, we may 
count upon Him: ‘I have known Abraham, to the 
end that he may command his household and his 
children.’ 

It is part of God’s covenant that He will first 
teach man to keep it, and then reward that keep- 
ing (Jer. xxxiil. 40).. A covenant-keeping God 


‘and a covenant - keeping parent, —in these the 


children must be blessed. ‘The mercy of the 
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them 
that fear, and His righteousness to children’s 
children, to such as keep His covenant, and to 
those that remember His precepts to do them.’ 
Believing parent! see here the two sides of a 
parent’s calling. Be very full of faith, be very 
faithful. Very full of faith: let faith in the 
living God, in His covenant with thee and thy 
seed, in His promises for thy children, in His 
faithfulness, fill thy soul. Take God’s word as 
the only measure of thy faith. And then, be 
very faithful: take God’s word as the only 
measure of thy life, especially in the family. Be 


60 The Children for Christ : 


a parent such as God would have thee be. Let it 
be thy one desire so to live thyself, so to rule thy 
home, so to command thy household and thy 
children, that they may walk in the ways of the 
Lord, that so the Lord may bring upon thee 
that which He hath spoken concerning thee. 
Thou mayest depend upon it that the blessing 
will be large and full. In the blessing for thine 
own Christian life, which comes from that self- 
discipline and exercise of faith which parental 
faithfulness involve, in the blessing on thy home 
life and thy children, in the influence which will 
come to thee on those around thee (1 Tim. iii. 5, 6), 
in the power given thee, like Abraham, to enter 
into God’s secrets, and to plead with Him as 
intercessor for the perishing, God will prove to 
thee that believing, faithful parentage is one of 
the highest privileges to which man can be ad- 
mitted. Study Abraham in his fatherhood as 
chosen of God, faithful to God, blessed of God, 
and find in him the type, the law, the promise of 
what thy fatherhood may be. 


O my God! hast Thou indeed taken me too 
into this wonderful covenant, in which Thou art 
the God of the seed of Thy saints, and makest 
them the ministers of Thy grace to their children ? 
Open my eyes, I pray Thee, to see the full glory 
of this Thy covenant, that my faith may know all 


et it 
thy 
thy 
the 
thee 
hee. 
sing 
hine 
self- 
ntal 
ome 
will 
5, 6), 
nter 


m as 
ye to 
1e of 
> ad- 
d as 
God, 


Keeping the Covenant. 61 


that Thou hast prepared for me to bestow, and 
may do all Thou hast prepared for me to perform. 
O my God! may Thy covenant-keeping faithful- 
ness be the life and the strength of my faith. 
May this faith make me faithful in keeping the 
covenant. 

And teach me to realize fully what this parental 
faithfulness is which Thou dost ask of me. I 
would make this the one object of my home life, 
to train a seed to serve Thee. By my life, by my 
words, by my prayers, by gentleness and love, by 
authority and command, I would lead them in the 
way of the Lord. O God! be Thou my helper. 

Teach me, above all, that, as Thou hast appointed 
this parental training for the fulfilment of Thy 
purpose, I may be assured that Thou hast made 
provision for the grace to enable me to perform. 
Let my faith see Thee undertake for me and all 
I have to do, and an ever-growing faith so be the 
root of an ever-growing faithfulness. I ask it in 
the name of Thy Son. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


_ a 


the care of a child amid the dangers of the journey 


thi 

wl 

the 

chi 

THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 

aCe ma 

we 

i EIGHTH DAY. ‘Se 

eit ice In 

ei on¢ 

rt The Chilv’s Surety. oo 

i a 

| | ‘And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with to | 

\) i me ; I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require . 

ina him.’—Gen, xliii, 8, 9. phic 

ria an 

| HESE are the words of Judah, when he sought it 

14 to persuade his father to send Benjamin tin 

Lid with him. And that he realized what his surety- the 

| | ship for the child meant, and was ready at any thr 

| sacrifice to fulfil its duties, is evident from his liv 

| pleadings before Joseph, when he said, ‘ Thy Sp 

4 servant is become surety for the child with his da 

ae father,’ and offered himself as slave in his brother’s sh 

# i place. In this he was not only the type of his th 

ee own descendant, the great Surety of His people, | an 

I | who gave Himself in their stead; but also, because | ch 

ate the spirit of self-sacrifice passes from the head to / mé 

1 | the body, of every parent to whom God commits fat 
td 
Bt 
ee 


ite sarnecianwcnthemengye nee ts 


d with 
require 


ought 
jamin 
urety- 
any 
m his 
‘Thy 
sh his 
ither’s 
of his 
eople, 
ecause 
ead to 
mmits 
yurney 


The Child's Surety. 


through life. The language and conduct of Judah 
will teach us some most suggestive lessons as to 
the little ones who have been entrusted to our 
charge. 

Consider first the meaning of the engagement 
made. What else is our language, as in baptism 
we undertake to train a child for God, but this: 
‘Send the child with me ; I will be surety for him,’ 
In answer to the questions, How can that little . 
one receive the mark of the covenant, and then be 
sent forth into a sinful world? Were it not better 
that it were removed at once from a world of sin 
to the Father’s home? Or else left without that 
sign of the covenant which has so often been but 
an empty form? The answer has been, ‘Send 
it with me; I will be surety for it.’ Most dis- 
tinctly the question has often again been put to 
the trembling parents when the little one was 
threatened with sickness or death, Shall the child 
live or die? and the answer was heard again: 
Spare it, leave it, even though it be a world of 
danger; I will be surety for the child; of my hand 
shalt thou require it; send it with me. Solemn 
thought! Amidst all the dangers down in Egypt, 
and so many seen perishing, as parent I take 
charge of the child, and the great God may hold 
me responsible if I bring him not back to his 
father’s home in safety. With Judah I have 
spoken: ‘If I bring him not unto thee, and set 


64 The Children ai Christ : 
him halos thee, then let me ee ‘the blew for 
ever !’ 

Consider, too, the duties of such a suretyship, 
as illustrated in Judah. He was thoroughly in 
earnest with the engagement he had undertaken. 
When the governor of Egypt had commanded that 
Benjamin should be kept as a slave, he at once 
came forward as a substitute. Not for a moment 
does he think of his own home and children, of 
Egyptian slavery and its hardships; everything 
gives way to the thought, My father entrusted him 
to me, and I am surety for the lad. With the 
most touching earnestness he pleads to be accepted 
in the youth’s stead: ‘Thy servant is become 
surety for the lad with his father. How shall I 
go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? 
Now, therefore, let thy servant abide instead of 
the lad as bondman to my lord, and let the lad go 
up with his brethren,’ 

Would God that Christian parents realized, as 
Judah did, what it means that they are surety for 
their child! Alas! how. often, when our children 
are in danger from the prince of this world, when 
the temptations of the flesh or the world threaten 
to make them prisoners and slaves, to hold them 
back from ever reaching the Father’s home,—how 
often are we found careless or unwilling to sacrifice 
our ease and comfort in seeking to rescue them 
from their danger! How often the spiritual interests 


for 


ip, 
y in 
ken. 
that 
bnce 
nent 
n, of 

ing 
him 

the 
rpted 
ome 
all I 
me ? 
ad of 
ad go 


ad, as 
iy for 
Idren 
when 
eaten 
them 
—how 
srifice 
them 
erests 


The Child's Surety. 65 
of the child are considered subordinate to worldly 
prospects or position or profit, and the solemn 
covenant forgotten in which we undertook to make 
it our first care that the child should not be lost to 
the Father in heaven! How feebly we realize that 
it is only in a life of pure and whole-hearted devo- 
tion, in which the selfishness and worldly-minded- 
ness of the world are crucified, and our life is lived 
for God, that we can really train children for 
heaven! And how little we have learnt, when 
danger threatens, and our children appear to be 
growing up unconverted, to bow at the foot of the 
throne, until we see that our plea, ‘I am surety 
for the child,’ has touched the heart of the King, 
and we have His word to set him free. Oh, that 
the ruling principle of parental life and love might 
be, Without the child I will not see my Father's 
face. 

Consider now, too, the encouragement Judah's 
example gives. It sets before us the abundant 
reward the faithful surety will reap. In pleading 
with the ruler of Egypt, Judah thought he had to 
do with a stranger, a despot, and an enemy. Little 
did he know that his pleadings were entering tlic 
ears of one who was his own and Benjamin's 
brother. He never dared to hope that it would 
exercise such a mighty influence, or call forth that 
wondrous revelation of the ruler falling weeping 
on Benjamin’s neck, with his, ‘I am Joseph,’ 
E 


66 The Ohildren for Ohrist : 


Wonderful picture of the power and the rewerd 
of a surety’s supplication ! 

And yet not more wonderful than the parent- 
surety may expect. Did we but more feel the 
sinfulness of our children’s nature, and the dangers 
surrounding them, with what fervency we should 
plead with the great King and Saviour of the 
world for their salvation. J% is there, not less than 
to Judah, that the blessing would come tous. It 
might be that at the first, as it was with him, we 
had no conception of the tender relation in which 
He stands to us and our children as a Brother: as 
we plead for the child, and show ourselves ready 
to make any sacrifice so he may be saved, we 
should have our reward in the blessed revelation 
of what Jesus is to us, as well as in the blessing 
on the child. ‘The blessing to the pleading surety 
would be no less rich than to his charge, In 
Jairus, and the father of the lunatic, and the 
Syrophenician woman, and in the experience of 
ten thousand parents, we have proof that, while 
they only thought of obtaining what their children 
needed, their prayer led to experiences of the 
power and love of the Saviour, to such closer and 
more intimate fellowship with Him, to such per- 
sonal blessing as they never had found in only 
praying for themselves, They saw Him with 
whom they were pleading on the throne descend 
and say, 1 am Jesus; they saw Him embrace the 


ward. 


irent- 
1 the 
ngers 
hould 
f the 
3 than 
s, It 
m, we 
which 
or: as 
ready 


with 
Bcend 


The Child's Surety. 67 
beloved one they pleaded for and kiss him; Jesus 
was never so gloriously revealed as when they 
were pleading as parents and sureties for their 
children. 

And just as Judah then learnt to understand 
how Joseph was the true surety, who in the path 
of suffering had won the throne and their deliver- 
ance from famine and death, so parents will learn, 
the more they seek to fulfil their duties as sureties, 
to know and rejoice in Jesus as their Surety. He 
has not only undertaken their own personal salva- 
tion : He has secured and vouchsafes the grace they 
need to fulfil their duties; He is the Surety for 
their suretyship, too, because theirs is grounded in 
His. The vicarious principle on which redemption 
rests, and in virtue of which He died, ‘One for 
all,” runs through the whole of its economy; most 
specially does it appear in the family, that image 
of humanity as a whole. There the father is head, 
is priest, is king, even as Christ, over his own 
house; the father is, in limited sense, but most 
really, surety for the child. And now it is, as he, 
the surety on earth, under the burden of his charge, 
draws nigh to the King, and discovers in Him the 
Great Surety, that the revelation will give him new 
confidence and strength and joy in the work he 
has undertaken. In the light of the redemption 
and love and friendship of Jesus, the thought, ‘I 
am surety for the child,’ will gain new brightness, 


68 The Children for Christ : 


devotion to the training of the children wil! become 
more earnest, the readiness to make any sacrifice 
to save them from the world will be more spon- 
taneous, and the pleading of faith more confident 
and triumphant. And it will be found now what 
richest blessings for parents and their family open 
out in the words, ‘I am surety for the child.’ 


Blessed Father, most earnestly do we beseech 
Thee to open the eyes of the parents of Thy 
Church to see and know their holy and most 
blessed calling. May they understand and realize 
that Thou dost say to them at the birth of each 
little one entrusted to their care, At your hands 
will I require it. May they understand and 


realize, too, that with each little one they brought 
and gave to Thee in baptism, they accepted the 
solemn charge, and gave the answer, ‘Of my 
hand Thou shalt require him; I am surety for the 
child.’ 

O God, show us what the dangers are that 
surround our children, and how impotent we are, 
Give us the true surety spirit, the willingness to 
sacrifice all rather than be unfaithful to our 
charge. As we see the power of sin and of the 
world threatening them, may we plead as for our 
own life, yea, with the offer of our life, that the 
children be now saved from sin and Satan. As 
Thine eye sees us day by day with our children, 


The Chii’’s Surety. 69 


ni may this be the one desire of our parental love 
dive Thou findest, that they may be wholly Thine. 
on Be this our one aim in prayer, and education, 
iil and intercourse. 
una And do Thou, O blessed Lord Jesus, King, 
pee Surety, Brother, on the throne, reveal Thyself as 
our Helper and our Joy. 

O Lord Jesus, teach us and the parents of Thy 
eech Church that, as Thou art our Surety, we are the 
™ surety of our family. O Thou whe art the faithful 


Surety, make us faithful too. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


ed 


NINTH DAY. 


Faith hining the Child. 


‘And when she saw that he was a goodly child, she hid him 
three months.’—Exop. ii. 2. 

‘ By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months 
by his parents, because they saw he was a goodly child ; and 
they were not afraid of the king’s commandment.’—HEs, xi. 23, 


HE story of Moses will lead us a step further 

in the study of the way in which the faith 

of parents will manifest itself in dealing with their 

children. It was faith that saw the goodliness of 

the child; it was faith that feared not the king’s 

wrath; it was faith that hid the child and saved 

its life. In each child born of believing parents, 

faith sees the same goodliness, meets the same 
danger, and finds the same path of safety. 

It was by faith Moses’ parents saw he was a goodly 
child. The natural love of a parent’s heart doubtless 
made the child a beautiful one in the mother’s eye; 
but faith saw more than nature could. God opened 


eee eed le le le Olle ll essltics“ 


Ra OQa 


O 


1 him 


Faith hiding the Child. 71 


the eyes, and there was the consciousness of some- 
thing special, of a spiritual beauty, that made their 
babe doubly precious. And so the eye of faith 
sees in each little one a Divine goodliness. Is 
it not a being created in God’s image, with the 
faint light of a Divine glory, of an immortal life, 
shining from it? Is it not an object of the great 
redemption; destined to be a partaker of the 
precious blood and the Holy Spirit of Jesus, to 
be the object of the joy of angels and God’s ever- 
lasting love and pleasure? a child, whose worth 
exceeds that of the whole world? a child, that 
even in this life can be a brother of Jesus, a 
servant of God, a blessing for the immortal spirits 
of feliow-men? Surely faith may call the little one 
unspeakably fair, for it sees it shining as a jewel 
in the crown of the Lamb,—His joy and His glory. 
We have indeed a surer hope than ever Moses’ 
parents had, and a brighter light in which the 


- heavenly beauty of our little ones is reflected. O 


Father, open the eyes of all Thy people that, with 
each little babe Thou givest them, their faith may 
see that it is a goodly child. 

It is faith that sees, but fears not the danger. 
Our children are still exposed to the same danger. 
Pharaoh had commanded that the children of God’s 
people should all be destroyed. He knew that if 
the children were cut off, the people would soon die 
out. There would be no need of the trouble and 


ieee rere en 


ee 


oe 


¢ « 
Lahn be eI A AMET ROR Rm ea tae a 


’ ‘ 
rie be Sata a re acento nn ty Be somal 
. ori systins = inel ‘ ¥ 


72 The Children for Christ : 


danger of war; by a slow and silent but sure 
process the nation would be cut off. The Prince 
of this world still pursues the same policy. When 
parents take a decided stand for God, the world 
may despise or hate them ; it soon learns that it is 
of little use to attempt to corquer them. But it 
knows a surer way. The spirit of the world 
claims possession of the children: if these are 
won, all are won. And too often, alas! Christian 
parents give their children a prey to the world. 
Children are allowed to grow up in comparative 
ignorance about the blessed Saviour, are entrusted 
to the care of irreligious or worldly teachers, 
are allowed to associate with those whose spirit 
and influence is altogether worldly. And in many 
a Christian home, where at one time, when the 
children were still young, all was earnest and 
decided; as they grew up, the tone became 
changed, and the power of religion was far less 
to be seen. And the Church, alas! is often too 
faithless or feeble to warn against it. How little 
it has realized that in the parental relation, and 
in baptism, it has a mighty hold on the Church 
of the future, and given to the instruction and 
encouragement of parents the prominent place its 
importance demands. To what a large extent the 
education of the young has been left to the State, 
and the secular school, and the spirit of the age, 
until the youthful heart has lost the simplicity 


————= 


sure 
rince 
Vhen 
vorld 
, it is 
but it 
world 
2 are 
istian 
vorld. 
rative 
usted 
shers, 
spirit 
any 
the 
and 
came 
less 

1 too 
little 
, and 
hurch 
and 
e its 
the 
State, 
p age, 
icity 


Faith hiding the Child. 


and tenderness of which the Master spake when 
He said, ‘ Of such is the kingdom of heaven.’ Oh! 
what thousands on thousands of the children of 
the kingdom are thus drowned in the mighty Nile 
of this world,—the fruitful stream of its pleasures 
and profits. Would God that the eyes of His 
people might be opened to the danger which 
threatens His Church! It is not infidelity or 
superstition, it 1s the spirit of worldliness in the 
homes of our Christian people, sacrificing the 
children to the ambition or society, to the riches 
or the friendship of the world, that is the greatest 
danger of Christ’s Church. Were every home 
once won for Christ, a training-school for His 
service, we should find in this a secret of spiritual 
strength not less than all that ordinary preaching 
can accomplish. 

It is faith that still finds the same path of safety. 
‘ By faith Moses was hid by his parents.’ ‘They 
trusted God on behalf of this goodly child, one of 
the children of His covenant. ‘By faith Moses 
was hid by his parents,’—these simple words tell 
us our duty, what our faith must do. Christian 
parent! hide thy child. And where? Oh, hide 
it in that safest refuge—‘the shadow of the 
Almighty, ‘the secret of God’s countenance.’ 
Lay thy child from its birth daily there in faith, 
and let thy soul be filled with the consciousness 
that He has indeed taken charge of it, Let the 


nn 
a = 


nee ee a ea 


aR 


; 

j 

i 

| 
ii} 

Hi 

| 
Huet 
Way 
\ ba 
zi 
ait 

/ 

i} 

I 

R | 

é 

'L) 

{ ; i 
Hi 

i } 
; i 
i Hi 
tH 

] 1 
i | 
ee 
Hi 

i! 
; 
Hi 


72, ‘The Children for Christ : 

mighty rock of God’s strength and the tender 
covering of His feathers be its ark, while still it is 
all unconscious of te:nptation or danger. Let with 
the first dawn « ©¢1°99, the clefts of the rock and 
the love of Jesu: he tiie place of safety to which 
thou guidest its youthiu: feet. Hide it in the 
quiet of home life from the excitements of the 
world without, from the influence of a civilisation 
e21d culture which is of the earth. In that hiding, 
where the enemy cannot find, we have one of. 
faith’s highest duties. And when the time comes 
that it must come into contact with the world, 
oh! thou canst still entrust it to Him who is the 
Keeper of Israel,—let it be a settled thing with 
thy heart that He has accepted thy trust, has 
taken charge, and cannot disappoint thy faith. 
Commit thy child boldly to the waters in the ark of 
the covenant of thy God. Fear not the inexorable 
law which is continually being proclaimed,—‘ The 
children cannot be kept separate from the world— 
the children must go with the stream.’ No, let 
faith hold it fast that thine are the children of a 
peculiar people, separated unto God; they must 
be kept separate for Him. 

The reward of the faith of Moses’ parents will 
be ours, Not only was Moses saved, he became 
the saviour of his people. Thy child, too, will not 
only be blessed, but also be made a blessing. 
Each child has not the calling of a Moses. But 


Faith hiding the Child. Te 


in His kingdom God needs not only a Moses, but 
a Moses’ mother and a Moses’ sister, for the ful- 
filment of His purposes. Let thy faith but, like 
Moses’ mother, do its work: God Himself will see 
to it that our labour is not in vain. The educa- 
tion Moses’ mother gave her son during the years 
of his childhood was such as all the years of h.: 
training at Pharaoh’s court could not oblitera’ 2, 
His parent’s faith bore fruit in his faith, when he, 
at every cost, chose suffering with the people of 
God, and was not afraid of the wrath of the king, 
because he saw Him who is invisible. Let taith 
hide the child in the ark of God’s love. Let faith, 
when God entrusts the child to its care, train the 
chiid for God and His people, and when the time 
comes that it must go into the world, were it even 
to live at Pharaoh’s court, it will be safe in the 
power of faith and of God’s keeping. A child of 
faith will not only receive a blessing for itself, but 
be a blessing to those around. 

God grant that the Church may indeed become 
a‘ Moses’ mother, the faithful nurse of the children 
He entrusts to her care, ‘hiding’ them and keeping 
them separate from the world and its influence, 
He will give a wonderful fulfilment of the promise, 
wherever He finds the fulfilment of the duty: 
‘Take this child, nurse it for me: I will give thee 
thy wages,’ 


726 The Children for Christ : 


Gracious God! with my whole heart I thank 
Thee for the teaching of Thy Word, by which 
Thou preparest me to fulfil aright my holy call- 
ing as parent. I thank Thee for the example of 
Moses’ parents, and pray that the grace that 
taught them in faith to save their child may be 
given to ime too. 

I acknowledge, Lord, that I do not sufficiently 
realize the value of my children, nor the danger 
tc which they are exposed from the Prince and 
th2 Spirit of the world. Lord! teach me fully 


to recognise the danger and yet never to fear the i 
commandment of the king. Open my eyes to see lam 
in the light of heaven that each little one is a a 
goodly child, entrusted to my keeping and train- 
ing for Thy work and kingdom. Help me in the [ 
humility and watchfulness and boldness of faith | 
to keep them sheltered, to hide them from the giv 
power of the world and of sin. May my own life anc 
be the life of faith, hid with Christ in God, that ofte 
my child may know no other dwelling-place. ins 
And grant all this also to all Thy people, O my anc 
God. Let Thy Church awake to know her place des 
in this world, and her calling to go out to the | the 
land to which God has called her. Let, in the me 
training of the children, the mighty power of faith or 
be seen, the difference between them that fear yor 
Thee and them that fear Thee not, O give us the 


grace to rear our children for Thee. Amen. 


nies eats io iinet ste ei tcc rt ee tinahansisannatiesnintre 


——_—_—— 


ank 
hich 
call- 
le of 
that 
y be 


ntly 
nger 
and 
ully 
the 
) see 
is a 
‘ain- 
the 
‘aith 
the 
life 
that 


my 
lace 
the 
the 
faith 
fear 


P us 


A Lamb for an House. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TENTH DAY. 


A Lamb for an ouse. 


‘Take every man a lamb, according to their father’s houses, a 
lamb for an house. When He seeth the blood, the Lord will 
pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to enter your 
houses.’—Exop. xii. 3, 23. 


T has often been pointed out that, of all the 
Old Testament sacrifices, there is none that 
gives a Clearer or richer revelation of the person 
and work of our Lord than the Passover. It has 
often, however, escaped observation how the whole 
institution of the Paschal Lamb aimed at deliver- 
ance, not of the individuals, but of families; it 
dealt not with the persons, but with the families, 
the houses of God’s people. What else is the 
meaning of the expression, A lamb for an house ? 
or (as in ver. 21), Take you lambs according to 
your families? and of the blood sprinkled upon 
the house? As so it is expressly declared, ‘When 
your children shall say unto you, What mean ye 


‘ 


78 The Children for Christ : 


by this service? that ye shall say, It is the sacri- 
fice of the Lord’s Passover, who passed over the 
houses of the children of Israel, when He smote 
the Egyptians and delivered our houses.’ Among 
the Egyptians it was the first-born in every house 
wko died, as representing the house, as in Israel 
it was the first-born who through the blood was 
saved from the impending danger and consecrated 
for God. All teaching how God, in redeeming 
His people and revealing the principles on which 
He is to deal with them, lays this down as a 
fundamental law in the Passover and the blood- 
sprinkling: I deal with you, not as individuals, 
but as families. As I chose and blessed you, as 
the seed of your father Abraham, so I still bless 
every household through the believing father, who 
sprinkles the blood in obedience to My com- 
mand. The lamb and its blood are the consecra- 
tion of the dwellings and the family relations of 
My people. In the hands of the father, God thus 
places the destiny and the safety of the whole 
house. 

Christ, our Passover, is slain for us. We love to 
trace how, in every, even to the most minute par- 
ticular, the foreshadowings of the Paschal Feast 
were fulfilled in Him. Have we any warrant in 
God’s Word for excepting this so important feature, 
and allowing the type to hold good in every respect 
but this? Is, in this one respect, the Old Testa- 


sacri- 
r the 
smote 
mong 
house 
Israel 
1 was 
rated 
ming 
which 
as a 
lood- 
duals, 
OU, as 
bless 
, who 
com- 
becra- 
ns of 
thus 
hole 


ve to 
par- 
east 
t in 
ture, 
spect 
esta- 


A Lamb for an House. 79 
ment feast to stand higher than the New, and the 
blood which then was for the saving of the house 
here to be only for the individual? and not be 
sprinkled on the houses too? How the Christian 
parent might then envy the Jew, who enjoyed the 
privilege, as he looked at the sprinkled blood, of 
knowing that he had done it to the saving, not 
only of himself, but his household too. And the 
Christian parent would not have the right thus, in 
definite and assured faith, to claim the blood for 
his children? God forbid! Christ, the Lamb of 
God, is still ‘a lamb foran house’! His blood may 
still be sprinkled upon the door, that the destroyer 
enter not in. In the new covenant, and with the 
precious blood of Christ, the principle still holds 
good: it is the believing father’s right and duty 
in faith to appropriate the blood for his whole 
house. His faith has the Divine warrant, and 
will be rewarded with the Divine blessing. 

Let me endeavour henceforth to live in this 
faith, fully to realize this privilege. As I think 
of the precious blood, and seek to walk in the 
nearness to God which it gives, let me claim its 
cleansing power for my house as well as myself. 
Let me be assured that my faith as parent has 
power and does secure a Divine influence. Daily 
there is the sin of my house defiling and darken- 
ing. Even my sin, pardoned though it be, might 
justly, in its consequences, be visited on my child- 


| | | 
I 


1} i 
ie 
| 
ip 


1a 
Ht 
nit 
Hit 


80 The Children for Christ : 
ren. The fulness «f the application of the blood 
will correspond to what faith claims. I have in 
nature transmitted sin and death,—through me 
they inherit it. Thank God, as a father, I may 
also transmit the grace and blessing of redemption. 

Not only my own soul, but my house, can daily 
be kept under the sprinkling and cleansing of the 
blood, And each time I enter my door, or think 
of Satan entering it, in the light of heaven I may 
see it sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb. 
Parents and children together stand under the 
cover and protection of the blood: the Lord is 
our keeper. 

Every year in Israel parents had tc renew the 
sprinkling: the blood of the Lamb has been shed 
once for all, i have now only each day again to 
renew the consecration of my house to the Lord 
in the assurance of faith: the blood saves me and 
my children, In this faith I may confidently 
expect that the wondrous redemption of the blood 
will exercise its full and mighty influence, until 
all our domestic life and its relations be sanctified, 
our house be wholly the Lord’s, and each child be 
consciously and confessedly one of His redeemed. 

To this end I must notice carefully how God 
commanded the parents to teach these things to 
their children (Exod, xii, 26, xiii. 14), ‘The grace 
of God that bringeth salvation ¢eacheth us, What 
is secured to the child in redemption must be 


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee on ee ot 


blood 
ve in 
h me 
- may 
ption. 
daily 
f the 
think 
[ may 
Lamb. 
r the 
rd is 


w the 
shed 
in to 
Lord 
e and 
ently 
blood 
until 
ified, 
ld be 
ned. 

God 
ys to 
Prace 
V hat 
t be 


‘ 


A Lamb for an House. 81 


made his own in free and personal appropriation. 
And this cannot be without his knowing it. The 
children were to be taught that they belonged to 
the redeemed people, that they belonged to the 
redeeming God. The parent was to act not only 
as priest, and thus, in a sense, mediator, but also 
as prophet and teacher. As he had dealt for the 
child with God in the blood-sprinkling, so he was 
to deal for God with the child in the instructions 
he gave him.’ Let me seek grace and wisdom in 
the spirit of faith to teach my children what the 
blood has done for them, to make them know and 
love the God who accepted them ere ever they 
knew Him! 

One thing more is deserving of very special 
note. The believing Israelite had not only every 
year to sprinkle the door-posts with blood, and so 
to testify that it was only in the blood that he and 
his house could stand before God; he had also to 
write upon these same blood-sprinkled door-posts 
the words of God’s law (Deut. vi. 7-9). In all 
the going-out and coming-in of his children, these 
words were ever to meet their eye, the freedom 
from Egypt's bondage and Egypt’s curse was a 
freedom to serve God. God wills to be not only 
trusted but obeyed. It is ‘unto obedience and 
the sprinkling of the blood of Christ’ that we 


1 See the next meditation for the further illustration of this 
thought, 


F 


ma Py - (tate ern Aen RENE Ch Amine Ha 
' ae} 
i 


mo 
mi} 
ea! 
Bil 


whence Staines ‘ nee esslinavemnatinentpes . 
aay ea = i 


Hee A te EE EON 
z a 


te ates Mere 


nee 


SS 
= : 


82 The Children for Christ : 

have been chosen: the door-posts sprinkled with 
the blood, and inscribed with the words of the law, 
remind me of the blessed oneness of faith and 
obedience, liberty and service. I would in the 
joy of the great redemption train and educate my 
children to know, and love, and keep the commands 
of their God. Day by day, in faith and prayer, 
in teaching and living, I would seek to set before 
them in its harmony the blessedness of a faith 
that freely accepts all that God gives, with a sur- 
render that gives all He claims. 

‘A lamb for an house:’ I must pray that God’s 
Holy Spirit reveal in its full power all the 
truths that cluster round this blessed word. A 
father redeemed by the blood; his childrer: through 
him and with him partaking of the sprinkling; 
the father, God’s minister every year anew to 
sprinkle the house; the father, God’s witness and 
messenver to the children to teach them of this pre- 
cious blood, and of the God it reveals; the blood- 
sprinkled door-posts inscribed with the words of 
God’s law ;—such is God’s wond:ous provision for 
getting full possession of His people, and making 
the family the foundation of the kingdom, 


Blessed Lord Jesus! the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sin of the world, the Son of God, 
whose blood cleanseth from al] sin, in humble faith 
I claim that blood for myself and my children. 


A Lamb for an House. 83 


May my own experience of its ever-cleansing 
power every day grow fuller and clearer. And 
may I by Thy Holy Spirit realize fully my right 
to claim it for my house. 

O most blessed Saviour! may the power of Thy 
blood work in me so mightily, that my faith may 
in full assurance accept it for each of my children 
as a present blessing. May we, under the covering 
of the blood, know ourselves protected from the 
destroyer. 

O most gracious God! whose is this wondrous 
ordinance of a lamb for an house, I yield myself 
to Thee afresh as the minister of Thy covenant. 
Use me, my God, to save my children, to train 
them for Thee, and Thee alone. I would have the 
door-posts not only sprinkled with the blood, but 
inscribed with the law. I would have Thy service 
the one thing they grow up for. As Thou hast 
chosen’ us, in sanctification of the Spirit, unto 
obedienve and blood-sprinkling, may faith in the 
blood and surrender to Thy will be as the two 
door-posts, between which we daily go in and out. 
Tne Lord make it so, Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


ELEVENTH DAY. 


The Father as Priest and Prophet. 


* And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say, i 
What mean ye by this service? that ye shall say, It is the 
sacrifice uf the Lord’s passover, who passed over the houses of 
the children of Israel in Egypt, when He smote the Egyptians, 
and delivered our houses,’—Exop. xii, 26. 27. 


HE Passover sets the believiug parent before 

us in a twofold aspect. First, as dealing 
with God on behalf of the children, and bringing 
down the blessing on them; then as dealing with 
He the children for God, and seeking to lead them up 
ti to Him. In the former capacity, he sprinkled 
the blood of the lamb upon his house, securing 
God’s protection for the children. In the latter 
he had ‘o instruet his children, telling them of 
| whet God had done, and seeking to lead them to 
of the personal knowledge and acceptance of this 
| God as their God. Those two parts of parental 
dnty ave closely and inseparably linked to each 


The Father as Priest and Prophet. 85 


other, the first being necessary as the root and 
origin of the latter. The parent’s work as priest 
fits him for his work as prophet and teacher. The 
second is indispensable to the full appropriation 
of the blessing that the former has secured. It 
was after having sprinkled the blood for himself, 
and his child too, that the parent had to instruct 
him in the meaning of the holy mystery. His 
interposition with God, his experience of God’s 
blessing on himself and child, were his own 
training to fit him for the training of his child. 

| As we keep this in view, we shall recognise the 
Says | beauty of that institution by which God has 


the . “ar 
- A chosen and appointed the believing parent the 
ans, instructor of his children, and realize its extreme 


fitness as the best means of securing a godly seed 
for the Lord. 


os Observe, it is the parent, who has himself already 
ed experrenced the salvation of God, who is appointed 
ei to lead the child to know God. The knowledge 


of God is no mere matter of the understanding ; 
led . it is to love Him, to live in Him, to experience 
ii the power of His presence and His blessing. It 


: , is evident that the man who would teach others 
sii to know God must be able to speak by personal 
n of 

‘ experience of Him, must prove by the warmth of 
o i love and devotion that he loves this God, and has 
bin his life from Him. When God instituted the 


family as the great instrument of transmitting 


penn nn 


lai an i sa netihgs 


rata ni 


" tins wn isicaneiictnttin silences —_ 
Ne saion pet aeamepneremen gee rere ae 
Ta 8 are ers ste sibalatasigerong 

geet satisil—soneieiahaamiintiineitia: 


> 
z 
Se a . * 
vs Mi if 
ae Sa ee aa RN nal an 
E E ~ ; a > + SOS PSE? ELE ILI OTLEY WE DRIES 
aparece nteinnemeeeernageseriap metieer->-aury~ gensisabesiacsapiatioiomeie sissy, 2b me Ss. 5: si Si wits i 


86 The Children for Christ : 


His fear, He so arranged it as to give it the 
highest possible efficacy. This consisted in his 
revealing Himself to each head of a family as the 
God of his salvation. In the other sacrifices in 
Israel, the priest sprinkled the blood in the holy 
places, but in the Passover there was this pecu- 
liarity, that cach father sprinkled it on his own 
house. He thereby performed the act of faith by 
which the destroyer was kept from his house; 
and when he went forth from Egypt, and under- 
took the journey to Canaan, he could bear personal 
witness to God’s faithfulness, and to the efficacy 
of the atoning blood of the lamb. He covld 
speak as a living witness from personal experience. 
As a redeemed one he could tell of redemption ; 
he could tell of the Redeemer-God. It is even so 
now still: personal experience of the power of the 
blood can alone fit a parent for speaking to his 
children of God. It is the looking back upon the 
time when personal deliverance from sin was 
experienced, aud the looking up to a God with 
whom, in the spirit of adoring gratitude, a personal 
intercourse is maintained, and the looking forward 
to a home where the longing spirit knows it will 
inherit a place prepared by the Father,—it is this 
and this alone that fits a parent to speak aright 
and in power. It is the parent who has himself 
experienced redemption who can tell his child in 
truth of the God of Redemption, who can act in 


a ne ee ee ee 


The Father as Priest and Prophet. 87 


accordance with the injunction (xiii. 8): ‘And 
thou shalt show thy son in that day, saying, This 
is done because of that which the Lord did unto 
me in the day when I came forth out of Egypt.’ 

And as parents in Israel had every year to 
renew the remembrance of that deliverance, so 
now it 1s the parent who lives in the ever fresh 
experience of what the powers of redemption are, 
who can, with ever-deepening earnestness and 
freshness, speak of the mercy and the truth, as 
well as of the blessed service, of the God of 
salvation. 

But observe, further, this parent has also been 
constituted and accepted as God's appointed minister 
in the redemption of the child. It is this gives an 
increased fitness for his work as instructor of the 
child. He can not only speak of a salvation he 
has experienced,—urging and inviting the child 
to come and taste that to which he is as yet a 
stranger. No; in sprinkling the blood upon the 
door of his house, he saved his child too from the 
destroying angel. He was honoured to act with 
God on behalf of the child; what the child could 
not do, he did for him, and the deed was accepted. 
The child has initially been made partaker of the 
blessing of that sprinkling of blood, and has, in 
growing up, personally to accept what has been 
secured and sealed to him. And what a mighty 
vantage ground it gives the believing parent in his 


88 The Children for Christ: 


— 


labour, when he can thus look upon his child in 
the light of that great transaction between God 
and himself, of which that child has been the 
object! With what confidence it inspires his 
faith! how his energies will be roused ! and what 
a strong motive in pleading with the child him- 
self! He speaks to him, as no longer a stranger 
to the covenant of grace, but as a child of the 
covenant. He points him to a God who began to 
deal with him in the feebleness of infancy ; he 
can attest to the reality of an engagement entered 
into between God and himself, and sealed in the 
sprinkling of blood. He shows him how God 
dealt with the houses, with the families of Israel ; 
and if not in the way of argument, yet practically, 
and in the tone of the language which his faith 
adopts, he lets him feel that he cannot consent to 
one of his house refusing to acknowledge the God 
of the house. 

And it gives him no less power in pleading 
with God on behalf of the child. He reminds 
the great Jehovah of the blood and the oath of 
the covenant, and claims for his child the bless- 
ings of redemption,—that just as he is a child of 
the redeemed people, he may grow up personally 
to accept and ratify the covenant. Next to. his 
own personal experience of the blessing of salva- 
tion, this consciousness of what, as a believing 
parent, he has been allowed to do, and of his seed 


be C9 i 


ee. ee oe io os ee ee en, ee ee ee ee ee 


ld in 
n God 
n the 
es his 
what 
| him- 
ranger 
of the 
gan to 
y; he 
ntered 
in the 
v God 
[srael ; 
ically, 
s faith 
ent to 
e God 


bading 
minds 
ith of 
bless- 
ild of 
bnally 
o. his 
salva- 
eving 
5 seed 


The Father as Priest and Prophet. 89 


having been received with him into covenant, 
constitutes the fitness of the believing parent for 
his being the minister of God’s grace to his child. 
But there is another thought that brings out 
still more strikingly the wondrous adaptation of the 
family constitution for the working out of God’s 
purposes,—this, namely, that 7 7s grownded on 
the natural relation, sanctifying its affections, and 
adopting them into the service of redemption. It 
is not any one redeemed man saying to his fellow- 
man, Come and see what God hath wrought for 
me. Nor is it any one redeemed man saying to 
some child to whom he sustains a certain official 
relation, and on whose behalf he has performed an 
act of atonement, Come and let me lead thee to 
thy God. But cz i a father, with his own child. 
In nature they are one, united by the closest and 
most wondrous ties. The child has his life from 
the father. The father looks upon him as part of 
himself, of his flesh and of his bones; he loves and 
cherishes him. This love seeks, even in nature, 
the happiness of the child, and can often make 
wondrous sacrifices to attain it. And it is this 
love God lays hold of in the parental covenant, 
and purifies to be the minister and vehicle of His 
grace. And with a parent’s love there is a parent's 
influence. ‘The weakness of the child renders him 
dependent, to a wondrous degree, upon the parent’s 
will. The character of childhood is formed and 


90 The Children for Christ : 


moulded by impressions; unceasing intercourse 
with the parent can render these impressions deep 
and permanent. ‘The child’s love to the parent 
rises and meets the parent’s love, and the spirit 
of the parent can thus, in addition to the natural 
influence of birth, in wondrous measure be breathed 
into the child. Of all this God’s grace seeks to 
avail itself, and while it is the sole prerogative of 
the Holy Spirit to renew the soul, and make a 
child of God, there is nevertheless a need for the 
means and instrumentalities through which His 
gracious workings are prepared and applied, are 
confirmed and established, And of all these instru- 
mentalities, there is none more wondrously devised, 
or more beautifully adapted to its object, than this 
of godly parentage. A parent made partaker of 
God’s love and grace himself, accepted and blessed 
with the promises of the covenant and the Spirit, 
as covenanting for his child; and then sent forth, 
in the power of consecrated parental affection, to 
make all the influences and intercourse of domestic 
life.the auxiliary to the great work of gaining 
the child for God,—this surely is one of the 
most wondrous exhibitions of God’s grace upon 
earth. 


O my God! I come to Thee again with the 
earnest prayer for Thy teaching. Thou hast said, 
‘I will be the God of all the families of Israel.’ 


Ope 
deey 
Sj 


wou 
Thys 
thei 
Tho 
then 
for t 
‘A ¢ 
send 
clain 
ren, 1 
train 

Le 
Chur 
Thee 
my ¢ 
as ON 
for tl 
encd 
ed} 
and | 
them 


a 


ourse 
; deep 
arent 
spirit 
atural 
athed 
eks to 
ive of 
ake a 
or the 
n His 
d, are 
nstru- 
‘vised, 
n this 
er of 
lessed 
Spirit, 
forth, 
on, to 
1estic 
hining 
f the 
upon 


h the 
said, 
srael.’ 


The Father as Priest and Prophet. 91 


Open my eyes to see clearly, and my heart to fecl 
deeply, what Thy purpose is in this. 

Since sin entered and ruined our nature, Thou 
wouldst early take possession of the little ones for 
Thyself. Thou seekest to secure parents with all 
their love and influence to be Thy ministers, 
Thou enterest into covenant with them, giving 
them the right to claim the Blood of the Covenant 
for their children, and in that Blood the promise, 
‘A God to thee and to thy seed.’ And then Thou 
sendest them, as themselves redeemed, as having 
claimed and accepted redemption for their child- 
ren, to use their influence for Thee, and win and 
train their children for Thy love and service. 

Lord God! open the eyes of the parents of Thy 
Church to their calling, that they may honour 
Thee as the God of their families. And, O Lord 
my)God! bless my own house, and give me grace, 
as one of Thy redeemed ones, to train my children 
for their God. May the joy of a personal experi- 
encd of redemption, and the love of the blessed 
Kiedjemer, warm my heart, and inspire my words, 
and light up my life, to testify of Thee, and train 
then\ for Thee alone. Amen, 


SPEER 
ddaa- xf 


y ary 
oO. 
Ks 
<= 
2h 
<H 
a oe 
sp 
0. 
qn 
=u 


jmeteispaninieandhiseesisinandeaeeaniorapc itt 

“ — oud cn ee Re. 

At OEY BBR ED PES ES RTT cE Till te, hel Aloe ee 2 RiGee, hone 
® 


ot TR 


y 
e 4 


SAF ee ee catienemarteel ~ 
o Oa ae SSO ee gee eG Mp Rs oe 


The Children for Christ: 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWELFTH Day. 


Sanctify the First-born. 
, i 
‘And the Lord said unto Moses, Sanctify unto Me all tie 
first-born. . . . All the first-born of man among thy sons thu 
shalt redeem. And it shall be, when thy son asketh theein 
time to come, What is this? that thou shalt say unto hm, 
By strength of hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt ; ax it 
came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, tha/the 
Lord slew all the first-born of Egypt ; therefore I sacrificetnto 
the Lord all that openeth the womb, being males ; but aj the 
first-born of my sons I redeem.’—Exop. xiii. 1, 18-15. - 


‘| ET My people go that they may serve M,— 
in these words so often repeated b; the 
Lord in sending Moses to Pharaoh, we seehow 


_ service is the aim of redemption. God make His 


people free from the bondage of Egypt, to rans- 
late them into the liberty of His servi, the 
willing, loving, free service of a redeemed ‘ople. 


’ The deeper God's people enter into the stit of 


redemption, the deeper will be the insiyé into 
the blessed unity of liberty and service, oliberty 


t 


ST. 


erve M— 
ted by the 
ve seehow 
make His 
bt, to rans- 
servi, the 
med :ople. 
he stit of 
nsit¥ into 
e, oliberty 


U 


} 
| 


10 Me all the 
thy sons thu 
sketh theein 
say unto }m, 
gypt 4 au it 
s go, tha/the 

sacrificointo 
8; but al the 
13-15. 


Sanetify the First-born. 93 


and necessity. No true service of God without 
liberty ; no true liberty without service. 

We have seen in the Passover what a per- 
manent place the family and the children take in 
redemption. No less than their parents were they 
redeemed to serve; all their training was to be 
a training to the service of God. When Pharaoh 
said to Moses after the plague, ‘Go, serve the Lord 
your God; but who are they that shall go?’ the 
answer was very distinct, ‘We will go with our 
young and our old, our sons and our daughters,’ It 
was on this point that the negotiations wero breken 
off. The going of the children was what the king 
would not consent to: ‘So be the Lord with you, 
as I will let you go with your little ones: look to 
it, for evil is before you’ (Exod. ix. 8-10). And 
when later on Pharaoh still wanted to keep the 
property, he felt that this at least must be con- 
ceded: ‘Go ye, serve the Lord; only let your 
flocks and herds be stayed ; let your litile ones 
also go with you’ (x. 24). It is the future of the 
nation that is to be secured for God; a people 
that is really to serve God must, in the first place, 
see to the little ones. 

After the people had left Egypt, the very first 
command God gave to Moses was in regard to the 
first-born, who were to be separated and sanctified 
for Him, In each family the first-born son was 
counted the chief and the best ; the father looked 


Figpetth oas 


SOS AOE A TROBE tc gt eres 
ETON Ae ik ME ne Fans ee ° 


ABs 1S Dat Eh ati a RY RC IN RO as eC tia 


ica ceeisdhcahenek Lentesinarastn tinal Sore hon ee 


94 The Children for Ohrist : 


upon him as Jacob said of Reuben: ‘Thou art 
my first-born, my might, and the beginning of my 
strength.’ 

His was the birthright and the place of honour 
in the family. He was the representative and 
head of all the children. God looked upon Israel 
as His first-born among the nations. Because 
Egypt oppressed him, and would not let him go, 
God slew his first-born. And now in commemora- 
tion of this, and as a pledge of God’s claim on all 
the children and the whole people, every first-born 
belonged to God, and was set apart as His peculiar 
property. 

And with what object ? For none other but His 
service, This comes out with great distinctness 
in the exchange that was made, by which the tribe 
of Levi was taken instead of the first-born, ‘The 
Levites shall go to do the service of the tent, for 


they are wholly given unto Me from among the 


childreh of Israel; instead of all the first-born of 
the children of Israel have I taken them to Me; 
for all the first-born are.Mine’ (Num. viii. 14-19). 
And in the redemption money, which had to be 
paid at the birth of each first-born for his release, 
the parents had the unceasing reminder that the 
first-born belonged to God and His service, and 
were represented in the Levites. 

The principle involved in this is one of the 
deepest importance. God claims our best children 


pn ga Se ee ee ree 


——— e-F 2 £4 65 823 Ss oe Se fF OO OO FefDUlUlUCCClU CUP 


Thou art 
ing of my 


of honour 
ative and 
on Israel 

Because 
t him go, 
nmemora- 
lim on all 
first-born 
is peculiar 


er but His 
istinctness 
1 the tribe 
rm, ‘The 
s tent, for 


st-born of 
m to Me; 
ii, 14-19). 
had to be 
his release, 
pr that the 
rvice, and 


ne of the 
st children 


mong the 


Sanetify the First-born. 95 


for His own direct and immediate service. The 
whole people, old and young, were to serve Him, 
but the first-born, the very best, were to be entirely 
set apart for the special maintenance of that ser- 
vice, not only by the part they took in the worship, 
but by instructing the people in the law of their 
God. Let us try to take in fully the lessons the 
Christian Church has to learn from this, 

In Israel all the first-born, and as their repre- 
sentatives, all the children of Levi, a twelfth part 
of the whole nation, were exclusively claimed by 
God to be continually at His disposal in the ser- 
vice cf His house. And in Israel that service 
consisted solely in the maintenance of what 
existed,—nothing had to be done for the extension 
of the kingdom or the propagation of the knowledge 
of God amonz; the heathen. The Christian Church 
has now not only to see to it that she maintains 
her hold on whet she once has occupied: her 
calling in her redemption from sin is distinctly 
and essentially aggressive, to teach all the nations 
and seek the extension of the kingdom through- 
out the whole world. And the question is natur- 
ally suggested: If Israel had to set apart one- 
twelfth of its children for the work of God, what 
portion should the Christian Church devote to the 
work committed to her? And what portion has 
she devoted ? 

Alas! that the answer to the latter questioa 


96 The Children for Christ : 


should be so sad! There is hardly a missionary 
or philanthropic society engaged in teaching and 
rescuing the ignorant and the lost, that has not | 
to complain of want of labourers, The call is 
being sounded forth louder every year that the 
doors to the hundreds of millions of heathen are 
opened wide, and yet how few, how sadly few, 
is the number of labourers, And why? Simply 
because Christian parents do not, as a rule, educate 
their children under the conviction that they are 
the Lord’s, do not place them at His disposal, do 
not train them to look upon this as their highest 
privilege, if they be found worthy to bear the 
name of Christ among the heathen. 

Let us just think a moment what would be 
thought of the loyalty of Englishmen to their 
Queen if it were found difficult to find men to 
form her bodyguard, or accept appointments in her 
service! Or what of the enthusiasm of an army 
where the General could never obtain volunteers 
for a post of danger and of honour! And Jesus 
Christ, our King, who came to seek and save the 
lost, has said that these are His guard of honour, 
and shall have His richest rewards, who forsake | 
all for His and the gospel’s sake. And yet, | 
while in every profession there are complaints | 
of more applicants than openings, the Master 
has to wait, and His work has to suffer, because 
His people do not understand that they and 


A ectie N  aR cae 


cin 
ti ARC SAARI ltd Me 


pe EDS SR NORMS stabs Be IT hs SEER Sets SNE OR Re. 4 ee 


Rate 7 SPDR TR A A ATR 2 NER. EMS ASSESS Pie WA oa tn Nanas at tn - - 7 _ dhapanaumoamse i wt ne Bes ae F 
aes ance : al a tok tee Tet Se a mt a Ee a it Sih i Da Sa RANG RAN AIA Mc DUkig ks LORS it See SES ai ARTE, LT IE Big CRANE iP ek ain TS MRRP D ENGR SF 0 2 
sae i < " —¥ _ 5 jp ag Roi a rit ET a eT Re Te f " e Mee Figs FO ee are GaSb a Ri cry Se Sood 


Ge Sai hal i RE SS NA Rs NR NLD Se NOS eae ve Coane, 


i 


ssionary 
ing and 
has not 
> call is 
that the 
then are 
dly few, 

Simply 
, educate 
they are 
posal, do 
r highest 
bear the 


would be 
to their 
1 men to 
nts in her 
an army 
olunteers 
nd Jesus 
save the 
f honour, 
o forsake 
And yet, 
e Master 
r, because 
they and 


Sanctify the First-born. 97 
their children have been redeemed to serve Him 
who gave Himself for them. 

And what is the cure of this evil? And what 
can we do, each in our sphere, to wipe out this 
terrible reproach? What we can do is this: 
Let us devote every child to God and His service. 
Let us cease praying that our children may be 
seved, while we never think of giving them to 
serve. Let us cease choosing honourable and lucra- 
tive professions for our children, with the truth 
that they can serve God in any calling, turned into 
an excuse for declining special service. Let us 
lay. each child upon the altar, specially our first- 
born and our best, and seek this one thing—that 
they may become worthy and fit to be set apart 
for the service of the King. 

And let the Church learn as part of her preach- 


_ ing of redemption to lift aloud her voice and cry, 


You are redeemed for service, you and your child- 
ren. Is not this the reason that so many a parent 
has prayed for the salvation of his child and been 
disappointed? the prayer was utterly selfish; it 
was simply the desire to see the child happy, 
without any thought of the glory of God, or of 
consecration to His service. When God established 
His covenant with Abraham and gave him Isaac, 
it was to have him at His disposal as the channel 
of blessing to the world. When God rewarded the 
faith of Moses’ parents, it was because He wanted 
G 


crue a i pam 
IA abate eases anaes oe 


: 
— fusntaninstcinieanttaiasitmastin 7 
- Prepare neem he ate iceenniemdiheeeremktnempe sun 
Uc aR EN 5 salamat ae ‘ tf 
aneers SempaeneOs casisndssaatons apes sabocrameneneo = 


98 The Children for Christ : 


a servant by whom He could save Israel. When 
God redeemed Israel’s first-born in the night of the . 
Passover, it was to have them for Himself. Oh, 
Christian parent, when God offers to be what He 
was to Isaac, and Moses, and Israel’s first-born, to 
thy children, it is because He wants them for His 
service, His blessed service of love and liberty. . Oh, 
say, has He not a right to claim it, and shall He 
not .have it? He gave His First-born, His Only- 
begotten, for thee and thy children ; can anything 
be too precious for Him? Listen not to the 
thought that the demand is hard or the sacrifice 
great. Know that for thyself, as for thy children, 
it is the path of honour end blessing. And let 
thine example teach the Church that there are 
those who, just because they love their children 
most intensely, know nothing better for them than 
to yield them utterly to the will and the work of 
their God. 


O Lord ! Thou art a greet and a glorious God, 
and Thy kingdom ruleth over all. Thou alone art 
worthy to be praised; Thou alone hast a right to 
the love and the worship and the service of all Thy 
creatures. And this too is their blessedness: in 
heaven above and on earth below, blessed are Thy 
servants who stand around Thy throne and do Thy 
will. 

O Lord! we do bless Thee that Thou dost ask 


When 
of the . 
f, Oh, 
hat He 
orn, to 
for His 
Y. - Oh, 
nall He 
's Only- 
nything 
to the 
sacrifice 
shildren, 
And let 
here are 
children 
nem than 
work of 


ous God, 
alone art 

right to 
dness: in 
oo are Thy 


dost ask 


Sanctify the First-born. 99 


and dost accept of our children for Thy service. 
We acknowledge Thy claim: let them all be used 
for Thy service and glory. But specially would 
we offer Thee the first and the best. 

O God! teach us to feel deeply that Thou hast 
need of them. For the building up of Thy temple, 
in the struggle of Thy kingdom with the power of 
darkness, in the ingathering of Thy people from 
the hundreds of millions of heathen, Thou hast 
need of our children. We give them to Thee. We 
will train them for Thee. We will wait in prayer 
and faith, and beseech Thee to inspire them with 
a holy enthusiasm for the kingdom and its con- 
quests. We beseech Thee to fill them and us with 
love to Jesus and love to souls, that they may 
serve Thee as Thy Son did, and give their lives to 
save men, 

O Lord God! who hast redeemed us and our 
children by the blood of the Lamb, let our first- 
born, let all our children, be holy unto the Lord. 
Amen. 


ea 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTEENTH DAY. 


Che Sabbath and the Chiloren. 


‘The seventh day is a Sabbath unto the Lord thy God: in it 
thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter.’ 
—Ex. xx. 10. ; 

MONG the most precious blessings which 
a child going out into the world from a 
. godly home can take with him, is the habit of 


reverent observance of the Sabbath. In its separ- 
ation from evil company, in its leading to God’s 
house, in the calm and thoughtful quiet it some- 
times brings over his spirit, it will, even if he be 
still a stranger to grace, be a safeguard and a help, 
a schoolmaster to bring to Christ. If he be a Chris- 
tian, it will be one of his surest aids in the growth 
and strengthening of the life of faith. It is a part 
of a parent’s duty that needs to be studied in ear- 
nest prayer, and for the performance of which much 
wisdom and grace are needed. The Lord, who has 
enjoined the duty, will not withhold the grace. 
Note in the words of the fourth commandment 
how specially the children are remembered. It is 
to parents the command is given; it is in the 


as EN Ae 
Cee rth nm 


jpmcceeaapslinciaoheen this cia carte ae are Le 


‘a shits naa apa eens 
BRS ART AR iS ER ER BOBBIE PEDO tak 
COATINGS RCA CANON hie eee sn AE sane 


PT eiemnicamenenange.. “abs 


t. 


God: in it 
daughter.’ 


s which 
1 from a 
habit of 
ts separ- 
to God’s 
it some- 
if he be 
d a help, 
B a Chris- 
ne growth 
is a part 
bd in ear- 
ich much 
| who has 
grace. 
andment 
ed. Itis 
s in the 


The Sabbath and the Children. 101 
keeping holy of the day by their children, as well 
as by themselves, that their obedience is to be 
manifested. ‘Thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, 
nor thy man-servant, nar thy maid-servant:’ it is 
not so much as a private, nor as a national, but as a 
family ordinance, that the Sabbath was first of all 
appointed. ‘Zhou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter :’ 
just as the terms of the covenant, ‘a God to thee and 
to thy seed,’ the words suggest the two thoughts 
that it is first the parent, and then the child through 
the parent, with whom God wishes to deal. The 
parent must first learn to keep the Sabbath day holy 
himself, then to train his child to keep it holy too. 
The parent’s keeping holy the Sabbath precedes 
the training of the child to do so. Here comes 
up the principle which lies at the root of all true 
education: What I am to make my child I must 
first be myself. Example is more than precept; 
being more than teaching ; what I am and do, more 
than what I tell him to be ordo. The question 
is often asked how we can teach our children to 
revere and love the Sabbath, and in answer many 
lessons of great value have been given. But we 
cannot too earnestly insist on the truth that 
the first requirement is that the day should be 
a holy day to the parents themselves. It is as 
they serve God upon it in the beauty of holiness, 
as the spirit of holiness breathes on and from 
them in the services of the Sabbath, as that day is 


4 
Bead danbiheatestline nite sensi ASAE 1 een ai ARS reel Se i a. : 
catia . : “ ee 
i a a a OTT: — ~ ~——e - 
; aS ee Zee, bs 
noe NR ee CRO ae DEES a = = —s ~ 
Raid tagline aA nS Een cA MH I Ota BADOSERG 


102 The Children for Ohrist : 


to them a day not only of strict observance, but 
of joyful worship, of quickened devotion, of real 
loving fellowship with God, as the Sabbath is a 
delight, that the first condition will be fulfilled for 
teaching their children to love it. 

Let Christian parents note this. God means the 
Sabbath to be to your child what it is to you, not in 
value of your training and habits, but what it is to 
your own experience, as a day you really love and 
rejoice in, Study to this end its wonderful signifi- 
cance and the riches of blessing connected with it. 

Look upon it as the day of rest, of entering into 
God’s own wonderful rest. The rest of God is in 
a finished work ; by faith in that work we enter 
into that rest, and the great calm, the peace that 
passes understanding, keeps the heart and mind 
(Gen. ii. 3; Heb. iv. 3-10). 

Look upon it as a holy day, the day God has 
given as a token and pledge that He who is holy 
makes us holy too (Ex. xxxi. 13; Ezek. xx. 12). 
It is in fellowship with God that we are made 
holy ; let His presence, His love, His joy, be the 
mark as well as the fruit of keeping it holy. 

Look upon it as a day of blessing (Gen. ii. 3). Of 
the blessing God laid on the day sin robbed us, 
In the resurrection of Christ the finished work of 
creation was restored, was finished and perfected 
in a higher sense. Under the leading of the 
Holy Spirit, the first day of the week, the day of 


2, but 
f real 
1 is @ 
ed for 


ns the 
not in 
t is to 
ve and 
signifi- 
vith it. 
1g into 
| is in 
» enter 
6 that 
| mind 


od has 
s holy 
x. 12). 
> made 


be the 


B). Of 


bed us, 


work of 
rfected 
of the 
day of 


The Sabbath and the Children. 103 


the Lord Jesus, the Sabbath of the new Life, took 
the place of the Sabbath of death, when the Lord 
of the Sabbath was in the tomb. The Sabbath of 
creation, rendered void by the fall and the law, is 
now glorified in the Sabbath of redemption. And 
now all the blessings of the Living Christ, His 
finished work and resurrection power and eternal 
rest, and of the Holy Spirit, who descended from 
heaven on this new Sabbath, are to be made ours 
by this day. Oh let it be to thee a day of blessing, 
in the fellowship of the Father’s love, and the 
Son’s grace, through the Holy Spirit, and thou hast 
taken the first and the surest step for its being a 
blessing and a joy to thy son and thy daughter too. 

And now comes the second lesson. It is not 
enough that the parent keep holy the Sabbath 
day; the Lord lays it upon him to secure the 
child’s doing so too. As parent he is responsible 
for it, and must make it a matter of distinct effort 
and prayer. It is not enough that Christian 
parents seek to keep the day holy: the training 
of their children to do so is a sacred obligation 
resting upon them, and requires, just on account 
of its difficulty, the sacrifice of personal enjoy- 
ment, the exercise of thought and wisdom, and 
the patience of much faith and love. 

In seeking to do so, there are two dangers to be 
avoided. In human nature we find that there are 
two principles implanted in our hearts to guide 


104 The Children for Christ : 

us to action—pleasure and duty. The former 
leads us to seek what is agreeable and for our 
own interes, and is one of the most powerful 
motives in all our conduct. When our pleasure, 
however, is at variance with the interests of others 
or the will of God, the sense of duty comes in to 
restrain and regulate the desire for pleasure. The 
reward of obedience to duty is that in course of 
time it is no longer a check to pleasure, but 
‘becomes itself the highest pleasure. The art of 
education consists in so bringing pleasure and 
duty into harmony, that without the sacrifice of 
either both may be attained. 

In training the child to keep holy the Sabbath 

day, there is a danger of putting either of these 
principles too exclusively in the foreground. 
With our Puritan and Covenanting ancestors the 
former principle was urged, and the only sanction 
sought for keeping the Sabbath was the lrw. In 
our days we are in danger of the opposite extreme, 
To make the Sabbath interesting to the children, 
to make them happy on it, if possible to make 
them love it as a day of enjoyment, is so exclu- 
sively the object of attention, that the thought of 
obligation is almost lost sight of, and the prin- 
ciple almost unconsciously instilled that the day 
is to be hallowed and loved only as far as it is 
made interesting and pleasant. Let parents seek 
grace from Him who, as Divine wisdom saith, 


2 former 
| for our 
powerful 
pleasure, 
of others 
nes in to 
ire. The 
course of 
sure, but 
he art of 
sure and 
acrifice of 


> Sabbath © 


- of these 
reground, 
hstors the 
sanction 
lew, In 
extreme, 
children, 
to make 
s0 exclu- 
ought of 
he prin- 
the day 
as it is 
nts seek 
bm. saith, 


The Sabbath and the Children. 105 


guides in the midst of the paths of right, to be kept 
from the right-hand as well as the left-hand error. 

Do not hesitate to speak of God’s command 
and of duty. God trained Israel as a child in the 
life of law for the life of love in Christ Educa- 
tion consists, in its first stages, more in training 
to right habits than inculcating principles: these — 
come later. Be not afraid, in connection with 
the Lord’s day, of the element of self-denial and 
quiet self-control which the thought of obedience 
to God’s will and to your will brings over the 
child’s spirit. They are part of the foundation of 


_ noble character, Tranquillity of mind and serenity 


of spirit are invaluable blessings; the quiet of the 
Sabbath helps to foster them. Holiness is much 
more than separation; it is a positive fellowship 
and enjoyment of God. But it begins with separ- 
ation: the putting away of week-day toys and 
books and companions, the marking off of the 
day from other days, even in little things, is, 
under a wise guidance, a preparation for the truer 
hallowing of it later on. 

This on the one side. On the other, exercise a 
wise and loving thoughtfulness as to the ways in 
which the day can be made a happy one. In the 
picture lessons to the younger ones, in the care- 
ful selection of suitable and interesting reading 
for the elder ones, in the merry singing of psalms 
and hymns and spiritual songs, making melody to 


- 
il vec ene IS 2 NEES ARAN a IAN SE ELS ION Ron son 
i scares een ors as aareEs mi aamcet 2 


+ 
fe ‘ ' 
Sie | 
Wey 
if | 

#5 i 

B YE 


106 The Children for Christ : 


the Lord, in the forethought with which possible 
transgression is guarded, in the tone of gladsome 
and loving reverence with which the day is spoken 
of and spent, in the personal intercourse specially 
given in Bible study and prayer, the believing 
parent will find the means of leading the child on 
to call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord 
(Isa. lviii. 13), and to inherit the blessing promised 
to those who do so. ; 

Dear Christian parents, how deeply the thought 
of how we ought to train our children to love the 
Sabbath reminds us of our shortcomings and our 
impotence. But let not this discourage us. We 
have God, the God of the Sabbath, who gave it us 
as a token of the covenant He has with us and 
our children, to sanctify us, we have Himself to 
teach us and our children to sanctify His day. Let 
us look to Him to give us grace to feel and show 
that the Lord’s day is the happiest of the week. In 
the divided life of the ordinary worldly Christian 
it cannot be so. God’s commandments cannot be 
obeyed without a whole-hearted surrender to live 
for Him alone, without a life under the full power 
of His Holy Spirit. But if God be our chiefest 
joy, the desire after His service and love our 
highest aim, He Himself will sanctify our Sab- 
baths, our hearts, our homes, our children, by His 
Holy Presence. And the Sabbaths will be but 
a part of a life holy to the Lord. 


possible 
adsome 
spoken 
ecially 
lieving 
nild on 
ie Lord 
‘omised 


hought 
ve the 
nd our 
s. We 
ve it us 
us and 
aself to 
uy. Let 
d show 
ek. In 
hristian 
nnot be 
to live 
L power 
hiefest 
ve our 
ir Sab- 
by His 
be but 


em I 


The Sabbath and the Children. 107 


Most Holy God! I do thank Thee for the 
precious gift of the holy Sabbath day, and the 
wonderful blessings of which it is the pledge. I 
thank Thee above all for its redemption, in the 
death of Jesus, from the power of sin, and its 
restoration to us in the power and the joy of His 
risen life. Oh, grant that each succeeding Sab- 
bath may lead me deeper into Thy rest, the rest 
of God in Christ, and so into the fellowship of 
Thy holiness and Thy blessedness. May a daily 
life that seeks its only joy in Christ, and is wholly 
yielded to the Spirit, prepare me for keeping the 
day holy. 

Blessed Father! I specially ask for grace to 
train my children to love and hallow Thy day. I 
know it, nothing but the joy of Thy presence in 
my own life can fit me for it. Give me this. 
And then give me the wisdom, as Thy servant, 
to bring to them the sense of Thy Holy Will and 
Thy lovingkindness, in claiming the day for 
Thyself,.and then giving it to them as Thy own 
day, that the fear of grieving Thee and the joy of 
pleasing Thee may each find due place in their 
hearts. So may the command and the promise, 
the duty and the pleasure, be one to them, and 
their delight in Thy day indeed meet the promised 
reward, ‘Then shalt thou delight thyself in the 
Lord.” Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


D: 

an 

THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. as 
Soins sp 

Tu 

FOURTEENTH DAY. fai 

Paar he thé 

de} 

The Children’s Comm noment. pa: 
‘Honour thy father and thy mother; that thy days may | th 
be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.’— : wal 
Ex. xx, 12, : the 


‘Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.” 
—Epu. vi. 1. 

‘Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well- 
pleasing in the Lord:’—Cot. iii. 20. 


HE first four commandments have reference 

to God, the last five to our neighbour. In 
between stands the fifth. It is linked to the first 
four, because to the young child the parent takes 
the place of God; from him the child must learn 
to trust and obey his God. And it is the tran- 
sition to the last five, because in the fainily is the 
foundation of society, and there the first experi- 
ence comes of all the greater duties and difficulties 
of intercourse with men at large. As the training- 
school for all our intercourse with God and man, 
this commandment lies at the foundation of all 


ee ee x ae 
i . 


EE SERENE LATS BARRON AE ORE SN a PTL Teeth 
* 


RS, ER SN BK Hie i AI LY Rt a I a AON ri ON 


é 
eT 


t. 


days may 
th thee.’— 
is is right.” 


his is well- 


reference 
pour. In 
» the first 
ent takes 


bust learn 


the tran- 
ily is the 
st experi- 
ifficulties 
training- 
and man, 
on of all 


The Children’s Commandment. 109 
Divine and human law, of all our worship of God, 
and all our intercourse with man. 

Of the ten, this one is specially the children’s 
commandment. But just on that account, very 
specially too, the parents’ commandment. A wise 
ruler makes good subjects; a firm commander, 
faithful soldiers ; it is on the parents’ character 
that the children’s fulfilment of this precept will 
depend. And so it leads us to consider what 
parents must be if they are to succeed in training 
their children to honour them. 

The sentiment of honour, reverence, is one of 
the noblest and purest our nature is capable of. 
The power of perceiving what is worthy of honour, 
the willingness to acknowledge it, the unselfishness 
that feels it no degradation, but a pleasure, to render 
it—all this is itself honourable and ennobling ; 
nothing brings more true honour than giving 
honour to others. This disposition ought to be 
cultivated most carefully in the child, as an im- 
portant part of his education. It is one of the 
chief elements of a noble character, and a pre- 
paration for rendering to God the honour due to 
Him. If the teaching of Scripture to honour God, 
to honour all men, to honour the widows, to give 
honour to whom honour is due, is to be obeyed 
by our children, they must be prepared for it by 
learning first to honour their parents, If they 
are to honour God, it must begin by honouring 


iene NOMA in ma — 


NAGE SELON i ag WAP EN TY 


a 
: = : 
2 E . a : : —— 
AN ARN  a  n  ing —n aN state - o ~ - a - 7 £ on ont —_ 
a er — ; - srt 
b. pe waist: SS Ce Asia - Scania: wi tke Hy ra Ce iw Sgn Seine ae 2 2 as {Dehli era case’. thal one Fa * * 


st ate ARE eA BO Sa Aon | 
ona a men SS FANN Pas ma 


an enertis 


Ss ae OS ainda Aerie i 2S SRR N. NC mliet SOR ba mT JD 1 nn dame A ti INE 
Ee FH ie ote oh Ge etd eo Care ed her FM 


110 The Children for Christ : 
their parents. If they are, in after life, to do 
what is so difficult, to honour all men, by recog- 
nising even in the degraded and the lost the 
worth that belongs to them as created in the 
image of God, they must be carefully prepared 
for it in the home-school of family life. It is — 
not only to secure a happy home, and place the 
intercourse of parent and child on a right footing, 
but to fit the child for all his future relations to 
God and his fellow-men, and to lay in him one of 
the foundation-stones of a noble character and a 
holy life, that God has placed this commandment 
the first of those on the second table. Parents 
may well study how they can train their children 
to fulfil it. 

The child must honour the parent in obedience. 
‘Obey your parents’ is the New Testament ver- 
sion of ‘Honour thy father and thy mother.’ The 
importance of this word, obedience, is more than 
the mind can grasp. God created man, with his 
wonderful liberty of will, that he might obe Him. 
Obedience to God was to lead to the enjoy:nent of 
God. By disobedience sin entered ; in obedience, 
the twofold obedience, of Christ and to Christ 
(Heb. v. 8, 9), salvation comes. And on the 
parent the sacred charge is laid of training the 
child to obey, teaching it to link all the memories 
of happiness and love in home-life with obedience, 
working the principle into the very life of mind 


e, to do 
y recog- 
lost the 
d in the 
prepared 
e. It is 
place the 
t footing, 
ations to 
im one of 
er and a 
andment 

Parents 
children 


ybedience. 
nent ver- 
ier. The 
nore than 
, with his 
bev Him. 
oy nent of 
obedience, 
to Christ 
d on the 
ining the 
memories 
obedience, 
e of mind 


The Children’s Commandment. 111 


and heart, not so much by instruction or reasoning, 
as by training and securing the habit of obedience. 
The child is to be taught to honour the parent. 
The will of the child, no less than his mind and 
affections, is given into the parent’s hands to 
mould and guide. It is in yielding his will to 
the will of the parent that the child acquires that 
mastery over it and over himself which will after- 
wards be its strength and safety, and make it a 
fit instrument for doing God’s will Man was 
created free that he might obey; obedience is the 
path to liberty. 

On this point parents often err; they often say 
that to develop the will of the child the will must 
be left free, and the child left, to decide for him- 
self. They forget that the will of the child is not 
free—passion and prejudice, selfishness and ignor- 
ance, seek to influence the child in the wrong 
direction. The superior judgment, the calmer de- 
liberation, the fuller experience of the parent, are 
to decide for the child whose will has been 
entrusted to his care. 

But are we not in danger of repressing the 
healthy development of a child’s moral powers by 
thus demanding implicit submission to our will ? 
By no means. The true liberty of the will con- 
sists in our being master of it, and so our own 
masters. Train a child to master his will in giving 
it up to his parents’ command, and he acquires 


rT a ACM, RRL LA OE A Rar RR eB CE Re MRE OB. par Beat mt 0 pe met nas Seated ears «ee - ae 
eve Ces =, arn —— apren os eaaeen as, pape sees ene tad: - 
z . e Reels ¥ a ¥ Poa 5 a ee te 
: ie 5 = 


ein mac vret Re SI = 


~4 
I Ul eal dcoeie Seen tecedeolec anion eotecsia nema etenatanemaatatednekedoete mame seer 


he = 
RE ES AR ERD Ga DA TI ED NE FIN ROGIER ti oA Teh me RE ropa 
- < = —— i ona mamenmngreenaee inet 


The Children for Christ : 
the mastery to use when he is free. Yielding to 
a parent’s control is the path to self-control; and 
self-control alone is liberty. The child who is 
taught by a wise parent to honour him and his 
superior wisdom will acquire, as he gives up his 
own way, the power over his will, as he never 
can who is taught to imagine that he need do 
nothing unless the parent has first convinced him 
of the propriety of the act, and obtained his con- 
sent. The New Testament says very distinctly, 
‘Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for 
this 1s right.’ Not because the child approves or 
agrees, but because the command is given by a 


parent: this is the true reason for its being 


obeyed. In obedience, the parent is to be 
honoured. . 

In all his disposition and conduct, too, the 
child is to be trained to honour the parent. 


' Familiarity breeds contempt; in language and 


carriage and conduct, parents often tolerate an 
easy-going familiarity, which, however it may be 
miscalled by the name of love or kindness, 
destroys those sentiments of respect and rever- 
ence in which true love has its strength and its 
real happiness. Manners are of more importance 
than many think; the neglect of good manners 
not only reveals a want in the disposition of those 
sentiments of respect and courtesy to which life 
and intercourse owe so much, but it reacts on the 


ee a, ee ee ee ee ee a ee ee ee oe ee a oe ee Se 


ding to 
rol; and 
who is 
and his 
} up his 
ie never 
need do 
iced him 
his con- 
stinctly, 
ord: for 
roves Or 
en by a 
is being: 

to be 


too, the 
parent. 
age and 
rate an 
may be 
indness, 
i rever- 
and its 
bortance 
nanners 
of those 
ich life 
on the 


The Children’s Commandment. 113 


heart, and fosters the selfishness and indifference 
that cares little for others’ feelings. Locke has 
said that next to religion and virtue, manners are 
the most important thing in education, more so, 
he thinks, than learning. Let parents remember 
that in taking trouble t» train their children to 
show them due honour and respect, even in 
apparently insignificant things, they are forming 
habits and breathing principles into them which 
will afterwards repay all their labour. ‘Him 
that honoureth Me, I will honour,’ is God’s law, 
which has its reflection in the life of earth too. 
None have received higher honour on earth than 
those who have learnt to honour all men, to 
honour the poor and needy. 

And now, it is the parent who is to cultivate 
and develop this sentiment in the child. The 
young child is guided, not by reflection or argu- 
ment, but by feeling and affection. He cannot 
yet realize and honour the unseen God. He cannot 
yet honour all men, the wretched and unworthy, 
for the ideal, the unseen worth of their creation in 
God’s image. The child can only honour what he 
sees to be ‘worthy of honour.’ And this is the 
parent’s high calling; always so to speak and act, 
so to live in the child’s presence, that honour may 
be spontaneously and unconsciously rendered. 
This can only be where, in quiet self-recollection 


and self-control, the parent lives as in God’s fear 
H 


114 The Childr: ‘or Christ: 


and presence, and walks worthy of this calling, as 
one who has been placed in the home, at the head 
of a family, to be not only its prophet, priest, but 
king too. Yes, a king receives honour; let the 
parent as a king reign and rule in love and the 
fear of God, his honour will be given him. 

Above all, let parents remember that honour 
really comes from God. Let them honour Him in 
the eyes of their children, and He will honour 
them there too. Let them beware of this sin, 
honouring their child more than God; it is the 
sure way to grief for parents and children to- 
gether. But from parents, who in everything 
seek to honour God, children will learn to honour 
God and them together; .the parent who teaches 
his child to obey the fifth commandment has 
guided his feet into the way of all God’s com- 
mandments. A child’s first virtue is the honour- 
ing and obeying his parents. 


O my God! I come again to Thee with the 
prayer to open my eyes and give me fully to 
realize the place of the family in the purposes of 
Thy grace, and the parent's holy calling to train 
his child for all that Thou wouldst have him be. 
I ask of Thee especially to reveal to me in Thine 
own light the full import of the fifth command- 
ment, that I may teach my child to fulfil it 
according to Thy will. 


ee a” Se ee ae ee SS) Oe Se 


| oil a 2 See ee eee 


alling, as 
the head 
riest, but 
; let the 
> and the 
¥ 

+ honour 
r Him in 
ll honour 
this sin, 
it is the 
dren. to- 
verything 
to honour 
o teaches 
ment has 
od’s com- 
e honour- 


with the 
rposes of 
y to train 
e him be. 
s in Thine 
ommand- 


» fulfil it 


The Children’s Commandment. 115 


Fill my own soul, I pray Thee, with such 
honour and reverence of Thy holy majesty, that 
both I and my child may learn what honour is. 
Teach me to claim honour of my child with the 
holy aim of leading him to honour Thee above 
all. May honouring his parents and honouring 
his God work in him the spirit of humility, which 
will gladly render to all their due. And may, 
above all, I be kept from the terrible sin of ever 
honouring my child more than God. 

\O Lord! I look to Thee for grace to secure the 
keeping of this, the children’s, commandment in 
my home. Oh! grant that I may always live in 
it worthy of all honour. And may the holy power 
of training young souls to keep Thy command- 
ments, to honour and serve Thee, be the fruit of 
Thy own Spirit's work in me, I ask it, my God, 
in Jesus’ name. Amen. 


ig eae ea 3 Pee et ea oe a Mines Dt 
ot Sa a I ge A Fy ee EL Sg ey a 
PTR CERF UNTO att " . 4 7 a 


eeeeegervin. 3s 


a AREER EES Om NETTIE CNR PNR RISE UES SRS HAI May NR I 


= Mae TRE a MN Lk . 7 - ee ve r ssincieeedaandandaeaiod 
— - = = — = —— —= = == = —— : 


ne | CRs ome es ne 


oa me 


oem OTR es he mo. . > P= 
deep mata i CAs Mee ODS at a NOC tt a es 8 a " sasiiaan 
peraps ersmemsenn sores aaperennmanes Sn TT, © RA OR IN 


Eo Ueea Mestiateteet> nisaneates ten tnned ec mekcnahe uataedgicssemansd of tok aeath ce 
POSES RI RMR AMT NR a AC te LENSE ER AREY TA RLAIES OTA PRS TABOR AN Ae. 


The Children for Christ : 


aes ee ee ——— ah re cia 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FIFTEENTH DAY. 


Parental Instruction. 


‘This is the commandment which the Lord your God com- 
manded to teach you, that thou mightest fear the Lord thy 
God, to keep all His commandments, which I command thee, 
thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life. 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. And 
these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine 
heart. And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, 
and shall talk of them when thon sittest in thine house, and 
when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and 
when thou risest up.’—Devt. vi. 1, 2, 5-7. 


‘fP\HOU, and thy son, and thy son’s son,’ with 

these words in the second verse, Moses 
gave expression to the thought that God’s purpose 
in giving His commandments to His people was not 
limited to the individual or to a single generation, 
but had in view the people, through its whole 
existence. This purpose of God’s has therefore to 
be the law of individual duty: each one who 
received the commandments of God was to strive 
not only to keep them himself, but to hold him- 


eo &, wy be et Oe UE ElUcrrelUC wZhlC hLlCODlC OS lCULl lll lel rl ltétsSS 


r God com- 
e Lord thy 
mand thee, 
of thy life. 
reart. And 
be in thine 
hy children, 
house, and 

down, and 


son,’ with 
se, Moses 
S purpose 
le was not 
eneration, 
its whole 
erefore to 
one who 
8 to strive 
hold him- 


Parental Instruction. 117 


self responsible for their maintenance among his 
children. ‘These are the commandments which 
the Lord commanded to teach you, that thou 
mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep his com- 
mandments, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son.’ 
In the following verses (5, 7) this idea is brought 
forward more prominently and enlarged upon. In 
verses 20 and 21 the duty is afresh inculcated of 
expounding to the children the ground of that 
wondrous relation in which God’s people stood 
to! Him, and by virtue of which they had been 
favoured with the Divine Law, even the mercy and 
faithfulness of God that had redeemed them from 
the land of Egypt. All concentrating in the one 
important and blessed truth, that the fear and 
faith of God must be seen in family religion, as 
domestic piety. The grand means for maintaining 
and extending the fear of God among His people 
are the faithful performance of parental duty, in 
harmony with His purpose that His service and 
blessing should descend from son to son. The 
special aspect in which God’s will is here set 
before us, is parental instruction, and we ‘are 
taught in the words we meditate on, how hearty, 
how diligent, how unceasing this ought to be. 
Parental instruction must be from the heart. 
We all know how little influence commands or 
instructions exercise, when given by a listless or 
uninterested teacher. It is only the heart that 


ne SCN a aah aN en Estee 


te 


- * 
+ 
A ERAS Tn ACE A a eA a + = 
S = “ « uct tit kata 
ee panies rn ae reper on nae ae eS OF Ene SO pan wage mar earner apn me retin ete tan eel ~ 
' —— is ees: . . © : ' 


PR gn NS ee ee 


a 


ah Rec GEE GeO SECA ih Ps a eg REAL TONG OCNESLI NERS tC nl Naa 
panes are nner i Rg rn RR BE a =I = = 


a . 
= > ay : < 
: « 7 
; Po fe ae . ; 
~ . | ort Se c 
~ xe - LLP. , 5 
palicbamitoipssasitinsaoesyndicprmatanignaaeseeset dinatsaeer ae TR NB ee Leewieataen ee i cae - ~ ¢ 
‘ R <. _— 
Ps 


~ 
Ee ON 


a CMU ante pababoA 


| 


Saag ene ee 


e 
a 


S 
=) - = 
— 


118 The Children for Christ : 


gains the heart, the loving warmth of interest and 
affection that can waken corresponding emotions 
in the bosom of the pupil. God would secure 
all the influence of parental love to gain access 
for His words and will to the youthfvl and 
susceptible hearts of the children of His people. 
He therefore says, ‘ Thow shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, and these words shall be 
an thy heart: and thou shalt teach them to thy 
children.’ How easy and how blessed the work, 
so often sighed over, if not neglected, to those 
who listen to God's guidance. As is thy duty 
and thy blessedness, love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart. If thou lovest Him, love His 
words too; let- them live in thy heart, let them 
have a place in thy affections. And, the heart 
filled with God’s love and God’s words, how easy 
to have them in thy mouth too, and to teach 
them to thy children. Let holy love to God and 
His words mingle with all thy fond and tender 
love to thy tittle ones ; and it will be a sweet and 
happy work to win the beloved on earth, to the 
Father beloved in heaven. As often as the work 
of instructing the children upon earth threatens 
to become a burden or a weariness, thou mayst 
be sure it is a token of something wrong within: 
the love to God in heaven, or the delight in 
His word, has been fading. As often as thou 
seekest for fresh vigour to perform thy work hope- 


erest and 
emotions 
d secure 
in access 
ful and 
s people. 
Lord thy 
s shall be 
] to thy 
he work, 
to those 
thy duty 
God with 
love His 
let them 
the heart 
how easy 
to teach 
God and 
nd tender 
sweet and 
th, to the 
the work 
threatens 
jou mayst 
ig within : 
lelight in 
1 as thou 
7ork hope- 


Parental Instruction. 119 


fully and joyfully, thou hast but to turn to the 
words, that reveal the secret of a godly education, 
and thou shalt experience that, as for thy children 
so for thyself, there is an unspeakable blessing in 
the wisdom that has so inseparably connected the 
heart’s secret love with the mouth’s spoken words: 
‘ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart. And these words shall be in thy heart. 
And thou shalt teach them to thy children.” Oh! 
that we might remember that this is the Divinely 
appointed ministry and means for the salvation 
of our children,— parental love elevated and 
strengthened by the love of God, guided and 
inspired by His own Holy Word. 

The parental instruction must likewise be 
diligent and earnest: ‘Thou shalt diligently teach 
them unto thy children,—or, as it reads in the 
original (see margin), Thou shait sharpen them 
unto thy children. The word is used of the 
sharpening of weapons, as arrows and spears, to 
make them penetrate deep. It must be no cold 
declaration of His will that we communicate, no 
mere intellectual knowledge. It profits little that 
the dart be cast or the arrow shot from the bow, 
unless they have been sharpened—to pierce the 
heart of the enemy. And so the godly parent 
must use diligence to consider how he can best 
find access to the heart for the words that he 
speaks. He does this by carefully considering 


120 The Children for Christ : 


how he can best gain both the child’s understand- 
ing and affections: by seeking to avail himself of 
the best opportunities for securing his interest; 
by studying the art of speaking in the spirit of 
love, and not without the preparation of prayer. 
He does it by striving to make his whole life an 
attractive example of what he has taught, because 
there is nothing that does so drive home the word 
of instruction that has touched the heart, as the 
confirmation of a consistent and holy life. Above 
all, he seeks to do it by waiting for that Holy 
Spirit who alone can make the word sharp as 
a two-edged sword, but with whose aid he may 
experience how true it is: ‘ The words of the wise 
are as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, 
which only are given from one shepherd.’ God’s 
promise is sure: from earnest, painstaking, and 
prayerful effort the blessing of the Spirit will not 
be withheld. 

And to this end the parental instruction must 
be persevering and continuous, ‘ Thou shalt teach 
them diligently to thy children, and thou shalt 
talk of them, when thou sittest in thine house, 
and when thou walkest by the way, and when 
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.’ The 
entrance of Divine truth into the mind and heart, 
the formation of habit and the training of character, 
these are not attained by sudden and isolated 
efforts, but by regular and unceasing repetition. 


erstand- 
mself of 
interest ; 
spirit of 
prayer. 
. life an 
‘because 
she word 
't, as the 

Above 
at. Holy 
sharp as 
he may 
the wise 
semblies, 
” God's 
‘ing, and 
E will not 


ion must 
alt teach 
nou shalt 
1e house, 
nd when 
p. The 
nd heart, 
haracter, 
isolated 
epetition. 


Parental Instruction. 121 
This is the law of all growth in nature, and of this 
law God seeks to make use in the kingdom of 
grace, in dependence upon and subservient to the 
power of the Holy Spirit. This is the principle 
that is so beautifully applied by Moses to parental 
duty. The instruction he had enjoined was not 
to be by means of set times, and stated formal 
lectures ; the whole life with all its duties has to 
be interwoven with the lessons of God’s presence 
and God’s service. With a heart full of God’s 
love and God’s word, the ordinary avocations of 
daily life were to be no hindrance, but helps 
to lead the youthful hearts heavenwards. The 
children were to feel that it was no matter that 
could be done for the day, in the moments of 
morning or evening prayer; the continued and 
spontaneous outburstings of the heart in the 
language of the lips was to prove that it was a 
life and a joy, that God’s presence and love were 
a reality and a delight. Sitting in the home, or 
walking by the way,—now in quiet rest, then in the 
labours and duties of the way,—now with the Bible 
of God’s grace, and then with the books of God’s 
glory in nature,—home retirement and wayside 
intercourse were equally to afford opportunity and 
material for recognising the goodness and rejoicing 
in the service of the ever-present One. Lying 
down and rising up—from early morning and its 
freshness to evening weariness and its repose—the 


SON ne wt “ 
tn a ea 


Em nA oc ce 
i ha abr Darna oe ne 
aceensntnateang aia Bemean: ra ne ‘ai 


‘ 
S012: nb at minal enact 7 
~ es oe 


122 The Children for Christ : 

whole of the day and the whole of life was to be 
the occasion of an uninterrupted fellowship with 
the Holy One, and of the pointing of the little 
ones to the unseen and ever near Father in 
heaven. And lest the objection should be made 
that all the speaking would but weary and 
estrange: an objection often made with terrible 
truth against mere speaking in religion, while 
heart and life deny it; an objection that is as 
often, alas! the excuse for a heart that knows no 
fervent love: lest this objection should be made, 
we point once more to what is the source and 
centre and secret of all: ‘Thou shalt love the 
Lord with all thy heart. And the words shall 
be in thy heart. And thou shait teach them 
diligently to thy children, and shalt talk of them 
when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou 
walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and 
when thou risest up.’ Such a_ whole-hearted 
love and such a loving piety! Ah, how would 
it receive wisdom from on high, and be guided 
by Divine love to know when and how to speak: 
how it would influence children’s hearts with 
the flame of its own zeal, and find a willing 
and a loving ear when others could only weary ! 
And how surely it would be blessed ! 


O Lord my God! I thank Thee for each new 
reminder of the value that my relation to my 


vas to be 
ship with 
the little 
‘ather in 
l be made 
eary and 
h terrible 
ion, while 
that is as 
knows no 
be made, 
ource and 
| love the 
rords shall 
ach them 
k of them 
vhen thou 
nown, and 
le-hearted 
ow would 
be guided 
to speak : 
arts with 
a willing 
ly weary ! 


each new 
on to my 


Parental Instruction. 123 
children has in Thy sight, and of Thy call to me 
as parent to carry out Thy purpose. May each 
thought of loving and serving Thee ever be con- 
nected with Thy word, ‘Thou and thy son’; and 
each act of faith claim for the child all I seek for 
myself. 

Blessed God! give me wisdom and grace to 
be such a teacher of my children as Thou wouldst 
have. I see how Thou sufferest not any other 
to usurp the parent's place: how Thou hast ap- 
pointed him the first and highest teacher. Lord! 
teach me, with all parents, to take home the lessons 
which Thou seest we need to fit us for our work. 

Fill our hearts with Thy love and Thy word. O 
Lord ! love knows of no sacrifice, it counts nothing 
a burden: love rests not till it has triumphed. 
Oh, fill us with Thy love, shed it abroad in 
our hearts by the Holy Spirit; and fill us with 
Thy word dwelling richly in us, and teaching 
our children will be the spontaneous overflowing 
of the heart’s fulness. And make us diligent and 
wise in studying to do our work well, to sharpen 
Thy words deep into our children’s hearts too. 
And make us persevering, day by day, and all 
the day, walking in Thy love and presence, and 
making our whole life an influence educating our 
children for Thee. 

Father! help us for Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


a 
— “ Scans eas ons st 


iA A RAR ren RR RSS em 


+ - Ss cat A ina re Ada aaa 


rie 


; i 
\ 
Ns i Se 
ae Hl , 
i 
+] 
ia 
; : 
‘3 
: 
a 
a ‘ : \8g 
§ f 
ei 
j . (ae 
; a 
‘ { 
iY a i 
i] 
4 in 
, Ff 
4 Hi ua 
; 8 
Reo ind 
a 
ie ia 
3 ‘ gil 
i j hy 
: i ; 
i ng 
; ' 
‘ tf 
4 ey 
i Na | 
i ] {4 
Poa 
Bal 
| Pit 
Hie 
; a | 
i i 
} 
ae 
Hate | | ag 
? NH 
‘4 de 
j | 
i Gh 
eed 
ae | OR 
i 
H 
ay 
:) 
; Hit 
Bh 
if 
TEI i 
Sime 
it Af 
; H 
ag it 
BY 
i3 Hy 
8 i 
" 
. 3 ha 
3 
‘ 
' 


D 
- ¥ ; dia i 
Enns Univer eneeen Ene Main nesn ones ppeemptieeneaneneaeneell ~ 
. 
* 6 ‘ 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


SIXTEENTH DAY. 


@ Consecratey Home. 


‘ As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord,’—Josu. 
xxiv. 15, 
N God's dealings with Noah and Abraham, with 
Israel in the Passover and at Mount Sinai, we 
have repeatedly noticed the deep meaning of the 
united mention of father and children in His 
commands and promises. ‘Thou and thy house,’ 
‘thou and thy seed,’ ‘ye and your children,’ ‘thou 
and thy son.’ Such is ever the language of the 
Covenant God. In the words of Joshua we have 
the response from earth, ‘as for me and my house.’ 
The principle of the Divine dealing is accepted ; 
the parent boldly vouches for his family as well as 
himself; the covenant engagement of the Father 
in heaven is met by the covenant obligation of the 
father on earth. Joshua is to us here the very 
model of a godly parent, and in him we can see 
what parental religion ought to be. 


1,’—J Osi. 


am, with 
sinal, We 
p of the 
in His 
y house, 
i! thou 
B of the 
ve have 
y house.’ 
cepted ; 

well as 

Father 
n of the 
he very 


can see 


A Consecrated Home. 125 


Let it be a personal religion. ‘As for me and 
my house’: he began with himself. We cannot 
too strongly press the truth that for a godly 
education the first and the most essential requisite 
is personal consecration. It is good to reflect on 
our responsibility, to study our duties and the 
best way of fulfilling them, to speak with our 
children, and to pray much for them,—but all these 
may be called accessories. The first thing on the 
part of the parent is a life devoted to God and 
His service. It is this that creates the spiritual 
atmosphere the children are to breathe. It is this 
gives our performance of duty and our dealings 
with our children their spiritual influence. It is 
this gives our praying and our working its value 
with God. ‘As for me’ there must be no hesita- 
tion or half-heartedness in the consciousness or the 
confession of devotion to God’s service. As often 
as the prayer for God’s blessing on the children 
comes up, it must be in the spirit of David: 
‘Thou, Lord God! knowest Thy servant. There- 
fore now let it please Thee to bless the house of 
Thy servant.” With God and men, in the home 
and out of it, as well as in the hearts of parents 
themselves, it must be a settled thing: ‘As for 
me, I will serve the Lord.’ 

But let yours be as distinctly a family religion. 
Take your stand for all who belong to you: ‘As 
for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord.’ 


126 The Children for Christ : 


There are pious parents who do not understand 
that this is their duty and their privilege. They 
know not what God has put in their power. They 
imagine they honour God by thinking that the 
religion of their children is dependent on God’s 
will apart from their instrumentality. They are 
so occupied, either with the engagements of their 
calling in this life, or it may even be with religious 
work, that they cannot find the time for speaking 
out and acting out the grand decision: ‘As for me 
and my house, we will serve the Lord.’ Or, perhaps, 
the father leaves the religion of the children to the 
care of the mother, and the mother thinks that the 
father as head is more iesponsible; they hesitate 
or neglect to come to a clear and definite under- 
standing, and the religious education of the children 
does not take the prominent place it ought to in 
the intercourse of parents with each other. Let 
each believing parent take Joshua’s words, first, in 
the depth oi .is own soul, then in fellowship with 
partner and children. The more we speak it out in 
prayer and conversation,—our house is and must 
be holy to the Lord, our children must be trained 
first of all for God and His service,—the more 
mightily will the power of the principle assert 
itself, and help us so to guide the house, that it too 
serves the Lord. 

The words of Joshua teach usmore. Let yours, 
like his, be a practical religion: ‘we will serve the 


derstand 
3 They 
r. They 
that the 
om God’s 
They are 
of their 
religious 
speaking 
\s for me 
perhaps, 
en to the 
that the 
hesitate 
fe under- 


tht to in 
er. Let 
|, first, in 
ship with 
it out in 
nd must 
e trained 
he more 
le assert 
hat it too 


et yours, 
serve the 


children . 


A Consecrated Home. 127 


Lord.’ There are many parents with whom the 
whole of religion consists in salvation, not in 
service. They pray most earnestly that all their 
children may be saved; they comfort themselves, 
if they see them spend their lives in the service of 
the world, that they will yet be brought in before 
they die. No wonder that their education for this 
life has been a failure: they never understood the 
truth, and never trained their children under its 
guiding influence, that salvation is subservient to 
service, that to train for God’s service secures the 
fullest salvation. Did we not hear God say of 
Abraham, ‘I have known him, to the end he may 
command his children and household after him, 
that they may keep the way of the Lord; to the 
end that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that 
which He hath spoken of him?’ Do we not re- 
member in connection with Israel’s deliverance 
from Egypt the words of God, ‘Let My people go 
that they may serve Me;’ and of Pharaoh, ‘Go ye, 
serve the Lord; let your little ones also go with 
you. Hath not the Holy Ghost spoken, ‘How 
much more shall the blood of Christ purge your 
conscience to serve the living God’? All redemp- 
tion is for service. God wills not that He should 
be worshipped without being served. The glory 
of heaven will be that ‘ His servants shall serve 
Him.’ Let our lives and our homes be consecrated 
to serving God: let obedience to His will, the 


iaelieentrinenstae®)- aisiueesceinanouinttoen te Ahr AEE nacre 
i RAP SAAC INNC it 8 i A a er re manger ecm et me . ihe 
Shien sheila ssmnin scat ili ocdich bledibiniSincmrpuenand us 
pe nn Sheehan a ae ne i ee pe 


128 The Children for Christ : 


— a 


carrying out of His commands, the doing His 
work, devotion to the interests of His kingdom, 
give family life its nobility. 

And then let yours be a confessed religion. It 
was in presence of tens of thousands of the 
children of Israel, with the first symptoms of the 
falling away that came after his death already 
beginning to show themselves, that Joshua 
witnessed this good confession, ‘Choose ye this 
day whom ye will serve; as for me and my 
house, we will serve the Lord.’ His was not to be 
the religion of the nation or the religion of neigh- 
bours: all might reject God, and he be left alone; 
still the Lord Jehovah would be his God. As 
with Abraham leaving his father’s house, and 
Israel leaving Egypt, his too was to be a religion 
of decision and confession; a coming out and 
being separate—one of a peculiar people unto 
the Lord. This is the religion we want in our 
family life, where not the example or authority 
of pious people, not inclination or pleasure, but 
God’s own holy and blessed will, revealed in the 
leading of the Holy Spirit, is sought after as the 


-law of the house. Oh! how often one hears it 


said: It can be no harm to dance, or to play 
cards, there are so many religious people, there 
are such earnest ministers, in whose houses it is 
done. How often parents, where early married 
life was marked by decision and earnestness, have 


ng His 
ngdom, 


on. It 
of the 
sof the 
already 
Joshua 
ye this 
nd my 
ot to be 
f neigh- 
t alone; 
od. As 
se, and 
religion 
out and 
le unto 
, in our 
uthority 
ure, but 
d in the 
r as the 
hears it 
to play 
le, there 
ses it is 
married 
ess, have 


A Consecrated Home. 129 


Senne 
a 


afterwards hecome conscious of declension and 
coldness, because they gave in to the desire to 
gratify their children or their friends. Oh! let us 
believe that though at first sight it may appear 
hard to be peculiar, yet, if we trust God for His 
guidance, and yield ourselves to His personal 
friendship and love to walk with Him, the bless- 
ing of separation will be unspeakable to ourselves 
and our children too. 

If this page be read by a father or a mother, or 
by father and mother together, who are conscious 
that their own and their house’s service of God 
has not been as marked and clear as God and 
they would have it, let me venture a word of 
advice. Speak with each other of it. Say it out 
what you have often felt, but each has kept to 
himself, that it is your united desire to live as 
entirely for God as grace can enable you to do. 
If your children are old enough, gather them too, 
and ask if they will not join in the holy covenant, 
‘We will serve the Lord.’ Let that covenant from 
time to time be renewed in a distinct act of con- 
secration, that the conviction may be confirmed: 
We do want to be a holy family, a house where 
God doth dwell and is well pleased. Ours must 
be a home wholly consecrated to God. And be 
not afraid that strength will not be given to keep 
the vow. It is not we who have to do the work, 


and then bring it to God. It is with the Father 
I 


coe Amn Re 


aire ig a a ee ee ee 


voaere 


Ce SRA CAEN ee OE LMG A oe 
: 


ae een casera shes oe 
Se Paes 


130 The Children for Christ : 


in heaven, calling and helping and tenderly work- 
ing both to will and to do in us, that we have to 
work. We may count upon Him as the inspirer, 
to accept and confirm, and Himself carry out 
the purpose of our heart, ‘As for me and my 
house, we will serve the Lord.’ 


O Lord my God! I thank Thee for what I have 
seen this day, Thy servant Joshua, the leader of 
Thy pecple Israel into Canaan, in his faithfulness 
to Thee as father in his own home. I humbly ask 
Thee to give me grace to say as distinctly and as 
publicly 2s he did, ‘As for me and my aouse, we 
will serve the Lord.’ 

Lord! may mine be a personal religion. O my 
Father! let Thy love to me, and my love to Thee, 
be its inspiration and its joy. May my children 
see that it is with my whole heart I serve Thee, 
that it has become a delight and my very nature. 

And may mine be a family religion, exercising 
its influence on my home, gaining and training all 
to walk with me. Lord! remove every incon- 
sistency and all weakness that might hinder any 
one from being: wholly Thine. May mine be a 
truly consecrated home. 

May mine, too, be a practical religion, serving 
Thee day and night. Let the knowing and the doing 
of God’s will, the working for His kingdom, the 
seeking His glory, be the one desire of our hearts. 


r work- 
have to 
nspirer, 
ry out 
und my 


| I have 
rader of 
hfulness 
ably ask 
y and as 
ouse, we 


. Omy 
to Thee, 
children 
ve Thee, 
y nature. 
xercising 
uining all 
ry incon- 
nder any 
1ine be a 


n, serving 
the doing 
ydom, the 
ur hearts. 


house, we will serve the Lord.’ 


A Consecrated Home. 


May thus our home be a blessing to others in 
encouraging them to take a stand for Thee. Lord 
God! let Thy Spirit work mightily in the homes 
of Thy people, that everywhere this confession 
may be heard ringing out: ‘As for me and my 


Amen. 


i| 
al 
Af! 
a) 
it 
Hy 
i 
ime i 
| 
a 
! 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


SEVENTEENTH DAY. 


Consecrated Parents, 


‘And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass: how 
shall we order the child? and what shall we do unto him?’— 
JupG. xiii. 12. 


N angel of the Lord had appeared to 
Manoah’s wife, to predict the birth of a 
child, who should be a Nazarite wuto God from his 
birth, and a deliverer of God’s people. The first 
feeling of Manoah, on receiving the tidings from 
his wife, was that, to train such a God-given child 
for God’s service, God-given grace would be needed ; 
he therefore entreated the Lord, and said, ‘O my 
Lord, let the man of God which thou didst send 
come again to us, and teach us what we shall do 
unto the child that shall be born.’ And when in 
answer to his prayer the angel came again, his one 
petition was, ‘ How shall we order the child ? and 
what shal] we do unto him?’ Let us consider the 
prayer, the answer, and the attendant blessings, 


y pass ; how 
ito him?’— 


eared to 
birth of a 

from his 

The first 
ings from 
iven child 
be needed ; 
id, ‘O my 
lidst. send 
e shall do 
d when in 
n, his one 
hiid ? and 
nsider the 
essings, 


Consecrated Parents. 133 


1. Mark ‘the deep sense of responsibility and 
unfitness for the holy work of training a child 
as a Nazarite unto God. The angel had already 
given Manoah’s wife the needful instruction ; but 
Manoah is so deeply impre sed with the holiness 
of their calling as parents of this child, that he 
must needs ask for the angel to come again and 
teach them. What a contrast to the thoughtless 
self-confidence with which, in these gospel days, 
many Christian parents undertake the training of 
their children. How little effort is made to realize 
the importance and solemnity of the work! How 
little real prayer for the preparation of the Spirit 
to fit them for it! How little true surrender to a 
life for God as the only fitness for training a child" 
for God! What would be thought on earth of a 
man offering to manage a bank or to navigate an 
ocean steamer who had no training to fit him for 
either? And what must be said of the presumption 
that feels no fear in taking charge of an immortal 
spirit of such priceless value, and undertakes to 
guide it through the temptations and dangers of 
life? Would God that all Christian parents might 
learn from Manoah to feel and confess their ignor- 
ance, and, like him, to set themselves at once to 
seek and obtain the needed grace. 

We note, further, how Manoah’s sense of need at 
once found expression in prayer. He believed in 
God as the living God, as the Hearer of prayer. 


. 
bho eet 


A ORR rata 1 By 
Seaman - 


epatence ee 


eget 
NAR NREE La 


tibetan 


niiiitiemtiuiant oe 


aa aC, 


Wistendecie oe 


134 The Children for Christ : 
He believed that where God gave a charge or a 
work, He would give the grace to do it right; that 
where God gave a child to be trained for His 
service, He would give the wisdom needed to do 
so aright. Instead of the sense of unfitness 
and feebleness depressing him, or the sense of 
his obligation setting him to work in his own 
strength, he simply prayed. Prayer to him was 
the solution of difficulties, the supply of need, the 
source of wisdom and strength. Let Christian 
parents learn from him. Each child is a gift of 
God as truly as Manocah’s, and has as much as his 
to be trained for God and His service. Like him, 
we may count most confidently on the Father, who 
has entrusted the child to us, to give the grace to 
train. Let us only pray, pray believingly, pray 
without ceasing, at each step of our work; we 
may depend upon it, God hears prayer, and no 
prayer more surely than of a parent seeking 
wisdom to train his child. 

There is one thing more we must specially 
observe in regard to Manoah’s prayer: it was 
after his wife had told him of the injunctions the 
angel had given that he thus asked for guidance. 
He longed to hear them himself, to have full 
certainty and perfect clearness. As parents, we 
have in God’s Word plain and full directions as to 
the training of our children; our own experience 
or that of others may have supplied us with much 


ge Or & 
it; that 
for His 
d to do 
infitness 
sense of 
his own 
1im was 
1eed, the 
Yhristian 
a gift of 
ch as his 
ike him, 
ther, who 
grace to 
gly, pray 
ork; we 
, and no 
seeking 


specially 
: it was 
tions the 
guidance. 
have full 
rents, we 
ions as to 
xperience 
rith much 


Consecrated Parents. 135 


of great value to aid us in our task; all this. does 
not diminish, it only increases the need of prayer. 
With each child, and each of its separate needs, we 
always need renewed wisdom direct from above ; 
daily renewed prayer is the secret of training our 
children for God. 

2. And now the answer. Let us learn the lesson 
Manoah’s story teaches here: God loves to answer 
a parent’s cry. The angel had nothing new to 
communicate above what he had previously said 
to the woman; and yet God sent him, because He 
would not leave His child, who seeks to know His 
will fully, in the dark. The fact of the angel 
having come once was what had encouraged 
Manoah to hope he might come a second time. 
Just they who have already had communications 
with God, and have had Divine teaching about 
their children, will be those who desire more, and 
pray for it most earnestly. 

The answer to Manoah’s prayer contained no 
new revelation; it simply pointed back to the 
instruction previously given: ‘Of all that I said 
unto the woman let her beware; all that I com- 
manded her let her observe.’ In answer to our 
prayer, it may be that no new truth will be 
revealed, perhaps even no new thought impressed. 
But the answer to the prayer may be something 
better. As the Holy Spirit leads us back to what 
the Lord hath already spoken, to study more care- 


a On ne eT Se 
‘e= 


tty 


or ennen a aegTeNNRSNctReetaE SeRIeanCES Sie ANEENrenats a:tnseneenmeather apenas arsmaerteossaurensaserseveneneeeenrerarerenens oem 
SS eee — rs = = 
: 


2 
— ee — 
Pie NEN Ee t —— ——— e _ schon sass ainda neat siomee pe 
a > é 2 : 
Sa ame ter alesse bite jess . os - 
ae ; - 4 g ‘ 
os Stash ta pana eee 
} + . 5 - : 

Estat tlalaeegneesinticrunsaten Sabeelereeaverrisienensiginenal-tempedeeadionaerabiah uaipupenticoe del toegariccemntemespem ios eee Sa ASN ab SSS shri eR BASE RT NAT TO i, ea we re Ace ante Bs . bo 


136 The Children for Christ : 


a een: a ee 


fully and adopt more unreservedly the principles 
laid down in Holy Scripture for the training of 
our children, we shall realize as never before how 
our children are the Lord’s, and must be kept 
holy for Him; how parents are God’s mini- 
sters, in whose holy life the children are to be 
blessed. 

It is this last thought that comes out with 
spécial clearness. What were the commandments 
that had been given, and were now renewed ? 
The angel had only spoken of the life of the 
mother before the birth of the child: the Nazarite 
child must have a Nazarite mother. The giving 
up of the fruit of the vine, the sacrifice of the 
stimulus and excitement and enjoyment of the 
world and the flesh, the not eating any unclean 
thing, separation to special purity and holiness, - 
this was God’s secret of parental duty. Education 
consists not so much in anything we do or say, but 
most of all in what we are; and that not only when 
our children are of an age to see and judge, but long 
before, even before their birth. In that holy time 
of mystery, when mother and child are still one, 
and influences from a mother’s spirit pass into the 
child, God says, ‘ Of all that I said unto the woman 
let her beware ; all that I commanded her let her 
observe,’ It is a life of moderation and self-denial 
that does not ask how far and deep it may go into 
the world to enjoy all that is not absolutely for- 


‘inciples 
ining of 
‘ore how 
be kept 
'$ mini- 
re to be 


ut with 
ndments 
cnewed ? 
e of the 
Nazarite 
he giving 
ce of the 
t of the 
unclean 
pliness, - 
ducation 
r say, but 
nly when 
, but long 
oly time 
still one, 
5 into the 
he woman 
er let her 
elf-denial 
by go into 
utely for- 


Consecrated Parents. 


bidden, but that willingly gives up whatever is 
not helpful to entire consecration and fellowship 
with God; it is a life of purity and obedience 
that is the preparation for a mother’s and a father’s 
work. God’s answer to the prayer, ‘ How shall we 
order the child ?’ is, As you live, you train: live a 
Nazarite, holy to the Lord, and your child will be 
a Nazarite unto God, a deliverer of His people 
Israel. ! 

3. The blessing that avtended Manoah’s prayer 
was something more than the answer. There was 
the blessed revelation of God Himself, and the 
wonderful knitting together of the hearts of the 
parents. Ere he left them, the angel of the Lord 
so revealed himself that Manoah felt, We have seen 
God. When he asked the angel’s name, he might 
not know it; his name was WONDERFUL. And 
the angel did wondrously. And this is still the 
name of the parent’s God, WONDERFUL. It is as 
with Manoah we pray, and wait for, and accept 
His Divine teaching, and then ask Him to wait 
that we may bring Him an offering, that our eyes 
will be opened to see wondrous things, and to fall 
down and worship Him. Wonderful in His love, 
wonderful in His ways, wonderful in His work, 
wonderful in what He does for us as parents, and 
wonderful in what He does through us for our 
children ; oh, let us worship the Lord, the parent’s 
God, whose name is WONDERFUL! And let our 


meee anne ea gy orvenene-aeecremeeenepeeeen enor ene oe ee ne x 
o ee ee ——— ae 


a a a 
I ar etter ete ea ce ciee one. 


| 
if 
| 
i 
i 
i 
ih 


— - 
cs neeeretdhentteeereeppeermacenmen ae eae 
i epee 


138 The Children for Christ : 
prayer, like Manoah’s, end in praise and worship, 
in faith and truth. 

And how rich was the blessing this revelation 
brought to the praying couple. . What a picture 
the chapter gives us of the way in which father and 
mother are lovingly to help each other in all that 
concerns their children. Manoah’s wife gets the 
message from the angel; immediately she tells her 
husband. He prays at once for more light and 
fuller teaching. The angel comes again to her; 
she runs to tell Manoah, who follows her. He 
hears again what his wife had been told. When 
the sacrifice was offered, and the angel did won- 
drously, Manoah and his wife looked on together, 
and together fell on their faces to the ground. 
And when Manoah was afraid, and spake, ‘We 
shall surely die because we have seen God,’ she 
comforted him, and strengthened his faith. 

Blessed fellowship of love and faith, of prayer 
and worship between husband and wife, to which 
the coming and the training of a child can lead! 
Oh, it is not only parents who are to be a blessing 
to their children; no, but children to their parents 
too. As they talk together of God’s promises and 
His commands, as each tells the other what has 
been revealed to him, as they unite in seeking to 
know and carry out -God’s will, as they now pray 
in presence of each other, and then fall down in 
worship before Him whose name is WONDERFUL, 


worship, 


evelation 
4 picture 
ather and 
. all that 
gets the 
tells her 
ight and 
1 to her; 
her. He 
| When 
did won- 
together, 
2 ground. 
ake, ‘We 
God, she 
h. 
of prayer 
to which 
can lead ! 
p blessing 
ir parents 
mises and 
what has 
seeking to 
now pray 
down in 
DNDERFUL, 


Consecrated Parents. 139 


as they unburden their fears, and encourage each 
other to trust and hope, they experience that the 
home school is as much for training parents them- 
selves as their children, and that there is nothing 
opens the fountains of Divine love and of each 
other’s love more than the prayerful desire to 
know how to order the children God has given 
them for His service and glory. 


Blessed Lord! as those whom Thou hast joined 


. together to train children for Thy holy service, we 


bow in united worship before Thee. Make us by 
Thy Holy Spirit to be so of one heart and mind, 
that all Thou revealest to the one may at once be 
witnessed to the other. Grant that in our con- 
versations and our prayers, in our weakness and 
fear, in our faith and our worship, we may feel 
what blessing and help there is in Thy having sent 
us two and two to each little flock of children to 
be tended. 

Lord God! we come to Thee now for wisdom 
for each child Thou hast given us. Of each one 
we would say, What shall be the ordering of the 
child, and what shall we do unto him? Open our 
ey2s to see the treasures of wisdom in Thy Holy 
Word, in promise and instruction for parents and 
children. Especially reveal Thyself to us, we 
beseech Thee, as the God of the covenant and 
the promise, the parent’s God, whose name is 


140 The Children for Christ : 


WonDERFUL. Teach us in holy fear and reverence, 
in childlike trust and joy, in purity of life and 
separation from the world, to walk before Thee, 
and so to train children that are Nazarites, holy 
to the Lord, prepared to fight for the kingdom, and 
to be the deliverers of the oppressed. Amen. 


reverence, 
life and 
ore Thee, 
‘ites, holy 
rdom, and 


men. 


141 


2 ee ee ee 


A Consecrated Child. 


ee ee we me 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


EIGHTEENTH Day. 


A Consecratey Child. 


‘ For this child I prayed ; and the Lord hath given me my 
petition which I asked of Him : therefore I also have granted 
him to the Lord ; as long as he liveth he is granted to the Lord.’ 
—1 Sam. i. 27, 28. 

HE intercourse between the believing parent 
and the Lord in reference to his child has 

been set before us under different aspects, In 
Samuel’s story we have a new and very beautiful 
expression of the relation. Hannah has received a 
child from the Lord in answer to her prayer; the 
love and joy of her heart can find no better way of 
expressing themselves than in her giving her child 
to the Lord again, to be the Lord’s as long as he 
lives. ‘In very deed just the thought that comes up 
into the heart of many a Christian mother as she 
looks on her first-born little one; a thought that 
has only to be considered carefully to open up to 
us some of the most precious lessons of parental 
faith and duty. Whether we think of God, of 
our child, of ourselves, there is every reason to 
say, ‘As long as he liveth he is given to the Lord.’ 


ii 
{ 
i 
i 
§ 
| 


Ae MSO Un AY VCE AL BS La Mt 
ms Eta» Saab nee SO OA 


142 The Children for Christ : 


Or does not, so the mother speaks, the child 
belong to God? Was it not to bear His own 
image, as His servant, for His own glory, that He 
created man, that my child, too, has been born ? 
God looks upon him as His; he has only been 
lent and entrusted to me to train. It is indeed not 
mine but the Lord’s. And because I am naturally 
so inclined to forget this, to love and treat the 
child as if it were altogether mine, I count it such 
a precious privilege, in a distinct act of surrender, 
to give it to the Lord for all the days of its life. 

And God has not only a right to the child, but 
He needs him. The work He has to do upon 
earth is so great, and He has so arranged for each 
his work, that He would not miss one single one 
of His people’s children. I have so often heard or 
read of a mother joyfully sacrificing an only son, 
or all her sons, for her king or country ; and shall 
I not count it an honour to give to my King the 
child which is His, and which He has lent me, 
with the privilege of loving and training and 
enjoying it? DoI not love Him, and have I not 
often asked what I can render to Him for His 
love tome? And shall I not Aelight to give what 
is my most precious possession upon earth to be 
His? Yea, to Him who gave His Son for me, to 
Him alone, all I am and have belongs; my child 
too I have given to the Lord as long as he shall live. 

But ’tis not only for God’s sake; for my child’s 


the child 
His own 
, that He 
en born ? 
nly been 
ndeed not 
naturally 
treat the 
nt it such 
surrender, 
its life. 
child, but 
do upon 
| for each 
‘ingle one 
n heard or 
only son, 
and shall 
King the 
lent me, 
ning and 
ave I not 
n for His 
pive what 
rth to be 
for me, to 
my child 
shall live. 
y child’s 


A Consecrated Child. 


143 


sake too I give it to the Lord. The more I love 
it, the more heartily I give it away to God. No- 
where can it be safe or happy but with Him. I 
do indeed love my precious little one, and yet 
how little I can do for it! I know it is born in 
sin, and has inherited from me dn evil nature, 
which no care or love of mine can overcome. If 
I give it to God I know that He accepts of it, and 
takes it for His own, to make it His own. He 
will make it one with His beloved Son, cleansing it 
in the precious blood, and, in a second birth by His 
Spirit, giving it a new and holy nature. He, the 
great God, will adopt my child as His, and make 
it His here, taking it up to His own home through 
eternity. He will use me as His minister, giving me 
all the wisdom I need to train my child worthily 
as His. Oh, ask me not why I give my child to 
God! It is because I love it. Who would not give 
their child to such a God, for such blessings ? 
<~nd for my own saxe, too, I give it to the Lord, 
for—and this is so wonderful—the child I give to 
God becomes doubly my own. In the conscious- 
ness of the wonderful partnership between God 
and me, I feel that the child % give to God, and 
He then holds for me and yet gives back, I can 
love with an intenser and a holier love. I then 
possess it without the fear of sinning in loving it 
as my own, without the fear of ever losing it. 
Even if death were to come and take it from me 


144 The Children for Christ : 
here, I would know that it was still mine in the 
Father’s home, only taken from me for a time to 
serve in the King’s own palace. God gave it me; 
I gave it back to Him. God gave it once again to 
me; and once again I gave it back to Him; giving 
my child has become the link of a most blessed 
friendship and intercourse between God and me. 

And if He leaves it with me on earth, having 
given it to Him and knowing that it is His gives 
the confidence that all the grace and wisdom I 
need for training it will be given. I need have 
no care; my child is now the Lord’s: will He 
not provide for all His child needs? If the parent 
would know to love and enjoy and train his child 
aright, let him give the child to God. 

Such are some of the blessed grounds on which 
a parent gives his child to God. Let us row con- 
sider how this consecration of the child is to be 
maintained and carried out in education. 

Let the parent use it as a plea with God .in 
prayer. The grace promised for training a child, 
‘though most certain, is not given at once, but just 
as the grace for our own personal life, day by day. 
In the education of our children difficulties will 
often arise, in which it is as if God’s help does not 
come. Then is the time for prayer and faith. The 
power of sin may manifest itself in the child ; in his 
natural character there may at times be more 
to waken fear than hope. Our own ignorance, 


in the 
me to 
it me ; 
ain to 
giving 
lessed 
| me. 

having 
; gives 
dom I 
1 have 
rill He 
parent 
s child 


which 
»w COon- 
5 to be 


God .in 
a, child, 
put just 
by day. 
ies will 
oes not 
h. The 
; in his 
2 more 


horance, 


A Consecrated Child. 145 
or unfaithfulness, or feebleness may often make us 
fear that, though God be faithful, we may be the 
cause of our child’s not growing up the Lord’s, 
At such times, as at all times, God must be our 
refuge. Let us then maintain our consecration of 
the child, and plead it: we did give it to the Lord; 
we abide by it; we refuse to take it back because 
either we or the child are guilty; we plead for 
grace for the child that has been given by us and 
accepted by God. The more we do this, it will 
become in our souls a settled thing, definitely and 
finally settled, that what we gave God took, that it is 
His now, and that we can leave it with Him. Such 
faith will give rest, and bring a sure blessing. 

Let us use it as a plea with our child too. Let 
him, even if we do not often say so in words, feel 
that it is implied in all our intercourse with him, 
that he has been given away to God. Let him 
know that this is the reason we cannot give way 
to his will, or to allow sin in him—we have a 
charge from God to keep him for Him. Let him 
mark, in our holy gentleness and firmness, that 
this is not a profession, but a principle that really 
animates us. Let him realize it so that- it 
gradually becomes a motive with himself; he has 
been given to God, and accepted by Him; how 
should he disobey or grieve Him? Let not our 
words, but the whole spirit of our life and prayer 
and education, make the child feel, I am the Lord’s, 
K 


146 - The Children for Christ : 
Let us use it as a plea with ourselves, a moiive 
to the faithiul discharge of our duties. The 
pressing avocations of lif2, the spirit of the world 
all around us, the little help we receive from 
the Church ia regard to the consecration of our 
children and a really consecrated education, makes 
even godly parents grow unwatchtul or negligent. 
And a reali consecrated education needs a high 
tone of devotion in daily life, and that without 
ceasing. Let us from time to time look at our 
children in the light of this great transaction with 
God,—I have given my child to the Lord,—to stir 
ourselves to diligence, to faith, and to prayer. 
Let us very specially act under the influence of this 
motive as we think of the profession we educate 
our child for. God needs servants for His temple ; 
let us ask Him what the place is He has for each 
child in His kingdom. If such a spirit animated 
each parent who has given his child to God, surely 
a far larger number of ‘young Christians would 
grow up to work for God. If all the children pro- 
fessedly consecrated to God were really brought up 
as such, if we had consecrated parents as Hannah, 
and a consecrated education as Samuel’s, we should 
have no lack of men to stand up and take their 
place in the service of God’s temple. May God 
by His Holy Spirit teach us the full meaning 
and power of the words we use! 1 have given 
my child to be the Lord’s as long as he liveth. 


moive 
3. The 
e world 
ve from 
1 of our 
n, makes 
egligent. 
} a high 
without 
; at our 
ion with 
—to stir 
prayer. 
se of this 
educate 
temple ; 
for each 
Animated 
rd, surely 
s would 
dren pro- 
ought up 
Hannah, 
ve should 
ake their 
May God 
meaning 
ve given 
veth. 


A Consecrated Child. 147 


O Lord my God! hear, I pray Thee, a mother’s 
prayer, as I come to Thee with the child Thou 
hast given me. O my God! I have heard that 
Thou dost allow the mother to give her child 
back again to Thee, and that, having accepted and 
sealed it for Thine own, Thou dost entrust it to 
her again. O my Father! it is now Zhine—and 
mine! My soul bows in the dust at the thought 
of this inexpressible privilege, this joint owner- 
ship in my child between God and me. I look to 
Thee for the grace to enable me to keep this 
treasure, to be given back to Thee with usury. 

Teach me, I pray Thee, to love it with a holy 
love, and to train it for the service of Thy temple. 
Teach me to speak to it of Thee and Thy love so 
that its heart may early be won for Thee. May 
my whole life be to it an inspiration, inviting and 
helping to what is pure and lovely, to what is 
holy and well pleasing to Thee. And do Thou, of 
Thy great goodness, cause my child early to hear 
the voice that called Samuel, and in childlike 
simplicity and reverence to answer, Speak, Lord, 
Thy servant heareth. 

O Lord! Thou wilt not despise a mother’s 
prayer. Thou acceptest my surrender. By Thy 
blessing we shall be a consecrated mother and a 
consecrated child. Amen, 


oe eee 


cnet em i i er tnt “ 


” 
a SEs — 


 dieaciaeesietpasadiane seatiivapananecaenmiineds crecasioenaooeteemnener ees eee ee 
Fon ew ct apecnentancam mene ws rn PS yak naar eategee eae Oa meme 


The Ohildren for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


NINETEENTH DAY. 


Parental Heakness. 


‘Thou honourest thy sons above Me; them that honour Me 
i will honour, and they that despise Me shall be lightly 
esteemed.’—1 SAM. ii. 29, 30. 

‘I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he 
knoweth ; becauss his sons made themselves vile, and he 
restrained them not.’—1 Sam. iii. 13. 

OME men are born to rule; it costs them no 
trouble, it is their very nature; they often 

do it unconsciously. Others there are to whom it 
never comes natural; they either shrink from it, 
or, even if they attempt it, utterly fail. They 
appear to be wanting’ in the gifts that fit them for 
the work; it is always a struggle and an effort. In 
ordinary life men can choose, or are chosen for, 
the situations they have to fill as rulers or com- 
manders. In family life we see a strange and 
very solemn spectacle: every parent has to rule, 
whether he be fit for it or not. Nor does the fact 
of his unfitness take away his responsibility ; the 
terrible consequences of his failure to rule are still 
visited upon himself and his children. The picture 


honour Me 
be lightly 


r which he 
e, and he 


them no 
sey often 
whom it 
from it, 
1, They 
them for 
ffort. In 
osen for, 

or com- 
nuge and 

to rule, 
the fact 
lity ; the 
b are still 
e picture 


Parental Weakness. 149 
of feeble old Eli, faithful to God’s cause and ready 
to die for the ark of God, but unfaithful to his duty 
as parent, and unable to restrain his sons, suggests 
to us the very needful inquiry as to the causes, the 
consequences, and the cure of parental weakness. 
1. We have spoken of natural incapacity for 
ruling as one cause. But this is never so absolute 
that determined effort could not to some extent 
remedy it, much less that the grace of God could 
not change it. We must therefore look for other 
causes. And of these the chief is the want of self- 
discipline. A Christian may not ask what is 
easy or natural, what he likes or what appears 
possible. His one question must be, What is 
duty? what has God commanded? There is 
wonderful strengthening, even for the weakest 
character, in giving itself up to the Divine ought 
and must of God’s will. The fear of grieving the 
Father, the desire of pleasing Him, the assurance 
of His strength to aid our weakness,—such thoughts 
rouse and nerve the energies of the soul. The 
will wakens up, and nothing is so invigorating as 
the hearty effort to obey. It is because the Chris- 
tian parent too little realizes, and is too little 
taught by the Church, that’ ruling his home well 
is a simple matter of duty, a command that must 
be obeyed, that so many children are ruined by 
parental weakness. Not to restrain the child is 
to dishonour God by honouring the child more 


150 The Children for Christ : 


than God, because the duty God has imposed is 
made to give way to the child’s will. 

Closely connected with this is the good-natured 
weakness, misnamed kindness, which ca~not bear 
ever to reprove, to thwart, or to punix!. a child. 
It is nothing but a form of sloth: it cannot take 
the trouble to rule and guide its feelings by God’s 
Word ; it refuses the pain which punishing causes 
the parent. Alas! it knows nt how it chooses 
the greater pain of seeing the child grow up un- 
restrained. No grace of the Christian life is 
obtained without sacrifice; this very high grace of 
influencing and forming other souls for God needs 
special self-sacrifice. Like every difficult work, it 
needs purpose, attention, perseverance. 

But the chief cause of parental weakness will 
be found deeper still—the want of a life of true 
devotion to God Himself. God is the great Ruler 
and Educator; the powers that be, the parents’ 
powers, too, are ordained of God; he who does 
not live under command to God in his own life 
has not the secret of authority and command over 
others, It is the fear of God is the beginning of 
wisdom, of wisdom for the work of ruling too; 
it is the failure in personal godliness that is the 
root of parental failure. 

2. And now the consequences of such parental 
weakness. There is onc element in the law of 
consequences under which we live that makes it 


eed 


sed is 


atured 
t bear 
, child. 
t take 
- God’s 
causes 
‘hooses 
up un- 
life is 
race of 
l needs 
york, it 


ss will 
of true 

Ruler 
parents’ 
o does 
wn life 
nd over 
ming of 
ng too ; 
t is the 


parental 
law of 
hakes it 


Parental Weakness. 151 
specially solemn and terrible. It is this, that 
ordinarily they are not experienced until it is too 
late to redress them. Our actions are seeds; no 
one who looks at the little seed could ever imagine 
what a great tree, what noble or what bitter fruit, 
could come from it. Consequences, as seen in 
those around us, somehow hardly affect us; self- 
interest fintters itself with the pleasing hope that, 
in our case at least, the results will not be so 
disastrous. Let me plead with parents, when 
conscience or experience tells them that they too 
have been guilty of consulting the will of their 
children more than the honour of God, to look at 
the picture of Eli and his home under God's judg- 
ment, Let them ponder carefully what God says. 
Let them remember that throughout the universe 
there is no well-being but in harmony with the 
law of our being. In earth and heaven, in 
nature and grace, in the individual, the family, 
and the Church, obedience to the law under which 
God constituted a creature is the only possible 
path to happiness. To disobey that law is to 
court misery. And if the parents, destined of God 
to bear in the home the likeness of His own 
Fatherly rule, from ignorance or sloth give way to 
weakness, they must expect the natural results. 
It may not always become manifest in the same 
degree or with equal speed, but in the loss of 
power to their child’s character, in the loss of 


152 The Children for Christ : 


peace and happiness, in many cases in the loss of 
the soul for ever, they must reap what they 
sow. God appointed parental rule in the family 
as the symbol of His own authority, in which 
parents and children alike are to honour Him; to 
dishonour Him is to lose His favour and blessing. 
3. The cure of such weakness, In speaking of 
the causes, we have already indicated some of the 
remedies. The first one is this: the determined 
purpose, by God’s grace, to do God’s will. My 
duty is never measured by what I feel it within 
my power to do, but by what God’s grace makes 
possible for me. And I never can know fully 
how much grace can enable me to do, until I begin. 
It is only little by little that the evil habit will be 
conquered, But to him that hath shall be given. 
Let the weak parent accept it as a God-imposed 
duty: he must rule his children. Let him re- 
member that not to rule and restrain his children 
means that both parent and child dishonour God 
by not doing His will. Let him yield himself to 
the God of grace, with the purpose to do His will, 
however impossible it appear; the surrender will 
be accepted, and the grace not withheld. Step by 
step, amidst many a failure, the honest effort to do 
God’s will cannot remain without its reward. 
Next to this, let the parent who has failed, study 
some of the simplest laws in the art of ruling. It 
is often owing to the entire ignorance and neglect 


33 of 
they 
mily 
rhich 
1; to 
sing. 
ng of 
of the 
nined 
My 
vithin 
nakes 
fully 
begin. 
ill be 
wiven. 
posed 
nh re- 
ildren 
God 
elf to 
S will, 
by will 
ep by 
to do 


study 
g. It 
eglect 


Parental Weakness, 153 
of these that failure comes. Ruling, like any other 
art we are ignorant of, must be learnt. Some of 
these rules, as often given, are as follows: Do not 
give too many commands at once; begin if need 
be with only one. If you secure obedience to one, 
your own and the child’s consciousness of your 
power to rule is established. Do not command 
what you cannot enforce, or what the child has 
not the power to obey. Begin and prove your 
authority when it is easy for you to secure obedi- 
ence and the child to render it; in all learning 
we proceed from the easy to the less easy. Tet 
the command be given in quiet, deliberate tones, 
with full self-control ; hasty, ill-regulated injunc- 
tions lead to disobedience. Self-rule is the secret 
of all rule ; as you honour the law yourself in self- 
command, others learn to honour it too. ~ 

Above all, let the Christian parent who would 
rule well, remember God. He is God’s minister, 
doing God’s work. God loves the children, and 
wants them trained for Himself. He is your cove- 
nant-God; depend upon Him to be your help and 
strength. It is God who, through you, will rule 
your home. Yield yourself: to Him. Pray not 
only for help, but believe most certainly it is given. 
Believe not only, but act in the assurance that it 
is given, and is beginning, little by little, to work 
in you. Say to your Father that you desire to do 
your duty at any risk, and to honour Him with 


Sapa aaa —— Sree EW BEE aa - 


a 
. o By 
a 
sn aaNet ten iinaniaesicmsshenaieie 
aranenehete-itesiosshtitchaeenaanaititaatngeniasal 
eae aatted naesweme. - - r- ravens _ sas ab Sear o-2e coomenn intenatomon ane ~ 
5 NGS RC NN He lA TAS RB GOSS al deac ¢ 
“e _ prcpnptee citer niableninneaeanenibiencsnate > 
t 


154 The Children for Christ : 


ene 


yourchildren. And, depend upon it, in the spirit 
of a quiet, restful assurance, “hat here, too, God’s 
strength will work in your weakness. 


O my God! withfear and trembling would I 
bow before Theeythe righteous God, who wilt not 
give Thine honour to another, nor sufferest sin, 
even in Thy servants, to go unpunished. Impress 
deeply upon my heart, O Lord, the solemn lessons 
Thou dost teach Thy Church by the terrible sight 
of Thy judgment on the house of Eli Thy servant. 

Not to rule and restrain our children, to give 
them their own way, is to honour them more than 
Thee. Ere we think it, weakness becomes wicked- 
ness, in ourselves and our children too. Thou 
hast made every parent after Thine image, a king 
in his home, that he may rule his home well, and 
command his children in the way in the Lord. On 
his exercise of authority, and their rendering of 
obedience, Thou hast made Thy blessing dependent. 

O God! have mercy upon us. Let the thought 
of Thy command to rule our home, of Thy judg- 
ment on disobedience, of Thy promised grace to 
those who give themselves to obey, of Thy blessing 
on a home ordered in Thy fear, stir us with our 
whole heart to fulfil our holy calling in Thy fear, 
And let us, above all, believe that as we and our 
children in this fulfil Thy will, we are in the path of 
true blessing for this life and the life to come. Amen. 


ae 
abou 
the 


lest 
in t 
sin 
kno 
of 
tio 
posi 
ther 
the 


) spirit 
, God’s 


ould I 
ilt not 
ast sin, 
impress 
lessons 
le sight 
jervant. 
to give 
re than 
wicked- 
Thou 
, a king 
ell, and 
ord. On 
ering of 
pendent. 
thought 
y judg- 
prace to 
blessing 
vith our 
hy fear. 
and our 
p path of 
», Amen. 


hey, 


The Father as Intercessor. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTIETH Day. 


| The Father as Intercessor. 


‘And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone 
about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early. in 
the morning, and offered burnt- offerings according to the 
number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons 
have sinned, and renounced God in their hearts. Thus did 
Job continually.’—Jos i. 5. 


HAT a beautiful picture of a man in whose 

heart the fear of God lives! He fears 
lest his children sin against God or forsake Him 
in their heart. He is so deeply conscious of the 
sin of their nature, that, even when he does not 
know of positive transgression, the very thought 
of their having been in circumstances of tempta- 
tion makes him afraid. He so fully realizes hjs 
position and privilege as father, that he sends for 
them to sanctify them, and takes upon himself 
the continual offering of the needed sacrifice. Job 
is here another example, among Bible saints, of a 


PSP MIN RE DPW RIESE BEEBE RANTS POPE CREE pi. SRL RT TOS reno Sos 


156 The Children for Chvist : 

servant of God in whom faith in God takes up the 
whole home in its intercession, and whose fear of 
God extends to the sin of the children too. God 
could hardly have said of him, ‘There is none like 
my servant Job in the earth, a perfect and an 
upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth 
evil,’ if this element of true piety had been want- 
ing. The book might have been complete without 
it, as far as the record of Job’s patience and faith 
is concerned, but we should have missed the so 
much needed lesson—a man’s entire consecration 
to God implies the consecration of the home 
life too. Let us study the lesson his example 

teaches. 

- 1, A deep sense of the sinfulness and the sins of 
his children is one of the marks of a godly parent. 
It is to conquer and free from sin that God entered 
into the parental covenant with Abraham. It was 
on account of sin, and to deliver from its cause, 
that the blood of the lamb was sprinkled in the 
passover. It was to lead from sin to the service 
of God, that parents were constituted the instruct- 
ors of their children. In all God’s dealings with 
us in redemption and grace, in His revelation in 
Christ and His Cross, He has one object—to save us 
from sin, and make us partakers of His holiness. 
And if the parent is to be God’s fellow-worker, if 
the authority God delegates to him is to be used 
aright, and the blessing promised to him is to 


s up the 
e fear of 
0. God 
ione like 
and an 
cheweth 
*n want- 
without 
ind faith 
1 the so 
secration 
e home 
example 


e sins of 
parent. 
entered 

It was 

S cause, 

d in the 
service 

nstruct- 

gs with 
ation in 

) Save us 
oliness. 

orker, if 

be used 

m is to 


The Father as Intercessor. 


157 


come true, it can only be if God finds the parent 
in harmony with Himself, hating sin with a 
perfect hatred, and seeking, above everything, to 
keep or cast it out of his home. 

And have we not all to confess how superficial 
our views of sin are? And how easily we often 
are satisfied, while, under the appearance of what 
is good and loving, sin may be lurking, or our 
children be growing up renouncing God in their 
hearts! And how sadly wanting we are in that 
deep sense of the grief and dishonour to God 
which our children’s sin is, and which ought to 
be the motive that urges us most strongly to 
plead for its forgiveness and strive for its putting 
away! Let parents ask God to give them a right 
sense of what sin is in their children, in its curse, 
its dishonour to God, its power. And let us ask 
Him to work in us a very deep and very clear 
conviction that His great object in taking us into 
covenant as His ministers to the children, is that 
sin may be cast out of them. This is the one 
thing that He aims at, that the power of Christ’s 
victory over sin may be seen in them, that we 
and they and our home may be holy to the 
Lord. 

2. Very special watchfulness, where there is 
special temptation, will be the natural fruit of 
such fear of sip. Job knew that at a time of 
feasting there would be special danger, and as 


158 The Children for Christ : 


often as the days of feasting were past, he sent for 
his sons and sanctified them. What an impression 
these children must have received of the fear of 
sin in their God-fearing father, and how it would 
waken in them the need of watchfulness and the 
fear of forgetting God! Every thoughtful parent 
knows how there are times and places when the 
temptations of sin come more speedily, and more 
easily surprise even the well-disposed child. Such 
are the times, both before and after a child goes 
into the company and the circumstances where 


he may be tempted, that a praying father and toy 
mother should do what Job did when he sent for pare 
his sons and sanctified them. A Christian man, inte 
only lately converted, has told of the indelible We 
impression made by his mother taking him ings 
into her room, just as he was in full glee to that 
start on his first long journey from home, and toa 
praying with him that he might be kept from sucl 
sin. hold 

Let us ask God to make us very watchful and faith 
very wise in availing ourselves of opportunities, and 
There are times when conscience in a child is base 
specially sensitive, and a word fitly spoken will is t 
sink deep into the heart. There are times when this 
conscience has been slighted, and when a word or chil 
prayer will help to waken it up and restore its heat 
authority. A parent who is in sympathy with In Si 


God’s purpose as to destroying sin, and who holds God 


ent for 
ression 
fear of 
, would 
nd the 
parent 
en the 
d more 
. Such 
ild goes 
; where 
her and 
sent for 
in man, 
ndelible 
ng him 
glee to 
me, and 
ot from 


ful and 
unities, 
hild is 
cen will 
es when 
word or 
store its 
hy with 
o holds 


The Father as Intercessor. 159 


himself at God's disposal, will be guided from on 
high as ts when and how to speak, to rouse and 
strengthen in the child the consciousness of sin 
and its danger. 

‘3. A godly parent has power with God to 
intercede. Job not only sent for his children to 
speak—he sanctified them, through the burnt- 
offerings he offered. The parent who has in 
baptism accepted the sign of the sprinkling of 
the blood for his child, who has sprinkled the 
blopd on the doorposts of his home, has a right 
to plead that blood with God. His faith obtains 
pardon for the child. And he has a right to 
intercede for the grace that can save and sanctify. 
We have, through the whole course of (od’s deal- 
ings with parents, from Noah downwards, seen 
that God gives the parent the right and the power 
to appear and act in behalf of the child, and that 
such representative action is accepted. To lay 
hold of this clearly, is the very essence of parental 
faith ; to act upon it, the secret of parental power 
and blessing. The whole family constitution is 
based upon this; all the other influence a parent 
is to exert depends much on.his being clear on 
this point: Tam the steward of God’s grace to the 
child; I represent the child with God, and am 
heard on his behalf. This makes him confident 
in saying, I represent God with my child; I have 
God’s help to give me influence and power. I have 


160 The Children for Christ : 


overcome the power of my child’s sin in pleeding 
with God for him; I am sure of conquering it in 
pleading with my child. 

Dear parents! let us plead very earnestly that 
God may by His Spirit enlighten our hearts to 
know this our calling—as parents to intercede and 
prevail for our children. We want the Holy 
Spirit so to shine upon God's purposes with us, 
that in our family life, and the intercourse with 
our children, the first thing shall be, not the 
happiness of parental love and intercourse, not 
the care for the providing all the good gifts they 
daily need; not the thought of their education for 
a life of prosperity and usefulness, but the yield- 
ing ourselves to God’s redeeming love, to be every 
day the ministers of its grace and blessing. Let 
us live to secure God’s purpose—the deliverance 
from sin; let us act in the assurance that He will 
use us, And our family life, even though there 
be still the remains of sin in the home, shall ever- 
more be lighted up with God’s own presence, and 
with the joy of the heavenly home, of which it is 
the nursery and the image. 


Gracious God! I humbly ask Thee to print 
deep in my heart the lessons Thy holy Word was 
given to teach. May Job, who has taught Thy 
saints so much of patience in the hour of trial, 
and of Thy wondrous grace in delivering from it, 


i 
] 


pleeding 
ng it in 


stly that 
rearts to 
cede and 
he Holy 
with us, 
irse with 
not the 
urse, not 
rifts they 
sation for 
he yield- 
be every 
ing. Let 
liverance 
t He will 
igh there 
hall ever- 
ence, and 
hich it is 


to print 
Word was 
ught Thy 
r of trial, 
g from it, 


The Father as Intercessor. 


161 
be to all parents a lesson and a model of the 
God-fearing parent. 

Teach us, we pray Thee, how this marks the 
fear of God in its full power and extent, when 
it trembles at the sins of the children, and inter- 
cedes for them, as its own. Oh, teach us, Lord! 
to fear sin as the one thing Thy soul hateth, 
and to make it our one care that the children 
sin not. 

Teach us to realize our God-given position as 
intercessors, and to plead the blood for them as 
definitel; and as believingly as for ourselves. 
May we know in faith that we are heard. 

And teach us so in prayer to bring them with 
us, so to speak and pray at the right time and 
way, that from us they may learn both tae fear 
of God and the confidence of faith. O God! if 
we are indeed Thy children, may this element 
distinctly mark our piety and our faith, that they 
embrace and influence our homes as much as 
ourselves, that they stamp home and family life 
as wholly the Lord’s. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-FIRST DAY. 


The True Goov, 


‘Come, ye children, hearken unto me ; 
I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
What man is he that desireth life, 
And loveth many days, that he may see good ? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, 

And thy lips from speaking guile. 
Depart from evil, and do good; 
Seek peace, and pursue it.’ 


Ps. xxxiy. 11-14, 


HERE is a science called Ethics, which seeks 

to discover the laws which should regulate 
human conduct, and so to teach the art of living 
aright. In the pursuit of its object, the science 
seeks to find out in what is the moving principle 
which urges men to act as they do, or, in other 
words, what the aim is they propose to themselves. 
In the discussions on this point, the word that 
comes up universally is, THz Goop. Men propose 
to themselves some good or other as the reward of 
their efforts, 


dl ? 


14, 


h seeks 
regulate 
of living 
science 
rinciple 
n other 
selves. 
rd_ that 
propose 
ward of 


The True Good. 163 


The students of Ethics are divided into two 
great schools according to the meaning they 
attach to the word Good. ‘With some, it expresses 
the good of well-being, the possession or enjoyment 
of what is desirable. They maintain that happi- 
ness, our own or that of the human race, the fear 
of pain and the desire of pleasure, is and ought to 
be the motive of conduct. 

Another school takes higher ground, It main- 
tains that, though the desire of happiness is 
innate and legitimate, it may not be man’s first 
or ultimate cim. Happiness will be the accom- 
paniment and the reward of something higher. 
The good not of well-being but of well-doing is the 
only true good. The ideas of right and wrong are 
deeper and holier than those of pleasure and pain. 
To teach men to do good is their ideal. 

In the words of our psalm, children are invited 
to come and learn what the secret of a happy life 
is. The call appeals to the desire for happiness : 
‘Who is he that would see good?’ The teacher 
promises to show the path to the enjoyment of 
true well-being. That path is, ‘ Depart from evil, 
and do good. God has so: ordered our nature 
that well-being will follow well-doing : to do good 
is the sure way to see good, 

But our inspired teacher goes further. He not 
only tells of our seeing good and doing good, but 
would teach us the secret of being good. This human 


164 The Children for Christ: 


science cannot teach. It may speak of the value 
of uprightness and purity in the inner motive 
to make conduct really good; it cannot show us 
what the true, the only pure and purifying 
motive is. The Psalmist tells us, ‘Come, ye child- 
ren, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of 
the Lord.’ The fear of the Lord— this is the 
beginning of all wisdom and goodness, It is doing 
what we do, unto the Lord, for His sake and as 
obedience to Him ; it is our personal relation to 
God that. makes conduct really good. To fear 
God—this is being good ; then follows doing good ; 
then seeing good. 

Christian parents have in this call, ‘Come, ye 
children, hearken unto Me,’ words prepared for 
them by the Holy Spirit to use with their children. 
They are God’s ministers to teach the children tie 
fear of the Lord, the path to the true, the highest 
good. Let us try and take the lessons home to 
ourselves we have to give them. 

To begin with the lowest, seeing good: ‘What 
man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, 
that he may see good?’ Let parents not be afraid 
of promising their children that it shall be well 
with them if they do indeed fear God. Witha 
Creator of infinite goodness and wisdom it cannot 
be otherwise: doing right and pleasing Him 
must bring blessing and happiness. The desire 
for happiness may not be the only or the first 


ralue 
otive 
WwW us 
fying 
shild- 
ear of 
s the 
doing 
nd as 
ion to 
) fear 
good ; 


me, ye 
ed for 
ildren. 
en tiie 
1ighest 
yme to 


‘What 
y days, 
afraid 
e well 
ith a 
cannot 
Him 
desire 
1e first 


The True Good. 165 


motive for a man’s conduct. Experience has 
proved that those who make it their first object 
fail; while they who gave it a second place, 
subordinate to duty, find it. It is so in religion 
very specially. God commands us to be happy ; 
He promises us joy; but always in connection 
with our being in the right relation to Himself 
and His will. So the previous verse had said 
(ver. 10), ‘They that seek the Lord shall not want 
any good thing.’ The promises that God will do us 
good are many. ‘1 will surely do thee good, He 
said to Jacob. To Israel He spake: ‘ Do right 
and good, that it may be well with thee.’ The 
principle expressed in the prayer, ‘Be good to 
them that do good,’ tells that the favour and friend- 
ship of God, His peace and presence, His guidance 
and help, will come to those who do His will. 
Such obedience and doing good will bring a bless- 
ing even for this life too. 

Let our children learn it early, that if they would 
see good it will be found with God. Let them 
learn it of us, not as a doctrine, but as a personal 
testimony ; let us show them that the service of 
God makes us happy, and that the good which. 
God bestows is our one desife and our highest joy. 

The next step is doing good. Let us seek in the 
hearts of our little ones to link inseparably well- 
doing and well-being. ‘ Blessed is the man that 
feareth the Lord.’ The Christianity of our day 


166 The Children for Christ : 


has so learnt to seek only safety ‘n religion, but 
pleasure and happiness in the world, that it will 
need a very clear testimony to fill our children with 
the thought that to do God’s will and serve is in 
itself blessedness, is enjoyment. No trouble ought 
to be great, if we can teach them these lessons. 

And now comes the teaching as to what doing 
good is: ‘ Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips 
from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good; 
seek peace, and pursue it.’ Sins of the tongue, 
sins of disobedience, sins of temper: these are the 
three principal temptations children are exposed 
to, and against which parents have to guard them. 

‘ Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from 
speaking guile.’ Let the Christian parent strive 
after a deep conviction of the power of the tongue. 
It reveals what is in the heart; it sets it further 
on fire, by encouraging the utterance of the evil 
there. It is the medium of intercourse and in- 
fluence on others. It is the index of the presence 
or the want of that integrity or uprightness which 
is the very foundation of true character. Parents! 
study above everything to make your children true 
—first true in words, and then true in heart and 
deed. A child’s truthfulness and integrity may 
be the beginning of his walking in the truth of 
God. ‘I have no greater joy than to hear that 
my children walk in the truth:’ let this be your 
aim even with the little children. : 


, but 

5 will 
with 
is in 
ought 
ns. 
doing 
y lips 

» good ; 
ongue, 
ire the 
xposed 
them. 
s from 
_ strive 
ongue. 
urther 
e evil 
nd in- 
resence 
5 which 
arents | 
en true 
Art and 
ty may 
ruth of 
ar that 
pe your 


The True Good. 167 


‘Depart from evil, and do good.’ To a young 
child that first of all is evil which his parent for- 
bids. The parent is to him as a conscience, as a 
God. Train your little ones to flee from evil, to 
depart, to come away from everything naughty 
and forbidden. And to do good: keep it occupied, 
if possible, in what is good, as being allowed by 
you and pleasing to you. Stir and strengthen its 
young will, train it to do good; not to think and 
wish and feel good, but to doit. It is the will, 
and what it does, that makes the man. 

\ ‘Seek peace, and pursue it.’ To quarrel is asin 
that comes so easily with children. Let us train 
aurs to respect the rights of others, to bear and to 
forgive when ours are affected, or to seek redress 
only from the parent. ‘Blessed are the peace- 
makers, for they shall be called the children of 
God,’—this is one of the words to which the 
education of the nursery and the home must lead 
them up. 

But we have still the highest good to speak of : 
we must not only seek good, and do good, but be 
good. Only a good tree can bring forth good 
fruit, And what is it to be good? What is the 
disposition that makes the good man or the good 
child? ‘I will teach you the fear of the Lord.’ 
There is none good, and no good, but God; if we 
seek and find Him we find all good. It is in the 
fear of the Lord that good conduct has its spring, 


‘ 
enamel 
. 


168 The Children for Ohrist : 
that virtue has its worth. ‘In singleness of heart, 
fearing God: whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as 
unto the Lord ;’ it is the personal relation to God 
carried out into all our conduct that constitutes 
the fear of the Lord. It is not the fear of a slave, 
but of a cli), twin sister to hope and love: ‘ The 
Lord taketh ,Jeasuve in them that fear Him, in 
those that hope in His mercy.’ 

And how can the fear of the Lord be taught ? 
Dear Christian parents! you know the answer: 
only by yourselves walking in the fear of the 
Lord all the day. Seek to train your children to 
understand the connection between seeing good, or 
always being blessed and happy; and doing good, 
or @ life in which we always choose what is right ; 
and being good, or having a heart filled with 
the fear and love of God. Train them to it by 
living it. Let them see you walk in the fear 
of the Lord all the day, His holy presence 
resting on you and brought with you into daily 
life. Let them see in your conduct that reli- 
gion ¥s a holy sentiment and emotion, a power 
in the heart which moves the will in everything 
to do what is good. And let the light of your 
eyes and the brightness of your face be the 
exposition and the confirmation of God’s truth, 
‘ Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord.’ 


O my God! I ask for grace to take to heart, 


heart, 
ily, as 
o God 
itutes 
slave, 
‘The 
im, in 


ught ? 
swer : 
f the 
ren to 
0d, or 
good, 
right ; 
L witii 
» it by 
e fear 
esence 
» daily 
t reli- 
power 
ything 
f your 
ye the 
truth, 


heart, 


The True Good. 169 


and wisely to apply in dealing with my children | 


the lessons of Thy Word. 

May my whole intercourse with them be full of 
the joyful assurance that the fear of the Lord is 
the path to the enjoyment of all good, and that 
Thy service is happiness. Let this be so real that 
all thought of there being pleasure in the world or 
sin may pass away. 

Help me to teach them the fear of the Lorc vy 
instruction, and example, and the spirit of my life. 
May thoughtfulness, and truthfulness, and loving- 
négss mark the conversation of my home, and the 
life of all be holy to the Lord. Day by day I 
would show them, through Thy grace, how uepart- 
ing from every—even little—evil, and doing good, 
v/ith a following after peace and holiness, is what 
Lhy fear teaches. 

Give me grace, above all, to teach them that the 
fear of the Lord itself is the true good, the prin- 
ciple of all good. May we walk as children in 
the full light of Thy countenance, only fearful 
of offending Thee, or not rendering Thy Holy 
Majesty the reverence due to Thee. And let ours 
be the true Christian life of Thy.disciples of old, 
who, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the 
comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. 

O my God! I beseech Thee, make me a parent 
such as Thou wouldst have me, and let on me and 
my home Thy blessing rest. Amen. 


SAL RI A HDR TAI RRL SEI OTE TLD EE OL RESIN TRCN EE AMORA tt hom A WE oa ah A 


a a NN cee nt nt ym 
tyne: sme stidiasanatacestn rtedibienshiete tistics ‘ 
PT bE TENG A ROTM IE ia NONI is PAD NS Ae rate mst nse eamacth . . 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-SECOND DAY. 


Training. 


‘Train up a child in the way he should go; and even when 
he is old, he will not depart from it.'—Prov. xxii. 6. 


HIS promise is the Scripture expression of the 
principle on which all education rests, that 

a child’s training can decide what his after life is 
to be. Without this faith there could be no 


thought of anything like education ; when this 


faith is elevated to a trust in God and His 
promises, it grows into the assurance that a 
parent’s labour will not be in vain in the Lord. 
Education has been variously defined as fully 
developing a child’s faculties, fitting him to fulfil 
his destiny, developing in him all the perfection 
of which he is capable. Such definitions have 
their value for every parent who would thoroughly 
understand his work, and yet their application is 
dependent upon the further statement of what his 
faculties and his destiny really are, and wherein 


en when 


. of the 
ts, that 
life is 
be no 
Bn this 
d His 
that a 
ord. 

Ts fully 
o fulfil 
rfection 
s have 
oughly 
ation is 
rhat his 
wherein 


Training. 171 
his highest perfection would consist. It is only 
when the real aim of education is first clearly and 
firmly grasped that its work can be successful. 
Just as, in our text, everything will depend on a 
correct view of what is ‘the way in which he 
should go,’ only then can the training do its work 
in the assurance of the Divine fulfilment of the 
promise. 

There have been so many failures in religious 
training, that a spirit of doubt has grown up as to 
whether a principle like this can be regarded as 
holding universally good. With such doubt we 
undermine God’s covenant. Let us rather believe 
that the failure was owing to man’s fault: ‘ Let 
God be true, and every man a liar.’ KEither the 
parent did not make ‘the way in which he should 
go’ his one aim in the child’s training, or the 
training in that way was not what God’s Word 
had ordered it to be. Let us see what the Word 
teaches us on each of these points. 

As to ‘the way in which he should go,’ we need 
be in no doubt. The names Scripture gives to this 
way make clear what itis. ‘The way of the Lord,’ 
God calls it, when He speaks of Abraham train- 
ing his children; and we often read of ‘ walking 
in His ways,’ ‘the way of His footsteps,’ ‘ the way 
of His commandments.’ It is called ‘the way of 
wisdom,’ ‘the way of righteousness, ‘the way of 
holiness,’ ‘the way of peace,’ ‘the way of life.” It 


ranean tin alin versace adinaiaiibiare a . 
LL A AI Ee TCO A cette ic itll ences ate 
o5 a 
- 6 . 
: : =a 


172 The Children for Christ : 


is ‘the new and living way’ opened by Christ for 
all who will walk in His footsteps; it is Christ 
Himself, the living Way, of whom Scripture says, 
‘Walk in Him,’ 

There are many religious parents, who are most 
anxious to see their children saved, but who do 
not choose this way for them; they do not decide 
on it distinctly as the one only way in which they 
are to walk. They think it too much to expect 
that they should walk in it from their youth, and 
so they do not train them to go in it. They are 
not prepared to regard the walking in this way 
as always the first thing. It is not their first aim 
to train whole-hearted, devoted Christians. There 
are worldly interests must not be sacrificed. They 
are not always ready themselves to walk in that 
way only and wholly—‘the narrow way ;’ they 
have chosen it, but not exclusively and finally. 
They have their own thoughts as to the way they 
and the child may go. No wonder that with a 
great deal of apparent religion their education 
fails; a mistake here is often fatal. There-may 
be no doubt or hesitancy ; ‘the way of the Lord’ 
must be heartily accepted as alone ‘the way in 
which he should go.’ 

‘In the way in which he should go, train up a 
child.” Train, a word of deep importance for every 
teacher and parent to understand. It is not 
telling, not teaching, not commanding, but some- 


hist. for 
Christ 
fe Says, 


re most 
who do 
, decide 
ch they 
expect 
ith, and 
hey are 
lis way 
irst aim 
There 
. They 
in that 
;’ they 
finally. 
ray they 
, with a 
lucation 
ere-may 
1e Lord’ 
way in 


ain wp a 
for every 
, Is not 
ut some- 


Training. 173 
thing higher than all these; that without which 
the teaching and commanding is often more harm 
than good. It is not only telling a child what to 
do, but showing him how to do it and seeing that 
it is done, taking care that the advice or the com- 
mand we give is put into practice and adopted as 
a habit. 

What is needed for such training we can under- 
stand easily if we look at the way in which a 
young horse is trained. How it is made to yield 
its will to its master’s, until at last it is in perfect 
sympathy with him, and yields to his slightest 
wish! How carefully it is directed and accus- 
tomed to do the right thing until it becomes a 
habit, a second nature! How its own wild native 
tendencies, when needful, are checked and re- 
strained! How it is encouraged and helped to 
the full exercise of its powers in subjection to this . 
rule, and everything done to make it bold and 
spirited! With what thoughtful care I have seen 
a coachman watch his young horses, and sit ready, 
at any difficulty, to help them with voice and 
hand, lest they should lose their confidence or be 
overcome by some difficulty they had to surmount! 
And I have thought, Would that parents bestowed 
somewhat of this care on training children in the 
way they should go! 

Training may now thus be defined : accustoming 
the child to do easily and willingly what is com- 


f- 


G 
=e 


5 ‘ « 
nsnetnnarennteernnapserencprnsqupensnanabeteies-a-congeaeenteeeeee tae Eee ew 
“ seep et pn mete sm —~ “ . 
SA ROC DP i A ek tt am pc bao s 
- < ‘ 


174 The Children for Christ: 


manded. Doing, doing habitually, doing from 
choice,—this is what we aim at. 

Doing. The parent who wishes to train not 
only tells or commands, but sees that the thing is 
done. To this end he seeks to engage the interest 
and affection of the child on the side of duty 
generally, as well as of the duty specially to be 
performed. Knowing how naturally thoughtless 
and fickle a child’s nature is, he urges or excour- 
ages, until the thing, which involves self-denial or 
difficulty, is performed. He is careful not to give 
too many commands, or to give them hastily ; he 
begins with commands to which submission is 
most easily secured, that so the thought of obedi- 
ence may not too much be linked with the thought 
of what is displeasing or impossible. But the 
ereat thing is, whether he appeals to the motive 
of authority or of love, of duty or of pleasure, 
that he watches the child through the struggle, 
until the consent of the will has become deed and 
action. 

Doing habitually is, we said, an element of 
training. Success in education depends more on 
forming habits than inculcating rules. What the 
child has done once or twice he must learn to do 
over and over again, until it becomes familiar and 
natural; it must feel strange to him not to do it. 
If the educator be content with the first acts of 
obedience, sloth, forgetfulness, and reluctance to 


ps ct eS Oo 


a 


° = 


= 


ig from 


rain not 
thing is 
interest 
of duty 
ly to be 
ughtless 
 encolr- 
lenial or 
t to give 
tily ; he 
ission is 
of obedi- 
thought 
But the 
b motive 
pleasure, 
struggle, 
Need and 


ment of 
more on 
hat the 
rn to do 
liar and 
to do it. 

acts of 
ance to 


Training. 175 
effort, the evil of his nature and self-will, may soon 
come in and break the power of the incipient 
habit. The parent silently watches, and, when 
there is danger of a retrograde step, iaterposes to 
help and confirm the habit until its mastery is 
secure. Going on from a first and a second com- 
mand, in which obedience has been secured, the 
principle is extended until the child comes to feel 
it quite natural that in all things he should do 
the parent’s will. And so the habit is formed 
of obedience, which becomes the root of other 
habits. 

Doing from choice. This is something higher,— 
the true aim of education. You may have good, 
obedient children, in whom there never has been 
much resistance to a parent’s training, who render 
habitual and willing obedience, and yet, when left 
to themselves in later life, depart from the way in 
which they were trained to go. The training was 
defective ; parents were content with habits with- 
out principles. The training of the young horse 
is not complete until he delights, full of joy and 
spirit, to do his work. It is the training of the 
will that is the aim of education. Beginning with 
obedience, the parent has to lead the child on to 
liberty ; the apparent opposites have to be recon- 
ciled in practice ; really to choose and will for 
himself what his parent wills, to find his happi- 
ness not only in the obedience to the parent’s 


aes 


3 oa - 
—~s ae “a 4, : 
ene 


176 The Children for Christ : 

command, but in the approval of the thing 
commanded, — this is what the child must be 
formed to. And here is indeed the highest art, 
the real difficulty of training a child in the way 
he should go. 

But just here the promise of Divine grace comes 
in. No mind has yet apprehended the wondrous 
interplay of God’s working and our working in the 
matter of our salvation; and as little in the 
salvation of our children. But we need not to 
understand it to be sure of it, or to count on God’s 
faithfulness. Where the believing parent seeks 
not only to form the habits of obedience, but in 
prayer and faith to mould and guide and strengthen 
the will of the child in the way of the Lord, he 
may court upon the workings of God’s Holy Spirit 
to do what God alone can do. In euvenant with 
God, as His fellow-worker and minister, he does 
not shrink back from this highest and holiest of 
tasks, the training of that mighty power, a wii! 
made after the image of God’s will, and now under 
the power of sin. He reckons on a Divine 
wisdom to guide him; he counts on a Divine 
strength to work with him ai: for him; he trusts 
in a Divine faithfulness to make the word true 
and sure in all its fulness, ‘Train up a child in 
the way he should go; when he is old, he will not 
depart from it, * 


? See Note A, at close of volume, on training. 


thing 
ist be 
st art, 
le Way 


comes 
ndrous 
in the 
in the 
not to 
. God’s 
| seeks 
but in 
ngthen 
ord, he 
r Spirit 
it with 
ie does 
liest of 
a will 
r under 
Divine 
Divine 
> trusts 
rd true 
vild in 
vill not 


Training. 177 

Holy Lord God! with fear and trembling I bow 
before Thee in view of the work to which Thou 
hast called me. O my God! I feel deeply that I 
lack wisdom; I come to Thee, who givest liberally, 
and upbraidest not. Thy word has said, it shall 
be given. 

Lord ! give me the spirit of wisdom, that I may 
understand aright the wondrous nature of that 
immortai spirit that has been put into my charge, 
with its power of mind and emotion and will. 
Give me wisdom, that I may knowthe way in which 
the child should go, even the way of Thy footsteps, 
and let me so walk in it that he may learn from 
me that, as there is no other way well pleasing to 
Thee, so there is no other way that can give us 
true pleasure. And give me wisdom, that I may 
know how to guide and influence the will, that it 
may give itself first to my will, and then to Thine, 
to choose only and always Thy way. Lord! give 
me wisdom to train my child in the way he should 
go, even the way of the Lord. 

And, 0 my God! strengthen my faith to hold 
fast the blessed assurance that a godly training in 
Thy fear, and under the rule of Thy spirit, cannot 
fail. Thy promise is sure, Thy power is infinite ; 
Thou wilt bless the seed of Thy sc..:nts. Amen, 


+ 
¥ 


clicomtine inleinesaiieaneaniot aoa ataaicees aaa 


The Children for Christ : 


a nT 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


C etameeetel 


TWENTY-THIRD DAY. 


The Child choosing the Goov. 


‘ Before the child shall know to refuse the evii, and choose 
the good.’—Isa, vii. 15, 


Q* all the wondrous powers with which God 
has endowed man, his will—the power of 
determining what he does, and so what he is-~is 
the most wonderful. This is indeed the deepest 
trait of the Divine image, j:eceuse even as God was 
what He is, of Himself anu not of another, so He 
gave man to a very large extent the power of 
deciding and making himself. The mind, with 
all its wondrous capacities, the soul, with all its 
wealth of feeling, man’s moral and _ religious 
nature,—-all these have been given that he might 
be able to exercise aright that royal prerogative 
of the liberty he has from God to will himself, 
a so to fashion his own being and destiny for 
eternity. 
And it is to the parent that the solemn task is 


oe 
gr 


fr¢ 


ste 


1 choose 


h God 
er of 
is--—18 

leepest 
od was 
so He 
wer of 

1, with 
all its 

ligious 
might 
pgative 

himself, 
iny for 


task is 


The Child choosing the Good. 179 


entrusted of teaching the child how to use this 
will aright. This delicate instrument, on which 
in after-life the weal or woe, not only of the child, 
but of others, is to depend, is put into the hands 
of the parents to keep, to direct, to strengthen, 
and to train the child all unconsciously to hold 
and to exercise it to the glory of the God who 
gave it. One would imagine that parents would 
shrink from the task with trembling, or, if they 
heard how the wisdom was to be obtained to 
execute it aright, would count no sacrifice too 
great to secure it. To those who seek the wisdom 
from God in faith, and in His fear seek to under- 
stand and fulfil their task, success is possible, is 
even promised. 

The problem is one of great delicacy, to com- 
bine the greatest degree and the fullest exercise 
of personal liberty with perfect obedience. God’s 
Word has more than once taught in that obedience 
is the child’s first virtue—that in yielding it, his 
will is to be exercised. He is to obey, not 
because he understands or approves, but because 
the parent commands. In this he is to become 
the master of his own will, that he voluntarily 
submits it to a higher authority. Obedience from 
this principle will thus secure a double good: 
while guiding the will into right habits, it 
strengthens the command the child has over it. 
When first this has been attained, a safe found- 


180 The Children for Christ : 
ation has been laid for the farther exercise of 
the child’s free will in the deliberate choice of 
what appears to him best. It is this that the 
parent must regard as his highest and most blessed 
work, ‘ Before the child knows to refuse the evil 
and choose the good,’ in this first stage of child- 
hood, simple obedience is the law. As he grows 
out of it, it is still a parent’s influence that must 
train the. young will to exercise the power on 
which in after-life everything depends; he must 
now be trained himself to refuse the evil and 
choose the good. 

And how is this to be done? The choice of 
the wil] depends upon the impulse and motives 
which prompt it to action. These impulses and 
motives again depend upon the objects presented 
to the mind, and the degree of attention with 
which they are regarded. In our fallen nature, 
the soul, dwelling in the flesh, and surrounded by 
the world, is far more alive to the visible and the 
temporal, than the unseen and the real: it is 
deceived by what appears pleasing or beautiful; 
the influence of what is present and near outweighs 
that oi the distant, though of infinitely greater 
worth, it is the work of the parent to present 
to the child the true motives of action, and thus 
aid it in refusing the evil and choosing the good. 
The beauty of virtue, the nobility and happiness 
of self-denial, the pleasure that duty brings, the 


be of 
ce of 

the 
essed 

evil 
shild- 
pTOWS 
must 
er on 
must 
l and 


ice of 
otives 
gs and 
ented 
with 
ature, 
ed by 
1d the 
it is 
itiful ; 
veichs 
reater 
resent 
l thus 
good. 
piness 
x8, the 


The Child choosing the Good. 181 


fear and the favour of God,—-not in these words, 
but clothed in forms suited to a child’s appre- 
hension, the parent holds up to his view objects 
that wake emotions by which the will is guided 
gladly to choose the good. Amid the thought- 
lessness of childhood, that lives in the seen and 
the present, the parent acts as a conscience to the 
child, calling it to he true to its higher instincts 
and convictions, and leads to the true pleasure 
with which duty rewards even the young. But 
the training of the child aims specially at teaching 
it, to refuse the evil and choose the good when 
there is no parent near to help. In conscience 
evéry man possesses a guardian and helper of 
inestimable value in the path of right. A wise 
training can do much to establish the authority 
of this inner rule, and to lead the child to look 
upon the indwelling guest, not as a spy ora 
reproachful enemy, but as the truest friend and 
best companion. Let the authority of the parent 
and of conscience be linked together, that even 
in the parent’s absence the weight of his influence 
may be felt. If the success of all true education 
consists in aiding the pupil to teach himself, the 
aim and success of moral training must specially 
consist in forming the habit of ruling himself, and 
always listening to the inward monitor. Cultivate 
in the child the power of self-control, of recollec- 
tion, of quiet thoughtfulness, that he may always 


182 The Children for Christ : 
wait to listen for the gentle inner whisper that 
tells him to refuse the evil and choose the good. 

Conscience, however, can only tell to do the 
right; what the right is it cannot always teach. 
The mind may be wrong in its views of good 
and evil, and faithfulness to conscience may 
even lead to choose the evil and refuse the 
good. The inner light shines upon the path of 
what we think duty; it is only the light from 
above that shows what that duty really is, ‘Thy 
Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my 
path.’ One of the most precious influences of a 
godly education is, not so much the knowledge 
of what the Bible contains, as the consent of the 
heart to take God’s Word as the standard of good 
and evil, and the desire to let it decide in every 
choice. The authority of the parent, of conscience, 
of God’s Word: here is a threefold cord -that 
cannot be breken, binding the child to the throne 
and the will of God, there to know to refuse the 
evil and choose the good. 

We need hardly repeat again how such an 
education is not to take the place of Divine grace, 
but to be its servant ; both in preparing the way 
for God’s Spirit, by forming a strong and intel- 
ligent will to be afterwards used in God’s service, 
and in following up the work of grace, by guiding 
it in the path where all God’s perfect will is to 
be accepted as the rule of conduct. Such a 


that 
od. 


» the 
teach. 
good 
may 
> the 
uth of 
from 
‘Thy 
to my 
s of a 
vledge 
of the 
f good 
every 
cience, 
1 -that 
throne 
ise the 


ich an 
3 pTAce, 
he way 
| intel- 
gervice, 
guiding 
ll is to 


Such a 


The Child choosing the Good. 183 


training, that the child may know to refuse the 
evil and choose the good, is of unspeakable value. 
When once the eyes of the parent are opened to 
the meaning of the words, he will see how in every 
step of life, in every action, there are two motives 
contending for mastery, and the choosing between 
the evil and the good is the solemn lifework being 
carried on all the day. He will recognise the 
responsibility entrusted to him of awakening, 
guiding, strengthening that young will, on which 
such infinite issues depend, and feel that if he can 
do this one thing well, he has cone his highest work. 
To know to refuse the evil and choose the good will 
be to choose Christ and holiness and eternal life. 
Dear parents, God’s highest gift to man in 
creation was his will, that he might choose the 
will of his God. Your highest work is to take 
charge of that will in your child, and be God’s 
minister in leading it back to His service. Pray 
earnestly for light on this holy trust committed 
to you. Study carefully the wondrous character 
of this remains of the Divine image. See in it 
the power to which the gospel comes to make it 
free to choose God and His service, Christ and 
His love. Realize your own incompetency aright 
to influence a will in which the powers of light 
and darkness are wrestling for supremacy. And 
cast yourself on the covenant for the leading of 
the Holy Spirit in your work, for the renewal of 


184 The Children for Christ : 


the Holy Spirit in your child, that it may be your 
and his joy to see his will given up to choose the 
good, to choose God. 


O Lord my God! how holy is the work Thou 
hast committed to a parent. Open my eyes, I do 
pray Thee, to see its responsibility. May the 
traces of the Divine image to be seen in the 
child’s power of willing, and so making himself, 
stand out clear to me. May the tremendous 
issues for time and eternity depending upon the 
right use of his will be ever before me. May 
I feel aright the danger from the corruption of 
sin within and temptation from without. May I 
realize the wonderful power entrusted to me, by 
Thy giving the child’s will into my power. And 
may a due sense of my own impotence, and Thy 
Almighty Power working in me, combine to keep 
me humble and yet hopeful, conscious of my 
weakness, but confident in Thee. O God! teach 
me to form and train the will of my child to 
refuse the evil and choose the good. 

Lord! make me very gentle and patient under 
a sense of my own wilfulness. And very watchful, 
because of the sleepless vigilance of the enemy, 
and the hourly danger of my child. Ever faithful 
to fulfil my commission well. And very full of 
trust, because Thou art my Help and my Father, 

O my God! do it for Jesus’ sake. Amen, 


‘] 
tliy 
shall 


your 
e the 


Thou 
TI do 
\ the 
n the 
mself, 
ndous 
n the 
May 
on of 
ay I 
e, by 
And 
d Thy 
» keep 
f my 
teach 
iild to 


under 
tchful, 
eneiy, 
aithful 
full of 
ather, 
Dy 


God's Spirit in our Children. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-FOURTH Day. 


God's Spirit in our Chilvren. 


‘I will pour My Spirit upon thy seed, and My blessing on 
tliy offspring. One shall say, I am the Lord’s; and another 
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord.’—IsA. xliv. 3, 5. 


VEN as in the prophecy of the outpouring of 
the Holy Spirit, quoted by Joel on the day 

of Pentecost, express mention is made of the sons 
and daughters, so here too the blessing of an out- 
poured Spirit is made to the seed and offspring of 
God’s people. The root-principle of the covenant, 
promising grace to the fathers for the children, to 
the children for the fathers’ sake and through the 
fathers, is to be the mark of the dispensation of 
the Spirit too. The promise is accompanied by the 
very distinct statement of what would be the fruit 
of the Spirit’s coming on the offspring. Not rest- 
ing content with a religion inherited from the 
fathers, the children would openly profess their 
personal faith in the words: I am the Lord’s, 
Through the power of the Holy Spirit the religion 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


7 


We Md Mag 


6” 


Corporation 


186 The Children for Christ : 


of parental training would become the religion of 
a personal profession. Let us seek to grasp the 
two thoughts,—the personal acknowledgment of 
the Lord as the fruit of the Spirit’s work, and the 
sure promise of the Spirit to do that work. 

Among all earnest parents there is the desire 
that, as their children grow up, they may be found 
coming forward to make personal confession of the 
faith in which they have been educated. If we 
enter fully into the mind of God, it will be one of 
the great aims of parental training to rear our 
children for such a profession. And yet there 
are many Christian parents who would hesitate 
to admit this. To some the dangers attending 
a distinctly religious education, of cultivating a 
formal and traditional faith, appears so great, 
that they leave their children to themselves; they 
would never think of asking them whether they 
can say, I am the Lord’s, or encouraging them to 
do so. They do not believe in the conversion of 
children : they are so impressible, and so. much the 
creatures of their surroundings, that such a profes- 
sion is not to be counted on, and ought rather to be 
avoided. Others are themselves, though living in 
the fear of God,-still so much in the dark on what 
they consider t'e intricate question of assurance 
of faith, that if they themselves have no liberty to 
say, I am the Lord’s, it is no wonder they never 
think of helping their children to say it. It is, as 


God's Spirit in our Children. 187 
they think, only the advanced believer who dare 
speak thus; in them it would be presumption 
and pride. With others still, though they admit 
in theory the duty of making such a confession, 
and the possibility of a child making it too, yet 
the heart is so cold and worldly, that the warm, 
loving confession of Jesus as their Lord is never 
heard from their lips. Family worship and religi- 
ous profession testify to anything but the living, 
loving attachment to a personal Saviour. Their 
children would never learn from them to say, I am 
the Lord’s. 

‘And yet we see it here promised so distinctly 
that the Spirit’s working, a living spiritual religion, 
will manifest itself thus, The experience of these 
last years has proved to many, who formerly were 
in doubt, that a distinct profession of Jesus as a 
Saviour is as sure a, fruit of the Spirit’s presence 
among the children as among older people, and 
that it can be quite as trustworthy too. A little 
reflection, too, will convince us that nothing can 
be more natural than that this should be the fruit 
of God’s blessing on the labours of believing 
parents. Do we not tell them from their youth 
that God is Love, and that He gave Jesus to bea 
Saviour ? .Do we not tell them that they belong 
to God, not only in right of creation and redemp- 
tion, but in virtue of our having given them to 
Him in baptism, and His having accepted them ? 


a ea 


AE LIE SES IY SP RANE AP I EET TATE RA ary 
¢ 


188 The Children for Christ: 


And why should it appear strange if the child 
believes what we say, and speaks it out, I am the 
Lord’s?> We,tell them that Jesus receives sinners 
who confess their sins and give themselves to Him 
to be cleansed, This truly is what we ought to 
hope for as the fruit of our instruction, that 
when he feels his sins the child goes and confesses 
them to the blessed children’s Friend, and believes 
that He does not cast him out, but accepts and 
pardons. Oh, let us be very careful of casting 
_ suspicion on the childlike, Iam the Lord’s! We 
teach the children what it means to speak thus: 
that it implies a giving ourselves to be His 
property, to do His will, and to acknowledge 
Him as Lord and Master. And if their young 
hearts are touched, and consent, oh.! let us beware 
of refusizg or doubting their profession, or of 
reproaching them when they fail; let us remember 
the promised fruit of the Spirit’s working among 
the children is this: I am the Lord’s. 

And are we then to think that there is no danger 
at all connected witb it? And are we to rest content 
with the momentary impressions which speak the 
words without inquiring farther? By no means. 
As with those who have come to years, so with 
children : impressions may be temporary and pro- 
fession superficial, We have been warning against 
the disposition that doubts the reality of all 
children’s conversion and profession: God’s Word 


Spirit 
given 
filled 
in th 
homes 
still ; 
Spirit 
extent 
to cor 
to wai 
of, Hi 
parent 
that H 
means 
childre 
Word. 
minist 
dispen 
the H 
youth 
his wo 
in fear 
stratio 


God's Spirit in our Children. 189 
teaches us what it is that will give them sincerity 
and reality. Let us consider well the second lesson 
our prophecy teaches: it is the Spirit’s working 
that will make the ‘I am the Lord’s’ Spirit and 
truth. 

And in what way is the outpouring of the 
Spirit, that is to have this blessed result, to be 
given? Blessed be God! the promise was ful- 
filled on the day of Pentecost.. The Spirit dwells 
in the Church of Christ, in the hearts and the 
homes of His believing disciples. There may now 
still at times come special outpourings of the 
Spirit in revival movements of wider or smaller 
extent, when the young come forward in numbers 
to confess their Lord. But for this we have not 
to wait. In promising the Spirit to the offspring 
of, His people, God would have us expect that 
parental instruction, that a consecrated home life, 
that His ordinances of famiiy religion, are to be the 
means the Spirit is to use and biess for leading the 
children to Christ. The Spirit ever works in the 
Word; to the child the parent is the God-ordained 
minister of the Word. The blessing of the new 
dispensation is this, that the parent may count on 
the Holy Spirit for his children too, from their 
youth up, and that all his teaching and training, 
his word and work, though it be in weakness, and 
in fear, and in much trembling, may be in demon- 
stration of the Spirit and of power. 


ES SLI NR IIRL IEE IE IIE IOS BEE IRE SR om 


190 The Children for Christ : 

But then everything depends upon the parent 
himself as a minister of the Spirit. He must live 
and walk, he must be led and sanctified, by the 
Spirit, he must speak and pray in the Spirit, and 
he must in faith claim and accept the promise of 
the Spirit for his child. It is possible, we said, 
that a child’s profession, I am the Lord’s, may be 
of no value. This depends greatly on the parents 
and those who surround it; he takes the meaning 
of the words very much from them. If to them 
it be the language of a joyous faith and consecra- 
tion, the child unconsciously catches the meaning 
from the spirit in which he sees them lived out. 
If they watch over his weakness, and continually 
speak words of help and encouragement, even the 
little child can, amid childlike stumblings and 
failures, prove the reality of the change of which 
this profession was the token. 

Dear parents! let God’s thoughts for your 
children enter your hearts and rule there. These 
two thoughts specially: God’s Spirit and my 
children belong to each other: I may in faith 
claim the Spirit’s dwelling and working in them. 
And my child may know and say that he is the 
Lord’s: the fruit of the Spirit is the faith of the 
heart and the confession of the lips, Jesus is mine. 
Let this promise be your strength as you deal with 
God, your strength as you deal with your child: 
They that wait on the Lord shall not be ashamed. 


God's Spirit in owr Children, 191 


O Lord God! we draw nigh to Thee to claim the 
fulfilment of this promise on behalf of our beloved 
children. Lord! may they from their very youth 
have Thy Spirit poured out upon them, that even 
in the simplicity of childhood they may say, I am 
the Lord’s. 

O Lord! be pleased to this end to fill us Thy 
servants with Thy Holy Spirit. May a'l our 
home life and our parental influence be a channel 
through which the Spirit reaches each child. 
God! help us so to live that the life that breathes 
around him may be life in the Spirit. 

' Specially we ask Thee, gracions Lord! to give 
us great singleness of aim in training our children 
for Thee alone. Oh! that the indwelling of the 
blessed Spirit may not be thought of as something 
hardly to be expected, but as the one gift the 
Father loves to bestow, and the first thing the 
child needs to grow up into a noble man and 
Christian. Lord! let our training of him, as Thy 
exclusive sacred property, to know and say he is 
Thine, be our one desire. And we can count on 
this, that each child we so consecrate to Thee, 
Thou wilt, by Thy Spirit, consecrate for Thine 
own. May we so experience how wonderfully 
the parent’s work and the Spirit’s work blend in 


securing the seed of Thy people for Thyself. 
Amen. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-FIFTH DAY, 
From Generation to Generation. 


‘My righteousness shall be for ever, and My salvation from 
generation to generation,’—Isa. li. 8. 


UP HEN we speak of a generation in the his- 


2 


'¥ tory of man, we think of the shortness of 
gzuman life and the continual change among men. 
‘One generation passeth away, and another genera- 
tion cometh: but the earth abideth for. ever.’ 
What a contrast between man and the heavens 
above, or the mountains around him,—always the 
same. What a contrast, still more, between man, 
whose life is but a span, and the unchangeable, 
the everlasting God. 

We shall find in God’s Word that it ioves not 
so much to contrast as to link together these 
opposites ; it lifts man out of the transitoriness of 
life, to find his refuge in the unchangeableness of 
God. ‘As for man, his days are as grass; but the 
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to ever- 


From Generation to Generation. 193 


lasting upon them that fear Him, and His 
righteousness unto children’s children.’ ‘O God, 
take me not away in the midst of my days: Thy 
years are throughout all generations. The earth 
and the heavens shall perish, but Thou shalt endure. 
Thou art the same, and Thy years shall have no 
end. The children of Thy servants shall continue, 
and their seed shall be established before Thee.’ 
Death may separate one generation from another 

God’s mercy connects them, passing on from 
one to another; His righteousness, which is ever- 
lasting, reveals itself as salvation from generation 
to generation. At every point where. God meets 
and acts with man, there are two sides to be 
regarded—the Divine and the human. So it is 
here too, in the transmission of God’s salvation 
from generation to generation. God’s faithfulness 
inspires that of man, and therefore demands and 
rewards it. In some passages it might almost 
appear as if everything depended upon man and 
his keeping the covenant; and so it does indeed. 
But not as if this keeping of the covenant were to 
be his work, by which he secures the blessing. 
No, but it is in the mercy and truth of God, as 
these are known and trusted, that human faithful- 
ness has its strength and security. To know 
God’s purpose, to believe God’s promise, to adore 
God’s unchanging faithfulness, communicates to 
the soul the very spirit of that faithfulness, and 

N 


Pdi 


194 The Children for Christ : 


binds us firmly to Him, so that He who is all in se 
all can work out His purpose in us. th 

Let us first look at the Divine side of this th 
salvation from generation to generation. In sec 
Isaiah, from whom we have these words, the truth Or 
is expressed with great frequency and distinct- oT 
ness: ‘As for Me, this is My covenant with them, - anc 
saith the Lord; My Spirit that is upon thee, and wit 
My words which I have put in thy mouth, shall | cov 
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth hea 
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s | her 
seed, from henceforth and for ever’ (Isa. lix. 21). par 
This speaks of New Testament times. When tos 


God made His covenant with David, He antici- 
pated generations in which there would be dis- 
obedience, and therefore punishment (2 Sam. ii. 
14; Ps, lxxxix. 30-33), But here the promise of 
the Spirit and the Word in the mouth of God’s 
Anointed One and His people is not to pass from 
the mouth of the seed’s seed. And blessed be 
God! there are families in which for generations, 
and even for centuries, the Word and the Spirit 
have not departed from the mouth of the seed’s 
seed. Let us only open the heart to take in the 
promise, and to let it grow within us.! 

Then we have that other beautiful promise: ‘Z 
will direct their work in truth, and J will make 
an everlasting covenant with them. And their 
' See Note. 


From Generation to Generation. 195 


seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and 
their offspring among the people: all that see 
them shall acknowledge them, that they are the 
seed which the Lord hath blessed’ (Isa. lxi. 9). 
Or, as it is otherwise expressed (Isa. Ixv. 23), 
‘They are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, 
and their offspring with them.’ The covenant 
with Abraham and David was also an everlasting 
covenant, but its fulfilment was reached over the 
heads of generations that proved faithless. But 
here, in the power of the promised Spirit, believing 
parents may claim and expect, from child to child, 
to see the blessing of the Lord. This is to be the 
fruit of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit; the 
promise, ‘Thou, and thy son, and thy.son’s son,’ is 
to have its literal fulfilment. And this not only 
for our comfort and joy, and the blessing on our 
children, but that God may be known and glorified. 
‘Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles.’ 
To be God’s witnesses on earth, if need be, among 
the Gentiles to the end of the earth: it is for this 
that the Word and the Spirit are not to depart 
from the mouth of our seed from henceforth and 
for evermore. 

Let us look now from the human side at the 
fulfilment of this promise: ‘My salvation from 
generation to generation.’ Most strikingly God’s 
purpose is set forth in the words of Psalm Ixxviii. 
(4-7): ‘We will not hide from their children, 


196 The Children for Christ : 
showing to the generation to come the praises of 
the Lord, and His strength, and the wonderfal 
works He hath done. For He established a testi- 
mony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, 
which He commanded our fathers, that they should 
make them known to their children; that the 
generation to come might know them, even the 
children which ‘should be born, who should arise 
and declare them to their children; that they 
might set their hope in God, and not forget the 
works of God, but keep His commandments,’ 
And then we read (Ps. cxlv. 4), ‘One genera- 
tion shall praise Thy works to another;’ the 
triumphant joy of that psalm of praise being the 
spirit in which the parents tell their child of 
God’s glory and goodness. Here we have the 
human side. Parents who know God show His 
praise, and His strength, and‘His wonderful works 
to their children. Parental instruction is in the 
ministry of the Spirit, not less but more than in 
the old covenant, a testifying for God in the 
spirit of praise, telling what He has done to us, 
His strength and His wonderful works. And so 
the children are taught not to forget the works of 
God, but to set their hope on Him and keep His 
commandments, to trust and to obey Him. And 
so His righteousness, which is from everlasting to 
everlasting, becomes salvation from generation to 
generation. 


genera 


must ] 
God ; 
what 
and a 
with 
whole 
our fa 
inspire 
believi 
joyful 
the m«¢ 
living 
I ma 
consec 
blessec 


From Generation to Generation. 197 


Parents! it is God’s will that His salvation 
should be from generation to generation in your 
family too; that your children should hear from 
you, and pass on to their children, the praise of 
the Lord. Oh, let us seek to enter into God’s 
plans, and with our whole heart labour earnestly 
to secure the blessing and to please our Father! 
We know what is needed—nothing but whole- 
hearted devotion to God. But nothing less will 
do. God’s salvation must not be a secondary 
thing, something to be enjoyed along with the 
world. It must be the first thing. We must set 
our whole heart upon it, even as God does. It 
must be the one thing we live for, to glorify this 
God; it is such a life, proving to the children 
what the joy of God’s salvation is, a blessedness 
and a delight, that will influence them to come 
with us, that we may do them good. It is this 
whole-hearted devotion that will give strength to 
our faith and confidence to our hope. Under its 
inspiration our prayers will be persevering and 
believing. It will impart to our instruction the 
joyful tone of assurance, and make our whole life 
the model for our children. It is one generation 
living for God that will secure the next for Him ; 
I may ask and expect that my whole-hearted 
consecration to God will, in His infinite mercy, be 
blessed to guide them; His salvation is from 
generation to generation. 


198 The Children for Christ : 


Gracious and most blessed Father! I bow 
before Thee once again with the prayer, to open 
my eyes and my heart, that I may fully appre- 
hend Thy holy purpose with an earthly parent- 
age, to transmit through it Thy blessing. O my 
God! let Thy word, ‘ my salvation from generation 
to generation,’ so fill my heart that my calling and 
duty, with Thy promise and purpose, may be 
equally clear to me, and the salvation of my 
children be as sure as my own. 

And grant, Lord! that in Thy light I may 
realize and manifest fully what salvation is— 
salvation from sin and its power unto the holiness 
and the service of God. Let it be in me a salva- 
tion that fills the heart with gladness, and the 
lips with praise, and the whole life with purity 
and love. Let the salvation in which I walk, and 
in which I train the children, indeed be, not what 
man calls so, but the salvation of God. 

O my God! I do beseech Thee, give me grace 
that this be the one heirloom of-their parents my 
children cherish, the one thing transmitted in our 
home from child to child, the salvation, the love, 
the joy, the service of God. Yes, Lord! Thou art 
the Eternal and Unchanging One; let it be from 
generation to generation, Amen, 


bow 
Open 
!ppre- 
prent- 
) my 
ration 
g and 
ay be 
f my 


may 
. is— 
liness 
salva- 
d the 
purity 
, and 
what 


grace 
ts my 
n our 
love, 
Du art 
from 


From Generation to Generation. 199 


NOTE. 


In the life of Fidelia Fiske, the devoted Persian 
missionary, we have an instance of the covenant 
blessing descending not only through genera- 
tions, but through centuries, We read in her 
Memoir : — 

‘In the year 1637, when the effort seemed 
hopeless to establish in England “a practical world 
based on belief in God,” two brothers, William 
and the Rev. John Fiske, emigrated from the 
county of Suffolk to America, settling first in 
Salem, Massachusetts, and subsequently in the 
adjoining town of Wenham. According to the 
testimony of Cotton Mather, who places the name 
of John Fiske in his list of reverend, learned, and 
holy divines, by whose evangelical ministry the 
churches of New England have been illuminated, 
they were children “ ‘of pious and worthy parents, 
yea, of grandparents, and great-grandparents, 
eminent for zeal in the true religion.” 

‘Let this last sentence be noticed, These two 
young Englishmen were the children of ancestors 
“eminent for zeal in the true religion;” we shall 
thus be able to arrive at one of the most encour- 
aging and remarkable instances of the blessing of 
the Lord in the seed “of the godly. It may y be 
presumed that these great-grandparents of Suifolk 
lived a hundred years betore these two brothers 
sailed for America. 

‘Let parents observe, and let the fidelity of God 


1 Fidelia Fiske, the Record of a Oonaecrated Life, Morgan & 
Scott, 


200 The Children for Christ : 


to His promise be adored—for more than three 
hundred and thirty years the line of the holy seed 
has been preserved. 

‘From William Fiske,a man of great intelligence 
and Christian integrity, descended a second 
William, who inherited largely his father’s abil- 
ities and virtues, was deacon of the Church, and, 
like his father, held various offices of public trust 
and honour, representing his town for six years in 
the General Court. 

‘Ebenezer Fiske, son of William, jun., was born 
in 1079, resided at Wenham, was deacon of the 
Church, and died at the age of 92. The son of 
Ebenezer was born in 1786, and removed to Shel- 
burne. He was a man of inflexible religious 
principles, and exerted great influence on the 
growing community. His wife was a woman of 
energy and eminent piety, and would frequently 
set apart whole days to pray that her children 
might be a goodly seed, even to the latest genera- 
tion. In 1857 three hundred of the descendants 
of this praying mother were members of Christian 
churches ! 

‘Ebenezer Fiske was the child of these Shel- 
burne settlers. He was a man of noble form, 
benignant face, saintly character, and lived to the 
patriarchal age of 92. His son Rufus was a 
devout and exemplary Christian, sound in doctrine, 
firm in principle, and of a meek and benevolent 
spirit. His wife, the mother of the subject of this 
Memoir, was a woman of great activity and equa- 
bility, a native of Taunton, Massachusetts, 

‘What a blessed testimony is this to the faithful- 


From Generation to Generation. 201 


ness of God to His people through more than ten 
generations! How impossible for any human 
mind to estimate the chain of sanctifying influ- 
ence, which must have extended more and more 
as time rolled on! Ye praying fathers and 
mothers, let this remarkable genealogy confirm 
your faith in the promise of God. The emotions 
of the sainted head of such a house, as he beholds 
his descendants through successive generations 
coming into heaven, and the numerous converts 
they have won from Satan and from eternal 
death, can scarcely be conceived, much _ less 
described.’ 


CpRunmmnnabhmeseesnae 


dl 


Phe Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-SIXTH DAY. 


Che Crowning Blessing. 


*I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh ; and your sons and 
your daughters shall prophesy,’—JoeEx ii, 28. 


i HIS is the promise of which the day of 1. 

. Pentecost was the fulfilment and the inter- Spirit 

pretation. The coming of the Comforter, the object 
baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, of tes 
the endowment with power from on high, the last W 
receiving the power of the Holy Ghost to be this. 
His witnesses to the end of the earth,—all these GNEE, 
precious promises of Christ were comprehended influe 
and fulfilled in the fulfilment of Joel’s prophecy. | becau 
It contains the title-deeds of what the birthright that 
and the baptism of Christ's Church secures to her : seekit 
the Holy Ghost from the throne of the exalted . wonlc 
Saviour, as her power for testimony and for heart 
suffering, for triumph and for blessing, is the quali! 
heavenly sign with which she has been marked waste 


and sealed, suffic: 


The Crowning Blessing. 203 


In this foundation promise, what a place is given 
to the children! ‘Your sons and daughters shall 
prophesy ; your old men shall dream dreams; 
your young men shall see visions,’ The seed ot 
God’s people have such a place in His heart, when 
He deals with His people their offspring are so 
continually in His thoughts, that even in the 
promise of Pentecost the first thing introduced is, 
not the disciples now anointed to preach, but the 
sons and the daughters prepared to prophesy. 
Let us try and take in what it teaches us of 
God’s purpose, of a parent’s hope, and of a child’s 
education. 

1. God's purpose. With the gift of the Holy 
Spirit to His Church, God had an object, and that 
object was power, power from on high for her work 
of testifying to the ends of the earth. The very 
last words of the Master (Acts i. 8) speak only of 
this. All the other blessings of the Spirit, assur- 
ance, joy, holiness, love, have this as their aim— 
influence, fruit-bearing, the power to bless. It is 
because so many Christians do not understand this 
that there is often such a weary and fruitless 
seeking for the blessings of the Spirit, when they 
would come as unsought, if there were but a whole- 
hearted surrender to what the Spirit is given to 
qualify for, God’s service and work. No wise man 
wastes power: he economizes it, and puts in just 
sufficient for the work. According to the work our 


ss. 
aaa lL SMART NTS SECRET Lons — SRO mM _ . 
: — RRL AGS NE ARE ESOT am ca ae te wD ean 2 ae esate 
es » 


“eee 


204 The Children for Christ : 


will undertakes, and our faith expects to perform, 
is the power, the measure of the Spirit God 
gives, utm 

This is true of our children too. In Joel’s arm 
prophecy God reveals His purpose with our sons 
and daughters. Under the mighty breathings of 
His Spirit they are to prophesy. What this 


prophesying is Paul tells us: ‘If all prophesy, and wou 
there come in one unbelieving or unlearned, he is mak 
reproved by all, he is judged by all: the secrets of of tl 
his heart are made manifest: and so he will fall shou 
down on his face and worship God, declaring that for 
God is among you indeed.’ This is prophesying shou 
in the power of the Spirit, convicting even the | tion 
unbelieving and unlearned. And for such prophets and 
God wants our sons and daughters. And for such 2. 
prophets we ought, in this dispensation of the pare) 
Holy Spirit, to educate our sons and daughters. purp 
The world is in sore need of them. The Church is that. 
suffering for want of them. Supply always creates of Gi 
demand. Because there is so small supply, the mind 
Church thinks it has done something great when versi 
there is annually some increase in the amount of maxi 
its subscriptions and the number of its agents. conte 
But oh! if there were a heart to enter into God’s of fu 
purpose, and the Church and parents understood that 
what glory it is definitely to train our sons and other 
daughters to be prophets of the Most High, to th 


witnesses and messengers for Jesus our Lord, of th 


The Crowning Blessing. 205 


what a change it-would bring in our modes of 
operation! As the children of this world do their 
utmost to obtain some high commission in the 
army or navy, some good appointment in the 
civil service or in business, why should not the 
children of God press around the throne of their 
Father, seeking no favour so earnestly as that He 
would fulfil this promise in their children, and 
make them His prophets wherever He has need 
of them. God’s purpose is that the Holy Spirit 
should take possession of our sons and daughters 
for His service; that uur sons and daughters 
should be filled with the Holy Spirit of consecra- 
tion and power for service. They belong to Him, 
and He to them. 

2. The parent's hope. Just imagine believing 
parents entering fully and heartily into this 
purpose of God, acting upon it as a settled thing 
that they are training their children for the service 
of God’s Spirit, could any doubt still arise in their 
minds as to whether they might count on the con- 
version of their children? Aim high, is a daily 
maxim; you will accomplish more than he who is 
content with a lower range. This is the blessing 
of full consecration: while it aims at the highest 
that God has promised, the secondary gifts, that 
others struggle life-long for in vain, fall unsought 
to their share. Nothing will give such confidence 
of the salvation of our children, of the Spirit’s 


i> 
: * 
5 RNA TENE HARE TCE ET eR BONIS URIS LMRRN IS EAR YEN MORSE IBEN TT ANC Nn INA oe ee . — 
Fr Rear 2, PORE PER RAP COE ROG DEY sahonareaiieiaeesi 


eaomengeirantichenanetaniorse tmp ensin as eae peC esate sia Baar 


Prine ED 


206 The Children for Christ : 


working for conversion and renewal, as the con- 
sciousness of having surrendered them undividedly 
to the service of God and His Spirit. 

And it will equally inspire us with confidence 
in regard to fitness for parental duty. We have 
no conception of the extent to which self-interest 
enfeebles faith and. self-sacrifice emboldens it. If 
I know I am very much seeking the salvation of 
my children for their own and for my sake, the 
soul cannot find the strength to rise to the con- 
fident assurance that all grace for training my 
child will be given. But let me lose all selfish 
thought of myself and them in the childlike, 
generous placing them at God’s disposal, and it 
will become impossible to doubt that my Father 
will give me grace for the work I do for Him. 

And then, though there is a diversity of gifts, 
and I may not see each child used in the direct 
service of the Master, I may be sure that the 
heart’s purpose is accepted, and the effort to train 
all my children to be the vessels of God’s Holy 
Spirit has had its elevating influence on my own 
soul, on my home, on each of my children, what- 
ever their external calling in life may have to be. 
The more distinct my acknowledgment in family 
religion that in this dispensation the Spirit claims 
all, the more may I depend upon His presence with 
me and mine. » . 

3. The children’s. training, Such a purpose in 


God’s 
clear] 
will, i 
C 
of hay 
Maste 
nature 
metho 
aim o 
be dor 
form 
obedie 
and te 
humili 
the Hx 
Christi 
prophe 
childre 
there h 
want t 
secure 
Oh, let 
we see 
sacrific 
we pra 
countec 
ones wl 
work. 
And 


Dall ewe Te SFOS —_— 


The Crowning Blessing. 207 


God’s heart, and such a hope in the parent's heart 
clearly apprehended, how they ought to, how they 
will, influence the children’s training ! 

Cultivate every mental power, with the view 
of having a sharp instrument prepared for the 
Master’s use. Cultivate even what are counted 


natural virtues—diligence and decision, order and. 


method, promptness and. firmness, with the high 
aim of having the child the fitter for the work to 
be done. Cultivate every moral power to be the 
form prepared for the Holy Spirit’s filling. Let 
obedience to conscience and to law, let self-control 
and temperance, let strict integrity and justice, let 
humility and love, be aimed at in education, that 
the Holy Spirit may have them to form a noble 
Christian, an efficient servant of the Lord, a true 
prophet. The prize that parents aim at for their 
children is often counted worthy of any sacrifice ; 
there have been those who have willingly suffered 
want to give their sons a liberal education, or to 
secure their daughters a position in the world. 
Oh, let us so set our hearts upon the promotion 
we seek for our children, that all thought of 
sacrifice passes away as we study and labour, as 
we pray and believe, to have them in very deed 
counted worthy of a place among the separated 
ones whom the Spirit of the Lord anoints for His 
work. 

And now we close our meditations on the Old 


a ‘ 


car een eee 


f , 3 
‘ | { 
i 
} 
( 
f 
\ 
| 
: 
ti 
S @ 


i 
| ot 
| 


208 The Children for Chris 

Testament testimony as to the place children occupy 
in the purpose and promise of God. We have seen 
what God would be for our children—a God in cove- 
nant, with the covenant blessing of the blood and the 
Spirit of Jesus. And we have seen what He would 
have our children be to Him—a covenant seed, to 
receive and transmit and multiply the blessing 
through the earth. And we have seen what He 
would have parents be, as standing between Him 
and their children—the ministers of the covenant, 
to sprinkle and plead the blood with Him, to 
receive the Spirit from Him, and by example and 
training and life to communicate the blessing to 
them, to be the channels for the Spirit’s training 
them for His service. 

God help us to learn these three lessons. God 
help us to believe and receive all He is willing to 
be for our children through us. God help us to 
give and train the children for all He would have 
them be. God help us to be faithful sureties for 
our children, to seek for them nothing less than 
God seeks, and so to live that from our homes 
may go forth sons and daughters to prophesy in 
His name. | 


O Lord our God! we thank Thee again for the 
institution of the family, as Thy Divine appoint- 
ment for transmitting Thy salvation to all genera- 
tions. And we thank Thee for the revelation of 


Thy 
serv 
of b 
the 
the 
daug 

Q 
Give 
of th 
powe 
for 
consé 
daug 
Ghos 

O 
claim 
Spirit 
offeri: 
powe’ 
labou 
He cz 
fill tl 
in ha 
daugl 


The Crowning Blessing. 209 


Thyself as the covenant God of the children of Thy 
servants, pledging Thyself to fulfil all Thy promises 
of blessing. And we thank Thee most of all for 
the promise of the Spirit, of Thy Holy Spirit, of 
the Spirit of Thy Son, to dwell in our sons and 
daughters. 

Q Lord! fulfil Thy promise to our children. 
Give us grace to train them for Thee, in the faith 
of the Spirit’s working, of the Spirit’s coming with 
power. Give us grace to prepare them to be meet 
for the Master’s use, every gift cultivated and 
consecrated for Thy service. Let our sons and 
daughters prophesy in the power of the Holy 
Ghost. 

O Lord! bless all believing parents. Let Thy 
claim on their children, let Thy promise of the 
Spirit, let the inconceivably high privilege of 
offering their children to Thee for service, let the 
power promised to parents, let the crying need for 
labourers, let the Spirit’s seeking for those whom 
He can use as the prophets of the Most High, so 
fill their hearts, that all their training may be 
in harmony with Thy purpose: ‘Your sons and 
daughters shall prophesy.’ Amen. 


earn OE 


a i lain eer eee nee ened 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-SEVENTH Day, 


The Heavenly anv the Garthly Father. 


‘If ye, being evil, know how to give good gifta unto your 
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven 
give good gifts to them that ask Him ?’—Marr. vii, 11, 


E began our meditations on the Old Testa- 

ment with man created in the image, after 
the likeness of God, and the home on earth the 
picture of the home in heaven. The glory of 
the New Testament is its fuller revelation of the 
Father in heaven: we can have no better begin- 
ning for our New Testament studies of what God 
means family life to be, than to see what light the 
fatherliness of God casts upon our own father- 
hood, and upon what-we are to be to our children. 

1. And first we note how Jesus wants us to 
rise from and through the experiences of father- 
hood on earth to know the Father in heaven 
aright. Not as if our fatherhood were the original 
and the reality, to be used by way of comparison 


v, 


your 
eaven 


esta- 
after 
the 
of 
the 
ogin- 
God 
t the 
ther- 
dren. 
8 to 
her- 
aven 
ginal 
rison 


The Heavenly and the Earthly Father. 211 


and illustration to make God’s relation clear to 
us. By no means. God is the true Father: from 
eternity, in His very nature, as the God of Love. 
Fatherhood was the glory and the blessedness of 
the Divine Being. And our fatherhood on earth. 
has been given as a reflection of His, and to lead us 
to a participation in its honour and joy. We, too, 
are to taste the blessedness of begetiing a son in 
our likeness, having in him the object of our 
love, the reflection of our image, a companion and 


helper in all our work. 


But because this fatherhood in heaven is so 
high above us, we are to study the father-heart 
on earth, and from it continually rise into a truer 
and fuller apprehension of what God is to us, 
Home life is a school as much for training parents 
as children ; the deepest mysteries of God’s love 
are best studied by a parentin hisown bosom. As 
we think of our love to our children, the joy they 
give us, the tender sympathy their troubles wake, 
the patient kindness their dulness or wayward- 
ness. requires, the ready response their needs 
and requests meet with, Jesus wants us to look 
up and calculate how much more than in us 
who are evil all this must be in God, the Good 
and Perfect One, the Fountain of love He 
wants us to banish every shadow of unbelief 
from the heart, and live our life in the sunshine 
of God’s love. As we see what influence a parent 


EO ee Eee 


= pales nitessicccatitentane i ann ; " ; : 
_ aonhasenenetacin - 
— Sst meme i — 


212 « The Children for Christ : 


can exert on his child, breathing his disposition 
and even his will into him, securing his unbounded 
trust, He would have us be sure that the Father 
does love, and is able to breathe His own mind, 
His own disposition, what Jesus calls His own 
Spirit, into us. And as we claim and strive to 
secure the love and obedience of our children, as 
we long that they shc: Id find their happiness in 
our will, our friendship, our company, He asks 
us to remember that the Father loves to meet us 
in secret, that the voice and the trust of His 
child are His joy, and will meet a rich reward. 
What a study for every father, and every mother 
too, in each pulse of love and joy that swells the 
heart to mark the revelation of a love and joy 
that is bending over them, and longs to meet with 
the response of their childlike love and joy. And 
so, in the light of the fatherhood of earth, we rise 
to what fatherhood in heaven is. 

2. But then, again, the fatherhood in heaven 
will also cast its light on the fatherhood of earth, 
and teach us what it ought to be. In giving us the 
place and the name and the power of father, God 
has in a very real and solemn sense made us His 
image-bearers. He asks and expects us, in doing 
our work as such, in every way to copy Him, to 
act as like Him as possible. The parents who 
desire to bring a full blessing to their children must 
make God’s fatherhood their model and their study. 


with 
seeks 
has n 
less « 
for e) 
on ea 
to cai 
unde! 
objec 
Fre 
too, 1 
attain 
will s 
love ¢ 
then 
self-k 
the g 
might 
paren 
and tl 
surre 
and p 
in the 
the p 
traini 
Fro 

a ver 


must 


nidy. 


The Heavenly and the Earthly Father. 213 


They must enter into God’s purpose, and make 
it their own, and give themselves to pursue it 
with their whole heart. The heavenly Father 
seeks to educate children into His likeness: He 
has nothing higher to bestow on them; with nothing 
less can He be content, if they are to have a place 
for ever in His home. God has appointed parents 
on earth to be His ministers and fellow-workers, 
to carry out His plan: how can they, unless they 
understand it, and make its realization the first 
object of family life ? 

From the Father in heaven they must learn, 
too, the way in which that purpose is to be 
attained. In His dealings with His people they 
will see how He first came, as with Abraham, in 
love and kindness, securing trust and confidence ; 
then with law and its authority, to lead on to - 
self-knowledge and self-renunciation ; then with 
the gospel of full liberty in the Spirit, that we 
might no longer be children, but men. From Him 
parents will learn to combine love with authority, 
and through them to aim at the free and hearty 
surrender to all God’s will. In the tenderness 
and patience and self-sacrifice of the Divine love, 
in the firmness and righteousness of Divine rule, 
the parent will find the secret of successful 
training. 

From the Father must above all be learnt what 
a very personal thing such training is. How the 


214 The Children for Christ : 


Father has come down to us in Christ; how in 
His own example He shows us that He only 
wants us to be as He is; how in giving us His 
Spirit He would have us understand that father- 
hood longs to draw the child into perfect likeness 
and oneness with itself. As the earthly father 
gazes and studies, it will dawn upon him how the 
highest duty of our fatherhood is just to be what 
the child is to be. A father must breathe his 
own spirit into the child; he that as a child of 
the heavenly Father receives His Spirit day by 
day, can breathe this into his child too. Is it not 
a solemn but most blessed thing to be a parent ? 
first a child of the heavenly Father, and then His 
image, His substitute, His picture to the child 
on earth. 

3. This brings us toa third lesson. The earthly 
father must not only take the Father in heaven 
as his model and guide, but he must so reflect 
Him that the child may most naturally rise from 
him whom he sees to the unseen One whom he 
represents. A child loves its parents by natural in- 
stinct : as the child sees in the father all that is holy 
and worthy of honour, natural love becomes tlic 
homage of an affectionate and enthusiastic admira- 
tion. In a Christian father a child ought to have 
a better exposition than the best of sermons can 
give of the love and care of the heavenly Father, 
and all the blessing and joy He wants to bestow. 


name 
the }F 


The Heavenly and the Earthly Father, 215 

But to attain to this the parent must consciously 
and distinctly aim at making himself, and the 
name he bears, the ladder by which the child can 
ciimb to the Father above. It is when the bright, 
living, happy piety of the parents, a mingling of 
holy reverence to God with childlike love, shines on 
the children from their early youth, that the name 
of God as Father will become linked with all that 
is lovely and holy in the memory of a child. Not 
so much as a matter of reflection or thought, but 
as the life-breath taken in all unconsciously, the 
fatherhood of earth will have been the gate of the 
Father’s home above. 

And is it possible so to live that all this shall 
be true? The one thing the Father loves to give, 
the sum and centre of all His good gifts, is His 
own Holy Spirit—His Father-Spirit to be in us 
the spirit of a son. And we have only to believe, 
and as we believe, to receive, and as we receive, 
to yield to and live in the Spirit, and He will 
make our fatherhood the image of God’s, and from 
us too there will flow streams of living water to 
bless our children, 

What a world it would be if every Christian 
father set himself in true earnest to realize and 
fulfil his calling, and in his little home circle as 
God’s vicegerent to bear God’s name—the holy 
name of father; if, in a holy partnership with 
the Father in heaven, he yielded himself by Him 


215 The Children for Christ : 


to be taught, and sanctified, and used to train 
children for the Father who is in heaven. Shall 
we not,.all who are fathers, join, and shall not 
all mothers, with whom the fathers are so truly 
one, and on whom they so depend for what they 
are to be as fathers in the family, join too in the 
fervent prayer that the Fatber would make us all 
the worthy bearers of that name ? 


Our Father which art in heaven, we unite in 
an earnest prayer for all Thy children who bear 
the holy name of father. Give us, we beseech 
Thee, more insight into Thy Fatherhood, and 
what unspeakable riches of blessing for us and 
our children it includes. Let us, from the wonder- 
ful traits of Thine own likeness in our own 
feelings towards our children, rise up to believe 
and enjoy the Divine fulness of love which Thy 
heart and Thy name offer to us. Let our father- 
hood so teach us the blessedness of being the 
children of Thy Father-love. 

And then, our Father, give us to see how really 
Thou dost command and expect that our father- 
hood shall be nothing less than the reflection and 
the outflow of Thine own. Oh may they indeed 
be one; one in purpose, one in method, one in 
principle, one in spirit. O God! we want to be 
fathers to our children, just as Thou art to us: 
make us such, so that Thou canst fully use us 


The Heavenly and the Earthly Father. 217 


as the channels for thy Father-grace to our little 
ones. May they see in us true pictures of Him 
to whom we teach them to say, Our Father which 
art in heaven. 

Father! we look to Thy Son, and the ‘ how much 
more’ He taught us, for the answer to our prayer. 
We count upon the tenderness and the faith- 
fulness of Thy love, and upon Thy mighty power 
and Spirit, to bless the parents of Thy Church 
who cry to Thee. Amen. 


The Children for Christ. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


————y 


TWENTY-EIGHTH DAY. 


Children of the Hingdom. 


‘But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into 
outer darkness,’—Marrt, viii. 12. 


N what close union we have here before us 
the wonderful privilege and the terrible 
danger that attach to the place our children have 
in the Church of Christ. They are children of 
the kingdom: what more glorious! They can be 
cast out into outer darkness: what more awful ! 
The only way certainly to avoid the latter is fully 
to grasp the former; to let it be not a name but 
a power ruling and renewing the whole life. To 
this end let us try to apprehend all it implies. 
Children of the kingdom! What kingdom ? 
The answer is simple: the kingdom of God! And 
where is this kingdom? In heaven. It is that 
Divine rule or dominion which obtains in heaven 
and the whole heavenly world. Its centre is the 
Throne of God, on which He dwells who is the 


Children of the Kingdom. 219 


Holy One, from whom all life and all law and 
all love flow forth. Around that Throne are 
powers and principalities and dominions, with 
their untold myriads of holy spirits who do His - 
will and are the messengers of His power. Of 
that kingdom the mark is, that in God everything 
is love and blessing, in His subjects everything 
obedience and joy. 

And how can this heavenly kingdom be here 
on earth? When God created the heavens and 
the earth, it was with the object of securing new 
territory in which His heavenly empire might be 
established. But the power of another kingdom, 
the kingdom of Satan, interfered, and in the fall 
of man the coming of the kingdom was delayed. 
For four thousand years it was promised and 
hoped for, but the kingdom of heaven was not 
yet on earth. 

And how did this kingdom come? It was 
in the fulness of time, when the King Himself 
came to earth, that the message was heard: 
The kingdom of heaven is at hand, the kingdom 
of heaven is come unto you. He came, first 
in His own life as a subject and a servant, to 
show us what the spirit is that animates all the 
subjects of the kingdom — implicit obedience, 
delight in doing the will of God. In that obe- 
dience unto death He broke the power of Satan 
and of sin, showed forth the wondrous love with 


220 The Children for Christ : 


which as our King He loved us, and set us free 
for the blessed life of serving and obedience like 
His own. And then, when as King ascending to 
heaven, He took His seat upon the throne, the 
kingdom could come. In the outpouring of the 
Holy Spirit the kingdom came in power, and was 
set up in the hearts that had been prepared to 
receive Him, and to enter the kingdom. 

And who were the subjects of this kingdom ? 
Jesus had said: ‘Except a man be born again, lie 
cannot see the kingdom of God.’ Nothing less 
than the Spirit of God, the Spirit of heaven, 
coming in and taking possession of a man, could 
fit him to enter, or even sce the kingdom, or to 
live as one of its subjects. Dut with this solemn 
message Jesus had also spoken: ‘ Blessed are the 
poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven :’ 
to become an heir of the kingdom, nothing was 
needed but the consciousness and confession of 
poverty ; having nothing, we might possess all. 

And the marks vu. those who truly belong to 
this kingdom ? Nothing less than the marks by 
which the King was known on earth: obedience 
and love towards God, obedience to the uttermost, 
an absolute surrender to His will. And towards 
man, love, giving itself to live and die, to bring 
the blessings of the kingdom to all around. ‘The 
kingdom is not in word but in power;’ the 
kingdom of heaven above everything is in the 


Children of the Kingdom. 

infinite power of the eternal life: as the kingdom 
comes down, the Holy ‘Ghost, the power, comes 
too to give the strength to live as meinbers of the 
kingdom. In each one of whom the kingdom truly 
takes possession, the prayer, ‘Thy kingdom come,’ 
becomes the desire of the heart, and everything 
is subordinate to its extension and the manifesta- 
tion of its glory. : 

And who are the children of the kingdom ? 
Jesus spake this word even of the Jews who 
rejected the kingdom. God had in His great 
mercy committed the promise of the kingdom to 
Israel, and all its children were its heirs. And 
now our children, born under its influence, destined 
for its blessings, baptized into the fellowship of the 
Church, which is the nursery and training school 
of the kingdom,—our children are children of the 
kingdom— of such is the kingdom of heaven.’ 

And what is needed to secure for them the 
possession of the kingdom to which they have 
thus been made the heirs? That they may lose 
it, we see—children of the kingdom may be cast 
out into outer darkness. What is needed above 
everything is this, that they be so educated and 
trained under the influence and power of the 
heavenly life, in the very spirit of the kingdom, 
that the blessing which their name, as expressive 
of their destiny, brings, may become their own 
personal and everlasting possession. 


222 The Children for Christ : 


And who is to train them thus? Christian 
parents! this is our holy privilege. As children 
of the kingdom, they are entrusted to us to keep 
and nourish. The keynote of our education, the 
watchword in all our desires and efforts on their 
behalf, our plea with God for them, and with them 
for God, must be this : They are children of the 
kingdom. - To parents God has entrusted the high 
commission of leading their children on from the 
place where their title is only yet a name and a 
promise, to the life of possession and full enjoy- 
ment. 

And what is needed to enable the parent to 
do this? Nothing less than that with his whole 
heart he himself live in and for the kingdom of 
heaven. The atmosphere of the home must be 
the spirit of heaven; Christ’s command, ‘Seek 
first the kingdom of God,’ must be the ruling 
principle of all its conduct: unconsciously the 
child must receive the impression that not only 
personal blessing, but the interests and extension 
of God’s kingdom, are the hope and the joy of life. 
Parents whose citizenship is in heaven, who have 
in truth entered the kingdom, and live in it, will 
alone be found worthy or fit to train the children 
as heirs of the kingdom. 

And how are parents able thus to live? ‘My 
kingdom,’ Jesus said, ‘is not of this world: my 
kingdom is not from here.’ It is from above, 


sane areas arian rns pasaoneoaaacamaenaspaain nine aoicsannene mepion spine cncmasems ni 


nase ne nat ce peeing ap oioseaecabnts non diiti inaln 
nents 


ean. 


Owes WVUY’ fF & 


_ 
_ 


2° @® 


Children of the Kingdom. 223 


from heaven, from God, the kingdom comes ; it is 
from above, from heaven, from God, the Spirit and 
the life and the power of the kingdom must come 
each day. Coming out of the world, daily rising 
upward and entering into the Holiest within the 
veil through the blood, the believer must tarry in 
God’s presence in worship and surrender, until 
the anointing is fresh upon him; so only can he 
come down into his home, and consecrate it as the 
nursery for children of the kingdom. So long 
as we are content with just religion enough to 
save ourselves and our children, we must not be 
surprised if they remain unsaved: it is only in 
seeking to be filled with the Spirit, to have our 
whole life, like Christ’s, sacrificed for the kingdom, 
that we may count on the blessing of a successful 
education. ‘My kingdom is not of this world :’ 
the spirit of the world, perhaps unconsciously, 
ruling in the parents, destroys all that they hope to 
effect by their purposes, their precepts, or their 
prayers. In Christ’s command, ‘ First the king- 
dom, we have the secret and the certainty of a 
successful education. 

Parents! your children are children of the 
kingdom, the kingdom of God in heaven! Hold 
and love and train them as such, for God alone ! 
From God alone be your hope. From above, from 
above must be your help. Seek it in much prayer. 
Accept it in childlike faith, that believes that you 


224 The Children for Christ : 


A TT ttt te te 


have what you ask. Yield yourself to it, denying 
self, not allowing self any say in the guidance 
of your life orhome. Yield yourself to it, keeping 
the ear open every hour to hear the voice of the 
Holy Spirit, through whom alone the laws and the 
powers of the kingdom can work in us. 

Above all} remember Jesus! HE Saln, ‘Suffer 
little children to come UNTO ME, for of such is 
the kingdom of heaven.’ He is the King: in Him 
we have the kingdom as a Presence. Live with 
Him, on Him, in Him. He loves our children 
and looks after them ; His presence and love will 
more than anything fill us and them with a holy 
enthusiasm for the kingdom: so will they grow 
up in the kingdom and for the kingdom. And 
we shall taste the joy unspeakable of having our 
home, with its life and love and training, within 
the kingdom; yea, of having the kingdom of 
heaven within our home. 


Our Father which art in heaven, Thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and tlie glory. Blessed 
be Thy name, that by Thine Almighty power Thy 
kingdom, the kingdom of heaven, hath come to 
this earth, and will come, until the whole earth be 
filled with Thy glory. Blessed, too, be Thy name, 
that we and our little ones are the children of the 


kingdom. O Father! we look to thy Father-love | 


to give us who are fathers and mothers grace to 


Na ee 


realiz 
becat 
for T: 
asunc 
toget! 
our ] 
link : 
they 
growi 
Ble 
ones, 
Thee, 
spirit 
on eal 
the h 
kingdc 
we Wi 
not or 
sphere 
really 
Amen, 


Children of the Kingdom. 225 


realize how sacred our calling and our home is, 
because we are training children of the kingdom 
for Thee. Teach us, we pray Thee, never to put 
asunder what the words of our Lord have joined 
together—the children and the kingdom. May all 
our love and intercourse and influence help to 
link them inseparably with the kingdom. May 
they never know that they are not living and 
growing up in it. 

Blessed Lord Jesus! who didst say of the little 
ones, ‘Of such is the kingdom,’ we do beseech 
Thee, reveal to us what Thy kingdom is in its 
spiritual reality and glory; what it is even here 
on earth as the rule of God by the Holy Spirit in 
the hearts and lives of His people. May the 
kingdom of God be within us in such power, and 
we within it in such truth, that our children may 
not only have the name, but that the very atmo- 
sphere they breathe in our home be such as will 
really make them children of the kingdom, 
Amen, 


i 


oe en rn rT 


The Children for Christ : 


A YS 
—_—_. 


chil 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


TWENTY-NINTH DAY. 


A Mother's Persedering Praver. 


‘A woman of Canaan came and cried unto Him, saying, 
Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David! my daughter 
is grievously vexed with a devil. . . . Then Jesus answered 
and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto 
thee even as thou wilt.’—MATT. xv. 22, 28. 


N the Old Testament we found God’s promises 
of blessing on the godly training of children 
most clear and sure. Nor were His threatenings 
on the neglect of this duty less distinct. And in 
more than one terrible example we saw with what 
relentless power the threatening came true, In 
the sons of Aaron and Eli, in the family of David 
and Solomon, proof was given that the personal 
righteousness of the father could not save the 
ungodly child. And we found no answer to one 
of the most solemn questions that can be put, and 
which has been as a burning fiery furnace to 
many a parent’s heart: Is there still hope for a 


The Mother's Persevering Prayer, 227 


child grown up in sin, and passing out from 
beyond the reach of a parent’s influence ? 

It is in Christ Jesus that God has revealed how 
completely the power of sin and Satan has been 
broken. It is in Christ Jesus that God has shown 
us what it is possible for His grace to do. It is in 
Christ Jesus, too, we must seek for the answer to 
every question of a parent's heart. And as it is 
His earthly life in which we have revealed all 
that the unseen Father and He now too in His 
exaltation, are willing to do for us, so there we 
must find what a parent may hope for from His 
mighty saving power on behalf of a wandering 
child. As we study this carefully, we shall be 
surprised to find how many of the most precious 
and encouraging words of Christ in regard to faith 
have been spoken to parents in reference to their 
children, ‘Fear not, only believe;’ ‘All things 
are possible to him that believeth ;’ ‘O woman, 
great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou 
wilt.’ Such words, which have countless times 
been the strength and comfort of the penitent 
seeking pardon, or the believer pleading for some 
spiritual blessing, are in the first place the 
parent’s property ; the blessed assurance that there 
is no case in which a child, now in Satan’s power, 
is beyond the reach of a Saviour’s love and a 
parent’s faith. Let us see how wonderfully this 
will come out in the well-known story of the 


* - u 
sceaiiiaicaneshicin ie carom earn 
a 


I Se ST SLOSS NS es Stn cence em = 
* 


- Lars 


228 The Children for Christ : 


Syrophenician mother, as we think of her 
daughter’s misery, her prayer’s refusal, her faith’ s 
perseverance, end her rich reward. 

Her daughter's misery. ‘My daughter is 
grievously vexed with a devil.’ How many a 
mother is there who has to pray this prayer for a 
child possessed with an evil spirit far more terrible 
than that of which we read there. In this case it 
was more sickness than sin, it was the power of 
Satan in the body more than the soul. But, alas! 
how many of the grown-up children of Christian 
parents there are who are under the power of 
Satan, given up to pleasure or worldliness, ta self- 
will or to sin. Let our story encourage them to 
believe that, however hopeless their case appears, 
there is One who is mighty to save, the parent’s 
Friend, the children’s Redeemer. Let them come 
to Him with their need, and cry out in prayer, 
‘My child is grievously vexed with a devil.’ Tet 
them make full confession of their child’s lost 
estate. Beware of excusing their sin by the 
thought of what is good or loveable about them, 


‘or by laying the blame on circumstances or com- 


panions. Bring them to Christ, and say it out 
that they are lost, under the power of Satan, that 
they have deserved and are on their way to be 
with him for ever. Hide not their wretchedness., 
Ask not only that they may be saved and made 
happy and taken to heaven. Ask nothing less 


thar 
unt 
pow 
Son. 
fron 
of ¢ 
God 
ackr 
tinct 
Hl 
wom 
a de 
answ 
answ 
hope 
ans 
again 
appe 
was 
of w 
pare 
and 
answ 
or ch 
pray, 
stron 
off. 
and 
have 


The Mother's Persevering Prayer. 229 


than that they may turn from the power of Satan 
unto God, that they may be translated from the 
power of darkness to the kingdom of God’s dear 
Son. Ask that they may be born again, changed 
from being the children of the devil and enezaies 
of God to be His friends and children; honour 
God by confessing their sin fully and clearly, and 
acknowledging His righteous judgment; ask dis- 
tinctly and definitely for a full salvation. 

Her prayer’s refusal is the second lesson this 
woman has to teach us. Christ appeared to turn 
a deaf ear to her prayer. At first He did not 
answer her a word. When He did speak, His 
answer was worse than His silence; it cut off all 
hope: He was not sent to the heathen. A second 
answer, given as she had come nearer and had 
again worshipped Him, saying, Lord, help me! 
appeared to heap contempt on her misfortune: she | 
was not only a heathen, but adog. A true picture 
of what passes in the heart of many a pleading 
parent! They hear of Christ’s love and power, 
and begin to pray with great urgency. But He 
answers not a word: there is no sign of thought 
or change on the part of the lost one. Still they 
pray, and it is as if the power of sin grows 
stronger, and the loved one only wanders farther 
off. Conscience begins to speak of parental sin 
and unworthiness. Others, who are holier, and 
have more power with God, may be heard: how can 


we expect that God should work a miracle for us? 
And the parent settles down in a quiet despond- 
ency, cr a vague hope that tries to shut its eyes to 
its own wretchedness, Oh, the dark, heartrending 
uncertainty as to the salvation of that child! 

Her faith and perseverance. It is for this specially 
that the mother’s example is held up to us. She 
refused to be denied. She met silence and argu- 
ment and contempt alike with one weapon— 
more prayer, more trust. She had heard of the 
wondrous Man and His compassion; she saw it 
in His face; she heard it even in the voice that 
refused her; she would not believe He could send 
her away empty. She hoped against hope; she 
believed against appearances, and, what is more, 
against His very words; she believed and she 
triumphed. And. now, mother! you who are 
pleading for your prodigal child, you have her 
example. And not only her example, but a 
thousand words of promise, and a revelation of the 
Father's will and the Saviour’s power and love 
such as she never had. Let her faith and perse- 
verance put your unbelief to shame. In the face 
of all appearances and all doubts, let your faith 
rise and claim the promise of an answer to prayer 
in the name of Jesus. Yield yourself to the Holy 
Spirit to have everything searched out and brought 
to the light that you must confess and cast out. 
Trust not to the fervency of your desires or the 


ee 


wres 
strer 
His 
delit 
pron 
fiden 
and 
faith 
7] 
Ther 
this ¢ 
bette 
appre 
be it 
earne 
parer 
can | 
to th: 
ing ‘ 
consG 
who 
come 
indee 
take 
Oh, 1 
to co 
has 
near¢ 
your 


The Mothe’s Persevering Prayer. 231 


? wrestling urgency of your petition; seek your 
: strength in God’s promise and faithfulness, in 
His power and love. Let the soul, in restful 


4 | deliberate confidence in Jesus, praise Him fc: His 
, promise and His power to save. In this con- 
y fidence let nothing shake you from the continuous 
@ and persevering prayer of faith, The prayer of 
2 faith is always heard. 
2 The wondrous blessing she obtained is for us too. 
mes There was not only her daughter's deliverance from 
it this grievous trouble ; there was something almost 
it better,—a spiritual blessing,—o..r Lord’s delighted 
d approval of her faith : ‘O woman, great is thy faith! 
18 be it unto thee even as thou wilt.’ Yes, it isin the 
2, earnest, believing supplication for a child that the 
ie | parent’s heart can be drawn out toward the Lord, 
re can learn to know and trust Him aright, can rise 
er to that insight into His love which is most pleas- 
a ing to Him, and bring down into the soul the 
he consciousness of His good pleasure. Mother, 
ve who art pleading for loved ones far from the fold, 
se come nearer, come nearer to Jesus. He is able, 
ce indeed, to save them. He waits for your faith to 
ith take hold of His strength, to accept their salvation. 
rer Oh, let not your child perish, because. you refuse . 
bly | to come and take time with Him, until His love 
has inspired you with faith. Mother! come 


nearer, tarry with Jesus in prayer, trust Him: 
your child can be saved. 


232 The Children fer Christ : 


Blessed Lord Jesus! I,‘ too, like the Syro- 
phenician woman, have a child grievously vexed 
with a devil, Like her I come pleading, ‘Have 
mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David.’ 

O Lord! I would confess the sin of my child. 
Thou knowest it all: unconvorted, and an enemy 
_ to Thee by nature, he has rejected Thy love, to 
choose the world and sia. I confess my sin, too, 
Lord! Thou knowest how bitter the thought is, 
that, had my life been less in the world and the 
flesh, purer and holier, more full of faith and of 
love and of Thee, my child might have grown up 
differently. Lord! in deep sorrow I confess my 
sin; oh, let not my child perish. Son of David! 
have mercy on me, 

Blessed Lord! I put my trust in Thee. I look 
in faith to Thine Almighty power; the things 
that are impossible with man are possible with 
God. I look in faith to Thy promise to hear 
prayer. Lord, I believe Thou hearest me; help 
mine unbelief. I lay this perishing child at Thy 
feet, and plead Thy love. Saviour! I do believe 
in Thy love, and claim deliverance for my child. 
In this faith I will praise Thee for Thy grace. I 
will tarry at Thy feet day by day in the rest of 
faith, praising Thee, and looking out for Thy 
fulfilment. Make haste, O my Lond, for Thy 
name's sake. Amen. 


dom 
kingd 
and g 
have 
incon 
Jesus 
child 
them 
woulc 
the k 
child 


The Heavenliness of a Little Child. 233 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTIETH DAY. 


The Reabentiness of a Little Child. 


‘Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the 
same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whoso 
receiveth one such little child in My name, receiveth Me.’— 
MATT. xviii. 4, 5. 


HE disciples had come to Jesus with the 
question, Who is the greatest in the king- 

dom of heaven? He spoke so often of the 
kingdom ; to them it suggested the idea of power 
and glory ; they could not but wonder who would 
have the highest place. How utterly strange and 
incomprehensible must have been the answer 
Jesus gave to their question. He called a little 
child, and set him in the midst of them. He told 
them that as long as they were thinking of who 
would be greatest, they could not even enter 
the kingdom; they must first become as little 
children: and then in the kingdom the humblest 


234 The Children for Christ : 


‘and the most childlike would be the highest. 
And whoever should receive one such little child 
in Jesus’ name, should receive Himself. The 
deeper the sympathy with the child-nature, recog- 
nising Jesus and His name in it, the closer and 
more complete the union with Himself. 

How wonderfully applicable to parents is what 
Jesus spoke to His disciples. In creating a family, 
with father and mother, God sets a little child 
in the midst, And in that little child He opens 
to them the mystery of the kingdom of heaven 
and the spiritual world. He tells them that if 
they want to know about heaven, and what will 
prove their fitness for its highest place, they 
must study the child-nature. On earth they 
will find nothing so heaven-like as a little child, 
and no surer way to the highest enjoyments of 
heavenly dignity than in receiving little children 
in His name, for in doing this they will receive 
Himself in whom the kingdom is. These are the 
three lessons we parents must learn. 

First, the heavenliness of the little child. 
Wherein does this consist? Our Saviour uses 
one word, ‘ Whosoever shall humble himself as this 
little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom.’ 
The greatest will be he who thinks least of being 
greatest, because he loses sight of himself in 
seeking God and His kingdom. The great beauty 
of childlikeness is the absence of self-conscious- 


-_——— 


ness. 
is ar 
man, 
seeks 
ing | 
the t 
it li 
pare? 
is tr 
itself 
they 
the 
the t 
And 
nothi 
more 
It is 
seren 


The Heavenliness of a Little Child. 235 


ness. The true child loses himself in that which 
is around him. The curse of sin is that it makes 
man, every man, his own centre; even y*en he 
seeks the kingdom of heaven he is still think- 
ing how he can be greatest in the kingdom. Jn 
the true child self does not yet manifest itself; 
it lives and is at rest outside of itself in the 
parent. It loves, and rejoices in being loved ; it 
is truthful, and trustful to all around, showing 
itself as it is, counting upon others to be what 
they appear. This naturalness and simplicity of 
the child, Jesus tells us is something heavenly, 
the thing in nature most allied to the kingdom. 
And the lesson we need to learn is that there is 
nothing a parent should seek to preserve and cherish 
more carefully than this heavenly childlikeness, 
It is the secret of that beautiful calmness and 
serenity which is the image of the peace and the 
rest of heaven.’ 

The spirit of the world is the very opposite; 
with its rivalry and its ambition, its seeking 
excitement and possessions, it destroys all that 
is so beautiful and heavenly in the child, to 
make way for the show and self-seeking that 
are its marks. Especially Christian parents who 
have the means for gratifying taste and pleasure 
at their disposal, are in danger of destroying the 


1 See Note B on the value of this serenity and tranquillity in 
a child’s character. 


236 The Children for Christ : 


simplicity and tenderness of the child-life by 
stimulating the desires which are of the earth 
and draw thither. And so, in the midst of a 
great deal of Bible-teaching and hymn-singing, 
the very heart of true religion may be eaten out 
4y the artificial and unchildlike spirit of the 
homes in which the children are reared. 

Parents! make a study of it to find out what 
the thought of Jesus’ heart was when He spoke 
so strongly of the need of being childlike, as 
the only path to heaven and heavenly greatness. 
Value the childlikeness and simplicity of your 
little one as its heavenly beauty ; realize that the 
little ong, in its tender susceptibility of impres- 
sions, is all alive to what surrounds it, to the 
fostering influence of the heavenly life, or the 
withering effect of a worldly life. Believe that 
between the Holy Spirit, who brings heaven down 
to us and reveals it within, and the heavenliness 
of childhood, there is a wonderful suitableness 
for each other; train your children in that holy, 
happy stillness which keeps the heart open to 
His workings. 

But how shall the parent succeed in doing this? 
Our Lord’s words have a second lesson. If we 
are to watch over the heavenliness of our children, 
we must ourselves be childlike and heavenly- 
minded. Christ put a little child in the midst of 
strong men to teach them. Parents often owe 


child i 


The Hedvenliness of a Little Child, 237 


more to the teaching of their children than these 
to them. Our children lose their childlikeness so 
soon because parents have so little of it. The 
atmosphere of the home is so little that of simple, 
happy, trustful living in the Father’s presence. 
Amid many of the proprieties of religion the 
spirit of the world too often reigns. To be great 
in the kingdom of heaven is all too seldom the 
object of earnest desire. To be the greatest, as 
Jesus puts it, by being humble and childlike, the 
least and the servant of all, this is hardly dreamt 
of, No wonder if parents, instead of maintaining 
and strengthening the spirit of the child and of 
the kingdom, hinder and quench it. 

Let parents study to be childlike. There are 
very few studies more difficult; very few that 
will bring a richer reward. The little treasures 
entrusted to us have a higher worth than we 
know; their very littleness, of which we often 
think only in connection with their weakness, and 
their future value, is what to Him, who looked 
at things in the light of God, constitutes their 
createst attraction. Itis only the childlike life 
of the parent, living in great simplicity of truth 
and trust with the Father in heaven, that can 
maintain the childlikeness in the child too. 

To this end let us take in the third lesson our 
Saviour has: ‘Whoso receiveth one such little 
child in My name, receiveth Me.’ Let us at their 


nea eA A mn aN an en 


i 
| 
i 


238 The Children for Christ : 

birth receive our children in the name of Jesus, 
in His Spirit, with His appreciation of their sim. 
plicity and humility. Let us receive them in His 
name, as those whom He loves and blesses, and 
of whom He says, ‘of such is the kingdom,’ to be 
kept and trained for Him and His kingdom alone. 
Let us receive them in His name, as sent by 
Jesus to remind us of His own childlike humility 
and obedience to the Father. Let us receive them 
day by day in His name, coming as a gift from 
the Father and the heaven from which He came, 
to draw us thither too. Let us receive them and 
cherish them in His name, just as He would 
receive them, as He did receive them, and bless 
them. Let us receive them in His name, just as 
we would receive Himself. 

Yes, just as we would receive Himself. This is 
not saying too much, for He asks and promises 
nothing less. ‘He that receiveth one such little 
child in My name, receiveth Me.’ He that recog- 
nises and loves the humility, the childlikeness, 
the Christlikeness of the little child, and on’ this 
account receives and treasures the child, receives 
Christ Himself. This is the promise, With 
every child something of heaven and of Christ 
comes into the house. In many cases it is not 
noticed, not cared for, and all of heaven is pushed 
aside by the world. Blessed they who know truly 
to receive the child in Jesus’ name, a being from 


The Heavenliness of a Little Child. 239 


heaven, and like heaven, and for heaven—they 
receive Himself. He comes to such with the 
little one to be its and their Saviour. ‘ Whoso- 
ever receiveth one such little child in My name, 


-receiveth Me,’ With the child He sets in their 


midst He takes the parents afresh into His 
training, to teach them how to be great in the 
kingdom of heaven. He comes to make their 
child a blessing to them, that so they may be pre- 
pared to be a real blessing to it. He comes to 
bless parent and child together, and make the 
home what it was meant to be—the picture, the 
promise, the pathway, to the Father’s home in 
heaven ? 

Dear parents! shall we not ask our Lord Jesus 
most earnestly to open our minds to take in His 
Divine thoughts about the heavenliness of our 
children, to open our eyes to see Him in them, 
to bring our hearts into perfect sympathy with 
Himself, so that our little ones may day by day 
be the blessed messengers that lead us to heaven, 
that bring to us Jesus Himself, the life’ and the 
light of heaven ? 


Blessed Lord! open our ears to hear what Thou 
speakest, and our eyes to see as Thou seest. 
Give us hearts to beat in sympathy with Thine 
at the sight of every little child; and above all, 
our Lord, to understand and experience how 


240 The Children for Christ : 


surely and how blessedly Thou fulfillest Lhy 
promise, ‘Whosoever receiveth oie such little 
child in My name, receiveth Me.’ 

Lord Jesus! we do ask Thee for a childlike 
spirit. May the simplicity and restfulness, the 
love and the loveliness, the trustfulness and 
truthfulness, of the child-nature so dwell in us, 
that in inter: ourse with us the heavenly childlike- 
ness of wir little ones may not be lost, but cherished 
and maintained through advancing years. Give 
us to feel very deeply that we cannot truly fulfil 
our parental calling except as in simplicity and 
godly sincerity our walk with God be that of little 
children, 

Blessed Lord! we do thank Thee that, however 
feeble we be, and however far short our attain- 
ments fall of what we should be, in receiving a 
child in Thy name we receive Thee. Thou comest 
Thyself to be our Teacher and our Helper. We 
pray Thee to strengthen us and all parents in 
this faith, that we may rightly understand that 
nowhere art Thou nearer or more ready to bless 
than in the home where the children are received 
in Thy name, to be saved by Thee, to be trained 
for Thee. Amen. 


Suffering Children to come to Jesus. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTY-FIRST DAY. 


Suffering Chiloren to come to Jesus. 
‘But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, 


to come unto Me, for of such is the kizgdom of heaven,’— 
Matt. xix, 14, 


THAT deep significance there is in this word, 


‘Suffer little children to come unto Me.’ 


We suffer, or allow, or permit that which we are 
not naturally inclined for, which we would prefer 
to be otherwise. The mothers had probably 
heard of the words Jesus had just spoken (xviii. 
3-5), and brought their little ones to be blessed 
of this wonderful Teacher. Jesus saw the dis- 
ciples rebuking them. They found it so hard to 
understand and to follow the Master: what could 
the little children have to do with Him? Jesus 
hears them, and says: Forbid them not; allow 
them to come unto Me, for of such is the kingdom 
of heaven. Among His disciples He loves to 
Q 


ee a ee SEES Sap ees See Sa ea aaa =F ; z s-= Si ; es RS 
ST AOE OBIE LN ic ET LR TT LEE LIF PE ANG Et SEE DE OLED ETN . : ; a ae : : 
24 2 zs Baas, 5 SRS aly oe eerie AMR Se AEE LINE ULE PRAT PMH: aaa Cece eats & 


ae. 


242 The Children for Christ : 


have the children: they are nearest the kingdom, 
the fittest for it; the kingdom needs them as 
the teachers of the wise and the great, to show 
the path through which alone heaven can be 
entered. 

‘ Suffer little children to come unto Me:’ the 
word reminds us how, now still, our wisdom cannot 
understand that the kingdom and the little ones 
are specially fitted for each other. It is only as 
it were by sufferance that the religion and the 
faith of a child is borne with; a thing not to be — 
too much trusted or rejoiced in. No wonder that 
with such a spirit in parents or the Church the 
youthful grace is quenched, and that the child’s 
religion becomes very much as that of the 
majority of older people. Let us hear the words 
of the Master to-day. If you cannot understand 
or fully approve, still do not forbid or hinder the 
children coming to Jesus ; just bear with it, until 
you see how He can bless them, until His word, 
‘of such is the kingdom,’ has entered your heart, 
and you learn to receive them as He did. Then 
only and truly will you have right views of 
what child-religion is, its nature, its dangers, its 
needs. 

Child-religion must consist of that which 
constitutes the very centre of God’s revelation— 
coming to Jesus. In His own well-known words, 
‘Come unto Me,’ our Lord spoke of the blessed 


Suffering Children to come to Jesus. 243 


rest He would give to all who came to Him to 
exchange their weary burdens for His loving yoke. 
This simple gospel is just what a child needs. 
Its faith is ready to believe in the unseen One, so 
kind and loving. Its humility finds no difficulty 
in confessing its sin and its need of help. And 
nothing appears more simple and natural than 
that this loving Saviour should be obeyed and 
followed. As by instinct it reconciles faith and 
works; it sees at once that trust in Him should 
beget obedience. But, above all, the child at once 
takes in what older. people often cannot appre- 
hend,—that all religion and salvation centre in 
a living Person: to a child, Jesus, Jesus loving 
and to be loved, Jesus trusted and obeyed, Jesus 
Himself, is religion. Would that it were so all 
our life! coming to Jesus in prayer, in surrender, 
in love, would be the spontaneous exercise of 
our faith. Oh, let us not hinder, but help our 
children to come to Jesus ! 

For this child-religion can be hindered. The 
words of Jesus suggest the thought. The child is 
weaker than the older disciple, is under his influ- 
ence, can be kept back by him. God has given 
the making of the children into the hands of their 
elders. And the natural religiousness of the child, 
his simple faith and sense of love and duty to 
Jesus, may be terribly checked by the example 


and conduct of those around him, And so Jesus 


eee LS atts DR 


ARREST I TE Ta 


244 The Children for Christ : 


says, Forbid them not. The word means (as it 
is elsewhere translated), Hinder them not. The 
religion of the child is feeble, and can so easily be 
hindered. Christian parents are appc::ted as 
guardians, to watch and foster its growth. All 
growth comes from within, and depends upon a 
healthy life. But young and feeble growth needs 
to be preserved from danger fro1. vithout, and to 
have provided for it the sustenance it demands. 
Often parents have been bitterly disappointed in 
their children: when young they could feel so 
deeply and speak so beautifully ; they had not 
lived long before all was lost. It was probably 
because parents trusted to what was a blessed, but 
still only a feeble, beginning. They did not watch 
over the evil influences which the young plant 
could not yet resist. They allowed the spirit of 
the world, in their own religious life or their 
friends, they allowed company and pleasure and 
the enjoyment of the world, to choke the good 
seed. Or they failed to supply the needful nour- 
ishment. There was not, as the child grew up, any 
more the personal speaking of this blessed Jesus, 
the helping of faith and obedience by the fellow- 
ship and example of a warm, living Christianity, a 
living love to Jesus. The child’s religion dis- 
appeared, because the parents hindered it in 
coming to Jesus, 

How different the result is where this coming 


. Suffering Children to come to Jesus, 245 


to Jesus is, in a right spirit, fostered and encour- 
aged not only in the little ones, but in the growing 
boy and girl through the years that lead to maturity. 
We need to be kept from right-hand as well 
as left-hand errors. On the one side, we must 
beware of despising a child's religious impressions 
as of littl. value. Like all beginnings of life and 
growth, they may be feeble and easily lost; thoy 
are still of infinite value as the preparation for 
chat which abideth ever. We must, on the other 
side, be kept from over-estimating or trusting in 
it. We must remember that the tender plant 
needs unveasing watching, and that only in the 
congenial atmosphere of a home holy to the Lord, 
and wholly dedicated to His service, can we count 
on its ripening fruit to eternal life. 

We have already suggested what a child’s 
religion needs. Just suffer the child to come 
to Jesus, and remove every hindrance. Believe 
deeply what Jesus says, ‘of such is the kingdom,’ 
and allow this heavenly element in the child’s 
nature to show itself, and to reach out after the 
Son of God. Let, in your education, Jesus and 
the coming to Him to be saved from sin, to have 
the heart sanctified and satisfied, be your chief 
end. Beware of coming in between the child and 
Jesus ; let the child under your leading have free 
access to Jesus. Beware of hindering it by dis- 
trust or coolness, Let the warmth of your love 


nn IS a 
7 tue <e 


aoe ee 


oN ER RN RO Hn 
Seer arses 


246 The Children for Christ : 


to Jesus, your holy example of obedience, your 
teaching and praying,—in one word, your whole 
living,—be a daily help to the child to see Jesus, to 
live with Him, and to long for Him. Jesus Christ 
is meant to be our every-day friend, our every 
hour companion. Let all the wondrous influence 
you possess in forming your child and fixing his 
destiny be wielded for this one thing,—to satisfy 
the desire of the Saviour’s heart, and make your 
child wholly His. 

These words of Christ’s were spoken to disciples 
who knew Him, and confessed Him the Son of 
God. They were sound in the faith,- Christ’s 
chosen friends, But they understood not His 
thoughts about the children: this was too high for 
them, because the love of childlikeness is one of 
the highest things in the kingdom. Many a theo- 
logian and preacher and parent is not yet in 
sympathy with Jesus. Dear parents! who have 
taken the Saviour as your only teacher in the 
revelation of the mysteries of Divine love, let Him 
teach you the preciousness of your little ones. 
Learn to see in them what He does; in His light 
your care of them will become a blessing to your- 
self and to them. 


Blessed Saviour! again do we beseech Thee, 
open our eyes to see in our.little ones what Thou 
seest ; to think of them as Thou dost, as belonging 


' 


Suffering Children to come to Jesus. 247 


ORG REP RAR oe VAG OAR 8% 


{ 

ir to Thee and the kingdom. Make this so clear to ie 
le us, that it may become impossible to do otherwise | : 
0 than to lead them to Thee. Let Thy claim on it ) 
st them, Thy love to them, be the secret principle ie 
y that inspires all our education. | ; : 
ye) And we ask, Lord, for a heavenly wisdom to i f | 
is know how to guide them in coming to Thee, and | ie 
y | to help them to abide with Thee. Teach us to | t 
r estimate aright a child’s impressions, both in their | : 

weakness and in their worth, as the seeds of the | : 
os | : eternal life. And may our faith in Thy love to af 
of them, and in their share in the kingdom, be the a H 
8 power by which their young hearts are made 1 | | 
is strong. tie 
or Blessed Lord! Thou art the parent’s and the : i f 
of children’s Friend. Come unto me, is Thy one call, ie 
0- | in every need and for every blessing. We come 
n now, Lord, and ask grace to enable us to bring our | 
e children. Grant us Thy Holy Spirit, that day by 
rs) day, and year by year, we may possess and train 


them for Thee alone and for Thy glory. Amen. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST, 


THIRTY-SECOND Day. 


A Father's Tears, 


" And straightway the father of the child cried out and said he 
with tears, Lord, I believe; help Thou mine unbelief.’—Mark | 
ix. 24, | and 
thin 
HEN Jesus spoke to the disciples about the thre 
mothers who were coming with the'r little upot 
children to Him, His word was, Suffer the children are } 
to come, and forbid them not. In this story He ques 
uses a stronger word. When the father of the whet 
lunatic had told Him that the disciples had not heal: 
been able to cast out the evil spirit, and Jesus place 
had reproved their unbelief, He spake, Bring the ‘T 
child unto me. The expression is a stronger one, that 
still setting forth the same truth. The little ones knov 
were quite ready and willing to come to the loving God’ 
Stranger to be blessed. This poor child, at times of fai 
all unconscious or rebellious, had to be brought, has « 


whether he knew it or not, There can be no evil 


A Father's Tears. 249 


spirit in a child so strong, no resistance 80 
desperate, but the parent has the liberty and the 
power to bring him to Jesus. To every disciple, 
to every father and mother, in every extremity of 
sin or need, Christ’s voice is heard calling, Bring 
the child unto me. 

And then, if we want to understand what it is 
really to bring a child, on whom Satan has a hold, 
to Jesus, we have this most wondrously set forth in 
the further intercourse of this father with Jesus. 
When, in answer to Christ’s question, he had told 
the touching story of how ever since his childhood 
the boy had been the prey of this terrible trouble, 
and had pleadingly added, ‘Jf Thow canst do any- 
thing, have compassion on us and help us,’ Jesus 
threw all the responsibility of the issue of the case 
upon the father, and said, ‘If thou canst ! all things 
are possible to him that believeth.’ It was not the 
question whether Jesus could and would doit, but 
whether the father could believe. If he did, the 
healing was sure; if he did not, it could not take 
place. 

‘If thou canst! all things are possible to him 
that believeth.’ These words are one of the well- 
known expressions in which all the blessings of 
God's mighty saving love are put at the disposal 
of faith. ‘ By faith we understand, both what God 
has done and will do. By faith we see Him who 
is invisible, in the reality of His almighty power 


re = 


(a rete iscers aie 


hs Sao a 


Rie 
SL ee 


eosin neo snsaensese aah Bison ashore anil 


aR ASE A ELE NIT IS OL ~ 


a 


250 The Children for Christ : 


and His love towards ourselves, By faith we 
receive His word into our very heart as a quick- 
ening power, that works in us the very thought 
and sentiment that was in His heart when He 
spake it. By faith our heart, our nature, our life 
is opened up to give place to God, so as to let 
Him be and do in us what He pleases. By faith 
we become fully conscious of what the purpose of 
His will is, and of Himself as waiting to work it 
in us. By faith we forsake-the visible, ourselves, 
with our own thoughts and strength; we look to 
God to do what He has promised, and so give 
Him the glory. Faith is the exercise of a will 
that yields itself for God’s holy will to take 
possession of it and work out its pleasure. ‘ All 
things are possible to him that believeth,’ because 
‘with God nothing shall be impossible,’ and faith 
is union with God. 

In speaking these words to the father of the 
lunatic, Jesus gave to us for all time the secret of 
successful parental training and prayer. He tells 
us that it is not only the ministers of His gospel, 
the watchmen, and the workers in fields of special 
danger or difficulty, but every Christian parent, 
that needs to exercise strong faith, and in strong 
faith may most assuredly secure the salvation of 
his child, It teaches us that His compassion and 
power are longing to help us, if we can believe. 
If not, it is our blame if our children perish. 


A Father's Tears. 251 

There are parents who think this. is a hard 
saying. They seek the cause of unconverted and 
unsaved children in God and not in themselves. 
Has God’s sovereignty nothing to do with the 
salvation of our children? Is there not such a 
thing as election? And if so, how can all the 
responsibility be thrown on our unbelief? Scrip- 
ture reveals to us most clearly God’s sovereignty ; 
His grace is electing grace; the final decision of 
the destiny of each man is in His hands. Scrip- 
ture reveals as clearly man’s responsibility, and 
the all-prevailing power of faith. True humility 
accepts both statements without reconciling them ; 
it bows under the solemn truth Jesus utters here, 
that if the parent can believe the child can be 
saved. 

How this truth ought to affect us, our text 
tells us. With tears the father cried, ‘Lord, I 
believe! help mine unbelief.’ In the agony of the 
thought that his unbelief may keep the blessing 
from his child, in the consciousness of how 
strong unbelief is still in himself, he bursts into 
tears, and casts himself to confess at Jesus’ feet 
that unbelief, and ask deliverance from it. It 
is amid these tears of penitence and confession 
that the faith is exercised to which the victory is 
given. The devil is cast out, and the child is 
saved. Christ’s blessed and most heart-searching 
word had done its work; it had revealed the un- 


252 The Children for Christ : 


belief, but also wakened the faith that brought 
the blessing. 

Christ’s word must do the samo with every 
parent, with every father, who pleads for a child’s 
liberation from Satan’s power. A father’s tears 
have power. There must be confession and 
humbling wherever there is to be strong faith. 
There must be the conviction and confession of 
the sin of unbelief: that it has been the cause of 
the blessing being withheld, and that we are 
verily guilty in being unbelieving. When the 
disciples asked the Master why they could not 
cast out this devil, He told them it was because of 
their unbelief, and that this unbelief was caused 
by their life not being one of prayer and fasting. 
Unbelief is not, as many think, a weakness, inex- 
plicable and beyond our power. Unbelief has 
its reasons: it is the indication of the state of 
heart. The world, the worldly man, cannot believe. 
The self-righteous, the proud man, cannot believe. 
It is only the pure in heart, the humble, the soul 
that thirsts for God, and forsakes all to follow 
Christ, that can be strong in faith. And therefore 
the first step in the path of an overcoming faith is 
the confession of its sinfulness, and the sins of 
which it is the index and the symptom. 

I have heard parents plead very earnestly with 
God for the conversion of their grown-up children, 
when I secretly feared that they could not be 


A Father's Tears. 253 
heard. I saw no sign of confession of parental 
sin. There are parents whose worldliness, whose 
lack of living faith, whose self-indulgence and 
neglect in the education of their children, have 
simply sown the seeds of which they are now 
reaping the fruit in the departure of their children 
from God ; and yet they wonder why their children 
are not more religious, They sometimes pray ear- 
nestly for them, and try to have the faith, perhaps 
think they have it, that their children will. be 
saved. They may be deceiving themselves. True 
faith sanctifies. It searches the heart. It con- 
fesses the sin of unbelief, and all the sin in which 
that has its root and strength. It casts itself 
weeping and helpless ai the feet of Jesus. There, 
and there alone, bowing in its weakness, resting 
on His strength, it obtains the blessing He loves 
to bestow. 

Fathers, who have sons you would fain bring 
to Jesus to be saved, come and hear the lessons 
the Lord would teach you. Let these children 
first bring you to Jesus in confession, and prayer, 
and trust; your faith can then bring them in 
truth. And in yourself and in them you will 
experience what the all- prevailing power and 
truth is of the word: ‘If thou canst! all things 
are possible to him that believeth.’ 


Blessed Son of God! look in mercy upon a 


The Children for Christ : 


parest who now comes to Thee with a child still 
unconverted and under the power of the Evil One. 
UY Lord Jesus! have compassion on us and help 
us! Let the child be delivered from Satan’s 
power; oh, make Him a child of God. 

Lord ! I have heard Thy voice—‘ If thou canst 
believe!’ and it has filled my heart with trembling. 
I have to confess how little my life has been a 
life of faith, and how my unbelief has hindered 
the blessing from my child. I have to confess 
the worldliness and selfishness, the want of entire 
surrender and obedience to Thee, which made a 


strong faith impossible. I bow in shame at the ike 
thought of all the- unbelief that even now comes 

up in me. Lord, I do believe! help Thou mine M 
unbelief. 

I do believe, Lord, in Thy mighty power. I do revet 
believe in Thy infinite Love. I do believe in : preci 
Thee as my Saviour, my Friend, my Covenant moth 
Redeemer. I do believe, my Lord, that Thou Our | 
hearest me now for this child. Lord, I believe! dom 
help Thou mine unbelief. I look to Thy word, and if he 
hold it fast. I yield myself to a life of entire befor 
surrender to Thee, to be Thine alone. Blessed is gle 
Lord Jesus, I do believe! Thou hearest and those 
savest my child. In this faith I praise Thy holy reder 


name. Amen. Chris 


Seon _s 


The Sacredness of Motherhood. 255 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


~ 


THIRTY-THIRD Day. 


The Sacredness of Motherhood. 


‘He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his 
mother’s womb,’—-LUKE i, 15, 


AY God grant us His grace, to meditate in 
holy tenderness and reverence on the truth 
revealed to us here, a truth of unspeakable 
preciousness and power to a believing parent: the 
mother’s womb the work-place of the Holy Spirit, 
Our Lord has taught us that the least in the king- 
dom of heaven is greater than John the Baptist ; 
if he could be filled with the Holy Spirit from 
before his birth, how much more, now that Christ 
is glorified and the Holy Spirit given, the child of 
those who have become partakers of the full 
redemption, and the indwelling of the Spirit of 
Christ. : 
We find here, at the very opening of the New 
Yestament history, the same truth that came out 


agrees ws a aa 
atest 2 er SS sir P omnis 
15 SSRN PIPER Fo Tat MRS PB ENON EL RAT LEPLE SEED BM LEES RAE TOTES: Pein 


> 
Se OMIT 2 RI PELL RI ESE EEE PRADA 


eos 


esr tp ner moreno 


; oro me erm 
<table ini sligniacaeepanipap= eet teeth seen De 


a ee es a a ae see 3 
. 


feenaneb-npemrcemsararmritnseencones tert Het Sn : 


256 The Children for Christ : 


so strongly in the laying of the foundations of the 
covenant with the patriarchs. In preparing and 
securing servants to do His work, God loves to 
begin at the very beginning, and from before the 
birth, from the very first conception of life, to take 
charge and to sanctify the vessel He is to use for 
His service. The more distinctly we apprehend 
this part of God’s rian with His Church as one of 


the root-principles of the economy of redemption, | 


the better shall we understand the holy privilege 
and duty of parentage. Very specially will 
mothers be encouraged and strengthened in faith 
to yield themselves, with all the hopes and joys of 
motherhood, to be God’s chosen vessels for the 
fulfilment of His purpose and the perfecting of 
His Church. 

Let us look first at what Scripture teaches 
us of the mother in whom the Holy Spirit is thus 
to work. Of John’s parents it is testified: ‘They 
were both righteous before God, walking in all the 
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blame- 
less.’ It is the God of nature, who in this world 
of cause and effect has ordered that like begets 
like, who is also the God of grace. With omni- 
potence at His command, ready to work any 
miracles He pleases, He yet most carefully 
observes His own laws, and when He wants a 
holy child, seeks for holy parents. Throughout 
Scripture, specially in the New Testament, the 


— 


blame 
redee 
throu 
and 
what 
‘ bla 


The Sacredness of Motherhood. 257 


e blessed indwelling and inworking of the Holy 
d | Spirit is promised to the obedient. Man must, in 
0 obedience to Divine command, and under the pre- 
1G paratory moving of the Spirit, build the house ; 
C then does the Holy Spirit as the glory and the 
is presence of the Lord take possession and fill it. 
iC 


And so it was of parents, walking in all the com- 


of mandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, 
mn, \ that he would be born who was to be filled with 
ge the Holy Ghost from his mother’s womb, and 
ill the forerunner of Him who should baptize with 
th the Holy Ghost. It is of holy parents that God 
of would take a holy child. 
he The double lesson for every parent, and specially 
of for every mother, is of the deepest interest. A 
rightecus and blameless life prepares for, and may 
hes also count upon the power of the Holy Ghost in 
us the unborn child. Let expectant mothers, who 
ey would fulfil their holy calling as the ministers of 
he their Lerd’s purposes, study Elizabeth’s character : 
ne- ‘righteous, and walking in all the commandments 
rid of the Lord blameless.’ It is to such a life that 
ets God chose us, ‘ that we should be holy and witiout 
ni- blame before Him in love,’ It is to such a life Jesus 
nhy redeemed us: ‘He hath reconciled you in His bedy 
lly through death, to present you holy and wnablameable 
a and unreprovable in His sight.’ It is no more than 
what every child of God ought to be and can be, 
e 


‘blameless and harmless, without blemish in the 
R 


258 The Children for Christ : 


midst of a perverse generation.’ But it is specially 
what every mother should be, who would offer her 
body as the temple of the Holy Ghost, that in her 
the very first beginnings of life may be over- 
shadowed by the Holy Ghost. Oh, that mothers, 
and fathers too, understood to what a terrible 
degree the spirit of the world and the flesh, a life 
in which blamelessness before God is never ex- 
pected or sought after, in which sin and selfish- 
ness are allowed to have rule, hinder the influence 
of the Spirit, and entail upon the child, more than 
is needed, the heritage of unholy appetite and 
passion. Let them believe that a life which, in 
deep humility and the faith of Jesus as our sancti- 
fication, seeks to walk in obedience and righteous- 
ness, blameless before the Lord, will be accepted 
and honoured of Him, Let them believe that they 
have a right to ask, and most confidently to expect, 
the Spirit that is in them to take possession of the 
life God gives through them, Let them cherish 
this as the highest and the brightest hope of a 
holy motherhood: ‘ He shall be filled with the 
Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s womb,’ 

Let us now look at what the angel’s message 
teaches us of the child thus conceived and born: 
‘Thou shalt have joy and gladness, and many shall 
rejoice at his birth, for he shall be great in the 
sight of the Lord,—three marks of a child boin 
under the covering of the Holy Spirit, The 


rejoice 


The Sacredness of Motherhood. 259 


parents are to ‘ have joy and gladness.’ Alas! how 
many a Christian parent has had reason to say in 
bitter agony, Would God my child had never 
been born! Would you have divinely given and 
divinely secured joy and gladness in the children 
that are given you? Oh, let the Holy Spirit take 
possession of them from before their birth. Yours 
will be the holy joy of heaven in them, as you 
see the beauty of the Lord upon them, a joy that 
none can take away. 

‘And many shall rejoice at his birth.’ Alas! 
how many children of Christian parents have been 
the curse of their fellow-men! Would you have 
your child blessed and made a blessing, with 
many to thank God that ever they knew him or 


_ that he was born? Study the story of John’s birth. 


Study it in connection with the story of Jesus’ 
birth. It was for Jesus’ sake, in the power of the 
Son of God coming in the flesh, in virtue of his 
connection with Jesus, that John was thus filled 
with the Holy Ghost from his mother’s womb. 
Plead the coming, and the birth, and the redemp- 
tion of Jesus on behalf of your child; claim the 
outpouring of the Spirit upon all flesh, and the 
promise of the Spirit to you and your children, 
and your faith will be strengthened to perfect 
confidence that your child too may in his measure 
be filled with the Spirit, and shall make many to 
rejoice at his birth. 


260 The Children for Christ : 


‘And he shall be great in the sight of the Lord,’ 
This sets the crown on the whole. A joy to his 
parents, a blessing to his fellow-men, and great in 
the sight of the Lord, is the Spirit-born child. 
Among men he may not make a name, in gifts and 
talents he may not be great, but great he will be in 
the sight of Him who sees not as man sees. He will 
be a vessel God can use for His work, a true way- 
preparer for the coming of the Lord in His kingdom. 

Mother! God gives you this picture of Elizabeth 
and her child of promise, with the double lesson : 
live as she did; believe and receive what she did. 
Young mother, your metherhood is in God’s sight 
a holier and a more blessed thing than you know. 
If you are indeed God’s child, you have in every- 
thing been placed under the leading and the rule 
of His Holy Spirit. Be sure that all the tender 
interest and solemn thought, all the quiet trust 
and joyful hope, which expectant motherhood 
calls forth, may be sanctified and refined by God's 
Holy Spirit, and you be united with your little one 
under the overshadowing of His heavenly grace. 


Ever blessed God! once more Thou hast shown 
me Thy way in preparing a seed to serve Thee, 
and what a deep interest Thou hast in securing a 
holy and blameless motherhood, I have seen Thee 
training a mother for Thy service. Thou dost fill 
her heart with the thought of the Divine destiny 


The Sacredness of Motherhood. 261 


of her child. Thou dost stir her faith to the con- 
fident expectation of Thy Divine Spirit and blessing 
on her seed. Thou dost call her in righteousness 
and blamelessness of life to her holy work. Thou 
dost in all things teach her that the life she is to 
bring forth is a holy gift from Thee, to be received 
and borne in a pure and holy vessel. 

O Thou great and glorious God! in deep 
humility and trembling Thy handmaid bows before 
Thee, to offer herself to Thy service. O my 
Wather! who dost much more surely than fathers 
on earth give good gifts to their children, give 
Thy Holy Spirit to Thy children, to make even 
their body Thy temple, fulfil Thy wondrous pro- 
mise to Thy child. Let Thy Holy Spirit dwell in 
me. If it please Thee to make me the mother of 
a child, oh, let him be filled with the Spirit from 
the womb. Let me be filled with the Spirit. And 
let my child be born only for this one thing, that 
he may be great in Thy sight, and a blessing to 
all around him. Amen. 


se al 1s 4 Sr 2 ey 
ret RRR EGS ERNE ROR er 
SRG ae Sa 


BET AINE NS 


RCN AE PLL ET ATEN RE OEIC RS 


eA see i owlaay Na se 
S , 


ee . 


mo 


a 


M 
| 


i A AO TERR CRE AS UNCP ROA A ae ON 


I 
= 
748 


Annee 


The Children for Christ : 


THE «:.i1'DREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTY-FOURTH DAY. 


A Mother’s Surrenver. 
‘And Mary said, Behold the handmaid cf the Lord ; be it 


unto me according to thy word.’—LvKE i. 38. 


E have often had occasion to notice the 

wonderful oneness of mother and child, 
and to what extent the former, in her life and 
character, influences and decides what the child 
is to be. The life she imparts is her own life, in 
the deepest meaning of the term. When God 
gave His Son to be born of a woman, this law was 
not violated, and the mother He chose for His Son 
was doubtless all that grace could make her to 
be the fit vessel through whom He should receive 
His human nature and disposition. 

And so, just as Jesus Himself is in everything 
our example, so we may naturally expect that: in 
His mother God has given ns one of His servants 
who may be an example to our mothers, If the 


child Jesus be an example to our children, there 
will be something for mothers to learn from His 
mother. She to whom the heavenly messenger 
said, ‘Hail! thou highly favoured, the Lord is 
with thee: blessed art thou among women;’ and 
to whom Elizabeth, filled with the Holy ‘host, 
also said, ‘Blessed art thou among women, ¢ 
blessed is the fruit of thy womb, and blessed is 
she that believed,’ will surely in her words and 
ways have left an example for every mcther who 
yields herself like Mary to the Lord, .. bear o 
child that can be calleda son of the Most High. 
Were there more mothers like Mary,—this we may 
confidently say, without forgetting the infinite 
distance between her child and ours,—there would 
be more children like the holy Child Jesus. 

And what, looked at from the human side, con- 
stitutes the most marked feature of Mary’s mother- 


hood? It is the childlike simplicity of faith in — 


which she surrenders herself to the Divine pur- 
pose: ‘Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it 
unto me according to thy word.’ She calls her- 
self the Lord’s slave or bondwoman ; she gives her 
will, herself, up to Him, to do what pleaseth Him ; 
in quiet trust and expectancy she will look to Him 
to do what He has said. It is the same spirit of 
obedient faith which had once fitted Abraham to 
be the father of the promised seed, which now 
prepares her to become the mother of Him in 


A Mother's Surrender. 263. 


% 
SRO GCOS Ee EREREY | EEO Ty eS 


as. Be = = 2 
IAT AE 


264 The Children for Christ : 


whom the promise is to be fulfilled. Not that 
there were no difficulties or questionings. We 
read, ‘She was greatly troubled at the saying of 
the angel, and cast in her mind what manner of 
salutation this should be.’ When again he had 
spoken, she feared not to ask, ‘How shall this 
be, seeing I know not a man?’ But when once 
the angel had spoken to her of the power of the 
Most High overshadowing her, she yielded herself 
to the Divine word. And she became an example 
to every mother who would like her share the 
benediction, ‘ Blessed is she that believeth, for 
there shall be a fulfilment of the things which 
have been spoken to her from the Lord.’ It is 
the surrender of faith that makes a blessed mother- 
hood: ‘Blessed art thou, and blessed is the fruit 
of thy womb.’ | 

‘Behold the bondmaid of the Lord.’ Mary 
teaches a mother to yield herself to God for the 
service of His kingdom, that in her. His purpose 
and glory may be made manifest. It was not by 
the birth of Mary’s son alone that God’s kingdom 
was to come. Believing parents may look upon 
their children as the stones of the great temple of 
which Jesus was the corner-stone. Not less than 
with the birth of Isaac, and every child of the 
chosen race down to Christ, is the birth of each of 
our children under God’s guardianship a link in 
the golden chain of the good pleasure of God’s 


one 


spirit 
streng 
first | 
not a 


se ee ee ORO eee er rm 


177) 


- co 


on mee so eS 


Loc) 


a 


eJ 


m2 


A Mother's Surrender. 265 
will. Over ali the impulses of human love and 
the instincts of a God-given maternity, there 
hovers a Divine purpose using them for the 
carrying out of His plan. And nothing will do 
more to sanctify the life of the wife and the 
mother than when she realizes herself to be the 
Lord’s bondwoman, redeemed for this too, that 
from her the chosen seed may be multiplied, that 
from her may be born a generation to serve the 
Lord. Human love will receive a Divine conse- 
cration ; what otherwise appears to be only nature 
and earthly is elevated into the heavenlies, the 
region of God’s will and God’s favour; the ex- 
pectant mother knows herself to be like the angels, 
one of His servants, doing His commandments, 
hearkening unto the voice of His word. 

‘Be it unto me according to Thy word.’ Such 
is the faith that gives the strength to surrender 
oneself to God’s service. It looks no longer at 
difficulties or impossibilities; it counts upon God 
to carry out His purpose, and to give the grace 
and the strength for the work to which He has 
called us. And it is just this faith that above 
everything fits for the blessed duties of mother- 
hood, that gives that quiet rest of body and 
spirit which to mother and babe is health and 
strength. Or what mother is there who, as she 
first becomes conscious of her new vocation, is 
not at times with Mary ‘greatly troubled, and 


266 The Children for Christ : 


does not feel the question come many a time, 
‘How can all this be?’ She finds no rest so 
sure or sweet as to cast her troubles on her Lord, 
—let Him do what seemeth to Him good. If the 
~ God of nature has created her for a calling, and 
the God of grace has redeemed her to fulfil that 
calling in the interests of His kingdom, she 
assuredly may trust His power and love not to 
forsake her in her hour of need. ‘What hour I 
am afraid I will trust in Thee; in God have I put 
my trust, I will not be afraid :’ such words have a 
thousand times over been the stay of the trembling 
but trusting handmaid of the Lord. 

‘Be it according to Thy word:’ to understand 
fully the teaching of Mary’s éxample here, there is 
one trait of her character we must not omit to notice. 
Twice it is said of her, ‘ Mary kept all these things, 
and pondered them in her heart.’ It is in the 
holy quiet of meditation and reflection on what 
God has said that the spirit of trust is cultivated. 
‘It is only as God’s words are kept and pondered 
in the heart that they can quicken and deepen a 
living faith in Him who spake them. Every 
mother who searches Holy Scripture will find 
there many a saying of God with reference to her 
sacred calling, which, if truly drunk in, will fill 
the heart with confidence and joy, They will 
teach her to regard everything connected with 
the birth of the child as a matter of deepest 


eo oO er TEN 


it 
ny 


A Mother's Surrender. 267 


interest to the Father in heaven, and of great im- 
portance to His kingdom, as the ushering in of a 
new member into its number. She will see how 
all the exceeding great and precious promises 
may be claimed by her for the little one, ere ever 
yet it has seen the light. She will see how her 
receiving the little one in the name of Jesus has 
the promise of Jesus’ presence for herself and for 
it. She will find that all the ordering and training 
of the child has been provided for in regulations 
of Divine wisdom and love, and that all the grace 
needed for carrying out these orders is most surely 
given to each one who, like Mary, will but be a 
bondmaid of the Lord, and will believe what He 
hath spoken. All of care and fear, of danger and 
pain in the life of motherhood, all the help and 
joy and rich reward God has connected with it,— 
all is written in the Book of the Lord; the mother 
who listens, and waits, and believes, will, in view 
both of what she fears and what she hopes, be able 
to say, ‘Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it 
unto me according to Thy word. As she bides 
her time, let quiet retiremeni, in which she not 
only hides herself from the world but opens her 
whole being to the rays of heaven, let thoughtful, 
trustful pondering of God’s words engage the 
heart, she will find how true the word is, ‘ Blessed 
is she that believed.’ 

What a holy and what a blessed thing the birth 


268 The Children for Christ : 

of a child becomes in the light of the birth of 
Jesus! What a holy and what a blessed task 
that of the mother becomes in the light of the 
favour of the Most High God, as the means of 
the fulfilment of His purpose, the promotion of 
His glory, the experience of His special grace and 
mercy! Asthe mother ponders these things, she 
will understand something of the deep meaning 
of that word of Paul, ‘She shall be saved through 
the childbearing, if they continue in faith, and 
love, and sanctification, with sobriety.’ Just as 
labour in the sweat of his brow was given to 
man, to be in his fallen state one of his greatest 
blessings, so the labour of childbearing to the 
woman, that through it and its blessed discipline 
the salvation of Christ might the more effectually 
be inwrought into her whole character and dis- 
position. It calls and helps to a continuance in 
that blessed life of faith and trustful dependence, 
of love and gentleness and motherly kindness, of 
holiness in the indwelling and sanctification of 
the Spirit, of sobriety and self-restraint and tem- 
perance, in which true blessedness is found. It 
helps, to them who are rightly exercised thereby, 
to form that perfect womanly character which is 
one of God’s most beautiful gifts on earth. It is 
in this path of loving acceptance of God’s appoint- 
ment, and trustful resting in His promise, that the 
word will come true, as a greeting to each expect- 


A Mother's Surrender. 


ant mother: ‘ Blessed art thou, and blessed is the 
fruit of thy womb.’ 


Behold the handmaid of the Lord! Yes, Lord! 
as Thou hast already looked upon her in Thy 
mercy, and set her apart for the sacred work of 
bearing and bringing up a seed for Thee, still con- 
tinue to look upon her to give her all that she 
needs, and to work in her all that is well pleasing 
in Thy sight.. ‘As the eye of a maid unto the 
hand of her mistress, so our eyes look unto the 
Lord our God, until He have mercy upon us.’ 
Grant to Thy child an ever-increasing clearness, 
the blessed assurance that in this holy calling 
of motherhood she is indeed Thy handmaiden, 
called to the fulfilment of Thy purposes, set apart 
for the service of Thy kingdom. Let this thought 
teach ne to look upon everything connected with 
the birth of my child as of deepest interest to 
my Father. Let it encourage me to cast every 
fear and burden, every care and pain, on Him in 
whose service they come. Let it sanctify all the 
hope and joy with which Thou dost so wonder- 
fully sweeten the sorrow with which sin had filled 
our cup. 

And so let it be unto me according to Thy 
word. In childlike faith, O my Lord, I would 
take Thy blessed Word, with all its teachings and 
its promises, as my light and strength. In the 


270 The Children for Christ : 


time of patient waiting, or in the hour of anguish, 
Thy Word shall be my stay. Let Thy Holy Spirit 
unfold to Thy handmaiden what treasures Thy 
Word contains for her as mother, that she may 
know at the right time to receive what Thou hast 
provided for her. May she so be prepared that 
the child which has been received according to 
Thy word may be trained according to that Word, 
and enter into the full enjoyment of all that Thy 
Word holds out in promise to the seed of Thy 
people. Behold the handmaid of the Lord! be it 
unto me according to Thy word. Amen. 


A Mother's Thanksgiving. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST, 


t THIRTY-FIFTH DAy. 


A PMother’s Thanksgibing. 


‘And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my 
spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. For He hath regarded 
the low estate of His handmaiden.’—LvukKk i. 46-48, 


HERE is perhaps no such moment of ex- 
quisite joy, of deep, unutterable thanksgiving 
taking the place of pain and sorrow, as when a 
mother knows herself to be the living mother of 
a Jiving child. Our blessed Lord used it as the 
fittest, type of that wondrous surprise, that strange 
resurrection joy, with which His disciples should 
find Him whoin they mourned as crucified and 
dead to be the Living One. ‘A woman when she 
is in travail hath sorrow, becau.. her hour is come, 
but as soon as she is delivered of the child she 
reriembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a 
man is born into the world.” A mother will find 
no more fitting expression for her joy than in 


i 
Bee 
me $e RELATE SDS PELE BES SER SOIR ATI LENE ORIN AOI 


272 The Children for Christ : 


thanksgiving to Him to whom she owes so much. 
And for the expression of that thanksgiving she 
will find in many portions of Holy Scripture the 
most suitable language. How often, for instance, 
has the mother almost instinctively asked for the 
words of Psalm ciii.: ‘Bless the Lord, O my 
soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy 
name, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget 
not all His benefits: who forgiveth all thine 
iniquities ; who healeth all thy diseases; who re- 
deemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth 
thee with loving-kindness and with tender mer- 
cies; who satisfieth thy mouth with good things, 
so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s.’ 
But as the simple summary of all a mother has to 
say, no words will be found more beautiful than 
these of the mother of our Tord: ‘My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my «.i:it doth rejoice in 
Giod my Saviour. For He heis regarded the low 
estate of His handmaiden.’ 
In His holy providence the Father has so 
ordered it that the first week after the birth of 
the little one is a time of weakness, in which 
nothing is so much needed as quiet and rest for 
the restoration of nature’s exhausted powers. The 
arrangement is one of wondrous grace, giving the 
mother time to prepare hersclf again for the new 
duties devolving on her. While household duties 
wad ordinary intercourse are kept at comparative 


A Mother's Thanksgiving. 73 


distance, the Lord would keep His child for a 
little while in the secret place of His Holy Pre- 
sence, to encourage and instruct her for the 
solemn responsibilities now again awaiting her. 
And there is nothing that will be more pleasing 
to her Lord, and more refreshing and strengthening 
for her own life, and a@ fitter preparation for 
blessing to the little one, than that the spirit of 
thanksgiving should give its bright tone to all her 
thoughts and hopes, and the song of praise, from 
the lips of the model-mother, be repeated day 
by day, and from hour to hour: ‘My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit doth rejoice in 
God my Saviour. For He hath regarded the low 
estate of His handmaiden. For He that is mighty 
hath done to me great things, and holy is His 
name; and His mercy is on them that fear Him, 
from generation to generation.’ 

It is hardly necessary to remind a mother of 
what all there is to stir her to praise. She has 
but to think of the anxious thoughts and fears that 
would sometimes come up as the solemn hour of 
her trial rose up before her, and her song is, ‘I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, and delivered 
me from all my fears.’ She looks at the precious 
little treasure that has been given her, with all the 
love and joy it brings into heart and home; and 
the words come spontaneously, ‘What shall I 


render to the Lord for all His benefits toward 
8 


The Children for Christ : 
me?’ She sees in the little one, as she looks 
upon it in the light of God’s purpose and promise, 
an immortal being, fitted for showing forth God’s 
glory on earth, and sharing that glory in heaven, 
as a jewel in Jesus’ crown; and her soul bows in 
trembling wonder at the thought that the charge 
of keeping and forming such a treasure should be 
committed to one so feeble. She remembers that, 
though the little one has inherited from her an 
evil nature, yet through her too it has the promise 
of the covenant and the earnest of the Spirit: her 
child is holy, because she is one of God’s holy 
ones in Christ. She thinks of all the grace and 
wisdom and strength provided her in Christ to 
secure to her and her child all that God’s love had 
prepared; and as she listens to the voice, ‘My 
grace is sufficient for thee: my strength is made 
perfect in weakness, she can only sing again, 
‘My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit 
doth rejoice in God iy Saviour ; His mercy is on 
them that fear Him, from generation to genera- 
tion. It is not only God’s mercies, but God 
Himself, in whose love they have their value and 
their continuance; az is God Himself in whom 
Mary, in whom the believer, in whom the grate- 
ful mother, is glad and rejoices, True praise uses 
God’s mercies only as the steps of the ladder along 
which it rises to leave them behind and rejoice in 
God alone. 


A Mother's Thanksgiving. 275 

This spirit of thanksgiving, in which, not con- 
tent with the blessings alone, we rise up to the 
God who gave them, and rejoice in Him, is of 
greater worth than can well be expressed. It 
elevates and sanctifies both the joy, the gift that 
causes it, and the glad possessor, because it lifts 
all out of the sphere of nature into the fellowship 
of the spiritual and the Divine. And in this way 
it is the true preparation for all the work the 
mother has before her. We saw in Mary’s sur- 
render of herself to her God, that He might fulfil 
in her the good pleasure of His will, how there 
were combined in it two elements, the surrender 
to the work she had to perform, ‘ Behold the bond- 
maid of the Lord, and the trust that counted on 
God to do for her what He had promised, ‘ Be it 
according to Thy word.’ In both of these aspects 
the thanksgiving and joy of the hour of deliver- 
ance, if cultivated and kept up, will be guidance 
and strength. 

‘Behold the bondmaid of the Lord.’ The labour 
of bearing a child is but the beginning of that 
labour of love to which God has appointed and set 
apart the mother. The whole work of rearing 
and guarding and training the child is now to 
follow. The spirit of thanksgiving is the best 
preparation for the altar of consecration. If the 
mother is indeed to receive grace for the right and 
successful fulfilment of this new charge, it will 


sa . mn ~ . P . . 
Casa oT ime manne _ 


The Children for Christ: 


need on her part a very distinct consciousness 
and confession of unfitness, a very definite giving 
up of herself to be henceforth the Lord’s willing, 
loving slave for this holy work. As she looks at 
how much there may be that has to be parted 
with and put away, how much that she will have 
to struggle against and overcome, to be the holy 
mother of a holy child, entirely consecrated to 
God, the thought may come up that the sacrifice 
and the strain will be too great, that it is impos- 
sible to live so strictly, so entirely and peculiarly 
given up to God’s service. We fear to be too 
different from others ; God could bless us and our 
children even though we are not so very holy. 
Oh, that a mother, if such thoughts come up, 
would just pause and think of what God has 
done! There is the new life given to herself, and 
the life of her precious little one, there is the 
love and mercy of God, and all the promise of 
more love and mercy to be poured out—has the 
thanksgiving been so unreal, has the joy been so 
selfish and earthly, that there can be any hesita- 
tion as to whom these lives shall belong to? God 
forbid! if the thanksgiving has been true, it 
cannot but lead the mother to say that utterly 
and entirely she will live for God, that she may 
have grace to train a child who, too, shall utterly 
and entirely be the Lord’s. ‘The joy of the Lord 
is your strength ;’ a mother’s joy is the power for 


ON © be cree er 


fea) 


3= 
ly 


A Mother's Thanksgiving. 277 
a mother’s work ; the spirit of thanksgiving leads 
to the altar of consecration where mother and 
child are laid as living sacrifices to be the Lord’s 
alone. 

‘Be it unto me according to Thy word:’ this 
word of faith and trust, looking to God to do all 
that He has promised, gets new meaning after the 
experience of the first part of its fulfilment. In 
all the work that waits the mother in the future, 
the goodness just experienced teaches her to trust. 
Let her but yield herself heartily, not to her work, 
but to her God for His work; she may depend 
upon it that His teaching and His help and His 
strength are reales, Let her in the joyful spirit 
of praise take His word, and, as she studies what it 
says of a mother on earth, note what it says of the 

Father in heaven and the abounding grace He 
has undertaken to supply, and her faith will grow 
strong that her vow of surrender has been accepted, 
that its fulfilment is possible and certain, and that 
the joy of a child born into the world is but the 

beginning of a joy that shall know no ending. 

Let thanksgiving lift the heart to God in praise ; 

there faith becomes easy. Let faith lift the 

heart to God too; there thanksgiving becomes 
natura], and the life of mother and child may 
become one unceasing song of faith and love, of 
surrender and obedience, of thanksgiving and 
praise, 


278 


— 


The Chiidren for Christ : 


Blessed be the Lord! for He hath showed me 
His marvellous kindness! Bless the Lord, O my 
soul, and forget not all His benefits! What 
shall I render to the Lord for all His benefits 
toward me ? 

O my Father! in this the time of her weak- 
ness and gladness of heart, Thy handmaid 
draws nigh to praise Thy mercy and Thy love. 
Here am I and this precious child Thou hast 
given me, the witnesses of Thy power and Thy 
goodness; may our lives, all our days devoted 
to Thee, be the sacrifice of thanksgiving we bring 
Thee. 

Oh, hear the prayer of Thy handmaid, and let 
my life, now received anew as from Thy hand, 
indeed become wholly new. In daily intercourse 
with my Father, in close following and fellowship 
with my Lord Jesus, in a very tender yielding to 
the leading and sanctifying of the Holy Spirit, I 
desire henceforth to live only and wholly as Thy 
handmaid. 

And with myself, Lord, I offer Thee my precious 
child. Let the grace I have implored of Thee fit 
me from its very birth to hold it as Thy property, 
a sacred trust from Thee to nurse and train as 
Thine. It comes from Thee, O my God, a gift to 
me; accept it from me again, a living gift to Thee, 
Come to Thy handmaid, I pray Thee, in this her 
time of weakness and thanksgiving: let in this 


A Mother's Thanksgiving. 279 


time of holy quiet Thy presence overshadow me, 
and give me the assurance that my prayer is 
heard; that Thou hast accepted her and her 
little one to keep as Thine own for evermore. 
Amen.’ 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTY-SIXTH DAY. 


ee 


Jesus the Chilvren’s Surety, 


‘ And they brought Him to Jerusalem, to present Him to the 
Lord, as it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that 
openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord, and to offer 
a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the 
Lord.’—LUKE ii. 22-24. 


CCORDING to the law of God i: Israel, a 
child was circumcised when eight days old ; 

this was done in its home. On the fortieth day 
the mother was to appear in the temple to bring 
the sacrifice of her purification, and to present her 
child to the Lord. If the child was a first-born, 
then its presentation had special reference to the 
first-born belonging to the Lord, and it had to be 
redeemed. The Child Jesus had thus too to be 
presented to the Lord, as being made under the 
law, and made like unto His brethren in all things. 
Made like in all things, not only that He might 


Jesus the Children’s Surety. - 281 


have experience of everything we pass through, 
but that we might know that every state and con- 
dition has been sanctified by His Holy Presence 
and merit, and that He now, by giving us the 
spirit which was in Him when passing through 
them, might impart to us the blessing and the 
sanctifying grace that flow from fe!lowehip with 
Him, This truth has thoughts of wonderful joy 
and comfort for parents as they bring their little 
ones to God’s home, to present them before the 
Lord in baptism. 

Let us study this presentation of the holy Child 
Jesus. There He is, presented to His Father in 
heaven by His earthly parents; a helpless infant, 
but yet a pleasing sacrifice,a sweet-smelling savour. 
There, too, He comés as the first-born among many 
brethren, the Forerunner, through whom our little 
ones too can be acceptable to the Holy One. For 
now, when we bring our child to present him to 
the Lord, He looks down from heaven on the 
offering, and gives, in answer to the parent’s faith, 
to our child the spirit of His holy childhood. He 
was indeed made like us, that we might become 
like Him; He was made like unto our children, 
that they might be made like Him. He was not 
only Mary’s first-born, but the Father's first-born 
among many brethren. Where the first-fruits are 
holy the whole family is holy. The presentation of 
the Child Jesus to the Father gives us a right to 


282 The Children for Christ : 


present ours, and makes them acceptable too. 
Blessed thought! to place my child beside the 
holy Child, and in faith to claim that in Him my 
child is holy and accepted too. 

In Israel] the presentation of the child was 
accompanied with a sacrifice to cleanse away the 
defilement of sin cleaving, at every birth, to both 
mother and child. This we need too, And what 
a mercy that the mother now can look to the 
blessed Jesus, the great sin-offering and atone- 
ment (Lev. xii. 6), for her cleansing from all sin, 
so that she may be accepted and fitted for being 
a true mother to this God-devoted child! And 
what mercy that the children, too, share in the 
efficacy of that great sacrifice ere they know it! 
that from their birth they now are holy to the 
Lord, and may receive that Holy Spirit which 
is the lawful inheritance of the seed of God's 
believing people. We present our little one to 
the Lord, with Jesus as the great sin-offering 
making us acceptable and clean, and holy to the 
Lord. 

The object of this presentation in the temple: of 
the children was very specially to acknowledge 
God’s claim upon them, and to devote them to 
Him as His property. With what gladness and 
confidence parents do this when first they have 
seen Jesus presented in the temple. Or what 
does this mean? Has the Eternal God indeed 


Jesus the Children's Swrety. 283 


not spared His only-begotten Son, but given Him 
up for us and our children? Has He in very 
deed given His Son, the Lord of glory, to be our 
and our children’s possession, to enter into all 
their feebleness and misery, to be like them sub- 
jected to a birth needing purification and pre- 
sentation with sacrifice, and to a death like ours 
under the curse, and shall we now withhold our 
children from Him? Or shall we not most gladly 
present them before Him to. be only and wholly 
His, devoted to His service and glory? Shall we 
not place our little one beside this holy Child, and 
on His merits, and say, Father ! through Thy holy 
Child Jesus, with Him, in Him, like Him, I pre- 
sent my child to Thee, to be the Lord’s only and 
for ever ? 

Be .ssured that in such a presenting of your 
child, after the example, in the power and spirit of 
God’s Child, there is a rich and sure blessing. 
Presented to God in Jesus, accepted in Jesus, it 
may now grow up with and like Jesus. Let your 
faith lay hold of the holy child-life of Jesus as 
belonging to your child, as communicable by the 
power of the Holy Spirit. Let your faith main- 
tain and renew daily the solemn act in which 
you as parent appeared before the Lord to present 
your child to Him, ere you took it back to your 
home to rear and train. Let your faith rejoice in 
that definite Divine transaction in which, when 


wees 


———— 


SS A ct a I 


4 
4 


284 Lhe Children for Christ : 


you presented your child in the name of Jesus, ¢é 
was accepted of the Father as His own. What we 
present to God, ‘according to that which is said 
in the law of the Lord,’ that, in accordance with 
His word, God takes. And what He takes He 
k=sps. And our faith has only ever to look to 
God’s taking and keeping, to have the joyful 
assurance that the matter is finally settled be- 
tween God and us. Let this faith make you 
strong to train the child for God, in a strength and 
grace which He will give, to secure His property 
for Himself. Let this faith speak to your child, 
as he can receive it, of his having been presented 
with Jesus, like Jesus, in Jesus, to the Father, 
and of his fellowship in the life and spirit of Him 
who became the children’s Surety. Let the holy 
childhood of Jesus overshadow and sanctify the 
childhood of your little one. Let your children 
grow up in the friendship and the footsteps of the 
holy Child. Live in everything as those who are 
going to train children who are to be like Jesus. 
If the thought appear too high, let it but constrain 
you to ask the Father whether He does indeed 
desire your child to be wholly like His, and 
whether He does expect of you to train it to be 
so. The answer will not be withheld, and the 
presentation of Jesus in the temple will become 
to you a pledge of the grace that enables you to 
see how Jesus is in everything the promise of 


<< +s oe i ee py 


ge & ef 485 hs fp 


—O 8 FT & @ w I 


“C8 
‘ 


ao < a & 


a 


oo RP aos F& 


™ Oo c Ones # 


Jesus the Children’s Surety. 285 
what your child can be, and to train him accord- 
ingly. 

We all know how, in the economy of grace 
and in the work of salvation for man, there are 
always two powers in action, the Divine and the 
human.. To the former corresponds faith, that 
ever looks to God’s promise and power; to the 
latter works, without which faith cannot be per- 
fected, and which obey and fulfil the will of God. 
In our study of tie teachings of God’s Word on 
the parent’s calling, we have ever found how these 
two aspects of truth are presented by turns, and 
how, while at one moment everything appears to 
depend upon a parent’3 faith in what God does, 
very soon after a parent’s character and conduct 
appear to decide all. The two are inseparably 
interwoven: the more intently we pursue the one 
line of thought, the clearer will the other become. 
And we shall see that the deeper our insight into 
the indispensable necessity of either, the greater 
will be our felt need of the other as its comple- 
ment. 

We have here again been meditating on the 
spiritual side, and apparently speaking less of the 
practical training of daily life. Let all parents be 
assured that'there is nothing more intensely prac- 
tical than an act of real faith. If our presenting 
a child to the Lord be the deed of an intelligent, 
childlike, heartfelt faith, it will have its mighty 


“5 
? 
ae 
we 
4 
i 
> 
nm § 
ie 


GPA RER OCR EDEN AR TB BOOT RTI th 2 


286 The Children for Christ : 


influence on our daily treatment of the child. 
If it be renewed from day to day, it will have its 
effect on our whole relation to the little one 
growing up under our care. As we think of it as 
God’s devoted and accepted property, as we regard 
ourselves as trustees to whom it has been com- - 
mitted for keeping and training, as we realize how 
God never would expect of our feebleness to take 
charge aright of an immortal spirit without pro- 
viding the grace to do it well, and give ourselves 
with the child to a life of consecration and 
holiness, our faith will be the vital principle 
ruling all our conduct. Sanctifying our home 
life, and elevating our education to what God 
would have it be, our faith will be the work of 
His Spirit, transforming through our life each 
child, who, like Jesus, has been presented to Him, 
into the likeness of the life of Him who is the 
first-born among many brethren. 


Kternal God! who art the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and in Him of all that is truly 
childlike in heaven and on earth, see us draw 
nigh to Thee with our little one to present it to 
the Lord. We bring it to Thee, that Thou mayest 
regard it in Thy great compassion, cleanse it from 
the sins it inherits, through its birth from sinful 
parents, and accept it as Thine own, to be set apart 
and sealed as holy to the Lord. We present it 


Jesus the Children’s Surety. 287 


unto Thee,O Lord God. We do it in the assur- 
ance of faith and hope, because Thine own holy 
Child Jesus was once, as the first-born, presented 
in the place and on behalf of all who are brought 
to Thee in faith in Him. Blessed God! beside 
Him, and in Him, the children’s Surety, we pre- 
sent our child unto the Lord. 

We heseech Thee, enlighten our understanding 
to apprehend fully all that Thy Son’s being made 
like our children implies and secures. Strengthen 
our faith to apprehend and accept all the fulness 
of blessing it has opened to us, Let the holy 
childhood of Jesus be the protection of the child- 
hood of our child. Let the likeness of our child, 
O Father, to Thine in this that he has been 
presented to Thee as Jesus was, be the beginning 
and:the power of a likeness that shall take posses- 
sion of the whole life, And give grace to Thy 
servants to be the worthy parents and guardians 
and guides of a child who-has been presented to 
the Lord, as Jesus was. For His sake, O our 
Father. Amen. 


cb ERIN CSUR RA RIT IOC STONE gs RAMEE I NWR ee 


| ‘The Children for Christ : 


-_—= 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTY-SEVENTH Day. 


The Baptism with Cater and the Spirit, 


‘John answered, saying, I indeed baptize you with water ; 
but there cometh He who is mightier than I, the latchet of 
whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose, He shall baptize you 
with the Holy Ghost and with fire.’—Luxg iii, 16, 


AN has a twofold nature: there is the ex- 
ternal and visible; there is the internal, 
unseen, spiritual. Sin brought both equally under 
the power of the curse. In redemption both are 
to be made partakers of the glorious liberty of the 
children of God: ‘we wait for our adoption, to wit, 
the redemption of our body;’ the whole man, body 
and spirit, is to be saved. All God's dealings 
with us have respect to both sides of our nature; 
through the external He seeks to reach the inner 
man; the inner again is renewed that thence the 
blessing may stream out and take possession of 
the outer man. 
It is on this ground that we have the twofold 


r= - mic mm ..,_. 


The Baptism with Water and the Spirit. 289 


baptism of which our text speaks: the baptism 
with water, and the baptism with the Holy Spirit. 
The Baptist teaches us the relation existing 
between the two; the insufficiency of the baptism 
with water in itself, and its high value as the 
pledge and the preparation of what was to come. 
In his words, ministers and parents, through 
whom together the little ones receive their 
baptism of water, find the clearest light on their 
duty towards the baptized child, and on the spirit 
in which they themselves, and afterwards the 
child under their guidance, are to regard its 
baptism. 

And first we note the faith which the baptism 
with water warrants and demands as a sign and 
seal of the baptism of the Spirit. It is a sign in 
which God sets forth the working of regeneration, 
the cleansing of our nature by the renewal of the 
Holy Spirit. It is also a seal, an assurance that, 
where God has given the water, He most certainly 
gives the Spirit too, to the faith that claims and 
takes it. When John had come, the coming of 
Christ was certain too; when John had baptized 
with water, the baptism with the Spirit was 
certain too. God gave the one to waken faith and 
expectation for the other. So intimate is the 
connection, that our Saviour did not hesitate to 
speak of being ‘born of water and the Spirit ;’ 


thus closely doth He join and make them one. 
T 


290 The Children for Christ : 


God would teach us that what He hath meant to 
be one, and made one in promise, our faith can 
make one in reality. As in the whole economy 
ef grace the connecting link between God's 
promise and His fulfilment is our faith, so here 
too. The promise of God is no empty word, 
though our unbelief may make it of none effect. In 
His purpose the water and the Spirit are insepar- 
ably united: ‘what God hath joined together, let 
not man put asunder ;’ let not a parent’s unbelief 
rest content with the water without the Spirit. 
Claim and accept with the most assured confid- 
ence the baptism of the Spirit for thy child; and 
in faith praise for it as the divinely-secured herit- 
age of thy little one. 

Let us now observe the work to which the 
baptism with water calls and pledges us. The 
whole history of John teaches us that the Spirit 
could not be received until the way had been 
prepared for Him. The Baptist knows how little 
his labours avail until the baptism of the Spirit is 
given. And yet he labours. He does the double 
work of preaching repentance of sin and faith in 
the Lamb of God. A most blessed lesson for the 
Christian parent. In some children the workings 
of the Spirit are given from the very birth. In 
others they become manifest at very different 
stages of later growth. But in all, the manifesta- 
tion of the Spirit needs a parent’s education in 


The Baptism with Water and the Spirit. 291 


the lines of John’s preaching. The child needs 
to be taught what sin is and what repentance is, 
what the giving up of everything that is not 
according to the will of God. And it needs to be 
pointed to Jesus, the Lamb of God, through faith 
in whom the full influx of the Spirit is to come. 
So that, just as in the parent there is to be the 
harmony of faith and work, so the child no less 
from its earliest youth has to be trained for a God 
who asks to be trusted and obeyed. It is by the 
obedience of faith that parent and child are pre- 
pared for the fulfilment of the promise. 

Learn one more lesson from John. The secret 
of the wondrous union between faith and work in 
him you will find in his deep humility, His 
preaching had been with mighty power. A great 
revival of religion was taking place ; all men were 
flocking to him; no prophet in Israel had ever 
preached as he had done. And yet he says, ‘The 
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to un- 
loose.’ It is ever thus. The more the soul has 
received of the vision and the fellowship and the 
power of the Holy One, the deeper the sense of 
its utter nothingness and absolute dependence. 
But then, also, the deeper its confidence in the 
truth and power of Him whom it hath seen, and 
the greater its courage for His work, because it 
knows whence its help most surely comes. The 
thought might rise, or we might even hear others 


ag amstors 


vs ‘clipe apts oer oneplonasltteak rae a 


292 The Children for Christ : 


say it, that the assured confidence of the Spirit's 
being given to owr children may lead to pride, or 
may slacken exertion in their behalf. He that 
understands what faith is knows the answer: 
True faith and deep humility are inseparable, 
because faith is the becoming nothing to let God 
be all. And so true faith and faithful labour are 
no less inseparable, because faith yields itself to 
God to use and to work through us. Let it be 
with the parent as with John; there is nothing 
makes us so strong to honour God as when we are 
bound by the threefold cord of strong faith, earnest 
effort, and deep humility. 

Christian parent! hast thou accepted the pro- 
mise of the Spirit with the water? Oh, hold that 
promise fast in a living faith. Praise God un- 
ceasingly for His gift to thy child, even when 
thou dost not yet see its fulfilment. Let in thy 
daily home-life everything be subordinated to 
the high destiny for which thy God hath entrusted 
a child to thee: he is to be a vessel filled with 
His Spirit. Labour earnestly and hopefully with 
this blessed prospect in view. As often as these 
labours teach thee thy impotence or thy unfaith- 
fulness, look to Him whose servant thou art, and 
who has made thee the messenger of the Spirit. 
He will fit thee for the work He has given thee 
to do, Jesus hag said, ‘He that believeth in me, 
rivers of living water shall flow out of his belly.’ 


The Baptism with Water and the Spirit. 293 


Believe in Jesus! try again, and once again, and 
ever more again the unexhausted fulness of that 
word ; live thy life by the faith of the Son of God. 
Through thee the Spirit will flow out to thy child. 
And each baptism thou witnessest will be the 
glad reminder of the riches of the inheritance of 
thy child too. 

And, ye ministers of Christ,—if any such read 
these lines——to whom is committed the ministra- 
tion of this holy baptism, seek, oh, seek, like 
John, with every baptism to testify that He 
which hath sent you to baptize with water hath 
said to you that there is One coming after you to 
baptize with the Holy Spirit! Let us pray God 
to make all His servants indeed ministers of the 
Spirit, that they may have grace in all their 
ministrations to speak and act as men who have 
realized that the Spirit has been given to follow 
and to seal the message and the work of faith. 
And specially that they may have grace to lead 
and train both parents and children into the 
apprehension of that presence of the Holy Spirit 
in their home-life, through which the family can 
again take its place as God's first and choicest 
ordinance for the maintenance and the extension 
of the kingdom of heaven, It is as ministers and 
parents, as the whole Church, awakes to this 
truth, that the baptism of little children will no 
longer be, what it has too often been, a religious 


sacpnlererene emanate RE AA IRI LE vot 


- rennin pa ep ee ati entrant ann Te soa EN 
 ismsuihuce wate oe es ce 
een nine 
: « 


. 
- : CRORE a at NO MBE ACES BALE SAAS DEBT NON TR TPE hs BBN pe A a LEGS GON in eal he Sci a a f 
sa Pe RL SESRENRR i ease RACINE NTR ReRaNNEseepENteee nee TRIE gee abe ene 
5 tx cds si eT Re ae ee ee ee civ SA ata ae i ee et a ie Hae ck roca 
: 2 abe “te pti Aa ey. et of aa, 


294 The Children for Christ : 

form, or a promise that is never fulfilled; but a 
sacrament, mighty and efficacious, of the presence 
of the Holy Ghost in the Church -and in the 
home, 


Gracious God! I thank Thee for the holy ordin- 
ance of baptism, with its Divine assurance of the 
baptism of the Spirit. And I thank Thee that as 
our little ones are with us children of the cove- 
nant and its spiritual promises, they also share in 
the seal of the covenant. And I thank Thee that 
their baptism is the token of their being holy to 
the Lord, and the heirs of the promise of the 
Spirit. Lord God! teach me, teach all believing 
parents, teach Thy Church, to believe that, wher- 
ever in Thy name the baptism of water is received, 
Thou waitest to fulfil Thy engagement to give the 
baptism of the Spirit too. In the great gift of Thy 
Son, Thou hast given us Him who baptizeth with 
the Holy Spirit. 

Blessed Lord Jesus! I come to Thee with my 
children. I bring them to Thee. I claim for them 
the baptism of the Spirit. In faith I accept of it. 
Tn that faith I would train them to believe in Thee, 
that they may by faith in Thee come into the 
personal possession of what I have received for 
them. Yea, ere they can yet believe, I offer my- 
self, that through me and the influence of my life 
Thy blessed Spirit may rest upon them. 


The Baptism with Water and the Spirit, 295 


Blessed Saviour! give me grace in this faith to 
train them wisely, and according to Thy will, pre- 
paring in them the way of the Lord. Amid the 
consciousness of unworthiness and impotence, may 
this be my one hope and aim, that my children 


may daily live under the rule of Thy Holy Spirit. 
Amen. 


. eed ee at er ae ant tien v 
esata namaetiiniateriiiadaeiiacesedimeateilins ail tals eee - ™ 


a a SN I CAE NS at eam eh 


— 


ie ea li ests - 7 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


ee re 


THIRTY-EIGHTH DAY. 


A Faith Home. 


‘One cometh from the ruler’s house, saying, Thy daughter 
is dead ; trouble not the Master. But when Jesus heard it, he 
answered him, saying, Fear not; believe only, and she shall 
be made whole.’—LUKE viii. 49, 50.- 


EAR not; only believe! to how many 
thousands that word has been the mes- 
senger of comfort and hope, as they struggled 
under the burden of sin, or sought for help in 
trial or difficulty! - It told them that there was 
deliverance from fear in believing in Jesus; faith 
can banish fear. And yet, how many who have 
found a blessing in the word have forgotten that 
it is a word that specially belongs to parents. In 
every other use is but a loan; it is as parents that 
we have full right to it. It is Jesus, the Lord of 
the home, of parents and children, who speaks: 
Fear not, only believe. The word reminds of the 
needful double lesson,—in our children there is 


pe 8 


A Faith Home. 


natneiattin Ch na i i a rm 


every reason for fear, in Jesus every reason for 


faith. 
‘When we look at our children, there is every 
cause for fear. When we think of the evil nature ; 


they inherit from us, and the mighty power Satan 
has in this world into which they are entering, we 
may well fear. When we see, both in Scripture 
and in the world around us, how often the bright 
promise of childhood is tlighted, and the children 
of a religious home depart into the ways of evil 
and of death, we may well fear. When we think 


shter of the dangers to which they often are exposed, 
ner in the very nurses that surround their infancy, in 
sna ba 


the little friends of their childhood, in the schools 
through which they must pass, in the spirit of the 
world with which they must come into contact, in 
the literature and the amusements and the busi- 
ness from which they cannot be kept separate, we 
may well fear. } 

And then, when we think of our childven, and : 
realize how feeble and unfit and unfaithful we are to 
take charge of them, the fear grows stronger whether 
they will indeed secure the blessing prepared for 
them. We know how the atmosphere we create 
and breathe through our home is stronger than all 
precept or external practice. We are deeply con- 
scious of how much there still is of worldliness and 
selfishness, how much that is not in the fulness 
of the Spirit and the love of God; and we tremble 


© 
LOAN MMR RPE LSE RUE RBI RENTS SATA REY RTE SBP AR Ne 0 TR ttt HS arn IHS 


298 


The Children for Christ : 


at the thought of how our children may suffer 

from our lack of grace. We have reason to fear: 

would God that there were more of earnest, hearty 
fear of the power of sin and death ! 

- To such the word of Jesus comes: Fear not; 
only believe. Only believe: for faith is the one 
condition through which the power and the salva- 
tion of God are given. Only believe: for it is by 
faith that we throw ourselves and our children on 
Jesus and secure His blessing. Only believe: let 
faith look upon God’s covenant with us and our 
seed, and see how He engages to give us all the 
grace we need as parents, as well as all the grace 
our children need. Only believe: it is faith that 
is the mighty renewing power in a man’s life that 
teaches him to obey, and do all that God has com- 
manded. Only-believe: this is the one thing 
Jesus asks of the parent who truly seeks his child’s 
deliverance from sin and death, and fears lest he 
fail of securing it. 

This is now the one lesson we must seek to 

: learn, that of a parent who has come to Christ 

Sy with his child the first duty is faith. Just as 
with the penitent sinner, or the believer seeking 

more grace, all things are possible to him that 
believeth. Our domestic, as our personal life, must 

be a life of faith, We must not only have the 

heart, but the home too, purified by faith. Faith 

is the one thing God asks for in His children ; 


etlenas Ses AER Se RA SS REE BIE TE IEE SASS EAS NE se SAE Suasce Rants * 
4 asa Se a RE DID —_ = é 
: — i is tein. —s scale aia re a a ae 1s 
x . - hte aa a 5 Se tees oe 
$ a Ce 
. 


> fe a oe 


A Faith Home. 299 


and if the family constitution be indeed Divine, 
and a holy parentage God's first means of grace 
to the little ones, we cannot be too earnest in 
reminding each other that parental faith is the 
only spring of parental duty and parental obedi- 
ence, parental happiness and parental blessing. 
Only believe! must be written on the doorposts 
of our homes. It must be the animating power 
of all we are and do for our children. It must 
indeed be, in the fullest sense of the word, our 
only care snd aim: Jesus said, Only believe. 

To realize this truth, it may be well to re- 
member what God’s Word says of faith and its 
actings in that portion so specially devoted to it 
(Heb. xi.). There we read: Faith understands ; 
faith offers a more excellent sacrifice; faith 
pleases God; faith saves the household; faith 
obeys when it is called; faith receives strength 
to bear a child; faith offers up the child; faith 
blesses the children; faith hides the little one; 
faith saves the first-born. Faith is first the 
spiritual understanding that receives the revela- 
tion of God and His purpose; i hears His voice ; 
it listens to His call; it believes His promises, 
Then it is a Divine energy, a living principle of 
action that carries out God’s will, and inherits all 
His blessing. And that it is very specially the 
parent’s grace we see in what is said of Noah, 
Abraham, Sarah, Jacob, Moses’ parents, and Moses, 


- 
» : 4 
‘ . : ee 
‘eaten RER RENN DN MeN OR NTO L LLIN ATL RAEN LE ENTE LETT ELIT LES LIS RAMA A AHH EEE MS 


Tanipss oonbvasamslcnstone seaptnent  eon 


stesso amnensimantn.asSbansicstennaeen 
ce a A SA NNN inane sma Tapas a cee Ba 


2 Sel fu Ale A RS EC a 
i jee 


300 The Children for Christ : 

It was in each case faith that made it possible, 
made it simple and easy, as parents, to do what 
made them the channels of a Divine blessing to 
their children. 

And so still the power to understand God's pur- 
pose with our children, to save our household, to 
obey God’s will in all its rule, to offer our children 
to God, to bless our sons, and to save them from 
the destroyer, depends upon our faith. The 
living Christ, in whom is our salvation and our 
strength, every needed blessing and grace for us 
and our children,—it is He who speaks, Only 
believe. It is in the knowledge of what He 
is, it is in His presence, that such a faith is 
possible and must prevail. Has He not, if we 
are indeed His, redeemed our children as well 
as ourselves from the power of sin? Has 
He not come to make the covenant of promise, 
‘thy God and the God of thy house,’ a brighter 
and fuller reality than ever it was to Abraham ? 
Has He not secured for us, in the Holy Spirit, a 
power from on high tq fulfil every obligation that 
rests on us as God’s children, this one, too, of 
keeping our children for Him to whom we belong? 
Has He not made true all the promises given of 
old, of God’s Spirit upon our offspring, of God's 
Word not departing from the mouth of our seed’s 
seed for evermore, in that one word on the day of 
Pentecost, ‘the promise is to you and to your 


eS EO ee 


A Faith Home. 


children’? Can we not count upon Him to give 


“ for us and each child just what we need, if only 
to we believe ? 

‘Only believe :’ let us take the command liter- 
ibe ally; faith has never yet been disappointed. 
to . Living faith will teach us to see new beauty and 
ren preciousness in our children. Living faith will 
om _ waken in us new earnestness and desire in every- 
The thing to hold and to train them for God alone. 
and Living faith will give its own hopeful and con- 
van fiding tone to all our intercourse with God for 
nly them, and all our intercourse with them too. The 
He name of Faith Home has been appropriated to 
1 is certain special institutions ; we shall boldly claim 
wo it as the name of our own dear home, because 
wall everything is done in the faith of Jesus. The 
Has - birth of our children, and our love to them, our 
ise, prayer with and for them, our watching against 
hter their sins and our reproving them, our teaching 
bm ? and training, their lessons and employments and 


pleasure,—all will be under the inspiring and regu- 
lating power of this :. Only believe. 

It need hardly be said that such a faith life i: 
the home is not possible without the faith life: in 
the heart. We cannot be to our children more 
than we are to God. ‘It is no longer I that live, 
but Christ that liveth in me; I live by the faith 
of the Son of God:’ this must be the language 
of the father, the mother, who would have theirs 


OP AALS RTO, EE 


0 " 


302 The Children ,.° Christ : 


a faith home. It is not only in moments .of 
special need and prayer, or when we are in direct 
contact with the children, that Jesus says, Only 
believe. No, day by day, hour by hour, it must 
be, I live by the faith of the Son of God. 
Christian parent! this life is for you. Learn 
only with each new morning to say: For this day 
I accept Jesus for all my duties as believer and 
as parent. Commit simply, commit fully to Him 
every duty, every difficulty, every circumstance, 
every moment, and say then confidently, I know 
in whom I have believed. It is He who spake to 
me as parent the blessed word, Only believe; and 
I am persuaded that what I have committed to 
Him He is able to keep. This is the blessed 
secret of a faith life and a faith home. 


Blessed Saviour! I thank Thee for this precious 
word. I have long heard and understood that it 
is by faith alone the sinner is saved. I have 
begun to understand and experience something of 
what it is that a saved sinner is to live entirely 
by faith, and every hour to receive from Thee the 
life Thou hast engaged to live in him. Lord, 
teach me the additional lesson that in the home- 
life faith is just as much the power of blessing, 
and that in all my intercourse with my family 
Thy word still is, Fear not, only believe. O Jesus, 
Thou art not only the sinner’s, but the parent's, 


re ct ee eg 


A Faith Home. 303 
Friend ; in nothing wilt Thou delight so much to 
reveal Thy saving and sanctifying power as in the 
family life which Thou hast redeemed to the ser- 
vice of Thy kingdom. 

O my Lord! I do pray Thee to teach me and 
all parents how impossible it is to train our 
children aright, or be a blessing to them, except as 
we live the life of faith. Open our eyes to see all 
that Thou offerest to our faith, and how our love 
to them, our influence on them, our education and 
our training, may all be inspired and purified 
and perfected by the faith in the power of Thy 
finished redemption and Thy abiding presence. 
Show us how all our own feebleness and our fears, 
all the waywardness of our children and all the 
wickedness in the world that tempts them, can be 
fully met by Thy power and Thy love, if we only 
trust Thee. O Lord Jesus! do teach us to know 
Thee as the Saviour of our children from their 
very birth, and in the homes we have to form for 
them. And let our whole life and intercourse 
with them, day by day, every day and all the day, 
be in the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, 
and gave Himself for us. Amen. 


‘ : i ye oR en " 2 © 
3 grey tne tinny mre tama or A ew Sn NAG Sa SIS SSSEAE a re 


C6 eee Pe, = 


A Een dsr ene 


ETE TO TT SRT Bats 


Rt AEN RT SAAT a a nt a Raat 
- pigetiee a hdi _ F \ 2 ™ ee 
-~ » 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


THIRTY-NINTH Day. 


The Chamber of Death, 


‘ And all wept and bewailed her. But Jesus said, Weep not ; 
she is not dead, but sleepeth.’—LukE viii. 52. 


N God’s great school of tribulation there are 
many classes. In the department where God 
trains parents, there is one room which all greatly 
fear to enter. Many, as they are led into it, are 
seen struggling and murmuring. As its darkness 
closes in over them, they almost refuse to believe 
that God is love. Many pass through it, and 
come out of it, with hardly aught of the Divine 
comfort or holiness the chastisement was meant 
to bring, because they knew not why they were 
there, and were not silent to wait for the teaching 
and the blessing Jesus gives. Others, again, who 
entered trembling, can testify that the chamber of 
death—for of this we speak—was to them the gate 
of heaven; it was the death of a little one that 


not; 


are 
God 
atly 
are 


that 


The Chamber of Death, 305 


first led them truly to know Jesus, As truly 
as to Jairus with his dead daughter, the child's 
death was the parent’s life, 

Let us see how Jesus meets the sorrowing 
parent in the chamber of death. The first thing 
He asks is silence and solitude. Jesus comes to 
the house, and finds ‘the crowd making a great 
tumult.’ At once He puts out the crowd, and 
goes in alone, with the parents and the three dis- 
ciples. One of the things that most effectually 
hinders the blessing of affliction is that it is too 
much spent in the intercourse with men, and 
comfort sought in their sympathy. One of God’s 
great objects in chastisement is, by clouding the 
light and the brightness of visible things, to draw 
the soul to Himself and the Unseen. ‘ My soul 


‘is silent unto God;’ ‘I will hear what God the 


Lord will speak:’ such is the disposition God 
would fain have in those whom He visits. He 
has lessons, often difficult lessons, to teach the 
parents whose little one death has taken away ; it 
is only when there is the teachableness that really 
looks to God Himself, and waits on Him, that the 
trial becomes fruitful in blessing. 

What the lessons are in the dying chamber of 
a child it is not difficult to say. The parent is 
led to ask, Have I loved my child in the Lord, or 
looked upon it and treated it too much as my own 


possession? Has the spirit of my life and my 
U 


306 The Children for Chiist : 
home been truly an educating of my children for 
heaven and its holiness? Is there not worldli- 
ness, selfishness, sinfulness, of which this affliction 
must remind me? Has it indeed been, in all I 
seek for my family, ‘the kingdom first’? Afflic- 
tion never can profit without heart-searching ; and 
heart-searching is impossible except in the holy 
stillness of soul that is found in separation from 
man and meeting with God. Oh, let parents 
beware, in their time of trial, of the dissipation that 
comes from too much seeing of friends, from seek- 
ing and finding comfort in their company. God 
wants to see us alone; without this He cannot 
bless or comfort us, Jesus waits to reveal Him- 
self in the power of His great salvation as the 
Surety of the parental covenant too,—the Redeemer 
in whom the parent will find all the grace and 
blessing the covenant God has promised; but He 
cannot do it except the crowd is put out. He 
takes His three disciples with Him, that all His 
servants may learn in their ministry to remind us 
that by the bedside of a dying or a dead child 
Jesus wants to be alone with the parents. Even 
His ministers are only to come in as they come 
with Him, and point to Him. 

And now that He is alone with the parents, 
now comes the comforting. ‘Weep not,’ He says. 
Jesus does not condemn weeping. He wept Him- 
self; weeping ever touched His heart. And yet 


ne nan 


s 


rents, 


} says. 
Him- 
d yet 


copay a tee PRES TS Ngee eye Sag ee 
% 3 ¢ i Miss CMa RE Re Cp cE 


The Chamber of Death. 307 


He says, ‘Weep not.’ ‘Woman, why weepest 
thou ?’ was His very first resurrection word. Itis 
as the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, 
leads His redeemed, that all tears are wiped away. 
Jesus came to dry oar tears. He says, ‘Weep 
not.’ Weeping is often self-indulgence, a nursing 
of our grief, the fruit of being too absorbed in 
ourselves, the object we mourn, or the suffering 


-we endure. Weeping often hinders the voice of 


God being heard, hinders altogether the blessing 
the affliction was meant to bring. We are only 
occupied with what we suffer, and God would 
have us think of the cause of the suffering, the sin 
with which we have made Him suffer. By taking 
away a child, God meant to take us away from our- 
selves, and to make room in the heart for Him- 
self. Weeping often only fills us with ourselves, 
God would have us in the affliction learn to bear, 
and love, and worship His will. Weeping is often 
the homage, yea, the adoration, of our own will. 
Beloved mourner! hear the voice of Jesus 
say, ‘Weep not.’ He does not say it without a 
reason. It is not enough that the tumult of the 
crowd outside is put away, and that there is 
silence in the room; the tumult of thought and 
feeling must be hushed too, within the soul there 
must be silence. At the bidding of Jesus the 
gush of tears must be restrained, and the hear‘ 
must turn to Him, to ask who this is who thus, 


1 
’ 
: ae 
i‘ 
z 
‘es 
i af 
> | 
a 
. 
: 2 
i 8 
: & 
; HL 
5 5 
j g 
a i 
b 
‘ i 
a &@ 
, i 
3 
4 
| ‘ 
i) 
i 
si} t 
Hee 
A Thi ; 
Hild 
He 
Het : 
Wii i 
A Hh 
if j 
Hat { 
HAM | | 
Ani 
it an 
HLS | 
His | 
thigh i 
Hh 
ian 
Fi} 
4 
ee £ 
ip EE 
: 
ati 


308 The Children for Christ : 


with authority, bids us cease our weeping, and 
what He has to say to justify His injunction. 
Obedience to the command is the path to the 
comfort He brings. 

And what is the comfort Jesus gives? He 
leads from the visible to the invisible ; where we 
only see death, He speaks. of life; He comes to 
rouse us to faith, and to it He reveals Himself as 
the Living and Lifegiving One. ‘Weep not: she 
is not dead, but sleepeth. With these words 
Jesus draws near to the lifeless form of each little 
one over whom a mother’s bursting heart is weep- 
ing, to remind her that death has been conquered, 
and that the loved one is not dead, in the terrible 
meaning which sin gave that word, but truly 
sleeps, in the deep and blessed sense which that 
word now has in His mouth. 

Thy little one is not dead. Judge not by sight. 
There is a better life than the life of this earth,— 
the eternal life in which God dwelleth. In that 
eternal life there is a sleep provided for those 
who are in Christ Jesus, the blessed waiting-time 
till He comes to gather all His own. As the life 
itself, and the glory in which it shall be fully 
manifested, is something that hath not entered the 
heart to conceive, so this sleep, too, is something 
that passeth knowledge. We only know for certain 
shat it is a most blessed rest, rest in the bosom 
of Jesus, And Jesus asks if this is no comfort, 


s to 
r as 
she 
ords 
ittle 
eep- 
red, 
rible 
ruly 
that 


ight. 
h— 
that 
chose 
time 
b life 
fully 
1 the 
hing 
rtain 
psom 
ifort, 


The Chamber of Death. 309 


_ to know that thy little one, whom with thyself He 


took into His covenant ere it could know Him, or 
thy child, grown up and trained in the faith of the 
covenant, is now resting with Him. He took it 
that He might draw thee heavenward. He took 
it that He might, empty thy heart, to make more 
room for Himself. He took it that thou mightest 
be drawn to Him in thy need, and be prepared for 
receiving the new revelation He has to give of His 
power, of His love, of Himself as thy life. 

It is Jesus Himself who comes to thee tu speak 
of all this. Asin the Old Testament it was the 
God of the covenant who came to one believing 
parent after another with His promise of what 
their children should be; so in the New it is 
Jesus, the Surety of the children, in whom the 
parent will find the grace for all he needs to train 
a seed forGod. Jesus said, ‘ Believe me that I am 
in the Father, and the Father in me: he that hath 
seen me hath seen the Father.’ In the incarna- 
tion of Jesus all that God of old had promised 
of blessing to parents and children is now fulfilled. 
If we but learn to know Jesus aright, to believe 
on Him fully, to live in the faith of Him, our 
home and family life will be holy to the Lord. 
No sacrifice is too great, if we only learn to know 
Jesus aright. It was in the chamber where 
Jairus’ daughter lay dead that her parents learnt 
to know Jesus. 


AAR AR SRA ON se ren 
4 


eeiaaiiier tebe ee ae ee 


Rae at — 
es Saietrsnnemirreeeatueeeniee ~ 
SSS = = 


310 The Children for Christ : 


Weeping parents! this is God’s one purpose 
and desire, this is God’s one great thought of 
blessing and comfort: in His Son Christ Jesus 
He has come nigh to bless and take posses- 
sion of you. Let this your time of affliction not 
pass without a hitherto unknown experience 
of what Jesus is as the parents’ Friend, their 
Teacher, Comforter, and Sanctifier. And so the 
loss you have sustained will be restored tenfold in 
the blessing it is made to yourself and the child- 
ren still left you. Or even if it were the only 
one, in the power and blessing which this new 
knowledge of Jesus, the Living One, the parent's 
and the children’s Friend, will enable you to bring 


‘to others, jou will yet be led to confess how 


that death has become your greatest gain. The 
presence and the power and the love of Jesus 
can more than compensate for the absence and 
the loss of the child. 


Blessed Lord! in this my hour of deep sorrow 
I come to Thee, my Saviour and the Saviour of 
my little one. Condescend, I beseech Thee, to 
come in with me, my Lord, to the chamber of 
death, where Thy weeping child waits for Thee. 
Oh, come in and be Thou my Comforter and my 
Teacher. Put out, I pray Thee, the tumult of the 
crowd, all the sad thoughts and uncontrolled feel- 
ings that keep me from hearing Thy voice. Speak 


The Chamber of Death. 311 


Thyself; say to the storm, Be still! and let Thy 
presence be the great calm. O my Saviour! speak: 
I would hear. A 

Speak, Lord, if it please Thee, of Thy holy 
will, and Thy right to do with Thine even what 
pleaseth Thee, and teach me to say, ‘Thy will be 
done.’ Speak, as Thou seest it needful, of my sin 
and wandering from Thee, of my love of the 
creature, of my want of love to Thee and delight 
in Thy fellowship, and make me see how this 
chastisement of Thy love was what I needed to 
make me partaker of Thy holiness. Speak, Lord! 
and teach me. 

Speak, Lord! and comfort Thy child. Reveal 
Thyself to me as the Resurrection and the Life, 
the Shepherd who has taken His lamb into His 
bosom. Reveal Thyself as my Shepherd! who 
will see to it that the blessing of the affliction is 
secured, by coming nearer to me with Thy abiding 
presence. Reveal Thyself as from henceforth 
more than ever the house-Friend, making Thyself 


' at home with us, to sanctify our family life more 


than ever into the blessed experience of Thy care 
for the homes of Thy people. Come in, Lord 
Jesus! come in to me in the chamber of death, 
and, as Thou hast taken my child to Thyself, take 
me and my beloved home, and make us entirely 
Thine. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTIETH DAY. 


The Wivow’s Child. 


‘There was carried out one that was dead, the only son of 
his mother, and she was a widow. And when the Lord saw 
her, He had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.’ 
—LUKE vii. 12, 13. 


— seen: - : 
oF a eens ats adsnenenisnitnaemee 


Scripture on the education of children 
would certainly be incomplete, if it had nothing 
to say on what always is so sad and difficult, and | 
yet often has been so blessed and successful a | 
work,—a widow’s training of her orphan children. 
There are few sights which so claim and attract 
sympathy, both human and Divine. It is indeed 
one of the sorest trials that can befall a woman. 
The husband for whom she left her father’s home, 
on whom she counted, and leant as her guide and | 
guardian, in whom her life and her love found : 


NY attempt to set forth the teaching of 
| 
| 
| 
| their joy, to whom she looked as her help and 


The Widow's Child. 


313 


strength in the training of her children,—her 
husband is taken from her, and she is left alone 
and desolate. The stricken heart seeks in vain for 
the object of its affection ; in temporal prespects 
there is perhaps nothing to which to cling, and the 
sight of the beloved little ones still left her, instead 
of being a treasure to which her love now clings, 
at first only gives new bitterness to the trial. It 
is not only the heart of man that is touched by 
this thought: the heart of God too. Throughout 
Scripture, from the repeated commands in the law 
of Moses down to James's testimony that pure 
religion teaches us to visit ‘the fatherless and 
widows’ in their affliction, God never forgets the 
widow. ‘A Father of the fatherless, and a Judge 
of the widows, is God in His holy habitation;’ ‘ He 
upholdeth the fatherless and the widow;’ ‘ Leave 
thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive ; 
and let thy widows trust in me’ (Ps, Ixviii. 5, 
exlvi. 9; Jer. xlix. 11): Such words reveal to us 
the very heart of God. 

And now, when Jesus came, how could He fail 
of showing in this too, that He was the Father's 
image, that God was in Christ. It is as if the 
picture of the Master’s life would be incomplete 
without the story of the widow of Nain. In what 
He said of the widow’s mite, we see how His 
eye watches over a widow’s poverty, and values, 
what men would call, her little deed of love. At 


* a 
ey hee eee ee eee ne eee 
Bape erik a ea es Ha ci Fad SPEAR E RD gk * pad aata  eh Nal Di Aaa e ca hi Uh ka Hs v eee Seer 


314 The Children for Christ : 


oe an a 


Nain we see Him as the Comforter of widowed 
motherhood. Let us go to Nain, the sacred spot 
to which so many a widow has resorted to find in 
Jesus her Friend and Lord, to learn what Jesus, 
the Friend and Saviour of our children, has to say 
to a widow weeping over her child. Not only 
when the tears are those of sorrow over one taken 
away, but those of anxious love or sad distress at 
the sight of those still left behind, Jesus meets us 
with His, Weep not. 
Weep not, widowed mother, as you look at your 
little ones, and the heart almost breaks at the’ ‘ ‘ 
thought of their being fatherless. Weep not, but 

come, follow me, a8 we seek Him who has been F 
anointed ‘to comfort all that mourn.’ Weep not, 

as you tremble to think of how you are to train 7 

and educate them all alone in your feebleness. Let ' 
your soul for a little be silent unto Him who came 
from heaven to say to the widow, ‘As one whom 
his mother .omforteth, will thy God comfort thee;’ 
weep not. 

Weep not! And may the wounded heart not 
have at least the comfort that the unrestrained 
flow of its tears does often bring? Just think 
for alittle moment. As little as the widow of Nain 
knew why Jesus spake thus, do you know it yet. 
But let it be enough that Jesus says it, All the | ae 
other parents, whose children Jesus blessed, came 

and asked for help; He speaks to the widow with- 


a | ae ve ls 


a NT A an ony 


The Widow's Chili: 315 


—_—— 


out being asked. Her widowhood is her sufficient 
plea: ‘When the Lord saw her, He had com- 
passion on her, and said, Weep not.’ Jesus is 
looking on you; do not let your tears keep you 
from looking and listening to Him. Be sure that 
if it could have been, He would have spared you 
that cup; that now that it has come, He is looking 
on you in compassion, waiting to comfort and to 
bless; in the tenderest love, but with the voice of 
authority Jesus says, Weep not. 

But Jesus was not one who comforts only with 
words ; His words were always followed by deeds. 

And so, if you will look up and see, He will 
show you what He will do. To the widowed 
mother at Nain He gave back the dead son, who 
had been to her in the place of a husband. And 
His believing people know that, though it may 
last a little while, the departed ones who have 
died in the Lord will be given back-to them, in 
glory and for ever. Look up to Jesus, the Re- 
surrection and the Life, weeping widow! and 
believe ; them which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring with Him. The resurrection, the meeting 
again, the being ever with the Lord, are realities, 
as real, more real, more mighty than the separa- 
tion and the sorrow; look up in faith, it is Jesus 
who speaks, Weep not. 

But oh, the desolation that meantime fills the 
heart! and the sense of utter feebleness and un- 


316 The Children for Christ : 


fitness to fulfil my charge with these boys, these 
girls, who still live, and who do so need a father’s 
wise, firm, loving rule. Dear mother! when Jesus 
says, Weep not, He never speaks without doing; 
He gives what can dry the tears, What think 
you? if Jesus were to take the place of the father 
to these children, would not this make you smile 
and sing even through the tears. If, as a living 
reality, Jesus would undertake the responsibility 
of educating those children, of being your Adviser 
and your Strength and your assurance of success 
in your work, would this not be enough to stay 
those tears? And just this is what He comes 
to do. What God spoke of old, ‘Leave thy 
orphans to me, and let thy widows trust in me;’ 
‘The Lord upholdeth the fatherless and the 
widow, Jesus comes in human tenderness, and 


‘in the nearness of the Holy Spirit, to fulfil. You 


may trust your fatherless children to Him; He 
will preserve them; He will, in a Divine fulness 
and power of meaning, be the father of the father- 
less. 

It may. be that a widowed mother reads these 
words, to whom they have but little meaning. 
Though a Christian, she has so little yet learned 
to live by faith, to count the unseen things of 
faith surer and clearer than the things of sight, 
that the promise appears all vague and distant. 
She hardly dares hope that it ever will become a 


eS ABH > eas 


— 


= et DM 


The Widow's Child. 317 
reality, that she may be quite sure that Jesus will 
do it for her. She does not feel as if she is good 
or holy or believing enough, that her children 
should receive such a wonderfully special and 
Divine guidance. 

My sister! would you learn what Jesus would 
have of you, that you may with confidence depend 
upon your children being preserved and blessed by 
Him, and your tears pass away in the sunlight of 
His love and care, come and listen. Of a widow 
He asks but one thing—‘ Let thy widows trust in 
me:’ ‘She that is a widow indeed trusteth in God, 
and continueth in supplication and prayer night 
and day.’ Trust me! this was what He claimed 
from the widow of Nain; this is what He asks of 
you. Trust Jesus! this is the message I bring 
you this day in your weeping, anxious widowhood. 
Trust Jesus! trust Him for yourself. Let each 
thought of your departed one lead you to say, I 
have Jesus with me—I will trust Him. Let the 
consciousness of sin and shortcoming, of unfit- 
ness for your mother’s work, wake the prayer, 
Jesus! I will trust Thee, to make me what I 
should be. Trust Him with your children, with 
their temporal and their eternal interests. Only 
remember, the life of trust just needs a life of un- 
divided, of simple, childlike surrender. Be wholly 
His, and He will prove Himself wholly yours. 
Tarry in prayer and supplication, in the silent, 


318 The Children for Christ : 


restful committal of every care and fear to Him. 
Really trust Him; in every prayer make this the 
chief thing. I have now entrusted my need to 
Him, I trust Him with it; Iam confident He is 
mighty and faithful to keep that which I have 
committed unto Him. Trust Him wholly; they 
who wholly trust Him, find Him wholly true. 
And if ever the double trial of the widow of 
Nain should be yours, and you have to mourn the 
loss not only of a husband, but an only son, oh, 
remember that there still Jesus is the Comforter 
of the widow doubly desolate! This will be the 
time in which you will find Him becou.e doubly 
precious, and you will have grace to say, My 
flesh and my heart fail; but God, but Jesus, 
is the strength of my heart, and my portion for 
ever. 


Blessed Lord Jesus! how shall I praise Thee 
for that thoughtful love which would not give us 
the record of Thy life without the story of the 
widow of Nain. Blessed be Thy name for the 
revelation of the special place the widow has in 
Thy heart, and the tenderness of that compassion 
which drew nigh to her ere ever she knew that 
she might look to Thee! Lord Jesus! for every 
widowed mother we now pray to Thee. Teach 
her to come to Thee with her fatherless children. 


1 See Note C at close of volume. 


nD = ef © 2 8 


The Widow's Child. 


aa ane a ee ee een -— wn ee 


We bless Thee that there are thousands of widowed 
mothers who have proved how wonderfully Thou 
canst bless the feeble, and how richly Thou hast 
blessed their children. 

Teach the widow, we pray Thee, to put her 
trust in God and in Thee. Thou art able and 
Thou art willing to do what man dare not expect, 
what man counts impossible, if we honour Thee 
by trusting Thy love. O Saviour! help the feeble 
faith of every widow. Let her desolation and her 
sorrow and her feebleness compel her now wholly 
to cast herself with her children on Thee, to 
depend upon Thee alone. Draw Thyself nigh, O 
Thou compassionate One, and reveal Thyself. 
Speak into the depths of the sorrowing, anxious 
heart Thy word of comfort: Weep not! Oh, 
let Thy widowed child hear Thee speaking, see 
Thee come to take charge, and provide, and care 
for the education of her children. Teach her 
that her one work is to trust Thee, in separation 
from the world, in holy devotedness to Thee, to 
trust Thee for a more than human, a Divine guid- 
ance and blessing on her children. Let her 
continue in prayer and supplication, in daily 
communion with Thee the Unseen One, the por- 
tion of her children. Let her then fully know 
how truly Thou art the widow’s Friend, the 
Saviour and the Friend of her children. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-FIRST DAY. 


The Sick Chilv. 


‘There was a certain notleman, whose son was sick at 
Capernaum. He went unto Jesus, and besought Him that He 
would come down and heal his son ; tor he was at the point of 
death,’—Joun iv. 46, 47. 


ERE is an experience that almost every 
parent passes through. In the wonderful 
training of the parent through the child, God uses 
a child’s sickness as one of His special means of 
biessing. And in the parent’s training of the 
child, the sick-room has often been the place when 
the parent first fully found his way to the child’s 
heart, to guide it to Jesus and the distinct con- 
fession of faith in Him, Let us prepare ourselves 
for the children’s sick-rooms by the lessons the 
beautiful story of the nobleman of Capernauin 
teaches us as to how sickness is to be met, to be 
healed, to be blessed. 


ck at 
at Llc 
pint of 


pvery 
erful 
uses 
ns of 
the 
hen 
hild’s 
con- 
elves 
5 the 
1aumn 
o be 


The Sick Child. 321 


How sickness is to be met? God’s great gift 
to sinful men is Jesus; in His Son He meets 
our every need. And the one great thing God 
asks of in us, as the spirit in which we are to 
meet Him in Christ, is, faith—the trustful sur- 
render to let this blessed Jesus be to us all that 
the Father would have Him be. And because He 
has been given to us, not only as individuals, but 
as parents, for us to accept and to use on behalf 
of our children, until we can lead them to accept 
Him for themselves, the one thing that God 
asks of the parent is, faith—trust in Jesus, As 
faith in God was the one thing by which the 
saints of old pleased God, and did all that was 
pleasing to Him, and to which God therefore 
sought to train them, so faith in His Son is the 
one supreme grate by which the Christian parent 
can please God, and obtain His blessings on his 
children. And all God’s leadings and dealings 
have this one object and purpose, to make us 
strong in faith, giving glory to God. 

When God allows sickness to come upon the 
child of one of His believing people, perhaps still 
young or an infant, and the parents’ hearts are 
agonized by the sight of its pain or the fear of 
losing it, the question comes with terrible force, 
Why God permits all this suffering? The answer 
Scripture gives is, for the trial and so for the purify- 
ing and the strengthening of faith. God’s one pur- 
xX 


oa A RRO 
ee eee 


me 
Seen onynneneran ates 
= : ; - or omarion er 
Se neni nnsc ERT inne bretiiinntereniersans: ey-nmneeerreine 


ERS raat ot Na a — ' — —— ~ | ax 
ate 
(eres 
meme ee ” 
Ro RDA rg Dis, ho 
: NEI NR I aetna . 


322 The Children for Christ : 
pose with parent and child is to work and increase 
faith in them. By faith they become capable of 
receiving the revelation of God’s glory, and show- 
ing it forth again; by faith God can dwell in 
them, and work through them. God’s one desire 
is that they should more fully believe in His Son; 
and our one desire should be to meet the sickness 
by faith in Jesus. 

This is the one great lesson the story of the 
nobleman teaches us,—the growth and increase of 
faith in the dealing with Christ. It begins as a 
general faith in what he has heard of Christ’s 
compassion and power; this brings him into 
contact with Christ. He believes in Jesus as 
a healer. It becomes a distinct faith in the 
promise he received of healing: ‘the man_be- 
lieved the word that Jesus had spoken unto him.’ 
He believes in Jesus as the Healer of his child. 
And then the faith in Jesus the Healer is per- 
fected in the faith in Him as Saviour and Lord: 
‘himself believed and his whole house.’ This is 
God's one purpose with sickness ; let it be ours 
too. Let the chastisement discover to us our un- 
belief, and that fieshly and worldly spirit, that 
unholy life, in which unbelief has its root and its 
strength. Let us look from the hand that holds 
the rod to the face of Him whose is the hand; 
to see that face in truth makes trust easy and 
real, 


DASE 

2 of 
\OW- 

1 in 
esire 
Son; 
cess 


f the 
ise of 
as a 
nrist’s 
. into 
us as 
n the 
n be- 
) him.’ 
child. 
g per- 
Lord : 
his is 
e ours 
r un- 
t, that 
and its 
holds 
hand; 
sy and 


The Sick Child. 323 


How the sickness is to be healed? This is the 
second question our story suggests. The answer 
it gives is very simple: By the power of Jesus. 
In Matthew Christ’s healing work is spoken of as 
the natural result of His atoning work of which 
Isaiah had spoken (Isa. liii.; Matt. viii.) as a 
bearing of our sickness. He took upon Him our 
human nature in the flesh, and, having redeemed 
it, lifted it into the glory of the eternal life in 
heaven. When on earth, He delighted in healing 
the sick, as something His loving heart could do 
for them even when He could not save their souls. 
In His Word He left among the heritage of the ex- 
ceeding great and precious promises which are the 
riches of His Church, the assurance that the prayer 
of faith would save the sick, because the prayer of 
a righteous man availeth much. He has a thou- 
sand times over by His Spirit led His children, 
applying the promise of an answer to believing 
prayer, the promise of His doing whatsoever we 
will if we abide in Him, to believe and receive 
the healing of a sick child. His great desire in 
sickness is to educate us into that simple, child- 
like faith, which, while it cannot give account of 
its assurance to reason, yet through the Holy 
Spirit has the assurance that its petition is 
granted, that it has what it asks. Let us but 
see that the lesson of the chastisement has been 
accepted, that the sin, or the want of entire har- 


324 The Childrer 2” Christ: 
ie Shalontt Sent sted ange ee al gene 
mony of our life with God 
fessed and pardoned, has 
quered ; let us claim th” 


3 will, has been con- 
“n cast out and con- 
fe of the beloved sick 


one for God’s glory ~ im and in us as parents: 
the word of Jeg” C#m come to us as real as to 
the nobleman: “ty son liveth. 

And we ~!all learn how sickness is to become 
a blessix¢- The Lord Jesus used it as a means of 
drax ing to Himself; when it had done this He 
wok it away, that the healing might bind to 
Himself. When the sickness had done its work, 
the healing perfected what had been begun. The 
sickness had brought the nobleman to Jesus in 
hope and expectancy; the healing left him a 
confirmed believer, with his household. There is 
a very prevalent opinion that sickness is better 
than health for true piety; in the life of Christ 


and in His work we see no token of this. Health 
obtained direct from Jesus in the prayer of faith, 
health received consciously as a gift of redeeming 
love, is one of the most wonderful spiritual bless- 
ings: a bearing in the body the mark of the 


hand of Jesus. 


leads into this school of sickness, realize this fully, 
that health, indeed asked and received in faith, 
may be a token of even more intimate contact 
with Jesus than the blessing of the sick-bed ever 
has been. As this is understood, we shall feel 
courage to make known our desire for a health in 


Let each parent, whom our Lord 


con- 
con- 
sick 
ents : 
as to 


come 
ans of 
is He 
nd to 
work, 
The 
sus in 
him a 
here is 
better 
Christ 
Is ealth 
faith, 
eeming 
l bless- 
of the 
r Lord 
s fully, 
\ faith, 
ontact 
ed ever 
p l feel 
palth in 


The Sick Child. 325 


which there is to be power for God’s glory. The 
new revelation of the power and the love of Jesus 
may make us and our household believers as never 
before—full of faith and devotion to Him who has 
blessed us. 

Parents! our sick children are God’s messengers 
to lead us to Jesus and to faith in Him. The 
sickness has a message and a blessing. It calls 
us to remember parental sin, and to confess it. It 
calls us to search the heart and life and home as 
to whether we have held our children wholly for 
God, trained them as holy to the Lord. It comes 
to make the heart tender and humbie, and to draw 
it out to Jesus. Oh, let us beware lest in all the 
care or sorrow the sickness occasions, in all the 
means to which we flee to seek deliverance, in 
all the fear of losing our child, we miss God’s 
purpose. He wants to bring us, subdued and 
quiet, in faith and hope to Jesus. Let us pray 
God very earnestly that we may not miss the 
blessing of the sickness. 

And, much more, let us accept the greater bless- 
ing of the healing. The exercise of faith honours 
God more than anything. The availing ourselves 
of our privilege, the trusting of Jesus’ word and 
power, the learning to know Him as indeed our 
Helper, the experience of His healing power in 
distinct answer to our faith,—it is this that binds 
to Christ. We learn to know Him as the Living 


326 The Children for Ohrist : 


One. We have the token of the acceptance of 
our surrender and our trust. Our home has 
become the scene of the display of His kingly 
power. It has sealed afresh the parental covenant. 
We and our home become the Lord’s as never 
before. 


Blessed Redeemer! we come to Thee to learn 
the lesson that sickness has but this one purpose— 
to draw us to Thyself. When Thou wert on earth, 
the sickness of a child was one of the cords with 
which the Father drew men to Thee. And still 
He takes parents into the sick-room of their little 
ones, that there they may learn to seek and find 
Thee, to wait for and to receive the revelation of 
Thy power and love. 

Lord Jesus! teach us, we pray Thee, in all 
the time of our children’s sickness to learn the 
blessed lesson of coming to Thee and trusting 
Thee. We may be most sure that Thou art 
watching over us to teach, to comfort, to sanctify, 
and to heal, Teach us especially that Thou 
art still the same as when on earth, mighty 
to bid the sickness depart, and to free from the 
power of death. To spare the life of a child for 
Thy service, to gladden and sanctify a parent’s 
heart by Thy grace, and for the Father's glory, 
Thou art still ready to hear the prayer of faith 
and raise up the child. Oh, grant us this faith, 


ce of 
» has 
ingly 
nant. 
never 


learn 
ose— 
earth, 
s with 
d still 
r little 
d find 
tion of 


in all 
rn the 
sting 
ou art 
nctify, 
Thou 
a ighty 
om the 
ild for 
harent’s 
glory, 
rf faith 
5 faith, 


The Sick Child. 327 


that we may honour Thee, and not hinder Thee 
from proving with what compassion thou hearest 
a parent’s cry. 

And grant, Lord, when Thou graciously hast 
heard, and given back a child to the parent’s faith, 
that the blessed fruit may be that the parents 
with their whole house believe in Thee as never 
before. May all see that Jesus is now Lord and 
Master, the beloved Friend of the home. As the 
sickness leads to seek Thee, may the healing bind 
to Thee and Thy blessed service. Amen. 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-SECOND DAY. 


Feey fav Lambs. 


‘ Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Lovest thou Me more than 
these? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord ; Thou knowest that I 
love Thee. He saith unto him, Feed My lambs,’—Joun xxi. 15. 


ETER was a fisherman. After the first 
miraculous draught of fishes, the Lord had 

said, ‘Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of 
men. Peter's work on earth was made the symbol 
of his heavenly calling. After the second miracu- 
lous draught of fishes, in the days preceding the 
ascension, our Lord no longer calls Peter a fisher- 
man, but a shepherd. There is a deep meaning in 
the change. One great point of difference between 
the fisherman and the shepherd is, that while the 
former catches what he has neither reared nor fed, 
and only seeks what is full-grown, casting away all 
the little fish out of his net back into the sea, the 
shepherd directs his special attention to the young 


than 
hat I 
xi. 15. 


first 
had 
rs of 
mbol 
acu- 
r the 
sher- 
Ag in 
een 
e the 
fed, 
y all 
, the 
oung 


Feed my Lambs. 329 


and the feeble ; on his care for the lambs all his 
hope depends. 

The type of the fisherman , ~# no place for 
the Master to give special charge concerning the 
children of His Church. The shepherd’s calling 
at once suggested the words, Feed My Jambs, and 
sets forth the deep importance and the blessed 
reward of giving a first place to the little ones of 
the flock. Peter, and Christ’s ministers, were not 
only to feed the sheep—the prosperity of the 
Church would specially depend upon their feeding 
the lambs. What was said to vhem is very 
specially applicable to parents as under-shep- 
herds, who each have their little flock of lambs 
to keep and rear for the Master. Christ’s com- 
mission to His Church through Peter shows 
the place the little ones have in His heart, and 
teaches us to think of the weakness, the value, the 


. need, and the hope of our children. 


Feed My lambs, Jesus says, and reminds us of the 
feebleness of our children and their religious life. 
I was once leaving a sheep-farm in company with 
its master towards evening. There were threaten- 
ing clouds ; just as we had left he hurried back to 
call his son, and cry out, ‘Take great care of the 
lambs! there is a storm coming.’ The Lord was 
just about to ascend the throne; one of His last 
words is, Care for the lambs. The sheep is a 
weak and helpless animal; how much more the 


Serres ripen inert t/ha aS ~ $ 
n r= 6, 


hadenaneceea tee 
ra vonetalinatonoDrecsinoare: 
an eA onelngnenDaman-aacmmapeNnoanmnecoconomiromee ee 


a Ras <n 
ne 


330 The Children for Christ : 


ee ee erewne 


little lamb! Itcannot care for itself. The Master 
would have every minister and every parent think 
much how utterly dependent the child is on the 
care of those to whom it is entrusted. It cannot 
choose the company under whose influence it 
comes. It knows not yet to choose between good 
and evil. It knows nothing of the importance of 
little words or deeds, of forming habits, of sowing 
good or bad seed, of yielding itself to the world or 
God. All depends upon its surroundings: parents 
especially have the children in their power. What 
a solemn responsibility to lead and nourish them 
carefully, to feed them, not with the husks of 
this world’s thoughts and pleasures, but with 
food convenient, the milk for babes which our 
Father has provided, to lead them only in the 
green pastures | 

Feed My lambs: the words remind us of the 
high value of the little ones. In the lambs the 
shepherd sees the possibilities of the future: as 
the lambs, so the coming flock. The Church of 
the next generation, the servants with whom, 
in but a few years’ time, Jesus has to do His 
work of converting and saving and blessing men, 
are the children of to-day. No wonder He 
says, — alas! how little we have understood 
or heeded the voice,—Feed the lambs, . He says 
more, He says, ‘ Feed My lambs, ‘of such is 
the kingdom.’ Not only for what they are to 


ster 
ink 
the 
not 
e it 
zo0d 
ce of 
wing 
ld or 
rents 
W hat 
them 
ks ot 
with 
our 
n the 


Df the 
bs the 
e: as 
rch of 
hom, 
lo His 
ry men, 
py He 
pystood 
e says 
uch 1s 


are to 


Feed my Lambs. 331 

become, but for what they already are in their 
childlike simplicity and heavenliness, He loves 
them and counts them of great worth. For the 
lesson they continually have to teach grown-up 
people, for all the influence they exert in making 
their parents and elders gentle and humble and 
trustful, for all the blessings they bring to those 
who receive them in the name of Jesus, they are 
to Him of unspeakable worth, the most beautiful 
part of His flock. Let us try to catch His spirit 
as He cries, ‘Feed My lambs.’ Oh, let us learn to 
look upon our children in the light in which Jesus 
looks upon them! Let us pray for the Holy Spirit 
to make the familiar words, Jesus’ lambs, a deep 
spiritual reality to us, until our hearts tremble at 
the thought. Our little ones are His lambs: we 
are daily to feed them as such, that they may 
grow up as the sheep of His pasture. 

Feed My lambs: the children’s great need is 
here set before us. Food is the condition of 
growth. Food is something received from with- 
out, to be assimilated and taken up into our very 
life. The body has its food from the visible world. 
The mind is nourished by the thoughts that enter 
it. The spirit feeds, through the mind, on the 
thoughts, the words of God. The little ones cannot 
seek pasture for themselves; Christ looks to 
parents to bring to them day by day, not a chapter 
of the Bible just read over, and in most cases 


— cea cre eae Stern - . 
een 
sae aS : = 
‘ 


332 The Children for Christ : 


beyond their comprehension, but some of the 
thoughts of Divine wisdom and love, without 
which the soul cannot possibly grow. Not less 
carefully than the mother studies daily how to let 
the child have something to eat, and what it is 
to eat, ought she day by day to feed each lamb 
entrusted to her care. The one desire and aim 
must be to rear it for Him. The consecration of 
the child to the Lord must be the chief thing in 
its life. The idea of its being His, and growing 
up entirely and alone for Him, the absorbing 
desire, this will make the duty easy. 

Feed My lambs: the words tell the provision 
Christ has made for His feeble ones, To whom 
were the words spoken? To one of whom the 
question had been asked, ‘ Lovest thou Me?’ and 
who had answered, ‘ Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that 
I love Thee.’ It is only one who is inspired by 
love to Jesus who can truly take charge of the 
lambs. This is the examination of fitness for the 
duty of parent and shepherd of the lambs,—‘ Lovest 
thou Me? This is the provision Jesus has made 
for the lambs: true love to Jesus can do the 
work. 

Let every parent who longs to know how he 
can obtain the needed qualification for his work, 
give in his name for this examination. Let Jesus 
search your heart,—once, twice, a third time,— 
until the remembrance of past unfaithfulness 


Feed my Lambs. 333 
brings tears, and the answer comes, Lord, Thou 
knowest all things, Thou knowest that I do love 
Thee. Alas! it is this that is the blight of so 
many a Christian home—the conscious, fervent, 
and confessed love of Jesus is wanting. Nothing 
influences a child like love: the warmth of a holy 
love to Jesus will make itself felt. There may be 
a great deal of religion, and of teaching, and of 
praying ; it is only love that will conquer. Love 
to Jesus will lead to obey Him very carefully, to 
walk with Him very closely, to trust Him very 
heartily. Love to Jesus will make the desire to 
please Him very strong, and the charge He gives 
us to keep very precious. Love to Jesus will 
make our testimony of Him very personal. -The 
food with which we feed the lambs will have the 
warmth of a Divine love about it. Jesus wants 
parents who love Him, who love Him with their 
whole heart and strength: this is the provision 
He has thought out for His little lambs. 

The religion of Jesus is a religion of love. Of 
the Father it is said, ‘God is love.” Jesus Him- 
self is the gift of a love that passeth knowledge. 
His own life and work is one of love,—love 
stronger than death. When the Holy Spirit 


‘comes to us He sheds abroad in our hearts 


the love of God. Our whole relation to the 
Divine is to be one of love. And our relation 
as parents and children was meant to be one 


er nnn ore 


-- 
_aheeanleonepsencrsenesmnmac 


: - ee 
eae E —ryecmae screen anne ean nyenetstanemane “ ° 
Ssansonnettensnine uae FAS ¢ - : : = - : - 


pera wer eer ee. aa 
= reeeersanticeceesieeisecey 


334 The Chilaren for Christ : 


of love. It was to restore this that Jesus came. 
And He does it by calling parents to love 
Himself, and then, receiving the little ones in His 
name, for His sake, and in the fervour of His love, 
to take charge of them, The love of earth He 
purifies and elevates by the love of heaven. And 
the home is consecrated by the light of Jesus’ 
love resting on the children, and the power of His 
love dwelling in the parents, and the whole of 
education being made a work of love for Him. 
Christian parents! see and accept your blessed 
calling ; you are the shepherds of the Divine love 
to tend and feed the lambs. In His Church the 
Chief Shepherd has many shepherds to care for 
the flock, but none who can so care for the lambs 
as the parents. ‘He maketh Him families like a 
flock :’ it is to parental love, inspired and sancti- 
fied by redeeming love, that Jesus looks for the 
building up of His Church. Let us pray very 
earnestly to have, in the first place, our eyes 
opened to see things as Jesus sees them, to 
realize by the Holy Spirit what He feels for our 
little ones, what He expects of us and is ready to 
do for us in giving us wisdom and strength. 
‘Feed My lambs:’ when this word is made the 
law of a parent’s duty, what gentleness and love 
will it inspire, what heavenly hope, what faithful, 
watchful care, and what an unceasing life of faith 
in the love and grace and blessing of Jesus on our 


nithful, 
f faith 
on our 


Feed my Lambs. 335 


home! Let us often wait for the voice to say to 
us, ‘Lovest thou Me? feed My lambs.’ 


Blessed Saviour! Thou art the good Shepherd, 
of whom my soul hath said, ‘The Lord is my 
Shepherd, I shall not want.’ I bless Thee for the 
tender love that did not forget the little ones, 
but didst:so carefully commit them to the charge of 
Thy servant Peter, at his installation to the office 
of shepherd, in Thy precious, ‘ Feed My lambs.’ 
I bless Thee for the holy privilege Thou hast be- 
stowed on me of being a parent, and also bearing 
Thy commission: ‘Feed My lambs.’ I bless Thee 
with my whole heart for the honour and blessed- 
ness of being, in my little sphere, what Thou art 
in Thine, of being to others what Thou art to me, 
a gentle, loving shepherd. O my Lord! may my 
daily experience of the way in which Thy shep- 
herd-love does its work on me be a daily lesson 
to teach me how to feed my little flock of lambs. 
Blessed Master! the servant of whose love I 
am to my children, I beseech Thee open my eyes 
to look upon my children as Thou dost, to regard 
them always and only in the light of Thy claim 
upon them. Open my eyes to see what a holy 
life of fellowship with Thee, of separation from 
the world and its spirit, of watchfulness and trust, 
is needed, to do my duty to Thee and Thy lambs, 
Take away every thought of reluctance and fear 


336 The Children for Christ : 


of difficulty and burden, and let me see how a 
simple, childlike life with Thee is the best, the 
only true treining for doing a parent’s work aright. 
And to this end, my Lord! fill me with Thy 
love. I confess with shame that there has been 
in my life so little of an enthusiastic love to Thy- 
self. Lord, forgive it me, and deliver me from it. 
Let love to Thee, a bright, obedient love, be the 
atmosphere of the home in which my children 
grow up. O Thou who art Thyself the Lamb of 
God, and dost allow my children to bear the same 
name Thou dost, to be God’s lambs; oh, let Thy 
holy love in my heart be the inspiring power 
of all my intercourse with Thee and with them. 
And let me so prove how wonderfully Thou art 
my Shepherd, and how blessedly I am their 
shepherd. 
For Thy name’s sake. Amen. 


The Holy Spirit in the Family. 337 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-THIRD DAY. 


The Roly Spirit in the Family. 


‘To you is the promise, and to your children.’—Actrs ii. 39, 


E have not forgotten the frequent use in the 

Old Testament of the words in which 
parents and children were joined together as being 
together partners in God’s covenant and blessings. 
‘Thou and thy house,’ ‘Thee and thy seed,’ ‘ You 
and your children,’ ‘Me and my house,’ such were 
the expressions of the blessed bond that made the 
whole family one in God’s sight. God be praised ! 
the expression is found in the New Testament 
too: ‘You and your children. And nowhere 
could it have found a place of deeper significance 
than where we have it to-day. On the day of Pen- 
tecost, as the Church of Christ, which had just been 
born by His resurrection from the dead, receives 
its baptism of the Holy Spirit, the word is heard, 

Y 


The Children for Christ : 

‘To you is the promise, and to your children.’ 
All the blessings of the new dispensation, the 
ministration of the Spirit, are at once secured to 
our children. 

‘To you is the promise, and to your children.’ 
The promise is of the Spirit of the glorified Jesus, 
in all His fulness, the baptism of fire and of power. 
When we are baptized in th: name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Hoiy Ghost, we confess 
our faith in the Holy Trinity, and in the Holy 
Spirit, not only as one with the Father and the Son, 
but as being the third person, as alone bringing 
the full and perfect revelation of the Divine glory. 
All that in the Old Covenant had been promised by 
God, all that had been manifested and brought 
nigh to us of Divine grace in Jesus, the Holy 
Spirit is now to make our very own. Through 
Him all the promises of God are fulfilled, all 
grace and salvation in Christ becomes a personal 
possession and experience. God’s Word calls our 
children children of promise; it is specially of 
this promise of the Holy Spirit that they are the 
heirs. And the secret of a godly education is to 
bring them up in the faith and for the fulfilment 
of this promise. Jn the faith of the promise we 
must learn to look upon the aid and the presence 
of the Spirit in our daily training as absolutely 
necessary and indispensable, but also as most 
positively secured to us. In all our praying for 


The Holy Spirit in the Family. 339 


on’ tnem, and living with them, in our family religion 
the and daily life, we must learn to count upon and 
to expect the direct working of the Holy Spirit. So 
we shall educate them for the fulfilment of the 
ren? promise, that their lives more than our own may, 
sus, from their youth up, be in the power of the Spirit, 
wer. holy to the Lord. 
her, To you the promise is, and to your children. 
ifess The very thought of training children every day 
Holy in dependence upon the Holy Spirit’s presence, 
Son, and with the expectation of His filling the children, 
ging appears to some too strange and high: the thing 
‘lory. is impracticable. The reason of their thinking 
od by thus is simply that they have not yet learned to 
Sadhit understand and enjoy the abiding of the Spirit as 
Holy essential to a true Christian life. The promise of 
ough the Spirit is to you: it is just as parents realize 
F all in their own personal experience that it is only 
saith the continual leading of the Spirit that enables to 
Is our live as God would have us, that they will have 
lly of the capacity for believing, in its full meaning, the 
e the promise of the Spirit for their children. So only 
is to can they become the ministers of the Spirit to 
ment their families. Oh, that the Church of Christ 


understood the place and the power which the 
Spirit of God is meant to have in every Christian, 
and in every Christian home! All the complaints 
most about the neglect or the failure of religious educa- 
tion have their root in this: the Holy Ghost is not 


f 
; 
9 
my 
i 
f 
; 
; 
ee 
; 
na) 
eof 
fi 
Hou 
' 1 
; 
: H 
i} 
i 
; 
ipl 
s it 
Ho 
| Y 
ai. if 
eae | 
ie 
; t 
i 
Bout 
any 
lft 
att 
aly 
Wil 
bil 
iil 
Hilt 
} 
, 
tH 
Hilt 
Hk 
Hig 
Will 
iat 
ith 
Te 
Hitt 
Wii 
HE 
Hy 
Wil 
iii 
iil 
Hill 
PR: 
Hill 
bil 
tit 
‘i 
} 
i 
i 
Hi 
| | 
{ 
i 


} 
| 


SSS 


spree inn neieame so 


—— 


——S————SSSHSSSSTSHSSESESaSSl]S=S== 


ee 


i 


340 The Children for Christ : 


expected, is not accepted as the only, as the 
sufficient strength of the believer for all his God 
asks of him. As you parents receive the promise, 
and live and walk in the Spirit, will you receive 
it for your children too ? 

For to you is the promise, and to your children. 
As in nature, so in grace, you and your children 
have been linked together for good or for evil. 
Physically, intellectually, morally, they are the 
partakers of your life. Spiritually it may be so 
too. The gift of the Spirit and His gracious 
workings, to you and to them, does not consist of 
two distinct separate acts ; no, but in and through 
you He would come to them. Your life, your 
daily influence, is the channel through which His 
quickening and sanctifying grace would reach 
them. If you are resting content with the 
thought that you are saved, without seeking to be 
truly filled with the Spirit,—if your life is still 
more carnal than spiritual, with more of the spirit 
of the world than of God,—do not think it strange 
if your children grow up unconverted. It is 
nothing but what is right and natural. You are 
hindering the Holy Spirit. You are breathing 
day by day into your children the spirit of the 
world. You are, it may be unconsciously, but 
most effectually, using all your influence to train 
them into man’s religion, in its harmony with the 
spirit of the world, instead of God’s religion, in 


The Holy Spirit in the Family. 341 


the power of the Holy Spirit sent down from 
heaven. The promise is to you, and to your 
children : in spite of your evil influence, through 
the faith of others the blessing may reach them, 
but you have no reason to expect it, except as you 
yield yourselves to be the channel for its convey- 
ance. If nothing else has yet roused us, would 
that parental love might lead us to see that for 
our children’s sake nothing less is needed than 
for us to be filled with the Holy Ghost. 

To you is the promise, and to your children. The 
promise! would God that all parents understood 
what is implied in the promise. Too many look 
upon a promise of God as a mere word or thought 
—something that is without power until they 
from their side do what is needed to make it 
effectual. They do not know that the word of 
God has in it a living, mighty energy, a Divine 
seed-life, and that if they will but hide and keep 
it in their hearts, it will beget the faith through 
which the blessed fulfilment comes. I come 
this day to every parent who reads this with a 
wonderful message. Zhe promise, the promise of 
the Holy Spirit in His fulness and His power, is 
to you and to your children. A promise means 
that God in His infinite power has bound Him- 
self to do what He has said, and that He will 
most certainly do it for us as soon as we claim it 
in faith. And the promise here means that the 


342 The Children for Christ : 


Holy Spirit, with His quickening, sanctifying, and 
gladdening grace, is ours, waiting to come and to 
be, in our home, in our family life, all that we 
need to make it holy and happy. And however 
far our home life may yet be from God’s ideal, 
and however impossible it appear to us that in 
our circumstances and with our difficulties we 
shall ever succeed in making it very different, if 
we will but claim and hold fast the promise in the 
prayer of faith, God Himself will fulfil it. A 
promise needs two things: the receiver must 
believe and claim it; the giver must fulfil it and 
make it true. Let our posture be that of simple, 
trustful faith in God for ourselves and our 
children, counting on the promise : God is faithful, 
who will also do it. 

Dear fellow-parents! let us humble ourselves 
that our home life has not more distinctly proved 
the truth and the glory of this promise. Let us 
confess with shame how much there has been that 
was carnal and not spiritual; of the spirit of the 
world, and not of the Spirit of God. Let us open 
our hearts to take in the promise of God as some- 
thing that has a Divine quickening power, and 
that will itself beget in us the very state of mind | 
which God requires ere the fulfilment comes. Let 
us look upon ourselves as the divinely-appointed 
ministers of the Holy Spirit, to prepare and train 
our children under His influence from their youth 


and 
1 to 
we 
aver 
jeal, 
4 in 
; we 
nt, if 
n the 
ae 
must 
t and 
mple, 
d our 
ithful, 


selves 
proved 
Let us 
pn that 
of the 
1s Open 
s some- 
er, and 
f mind 
bs, Let 
pointed 
nd. train 
r youth 


The Holy Spirit in the Family. 343 


up, and let us yield ourselves wholly to His guid- 
ance and working. To train a child aright means 
training him to be a temple of the Holy Spirit, . 
means living ourselves in the power of the Spirit. 
Let no sense of shortcoming or feebleness dis- 
courage us: to you is the promise, and to your 
children, Let us place our lives as parents under 
the leading of the Holy Spirit. That will mean, 
placing our whole life under His leading : because 
we can be to our children only what we really are 
to God. Jet the spirit of praise and thanks 
unceasingly fill us, that God should have bestowed 
the wondrous grace upon us to make our family 
life the sphere for the special working of His 
Spirit; and let it be our unceasing prayer and our 
confident expectation that, by the power of the 
Holy Spirit from heaven, our home on earth shall 
be coming continually nearer to the home in 


~ heaven, of which it is meant to be the image and 


the preparation. 


O Thou thrice holy God! how shall we bless 
Thee for the promise that our home is to be Thy 
home, the abode of Thy Holy Spirit, and that in 
the happy life of love between parents and children 
which Thou givest us on earth, the Spirit of Thy 
Divine love is to be the link that binds us together. 
Glory to Thy name, O my God, for the promise of 
the Holy Spirit to us and to our children ! 


344 The Children for Christ : 


O God! we come to set wide open the doors of 
our beloved home to Thee, and to place it with 
our whole family life at the disposal, under the 
rule, of Thy Holy Spirit. We beseech Thee, let 
Him take possession. As parents we desire to 
claim the fulfilment of the promise. May our 
love to our children and our desires for them, our 
daily intercourse with them and our influence on 
them, all be under the continual overshadowing 
of Thy Holy Spirit. May our whole life, the 
invisible atmosphere that surrounds us and that 
filis our home, be that which Thy Holy Spirit 
breathes, holiness to the Lord. 

We claim the promise for our children. We 
desire, in simple, childlike faith, to count upon it, 
as a settled thing between Thee and us, that they 
are the heirs of the promise of the Spirit. Give us 
grace, O Father, as often as we see in them signs 
of evil that make us sad, tendencies and disposi- 
tions that make us fear, or influences around them 
that bring danger; oh, give us grace to plead 
the promise in the assurance of faith! O our 
Father! we would live ourselves, we would guide 
our home life, we would train each child day by 
day under the leading of the Holy Spirit. Teach 
Thou it us. May the holy reverence, the deep, 
quiet joy, the tender watchfulness, the death to 
self and the flesh, the life of faith in Jesus, which 
mark His presence, ever be ours, Amen. 


LR cn Re a ee ee Ey 


no 


Parental Self-Culture. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-FOURTH DAY. 


Parental Self-culture. 


‘Thou therefore that teachest another, teachest thou not 
thyself ?’—Rom. ii. 21. 


OTHING can be more inconsistent and vain 

than the attempt to teach others without 
teaching ourselves. It is in ordinary instruction 
only what the teacher is really master of and has 
thoroughly made his own, that he can success- 
fully communicate to others. In the higher sphere 
of the life-truth which a parent has to impart, it 
holds far more good: it is only the lesson I first 
teach myself that I can really teach my child. 
One of the first laws in the science of home edu- 
cation is, that it depends far more on example than 
precept; what parents are avails more than what 
they say. There is not one of the great lessons 
of child-life which the parent must not first him- 
self learn. Let us look at some of them. 


346 The Children for Christ : 

The great aim of education is to give the child, 
when grown up to manhood, the perfect mastery 
and the ready use of all the wondrous powers 
God has endowed him with. To this end a wise 
self-control is one of the first of virtues. Ac little 
as a state can prosper if there be no wise, intelli- 
gent ruler to make its laws and provide for its 
needs as they arise, can there be happiness in the 
little empire within man’s bosom, unless every- 
thing be subject to a ruling power. The child 
cannot be too early trained to habits of quiet 
thoughtfulness in speech and act, giving time and 
opportunity for mind and will to hold their rule. 
This training comes far more through example 
than precept. It is the atmosphere of a well- 
regulated home, the influence of the self-control 
which parents exhibit, which unconsciously set 
their mark on the child. When parents give way 
to impulse and temper, perhaps at the very time 
when professing to reprove or restrain the child’s 
temper, the effect of the good advice they mean 
to give is more than neutralized by the evil in- 
fluence of the spirit displayed. It is the spirit 
that influences. The child may never look up 
and say, but God’s Word on its behalf says, ‘Thou 
that teacheth another, dost not thou teach thy- 
self?’ If parents honestly watch themselves, 
they will often discover the causes or the helps 
to their children’s failings in themselves. Such 


hild, 
stery 
ywers 
wise 
little 
telli- 
yr its 
n the 
very - 
child 
quiet 
e and 
r rule. 
ample 
well- 
ontrol 
ly set 
e way 
time 
hild’s 
mean 
il in- 
spirit 
ok up 
‘Thou 
thy- 
selves, 
helps 
Such 


Parental Self-Culture. 347 
discovery ought to lead to very earnest confession 
before God, to a very hearty surrender to the 
teaching of Jesus and the Holy Spirit. We can 
depend upon the Divine renewal to fit us for true 
self-control; and what we so by grace teach our- 
selves will in due time influence our children 
too. 

But the self-control must know its object and 
the path to reach that object. The child. finds 
both in the word we have already repeated so 
often—-obedience. He must control himself to 
be able to render obedience to his parent, thut 
in that he may be trained to what will be his 
liberty and his glory, obedience to God. But 
here again the parent’s obedience will be con- 
tagious, it will inspire the child. If the parent's 
position be all one of privilege and liberty and 
command, the child may feel that the burden of 
obedience is all put upon him, the weaker one. 
‘Johnny,’ said a father once to a child, who was 
hesitating about obeying his father’s will, ‘ whose 
will must you do, your own or papa’s?’ ‘ Papa’s 
will,’ was the reluctant answer. But on it followed 
at once the question, ‘But whose will must papa 
do,then ?’ The father was able at once to answer, 
‘God’s will, and to explain how he considered such 
obedience, to a wiser and a better will than his 
own, his greatest privilege. He could at once 
take his place by the side of his child as also 


348 The Children for Christ : 


having to give up his own will. The parent who 
cau appeal to his daily life with his children, that 
they know how he in all things seeks to do the 
will of his God, and can in his prayers, in their 
presence, appeal to his God too, will find in the 
witness of such a life a mighty power to inculcate 
obedience in the child. When, on the contrary, 
the seeking of our own will marks our intercourse 
with our children, we need not wonder if our 
education is a failure. Let us turn at once and 
hearken to the voice, ‘Thou that teachest another, 
dost not thou teach thyself? ’ 

Very specially does this hold true of that 
great commandment which is the fulfilling of the 
law. Family life has been very specially ordained 
of God as the sphere where love can be cultivated. 
In nothing is our self-control to be more proved 
than in loving others, in restraining everything 
that is selfish or unloving. In the daily life of 
our children with each other and their companions, 
we have in miniature the temptations to which 
later life will expose them. For the exercise of 
the virtues of gentleness and forbearance, of for- 
giveness and generosity, of helpfulness and bene- 
ficence, continued opportunity will be found. 
Principles must not only be inculcated, but the 
trouble taken to lead the child to do the right 
thing easily and lovingly. Many a one wishes 
to help the poor, for instance, but does not under- 


who 
that 
the 
heir 
the 
cate 
rary, 
urse 
our 
and 
ther, 


that 
f the 
nined 
rated. 
oved 
thing 
fe of 
hions, 
hich 
se of 
for- 
ene- 
bund. 
the 
right 
ishes 
nder- 


Parental Self-Culture. 349 


take it, from not knowing how to set about it. It 
is one of the highest parts of a right Christian 
education to make beneficence the chief object of 
life, and awaken the desire to live to make those 
around us better and happier. But we feel at 
once how all this can only be attained as the 
parents teach themselves, and, for their own sakes, 
as well as their children’s, cultivate the virtues they 
inculcate. In the daily life of the family the 
parents must seek to prove that love is the law 
of their life. It must be understood that unkind 
words, harsh judgments, unloving reports, form no 


_ part of their conversation. In the intercourse 


with each other, with children, with servants, 
with friends, and the world around, love, God’s 
love, must be sought after and manifested. In 
the sympathy with the needy and wretched, in 
the thoughtful study of everything by which those 
who have none to care for them can be helped or 
comforted, in the actual loving self-denial exer- 
cised for the sake of the poor or the suffering, 
the example of Christ and His love must be 
reduced to practice in daily life. Thus alone can 
education to a life of love be truly successful. 
‘Thou that teachest another, dost thou not teach 
thyself?’ With what searching light these words 
ask whether as parents we are doing the first and 
most needful thing for being successful teachers 
of our children: teaching ourselves. Yes, parents, 


sce eeintaereremere 


SE TR pee. = 
oneteraginoescnipeenantsereeatencrtene 


—— 


oy ar a . 
————— . ~ a seem acne : 
ee ee erienerenenenenensd 

= See rete pt ecomenestommnrnneimetiacememens = 
—— a 


350 The Children for Christ : 


teach yourselves. If we are to train our children 


wisely, we must go through a new course of train- 
ing ourselves. We have to put ourselves to school 
again, and to be teachers and scholars in one. Of 
the two scholars whose education has to go on 
simultaneously, the parent and child, the parent 
will often find that the child makes more progress. 
The lessons which the attempt to train a child 
teaches parents, are often of greater importance and 
difficulty than those the child has to learn. It is 
especially well if the first lesson is learnt,—the 
need of self-teaching, the need of teachableness, 
the need of continual daily learning. 

Let the parent who begins to see this realize 
what it means to become ascholar. All schooling 
requires time and trouble, patience and payment. 
Teaching that costs nothing is of little value. 
No one can graduate as even fairly competent to 
train a child for eternity, without making sacrifices. 
Take time to study God’s Word and what it says 
of a parent’s duties. Study man’s moral nature, 
with its wonderful capacities, as the sacred trust 
committed to your care. Teach yourself to culti- 
vate that nature to its highest fitness for God’s 
service: it will be the best preparation for teaching 
your children aright. And if you feel how much 
you need the help of some friend to stimulate 
and to guide—let Jesus be that teacher. He came 
and taught Himself, that He might know to teach 


Parental Self-Culture. 351 
us; He learned obedience that He might show 
us the way. He came to show us the Father; 
He will so reveal the Father’s love and grace, the 
fatherly tenderness of our God, that we shall be 
full of a joyful assurance that He will not refuse 
to teach and enable us to be true fathers and 
mothers to our children. And we shall under- 
stand that to be ourselves teachable, obedient, 
loving children of the Heavenly Father, is the 
surest way of having our children teachable, 
obedient, and loving too. 


Gracious God! I come again to seek the grace 
I need for filling rightly my place as a parent. 
I ask of Thee to imprint deep on my heart the 
solemn thought that I can effectually teach my 
children only what I really teach myself, and that 
I can only expect the truth that influences my 
own life really to influence theirs. 

O my God! I think with s}.ame of how much 
that I reprove in them, is only the reflection of 
what they have seen in me. I confess how much 
there has been wanting of that spirit of childlike 
love and self-denial, of joyful obedience to Thee, 
and thoughtful self-sacrifice for others, which 
would have been to them the highest education. 
O my God! forgive me what is past, and give me 
grace in everything to teach myself what I want 
to teach my children, 


RE RARER EM IS AANA ARDELL SS: emg nmamncimse nm a ; ; 


352 The Children for Christ : 


Be pleased especially to make me feel deeply 
that it is as I live as an obedient child with my 
Father in heaven, that I can teach my children 
and expect them to be obedient to me. Lord! 
may childlike simplicity and obedience be the 
atmosphere my home breathes, the bond that 
makes parents and children one. .18 I think of 
my own slowness in learning, may I be very 
patient and gentle with my children, and yet full 
of hope that the lessons I impart to them will 
have their effect. 

Jesus, Master, teach Thou me, that with Thy 
teaching I may teach my loved ones. Amen. 


Baptized into Christ. 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-FIFTH DAY. 


Baptized into Christ. 


‘We who died to sin, shall we live any longer therein? Or 
are ye ignorant that all we, who were baptized into Christ 
Jesus, were baptized into His death? We were buried there- 
fore with Him, :hrough a baptism into death; that like as 
Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the 


Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.’—Rom. 
vi. 8, 4. 


‘In Him ye are complete, having been buried with Him in 
baptism, wherein ye were also raised with Him, through faith 


in the working of God, who raised Him from the dead.’—Co . 
ii. 10-12. 


N writing both to the Romans and the Colos- 

sians, Paul, in pleading with believers to 
live a life of separation from sin and the world—a 
life of holiness and liberty—uses their baptism 
into Christ as his great argument. He unfolds 
the spiritual meaning of baptism, as a union with 
Christ both in His death and His life, and shows 
how this is both the obligation and the possi- 
bility of a walk like Christ’s in newness of life. 
Baptism is the symbol of the deep spiritual mystery 

4 


The Children for Christ : 


of our perfect oneness with Christ; as it is under- 
stood and believed, it is the pledge of an abiding 
union and the ever-growing likeness to Him. 

It is a matter of deep importance to remember 
that baptism brings and seals to an infant nothing 
less than to an adult. All the believing parent 
receives in the covenant and its seal, is by God 
meant and secured for the child too. For a double 
reason thus the parent needs continually to re- 
member what God meant baptism to be. Without 
this he cannot educate the child into the posses- 
sion of what God intended for it in its baptism. 
Without this he cannot live himself, in the power 
of his baptism, that life which alone can lead the 
baptized child to the blessing God has in store for 
him. Let us try and understand what, in the 
full light of the Holy Spirit’s teaching, baptism 
really is. 

The great lesson we are taught is, that in 
baptism the death and resurrection of Jesus 
Christ are set forth, We know that baptism 
originally was by immersion. Scripture teaches us 
how the old world, in the time of Noah, had been 
destroyed and renewed again by a fearful baptism 
of water. The old nature, mankind in its sinful- 
ness, had perished under the water. From the 
water a new and cleansed world had emerged; 
Noah the believer had been brought forth, as 
begotten again from the dead. Scripture teaches 


ider- 
iding 
mm ber 
thing 
yarent 
y God 
louble 
to re- 
’ithout 
posses- 
aptism. 
} power 
ead the 
tore for 
in the 
aptism 


hat in 
Jesus 
aptism 
nches us 
d been 
aptism 
sinful- 
om the 
nerged ; 
orth, as 
teaches 


Baptized into Christ. 355 
us how, at the birth of Israel, God’s first-born son 
among the nations, that terrible baptism had not 
been wanting. Under Pharaoh’s rule the Egyp- 
tians and the Israelites had been mixed up, very 
much one. In the Red Sea, Pharaoh, the old man. 
had perished ; out of the waters that were death 
to Egypt, Israel came forth as God’s first-born, to 
sing the song of redemption. The Holy Ghost 
teaches us (1 Pet. iii. 20, and 1 Cor. x. 2) to 
regard the waters both of the flood and the Red 
Sea as types of baptism and its spiritual meaning. 
As the Jew, at John’s command, went in under 
the water, he not only thought of the water in its 
cleansing power. His life was so tainted by sin, 
that nothing but the giving up, the death of the 
old life, the reception of a new life, could really 
cleanse him. Going in under the water meant 
the drowning, the death of the old nature, the 
putting off of sin in confession and repentance ; 
the coming up out of it, the profession and the 
hope of a new life. 

John’s baptism of water was but a preparation ; 
Jesus Christ alone could give the true baptism,— 
the true deliverance from the old nature. But 
even He could not do this until He had Himself 
undergone His own baptism into death. In Him 
the two elements, the old and the new, which in 
the flood and the Red Sea were represented by 
two separate parties—-in Him they were united. 


356 The Children for Christ : 


The power of sin He bore in His own flesh— Our 
old man was crucified with Him ;’ He descended 
into the great deep, where He had to cry, ‘ All 
Thy wis: aud Thy billows are gone over me; 
let not :e waterflood overflow me’ (Ps. xl. 69). 
It was this pro«:;7ct that made Him say, ‘I have 
a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I 
straitened till it is accomplished.’ And again, 
‘Can ye indeed drink of the cup that I shall drink 
of, and be baptized with the baptism that i am 
baptized with?’ This was Christ’s baptism, a 
terrible reality—a baptism into death. 

But this was only the one half. There was also 
‘the coming up out of the water,’ the entrance on 
a new life, redeemed from destruction. That new 
life, typified in Noah and Israel, symbolized in 
John’s baptism, now became a reality. Jesus was 
raised from the dead, in the power of a new 
victorious life that can die no more. ‘We were 
buried with Him, through a baptism into death; 
that like as Christ was raised, we also might walk 
in newness of life.’ ‘Ye were buried with Him 
in baptism, wherein ye were also raised, through 
faith in the working of God who raised Him.’ 
Baptism is, in the power of the Holy Spirit, our 
participation with Jesus Christ in the deepest and 
most mysterious experiences of His life; as our 
faith ever looks to, and rests on, and claims, and 
yields itself to the working of God who raised 


a Rote 


Our 
ded 
‘ All 
me ; 
69). 
have 
am I 
gain, 
drink 
i am 
sm, @ 


as also 
nce on 
at new 
zed in 
sus was 
a new 
le were 
death ; 
nt walk 
h Him 
hrough 
Him.’ 
rit, our 
est and 


as our 
ms, and 
raised 


Baptized into Christ. 357 
Him, we experience the power of His death and 
His life working in us; our life becomes conform- 
able to His, that life of His which died and lives 
for evermore. Reckoning and knowing ourselves 
to be indeed dead unto sin and alive unto God in 
Christ, we have the power to walk in new~ess of life, 
we are made free from sin and live as t.:e : rvants 
of God and of righteousness. And as »fteu as the 
flesh suggests that we must sin, or tells us, with 
the Colossians, to seek our strength in carnal help 
and ordinances, God’s Word remi*4s us of our 
strength: ‘We have been baptized into Christ, 
into His death and into His life.’ 

What strong consolation this teaching of God’s 
Word offers believing parents in bringing their 
children to baptism. The deeper our insight into 
the spiritual blessings which the sacrament seals, 
the more we shall value the grace which secures 
them to our infants. Our gratitude will be deeper ; 
our sense of responsibility more solemn ; our faith 
more stirred to effort; our whole life will be 
holier, as the appointed channel through which all 
this blessing is to be conveyed to the child. Yes, 
believing parent! thy life is the means of grace, 
the mediuyn appointed and consecrated by God, 
through which the life of the Risen One is to 
become the life of thy child. It is through thy 
life——-not thy teachings, or thy prayers, or thy 
beliefs, for these are but paris of thyself,—but 


358 The Children for Christ : 
through thy life, representing the sum of all thou 
art, and of the influences thou dost exercise upon 
thy child, that God would have him inherit the 
blessings his baptism into Christ have made his. 
What an urgent call for the parent to live truly 
the life of a baptized one,—as one who has been 
made one plant with Christ in the likeness of His 
death and resurrection. Let no believing parent 
say or think that this truth, that this life, is too 
high for him. If he be a true believer, this Christ, 
who died but lives again, is his life, his blessed- 
ness. He cannot taste the true blessedness of the 
life of faith, he cannot praise or honour God 
aright, he cannot abide fully in Christ, but as he 
accepts Him fully in all He is and gives. Parents! 
I beseech you, make it your firm resolve to edu- 
cate your children for nothing less than all their 
baptism offers them. Live to this end yourselves 
under its full power, as people who’ have been 
baptized into the death of Christ, with the flesh 
crucified, yourselves crucified to the world, made 
free from sin, bearing daily the cross and the 
dying of the Lord Jesus, Live as those who in 
baptism have been raised again by the faith in the 
working of God who raised Jesus. Let your faith 
claim all the power of His resurrection life; all 
that God wrought in Him, He will work in you 
(Eph. i. 20, ii, 6; 1 Pet. i, 21). Let the whole 
of your education be in this faith in the working 


thou 
1pon 
the 
118. 
truly 
been 
f His 
arent 
is too 
hrist, 
2esed- 
of the 
- God 
as he 
rents | 
» edu- 
their 
selves 
been 
> flesh 
made 
d the 
ho in 
in the 
r faith 
fe ; all 
n you 
whole 


orking 


Baptized into Christ. 359 
of God to make true to your child all He promised 
in raising Jesus from the dead. Live as one 
baptized into the death and life of Christ, taking 
charge of a child who is partaker of the same 
baptism. 

And make that baptism the starting-point of all 
his education. Lead him to Jesus, to whom he 
alone belongs. Lead him to the cross, to take it 
up and bear it in the love of Jesus. Help him, 
as sin and self come up, as the flesh and the world 
tempt, to practise the blessed self-denial which 
Jesus links with the cross. Guide him in that 
path of bright and loving obedience, where truest 
happiness is found. Speak to him of Jesus, the 
Risen One, as a living Friend, as the power of his 
new life. Long ere he can understand the theo- 
logy of it, let the impressibility of his young 
heart have been won for Jesus and a life like His, 
devoted to His service. Pray for grace, that above 
everything you may be to your dear child the 
interpreter who teaches him to apprehend the 
wonderful baptism with which he has_ been 
baptized into Christ, the guide who leads and 
helps him to the full possession of all it gives. 


—_$—$$$$ ee 


O my God! with my whole heart I thank Thee 
for all the blessing and power that is secured to 
me by my having been baptized into Christ and 
into His death. And that my child is partaker of 


= . to RIE I, nanbibieas i 
——S— r ~ , 
= Peay ana meee oe apnea neat ee oan - ™ : 
$ SEUNG CEE SEC ae Reet eek LS a EE AC ce RE RE AS ELIS aS 


360 The Children for Christ : 


this baptism too. And that Thou hast set me 
apart as parent so to live as one baptized into 
Christ’s death, that first my life, and later on my 
teaching too, may lead my child to know the 
blessed life in Christ which has been sealed to 
him. 

O my Father! I humbly ask Thee to deliver me 
from all ignorance and unbelief concerning this 
wonderful baptism into Christ’s death, and my 
fellowship in it. Enlighten my understanding, 
strengthen my will, and help my faith in Thy 
mighty working, that my own life may be in the 
full power and fellowship of the death and the 
resurrection of Jesus. As crucified to the world, 
as dead to sin in my Lord Jesus, I yield myself 
to walk in newness of life with Him. 

I ask Thy grace, O my God, that a baptism 
into the death of Christ, as it has been pledged 
in the water, may now come true to my child 
through the Holy Spirit in full power. May this 
be my one aim in education, to have the power 
of the cross, as it crucifies to the world, and lifts 
up unto God, revealed in those Thou hast given 
me. And may so the life of Christ be manifest 
in me and my home, to the glory of Thy holy 
name. Amen. 


oS ty 


The Heritage of Holiness. 


into 
my 
oe THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 
to 
‘this FORTY-SIXTH Day. 
my mre 
fi The Meritage of Holiness. 
1 the ‘ Now are your children holy.’—1 Cor. vii. 14. 
d the 
vorld, ET us bless God for this precious sentence. 
yself There is not a deeper or more distinctly 
Divine word in Scripture than holy ; in this state- 
ptism ment the whole treasure of holiness, with all that 
edged revelation teaches us concerning it, is made the 
child heritage of our children. God’s holiness and our 
y this children are meant for each other; as parents we 
nower are the God-ordained links for bringing them into 
lifts perfect union. If we would do this we must know 
given to understand and apply this precious truth. The 
nifest revelation of God’s holiness was a very gradual one, 
holy because it was the opening up of the mystery of the 


Holy Trinity. There was first holiness as seen in 
God, its source and fountain; then in Christ, the 
Holy One of God, our sanctification ; then in the 
Holy Spirit, as the Spirit of holiness in the 


‘ 
> 2 . 
etiea ett ideriiiatiieeetien ate ee Se 7a a be ia 
~ ; ws : eleieeces : 
pica AB singe ann iaseninedseeeMeee es aus zs 
—— = 3 seb : 


362 The Children for Christ : 


Church. It is only by gradual steps that we can 
rise from the lower to the higher use of the word, 
and enter into the fulness of Divine meaning which 
the word has as used of our children. 

Holy. The word expresses a relation. What- 
ever was separated unto God and made His pro- 
perty was called holy. ‘The Lord will show who 
are His and who is holy: the man whom the Lord 
shall choose, he is holy.’ Apart from the moral 
character, even an inanimate object, whatever 
had been given to God, and taken by Him to be 
His own, was holy. And so the first and simplest 
thought our faith must take in and fill with 
spiritual meaning is this: our children belong to 
God. The very fact of their being born of believing 
parents make them His in a very special sense. 
Just as in olden times the children of the slave 
were the property of the master as much as the 
slave himself, so the Lord’s redeemed, who love to 
call themselves His bond-servants, have no desire 
to lock upon their children in any other light than 
themselves—wholly and absolutely His. ‘Now 
are your children holy.’ 

Holy. The word suggests a destiny. It is of 
great importance, as we study the word holy in 
Scripture, to notice how everything that is called 
holy had a use and purpose; every holy day and 
thing, place and person, had its service to fulfil. 
Let the Christian parent beware of looking upon 


- oo & tt © & 2 he & ee 


can 
ord, 
rich 


hat- 
pro- 
who 
ord 
oral 
ever 
o be 
plest 
with 
ig to 
ving 
ense. 
slave 
s the 
e to 
esire 
than 
Now 


is of 
y in 
alled 
r and 
‘ulfil. 
upon 


The Heritage of Holiness. 363 


holiness as a mere means to an end, simply as the 
way to get safe to heaven. Oh, it is infinitely more ! 
Let him consent to it, that his child is God’s pro- 
perty, to be used in this world only as God directs, 
to be trained with the one purpose of doing God’s 
will, and showing forth God’s glory. The more 
clearly this is apprehended and made the distinct 
object of the work of prayer and education, the 
more speedily shall we be led to grasp what the 
word holy contains in its higher meaning, and what 
the path is to realize the blessing it offers, 

Holy. The word is the pledge of a Divine life- 
power. Though we find that God Himself uses 
the word holy sometimes of external relation or 
privilege, and at others of real spiritual blessing, 
we must remember that the former always had 
the latter in view as its aim. Let us beware of 
emptying the word holy of its Divine truth and 
power. If God calls our children holy because of 
the covenant in which He has taken them up, it is 
because they are born, have their life from a be- 
lieving parent, who is holy in Christ, and therefore 
are holy too. The child of true believers, having 
soul and body under the rule and indwelling of 
the Holy Spirit, inherits from his parents, not 
only the sinful nature, but habits and tendencies 
and dispositions which the child of the heathen or 
the infidel does not share. These are the true 
seed-germs of holiness, the working of the Holy 


364 The Children for Christ : 


Spirit from the mother’s womb. Even where it 
cannot be seen, and is but very feeble, there is a 
secret heritage of the seed of holiness implanted in 
the child of the believer. And with this there is 
given, in the word holy, the promise of the Divine 
life and power to make to the child a reality and 
@ personal possession what is his in covenant and 
in the being born of a holy parentage. There is 
secured to him that Holy Spirit in whom the 
holiness of God has reached its full manifestation. 
In promising the Holy Spirit to His disciples, our 
Lord said He would be a river of living water 
flowing from them to others. The believer has a 
power to influence those with whom he comes in 
contact ; his faith is to save his household, since 
the child born of him inherits a blessing in the 
very life he receives from one who is sanctified 
by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. In the 
mother’s womb the child can receive the Holy 
Spirit. Oh, let us be sure of it, when God gives 
our child the name of holy, there is the beginning 
and the pledge of a Diviii:e power, even the work of 
His own Holy Spirit. Let nothing less than this 
be what our heart reads in God’s words: Your 
children are holy. 

Holy. The word describes a character. God’s 
holiness is His infinite moral perfection; that He 
hates and destroys the evil, that He loves and 
works the good. Holiness is the Divine energy 


{ 
t 
( 


tat Or > © 


> it 
is a 
1 in 
e 18 
vine 
and 
and 
re is 
the 
tion. 
, our 
vater 
1as a 
es in 
since 
] the 
tified 
. the 
Holy 
gives 
ning 
brk of 
this 
Your 


God’s 
at He 


5 and 
0 ergy 


The Heritage of Holiness, 365 


of which perfect righteousness and infinite love 
are the revelation. It is correspondence with 
Himself that God seeks and that He gives. ‘ Be 
ye holy; I am holy; I make holy.’ In calling 
your children holy God invites you to have them 
partakers of His holiness ; without this, holiness is 
but a name and a shadow. It is the work of the 
Christian parent to train his children in such dis- 
positions and habits, such ways of thinking and 
feeling and acting, as shall be in harmony with the 
faith, that they are holy in Christ and belong to 
the E:oly Spirit, as shall be a preparation for His 
dwelling in them and using them as His temple. 
‘Holy in all manner of conversation’ is what 
your children are to be; their young child-life 
separated from the world, its spirit and its service ; 
consscrated to God, His Spirit, and His will. 

It is as we begin to understand the word, ‘ Your 
children are holy, clearly, that we shall know to 
apply it rightly. We shall find it a word of great 
power in our dealings both with God and with our 
children. With God it will be the streagth of our 
prayer and faith. We shall feel liberty to claim 
that we be not sent awa’ ~ith a mere possibility, 
& promise without fulfilment, a covenant - right 
without a personal experience. No. We may be 
sure that when our children are called holy, all that 
isimplied in the word holy is meant for them. As 
we study the wonderful word in the story of Israel, 


366 The Children for Christ : 

in the character of God, in the person of Jesus, 
in the work of the Spirit of holiness, we shall 
find in God’s ‘ Your children are holy’ the assur- 
ance that it is all for them. As we plead for 
the conversion of our children, we shall say with 
holy boldness, Hast not Thou said they are holy ? 
As we plead still more earnestly that they may 
not only be saved, but truly and fully sanctified, 
vessels meet for the Master’s use, we shall most 
confidently cry, O Thou who hast laid the name of 
holy on them, it cannot be Thy will it should mean 
anything less than all Thy power and love can 
give. As in its light we confess how little we 
have realized the holiness of our parentage and the 
holiness of our children, the blessed heritage of 
holiness they have in us as believing parents, we 
shall yield ourselves ric than ever to train them 
as holy to the Lord. 

And so the word will exercise its mighty intlu- 
ence in our dealings with our children. ‘We shall 
think of our home and family as His home, the 
dwelling-place of His holiness. We shall iearn 
to look «pon sin in our children, upon the spirit 
of the world, or conformity to it, as at utter vari- 
ance with a child which the Holy God has set 
apart for holiness. We shall write holiness to the 
Lord upon our doorposts. We shall realize that 
the first need of a parent, whose children God 
calls holv, is to be very holy ; that personal holi- 


most 
18 of 
jean 
can 
2 we 
d the 
ge of 
s, We 
them 


infiu- 
shall 
», the 
jearn 
spirit 
vari- 


is set 
o the 
that 
God 
holi- 


The Heritage of Holiness. 367 
ness is the indispensable condition for educating 
a holy child. ‘Your children holy’ will lead us 
to look to our own position, ‘ Ye are holy in Christ 
Jesus,’ and to our own example and conduct as 
the channel through which the knowledge and the 
love and the power of holiness are to come to them. 
And as we hear the words we have known only 
as spoken of Jesus used by God Himself of each 
child as it is born, ‘that holy thing which is born 
of thee, ‘thy holy child, we shall realize that 
nothing but a life in the holiness of God, a life 
entirely under the leading of the Spirit of holi- 
ness, can fit us for watching over and training the 
children God has given us. 


O my God! my meditations on this word of the 
Holy Spirit have made me feel deeply the need of 
His Divine light to teach me what it means to 
Thee. Lord, show me, I pray Thee, what the 
thoughts and the purposes of Thy heart are when 
Thou sayest to Thy believing people, whom Thou 
hast sanctified in Christ, ‘Your children are holy.’ 
Show me, my God, how in this word there is 
secured to my child all that treasure of sanctifica- 
tion which is prepared in Christ, and which the 
Spirit of sanctification makes our personal posses- 
sion. 

O blessed God! Thou art the Thrice Holy; 
ithe glory which the seraphim praise and worship 


»~ 9 . ‘ 
ys ip aleeghmenstcliadabdincat ia aiapenihanalecronuiaamiecntaooatasumenoacaenemcomaat ueenarneerercenpee 
wl iG ? ’ r se 


ee oy 
: 7 “ 

of 

= 


ee 
SS 


* 
iad ‘ . eet 

eeieetienee ee ae van ae: 
~ - hid renrecnneenipcnurerueemeenmereer " Bed 54 
as SSS — 3 & 

AE, SimanaaAsaanee . : — este . 
Saat _ s = > ? 
a cali “ Soe — = = - ’ 


-_ 


368 The Children for Christ : 


without ceasing is the glory of Thy holiness ; in it 
all Thy attributes have their perfection and their 
beauty. Thou hast revealed Thyself as the Holy 
One who makes holy, Thy Son as Thy Holy One, 
Thy Spirit as the Spirit of holiness. Thou callest 
Thy people Thy holy ones, and even of their little 
ones thou sayest, ‘ Your children are holy.’ 

O my God! Thy words are never like men’s words, 
empty thoughts; they are full of meaning, of life, 
and of power. Oh, make these words of Thine 
quick and powerful in our hearts, that we may 
understand and rejoice in and hold fast the infinite 
blessing they bring us. And grant, Lord, that as 
we love and train, as we pray and believe for, our 
children, it may all be with this one object as our 
motive and aim, that we and they may be holy 
to the Lord, realizing and showing forth the glory 
of His holiness. Amen. 


it 
pir 
oly 
ne, 
est 
ttle 


rds, 
life, 
nine 
may 
nite 
ut as 
, our 
3 our 
holy 
lory 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-SEVENTH DAY. 


The Reign of Lobe. 


‘Ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath.’—Epu, 
vi. 4. 

‘Fathers ! provoke not your children, that they be not dis- 
couraged.’—CoL. iii. 21. 

‘ Love suffereth long, and is kind ; seeketh not her own, is 
not provoked.’—1 Cor. xiii. 4, 5. 
‘Train the young women to love their children.’—TIr. ii. 4. 


HE apostle had notined in the houses he 

visited, how sadly education often suffers 
from a want of love. And so, in addressing 
different classes in his general epistles, he speaks 
specially to fathers, and, on the two occasions in 
which he names them, repeats the warning to them 
not to provoke their children to wrath. His 
words suggest the three thoughts that a child is 
often very provoking, that a father often allows 
himself to be provoked, that then the result 
generally is that he again provokes the child to 
wrath, Instead of aa by his reproof, being the 

A 


The Reign of Love. 369 


te tpeniacaaaalinaaesaeataattl tae NN NDR TLL A AOL LADO 


370 The Children for Christ : 


help and the strength of his child in seeking what 
is good, he discourages and hinders him. Paul’s 
warning opens up to us the whole subject of the 
difficulty of giving reproof or punishment in the 
right spirit, of the need of patience and wisdom 
and self-control, of the secret of a parent’s rule 
being this, that it is to be a reign of love. 

Let us mark first that fathers are here specially 
addressed. They are expected to take a part in 
the management of the children. There are many 
fathers who neglect this, and seek to throw the 
work entirely on the mother. When returning 
| home from the day’s labour, they do not feel t 
| inclined to trouble themselves, and the children 
| are regarded more as a burden and a weariness, 

than as a charge entrusted by the Lord, to be met 
| in the spirit of love and gladness. God has joined fr 
| to the weakness and gentleness of the mother the tl 
firmness and strength of the father; it is as each 
takes his share in the work, and becomes the 
helper of the other, that the Divine blessing may 
be expected. On this account it is of such 


great importance that in addition to the daily ¥ 
united devotions at the family altar, there should i 
be set times when father and mother join in read- of! 
ing and conversation and prayer on the training of its 
their children. One half-hour a week set apart in 
for this purpose, if it were only for one year, his 


would bring a rich reward. It would supply the 


nat 
al’s 
the 
the 
lom 
rule 


ially 
rt in 
many 
y the 
rning 
, feel 
ildren 
riness, 
be met 
joined 
ner the 
hs each 
es the 
g may 
yi such 
daily 
should 
in read- 
ining of 
t apart 
ne year, 
pply the 


The Reign of Love. 371 


lack of a training-school for parents, and draw 
attention to many an important lesson which is 
otherwise not noticed in the presence of work. It 
would give the opportunity for a mother’s calling 
for, and receiving a father’s aid and guidance. It 
would bring the blessing on conjugal and parental 
love, of which Peter speaks: ‘ Ye husbands, dwell 
with your wives according to knowledge, giving 
honour unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, 
as being also joint heirs of the grace of life; to 
the end that your prayers be not hindered.’ Let 
every father accept his calling to take his part in 
the training of the children. 

‘Ye fathers! provoke not your children unto 
wrath. The occasion of this taking place is 
ordinarily that the child has first provoked the 
father. A child is sometimes wayward, often 
thoughtless, always feeble and ignorant, so that 
even what was well meant may be the cause of 
annoyance. It is only when the nature of the 
child, and specially its weakness and sinfulness, is 
carefully and lovingly taken into account, that the 
parent will be able patiently to bear with it and 
rightly to train it. It is the privilege and hon* ar 
of the parent to have this immortal spirit, with all 
its failings and with all the trials of patience it 
involves, entrusted to his charge, with the view of 
his being the artificer through whom God is to 
make of it something of beauty and of glory for 


372 The Children for Christ : 


Himself. Let parents lay their account with the 
weakness and the wilfulness of their children ; let 
them not be surprised or taken at unawares by 
what may be trying to temper and to patience ; 
they will see the need for preparing themselves 
for their holy work by faith in Him who fits us 
for every work He gives us to do. 

‘Ye fathers ! provoke not your children to wrath.’ 
There is much in some children that is provoking, 
there is much in some fathers that is easily 
provoked : beware above everything of giving way 
to such provocation ; it has been the ruin of many 
a child. To educate a child is impossible without 
self-control. If anywhere, in this that scripture 
is true, ‘ Ye have need of patience,’ ‘ Let patience 
have its perfect work.’ The whole life of the 
Christian is meant by the Father in heaven, under 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit, to be one of 
watchfulness and self-recollection. In home life 
these graces are specially indispensable. The 
sudden outbreaks of temper in children, the little 
vexations arising from their disobedience or 
neglect or mistakes, their little quarrels and 
naughtinesses, are all so many occasions on which 
a father needs the love that is not easily provoked. 

God meant the rule of the family to be like His 
own, a reign of law inspired by love. 

‘Ye fathers! provoke not your children to 
wrath.’ However provoking the child may have 


he 
let 
by 
ce 5 
ves 
;us 


th.’ 
ing, 
sily 
way 
any 
hout 
ture 
ence 
the 
ander 
ne of 
p life 
The 
little 
e or 
and 
hich 
roked. 
e His 


en to 
have 


The Reign of Love. 373 
been, however much inclined the father may be to 
feel provoked, he must see to it that he does not 
provoke the child to wrath. One provocation 
calls forth another, an angry father, giving way 
to his failing of being provoked easily, makes 
an angry child. There is innate in each human 
bosom a sense of the dignity of government and 
the duty of submission to authority. The calm, 
quiet assertion of authority helps greatly to bring 
the offender to the acknowledgment of the justice 
of his punishment. When, instead of trusting to 
this, the parent gives way to anger and passion 
in the sharp reproof or the hasty punishment, 
the child’s passion is roused too, and he is angry 
and vexed at an infliction of which he does 
not understand the reason or perhaps the justice. 
Passion ordinarily rouses passion; the parent is 
the teacher and example of the child appointed of 
God to meet and conquer outbreaks of his passion 
by the gentle firmness of love: how sad wien the 
very opposite is the case, anu a father’s hasty 
anger inflames a child’s passion, and he becomes 
his provocation to wrath ! 

‘ That they be not discouraged.’ In the struggle 
between good and evil that goes on in the child, 
there is nothing so much needed as that he should 
be encouraged to believe that the victory of the 
good is within his reach, that goodness is possible 
and pleasant. To inspire a child with a holy con- 


LL 


4 % 
\ Ry : 

y 

V4 


v. ra 


y ry 
oO. 
ee 
q= 
Efe 
ii & 
On 

— 
qn 
= 


en PO ert eet 
Rae 
arr ore 


ak 
V 'y | 
vy, 
vy 


374 
fidence in what, by God’s grace and the aid of his 
parents, he can accomplish, is one of the blessed 
secrets of success in training. In training a horse 
the utmost care is taken never to overtax it, or 
give a load that might lead to failure; at each 
difficult place you see its master all alert with 
voice and hand to inspire it with confidence; it 
must not know that it cannot succeed. That the 
child may never be discouraged by thinking that 
its weakness is not taken account of, that its 
little reasonings are not regarded, that it has not 
received the pity or the help or the justice it 
expects, will need a love which children all too 
little receive, and a thoughtfulness which parents 
all too little bestow. 

‘Ye fathers! provoke not your children to 
wrath.’ The education of a child is a holier work 
than many think. It needs shove everything 
self-training. This was one of the objects with 
which God created the family relation: it is one of 
its chief blessings. Without his knowing it, your 
child is God’s schoolmaster to bring you ever 
nearer to Christ. Not only does the child, in his 
tenderness and lovingness, call forth the love of 
your heart ; his waywardness and wilfulness call 
for it still more, as they put it to the test and 
school it in forbearance and gentleness. Study 
to have every token of your displeasure, every 
‘reproof and every punishment, so marked by 


The Children for Christ : 


The Reign of Love. 375 


love that through it all the child may really be 
encouraged into goodness. 

But it is not by reproof and punishment, how- 
ever gently and wisely administered, that parents 
will keep their children from getting provoked or 
discouraged. This is but the negative side; the 
positive is of more importance. Prevention is 
better than cure. Cultivate ever in yourself and 
the child that state of feeling which takes away 
the opportunity of its coming into collision with 
you. Endeavour by your own tranquillity, gentle- 
ness, and kindliness to promote the same feel- 
ings in the child. Count upon the wonderful 
ascendency and influence over children that 
sympathy gives, in both its aspects. Throw your- 
self in sympathy into their interests, entering into 
their state of mind and feeling. Expect them—for 
their nature is as keenly susceptible of sympathy 
for others as from others—to enter into your spirit 
and temper, and instinctively to yield themselves to 
its influence. And as you seek to maintain the 
rule of love,—not the mere love of natural instinct, 
but of love as a principle of action, earnestly 
sought in prayer from above, and carefully cul- 
tivated in all your family life——you will find how 
the children will catch its spirit, and become 
your helpers in making your home the reflection 
of the life of love in which the Heavenly Father 
guides and trains His children. 


376 The Children for Christ : 
Gracious God and Father! the longer we listen 
to the teaching of Thy W:rd on our duty as 
parents, the more deeply we feel the need of a 
Divine grace for doing that work aright. I come 
to Thee with the humble confession of my sin; 
how often sin in the child has only been met by 
sin in the parent, to call forth in the child new 
sin, and to discourage him in the battle with it. 
And Thou hadst meant the parent to be to the child 
the model of a holy, patient love, uniting and help- 
ing its feebleness, and by his example encouraging 
him into the assurance that he, too, can conquer. 
O God! we beseech Thee to open our eyes that 
- ‘we may know our holy calling. Give us a deep 
conviction that nothing but Thine own Spirit, 
dwelling in us day by day, can fit us for training 
sinful beings in a life of holiness; that nothing 
but-the most entire surrender to walk with Thee, 
and to be in everything guided and possessed by 
Thy Spirit, can prepare us for the work of parents. 
O God! we pray Thee especially for a baptism of 
love, of Thine own love. May a holy wisdom 
and patience in meeting each little outbreak of 
the evil nature, may the power of a love that 
enables us to bear and yet to conquer, as well as to 
inspire our child with confidence in us and the 
victory of good, be given us. O God! we would 
train our children after Thy mind, and to be a 
pleasure to Thee ; be Thou our help. Amen. 


isten 

iy as 

of a 
come 

, giD ; 
et. by 

d new 
ith it. 

> child 

| help- 
raging 
quer. 

es that 
a deep 

Spirit, | 
raining 
nothing 
h Thee, 
ssed by 
parents. 
ptism of 
wisdom 
yreak of 
xve that 
yell as to 
and the 
ve would 

to be & 
men. 


The Nurture of the Lord. 377 


A atta ne ECE NS Nt ELAN tte R CREAN eC Ce tit cate eRtR Cee Re 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FORTY-EIGHTH DAy. 


The Nurture of the Lord. 


‘Ye fathers,-nurture your children in the discipline and 
admonition of the Lord.’—Epu. vi. 4. 


E know of what great importance it is to 
‘attend to the distinction between instruc- F 
dion and education, between teaching and training. ne 
The former is the communication of knowledge, 
seciilar or religious ; the latter is the development 
of the faculties, both intellectual and moral, help- 
ing the child really to do and to be what the 
teaching has set before him. The two words the 
apostle uses correspond exactly to our expressions : 
we might translate, ‘ Nurture them :n the training 
and teaching of the Lord.’’ 


1 It is difficult to understand why the Revised Version should 
have translated the first of the two words by chastening. The 
Greek word paideia is the exact equivalent of our education, 
and is only translated chastening where th. context evidently 
requires it as being a part of education. 


—— 


6 2 e 
ponte seepennaananhall pessoa ncsist dbhanmmin~omsomsenace, < : as 7 
er grenneenanna ore eh er nansap arr apare oe = ~ ay ‘ 
=. eprarmeeeencrwesns ~: sshnGinatteearteaet ensue oa ee San _ — - ~- * 
# . mF Faas se Fg <mes = 
: = a ae Relat Seen Se ee a > 
: - - mre ee anes Se Oe ee RE ee ee eT ee re eect eee 
; ‘ 


a a 
? 


The Children for Christ : 

Let us first note the spirit which must pervade 
the upbringing of our children : ‘ Nurture them in 
the discipline and admonition of the Lord.’ Our 
children are the Lord’s; their whole education 
must be animated by this thought ; we train them 
for Him, according to His will and in His spirit : 
it is the Lord’s own training of which we are to 
be His ministers to them. Jesus Christ, the Son 
of God, as our Lord and Master, with His personal 
presence, His love and rule in heart and home, 
must be our aim; we must educate our children 
as ‘unto the Lord.’ That they may know and 
love Him, that they may be fitted to obey His 
will and to serve Him, must be what all our 
education strives after. And it can only be this, 
as we very earnestly study His will, and the rules 
He has laid down in:His Word for parental duty, 
as we wait for His Spirit to guide and to sanctify 
us for our work. Our whole nurture is to be the 
nurture of the Lord. 

In it the two parts God has joined together may 
not for a moment be separated. In the life of the 
child its emotional nature, with all its sensitiveness 
and impressibility, is first developed. For the 
due regulation of this, the Creator has endowed it 
with two great powers, that of willing and knowing. 
Training seeks to influence the will, as the power 
which really makes a man; teaching supplies the 
knowing by which the willing is to be guided and 


— ae 


Ae, ReeNlhOM Rennewencn SE 


<eppenmeegunemee ee 


3 
‘ 
Pi 
SES, 
== — = = —— 
CE REIS TRIESINdesniteNmAteeanne? weomnmaens ar 


TE Sie 
sin ean sence 


. 
a 


ae 


rvade 
2m in 
Our 
ration 
them 
spirit : 
are to 
e Son 
sonal 
home, 
nildren 
WwW and 
ey His 
all our 
DE this, 
ne rules 
al duty; 
nanctify 
be the 


her may 

e of the 

tiveness 
For the 
q owed it 
knowing. 
e power 
plies the 
ided and 


The Nurture of the Lord. 379 


strengthened. The nurture of the Lord is to bring 
up the child that he may be a vessel meet for the 
Master's use, with every faculty of spirit, soul, and 
body prepared for doing His will. The training 
and teaching must work in harmony for securing 
this blessed object. All instruction and admoni- 
tion has the forming of the will, of character as a 
completely fashioned will, of the perfect man as 
its purpose. 

The word education is so much used of what is 
merely instruction, that I have used the word dis- 
cipline to give the idea the apostle intended. . 
The foundation of a useful and happy life will be 
found in the habit of order and self-control, the 
ready submission to law and obedience to duty. 


’ When not impulse or circumstance, not our likes 


or dislikes, but the steady purpose and power of 
knowing and doing right rule the life, one of 
the chief objects of education has been attained. 
Discipline uses the means, and exercises the power 
needed for securing this result. The discipline of 
the Lord has not only reference to what may 
be considered more directly religious, but to the 
child’s whole being, spirit, soul, and body. What- 
ever contributes to the healthy development of the 
powers God has bestowed on us, is included in the 
nurture of the Lord. There are what may be 
called physical virtues, at the foundation of which 
is order. ‘ Order is heaven’s first law’ throughout 


380 ‘The Children for Christ : 


the immeasurable spaces of the universe, and in 
the minutest atoms that the mind can conceive 
there reigns a Divine order ; everything owns sub- 
mission to law. How little it avails that a child 
or a man is converted, if the power of self-control, 
the power of at once doing what is seen to be the 
right in its time and place, has not been cultivated. 
Conversion will not give this: the parent has to 
prepare the home in which the Spirit of God is to 
dwell, and to find its servants. The habit of order 
cultivated in a little child in external things can 
pass on into his intellectual training, and become 
a mighty power in his moral and spiritual life. 
And it leads tc that other foundation - virtue, 
decision of character, firmness of purpose, strength 
of will. In submitting to order in the external, 
the child learns that for everything there is an 
ought and a must, and that his welfare will be 
found in entering at once and heartily into that 
ought and what it requires, Let every parent seek, 
in nurturing a child for the Lord, to discipline 
into a fixed habit the innate sense of the rightness. 
of order and decision. They will become ruling 
principles, in the wake of which other natural 
virtues will easily find their place. 

Then come what may be called the legal virtues 
—those distinctly commanded in God’s law. Such 
are obedience, truthfulness, justice, and love. 
Parents cannot too often or too earnestly remind 


SS 


nd in 
nceive 
3 sub- 
, child 
ontrol, 
be the 
‘ivated. 
has to 
di is to 
of order 
ngs can 
become 
ual life. 
- virtue, 
strength 
>xternal, 


liscipline 

ightness m 

he ruling 
natural 


al virtues 

Such 
wnd_ ilove. 
y remind 


The Nurture of the Lord. 381 


themselves of the power of single acts often 
repeated to become habits, and the power of habit 
to aid in giving ascendency to the principles 
that underlie the acts. Our moral, no less than 
our bodily powers, are strengthened by exercise. 
Conscience may in early life be so disciplined as, 
by the Divine blessing, to become habitually tender 
and ready to act. The innate sense of right and 
wrong, the feeling of guilt and shame following 
on sin, the authority of God’s Word—all these the 
discipline of a wise training appeals to in nurturing 
for the Lord. 

And then there are the virtues that belong more 
distinctly to the New Testament, and the great 
redemption it reveals. These are the faith and 
love of Jesus, the indwelling and leading of 
the Holy Spirit, the self-denial and holiness and 
humility of a Christlike life. All this is not to be 
only matter of teaching in the faith of the pro- 
mise of the Spirit, working all unconsciously in 
the children ; they are to be trained into it. Tobe 
temples of God through the Holy Spirit, to bear the 
image and be fit for the service of the Lord Jesus 
must, from the outset, be the aim of the Divine, 
nurture in which we seek to bring up our children. 

For such training to be successful, it is absolutely 
necessary that there be authority ; the nurture 


' must be in the discipline of the Lord. To this 


end it is not enough that the parent as the superior 


382 The Children for Christ : 


assert the right God has given him ; the authority 
derived from God must become a personal possession 
by the influence the parent acquires over the child. 
The parent must prove himself worthy of his place ; 
his ascendency will depend upon the weight of 
his moral character. To acquire such influence 
must be a matter of study and effort and prayer. 
All who wish to govern children not by force, but 
by influence, not against their will, but by means 
of it, not in virtue of a position in which they have 
been placed, but in the power of a life that proves 
them worthy of that position, and that secures 
an instinctive acknowledgment of their authority, 
must make not only their own duty, but ‘specially . 
the nature and the needs of childhood, their care- 
ful study. Only then can the education of our 
children become, instead of being a series-of ex- 
periments and failures, that teach us wisdom when 
it is too late to benefit by them, the wise and well- 
ordered commanding of our household that they 
may keep the way of the Lord. 

Of such influence, in which true authority has 
its root and strength, the secret is, a life in which 
we exhibit ourselves what we ask of our children. 
A life of childlike trust in the Father’s love, 
of submission to His authority, and surrender to 
His training, will make itself felt through the 
home. It will waken our sympathy for their 
childlike needs and failings. It will waken their 


thority 
session 
2 child. 
place ; 
ight of 
fluence 
prayer. 
rce, but 
' means 
ey have 
; proves 
secures 
thority, 
pecially 
ir care- 
of our 
s-of ex- 
m when 
nd well- 
at they 


rity has 
1 which 
hildren. 
’3 love, 
nder to 
gh. the 
1 their 
n their 


The Nurture of the Lord. 383 


sympathy with our teachableness of spirit and our 
quiet restfulness in the Divine rule. And the 
nurture of our children will be to ourselves and to 
them truly the Lord’s nurture—God’s nurturing 
us by means of them, that He may nurture them 
by means of us. 


Blessed God and Father! who hast appointed 
us Thy servants to bring up our child in a training 
and teaching which is to be Thine own, we come 
again with the prayer for wisdom and grace to 
perform our task aright. We ask of Thee to show 
us the difficulty and the sacredness of our task, to 
show us, too, the nearness and sufficiency of Thy 
help. We want specially to realize that it is as we 
yield ourselves to Thy training and teaching, and 
walk with Thee as loving, obedient children, that 
we shall have power to nurture them aright. 

We ask for grace rightly to combine the admoni- 
tion that points out the way, with the discipline 
that trains to walk in it. We would form our 
children’s character to that order and self-restraint, 
to that submission to law and authority, in which is 
the secret of happiness. We would give their body 
and mind such a healthy development, that they 
may be formed the fit and ready instruments of 
a spirit under the leading of Thy Holy Spirit. 
Blessed Father ! we look to Thee for the grace we 
need to do this work. 


| 

4 

| 

‘4 
:a 
ee 
ia 
ia 
i] 


i tnaeniogs UR Rata het be Ma ety 


if 


384 The Children for Christ : 


eee 


We will trust to Thee to show each of us 
wherein we are in special danger of coming short. 
We will trust in Thee to accept our childlike 
desire to obey Thee, and, notwithstanding our 
failings, to bless our home. We claim the merit 
and the presence of Jesus our Lord. Weclaim the 
power of a full salvation for us and our children. 


Amen. 


Home Rule. 


et RE ER ER AN el 


, our THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


m the seb ike 
Idren. FORTY-NINTH DAY. 


‘Bome Bule. 


‘The bishop must be one that ruleth well his own house, 
having his children in subjection with all gravity ; (but if a 
man knoweth not how to rule his own house, how shall he take 
care of the Church of God?) Let the deacons be the husbands 
of one wife, ruling well their children and their own houses,’ — 
1 Tim, iii. 4, 5, 12, 


T is a most suggestive thought that among the 
qualifications for office-bearers in the primit- 

ive Church, bishop, elder, or deacon, in each case 
the state of their household should have been taken 
account of, and a failure there should have been 
considered sufficient to bar them from the office 
for which personally they otherwise might have 
appeared fit. It reminds us once again of the 
closeness of the link between parents and children, 
and the organic unity of the home as a whole. 
From the household you can infallibly judge of 


what the parents are: the parents make it: it is 
2 8B 


a 


~ 


< > <1 J 
VF 


— 
SS — 


z = ay nr eee a 
seeeosnsiee terpaheennmmesoeneae een mene JE << i e 
- <a ee ae Seas. tats 
° 


— 


ma 


a 


la 


4 


x 


‘ 
¢ 
; 
hd , 
ify 
He test | 
if eR 
‘ i 
Ps itil 
t fs 
+ iJ ; 
eo rf 


386 The Children for Christ : 


the outgrowth and the expression of their life, 
the iirror in which, often with startling faithful- 
ness, their hiddea failings are revealed. 

Some may be inclined to doubt the truth of 
this statement. They have so often heard, they 
know, of pious parents whose children have turned 
out ill. Is all the blame to be laid on the parents ? 
We have no power to change the evil nature; it 
is grace alone can do it. Is it not going too far 
to put the blame of unbelieving or unruly children 
on the parents, and count such a father unfit for 
holding office in the Church or household of God, 
because his own household is not what it should 
be? And yet just this is what the Holy Spirit 
does. He teaches Paul to connect unbelieving 
and unruly children with the failure of the home 
rule, and unfitness for Church rule. He thus 
stirs us to search out what the secret evil may be 
by which, in parents who otherw:se appear fit to 
be leaders in the Church, the training of their 
children is robbed of its power and its promised 
blessing. We are to seek for causes of failure in 
the home rule. 

The first answer may be suggested to us by the 
words of Paul, as he argues from failure at home 
to failure in the Church. We may go a step back- 
ward and argue from failure in the family to failure 
in the person ; the wrong in the home reveals some- 
thing wrong in its head. We have more than 


life, 
hful- 


th of 
they 
urned 
‘ents ? 
re; 1b 
oo far 
vildren 
fit. for 
f God, 
should 
y Spirit 
alieving 
home 
e thus 
may be 
r fit to 
of their 
romised 
ilure in 


: by the 
nt home 
ep back- 
o failure 
ls some- 
bre than 


i ee 


once seen that the secret of home rule is self-rule, 
first being ourselves what we want our children 


to be. The wonderful power of the will with 
which man has been endowed was meant to make 
hiin in the first place his own master. And yet 
how many Christian parents there are to whom 
real self-control in daily life is quite foreign! It 
is not the thought of God’s will, nor the rule of 
their own will, that guides and decides their con- 
duct, but in conversation and action, in likes and 
dislikes, they are led away by the feelings of the 


moment. 


Because they trust that they are God’s 


- children, and that Christ’s blood pardons their sins, 
aud that their prayers will be heard, they hope for 


the salvation of their children. 


And yet their 


education is setting up the most effectual barrier 


against God's grace. 


Pleasing themselves, allow- 


ing their inclination or temper to be the rule of 
language and conduct, they give the most effectual 
contradiction to their profession of being the 
servants of God’s will. Would that all Christian 
parents might learn the lesson that a quiet self- 
recollection and self-control, that a calm stillness 
of soul that seeks to be guided vy God’s Spirit, 
is one of the first conditions of success in our 
own spiritual life, and so in the sacred influence 


we wish to exert on our children. 


‘In quiet- 


ness and confidence shall be your strength;’ 
nowhere will the unconscious but strong influence 


toad 


388 The Children for Christ : 


ee 


a a 


of this restfulness be felt so soon as in family 
life. 

But there may be other causes. A Christian 
parent inay not be wanting in self-control, and 
yet fail. The reason will very possibly be found 
in neglect of the duty of ruling. With some this 
may come from an entire ignorance of the solemn 
place a parent occupies. They have never thought 
seriously of the extent to which the souls and 
wills and characters of the children are in their 
hands. They have never taken any trouble to think 
carefully of the work entrusted to them. They 
may pray earnestly at times that their children - 
may be saved ; they know not that it is of more 
importance to pray daily that they themselves may 
be fitted to guide their children aright. With 
others the neglect of the duty rests on wrong. 
principles thoughtlessly adopted. They admire a 
strong will; in the waywardness or self-assertion 
of a child’s will they often see nothing but cause 
of amusement or admiration. They wish to see 
their child grow up a strong, bold character, able 
to do and dare; they would not for anything 
weaken his will. They know not that a wayward 
will is a curse; and that a will that masters itself 
to obedience is the truly strong will. No wonder 
that the children later on should be disobedient 
or unruly. And then with others the neglect of 
the duty comes from simple weakness and sloth. 


tian 
and 
pund 
this 
lemn 
pught 
3 and 
their 
think 
They 
ildren - 
r more 
ag may 
With 
wrong, 
Amire & 
gertion 
cause 
to see 
ar, able 
ything 
ayward 
3 itself 
wonder 
pbedient 
plect. of 
d sloth. 


Home Rule. 389 


.They admit that it is their duty; but it is so 
hard; it takes so much time and thought. It is 
so trying to their love to punish or ta thwart the 
child, and, under cover of the name of tender- 
heartedness, the authority with which they have 
been entrusted of God is neglected and abused. 
Let parents take time and thought to realize: to 
rule a child is as distinctly God’s command as to 
love it or to care for it. The interests of parent 
and child demand it; the time and labour spent 
in cultivating this grace will be richly rewarded. 
But still there are parents in whom neither of the 
causes of failure mentioned hold good. They do rule 
themselves, and they do seek to rule their children, 
and yet have failed. Tha cause must be sought 
deeper: the want of the Divine blessing must be 
sought in the want of true faith and consecration. 
There are some children easily ruled; there are 
others of nervous temperament or wayward dis- 
position who appear to defy control. ‘The things 
that are impossible with men are possible with 
God.’ Education is a work in which the parents 
are meant to be God’s servants, His fellow- 
workers; but to work really with God means to 
walk closely with Him. It is to the soul that is 
wholly given up to Him, and seeks undividedly 
to do His will, that the power of faith will be 
given to hold fast the covenant, and to live in the 
assurance that God Himself will do the work. 


ee cee saath aeentlane ea 


a San 


390 The Children for Christ : 


— 


Let there be but simple, childlike heart-searching, 
to see if there has not been in our aim with our 
children desire for worldly honour or position ; 
the spirit of the world is the must secret but most 
certain hi:.drance to true faith. Let the surrender 
of ourselves and our children—not only to God's 
mercy, to save, but to God’s will, to rule and use— 
be complete and unreserved; we shall find God to 
be our ally, our covenant-helper in training the 
children; and with Him on our side we must 
prevail. To have had power with Him in prayer 
is the sure guarantee of victory with the child. 
Parents! the work entrusted to us is holier than 
we know. The precious instrument, so delicate, 
so wonderfully made, so marred by sin already, 
and so exposed to its power, is of such inconceiv- 
able worth. To take charge of an immortal soul, 
to train a will for God and eternity, surely we 
ought to shrink from it. But we cannot. If we 
are parents, the duty is laid upon us. But, thank 
God! sufficient grace is prepared and promised too. 
If we do but give up our home and our life to 
God for Him to come in and rule, He will Himself 
take possession, and by the gentle influence of His 
Holy Spirit bow their will to Himself. And the 
discipline: which our thus ruling the children 
brings will be the best preparation for our ruling 
in God’s house, with that rule of: which Jesus 
speaks: ‘He thet is chief among you, let him be 


ling, 
1, our 
tion ; 
most 
onder 
God's 
use— 
tod to 
1g the 
- must 
prayer 
ild. 
er than 
lelicate, 
, eady, 
honcelv- 
al soul, 
rely we 
If we 
t, thank 
ised too. 
life to 
Himself 
e of His 
And the 
children 
y ruling 
ch Jesus 
t him be 


Home Rule. 391 
servant of all.’ If, for the sake of serving God 
in our homes, we deny ourselves to acquire real 
influence and power to rule with onr children, He 
will count us worthy of influcaice and power with 
our fellow-men and in His Church. Faithfulness 
in the home rule will give power to take care of 
the Church of God,—will be, as it was with Abra- 
ham, the secret of admission to the counsel of Him 


who rules the world, to the power that prevails 
with God and mei. 


Adorable Lord God! we worship Thee as the 
Ruler of the universe. Rightéousness and judg- 
ment are the foundation of Thy throne. Thou 
art gracious and full of compassion ; slow to anger, 
and of great mercy, Thy kingdom ruleth over all ; 
and Thy rule is everywhere the fountain of all 
blessing and good. 

O Lord! it hath pleased Thee to ordain that in 
each home on earth Thy heavenly rule should 
have its reflection. Thou hast given tc parents 
power and authority over their children to rule in 
Thy name. Thou hast promised to give them all 
needful wisdom and strength for maintaining t* 1t 
authority, and ruling their children well. 

We have to confess with shame how often this 
holy trust of ruling in Thy name has been neglected 
and abused. We beseech Thee to forgive us. We 
beseech Thee to deliver us from all that hinders 


* 
eens ai ae LEANER ES ERTL EI TOG SED ELON SO LE IE sem 
” : . 


this 
} 


| | 
i 


ne 

it 
i! 

hi 


392 The Children for Christ : 


—— 


that rule. We desire to take it up as a life-work 
in Thy strength. May a holy self-rule fit us for 
a happy home rule. We desire to make the work 
Thou givest us a study and a pleasure; to fit 
ourselves carefully for doing it well. Be Thou 
our Teacher and our Help. 

Lord Jesus! we do indeed yield our homes and 
our children, our lives and all our powers, to be 
wholly Thine. Thou art able to keep that which 
we commit to Thee. Keep our homes as Thy 
sacred dwelling-place, where we and our children 
serve Thee in righteousness and love, in peace and 
in great joy. Amen. oe 


Children and Scripture. 


ce eee tee 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FIFTIETH DAY. 


Chilvren and Scripture. 


‘Having been reminded of the unfeigned faith that is in 
thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy 
mother Eunice.’—2 Tim. i. 5. 

‘Abide in the things which thou hast learned, and been 
assured of; knowing that from a babe th:u hast known the 
sacred writings, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation 
through faith which is in Christ Jesus.’—2 Tim. iii. 14, 15. 


F we connect these two passages, we find in 
them the true relation in which children 
and Scripture ought to stand to each other. 
Between the unfeigned faith of the mother and 
grandmother, and the faith of Timothy, Scripture 
had been the connecting link. Scripture needs 
the believing parent as its messenger. The 
believing parent needs Scripture as the vehicle 
for the communication of his faith. .A parent’s 
faith teaching the word of faith may count upon 
the child’s faith as the fruit of his labours. 
God has so ordered it that it is mostly through 


x 
eee CNEL NLL ALLL LAL LLL LLL ALLO LAA LALA action — 


394 The Children for Christ : 


the Holy Spirit dwelling in His saints that the 
word is brought to sinners in the power of the 
Spirit. It is one Spirit dwelling in the word and 
in the child of God ; in the combined action of the 
two the word is made a blessing to others. It is 
one of the highest honours God has for the believ- 
ing parent, that He has made him the minister of 
His holy Word to his children. It is the un- 
feigned faith of father or mother, a faith which 
lives on and according to the word, and speaks of 
it in the power of personal testimony and ex- 
perience, that will be used of God to waken a 
child’s faith. In real living faith there is some- 
thing contagious; the life of the Spirit breathes 
in it, and makes its words a blessing. This truth 
suggests some very precious lessons a parent should 
seek to learn. | 
Teach your child to believe the Word of God. 
Of old God sought above everything to train His 
saints to be men of faith. There is nothing more 
pleasing to Him than faith. Faith is the soul’s 
surrender to God, to hear what He says, to take 
what He gives, to receive what He works, to be 
entirely at His disposal. Faith in God begins 
with faith in His word, and there is no habit a 
parent can cultivate in a child of deeper import- 
ance than that of a trustful acceptance of all that 
God has said. In an age of doubt and question- 
ing, teach it to accept what it cannot understand, 


| 
t 
i 


, the 
f the 
i and 
of the 
It is 
yeliev- 
ster of 
le un- 
which 
aks of 
nd ex- 
aken & 
; some- 
yreathes 
is truth 
should 


of God. 
ain His 
ng more 
e soul's 
/to take 
s, to be 
d begins 
) habit a 
import- 
f all that 
question- 
derstand, 


Children and Scripture. 395 


even what appears mysterious and contrary to 
reason, because God who is wise and great has 
said it. Teach it to believe in His love, in the 
gift of His Son, and in the life through Him, as 
realities which come true to us as our faith simply 
trusts the wor’ and is assured of what it says. 
Teach it day by day to look upon every proiise, 
every truth in the word, as the food of faith, 
meant to make our faith, and through it our life, 
stronger. Parents! a child is naturally trustful ; 
guide its young trust to that word which never 
fails. The child wants to trust; the word wants 
to be trusted ; let your unfeigned faith bring them 
into contact. 

To the end teach your child to know the 
Word of God. Faith depends upon knowledge. 
Timothy had known the sacred writings as able 
to make him wise unto salvation. If the grace of 
God is to save us, it must teach us; it is a wisdom 
from above; we must love God with the mind as 
well as the heart. Let the parent seek to give 
the child a clear and intelligent apprehension of 
the great truths of salvation God has revealed. 
He may not entrust this work to school or chure! ; 
it is astonishing how vague the knowledge thu: 
obtained often is. Let family worship be so 
ordered as to be really helpful in the knowledge 
of God’s Word. Try always to make it clear at 
what stage in the history of: the kingdom and in 


396 The Uhildren for Christ : 

the progress of revelation it was that the word 
you read was given. Take trouble to lodge in the 
mind not only the truths and the history of the 
Bible, but specially to store the memory with 
some of God’s own words. Be not content with 
the child’s learning and saying his text at fixed 
times; it is often forgotten as soon as said. But 
seek to have some of these words, by frequent 
repetition, so rooted in the mind that nothing can 
efface them. Teach the child to know the book 
itself too; to be at home in it, to feel at home 
and more at ease in it; to be taught by unfeigned 
faith thus to know the sacred writings is an 
inestimable blessing. 

Teach your child to love God’s Word. This is 
more difficult than to teach it to believe and 
to know it. There is often the assent of faith, 
and an interest in the knowledge of Scripture, 
with very little of real love to it. To teach this 
is no easy task. Its first requisite is, of course, 
that we love it ourselves. ‘Oh, how love I Thy 
law,’ is an expression of piety which many an 
earnest believer will be afraid to utter. Love and 
joy ever go together: what I love I rejoice to 
possess. Reverence and respect for God’s Word, 
the earnest study of it, and the desire to be 
guided by it,—these are good,—but they do not 
necessarily breathe that bright spirit of. delight 
which says to God, ‘Oh, how love I Thy law!’ 


Children and Scripture. 397 


a cr ee ee a ren a a ro a eR ae — 


And yet it is love of which a child’s heart is 
specially susceptible. Childhood is the age of 
feeling and impression; the child can be won 
before it can give a reason of its hope. Anda 
parent’s holy, tender love to the Word of God will 
be the surest means of inspiring the child’s love. 
Let this be a distinct matter of desire and prayer, 
and of careful study too, so to guide the child in 
his intercourse with the Bible, that he may not 
only not dislike it, not only like it for its stories 
and its study, but truly and heartily love it as the 


’ Father’s word. This will indeed be the token of 


Divine grace, and the preparation for all blessing. 

And then, teach your child to obey the Word of 
God. God connects all believing, knowing, loving, 
with doing ; obedience is God’s test of upright- 
ness and reality. Teach the child to make what 
the Father has said the standard of conduct. Let 
him see and hear that you do so. In our ordinary 
Christianity, children are educated into the belief 
that God’s commandments are grievous; the idea 
of obedience to Him, whole-hearted and unceasing 
obedience, being simply happiness, is never thought 
of. And yet this is the only religion that really 
will be mighty to plant itself in the hearts of our 
children. The Bible must not be as a law con- 
tinually holding us in check, keeping us from what 
we would like, and demanding what is difficult. 
No! with our children we must take up an entirely 


398 The Children for Christ : 

different position. As the Father’s redeemed ones, 
the children of His covenant and kingdom, we 
must say, with the only-begotten Son, ‘I delight 
to do thy will, O God; yea, Thy law is within my 
heart.’ It is His covenant~promise to work this 
in us and our children. If in Christ Jesus we 
enter into the blessed life of the liberty of God’s 
children, our children will learn from us how 
impossible it is to us to read the Father's Word 
and not doit. Our study of it with them will all 
have. this as its one purpose: we want to know 
and do the will of God. 

The custom of family worship is to be found 
in almost every Christian family. Every day a 
portion of God’s holy Word is read there. But 
alas! in that reading there is often little power or 
blessing. Many an earnest Christian parent looks 
more to his private reading for profit and nourish- 
ment. And yet the daily gathering of the family 
round the Word of God might become such a season 
of spiritual refreshment and nourishment! If the 
same care we take to have a properly prepared 
meal placed on the breakfast table, and each child 
served with just what he needs, were only taken 
to see that the children really receive and enjoy 
the feeding with the Divine Word. Let parents 
make a study of it to have their family worship 
so ordered, as indeed to lead the children into the 
holy place, to be presented before the Lord, to be 


mes, 
light 


_ this 
s we 
God’s 
. how 
Word 
ill all 
know 


found 
day ® 
But 
pwer Or 
t looks 
ourish- 
family 
h season 
Tf the 
repared 
h child 
y taken 
ad enjoy 
parents 
worship 
into the 


Children and Scripture. 399 


fed with the bread each one requires, and to 
receive the Father's blessing for the day. Let 
them prepare for reading the Word with the 
family. Let the reading be as of God’s Word, in 
His presence, and waiting on His Spirit. Beware 
of the hurry which just gives time enough for 
the hasty reading of a chapter. Family worship 
becomes a dead and deadening form, hardening 
children into a habit of careless dealing with the 
Word and with God Himself. A few moments 
devoted to a quiet, loving, calling of the attention to 
what God says, and to making the personal appli- 
vation, encouraging the children to take and keep 


' the word, may be the beginning of great blessing. 


Parents! God’s Word is your child’s heritage 


_ from the Father in heaven. And you are com- 


missioned to lead him into the knowledge and the 
love and the possession of its treasures. Make it 
a matter of earnest prayer that you may wisely 
and rightly do it. Let that word dwell richly in 
you in all wisdom. In giving His promises, Jesus 
said, ‘If ye abide in my word; if my words abide 
in you.’ Let your life be one of unfeigned faith, 
that lives and delights in doing God’s word, such 
faith will pass on into your children. The quiet 
confidence that comes from God’s word is a power 
that makes itself felt with our children. And if 
you often feel that you know not how to bring the 
word aright to them, or see in them what hinders 


oh Ga RR cca cs 8 


400 The Children for Christ : 


its reception, be still of good cheer, you have God 
to do the work, to make the word effectual. Pray 
and believe for the Holy Spirit’s working; He 
will make the word, which you speak snd live 
in u-‘eigned faith, the seed of faith to your 
children too. 


Gracious God! we ask Thee to give us a very 
deep sense of the blessedness of this part of our 
work as parents, to bring Thy holy Word to them. 
May the privilege Timothy had be that of our 
children: from earliest youth to have the un- 
feigned faith of a loving parent as the interpreter 
of holy Scripture. May a deep, full, and very 
joyous faith in Thy blessed Word be the power in 
which all our Scripture teaching comes to them. 
Give us to see clearly how their hearts are claimed 
by Thee, to be filled with Thy words, that these 
may be in them the seeds of all holy thoughts and 
dispositions. 

We ask of Thee the grace of wisdom, and faith, 
and patient faithfulness, to bring Thy word day 
by day te our children. May our family worship 
every day be a holy season of communion with 
Thee, the Unseen One, in which we lead our chil- 
dren into Thy presence to hear Thy'voice speak, 
and to receive Thy teaching. O our God, we 
yield ourselves to the supremacy and the power 
of Thy Holy Word ; let it so abide in us, that our 


d faith, 
rd day 
worship 
n with 
r chil- 
speak, 
od, we 
power 
hat our 


Children and Scripture. 401 


life may be the shining forth of its holy light. 


Let us be so full of faith and love and obedience 

to the word, that our dear children learn from 

their youth to iove and believe and obey it too. 
Father! forgive us that this has been too little 


so. Wilt Thou not by Thy mighty power make 
it sonow? Amen, 


The Children for Christ : 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FirTY-FirsT Day. 


Belichbing Children. 


‘ Ordain elders, if any be blameless, the husband of one wife, 
having children that believe, not unruly.’—Tir. i. 6. 


OD expects that the children of believers 
should be believers too. There is nothing 
so honouring or pleasing to God as that we believe 
Him; nothing that so. opens the way for His 
blessing and love to flow in and take possession 
of us, as that we believe Him. And the very 
object and purpose of God in the institution of the 
parental covenant is that believing parents should 
educate believing children. They are the children 
of the promise ; God and His grace are theirs in 
promise; a promise has no value but as it is 
believed; parents who truly believe will under- 
stand that it is their privilege and their duty to 
train ‘children that believe.’ 
We have seen how, on the day of Pentecost 


f one wile, 


believers 

; nothing 

e believe 
for Fis 
nossession 
the very 
ion of the 
ts should 
e children 
, theirs in 
t as it is 
ill under- 
ir duty to 


Pentecost 


Believing Children. 403 


with the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, Peter 
announced that the foundation-principle of God’s 
covenant with Abraham was in the New Testa- 
ment to remain unchanged, and children were still 
to be regarded as the heirs of the promise. Family 
life, as ordained by God in Paradise, the household, 
was still to be the channel for the transmission of 


_ the blessing of the Spirit. Faith was not to be 


an individual thing, but to embrace the household, 
and then from the parent out to pervade it. It is 
in harmony with this that we so often find in the 
Acts—that book of the Acts of the Holy Ghost— 
mention made of the household. ‘Cornelius feared 
God with all his house.’ ‘ Lydia was baptized, and 
her household.’ To the jailor of Philippi Paul said, 
‘Believe, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house,’ 
and ‘he was baptized, and all his, immediately ;’ 
and ‘he rejoiced greatly with all his house, having 
believed in God.’ ‘Crispus, the ruler of the syna- 
gogue at Corinth, believed in the Lord with all his 
house.’ In the Epistles of Paul we find that he 
four times uses the expression, ‘the church in thy 
house ;’ he does not say the church assembling in 
thy house, but the church which is in thy house, 
referring evidently to the circle of believers con- 
stituting the family. Though in these cases no 
express mention is made of children, the principle 
of the urganic unity of the family, on which the 
idea of a household rests, assures us that the child- 


404 The Children for Christ : 

ren were comprehended in it too. And it is so 
clear to Paul that believing parents ought to have 
believing children, that, when such is not the case, 
he regards it as a matter of blame, as asure index 
that there has been something wrong on the part 
of the parents, that their own faith and life has 
not been what it should be; they are at once 
debarred from holding any place of honour or 
influence in the Church of Christ. When the 
father, as the ruler of the church in the home, 
has not trained children that believe, he is unfit 
for taking care of the house of God. Children 
that believe are to be looked for from parents 
whose life is truly that of faith. Let us try 
and once again take home the lesson God would 
teach us. 

Even children can be believers. Trustfulness, the 
power of simply. believing what is told, of resting 
on what love has promised, is one of the most 
beautiful traits of true childlikeness. It is this 
wonderful power ofa child’s heart, of which the 
parent avails himself every day, and which often 
fills him with such gladness, that must be guided 
heavenward, and led to cling to God and His Word, 
to Jesus and His love. There is nothing more 
natural to children than to believe; it is through 
a parent’s faith that the Holy Spirit loves to take 
possession of the child’s, and makes it the living 
link to a living Saviour, As the child grows, the 


is 80 
have 
. case, 
index 
@ part 
fe has 
1 once 
our or 
en the 
home, 
is unfit 
‘hildren 
parents 
us try 
\d would 


ness, the 

f resting 
he most 
+ is this 
hich the 
ich often 
ne guided 
is Word, 
ing more 
‘s through 
res to take 
the living 
grows, the 


Believing Children. 405 


faith may grow; a deep and hidden root of life 
that even amici temporary coldness or declension 
still holds on to the blessed Saviour. 

God expects our children to grow wp believers, 
We ought to expect it too. It is of the very 
nature of faith in God that it ever seeks to think as 
He thinks, to count upon Him for what with man 
and nature is impossible, to make His promise 
and His power the measure of its hope. Let us 
take time to realize that God’s wonderful ‘promise 
to our children is meant so to take possession of 
us that it shall fill us with the sense of His holy 
power waiting to fulfil it, and draw us to live in 
His presence and in presence of our children as 
the channels of that power and that blessing. 
The confidence that our children will grow up 
true believers—something much higher than the 
confidence that they will eventually be saved— 
will exercise its influence on us andonthem. On 
us asa daily call to a life of pure holiness and 
consecration ; on our children in the creation of 
an atmosphere of faith around them in which they 
breathe and live. In our homes God expects 
that there shall be children that believe. 

The proof that our children are believers will be 
their conduct. Paul writes, ‘elders having children 
that believe, not unruly.’ Faith is ever perfected 
by works; like every other function of life, it can 
grow and become strong only by action, A life 


406 The Children for Christ : 
of faith is always a life of obedience. And a 

chid’s faith must prove itself in a child’s obedience, 

that is, obedience to the parents. Children that 

are allowed to be unruly and disobedient and self- 

willed will speedily lose their childlike faith. 

What is said of men, that, having thrust from them 

a good conscience, they have made shipwreck of 
the faith, holds good of children too. Faith is 

surrender. I yield myself entirely to the influence 

of the news I hear, of the promise I receive, of the 

person I trust. Faith in Jesus is entire surrender 
to Him, by Him to be ruled, and influenced, and 

mastered. Faith in Jesus is the surrender to Him 
and His will. Faith in Jesus to be saved by Him, 
is the surrender for Him to let Him save us in the 
way He has opened up, the way of trusting, loving, 
holy obedience. Let parents seek to lead the little 
one’s simple faith in Jesus to this surrender. Let 
them claim the child’s obedience to themselves as 
obedience to Jesus. Let them educate the child 
to obey conscience in Jesus’ name; their home 
will be the happy proof that believing children 
are not unruly. 

Tf ours are not children that believe, let us seek 
the cause with none but ourselves. God’s promise is 
sure, and His provision is perfect. There is some- 
thing wrong in our consecration. It may be— 
alas! how frequently it is so—that the spirit of 
the world so prevails in heart and home, that while 


nd @ 
ience, 
1 that 
d self- 
faith. 
n them 
reck of 
‘aith is 
fluence 
7 of the 
irrender 
ced, and 
to Him 
by Him, 
g in the 
y loving, 
he little 
her, Let 
gelves as 
he child 
pir home 
children 


et us seek 
promise 18 
2 is some- 
may be— 
D spirit of 
that while 


Believing Children. 407 
the Sunday talks teach the children faith in Jesus, 
the week-day life trains them to faith in the 
world, to a aurrender to its spirit and rule. Or it 
may be that, while we are earnestly engaged in 
religion and religious work, there is but little of 
true spirituality, of the joy and the love and the 
power of holiness which alone make religion a 
reality. Religion has been an occupation like 
any other; but the holy presence of Jesus has 
not been felt by our children. Or even when 
there has been a striving after this, there may 
have been failure, in our not devoting ourselves 
to the holy task of training children; we have 
entrusted the work to others, and neglected the 
self-denial and the study needed to fit ourselves 
for the work of ruling them well, and of guiding 
them in the ways of the Lord. Let us seek 
very honestly and very earnestly to discover the 
reason of failure, to solve the sad enigma: we 
are believers, we have a faithful God, and yet we 
have not what He claims, ‘children that believe, 
not unruly,’ 

God calls us to heart-searching, and confession, 
and return. And even if we have children that 
believe, but of whom we cannot but confess that 
their faith is not in such power and devotion as 
we could wish, let us turn to God with humbling 
and a new surrender. Our home life needs the 
power of a true consecration. The warm light of 


ae 


eee re es Ne wae og, ee ae Saree ee ee 
eee. ¢ ie t ey " 


408 The Children for Christ : 


9, Saviour’s love and the joy of His near presence 
shining from us, it is this our homes need as the 
secret of a successful education. Each new step 
in the path of entire separation to God, and of 
larger faith in His abiding and keeping presence, 
must make itself felt in the family. If there are 
circumstances and influences that appear to make 
it impossible, let us remember what faith can do: 
it can bring Almighty God and His power into 
the scene. It may not obtain at once what it 
asks, But it can live the life God wants His ' 
child to live, it can keep the soul in peace and 5 
rest; it can in secret exert its slow but sure 
influence. It is the faith of an entire surrender 
that our homes need, and that will transform 
them into what God would have, the nurseries of 
believing, obedient children. Both with God and 
with our children, let us study and remember this 
wil: there is no power so mighty as that of a 
quiet, restful faith, that knows that God has given 
what we have asked, that He has taken charge of 
what we have entrusted to Him, and that in His 
own hidden, silent ways He is already working 
out what He has undertaken. Parents who are 
believers, who believe with their whole heart and 
strength and life, will have ‘children that believe, 
not unruly,’ 


fa ee rte; 


, 2? 


Blessed Lord God, the God of the families of 


ae 


ence 

3 the 
step 

1d of 
ence, 

re are 
make 
n do: 

r into 
hat it 
1s His 
ve and 
t sure 
render 
nsform 
ories of 
od and 
per this 
at of & 
3 given 
arge of 
in His 
vorking 
ho are 
bart and 
believe, 


ilies of 


Believing Children. 409 


Israel! we thank Thee for each message that 
reminds us of what Thou wouldst have our 
children be, as the proof of the reality of our 
faith in Thy Word and our life in Thy love. We 
pray Thee, blessed Lord! to print it deep in our 
hearts that in every believing home Thou dost 
expect and dost seek for believing children. 
Lord! as trees of Thy planting, we would yield 
Thee the fruit Thou seekest. 

When Thou dost not find it, we beseech Thee to 
work a deep conviction of the sin that is the cause 
of the shortcoming. Whether it be unbelief or 
worldliness, the want of ruling well or the want of 
living well, reveal, we pray Thee, the sin, that i’ 
may be confessed and cast out. Reveal especially 
how it is chiefly the want of our undivided con- 
secration to Thy will, with its consequent want of 
a full assurance and experience of Thy presence, 
that is the secret cause of all our failure. 

Blessed Lord Jesus! it was Thy presence, the 
tidings of Thy being so near and so loving and so 
mighty to bless, that drew so many parents to 
trust Thee when Thou wast on earth. O our 
Lord! it is Thy presence with us which will 
strengthen our faith and give us children that 
believe. We do set our homes open to Thee. 
Come in and reign. Be our joy and gladness 
every day. We have yielded ourselves to live 
each moment under Thy rule; we have believed 


410 The Children for Christ : 


in Thine acceptance of our sacrifice to keep us 
abiding in Thee; oh, give us the wisdom and 
sweetness, the faith and the power to be a bless- 
ing to our home. Oh, give us children that 
believe, children whom in the power of faith Thou 
canst use for Thy glory. Amen. 


I and the Children. 


a et te ri ee oe ae eee eee et 


THE CHILDREN FOR CHRIST. 


FIFTY-SECOND DAY. 


ee ee 


Xt and the Chiloren. 


‘Behold, I and the children which God hath given me,’— 
Hes. ii. 13. 
HESE words were originally used by the 
prophet Isaiah : ‘ Behold, I and the children 
whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and 
for wonders in Israel. The prophet and his 
family were to be God’s witnesses to certain great 
truths which God wanted His people not to 
forget. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, these 
words of the Holy Spirit are put into the mouth 
of Christ as His confession of His relation to 
those whom He is not ashamed to call His 
brethren. They are words which the Holy Spirit 
still uses as the language of the believing parent 
who presents himself with his children before the 
Lord, in the consciousness of that wonderful unity 
of the Spirit in which the family is one before 
God. As we draw our meditations to a close, these 
words invite us to gather up all that the Word has 
taught us of the Purpose and the Promise of our 


re Sen On Sern eee 


412 The Children for Christ : 


God, of the work of Love committed to us, and the 
abounding Hope in which we may look to the 
fulfilment of what God has led us to expect. 
‘Behold, I and the children which God hath 
given me!’ let this be the language of a deep and 
living faith, as we think of the wonderful ground 
of our unity. I am one with my children in 
virtue of God’s eternal purpose, when He created 
man and instituted the family. He meant the 
parent to beget children in his own likeness, to 
impart his own life and spirit to them, to have 
one life with them. When sin entered, the pro- 
mise and the covenant were given to restore the 
blessing that had-been lost; again, the parent 
was in faith to receive for the child, and com- 
municate to him, the grace God had bestowed. In 
virtue of that promise I am one with my children, 
and my children are one with me, in the enjoy- 
ment of the love and the life that comes in Jesus. 
In that faith I present myself before the Father 
with that same ‘ Behold!’ with which Jesus called 
the Father to look upon Him and His, and‘I say 
too, ‘Father! behold, I and the children whom 
Thou hast given me.’ Zhow hast given them me, 
with a Divine giving, to be inseparably and 
eternally one with me. God hath given them me, 
in the power of the complete redemption ot His 
Son, with the sure and full promise of Thy Holy 
Spirit for them as for me. God hath given them 


IT and the Children. 413 


me to keep and train for Him, and then present 
before Him as mine and His too. In this faith 
I want day by day to look upon my little God- 
given flock, to believe that they are one with me 
in the possession of all the promises and blessings 
of the covenant, of all that the love of my God 
can give. As often as the thought of the corrup- 
tion of their evil nature or the sight of its 
outbursting comes up, when for a time it may 
appear as if they are not growing up as one with 
me in Christ, my faith will still say, Behold, I 
and the children Thou hast given me. And even 
when the thought of past sin and neglect in my 
training makes me fear lest my guilt is the cause of 
their being unconverted, I will still say, looking to 
the blood sprinkled on the doorposts of my home, 
the precious all-availing blood, that cleanses all my 
sin too: Behold, I and the children whom Thou 
hast given me. We are one, we must be one 
through Thy grace, we shal! be one to all eternity. 

In Jesus Christ nothing avxileth but faith work- 
ing by love. ‘Behold, I and the children God 
hath given me:’ when spoken in loving faith, 
the words become the inspiration of love for the 
work God has committed to it. The bond be- 
tween a parent and child is a double one—there 
is the unity of life and of love. What has 
apparently become two lives love voluntarily and 
joyfully links together and makes to be still one 


414 The Children for Chiist : 
This love in nature cares for and rears and 
nurtures the child. It is this love that God takes 
possession of and sanctifies for His service. It is 
this love that becomes the strength for the difficult 
and yet delightful work the parent has to do. 

Love is always self-surrender and self-sacrifice. 
It gives itself away to the beloved object ; it seeks 
to enter into it, and become one with it; true, full 
love has no rest apart from perfect union with the 
beloved ; all it has must be shared together. God 
calls His redeemed ones thus as parents to love 
their children, to identify themselves with them, 
to seek and claim their salvation as much as 
their own, And as the Spirit of Christ takes 
possession of the heart, the parent accepts the 
call; and in the unity of a love that cannot think 
of itself without the children, that is ready to 
sacrifice everything to make them partakers of 
its own blessedness, the parent learns to say 
with a new meaning, Behold, I and the children 
which God hath given me. 

I and the children! I, the author of their life, 
the framer of their character, the keeper of their 
souls, the trustee of their eternal destiny. I, first 
blessed that I may bless them, first taught how 
my Jesus loved me and gave Himself for me, that 
I may know how to love and how to give myself 
for them. I, having experienced how patient and 
gentle and tender He is with my ignorance and 


pir life, 
f their 
I, first 
t how 
he, that 
myself 
ont and 
ee and 


I and the Children. 415 


a nen emt 


slowness and wilfulness, now set apart not to 
think of my ease or comfort, but in the meek- 
ness and gentleness and long-suffering of Christ 
to watch over and to bear with their weakness. 
I, made one with these children, that in the power 
of love I may be willing to study what they 
need, and how I may best influence them; to train 
myself for the work of ruling well, and training 


~ them to self-rule. J, walking in the obedience 


and the liberty of a loving child of God, and 
guiding them in the happy art of an obedience to 
authority that is always free, and a freedom that is 
always submissive tolaw. Yes, I and the children ! 
the consciousness grows upon me that, in the unity 
of love.what I am thechildren may andwill be. And 
the more tenderly my love to them is stirred up, the 
more I feel that I but need first myself to be wholly 
and only the Lord’s, entirely given up to the Love 
that loves and makes itself one with me; this will fill 
me with a love from which selfishness shall be 
banished, and which gives itself in a Divine strength 
to live for the children that God has given me. 
When faith and love thus have spoken, hope 
will have courage to take up the song, and in full 
assurance to say, ‘Behold, I and the children 
which the Lord hath given me!’ We are insepar- 
ably and eternally one. Hope is the child of faith 
and love. Faith is its strength for waiting and 
watching, love its strength for willing and working. 


: — - Pema SR ee . % 
, 
sre A Dp BRENT APE EOSIN LSAT CARNES TOUR SO NOREEN SEER RAEI, SENNA SANDS IE ALATA Ry BELA TMAROLE ARN ROR ON Reh a 


416 The Children for Christ : 


Hope ever looks forward. It sees even in this 
life, when things are dark, the Unseen God coming 
through the clouds to fulfil His word. It sings 
the song of victory, when others see nought: but 
defeat. Amid all the struggles through which it 
may see a loved child passing, amid all trials of 
faith and patience it speaks: ‘In His word do I 
hope : I will hope continually, and will praise Thee 
yet more and more.’ Through its own buoyant 
tone it inspires with hopefulness the children 
when discouraged in the fight with evil; it seeks 
to be the morning-star of the home. It looks 
forward to each one of the circle being not only a 
saved one, but a sanctified one, fit for the Master's 
service here on earth. And as often as it looks 
for the blessed hope, the appearing of our Lord 
Jesus, and the glory that is to follow, it rejoices in 
the full assurance of an unbroken family circle in 
heaven. It even now trembles with joy as it 
thinks of the privilege that waits it, when the 
Son has presented Himself with His brethren in 
His ‘ Behold, I and the children whom God hath 
given me, of also coming forward to fall down 
and worship and say likewise, ‘ Father, behold ! 
here am I too, and the chiidren which Thou hast 
given me.’ May God teach us to rejoice in this 
hope! ‘ Now the God of hope fill your hearts with 
joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in 
hope in the power of the Holy Ghost.’ 


I and the Children. 417 


‘Behold, I and the children which God hath 
given me:’ beloved fellow-believers, whom God 
has honoured to be parents, shall we not seek to 
have the spirit of these words breathe through 
our whole home life? It is God who has given us 
the children ; it is He who regards them as one 
with us in His covenant and blessing, and teaches 
us to regard them so too. It is His love calls and 
fits for a life of self-sacrifice and unselfishness ; it 
is His grace will accept and give success to our 
efforts to be one, perfectly one with our children 
in the power of faith and love and hope. In 
God’s sight and promise we are one; in our life 
and love and labour let us be one with them too ; 
we shall be one through the glory of eternity. 


Our gracious Father! we do thank Thee for ai 
the blessed teaching: of Thy Holy Word concern- 
ing our children. We thank Thee that it has set 
them before us in Thine own light, as created by 
Thee, ruined by sin, redeemed in Christ, and now 
entrusted to us to keep and care for, while the 
Holy Spirit renews them to Thine eternal life and 
glory. We thank Thee that Thou Thyself hust 
come as our Teacher to fit us for teaching them. 
We pray Thee for Thy blessing on each word of 


Thine, that we may indeed become such parents as 
Thou wouldest have us be. 


O Lord, we pray Thee to establish in our thoughts 
2D 


(DACRE NENT OE LTT LLL LN LOLA L IED LT OD 


ae MN EE. 


ei 


418 The Children for Christ : 


and hearts and lives all the wonderful truths that 
gather round the home life. We would count 
Thy covenant and its promises as exceeding pre- 
cious to us. Our faith would see the names Thou 
givest to our children, children of the covenant, of 
the promise, of the kingdom, as written on their 
foreheads. We would treasure all the promises 
of Thy Spirit and Thy blessing as their sacred 
heritage. We would read of all Thy dealings 
with Thy saints in the birth of their children, and 
their upbringing for Thy service, as the revela- 
tion of Thy will with ours. .We do accept all Thy 
warnings and all Thy instructions concerning 
children as the law of our home. O Lord! open 
our eyes, that we may ever have h2fore us the 
picture of a believing home as Thou willest it, and 
willest to make it for us. 

Above all, blessed Lord Jesus! let Thy presence 
and Thy love and Thy joy, filling the parents’ 
hearts, be the power to fulfil the Father’s will, 
and to win our children’s love. It is in Thee all 
the promises are Yea and Amen; come Thyself, 
and accept our consecration to be wholly Thine; 
come Thyself, and let our home be the abode 
where Thou lovest to tarry. Then shall it be 
blessed indeed, and each of us say with never- 
ceasing gladness of hope, Behold, I and the 
child God hath given me. 

Even so, Lord Jesus. Amen. 


yre- 
hou 

t, of 
heir 
nises 
rcred 
lings 
, and 
evela- 
li Thy 
ening 
! open 
us the 
it, and 


resence 
parents’ 
rs will, 
hee all 
hyself , 
Thine ; 
e abode 
ll it be 


never- 
and che 


The Church's Duty to Parents, 419 


NOTES. 
The Church's Duty to Parents. 


SHORT s:count of the origin of this book 
may not be without its interest, and may 
be the best explanation of its’ object. 

When first I entered the ministry, thirty-six 
years ago, I was placed in charge of the whole of 
what is now the Orange Free State. As the 
neighbouring territory of the Transvaal was at 
that time also without a minister, I had to supply 


_ its wants too, With a large population, so widely 


scattered, each of the separate congregations could 
only be visited at distant intervals. When services 
were held there always was a large gathering, with 
very large numbers of children to be baptized ; in 
the Transvaal I repeatedly baptized a hundred and 
upwards on each of several consecutive Sabbaths. 
In some of the congregations of our Church the 
custom existed of meeting the parents, when they 
applied for the baptism of their children, to explain 
the meaning of the ordinance, and to insist upon 
earnest preparation for a believing reception of 
it, as well as for the duties undertaken in it. In 
the course of these conversations I became deeply 
impressed with the ignorance prevailing as to the 


420 The Children for Christ : 


object of the ordinance, and the large extent to 
which it had become a mere religious ceremony. 
And I was almost involuntarily led, in connec- 
tion with every baptism service, to make parental 
duty the subject of the sermon. I began to realize 
very painfully of how little value infant baptism 
could ve apart from the parent’s believing appre- 
hension of God’s promise, and his faithful fulfil- 
ment of parental duty. 

In the course of my further ministerial labours 
in my own congregation these convictions were 
deepened. In the effort to encourage parents to 
seek religious instruction for their children, it 
became manifest how much labour in this direc- 
tion was lost because the foundation which God 
had meant should be laid, in parental instruction, 
was wanting. I saw that God would not allow 
even a faithful minister to usurp the place or do 
the work destined by Him for the parent. It 
became plain that, in the threefold cord of home, 
school, and Church instruction, the home had the 
first and in some respects the most important 
place. If the Church would do her work success- 
fully, she must direct to the training of parents her 
first and best efforts. Through these she would 
reach the children far more effectually than by 
any other methods, ~ 

I looked around to see how the Christian Church 
elsewhere was combating the evil. JI heard some 


—e 


to 
ny. 
1eC- 
ntal 
lize 
tism 
ypre- 
ulfil- 


pours 
were 
nts to 
en, it 
direc- 
God 
ction, 
allow 
» or do 
nt. It 
home, 
ad the 
portant 
bUCCeSS- 
onts her 
I would 
han by 


Church 
rd some 


The Church's Duty to Parents. 421 


voices crying in great earnestness that the children 
are the Church of the future, and that they ought 
to have a larger place in her care than hitherto. 
I saw that Sunday schools, and, later on, children’s 
services, were wakening large interest; that faith 
in children’s conversion and in revival work among 
them was gaining ground. And yet there appeared 
to me to be something lacking. I listened to hear 
whether I could hear a clear and distinct witness 
in the Church in regard to the parents’ place, their 
inalienable right, their incomparable influenceas the 
ministers of God's grace to the children. I fancied 
Idid not. The truth was acknowledged by all, but 
little insisted on. In but few cases could I hear 
of systematic attempts, on the part of the Church, 
to instruct and encourage parents by the full 
exposition of their duties and God’s promises. 

A little thought will convince us that this is a 
fatal mistake. One of the marks of men who have 
succeeded in influencing and ruling their fellow- 
men, and one of the secrets of their success, has 
ever been the gift of enlisting and inspiring the 
service of others. This is what the Church must 
study to do, not only with regard to those who are 
ordinarily called Christian workers, but specially 
with that band of God’s own workers, the parents 
there are in every congregation, to whomn its children 
are entrusted. Teach, train, stir up, encourage these 
to their work, and there is hope, there is more than 


sestlaaeenaines tea Rene INA ee its 


> 


” chs ° 
“ : . 

. ~ a amen eel 
6A SONS SOSA ASNT TS s ry 


bates 


oe 


422 The Children for Christ : 


hope, there is assurance for the future. Let the 
minister, instead of preaching almost solely to 
individuals, whether it be conversion or sanctifica- 
tion, for a season, or at stated intervals, make it 
his special object to guide the parents of his con- 
gregation ; he will stir and strengthen one of the 
mightiest agencies in the service of God’s kingdom. 
The work of a parent is one of extreme solemnity 
and difficulty. It needs great wisdom and patience, 
much self-control and prayer and faith. As we do 
not expect a believer to advance in the Christian 
life without the teaching of the Word, much less 
must we look for a parent to be able to do his work 
aright without instruction and encouragement. 

It was under the impression of thoughts such 
as these that I was led, when other ministers took 
part of the work from me, and I could devote 
myself to my own congregation, to appoint one 
Sunday in every month for the celebration of 
baptism, and to arrange that the whole service 
— singing, reading, prayer, and preaching — 
should have reference to the one thing: God’s 
purpose with the family, and the way in which 
parents had to fulfil it. It cannot but strike 
any but the most thoughtless observer what a 
difference is ordinarily made between the two 
sacraments instituted by our Saviour. With the 
Lord’s Supper, how much solemnity, what earnest 
preparation, how much of teaching and preaching 


ica- 
5 it 
0n- 
the 
lom. 
nity 
ence, 
ve do 
stian 
n less 
work 
it. 
; such 
iG took 
evote 
{ one 
hon of 
bervice 
ing — 
God's 
which 
strike 
what @ 
ne two 
ith the 
earnest 
caching 


The Church's Duty to Parents, 423 


and praying to make it profitable. With baptism, 
on the contrary, what haste, what absence of 
teaching, what irreverence {ten where it is per- 
formed at the close of a service or in the house. 
With the Lord’s Supper, how much definite promise 
and expectation of blessing; wita baptism, how 
little. And yet the two saczainents are equally 
sacred; they equally represent the precious blood 
and the new covenant of which it is the seal; they 
equally claim the faith and the surrender of the 
heart. The attempt on the part of the Church to 
connect baptism more definitely with the faith and 
the duty of parents, to let them feel more deeply 
how it was to their faith that the promise of the 
covenant for their child was given, and to their 
faithfulness that its training was committed, 
would most assuredly bring a blessing. 

I soon found that baptism-Sunday was looked 
forward to with special interest. One might have 
thought that for ordinary hearers the subject would 
be less attractive; on the contrary, no sermons 
were listened to with greater attention. Brethren 
in the ministry have asked whether. the supply of 
texts was not speedily exhausted: experience has 
taught here, as in other matters, that when once 
God’s Word is searched with a special object in 
view, words and histories, which were never noticed 
before, become luminous with a new meaning. In 
illustrating the lives and characters of the parents 


424 The Children for Christ : 


and children of the Bible, in setting forth all 
God’s teachings and dealings with reference to 
them, abundance of the richest matter was found. 
In dealing with the special sins of children, or 
inculcating children’s virtues, in setting forth the 
wondrous nature of the being entrusted to them, 
and some of the laws by which his conduct is 
actuated, it was found that often the teaching given 
for the control of children was the most profitable 
that could be found for those who wanted help 
in their own moral self-culture. 

It is now more than twenty years since the 
original of the present volume was published in 
Dutch, in meditations for a month, each contain- 
ing a short summary of some sermon that had 
been preached on such occasions, Since that 
time many a new subject has been treated, and I 
have been led now to prepare a series of fifty-two— 
one for each week. I have done this in the hope 
that some Christian parents, who feel the need of 
such help, perhaps young parents, may be led once 
a week, on the Sunday afternoon or evening, or at 
some other time, to read and meditate and pray 
together over some of the precious words of God 
with regard to their calling. In these God has 
revealed His loving purpose towards our children, 
and abundantly promises us the grace we need 
to make us truly and surely a blessing to them. 
Such a use of it need not hinder the perusal day 


The Church’s Duty to Parents. 425 


by day for those who prefer this. I hope very 
specially, that to more than one young mother, in 
that sacred period, when, as she bides her time, 
and waits to receive her little one from the Lord, 
and then after its birth is kept in weakness and 
solitude to think of the precious little life that has 
been entrusted to her, and prays for grace to do it 
aright, this little book may be God’s messenger to 
encourage and guide to that entire consecration 
to God, in which alone a godly education can find 
its strength. 

But it is not only to parents that I would offer 
this work, but very specially to my brethren in 
the ministry, in the hope that, where they have 


’ not ‘already done it, they may make their duty, 


and the duty of the pulpit, towards parents matter 
of earnest prayer and study. They may be sure 
that the time, and energy, and preaching devoted 
to parents will bring a double reward. It may be 
doubted whether God teaches and blesses children 
more through their parents, or parents through 
their children. Spiritual efforts for the parents are 
a blessing to parent: and children both. Let us 
carefully notice now much of the Bible, and of 
God’s dealings with believers, has reference, not to 
individuals, but to parents for the sake of their 
children, Let us try and realize how deep, in 
God’s people, the foundations of the kingdom were 
laid in parental instruction and family religion. 


- ee ee 


426 The Children for Christ : 

With Israel at the Passover, in the laws of Moses, 
in the Psalms, how much more “mention is made 
of the teaching of the parents than of the priests. 
To elevate the standard of thought, and faith, and 
duty among the parents, is one of the highest tasks 
a Church can have. 

And a Church that believes in infant baptism 
has in this ordinance the most wonderful oppor- 
tunity of coming into contact with parents. With 
each child, baptized publicly, not only its own 
parents, but the whole assembly of parents, are 
reminded of God’s covenant engagement with 
them, and theirs with God. What an opportunity 
(especially if a fixed Sabbath could every month 
be devoted to it) to let the light of God’s Word 
shine into.the home and the family life, to discover 
shortcomings and unfaithfulness, to teach and to 
help, and to stir up to faith and prayer. 

If there is one subject on which systematic 
Bible teaching is needed, it is this. The training of 
children is one of the most important and difficult 
tasks that can be undertaken. The welfare of 
society and the Church depend upon it. God’s 
Word gives abundant teaching on the subject; 
but the Church has hardly yet given herself to the 
systematic effort of teaching and training parents 

for their holy work. One of our modern philo- 
sophers has expressed so well the utter folly of 
thinking that parents can. perform their duties 


ae 


ses, 
ade 
ests. 
and 
asks 


tism 
ppor- 
With 
own 
3, are 
with 
unity 
nonth 
Word 
scover 
nd to 


ematic 
ning of 
ifficult 
are of 
God's 
bject ; 
to the 
parents 
philo- 
olly of 
duties 


The Church's Duty to Parents. ne, 


without preparation, and the need of providin, 
instruction in parental duties, that I give the pas- 
sages at length : '— 

‘We now come to the third great division of 
human activities—those which have for their end 
the rearing and discipline of offspring—a division 
for which no preparation whatever is made. If, 
by some strange chance, not a vestige of our 
literature descended to the remote future save 
a pile of our schoolbooks, we may imagine how 
puzzled the antiquary would be on finding in 
them no sign that the learners were ever to be 
parents, “This must have been the curriculum for 
their celibates: I find no reference whatever to 
the bringing up of children. They could not have 
been so absurd as to omit all training for the 
gravest of responsibilities.” Seriously, is it not an 
astonishing fact, that though on the treatment of 
offspring depend their lives or deaths, and their 
moral welfare or ruin, yet not one word on the 
instruction of offspring is ever given to those 
who will by-and-by be parents? If a merchant 
commence business without any knowledge of 
arithmetic, we should exclaim at his folly, and 
look for disastrous consequences. But that parents 
should begin the difficult task of rearing children, 
without having ever given a thought to the prin- 


1 Education: Intellectual, Moral, and Physical. By Herbert 
Spencer. 


428 The Children for Chrisi : 


ciples which ought to guide tiem, excites neither 
surprise at the action, nor pity for their victims, 
. . » We find the facts to be such as might have 
been inferred a priori: the training of children 
—physical, intellectual, moral-—is dreadfully de- 
feztive. And in great measure it is so, because 
parents are devoid of that knowledge by which 
their training alone can rightly be guided. What 
is to be expected when one of the most intricate 
of problems is undertaken by those who have 
scarcely given a thought to the principles on 
which its solution depends? For shoemaking or 
housebuilding a long apprenticeship is needful. 
Is it then that the unfolding of a human being 
in body and mind is so compacatively simple a 
process, that any one may superintend and regu- 
late it with no preparation whatever? If not,—if 
the process is, with one exception, more complex 
than any in Nature, and the task of ministering 
to it one of surpassing difficulty,—is it not madness 
to make no provision for such a task? .. . 

‘The greatest defect in our programme of 
education is entirely overlooked. While much is 
being done in the detailed improvement of our 
system, the most pressing desideratum has not 
yet been even recognised as a desideratum. To 
prepare the young for the duties of life, is tacitly 
admitted to be the end which parents and school- 
masters have in view; yet no care whatever is 


The Church's Duty to Parents, 429 


taken to fit them for the position of parents. 
While it is seen that for the purpose of gaining 
a livelihood, an elaborate preparation is needed, 
it appears to be thought that for the bringing up 
of children no preparation whatever is needed. 
While years are spent by a boy in gaining 
knowledge, of which the chief value is that it 
constitutes the education of a “gentleman,” not 
an hour is spent in preparation for that gravest 
of all responsibilities, the management of a family. | 
Is it that this responsibility is but a remote con- 
tingency ? On the contrary, it is sure to devolve 
on nine out of ten. Is it that the discharge of 
it is so easy? Certainly not; of all functions 
which the adult has to fulfil, this is the most 
difficult. Is it that by self-instruction each may 
be trusted to fit himself for the office of parent ? 
No; not only is the need for such self-instruction 
unrecognised, but the complexity of the subject 
renders it the one of all others in which self- 


instruction is least likely to succeed. Whether 


as bearing on the happiness of parents them- 
selves, or whether as affecting the character and 
lives of their remote descendants, we must admit 
that a knowledge of the right methods of juvenile 
culture—physical, intellectual, and moral—is a 
knowledge of extreme importance. The topic 
should be the final one in the course of instruction 
passed through by each man and woman. As 


430 The Children for Christ : 


physical maturity is marked by ability to produce 
offspring ; so mental maturity is marked by the 
ability to train their offspring. The subject which 
involves all other subjects, and therefore the subject 
in which education should culminate, is the Theory 
~ and Practice of Education.’ 

Many will doubt the wisdom or the possibility 
of the proposal to make the art of educating 
children part of ordinary education. Education 
requires practice, exercise in the art that is being 
taught. When people are parents they can no 
longer go to school again. There is but one way 
out of the difficulty. The Church has the solution 
of the problem in her hands. In God’s Word, 
with its wonderful lessons as to parents and her 
children, she has a Divine class-book. In the 
Church gathered at the sacrament of baptism she 
has her class. In the feeling of parental respon- 
sibility and affection, in the experience of the 
difficulty of training the children aright on the 
consciousness of failure, there is a stimulus to 
learn, which no class in the mere art of educating 
children ever can have. Could the Church, with 
her views of the power of sin and the power 
of grace, with her faith in God’s Word and God’s 
Spirit, but realize the absolute need, the infinite 
importance, the rich blessing of training her 
parents for their work, how speedily ways and 
means for having it done could be found. I am 


F 
i 
a. 


The Church’s Duty to Parents, 431 


persuaded that a monthly baptismal service would, 
in course of time, be welcomed by many parents 
as a boon of unspeakable value. 

Where this is not possible, other arrangements 
might be made. Mothers’ meetings already exist 
in many places: these might be utilized for giv- 
ing more distinct instruction. And is there not 
as much need of fathers’ meetings? We have 
Bible-classes for the young: a parents’ class, with 
the pastor leading and teaching, could in some 
cases be organized, even were it but for a short 
course. Parents would gradually become con- 
scious of their high calling, and themselves seek 
the help they need. If the Church is content, let 
us not wonder that parents are content too. The 
misapprehension, by which parents expect from 
the public teaching of the Church more than from 
their own training, is a very fatal one, and no 
effort ought to be spared to dispel it. A writer 
on this subject has well said: ‘What can be more 
strangely wide of all just apprehension than the 
immense efficacy imputed by most parents to 
the Christian ministry, compared with what they 
take to be the almost insignificant power con- 
ferred on them in their parental charge and 
duties? Why, if all preachers could have their 
hearers for whole months and years in their own 
will, so as to move them by a look, a smile, a 
frown, and act their own emotions and sentiments 


i‘ —— psig tenn ens ne generis ert oT - coment 
- no enn pane ES rg rar ae pe Sd PME 7 anes = fie z 
. ~ . 


Sate 


432 The Children for Christ : 


over in them at pleasure; if, also, a little further 
on, they had them in autb.ity to command, 
direct, regulate their pleasures, their company, 
and call them to prayer every morning and even- 
ing—who could think it impossible, in the use 
of such a power, tc »roduce almost any result ? 
Should not such a m:stry be expected to fashion 
all who come under it to newness of life: Let 
no parent, shifting off his duty to his children, 
think to have his defects made up, and the con- 
sequent damages mended afterwards, when they 
have come to maturity, by the comparatively 
slender, always doubtful, efficacy of preaching.’ ! 
The Church does much of her work through the 
press: a parent’s Manual of Education would 
supply a real want. We have a great number of 
handbooks of education and school-management, 
in which a summary of what a teacher requires 
to know of is presented; in these parents would 
find much that is suggestive in some cof the 
chapters. Various religious works exist, with 
valuable hints on parts of a parent's work. But 
what. is required is a work in the spirit of 
Christian Science, in which what the science of 


1 Christian Nurture. By Horace Bushnell.. A most sug- 
gestive volume, Though he may find thoughts or expressions 
he may not agree with, every minister, who wishes to realize 
his duty to the parents of his flock, will find himself well 
rewarded for the study of this work. 


y; 

n- 
ise 
lt ? 
10n 
Let 
ren, 
con- 

hey 

vely 

ul 1 

,. 

h the 
ould 
er of 
mM ent, 
puires 
vould 

the 
with 

But 
it of 
nce of 


at sug- 
essions 

realize 
pif well 


The Church's Duty to Parents. 433 


psychology teaches of the wonderful nature of the 
being that has to be trained, and what the science 
of education of the laws under which its powers 
can best. be developed, and what the science of 
ethics of the principles by which the child’s 
powers can be ruled and guided aright, and what 
Scripture of the wondrous work that grace will 
do in sanctifying all this, is presented in popular 
and practical form. 

But, in whatever way the work is to be done, 
only let it be done. Let the Church, the teacher 
of the nations, the messenger of God to His 
people, lift up her voice and secure the aid of 
the hundreds of thousands of parents that belong 
to her to train the coming generations for God. 
Let the ministry hold forth God’s Word to dispel 
the ignorance, to shame the indifference, to banish 
the unbelief that hinders, and to make the family 
again what God meant it to be: His first and 
mightiest means of grace for the maintenance of 
His kingdom among His people. 

Meantime, I trust the present work may be 
accepted of the Lord and of His people, and be 
blessed to bring to some parents words of guid- 
ance and encouragement. All the teaching clusters 
round the four great central thoughts of God with 
regard to the family: God, as its Creator, its 
Redeemer, its Sanctifier, its Covenant God ; Fasth, 
as the one condition for bringing parent and child 

ye 


434 The Children for Christ : 


into relation with God, and making both partakers 
of its covenant- promise and blessing; Parental 
faithfulness in life and training as the path in 
which the blessing apprehended by faith is appro- 
priated and brought down upon the home and the 
child ; the Children, God’s property, to be trained 
for His glory and service. 


Baptism, Adult or Infant. 436 


T3 

tal 

in Baptism, Adult or Enfant. 

ro- 

the N the Baptist controversy, the opponents of 
ned | infant baptism consider that Scripture is so 


clearly on their side, and are so sure that it is 
only the influence of human custom and authority 
that holds its supporters in their fetters, that 
they feel justified in saying that the only reason 
believers in infant baptism cannot see God’s will 
in Scripture on this point to be what Baptists 
practise, is their unwillingness to make the sacri- 
fice which would follow their acceptance of the 
truth. Even men, who are large-hearted and 
loving men, find it difficult to. explain the hold 
which infant baptism maintains on the Church of 
Christ on any other ground, 

It would indeed be a terrible thing if the 
charge were true. Tens of thousands of Chris- 
tians, professing with intensest longing to know 
the will of God in Scripture, and yet maintaining 
that to them it teaches that the baptism-of the 
children is His will, not able to see what their 
brethren assure them is clear as day, only because 
they are not willing to do His will! Hardly less 
terrible is the charge if it be not true; because 
such judgments, however for a time they may be 
covered by Christian love, yet at times cannot 


436 The Children for Christ : 


but spring up and bring forth the bitter fruits 
of division and estrangement, to the weakening 
of the body of Christ. 

And what answer has infant baptism to give 
to its opponents? Our book, though not written 
for the purpose, may be taken in answer. There 
are truths we believe, and duties we consider bind- 
ing, for which one clear single chapter-and-verse 
proof cannot be given. Take our keeping holy 
the first day of the week, instead of the seventh, 
as the fourth commandment requires. Because 
there is no distinct command for the change, we 
have men who insist that they alone truly obey 
God’s commandment who keep the seventh day. 
And such servants of the letter utterly refuse to 
listen to or understand the teaching of the Spirit 
in Scripture, on which the Church, without any 
literal command, grounds its keeping holy the 
Lord's day. It is just so with the question 
between infant and adult baptism. Though there 
be no literal command to baptize the little ones, 
the study of God’s Word as a whole makes so 
clear both the ground on which it rests, and the 
reasons why no literal command on the subject 
was needed, that the Holy Spirit leads men, 
wholly given up to follow Him in, teachableness 
and obedience, to find in God’s Word the con- 
fident assurance that infant baptism is according 
to His will. 


ive 
ten 
\erc 
nd- 
erse 
holy 
mth ’ 
ause 


leness 
e con- 
ording 


Baptism, Adult or Infant. 437 


And their judgment then on adult baptism ? 
‘Who art thou that judgest another man’s ser- 
vant? To his own master he standeth or falleth ?’ 
In the very remarkable chapter from which these 
words are taken, God has for all time given His 
Church the principle that ought to guide her in 
matters in which those who seek to follow the 
leading of the Word and Spirit differ as to duty. 
It is a most significant fact that while Paul 
knew that it was lawful to eat the meat by which 
some were offended, or to esteem every day alike, 
he did not interpose his authority, much less the 
authority of God, to tell the weak brother to give 
up his ignorant prejudice. Such a decision might 
have settled that question, but it would have left 
the Church a great loser; it could ill miss the 
teaching the chapter conveys, by which, as it is, 
she has profited all too little. That natural cha- 
racter and other circumstances may give rise to 
differences of view; that such diversities may at 
all times exist, which it is not the will of God 
to settle by any absolute rule; that, therefore, 
the judgment of the brother is not ours, but the 
Lord’s; and that the exercise of humility and 
forbearance, for which the diversity calls, may be 
a far greater blessing than the uniformity which 
we think so desirable: these are lessons of the 
utmost importance, which have their applicability 
here too. 


438 The Children for Christ : 


Our place on the earth is such that we can only 
see one-half of the starry heavens at a time. And 
so in the great sphere of Divine truth no mind is 
Jarge enough to grasp the whole. Every truth 
in man’s hands becomes one-sided. God’s way 
of remedying this defect and its danger is to 
entrust one aspect of truth to one portion of His 
Church, while another holds the abuse of it in 
check by testifying for some different aspect. In 
this way the dependence of all on each other is to 
be maintained, and the triumph of love in the 
midst of difference to be made manifest. So with 
baptism. Infant baptism, with its discipling and 
baptizing the nations, has its danger. When the 
Church becomes lax, and the ministry is not 
faithful in teaching the word of faith, through 
which alone a sacrament is effective, infant bap- 
tism may come to be a form without power. 
And then adult baptism comes in as a needful 
protest, to plead for the spiritual character of the 
rite, and the absolute necessity of a living faith 
to make it acceptable with God. 

But adult baptism, that is, man’s teaching 
concerning it, has its danger too. In thie indi- 
vidualism which cannot understand God’s dealing 
with the family, on the groundwork of the 
covenant of grace, nor the power of a parent’s 
faith, as according to God’s will it embraces the 
child, nor the free mercy which when it takes a 


Baptism, Adult or Infant. 439 
child into the covenant for the parent’s sake can 
give it the seal of the covenant ere it has believed, 
it would utterly fail of gathering in the nations. 
And while it holds that it alone witnesses aright 
for the faith through which the sacrament can 
have its value, and a spiritual blessing be received, 
infant baptism claims that it is a still bolder 
witness for the power of faith, as it teaches, in 
accordance with all God’s revelation, how a 
parent’s faith can accept and keep the blessing 
for the child too. . 

I sincerely trust that the study of God’s words 
and thoughts, concerning parents and children, 
will lead those who hold infant baptism to see the 
Divine ground on which it rests, its deep spiritual 
significance for them and their seed, and the need 
of a living faith, as that without which it may 
become but a lifeless form. 


The Children for Christ. 


ee 


NOTE A. 


TWENTY-SECOND DAY. 


Ir may be helpful to parents, to young mothers 
especially, to give a short summary of the prin- 
ciples on which all training rests. Let them 
meditate carefully and prayerfully on what. it 
implies: they will find that it is a work that 
cannot be performed without careful thought and 
earnest purpose. It is only as reflection opens up 
to them the infinite significance of the holy work 
of moulding, of really forming and giving shape to, 
an immortal spirit, that they will feel urged with 
due fervour and faith to plead the promise: ‘If 
any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who 
giveth to all liberally ; and it shall be given him.’ 


1. Training 1s more than teaching. Teaching v 
makes a child know and understand what he is . 


to do; training influences him, and sees that he 
does it. Teaching deals with his mind ; training, 
with his will. 

2. Prevention is better than cwre. Not to watch 
and correct mistakes, but to watch and prevent 
avistakes, is true training. To lead the child to 
know that he can obey and do right, that he can 
do it easily and successfully, and to delight in 
doing it, is the highest aim of true training. 

3. Habits must precede principles. The body is 


t 
I 
g 
¢ 
a 
y 
n 
tl 


Notes. 441 


formed and grows for the first years of life while 
the mind is to a great extent dormant. Habist 
influence the person by giving a certain bent and 
direction, by making the performance of certain 
acts easy and natural, and thus preparing the way 
for obedience from principle. 

4, The cultivation of the feelings precedes that of 
the judgment. The early years of childhood are 
marked by the liveliness of the feelings and the 
susceptibility of impressions. The parent seeks to 
create a feeling favourable to the good, to make it 
attractive and desirable. Without this, habits 
will have little value; with it, they have a con- 
necting link by which they enter and grow into 
the will. 

5. Ecample is better than precept. Not in what 
we say and teach, but in what we are and do, lies 
the power of training. Not as we think an ideal 
to train our children for, but as we live do we 
train them. Not our wishes or our theory, but 
our will and our practice, really train. It is by 
living a thing that we prove that we love it, that 
we have it, and that we influence the young mind 
to love it and to have it too. 

6. Love that draws is more than law that 
demands. To train needs a life of self-sacrifice, of 
love that seeketh not its own, but lives and gives 
itself for its object. For this God has given the 
wonderful mother-love: it needs but to be directed 
into the right channel as the handmaid of God’s 
redeeming love. Law alone always works sin 
and wrath. It is love that gives itself with its 
thought and strength to live for and in the other, 


/ 


442 The Children for Christ. 


and breathes its own stronger and better life into 
the weaker one. Love inspires, and it is inspira- 
tion is the secret of training. “ 


NOTE B. 
THIRTIETH DAY. 


AmMOonG the first traits of the heavenly spirit in 
the child is restfulness. The following remarks 
on cultivating this, even during the two first years 
of a child’s life, are well worthy of a thoughtful 
perusal]. 

‘We may even from the earliest infancy culti- 
vate those dispositions which are unfavourable to 
the growth of dangerous inclinations. Certain 
habits, which exercise a salutary influence on 
tbe moral feelings, may be given to the infant, 
even before his character distinctly shows itself. 
Inward tranquillity will calm the restlessness of 
his wishes ; and the kindness bestowed upen him 
will direct his attention out of himself, and make 
him feel kindly towards others. 

‘Inward tranquillity is produced by outward 
tranquillity: and for this, among other reasons, 
infants should, as much as possible, be prevented 
from crying. By a careful attention in this 
and other things we may keep the minds of the 
children in a state of habitual tranquillity, an 
inestimable advantage, easily lost, indeed, but 
perhaps the quality of all others most necessary 


Notes. 443 


to their moral constitution, as yet so weak and 
vacillating. Their nerves, once agitated, are lon 

in recovering their tone; and both the health nk 
character suffer in consequence. Nor do I dwell 
on this merely as a means of preventing evil. 
There is one entire class of qualities, the noblest 
of any, which will grow and ripen only in the 
shade of repose; in this class are not only in- 
cluded our virtues, but also our most valuable 
acquirements, There is nothing worthy of admira- 
tion, nothing great in our moral nature, which is 
not cherished by serenity of mind. Why is it 
that this dispositisn, which seems to establish a 
connection between the soul and heaven, which 
can exist only when the heart is at peace with 
itself and all around it, is now so rarely to be met 
with among us? Whatever the reason may be, 
we shall always find this happy disposition of 
mind in young children, unless we ourselves are 
so unfortunate as to disturb it. 

‘I have often thought that we are too much 
accustomed to keep intants constantly in motion. 
We ought certainly not to allow them to grow 
weary,—ennut is the lethargy of the soul; but 
nothing is more likely to produce this evil than 
an excess of variety in our methods of amusing 
them. The more tranquillity a child has enjoyed 
in infancy, the more he will possess hereafter ; and 
a calm cheerfulness of disposition may be per- 
manent, which gaiety and mirth seldom are. It 
is for this reason that it is so much more desirable 
for children to be occupied with things than with 
people ; things are tranquil objects which do not 


444 The Children for Christ. 


— 


interest them too eagerly. With people their 
feelings of sympathy or dis!'ke are continually 
excited.’—From ‘ Progressive Aducation, from the 
French of Madame Necker de Saussure. 


NOTE C. 
FORTIETH DAY, 


THE following extract, from ‘LIFE IN JESUS: A 
MEMOIR OF Mrs. Mary WINSLOW BY HER SON, 
gives a very: touching and instructive illustration 
of a widowed mother claiming God’s covenant 
on behalf of her children. And in~later years, 
after her death, her son, Dr. B. Winslow, loved 
to tell how wondrously God had proved Himself 
faithful in fulfilling His promise to all her 
children :—- 

‘She was now a widow with a large family of 
sons, dependent upon her for their training and 
settlement in life. “Sho that is a widow indeed, 
and desolate, trusteth in God.” Such was her 
present condition. The surges of grief now 
yielded to a calm, intelligent survey of her posi- 
tion. She threw herself upon God. The covenant 
she made with Him when a wife, she now and 
more solemnly renewed as a widow,—that the 
Lord should be her God. It was at this important 
crisis of her history that the following touching 
incident in her experience occurred. 

‘“T had sent one of my sons, a youth of ten years 


ess 


Notes. 445 


A ee Np ne = a an na 


old, accompanied by a servant, across the river on 
a matter of business. The appointed hour for his 
return arrived, but he did not appear. Hour after 
hour passed away, and nightfall drew on, but he 
came not. The last steamboat touched the pier. 
but he was not on board. I walked my room for 
hours in prayer, and in great agitation of mind, 
Keenly did I feel my lonely, helpless widowhood. 
Again and again I sought the Lord. After passing 
hours in this state of mental anxiety, I sent a 
brother in search, and soon after, all made their 
appearance. He had missed his way. The Lord 
heard a mother’s prayer, and brought him in 
safety to me. After all had retired for the night, 
I was left alone with God. My mind and heart 
had been greatly exercised throughout the day. I 
felt deeply my helplessness and responsible situa- 
tion. I thought, ‘How can I, a helpless woman, 
care for and train up these children to manhood ?’ 
I felt I should sink beneath the overwhelming 
conviction of my weakness and insufficiency. I 
paced my room in prayer, tried to take hold of a 
promise ; but all was dark, the present and the 
future, as midnight. xt was late before I retired 
to rest. In vain I endeavoured to console myself, 
sleep had forsaken me. Again I lifted up my 
heart in prayer. I tried to cease from thinking, 
and to close my eyelids, but in vain. All night I 
continued in prayer, until just before the dawn 
of day these words were spoken 0 my ear and 
heart, as if an audible voice had uttered them: 
‘I will be « Father to thy fatherliss children’ I 
knew this voice, and could make no mistake. So 


416 The Children for Christ. 


powerful was it, I instantly replied aloud, ‘O 
Lord, be Thou the Father of my fatherless, and my 
God!’ Oh, the solemnity of that hour! I felt 
God was with me, and my soul was filled with joy 
and holy reverence. He had condescended to 
visit my lone room, and fill it with His presence. 
He had come to comfort His widowed child, and I 
was comforted. My soul poured out its grateful 
acknowledgments. I could adore, and praise, 
and bless His holy name. A solemn, sacred influ- 
ence pervaded the place. God was with me ofa 
truth. Fatigued with the anxieties of the day, 
and exhausted with the mental exercises through 
which I had passed the night, I composed myself 
to rest. The Lord withdrew, and my weary eyes 
were closed in refreshing sleep. Years have 
passed since then, and the Lord has not for one 
moment forgotten His promise. But I take the 
promise to extend beyond this poor dying world. 
Had the Lord given each of my children a world, 
and they should lose their souls, what would it 
profit them? I believe He designs tc be their 
Father to all eternity, and then I shall meet all 
my children in heaven. How often have I gone 
and. pleaded this promise before Him, and have 
always found my faith increased. And still my 
faith holds out: ‘For He is faithful that has 
promised,’” 

‘From the moment God sealed upon her heart 
this special and remarkable promise, causing her 
to rest on His own veracity as the pledge of its 
fulfilment, she became animated as by a new and 
mighty impulse, Her natural spirits, unstrung by 


as Se ct ch ee 


ae ON rN I 


Notes. 447 


grief, and her mental powers, paralyzed by anxiety, 
now acquired fresh tone and energy. An over- 
whelming pressure of despondency and care 
seemed suddenly and entirely to be lifted from off 
her mind, Strengthened with might in the inner 
man, she cast her care on God; and, girding her- 
self afresh for the arduous duties to which He 
now summoned her, with a calmness of judgment, 
a firmness of rezolution, and a reliance of faith, 
equal to the dignity of her position, she cheerfully 
met and vigorously discharged all its claims. The 
promise thus given proved a sheet-anchor to her 
soul in many a subsequent hour of storm and 
cloud. And when at times—for such there were 
—the sentence of death seemed written upon it, 
her “sith in God never faltered; giving to that 
promise, as she herself tells us, its widest range of 
meaning, she rose above the temporal blessing it 
involved, and claimed, as the only limit of its 
fulfilment, a Divine inheritance, a spiritual birth- 
right, an eternal home for her orphan ones. She 
knew that she had to do with a Being, all whose 
resources of power, wisdom, and love were as 
boundless as His own infinity ; who was not only 
a prayer-hearing and a prayer-answering, but also 
a prayer-exceeding God ; and ‘vho in the bestow- 
ment of His blessings upon His people never gave 
less, but always more, than He had promised or 
than they had asked. She reasoned—and it was 
the logical reasoning of true faith—that if God, 
in the lone hours of that night of weeping and of 
prayer, had engaged to be a father to her father- 
less children, that engagement bound Him to 


448 =‘ The Children for Christ, 


them as their heavenly father. To this broad 

interpretation of the pledge she held Him, with a 
grasp which never for an instant relaxed. And 
when she died, it was in the firm, unfaltering faith 
of that promise. Not having received its com- 
plete fulfilment, but viewiny it afar off, she was 
persuaded of it, embraced it, and closed her eyes 
with an undimmed, unshaken assurance that it 
would be even as God had said, and that she 
would meet again all the children He had given 
her—AN UNDIVIDED fAMILY IN HEAVEN.’ 


MORRISON AND GIBB, EDINBURGH, 
PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE. 


