





























































































ey Gan SC Br Wey Noon Wa Wl Seg SNR a eh he Ge a i WAR RSS ti aan
SERRE S Sch ‘ a » eS
RANA chool of Theology at Claremo {ASSEN SNES SS
EO " . Lae WN .
SY 7 SS ESL aE > RS a,
Rte, tat - ae ¥ = v
TASES? Ce de rey t Ane
CLOGG SE IP POCSS a i >
Tae SALEM SASL, Vr ree fr v4 z
ea a ad fey Pe eee ee Cr er. Bs LUPE ORE BAA i A Z
PLL LL A ’ ee ee rrrrerre , rrr er f id V4





The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711











THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOK OF RUTH >


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
| INDEXES, ETC., ETC.





By VARIOUS AUTHORS





In Twenty-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


i“


SHA
ps A HOMILETIC


‘7 COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF
Rely) 0c
WITH CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NOTES


BY THE
REV. WALTER BAXENDALE





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





PREFACE.


The Book of Ruth stands apart from other books of Scripture, and
therefore may well deserve and demand a separate and somewhat distinct
method of treatment. Neither doctrinal nor polemical, and scarcely to be
called historical, it yet has the infinite suggestiveness which must always
belong to human life, tried, tempted, and finally triumphant. With such
a book it has seemed that the poets have sometimes caught its meaning,
teaching, and spirit better than the theologians. So much also has been
written upon it, and so well, that while, as in its own harvest field, there is
room for the solitary gleaner, as well as the many reapers, it can scarcely be
an unprofitable labour to endeavour in some measure “ to bind into bun-
dles”” the precious grain so abundantly provided. The present attempt has
sims in all three of these important directions.

In no sense however must this book be looked upon as a mere book of
outlines. ‘The true value of a sermon” lies, as Mr, Spurgeon well says,
‘not in its fashion and manner, but in the truth which it contains.” The
author has aimed, first of all and above everything else, at gathering sugges-
tive materials, and, for this purpose, the opinions of the many are often to be
valued above the finished productions of the most highly gifted minds. He
holds, too, with the great preacher already quoted, that ‘‘ to divide a sermon
well may be a very useful art, but what if there is nothing to divide? A mere
division maker is like an excellent carver with an empty dish before him.”

The character of the book lends itself naturally to expository preaching,
and to a textual rather than a topical method of treatment. No two
passages are exactly alike. The aim has been to bring out the precise
meaning, teaching, and drift of each, rather than to use it as a standpoint


for discoursing on topics which might better and more fairly be approached


from some other portion of God’s Word. At the same time, themes and
- topics are continually suggested, the author taking that his work draws
to a close when the topic itself has been fairly launched.

In an age when so much has been written about so little, he has no
apology to offer for this deference to what some would call ‘“‘the mere
verbiage of the Scriptures.” The only apology that could be offered is that
the work has not been done more completely and with somewhat more of
the thoroughness, scholarship, ability, and enthusiasm, distinguishing the
Commentaries on our great master-pieces of human genius. His work has
been hindered and postponed by a long and tedious brain affection, but it
has been all throughout a labour of love, oppressed only by this feeling
that ‘“‘ one can do but little to gild refined gold,” and he leaves it with a
deepened and ever-deepening sense of the beauty, tenderness, truthfulness,
simplicity, and dignity of the Divine Word, as well as of its fitness and its
suggestiveness amid the perplexing walks of common and daily life.

To acknowledge obligations in any special instance, where has been so
much indebtedness, would be invidious. The author’s plan has rendered
it necessary that he should avail himself, as far as possible, of the labours
of all who have preceded him. Wherever practical the name has been
given; and he hopes this plan may not be without its uses in directing
attention to works which need only to be known to be appreciated.

That his labours may be useful to his brethren, who amid the pressure
of modern ministerial duties find it difficult to appropriate time to either
special or extensive acqnaintance with the literature of the book of Ruth,
is the earnest and sincere prayer of their well-wisher and brother in the


ministry of Jesus Christ,
WALTER BAXENDALE.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


Rodi Bale he


————<


INTRODUCTION.


(1.) Formed a part of the book of Judges iv the ancient Hebrew canon, supple-
mentary to that book, like the last five chapters at present, according to Josephus,
Origen, Jerome. The Septuagint, in harmony with Jewish tradition, places it
there without a separate title, and Melito of Sardis says the Jews of his day
counted them together. Keil questions this (see note, p. 467 Keil’s Intro.), Like
the book of Judges, a narrative. The contents contrast. At the close of the
satter a dark eclipse has fallen upon Israel; the last five chapters a history of
sinners and their sins. In the one, Israel seen asa declining nation; the other
shews the Gentile hope as enlarging. A connecting link between the book of
Judges and that of Samuel; yet a joyous transition from the former (Words-
worth). Carries the history of Israel into the house of David. Links the monarchy
with a more simple and primitive form of government. What is of more impor-
tance, traces the descent of Israel’s greatest king directly from Judah. Like
Esther, takes its title from the heroine. Both books link Jew and Gentile histories.
Its canonicity has never been questioned among the Jews. Has the superscrip-
tion of Cesar, the stamp of the Holy Spirit (Fuller). Not in the Codex Sinaiti-
cus. The Targum on Ruth only dates back as far as the seventh century. The
Arabic version is generally considered to have been made from the Peshito
Syriac.

(2.) According to modern Jews, Ruth holds a variable place smong the
Kethubim, or Hagiographa, that is, in the third class of O. T. writings, comprising
the Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther. This
owing to liturgical causes, as it was read from primitive times during the Feast of
Weeks, or Pentecost MRaschi and others connect this with the proclamation of the
kingdom of God among the nations; and as the custom dates back earlier than
the birth of our Lord, the fact is significant. Represents the O.T. aspect towards
the Gentiles. The Midrash explains that the law was given on Sinai to all nations,
only it was not accepted by them. In the letter the book of Ruth forms a
suitable introduction to the prophecies, in spirit it stands like the Psalms at the
gates of the Gospel.

(8.) Not quoted or referred to in the N.T., unless the genealogy in Matthew
is taken from it (comp. ch. iv. 18—22 with Matt. i.4—6). The language gene-
rally pure Hebrew, and that of a very simple type. So-called Chaldaisms ought
rather to be called archaisms, and are signs of antiquity and authenticity—
vestiges of the ancient colloquial language of Palestine (Wordsworth). One of
thes found in the book of Job, another in Judges (comp. Ruth i, 4, Judges xxi.
#3. Ruth i, 13, Job xxx. 24), They occur always in the dialogue, not in the

)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





narrative portions of the book. The narrative Hebrew is good (Dr. Pusey)
Sertain passages have a striking likeness to expression used in the book of
Camuel, The quotations in Ruth are only taken from the earlier books of
Scripture.


CONTENTS.


Matter, etc.—(4.) Consists of four chapters, eighty-five verses. Too simple to
admit of artificial divisions, the existing chapters supply a convenient method of
arrangement (Groser). May be divided into two parts: the first chapter shews
that many are the troubles of the righteous; the three last, that God delivereth
out of them all (Fuller). The four chapters may be called respectively, “ The
Famine,” ‘The Harvest Field,” ‘‘The Project,” ‘‘The Result” (Binney).
Like the book of Job, deals mainly with the history of an individual, and those
associated with her life. In Job the afflictions prevail throughout the book.
Not so here. With good reason the book is not called Naomi, or Boaz, or the
Descent of David, but Ruth (Lange). She is the heroine. No prophetess like
Deborah ; not a queen like Esther; but a simple Moabitish maiden, a gleaner in
the harvest fields, strong in her own simple purity. She is no saint, no devotee,
no prophetess, but a very woman, and a woman


“Not too bright and good
For human nature’s daily food.”— Werdswerth (queted im Cow),


The book celebrates the piety and loving faithfulness of a proselyte. Its heroisza
is that of the home and family. Does not preach by means of mighty deeds like
those of Gideon and Samson, but by acts of love (Lange). Contrasts as much
with the book of Esther (the only other book to which a woman’s name is attached)
as does the heroine with Deborah. Bertholdt and other neological writers treat both
books as fictions or parables.

Character.—(5.) A prose pastoral. Has some of the finest features of a
pastoral poem. A romantic, yet historic, Hebrew idyl (Steel and Terry). No
doubt a love story (Cox). A beautiful, because natural, representation of human
life (Hunter). Catholic tm its spirit. Sympathetic, not critical, A book of
reconcilation for those aliens who accept the true and living God. .


“The narrative displays no hatred towards foreigners, gives no prominence to the keen dis-
criminations of the Mosaic law against them, notwithstanding that they form the background of
' the story: does not blame the really well-disposed Orpah, although she turns back ; has not a

word of reprehension for the anonymous relative who refuses to marry Ruth ; but in contrast to
these facta it causes the blessing which lights upon Ruth to become known.” —Lange.


Deeply religious, yet domestic. A brief but exquisite story of hearth and home.
Abounds with felicitous pictures of Oriental village life. Simplicity of rural
manners beautifully depicted, not by a shadowy fiction, but inthe homely records
of affection and virtue (Eadie). Not the warrior or the king, but the farmer and
householder, find their prototypes here (Lange). The reader finds himself now in
the open field. now on the road, and anon among the assembly at the gate (Lange).
In style dramatic. He makes his rustics talk in rustic fashion (Lange). Yet
all this subdued, and with the finest moderation. A unique specimen of the art
which conceals art. This prose idyl far exceeds those laboured songs and
artificial delineations which grace the poetry of Greece and Rome ( Eadie).


“The book of Ruth is like some beautiful landscape of Claude, with its soft mellow hues of
quiet eventide, and the peaceful expanse of its calm lake, placed side by side with some stern
picture of Salvator Rosa, exhibiting the shock of armies and the storm of war; and receiving

2


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.


eS


more beauty from the chiaro-oscura of the contrast. Or if we may adopt another comparison,
derived from classical literature, the book of Ruth, coming next after the book of Judges, is like a
transition from the dark, terrific scenes of a tragedy of Aischylus, to the fresh and beautiful
landscapes of some pastoral idy] of Theocritus, transporting us to the rural Thalysia, or harvest-
home under the shade of elms and poplars, on the banks of the Halis, or to the flowery meadows
and sheep-walks on those of the Arethusa or Anapus.”— Wordsworth,


Simple, sometimes sorrowful, always touching. We have known strong and
rough voices break down with emotion in reading aloud some of the passages
(Kitto).* Occasionally becomes poetic in form as well as in substance. (See
ch. i. 16, 17; iv. 11, 12, and 14, 15, in Wordsworth.) A most artless and
inexpressibly charming picture of nature (Humboldt). The loveliest thing in the
shape of an epic or idyl which has come to us (Goethe).

Scope and Object—(1.) To teach the dignity and even sacredness of much we
call secular and commonplace in life.

(2.) To afford a salutary example of virtue in times of trial (Theodoret). The
moral encouraging to unselfish virtue (Speaker’s Com.). It gives us a beautiful
picture of female virtue, first shining in the midst of poverty, and then crowned
with felicity (Lawson).

(8.) To shew how conversant God is as to the private affairs of His people.
Lawson says, ‘‘ We find here that private families are as much the objects of the
Divine regard as the houses of princes.”

(4.) To prove the watchful care of God over such as fear and trust Him, as
well as His merciful providence towards the afilicted, the widow, and the fatherless

Eadie).
(5.) Ie portray the under-current of piety existing in households, even in times
of great national wickedness (Wordsworth).

(6.) To set forth the power of love to overcome all the alienations, hostilities,
and prejudices of nature, and of that second nature which we call habit (Cox).
The story of a woman’s love for a woman (Cox). Teaches that such love is
valued before God (Lange).

(7.) To.shew how a stranger, one of the hated house of Moab, may be exalted
because of her trust in God (Umbreit).

(8.) To teach that when men and nations are falling away from God, mission-

work is not at astandstill: a Ruth comes from Moab, and is joined to the
church of God (Wordsworth). ;

(9.) To typify the calling of the Gentiles in Ruth the Moabitess (Fuller). To
foretell that the Gentiles should be called in Christ (Topsell).

(10.) To exhibit the piety and faithfulness of David’s ancestors (Keil). Written
to do honour to David (Dr. Davidson).

(11.) To shew the pedigree of our Saviour, otherwise genealogists had been at
a loss for four or five descents in the deducing thereof (Fuller). Supplies con-
necting links in the chain of evidence that Shiloh came of Judah.

(12.) To contain as it were the inner side, the moral background, of the
genealogies which play 80 significant a part even in the Israelitish antiquity
(Auberlen). ‘

(18.) To typify in the marriage of Boaz and Ruth the espousal of the Church
to Christ (Bede.) So Chrysos., “ Ruth alienigena et Moabitis veniens, sub lege
Dei, ea egit que figuram gestarent Ecclesix venientis ex gentibus.” So Jerome,
‘‘ Christus est Sponsus, cui illa venit ex gentibus sponsa.” (Quoted in Words-
worth.) Spiritual and typical (Professor Bush). No mystical or allegorical sense
can be assigned to the history (Speaker's (0, a

(14.) Lo inculcate a man’s duty of marrying his kinswoman (Berthold and


© « Tt is said that Dr. Johnson once read the book of Ruth from MSS. toa company of fashionable
people in London. Whereupon their admiration was #o excited, that they requeste’ te know
where he had obtained so exquisite a story.” Braden.
8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
OMe Ay Ro aaa eye LI) RE TN OTT) Hod eS eT eee ae


other neological writers). The fact that Ruth’s descendants are represented ag
the children of Boaz rather than of Mahlon, her former husband, against this
view.


AUTHORSHIP AND CHRONOLOGY.


Authorship.—(7.) Like many other of the inspired books, the author’s name
is not inscribed, So far the custom is against giving the name. The Talmud
affirms that the book of Judges was written by Samuel, and treats this as an
appendix, Samuel is described as an historian (1 Chron. xxix. 29). This opinion
held among the rabbis, and adopted by Isidorus and other ancient commentators.
Not so Eichhorn, De Wette, Ewald, and many of the German critics. Dr. David-
son agrees with the latter, and thinks it is impossible to discover who was the
writer of the book. He that has a piece of gold of right weight, and stamped
with the king’s image, cares not to know who minted or coined it (Fuller).

Date of Composition.—(8.) Written after the crowning of Saul (chap. i. 1), at
a period considerably later than the circumstances it relates (chap. iv. 7). After
the birth of David, since he is mentioned twice. From internal evidence in a
time of peace, and in days singularly free from the bigoted and narrow spirit
which generally clings to Jewish history. Could not have been composed after
the birth of Solomon, or his name would have been added to the genealogies. The
prejudice against Moabitish women becomes so intense afterwards as to render it
extremely improbable such a book would either have been written, or if written
accepted in the canon of Hebrew Scriptures (see 1 Kings xi. 1; Hazara x. 10;
Neh. xiii. 1). Yet Bertheau, Davidson, and others ascribe its composition to the
days of Hezekiah, and even Ezra, because of what are thought to be Chaldaisms
in the more coloquial parts. This is extremely improbable, and held upon insuffi-
cient data. The book breathes the tone of David’s life and times (Cox). Is in
keeping with his sending his father and mother for safety into the land of Moab
(1 Sam. xxii. 3), and with his whole history. Evidently David was an important
personage to the writer ; probably the most important in the realm. Keil thinks
the book was not written before the culminating point of the reign of this great
king. It would be sufficient to say before the anointing by Samuel. Such a book
almost necessary to justify the act of the prophet in choosing the son of Jesse, to
the exclusion of Saul’s children. And what better justification than that of tracing
David's descent from Judah ? Tradition and internal evidence alike support this
view, as well as the testimony of the rabbis and the early fathers. Worthy of
notice, that no mention is made of David as being king in Ruth.

(9.) Keil puts an interval of 150 to 180 years between the events themselves
and the writing of the book; Pusey, 100 years ; and the former fancies the con-
tents were not drawn from oral tradition, but that the author may have had the
use of written documents. The reference to the custom of drawing off the shoe
as belonging to the “ former times ” (iv. 7, 8) in favour of the longer period.

Date of Events.—(10.) Josephus relates the history of Ruth immediately after
that of Samson, and even connects the narrative with the times of Eli. Cox
accepts this, and says we may be reasonably sure that the story was enacted while
Eli was judge. Bertheau places it in the latter part of the judges, and Keil advo-
cated this view at first, but afterwards argued in favour of an earlier date, pro-
bably in the days of Gideon. Bishop Patrick, with Hengstenberg and others,
inclines to this view, and points out that the only scarcity noticed in the book of
Judges was in the time of Gideon (comp. Ruth i. 1 with J udges vi.4d—6). The gene-
rality of the Jews assign it to the period of Ibzan’s government, the successor of
Jephthah, conceiving Ibzan is another name for Boaz, as both belong to Bethlehem.
(Wordsworth). Gantz adopts this, and notices the fact that Ibzan was the only judge
born at Bethlehem. Vorstius says in the days of Deborah and Barak. Usher assigna


4


\


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


the narratives to the still earlier days of Ehud, or more probably Shamgar; and
Lightfoot, following some eminent Jewish writers in general agreement with this,
places it between the third and fourth chapters of Judges. Matthew Henry says
it must have been towards the beginning of the judges’ time; for Boaz, who married
Ruth, was born of Rahab, who received the spies in the time of Josbua, Salmon,
the father of Boaz, fought under Joshua.

The only landmarks to guide to a decision are the general statement of Ruth
i. 1, that it was in the days when the judges ruled; and the genealogies found in
Ruth iv. and Matt. i., with such help as may be obtained from internal evidence.
The time of the judges generally estimated at about 400 to 450 years. (See
Judges xi. 26; Kings vi. 1; Acts xiii. 20.) Another school of critics calculate
from 800 to 850 years. Modern criticism is in favour of this latter view. 140
to 160 years left for the events related in the book of Judges (Speaker’s Com.).
Many of the events narrated possibly synchronous. Keil insists that the
Ammonitish and Philistine oppressions occurred not successively, but simultane-
ously. The condition of Israel under the judges similar to that of the Anglo-
Saxon kingdoms under the Heptarchy (Speaker’s Com.). Possibly Ehud, Jephthah,
and even Gideon contemporaries, local magistrates raised to pre-eminence in their
own particular districts. In every tribe the judge was the local magistrate. In
Deut. xvi. 18 it is said thou shalt make thee judges (shophetim) in all thy gates.
(See Lange’s Introduction to Judges, p. 4, and Speaker’s Com., pp. 118—120.)

(11.) Whatever the time between Joshua and David, it is spanned by four
generations in the genealogy—Salmon, Boaz, Obed, Jesse, the latter being possibly
an old man when David was born (1 Sam. xvii. 12). Usher thinks the ancestors
of Israel’s future king were blessed with extraordinary longevity. As the genea-
logy stands, Boaz is the grandfather of Jesse, and the son of Rahab, that is, if the
Rachab of Matt. i. is the Rahab of Ruth iv., and of this there is but little doubt.
Possibly some names of less famous ancestors are omitted, a common practice
among the Hebrews (variously estimated by those who adopt the longer chrono-
logy at from four to six, and even eight to ten). Lange, and those who placa
the events in the days of Samson or Eli, say it is not to be supposed that names
have fallen out between Boaz and Obed, or Obed and Jesse. The Scripture
language, however, as to the earlier links in the chain, precise and unusually
definite. Salmon begat Boaz of Rachab, and Boaz begat Obed of Ruth, the two
Gentile mothers being mentioned as well as the fathers. Dr. Davidson goes so
far as to say that “the scrupulous fidelity of the Jewish scribe is entirely of
modern growth,” and De Quincey says there is no correct system of chronology in
the Old Testament. Lither the genealogy is incomplete, or the chronology of
Usher. as derived from the book of Judges, wrong. é

(12.) From internal evidence the events must have taken place in a time of
spiritual declension and of famine,—a time of friendship with Moab, and possibly
of hostility to the Philistines. The way southward to Egypt, or westward to
Philistia not chosen, yet these were the usual granaries. Judges iil. presents us
with an eighteen years’ servitude under Moab, a revolt under Ehud, a conquest of
Moab, and a fourscore years’ rest, evidently from that direction, accompanied by
inroads from the Philistines on the west. (See Judges iii. 14—80, 81.)


GEOGRAPHY.


Scene.—(18.) At first Bothlehem, then Moab, then Bethlehem and the regions
around once again. Bethlehem, two short hours’ journey south of Jerusalem. The
most attractive and significant of all the world’s birthplaces (Schubert). Under
ordinary circumstances a fruitful land. Remarkably well watered in comparison
with «ther parts of Palestine (Benjamin of Tudela). Even in the proment plete A


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. owaP, i,
a
Palestine, deserves its old name. (See note on ch. i. ver 1.) Ritter says
“‘ Notwithstanding poor cultivation, the soil is fruitful in olives, pomegrantes,


almonds, figs, and grapes. Hepworth Dixon thus describes its present appear-
ance :—


“A string of ens, & few steep fields, much crossing of white roads—so many that the
point of Au ay be called the Place of Paths—a glen which drops by leaps and steps to the
great Cedron valley, makes the landscape. Yet the slope which is thus bound in by higher tops
and more barren crests, has a winning beauty of its own, a joyous promise of bread and fruit,
which puts it first among the chosen places of Judea. The old word Ephrath meant Place of
Fruit, the newer word Bethlehem meant House of Bread ; one following the other, as barley and
maize come after grapes and figs, and the sower of grain succeeds to the breeder of goats and
kine. The little bit of plain through which Ruth gleaned after the young men, together with
a level of stony ground here and there inthe glen toward Mar Saba, are the only corn lands

ing in the hill country of Judea for many a league. . .. The lovely green ridge of
Bethlehem is the scene of some of our most tender and gracious poems : the idyls of Rachel,
of Ruth, of Saul, of David, of Chimham, of J eremiah, of the Virgin-mother ; the subjects of
these poems being the foremost passages in Israel’s religious life.”—Dixon’s Holy Land.


Moab, on the other side, and S.BE. of the Dead Sea, from Bethlehem. A dis-
trict about forty miles long by twenty in width. In parts a luxuriant land when
cultivated. The uplands are very fertile and productive (Professor Palmer). Now
but scantily populated, but presenting evidences of former plenty and fertility,
Cox says :—


“The name of Moab stands in the Bible for three districts on the east of the Dead Sea, but
we can tell in which of these it was that Elimelech found a home and a grave, for one of these
districts is expressly called ‘The Field of Moab,’ which is the technical phrase used throughout
this book, while another was called “The Land of Moab,” and a third “The Dry,” ie., the Dry
Canton of Moab. This district or canton—the Field of Moab or Moab proper—has the preci-

ices which border the Dead Sea on its western limits, a semicircular sweep of hills on the east,
behind which lies the Arabian Desert ; on the north it is defended by the tremendous chasm
down which the river Arnon foams ; while on the south the two ranges between which it lies
run together, meet, and shut it in. It was a high tableland, dotted with cities, on which the


grass grew sweet and strong; and it has been in all ages, as it is even now, a favourite haunt
of pastoral tribes.


—— <>


CHAPTER L
THE EXILE AND THE RETURN.


CONTENTS.—A famine in the land of Israel.—Elimelech a wealthy Hebrem, descended of
an ancient and honourable house, goes down to the fields of Moab with his family. The
removal is followed by his death ; the marriage of his sons Mahlon and Chilion to Ruth and
Orpah, and their death.—At the end of ten years, Naomi his wife returning, dissuades her
two daughters from accompanying her Surther.—Orpah goes back, but Ruth continues with
Naomi.—The two come to Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest, and are received
with astonishment.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETIOAL NorEs,— Ver. 1. Now] Heb. y vau, and, The same intro-
copula between all the books of the O. T. so far, except in the opening of Deuteronomy, which
begins abruptly. Keil (1 Kings i. 1) says the use of this conjunction at the beginning of a
writing is a sure sign of its cont ection with another book. It came to pass in the days when
the judges ruled (judged). 7 The imperfect with vau consec, simply attaches itself to a com-
pleted action, which has either been mentioned before, or is supposed to be well known (Lwald),
Assigns a particular period. Shows also a different state of things [monarchy] existed around
the writer. Time of the judges generally a troubled time. Spent to a large extent under the
usurpation of neighbouring nations. Towards its end Israel had fearfully degenerated (Judges
xxi. 25). Does not necessarily imply a judge ruled when Elimelech left the country
(Lawson), A famine in the land] Threatened, Ley. xxvi, 19, 20; Deut. xxviii. 23,24, Re.
cognised as a Divine instrument of punishment, 2 Sam. xxiy. 13,14; Ezek. v.16; Amos iv.
6,7. That it did not extend to Moab favours this idea. Said by some to have been caused
by an incursion of the Midianites (see Judges vi. 3, 4) by the Philistines (Cor). Josephus says
it was in the days of Eli (see Intro., par. 10—12). Solomon’s prayer concerning famine (1 Kings
viii, 35—37). Christians’ duty during (Acts xi, 28). A more terrible fomine (Amos ¢iii. Le

6


onar. 1 L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
ne,


when men shall seek the word of God, and shall not find it. And a certain man

And a man) of Bethlehem-Judah] To distinguish it from another Bethlehem in Zebulon
.Means, House of Bread. Ancient name Ephrata (fruitful), though this may have applied te
the district as far as Jerusalem. Now called Beit-Lahm, or Beit-el-ham (Mansford). Rachel
died here. David and Christ born here. Hepworth Dixon advances the theory that both
may have been born in the house which is mentioned ch, iii. 3. (See note on that verse; also
Dixon’s “Holy Land.”) References to Bethlehem in the book of Judges mournful ones
(xvii. 7, xix, 1,2). The turn of the narrative heve same as in the former (Speaker’s Com-
mentary). Favours the idea that the writer was the same. Went to sojourn] Expresses
correctly the meaning of the Heb., which signifies “to tarry as a stranger in a place.” Isaac
was forbidden this method of relief from famine (Gen. xxvi. 2), when he would have followed
the example of Abraham in going down to Egypt (Gen. xii. 10). Israelites generally much
attached to their own land. In the country (field or fields) of Moab] Bertheau maintains,
we have in “jp only another way of writing mw the singular (ver. 6). Keil, Gesenius,
Fiirst, look upon it as a form of the plural. The same style of expression used of Moab
(Gen. xxxvi. 35; Num. xxi. 20; 1 Chron. i, 46). Moab connected with Israelites in the daya
of Ehud (Judges iii. 12—20). Continued to be an asylum for them (comp, 1 Sam. xxii. 3, 4;
Isa. xvi. 34; Jer. xl. 11,12). Israelites held places of trust there (1 Chron. iv. 22, 23).
David sent his father and mother there. Moabites descendants of Lot (Gen. xix. 37), and
worshippers of Chemosh. Their inheritance spared to them by command of God, when Israel
entered into the land. This may account for the friendship with Israel, and in favour of the
earlier date ascribed by Lightfoot and others to book of Ruth (see Intro., par. 10,12), Moabites
not admitted into the congregation of the Lord until the tenth generation, on account of their
disgraceful origin. For description, etc., see Intro., par. 14, He, and his wife, and his two
sons] Sarah went with Abraham (Gen. xii. 18) into Egypt. Rachel and Leah left their
country with Jacob, The family of importance (ch, ii and iii.), well known in Bethlehem
(ch i, 19, and iv. 1). See notes on ver. 2.


—+—


CHAPTER I.—VERSE 1.
HOMILIES AND OUTLINES.
Theme.—TuHeE Famine AND EXILE.


Now [and] i came to pass. Simple phrases bear the marks of # nation’s way
of thinking. Language has been called fossil thought, poetry. Here the Hebrew
faith in an overruling hand. Not by chance, but by the orderly unfolding of
events. A common scriptural form of introduction; simple, dignified, yet how
much it may express.

I. View it simply as a statement of facts. (a) These things happened. The
phrase introductory to a remarkable life ; singled out from many others. Much not
considered worthy of record. Lives of which the Scripture takes no note, written
in the record kept until the last great day. Events which have dropped even
from the pages of inspired history. Note: When God is silent, it is not wise to
speak (Welsh Proverb).

‘But these things come within the scope of revelation—(a) for wise purposes.
God saw fit to transmit the knowledge of them for our edification (2 Tim. ii. 16).
Paul bids us look to Christ, yet learn of those who through faith and patience,
ete. (Heb. vi. 12). (8) For gracious purposes. Here are links in the chain, and the
end is Christ. ‘The way leads through Moab back again to Betulehem.

(b) These things happened by the hand and providence of God. The theocratic
aspect is not prominent in the book of Ruth (Davidson). But it is there. A
special hand of God in all this business, beyond man’s purpose and thought (R.
Bernard). The story of Ruth is an impertinence in Scripture, unless we believe
in a special providence. This everywhere taken for granted in the Divine word.
God in profane history, much more then in sacred. God in every life. The
very absence of what is called the religious element has its significance. The
book beautifully enforces what Wordsworth calls “natural piety.” But more
particularly amid these seemingly commonplace events a Divine purpose and
plan. ‘‘ While the judges were ruling, some one city, and some another, Pro-


4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH, OHAP, I, 1.


vidence takes particular cognizance of Bethlehem, and has an eye to a King, to
Messiah Himself” (M. Henry).

II. See in it a subtle connection between cause and effects.

In those days of ungodliness this happened. The judges ruled, but every man
did right in his own eyes (Judges xxi. 25). Religion corrupted, worship decayed,
idolatry common; and here are the results. When sin is ripe, vengeance is
ready.

Notice (a) National life affects individual history. We cannot separate ourselves
from our surroundings ; are members one of another in many senses, We prosper
or we suffer together in times of Divine visitation.

(b) Life as it stands towards God influences life as tt stands towards men. All
life an unfolding, a coming to pass. But how? Look for the seeds within,
around, in the past; but look above for the hand overruling and bringing to pass.
God of His most dear justice hath decreed the sum of all discipline (Cyprian).
Divine law in the natural world immutable, so in the spiritual. The world of
morals sways the sceptre over the world of circumstances. Every other view
of life practical atheism. Do we believe it? rather, do we live as though we
believed it? In prosperity we are commonly like hogs feeding on the mast, not
minding his hand that shaketh it down; in adversity, like dogs biting the stone,
not marking the hand that threw it (Fuller).

Improvement. By-and-by our life will be summed up in this short sentence,
“It came to pass;” the pilgrimage a road with many turnings, but all mapped
out. The “to be” will be the ‘‘has been.” And to what issues? Doubtless a
link in some chain or other. Ruth’s is joined to Israel’s, to David’s, to Christ’s.
A Gentile from the outer darkness brought within the hope of Israel. Gospel
mercy foreshadowed so far back in the unfolding of events. In God’s time, “ it
came to pass.” Fuller says, ‘‘ To typify the calling of the Gentiles, as He took
of the blood of a Gentile into His body, so He should shed His blood out of His
body for the Gentiles, that there might be one Shepherd and one sheepfold "—a
quaint conceit, but enshrining precious truth. The ingathering had begun to
work itself out in this ‘‘coming to pass.” The ingathering is going on now. How
do we stand as towards it? Linked with Israel’s hope, or —? What is the life
unfolding? A history of one whom God has chosen, and who has chosen God ?
or the sad story of one who has wandered into strange lands, leaving behind him
the home and the sanctuary of his fathers—wandered to die amid his wanderings ?
or the story of one who did run well for awhile like Orpah? Which is it ?


“Tt is our fault that we look upon God’s
ways and works by halves and pieces; and so
we see often nothing but the black side. ...
We see Him bleeding His people, scattering
parliaments, chasing away nobles and pre-
lates, as net willing they should have a finger
in laying one stone of His house; yet do we
not see that in this dispensation the other
half of God’s work makes it a fair piece ?”"—
Rutherford.

“ Life is all one unfolding, as of some quaint


manuscript which now we may not be able
to decipher, but which by-and-by will prove
itself to the righteous a new Scripture full
of the benedictions of God.”—B,

“ The curtains of yesterday drop down, the
curtains of to-morrow roll up, but yesterday
and to-morrow both are. Time and space
are not God, but creations of God. With
God, as itis a universal HERE, eo is it an
everlasting Now.”—Carlyle.


Theme.—Tue Brcinnine or Sorrows.


In the days when the judges ruled [judged], a famine, eto.


God takes the events into His own hands.


too is holding the balances.


The times were evil.


While the judges are judging, God
Six long servitudes, at least,


mark the Divine displeasure at Israel’s sin. Sin deprived angels of heaven, Adam
vf Paradise, Cain of his honour, Reuben of his birthright, thousands of the land


of Canaan (RB. Bernard).


Now it deprives Israel of food. A blessing promised on


their lead, their basket and their store, ag long as they walked in His law (Lev.


cHaPp. 1. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


xxvi. 8—5; Deut. xxviii. 5). Evidently they had departed from that law. And
now the presence of the godly in the land cannot avert the evil, as at Sodom.
The fact that there are children in the households of Israel does not stay the
Divine hand as at Nineveh. No place is exempt, not even Bethlehem. The rich
suffer with the poor, for Elimelech belonged to a wealthy and honourable family.

See in this, I. Designed punishment, Shall there be evil in a city, and the
Lord hath not done it? God has many arrows in His quiver; the land may have
rest, but it has not plenty (M. Henry). Famine, the peculiar instrument used—a
very terrible one. David preferred the pestilence (2 Sam. xxiv. 14). But no
choice is given here,

Notice (a) God’s judgments come in a very natural way. The wonted streams
dry up possibly from very apparent causes—easy to understand, easy to explain.
A drought or an inroad of the enemy may have caused this. But beyond natural
causes, another reason—behind Nature, Gop. He turns a fruitful land into barren-
ness, because of the wickedness of them that dwell therein (Ps. evii. 84).

(b) There is always something special in them worthy our attention. Esau, de-
spising his birthright, lost it. Lot, led of his lust into Sodom, had to leave behind
all for which he lusted. Judas perished ‘‘in the midst” of the field he had pur-
chased with the price of blood. (See Alford on Acts i. 8.) A sad irony often in
the history of sinners and their sins. So here, a famine in the land flowing with
milk and honey! No bread in Bethlehem, the house of bread! And more,
Moab has plenty while Israel is pinched with penury.

(c) There is always a reason which stands out in connection with them. God had
said expressly He would deal with Israel after this fashion. Famine was to be to
them one especial mark of His displeasure (Lev. xxvi. 19, 20). Moab may have
ease, not so Israel (Jer. xv. 11, xlviii. 11); for Moab is as the unregenerate, his
taste for earthly enjoyment and sensual gratification unchanged. The wicked
have their portion in this life, but Christ says woe to them (Luke vi. 25; Amos
vi. 1). And Paul reasons of such, ‘‘ Then are ye bastards, and not sons.”

See in this, II. Necessary discipline. Chastisement meant discipline with
Israel. Jehovah explains the weary wilderness privations as intended “ to prove
thee, to know what was in thine heart.” This famine has a like explana-
tion (Judges ii. 20—22), if it resulted either from a Midianitish or Philistine
invasion, as is probable. (See Notes and Intreduction.) The prodigal child was
brought from the keeping of harlots to the keeping of hogs (Fuller), And why ?
The ‘*I will arise’ explains and justifies “the hungering in a far country.” So
always. Christ for mere trial sometimes, for sin at other times, doth cover
Himself with a cloud (Rutherford). Whatever the reason, the Divine purpose the
same—discipline. ‘

(a) Notice the different forms this discipline may take, as illustrated by the narra-
tive. Want, scarcity of provisions, possibly hunger, and these leading to loss of
worldly possessions and the family patrimony, absence from the sanctuary, wan-
derings in strange lands, years of exile, death to most of them in a foreign land.
A similar epitome might be made of many a family history—


« They grew in beauty side by side,
They filled one home with glee;
Their graves are scattered far and wide,
By mount and stream and sea.” —Mrs. Hemana,


(b) Notice the severity of this particular form. Hunger a most trying test. Any
kind of deprivation is. The same cause sent Abraham and Jacob into Egypt,
Isaac to Gerah. Even Christ must feel its pangs when He is led into the wilder-
ness to be tempted. : ; é

Improvement. The dispensations of Providence strange—sovereign, even puni-
tive. Can we see this other thing, that they are disciplinary (‘Whom the Lord
loveth,” ete., Heh. xii. 6), and may be beneficial? This last aspect oe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





onAP, I. L





largely upon ourselves. He is dealing with us in one way or other. If not by
famine, then by our very abundance; if not by plenty, then perhaps by penury.
And to what effect? Driving us towards Moab; away from the sanctuary ; away
from all that links us with the people of God? There is this sad possibility, and


the narrative which follows may warn us of this.


Or ripening us for that land


where there is no hunger? tribulation working patience, etc. (Rom. v. 8).


Topsell treats the passage—


I. That the corruption of religion and the neglect of the worship of God is
the cause of all His judgments.
II. That the Lord is true in His judgments as in His mercies (Deut. xxviii.
28, 24; Ps. cxlv. 17; 2 Thess. i. 6).


Bernard—


I. That people deprive themselves by their sins, of that which God had
_ given, and they enjoyed, according to His promise.
I. That a fruitful land is made barren for the sins of the inhabitants


thereof.


III. That judgment begins at the house of the Lord.
Faller derives the following uses [lessons] :—
I. Let us practise that precept, ‘Babes, keep yourselves from idols”


(1 John v. 21).


II. Let us be heartily thankful to God for our plenty.
Ill, Let us pray with David, ‘Deliver us from blood-guiltiness.”
IV. Let us be pitiful and liberal to relieve the distresses of the poor.


© Burckhardt states that in Nejd in Arabia
famines like these recur at intervals of from
ten to fifteen years.”— Wordsworth.

“The Athenian women had acustom to
make a picture of famine every year, and to
drive it out of their city with these words:
‘Out famine, in food; out penury, in
plenty!’ But let us say in word, and
second it in deed, ‘Out sin, in sanctity; out
profaneness, in piety:’ and then we shall
see that as long as our king reigneth, there
shall be no famine in our land... . . Is this
the land whereof it is said, ‘Asher his bread
shall be fat, and afford dainties for a king’
(Gen. xlix. 20), which is called ‘a good
land of wheat and barley, ‘vineyards and
fig trees, oil, olive, and honey’ (Deut. viii.7);
which is commended (Ezek. xx. 6) to be ‘a
land flowing with milk and honey, theglory of
all lands’?... The people’s hard hearts were
rebellious to God, and the hard earth proved
unprofitable tv them ; their flinty eyes would
afford no tears to bemoan their sins, and the
churlish heavens would afford no moisture
to wake their earth ; man proved unfaithful
to God his Maker; the earth proved unfaith-
ful to man her manurer,.”—/Fuller.

“Think not that the fertility of a land is
able to secure its inhabitants against famine,
or that any earthly advantage is sufficient to
secure us against any calamity whatsoever,


_ which she held him,


All things are in the hands of God, and His
creatures change their qualities or effects at
His pleasure.”— Lamson.

“A clear and striking proof that here is no
continuing city or place of abode, and shews
the necessity of our seeking a city which hath
foundations, the builder and maker of which
is God. For if a man be ever so agreeably
situated in the midst of plenty, Divine Pro-
vidence can soon drive him from his Test, and
reduce him to the disagreeable necessity of
depending upon the bounty of even the wicked
themselves, who are, like Moab, for ever shut
out from the sanctuary of Jehovah.”—j/ac-
gowan.

“When afflictions fail to have their due
effect, the case is desperate.” — Bolingbroke.

“Suffering seasons have generally been
sifting seasons, in which the Christian hae
lost his chaff, and the hypocrite his courage,”
—Secher,

“There is a deep truth contained in the
fabled story of old, where a mother, wishing
to render her son invulnerable, plunged him
into the Styx, but forgot to dip in his heel, by

We are baptized in the
blood and fire of sorrow, that temptation
may make us invulnerable; but let us re-
member that trials will assail us in our most
vulnerable part, be it the head, or heart, or
heel.” —Robertson,


Theme.—Tue DEPARTURE FRoM Hom.


* Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon
The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide.” — Milton,


And a certain man of Bethlehem went to sojourn in the country [fields] of Moab.
An exile leaving Bethlehem, like Dante leaving his beloved Florence, To this
10


CHAP. I. 1, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





man also munquam revocare. He dies in exile. God’s providences often unex-
plained in this life—await the clearer light of eternity. Some blame Elimelech’s
going to Moab. Possibly self-exiled. But no man ought to be condemned without
proofs of guilt, and no certain proofs appear in the present case (Lawson).
Israelites were not prohibited sojourning in a strange land. David dwelt in Gath.
Sent his father and mother for protection into Moab. What if a kindred necessity
impelled Elimelech ?

I. Suggests the mutability of human affairs, (a) We must expect changes i
this world, changes which make life Mara (ver. 20). While Moab is at ease, Israel
is to be poured from vessel to vessel. Elimelech an Israelite, and they were
much attached to their land—dwelt in the most fertile part of the country, pro-
bably a rich man (see notes), and yet in his old age he must become a wanderer.
No condition of life, no circumstances, no experience, can exempt us. (b) We
cannot always dwell where we wish. David must sojourn in the tents of Kedar,
leave city and palace behind, and flee to the wilderness. El must go down to
Moab, Joseph to Egypt. Nay, touches the holiest: Christ Himself a wanderer,
“not having where to lay His head.”

II. Presents a picture of restlessness under affliction.

Sight, not faith, guides Elimelech. The sublime trust which waits upon God
in these hours of peril seemingly absent. The promise to Israel, ‘‘ Thou shalt eat
bread without scarceness” (Deut. vill. 9). Tous, ‘Rest in the Lord; wait
patiently for Him; verily thou shalt be fed’’ (Ps. xxxvii. 8,7). ‘*In the days of
famine thou shalt be satisfied” (ver. 19).

Outward appearances against the promises. Faith weak—he went down to Moab.
Some suggest desire after gain led him. Dr. Cumming thinks that he fled from
the sight of poverty and want around him. He went out ‘‘full.” Certainly
strong reasons demanded for a change like this. Otherwise God says to such,
*‘ Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy ways?” (Jer. ii. 36.)

Restlessness a very common sin. At the first approach of trial men grow im-
patient; seek a change in outward circumstances, or in doctrine; become
offended even with Christ Himself (John vi. 66).

Note.—One single restraint made Adam a wanderer from God, (See outlines
on ver. 2.)

And III. May illustrate spiritual declension.

Elimelech a wealthier man than many of his neighbours, who bore the brunt of
famine rather than expose their children to the seductions of heathen license
(Cow). If all should do as he did, Canaan would be dispeopled (M. Henry).
What was the cause in his case? Did he value the sanctuary privileges less, or
the good things of this world more than they ?

Note a principle in this. Men go down to Moab,

(a) Because the promised land itself seems to yield them scanty supplies. The
narrow way not attractive in itself. A gospel that says by the mouth of its
Master, ‘ Sell all that thou hast,”’ and by one of its chief apostles, ‘‘ Silver and
gold have I none”—a service which demands honesty, though honesty should
prove to be other than the best policy—truthfulness, though truth be an offence—-
must seem meagre in its rewards, alas to how many! They follow for awhile,
charmed by the novelty of Christ’s kingdom. Sooner or later He is seen as ‘“ one
not having where to lay His head,” a ‘‘root out of a dry ground.” Human
nature asks large things (2 Kings v. 13). His gospel has chosen the weak things
and things which are not (1 Cor. ii. 27, 28). Scanty supplies a great secret of
spiritual declension.

(b) Because of the rich abundance inviting them there. Possibly pinched by
famine, and in all probability fearing to lose his flocks and herds, the rich grass
lands on the other side of the Dead Sea proved irresistible to this man. Lot
went down to dwell among the wicked cities of the plain for similar reasons—led
of his own spirit and of his own judgment. To both men the journey was as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





x


disastrous as it was tempting. So Judas, Demas.


‘cHar. tL





Abundance is not everything.


The world may seem to have it, does seem to have it even to the righteous (see


Psalms xxxvii. 35, Ixxiiil. 5, 7, 12).
seck it.
Sodom ‘‘as by fire.”


* sorrowful.”


Elimelech goes down to Moab to die there.
The young man who came to our Lord went away


A blight always upon it when the righteous


Lot has to escape from


Fuller observes: ‘‘It is lawful for men to leave their native soil, and to travel


into a foreign country ; as—


L For merchants, provided always that, while they seck to make gainful
adventures for their estates, they make not ‘shipwreck of a good


conscience.’


Il. For ambassadors, that are sent to see the practices and negotiations in


foreign courts.


Ill. For private persons that travel with an intent to accomplish them-
selves with a better sufficiency to serve their king and country.”


Bernard observes:


I. No place is exempt from punishment, where sin is suffered to reign,
II. God can remove, by one means or another, men out of their homes and


harbour.


No man may think himself securely settled.


III. Fear of corporal wants will make men leave their homes, their native


soil, their friends and kindred.


How much more, then, for the love


of eternal life, should we be willing to forsake all!”


Topsell—We note,


I. It is lawful for the godly, in the time of necessity, to crave help or
relief of the very enemies of God, so they be not polluted with their


superstitions.


Ii. That the Lord doth ever provide for His faithful servants in all their


miseries.


Joseph sent beforehand to provide for his brethren (Gen.


xlv. 45); Obadiah, who hid fifty of the prophets, and fed them in a
eave (1 Kings xviii. 18); Elijah provided for (1 Kings xvii. 4—10;


see also 2 Cor. iv. 8, 9).


“When we go from home, it depends en-
tirely on the will of God whether we shall
arrive at the place of our destination. When
we are in it, it depends no less cn the Divine
pleasure whether we shall ever again see the
place from which we went out. ‘A man’s
heart deviseth his way, but the Lord directeth
hia steps,’ Beware of bringing upon your-
selves the punishment that came upon the
proud king of Babylon, because he did not
glorify that God in whose hand his breath
‘was, and whose were all his ways. Do not
say that to-morrow you will go into such a
city, and buy, and sell, and get gain, Say
rather if the Lord will.”—Zawson.

“Tt is an evidence of a discontented, dis-
trustful, unstable spirit, to be weary of the
place in which God has set us, and to be for
1eaving it immediately whenever we meet
with any uneasiness or inconvenience in it,
It is a folly to think of escaping that cross
which, being laid in our way, we ought to
take up. It is our wisdom to make the best
of that which is, for it is seldom that changing
our place is mending it.”—Matt. Henry.

“Now if any do demand of me my opinion
concerning our brethren, which of late left
this kingdom to advance a plantation in New
England, surely I think as St. Paul said con-
serning virgins, he had ‘received no come

1%


mandment of the Lord;’ so I cannot find
any just warrant to encourage men to under-
take this removal; but think rather the
counsel best that King Joash prescribed to
Amaziah, ‘ Tarry at home.’ Yet, as for those
that are already gone, far be it from us to
conceive them to be such to whom we may
not say ‘God speed.’ I conclude, therefore,
of the two Englands, what our Saviour saith
of the two wines (Luke y, 39), ‘No man
having tasted of the old presently desireth
the new; for he saith, The old is better,’ ”—:
Fuller,


“The merchant, having obtained his bank,
promiseth rest and security to himself; the
husbandman, having gathered his fruits, never
doubteth but he shall spend them, and pro-
videth for more; the gentleman, coming to
his lands, thinketh his revenues and pleasant
life will endure alway, like the apostles when
Christ was transfigured in the Mount, pre-
sently they would build tabernacles of resi-
dence; but as the cloud came betwixt them
and heaven, and bereaved them of their pur-
pose, even so suddenly will death come and
deprive you of your profits, call the merchant
from his: bank, the husbandman from his
farm, the gentleman from his land, the prince
from his kingdom.”-—Topsell.

“Sometimes it dimly dawns upon us. wher


cHap. 1. 1.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.





we see other men’s mischiefs and wrongs,
that we are in the same category with them,
and that perhaps the storms which have
overtaken them will overtake us also. But
it is only for a moment; for we are artful to
cover the ear, and not listen to the voice that
warns us of our danger.”—Beecher.


‘“ What is this passing scene?
A peevish April day !
A little sun, a little rain,
And then night sweeps along the plain,
And all things fade away.
Man (soon discussed)
Yields up his trust,
And all his hopes and fears lie with him
in the dust.
Then since this world is vain,
And volatile and fleet,

Why should I lay up earthly joys,
Where dust corrupts, and moth destroys,
And cares and sorrows eat?

Why jly from ill
With anxious skill,
When soon this hand will freeze, this
throbbing heart be still?”
Kirke White.

«‘ There are evils worse than famine. What
is the real misfortune of life? sin or want
of food? sickness or selfishness? And when
I see Isaac (Gen. xxvi.) gaining from his
want of food the heart to bear up and bear
right onward, I can understand that the land


of famine may be the land of promise, and
just because it is the land of famine.”—
Robertson.

“People do not leave their country for a
mere whim. To forsake the homestead where
the boys were born, to bid farewell to familiar
well-tried friends, to leave the spot made
sacred by religious worship, for a heathen
country—it is hard! very hard! Elimelech
and Naomi must have felt this. .... These
involuntary emigrants hoped to return speedily
—when times were better. Little did they
dream that three out of the four would be
lying in their graves before ten years had
passed. Their farewell was a Snal one. Oh!
these plans of ours, what folly they appear to
us when we look back to see how one touch
hasruined them all! Our designs always need
‘if the Lord will’ written right across the
face of them.”— Braden.

“ One month in the school of affliction will
teach thee more than the great precepts of
Aristotle in seven years; for thou canst
never judge rightly of human affairs, unless
thou hast first felt the blows and found out
the deceits of fortune.” —Fudler.

“Probably this family held on, trusting
that prosperity would again smile; but it
came not, and hope faded away. What were
they todo? Terrible question! Crops gone,
cattle gone; starvation stared them in the
face,”—Braden.


Theme.—F amity CHANGES.


“ Urged by remembrance sad, and decent pride,
Far from those scenes which knew their better days.’


He, and his wife, and his two sons.


Touches the whole household. The children bear the burden as well as their


parents.


In times of scarcity, the family a heavy burden. Christ uses this as an


extreme case, “‘ Woe to them that are with child and give suck in those days!”


(Matt. xxiv. 19.)


We have here, I. Animportant step in the family history. Not lawful unless
there had been a public calamity or some great private necessity (Maimonides).


Nothing but necessity can dispense with
pleasure, nor profit, nor curiosity (Bishop Hall).


a local relinquishing of God’s church, not


In moments like these, go not


before God and Providence, but follow Him (Rutherford).


II. A united household in these trying times. ) 0
Nothing can separate those whom God has joined.


of the greatest distresses.


Domestic union in the midst


Grace finds its most appropriate sphere in the family life. Husbands and wives


who aim at separate interests reproved here.
She was one of those wives whose law is their


land. Saw the necessity.


Naomi willing to go even to a strange


husband’s will in all things wherein the laws of God leave them at liberty
(Lawson). A man and his wife should be like the two wheels of a chariot (Hindoo


Proverb).


III. A parent’s responsibility in these critical changes.
Elimelech’s conduct were not confined to himself.
No man lives to himself, sins to himself.

His care for his wife and children to be commended (1 Tim. v. 8).
for themselves (Job xxxix. 16).


or suffered by it.


leave them as the ostrich, to care


The results of
His children either gained


Did not
He acted


kindly, did he act wisely ? One thing certain, his responsibility was ae by
ae 3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP, I, 2,


i ee oe
going down to Moab, where temptation was sure to assail his children. Possible
to live like Joseph in Pharaoh’s court, but how difficult!


‘All worship not at idol feasts,
Whose lot it is to live in idol lands,”


David in his exile.
how few come out untainted !


Daniel and the three Hebrew children in Babylon.
Lot’s children seem to have carried the defilement


But


with them when they left Sodom (Gen. xix.).
This man went to sojourn, not to stay. ‘God did not forsake him. The wan-
derers were fed. Josephus speaks of his ‘happy prosperity’ in the land of


Moab.
He died there.


There is a law of compensation, however, in connection with all this.
His children married Moabitish women, and then died in exile.


His wife returned empty to that place she had left (ver. 21).


“The religious man may be considered in
his family as the key-stone to the arch.”—
Salter.

“Ts such a man a Christian?” was asked
of Whitefield. ‘“ How should I know?” was
the answer ; “I never lived with him.”

“The very tigress fostereth her young, and
the helpless hen gathereth her chickens under
her wings, and exerts the full extent of her
feeble powers in their defence.”—Macgowan.

“The godly in old time knew that their
wives and children were as themselves; and
as they were careful to cherish their own
bodies, so they were mindful to nourish their
own families.” —TZopsell.

“An honest man careth for his wife and
children as weil as for himself.”— Bernard.

“We see the flesh of fishes remaineth fresh,
though they always swim in the brackish
waters,” —Fuller,

“If Elimelech had made inquiry, it is pre-
bable he would have found plenty in some of
the tribes of Israel; and if he had had that


zea] for God and His worship, and that af- -


fection for his brethren which became an
Israelite, he would not have persuaded
himself so easily to go and sojourn in Moab,”
—WM. Henry.

“Life is the first thing. God wishes no
‘man to starve; and if his circumstances are
such that, by remaining in them, he must
suffer want and death, his path is clear—he
taust depart. Bishop Hall quaintly says,
‘The Creator and Possessor of the earth hath
not confined any man to his necessary de-
struction.’ It may be our duty, in order to
save ourselves from pecuniary difficulties, to
sever the dearest ties.”— Braden,


“Now the devil knoweth that this is a
blow at the root, and a ready way to prevent
the succession of churches; if he can subvert
families, other sovieties and communities will
not long flourish and subsist with any power
and vigour; for there is the stock from
whence they are supplied both for the pre-
sent and future.”—Janton.

“Families are societies that must be sancti-
fied to God, as well as churches; and the
governors of them have as truly a charge of
the souls that are therein, as pastors have of
churches. But, alas! how little is this con-
sidered or regarded! But while negligent
ministers are (deservedly) cast out of their
places, the negligent masters of families take
themselves to be almost blameless, The y
offer their children to God in baptism, and
there they promise to teach them the doctrine
of the gospel, and bring them up in the nur-
ture of the Lord; but they easily promise
and easily break it; and educate their children
for the world and the flesh, although they
have renounced these, and dedicated them to
God. This covenant-breaking with God, and
betraying the souls of their children to the
devil, must lie heavy on them here and here-
after. They beget children and keep families
merely for the world and the flesh; but little
consider what a charge is committed to them,
and what it is to bring up a child for God,
and govern a family as a sanctified society.”
— Westminster Confession of Faith.

“ Home is the chief school of human virtue.
Its responsibilities, joys, sorrows, smiles,
tears, hopes, and solicitudes form the chief
interest of human life,” — Channing


—g_
VERSE 2.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL Notrs.— Ver, 2, And the name of the ma:
A descendant of Nahshon mentioned in connection with the erectio
According to Jewish doctors,
with “ melech” (king) borne by distinguish
king (Keil). My God is King (Lange). My G
worth). Josephus calls him Abimelech. Nao
Vulg., Noemi; Old Eng. trans. Noemi]. According to Talmudists, niece of
of the tribe of Judah, and daughter of his brother Salmon (?).
delight (Wright) ; pleasant, gracious (Gesen.) ; the lovely gracious o

Mahlon, more correctly Machion, the husband of
| gs (Gesen.); the weakly (Keil);
ik


(Numb. i. 7).


(Josephus).


a noble and potent person.


n (was) Elimelech,
n of the tabernacle
All names ending
persons (Lange). Means to whom God is


od is my King (Cow). God is King ( Words-
mi, more correctly Noomi [LXX. N wep ;


Naason, prince
Means my pleasure or
ne (Lange); happiness
Ruth. Means sicknesg


consumption ( V. Henry). Not go ( Lange);


cnap. 1. 2. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





rather derived from ‘yp (machol) “circle dance,” Greek choros, and so may mean joy.
Chilion, more correctly Kilion. (Sept., Xedatwy; Josephus, Xe\\wv); means pining (Keil),
destruction (Wright). Not so; should be referred to 5$>, to crown, and so means ornament
(Lange) Ephrathites of Bethlehem-Judah. Some of the older J ewish teachers not inappro-
priately render “ Ephratim ” by evyeveorarot [high-born] (Lange). Shews these were natives
of the city or district around Bethlehem, not mere residents (comp. 1 Sam, xvii. 12; Judges
xvii. 7). The place honourably distinguished, and Jesus Himself called an Ephrathite of
Judah in Micah v. 2. Euphrates, Ephraim (Gen. xl. 52), words having a similar derivation
and meaning. (See also notes on ver. 1.) The Epbraimites called Ephrathites (Judges xii,
5: 1 Sam. i. 1; 1 Kings xi. 26) (Wright), And they came into the country [field] of Moab,
and continued there [literally. were there; Old Eng., abode there]. The Targum adds, and
were there as princes. The route supposeu to be down the Wady Sudier to Engedi, and then
round the S.E, shores of the Dead Sea, as with modern travellers. Moab not so large ag
Huntingdonshire, and not so far from Bethlehem as is Huntingdon from London (Cow),


Theme.—Man Proposinc, Gop Disposine.


“ And the name of the man (was) Elimelech, . . . . Ephrathites of,” ete.

Names give an air of truth to the narrative (Lawson). Express in @ very
touching manner parental hopes and faith. Of especial significance among the
early Hebrews. A really good name of unspeakable service to all who are
capable of feeling its aspiration (Dr. J. Hamilton). But sometimes given in vain,
When contrasting with the character, a continual humiliation.

Suggests, I. That however others may propose, the final issues of life
are with God and with the man himself.

These names remarkably significant and suggestive. But in what way?
Elimelech means “ my God is King,” and yet some take his life as illustrating
the feelings and conduct of the spiritnally dead; others, of the backslider driven
by momentary trials from God’s ordinances down to Moab. Note (a) the irony of
a good name when men fall short of its promises, At the present day, men baptized
Martin Luther by their Protestant parents are found ministering at the altar of
Rome (Braden. See extracts), Naomi means pleasure, delight, happiness, and
yet she comes at best to be an illustration of sanctified affliction. Possibly the
names of the whole family pitched in this exultant key (see notes), and yet their
experience is in sad contrast.

(6) Events as they unfold often make vain all human forecastings. Even parental
love not always prophetic. The name given with many fond anticipations,
perhaps with much heart searching and prayer. That is all the human can do—
the rest is in the hands of God.

The local designation of these Hebrews enforces similar lessons. They were
Ephrathites of Bethlehem-Judah, a title as honourable as any an Israelite could
desire. And yet under stress of circumstances Bethlehem-Judah changes to Moab,
Ephrathites (probably meaning ‘‘ high-born ”’) to exiles.

Il. That it is not how men are called, but how they live, and what
they are, which is the important thing.

A deadly heresy to rest satisfied with the outward calling of things. The con-
ventional Christian hearing himself termed so continually, begins possibly to lay
the flattering unction to his soul that he is such. The sweet delusion grows,
eats into the heart of the man. No greater offence than to deny him that title.
Translate it to mean ‘the Christ-like,” or even the ‘follower of Christ,” and
what then ? So the conventional church member bears as lofty a name as this,
“My God is King.” A member of Christ, for the Church is ‘His body.” Youmay
explain that boud to imply “ My Saviour my Head” (Eph. iv. 15), and yet how
many are satisfied with the mere name! This-—

A strong delusion.—The ‘name to live, and are dead.”

A transparent folly.—Others see through it; if not, God does.

A cruel self-deception. —Born of presumption, fostered of hypocrisy.

A crowning impiety.—Disastrous, Laodicean, deadly (Rev. il. ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. oar. 1. 2.





III. That men consecrated by the loftiest associations of the past come

these strange experiences
ie ries oF an acl family, born in the most honourable of birth-places,
dedicated seemingly from his youth upwards, His name should have taught
him faith. Had he been true to that, all would have been well, and possibly he
would never have gone down to Moab. ;

So those born as it were inside the Church, early dedicated to God, registered
among His covenant people, and yet to-day they are prodigals in the far
country, Cains with the brand upon them, though with Something also which
speaks of the old family relationship—at best Elimelechs in Moab—God mourn-


ing over them, as over Hphraim (Hosea vi. 4) the departed glory of their youth,


gone like ‘‘the morning cloud and the early dew”





asking, as of Israel, «‘ How


shall I put thee among the children, give thee a pleasant land ?” (Jer. ili. 19.)
IMPROVEMENT.—Sainted memories may become sad remembrances ; mementoes of


a better past, reminders of a glory which has been, and is departed.
something with them from the past, must carry it.
or to bless? How was it with this name Elimelech in


taught faith even there. But did it ?


Men carry
Does it come in to upbraid
Moab? Might have


These patriarchs and early believers types of those still found in our midst. The
history of the most insignificant not without meaning. They hold the mirror to
all time, though the natural man, beholding his face as in a glass, straightway


forgets what manner of man he is.
without a parallel in our experience ?
first stone.”


“Great birth, good means, high name and
fame, save not from falling either into sin or
outward misery, if a better blessing than all
these benot given men from God.”— Bernard.

“How happy must that man be whose God
is King! He may be driven by famine, by
persecution or otherwise far from the house
of his God, yet he can never be banished to
any place but where God is his King,”— Mac-
gowan.

“In the Hebrew history are discernible
three periods distinctly marked, in which
names and words bore very different charac-
ters, corresponding to the periods in which
the nation bore the three different appellations
of Hebrews, Israelites, Jews.

“In the first, names meant truths, and
words were the symbols of realities. The
characteristics of the names given were sim-
plicity and sincerity.

“The second period begins about the time
of the departure from Egypt, and it is cha-
racterised by unabated simplicity. with the
addition of sublimer thought, and feeling
more intensely religious. The heart of the
nation was big with mighty and new religious
truth, and the feelings with which the
national heart was swelling found vent in the
names which were given abundantly. God,
under His name Jah, the noblest assemblage
of spiritual truths yet conceived, became the
adjunct to names of places and persons.
Oshea’s name is changed into Je-hoshua.

“In the third period, words had lost their
meaning, and shared the hollow, unreal state
of all things.”— Kebertson (abridged).

“The meaning in names not always true,
Absalom meant ‘father’s peace,’ but the
young man broke his father’s heart, Solomon


Elimelech going down to Moab !


Is the case


‘Let him that is without sin cast the


called his son Rehoboam, ‘an enlarger, '
but he reduced the kingdom instead of ene
larging it.”— Braden.

“The believing Church is Christ’s N. aomi,
His sweet and pleasant one, and He is her
Elimelech, her God the King. For her He fore
sook the mansions of plenty and delight—
with her He sojourned in a Moabitish world,
amongst enemies to God; there He died an
accursed death to accomplish her salvation ;
there He was buried to purify the grave for
her use, rose again to trample on all her
enemies, and is now gone to Bethlehem, the
House of Bread, to prepare a place for His
Noami.”— Macgowan.

Here also we may see that it was a custom
of great antiquity in the world, that men
and women should have several names
whereby they were called, and that for these
three reasons :

I. That they might be differenced and dis-
tinguished from others,

II. That they might be stirred up to verify
the meanings and significations of their
names. Wherefore let every Ohadiah strive
to be a “servant of God,” each Nathanael to
be “a gift of God,” Onesimus to be « profit-
able,” every Roger “ quiet and peaceable,”
Robert “famous for counsel,” and William
“a help and defence” to many ; not like
Absalom, who was not a “father of peace,”
as his name doth import, but a son of sedi-
tion; and Diotrephes, not ‘“ nursed by God,”
as his name sounds, but putied up by the
devil, as it is 3 John 9,

III. That they might be incited to imi.
tate the virtues of those worthy persona
who formerly have been bearers and owners
of their names, Let all Abrahams hea faith.


CHAP. I. 2.


Ls


ful, Isaacs quiet, Jacobs prayerful, Josephs
chaste ; every Lewis pious, Edward confessor
of the true faith, William conqueror over his
own corruptions. Letthemalsocarefully avoid
those sins for which the bearers of the names
stand branded to posterity. Let every Jonah
beware of frowardness, Thomas of distrustful-
ness, Martha of worldliness, Mary of wanton-
ness. If there be two of our names, one ex-
ceedingly good, the other notoriously evil,
let us decline the vices of the one, and prac-
tise the virtues of the other. Let every Judas
not follow Judas Iscariot, who betrayed our
Saviour, but Judas the brother of James, the
writer of the General Epistle; each Deme-
trius not follow him in the Acts, who made
silver shrines for Diana, but Demetrius (3
John 12) who had a “good report of all
men ;” every Ignatius not imitate Ignatius
Loyola the lame father of blind obedience,
but Ignatius the worthy martyr in the primi-
tive church. And if it should chance, through
the indiscretion of parents and godfathers,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.





that a bad name should be imposed on any,
Oh let not “folly ” be “with” them, because
Nabal is their name; but in such a case let
them strive to falsify, disprove, and confute
their names. Otherwise, if they be good,
they must answer them. In the days of
Queen Elizabeth, there was a royal ship
called “ The Revenge,” which, having main-
tained a long fight against a fleet of Spaniards
(wherein eight hundred great shot were
discharged against her), was at last fain to
yield ; but no sooner were her men gone out
of her, and two hundred fresh Spaniards
come into her, but she suddenly sunk them
and herself; and so “The Revenge” was
revenged. Shall lifeless pieces of wood
answer ithe names which men impose upon
them, and shall not reasonable souls do’
the same? But of all names I pray God
that never just occasion be given that we be
christened “ Ichabod,” but that the glory may
remain in our Israel so long as the faithfal
Witness endureth in heaven,


Theme.—THE Sosourn iw Moas.


“Nos patrie fines, et dulcia linguimus area}
Nos patriam fugimus.”’— Virgil.


And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there,


In weighing human actions, difficult to say what is merely an error of judgment
and what an error of heart. The former slides imperceptibly into the latter.
We take a false step—pride prevents our retracing it, habit comes in to perpe-
tuate the mistake. Thus folly becomes sin and the cause of sin. Hlimelech not
to be severely condemned in that, driven by stress of famine, he went down to
Moab. Very human this. What of his continuing there?

After all, a man must be judged by the standard of his own times. This would in
some measure condemn Elimelech. [Jewish expositors do so almost unanimously.]
The land given to Israel to inhabit, under special circumstances. with special
promises (Deut. xxviii.). Would not the true Israelite have heard the call ‘‘ to
return” sounding in his ears continually? May we not say at least what was
not of faith was of sin? Note. An error generally, though on the side of charity, when
we impute the broad catholicity of Christianity to these early Jews. The traditions
of his people, national feeling, education, all that distinguished the true Israelite,
against this journey and sojourn. But he broke through all. Does not seem to
have had any fear of dwelling among an idolatrous nation.

The danger subtle, unseen, often unrealized, but as often deadly. Malarias
are dangerous just because they do not address themselves to any of the senses,

Notice—

I. That the present choice may influence all the after life.

A mistake to put Elimelech outside the pale of ultimate salvation. But short
of this, much which is instructive.

(a) A man’s error may be foolish without being final.
first of a succession of disasters. Peter’s denial a better example.
disciple’s cowardice, Jonah’s fleeing to Tarshish, ete.

b) But a tendency in one false step to lead to a second, to a continuance in folly.
Peter’s first denial led to a second, toa third. Here, journeying to Moab ends in
dwelling there. Elimelech went to sojourn for awhile, the same reason led him to
continue. The first temptation was to go, the second would naturally be to remuin,
Note. Habit makes the sin of the past the ‘* easily besetting sin.” Lot lingered in


Sodom ; what wonder he afterwards lingered in Zoar? (Gen. xix. 16, 19—23).
Cs


Seems to besohere. ‘The
So with the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH, CHAP. I, 2.


ee


II. That after a false step in life, God’s mercies are not wholly denied us.

Elimelech was protected in journeying. The Moabites seem to have received
him and his family with great kindness (cf. Deut. xxiii. 8, as shewing it might have
been otherwise). Good also out of what may have been evil, in the case of
Ruth.

(a) Divine providences seem to descend to our human levels. Follow even into
Moab. God does not forsake His children in the hour of their folly. More strange
still, the wicked are provided for in the midst of their wickedness (Matt. v. 45).
Households which have become careless and godless have some place of refuge
opening to them in the hour of need. We fail to embrace the wise guidance
offered to-day ; His hand is stretched out again on the morrow. Step by step we
descend lower and still lower in the way of moral rectitude; His gospel can meet
us in the last hour with the offers of salvation and mercy. Note. This should
. give no encouragement to men in going towards Moab, but may save us from despair if
we are there. The folly which sins that grace may abound possibly finds a
warning in the context.

(0) Men condemn, and so think themselves justified in neglecting ; tt ts not so with
God.

After the Divine lament, ‘‘I have nourished up children, and they have rebelled
against me—gone away backwards,”’ comes the affectionate question of a father
waiting to be reconciled, ‘‘ Why should ye be stricken any more ?” (Isa. i. 1—5.)
Nay, more; He follows the terrible accusation, ‘‘ Your hands are full of blood,”
with the tender appeal, ‘‘ Come now, let us reason together: though your sins be
as scarlet,” etc. (Isa. i. 15—18). No condemnation like His upon every soul that
sinneth, and no compassion like His. It is this that gives point to the Divine
declaration, ‘‘My ways are not your ways,” etc. (See context, Isa. lv. 8.) So
with Elimelech in Moab. Doubtless mercy followed while justice cordemned.
His piety may have been the ‘smoking flax” and the “bruised reed.” Rest
assured it was neither ‘* quenched” nor ‘* broken.”

Improvement.—To us the world offers its Moab continually. Forgetfulness of
God is that far-off land (Augustine). Note. The filial spirit has died out in the
sreast of every prodigal before he leaves his father’s house. Distance from God is not
in space, but in affections (Bede). Apostacy of the heart always goes before
apostacy of the life. Is thy heart right ? the important question. If not, the land
of promise will sooner or later be the land of penury,—Bethlehem itself a place
of weariness and want. To such, life cannot be otherwise than a sad departure
from the heritage of God.

Another treatment of the same text.


Theme.—Tum WaAnDERERS.


“TI see that all are wanderers, gone astray,
Hach in his own delusion; they are lost
In chase of fancied happiness, still woo’d,
And never won.”— Cowper.


The history of Ruth begins with a story of wanderers from God—a sad but
not strange commencement (Tyng). A common story (a) in God’s Word; (2) in
human experience. We, too, know of a spiritual wandering from God, from
His Word, from His Spirit, from His church and sanctuary, from His gospe}
from Bethlehem, where Jesus igs. A wandering more sad and fatal then
this in the text. Those who go out “full,” to return like the prodigal in
want (Luke xv. 17), in bitterness of spirit (Ruth i. 20), having lost all. Or
sadder still, who never return. Jonah a wanderer, Manasseh, Demas. Nay, all
men by nature wanderers (Isa. liii. 6). The wicked are emphatically called ‘wan-
dering stars” (Jude 18).

I. 4 in what this wandering begins.


onarP. I. 2. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


Lp SEN Ea SE enna


a) Led by distrust rather than by immediate want. (See previous outlines.)

b) By sight rather than by faith. No Divine voice comes to Elimelech, “ Get
thee out of thy country,” as to Abraham (Gen. xii. 1), or as to J oseph, ‘ Arise,”
etc. (Matt. ii. 20). No pillar of fire and cloud leads, as with Israel departing from
Egypt. On the other hand, no angel stops the way, as with Balaam (Numb. xxii.
2285). No miraculous providence hinders, as with Jonah. Probably his
spiritual experience feeble and meagre, his life commonplace and unheroic. The
better illustration of multitudes who wander away from sanctuary privileges.
The very absence of the miraculous int hese critical moments, these times of
choice, when life turns to the right hand or the left, itself suggestive. How many
had to walk, even in those days, with nothing supernatural, nothing out of the
ordinary, to guide; only the light of conscience. But faith can always speak,
and did speak. Contrast Abraham’s wandering with Elimelech’s—this seeking
a country with that mentioned in Heb. xi. Said of God’s heroes, they became
strangers and pilgrims, but ‘‘ by faith,” and ‘‘ seeking a better country’ (Heb.
xi. 16). Happy wandering and even sojourning in a strange country, when
men can say they are “persuaded,” etc. (ib. 13). But sad when men leave
Rethlehem for Moab, go out but to sojourn for awhile, and continue there.

(c) By discontent rather than duty. A common frame of mind with men, and
the secret of much of our unrest. The unstable are always dissatisfied. Clouds
without water are driven to and fro with every wind, and ships without ballast
liable to the violence of every temp: st (Westminster Conf. of Faith), Cain’s envy
made him a wanderer. (See also Outline IIL., ver. 1, div. II.)

II. See where this wandering leads. As in the parable, the son goes to hire
himself in the far country. Possibly with Elimelech, also, wandering brought want.
If so, another sentence may apply, “ He would fain have filled his belly—and no
man gave untohim.”” The peril in Moab as real, though no tas apparent, as that
in Bethlehem ; perhaps more real. The one a famine, the other a scarcity of all
those things by which men truly live. Countless avenues besides famine to the
human heart (Lawson). Which was the best, bread or faith, to have abundance
or to have God ? ( Robertson.)

Note. We need never go far to sojourn in Moab (Tyng).

III. See how this wandering ends.

Notice (a) Journeying to Moab often means continuing in Moab, dying in Moab.
Not said, that the Lord was with him, as with Joseph in Egypt. Tf so, all would
have been well. Not said, how he lived, or even how he died. His life after-
wards summed up in one short sentence, “ He continued there.” Whatever his
state of mind and circumstances, they became fixed, permanent.

Notice (b) That for some men there ts no returning in life. He prep THERE. How
much then may depend upon the moment’s choice! this present false step from
the path of duty: all time; nay more, all eternity. In every sinful life, critical
moments when the wandering begins. In that moment the path is turned aside,
the bias given, and for ever it may be.

ImprovementT.—Are we free agents ? and do we choose our own path in life?
God chooses the circumstances that surround it. And He has said the way of
transgressors is hard. To the sinful He says, ‘Behold, I will hedge up thy way with
thorns”’ (Hos. ii. 6). Are we froward ? He will shew Himself froward (Ps. Xviil.
96). Do we walk contrary to Him? He will walk contrary to us (Lev. xxvi. 23,
24, 27, 28). Wandering from God means strife with God—a folly, a gigantic
mistake (Isa. xlv. 9.)

Bernurd observes on these passages—

I. God, intending good to some in His secret counsels, may prosper that
which others undertake with no good warrant. Elimelech’s misfor-
tunes and sojourn in Moab the means of blessing Ruth. So also
Jacob’s sons, in selling Joseph into Egypt, were providing 4 refuge
for the family. Christ’s cruel death the world’s salvation.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH...





CHAP. I. 3.


I. That if men live where idolaters be, it is good to avoid the occasion of


infection as much as may be.
not into the cities of the Moabites, but dwelt in tents.
See notes on ver. 1.)


Fields of Moab.


Some conjecture that Elimelech went
(Translate


IL, That none are so churlish and unkind at one time to some, but God can


incline their hearts at another time to others.


These Moabites


formerly hard-hearted to Israel.
IV. That it is a praiseworthy matter to be harboursome to strangers. The
barbarians commended (Acts xxviii. 2, 7, 10), who received the apostle.


Abraham, Lot, and Job praised for this.
(Heb. xiii. 2; Rom. xii. 20).


“What made it wrong for Elimelech to
migrate to Moab, wrong according to the Old
Testament standard, was that he was aban-
doning his place among the elect people to
sojourn among heathen, whose social life,
whose very worship,was unutterably licentious
and degrading. . . . True, he is not directly
blamed for his error in the book of Ruth,
which is written in the most considerate and
generous tone throughout; but that the
writer of the book thought him to blame,
and held the calamities which fell on him
and his house to be a judgment on his sin,
there is scarcely room to doubt.”— Cow,

“‘Oh these wanderings from sanctuary pri-
vileges and home delights, how lightly begun,
how disastrous in the ending! There are
those to-day who are flitting about like the
poor dove from Noah’sark, and finding no rest
for the sole of the foot; spirits wandering
self-tormented in desert places, and among
the tombs, like that poor demoniac of old.
And Christ’s message to such is as then,
‘Return unto thine own house, among thy
kinsfolk and acquaintances, show forth what
things God had done for thee.’”—B,

“Tike wandering birds driven from their
nest ; like wandering stars rushing into dark-
ness; like waves of the sea driven of the
wind and tossed. Thus we wander in sin,
we know not where, we know not to what.
Forsaking the fountain of living water, we
hew out to ourselves cisterns, broken cisterns,
that can hold no water.”—Tyng.


“ To grasp at happiness is all our view;

Through different tracks her footsteps we
pursue ;

While each his own fallacious path approves,

As interest leads, or inclination moves ‘.

Yet most through error loge the wished-for
way:

Whe sets out wrong must wander far astray.”


“ For everywhere heis a Judas, with whom
his worldly interest, his worldly ambition,


We are exhorted to it


prevail over his attachment to Christ and ta
Christ’s cause.” —Dr. Hanna.

“It was said of Athens, that it was ‘a good
place to pass through, but a dangerous place
to linger in.’ To the faithful Israelite, Moab
could have been no more than this, But it is
written of Elimelech, ‘ He continued there.’

“As you value your souls, beware of the
world: it has slain its thousands and tep
thousands. What ruined Lot’s wife? the
world, What ruined Achan? the world.
What ruined Haman? the world. Whay
Tuined Judas? the world. What ruined
Simon Magus? the world. What ruined
Demas? the world. And what shall at profit
a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul?”—Dice. of Illustratione.

“Why should the professor of Christianity
be found eagerly pursuing those trifles which
even heathen have been found fleeing from ?
The world is rather a sharp briar to wound
us, than a sweet flower to delight us.”—
Secker.

“Ages have passed away ; yet Moab exists
in the shape of the world, its pleasures, its
follies and vanities; the lust of the eye, the
pride of life, the love of the world, that is
Moab.”—Dr. Cumming.

“ Let us not therefore abuse strangers, and
make a prey of them, making an advantage
of their unskilfulness in the language, and
being unacquainted with the fashions of the
land; like Laban that deceived his nephew
Jacob in placing Leah for Rachel, and, to
cloak his cheating, pleaded it was the cus.
tom of the country.”—Fuiler,

“Romulusissaid to have been nursedofa she-
wolf; Hieron, king of Syracuse, by bees ; Semi-
ramis, of birds; Habides, king of Tartesius, of
a hind ; Cyrus the Persian, of a bitch ; Pelias,
of a mare; Paris, of a bear.... We know
how the Lord commended the strange
Samaritan beyond the priest and the Levite,
because he succoured the poor wounded Jew
which had fallen among thieves,” —Zopsela,


— ~——_—.


VERSES 8—-65,


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NoTEs.—Ver.3, And Elimelech +. died. The
seems to intimate shortly after his arrival.
Josephus thinks, however, towards the end of th


Ver. 4. And they took them Wives.
2u :


conjunction
Certainly before the marriage of his sons,


é e ten years’ sojourn.
The verb, though not Chaldaic, said to be peculiar to


CHaP. 1. 3. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


reer te,





the later Hebrew, but found Judges xxi. 23 (Speaker’s Com.). Always used in a bad sense
(Kitto). Of the women of Moab. And they transgressed the decree of the Lord, and married
foreign wives, etc. (Chaldee Paraphrast). Probably justified by necessity (Speaker's Com.).
In violation of the Mosaic Law (Lange). Marriages with Moabitish women not forbidden
like marriages with Canaanites in Deut. vii. 3 (Keil). Bertheau, Le Clerc, and others defend
the act. Aben Ezra thinks that Orpah and Ruth were proselytes, Why make excuses for
them? for Scripture does in no way represent them as holy men (Scrarius,a Roman Catholie
expositor). Traditum ferunt Judei Ammonitam et Moabitam quidem semper fuisse inter-
dictos, at feminas eorum statim permissas (Midrash Tillim). The name of the one (was)
Orpah. Previous names genuine Hebrew, these cannot satisfactorily be explained from the
Heb. (Keil). Means, turning the back? (Keil), a hind (Haller, Simonis), a mane (Gesen.),
liberality (Wright). Ruth, Ancestress of the Singer (Dante). A Jewish tradition that Ruth
was the daughter of Eglon, king of Moab. Chaldee paraphrast adopts it. A higher honour
in that, like Eve, she is to be mother of the chosen seed. God not only wrote her name in the
book of life in heaven, but also prefixed her name before a book of life on earth (fuller).


Means vision or beauty (Gesen.). Either to be considered a contraction for mx), appear-
ance, beauty; or still better, as a contraction for my, a female friend, or as an abstract
friendship (Wright). A conjecture that Ruth is an ancient form of the Greek podov, the Latin


rosa, redness (Lange, Cox).
It is imagined, and not without probability, that Mahlon and Chilion are the same as Joash


and Seraph, who married in Moab (1 Chron. iv. 22).—Adam Clarke. So Aben Ezra.
Ver. 5. And Mahlon and Chilion died. Cut short because they married strange women


(Chaidee Paraphrast). Wright translates, and also the two of them died. The oa carries
us back to ver. 3. Was left of (from). Was bereaved of. ‘“Almonah,” which we render
widow, signifies “dumb” (Macgowan).


VERSE 8.


Theme.—Tue First Breach mn THE Famiy Crrcia)


“ There never breathed a2 man who when his life
Was closing, might not of that life relate
Toils long and hard.”— Wordsworth.


And Elimelech, Naomi’s husband, died,


The story grows intensely sad (Braden). Death steps in here as elsewhere,
They had escaped one danger only to fall into another sorrow. How true the
narrative is to human experiences! The text eloquent in its simplicity, the
chapter full of those contrasting lights and shadows which cling to human
history.

Ae See how much there is uncertain in connection with life. (a) As to tts
circumstances. I have seldom seen a tree thrive that hath been transplanted when
it was old (Fuller). Changing our place is not always mending it (M. Henry).
Could Elimelech have foreseen this end of all his wanderings, would he have
undertaken the journey? But no! he went forward as we do. (b) As to its
character. Different estimates as to this. Cox says, ‘‘He lost his life while
seeking a livelihood—found a grave where he sought a home—judgment appa-
rently treading on the very heels of offence.” But ? Those actions not
ungodly which are unsuccessful, nor those pious which are prosperous (Fuller).
He would have died, whether he sinned or not, in coming to Moab. The lawfal-
ness of an action is not to be gathered from the joyfulness of the event, but from
the justness of the cause for which it is undertaken (Fuller). Poor man to suffer
want in his life, and be maligned after death (Braden). Note. Something of this
uncertainty invests every life. We are mysteries one to another—our actions but
imperfectly understood, our characters imperfectly estimated, our lives misread.
Christ says, Judge not, ete. (Matt. vil. 1). (¢) As to its continuance. We know not
what a day, etc. The only thing certain in that future is death. (a) We cannot
escape tt. Elimelech could avoid the arrows of famine in Israel, yet he could not
shun the darts of death in Moab. (8) We cannot prevent it. With this man the
journey accomplished, the project seemingly successful; but what of that? He
that lived in a place of penury must die in a land of plenty (fuller). age With





cHap. 1. 3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





Elimelech the mystery of sorrow and exile ends in the crowning mystery of death.
The first journey to Moab, at his own desire, his own time; the second unexpectedly
at God’s, ; ; ;

II. See how much there may be uncertain in connection with death. The
Bible tells us very little of the closing scene (Robertson). One short sentence here
concludes the history. (a) We know little of this man’s life. Was he one of
those—


Whom unmerciful disaster
Followed fast and followed faster” ?


Then a warning to the afflicted, that sorrows bring no exemption from death.
Was he one who wandering sinfully, always purposed to return? A lesson to
the procrastinator here. Or one having taken the false step, and for whom there
is no repentance, no return? Then an example of God’s dealings with the repro-
bate. (b) We know less of his death. Simply the place, and possibly the time.
He died in the place to which he had wandered from Bethlehem, and in all pro-
bability just as he conceived his purpose in coming there accomplished. (c) We
know nothing of his eternal destiny. Multitudes live like this, die like this, die and
“give no sign.” The life such that you can form but an imperfect estimate of
the character and the destiny—only hope the larger charitable hope, which rests
upon the infinite mercy of God. The death sudden, or from attendant circum-
stances such as to give no chance of forming a judgment. Note. To be uncertain
on some questions is itself decisive. Christ says, ‘‘ He that is not with me is against
me” (Matt. xii. 80). The uncertainty here may be merely historic. Instructive
even then.


“ Once in the flight of ages past He was—whatever thou hast been;

There lived a man, and who was he? He is—what thou shalt be.
Mortal, howe’er thy lot be cast, * 2 * °

That man resembles thee, The rolling seasons, day and night,

be * ee, * Sun, moon, and stars, the earth and main,

He suffered—but his pangs are over; Erewhile his portion, life and light,
Enjoyed—but his delights are fled ; To him exist in vain,
Had friends—his friends are now no more, * * e s

And foes—his foes are dead, The annals of the human race,


Ge i i! - Their ruins, since the world began,
He saw whatever thou hast seen ; Of him afford no other trace


Encountered all that troubles thee; Than this—there lived a man.”
Montgomery.


Improvement.— When life ig past, it is all one whether it has lasted two hundred
years or fifty (Dr. Newman). Death levels all distinctions, thwarts the best laid
plans, will come in with us as with Elimelech, to write vanity across our most
cunningly laid schemes. What is our life ?. It is a vapour which appeareth


for a little while, and then vanisheth away. Learn (a) amid the many trials
of life to remember the greatest is yet to come.


death itself may be here.


(b) Before the want we dread,


(c) Are you obliged to leave your native fields? you


may have to leave the world itself (Lawson).


“ Which, I wonder, is the better lot, to die
prosperous and famous, or poor and dis-
appointed? To have, and to be forced to
yield; or to sink out of life, having played
and lost the game? That must be a strange
feeling, when a day of our life comes, and
we say, ‘ To-morrow, success or failure won't
matter much ; and the sun will rise, and all
the myriads of mankind go to their work or
their pleasure as usual; but I shall be out
of the turmoil.’”-—~Thackeray,

‘When Socrates was urged by his friends
to esca BD tes the prison where he was con-


demned to die, he answered, ‘Tell me of a
land where men do not die, and I will escape
to that.’”—Tyng.

“There is a tradition of an Indian chief,
who, with his tribe, fled before the prairie
fires, till he had crossed a broad river, when
he struck his tent-pole into the ground, and
cried ‘Alabama!’ (Here we may rest!) He
was no prophet, Hostile tribes overpowered
them ; and they found only graves where
they sought a home. This is, maybe, a
parabie of the soul; for it earth has no
Alabama.”— Die, of "Ulustrations,


CHAP. I. 3.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


eee


“Death is a friend of ours; and he that is
not ready to entertain him is not at home.”
—Lord Bacon,

“Death argues not displeasure; because
- + a God loved best died first.” — Bishop

‘all,

“Tt is hard to die when the time is not
ripe. When it is, it will be easy. We need
not diu while we are living.”— Beecher.

“Tt is said that Guerricus, hearing the
passage read in church, beginning, ‘ And all
the days that Adam lived were nine hundred
and thirty years,’ and ending ‘the days of
Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty and
nine years, and he died,’ went home and
began immediately to prepare for death.

“The ashes of an oak in a chimney are no
epitaph of that to tell me how high or how
large that was, what flocks it sheltered while
it stood, what men it hurt when it fell. The
dust of great men’s graves is speechless too;
it says nothing ; it distinguishes nothing,”—
Donne.

“There is a moment when a man’s life is
re-lived on earth. It is in that hour when
the coffin-lid is shut down just before the
funeral, when earth has seen the last of him
for ever. Then the whole life is, as it were,
lived over again in the conversation which
turns upon the memory of the departed. ...
For the most part, when all is over, general
opinion is not far from the truth. Misrepre-
sentation and envy have no provocation left
them. What the departed was is tolerably
well known in the circle in which he moved.”
—Robertson, “ Israelites’ Grave in a Foreign
Land.”

“¢ May it please your Majesty, Jenkyn has
got his liberty.’ Upon which the king asked
with eagerness, ‘Aye, who gave it to him?’
The nobleman replied, ‘A greater than your
Majesty, the King of kings;’ with which the


king seemed greatly struck, and remained
silent.”—Death of the Rev. W. Jenkyn, 1685.

“Death does not always give warning be-
forehand; sometimes he gives the mortal
blow suddenly—he comes behind with hia
dart, and strikes. ... Eutychus fell down
dead; death suddenly arrested David’s sons
and Job’s sons; Augustine died in a compli-
ment; Galba with a sentence; Vespasian
with a jest; Zeuxis died laughing at a picture
of an old woman which he drew with his own
hands; Sophocles was choked with a stone
in a grape.”— Brooks.

“A man may escape the wars by pleading
privilege of years, or weakness of body, or
the king’s protection, or by sending another
in his room; but in this war the press is so
strict, that it admits no dispensation, Young
or old, weak or strong, willing or unwilling, .
all is one, into the field we must go, and look
that last enemy in the face. It is in vain to
think of sending another in our room, for no
man dieth by proxy; or to think of com-
pounding with death, as those self-deluded
fools did (Ps. xxviii. 5) who thought they
had been discharged of the debt by seeing
the sergeant. No, there is no discharge in
that war.”—/lavel.

“Nihil prodest ora concludere et vitam
fugientem retinere.”—Hierom.

“ Where men think to preserve life, there
they may lose it as Elimelech; fleeing from
the famine in Israel, he died where plenty
was in Moab.”—Bernard.

“ No outward plenty can privilege us from
death. . . . God can easily frustrate our fair-
est hopes, and defeat our most probable
projects, in making those places most dan-
gerous which we account most safe and
secure; causing death to meet us there
where we think furthest to fly from it,”—-
Fuller.


And she was left, and her two sons.


Another instance of the wonderful subservience of the events of human life te
the righteous purposes of God. God deals with Naomi in this way; not in anger,


but in love.


First famine, then exile, then bereavement.


Recognize the Divine agency, and see something of the Divine plan.


Naomi a Christian, but what is


called a backsliding Christian; one under a cloud, one who had proved to some
extent untrue, undutiful, unthankful; bitterly chastened, and therefore eventually


reinstated in her forfeited privileges (Dr. Cumming).
view of her character in looking for a Divine purpose in this sad event.
the Lord lveth he chasteneth (Heb. xii. 6).
None the less they have a meaning, and come to us pregnant


common, familiar.
with important lessons.


Not necessary to take this
Whom
Bereavements natural, inevitable,


I. See how much there was that must have seemed severe in this bereave-
ment. Naomi left a widow—the husband, friend, counsellor, head of the household,
gone. The widow’s lot always a bitter and lonely one. Especially so here.
Naomi a widow in a strange land—far from home and sanctuary. Notice. (a) That
sorrow ts natural under circumstances like these. A mistaken notion to think that
grief in itself is sinful. It is undue, rebellious sorrow which is to be rebuked,
sorrow without faith, grief which sees no future, nothing beyond the past and the


present. One pregnant instance at least of a holy sorrow at the ee Jesus


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. 1 3.
i


wept.” (b) That affection for those taken away is still natural. Unreasonable to
think that the family bond is broken at death. They are “loved ones” still,
though “loved ones gone before.” A danger in this. Affection at these times
may become morbid, a matter of mere sentiment. Modern spiritualism in many
family circles the perversion of what is in itself true and right ; love for the dead,
and then a craving for a material manifestation of the loved ones. Note. It is
not the intensity of our affection, but its interference with truth and duty, which makes
it sinful. No man ever loved child or brother or sister too much (Robertson).
(c) That religion comes in to sanctify alike the sorrow and the affection. It says of
those taken away, ‘ Blessed are the dead,” ete. (Rev. xiv. 13), and of the faithful
remaining, ‘‘ We which are alive shall be caught up together with them: go shall
we ever,” etc. (1 Thess. iv. 17). Perhaps we never love truly until we learn to
love with all the deep fulness of a sanctified affection. Especially is this true in
circumstances like those in the text. That higher affection sustains and elevates
the lower human one, casting round it a glory which mere personal feeling could
never give (Robertson).

II. See how much there was especially to be regretted in this bereavement,
To pass beyond the great loss itself. To the mother a multiplicity of new cares
and anxieties involved (a) in the training up of her Jatherless offspring. A mother’s
task always a difficult one. Much more then a widowed mother’s. The strong
sommanding voice hushed in death. The will which ought to be the supreme
authority in the household missing. Possibly this one reason why Paul lays
stress upon widows who have children learning “first to shew piety at home”
(1 Tim. v. 4). This the more necessary since the father’s character and influence
is absent. (b) In doing this amid the surrounding circumstances. Journeying to
Moab involved much, and perhaps nothing more serious than this. A cheerless
prospect to Elimelech in dying, this of leaving his widow and orphans among
strangers and heathen, and well for him only if he had strong faith in the God of
the fatherless (Ps. xxvii. 10). Even Elimelech must have known His promise:
( “Tf they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their ery” (Exod. xxii. 23).

Note. (1) A caution to those who have kindred responsibilities. When you choose
your place of abode, if you have families, let this be one principal consideration,
where you will leave them if God should cail you out of the world (Lawson),
(2) A warning to Christians who lead their children into the midst of worldly sur-
roundings, We wonder sometimes why the children of sainted parents fail to
grow up in the fear of God. The secret here and in this: led into the world,
and left there, as Elimelech’s children in Moab.

III. See how much there was merciful, after all, in connection with this
bereavement. Her children left to her. The family circle broken into, but not
destroyed. Two sons to support her declining years. And by-and-by Orpah
and Ruth are introduced into the bereaved household. Note. The wonderful
way in which the breaches made by death are repaired by Divine mercy, now
and always. The family circle, like the ark of Noah, survives amid the wasting
waters of universal change (Dr. Lee).

Doubtless the affliction itself had its spiritual use. Preparatory to the ‘I will
arise” (ver. 6). Manasseh’s woes drove that erring monarch to God (2 Chron.
axxill. 12). With the righteous, grief makes sacred. Joy may elevate, ambition
glorify, but sorrow alone can consecrate (H. Gresby).

Bernard on this verse—

And Elimelech . . . . died,

I. That death is the end of all, and spareth none (Job xxi. 83; Eccles.
vil. 2, vi. 6; 1 Cor. xv. 51); for all have sinned (Rom. v.) ; and death -
is the reward of sin (Rom. vi.).

I. That a full supply of bodily wants cannot prevent death. This man in
Moab, where there was food enough. The rich glutton also (Luke


P xvi. 22). The rich man with his barns full (Luke xii. 20). Life
4


OBAP. 1. 3.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





depends not upon the outward means, for then the rich and mighty


would never die.


ili, That where men think to preserve life, there they may lose it.


Fleeing


from famine in Israel, this man died where plenty was, in Moab.
Where we may count ourselves secure, there death may take us


away.
Naomi’s husband.


L That it is a grace to be called the husband of some women.
one is a crown to her husband (Prov. xii. 4).


Such an
The foolish woman


rottenness to his bones (Prov. xii. 4).


II. That grace in one prevents not death in another.
appointed the same length of days.


go not together.


Married persons not
We come not together, and we


I. That it is a great cross for a woman to lose a good husband. In this
the wife loses her head, her guide, her stay and comfort.


And she was left, and her two sons.


I. That albeit death is due to all, yet it seizeth not upon all at once.
Ii. That the Lord in afflicting His children sweeteneth the same with some


comforts.


In dealing with Naomi, He took away her husband, yet


left her two sons; and afterwards, when He took them away, gave


her an excellent daughter-in-law.


A bitter affliction for Joseph to be


sold of his brethren, but it was sweetened with Potiphar’s favour.


“Bereavements at home are sorrowful
enough, even when the tenderest sympathy
beams from the eyes of friends, and all those
gentle healing agencies which love has ever
at command are striving to bind up the
broken heart. But to bury one’s precious
dead in a foreign country, away from all
the blessed associations of home, is a test
under which the strongest spirit may well
bow down.” —Braden.


“ For by the hearth the children sit
Cold in the atmosphere of death,
And scarce endure to draw the breath,
Or like to noiseless phantoms flit.
But open converse is there none,
So much the vital spirits sink,
To see the vacant chair, and think
How good! how kind! and he is gone.”
Tennyson.


“ Here we see how mercifully God dealt
with Naomi, in that He quenched not all the
sparks of her comfort at once; but though
He took away the stock, He left her the
stems; though He deprived her, as it were,
of the use of her own legs, by taking away
ner husband, yet He left her a staff in each
of her hands, her two sons, to support her.
Indeed, afterwards He took them away; but
first He provided her a gracious daughter-in-
law. Whence we learn, God poureth not all
His afflictions at once, but evs ‘leaveth a


little comfort; otherwise we should not only
be pressed down, but crushed to powder under
the weight of His heavy hand.”—Fwller.

“ Life passes, riches fly away, popularity is
fickle, the senses decay, the world changes,
friends die. One alone is constant; One
alone is true to us; One alone can be true.”
—Dr. Newman.

“ God out of these things is bringing forth
in us that diviner tenderness which can only
characterize the matured and chastened
Christian, The time is indeed short, and
it is well for us to be made to feel it.”—B,

“Suffering in this world is both remedial
and penal. When it is rightly received, it is
remedial. When it is resisted, it becomes
penal to him who resists, and admonitory to
the spectator. ... There are two ways of
escaping from suffering—the one by rising
above the causes of conflict; the other by
sinking below them, The one is the religious
method; the other is the vulgar, worldly
method, The one is called Christian eleva-
tion, the other stoicism.”— Beecher.

“When the bridge is finished, the timbers
and scaffolding upon which it has rested are
all removed. So God is removing these
earthly props of ours, one after another, and
for two reasons as regards ourselves, First,
that we may learn the great lesson of self-
reliance in human life, but chiefly that we
may learn to rest above all on Him.”—Z,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHAP, 1. 4,





VERSE 4.
Theme.—Marriaces in Moas,


“ Honest wedlock
Is like a banqueting-house, built in a garden,
On which the spring fluwers take delight
To cast their modest odours.”


And they took them wives of the women of Moab.


The father’s death did not arouse these Israelites in their wanderings, The
sons thinking of marrying when possibly they ought to have been thinking of
returning. Note. (a) Hvery cross bringeth not men home again (Bernard), First the
loss of the father, then the marriage of the sous, the wedding feast seemingly
following hard upon the funeral. How true to human life! Note (6) Sojourn-
ing in Moab meant friendship with the Moabites, marriage with their children,
Little else could be expected. [The Old Testament seems to intimate that
the daughters of Moab were fair to look upon.] The two sons in Moab did
as Moab did,—married Gentile women, not caring whether they were idolaters
or not (Dr. Cumming). Is this the explanation ? or is it that Elimelech and his
family were, after all, lights in the midst of a croked and perverse generation ?—
attraeted Ruth and even Orpah for a while, New joys indeed in store for Naomi,
yet these mingled with many anxious questionings, which a godly parent’s ex- .
perience alone may interpret.

I. Take the brighter and more charitable view of these marriages. The
act simply considered as following out the usual course of human life not at all
reprehensible. Rather to be viewed favourably—the loss of one comfort supplied
by the enjoyment of another. Judged by its circumstances and surroundings, much
to be said in its defence, The main question of right and wrong lies farther
back, as to whether they were justified in coming to Moab. Lawful for Israelites
to marry foreign women under certain exceptional circumstances, as, ¢.g., those
taken in war (Deut. xxi. 10,11). No direct command against Moabitish women, a8
against the Canaanites (Deut. vii. 8). Better marry than do worse. Judged
tts results, the answer favourable. Salmon did well in taking Rahab. Mahlon
could have found no less a treasure in Ruth. By this act the young men did
much to endear themselves to a people who had evidently received them kindly.
Orpah and Ruth, wild branches—it was something to graft them upon the stock
of the true Israel. (Cf. 1 Cor. vii. 18, 14.) }

II. Look at the darker possibilities connected with marriages like these,
Bishop Hall strongly condemns such unions (see “ Contemplations,” vol. i., pp. 210,
211). Note. (a) Does not appear that the godly mother had any hand in the matter,
Seemingly their own act: ‘ They took them wives.” The influence which won over
Ruth may have belonged to after years, and to Naomi’s character and life (ii. 12),
The sons themselves possibly having lost all which ought to distinguish the true
Israelite. Such marriages fraught with great danger, even if overruled for good.
The decisive step taken, and the future has to decide whether for good or evil.
Note. (b) In the most favourable view, these young men to blame, unless they had
credible evidence their future wives were cordially disposed towards the worship of
God. The wife’s influence often more subtle, and even more powerful and lasting
in religious matters, than the husband’s. The strength of Samson, the wisdom of
Solomon, not sufficient to withstand it when used for evil. Note. (c) Impossible
to say what was the effect weon the young men themselves. Judging from the
influence of Eve over Adam, ete., we fear it was evil (Dr. Cumming). Would
naturally tend to lengthen the sojourn in Moab. Mahlon and Chilion excep-
tionally fortunate in their wives (Cox), Strange if they should have deteriorated,
while Orpah and Ruth were benefited; yet not impossible—not unlikely,
Characters assimilate, mutually act and react upon each other—give and take,
especially when the bond is as close as that of marriage.

af


onaP. I. 4. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
ae


III. Improvement. To the Christian the command is, “Be not unequally yoked,”
etc. (2 Cor. vi. 14). His privilege ‘‘to marry in the Lord.” This safe—without
offence—within the sphere of the promises, (See next outline.)

Braden on this :—

Mahlon married Ruth, Chilion Orpah. Little is known of either, perhaps
they were sisters—the parents’ names not mentioned. Both natives of Moab, and
heathen—appear to have remained so while in their own land. (See i. 15.)

The question asked, Were these two young men right in marrying heathen women #
Some writers justify, others condemn. A plausible case can be made out in their
favour: great distance from Bethlehem, absence of Jewish maidens, uncertainty
of their return. naturally diminished interest in their native land, arising from
long residence in Moab, the fact that there was no distinct commandment against
marrying a Moabitess, though there was against marrying a Canaanite—all good
reasons for pleading on their behalf. More, Boaz married Rutk afterwards, and
God made her ancestress of Christ. Yet were not absolutely free from blame.
God overruled for good, still they erred. This nation under a curse, excluded
from the Jews (Deut, xxiii. 8). Ezra rent his garment, etc., under similar
circumstances (Ezra ix.). No doubt, to marry a heathen a sin in the eyes of
the Jew.

A practical question started: Should a professing Christian marry one who makes
no such profession? ‘‘ Whatsoever is not of faith is of sin.” If you are not
firmly convinced the step is right, then for you it is sin. Does the N. T. lay
down any law? No direct utterance on the subject to be discovered. Paul’s
warning (2 Cor. vi. 14), ‘‘ Be ye not unequally yoked with unbelievers,” etc., often
quoted against such mixed marriages, but does not specifically refer to them.
The apostle arguing as to the whole relationship of life, urging that the Christian
Church should be separated from heathen associations. The greater, however,
included in the less. The law applicable to the entire life peculiarly touches
marriage.

It may be answered, ‘‘ Times have changed, the broad line of demarcation
between believer and unbeliever no longer exists. Heathen are not found among
us; non-professors moral and reputable in life, and can hardly be designated
*‘ unbelievers.”’ True, no doubt. The lines between the Church and the world
faded, a mutual movement towards each other. Many see no wrong in marrying
one who appears to be everything but a professor of religion. A mistake to
burden consciences by asserting that any course of conduct is sinful if the vexed
matter is fairly open to doubt. Tends to produce a reaction, in which sacred
principles are themselves thrown aside.

This, however, may be maintained, that mixed marriages are eminently inew-
pedient and very dangerous. A want of sympathetic religious convictions between
husband and wife injuriously affects their sacred relationship. True marriage
rests on common admiration and sympathy—a union of hearts. If religion, which
concerns the deepest emotions and noblest thoughts, is excluded, the union dis-
astruasly incomplete, the real foundation insecure. Love which rises from other
things meagre, partial, unsatisfactory—the richest cords of the soul untouched.
That which one esteems as the best thing in life, the other may not possess—a
perpetual craving for sympathy where it cannot be given. The hindrances and
sorv*e-vs springing from this spiritual isolation incalculable. Man and wife do not
erierstand each other. look at numberless experiences from opposite stand-
points—motives imputed, sneers at saintliness uttered perhaps on one side, and
denunciations at godlessness on the other. Multitudes of family quarrels arise from
want of spiritual union, and the highest aspirations of the godly soul perpetually
thwarted. Then the education of the children perplexing, the example of the one.
nullified by the conduct of the other. To marry an unbelieving husband or wife
may involve the future destiny of the offspring. If the children grow up in the
fear of God, it wil] be in spite of the bad example of one parent. of


LOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


cHar. L &


NS


Tt may be said that many wed hoping to produce a change.


They may be in-


strumental in the conversion of the beloved one—a beautiful but most delusive
hope. Can instances be quoted? Their scarcity contrasts most painfully with
the multitude of failures. Religious influence generally less after marriage than


before.


The charm strangely disappears, the same words irritate.


More difficult


to speak upon these themes, lest there should be some taunt about inconsistency.


Easier to address strangers about Christ, than our own households.


The home


friends know our failings—do not see our struggles against them. Decision for
God the great pre-requisite for a happy and useful marriage, far better than


beauty—intellect—wealth.


(Condensed by permission from ‘‘ The Beautiful Gleaner.”’)


“Here we see the fashion of the world.
Mankind had long ago decayed, if those
breaches which are daily made by death
were not daily made up by marriage,”—
Fuller


“And thus the world moves on—deaths
and marriages, marriages and deaths. The
household which to-day mourns as though
all joy had taken flight for ever, to-morrow
resounds with the laughter of many voices
at a new-born happiness. The faces all
tear-stained yesterday are bright with smiles
to-day. The bell which slowly tolled the
funeral knell an hour ago, now rings out the
joyous wedding-chime. So it must be, so it
ought to be. Probably life would lose half
its beauty but for this alternation of shadow
and sunshine; at least, this we know, that
human hearts need both the darkness and
the light, or they will not grow to that
perfection of truth and purity which God
has designed they shall attain. Elimelech
died, the sons married. It is a simple state-
ment, yet a whole world of change is in-
volved in it for that small household,”—
Braden.


“ Hail, wedded love, mysterious law, true

source

Of human offspring, sole propriety

In paradise of all things common else,

By thee adulterous lust was drawnfrom men

Among the bestial herds to range; by thee,

Founded on reason, loyal, just, and pure,

Relations dear and all the charities

Of father, son, and brother, first were
known.” Milton,


“Wherever found, women are the same
kind, civil, obliging, human tender beings,
inclined to be gay and cheerful, humorous
and modest.”—Ledyard.

“True marriage rests on common admira-
tion and sympathy; it is the union of hearts
in the bonds of holiest love. If, however,
religion, which concerns the deepest emotions
and noblest thoughts, is excluded, the union
of the two natures is disastrousiy incomplete,
the real foundation of married life becomes
fearfully insecure.”— Braden,

‘‘ Marriage has less of beauty, but more of
safety, than the single life. It hath not more
ease, but less danger; it ismore merry and more
sad; it is fuller of sorrows and fuller of joys;
it lies under more burdens, but it is supported
by alt the strength of love and charity, and

28


those burdens are delightful. . . . It {s that
state of good to which God hath designed the
present constitution of the world,”—Jeremy
Taylor.


“The woman’s cause is man’s, They rise or
sink
Together. Dwarfed or godlike, bond or
fr


ee 5
If she be small, slight-natured, miserable,
How shall men grow? .. . Let her be
Ail that not harms distinctive womanhood;
For woman is not undeveloped man,
But diverse. Oould we make her as the
man,
Sweet love were slain, whose dearest bond
is this,
Not like to like, but like in difference;
Yet in the long years must they liker grow;
The man be more of woman, she of man,
* * *


Till at the last she set herself to man
Like perfect music unto noble words.”
Tennyson,
“——An unlessoned girl, unschooled, un
practised ;
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn; and happier than thia,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn ;
Happiest of all, is, that her gentle spirit
Commits itself to yours, to be directed
As from her lord, her governor, her king.”
Shakespeare,


“When a woman marries a man that ‘s
ungodly, wrong as it is, we may indulge a
reasonable hope that he through her influence
will become a Christian. But it rarely hap-
pens when a man marries a woman that is
not a Christian, that she becomes a Christian ;
rather he sinks down to her moral level,” —
Dr. Cumming.

“A good wife is heaven’s last, best gift to
aman; his angel of mercy, minister of graces
innumerable ; his gem of many virtues, his
casket of jewels.”—Jeremy Taylor,

“No doubt it isa truism to say that in any
case marriage isa solemn thing. We smile
and jest over it; the prospect of a wedding
always awakens good-humoured remark ;
festivities appropriately accompany the cele-
bration; yet we cannot lose sight of the
grave importance of the event itself. Two
human beings of differing temperament and
education stand before God and clasp hands,
covenanting ‘to be faithful even unto death,’


cHaPp. L 5,


SS eee


Henceforth the making or the marring of
each cther’s happiness rests with that husband
and wife. Henceforth they are bound by «
tie strong as the law itself, and no discovery
of incompatibility of character, no change
of temporal circumstances, no mere incon-
veniences of position, only distinct criminal
acts, can ‘put asunder’ ‘what God hath
joined together.’ Well, therefore, does the
Service declare that it shoulda ‘not be taken


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





in hand unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly,
but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly,
and in the fear of God.’ ”"— Braden,

“Marriage is the best state for man in
general ; and every man is a worse man in
proportion as he is unfit for the married
state.”—Dr. Johnson.

“He that goes farto marry, goes to be
deceived or to deceive. The day you marry
you kill or cure yourself.” Spanish Proverbs,


—_—-}>——-


VERSE 6.


Theme.—Tue Seconp Great BEREAVEMEN®,


“Ts God less God, that thou art left undone?
Rise, worship, bless Him, in this sackloth spun,
As in that purple! ”—Mrs. Browning


Then died these two also.


Thus far the book of Ruth resembles that symphony of Beethoven, in which the
song of birds, the cheerful hum of a holiday crowd, . . . are hushed by the
crash of a sudden and threatening storm (Cox). Scarcely so: all along there has
been the undertone of sorrow, affliction following affliction. But we can imagine
years of happy prosperity (possibly ten) in Moab, since the last great calamity
(ver. 8). Nowa further trial—to Naomi the climax of all which has gone before,
a more terrible famine than that in the land of Israel.

I. We have Death here once again in the family circle. Three sepulchres
now attest his melancholy ravages (Kudie). This time the sons taken in the
flush of manhood ; not as the father. who might well have anticipated his end.
Note. (a) Even the young man’s life a vapour. Death no respecter of youth, or
strength, or beauty. The blossom as subject to be nipped as the flower, the
spark to be extinguished as the flame. Was it the “joy” and the “ornament”
(see note on ver. 2) of this household God took, or the ‘ weakly” and the
“pining” ones? Was the death sudden, or ushered in by signs of failing
strength, as the latter interpretation of the names would seem to intimate? The
Scripture language severe in its brevity, but touching in its simplicity, ‘‘ Then
died these two also” (see notes)—died in banishment, from their fatherland,
perhaps from their father’s God. (6) The young man’s plans vanity. Escaped
famine, but death overtook them, Founded their houses in Moab, Moab became
their grave (Lange). Probably determined not to return home until the famine
was over; when it was, they themselves were no more ( Lange i

II. We have separation once more in the househoid life. Husband from
wife, children from a fond parent. With Naomi, first it had been separation from
kinsfolk and acquaintances, then from husband, now from her sens. Thus the
Divine hand is removing one after another the ties whieh bind her affections
earthward. Note. A warning against seeking unmitigated satisfaction in family


joys. Weshould live together as those who may be called upon to separate at any
moment. Rather as those who look for a union beyond the separation (1 Thess.
iv. 14).


“ The love that rose on stronger wings,
Unpalsied when he met with Death,
Is comrade of the lesser faith,
That sees the course of human things,
* * * * *
That all, as in some piece of art,
Ts toil co-operant to an end.”—Tennyson,


ITI. We heave still further separation in a foreign land. New pein


HLOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. vHaP. I. 5.





added to Naomi’s former griefs—loss upon loss, trial following trial. The grief
of the two younger widows not mentioned—speechless before a more majestic
sorrow than its own. ‘‘ And the woman was left of her two sons and her hus-
band.” The desolation of bereavement never more vividly pictured than by these
touching phrases (Braden). To heighten the picture, what little wealth had
remained would seem to have vanished. Poverty comes in upon them “ like an
armed man.’’ Note. (a) The case by no means singular, even though the afflictions
are complicated. Bereavement! in what household is the shadow unknown ?


‘¢Too common! never morning wore
To evening, but some heart did break,


The widow’s story too familiar! Note. (b) These providences mystertous—in-
scrutable. Only on all theories of human life, the atheist’s among the rest, they
face us, and we must bow to them. Explain it or not, here is the fact. And
happy those alone who can say, as Naomi appears to have done, ‘ Although I
have lost the gift, [have not lost the Giver (Dr. Cumming). Faith only, though it
be “but as a grain of mustard seed,” can give consolation in such hours. Note.
(c) Some comfort remaining even to the most forlorn and desolate. The sons’ wives
left in the household—human love side by side with Divine care.


“Oh weep no more! there yet is balm
In Gilead : love doth ever shed
Rich healing where it nestles, spread
O’er desert pillows some green palm.
God’s ichor fills the hearts that bleed,
The best fruit loads the broken bough,
And in the wounds our sorrows plough,
Immortal love sows sovereign seed.”— Gerald Massey.


Improvement. (a) When heavy calamities befall, beware of speaking or even
thinking unadvisedly of them. ‘Shall not the Judge of all the earth,” ete,
(Gen. xviii. 25), Our best thoughts sometimes presumptuous on these matters,
b) The love or hatred of God not to be estimated by what we see of His doings.
(3 Let none because of youth put far off the day of death (Bernard). The
question of early death is one about which no like mystery hangs (Braden).
Some He takes away from the evil of the world; others for reasons beyond our
present knowledge and judgment. (d) Those least expected may be most likely to
go soonest. Remember now, etc. (Keel. xii. 1).

M. Henry on this:—

I. That wherever we go we cannot outrun death, whose fatal arrows fly in
all places.
II. That we cannot expect to prosper when we go out of the way of our
duty. He that will save his life by any indirect course shall lose it.
III. That death, when it comes into a family often, makes breach upon
breach. One is taken away to prepare another to follow ; that afflic-
tion not duly improved, God sends another of the same kind.
Bernard :—
That the Lord gave them time to marry and to enjoy their marriage for
some space, though they made no better use of their father’s death.
Thus good and patient is God unto men for their bettering.
I. That when God hath proved men in patience, and they will not make
right use thereof, then will He take them away.
TL That God can, and sometimes will, cut off young men in the flower of
their youth. So Nadab, Abihu, Hophni and Phinehas, Amnon, ete.
Some for their own sins, as Absalom ; others for their father’s, aa
David’s child (2 Sam. xii. 14) and the sons of Saul.


‘ The end of one sorrow is the beginning of _ from the top of a house, when one is gone
pea AY the drops of rain distilling another f-loweth ; like a ship upon the sea,


OHAP. I, 5.


being on the top of one wave presently is
cast down to the foot of another; like seed,
which being spread by the sower is haunted
by the fowls, being green and past their
reach is endangered by frost and snow, being
oe the winter’s hurt, by beasts in summer,

ing ripe is cut with the sickle, threshed
with the flail, purged in the floor, ground in
the mill, baked in the oven.”—Zopsell.

‘*The good husbandman may pluck his
roses and gather in his lilies at midsummer,
and for aught I dare say in the beginning of
the first summer months; and he may trans-
plant young trees out of the lower ground to
the higher. What is that to you or me?
The goods are his own "—Rutherford.

‘“With many it is ebb water before the
tide be at the full. The lamps of their lives
are wasted almost as soon as they are lighted,
The sand of their hour-glass is run out when
they think it is but newly turned.”—Secker,

“Oh ! these earthly separations from those
we love, how terribly do they scald and wear
the heart! day by day to see those things
laid out, as it were, in such stony, death-like
forms, which used to lie about here and there,
in that sweet abandonment of daily life.”—
Power.

“* Death strikes with equal foot the rustic
cottage and the palaces of kings.’ After ten
years. in which the members of this notable
family seem to have opposed a constant face
to the austere and threatening brow of mis-
fortune, and to have grown the dearer to each
other for the sorrows and calamities they
shared together, Mahlon and Chilion, still
young men, followed their father to the grave,
and Naomi was left a childless widow.
Songs of mirth were exchanged for songs of
mourning. The three men of the household
had gone to their long home, and the three
bereaved women were left to weep together,
and to comfort each other as best they might.”
— Cox.

“ Hven young men in the prime of their
age are subject to death, The sons of Jacob,
when they came to the table of Joseph, sat
down, the eldest according to his age, and
the youngest according to his youth: but
Death observes not this method; he takes
not men in seniority, but sometimes sends
them first to the burial that came last from
the birth, and those that came last from the
womb, first to the winding-sheet.”’—Fulier.


“ He the young, the strong, who cherished
Noble longings for the strife,
By the wayside fell and perished,
Weary with the march of life.”
Longfelion.


“Hush! listen! let the heart in silence

learn

How that of all things fair Time hath no
certain hold :

The fairest flower, the greenest leaf, may
fade.

Death is a ravening wolf, sparing no earthly
fold.” B.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH,


‘6 Death is the solemn thought of the world,
Let it be ever so vulgarized or common;
still beneath the tent of the eastern emir, or
in the crowded cemeteries of the capital,
death is an awful arresting thing. While
civilization has robbed other horrors of their
wonder, death is still the insoluble event.
But here we have something more than
death ; we have separation. . . . Death be-
comes awfully credible when those we are
accustomed to live with die. We feel then
as those tell us they have felt who have
experienced an earthquake. The earth, the
most stable of things, becomes to them
unstable, and to us the solid life becomes
hollow, and ‘I may be the next’ is the first
thought.”— Robertson.


“ God keeps a niche

In heaven to hold our idols ; and, albeit

He brake them to our faces and denied

That our close kisses should impair their
white,

I know we shall behold them raised com-
plete

The dust swept from their beanty—glori-
fied

New Memnons singing in the great Gode
light.” Mrs. Browning.


‘*When you and I die, Providence will not
be buried in our grave; the ‘ Redeemer liveth.’
We entrust to Him our eternal life, shall we
not entrust to Him our dearest earthly rela-
tives? He will be a husband to my beloved
wife, and a father to my children, when I can
no longer look after them; His gracious
presence will cheer them in solitude, shield
them in danger, guide their inexperience
through untrodden paths in the darkest
night.”—Dr. Waugh.

‘* Before we had the particular losses of
Naomi, now we have them all reckoned up
in the total sum. “A threefold cable,” saith
Solomon, ‘‘is not easily broken,’ and yet
we see Naomi’s threefold cable of comfort,
twisted of her husband and her two sons,
broken by death. Of the two sexes, the
woman is the weaker; of women, old women
are most feeble; of old women, widows most
woful ; of widows, those that are poor, their
plight most pitiful; of poor widow , those
that want children their case most doleful ;
of widows that want children, those that once
had them and after lost them, t.eir estate
most desolate; of widows that have had
children, those that are strangers in a foreign
country, their condition most comfortless.
Yet all these meet together in Naomi, as in
the centre of sorrow, to make the measure of
her misery ‘ pressed down, shaken together,
Tunning over.’ I conclude, therefore, many
men have had afiliction—none like Job;
many women have had tribulation—none
like Naomi.”— Fuller.

‘¢ High up the mountain slopes of Cha-
mouni there is a plain covered with verdure
and flowers. Thither the shepherds of the
Alps drive their flocks. At one point of the
ascent the rocks rise almost perpendicular,

81


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


oHAP. L &


en


When the flock arrives at this point, none is
bold enough to venture; but the shepherds
gather the lambsin their arms, and toss them
upon the plain; the whole flock clambers
after them, and soon is feeding upon the rich


trees of the Alps.’ Bereaved parents, the
lamb of your love has been carried up, and
beckons you to follow where are flowers
sweeter than those of the Alps, and air and
sunshine purer and brighter than is fonnd


herbage, or ruminating beneath the ‘rose- up in Chamouni.”—Die. of Illustrations.
———_— >
VERSES 6, 7.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NoTEs.—Ver. 6,7. Then [and] she arose. She arose in


order to return. Et surrexit ut in patriam pergeret (Vulgate). With her daughters-in-law,
Both the young women set out with the intention of going to Bethlehem (Bertheau and others)


That she might return. 373) (to return) applies strictly and grammatically to Naomi only,


For she had heard, By the mouth of an angel (Zargum). The cause of her rising to return
was not the death of her sons, but the message (Speaker’s Com.). That the Lord had visited,
etc. Because of the righteousness of Ibzan the judge, and because of the simplicity of the


ious Boaz (Zargum). yo occurs repeatedly for such a return of Divine remembrance
(Gangey Ths laeeeeee (comp. Luke i. 72, vii. 16), especially in the LXX., can hardly fail to
draw the mind onward to that used in connection with the coming of Christ (Wordsworth).
In giving them bread, Ps. cvii. 35—37; Luke i. 68. From the turn of the language it
may properly be inferred that the famine was not the result of war, but of drought (Lange).
And they went on the way. And they already went, etc. (Lange). _From this verse it appears
plain that all started out for the land of Judah (Bertheau)? Until now N: aomi had looked
on her daughters-in-law as only bearing her company for a while (Dr. Cassel, in Lange). The
journey to the borders of their own land would probably be an act of oriental courtesy,
whether they intended to proceed further or not (Speaker's Com.). The sense here demands
that this should be read with the following verse: ¢e., “ On their way Naomi said,” ete.


VERSE 6.
Theme.—Tue Awakentne In Moan.


“ Ah, graceless heart ! would that it could regain
From the dim storehouse of sensations past
The impress full of tender awe, that night
Which fell on us! It was as if the Christ
Had been drawn down from heaven to track us home.”
Jean Ingelow,


Then she arose with her daughters-in-law.


No rest, no comfort, no profit in Moab. Perhaps Naomi had said, ‘I shall die in
my nest” (Job xxix.18). Not so, the nest is broken up. Now she was ready to say, “I
would rather have been a beggar in Canaan, with my husband and my sons abcut
me, than be the possessor of everything in Moab without them ” (Tyng). Note.
How vain and empty the world will seem to us when the day of a similar awakening
comes! (Luke xv. 16,17.) Enjoyment gone, wealth vanished, hope departed,
loved ones taken away, Moab begins to shew itself in its real character. Like
the prodigal, Naomi “‘ came to herself,” and remembers now that there is bread
enongh and to spare in the Father’s house.

We have here—

I. fhe result of a mind’s transition. ‘She arose,” a decided, and, in this
case, a decisive step. The expression similar to that used in Luke xv. In all
probability there would be several preliminary stages: first, the longing for home,
then the resolve, then the act. Note. (a) Right purposes are good so far us they go,
to be profitable they must be followed by prompt and decisive action. This is espe-
ciaily true in the critical moments of humanlife. Note. (b) It is time to leave
the place of our abode when the godly are taken away, and none left but the wicked to
converse with (Bernard).

The awakening, no doubt, was painful; but marir, if is the beginning of a new

82


CHAP. L 6. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





life. Naomi’s experience a very common one,—through sorrow to repentance,
through bitterness to decision. Note. (c) Adversity saves multitudes whom prosperity
would possibly have destroyed. The world becomes distasteful, the pleasures of
Moab delight us no longer, rather they weary us. Then comes the old longing
for home. Many a prodigal, many a backslider, has been brought to himself again
in this way. Note. (d) Such awakenings are the work of the Holy Spirit, though
brought about by natural causes, Possibly she had heard the Divine voice saying,
‘“‘ Arise ye, depart,”’ etc. (Micah ii. 10, Isa. lii. 11) in a still more unmistakable
manner. A simple word aroused Jacob, and sent him back to Bethel (Gen. xxxv.
1). The best men need such at times. (See next outline.)

We have here—

_ II. The influence of a right and wise decision, not only upon her own
course of action, but upon “‘ her daughters-in-law.” If Elimelech’s going to Moab
had been the fatal thing in connection with his sons, Naomi’s return is to be a
blessing to one of the wives at least. This influence argues much in favour of
Naomi’s piety (cf. ver. 16) and her sweetness and beauty of character. Note. The
truly virtuous are of an attractive power (Bernard). Goodness, even among in-
fidels, will make itself friends. Orpah and Ruth ready to forsake their kinared,
their country, and even their own mother, for a stranger whose affinity died with
her sons (Bishop Hall).

We have here—

III. The reason of this immediate and decisive step. She had heard that
the Lord had visited, etc. Note (a) that God’s mercy is here as elsewhere the key-
note of man’s return. The pious Hebrew saw God in all things (Cow). Second
causes had not as yet hidden the Almighty. A lesson for to-day; (1) in temporal
affairs.

“Happy the man who sees a God employed
In all the good and ill that chequers life.”— Comper.

(2) in spiritual matters. In the larger sphere of human history, the fact that God
has visited His people (Luke i. 68) is the great reason for man’s return unto Him.
More than this, (6) We never shall return unto Him until we have seen the hand of
God in human affairs. Naomi’s faith quickened her footsteps homeward, a faith
which came by hearing: ‘‘ She had heard.” She believed, and a simple trust in God
solved all her difficulties. Hence “ she arose.” The reasons for her remaining in
Moab had ceased, if they ever existed. Now it was dangerous to remain. See
the hand of God in all this leading her (Isa. Ivii. 18). Recognize it even in the
rumour, ete. ‘Trifles in the moment of mdecision may be angel-hands, guiding
ns homeward and Godward, Note (c) Not all that is in Moab can keep the godly
there, when God calls them away (2 Cor. vi. 17, 18).

Bernard on ‘‘ How that the Lord had visited His people ” :—

I. That God seeth His people in adversity and want, and cometh in His
due time to help them. We are not to think ourselves forgotten in
great extremities (Exod. ii. 7, 8), but rest in the stability of His love
and promises.

Il. That God hath ever had more specially a people for His own, called His
people, called the sons of God (Gen. vi.). Not chosen out of any
merit in them, but of His mere love (Deut. vii. 8; Eph. i. 4).

IIL That corporal food and the necessaries of this life are God’s gift. (Deut.
xi, 14, 15; Hosea ii. 8, 9; Joel ii. 19). He makes the earth fruitful.
Man without Him can do nothing (Ps. cxxvii. 2; Hag.i.6; Deut.
viii. 18).

Fuller on this— aaaibe

By bread is meant all sustenance necessary for the maintaining of our lives,

whereof bread is the chiefest. As the temple of Dagon principally leaned on two

pillars, and fell te the ground when Samson took them away, so the buildings of

our bodies chiefly rely on bread and water for outward sustenance, Lo being
a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.





OHAP. 1.





taken away, they cannot but presently decay. Let others, therefore, wish those
dishes which curiosity hath invented rather to increase than satisfy hunger, which
are more delightsome to the eye than pleasing to the palate, yet more pleasing te
the palate than wholesome to the stomach: let us pray, ‘Give us this day our


daily bread.”


Bread is a dish in every course: without this can be no feast, with this can be


no famine.


“In all the ways of earthly feeling which
man can take in order to seek his happiness,
he must sooner or later fall into a death-like
absence of joy; it becoming clear to him
that he has fallen into a grievous delusion.”
—Lange.

“There had been a famine in Judah, but
ah! she found a far worse famine in Moab.
- . .. Her poverty when she arrived back
again seems to argue other troubles besides
bereavement. .... Far better was this begin-
ning of a return with conscious emptiness to
God than her former going out ‘full.’”—Tyng.

“We know not precisely how the change
was effected. . ... Perhaps the Divine
Spirit wrought by the power of memory,
thawed the ice away from the frosted spirit
by sunny pictures of the past—by the vision
of the ancestral home.”—Zhe Prodigal Son,
Morley Punshon.

“Whilst her husband and her sons lived, I
hear no motion of retiring home; now these
earthly stays are removed, she thinks pre-
sently of removing to her country. Neither
can we so heartily think of our home above,
while we are furnished with these worldly
contentments; when God strips us of them,
straightway onmr mind is homeward.’—
Bishop Hall.

“How often is it that in this way the
darkest day is the beginning of the brightest
life. Reverses, difficulties, trials, are often
amongst God’s best blessings, From the loss
of property is brought out very often the
latent energies of character, a power to suffer
and to act which, in the querulous being,
without a wish ungratified, you would have
scarcely said existed at all.”— Robertson.

“To Naomi there comes the voice, ‘ Arise,
this is not your rest, it is polluted.’ Like
the prodigal, for the first time she felt in her
heart, if she did not give utterance with her
lips, ‘I will arise and go to Bethlehem, the
house of bread, my Father’s house,’ "—Dr,
Cumming.

“Tt has been well and beautifully said that
woman has no life but in her family. While
her husband and sons lived, their home was
hers—there was the scene of her duties, there
of her affections ; but now those ties were
broken, she was called on to act for herself ;


and with energy and with dignity she did
act. Israel was her proper home; and now
it was seen, perhaps for the first time, that
her heart was there.”—Macartney.


** All are not taken; there are left behind
Living beloveds, tender looks to bring
And make the daylight still a happy thing
And tender voices to make soft the wind:
But if it were not so—if i could find
No love in all the world for comforting,
Nor any path but hollowly did ring
Where ‘dust to dust’ the love from life
disjoined,

And if, before those sepulchres unmoving,

I stood alone (as some forsaken lamb

Goes bleating up the moors in weary
dearth),

Crying, ‘Where are ye, O my loved and
loving ?’—

I know a voice would sound, ‘ Daughter, I


AM
Can I suffice for HEAVEN, and not for
earth?’ ” Mrs. Browning.


“When Naomi, the aged widow, proposed
to return to Bethlehem, the two young widows
were so charmed with her faith, so struck
with her meek submission beneath a load
that would have crushed the strongest giant
in the land of Moab, so convinced that this
aged widow had some spring of consolation
that the world had not, some sweet source of
peace that they knew not of, that both the
young widows, under impulsive attachment
to a beautiful character, resolved at all
hazards to go with her.”— Dr, Cumming.

“T suppose when any messenger srrived in
Moab out of the land of Canaan, Naomi did
presently repair unto him and load him with
questions concerning the estate of her country,
For nine years Naomi had no news, but of
want and scarcity ; yet the tenth year there
came a man who brought her word that the
valleys began to laugh and sing with plenty.”
—Friler.

“Let none therefore pretend in needless
excuses to linger in the land of Egy pt when
they may return unto the honey-flowing land
of Canaan. Joseph must not tarry, with his
wife and son, when he is dead that sought
the life of the child,”— Fuller


°


pe


VERSE 7.
Theme.—Tre Homewarp Pineroaer,


* What though the radiance which was once so bright


Be now for ever taken from


84


my sight,


 OHAP. 1.7 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.


SEE


Though nothing can bring back the hour
Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower
We will grieve not, rather find
Strength in what remains behind
In the primal sympathy
Which having been ever must be,
In the soothing thoughts that spring
Out of human suffering,
In the faith that looks through death,
In years that bring the philosophic mind.” — Wordsworth,


Wherefore she went forth out of the place.


The real commencement of the narrative as it concerns the true history of Ruth.
All else preparatory, explanatory, introductory. A fresh starting-point in the his-
tory of Naomi. Poor, solitary, and almost broken-hearted,—yet this is the most
promising hour of her life. Her prosperity dates from it, begins to dawn when
the night of affliction seems darkest. Divine wisdom has put a boundary to this
deep sea of affliction, and said, ‘‘ Here thy proud waves shall be stayed.” Christ
suffered Peter to sink, not to perish— Jonah to be overwhelmed, not destroyed—
sent Titus lest Paul should be swallowed up of sorrow (2 Oor. vii. 6). Note.
No state so bad, no circumstance so desperate, as to be considered altogether hopeless.
With God’s children the smoking furnace of temptation usually precedes the
smiling lamp of gospel consolation.— Macgowan.

Ip connection with this return, notice—

I. The thought and purpose. The home tics which bound Naomi to Moab
exist-no longer. Her husband dead; like Israel, happy only as she realizes that
her Maker is her husband (Isa. liv. 5), all things are ready, and now her face
is set towards Bethlehem. Returns like these the human response to the Divine
appeal, ‘I am married unto you” (Jer. iii. 14). When they spring up in the heart
of the true Israelite, where else can they lead but to the land of the sanctuary
and the promises? Necessary then and always that men should renew their
spiritual youth—trace back the path until they have assurance that they are
standing on holy ground. Jacob responded to a similar appeal, and went back
to Bethel, the place of the covenant (Gen. xxx.). Note. (a) Homeward with such
often, perhaps always, means Godward. Life seems to move ina circle sometimes,
departing only to come back again; wandering afar to return at length, finding
itself at last at the point from whence it started. Christian eaperience knows
eomething of this. With many, as years advance, there is a return to the old land-
marks, to the simplicity of old experiences, to the faith and theology learnt around
a mother’s knee. You may picture many an experience in this way—an oasis of
childhood and an oasis of old age, and between them the barren waste, scorched
of passion, and laid desolate of sin, which men call life. With Naomi, and with
all, the past irreparable, but the future availing. Note (b) in connection with this
return, the Divine intention must have embraced two things—(1) The renewal of
@ past consecration ; (2) The revival of a past spiritual life.

Notice, II. The significant fact. Men may rise from this lowness and dead-
ness, to this earnestness and newness of life, in a moment and with a word.
Samaon is caught in the Delilah spell, and bound with the Philistine bonds, but
something of the old strength lingers (Judges xvi. 8—15). Note. (a) A plain dis-
tinction between the true Israelite and those who know not God—enough for hope,
not enough for presumption. The child carries the home instincts wherever the
path may lead; the alien bas never known them, though he lives in the Father’s
house. Naomi an illustration of this. Life without God, a desert to which
the sweet rains of heaven bring no fertility. But life with this thought of God
in the heart, hidden, slumbering, like the parched and thirsty earth, which may
revive again in the time of the latter rain. Naomi’s past history in Moab may
have been a dead and barren one. In no single point had her condition heen
improved by the change. Her experienco the type of a very common Christian


BO


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. I. 7.


SSS


experience. The freshness of first love—gone. The glow of zeal and the ardour
of devotion—a thing of the past. The joy of believing—well-nigh forgotten.
Now love has torments, and faith is full of fears, and devotion is a burden.
Note. (6) Wor such there is a return: (1) it may be now; (2) it may be accepted;
(8) i may be final and for ever. We are to think of it as necessary—as not





impossible—as not too late.


“In December, the days grow shorter till
the twenty-first, the shortest day, when, at a
precise moment, the sun pauses and begins to
return towards the north. . ... So there is
& precise moment when the soul pauses in its
departure from God, and begins to return
towards Him. The fruits of that return may
not be at once visible; there may be long
interior conflicts before the coldness and
deadness of the heart is overcome; but at
length the good will triumph, and instead
of winter and desolation, all the Christian
graces will spring up in the summer of divine
love.” —FReecher.


“ With fettered steps we left our pleasant

land,

Envying our fathers in their peaceful grave.

The strangers’ bread with bitter tears we
steep ;

4nd when our weary eyes should sink to
sleep,

"Neath the murk midnight we steal forth
to weep.....

The born in sorrow shall bring forth in
Joy;

Thy mercy, Lord, shall lead Thy children
home,

And Canaan’s vines for us their fruits shall
bear,

And Hermon’s bees their honeyed stores
prepare.” Milman.


“Like Bunyan’s pilgrim when he had slept


in the bowers of ease, there is to be thet
humiliating journey, which is not forward,
but backward, until the lost treasure has been
recovered,” —,

“The Bethlehem of the past may become
the Bethlehem of the future, once again ‘a
house of bread’ to God’s chosen people, if
they will only turn their faces thitherward,
It may seem a pilgrimage of penitence and
sorrow—the path slopes backward and down.
ward—but new consecration is new life, and
this is the repentance which needs not to be
repented of.”—B,

“As in music there are particular key-
notes, so also in the whole wide life of the
world and of man. Life has a deep key-
note which answers to the note of life in itg
bloom. It is called return—return to God—
return home—and it is accompanied with a
longing after home.”—Lange.

“ She arose to return, not to another idola-
trous land, but ‘home.’ "—Tyng.

“Memory is busy, and upon her painted
fency she pictures the home-scenes of the
happy past..... Anxiety is busy, and she
projects her wonder into the nearing future,
and speculates upon the probabilities of her
reception.” —Punshon.

“There is not a trouble so deep and swift-
running that we may not cross safely over,
if we have courage to steer, and strength to
pull.”— Beecher,


eee cee


VERSES 8—10.
CRITICAL AND EXEGETIOAL Nores.— Ver. 8,10. And Naomi said [Then said Naomi] untae,


The first recorded utterance of Naomi.


Cox imagines them having reached the ford o! the


Arnon [N. boundary of Moab], or perhaps the fords of the Jordan (E. boundary of Judah],
Go, return each. Shews that they were not natural sisters (Bernard). To her mother’s house,
The mention of the mother’s house, which the separation of the women’s house or tent from
that of the men facilitates, is natural... . has more tenderness... . does not imply the death
of their fathers (Speaker’s Com.). Ruth’s father was still alive (ii. 11) (cf. Lev. xxii, 13).


The Lord deal kindly with you. Lit. Jehovah do kindness with you. In Dy the suffix


is masc,, although referring to women, a colloquial inaccurac
With the dead. The Papists expound it, that these women


found in conversations ( Lange).
id fast and pray for the souls of


their deceased husbands (Fuller). The sense is in all probability, “You have been kind to


your husbands, who now are dead, whilst they were living.”
more may be implied. The Lord [Jehovah] grant you,
surprisingly corrupt in the Hebrew (Kennicott).


[See Intro. par. 2.] So with the verbs.


like, is intended to be predicated of females,
‘Prof, Lee). All but two of these inaccuracie
Ye may find rest [a resting-place} each in t


Fuller thinks, however, that
yo The pronouns in these verses are
Originally colloquial inaccuracies ( Gesen.)


When courage, virility, fortitude, efficiency, or the
these verbs are put in the masculine gender
§ are actually found in conversations (Lange).
he house of her husband. She wished them


happier marriages than they had with her sons, who were so soon taken from them (Josephus).
In the East of antiquity, the position ef an unmarried woman a very unhappy and perilous
one (Cow). The Hebrews spoke of the husband’s house as a woman’s “menuchah,” or * rest,”


—her secure and happy asylum fron) servitude,
giruction see Gesen. 120, Then she kissed the


B6


m. To take leave of them (Keil),


neglect, license ( Coz, Lange). On the cone


So Gen,


onap. I. 8, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





xxxi. 28, 55; 2 Sam. xix, 39; Acts xx. 37. Gave them her parting kiss, as the Jews call it
(Gill). A rejection of every form of homage proceeds from superstition rather than from
Scripture usage (Macgowan). And they said, ‘‘Surely.’’ »> before a direct statement serveg


to strengthen it, and it is almost equivalent to a positive assurance (Keil, Wright). Not true
fn all cases (Lange). Dr. Cassel trans. ‘‘ for,” but first supplies, We eat tab a back.”
Best taken like or: in the New Testament before words directly quoted (Lange). Not so,
tat to be translated as “certainly ” (Wright) ; “nay” (Geddes, Cow); in an adversative sense
as “but” (Rosen.). We will return. To be proselyted (Zargum).


VERSE 8.


Theme.—TuE First Triau or AFFECTION,


“© friendship ! of all things the
Most rare, and therefore most rare because moss
Excellent; whose comforts in misery
Are always sweet, and whose counsels in
Prosperity are ever fortunate,”—Lilly.


And Naomi said, .... Go, return each to her mother’s house.


The farewell greetings of friends, the words spoken in parting—everything
connected with such moments—will tend to draw out our truer and deeper cha-
racteristics, as well as our tenderest and holiest feelings. Having travelled some
distance, Naomi’s unselfish nature manifests itself (Braden). Silence has com-
mended her virtues so far. It would seem she had not urged Orpah and Ruth
to go with her even to this distance. We are not to see her, however, in what
follows, as careless of their best interest. They are to go willingly and knowing
what lies before them, if they are to go wisely. The Targum puts this in a very
striking manner [cf. Crit. Note on ver. 16]. Of course their presence would have
been a comfort to Naomi. But note. A true lover ts loath to disadvantage friends
for the sake of private interests (Bernard).

We have here—

I. The care and thoughtfulness of a generous spirit for the outward estate
of others. She knew they had friends in Moab, none in Judah. Even a friend-
ship like hers could scarcely supply the place of a mother’s love. Go, return each
to her mother’s house. To go forward with her might be for the saving of their
souls. Might there not also be something of selfishness in this ? Note. Our efforts
for the good of others need to be watched very narrowly when they coincide with our
own interests. Selfishness the most subtle and insidious of ail sins. Judas an
instance of one who under a plausible pretext cloaked the most mercenary
motives (John xii. 6). If Naomi errs at all, she errs on that side which demands
a sacrifice of her convenience and feelings. Her sense of justice and love towards
these young warm-hearted women will not allow her to reap any advantage at
their cost (Braden). She would not have them come to Bethlehem merely on her
account. Notice. (a) Self-love contrary to Christ's commands; against the true
fellowship of Christians one with another; contrary to the end of our calling
(1 Cor. x. 24; 2 Cor. xii. 14; Eph. iv. 28). (6) A sin as between man and man.
Contrary to that care which God commands for the preservation of other men’s
estates (Deut. xxii, 2—4 ; Exod. xxiii. 4, 5). (c) A sin as between man and God.
Belf-love is idolatry. Note. True religion will shew its influence in every part of
our conduct; like the sap of a living tree, which penetrates the most distant
boughs.

Ti. A fair test and trial of the fervour and sincerity of those who have
already been influenced towards good things. The deepest religious interests
were involved. A choice like this not to be made lightly and from mere personal
motives as towards ourselves. Our social influence may be consecrated, but
questions like these are to be decided on a higher ground.

Naomi would try (a) the strength of their atlection to herself. Rather she


wou'd see (b) whether nature wrought more powerfully than grace (Dernard),
.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


oe


80 Christ tried those who followed Him


—





(Mark x, 17—22). Note.


OHAP, x, 8.


(Luke ix. 57, 58), The young ruler


With those who have been led towards holy things
by the force of a noble and consecrated life,
The Saviour puts it in one strong and e


a similar time of testing is sure to come.


xpressive phrase (Luke xiv. 26). The


hour arrives when every secondary consideration, every subordinate motive, ig


counted as nothing in the balances.


The momentous qnestion stands on its own
merits, and asks of us a deliberate choice.


Notice that the same issues were


involved here as upon Carmel (1 Kings xviii, 21).


“Tt is no sign of friendship to draw others
into any calamity for our comfort’s sake, how-
ever much they may press it. Bear the bur-
den bravely alone, if it be possible, and do
not crush another heart, though it plead with
generous sympathy to share the load,”—
Braden.

“Naomi could not be so insensible of her
own good as not to know how much comfort
she might reap to the solitariness both of her
voyage and her widowhood by the society of
these two younger widows, whose affection
she had so well tried; even every partnership
is a mitigation of evils; yet so earnestly doth
she dissuade them from accompanying her,
as that she could not have said more, if she
had thought their presence irksome and bure
densome. Good dispositions love not to
pleasure themselves with the disadvantage of
others; and had rather be miserable alone,
than to draw in partners to their SOTTOW }
for the sight of another’s calamity doth rather
double their own ; and if themselves were
free, would affect them with compassion,
As contrarily, ill minds care not how many
companions they have in misery, nor how
few consorts in good; if themselves miscarry,
they would be content all the world were en.
wrapped with them in the same distress,”—
Bishop Hail.

“A sound-hearted friend will follow the
apostle’s advice, not seeking his own, but his
friend’s welfare, True love will not make


worse, where it cannot make better.”—
Bernard.

“ Many give counsel like lawyers for their
fees, but few like Naomi for their conscience,
She loves their company well, but counsela
their safety better.”— Topsell,

“It is harder for me than for you that we
must part. But the hand of the Lord is gone
out against me. I have no hope for the
future. I must walk my darkened path
alone, But you, you may still find an asylum
with the people of your own race. Go then
Vm return each to her mother’s house,”—

a.

“ Maternal love knows best how to comfort
a daughter in affliction.” — Keil,

“ Here we see widows, if poor, are to be
maintained by their parents. These widows
(1 Tim. v. 16) were not to be burdensome to
the Church, but to be relieved by their own
kindred.” — Fuller.

“Tf religion does not make us lovely and
amiable in our family relations, it does no- -
thing for us, put deceives us to our ruin,”—
Simeon,

“‘Ittai the Gittite, when following David
in his flight from Absalom, was urged to
leave him, as Elisha also was repeatedly by
Elijah, previous to his assumption to heaven,
There was no positive duty lying upon them,
or, at all events, none which David and
Elijah were not at liberty to dispense with.”
—Simeon,


Sy
VERSES 8, 9.


Theme.—A BENEpictIon AND A VALEDICTION,


“Wouldst thou from sorrow find & sweet relief ?
Or is thy heart oppressed with woes untold ?
Balm wouldst thou gather for corroding grief ?
Pour blessings round thee like a shower of gold.”—Charlos Wilcoa.


The Lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt, ete,
The Lord grant you that ye may find rest, ete.


A scene now begins of unequalled tenderness ané amiableness (Lange).


th with wisdom,
law of kindness” (Prov. xxxi, 26) truly verified in Naomi,


with salt (Col. iv. 6), her words breathe all the fervour of pie

We find in them (2) a generous recog
an afiectionate regard for
This generous, unselfish spirit, one of the secrets of Naomi’s influence.
If we or more like Naomi ix tne Church, we might expect


inspired words, “She openeth her mou


a self-denying love.
these two young women, and (0)


The
and in her tongue ia the
The speech seasoned
ty and the warmth of
nition of the worth of
their future welfare,
Note,
to win mere like Liuth


®HAP. I. 9, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
eae ee a a


‘rom the world. See how takingly love behaves itself in every condition, on every
occasion, to every person, and about everything (Pennington). It sees God in
ill things, and all things in God.

The text contains, I. A prayer. Like David, her eyes are unto the Lord
(Ps. xxv.15). She could not part without praying with and for them (.Macyowan),
Poor and destitute, she had no other means of requiting their kindness (fuller),
No other was necessary. A prayer like this better than all gifts. Goes up in a
shower of tears, but descends in a shower of blessings—returns laden with
comfort, like the southern winds in Egypt, whose wings are charged with the
sweet odours of spices (Penn).

Notice. Naomi prayed with equal earnestness for both. Did not know which
the Lord had chosen (Macyowan).

She asks for them (a) The favour of God; His kindness, smile, benediction—
all the Hebrews would include under their beautitul pbrase, “The light of His
countenance (Numb. vi. 26; Ps. iv. 6, xl. 8, Ixxxix. 15); (b) The comforts and
blessings which with God’s approval would flow from a second marriage. Only
in the house of a husband could a woman be sure of respect and protection (Coa),
(See Orit. and Ex. Notes.) The prayer agrees with the apostle’s direction
(1 Tim. v. 14), which applies to young widows like Orpah and Ruth. (c) And
these in the measure they had meted to the dead (cf. Matt. vii. 2; Col. ili, 23,
24) and to her.

Notice. (1) Duties honourably fulfilled in the past come in to bring a blessing
upon us in the present. Who would not wish for a similar commendation to this
of the text? especially with regard to our treatment of the dead. They had
given good measure, pressed down, running over ; now it is returned to them,
When mothers-in-law will thus freely testify of their sons’ wives, it is evident that
duty has been nobly fulfilled ; for they usually set up a high standard (Braden).
An instinctive conviction in every heart that God will reward us according to our
treatment of others (Judges i. 6; Rom. ii. 15; of. also Exod. xxi. 23—25;
1 Sam. xv. 83; James ii. 13),

(2) That dutiful conduct has few sweeter rewards in this world than its acknow-
ledgment. Even aliens to the hope of Israel have experienced this. Ruth does
not appear to have exceeded Orpah in affection for those who were gone. The
commendation shared equally by both. Shews, on the other hand, that moral
and social virtues, and the faultless discharge of the duties of this life, offer no
suitable ground for the hope of salvation. How many wives, as tender and
sympathetic as Orpah, have gone back again, and been unfaithful to the little light
which has shone upon them from God! Yet, even with these, no act of kindness,
no self-sacrifice, no silent deed of love, is unknown to Him.

(8) That prayer for us gains warmth and power by what men seein us. Every
wish is a prayer with God (Mrs. Browning). The warmest wishes will in the
main follow the most worthy. Live well! and the prayers of the good will gain
in faith and confidence. So Paul evidently regarded Timothy (2 Tim. i. 8—6).

The text contains, II. A valediction. Her motherly benediction was the best
valediction (Trapp). She blesses them not in the name of Chemosh, but in the
name of Jehovah (Lawson). Gold and silver she had not for them, but that,
which was better, heartiest orisons and well-wishes (7rapp). A heart impelled by
Jove and self-devotion does much to invest the scene with its sacred charm. No
priest like Melchisedec, yet Naomi blesses them as the patriarch blessed Abraham
—as Simeon blessed the infant Christ and His mother (Luke ii. 84), with like
faith, and a like trust in God (tb. 28)—as Elizabeth blessed Mary (ib. i. 42—45).

Note. Love amid its own sorrows wi!l still think of the welfare of others. Has a
word of comfort and kind wishes in whdt is intended to be the hour of separation.
We get a glimpse here (1) Into a family life that may serve as a model for all
(Lange). What a picture of peace and happiness does it suggest | The women
bave not only heard the religion of Jehovah confessed in Moab, but ay have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH. CHAP, &








aeen the expression of it in the life (Lange). Never more so than now. (2) Into
the way in which the godly used and made memorable the separations which come


in life (cf. Gen. xxviii. 1—8, xxxi. 55, xiii, 14).
elders of Ephesus to God (Acts xx. 82).


So Paul commended the
So Jonathan separated from David


(1 Sam. xx. 42). Men do it now, but not with that reverence and earnest desire
meet and befitting in such a case (Bernard).


Bernard on this—


J. That it is a duty to pray for those who do either us or ours good


(ii. 12; 1 Sam. xxv. 88, and xxiv. 19).


If, That, at parting, friends are to pray one for another (Gen. xxviii. 1—8,
xxxi. 55, xliil. 14; Acts xx. 36).

Til. That the godly are persuaded that the Lord is a merciful rewarder a{
the duties of love which one doth toward another (Col. iti. 24),

IV. That children should so well deserve of parents, yea, though Irv
parents-in-law, as that they may be moved heartily to pray fo


them.


.


VY. That God will not only barely reward, but so deal with us as we deal


with others,


ds ye have dealt with the dead and with me,
I, That daughters of a bad race may prove good wives and good children-


in-law sometimes.


Il, That good and truely loving wives love their husbands’ parents for their


husbands’ sake.


The Lord grant you that ye may find rest.
I. That godly and wise friends pray not only in general, but in particular,
aa they know them to stand in need, for whom they pray.
II. That godly mothers-in-law are hearty well-wishers to their children-in-


law.


III. That second marriages are lawful.
IV. That husbands are to be their wives’ rest.
V. That it is God’s blessing to be peaceably marricd
Fuller remarks on kindly... . as ye have dealt with the dead :—~


A godly man dying, leaves behind him,


First, his body ; to which we must be kind by burial and lamentation.
Secondly, his estate; to which we must be kind by careful and faithful


administration.


Thirdly, his children, friends, or kindred ; to whom we must be kind by love


and affection.


Fourthly, his faults and failings; to which we must be kind by silence and


suppression,


Fifthly, his memory and virtues ; to which we must be kind by congratulation,


commemoration, and imitation.


“ Prayer eases the soul in times of distress,
when it is oppressed with griefs and fears, by
giving them vent, and that in so advantage-
ous @ way, emptying them into the bosom of
God. The very vent, were it but into tue
air, gives ease; or speak your grief rather to
a statue than smother it; much more ease
does it give to pour it forth into the lap of
a confidential and sypathising friend, even
though unable to help us; yet still more of
one who can help; and of all friends, our
God is, beyond all comparison, the surest,
and most affectionate, and most powerful.”—
Leighton.

“The words of parting friends, who are
likely never to meet again, make an im-


‘oe


pression not to be erased, Tey are like the
words of the dying ; for our friends are dead
to us when we see them no more.”—Lamgon,
“ Our duties which we discharge to parents
or husbands are as pledges before the Lord to
do good unto us. . . . . Goodness procureth
goodness, aid evil begetteth evil, like as birds
breed birds, and fishes fishes,”—Zonsell.
“When the tribe of Reuben, Gad, and
half Manasses erected the altar Ed at the
passage over Jordan, it startled all the rest
of the tribes, as if under it they had hatched
some superstitious design; whereas indeed
the altar was not intended for sacrifice,
but was merely an altar of memorial, to
evidence to posterity that these two tribes


CRAP. I. 9.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


re -
a preeeein}


and a half, though divided from the rest,
were vonjoined with them in the worship of
the same God. In like manner, when some
ministers thank God for the departure of His
servants, some people are so weak, and some
so wilful, to condemn such for passages of
Popery, as if superstitious prayers were made
for their departure ; whereas, indeed, such
congratulation, on the contrary, speaks our
confidence on their present bliss and happi-
ness, and continueth the Church militant
with the Church triumphant, as the com-
pleting one entire Catholic Church of Jesus
Christ.”— Fuller,

“Tt is the best remembrance of our dead
progenitors to follow their virtues. St. Paul
cannot look upon Timothy, but presently
calls to mind his mother Eunice and his
grandmother Lois, though the latter, no
ioubt, was long since departed.”— Fuller.

‘““ Men and women were joined in marriage
\ Gen. ii.) to the end to be a mutual help one
to the other; but many prove such helpers
as the king of Assyria did to Ahaz (2 Chron.
xxvii. 20), of whom it is said, ‘ He distressed
him, but helped him not.’ ”"— Fuller.

‘A man’s best fortune or hig worst is his
wift.”—Lnglish Proverd.

“Tt is an honour to the deceased sons,
Mablon and Chilion, that they made such a
selection of wives; but they must also have
been worthy of tbe enduring love they
awakened, notwithstanding that there were
no children to strengthen the bonds of
affection. The attachment of the Moabitish
women, Ruth and Orpah, to their new family
must be grounded on psychological facts,
with a knowledge of which exegesis cannot
dispense. The Moabitish women had entered
into an Israelitish house, and had breathed
the beneficent atmosphere of a family of
Judah, Marriage and family life form the
real mirror of religious belief and worship.
Hence the apostle, in his sublime manner,
arranges the relations of husband and wife


by referring to the love of Christ for His
Church (Eph. v. 22), Ancient Israel there-
fore distinguished itself from the inhabitants
of Canaan, not merely by the name of its
God, but by its life at home in the family,
by faithfulness and love to wife and child,
Purity and morality in marriage were the
necessary results of faith in the only living
God.” —Lange.

“The unhappy relations between daughter
and mother-in-law, elsewhere usual, must in
general have been unknown in Israel. Other-
wise the prophet could not represent it as a
sign of the extremest social ruin that as the
son against the father and the daughter
against the mother, so (Micah vii. 6) the
daughter-in-law rises up against the mothers
in-law.” —Lange.

“The mother-in-law has forgotten that she
was ever a daughter-in-law. The best mother
in-law is one who is dead.’—German Pre
verbs.

“Here we learn, God, in the rewarding of
the good deeds of His servants, dealeth with
them accordingly as they have done with
others. Yet far be it from us to suppose
that in our stained and imperfect works there
is any meritorious virtue, which deserveth
that God should proportion a reward unto
them ; but this freely proceedeth from God's
favour, who, to encourage us in well-doing,
will not suffer a cup of cold water to pass
without its reward. Do we desire, then, to
leave dutiful children and faithful servante
hereafter? Let us be dutiful to our parents,
faithful to our masters, On the other side,
hath God afflicted us with Zibahs to our
servants, and with Absaloms to our sons?
Let us reflect our eyes on that which is past,
and call ourselves to account, whether we
formerly have not been unfaithful to our
masters, undutiful to our parents : no doubt
we may then take up the confession of Adoni-
bezek: ‘As I have dealt with others, so the
Lord hath done to me,’ ”"—Fuller,


“ Benign restorer of the soul,
Who ever fliest to bring relief,
When first we feel the rude control
Of Love or Pity, Joy or Grief.”—Rogers, On a Tear,


Then she kissed them, and they lifted up their voice and wept.


In every life these sudden outbursts of feeling. The clouds do not gather and
the showers fall more naturally than sorrow expresses itself in tears. Christ
Himself has shewn us that even a perfect humanity is not cutside the realm of
this law (John xi.). Note. (a) Apathy is not fortitude. The Christian is no
Stoic. Firmness with him is to exist side by side with the tenderest susceptibili-
ties (Kecles. iii. 4, vii. 2; Rom. xii. 15).

Times even when a loud and demonstrative sorrow like this is appropriate ;
They lifted up their voice and wept. So the Ephesian elders said farewell to
Paul (Acts xx. 37, 88), ‘‘sorrowing most of all that they should see his face no
more.” §o0 with these three widows. Their love was a passion of the heart,
breaking forth into wailing and weeping (Bernard). Note. (b) Community of
trials unites human hearts, as fire unites metals (Dr. Waugh).

They wept—

I. At the recollection of the many endearing and joyful eh eraye of the

4


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP. 1. 9,


a a a Se a EL ES


past, Their tears a tribute to the love which bound them so closery together to
the memories they shared in common, and to “the dead,” with whom they had


dealt so faithfully.


The very joy which had been theirs comes in now to


enhance their sorrow. Naomi’s reference to the past (ver. 8) probably the key


to this affecting scene.


II. At the realization of their poverty and defenceless condition.
however, love was strengthened rather than abated by their trials. :
Note. There ts a charitable and holy weepina


evidently drawn them closer together.


So far,
Affliction had


Sor the miseries of others (Bernard), and of our own.
III. At the very thought of a separation as possible. Adieu!—more tears


have been shed at that word than at the utterance of any other,


Separation !—a


mysterious, if a familiar subject. Its shadow seems to have fallen upon the


spirit of Christ Himself as He wept at the tomb of Lazarus,
women, Naomi’s kiss meant their dismissal,


With these young
and they wept at the thought of


parting with one who had so endeared herself to them. Note. One of the sorest
afflictions incident to this life is the everlasting separation of those who are mutually


dear to each other (Lawson).


IV. In protestation of their fidelity. Possibly the bitterest trial of all with
both was that Naomi should doubt their willingness to go with her, and thus put


it to the test.


The event (ver. 14) proved that Naomi was right.


So Peter


viewed the words of Christ (Mark xiv. 27—81), and protested ‘‘the more


vehemently.”
and Peter both sincere, but mistaken.


taken always as a sign of ultimate re


Note. Tears are not always a proof of an enduring fidelity. Orpah
So present sorrow for sin is not to be
pentance. Many who have wept with


Christ, it may be, as well as many who have done wonderful works in His
name, will be found at last saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open unto us” (Matt. vii. 22 :


Luke xiii. 25).
Bernard on this—
Then she kissed them.


This action we may find fourfold: carnal, as in fleshly
lust; hypocritical, as it was with Job and Judas; holy,


of which the apostle


speaks (1 Cor. xvi. 20); or civil, as here used at the meeting of friends (Gen.


xxix. 11, xxxiii. 4), at their departing (Gen. xxxi. 55).


It was honestly used to


testify love and unity; therefore in the primitive Church, before they received the


sacrament, they thus saluted one another.


And they lifted up their voice and wept,


Weeping is used in Scripture—I. To express sorrow at the parting of friends


(2 Kings xiii. 14; 1 Sam. xx.


41); II. For very joy (Gen. xlv. 14, xlvi. 29,


xxix. 11); II. In pity and compassion at the misery of others (Job xxx. 25;


Jer. iv. 19; Luke xix,
xxiv. 16),


“Observe the beautiful simplicity of Scrip-
ture, which counts it not a thing unmanly to
own that Abraham, the stern, iron-hearted
saint, has wept. J oseph ‘lifted up his voice
and wept,’ Jacob, Peter, Christ, are all said
to have wept. Contrast this with the con-
ventional feeling which represents grief ag
unworthy manhood.”— Robertson,


“Tears! what are tears? The babe weeps

in its cot;

The mother singing; at her mazrriage-bell

The bride weeps, and before the oracle

Of high-faned hills the poet has forgot

Such moisture on his cheeks, Thank God
for grace,

Ye who weep only! If as some have done,

Ye grope tear-blinded in a desert place,


2


41); IV. At the apprehension of kindness (1 Sam.


And touch bnt tombs,—look
tears will run

Soon in long rivers down the lifted face,

And leave the vision clear for stars and
sun.” Mrs. Browning.


“Who never wept "—What right have you
to say that of angels?’ None! I own to none
in revelation, none in reason, none in any-


up! those


thing, ex-ept a spontaneous and universal


idea.” —Llihu Burritt.

“Through the dim windows of affliction
how changed is the aspect of the world | how
cold, and grey, and desolate, all its radiant
glory departed, all its beauteous hues reduced
to one dull leaden sadness ! The tears of
sorrow are like spiritual lenses, shewing ug
the world in its true character, as a poor,
empty, unsatisfying thing.”— Anon,


chap. 1. 10.


“Tt is better for a Christian to be sorrow-
fal, than secure as the people of the world
are.” — Luther.

“ Adversity is the only furnace of friend-
ship. If love will not abide both fire and
anvil, it is but counterfeit: so in our love to
God we do but crack and vaunt in vain, if we
cannot be willing to suffer for Him.”— Bishop
Ffall.

“The observation here may be the same
which the Jews collected (John xi,), which,
when they saw our Saviour weep for Lazarus,
they said, ‘ Behold how He loved him!’ So
these tears in this place were the expression
of their affection. Sorrow, like the river of
Jordan in the first month, did overflow the
banks, and streamed water down their cheeks.”


HOMTLETIC COMMMENTARY: RUTH.
ee





,

she kissed them, wished she had somewhat
better to give them, but silver and gold she
had none. However, this parting kiss shall
be the seal of such a true friendship as
(though she never see them more) she will
while she lives retain the pleasing remem-
brance of. If relations must part, let them
thus part in love, that they may (if they never
meet again in this world) meet in the world
of everlasting love.”—Matthew Henry.


““ What precious drops are those
Which silently each other’s track pursue,
Bright as young diamonds in their infant
dew?” Dryden.
“The rose is sweetest washed with morning


—Fuller.
“ She dismissed them with great affection :


oes


VERSE 10.
Theme.—Tur Prouisina ComMENCEMEN?.


“Call to thy God for grace to keep
Thy vows, and if thou break them weep—
Weep for thy broken vows, and vow again,
Vows made with tears cannot be still in vain."— Herbert,


dew
And love is loveliest when embalmed in
tears.” Scott,


And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee.


Youth is the season of warm and generous emotions. Renewed proofs of Naomi’s
affection only bind these young women to her with stronger ties (Braden). Such
a love a chain not easily broken (Braden). Note. (”) In all this we are to see the
reward of a godly affection and a consistent walk. Piety, wherever found, bas the
power to win the hearts of people (Stari). She won love because she was Naomi,
‘‘ pleasant ”’ (Lange). She cherished no vanity, sought no strife, and did not wish
to rule; hence she had peace and love (Lange). (b) We should so live that others
by our good example may be drawn to love the truth (Gen. xxxiv. 31; Luke
vill, 16). Naomi’s character sheds 1 Instre upon a whole nation. For thy sake
we are drawn in love with the whole people (Topsell). Besides, to follow and go
with Naomi, meant to serve the Lord. So Ruth understood it afterwards (ver. 16).
and we can scarcely imagine Orpah intending to serve Chemosh now she resolves
to go forward with Naomi. (c) Many infidels and carnal persons are sooner drawn to
the Lord by the works which they see than by the words which they hear (Topsell).

e have—

Mi An apparent agreement. They walk together—journey on the same road,
are engaged in the same object, apparently with the same results. Now they
protest in the same language. Worthy of attention, that their first utterance
recorded by the inspired writer is a vow of fidelity to Naomi. Their choice
voluntary, made with seeming deliberation, and after being urged very earnestly
and affectionately in a contrary direction.

See in this— ; zie

(1) An encouraging and happy commencement. Naomi can rejoice for the present,
in not knowing the difference between them, and the Divine record gives no sign
as yet. God only knows the Orpah from the Ruth at this stage, outwardly there
is nothing to distinguish them. Note. It ts ours to rejoice im the beginnings of
good things, irrespective of after results. Not for us to turn any back (Lyng). We
should encourage and not suspect, rejoice rather than criticize. The Christian is
tne sower of the good seed, not the separater between the tares and the wheat.
God’s command to-day, Let both grow together until the harvest (Matt. xiii. 80).

(2) A purpose good and commendable so far as tt was carried out. A an gdd


HOMILETIO COMMEN14.tY: RUTH. cHaP. 1. 10.


Le


return, etc, §o they both said, and said as they thought (Trapp). No reason to
doubt the sincerity of either (Lawson). For awhile they travelled happily and
affectionately together, and there seemed no prospect of their separation. §o in
the heavenward journey with the believer and the mere professor. Whatever can
be done in religious appearance in the world, and without an absolute separation of
the heart from the world, they may have in common (Tyng). J ourney together
to the very extremities of Moab. Note. We mistake life, and read tt amiss, when we
look for those fine distinctions between the righteous and the wicked which shall one
day be made apparent.

We have here—

II. A startling contrast. Undeveloped, unseen as yet, but real and already
apparent in the eyesof God. Orpah upon second thoughts did otherwise (Trapp).
The impulse with her good, but frail. She lacked the deep earnestness of Ruth.
The seed sprang up, but it withered « immediately ” (Matt. xiii. 5,6). Her choice
the result of passion, and an earthly affection, not rooted in lungings after God
and the true Israel, as with her sister-in-law (ver. 16). She loved Naomi, but even
with all this her affections were back in Moab. And go even now the thorns were
springing up which were to choke the good seeds of a noble resolution, made and
partially carried out.

So in spiritual things it is not every blossom which comes to fruit. They fall
away (Luke viii. 18) speedily, miserably, inexplicably, irrevocably. Note. A con-
version in the understanding, sentiment, or imayination may be a flower, but will be
fruitless (Oosterzee). The promise is not the performance; beginning well is not
always a sign of ending well. There is a great difference between the same mind
st different times. Saul in a passion promised fair (1 Sam. xxiv. 16, 17, xxvi. 21),
but David knew there was no trusting to either his tears or his talk (Trapp).
Note. Strong passions, without a settled judgment, commonly produce weak resolutions
(Matthew Henry).

Lessons (1) How short-lived are the noblest purposes when made in our own
strength! Like the morning cloud and the early dew (Hos. vi. 3). Orpah and
Ephraim, types of those only too common in our churches. (2) We ought not to
mistake every determination to walk with God's people as a sign of true grace,
Regeneration is a change of heart, not a mere momentary change of habit,
(See also on ver. 14.)

Macgowan on this—

I. Promises of speech and purposes of heart, whether to God, to His Church,
or to individuals, ought to go hand in hand. Ifa man’s word does not expres
his meaning and bind hin, nothing can,

II. Promises and purposes often proceed from passion instead of principle.
Exemplified in young converts who have a passionate regard to the person or
manner of a preacher. Saul, overcome with David’s kindness, promised that he
would not seek his hurt,

III. Promises and purposes proceeding merely from passion soon fall to the
ground. “‘T go, sir,” one said in the Gospels, and ‘* went not.”” Some persons
melting under the ministry of the word as a summer brook (Job vi. 15—20). 4
changed heart necessary to perseverance. Saul may have religious fits, and Jehu
much zeal; for want of a regenerated nature both come to nothing.

Bernard on this—

I. Surely we will return. An earnest affection suffereth not easily a separation
from the party affected. True love liveth in the party beloved, and ean no more
forsake him than it can forsake itself.

Il. With thee. It is better to have the company of one sound Christian
than to enjoy the fellowship of a world of Worldlings. Jonathan took more
delight in ove David than in the society of all his father’s house. The godly are
such as go the way to eternal life. Whosoever looks for them must keep them
company thithei,

Ce


omar, 1. 11,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


eee


Iii. Unto Thy people. There is a right in every particular member to the
Church, asin the Church to every member, and all to Christ, and Christ to them


(1 Cor. xii. 12).
LY. On the whole verse.


In passionate affection more will be spoken than


acted. Both women say the same thing; but yet upon more deliberation one of


them calleth back her word. Passion causes men to speak unadvisedly.


not themselves.


“What a pleasing sight to see relations
walking hand in hand in the fear of the Lord
from Moab to Canaan—from this world,
doomed to destruction, to the upper regions,
the seat of rest and felicity |—Macgowan.

“The wise and foolish virgins both take
their lamps and go forth to meet the bride-
groom. ‘Thus all go together on the way to
return unto the land of Judah, As far as
this journey lies still within the limits of
Moab, so far they may unite to go.”—T yng.

“At Preston, at Malines, at many such

laces, the lines go gently asunder: so fine
is the angle, that at first the paths are almost
parallel.” —Dr. J. Hamilton.

‘“‘Many listen together to the preaching of
the word of God. Many feel together the
burden of personal affliction and distress.
Many are made to see their danger, and to
remember their responsibility to God. Many
appear to feel the guilt of their past sin-
ful life, and to be really aroused in their
mind and conscience to the necessity of
obtaining salvation. Anxious, excited, appa-
rently earnest and sincere, they set out upon
their journey back to the gracious Being
whom they have so long neglected. Yes,
they really set out, and appear to set out
sincerely.” —Tyng.

“ How many of these young travellers have
I seen! The Church delights over them, the
pastor rejoiced in them; Christian friends
were encouraged by them ; the brightest and
most blessed hopes clustered around them.
.... Foraseason they must be allowed to
go on together. Awakened, convinced, inter-
ested in religion, apparently equally deter-
mined, they set out well.”"—7yng.


“ So from the heights of will

Life’s parting stream descends,
And, as 2 moment turns its slender rill,
Each widening torrent bends.
From the same cradle side,
From the same mother’s knee,
One to long darkness and the frozen tide,
One to the peaceful sea.”—Holmes.


They are


“What a strange and perplexing medley
this world is! and how the confusion would
be increased, could we read the hearts of men
aright, and distinguish the destinies shaping
themselves to-day for that other and never-
ending life! Here is one who by the grace
of God is seeking a crown of unfading glory,
yonder one who shall assuredly wear the
crown of everlasting reproach; here a spirit
climbing heavenwards, there one going down
deliberately to the home of eternal darkness.
And they dwell to-day side by side, linked by
the various ties of social and family life, in
the same street, in the same house, it may
be, bound together in the closest bonds of
love and friendship. To men the difference
is but a slight one; with God the distinction
is seen as the beginning of a never-ending
separation.” —B.

“ Man oft resolves and re-resolves, yet dies
the same. Hell is paved with good inten-
tions.” —Luther.


“Man is but man, unconstant still, and
various;
There’s no to-morrow in him like to-day.
Perhaps the atoms rolling in his brain
Make him think honestly this present hour;
The next 2 swarm of base, ungrateful


thoughts
May mount aloft.” Dryden.


“ A variety of minerals exhibit translucency
only on their edges. The central mass ia
dark; but, holding the specimen up to the
light, light is transmitted dimly through the
thin edges. Marble, flint, or hornstone are
examples. These symbolize the man who
has been brought so much under the influence
of Christianity that it has modified his exter-
nal conduct, produced some regard for true
piety, led to some outward reformations, and
caused him to adopt some of the forms of
religion. Yet the darkness of unregeneracy
reigns within. Friends, and possibly the
man himself, mistake the rays that struggle
through the edges of his character for genuine
Christian experience.”—Hitchcook-


———$ $e


VERSES 11—18.


CriricaL AND EXEGETICAL NoTes.—Are there yet sons? etc. In allusion to the
custom of a man raising posterity to his deceased brother by taking his widow (Adam
Clarke, Jarci, Wright, Keil). Probably this custom obtained among other nations (Patrich,


Scott).


Known among the Gentiles before it was given to Israel (Gill, Speaker's Com.)


(cf, Gen, xxxviii. 8, 26; Deut. xxv. 5). That law respects a brother by the father’s side, and
not by the mother’s only (Aben Ezra, Carpzov) Not binding on a brother as yet unborn


(Gill, Carpzov, ete.).


Evidently, however, extended beyond the brother in the strict sense,


and applied to the nearest relative, Boaz (Speaker's Com.) Deut. xxv. 5, probably to be


understood in this wider sense.


Turn again [return] go {to your own people] (


Targum).
=


45


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. oHaP. L 11,





If I should say. Rather, suppose that I should say I have hope that I were even to be
married this very night, and were even to bear children (Bishop Horsley), In English we
might imitate the sentence thus: For (let us suppose) I say I have hope; I have a husband ; I
have children; will you, etc. (Lange). Another reference to a Levirate marriage, possibly.
So Keil, Wright, etc. Not so Rosenmuller, Carpzoy. (See on ver. 11.) If I should have an
husband, etc. If I were with an husband, etc, And should also bear sons. Shall I yet
have any more sons that I may give them to you? (Syriac.) Perhaps you think that I will
marry, and that sons will be born to me (Arabic).

Ver. 13, Would ye tarry. For ym) read the masculine phb (Houbigant, Bishop Horsley).
Rather to be taken adverbially, as “ therefore.” “Would you therefore wait,” etc, (Maurer,
Rosen.,.Gesen., Bertheau, Wright). The rendering of the English version (after Sept., Vulg.),
“for them” is very improbable (Lange). Omit “for them,” and translate “under these
circumstances,” or briefly “then” (Lange). Would ye tarry on these accounts, for these
reasons ? (Wordsworth.) Would you stay [for them (omit)] from having? etc. Would you
therefore shut yourself up, so as not to have an husband? ( Wright.) yy From the Chaldean,
“to keep back,” “to shut up” (Wright). Does not occur elsewhere in Hebrew. As virgins
before their marriage lived in seclusion, so widows who were betrothed to children, while
waiting for their coming of age, should keep themselves at home, lest any suspicion should
attach to them (Ze Clerc). And will you be hindered from being married? (Syriac.) Will you
be kept back by them from marrying? (LXX.) It grieveth me much. It is much more
(Lange), far more bitter to me than to you (Wright, etc.). For it has gone much more bitterly
with me than with you (Keil). As in the Authorized Version (Gesen., Bertheau). It may be
a trial to you to leave me, but it is a still greater trial to me to be deprived of you; but it
must be done, since, etc. (Zremellius, Junius), The LXX. has umep vpac, not virep vpwy ;
and so Syriac, Arabic (comp. Gen. xix. 9). You may have husbands and children, but I can
never expect to have either (Wordsworth). The hand of the Lord, Generally signifies the
means whereby He accomplishes His counsels (Zopsell).


VERSES 11—18,


Theme.—Tue Sxconp Trian or AFFECTION,


“TI have lived long enough : my way of life
Is fallen into the sear, the yellow leaf:
And that which should accompany old age,
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have,”—Shakespeare,


“ Our voluntary service He requires,
Not our necessitated; such with Him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find; for how
Can hearts not free be tried whether they serve
Willing or no?””—Milton.


Ver. 11.—And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters, ete,
Ver. 12.—Turn again . . . go; for I am too old, ete.
Ver. 18.—Would ye tarry for them [Heb. therefore, ] etc. ?


Here we see in Naomi the same non-proselytising spirit which characterizeg
her descendants down to the present day (Anon.). Scarcely so. Rather the
spirit which would convince before it converts, which loves too well to per uad
unwisely, which knows that a conversion made outwardly and in seeming only
is but the beginning of a future apostacy.

Note. (a) To decide any important question on wrong issues or false expecta-
tions is inevitably to find the ground hollow under our feet by-and-by.

(5) Love which deals faithfully with us in such moments is likely to prov
sae us hereafter. It may wound, but it does so with good reasons (Prov
xxvii. 6).

(c) Love can say ‘“‘no” sometimes, even when no means “ separation.”

With Naomi, in fairness to them, she says ‘‘return,”—but in her affection she
calls them “‘ daughters.”’ She can do the latter, but she can do nothing more
They could enter into her house, but not into Israel's national life (Lange)
This the key to what follows. In her own mind, if they go forward with her the
prospect, humanly speaking, is hopeless, ‘

46


onaP L 11—13. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
Sp aa ET ee ce eae


Notice. Grief often says many really unnecessary things in order to conceal
others which tt dares not say (Lange). When she says that there is no hope for
them in herself [7.¢., in husbands being born them through her], she implies there
will be none elsewhere in Isracl. At best they could only be as widows shut up
(see Crit. Notes), waiting for a husband never to be born. A dreary prospect
even to Naomi. The climaz of grief shows itself in the climax of impossibilities
adduced (Lange).

We have—

I. A test of true love. If they go forward, (1) They must die to their own
interests. Do not indulge romantic hopes—visionary expectation which can only
end in disappointment (Lawson). What her sons had done in Moab was not cus-
tomary in Israel (Lange). She loves them too much to deceive them,—would
rather part with them than do this, or even allow them to deceive themselves ;
if they go with her, they must go forward with a similar and kindred spirit of
self-denial. Note. Thoughts ripened into resolves by serious consideration are
likely to be kept (M. Henry).

So Christ dealt with His disciples. He said, ‘‘ Foxes have holes,” etc. (cf. Luke
iz. 23, 24, 58). So a faithful pastor will deal with young converts.

The test here plain, sincerely meant, and founded, as the issue shews, upon good
reasons, Naomi’s words follow, and are in agreement with the outward circum-
stances. We see, too, that they follow the leadings of Divine Providence. To
do the one is often, and if we could rightly read the outward circumstances would
always be, to do the other.

Note. (a) God sometimes hedges up the path so that there is nothing before us but
the strait gate of self-denial. Especially is this true of the spiritual life. Stript of
all, we enter the kingdom of God. The gate strait, the way narrow.


“ Heaven’s gates are not so highly arched
As princes’ palaces. They that enter there
Must enter on their knees,”


(b) To be joined to the hope of the true Israel of God, we must be ready to deny
ourselves of everything else. Esau sold his hope for a mess of pottage. So Orpah.

Again, (2) If these young women are to go forward with Naomi, love itself
must bring its own and only reward. Not a single inducement is held out, nota
single promise made. Naomi would be theirs, nothing more. It is this that
sends Orpah back, but suffers Ruth to go onward. And why? Orpah saw
herself, while Ruth saw only the beloved one (Lange). She went with Naomi,
though alone, because she loved Naomi alone.

How true all this is of a real affection for Christ! Im love as in life He will be
the first and the last. (Comp. Matt. vi. 24, with xxiii. 10; John xxi. 15, 22.)

We love not Christ at all, unless we love Him above all (Augustine). Compare
the Saviour’s description of the stony-ground hearer (Matt. xiii. 20, 21), as seen
in the conduct of the Jews (John vii. 60—66), with the words of Simon Peter on
that occasion (tb. 67—69).

We have—

II. A test of character and motives. Free will is essential to virtue; amd
that free will may be fairly exercised, there must be no concealment. It must be
able to sit down and count the cost. One test is not sufficient. Naomi’s words
search Orpah through and through, from many sides and in many ways. Did she
desire ‘‘ rest in the house of a husband”? (ver. 9.) Hitherto this may have
seemed possible to her in going forward. Not so now, and she must see it!
A dreary blank hopelessness in this direction, the secret of Orpah’s return to Moab.

Of this return notice— ;

(1) Persuasions which fall in with our own desires are readily accepted.

(2) And that until these come we have not been truly and really tested.

(3) The strongest and purest motives are the only enduring ones. He


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. omar. i. 11—13.





So in Christian life. Time, and circumstances, and the unfolding of events
around us, must and will come in to test the momentary decision for Christ.

Note. This is God’s ordinary and deliberate plan in dealing with men in life.

If heaven could be won by a single struggle, by a single determination, the
work would be easy. But experience does for us what Naomi did for these.
The test possibly not very severe at first,—the victory on our side (cf. ver. 8—10).
Sooner or later we are met by a prospect as blank on the human side as this
(Luke ix. 23; Mark x. 21). What then of our better resolutions and vows ?

We have here—

III. A test involving the deepest and most solemn issues. (1) Decisive
between God and Chemosh. So Orpah understood it, for she went back ‘to her
gods.” So Ruth understood it (ver. 16).

Note. (a) The human love is made the pivot on which a higher affection turns and
hangs—the human selfishness or unselfishness decisive of more lasting questions.
A principle connected with this, love for the creature leading to and shewing »
capacity for, love to the Creator (cf. 1 John iv. 20). More particularly must this
be seen in a lasting and unselfish affection for the godly.

Note. () We may love the image of Christ in His servants, though we have not yet
understood the full meaning of our affection. This Ruth’s position. Her affections
leaned in that direction, and she was ready to embrace all it involved (ver. 16, 17).
Another extreme of character shrinks from all contact with Christ’s disciples. A
third type exists, in those who love God’s people but merely on the human side.
This Orpah’s danger. Note. Earthly affections are frail at best, and often mingled
unconsciously with much that is selfish. Such characters fail ignominiously in
moments like these.

(2) Decisive seemingly for time and eternity. A choice of mere outward circum-
stances may involve issues which are to last throughout eternity. Opah took
Moab and all that Moab implied and included; Ruth, Israel. This last test
seems at first a trifling one; judge it by its results! So always in spiritual
things. When we choose the lower path, what is it but that we turn our back
upon a higher? The momentary action decisive, the tendency fatal. Christ would
give to the world the kingdom of heaven, but they will have the kingdom of earth,
and here they part (Luther).

Bernard on this—

I. That in giving counsel to or fro, it is good so to speak as may declare
love and respect to the parties,

- That it was a custom among the Jews, for parents and children to speak

most commonly one to another in the nearest and dearest terms of love.

IL That it is a point of wisdom to ask ourselves, Why we will do this or
that thing, before we undertake it, or resolve upon it.

IV. That the true, honest-hearted, and such as fear God, in the kind offers
of their friends, deal truly with them, and will not lead them into
vain hopes.

V. That worldly respects are not the motives which should induce any to
join themselves with God’s people.

VI. That the wise will not make promises rashly for others, nor persuade
to more than they well know.

On the point of marriage, as taught here—

I. That while a woman hath hope of children she may marry,
II. The marriage is for them that are grown up for it and are marriageable,
III. That it is not good for such as intend to marry to defer off too long.

IV. That a godly and wise mother-in-law cannot only be willing, but also
will persuade her children-in-law should marry again,

“Till this advice was given, the soundness “Naomi would not willingly leave her
and sincerity of Ruth’s religion did not ap- widowed daughters-in-law in Moab. Thouch
pear; nor did the rottenness of Orpah’s pro- she apparently discourages them, it is with
fession. arn itself,” —Macgowan. the manifest design that they should vo with


_ cHar. 1, 11—13. HOMiLETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


a


her upon motives that should be permanent
and not disappointing.”"—Zyng.

“She discharges her difficult task with in-
finite delicacy. They, of course, had no
thought of marrying any sons that might
be born to the widowed Naomi. Such a
thought could not possibly have entered into
‘heir minds, Why then does Naomi lay such
emphasis on the utter unlikelihood of her
having sons, and of their waiting for them


even if she should have them? Simply to.


convey to them that, if they went with her,
ose have no hope but in herself."—


“The surprising delicacy with which this is
done is such as to shew clearly how truly a
religions love educates and refines. The
ultimate cause of the grief occasioned by the
separation lies after all solely in the fact that
Ruth and Orpah are Moabitesses. Naomi
could not bear to tell them that if they, as
daughters of Moab, went with her to Israel,
they would find themselves in a less hospita-
ble situation than they had hitherto enjoyed.
She is too tender to remind these good chil-
dren of the fact that Israel does not sanction
connections with Moab,”—Lange.

“ Orpah and Ruth are themselves aware of
all that Naomi says to them in these verses,
In wishing to go with her, they cannot possi-
bly have a thought of building hopes onsons
as yet to be born to Naomi by another mar-
riage. But—and this is what Naomi would
make them feel—any other hope than this
vain one, they as Moabitish women could not
have in Israel. If I myself—she gives them
to understand—could yet have sons, I would
take you with me. My home would then be
your hometoo. To me you are dear daughters-
in-law, whether in Israel or in Moab, but other
prospects have you none, She heaps up im-
probabilities in order to indicate in this
yeiled manner that this was nevertheless the
only possible ground of hope for them in
Israel.”—Lange (condensed).

“We see these young travellers meet with
many discouragements to their return. How
earnestly Naomi argues with them to search
what manner of spirit they were of! How
kindly she presses them to go back and find
their shelter and their rest among the friends
they were leaving! How she presses upon
their remembrance that she has nothing to
offer them, no hopes, no promises to hold out
of present or prospective worldly gain! How
she mingles the expressions of her gratitude
and her grief in order the more effectually to
impress them with a conviction of the earthly
poverty of her journey! Again and again
she kissed them in token of farewell. Again
and again they wept in protestation of their
fidelity and determination. How affecting
and how promising seems such an interview!
Read again these pathetic verses. Did Naomi
really wish to discourage them? Did she
really desire them to go back? Was she
willing to leave them in Moab? Did Orpah
gratify her more than Ruth? Far from this.
She would try their faith and affection. she


would know what was in their heart. She
would see how long and how truly she might
trust them hereafter. And therefore she lays
before them the sorrows of the journey and the
barrenness of the earthly prospect.”—Tyng.

“We cannot [but] notice here what seema
an interesting fact—the thorough tolerance
of Naomi. She indicates not the slightest
shadow of intolerant dictation or overbearing
advice, the most obnoxious form that advice
can take. She recognizes in the two, when
then say they will return with her, their in-
defeasible right, though her own children by
marriage, at least to think and to decide for
themselves. She felt her business was to give
them clear and trustworthy information, but
not to exercise even maternal influence in
precipitating what they might blame her for
when they came to taste the possible bittere
ness of her position, and to experience poverty,
it might be, with the knowledge of the true
and living God. She sets to us a most
righteous example. Never try to coerce the
judgment, or to force the conscience, even of
the nearest and dearest ; a victory gained at
such expense is worse than a defeat. Respect
the intellect, revere the conscience; say what
you would like, urge what you would prefer,
but leave to each individual connected with
you perfect liberty to decide and act for them-
selves. To tempt, to coerce, or compel by fear,
or by reward, or by force, is to intrude your
hand into the holy place which the human
conscience is, even in its aberration,—to lay
a rade hand, as it were, upon the ark of God,
and to assume prerogatives for yourself which
God alone is exclusively competent to exer-
cise.

“ As there was to be no coercion or violence
on the part of Naomi, there was on the other
hand to be no concealment, There are two
ways of bringing another over to what we
like; we may either coerce the pereon, which
is most criminal, or we may conceal—which
is most dishonest—the actual state of things,
and draw over to us unawares one who will
afterwards, on discovering facts as they
are, repent and regret the step. Naomi was
candid. She shews them that there was no
earthly prospect whatever of bettering their
condition.”—Dr. Cumming.

‘¢T cannot think very highly of Naomi’s
character when I see the advice she gave ta
her daughters. She loved them, it is true ;
but her love was of too carnal a nature; for
she had more respect to their temporal wel-
fare than to the welfare of their souls. Should
not the advice of Moses to Hobab have been
hers to both of them, “Come with me, and
God will do you good”? (Numb. x, 29—82.)
Naomi, thou hast given us a picture too often
realized in the present day: in her we see a
mother more anxious about the providing of
husbands for her daughters than the saving
of their souls.” —Simcon.

“A Jesuit might raise the question, is tt mise
to tell the whole truth under circumstances
like these? The Christian conscience is satis-
fied in knowing that i¢ cannot be sinful.” —B.

49


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHAP. L 13.
a


Theme.—RuSIGNATION IN SUFFERING


“ Oh, ’tis good
To wait submissive at Thy holy throne,
To leave petitions at Thy feet, and bear
Thy frowns and silence with a patient soul.’—WATTS,


Nay, my daughters ; for it grieveth me . ... that the hand of the Lord is gone out
against me.


Three widows remaining, the solemn and affecting monuments that God will
not be forgotten. Here is the end of all the wanderings of the past! Naomi’s
sorrow, bitter as it is, intensified by the helplessness of those who have shared her
‘calamities with her, her afflictions finding an increasing heaviness because of her
unselfish desires for their welfare. [Some translate, ‘‘ It is far more bitter to me
than to you,” or, “It has gone much more bitterly with me than with you.”]
God has reduced me to such mean services that I can do nothing for you (Gill).
Note. (a) To a gracious spirit it ts an increase of sorrow to see others involved in the
fruit of our sins, The heaviest burden of many a parent’s heart explained in this
(cf. 2 Sam. xii. 15—23). Even amonarch’s crown brings no exemption from the
law (2 Sam. xxiv. 17). () True love takes to heart a friend’s afflictions in its own
troubles (Bernard). Human life, alas! shews too often the other extreme, a hard-
ness and callousness of heart to all the expressions of Divine displeasure as they
concern ourselves, and a total insensibility to the result of our sin, as it may
affect others. (c) Calamities like these not only bring sorrow for the dead, but grief
for the living.

Notice, I. The source of this affliction. Men generally see in details like
these (v. 1—5) the natural and ordinary sequence of events. Naomi saw something
else beyond and behind, infinitely more worthy of note. Her loss proceeded from
no other by-causes, but from the hand of God (Fuller), As the showers come
from the clouds, so her afilictions from the Lord (Topsell). Why doubt this,
though they had stolen upon her a thousand times more naturally, gently, and
insensibly, were that possible? Stoics ascribe calamities to inevitable fate ;
Kpicureans and atheists, to blind fate; Philistines, to chance ; Christians, to
that One by whom the very hairs of our head are all numbered (Macgowan).
Note. This is one of the distinguishing marks of God’s children in all ages, Afflictions
come of the Divine hand. Their measure, their continuance, their purpose, all
appointed of Him ‘“‘ with whom we have to do.”

A caution necessary here. God’s people may sometimes without good reason
think that the hand of the Lord is gone forth against them (Lawson). Job thought
so when the hand of Satan had despoiled him of his substance and his children
(Job i, 12, 21; ii. 6,10). So also there is a slothful way of giving assent to
Divine judgments. We say it is His hand when it is the hand of our own sloth
and folly. Eli, with a resignation which would have been beautiful under other
circumstances, said, ‘‘ It is the hand of the Lord” (1 Sam. iii. 18). Note. This a
common phrase in the mouth of the wicked. Under this covert we often hide our
_ impatience as well as our sinful carelessness,

II. The spirit in which afflictions should be borne. (a) With resignation.
Naomi does not complain. Seems to bow to the inevitable future. Doubtless
found comfort in the fact that it was the hand of the Lord—that God, with whom
is mercy, and not another, had wounded her heart. Note. Every other way of
receiving chastisement folly and madness (Acts ix. 5; Isa. i. 5; Rom. ii. 4, 5),
(6) With candour. She acknowledged evidently the sinful cause of all the dis-
cipline through which she has passed as in herself—* the hand of the Lord has gone
out against me.” Otherwise the passage reads like an accusation against God,
Note. Some have even represented life in this way as a conflict with God (ef. Job ix,
34, xiil, 21, xvi. 12—21, ete.). A terrible thought, if true, and there is a seuse in
which : is true of the wicked. Naomi, however, looked upon her afflictions as a

Q)


onaP, 1. 13,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





judgment for lingering in the country of Moab (M. Henry). (c) With wise thought.


fulness.
for the evil estate of others.
outside our own. It is not so here.


She obeys and returns (M. Henry).


(d) With unselfish care and regret


Grief too often hardens the heart to all other sorrow
Naomi’s gentle unselfish spirit shines out


conspicuous among the Old Testament saints. It grieveth me much for your sakes.


Topsell on this :-—


First, that all our afflictions come from the Lord, that He might chastise His own,


and confound the ungodly (Job xxxiv. and xxxvi.).
nor the wicked go scot-free (Deut. xxxi. 18).


\ Neither the godly escape,
This the confession of Moses and of


David, a man more exercised in trouble than all the world beside (Ps. cxix. 71).
Secondly, that the godly are so patient in all their tribulations, even from this


-


Bernard on this :—


consideration, that the Lord’s hand afilicteth them (2 Sam. xvi. 10—12 ; Jobii. 10).


I. The most godly sometimes take their afflictions very heavily (Job iii;


Jer. xx. 9—12).


II. Afflictions are the more grievous for friends wrapped therein, so as one


cannot help another.


III. That all afflictions come by the power and providence of God—as by a
hand upon us (Lam. i. 12—17; Amos iii. 6, iv. 6—11; 2 Chron. xv. 6).

IV. That the godly in common calamities take themselves to be especially
chastised. This good woman applied the whole cross to herself,
They think upon their own sins, and not upon other men’s misdeeds.


“And if there be some things which we
believe to be inflicted by the Lord, to whom
can we render our patience better than to the
Lord! Nay, He teacheth us to rejoice more-
over, and to be glad in that we are thought
worthy of Divine chastisement, As many as
T love, saith He, Z chastise. Oh, blessed is
that servant on whose amendment the Lord
is bent; with whom He de:gneth to be angry ;
whom He deceiveth not by hiding His ad-
monitions from him !”— Tertullian.

“ Patience ... adorneth the woman, ap-
proveth the man ; is loved in the boy, praised
in the young man, respected in the old; is
beautiful in every sex, in every age. Come
now, let us describe her form and her de-
meanour. She hath a countenance serene
and placid ; a forehead smooth, contracted
with no wrinkle of grief or of anger, her
brows evenly and cheerfully relaxed, her eyes
cast down in humility, not in melancholy.
Her mouth beareth the seal of honourable
silence. Her colour is such as those have
who are free from care and crime,”—Ter-
tullian.

“ God Almighty in mercy makes this world
unpleasing to good men by affliction, that
they may set the less value upon it. This
is the voice of the rod, and of Him that
hath appointed it, which every wise man
ought to hear and answer with all obedience,
submission, and thankfulness; and when
affliction hath wrought this effect, its busi-
ness is in a good measure ended, and for the
most part it is thereupon eased or removed.”
—Hale. ,

“+ Qh,’ saith the people, ‘God hath justly
sent this plague for the corruption of the
magistrates.’ ‘It is justly inflicted,’ saith
the magistrate, ‘for the disobedience of the

eople’ ‘Herein,’ saith the poor man, ‘ God
ath met with the oppression and extortion


of the rich. ‘ Herein,’ saith the rich man,
‘God hath paid home the muttering and the
repining of the poor.’ ‘Now,’ saith the pro-
digal, ‘God punisheth the covetousness of
old men.’ ‘Now,’ saith the old man, ‘He
scourgeth the prodigality of such as be
young.’ Far otherwise Naomi, who, though
the arrows of God did glance and rebound, to
the wounding of Orpah and Ruth, yet she
thought herself wasthe mark at which God
did level His shafts. ‘The hand of the Lord
is gone out against me.’ ”—Fuller,


“We are never nearer to God than when
we are lowest in our own estimation; and
never more pleasing to Him than when we
abhor ourselves, and repent in dust and
ashes.” — Charles.

“To be dejected is natural; but to be over.
come by dejection is madness, and folly, and
unmanly weakness, You may grieve and
weep, but give not way to despondency, nor
indulge in complaints. Weep as wept your
master over Lazarus, observing the just limite
of sorrow which it is not proper to pass, —
Chrysostom.

“He who possesses religion finds a pro-
vidence not more truly in the history of the
world than in his own family history; the
rainbow which hangs a glistening circle in
the heights of heaven is also formed by the
same sun in the dewdrop of a lowly tlower.”
—Jean Paul Richter.

“ Disappointments meet us at every turn 3
where we expected we should be particularly
favoured with helps and advantages... .«
we behold ourselves left destitute; so that
we have no more a place of refuge upon
earth, no more a dear counsellor or friend
who is as our ownsoul. By this means we
are compelled, as Noah’s dove was, by the
wide watery waste which did not afford a


§1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHaP. I, 14,





ry


single resting-place, to fly to the Ark, and to If from Thy ordeal’s heated bars,


take shelter there.” — Venn, Our feet are seamed Ga Pm ae
: wills y wi one
i mire orunrebaleat ie die Strike, Thou the Master, we Thy keys,
Submissive ’neath His strokes receive ap car ptr sued ee 3
His image stamped on thee. MOS y 2OLUer Strain, ;
Be still in God! Who rests on Him, Our hearts shall breathe the old refrain,
Enduring peace shall know, Thy will es
And with a spirit glad and free, a :
Through night and grief shall go. “ The good we have enjoyed from Heaven's
Sturm, free will ;
And if in our unworthiness And shall we murmur to endure the ill?”
Thy sacrificial wine we press; Dryden,
—— es
VERSE 14


CRITICAL AND EXEGETIOAL Nores,—And they lifted up their voice and wept again
“exceedingly” (Dr. Cassel), “ still more” (Luther), Asin E.V. (Lange). (dee on ver. 9.)
Much affected with the tender things Naomi had said (M. Henry) (cf. Gen. xxix. 11), And
Orpah kissed her mother-in-law («at eweorpeWev eg roy Naov aurnc), [and returned to her own
people] (LXX.), So Vulgate, Arabic, Syriac, Unquestionably found in their MSS (Bp.
Horsley). 8o Dathe, Houbig, Booth. Not so Wright. Lange supplies, “and turned back,
As it stands, the sentence seems incomplete, Buxtorf contends, however, that the return
is implied in the act of kissing. Naomi’s kiss (ver. 9) evidently meant “return,” and so
Orpah’s may be understood to say “farewell.” The last sad kiss of a tearful separation (Steele
and Terry).

But Rath clave unto hor, followed her (LXX.), stayed by her (luther). Her person
was, as it were, glued unto Naomi, as the force of the Hebrew words is (Bernard). In
Psalm Ixiii., the same word is rendered “followeth hard.” No fresh demonstration of affec-
tion, but she clave, etc., not merely because of a tender affection for her mother-in-law, but
also a yearning desire to know more of the God and land of Israel (Steele and Terry), The
conversion of Ruth probably commenced at this time (A. Clarke). She had been a proselyte
before (Rambachius, Aben Ezra), Buth (see Intro., par. 4,5; and Crit, and Exeg. Notes
on ver, 4). In his genealogy of our Lord, St. Matthew inscribes the name of only four
women—Thamar, Rahab, Ruth, and Bathsheba {literally only three are mentioned by name,
and these three are foreigners (Kitto), Bathsheba being designated as “her of Urias”]; and
among these four, Ruth easily holds the pre-eminence (Cox), Thamar, Rahab, and Bathsheba,


were all women of dubious virtue (Cow), Ruth is,in some respects, one of the most interesting
female characters of the Bible (Kitt).


Theme.—Txe Crisis anp THE CONTRAST ONOE AGADN,


“'Twixt two worlds, like a star, life shines ;
A little star with fading light ;
Above, o’erbending day ; beneath,
The deep abyss of endless night,
* ®


And who shall hymn its praise aright,
If it enfold eternal bliss?

What notes express the funeral dirge,
If it the future crowning miss ?”—B,


And they lifted up their voice and wept again; and Orpah kissed her mother-tm
law, but Ruth clave unto her,


Insensibility in certain circumstances is not fortitude ; it is savageness and
stupidity, or something worse (Toller), Their tears here their ornament and


their honour. Both wept again (cf. ver. 9); alike in the signs of their affection,


not so in the actions which follow, Probably Orpah’s grief was the more demon.


strative (ver. 10), especially so now. Note. (a) That all outward sorrow giveth
not certain witness of the soundness of the heart (Bernard). Saul’s weeping to
David (1 Sam. xxiv. 16). Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, in his tears a deep
dissembler (Jer, xli, 6—8), (0) The difference between mere kindness of manner


and ie love most vividly depicted here ( Speaker’ Com.),


OfiaP. 1. 14, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


a


“© And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law,”—the customary salutation in saying
farewell. Previously Naomi had kissed Orpah (ver. 9). They parted possibly
without a word. Too much overcome to speak, the natural and usual sign of
affection comes in to say that which words cannot.


“Oh! when the heart is full; when bitter thoughts
Come crowding thickly up for utterance,
» « e The poor, common words of courtesy
Are such a very mockery.”— Willis,


Note. (a) An evidence here that affection survives a difference of opinion (Dr.
Cumming). Separation, even on the most vital points of religion, does not
necessarily mean alienation of heart; just as distance, either in time or space,
does not necessarily affect true love. The adoption of a false religion must not
deaden affection, or break up the courtesies of social intercourse (Dr. Cumming).
(b) Farewell may be spoken and received, even when we think it spoken unwisely,
without anger. No dispute here, no bitter feeling in the mind of either. (A
Second remonstrances may succeed where previously our entreaties and persuasion
have met with apparent failure. This is true whether for good or for evil.

We have here again (cf. on ver. 10)—

I. A marked and strong contrast. Orpah going back in tears, perhaps in
despair (cf. Matt. xix. 22); Ruth going forward in resolute self-sacrifice, though
from the human side without hope; the one to the pleasures and delights of
Hae past; the other, true to the little light already given, onward to a better
uture.

(1) Points to an underlying though unseen difference in character and faith.
Orpah preferred the sensuous to the spiritual; Ruth, the unseen to all she knew .
as lying behind her in Moab (cf. ver. 16, 17). Orpah sought rest in the ‘‘ house
of a husband ;” Ruth, rest with the Israel of God. Orpah could not easily under-
stand the force of a great moral or intellectual obligation (Cumming); Ruth
determined to follow love wherever it might lead her. In Orpah we have
nature in its most hopeful aspect; in Ruth we begin to see the dawnings of grace.
Note. Where and how a child of sense differs from a child of the Spirit. (a) In
the want of steadfastness. () In clinging to self after all in the decisive moments
of life. (y) In love of the world behind when the final hour of choice has come.
(Cf. on ver. 10, div. II.)

(2) Suggests a very common contrast between natural gifts and grace. The one
makes a man, the other a Christian. Orpah’s religion was passion; Ruth’s,
principle. Orpah’s illustrates mere profession; Ruth’s, decision for God. Orpah
the type of the beautiful, affectionate, fair, but frail ones of this world. Much that
is good, only the touch of the defiler is there. Ruth the representative of the noble,
enduring, and self-sacrificing spirit God only can bestow.

We have here—

II. A final separation. Brought about by natural causes, but involving
spiritual and even eternal issues. (See on ver. 11—13, div. III.; also p. 57.)
Onward with Naomi means Godward, and so heavenward. Like Abraham, Ruth
becomes through her fidelity ‘‘ heir of the promises,” and ancestress of a long line
of kings, ending in the Shiloh that was to come. What does backward mean ?
And yet all depends upon the choice of the moment. A pvrinful but inevitatle
crisis (Tyng). They have dwelt together, suffered together, journeyed side by
side. Yet now they must separate, and here they have come to the decisive point,
Their paths lie apart. For the future, their aims, direction, the issues of their
lives, wide as the poles asunder.

Note. (a) A time like this im the soul’e history. The sinner comes to a point
where he must either go forward and confess, or backward and deny, the hope
which is in Christ Jesus. He sta nds, like Orpah, irresolute, deciding now for and
now against. But sooner or later the irrevocabl- decision comes, and all the future
bangs upon that.

&


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. onaP. L 14,





(b) A time like this in the history of all human friendships. A separation »s
certain, and as final; if not before, then in that great day when the sheep are
divided from the goats (Matt. xxv. 82). (1) Often brought about by rel igious influences
in this world. The Ruths go forward to new and holier companionships ; the
Orpahs back again to the sinful associations of Moab. (2) Sometimes by out-
ward circumstances, the exigencies of human life, and the providential leadings of
God.


“ There is no union here of hearts
That finds not here an end.”


Iuprovement.—Learn (1) the necessity for an instant and wise decision in
these critical moments; (2) That the plausible choice, like Orpah’s, is not always
the wise one; (3) That all connexions, all enjoyments, all worldly pursuits,
should give place, as with Ruth, to the sweet and endearing influences which
draw us towards God.

Fuller on this (condensed) :-— ;

These words contain two general parts; (1) A blazing meteor falling down out
of the air; (2) A fixed star fairly shining in the heaven.

That thou mayest finally persevere observe these four rules— :

L Utterly renounce all sufficiency in thyself. Who but a madman will
nowadays warrant the paper shields of his own strength, that knows
that Adam’s complete armour of original integrity was shot through
in Paradise ?

II. Place all thy confidence on the undeserved mercy of God. Perseverance
cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor as yet from the
south; but God suffereth one to fall, and holdeth up another. The
temple of Solomon had two pillars; one called Jacin (‘The Lord
will stablish”), the other Boaz (‘In Him is strength’’). So every
Christian—the temple of the Holy Ghost—is principally holden up
by these two pillars, God’s power and will to support him. Where-
fore in every distress let us cry out to God, as the disciples did to
our Saviour in the midst of a tempest, ‘‘ Help, Master, or else we
perish !”

Til. Use all those means which God hath chalked out for the increase of
grace in thee; as prayer, meditation, reverent receiving the sacra-
ments, accompanying with God’s children, reading, hearing the word,
etc,

IV. Always preserve in thyself an awful fear lest thou shouldest fall away
from God. Fear to fall, and assurance to stand, are two sisters;
and though Cain said he was not his “ brother’s keeper,” sure I am
that this fear doth watch and guard her sister assurance. Faulus est
gradus certitudinis, quantus sollicitudinis : they that have much of this
fear have much certainty ; they that have little, little certainty ; they
that have none, have none at all. It is said in building, that those
chimneys which shake most and give way to the wind will stand the
longest: the moral in divinity is true; those Christians that shiver
for fear by sins to fall away may be observ:d most courageous to
persist in piety.

Improvement.—Let us therefore “work out our salvation with fear and
trembling :” ever trembling, lest we should be cast to hell; ever trinmphing that
we shall come to heaven: ever fearful, lest we should fall; ever certain that we


shall stand: ever careful, lest we should be damned; ever cheerful that we shall
be saved.


“Took at that sad group of three tearful No, not for any painter, but for one whose
widowed women standing in the highway soul can sympathise with womanly grief. and
debating this question, Shall we say farewell whose hand has skill enough to portray that
or not? Is it not a scene for any painter? vathetic mingling of sorrow and love. How


OnaP. L 14


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ROTH,





he would sketch the varied expressions in
those faces! Naomi with eyes full of eager
entreaty, and lips quivering with pain ; Orpah
moved to weeping, yet perplexed, wondering
what decision to make, and casting a glance
ever and anon back on the road they have
come; Ruth standing, grasping her mother’s
hand with unwavering resolve in every line
of her face and attitude. It is a sacred
moment, an hour of suspense, on which de-
pends a future that no prophet’s eye hath
discerned.” —Braden.

“ We have [here] a very striking and in-
structive instance of the distinction between
mere amiableness of natural temper and
religious principle. Forming your opinion
of them from the whole of the former
part of the history, you see nothing to
choose between them. Both of them appear
to great advantage, most amiable and well-
disposed young women; excellent wives,
and kind and affectionate daughters-in-law.
But when put to the test, you see the differ-
ence. Orpah appears to have had every
natural excellence that Ruth possessed, but
it was not grafted on religious principles,
Ruth was not only as amiable as her sister-
in-law, but knowledge of the true God appears
to have reached her heart... . The one wasa
lovely heathen, the other what we should call
in this day an amiable Christian. . . . Orpah
was like the young man whom Jesus loved
for his amiable qualities, but who went away
sorrowful; Ruth was like Mary, who chose
the better part, that could not be taken away
from her,”—TZ. XN. Toller.

“It might be said with a certain degree
of truth, that the same cause induced Orpah
to go, and Ruth to remain—the fact, namely,
that Naomi had no longer either son or
husband. The one wished to become a wife
again, the other to remain a daughter. Few
among the natural children of men are as
kind and good as Orpah; but a love like that
of Ruth has scarcely entered the thoughts of
poets, Antigone dies for the love of her
brother ; but the life which awaits Ruth was
more painful than death. Alcestis sacrifices
herself for her husband, and Sigune persist-
ently continues in a solitary cell, with the
corpse of her lover whom she had driven
into battle, until she dies; but Ruth goes to
a foreign land, and chooses poverty, not for
a husband or a lover, but for the mother of
him who long since was torn away from her.
She refuses to leave her for the very reason
that she is poor, old, and childless. Naomi,
having lost her sons, shall not on that account
lose her daughters also. Rather than leave
her to suffer alone, Ruth will starve with her
or beg for her. Here is love for the dead
and the living, surpassing that of Alcestis
and Sigune. That Ruth does for her mother-
in-law, what as the highest filial love the
poet invents for Antigone, when he represents
her as not leaving her blind father, is in
actual life almost unexampled. Nor would
it be easy to find an instance of a deeper
conflict than that which love had to sustain
on this occasion, The foundation of it was


laid when Elimelech left his people in order
not to share their woes. It was rendered
inevitable when, against the law of Israel,
his sons took wives of the daughters of Moab.
It broke out when the men died. Their love
for their Israelitish husbands had made the
women strangers in their native land; and
the love of Naomi for her Moabitish daughters
made her doubly childless in Israel, Nation-
ality, laws, and customs were about to sepa-
rate mother and daughter-in-law. But as
love had united them, so also love alone has
power to solve the conflict, but only such a
love as Ruth’s. Orpah escaped the struggle
by returning to Moab; Ruth ends it by going
with Naomi.”—Lange,


“ Longing for knowledge,

Thirsting for truth,

Loving fair virtue,
Saying like Ruth,

‘I will go with thee,
Thine shall be mine ;’

Friendships it may chanep
Leaving behind ;


New worlds shall open,
Bright with a sheen,
Decked with a glory,
Eyes have not seen 3
Clearer the sunshine,
Lighter the shade,
Daily and hourly
O’er life’s way made,


True to thine own self,
True to thy God,

Treading the pathway
Good men have trod 3

All the past for thee
Worketh amain,

All the past in thee
Liveth again ;


All that is worthy,
All that is true,

In thy right deed
Liveth anew;

And unborn blessings
Springing from thine,

Gladden the morrow,
Make it divine.”—B,


“Nature in its highest endowments and
improvements is infinitely below grace. There
are some believers in Christ whose natural
tempers are never refined to such a degree
as we might expect from their religious prin-
ciples; yet they shall dwell for ever in the
regions of love. There are other men whose
natural tempers are affectionate and humane.
Perhaps they are improved by all the advan-
tages of a polite and learned education.
Thus they acquire an uncommon degree of
respectability in the world, and yet continue
destitute of faith in Christ and love to God.
With all their attainments they are still ina
miserable condition. The love and esteem
of men will not secure them from the wrath
of that God whose service they neglect, and
whose Son, the only Saviour, they despise.”—=
Lawson.

65


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


omar. 1. 14





“Vike Martha and Mary of New Testa-
ment history, Orpah and Ruth represent two
different types of character. Orpah’s home
attachments, and desire to find rest in an-
other husband’s house, control and limit her
life influence and action. Ruth’s loftier spirit
discerns in the God of Israel the fountain of
a purer religion than the Moabitish idolatry
affords, and she gladly forsakes father and
mother, and sister, and native land, to identify
herself in any way with the people of Jeho-
vah.”—Steele and Terry.

“Some habits and practices of godly men
may be easily counterfeited. Yet I think
that there are certain virtues of God’s chil-
dren which are perfectly inimitable. To bear


‘reproach for Christ,’ and to suffer wrong
patiently, is to my mind very much like ‘the
root’ in practical godliness. .. . See there a
young man who has risked losing his situa-
tion because he will not conceal his attach-
ment to Christ. Such as these are sometimes
brought into great straits. They do not see
any precept that plainly says, ‘Thou shalt do
this,’ or ‘Thou shalt do that.’ But they find
they must do one thing or the other. They
make their choice, and it is against their
worldly interest, but it is done for the love
they bear to a Saviour’s name. Little faith
takes a strong grip. Oh! I cannot doubt
the root of the matter is found in them,”—
Spurgeon.


Theme.—Tue Farmvre or A MERELY Earraity AFFECTION.


“Oh heart of ours! so weak and poor,
That nothing there can long endure
And so their hurts find shameful cure,—
While every sadder, wiser thought,
Each holier aim which sorrow brought,
Fades quite away, and comes to nought.”— Trench,


“ Thy soul shall have her earthy freight,
And custom lie upon thee with a weight,
Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life.”’— Wordsworth,


And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law [and went back to her own people, LXX.].
A little entreaty will serve to move nature to be good unto itself (Bishop Hall),


So with Orpah. No other persuasions have been used but worldly reasons taken
from marriage. She that even now, for the love of people and mother-in-law,
would go as far as the farthest, for the cogitation of a heathen husband forsaketh
both God and people and mother and sister (Topsell), Alas for human nature,
for here is the type! Men follow the higher and nobler instincts of the heart for
awhile; but how often is it that afterwards inducements of worldly prosperity
or comfort come in to turn them aside, and to lead them back to the world!
And alas, too, for the fickleness of our best resolutions (cf. ver. 10), if unaided by
Divine grace !

See here, then—

I. An instance of instability and inconstancy. Orpah a reed shaken wit
the wind (Braden). (1) She must have been yess shar convictions. Men i
not go so far as this towards the true Israel, without seeing enough to encourage
them in still going forward. We may pity, but pity must not warp the judgment.
We may even excuse in some measure. But the true reason of such “returns ”
found in the apostle’s words, ‘‘ They went out from us,’”’ etc. (1 John ii, 19),
(2) She certainly was untrue to her affections. And untrue to the lower love, how
could she be true to the higher hope of Israel ? (cf. 1 John iv. 21.) Seeking the
things that were her own, she left behind her the things that were Christ’s
(Phil. ii. 21).

Note with such—(a) A change of mind evidently underlies this outward change of
purpose. Man in himself fickle as the wind, especially in those things which
concern his best welfare. ‘Ye did run well,” etc, (Gal. v. 7)—a common and
necessary exhortation always.

Note. (b) The necessity for a decision is the signal for a retrograde movement (M,
Dimson). _ They begin to go backward precisely as they begin to understand what
is really involved in going forward. So with those who followed Christ (John
vi. 60—66). When they heard that discipleship meant faith in Him (ib. 63)
and a Divine power working in themselves (ib. 65), they stumbled at the saying,


and ‘ ae no more with Him.” They ‘‘ went back,” ag Orpah did. Sued,


(CHAP. L 14, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





minds will go a certain length in positive duty, and yet always draw back from a
really decisive act (M. Timson).

Note. (c) In some feeble way there will be an exhibition of actual love for the course
which ts nevertheless renounced (M. Timson). Orpah wept, and Judas bitterly
repented. The vision of things divine haunts them even as they return into the
darkness they have chosen (M. Timson). And inspiration sends after them the
solemn words of warning, “ If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him” (Heb. x. 88). Notice then the perilous position of those who stand in
the critical moments of life—on the boundary-line of God’s Israel, and yet with
love to the Moab behind hidden in the heart. Orpah the type of a mind half
awakened to the things of God (M. Timson).

See here—

II. An illustration of apostacy. Orpah neither cold nor hot, like the
Laodicean church (Macgowan). Puts her hand to the plough, but looks back
again; and such are unworthy the kingdom of heaven. Like Judas with Christ,
she is loving enough to kiss, but not to cleave to Naomi.

Notice as significant—This going back (1) her own choice, (2) deliberately made,
(8) respectfully expressed, (4) freely and finally carried out (1 John iv. 21).

So with many to-day. They forsake the world apparently ; join themselves to
God’s people; travel towards the heavenly Jerusalem; seemingly profit in reli-
gion, but they have no stability, ‘‘no root in themselves,” as the gospel expresses
it (Matt. xiii. 21), Easy Christianity, half-hearted Christianity, external Christianity
apostatizes, and well it may! Without vital change, men return to the world, to
their old state and ways (Heb. iii. 12). They return speedily, and as certainly
as Orpah went back to Moab (John vi. 66). And this in the face of all their
protestations (ver. 10).

Note. (a) Professions are like bills; you judge their worth by the names they bear,
the firms by which they are issued (Braden). (b) What is soon ripe is soon rotten
(M. Henry).

See here—

III. An illustration of the causes and consequences of apostacy. (1) The
causes, With Orpah the reasons for this return to be found (a) in her inclinations.
Hence she is easily persuaded to yield to these. She prefers her pagan connections,
after all, to the privileges of the house of Israel. Puts her country, her kindred,
and her god [Chemosh] before all else. Eve lost Paradise for an apple, and the
Gadarenes will lose Christ rather than their swine (Bernard). Such is man’s
choice naturally. A warp in the nature, a proneness to meaner things. (6) In
ner supposed interests. She went as far as consisted with her hope of carnal
enjoyment (Macgowan). But when the prospect of a husband in Israel was for
ever put aside (ver. 12, 18), then she returned to Moab, where there still might
be hope (ver. 8, 9). Note. An inability to deny herself the key to this “ going
back.” Orpah like many now, who are almost but not altogether Christians.
They follow Christ to a great length, but cannot forsake all for Him; are willing
to part with much, but not with everything; go as far with Him as costs no pain
and calls for no complete self-denial, but stumble at a daily ‘‘ cross-bearing,” and
that following Him through good and evil report which He demands (cf. Luke
xiv. 26; James iv. 4; 1 John ii. 15, etc.). (c) In the threatened inconventences.
Orpah a type of those who have a sensitive hatred to suffering (Braden).

(2) Its consequences. She “‘ goes back,” and the separation becomes wider every
nour. So an awakened and convinced mind can never abide at the line where a
Saviour is refused (Tyng). No permanency in that state. She goes back to her
own people. So apostates return to the old companionships and associations of
the past; to the haunts ef dissipation and delight (2 Pet. ii. 22); to the folly and
frivolity of the past (2 Tim. iv. 10); to covetousness and ever-increasing greed
(2 Pet. ii. 15, 16); to unbelief and hardness of heart (2 Tim. ii. 17); to open
hostility and hatred of the truth (tbid.). She goes back to her qod, s hemos


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. owap. 1. 14.








preferred to Jehovah—a being without existence, having eyes and yet seeing not
(Isa. xliv.), to the Lord of heaven and earth. Note. Apostates begin in the spirit,
but end in the flesh (Lawson). How true the apostle’s words of such, “ The latter
end is worse with them than the beginning” (2 Pet. ii. 20).

Lxssons.—(1) We are not easily to entertain men as sincere, because thoy
have made a fair show in religion for a time (Bernard). (2) An amiable temper
or an affectionate behaviour will not compensate for perseverance in the heaven-
ward calling. Being almost a Christian never conducted any man to heaven
(Macgowan). (8) Those who at first were forward in religion, may afterwards
altogether fall away (fuller), Asa possibly an illustration of this (2 Chron.
xiv. 10—12). Note. Many leave Christ with a kiss, who would shrink from
betraying Him as Judas did.

Price on this (condensed) :—


Theme.—OrraH, OR THE MERE PROFESSOR.


An onlooker not able to discover the difference between Orpah and Ruth so far.
Begins to appearnow. The crisis has come. Both had made professions (ver. 10).
Here the difference is made apparent.

I. We learn that it is possible to go a long way towards Christianity, and
yet not to be a Christian. To be born, educated, and dwell in Christian house-
holds, these are great blessings, but do not constitute or make a Christian. It
will not do to be almost, we must be altogether, decided for Christ. The cup
that is almost sound will not hold water. The ship that is almost whole will not
weather the storm. To be almost son is to be a bastard. To be almost a
Christian is to be almost saved, and to be almost saved is to be altogether damned.
Nothing will save us short of being in Christ. Feelings, sentiment, profession,
are all good if they spring from a living faith in Jesus Christ ; without this they
are worse than worthless,

II. We learn that it is possible to deceive ourselves, and to think that all is
right, when in truth all is wrong with our souls. Hardly possible that Orpah
played the conscious hypocrite. She meant what she did when she became a
proselyte—did not deliberately act a part. Feeling and sentiment [love for her
husbard] blinded her eyes. Now that which looked like principle proves itself
passion. Discovers that she had deceived herself. Love to God, which she had
thought supreme in her heart, subordinate to the love of Moab.

This often so with men; they are not hypocrites, they are self-deceivers,
Education, circumstances, the force of influences around them, produced an
emotional religion which they mistake for vital godliness. They hear with joy
like the ‘‘stony-ground hearers.” We do such an injustice, if when we see them
going back we point the finger of scorn, and ery ‘‘ hypocrite.”

III. We learn that our religion will not profit us at all unless it be
characterized by perseverance to the end. Orpah stands with Jehu, Judas
Demas, Hymenzus, Alexander, and Philetus—Beacon lights! Their word io
us is this, “Beware!” No grace, however bright and precious, will take us to
heaven without perseverance. Language cannot adequately set forth the misery
of the man who apostatizes, The latter end of that man is worse than the
beginning (2 Pet. ii, 2022), Conscience becomes hardened, etc.

Iuprovement.—Is our profession a mere profession or the fruit of a living faith ?
Brought by circumstances to the boundery-line between life and death, have we
stopped there? The Bible full of such instances. Felix trembled; Balaam
prophesied ; Herod heard gladly; Judas sat at the sacramental table with our
Lord ! Whatever we do, we must not stop short of conversion; if we do, we
perish. We must not be content with a mere outward reformation ; we ined


oF that radical and entire change in the soul, of which the Holy Spirit is ths
author.


58


_OHAP. L 14,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.





Berrard on this—


I. It is easy to make signs of love, but not to shew the true fruits of


love.


II. Worldly respects are great hindrances in the course of godliness.
JI. An unsound heart may for a time make a fair show in the way to
Canaan, but yet turn back at the last.
IV. Such as want soundness towards God for religion, may yet have other-
wise commendable parts in them.


“In the first half-awakened state of the
mind, and before Christ has been seen in the
vision of a true faith, to go away, or to cut
oneself off from the human teacher and friend,
is to cease from the spiritual good already
attained. It may be that Orpah did not
realize this at the time, or that she was but
partially conscious of it; yet it was present,
and the mightiest element in the question
apon which she was called to decide. She
was not the first, nor the last, who, in for-
saking a friend, forsook also a true teacher
and guide—one whose love would have been
the guarantee of the quality of the higher
influence exerted.”—WM. Timson.

“Ts this she which even now was so pro-
mising in her words, and so passionate in
her weeping? See how soon a forward pro-
fessor may turn to a fearful apostate. Though
she standeth or falleth to her own Master,
yet, as the Psalmist saith, ‘I am horribly
afraid for those that forsake Thy law.’ so
have we just cause to suspect the fearful final
estate of Orpah.”—/uller.

“ Orpah had left her heart in Moab, with
its follies, its frivolities, its amusements, its
dissipations, its sights, festivals, and fétes ;
its idol temples, shrines, and altars. Her
heart was so full of these, that she could not
detach it from them ; and therefore she re-
turned to her gods, her people, and her
country,”—Dr. Cumming.

“The bright morning does not always
shine unto the perfect day; the sweetest
spring-bud of promise does not always ripen
into precious fruit. The seed that was cast
on stony ground grew rapidly up, but withered
ina moment. Orpah’s decision was the de-
cision of impulsive feeling, of filial affection ;
it was strong suddenly, it grew up in an
instant, and in an instant it perished,”—Dr.
Cumming.

“ On second thoughts her enthusiasm cooled
down. I daresay she said within herself,
‘Tt was not enthusiasm—it was simply
fanaticism, and I have now come to 4 better
mind.’ One would gather from the conduct
of Orpah that she had feelings, not very deep
affections, strongly rooted in her nature;
pure passions, but not yet consolidated into
fixed principles; resolutions that had no
ancborage in her heart, no hold of her inmost
and her deepest nature. She was vacillating,
impulsive, very likely sentimental; her tears
and smiles followed each other in rapid tran-
sition. She was easily swayed; the victim
of feeling and momentary impulse; tepent-
ing at her leisure what she had accepted in a
hurry.”—Dr. Cumming.


“Tf the soul be not changed, though there
may for awhile some religious colour ap-
pear in the man’s face, he will at last return
to his former habit.” —( Spiritual Bee) Penn?

“T have sometimes seen a blazing comet
much outshining other stars, and attracting
the eyes of men to Behold with wonder, which
yet by its decay and vanishing awhile after
hath appeared to have no true place among
the stars, but in the lower region.’’—( Spiritual
Bee) Penn?

“ Gifts, affections without Christ ....
They are the fair flowers and perfumes which
only make more terrible the death-pyre.”—
Wadsworth.


‘¢ Men said to-day of one who sinned, ‘ What

may

This eee What sudden madness overs
too

His brain, that in a moment he forsook

The rectitude which until yesterday

Had made his life a beacon by the way

To common men?’ J answered, ‘We but
look

On surfaces. Temptation never shook

One soul whose secret hidden forces lay

Firm centred in the right. The glacier
bides

For ages white and still, and seems a part

Of the eternal Alps. But at its heart,

Each hour, some atom noiseless jars, and
slides,

Until the avalanche falls with thundering
weight.

God only knoweth the beginning’s date.’”

Helen Hunt.


“ They fall deepest into hell who fall back-
wards into hell.”— Bunyan.

“ Karagihew ovy sort pehey, saith Philo.
Apostates betray Christ with a kiss, tempo-
raries forsake Him, and embrace this present
world.”— Trapp.

“ Faith is the champion of grace; but what
is it worth if it faint and fail? Love is the
nurse of grace; but what will it avail if it
decline and wax cold? Humility is the
adorner and beautifier of grace; but what
will it profit if it continue not unto the end?”
—A Puritan Divine.

«Ag the worst travelling is when the road
is frozen after a thaw, so those are frequently
the most hardened who have had some con-
victions, who have had some knowledge of
the Gospel, and some religious affection, and
have then relapsed into their natural hard-
heartedness,”—Arromsmith.

“ Bvery one is rather a Naomi to his own
soul, to persuade it to stay still, and enjoy

&


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTR.








the delights of Moab, rather than to hazard
oer entertainment in Bethlehem. Will reli-
gion allow me this wild liberty of my actions,
this loose mirth, these carnal pleasures ?”"—
Bishop Hall. :

“His heart he cannot, will not, give to
Christ. Anything else he will do, But no-
thing else will avail him anything, He will
be baptized. But baptism cannot save him,
He will be confirmed, But that is not sal-
vation. He will come to the table of the
Lord. But there isno salvation ror him there,
He will fast and pray. He will toil and
labour in his own self-righteous plans. He
will try to cleanse the outside of the cup and
platter, and resolve to work religious works,
But all this is not salvation. And here he
must separate from the people of God, though
they have travelled long together, They must
Go on, and he will not.”—Tyng.


onaP. 1, 14,


SL


“You have seen a ship out on the bay,
swinging with the tide, and seeming as if it
would follow it ; and yet it cannot, for down
beneath the water it is anchored. So many
a soul sways towards heaven, but cannot
ascend thither, because it is anchored to some
secret sin.’— Beecher.

“ The soul’s birthright is not cast away by
& momentary weakness or folly,—one act
such as this before us may decide the woful
transaction, but a hundred minor actions and
thousands of thoughts of wrong have gone
before it to make it possible... . Tempta-
tion, when it comes upon a man well-grounded,
leaves him as the wave leaves the rock over
which it has rolled ; but when principles are
already undermined, a trivial temptation, a
single wave, is often enough to complete the
ruin,” —/7. Wonnacott,


Theme.—Tue Constanoy or a DrvineLy-KINDLED Lovag.


“ True friends, like ivy and the wall it props,
Both stand together, or together fall.””— Dio, o Poetio Mlustrations,


“ Without a murmur I dismiss
My former dreams of earthly bliss ;
My joy, my consolation this,
Each honr to cling to Thee.”—2fre, Eliot,


But Ruth clave to her.


The Scriptures are seminally brief (Lynch). A phrase here expresses a love


and heroism which has seldom been equalled and never excelled in h
The force cf the Hebrew word is to be kn
wife inseparably (Bernard) [cf. Gen. ii. 24 ; Matt. xix.
in this connection]. So Onesiphorus clung the more cl
when Phygellus and Hermogenes, with all who were i
the hour of his distress (2 Tim, i. 15, 16).

Note. (a) The heart has reasons which the reason does not com
Who can explain, much less justify at the time, a sublime and sel
like Ruth’s? All outward appearances are against it,—the ch


*« Ruth clave to her.”


heroic were it otherwise.


(b) But a deathless love such as this has al
cation. So when the soul cleaves to Christ,


understanding but imperfectly estimate
to comprehend.


whether we walk by faith or by sight,
that question, “‘ Why ?” (Luther).


(c) Every theory which fails to appreciate that man is a s
in other ways than mere external ones, must inevitabl
If this life is all, what profit in self-denial,
that can seriously command our attention for a moment? On the sce
Ruth’s choice a mere impulse, and not even her after-succ
red..m it from the charge of folly. And yet what heart fails tc
incomparable superiority of Ruth to Orpah? Th


life.


men have admired and loved in all
possible, and left a halo of glory arou
i best in human fiction finds


ages, that which has made num
nd the past, is mirrored here,
its counterpart ;


uman history.
it as man and
5, where the word is used
osely and tenderly to Paul,
n Asia, turned from him in


prehend (Pascal),
f-sacrificing choice
Oice would not be


ways in the end proved its own vindi-
it is influenced by motives which the


s, and which the carnal mind fails altogether
The Saviour Himself offers the true explanation, that «
is justified of her children” (Matt. xi. 19).


wisdom
Yet in this is the real test as to


If you would believe, you must erncify


piritual being, influenced
y misread and misinterpret humar
what promptings towards virtue,
ptical theory,
ess and prosperity can
estimate the
e heroie in history, that which
a progress
That which
that which is noblest in life. its


cHap, 1. 14, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
i eeeeeSSSSSSSSSSSSFeFseFeFeFeFeseFeFe"


image and semblance. And all is explained and accounted for if we see in Ruth
one chosen out of a far country, and from among a strange people, that she might
become an Israelite indeed—one yielding to the Divine impulses, and listening to
the Divine voice, though unable as yet to interpret its full meaning. ‘ Forget
also thine own people and thy father’s house; so shall the king greatly desire thy
beauty ; for He is thy Lord: and worship thou Him” (Ps, xlv. 10—13).

We have here—

I. The choice of true love. Orpah’s stone of stumbling and self-denial seen
as a jewel flashing with heaven’s own light to Ruth. Naomi so precious in her
person and influences as to be clung to, be the consequences what they may.
The choice a kindred one to that of Moses in its faith and self-sacrifice. (Choosing
rather to suffer afMiction, etc., Heb. xi. 25.) Can we be far wrong in seeing in
both the same underlying religious convictions, as coming in to decide the choice ?
If so, it is a mistake to say that love for Naomi merely led her to become a
Jewish proselyte. Note. (d) Love may be spiritual and God-given, and yet perfectly
natural in its way of development.

Notice of this choice, (1) That it was not that of impulse, but of conviction. Nothing
can shake her resolution. The love that has brought her so far with Naomi kept
her steadfast now, and to an affection like hers decision becomes more and more
easy. Note. (a) Affections are the great deciding influences in life. Hence Paul
says, ‘Set your affections,” ete. (Col. iii, 2). And (b) The supreme affection is
the great central power in human life. Everything else responds as by a law of
gravitation to that. Hence, if it be toward Moab and the world, as with Orpah,
everything around us will lead us backward; if it be towards the hope of Israel
and God, onward and forward as with Ruth.

(2) That it was not the influence of mere sentiment or excitement. The choice
made with a full determining to abide by it, come weal or come woe, for ever
(Price). She had counted the cost. Probably, as a Moabitess, she might have to
bear cold looks and harsh treatment (Price), Significant that she was called
afterwards Ruth the Moabitess (cf. ii. 2, 12, etc.), the designation of an alien and
one outside the covenant. Note. Steadfastness essential to the formation and manifes-
tation of a religious character (Toller). Piety must be such as to stand the test of
time.

(3) That it was not biased by any selfish hope. The same gloomy prospect
pefore her which had deterred Orpah from going forward. But like that one who
cried out ‘‘so much the more” because of discouragements, Ruth clave to Naomi
the more steadfastly, in spite of threatened affliction and seeming opposition.
Seems to say, “Be the sacrifice ever so great, 1 am ready to make it; I shall
delight in making it” (Simeon). Note. (a) A true and steadfast convert to Israel
foliows very naturally in one who has stood such a testing of the natural affections.
(b) The portion of Israel and of Christ not a barren choice, though & may look so
for the present. Such are to receive ‘‘a hundredfold” (Matt. xix. 29). The
promise literally fulfilled in the case of Ruth.

We have here— ; ;

II. An instance of more than filial piety. Almost as marvellous in what it
leaves as in what it clings to. She realizes, doubtless, a keen sense of her
mother-in-law’s forlorn condition; but only the more vividly to become conscious
of Naomi’s worth and her own duty. Her natural affections are to be seen as an
open door leading towarde faith and God. Note. (a) The neat degree unto godli-
ness is the love of goodness (Bishop Hall), He is in a fair way to grace, that can
value it (ibid.). (b) There are circumstances in which we are called to stand to
gertain people in the place of God (Braden), Parents have to do so to their
ehildren. They have to learn of us before they can learn of Him (ihid.).

See here (1) The expulsive power of a new affection, Transforms her whole
nature, changes the tenor of her whole life. Love is a marvellous magician
(Braden). Note. (a) It is not what we taxe up, bud what we give up, ee ee us


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH. omar. L 14








rich (Beecher). Only with renunciation life, properly speaking, can be said to
begin (Carlyle). Mark, too, (b) The higher good can only be gained by the sacrifice
of the lower (M. Timson). : Poe :

See here then (2) A sacrifice almost unequalled in its severity. The old nature
against her, the force of habit, and all the early associations of the past. Yet love
triumphs over all. Put to the trying alternative, either to forsake her mother-in-
law and the hope of Israel, or all that was behind her in Moab, she does not
hesitate for a moment. The religious aspect of the question comes in here. This
alone could justify her leaving her own mother for a comparative stranger.
Remember what Moab was, and in this higher aspect Ruth’s choice is completely
vindicated,

II. An illustration of the entire surrender of ourselves to God. We have
a final separation from Moab, and a complete devotion to Naomi. So David clave
to the sanctuary (Ps. xxvii. 4), So Paul to Christ (Phil. iii 7—9), and to the way
of salvation. ‘‘This one thing I do,” he said (cbid. 18).

See what a real determination for God and religion is (cf. 16). It does not consist
in rash promises, in hasty resolutions, in transient feelings, however strong, but
in what the Scriptures call ‘a full purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord,” @
fiaedness of soul upon matured conviction (Toller), To this Barnabas exhorted the
Christians at Antioch (Acts xi. 23). Note. (a) To know Christ truly is to need Him
eternally. Whoever has tasted Him can never again live without Him (Lange).
No going back to the ‘‘ beggarly elements of the world” then! (b) Only those who
are cleansed by the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost will
cleave to Christ and His believing Church in the dark and clouded day of adversity
(Macaowan).

Dwrovement.—{1) Away with all mere affection which kisses, but does not
cleave to Christ! Clinging to Him is the only test of true love (John xv.), All
else counterfeit,—this the only conclusive sign that we are His. (2) See too the
necessity for decision. To make a beginning in the right direction is a great
thing (Beecher). (8) Learn also the power of resolution; it silences temptation,
Those that go in religious ways without a steadfast mind stand like a door half
open, which mocks a thief; but resolution shuts and bolts the door (Miniature
Com.).


“Blessed is Ruth, who so clave to her aged
mother-in-law that she would not leave her
until death. For this reason, Scripture indeed
has justly extolled her ; but God has beati-
fied her for ever. But He will judge, and in
the resurrection condemn, all those wicked
and ungodly daughters-in-law who deal out
abuse and wrong to their parents-in-law,
unmindful of the fact that they gave life
and sustenance to their husbands... . If
therefore thou lovest thy husband, O wife,
then love them also who gave him being,
and thus brought up a sca for themselves
and a husband for thee. Seek not to divide
the son from his father or mother, lest thou
fall into the condemnation of the Lord, in
the day of awful inquest and judgment,”—
Origen.

“ Neither self-interest, nor hope, nor vanity
mix themselves up with this love, It is a
purely moral and spiritual love, of which no
other instance is on record. It is in fact the
love of those whom (od by His mercy has
won for Himself, and who love God in their
brethren, It is the evangelical love of the
apostles, who loyed Greeks and Franks,
Persians and Sythians, as their own flesh
and blood, Such iove as this followed the


62


steps of our Lord, and tarried where He was,
Confession, martyrdom, prayer, and every
brotherly thought or deed, spring from the
love of the converted heart.” —Lango.

“Love is above all, and when it prevails
in us all, we shall all be lovely, and in love
with God, and one with another.”— Penn,

“Yead men through love to love. For
love cultivates and preserves the true and
the good by doctrine, life, prayer, watchful-
ness, and by a thousand other inventions of
its inexhaustible genius.”—Swiler (quoted im
Lange).

“If moral virtue could be seen with mortal
eyes, it would attract all hearts to it, =
Plato,

“A spiritual relationship is never so close
and so strong as when the persons are related
also by strong natural sympathies... . N ow
and then it has happened that this harmony
has been so strangely complete, that each |
has loved the other literally as his own
soul, and felt indeed as though thesa were
but one soul between them. The fact ia, that,
the one spirit enters into and affects similar
natures so similarly, that when either speaka
out of his deepest life, he equally speaks the
experience of the other. When these similacs


OnAP, 1. 16.


by nature are apprehended by the Second
Adam, and the sweet life of eternity springs
up in their hearts, the relation becomes one
of unutierable endearment. . . . Every step
of their spiritual progress relates them more
and more essentially.”—John Pulsford.


“°Twixt that, long fled, which gave us light,
And that which soon shall end in night,
There is a point no eye shall see,

But on it hangs eternity.
This is that moment—who can tell
Whether it leads to heaven or hell?
This is that moment—as we choose,
The immortai soul we save or lose.
Time past and time to come are not;
Time present is our only lot ;
O God! henceforth our hearts incline
To seek no other love than Thine.”
J, Montgomery.


“ Think not too meanly of thy low estate;
Thou hast a choice; to choose is to create }
Remember whose the sacred lips that tell,
Angels approve thee when thy choice is

well.” O. W. Holmes.


* A few forsake the throng, with lifted eyes,
Ask wealth of heaven, and gain the real
prize—
Truth, wisdom, grace, and peace, like that
above,
Sealed with His signet, whom they serve and
love.” Anon,


‘‘ Blest with this followship divine,
Take what Thou wilt, I'll ne’er repine;
E’en as the branches to the vine,

My soul would cling to Thee.


Far from her home, fatigued, oppressed,
Here she has found her place of rest;
An exile still, yet not unblessed,
While she can cling to Thee.”
Mrs, Elliot.


“A few years ago, and you were not; a
few more, and on this stage of life you will
be no more. Much has been done, much is
yet to be done in the interval. You are now
at the outset of womanhood. Woman’s duties,
woman’s strange and mixed destiny of suffer-
ing, feeling, and deep life, is beginning.”—
Robertson.


“They say that when the temperature has.


gone down below the freezing-point, water
will remain apparently the same, and yet
that it will congeal at a touch and ina
moment. So with the changes and transi-
tions in human character and life. They go
on silently and invisibly, until some crisis in
outward circumstances brings them suddenly
to maturity.”—B.

“ Thus it is that in some decisive moment
every soul that attains salvation makes its





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





choice, by which it adopts the true Jehovah
as its portion. It abandons all the former
idolatries of its life, and becomes a true wor-
shipper of the true God.”—Steel and Terry.

“So a soul that is truly brought to Christ
affectionately loves Him and heartily cleaves
to Him, resolves in the strength of Divine
grace to follow Him whithersoever He goes
or directs, and is desirous of having commu-
nion with none but Him.”— Gill,

“Ruth’s attachment was worth ten thousand
of Orpah’s kisses. The young nobleman in
the Gospel treated our Lord with high respect;
but all this availed him nothing, for he would
not sell his possessions at Christ’s command,
and become a follower of Jesus. Happy were
the apostles who continued with Him in all
His temptations. They left all, and followed
Him. What they left was little; but that
love which disposed them to leave all was
highly valued by Him, and they received a
hundredfold of recompence even in this
world.” — Lamson.

“The story of Ruth has shed a
light over what else would be the accursed
race of Moab, We strain our gaze to know
something of the long line of the purple hills
of Moab, which form the background at once
of the history and of the geography of Pales-
tine. It is a satisfaction to feel that there
is one tender association which unites them
with the familiar history and scenery of
Judea—that from their recesses. across the
deep gulf which separates the two regions,
came the Gentile ancestress of David and the
Messiah.” —Stanley.

“Ruth is a prophecy, than which none
could be more beautiful and engaging, of
the entrance of the heathen world into the
kingdom of God. She comes forth out of
Moab, an idolatrous people, full of wanton.
ness and sin, and is herself so tender and
pure. In a land where dissolute sensuality
formed one of the elements of idol worship, a
woman appears as wife and daughter, chaste
as the rose of spring, and unsurpassed in these
relations by any other character in Holy
Writ. Without living in Israel, she is first
elevated, then won, by the life of Israel, ag
displayed in a foreign land. Amid sure
rounding enmity and jealousy toward Israel,
she is capable of being formed and attracted
through love.”’—ZLange.

“What can you do, but faithfully and
simply follow Him who has said, ‘ Whoso-
ever loveth father or mother more than me,
is not worthy of me’? You must go forth
with Ruth, and leave those who, rejecting
Jesus, will not go with you. You must
follow the Lord fully, though you follow
Him alone among your earthly connexion,”


—Tyng.


wR EE al,


VERSE 15.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL Norrs.—And she [Naomi] said, Behold thy sister-in-law,
i.e., wife of a husband’s brother; no English wora exactly answering to the original Hebrew.
The same word is rendered brother’s wife ‘Deut. xxv. 7.9). being the feminine of that ren-


33


WOMILETIC COMMENTARY; ROUTH. oar, 1. 1.








—————


dered (i). 7) husband’s brother (Speaker’s Com.). Unto her gods [god]. ‘And to her
god” ratnove Bible). The ete is to be preferred (Lange). Adam Clarke thinks that
both Orpah and Ruth had been idolaters so far. With Ruth, however, a leaning towards the
God of Israel and His laws (Keil), Wright argues from these words that Naomi viewed
idolatry without serious disfavour, at least as practised by others. This held upon insuflicient
data, Naomi’s words do not necessarily contain any recognition of the Moabitish deity, or
indicate (as Wright suggests) that she was possibly led astray by the false idea that Jehovah
was only the God of Israel (Zange). Was Jephthah then (Judges xi, 24, 27) similarly led
astray ? (Lange.) 3

Return thou. Serious in her intentions, sincere in her advice (Keil). Perhaps said merely
to prove Ruth’s constancy (Speaker’s Com.). (Cf. Josh. xxiv. 15—19; 2 Kings li. 2-6).
Spoken that it might be made clear whether she would adhere steadfastly to the G od of Israel]
(Seb, Schmidt), Not that she desired her to return, but to try her sincerity (Gill), She had
aimply the earthly prosperity of her motier-in-law in her mind (Keil, Carpzov).


Theme.—Tue Tuirp anp Last Triuu or AFFECTION.


“ What though the world unfaithful prove,
And earthly friends and joys remove?
With sure and certain hope of love,
Still would I cling to thee."—Mrs, Elliot,


And she [Naomi] said, Behold thy sister-in-law is gone back. . . . Return
thou, ete.


How sad is the history of a return to Moab (Tyng), both in its effects and in its
influences! With Orpah, to go back to her people was to return to her gods.
And yet how pregnant with meaning! Evident now that Orpah had mistaken a
mere momentary feeling (cf. ver. 10) for something deeper and more lasting.
Evident, too, that Naomi’s suspicions and gurmises were correct. Note. (a) The
“return” justifies the tests (ver. 8, 9; 11—18). Very naturally, also, it leads to
this final trial of Ruth’s affection and steadfastness. Naomi anxious still ; fears
lest even now cleaving to her should be the result of a rash, unthinking choice ;
dreads a future apostate in a present convert. Could not really intend to persuade
her beloved daughter to return to the service of Chemosh (Lawson). Said of those
of whom the world was not worthy, “they were tempted ” (Heb. xi. 87). So here,
Note. () The trial is by no means intended to justify the “return.” In the present
case, disobedience a virtue (Macgowan). When Christ said to Judas, ‘ What thou
doest do quickly,” He by no means authorised Judas to execute his wicked designs
(Lawson). Orpah doubtless went back to Naomi’s grief (Lawson).

I. See where the strength of this last trial lay. An unfavourable example
lends its weight to worldly disadvantages (M. Timson). These heavy enough before ;
now Ruth is to see one she loves turning away from Naomi, and lending her
influence to lead her backwards. Orpah has ‘gone back,” too, although she
cherished as warm an affection for Naomi as any a mother-in-law could expect,
Note. (a) Example has a mighty influence, especially the example of those who
are dear to us. Christ felt it to be so in that moment when the last link between
Himself and His half-hearted followers was severed, and He turned to the rest
with the question, Will ye also go away ? (John vii. 67.) A scriptural doctrine,
that because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold (Matt. xxiv,
12). Note. (+) The castle seems almost won where one-half the soldiers are
overcome (Lawson), Orpah has yielded, and yet for all this Ruth stauds
steadfast.

II. See in what lies its meaning and purpose. It evidently settled the
questions at issue once and for ever. Decision comes as the result of conflict.
Distrust of one’s own judgment the most terrible spectre to fight (M. Timson),
Especially so when the example of those we 1espect is adverse to our decisions,
This mastered, however, the rest is easy
__Lsssons. (1) The falls of some may justly bring others into trial (Bernard),
(2) Not the length or tury of the conflict whieh is important, but its results,
(8) ae of apostacy must not damp but rather invigorate our zeul,


cHap. 1. 15. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.





“a





Fuller on this (conderged) » -

Examples of others se} before our eyes are very potent and prevalent arguments
to make us follow and imitate them, whether they be good examples—so the for-
wardness of the Corinthians to relieve the Jews provoked many—or whether they
be bad—so the dissembling of Peter at Antioch drew Barnabas and others into the
same fault. But those examples, of all others, are most forcible with us which
are set by such who are near to us by kindred, or gracious with us in friendship,
or great over us in power.

Usx [Lesson] I. Let men in eminent places, as magistrates, ministers, fathers,
masters, and the like (seeing that others love to dance after their pipe, to sing
after their tune, to tread after their track), endeavour to propound themselves
patterns of piety and religion to those that be under them.

Il. When we see any good example propounded unto us, let us strive with all
possible speed to imitate it. . . . Follow not the adultery of David, but follow
the chastity of Joseph; follow not the dissembling of Peter, but follow the sin-
cerity of Nathanael ; follow not the testiness of Jonah, but follow the meeknoss
of Moses ; follow not the apostacy of Orpah, but follow the perseverance of Ruth.

II. When any bad example is presented unto us, let us decline and detest it,
though the men be never so many or so dear to us. Imitate Micaiah (1 Kings
xxil.). . . . Yea, but one may say, ‘‘ What if I find in the Scripture an action
recorded whose doer is known to have been a godly and gracious man, may I not,
without any further doubt or scruple, follow the same?” ... The Holy Spirit
hath not set these sins down with an intent they should be followed; but first to
show the frailty of His dearest saints when He leaves them to themselves; as
also to comfort us when we fall into grievous sins, when we see that as heinous


offences of God’s servants stand upon the record in the Scriptures.


“Oh, Orpah, Orpah ! that thou hadst been
wise, at least in this thy day, to think of the
things which belong unto thy peace! but now
they are hidden from thy eyes, ... And
could we know her history, we should doubt-
less find in it many a sorrowful and weeping
hour as she thought of these friends of her
youth whom she was to see no more.. .. It
is the history we have seen in the child of
the world over and over again. You may
renounce the Saviour, and walk with Him no
more. You may go back to Moab, and bury
yourself in its sins and follies. But you will
find no peace or happiness there. Your con-
\cience will never again allow you to rest.” —


4c Worldliness is not living in the world,

ssessing the world, using the world ; world-
lines is pursuing the world which is, to the
forgetfulness and exclusion of that which is
to come ; it is a sacrificing of the future to
the present, the enjoying of earth’s mess of
pottage at the loss of the heavenly birth-
right.”—H. Wonnacott.

“ Where the heart is indeed influenced by
sovereign grace, and drawn by the eternal
Father, opposition will only serve to inflame
our love and zeal, as oil cast into the fire
serves only to increase its ardour instead of
extinguishing the flame.”—Margowan.

“Still Naomi proves the spirit of Ruth.
‘Your sister has gone back to her people and
her gods. If you mean ever to go back, now
is your best time to go. Think well of what
you give up, and of what you may encounter
im accompanying me, Much as I would lave


to have you to go with me, I do not wish you
hereafter to feel disappointed or grieved on
my account. Remember, I have nothing to
offer you. If you go with me, it must be ag
a partner of my griefs and wants.’ Thus God
often proves the young disciple with new
trials. He sends the east wind upon the
young trees of His planting, not to weaken
or destroy, but to give greater strength and
endurance for the time to come.”— yng.

“Adam was soon drawn by Eve; Rehoboam’s
heart was easily led after the advice of his
familiars ; the women of Judah by their hua-
bands easily fell to idolatry.”— Bernard.

“This is Naomi’s last trial of Ruth; and
these words show plainly all was to try her,
because she telleth Ruth of Orpah’s going
back, not only to her people, but also to her
gods, which Naomi, a good woman, could not
but hate, and could not so ill respect Ruth,
and show so great coldness in religion and
honour of the true God, as to dissuade Ruth
from the same God of truth to return unto
idols.” — Bernard,

“The Saviour Himself cared not so much
to be followed by the crowd, as to be served
and loved by thefew, Let the promiscuous
multitude be gone, so that the handful left
prove faithful and worthy! And even these
He tries again and again. Strong enough to
deny Himself of every faint-hearted and
faithless disciple, and yet tender enough to
weep after every such denial and desertion, it
is so He speaks those pregnant and searching
words of His to every one of us, Will se ales
go away?"—2B,


if


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ROUTH. cHapP. I. 16, 17.








VERSES 16—18,


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL Norrs.—Entreat me not—Urge me not (Lange), Force ma
not ( Wordsworth), Be not against me (Trem. Junius, Montan. Bernard, Fuller, Wright ; Vulg.;
Wycliffe, and Douay Ver.). Thy people shall be {is] my people. I will bea Jewess both in
country and religion (Wright). This appears to be a form of compact and union, as we may
infer from Zoheir’s speech in Antar (vol. iii, 98): “If you engage, we will engage; if you fight,
we will fight ; if you die, we will die; yours is our property, and yours is all we possess”
(Kitto). Where thou lodgest, abidest (Lange), stayest (Keil).

Ver. 17, The Lord [Jehovah] do so, The Eternal do so to me, and more also (Benisch, a
Jewish translator, who invariably renders the word “ Eternal.”) And more also, Lit. And so
may He add to do (Keil). This form of imprecation is frequent in the books of Samuel and
Kings (cf. 1 Sam. iii. 17; 2 Sam, iii. 9; 1 Kings ii, 23; ee When the imprecation is
followed by the thing which the speaker affirms shall happen, the affirmation is preceded, as
here, by the particle » that (Speaker's Com.) So Adam Clarke, Lange. » is not if (Lange).
Answers to ori in the sense of quod, introducing a declaration (Keil), The E. V. might be cor-
rected by leaving the particle untranslated, and rendering “ Only death shall part thee and
me (Lange). Death alone shall part thee and me (Benisch). So the LXX., I swear that
death, and nothing else than death, shall separate us (Keil). I swear, or some such expression,
is understood (Lange). The first occurrence of that common formula of an oath, by which
the person swearing called down upon himself a stroke of Divine judgment in case he kept
not his word nor carried out his resolutions (Steele and Terry). The Hebrew, instead of
invoking a definite judgment or calamity on himself, in case he oad break his oath, simply
says rz, which with the addition “and more also,” is perhaps more awful to the imagination
because it is not definite (Lange).

There is an antiphonal character in these words, which gives it almost the character of a
musical chant: perhaps it was often on the lips of maidens of Israel (Wordsworth): comp.
Ps. xlv. 10, “ Hearken, O d aughter,” etc., and the rhythmical movement in Rom. viii, 35, “Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ?” etc. (ibid).

“And Ruth said, ‘Entreat me not to leave thee and return from following after thee, for I
desire to become a proselyte.’ Said N aomi, ‘We are commanded to observe the Sabbath and
good days in not travelling more than two thousand cubits.’ Said Ruth, ‘ To every place
where thou goest I will go.’ Said Naomi, ‘We are commanded not to lodge with the Gentiles.
Said Ruth, ‘ Wheresoever thou lodgest, I will lodge.’ Said Naomi, ‘We are commanded to
keep six hundred and thirteen precepts.’ Said Ruth, ‘ What thy people keep, I will keep, as
if they were my people from of old until now.’ Said Naomi, ‘We are commanded not to
worship with a strange worship.’ Said Ruth, ‘Thy God shall Himself be my God.’ Said
Naomi, ‘ We have four kinds of capital punishment for criminals : stoning, burning, behead-
ing, and hanging.’ Said Ruth, ‘ In whatever way thou diest, I will die.” Said Naomi, ‘We
have a house of burial.’ Said Ruth, ‘And there will I be buried’ ” (Chaldee Paraphrast)
So the Jewish expositors after the Targum (Lange).

Verse 18. When [and when] That she was steadfastly minded. Firmly resolved (Lange,
Wright) that she strengthened herself (Wordsworth) with an oath (Bernard, Fuller). The


verb means “ to stiffen oneself firmly upon a thing” (Keil, Pradsniis Shales peg an
her, Ceased to dissuade her (Lange, Che), gs” ( ’ ) ft speaking


VERSES 16, 17.
Theme.—Sacrep Momunrs AND Sotemn Vows


‘ Love’s holy flame for ever burneth 3
From heaven it came, to heaven returneth 3
Too oft on earth a troubled guesh,
At times deceived, at times opprest,
It here is tried and purified F
But hath in heaven its perfect rest p
It soweth here in toil and care,
But the harvest-time of love is there.” — Southey,


And Ruth said, Entreat me not [be not against me] to leave thee, ete,
Where thou diest, etc.


Ruth’s famous reply to Naomi’s disguasive entreaties takes hi
the sentences which the world will not willingly let die (Cox)
which is the more admirable,—Naomi in putting from her her

66


gh rank among
. Hard to say
sole comfort and


cHap. 1.16,17. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.





stay, or Ruth, in leaving all that she had to become the stay and comfort of
Naomi’s declining years (ibid). God has chosen to confer singular honours upon
women throughout the sacred Scriptures (Kitto). As examples, Miriam, Deborah,
Huldah, Anna, Mary, Lydia, and Dorcas may be mentioned. Ruth stands pre-
eminent among them for the strength of her affections, and these have been the
glory of woman always. Did ever the love of the human heart find a richer,
sweeter expression than this? In the whole realm of literature where can they
be equalled? They are absolutely matchless (Braden). The words become
rhythmical and musical with the burden of love,—a love which solves all
difficulties, and removes all obstacles. There are moments in life when the
Godlike within us flashes forth, when we prove ourselves children of immortality ;
for we can face the ills of time, and look beyond them. Such a moment is this
in the history of Ruth.

We have here, I. The utterance of a pure, passionate, and personal affection
—pure, because unselfish; passionate, because intensely in earnest; and personal,
for love naturally centres in a person [see on ver. 14, p. 60]. She sacrificed all
the pleasures, all the friendships of her youth; all the hopes of better days in her
own country, and she chooses banishment here, for Naomi’s sake, as John for
Christ’s (Rev. i. 9). Note (a) The Saviour demands a kindred sacrifice of His
disciples (Luke xiv. 33). (b) The Christian’s Patmos his way to Paradise (Secker).
“‘ Now I begin to be a disciple,” said Ignatius on his way to martyrdom. “I weigh
neither visible nor invisible things, so that I may gain Christ. (c) Adversity alike
the test of sincerity and discipleship [ef. Luke xxi. 16, 17; vi. 22).

Some translate, “Be not against me,” [that is, in urging me to leave thee.] Ruth
evidently was greatly distressed and moved by what Naomi had just said. Toa heart
like hers the mere thought of separation was unbearable, See here then a mind fully
persuaded. She weighs neither pains nor penalties, and obstacles only make the
decision more plain, as the refining fire serves to make the purity of. the gold
more apparent. Note (a) They are against us who use reasons, and exhort us to
turn back from well-doing (Bernard). Christ called Peter “ Satan,” that is, adver-
sary, when he gave Him counsel to do otherwise than His Father had appointed
(ibid). (b) The godly have a desire not to be hindered in a good course. So it was
with David when he had determined to meet Goliath. So Elisha, repeatedly
urged, refused to leave Elijah. So Paul in his resolve to go onward to Jerusalem
(Acts xxi. 13, 14). And so it must be always with the man of God. A holy
boldness characterizes him ; for the kingdom of heaven is to suffer violence, ete.
(Matt. xf. 12). ; .

We have here, then, II. The expression of a choice made once and for ever.
Not a wish merely, but a strong, deliberate purpose, formed amid much apparent
opposition, and expressed with an impassioned invocation on the name of Jehovah.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Opposition only makes her
the more steadfast; she strengthened herself with an oath [see Crit. and Exeg.
Notes on ver. 18]. ‘God do so to me,” etc. The choice full [complete, whole-
hearted], unlimited, affectionate, determined, final. (Belfrage). No reserve, no
conditions. Her creed not an election of the heart only, or o preference of the
intellect, but a practical adoption (Cumming).

Notice of this choice, (1) That tt was a choice made in youth. ‘St bless Thee,
O God!” said Beza in his will, “ for many things, but especially that I gave myself
up to Thee at the early age of sixteen.” Ruth probably older than this, though
there can be little doubt she came to Bethlehem early in life. [Boaz, when he
first meets her, asks, ‘‘ Whose damsel is this 2 and: calls her daughter, ii, 5—8. ]
Life opening before her, the future untried, so she gives herself to the God of
Israel, and comes to take shelter under His wing. To the young, life is yet fresh
and new—in their hands it is plastio and pliable. They have the experiment of
living yet to begin, and they are interested as none beside can be, in learning how
to begin it well (Binney). Note. Early piety is likely to be eminent picty. Why

67


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. I. 16, 17.


ee eee
should not the powers of nature, in their first bloom and glory, adorn the kingdom
of grace ? (Dr. Watts.) ;

Notice, (2) That it was a choice made Jor life and death. Made in a moment,
but made for all the future. See in it therefore, not only the expression of the
old love for Naomi, but of the new hope and the new life dawning within the
heart of Ruth. They have been together in Moab, in darkness, bondage, and
misery, why should they not be together in the land of promise? How beautiful
when companionship outside the covenant of Israel ends and even leads to com-
panionship within the fold of Christ! Mark of this choice, (a) It is to control all
her actions, her goings and abidings. ‘‘Where thou goest,” etc. She takes Naomi
for better or worse, for richer or poorer—makes no exception to any condition
which may arise. So men must give themselves to Christ, as the disciples followed
the Saviour. They were content with such lodgings as their Lord had for Himself
(Macgowan).

Again, (b) It is to influence all her hopes. ‘Thy people shall be my people,” ete,
Religion creates a firmer kinship than nature. Grace in the heart overleapg
such petty boundaries as nationality. ‘¢Hereby,” says the inspired divine, “do
we know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren,”
Henceforward their hope is our hope, their lot our lot in time and in eternity.

So always. To us, to-day, there are two lands and two people. When we
give ourselves to the Lord, we give ourselves to His people also. The love of
Christ constrains us in this ag in every other way. David’s delight was not in
one saint, but in ‘the saints;” and they that love one godly person for godlinegg’
sake cannot but affect all the Lord’s flock (Bernard). Mark, the Christian is no
recluse, the Church is not a nunnery. ‘Thy people;” it is companionship,
society, the general assembly of the church of the firstborn (Cumming).

Once more, (¢) It is to last as long as life itself. Ruth thinks only of the future as it
is joined to Naomi’s, and in this she is the true type of the Christian convert. Death
alone shall divide them ; for death must divide all earthly friendships, at least, for
awhile. ‘ Where thou diest,” ete, How strong the affinity which holds out for life,
stronger still that which is for life and death! Nay, more, she ig willing to take
the risk of dying first, and she will not so much ag have her body taken back to
Moab. “There will I be buried,” etc. Love alone strong as life itself, unquench-
able and unchangeable, dare speak in language like this, And yet this is the
only language Christ will listen to if We are to be His disciples. We are to hate
father and mother for His sake; and if we love our own life, we shall lose it in
loving Him. We take Him for life and for death, and the grave is not to separate
us. Blessed compensation! To die the death of the righteous, to be buried with
them, is to sleep in Jesus, to be with Christ, which is far better,

(8) That it was a choice made for God and eternity. Her nominal profession
changed into an abiding principle (Braden). The climax here, ‘‘ Thy God shall be
my God.” This confession the key-stone of her vow (Lange). Not merely chosen
because He was Naomi’s God (Lawson). Not And yet love to Naomi was the


Lysterious truth, that we may be instruments of grace to our fellow-men !
Friendship may lead upward to the love of God! Note, of this choice, in the last
place, that (d) It is to decide the great question of her destiny, It places her within
the Israel of God. It links her with the promises coming down from Abraham’s
time and Adam’s. §o it ig « the seed of the woman,” this woman, is to bruise the
serpent’s head. Happy choice! earnest of that day when men shall lay hold of
the skirt of Him that is an Israelite indeed, saying, We will g0 with you;
for we have heard that God is with you (Zech, viii. 28),

ImprovemEnt,—(1) The most painful part of religion comes first: God has provided
“some better thing” further on (Morlais Jones), Poverty and misery awaited Ruth
at first. (2) Self-denial is the only way to share the Israelite’s hope. (8) With the
truly earnest spirit, spiritual affections will always have the victory over carnal per


68


cHaP. 16,17. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.











suasions. (4) The love of goodness in men should lead to, and show itself finally in,
the love of God Himself, the supreme good. ‘Thy God shall be my God,” the
language of every truly believing heart to the Church of Christ. A natural man
may choose deliverance from hell, but no man doth ever choose God and Christ,
and the spiritual benefits Christ hath purchased, and the happiness of God’s people,
till he is converted (President Edwards).

Tyng on this (condensed) :—


Theme.—Tue Cuotcr or Yours.


Ruth’s faithful choice remains a permanent and everlasting pattern to all who
hear the gospel in their youth.

I. It was an humble choice: nothing to offer but herself; no claim to present ;
fears she may be a burden and unwelcome. So when the Holy Spirit brings the
soul to Jesus, she comes as a beggar. But in all her conscious unworthiness she
ehooses Christ as her portion and her Lord.

II. It was an affectionate choice: personal, tender. Can leave Moab without
regret ; can part with earthly friends, but she cannot leave Naomi. (Entreat, etc.)
To such a choice the Saviour would lead us; not one of duty merely, or obliza-
tion, of fear or necessity. Not the mere remedy and recourse of disappointment
and weariness ; not the constrained denial of self, of appetite, and loved indul-
gence ; not an involuntary, sorrowful relinquishment of a world that was loved
as long as it bloomed, and has been forsaken only because it has faded. No. The
world was never brighter. It is the perception of something infinitely more
precious, the choice of the Saviour, etc. As freely as the falling drop mingles
with the current, does the affectionate heart embrace and resolve to go with Him.

III. It was an entire choice—no hesitation. The contrasting claims of Moab
were nothing. She made the exchange—the transfer of herself—freely, com-
pletely, and without reserve. So the true convert makes a complete surrender of
herself to the Lord. Like Saul, ‘*‘ What wilt Thou have me to do?” None but
Christ the language of her youthful heart.

IV. It was a determined choice: amazing dignity and firmness in her stand.
Useless all attempts to lead her back to Moab. So in the history of early martyr-
doms for Christ. ‘I ama Christian,” the gentle but firm reply to every solici-
tation to recant. An open, sincere, and determined choice of Christ leads us into
a harbour of rest. So Paul: ‘‘ None of these things move me” (Acts xx. 24).

V. It was an instant choice. Asked no time for consideration. She staggered
not in unbelief, nor wavered amidst conflicting motives.

When Ruth’s faithful choice was thus made, she was allowed to go on her way
in peace. The young convert’s sincerity was proved. There she stood, acknow-
ledged, honoured, and accepted, as a chosen traveller for Immanuel’s land.

McCheyne on this :—

We should cleave to our converted friends. Follow those who follow Christ.

I. Their God is a precious God; sin pardoning, faithful.

Il. Their people are a happy people.

III. They want you to go with them,

IV. If you do not go, there will be an eterna) separation between you. How
strange that two trees should grow so near—one to flower in Paradise,
the other to be a firebrand in hell. Can you bear the thought of such
a separation ?

Ferris on this :—
J. A beautiful illustration of the influenco of true affection,

TI. An illustration of the character and feelings of the true convert,

III. One of the richest sources of parental joy.

IV. An encouragement to pious example and effort,

Cox on this :—
Three points should be noted. (1) That in these words Ruth nee every
4


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: RUTH.


cuapP. 1. 16, 17.


IS a


dissuasive plea of Naomi.


Naomi had no
replies, “ Where thou lodgest, I will lodge.”


home, no asylum to offer; and Ruth
Naomi reminds her that she is


going among an alien people, who worship another God; and Ruth replies, “ Thy


people shall be my people.” Naomi urges that there will


be no brightness, no


life in her life; and Ruth replies that she is content to die, so that she may share


Naomi’s grave,
Naomi.


(2) That Ruth adopts Naomi’s God, as yet, pyrely from love of
And (8) that she shows how instantly and entirely she adopts Naomi’s


religion by sealing her yow with her Hebrew oath, and by calling on the God of


the Hebrews,


“Her vow has stamped itself on the very
heart of the world; and that not because of
the beauty of its form simply, though even in
our English version it sounds like a sweet
and noble music, but because it expresses in
a worthy form, and once for all, the utter
devotion of a genuine and self-conquering
love. It is the spirit which informs and
breathes through these melodious words that
makes them so precious to us, and that also
renders it impossible to utter any fitting
comment on them. They shine most purely
in their own light.”—Cow,

“Love is a giant—it heapeth mountains
pon mountains, and thinks the pile but
little ; it is a mighty mystery, for it changes
bitter into sweet ; it calls death life, and life
death; and it makes pain less painful than
enjoyment.” —Spurgeon,

‘Love here is surrounded by the other
graces, and divides the honours with them ;
but they will have felt the warp of night and
of darkness when it will shine luminous
against the sky of eternity.” — Beecher,

“ Love is a marvellous magician. Let the
soul but feel its mighty touch, and you dare
not prophesy the results. Men and women,
commonplace enough in the ordinary affairs
of life, become poets and heroes under the
influence of its mysterious inspirations. The
slowest tongue grows eloquent, timidity loses
its fear, and is brave for all duty and sacri-
fice, and even death looks not terrible to the
clear eyes of love.” — Braden,

“Love does not aim simply at the con-
scious good of the beloved object ; it is not
satisfied without perfect loyalty of heart ;
ip aves at its own completeness.” — George

jot.


“ The love of Thee flows just as much
As that of ebbing self subsides ;
Oar hearts (their scantiness is such)
Bear not the conflict of two rival tides,”
Madame Guyon,


“ Of all that human was or is,

Alone unchanging is Thy love,

Thy love to us, and ours to Thee,

Responsive turns to heaven above,

True as the needle to the pole,

True as the branches to the vine:

Oh blessed hope ! if kept by Thee,

Amid these changes we are Thine.”

B.
“After a little, when a man has fairly
committed himself to a Christian life, many


70


“ Jehovah do so to me, and more also,” ete,


of those things which have been against him
turn round, and are like winds in his sails to
help him. The great thing is to beyin—to
begin honestly, to begin with the help of
Christ and God—to begin. For this is one of
those cases in which to begin is half the
journey. And where aman ig willing to say
to his companion, or to some friend or Chris-
tian brother, ‘ The time past suffices in which
I have lived a worldly life, and I am going,
by the grace of God, to begin to lay the
foundations of a Christian life,” in many and
many cases the crisis is past. You may not
have joy to-day, nor for weeks; but you are
on the way toward it. It may not be con-
version ; but will stand ultim ately connected
with it. ... When Peter was in prison, and
he was aroused by an angel in the night, that
touched his chains, and caused them to fall
off, when first he opened his eyes, and beheld
the angel, his rescue had begun. His rescue -
had begun before his chains fell, before the
prison-door was thrown back, before he passed
the keeper.” — Beecher,

“To follow Naomi was not simply to go
with one whose piety was deep and true, and
whose ability to teach the doctrines of a
diviner faith might. be measured by her
character and her personal affection, but to
go into a land of piety, where the service of
God was publicly celebrated ; where instruc.
tion might be received in the Divine law, and
where everything around would tell of the
worship of Jehovah. Who that has thought
at all of the subtle influence of daily sur-
roundings, or attempted to measure the effects
of a moral atmosphere, that may be peculiar
to the age in which he lives, does not know
what this would mean ?”—jy. Timson,

“T would not even ask a Hindoo to give up
the religion that he has, so great is the saeri-
fice, unless I could supersede it by a more
comforting, a more glorious religion, the T@-
ligion of light and liberty, and life and truth.” °
—Dr. Cumming.

“The humble, meek, merciful, just, pious,
and devout souls, are everywhere of one
religion ; and when death has taken off the
mask, they will know one another, though
the diverse liveries they wear here make
them strangers.”— Penn,

“Our vows are cruel to ourselves, if they
demand nothing but gentle zephyrs, and
flowery fields, and calm repose, as the lot of
our life; for these pleasant things often
prove the most dangerous enemies to our
nobler and dearer life.” Leighton,


CHapP. I. 16, 17.


“ Making thus the Lord my choice,
I have nothing more to choose,
But to listen to Thy voice,

And my will in Thine to lose:
Thus whatever may betide,

I shall safe and happy be;
Still content and satisfied,
Having all in having Thee.”


“Some men will follow Christ on certain
conditions ;—if He will not lead them through
rough roads—if He will not enjoin them any
painful tasks—if the sun and wind do not
annoy them—if He will remit a part of His
plan and order, But the true Christian, who
has the spirit of Jesus, will say, as Ruth said
to Naomi, ‘Whither thou goest, I will go,’
whatever difficulties and dangers may be in
the way.”

“The upright in heart are like Ruth;
whatsoever becometh of the gospel, they will
be sharers with it in the same condition; be
it affliction, or be it prosperity ; be it comfort,
or be it sorrow ; be it fair weather, or be it
foul ; be it light, or be it darkness; they will
take their lot with it.”— Caryl.

“See here the large extent of a saint’s
love; it lasts till death: and no wonder;
for it is not founded upon honour, beauty, or
wealth, or any other sinister respect in the
party beloved, which is subject to age or

mutability, but only on the grace and piety
in him; which foundation, because it always
lasteth, that love which is built upon it is also
perpetual.” — Fuller,

“Carnal affections cannot prevail over
spiritual convictions. The sinner who is in
esrnest for salvation will be deaf to invi-
tations to go back. The more he is solicited
by them, the faster he will flee from them.”—
Mason’s Notes on the Pilgrim’s Progress.

“ A good companion, saith the Latin pro-
verb, is pro viatico; I may add also, pro
diwwersorio, Ruth, so be it she may enjoy
Naomi’s gracious company, will be content
with any lodging, though happily it may be
no better than Jacob had. And yet we see
how some had been discouraged even from
the company of our Saviour, for fear of hard
lodging. Witness the scribe, to whom our
Saviour said, ‘The foxes have their holes,’
etc.” —Tuller,

“Tt has not in any age been common for
the greatest of saints to have the softest beds
and most comfortable lodgings ; and yet, in
every age, God has had His followers and
witnesses, and the Church her untfeigned
lovers.” —Maggowan.

“When those that we have formerly been

mversant with are turning to God and to

is people, their example ought to influence
us. Their example should be looked upon
as a call from God, to do as they have done.
God, when He changes the heart of one, calls
upon another, especially does He loudly call
on those that have been their friends and
acquaintaness. We have been influenced by
their example in evil, and shall we cease to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH
Se ee ae





follow them when they make the wisest
choice that ever they made, and do the best
thing that ever they did ?”—President Kd-
wards,

“In our narrative, the confession of Ruth,
‘Thy God is my God,’ is the highest stage uf
that devotion which she yields to Naomi for
life, She has vowed that nothing shall sepa-
rate her love from its object; for whatever
could separate it would make it imperfect.
But since the God of Israel is the true ground
of all the love which she felt for her israel-
itish friends, it follows that her confession of
Him is the keystone of her vow. It is at the
same time the true solution of the conflict
into which persons who mutually loved each
other had fallen, It rectifies the error com-
mitted by her husband when he took the
Moabitish woman, notwithstanding her rela-
tion to the idol of Moab. The unity of the
Spirit has been attained, which not only
shows true love, but even in memory recon-
ciles what was amiss in the past. For Naomi’s
grief was so great, not only because she had
lost her sons, but also because the daughters-
in-law which she had must be given up, and
she be left alone. And as love enforced the
separation, so love also became the cord
drawing to a yet closer union, If Naomi
believed herself fallen out of the favour of
God on Moab’s account, she could derive
comfort from Ruth, who for her sake entered
into the people of God.”—Lange.

“She was unchangeably resolved. So was
that martyr who said, ‘The heavens will
sooner fall than I will forsake my profession.’
I will follow the Lamb wherescever He
goeth. The hop in its growing windeth
itself about the pole, and always followeth
the course of the sun from east to weet, so
that it can by no means be drawn to the
contrary, but chooseth rather to break than
to yield.” — Trapp.

“JT have oftentimes noted, when women
receive the doctrine of the gospel, they are
more tervent in faith, they hold it more stiff
and fast than men do, as we see in the loving
Magdalen, who was more hearty and bold
than Peter.” —ZLuther,

“To her religion is no weak and drivelling
fanaticism, but a life, a power, a heavenly
glory.” — Wadsworth.

‘* Naomi had said, and there was a sifting
emphasis in her words, ‘ Thy sister has gone
back unto her people and to her gods.’ Ruth
says, ‘Thy people shall be my people, and
thy God my God.’ ”—Price.


“ O beautiful example,
For youthful minds to heed t
The good we do to others
Shall never miss its meed;
The love of those whose sorrowa
We lighted shall be ours,
And o’er the path we walk in
That love shall scatter flowers.”
Bryans


Wi


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHaP., I, 18
eee


VERSE 18.
Theme.—StTEADFAST-MINDEDNESS,


“ When all things have their trial, you shall find
Nothing is constant but a virtuous mind "— Shirley,


“Tam constant as the northern star,
Of whose true, fixed, and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.” —Shakespeare,


[And] when she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, then she left
speaking unto [ceased.to dissuade] her.


Older expositors have imagined that Naomi’s efforts to persuade her daughters-
in-law to return homeward were not altogether seriously meant . . . a dogmatic
anachronism (Lange). The efforts to be looked upon as sincere, but limited in
the direction the text points out; when she saw, ete. Only the omniscient God
Himself can read the heart, and yet even He sees fit to try and to test His children.
But mark, in a case like this, friendship can dissuade no longer, when love shows
itself to be firmly resolved, ‘steadfastly minded.”

Note. After proof and trial made of their fidelity, we are to trust our brethren,
without any further suspicion (Fuller). Not to try before we trust is want of
wisdom ; not to trust after we have tried is want of charity (ibid). Naomi the
elder, yet she yielded (Braden).

Learn, L That steadfast-mindedness does much to bring trial itself to
anend. The discipline of life has accomplished its purpose when it becomes
plain and apparent that we are “ fully persuaded.” Ephraim is fully persuaded
to evil, and God says, ‘‘ Let him alone.” Ruth ig steadfastly minded towards good,
and no further hindrances are to be placed in her way.

Note. (a) Deciding for ourselves, we help others to a decision; even those who love
us and seek our best welfare. So, too, decision for Christ, and confession of
Christ—the making it plain that we have chosen God’s people to be ours—will
bring those to be with us who formerly may have seemed to be against us.
(6) Many of the hindrances to our best and highest life are not meant permanently to
hinder us. They are obstacles only for the moment placed in our way, that we
may overcome them, and use them as stepping-stones to higher things: at their
worst they are only intended to hold us back from entering the kingdom until we
are ‘‘fully persuaded.” God wrestled with Jacob, with a desire to be conquered ;
so Naomi no doubt opposed Ruth, hoping and wishing that she herself might be
foiled (Fuller). (c) Opposition will cease generally the moment it is plain that
opposition is in vain. It is the wavering mind which invites persuasion, courts
opposition ; men spare their breath when they see that we are steadfastly minded
as the disciples at Cmsarea did with Paul (Acts xxi. 14),

Learn, Il. That earnestness of character is the secret of perseverance
and final success on the human side, « Hard pounding, gentlemen; but we
will see who can pound the longest ” (Wellington at Waterloo). The steadfast-
minded are like the oak, deep-rooted, and so unmoved 3 like the iceberg in a
swelling sea: the cause of its steadiness is itg depth (Arnot). Lange and others
translate “firmly resolved.” The one phrase points to the cause, the other to
its effect. Note. With such to be Sully persuaded is to be steadfast-minded. Thig
steady earnestness of purpose is like the vital energy in the animal and vegetable
creation, without which they would languish and die (Pilkington).

We have here the silvern side of the shield of truth illustrated, viz., that we
continue in the heavenward course, just as Ruth went onward towards the earth]
Canaan, because we are fully persuaded and so steadfast-minded. (cf. Heb. xii.) Sait
of the Patriarchs, “they were persuaded,” and that “if they had been mindful of
that country from whence they came out,” like Ruth « they might have had
pportunity to have returned.”


72


— CHaP, 1. 18,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ROTH.


The other and golden side of truth also illustrated here.


Mark, the influences


came from Naomi, which bound Ruth to Naomi, the attractions drawing her onward
to Canaan came from that other and better land. So, too, in spiritual things we


“are persuaded,” but we are persuaded “ of Him.”


In all affection which is to be


lasting there must be the influences which attract, as well as the mind and spirit
capable of being attracted. Love and life are always influenced from without.


We speak of an affection laying hold of us.
within the veil by faith, “hid with Christ in God,”


And note, it is only the life anchored
which will bear without


breaking the strain and stress of the storm,
So, too, Ruth was not without her own misgivings and realization of the weak-


ness which is ours always.


The Hebrew reads it “that she strengthened herself,”


that being their phrase to express an oath (Fuller),


IuprovemEent.—(1) Divine moment when


@ man can say that he is “fully


persuaded.” Henceforward the problem of life may be looked upon as solved —


the light that shone upon our path has become a fixed and guiding star.


(2.) A


distinct step too, in all true progress, when others perceive our steadfast-minded-
ness to go onward. It is certain, my belief gains quite infinitely the moment


I can convince another mind thereof (Carlyle).


(3.) As the gold is not known


but by the touchstone, so is not any Christian till he be thoroughly tried (Topsell).


Bernard on this :—


I. The godly wise are wary in their admittance of others into their company,


till they well know them.

II. Words with an oath, and actions
the steadfastness of the heart, and the
show themselves virtuous.


agreeing sufficiently, may persuade us of
inward disposition of the mind of such as


TIL An oath is the strengthening of the mind of him that sweareth.
IV. There is no reason to make further trial, where an honest resolution ig or


may be well discerned.


Lessons.—Learn (1.) To try before we trust, and then to trust after sound


trial.


‘When Constantine was chosen emperor,
he found several Christians in office; and he
issued an edict requiring them to renounce
their faith, or quit their places. Most of them
gave up their offices to preserve their con-
science; but some cringed, and renounced
Christianity. When the emperor had thus
made full proof of their dispositions of cha-
racter, he removed all who basely complied
with his supposed wishes, and retained the
others ; saying that those who would desert
or deny their Divine Master would desert
him, and were not worthy of his confidence.”
—Dic. of Illustrations.

“ After supper, the dean having decanted a
bottle of wine, poured what remained into a
glass, and seeing it was muddy, presented it
to Mr. Pilkington to drink it. ‘For,’ said he,
‘I always keep some poor person to drink
the foul wine for me.’ Mr. Pilkington, enter-
ing into his humour, thanked him, and told
him ‘he did not know the difference, but
was glad to get a glass at any rate.’ ‘Wh
then,’ said the dean, ‘you shan’t, for V’il
drink it myself.’”—Sheridan’s Life of Swift.

“The goldsmith must purify the dross and
ore from the gold, but he must be wary lest
he make waste of good metal, if over-curious
in too often refining. We may search and
sound the sincerity of our brethren; but after
good experience made of their uprightness,
we must take heed lest, hy continual sifting


(2.) Not to put to further trial than need is, lest we weaken faith, ete.


and proving them, we offend a weak Chris
tian. Christ tried the woman of Syrophoe-
nicia first with silence, then with two sharp
answers ; at last, finding her to be sound,
He dismissed her with granting her request,
and commending of her faith. When He had
said to Peter the third time ‘ Lovest thou
Me?’ He rested satisfied with Peter’s an-
swer, and troubled him with no more ques-
tions.”— Fuller,

“As soldiers, when they have long besieged
a city, with the loss of time, money, and men,
being hopeless to take it, they even sound a
retreat, and retire home without accomplish-
ing their desire; so Naomi, perceiving that
all her arguments which she used to conquer
Ruth, like water in the smith’s forge cast on
coals, did more intend [intensify] the heat of
her constancy, gives over in my text.”— Fuller.

“The mind can never be steady, whilst it
stands upon other’s feet, and till it be settled
upon such grounds of assurances, that it will
rather lead than follow; and can say with
Joshua, whatsoever become of the world, ‘1
and my house will serve the Lord.’ ”"— Bishup
Fail.

“There is all the difference in the world
between firmness and obstinacy, though they
are constantly corfounded. Firmness is a
conscientious adherence to what is held to
be right after a careful examination of the
reagons that ean be given for the opposite


ue)


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH. cmap. 1. 19—21,





course. Stubbormness is the tenacious main- iene contrary to their own judgment.”—
tenance of a position, whether it be right or raden, ;
Grong = Bralen: : : “When our Saviour Christ had dealt with

“ Naomi teaches us that there is‘a time to the Canaanitish woman about the like cause,
speak and a time to keep silence,’ a time to _ seeing that silence would not answer her, nor
entreat and a time to refrain from entreating, denial satisfy her, nor the opprobrious word
a time to argue ani a time to yield in the of dog dismay her, then He yielded to her
argument, a time even when parents should desire, cured her daughter, and proclaimed
concede to the wishes of their children, her faith to be wonderful.”—Zopsell,


ae


VERSES 19—21.


CRITICAL AND ExyeGETICAL NoTES.—So they two. Types of the Jewish and Gentile
Churches (Macgowan). Amicitia sit inter binos qui sunt veri, et bonos qui sunt pauci(Zrapp).
Went. They were obliged to travel on foot (Patrick, Gill). If the more southern route was
chosen, they would descend from the high table-land of Moab, cross the plain at the south-
western extremity of the Dead Sea, part of the once larger vale of Siddim, where stood the
cities of the plain, the soil of which is entirely covered with salt (Hadie), then turn north-
wards up the Wady Sudier to Engedi, and so to Bethlehem. If the more northern route,
they would cross the two fords of Arnon and Jordan. In either case one of the most weird
and desolate landscapes in the world, the scene of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah,
lay before them (cf. Deut, xxix. 23), Came to Bethlehem (cf. Intro., p. 13], All the city was
moved [cf. 1 Sam. iv, 5; 1 Kings i, 45]. All the city was in a commotion about them
(Benisch). tynoe  wodte. The city rang with the news (LXX.). All the city rejoiced at
them (Arab, Syriac). The B.V. rightly uses the more comprehensive term which may include
curiosity, surprise, gladness, etc. Amazement not so much at the fact that Naomi was still
alive and had come back again, as at her returning in so mournful a condition (Keil). And
they said. They in the Hebrew is feminine. The women of Bethlehem said (Speaker's
Com.). Not exactly, dicebantque mulieres, as the Vulg. has it; the population of the city are
the subject of the verb, but in a matter of this kind women would naturally be so prominent
as to lead the narrator insensibly to use the feminine. Perhaps Naomi arrived in an hour of
the day when the labours of the field left none but women in the city (Lange). The Midrash
makes the scene still more dramatic by the explanation that the concourse of the inhabitants
was occasioned by the fact that the first wife of Boaz had that very day been carried to her
grave (Lange). May possibly have been some such public occasion.

Ver. 20, Call me not Naomi [pleasant. See on ver. 2, p.14]. Call me Mara [bitter ; LXX.
mixav ; comp. Exod. xv. 23]. I have no more anything that is pleasant about me: my
lite, like a salty, bitter spring, is without flavour or relish (Lange). A similar allusion to the
meaning of names, Gen. xxvii. 36; Jer, xx. 3 (Speaker's Com.). From this we gather that
Naomi was not the name given her at first by her parents, but a popular name commonly
given her by her neighbours, because of her comely presence and courteous behaviour
(Patrick?) The Almighty [Shaddai]. The name Almighty is almost peculiar to the Penta-
teuch and to the Book of Job, in which last it is found thirty times. It occurs twice in the
Psalms and four times in the prophets (Speaker's Com.). Why is Shaddai used here? Must
be connected with its pregnant, proper signification (Lange), the source of fruitfulness and
life. Used continually as in Gen, xxxv. 11; Iam El Shaddai: be fruitful and multiply. The
word must therefore unquestionably be referred to a root 70 still used in Arabic in the


sense “ to water, to fertilize.” [See Lange in loco.) Naomi was rightly named, when with
a flourishing family she went to Moab; but now Shaddai, who gave the blessing, has taken it
away (Lange). Rashi and Adam Clarke explain Shaddai to mean self-sufficient. Hath dealt
very bitterly with me; has worked against me (Bertheau) ; hath testified against [lit. hath
answered] me (Wordsworth); hath inflicted bitter sorrow upon me (Lenge); hath made
me very sad (Wright). [Comp. Bxod. xx. 16; 2 Sam. i. 16 3 Job x. 17; Mal. iii, 6.) A
ng beat Fg adversaries at law (Trapp). So Job says, ““Thou writest bitter things against
me” (xiii, 26).

Ver. 21. I went out fall, That is, in the rich Possession of a husband and two sons (Steele
and Terry), Home again empty. The very reverse of Jacob’s experience (Gen. xxxii. 10):
“With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two baads,” Cf, Hannah’s
song (1 Sam. ii. 5), “ They that were full have hired out themselves for bread.” Though the
Hebrew “ fall,” there meaning full of food, is quite different from that here used, which is the
opposite of empty (Speaker's Com.). The Lord [Jehovah] hath testified against me. Kat
kuplog eramewoe we (LXX.), Thereading of the LXX., “ He humbled me,” was justly departed
from, for it is only a paraphrase of the sense (Lange). Quam Dominus humiliavit (Vulg.).
The Lord has brought me back in vain (Syr.), has sent down upon me a terrible punishment
(Arad.). On the whole, we inchne to prefer the ordinary translation (Wright). So Lange
Tremel,, Drusius, Gesen., Rosenm, That which Bertheau considers to be the difficulty of the
passage, that it makes God to testify against a person, while elsewhere only men bear testimony,


74


cHaP. 1. 19. AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





a ee ns a la ae


is precisely the special thought of Naomi, “ I went,’ she says, “and God has testified that
this going wasa sin” (Lange). In the loss of my children and family, says Naomi, I perceive
that He “declares me guilty,” as the Targum excellently renders it (ibid), Comp. for a
similar turn of thought, 1 Kings xvii. 18, followed at ver. 20 by the identical word here rendered
hath afilicted, there thou hast brought evil (Speaker's Com.)


VERSE 19,


Theme.—CompPaNionsHip in PRoGREss,


“ Along the solitary plain we went,
As one who unto the lost road returns,
And till he finds it seems to go in vain.” Dante,


® Not enjoyment, and not sorrow,
Is our destined end or way,
But to act, that each to-morrow
Finds us farther than to day.”—Longfellow,


So they two went until they came to Bethlehem,


In fife action is everything, and joy and sorrow come of themselves ( Goethe).
Onward with these two means that they are nearer every moment to Canaan, the
land of promise, and Bethlehem, the house of bread. A rough way, but the right
way (Philpot)—a difficult journey, but a wise one; onward from weakness to
strength, poverty to riches, disquietude to rest. Moab behind them, the promised
land in front.


“ Linked hand in hand they went, tears in their eyes,
As faint and beautiful as eyes of flowers.”—Alewander Smith.


Note. Pilgrimage ts the appointed lot of God’s saints; for true life is always
moving onward, progressing. :

We have here, I. Companionship in Progress. They two went. Their prin-
ciples were one, the life and love of God in the soul. Their object was one,
to come and trust in the shadow of the Divine wings (ii. 12). Their interest was
common, the salvation of their souls and communion by the way (Macgowan). So
Lot and his daughters went hand in hand out of Sodom, led of the angels to a
place of safety. Note. The world is our wilderness, and we are happy only as the
path leads us onward to a place of rest. They came to Bethlehem [the house of
bread]. How many accompany each other to Bethaven! [house of iniquity.] Our
travellers are an emblem of the righteous, who hold on their way, ete. (Macgowan).
They went together lovingly, they ceased not to go on, they did not linger, they
took no by-paths, neither forgot they whither they were going, till they came unto
Bethlehem (Bernard). See also on ver. 6, 7; pp. 82—36,

IL, Mutual sympathy in affliction—The Holy Spirit mentioneth not what
discourse they exchanged by the way ; yet no doubt they were neither silent, nor
busied in unprofitable talk (Fuller). Note. Two things prevented them sinking into
despair, their piety and their mutual love. An instance here of God’s faithfulness in
restoring comfort to His mourners. Elimelech and his sons taken. Ruth given asa
fast friend. When Abraham lost Sarah, Rebekah is brought into her tent (Macgowan).
Note. (a) True companionship embraces three things, love, unity, and constancy.
Friends must be of one mind and one heart, if they would journey together,
These united in an indissoluble bond of love (Cox). (6) Only in looking heaven-
ward, not in looking earthward, do what we call union, mutual love, society, begin
to be possible (Carlyle). :

III. Fellowship and communion in desire and hope.—Both are journeying to
join the Israel of God. Probably they were beguiling the way by anticipations of
the future; for now that Naomi has taken Ruth more closely to herself, their
interests are inseparable, whatever may unfold. Note. They are to be admitied
unto our fellowship, whom we find to be constant in a good course, and true lovers of


76


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ROTH.


%
a ee ee


yosdness, whatsoever they were before (Bernard).





CHap, 1, 19.





ery





Thus God’s angels deal with us;


they will account us their fellow-servants when we turn to God (ibid).


IuprovemEent.—(1.) God leaves His saints


comfortless. Luke,
Paul [cf..2 Cor. vii. 6].


Saviour,
with Divine purposes.


generally neither companionless nor


Mark, Titus, Timothy given and sent at different times to
And where man’s company fails, He will send His angels.
Jacob was comforted of heaven when earth failed him
when the disciples slept in Gethsemane,


(Gen. xxviii. 12). And
an angel appeared strengthening the


(2.) Success always attends our efforts when they are in accordance
They came to Bethlehem. Naomi is at home once more ;


and for the first time Ruth stands on the sacred spot where the Saviour is to be


born,


How much depended upon the journey,


humanly speaking! Fit emblem of


another journey to another land of promise,


“Ts it a long way off?
Ob ! no, a few more yeara,
A few more bitter tears,—

We shall be there,
Sometimes the way seems long
Our comforters all go,

Woe follows after w

Care after care,”


*


"Tis no uncertain way

We tread, for Jesus still

Leads with unerring skill
Where’er we roam ;

And from the desert wild

Soon shall our path emerge,


And land us o


n the verge


Of our dear home.”"—Z, W. Dio. of Poetic Iilustrations.


“Naomi’s heart throbs with mingled feelings
as they pass along the way traversed by her
and her venerated dead some ten years
before. The sight of the beloved city and
the familiar spots quickens a crowd of
painful memories. Those who have returned
to their native country and their childhood’s
home after a prolonged absence know too
well how everything looks familiar yet
strange, old yet sometimes new, and a
thousand thoughts throng to the mind, and
tearful emotions surge in the heart, at every
turn of the way.”— Braden.

“A man may turn whither he pleases, and
undertake anything whatsoever, but he will
always return to the path which nature has
prescribed for him,”— Goethe.

“Often again in his course of life man
feels as a feathered seed driven by winds ;
as if, without weight or power, he slowly
floats or is swiftly hurried, but rests nowhere,
He feels that within him is life, but knows
that he is as yet an embryo, He is con-
fusedly conscious of what his tendencies are,
but cannot tell what his outgrowth will be.
.+ + Let him but find resting place, and
he also will put forth buds and boughs, and
array himself in beauty.”—Lynch.


“Life is only bright when it proceedeth
Towards a truer, deeper life above;

Hnman love is sweetest when it leadeth
Towards a more divine and perfect leve,


Learn the mystery or Progression daly ;
De not call each glorious change decay ;


a)


But know, we only hold our treasures truly
When it appears as if they fade away.


Nor dare to blame God's gifts for incom.
pleteness—
In that want their beauty lies : they roll
Towards some infinite depths of love and
sweetness,
Bearing onwards man’s reluctant soul |”
Adelaide A. Proctor,


“Men’s mid-day, cold, and slow pace to
heaven will cause many a man to want his
lodgings at night, and to lie in the fields,’
Fuller.

“ To walk with Love in Love’s own coun
will be as easy as it is happy; but here,
where love is put upon its trial, it is not go,
It is to walk as with a thorn in your foot,
which gives great pain at every step—new
pain in an old wound,”—Zynch.

“Permanent rest is not to be expected oa
the road, but at the end of the journey,”—
Dillwyn.

“Though God may bring us into the
wilderness, yet if He speek comfortably to
us, the wilderness will be turned into a
paradise. ... If the road is rough, let ug
Rot complain, for it leads to a glorious rest
which nothing shall disturb,""— Charles.

“ Make all plain and clear, and what
sphere is there left for that trust by which
the soul learns to lean upon God Himself?
To see all the pathway, and know whither it
leads, and what are the difficulties in the way,
and how they are to be avoided, that is sight,


CHAP, 1. 19.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





and not faith. But when ‘ light-is given, and
yet the way is hid,’ when the little we know
points to a deeper mystery, and beyond there
is the darkness and uncertainty from which
the spirit shrinks and life holds back, when
we stand like the Israelites at the Red Sea,
the swollen waters in front, the mountains on
either hand, the enemy behind, and none to
help us but God ; it is then that faith either
falters and fails, or triumphs and shows itself
inestimable, most precious when most needed,
just as the miner’s candle is valued beyond
all else when the gloom is densest and the
way most intricate,’—JB.


“The more the cross, the more the longing:
Out of the vale man upward goes ;
Whose pathway through the desert lies ;
He craves the land where Jordan flows:
When here the dove finds no repose,
Straight to the ark with joy she flies.”
Sclunolk.


“Tt is a mere and miserable solitude to
want true friends, without which the world
is but a wilderness. ... There is no man
that imparteth his joys to his friend, but he
joyeth the more; and no man that impart-


eth his griefs, but he grieveth the less,”—
Bacon.

“Then I saw in my dream, they went very
lovingly on together, and had sweet dis-
course of all things that had happened to
them in their pilgrimage.”— Bunyan.

“Tt is with Christians as with burning
coals. If these are scattered far apart, one
after the other is easily extinguished, but
when collected together, the fire of one pre-
serves that of the other, and the glowing
coals often ignite others that lie near.”—
Franke.


“¢ Daughter,’ ye softly said—‘ Peace to thine
heart ; :

We too—yes, daughter |!—have been as thou
art

Tossed on the troubled waves, life’s stormy
Bea ;

Chance and change manifold proving like
thee,

Hope-lifted, doubt-depressed, seeing in part,

Tried, troubled, tempted, sustained as thou
art:

Our God is thy God ; what He willeth is best ;

Trust Him as we trusted, then rest as we
rest,’ ” Caroline Southey.


— @~———


VERSE 19.


Theme.—A City IN ASTONISHMENT.


“ The blast of death
Hath stript our roof trees; the guardian boughs
Hang like sad willows o’er the stream of life,—
Where drifting slowly by our native shores,
Familiar faces smile on us no more.” —Mackhay,


And it came to pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved
about them, and they said, Is this Naomt?


Naomi’s return was no common occurrence. Probably the inhabitants of
Bethlehem never expected to see her more (Lawson). The city, and especially
the women, were thrown into a peaceable uproar. Everybody ran, told the
news, and wondered (Lange). The great change in Naomi’s circumstances
apparent in her appearance, in her very way of entering Bethlehem. Ten years
ago she had left under far different circumstances. She went out with a husband,
children, wealth; as she herself says, ‘‘fuli.” The story well remembered, for
the family was a prominent one in Bethlehem ; natural that the news of her return,
poor and sorrowful, should spread like wildfire, and create what to her was an
unpleasant sensation (Lange). Is this Naomi? Note. No questions cut so keenly
as those which remind us of beloved ones who have passed into the shadow of death
(Braden). ;

See in these words, I. The language of surprise and astonishment, Strange!
Wonderful! Is this she who was once so wealthy? How quickly is a river of
riches drained dry! (Fuller.) Is this, can at be, Naomi? Time and sorrow, too,
had wrought their cruel work upon her. Ten years, and such troubles as hers,
leave terrible marks at her time of life (Braden). The rose withered unlike what
it was when blooming (Matt. Henry). She that formerly was so fair, now one
ean scarcely read the traces of beauty in her face (F’ uller). Is this Naomi ? Note.
(a) The more renowned any are in prosperity, the more remarkavle are they m


@


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHapP. 1. 19,


adversity (Bernard). Men are more carried away by the consideration of the
outward means how things come to pass, than of the power and pleasure of God
to make such an alteration (ibid). And so (b) God’s providential doings are a
continual cause of surprise—as full of mystery as they are of mercy; necessarily
so if faith is to have its perfect work. He brings about great changes in persons,
families, cities, countries. And that often in ways least expected. The poor
are exalted, the rich cast down; empires seemingly established for ever, like
Babylon and Rome, coming to nought; cities destroyed, ete. (Cf. Lam. ii. 15,
“Is this the city that men call the perfection of beauty?” ete.; Rev. xviii. 15—17.)

II. The language of condemnation. May be feared there was more blame
than pity in the exclamation (Com). See! see! this is she that could not be
content to tarry at home to take part of the famine with the rest of her fellows
(Fuller). Perhaps they were moved about her, lest she should be a charge to
the town, she looked so bare (Matt. Henry). Men judge mainly by outward
appearances


“Virtue without success
Is a fair picture shown by an ill light."—Dryden,


Under the old economy, too, adversity was looked upon largely as meaning
punishment. Only the nobler spirits seem to realize the meaning and ministry
of suffering. A trace of this to be found among the heathens, as in the seven
years’ probation of Eneas :—


“Long labours, both by sea and land, he bore,
And in the doubtful war, before he won
The Sabian realm, and built the destined town.”— Virgil.


But even this was associated with fate and ‘‘the wrath of the gods.” Note.
The multitude in all ages have traced afflictions to the anger of the Deity. (See Job
viii. 6, xi. 20, etc.) Difficult for Christians to realize always that ‘whom the
Lord loveth He chasteneth.”

So that we may have here, III. The language of contempt. The erowd come
and look upon a spectacle like this, and then pass away to their usual avocations,
some at least pointing the finger of scorn. David was cursed of Shimei in his
affliction, and God’s prophet saluted with the ery, “ Go up, thou bald head.” The
man of God must expect to be misunderstood in all that concerns him, even in the
Divine dealings with him. Christ said to His disciples, “‘ The time cometh that
whosoever killeth you will think he doeth God service.” Note. Hatred to the
good seems inherent to the evil heart; and poverty brings contempt upon the best.
Proud hearts take contempt in adversity as worse than death (Bernard); but we
must learn to bear it as Naomi, as David, as Christ did.

We may have here, IV. The language of pity and commiseration. Alas! alas!
is not this that gracious woman, that godly saint, which formerly by her charity
relieved many in distress? How soon is a full clod turned into parched earth !
one that supplied others into one that needeth to be supplied by others! (Fuller.)
‘“* How has the gold become dim!” Those that had seen the magnificence of the
first temple wept when they saw the meanness of the second (Matt. Henry).
There are always hearts that are touched in a right way at the sight of sorrow
and trouble. The priest and the Levite may come and look on and pass by on
the other side; beé some good Samaritan draws nearer sooner or later to pour
in oil and wine inte the open wounds. Naomi evidently moved by the expression
Is this Naomi? Shs utters no word of reproach afterwards against the inhabitants
of Bethlehem. Note. Good and godly people do not less esteem the virtuous because
of their outward low estate and poverty (Bernard). The poor around us test the
si.cerity of our professions of religion. Christ will say at last, ‘Inasmuch ag ye
did it not,” ete.

ImprovemEnt.—(1) The same language may have a very different meaning in
different lips. (2) Our very surprise at adversity should be mingled with com-


78


CHAP, I. 20.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


 o——


passion, and meted out with sympathy. Idle words, how they wound the broken
heart! Is this Naomi? brings back the memory of all the past. (8) In adversity
we should be comforters, not as Job’s friends, who sat down and censured him,
nor as Christ’s and St. Paul’s, who forsook them (Bernard), not even as Naomi’s,
whose casual words open the fountains of grief afresh; but as those who them-
selves have suffered, and.have the meek and gentle spirit suffering only can bring.
(4) When we remark the sad changes which numbers suffer, we should be reminded
to prepare for changes ourselves, especially the last great change (Scott).


“Their exclamation, ‘This Naomi!’ ex-
presses the general astonishment at the
change which had passed upon her. No
doubt the little hamlet had been all aflame
with gossip when, ten years before, the rich
sheep-master Elimelech had left it, and
many pious brows had been shaken over his
sin in going to sojourn among the heathen.
And no doubt, on Naomi’s return, many who
would have shared that sin if they could, and
many who had committed far worse sins than
any of which she had been guilty, once more
sn00k their heads in grave rebuke, and were
forward to recognize the judgments of an
offended God in the calamities which had
befallen her.”— Coz.

Naomi was formerly a woman of good
quality and fashion, of good rank and repute;
otherwise her return in poverty had not so
generally been taken notice of. Shrubs may be
stubbed to the ground, and none miss them;
but every one marks the falling of a cedar.
Grovelling cottages may be levelled to the
earth, and none observe; but every traveller
takes notice of the fall of a steeple. Let this
comfort those to whom God hath given small
possessions. Should He visit them with po-
verty, and take from them what little they
have, yet their grief and shame would be the
less; they should not have so many fingers
pointed at them, so many eyes staring on
them, so many words spoken of them. They
might iurk in obscurity. It must bea Naomi,
@ person of eminence and estate, whose
poverty must move a whole city.” —uller.

“Tf we would truly sympathise with others,
we must beware of hastily estimating the
manner and degree of their trouble.....
Comforters must come as inquirers, not
judges; come to bestow consolation, not
eriticism.”—Lynch.

“To seek the applause of man is wrong;
but to merit itis most desirable. A man of
worthless character creates no respect in the
minds of others, so that if ill befall him, he


finds but little sympathy in the bosom of
those around him; whereas a good man under
misfortune excites a lively interest in his
affairs.’— Simeon.

“The feelings of men are easily excited for
those who have met severe and peculiar
afflictions; but in the generality of mankind
those feelings soon die away, and, even while
exciting, rarely produce any practical effect.
‘The whole city was moved’ about Naomi,
but we are not told that one door was opened
to receive her, and we soon find her rejoicing
in being allowed to partake of the last and
lowest resource of the destitute. ew re-
member how large a proportion of pure and
undefiled religion consists in visiting the
fatherless and widows in their affliction.” —
Macartney.

“ Outward contact never accords with the
epoch of inner culture, and therefore, as it
cannot further us, must necessarily injure
us.” — Goethe.

“We all suffer from the want of genuine
human help and sympathy. But often, to
meet our particular case, it is required that
those around us possess a higher than the
average goodness. We must not curse hu-
manity because we cannot find the man we
want.”—Lynch.

“ There is ‘salvation in fulness,’ and there
is ‘salvation by fire.’ There is the ‘abun-
dant entrance’ into the kingdom of God,
and there is the getting in with something
like ‘ difficulty.’ One man may be conducted
to his ‘joy and crown’ through thronging
multitudes, amid outstretched hands and
reverberating hosannas, and along the great
public thoroughfare of the city; while
another shall advance with hesitating step ;
be glad to get an entrance without observa-
tion ; be met by no congratulating crowds;
creep stealthily by some unfrequented street
to his undistinguished abode; tremulous with
a thankful, though shaded joy, that he is
saved at all.”"— Binney.


——@———


VERSE 20.


Theme.—SprrirvuaL DrsPonDENCY AND DEpREssIoN.


“ Grief hath changed me,
And careful hours, with Time’s deforméd hand,
Hath written strange defeatures in my face,”—Shakespeare,


« We overstate the ills of life, and take
Imagination, given us to bring down
Whe choir of singing angels. ..


79


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. & 20.


Oe ne





to rake
The dismal snows instead; flake flowing flake,
To cover all the corn... ,
O brothers! let us leave the shame and sin
Of talking vainly, in a plaintive mood,
The holy name of Grief,—holy herein,
That by the grief of one came all our good.”— Ure, Browning.


Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly
with me. I went out full, etc.


Ten years have turned Naomi into Mara (Bp. Hall). Ten years and departure
into the far-off land (cf. Luke xv. 14). This is what sojourning in Moab meant
then and always; affliction, barrenness, want, even to those who are least guilty.
So Israel had to come out from Egypt, though they found a Goshen there for
awhile, ‘in haste,” and as from a land of bondage. Note. Man goes, but God
brinys home (Lange). The departure is all our own, the return is His with whom
we have to do.

Remark, I. On the changes incident to human life. Its sweet and pleasant
things become bitter, its fulness emptiness, its prosperous goings out disastrous,
Note. (a) This is not by chance, but by the providence of God. A peculiarity of
piety, that it ascribes the issues of all the affairs of life to God (Lange). He turns
Naomi into Mara, mirth into mourning, sweet into sour, honour into dishonour
(Bernard). As examples we have Job, Haman, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar,
Herod, beyond the memorable instance of the text. Outward glory is but as a
fading flower, and as the warm sunshine of a cold wintry day, soon gone, and all
the delight thereof (Bernard). Note. (6) Every man’s estate is in the hands of the
Lord to alter as He will.

Remark, II. On the meaning and manner of these changes. (1) Life means
discipline, and therefore pain is a secondary question to that of our perfection. God
denies and takes away, just as the sculptor does with the marble, that he may
bring out the ideal form beneath. He finds it sometimes best to cross the likely
projects of His dearest children (Bishop Hall). «If God have loved thee,” says
Bengel, ‘ thou canst have no lack of trouble.”’

| Again, (2) Haperience comes in this way: we grow strong, not only in conflict,
but in times when we must bear ag well as do. ‘ Thou therefore, my son, endure
hardship,” etc. (2 Tim. ii. 8). The soldier must pass through his baptism of
fire, and the Christian his baptism of suffering.

Once more, (8) We never understand life aright until we see in it two wills in
conflict, the human and the Divine, Our thoughts and purposes at best are not
His with whom we have to do. Mark, the choice in life is with us, the issues
with Him. There is the exercise of free will on our part, and there are Hig
foreordained purposes. And note, His purposes will be accomplished, even though He
deal bitterly with us. In g%) our projects we must expect that God may testify
against us as against Naomi, He does 80 a8 seeing the end from the beginning,
the true meaning of life amid its outward and plausible appearances. Man in
his abundance, too, is apt to forget God. Adversity, denial, is the Divine way of
calling our thoughts back again to Himself. No doubt God does deal bitterly
with men at times. ‘The profoundest love may show itself in this way, as with
the parent when he eorrects his child ; the most far-reaching wisdom, as with the
FO ST when he cures with distasteful remedies, [See also on ver. 18, pp.
50—52., :

Remark, III. On spiritual depression ag accompanying these changes.
Usually, the natural man, even as a beggar, still desires to shine (Lanye). Not so
Naomi. Her humility regards not a glorious name in a dejected state (Matt.
Henry). She hates this hypocrisy, and since God hath humbled her, desires not
to be respected of men (Bishop Hall). A poor widow now, though once a noble
woman. Call me not Naomi, she says, call me Mara. Note. We have in thig

gO


CHAP. I. 20. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
SS


the bitterness of grief, not of impatience; something of that shadow which has
fallen at times upon the noblest spirits. We call it spiritual depression, religious
despondency, melancholy, etc., and in it the heart does not so much murmur against
the burden of life as feel it. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Enquire (1) As to some of the causes of this spiritual depression. Sin in ourselves,
wrong-doing of others, peculiar mental and physical conditions, unsolved problems
of this our existence. Or, as here, adverse circumstances, and the lowliness of
human life (Ps. lxxxviii. 8). Naomi’s Josses have followed one another like J ob’s,
hence her bitter cry. So Elijah in the hour of depression said, ‘It is enough;
now, O Lord, take away my life.” Note. With all men there ts a cloudy and dark
day ; and the world within us generally reflects the world without.


“Many of God’s most precious gifts are sad ;”


and so far in the world’s history the best songs, like the nightingale’s, have been
sung in the dark.

Again with Naomi, God Himself seems to be against her, afflicting her. Her
loving heart takes all God’s judgments on itself (Lange). She is humble, repentant,
but also keenly sensitive and alive to the hand above her. A great alleviation of
pain to see God in our afflictions [ef. on ver. 13, p. 50, div. I.], but there is a
dark side even to this. ‘* The Lord hath testified against me.” It is not only God
hiding Himself, but God against her, as an advocate pleading, as a witness testifying
on the other side. ‘This the bitterest drop in her cup of affliction, which makes
her ready to disclaim her very name, and all the past of her history. So, too, in
a more mysterious sorrow the ery went up, ‘‘ My God, my God, why hast Thou
forsaken me?” Note, God testifies against His own children, His saints are by no
means perfect in love, in faith, in obedience ; and He will continue to testify until
His own purposes are accomplished in them.

Enquire (2) As to the Divine meaning in connexion with spiritual depression.
Afflictions (a) sent as chastisement, (b) allowed as discipline, (c) part of a wider
problem in the history of the human race.

So with that chastened, humbled, and even sorrowful frame of mind, which
accompanies them. Undue sorrow is better than undue security. Where the
showers fall most, there the grass is greenest (Spurgeon). Just as some islands
owe their fertility to the humidity of the atmosphere, the very clouds that darken
and the rains that deluge the land, so many Christians owe their richest and
divinest experiences to the sorrow which has darkened all their life. No chastening,
says the Apostle, for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous; but after-
wards it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness (Heb. xii. 11). And Christ
Himself likens the disciples, in the hour of His trial, to a woman in travail (John
xvi. 20—22).


“The night is darkest before the morn:
When the pain is sorest, the child is born ;
And the day of the Lord is at hand.”—Kingsley,


Again, just as the capacity for sorrow proves man above the brute, so thie very
sensitiveness to God’s dealings shows the saint superior to the worldling. ‘‘ Sane-
tified afflictions,” says Dodd, with deep insight into God’s dealings with His
children, ‘are spiritual promotious.” He treats us as sons (Heb. xii. 7). And
so the godly sorrow, our burden to-day, will be our glory to-morrow. Paul felt
this when he said, ‘Our light affliction,” ete. (cf. 1 Cor. iv. 11—18; 2 Cor. iv.
16—18, vi. 8—10).

Lessoxs. (1) The condition of creatures is soon changed (Macgowan)
(2) Afflictions may make that which was once our glory seem and sound like
irony to us. With Naomi, the very remembrance of her name increases her
grief. (3) Those who are truly humbled are not ashamed that the world should
think them so. In all forms of good there are more that care to seem than to be
(Bishop Hell). Many that are debased and impoverished. yet affect to be called

81


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP. I. 20.


SU ne gn ee


by the empty names and titles of honour they formerly enjoyed (Matt. Henry).


Not so Naomi.


expect our spirits to be humbled with it.


(4) When our condition is brought


down, we may and must
(5) Neither dignity of place, highness


of birth, nor fruitfulness of children, may minister comfort to those whom the Lord


has humbled (Topsell).


The hand that smites is the ha
and worldly misery is only abated entirely by everlasting felicity.


only hand that can heal;
(6) It is not


an affliction itself, but an aflliction rightly borne, that does us good (Matt, Henry).
‘* So, friend, I see that thow hast not yet forgiven God Almighty!” the rebuke of
Ebenezer Adams to a lady of rank, a widow, he was Visiting. The reproof pro-
duced such an effect, that she immediately had all her trappings of grief destroyed,


and went about her necessary business and avocations.


So many calamities have


been lost upon you if you have not yet learned how to suffer (Sen. ad Helv.),
Behold us willing to suffer in this life the worst it may please Thee to bring upon


us ; here lay Thy rod upon us;
spare us in eternity (St. Augustine).
selves against the rod.


consume us here, cut us to pieces here, only
(7) It is no part of religion to harden our-
“Thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved ’”


(Jer. v. 8), is the charge the prophet brings against Jerusalem; but we nowhere
find them condemned for feeling too keenly (Macartney).


“She put her mouth in the dust, and spake
in a low language, suitable to her present
condition; God had afflicted her, and she
would carry her sails accordin gly. Many are
humbled, but not humble; low, but not
lowly. These have lost the fruit of their
affliction, saith Augustine, and are therefore
most miserable. God, saith another, calls no
man Benjamin, but those whom their own
hearts call Ben-oni in their humility. He
salutes them not Naomi, beautiful, who do
not humbly feel themselves Mara, bitter,”—
Trapp.

“if all our afflictions come from the
Almighty, it is in vain. as well as impious, to
contend with Him that smites, Shall the
potsherds of the earth strive with their Maker,
who has all power to do with them as He
pleases? He cannot effectually be opposed,
and He can do nothing that is wrong. Weak
mortals may injure their fellow-creatures for
their own advantage, but what profit can it
be to the Almighty that He should oppress
the work of His own hands? "—Lan:son,

We ought not so to lament the comfort we
have lost, as to think that all our future days
must be spent in bitterness,” — hid,

“ Wonder not at David, if he crieth in the
anguish of his heart; at Job, if he complaineth
in the bitterness of his soul; at Jeremiah, if
he lamenteth in the extremity of his grief;
for even then they are swallowing of a potion
which is bitter unto flesh and blood.”—
Filler,

“It will always remain a wonder to the
majority of men what the agonies of some
spirits mean. Questions which scorch the
spirit like burning lava, pitiful wailings after
light, gaspings of the oppressed soul for fresh
air and liberty, they know nothing of, I
have met men and women who had been
familiar with sorrow in Imany forms, For-
tune had not favoured them—fortune is
strangely capricious: in whatever direction
the golden veins run in this world, they had
never somehow struck into one ; the gifts of


8&3


health had been niggardly doled out to them,
and the common enemy death had passed
through their homes, and his footsteps had
dried up the springs which, amid all the
world’s weariness, had been so refreshing,
These trials they had borne patiently and
humbly. But the pain which was almos
impossible to bear, the blow which made th
soul stagger and reel was this, the ligh
went. They were left in mental darkness
there was nothing to guide the soul by ;
plexity, uncertainty, bewilderment through
out the whole realm of religion.”—Moriai
Jones,

“ Now I saw in my dream, that just as they
had ended this talk, they drew nigh to a very
miry slough that was in the midst of the
plain, and they being heedless did both fall
suddenly into the bog. The name of the
slough was DESPOND.”— Bunyan,

‘‘ Men spoil their own lives, and then com-
plain that life is evil; they mar and rend the
picture, and murmur because its beauty has
disappeared ; they run the ship upon the
rocks, and weep to find her a wreck ; they
crush the flower with a rude hand, and are
disappointed because it withers.” — Thomas
Jones.

“ As torrents that are dried up in the heat
of summer, when there is most need of them,
so all comforts fail in the extremity, that are
not derived from the fountain of life.” —Dr
Bates.


“Sorrow is the substance of man’s natural
life, and it might almost be defined to be his
natural capability of the Supernatural, no-
thing has a lasting interest for man which
is not in some way connected with sorrow;
sorrow is the poetry of a creation which ig
fallen, of a race which is in exile in a vale of
tears.”"—F. W. Faber,

“The cross is always ready, and waits for
thee in every place... . Why hopest, then
to avoid that from which no human being
has beenexempt? Thou art deceived, wretch-
edly deceived, if thou expect anything but


- CHAP. I. 21.





tribulation; for this whole mortal life is full
of care, and signed on every side with the
cross.’— Thomas a Kempis.

“What is sixty years’ pain to eternity ?
We never think of sorrow in our dreams ;
wherefore should we in the dream of life?’
—Jean Paul Richter.

‘©A few in every age have known the
divine art of carrying sorrow and trouble as
wonderful food. as an invisible garment that
clothed them with strength ; as a mysterious
joy, so that they suffered gladly, rejoicing in
infirmity, and holding up their heads with
sacred presages ; whenever times were dark
and troublous, let the licht depart from their
eyes, that they might by faith see nobler
things than sight could reach.’— Beecher.


‘¢ Darkness shows us worlds of light
We never saw before.”"— Moore,


“The cares and irfelicities of life, which
are spoken of as ‘hindrances to grace,’ may
be hindran~es, but they are the only helps it
has in this werld. The voice of provocation
is the voice of God calling us to the practice
of patience.

’ **4 man in his old age is like a sword ina
shop window: men that look upon the per-
feet blade do not imagine the process by
which it was completed. Man is a sword.
Daily life is the workshop, and God is the
artificer ; and those cares which beat him
upon the anvil, and file his edge, and eat in,
acid-like, the inscription upon his hilt,—these
are the very things that fashion the man.”—
Beecher.

‘““No men have need to be so vigilant, so
attentive, so listening, so appreciative, as
those who are in deep trouble. Sorrow is
Mount Sinai. If one will go up and talk
with God face to face, he must not fear the
voice of thunder, nor the trumpet sounding
long and loud.”— Beecher.

“T have read of a fountain that at noon-
day is cold, and at midnight it grows warm ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : RUTH.





80 many a precious soul is cold God-ward,
and heaven-ward, and holiness-ward, in the
day of prosperity, that grows warm God:
ward, and heaven-ward, and holiness-ward
in the midnight of adversity.” Brooks.

“Prosperity is the blessing of the Old
Testament ; adversity is the blessing of the
New, which carrieth the greater benediction
and the clearer revelation of God’s favour ”’—
Lord Bacon,


“The good man suffers but to gain,
And every virtue springs from pain;
As aromatic plants bestow
No spicy fragrance while they grow 3
But crushed or trodden to the ground,
Diffuse their balmy sweets around.”

Goldsmith.


“T¥ see not a step before me as I tread the
days of the year,
But the past is still in God’s keeping, the
future His mercy shall clear ;
And what looks dark in the distance may
brighten as I draw near.


For perhaps the dreaded future has less
bitterness than I think ;

The Lord may sweeten the water before I
stoop to drink,

Or if Marah must be Marah, He will stand
beside its brink.


* Ss * ®
80 I go on not knowing. I would not if I
might ;


I would rather walk on in the dark with
God, than go alone in the light ,

I would rather walk with Him by faith
than walk alone by sight.


My heart shrinks back from trials which
the future may disclose,

Yet I never had a sorrow, but what the
dear Lord chose ;

So I send the coming tears back, with the
whispered word, ‘ He knows,’”


oe


VERSE 21.


Theme.—PatnruL REMEMBRANCES.


“ This is truth the poet sings,
That a sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering happier things.” —Texnyeon.


‘ Brothers, hush ! the Lord Christ’s hands
Ev’n now are stretched in blessing o’er the sea and o’er the lands,
Sit not like a mourner, brother! by the grave of that dear past ;
Throw the present | ’tis thy servant only when ’tis overcast.
Give battle to the leaguéd world ; if thou’rt worthy, truly brave,
Thou shalt make the hardest circumstance a helper and a slave.”


Alexander Smith,


I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home empty again: why, then, ? ete.


Sooner or later the time comes in the history of good men when things begin


to show themselves as they are.


Appearances deceive us no longer.


The scales


fall from our eyes. Life stands out in its true relationships, and we read, plain ag


88


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. I. 21,


ae








the handwriting on Babylon’s walls, the lessons God would have us learn from
the past. We come more completely to ourselves, and that moment, even to the
best of men, is one of contrition and regret, and often of painful self-accusation.

Naomi is evidently passing through such a time in this the hour of her return.
A penitent feeling pervades her lamentation (Lange). She left her people in the
day of famine, and now she comes back to them, the famine in her own heart.
Life has narrowed itself to a question between herself and God. Her emptiness
is of Him, but her going away is all her own. She went out of her own free will,
though others led her ; and in contrast with this comes the doings of the God of
the Israel she left behind. I went because it was my will to go, not God’s; now
God’s judgment has sent me back (Lange).

Note. (a) To go out of God’s way is to go out of His protection (Macgowan) ;
but (4) to go against His will is to come under the sweep of His chastisements.

We have here, I. The true conception of human life. (1) God dealing in it
personally, individually, with men. A Scriptural doctrine found from Genesis to
Revelation. Pre-eminently a Christian doctrine: ‘‘ Even the very hairs of your
head,” etc. More than this, it is a reasonable doctrine. If there be no special
providence, there is no providence at all; only blind fate, or resistless law. On
any other theory which recognises a Deity, we are at the mercy of what is worse
than chance—a God who thinks it beneath Him to regard His creatures; or
worse still, a God who is chained and overmastered by His own laws.

(2) lts departures and wanderings our own. ‘I went out.” TE any might hav
blamed others. Naomi might. But not so, she blames herself alone. Note. Self
condemnation a constant attendant upon Christian life. ‘I went out full.” Se
did the prodigal. People usually get full before they go out from God’s way and
nabitation (Macgowan). She went out not for want, but for fear of want (Bernard,
Trapp). (See on ver. 1, pp. 10—18.) She went out full of family happiness,
of joy in her sons, and of hope of a cheerful old age, surrounded by children and
children’s children ; but empty now of all these, without possessions and without
hope (Lange). What a vivid picture of those who leave the way of God’s
ordinances and sanctuary privileges! They go out for gain, but they meet with
gall and wormwood instead of honey (Macgowan). Note. Our blindness oftentimes
varries us into the perils we seek to eschew (Bishop H all),

(3) Its better leadinys and holier impulses, its repentance and return to God. ‘The
Lord hath,” ete. Just as the planets are brought into their appointed orbits by
the central and attracuive force of gravitation, so it is between man and God.
(See on ver. 7, div. I., p. 85). Mark, (a) that she was brought home again.
Afflictions are not a consuming but a refining fire to the godly (Secker). And
mark (b) how she was brought back. By weeping cross, Trapp says quaintly,
‘“‘ Home again empty,” says the text, Jehoshaphat’s ships were broken; Lot lost
all; Josiah came nome short (Trapp). Note as true always of such returns, that
the buckslider retraces his steps (1) with many tears and self-reproaches, (2) with
zonscious emptiness, (8) with total self-renunciation. Naomi renounces even her
right to her former name, Why call me Naomi? Why speak a single word to
remind me of my former glory? In my losses and in my loneliness, in all that
velongs to may life, “the Lord hath testified against me.”’ Men call her Naomi
(pleasant, gracious, lovely); but she reads her life in a different fashion, and says,
wall me Mara (bitterness), Note. We fall short in the eyes of God, however we
nay seem m the eyes of our fellow-men. Repentance and a change of heart alwavg
vrings us to see this. The old nature and the old life is no longer Naomi, rather
it is Mara to us.

We have here, II. The true explanation of afflictions. (1) Always from God, of
vot always for punishment. This one of the great lessons taught in the book of
dob. So here. Naomi, not worse, not even so bad, as many around her who had
40 far escaped calamity. But God has a right to deal severely with the best of
@ie children for their ultimate good, Mark the distinction; He corrects His


O4


CHAP. I. 21.





children, He punishes the wicked.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. RUTH


{
ae ae


The one act looks forward to a future perfect-


ness, the other looks back only upon the past. The one is remedial and continual
uncil the end is accomplished ; the other waits and lingers in hope of repentance,


but comes at last, swift as lightning, and sudden as the whirlwind.


(Cf. Heb.


xii. 5—11, with Ps. xxxvii, 9—13, 20, 38.)


(2) Always having a meaning and a message, though not always in anger.


(See


last outline, div. II.) Afflictions are represented here as God’s testimony against


those who have wandered from His ways.


“‘The Lord hath testified,” ete. He


puts the straight way of His judgments side by side with our crooked ways. As
that One who brings all things to pass, He brings our folly to fruition to confound
us. He ripens our plans, and lo they are our undoing! It is not that He thwarts
us; oftentimes He gives us the desire of our heart, and it is the strongest testimony


to our sin.
uon, but in providence.


Note. God not only testifies by word, but by act; not only in revela-
Our life a testimony in its circumstance, ete.


God’s


will is being accomplished in it, as well as our own.


Lessons. (1) The vanity of earthly possessions.
we call fulness in the creature, an hour may strip us of all.


So uncertain is that which
Like a bladder, so


is worldly prosperity ; a puff doth make it swell, but a prick doth make it fall


again (Topsell).


(2) It is a sign of true grace when we ascribe the ills which


come in life to the hand of God, while we take all the blame to ourselves. What
is it but the child recognizing even in chastisement the hand of the Father ?


Bernard on this :—


I. That it is a fault, voluntarily for safety of goods, through distrast, to leave
God’s people, and go to live among idolaters.
ML. That there is no certainty in worldly wealth.
II. That oftentimes the ways and means which men take to prevent want, by
the same they bring it on them.
IV. That such of God’s children as go astray, He will bring home again, but


yet with correction.


V. ‘* Why then call ye me Naomi?” etc. That the humbled and afilicted take
no pleasure to be remembered of their former prosperity by names and


titles.


VL That man’s comfort is nothing able to allay the bitterness of God’s dis-


comforts on US.


VII. That afflictions are commonly the Lord’s witnesses against us for something


amiss in us.


“The Lord giveth, and the Lord hath taken
away.’ When He gives, He is under no
necessity of securing to us the possession of
what He gives. We may soon provoke Him,
by our sins, to bereave us of all that He hath
given us; but however careful we may be to
please Him, we cannot merit the continuance
of His favours, and without any special provo-
cation on our part He may have good reasons
for impoverishing us, and placing us in con-
ditions quite the reverse of those to which
we have been accustomed. And one great
reason why God so frequently changes men’s
prosperous condition into misery is to teach
us the folly of trusting to our present enjoy-
ment. ‘But this I say, brethren, the time is
short. It remaineth,’ etc.”—Lawson.

“Tt is hard to come down in the world
through upright dealing, but harder still to
stoop to dishonest dealing in order to keep
up in the world. If the loss of temporal gain
be the gain of eternal good, then the reverse
of fortune is the reverse of misfortune.

“Tt is difficult to mourn without murmur-

’


ing. We are permitted to weep and moan
under the hand of God, but it is not easy to
weep, to sorrow without excess ; at once to
feel the rod and to kiss it, to adore and to
bless a correcting and bereaving God. How
noble the spirit, and how pious the language
of Job, when he exclaimed, ‘ The Lord gave,’
etc.” —oller.

‘“ There are times when we reason thus: the
darkness is around us, therefore it will always
be dark; the winter has been long and cold,
hence summer will never arrive; troubles are
come upon us, consequently we are to expect
nothing but trouble. Thus does the min¢
take a melancholy pleasure in tormenting
itself, We turn our back to the light, loo}
at our own dark shadow cast upon the ground
and then cry out in sorrow that all thing
are and will be against us.’—Zhomas Jones.

“ Afflictions are a testimony against mer
that they are sinners, but they are not alway»
a testimony that the sufferer is guilty of some
particular sins for which God chastiseth him
{Job ii. 3).— Lawson.

85


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


a—————— ee — eee





“God made men to be blessed. If the cry
of broken hearts goes up to heaven, it is not
His institution.”— Baldwin Brown.

“Men think God is destroying them because
He is tuning them. The violinist screws up
the key till the tense cord sounds the concert
pitch ; but it is not to break it, but to use it
tunefully, that he stretches the string upon
the musical rack.” — Beecher.

“She utters not a breath of accusation
against Elimelech, or of excuse of herself,
Properly speaking, the fault did lie with her
husband and sons. They were the originators
of the undertaking that ended so disastrously ;
but of this she has no memory.”—Lange.

“She takes the whole blame on herself,
She confesses that, in leaving ‘the land of
promise,’ she was walking after her own will,
not the will of God. But though she con-
fesses her own sin, she utters no reproach
against the beloved dead. ‘I went because
it was my will to go; and now God has taught
me, by all I have suffered and lost, that it
was wrong to go. He has justly emptied me
of all my possessions, all my hopes.’”— Cow.

“Tt is nearly the same utterances as fell
from her lips in parting with Orpah. Grief
makes her almost fierce. The name she bears
sounds like irony and a reproach.”—Braden.

“It is good at times to be in distress, for it

minds us that we are in exile.”—Thomas &
empis.

“Those trials which come from God are
ever without benefit to us, when we receive
nem worthily, since there is always a rich
arvest of spiritual blessings for the afflicted

religious heart. If human nature at first
shrinks from sorrow, faith and Christian hope
soon come to its support; the trial then
appears easy to be borne. Receive it as Srom
God, and its bitterness is past. ... Indeed,
the peace which is always found in this sub.
mission is itself a great blessing, even without
any exterior alleviation of sorrow, It is a
peace so much the more pure as it is uncon-
nected with the world.”— Fenelon,


CHAP. I. 22.


“But the problem of our life is solved in
and by Jesus Christ. He has explained its
nature, purpose, and ending. Without Him
the world is a haunted house, disturbed by
strange noises—halt-formed apparitions glide
through the gloom, and the inhabitants are
sore afraid; but possessing His revelation,
we know it to be the outer court of the hea-
venly temple, and we hear already the har-
monious voices of the worshippers in the inner
sanctuary praising God for their existence,
Christ is our refuge from fear.”—Zhomas
Jones.

“The martyrdom of an hour is sudden
glory, but the martyrdom of a life—there
needs something more than human to endure
this.” —Spurgeon.


** Oh ye who suffer, whatsoe’er it is
Hath brought this fellowship with Christ
to try the heart,
Know that the angel ministering is God’s;
And suffering e’en as doing is the better
part.


And ye who, cumbered with much care or
pain,

Sleep not, but count the weary hours, and
wish for morn;

Lo! from the pentecost of sorrow yours
to-day,

The pentecost of joy to-morrow shall be born,


And ye who sorrow for a light that’s
quenched

For love that gladdened all the morning cf
life’s day ;

By all the sacred tears that Jesus wept,

The dead ye mourn are sleeping, and not
lost for aye.


Our friend he sleepeth, said the Master once,

So named He man’s last hour, when fails
the feeble breath.

A sickness to God’s glory; through the
ages thence

New meaning lurks to us in solTow, suffer.
ing, death.”—B,


—_——_.
VERSE 22.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NoTEs.—Which returned out of the country (territories
Vhic! or
fields] of Moab. The description by which Ruth was commonly HaTyEAL [chniiG
(Speaker's Com.). As the same expression occurs at chap. iv. 3, in connexion with N aomi, it
may be supposed that it became customary to speak of Naomi and Ruth as ‘‘the returned


from Moab,” or, as we should say popularly, “the returned Moabites” (Lange).


Here the


phrase applies to Ruth, as at ii. 6, but in iv. 83 to Naomi (Keil). Dr. Cassel translates, “ Ay
so Naomi was returned home, and Ruth, the Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her whe


accompanied her] after [or on] her departure from the fields of Moab.”


And she desired to


return with her [that is, with N aomi] with the whole heart ; and they came from the land
Moab, ete. (Sy7.). The Douay, following the Vulgate, trans,, “So N: ae came with Ruth tha


Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, from the lan
pilgrimage ( Wycliffe)]. Aben Ezra thinks th
time (Gil), In the beginning of barley harv


the barley harvest (Keil),
sponded with our March (A. Clarke),


d of her sojourning” [from the land of her
a be understood of her returning at another
est.
The beginning of spring, for the barley harvest be i i
after the passover, and that feast was held on the 15th of oan Ni An Whe


They came to Bethlehem on that day in which the


The harvest as a whole commenced with


children of Israel began to mow the sheaf of barley which was to be waved before th
(Zargum). The firstfruits of the barley harvest were, as we know, presented ae ce baste


86


cmap. 1. 22. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : RUTH.


before which it was not lawful to begin the harvest (Xitto), In the next chapter (ver. 23) it
is related that Ruth gleaned “ until the end of barley and of wheat harvest.” This book was
therefore appointed by the ancient Hebrew Church to be read in the synagogues at the feast
of weeks or Pentecost, when the wheat harvest began ( Wordsworth) [cf. Intro., p. 1, par. 2].
They came to Bethlehem in the beginning of the barley harvest, Opens the way for the
further course of the history (Keil), Explains the narrative in the next chapter. Keil
questions whether the Bethlehem mentioned in connexion with Ibzan in Judges xii, 8—10 is
the Bethlehem of the text, as Josephus affirms,


VERSE 22,
TLheme.—THe WanvereR Home Acatn.
“T still had hopes, my long vexations past,
Here to return, and die at home at last,” — Goldsmith,
“We leave
Our home in youth—no matter to what end—
Study, or strife, or pleasure, or what not;
And coming back in few short years, we find


All as we left it outside:...
But lift that latchet,—all is changed as doom."— Bailey.


So Naomi returned...» and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of the
barley harvest.


This first chapter of the book of Ruth is in itself a perfect poem, as well as an
epitome of human life and a parable of the soul’s pilgrimage. The theme is that
of ‘‘the wanderers.” It has its prologue in the famine, and its epilogue in the
return. Blow follows blow until the catastrophe is complete in the death of alk
who left the land of promise, save one. Then out of the dark night of sorrow
hope is born and the return begins. Love lights up the picture, a love surpassing
the ordinary and usual love of woman, and the chastened spirit bows at last, not
to fate, but God. It is a poem complete in itself, rich with contrasting lights and
shadows, and as Goethe has well said, ‘the loveliest thing in the shape of an
epic or idyl which has come to us.” Penned by inspiration, it has no equal and
no second.

See here then, in conclusion, I. The wanderer home again. The most friend-
lees of human beings has a country which he admires and extols (Sydney Smith).
The greatest wanderer, some place dear above all else which he thinks of as home.
Even the prodigal, sitting in the far country among the swine, remembers he
has a “‘father’s house,” and turns longingly towards it. So with Naomi. [For
the return, see on ver. 6, 7, pp. 82—36, and on ver. 19 and 21.] Note. (a) The home
ties the strongest, the home claims the most binding in human life. True friend-
ship as well as true religion centres there. Bethlehem was Naomi’s proper place
and the whole scope of the narrative is to show that in leaving it she had gone
out of the way of God’s providences, as well as of His ordinances. (b) Christian
love beyins its work at home. Christian manhood shows its best there, and the
circle of genial influence spreads and widens from that centre.

II. Home again in a fortunate way. Led of God; for she recognizes that
the Lord kad brought her home again (ver. 21). Naomi’s extremity was God's
opportunity. So with David (1 Sam. xxii.), The statement of the text made in
order to intimate that the help of God did not tarry long (Lange). Note. (a)
When God leads, it is not ours to linger, Beware of by-paths and idle goings, keep
straight on (Bernard). These came from Moab to Bethlehem ; they had no idle
vagaries that we read of. Old Naomi desired to see her country, and young Ruth
was not wantonly disposed, but constantly kept her company (Bernard). (b)
They arrive safely, whom God conducts. He neither slumbereth nor sleepeth. He
led Israel through the wilderness for forty years, and landed them safely in
Canaan at last So always in lawful journeys, 80 especially in the heavenward
one. Only let us see to it that we are of the same mind as Moses, ‘‘If Thy

87


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. I. 22.
a
presence go not with us, carry us not up hence” (Exod. xxxiii. 15), and all out
journeyings must come to a prosperous issue.
III. Home again at a fortunate time. At the time of the barley harvest
(see Crit. and Exeget. Notes). When there was at least gleaning to yield them


sustenance, and the summer before them. In the beginning of the passover, saith
the Chaldee Paraphrast, taking the fittest opportunity both for soul and body


(Trapp). Here we see the providence of God, in ordering and disposing the journey


of Naomi, to end it in the most convenient time.


Had she come before harvest,


she would have been straitened for means to maintain herself; if after harvest,


Ruth had lost all those occasions which
God therefore, who ordered her going,
harvest (Fuller).
(Macgowan).
Bceptre was departing from Judah;
affliction, etc. (ibid).


paved the way to her future advancement.
concludes her jourmey in the beginning of
Note. There ts a fulness and fitness of time for every event
The redemption from Egypt; the coming of Shiloh when the
the soul’s conversion; deliverance from
Got's time is always the best time.


Improvement.—(a) When the heart is truly repentant, past error and sin, the
humiliating experiences which have left their scars upon our inmost souls, may


become to us blessed monitors urging


appointed.


us onward in the path that God has


(6) Like the wounded hart, the bruised and troubled spirit turns


homeward in its last extremity, if perchance it be only to die there.


“Tender and dear memories cluster around
many a spot: none so sacred, so hallowed as
this ; for once again she is standing in the
place consecrated by a thousand memories of
the sacred dead. Returns like these ought to
be significant of rest and privileges restored,
as well as of new consecration to God 3 and
this, although the past has been a barren
pest of worldly compromise and spiritual

eadness,”— B.

“There is a latter as well as a former rain
in spiritual things; covenant mercies to be
manifested in our declining years, as well as
in the days when the kingdom of heaven was
but newly entered. Our youth may have
been given in part to fully, the more reason
that old age should be consecrated unmis-
takably to God. And perhaps we, like Naomi,
shall best find the Protector of our declining
years in the Bethlehems of our youth... .
Understand the meaning of this place to
Naomi. No dreamy haze of mysticism rests
upon it, no unreal sanctity. “It is a place
where the heart writes bitter things against
itself, where the icy fountains of the great
deep within break up, a place where the past
seems a failure, and the future hopeless ; and
yet for all this it is a place where the winter
time of the soul is ending, and the new sum-
mer life of prosperity begins to dawn.”—B.

“The wandering of men from the perfect
Home has brought with it degradation and
scourging. Their return will be to find a
Divine birthright restored in Christ,°—
Pulsford.


“ Woe for my vine-clad home,
That it should ever be so dark to me,
With its bright threshold and its whisper-
ing tree,
That I should ever come,
Fearing the lonely echo of a tread
Beneath the roof-tree of my glorious dead |”
NV. F. Willis.
88


“Perhaps this world of sorrows presents
no sadder picture than that here brought
before us—the return of a childless widow to
the spot she had left a happy wife and
mother.”— Macartney.

“ Thou needest not, then, sit down in weari-
ness and hopelessness, whatever of earlier
years thou hast lost, whatever grace thou
hast forfeited; though thou hast been in a
far country, far away in affections from him
who loved thee; and wasting on his crea-
tures,—nay, sacrificing on idol altars, with
strange fire, the gifts which God gave thee
that thou mightest be precious in His own
sight.”— Pusey.

“ Landed property in Palestine is of very
little value, except the possessor has the
means of cultivating it; and as it was under
the Jewish law unaiienable, strangers could
not purchase it. A landed proprietor might
thus be reduced to beggary, and in times of
general distress might long remain so. Such
seems to have been the case with the family
of Elimelech, and they were therefore forced
to remain in Moab. Hven upon the return
of Naomi and Ruth, though the family
property was still theirs, they were com-
pletely destitute. Their property was value-
less, because they did not possess the means
of cultivating it. This will serve to explain
the peculiar position of Naomi and Ruth on
their arrival in Bethlehem.”—Kitto.

“Many a Swiss has sunk a martyr to his
longing after home. The malady is com-
monly brought on by hearing the celebrated
national air of the ‘ Ranz des Vaches,’ sung
at an unexpected moment, or when under the
influence of dejected feelings. Overcome
with the recollections which it awakens, he
sheds tears; and is only to be consoled by
the prospects of immediately returning to
that home, his exile from which he deplores.
If unable to accomplish this wish of his heart,
he sinks into a profound melancholy, which


“nap. 11. 2 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





ey


not unfrequently terminates in disease and he would maintain due allegiance to it in his

death.” —Percy. own realm and upon his own estate. Se
“Tt was the custom, and still may be, at true hearts give themselves to God—in tha!

the coronation of our sovereigns, that every which is truly theirs, at least, He shall reigr

peer of the realm should come forward, and supreme.” —2B,

placing his hand upon the crown, swear that


2


CHAPTER II.
THE GLEANER IN THE HARVEST FIELD,


ContTENTS.—Ruth, in her poverty, is led by seeming chance to glean in the field-portion af
Boaz, Naomi’s kinsman, and a great man in Bethlehem. Boaz, coming down from Bethlehem,
is attracted by her, and makes inquiries concerning her. He afterwards shows her grewt
kindness, and gives his reapers directions to favour her. She returns to Naomi to hear that
he is near of him to chem, and to receive the approbation of her mother-in-law, She gleans in
the field-portion of Boaz until the end of the harvest, dwelling with Naomi.


VERSES 1—3.


CRIT(CAL AND EXEGETICAL NotEs.—And Naomi had a kinsman. According to Rabinical
tradition, which is not well established however, Boaz was a nephew of Elimelech (Keil).
Lyra saith Blimelech and Salmon—other Hebrews say Hlimelech and Naason—were brethren,
Some more probably hold that Elimelech was the son of Salmon’s brother, and so his son the
kinsman of Boaz once removed, for there was one nearer (Trapp). Not the kinsman who is
meant, but @ kinsman, as there were several (Wright). Boaz was only a yp (Lange);

iend, a person known (LXX., Wordsworth). This not only explains a certain
aaa i Naomi fom him, but . makes the piety, which, notwithstanding the distance
(manifest alg» from iii. 12) of the relationship, perform what the narrative goes on to relate,
more conspic aously great than it would appear if, according to an unfounded conjecture of
Jewish exporitors, he were held to be a son of Elimelech 8 brother (Lange). The Hebrew
word is not the same as that rendered hinsman in ver. 20 and ii, 9—13. Literally, it means
only an acquaintance, but it expresses more than we mean by that term. The man was not a
very near telative, but one “known ” to the family as belonging to it (Lange). A mighty
man of wealth (a valiant hero] (Lange). Here it signifies a man of property (Kel). These
words az, applied to Boaz in no other sense than to Gideon (Judges vi. 12), Jephthah (xi. 1),
and others, and have no reference to his wealth and property (Lange). The phrase undoubt-
edly poiats to his valour and capacity in the field of battle ¢ Cox). : J t is to Re understood in
the sense of “a leading man; a great man.” Hence the Jewish tradition that Boaz is another
name for Ibzan, the only judge connected with Bethlehem. He was & strong and able man in
Israel in war and in peace (Lange). And his name was Boaz. Signifies strength ( Fuerst,
Wordsworth,Wright). Son of strength (Lange, Cox). Alacrity ( Gesen., Keil). To be explained
by reference to the name of one of the pillars erected by Solomon (Lange, Wordsworth). Ch
1 Kings vii. 21, 2 Chron. iii, 27, in connexion with Solomon’stemple. The signification alacritas
would hardly be applicable to the pillar (Lange). The name Boaz found a contrast to that of
Ruth’s former husband, Mahlon, which signifies mea kness (Wordsworth). The Chaldee readr
“ mighty in the law.” Boaz, son of Salmon and Rachab the harlot (Matt, 1. 5).

Ver. 3, And glean ears. Literally, glean among the ears. Let me gather (Sc., some ears)
among those that are left lying in the field by the harvesters (Lange). The right to glean was
a legal privilege of the poor in Israel (cf. Lev. xiii. 22, xix. 9, and Deut. xxiv. 19). But hard-
hearted farmers and reapers threw obstacles in the way, and even forbade the, leaning alto-
gether (Keil). Hence Ruth proposed to glean after him who should generously alow it (ibid).
Gleaning conceded, not as a matter of right, but as a favour (Kitto), Of corn, Corn e
in Syriac the generic word for grain of any kind (Steele and Terry). After him in whose sight
I shall find grace. Whoever he might be. Did not mean Boaz (A. Clarke). The owner had
a right to nominate the persons who might glean after his reapers (Steele and Terry). In other
words, the poor applied as Ruth did (ver. 7) for permission to glean. Some think, however,

i i foreigner.
Me eT eh faa ont Ae came, That is, she went out of the house where she was, and
out of the city, and came into the field (Gill). According to the Midrash, however Cees
and Alshech, in loco.), she marked the ways as she went, before she entered pl a id, ae
then came back to the city, that she might not mistake the way (ibid). And g nae - a
field after the reapers. Still regarded by the rural poor as one of their rights, ae e
decision has been against them in courts of law. — The popular notion probably Cake ie
Jewish customs (see Kitto). The law of Moses directed very liberal treatment of the poor a


the seasons of harvest and ingathering. The corners of the field were not to be reaped ; the
; a9


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. NM. 1,





owner was not to glean his own field ; and a sheaf accidentally left behind was not to be fetched
away, but left for the poor (itte). As landowners were not subject to money taxes for the
support of the poor, this claim was liberally construed by them (Atéte), at least by the better-
disposed among them. And her hap was to light. More literally, “And her lot met her on
the field of Boaz” (Lange). Literally, her hap happened (Schaff. in Lange), her chance
chanced to hit upon the field (Keil, Wordsworth). A part of the field belonging unto Boas,
“ The field-portion,” 7.e., that part of the grain-fields about Bethlehem which belonged to Boas
(Lange). The grain-fields, unlike the vineyards, are not separated by any enclosure. The
boundary between them is indicated by heaps of small stones, or sometimes by single upright
stones, placed at intervals (Lange),


pia BE
CHAPTER II.—VERSE 1,


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES.
Theme.—THE CLAIMS OF THE WEAK UPON THE STROWA


“Who gain their titles not by birth,
But win them by the lordlier worth
Of noble deeds,—true chivalry,
These men are God’s nobility."—


“ Howe’er it be, it seems to me
‘Tis only noble to be good:
Kind hearts are more than coronets,
And simple faith than Norman blood.”"— Tennyson,


And Naomi had a kinsman [lit. acquaintance] of her husband’s, a mighty man o
wealth [a valiant hero (Lange)], etc.


The second chapter opens up a new act, as it were, in this beautiful and touch-
ing drama; poetry of the highest order, and not the less poetry because it is fact;
for far more romantic things are recorded in history, than ever yet were created in
novel or romance (Cumming). Mark, too, that thus early in the narrative, what is
the key to the whole story is plainly pointed to, viz., redemption, salvation, help,
from one near of kin, one of the same family and blood. No wonder the old
Puritans saw a spiritual suggestiveness in the character of Boaz. “ My Redeemer
liveth” is “my Goel liveth,” and the very word is applied to Boaz (chap. iv.).
My strength and my Redeemer (Ps. ix. 14), in the Hebrew is my Boaz and my
Goel (Cumming).

The text suggests as worthy consideration—

I. The relationship between the rich and the poor. Every branch of the
tree is not a top branch (Matt. Henry). Must be and will be subordination,
mutual dependence, and mutual responsibility, as long as the world lasts, or as long
as the world is what it is. God wills that it should be so. He puts the rich and
the poor side by side, and has linked them together a thousand times in this way.
Beautiful when life repeats what is seen here, for the narrative goes on to show
how Boaz came to respect Ruth and Naomi, first for kindred and then for virtue's
sake. Note. (a) A wealthy man may be a good and godly man, ready to meet the
responsibilities which come to him. Riches neither further nor hinder salvation,
but as loved and trusted in. Not money, which is “ the root of all evil,” but the
love of money. It is rare that religion and riches meet, yet Boaz was both rich
and religious (Macgowan). Not many rich, ete. (b) Poverty a thing not to be
despised in and for itself. The poor may be virtuous and attractive, as Ruth and
Naomi evidently were. Boaz had “a poor relation,” a most uncomfortable fact, as
mary respectable people know (Braden). And yet they neither begged of him nor
thrust themselves unduly on his notice, They were an example to all the world
of that quiet self-respect which feels the claim, and yet waits the opportunity when
that claim is to be presented by circumstances and providential leadings rather
than by themselves,


90


CHAP. TI. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


Note. (c) It ts not in the outward estate to alter blood and kindred, or the claims
which come from thence. Poor Naomi and rich Boaz were of the same stock after
all. Joseph, though governor of Egypt, had poor Jacob for his father, and plain
shepherds for his brethren (Fuller). Mark the frailty and vanity of worldly
dignity. However parents provide for their posterity, these contrasts are
common enough in family life. The posterity of the righteous are brought into
poverty, that they set not their minds on temporal glory (Topsell).

II. The relationship between the strong and the weak. A link here between
the two extremes. Boaz, whose very name signifies strength, a hero and a great
man, perhaps a judge in Israel; and this poor bankrupt widow, forced to live upon
another’s gleanings. Naomi could say as does the Psalmist, ‘‘ Thou hast put my
kinsman far from me” (Lange). But Boaz had other qualities besides his strength.
He shows himself morally brave in every relationship (Lange) All the claims
which came to him in life are recognized and responded to, (1) as master; (2) as
servant of God; (8) asaman of action; (4) as one not insensible to worth, hiding
itself under the garb of poverty, he is an example of what is meant by the godly
and righteous man. He stooped from his high estate, as Christ Himself humbled
Himself te rescue the poor from their lot of ignominy and poverty ; and he clothes
them with his own dignity. His strength like the Saviour’s strength—to compare
human things with Divine—is shown in his works. Note. Jesus is owr near kins-
man and Goel (Macgowan), a mighty man of wealth in a natural and in a
spiritual way (Col. i. 19, il. 8).

IuproveMENT.—Learn from the whole narrative, as shadowed forth here,
(1) ‘The nobleness of strength nourishing weakness, true greatness recognizing the
claims of those beneath it, where many would pass by and despise. ‘‘ We that are
strong,” ete. (Rom. xv. 1). (2) Recognize the claims, which make the whole


family of God as one.
you will find relationship.


We are all of the same blood.
Remember the words of that noble Roman, received


Go back far enough, and


even then with tumultuous applause, ‘‘I am a man; nothing that concerns man can


be a matter of indifference to me.”


“The improvement of the ground is the


most natural obtaining of riches; for it is our _


great mother’s blessing, the earth’s ; but it is
slow. And yet. when men of great wealth do
stoop to husbandry, it multiplieth riches ex-
ceedingly.”—Lord Bacon.

“It is not the having of wealth, but the
having confidence in wealth ; not vg pose
ing it, but the relying on it, which makes rich
men incapable of the kingdom of heaven:
otherwise, wealth well used is a great bless-
ing, enabling the owner to do God more
glory, the Church and commonwealth more
good.” —Fuller.

“Naomi, though a poor, contemptible
widow, had rich relations whom yet she
boasted not of, nor was burdensome to, nor
expected anything from, when she returned
to Bethlehem in distress. Those that have
rich relations, while they themselves are poor,
ought to know that it is the wise providence
of God that makes the difference (in which
we ought to acquiesce), and that to be proud
of our relation to such is a great sin, and to
trust to is a great folly."—Matt. Henry.

“ How came it to pass, then, that a man so
bold and generous and pious left Naomi an-
helped and uncomforted in the time of her
penury and grief? We cannot altogether
tell. He may have been absent on military
yervice when she returned from the field of


Moab, and have only got leave of absence, as
soldiers then commonly did, during harvest,
He may only just have heard the tale of
Naomi’s sorrow when he met Ruth in the
harvest-field.”— Coz.

“ One would suppose that to the proud heart
of man anything would be preferable to beg-
gary; but so inconsistent are its workings,
that more are led to beggary by pride than
poverty, as people imagine that a certain dis-
tinction attaches to dependence on relatives,
or even on friends, while they regard the lower
kinds of industry as disgraceful... . It would
be well for all classes to remember that mean-
ness is not humility ; it is the miserable re-
source by which disappointed pride seeks to
steal that distinction which has been denied
it, and to avoid the humiliating and correcting
lessons which Providence sends; it ia the
crouching to man of those who will not bow
to God. In proportion as pure religion enters
the soul, this hateful spirit leaves it, and a
love of independence takes possession of it,—
a love of independence arising not from pride,
but from the genuine desire not to encroach
on human kindness, not to forget the Divine
declaration, “That if any would not work,
neither should he eat.”— Macartney.

“ Behold therefore as in a glass the perfect
image of temporal felicity, the father a king,
the children beggars, the father honourable,


91


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


‘ A





the son not worshipful, the predecessors the
chiefest in authority, but the successors the
meanestin calling: this made the fathers think
that the world was like a sea, here a mighty
wave, there a great downfall. Some thought
it to be like ice, where a man can never stand
gure, but the one will be breaking, or he be
sliding ; some like to trees whereof the tallest
are soonest overturned ; but all agree in this,
that worldly felicity is miserable vanity ; for
our present wealth is like a pleasant summer
which must needs come to an end, though all
the world should strive to the contrary.” —
Topsell.

“Therefore make you friends of the unright-
eous mammon, that when you shall have need
they may receive you into their everlasting
habitations. Distribute liberally, give plenti-
fully, live peaceably, walk humbly ; for the
wealth of the world doth not always last,
neither the crown from generation to genera-
tion.” — Topseil.

“ Let this confute such as having gotten a
little more thick clay than the rest of their
family, the getting of new wealth and honour
makes them to lose their old eyes, so that they
cannot see and discern their poor kindred
afterwards. When Joseph was governor of
Egypt, it is said that he knew his brethren,
but his brethren knew not him; but now-a-
days it happeneth clean contrary. If one of
a family be advanced to great honour, it is
likely that his kindred will know him, but he
oftentimes comes to forget them. Few there
be of the noble nature of the Lord Cromwell,
who, sitting at dinner with the lords of the
council, and chancing to see a poor man afar
off which used to sweep the cells and the
cloisters, called for the man, and told the
lords, ‘ This man’s father hath given me many
a gooc meal, and he shall not lack as long as
I live.’”—Fuller.

“Who knoweth whether God hath raised
thee up, who art the best of thy kindred, to
this very intent that thou mightest be the
treasure and the storehouse to supply the want
of others which are allied unto thee?”—
Fuller.

“There are multitudes of men like the sum-
mer vines, which never grow even liqueous,
but stretch out a thousand little hands to


CHAP. It. 2,


ee


grasp the stronger shrubs; and if they cannot
reach them they lie dishevelled in the grass,
hoof-trodden, and beaten of every storm... .
As yet the world will not understand that he
governs whom love makes serviceable. The
strong are few, the weak are many, and God
appoints the strong to serve the weak, saying,
‘We, then, that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please
ourselves. Let every one of us please his
neighbour for his good to edification. For
even Christ pleased not Himself; but, as it is
written, The reproaches of them that reproach
thee fell on me.’ ”— Beecher.

“A Christianity which will not help those
who are struggling from the bottom to the
top of society needs another Christ to die for
it.”—Lbid.

“ How seldom, friend, a good great maz
inherits
Honour and wealth, with all his worth
and pains !

It seems a story from the world of spirits

When any man obtains that which he merita,

Or any merits that which he obtains.

For shame, my friend ! renounce this idle


strain |
What wouldst thou have a good great man
obtain ?
* * * * *
Goodness and greatness are not means, but
ends.


Hath he notalwaystreasures, always friends,

The great good man? Three treasures—
love and light,

And calm thoughts, equable as infant’s
breath ;

And three fast friends, more sure than day
and night—

Himself, his Maker, and the angel Death?”

Coleridge.


“ How blessed he
That feels not what affliction greatness
yields !
Other than what he is he would not be,
Nor change his state with him that sceptre
wields. :
Thine, thine is that true life; thatis to live
To rest secure, and not rise up to grieve.”
Daniel,


ote a
VERSE 2.


Theme.—Homstx Tom, rae First Srer TOWARDS AN AFTER REC MPEMOBs


“O woman ! in our hours of ease
Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
And variable as is the shade
By the light quivering aspen made ;
When pain and anguish wring the brow,
A ministering angel thou ! ”—Scott.


“Oh, what makes woman lovely? virtue, faith,
And gentleness in suffering,—an endurance
Through scorn or trial.—these call beauty forth,
Give it the stamp celestial, and admit it
To sisterhood with angels | ’—-Brené,


CHAP. II. 2. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
Sa ee ee ee a


And Ruth said . . . Let me now go into the Jields, and glean, And she said unto
her, Go, my daughter.


This is the first movement of the machine which brought such grand things
about. From gleaning she arose to be ancestress to Jesus (Macgowan). This
request led to the recompence ; proved a step towards her highest preferment.

Note. (a) Great things often arise from very small beginnings. A restless
night by Ahasuerus produced that great revolution in favour of the Jews
(Esther vi.) (Macyowan). (b) High buildings are raised upon the lowest foundations
(ibid.). Christ’s Church was to be built upon the truth contained in Peter’s con-
fession (Matt. xvi. 16—18). So upon Ruth’s fidelity the human nature of our
Lord is, as it were, to be engrafted.

It reveals, I. A truly filial spirit. Gentle obedience, willing submission to
Naomi. Her nativity of Moab; her behaviour that of an Israelite indeed—a
true daughter of Abraham, though she springs from Lot (Lawson). Mark how
her meek and beautiful spirit begins to show itself. She did not go of herself,
obstinately and selfishly. She consulted her mother-in-law, and this was even
more commendable than if it had been done to her natural parents. Possibly,
too, she wished Naomi to enjoy the rest suitable to her time of life. Note.
(a) A wise, thoughtful, considerate spirit one of the true signs of grace. This not
always exhibited, especially where the pangs of want are felt. A parent's poverty
at times the source of discontent (Braden). Many become hard, cold, cynical in
reverses. Not so Ruth. (b) These charities of the heart sweeten life (Lawson). We
have here a beautiful example of courtesy between children and parents, as in
verse 4, between masters and servants.

II. A truly humble spirit. Mark the lowliness of her employment. She will
work in the hot sun as a poor gleaner, and never murmur (Braden). Some way
of earning a livelihood was a necessity. Ruth desirous of an honest though never
80 simple a calling (Topsell). Takes that which is nearest to hand. Will not
depend upon Naomi, but would rather that Naomi in her old age should lean upon
her. Will not even wait until, perhaps, Naomi’s relatives, out of very shame,
step in with succour and assistance. No! Like that one in the Gospel, she
cannot dig, and to beg she is ashamed. But unlike that one, she is not above
using every honest means to maintain herself and assist her mother. Note.
Female feelings are keener than those of men (Macgowan). Contact with the rude,
unfeeling world means more to them. Ruth must have shrunk with a woman’s
sensitiveness from the step. And yet she adapts herself to the new circumstances,
She goes out to glean with the poor around her. So Paul: “I have learned in
whatsoever state,” ete. ‘I know both how to be abased,” ete. (Phil. iv. 11, 12),

III. A truly noble spirit. The best natures show best when most tried, and
they are lovelier in poverty than in wealth. Note. (a) Brave toilers have always
made the worst drudyery sublime (Braden). Work is not degradation, and only mean
spirits think it to be so. Paul laboured with his own hands as a tent maker,
Not what I have, but what I do, is my kingdom (Carlyle). ‘There is a perennial
nobleness, and even sacredness, in work (ibid). However humble, it exalts the mar.
Labour is man’s necessity . . . is man’s glory (Caleb Morris), and brings its own
reward, Especially so when an affection like Ruth’s prompts us to it.


‘ Offices of love
Wrought for a parent lighten duty’s labours,” —Sephocles.


Lessons. (1) Before honour is humility. (2) Great things come to pass by
poor and unlikely beginnings (Bernard). (8) The way of our abasement may
become, in God’s providence, the way of our advancement.


Bernard on this :—
I. Honest hearts truly entertaining religion, do not forsake it or the godly for


worldly wanta.
93


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
a ae Fa


CHAP. II. 2.





II. Godly children hold themselves bound to be at the disposing of their


parents,


III. Honest minds will stoop to base means, so they be honest, to relieve their


wants in their poor estate.


The truly religious will not live idle.


IV. Gleaning then, as now, was a lawful means for the poor to get food.


In whose sight I shall find favour.


V. The godly, in using lawful means to live, hope to find favour with one or


other for their relief.


And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.


VI.
and fit.


Requests are to be granted of parents, unto children, when they be lawful


VUI. A meek and loving spirit giveth a meek and loving answer.


“ What cold entertainment do they find at
Bethlehem, even in the Church of God, for
whose sake one forsook her country, the other
her wealth, and both of them their welfare.
... Is this the profit of your profession, which
promises mountains of security, and pays a
multitude of miseries? . . . A man that hath
a thousand pounds laid beside him, and layeth
it out upon a bargain, whereof he shall receive
no profit in many years, but the date expireth
wd the day of receipt come, receiveth his
own and many thousand pounds for his gain.
. . . Even so with religion, it is a pearl for
which we must sell both living and lands,
and yet it is worth both, and many a thousand
times more; if thou feel not the profit at
first. tarry awhile, thou hast the promise and
bond of the Lord of hosts.”—Zopsell,

“ For this, then, she had left paternal house
and land .., But the love she cherishes makes
everything easy to her. It not only gives
utterance to good words, but it carries them
into practice. She forgets everything in order
now to remember her filial duty to Naomi,
and Naomi accepts her offer. Until now she
has only silently endured every expression of
Ruth’s self-sacrifice. She had indeed ceased
to dissuade her from going with her, but she
had also refrained from encouraging her... .
The meekness with which ghe asks permission
to encounter toil and misery overcomes in
Naomi every other ulterior consideration.
Such a request could no longer be silently
accepted, nor could it be refused. Naomi
has no other reward for Ruth’s self-sacrificing
disposition, than that she is ready to accept
its effort for herself.” — Lange (condensed).

“ What prosperity had concealed, adversity
brings to light. Nobleness that we never sus-
pected, with powers that would have remained
uncultured and unfruitful, have been mani-
fested. They are like some grand mansion
surrounded and hidden in summer time by
large full-foliaged trees; the passer-by cannot
discern the fine proportions and ornamental
sculpture that make it ‘a thing of beauty ;’
but when winter tears away with ruthless
hand every leaf, until the trees stand clear
and bare, then behold the magnificent handi-
work appears in all its glory and perfection.”
— Braden,

“T do not hear Ruth stand upon the terms
of her better education or wealt hy parentage ;


a4


but now that God had called her to want, she
scorns not to lay her hand upon all homely
services, and thinks it no disparagement to
find her bread in other men’s fields. There
is no harder lesson to a generous mind, nor
that more beseems it, than either to bear want
or to prevent it. Base spirits give themselveg
over to idleness and misery, and because they
are crossed will sullenly perish,” — Bishop
Hall.

“High spirits can more easily starve than
stoop; Ruth was none of those. She does
not tell her mother. She was never brought
up to live upon crumbs. Though she wus
not brought up to it, she is brought down to
it, and is not uneasy at it, Nay, it is her
own motion, not her mother’s injunction.
Humility is one of the brightest ornaments
of youth, and one of the best omens. Before
Ruth’s honour was this humility,”— Matt,
Henry.

Let this teach even those whose veins are
washed with generous blood, and arteries
quickened with noble spirits, in their pros-
perity, to furpish, qualify, and accommodate
themselves with such gentile (gentle) arts and
liberal mysteries as will be neither blemish
nor burthen to their birth; that so, if here-
after God shall cast them into poverty, these
arts may stand them in some stead towards
their maintenance and relief.”— Fuller.

“There are compensations even in this
world, of which we little dream, and God sets
one thing, and often a better thing, overagainst
another in human life. Riches fly, but cha.
racter is developed; we are compelled to
work, and out of work spring our truest joys.
Our life is paradoxical, but without contra.
dictions ; we are made the least, that we may
become the greatest, and the way down is,
with God as guide, always the road to exalt.
ation.” — Braden.

“Young persons should be cheerfully will-
ing to bear fatigues and troubles for the sake
of their aged parents, that they may enjoy
such ease as the infirmities of age require,
Let those who are in the vigour of age. if their
parents are feeble, remember what their
mothers endured for them in infancy or sick-
ness, how they willingly suffered anxicty of
mind, the want of sleep, and many fatigues
of body, that their beloved offspring might
cnjoy pleasure, or be relieved from distress,


Hap. 11. 3.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


See Cy OE ek ea


How selfish are the spirits of those young
persons who grudge toil or expense for their
parents in that time of life when they can
enjoy little pleasure but what arises from
beholding the affectionate attachment of their
children. ”"— Lawson.

“Tam told that the Court of Common Pleas,
which is not infallible, has decided that no-
body has a right to glean. It was hitherto
supposed to be a universal right; that pre-
script had made it law; but one of our courts
has decided that it is not law, and that no-
body has a right to glean, And therefore we
have got what I suppose is thought politically
a better substitute—the Poor Law, instead of
the ancient usage of gleaning in the fields
after the reapers.”—Dr. Cumming.

“Labour is, and must be, the foundation
of our earthly livelihood, must be the price


of our natural, our bodily, our animal happi-
ness, Labourin some shape or other is, in
fact, the very foundation of everything that
is good for man.”—Caleb Morris.

“Do the duty which lies nearest thee, which
thou knowest to be a duty. Thy second duty
will already have become clearer. . . . Hence
also our whole duty, which is to move, to
work, in the right direction.”’— Carlyle.

“ As frosts unlock the hard shells of seeds,
and help the germ to get free, so trouble
developes in men the germs of force, patience,
and ingenuity, and in noble natures ‘ works
the peaceable fruits of righteousness.’ A
gentle schoolmaster it is to those who are
‘exercised thereby.’ Tears, like rain-drops,
have a thousand times fallen to the ground
and come up in flowers.” — Beecher,

e


—_.>_—
VERSE 8.


Theme.—SxEEmiIna CHANCES, REAL PRovIpENcEs,


© Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,
When our deep plots do pall; and that should teach us
There’s a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”—Shakespeare.


“ All Nature is but art, unknown to thee ;
All chance, direction which thou canst not se63
All discord, harmony not understood ;
All partial evil, universal good.
And spite of pride, in erring reason’s spite,


One truth is clear, whatever is, is right.” — Pope,


And she went and came, and gleaned in the jield after the reapers, and her hap was
to light, etc.


Inspiration speaks here after our human ways and methods of speech. Christ
Himself did so in His wonderful parable of the Good Samaritan. ‘ By chance,”
He says, “there came” (Luke x.31). Note. A revelation from God to man neces-
sarily implies this condescension. Just as the Word was made flesh, so the Divine
thought, when it was revealed to holy men of old, must clothe itself with the
limitation and imperfection which belong to speech. How else could we receive it
—understand it? Elsewhere, however, the Scriptures teach us there is no such
thing as chance. ‘Not a sparrow falleth,” ete. And where men think they
appeal to fortune, the hand of God is to be seen. ‘‘ The lot is cast into the lap,
but the disposing of it is of the Lord” (Prov. xvi. 33). i
_ Observe, I. That by what appear mere accidents, we may alight upon our
best blessings (Braden). Wandering at her will, going whithersoever she would,
she was still treading in the path of destiny. Possibly she had neither choice nor
desire, which couid bias either to the right hand or to the left. At best, it was
only a question as to where she would be allowed to glean that absorbed the
mind (ver. 2,7). Yet it was one of the critical moments of her life. So with
ourselves. How many things have happened, about which we were strangely
indifferent; yet their issues have proved unspeakably momentous (Braden).
Note. Human life ttself is made up of little things, of smali and seemingly unim-
portant events, upon which greater things depend.

“ Guard well the boon, ’tis trivial
In seeming only, and shall win


A dower of heaven for faithfulness,
The curse of hell, if there be sin,”—


06


f


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHaP. 1. 3%





Observe, II., as following this—

That these seeming chances are real providences. If we could see the end
as God does, we should see that every event is for the believer (McCheyne). With
regard to Ruth, this was hap or chance; she knew not the fields of Boaz from those
of another. With God it was providence. Outwardly, and as men speak, it wag
an accident, but mark to what the accident led! It brought her to that part of
the field belonging to the man to whom, of all others, it was of the greatest
importance she should be introduced. Note. (a) That which we call chance.
casualty, accident, “ good luck,” ts included in the all things that work together for
good (Rom. viii. 28). What though it be u catastrophe or a crime !—there may
be second causes and the action of human evil, but the great first cause is in a}
(Spurgeon).

Note. (0) Those things which with us are accidental, are all the determinations of
a holy Providence (Macgowan). Ruth’s purpose was to glean, God’s purpose wag
to direct her into the way of meeting with Boaz. So always. In the eye of man,
mere chance brought Jacob and Rachel together (Gen. xxix). So with Pharaoh’s
daughter going to bathe (Exod. ii. 5—10). None the less there was the Divine
purpose being accomplished, which had respect to the future of Israel. So witb
the Syrian arrow drawn at a venture (1 Kings xxii. 84). God directed it. Note.
(c) The way of man is not in himself ; it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps
(Jer. x. 23). We go blindly, not knowing what a day or even an hour may bring
forth. All is chance in one sense. We stumble upon the best things that come
to usin life. It is all a surprise, and God has intended that it should be so. But
then this is only the human side. Look deeper, and there is a plan, a purpose.
Life unfolds itself to the wise man more and more as if it were a premeditated
thing. There is a fitness, an appropriateness about all that happens, which
speaks the Divine direction and control. Note. (d) Providences to the righteous,
are but the fulfilment of promises.

Learn, III. That God does direct and give success to the efforts of the right-
minded. David says, “‘The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord ”’ (Ps,
xxxvil. 23). If so, the way and its issue alike must be well. Who can guide
himself aright in this perplexing world? (Braden). Ignorance, confusion, the
tangled thread of human affairs, everywhere apparent !

“ Mystery enshroudeth ever,
Unknown shores on either side,


And for ever through the darkness
Flows the deep and troubled tide,’—B,


So men have said as they travel onward down the stream of time. But faith had
its answer amid these perplexities of human life,—‘ This God is our God for evor
and ever, and He will be our guide even unto death.”

Note. (a) That this Divine guidance, however apparent, does not set aside inds-
vidual responsibility. The angel hands were laid upon Lot when he left Sodom,
but he himself must yield to them—the human will working with the Divine will
—if his salvation is to be secured. He might have cast off the angel hands, and
perished with his sons-in-law, who mocked alike at the threatened danger and the
offered guidance (Gen. xix. 14—16). Note. (b) “I being in the way, the Lord led
me” (Gen. xxiv. 27), the principle upon which God deals with men.

So it was with Ruth. Mark (1) God's blessing met her in the way of humbls
toil. Lange gives as a more literal translation, ‘ And her lot met her in the field
of Boaz.” Her destiny was decided there—humble gleaner as she was, she found
favour with the man upon whom everything depended. So always. God’s bless-
ing can come to us in the cornfield, or in the workshop, or in the counting house.
And He Himeelf can be with us there. ‘Not man’s manifold labours,” says Dr.
Pusey, “‘ but his manifold cares, hinder the presence of God. Lakour ordained
by God, and wrought for and in God, invites God’s fuller presence.” Note. A
principle in this chuice of the humble who are to be exulted (ef. Luke i. 48—53]. He


96


cHaP. 11, 3. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
——————— EEE


who chose a gleaner to be the ancestress of David, of Christ, chose the fisher-
man, and the tax-gatherer, and the tent maker, to confound the wisdom and the
greatness of the world (1 Cor. i. 18—28).

Mark (2) Gfod’s blessing met her in the way of a self-denying as well as a self-
appointed duty. Her reward found her where her love led her. This one of
the main lessons of the history, a lesson pointed out by the pen of inspiration
itself [cf. ver. 12].

Tyng on this (ver. 2—6) condensed :-—


Theme.—THE GLEANER.


God brings His children by ways they know not. The manifestation of His
plans gradual. No accident in our lives. How ample was the portion He had
provided for Ruth, a kinsman prepared to protect, to sustain, and to exalt her
—a mighty man of wealth. But as yet she had no personal knowledge of him
—no means of knowing the gracious purposes of God regarding her. So God
has prepared an all-sufficient and waiting Saviour for the poor and perishing
sinner, a Saviour able to meet his wants, his dangers, his future need. But the
perishing one knows nothing of Him. The way in which God is pleased to lead
as to Jesus illustrated in the method of Ruth’s introduction to her rich kinsman.

I. The first step is to reduce her to the deepest necessity. In great
poverty, and with no apparent means of relief, Ruth proposes to glean. The very
necessity brought out a proof of her excellency. So God brings the soul to an
experience of utter want. Looksround in vain for relief. His conscious necessity
urges him to come asa beggar. And it is whenhe can say, ‘‘I am willing to be
the lowest of the low, if the Saviour will receive me,” that the day of his salvation
draws nigh.

II. The next step is to take away all feeling of rebellious pride in this
state of want. Sinful pride, a most common attendant on earthly distress—a very
different feeling from self-respect. Ruth had great self-respect, and yet she was
not ashamed to be poor. Willing to glean—to do anything. So the sinner must
be made to feel his deep unworthiness, his complete nothinyness, ete.

III. The next step is one of gracious providence to bring her, as it were
by accident, to an unexpected intreduction to her rich kinsman. God had
disposed and prepared her way before her ; and leads her to the very place where
He designs to bless her. Her coming seemingly accidental, but far enough from
accident in reality. So the gracious providence of God is often manifested in
bringing poor, perishing souls under the ministry of the Word! This the point
to which everything else is tending, and to which everything else is subordinate.

IV. The next step in Ruth’s history is the peculiar crisis at which she
came into the field. The time of a gracious visit from the master, ete.

Bernard on this (condensed) :—

And she went and came and gleaned. She craved leave to go, and when it was
granted, she accordingly went. (1) Honest motions and intentions to well doing are
to be put into practice, else they are worth nothing. Paul had a mind to visit the
brethren, and he did so; the prodigal son had a purpose to return home, etc. If
motions be good, it is good to put them into execution, and that speedily .. .
and not to lose the fruit of good thoughts. (2) Whom necessity moveth, and con- —
fidence in God encourageth, they fear no danger. Trusting in God, und being urged
of necessity to use honest means to live, she feared no peril, though in those days,
every one did what they listed (Judg. xviii., xxi. 25). When men have faith in
God, when the duty of their calling warranteth them, they grow courageous and
bold, and put on a resolution without fear.

And her hap was. When things fall out beside a man’s purpose, or otherwise
than was intended, and whereof a man ix ignorant before the thing come to pass,
then it is counted hap, or luck, or as the heathen used to speak, fortune. (1) Jt
w net unlawful to speak accordsng to men thus: It happened, tt chanced, it was my

27


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.


OBAP. I. 3.


luck ; 80 that we understand thereby that which happened beyond our purpose
and expectation, but yet guided by God’s hand and providence . . . . always
excepting in clear cases, where the apparent hand of God is seen ; for thus offended


the Philistines (1 Sam. vi. 6—9),.


(2) God doth so govern men’s actions, as things
fall out beyond expectation, and as they were to be wished.


See it in the success of


Abraham’s servant sent to fetch a wife for Isaac (Gen. xxiv.) ; in Elijah coming to


the poor widow of Sarepta in a most fit hour, ete.


This should make us to rely


upon God’s providence as Abraham did (Gen. xxiv. 7). (8) God will prosperously
direct the well-minded which use honest means to relieve themselves.


“She went out, not knowing whither she
went; taking either the right hand, or the
left, scarcely being able to assign a reason
why she preferred the one to the other,”—
Toller.

“The misery or happiness of our life is
often derived from accidents that appear
quite trivial. Time. and chance happeneth
to all men, and no man can tell what conse-
quences the slightest accident may leave.
Connections, happy or pernicious, riches or
poverty, life or death, may be the conse-
quences of a walk or a visit intended for the
amusement of a single hour,” — Lawson.

“As the star (Matt. ii.) guided the wise
men to Judea, to Bethlehem, to the inn, to
the stable, to the manger; so the rays and
beams of God’s providence conducted Ruth,
that, of all grounds within the compass and
confines, within the bounds and borders of
Bethlehem, she lighted on the field of Boaz.”
—Fuller.

“We take our steps without thought of
consequences, and imagine that we are fol-
lowing out our own arranged designs, when
all the while we are unconsciously fulfilling
the purposes of a sovereign Providence,”—
Braden.

“How comes the Holy Spirit to use this
word—a profane term which deserves to be
banished out of the mouths of all Christians?
Are not all things ordered by God’s immediate
providence, without which ‘a sparrow light-
eth not on the ground’? Is not that sentence
most true, ‘God stretcheth from end to end
strongly, aad disposeth all things sweetly :
strongly, Lord, for Thee ; sweetly, Lord, for
me’? So St. Bernard. Or was the providence
of God solely confined to His people of Israel,
that so Ruth, being a stranger of Moab, must
be left to the adventure of hazard? How
comes the Holy Spirit to use this word
‘hap’ ?”—Fuller.

“ Things are said to ‘ happen,’ not in respect
of God, but in respect of us; because often-
times they come to pass, not only without
our purpose and forecast, but even against
our intentions and determinations. It is
lawful therefore in a sober sense to use these
expressions, ‘It chanced,’ or ‘It fortuned ’
(Luke x. 31). Nor can any just exception be
taken against those words in the collect,
‘Through all changes and chances of this
mortal life,’ provided always that in our
forms of speech we dream not of any heathen
chance, It is observed that ruyf is not used
fn all the works of Homer; but sure St.
Austin, in the first of his ‘ Retractationg’


98


complaineth that he had too often used the
word fortuna, and therefore, in the pagans’
sense thereof, we ought to abstain from it.”—
Ibid.


“Scripture speaks of all things as being
what they appear to be: were it otherwise,
its language would be incomprehensible to-
us. We would not talk toa savage of chemical!
affinities, in endeavouring to explain to him
the uses of salt or soap; we would speak of
their apparent properties, and thus be en-
abled to carry his mind with us. Were Goi
to speak to us of things as they are, that, is.
as He sees them, how utterly unintelligible
would such address tous be! Let us mark
attentively the course of events connected
with, and depending on, this chance event—
the birth of Obed, and through him of David
—the promises made to the man after God’s
own heart fulfilled by the appearance in that
family of God manifest in the flesh;... ,
and let us cast from us as unscriptural and
absurd the theology which would teach us
that great events are indeed ordered by God.
but that smaller matters are beneath His
notice, and unworthy of it. While the great-
est events are made to spring from minute
causes, the Lord of the universe must be
recognised alike in the smallest as in the -
vastest of His works, whether of providence
or of creation. ‘The very hairs of your head
are all numbered.’”’— Macartney.

“The story describes it as a fortunate
incident, a curious coincidence ; that is, it
speaks in a natural human manner about it.
because, when unable to trace the immediate
action of a Divine hand, we are inclined to
speak of chance rather than law, and ol
fortune rather than God. But we believe
that it was by a supernatural guidance she
was led there that day... . It was ‘her hap,
but it was God’s will.”"— Braden.

“Things do not happen—casualty, accident,
chance, are mere words used to conceal our
ignorance, Look deep enough, and you will
find law, order, and purpose in the most
chaotic circumstances ; listen attentively, and
you will hear the sound of a Divine harmony
beneath the discordant and confusing noises
of our present existence.”—Thomas Jones.

“People say, ‘How fortunate it is that
things have turned out just as they have—
that I was prepared for this!’ As if God did
not arrange the whole! One might as well
say, ‘How fortunate it is that I have a neck
beneath my head, and shoulders under my
neck !’”’— Beecher.

“ Doubt Providence—and what the better


CHAP. 11. 4—7.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


—_—o—OOO,eee ee eee — — — eee


are you? You have the liability to accident,
and nothing to control it, nothing to throw
light upon it, nor to which you yourself may
fly. You are the creature of chance, driven
to and fro as a fallen leaf, and when you cry,
there isnone greater than you to help you.”—
Wardlaw Me All.

“ This circumstance was with Ruth merely
accidental, and not the result of choice and
contrivance ; but it was the effect of the
Lord’s secret direction, in whose providence
great events depend upon apparently trivial
incidents.” —Scott.

“ Accidit acciders vel eventus, By mere
chance in respect of Ruth, who, being a
stranger, knew not whose field it was; but
by a sweet providence of God, who led her
hither by the hand, as it were, for her present
encouragement and future advancement.”—
Trapp.

“ Little do we know, when we go forth in
the morning. what God means to do with us
ere night. There is a providence that attends
on us in all our ways, and guides us insen-
sibly to His own ends; that Divine hand
leads Ruth blindfold to the field of Boaz.”—
Bishop Hall.


“ Blindfolded and alone I stand,
With unknown thresholds on each hand;


The darkness deepens as I grope,
Afraid to fear, afraid to hope:

Yet this one thing I learn to know
Each day more surely as I go,

That doors are open’d. ways are made,
Burdens are lifted, or are laid,

By some great law unseen and still,
Unfathom’d purpose to fulfil

Not as I will.’"— Helen Hunt.


“TI do not deny that these things happened
in the natural order. I say I am grateful for
what happened; and look back at the past
not without awe. In great grief and danger,
may be, I have had timely rescue. Under
great suffering I have met with supreme
consolation. When the trial has seemed
almost too hard for me, it has ended, and our
darkness has been lightened. Ut vivo et
valeo—si valeo, I know by whose permission
this is, and would you forbid me to be
thankful? To be thankful for my life ; to be
thankful for my children ; to be thankful for
the daily bread which has been granted to
me, and the temptation from which I have
been rescued? As I think of the past and
its bitter trials, I bow my head in thanks and
awe. I wanted succour, and I found it, I
fell on evil times, and good friends pitied and
helped me.”— Thackeray


ee


VERSES 4—7.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NorEs.—Ver. 4. And behold Boaz came. Not only to see
the progress of the work, but also to take part in the entertainment provided for his labourers
(Wright). The Lord [Jehovah] be with you. The first time this emphatic expression occurs in
Scripture (Scott). Cf. Judges vi. 12. The same salutation as that addressed by the angel to
Gideon (Speaker’s Com.). The salutation one almost universally hears between the peasants
in the fields are identical with those used by Boaz and his reapers (Dr. Porter). The
Targum is, “ May the word of the Lord be your help.”

Ver, 5. Then said Boaz [1nd Boaz said] unto his servant that was set over the reapers
aypoxopog; the land steward (Josephus). v2 is not only used in its primary significance as a
ten hat eb in its more seseted Gennes as a servant (Wright), Whose damsel is this ? Tivog
9 vearic &utn (LXX.). Cujus est haec puella (Vulgate). What nation is this girl? (Zargwm.)
What is the news of this girl? (Sy7.) What is the state of this maiden? ( Arab.) It seems
that Boaz found her resting in the tent where the reapers took their meals (cf. ver. 7—14).

Ver. 6. It is the Moabitish maiden. Or she is a Moabitish maiden, who came back with
Naomi, etc, (Lange). Thus taken, the answer does not assume that Boaz is acquainted with
the return of Naomi. The E.V. may, however, be justified by taking mpwn as a participle
(cf. Ges. iii, 2, a) (ébid.) (cf. on i. 22]. Boaz had heard of her, and had been much interested
in her history (ver. 11), but he had not seen her before, so that this was their first meeting

e and Terry.
eres 7. And ee said. And she has said (asked), Pray I will glean [%.¢., pray allow her
to glean] (Keil). And gather among the sheaves (Greek, handfuls]. The Israelites appear
generally to have made, up their corn into sheaves (Kitto), cf. Gen. xxxvili. 7; Lev. xxiii.
10—15; Job xxiv. 10, etc. In the most ancient times, however, the corn was plucked up by
the roots, and in Egypt at this day, barley and dourra are so gathered. Wheat as well as
barley does not grow half so high as in England (Russell ). So she came, and hath continued.
And has come and stays (here) from morning till now (Keil). And she has gleaned from
morning even to resting (Syr.). The LXX. renders it freely a And she came and stood from
morning till evening, and rested not even a little in the field. That she tarried a little in
the house. Thus her sitting in the house is but for a little (Lange); i.¢., she has been sitting
in the house as you see her now, only for a short time (Wright). Boaz, it would seem, had
remarked Ruth sitting in the cottage or tent in which the reapers were accustomed to rest
themselves and to take their meals (édid.). Wordsworth thinks it hardly probable, that she
wonld have entered a tent of the reapers, and translates rather as to her stay in the house,
that ig little ; #,¢., she spares herself ao time to go bome for rest and refreshinent, Her


99


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. II. 4,
eee


sitting in the house that is little (Keil). Evident from this answer, (1) that Boaz did not
prohibit any poor person from gleaning in the fields ; (2) that Ruth asked permission of the
overseer, and availed herself of that permission, with untiring zeal from the first thing in the
morning ; (3) that her history was well known to the overseer, and also to Boaz, although
Boaz sees her now for the first time (ébid.).


VERSE 4,
Theme-—Tue Rigur Revationsuie BeTwEEN Masrers anp SERVANTS,
“It is a kind of good deed to say well;
And yet words are not deeds.” —Shakespeare,


“ Large-hearted souls that turn with love
To all beneath and One above ;
To heaven they constant bow the knee,
And prove them God’s nobility.”—B.


And behold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The Ture
[Jehovah] be with you, ete.


Now that Ruth is in the field, the plans of Divine Providence are not completed
until Boaz has been led there. Note. (a) Providence is the execution of the
Divine decree, always infallible and well-timed (Macgowan). How opportunely it
brought Pharaoh’s daughter to the infant Moses ; Ahasuerus to have that part of
his chronicles read which concerned Mordecai (Esther vi. 1, 2); Pharaoh to dream
when Joseph is to be delivered from prison. A similar guidance to be recognized
in connexion with the text. [See on ver, 8.] Note. (6) God’s thoughts are above
ours, and Ee so orders our actions as we, if we had known, should have wished
(Bishop Hall). Looking back, how often do we see that He has not only given
us the thing that is best for for us, but brought about events even as we our-
selves could have desired.

Remark, I. On the character of a righteous man as illustrated here. Boaz
seen in the text as (1) diligent in business, (2) fervent in spirit. Rich but religious,
a rare bird (Trapp).

Mark his industry. Did not sit at home, and leave his affairs to hig servants,
There is an overseer [a land steward—Josephus] but everything is not left to him,
Not one of those who are ashamed to be seen in the fields with his labourers.
No! he goes to inspect, to oversee, to direct, to look well after hig business
affairs. An example (a) to masters. No eye like the master’s.” If a man would
thrive, let him do his business himself (Toller). Careful personal superintendence
not only necessary, but beneficial—work performed more rapidly—vast waste
prevented, ete. (Braden). (b) To ministers, Oportet Episcopum conscionantem
mori (Bishop Jewell).

Again mark his benevolence and kindness to a stranger (ver. 8—16), as well as
the courtesy and piety expressed here. The salutations are earnest prayers. Like
every good man, he carries a devout atmosphere about with him wherever
he goes, into the cornfield as well as into the, closet. Note. (a) Real goodness
will display itself in every relationship of life. Naaman, although a heathen.
appears to have showed kindness to his servant (2 Kings v. 1—8). Our faith
barren, unless it make itself seen in the character and the life. If a man cannot
be a Christian in the place where he is, he cannot be a Christian any where
(Beecher). Note. (b) Good men will pray for a blessing upon those around them.
especially those of their own household. ‘The Lord be with you! This address,
with the response, is one of the earliest examples of family prayer (Wordsworth),

Remark, II. On the right relationship between master and servants, as
illustrated here. They must be very depraved men who are not faithful servants
and sincere friends to such masters as Boaz. ‘ Even publicans,” says our Lord,
** love those who love them” (Lawson). Note. Good masters generally make good
servants. Treat men with kindness and courtesy, and they will return it, as here.
The just demeanour of their master, refined by humility, controlled these (Lange),

1


CitaP. 17. 4. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.











Observe, (1) The mutual respect and good-will between master and servant ex:
pressed in these salutations. The picture a very beautiful one, the master pray-
ing a blessing upon his servants, the servants in return praying a blessing upon
their master. Can a pious mind read these godly salutations without wishing for
a return of those simple, primitive times? (Adam Clarke.) Note. (a) Christians
are to bless, and curse not. Religion requires rather than prohibits these salutations
[cf. Matt. x. 12; John xx. 26; Luke i. 28; Ps. cxxix. 7, 8, etc.], so that our
greeting be sincere. It is to be neither that of an Absalom (2 Sam. xx. 10) nor a
Judas, but free from guile, and without hypocrisy. (6) A sign of an wngenerous
nature to be outvied with courtesy (Fuller). Charity hopeth all things, and if they
[whom we salute] be not sons of peace, our peace returneth to us (Trapp). Those
passages, as 2 Kings iv. 29, and Luke x. 4, which the Anabaptists formerly quoted
against Christians saluting each other, to be explained by the haste of the messen-
ger, etc. (Bernard).

Observe, (2) The harmony between employer and employed. The secret of it to
be found in the joint dependence upon the Divine providence expressed. ‘The
Lord,” etc. Living faith in God is the best bond between master and workman ;
preventing a wrongful use of power on the one side, and presumptous insubordi-
nation on the other (Lange). Note. Only a true Christian can make either the
highest type of master or of man. Until men are inspired by God’s love .. . until
they have confidence in each other as religious men, there will be neither mutual
sincere courtesies, nor any profound trust in each other’s dealings (Braden).

This happy relationship expressed in the text useful, if only by way of con-
trast. Class alienation our country’s greatest curse (Braden) ; little of genial
unity between employers and empleyed; the breach between capital and labour
seriously widening (2bid.). Where is the cure? Laws, however wisely framed,
can never altogether amend relationships which depend upon mutual esteem and
good-will. ‘The cure must go deeper than the realm of law. Is to be found alone
where Christianity promises it, in the regeneration of human nature itself.

Iuprovement.—(1) Let us learn to use (a) courteous salutations as expressions
of a sincere good-will (MM. Henry). (6) Pious ejaculations, lifting up our hearts to
God for His favour (ibid.) unon ourselves, our friends, households, servants, ete.

(2) See how grace humbles the heart, teaches men to be sociable—is the very
cement of society. It makes mighty men of wealth not above their fellows
(Macgowan). Among the Moslems, the salutation . . . . a sign of their brother-
hood in religion, and their actual equality before God (Kitto). We may go to the
East to learn how the poor may be treated with courtesy, and be continually
reminded, in every passing form of speech, of their natural and religious brother-


hood (zbid.).


“Tt appears safe to conclude that the inn of
Joseph and Mary was the inn of Jeremiah;
and if it was the inn of Jeremiah, it was also
beyond doubt the house of Chimham, and
consequently it was presumably the house
which had once been that of David and
Ruth. 3

“ Every hint afforded by the Bible narrative
as to local fact and local colour helps to
prove that the birthplace of David, and
that the khan, or residence of Jesse, in which
the two men were born, stvod here in Beth-
lehem, on the very ridge now crowned by the
Church of the Holy Nativity... . As the
shape of the ridge, and its relation to
Jerusalem imply, the spot on which the house
of hospitality would stand must have been a
little below the town, at the junction of
roads coming up the great valleys ...on a
spot lying below the gates and above the


fields ; in fact, the very ground on which the
inn of Jesus stood, and op which the church
and convent of the Grotto stand.

“Here, thm, where by all analogies we
should seek it, the Bible tells us thatthe house
of Boaz stood on the green slopes some paces
below the town, between the gates and the
cornfields. Ruth, living in the town with
Naomi, had to go down into these fields as
the gleaners go down now (iii. 3), the descent
from the hill on which the city is built to
the fields being sharp.”—Hepworth Dixon's
“ Holy Land.”

“So a king, in Homer, is represented as
among his reapers, with his sceptre in his
hand, and cheerful. Pliny relates it, as a
saying of the ancients, that the eye of the
master is the most fruitful thing in the field ;
and Aristotle reports, that a Persian being
asked what fattened a horse most replied, The


ial


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP. II. 4.


ee LT


eye of the master; and an African being
asked what was the best dung for land,
answered, The steps of the master.” — Gull.

“Say to a Turk according to custom, ‘ May
your morning be propitious!’ he replies,
‘May you be the pledge of God!’ Ask a
Turk, ‘Is your health good?’ he answers,
‘Glory be to God!’ Salute him, as you
pass him rapidly in travelling, he exclaims,
‘To God Icommend you!’ and is answered,
‘May God be with you!’”’—Hartley. )

“The pious, affectionate language inter.
changed between him and his reapers, and
which appears to have been familiar to them,
shows that there were many godly persons in
Israel, notwithstanding national defections ;
and it beautifully illustrates the genuine
effect of true religion in producing affability
in superiors, and respect and affection in
inferiors, and mutual unaffected goodwill in
all, It is lamentably true that such language
as this is seldom heard in our fields, while
the bounty of Paradise is gathered in, but
frequently the reverse; yea, whatever can
inflame the passions and corrupt the morals;
so that a stranger, who should be occasionally
present, would be apt to form a very different
opinion of the religion of England, than Ruth
did of that of Israel, from the conversation and
conduct of Boaz and his reapers.” —Scott.

“¢Tf a civil word or two will make a man
happy,’ said a French king, ‘he must be
wretched indecd who will not give them to
him.’ ”— Dictionary of Illustrations.

“ Observe, courteous and loving salutations
beseem Christians. Indeed, our Saviour (Matt.
x.) forbade His disciples to salute any in the
way ; but His meaning was that they should
not lag or delay, whereby to be hindered from
the service wherein they were employed,
And St. John, in his second Hpistle, saith,
that to some we must not say ‘God speed,’
lest we be made ‘ partakers of their evil deeds;’
but that is meant of notorious sinners, which
have discovered their impious intents, It is
commonly said that the smallpox is not in-
fectious until it be broken out, so that before
the time one may safely converse, eat, drink,
lie with them; but after the pox is broken
out it is very dangerous; so we may safely
salute and exchange discourse with the most
wicked sinners, whiles yet they smother and
conceal their bad designs; but when once they
declare and express them, then it is dangerous
to have any further familiarity with them,”
—Luller,

“ Piety not only stands with humanity and
civil courtesy, but aiso exacteth and requireth
it (Matt. xii.; 1 Pet. iii, 8; Lukex. 5). God
hath His ethics, and commandeth good man-
hers as well as good conscience, Affability
and courtesy is the way to win others; men’s
minds are taken with it, as passengers’
eyes are with fair flowers in the springtide;
whereas a harsh, sullen, sour, churlish con-
versation is very distasteful to al, galieth
the best (witness David, 1 dam, XXV.), aad
openeth bad men’s mouths to speak evil of
religion.” — Trapp,


102


“This was a real prayer from the mouth of
Boaz. It is too common with men to say
‘God be with you,’ when God is uot in their
thoughts. The name of God is profaned when
it is used without consideration. It is ree
ported of the great philosopher Boyle, that
he never mentioned the name of God without
making a visible pause in his discourse. , . .
All good things are requested in this prayer,
The Lord be with thee, God’s presence and
favour will satisfy our souls, will supply every
want, will turn sorrow into joy, and the sha-
dow of death into the morning. But without
God’s presence and blessing, the richest con-
fluence of sublunary blessing will leave us
wretched and miserable, poor and blind and
naked,” — Lamson.

“ These salutations are well paraphrased by
Dr, A. Clarke :—‘ May God be with you to
preserve you from accidents, and strengthen
you to accomplish your work,’ ‘May God
bless thee with the increase of the field, and
grace to use His bounty to the glory of the
Giver,’ They impress us as beautiful indica-
tions of the pious and simple courtesy of the
ancient Hebrew people. Such salutations,
both between equals and superiors and infe-
riors, are still common in the East, but a
Moslem will not thus knowingly hail one of
another religion.” — Steele and Terry.

“Men must strive to understand each other’s
position, to look upon it with broader sympa-
thies, to learn that the interest of master and
servants cannot be separated. For this class
alienation is our country's greatest curse, and
must prove utterly disastrous to the prosperity
of its commerce and the growth of its social
well-being.” — Braden.

“Where a pious and brave spirit like that
of Boaz pervades the community, social ques-
tions and crises do not arise; for external
laws can never restrain the inward cravings
of the natural man, But where the landed
proprietor, in his relations to his people, is
governed by other principles than those of
self-interest, and cares also for their moral
and religious development ; where, further,
the labourer understands that an increase in
wages is not necessarily an increase of peace
and happiness ; where, in a word, the con-
sciousness of an omnipresent God regulates
the uprightness and care of the one, and the
honesty and devotion of the other ; there, nc
artificial solutions of conflicts between capital
and labour will be required. Boaz lives in
God, and therefore knows what duties of faith
and love are obligatory upon hine.”— Lange.

“T think it looks as if Boaz and his ser
vants were really or friendly terms, and had
one another’s interests at heart; he was
pleased to see them cheerful and happy, and
they to see him prosperous; he piously
wished a blessing upon their labours, and they
devoutly returned a benediction upon his
substance,” — Fuller,

“ The master of the great household of the
world gives us an example of the case, whose
eye is in every corner of his large possession.
Not civility only, but religion, binds ug to


CHAP. Il. 5—7.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.


good husbandry, We are all stewards,
and what account can we give to our Master,
if we never look after our estate? I doubt
whether Boaz had been so rich if he had not
been so frugal, yet was he not more thrifty than
religious. He comes not to his reapers but


with you,’ as one that knew if he were with
them, and not the Lord, his presence could
avail nothing, All the business of the family
speeds the better for the master’s benediction,
Those affairs are likely to succeed, that take
their beginning at God."—Bishop Hall,


with a biessing in his mouth, ‘The Lord be


~~


VERSES 56—7.
Theme.— ATTENTION TO THE STRANGER aT THE Gagn,


“ The fragrant sheaves of the wheat
Made the air above them sweet ;
Sweeter and more divine
Was the scent of the scattered grain,
That the reaper’s hand let fall
To be gathered again :
By the hand of the gleaner:
Sweetest, divinest of all,
Was the humble deed of thine,
And the meekness of thy demeanour.”—Longfellow,


Then said Boaz. . . Whose damsel is this?
And the servant that was set over the reapers answered, et,
And she said, I pray you [thee] let me glean, ete,


A finer picture of rural harvest-scenes is nowhere extant. We hear, as it were,
the rustling of the reapers’ sickles (Lange). The interest, however, here, as always,
centres in the human elements of the picture—most of all, in Ruth pursuing her
humble and lonely task, a stranger in a strange land. Possibly the poet’s words
are only too true, where he speaks of

“ The sad heart of Ruth, when sick for home,
She stood in tears amid the alien corn.—Keate

Rural life not that paradisiacal thing Virgil contrasts so enthusiastically with the
luxuriant life of Rome (Lange). Even in Israel a gleaner, conspicuous by her
foreign garb, may have been in danger of insult (ver. 9). Only when a pious and
Godfearing spirit rules in the heart of proprietor and dependants, is it good to
live amid the quiet scenes and rewardful toil of the country (Lange). Only then
“the chaste dwelling preserves virtue [casta pudicitiam servat domus] (ibid.).
The text gives a fine example of the best aspects of rural life, where religion comes
in to soften and refine its usual asperities.

Observe, I. The prompt attention as well as careful although courteous
bearing towards a stranger on the part of the master. (1) Prompt attention.
The Hebrew law held a master, in some measure, accountable for the stranger at
his gate [cf. Exod. xx.10]. Nehemiah recognized this responsibility (Neh. xiii. 16—
22). So does Boaz in the text. He does not wait for information, but asks at once,
Whose damsel is this? An example (a) to masters and heads of households, which
followed, will assuredly bring its own reward, as here. ‘‘ Be not forgetful,” says
the Apostle, “ to entertain strangers; for thereby some have entertained angels
unawares” (Heb. xiii. 2), (6) To ministers. One of the complaints of modern
worshippers is, that they come and go from the sanctuary unheeded; no one
making inquiries concerning them or their welfare ; no one doing for years what
this fine old Hebrew gentleman did at once, and in a spirit which lifted it above
all possibility of being misunderstood. Even Eli, although mistaken, was not
indifferent to the stranger in the sanctuary (i Sam. i. 1—18). Note. “No man
careth for my soul,” a terrible inditement, if true, against any Christian church or
commamnity. S


108


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH. cHaP it. 5.





(2) Carefulness. Boaz, in doing good, evidently would know the persons and
recipients ; who they are, whence they came, whether they were worthy or not.
A modern tendency to be lax on all these, and kindred points, rebuked here.
True that God sends His rain upon the just and the unjust, that the wicked
are not to be left to perish in times of want ; but also true, that the Church
has a specia) duty towards its own [cf. Gal. vi. 10; Luke xxiv. 47, etc. }.
Charity is to begin at home, as well as to begin with the worthy, though it is
not to remain there. Note. Strict inquiry should be made respecting those damsels
who glean in the field of gospel ordinances. Whose are they, God’s or Satan’s?
(Macgowan.)

Observe, Ii. The ready and unhesitating answer on the part of the steward.

Mark, (1) He answers without hesitation; can give a ready account of those
whom he has suffered to glean in his master’s fields. Evidently he has performed
his duty as overseer diligently and faithfully, as one who may at any moment
be called to an account by the master. An example (a) to servants, (b) to church
officers, elders, deacons, ministers, etc. Note. Church stewards ought to be capable
of giving an account of those they suffer to partake of her bounty (M/ acgowan).

(2) He makes no attempt at concealment. Had done nothing but what he
knew the master would approve. His kindness to the damsel had not made
him unfaithful to his master; nor did his faithfulness to his master make him
surly to the poor (Macartney).

(3) He is just and accurate in the account he gives. He neither misrepresents
nor overstates,—a model steward. ‘Faithful in that which is least,” in that
which simply concerns a poor gleaner, he is likely to be “ faithful also in much.”
A contrast to the unjust. steward mentioned by our Lord (Luke Xvi.).

(4) He displays a kindly and considerate spirit. Little did he think that this
damsel was his intended mistress (Macgowan). But, like master, like servant.
He had caught some touch of the generous and considerate spirit which belonged
to Boaz; he knew his master’s beniguity, and imitated it. Honourable of him,
that he at once recommends Kutn by praising her diligence (Lange). Note. The
well-disposed will praise virtue wherever they see tt.

Observe, III. That which made this attention and kindness on the part of
master and servant of value in the case of Ruth. (1) She was a stranyer, one
of an alien race, a Moabitish damsel. Kindness, sympathy, slight attentions of
especial value to such. [Example, Mungo Park and the African women.] This
gave her, too, a special right to gather the gleanings of the harvest (Lev. xix. 9, 10).
Even the law pointed out the stranger as one not to be forgotten and overlooked
by the benevolent—how much more then does the gospel! Ruth’s position
illustrates that of many to-day; just coming into similar relationships with the
Church of God. Note. All are Moabites by birth, who glean in the gospel fields
(Macgowan).

(2) She was a proselyte—had left all for Naomi and Naomi’s God. This
evidently procured her favour in Israel, and ought to have done so. Note.
Such deserve the deepest sympathy and the warmest welcome from the Church of
Christ. Only those who have passed through the same, or a kindred ordeal, can
understand what it means, this tearing oneself away from old associations and
affections, for the sake of a new principle, possibly to be met with coldness
and even distrust and prejudice.

(3) She was humble and modest in her behaviour. Not merely the natural
eharm and grace of her presence, not merely her modest and reserved bearing,
not merely the fact that she was a foreigner, makes her conspicuous; the
narrative reveals other and more sterling qualities: (a) gratitude (ver. 10), (0)
humility. Did not glean until she had asked leave: “I pray you let me,” ete.
(ver. 7). Little did she think that this rich field was to become her own.
Note. In all this she is a type of the true convert. What mean thoughts have
such of themselves when they come first to glean in the gospel fields ! (Macyowan.)


104


CHAP. II. 6. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
ce


They cannot think they have a right to the handfuls, much less to the sheaves,
less still that the field is their own; and least of all, that the unsearchable
riches of the owner are theirs (ibid.).

(4) She was diligent and unsparing of herself. Gleaning not a dignified em-
ployment, but she evidently did it thoroughly and heartily. Note. (a) There
shauld be fidelity, heartiness, thoroughness, sincerity, honest truthfulness, in the
minutest things (Beecher). (Example, Phidias; see extracts. ]

Mark her constancy, too, in industry. Not merely diligent at first, as many,
but all day long. A type of those who are really and truly Christ’s. We are
His if we continue in well-doing, if we hold the beginning of our confidence stead-
fast unto the end (Heb. ili.14). Ruth continued in her labour “ from the morning
till now,” till night, till the end of the harvest (Fuller). Oh that we could imitate
her constancy in the working out of our salvation! not only to be industrious
in the morning, when we first enter into Christianity, but to hold out and to
persevere even to the end (ibid.).

Again, observe on the other hand, as taught here, that rest is a necessity with
the most urgent and diligent. Allowed and blessed of heaven (Ps. exxvii. 2).
True Christians, however, feel like Ruth, that they must be up and doing ; “ her
resting in the house is but for a litile” [see Crit. and Exeg. Notes]. They feel
emphatically that to-day is for work; to-morrow, the to-morrow of eternity for rest,

Braden on this (ver. 5—16) condensed :—


Theme.—InTRODUCTION TO A FutTuRE WIFE,


Divine Providence led Ruth into that particular harvest-field, and under the
same mysterious guidance, Boaz directs his steps thither. Judging from the
subsequent history, may we not say, that God designed this meeting in order that
the two might become husband and wife? The truth of the proverb (not always
applicable, however,) that marriages are made in heaven, illustrated here,

1. Notice here Boaz’s introduction to his future wife. As he enters the field,
he notices a stranger,—his curiosity aronsed, little dreaming what consequences
would follow. May have been attracted by the beauty of her face, by her
industry in the field, or her Moabitish dress. Inquires ‘‘Whose damsel is this ?”
(ver. 5.) The reply shows how well known, and equally appreciated is her behaviour
to her mother-in-law. Evidently the universal theme of conversation. Good
deeds done modestly need no trumpeter, they are speedily recognised.

(2) Notice the first conversation between this future husband and wife. Ruth,
absorbed in her work, heard not Boaz speaking to her (ver. 8, 9). Note how
sensitive, thoughtful, and delicate his offer. He makes provision that she shall
not only be unmolested, but refreshed (ver. 9). Seems a little thing to do, but
character is shown more in small than great deeds. The needy often deeply
touched by trivial gifts. Ruth deeply moved. ‘‘ Why have I found grace?” ete.
{ver. 10). Has no vanity, no pride; she knows how to receive a gift. Does not
regard this generosity as a right, nor accept it with grim sullenness. Evidently
Naomi has told the story of her daughter-in-law’s fidelity, love, and self-sacrifice.
An Israelite, like Boaz, devotedly attached to Bethlehem, appreciates the intensity
of affection which could so unreservedly forsake the home of childhood and the
associations of youth,—a rare instance of high virtue (ver. 12). Did not, how-
ever, let his admiration rest in fine utterances of praise, but gives substantial proof
of its sincerity in gifts. His sympathy and benevolence unlike that described
by James ii. 15,16. His kindness exquisitely delicate. He will not offend her
sense of independence, so practises a little harmless deception. She shall
gather much, and go home fancying her abundance is the result of her own
industry. The secret of judicious giving is to help the poor in all possible ways,
and not destroy the proud and noble virtue of self-reliance. Indiscriminate charity
has produced the pauperism, and lazy beggardom under which society so grievously
suffers.

195


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH. cHaP. 11. 7.





(3) Observe how Ruth won his affection. Not by art, stratagem, nor, perhaps,
even by her personal beauty. But by her virtues, by her faithful attachment to a
poor, distressed mother-in-law, by her steady industry, by her sweet humility,
and above all, by her love to the God of Israel. In all this Ruth an example to
English maidens. Unfortunately, many seek husbands, if husbands do not seek
them—attempt to catch them by meretricious guile and superficial qualities.

(4) Notice where Ruth won the affection of Boaz. In the harvest-field. Engaged
in common and humble tasks. A hint as to the best place in which to estimate a
woman’s virtue: not in the ball-room or the music-hall, not in the excitement
of a holiday or of the social party, not on the Sunday and in company, but in the
quiet routine of her ordinary life. This followed, and there would be fewer
mistakes made in matrimonial alliances. Look for a wife, not amongst those who
gad about in ostentatious grandeur, nor amongst those whose chief amusement is
gossip and flirtation ; but seek one whose gentle, unassuming manners, industrious
habits, and filial affection, will ensure a happy future, and make a real home.
Beware of marrying a slothful woman, or one who speaks against her parents,


or one who does not lovingly perform all home duties.


good daughter makes a good wife.


“Thus the Saviour comes to visit His earthly
field, and calls the servants to account for
their charge. He walks amidst the candle-
sticks, and holds the stars in His right hand,
His ministers watch for souls as they who
must give an account, Not the poorest
stranger is unnoticed, or forgotten by Him.
It is a blessed thought. The Saviour sees,
The poor, the lonely, the neglected, in all
their needs and sorrows, are marked by His
eye. The poor widow’s two mites were not
forgotten. The Syro-Phcenician was not sent
away. Bartimeus was not despised. Lazarus
was not rejected. Jesus may be considered
as asking His ministers continually, of one
and another in their flock, ‘Who is that?’
And they should be able to reply. He will
call them at last to an account for all, and
for every soul entrusted to them they must
answer.” — 7yng.

“To create and maintain a familiar and
intimate acquaintance with the members of
the flock committed to him is a most important
instrument of usefulness to a faithful pastor.”
—Thid.

‘The first thing required in stewards is,
‘that a man be found faithful’ to his em-
ployer; but it is also a good property in
a steward to be humane towards his lord’s
, Servants, and towards all that have any de-
pendenceupon him foremploymentor favours,
The man that was set over the reapers of
Boaz had already shown such favour to Ruth
as it was the part of a steward to do, and by
his answer to his master’s question concern-
ing her, he was a means of procuring her
such favour, as a steward could not confer
without permission, Words fitly spoken may
do much good, and indicate good sense and
good disposition in the speaker.”— Lawson,

“Let masters, therefore, in choosing the
stewards, to be set above the rest, take such
as are qualified, like Jethro’s description of
Inferior judges (Exod. xviii. 21), ‘men of
sourage, fearing God, dealing truly, hating
covetousness.” And however they privilege


106


Essentially true that a


them to be above the rest of their servants,
yet let them make them to know their duty
and their distance to their masters, lest that
come to pass which Solomon foretelleth (Prov.
xxix, 21): ‘He that bringeth up his servant
delicately in his youth will make him like
his son at the last.’ Let stewards not be
like that unjust one in the Gospel, who made
his master’s debtors write down fifty measures
of wheat, and fourscore measures of oil, when
both severally should have been a hundred ;
but let them carefully discharge their con-
science in that office wherein they are placed ;
whilst inferior servants, that are under their
command, must neither grieve nor grudge to
obey them, nor envy at their honour, But
let this comfort those underlings, that if they
be wronged by these stewards, their appeal
lies open from them to their master, who, if
good, will no doubt redress their grievances,”
—Ffuller.

“No sooner is she come into the field, but
the reapers are friendly to her. No sooner is
Boaz come into the field, but he invites her
to more bounty than she could have desired.
Now God begins to repay into her bosom, her
love and duty to her mother-in-law, Reve-
rence, and loving respect to parents, never
yet went away unrecompensed; God will
surely raise up friends amongst stran gers, to
those that have been dutiful at home,”—
Bishop Hail,

“Had a sister Moabitess met her in this
employment, and inquired what it was that
could urge her to it, she would have answered
her as Elger von Hohenstein did his brother,
who, finding him away from his castle and
its life of ease, engaged in taking care of the
poor, exclaimed, ‘Alas, my brother! what
are you doing? What distress compels you
to this?’ ‘Sir brother mine,’ was the au-
swer, ‘distress compels me not; but the love
of Christ my Lord constrains me.’ ”"—Lange,

“Observe, that what happened to Ruth is
analogous to what happened to us. For she
was a stranger, and had fallen into the


cHapP. mn. 8—12.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





extremest distress; but Boaz, when he saw
her, neither despised her poverty, nor con-
temned the lowliness of her family, So
Christ took up the Church, and chose the
stranger, who lacked the most necassary
possessions, for His bride. But as Ruth
would never have attained to such a union
had she not previously left her parents and
given up people, home, and kindred, so the
Church also does not become dear and de-
serving in the eyes of her Bridegroom until
she has left her ancestral (heathen) morals
and customs.”— Chrysostom.

“Even the greatest, in respect of God, is
but a gleaner. God, He is the Master of
the harvest; all gifts and graces, they are
His, in an infinite measure; and every godly
man, more or less, gleans from Him, Abra-
ham gleaned a great glean of faith ; Moses,
of meekness; Joshua, of valour; Samson, of
strength ; Solomon, of wealth and wisdom;
St. Paul, of knowledge and the like. Now,
if we would be glad at our hearts that the
Lord would give us free leave and liberty for
to glean graces out of His harvest, let us not
grudge and repine that poor people glean a
little grain from our plenty. To conclude:
when God hath multiplied our ‘five loaves,’
that is, when of our little seed He hath given
us a great deal of increase, let poor people,
like Ruth in the text, be the ‘twelve baskets’
which may take up the fragments of gleanings
which are left.”—Fuller,


“The plume-like waving of the autunin corn,
By soft winds to a dreamy motion fanned,
Still bring me back thine image, O forlorn,
Yet not forsaken, Ruth! I see thee stand,
Lone ’midst the gladness of the harvest-

band,
Lone as a wood-bird on the ocean’s foam,
Fallen in its weariness. ‘hy fatherland
Smiles far away! Yet to thy sense of
home,
That finest, purest, which can recognise
Home in affection’s glance, for ever true,
Beats thy calm heart; and if thy gentle
eyes
Gleam tremulous through tears, ’tis not to rue
Those words immortal in their deep love’s
tone,
Thy people and thy God shall be mine own.
Mrs. Hemans.


“Tt is related that when Phidias. the great
sculptor, who carved statues for one of the
temples in antiquity, was labouring with
minute fidelity upon the hair on the back of
the head of one of the historic figures, which
was to be elevated from the pavement to the
very apex of the builling. or placed along the
frieze, some one expostulated with him, say-
ing, ‘Why do you take such great pains with
the hair? it is never to be seen.’ His simple
reply was, ‘The gods will see it.’ So he
laboured thoroughly in the minutest things,
not for the eyes of men, but for the eyes of
the gods,”—-Beeoher,


——_—————_————


VERSES 8—12.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NoTEs,—Ver. 8. Then said Boaz [and Boaz said], Hearest
thou mot? Dost thou hear (i.e., thou hearest, dost thou not? interrogatio, blande aftirmat)
(Keil), Lit. Hast thou not heard ? (in the perfect,) the effect of the use of this tense being to
mark the permission to glean as irrevocably fixed, not subject to uncertainty or change
( Speakers’ Commentary). My daughter. A kind phrase, indicating at the same time Boaz’s
mature age (ibid.). He recognizes the existence of a certain relationship, the benefit of which
is due to Ruth (Lange). The good report of the overseer (ver. 7) would strengthen any claim
he felt Ruth had upon him through Naomi. Spoke with fatherly kindness therefore (Kett).
Neither go from hence, and go not away from here (Keil). He has called her to him where
he stands by the reapers(Lange). Abidehere. Lit. cleave (Wordsworth). koddy@yre (LXX.).
Fast by my maidens, And keep so to my maidens (Keil), The gleaner who was allowed to
approach nearest the reapers had the best opportunity (Lange). Boaz seems to have had
women-servants employed. Also perhaps other gleaners in the field, whom he would include
among his maidens (Steele and Terry). Robinson saw nearly two hundred reapers and
gleaners at work in one field (ii. 394), Gleaning was often almost as important as reaping,
since the latter was done in a very slovenly manner, :

Ver. 9. Let thine eyes. Thine eyes (directed) upon the field which they reap, go behind
them (i.¢,, behind the maidens, who probably tied up the sheaves whilst the men-servants cut
the corn (Keil), The maidens were probably only gleaners, for the verb they do reap is in the
masculine, while after them is in the feminine (Speakers’ Commentary). In the absence of
fences, Ruth might go unlicensed on another’s possessions ; hence the charge to keep near his
maidens (Steele and Terry). Have I not charged the young men? Such precautions are not
out of place at this day. The reapers are gathered from all parts of the country, and lar-ely
from the ruder class, and being far from home, throw off all restraint, and give licence to their
tongues, if nothing more (Dr. Thomson). That they should not touch [molest] thee. That is,
either to hinder, or to injure. Go unto the vessels, Doubtless a special indulgence to a
gleaner. The harvest-field was often at a distance from springs or wells (Steele and Terry).

Ver. 10, She fell on her face, With Oriental reverence (Speakers’ Commentary). [Cf. Gen.
xxxiii, 3; 1 Sam. xxv. 23, and 2 Sam.i.2] Bowed herself to the ground. © Towards the earth
(Wright), Why have I found grace? (Cf. 2 Sam. vii. 18, 19, and Lukei, 43.] A stranger,


107


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. 11, 8, 9.
ee


She is so unassuming as to deem this very fact an enhancement of his kindness (Lange).
Keil trans, “ Why have I found favour in thine eyes, that thou regardest me, who am only a
stranger?”

Ver, 1], It hath been fully shown me. Everything has been told me (Keil). Boaz could
have derived his knowledge only from narrations proceeding from Naomi (Lange). All that
thou hast done. So Christ knows all concerning those who would be recipients of His favour
(ver. 30—36 ; John i.48), And how thou hast left. Hast therefore done what God commanded
Abraham to do (Gen. xii. 1) (Keil). Thy father and thy mother. (Cf. Matt. x. 37, xix. 29.]
One of the plain signs of discipleship. Unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore,
Lit. Which thou knewest not the day before yesterday (Wright). Here also is a figure of the
Gentile Church coming to Christ ; see Ps. xlv. 11—17 (Wordsworth).

Ver. 12, The Lord [Jehovah], Anda full reward, A complete reward (Lange), And let
thy reward be perfect (Keil). Recalling Gen. xv. 1 (Keil). Under whose wings. A figure of
speech derived from Deut. xxxii, 11 (Wordsworth). Jehovah represented as an eagle there,
spreading abrvad her wings over her young. Others think the allusion is to the mercy
seat overshadowed by the outstretched winys of the cherubim. Cf. also Ps. xci. 4, xxxvi. 8,
Wii. 2; and our Saviour's words, Matt. xxiii. 27. In these words we see the genuine piety
of a true Israelite (Keil, Groser), The Syriac renders this verse guod senswm, thus, “ May
the Lord, the God of Israel, reward thee, and give thee thy reward, to whom thou hast
come, that He may protect thee under His wings.” Very similarly the Arabic (Wright).


VERSES 8, 9.


Theme.—Carz FoR THE STRANGER AT THE GaTE,


“With countless sheaves of golden grain
The joyful reapers strew the plain.”—Anom


“She was a phantom of delight
When first she gleamed upon my sight 3
A lovely apparition, sent


To be a2 moment’s ornament.
* * * s 8


I saw her upon nearer view,

A spirit, yet a woman too;

Her household motions light and frea,

And steps of virgin liberty;

A countenance in which did meet

Sweet records, promises as sweet;

A creature not too bright or good

For human nature’s daily food.”— Wordsworth.


Then satd Boaz . . . Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not, ete. Have I not
charged the young men? ete. And when thou art athirst, etc.


Grace humbles even mighty men of wealth to utter the law of kindness to the
poor and needy (Macgowan). With Boaz, Naomi’s nearness of kin, and Ruth’s
worth, were both at work to produce this favourable treatment. He recognises
the latter (ver. 11, 12) even more plainly than he does the former; for to good
men virtue is even more precious than kinship, and goodness will make itself
friends always, as here. His good-will shown at once.

(1) He has a care to be understood, Hearing is often without taking heed
(Macgowan). Age and experience may fittingly claim a special attention from
the young. Note. This was a favourite method of appeal on the part of the Great
Teacher. (1) Commands attention. (2) Claims a special and thoughtful consider-
ation for what follows. (Cf. Num. xii. 6; Isa. i. 2; Jer. v. 21; Matt. xxvii, 13;
vil. 26; Luke viii. 8, etc. ]

(2) He has a care to put her in her right position as toward himself. Calls her
daughter; a respectful, even affectionate, yet delicate form of salutation, most
appropriate under the cireumstances. Rich men who have poor relations are not
always found saluting them in this way. The same noble yet thoughtful spirit ig
to be seen in every word he utters,

I See the delicacy of his help. (1) Does not despise her labour, respects it,
forwards it, helps it,—the sign of a truly noble spirit. He calls her near, and
makes her gleaning more productive. So the Saviour, signalized His approach to


108


CHAP. IL. 8, 9. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.





His disciples, on a memorable occasion, by a miraculous draught of fishes. He
entered into their toils, and increased its returns so much, that the net brake,
etc. (Luke v. 6; cf. also John xxi. 6),

(2) He managed to supply her wants without taking away her sense of independence.
A hint to the benevolent, too often forgotten. Note. Charity itself may be and is
an evil, if it pauperize the poor. Depend upon it, the best way is to help them to
help themselves. The benevolence of Boaz a model in this: (a) practical;
(b) unostentatious. Made the obligation as light as possible, and apparently
scarce of a pecuniary nature (Macartney).

II. See its genuineness. Is not anxious to get rid of the burden, or to share
it with another; rather would take \t all upon himself, be it much or little.
‘‘Go not to glean in another field . . abide here fast by my maidens.” As if
he had said, ‘‘ Depend upon me and mine.” A right royal, large-hearted spirit ;
he has at least enough and to spare for her. Note. (a) It ts so he begins to show
himself already, her Goel, her kinsman. Mercy is never miserly. Boaz in all
this, his giving and his doing, an illlustration of the way Christ receives
(a) strangers, (b) gleaners in the gospel fields, (c) young converts. His pro-
visions are ample—there is enough and to spare; His fields are wide—there is no
need to wander from them. Nay, He is even jealous at the thought of our looking
elsewhere. Note. (6) In wandering, a snare is more likely to be met with than a
blessing (Macgowan).

III. See its thoroughness. He offers not only help, but protection, and
provision for all her wants. (1) He provides for her society. ‘‘ Abide fast by my
maidens.” Hence we gather it is most decent for women to associate with those
of their own sex (Fuller). The disciples wondered that Christ talked with a
woman (John iv. 27), showing hereby that it was not His ordinary course to
converse alone with one of another sex (ibid).

(2) He provides for her safety. ‘‘ Have I not charged the young men ?” ete.
Boaz evidently felt that his servants had need of the caution, and that they would
stand in awe of his word. Note. (a) Servile natures aré most prone to wrong strangers.
(b) It is the part of a good master, not only to do no harm himself, but also to take
care that his servants do none (Fuller). This instinct to protect the young and
the defenceless from wrong and harm, belongs to every truly noble nature, and
the want of it, is a certain sign of baseness and churlishness of spirit. See how it
finds its noblest expression in the pathetic words of Christ, “ How often would I
have gathered,” etc. He would that all men should come unto Him and find
safety, salvation, life eternal.

(3) He provides for her refreshment. ‘‘ When thou art athirst,” etc. Matthew
Henry thinks the water was drawn from the famous well of Bethlehem, which
was by the gate, the water of which David longed for (2 Sam. xxiii, 16).
Wherever it came from, there it was (a) already provided; (b) freely offered ;
[cf. Rev. xxii. 17]; (c) to be partaken of whenever thirsty [cf. Isa. li. 1]. Note.
(a) Thus generosity a faint type of the liberality of Christ (John iv. 10). (6) 4
work of mercy and love may be shown in a small matter (Bernard).


‘“ Mothers and nurses are very careful, ten-
derly to handle infants when they are but
newly born. So Ruth: Christ was newly
formed in her, a young convert, a fresh prose-


lyte; and therefore Boaz useth her with all _


kindness, both in words and works: ‘ Hearest
thou, my daughter ?’”—uller.

“ Christ knows the heart of a ‘ stranger’—
a stranger to the work of grace, yet a seeker
after it—and He bids such stay by Hin,
among His people, and in His pastures : ‘Go
not to glean,’ etc. He shows not the fulness
of His love all at once, lest the trembling goul
should be overpowered; but by His gentle-


ness He attracts her love, showing more of
the kindness of His heart in acts for her than
by any personal expressions uf tenderness :
‘Have I not charged?’ etc, Cnrist forgets
not the sensitiveness of the newborn spirit ,
vigorous faith shall not boast itself against
budding hope, neither shall the strength of
manhood urge beyond its power the feeble-
ness of childhood; rather growing experience
shalllend a helping hand to new-born desires ;
and freely as we have received, we must
freely give.” — The Believer Filled with Christ's
Strength.

“You have with you, and around you, many


109


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


cuap. 11. 8, 9,


TO


who are striving to walk in the strait and
narrow way which leadeth unto life. Their
light shines before you; their daily walk
encourages and animates you. Keep fast by
them. You have a faithful and simple mi-
nistry of the gospel. You have a pure and
blessed form of public worship. Every benefit
and advantage for you is there. You have
the simple and appropriate ordinances of the
Lord’s house. Jesus has promised to meet
you there, Jt will be good for you to be found
tm no other field.”—Tyng.

“ According to a proverb of the fathers,
benevolence is one of the pillars upon which
the world rests. ‘The world,’ said they, ‘is
sustained by virtue of three things—the law,
Divine worship, and active benevolence.’ . . ,
To do a person a favour is to act beneficently
towards him, without any hope or desire of
return, and may be practised in two cases—
to oblige a person to whom we are not under
obligation, and to accommodate or oblige a
person, with more trouble to ourselves and
more gain to him than he deserves. The
mercy which is mentioned in the Bible is
that which is given freely and without desert
upon the part of one to whom it is granted ;
for instance, the benevolence of God is called
mercy, because we are in debt to God, and

€ owes us nothing.”—TZulmud.

“Rabbi Jochanan has said that it is as
pa in God’s sight if we are kind and

ospitable to strangers, as if we rise up early
to study His law; because the former is in
fact putting His law into practice.’—Zbid.


** The pilgrim and the stranger, who through

the day

Holds over the desert his trackless way,

Where the terrible sands no shade have
known,

No sound of life save the camel’s moan,

Hears at last, through the mercy of Allah
to all,

From his tent-door, at evening, the Be-
douin’s call;

‘Whoever thon art, whose need is great,

In the name of God, the Compassionate

And Merciful One, for thee I wait!’


For gifts in His name, of food and rest,
The tents of Islam of God are blest,
Thou who hast faith in the Christ above,
Shall the Koran teach thee the Law of Love?
O Christian ! open thy heart and door—
Cry, east and west, to the wandering poor,
‘ Whoever thou art, whose need is great,
In the name of Christ, the Compassionate
And Merciful One, for thee I wait !°”
Whittier,


“In this wonderful universe around us,
when the full play of life is seen, it is all a
giving, the ocean to the clouds, and the clouds
to the earth, and the earth to the rivers, and
the rivers to the ocean back again; the sun
sends its radiant beams and beni gn influences
among the stars, and the planets reflect them
around, each in his lesser sphere ; the ground
yields its sustenance to the trees, and the


110


trees their fruit and foliage to man; the
flowers send their perfumes abroad to the
winds of heaven, nor is there a cessation of
these sweet interchanges until that moment
when activity ceases, and the stagnation of
decay begins. The penurious spirit, the spirit
which has but to withhold, is an anomaly, a
blot in the whole realm of nature. Nothing
is made for itself, and it is a sign of death
rather than life when the creature begins to
circumscribe its influences, and ceases or ree
fuses to give.”— B,

“ Nature says it is ‘good,’ but grace says it
is ‘ better to give.’ Nature knows something
of that lavishness which bestows, because it
must bestow, which feels and knows that
withholding is to poverty; but grace teaches
a higher thing, that ‘giving to the poor is
lending to the Lord.’”—B,

“One day a philosopher inquired of Rabbi
Akiba, ‘If your God loves the poor, why does
He not sur port them?’ ‘God allows the poor
to be with us ever,’ responded Akiba, ‘ that
the opportunities for doing good may never
fail.’ ”—TZalmud.

“T have noticed in travelling, that when
one with a face wrinkied and worn walks
into the car, there is not a seat to spare for
her; and I have noticed that if one comes in
who is young and blooming, of radiant eye
and most comely face, there is not one in the
car who has not a seat for her. Beauty wins
its way. And if it be so in the outward life,
which is but a mere shadow of the inward,
how much more is it so,in the inward! And
nothing is more beautiful, than dutyperformed
under adverse circumstances.” Beecher,

“ He [Boaz] begged she would keep to his
grounds during the harvest, and not, in the
hope of bettering herself on the one hand, or
in the fear of presuming on the other, remove
to the lands of any other person. And it will
be observed how, in the absence of enclosures,
he gives her the means of knowing his grounds,
by telling her to adhere to the company in
which she already finds herself, that of his
own labourers, among whom she might rely
upon being perfectly safe. We gather that
the persons employed in the field were men-
servants, women-servants, and day-labourers,
the women seemingly being chiefly employed,
in ministering to the wants of the men engaged
in active toil, and in performing some of the
lighter labours. One of the most important
provisions of the harvest field was water, often
necessarily brought from some distance, and
placed so as to be kept cool.”—Xitto,

“Had he been actuated by the spirit of
modern sentimentality,he would probablyhave
been ashamed of her. He would have offered
her a piece of money, and sent her away, that
it might not become known that this Moab-
itish beggar is his relative. He would at all
events, not have allowed her to go on gleaning,
But according to the ancient delicate and
religious view, he cannot act thus, Nothing
has been asked of him ; consequently he has
no right to wound the self-respect of others,
The privilege of gleaning belongs of right to


Hap. rr 10,





HOMILFTIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





the widow and the stranger. It is not well
that she needs it; but needing it, he cannot
hinder her from using it. Even while he
admits her relationship, he can only support
her in the right, and enlarge its advantages.
And this is what hedoes Ruth had modestly,
gleaned at a distance from the reapers and
binders. He calls her nearer, and says, ‘Go
not to glean in another field.’ In these words
he acknowledges the first degree of the in-
terest to which his relationship binds him,.”—
Lanqe.

“Young men, in any station of life, are
often, by their rudeness or licentiovsness, the
terror of modest young women; but Boaz
would allow of no indecency in words or
conversation amongst his servants. A good
man will not only refrain from doing or
speaking evil, but will restrain all that depend
on him from licentious or rude behaviour,
Paul will have none to be admitted to the


office of elders in the church, who do not rule
well their own houses, Not that it is a duty
incumbent on elders only, to keep their families
in due subjection, but because elders must be
exemplary in everything worthy of praise.
We are all accountable for those evils which
it was in our power to have prevented,—
Lawson.


“Tis a little thing
To give a cup of water; yet its draught
Of cool refreshment, drained by fevered lips,
May give a shock of pleasure to the frame
More exquisite than when nectarian juices
Renew the life of joy in happiest hours.”
Talfourd.


“The Rabbis particularly insist that we are
not to confine the exercise of charity to our
own people, for the law of Moses inculcates
kindness and hospitality towards the stranger
within our gates,’—Zalmud.


—~—


VERSE 10.


Theme.—Tue Lowzy Atrirupe or a Grateron Harr.


“When gratitude o’erflows the swelling heart,
And breathes in free and uncorrupted praise
For benefits received. propitious Heaven
Takes such acknowledgment as fragrant incense,
And doubles all its blessings,’—Lillo,


Then she fell on her face... . Why have I found grace in thine eyes. « . seeing I


am a stranger?


Outward courtesies should be done in humility of heart, not out of mere compli-
ment or affectation, or an apish imitation of others. Our finest feelings, like the
flowers, open and display themselves almost insensibly and unconsciously. If Boaz
proves himself the ideal of a true gentleman, Ruth displays no less delicacy and
refinement of feeling throughout the whole interview.

Observe, I. What deep and touching humility is expressed here. Modesty, un-
ostentatious unassuming worth and humility, are always becoming in the young—
more especially so when they are recipients of favours, as here. She cast down
her eyes, not looking impudently upon him; she bowed to the ground (Bernard),
wondering at his great kindvess, though it was but permission to glean and to
drink water out of the vessels (ver. 9). Neither regarded this as her right, nor
an insult to her independence.

Again, IZ. What affectionate gratitude is here. How thankfully doth Ruth
tuke these small favours from Boaz! Perhaps some rich jewel in Moab would
not have been so welcome (Bishop Hall). Her words were few and to the point,
a rare grace in man or woman. Note. (a) Gratitude in the recipient is as beauti-
ful as generosity in the benefactor. It requires as much grace to receive a favour
becomingly, as to bestow one. (6) The humble are always disposed to be thankful.
They think everything better than they deserve.

We have a rebuke here. (1) To such as receive favours, and will not acknow-
ledge them, like the nine lepers (Luke xvii. 18). (2) To such as scornfully refuse
favours, and will not be beholden to others. Note. (¢) Ingratitude is a soul-sin,
a stoppage to all favours (Bernard).


Again, III. What confessions of unworthiness are here. Humble souls


111


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. va. 11. 10,





wonder at kindnesses, however small, rather than make light of them and disparage
the givers; look into themselves and their own unworthiness, rather than re-
member anything that is of worth in them, or might win them attention. So with
Ruth. Her mind is fixed upon that which might have hindered, viz., the fact that
she is a stranger, rather than upon anything else. So with the pardoned sinner,
He feels himself the object of such grace and boundless mercy, that his own
unworthiness and guilt are more apparent to him than ever (Z'yng). ;

Lastly, TV. What consciousness of need is here. She knows what she is, @
‘‘ stranger,” but does not attempt to disguise the fact, and all that it means, either
from herself or Boaz. A perilous test this, for nothing but goodness in a man
will make him kind to strangers (cf. Matt. v. 483—46). Note. Her very Srankness
is an appeal to his better nature for a continuance of his succour and protection.
So humble souls cast themselves always at the feet of Christ. They disguise
nothing, they feel that they deserve nothing.

Notice that two things were in her favour, and would naturally tend to lead
Boaz to listen to her appeal. (1) His own mother, Rahab, was once a stranger to
Israel’s hope. (2) The children of Israel had themselves been strangers, and were
required to remember this (Deut. x. 19). Ruth, however, very properly looks
upon her position as enhancing this kindness. So with man’s low estate and the
lovingkindness of God as displayed in the gift of Christ (Luke i. 48). Man’s
salvation must ever be a wonder to man, @ source of never-ending gratitude and
adoration. ‘*‘ Why have I found grace in Lhine eyes, that Thou shouldest take know-
ledge of me ?”’ the language of every regenerate heart (cf. Ezek. xvi.; John xv. 16).

Lussons. (1) ‘‘ He that exalteth himself shall be abased, but he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted.” Notice. That this was a presage of her better estate.
Those which shall receive great blessings are ever thankful for little (Bishop Hail).
(2) If poor souls be so thankful to us for a handful, or a sheaf, how should we be
affected to our God, for whole fields-full, for full barns, full garners !


“He that has nature in him must be grateful;
"Tis the Creator’s primary great law,
That links the chain of beings to each other,
Joining the greater to the lesser nature,
Tying the weak and strong, the poor and
powerful.” Madan,


makes not against this, he being either im-
mediately warranted by God, or else he
refused to bow to Haman as being an Ama-
lekite, betwixt which cursed brood and the
Israelites the Lord commanded an eternal
enmity.” — Fuller,

“Tt is a beautiful thing to see persons in


“In her humility, Ruth, who had done so _ reduced circumstances really humbling them-


much for Naomi, and made so many sacri-
fices, expects no grace or help from others,
Even the slight kindness of Poaz overwhelms
her with gratitude. She flings herself at his
feet, and pours out her thanks for the kindly
notice he has taken of an alien and a stran-
ger.” — Com.

“The Scripture often noteth this civil
gesture and comely behaviour as worthy imi-
tation. ... What difference [is there] be-
tween this which is done to men and that
which is done to God Almighty ? Surely, in
respect of the outward act, no difference is
there at all, but of the mind, which doth
conceive of God herein as God, and so this
outward humiliation becometh divine adora-
tion; and of man, but as man, worthy of
reverence and honour for his place, his age,
and gifts; and so the reverence and worship
done him is only civil.’— Bernard,

“Civil honour may and must be given to
all in authority, according to the usual ges-
tures of the country. Now such bowing was
the custom of the Eastern people (Gen.
Xxxili. 3). As for Mordecai’s instance. it


112


selves to their situation, and receiving kind-
ness as it is intended. It is sad to witness
the sullen contempt, the haughty dissatisfac-
tion with which every benefit is received by
such persons, when their hearts are not
softened by grace. It is more blessed to give
than to receive, and far, far easier to give in
a right spirit than to receive aright. It ig
most difficult to find the correct medium be-
tween a proud rejection of needful relief and
an indolent, self-indulgent dependence ; be-
tween a haughty ingratitude of manner, if
not of mind, and degrading sycophancy ; but
all things are possible to him that believeth;
and he who has treasure and a name in
heaven will know how to give to the things
of earth their due value; and, governed by
the will of God rather than by the ebullitions
of pride and seltishness, will tread the narrow
way.” — Macartney.

“It may be clearly seen here, that only
such as can exercise love understand how ta
receive it. Noone is humbler than he who
truly gives from love; of that Ruth is a
proof; and for that reason humility never


CHAP. Il. 11.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; RUTH.


shows itself more beautiful than when love
receives. Ruthhad made the greatest sacri-
fices, although no one had aright to expect
them from her, and is withal so unassuming
as not to look for anything from others,
Most people in her place would have made
the first favour shown them the occasion for
saying, that in truth they were not at all
used to such work. Their thanks would have
been combined with complaints and accusing
insinuations about the distress in which
they found themselves, although they had
exchanged the people and god of Moab for
those of Israel. Ruth’s love did not spring
from selfishness, and hence did not give birth
to any proud self-consciousness.”— Lange.
“Qh, then, if Ruth interpreted it such a
kindness that Boaz took notice of her, being
a stranger, how great is the love of God to us,
who loved us in Christ when we were ‘stran-
gers and aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel.’ As the never-failing foundation of
the earth is firmly fastened, for ever fleeting,
yet settled on no other substance than its
own ballasted weight; so God’s love was
founded on neither cause nor condition in the


creature, but issued only out of His own free
favour, So that in this respect we may all
say unto God what Ruth doth unto Boaz
in the text, ‘ Why have we found favour in
Thine eyes, that Thou shouldest take know-
ledge of us, seeing we are but strangers?’
Fuller.

“ Here shines forth her humility, modesty,
and many other graces: she was, as Gualther
saith of the Lady Jane Grey, ‘ Pietatis, pru-
dentiz, et modestiz delicium.’ Hence she
found so much favour, for true goodness
is very lovely, orrt xadov pihoy eoTt. .. «
‘Non sum dignus. Domine, quem diligas,’
saith Augustine. Every saint may say with
admiration, as he did in John xiv. 22, ‘ Lord,
how is it that Thou hast manifested Thyself
to us, and not to the world?’ ”’—Trapp.

“ Receiving, unless we keep a watch upon
our hearts, tends to nurture the meaner and
the baser self, the churl spirit within us,
which is ever stretching out its greedy hand
for gain; but giving belongs to that larger
life, which was ours when man was made in
the image of his God, ‘for it is God that
giveth liberally, and upbraideth not,’”"—B,


—@—


VERSE 11
Theme.—THE SEconD Gracious APPROVALs


© Kindness in woman, not her beauteous looks,
Shall win my love.”—Shakespeare.


“‘ Think not the good,
The gentle deeds of mercy thou hast done,
Shall die forgotten all: the poor, the pris’ner,
The fatherless, the friendless, and the widow,
Who daily own the bounty of thine hand,
Shall cry to Heaven, and pull a blessing on thee.” — Rowe,


And Boaz answered, It hath been fully showed me all that thou hast done . oes
and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother... « and art come, etc.


Never was there given to man such a manual for elegance and delicacy in his
social relations as the Bible gives (Tyng). Many of the Old Testament saints
models in this respect.

“ He is gentle that doth gentle deeds.”—Chaucer.


Boaz an instance of politeness growing out of real sympathy and benevolence.
We have in his words condescension without haughtiness, commendation without
assumption, familiarity without coarseness, delicacy without pretence. Note. (a)
Defect m manners is usually the defect of fine perceptions (Emerson). (6) Refinement
of heart springs only from faith (Lange). It is the natural outgrowth of a dispo-
sition permeated with the humility of the gospel of truth (ibid.). ‘

Observe, I. We can never live a truly noble life without its being known
sooner or later. Fame follows virtue as the shadow does the body (T'rapp).
Well-doing not only deserves praise, but brings favour. Beauty may be defaced,
strength may decay, but virtue must always be lovely to those who themselves
are virtuous. They seek it, appreciate it, love it wherever it is to be found.
So Ruth, and even Orpah, with that which they saw in Naomi (i. 10), and now


Boaz with that which he sees in Ruth,
118


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; RUTH. cHap, 11, 11,





5


“He whose mind
Is virtuous, is alone of noble kind;
Though poor in fortune, of celestial race."— Dryden.

Ruth’s virtues shine conspicuous (a) in her good deeds to Naomi and the dead
(see on i, ver. 8, 9, p. 89); (b) in that which she denied herself; (c) in hes
ehoice of Israel and Israel’s God [i. 14—17, pp. 60—70].

Notice. (1) She did no more than she apprehended to be her duty—no more thay.
satisfied her own conscience. Hence her surprise. “Why have I found grace ??
(ver. 10.) So withthe Psalmist. ‘* What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?”
ete. A common attribute of noble spirits displayed here. They do not see
the dignity of the life they lead. It seems insignificant, even commonplace. Wha
could be more insignificant than a gleaner’s history? Still conscience reigns ;
there is loyalty to duty, to convictions, to God; and it is this that will elevate
and ennoble the meanest life.

(2) She thought herself unknown and perhaps neglected. This gracious stranger
appears to be perfectly familiar with her whole history. So our fidelity may be
secret : He with whom we have to do brings our secret things to light. ‘ There
is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid that shall not be known”
—a promise often and partially fulfilled in this world, certainly and completely
in the next. Jt hath been fully showed me. Note. God’s revealing a full one,
when His purposes are ripe.

II. We can never do good to others without its bringing a due and appro-

riate reward. Naomi must have spoken and told all. How, indeed, could she
ie silent? Note. Virtue shall not want trumpeters (Bernard). Even the very
stones would have cried out, when Goodness incarnate stood among men, and the
hour of His triumph had come (Luke xix. 40), rather than that He had been without
the praise which was His due. A story like Ruth’s sure to touch a cord of
sympathy somewhere or other. Who can tell where or how? Note. The ways
tn which reward is to come, mysterious, but certain—unexpected, but how often nearer
than we could have imagined! Ruth begins to reap now forall her past fidelity. Faith.
ful in that which is least, she is to be rewarded with that which seemed to be much.

III. We can never really come to trust in God, and be disappointed either
of recognition or recompence. This at the root of all else, the moral of the
whole history. Ruth had honoured God, now she finds God begin to honour her,
Little did she expect it! Had not, could not have had, the remotest idea of
temporal reward. Naomi's words were too plain. [See oni. 11—18, pp. 46—48.]

So with all those in the position pathetically described by Mynster, the Danish
bishop: “I know that I am among the called, and I muse night and day, in
watching and praying, that I may be also among the chosen.” So with Abraham
leaving his fatherland, like Ruth, for God. So with Moses leaving the court of
Pharaoh to be with God’s people in affliction. So with the apostles, who became
aliens for Christ’s sake. So with true converts and proselytes in all ages; they
come out, leaving all, not knowing whither they go.

Notice, then, as encouraging and always true of such. God gives to ther
(1) reception ; (2) recognition ; (8) recompence. (1) He receives such; not ¢
single instance of one ever having been rejected. ‘Him that cometh unto me, J
will in no wise cast out.” Even sin cannot hinder, if we are persuaded ; for it ix
said of Him to whom we come, “ This man receiveth sinners.” (2) He recognizes
such ; knows them as His own (John x. 8, 14), and causes them to be known as
His. ‘His Church is to be as a city set upon a hill” (Matt. v. 14). Hip
people are to be “as the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign ” (Zech. ix. 16).
daid that ‘‘ by faith the elders obtained a good report ;” and Paul, writing to the
Thessalonians, says, “In every place your faith Godward is spread abroad”
(1 Thess. i. 8). (8) He recompenses such. (See next outline.)

Lzssons.—(1) Well-doing provides favour to the poor, though strangers, at the
hands of the virtuous (Bernard), (2) Let the rich in Christ learn where the first

114


CHAP. It. Th.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


RUTH.


claim upon their charity must always lie, viz., to the poor who are of the “‘ honse-


hold of faith.”


“ Always say a kind word if you can, if only
that it may come in, perhaps, with singular
opportuneness, entering some mournful man’s
darkened room like a beautiful firefly, whose
happy circumvolutions he cannot but watch,
forgetting his many troubles.”— Helps.

“ Did it ever strike you that goodness is not
merely a beautiful thing, but the beautiful
thing,—by far the most beautiful thing in the
whole world? So that nothing is to be com-
pared for value with goodness; that riches,
honour, power, pleasure, learning, the whole
world and all in it, are not worth having in
comparison with being good ; and the utterly
best thing for a man is to be good, even though
he were never to berewarded for it.”— Kingsley.

“ A beautiful form is better than a beautiful
face ; a beautiful behaviour is better than a
beautiful form: it gives a higher pleasure
than statues or pictures; it is the finest of
the fine arts.” —Hmerson.

“As might have been expected, the generous
heart of Boaz opens all the wider as he listens
to her thanks, and learns how unassuming she
is, how grateful even for the easy kindness he
has shown her. He knows who she is and
what she has done. And the piety as well as
the generosity of the man comes out in his
reply : ‘ You have left all,’ he says, ‘in your
love for Naomi,—father, mother, and the land
of your nativity. The Lord recompense you
for this good deed,’ etc., ete. Obviously, Boaz
had the history of his great ancestor in his
mind. Like Ruth, Abraham had left all, and
gone out into a strange country. And to him
God had said, ‘I am thy great reward.’ May
the blessing of faithful Abraham come on
faithful Ruth ; this is the wish and prayer of
Boaz. He speaks not as a Hebrew landowner
to a Moabitish vagabond and beggar, but
rather as a Hebrew judge and prophet,—as a
prophet who knew that even the stranger who
works righteousness and shows kindness is
acceptable to God.”— Com.

“ Nothing can be meaner than flattery ad-
dressed either to the rich or poor, but it may
frequently be proper to praise those who de-
serve to be praised. Our Lord praises His
disciples when He tells them that they were
the men who had continued with Him in His
temptations. Paul often commends the Chris-
tians to whom he wrote his epistles, although
he never failed to remind them that they were
indebted to the grace ef God for all that was
worthy of praise in their conduct or temper.
Boaz commended Ruth, not to inspire her with
vanity, but to animate her resolution, to com-
fort her dejected spirit, and to encourage her
to use those freedoms which he wished her to
use with himself and with other Israelites,”—
Lawson.

“Let this encourage men in their virtuous

roceedings, knowing that their worthy deeds
shall not be buried in obscurity, but shall find
4ongues in their lively colours to express them.
»\salom, having no children. and desirous to


(3) Let the poor labour for grace and godliness (Bernard), that
they may deserve help when they need it.


perpetuate his name, erected ‘a pillar in the
king’s dale,’ and the same ‘is called Absa-
lom’s pillar unto this day.’ But the most
compendious way for men to consecrate their
memories to eternity is to erect a pillar of
virtuous deeds, which shall ever remain, even
when the most lasting monument in the world
shall be consumed, as not able to satisfy the
ravel. ‘us appetite of all-consuming time. And
to put the worst, grant the envious men with
a cloud of calumnies should eclipse the beams
of virtuous memories from shining in the
world, yet this may be their comfort, that
God that ‘sees in secret’ will ‘reward them
openly.’ "—Puller.

“The merit which Boaz imputes to Ruth is
of a twofold nature. Induced by affection,
she has left the highest possessions of life,
She was no orphan; she was not homeless ;
she had what she needed ; but left all, and
that for something unknown, the value of
which she was not able toestimate. ‘Thou
camest,’ he says, ‘to a people which yesterday,
and the day before yesterday (formerly), thou
didst not know.’ How? had she not known
her family, Naomi, and her own husband,
who were of Israel? But this family lived
in Moab, where Israel’s law was not in force.
The national usages and institutions which
had been impressed upon Israel by Israel’s
God she did not know; and notwithstanding
this she had said, ‘Thy people is my people,
and thy God my God.’”—Lange.

“ Many who are connected by affinity think
that no more duties remain to be performed
when the bond of connection is broken by the
death of that husband or wife on whom the
relation depended. Naomi and Ruth were of
a different spirit. Naomi never could forget
Ruth’s kindness to her son. Ruth testified
her regard to the memory of her deceased
husband by her attentions to his mother.
She not only did ‘good and not evil’ to her
husband ‘all the days of her life,’ but she did
all the good she could to him when he was
dead, by performing those services to his
mother which he would gladly have performed
if he had been still alive. The apostle John
testified his affection to his departed Lord by
taking His mother to his own house and
treating her as a mother. There are kind-
nesses due to the dead as well as to the living,
and in these a generous spirit will be careful
not to fail.”’— Lamson.


&“ Rouse to some work of high and holy love,
And thou an angel’s happiness shalt know,—
Shalt bless the earth while in the world above;
The good begun by thee shall onward flow
In manya branching stream,and wider grow;
The seed thatin these few and fleeting hours
Thy hands unsparing and unwearied sowed,
Shall deck thy grave with amaranthine

flowers,
And yield thee fruits divine in heaven's
immortal bowers.” Wilcom


116


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. II. 12.
ES


VERSE 12.
Theme.—Tur Recompence or REWARD.


“The soul that works and lives throughout all time
Embrace you in the happy bonds of love.’— Goethe,


“Tis Thine alone to calm the pious breast
With silent confidence and holy rest ;
From Thee, great God ! we spring—to Thee we tend,
Path, Motive, Guide, Original, and End.”—Johnson.


The Lord [Jehovah] recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thes,


Naomi in her poverty had blessed Ruth (i. 8, 9), now Boaz takes up the same
strain. Must be something good in those whom poor and rich alike join to praise.
Note. (a) The craving of the human heart for the approval of others not necessarily
wrong in itself. It is the undue craving, etc. Unexpected, unsought in the present
instance, and therefore all the sweeter. When we have the prayers and good
wishes of the righteous, heaven itself is touched ; and when we win their approval
and blessing, it is as though the benediction of God rested upon us (Ps. xxxvii.
22). Note. There is a sense in which every believer may be a priest and prophet to
those around him [ef. on i. 8, 9, p. 39].

Remark, I. On the Divine recompence as expected and looked for by the
righteous. ‘I know it shall be well with them that fear God ;” the langua e
of every truly believing heart. Much that seems against this; but faith loo s
through the darkness, and beyond the shadows; knows that there is a power
that works for righteousness at the centre of all things, and that every deed of
love is sure to meet with its due acknowledgment, and cannot pass unregard .d
of God (Matt. x. 41—48). Note. It is only our little side of the world which is
in the shadow at night time, the whole universe else is filled with light.

Mark, (1) then, That there is a recompence of reward (Gen. xv. 1; Ps. xix. 11},
God is no respecter of persons. In every nation he that feareth Him and worketh
righteousness is accepted (Acts x. 84, 35). Such have the promise of this life and
of that which is to come. Note, Our doings stand linked in Scripture with our
reward. Not that they earn the recompence, but that they regulate, they measure,
they foreshadow that which is to be given as only God can give [Matt. vii. 2,
xxv. 21, 23].

Mark, (2) That the godly earnestly desire this recompence of reward. (a) For
themselves.’ They look forward, as the hireling, to the end of the day, when rest
begins, and every man shall receive, etc. (Matt. xx. 1—16). Not that they look
forward merely with the hireling’s spirit. No! but reward means with them, life
completed, holiness manifested, nearness to Christ. Therefore they have a desire,
like Paul (Phil. i, 23; 2 Tim. vi. 8). (6) For others, as here. They see the

- righteous in times of trial and poverty, as Boaz saw Ruth. ‘They feel how inade-
quate is any reward they themselves may bestow. And where they fall short,
they turn to God: “ The Lord recompense,” etc. Note. Boaz did something to
bring about this recompence himself—a hint to such ag are lavish in good wishes, lax
in corresponding deeds.

Remark, II. then, On the Divine recompence as prayed for by the righteous,
(1) These prayers for the recompence of reward may have a personal aspect, as here,
There are some deeds that men can repay; others God Himself only can recom-
pense. Ruth’s heroism and self-denial, a type of that which is sustained ‘ag
seeing things that are invisible; which looks for a reward not manifested as yet,
Note, (a) Boaz prays for God’s recompence, not man’s ; a full reward, abundant ag
His love ; so that she shall miss nothing, but recover all (Lange). But mark, he
prays for this only in the measure of her worth and her work, His prayer hag
respect to what he has seen and heard, even while he is calling upon the Unseen


Hap. 1. 12. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





for a blessing beyond the power of man to bestow—a characteristic of all true
prayer. There is nothing wild, nothing random, nothing extravagant, in the good
wishes and supplications of the righteous, But again note, (0) that God’s reward
is always a full reward. Oh! the sure and bountiful payments of the Almighty !
Whoever came under His wing in vain? Whoever lost by trusting Him ? Who-
ever forsook the Moab of this world for the true Israel, and did not at last rejoice
in the change ? (Bishop Hall.)

(2) These prayers for the recompence of reward may have a wider aspect. There
is a mysterious connection between prayer and Christ’s own recompence upon
earth. He is to see of the travail of His soul, but this only as the Church waits
upon God in prayer. For this He will be enquired of by the house of Israel
(Ezek. xxxvi. 87). The righteous prosper as prayer prevails, the kingdom of heaven
spreads as men have power with God. Hence the Church is always to be a
praying Church ; and when her arms are weary, as with Moses (Exod. xvii. 11, 12),
the enemy prevails, and the Divine recompence lingers. Wrong, confusion, evil,
seem to have the best of it. It is an age in which the spirits of the martyred
ones are represented as crying out, ‘ How long, O Lord ?” (Rev. vi, 16.)

Remark, III. On the Divine recompence as certain to the righteous.
Dionysius is said to have promised a great reward to some musicians who played
before him. When they came for it, he told them it was theirs already. They
possessed it, in their very hope and expectations of it. A truth taught in this, but
not the whole truth. Righteousness is good in and for itself, and brings its
present reward in the glorious hope it inspires. Bat this is not all. God does
not disappoint His children, There is something more awaiting us, something
hereafter.

Notice then that God’s reward comes (1) Sometimes in temporel gifts and bless-
ings, as here; always in the approval of conscience, The Mosaic economy recognized
both these, but laid a stress upon the former; while the Christian dispensation
makes the spiritual, the inner reward, the great thing. (2) Sometimes in the recog-
nition and approval of good men, as here ; always in the recognition and approval of
God. A craving for the former becomes Pharisaism; and therefore the latter is rather
to be the distinguishing sign of Christian discipleship [ef. Matt. vi. 1—6, 16—18].
(3) Sometimes in the spiritual growth and changes which accompany right doing, as
here ; always in the after reward of eternity. No doubt that right actions draw us
nearer to God, bring peace and quietness of heart now, incline us to become
recipients of His mercy, who alone can save. Every deed of righteousness is an
acknowledgment of the law which He would bind upon men, and so is a turning
to Him and His; not unreward here, not unreward in itself, but to be more fully
recompensed hereafter. Note. (a) The workman is not fully paid until his work ts
done (Matt. xx. 8) ; and (b) That all earthly rewards are partial and unsatisfactory
(Luke xiv. 14). It is heaven that is to compensate for the inequalities in the
Divine recompence here. As the end approaches, tbe reward will become more
and more apparent (Ps. xxxvii. 4—6, 22— 87).


“We find in the Scriptures three sorts of
blessings among men. The first is the blessing
of a simple wish, which is the most common,
Men, naturally limited and feeble, have
scarcely anything to bestow but good wishes ;
they can hardly give anything but their pro-
mises, of which, for the most part, they are
not very sparing. Their blessings in this par-
ticular consist of pees which they mutually
offer, that the Almighty will deign to preserve
—to fill with grace, with joy, and happiness—
the persons whom they bless. . .. The second
kind are paternal blessings, which include,
besides the wish, an act of approbation and
guthority. Fathers. then, represent jn some


sense the Deity. Thus almost all the blessings
of the patriarchs were prophetical, because in
effect the Spirit of God inspired them....
The third kind are: blessings“-of command,
which are given with authority, by a power
received from God to bless in His name
and in His stead. Thus Moses blessed the
people in the character of their leader and
mediator. Melchizedec, both a king and a
priest, blessed Abraham, and in his person all
the patriarchs. Jesus Christ, the King of
e and righteousness, blessed His apostles,
and in their persons the whole Church.’’—-
Superville.
“ The kindness I show thee is little in coay


117


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP. U1. 12.


eee


parison of thy desert; God alone can give
thee a full reward for thy kindness to thy
busband and mother-in-law, and He will do
it because thou art come to trust under His
wing."—A. Clarke,

“Boaz does not discourse as one would
speak to a Moabitish beggar, Having heard
who she is, he looks upon her with eyes full
of joy over her pious actions. He speaks to
her as a priest and prophet. And since he
spake from the enthusiasm of piety, and she
was deserving, his words found fu’ filment,
She received a reward that was not only full,
but which completed and wholly filled her ;
all of which is implied in the [Heb. ] words.”
—Lange.

“When we begin to feel ourselves lag in
Christianity, let us spur on our affections
with the meditation of that ‘full reward’
which we shall in due time receive; with
our Saviour, let us ‘look to the joys which
are set before us;’ and with Moses, let us
have ‘an eye to the recompence of reward;’
yet so that, though we look at this reward, yet
also we must look through it and beyond it.
This meditation of the reward is a good place
for our souls to bait at, but a bad place for
our souls to lodge in. We must mount our
minds higher—namely, to aim at the glory of
God, at which all our actions must be directed,
though there were no reward propounded unto
them.”— Fuller,

“ Plutarch tells of a complaint which came
from the Islands of the Blessed because im-
proper persons were sent there by the judges

the earthly courts. It was found that titied
and noble persons went before the judges with
their friends, who solemnly swore that they
deserved to be sent to the Islands of the Blessed
when they deserved the contrary. It was then
decreed by eternal doom that no judgment
should be passed till after death, and then
only by spirits who could discern the qualities
of those whom they judged.” — Dictionary of
Illustrations,

“There are great rewards like jewelled
crowns; there are little rewards like diamond
dust ; the great deed of love shall receive its
great reward, and the little deed shall receive
ts measure too; and so it shall be found here-
after that nothing was forgotten.”’— Power,

“Reward and recompence unto our good
works are not due unto us for any worth of
our own, but merely from God’s free favour
and gracious promise. For to make a thing
truly meritorious of a reward, it is required,
rst, that the thing meriting be our own, and


not another's. Now our best works are none
of ours, but God’s Spirit in us. Secondly, it
is requisite that we be not bound of duty to
do it. Now we are bound to do all the good
deeds which we do, and still remain but *un-
profitable servants.’ Thirdly, there must be
a proportion between the thing meriting and
the reward merited. Now there is no propor
tion between our stained and imperfect works
(for such are our best), and that infinite
weight of glory wherewith God will reward
us. It remains, therefore, that no reward ig
given us for own inherent worth, but merely
for God’s free favour, who crowns His own
works in us.”— Fuller,

“Longing for heaven, if there be no yearn:
ing and endeavour for present pureness of life
and inward peace, .. . can be but an eager,
sanguine lust—never a solemn, inspiring
hope.” —Lynch.

“He who sacrifices a whole offering shall
be rewarded for a whole offering ; he wha
offers a burnt-offering shall have the reward
of a burnt-offering ; but he who offers humility
to God and man shall receive as great a reward
as though he had offered all the sacrifices in
the world.”—Zalmad.

“ There is an invariable connection between
the outpouring of spiritual influence and the
ascent of prayer, and the latter is the antece.
dent of the former; and we believe, verily,
that there never was an instance yet, in the
history of the Christian Church, signalized by
the revival and extension of true religion,
which was not preceded by another period
of humiliation and anxious and agonizing
prayer. ... At the sixty-second chapter of the
prophecies of Isaiah, you read, ‘For Zion’s
sake will I not hold my peace ’—that is, in
prayer—‘until the righteousness thereof go
forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof
as a lamp that burneth; and the Gentiles
shall sce Thy righteousness, and all kings Thy
glory.’ Then God speaks in the sixth verse;
‘I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace
day nor night ’—that is, in prayer. ‘Ye that
make mention of the Lord, keep not silence’
—that is, in prayer ; ‘and give Him no rest
till He establish and make Jerusalem a praise
in the earth.’ ‘Give Him no rest —that is,
in prayer. Shake off the lethargy which has
oppressed you, enter into the holiest of all,
bring before it the blood of propitiation, and
stand before the Shekinah with unwearied
and importunate prayer.” — Parsons,


—_—_o—


VERSE 12.
Theme.—Tue Wincs or tHe ALMIGHTY,


“The while He sits whose name is Love,
And waits, as Noah did the dove,
To see if she would fly to him,


** He waits for us, while, houseless things,
We beat about with bruised wings


118


CHapP. 11. 12. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.





On the dark floods and water-springs,
The ruin’d world, the desolated sea ¢
With open windows from the prime,
All night, all day, He waits sublime,
Until the fulness of the time
Decreed from His eternity.”—Jean Ingelow.


Under whose wings thou art come to trust.


In all ages and nations conversion is essentially the same; irreligion or false
religion is exchanged for the spiritual worship of the true God (Scott). Thealien in
birth, or in heart and life, comes to take shelter under the wings of the Almighty.
The hour of repentance and conversion is the hour of this turning and taking
shelter, whenever and wherever it may be. Note. We are all aliens by birth.
Humanity left the Ark of shelter ages ago, and has been wandering about like
the poor fluttering dove (Gen. viii. 9) ever since.

You will notice—

I, That the Divine willingness to receive men is assumed here. And this,
although they are aliens to the commonwealth of Israel, and children of the sinful
race of Moab. So with ourselves. There are times when we must have help or
perish ; there are dangers from which none but God can save us. Note. We seek
wisely only when we seek Godward, as here. The wings under which Ruth had
come to trust, (1) swift, (2) broad, (3) strong, (4) gentle (Talmage). She had
come to that One who had revealed Himself to Israel, as a personal God, tender,
sympathetic, mighty to save, It is so with all true proselytes. They come not
merely to Israel, but to Israel’s God; not merely to the Church, but to Him who
is Head of the Church. Note. The two aspects of the Divine character brought
together here. God the Refuge is also God the Rewarder. So Christ (Heb. xii. 2)
is the author and finisher of faith, One strengthening and supporting, and yet
* holding forth the crown of life,”’

Observe, then, that when the sinner seeks pardon, or the soul seeks help,
(1) It is here, in God. He has undertaken to protect, to save such (cf. Isa, xliii. 25,
lv. 6, 7; John iii. 16, 17]. (2) It is ready and waiting. The wings outspread
from the foundations of the earth. Outside is danger, inside is protection; out-
side is wandering, inside is rest; outside is destruction, inside is salvation.
Note. The grace that comes too late is no grace at all. What you and I want is a
God now (Talmage).

II. That the human readiness to seek God is looked upon as necessary.
Ruth had come, etc. Blessed truth! for that opened the way to all the rest of her
history. Man’s great sin always is that he will not come. More, Boaz takes it
for granted that she had faith; for he that cometh to God must believe, etc.
(Bernard). y

Men come to God (1) To trust. Where else can man find a fitting sphere
for faith but Godward ? (2) To find shelter (Ps. xci.). (8) To find deliverance,
(4) To find rest and reward.

R. Macbeth on this :—


Theme.—Tue SHELTERING WING.


We have here one of those grand and suggestive figures of speech with which the
Old Testament Scriptures abound, and by which those Scriptures become, to the
‘‘ scribe well instructed,” an inexhaustible mine of ‘‘ things new and old,” ‘ profit-
able for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness.”

The figure—suggested perhaps in the first instance by the divinely prescribed
symbolism of the cherubim overshadowing with their wings the mercy-seat—is
of frequent occurrence, with richly beautiful variations of aspect, especially in the
earlier books of Scripture and in the Psalms [cf. Exod. xix. 4; Deut. xxxii.
11, 12; Ps. xvii. 8, xxxvi. 7, lvii. 1, lxi, 4, lxiii, 7, xci. 4]. By this image we
are taught to think of God—

119


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH. CHAP. 11, 12,


ES


I. As a beneficent sheltering power, to whom the spirit of man, wounded,
wearied, baftled by the ills of life, turns and flees for refuge and rest (Ps,
xlvi.1). But this primary conception by no means exhausts the significance of the
figure. It suggests— :

II. The paternal relationship of God to His people, and the benign constancy
and carefulness with which Ho fulfils the obligations of that relationship. ‘* As
an eagle stirreth up her nest,” ete, (Deut, xxii. 11, 12). his implies (1) Nur-
ture, (2) culture, (3) development, (4) guidance.

It suggests further — me ;

III. The beauty, grace, and tenderness of the Divine action towards man.
We naturally ascribe these qualities in a special degree to the feathered tribes,
And the inspired writer takes this natural conception of ours, and fills it with an
inspired thought of God. Just as elsewhere it is said, “He that formed the eye,
shall He not see?” ete. ; so here we would say, He that taught the dove to soften
the nest for her young with the feathers from her own breast, shall He not deal
tenderly, graciously, even to self-sacrificing acts of love, with those whom He
regards as His own offspring? (1) He covers them with His feathers (Ps,
xci. 4); (2) He keeps them as the apple of His eye (Ps. xvii. 8), ete. We
have here, not the mere negations of the agnostic, but the God of Israel revealing
Himself to the hearts of men; not the vague sentiment of the Pantheist, but the
living, personal God, entering into human relationships with human spirits;
‘Immanuel, God with us.” Not the mere “ fate,” or “law” of either ancient
or modern paganism, but the loving Friend who knows His friends, and is known
of them (Prov. xviii. 24). In short, we have here a foreshadowing, “ as men
were able to bear it,” of the final manifestation of the fulness of the Godhead in
Him who said, ‘“‘ How often would I have gathered you,” ete.

E. Price on this :—


Theme.—Tue Hasir or Hoty Communion,


In this benediction we see—
I. A clear definition of the happiness the soul desires.
Zé would feel it is under Jehovah’s protection, like a bird under the wing
of its mother.
Jt would find repose in communion with Him, confiding unsuspectingly is
His favour.
Il. The act of the soul itself that would enjoy the blessing,
It must put itself under the Divine protection.
God always works through our willinghood.
YL The law illustrated by the facts under consideration.
The holier the life, the deeper is to be the enjoyments of the soul.
In this sense, the fellowship a Ruth has with her God is the reward ‘of
grace.


“ The living God was exhibited to the faith
of His ancient peeple, as the God who dwelt
between the cherubims that spread their
wings over the mercy-seat, the throne of His
grace. It was perhaps in allusion to this
symbol of God’s residence amongst His

eople, that those who sought protection from

im were said to trust under the shadow of
His wings. ‘ He that dwelleth in the secret
place of the Most High shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty. His feathers
shall cover thee; under His wings shalt
thou trust ; His faithfulness shall be thy
shield and buckler.’ "— Zamnson.

“This life is but a sort of outward stage, on
which we act for a time, and which ig onlv


120


sufficient and only intended to answer the
purpose of trying whether we will serve God
or no.’—Dr. Newman.

“ How inexcusable are we, if we do not
make the Lord our refuge, when we were
born in a land blessed with the knowledge of
Him, baptized in His name, and trained up
to know and serve Him! If a Moabitess
came to trust under the wings of the Lord
God of Israel, how shameful wasit in Israclites
not to know and trust: the God by whose name
they were called | "—Zamson.

“Truly this poor stranger is like some poor,
heipiess. duttering bird exposed to wild storms
and unfriendly influences ; she needs shelter
and fostering, and God will cover and nurture


=—


cuap, 11, 13,14. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





her beneath His protecting wing—wing that
ensures perfect safety, but brings no darkness.
Ah! it isa grand belief this man has in the
‘God of Israel.’ It is no cold speculation
about a distant incomprehensible Deity, a
Being of icy mountainous magnificence, a
Being who is but a combination of mysterious
forces and laws; but a firm faith in One who
is a very Father, tenderly cherishing the weak,
caring for every child’s life, comforting in
sorrow, sheltering in danger, abundantly re-
warding every good word and work. Would
that the strone confidence of this man were
ours | ’"— Braden.

“There is nothing softer than a feather.
You have noticed, when a bird returns from
flight, how gently it stoops over the nest.
The young birds are not afraid of having
their lives trampled out by the mother-bird.
The old whip-poor-will drops into its nest of
leaves, the oriole into its casket of bark, the
humming-bird into its hammock of moss,
gentle as the light. And so, says the Psalmist,
He shall cover thee with His wing. Oh, the
gentleness of God |”— Talmage.

“Tn summer the hen’s wings are a canopy
to keep her chickens from the heat of the


scorching sun; and in winter they are a
mantle to defend them from the injury of the
piercing cold. So God’s providence and pro-
tection makes His children to sprout, thrive,
and prosper under it. In prosperity, God’s
providence keepeth them from the heat of
pride; in adversity, it preserveth them from
being benumbed with frozen despair.’

“Let not us trust to the broken wall of
our own strength, or think to lurk under the
tottering hedge of our own wealth, or wind—
shaken reeds of our unconstant friends ; but
fly to God, that He may stretch His wings
over us, as the cherubim did over the mercy:
seat.”’— Fuller.

“Thou, O God, hast created us for Thyself
and our hearts are restless until they find
rest in Thee. ... Ihave heard all that philo-
sophers can say, but none of them ever said
what Jesus of Nazareth has said, ‘ Come unte
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest.’””— Augustine.

“What cares the child when the mother
rocks it, though all storms beat without? So
we, if God doth shield and tend us, shall be
heedless of the tempests and blasts of life,
blow they never se rudaly.”— Beecher,


=


VERSES 18, 14.


CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL NoTEs.—Let me find favour. I find favour (Ze Clero,
Bertheau). This trans, not in accordance with the modesty of humility which Ruth manifeste
in the following words (Keil). Lange and Keil take it as optative, and translate, “ May I find
favour.” The sense rather is as in Psalm xli.11. (By this I know that) I am finding savour,
because Thou comfortest me, etc. (Speaker’s Com.). She had found favour in his sight already.
The words are to be translated as expressing this, and not a further desire. So Gill and
others. Spoken friendly. Lit. to theheart. Trans. kindly (Gen. xxiv. 3, 1. 21); comfortably,
(2 Sam. xix. 7), ete. (Speaker’s Com.): Be not like unto. Lit. be not as—that is, not on a par
with them ( Wordsnorth). But what am I saying when I call myself thy maiden? Iam not
worthy to be compared to the least of thy maidens ( Carpzov). The LXX. leaves out the negative
particle, and trans., “I shall be as one of thy handmaidens.” So the Syriac, which reads, “ And
she said to him, Because I have found mercy in thine eyes, my lord, and thou hast consoled
me and comforted me, I will be as one of thine handmaids.” So the Arabic, with some variae
tions. Boaz had placed her among his handmaids (ver. 9), and goer on to treat her as such
(ver.14). Nothing could be more delicate or appropriate than the language of the Syr. trans.,
or more in accordance with Eastern ways of speech.


Ver. 14. At mealtime. Lit. at the time of food (Wright). Tre time of the noontide
lunch. The principal meal was taken after the labours of the day were over (Steele and Terry).
Bread, provisions generally. Vinegar, Heb. chomets, a cooling and refreshing drink made of
gour wine mingled with oil; still used in the East (Keil, Wordsworth, Rosen., ete.). A kind
of acid sauce (A. Clarke). Used because of the heat of the season (Jarei, Aben Ezra). The
Midrash gives an allegorical sense to this, as meaning the chastisement and affliction of the
Messiah. Dip thy morsel in the vinegar. Cf. Christ’s words when He gave the sop to
Judas (John xiii. 26). The Arabs to this day dip the bread and hand together (Dr. Shaw).
It is truly incredible how the biscuit, eaten with vinegar and oil, strengthens the weary and
exhausted system. and restores its powers (Heberer). The drink of the Roman soldiers, called
posca, consisted of water and vinegar (Lange). Sat beside the reapers, From this we ma:
not infer the two sexes ordinarily took their meals together (Steele and Terry). Parch
corn, Made of the best ears, when they are not too ripe. Roasted in a pan or on an iror
plate (Robinson). The green ears become half charred by the roasting, and there was A
pleasant mingling of milky wheat and a fresh crust flavour as we chewed. the parched corn
(Tristram). And was sufficed [satisfied] and left [over]. ‘Was obliged to leave some, which
it seems (ver. 18) she carried home to her mother-in-law (Gill).


»


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP, II. 13.
ere LT
VERSE 18.

Theme.—Tux Heart rearizine a Ministry or Love.


“Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful,”"—Shakespeare,


“ Low at Thy feet I lie, my Saviour and my God,
Low at Thy feet I lie, nor feel the chastening rod ;
Who lose their all to find the Spirit here,
Have found this freedom from all further fear,
Safe at Thy feet.”—B,


Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that [or, I am finding, etc., because
thou hast comforted, ete.


A thankful heart will seek the continuance even of undeserved favours. Ruth
did not wonder more at the kindness of Boaz (ver. 10), than show herself ready
to respond to it. The text is not so much a request as an acknowledgment ;—she
had found favour in his sight already [see Crit. and Exeg. Notes],—and should be
so translated.

See here, I, The secret of all true and effective ministries. (1) He had
‘‘ spoken to the heart” [so the Heb., LXX.]. The hidden springs of sensibility had
been opened, and here is the response. So when the Jews comforted Mary and
Martha (John xi. 19), the Syriac translates, ‘they spake with their heart.” All
other speech ineffective in comparison with this, especially so when speaking on such
tender and momentous subjects as the soul’s refuge, “ the wings of the Almighty.”
(2) He had spoken kindly in praising her virtues and in praying for her. Kind
words generally, if not always, unlock the human heart. (8) He had comforted
her in deed as well as in speech. What wonder that she says, or seems to say, ‘I
know by this that I am finding favour in thy sight” !

See here, II. A beautiful instance of the heart becoming conscious of this
ministry of love. The meaning of his kindness dawns upon her, and is dawning,
as she recounts the manner of its manifestation. [Trans. (I see that) Iam finding
favour in thy sight, because thou comfortest me (Speaker's Com.)]. So there is a
special moment in the history of every Christian, when the heart begins to
realize the Divine love. His comforts and His tenderness to us are seen, and
shine out the more conspicuously as tokens of His regard.

Note. She was nut one of his handmaids, and yet she realizes that he is treating
her as such. Gives her a position among them, ete. §o the Apostle sees himself
as one born out of due season, not meet to be called an apostle, and yet raised to
these privileges, ete. (1 Cor. xv. 8—10). So the prodigal finds himself placed
among the children, and possessing a goodly heritage [comp. Jer. iii. 19 with
Luke xv. 21—23]. So with all who are truly called and chosen of God. They
see themselves the recipients of mercies and comforts, as unexpected as they are
gracious ; and exalted to a position and privileges not only dignified, but prophetic
of still greater favours yet to come, * Beloved, now are we the sons of God,” ete,

See here, III. An instance of the heart responding to these tokens of good-
will, Ruth evidently felt that this was her one opportunity, and acts as though
she felt it. Had not been forward in making known her claims, but, on the other
hand, is not backward in responding to his kindness, (1) She exalts her bene-
factor. She calls him “ my lord,” and so magnifies his mercy. (2) She is not
unduly exalted herself. Rather she feels her own humble position the more, and
deprecates her own unworthiness: -“I am not like unto one of thine hand-
maidens.” So the centurion did not think himself worthy that Christ should
come under his roof. To the humble, every mercy comes as the voice of unde-
served kindness, which encourages without pufling up (Macartney).

So in spiritual things. The soul’s response to “ Seek ye my face” is, ‘ Thy
face, Lord, will I seek.” While it magnifies the Divine mercy, and enlarges upon


122


‘


Guap, 1. 13.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





the tokens of the Divine love, it is ready like Ruth to humble itself in the dust at


the Master’s feet.


Lessons.—(1) It is lawful to give honourable titles to men, such as befit their
place [ef. Gen. xxiii. 6; Num. xii. 11; 1 Sam.i. 15; 1 Kings xviii. 7; 2 Kings


vill. 12].
they get (Bernard).
which are set the lowest (Fuller).


(Trapp).


(2) The more humble men of wealth show themselves, the more honour
Those stars seem to us the greatest, and shine the brightest,
(3) Comfortable words do good like a medicine
They do more, they bring out that which is good in the recipient. So


here, the more generously Ruth is dealt with, the more unassuming does she
become. So with the saints at last (Matt. xxv.): ‘‘ Lord, when saw we Thee an


hungred ?”’ etc.
E. Price on this :—


Theme.-—THE Ovtwarp Proor or tHe Driving Rea@arD.


He predisposes influential men to give us their affection.


Note the steps of the process :—


1. We are rendered acceptable to them, finding ‘“ favour ” with them.
2. We are solaced amidst the providential movements around us. They comfort


the heart.


3. We are addressed by the assuring words of sympathy.

They express the affection borne to us, and hence (4) we are astonished at the
Lord’s wonderful condescension to our unworthiness.

Infer. Humility bears direct proportion to our sense of the Divine favour.

Whenever a Ruth trusts in God, a Boaz is sure to appear.


“To the humble mind of Ruth the words of
Boaz were the first sunbeam that broke
through the grief and tears of many weeks,
Hitherto she had tasted only parting sorrow.
Now, for the first time, she is addressed about
tbe God of Israel and His grace. The full
import of his words her humble heart does
not presume to appropriate. But the kind-
ness of the speaker’s voice is for her like the
sound of a bubbling spring in the desert to
the thirsty. A word of love comes on a
loving heart like hers, long afflicted by sorrow,
like morning dews on a thirsty field.”— Cassel
(in Lange).

“Qh that ministers had this faculty of
speech! not to tickle the ears, teach the
heads, or please the brains of the people,
but that their sermons might soak and sink
to the root of their hearts. But though this
may be endeavoured by them, it cannot be
performed of them without God’s special
assistance. We may leave our words at the
outward porch of men’s ears ; but His Spirit
must conduct and lodge them in the closet of
their hearts.”— Puller.

“ Pleasant words are like an honeycomb,
sweet to the soul. Those words which at
once indicate friendship and nourish piety
are doubly pleasant. Boaz had not only
expressed his affection and esteem to Ruth,
but raised her views to the Lord God of
Israel, from whom he encouraged her to ex-
pect her reward. His words were no less
valued by her than his gifts. Words are
cheap to ourselves, and they may be very
precious to those to whom they are addressed,
especially to those who need our sympathy.”
—Lawson.


“A little word in kindness spoken,
A motion, or a tear,
Has often healed the heart that’s broken,
And made a friend sincere.”
Whittier.


“There are occasions when speech is golden
rather than silence, and when an encourag-
ing word would be of more real value than
the richest material gift. . . . Some persons
are far too much afraid of the effect ofa little
generous and well-timed praise. They would
keep all their flowers in an ice house. Letting
in a little sunshine upou them at times would
not be amiss. How lavish was the wise and
large-hearted Paul with his words of com-
mendation, whenever they could be honestly
spoken or written !”—Dr. A. Thomson.

“Opportunity is the flower of time, and
as the stalk may remain when the flower is
cut off, so time may remain with us when
opportunity is gone.” —Bond.

“ Augustine being asked what was the first
article in the Christian religion, replied,
‘Humility ;’ and what the second, ‘ Humi-
lity;’ and what the third, ‘ Humility.’ —Dic.
of Illustrations.

“¢‘DLord, when did we do all this?’ So
completely is their mind and memory filled
with His goodness, that there is no standing-
place there for any recollection of their own
acts of love to Him, So abounding and
immeasurable appears His love to them, that
less than nothing, in the comparison, seems
every act of theirs for Him in return. Like
Ruth, they can praise Him for the comfort
He has bestowed upon them, for the gracious
and friend)y way in which He has spoken to


123


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY + RUTUHL
Se cre es ree


them ; but all this only increases their sense
of their own unworthiness of such mercy.”—
Lyng.

“The train of our adorable Immanuel is
80 august, so glorious by His communicated
grace, that the poor believer cannot easily be
brought to consider himself amongst the
happy number. All the holy angels, all the
glorified saints, day and night attend upon
His pleasure ; ten thousand times ten thou-
sand stand before Him, and thousands of thou-


CHAP. 11. 14.





sands fly at His command. The patriarchs
and prophets, the apostles and evangelists,
the noble army of martyrs, and all the spirits
of just men made perfect, swell His brilliant
train ; and how can I, who am so black and
swarthy, so wretched and sinful, be numbered
amongst company so honourable? Whence
is it to me that my Lord should regard me
with favour, and permit me to approach Thy
sacred presence, and encourage me to feed on
the bounties of Thy grace ?”—Macgonan.


—o—


VERSE 14,
Theme.—Provision FOR THE STRANGER aT THE GaTE,


“That best portion of a good man’s life;
His little, nameless, unremembered acts
Of kindness and of love.”— Wordsworth.


“A poor man, served by thee, shall make thee rich ;
A sick man, helped by thee, shall make thee strong ;
Thon shalt be served thyself by every sense
Of service which thou renderest.”—Jirs. FE. B. Browning.


God has from the beginning made the cause of the poor man His own (Baldwin


Brown).


Rich men, if good men, are to be His almoners.
‘The poor ye have always with you.”


To such Christ says,
See how natural kindness is to such!


one deed of love leading to another and a better almost unconsciously. That
of Boaz like an open fountain when it has once begm to flow (Dr. Thomson).
From kind actions he goes on to comforting words, and fi»m comforting words to


kind actions once again.
strangers }


(Toller).
Christ receives such.


Boaz, in his treatment of Ruth, a beautiful


Wonderful how Providence does open the heart to
Joseph was 80 affected by the treatment he received as such in
Egypt, that he called one of his sons b


y @ name expressive of what he felt
illustration of the way


I. He invites her to come and partake of the meal provided for his servants.


Not meet to give the children’s bread unto dogs (Matt. vii. 6; Mark vii. 27
yet, from the voice calling Adam in the garden,


); and
to the Spirit and the bride


saying “‘Come,” in the Apocalypse, the Word of God is full of invitations to


wandering, weary men,


[Cf. also Luke xiy. 21—23.]
II. He seats her in honour among his reapers.


So the Saviour calls the


Gentiles to be co-heirs with His own people ; puts the alien among His children;
exalts Saul the persecutor to be the chiefest among the apostles; gives His saints
at last an inheritance among the angels of God.


III. He reaches forth his own hand to provide for her wants.
Saviour sent not a servant, but came Himself, to provide for man’s need.


So the
‘“ He


saw there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor ” (Isa. lix. 16)
“Therefore,” He says, ‘‘mine own arm brought. salvation” (Isa. Ixiii. 5),
IV. He satisfies these wants completely. There was plain fare, but it was


sufficient. Nature is content with a little,


(Trapp).
gospel of Jesus Christ.
Spurgeon on this (condensed) :—


and hunger hunteth not after delicacies


So in the spiritual realm, every real want of man is provided for by the


Theme.—MEAuTIME IN THE CornrreLp: A Harvest SERMoNn


1. God’s reapers have their mealtimes.


ox that treadeth out the corn.


A good master will not muzzle the


Christ’s reapers not only have a blessed reward


at last; they have also plenteous comforts by the way. They have (1) mealtimes,


199


CHAP. II. 14, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





when they come together to listen to the word preached. Where the doctrines of
grace are plainly and boldly delivered in connection. with the other truths of
revelation; where the cross is lifted up, where the work of the Spirit is not
forgotten, there is sure to be food for the children of God. Our hearers must
have their portion of meat in due season. There must be something fcr all—
milk for babes, etc.

2) Mealtimes in our private readings and meditations. Meditation is digestion,
and the finest wheat is to be found in secret prayer. The shepherd of Salisbury
Plain said, when his wallet was empty, his Bible was meat to him. (3) One meal-
time that is specially ordained—in the supper of our Lord. In keeping the
Master’s command there is great reward. Like poor Mephibosheth, we are
made to sit at David’s table. The prodigal eats the meat of children.

(4) Mealtimes which God gives us at seasons when perhaps we little expect them.
In the street, in the middle of business; when dull and. earth-bound; suddenly.
In the morning, as if the dew was visiting the flowers; in the evening, ete,
(5) Mealtimes at certain seasons when we may expect them. The Kastern reaper has a
set time. So in affliction we may expect them; after toil we may look for them;
and again, before atrial. Elijah must be entertained beneath a juniper tree, for
he is to go forty days in the strength of that meat. After trouble or arduous
service.

II. To these meals the gleaner is affectionately invited. The poor trembling
stranger, who has no right to be in the field, except the right of charity, is called
to the meals of the strong-handed, full-assured reaper.

(1) The gleaner is invited to come. ‘‘ At mealtimes come thou hither.” None
should be kept away from the place of feasting, the house of God, by personal
character, or poverty, or physical infirmities. A poor deaf woman, asked why
she was always there, replied, ‘that God was pleased to give her many a sweet
thought upon the text while she sat in His house.” (2) Again, not only to come, but
to cat. Whatever the sweet and comfortable word, the broken and the contrite
spirit is invited to partake of it. You are saying, ‘‘I have no right;” but He
gives you the invitation. ‘‘ You are unworthy;” but He bids you come. Further,
Ruth was not enly invited to eat the bread, but to dip her morsel in the vinegar—
@ sauce which the Orientals used with their bread. So the Lord’s reapers have
not merely doctrines, but the holy unction which is tho essence of doctrines—
not merely truths, but the hallowing and ravishing delight which accompanies
the truths.

III. Boaz reached her the parched corn. Christ does this to believers (1)
when He inspires their faith ; (2) when He sheds abroad the love of God in their
hearts ; (8) when He gives us close communion with Himself; (4) when He gives
us the infallible witness that we are born of God. Philip de Morny was wont to
say that the Holy Spirit had made his salvation as clear to him as ever a problem
proved to a demonstration in Euclid could be.

IV. She did eat, and was sufficed, and left. Sooner or later every penitent
shall become a satisfied believer—head, heart, hope, desire, conscience, judgment,
memory, imagination, all filled.

E. Price on this :—


Theme.—Tue Common Mrat,


It should be characterized by the following particulars :—
It should indicate the Divine hand in providing it,
It should minister to the calm contentment of our hearts,
Jt should indicate a self-respect before men.
Jt should prepare for the next duties in life.
Hence conclude—
If God provide for a Ruth, the daily bread will not only come to the hand, but
satisfy all the longings of the heart,
5


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP, II. 13,


eS


“One fact I think I have everywhere ob-
served : the farther one moves from the high
road and the busy marts of men, the more
people are shut in by the mountains, isolated
and confined to the simplest wants of life,
the more they draw their maintenance from
simple, humble, and unchangeable pursuits ;
s0 much the better, the more obliging, the
more friendly, unselfish, and hospitable are
they.” — Goethe.

“You have seen the stagnant pool, over-
grown with weeds, into which the rain falls
and the showers descend, but which gives out
no fertilizing stream to water the barren earth
around. There is the image of an avaricious
and selfish life—a life'stagnant and noxious
in the sight of God and man. And you have
seen the mountain lake, clear as crystal, into
which the brooks run and the streamlets flow,
but which sends them forth again a broad
river to refresh and make glad the earth.
There is the image of a life responding to the
law of Christian usefulness, counting itself as
steward only for a while, and not as owner of
all that it possesses.”— B,

“Wherefore doth the Lord make your cup
run over, but that other men’s lips might taste
the liquor? The showers that fall upon the
highest mountains should glide into the lowest
valleys.” —Seckher.

“The precept of love was given also in the
moral law. That law contains ten command-
ments, but they may all be reduced to this,
‘Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and thy neighbour as thyself.’ . . . If we go
farther back still, we shall find the ancient
commandment in existence; for the law of
love is as old as human nature itself, ‘God
created man in His own image ’—gave him a
spiritual nature, possessed of the powers of
thought, will, conscience, imagination, and
the faculty of goodness or love. Two things
should be noticed with regard to the last of
these. First, the faculty of love belongs to
him as man—is part of hisnature. Treat the
flower rightly, plant it where the sun-rays
play, and it will grow and become beautiful,
and will fill the surrounding atmosphere with
its fragrance, for it is made to give itself
away; and if man had been true to himself,
if he had avoided sin, and lived in all his
faculties, his good-will and love would bave
gone forth to his fellows as naturally as pez.
fume from the flower. Second, the sense or
feeling that love is right, that it is a duty;
and that to hate others, or even to be indif.
ferent to them, is wrong. This is the Divine
testimony in man’s conscience, the ‘ old com-
mandment’ of the gospel and of the law in
another form—a silent commandment which
makes itself heard and felt without the use of
words.” — Thomas Jones,

“ The very essence of charity is disinterested
goodness; and although we may like it the
better for its returns of benefit, we must obey
its impulses from delight itself. Where we
fail in this, our charity fails, although our
ce of beneficence still be abounding, ”’—

non.


126


“The rich man’s superfluity was ordained
to relieve the poor man’s necessity. A lady,
on giving sixpence to a beggar, accosted him
thus: ‘I have now given you more than God
ever gave me.” To whom he replied, ‘No,
madam; God hath given you all your abun-
dance.’ ‘Thatis your mistake,’ said she, ‘for
He hath but lent it me that I might bestow it
on such as you.’ ”—Secker.

“Men resemble the gods in nothing so
much as in doing good to. their fellow-
creatures.” — Cicero,

“Seneca the heathen inculcates a principle
worthy the credence of every Christian: ‘I
believe I truly enjoy no more of the world’s
affluence than what I wiNingly distribute to
the necessitous.’ Without your mercy the
poor cannot live on earth, and without God’s
mercy you shall not live in heaven.”—Secher,

“ This also is given to pious souls by God,
that being devoted to Him, He often secretly,
and even without their becoming aware of it,
impels them to this or that good action,’—
Starke.

“Ts not this the very way in which our rich
Kinsman deals with those whom He loves and
saves? ... He calls poor fainting sinners to
come without doubt or fear, and take their
place among the company of the redeemed ;
for everything is there provided which they can
need—abounding grace for abounding sin, He
ministers Himself to their secret wants. He
reaches forth with His own hand the parched
corn of His sacrifice for them. And in this
secret, personal, divine ministration, they eat
and are sufficed.” —Zyng (condensed).

“Oh! but,’ says one, ‘how can it be? I
am a stranger.’ Yes, a stranger; but Jesus
Christ loves the stranger. ‘A publican, a
sinner ;’ but He is ‘the Friend of publicans
and sinners,’ ‘ An outcast;’ but He ‘ gather-
eth together the outcasts of Israel.’ ‘A stray
sheep;’ but the shepherd ‘leaves the ninety
and nine,’ toseek it. ‘A lost piece of money,’
but He ‘sweeps the house’ to find it, “A
prodigal son;’ but He sets the bells a-ringing
when He knows that thou wilt return. Come,
Ruth! Come, trembling gleaner! Jesus
invites thee; accept the invitation, «At
meal-time come thou hither, and eat of the
bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar.”—
Spurgeon.

“We must not look upon this as being some
sour stuff. No doubt there are crabbed souls
1m the Church, who always dip their morsel in
the sourest imaginable vinegar, and with a
grim liberality invite others to share a little
comfortable misery with them; but the vine-
gar in my text is altogether another thing,
This was either a compound of various sweets
expressed from fruits, or else it was that weak
kind of wine mingled with water which is
still commonly used in the harvest-fields of
Italy and the warmer parts of the world—a
drink not exceedingly strong, but excellently
cooling, and good enough to impart a relish
to the reapers’ food.”—/bid,

“You may suspect some danger nigh when
your delights are overflowing. If you see a


CHAP. ry. 15—17.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





ship taking in great quantities of provision, it
is bound for a distant port. And when God
gives you extraordinary seasons of communion
with Jesus, you may look for long leagues of
tempestuous sea. Sweet cordials prepare for
stern conflicts. Times of refreshing also occur
after trouble or arduous service. Christ was
tempted of the devil, and afterwards angels
came and ministered unto Him. Jacob


wrestled with God, and then afterwards, at
Mahanaim, hosts of angels met him. Abra-
ham wars with the kings, and returns from
their slaughter; then it is that Melchisedec
refreshes him with bread and wine. After
conflict, content; atter battle, banquet. When
thou hast waited on thy Lord, then thou shalt
sit down, and thy Master will gird Himself
and wait upon thee.”-—ZIbid,


ced


VERSES 15—17.


CRITICAL AND ExEGETIcAL Nores.—Ver. 15, And when she was risen up. Evident
from this and the previous phrase that Boaz said, “ Come thou hither,” as he himself sat among
his reapers at the mid-day meal. So that a pause may be understood between the first con-
versation, ending with ver. 13, and the invitation itself, during which Ruth goes on with her
gleaning. Then there is the rest lasting throughout the hour of meals, in the tent or house for
the reapers, followed by fresh toil until the evening. Commanded his young men. He had
charged them already not to touch her (ver, 9). Let her glean even among the sheaves. She
may also glean between the sheaves (Keil), Avrare privilege, not allowed to ordinary gleaners
(Steele and Terry); and a still greater concession than that in ver. 9—“ after the reapers.”
And reproach her not. (Heb, shame her not); ph xaraucyivyre (LXX.). Ye shall not shame
her [do her any injury (Jud. xviii. 7)] (Keil). In other words, they were not to say things to
her which would make her blush (Zange), not to remind her of her poverty, etc.

Ver. 16, And let fall also of the handfuls, Let fall also out of your armfuls that you
have reaped ( Vulg.). Pull out from the bundles (Zange). Ye shall also draw out of the
bundles for her (Keil). It is necessary to distinguish carefully between “ the sheaves ” (ver. 15)
and the “handfuls,” The former is the sheaf already bound by the maidservants, and lying
on the ground; the latter is the bundle as taken up and still held in the arm, manipulus
(Lange). And leave them. Let them lie (Keil), And rebuke her not. Scold her not
(Lange, Keil). These directions of Boaz went far beyond the bounds of generosity and com-
passion for the poor, and show that he felt a peculiar interest in Ruth, with whose circumstances
he was well acquainted, and who had won his heart by her humility, etc..—a fact important
© notice in connection with the further course of the history (Keil).

Ver. 17, And beat out, éss4Bd.cev (LXX.). With astick (Wordsworth). A process often
witnessed by modern travellers in the Hast (Steele and Terry). About an ephah of barley.
Aout a bushel and a half (ibid). About twenty to twenty-five lbs. (Keil). Impossible to
ascertain the quantity, still less its weight, exactly, but it was considerable, say fifty-five
pounds (Lange). About eight gallons; see Exod. xvi. 36 (Wordsworth). She had gleaned so
much, she could not carry it home in the ear (idid.), An ephah exactly equal to an English
cubic foot (Conder), The quantity of manna contained by the ephah was sufficient for ten
men (cf, Exod, xvi. 16, with ver, 36).


VERSES 15, 16,
Theme,—Liserat Giving, Like Gop’


“ And the more thou spendest
From thy little store ;
With a double bounty,
God shall give thee more,”


“Thrice happy man! enabled to pursue
What all so wish, but want the power to do !"—Pope,


And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Le
her glean among, etc., and reproach her [shame her] not. And let fall, ete.,
and rebuke [scold] her not.


Rested, refreshed, invigorated with food, as well as comforted by the kind
words of the master of the harvest-field, Ruth evidently rises to her labour
with new pleasure and fresh earnestness. Note. (a) The poor can appreciate and
respond to all this, without presuming upon it, or without being encowraged to idleness.
Kindness to the deserving is a stimulus, an incentive 4o fresh enterprise and

197


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH. cHaP, rr, 16.





diligence. (0) The true use of rest and food is to strengthen us for resuming our
nee mark how the diligent hand obtains new and ever-increasing favours,
God’s law is, to him that hath shall be given, and labour is the appointed way of
increase, from which even Paradise itself was not exempted (Gen. ii. 15). He
who would have must get, and he who would have much, must get diligently.
We are all gleaners, and the world is our harvest-field; and productive gleaning
is, and always has been, to the earnest and the industrious. God helps us, both
in spiritual and temporal things; but He in no way does so with a desire to do
away with human responsibility. He seatters His blessings around us, but we
ourselves must gather and make them our own. His giving is never intended to
abate our diligence. Boaz here gives from pure goodness and nobleness of heart,
and therefore bis benevolence is a type of the divine and perfect giving of God.

I. He gives unexpectedly. ‘This is seen in two ways: (1) He allows her to
“glean among the sheaves,” in a place where her labour will be more productive.
So the Divine hand, in reward for past diligence, and as a proof of present favour,
leads men to new spheres and employments, more fertile, as well as more digvified
and productive. Joseph is exalted in Egypt, and David in Israel, and Paul among
the apostles. Note. Jt as lawful to extend favours more to one than another (Fuller),
in those things which are free favours (ibed.), in those things which are our own
(Matt. xx. 15), as with Boaz here. So with the Divine grace, and those privileges
and opportunities God bestows in a seemingly unequal way among men. He gives
and rewards not without a meaning, and not without a reason—this were im-
possible with Him; but He will be accountable to no man for His dealings with
the most highly favoured among men. The answer of sovereign grace to the
caviller is, and always must be, “Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own?” ‘Is thine eye evil?” etc.

(2) He charges his reapers to scatter handfuls for her. He increases her glean-
ings, and yet makes it appear the fruit of her own industry (Thomson). [See on
ver. 8, 9, div. I, p. 108.] And in our own lives how often God has given (a)
beyond our fondest anticipations, and (6) in ways which seem the result of our
own thrift and endeavours. [Hxamples: Jacob in Laban’s household; Daniel in
Babylon.|] We say, in our short-sightedness, possibly, that our own hand and our
own wisdom has gained us all this increase ; but is it so ?

II. He gives liberally. Nowhere have the poor been cared for so liberally as
among the Jews (Baldwin Brown). The law made it a sacred duty not to reap
‘‘ wholly the corners of the field,” ete. (Lev. xix. 9, 10), but to leave something
behind for the destitute and the stranger. Boaz, however, goes beyond his creed;
and so Ruth, who expected to gather a little, gathers abundantly. This is the
Divine idea, “‘ good measure, pressed down, running over ;” not the giving with
a niggardly spirit and a grudging hand, but largely, overflowingly, beyond that
which is due, beyond that which is expected or even deserved, (1) So good men
gwe. They live to bestow happiness. Riches are lent, not given, and bring the
purest pleasure when scattered around upon the worthy and the necessitous,
Wealth—


“By disburdening grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.’— Milton,


So God gives (a) largely, (6) liberally, (c) lavishly, (¢) constantly. Note. He can
make the world, to every one of us, a harvest field, full of temporal and spiritwal
blessings.

III. He gives without reproach and without rebuke. His reapers are only
his agents in this matter; the master’s will is to control all. An alien, and a
daughter of the sinful race of Moab, shall glean in the choicest portions of his
harvest-field, shielded from prejudice, and without a single word to remind her of
her poverty, or her unworthiness (as some would think it), or of the unexpected


128


cnap. 0.15,16. HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: RUTH.











favour bestowed upon her. A word to a delicate, sensitive spirit like that she
has displayed would spoil all; therefore rebuke her not. Note. Kindness shows
ttself’ not only in doing good, but also in preventing evil and reproach, How exactly
all this corresponds to the Divine dealings with sinful men! When they come
in humble, suppliant attitude, it is said, “‘ None of their sins shall be mentioned
unto them.” God shields from shame, as well as bestows pardon, and sovereign
grace is always willing to blot out the past. The inspired conception of the Divine
benevolence is that He “giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not ”(Jamesi. 5).

Again, God charges others, lest they should reproach the sensitive and the
tender-hearted among His children (Isa. xl. 1, 2; lxv. 25), as well as the wan-
derer and the stranger who cast themselves on His protecting care. The Saviour’s
disciples were reapers in a field “‘ white unto the harvest,” and yet, when they
would have rebuked others who were not “of them,” He said, “ Forbid them
not” (Matt. ix. 39).

IV. He gives in encouragement of her own labours. The kindness of Boas
suited (1) to her situation, (2) to her employment as a gleaner in the harvest field.
So God gives in kind as well as in degree, according to our present capacity. He
gives along the lines we ourselves are laying down—a solemn yet certain truth
—and according to the spirit and diligence we ourselves are displaying. He gives
“ wood and hay and stubble ” to such as are seeking such ; the pure and precious
grain of the kingdom only to those whom He is certain have sought, and sought
diligently, for the same.

ImproveMENT. (1) Charity, wisely directed, will not tempt the poor to idle-


ness (Lawson).


characters from shame (Z. Price), as well as our lives from want.


(2) If we come into fellowship with God, He will protect our


We are to do


our duty, and leave the rest with Him. When led into danger, we are to go
quietly on, trusting to His guidance, as well as to our own integrity.


“The end of feeding is to fall to our call-
ing. Let us not therefore, with Israel, sit
down to eat and to drink, and so rise up to
play; but let us eat to live, not live to eat.
We need not make the clay cottage of our
body much larger than it is by immoderate
feeding: it is enough if we maintain it so
with competent food, that God, our Landlord,
may not have just cause to sue us for want of
reparations.” — Fuller. se

“That bird was once a woman, and it is a
good fesson she reads us. One day she was
kneading bread in her trough, under the eaves
of her house, when our Lord passed by, lean-
ing on St. Peter. She did not know it was
the Saviour and His apostle, for they looked
like two poor men travelling past her door.
‘Give ns of your dough, for the love of God,’
said the Lord Christ: ‘we have come far
across the field, and have fasted long.’ Ger-
trude pinched off a small piece for them; but
on rolling it in her trough, to get it into
shape, it grew and grew, and filled up the
trough completely. She looked at it in wonder,
© No,’ said she, ‘that is more than you want ;’
go she pinched off a smaller piece, and rolled
it out as before; but the smaller piece filled
up the trough, just as the other had done; so
she put that aside too, and pinched a smaller
bit still. But the miracle was just as appa-
rent, the smaller bit filling up the trough the
same as ever. Gertrude’s heart was hardened
still more; she put that aside also. ‘1 cannot
give you any to-day,’ said she; for the greed


of her heart was to divide all her dough into
little bits and roll it into loaves. ‘Go on your
journey, and the Lord prosper you.’ Then
the Lord Christ was angry, and her eyes were
opened, and she fell down on her knees to
hear Him say, ‘I gave you plenty, but that
hardened your heart, so that plenty was not a
blessing to you; I will try you now with the
blessing of poverty; you shall henceforth seek
your food day by day, and always between
the wood and the bark.’ ”"—Norwegian Legend
of the Gertrude Bird,

“We learn, that is the best charity which
so relieves people’s wants as that they are stil.
continued in their calling. For, as he w:.
teacheth one to swim, though haply he will
take him by the chin, yet he expecteth that
the learner shall nimbly ply the oars of his
hands and feet, and strive and struggle with
all his strength to keep himself above water ;
so those who are beneficial to poor people
may justly require of them that they use both
their hands to work and feet to go in their
calling, and themselves take all due labour
that they may not sink in the gulf of penury.
Relieve a husbandman, yet so as he may still
continue in his husbandry ; a tradesman, yet
go he may still go on in his trade; a poor
scholar, yet so he may still proceed in his
studies. Thereby the commonwealth shall be
againer. Drones bring no honey to the hive ;
but the painful hand of each private man cow-
tributes some profit to the public good. Hew.
by the able poor, the more diligent they be-


¥QQ


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





x


the more bountiful men will be to them;
while their bovies are freed from many dis-
eases, their souls from many sins, wherof idle-
ness isthe mother Laziness mukes a breach
in our soul, where the devil doth assaalt us
with greatest advantage; and when we are
most idle in our vocations, then he is most
busy in his temptations.’ —f'uller,

“There can be no wrong in those things
which are free favours. 1 am not less just to
him to whom I give less, but I am more
merciful to himto whom I yive more. .. .
Shall it not therefore be lawful for the Lord
of heaven to bestow wealth, honour, wisdom,
effectual grace, blessings outward and inward,
on one, and deny them to another? You,
therefore, whom God hath suffered to glean
among the sheaves, and hath scattered whole
handfuls for you to gather; you that abound
and flow with His favours, be heartily thank-
ful unto Him. He hath not dealt so with
everyone, neither have all such a large measure
of His blessings.” —Ful/er,

“I know some preachers who never went to
Martin Luther's school ; they may have prayer
and meditation, but they have never been
schooled by temptation; and if we are not
much tempted ourselves, if we are not emptied
from vessel to vessel ourselves, we are in very

teat danger, when we are dealing with these
uths, lest we be hard with them, and rebuke
and reproach them, when instcad thereof we
should hear the Master say, ‘ Comfort ye, com-
fort ye my people ; speak ye comfortably unto
Jerusalem,’ NowlI take it that we do very
much reproach these tender ones when we set
up standards in our ministry to which we tell
em they must cume or else perish,” —Spurgeon,

*“ But then, brethren, you will notice that
these reapers were to Jet handtuls fall on pur-
pose for her. Well, theu, ye reapers in God’s
field, let your preaching be very personal. Oh!
1 love, when 1 draw the bow, not to do it ata
venture, but to single out some troubled heart,
and speak to you all as though tnere were but
one here ; not pouring the oi! over the wound,
but coming up to the edge of the gaping sore
to pour ¢a oil and wine. These poor Ruths
will not dare to take the corn unless we put it
right in their way. They are so faithful, so


CHAP, 11. 17,





timorous, that though it seems to be seattered
for everybody. they think it cannot be for
them : but if it be there, pat there so that they
cannot mistake it, then they say,‘ Well, that
is for me; ay, that is whut J have felt; chat
is what Z want ;’ and they cannot, unbelieving
though they be, they cannot help stooping
down and picking up the bandful ‘hat io let
fall on purpose for them. ‘'hen, if it be so,
our preaching must always be very affectzon-
ate,’ —Ibid.

“Dr Manton once preached in St. Paul's
Cathedral, and a great crowd went to listen
to him, A poor man, who had walked fifty
miles to hear the good doctor, atterwarda
plucked him by the sleeve, and said, ‘ There
was nothing for me this morning.’ The
doctor had preached a very learneu sermon,
full of Greek and Latin quotations which thu
poor countryman couid not understand ; but
the doctor had not expected him, and there
was nothing for him. I think there should
always be in our ministry some things fox
poor Ruth, so plain and go simple, that the
wiseacres will turn up their noses, and say,
‘What platitudes!’ Never mind, it Ruth
gets a handful of corn, our Master at the last
shall kuow who did His errand best. and
served Him with a perfect heart.’—Jbid.

“ While such a practice as is here enjoined
would have been dishonest and unfaithtul
without the express authority of the master,
not to have dene it after it was enjoined
would have been undutitul in its turn,”—
Lhomson,

“ Doubtless Boaz, having taken notice of
the good nature, dutcful carriage, and the near
affinity of Roth, could not but purpose some
greater beneficence and higher respects to
her; yet how he fits nis kindness to her con-
dition, and gives her that which to her
seemed much, though he thonght it litre,
Thus doth the bounty of our God deal with
us, It is not for want of love that He gives
us no greater measure of grace, but for want
of our fitness and capacity. He hath re-
served greater preferments for us, when it
shall be seasonable fur us to receive them,”
—Bishop Hal


VERSE 17.


Theme.—LaBouUR UNTIL THR EVENINe®


® When the corn’s rustle on the ear doth come,
When the eve’s beetle sounds its drowsy hum,
W ben the stars, dewdrops of the summer sky,
Watch over all with soft and loving eye.”—/Viced,,
“Night is the time for rest ;
How sweet, when labours close,
To gather round an aching breast
The curtain of repose,
Stretch the tired limbs, and lay the head
Upon our own delightful bed.” —J. Montgomery,


So she gleaned in the fields until even, and beat out, ete.


Tke longest and most eventful day must come to a close at last. So with
139


CHaP. II. 17.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


i


this of Ruth’s toil, and the beginning of her recompense.


in well doing.





(1) She was net weary


(2) She did not presume upon the tact that Boaz had so greatly
and so generously increased her gleanings.


No! She perseveres in her labour


of love until the due and proper hour for retiring; then, pleased with what she
had gained by her own industry, and careful to secure it, she lingers to beat out,
the corn, instead of taking it where it might trouble Naomi—a thoughtfulness
surpassing even that of most natural children to their parents.


Learn, as suggested here—


L That it is good to abide where we


do well. Boaz had charged her not tu


glean in another field, but to stand fast by his maidens (ver. 8), and here is the


~esult.
temporal things.
hand that maketh rich ;


She reaped the fruit of her constancy ;
Prosperity only follows persevering labour.
“the rolling stone gathers no moss” (Braden).


(1) a lesson to the unstable in
It is the diligent


(2)


To the unstable in the kingdom of God—men who wander from one church ta
another, from one preacher to another, from one sphere of duty to another
Note. very man has his appropriate place: the aim of life should be first to


find it and then to keep it.


Ii. That it is good to labour where God sends success.


Can Ruth return


to the city with a dejected countenance? Never, while Jehovah lives (Z. Price).
And why? Evident that she was in the place God had appointed for her. We
misread the whole narrative, too, if we fail to see that Boaz is only an instrument


in the Divine hands.


In all labour, even that of gleaning, there is profit; but
see what gleaning is when God guides to the harvest field |


The humblest toil


then becomes not only productive, but beautiful, and pregnant with after conse-


quences.


III. That it is good to toil on until God’s appointed time of rest.
goeth forth to his labour until the evening.”


“Man
There is a time, then, for going


forth, and there is also a time for returning. The day for toil, the night for


repose, this is God’s great appointed law.


Labour is man’s heritage (Gen. ii.


15), and we are happy only as we bow to this. Life, health, man’s physical and


moral well-being depend upon obedience.


But mark! Labour, tov, has sts


boundaries, the time when it must end ; and from this thought comes a stimulus
to which even the great Master Himself responded, “I must work the works of
Him that sent me, while it is day,” as well as a hope which looks forward to rest


and reward when toil is over.


Note. Rest time is not waste time (Spurgeon). The


pause prepares mind and body alike for further service.


“King Alphonsus doing something with
his hands, and labouring so, as some which
beheld him found fault, smiled and said,
‘Hath God given hands to kings in vain?’ i
— Bernard,

“J do not like to see a Christian man too
eager for holidays, nor doling out his services
in exact and precise proportion to his wages,
bitterly complaining if he is requested to do
a little more than is in ‘ the bond,’ ready to
fling down bis tools before the first stroke of
the clock has fairly struck which tells that
the day's work may cease. A man should be
in love with his work, and should take as the
mottoes for his inspiration the words, * W hat-
soever thy hand findeth to do,’ eic., © Not
slothful in business, fervent in spirit,’ etc.”—
Braden,

“ Sarah kneaded cakes; Rachel fed sheep ;
Rebekah drew water; Tamar baked cakes.
Suetonius reporteth of Augustus Cesar, that
he made his daughters to learn to spin ; and
Pantaclon relates the same of Charles the


Great, Yet now-a-days (such is the pride of
the world) people of far meaner quality scorn
so base employments. ’—Luller.

“ Such diligence is supremely praiseworthy.
and deserves, nay, ensures an abundant
reward. It is a great thing in life to be
wholly devoted to the work we have in hand,
and to be able to say, ‘This one thing I do.’
For there is an inca/culable multitude of

ople who are ‘everything by turns and
nothing long.’ Shifty, changeful, dissatisfi: d,
untrustworthy, they pass from one occupation
to another with the ease and rapidity with
which the wind veers round all the points of
the compass; busy, fussy folk whoare excited,
enthusiastic about one thing to-day, and
equally excited and enthusiastic about another
and totally opposite thing to-morrow. All they
undertake is regarded of the same importance,
to be entered upon with unrestrained vigour ;
but nothing prospers that they tonch, becaxse
they only touch it, and soon it doops end
fades,” — Braden,


adh


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


a i Ee





“Seek a retentive memory, to keep in thy
hand what thou hast ga‘hered. or elas thou
wilt be like a silly gleaner who stoops to
glean one ear, and drops another at the same
time. Carry home what of truth thou canst,
fake notes in thy heart. And when thou
hast gathered and hast thy hands full, take
care to discriminate, Ruth, we are told,
threshed her corn, and left the straw behind,
and took home the good wheat. Do thou the
same.” — Spurgeon,

“Corn, even the finest kidney of the wheat,
grows encompassed with chaff, and therefore
maust be beaten out and winnowed before it is
fit for use. Paul, that incomparable
preacher, freely confessed that he saw and


CHAP. IL 18,


prophesied but in part: if he in part, surely
we in a very little part ; consequently much
of our own chaff is mixed with our Redeemer’s
wheat : and that you our hearers are called to
beat out what you glean, by a diligent search
of the Scriptures, by meditation and prayer.”
—Macgowan,


“The materials of the temple were so hewed
and carved, both stone and wood, before that
they were brought unto Jerusalem, that there
was not so much as the noise of a hammer
heard in the temple. So Ruth fits ali thinga
in a readiness before she goes home, that 80
no noise might be made at home, to disturb her
aged mother.”—Fuller.


Oi


VERSES 18—23,


CarricaL awp Execeticat Norrs.—Her mother-in law saw.
Aud she brought forth. And she showed (Vulgate, Syr.- Arab Wright
Brought forth out of a wallet (Targum).
That she had reserved. Of the parched corn (see ver. 14). After
Lit. From her satiety (Morison),

Where didst thou procure ? C


quantity evidently.
Lange).
correctly supphed (Ke7/)
she was sufficed. Sntisfiea (Linge).
Ver. 19. Where wroughtest thou ?
thon stayed ? (Wright).
Bertheau. Blessed be he.


Ruth with unexpected and unwonted kindness,


Where strayedest thou?
Naomi seems to have seen at once that someone must have treated
Did take knowledge.


With astonishment at the


Drew out of her pocket, as the Chaldee hag


r. Cassel) Where hast
(Gesen). Asin EV. LKX Vulg. Rosen,


Friendly and special


no‘ice. The same word used by Ruth (ver. 10) in expressing her gratitude to Boaz (Lange)
aa


With whom I wrought.


Wright would appear to propose. Boaz.


Certainly a better translation than “with whom I spent my time,’
She could not know what a consolation and joy the


utterance of this name conveyed to Naomi (Lange).
Ver. 20. Who hath not left off. Precisely the same expression Eliezer uses when he meeta


Rebekah, after having prayed for guidance (Gen. xxiv. 27),


There, however, it is Jehovah


Himself who is pronounced “ blessed ”’ (Speaker’s Com.). Naomi possibly only applied a general
formula or even a common proverb to her special case, and in this sense Jehovah alone is to be
seen as the source of kindness to the living and the dead. So the Syriac, Arab, Bertheau,


Keil, Lange, & The Chaldee, LXX., and Vulg. apply the words, however, to Boax
ch. i, 8, and also ef Gen. xiv. 19 3 Ps. exv. 15.]


[See on
To the living and the dead. Here isa profes-


sion of faith in the existence of the faithful after death (Wordsworth). Not so (Bertheau,


Mortson).


Israelitish faith, what mening can they have ?
who have passed away and are no more for ever
still the wife of the dead in the Hebrew way of thinking and speaking (iv. 5).


If these words do not presuppose the immortality of the soul as an article of
Lange). God is not the God of the dead [those


but of the living (Matt. xxii. 32). Ruth ig
And does not


this amd kindred Je wish potions as to the dead having claims upon the living, receiving kind-
nesses from them, having seed raised vp by them, &c., necessarily point to an underlying cone
viction of the continuiny existence of those who have only passed away to the outward senseg


and sight? The man is near of kin.


a ; Is our relative (
with other relatives, but with men in general (Lange). One of our next kinsmen.


etl), Lit. Near, not in comparison
One of our


redeemers (Lunge, - One that hath a right to redeem (Kitio). The second in the order
4 ,


of the Goélim (Michaelis


ance of the person, (2) of marrying the widow
Cf. Lev. xxv 25-31, 47-55 ; Deut, xxv. 5-10,


Ver, 21. He said unto me also. Byen so m
Not so (Lange).
said, &e. (Lange) Keep fast by my young


Gesentus). The Redeemer had a right (1) of redeeming the inherit
, (8) of avenging the death (Speaker's Com.).
xix 1-13; Jer. xxxii. 8-12.

ay he be biessed (Carpzov, Wordsworth, Wright).
Yea also he said to me (Morison). More! I have not told you all, for he
men,


My people (Keil). My servants (Lange).


The people also belong to my house as distinguished from the people of other masters (Keil),


The masculine here to be taken as including both sexes (Gesen, Furst, Maurer),


Boaz (ver 8)


and Naomi (ver. 22), however, vse the feminine form, which seems to show that the distinction


of gender was no longer neglected (Lange). A


special point is made of Ruth being allowed


to glean among the sheaves close to the reapers (ver. 15), that is, the young men, evidently @


special and privileged place.
countenance and encourage her (ver. 16).
Ver. 22.


The young men had a commission, too, from their master to


It is good. The key to much which follows as well as an approval of what hag


Pao-dd. That they meet thee not, Lit., that they do not fall upon thee (Keil, Wordsworth),


Veiga eens to light upon, whether for good or evil (Mortsen),


Keil views the verb, how


Chap. 11. 18 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.








_


ever, as having only a bad meaning, and as signifying to fall upon a person to smite and ill.
treat him. Fall not upon thee, or solicit thee to folly. Vulgo dicitur castam esse quam nemc
rogarit (Trapp). In a strange field she would be exposed to annoyances and, possibly,
insults (Steele and Terry), from which Boaz has specially guarded her in his (ver. 9, 15, 16). To
go elsewhere also would be to show a want of appreciation for the kind words and actions of
which she has been the recipient already. Her seemingly needless repetition of this idea of
clinging to the fields and servants of Boaz, is, indeed, highly artistic, and serves to prepare the
mind for what is to follow.

Ver. 28. So she kept fast. And she kept gleaning along with the maiden of Boas (Wright)
(cf. v. 9; 21). Gives the opportunity for Boaz to acquire that knowledge of Ruth and respect
for her implied in iii. 10,11). By the maidens. Showing clearly that his maidens were only
gleaners (speaker's Com.), Unto the end of barley and wheat harvest. Until about the beginning
of June. The two harvests would cover fromtwo to three months. And dwelt with her mother
in-law. After she returned to her mother-in-law (Vulg., Luther, Coverdale). And lived with
her mother-in-law (Ki A tacit allusion to the fact that a change took place when the har-
vest, ube! nag (ibid). She did not gad abroad, but kept her aged mother company at home


mG


VERSE 18.
Theme.—Tun BreAD-WINNER AND HEB Precious Burpsm™.


“ Find out men’s wants and will
And meet them there. All worldiy joys go less
To the one joy of duing kindnesses.”— Herbert.


And she took it up... .. and she brought forth, and gave, ete.


Ruth returns to the city, bearing herself the results of her toil, but not for
herself alone. True affection is always carrying some burden or other, and love’s
erosses are never her own entirely.

She returns to bestow of her labour. The needy may often play the benefactor to
others. Christ carried a bag to relieve those who were in want, and the poor widow
had still “two mites to spare” (Luke xxi, 2). How the text condemns the covet-
ousness of such as Nabal, who have plenty and yet give not out of their
abundance !

I. She was frugal. Carefulness as necessary as industry. That nothing be
lost for want of frugality comes with the force of Divine authority. “ Gather
up the fragments,” etc. Wisdom teaches us to have an eye upon the future as
upon the present. Even dumb creatures, like the ant and the bee, have this
instinct. Note. Wastefulness as much a sin as idleness.

IL She was frugal amid unexpected abundance. A contrast to such as
plunge into mad riot and wanton, reckless wastefulness at such times. The
prodigal, when he had obtained his “ portion,” made all haste to spend it among
harlots. Must be confessed that the poor are not always the most careful when
fortune favours them. “Beggars on horseback ride the faster to the devil,”
Note. A true test of character to be found here.


“Who cannot live on twenty pound a-year,
Cannot on forty ; he’s a man of pleasure,
A kind of thing that’s for itself too dear.”—Herbert.

III. She was frugal for the sake of others. The thought of Naomi at home
nad evidently stimulated her to carefulness as well as industry in the harvest-
field. Ruth not one lost in vacant reveries and so missing the hour of service.
The spirit of love and self-sacrifice breathes in all that she does. Note. (a)
Extravagance is especially reprehensible when there may be those in want at home.
Becomes doubly a sin then to waste, or to neglect opportunities of providing for
them. (6) A kindred thoughtfulness to Ruth’s not unusual among the poor. Only
that while the good deeds of the rich are concealed with difficulty, theirs are
tov often passed by unnoticed. How many a heart has thrilled with joy at tha


thought of being able to minister to the joy of those at home! Burns ee us
13


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





CHAP. mm, 19..


_


the picture of the eldest daughter, in his “ Cotter’s Saturday Night,” bringing


home


“her sair-won penny fee
To help her parents dear, if they in hardship be,”


Ministries like this have gladdened and sweetened family life all the world over.
Note. den may and ought to find the sweetest and noblest use of all their gains ai


Lussons. (1) Even love must have its burden, if it would enjoy its after-
recompense and approval. There are who would scatter without first having


gathered, but that is not God’s law.


(2) The savishness of this evening hour


only follows the gleaning and carefulness of the day. (3) What is gained in a
nook of the harvest-field comes to be seen and reported in the city (Price).


“They come home from their busy toil feeling
that they have the day’s sweetest and not
always lightest task betore them—to lighten
the hearts and gladden the lives of those
whom they love best. Whatever the world
has done ¢o them or for them they have one
thing to do—to do the very best they can for
the dear ones round their fireside. Not that
these are to be kept always ignorant of the
cares, troubles, and losses without which the
world’s business cannot be carried on.’—
Baldwin Brown.

“See here, the shoulders of God’s saints are
wonted to the bearing of burthens. Little Isaac
carried the faggot wherewita himselc was to
be sacrificed; our Saviour, His own cross, till
His faintness claimed Simeon of Cyrene to be
His successor. Yet, lec not God’s saints be
disheartened ; if their Father had a ‘bottle’
wherein He puts the tears which they spend,
surely He hath a balance wherein Ho weighs
the burthens which they bear, He keeps a


note to what weight their burthens amount,
and, no doubt, will accordingly comfort them.”
—Fuller,

“ It is no less necessary to be careful of the
fruit of our labours, than to labour with dili-
gence. Christ Himself, who could multiply
bread at His pleasure, commanded the frag-
ments of the barley loaves and fishes to be
gathered up, that nothiag might be lost. ‘In
all labour there is profit, says the wise man ;
yet there are some that labour for the wind.
They lose what they have wrought, because
they suffer it, through their carelessness, to
slip through their fingers. This folly, how-
ever, is much less frequent in things relating
to the body than in tnose which relate to the
soul.” — Lawson.

“The Church is our mother, whom we are
called to serve and comfort; therefore every
comfort you glean ought to be brought home
to her; so disposed of and applied that she


9


may share in your pleasure,”—Macgowan,


et Ofres


VERSE 19,


Theme.—Houn Conripznors, Muruan ConFzssions, AND ENQUIRIES,


** And none can say but all my life
T have His wordis kept,
° And summed the actions of the day
Each night before I slept.”—Chattertom,


“Think nought a trifle, thongh it small appear—
Small sands the mountain, moments make the year,


And trifles life.”"— Young,
And her mother-in-law said, Where hast thou, etc... . Blessed be he, ete.


And she showed, ete.


It is in the very nature of affection to feel the interest, solicitude, anxiety


expressed here,
life.


Parents see their children go out to the snares and difficulties of
Will they be preserved spotless ? etc.


More, it is the duty of such to


ascertain how their children have been employed, what associations they have


formed, with whom and where


they have been.


Such sympathetic questioning


(1) elicits confidence, (2) shows thoughtful interest, (3) offers Opportunity for


wise counsel and encouragement (Braden).


Carelessness on these points (1) un-


natural, (2) dangerous, Even Eli cid not ain in neglecting this duty. He


134


CHAP. I. 19. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


ee





noticed and enquired (1 Sam. ii 23, 24). His sin was that he restrained not
after knowledge (iii. 13).

But see how “love thinketh no evi!,” and makes even a duty like this free
from whatever might be otherwise irksome or unpleasant. Naomi asks from a
desire to know who was the instrument in God’s hands through whom His bounty
came, not from curiosity merely, or from any suspicion concerning Ruth.
Favours bestowed naturally bring the desire to know from whom they come.

We have, I. A fitting conclusion to a well-spent day. Note. Good to sum
up the actions of the day (1) to ourselves, (2) to others when convenient and
proper, as here. ‘ Confess your sins one to another.” The New Testament idea
of a confessor, however, not that of an official person, a “ priest,” but a friend
whom we can trust and to whom we can unbosom, as Ruth evidently did to
Naomi [cf. Mal. iii. 16 ; Judg. v. 11]. Especially is such confession one to another
good when accompanied and permeated by a devout spirit such as breathes
through the whole context. Note. When integrity directs our steps there is no
need for evasion. Can give a minute account of our conduct.

IL A mutual stimulus and encouragement to gratitude. Gratitude kindles
gratitude. Good deeds to ourselves, recognised and pointed out, bring thankful-
ness to other hearts beside our own, to the devout everywhere.


“‘ Whene’er a noble deed is wrought,
Whene'er is spoken a noble thought,
Our hearts in glad surprise
To higher levels rise.” Longfellow.


Many men niggardly in letting it be known they have received favours, They
would hide the sunshine which has gladdened life in their own hearts, were it
possible. Not so Ruth. She brings to her home, and to her friend, these
abundant signs and tokens of that which has made the labour of gleaning a light
and pleasant task. Christ’s command, “ Return to thine own house,” etc.
(Luke v. 39), enforces the duty illustrated here. j

It is, III. A mutual stimulus and encouragement to piety. The heart
naturally looks upward and thanks God when it comes face to face with noble
deeds of any kind. Men stifle the feeling if they can, it may be, and feel
ashamed of it, but it is there. Note. Thanksgiving as natural as prayer.

Here the kindness of Boaz and the success of Ruth both come in to fan the
flame of piety in the heart of Naomi. Her first thought is not that the wants
of the morrow are satisfied, and that abundantly, but “ Blessed be he,” ete.
True always that—

“The tidal wave of deeper souls
Into our inmost being rolls,
And lifts us unawares
Out of all meaner cares.”


Noble deeds, when seen and realised, lead men aimost unconsciously to think
and to speak nobly. Note. Prayer is sometimes the only possible way left us
of exprescing our gratitude. [On these ejaculatory expressions see ch. ii. 12 pp.
116, 117.] The debt contracted in the currency of earth is paid back in the
coin of heaven (Thomson).

ImprovemEnt.—(1) We should take special notice of such as do us good
(Bernard). (2) A good heart rejoices in the welfare of another (vd.). (3)
How naturally the name of God comes in on occasions like these! (4) How
potent our kindness may be in quickening the sense of God’s kindness (Coz).

E. Price on this :~ God’s Providence an excitement to a question. Wherevet
can such a blessing have come from? to a benediction. Blessed be God in the fact
and in the agent of His will ; and to a recognition of His inscrutable but merciful
designs. Who can this man be—coming at the very time when needed—hut a
Boas, and be the father of biessings yet beyond the present hour ?

185


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. IL 19,


ood





Observe,—A man may be as a stranger to-day, and yet God may cause him to
appear an angel of blessedness to-morrow. Despise nothing—hope in everything,
and unite the actions of life by the spirit of cheerfulness. Jf Providence be a
fact, trust in it |

J.P. Allen, M.A., om this :—Ruth ii. 19, “Where hast thou gleaned to-day ?”
—A simple question is sometimes startling, and is often stirringly suggestive.


I, The Sphere: Life’s opportunities,

(1) The law of labour is the law of life.
accomplished without energy and enterprise.
this is true.

(2) To the open and eager eye openings invite and opportunities multiply.
“Let me now go to the field.” “I have set before thee an open door.”
“ The field is the world.” See Isa. vi. 8.

(3) Forms of activity, how diversified they are. There is not only the
reaper but the “gleaner” also. “All works are good, and each is best
when most it pleases Thee.” “ Gather up the fragments,” and despise
not “the day of small things.”

(4) Scope exists for all. ‘‘How many serve, how many more may to the
service come.” ‘ Even I, in fields so broad, some duties may fulfil.” —
Woman's work,

(5) Each “day” brings its demands, “ To-day.”


II. The Service: Our use or neglect of life’s opportunities,

(1) Neglect possible. There is no compulsion. The parable of the talents,
The field of the slothful (Prov. xxiv).

(2) Success attainable. Satisfaction in healthful industry. Beneficent
results are an “ephah of barley.” “ Neither man nor work unblest wilt
thou Thou permit to be.” ‘He shall doubtless come again bringing
his sheaves with him.” “ Enter into the joy of thy Lord.”

(3) Co-operation here desirable. ‘Let fall some for her” « Reproach
her not.” Community in labour. Unselfishly thinking of others and
their work, without unkindliness or rebuke. Cp. moroseness aid
malevolence, ‘Each worker pleases where the rest he servis in
charity.”


III. The Scrutiny: Direct investigation into our use of life’s opportunities.
(1) The “day,” however, varying in incident and duration, soon “ goeth
away.” “The shadows of the evening are stretched out.’ “The

night cometh when no man can work.”

(2) After that, the Tribunal and award. (a) The Fact of Judgment [cf.
Matt. xxv. 19.] (b) Its characteristics (1) Personal and individual :
“Those.” (2) Practical : “ Where.” (3) Precise: each “ day” and its
doings, How wise to let the inquiry here anticipate the inquiry
hereafter. Day by day and every day should conscience put the
question—“ Where hast thou gleaned to-day #”


In this world but little can be
In every department


“ff we are not our brethren’s, yet surely we
are our children’s keepers ; and we know what
a son Adonijah proved, that had never been
ehidden. Purents should examine their
children, not to frighten nor discourage them,
not 60 a8 to make them hate home or tempt
them to tell a lie, but to commend them if they
have done well, and with mildness to reprove
and caution them if they have done otherwise.”
—Matthew Henry.

“Tt is a good question for us to ask oure
selves in the close of every day, ‘ Where have


186


I gleaned to-day ? What improvements have
I made in knowledge and grace? What have
I done or obtained that will turn to a good
account ??”

“Sum up at night whatthou hast done by day ;
And in the morning what thon hast to do.
Dress and undress thy soul: mark the decay
And growth of it : if with thy watch, that too
Be down, then wind up both ; since we shall

b


@
Most surely judged, make thy accounts
agree,” Herbert.


=,


CHAP. It. 20,


“Spirits rest in duty, in the interchange of
{6 communications and ministries of thought
and love."—Baldwin Brown,

“The recording of these small matters
showeth how dear to God are His saints, and
‘ow He is taken with everything they say or
do, if not sinful.”— Trapp.

““They are rich who have friends There
is no living without friends.”— Portuguese
Proverbs

“And whether a man be poor or rich,
caressed of fortune or crushed under diffie
culties, if he be homeless in this sense, if he
have no loved ones caring for him and not for
his substance, sympathizing in his trials and
rejoicing in his successes, the veriest dog that
has a kennel to creep in out of the cold wind
at nights, is to be envied more than he.”—B.

“ Piety, however, does more than indulge in
curiosity. The natural heart would have re-
joiced, received, enjoyed, and inquired just as
Naomi did, but withal with no thought except
of self. She, on the contrary, before her in-
quiries are answered. induced simply by the
abundance of the gifts and the manifest hap-
piness of Ruth, blesses the giver.”— Lange.

“ The blessings of grace also are scattered
abroad in the gospel field in the greatest
abundance, but they must all be gathered in
8 diligent use of the appointed means. Sove-
reign grace could, if infinite wisdom saw
meet, save its object without the intervention
of means; and so might Boaz have given
Ruth the handfals unscattered, but he did
not choose to do that, neither does grace
choose to de this. God has therefore bound


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
eo





His people to as strict, as conscientions a use
of the means, as if upon them only salvation
was entirely dependent. ... What He gives
in a way of sovereign goodness must be
gathered in the way of the strictest diligence.”
—Macgowan,

“If the rich can exchange their alms with
the poor for blessings, they have no cause to
complain of an ill bargain. Our gifts cannot
be worth their faithful prayers; therefore it is
better to give than receive; because he that
receives hath a worthless alms: he that gives
receives an invaluable blessing.”—-Bishop Hall.

‘Tf we would but recollect that life is a
mosaic, made up of very little things, and that
the very smallest and meanest well done, is as
thr ykworthy as the greatest.”—Anon.

“ Before even her question can be answered,
and moved simply by the manifest happiness
of Ruth in the abundance of her gleanings,
she ‘ blesses’ the man who has given her this
happiness. For this she does not need to
know who he is. Whoever had been kind and
bountiful to Ruth must have meant to show
that he appreciated her virtues and felt for
her misfortunes.”—Coz.

“«« For the last ten years I (Gambetta) have
made a pledge with myself to entirely avoid
introducing the name of God into any speech
of mine. You can hardly believe how dif-
ficult it has been, but I have succeeded, thank
Ged!’ (‘ Dieu merci!’), Thus the name so
sternly tabooed rose unconsciously to his lips at
the very moment when he was congratulating
himself on having overcome the habit of using
it.".—. D, Pressense.


VERSE 20.


Theme.—KinDNESS TO THE LIVING AND THE Dram


© Ti ose that he loved so long, and sees no more,
Loved and still loves—net dead, but gone before.” —Rogera.


“ The dead are like the stars by day,
Withdrawn from mortal eye,


Yet holding unperceived their way
Through the unclouded sky.”— Bernard,


Blessed be he of the Lord [Jehovah] who hath not left of His kindness to the
living and the dead.

It is just possible these words apply entirely to Boaz, New favours cause a
fresh remembrance of former courtesies (Fuller). Memory is busy, and Naomi
may see in the kindness of to-day only a continuance of similar acts to the dead
Elimelech done years ago. If so, she recognises in this the habit and spirit of
his life. The new benefactor is the benefactor of old. He ‘‘hath not left off,”
&c. Note. Benevolence grows upon men. One deed of charity leads to another,
fosters the spirit, forms, or helps to form, the habit. Characteristic of a good
man that he has not “left off” those deeds of kindness which bring down life.
long blessings and benedictions upon him [ef. Job xxxi 16-2; xxix. 11-16.]
While some give from impulse merely, and others from ostentation, he gives from
a heart permeated bv the svirit of love. and so he is always ready to respond to

137


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. I. 20,
FR A


the wants of those around him. Note. What a noble and spontaneous testimony
to the worth of Boaz, if the words are to be so employed and applied.

Again, the phrase is a very significant one as to the whole action and scope
of the book. Among the Hebrews kindness to the widow, duties performed to
and for the bereaved were looked upon as done to and for the dead. This one of
the fixed ideas in Naomi’s mind seemingly hopeless t first [see on i. 11-13;
p. 46] as to any outward accomplishment, but now to be seen as beginning to
shape itself in another way. Note. There ts a sense in which we may be kind to
the dead—to his memory, to his loved one [see on ch. i. 9, p- 40; Fuller's
remarks. }

The very close relationship, however, between the name of Jehovah and the
following sentence seems to intimate that it is the Divine Mercy as bestowed
upon the living and the dead which is filling her heart with a gratitude not to
be concealed [cf. Crit. and Exegetical Notes.} She thinks of God, not so much
of Boaz as the author of this new kindness. It is, “ Jehovah who hath not,”
&e. Note. Naomi recognizes this even more profoundly than Eliezer. (Gen.
xxiv, 26.) (Lange.)

May be looked upon if taken in this way. I. In the sense of the unbroken
continuance of the Divine favour throughout the ages, to children, and chil-
dren’s children. He is the God of Abraham and of Isaac, and of Jacob, He
blesses Ruth to-day, even as He blessed her husband yesterday. To each new
generation there is this revelation of new mercies, for He is the God of each
“succeeding race.” Men there are whose charitable deeds are as rare ag an
eclipse or a blazing star (Fuller). Not so with Him. He ceaseth not. “He
hath not left off,” &.

Note. The pious have recognised this in all ages. Moses saw Him as, keeping
covenant to a thousand generations (Deut. vii. 9) and as, “the dwelling-place ”
of His people in al/ generations (Ps. xc. 1). David conceived Him as keeping
mercy for ever (Ps. Ixxxix. 28), and as not suffering His “ faithfulness to fail”
(33). Isaiah speaks of Him as hearing and preserving and establishing His own
(Is. xlix. 8). Jeremiah says, “His compassions fail not—they are new every
morning” (Lam, iii. 22, 23). This unchanging faithfulness and compassion of
God (1) Comes from the Divine Nature (Is. xlix.; 1 Cor. i. 9 ; 1 Thes. v. 24), (2)
Endures with the Divine existence [cxlvi. 3]. (3) Shows ttself in the Divine action
at all times.

It may be looked upon II. In that completer sense in which God controls the
unseen world as well as this. The dead are with Him even as the living are,
and this thought may possibly have been in Naomi’s mind, For how can merey
be shown to such as exist no longer? (Lange ). Would never occur to speak of
that as mercy [kindness] to the dead, which is mercy to the living and nothing
more (Li¢d). [See Critical and Exeg. Notes, and Lange in loco]. Certainly the
dead held a very conspicuous and important place in» Naomi’s speech and
thoughts [cf. i, 8.21], as well as in that of the Hebrews generally [iv. 5. 10].
And can we imagine this as side by side with the conception that they had ceased
to exist for ever? To do so is to commit the error of the Sadducees, who erred,
“not knowing the Scriptures.” All the light of subsequent revelation has not made
the dead one whit more real to us, more clearly identified with ourselves, than we
see them bere. Why, then, refuse to believe that Naomi saw her loved ones ag
resting even then in Abraham’s bosom? Where otherwise is the force of Christ’s
appeal (Matt. xxii. 31, 32), “God is not the God of the dead, but of the living ?”

Blessed thought if taught here! He comforts us to-day, and He comforts
those who are no longer with us but with Him. Death has not removed them
from the sphere of His kindness. Separation from us does not necessarily mean
separation from Him; rather it means, with the righteous, to come more com-
pletely within the scope of His love (Rev. xiv. 13). They serve and we serve
(Rev. vi. 15). He feeds them (17) and He feeds us. He strengthens the beart


CuaP. II. 20. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





of the mourners here, and He wipes away all tears from their eyes yonder. Ha
hath not left off, etc. Note. The dead and the living are linked together still im
the eyes af God and of good men. Not 80 much two worlds as one, that the other
side of this and God over all blessed for evermore. Parted only by a thin and
perhaps, from their side, transparent veil (Braden).

Lussons, (1) Kindness to the living may be, and is sometimes, kindness to the
dead. (2) As health is the poor man’s patrimony, so prayers are the poor man’s
requital (Trapp).

Bernard on “ Blessed be he of the Lord.” (1) That prayer in and by every true
member of the Church hath been only made unto God. (2) That it is the Lord
who doth bless and make happy. (3) That the Lord will bless the merciful.
(4) That the poor’s reward unto the rich for their work of charity is only
their prayer to God for them.

E. Price on this :—God’s Blessing. (1) In its nature, it is “kindness ”—the
very soul of tenderness to the God-fearing among men. (2) In tts continuance.
He can’t “leave off” making His children happy. (3) Jn «ts application to both
worlds—to the “living” as the song of a Ruth may testify; to the “dead,” as
the hope of a Naomi must imply. Both are in the covenant of the God of
Ysrael. And (4) tn its expression, He knows how to prepare some lip to give it


adequate expression before the world.
the young.


« Tt is kindness to the dead as well as to the
‘iving. The natural human protectors are
gone, but the Almighty Father has taken
their place. It is what Elimelech and Mahlon
would have desired, and it is kindness to them.
Can we not imagine that those who have

ssed from earth, leaving poor disconsolate
ones behind to struggle with life’s difficulties,
often find, in their glorified condition, fresh
and continuous reasons for rejoicing, because
they see how the ever-watchful love of God is
constantly shown towards beloved ones, whose
comfort was their desire and endeavour ?”—
Braden,

“ Though old Barzillai be incapable of thy
favours, let young Chimham taste of thy kind-
ness. Though the dead cannot, need not, have
thy mercy, yet may they receive thy kindness
Wy a proxy—by their friends that still are
living.

“Mercy, then to the dead, makes nothing
for the Popish purgatory, and yet no wonder
if the Papists fightfor it . . . Ina word,
were purgatory taken away, the Pope himself
would be in purgatory, as not knowing which
way to maintain his expensiveness.”—fuller.

“Call upon the Almighty, He will help
thee; thou needest not perplex thyself about
anything else : shut thy eyes, and while thou
art asleep, God will change thy bad fortune
into good.” —Arabian Nights.

“The Lord is the fountain from whom all
blessedness flows. Indeed, Jacob blessed his
sons ; Moses, the twelve tribes; the priests,
in the law, the people : but these were but the
instruments, God the Principal ; these the
pipe, God the Fountain; these the ministers
to pronounce it, God the author who bestowed
it.” — Fuller.

“Thedead. Sosilentnow. Never to come
back for us to touch imperfectness into riper
good; never to charm away with pleasant
thoughts the dull hours; never to fill with


The old shall ever confirm the faith of


deeper meanings of love the half empty words ;
never to make more divine the common ger-
vice of life; never to put the best interpreta-
tion upon conduct ; never to lift the leaden
crown of care from the anxious brow; never
to help to transfigure the mean and lowly with
heavenly hopes and aspirations. Gone! What
a world of vacancy and silence and subtle
mystery! Is it strange we should wish well
to those who were kind to the dead? And
Naomi links her own being with them still.
. . « . With true hearts they can never
be disassociated.” —Statham,
“ Qh, ye beloved ones!
Though speechless, though wnseen,
Love's bond is strong to-day,
As love has ever been.
© Deathless the memories,
And though unspoken now §
Dear names and tender words,
Binding as lover’s vow.
e e ° o o e ®
Tender and true ye were,
All passionless ye lie
Beneath the churchyard grass,
The weird wind wanders bye


° e . ° e e e
“ We speak, the murmuring wind
Wanders earth-born above ;
They rest below ;—that calm,
Speaks God’s best gift of love.”"—B.
“In the wonderful providence of God which
made Ruth find a friend in Boaz, the rich
relative of her husband, she feels herself
justified to find an indication that God is once
more gracious to her, and has not left off his
kindness. If now it was through the fault of
her dear departed ones that she had hitherto
experienced distress, then it also follows that,
since God’s goodness again manifests itself
so conspicuously, his anger against those must
likewise be come to anend. For that reason
she speaks of his kindness, pot only to the
129


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. It. 20, 21,








living but also of the dead. For these had © Naomi had lost her faith—not in God, indeed,
died through the same sin which had bronght — but in the goodwill of God for her. Hey eae
suffering on herself. Hence, God'shelp toher | Now she descries a proof that God had not
in her suffering is a manifestation of His un- wholly abandoned her. No one who | haa
wearied grace toward both the living and the witnessed such a revulsion from spiritual
dead.” — Lange, despair to renewed hope in the Divine good-
“If we would enter into the force of this ness and compassion will marvel at the ecstasy
outburst of praise, we must remember that which breathes in Naomi’s words.”—Cos,


VERSES 30, 21.
Theme.—Kinsuip tox GRounp or Repempriom.


*O God, O kinsman loved. but not enough!
O man, with eyes majestic after death,
Whose feet have toiled along our pathways rough,
Whose lips drawn human breath |
By that one likeness which is ours and thine,
By that one nature which doth bold us kin;
By that high heaven where sinless Thou dost shine,


To draw us sinners in.
© @ ® ® e


Come, lest this heart,”etc.—Jean Ingelow,


And Naomi said, the man ts near of kin ete. . . . And Ruth said, He said
unto me also, etc. . » . And Naomi said, it ts good, my daughter, ete,


In this exquisite dialogue Ruth goes on, we can imagine, to relate and un-
fold at greater length than is here written the goodness of Boaz. She is
evidently pleased to speak well of him and his. Then comes out in reply what
has all along possibly been in the mind of Naomi. She had been no boaster of
her rich friend and kinsman, as many, and that only to be disappointed at last.
But the right moment for speech has arrived, I+ is not merely “ by chance ”
that this Good Samaritan has come along. She sees that Providence has been
playing its part in the unfolding of events, and the loneliness and bitterness of
spirit which found expression in her ery, “Call me not Naomi, call me Mara,” is
already a thing of the past. It is no casual helper who has come forward to
relieve their necessities, but one of the goclim, “The man is near of kin unto
us, one of our next kinsmen.”

Notice I. That this nearness of kinship gives the right to redeem. (a) A
principle underlying the whole Jewish economy to be seen alike in the patriarchial
and Mosaic systems. Everything centred from the family centre, Kinship the
very cement of their society.

The law has, however, a wider application, (b) kinship is @ natural and so a
Divinely ordained institution, The principle as true to-day as when laid hold of by
Naomi, When kindred show themselves kind they only follow and satisfy the law
of nature. The apostle says, “If any provide not for his own, and specially for
those of his own house, he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel”
(1 Tim. v. 8). So that men even standing aside from the claims of God, allow
and respond to these claims,

Again (c). The law touches a deeper realm still, that of spiritual and eternal
things. Christ Himself must conform to it when He came to redeem, (1) There
was a necessity for this,a needs be. In all things “éé behoved Him to be made like
unto His brethren,” says the apostle (Heb. ii. 16, 17). (2) There was a reason
for vt. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He Himself
took part of the same, that through death He might destroy, &¢., and deliver
them who through fear of death, &. Note, Christ ts the kinsman— Redeemer
of all men. [cf also on iii, 2, 4; iv, 9.)

140


cHaP. II. 20, 21. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


or NE





II. This nearness of kinship points out and emphasises the direction in
which to look for help. Naomi saw their safety secured by this intervention,
their wants provided for, therefore she says in effect, “Cling to the deliverer
thus providentially pointed out.” So God often, and still opens up the path of
sefety and plenty in life (1) suddenly, (2) unexpectedly, (3), unmistakably.

“« It ts good,” she says, immediately and prospectively. Usual voth in the Old
and New Testament to put the positive fur the comparative in this kind. [Mary
hath chosen the good part, ¢.e. the better part, Luke x. 42. It is profitable for
thee ; ¢.e. more profitable, Matt. v.29] (fuller). Note. God not only gives ua
providential directions, there are special moments when He opens our eyes to see
them as such. Such a moment comes when the scales fall from our eyes and we
see Jesus as our kinsman and our all (cf. Luke xxiv. 31; John xi. 40; 2 Kings
vii, 7). It came to doubting Thomas, and he cried, ‘ My Lord and my God.”

Again, mark that just as natural affection, and the Levirate law alike, bound
Boaz to render this help: they laid the obligation upon both Naomi and Ruth
look to him for it. He had opened the way to aright relationship between them,
and nw there can be no excuse on their side. Note (1) How exactly this illus-
trates Christ’s position towards us. He has taken the first step—given invitations
which are unmistakable ; now it is ours—under charge of the blackest ingrati-
tude if we refuse—to respond. (2) Jt ts a discourtesy where we are beholden to
alter our dependency (Bishop Hall). Generosity dislikes to have its gifts slighted
or its sincerity doubted (Zhomson). Ruth evidently felt that because the kind-
ness of Boaz was so great her obedience and dependence should be complete,
while Naomi encouraged her thus to regard his orders as obligatory.

ImPRovEMENT. (1) Follow Providential guidances as they unfold in life. (2) Fall
in with the natural and Divinely-appointed way of redemption. (3) May we not
say that these words express the duty of the spirituai Ruth to labour in Chrict’s
fields and believe steadfastly in Him, and not to stray from His presence into
other fields even till the end of the world (Wordsworth).


“ So suggestive is this figure, which was not
@ mere random selection, but an institution
designed to foreshadow a great truth, that it
is constantly referred to in the Word of God.
We all recollect the touching case of Job.
In the depth of his affliction, when all seemed
desperate, he said, ‘I know that my Redeemer
liveth’ [Heb., ‘My Goel liveth’].”—Dr.
Cumming.

‘Christ came into our home, breathed our
air, clad Himself in our dress, wept our tears,
and was penetrated and pierced with more
than all the accumulated sorrows that humanity
is heir to, that we thus—there being no other
process in the world besides—might be rescued
from our sins, and might hear, ringing in the
depths of our hearts, with the opening of the
prison doors to the captive, ‘There is no con-
dempation to them that are in Christ Jesus.’”
—Dr. Cumming.

“I have seen the twine-thread of a cordial
friend hold, when the cable-rope of a rich
kinsman hath broken. Let those therefore be
thankful to God, to whom God hath given
means te be maintained of themselves, without


dependance on their kindred. Better it is to
be the weakest of substances to subsist of
themselves, than to be the bravest accidents
to be maintained by ancther.”— Fuller,

“ Our blessed Saviour is our Goel; it is He
that hath a right to redeem. If we expect to
receive benefit by him, let us closely adhere to
Him, and His fields, and His family; let ua
not go to the world and its fields for that
which is to be had with Him only, and which
He has encouraged us to expect from Him.
Has the Lord dealt bountifully with us? Let
us not be found in any other field, nor seek
for happiness and satisfaction in the creature.
Tradesmen take it ill if those that are in their
books go to another shop. We lose Divine
favours if we slight them.”—Mait. Henry.

“Even the lump of clay, when it was placed
near the rose, according to the beautiful
Persian proverb, caught some of its fragrance.
It is the direction of Him in Whom are hid
all the treasues of wisdom and knowledge,
‘Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherd’«
tenta.’”—A. ‘homson, D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ROTH. CHAP, It. 28.





VERSE 23.


Theme.—ConstaNncy aT Home anp ABROAD


“Man to thy labour bow,
Thrust in the sickle now,
Reap where thou once did plough—=
God sends thee bread.” —Montgomery.


® Home to calmer bliss invites, ,
More tranquil and more true.”—Bowring.


So she kept fast by the maidens of Boas to glean unto the end, eto. And dwelt with
her mother-in-law,


The homely history repeats and re-repeats this idea of keeping fast by, ete,
The wandering sheep never thrives (Thomson). Wisdom to prevent danger by
not exposing ourselves to peril (Bernard). Naomi has wisely and affectionately
warned her against the danger of going elsewhere (v. 22). Boaz, too, has
spoken to the same end (v. 8, 21). Here we see the good counsel (a) thankfuily
accepted, (6) carefully followed [cf. Prov. xiii. 20].

Note. Ruth an example to the young in this—obedient, scrupulously attentive
in carrying out the advice which has been given. Even Ishmael obeyed his
mother in matters of moment (Gen. xxi. 21), and Herodias first consulted her
mother before she asked a boon of her father Herod (Matt. xiv, 7, 8,). In this
respect they condemn many undutifu) children of our days (Fuller).

Labour and rest go a long way to make up life. Here is constancy in both,

Notice I, The commendable constancy and continuity in connexion with
labour enforced here. Harvest prospects naturally (1) reconcile to exertion, (2)
animate to diligence, (3) stimulate to constant and continual toil, Whether as
gleaners or reapers we should respond to the appeal. Ruth evidently laboured
as one who felt that the present gracious season of ingathering would not last
for long. Blayed the ant and not the grasshopper (Bernard). A few days or
weeks, and it would be all over—its opportunities gone for ever. Reasonable,
therefore, that every other concern should give place to this, and that every
exertion should be made to improve the short, but all-important, period.

How true the principle in other directions! (a) So with life uself—fleeting —
once ours, then gone for ever. (6) So with gospel opportunities. The season for
repentance and the ingathering of faith (1) limited, (2) short, (3) uncertain in
duration. Hence the wisdom of improving the present opportunity. To-day
if ye will hear His voice, etc. (Heb. iv. 7). He that gathereth in summer is @
wise son ; but he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame (Prov.
x. 5). Note. The best thrift ts to use the present opportunity.

Again, Ruth laboured until the end of the barley and wheat harvest—a
double chance, and no part of it neglected. There are who at first have @
ravenous appetite to work, but quickly surfeit thereof (fuller). So in spiritual
things many who begin well, as Orpah did, (I. 14) (cf. Gal. ili, 3; iv. 9; Matt,
xiii, 5, 6, etc.) Note. (a) The constant pace goes farthest and is freest from being
tired (Fuller). (b) He that endures unto the end is to be saved (Matt. xxiv 13)
(c) Opportunities neglected are not likely to return again. How solemn the
responsibility, then, of this present! lest we should be found saying, “The
harvest is past,” etc. (Jer. viii. 20).

Notice II. The commendable constancy and continuity in connection with
home and rest enforced here, And she dwelt with her mother-in-law (1) Shows
her discretion, She constantly came home to her mother at night as became a
virtuous woman, that was for working days, and not for merry nights (Matt.
Henry) ; (2) Shows her affection for Naomi. No favour abroad, or gain reaped
there, made her neglect the friend with whom she had come from Moah,
Clingins fast to her new acquaintances in the harvest-field did not interfere with

142


CHAP. II. 23. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.








“cleaving to Naomi” at home. A lesson and an example to the inconstant
here. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy ways [cf. on I. i. p. 11] ?
(3) Shews her love for home. Had what so many men in these days want, a
centre for her duties and affections, and was true to that—fixed—not given to
change. Christ’s command to his disciples “go not from house to house ;”
enforces this in connection with the interests and spread of his kingdom (Matt.
x. 16). Note. (a) Children are to cling to home so long as they may be of use
there. How can they show their gratitude for the past better than as Ruth dii
by affection and care in the present? (6) Change apart from God's guidance is





always a foolish thing.

ImproveMENT.—An interesting tlustration of youthful fidelity in the Saviour’s
work (Tyng). Such fidelity makes its distinct and decided choice. The aim
single, the pursuit absorbing. ‘‘This one thing Ido,” said Paul. Suggest


(i) that every one should have his chosen field in which to gather instruction ;
(2) And that having chosen it he ought to keep to it (Thomson). Wandering
may very possibly lead on to dangerous ground. (3) The necessity there is
for the “‘ home life ””—(a) guard it, (6) cherish it. Go forth to work, come home


to live (Baldwin Brown). Note, Home and heaven are kindred spheres (Ibid.).


* Maids are the fittest company for maids ;
amongst whom a chaste widow, such as Ruth
was, may well be recounted. Modesty is the
life-guard of chastity.” —Fuller

«Dinah went out to see the daughters of
the land, and we know what a disgrace her
vanity ended in. Ruth kept at home, and
helped to maintain her mother, and went out on
no other errand than to get provision for her,
and we shall find afterwards what preferment
her humility and industry ended in. Seest
thou a man diligent in his business? Hon-
our is before him.”—A/att. Henry.

“ Perhaps some will say, that Christ willeth
us not to take care, But doth He ever will any
man not to labour? ‘The care which Christ
speaketh of, is immoderate care, care without
faith, or care full of doubting, and little faith,
and that which is without care of religion,
the mind being taken up wholly with the world ;
else men may, yea, and ought to labour for the
things of this life to be provident for the time
to come, and frugal in expenses for the time
present,”— Bernard,

“It was Christ’s counsel to His disciples,
{Matt. x. ii.) to “ abide” in the place wherein
they did enter, and not to go from house to
house. Such the settledness of Ruth,—where
she tirst fastened, there she fixed; she “ dwelt
with her mother.” Naomi affords Ruth house
room, Kuth gains Naomi food; Naomi pro-
vides & msasion, Ruth prays for meat; and so
[they] mutually serve to supply the wants of
each uther. If envy, and covetousness, and
idleness were not the hindrances, how might
one Christian reciprocally be a help unto an-
other! All have something, none have all
things; yet all might have all thivgs in come
fortable and competent proportion, if seriously
suiting themselves as Ruth and Naomi did, that
what is defective in one might be supplied im
the other.”— Fuller.

“This Ruth the Moabitess, a heathen b
birth, may rise up in judgment against su
as should be natural children, who having


gotten from under their parents, when they
can live of themselves, they make no reckon-
ing of them being altogether unwilling to
live with them, and most of all to relieve
them.”— Bernard,

The Saviour’s field is perfectly distinct. ...
We can never doubt what positive and true


_religion is in the human character, or what it


requires of us; our questions are never on the
side of things which are certainly right, but on
the side of those which are possibly wrong.
In such cases there can be no question that it
is right to abstain from that which is not pers
fectly free from doubt in its indulgence.
Happy is it for the young christian to take a
decided, positive standard of conduct; and in
all things to seek and to pursue that which is
manifestly good to the use of edifying, and
adapted to minister to a growth in grace, and
a real likeness to a holy Master. Such will
avoid the scenes and instruments of temptation.
“It is good that they meet thee not in any
other field.”—T yng.


* She stood breast high amid the corn,

Clasped by the golden light of morn,

Like the sweetheart of the sun,

Who many a glowing kiss had won

« On her cheeks an autumn flush

Deeply ripened—such a blush

In the midst of brown was born,

Like red poppies grown with corn.

“ Round dark eyes her tresses fell,

Which were blackest none could tell,

But long lashes veiled a light

That had else been all too bright,

‘‘ And her hat with shady brim,

Made her tressy forehead dim ;

Thus she stood amid the stocks,

Praising God with sweetest looks,

s‘ Sure,’ I said, ‘ Heaven did not mean

Where I reap thou should’st but glean

Lay thy sheaf adown and come,

Share my harvest and my home.”
Themus Hood,


148


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH,  cuap. 1. 1—6.








CHAPTER TL
THE CLAIMANT IN THE THRESHING FLOOR.


Conrents.—Ruth, at the instigation of Naoms, by laying herself down at the feet of Boaz
claims an acknowledgment of the relationship between them. He explains to her that there is a
nearer kinsman than himself, but promises to undertake the duties of a gvel [ve feemer] shoula
the prior claim not be insisted upon, He dismisses her with a present, and she returns to Neomi
to awast the issue,





VERSES 1—6,


Cairrcan anv Exxentican Norzs.—Then [and] Naomi . , said. The plan had
matured itself slowly in her mind during the harvest season, now comes the proposal. Boaz,
by his kindness and attention to Ruth, has evidently removed whatever difficulties she hag


felt heretofore (cf. on i, 11-13: p. 47]. Shall I not seek? I must seek rest for thee. Non


as usual an expression of general admission or of undoubted certainty, in the sense of “Is it
not true I seek for thee?” It is my duty to seek for thee (Keil). The obligation to enforce the
claims of a Levirate marriage lay on the side of Naomi and Ruth. In accordance with ancient
usage to leave the asscrtion of a right with its possessor (Lange), the widow could demand her
rights of the nearest relative, and if refused, put him openly to shame (1bid). Rest [a resting
place, Num. x. 33] for thee. A secure life, under the guardian care of a husband (Rossenmuller)
Cf.oni.9 as to this “rest in the house of a husband ;” with the respect and protection it
implied. That which made the fate of the daughter of Jephthah so sad was, that she never
found a resting place in the house of a husband (Lange). That it may be well with thee,
Which shall be good for thee (Carpzov Rosen.) 'That marriage may be to thee a merry-age
(Trapp). She assumed that every true rest was good (Morison,)


Ver. 2. And now is not Boag of our kindred? Our relation (Keil). Our acquaintance, #.e.,
relative (1 ae Hence the justness of the claim. Is he not therefore thy husband accordiug
to the law (Wordsworth). Canmt reasonably suppose that a pious woman would counsel
against the law of God or the morai sense of good men, such as Boaz. To do so, would have
alienated and repelled him, and so have frustrated her own purpose (Jbid). With whese
maidens thou wast. A delicate reminder that Boag has himself placed her on a level with
his own Israelitish people [ef. on v. 13, 14]. Behold he winnoweth barley to-night. Naomi
must have come into closer connection with her relative. She is minutely informed of what
he does, and where he is (Lange). The claim which Ruth had to make, could hardly be urged
by her publicly in the harvest field, in the light of day (Wordsworth). He winnoweth barley.
Literally, he is winnowing the threshing-floor of barley. He is winnowing the barley floor
(barley on the threshing-floor) (Keil). Performed by tossing up the grain against the wind
with a fork (Jer. iv. 11, 12). Shows the simple manners of the times. This “ mighty man of
wealth” assisted personally (Speakers’s Com.). It is not unusual for the husband, wite, and all
the family, to encamp at the baiders, or threshing-floors, until the harvest is over (Dr. Thomson),

o night. Chosen for the advantage of the breeze which blew then (Gen. iii. 8). Tn the night
wind (Zargum). Much agricultural labour of various kinds performed on bright nights (Kitto).
In the threshing-floor. Nothing more than a level place in the field, under the open heavena
(Keil). Constructed of a circular form, perhaps 50 feet in diameter, merely by beating down
the earth hard (Robinson) (cf. Thomson ii, 314]. Both the threshing and wiuno wing are done
in the open air, rain in harvest time being almost unknown ( Wordsworth) [ef. J udges vi.
87; 2 Sam. vi. 6.]

Ver. 8. Wash thyself therefore and anoint thee. Not done in order to win Boaz by external
beauty ; for she is especially cautioned against allowing him to see her by day (Lange), Yet
she is to go as a bride adorned for her husband, appropriately and symbolically dressed. And
put thy [best] raiment upon thee. And ornament tiiyself with thy garments (Syr. Arab). Use


all lawful means to ingratiate (Trapp). And get thee down to the florr, Bethlehem si

& hill (Stanley), c.f. on ii. 4; p. 101. Serve God's providence by demanding arias greet
which in those days, and in Ruth’s case, was neither unlawful nor immodest (Z’rapp). Con.
silium hoc est re legitimum specie inhonestum (Juntus), Nothing in these directions which waa
considered improper under the special and peculiar circumstances of the case (Kitto). Thi
was @ bold expedient, but it must be remembered that it was undertaken at the insti. ation of an
aged and pious woman, and simply to remind Boaz of the relative positions in which they
stood to each other. Make not thyself known unto. Suffer not thyself to be perceived b
(Lunge). The grain heaps probably surrounded the threshing floor, and would offer a chitin
ri Sue ae oes the ou itself was under the open heayena Until he shall have

me eating aud drinking, Until the moment of leisure and i i

pee ay king, ease Men more disposed to listen


144


CHAP. mn, 1. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH.











Ver.4 Thou shalt mark, For the sake of finding it in the darkness coming on. And
ancover his feet, Kather the place of his feet, the foot of his bed, as we should say (Sp. Com ).
Sleep at his feet (Syr. Arab), Boaz probably slept under a rug, sheep skin, or thick quilt, and
Was covered with another, or by his cloak (Kitto). In Palestine men Jay down with their
2lothes on, but are careful to cover their feet with a long mantle now called the Chudda, a
wrapper of coarse cloth (Postans), All that thou sayest. Her consent that of faith and obedi-
ence, the conduct of one conscious of her own purity of purpose, and willing to encounter sus-
picion in the exercise of duty (Wordsworth). Unto me. Omit (Cassel, Bertheau, Bellamy,
fe.) I will do. Evident that inclination, judgment, and all that she had seen of Boaa came in
to enforce Namoi’s advice. His age and his character probably shrinking and diffident, yet
pious and honourable, encouraged her in obedience,

Ver. 6, And she went down unto the floor, Probably while it was yet light.





VERSE 1,
Theme.—One Szxxina Rest ror ANOTHRE,


“ Asif with marriage came the end,
The entrance into settled rest,
The calm to which love's tossings tend,
The quiet rest.”—Jean Ingelow.
“ Whatever hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity, and place, ard innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, ani commands to some, leaves free to all,
Our Maker bids increase.”—JA/zlton.


Shali I not seck rest for thee, that it may be well with thee #

All Scripture given by inspiration of God and profitable (2. Tim. fii. 10).
Phat is when rightly understood and intrepreted. Some passages however
peculiarly liable to misunderstanding (Zhomson). Divine ways often strange at
first sight, and seemingly unsatisfactory to first judgments. We have to look
at them as a whole before we can see them aright. So with the Divine Word.
Parts which a false delicacy would expunge and which would never have
appeared had the Bible been a merely human book. To understand them aright
you must look (a) at their scope, (6) at the motive (c) at the underlying prin-
ciple. Theend aimed at right, the spirit which prompts the aim right, rest assured
that the means employed will fail under the same great law. This true (1) of the
Divine doings however mysterious, (2) of the doings of all who are truly led of Him.

See how this is illustrated here. I. Naomi’s motive is right. (1) Justice to the
dead. 'Tho law of Israel was that no branch of the family tree should be allowed
to become extinct. The dead Mahlon had claims upon Boaz, and only the fact
that Ruth was of Moab, had prevented these claims being enferced earlier. At
first the claim seemed a hopeless one (I. 11-13). Now thanks to the kinduess
of Boaz, Naomi sees light beginning to break in upon their gloomy prospects.
(2) Justice to the living. Not merely kindness to Ruth and not merely gratitude,
although these motives must have moved Naomi powerfully, but a deeper feeling
-—~that instinctive sense of right, which overleaps such petty boundaries as
nationalities. Her feelings as an Israelite, exclusive, conservative, unyielding
may find expression I, 9-14; now comes out the deeper feelings of a woman and
a@ mother. Hence her wisdom projected for her daughter, that which her
daughter’s modesty forbade her to project for herself.

Anxiety, solicitude for the settlement of a daughter pardonable, even commend-
able, so that modesty be not overstepped. Naomi of the same opinion aa
Paul as to the true sphere of woman: “I desire therefore that the younger
widows marry,” &c. (1 Tim. v. 14). Too old to marry herself, she by no means
placed the same restriction upon those younger than herself. Such prudery is
often only disguised selfishness and callousness of heart. Note Aye must not
make ttself a standard for youth. Naomi’s care without doubt commend-
aole and recorded for imitation (M. Henry). Analagous to the conduct of a
gospel church. Jerusalem atways tender towards her daughters (Macyowan).

.. Naomi’s principle is right. That one may seek rest for another-—that one
145


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP, IT, 1.





may, and ought to forward the well-being of others the essential principle of the
gospel itself (Luke xix. 10). So Christ sought not his own (John v. 30; viii. 28;
viii. 50), So charity seeketh not her own” (1 Cor. xiii. 5). So Paul “ not seek-
ing mine own profit,” he says, “but the profit of many” (1 Cor. x. 33). Note.
Bearing one another's burdens we “‘ fulfil” the law of Christ (Gal. vi. 2> 1 Cor. x.
24; Phil. ii. 20, 21).

Again, could Naomi do otherwise for one so near and dear as Ruth. 8he fulfils
not only a religious but a natural duty. The young have claims upon the aged.
upon their experience, foresight, judgment, &c. As wrong to withhold these, as
to withhold more natural and apparent benefits. Eli doubtless gave his children
bread, but seems to have withheld instruction, direction, reproof, restraint.
and so came under the anger of God (James iii. 12, 13). Note. Few greater
responsibilities tm life than this of providing for the future well-being of children.
“Shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee”—the burden of
many a parent’s heart and prayers,

Once more mark the kind of “rest” Naomi sought for Ruth—home res
household well-being, that which is the purest of earth’s pleasures and the fore-
taste of heaven’s joys. Note. The inspired idea of marriage ts, that it is and
ought to be “arrest.” “Not good for man to be alone” (Gen. ii. 18), much less
woman, naturally weaker and more defenceless than man: still less a stranger
like Ruth. (cf. on i, 9; p. 36.] With regard to woman marriage was viewed ag
the natural fulfilment of her calling, without which her life was helpless and
defenceless as that of a people without a God (Lange).

The prineiple true to-day. Where love, patience, unselfishness, &o. are found ;
married life as much like “rest” as can be discovered in this world (Braden).
Of course, cares, anxieties, difficulties are to be expected. As it is said of Egypt
no country hath more venomous creatures, none more antidotes; so marriage
hath many troubles, but withal many keeps against trouble (Trapp). Note.
Those are giddy indeed that marriage does not compose (iM. Henry).

Naomi’s plan is right—judged by the time and circumstances. Involved ne
impropriety (Binney). The face, the worst piece of it, the heart was sound
(Bishop Hall.) Certainly it was a bold expedient but not necessarily the wors«
because of that. She knew the piety and chastity of Boaz and Ruth (Trapp).
The customs of the age and country were simpler, freer, but not less pure than
the more formal customs of our own land and age (Braden).

Dr. Thomson and others however only vindicate the intentions, while they
censure the measures, acquit of designing evil, but blame Naomi for not “ abstain-
ing from all appearance of evil.” Too much cunning and stratagem, and forcing
of Providence about the whole transaction (Thomson), Ran the hazard of
sacrificing a good name in the use of a too bold and perilous artifice (Ibid).
Note. very action that is reported is not straightway allowed (Bishop Hall). If
every act of a holy person should be our rule, we should have crooked tives (Ibid).

Iuprovement.—(1) Kest a natural desire of all men. David would flee away
into the wilderness, leave the city and camp far behind, and be at rest (Ps, lv. 6).
Take the broad sense of the word and this is what all men are seeking. Recog-
nsed by Christ as a necessity. “Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and
cest awhile (Mark vi. 31). Z'his desire satisfied in Christ (Matt. xi. 28, 29 3 Heb. iv. 3.
We which have believed, &c). Note, Rest is a thing to be sought.

(2) Thoughtful love a common thing in human history. We cannot always be
with those who are dear to us—we may provide for their welfare, however, in that
future when we are with them no longer. Bernard on this :—

Shall I not seek. It isthe parents’ duty to provide matches for their children, Se
did God, the general Father, for His son Adam, Abraham for Isaac, Isaac for Jacob
Ssmison entreated his father and mother to get him a wife (J udges xiv. 1, 2).

vest for thee. So she called the married estate. The word is “a place of rest”
to settle in. Note. The married estate ts an estate of rest.

are by may be well with thee,  Marriace is for the well-being of such as enter


cHap, 11.2—4. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH,


——————————


into the holy estate. Doth not God say, “It is not good for man to be alone”?
It is the estate in which the holiest have lived, and in which Christ Himself


would be born.


St. Paul indeed commended single life, but not simply but


with respect unto the then present times, full of troubles and persecutions.


While the women are in distress it is Ruth
who takes the initiative (ch. ii. 2.]; now,
when hope grows large, it is Naomi. When
hardship was to be endured, the mother sub-
mitted her will to the daughter—for Ruth
was not sent to glean, she went of her own
accord ; now, when the endeavour is to secure
the joy and happiness held ont in prospect,
the daughter yields in all things to the direc-
tion of the mother. The thought of labour
for the mother originates with the daughter ;
but it is the mother who forms plans of happi-
ness for the daughter.—Lange.

Luck is ever waiting for something to turn
up. Labour, with keen eyes and strong will,
will turn up something. Luck lies in bed,
and wishes the postman would bring him the
news of a legacy. Labour turns ont at six
v’clock, and, with busy pen or ringing hammer,
lays the foundation of a competence. Luck
whines. Labour whistles. Luck relies on
chance. Labour on character.— Cobden.

This word “menuchah” is used in many
weighty sentences in the Old Testament
Scriptures. It is used to designate the asylum
of honour and freedom which a Hebrew found
in the home of her husband, her secure refuge
from servitude, insolence, and neglect. It is
also used to denote the asylum of freedom and
repose on which the Hebrew race entered
when it gained full possession of the promised
land, when in the days of Solomon, every man
might sit onder his vine or his fig tree, none
daring to make him afraid, It was used by
the Prophets in a still higher sense; with them
God was the true menuchah or rest of His
people, nay, of the whole world; to them it
was revealed that only when the Immanuel
came, the God-with-us, would the golden days
of Paradise retarn ; and the world enter into
its final and glorious rest. So that those who
first listened to our Saviour’s gracious invita-
tion (Matt. xi. 28-30), those on whose weary
and fevered spirits His promise of “‘ rest” first
fell, would understand that He was offering
them an asylum of repose, honour, and free-
dom, such as the Hebrew wife found in her
husband’s house, such as the Hebrew race
found in the sacred land when it was wholly


their own, such ag the Hebrew Prophets had
found in God in the moments of their loftiest
aspirations.— Coz.

This is Naomi’s conception of wedded life.
Very beautiful, but how many realise it in
their experience ? Have we not heard multi-
tudes of people declare that marriage was the
real beginning of their troubles? Then
anxiety about providing and regulating a
household has commenced ; then business and
domestic cares have taken away all expected
pleasure; then tempers are tried as never
before; then disputes and bickerings arise
that destroy all peace ; then the beautiful illu-
sions of youth have given place to thehard and
stern practicalities of maturing life.— Braden

The estate of holy matrimony is well callec
a state of rest, for the natural affections and
propensities instinctively yearn for it, and in
it alone find their lawful gratification. The
Rabbin’s say : “ The man is restless while he
misses the rib that was taken out of his side ;
and the woman is restless till she gets under
the man’s arm, from whence she was taken.”
—Steele and Terry.

“T,asa Protestant have been accustomed
to assert the purity and dignity of the offices
of husband, wife, and parent. Have I ever
examined the grounds of my own assertion ?
Do I believe them to be as calings from God,
spiritual, sacramental, divine, ternal ? Oram
I at heart regarding and using them, like the
Papist, merely as heaven’s indulgences to
the infirmities of fallen man?” ... .
Those miserable dilettanti, who in books and
sermons are whimpering meagre secondhand
praise of celibacy, depreciating as carnal and
degrading those family ties to which they owe
their own existences, and in the enjoyment of
which they themselves all the while unblush-
ingly indulge —insulting thus their own wives
and mothers—nibbling ignorantly at the very
root of that household purity which consti-
tutes the distinctive superiority of Protestant
over Popish nations ”— Kengsley.

Christianity, be it remembered, proposes not
to extinguish our natural desires, but to bring
them under just control and direct them to
their true objects.— Welberfores,


—<e——
VERSES 2—4,


Fheme.—An ImporTaN? REMINDER,


The grey old man was honoured there,
‘I'he matron’s words were cherished,
And honesty in youthful hearts
By age’s word was nourished.” —ichol.


(2) Isnot Boas of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast F


Naomi has laid


hold of the fact that they are entitled to use a certain amount of freedom in the
affair—(1) because of kinship; (2) because of the kindness Boaz has already


shown to Ruth. The allowing Ruth to g
stance [see on ii. 8, 13—16] not witkout @ meaning.


lean under especially favourable cireum-


Note. We mare readily ask
147


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RU1H.  cuar. mw. 2—4,
wi Se


favours from those who have already shown us kindness, In the nature of such
to grow and become the foundation of our future actions,

I. An encouraging reminder. We need to put each other in mind, as well ag
recall to our own memories the thought of our claims and privileges. Natural ly (1)
apt to forget; (2) apt to delay action even when remembering ; (3) apt to re-
member and yet not realize. “TI will not be negligent to put you always ie
remembrance of these things,” says the Apostle Peter, “though ye know them.”
This a favourite idea of the Apostle’s in his old age [cf. 2 Peter i. 12, 13, 15;
iii 1, &e.]. So Paul writing to Timothy [1 Tim. iv. 6; 2 Tim. i. 3, 6; ii. 14].

II. An implied argument, viz., that he is bound in conscience to take care of
our affairs (M. Henry). Js he not our kinsman? How much a kindred question
implies to the believer in Christ's proper humanity, (1) Can we fear to
approach? (2) Can we do other than expect a welcome % [On the Kinsman
Redeemer, see iv. 9, 10; ii, 20, a

Ill, A duty beginning to unfold itself, Why not bring the claim to the
notice of Boaz? The obligation lay upon them to take initiative [see Crit. and
Exeg. Notes]. Time and place, both opportune now that the harvest is ending.
Note. A well-chosen season ts one of the best advantages of any action (Trapp).

So in spiritual things we must seck, knock, ask, &o. In one sense Christ
woos, in another He waits to be wooed. No presumption in seeking his feet,


“From labour health, from health contentment springs,
Contentment opes the source of every joy.”—Beattia,


Verse 2. Behold he winnoweth, de.

Not ashamed to do this himself—lived fn the days of ancient simplicity
(Lawson). Not too idle to deny himself of sleep that it might be done properly
—a model farmer [cf. on ii. 2, 4, p. 93, 100].

See here, I. Work associated with the character and position of gentleman.
Boaz was this, yet he labours with his own hands. Modern refinements and
etiquette give no more pleasure to the fashionable gentleman than honest in-
dustry gave to this grandson of a famous prince (Lawson). Camillus, Fabricius,
and other famous Roman consuls held the plough. Edmuad Burke, in the very
beight of his fame, farmed his own lands near Beaconsfield. Note. (a) Labour
the law of God (Gen. ii, 15; iii. 19). All are to work, some with hand, some
with brain. (6) A false pride that dislikes handwork (Radford Thomson).

II, Work associated with the character and position of aman of God. The
claims of the higher life do not exempt us from the calls and cares of the lower.
Christ Himself doubtless laboured in the carpenter’s shop at Nazareth. And it
was while deing so that it was written of Him that He “increased in wisdom
and stature and in favour with God and man.”

Verse 3. Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee. Ruth must seck to make herself
attractive; even though the coming interview is to be in the dark—a duty
always. Preparation necessary even for a duty like this. Note. Cleanliness
enforced tn the Scriptures as well as godliness ; comes down to the lowest duties
of life. Much that inspiration takes notice of, which men count mean and un-
worthy of attention. ‘These trifling details, however correct from an artistie
point of view, heighten the effect of the whole picture, suggest the truthfrlnesg
of the narrative, &.

Iuprovemenr.—(1) The Bride of Christ is pleasing to her Bridegroom only
when anointed with the Spirit and clothed in the garments of salvation
(Starke). (2) We may use all lawful means to ingratiate, &c., if our purpose
be right. If decency of apparel is not @ virtue, slovenliness is at least an
approach to vice (Lawson),

Bernard on this (condensed) :—

A true friend is not in show only, or in well wishes, but in devising how te
bring to pass what they desire, So Jonathan with David (1 Sam. xix. 2, 3 ; XS.

148


car, ui, 2—4. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.








12, 13), Abraham with Lot (Gen. xiv.) Note. Godly parents seek te match their
shildren where God alloweth. Naomi’s ground was the law of God, as she
thought.

Behold he winnoweth barley to-night. See and consider the providence of God!
It is as one would wish, it falleth out opportunely. Warrant from God, expe-
rience of the love of man, and fit occasion to effect a matter, are strong induce-
ments to attempt the same. So Esther going in unto Ahasuerus (Esth. v. 1—8).
Note. It is no unseemliness for men of birth, of place, of wealth, sometime to
follow in their own person mean labours of their calling.

Verse 3. Wash thyself, therefore. Outward cleanliness is praiseworthy. Our
Christian profession is pure and holy, which outward cleanliness well befitteth.
And seeing it is of good report, we are to observe it. And anoint thee. Christians
may lawfully use God’s creatures for outward comeliness, and to preserve that
seemliness which is God’s own work in us (Psalm cxiv. 15). And put thy raiment
upon thee. Touching this necessity of wearing apparel, nature teacheth it, and
need enforceth it.

Get thee down to the floor. The widow woman allowed by the law of Moses to
claim marriage of the next kinsman, No more immodest for women to claim
that right then, than now for one betrothed to challenge the man for her husband.
Where God alloweth the thing it taketh away the scandal and the offence. But
make not thyself known to the man until he shall have done eating and drinking.
Men are more apt to speak freely then and to promise their goodwill than at
other times. Note. Her mind must be showed in private, and to him alone.
The night and in private make modest persons utter more freely their thoughts


than otherwise they would in the light and before company.


When he iveth down.
the same.
This the right use of time.

Thou shalt mark the place.


Careful observation prevents error.


Rest follows after labour, and the night is appointed for
So the Psalmist teaches (civ. 13), and Jacob practised (Gen. xviii. 2).


Shows also


that in those times they had no set place to lie down.


Uncover his feet.


Aims at making Ruth his yokefellow, yet teaches her to pro-


ceed in humility, to go to his feet. Note Humility not any hindrance, but the


way to advancement.


“Let us look into providences ; surely they
mean somewhat. They hang so together ;
have been ao constant, so clear, go unclonded.”
—Cromwell.

“Perhaps the assurance, which long trial has
given her of the good government and firm
chastity of her danghter-in-law, together with
her persuasion of the religious gravity of Boaz,
made her think that design safe, which to
others had been perilous, if not desperate. But
besides that, holding Boas next of blood to
Elimelech, she made account of him as the
lawful husband of Ruth ; so as there wanted
nothing but a challenge of a consummation,
nothing was abated but some outward solem-
nities, which though expedient for the satis-
faction of others, yet were not essential to
marriage; and if there were not these colours
for a project so suspicions, it would not follow
that the action were warrantabie because
Naomi’s. Why should her example be mvre
safe in this than in matching her sons with
infidels, than in sending back Orpah to her
father’s gods."—Bishop Hall.

« Labour is the law of man’s life, in contrast
to the creatures. Because man became a sin-
ner and God cursed him witb it, says a large
school of theologians. Because man was &


child of God, and the Father worketh hitherto,
and the Son also worketh, say others, and, I
think, wiser and more far-sighted men. These
daily tasks are the dignity and glory of our
nature, ag sons under discipline.’—Baldwin
Brown.

‘‘ Naomi’s aolicitude for her devoted daughter-
in-law is beautiful and motherly. But the
form into which it ran and took shape can
never recur in the midst of the culture and
customs of European society. Even the method
of winnowing the golden grains of the harvest
field is antique and obsolete. So, too, is the
method which Boaz adopted to watch over his
cereal treasures. He constituted himself his
own watchman and policeman.”—Pulpit Com.

“ Ruth was directed to pay special attention
to the adornments of her person, to which, to
this extent at least, she had been a stranger
sirice the death of her husband. She is to lay
aside the weeds of mourning and the garments
of toil, and, after bathing and anointing, don
the festive garb, for the expedition on which
she goes is of @ joyous, bridal nature. All
this, however, is noc done in order to win
Boaz by external beauty, for she is specially
cautioned against allowing him to see her by
day. But why this caution? Boaz was a


149


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP. UL 5, 6,





believing Israelite, and therefore also a man
of strict morals, It would have perplexed and
displeased him to think that anybody else had
seen Ruth, and might suspect both her and
himself of an illicit meeting on the solitary
thresling-floor. He would have scarcely
listened to her, but removed her atonce. The
purpose for which she came had also an appro-
priate symbolism which any previous meeting
would have disturbed.”—Lange.

“The church must put on her best attire when
she comes to Christ. She is brought to the
King in raiments of needlework, in the Psalms
(xiv. 14) ; she puts on her beautiful garments,
in Isaiah (lii. 1); she is adorned as a bride for
her husband in raiment pure and white, in the
Apocalypse (Rev. xxi. 2).”— Wordsworth.

‘She was to discover nothing of her intention
to Boaz when she went to the feast, but rather
to avoid any particular notice, that he might
entertain no suspicion of what was to follow.


Concealment of intentions may be very proper
and very consistent with uprightness in some
cases. But we must beware of doing anything
that will not bear the light, or using those arts
of concealment in transacting lawful affairs
that may be attended with bad effects upon
our character. It was perfectly consistent
with uprightness in Samuel to conceal his
chief intention when he came to Bethlehem to
anoint David; andin Solomon, when he com-
manded a sword to be brought and his guards
to slay the living child about which the two
harlots contended.”— Lawson.


“Seek him in private when no eye but that
of heaven is upon thee; come secretly to his
feet, and lay thy helpless, desolate state open
before his seat of mercy ; freely confess the
baseness of thine original; he will not despise
thee on acconnt of the hole of the pit frozs
whence thou wast digged.”—Macgowan,


——=—— ee


VERSES 65, 6,
Theme.—Oxuviencr in INNOCENCE
* Age, by long experience well informed,


As time improves the grapes authentic juice
Mellows and makes the speech more fit for
And claims a reverence in its shortening day,
That ’tis an honour and a joy to pay.”


All that thow sayest unto me I will do, And she went, ete;


Ruth once more a model of filial obedience, and that when called upon to
discharge a difficult and delicate mission, one which must have been trying tc
her modesty as a woman. She errs, if at all, by excess of complaisance. The
errors of young people are commonly of an opposite kind (Lawson).

If anyone is to be blamed it must be Naomi. Her acquaintance with the
laws and customs of Israel are her defence. Ruth, as a foreigner, was dependent
upon her for instruction in these things. She obeys, although she might very
naturally shrink from the task. Gratitude, respect for Naomi, as well as reason
led her. Goes freely and without fear. Hesitates not, doubts not.

Three things exemplified and enforced here—

I. Humble trustfulness on the part of the young. ( 1) On the lowest ground
a duty. (2) On higher ground to be cultivated as a virtue. (3) On highest, as
its own reward, a pleasure. The sequel proves that this obedience of Ruth was
not tempting Providence—rather it was acting upon faith. The trust that haa
brought her so far sustains her now. Goes with unshrinking confidence.

Il. Deference to the opinions and judgment of the aged. An important


lesson. Note. These more likely to be correct than those of the young. More
experienced.
III. That cheerful compliance which adds grace to obedience, The way we


obey is something as well as the act itself [cf. on i. 10, p. 44, Macgowan).

Note. (a) Ruth not only promised but performed. Contrasts with many who
say, and do not; or who will not say, and yet do. More, (6) she carries out her
obedience to the slightest detatls of the project. ‘All that thou sayest I will do.”
How important is this that obedience should be thorough [through out) The

150


CHAP. 111. 7—18.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





fortune of things of the greatest importance often hangs upon the doing or
leaving undone a thing which seems very small (Guicctardiant).


“ That the conduct of Ruth was in accord-
ance with the law under which she lived
cannot be doubted. See Deut. xxv. 5—10,
where no option seems left to the woman.
The demand was a duty which she owed to
the memory of her dead husband, whose name
she was to continue ; tothat husband’s mother,
who was more than a parent to her, and whom
she might rescue from indigence and misery;
to the nation whose tribes and law of inherit-
ance were thus appointed to be preserved; and
to God, whose mandates were thus obeyed, and
who held out to her the propect that Messiah
possibly might, as we find, he actually did,
spring from this union.”— Macartney,

“Abraham equivocated; David doubly
sinned; Peter denied his Lord; Paul was
not faultless; Aaron enticed to idolatry;
Moses spoke anadvisedly with his lips; in
fact every vessel in the sanctuary has been
flawed; only one has been pure, perfect,
spotless, unimpeachable; that we may all
feel how true is that word, ‘If we say that we


have no sin we deceive ourselves,’ and by the
contrast how magnificent is that character
which was holy, harmless, and undefiled, and
separate from sinners. Suppose, then, Naomi’s
advice does not commend itself to you as
proper even in these circumstances ; let it be
regarded as wrong ; yet the record of what an
individual does in the inspired page, is not,
therefore, the justification of his condact.”—
Cumming.


“Tempting God oie is either by act-
ing presumptuously in carnal confidence, or in
unbelief through diffidence. Not the
encountering difficulties therefore makes us to
tempt God ; but the acting before and without
faith. If the Lord has in any measure per-
suaded His people, as generally He hath, of
the lawfulness, nay, of the duty, this persua-
sion prevailing upon the heart is faith; and
acting thereupon is acting in faith, and the
more the difficulties are, the more the faith.” —
Cromwell,


aa Shy


VERSES 7—13.


Crrrican anv Exrerticar Norrs.—Ver. 7. And when Boas. Illustrates the simplicity of
encient patriarchal times and manners (Lange). The owners of the crops came every night
and slept upon their threshing floors, and this we found to be universal in all the regions of
Gaza (Dr. Raines): Had eaten and drunk. An Eastern idea that great men were more kindly
disposed after eating SS Esth. vii. 3). And his heart was merry [cheerful]. Not necessarily
implying any excess (Sp. Com.); cheerful and happy over a bountiful harvest (Steele and Terry).
(Cf. Judg. xix. 6—9 ; 1 Kings xxi.7; 2 Sam. xiii, 8. in Judges XViil. 20 ; Prov. xv. 15 it de-
notes gladness without any reference to eating and drinking. Designed to point out the danger en-
countered by Ruth, and the virtue of Boaz (Lange). He went to lie down. Betakes himself
to rest in the solitude of the open field (Lange). In the open air wrapped up, »s it seems, in his
cloak (Wright). And she came softly. see Judges iv. 21. Secretly (Keil). Not s0, but
quietly, softly—in a muffled manner (Cassel). And uncovered his feet. Servants in the Kast
often sleep in this position. If the weather is cold usage allows this using the covering of the
master’s bed (Kitto). And laid her down. And uncovered the skirt of his cloak, and fell (én
sleep) at his feet (Syr. Arab). Natives of the Hast care little for sleeping accommodation, but
rest where weariness overcomes them, lying on the ground (Postans).

Ver. 8. The man was afraid [startled, Lange]. The Targum renders it, “and trembled ”—
the translator explaining his sense of the word by the silly gloss, and his flesh was made soft
like a turnip (Wright). And turned himself, Rather “ bent forward,” go as to feel what was
at his feet (Speaker's Com.). Same word as Judges xvi. 29—“ took hold of.” “ Bent over”
(Cappellus, Rosen, Gesen. Bertheau Wright). ; : :

Ver. 9. Who art thou? What is your news? (Syr.). What is your state ?—+¢.e., What is the
matter with you? (Arab). Spread therefore. Lit, And thou hast spread (Morison). A request
as in AV (Lange, Wordsworth, Wright, gc). Thy skirt. Thy wings (Tremel, Junius, Geddes,
Bertheau, Keil, Wright, gc.). Same word as in ii. 12—“ Under whose wings thou art come, &e
In Hebrew marriages the bridegroom places his tal/ith on the head of his bride. The phrase
indicates receiving the woman in soctetatem tori acknowledging her as a wife (Speaker's Com.}.
Equivalent to “I have made thee my wife,” in Ezek. xvi 8 (Wright). We are inclined, how-
ever, to adopt the opinion of those who consider the word to be employed metaphorically of pro:
tection, as in ii, 12, much more delicate way for Ruth to intimate her wish (ibid). Let thy
name be called upon thine handmaid (cp. Is. iv. 1) by taking her as a wife (Targum). But
cover thy handmaid with a corner of thy cloak (Syr.). A near kinsman [a redeemer] a goel,
one that hath a right to redeem. :

Ver. 10. Blessed be thou. The same phrase as in ii. 20. Thou hast showed more kindness.
Lit. ‘Thou hast made thy last kindness better than the first. The first was faithfulness to her
husband and her mother-in-law, the last was her willingness to accept Boaz, aged as he was.
This latter feeling, according to Rosenmiiller and Bertheau, allied to her attachment to her


151


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.  cuap, w1. 7—14.








former husband, for whom she wished to raise seed (Wright). ‘The kindness which thou art
showing to thy husband now that he is gone is still greater than that thou didst show to him
while he lived (Michaelis). Inasmuch as thou followedst, Lit. In not going after the young
men, whether [after] a poor one or a rich one.

Wer. 11. My daughter. Continues to speak as one older than herself. Fear not, A common
thing to fear where there is intense desire. All that thou required [sayest]. All the city
[Lit. gate] cf. Gen. xxxiv. 24; Dent. xvii. 2 [see on iv. 1]. This not to be understood with the
Targumist to signify only the council of the elders, but rather to mean all the people who were
wont to assemble at the gate (Wright). A virtuous woman ju) duvapsoc (LXX). Lit.
A woman of strength. A good woman (Lange), Strong in a moral sense. Corresponds with
the common expression, man of valour (Steele and Terry). Means that Ruth was strong in all
that constitutes female excellence and worth ; possessed force of character, &c. ‘The same
Hebrew word as in Prov, xxxi, 10: “ A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband.” Boaz
fully justified in ascribing to this very act an honourable principle.

Ver. 12, And now it is true. Truly indeed only a goel am I (Bertheau). 9%) in order to
strengthen the assurance (Lange). Howbeit there is a kinsman [redeemer] nearer than I.
But there is also a goel nearer of kin than I (Speaker’s Com.), From this it appears that Naomi
had laboured under some mistake. Probably she was ignorant of the existence of this nearer
kinsman (Steele and Terry). Or there may have been on her part a knowledge of his inability
or unwillingness to act the part of a redeemer (iv. 6). Cox, however, thinks she hada
further purpose. Of the women Naomi has tho first claim [upon her kinsman]. How isshe to
show that she waives it in favour of Ruth? Of the men the unnamed kinsman has the first
right to redeem. How is Naomi to indicate that she would prefer Boaz? She achieves both
points at a stroke by sending Ruth to Boaz [See Coz, p. 115—6].

Ver. 18. Tarry this night. Dangerous to return to the city in the darkness, but not in the
indistinct twilight (ver. 14). He cannot send her away, uor is he afraid to let her remain
 eocee If he will perform the part of a kinsman. Lit. If he will redeem thee (Lange)

‘anslate redeem and redeemer throughout the verse.


eof


VERSES 7—14,
Theme.—A Deuicats Mission DerenpE,


‘Fie on possession
But if a man be virtuous withal.— Chances.


And when Boaz had eaten, etc.


We need not dwell on this part of the narrative except to defend it from un-
fair surmises, and possibly from what men have added to the simplicity of the
story. The Scriptures in this very much liké human life—we find in them what
we take to them. There are who see evil suggestiveness everywhere. The eye,
no longer single, the whole world is full of evil Nothing in these incidents,
however, but what is perfectly in accordance with the customs of the East, the
habits of the age, or with modesty itself. Note, (a) Men should be judged by the
standard of their own times—especially in matters of custom. While virtue and
vice are the same always, manners and customs are continually varying. Note,
(6) An Eastern custom not necessarily a bad one because we do not approve of tt
(Cumming).

Look, 1. At what is certainly known in connection with the incidents before
us. (1) That Boaz and Ruth must have come into daily contact during the
harvest season. Hence mutual esteem and regard may be expected to have
sprung up (ver. 10) passibly admiration and affection. (2) That there were
reasons for reticence on the part of Boaz (a) his age (b) the fact that there was a
nearer kinsman. (3) That the widow had a right to claim marriage from the
nearest of kin. [For the Levirate marriage, see extract from Lange, and Crit.
and Exeg. N otes on ver. 1, 2 &c.]. If any one might criticise, and com-
plain of the project it is Boaz, yet he does nothing but commend, (ver. 11)
a en jane feet neither Naomi or Ruth had overstepped what was customary
or lawrui under the circumstances, No apolocy was m i
expressed by Boaz (Statham), Ate ie! miaebuiinae rec

152


cmap, 1. 7—14. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.








Look again II. At what fairly may be said in defence of the act.
(1) Zt was in general accordance with the usages of the tume and vlace. The inter-
view in the open air [see Crit. and Exeg. Notes]. The claim made ty an act
expressive of taking the place of a servant, and of claiming protectior (Spread
thy skirt, &c.); a more delicate way after all than if done by Ruth in the
harvest field before the servants and reapers engaged there. Note. Vhe trans-
action concerned only those engaged tn tt,—was a matter of the most private and
delicate nature. If followed by a refusal on the part of Boaz it was best for
both parties, the thing should be kept as a secret. As the issue proved it
showed the confidence of both women in the integrity of Boaz. True love wu
always bold and may venture where false would fail. Only in the event of Boaz
proving untrue could the end be disastrous, and we may rest assured that
Naomi had settled this point to her own satisfaction. She knew her man and
acted accordingly. His diffidence must be removed, his recollection of duty
stimulated in this abrupt and dramatic way. He must be put upon his
honour (Statham).

(2) It was done with a definite end and purpose, and that in no way connected
with intrigue (a) to do honour and raise posterity to the dead Mahlon. To the
pure all things are pure. Ruth simple concerning evil. Had there been the
slightest immodesty in the place it would have tended to have defeated its own
purpose and alienated Boas. (b) There was the hope that Boaz would redeem
the land (Braden).

(3) It was done by the advice of an elderly and pious woman. Not an English
or European mother, indeed bound by the sensitive conventionalities of a highly-
civilised and fastidious society, but an Eastern mother, &c. (Braden). Note.
Children do not generally sin in collusion with their elders and parents.

(4) This advice doubtless had respect to the upright character and known prety of
Boaz. Ruth sent not to a young man but to one advanced in years, one who
had previously commended her purity and worth.

ImpRovemMENT. (1) All agree that this is not to be drawn into a precedent
(1, Henry) ; laws, customs, ete. differ now. (2) True also that others may do
what it is not wise for us to do, go where it would be dangerous for us to go,
(2) because ther motives are higher and purer than ours, (6) because their spirit
«3 less liable to be influenced by evil. One man is no law to another as to what
would be temptation. Every man must judge for himself as in the sight of God
[cf. on i. 15, p. 65].

Ver 7. And when Boas had eaten and drunk, ee. No asceticism here. Becomes
the rich and great to be generous (M/. Henry). There isa time to be merry,
The phrase here involves no excess (see Crit. and Exeg. Noves). Means that he waa
physically comfortable (Pulpit Com.) Note. Chrost's glory to declare the sacred-
ness of all natural enjoyments (Robertson). His first miracle wrought at @
marriage feast, at which the language of the master (John ii. 10) tells us there
had been, not excess of course, but happiness and merry-making. He himself |
called a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber.


“There is but one indivisible point from
which we should look at a picture ; all others
are too near or too distant, too high or too low.
Perspective fixes this point precisely in the
art of painting ; but who shall fix it in regard
to truth and morals? (Pascal). Now. there are
a right and a wrong point from which we may
judye of the scene described in these verses.
Judge of it according to the maxims and the
manners of our own age and country, and we
shall inevitably fall into a most mistaken
estimate of the characters and events that pass
before us. We must be fully aware of the
peculiarities in ancient manners and laws; we


muat stand in thought amid the simplicities
and catch the colouring of Oriental pastoral
life; for this is the ‘ point neither too near
nor too distant, neither too high nor too low”
—the true perspective position from which to
look, and to form a oorrect moral judgment
of the whole transaction.—Thomson.

To understand the incidents of this chapter
we must have before us the ancient custom
and laws of levirate marriage, so called from the
Latin word levir, a brother-in-law. We meet —
the first instance of it in Gen. xxxviti, 8,
where Judah ealls upon his younger son Onan
te marry Er’s widow, and thus preserve his

168


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RUTH. CHAP. I. 9.
ee ceNr mu sAsiRi:Serat=SRSISSRIG Ua eS REAR RAGS RSS RT? aT a, a


orother’s name. The custom, however, was
not peculiar to the Hebrews solely, but has
been found toexist in several eastern coun-
tries. The Mosaic law on the subject is given
in Deut. xxv. 5—10, and is in substance as
follows : If a man die and leave no children,
his brother is under obligation to marry the
widow, and she has a right to demand it of
him. This obligation, however, is not abso-
lutely binding. . . . From this book
of Ruth we see that the levirate law was so
contrived that in case the deceased husband
had no surviving brother the obligation to
saarry the widow devolved upon his next
oearest kinsman.— Lange.


The Hebrew word for this kinsman is ON]
goel which means a redeemer. Its root is the
exact equivalent of the Greek Avo to loose,
from which comes the New Testament Avrpoy
a@ransom. The meaning of the word is pro-
foundly set forth in the various grand his-
torical unfoldings of its ideas. According to
the social philosophy of the Mosaic law no
member of the national organisation was to
perish, no branch of the tree was to wither;
whatever had been dislocated by natural events
was to be reset; whatever had been alienated
was to be redeemed. This applied to lands as
well as to persons; and the duty of redemp-
tion rested, as within the nation, so within the
families into which the nation brarched out.
No one could redeem anything for a family
who did not belong to it by blood relationship.
The Great Liberator of Israel is God. He
frees from servitude. For that reason the
Messiah who delivers Israel is called Goél-
Redeemer, When He appears he will come as


Israel’s blood relation and brother, as Christ
truly was.—Cassel (condensed) hs

We must remember that delicacy as distin-
guished from morality consists not in any par-
ticular action, but in the conformity of that
action with the habits of the society in which
we live; while morality often requires a sturdy
opposition to those very habits. To judge of
the morality of an action we must therefore
inquire concerning its conformity to the
law of God; to judge of its delicacy,
its conformity to the law of contemporary
opinion. . . . . . Nothing can be
more unrizhteous than the measure which
ungodly persons apply to the characters of the
Old Testament saints; the nations called Chris-
tian and Protestant, receive from the Gospel
notions of purity and real delicacy, of which
man, without that revelation, has no concep-
tions. They receive them, but deny or forget
the source from whence they came; and, re-
garding these Gospel sentiments as natural
laws, represent these holy men of God as vio-
lating the first principles of the natural law
of conscience, when, in fact, they were walk-
ing fully in accordance with the light they
possessed, and earnestly desiring to see the
rising of a brighter day.— Macartney.

What took you there? What right had
you to be there? ‘Those are the critical
questions on which everything depends. If
you are passing through temptation with your
eye fixed on a pure, true life beyond it, temp-
tation being only a necessary stage upon your
way, so long as you keep that purpose, that
resolution, that ideal, you shall be safe. If

ou are in temptation. with no purpose beyond
it, you are lowt.—P, Brooks.


VERSE 9.


Theme.—A Cry vor SHELTER AND a Cram For HELP,


“ Therefore I come, thy gentle call obeying,
And lay my sins and sorrows at thy feet,
On everlasting strength my weakness staying,
Clothed in Thy robe of righteousness complete.”


Who art thou? Iam Ruth, thine handmaid. Spread, therefore, thy skirt [winge]
over thine handmaed.,


This conversation, a strangely interesting and suggestive one. Fear may
possess wise and godly men (ver. 8), yet they moderate it and are not over-
mastered by it. Boaz evidently has both his terror and his passions completely
within control.

Evident, too, that both actors in the scene fully understand the meaning and
the teaching of the Hebrew law as to the relationship between them. By a very
delicate and thoroughly national figure of speech, the same Boaz has himself
referred to and used, (ii. 12) Ruth claims the acknowledgment of this relation-
ship. She asks to do with respect to Boaz what he has already seen her do with
regard to Jehovah, te. take shelter under his protecting wings. And she uses
the strongest argument possible in order to prevail, taken alike from the law and

1as


CHAP. III, 9. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





from the word of God, Thou art a near kinsman. The fact that she is of Moah
can no longer stand in the way. Has he not himself received and treated her as
an Israelitish maiden $ (Lange).

In this act, I. She claims an honourable acknowledgment of the relationship
existing between them. He owed it asa duty, she asks it as a right. Mark,
too, the petition can no longer be denied without disgrace to one or the other.
She comes with boldness, and risks her fair name upon the result. So with
Esther going in to Abasuerus (Est. iv. 15). So with the woman (Luke viii. 43)
approaching Christ, upheld by a similar ground of hope, and a like conviction
that help lay in Him. Note. How brave and trusting ts such an approach
(Wordsworth). This confidence itself is the earnest of success. The kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, etc.

So, as between Israel and God, the very same idea is used to convey the idea
of covenant relationships recognised as toward His own. “I have spread my
skirt over thee,” is equivalent to I have made thee my wife (zk. xvi. 8).

II, She asks protection and help. Rest under the guardianship of a husband,
one of the underlying ideas of the whole book. ‘I'he covering of the bride-
groom’s bed called a “ wing ” among the Hebrews (cf. Deut, xxii, 30). In word
and in symbolical action alike Ruth refers to this fact. Note. Husbands are
or should be a protection to their wives.

These natural relationships have their spiritual analogies. The figurative
representation of God in this attitude, as one protecting with outstretched wings,
is a common and familiar one in Scripture. [See on “The Sheltering wings,” ii. 12,


pp. 119, 120.] We have here (1) a cry for shelter, (2) a clavm for assistance.


Means take my all under thy care.


So sinners come to Christ.


« Rock of ages cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee.”


III. She renounces all else to make this claim (ver. 10). Her near relation-
ship, her encouragement—she takes Boaz for better or worse. And she does all
this with abundant and evident humility, self-abasoment, and self-renunciation


[ef. on ii. 10, page 111.]


Improvement. (1) What a lowly attitude.
Christ, content to touch the hem of his


the Syrophenician woman came to


(2) What a significant one. So


garment unobserved. So the Gentile Church comes to Christ, humbly, faith-


fully, and lovingly (Wordsworth).


“In the present day, at a Jewish marriage,
they always take up the corner of the plaid or
cloak of the bridegroom, and spread it over
the head of the bride. I saw in the Roman
Catholic Church of Notre Dame a marriage,
at which they seemed to retain a fragment of
the ancient usage; after the parties were
married, and the priest was pronouncing the
benediction, he spread a robe over the heads
of both—a memorial of the ancient Jewish
usage, ‘Spread thy skirt over me.’ ”— Cumming.

“Jt is our melancholy and miserable misap-

rehension, that we fancy there is some re-
Jnetanee on Christ’s part that needs to be
overcome, some repulse in His mind that we
need to do away with, and that we have to
persuade and urge Him to do what we yearn
to have done, to forgive us all our sins, and
to blot out all our iniquities, This is a great
mistake; ten thousand times more willing is
Christ to receive you, than ever you were to
make application to Him.”—J6id.

« «Thou art he that has a right to redeem a
family and estate from perishing, and there-


- His wings over them.


fore let this ruin be under thy hand; and
spread thy skirt over me—be pleased to ea-
pouse me and my cause.” Thus must we, by
faith, apply ourselves to Jesus Christ as our
next kinsman, that is able to redeem us; come
under His wings, as we are invited (Matt.
xxiii, 37), and beg of Him to spread His
skirt over us. Lord Jesus, take me into Thy
covenant and under Thy care. I am oppressed,
undertake for me.”—Matt. Henry.

‘6 Marriage is a resting place. The wife
finds rest under the proiection of her husband,
as Israel finds it under the overshadowing
wing of Jehovah. Even until the latest
times, the figurative representation of God as
the living Bridegroom of His people, con-
tinues. instructively and sublimely, to run
through Scripture and tradition. Christ says,
(Matt. xxiii. 87), ‘ How often,’ etc. Israel
has rest (menuchah) when God spreads out
The Psalmist prays to
be covered by the shadow of Jehovah's wings.
Boaz says to Ruth (Chap. ii. 12), ‘ May thy
reward be complete, since thou hast come to

TAH


HOMILEL1IC COMMENTARY: RUTR.


CHAP, 111. 10, 11.





take refuge under the wings of Jehovah, the
God of Israel.’ That which Ruth there did
with respect to the God of Boas, she now asks
to be permitted to do with respect to Boaz
hinselt. ‘he husband gives rest to the wife
by spreading out his wings over her.”—


“ Under the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure 3
Sufficient is Thy arm alone,
And our defence is sure,” — Watts.


“ These times were not delicate. This man,
though great in Bethlehem, lays himself down
to rest upon a pallet, on the floor ot his

When he awakes at midnight, no


marvel if he were amazed to find himself
accompanied. Yet though his heart were
cheered with wine, the place solitary, the
night silent, the person comely, the invitation
plausibl-, could he not be drawn to a rash act
of lust, his appetite could not get the victory
of reason, thougn it had wine and opportunity
to help it. Herein Boaz showed himself a
great master of his affections that he was able
to resist a fit temptation, It is no thanks to
many that they are free of some evils. Per-
haps they wanted not will, but convenience.
But if a man, when he is fitted with all helps
to his sin, can repel the pleasure of sin out of
ores this is true fortitude." —Bishop


omaGi¢ouss


VERSES 10, 11,


Theme.—Viagtur REcoGNISED AND BLESsEm


“ A good man’s prayers
Will from the deepest dungeon climb to heaven's height,
And bring a blessing down.”—Joanna Baillie.


Blessed be thou of the Lord, etc. For thou hast shown more kindness, ete. AU the
city [gate] doth know that thou art a virtuous woman.


A good man will not lightly condemn the virtuous for some show of evil
(Bernard). Boaz instead of blaming Ruth blesses her, and praises her Virtue, a
significant fact to those who question her conduct. Makes no complaint of being
disturbed in the night, nor of too great importunateness (Lange). On the other
hand entertains no thought of abusing her confidence (Ibid). Note (a) Actions
are often to be estimated from the character of the actor (Lawson). Some unknown
cause may explain away everything that otherwise might seem suspicious. (6)
Prety prevails even in @ situation like this, She calls herself “ his handmaid,”'
he calls her “his daughter,” and the actions of both are in keeping with this.

Dwell I. On the benediction. [cf. on IL, 4, p. 100; II., 12, p- 116; also on I,
8, 9 p. 38]. May be looked upon either (1) a petition, (2) An expression of
good wishes, the opposite of cursing. (3) An affirmation. Note, Whe godly
alihough poor may be blessed (Bernard).

Implies (a) Piety. Fervent prayer, even when a mere ejaculation or the
expression of benevolent desire, rests upon belief in God and His willingness to
bless. (b) Deference to the Divine Will. Bows to that and is in harmony with
that. Ifthe words are a mere salutation, they imply sympathy and express
friendly and benevolent feelings. How much of the joy and pleasantness of life
depends upon a word “fitly spoken!” hese courtesies of life not to be neglected
by the true Uhristian. Boaz did not forget them even in such a trying situation.
They are everywhere sanctioned by Scriptural usage.

Li, The Reasons for this expression of goodwill. (1) Thow hast showed more
kindness at the latter end, etc. The virtuous are better at last than at first
(Bernard). Thus love grows stronger as ditficulties abound ; not only begins
but continues its ministry and its mission. So with Ruih. Her affection for
the dead Mahlon to be seen in her present act [See on kindness to the dead II,
20]. Note. Apostates like Judas, Demas, Alexander (the coppersmith) were truly :
good at the first—grow more evil at the last just because of this (Bernard).

(2) AU the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman. A great
recommendation—her virtue manifest, known, seen, acknowledged. Graces may

156


cuaP. 111. 10,11. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
rr ae oe


exist and yet be hidden. Here they shine forth conspicuous, resplendent. A
stranger, a Moabitess, yet not only escaping calumny, but winning favour. Such
was Ruth. Note. Virtue makes even the poor to become famous.

Her virtue manifested in her circumspect conduct towards the aged and the
young, rich and poor alike. Manifested everywhere, recognised of all. All the
city [gates.] Note. Character tells everywhere (Statham). The price of such
above rubies (Prov. xxxi 10-31). Her works to praise her in the gates (31),

IMPROVEMENT.—(a) Virtue (1) recognised (2), received (3), rejoiced over (4),
rewarded by the godly. Note. Virtue a means of preferment, a source of praise,
“ Blessed be,” &c. (b) See how completely Boaz turns what would have been the
hour of temptation to many, into a time when his gifts and graces shine out the
more conspicuously. What wise counsel, what just and appropriate speech,
what careful thoughtfulness for others, what gentleness, courtesy, and bene-


volence! Note.


Good men praise virtue where others would practise vice. Its spel


holds them in the extremest moments of temptation.


“She calleth herself his ‘handmaid ;’ he
calleth her his ‘daughter.’ There is nothing
lost by humility. The humble shall have
‘riches, and honour, and life’ (Prov. xxiii
4).”—Trapp.

“How blessed is 8 man the moment his
thought has come into the realisation of this
God, who is to-day and to-morrow, night and
day, at home and abroad, every where, thinking
of him and interested in him! Not of a God
who is penned up behind marble laws ; nota
God who is afar off, and who requires that
some one shall ascend into the heaven and
bring him down; but a God with ns; a God
in us; a God for ns,”—Beecher.

“Exemplary virtue ought to have its due
praise (Phil, iv. 8), and it will recommend
both men and women to the esteem of the
wisest and best. Ruth was a poor woman and
poverty often obscures the lustre of virtue:
yet Ruth’s virtue, even in a mean condition,
were generally taken notice of and could not
be hid: nay, her virtues took away the re-
proach of her poverty. If poor people be but
good people they shall have honour from God


The less she proclaimed her own goodness the
more did her neighbours take notice cf it. In
the choice of yolk-fellows, virtue should ese
pecially be regarded, known approved virtue.
Let religion determine the choice, and it will
certainly crown the choice and wake if; come
fortable.” — Matt. Henry.

“Tnstead of touching ker ae a wanton, he
blesses her as a father, eacourages her asa
friend, promiseth her as 9, kinsman, reward
her as a patron, aud sends her away laden
with hopes and gifts ; no ese chaste, but more
happy than when she came. Oh, admirable
temperance, wortby the progenitor of Him in
whose lips and hesrt was no guile! ’—Bishop
Hall.

“A man’s nature is best perceived in privates
ness, for there is no affectation ; in passion,
for that putteth a man out of his precepts,
and in a new case or experiment for there
custom leaveth him.”— Bacon,


“A noble mind !
With this and pleasures under ban,
True faith and holy trust in God,


and man. Ruth had been remarkable for her Thou art the peer of any inan.”—
humility, which paved the way to this honour, Gallagher,
===


VERSES 12, 18%
Jheme.—Carze ror TH# Ciaims or OTHEE&


Ah me!


How dark the discipline of pain,


Were not the suffering follow by the sense
Of infinite rest and infinite release !
This is our consolation !’—Long fellow,


Ver. 12, 13. Lam thy near kinsman [redeemer], howbert there te a kinsman nearer
than I. If he will perform, ete. |lit. if he will redeem thee], but tf not then


I will, etc.


Ruth’s recompense and rest begins from this hour.
“ Fear not, 1 will do to thee etc.,” and she may repose in confi-
Note. Where a godly and honest man makes a promise there te


man is pledged.
dence upon that.


The word of an honorable


hittle fear of failure, With such to say is to do.


WG


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cuar. 111. 12, 13.





oe ae


There is a difficulty, however, in the way. of a technical kind indeed, but
none the less a difficulty because of that. Evident that Ruth had impressed
Boas favourably, that inclination pointed in the direction outward circumstances
and claims were pointing. Note (a) The most subtle and dangerous temptations
come tn this way. Come as angels of light, etc. We persuade ourselves we are
even serving others and not ourselves, (b) How good men act under such circum
stances, Boaz remembers even in this hour that there is another and a neare1
kinsman, Yields the preference to duty, not to inclination.

Suggests I. Care for the claims of others—respect for their rights. Note.
Conscientiousness a characteristic of good men always. Justice to give every one
his own, to do to others as we would they should do to us.

(a) The danger comes from our feelings and desires in such moments. We
naturally seek our own interest, and we are right in doing this, so long as they
do not intrude into the sphere sacred to our fellows. Note. The more ardent the
man the more earnest the pursuit, and therefore the best of meu sometimes feel
this temptation to step beyond their own sphere the strongest.

(b) These feelings and desires need to be continually watched. Very easy to
wrong others even in our acts of charity and kindness, much more then in
pursuit of our own gratification. Note. (1) Those nighest to a right are first to be
preferred. (2) Personal feelings always increase the urgency of the claims of
selfishness. (3) Grace can conquer even these tendencies in a good man.

II. Promptness to respond to claims upon ourselves. This request of Ruth’s
cannot be gainsaid—Boaz does not leave her a moment in doubt. Acknowledges
her at once as a kinswoman, and poor as she is, responds to her demand go far as
it falls upon him. He himself will prosecute the matter (Lange).

(1) How easy to evade responsibility. A natural sloth and lethargy of soul
towards duty in most men. The priest and the Levite pass by on the other
side, leaving the poor wounded and bleeding ones to perish. (Luke x, 31, 32.)
(2) How natural to let it rest wpon others, to lay it upon them, and to
criticise them if they fail to respond to it. Note (a) The man who most respects
the claims of others is generally the readiest to respond to those wpon himself.
Boaz an instance of this: tender, true, conscientious all round. (b) Piety, high
principles, true nobility in men run contrary to nature in these things; make us
careful where we are inclined to be careless {in regard to others] and the reverse.
(3) Goodness should show itself in actions, faith be seen in works, kindliness of
heart be manifested in deeds.

Then will I do the part of @ kinsman to thee. [Then will I redeem thee] as the
Lord [Jehovah] liveth.

The law made it incumbent on the nearest kinsman to marry the childless
widow (Deut. xxv. 5.) so as to redeem the inheritance and prevent the name of the
dead husband being forgotten or blotted out, Boaz acknowledges that Ruth’s
claim cannot be gainsaid. What an encouragement this to the humble seeker |
Her rights deferred, not denied.

The Goel or Redeemer here, (1) Responds to the first application. No
importunity needed. The seeker met half way. The burden and responsibility
accepted at once, (2) Conditionally promises all that is asked. No right to
expect more than a sonditional promise. Other rights beyond our own in the
universe. (3) Does soon the existence of God. “As Jehovah liveth "a solemn
oath, not to be lightly taken, not to be easily put aside. Note. How strong the
Rope that ts built upon such, [On the Kinsman Redeemer, see iv, 9-10, p.J


“When Alexander the Great took Tyre he better title than himeelf to the royal dignity,
was informed of a young prince who had ob- for they were of the ancient blood of the Tyrian
tained a high character for virtue, and offered kings. Boaz deserves no Jess praise than this
him the crown, ‘The young prince refused it, Tyrian prince. Such a wife as Ruth would
because he had an elder brother who had a _ have been preferred by Boas to a royal diadem ;

158


cnapP, 111, 14—18. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


i


yet he would not take her to himself to wife
whilst there lived another man who had a pre-
ferable claim to her, if he was willing to make
use of his right. We ought to‘ look every
man not on his own things only but every man
also on the things of others.’”—Lawson,

“ Howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than J.
There are different degrees of relation, all of
which have their respective duties, and their
respective rights belonging to them. We sin
either by neglecting any of the duties to these
relations, or by arrogating the rights peculiar
to nearer relations. Boas would do everything
to serve Ruth that becarne her nearest relation,
but one; and this one thing he declined, be-
cause he had no right to do it. He would not
intrude into the rights of another man till they
were voluntarily surrendered. As every man
ought to abide in his own calling, so we all
ought to keep our own places in society.
Much of the unhappiness, and many of the
sins of social life originate in that assuming
and meddling disposition, which renders some
people a pest to their neighbours and still
more to themselves.”—Jbid.

“What true Christian chivalry born of
faith, there was in the heart of this Bethlehem
yeoman. He was not only sternly honest, but
sensitively honorable, bearing his escutcheon
without a sinister brand on it. We trace the
same quality in some of the most memorable
passages in the early life of his illustrious
descendant, the greatest of Israel’s kings.
David knew from the prophet Samuel that he
was divinely selected for the throne of the
Hebrew Commonwealth. The life of Saul
was more than once in his power, and the un-
relenting persecution with which he pursued
him and sought to destroy him, would have
seemed to a conscience that was less informed
and scrupulous, almost to warrant his taking
his life, and seizing the sceptre as it fell from
his hands, But he will not so much as lift up
his finger ‘against the Lord’s anointed,’ or
ascend toa throne by steps that are stained
with blood. He dare not force Providence, or
enjoy a blessing while sitting on the grave of
amurdered duty. To wait God’s time, is to
prove that ‘We believe in God,’ is not only an
article in our creed, but an active principle in
our Christian life.”—Zhomson.

“ A godly life includes every form of moral
virtue—temperance, wisdom, fortitude of every
kind, moralities, whether on a low scale of in-
dividual interest, on a higher scale of society
relations, or in the highest form to which
patriotism inspires. All these are included in
religion — Beecher.

“He is an Israelite, not only before men,
but also before God alone. And it was because


he did not forget, what man is naturally so
prone to forget, that God sees him, that he is
so mindful of his duty. Hypocrites, when
alone, are different from what they appear in
company. Israelites like Boaz feel and act in
the presence of the all-knowing God alone
not otherwise than they would if all the stars
of. heaven and all the creatures of earth could
testify against them. Boaz showed an active
faith when he gave no place to temptation.
Pious and offenceless as he was when Ruth
came to claim the right of the poor, he is
equally so now when she asks for her right of
redemption, Then the question was only
about a few ears of grain, now it involves his
own person and estate. Then he was kind in
the presence of Ruth’s humility, now he is
humble in the presence of her claim to be
righted. Then he forgot herself in the fact
that she had ever owned another law than that
of Israel. Then his tender delicacy made
Ruth assured of her safety in his fields; now
that same delicacy understands that since she
has come to him the right she claims must be
fulfilled. He might have released himself by
the letter of the law to which she appeals—
there was a nearer relative ; but his faith isan
active faith. ‘The question was one of right,
not of ingenious play with the letter, The
claimant must be satisfied. And he does what
he promised to do.”——Lange.

“ According to its derivations, goe/ means one
who wunlooses,’ unlooses that which has been
bound, and restores it to its original position.
The goel did his duty, for example, if he
redeemed a promissory note by paying it and
handing it back to the'man who had given it 5
or if he had redeemed a pioce of !and by pay-
ing off the liens upon it and restoring it to its
original owner; or if he redeemed a captive
by payimg his ransom and setting him free.
So that the fundamental idea of a goel
was that of a man who redeemed, or set loose,
that which had in any way been bound,”—
Cox,

“Tt is easy to understand, how, in process
of time, this title came to be applied both to
Jehovah and to Jesus. Jehovah was the
Redeemer of Israel; for, again and again,
he interposed to save them from captivity, or
to ransom them when they had been carried
away captives and to preserve them a name
and a place in the earth. Jesus is the Re-
deemer of the whole world; for when we were
captives to divers lusts, aud groaning under
the oppressions of evil, the Son of Man proved
Himself our true kinsman by paying a ransom
for us and setting us free from our intolerable
bonds,” —Jbid,


raises


VERSES 14—18.


CeiTicaL AND Exreeeticat Norzs —Ver.
his feet, Before one could know another.


14. And she lay at his feet. Lit, The places of
Lit. Before a man could know his companion,


ise his friend (Lange). The Mishna has decided daybreak to begin when it became
Soils to Miatingaiah aan white and blue; B, Mair when a wolf and a dog—R. Akiba


158


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHaP. tL 14


when an ass and a wild ass—could be distinguished. But others said, when one sees and recog-
nises another person at the distance of four ells (¢b¢d), And [ fer] he said, Let it not be known.
It might (1) cause scandal, (2) prejudice the other kinsman’s choice, (8) render it difficult for
him to prosecute his own suit, One suspected of previous intercourse with a foreigner, ever
though she were @ convert, was not allowed to perform the duty of a levirate marriage (Mishna).
That a woman, That “the” woman, The use of the article [the #.¢, this woman] forbids us
to suppose that these words were actually addressed to Ruth (Wright). Luther and Coverdale
explain, * And he said in his heart.” They express Boaz’s opinion which he had previously
intimated to Ruth (Wright), The Targumist considers it unlikely from the words that Boaz
should have been alone in the threshing floor, and renders it, Boaz said to his young men. This
idea, if true, should have its due influence in considering the whole chapter.

Ver. 15. Bring. ‘“ Allow me.” Lit. “Give me.” A current phrase of courtesy (Morison).
The veil. Sheet or apron (Elliot), wrapper (Morison), mantie (Lange). It is merely a square
piece of cotton cloth, and I have often seen it used for just such service as that to which Ruth
applied hers (Dr. Thomson; Land and Book). The mantle worn by the pcorer classes is very
coarse and strong, and large enough to envelope the whole person. The word used here occurs
again only in Is. iii. 22, and is translated “ wimple.” And he measured six measures of barley.
Lit. Six of barley. A considerable load, for he had to put it on her (Lange). He measured
six sacks (nearly two bushels) of barley, and placed it upon her, and she received strength from
the Lord to carry it, and immediately it was said in prophecy that there should come of her the
six righteous ones of the world, &¢ (Chaldee Paraphrast) , The number six is the symbol of
labour and service, which is followed by seven, the time of rest (Lange, Cox), She went into
the city. The pronoun is masculine, He, Boas, went (Lange). Possibly at once to settle the
matier (?). Asin AV, Wright, Vulg. Syr.

Ver. 16. Who art thou? In what condition? (¢e., in what character ?). As the espoused of
Boaz, or what? Cp. Judges xviii. 8. (So Vulg. Bertheau, Michaelis, Maurer, Wordsworth,
Steele and Terry, §c.). Probably stilldark when Ruth reached home (ifot, Drusius). Naomi
knew her daughter, and addressed her as such (Bellamy). How art thou? (¢b¢d). Go not
empty. Not to return as one unappreciated.

Ver. 18. Sit still, Remain quiet (Lange). Stay quietly at home (Steele und Terry). How
the matter will fall. How it is decreed from heaven (Targum). The man will not be in rest.
Omit “be in” (Lange). His actions and his oath show that he will quickly decide the


mattes.


VERSE 14.
Theme.—OarRine FoR a Goop Nama


“Tt is a busy talking world
In which licentious breath blows, like the wind,
As freely on the palace as the cottage.’—Rowe,


She rose up before one could know another [Lit. Before a man could recognise
his friend]. And [for] he sazd, let tt not be known, that a [the] woman, de.

Boaz hopes she may escape unobserved. This necessary, lest the rights of
the other kinsman might have seemed to have been infringed upon [see Crit. and
Exeg. Notes]. They must act not only with strictest honour and propriety, but
with the greatest circumspection and care. Note. Certain situations and circum-
stances may render tt wise and even necessary to do things otherwise uncalled for and
tmproper. ‘Times when secrecy is a duty. If we have done anything that may
expose ourselyes or other to unjust suspicion if it were known, it is not incon-
sistent with integrity to conceal it, providing it can be done without falsehood or
dissimulation (Lawson).

A. Thomson on this (condensed) :—

Let it not be known, etc. We, may generally, suspect the prudence, if not the
virtue, of an act when it needs to be concealed. Boaz possibly felt this.

I. The duty of caring fora good name. A treasure no wise man will trifle
with. Boaz knew its value—trembled when he found himself unexpectedly in
eircumstances capable of an injurious constructioa—sought to screen Ruth from
the withering blight of scandal. True (1) that the judgment of men cannot

16


CHAP. Im. 14. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH,








affect our relation to God; (2) that the approval of conscience is worth more
than the applause of a kingdom. Yet there are two things whereof every man
should be specially chary and tender—his conscience and his credit (St. Augus-
tine). Moral power a divine trust. An equivocal reputation seriously enfeebles
or entirely neutralises our influence, and so injures our power of benefiting men
and of glorifying God. “The sous of God are to be without rebuke.” A good
name rather to be chosen than riches. This one of the seals upon the Pente-
costal Christians. Said (Acts ii. 46, 47) of them they were “ praising God and
having favour with all the people.”

II. The duty of charity in our judgment of others. Boaz judged of Ruth
by himself. In the light of the report of her modest and seemly behaviour,
overlooked the boldness of the step because of the virtuous motive that had
prompted. The wisest course to form our estimate of a doubtful action by the
character of the actor. When we stand in doubt let love turn the scale.

Yet how difficult to teach the grand lesson of charity. Perverse ingenuity
puts the worst construction, makes up by surmise what is wanting in evidence,
hastens to circulate the slanderous tale, etc. Characteristic, however, of a citizen
of Zion that “ae taketh not up an evil report against his neighbour.”


“To be noble, we'll be good,
I live not in myself, but I become
Portion of that around me.”—Byren.


Ver. 15. Bring the veil that thou hast, etc. He measured six measures of barley
ete. A good man will avail himself of the smallest occasion, the slightest chance
of doing good, and conferring benefits upon the worthy. The liberal heart 4s
never weary of well doing. Boaz shows himself the same bountiful, large-hearted
man in the threshing floor asin the harvest field. [On ‘Liberal Giving,” see IL.
15, 16, pp. 127-8.] (1) Here was tangible proof of his regard and thoughtfulness
Every grain a testimony to his esteem and affection for the widow of his kinsman
He said, “Go not empty unto thy mother-in-law.” Did ever a true man send
such “empty” away? (2) Possibly a gift in part to avert suspicion. Her appear-
ance laden with grain, would be less likely to attract attention or call for remark
as she generally left the fields of Boaz laden in this way. A harmless subterfuge
unless used to conceal actual guilt, Everything else of this kind must be judged
by the motive behind. (3) Certainly a significant hint to Naomt. Said plainly
that the claim had in part been responded to. Lange and Cow see a further
significance in the number of measures of barley, sé. In six days the Lord made
heaven and earth, and the seventh the Sabbath of rest follows. [See Crit. and
Exeg. Notes.] (?) Naomi would see the grain in bulk, and Ruth’s mention of
six measures may have been merely accidental. Just possible, however, that
Boaz significantly hinted the result in this way, “ The day of rest is at hand.”


“Here is a very important lesson; we are
not only to abstain from what is evil, but
from even the appearance of evil. Some
people are more zealous in abstaining from
the appearance than from the evil; others are
more zealous, and truly so, in abstaining from
the evil than from the appearance. Our duty
is to abstain from both; not only to do no
evil, but, as far as in us lies, to give to no man
the opportunity of misconstruing the good
that we do. We shall not escape misconstruc-
tion ; it would be wonderful if we did. Mis-
constructions of piety and Christian character
we shall escape * but the misinterpretations of
envy, of pride, of jealousy, of ill-nature, which
are not yet rooted out of the world, it will be
impossible for any man to avvid, do as he
please, and therefore the only way is not to


notice murmurs that must soon die.”— Cum


ing.

“A holy Paul, it has been said, may some-
times be found on board a ship that has
Castor and Pollux for its sign. It is recorded
of the excellent Bishop Ken, that, when his
copy of the Bible was examined after his
death, it opened spontaneously at Paul’s great
chapter of the Corinthians and charity.”—
Thomson.

“There is an over-sensitiveness and over-
delicacy which shows not innocence, but an
inflammable imagination. The soul spreads its
owr hue over everything; the shroud or wedding
garment of nature is woven in the loom of our
own feelings. Persons seem to each man what
he is to himself, One who suspects hypocrisy
in the world is rarely transparent ; the mam

13


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





constantly on the watch for cheating:is gene-
rally dishonest ; he who suspects impurity is
prurient,”— Robertson,

“If we indulge in a tendency to criticise
our neighbour’s affairs, we shall soon find
ourselves speaking things that, to use
Solomon’s phrase are ‘like the piercings of a
sword.’ We can easily ruin a noble reputa-
tion, just as a mischievous child can pull the
most beautiful flower in pieces, but like him,
we cannot restore again its symmetry and fra-
grance, Weare more powerful for evil than


CHAP. I 18,





we think. I am aware that an immense
amount of scandal is not malicious in inten<
tion, and is uttered unconsciously.

« Kvil is wrought from want of thought

As well as want of heart.”—Braden.

* Christian, behold the kindoess and gentle-
ness of Boaz! Will it then be possible that
God, when thou art in need, will send thee
empty away ? Never! His generous hand ia
never closed. Only open Him thine heart,
and divine gitts flow in upon thes without
any action on thy part.” —Starka,





VERSE 18,


Fheme.—Rust iN OursELVEs AND Rest in ANOTHER


“Who may not strive, may yet fulfil
The harder task of standing still,
And good but wished with God is done.”— Whittier.


Sit still [Remain quiet] my daughter until thou know, ete. For the man will
not rest,


The Hebrew bride had to remain at home until her affianced husband came to
fetch her (Coa). Naomi’s advice is evidently that Ruth shall take this position,
Mark, however! Zhe command only follows strenuous effort. She has done all
that she could, all that lay on her side. Now she must wait, not be perplexed,
not unduly anxious. Rest in herself, in her own mind, is to foreshadow and be
the earnest of rest in the house of a husband [cf. on I. 9 ; IIL. i.].

Dwell, I. On the principle underlying this injunction. A time to speak and
a time to be silent ; a time to act and a time to “sit still” ; a time for enterprise
and a time for remaining quiet ; a time to work and atime to wait. Note. Two
sides to lufe, the active and passive, aud both necessary. Night the counterpart and
complement of day, rest and sleep of toil and activity. Men must fall’in with
the claims of the one as of the other ; respond to the laws of “ rest” as of motion,
quietness, as of activity. Note. A lesson for this busy age here.


“ The world is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers.”— Wordsworth,


Men are naturally restless im critical moments like this, The mind anxious, per-
plexed, etc. Yet it may pre-eminently be our duty to sit still then, (a) because it
ts the Divine will. God said to Israel at the most critical moment in her history,
the sea in front, the mountains on either hand, the enemy behind, “Stand still
and see the salvation of the Lord” (Ex. xiv. 13). So in another critical moment,
““ Who is among you . . . that walketh in darkness and hath no light, let
him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon His God” (Is. 1.10). Note,
In such moments our strength ts to sit still, even when we are saying with Saul,
“Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do ?”

(b) Because tt is the only wise course. What can be done by disquieting and
anxious thoughts? Ruth, for instance, could not alter the laws of the
country.

Note. (1) There are times when it ts a waste of power to make further effort, and
a waste of feeling to allow anxiety to distress the heart (Radford Thomas). The
Psalmist pictures such a moment (Ps. xxxvii.) when men would naturally be
fretful and anxious ; and the exhortation to such is, “ Rest in the Lord, and wait
patiently for Him” (v. 7 cf. also 1—3). ; E

Note. (2) There are times when we are simply helpless, and effort és émpossible,

163 .


CHaP. I. 18, HOMILETIC. COMMENTARY: RUTH.





Sitting still certainly justified then. This the underlying thought in Milton's
exquisite ‘Sonnet on his own Blindness ” :—


“ Doth God exact day-labour, light denied ?
* . cd J ®


God doth not need
Either man’s works or his own gifts,
e ® 2 Sd e


They also serve who only stand and wait.”


A lesson here for those laid aside by sickness and infirmity. Providence is saying
to such, “Sit still.” Difficult, but not impossible, to wait while others work.
God’s message to such, “In quietness and confidence shall be your strength”
(Isaiah xxx. 15).

II. The reasons given here for this injunction. (1) To give time and past effort
a fair chance, ‘ Until thou know how the matter will fall.” Sometimes wise to
wait for the sake of observation—where we are, what we have already done.
The traveller has to pause to find his bearings, the sculptor to see the effect of
the blow he has already given. estlessness condemned here, that restlessness
which would be for ever rooting in the earth to see whether the seed is growing.
Note. Faith and patience are essentials in human life. A lesson to Christian
ministers, among others. Preach, labour in season, out of season, etc.; but
learn also to wait, to rest in the promises, to leave the results with God, Over-
doing condemned here, that overdoing which undoes all that already has been
done.

(2) To give time and the efforts of others a fair chance. “ For the man will not
rest until he have finished the thing.” The past had proved how true and
honourable Boaz was—how much to be depended on. Note. (a) We sit still the
more readily when we know that others are engaged om our behalf. Nay, we are
such, so weak in ourselves, that we never find rest at all until we find rest in another,
A deep principle here which lies at the foundation of the marriage relationship
(iii. 1). Note. (0) The whole Christian economy and scheme of redemption rests upon
this fact, that man needs help from without—that he cannot save himself, aud that
he cannot “rest” until he finds it.

Lussons.—(1) We may “sit still” when duty has been loyally performed.
(2) When another who is competent has undertaken for us. Note. (a) He who
rests in Christ rests not without reason; has found an advocate, brother, friend,
kinsman, Saviour, Redeemer; his confidence is not that of the slothful, or the
careless. (b) He that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his own
works (Heb. iv, 10). Mary rather than Martha the type of Christian discipleship
(Luke x, 42).





Theme.—PRoMPTITUDB In Dutins, SEcULAB OB SacRED


« Make haste O man to do
Whatever must be done 5
Thou hast no time to lose in sloth,
Thy day will soon be done.”—Bonar,


Dr. A. Thomson (condensed) on The man will not [be in (omit)] rest until he have
Jinished the thing this day.


This favourable estimate Naomi had formed of the character of Boaz. A man
who meant what he said and did it—not only held a promise sacred, but went
about its fulfilment with a will. Did the right thing at the right time—a person
of probity and promptitude.

Another passage of Scripture kindred to this (Ezra iii. 4). The Israelites, on
their return from Babylon, again offered the daily sacrifice “ according to the custom
as the duty of the day required.” A rich ethical meaning in this word “ duty”—

163


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH CHAP, In. 1&


Ce —





something due by us to God. When it is said we “ ought ” to do a thing, it
means we owe it to God to do it. Not only with the Israelites no omission, but
no delay until the morrow. Not “like silver bells out of tune,” their clock
always seemed to strike at the right moment. Note. One of our Saxon Kings
called Hthelred the Unready. The subject then, punctuality and promptitude
in duties, whether secular or sacred.

I. Certain rules which are indispensable if this is to be our characteristic and
habit. (a) Wot to undertake too much work, grasp at more engagements than there is
a reasonable likelihood of being able to accomplish. (b) Lndeavour by Sorethough
to make the most of every hour. Wise arrangement makes work easier and the day
longer, just as careful packing makes a box contain twice as much, etc. (c) Must
be no indolent procrastination or giving away before little difficulties, Keep
ourselves masters of circumstances, Examples. (1) Eliezer of Damascus sent to
seek a wife for Isaac. What deliberation! What concentration of aim! What
promptitude! (2) Nehemiah building the ruined wall of Jerusalem. Whatso-
ever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might f

The benefits of this ordering of time various and great. Makes what we do
likely to be well done, saves time, conscience, temper, eto,

II. Apply the principle to some things in detail, e.g. the matter of personal
salvation. Every other interest should be made to stand aside as a “ grand
impertinence” until the man “ has given heed to the things of his peace.”

Assuming the supreme interest has been cared for. (1) There are certain duties
which regularly fall to be performed by us, and which may be described as the work of
every day, recur almost as regularly as the rising and setting of the sun, or the
ebbing and flowing of the ocean tides, (4) The duties of our stated secular
vocation, Daily summoned anew in these to serve God. Whatever ye do, in
word or deed, eto. (Col. iii. 17). Paul exemplified his own rule, preaching Christ,
and making tents at Corinth. The Christian disciple may find in every hour of
his daily toil—

“Room to deny himself, a road
To bring him daily nearer God,”


(5) The more direct exercises of religion, especially secret devotion, prayer,
reading of God’s Word, eto.

(2) There +s another class of special duties appropriate to particular times and
circumstances, which may be said to grow out of them. (a) “ The weekly rest of
the Lord’s day,” (6) “ Last will and testament.” Saves family discord. “Do it at
once. The work of the day should be done in the day. (c) Reconciliation with
friend or brother. Be magnanimous, “not in rest,” until you have finished the
thing this day.” (d) Warning friend gradually coming under evil habits, (e)
Succouring the widow, speaking a seasonable word for those who are struggling.
Make haste! To-morrow may be too late, Finish the thing this day.

There are opportunities for doing good, which, if allowed to pass unimproved,
can never return. It is often now or never. Other chances or ways may be
presented, but this particular service never again. The disciples in Gethsemane
lost a golden opportunity, Hence Christ’s words of disappointment, « Sleep on
now,” etc. So with our words of warning and acts of goodness. If omitted
the opportunity will never return, Ob, sad neglect! cruel procrastination | ”


“Make haste O man to live,
Thy time is almost o’er 3
O sleep not, dream not, but arise=»
The Judge is at the door,”


“What could she now do better than to sit and all the toil of men and angels we
still, resigning herself to the providence of employed to bring them pr Eade ot!
God. Things that will happen cannot be pre- “We live one day at a time. God has but
vented by our utmost solicitude, Things not laid upon us the burden of one day. If we
appointed will never take place if all the care, will attend to daily duty and daily devotion,
164 ?


CHAP. Iv. 1—10.





if we will do the thing He commands, though
not knowing whither they may tend, or how
they will bring about good, He will sce to the
issue.”— Lynch.

“ Defer nothing till to-morrow that may as
well be done to-day, either for yourselves or
for your friends. ‘Who knows what a day
will bring forth ?’ It is said of Richard IL.
that he lost his crown and life by being a day
too late in coming to join his army in Wales.”
—Lawson,

“Tt would be well if this testimony could
always be borne to us, that we would not be
in rest till we had fulfilled the duty that was
once fairly laid before us.”—Macartney.

“It is a comfort to have dealings with such
men [as Boaz]. They do not promise and
forget to perform, but are men of honour,
straizhtforward, energetic, doing well, while
other dilatory people would be dreaming
about it."—Braden.

“There are some men who are never in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


eee eee


good time for anything. They appear to
have put the clock of their time ten minutes
too late for life.”— Hamilton.

“The road of by-and-by leads to the town
of never. That whieh the fool does in
the end the wise man does in the beginning.”
—Spanish Proverbs,

“ Have you ever seen those marble statues
in some public square or garden, which art
has so fashioned intoa perennial fountain,
that through the lips or throngh the hands
the clear water flows in a perpetual stream, on
and on for ever; and the marble stands there
——passive, cold—making no effort to arrest
the gliding water. It is so that Time flows
through the hands of men ,. .. so that the
destiny of nine men out of ten accomplishes
itself slipping away from them, aimless, use-
less, till it is too late.”— Robertson.

“ No rest until work be done, until duty be
fulfilled! ‘Then rest can never be ours here,
but yonder, for here work is never done.” —B,


CHAPTER IV.
THE GOEL AT THE GATE.


Cowrexts.—Boaz in the presence of the elders of Bethlehlem obtains the right of redeeming
the inheritance of the dead Llimelech. Amid the acclamations and congratulations of the people
at the gate, he publicly takes Ruth to be his wife, Obed is born, and the generations of Phares


are traced as jar downward as David,


VERSES 1-10.


Carrical axp Execrticat Nores.—Ver. 1. Then went Boaz up. Bethlehem situated on a
hill, while the cornfields and threshing floor would be in the valley below [cf. on ii. 4, p. 101,


also p. 6.] The gate.


The place of resort where business was transacted. I have seen in cer-


tain places, Joppa for example, the Kady and his Court siiting at the entrance of the gate
bearing and adjudicating all sorts of causes in the audience of all that went in and out thereat


(Thomson), And sat.


Eastern people are never in a hurry at such times.


Stone seats would be there.


The attitude expressive of deliberation.
The judges sat in the gates that the coun-


try people might not be compelled to enter the cities and so suffer detriment (Lange). And
behold. Set torth as with a starry note (Z7rapp). Possibly calls attention to the fortunate


coincidence or Providence of the thing.


Lange thinks Boaz came early not to mi3s his man.


Ho such aone. xpiyu hidden one (LXX). Conveys the idea of his being kept anonymous


purposely.


The Hebrew words peloni almoni are derived from palah to distinguish, to point


out, and alam to conceal (Gesen 53, 677), and signify a person who is pointed out, but whose


name is concealed ( Wordsworth).


At presen


t any anonymous donor to the synagogue funds


is habitually s'yled “Almoni Peloni” (Picciotto). The name of the kinsman was Tob (M@iiirash).


Impossible (Longe).


Ver. 2. And he took ten men. So Abraham bargained for a place of sepulchre in the field
of Machpelah, in the presence of those who stood at the gate of Hebron (Gen. xxiii. 17, 18).


Possibly ten were chosen because it was a perfect number.


The requisite number for a local


court of magistracy (Groser). In later days ten men were needed to form a worshipping


assembly in the synagogue (Lbid).
(Morison).


Ver. 3. And he said unto the kinsman [re


Of the elders of the city. LKlderly persons of the city


deemer.] The narrator again avoids using the


pame, though there 18 little doubt it must have been known.


Naomi that is come again.
to plead her own cause.


The etstom of all Kasern nations lay in the same direction.


The Athenians had a law, that no woman should be permitted


Selleth


[sold] a parcel of land. Rather, kath sold (Wordsworth, Lange, Wright). Naomi had
already sold her interest in the land during the terms of years that intervened between the
date of sale and the year of jubilee, when the land would revert to the representatives of
Elimelech ; and the nearest of kin could [only] gain immediate possession by redeeming it,


165


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTh.  cuap. 1v. 1—10,











that is, by paying the worth of the land during the term of years which still remained to the
jubilee (Wordsworth). She had mortgaged her own and Ruth’s life interest in the land
(Braden). ‘Uhat, contrary to the opinion of the earlier commentators, a widow could do this
—see Lange in loco, Probable that Hlimelech had sold his interest before he went into the
land of Moab (Z//ot). In this case, the reversionary interest of Ruth, as the widow of Mahlon,
would have to be purchased by the next of kin, as well as the life interest of Naomi (Lbid).
Others think that the destitution of the widows arose, not from having lost their property,
but from their inability to turn it toa profitable account. Morison views the use of the per-
fect here as expressing such an unalterable determination to sell the land, that it may be looked
upon as already accomplished, and translates “Has resolved to sell,” So Drusius, Vatable, ete.
“ Offers for sale” (Luther, Coverdale). She may have put up the land for sale, for the express
purpose of putting the law in motion, and compélling her kinsman to redeem it (Cox). Our
brother Elimelech’s. Or kinsman Elimelech’s, ‘Lhe word not tobe interpreted in a strict sense
(cf. on IL. 1 Crit. and Exeg. Notes, p. 89.] ;

Ver. 4. AndI thought to advertise the—Determined to inform thee (Lange). Wit. I said [
will uncover thine ear ; droxakyww ré od¢ cou (LXX.), by lifting up the hair which covers it [ep.
1 Sam. ix. 15; 2 Sam. vii. 27] (Wordsworth), Buy it before the inhabitants, In the presence
of those sitting here (LXX. Valg. Syr. Arab). So also Lange, Wordsworth, etc. If thou
wilt not redeem it, The Text. Recept. reads, “If he will not, The common reading is sup-
ported by Schmidt, Lange, Carpzov, Keil, etc., and is more natural. So fifty MSS. in Kenni-
cott (Wordsworth). And he said, I will redeem. Shows he had the ability. Would add to his
own estate to procure the property of the dead Elimelech. Supposed he would only have to
pay Naomi a certain annual allowance till her death, and the inheritance would pass to him as
the lawful heir (Steele and Terry.)

Ver. 5, Thou must buy [thou buyest] it also of Ruth. Must take the widow of Mahlon who had
a claim upon the land. The children born of such a marriage would inherit the state, to the
exclusion of children by an earlier wife. Would stand as the direct descendants of Mahlon,
and be called by his name. The Moabitess, Here was the difficulty, and Boaz presents it
thus fairly and delicately, The goel does not lay hold of the fact that the law against marri-
age with a Moabitess, if such existed [cf. on I 4] may have been suspended because Kuth had
cast in her lot with Israel.

Ver. 6. I cannot. Means I will not for certain reasons [ver. 4]. The Targum says he had a
wife and children. Lest I mar [injure] mine own inheritance. By spending time and atten-
tion besides money upon that which would revert to the name and estate of another. This
possibly only an excuse. The true reason found in his superstitious fears, Thinks he ought
not to take into his house a woman marriage with whom has already been visited with the
extinguishment [according to popular ideas] of a family in Israel (Lange).

Ver. 7. Now this was the manner in tormer times concerning &c. Formerly in cages of
redemption and exchange (Lange), That is in every bargain this was done. Shews that consider-
able time must have elapsed between the events recorded and the writing of the story. An old
custom has fallen into partial disuse in the meantime (cf. Intro, p. 4]. A man plucked off his
shoe and guve it to his neighbour. A man pulled off his shoe and gave it to the other(Lange).
In acknowledgement that he to whom the shoo was given might tread and own where he
the seller had previously stood as owner, The shoe is the symbol (1) of motion and wandering,
@) of rest and possession (Lange). When the prodigal is reinstated, he has shoes put on his

eet (Luke xv. 22) (cf. also Ex. iii. 5; Eph. vi. 15).

Ver. 8. So he drew off his shoe, i.e., the kinsman drew it off, and ao surrenders all claims, The
woman had the right in ordinary cases to pluck the shoe off herself and spit in the face of the
kinsman—a great dishonour (cf. Deut. xxv, 7]. This shews that the present case was looked
upon as exceptional. When an Arab divorces his wife, he says of her, “ She was my slipper and
I cast her off,” (Thomson),

Ver. 9. And Boaz said. He addresses the elders in their representative character. Under the
theocracy the principle of Tepresentation was early carried out (L. Price). Possibly a pause follows
v. 8, during which Naomi and Ruth may have been brought upon the scene, Ye are witnesses.
Settled deeds of compact in our modern sense not used or needed. Enough, in a simple primi-
tive age, that a solemn transaction should be committed to the memory of ths people (£. Price),
T have bought [acquited] all that was, etc. The three dead relatives are mentioned with legal
precision and particularity, although no mention is anywhere made of Orpah’s claim, which, in
contradistinction to Ruth's, is looked upon as forfeited or lapsed, if it ever existed. Of the hand
of Naomi, Evidently looked upon as heir to the property now her sons are dead. To use &
modern legal phrase, she was considered as a trustee until the birth of a male child (Z. Price),

Ver. 10. Ruth the Moabitess. Deut. xxiii. 8. refers to males, not to women (Keil, E. Price),
as with Canaanitish women [Deut. vii. 3]. Have I purchased. Acquired (Lange). Means te
obtain, to acquire, which may be done ina variety of ways. The use of the word “ purchased ”
unfortunate (167d). To raise up the name, ete. A Hebraism signitying the continuance of the
relation he had sustained in the genealogy of his tribe (£. Price). From y. 21 it would seem ag
though popular opinion were too strongly in favour of Boaz to allow the usual law to come in ta
operation. The gate of his place. The Chaldee reads, “ the sanhedrim of his place,” introducing
& later idea (£. Price),

166


CHAP, IV. 1—5, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





VERSE 1—6,


Theme.—F Rienps In Councth


® And next the valley is the hill aloft,
And next the darke night is the glad morrow,
And also joy is next the fine of sorrow.”— Chaucer,


Then went Boaz up to the gate.


The interesting and fascinating story draws near to its proper conclusion.
Ruth’s virtue has been seen “in all the gate” ; now her reward and recompense
are to be as plainly apparent there. Amnother,—a goel, a redeemer has under-
taken to perform the duties which fall upon him. Note. (1) Here is an image of
the final perseverance of the saints. Continuing first, then crowned afterwards,
steadfast under discipline and temptation, then to be owned of Christ, and
manifested to all as His own in the day of His glory (Rev. iii. 5, etc.). (2) Here
ts a picture and illustration of virtue triumphant true to all ages. After humilia-
tion, exaltation, after the bitter, sweet, after mourning, joy. So with Joseph in
Egypt, Moses, David, ete.

It is not Ruth, however, so much who claims attention for the present, as her
goel intent on her behalf. We have seen Boaz “diligent in business (ii. 4, iii.
2), fervent in spirit” (ii. 4, 12), courteous (ii. 4), quick to perceive goodness in
others (ii. 11, iii. 10, 11), ready to encourage and commend it (ii. 12, iii. 10),
generous and hospitable (ii. 8, 9, 14-16, iii. 15), wise and circumspect, and having
his own spirit under complete control, in what otherwise might have been the
hour of temptation (iii. 10-14), acting always as in the presence of God. And
here we are to see him as possessing other qualities, which go to make up the
hero, and the true man, one commanding respect not less by his moral earnest-
ness and diligence than by his wealth and social rank. We follow him to the
gate and see him among his peers, evidently received as few men in Bethlehem
would be.

I. This is how business should be attended to.

(1) Speedily. The man is in earnest, “ will not rest until he has finished
the thing.” Gets up early to catch his man [see Crit. and Exeg. III.
15, p. 160}.

(2) eee Will finish it before the day is over [see on III. 18, p. 164].
All that has ever been said in praise of the diligent may be said of
Boaz here.

(8) Righteously, In the spirit of candour and fair dealing. Hence he seeks
the advice of friends; “the Council at the gate.” Conceals nothing,
overstates nothing, speaks apparently without bias. In few and fit
words he propounds the cause and brings it to an issue (Zrapp). Note.
(a) That a true and right result may be obtained tn this simple honour-
able way. Crooked courses are not always the best courses. (0) An
example of the right use of arbitration which might often be followed
with advantage. The justice may be administered in a rough and
ready way to our Western ideas, but it is justice none the less that is
sought and obtained. And the decision arrived at will be solemnly
ratified as in the sight of God.

Note.—(a) That which is done with the heart ts done with cheerfulness and
readiness. Love lends wings to the feet, and strength to the hands, and _per-
suasive eloquence to the tongue. So with Boaz in the chapter before us. Duty
and affection alike urge him. (6) When God appoints, he prospers and gives wisdom
in the direction of the affair. How much there is to be admired in the way
Boaz proceeds to settle this delicate affair once and for all. And as if the
Divine favour is to rest upon him at once, the man he seeks and upon whom
everything depends comes by as soon as the business is fairly set afloat [On


Seeming Chances, Real Providences, see II. 3, p. 95-6}.
167


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cHAP, Iv 1—5.





(4) An honourable man’s dealings while perfectly frank and open are not to be
deficient in wise circumspection. Boaz having to do with a wily world-
ling deals warily with him (Trapp). Tells him first of the land, and
then of the wife that must go along with it (Jd). The man of God
is to be wise as well as harmless in his dealings with men. ,

II. This is how difficult affairs should be settled, delicate claims adjusted,
fair rights allowed and satisfied. moe! hes

(1) Openly and publicly. That is unless scrupulous justice can be adminis-
tered privately in a better way. The rights between man and man
must not be left to chance or fraud. Note. (a) Greed and rapacity
flourish best in secret. Naturally seek to hide their deeds. Honest
men can bear and covet the light. (b) The fountains of justice are best
kept pure by being constantly open to public inspectton. :

(3) By the advice of wise men. We have here an old world picture of a city
council, (a) Abundance of witnesses to attest the proceedings, (6) of
counsellors to give advice, (c) of judges to determine difficulties, ‘In
the mouth of two or three witnesses” every word would “be estab-
lished ;” while “in the multitude of counsellors” there would be
“safety.” Notice again they were the choice men of the city —aged,
experienced—elderly men upon whom devolved the conducting of
affairs in Bethlehem. Note. <Age and experience give weiyht to advice
and decisions.

(8) Calmly and deliberately. They sat down. Undue haste to be depre-
cated in conducting important affairs like these.

(4) With care and exactitude. Business should be done in a business-like
manner, not only to make provision against defects in integrity, but
also to prevent difficulties arising from failures in memory, &c. Note,
A Scripture precedent here for scrupulous exactness in transactions like
these, transactions involving questions of property. You have the wis-
dom, dignity and grave deliberation, the solemn careful procedure such
@ case demanded.

III. This is the way the affairs of the destitute and needy especially should
be attended to. All this for two poor widows! Yes, but this ts the public care.
“The poor ye have always with you.” It was no personal concern of these elders
and yet they gave time and attention to it, and that readily. Note. Thus early in
human history the claims of the weak were recognised and responded to publicly.
Christ answers the question so often asked as to “ Who is responsible?” in the
parable of the Good Samaritan. So the Apostle, Bear ye one another’s burdens,
&c. ; Look not every man on his own things, &. (Phil. ii, 4),

E. Price on this: Theme.—Ruspeor ror Property.

The modern war against property can never be justified by the far-seeing Laws
of Moses. And, of course, Boaz would hold himself bound to observe them, as
here illustrated.

1. He conforms to the letter of the enactment as for as possible.

2. He avows the fact publicly : before the elders and the people.

3. He evokes the confirmatory act of adequate witnesses.

4, He, nevertheless, is careful in stating his claims in order to enforce his
full rights.

Observe then, how it was through the sanctified ‘ property ’ the hopes of the world


were met, in the advent of the Messiah. And (2) how the observance of.


righteous rules respecting this ‘ property,’ restricts no man’s real liberty.


“The gates of ancient cities played many sively built, with recessed chambers or divans
parts: they were guard-houses; they were in the sides, and often with chambers also
markets, they were courts of justice; they abovethe arch. Here the inhabitants of the
were places for public deliberation and audi- city were wont to assemble, either for the
ence. Necessarily, therefore, they were mas- transaction of business or to hear and tell the


cg


\


CHAP. Iv, 6


news. Here the judges sat and administered
justice to all comers. Here even kings came
to give audience to other kings, or to their
ambas-adors Some faint resemblance to these
ancient gates may be found In the structures
called ‘ Bars,’ in London and Southampton,
though these modern gates are much smaller
than their ancient prototypes; and some faint
reminiscence of their character as seats of
judicial and royal authority in the titles
Sublime Porte, or the Ottoman Porte—porte
Ineaning gate—by which the Government of
Turkey is still de-ignated.”—(Coz,

_ “ Boaz was worthy of the confidence reposed
in him. He at once secks the nearer kinsman,
and brings the matter to a decided issue,
How many an hour of bitter anxie‘y, of sus
pense—a form of anguish harder to bear than
the certainty of disappointment—have the
unhappy to undergo, simply becanse those who
have undertaken their cause, gratulating them-
selves on the benevolence of their intentions
s-em to think that, if they accomplish the
service, the time and manner are of no im-
portance, but that in these they may suit their
own convenience. If, like Boaz, we would
judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow,

t us, like him, ‘not be in rest until we have
finished the thing.””—Macartney.

** Behold an Israelite indeed,in whom is no
guile!’ He knew the preference which both
Naomi and Ruth had for himself ; he was con-
scious too that he no longer regarded with
indifference this beautiful daughter of Moab,
who had ‘come to trust beneath Jehovah’s


wings;’ nor was he unwilling to pay even


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
rr a








more for the redemption of the inheritance
than this nearest kinsman. Bnt he ‘would
not go beyond or defraud his brother,’ or in
the least take advantage either of his ignor-
ance or of Ruth’s preference. All was open
and above-board. His fine sense of honour
was not blunted either by covetousness or by
inclination, nor would his conscience allow
him, even when seeking a good and generons
end, to have recouise to sharp practice. Here
is that ‘clear and round dealing which is the
honour of man’s nature.’ ”—Thomson.

“ Aristides being juige b tween private
persons, one of them declared that his adver-
sary had greatly injured Aristides, ‘ Relate
rather, good friend,’ said he interrupting him,
‘what wrong he hath done thee, for it is thy
cause not mine, that I now sit judge of.’
Being desired by Simonides, the poet, who had
a cause to try before him, to stretch a point in
his favour, he replied : ‘ As you would not be
a good poet if your lines ran contrary to the
just measures and rules of your art; so neither
should I be a good judge or an honest man ii
I decided aught in op;osition to law and
justice.”—Percy Anecdotes.

“ There then is the court of justice. How
simple! How primitive! No lawyers and
expensive forms; no long rhetorical argu-
ments ; but a quiet deliberative meeting, in
which the persons concerned ‘sit’ and talk
over the whole affair. Perhaps many a
tangled matter would soon come ont straight,
many a dispute be quickly settled. if at first
people would submit it to eome such Board of
Arbitration.” — Braden,





VERSE 6,


fheme.—A SuHortTsicHteD Poiticy anp rrs Meritzp Osttivion,


“ Despite those titles, power and pelf,
The wretch, concentred all in self,
Living shall forfeit fair renown,
And, doubly dying, shall go down


To the vile dust from whence he sprung,
Unwept, unhonoured and unsung.” —Scvtt,


I cannot redeem tt for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance.


The kinsman’s conduct here stands out as a contrast for all time with that
of Boaz. Are we wrong in seeing in him an example of the mean equivocating
worldling? When it is a question of the land (ver. 4) he will redeem, but when
it is a question of the law which binds him to succour the widow as well as take
possession of the land, he hesitates. He stands as a representative of that large
class who say “I cannot” to every appeal. Note (a) Something will always come
tn to hinder from the path of duty if we will allow it. “ A lion in every street.” No
man ever equivocated, or prevaricated in such a moment but the devil helped
him to a sufficient and plausible excuse. (b) We may miss or misuse the one
opportunity in life. This roan did so undoubtedly. May be profitable to look,

L At some of the probable reasons for his action.

(I) A prejudice, and belief in a common superstitwa. Ruth a Moabitess. In
Israel marriage with the daughter of an alien race wag held to be
169


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY RUTH. cHaF. Iv 6


i





“unlucky” even when it was /awful (Coa). No doubt, the popular
voice affirmed that Mahlon and Chilion were cut off before their time
because they married strange women (/bid.) How superstitious fear
rides some men against the plainest dictates of reason! It needs a
strong mind, a truly noble spirit to shake off the control of popular
opinion, to say nothing of popular superstition. No matter that
Ruth’s virtues are known “in all the gate.” That shadowy, impal-
pable, intangible something which fear conjures up in the hearts of so
many comes in probably to decide the question.

(8) Selfish regard for his own inheritance. Every way the thing must have
seemed undesirable to such a man, indeed to most men. Ruth was
poor, so was Naomi, and he must take charge of both—a double burden.
If an heir should be born, he would be called by the name of Mahlon, —
if more children, the inheritance would have to be divided among
many. A shrewd, selfish man would be sure to say “ No” under such
circumstances, and the unnamed kinsman seems to have been such.
(a) Took no care (6) made no enquiries about the widows until forced
to do so thus publicly. A type of those who fear trouble and so say
nothing. Let wrong continue, fraud, want, &c., multiply and go on
their way as if they were neither responsible to God or man. Note on
the other hand a danger from excess either way. Some will have to say
at last “They made me keeper of the king’s vineyard, but mine own
vineyard have I not kept.” No man is asked to neglect his own affairs,
to their serious detriment.

(8) Want of a chivalrous and heroic spirit. This the secret of all else. The
duty was clear, but the man was living in that state when duty is only
felt as a burden. Of course there were difficulties, but they were just
of that kind that a true unselfish man, would be delighted to overcome.
Possibly the man was a just man according to his lights (Com). May
have honestly doubted whether he was bound to marry Mahlon’s
Moabitish widow. Probably one of those cautious, common-place souls,
who fail under severe tests, and in critical moments, when the law
seems doubtful, and prudence can only discuss the question from a
selfish standpoint, and who fail just for want of that larger vision,
which looks at the spirit, not at the letter. So Orpah failed where Ruth
triumphed [cf. on I 14 p. 53; also on p. 60]. So Lot was led to the
land of Sodom and Gomorrah, while Abraham remained with God to
receive the promises (Gen. xiii. 10—17). So the kinsman as contrasting
with Boaz. So the “child of sense” always as contrasting with the
child of the spirit. Note! The reluctance and enability of the mere
natural man to undertake and effect the work of doing and suffering
(Wordsworth).

Look II. At some of the certain results of his action.

His name ts studiously avoided in the Scriptures, simply called “such a one,”
almost an epithet of contempt. Note. There is an over-cautious, calculating
selfishness which misses tts mark by over-shrewdness.

This man sought fame and the remembrance a large inheritance would give,
and this is what he found—feared that his “name” would be cut off from Israel,
and his inheritance marred, since his children would be called by the name of
another, and so he denied himself and let another go down to posterity as
redeemer. Curious he is unnamed in the very book which recounts his story. We
know him simply as the “ anonymous kinsman” (Coz). His miserable, narrow
policy brought its own defeat, while Boaz, who had no such selfish desire or
ambition, lives in the pages of inspiration as the ancestor of Christ Himself.
Note. A principle sn this. Impossible that men should live both for the present
and sein in many senses. ‘The immediate policy often seems best when it is a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; RUTH.


CHAP. IV. 6,








selfish one, a narrow, degraded one. But wait! True, men exist from day to day
by vare and industry, but they live to posterity by virtue of unselfish and heroic
deeds. There is a losing the life which is a saving it. Live to yourself and
you perish with the present, but live for others, and the memory will be fresh
and fragrant when you have passed away. Men speedily forget everything but


goodness.
* Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust.”—Shirley.


IMPROVEMENT. (1) The desire for fame natural to the human breast. Nothing
30 wrong in it after all, The desire to leave an inheritance behind not uncom-
mon—not to be condemned of itself. The whole question is as to how the accom-
plishment of these desires is pursued, whether (a) To the forgetfulness of other
tlaims and duties as here ; (b) To the neglect of others’ rights. Then be sure it
is a short-sighted policy, seen through by men, condemned of God? Best to do
on duty, and leave the question of fame and heritage, as everything else, with

im |

(2)


“Tf souls be made of earthly mould
Let them love gold ;
If born on high,

Let them unto their kindred fly."—Herbert.

(3) What is a hard duty to the worldling may show itself a delightful plea-
sure to the good man—to the man of God.

(4) Lest I mar mine inheritance. (1) How easy to do this. (2) In how
many ways it may be done—ways of which we have no conception at the
time. Striving to save it we may lose it, as this man did. (3) How many do
this? (a) Ruin health, (6) lose reputation, (c) make the estate bankrupt, (d) cast


faith aside, ete.


“How very ready are we to acknowledge
du ies which are likely to benefit ourselves.”
—Macartney

“ This person readily owned himself Hlime-
Jechs near relation and next kinsman, when
the remnant of his property was to be got,
and then he had plenty of money for the
redemption : but when other duties were pre-
sented to him—when he was remi:ded that
there were widows to be cherished, as well as
fields to be grasped—then he discovered the
danger to his own inheritance.” —Macartney.

“This makes many shy of the great redemp-
tion, they are not willing to espouse religion.
Heaven they could be glad of, but holiness
they can dispense with ; it will not agree with
the lust they have already espoused and
therefore let who will purchase Heaven at
chat rate they cannot.”—J/. Henry.

“ When a man finds that he is living from
onscience, and not from trust and love and
peace; when he finds that he has not sponta-
aeity nor generous impulses any more, he
feels that he is going down to the lower level ;
and he is asking every day, “What is it my
duty to do?” He does not get any higher
than this. Itis a sign of great retrogression,
It is a sign that a man has lost the liberty of
a son of God. It is a sign that he is no longer
a friend, but a servant. He feels like doing
his duty and that is all.”—Bvecher.

“Go ont with me to-day into the woods,
where the white oak is, and where the beech
is. Their leaves died last November, but they
all hang on the trees yet. The trees have not
strength enough to slough them. They always


make me think of a great many people. Sap
does not run in them any more, but theiz
duties hang on them like dead leaves all over.
They would not like to drop their duties ;
they are not quite in that state yet ; but those
duties are dry, sapless, and enforced”—Jbid,

“ Ho, such a one!” The name of the kinse
man who feared to mar his own inheritance
is blotted out, whilst the name of him who was
willing to marry the stranger and the outcast,
has been transmitted to honorable remem-
brance. In like manner the name of the
beggar has been left on perpetual record,
whilst the name of the rich man at whose
gate he lay has utterly perished.” -—HWiot.

“The Muse of History does not trouble
herself with useless names, but Jets them drop
into a congenial oblivion, and if compelled to
record some facts about them, uses such a
slightly contemptuous epithet—‘ Such a one.”
A poor immortality that almost worse than
utter neglect.”-— Brades.

“ The Pyramids of Egypt, selfishly reared
it is thought, to perpetuate the fame of the
mighty monarchs that built them, refuse to
whisper their ambitious names; but the poor
widow, who, without thinking of fame, silently
dropped her two mites into the temple treasury,
and the weeping penitent who, in the prodi-
gality of her great love anointed the tect of
her Savour with her precious spikenard, shall,
wherever the gospel is preached to the end of
time, have these acts spoken of for a memo-
rial of them. In the highest sense, every trae
act of goodness is immortal.”—Thomson.

“Tf kinsmen dwell together, and one of thema


17}.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
PUA eR ae ANIL ig ee Le kt





die, and have no child, the wife of the dead
shall not marry ontside [i.e. ontside the
family circle], unto a stranger ; her husband’s
kinsman shall go unto her, and take her to
wife aud perform the duty of a husband’s
kinsman unto her. And it shall be that the
first-born whom she beareth shallstand upon
the name [i.e. take the place, or arise in the
place] of the kinsman who is dead, that hie
name be not wiped out of Israel. And if de
tan like not to take his kinsman’s wife, then
fet his kinsman’s wife go up to the gate, unto
the elders, and say, ‘my husband’s kinsman


CHAP, IV. B.


refuseth to raise up unto his kinsman a name
in Israel ; he will not do the duty of my hus-
band’s kinsman.’ Than the elders of the city
shall call him, and speak unto him; and if he
stand to it, and say, I like not to take her;
then shall his kinsman’s wife come unto him
in the presence of the elders, and loose his
shoe, from off his feet, and spit in his face,
and shal! answer and say, ‘so let it be done
unto the man who will »ot build up his
kinsman’s Louse.’ And his name shall be
called in Israel, House of the shoe taken
off,”—Deut. xxv, 5-10,


te]


VERSE 9.
Theme.—Tue Kinsman Reppemer,


® The man most man, with tenderest human hands
Works best for man,.,.as God in Nazareth.— Mrs. Browning,


Ye are witnesses this day that I have bought all that was EHlimelech’s, ete.


Charity should begin at home, with that which is nearest. So redemption,
deliverance must work along the same lines, from the same centre. In every
way the claims of the nearest are first. How far Boaz recognised the force of
this law may be seen in his respect for the rights of the nearest kinsman [cf. on
iii, 12,13; iv 3,4]. That failing only, the welcomed claim falls upon himself
[cf. also Jer. xxxii. 7, 8, etc. ].

The same law is recognised and followed in the world-wide schemes of re-
demption. God is our Father, what nearer relationship can there be than this ?
Christ the elder brother. And in this link between the human and the Divine is
the reason for the incarnation at Bethlehem, the agony at Gethsemane, the
sacrifice at Calvary. He was redeeming his own. The sin was in the flesh, and
the payment must be in the flesh. Forasmuch then as the children are par-
takers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, ete.
(cf. Heb. ii, 14—16). More emphatically still is this law of kinship asserting
itself on our behalf laid down in the epistle to the Galatians. The “ children”
are represented as seen “in bondage under the elements of the world,” Then
when the “ fulness of the time” had come, “ God sent forth His Son, made of a
woman, made under the law. To redeem them that were under the law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons” (Gal. iv. 3-5), The whole belongs to the
family economy, the family arrangements for bringing back and buying back its
own. Hence it is the spirit of Anti-Christ to say that Christ has not come in
the flesh—a blow at the very foundation truth of the gospel—a denial of the
one and only hope of humanity,

Notice then with regard to the office of this Kinsman Redeemer.

I. It was not an arbitrary institution. It was one resting upon principles
inherent to man, that help comes or should come from those nighest to us.

1. It was reasonable. Founded upon the reason of things, and working in
harmony with all that essentially belongs to the idea of human society. The
family estate remained unimpaired because of it for any considerable length of
time, and was kept from passing to others. The Hebrews would not lose a
single family, or branch of the family if they could help it—a wise and states-
man-like arrangement. [cf. also ii, 20, 21; p. 140. ]

So in the wider sphere. .Sin has brought disorder, alienation, loss of heritage, '
into the midst of the great family of God. But are there no remedial processes thad
sproag out of the family life and bond? ‘To deny this possibility is to deny every

172


OBAP. IV, 9. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RU7H.
LLL CCS EE SE SD,


hope of humanity, and can belong to a creed born only of despair. No doubt as to
the Scriptural answer to the question. They remembered that God was their Rock
and the high God their Redeemer (Psalm Ixxviii, 35.) Christ hath redeemed, ete.
(Gal. iii. 13). Ye are bought with a price (1 Cor. vii. 23), Cf. also 1 Peter 18,
19; 1 Tim. fi. 6; Matt. xx. 28; Mark x. 45, etc, etc. And, however, we ex-
plain the utterance of Job (xix. 25) it has this great hope of humanity under-
lying it. I know that my goel is not cut off, but liveth ever to make inter-
cession for me ; he will not forsake me, but will stand at the latter day upon the
earth, having redeemed for me my forfeited possession, etc. (Macartney’s Trans.)

2. It was necessitated. ‘That is if the family tree be kept with all its branches
flourishing. There must be some way of providing for lost and forfeited inheri-
tances. So as between God and man, the scheme of redemption springs out of
the necessities of the case, and is but the outcome of the character of God
Himself, and His love for His alienated children.

3. It was legaliy and technically right. An express provision of the law. Law
indeed in its best sense is only the endeavour to fix these great principles of
human nature and give them expression. Note. (1) Law is not enough for the law
might and must farl at times astt did here. Hither it absolved this kinsman, aa
Lange thinks, or it was too weak to carry out its own demands of him in the
face of a popular superstition {see last outline]. (2) Love alone can truly under-
take to redeem. (a) Looks through the letter into the spirit. The spirit of the
law entirely on Ruth’s side even if the letter were against her [see Crit. and Exeg.
notes]. (4) Rises superior to all thought of fear. (c) Works promptly and
willingly as here. One passage alone will show how completely the gospel
scheme of redemption is in harmony with this, God so loved, etc. (John iii. 16),

4, It was Divinely sanctioned [cf. Deut. xxv, 5—10; Lev. xxv, 47—54].

II. It was not a mere passing custom, but one involving and foreshadowing
glorious truths. Truly and in the deepest sense of the word a type—a figure
of still better things to come.

See how significant the work of a goe] is to those who believe in the
redemption by Jesus Christ. Hts first duty was to purchase those who were other-
wise lost. So with ourselves, We were “sold under sin,” “led captive of the
devil.” But He came, gave Himself a ransom, bought us with His own
blood, &e. [1 Peter i. 18,19; Heb. ix. 12—15; Eph, i. 7, &e.]. The second
d-ty was to redeem the forfeited inheritance. The creature and the creation
gtoan and are in travail, but they are redeemed and shall be delivered
[Rom. viii. 20]. Man was made heir and lord over all (Gen. i. 26—31 ; Ps. viii. 6).
He is now only living as a discrowned monarch. But we see Jesus, the Apostle
says (Heb. ii. 5—9), and in Him we have the hope of the final redemption of all
things. The third duty was to protect and take to Himself. The concept of the
Almighty as the Goel or Redeemer of Israel is a very common one in the Scriptures
[Is. xlix. 7, liii. 3, liv, 8, &c.]. So with Christ and the Church [see next outline].
Note. Christ is the Goel or Redeemer whose shoe is never drawn of (Wordsworth).
His work of Redemption is for eternity (Jd:d).

Improvement. (1) How completely love is the fulfilling of the law! (2)
And even where the law fails love triumphs, (3) We have here redemption (a)
proposed, (b) accomplished, (c) applied.


“ And if the name of Redeemer be dear to
ne, conveying, as it does merely the idea of a
penevol-nt person, who, by purchase, delivers
a poor bondsman from servitude, how much
dearer will is be when we find it setting forth
to us the brotherhood into which the High
and Lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, enters
with his best creatures, and the watchful, pa-
tients care which he exercises over them.”—
Macartney.

“ Qur ancestors by corrupting the spirit and


blood of humanity brought upon the Son of
Man his sore travail. The degeneracy of the
race is His humiliation. What ever reproach
He may suffer, He will be numbered with
transgressors, that through his straightness he
may breack their bonds, and resture the inte-
grity of their nature. He must redeem mem
“because He is the Son of Man.’ Hoe
The great secret of Christ’s power over men
lies in the fact that in Him humanity is Divine,
On the ground of his supreme humanity,


178


HOMILETIU


COMMENTARY: RUTH.


CHAP. IV. 10,


SS


vothing is more natural than that He should
say ‘I will draw allmenuntome’ ... .
His drawing power was always in principle
the same, ‘I drew them with cords of a
man’ (Hosea xi.4,) . . . In His de-
scent into our earthly human condition He
becomes himself the first example of his own
law. “Thou mayest not set a stranger over thee
which is not thy brother.’ (Deut. xvii. 16,)
Does not the Highest Authority for this law
vanish if we deny the humanity ot the Son of
God ?”—Pulsrord,

“ The kinship with the redeemed in short, ig
an invariable law and condition of redemption.
And this law holds of the Divine Goel. ‘ For-
asmuch a8 we were partakers of flesh and
blood Christ also himself took part in the
same.’ ‘None but a man could be the Goel
of men. Noalien, no stranger, could interpose
for us; only ‘the Man who is near of kin
to us, our nearest kinsman.’ Hence the Son
of God became the Son of Man.”—Coz,

“ Will the vexed accursed humanity

As worn by Him, begin to be

A blessed, yea, a sacred thing

For love and awe and ministering ?”
Mrs. Browning.

“Under this manifold and most appropriate
image we have presented to us the supreme
facts in the moral history of the world, the
truths which have most profoundly entered
into our spiritual ex periences. No poor


the fields he had inherited from his fathers
suffered a loss comparable with ours, when, by
sin, we had lost the righteousness, the right
relation to God and man, in which we were
originally placed by the Father of our spirits,
No Hebrew sold, or selling himself, for a slave
to a hard and alien master ever endured a
bondage half so bitter and shamefnl as that
into which we fell when, sold under sin, we
sank into bondage to our Insts, No deliver-
ance wrought by a Hebrew Goel is worthy to
be corapared with that by which Christ has
made it possible for us to subdue our evil pas-
sions and lusts and to possess ourselves of a
pied lan sheer more stable, and more perfect.”
—Cox,

“Kinsmen.” Lit. Goels. The distinc.
tion between this and other words used to
designate one near of kin, is that whereas
the latter denotes only relationship. this implies
certain defined rights and obligations. The
rights of the Goel who was the nearest living
blood relation, consisted (1) in the redemption
ef the inheritance, and when, he had sold
himself into slavery, of the person of him who
was near of kin to him, (2) in his claim to
restitution or satisfaction for wrong done to
such an one, when he left no son behind him,
and (3) in the avenging the blood of such an
one in the case of murder if intentional, and
even if accidental, provided the manslayer
were found without the precinctg of the cities
of refuge.” —Elios,


Hebrew who had been compelled to part with


eS


VERSE 10,
Theme.—Tuz Bripecroom REpEsMER


** Love he sent to bind
The disunited tendrils of that vine
Which bears the wine of life, the human heart." — Shelley,


“ But now possession crowns endeavour,
I took her in my heart, to grow
And fill the hollow place for ever.”—Jean Ingelow,


Moreover, Ruth the Moabitess have I purchased . . . tobe my wife,


Ruth's recompense now is to be plainly and openly manifested. As with the
wise men who sought they knew not what, she, too, had seen the star in the East,
and followed it she knew not where. Faith had sustained her. With sublime,
beroic self denial, leaving all behind, she had gaid to Naomi, “Thy people shall
be my people, and thy God my God.” She had come to find neglect and penury
in Israel, to be a lonely gleaner in the hot sun, known and pointed at as the
Moabitish woman who came back with Naomi. Her virtue evident, and not
unknown in the gate ; whatever claims she had upon kinsmen had been ignored
because she was one of an “accursed race.” That which should have come to
her unsought, she has not merely to demand, but to seek for and plead for (iii,
9) “Spread thy wing over thine handmaid for thou art @ near kinsman.” And
when her noble-hearted protector had demanded public justice for her the claim
had been repudiated. But the path of the just shines none the less towards the
perfect day because of obstacles like these. There was one generous spirited
man in Israel at least whe had marked her virtue, her self-respect, shining con-

174


cap, Iv. 10. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


a OY,
ee


spicuously, not only in the harvest field, but even during the difficult and
delicate interview in the threshing floor, And now he shelters her under the
spreading wings of his own fair name and social position, rejected as she is, takes
her to himself before all. Did ever fiction conceive a more fitting climax to so
sweet a story? ‘Marriage is honourable” everywhere and in all ages, where
more so than here #

I. Marriage is honorable because of principles to be seen and illustrated
here.—(1) The relationship openly acknowledged. A most important thing this,
which, if refused, can only be refused from mean an4 sinister motives. Clan-
destine marriages a fruitful source of misery. Why should there be any reason
for not acknowledging the relationship entered upon before all? Boaz was not
ashamed of Ruth, although she was a Moabitess. Not ashamed even of the
peculiar motives which prompted his conduct. Nor will any true man be. Note.
Tf there be cause to be ashamed of the moment's confession, why should he seek a life-
long companionship? Love may begin in secret, but ends in being confessed openly.

(2). Publicly recognised. “ We are witnesses,” they said. (a) Enforces
fidelity, (b) gives legal protection, (c) secures permanence to the relationship, (d)
hands down a good name to the children, and preserves them from the finger of
scorn. Note. He that tampers with the institution of marriage touches the ark of
God (Thomson) ef. Gen. ii. 18, 21-25, [See also on “ Marriages in Moab,” ch. i.
4, pp. 26-28.]

(3) Solemnly ratified. (a) With prayer. The Lord make, etc. What is
religion intended for if it is not to come in at times like this? The secularisa-
tion of marriage means the separation of human life from divine things at its
mest solemn moments. A sorry match that has no prayer breathed over it, a
disastrous beginning likely to have a worse end (Braden). Rather our religion
should come in the more, to touch life and humanity everywhere, on all sides.
Note. The prayers here are not oficial prayers, but those of the people, the elders
and inhabitants of the city. (b) With lavish professions of good will, neigh-
bourly expressions of esteem, desires for prosperity, eto. Ruth, indeed, taken
with the approval and acclamation of the people—a truly Eastern picture.
Note. The sanction of Christianity must ever rest upon kindred scenes. Christ’s
first miracle was wrought at a marriage-feast.

II. Marriage is honorable because of what it is used to illustrate and
shadow forth. The inspired Word has put honour by making it to express,
represent, and illustrate some of the kindred relationships between God and
man. (a) Between Israel and Jehovah: “Thy Maker is thy husband” (Isa.
liv. 5); (6) between Christ and the Church (Eph. v. 25; Rev. xxi. 2). Note
Relationships below are often only the faint shadow of grander relationships above.
What else can we expect when man himself was made in the image of God
(Gen. i, 27). So Moses was commanded to make the tabernacle according to
the pattern God showed him in the Mount.

In the union of Ruth the Moabitess with Boaz, of Bethlehem, the future
birth-place of Christ, we have a foreshadowing of the mystical union and
marriage between Christ and the Gentile world, and of the junction of Jew and
Gentile in one body in Him (Wordsworth). Certainly the incident very beautifully
illustrates Christ’s dealings with those who were once alien and reprobate. (1)
He takes them to Himself, just as Ruth was taken in her lowly estate and poverty
a Moabitess. (2) He covers them with His wing [cf. on the Overshadowing Wing,
page 119, ete]. (3) He clothes them uth His righteousness. — Ventured the
marring of his own inheritance to do this, for though He was rich yet for our
sakes He became poor (i. Henry). (4) He redeems their inheritance, and presents
them to a more lasting heritage.

Iuprovement.—How strikingly the story here exemplifies the words of Christ,
“Verily, I say unto you, There is no man that hath ieft house, or brethren, ete,


(Mark x. 29, 30).
175


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH. cuap. rv. 11—22.


LAC ELE ALC ECL eS


‘All Bethlehem seemed moved to. devout
and gladsome sympathy, with an event which
had such a history behind it. The little town
kept holiday ; and it was meet that it should
do so. Far from os be that ungenial and
narrow spirit, which would frown upon cheer-
fulness at such an hour. It is one of the marks
of the Divinity of our religion that it touches
our humanity on all sides. But farther still
be that irreligious spirit which would degrade
the marriage rite into a mere business trans-
action, and form @ connection between two
human beings for better or for worse, a
union of interest and affections, of hopes and
fears, so that ‘they twain become one flesh,’
and only the grave has power to break the bond
with less of deliberation and solemnity than
men usually display in the sale or the purchase
of an animal. Surely the formation of the
marriage bond pre-eminently ought to be
‘sanctified by the word of God and by
prayer.’ ”— Thomsos,


VERSES


Currican axp Exr@rtroan Norrs.—Ver. 11. We are witnesses.
out lawyers or legal casuistry (A. Clarke). The Lord make,


‘ Love is the best investment cf all, save con-
science and the sentiment of duty. These are
the treasure-houses of life, the great .oarket
wherein the shares are always rising. The
step can be easily taken, but never retraced.
It brings with it, in all cases, additional sorrows
as well as joys. The freedom of the man and
woman is thereby in a certain sense limited
and curtailed. Then each has to think not
alone of self, but, also, and as much, if not
more of another. Each has to act, not with
& view to personal comfort and ease, but with
the loving purpose of contributing all possible
satisfaction and joy to another's life.” —Braden,


“And may our love be ne’er a trailing robe,
To clog our feet along our heavenward way,
But a warm garment for our daily use.
Marriage is bat for earth, but holy love
Will live in Heaven. Let us ever strive,

To grow more like to God—for God is love.’
—Mre, Browning


11—22.


The business settled with«
The birth of children looked


upon as a direct interference of Providence—a contribution to the fulfilment of the great pro-
mise whereon their hearts were set (E. Price). Like Rachel and like Leah. The two ances-


tresses of all true Israelites,


Like Ruth they had left home for their husbands. The younger


probably mentioned first not only as the favourite wife, but as connected with Bethlehem
(Gen. xxxv. 19; Jer. xxxi. 15). Do thou worthily {manfully]. Lit. make thou strength or
power. In Ephratah. Some distinguished Ephratah as the country, Bethlehem as the town


(Bernard, Price).


And be famous in Bethlehem, Lit. call a name,


Get a name (Lange),


Meant “act the noble part ” (JZorison). The real force of the whole phrase is “ Se thou influ.
ential in the growth of thy weaith, and be well spoken of as far as thy influence may be made
to extend” (£. Price). These words are prophetic, for thence came the birth of Him who hag
made Bethlehem famous in all the world (Theodoret),

Ver. 12. Like the house of Pharez [Gen. xxxviii. 29; 1 Chron. ii. 4 ; Matt. i. 8.] The second


son of Judah (Numb. xxvi. 20) and one of the ancestors of Boaz,


His family was more illus-


trions and numerous than that of his brother Zarah. Perez also was a son of Tamar, who,
although a very different character than Ruth, resembled her in history in that she suffered in-
justice in having the rights of marriage withheld from her {see Lange in loco.]


Ver. 18. The Lord gave her.
A son.


By a special blessing Boaz advanced in years ( Wordsworth),
The kinsman’s superstitious fears [see on v. 6] now shown to be groundless.


Ver. 14, Blessed be the Lord. Another rythmical sentence [ef. i. 16, p. 66; also ep. Luke i,


46—55 ; 68—79, etc.
(Wordsworth). So


the estate of Elimelech, and so he is the real goel


points to Obed, “ the restorer, nourisher, &ce.,”
may be. And may his name be (Lange).


Ver. 15. And he shall be [may he be] a restorer....nourisher.


Not left thee this day without a kinsman [redeemer.] Thy grandson
nge and Mowison. Not so, Boaz (Speaker's Com.). Obed would inherit.
of Naomi, The grammatical construction also
as well as the phrase “this day.” That his name


Trueliterally in her case, true


spiritually to all the world by Him who was born at Bethlehem of this seed according to the
flesh (Lheodoret). Better to thee than seven sons. Cf,1 Sam. i, 8; ii. 5, for similar expressions,


The women acknowledge now how far short th


fallen in comparison with the self-sacrifice of


now presented of her becoming the tribe mothe


Ver. 17. Her neighbours gave it a name.


his parents (Lange). This of the women con


@ legal friendship of Israel towards Naomi has
the daughter of Moab (Lange). The prospect
x of @ numerous and flourishing family (Keil),

Besides this he doubtless received a name from
tinued and inserted in the family genealogy, be-


cause seen to be appropriate (ibid). Obed, servant—i.¢., of the Lord ¢( Wordsworth, Gesen,


Targ.) Because he served to gladden Naomi’s old age (Steele and Terry),


Serving or wor-


shipping (Elliot). Musi be understood in the sense of serving asa son [see Lange in loco,
Obed in the sense of “ one that serves,” harmonises well with the words in v. 15 ( Bertheau. )


Ver. 18. Now these are the generations.


The table presents ten names,


A round number,


suggesting, it may be, that unimportant ones have been omitted. The scribes were accustomed
to do this both to ease their own labour of transcription, and to give additional emphasis to the


176


onap.1v, 1—13. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


ee


names appearing in the recetved list ise Price) |see Introduction, p. 4, 5.]. Boaz. Not Mahlon,
as might have been expected from the Levirate law. David, Why end with this name if the
book were written, as Bertheau, Davidson, and others seem to think, long after the time of
Solomon? Points possibly to a reason, if he were reigning as king,


VERSES 11—138.


Pheme.—PRaYeErRs FoR PostTsRIty AND PROSPERITY,


Patience and abnegation of self, and devotion to others,

This was the lesson a life of trial and sorrow had taught her.

So was her love diffused, but, like to s»me odorous spices,

Suffered no waste nor loss, though filling the air with aroma.—Long fellow.


The Lord make the woman, etc, And let thy house, ete. So Boaz took Ruth, etc.


Good wishes are to be regarded as prayers before God, but those of a people
(“all the people”) as the effectual fervent prayer which availetn much (4. Price).
Good to keep the heart in readiness, so as to resolve our common emotions of
sympathy into benedictions as here. How long did this biessing rest over the
house of Boaz !—until Christ came? The best seal to a cotapact like this found
in prayers like these which stretch out towards generatioas yet unborn.

L We have the general truth taught here. That the love of posterity may
be used of God and sanctified. How the Hebrew idea of “children, a blessing
from the Lord” expresses itself in these devout prayers. Note. All natural
emotions and tendencies may be worked by the Divine wisdom into the great scheme
of Providence and grace (i. Price). The Incarnation, the direct issue and product
of preceding conditions. God glorifying what is good in the race, the noble spirit
of Boas, the virtue of Ruth, the prayers of these devout Israelites, all leading
upwards, onwards, toward the Christ that is to be. (1) How wonderful! (2)
How suggestive! Who knows what His purposes may be through our children, if
we are faithfully consecrating them to Him? Men make much of a pious
ancestry, What if we look in the other direction, and have faith, and use the
privilege of prayer arisht

IL. The particular truth is taught here: That a Moabitess is thus introduced
among the progenitors of our Lord Himself. Cf. Matt. i.5. Bows begat Obed
of Ruth. A memorable fact. A Gentile woman thus rendered a constituent
portion of the Redeemer’s genealogy (HZ. Price). Why (1) Lo wmdicate the
heathen were not quite forgotten under the old dispensation severe and exclusive as
it was (Ibid). (2) To emphasise the fact that God has always appeared to work
by what at some times might be regarded as contraries. (3) To remove the suspicion
from the sceptic that the Advent depended upon the mere natural course of events
(Ibid). (4) To keep the devout student lovingly and reverently dependent upon
the unerring though mysterious will of the Most High (Id).

Theme.—CHILDREN THE Girt oF HiaveEn.

E, Price on The seed which the Lord shall give thee.

The Jewish idea may be modified by us, that the number of children measures
a man’s felicity. Yet the truth, underlying it, continues with us: viz., that
pious descendants are always the greatest blessings which the great Father can
bestow upon us.

De they not bind us to heaven by sanctified affections

De they not sweeten home sympathies
’ Do they not exemplify the advantages of that saintly education, they are
supposed to be susceptible of?


Do they not become the best support of the declining years of Ane he eee
N


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUA.








CHAP. IV. 11.





Do they not assure prosperity to a spiritual church? And do they not thus


hand down the tradition of the faith unimpaired }
In this sense, shen, “ blessed is the man who has his quiver full of them.”


“The man has acted both unselfishly and
honourably in upholding the family custom of
Israel. The public therefore, praise him and
wish him good. Such applause is both desir-
able and profituble. The actions of a good man
are fit subjects for praise. It stimulates us to
higher deeds when we recognise nobleness in
others. It encourages them in acts of gene-
rosity and honour. If any around us do wise,
thoughtful, open-hearted, unselfish deeds, let
us not fear to praise them.”— Braden,

‘What fame would be acquired in Israel by
the kindness of Boaz to Ruth and Naomi?
Was it to be hoped that his goodness and
bounties to them would be known and praised
among all the tribes? Itis natural for men
to think that the actions which they admire,
should be known and admired by all. The
hopes of these good women were, perhaps,
more sanguine than the case could justify ;
and yet they were more than realised. The
name of Boaz became famous through all
Terael, and will continue famous among the


Gentiles also, while the world lasts, because it
is mentioned with honour in the Book of God.
Both bad and good actions are often published
to a greater extent, and continue longer to be
known, than the doers or any of their friends
expected.” — Lawson.

‘*The godly are members one of another,
therefore must needs have a fellow-feelin
- . . . but let this be with them in lawfus
things, for charity rejoiceth not in iniquity.
What joy can it be to a godly man to see his
friend rich and in glory by usury, bribery,
oppression, deceit and fraud ?”— Bernard.

“Tt is one of the grand aims of divine revelac«
tion to produce this state of mind [the habit~
ual recognition of God]; and in the case oV
this people it evidently had produced it. Re
ligion was an all-pervading life . . . If
penetrated everywhere, like the sunlight. God
was beheld as the Cause of causes ; His Hand
was visible in every occurrence ; He was a felt
Presence,”—Dr. A. Thompson,


VERSE 11.


Theme.—MAN iv ESS, ITS FIT AND PROPER SPHERE


“The world waits
For help. Beloved, let us love so well,
Our work shall still be better for our love,
And atill our love be sweeter for our work.”—JMrs. Browning,


Do thow worthily [manfully] in Hphratah and be famous [get a name] tm
Bethlehem.


The world wants men, always has done 80; did so even thus early in its history


—men who play the worthy, manful part.


Such will always (1) be well spoken


of, (2) desired and longed for, (3) in the highest sense “make the best of both


worlds.”


a8 cynics would teach, rather to be sou


of God. [cf Ps,


(a) So on the gentler side.


Note. (1) Honour, the respect and esteem of others, not to be despised
ght for in legitimate ways as in the sight
i, exii, Job xxix. Prov. iv. 8, 9, eto.]
a man and play the manly part includes all virtues,


(2) To be truly
or should do go.


To be human is to be humane, and should be thus


understood always. N ote. Impossible to be noble in character without tender-
ness. gentleness, compassionateness, etc. (b) So on the sterner side. The root idea
of the word virtue is strength. The strong man, self-contained, self-balanced,


having the mastery over his passion, is the


virtuous man. This seemingly the


idea of the text, “ Act the part of a true man, a strong man.” A right worthy


exhortation for such an occasion.


I The sphere of this manly part. At home—in Ephratah, Bethlehem. Do
good among thy own people [Ezk. xviii. 18], be public-spirited, though to private


dsadvantage (Z'rapp).
and duties are not forgotten.


So in Christ’s charge to His disciples, these home claims
“ Beginning at Jerusalem,” He said. Note. Easy


to ignore this aspect of duty—like Jonah, to flee to Tarshish from the N ineveh God
has pointed out, but this is the Divine idea, “Begin at home.” “Shine there,”


178


cHaP, Iv. 14,15. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH,





consecrate that. “Return to thine own house and shew how great things God
hath done unto thee” (Luke viii. 59). Mote. A dificult duty this always, as with
Eli, Noah, Lot, Judah |cf. Genesis xxxviii; Song of Sol. i, 6].

II The results of this manly part. Be famous, etc. The two things linked
togeiher, the doing worthily and the fame that follows it. Note. All other ways
of making a reputation valueless. Great reputations are to be obtained by great
merits, by saying well and doing well, by wise speech and wise actions, by being
useful and serviceable in our own day and generation. Note (a) A great name
often not so much to be coveted, “ but a good name is better than precious ointment”
(Lawson). (6) The common and vulgar ideas of fame, glory, martial renown,


etc., not encouraged here.


“ Home is the most appropriate sphere for
Christian usefulness. It is the place where
true piety is ever tested, and false piety soonest
put to the blush. It has the first claims upon
the man of God, whatever his public position
may be. And yet how often is this forgotten
or ignored. Eli, priest of the Living God,
can enter into the Holiest place and stand
before the Shekinah glory in the manifested
presence of Deity itself, and yet he cannot
order his household aright, or protect the
sanctuary of the Most High from the pollution
of his children. But it is not so with the truly
devout and consecrated spirit. As master, or
as servant, in the workshop and in the count-
ing house, it is there bis Christ-like character
shines to best advantage; it is there, by the
quiet mfluence which belongs to every life, the
noblest testimony is borne for God. The house-
hold is hallowed, the home life consecrated, the
private walks sanctified, the neighbourhood
blessed by the sweet and gentle aroma of a
holy and heavenly life."—B

A name truly good is the aroma from a


It is fame won at home of which the text speaks.


virtuous character. It is a spontaneous ema-
nation from genuine excellence. It is a repu-
tation for whatsoever things are honest and
lovely, and of good report. It is such a name
as is not only remembered on earth but written
in heaven. Just as a box of spikenard is not
only valuable to its possessor, but pre-eminently
precious in its diffusion; so, when a name is
really good, it is of unspeakable service to all
who are capable of feeling its aspiration.”—
Hamilton.
‘“ But there are deeds which should not pass
away,
And names that must not wither, though the
earth
Forgets her empire with a just decay.
The enslavers and the enslaved, their death
and birth,
The high, the mountain majesty of worth
Should be, and shall, survivors of its woe,
And from its immortality look forth
In the sun's face, like yonder Alpine snow,
Imperishably pure beyond all things below.”
— Byron,


a$$ faa


VERSES 14, 15.


Theme. —@ONGRATULATIONS AND Goop WISHES


The soul of music slumbers in the shell,

Till waked and kindled by the master’s spell ;
And feeling hearts, touch them but rightly, pour
A thousand melodies unheard before.—Rogers,


Blessed be the Lord which hath not left thee this day without a kinsman.


The birth of a son and heir an important event always; more especially in an
eastern household, and with one of the age and position of Boaz. A memorable


day this, too, in the history of Israel.
ward.


Another link added in the chain Christ-
The joy here an earnest of the joy hereafter, the barriers of national


pride broken down in part ; prophetic of that glory to God in the highest, peace


on earth, goodwill towards men (Luke ii. 14).


now praise. Blessed, eto.


Note. First prayer here (v. 11)


In these congratulations there is I. A glance at the new circumstances surround-
ing Naomi. As much our duty to rejoice with those who rejoice as to weep with
those who weep. (a) We should enter into their plans (b), sympathise in their
successes (c), rejoice especially at their unexpected prosperity, as here. Note
(1) We cannet help doing this if we encourage that which ts good ts ourselves. God


179


@OMILETIC CUMMENTARY; RUTH.  cuap. tv. 14, 15.








meade men to sympathise with each other, only that sin has made them selfish
and envious.

(2) Man’s duty ts to respond to these Divinely implanted instincts. Our good

wishes are not worth much unless they find utterance or expression in some
way. Here the joy not only felt but avowed. ‘The women are, as is usual in
such times, full of expressive sympathy. That is quite a touch of nature.”—
‘Braden.
There e II. A glance heavenward. The Lord, ete. The joy of the godly
a8 this holy and religious expression naturally and always. Especially should we
look upward in these moments of family rejoicing. Note. Whatever joy men may
give us, praise is due to God, who thus makes them the instruments of his benefits.

Right again that this devout feeling should find expression. Is it that our
homes are to be made glad with his gifts, and our hearts with the sunshine of
his presence, and no sign be seen of the gladness which is there? A holy and
profitable way of gossiping this; God praised and called upon (Zrapp). Note.
The blessings of the Old Testament generally of a material character (Kitto). Yet
they are not the less often the source of spiritual joy (cf, Isa. xxiii).

Ill. A glance toward the future. He shall be unto thee, etc. (v. 15). Why
to Naomi especially? Are we not to see in this her reward for all the past ¢
Note. (a) Those are to be comforted most by us who have been most humbled. They
need it most, and we should be ready to speak the word of consolation. A poor
Christian who has no word of congratulation for a time like this! (6) A joyous
prospect may open suddenly even for the sorrowing and the aged. Call me not
Naomi, she had said (I, 20). But God can send light at eventida [See next
outline].

EK Fico on this: Theme.—A Goop CHILD.

Women do not always babble vain things, How quick are they to apprehend
the modifications of our domestic life.

Study, then, the portrait of a good son, which they offer here,

God must have given him.

God adapts him to special needs.

God makes him felt as a comforter (Heb., a Redeemer).

God in him restores exhausted life.

God secures the true honour of the family,

pens thus “ nourishes ” old age, till it be resolved into heaven. Yes} God
ds in all!

Let parents pray, labour, and educate for this high end.

Let children see to it that their welcomed presence around the hearth may
secure it.

And let “ our gossips” even change their idle talk into kind congratulations
and earnest prayers.


“It would seem as if there was already a
kind of joyous foretaste of the birth and in-
fancy which, in after times, was to be for ever
associated with the name of Bethlehem. It


else would have been, humanly speaking, im-
possible. ‘An Ammuonite or a Moabite shall
not enter into the congregation’ (Deut. xxiii,
8; Ezraix.1; Neh. xiii, 1). This was the


was the first appearance on the scene of what
may by anticipation be called, even then, the
Holy Family, for that child was Obed, the
father of Jesse, the father of David. Nor is
it a mere genealogical connexion between the
two generations. The very licence and inde-
pendence of the age may be said to have been
the means of introducing into the ancestry of
David and of the Messiah an element which


letter of the law, and, in the greuter strictness
that prevailed after the return from the cap-
tivity, it was rigidly enforced. But in the iso-
lation of Judah from the rest of Israel, in the
doing of every man what was right in his own
eyes, the more comprehensive spirit of the
whole religion overstepped the letter of a par-
ticular enastment”—Stanley


eHaP, IV. 15,16. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.





“ VERSES 15, 16.


Theme.—YoutH anp AGRE


- “QO thon bright thing fresh from the hand of God,
e * ® ® e @


Nearer I seem to God when looking on thee;
"Tis ages since He made His youngest star s
His hand was on thee as ’twere yesterday.” Alexander Smith.


He shall be to thee a restorer of thy life, ete. And Naomi took the child, ete,


How often the children are messengers of God, bringing new life into the
household as here. There is a fountain of love enclosed in the heart of the
aged, and it only needs the tiny infant fingers of some dear one’s child to
unloose it. Note. The birth of a new spirit may come in the home with the new
life. New consecration to God, new sympathy with all around. “Children are
a heritage from the Lord.” (a) What sacredness should surround them, (6) what
prayers ascend for them, (c) what blessedness be found in them! Note. /faman
do not find his joy in the home, he will find his burden there.

Dwell on, I. What the children expect from us. (a) Care, (6) attention, (c)
protection, (d) love, (e) nurture and training. In the text Naomi seen as respond-
ing to these demands. Her name still descriptive of her character [cf. on I. 2,
p- 14]. Must be doing something. Felt that she had a duty which was no
burden but a pleasure. “Took the child,” etc, Note. (2) Whoever was once
capable of true love preserves tts power for ever after (Lange). And life all the
way through finds a sphere for it. Even in old age, when the maternal instinct
may have been thought to have almost died out, Naomi becomes a foster-
mother. So generally. Grandchildren not loved less, but sometimes more than
the children themselves. Note. (6) Love may grow more intense, even as the shadows
of death begin to fall around. What a tribute to and foreshadowing of its immor-
tality.

Il. What we expect of the children. (1) They are to be the restorers of life
and joy. “He shall be,” etc. Life intended to have this twofold, and reciprocal
action and aspect. We do not give more than we get, if the true conception of
God’s word and of our nature be carried out, Love brings its own reward.
(2) They are to be the supports of old age. “Anda nourisher,” ete. The conditions
will be reversed by-and-bye. Weakness coming on with us as strength grows
with them.. Then this new law is to come into operation. They are to succour
and cherish in return for the past, as the trembling infirmities of second child-
hood claim us as their own. Beautiful, divine idea, which sin and selfishness
may mar, but cannot altogether destroy! The old and the feeble never for-
gotten, but reaping then what they have sowed in the tears and joys, the sorrows
and cares, and fond affections lavished upon childhood and infancy.

ImpROvEMENT.—So the Church is to foster young converts. In return they will
become sooner or later her strength and support. Note. Spiritual children bring
a greater blessing to her than “ seven sons” according to the flesh (Lange).


Children should nourish their old parents
and supply th-ir wants, dvre weAapyw. Storks
and mice feed their dams when old; boughs
incline and bend down towards the root; and
jn summer, receiving from the root leaves,
flowers, and fruit, they let them fall again in
winter to the fattening and nourishing of the
yoot. Unkind and unnatural children are like
kites, which, when grown strong expel their
dams, and with their bills and wings beat them
out of the nest.”— Trapp.


“A certain D-ke of Ormond who lost a
virtuous son, the Lord Ossory, said that he
would rather be the father of the dead Ossory,
than of any living nobleman in England.”—
Lawson,

“Tt is one of the many fine points of the
story, that its concluding sentences are almost
wholly devoted, not to the young and happy
wife and mother, but to Naomi, who had suf-
fered so many calamities, and who, by the
piety and resignation with which she bore

181


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.
a a


em es


them, had drawn Ruth from the frivolities of
Moab. It is Neomi not Ruth, whom, “the
women, her neighbours,” congratulate on the
birth of Ruth’s son. In him they see Naomi’s
goel-- Rutb already had hers in Boaz; and
they pray that, as he grows up, he may restore
her to her former happiness, and be the stay
and gladness of her old age. But though they
speak to Naomi, and pray for her, they do not
utterly forget the singular virtue of Ruth. In
the words, “Thy daughter-in-law, who loveth
thee, who is better to thee than seven sons,”
they pronounce on her an eulogy such as few
‘strange’ women could have heard from He-
brew lips It is because the boy is Ruth's son,
that he is Naomi’s goel ; for how can he fail to
love and cherish the woman whom his mother
has loved with a love even passing the love of
women. ”— Coz,

“Naomi is everywhere an image of the
Church of Christ, which wins, confesses, and
fosters through love. Men whose natural
hearts are hostile to her, become her obedient
ehildren. When there is apostacy and misery


CHAp. tv. 19—23,


in the Church it is for priests and preachers to
repent, as Naomi did, and not toexcuse them-
selves. ..... And how greatly she sins,
when she does not rightly foster, those who
do come; exhibiting neither love, nor wisdom,
nor faith in her treatment of them—that too
will one day be made manifest. Impatience
is not in love; and a little money does not
make amends for the coldness of consummate
self-righteousness.”— Lange.

“Of Boaz himself no warrior deeds are
known, and yet the greatest of Israel’s heroes,
the conqueror of Goliath [There is a tradition
that Goliath descended from Orpah, as David
from Ruth] sprang from him. He conquered
himself, and on that account became the
ancestor of Him who triumphed over sin and
death. Similarly, Ruth had nothing but a
heart full of love, and yet to her, once a
daughter of Moab, there was given what
neither Deborah nor Jael obtained, to become
the Mother of Him by whom all the nations
are redeemed.” —Jbid,


Vrrszs 19—22,


Theme.—Linxs in tHE Cuan CHRISTWARE,


* How vain are all hereditary hononrs,
Those poor possessions from another’s deeda,
Unless our own just virtues form our title,
And give a sanction to our fond assumption.” — Shirley,


And they called his name Obed, etc. Now these are the generations, ete,


Not a dry list of names merely useless and cumbersome as the stones of the


desert, These men lived, thought, played their part in life as we do now.
Then again the names themselves,
and with a motive. Obed, for instance,
called so because of the part he was to pl


of it.


Suggests I. The interest men take


Few men insensible or careless with reg
been one which has played a noble and dignified part.


couraged by Scripture,
world-wide importance.


Think
not given haphazard, but from reasons,


means a servant, and doubtless he wag
ay towards Naomi and towards Cod.

generally in genealogy. ( 1) Natural.
ard to their ancestry, especially if it hag


(2) Allowed and en-


The lineage of Israel for many reasons of especial and
(3) May be useful as a stimulus and inspiration.


Il. The interest men take in this particular record. (1) Because of the men


themselves.
king, ete.
to notice the variety of rank and co


king. “He who was bone of our bone,


They were men of fame. Nahshon a prince in Israel; David the
(2) Because they are links én the genealogy of Christ.
ndition in the ancestry
Rabab the harlot, Ruth the gleaner,


It is interesting
of the Saviour.
Boaz, possibly the judge. David the


and flesh of our flesh,” touches our race
at every point, and claims kindred with it all, (A. Thomson).


Note. How


this illustrates the spiritual relationship to which Christ invites us. (8) Because


they are helps in the study, and attestation of prophecy and of character.
much history is condensed in such a list !


How
Expand it, and what lessons are to


be enforced! Here, for instance, Obed is called the son of Boag after all, and


not the son of Mahlon as might have been expected. Note.
ase often borne down by the force of circumstances and
this the reward of Boaz—the reward of faith


182


Laws and customs
of public opinion. Is not
[ch on IV. 6} His name stands


CHAP. IV. 19—22.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RUTH.


oo


here contrary to the usual custom, stands as it ought to do amon the ancesto:
. . ¥ 8 . re
of Christ himself. [See also Introduction pp. 4, 5; and on L. 2, pp. 14, 15.]


E. Price on this :


Theme.—HERALDRY.


What a vanity these genealogies really are, although called a science, forsooth !
“The pride of life” is never more exemplified than when a bad man is seen
poring over the long catalogue of, it may be, worthless predecessors. A relief,
then, to study one, drawn out by God Himself, and suggesting the fondest hopea


of men !


From Pharez to David—what does the genealogical “tree” really suggest to


us 3
Why!

in Christ Jesus.

from that of his great successor 4


9. That Providence marvellously works


1. Our cescent is only valuable as it stands related to God's purpose
What would be the real worth of David’s name, if taken away


up our little lives into the grand whole


of His “Counsel.” Some of these names may in themselves be worthless, yet
can they not break away from God’s overruling purpose !

And 3. Regarding the descent of David and of Christ the Lord as historical
facts, the scheme of the Jewish “* Herald” continually reminds us of our relation
to, and gratitude for, the great and glorious Redeemer of men—Himself the son


of Adam!


Names go for something, when multiplied into that of Him, who is the Alpha


and the Omega of all human events |


“Obed a servant. It may be a remem-
brancer of duty. Just as the motto of the
Prince of Wales is ‘Ich Dien,’ I serve. Any
way it is beautiful never to despise ser-
vice. ‘A Christian is to be meet for the
Master’s use. How many there are who are
of no use in the world! Some dislike all ser-
vice, and prefer the dainty hand that is never
soiled, and the life that is never separated frora
selfishness.” —Statham.

“¢Orpah, the child of sense, dismayed by the
difficulties presented goes back aguin ; Ruth,
the child of the Spirit, ‘persuaded’ of better
things, presses through all obstacles onward
to join the Israel of God, and to find rest at
last where rest at first had seemed impossible.
So the ‘anonymous kinsman,’ fearing lest his
name should be blotted out from Israel, his in-
heritance marred, his children called after
another, misses the one opportunity of life
and goes down to a nameless oblivion. Boaz,
the man of nobler spirit, and larger faith, and
keener insight. is deterred by no fear, held
back by no difficulty; and, 2ontrary to cus-
tom, we find his name here 58 the father of
Obed, in the genealogy of David and of Christ.
Is it herd to read the moral of such a story ?


the moral which works itself out everywhere in
the pages of Inspiration, and repeats itself to-
day in the history of a thousand lives; that
sense deceives and sight fails, and cunning
defeats itself ; that the law is fallible and the
letter kills, while faith endures and love con-
quers: aud that only in obeying those instincts
which are of God, and which spring up in
hearts open to His influence, is the safety and
solution of human life, This is the victory of
faith, which overcomes the world and finds its
name written at last in the Lamb’s Book of
Life for evermore.”—B.

“©, Moab ! out of thee shall come forth the
unspotted Lamb which bears the sins of the
world, and rules over the whole earth! From
the rock of the wilderness, ie., from Ruth,
widowed by the death of her husband, Boas
derived Obed .... and from David came
Christ.” —Jerome.

“ Much of Scripture, and stil) more of that
which is written about Scripture, is but like
the valley of dry bones to eyes of sense and
sin. But if the Spirit, without whom there is
no true understanding breathe upon it, what-
ever men say, it may live aguin, and that to
the praise and glory of God.”—2,





INDEX OF SUBJECTS ANALYTICALLY
ARRANGED.


Ena cee
Paez Paes
Accidents, Their Meaning eee coe 95 Cornfield, Meal Times In eve e00 124
Affection, Expulsive Power of a New... 61 | Crisis of Life cee vee 52, 62, 96

Afféction, The First Trial of... ee 87 | Death, Certainty and Uncertainty con-
AA The Second ,, 46 nected with 22, 31

a The Failure of a Merely Earthly 56 »» A Breach in the Family ues
oe The Third and Last ‘Trial of 64 , ol
Affection, A Pure and Passionate eo. 67 | Dead, Kindness to the eee ‘o, 187
Afflictions, How they should be Borne Depression, Spiritual ane eo  %9
ee , 80 | Despondency, ,, oss woe §=—s9
Affiictions, Meaning of a eo 84 | Disposing, God’s ... cs woo §=—d'
= Sympathy and Companion- Duties, Promptitude in 168

ship in eee aoe »  Honourably Fulfilled ‘Bring 's
os Necessary ae 9, 50 Blessing ... ase coe «=D
Source of nee 60, 80 | Discipline, Necessary see oes 9
Aged, Mission of ... ee eee 181 | Diligence, Illustrated as ee 105
Agreement, An Apparent... e. 43 | Divine Action towards Men ... 120, 123
Almighiy, The Wings of ... es 118 | Decision, Result of a Wise ... oe «=
Apostacy, Illustration of ... ee 57 | Karnestness of Character... 72

Causes and Consequences of 57 | Employers and Employed, Relationship
Approval, The Second Gracious woe 118 bet ween... coe 100
Astonishment, A Cityin ... ee 77 | Employment, An Honest, Bought coe §=— 98
Awakening, The,in Moab ... eo 81 | Enquiries, Mutual ... oe 184
Backslider, Illustration of ... 56, 58 | Evening, Labour until the ... «- 180
Benevolence, An Example of Exile, The 7

108, 110, 127, ve Example, Influence of an Unfavourable
Benediction, A eee os coe .
Bereavement, The First coe oe 3B Error, Foolish, not Final always Hee ah A
. The Second Great oo. 29 | Family, Remedial Processes in connec-

Burden, The Precious... ooo zee 188 tion with woe 172
Bereavement, Seebeaiet Ofe vace eo 28 | Family History, Important Step i Ines. Le


Mercy Connected with ... 24-


Business, How it should be Attended to
100, 103, 167
Christian, The Steadfast 83, 54, 68, 72, 174
Christ, The Kinsman Redeemer
140, 148, 172, 174


» The Bridegroom Redeemer 146, 174
»  Cleaving to... eco 7, 60, 68
» Forsaken ... eee 56,
Children, What We may Expect of
Them, ete. ore Pee yl
Child, A Good eLSO


Claims of Destitute, * How Attended to 168


Claims of Others Respected ... 187, 167
Chance, Meaning of coe ee «69
Changes in Life... ove sce, 80

sien amily) Ves coe Pa val}


Chances, Seeming, Real Providences . 95
Christwards, Links in the Chain oe 182


Commencement, The Promising eo 43
Confidences, Home ... see eo 134
Confessions, Mutual... ooo ee 184
Council, Friends in ... coe eee illtes
Congratulations eee 135, 179
Constancy at Home and Abroad e 142
Crisis, The wen oe seul ge
Courtesy, Enforced .. ese 100, 108
Character, Test of . ese eset ed
# Earnestness of ss. eo =
Choice, Influence of... an See EG
» Once and for Ever ooo eee §=—« 67

» Of Youth ... coe sso 69
Contrast, A Startling ooo ' 44, 50


Family Circle, The First Breach in the 21


Famine, The eee oe 7
Fame, its True and Proper Sphere woe 178
Genealogy, Pride of, etc. eee pssst
Giving, Lawof .. see 126, 128
Giving, Liberal, like God's... seemed,
Gleaner, The nae 97, 186
Gleaner, i in the Harvest Field 89, 98, 142
God’s Way of Dealing with Men
48, 97, 118, 188
» Willingness to Receive Men .. 118


God, Surrender of Ourselves unto eo «62


» Lestifying Against Man 81, 84

», Guidance from ses On

» A Beneficent, Sheltering Power

120, 188

» Blessing of ... woo eo. 189
Good Wishes an eee ae eg)
Gratitude, an Example of ..- Pee i |
Goel, Christ the... 140, 148, 172, 174

» Missionof ... soot 1415 167, 173
Heart, The wes Attitude of a Grateful 111
Help, "A Claim for ... coe wwe 154
Home, The Departure from .. we 10
Home, Its Responsibilities ... 14, 179
Homeward often means Godward 85, 87
Household, Separation in ... 2
Home, In a Fortunate Way, at a For-

tunate Time S00 ooo 87
Humility, An Example of ... 98, lll, 154
Inconstancy, An Illustration of oe ©«=—5B
Influence, Secret of... bee veel) 08
Inheritance, Marred ove vee 469


INDEX.





Pagu
Innocence, Obedience in ae eo «150
Instability, An Illustration of ~ etek OG
Judgments, Come in a Natural Way ... 9
Kinship, The Ground of Redemption
140, 172, 174


Kinsman Redeemer, The ... 172
Life, Journey of ... ooo esp nue
» Crisis of aes os 52, 62, 97
» True Conception of 84, 142
» A False Step in ve 18


» Uncertainty of coe woe «2
Living, The, Kindness to se ere HF
Love. The Constancy of a Divinely
Kindled ane aa =o 00.
Love, The Heart Realising a Ministry of 122
» Zealous and Careful for Others ... 39
Love’s Valediction and Benediction ... 39


Love, Can Deal Faithfuily ... ee §«=—4.6
” Test of ooo eee eee 47

»  Truthfulness of veo ve = 46

» Ohoicoof «a. coo coe «G1

» Loyalty of ... oe oe §=— 0

» Ministry of ... cee 122, 126, 173
Labour, Not to be Despised ... 938, 127, 147
» _ Constancy in coo oo 142
Mara, Meaning of ... coo 80, 83
Marriages, Mixed ... cos Ce ee
x In Moab... aes re Wits


Marriage, Inspired Idea of .. ee 146
w Darker Possibilities Connected

with ... as woe «= 26

Is Honourable ces 146, 175


99
Manliness, [ts True and Proper Sphere 178
Master, The right Relations between,
and Servants ... ae e- 100
Mindedness, Steadfast foe ee §=— 72.
Mission, A Delicate, Defended cree
Moab, The Sojourn ia ose yee lye
» Marriages in... soe ee =. 26
Moments Sacred... cco eee §=— 66
asim eTitical ses ove eo. 62
Mutability of Human Affairs ee «11
Meal, The Common “5 eo 125
Mind’s Transition, Result of ... 82, 56
Ministry of Love, Effective ... 122, 126


Name, Caring fora Good ox. «- 160
Names Suggestive ... wee Seay LS
Nature. Contrasted with Grace 55, 170, 183


Need, Consciousness of sae eee §=112
Opportunity, Improved ooo coe 142
Orpah ; or, the Mere Professor ve «58
Parental Responsibility eos Ceti S213)
Perseverance, Secret of vce seem a
Pilgrimage, The Homeward ... we «= 4
Policy, A Shor'-sighted, and its Merited
Oblivion coo eee ao 169
Posterity, Prayers for coe eo 177
Progress, Companionship in v2. soot tO
Prosperity, Prayers for coe .


ae ale
Providences, Descend to our Levels, &c. 18, 96


Providence, A Particular ,.. ee =: 98
Punishments Designed soo 200 9
Prayer Eases the Soul ane woe «=—40
Prejudice, Influence of eee coe 169
Professor, The Mere ate 58


Promises often proceed from Passion,

not Principle 28 eae Pyaar. & |
Property, Respect for Rights of o- 168
Peor, Ministry unte ove 124, 128





Paes
Recompense of Righteousness. 114, 174
Pa Expected, Prayed for, Certain 116
Redemption, Kinship the Ground of
140, 147,172
Recompense, Humble Toil the First Step


towards an After tee aa nee
Remembrances, Painful use soa SD
Redeemer, The Bridegroom ... vee 174
ns The Kinsman see 147, 172
Reminder, An Important —... cep svi
Rest, in Another  ... seo eon Oe
» in Ourselves ... one sca G2
Rest, Seeking 6 145


Regard. The Outward Proof of the Divine 193
Reward, The Recompense of... 114, 116


Resolutions, Good but Frail ... sea ae ee
Restleseness under A filiction... vee ed
Reproach, Shielded from... ree ae!


Rich and Poor, Relationship between 90, 128
Righteous Man, his Character illustrated

100, 128, 167
Rights of Others Attended to geese BBs)
Saints, Rules for Final Perseverance of 54
Salutations ? Are Earnest Prayers ... 100


Selfishness, Overcautiousness of cas. 1G
Separation, The Thought of ... Sed
” A Final... eee eoe 58
Shelter, God a Ler aye 119, 155
Sincerity, A Test of coe Fare eect!
Soul, The Half-awakened ce. wo 59
Sorrow, Mutual ... sco renee ie 4!
Sorrows, The Beginning of ... Sone
Stranger, Attention to eee eee 103
Ks Care for ... see coe ©6108
i Provision for see soe 12S
Strong, Claims of the Weak upon the... 90
Suffering, Resignation in _.., we 50
Spirit, A Generous, Care and Thought-
fulness of xe ae 87, 93, 128
Spiritual Life, Revival of ... ee «=. 85
99 A fiinities cee vee 62
Step. A Decisive ... ose ee «=
Steadfast-mindedness 72


Strong and Weak, Relationship Between 91
Tears, Natural aaa Ar eee = AL
A Protestation of Fidelity ... 42


°

Thrift, An Instance of one eo 142
Tolerance, A Christian Virtue ws 49
Truthfulness of Love ose eo 8 4H
Unworthiness, Confessions of eee 111
Valediction, A wee mas coe §=— 838
Virtue, Recognised and Blessed ee. 156
Vows, Solemn as 6b0 a ile)
Wandering, Where it Leads and Ends... 19
Wanderer, The tee <<e coe =: 8

. The, Home again ... coe = 87
Wife, Introduction to coe ees §=105
Winner, The Bread a eo. 133
Wife, A Good eee eee ees
Wings of the Almighty mee ew. 120


Widow, Story of ... oct ns
Wishes, Good eee 3b, 100. 116, 185. 178
World, A Perplexing Medley oe 45
Worldling, Character of (Illustrated) ... 170


Work, Not Degradation coe =. 93, - 127, 147


Youth 405 nea See “yp Eh
»  Choiceof  .., tee we «=D
» The Season of Warm and Gene-

rous Emotions SS or «= 49


4
at
Sue cite over 0 09 09 20 hens me


11-18
11-18


TABLE OF
THEMES HOMILETICALLY TREATED.
CONSECUTIVELY ARRANGED.


CHAPTER L


Treme—Tokt WaNDERERR





Page Verse

The Famine and Exile sil alee 14 The Crisia and the Contrast Once
The Beginning of Sorrows ... 8 Again ... oy coe
The Departure from Home .. 10 14 The Failure of a Merely ended
Family Changes ast we 13 Affection
Man Proposing, God Disposing 15 14 Orpah; or, the Mere Professor...
The Sojourn in Moab Sates ld 14 The Constancy of a Divinely
The Wanderers ose 18 Kindled Love...
The First Breach in the Family 16 The Third and Last Trial of

Circle... ue peewee Affection ts vee
The First Bereavement ee 23] 16-17 Sacred npligins and Solemn
Marriages in Moab ... ve «—26 Vow! vee
the Second Great Bereavement 29 | 16-17 The Choice of Youth ... eee
The Awakening in Moab neo) 18 Stead fast-mindedness ove
The Homeward Pilgrimage .. 34 19 Companionship in Progress se
The First Trial of Affection .. 9387 19 A City in Astonishment ses
A Benediction and a Valediction 83 20 Spiritual Despondency and De-
Mutual Sorrow “a5 we «= 4 pression .. oes on
The Promising Commencement 43 21 Painful Remembrances
The Second Trial of Affection... 46 22 The Wanderer Home Again eos
Resignation in Suffering «- 50

OHAPTER IL


Tueme—-Tur GLEANER IN THE Harvest FIEipDs.


The Claims of the Weak upon
the Strong

Humble Toil, the First Step to-
wards an After Recompense

Seeming Chances, Real Provi-
dences  ...

The Gleaner

The Right Relationship between
Masters and Servants as

Attention to the Stranger at the
Gate

Tntroduction to a Future Wife...

Care for the Stranger at the


Gate... tie soe
The Lowly Attitude of a Grate-

ful Heart
The Second Gracious Approval
The Recompense of Reward ...
The Wings of the Almighty ...
The Sheltering Wing
The Habit of Holy Coramun-

ion


eee eco oe


90


108
111
113
116
118
119
120


18


19
20


20-21
22


The Heart Realising a Ministry
of Love ...

The Outward Proof of the Di.
vine Reward se

Provision for the Stranger at the
Gate ..

Meal-time in the Corn "Field

The Common Meal ... eco

Liberal Giving, like God’s

Labour until the Evening eos

The Bread Winner and Her
Precious Burden ...

Home Confidences, Mutual Con-
fessions, and Enquiries —...

God’s Presence an Incitement to
a Question

Daily Gleaning

Kindness to the
Dead

Kinship the Ground of Redemp-
tion see

Constancy at Bome and Abroad


Living and the


124


130


185
136


187


149
142


Verse


2-4


6-6
}-14


1-8
1-5


10
{1-18


INDEX.


CHAPTER IIL


TaemE—Tue CLAIMANT IN THE THEESHING-F Loon.


Page | Verse Page
One Seeking Rest for Another... 145 | 10-11 Virtue Recognised and Blessed... 156
An Important Reminder »- 147 | 12-13 Care for the Claims of Others... 157
Work associated with the Posi- 14 Caring for a Good Name --- 160
tion of a Gentleman Ko BEG! 18 Rest in Ourselves and Rest in
Obedience in Innocence ee 150 Another... see --- 163
A Delicate Mission Defended ... 152 18 Promptitude in Duties, Secular
A Cry for Shelter and a Claim or Sacred ovo coo 168
for Help ove coe 154
eee eee ee Ee A
CHAPTER IV,
Tueme—Tue Gorn at tHe Garm
Friends in Council ... ee 167 11 Children the Gift of Heaven .. 2977
Respect for Property ... ee 168 11 Manliness, its Fit and Proper
A Short-sighted Policy and its Sphere ... ass poe i)
Merited Oblivion ... eee 169 | 14-15 Congratulations and Good Wishes 179
The Kinsman Redeemer eee 172 | 14-15 A Good Child O85 -. 180
The Bridegroom Redeemer... 174 | 15-16 Youth and Age one cee LOL
Prayers for Posterity and Pros- 19-22 Links in the Chain Christwards 182
perity .. coe eee 177 | 19-22 Heraldry ... pee coe ©6183


a
LIST OF AUTHORS CONSULTED,


Arun, J. P..M.A. MSS. on “Ruth,”
BeRnaRp, Richard (1628). “Ruth’s Recom-
nse.”


Binney, Thos,, D.D. MSS. on “Ruth.”





Braven, W. (1874). “ Beautiful Gluaner.”
“ Boox or Ruta; on, THE GUIDB OF THE
Sour ” (1860).


CassEL, Paulus, D.D. In


Ciarkr, Adam, D.D. (1836).


Cox, Samuel (1876).
Cummine, John, D.D. (1859),


Chapter in Providence.”
Fouxer, Thos., D.D. (1650), “Oomment. on
Rath.”


Gitt, John, D.D.
Grosser, W. H. (1874). “Joshua and his


Successors.”


Haxt, Bishop (1656),


Henry, Matthew (1708).


Kez and Detitzson
on Ruth.”

Kirro, John,
Illustrations.”

Kyiant, J. A (1798).


D.D. (18650).


Book of Ruth.”


MacsetTu, R. “MSS, Outlines.”


Macartney, H. B (1842),
Ruth.”


“Lange on Ruth.”


“‘Ruth’s Recompense.”
“Ruth, a


“Contemplations.”
(1868). “Commentary
“Daily Bible
‘*Reflections on the


Lawson, Geo., D.D. (1808),


“ Lectures on
Ruth.


“ Observations


“ Discourses ex


Parriox, Bp. (1702), « Commentary.”
Purxpor, B., (1872). “ Lectures on Ruth.”
Price, Aubrey (1869). “ Lectures on Ruth,”
Price, E. “MSS. Outlines.”

Puxrit, The. “Comment ee

Scort, John (1844), “ Explanatory Notes.”
Srmmon, Charles (1832). “ Horm Homile tics.”
SPEAKER’s CoMMENTARY, The (1876).
SPURGEON, Charles H. “Two Sermon on


Ruth.
Srantey, Arthor P. “ Jewish Church,”
TERRY, M. S, (1875). “ Whedon's Commen-
tary.”
THompson, Andrew, D.D. (1877),
Life in Ancient Palestine.”
Timson, March. MSS. on “ Ruth.”


Totter, Thomas N. (1848), “ Discourses op
the Book of Ruth,”


Maceowax, John (1781).
Ruth.”


*s Home


TopsaLL, Edward (1596), “Reward of
Religion.”

TRarr, John, D.D. (1662), “ Commen-
tary.’


Tyne, Stephen, D.D. (1856). “Rich Kins.
man.”


Worpsworrts, Bishop (1865). On “Ruth,”
Weuieut, Charles H. H. (1864). “Book of
Ruth,” in Hebrew,
Htc. ete, ete,


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOKS OF


SAMUEL.


BY,


REV. W. HARRIS,


AUTHOR OF


Homiletical Commentary on the Book of Proverbs, Outlines of Sermons on Miracles and Parables
of Old Testament, and Sermons for Boys and Girls.


( Printed in the United States


‘FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK anp LONDON





CONTENTS.


PaaE
Lytropuocrion one os eee oe non eee veo eco 1
BOOK I.

CHAPTER IL.

VERSES
CRITICAL AND ene Nores eve ty nae pen rj
1 Elkanah, Genealogy of - ae See sae ase ooo 7
2—8 Elkanah, Household of eco eco eco ooo eee ace .)
9—11 Hannah, Prayer e eco ooo eco ee0 oe eee ll
12—18 Hannah and Eli.. eco cece eee coe eco eco 15
19—20 Samuel, Birth rds ee aes me eee wae eis 19
21—23 Elkanah in the Temple ... MUG ttaes Ui aean fake, | Lees 20


24—28 Hannah’ 8 Vow eco coe evo ooo eco eco eco 21


CHAPTER II.
CRITICAL AND POOR Nores coe ae soo ooo 23
1—10 Song of Hannah.. - eee eco ove oss oes 25
12— 17 Sons of f Eli eee eee eee eco eee 40
18—21, 26 Samuel i in he Temple eco eco ooo eee ooo 44
2225 Eli’s Reproof of his Sons ose aes ase soe ese 46


27—36 Messenger from God to Eli ++ oes eee eco eee 50


CHAPTER IIL
CRITICAL AND Pac NOTES ove pe oon a 57
1—10 Samuel, Call of eco eco eco eco 58
10—21 Eli receives the message ‘from Sarmnel ses one ove coe ees 62


CHAPTER IV.


Crrrican AND Expostrony NoTES 0 ce = os ove 67

1,2 Israel’s First Defeat —« eos see ose ese eae 68
3—11 Ark, Capture of the  .. aoe aes bed wee soe 69
12—22 Eli’s Death eco cee ooo eee ee eee eco 15





vi CONTENTS.
’ CHAPTER ¥.
VERSES PAGE
CRITICAL AND Exposrrony NorESs eee eee ose ooo 78
1—5 Dagon, Fall of coe eee see eco coe eco eee 79
6—12 P hilistines Smitten eee eee eco ed eco oes 82
CHAPTER VL
CriticaL AND Expository Nores eee ose ose ooo 84
1—21 Ark, Return of the eco eco eoe ooo eee eso 85
CHAPTER VIL
CRITICAL AND Exposttory Norges exe oe AS eee 89
1, 2 Kirjath-jearim, Ark in cee eco eco eee ece cece 92
3,4 Israel’s Repentance... eee ose aes ane ove 94
5, 6, 15—17 Mizpeh, Gathering at coe eee eco ooo eco 97
I—12 Philistines, Defeat of eee eee eco ove coe eco 99
CHAPTER VIIL
CRITICAL AND Expostrory Norrs ... eee aon ooo 103
1—3 Samuel’s Sons eco coe coo ece coe eve eco 104
4—22 King, Israel desires a +. eee tities sce. eee eee 107
CHAPTER IX.
CriticaL aND Exposrrory Notes ... een ace ose 112
1—14 Saul’s Seeks his Father’s Asses... nae ot eee seo 114
15—17 Saul and Samuel, Meeting of coo eco es ryy ecco 118
CHAPTER X.
CriticaL AND Expostrory Nores exe sae aoe ene 119
1—10 Saul, Anointing of Res tee ose vee ese eee 122
11,12,27 Prophets, Saul among the ... ae eee eee eos 126
17—20 Saul Proclaimed King ece e000 eee e000 e0c0e eee 127
CHAPTER XI.
CriticaL aND Exposrrory Norges  ... ese see aes 130
1—3 Jabesh-Gilead, Invasion of one tee wae coe eee 182
4—15 Saul Defeats the Ammonites ... ee ses eee wee 133
CHAPTER XII.
Critica, AND Exposrrory Norzs  ... eae see sed 135
1—25 Samuel resigns his Office ees ust See


137


CONTENTS.


vil


eee


CHAPTER XIIL


CRITICAL AND Expostrory NoTEs eee
1—23 Saul’s First Act of Disobedience ine


CHAPTER XIV.


Critical anp Exposirory Notes  ..
1—16 Jonathan’s Victory over the Philistines
17—46 Saul’s Rash Oath O20 e000 e228


CH4.PTER XV.
CrivIcaL AND Expert Nores = ae
1—5 Amalek, Sentence upon.. eae sve


10—12 Samuel’s Prayer for Saul. as
4—9,13—23 Saul’s Second Act of Dispbedionce
24—35 Saul’s Confession ose ene me


CHAPTER XVL


CRITICAL AND Exposttony NOTES ee

1—5 Bethlehem, Samuel sent to ... are
6—12 David, Anointing of ... Be! wee
13—18 David at Saul’s Court cco eco eco
19—23 David at Saul’s Court eee eee eee


CHAPTER XVIL


CrrricaL axp Expository NorEes «ee
12—29 David's Visit to his Brothers ee eae
1—11, 30—58 Goliath and David eco coo


CHAPTER XVIIL


CRITICAL AND ExposrtoRy NOTES ove
1—4 Jonathan and David ... one Has
5—30 David, Saul’s Jealousy of eapl  yviens


CHAPTER XIX.


CrrricaL AND Exposrrory NOTES ~~ eee

1—7 Jonathan’s Intercession ..- uve See
%7—17 Michal delivers David ... ses aes
18, 19 David’s Flight to Ramah aoa soe
20—24 Prophets, Saul among the ease


Beret


e200


SS)


PAGE
141
143


148
148
153


155
158
160
162
166


167
169
172
176
179


182
185
187


191
193
195


199


201
204
206


CONTENTS.


a a


{—15


1—4
6—23


1—6
7—12
13—18
19-29


1—7
8—15
16—22


1—25


1—12


CHAPTER XX.


CrirtcaL anp Expostrory Norss wis
Jonathan, Saul’s anger against... woe


CHAPTER XXL


Crrrical aND Expository Notes «ee
Gath, David’s Flight to coo ere ooo


CHAPTER XXIL


CrirtoaL AND Expository Notes  ...
Adullam, David in the Cave of... ae
Gad, The Prophet res cos see
Priests, Slaughter of the aes ore


CHAPTER XXIII.


Critical AND Exposirory Notes ...
Keilah, David delivers ... Pe see
Keilah, Saul marches against...


Jonathan’s visit to David in the Wilderiesa


Ziphites, Treachery of the oe: ee


CHAPTER XXIV.
CrivicaL AND Exposrrory Nores see


Cave, Saul meets David in the... Bale
David’s vindication before Saul neck
Saul’s Confession... can See Pre


CHAPTER XXV.


CRITICAL AND Expository NOTES exe
Samuel, Death of a coe aoe


* Nabal and Abigail pa ae sas


CHAPTER XXVI.


CrrricaL AND Exposrrory Nores ...
David visits Saul’s Camp os ese


CHAPTER XXVII.


CriticaL anp Exposirory Notes  ...
David in Gath ... ase spe a


eco


PAGH
209
211


213
214


218
220
221
223


225
226
228
230
231


233
233
236
238


239


242


243


251
253


257
258








CONTENTS. i
CHAPTER XXVIII.
VERSES eian
CRITICAL AND Expostrory NOTES — os wee a sae 260
8—25 Endor, The Woman of eee eco eee eco eco eee 262
CHAPTER XXIX.
CrrrrcaL AND Exposrrory NOTES eee os eee cae 265
1—11 Achish, David, and the Philistines coe eee eee eoe 265
CHAPTER XXX.
Crrrtcan anp Expostrony NOTES — eo Bes tas see 261
1—31 Ziklag, David Abece e20 eco ese eco eco eee 267
CHAPTER XXXI.
Criticat aND Exposrrory Notes “ee se Gus 27
1—7 Death of Saul and Jonathan -.. tee ves ese 270
8—12 Jabesh-Gilead, Gratitude of the men aS en eae ree 372
BOOK II.
CHAPTER L
CRITICAL AND Exposrrony NOTES — eve aes cae nae 74
1—16 David receives tidings of Saul’s Death soe 275
17—27 Lament of David over the Death of Saul and J Ghathen Ae 276
CHAPTER IL
CRITICAL AND epee NovrEs eve ose és Mes 378
1—7 Hebron, David goes to . eee ane es “5 ae 280
8—32 Ishbosheth made King eco eco eoe ooo ooo 282
CHAPTER III.
CriricaL AND Expository NOTES «+ ee ens ooo 284
1—21 Abner renders allegiance to David — «ss eee ove ove 286
22—39 Abner, Murder of eee ooo ooo ooo eo eoe 288
CHAPTER IV.
CRITICAL AND 1xpostroRY NOTES ~— eee Bi sos ad ns


1—12


Ishbosheth, Murder of ..- mies ise


CONTENTS,


So ee


VERSES


1—5
6—25


1—29


1—7
12—16
17—24


1—18


1—13


1—19


1—?%7


1—13
14—25
26—31


I—239


CHAPTER V.


Orirtcan anp Expostrory Notes  ...
King of all Israel, David see ee
Jerusalem, Conquest of .. ees ee


CHAPTER VI.


CRITICAL AND Expostrory N OTES «ccs
Zion, Removal of Ark to See =


CHAPTER VIL


Crirican AND Expostrory Worms...
Temple, David Forbidden to Build the


Messiah, Promise of the... ase
Messiah, Promise of the coe sce
CHAPTER VIIL


CrrricaL AND Exposrrory Norus ...
Conquests and Establishment of David -


CHAPTER IX,


CriricaL anp Expogrrory Nores se
Mephibosheth eee eee eee eee


CHAPTER X,


CrivicaL anp Exposrrory NOTES eee
Ammonites, David andthe ... coe


CHAPTER XL


Crrrican anp Exposrrory N OTES 3. .e6
David’s Adultery and Murder of Uriah


CHAPTER XIL


Critical anp Exposrrory N OTE: cs
Nathan and David See eae eee
Punishment of David ... ase ans
Ammon, Final Conquest of  . ene


CHAPTER XIIL


CRITICAL AND Expository Norss ee
Ammon, Sin and Murder of ... eco


Facn
294
297
299


802
304


311
313
316
319


822
823


825
826


828
829


832
833


838
340
846
35]


352
354


CONTENTS.





VERSES


1—24
25—33


1—37


1—4
5—19
20—23


1—24
25—29


1—33


1—15
16—40


CHAPTER XIV.


CriticaL anD Expostrory NorTEs  «w.
Tekoah, the Woman of... ons gee
Absalom, David forgives coe wee


CHAPTER XV.


CRITICAL AND Expostrony Nores ewe
Absalom, Rebellion under Ree ese


CHAPTER XVI.
CrrricaL anp Exposrrory Nores eee
Ziba, 'l'reachery of “ae eee cee
Shimei and David ae Ans oes


Ahithophel’s Counsel ... eee =e


CHAPTER XVII.


CriticaL AND Expository Notzs ee
Ahithophel, death of ... cep ane
Mahanaian, David at oe see eco


CHAPTER XVIIL


CriricaL AND ExpositoRy NOTES cee
Absalom, death of eee Px: eae


CHAPTER XIX,


Cerrican anp Exposrrory Notes = «:
David’s Restoration aie
Shimei, Mephibosheth, and Barzillai ooo


CHAPTER XxX.
CrrricaL AND Exposrrony NorTEs  o.


C. xix. 41 to xx. 2 Shebna, the Rebellion of ...


14—26


Shebua, Death of or nee eae


CHAPTER XXI.


CriticaL aND Expository Nortss


eee


1—9 Gibeonites, Breach of Covenant with them punished ove


1o—14


Rizpah and David wes eae ane


PAGE
856
858
860


861
863


867
868
869
376


871
372
374


876
877


881
883
885


888
390
39!


892
894
868


CONTENTS,


tte nse Ls ae es NU a eee eg


VERSES


1—19
20—28
29—40
47—51


1—7
8—39


b—25


CHAPTER XXII.


Critica, AND Exposrrory Nores Wo eae


David’s Song of Thanksgiving—

Part L ecco ceo ree coe ooo eee
Part: TL cc aes ee ike ase ae
Part ITI. coe eee eee eco eco eco
Part IV. coe eco ceo eee eee eee


CHAPTER XXIII


Crrrtcat anp Exposrrory Norss ... oe
David’s Prophecy oe Be Seen tebe
Might» Men, the, and the Well at Bethlehem...


CHAPTER XXIV.


CRITICAL AND Exposrrorny Novus so sae
Numbering the People .« 0 ee a





$3


PAGE
400


403
403
412
416


418
420
423


425
428


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOKS OF SAMUEL.





INTRODUCTION.


THE Books of Samuel form but one work in the Hebrew MSS. The division
was first made in the Septuagint translation, where they are reckoned as be-
longing to the Books of the Kings, and are called ‘‘ the books of the kingdoms,”
“evidently with reference,” says Keil, “to the fact that each of these works
contains an account of the history of a double kingdom, viz., the Books of
Samuel the history of the kingdoms of Saul and David, and the Books of Kings
that of the kingdoms of Judah and Israel.” The suitability of such a title is
very obvious when we consider that the book contains an account of the
establishment of the monarchy in Israel.” Its date and authorship rest entirely
upon conjecture, and scholars are divided in their opinions upon both subjects.
The Jews believed that the first twenty-four chapters of the first book were
written by Samuel himself, and that the remainder was the work of Nathan
and Gad. (See 1 Chron. xxix. 29). Many modern scholars of the Anglican
Church adopt this view. Keil and other commentators, however, regard it as
eertain that the book was not written until after the division of the kingdom
under Rehoboam, and found their opinion principally upon the remark in
1 Sam. xxvii. 6, that “ Zklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto
this day.” ‘There is internal evidence in the contents and style of the book
that it was not written long after the division of the kingdom. There is,
for instance, no reference to the decay of the kingdoms, and the
style and language are free from the Chaldaisms of a later period. The author
of the article on the “ Books of Samuel,” in Smith’s Biblical Dictionary, says,
“The Book of Samuel is one of the best specimens of Hebrew prose in the golden
age of Hebrew literature. In prose it holds the same place which Joel and the
undisputed prophecies of Isaiah hold in poetical and prophetical language. It
is free from the peculiarities of the Book of Judges, and likewise from the slight
peculiarities of the Pentateuch. It is a striking contrast to the Book of
Chronicles, which undoubtedly belongs to the silver age of Hebrew prose; and it
does not contain so many alleged Chaldaisms as the few in the Books of Kings.”
Upon this subject of its authorship Keil says, “Judging from the spirit of his
writings, the author was a prophet of the kingdom of Judah. It is unanimously
admitted, however, that he made use of written documents made by persons
who were contemporaries of the events described.” A reference to one such
person is made in 2 Sam. i. 18, and it seems highly probable that the other
sources drawn upon by the author were the works of Samuel, Gad, and
Nathan, mentioned in 1 Chron. xxix. 29. ‘It is very evident,” says Keil,
“that the author had sources composed by eye-witness at command, and
that these were employed with an intimate knowledge of the facts, and
with historical fidelity, inasmuch as the history is distinguished by great
perspicuity and vividness of description, by a careful delineation of the cha-
racters of the persons engaged, and by great accuracy in the accounts of
8B 1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I








localities, and of subordinate circumstances connected with the _ historical
events.” The chronology of the events recorded in the book of Samuel in
relation to those of the latter part of the book of Judges has also been a matter
of some dispute. It may be stated in general that the events recorded embrace
a period of about 125 years, and there is strong reason to believe that the
judgeships of Eli and Samson were partly contemporaneous, and that Samuel
was between twenty and thirty years old when Samson died, the work of the
latter being confined entirely to the west and south-west of the kingdom. The
silence of the author of the one book concerning the principal persons mentioned
by the other is no argument against this view. “ Notwithstanding the clear
and definite account given in the Book of Judges,” says Hengstenberg, “it has
been too often forgotten that it was not the author’s intention to give a
complete history of this period, but that he only occupies himself with a
certain class of events, with the acts of the Judges in a limited sense, the
men whose authority among the people had its foundation in the outward
deliverance which the Lord vouchsafed to the nation by their instrumentality.
In this sense Eli was by no means a Judge, although in 1 Sam. iv. 18
it is said that he “judged Israel.” Eli was High-priest, and merely
exercised over the affairs of the nation a more or less extended free
influence which had its origin in his priestly dignity. Hence the
author of Judges had nothing to do with Eli, and we are not to conclude
from the fact that he does not mention him that Eli’s influence was
not felt at the time of which he treats. And the author of the books of Samuel
had just as little todo with Samson. His attention is fixed on Samuel, and
he only mentions Eli because his history is so closely interwoven with that of
Samuel. The Book of Samuel takes up the thread of history where the Book
of Judges lets it fall, towards the end of the forty years’ oppression by the
Philistines (1 Sam. vii.). The following table is given in Lange’s Commentary
(English translation) :—

Samson’s judgeship,

Eli’s life (98 ee

Eli’s judgeship (40 years) =

Samuel’s life. - - B.0. 1120 (or 1130)—1060.

Saul’sreign = - = = - Bo, 1076—1050,

But the compiler doubts “Whether we have sufficient data at present for
settling the question.”

The history contained in the Book of Samuel is the history of a great epoch
in the history of the Jewish nation, and consequently of an epoch in the history
of the kingdom of God upon the earth. In the language of Dr. Erdman,
one of the authors of Dr. Lange’s Commentary—“ The theocracy was extri-
cated by Samuel’s labours from the deep decline pictured in the first book,
and in the Book of Judges, and under the guidance of God was led by
this great reformer into a new path of development. Without, under Samuel
and the royal rule introduced by him, political freedom and independence of
heathen powers were gradually achieved, and within, the internal theocratic
covenant-relation between the people of Israel and their God was renewed
and extended on the basis of the restored unity and order of political and
national life by the union of the prophetic and royal offices... .. From
the beginning of our books we see the great theocratic significance of the
prophetic order in the history of the kingdom of Israel ;_in the first place, as
the organ of the Divine Spirit, and the medium of the Divine guidance and
control. Samuel appears here as the true founder of the Old Testament
prophetic order as a permanent public power alongside of the priesthood and
the kingly office. Wordsworth says, “The Book of Samuel occupies an unique
place, va has @ special value and interest, as revealing the kingdom of Christ,


° 2 B.C. 1120—1100.
° - B.c. 1208—1110.
- B.o. 1150—1110,


OHAP. I, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
a aL SE SS ee


It is the first book in Holy Scripture which declares the incarnation of Christ as
King. It is the first book in Scripture which announced that the kingdom
founded in Him, raised up from the seed of David, would be universal and ever-
lasting.” An examination of the book shows that the author's purpose was not
to give a chronological statement of facts. It differs in this respect widely
from the Books of Kings. References are made to facts assumed to be known
transactions apparently trival are narrated with great fulness, and events which
generally hold a prominent place in historical works—such as great victories—
are very briefly passed over. ‘The last four chapters are not immediate historic
continuations of the events related in the preceding chapters, and the
history of David ceases quite abruptly, and makes it evident that the author’s
ain was not that of a mere historian or biographer. We conclude on this
subject with some extracts from Keil’s Introduction to his Commentary on this
Book : “Through the establishment of the monarchy, the people of Jehovah’s
nee became a ‘world power ;’ the kingdom of God was elevated into a

ingdom of the world, as distinguished from other ungodly kingdoms of the
world, which it was eventually to overcome in the power of its God. .... But
the Israelitish monarchy could never thus acquire the power to secure for the
kingdom of God a victory over all its foes, except as the king himself was
diligent in his endeavours to be at all times simply the instrument of the God-
King, and exercise his authority solely in the name and according to the will of
Jehovah ; and as the natural selfishness and pride of man easily made this con-
centration of the supreme earthly power in a single person an occasion for self-
aggrandisement, and therefore the Israelitish kings were exposed to’ the
temptation to use the plenary authority entrusted to them, even in opposition
to the will of God, the Lord raised up for Himself organs of His own Spirit,
in the persons of the prophets, to stand by the side of the kings and make
known to them the will and counsel of God. . . .. Whilst the predictions
of the anointed of the Lord before and in connection with the call of
Samuel (1 Sam. ii. 27-36, ili. 11 sqq.), show the deep spiritual connection
between the prophetic order and the regal office in Israel, the insertion
of them in these books is a proof that from the very outset the author
had this new organisation of the Israclitish kingdom of God before his mind, and
that it was his intention not simply to hand down biographies of Samuel, Saul,
and David, but to relate the history of the Old Testament Kingdom of God, at
the time of its elevation out of a deep outward and inward decline into the full
authority and power of a kingdom of the Lord, before which all its enemies were
to be compelled to bow. Israel was to become a kingship of priests, é.e., a
kingdom whose citizens were priests and kings. The Lord had announced this
to the sons of Israel before the covenant was concluded at Sinai, as the ultimate
object of their adoption as the people of His possession (Exod. xix. 5, 6). Now,
although this promise reached far beyond the times of the Old Covenant, and
will only receive its perfect fulfilment in the completion of the kingdom of God
under the New Covenant, yet it was to be realised even in the people of Israel
so far as the economy of the Old Testament allowed. Israel was not only to
become a priestly nation, but a royal nation also ; not only to be sanctified as a
congregation of the Lord, but also to be exalted into a kingdom of God.
The establishment of the earthiv monarchy. therefore, was not only
an eventful turning poimt, but also an ~“epoch-making” advance in
the development of Israel towards the goal set before it in its Divine
calling. And this advance became the a of the ultimate attainment of
the goal, through the promise which David received from God (2 Sam.
vii. 12-16), that the Lord would establish the throne of his kingdom for
ever. With this promise God established for His anointed the eternal covenant,
te which David reverted at the close of nis reign, and upon which ba rested

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.
SSS


his Divine announcement of the just ruler over men, the ruler in the fear of
God (2 Sam. xxiii. 1-7), Thus the close of these books points back to theiz
commencement. ‘Ihe prophecy of the pious mother of Samuel (1 Sam. ii. 10)
found ‘a fulfilment in the kingdom of David, which was at the same time a
pledge of the ultimate completion of the kingdom of God under the sceptre of
the Son of David, the promised Messiah. This is one, and in fact the most
conspicuous, arrangement of the facts connected with the history of salvation,
which determined the plan and composition of the work before us. By the side
of this there is another, which does not stand out so prominently indeed, but
yet must not be overlooked. At the very beginning, the inward decay of the
house of God under the high priest Eli, is exhibited ; and in the announcement
of the Judgment upon the house of Eli, a long-continued oppression of the
dwelling place [of God] is foretold (chap. ii, 32). Then in the further course of
the narrative it is shown how David first of all brought the ark of the covenant,
about which no one had troubled himself in the time of Saul, out of its con-
cealment, had a tent erected for it upon Mount Zion, and made it once more
the central point of the worship of the congregation ; and how, after that,
when the Lord had given him rest from his enemies, he wished to build a
temple to the Lord to be the dwelling-place of His name; and lastly,
when God would not permit him to carry out this resolution, but promised
that his son should build the house of the Lord, how, towards the close
of his reign, he consecrated the site for the future temple by building
an altar upon Mount Moriah (2 Sam. xxiv. 25). Even in this series of
facts, the end of the work points back to the beginning, so that the
arrangement and composition of it according to a definite plan are very
apparent. If we take into account the deep-seated connection between the
building of the temple as designed by David, and the confirmation of his
monarchy on the part of God, as exhibited in 2 Sam. vii., we cannot fail to
observe that the historical development of the true kingdom, in accordance with
the nature and constitution of the Old Testament Kingdom of God, forms the
leading thought and purpose of the work to which the name of Samuel has been
attached, and that it was by this thought and aim that the writer was influenced
throughout in his selection of the historical materials which lay before him in
the sources which he employed.” That our Lord and the Apostles recognised the
Book of Samuel as forming a part of the canon of Holy Scripture is shown by
the following references which are made to it in the New Testament _—


Matt. xii. 3, 4, etc., to 1 Sam. xxi. 1-6,
Acts iii, 24 to the general history,

Acts vii. 46 to 2 Sam. vii. 1, 2.

Acts xiii, 20-22 to 1 Sam. ix. 18

Heb. i. 5 to 2 Sam. vii, 14.


OHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





BOOK L
CHAPTER I.


CriricaL anD Expostrory Notns.—Verse 1. The site of Ramath-Zophim is declared by
Dean Stanley to be “the most disputed problem of sacred topography.” It is universally allowed,
and it is implied by Josephus to be the Ramah in which Samuel lived, died, and was buried ;
but next to nothing of its position can be gathered from the narrative. It is here said to be in
Mount Ephraim, but the limits of that district are uncertain, The name Ramathaim—the
double eminence—probably points to a city whose site was on two hills. But there were several
cities of this name in the land of Israel, and all on more or less elevated sites. No certain
explanation has ever been given of the addition Zophim. There was such a place on the east of
Jordan (Num, xxiii. 14), and “the land of Zuph” is mentioned in chapter ix.5. The region may
have derived its name from Elkanah’s ancestor. Some regard it as a common noun signifying
“ watch-towers”’ from the high position of the city. Elkanah, “The Levitical descent of Hikanah
and Samuel is put beyond doubt by a comparison of the genealogy here with those in Chronicles
(1 Chr. vi. 22 sq., and verse 33 sq.). Samuel is here shown to belong to the Kohathites,
Elkanah, i.e., he whom God acquired or purchased, is both in its signification and use a Levite
name. All the Elkanahs mentioned in the Old Testament (leaving out the one in 2 Chron.
xxviii. 7, whose tribe is not stated) were demonstrably Levites, and belonged mestly to the
family of Korah, from whom Samuel was descended” (Lange's Commentary).


Ver. 2. “Two wives.” “Perhaps he took the second on account of Hannah's barrenness ”
(Wordsworth).


Ver. 8. “Yearly.” Probably to the Passover, as that was the only feast which the whole
family were accustomed to attend (Luke ii. 41). “To worship and sacrifice.” “The
beautiful picture of Israelitish piety which we have in the following account of Elkanah and
Hannah is introduced by these features, as the chief and fundamental ones. The worship relates
to the name of the Lord, who dwells in His chosen place in the sanctuary, and is the expression
of the remembrance of this name before the Lord. The sacrifice is the embodied prayer. In
the sacrifice worship is presented to the Lord as the act by which the offerer brings himself and
all that he has to the Lord” (Lange's Commentary). If the Law given by God to Moses had
been observed, Elkanah would (unless he was now more than fifty years of age, which seems
unlikely) have been required to officiate in his turn in the service of the tabernacle. (See
Numb. viii. 24-26). That he did not do so is only one evidence, among many, of the low state
of religion at the time. “Lord of Hosts,” “Jehovah Zebaoth.” “Here first used as a Divine
name. It represents Jehovah as ruler of the heavenly hosts, 7.¢., the angels (Gen. xxxii. 2) and
the stars (Isa. xl. 26); it is simply applied to Jehovah as the God of the universe” (Keid).
“This appellation occurs sixty-two times in Isaiah, sixty-five in Jeremiah, and not once in
Job or Ezekiel ” (Wordsworth). “Shiloh.” 1. “Rest.” The tabernacle was set up here in the
days of Joshua (Josh. xviii. 1). Its position is described in Judges xxi. 19. This minute
description has enabled modern travellers to identify it. “This quiet place. situated on a hill
(Psa. Ixxviii. 54), was the scene of the mighty revolution brought about in the history of the
theocracy by the call of Samuel to be the prophet of God, and by the overthrow of the priestly
house of Eli” (Lange’s Commentary). “And the two sons of Eli,” etc. They performed the
priestly functions for their father, on account of his great age.


Ver. 4. “ When Elkanah offered.” “That this sacrifice was a praise or thank-offering
(Lev. vii. 15) is clear from what follows” (Lange's Commentary). “Portions.” Of that part of
the peace-offerings which belonged to them that offered. This was the whole, except the fat,
which belonged to the Lord, and the breast and the right shoulder, which belonged to the priest,
This feast was intended to be of a joyful character (Deut. xii. 12, xvi. 11).


Ver. 5. “A worthy portion.” This phrase has been much disputed, but it seems most
likely to mean a double portion. This was an Oriental mode of expressing favour. See Gen,
xliii. 34. “The Lord had shut up her womb,” Childlessness was not only held to bea
misfortune, but a Divine punishment (Gen. xix. 31; xxx. 1, 23),


Ver. 6. “ Her adversary.” i.¢., Peninnah.
Ver. 7. “He did so year by year,” i.¢., every year Elkanah gave Hannah a double portion.


Ver. 9. “Post,” or portal. “Probably a porch which had been placed before the curtain that
formed the entrance into the Holy Place” (Keil), “Temple,” “or palace, so called not on
account of the magnificence of the building, but as the dwelling place of the God-king of Israel
as in Psalm v.8” (Keil). “I think this is the first place where the temple of Jehovah is
mentioned. ‘This confirms the opinion that the book was compiled after the building of the
Temple” A, Olarke\. :


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOR &





Ver. 11, “Sterile women in the East to this day perform pilgrimages to holy places, and often
make a vow that, in case they shuuld be blessed with a son, he shall become a monk (/ausset).
“Vowed a Vow.” This vow contained two distinct points—(1) That she would dedicate her
son to the Lord in a life-long service, while as a Levite he was only bound from the age of 20 to
50 (Num. viii., 24, 25), and (2) that “no razor should come upon his head,” by which he was
set apart as a Nazarite for the whole of his life. ‘There is no notice in the Pentateuch
of a Nazarite for life; but the regulations for the vow of a Nazarite of days are
given in Num. vi. 1-2]1...... Of the Nazarites for life three are mentioned in the
Scriptures: Samson, Samuel, and John the Baptist. The only one actually called a Nazarite
is Samson. The Rabbis raised the question whether Samuel was in reality a Nazarite. It is
expressly stated that no razor shall come upon his head ; but no mention is made of abstinence
from wine. It is, however, worthy of notice that Philo makes a particular point of this, and
seems to refer the words of Hannah, in verse 15, to Samuel himself. We do not know whether
the vow for life was ever voluntarily taken by the individual. In all the cases mentioned in
sacred history, it was made by the parents before the birth of the Nazarite himself.
According to the general law of vows (Num. xxx. 8), the mother could not take
the vow without the father. Hannah must therefore either have presumed on her hushand‘a
concurrence, or secured it beforehand. The Nazarite of days might have fulfilled his vow
without attracting much notice until the day came for him to make his offering in the temple.
But the Nazarite for life, on the other hand, with his flowing hair and persistent refusal of
strong drink, must have been a marked man. Whether in any other particular his daily life
was peculiar is uncertain. He may have had some privileges which gave him something of a
priestly character—there is an ancient tradition that N azarites were permitted even to enter into
the Holy of Holies. Perhaps it would not be unreasonable to suppose that the half-sacerdotal
character of Samuel might have been connected with his prerogative as a Nazarite. Though
not necessarily cut off from social life, when the turn of his mind was devotional, consciousness of
his peculiar dedication must have influenced his habits and manner, and in some cases probably
led him to retire from the world. And as the vow of the Nazarite was taken by his parents before
he was conscious of it, his observance of it was a sign of filial obedience, like the vow of the
Rechabites. . . . The meanin g of the Nazarite vow has been regarded in different lights. Some
deny that it involved anything of an ascetic character ; others imagine that it was intended to culti-
vate, and bear witness for, the sovereignty of the will over the lower tendencies of human nature ;
whilesome regard it wholly in the light of a sacrifice of the person to God. . . . . That the Nazarite
Yow was essentially a sacrifice of the person is obviously in accordance with the terms of the
Law (Num. vi. 2). In the old dispensation it may have answered to that “ living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, which the believer is now called upon to make.” (Smith’s Bible Dictionary.)
That part of the vow of the Nazarite which had to do with his spiritual nature was the absti-
nence from strong drink. The other observances were merely ceremonial, and related only to
the outward man. But strong drink can and often does influence the mind, and may be the
means of moral deterioration, Even when not indulged in to excess, it may be used to such an
extent as to dull the spiritual sense, and to unfit men for holding intimate communion with God.
It was not a mere arbitrary statute when “ The Lord spake unto Aaron, saying, Do not drink
wine or strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation,
lest ye die” (Num. x. 8-9).


Ver. 13. “She spake in her heart.” Prayer is almost always oral in the East, even in
public (K7zto),


Ver. 14. “Put away thy wine from thee,” ae. sleep off the effects of intoxication.


Ver. 15. “ Neither wine nor strong drink has been poured out unto me, but I have poured
out my soul before the Lord” (A. Clarke).


_ Ver. 16. “ Belial,” é.c., worthlessness or’wickedness, The word is nota proper name, although
it has become impersonified to indicate the “ wicked one.” “ Complaint,” “ meditation, inward
movement of the heart, sighing ” (Keil).


Ver. 17. This word of the High Priest was not a prediction, but a pious wish (Kei),


Ver. 20. “Samuel.” “From Shama to hear, and El, God ( Wordsworth ). “The words of


Hannah are not an etymological explanation of the name, but an exposition fended upon the
facts” (Keil).


Ver. 21. “ Yearly Sacrifice ” literally, the “ offering of the days,”—the Israelites’ customary
and obligatory annual sacrifice, The “ offering of the days” is, as it were, the yearly reckoning
with the Lord, the presentation of those portions of the property which fall to him in the course


of the year” ( Hengstenberg). “His Vow.” Here is a proof that Elkanah had likewise vowed
unto the Lord in reference to Samuel.


Ver. 4 “Only the Lord establish His word.” “Elkanah secks from God, and suppliantly


OHAP. fe HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








begs with prayers, that, since God has bestowed on him male offspring, He wi i
and make him fit for His service (Calvin), ee ee


Ver. 24. Hebrew mothers were accustomed to suckle their children for three years (2 Macc.
vii. 27). ‘A child three years old is not troublesome in the Hast, and his nurture and education
could be committed to the women that served at the door of the Tabernacle. By the education
which the boy received in the Sanctuary he was even as a child to grow into the service ; and
moreover, as a child, he could perform little outward services” (Lange’s Commentary). “Three
bullocks.” Two would be required for the customary yearly offering, viz., one for the burnt-
offering and the other for the thank-offering, the third was probably a special offering in
connection with Samuel’s consecration, and on this account, the only one whose slaying ig
mentioned in verse 25. “The child was young,” literally, “the child was a child,” 2¢., not
merely in tenderness of years, but in docility, meekness, and gentleness ” ('Vordsworth).


_ Ver. 28. Lent. “The meaning to lend, which the lexicons give to the word both here and
in Exod, xii. 36, has no other support than the false rendering of the Septuagint, and is altogether
unsuitable both in the one and in the other. Jehovah had not lent the son to Hannah, but had
given him ; still less could a man lend his son to the Lord” (Keil), “te” refers to Elkanah,
and not to Samuel (Kez).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF VERSE 1,
Tue VALUE AND UsE oF A GENEALOGY.


I. The man who possesses a genealogy knows who and what he represents
in the world. Every human creature, in fact everything in the worid that
possesses life, represents more than he or it is. A single corn-seed represents
all the grains by which it has come into existence—all the seeds which have
lived and germinated and brought forth fruit between itself and the original
grain from which it sprung in the beginning. Every man knows that he repre-
sents numerically more than he is, and very possibly more intellectual power or
moral greatness than belongs to him as an individual, but only he who possesses
a genealogy knows certainly who and what he represents. ‘The written pedigree
of his ancestors makes him realise his oneness with the ages that are past, and
he will feel ennobled or dishonoured by the record according as the lives of his
forefathers accord with, or are opposed to, what he considers worth representing.
Elkanah knew that he represented a line of ancestors in one of the most
remarkable tribes in the Jewish nation—a tribe which had numbered among its
members men of great mental power and high moral wealth. Although per-
sonally he was inferior to some of these great men, he felt in some degree that
he belonged to them—that he represented their worth and greatness. A tree
growing in this country may have sprung from the seed of a tropical tree, It
may attain to sufficient size and beauty to be a worthy representative of its
tropical ancestors, but the difference of climate, as well as some inherent weak-
ness in the tree itself, may prevent it from reaching their gigantic stature—from
branching forth into their vast proportions. So it may be with many a man
who represents an old and worthily renowned family ; circumstances, as well as
mental inferiority may prevent them from attaining the renown of their
ancestors, although they may be good and true men and worthily fill a small
space in the world. Such men represent more than they are—not only in
numbers, but in ability and renown. Elkanah was such a representative man.
Being able as he was to trace his ancestry, he knew that he belonged to the
tribe whence came the most remarkable man of the ancient world—one who has
left an impress upon the nations which wil] last as long as time. Elkanah, by
the possession of a genealogy, knew that he had the honour of numbering
Moses among his ancestors, and although he knew he could never attain to the
renown of his great forefather, he must have felt there was honour in belonging
to the same tribe as the Jewish iawgiver. He knew that he belonged to a stock

1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK Yr


a ee ee


who on one memorable occasion had given proof that they preferred moral right
to blood relationship—who had declared themselves on the Lord’s side in the
day of Israel’s first idolatry—“ who said unto his father and to his mother, I
have not seen him, neither acknowledged his brethren, nor knew his own
children” (Deut. xxxiii. 9), in other words, preferred the honour of Jehovah’s
name to all human claims (Exod. xxxii, 26-28).


II. The value of such a possession, and the teaching it might suggest.
1. The knowledge that those to whom we are related by. ties of blood-relationship
have been great and noble—have done deeds and spoken words which reflect a
lustre upon their descendants long after they have left the world—ought to
inspire those descendants with resolution to tread in their Jootsteps. Although
the times in which they live may not demand the same sacrifices—may not
admit of the same renown—yet the principles which govern the lives of the
truly great and good are the same in all ages, and under all conditions of life.
Although Elkanah could not be a Moses, he could emulate his moral excellence;
although he was not called to make such a remarkable demonstration of his
fidelity to Jehovah as his fathers had made in the wilderness, he could always
act upon the principle of preferring duty to God before any human tie or any
mere earthly consideration. 2. The knowledge that we belong to the great and
good ts also a source of lawful comfort and satisfaction, if we ourselves have
enough godliness not to disgrace our ancestry, To feel that we are the children
of those who have served their generation according to the will of God, and
have perhaps been called by Him to some great and special service, cannot
fail to afford lawful satisfaction to any man. Doubtless Elkanah, in hig
humbler and more limited sphere, felt a special gratification that he was
linked in tribal relationship with him “whom the Lord knew face
to face” (Deut. xxxiv. 10), and that he was one of that chosen
tribe who were elected by God to be the teachers of Israel and the “ body-guard
of the sacred structure which was the sign of the presence among the people of
their unseen King”—Num. i. 51, xviii. 22. (See on Levi “ Smith’s Dictionary °.
of the Bible.” ) 3. A genealogy teaches a man his own mortality and immor-
tality, and the mortality and immortality of his fathers. Every family register
proclaims the mortality and the immortality of man. It tells of the body
whose dust is still with us, and of the spirit that is “absent from the body.”
The life once lived upon the earth made a genealogy possible—linked the
individual with the long line of progenitors who had gone before him and with
all those who have come and will come after him. . This life could not have been
lived without the body which was mortal and has returned to the earth, yet
that body would never have been more than lifeless clay if it had not been
animated by a “living soul,” who was, and is still, the man himself—still living
and feeling and acting in another part of God’s universe. ‘To the Old Testa.
ment saints a genealogy spoke of those who were “ gathered to their fathers”
(Gen. xl. 29, etc.) ; to us it tells of “ just men made perfect” in the city of the
living God (Heb. xii. 23), who died as to bodily life, but who live still as to
spiritual life. It teaches also the earthly immortality of the race. The man
passes away—the race remains. He leaves the world, but Ais are left in it,
Abraham was long ago called away, but his descendants are with us to this day.
Levi had quitted the world long before the days of Elkanah, but he lived still in
Canaan in his representatives,


OHAP, 1, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,





MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Vevrses 2—&
A Trovusiep HovsEHoLp.


I, A violation of the Divine intention in the institution of marriage.
Elkanah had two wives. God, by creating one wife only as the helpmeet fo
the first man, declared against polygamy and bigamy. Our Lord, in expounding
to the Pharisees the law of divorce, speaks decidedly upon the subject. “ For
this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife,
and they ¢wain shall be one flesh” (Matt. xix. 5). Apostolic teaching reiterates
the law. “Let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband”
(1 Cor. vii. 2). ‘Let every one of you in particular so love his wé/e, even as
himself” (Ephes. v. i.). The violation of the Divine intention in this institution
originated in a bad man. Lamech is the first person of whom it is recorded
that he “took unto him two wives” (Gen. iv. 19), and his own words tell us
that he was a man of blood. A descendant of the first murderer, he trod in
the same murderous path. His example was not followed by those sons of Seth,
who were honoured to re-found the human race. Noah and his three sons
entered into the ark, each having his one wife (Gen. vii. 13), but the sin of
Lamech became more and more common until it grew into a custom, and many
better men than he thus profaned God’s holy ordinance. Abraham, Jacob, and
Elkanah were good men, yet they all in this respect followed in the forbidden path
first trodden by a man-slayer. A miner working in darkness unconsciously
becomes blackened by the dusty atmosphere in which he is working, Imper-
ceptibiy to himself, one sooty particle after another settles upon his body and
his raiment, until he becomes entirely assimilated in colour to the blackness
and dirt all around him. The custom of society unconsciously colours men’s
characters and habits. Their very conscience is influenced by the moral
atmosphere which they breathe—they become coloured by the t oughts and
actions of those by whom they are surrounded, and often yield their consent te
a wicked custom, the sin of which they do not perceive because of the moral
darkness in which they live. It was doubtless so with those of the patriarchs
who practised bigamy or polygamy, and it was so also with Elkanah.


II. This violation of Divine intention becoming a means of chastisement.
The custom of polygamy was doubtless very common in the Hebrew nation, and
paved the way to much gross iniquity, and led them to the adoption of many
other corrupt practices of the heathen nations, for which, as a nation, they
suffered severe chastisement. Here we have an instance of chastisement in the
case of an individual and upright man. Although he had committed no
exceptional sin—although he had only followed other good men in conforming
to @ very common custom—he could not escape the inevitable retribution which
must always follow breaking any fence which God has placed about man’s path,
Doubtless Hannah would have been sorrowful at the absence of children if she
had been Elkanah’s only wife, but it would not have been aggravated by the
insolence of Peninnah. Custom had quarried these two upper and nether mill-
stones, and between them Elkanah’s domestic bliss must have been ground to
powder, for the strife was so bitter that it entered even into the service of the
house of God. (See verse 7.) ‘he history of the world confirms the teaching
of this history of a single family. The nations who adhere to God’s original
intention in the marriage state are spared from many sorrows, and avoid many
crimes which must always be the fruit of such a morally unhealthy and
unnatural custom. The joys of the home life are unknown where polygamy is

ractised—a terrible penalty 18 paid by ail those nations who thus violate God’s

ly and blessed institution. 4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK i


nh PR nee, OR 7
OUTLINES:AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. Elkanah was one of the sons
of Korah. Of that gainsaying “sinner
against his own soul” came Samuel.
Homo ille virtute simillimus.— Trapp.


Ver. 2. Polygamy might now plead
age and example. III customs are like
fashions of attire, which at the first are
disliked as uncomely, yet, when once
they are grown common, are taken up
of the gravest. Yet this sin, as then
current with the time, could not make
Elkanah not religious; the house of
God in Shiloh was duly frequented by
him, and once a year with all his
family. Thecontinuance of an unknown
sin cannot hinder the uprightness of a
man’s heart with God; as a man ma
have a mole on his back, and yet dine
his skin clear ; the least touch of wil-
fulness mars his sincerity.— Bishop
Hall.


Ver. 3. Elkanah’s piety in maintain-
ing a regular attendance on the Divine
ordinances is the more worthy of notice,
that the character of the two priests
who administered them was notoriously
bad. But doubtless he believed and
acted on the belief that the ordi-
nances were effectual means of salva-
tion, not from any virtue in them, or
in those who administered them, but
from the grace of God being com-
municated through them.— Fuusset.

This title, “The Lord of Hosts”
(see Critical Notes), seems to be in-
serted designedly by the sacred his-
torian at the beginning of this book,
which relates the craving of Israel for
an earthly king, when the Lord was
their King, and the setting up of an
earthly kingdom in Saul. It is like a
preliminary protest against that act of
national faithlessness.— Wordsworth.

The offering was the deed which
established the faithlessness of the
praying word.—Starke.

This subject-matter of adoration is
to be referred to the three following
heads: Firstly, that when about to
adore God we recognise that we owe all
things to Him, and in giving thanks

10


for past blessings we implore a still
further increase of His gifts ; secondly,
that confessing our sins as suppliant
and guilty, we pray Him to grant us
true knowledge of our sins and re-
pentance, and to pardon us; thirdly,
and finally, that denying ourselves
and taking His yoke upon our
shoulders, we profess ourselves ready
to render Him true obedience, and to
conform our affections to the rule of
His law and His will alone.—Calvin.


Ver. 4. The whole family take part
in the feast of the peace-offerings. So
as to the idol-worship in Jer. vii. 18.
Both this passage and that, as to true
religion and false, may impress upon us
the importance of family worship and
family religion.—Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 5. “The Lord had shut up her
womb,” This is the language of piety,
which refers all to God, and knows
only one source of blessings ; we only
have that which He gives, and we
cannot have that which he refuses to
us.— Duguet.

Peninnah may have the more chil-
dren, but barren Hannah hath the
most love. If Hannah should have
had both, she had been proud, and her
rival despised. God knows how to
disperse His favours so that everyone
may have cause both for thankfulness
and humiliation; whilst there is no
one that hath all, no one but hath
some— Bishop Hail.

Children were then regarded as a
blessing, and the correctness of this
view is confirmed by the inspired
writers, Psa, cxiii. 9; cxxvii. 3-5 ;
exxvili, 3. The contrary feeling,
which is now so rapidly growing in
America, is evil, both in its causes and
in its consequences.—American Trans-
lator of Lange's Commentary.


Ver. 7, Peninnah is an example of
those who think themselves to be
saints because they participate in holy
things and partake of Divine blessings,
but Hannah is a model of true peni-


OHAP, 1.


tents, seeking not to justify herself
since the Lord seemed to condemn
her. She judged herself unworthy to
partake of the sacred feast since she
deemed herself under the displeasure
of God.— Duguet.


Ver. 8. In a devout marriage, the
love of the one party should not only
be to the other a fountain of conso-
lation and of quieting as to painful
dispensations of the Lord, but for
whatever by the Lord’s will is lacking
in good fortune and joy it should seek
to offer all the richer compensation.—
Lange's Commentary.

In Elkanah we have an example of a
most excellent husband, who patiently
tolerated the insolent humour of
Peninnah, and comforted dejected
Hannah with words full of tender
affection, which was truly, in St.
Peter’s words, to dwell with his wives
according to knowledge.— Patrick.

As the marriage bond is much closer
than that between parents and children,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





it follows that husband and wife must
hold each other nearer and dearer than
all children.—J. Lange.


Verses 1-8. The priestly calling of
the man in his house. 1. In the close
connection of his whole house with the
service in the house’ of the Lord
(prayer and offering). 2. In the nurture
and admonition of the children for
the Lord (see comment on verse 4).
3. In expelling and keeping at a
distance the evil spirit of unlovingness
and dissension in the members of a
family. 4. In the constant exhibition
of faithful, comforting, helping love
towards his wife. The preservation of
genuine piety amid domestic troubles.
1. In persevering prayer, when the
Lord proves faith by not fulfilling
particular desires and hopes. 2. In
enduring patience towards vexatious
members of the family. 3. In con-
soling and supporting love towards
those members who are easily assailed.
Lange's Commentary.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9-11,


Tue Prayer or Hannan.


In this prayer we have—


I. A recognition of God’s faithful performance of His promises.


When a


parent promises to meet his child in a certain place at a certain time, and the
child is found waiting at the appointed place at the given time, the act isa
declaration of faith in the parent’s faithfulness. The child’s position and
attitude denote a recognition of the truthfulness of the parent’s word. God had
promised to “meet the children of Israel” in an especial manner in the
tabernacle (Exod. xxix. 43) “in the place which He should choose to place His
name there” (Deut. xvi. 11). Hannah’s choice of the house of God as the
lace whence she would direct her prayer—whence she would look up for help
in her sorrow—is a declaration that she believed the Divine Word. Her
presence there declares that she believed in another Presence there—even of
Him who was known to Israel of old to “dwell between the cherubims”
(Exod. xxv. 22; 1 Sam. iv. 4).


II. A recognition of God’s knowledge of the secrets of the human soul. ‘She
spake in her heart, only her lips moved” (verse 13). Speech of some kind is
necessary if one human being would communicate with another, and there are
some thoughts and feelings which, not being capable of being put into words,
must remain for ever uncommunicated to any earthly friend. In this sense the
heart is compelled sometimes to ‘“ know its own bitterness,” and “no stranger”
(no one outside the spirit) can ‘“intermeddle therewith” (Prov. xiv. 10). The
human body is the means by which the human soul reveals itself, and yet it

| 11


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.





conceals often more than it reveals. So word is the body of thought—the great
means of making thought known among men—yet it often hides more than it
makes known. But “ He that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind
of the spirit” (Rom. viii. 27). He stands face to face with the inmost feelings
—the deepest emotions—of every human soul. He needs not the information
conveyed by words—He sees not through them as “through a glass, darkly,”
but without that veil between reads the aspirations of the burdened heart—
hears the “groanings which cannot be uttered” (Rom. viii. 26). Hannah
recognises this truth when, without words, she speaks to the Eternal God. By
her silent prayer she shows she was penetrated with that sense of the Divine
Omniscience which filled David’s mind when he wrote “0O Lord, Thou hast
searched me, and known me, Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising,
Thou wnderstandest my thought afar off” (Psalm exxxix. 1, 2).


III. A recognition of obligation to God before the petition is granted.
“Thine handmaid.” Hannah was God’s handmaid whether the blessing she
craved was granted or withheld. A servant (while he acknowledges the rela-
tion) is bound to obey his master’s commands—to acquiesce in his will, whether
that will always coincides with his own or not. While the relationship ig
acknowledged the obligation continues. Hannah, by her own acknowledgment,
was a servant of the God of Israel. She was under an obligation to serve Him,
whether He fulfilled her heart’s desire or not. She recognises the fact that she
was already God’s debtor—bound to obey His commands and acquiesce in His
will, whatever might be the issue of her prayer. She admits that her obligation
will be increased if God grants the desire of her heart: “If Thou wilt look upon
Thine handmaid,” etc.; but she does not make her obligation to God depend
upon her prayer being answered.


IV. A recognition of God’s care for the individual. That system of govern-
ment and that code of laws are most perfect which take cognisance, not only of
a nation as a whole, but of the special need of the individual—when it meets
the need, not of men in a mass merely, but of each man. This can be done but
imperfectly in human systems. Laws which are generally beneficial press hard
in particular cases, or overlook particular exigencies, But it is not so in the
Divine administration. His laws take hold of the individual man, and His pro-
vidence works for each one, without injury to any. ach blade of grass drinks
in the sunlight and is watered by the showers, as abundantly and as sufficiently
as though it was alone upon the earth, instead of being a unit amid countless
millions, And so each soul is as much the object of God’s care as though He
had no other creature to care for. “Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ?
And one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father, But the very
hairs of your head are all numbered” (Matt. x. 29, 30). Hannah’s prayer—a
personal statement of her own personal sorrows and desires—shows that she
recognised the fact that the God of Israel not only “knew the sorrows” of the
nation as a whole, and was “willing to come down to deliver them” (Exod. iii. 8),
but that He had regard to the heart-grief of a single sorrowful woman among
the thousands of Israel.


V. A very specific statement of her desire. “If Thou wilt give unto Thy
handmaid a man-child.” All successful pleading is specific. If it begins with
generalities it does not end with them. When a barrister pleads for his client
he does not content himself with general appeals—he puts definitely before the
jury and the judge what he wants them to do. The widow made a definite
statement of her want to the unjust judge—she told him exactly what she
wanted him to do—“Avenge me of mine adversary ” (Luke xviii. 3). It hag
been oe that “Generalities are the death of prayer.” Hannah’s prayer was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


most definite—she not only asks for a child—but for a son—and not only for a
son but for one who would be in a special manner a servant of Jehovah.


VI. A recognition of the Divine working in and above natural laws.
Hannah acknowledges God as the only Giver of natural life. The laws of
nature, either in vegetable or animal life, are not the causes of that life, but the
means by which the Creator pleases to give it. ‘They are not the gods to whom
the praise is due, but the servants of the one God who works in them and by
them. Hannah’s prayer recognises the truth that life can only come into being
by the fiat of the Eternal. She asks for a living child from the only Life-Giver
of the universe—from Him who alone “ hath life in Himself” (John v. 26).


VII. A dedication of the desired blessing to the service of the Giver.
“Tf Thou wilt give unto Thine handmaid a man-child, then I will give him unto
the Lord all the days of his life.” The precious gift should be returned to the
Giver. God’s gift to her should be her gift to God. “The way to obtain any
benefit,” says Bishop Hall, “is to devote it, in our hearts, to the glory of that
God of whom we ask it: by this means shall God both pleasure His servant and
honour Himself ; whereas, if the scope of our desires be carnal, we may be sure
either to fail of our suit, or of a blessing.” :

In all the points we have noticed—in its faith in the Divine Word—in its
recognition of Divine Omniscience—in its acknowledgment of the Divine claim
to service—in its confidence in the Divine care for the individual—in its
definiteness—in its discernment of a Divine power in all the laws of nature—and
in its purpose to devote to the service of God the boon craved for at His hands—-.
this prayer of the Hebrew matron may serve as a model for all prayers in all
circumstances and in all ages. It is especially worthy of the study of those who
are pleading with God, not for the gift of children—but for the spiritual life of
children already given—of mothers whose daily and fervent prayer is put up to
God that those whom He has given to them may be, in a spiritual sense, “sons


and daughters of the Lord God Almighty.”


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 10. “If a woman has prayed
with so much importunity,” says St.
Gregory, “to obtain a son from God,
how ought we to pray to be made His
children.” — De Sacy.

The “hand of God in history” might
be the appropriate title of many of the
books of Scripture, for the sacred
records largely illustrate the agency of
God in the affairs of men... . That
simple Hannah on her knees, with her
face toward the tabernacle and the
mercy seat, and her lips trembling with
her prayer, became the link of a chain
in the revival of piety and patriotism
in the promised land. Her day of
small things was to be succeeded by a
life which would shed its biessings
upon the chosen people, and illuminate
a chapter of Hebrew history.—/Séeele.

Herein she took a right course to


get comfort. So did David (Psalm
cix. 4) and Paul (1 Cor. iv. 13), “Being
defamed we pray.” If she should
have rendered to Peninnah railing for
railing, there would have been some-
what to do. Prayer and patience are
the best antidotes against contumelies
and contempt; the one hot, the other
cold; the one quickening, the other
quenching. Prayers and tears are the
saints’ best weapons; their “great guns
and their scaling ladders,” saith Luther.
— Trapp.

Amid vexations and assaults, what
should impel us to prayer? 1. The
certainty that if men do us hurt, it
does not occur without the Divine per-
mission. 2. The feeling that even the
best human consolation cannot satisfy
the heart which is thirsting to be con-
soled. 3. Firm confidence in the helg

13


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK L,


ee A so


of the Lord, who in His faithfulness
will help and in His power can help,
when men will not help or cannot.—
Lange's Commentary.


Ver. 11. She thrice calls herself the
Lord’s handmaid, out of a profound
sense of her meanness and His majesty,
and desires a man-child because only
such could wait upon the Lord in the
service of the tabernacle. —Patrick.

It may be asked whether Hannah or
whether any parents have the right
thus to consecrate their children, and
0, without their consent, to interfere
with their personal liberty? I answer,
here was no vow of perpetual celibacy
or of religious poverty. He had the
liberty of marriage, for the Scripture
speaks of his sons, and he preserved
the possession and use of all his pro-
perty. ‘I'he engagement into which
Hannah entered on behalf of Samuel
simply consisted in his being attached
to the tabernacle service for some
years longer than an ordinary Levite,
which was an honour, and in_ being
brought up in the centre of religious
influences. It was a precaution against
the moral contagion of the times, and
tended to promote a natural growth of
piety in him—to make the love of
God within him grow and strengthen
with his years. It is true Hannah
destined her son for a Nazarite, but
this was only under the condition that
God made him willing to accept the
vow. She knew that He who inspired
her to vow would inspire her child—if
he were granted—with a willingness
to perform his part of it; that, if God
granted her the son, he would perfect
his gift in inspiring him with a desire
to be devoted to His service. . . . The
human spirit, as it is since the fall,
would never have established the
custom of vows. Such an engaging of
Providence would have appeared un-
worthy of the Supreme Majesty. The
institution could only have come
through a revelation. The universal
usage, diffused among all nations,
proves that the tradition descended


sf


from the family of Noah. God has
condescended by this religious com-
merce, to bind us to Himself more
firmly by means of our wants and our
desires. He desires to impress upon
our minds the truth that He rules in
the least events of our lives, and, by
this kind of contract that He makes
with us in vows, He would awaken our
faith by accepting the conditions that
we offer, and in accomplishing that
which we expect of Him.—Le Maistre
de Sacy.

A vow is to be made with prayer,
and paid with thanksgiving —7 rapp.

She has received nothing as yet,
and she begins her prayer with a
promise. She testifies already her
gratitude to God, while her hands are
still empty... . “I have two pleas,”
it is as if she had said, “I am Thy
servant, and I am introuble.” “ Ano
my child shall be entirely and abso-
lutely Thy servant. I give up all my
maternal rights. I desire to be his
mother only so far as that he shall owe
his existence to me, after that I give
him up to Thee.” She does not say,
“If Thou wilt give me three sons, I will
give Thee two, if Thou wilt give me
two, I will give Thee one,” but “If
Thou wilt give me one only, I will
consecrate him entirely to Thee.” . . .
She does not name her rival in her
prayer, she utters no invectives, she
complains of no injury, and speaks
only concerning the matters which fill
her soul. . . . If we are wise, not only
will our enemies be unable to do us the
least harm, but they will be the occa-
sion of our greatest good, if prayer is
our resource from the vexations that
they cause us.—Chrysostom.

The local service promised by the
mother was afterwards interrupted,
chiefly by the call of Samuel to higher
duties as prophet. To the mother
the sanctuary-service seemed the best
pursuit of life; but God had some-
thing better forthe son. Yet Hannah’s
devout spintual purpose is maintained
in her son’s life.—Zranslator a
Lange's Commentary.


OHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH—Verses 12—18.
Hannau AND ELI.


I. The wrong interpretation which Eli put upon Hannah’s conduct shows—
l. That the occurrence was an uncommon one. It was not a common thing
in those degenerate days for Eli to see a devout and deeply-moved worshipper
in the house of God. His eyes were not accustomed to the sight of a soul go
absorbed in wrestling with God, and so filled with a sense of the Divine
presence as to be oblivious of all external things. He was used probably to hear
the audible, formal prayers of less spiritual worshippers, but the silent communion
of the soul with its God was apparently beyond his power of spiritual appre-
hension. His explanation of the unwonted spectacle suggests the thought that
Kli himself was not accustomed to very close communion with God—that he
was not in the habit of coming into the presence of Jehovah with a heart full
of emotions too deep for utterance. Be that as it may, it has never been
uncommon for those who are ignorant of the deeper experiences of spiritual
life—whether of a joyful or sorrowful nature—to refer them to a wrong
source. The fervour of the Christian Church on the day of Pentecost was
referred to the influence of “new wine” (Acts ii. 13). In the days of
martyrdom those who faced death with joyful courage, being filled with the
power of the Spirit of God, were sometimes charged by their enemies, or by
those who had never drunk at the same fountain of Divine comfort, with being
in league with the devil and with being supported by him. Uncommon spiritual
phenomena, like any uncommon phenomenon in the natural world, are always
liable to be wrongly interpreted and to be attributed to a wrong source by those
who are utterly ignorant in such matters. Festus could only account for Paul’s
enthusiasm concerning Jesus of Nazareth by— Paul, thou art beside thyself,
much learning doth make thee mad” (Acts xxvi. 24). The uncommon
phenomenon of such a prisoner at his bar could be referred by him to nothing
else. The harsh judgment passed by Eli upon Hannah—his entire misappre-
hension of her character and conduct—is a type of what has happened ten
thousand times in the past, is happening now, and will go on to happen while
men are imperfect. And it is to be especially noted that not only does the
world thus misunderstand the actions of the saints of God, but one good man
or woman often, through ignorance, thus misjudges another—often refers an act
which lies outside his or her own range of experience to a motive or to a cause
which is the very opposite of the real one. 2. That the kind of worshipper
Lli supposed Hannah to be was not uncommon in the Tabernacle. Hverybody who
has had any experience in the professing Church of God, knows that indulgence
in strong drink and attendance upon the services of God’s house are not incom-
patible. Men who are lovers of wine are sometimes also very fervent and devout
in external service, and will even utter prayers while under the partial influence
of intoxicating drink. There is abundant evidence in the Old Testament
writings that drunkenness was one of the sins of the ancient people of God. It
was inseparable from such a state of things as that described in chapter ii. 22.
Doubtless many “daughters of Belial” and daughters of Bacchus frequented
the house of God in Shiloh, and Eli had often good reason to say to a devout
drunkard, “ How long will thow be drunken? Put away thy wine from thee.”
3. How suspicion blunts the power of discrimination. If a man has reason to
think he has been deceived in the past by certain characters or by certain
aspects of character, he will find himself always prone to suspect any person or
appearance of the same kind that is presented to him. And this suspicion will
make him less impartial—more uncharitable—in his judgment than he other-
wise would be. It is one of the saddest influences of crime upon joa men


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK E,


a ame ea AN AE BNI EN oi)


that it sometimes makes them harsh and unjust to innoceut people. Eli had
seen 80 many hypocritical and vicious worshippers in the tabernacle that he
could not discern a really devout one when she came—he hastily leaped to the
conclusion that this godly woman was like most of those who frequented the
service of God.


II. Hannah’s reception of the unmerited accusation. Consider how keenly
she must have felt Eli’s words. pean | insulted and taunted as she was,
by her rival at home, she would naturally look for sympathy from the priest of
God—to receive from him an insult greater even than she could have ever
received from Peninnah, must have been like a sword-thrust to one already
deeply wounded. Her defence is at once—1. Emphatic. She meets the accusa-
tion with a decided No. It is the duty of all, when wrongly accused, to meet
such an accusation with an emphatic denial. We owe it to ourselves to declare
that we are innocent. 2. Calm and respectful. “N o, my lord.” “Count not
thine handmaid a daughter of Belial.” N othing is more likely than an unjust
accusation to arouse angry feeling. We are, then, in imminent danger of
forgetting not only what we owe to the person who accuses us, but what we owe
to ourselves, and to let our indignation override our self-command. Hannah’s
calm reply shows that she was a woman who knew how to rule her own spirit,
that she had profited by the home discipline to which she had been subjected.
There were many things connected with Eli’s family which, if she had been dis-
posed to retaliate, she might have used to inflict a wound upon her accuser.
But she was too high-minded a woman to descend to the use of such weapons.
Spirited as was her reply, there was no lack of respect to God’s High Priest.
3, Kaplanatory. We may often be conscious, when wrongfully accused, that
information only is needed to convince our accuser that he is in the wrong. It
is our duty not to withhold this. Circumstances which admit of a very easy
explanation may look sometimes very much against us. It was so in Hannah's
case. A bottle that is full will pour out its contents much more slowly than
one which contains but little. So with the heart full of sorrow. Its feelings
are long in finding an outlet—it is long before there is any feeling of relief in
prayer. Hannah had continued long before the Lord in silent prayer, and this,
doubtless, gave some colour to Eli’s suspicion, She was not too angry, or too
proud, to give him a full explanation of all that had occurred.


III. Eli’s benediction. It involves the admission that he had erred. A
block of ice and a block of marble may look equally hard and feel equally cold;
but if the warm sun shine on them, how soon will the difference be seen. The
one will remain as hard and cold as ever, the other will be melted into streams
of refreshing water. So with a good anda bad man. Both may speak harsh
words in haste, both are liable to err in judgment, but the one can be melted
into contrition for the wrong he has done and will acknowledge his fault, while
the other remains proud and unsubdued, Elli’s change of speech and of bearing
towards the woman whom he had wronged, showed his desire to atone for his
error, and gave evidence that he “rejoiced not in iniquity, but rejoiced in the
truth” (1 Cor, xiii. 6); that it gave him no pleasure to utter stern rebuke, but
that it gladdened his heart to be able to say, “ Go in peace, and the God of
Israel grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of Him.” Thus we have seen :

I. The best people and the purest actions may be misconstrued even by good men.

II. The most vicious men may be found observing the external forms of religion.

Ill. That care is needed lest much experience of the wickedness of the wicked
harden us against the good.

IV. That a false accusation should not overthrow our self-command.

V. eA a good man will not be too proud to confess himself in the wrong,


OHAP, L


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


ae a hn a pte no
OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 12, 13. A devout prayer must
eat from the very bottom of the
eart, and may be offered without out-
ward words (Ps. xix. 14, xxvii. 8,
Ixxii. 8; Isa. xxix. 13, 14).—Starke.

Her voice was not heard by man,
but God heard it.—Chrysostom.

She continued praying, as resolved
not to give over her suit. Prayer,
like those arrows of deliverance, should
be multiplied. We wring out of God’s
holy hands that mercy which He with
an unwilling willingness withholdeth for
awhile, that we may be the more im-
portunate.—7Zrapp.

Hannah had learned from Moses
thus to pray, for when he fell upon his
face oer God, without uttering a
sound, God grants his request, and
says, “ Why criest thou unto me?”
(Exod. xiv. 15).—Le Maistre de Sacy.

The fervent prayer of troubled souls
measures itself not by time, but exalts
the soul above time into eternity, and
troubles itself not about human obser-
vation and judgment, but is a pouring
out of the heart before the living God.
—Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 16. Here we see what account
this holy woman made of drunken per-
sons and of drunkenness ; she counteth
them the sons and daughters of Belial.
And, indeed, unto them fitly agree all
the significations of this word :—
(1) They are licentious and lawless,
without any yoke or bridle to keepthem
in ; (2) they are altogether unprofit-
able, they neither do good to others
nor to themselves; (3) and such do
neither prosper in this world, and with-
out repentance do exclude themselves
from the celestial inheritance.— Willet.

She calls herself Eli’s handmaid, and
strives to remove his bad opinion of
her. She does not say, “He has
wantonly and thoughtlessly accused
me ; his suspicion is most ill-timed ; my
conscience is clear, I will let who will
calumniate me.” But she conforms to
that law of the Apostle who commands
us “to appear honest in the sight of
men ”—Chrysostom.
q


Defence against unjust accusations.
1, For what purpose? As a tribute to
truth, for the honour of the Lord, as a
tribute to ourown moral worth. 2, In
what manner? In quietness and
igs without sinful passion, in

umility and modesty. 3. By God’s
help, with what result? - Convincing
the accusers of their wrong, changing
their bad words into blessings, lighten-
Ing our own hearts of a heavy load.—
Lange's Commentary.


_ Ver. 17. Hannah turns her accuser
into her advocate by her wisdom and
discretion.— Chrysostom.


Ver. 18. She that began her prayers
with fasting and heaviness rises up
from them with cheerfulness and
repast. The conscience may well rest
when it tells us that we have neglected
no means of redressing our afiliction ;
for then it may resolve to look either
for amendment or patience.—Bishop
Hall.

The life of faith can take comfort
from a word, and rest a world upon a
promise. Hannah’saffairs without the
sanctuary actually remained in the
same state as before; but a transaction
had taken place within it, which placed
them in a new point of view. The
favourable aspect of God gives a new
aspect to everything besides.— Cecil.


I. It is a fact of history that prayer
is answered, The history of the
Church of God is a part of the history
of the world—it is as much a, part of it
as the history of the empire of Rome,
or the republics of Greece—and its
existence and growth in the world is
inseparably connected with the fact
that God hears and answers prayer.
The blessings that have descended
upon her members in answer to thieir
supplications are matters of historical
fact. So with the history of the
Hebrew nation. It is an incontestible
fact that their history, as given in the
Scriptures, is true, and this being ad-
mitted, it cannot be denied that the

17


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK I.


——<—— eee


cases of special Divine interposition in
answer to prayer are true also. Their
wilderness history has many instances
of forgiveness and help being accorded
to the earnest supplications of Moses
on their behalf, and their entire early
history is interwoven with records of

rayers offered and prayers answered.

he life of the prophet Samuel is an
important part of Hebrew history—he
was destined to take a foremost place
among its heroes—and his very name
is a record that God gives ear to the
supplications of his children, and often
grants to them the very gift they ask


for. II. The immediate effect of
prayer upon the human spirit. “The
woman went her way,..... and


her countenance was no more sad.”
Hannah’s sorrow vanished from the
hour in which she poured out her soul
before the Lord in Shiloh, A con-
Bclousness arose within her that her
prayer was answered—not that the
fulfilment of her desire was immediate,
but she had an assurance that it was
certain. This assurance made her as
joyful in the anticipation as in the


possession, An immediate blessing
always follows earnest and heartfeH
prayer, though the blessing sought
may be long delayed, or never granted
in the form which the petitioner
desires at the time. There is joy from
the asking as well as from the re-
ceiving—joy from the consciousness
that our cry has entered into the ear
of our Father in heaven, and will not
be disregarded by Him, whatever be
the issue. III. A consciousness of
accepted prayer sweetens every tem-
poral blessing. “She did eat and
drink.” A child who really loves his
parent feels his young life darkened,
and much of his joy in existence gone,
if that parent looks coldly on him.
Doubtless Hannah had regarded her
past condition as a mark of the absence
of Divine favour, and this had deprived
all the common mercies of her life of
sweetness. But now she felt that the
sun of God’s approval was shining upon
her, and this gilded with light every
social and temporal blessing. It is
this, and this only, that can turn life’s
water into wine,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF VERSES 19 and 20,


THe Brera or Samurt.


_ 1. The vast importance of the birth of a child. Every child is a new thing
in the earth—the only new thing in it. It has an identity separate from all the


human creatures that have gone before i
it differs from every one of them, For
every child that will not cease to exert a


t, or will come after it; in some points
ces are set in motion upon the birth of
n influence through the ages of eternity.


II. Godly families are the cradles of great men,


The real greatness of a


man consists in the development of all the faculties of the soul, and first, and


above all, of the development of his conscience.


If the waters of a stream flow


through a channel in which there is impure matter, it will imbibe some of the
poisonous particles, and carry them with it through many miles of its future


course. So it is with a child’s conscience.
character of those by whom he is surrounded,


impurity his moral sense is


It takes its character from the
If he is born in a family of moral


defiled—the young life, passing through such a
channel on its way to manhood, is tainted ; :


and while the taint remains there


can be no real greatness, for the conscience colours the entire life. As one drop
of poisonous matter diffuses itself through every part of a vessel of water, so a
defiled conscience makes its influence felt through all the words and deeds that


go to make up life,


But in a godly family the child’s conscience is not only


carefully guarded from all that might defile it, but the holy example and wise
gp the parents develop and train it, and so there is every reason to


GWAP, L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


hope that the whole after-life will possess the first requisite of a great man—a
healthy moral sense. Samuel could hardly have been the mighty power for
good in Israel which he afterwards became, if he had not had the blessing of
godly parentage, and consequently of early training in the fear of God. ‘There
have been many men in the world who have been great poets, great statesmen,
great warriors—great with the greatness most esteemed by the world in general
—but in how many of them has there been a moral taint, which has deprived
their famous words or works of all real power for good, which has been a blot
upon all their intellectual greatness. And of those who have been great in
goodness as well as great in intellectual power, how large a proportion have been
born in godly homes.


III. There is no blessing of earth greater than to be born in such a family.
Such children are indeed “prevented with the blessings of God’s goodness”
(Psa. xxi. 3). Contrast the lot of such a child with that of the millions who
first see the light in a home where God is never acknowledged—where the
supreme importance of moral purity is never thought of—or worse still, of those
whose earliest experiences are those of the lowest and most revolting exhibitions
of crime where the infant breathes with its first breath the atmosphere of
hell. Life, when it is most impressible, in such a home is surrounded by those who
will stamp it with images and characters all but indelible—with ideas that will
pollute the soul through its whole life. There is more mystery involved in the
advent of a child into such an atmosphere than can be solved by any human
mind—it must be left in the hand of Him whom we know to be the All Wise
and Righteous Ruler of the universe. But how different is the advent of a
child into a godly home. Blessings of all kinds—love and holy example, and
tender and wise nurture are awaiting his arrival. It is as if clouds laden with
refreshing showers hung in the sky before the seed is sown ready to descend
upon it the moment it is placed in the earth. Prayers on his behalf ascend to
heaven before he draws his first breath—holy plans and purposes are formed
concerning him before he sees the light of day. We can imagine how it was
with Hannah and Elkanah while they awaited the birth of this long-desired
son—this gift of the Lord—and s0 it is in a greater or less degree with every
godly parent as they look forward to receiving such a sacred trust. Is there any
blessing greater than to begin life’s journey under such propitious auspices ?


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 19. They had ten miles to go;
but “ they worshipped before the
Lord.” his whet they held no let in
their journey, but a furtherance
rather, and as oil to the wheels. It is
good to go in God’s name.—Trapp.


Ver. 20. The child’s name was the
mother’s memorial. As often as she
looked into his infant face, or numed
him in her love, her soul would swell
within her at the recollection of God’s
mercy. She saw the Divine gift in
the child of her affection, and received
a lesson of gratitude and dependence
in his every smile and tear.—Steel.


Blessed was Hannah, not in being a
mother, but in becoming one, not having
been one at first. For the first is the
lot of all her sex; but the second
happiness is reserved for Hannah.
Blessed, because of her child-bearing,
not less blessed on account of all that
had gone before it.—Chrysostom.

I do not find that Peninnah asked
any son of God, yet she had store.
Hannah begged hard for this one, and
could not till now obtain him. They
which are dearest to God do ofttimes,
and with great difficulty, work out
those blessings which fall into the
mouths of the careless. ...

19


MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I.


eee


this child was the son of his. mother’s
prayers, and was consecrated to God
ere his possibility of being ; so now
himself shall know, both how he came
and whereunto he is ordained. ....


named ; but he must needs remember
both the extraordinary mercy of God
and his mother's vow. . .. There is
no necessity of significant names, but
we cannot have too many monitors to
put us in mind of our duty.—Bishop


When pious parents receive their
children with calling on God and in
His fear, then is every child a Samuel.
Starke.

The fact that, in common with
Isaac, John the Baptist, and Samson,
his birth took place beyond all human
hope and expectation was calculated to
produce the conviction that God had
some other object than to turn the
sorrow of @ woman into joy.—Heng-
stenberg.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—VERSES 21—28,


Servine Gop In tHE Home anp IN THE TEMPLE,


I, An obedient recognition of Divine ordinances,
Elkanah went up to offer unto the Lord.”


1, As to place. “And
The value of laws or ordinances


depends upon the wisdom of him who institutes them, and our obligation to


observe them depends upon the claim to obedience that
upon their adaptation to meet our needs,


he has upon us and
In the time of Elkanah, the place of


the ark was the place appointed by God where his people were to assemble to
perform acts of special worship. Under the New Testament dispensation,
Christians are commanded to assemble themselves together for the same purpose
(Heb. x. 25), and the command is binding upon all because it has been given
by Him who is fully acquainted with man’s spiritual needs, and knows how


those needs will be most fully met.


2. As to time.
manded to assemble together at special seasons and on special days.
it may be disputed whether Christians are bound to observe an
there can be no doubt that the regular observance of a specia


Ancient Israel was com-
Although
particular day,
day such as the


Christian Sabbath, is indispensable to the maintenance of a national sense of
the existence of a God, and if it is not absolutely necessary to preserve divine


and spiritual life in the individual soul, it is indispensable


vigour.


to its growth and


The obligation of Christians to observe a “ Lord’s day ” has its origin


both in the Divine institution of the Sabbath at the Creation, in its recognition
by Christ Himself (Mark ii. 27), and in the manifest adaptation to meet their


spiritual needs.


He who knows man’s needs made the Sabbath for him, and to


set it aside as unnecessary is to impute to Him ignorance as to the spiritual


wants of His own creatures,


We are as much bound to recognise a place and a


period in which to meet for the public worship of God as the ancient Jew was.
Christ Himself has attached a special promise to such a gathering in His name
(Matt. xviii, 20), and in two instances on record, cheered his first disciples by
fulfilling it even in His bodily presence on “the first day of the week” (John


xx. 19-26),


It is worthy of note that the divine ordinances were observed not


only by Elkanah, but by “all his house,” that is, a8 is evident from the following
verses, by all who were not prevented by age or by home duties,


II. A service performed for God at home.


“Hannah went not up,” ete.


Hannah, in her present circumstances, served God to more Liles by absenting


herself for the time from the public worship of God. Go


permits His human


creatures to be co-workers with Him in the accomplishment of His purposes.
He had purposed to bring about a revival of true godliness in Israel by means of


Samvel, but in bringing about the accomplishment of his purpose,
20


e worked


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





through ordinary human channels and used human instrumentality. Hannah,
by nourishing the bodily life of her child, and by training his infant mind ina
<nowledge of the God whose propliet he was to be, was a co-worker with God in
the raising the nation to a higher spiritual condition. It is so in all God's
purposes in relation to the world, whether in the kingdom of nature or of grace
He has purposed that the earth shall bring forth her harvests year after year to
supply man with bread. But He calls man to aid Him in the accomplishment
of His purpose Se XXviii. 26-29). And so in the spiritual kingdom. And
when any man of God is raised up by Him for a great work, he is not the only
instrument of its accomplishment, but all those who have helped to train him
for God’s services—especially his mother, if she has been faithful to her trust—
have a share in the honour and joy. It may be questioned if anyone in the
kingdom of Israel at this time was doing so great a work for God as Hannah in
the performance of her unobtrusive work in the privacy of her home.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Verse 23. Hannah looked upon differently handled. So Hannah, with


her child, not as a child only, but as
an offering ; she had two reasons to
love him, one from nature and one
from grace... . Those who purpose
to consecrate cups or vessels of gold to
the service of God, while they keep
them in their house until the day of
consecration, look upon them no
longer as common objects, and do not
permit them to be carelessly or in-


much more reason, nurtured her child
with a special reference to his intro-
duction to the temple ; she loved him
more than as an ordinary child, she
regarded him as an offering to the
Lord, looking upon herself as sanctified
through him ; indeed, her house had
become a temple since it enclosed this
priest, this prophet.—Chrysostom.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 24—28,
Vows


I. When we pledge ourselves to a certain act or line of conduct on condi:
tion that God grants us a certain blessing, we must be very careful to fulfil
our vow. If we enter into such a contract with a fellow-creature, we hold our-
selves bound by honour to observe every jot and tittle of the contract. Let us
be at least equally scrupulous in the performance of any pledge which we give
to God. Hannah had placed before the Lord the conditions under which she
would give to His service a son, to dwell in His house for ever. The petition
had been granted on her own terms, and there is no holding back on her part.
She evidently hastened to perform her vow; there was none of that deferring
(Eccles. v. 4) which looks like a repenting of the promise made, ‘ When she
had weaned him”—as soon as ever his age permitted his separation from his
mother’s care—‘ she took him up with her.” And the sacrifices of thanksgiving
which accompanied the dedication of this darling child show that the gift was
that of a “cheerful giver”—that this great act of devotion on her part was per-
formed with gladness (Psa. c. 2).


Il. Our faith is strengthened, and our gratitude deepened, when our vows
can be paid on the very spot where they have been made. “Arise, and go
up to Bethel” (Gen. xxxv. 1), said the Lord to Jacob. The command indicates
that to visit the spot where he had fled from the face of Esau, and where he had
dedicated himself to the service of God, would deepen the patriarch’s ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





600K L





for all the mercy and truth that had followed him since, and would strengthen


his faith in the “faithful Creator ” and covenant-keeping God.


“Arise, and go


to Bethel” testifies that it is good to pay our vow in the place in which it wag
made. The very sight of the spot brings before us more vividly than anything
else can do the circumstances of the past, and thus makes us realise more fully
the blessings we have received in answer to the prayers then offered. Hannah
was enabled to pay her vow in the very spot where she had made it: “I am the
woman that stood by thee here, praying to the Lord,” ete,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 28. A double sacrifice was
celebrated ; one of the victims is en-
dowed with reason, and the other is
not; the one is offered up by the
priest, the other by Hannah. That
which was offered by the mother was
a far more costly sacrifice than that
presented by the priest. For Hannah
offered the fruit of her womb; she
treads in the steps of Abraham,
she emulates the self-sacrifice of the

atriarch, But Abraham received
Rel his son and led him away, but
Hannah leaves hers in the temple for
the rest of his days.— Chrysostom.

Hannah’s piety did not cool when
her wish was gratified.—Steele,

That God gives in answer to prayer,
and that man devotes to God what he
obtains, so that God takes again what
He has given, or lays claim to it for
the ends of His kingdom, is the law of
reciprocity ip the intercourse between
the living God and His saints ; the
latter contribute nothing for the
realisation of the special ends of His
kingdom which they have not received
from Him, and are not by Him enabled
to contribute.—Lange’s Commentary,

True religion is a divine life in the
soul, which its author Jirst tries and
then honours, 1. It isa life of Jaith,


hope, and love. 2. It is tried by Satan
who will seek to place such men as
Hophni and Phinehas at the altar, if it
be but to distress and drive away from
it such worshippers as Hannah. The
Jamily is often our furnace, it has
pains as necessarily secret as severe ;
and where they can be told they are
told in vain to any but God. Such
was the family of Hannah. ‘The
Church itself will try the patience and
faith of its true members, It will try
whether we can acknowledge a true
minister of God, and meekly bear with
his infirmities, though, like Eli, he
mistakes our case, and chills the heart
which he should cherish ; whether we
can receive the promises of God from

is mouth, though it sometimes speaks
unadvisedly. ‘I'he Church is a fire to
try the Church. 3. But true religion
will be owned and honoured of him
who gave it, as was the case with
Hannah. The Lord often does so
beyond all that we ask or think,
Hannah had asked for a man-child ;
but it was not in her contemplation to
ask for a Samuel—that light of Israe;
—that prophet mighty in word and
deed—that blessing and pattern to the
world in every age.—Caca,


LO aA A ONO RE ERNE


OHAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





CHAPTER IL


Crarricat anD Exposrrory Norus.—Ver. 1, “And Hannah prayed.” ‘Hymns are wont
to be comprehended under the name of prayers” (Ps. lxxi. 20). “It was the most ancient way
of preserving the memory of things to posterity, poets being more ancient than historians or
orators.” (Patrick.) “Mine Horn.” “There is no reason for supposing here a reference
to the custom among Oriental women (Druses and others) of wearing silver horns on the
head to which the veil is attached, and which, by their position, indicate the woman’s position
as maiden, wife, or mother. There is no trace of such a custom among the ancient Hebrews.
The word translated horn is used of the horns of beasts, of horns for blowing and drinking,
or for any horn-shaped vessel, and of a mountain peak. It is the symbol derived from horned
beasts, which carry the head high in vigorous courage and consciousness of power.” (Lange's
Commentary.) “ Mine horn is exalted” does not mean, I am proud, but ‘my power is great
in the Lord.” (Keil.) ‘This figure appears first here, and connects this song with that of
David, in 2 Sam. xxii. 3, and is adopted in the Gospel, and applied to Christ in the song of
Zacharias” (Luke i. 69). (Wordsworth.) “The mouth is ‘enlarged,’ or ‘opened’ wide, to
proclaim the salvation before which the enemies would be dumb.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 2. “Rock.” This figure is another connecting link which joins this song with that of
Moses (Deut. xxxii. 4) with David, and all with Christ.” ( Wordsworth.) (See on this subject
in Comments.) ‘The symbolical designation of the covenant-God by Rock, which occurs
frequently, was suggested naturally by the configuration of the ground in Palestine, where
masses of rock, surrounded by steep precipices, offered an image of solid and sure protection.”
(Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 3. “By Him actions are weighed.” Keil translates, “To Him deeds are weighed,”
that is to say, the acts of God are weighed, i.¢., are equal or just. Many exporitors agree with
him, and about an equal number understand it to signify that God weighs, or rightly estimates
the actions of men.


Ver. 4. “The bows of the mighty,” etc. ‘Bows were a principal part of warriors’ weapons
and their girdles a principal part of their military habit ” (Patrick).


Ver. 5. “They that were full,” etc. “See an instance in verse 36” (Biblical Commentary).

eased” either to be hungry or to work for bread. “The barren hath borne seven,” 1.¢.
many. “Seven children are mentioned as the full number of the Divine blessing in children ”
(Ruth iv. 15).—( Keil.) “Here prophecy concerning the Church mingles with her hymn of
praise.”—( Patrick.) (On this subject see Comments on the Song.)


Ver 6. “The Lord killeth,” etc. Killing denotes (with a departure from the ordinary
sense) bringing into the extremest misfortune and suffering, which oppresses the soul like the
gloom of death, or brings it near to death—making alive is extricating from deadly sorrow and
introducing into safety and joy.—See Deut. xxxii. 39, Psa, xxx. 3, etc. (Lange's Commentary).


Ver. 8. “The beggar from the dunghill.” “This alludes to » form of wretchedness
known in the East, and indicating the lowest degree of poverty and humiliation. The dunghill
—a pile of horse, cow, or camel offal, heaped up to dry in the sun and serve as fuel—was and is
piled up in the huts of the poor; and sometimes, from necessity, is the haunt of wandering
mendicants, who, finding it in some outhouse outside the city, lodge there for want of better
accommodation: so that the change that had been made in the social postion of Hannah appeared
to her grateful heart as auspicious and as great as the elevation of a poor despised beggar to the
highest and most dignified rank (Fausset.) “The pillars of the earth.” “There is no need
to find a geographical theory in a poetical statement. And even if it expresses the author’s
geographical views, it is not the thought of the passage, but only the framework of the thought ;
the real thought here is solely religious, and hes nothing to do with physical science ” (Translator
of Lange's Commentary). Wordsworth calls it “a figurative expression derived from a palace or
temple,” Some understand by the pillars, the rulers of the earth,


Ver. 9. “Keep the feet,” etc. Either from error and sin (Fausset) or from misfortune
(Lange’sCommentary). “Darkness.” Symbolic of misfortune.


Ver. 10. “Thunder.” “Thunder is a premonitory sign of the approach of the Lord to
judgment” (Keil). “Literally fulfilled in this history” ( Wordsworth). “The ends of the
earth.” “The object of God’s judicial interposition is not only the members of the chosen
people, but the whole world” (Lange’s Commentary), “ His anointed” or “ Messiah.” The
first time the word is used in Holy Scripture.


Ver. 11. “Minister.” “The word is used in three senses in Scripture, 1. Of the service
of both priests and Levites (Exod. xxviii. 35-43, etc.). 2. Of the ministrations of the Leviter
83


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK EL





88 rendered to the priests (Numb. fii. 6), where the phrase is nearly identical with that used here.
8. Of any service, especially one rendered to a man of God (Num. xi. 28; 1 Kings xix. 21;
2 Kings vi. 15, etc.), The application of it to Samuel as ministering to the Lord before Eli
the priest accords most exactly with Samuel’s condition as a Levite” (Biblical Commentary),
“He must have been engaged in some occupation suited to his tender age, as in playing upon
the cymbals, or other instruments of music ; in lighting the lamps, or similar easy and interesting
services” (fausset ),


Ver. 12. “Sons of Belial.” See on Chapter 1 16,


Ver. 18,14. They were not content with the portions assigned to them by the Levitical law,
namely, the heave-leg and wave-breast (Lev. vii. 80-84), but robbed the offerer of that portion
which belonged to him while he was preparing it to celebrate the feast of thanksgiving before the
Lord.


Ver. 15. “The fat,” etc, This was the part of the animal which was to be offered to God
(Lev. iii. 16, vii. 23, 25, etc.). “This was high contempt of God to demand their portion before
God had His” (Patrick), “In the case of the peace offerings, the offerer slew the animal
himself at the door of the tabernacle and the priest poured the blood and burnt the fat”
(Biblical Commentary ).


Ver. 17. “The young men.” “Not the servants of the priests (Keil ) but the priests themselves,
the sons of Eli” (Lange's Commentary ).


Ver. 18. “But.” The Levite-child is contrasted with the grown-up priest” ( Wordsworth ).
“Ephod.” “Tt does not appear whether the Levites wore the ephod properly. Micah wore
one, but that may have been in his character as priest (Judges xviii, 4, 6, 14), and David when he
danced before the ark (2 Sam. vi. 14), Possibly this was a mark of Samuel’s special dedication ”
(Biblical Commentary),


Ver. 19. “Coat.” Meil, rendered mantle in 1 Sam. xv. 27, xxviii. 14, eto. “It probably
resembled the robe or ‘ Mei’ of the High-priest (Exod. xxviii. 81), but was made of course of
some simpler material, and without the symbolical ornaments attached to the lower hem, bv
which that official dreas was distinguished” (Keil). “It is interesting to know that the garme
which his mother made and brought to the infant prophet at her annual visit was a miniature a
the official priestly tunic or robe; the same that the great prophet wore in mature years, and by
which he was on one occasion actually identified. When the witch of Endor, in answer to Saul’s
inquiry, told him ‘that an old man was come up covered with a meil,’ Saul perceived that it
was Samuel”—1 Sam, xxviii 14. (Smith's Biblical Dictionary ).


Ver. 22. “Very eld,” “ consequently listless” (Patrick), “'The women that assembled,”
The same phrase as that used in Exod. xxxviii. 8. Some commentators consider that these women
were employed in spinning, etc., for the service of the tabernacle like those mentioned in Exod.
xxxv. 25. Others, as Hengstenberg, look upon their service as purely spiritual, as that of Anna
(Luke ii. 36), Others again regard them as simply worshippers. Kitto says that if they were
employed in service they would have been inside, not at the doors of the tabernacle,


Ver, 25. “If one man sin against another,” etc. “A man may intercede with God for
remission of a penalty due to himself, but who shall venture to entreat for one who has outraged
the majesty of God.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver, 26, “In favour,” etc. The same words as are used of Christ (Luke fi. 52),


Ver. 27. “A man of God.” A prophet, as in 1 Kings xiii, 1, ete. “The only one mentioned
since Deborah.” ( Biblical Commentary.) “Thy Father.” “Eli was a descendant of Ithamar, the
youngest son of Aaron” (1 Chron, xxiv. 8)... . “The transfer of the high-priesthood to him
must have taken place, because at the death of the last high-priest of the family of Eleazer


Ran) eldest son), the remaining son was too young and inexperienced to take his place,”
(Kea


Ver, 28. “Did I not give,” etc. The bountiful provision made by God for His priests is
mentioned as the great aggravation of the sins of Eli’s sons. (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 31, “The judgment did not fall upon Eli’s house immediately. His grandson Ahitub
(1 Sam, xiv. 3), and Abiathar, Ahitub’s grandson (1 Kings i. 25; ii. 26), successively held the
office of high priest. So much importance in the Hast has always been attached to old age that
it would be felt to be a great calamity, and sensibly lower the respectability of any family which
could boast of few old men.” (Fausset.) Abiathar, the last high priest of Eli’s family, waa
deposed by Solomon, and the high-priesthood reverted to that of Eleazar, to whose family Zadok
balonpad (2 Ban xv, 24; xvil, 155 xix. 12; xx. 25. 1 Kings if, 27),

24


OHAP, If. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





Ver. 32, “This was the captivity mentioned in Judges xviii. 80. ( Wordsworth. )


Ver. 35. “A faithful priest.” This probably refers, in the first instance, to Samuel, who
was evidently called by God to perform priestly acts; and, secondly, to Zadok, the father of a
long line of priests. It is also generally regarded as pointing on to the Messiah. “It would
then seem best to regard it as announcing a line of faithful men,” (7'r, of Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 36. “A piece of silver.” The word is used only here. It signifies a small piece sf
money, and has been rendered “a beggar’s coin.” ‘ Commentators are divided in their opinion
as to the historical allusions contained in this prophecy.” (Kei. )


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—VERSES 1—1@,


Hanwan’s Sona.


I. The end of a granted desire should be the beginning of praise. The desire
of the husbandman ends when the last shock of corn is safely housed in the
barn. ‘Then comes the harvest song indicating that desire has been completed
by fulfilment. The ploughing and sowing, the bearing of the precious seed, the
toil, the hope, the fear, the patience are all things of the past, and the end of
all these should be a beginning of something new—of a song of thanksgiving.
So it will be in the kingdom of God at the end of the present dispensation. The
groaning and travailing of the whole creation—the sin, the sorrow, the tears, and
struggles of the present will one day be ended—the earnest expectation of the
creature—the desire of the best of the human race in all worlds—the prayer of
ages—will end in complete fulfilment : and the end of all the desire and longing
of the present will be the beginning of praise. <A “new song” will be sung to
celebrate the incoming of the new era—the birth of the new heavens and the
new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness (2 Pet. iii, 13). The beginning of a
perpetual thanksgiving will celebrate the end of the present state of things and
the incoming of the new. And so it should always be in the life of the
individual, Itwasso with Hannah. She had not experienced the consummation
of her desire without experiencing deep sorrow—without long and patient
waiting upon God. But the desire, the tears, the hope were behind her. The
child had been born, the son had been given. The vow had been paid and the
gift of the Lord had been given back to Him. The tide of joy and gratitude had
been rising higher and higher in her heart from the hour in which she left her
home until she stood in the very same spot where she had stood before—“‘a
woman sorrowful and grieved in spirit.” And now she was a joyful mother, and
gladness flooded her soul and burst forth into a mighty song of exultation and
thanksgiving.


II. The experience of one indvidual is often symbolic and prophetic of the
experience of many. The light that shone upon Paul on his way to Damascus
pained and blinded him at first. And the bodily pain and blindness were
symbolic of the pain and darkness of his soul from the light which shined into
his soul. But out of the darkness and sorrow came light and joy, such as he
had never known before. Of the experience of how many was this experience of
Paul symbolic and prophetic! How many through his pain and joy were brought to
pass through a like experience! ‘T'o how many was the soul transition of this man
an earnest of the same transition from darkness to light! Hannah’s experience
was symbolic and prophetic of what was to be the experience of many.of her
nation. ‘Those who were godly among them had been long grieved at heart
because of the persecution of their enemies—because it seemed, indeed, as if
God had forgotten to be gracious to His own people. Many a time, doubtless,
had they asked Gideon’s question—“ Jf the Lord be with us, why then is all thas
befallen us? and where be all His miracles which our fathers told Ae of?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L


(Judges vi. 13). But a new era was now to begin. Hannah’s joy coming aftet
her long sorrow was anticipatory of a time when the garment of praise should
take the place of the spirit of heaviness with all true patriots and servants of
God in the land of Israel.


III. The language of the human soul in one age is often fitted to express
its feelings in all ages. A common life expresses its existence in the same
general outward form from age to age. The life of the rose or of the lily finds
expression in the same general outward form to-day as it did when God first
called it into existence. ‘There are modifications and individual distinctions,
but the general outline is the same. So with the life of the human soul.
Although time modifies the form in which it gives expression to its thoughts,
although each individual has an experience which in some respects differs from
that of any other creature, yet the language spoken ages ago finds an echo in
the hearts of men and women in each generation, and expresses their feelings
as well as it expresses the feelings of the person who first uttered them. How
perfectly does the language of some of the Psalms, for instance, fit the experience
of many men and women in this nineteenth century. What a close resemblance
there is between this song of the happy mother of Israel’s prophet, and that of
the mother of that prophet, priest, and king, who was not the Saviour of Israel
merely, but the Saviour of the world. There are slight modifications, but the
great backbone of thought running through the one is the same as that in the
other. And the same words, with slight changes of expression, might be used
by any soul who had emerged from a long night of sorrow and darkness into a
new and brighter epoch in its history, and as a matter of fact it has been so
used by the Church of God in all ages, and will be until time shall be no longer.
These thoughts are suggested by the song as a whole. We will now notice its
main subjects.


I. That {there is one God in contradistinction to many. “There is none
beside Thee.” The human soul and the world around us speak alike of the
oneness of God. The heavens that declare His glory, and the firmament that
showeth His handy work speak of One Supreme Ruler who controls all the
forces by which the hosts of heaven move in their appointed paths. The vast
machine has many complications, but the unity of its movements and operations
bear the stamp of one ruling mind. The human soul cries out for One God—
for one distinct and over-ruling power above all the principalities and powers of
the universe. The Bible declares unmistakably that there is such a Being.
There is one “everlasting God, the Lord, the Orcator of the heavens and the
earth, who hath meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of
the earth ina measure, and weighed the mountains in scales and the hills in a
balance,” and none “instructed Him, or taright Him knowledge, or showed to
Him the way of understanding” (Isa. 1x.). He alone is the “ King eternal,
immortal, invisible” (1 Tim. i. 17), who “ doeth according to His will in the
army of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth” (Dan. iv. 35). The
human soul may well rejoice in the knowledge that its destinies and the des-
tinies of all the creatures of the universe are in the hands of a distinct identity
like itself, yet so much greater and more powerful as to be able to control all
the apparently conflicting forces which are at work into a complete and perfect
harmony for the good of His creatures. The Israel of Jehovah in all ages have
reason to rejoice in the knowledge that “the Lord our God is one Lord”
(Deut. vi. 4).


II. That this one God is pure in His character. “There is none holy as the
Lord.” If a human creature who holds in his hands the earthly destinies of
other a (who are inferior to him in power) is lawless and wicked, of what

2


OHAP. IL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


——


misery may he be the cause! When an earthly judge, although skilful and
learned, is known to be morally bad, we feel that his want of purity is not only
injurious to himself, but may affect the destinies of those upon whom he is called
to pass sentence. So with any ruler or judge of men in any capacity: purity of
character, perfect integrity (so far as a human creature can be pure and upright),
is fe!t to be indispensable to the well-being of those whom they govern or whom
they judge. If this be so in the case of a human and finite being, how much
more 80 is it in the case of the Almighty and Infinite God? If such a thing as
a moral flaw in His character could be conceived, how terrible would be the
issue! He who is to judge the world must be perfectly righteous. ‘There must
be nothing in His feelings and disposition that would tend to influence Him to
do anything but the strictest justice. Seeing that the destinies of untold
millions are in His hands, He must be absolutely without spot in His moral
character. “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” (Gen. xviii. 25)
But in order to do right at all times He must be absolutely incorruptible and un-
defiled. And this He is declared to be, this He has shown Himself to be. He has
shown it in His hatred to sin. A man’s moral purity, his holiness, may be esti-
mated by the abhorrence in which he holds all moral impurity—anything which
can defile his own soul and the souls of others. That God hates sin may be seen
in the searching and binding character of Hislaw. Human lawgivers make laws
which deal with man’s outward life—which have to do with him as a citizen rather
than as aman. If heabstains from certain outward actions, the law allows him to
live unmolested. But God’s law is so holy that it penetrates into the spirit,
legislates concerning thoughts and feelings, passes sentence upon hidden motives
as well as upon visible actions. ‘The “exceeding broadness” (Psa, cxix. 96)
of the law reveals the Lawgiver’s hatred to sin, and His consequent moral purity.
And God’s hatred to sin, and, therefore, His holiness is seen in tn the extent of
the sacrifice He has made to put away sin. A human ruler’s abhorrence of anv
evil law or custom may be estimated by the efforts he makes to abolish it ; by
the self-sacrifice he is willing to undergo to rid his country of the curse. Ip
nothing is the absolute holiness of God seen so plainly as in the fact that He
“ gave His only-begotten Son” to “put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself”
(Heb. ix. 26). Those who sing the song of the Lamb slain glorify the name f
the Lord for His holiness (Rev. xv. 3,4). And the contemplation of His work o

redemption gives His saints on earth the most assuring proof of that holiness
“at the remembrance” of which they join the first smger of this song in
“ giving thanks” (Psa. xxx. 4).


III. That immutability is a necessary consequence of God’s absolute poy
“ Neither is there any rock like our God.” ‘The unchangeableness of any human
being depends upon his goodness and upon the length of time he has been good,
He will be unchangeable in his feelings and actions in proportion to his moral
purity, and the longer he has lived a holy life the more fixed and rock-like
will be his character. If a man has pursued a line of righteous conduct for
half-a-century—if in all that time he has been a man of unblemished
integrity—everyone will feel that he is less likely to change now than
he was fifty years ago. Every year that has passed over his head—every
step that he has taken in the path of uprightness—has added something
to the immutability of his character. God has ever been perfectly holy
—holiness is His most important attribute—the one which forms the most
weighty theme of the adoration of those of His creatures who are
nearest to Him in moral character (Isa. vi 3). And because He is so holy
He must be unchangeable in His character. His everlasting holiness is a
guarantee that He will always be the same in thought, and word, and deed ;
while He remains the Holy One of Eternity, He must continue to ee un-


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY; SAMUEL. BOOK I.








changeable God (Mal. iii. 6). And that God is thus unchangeable may well
furnish men with a theme of song. It is an instinct of humanity to reach out
after something less changeable than themselves—to endeavour to lay hold of
some object to which, as to a rock, they may anchor for rest and security. All
the efforts of men to secure for themselves permanent positions in the world—
to ensure to themselves and to their families a source of livelihood which will
not fail them—are indications of their desire for a rock of some kind upon which
they may rest. That upon which they place their dependence may be a very
unworthy object of trust for an immortal spirit, yet men will make a rock of
any object rather than have none. But those who, like Hannah, know the
holy and unchangeable God, make Him, and Him only, the object of their entire
trust—the Rock of their souls. They know from joyful experience that in all
their need He has been, and ever will be, “a strength to the poor, a strength te
the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when
the blast of the terrible ones ts as @ storm against the wall” (Isa. xxv. 4).


IV. God is likewise to be rejoiced in as a God of knowledge. “The
Lord is a God of knowledge,” ete. 1. He knows Himself. This is
more than any human creature can assert concerning his own identity.
The anatomist who can describe every bone and vein and nerve in the
human body is looked upon as a man of knowledge, but when he has done
this there are many mysteries connected even with the body that are utterly
beyond his grasp—he stands before them in absolute ignorance. The student
of man’s mind is considered to be a man of knowledge if he can say something
instructive concerning the world of thought and feeling within man—if he can
analyse the operations of the mind and classify the mental faculties and throw
some light upon the relations of body and soul. Yet when he has said all, how
little has he said which can unfold to us the m stery of our own existence—how
little does the wisest man know concerning himeclt But God has a perfect
knowledge of His own nature, He never returns from any reflection upon Himself
with any mist of ignorance resting upon Him—He comprehends the whole length
and breadth and depth and height of His own Infinite Being. 2. Hehasa
perfect knowledge of His own actions. “ By Him actions are weighed ”—not
only the acts of men but Hisown. Man cannot pretend to any perfect judgment
of his own actions. He knows not the real value of his own deeds—he does not
know whither they willtend—hecan only cometo anapproximate estimate of hisown
motives, ButGod can perfectly weigh Hisacts—He knows exactly what will be their
effect—He has a perfect knowledgeof the motives which promptthem. 3. Having
this perfect knowledge of Himself and of ail that He does, the Divine Being
must know man in all the mystery of his complicated being, and must be able
perfectly to estimate the worth of every human action. The greater includes
the less) He who made man must comprehend the nature of hig existence; He
knows what constitutes life; He comprehends how mind acts upon matter, and
sees the subtle link which unites soul and body. And in the matter of human
actions, He “is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, and all
things are naked and opened in the eyes of Him with whom we have to do”
(Heb, iv. ei The motives that prompt human deeds, the influence that
those deeds will have upon future ages, the nature of the human will which ig
behind every human deed are all to Him as an open book. 4. Zhe proper con~
dition of heart in the presence of such a God ts humility. “Talk no more so
exceeding proudly; let not alrogancy come out of your mouth.” Limited
knowledge on any subject should make men humble in the presence of those
who are better informed. It ill becomes such to assume to dictate to and instruct
those who are far more competent to speak upon the matter. How much more
should ee limited knowledge of himself and of his Creator—of his own


OmAP. IT. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





actions, and of the actions of the All-Wise and All-knowing God—cause him,
like Job, to “lay his hand upon his mouth” (Job xl. 4). Unable as he is rightly
to weigh even his own actions, how can he dare to constitute himself a judge in
what seems to him dark in the mysteries of the Divine dealings, The only
condition of heart proper to finite creatures is that of Him “who is of a contrite
spirit,” and who “trembles” at the Divine Word (Isa, Ixvi. 2). Our own
ignorance and our conviction of God’s infinite knowledge should lead us to put
unreserved faith in His declarations, and yield uncompromising obedience to
His commands. We make the knowledge of a fellow-man a ground of confidence,
and we show our confidence by obeying their word. Our narrow outlook around
us and beyond us makes safety to be found only in listening to the words of
“the God of Knowledge,” in striving to conform our lives to His revealed will,
and leaving the result with confident trust in His hands.


V. This holy immutable God of Knowledge is the author of those inversions
of the ordinary course of nature which often occur in @ manner totally
unforeseen and unexpected. ‘‘'I'he bows of the mighty are broken......
The Lord maketh poor and maketh rich...... He raiseth up the poor out
of the dust,” etc. The natural law of the world is that the strong will hold
on their way against what is weak, and that they, being in power, shall remain
in possession. It is a foregone conclusion that the warrior who has the greatest
force at his command will win the victory. Men expect the race will be won by
the swift, and the battle by the strong: But God has other forces which He
can bring into the field, and if He is not “on the side of the great battalions”
He will bring about such unlooked for combinations that those who have fallen
in the struggle will stand upright, ‘‘ being girded with power,” and those who have
been mighty will be overthrown, and the lame will take the prey. When the
forces of Egypt overtook the Israelites at Pi-hahiroth, the natural conclusion of
a looker-on would have been that nothing could prevent the slaves so lately
made free from being overmastered and retaken into bondage. But God, being
on the side of the weak, brought auxiliaries into the combat such as Pharaoh had
never dreamt of having to fight against. The water of the Red Sea was turned
into an opposing force on behalf of the oppressed, and the army of Egypt was over
thrown by a power against which their horsemen and chariots and their mighty men
were utterly powerless. Between Egypt and Israel there was no comparison as
to natural strength, but the Lord of nations brought supernatural reinforcements
to the aid of the naturally weak, and thus “the bows of the mighty were broken,
and they that stumbled were girded with strength.” The woman who first
uttered these words had long been walking through life with a heavy burden of
sorrow weighing her to the earth: gladness and exultation seemed to be the
portion of her persecutor, but none seemed destined for her. But the Lord who
“bringeth low and lifteth up,” brought laws into operation which entirely
changed the colour of her existence, and from being an object of scorn she became
most unexpectedly raised to a position of more than ordinary honour. 1. These
unseen and unknown laws are generally brought into operation in order to punish
the strong for their oppression of the weak. God alone is responsible for these
inequalities in national or individual life; and because He is so, He will take
account of those who, being endowed with greater physical or mental advantages,
use them to lord it over those who have not been so favoured. Hannah’s sorrow
arose from a cause entirely beyond her own control, and those who oppressed her
because of it were guilty of a great sin against God Himself. In the exaltation
of her despised rival, Peninnah receives a just punishment for her wickedness ;
from the birth of Samuel her influence in the family must have declined, an
none of her children are even mentioned in the sacred history, while that of
Hannah’s son was honoured throughout his nation during his life, and 2 held in

4


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUBL, BOOK I,


RET SIN Rg ied


honour now that two thousand years have passed away. And so it is with the
rise of one nation on the stage of history and the decline and fall of another.
“ Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted and drunken, but not with wine: Thus
saith thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of His people,
Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of
the cup of my fury ; thou shalt no more drink it again: But I will put it into
the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that
we may go over” (Isa. li, 21-23). Such is the method of the Divine govern-
ment—there is a purpose in this subversion of natural order, and that purpose
is retribution to the strong oppressor who has trampled on the rights of the
weak. 2. God has a just right and reason so to intervene. “For the pillars of
the earth are the Lord’s, and He hath set the world upon them.” He is the
proprietor of the earth—the land upon which the oppressor dwells is His by the
most indisputable right—that of creation. The human proprietor claims a right
over that which he has purchased—he can eject tenants from his property who
do not meet his just demands. How much more is it the prerogative of Him
who called the earth into being to eject from their dominion over it
those who disregard His just demands, and abuse the power and the position
which He has entrusted to them? God had a right to call Abraham from Ur
of the Chaldees, and to give to his descendants the land of the Canaanite. He
had a right to sweep the inhabitants of the cities of the plain from off the face
of His earth when they so grossly defiled their fair inheritance. He had a right
to call Moses and David from following the sheep, and set them in high places,
to fulfil His eternal purposes. He had a right to take Nebuchadnezzar from his
throne, and make his dwelling with the beasts of the field, until he knew “ that
the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He
will,” and until he acknowledged that all “His ways are judgment, and those
who walk in pride He is able to abase” (Dan. iv. 25-37). “The earth is the
Lord's,” and “they that dwell therein” (Ps. xxiv. 1), and He, by right of pro-

Here, puts in an absolute claim to dispose of that which belongs to Him as

6 sees best.


VI. God also bestows and takes away human life. “He bringeth down to the
grave, and bringeth up.” 1. He alone can give life. There are many things
in which man can imitate God. He can imitate God’s benevolence by bestowing
upon his fellow creatures gifts which will sustain and embellish their existence,
He can be, to some extent, an imitator of God’s character (Ephes. v. 1). But
he can in no way imitate Him as the Giver of life. In that the Creator stands
absolutely alone in the universe—this is His sole prerogative. Human life is
continued in the world by the instrumentality of man, but human parents are but
instruments. In this respect there can be no likeness between man and God.
God is the only Being who has “ life in Himself ” (John v. 26). His is the only
independent life, the highest archangel—he who is permitted to draw the
nearest to the inaccessible light wherein dwells the Divine Majesty—ig
as much dependent for existence upon the only source of life as the
tiniest insect that crawls beneath our feet. He was not until God called
him into existence, and that existence is sustained only by Him who
gave it at the first. Of One alone can it be said that He “hath
immortality” (1 Tim. vi. 16), because all others receive it as a gift from Him.
2. He only has the power and the right to take life. He who gave has a right
to take, and He only does take it. For whatever may be the second cause
coming between, it is by Divine appointment that men die. Coming to the

ave is not a debt of nature, but a Divine appointment. Nature is inexorable
in exacting her debts—she works always by laws which she cannot set aside.
She is oe enough to kill, but not atrong enough to make an exception to the


OHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


rule—she cannot go out of her destined course to serve the highest purpose—to
favour the most holy character. But there have been exceptions to the universal
law of death—exceptions which have been made by Him who is the Lord of
Nature, and who can set aside her claims—can leave her debt unpaid when He
sees fit. Nature did not make the law, because she has no power to make
exceptions to the rule. It is God alone who “ bringeth to the grave.” Death
is not a chance which happens unto us. The arrow that entered between the
joints of Ahab’s armour came from a bow “drawn at a venture,” but the arrow
winged its way by Divine appointment. And so it is with all death’s arrows,
not one but hits the mark to which God has destined it. But it must be
remembered that the appointment of death was not part of God’s original plan
in relation to men. Although it is now “appointed unto men once to die” (Heb.
ix. 27), it was not so from the beginning. God’s purpose concerning man at the
first was to give life, and not to take it away ; to bestow upon His creature an
undying existence, a perfect and unending life of body as well as of soul.
It is man’s disobedience alone which has brought about the Divine appointment
of death. “Going to the grave” is not the outcome of God’s original purpose
concerning man, but an appointed penalty for man’s transgression. Death
being thus a Divine appointment, dying should be regarded as a duty to be
cheerfully discharged. Men face death bravely and cheerfully when they feel
that their country or their earthly ruler has appointed them to it. The good
man should learn from such examples to die as a duty of Divine appointment.
A Christian ought to die cheerfully, seeing he dies by the command of the
Lord of life. ‘This thought ought to reconcile him to the inevitable, and help
him to meet the last enemy without dismay. In proportion as a fellow-creature
is good, we trust him with our life—with interests that are dearer to us than
life. In proportion as he is wise as well as good—especially if he is powerful in
addition to his wisdom and his goodness—our confidence in him is increased,
our feeling of security in his hands is strengthened. ‘I'he claim of the Eternal
and Infinite God to kill and to make alive rests not only ape His power, but
upon His character. He is not only the Author of life, but He is the King who
cannot wrong any of his subjects, the Judge of all the earth who must,
from the necessity of his nature, do right at all times to all His creatures.
If God kills, it is not only because He takes what is His own, but because
He is doing what is the best thing to be done, and in the best manner.
3. The resurrection from the dead depends upen the Giver of lie. He not only
“bringeth down to the grave,” but He “bringeth up.” (a) This we might
have regarded as probable if we had no revelation upon the subject. We
might have concluded that He who at first “breathed into man the breath of
life,” and thus made him a “living soul,” could at His pleasure reanimate the
dust and bring life again out of death. If God could give life where there was
no life, is it not highly probable that He can give it again where it has once
existed? (b) That He has done so isa matter of history. We have it upon
reliable authority that He has restored dead men to life—that He has
reanimated the lifeless clay. (c) That He must do this for all mankind is
certain. Those who make promises ought to perform them if they are able to
do so. If a man promises to redeem a pledged garment of his poorer brother,
and is able to fulfil his promise, ought he not to do it, knowing as he does that
his needy brother is expecting anxiously the promised raiment to cover his
scantily clothed body? The raiment of God’s children is held in pledge by
death——He holds the garment until the time of the “redemption of the body ”
(Rom. viii. 23). God has promised to redeem that raiment, and He holds
Himself bound to fulfil His promise, and we hold him bound also. Christ has
given His word to bring from the grave both the just and the unjust—“ The
hour is coming when all that are in the graves shall hear His voice, re shall


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL BOOK i,





come forth ; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation” (John v. 28, 29). The
vision of the seer has pictured for us that great redemption day—that day of
“bringing up from the grave” of the human race (Rev. xx. 12, 13).


VII. In all the acts of His providence, in all the unlooked-for changes which
He brings to pass, God has a special oversight of His own children. «He shall
keep the feet of His saints.” 1. The character of the persons whose feet are
kept—“Saints.” Sainthood implies a soul transition. “A man that is known
to have been born poor and is found in after life to be living in wealth is known
to have experienced a great transition in his outward circumstances, By what
means or at what time in his life this change took place may not be revealed, but
that it has taken place is a certainty. So with asaint. Such a man isin a
condition to which he was not born. Sainthood is “ not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God” (John i. 13). Therefore every
human saint has been the subject of a soul-change. He may have been suddenly
raised from a state of spiritual poverty to wealth, or he may have acquired his
riches by degrees—increasing little by little in his knowledge of God and in
confidence in His character. 2. The change has taken place by the consent of his
will, Change of will brings about a change of position. Ifa child who hated
his lessons can be made willing to learn, his position in relation to knowledge is
at once changed. A sinner passes into a saint by becoming willing to learn of
the Holy One how to become holy. Willingness is the bridge by which the
sinner passes from a state of opposition to God into a state of reconciliation to
Him, and being thus reconciled to God 1s to be brought into that fellowship with
Him which constitutes sainthood. The entire process of the transition ig
described bythe Apostle in 1 Johni. 5-9. Fellowship with God based upon a know-
ledgeof His character makesaman a saint, but before this knowledgecan beattained
there must be a willingness to learn. 3. The saint needs a keeper for his feet.
The childwho has but just learned to walk needs a steady and strong hand to guide
his steps. The person who “keeps his feet” must possess a wisdom and strength
superior to that of the child’s. God is a guide and an upholder of the steps of His
saints, He alone is “ able to keep them from falling” (Jude 24), They cannot
see the dangers in the distance coming to meet them, or even those which are now
about their path. Hence their need of an eye that can discern them, and a
hand that can deliver from them, a“God of knowledge,” who is perfectly acquainted
with every danger to which they can be exposed, and a God of such absolute
power as to be able to deliver them. And His word of promise to each one is
“ Fear thou not, for I am with thee. Be not dismayed, for Iam thy God; I will
strengthen thee; yea, 1 will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness (Isa. xli. 10). ‘heir weakness and their ignorance are
both elements of danger, and both are fully met by their Allwise and Omnipotent
Keeper. The other part of the verse implies that they are surrounded by
enemies, both seen and unseen, who do not fail to watch for their halting, and
lose no opportunity they can lay hold of to trip them up; but “the wicked shall
be silent in darkness, and by strength shall no man prevail” against the saints of
God. ‘ley may, and often do, prevail against a saint’s earthly possessions, and
even against his life. Jezebel by strength did “ prevail” against Naboth’s
vineyard, against his life. For the time she was paramount against a good man,
Herodias did likewise prevail against the liberty and life of John the Baptist,
and her strength was strong enough to silence the voice that had been lifted up
against her crimes. And in many like cases the wicked have prevailed against
the earthly prosperity and life of the saints of God by His permissive providence,
But notwithstanding this permissive clause in the Divine code—notwithstanding
the licence that God thus gives to the enemies of His samts—there is no relaxing of

32


CHAP, IZ. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,





His hold, either of the saint or the sinner. The feet of the saint are still upheld, and
when they pass through the waters and the fire of temptation and persecution they
“ shall not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon them (Isa. xliii. 2), their
character and all their real interests shall come through the trial without loss or
injury. 4. The keeping of the saints’ feet arise from G'od’s special inheritance
in them. They are “ His saints.” The mother watches her child’s feet because
sae child is her own. She may have a general interest in all children, but the
feet of her own child are the objects of her most watchful love. Ifshe is a
godly mother, she not only keeps the feet of her child’s body, but she cares
unceasingly for the feet of the moral nature. She lays herself out to guide and
to guard the spiritual as well as the natural life. All who are saints are God’s
purchased possession, and His special relation to them, and theirs to Him, makes
gure an unceasing care on His part for all their real interests.

VIII. The inference to be drawn from a contemplation of God’s character
and government is, that contention against Himis vain. 1. He can overcome
His adversaries by His physical omnipotence. ‘ Out of heaven He shall thunder
upon them.” God’s manifestations of power in the material world are sometimes
of such a nature as to make men feel their utter powerlessness in His hands,
When the seaman finds that all his efforts to guide his vessel are as useless as
the dashing of the sea-spray against the rock, he becomes conscious of a power
which is far beyond that of human skill and science. When the lightnings
flash through the heavens and the thunder shakes the earth, we feel most
deeply how passive we are in the hands of the Almighty Being, who can thus
hold back and roll up the clouds of heaven. At such times we not only know
how useless it is to contend with God, but we are made to feel it; we are
conscious that to contend with One who has such powerful physical forces
at His beck is as vain as it is wicked. ‘The voice of God’s thunder
made even the heart of the hardened Pharaoh to quake and to acknow-
ledge himself defeated (Exod. ix. 27, 28), and all God’s mighty mani-
festations in the natural world should lead His creatures to humble
themselves before Him. 2 He can confound them by His superior wisdom
and goodness. ‘“ The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth.” ‘The opponent
in military warfare who can use the movements of his adversary to work his
defeat and can carry the battle into his very camp and overthrow him on his own
ground, is not one whom an enemy cares to meet. Neither is the opponent in
argument to be despised who can turn @ man’s own reasonings against him and
confound him by his own words. God has done this with His adversaries over
and over again. He has made the plans of the wicked instrumental in carrying
out His own purposes and in working out their own destruction. Men ought by
this time to have learned how useless it is to contend with One who “ taketh the
wise in their own craftiness:” 80 that “the counsel of the froward is carried
headlong” (Job v. 13). The imperfect knowledge of a human judge may
enable men successfully to contend against him. The fact that he is ignorant
of many things that he ought to know may defeat the ends of justice, and lead
him to an erroneous decision. But God is a perfect judge—His decisions are
always perfectly just and equitable, because he lacks neither the perfect
knowledge nor the perfect righteousness, out of which must come a perfect ruler.
When the final judgment comes—when the Son of man shall “ sit upon the throne
of His glory, and before Him shall be gathered all nations” (Matt. xxv. 81, 32),
all men will feel that it is utterly useless to seek to evade His searching scrutiny
—that His holiness and His omniscience make certain the overthrow of all that
is opposed to Him. “ Zhe Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are wngodly among them of
all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly commatted, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him (Jude 14, a

Sd


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


a Ee ey


BOOK L





TX. The end of confounding the wicked and the end of all God’s dealings with


men is the establishment of a kingdom of righteousness.
strength unto His King, and exalt the horn of His Anointed.”
change tends to the development of perfection,
but stepping-stones to the fully ripened grain.
flower, the flower is followed by the fruit.


“He shall give
In nature all

The blade and the green ear are
The bud unfolds into the perfect
So is it in God’s kingdom. All


the overturnings and changes, all the judgments upon the ungodly, are but
stepping-stones to the establishment of the kingdom of righteousness. All the
kings who have ever sat upon the thrones of the world have been preparing the


way for the rule of “ His King,” who is one day torule all the nations.


Looking


away into the future under the influence of the Spirit of God, Hannah foretells
the advent of a king who should reign in righteousness, and anticipates the
Psalmist King of Israel when he sang of Him who should “judge the poor of
the people” and “save the children of the needy, and break in pieces the
oppressor ;” who shall “ have dominion also yrom sea and to sea, and Jrom the
river unto the ends of the earth ;” whose “name shall endure Sor ever, and be


continued as long as the sun;”


and whom


“all nations shall call blessed,”


(Psalms lxxvi.) 'I'o the undisputed reign of this King all the present dealings of


God with men and nations are tending.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. The repetition of “in the
Lord” emphasises the fact that the
joyous frame of mind and lofty con-
sclousness of power has its root in the
Lord, and pre-supposes the most inti-
mate communion with the living God.
The mouth “opened wide over mine
enemies” intimates that the joy and
courage that filled her soul had found
utterance.—Lange’s Commentary.

Hannah’s song of praise compared
with her former prayer. 1. She was
then in “bitterness of soul” (i. 10) ;
now her “heart rejoiceth.” 2. Then
she was “humiliated” (i. 5, 8, 11);
now she is “exalted.” 3. Then her
adversary “ provoked her” (i. 6); now
her “mouth is opened wide over her
enemies.” 4, Then she “poured out
her soul before the Lord” (i. 15); now
she “ rejoices in His salvation.” Often
we remember to pray, and then forget
to praise.—Translator of Lange's
Commentary.

There is not one petition in all this
holy hymn, but thanksgiving is a prin-
cipal part of prayer; it is also an
artificial begging. —7'rapp.

How has Hannah’s glory been ex-
alted? ‘In the Lord,” saith she.
The elevation is no more dangerous,
for it has a solid foundation, a root

34


that cannot be shaken. The glory
that comes from men is accompanied
by the feebleness of those who give it,
so that it is easily overthrown, but it
is not so with the glory which comes
from God. It is the glory of which
the prophet speaks (Isa. xl 6, 7, 8).
Hannah is a remarkable example of
this truth. Kings, generals, great men,
are forgotten, notwithstanding all their
efforts to make their names immortal,
notwithstanding the magnificent tombs
that they build, the statues that they
erect, the monuments they leave as
tokens of their success, their very
names are forgotten. But Hannah is
celebrated to-day throughout all the
world, her glory is celebrated wherever
the sun sheds its light. ... , For,
when God _ glorifies anyone, death
comes in vain, time passes on in vain,
the glory of the mortal survives, and
its flowers are kept unfading : nothing
can throw a shadow upon that bright-
ness.— Chrysostom.


Ver. 2. God manifests Himself as
holy in the government of the kingdom
of His grace by His guidance of the
righteous to salvation.— Keil,

Two characteristics of the life of
God's children in their relation to the


OHAP, I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


SS EN


living God: 1. The humble reverence
before Him, in view of His holiness.
2. The heartiest confidence in Him,
in view of His unchangeable faithful-
ness.— Lange's Commentary.

Holiness is a chief and super-eminent
erfection of God, that wherein the
ivine excellence doth chiefly consist.

Therefore it is the most frequent epi-
thet given to His name in Scripture.
We never read mighty name or wise
name, but frequently holy name. The
holiness of God is His glory and beauty.
Therefore He is said to be “glorious in
holiness.” He is mighty in power, and
rich in grace, and glorious in holiness.
— Wisheart.


Ver. 3. The manner of God’s weigh-
ing actions. 1. With perfect know-
ledge. 2. With absolute rectitude
(Ver. 2). 3. With immutable justice
(Ver. 2).—Lange’s Commentary.

The weighed or righteous acts of
God (see Keil’s rendering in Critical
Nato are described in Vers. 4-8 in
great and general traits, as displayed
in the government of His kingdom,
through the marvellous changes which
occur in the circumstances connected
with the lives of the righteous and the
wicked.—Keil.

I. The perfection of God’s know-
ledge. 1. It is present and actual ;
His eye is always open, and everything
is in the view of it. The knowledge of
the creature is more power than act; it
is not much that we are capable of
knowing, but there is very little that we
actually know, and ’tis but one thing
that we can fix our thoughts upon at
once. But the knowledge of God is
an actual and steady comprehension of
things, all objects are at once in the
view of the Divine understanding.
2. It is intimate and thorough. Our
knowledge glides upon the superficies
of things; we do not know things in
their realities but as they appear and
are represented to us in all their masks
and disguises : but God knows things
throughout, all that can be known of
them. 3. It is clear and distinct. We
are ofter. deceived with the near like-
ness and resemblance of things, and


mistake one thing for another; our
knowledge is but a twilight, we see
things many times together and ina
heap, and do but know them in gross.
But those things which are of the least
consideration, and have the greatest
likeness to one another, the very hairs
of your head, are severally and dis-
tinctly known to God. 4. It is certain
and infallible. Everything almost im-
poses upon our understandings, and
tinctures our minds; our temper and
complexion, our education and pre-
judice, our interest and advantage, our
humours and distempers, these al! mis-
represent things and betray us into
error: but the Divine understanding
is a clear, fixed, constant, and undis-
turbed light, a pure mirror that receives
no stain from affection, or interes, or
any such thing. 5. It is easy and
without difficulty. We must dig deep
for knowledge and take a great deal
of pains to know a little; we strive to
comprehend some things, but they are
so vast that we cannot ; other things
are at such a distance, that our under-
standing is too weak to discern them ;
others so little, so small and nice,
that our understanding cannot lay
hold of them ; but God’s understand-
ing being infinite, it is a vast compre-
hension of all things without difficulty
or pain. II. God’s knowledge of the
heart teaches—1. The folly of hypo-
crisy. If we deal with men this is not
a very wise way, for there is danger of
discovery even from them, therefore
the best way for a man to seem to be
anything is really to be what he would
appear ; but having to deal with God,
to whom all our disguises are apparent,
*tis a madness to hide our iniquity in
our bosoms. 2. Charge yourselves with
inward purity and holiness, because of
the pure eyes which behold the most
secret motions of your souls. Fear
and shame from men lay a great
restraint upon our outward actions, but
what a strange freedom do we take
within our own breasts! This is an
argument of the secret atheism that
jies at the bottom of our hearts.
3. This is a matter of encouragement
to us in many cases—“ When my


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





heart 13 overwhelmed within»me, then
Thou knowest my path” (Ps, exliii. 8)
—in cases of difficulty which depend
upon the hearts of othe- men, which,
though we do not know, y 3t God knows
them. But especially is this a matter
of comfort to us when we suffer by the
calumnies and reproaches of men, when
the world chargeth u3 with crimes,
then to be able to arpeal to the
Searcher of hearts. 4. This renders
all deep and profound policies of the
wicked a vain thing. God sees those
cobwebs which they are spinning, and
can blow them away ata breath. 5. If
God only knows the hearts of men,
then what art thou, O man, that judgest
another’s heart? Will thou assume to
thyself the prerogativ2 of God ?—
Tillotson.


Vers. 4, 5. Every power which will
be something in itself is destroyed by the
Lord ; every weakness, which despairs
of itself, is transformed into power.—
Von Gerlach.


Vers. 4-8. The unity amid change
of the opposite ways which the pious
and the ungodly must go. 1. One
starting point, the Lord’s inscrutable
will, which determines them. 2. One
hand, the Almighty hand of the Lord
which leads them, 8. One goal at
which they end, humbie sabmission
under that hand. The wonderful
guidance of the children of men in
quite opposite ways. 1. The opposite
direction in which they go, (a) from
the height to the depth, ge from the
depth to the height. 2. The opposite
design which the Lord has therein with
men, (a) to lead them from the heights
of pride and haughty self-complacency
to humble submission under His un-
limited power, (b) to exalt them from
the depths of humble self-renunciation
to a blessed life in the enjoyment of
His free grace. 3, The opposite end,
according as men causs the divine
design to be fulfilled or defeated in
them : (a) everlasting destruction with-
out God, (0) everlasting salvation and
life in, and with God.—Lange’s Com-
mentary.

36


BOOK L


Vers, 3-10. The contrasts which the
change in the relations of human life
presents to us in the light of Divine
truth. 1. God’s holiness and man’s
sin. 2. God’s almightiness and man’s
powerlessness. 3, God’s gracious design
and man’s destruction.—Lange’s Com-
mentary,


Ver. 5. The view held by some, that
in Hannah’s barrenness a subsequent
fruitfulness there is a mystical or
typical meaning, deserves consideration.
Hannah is said to be the type of the
Christian Church, at first barren and
reviled, afterwards fruitful and re-
joicing. As to such typical character
we must be guided, not by outward
resemblances, but by fixed principles
of Biblical interpretation. These tacts
may guide us toa decision—1. God’s
relation to His people is set forth under
the figure of marriage er liv., Jer.
iii, Hosea i—iii.) 2. Isaiah (liv. 1)
describes God’s spiritual people as
barren, yet with the promise of many
children, 3. Paul (Gal. iv. 27) quotes
this passage of Isaiah, refers it to the
Church of Christ as distinguished from
the Jewish dispensation, and declares
that this antithesis is given in Sarah
and Hagar. . What he declares
is that Sarah is the mother of the child
of promise, while Hagar’s child is the
product of natural fruitfulness. .
Throughout his argument it is the
spiritual element of promise and faith
on which Sarah’s typical position is
based. Only, therefore, where we can
show such spiritual element are we
justified in supposing a typical charac-
ter. ‘There must be involved the truth
that the origination and maintenance
of God’s people depend on Hig promise,
and not on human strength. This ig
not necessarily involved in the history
of every barren woman who becomes
fruitful. Hannah seems to be
simply a pious mother, whose prayer
for a son, contrary to human proba-
bilities, is granted.— Translator a
Lange's Commentary,


Ver. 6. He layeth men for dead, and
then reviveth them, as 2 Cor, i 9, 10,


OHAP. 1.


That great apostle was “in death’s
often ;” and those ancient confessors
ery out, “for Thy sake are we killed all
the day long” (Rom. viii. 36).—77rapp.

Hannah asserts that supreme sove-
reignty of God, of which the boasting,
arrogant spirit, whether found in
Peninnah’s pride of fecundity, or in
* Sennacherib’s pride of conquest, or in
Nebuchadnezzar’s pride of empire, or in
Antichrist’s pride of rebellion, is a
blasphemous denial.—Biblical Com-
mentary.

The word sheol signifieth—(1) The
grave, the place of dead bodies ; (2) by
a metaphor, a state of adversity in this
world ; (3) the forlorn estate of those
who are deprived of God’s favour and
inward comfort, whether for a time
and when they are utterly cast off.—
Willet.

The Lord bringeth down to the grave
by the terror which He awakens in the
soul of justly merited punishment, and
He bringeth up by humble faith that
He grants in His infinite mercy and in
the merits of the blood of His Son.—
De Sacy.


Ver, 8. These words contain the
reason of all that precedes in the five
foregoing verses: for the very earth
being founded, upheld, and supported
by the Lord, no wonder that all the
mbhabiters of it are in His power, to
dispose of them as He thinks good.—
Patrick.

The plans of the Most High are very
different from men’s expectations. In
order to execute them He rejects the
great. While He allowed kings upon
the throne to ignore His greatest
miracle, He drew from the dust twelve
disciples, and made them the masters
of the nations, the judges of the world,
the instruments of the greatest event
which has ever taken place, the pillars
of His Church, and partakers of His
eternal empire. And He takes from
the obscurity of a peasant’s home a
poor, unknown girl, and makes her the
raother of the Highest.—Duguet.


Ver. 9. This is a lower love and
eourtesy than to keep their hands


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


G ohn xiii. 5, 6). He keepeth them
rom utter prolapsion, from devoratory
evils, as T'ertullian saith, so as that
either they fall not at all—stumble
they may, but they get ground by their
stumbling—or if they fall, they shall
arise ; for the Lord putteth under His
hand (Psa. xxxvii. 24). There is still
® supporting grace, below which they
cannot possibly fall... . . Augustine,
striving against his headstrong corrup-
tions in his own strength, heard a voice
saying, “Thou would’st stand by thy-
self, and therefore fallest.”— Trapp.

As Jehovah, the God of Israel, the
Holy One governs the world with His
almighty power, the righteous have
nothing to fear. But the wicked will
perish in darkness—4. ¢., in adversity,
when God withdraws the light of His
grace, so that they fall into distress
and calamity. For no man can be
strong through his own power so as to
meet the storms of life.—J/’e7l,

God keeps the feet of His people.
1. By the prevention of sinful and evil
occasions, so in that He does not so
easily suffer them to come within the
compass of ruin and spiritual destruc-
tion. 2. By fortifying and strengthen-
ing the heart and mind against closing
with them, so that though occasions
be administered, yet they shall have
no power or efficacy upon them. He
does this both by the grace of fear and
by the grace of faith. God, by stirring
up in His servaats a holy tenderness
and jealousy over themselves, does by
this means very much scare them, who,
by fearing lest they should sin, do
come to avoid sinning itself. And
faith is another supporter likewise. It
lays hold upon all the promises of
assistance and strengthening which
God has made to His servants, such
as this now here in the text, therefore
it is said, “ We are kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation ”


(1 Pet. i. 5). By the power of God as
the principal. And by faith as the
instrumental. We may likewise take


the words in reference to temporal

things. 1. God will bless His saints

in their ways, not only for the pre-

serving of their souls from sin, but the
37


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





preserving of their bodies from destruc-
tion. He that will keepthe feet'certainly
will not be wanting to the breast and
head. He namesthe feet, that from them
we might rise higher to all the rest. 2.
He will biess them in regard to their
works. There is a blessing upon a
righteous hand whatsoever it be that
he undertakes. As a blessing of pro-
tection upon his person, so a blessing
of success upon his labour and constant
employment. . . As there is a
difference between the wicked and. the
godly, in regard of their disposition,
80 is there likewise in regard of their
condition. 1. It is a state of dark-
ness. (a). In the ignorance of their
minds. (6). In the inordinancy of
their affections—malice shades the
mind, and so any other unruly passion.
(c). In the practice of all other sins
whatsoever, forasmuch as they seek
the dark for the commission of them.
(4). In that spiritual blindness to
which they are delivered and given up.
This is the darkness of the way, there
is also the darkness of the end—the
darkness of death, which is common to
all, and the darkness of judgment. 2.
It isastate of silence. (a). Grief, horror,
aud perplexity shall seize upon them.
Silence is an attendant upon grief and
astonishment in their extremities,
(6). It is a note of conviction, they
shall have nothing to say for them-
selves. (c). It is a note of abode and
continuance. It does denote the im-
movableness and irrecoverableness of
their miserable condition.—Horten,

The title, saints, is of all names the
most honourable. It literally signifies
the holy ones. It associates the servant
of God with his Maker, “ whose name is
holy,” with his Redeemer, “the Holy
One of Israel,” and with “the Holy
Ghost,” not to mention those holy ones
who veil their faces before His throne.
—Jowett.


Ver. 10. Here Hannah casts a pro-
phetic glance at the consummation of
the kingdom of God. As certainly as
the Lord God keeps the righteous at
all times, and casts down the wicked,
so certainly will He judge the whole

38


BOCK L





world, to hurl down all His foes and
perfect His kingdom whicn tHe aa
founded in Israel. -And as every king-
dom culminates in its throne, or in the
full might and government of a king,
so the kingdom of God can only attain
its full perfection in the king whom
the Lord will give to His people and
endow with His might. The Anointed’
of the Lord, of whom Hannah pro-
phesies in the spirit, is not one single
king of Israel, either David or Christ,
but an ideal king, though not a mere
personification of the throne about to
be established, but the actual king
whom Israel received in David and his
race, which culminated in the Messiah.
The exaltation of the horn of the
Anointed of Jehovah commenced with
the victorious and splendid expansion
of the power of David, was repeated
with every victory over the enemies af
God and His kingdom gained by the
successive kings of David’s house, goas
on in the advancing spread of the king-
dom of Christ, and will ovantaalee
attain to its eternal consummation in
the judgment of the last day, through
which all the enemies of Christ will be
made His footstvol.— Keil.

Hannah’s devout acknowledgment
that God only is the Rock, and that it
is the sole prerogative of God to raise
up princes and to give them strength,
stands in striking contrast to the people
of Israel, who impatiently asked for a
king to judge them like the nations,
and to go out before them, and to
Sight their battles (chap. viii. 5-20),
instead of waiting patiently God’s time,
and instead of rejoicing in their privi-
lege in not being like the nations, but
in being the special people of God,
and instead of relying upon His Al-
mighty arm to save them from their
enemies. She is the first who addresseg
God as the “Lord of Hosts” (see
chap. i. 11), a title which emphatically
declares the sovereignty of the Unseen
Ruler of the world; and in this also,
by her faith in Him, she stands in
contrast with the faithless impatience
of the peovle of Israel who asked
Samuel to make them a visible head.
The king of whem Hannah prophesies


OHAP. IL.


is “ His king,” a king by whom the
Lord shall judge the ends of the earth,
not the king craved by the people on
mere worldly considerations, but the
King to be appointed by God, in His
own time, and a figure of Christ of
whom Jehovah speaks by David (Psa.
ii. 6; lxxii. 1) to whom all judgment
is given, and who will put all enemies
under His feet (John v. 22-27; 1 Cor.
xv. 25-28).— Wordsworth.

The judgment of God’s primitive
justice. 1. Whom it threatens—the
ungodly, “adversaries.” 2. How God
makes it approach with warning signs,
“out of heaven shall He thunder.”
3. How it discharges itself against all
the world that is opposed to God.
“The Lord shall judge the ends of the
earth.” 4. How it promotes the per-
fecting of His kingdom. “ He shall
give strength unto His king.”—Lange’s
Commentary.


Vers. 1-10. The Magnificat of
Hannah is an evangelical song, chanted
by the spirit of prophecy under the
Levitical Law. It is a prelude and
overture to the Gospel. It is a con-
nection of sweet and sacred melody
between the Magnificat of Miriam
after the passage of the Red Sea—sym-
bolising the death, burial, and resur-
rection of Christ,—and the Magnificat
of Mary after the annunciation of His
birth. Let this song of Hannah be
read in the Septuagint, and then the
Magnificat in St. Luke’s original, and
the connection of the two will be more
clearly recognised. . . . The true cha-
racteristic of sacred poetry is that it is
not egotistical. It merges the indivi-
dual in the nation and in the Church
universal. It looks forward from the
special occasion that prompts the utte-
rance of thanksgiving, and extends and
expands itself, with a loving power and
holy energy, into a large and sympa-
thetic outburst of praise to God for His
love to all mankind in Christ. . . ..
The Magnificat of Hannah is conceived
in this spirit. It is not only a song of
thanksgiving, it is also a prophecy. It
is an utterance of the Holy Ghost
moving within her, and making her


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY; SAMUEL.


——


maternal joy on the birth of Samuel te
overflow in outpourings of thankful-
ness to God for those greater blessings
in Christ, of which that birth was an
earnest and a pledge. In this respect
it may be compared to the Song of
Moses (Deut. xxxii.) and the Song of
David (2 Sam, xxii.)— Wordsworth.
The history leaves us no room to
doubt that the immediate occasion of
this song was the birth of Samuel;
yet, if viewed in reference to this occa-
sion alone, how comparatively trifling
is the theme! How strained and mag-
niloquent the expressions! Hannah
speaks of her “mouth being enlarged
over her enemies,” of ‘‘ the bows of the
mighty men being broken,” of “the
barren bearing seven,” of “the full
hiring themselves for bread,” and other
things of a like nature,—all how far
exceeding, and we might even say cari-
caturing the occasion, if it has respect
merely to the fact of a woman, hitherto
reputed barren, becoming at length the
joyful mother of a child. Were the
song an example of the inflated style
not uncommon in Eastern poetry, we
might not be greatly startled at such
grotesque exaggerations ; but being a
portion of that Word which is all given
by inspiration of God, and is as silver
tried in a furnace, we must banish from
our mind any idea of extravagance and
conceit. Indeed, from the whole strain
and character of the song, it is evident
that, though occasioned by the birth of
Samuel, it was so far from having ex-
clusive reference to that event, that
the things concerning it formed one
only of a numerous and important
class pervading the providence of God,
and closely connected with His highest
purposes. In a spiritual respect it was
a time of mournful barrenness and
desolation in Israel: “the word of
the Lord was precious, there was no
open vision,” and iniquity was so
rampant as even to be lifting up its
insolent front, and practising its fov’
abominations in the very precincts of
the sanctuary. How natural, then,
for Hannah, when she had got that
child of desire and hope, which she had
devoted from his birth as a Nazarite to
89


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK L


I A a A SR ee UN SS


the Lord’s service, and feeling her soul
moved by a prophetic impulse to regard
herself as specially raised up to be “a
sign and a wonder” in Israel, and to
do so particularly in respect to that
principle in the Divine government
which had so strikingly developed itself
in her experience, but which was de-
stined to receive its grandest mani-
festation in the work and kingdom
which were to be more peculiarly the
Lord’s. Hence, instead of looking ex-
clusively at her individual case, and
marking the operation of the Lord’s
hand in what simply concerned her
personal history, she wings her flight
aloft, and takes a comprehensive survey
of the general scheme of God ; noting
especially, as she proceeds, the work-


°


ings of that pure and gracious sove-


reignty which delights to exalt a
humble piety, while it pours contempt
on the proud and rebellious. And as
every exercise of this principle is but
part of a grand series which culminates
in the dispensation of Christ, her song
runs out at the close into the sublime
and glowing delineation of the final
results to be achieved by it in connec-
tion with His righteous administration.
This song, then, plainly consists of two
parts, in the one of which only—the
concluding portion—it is properly pro-
phetical, The preceding stanzas are
taken up with unfolding from past and
current events, the grand spiritual
idea ; the closing ones carry it forward
in beautiful and striking application te
the affairs of Messiah’s kingdom.—
Fairbairn,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH, —Verses 12—17,


Tue Sin or Exi’s Song,


I, Natural birth is not a qualification for spiritual service.
The sons of sailors and


fit men for some professions.


Tt does seem to
soldiers often seem to be


born with tendencies towards the profession of their forefathers, and very early
give proof that they are intended by nature to enter a service which re requires
1


natural gifts tor its right fulfilment,


which fit them to be moral leaders and
possess the natural gifts which belong to
law must be brought to exert its influenc


succeed his parent in spiritual service.


merely because he is his son, it is a tran


and must eud in evil. If birth and


succeed their father.
kingdom stood higher than Eli,


But men do not inherit qu
spiritual guides. It is not enough to


fications


holy progenitors, another and a higher


€ upon a man’s heart before he is fit to
If he succeeds to his father’s position
sgression of the law of God’s kingdom
blood and time-honoured custom could
qualify men for a moral service, then Eli’s sons would


have been fully fitted to


They were born to a good social position—no man in the
They belonged to a family peculiarly honoured


by God—no human being ever held a higher spiritual position than’ the High-


priest of Israel.


They could trace back their relationship to Moses, that man
of God, whose name had for generations justly held


the highest place in the


history of his nation and was destined to become one of the most honoured in
the kingdom of God. They were in this respect ‘“‘ Hebrews of the Hebrews ?—
members of its most honoured family—born representatives of the nation of


which God was, in a special sense, the invisible king.
They “knew not the Lord” and therefore they


unfit for their important office,


et they were utterly


were His enemies although they were Eli’s sona
II. When men thus throw away all the advantages of birth and education,


they generally become sinvers of a double dye.


Although godliness does not


come by inheritance there is everything in a pious ancestry to favour its growth.
The swimmer who finds himself in the stream with both wind and tide in his
favour to second his efforts, is doubly to blame if he neglects to use his advan-
tages, ad dies by his own deliberate choice if he throws away the opportunity


OHAP. 11. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





he had of gaining the shore. Though time and tide waited not for him, yet
they waited wpon him, and he is verily guilty if he refused to take advantage of
them. Some are born into this world to find themselves surrounded with social
and spiritual influences which, like favourable winds and tides, wait to make the
road to godliness easy to them. If they neglect to avail themselves of these
good gifts of God they must become sinners of the blackest type, for they
harden their hearts against the most softening influence, they sin against light
and knowledge. ‘Thus did the sons of Eli. ‘They were launched into life upon
a stream whose current was flowing towards that which was pure and holy—they
were surrounded by influences which tended to make them worthy to be priests
of the Most High God and true sons of Abraham. But they cast them all
aside, and not only did not become spiritually fit for their service, but grew
mto monsters of iniquity, and turned the very tabernacle of God into a home
of the grossest sin.


III. No bond arising from social position or rank is strong enough to
prevent the manifestation of the sin which is in the heart. A tree may at
present seem to be in a healthy condition, but if there is that in the root beneath
the ground that is enough to kill the tree, nothing can prevent the fact from
becoming evident in that part of the tree which is above the surface. Leaves
and branches will, bye-and-bye, tell the tale. Nature is a symbol, and an
expounder of moral truth in this matter as in many others. There is nothing
morally bad that is hidden in a man’s heart that will not manifest itself in his
life, though his reputation and his rank call upon him to conceal it. The secret
sin will ere long become too strong to continue secret, although loss of position and
influence may be the result of its beimg made public. Social prestige 1s a garment
too narrow to conceal from view the hidden man of the heart, however desirable
it may be to do so. If the tree is corrupt, the fruit will be corrupt also (Matt.
xii. 33). Eli’s sons had every temporal advantage to gain from preserving an
outward decency of conduct—they must have been fully aware that only by so
doing could they command in any degree the respect which was usually accorded
to men in their position. But sin in the human heart is like pent-up water,
which after being held back for a time rushes forth with a force that breaks
down every dam, and sweeps away every obstacle, and carries desolation where-
ever it goes. Even the restraint of the office of the priesthood was not strong
enough to hold back Hophni and Phinehas from the grossest crimes, and their
lust and greed broke down every social barrier, and spread moral desolation all
around them.


IV. Those who are both irreverent and licentious poison human nature in
its highest and lowest relations. ‘I'he sin of licentiousness is a sin against
the animal part of man; it defiles his body, and causes the race to degenerate
physically. It makes all animal ties, which are intended to bring blessings to
men, sink below those of the brute creation. The Lord is for the body (1 Cor.
vi. 13), and He has proved that He cares for man’s physical well-being by the
strictness with which He has fenced him round in this respect. He who
transgresses God’s laws in this matter poisons the source of man’s physical
well-being, and degrades his nature below the lowest animal. A river, while it
flows within its appointed channel, carries fertility and beauty wherever it goes,
but when it bursts its banks it obliterates all the beauty of the landscape, and
spreais destruction all around. So with men’s animal passions. While they
keep within the limits prescribed for them they are instruments of enjoyment
and of blessing, but when the boundary is broken down and they flow
beyond their lawful channel, they leave ailing but a curse behind them. Eli’s
sons were guilty of thus defiling the boay, and by so doing they poisoned one of
the ordained streams of social blessing in their own families and in that of many

41


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK L


pT


others in Israel. They were also guilty of the grossest irreverence, and in this they


sinned against man’s hicher* nature,


the mind all conceptions of the holines
the place in which they committed the


Their conduct tended to dislodge from
s and purity of God. This they did by
ir most open crimes. The hospital is the


place where men hope to receive healing medicine. If those who are expected


to dispense remedies give poisonous


sick turn for help? The house of God is the place


drugs instead of healing, where shall the


where men ought to find


that which will conduce to moral health. If there they find only moral corrup:
tion, where shall they look? What higher crime can men be guilty of than


that of turning the house of spiritual healing into a moral pest-house.
sons of Eli have been guilty than that


greater act of irreverence could the


Of what


whereby they corrupted the chastity of the women who frequented the


tabernacle? They also tended to low
His service.


er men’s conception of God by profaning
If a man constantly takes the name of God upon his lips in a light


and careless manner he educates those about him to think lightly of the Divine
Being. This is a tribute that a child of the wicked one is expected to pay to


his father the devil, that thereby the name of the holy God


may be lightly


esteemed in the world. But if profanity of speech tends to dishonour God in
the minds of men, much more does profanity of action. The sons of Eli were
profane doers, and were therefore profane in a manner more calculated to pro-


uce irreverence in others than


men of profane speech merely, aa
c


took God’s name in vain in their actions, and despised the holy name by whi
they were called by despising the offerings which were wade to God according


to His appointment,


By open disobedience to God’s plain command, by robbing


the Lord, and by robbing those who came to worship Him, those whose special
function it was to hallow Him before the nation caused His offering to be
abhorred. It is treason to speak or act against the king in any part of his


dominion, but to defy him
aggravated form of the crime,


in his throne-room would surely be the most
The whole earth is the Lord’s, and to act with


irreverence towards Him in any part of His dominion is a sin, but to profane
His holy ordinances in the palace of the Great King, is a sin of the blackest


hue. The bo
and faithful
servants ?


service; if it betray its


dy-guard of a monarch is especially bound to render him loyal
trust, where is he to look for faithful
God’s ministers in all ages are the body-guard of the Eternal King ;


if they prove themselves renegades and unworthy of the high honour that He
has ae upon them, others will find in their unfaithfulness a licence to set Him
at


efiance,


(For a


parallel case in the modern history of the Church, see
Froude’s “ Annals of an English Abbey.” i


“Short Studies,” vol. iii).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 12. So were Jehoshua the
high-priest’s sons (Ezra x. 18). Their
parents, much employed about other
things, are oft not so careful of well-
breeding their children ; and besides,
they are apt to abuse their father’s
authority and power to a licentious
pene Eli brought up his sons to

ring down his house. They knew not

the Lord. Apprehensively they knew

Him, but not affectively ; they had no

lively light, their knowledge was not
49


accompanied with faith and fear of
God (Rom. i 21; Titus i. 16).—
Trapp.

If the conveyance of grace were
natural, holy parents would not be so
ill suited with children. . , . . It
virtue were as well entailed on us a3
sin, one might serve to check the
other in our children ; but now, since
grace is derived from heaven on whom
soever it coast the Giver, and that
evil, which ours receive hereditarily


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





from us, is multiplied by their own
corruption, it can be no wonder that
good men have ill children ; itis rather
a wonder that any children are not
evil, . . . If our children be good,
let us thank God for it; this was more
than we could give them ; if evil, they
may thank us and themselves, us for
their birth sin, themselves for the im-
provement of it to that height of
wickedness.— Bishop Hall.


Ver. 15. God may well call for the
best of the best; but these liquorish
Lurcos would needs be served before
Him and be their own carvers. Boiled
meat would not content them. But it
ill becometh a servant of the Lord to
be a slave to his palate. Christ biddeth
His apustles, when they come into a
house, ‘“‘eat such things as are set
before them.” —TZrapp.


Ver. 17. It hath been an old saying,
De templo omne bonum, de templo omne
malum—all good or evil comes from
the temple.—Chrysostom. Where the
pastor is good, and the people good, he
may say to them, as Paul to his Corin-
thians, “Are ye not my work in the
Lord?” (1 Cor. ix.1) Where the pas-
tor is bad, and the people no better,
they may say to him, Art thou not our
destruction in the world? It is no
wonder if an abused temple makes a
disordered people. <A wicked priest is
the worst creature upon God’s earth ;
no sin is so black as that shall appear
from under a white surplice. Every
man’s iniquity isso much the heinouser
as his place is holier. The sin of the
clergy is like a rheum, which, rising
from the stomach into the head, drops
down upon the lungs, fretting the most
noble and vital parts, till all the mem-
bers languish into corruption. ‘The
lewd sons of Eli were so much the
less tolerable by sinning in the taber-
nacle. ‘Uheiz sacrifices might do away
the sins of others; no sacrifice could
do away their own, Many a soul was
the cleaner for the blood of those beasts
they shed; their own souls were the
fouler by it. By one and the same
service they did expiate the people's


offences and multiply their own, Out
clergy is no charter for heaven. Such
men are like the conveyances of land :
evidences and instruments to settle
others in the kingdom of heaven, while
themselves have no part of that they
convey. It is no impossible thing for
men at once to show the way to heaven
with their tongue, and lead the way to
hell with their foot. It was not a Jewish
ephod, it is not a Romish cowl that can
privilege an evil-doer from punishment.
Therefore it was God’s charge to the
executioners of His judgment, “ Begin
at mine own sanctuary ” (Ezek. ix. 6) ;
and the apostle tells us that “judg-
ment shall begin at the house of God”
(1 Pet. iv. 17); and Christ, entering
into His prophetical office, began refor-
mation at His Father’s house (John
ii, 15). Let our devout and holy
behaviour prevent this, and by our
reverent carriage in the temple of God
let us honour the God of the temple.
.... If Christ, while he was upon
the cross, saith Bernard, had given me
some drops of His own blood in a vial,
how carefully would I have kept them,
how dearly esteemed them, how laid
them next my heart. But now He did
not think it fit to trust me with
those drops, but He hath entrusted
to me a flock of His lambs, those
souls for whom He shed His blood,
like whom His own blood was not
so dear unto Him; upon these let
me spend my care, my love, my
labour, that I may present them holy
saints to my dear Lord Jesus. But let
Christians beware, lest, for the abuses
of men they despise the temple of God.
For as the altar cannot sanctify the
priest, so neither can the unholiness of
the priest disallow the altar. Hissin is
his own, and cannot make you guilty ;
the virtue and comtort is from God,
and. this is still able to make you holy.
When we read that “the sin of the
priests was great before the Lord, for
men abhorred the offering of the
Lord,” this, we all confess, was ill done
of the priests, and I hope no man thinks
it was well done of the people. Shall
men, therefore, scorn the sanctuary,
and cast that contempt on the service


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L


(lL SI A ne TUR ed ce ee Ae
of God which belongs to the vices of must needs fall out with God?... .
men? ‘This were to add our own evil We say of the sacraments themselver,
to the evil of others, and to offend much moreof the ministers—These de
God because He was offended. Cannot not give us what God doth give us by
the faults of men displease us, but we them.—Z. Adams.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Vers, 18-21, and 26,
TrvuE Ministry.


I. Qualification for the service of God is not always on the side of years,
A child may have a more correct idea of how to serve God than a man. The
son may possess knowledge on this matter of which his parents may be pro-
foundly ignorant. This is true of other knowledge than spiritual, One who is
very young in years may far surpass his elders in his aptitude for science or art.
The youthful Watt had thoughts suggested to his mind by the phenomena of
nature such as had never occurred to the ancients who had preceded him, and
he was thus at a very early age more qualified to serve his generation in this
department of knowledge than they were. So in spiritual service. Age and
experience do not necessarily qualify men to minister acceptably before the
Lord. Hophni and Phinehas were old enough to serve God acceptably in the
priest’s office, but while they brought dishonour upon Him in the performance
of the most sacred functions, the child Samuel so performed his more humble
duties as to make them an acceptable service to Jehovah. It is not the office
which is held, but the spirit in which its duties are performed, that constitutes
the real service, and that depends not on years, but on character, and often
those who have been long nominal or even real servants of God are outstripped
in fervour and devotion by those who have entered the lists many years later.
“ Many that are first shall be last, and the last first” (Matt. xix. 30). Many
who take the lead in the first start of the race are left far behind when others
have reached the goal. Some who enter a school long before others are over-
taken and outstripped by the later comers. And it is so in the Church of God,
The sons of Eli were in the priesthood before Samuel was in the world, yet he
was far in advance of them in the possession of that “reverence and godly fear,”
without which no service to God is acceptable (Heb, xii. 28).


II. When regeneration has begun in the young and degeneration has set in
in those of mature years, the progress is commonly rapid in both, While
Samuel “grew on, and was in favour both with the Lord and also with men,”
Hophni and Phinehas hastened to fill up the measure of their iniquity. ‘The
sinful human nature which ig the inheritance of all men was common both to
Samuel and the sons of Eli, and they were both surrounded with influences
avourable to the overcoming of evil tendencies and to the formation of a holy
character. But Hophni and Phinehas strengthened every sinful natural disposition
by giving themselves up to be ruled by their passions, by utterly disregarding
the commandment of the Lord, the voice of conscience, or even their own repu-
tation. Such an entire disregard of all the restraints which God had placed
upon them made rapid degeneration inevitable, and they soon became as bad as
it was possible for fa'len men to become. But Samuel's upward growth was as
rapid as their descent. He had evidently already become a subject of the
regenerating influence of the Holy Spirit, he had yielded himself up to that
Divine guidance which is powerful enough to renew the human heart and to give
a new birth unto holiness, and so to make the path of him who is willing to be
np by it “as the shining light which shineth more and more unto the


OMAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





perfect day.” The child grewand so did themen. The one ripened for a noble
and holy and useful life, the others for the condemnation and judgment of God.


III. The most godless and the holy may be found associated in the external
service of God. Samuel and the sons of ili were both engaged in the temple
service. Samuel was “girded with a linen ephod,” and so, doubtless, were they.
Wheat and tares grow together in the same field. John and Judas sat at meat
together with the Lord. <A saint of the highest type may be associated in
external religious service with a most villanous man, they may worship in the
same house of God, may sit together at the table of the Lord. It must and
will be so until the harvest when the Lord of the field will say to the reapers,
“Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them ;
but gather the wheat into my barn” (Matt. xiii. 30).


IV. Fulfilled obligations will not discharge us from obligations yet tr be
fulfilled. Hannah had taken her child and given him to Eli for the service of
the Lord, but her loving care of him did not end there. Her heart was still
with him, and her hands still busy for him. She “made him a little coat, which
she brought to him from year to year.” The performance of past duties to God
does not free us from the obligations of the present any more than debts discharged
in the past will release us from those we may contract in thefuture. Not even
a very special work done for God, or a great sacrifice made for His service in the
past, will discharge us from the obligation to perform the commonest duties of
to-day. When Hannah had performed her vow, and dedicated her first-born
son to the Lord, and under the influence of the Holy Ghost had sung of the
coming kingdom of righteousness and of the Lord’s Anointed, she still regarded
it as her privilege and duty to care for her child’s every-day bodily wants, and
to make his garment with her own hands. She recognised the fact that if the
spirit is to serve God in the present life the body must be cared for too, even ag
did the great Apostle of the Gentiles when, looking forward to being shortly
crowned by his Lord in Paradise, he sent for his “ cloak which he left in Troas,”
that so long as he was in the flesh he might keep his body from cold and sickness,
and so continue fit to serve His Master until the end should come (2 Tim. iv.
13). Those whose hearts are right will not despise the lowliest or the most
ordinary work, or call anything that their hands find to do common or unworthy
of their notice.


V. We have here a record of Divine compensation for human sacrifice,
“The Lord blessed Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare three sons and two
daughters.” ‘I'he kingdom of nature demands sacrifices of men. The husband-
man must cast away some seed and give it up as it were to death, and he must
do this without regard to the wind or the cold. But Nature is generous when she
finds that her conditions are fulfilled, she gives an ear for a single grain, and the
joy of harvest to compensate for the toil of the sowing-time. And as it is in
God’s natural kingdom, so is it more abundantly in His spiritual kingdom. No
service rendered to Him, not “even a cup of cold water in the name of a
disciplz,” shall lose its reward. Hannah gave her firstborn son to the Lord in
the service of the temple, and her home was gladdened by five more children,
She found that God heaped into her bosom “good measure” and “running
over.” In the more spiritual dispensation of the New ‘Testament men must not
look for, nor do spiritual men desire such a repayment in the same kind, but
God will be no man’s debtor, and the word of Christ is sure: “ And every one
that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or Sather, mother, or wife, or
children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall recewe an hundredfold, and shall
inherit everlasting life” (Matt, xix. 29). .


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK L





OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 18. Samuel did not merely
worship and enjoy spiritual training ;
he ministered before the Lord, and did
what he could to make himself useful.
“Perhaps,” says Matthew Henry, “he
attended immediately on Eli’s person—
was ready to him to fetch and bring as
he had occasion; and that is called
ministering to the Lord..... He
could light a candle, or hold a dish, or
run on an errand, or shut a door; and
because he did this with a pious dis-
position of mind, it is called ministering
to the Lord, and great notice is taken
of it.” We have not now a tabernacle
such as there was in Shiloh, nor have
we such services as Samuel was called
upon to render; but in the Church of
God there is sphere wide enough for
the most active energy, diversified
enough for many workers, and simple
enough for the youngest to under-
take .... Common obedience and
everyday life, too, receive a consecra-
tion from the godly motive. Children,
by their infant prayers, have ere now
awakened a parent’s long silent heart.
. . . An infant’s hymn has awakened
the hardened, and the example of a
believing boy has occasioned an older
mind to inquire, “ What must I do to
be saved ?”—Steel.


Ver. 19. This was much in Samuel’s
education. It nurtured the family
feeling, the loss of which is a great
deprivation. It kept his heart tender,
when amidst strangers his feelings
might be blunted. It provided for
him that he might not be reproached.
—Steel.

“ Petty little histories!” cries Un-
belief. ‘What matters it whether one
knows that Samuel had a little coat
or no?” Holy Scripture is not written
for the wise, but for child-souls, and
a child-like soul does not doubt that
even the little coat which Hannah
prepared for her Samuel has its his-
tory. If I think of Hannah as every
year sewing this coat at her home in
Ramah, I know that at every stitch
a prayer for her Samuel rose up
to the throne of the Lord. The
coat which she was sewing would re-
mind her that she had given him to
the Lord; and when the coat was
ready, and she brought it to Shiloh,
then every time with the coat she
anew gave Samuel to her God, and
said, “I give him to the Lord again
for his whole life, because he was
obtained from the Lord by prayer.”—
Daechseb.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Vers, 22-28,
Exr’s REPRoor or wis Sons,


I. Impartiality is an essential qualification in a judge or ruler. Some sing
against Divine laws are to be dealt with by human rulers. Magistracy is an
ordination of God, and in proportion as the character of him who administers
the law is good, and the law itself is just, human judges are reflections of God,
and represent Him who will not acquit the guilty, and will defend the innocent,
But, above all things, be who holds such an office must be impartial. Eli, as
the judge of Israel, was bound to imitate God in this particular, as in all others,
No man can be honoured by his fellow-creatures unless he deals out evenhanded
justice to all to whom he administers law, and the man who will allow rank, or
position, or relationship to influence his judgment is no representative of Him
who will render to all their dues. A man should be specially guarded when
called upon to pass sentence or administer justice to one who is connected with
him by the ties of blood or friendship. Such a medium has a tendency to
distort our sense of right and wrong—to lead us to excuse the crime
with oh we should deal severely ina stranger. What we should look


OGal. Ti. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





upon as pure villany in the one we may be disposed to regard as mer
misfortune in the other. It needs a veh higher standard of ta
than that possessed by Eli to deal out the rightful measure of punishment to
those who are nearly connected with us. The goodness and integrity of
God leads Him to adopt a course directly opposite to that which men
generally pursue in such a case. He punishes with greater rigour in proportion
as the offender has been hitherto favoured and brought into near relation to Him.
We have reason to believe that few of the sons of God stood nearer the Eternal
throne than Satan. And because it was so, his punishment has been severe in
proportion, the hell into which he was banished was deep in proportion to the
place in heaven from which he fell. No people of ancient days stood in such
near and intimate relation to God as did the people of Israel. Yet for this very
reason no nation has received such severe punishment for transgression. “ You
only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities” (Amos iii. 2). God, being the perfectly righteous
judge and governor, is the Being whose example should be followed by all human
magistrates, and the prominent feature in God’s magistracy is His strict impar-
tiality. If Eli had imitated God in this respect he would have dealt very
differently with his abandoned sons. But he looked at their crimes through
the medium of his fatherly relationship, and this medium so softened down the
blood-red stains upon their characters that when, as the first magistrate of Israel,
he ought to have sentenced them to death or at least to have excommunicated
them from office, he contents himself with a very tame remonstrance. He
touches them gently with the back of the sword, whereas if a Moses or such a
man as the first Phinehas had been in his place, he would have thrust the blade
into them up to the very hilt (Num. xxv. 6-11). His stern rebuke of Hannah
for a fancied crime shows that he could be severe, in speech at least, upon
occasions, and the contrast even in the words used to the unoffending woman
and those in which he reproved his sons, makes him stand convicted of gross
impartiality, and therefore as lacking the most essential qualification of a
magistrate.


II, Men who are merely emotional are fit neither to govern men nor to
train children. Honey is good for man’s eating, and contains some nutriment
and also healing properties. But honey alone would be a poor sustainer or
nourisher of human life. Wax is a useful material for some purposes, but it
would be poor material of which to build a house. ‘To feed upon the first would
be to make sickness certain; to build with the second would be to ensure the
fall of the house. Emotions have their place in the human soul, and a man
destitute of feeling is a monster; but feelings are not to be the guide of human
conduct, and the judge or the father who is swayed entirely by his emotions will
in time forfeit all respect and confidence. Tenderness and gentleness are blessed
and Divine attributes of character, but mere softness and inertness must not be
mistaken for them; and where they really exist there is no lack of capability for
righteous indignation, no want of will to administer deserved rebuke. Eli’s
failure in his duty as a judge leads us to infer that he had been a too indulgent
father—that which unfitted him to deal justly with his grown sons would have
unfitted him to train them in childhood. Contrast the tender and long-suffering
Son of God with the soft-hearted Eli, and place the reproof of the high priest
side by side with our Lord’s denunciations of similar characters holding a like
position, and we see how the tenderest compassion is compatible with the most
terrible denunciation of sin. “ Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites !
.... Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of
hell?” etc.—(Matt. xxiii. 23-35).

III. There are sins beyond the power of human intercession. Even Eli

47


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book 4,


eT ee


allowed this (ver. 25). Men have committed and do commit certain sins, and
other men have interceded and do intercede for them and obtain their pardon.
This is the case where sins are committed against other men, and sometimes
when sin is committed against God. God Himself has accepted human
mediation, and has held back His judgments. This He did often in the case of
Moses and the people of Israel. Many a time He spared the sinful nation
because the voice of His servant pleaded for them. But sometimes no inter-
cession of man can avert Divine displeasure—no human creature can prevent
the thunderbolt of God’s judgment from falling. Noah, Daniel, and Job were
men who were highly esteemed by God, and whose prayers on behalf of others are
—in the case of two at least—known to have been effectual (Job xl. 8 ; Dan.
ix. 20, 23). But, if they had all lived in the days of Ezekiel, their joint inter-
cessions could not have saved the guilty Israelites from the chastisement which
their sins had made inevitable—“ Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and
Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
saith the Lord God” (Ezek. xiv. 14). The sins of Hophni and Phinehas were so
outrageously vile, and their position and office so aggravated their crimes that
they were beyond the power of human intercession. No prayer of Eli, not
even the prayers of a Noah, a Daniel, or a Job, could now have turned away the
judgment of God from them. The father seems to feel that he cannot ask
forgiveness for them in their present state of heart—he exhibits some conception
of the enormity of their crimes when he says, “If a man sin against the Lord,
who shall entreat for him?” It was his right and privilege to draw nigh to
God on behalf of others, but the iniquity of his sons was so great, that his very
position as high-priest forbade his pleading that God would pass over their sins.


IV. When sinners are beyond the reach of intercession and marked for
Divine punishment, they will not repent. The people of Sodom were in such
a condition. Intercession for them could not avail, because they were so
hardened in sin that repentance had become a moral impossibility. Even after
God had stricken them with blindness they persisted in endeavouring to
perpetrate their enormous wickedness, thus roving that neither the persuasions
of men, nor the judgments of God, could lead them to repentance. Eli’s sons
were as great sinners, for if their crimes were not quite so black, they were
committed against Divine light and holy influences such as were not possessed
by the men of Sodom. Where could stronger inducements to repentance be
found than those which they had set at nought? How could men be led to
repentance who turned the very house of God into a house of shameless crime ?
Before the executioner brings the sharp steel to the neck, he blindfolds the
culprit. These men had blindfolded themselves by their persistent iniquity,
and nothing now could prevent God’s axe from falling.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 23. Had these men but some
little slackened their duty, or heed-
lessly omitted some rite of the sacrifice,
this censure had not been unfit; but
to punish the thefts, rapines, sucrileges,
adulteries, incests of his sons with
“Why do ye so,” was no other than to
shave the head which had deserved
cutting off... . An easy rebuke doth
but encourage wickedness, and makes
it think itself so slight aa that censure

48


importeth, A vehement rebuke to a
capital evil is but like a strong shower
to a ripe field, which lays that corn
which were worthy of a sickle. It is
a breach of justice not to proportionate
the punishment to the offence: to
whip a man for murder, or to punish
the purse for incest, or to burn treason
in the hand, or to award the stocks to
burglary, is to patronise evi) inatead of
avenging it.— Bp. Hall.


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





Ver 24 Too mild all along. He
should have said as Isa. lvii. 3, 4,
*“Draw near hither, ye sons of the sor-
ceress,” etc., ye degenerate brood and
sons of Belial and not of Eli. ean
He should have said, “ Woe is me that
I live to hear it; it had been better
that I had died long since, or that you
had been buried alive, than thus to
live to stink above ground.” But he
saith only, “I hear ill of you by all
the people,” as if he went only upon
hearsay, and were put on by the
people thus to check them.—T app.


Ver. 25. The duties which men are
required to perform in society are two-
fold, they owe duties to their brethren,
they owe duties to God; or rather,
considered in a Christian light, every
one of our social duties, as it should be
performed on a religious principle, so
should it be considered of a religious
character. ‘“ Whatsoever we do, we
should do all to the glory of God.”
The mind of man, however, is so gross
that it is necessary for the sanctions of
religion to be seconded by the authority
of human laws in enforcing the ob-
servance of our social and moral duties.
Not only, therefore, is the wrath of
God denounced against the sinner for
his offences, every one of which isa
violation of God’s authority, but “if a
man sin against another, the judge also
judges him”—he is amenable also to
that human authority which he has
despised. Still, after all that can be
done by man’s interference, after all
the severity of punishment which men
can inflict upon the offender to deter
others from a like offence, it is the
anger of God which is most to_be
avoided, it is the punishment of God
which is most to be dreaded. Com-
paratively trifling should be our fear
of them “which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul;” for com-
paratively feeble is their vengeance,
and comparatively light and transitory
is the punishment which they can in-
flict; but our fear of the Divine wrath
should, if possible, be great in propor-
tion to the greatness of the power of
Him “who is able to destroy both

E





body and soul in hell.” — Bishop
Mant.

I read not in the Scripture of a
hypocrite’s conversion, and what won-
der? For whereas after sin couversion
is left as a means to cover all other
sins, what means to recover him who
hath converted conversion itself into a
sin ?— Trapp.

“The Lord would slay them!” It
is a dreadful sentence, and we would
fain know of whom it was uttered. It
is spoken of particular persons and not
generally. of the sons of a
priest, brought up amidst holy things
from their childhood. . . . What
more could have been done unto the
vineyard? What greater means of
knowledge, what better opportunities
of being impressed with a sense of
God’s majesty and holiness could
possibly have been granted them? But
these means and opportunities had
been neglected, till what was food at
first was now their poison. They had
gained such a habit of seeing and
hearing holy things unmoved that
nothing could possibly work on them.
It is probable that every fresh service
which they performed about the taber-
nacle did but harden them more and
more. How, then, could they hearken
to the voice of their father, a kind old
man indeed, and a good one, but one
with none of that vigour of character
which commands respect, even from the
evil. Were his words of gentle rebuke
likely to move those hearts which for
years had served every day in the pre-
sence of God, and had felt, neither fear
for Him nor love of Him. Vain was
it to hope that such hearts should be
so renewed to repentance. ‘The seal
of destruction was set on them but too
plainly ; the Lord would slay them ;
the laws of His providence, His un-
changed and unchangable providence,
had decrezd that their case was hope-
less; for they had hardened their
hearts greedily all their lives, and their
work was now set so sure that they
could not undo it, because they could
not now wish it to be undone.— Lr,
Arnold.

The purpose of God was not the

49


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK ©





cause of their disobedience, but their
disobedience was a sign that they were
now ripe for destruction, and that the
righteous purposes of God in their case
should now soon be executed.—Starke.

They were in a state of inner hard-
ening, which excluded the subjective
condition ofsalvation from destruction,
and so they had already incurred
God’s unchangable condemnation. As
hardened offenders they were already
appointed by God to death ; therefore
the word of instruction had no moral
effect upon them.—Lange’s Commen-
tary.

God is more honoured or dishonoured
in our religious actions than in all the
actions of our lives; in them we do
directly pretend His honour and ser-
vice, and therefore if we do not walk
in them watchfully, and intend them
seriously, the greater is oursin. Fora
trespass committed against holy things
the Jews were to bring a ram, to be
valued by the shekel, to the sanctuary ;
for a trespass against their brethren a
ram was required, but no such valua-
tion expressed; whence Origen infers :
“Tt is one thing to sin in holy things,
another thing to sin beside them.” . ,
When men are some way off in a king’s


eye they will be comely in their
carriage ; but when they come into his
presence-chamber to speak with him
they will be most careful. . . . God ig
very curious how men carry themselves
in His courts. ... Do but observe,
under the law, how choice He was
about all things relating to His wor-
ship: the tabernacle must be made of
the best wood, the purest gold, the
finest linen, etc. . . . And what is the
substance of all these shadows, but
this, that God will be served by holy
men, in the purest, holiest manner? . . .
Dost thou not know that He “will be
sanctified in them that draw nigh unto
Him ?” (Lev. x. 3). Great persons are
impatient of contempts and affronts,
especially when they are offered them
in their own houses; God will sooner
overlook thy forgetfulness of Him in
thy trade or travels than in His taber-
nacle. When thou drawest nigh to
Him there, He will be sanctified, either
in thee or upon thee. If thou refuse
to give Him glory in His service, be-
lieve it, He will get Himself glory by
thy suffering. His worship is His face,
and look for His fury if thou darest
Him to His face.—Swinnock.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF VERSE 37,


A Divine MEssEnGER.


I, This remarkable messenger was a nameless person.


of God unto Eli.”


“There came a man


All the prominent stars that stud our skies, and contribute


their portion of light to the inhabitants of earth, are known to astronomers by
name, but there are others that are so far off as not to admit of distinction, and
we group them under some general designation : yet each one of these far-off


bodies sheds some light upon us, nameless as it is.


There are records in the


holy Scriptures of many nameless persons, who, notwithstanding the little that
is told about them, have been used by God to shed upon men the light of His truth,
We yroup them together, like a cluster of far-off stars, under the general title of
“men of God,” and all we know of their individual character or history we gather
from the message which they delivered, and which has been left upon record to shed
@ permanent light upon the world. But although we cannot tabulate and name
all the myriad stars of heaven, those which are left unnamed by men are known


by name to their Creator.

80 it is with those human
fellow-men.
to all who


“ He calleth them all by names” (Isa. xl. 26). And
light-givers whose names are
Although this man of God remains

read his words, yet he was and is known and named by


not known to their
unknown by name


His Divine Master, who called him to His work, and has long since rewarded


him for it And ag those
50


nameless stars may excel in magnitude


OAR, It, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





and glory many of those which, from their nearer position to us, seem to be
stars of the first magnitude, so these unnamed prophets may be as great in
God’s kingdom, and may have done as great a work in His estimation as those
whose names are left recorded upon the Divine page. And so it may be now
with many a God-sent messenger, whose name is unknown to the world, or even
to the Church—he ny be more highly esteemed by Him whose name is above
every name, and stand in much closer fellowship with Him than many a one
whose name stands high in the estimation of his fellow-Christians. But, after
all the general name includes the particular—the greater name includes all
lesser names. “ A man of God” includes all that can be said in honour of
either Isaiah the prophet.or Paul the apostle. For “a man of God,” when the
designation is not a misnomer, signifiee—1. 4 man who has got his character
from God. An Englishman when he is a true representation of his country and
nation, has the disposition and tendencies which generally characterize his
people. A child generally has some of the characteristics of his parent, because

e 1s of his parent. So a man of God is one who possesses, in some degree, a
God-like disposition, is one who is in sympathy with God, who loves what He
loves, and hates what He hates. No particular name can express more con-
cerning a man’s relation to God than does this general one. ‘‘ We are of God”
(1 John iv. 6), is as much as can be said of any human creature, for these four
words include all the blessedness of Divine sonship—all the glory of the life
everlasting. 2. In the Scripture, a man of God is one who bears a message
from God. This is a title given both to Old Testament prophets and to New
Testament ministers. “But thou, O man of God, flee these things” (1 Tim.
vi. 11). “All Scripture is given by inspiration of God . . . . that the
man of God may be perfected,” etc. (2 Tim. iii. 16,17). In both these passages
the general name includes and means more than the particular. A “man of
God” is more than Paul or Timothy—it is one who is entrusted with a message
from the Eternal for his fellow-man—one who has “received” from God
“the things which he speaks” (1 Cor. ii. 12, 13). He speaks to men of God
and for God—his life-work is that of beseeching men to be “ reconciled to God”
(2 Cor. v. 20)—his one business in the world is to declare the “message” which
he “has heard of Him,” viz., that “God ts light, and in Him is no darkness
at all” (1 Jobn i. 5).


IJ. This messenger, though nameless, has been held in much greater honour
‘y men than has the well-known house whose doom he declared. Character
ig much more important than name, and the better the deed or the word the
more easily we can dispense with the doer or the speaker. The names of Eli, of
Hoplni and Phinehas stand out prominently upon the page of Hebrew history,
but what is recorded of the high-priest and judge himself is not calculated to.
set him very high in the estimation of men—he has left little more than his
aame behind him—while those of his sons are associated only with the memory
of their crimes. The nameless prophet passes before us like a ship upon
the horizon making for her destined port. We know not whence she came
or whither she is going, but she leaves a pleasing impression upon the mind.
But Eli and his sons remain like wrecks upon the shore, whose only use is to
warn others to shun the rocks upon which they were broken.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— VERSES 27—86,


A Drvine MeEssaGe.


I. The charge. The house of Eli is charged with ingratitude, Perhaps no
greater crime a chargeable upon human nature. The slave who has nom freed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I,





the tyranny of a cruel master by the putting forth on his behalf of a strong
Te ee fe not only been thus made a partaker of liberty but who has
been clothed, and fed, and educated by the same benefactor, is expected to
manifest gratitude to him to whom he owes all that makes life worth having.
Gratitude ought to well up in his spirit like water from a living spring, and if
such a man proves ungrateful it indicates that he is destitute of all right feeling,
for he sins, not against law but against love. Ehi’s family, in common with all
the other families of Israel, had dwelt in the “house of bondage.” They had been
for many years in “ the iron furnace, even in Lgypt,” and God had delivered
them from their degraded condition and made them “@ people of inheritance
unto Himself” (Deut. iv. 20). ‘To be ungrateful to such a deliverer shows them
to be without natural feeling. But their ingratitude was aggravated by their
elevation above all the other families of the nation, “ Did / plainly appear
wnto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house £
And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest 2” This ig
the head and front of their crime. When a number of homeless children are
taken from the streets, and housed and cared for, those who rescue them have a
claim upon the gratitude of all. _ But if out of this number, one is made
the object of special care and ig selected to fill a higher position than
the rest, the ingratitude of this one will be so much greater than the
ingratitude of the others, as the benefits bestowed upon the one have been
greater than those bestowed upon the rest. Ingratitude in any would be
a sin ; but ingratitude in the one who has been especially favoured would be a
sin of deeper die. ‘The house of Aaron, of which Eli was a member, was bound
to God by the common ties of gratitude by which all Israel was bound ; but God
had claims upon them which far exceeded those of any other family of the
nation. ‘lhe members of Aaron’s family had been elected by God to the highest
ossible honour, they had been set apart to the most sacred office, and they had
ce sustained at the command of God by the offerings of the people. It was
demanded of them in return that they should show their gratitude for such
unparalleled favours by reverent obedience to God. But the conduct of those
who now represented them was of the very opposite nature, There had been
the blackest profanity instead of reverence, and those who ought to have been
examples of holiness had been promoters of vice. Ingratitude has been called
@ monster in nature, and a comparison between the privileges enjoyod by those
men, and the returns they made, convicts them of being guilty of this monstrous
crime in an aggravated form,


II. The sentence. The authority and influence of Eli’s house was to cease in
Israel. That men by misdeeds entail a tendency to sin upon their posterity ig
a fact plainly written in the history of families and the oracles of God. A bad
father generally leaves behind him bad children. This law must work unless
God reconstitutes the present order of nature and makes each man’s power ta
work good or ill to end with himself, But while there is the relationship of
parent and child this cannot be. Wherever we look we find instances in which
children are born to an inheritance of good or evil influences, and the after-life
of the greater number takes its moral tone from the character of their parents,
Hence it is that families as well as individuals merit the blessing or the punish-
ment of God. Eli had not used his own authority and influence to much
purpose, and his sons had shamefully abused that which had been entrusted te
them by God. Such men were very unlikely to be the founders of a house
which would bea blessing to Israel, therefore the sentence is directed not against
Eli and his sons only, but against their posterity. As they had dishonoured
God, so God would bring their house to dishonour. As Eli had not used his
power ae authority to prevent the defilement of the house of the Lord, he

2


OBAP. Ir. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


a ni my


shall have no power to hold back the desolation of his own. As he and his
sons had not fulfilled the conditions laid down for the observance of the priests,
their sons shall have no conditions to observe, for the priesthood shall be trans-
ferred to others. As is generally the case in the judgments of God, the nature
of the punishment bears some resemblance to the nature of the transgression.
“ He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity ; he that killeth with the
sword must be killed with the sword” (Rev. xiii. 10).


_ IIL The authority for the sentence. “Thus saith the Lord.” God’s autho-
rity to pronounce this doom upon the house of Eli springs—1. From the relation
which He sustains to men in general. God was the absolute proprietor of the
lives of these men, as He is of the life of every human creature. He, as we
have seen (see on chap. ii. 6), is the giver of life to men; to Him also belongs
the world, which He has “given to the children of men” (Ps. cxv. 16) for a
dwelling-place, and, if men abuse His good gifts, He has an absolute right to
deprive them ‘of that which He has bestowed. 2. But God had a special right
to judge the house of Eli, a right springing from the special relation to Himself
tn which He had placed them. As we have before seen, in considering the
charge, as Israelites they had been objects of His special favour, as men of the
house of Aaron they were brought into a closer relationship to God, and this
threefold obligation gave to Jehovah a threefold authority to pronounce upon
them and theirs this terrible yet deserved sentence.


IV. The principle upon which God exercises this authority over all men.
“For them that honour me I will honour,” etc. God can be known so as to be
honoured. God must be known, not only as to His existence, but as to His
vharacter, in order to be honoured. Eli and his sons had enough knowledge of
the character of Jehovah to make it possible for them to honour Him, they had
enough knowledge to make their “ lightly esteeming” Him a black transgression.
Wherever men find moral excellence they are bound to honour it, their
consciences call upon them to reverence goodness wherever it is found, and God
here lays down a law of His government that He will not hold them guiltless
who withhold from His perfect character the honour which is His due.





OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 29. “And honourest thy sons selves up to an unbridled indulgence


above me.” Choosing rather to gratify
them than to glorify me, by abdicating
them from the priesthood, Butit may
be Eli feared lest the high-priesthood
should by this means go from his
family, as it had before from Eleazar’s
for misdemeanour, which also after-
wards befell him, and he by seeking to
prevent it hastened it.— 7rapp.

The well-fed beast becomes un-
manageable and refractory, and refuses
the yoke, and bursts the bonds (Jer. v.
5, 7, 8). So the priests, instead of
being grateful for the provision made
for them, in their pampered pride
became dissatisfied, wantonly broke
the laws of God which regulated their
share of the offerings, and gave them-


of their passions and their covetous-
ness.—Liblical Commentary.

It is often easy to be exposed to this
reproach of God without being aware of
it. ‘Those who labour to spread the
light of Divine truth by publicly de-
claring it to the people certainly offer
a sacrifice which may be very accep-
table to God. But if they nourish in
their hearts a secret pride, and if they
seek in these holy services their own
glory rather than the glory of God,
they take for themselves the first-
fruits of the sacrifice. They become
the end of their action, and God is
only the means. They put the creature
betore the Creator, and this is the
greatest of all oe Sacy.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK a.


Sa SEE PAM aT i iE Went ne a 2


Ver. 30. “ Them that honour Me, I
will honour.” This isa bargainof God’s
own making ; you may bind upon it.
“And they that despise Me.” God’s
visitation 1s like chequer-work, black
and white.—TZrapp.

Never did man dishonour God but
it proved the greatest dishonour to
himself. God will find out ways
enough to wipe off any stain upon
Him ; but you will not so easily re-
move the shame and dishonour from
yourselves.—Bazter.

There are three sorts of men to be
considered with respect to the honour
due to God. I. Such as despise Him
instead of honouring Him. Such were
the sons of Eli who knew not the Lord.
Those do not know God who despise
His services. It is impossible to despise
infinite goodness, and power, and wis-
dom, for those are things which all
that know them cannot but reverence
and esteem. For a poor creature to
despise his Creator, or one that lives
upon the bounty of another to despise
his benefactor, seems to be such an in-
consistency in morality, as if human
nature were incapable of it. .... .
But although God cannot be despised
for His glorious perfections, yet His
authority may be despised when men
presumptuously break His laws—when
“they profess to know God, but in
works deny Him” (Tit. i. 16), when
they own a God, and yet live as if
there were none. II, There are such
as pretend to honour God, but do not.
Men may be guilty of dishonouring
God under a pretence of honouring
Him, by worshipping their imagina-
tions instead of Him, or by doing
honour to Him according to their own
imaginations, and not according to
His will. Persons form false concep-
tions of God, and so give their
worship to an idol of their own fancy,
and they pretend to honour Him not
according to His will, but according to
their own fancy. There are some
things practised and defended in the
Christian world, which one would hardly
think possible to have ever prevailed,
had it not been that men thought to
do honour to God by them, Itt. But

54


there is a way left to give God that
honour which is due unto Him. J
shall not take in all the ways of
honouring God, but consider that
which is most proper to the design
of these words... . It was not for
Eli’s personal miscarriages that God
thought Himself so dishonoured by
him, but for want of taking due care
in suppressing profaneness and corrup-
tion in others. And this shows the
true way in which God may be honoured
by those who are bound to take care
of others. 1. By an universal dis-
countenancing of all sorts of vices and
profaneness. 2. By an even, steady,
and impartial execution of the laws
against vice and debauchery. 3. By
a wise choice of fit instruments to
pursue so good an end.—St¢illingfleet.
Outwardly, we see nothing to blame
in the personal conduct of Eli. All
that can be expected is found ; all due
respect for his office, all proper solem-
nity in the discharge of it. He is
just the character who would have
een eulogised by the men of his day
as doing honour to the post which he
filled ; who, as the saying is, would
have been respected in his life and
lamented at his death .... But we
presently see that he had been only
up to, not beyond the mark, for what
was expected of him. //e had sense
enough of propriety and decency,
creditably to discharge an office, to
the capability of filling which this
same sense alone raised him. He
had never lived above his office. That
God had delighted in burnt offerings
and sacrifices he had impressed upon
himself, and these things were the
summit of his estimate. He had never
learned that there are things better
than sacrifices and more acceptable
than the fat of rams... . . He knew
not that in order to do good a man
must live above, not up to, his outward
duties ; that influence with others is
found not where life is raised up to the
routine of duty, but where that routine
of duty is quickened and inspired by
a life led in higher places and guided
by nobler motives. This sense of
Gecency, this fine conservative feeling,


OHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


-_eoeoeoo ee


may get one man creditably through
his work, but it has no power over
those who grow up around him ; it has
no deep springs, no living and sparkling
eye, no winning to something above
itself; all its motives are secondary ;
what others did before, others will
think now. . . .. Eli found, as men
ever find, that all this system of
secondary motive is nothing to curb
the bounding heart of the young, or to
win the guidance of their strong and
precipitous course. He who dwells in
the circumference of his life gains no
sympathy from those who dwell in its
Such a state in the in-
dividual, the family, or the community,
contains of necessity the elements of
decayand of downward progress. . .. .
What will be the effect on a com-
munity of the prevalence of a lifeless
and conventional religion? First, and
necessarily, a low standard of duty,
up to that which is required by man,
not beyond it. Next, a false estimate
of realities ; a substitution of primary
objects for secondary ones ; a growing
couviction that this world is real, and
another world visionary ; that words
and ceremonies will serve for religion ;
but that deeds all belong to self and
the world. .... As Israel became
acted upon by the system which pre-
vailed under Eli, superstition succeeded
to the fear of God... . Who taught
his people to trust to the ark to save
them, and to forget Him. . . To what
must a people have been degraded, who
could look on that ark, accompanied
with two ministers of such iniquity
and profligacy, and greet its arrival
with shouts of trium sh ? ... Where
life is lived as unto God, and in His
sight and His revelation of Himself
held as a living present truth, there
is the seed of all true happiness, of all
true success, of all genuine honour.
Such men, whether they prosper or fall,
alone win the real prizes of life: solid
usefulness, firm stability, inward peace.
Such families alone are the nurseries
for worthy future generations, where
God’s name is known and loved;
where, if there be no glittering armour,
no nicely jointed harness for the youth-


ful warrior to go forth in, the young
arm is at least familiar with the use
of the simple sling, and knows where
to cull the smooth stones from the
river of the water of life. Such nations
alone contain in them the pledges for
sound and honourable progress, where
the national religion is not a system
upheld for venerable association’s sake,
but is a genuine portion of the
people’s life, a living seed expanding
through its history. . . On the other
hand, the man of mere proprieties gets
to his grave in peace; the man of
selfish views wins his prize, and be-
comes great and fills a space in the
world, and passes away, but who cares
for either?. . . Thefamily where God
was not, we have already followed in
the same downward path; but who
can tell, till the last dread day, the
shame and misery and ruin which have
overwhelmed men in generation after
generation, for want of God as the
guide of their youth? And if we ask
respecting the fate of nations that have
despised God—read it in the desola-
tions of Nineveh and Babylon: read
it in the history of the ancient people
of God, scattered over the nations.—
Aljord.

God is honoured in general by
avowed obedience to His holy will, but
there are some acts which more sigually
conduce to God’s glory. 1. The fre-
quent and constant performance (in a
reverent manner) of devotions immedi-
ately addressed to His name (Psalm
xxix.2). 2. Using all things peculiarly
related to God, His holy name, fis
holy word, His holy places, with especial
respect (Isa. lvii. 13). 3. Yielding due
observance to the deputies and ministers
of God, as such (Rom. xii. 4; Mal.
ii. 7, etc.). 4. Kreely spending what
God hath given us in works of piety,
charity, and mercy (2 Cor. ix. 13;
Prov. 111. 9, xiv. 31). 5. Ad penitential
acts, by which we submit to God, and
humble ourselves before Him (Josh.
vil. 19; Rev. xvi. 9). 6. Cheerfully
undergoing afflictions, losses, disgraces,
Jor the profession of God’s truth (John
xxi. 19). 7. By discharging faithfully
those offices which God hath entrusted

55


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; SAMUBL,


Ln





as with, and diligently improving those
talents which God hath committed to
us.— Barrow.


Ver. 33. The posterity of Eli pos-
sessed the high-priesthood in the time
of Solomon, and even when that
dynasty was preserved to another
family, God preserved that of Eli; not
to render it more happy, but to punish
it by seeing the prosperity of its ene-
mies, to the end that it might see itself
destitute and despised. This shows the
depth of the judgments of God, and
the grandeur of His justice, which ex-
tends even to distant generations, and
manifests itself to sinners both in life
and death—both in their own disgrace
and in the prosperity of their enemies,
—Calmet.


Ver. 35. The exercise of the priestly
office, which is well-pleasing to God:
1. Its personal condition and pre-sup-
position, fidelity, firmness, steadfast-
ness, “I will raise Thee up a faithful
priest.”
“According to that which is in my
heart and soul.” 3. Itg blessing and
reward. “And I will build him a sure
house,” etc.—Lange’s Commentary.

Of the priests under the law it might
be generally said that they walked
before the Lord’s Anointed; or, in
other words, they were appointed by
His authority — they acted by His
direction, and as his servants and
1epresentatives, till He should come
personally to offer the one sacrifice on
the strength of which their offerings
had been made available on behalf of
His believing people. And, in this
view of the subject, the last clause of
the verse conveyed another and more
explicit assurance that the priesthood
should be perpetuated during the Old
Testament dispensation, notwithstand-
ing all the calamities which might
from time to time befall Israel. But
it implied more, It contained a pro-
mise of blessing on that priesthood,
To walk before the Lord’s Anointed
must, I think, have implied not only
walking by His directions as ser-
vanta, HY walking in the light of


2. Its rule and measure.


BOOK L


His countenance as their approving
Lord and Master, in so far as Hig
Church was dependent on their ser-
vices for her edification and comfort.
And how frequently then must the

eople of God, in Old Testament times,
ee been comforted and refreshed in
seasons of perplexity and trouble when
they called to mind this gracious assu-
rance. But it is to the New T'estament
Church that this passage has opened
up, in all its fulness, the inexhaustible
fountain of consolation which it con-
It is impossible for us to
read the words without at least having
Christ brought before us, and without
feeling that to Him alone can the
words be applied in their full, literal,
and absolute sense. ... . Christ igs
exalted to the throne of the universe,
but He has not forgotten His priestly
office. He regards it with complacency,
and still executes it with delight; for
“He is a priest upon His throne,”—
Dr. R. Gordon.


Ver. 36. See the sin and its punish-
ment. They formerly pampered them-
selves, and fed to the full on the Lord’s
sacrifices, and now they are reduced
to a morsel of bread. They wasted the
Lord’s heritage, and now they beg their
bread. In religious establish-
ments vile persons, who have no higher
motive, may and do get into the
priest’s office, that they may clothe
themselves with the wool, and feed
themselves with the fat, while they
starve the flock. But where there is
no law to back the claims of the worth-
less and the wicked, men of piety and
solid merit only can find support, for
they must live on the free-will offerin gs
of the people. Where religion is es-
tablished by law the strictest ecclesi-
astical discipline should be kept up,
and all hireling priests and drones
should be expelled’ from the Lord’s
vineyard.—A. Clarke,


Vers. 27-86. Indulgent parents are
cruel to themselves oy) their posterity
Eli could not have devised which way
to have plagued himself and his house
80 much as by his kindness to his chil-


GtraP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





dren’s sins. What variety of judg-
ments does he now hear from the
messenger of God! First, because his
old age, which uses to be subject to
choler, inclined now to misfavour his
sons, therefore there shall not be an old
man left of his house for ever; and
because it vexed him not enough to
see his sons enemies to God in their
profession, therefore he shall see his
enemy in the habitation of the Lord;
and because himself forebore to take
vengeance of his sons, and esteemed
their life above the glory of his


another; and lastly, because he suffered
his sons to please their own wanton
appetite, in taking meat off from God’s
trencher, therefore those which remain
of his house shall come to his successor
to beg a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread . . . . I do not read of any
fault Eli had but indulgence; and
which of the notorious offenders were
plagued more? Parents need no other
means to make them miserable, than
sparing the rod.— Bishop Hall.

God often contents himself with a
single example of the estimation. in


which He holds the violation of certain
duties. But one lesson so terrible ought
to be sufficient to instruct every age,
and unhappy is he who does not profit
by it.—Duguet.


Master, therefore God will revenge
Himself by killing them both in
one day; and because he abused
his sovereignty by conniving at sin,
therefore shall his house be stripped of
this honour, and see it translated to


CHAPTER III.


OnitroaL and Exposttony Nores.—Ver. 1. “‘The child Samuel” According to Josephus,
Samuel was now twelve years old. “Precious,” ¢.c., rare. “The word was rare that came
directly from the Lord by prophetic announcement to the people; the proper organs were lacking,
persons who were filled with the Spirit of. the Lord, that they might be witnesses of His word 3
there was lacking also in the people the living desire for the direct revelations of God in His
word” (Lange’s Commentary). “No open vision,” lit. “no vision spread abroad.” “ Here
vision includes all the ways whereby God revealed Himself to men, Which He did then so
seldom that, whatsoever revelation there might be privately to some pious persons, there was
none then publicly acknowledged to be a prophet”’ (Patrick ),


Ver. 2. “His eyes began to wax dim.” This mention of Eli’s dimness of sight is introduced
parenthetically. It explains Samuel’s supposition that he had been called by Eli: the imperfect
vision of the aged priest would make him dependent upon the services of an attendant, and these
services Samuel was probably appointed to render” (Hobson). “The lamp of God,” ¢.¢., the
seven-branched candlestick. ‘This stood in the centre, on the left of the entrance, and is now
mentioned for the lasttime. Itwas superseded in the reign of Solomon by the ten separate candle-
sticks, but revived after the captivity by the copy of the one candlestick with the seven branches,
as is stillseen on the arch of Titus, It was the only light of the Tabernacle during the night ”
(Dean Stanley). “Went out.” This indicates that the time was nearmorning. “Temple.” See
on chap. i. 9. “The sanctuary was so encased with buildings as to give it the name and
appearance of a house or temple” (Dean Stanley). “Samuel slept in the court, where cells
were built for the priests and Levites to live in when serving in the sanctuary. See ver. 15.
(Keil). “The high-priest was not in domestic residence at the temple, much less, therefore, at
the tabernacle, ... . But Eli, who was now an aged man, with all his family grown up and
settled in their own households, might, both from feeling and convenience, incline to reside
constantly at his humble official lodge, under the shadow of the tabernacle, The proper place
of Samuel would have been among the attendant Levites, but on account of his personal services
to the high-priest, he rested not far from him” (Kitto). “The Lord.” Jehovah. “This
name stands after the temple because it is the Covenant God who descends to His people, and
dwells with them, that is brought before us. On the other hand, in connection with the lamp
and the ark, Elohim is used in the sense of the Divine in general” (Lange’s Commentary).


Ver. 4, “The Lord called Samuel” “Probably by a voice from the ark in the Holy of
Holies” ( Wordsworth) pe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMURL. BOOK L





Ver. 5. “He ran,” etc. ‘“ Which shows the great readiness and promptness of his obedience,
which made him come, yea, run at his first call” (Patrick ).


Ver. 7. “‘ Did not yet know,” etc. “He had not the special knowledge of God which was
given by extraordinary revelation” (Lange’s Commentary). “ Revealed,” literally uncovered.
“ The metaphor is transferred in a certain way in Chap. ix. 15, where it is said (Hebrew) that
the Lord uncovered the ear of Samuel. Our word revelation may be taken as including both
these ideas” (Hobson), (See comments on ver. 21.)


Ver. 10. “Stood.” The voice becomes a vision. a personal presence, not a mere voice, or
impression upon Samuel’s mind is here indicated” (Bishop Hervey).


Ver. 11. “The ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.” A mark of dread and
horror, (See 2. Kings xxi. 12 and Jer. xix. 3.) “Asa sharp, discordant noise pains one’s ears,
so the news of thia harsh punishment shall give pain to all who hear of it” (Lange’s Commentary
on Kings).


Ver. 12, “I will also make an end.” “He does not mean that He would begin and make
an end at once ; but that He would persevere in His punishments, and not desist when He
began, till all His threatenings were fulfilled, viz., in the death of Eli, and of his sons, and the
slaughter of eighty-five priests of this family by Doeg, and the thrusting Abiathar out of his
office, and so depriving that family of its dignity and honour” (Patrick).


Ver. 13. “Judge.” “To judge on account of a crime is the same as to punish it.” (Keil.)
‘ Restrained.” “He contented himself with mere remonstrance when, as High Priest and
Judge in Israel, he had severer measures at his command, which he ought to have employed,
setting aside his personal feelings of parental tenderness.” (Hobson.)


Ver. 14. “Sacrifice nor offering.” “Neither the bloody nor unbloody offerings.” (See
Lev. xvi. 6.) “The sin of Eli’s sons was so heinous as not to be purged by this appointed
sacrifice.” ( Hobson.)


Ver. 15. “Opened the doors.” “This appears to have been a part of Samuel’s duty. We
have not to think of doors opening into the Holy Place, however, but of doars leading into the
court.” (Keil.)


Ver. 16. “My Son.” “How much is expressed in this one word,” (Thenius,)


Ver. 17. Observe the climax in the words with which, in three sentences, Eli demands
information from Samuel ; it expresses the excitement of his soul. He asks for the word of the
Lord ; he demands an exact and complete statement, he adjures Samuel to conceal nothing from
him.” (Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 19. “None of his words fall to the ground.” “A metaphor from arrows shot out
of a bow, which hit the mark.” (Patrick.)


Ver. 20. “From Dan to Beersheba,” ¢.¢., from the northern to the southern extremity of
the land. Dan (anciently called Laish) was a northern frontier town, and Beersheba was
situated on its southern border. “That Samuel was established to be a prophet of the
Lord.” “A very important statement.” What Samuel did in offering sacrifices, etc. (see vii. 9)
was not, as some seem to imagine, an irregular intrusion into the priestly office. But in a time
of great degeneracy and confusion, when the exercise of the ordinary functions of the Levitical
priesthood was in abeyance, Samuel was specially raised up by God, and received an extraordinary
commission from Him to do what He did in maintaining the worship of God, and all Israel
“knew,” by visible tokens, that he was established to be an expounder and interpreter of God’s
will ( Wordsworth).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—VERSES 1—10,
Tuer Voice or tHe UNsEEN.


I, Special preparation qualifies for special revelation. “Samuel ministere¢
unto the Lord before Eli.” In any branch of service, whether rendered to mep
or more directly to God, training is needed before a man is fit to fulfil its duties.
Men to whom the voice of nature has spoken in any epecial manner are generally
men who have been her students from their early years, and their long waiting
upon her in her temple has made them capable of receiving special revelations
from ot Newton and Faraday were made partakers of some of her secrets only


GHP, 1 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
a a Se


after years of training in her school, and the same may be said of the poets and
artists whose ears have been opened, or whose vision has been enlightened in
an especial manner to hear her voice, or to see her beauties. David’s early days
were spent in meditating upon the heavens that declared the glory of God and
the firmament that showed the Divine handiwork. Doubtless this early training
had much to do with his susceptibility to impressions from the works of God
in nature in his,after-life, and made him able to see God in all the things that
He has made. God, by early training, fitted him to be not only a king and a
soldier, but a poet. So Samuel was prepared, by early and special training, to
receive special revelations from God.


II. Early religious training fits men for great and important work in after
life. From his very early days Samuel dwelt in the sanctuary of the Lord, and
was in daily attendance upon the services of His house. Corrupt as were some
of those who ministered in holy things, there were doubtless some good and
elevating influences around him which would accustom him to the thought of
the God of his fathers, and tend to prepare him for the special work to which
he was destined. The comparatively easy and pleasant ministry unto the Lord
within His house prepared him for the sterner service he was to be called to
render without the courts in a more public capacity. The sailor’s child is first
taught to handle an oar in the sheltered cove before his father’s cottage. in sight
of home and within reach of his mother’s eye. But this easy exercise is to fit
him in after years to move out into the wide ocean and face the perils of the
storm, and with askilful hand pilot his vessel safely over a dangerous sea. The
home-life of every well-trained child is a calm and peaceful bay, in which,
encircled by loving laws and gentle words, he is being fitted to fight the difficulties
and temptations of life outside the charmed circle. In due time he moves out
into the vast sea of life, and finds himself in a world altogether different from his
childhood’s home; but the holy influences that were around him there have fitted
him for taking his place and doing his work in the world, so as to glorify God
and bless himself and others. So it ought to be with every member of a godly
household, so it was with Samuel. The “ gentleness of God” (2 Sam. xxii. 36)
as he experienced it in the comparatively calm and peaceful atmosphere of his
early days, made him fit to fulfil the arduous mission to which he was afterwards
called, and strengthened him to~fulfil all the Divine commands /even to the
terrific one of “‘hewing Agag in pieces before the Lord” (1 Sam. xv. 33). What
a contrast was the last-mentioned stern service to the gentle ministry of his
early days, but obedience to the will of God was doubtless the motive power
in both. ‘his habit of obedience is the one which above all others, perhaps,
fits men bravely and faithfully to fulfil their duties to God and men. If a child
has been accustomed from a sense of duty to render obedience to his human
father or guardian he will come more readily to subject his will to his Divine
Father. Submission to the lesser and imperfect being prepares the way for
submission to the Almighty and Perfect One. We see from Samuel’s ready
response to what he supposed was the call of Eli, how accustomed he was to
render implicit obedience to him who stood to him in the place of his earthly
father, and this submission to a human wil] and authority was one of the most
impertant elements in his early training to fit him in after life to render -
aaneatating obedience to the word of the Lord, and to shrink from no service
which He called upon him to perform.


ITI. God speaks when His speech is most needed. Rain is never so precious ag
when famine has set in from lack of it. When the-clouds have for long ceased to
yield refreshment to the earth, then every drop is as precious as gold. When
there is lack of the rain of heaven, then there is dearth, and disease, and death.
Bo is it in the spiritual world when there is a lack of spiritual Leman From


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK &%





this soul-famine there springs apace all kinds of spiritual diseases, and souls
perish for lack of bread. In Israel, at this period of its history, there was such
&@ soul-famine, and with few exceptions its whole “head was sick, and. its heart
was faint” in consequence, and “wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores”
broke out in the lives of those who ought to have been fit mediums for the
‘descent of that spiritual rain which makes glad the wilderness and the solitary
place, and causes the spiritual desert to rejoice and blossom as the rose. In this
time of great need God broke the long silence, and in this word coming to Samuel
there was “a sound of” that “abundance of rain” which was to be poured do vn
upon this highly-favoured people almost unceasingly until the time of Malachi.
This voice of God, coming to the youthful Samuel in the night watches, was to be
the beginning of a long series of “ open visions,” and of an abundant revelation
of the mind and will of God. But the first drops of the shower fell in a time of
spiritual drought, and famine, and disease.


IV. God speaks through spiritually qualified instruments. A coloured
glass is not a fit medium to transmit the pure white light of the sun. <A
blackened glass almost entirely shuts out his rays; light can hardly find any
entrance through such a medium. God’s silence had been of so long continuance
because those who ought to have been fit mediums to transmit His word were
utterly incapable even of receiving it. Neither Eli nor his sons were qualified
instruments by which God could reveal His will to the people. _ Even the high-

riest himself was not one whose spiritual nature was sufficiently awake to render
chim capable of recéiving visions of God. And he who would reveal to others
the word of the Lord must be able first to see and hear for himself. But Samuel
was of an entirely different nature. His ear had been rendered susceptible to
spiritual voices, his eyes were fitted to discern spiritual realities, and his will
was so far in harmony with the will of God—his desire to serve the Lord was sO
far single and unbiassed;—as to render him’a fit medium through which the light
of the Divine word could be transmitted.


V. The unseen world is as real as that which is seen. The personality of
Eli in the tabernacle was one that could be seen—it was within the reach of
Samuel’s bodily senses. But he came to be conscious of a Person, quite as real,
though ordinarily beyond the reach of his vision. He who spoke to Samuel in
his sleep was as real an existence as was the priest to whom he at first attributed
the voice. That Samuel at first mistook the voice of the invisible God for the
voice of the visible Eli shows how strongly he was assured of the reality of the
person who spoke to him—how certain he felt that the voice belonged to a real
and actual existence. That which is unseen by our mortal eye is as real, and
is as near to us, as that which our bodily vision can apprehend, and it only needs
God to awaken our spiritual senses to make us conscious of this. Many a man
can testify from his own experience that communion with God is quite as much
a reality as any communion with man, Samuel, during his minority, had many
a conversation with the aged Eli, and had doubtless received some good impres-
sions from his intercourse with the old priest. But the intercourse which he
held from this time forth with a person who spoke to him from the invisible
world was as real and far more impressive than any he had ever had with the
person before whom he had so long ministered to the Lord. So real was it, and
80 strong an impression did it make upon him that he could afterwards reproduce
the words that had been spoken to him, and felt that communion with Him
whose dwelling is not with flesh, was a more influential fact of his life than any
intercourse with men. He had been conversant with many facts concerning
Jehovah before this time, but he now awoke to such a personal consciousness of
His existence, and such an abiding sense of His nearness, that up to this crisis
in his ae it is said of him that he “knew not the Lord.”


GHAP. Ot.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


ny


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. Since the extraordinary
gifts stand in close connection with
the ordinary, we must conclude that
the latter also were sparingly dealt
out, that among the masses there was
a great deal of lukewarmness, and even
open apostasy. The want of a reforma-
tion was urgent. That the extra-
ordinary gifts, however, had not quite
disappeared, we learn from the example
of the man of God who comes to Eli to
upbraid him with his sins and also to
announce the Divine judgment. And
with respect to the ordinary gifts, we are
led to the conclusion that there was at
that time a not inconsiderable ekloge,
not only by the institution of holy
women (see Critical Notes on chap.
ii. 21), but also by the custom of the
Nazarite, of which we have two con-
temporaneous examples in Samson and
Samuel, and must therefore have
been pretty widely spread. Hence we
infer that the spirit of piety was by no
means dead, especially since an institu-
tion such as that of the Nazarites
stands in close connection with the
whole national tendency, and can only
flourish when more or less supported
by it.—Hengstenberg.

Faithful in little, and therefore
entrusted with more, being the next
famous prophet to Moses, and called
the first (Acts iii, 24, 2 Chron.
xxxv. 18).—Zrapp.

The time of Samuel’s appearance in
Israel as prophet was a time of an
internal judgment of God, which con-
sisted in the lack of ¢ntercourse of God
with His people by revelation. It was
a theocratic interdict incurred by the
continual apostasy of the people from
theirGod . . . Such a judgment came
upon Saul conn: xevil. 6, 15). 64
The same law presents itself in all

eriods of the kingdom of God; men
ose the source of life, God’s revealed
word, by a Divine judgment, when they
withdraw from intercourse with the
living God, and will not accept His
holy word as the truth which controls
their whole lifa—Lange’s Commen-


tary.


Ver. 2. God lets old Eli sleep, who
slept in his sin; and awakes Samuel
to tell him what He would do with his
master. He, who was wont to be the
mouth of God to the people, must now
receive the message of God from the
mouth of another; as great persons
will not speak to those with whom they
are highly offended, but send them
their checks by others.—Bishop Hall.


Ver. 4. He answered “ Here am I.”
A hearing ear is a sweet mercy; and a
heavy ear, a grievous judgment (Isa,
vi. 9).—Trapp.


Ver. 5,6. He would not have lain
down to sleep had he thought that
the Lord had spoken unto him. So,
if men did but consider that God
speaketh unto them by His ministers,
they would hear and heed much better.
How oft do we either turn a deaf ear
to God’s call, or else mistake, and run
another way, till He please to speak
home to our hearts, and cause us to
hear Him.—7yapp.


Ver. 10. For the first time Samuel
stands with consciousness in the pre-
sence of the majesty of God—and
immediately all the riddles of life begin
to be solved for him, and the meaning
of his own life to become clear. What
he says bears the clearest stamp of a
really begun communion with the Lord.
Is it not the resolve to say and to do
all that the Lord might show him of
His lofty thoughts and ways—is it not
this, and nothing but this, that is ex-
pressed in “Speak, Lord, for ‘Thy ser-
vant heareth?” Has he not thereby
once for all renounced self-knowing
and self-will? That was the faithful-
ness asa prophet, which all Israel, from
Dan even to Beersheba, recognised in
him (ver. 20). And that which thus
first established a true communion with
the Lord could also alone be the
power that maintained it. ‘The con-
stant prayer, “Speak, Lord,” and the
constant vow, “ Thy servant heareth”—
that is the hand which takes hold of

- 61


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL, BOOK L


a a


God’s right hand, to be held fast by it
with everlasting life. “Speak, Lord,”
etc., a testimony of unconditional devo-
tion to the Lord. 1. How such a testi-
mony 1s reached (a), through the Lord’s
awakening call; (6), through recep-
tivity of heart for God’s word; C
through the deed of self-denial in the
renunciation of all self-knowledge and
self-will. 2. What is therein testified
and praised before the Lord—(a)
humble subjection [speak, Lord] ;


(5) steadfast dependence on the Lord
in free love [Thy servant] ; (c) uncon-
ditional, joyful obedience to His will
[Thy servant heareth]. Conditions of
@ blessed fulfilment of one’s calling
Sor the kingdom of God--1. The ex-
perience of the power of the Divine
word: I have called thee by name.
2. The repeated call in prayer, “ Speak.
Lord.” 3. The fulfilment of the vow :
“Thy servant heareth,” — Lange’:
Commentary.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH—Verses 10—21.


Tue Sin oF Omission AND THE GRACE OF SUBMISSION.


I. The mere omission of one man may be the calamity of many. Many
and terrible disasters have often been brought upon many people by one man’s
omission in the performance of his duty. If the man who stands at the wheel
of the vessel omits to look at the compass, he may bring death or ruin to


hundreds of his fellow-creatures, as well as


loss of reputation to himself if he


should survive the wreck. If one miner neglects properly to secure his light, the
death of all his fellow-workmen may as truly lie at his door as if he had slain


each one separately with his own hand.
which are destructive to human life, and
commissions. Iili’s great sin was a sin of omission:
selves vile, and he restrained them not.”


Omissions permit the play of forces
therefore are sometimes as guilty as
“His sons made them-
His omission of parental restraint


permitted the unchecked play of the evil passions of his children, and brought
as sure and as terrible a destruction upon them ag if he had taken their


lives with his own hand.


And the evil consequences of
restraint did not end with them; the
spread into every household in the land


nil ¢ his neglect of
mischief which was thus left to work
, and soon the whole nation had cause


to mourn over their high-priest’s omission of his duty. If Eli Aad restrained
his sons, he would certainly have delivered his own soul from blood-guiltiness,
and might have delivered them from such a public execution, and the nation from
overwhelming disgrace. Mere protestation against sin will do something to stem


the tide, or if it is powerless to do that i
can sometimes do no more than can a pi
He can but offer the resistance of his ow
of iniquity. He cannot check its onwar


him from guilt, but this will do it,
from his way, that wicked man shall


t is a witness against it. A godly man


llar in the midst of an eddying river,
n life and words to the prevailing current
d course.
“If thou dost not speak to warn the wicked
die in his iniquity ;


Less than this will not deliver


but his blood will ]


require at thine hand. N evertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn


from it, if he do not turn JSrom his
hast delivered thy soul.”
men can do no more.


way he shall die
(Ezek. xxxiii. 8,9.) This is all that God requires when
Eli had hardly done this and his power to do more—to


in his iniquity ; but thou


hinder his sons from continuing their public profanation of God’s house and
services—constituted him a partaker in their sins, and to some extent in their


punishment when he “restrained them not,” This
made him the instrument of bringing the wrath of Go


but upon his nation.


reat omission of his life
, hot only upon his house


II. A noble nature has no pleasure in the downfall of arival. A generous
soul is grieved at the afflictions that come upon men even through their own sin,


62


GHAP, Ii. HOMILETIC GQOMMENTARY: SAMUI.





ee


He not only “rejoiceth not in iniquity” but rejoiceth not in the punishment
that iniquity brings even when the downfall of the evil-doer is the occasion of
is own promotion. If a young man sorrows over the just discrace of those
whose fall is his own stepping-stone to promotion, he shows that he ig possessed
of a truly noble disposition. Samuel was not gladdened by being thus honoured
by God, seeing that the message he received was charged with heavy tidings
concerning those whom he honoured to some extent. Some consciousness of his
own advancement must have been borne in upon him by this revelation—he
must have had some presentiment that the setting of Eli’ssun would be the
cise of his own, yet he shrinks from showing the vision evidently not only from
unwillingness to grieve his aged friend, but from a sense of sorrow at the terrible
cetribution which awaited him and his. .


IIt. The highest wisdom under Divine chastisement is the submission
which justifies God. ‘There are children who will justify their human parents
even whon they are under correction, because they have such confidence in the
character of those parents, and because their own consciences convict them of
deserving that which they are now suffering. God’s children should always be
able to do this. They ought to be so assured of His unimpeachable justice
and wisdom, as well as of His love, as to be able at all times to echo the words
of Eli, and thus to “justify the ways of God to men.” Eli here proves himself
a true son of Abraham in the full assent he gives to Abraham’s assurance
“Shall not the Judge of ail the earth do right ?” (Gen. xviii. 25) Being fully
convicted of his own negative sins, and of the positive crimes of his children
he takes the course of true wisdom, and yields himself and his family into the
hands of that King who he knows can do no wrong.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 11. When God executes judg-
ment upon anyone, all should tremble
at these examples of severity upon
others, and say with Paul, “ Because
of unbelief they were broken off, and
thou standest by faith. Be not high-
minded, but fear” (Rom. xi. 20).—De
Sacy.


Ver. 12. Execution of justice is
God’s work, though His strange work
(Isa, xxviii. 21), and when once He
beginneth, He will go thorough-stitch
with it; He will neither dally nor
desist till it be done.—T7rapp.


Ver. 13. The judgment that was to
fall on Ithamar is the likeness of the
judgment which has followed the cor-
ruption and the nepotism of the clergy
everywhere. It was to begin with the
alienation of the people from the wor-
ship of the sanctuary ; it was to end
in a violent revolution, which should
overthrow with bloodshed, confiscation,
and long humiliation the ancient here-


ditary succession and the whole exist-
ing hierachy of Israel.—Stanley.

Parents cannot do God’s work, and
God will not do theirs; but if they use
the means, God will not withhold His
blessing.—A. Clarke.

Qh, it is dangerous to do the work
of God negligently. Eli was a magi-
strate, and should have put forth his
authority and punished those ungodly
children. .... That you (who are
magistrates) be terrors to evil-doers is
expressed as one of your chief duties
(Rom, xili..3). 25... If you are not,
look to yourself, for God hath iron
hands for justices that have leaden
heels, and will one day strike them
home for forswearing themselves to
spare others. He will be a terror to
thee and make thee a, terror to thyself,
who will not at His command be a
terror to evil-doers. Thou sinnest in
others whilst thou sufferest them to
sin, and thou shalt one day suffer with
them (Rev. xvill. 4)... . Cowards are
more fit to be slaves than rulers, A

63


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUE&i,


magistrate shculd be like Moses: in
his own cause as meek as a lamb, in
God’s cause as stiff as an oak, as bold
aa & Hons He that spareth the
bad hurteth the good. he chirurgeon
must cut off incurable members, and the
physician of the State must purge out
the peccant humours of the body poli-
tic, lest they infect and injure the
whole.—Swinnock.

“For the iniquity which he knoweth.”
Both by that prophet (chap. ii. 29), and
by that domestical chaplain, his con-
science.—Zrapp.


Ver. 18, 14. The guilt and conse-
uences of parental unfaithfulness,
t The sin here mentioned. It is not
said that Hli set his sons a bad example.
It is evident, on the contrary, that his
example was good. Nor is he accused
of neglecting to admonish them; for
we are told that he reproved them ina
very solemn and affectionate manner,
-_. - But though Eli admonished he
did not restrain. He did not emplo
theauthority with which he was clothed,
as & parent, to prevent them from
indulging their depraved inclinations,
. . . Every parent who is not as careful
of the morals as he is of the health of
his children; everyone who takes more
care of the literary than of the moral
and religious education of his children,
is guilty of this sin. II. The punish-
ments denounced. They are here de-
nounced generally ; but are described
at large in the preceding chapter. 1.
That most of his posterity shall die
early, The sin of which Eli wag
guilty naturally tends to produce the
consequence here threatened. :
If parents wish their sons to die before
they reach half the common age of man,
they cannot adopt measures better
calculated to produce this effect than
to cast loose the reins of parental
authority. 2. That such of his child-
ren as were spared should prove
@ grief and vexation, rather than a
comfort to him... . This was not
less terribly fulfilled in the family of
Davids," We are told respectin
one of his children, that his father had
not displeased him at any time, saying,
64


BOOK %





Wherefore hast thou done so? We
may then conclude that he was equally
culpable in his treatment of his other
children. And what was the conse-
quence ? This part of the
threatened punishment, like the former,
is the natural and almost inevitable
consequence of the sin against which it
is denounced. . . , Especially will such
parents usually meet with unkindness
and neglect from their children if they
live to be dependent on them jin
their old age. 3. That his posterity
should be poor and contemptible,
witotens Children who are not re-
strained by their parents will almost
inevitably contract habits of idle
ness, instability, and extravagance,
which naturally lead to poverty and
contempt. Here again we see the
natural consequences of Eli’s sin in its
punishment. Lastly, God declares that
none of the methods thus appointed to
obtain the Pan v sin, should avail
to procure pardon for the iniquity 0
his house. P This awful blireat os
veyed a plain intimation that they
should die in their sins, and this too,
was the natural consequence of his
conduct. He had suffered them to
follow without restraint those courses
which rendered them unfit for heaven
until their day of grace was past,
.... They were given up to a hard
heart and a reprobate mind. They
could not now be brought to repen-
tance, and. of course, no sacrifice nor
offering could purge away their sins,
.... Thousands now in the region of
despair, and thousands more on their
way to join them will for ever curse their
parents as the authors of their misery,
The terrible punishments denounced
against this sin show how exceedingly
displeasing it is to God. 1. Because
it proceeds from wicked and hateful
principles . . . Sometimes it proceeds
from the love and practice of VIGO (4:
In religious parents, it almost invariably
proceeds from indolence and selfish-
ness... There is also much unbelief,
much contempt of God, and much
ositive disobedience in this sin, 2,
Because it entirely frustrates Hig desi
in establishing the family state, 3 On


it MON Sy 658)


OHAP, IM.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Ce a Ne ee


account of the good which it prevents,
and the infinite evil which it produces
.. +. Nosin tends to produce more
or greater eviland misery, 4. Because
those who are guilty of it act a most
unnatural part. God knew that it
would not be safe to trust us with the
education of immortal souls, unless we
had powerful inducements to be faithful
to the trust. He, therefore, implanted
in the heart of parents a strong affection
for their offspring, that they might be
thus induced to educate them as they
ought. But those who neglect to
restrain their children do violence to
this powerful operative principle, and
may be said to be like the heathen,
without natural affection.— Payson.


Ver. 15. As the child Samuel was

not elated by this vision and revelation
vouchsafed to him in the temple, but
went humbly to Eli, and when it was
morning did the daily work prescribed
to him,—so the child Jesus, after the
honour paid to him in the temple,
“went down to Nazareth, and was sub-
ject’ to Mary and Joseph (Luke ii. 51),
— Wordsworth.
« As this is the first circumstance
which throws light upon the character
of one who was destined to become a
great man in Israel, it behoves us to
regard it well. Most lads of his age
evince much eagerness in communi-
cating anything surprising, without
much regard to the pain it may be
calculated to inflict. Samuel knew
that he had been highly honoured by
a special communication from God.
The burden of a great doom had been
imparted to him, and such secrets of
high import it is hard for youth to
bear undisclosed. But with Samuel
there was one consideration that over-
ruled every other. The secret con-
cerned his venerable lord, who had
been as a father to him, and could not
fail to afflict his spirit.—Kitto,


Ver. 18. Though we must groan and
feel God’s hand, yet we must not
umble and fret at His dealings.
Patisnos is thy duty under the sharpest
providence. He is too just to be


questioned, too good to be suspected,
and too great to be quarrelled with,
Eli doth not fall in His face in
passion, but falls down at His feet in
humble submission.—Swinnock.

“Told him every whit.” Bitter
truths must be spoken, however they
be taken, and if ministers be mannerly
in the form, yet in the matter of their
message let them be resolute.—7rapp.

If li have been an ill father to his
sons, yet he is a good son to God, and
is ready to kiss the very rod he shall
smart withal : “It is the Lord,” whom
I have ever found holy and just, and
gracious, and He cannot but be Him-
self; ‘let Him do what seemeth Him
good,” for whatsoever seemeth to be
good to Him, cannot but be good,
howsoever it seems to me. Every man
can open his hand to God while He
blesses ; but to expose ourselves will-
ingly to the afflicting hand of our
Maker, and to kneel to Him while He
scourges us, is peculiar only to the
faithful.— Bishop Alall.

I. A judicious discovery from whence
‘all evils come. “‘ Jt is the Lord.” He
is omnipotent, and who hath withstood
His power He is just, and will bring
no evil without good cause. He is
wise, and whatsoever evil He bringeth
He can draw it toa goodend.....
He remaineth the same God in the fire
and in the earthquake which He was in
the still voice; the same when He slew
the Israelites as. when His light
shone upon their tabernacle. His glo-
rious attributes cross not one another,
His justice taketh not from. Hig
mercy, nor His mercy from the equity
of His justice; but He is just when
He bindeth up, and merciful when He
woundeth us. . . . Thesame God that
overthrew Pharaoh in the Red Sea,
that “slew great and mighty kings”
(Psa. exxxvi. 15,17, 18) did deliver
up His own people, did deliver up the
ark to Dagon: for His justice, His
wisdom, and His mercy “did endure
for ever.” II. A well-grounded resolu-
tion. Let us learn with Eli to ‘kiss
the Son, lest He be angry ” (Psa. ii. 12),
nay, to kiss Him, and bow before Him


if when He is angry; to offer Him upa
65


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL.


BOOK f,


—





peace-offering, our wills, of more power
than a hecatomh, than all our:nume-
rous fasts and sermons, to appease
His wrath. ... This is the truest
surrendry we can make. ... “I do
not only obey God, and do what He
would have me, but I am of Hig mind,”
saith the heathen Seneca.” ... The
stubbornest knee may be made to bow,
snd obedience may be constrained. But
the true Israelite doeth it with joy and
readiness, and though he receive a
blow he counteth it as a favour, for He
that gave it hath taught him an art to
make it so.— Anthony Faringdon.


Ver. 20. Not only of the whole
Church in general, but of every Chris-
tian hearer in particular, it is demanded
that, with reference to the doctrine
taught, he shall perceive whether it is
right and true or not, and stand his
ground. In the case of Samuel the
word did not hold good—“ the prophet
has no honour in his own country.”
He comes before us here asa prophet who
has much honour in his own country—
(1) Because he was a faithful prophet
of God; (2) because he was counted
worthy by God of continual revelations
through His word ; (3) and God con-
firmed his proclamations by the publicly
manifested fulfilment of them as a ful-
filment of hts word.—Oramer.

When Samuel had entered into an
immediate relation to God, a relation
between him and the nation also began.
He receives through them the dignity
of a prophet, of a mediator between
God and the nation. With him pro-
plecy mounted a newstep. While the
prophets had previously entered power-
fully into the history only in solitary
decisive instances, hs prophetic activity
was a continuous one.—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 21. God breaks through the
silence of many years, and reveals
Himself to Samuel. Wherefore was
this? Samuel had a childlike faith ;
therefore he was very dear to God.
The words are remarkable, “the child
was a child” (see notes on chap. i, 24),
and “‘he grew before the Lord.” He
was a child in innocence, humility,

66


simplicity, nolmess, He was holy amid
scenes of unholiness, In spite of the
pernicious example of Eli’s sons, the
riests of God, the child stood firm :
he was true to God in the most trying
circumstances, therefore God revealed
Himself to him. The child Samuel
was preferred to the aged Eli, the
high priest and judge; and thus, as
Theodoret remarks, God showed that
holy childhood is better than hoar
hairs. He was “wiser than the aged,”
and had “more understanding than
his teachers,” because he “kept God’s
commandments” (Psa. cxix. 99, 100).
— Wordsworth.
The Lord revealed Himself to Samuel,
It is with, perhaps, one exception the
earliest instance of the use of the word
which has since become the name for
all Divine communication. “The Lord
uncovered the ear,” such is the literal
expression ; a touching and significant
figure taken from the manner in which
the possessor of a secret moves back
the long hair of his friend, and whispers
into the ear thus laid bare the word
that no one else may hear. It is a
figure which precisely expresses the
most universal and philosophical idea
conveyed by the term “Revelation,”
thence appropriated in the theological
language of both East and West,
“The Father of Truth,” says Professor
Muller—indicating his own use of this
phrase to describe the mission of the
Semitic races—“ chooses His own pro-
phets, and He speaks to them in a
voice stronger than the voice of thun-
der. It is the same inner voice through
which God speaks to all of us. That
voice may dwindle away and become
hardly audible ; it may lose its Divine
accent, and sink into the language of
worldly prudence; but it may also
from time to time assume its real
nature with the children of God, and
sound into their ears as a voice from
heaven. A “Divine instinct” would
neither be an appropriate name for
what is a gift or grace accorded but to
few, nor would it be amore intelligible
word than “special” revelation. —
Stanley.


OSAP, 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
Se EE ee eee eee


CHAPTER IV.


Cartroan aND Expository Nores.—Ver. 1, “And the word of Samuel,” etc. Commentators
are divided in their opinions whether this clause is connected with the rest of the chapter, and
whether it signifies that Israel went out to battle by the command of Samuel. Many think
they entered into the conflict without Divine direction ; but Keil says, “The two clauses, ‘ The
word of Samuel came to all Israel’ and ‘Israel went out,’ ete., are to be logically connected
together in the following sense: ‘At the word or instigation of Samuel, Israel went out against
the Philistines to battle.” There is no doubt that the Philistines were ruling over Israel at thig
time. “Ebenezer.” This name was not given to the place until a later period (see chap. vii. 12).
“Aphek.” As this word means strength, or Jirmness, it is applicable to any fort or fastness ; and
there were several places so named in Palestine. According to chap. vii. 12 this Aphek must
have been near Mizpeh, probably the Mizpeh of Benjamin mentioned in Josh. xviii, 26, and
identified by Robinson as the present Neby Samwil, five miles north-west of Jerusalem.


Ver, 2. “Joined battle.” “This word describes the sudden mutual assault of the opposing
lines.” (Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 3. “Let us fetch the ark,” etc. “In recommending this extraordinary step, the
elders might recollect the confidence it imparted to their ancestors (Numb. x. 35; xiv. 44), as
well as what had been done at Jericho. But it is more probable that they were influenced by
the heathenish ideas of their idolatrous neighbours, who, in order to animate their soldiers and
ensure victory, carried the statuettes of their gods in shrines, or their sacred symbols to their
wars, believing that the power of those divinities was inseparably associated with, or residing in,
their images.” (Dr. Jamieson.)


Ver. 4. “The people.” “It was the army that here acted, rather than the people in a
political capacity, but the word ‘people’ perhaps points to the absence of a regular army,”
(Tr. of Lange's Commentary.)


Ver. 7. “God is come into the camp.” “ The ark is called by the sacred writer ‘The ark
of the Lord (Jehovah) ’, but the Philistines, being heathens, say that ‘Hlohim is come into the
camp ;” and they speak of God in the plural number—‘ These mighty gods.’” ( Wordsworth. )
“ Just as all the heathen feared the might of the gods of other nations in a certain degree, so
the Philistines also were alarmed at the might of the God of the Israelites.” (Keil. ) “There
hath not been such a thing heretofore.” ‘The ark was always carried by the priests in
the van (Numb. x. 83; Josh. iii. 14), and, with one solitary exception, when the attack upon the
Amalekites and the Canaanites was made in spite of an express prohibition of Moses, it was
invariably carried with them in their early wars. But when they had become settled in Canaan,
and the ark was established in Shiloh, the practice of carrying it into the field was discontinued,
till now that ignorance and superstitious fear revived it.” (Dr. Jamieson.)


Ver. 10. “There fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.” “The slaughter in ancient
warfare seems, from the record of profane as well as sacred history, to have been often immensely
greater than in modern times, since the introduction of gunpowder and artillery, And in the
nature of the case it must have been when the soldiers of Opposing armies met in close combat
—man engaged in mortal strife with man; and when the weapons, too, were tipped with poison,
the result could not be, otherwise than a fearful carnage. The great numbers, then, of the
Israelites who are recorded in this passage (as well as in similar ones) to have fallen in battle,
and which have called forth the sneers of the infidels as gross exaggerations, are, from the
character of the context, perfectly credible, and the statements of the sacred historian are not
only in the present instance corroborated by the testimony of Josephus, but harmonise with the
recital of Herodotus, and other historians, as to the vast mortality that frequently marked the
battles of antiquity.” (Dr. Jamieson.)


Ver. 13. “Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside.” “This sitting om the side of the way
by which the first message must come answers precisely to the intense expectation in which Eli,
though blind, had taken this position, so as, if not with the eyes, yet with the sense of hearing,
to learn straightway the arrival of the first messenger. He sits, as in chap. i. 9, at the inner, so
here at the outer, gate of the sanctuary, on his seat, and, as appears from verse 18, on the side of
the gate, which was also, therefore, the side of the adjacent way.” (Erdmann. )


Ver, 14. “When Eli heard the noise of the crying.” “ His blindness explains the fact
that he failed to observe the messenger who ran hurriedly by without noticing him.” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 15. “His eyes were dim,” literally, “his eyes stood.” “This isa description of the
so-called black cataract (amaurosis), which generally occurs at a very great age from paralysis of
the optic nerve.” (Keil. ) 67


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. SY BeoK 1.





Ver. 21. “Ichabod,” i.e., Not-Glory. The narrator has in mind her words upon which
she based that ejaculation, but does not state them as hers till afterward; here he states
beforehand the fact contained in them as a historical explanation. We must note, however,
the difference between /is explanation and her reason for that exclamation in verse 22.
While 4e mentions the reference to the two dead, she bases the name on the one thing
only, the capture of the ark.” (Erdmazz.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1 and %
Tar First Dergat at EBENEZER.


On the connection of the first clause of this verse with the following para-
graph see Critical and Expository Notes on the chapter. Adopting the view of
Kiel and others, we remark—


I. That there may be an obedience which will bring punishment. Upon
the people and upon the priests of Israel at this time there rested the curse of
unpardoned sin. Eli’s sons had neither confessed their guilt nor amended their
lives, and the religion of the entire nation was very much like that depicted by
Isaiah at a later period, when, delivering the word of the Lord, he tells both
rulers and people that their “incense 1s an abomination,” and their feasts a
“trouble and a weariness” unto the Most High because they had forsaken Him
in their hearts. (See Isa. i. 1-15.) Therefore punishment came to them while
in the act of obeying the word of the Lord by Samuel. As there had been no
obedience unto (i/e, there was now an obedience unto death. This act of
obedience was doubtless in conformity to the national desire, and the desire to
free themselves from the yoke of the Philistines was both natural and right in
itself, but it was unaccompanied by a willingness to submit to the righteous law
of Jehovah and to obey His word, and therefore it brought judgment instead of
blessing. There are many parallel cases in individual history. Many men
make plans and try to gratify desires which may in themselves be lawful, but
they cannot have the Divine blessing because they set aside the indispensable
Divine condition of having in the first place a right relation to God by pardon
of sin and righteousness of life; and therefore their efforts to free themselves
from difficulties or to gain a more desirable condition often end in placing
them in a worse position than they were in at first. But in the case before
us it was not the mere effort to gratify a lawful desire that brought the
judgment, but an undertaking engaged in in obedience to a Divine com-
mand. As in the case of Balaam, obedience was made a means of punishment,
That false prophet at last set out on his journey in obedience to the
word of the Lord, but “God’s anger was kindled because he went” (Num.
Xxil, 22), and punishment came to him even in his obedience. Israel at this
time desired a national victory without national repentance—they desired free-
dom from the yoke of the Philistines without submission to the yoke of Jehovah,
and thought that this would be true freedom. Their numbers were great, and
they imagined that numbers would avail them in conflict with their ancient
enemy, even although they lacked cleanness of hands and purity of heart before
God. They ignored the conditions of success laid down for them by the mouth
of Moses—“ Jf thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe and to do all His commandments which I command thee this day,
that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth... .
and the Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten
before thy face ; they shall come out against thee one way and shall flee seven
ways.” But they again found from bitter experience that the Divine threaten-
ing was no idle word. “ But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and

- 68


OHAP, IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








His statutes which 1 command thee this day. . . . . the Lord shall cause thee to
be smitien before thine enemies ; thou shalt go out one way against them and flee
seven ways before them” (Deut. xxviii. 1, 7, 15, 25). ;


II, Where the moral condition for victory is wanting, it is better to have
defeat. ‘I'he word which came to Israel and led them out to defeat was a
blessing, because defeat was just what they needed at the time. 'The defeat in
circumstance that leads to an improvement in character is a victory in reality.
If national or individual loss in material things leads to moral gain, it is better
than the most splendid worldly success. How terrible seemed the defeat of all
the purposes and plans of the mighty monarch of Babylon when he was “driven
from men, and did eat grass as oxen ;” but it was a great moral victory, for it
brought him to a higher moral standing, and taught him to “praise and honour
Him that liveth for ever and ever” (Dan, iv. 34). Many a man in humbler
walks of life has learned to know himself and his God in the day which has
seemed to bring him nothing but defeat and ruin. ‘The defeat of Israel at this
time was the first of a series of steps by which, under the rule of Samuel, they
rose to a more healthy state of national life; and, therefore, what was in the
first instance a judgment was in the end a blessing. A victory over the
Philistines, when they were in a state of opposition to God, would have been a
far greater national calamity in the end than the two crushing defeats recorded
in this chapter. Freedom from chastisement, either in the nation or in the
individual, is the most terrible curse which God can inflct. Far better is it to
suffer the severest punishment for sin.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Verse 1. Not only were the people of Israel from the oppression and
to learn that the Lord had departed dominion of its foes was absolutely
from them, but Samuel also was to impossible without its inward conver-
make the discovery that the deliverance sion to God.— Keil.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 8—11.
Tur CAPTURE OF THE ARK.


I. Here is failure in a lawful enterprise. If a man finds himself so oppressed
by a stronger power that his moral nature suffers in consequence, it is both
lawful and right to endeavour to free himself from the yoke of the oppressor.
Especially if he finds himself the slave of habits which tend to his moral
degeneration, he is bound, out of regard for his own real interests, to use every
means within his reach to obtain his freedom. ‘The enterprise against soul-
oppression, whether individual or national, is always lawful. If a nation is
under such a yoke of bondage, and can find no way to liberty except through
strife—if it finds that by reason of its oppression it is sinking in the moral scale,
and sees no possibility of bettering its condition, except by the sword—such a
nation is justified in resorting to the use of such means, Israel was so oppressed
by the Philistines. The yoke of the heathen was not only injurious to them
materially but spiritually. It was not only a national humiliation but it tended
to national degradation of soul. ‘Therefore they were fully justified in using
every lawful effort to be free, and they were not defeated because they were
engaged in an undertaking which was in itself displeasing to God.


Il. Here is failure in a lawful enterprise because undertaken in a wrong spirit.
As we have seen in considering the first defeat recorded in this chapter, Israel
69


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I,


aE ns er ee


undertook to throw off the yoke of the Philistines without submission to the
yoke of God, and this was altogether contrary to the Divine revealed will con-
cerning them. They must first submit to Jehovah, and then their enemies
would submit to them. “0, Israel, of thou wilt hearken unto mé, there shalt
no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship any strange god. . ...
Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways !
I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries. The hatersof the Lord should have submitted themselves unto Him; but
their time should have endured for ever(Ps. 1xxxi. 8-15). But they were not willing
to lend an obedient ear to the Word of the Lord, and therefore the Lord’s hand was
turned against them in their day of need. This subject is full of teaching for the
individual man. The soul of every man is by nature more or legs enslaved by
appetites and passions which will degrade him if he does not war against them,
But there is but one way to do this successfully. ‘There must be submission to
the yoke of God before we can cast off the yoke of sin and Satan. Man’s will
in its present condition is not strong enough to overcome the evil within his
own heart. “To will” may “be present with him, but how to perform that
which he wills he yinds not” (Rom. vii. 18). There must be submission to a
higher will before the Philistines of the heart can be brought into subjection,
We are “ made free from sin” by becoming “ servants to God” (Rom. vi. 22)—
by falling in with His method of salvation by the death of His Son, and thus
receiving from Him the Divine help by which alone we can conquer sin within
us. The man who sets out to free himself from the bondage of any sinful habit
in any other way will find himself in the condition of Israel at this time—he
will be baffled and beaten on every side, and will have to give up the contest in
despair. ‘The evil spirit may go out for a time, but when he returns he will
find the house unoccupied by any stronger power, and “then goeth he, and
taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter
in and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse than the Jirst”
(Matt. xii, 43-45).


III, Failure in any lawful enterprise demands inquiry into the cause of
the failure. Even Israel said, “ Wherefore hath the Lord smitten us to-day ?”
(ver. 3). He who has failed to overcome any sinful habit within himself, or has
been defeated in his efforts to lessen the power of evil in the world, should ask
himself why it is so. If he knows that the end for which he strives is for the
glory of God, he will do well to suspect that the cause of the failure rests with
himself, and a searching and sincere inquiry into the state of his own heart
may lead to some wholesome discoveries, and prevent defeat in future efforts,
Israel here admits that the hand of God was behind the hand of the Philistines,
and that it was Jehovah who had smitten them by the sword of their enemies ;
but their inquiry lacked earnestness and sincerity, They admit that their
failure demands investigation, but they stop short without arriving at the real
cause of their defeat. ‘They were unwilling to push the question to its final
issue; but such a question asked with a desire to find the real answer cannot
fail to bring instruction to the man who asks it.


IV. Unwillingness to admit the real cause of failure will probably lead to
the use of means which will end in greater disaster. The inhabitants of a
house which is built upon a sandy foundation may blame the thunder when the


added to a structure upon such a foundation is only hastening its downfall and
the aye enion of its mhabitants, They have entirely missed the real root of


OHaP. Iv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





the mischief. The thunder may be the occasion of the damage, but it is not
the cause. That is to be found in the nature of the soil upon which the house
is built, and their failure to find it leads them to use means which end in
greater disaster. So it was with Israel in their first defeat. They did not
search deep enough to find the real cause of their discomfiture. The Philistines
under God were the occasion, but their own sin was the cause of their misfortune,
and failing to find it they rushed to the use of means which resulted in a more
shameful defeat and a more terrible humiliation. ‘I'o send for the ark of God
into the field was useless, because that state of heart was wanting which made
the symbol of God’s presence anything more than a chest of wood—it was but
tu cast greater dishonour upon the God whose favour alone made the ark a
sacred thing, and thus to add another sin to the many which already stained
their national history. And God demonstrates the uselessness and unlawfulness
of their effort by permitting this most sacred symbol to fall into the hands of
the uncircumcised Philistines.


_V. Relationship to the victories of the past without the character of the
victors may lead to wrong inferences and fatal results. There are many men
of the present day who have a special relationship to the great events of the
past, because they are descendants of those who were the actors in those events.
But if they infer from their mere relationship that they are as fit to accomplish
great things as their forefathers were, they fall into an error which may be
fatal to themselves and others. They must first make sure that they possess
the mental and moral qualities by which their ancestors became so renowned,
It is not enough to be bone of their bone and flesh of their flesh unless they
partake of their spirit. ‘The children of the great and good must be great and
good themselves if they would do the great deeds of their fathers. It they
venture upon great enterprises, looking for success to their descent from some
hero of the past, they will find that it will avail them nothing to bear his name
if they lack his courage, his self-denial, his fortitude and his faith. Priests
bearing the ark of God had in the past history of Israel made a way by which they
had advanced to glorious victory. There had been a memorable day in their
history when “as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of
the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the waiter, that the
waters were cut off and the people passed over right against Jericho” (Josh. iii.
16). And perhaps both priests and people hoped for some such interposition of
God on the present occasion. But then the ark was borne by men who
had faith in God—the feet of those by whose touch under God Jordan was
driven back, were cleaner feet that those of Hophni and Phinehas. The
priests who stood firm in the midst of Jordan—the first to descend into
its bed and the last to leave it—had confidence in the living God, and
their courage and faith spread itself throughout all the ranks of Israel,
and inspired them with a like faith and courage. But although the same
ark of God was in the midst of Israel to-day it was borne apon the
shoulders of men who had only a bodily kinship to their ancestors, and
who, instead of inciting the people to confide in the God of their fathers,
had brought His name and His worship into contempt. It was an act of the
highest presumption on their part to bring the ark of God into the field,
knowing, as they did, that though they belonged to a priestly family, they had
none of the qualifications for the priestly office. If they relied upon their
relationship to the victors of the past they were soon to become examples to all
succeeding ages of the futility of such a reliance.


VI. When superstition is the foundation of joy, the joy will soon be turned
into sorrow: It is superstition to attach any value to the symbol when that
71


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL, BOOK LE





which makes the symbol worth anything has departed. The human body is a
goodly and precious object, while it is tenanted by a living soul; but without
the soul it is only dead matter. So is it witha symbol, and that which it
signifies. When that which it symbolises is gone it is as a body without life.
The ark was intended to be a sign to the Israelites of the presence in their midst
of the invisible God. The mercy seat, upon which the blood of atonement had
been sprinkled, and over which the glory of God had been visibly manifested, had
been a token of the favour of Him to whom Israel had bound themselves te
render obedience. But the covenant had been broken by their faithlessness,
end the presence in their midst of the symbol of what had for a time ceased to
exist, was of as little worth as the presence of a corpse in the place of a living
man. ‘To attach any value to it was an act of ignorant superstition, and the
hope founded upon such a basis must end in disappointment. “ When the
ark of the covenant came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great
shout” (ver. 5), but their triumph was of short duration because it was
founded upon a superstition. Joy springing from such a source only increases
the bitterness of the disappointment when the true state of things is revealed,
and men should look well to the foundation of their hope and joy and
see that it is founded upon the truth of God, or the false hope will be but as
the lightning flash which is gone in the twinkling of an eye, and makes the
darkness all around seem deeper than it was before. The shout that now rang
through the Hebrew camp was a terrible contrast to the cry of despair that ran
through the host when the ark of God was taken.


VII. Men will fight as valiantly for a bad cause as for a good one. The
Philistines fought as valiantly as the Israelites (ver. 10). History furnishes us
with abundant testimony to the fact that courage is born of error as well as of
truth. He who believes a lie may contend for it as valiantly as he who fights
for the very truth of God. The Israelites, fallen as they were, had more of
right and truth on their side than their enemies had, yet the Philistines were at
least as bold and brave as they were. Though the heathen believed that they
were opposed by the mighty gods that smote the Egyptians, they resolved to
quit themselves like men, and fight even unto death rather than become
servants to the Hebrews. And the issue of the battle shows that their resolu-
tion did not falter. The courage of the battle-field is to a large degree of an
animal nature, hence the savage will stand and die at his post with as much
fortitude as the citizen soldier, and he who fights without knowing what he
fights for, or for the worst of causes, will be as brave as he who fights from the
purest and most patriotic motives, No men ever fought in a more unjust cause
than the Spaniards who sought to crush the liberties of the N etherlanders, and
yet their bravery was on many occasions equal to that of their opponents, who
were engaged in the holiest of all struggles—the struggle for religious freedom,


OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 8. The voice of many of us
now is like to the voice of the Jews in
the time of their distress, “ Bring us
the ark,” say they, “that it may save
us,” when, alas, they were destroyed
by the Philistines for all their ark. So
thou, reader, when conscience frighteth
thee, or death comes nigh thee, pro-
bablly speakest in thine heart, Come,
bring a the ark that may save me,

7


bring me the sacrament that shall save
me; thou runnest to thy baptism, to
thy sabbath, to privileges, and thence
concludest that thou canst not be con-
demned ; when, alas, thou mayest go
to hell fire for all thy font-water, and
to eternal torments, though thou hast
often been at the Lord’s table (Matt.
vil. 22). Baptismal water is not the
laver of regeneration, Many sit at


OHAP. IV.





the Lord’s table which do not taste of
His supper. .... Spiritual privileges
always commend God to us, but not
us to God.— Swinnock.

“Trust ye not in lying words,” says
the prophet (Jer. vii. 4), “saying, The
temple of the Lord;” but if ye
thoroughly amend your ways, “then
will I cause you to dwell in this place
for ever and ever” (ver. 7). It is
observable that God there refers to
this history, and says, “Go ye now
to Shiloh, and see what I did to it
for the wickedness of my people,
Probably David remembered it, when
he refused to allow the ark to be
carried with him in his retreat before
Absalom out of Jerusalem (2 Sam. xv.
25).— Wordsworth.

As Israel became acted on by the
system which prevailed under Eli,
superstition succeeded to the fear of
God. Now superstition is the refuge
of the conscience when it has lost the
sense of God’s personal presence. You
may measure by its prevalence the
absence of God from men’s hearts.
It will be natural that in an age of
mere outward respect for religion,
superstition should be advancing and
regaining its hold.—A//ord.

It will often happen that those who
are least affected by the overwhelming
sense of God’s abiding presence with
His Church, the authority of her
ministry and the power of her ordi-
nances, will be found, and that too
because of their little inward affection,
most forward on all occasions to talk
about, and in argument to contend for,
the high privileges with which Christ
has endowed her. Such men, like the
Israelites when defeated by the Philis-
tines, in the hope of victory scrupie
not at every conflict with their enemies
to lay bare, as it were, the veiled glories
of the tabernacle, and at their own
will to bring forth the ark of the cove-
nant, as if that alone were wanting to
strike dismay into the opposing ranks
and ensure success...... But to
make war in the name of the Lord
against athers only, and not against
our own sins and iniquities, is to
pollute the name of God and cause


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


His offering to be abhorred.— Bishop
Fuljord,


Ver. 4. Jehovah as covenant-God
is more properly designated in a two-
fold manner, corresponding to the
situation, in which the Israelites desire
His Almighty help, which they think
to be externally connected with the
ark, As Jehovah Sabbaoth (Lord of
Hosts), He is the Almighty ruler and
commander of the heavenly powers.
As Jehovah who “dwells above the
cherubim,” He is the living God, the
God of the completest fulness of power
and life, who reveals Himself on earth
in His glory, exaltedness, and dominion
over all the fulness of the life which
has been called into being by Him as
Creator. This designation of God is
never found except in relation to the
ark, which is conceived of as the throne
of the covenant-God, who dwells as
King in the midst of His people. The
cherubim are not representatives of the
heavenly powers, since they are, as to
form, made up of elements of the ving,
animate, earthly creation which cul-
minates in man. Representing this,
they set forth, in their position on the
ark, the ruling might and majesty of
the Living God, as it is revealed over
the manifoldness of the highest and
completest life of the animate creation.
In these two designations of God, then,
reference is had to the glory and do-
minion of God, which embraces and
high exceeds all creaturely life in heaven
and on earth, and whose saving interr
position the Israelites made dependent
on the presence of the ark. In sharpest
contrast to this indication of God’s
loftiness and majesty, stands the men-
tion of the two priests, Hophni and
Phinehas, whose worthlessness has been
before set forth, and who represent the
whole of the moral corruption and
sham religious life of the people.—
Lange's Commentary.


Ver. 5. When the ark was brought
into the host, though with mean and
wicked attendance, Israel doth, as it
were, fill the heaven and shake the
earth with shouts -= *“ *he ark and

78


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


victory were no less inseparable than
they and their sins, Even the lewdest
men will be looking for favour from
that God whom they cared not to dis-
please, contrary to the conscience of
their deservings ; presumption doth
the same in wicked men which faith
doth in the holiest. Those that re-
garded not the God of the ark think
themselves safe and happy in the ark
of God. Vain men are transported
with a confidence in the outside of
religion, not regarding the substance
and soul of it, which only can give
them true peace.—Bp. Hall.


Ver. 9. Observe the Philistines
crying, “God is come into the camp ;
woe unto us!” etc. Yet they settle,
hearten, harden themselves to fight
against Him. .... Refractory and
perverse affections make a man frantic.
There may be a sober knowledge, that
the patient may say, “I see better
things,” and a faith (but such as is
incident to devils) “I allow of them,”
but where the whole man is tyrannised
over by the regent-house of irrefragable
affects, he concludes his course with,
“T follow the worse.”—7. Adams.


Ver. 10. It is just the same now,
when we take merely a_ historical
Christ outside us for our Redeemer,
He must prove His help chiefly inter-
nally by His Holy Spirit, to redeem
us out of the hands of the Philistines ;
though externally He must not be
thrown into the shade, as accomplish-
ing our justification. If we had not
Christ, we could never stand. But if
we have Him in no other way than
merely without us, and under us, if we
only preach about Him, teach, hear,
read, talk, discuss, and dispute about
Him, take His name into our mouth,
but will not let Him work and show
His power in us, He will no more help
us than the ark helped the Israelites.
—Lerlenberger Bible.

It is one of the weightiest laws in
the kingdom of God, that when His
people, who profess His name, do not
show covenant fidelity in faith and
obedience, but, under cover of merely

4





BOOK L


external piety, serve Him in appear-
ance only, being in heart and life far
from Him, He gives them up for pun-
ishment to the world, before which
they have not magnified the honour ot
His name, but have covered it with
reproach.—Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 11. “ The ark of God was
taken.” Why did God permit this?
I. In order to show that His presence
had forsaken Israel, because they had
forsaken Him. II. In order to show
that visible ordinances of religion only
profit those who have the spirit of
religion within them. III. In order
to show that though men are bound to
use the means of grace which God has
instituted for the conveyance of His
blessings to them, yet God’s presence
and working are not tied to those
means. He can act without them.—
Wordsworth.

Instead of bewailing a nation’s sins,
and preaching public repentance and
interceding for mercy from a forgiving
God, Hophni and Phinehas had joined
in the superstitious desire to take the
ark into the field of battle, and they
met with a bloody and ignominous
death as the price of their perilous
temerity and open profanity. It is
ever dangerous for ministers of religion
to mix in the strife of war. Not that
it is foreign to their duty to become
pastors of soldiers—that is a duty in-
cumbent upon them... .. But it ill
becomes the minister of peace to mix
in the clang of arms. It was an evil
day for Hophni and Phinehas when
they took the ark of the covenant from
Shiloh, and sought to work on the
fanaticism of the people by unveiling
the Holiest of all. They provoked the
Judgment which shed their blood. I¢
was an evil day for Zwingle when he
left his chaplain’s post to wear a
helmet, a sword, and a battle-axe :
covered with wounds, insulted, killed,
he lay under a tree at Cappel; not yet
forty-eight years of age, his body cut
and burned, and his ashes driven to


the winds. “He had wielded an arm
that God had forbidden,” says
D’Aubigné ; “ the helmet had covered


OHAP., EV.


his head, and he had grasped the
halberd. His more devoted friends
were themselves astonished, and ex-
claimed, ‘ We knew not what to say—
a bishop in arms.’ The bolt had fur-
rowed the cloud, the blow had reached
the reformer, and his body was no
more than a handful of dust in the
palm of a soldier.”—Steele.
The ark of God was taken. These
words record the most disastrous event
that had till then befallen the children
of Israel. . . . Even in the worst times,
when the revolt might seem universal,
there were always some, however few,
who constituted the Church, the true
Israel, who never bowed the knee to a
false god; and to all such, Shiloh, with
the tabernacle, the altar of burnt
offering, and the ark of the covenant,
would be a precious spot, towards which
their thoughts would turn in every
season of distress and disaster. ....
So long as there was no visible intima-
tion that God had deserted Shiloh,
true believers in Israel would still
cherish the hope that, however severe
might be the judgments with which
God visited them, He had not finally
given them up... . But now what
could every thoughtful man in Israel
conclude, but that all the wonderful
deliverances in connection with the
ark of which their fathers had told
them, were at anend?... The state
of the people of God at the time here


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


referred to, as well as the immediate
cause of their being brought into that
state, reminds us of another period in
which the Church must have been in
great darkness and perplexity. I refer
to the time when our Lord was de-
livered into the hands of ungodly men,
when He was crucified, and remained
for a time under the power of death.
I do not say that the one is designedly
typical of the other. But we know
that the ark was in various respects a
remarkable type of Christ, and the
passage before us naturally suggests, at
least, his humiliation and death.—J.
Gordon.

Rather than God will humour super-
stition in Israelites, he will suffer His
own ark to fall into the hands of
Philistines: rather will He seem to
slacken His hand of protection, than
He will be thought to have His hands
bound by a formal mis-confidence.
The slaughter of the Israelites was no
plague to this ; it wasa greater plague
rather to them that should survive and
behold it. The two sons of Eli, who
had helped to corrupt their brethren,
die by the hand of the uncircumcised,
and are now too late separated from
the ark of God by Philistines, who
should have been before separated by
their father ; they had formerly lived
to bring God’s altar into contempt,
and now live tu carry His ark into
captivity.— Bishop Aall. 3


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 12—22
Tue Deatu or ELL


I. All God’s promises become histories. Inthe natural world there is promise
of what shall be, and in due time there is the history of its having been. The
green blade of spring is a promise of the harvest that is by and by a fact in the
history of the world. The cloud no bigger than a man’s hand upon the horizon
is the promise of the storm that may be presently set down in the catalogue of
destructive visitations that have devastated the earth. In the days of Noah a
promise of judgment hung over the people of his day for one hundred and
twenty years. So long was it before the cloud burst that the terror which was
perhaps aroused at the first announcement of its appearance passed away long
before the storm burst. But it came, and the flood is now a fact in the history
of the world. God had foretold the judgment which is described in this chapter
some years before. If the message which had been sent to the house of Eli had
eyer caused the hearts of Hophni and Phinehas to quake, the vied in the


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK





—


execution of the sentence had probably only hardened them in their sin, and
perhaps even Eli himself might have begun to hope that it would not be so
fertile as it had seemed to him at first. But on this memorable day God gave
a demonstration to all coming ages that all His promises, whether of judgment or
mercy, will one day become facts in the history of the universe. A promise was
made to Isaiah concerning the deliverance of his nation from Babylon long before
it went into captivity, but both captivity and deliverance, with all the circum-
stances foretold concerning the latter in Isaiah xlv., have long ago become well-
known historic facts. The great fact in which all history centres—the incarnation
of the Son of God—was for ages only a promise. ‘The dim outline given to our
first parents in Eden was like the tiny germ bursting from the seed which grew
into the blade and ear as the ages rolled, until the promise became the great
historic event of the world. And there are promises now waiting to become
histories, and they will as surely have their fulfilment as those that have gone
before. What has been is a pledge of what will be. Men say, concerning
Christ’s second advent, “Where is the promise of His coming?” But that

romise of the Lord will one day as surely be a fact of past history as those that
ae gone before.


II, The effects produced by the fulfilment of this promise of judgment,
There was not a family in the land who was not smitten with a sense of national
calamity. A stab at the heart sends a pain through all the frame, the
extremities of the body feel a blow aimed at the seat of life. In countries
where the army is drawn from the fields and workshops of the people, the
strength of the nation is often found gathered upon the battle-field, and a
defeat there is a blow at its very heart and sends a thrill of anguish into every
home. Such was the nature of the blow which Israel had now sustained, and
the entire body of the nation felt the shock. Wherever there was a child of
Abraham the news of the defeat pierced him through like a stab of cold steel,
But the calamity was more intensely felt by some households than by others,
In any time of national calamity the leaders of the nation have to bear a larger
‘ortion of the sorrow than the masses. They lose more in every way. They
ave more to lose—more in substance—more in honour: as their position has
been higher, their fall is greater, and as more responsibility has rested upon
them, so their disgrace is heavier. Although all the families of Israel suffered
on this day none suffered so much as the house of Eli. Even if it had not been
the execution of a special judgment upon them, their position would have made
them the greatest sufferers, but the consciousness that the calamity was mainly
due to the sins of their house intensified a thousand-fold the severity of the
blow. The effect that the news had upon the aged high-priest shows how
severely he felt it. In felling an aged oak many a stroke of the hatchet may be
dealt before there is any sign of its fall, but at length the woodman gathers all
his strength for a final stroke, which, following upon all that have gone before,
lays it even with the ground. So it is with men and the strokes of adverse
providence—they stand upright after having received many a heavy blow, but
one may come at last which, finding their courage and patience weakened
by the trials of the past, crushes them altogether. Job bore up manfully against
tepeated and heavy blows, but at last a stroke fell which laid even this brave
and patient man prostrate like a fallen tree, Eli had seen many a sad day in
the course of a life which covered nearly a century, but he had never seen a
day like this. Even now he bore calmly the news of Israel’s defeat, and even
that of the death of his sons, put the tidings that the ark of God was taken
was too much to bear and live—this stroke killed him.


III, Calamity often reveals excellencies which are hidden in prosperity,
There are many men in the Church of God living in ease and comfort who io
46


OMAP Iv. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





not seem to possess any extraordinary heroism. But very often such men, under
circumstances of special trial, reveal a nobility of character that men never
knew before that they possessed. Like spices, they must be crushed before they
yield their fragrance. What is recorded of the life of Eli does not leave the
impression that he was a very exalted character; but the fact that it was the
loss of the ark of God that killed him, and not the news of his own personal
bereavement, shows that there was much latent patriotism in him, notwithstanding
his grave shortcomings. We should never have known how much he really
prized the hallowed tokens of God’s covenant-relation to Israel if this calamity
had not befalien him. ‘The thought that God had departed from his people
broke his heart before he fell and broke his neck. It is the same with his
daughter-in-law. We should never have known of this woman’s piety if this
blow had not fallen upon her. It was not the death of her father, or of her
husband, that made her refuse to be comforted and to go down to the grave
with Ichabod upon her lips, but “ she said, The glory ts departed from Israel ;
Jor the ark of God is taken.”


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 13. There be four reasons why
the people of God are so much troubled
when the ark of God is in danger.
I. Because of the great love they bear
to it. As “God loved the gates of
Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob” (Psalm Ixxxvii. 2), so the

ople of God love the ordinances
of God, and the faithful ministers of
Christ. “Lord, I have loved the
habitation of Thy house, and the place
where Thine honour dwelleth” (Psalm
xxvi. 8). Now love stirreth up the
affections, as young Cresus, though he
were dumb, yet seeing his father like
to be killed, cried out “Do not kill
my father!” Such is the love of the
saints of God to the ark; they cannot
but tremble when they see the ark in
danger, and for Sion’s sake they cannot
hold their peace, and they cannot
be silent until the Lord make the
righteousness thereof go out like
brightness, and the salvation thereof
asa lamp that burneth. II. Because
of the interest they have in the ark
of God. Interest stirreth up affection
as when another man’s house is on
fire ; as you had a lamentable and sad
providence this last week, and it is not
to be forgotten how suddenly in all
our feastings may God dash all our
mirth. Now consider, how were they
affected that had an interest in those
that were burned; so the people of


God have an interest in the ark. God
is the haven of a child of God, his
portion and inheritance, and when
God begins to forsake them they can-
not but be troubled. The ordinances
of God are the jewels of a Christian
and the treasure of a Christian, and
the loss of them cannot but trouble
them. III. Because of the mischiefs
that come upon a nation when the ark
is lost. Woe be to that nation when
the ark is gone. For when the ark of
God is taken then the ways of Zion
mourn, and none come to her solemn
assemblies. That is matter of sadness.
Then the ministers of Christ are driven
into corners. ‘This is matter of heart-
trembling. Then the souls of men are
in danger. There is cause of sadness.
Then do the enemies of God blaspheme,
and then is Jesus Christ trampled under
foot. IV. Because of their accessari-
ness to the losing of the ark. And
this was that which made Eli so much
troubled, because he knew that for his
sin God suffered the ark to be taken.
And there is none of us so holy but our
consciences must accuse us. We have
done something that might cause God
to take the ark from us.—&. Calamy,
1662.


Ver, 22. With the surrender of the
earthly throne of His glory the Lord
appeared to have abolished His

i cis


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


—_—_—_————_—_—OOOO


covenant of grace with Israel ; for the
ark, with the tables of the law and the
capporeth, was the visible pledge of
the covenant of grace which Jehovah
had made with Israel.— Keil.

The glory is departed from Israel—
so it seemed in the eyes of men. But
with God there is “no variableness or
shadow of turning” (Jas. L 17); and
in that dark night of sorrow to the
Hebrew Church and nation His glory
shone forth most brightly. There is
no Ichabod to God. His sovereign
power and Divine independence were
seen to work more gloriously and gra-
ciously even when the visible Church
appeared to be overthrown. . ...
He inaugurated a new era in Samuel,
and prepared the way for the Gospel.
He showed that the Aaronical priest-
hood was only parenthetical and pro-
visional ; that the Levitical ordinances
were not necessary to God’s gracious
dealings with His people; that they
were shadows which would one day
pass away; that they were like a
scaffold for building up a house—the
Church of Christ. . .. . God thus
gave a prophetic foreshadowing of what
was more fully displayed to the world
when the material temple of Jerusalem


BOOK 1,





was destroyed by the Romans, and the
universal Church of Christ was raised
up in its stead.— Wordsworth.

The union of the heart with God
in the deepest foundation of its being
reveals itself in times of great misfor-
tune and suffering in this, that the
sorrow and mourning is not restricted
to the loss of earthly human posses-
sions, but directs itself chiefly to the
loss and lack of God’s gracious pre-
sence, and thus shows that for the
inner life the glory of God and blessed-
ness in communion with Him is become
the highest good. So here, in this
refraining from grief over the loss of
what to the flesh was the nearest and
dearest, and in the outspoken sorrow
only over the violence done to God’s
honour and the contempt cast on His
name, is verified the Lord’s word, “ He
who forsaketh not father or mother,
or brother, etc., is not worthy of me,”
Lange’s Commentary.

What cares she for a posterity which
should want the ark? What cares she
for a son come into the world of Israel
when God was gone from it? And
how willingly doth she depart from
them, from whom God was departed '
Bishop Hall,


———————————_—s


CHAPTER V.


CriricaL aND Exposrrory Norss.—Ver. 1. “ Ashdod.”


One of the five Philistine satrapfes,


about thirty-two miles north of Gaza, and about a mile from the sea. It is now the little village


of Esdtd.


Ver. 2, “Dagon.” One of the chief Philistine deities, “ With regard to the image of Dagon,
compounded of a man and fish, é¢., of a human body with head and hands, and a fish’s tail, see
Stark’s Gaza and Layard’s Nineveh, where there is a bas-relief from Khorsabad, in which ‘a


figure is seen swimming in the sea, with the u


wearing the ordinary conical tiara of royalty,
resembling the body of a fish.’


pper part of the body resembling a bearded man,
adorned with elephant’s tusks, and the lower part
(Starke.) As the bas-relief represents (according to Layard)


the war of an Assyrian king with the inhabitants of the coasts of Syria, most probably of Sargon,
who had to carry on a long conflict with the Philistian towns, more especially with Ashdod,
there can hardly be any doubt that we have a representation af the Philistian Dagon here,


This deity was a personification of the generative and vivifying principle of nature for which the
fish, with its innumerable multiplication, was specially adapted, and set forth the Giver of all


earthly good.” (Keil. )


Ver. 4. “The word were is not in the origin,
palms of Dagon, being cut off, were lying on t.


al, and would be better omitted ; the head and
he threshold. Here was the miracle, and it was


very significant. It was done by the Divine power. The head and palms of Dagon, the chiefest


of his members, the emblems of his strength, were lopped off.”
stump,” etc. aimed “only Dagon, the fish (from dag, a feh), the ignoblest part, was left.”


(We


( Wordsworth.) “Only the


OHaP, V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Ver. 5. “Therefore neither the priests—tread on the threshold,” etc. “Cf. Zeph. 1. 9.
‘On the same day will I punish all those that leap on (or over) the threshold.’ No doubt this
phrase was intended (perhaps with some irony) to describe the worshippers of the Philistian
Dagon.” ( Hobson.)


Ver. 6. “He destroyed them.” From chap. vi. 4, 5, 11, 18, where, besides the votive
offering referring to the bodily disease, a second, the golden mice, is expressly mentioned, it is
clear that, in addition to the corporal plague, another, a land-plague, had fallen on the
Philistines. ‘“ He destroyed them” (like “ destruction” or “ desolation,” in Mic. vi. 13, used
of persons) denotes a wasting of the land, that is, of the produce of the fields, as the support of
human life, by mice which “destroy the land” (chap. vi. 5). (Hrdmann,) “We must go to
the East for parallels to these ancient plagues. A parallel to this plague of mice is furnished
in the recent history of Ceylon. In 1848, the coffee-crop of that fertile island was utterly
destroyed by mice, and the people, losing their staple harvest, were reduced to the most terrible
misery and want.” (8. Cox.) “Emerods.” “The disease we call bleeding piles,” a disease
very common in Eastern lands, where the extreme heat induces indisposition to exercise, and
the liver is very apt to grow sluggish and weak. The word is vernacular English for the Greek
compound from which we derive the technical medical terms, “ hemorrhoids, hemorrhage,”
which designate a flow of blood. (S.Cow.) “The heathen generally regarded diseases affecting
the secret parts of the body as punishments from the gods for trespasses committed against
themselves.” (Jamieson.)


Ver 8. “Let the ark of the God of Israel," etc. The princes of the Philistines probably
imagined that the calamity which the Ashdodites attributed to the ark of God, either did not
proceed from the ark, ¢.e., from the God of Israel, or if actually connected with its presence,
simply arose from the fact that the city itself was hateful to the God of the Israelites, or that
the Dagon of Ashdod was weaker than the Jehovah of Israel ; they therefore resolved to let
the ark be taken to Gath in order to pacify the Ashdodites.” (Keil.) “ Gath.” Also one of the
five Philistian satrapies. Its site is not accurately known, but it is generally identified with
the modern Tell-es-Safich, 10 miles east of Ashdod, and about the same distance S. by E. of
Ekron. (See Smith’s Biblical Dictionary.)


Ver. 10. “Ekron.” Another of the princely cities, now Akir.


Ver. 12. ‘The cry of the city went up to heaven.” “The disease is attended with acute
pain ” (Jamieson).


Note.—This chapter, with the following, strikingly illustrates the non-missionary character of
the old dispensation. For centuries the Israelites were near neighbours of the Philistines, and
had some acquaintance with their political and religious institutions. Yet the Philistines had at
this time only a garbled and distorted account (ch. iv. 8) of the history of the Israelites, derived
probably from tradition, and seemingly no particular knowledge of their religion, nor did the
Israelites ever attempt, though they were in the times of Samson and David in close connection
with Philistia, to carry thither a knowledge of what they yet believed to be the only true
religion. This religious isolation was no doubt a part of the Divine plan for the development
of the theocratic kingdom, guarding it against the taints of idolatry, and permitting the chosen
people thoroughly to apprehend and appropriate the truth which was then to go from them to
all the world. But if we look for the natural causes which produced this isolation in ancient
times, we shall find one in the narrowness of civilisation of ancient times, where the absence of
means of social and literary communication fostered mutual ignorance and made sympathy
almost impossible, and another in the peculiarly national local nature of the religion of Israel,
with its central sanctuary and its whole system grounded in the past history of the nation,
presenting thus great obstacles to a foreigner who wished to become a worshipper of Jehovah,
(Amer. Tranr. of Lange’s Commentary).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH—Verees 1-6.
Tur Fatt or Dagon.


I. God works in silence and in secret against false systems of religion to
give men a public and sudden proof of their folly. Dagon’s downfall took
place in the secrecy of the night: when daylight came, his destruction was
made apparent. God’s kingdom of nature, and His kingdom of grace, are alike
in this, that neither “ come with observation ” (Luke xvii. 20). All the winter
nature seems to be at a standstill, but all the time secret preparation is going on
beneath the ground and within the plants for the outburst of life vara in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


=


BOOK L.





the spring. And in His spiritual kingdom there have often been times and
seasons in which there has seémed to be hardly any true religious life left in the
world, when solitary believers in God here and there have been ready to exclaim
with the prophet of old, “JZ, even I only, am left” (1 Kings xix. 14). But it
has often been found that such seasons of darkness have been followed by a day
in which the truth of God has won great victories in the hearts of men, givin

proof that His spirit has been, during all the long night, working silently an


secretly in men’s hearts.


So it was before the downfall of Paganism after the


coming of Christ, and before the overthrow of the Papal tyranny at the time


of the Reformation.


of the sacred ark of the covenant in the


When the pious Israelite lay down that night and thought


house of Dagon, he must have been


ready to exclaim with the dying wife of Phinehas, “The glory is departed from


Israel,”


But God at that very hour was working in secret, and was dealing a


heavy blow at the idolatry of the Philistines,


TY. Even miraculous evidence does not always suffice to bring men to
acknowledge God. Experience of the fallacy of the advice of a quack is the
surest way, we think, to lead men to put faith in the advice of a skilful
physician ; and when men have had the powerlessness of the gods whom they
worship proved to them by unmistakable evidence, we should expect them to
be ready to embrace a religion based upon supernatural evidence if history and


experience did not testify to the contrary
. an idol is nothing in the world” (1 Ce
riest,
His second fall upon the threshold seemed
be trodden under foot, yet they venerated the spot upon which he fell.
not more unwilling to receive evidence of the truth than the


into the minds of the Philistine


Philistines were


min cxity of mankind. Israel was formed
an


. Dagon testified by his first fall that
r. viii. 4). But jt brought no conviction


They “set him in his place again.”
to tell them that he was only fit to
But the


into a nation by miraculous power,


sustained miraculously for forty years, and over and over again were
delivered from their distresses by miraculous interposition, yet God’s testimony
concerning them is, “ Ephraim is Joined unto idols” (Hosea iv. 17). The Son


of God Himself proved that He came from the Father
but they made no impression upon the mass of the Jewish people,


by His “ mighty works,”
A delusion


proved 1s not a delusion abandoned, And Our Lord Himself tells us the reason


why.
are evil” (John iii. 19).


It is because “men love darkness


rather than light, because their deedg


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 1-5. Dagon before the ark, or
heathenism conquered at the feet of
the living God. 1. Inthe domain of
its power—its own abode (verses 1, 2),
2. Through the secret demonstration
of the power of the Lord (verses 8, 4),
3. Amid the destruction of its power
and glory—the face, as a sign of its
worthless glory and vain beauty, struck
down to the earth; the head also, as
the seat of the wisdom which is
alienated from God, and opposed to
God ; the hands, as a symbol of the
powers of darkness which work therein.
cut off (verses 3-5). The Sall of
heathenism. 1. It is thrown dows

80


before the power of God, manifesting
Himself as present in His Word (the
law and testimony in the ark). 2. Its
power broken and destroyed through
the secretly working power of the
Spirit of God. 3. Ever a more and
more glorious revelation of the power
of God, which casts down heathenism
in the light of the day of salvation. —
Lange's Commentary.

Where God comes with His ark and
with His testimony, there He smites
the idols to the ground ; idolatry must
fall where His gospel finds a place.—
Berlenberger Bible,

Tf men did not mistake God, they


CHAP, V.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





could not arise to such heights of im-
piety ; the acts of His just judgments
are imputed to impotence. Dagon had
never so great a day, so many sacrifices,
4s now that he seems to take the God
of Israel prisoner. Where should the
captive be bestowed, but in custody of
the victor? It is not love, but insulta-
tion, that lodges the ark close beside
Dagon. What a spectacle was this, to
see uncircumcised Philistines laying
their profane hands on the testimony
of God’s presence ! to see the glorious
mercy-seat under the roof of an idol!
to see the two cherubims spreading
their wings under a false god! O the
deep and holy wisdom cf the Almighty,
which over-reaches all the finiteconceits
of His creatures, who, while He seems
most to neglect Himself, fetches about
most glory to His own name! He
winks and sits still on purpose to see
what men would do, and is content to
suffer indignity from His creature for
a time, that He may be everlastingly
magnified in His justice and power:
that honour pleaseth God and men
best, which is raised out of contempt.
.... If the Israelites put confidence
in the ark, can we marvel that the
Philistines did put confidence in that
power, which, as they thought, had
conquered the ark? ‘I'he less is ever
subject unto the greater; what could
they now think, but that heaven and
earth were theirs ? Security and pre-
sumption attend ever at the threshold
of ruin. God will let them sleep in this
confidence ; in the morning they shall
find how vainly they have dreamed !
Now they begin to find they have but
gloried in their own plague, and over-
thrown nothing but their own peace.
. . . . Dagon hath a house, when God
hath but a tabernacle ; it is no measur-
ing of religion by outward glory.—
Bishop Hall.

The foolish Philistines thought that
the same house could hold both the
ark and Dagon, as if an insensible
statue were a fit companion for the
living God. In the morning they come
to thank Dagon for the victory, and to
fall down before him before whom they


thought the God of Israel was fallen ; pe


and lo! now they find the keeper flat
on his face before the prisoner. Had
they formerly, of their own accord,
with awful reverence, laid him in this
posture of a humble prostration, yet
God would not have brooked the in-
dignity of such an entertainment. But
seeing they durst set up their idol
cheek by cheek with their Maker, let
them go read their folly in the temple
floor, and confess that He who did cast
their god so low, could cast them lower,
Such a shame doth the Lord owe all
them which will be making matches
betwixt Him and Belial. Yet they |
consider not, How should this god
raise us who is not able to stand or
rise himself? Strange they must con-


- fess it, that whereas Dagon was wont


to stand, and themselves to fall down ;
now Dagon was fallen down, and them-
selves stood, and must help up with
their own god. Yea, their god seems
to worship them on his face, and to
crave that succour from them which he
was never able to give them. Yet in
his place they set him again, and now
lift up those hands to him which
helped to lift him up and prostrate
those faces to him before whom he lay
prostrate. So can idolatry turn men
into the stocks and stones which they
worship: “ They that make them are
like unto them.” But will the Lord
put it up thus? No, the next fall
shall burst it to pieces; that they
may sensibly perceive how God scorns
a@ competitor, and that there is no
agreement betwixt Him and _ idols.
Now, what is the difference between
the Philistines and the Papists? The
Philistines would set God in the temple
of idols; the Papists would set idols
in the temple of God. Both agree in
this, that they would make God and
idols agree together.—7. Adams.


Ver. 3. Because you have broken
your purpose, do not allow it to go
unmended. Even the heathen, with so
base a conception of divinity as Dagon
was, when Dagon fell to the ground,
lifted him up again and put him in his

lace. When, not your idol, but your
right ideal, falls to the ground, though
81


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


BOOK I:





its head and _ its feet be broken, lift it
up and put it in its place again. Be-
cause you have broken faith and fealty
to that which you meant to be, and
meant to do, it is no reason why you
should not swear again, and again go
forward.— Beecher.


Ver. 4. The prevalence of idolatry
in the heart of man. Dagon has still
his temple there, The great idolatry
of mankind is self. . . . Christ is the
true ark of the covenant, and when
He takes possession of the temple of
man’s heart, then the Dagon of the
place is dethroned ; it loses its head
and hands, its carnal wisdom and carnal
works, at the very threshold of the
sanctuary, but still the stwmp is left ;
however powerful the principle of in-


the remnant of indwelling sin. And
while we might unfeignedly desire that
even the stump of sin and self were
gone, we may well be thankful if no
more be left. . . . We know not whe-
ther the priests of Dagon erected
another idol upon the stump of the
broken one; but this we know, that
many idols are contending for the
throne of man’s heart, and when one
Dagon is deposed, he leaves his stump
upon which another is quickly raised.
But the same Almighty grace which
cast down one shall triumph over all.
‘I'he covenant ensures the death of sin,
the life of grace, and the crown of glory,
and when grace has brought you to
glory you will rejoice to all eternity,
that “only the stump of Dagon was
left.” —Fenn.


dwelling grace may be, there is still


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 6-12.
THE JUDGMENTS UPON THE PHILISTINES.


I. When has Fasc begins with the people of God it is certain to extend to
the ungodly. If a human king is just he will visit his own family with punish-
ment if they break the laws of his kingdom. But the very fact that he does so
is a pledge that he will not spare the rest of his subjects if they are found guilty.
Judgment will begin where transgression ought, least of all, to appear, and
where, if it appear, it ought to be least tolerated ; but should the same sins be
committed by others, it may be regarded as certain that it will extend to them
also. God deals with men as a good king and father deals with his children.
He will certainly inflict chastisement upon those who are most nearly related to
Him by moral character, but He will not spare those who are utterly ungodly.
God’s ancient people, at this period in their history, needed chastisement, and
they had it. He avenged the dishonour which had been done to His name by
those whom He “ had nourished and brought up” as His children (Isa. i. 2) by
a heavy visitation. But He did not spare the more guilty Canaanites. When
judgment “begins at the house of God,” the question forces itself upon the
mind, “ Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” (1 Pet. iv. 17, 18).


II. When the ungodly have been used as instruments of Divine chastise.
ment, they are chastened themselves to teach them that tney were not
chosen for their moral excellence. Sometimes delay takes place in the execu-
tion of a criminal, not because there is any reason to show him favour, but that
he may be used to bring others to justice. When he has been used for this
purpose he finds that the same law which convicts them punishes him also. It
is often so in the righteous government of God. He selected Nebuchadnezzar
to be His battle-axe when Israel needed chastisement, but he was but a reprieved
eriminal, and when he had fulfilled the Divine purpose he was made to feel that
it was so. Here the Philistines were made the instruments of God’s judgment
upon His people, but they soon found that they had not been selected for this
work because they were held in favour by Jehovah. The hand of God upon

82


OHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Se a


them soon taught them that they also were under His displeasure—that God
had, in the language of the prophet, taken “ the cup of trembling, even the dregs


of the cup of His fury, and put it into the hand of t. . pS
(Isa. li. 22, 23), P hand of them that afflicted Israel


III. There may be an admission that God has smitten without true repentance.
The Philistines confessed that the hand of Jehovah was sore upon them, and
upon their god, but it led to no investigation into His claims to their homage—
to no change in their disposition towards Him. Pharaoh acknowledged that

the Lord was righteous, and that he and his people were wicked ” (Exod. ix. 27),
but his admission had no effect upon his conduct. Saul admitted that God had
forsaken him, and was visiting him for his sin, but he turned not to Him who
had smitten him, but, in direct opposition to the Divine command, sought
counsel of a witch. Many men in every age are compelled to acknowledge tliat
God is visiting them, yet they will not turn to Him in repentance. They may
cry to God in their despair, but they give evidence that it is not sin that
troubles them, but the punishment of sin. Like the Philistines, they would be
rid of their suffering, but they are not willing to give up their Dagons, and to
give glory and render obedience to the Lord of hosts,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 6. The hand of the Almiguty,
which moved them not in falling on
their god, falls now nearer on their
persons, and strikes them iu their
bodies which would not feel themselves
stricken in their idol. Pain shall
humble them, when shame cannot.—
Bp. Hall.


Ver. 7. They should have rather
parted with their sins than with the
ark, and have said unto their sins
“Get thee hence,’ as Isa. xxx. 22.
What have we to do any more with
Dagon who cannot save himself, much
less us, from the Divine vengeance ?
Wicked men are glad upon all occasions
to be rid of God and His ark, His or-
dinances, which they, Philistine-like,
have rather as prisoners than as privi-
leges.— Trapp.

The emerods were not a disease be-
yond the compass of natural causes ;
neither was it hard for the wiser sort
to give a reason of their complaint ;
yet they ascribe it to the hand of God:
the knowledge and operation of secon-
dary causes should be no prejudice to
the first. They are worse than the
Philistines who, when they see the
means, do not acknowledge their first
Mover, whose active just power is no
less seen in exaploying ordinary means


than in raising up extraordinary ;
neither doth He less smite by a
common fever, than by an avenging
angel.— Bp. Hall.


Ver. 10. The struggles of the Philis-
tines against. Jehovah tended only to
bring the ark nearer to its own home,
and to bring more evils on its enemies,
The sufferings of Ekron were worse
than those of Ashdod, and the suffer-
ings of Gath were more grievous than
those of Ekron. So all the assaults of
the enemies of the faith against the ark
of Christ’s church will serve only to
bring her nearer to her heavenly and
eternal home.— Wordsworth.

Thus they send the plague of God
up and down to their neighbours.
Wicked men use to draw others into


‘partnership of their condemnation.—


Trapp.


Ver. 11. When man’s heart will not
give up its worthless idols, though
God’s food draw it to Himself by
affliction and suffering, then the dis-
tance between him and the God that
offers to be with him becomes greater
in proportion to the severity and pain-
fulness of the suffering felt by the soul
alienated from God and devoted to
idolatry. We shall at last desire ta

83


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK f.





be entirely away from God, as the
Philistines at last resolved to carry the
ark over the border, that they might
have nothing more to do with the God
of Israel, while, on the contrary, the
ark should have warned them to give
slory to the God of Israel, who had so
inmistakably and gloriously revealed
Himself to them.—Lange’s Commen-
tary.

God knows how to bring the stub-
bornest enemy on his knees, and make
him do that out of fear which His
best child would do out of love or
duty. It is happy that God hath
such store of plagues and thunderbolts
for the wicked : if He had not a fire of


judgment, wherewith iron hearts might
be made flexible, He would want obe-
dience, and the world peace.—Bp.
Hall.


Ver. 12. The ery that ascends te
heaven over sufferings and afflictions
that are the consequences of wicked-
ness, is by no means a sign that need
teaches prayer ; it may be made wholly
from a heathen point of view. The
cry that penetrates into heaven is
“ Against thee have I sinned,” and is.
the expression of an upright, earnest
penitence, which is awakened in the
heart by the chastisement of God’s
hand.—Lange’s Commentary.





CHAPTER VI.


CrrrioaL asp Exposrrory Notrs.—Ver. 1.


signifies the eultiwated plain.


“Country,” literally the fleld. It probably


Ver. 2. “Diviners.” “That is, the organs of the Deity, who reveal His counsel and will


through the mantic art, and whose decision is final.


After it had been determined in the


council of the princes (chap. v. 11) to send back the ark to the Israelites, the priests and


soothsayers are to tell how it shall be sent back.”


(Erdmann).


Ver, 3. “Trespass-offering.” Asham, literally guilt, then a gift presented as compensation


for a fault.


The gifts appointed by the Philistines as an asham were to serve as compensation


and satisfaction to be rendered to the God of Israel for the robbery committed upon Him by
the removal of the ark, and were therefore called asham, though in their nature they were only


expiatory offerings” ( Keil).


Ver. 4. “ Five golden mice,” etc. “It was a prevalent custom in heathen antiquity to make
offerings to the gods expressive of the particular mercy received. Those saved from shipwreck
offered pictures of the shipwreck in the temple of Isis; slaves and captives, in gratitude for the
recovery of their liberty, offered chains to the Lares ; retired gladiators, their arms to Hercules ;
and in the fifth century a custom prevailed among Christians of offering in their churches gold


or silver hands, feet, etc., in return for cures effected in those members. . .
(Biblical Commentary). The offering of the
it was rather a talisman or charm.


still prevails among the heathen in India”
Philistines was not, however, a thank-offering,


. . A similar custom


“ From the


ancient writers of Arabia we learn how a talisman, or charm of this kind, was composed. They
held that all earthly things are but shadows of heavenly things, and that the celestial forms have


an overruling influence on all earthly forms of life,
man a talisman that would make him safe against the bite of serpents,


Thus, for instance, if they wished to give a
they got the exact


moment of his birth. Their books told them what planet “ruled his birth,” what planet was


then in full lustre,


They waited for the moment when this planet was “out of combustion,”


t.€., was not shining at its strength—the moment in which, thus shorn of its strength, it entered


into the constellation which they called the Serpent.


The favourable moment having


arrived, they made a tiny stone or metal image of a serpent, engraved certain mystic letters upon


it, and here was the talisman,


So long as the man carried that about with him, no serpent could


hurt him, Ancient literature is full of marvellous stories of the power of these talismans. . .. .
it is this talismanic method that is alluded to in this passage, for, instead of reading “‘ Ye shall
make images,” etc., we ought to read, “Ye shall make talismans of your emrods, and talismans


of your mice.” (S. Com.)


“The Philistine astrologers could not but have heard that God had


shown His Divine complacency with the brazen serpent, set upon a pole in the wilderness. This
they, with their notions, would regard as a telesme (talisman), and as that image of a serpe ng


OHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





ord


was effectual against the plague of serpents, they might not unreasonably infer that similar
images of their own inflictions might be equally effectual; indeed, there have not been wanting
persons to suggest that the whole of this set of ideas regarding telesmes may have originated in
a distorted view of this transaction.” (Kitto. )


Ver. 6. “As the Egyptians.” “ Another testimony from the heathen to the truth of the
Pentateuch, and a proof that God’s judgments on Egypt were not without salutary effects on
idolaters.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 7. “Make a new cart,” etc. “The new cart and the young cows, which had never
worn a yoke, corresponded to the holiness of the ark of God. To place it upon an old cart,
which had already been used for all kinds of earthly purposes, would have been an offence against
the holy thing; and it would have been just the same to yoke to the cart animals that had
already been used for drawing, and had had their strength impaired by the yoke. The reason
for selecting cows, however, instead of male oxen, was no doubt to be found in the further object
which they hoped to attain.” (Keél.)


Ver. 9. “Bethshemesh.” “House of the sun,” an Israelitish priestly city on the border of
Judah and Dan (Josh. xxi. 16.) about twelve miles from Ekron.


_Ver. 13. “ Though it was a priestly city the inhabitants of Bethshemesh are expressly
oe from the Levites.” (Hrdmann.) ‘Wheat harvest.” Therefore about May or
une.


Ver. 14. “Field of Joshua.” “One who bore the same name as he who had brought
Israel and the ark into Canaan.” ( Wordsworth.) “A burnt offering.” “It was lawful to
offer the sacrifice here, because wherever the ark was offering might be made.” (#rdmann.)


Ver. 18. “ The Philistines offered as many golden mice as there were towns and villages in
their five states ; no doubt because the plague of mice had spread over the whole land, whereas
the plague of boils had only fallen upon those towns to which the ark had come.” (Keil.)
“Great stone of Abel.” Great stone is not in the original. Abel means mourning, and some
commentators think the stone was so named because of the lamentation mentioned in verse 19.
Keil, Erdmann, and others, however, for Abel read Hben or Aben—a stone, as in verses 14 and 15


Ver. 19. “ Fifty thousand,” ete. In some Hebrew manuscripts the statement reads seventy
men, fifty thousand men. Some do not contain the words fifty thousand, and Josephus speaks of
only three score and ten. These considerations, added to the unlikelihood that Bethshemesh had
so many inhabitants lead commentators to reject the words fifty thousand as an interpolation, or
to read (as Patrick and others) seventy men ; jifty out of a thousand.


Ver. 21. “Kirjath-jearim,” i.e., city of woods or forests (Ps. cxxxii. 6), in the territory of
Judah (Josh. ix. 17, xviii. 25, 26), generally identified with the present Kuryet-el-Enab, “It was
the nearest large city to Bethshemesh, on the way to Shiloh, to which, perhaps, they supposed
that the ark ought to return.” (Werdsworth.) “The inhabitants belonging to the Hivite
tetrapolis were the sacred servants of the sanctuary, and, therefore, the proper parties to whom,
in the emergency, the custody ot the ark should be committed. Bethshemesh, being in a low
plain, and Kirjath-jearim on a hill, explains the message, ‘Come ye down, and fetch it up te
you.’ ” (Jamieson.)

Norz.—“ After the transaction recorded in this chapter, we hear no more of any attempts
among the Gentile nations to join the Jewish worship with their own. They considered the
God of Israel as a tutelary deity, absolutely unsociable, who would have nothing to do with
any but his own people, or with such particularly as would worship him alone, and, therefore,
in this respect, different from all other tutelary gods, each of which was willing to live in
community with the rest.” ( Warburton.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
Tur RETURN OF THE ARK.


I. No change is needed in God to effect a change in His dealings with
sinful men. ‘lhe physician is as good when he is inflicting pain as when he is
giving pleasure. It does not need a change of disposition in him to cause him
to cease from giving pain to his patient; the change must be in the sick man
himself. When a sinner feels that matters are not right between him and his
God, he thinks that he should be in a better position if he could only change

85


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK &





God’s disposition towards him ; but no change is needed on the part of God. It
is in the character and disposition of the sinner that the change must be made,
if he is to have rest and hope in his relation to God. When the Philistines felt
that the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them, they changed the place of the
ark, thinking thereby to pacify God’s displeasure, and change His disposition
towards them. But what was needed was not change on the part of the Eternal
God, but change in their relations towards Him.


II. Divine blessings may be turned into curses if men get into wrong
relationship to them. Sunlight is intended by God to be a blessing to men.
But the light of the sun brings pain to a man whose eyes are diseased. The
suffering comes from his eyes and the sun not standing in that relation to each
other which God intended they should do. Fire is a great blessing to man while
it is kept in its right relation, while it is used as God intended it should be used,
to minister to his bodily comfort. But if fire lays hold of his raiment, or
his dwelling, a good gift of God becomes a curse, by getting into a wrong
relation. And as it is with the material gifts of God, so it is with His spiritual
gifts, All the Divine ordinances are intended as means of blessing and gancti-
fication to the heart of men. Yet to some that which was ordained to bless
becomes a curse—that which ought to be a savour of life becomes a savour of
death, Men through ignorance or indifference do not put the Divine ordinances
to a right use—get into a wrong relationship to them, and thus that which was
designed to bless becomes a curse. The ark of God was designed by Him to be
a means of grace and blessing to Israel by helping them to realise the presence
and favour of the unseen God. It would also have become a blessing to the
Philistines if they had considered the lessons which the fall of Dagon before it
was designed to teach them. But the heathen disregarded the voice of God
which spoke to them, and thus the presence of His ark became the means of
Judgment, because they stood in a wrong relation to it. And its return to
Israel, which ought to have been an occasion of unmixed joy, was marked by a
judgment upon the men of Bethshemesh, because of the thoughtless irreverence
of their conduct—hecause they lacked a right conception of the holineas of the
God whose presence the ark symbolised,


III. The human conscience testifies to the need of an atonement for sin.
The heathen, ignorant as they are of the revelation of God, offer gifts and
sacrifices to their deities. The Philistines here thought it expedient to try and
make some expiation of their trespass against the God of Israel, and such a
feeling of the need of atonement is found in almost every people in the world.
And this feeling does not grow weaker in proportion as men possess the
revelation of God. The conviction of the great distance between the holy God
and sinful man increases a8 men grow in their knowledge of Him—the nearer
view men have of His purity and greatness, the more are they disposed to
exclaim with the men of Bethshemesh, “ Who és able to stand before this Holy
Lord God?” It is when the artist places his most finished work beside the real
landscape that he realises how very far short he has come—the more closely
they are compared the more clearly does he see the perfection of the one, and
the im perfections of the other, And the more men know of God—the more they
become acquainted with Him by the manifestations of His power and moral
attributes, the more deeply convinced do they become of their own im erfections,
and the more do they cry out for some atonement. When the Bethshemites, on
the return of the ark, “ offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same
day unto the Lord,” they were not only obeying the Levitical law, but they were
acting 1n conformity to a law written in their hearts, and written with more or
less Geeta in the hearts of all men. The offering of the Lord Jesus Christ


OHAP, VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,





is not only said to be “ offered to God,” but also to the conscience of man (Heh
ix. 14, Rom. v. 11). The return of the ark also reminds us—


IV. That the enemies of God’s Israel are not always to retain the portiox
of His children. A battle was fought in Eden, and the great enemy of God and
man took from man his God-given inheritance. And from that day until now
the “kingdoms of the world and the glory of them” have been held by Satan
(Luke iv. 5, 6). This earth is still, to a great extent, in the hands of the
enemies of its rightful possessor. But itis being won back. Each generation
sees drawing nearer the day when there will be “great voices in heaven, saying,
The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of His
Christ” (Rev. xi. 15). And this earth will be given back to men who have
themselves been redeemed from the bondage of Satan. As Israel lost their ark
so the world has been lost to man by his own sin; but it will not be always in the
hands of his enemies—those who have returned to their allegiance to their
rightful sovereign will one day inherit a redeemed earth.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. This was a long while for
God’s people to be without that visible
pawn of His presence and glory ; so
that they might seem to be as forlorn
and forsaken of Him. Such a misery
may befall any people, to be bereft of
God’s ordinances ; or any soul, to be
for a time without the sense of His
gracious presence and light of His
countenance. But God hath promised
to His, to be a “little sanctuary unto
them” (Ezek. xi. 16), and “not to leave
them,” or if He do so, yet “not to
forsake them,” (Heb. xiii, 5), provided
that they look on all other comforts
as so many Ichabods, till He return
unto them in mercy and loving-kind-
ness.— Zrapp.

It had wont to be asure rule, where-
soever God is among men, there is the
Church ; here only it failed. The tes-
timony of God’s presence was many
months among the Philistines, for a
punishment of His own people whom
He left ; for acurse to those foreigners
who entertained it. Israel was seven
months without God. How do we
think faithful) Samuel took this
absence? How desolate and forlorn
did the tabernacle of God look with-
out the ark! There were still the
altars of God; His priests, Levites,
tables, vails, censers, with all their
legal accoutrements; these, without
the ark, were as the sun without light,
in the midst of an eclipse. If all these


had been taken away, and only the
ark remaining, the loss had been no-
thing to this, that the ark should be
gone and they left ; for what are all
these without God, and how all-suffi-
cient is God without these !—#p. Hall.

Greater dishonour is done to God
by those who call themselves His
people, yet continue to slight and
abuse the singular advantages with
which they have been long favoured,
than by the attacks of his avowed
enemies. Hence He may often seem
as it were to desert His own cause,
and suffer the declared enemies of His
name to triumph for a time, rather
than take part with hypocritical pre-
tenders, who with their lips profess
that they know and serve Him, but in
works deny Him. Thus He permitted
the sacred symbol of His own presence
to fall into the hands of Philistine
idolators, rather than to remain dis-
honoured by idolatrous Israelites.—
Lindsay.

Ver. 2. They say not, “ What shall
we do with it,” for they were most of
them resolved to send it home; but
“ What shall we do to it? How shall
we send it home as it ought to he
sent?” For they know that it is the
manner that maketh or marreth an
action, Sure it is that in divine
matters men must look that not only
the body of their service be sound, but
that the clothes be fit.— Trapp.

87


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK L.


a I a


Ver. 5. These sorcerers, like Balaam
end Caiaphas, ignorantly spake the
truth, ana promoted God’s glory and
honour. Peradventure.—Idolators are
always at uncertainty, and walking in
darkness, know not whither they go.—
Trapp.


Ver. 6. Samuel himself could not
have spoken more divinely than these
riests of Dagon... .. All religions
have afforded them that speak well ;
these good words left them still Philis-
tines and superstitious. How should
men be hypocrites if they had not good
tongues. . . . Who would think that
wisdom and folly could lodge so near
together that the same men should
have care both for the glory of the
true God, and the preservation of the
false ’—Bp. Hail.

The exact knowledge that the Philis-
tine priests and soothsayers had of the
punitive revelations of God against
the Egyptians, and of the cause of them
in the fact that the people hardened
themselves against Him, is an eminent
example of His government of the
world, which was closely interwoven
with the history of revelation in His
kingdom, and in which he penetrated
with the beams of His revealed light
the darkness of heathenism which
surrounded His people, and made pre-
paration for the revelation of the New
Covenant, which was to embrace the
whole world, They were in such light
to seek the Lord in their ways, if
haply they might feel after Him and
find Him.—Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 12. And the lords of the Philis-
tines went after them. And 80, as
servants and pages, they attend upon
the ark, which erst as conquerors they
carried captive.— Trapp.


Ver. 19. As it is hard not to over-
oy in a sudden prosperity, and to use
appiness is no less difficult than to
forbear it, these glad Israelites cannot
see, but they must gaze ; they cannot
gaze on the glorious outside, but they
must be, whether out of rude jollity,
or curiosity. or suspicion of the pur-

88


loining of those sacred implements,
prying into the secrets of God’s ark,

ature is too subject to extremities,
and is ever either too dull in want, or
wanton in fruition ; it is no easy matter
to keep a mean, whether in good
or evil... .).. There was no malice
in this curious inquisition : the same
eyes that looked into the ark looked
also up to heaven in their offerings ;
and the same hands that touched it
offered sacrifice to the God that brought
it. Who could expect anything now
but acceptation? Who could suspect
any danger? It is not a following act
of devotion that can make amends for
a former sin.— Bishop Hall.

God had just vindicated His own
honour against the Philistines ; 1t must
now be seen that He would be sanctified
in them that come nigh Him (Lev. x. 3).
It is obvious to observe how the doc.
trine of atonement, and its necessity
in the case of sinners, is taught in this
and similar lessons as to the awful holi-
ness of God.— Biblical Commentary.


Ver. 20, 21. Many appear joyful at
the revival of religion, and numbers
unite in external observances, who have
no inward reverence for the Divine
majesty .... Instead of this reve-
rence, the carnal heart substitutes a
slavish fear; and when rebuked for
presumption or contempt, or alarmed
with discoveries of the justice and holi-
ness of God, it will, with the Gadarenes,
or with these Bethshemites, request the
Saviour to depart, and vainly seek to
escape the Lord’s displeasure, by an
entire forgetfulness of Him.—Scott.

When God, so to speak, only passes
by us, through some temporary taste of

is presence, it is a favour which He
may also impart to sinners. But that
He may make His abode in us, as He
promises in so many passages of Holy
Scripture, that He may be willing to
remain with us and in us, for that
there is demanded great purity in every
respect.— Berlenberger Bible.

The attribute of holiness is, to our
own apprehension, so essential to the
mere idea of God—is in itself go
obvious and self-evident. that we may


GHAP. VI.


at times be inclined to wonder at the
frequency with which it is stated and
enforced in the Scriptures. But the
view of the Divine character out of
which this feeling arises, is itself the
creation of those scriptural declara-
tions on the subject ; and the formation
of this high conception of God was
the use they were designed to serve,
and which we thus find that they have
served. It may also be remembered,
that to the Hebrews the enforcement
of this doctrine was of an importance
which it is scarcely in our power to
understand or appreciate fully. The
surrounding heathen—indeed all the
heathen, had very different and inferior
notions of the gods they served. Holi-
ness was not their attribute. ‘They
were very capable of sin; and the
choice of good in preference to evil
was not essential to their nature.
These were above men in their essence
and in their sovereign powers ; but in
character they were men, and not
always good men. There was no one
attribute by which Jehovah was so
pointedly distinguished from the gods


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


of the nations as by this. Its main-
tenance, its constant assertion, was
therefore of the utmost importance
among apeople whose tendenciesso often
were to merge the worship of their own
Lord in that of the neighbouring idols,
This attribute set a great gulf between
them which could not be overpassed so
long as its presence was constantly kept
before the mind of the people. . . ‘There
was another and more general use in
it, in which we share the benefit with
them. It is a check to sin, and an
incitement to righteousness, It seems
impossible for anyone to realise a clear
and distinct idea of the holiness of God
—that sin, that whatever defiles, is
abhorrent to His pure and holy nature,
without hearing His voice crying unto
us—‘“O, do not that abominable thing
which I hate.” . . . . Instead of imita-
ting the ignorant Bethshemites, in
putting away the ark of God from us,
because we cannot stand before His
holiness, let us rather strive after
assimilation to Him, that we may be
enabled to keep the ark among us.—
Kitto.


——————————


CHAPTER VIL.


Crrroat and Exposrrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “The house of Abinadab,” etc. “Why
the ark was not carried back to Shiloh is uncertain. The reason may be -that the Philistines
had conquered Shiloh, and now held it, as Hwald supposes ; or it may be that, without a special
revelation of the Divine will, they were unwilling to carry the ark back to the place whence it
had been removed by a judgment of God, in consequence of the profanation of the Sanctuary by
the sons of Eli (Keil) ; or simply that the purpose was first and provisionally to carry it safely
to a large city as far off as possible, inasmuch as, in view of the sentence which had been passed
on Shiloh, they did not dare to select on their own authority a new place for the Sanctuary
(Erdmann). “Tt is probable that Abinadab and his sons were of the house of Levi. 1. For
the catastrophe at Bethshemesh must inevitably have made the Israelites very careful to pay due
honour to the ark in accordance with the law. 2. The fact of there being a high place at
Kirjath-jearim makes it highly probable that there were priests there. 3. The names Eleazar,
Uzzah, and Ahio are all names in Levitical families, and Abinadab is nearly allied to Nadab
and Amminadab, both Levitical names. 4. It is inconceivable that the breaches of the law in
looking into the ark, and in Uzzah laying hold of it, should have been so severely punished, but
the neglect to employ the sons of Levi according to the law should not be even adverted to,’
(Biblical Commentary.) “To keep the ark.” “ Not to minister before it.; but only to defend it
from such profane intrusions as had caused so much suffering to the Bethshemites.
(Wordsworth. )


Ver. 2. “Twenty years,” i.e., twenty years before the events occurred which are recorded in
this chapter. It was a much longer time before David brought the ark again to the tabernacle
(2 Sam. vi. 1-17), although it is not certain whether it remained in Kirjath-jearim until that
time. During these twenty years it is obvious (from ver. 8) that the Philistine oof


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.


oak ee


continued. “All the house of Israel lamented,” etc, “The image is that of a child that
goes weeping after its father or mother, that it may be relieved of what hurts it... . » As,
beside the constant pressure of the Philistine tule, no special calamity is mentioned, we must
Suppose a gradual preparation for this penitential temper of the people, which now, after the
lapse of twenty years from the return of the ark, was become universal. The preparation came
from within. By what means? By the prophetic labours of Samuel, from the summary
description of which, according to their intensive power, their extensive manifestation, and their
results in the whole nation (iii. 19-21), we may clearly see that Samuel, without ceasing,
proclaimed to the people the Word of God. And as in chap. iii. 19 it is said that “none of his
words fell to the ground,” we shall have occasion to recognise this penitential temper, and this
following after God with sighing and lamentation, as the fruit of Samuel’s prophetic labours,
which were directed to the relation of the innermost life of the people to their God.”
(Erdmann. )


Ver. 8, “If ye do return,” etc. “These words prove that a profession of repentance on
the part of Israel had preceded them. . . The profession, therefore, must be looked for in
the preceding words, All the house of Israel lamented,” etc.—( Biblical Commentary).


Ver. 4. “Baalim and Ashtaroth.” The plurals of Baal and Ashtoreth. “Baal was the
supreme male divinity of the Phcenician and Canaanitish nations, as Ashtoreth was their
supreme female divinity. Both names have the peculiarity of being used in the plural, and it
seems certain that these plurals designate not statues of the divinities, but different modifications
of the divinities themselves. . . There can be no doubt of the very high antiquity of the
worship of Baal. . . We need not hesitate to regard the Babylonian Bel (Isa. xlvi. 1), or Belus
(Herod i. 181), as essentially identical with Baal, thongh perhaps under some modified form. . . ,
The great number of adjuncts with which the name is found is a sufficient proof of the diversity
of characters in which he was regarded, and there must no doubt have existed a corresponding
diversity in the worship. . . . If we separate the name Baal from idolatry, we seem, according
to its meaning, to obtain simply the notion of Lord and Proprietor of all... . The worship of
Ashtaroth or Astarte was also very ancient and widely spread. There is no doubt that the
Assyrian goddess Ishtar is the Ashtaroth of the Old Testament and the Astarte of the Greeks
and Romans. . . It is certain that the worship of Astarte became identical with that of Venus.
- +. If now we seek to ascertain the character of this goddess, we find ourselves involved in
perplexity. There can be no doubt that the general notion symbolised is that of productive
power, as Baal symbolises that of generative power, and it would be natural to conclude that as
the sun is the great symbol of the latter, and therefore to be identified with Baal, so the moon
is the symbol of the former, and must be identified with Astarte ” (Smith's Biblical Dictionary).


“Mizpeh, or Mizpah. The word signifies a watch-tower, and was given to more than one
place in the land of Israel. The place here mentioned has been generally identified with the
present Neby-Samwil, an elevation near Ramah and Geba (see 1 Kings xv. 22; 2 Chron. xvi. 6),
and 2480 feet above the level of the sea, and five miles from Jerusalem. Dean Stanley and
Mr, Grove (Smith’s Bib. Dictionary) consider that Neby-Samwil is too far from Jerusalem to
answer to the description given of its position in 1 Mac. iii. 46, and identity it with the Scopus
mentioned by Josephus (B. I. 2, 19, 4), as on the north quarter of the city, seven stadia there-
from, and now generally held to be the “broad ridge which forms the continuation of the
Mount of Olives to the north and east, from which the traveller gains his first view of the holy
city” (Grove). “Iwill pray for you.” That deliverance from the hand of the Philistines
was not at least immediately the object of the intercession is clear, not only from the phrase
“for you,” since otherwise Samuel must have used an expression to include himself, but also
from the following words,” —(Zrdmann),


Ver. 6. “ Drew water, and poured it out before the Lord,” etc. “It is remarkable that
two rites are brought together here which belong respectively to the Feast of Tabernacles and
the Day of Atonement. The first is not, indeed, prescribed by the law, but it was the custom
for the High Priest to fill a golden vessel with water drawn from the fountain of-Siloam, and to
pour it over the sacrifices on the Feast of Tabernacles, Allusions to this, which was a joyful
act, are supposed to be made in Isa. xii. 3, and John vii. 87,38. . . . The only fast enjoined
by the law of Moses was on the Day of Atonement, upon the 10th Tisri. . . . It is likely, as in
Ezra iii. 4, 6, and in Neh. vii, 73 3 vili. 1-17, that Samuel also chose the Feast of Tabernacles, and
the fast which preceded it, as the occasion for assembling the people. The drawing water being
mentioned before the fasting is, it is true, rather against this view, though not conclusively, as
the mention of the fasting may be supplemental ; the real order being that they first fasted and
confessed their sing on the Day of Atonement, and then joyfully kept the Feast of Tabernacles,
If the fast here mentioned is not that of the 10th Tisri, it may be compared with that of Evra x. 6,
and those alluded to in Zech. vii, 5, and perhaps the pouring out of water (which is variously
explained), may be taken in connection with the fasting (as Ezra did eat no bread, and drink no
water). . . . Other explanations of the act are (with the Targum), “they poured out their
hearts in penitence as it were water,” or that it was a symbolical act of expressing their ruin


90


OHAP. VII. HOMILET) EL.





———o


and helplessness, according to the saying in 2 Sam. xiv. 14, or that the water typified their desire
that their sins might be forgotten “as waters that pass away” (Job xi. 16).—(Biblical Com-
mentary.)

“And Samuel judged Israel.” ‘With respect to the position of the judges, it is generally
estimated falsely when they are looked upon as proper judicial personages in our sense. . . . .
This error has been occasioned by the assumption that the Hebrew word is perfectly synonymous
with our judging, while in reality it has a much wider signification. In the Book of Judges ‘it
generally denotes the exercise of authority and superiority. . . . Only of Deborah do we read, in
Judges iv. 5, that the Israelites went up to her for judgment. But she cannot be placed upon
a level with the judges throughout. She pronounced judgment as a prophetess in matters where
no confidence was placed in the ordinary judicial jurisdiction, and a judgment of God in the
proper sense was desired, just as, according to Iixod. xviii., the nation leaving their natural
judges, thronged to Moses, to draw justice immediately from its source. Samuel’s position was
exactly similar to that of Deborah, he was judge in another sense than the judges of the Book
of Judges.—(Henystenberg.)

(See also on Ver. 15).


Ver. 7, “When the Philistines heard,” etc. “ Apprehending that such a gathering under
one so well known as Samuel boded no good to their dominions, and might be intended to
organise the assertion of the nation’s own independence,”—/( Kitto. )


Ver. 9. “Samuel, though only 2 Levite, offered a burnt offering to the Lord at Mizpeh,
because the regular ministries of the tabernacle which was separated from the ark were in
abeyance, and God had not yet chosen any fixed place to set His name there, after the destruction
of Shiloh; and Samuel was raised up with a special commission from God to supply the
deficiency of the transitory and provisional state of things.”—( Wordsworth.) (See also comments
of this verse.)


Ver. 12. “Shen,” literally a tooth, doubtless a rocky eminence in the neighbourhood, It has
not been identified. “Ebenezer,” or Eben-ha-ezer, i.e., stone of help.


Ver. 18. “They came no more.” “They no more invaded the territory of Israel with
lasting success as they had done before.” The words which immediately follow—“ the hand of
Jehovah was against the Philistines,” etc., show that they made attempts to recover their
lost supremacy, but that so long as Samuel lived they were unable to effect anything against
Israel” (Keil). The forty years domination, mentioned in Judges xiii. 1, now terminated,


Ver. 14. “From Ekron even unto Gath.” “This definition is probably to be understood
as exclusive, i.e. as signifying that the Israelites received back their cities up to the very borders
of the Philistines, measuring these borders from Ekron to Gath. For although these chief
cities of the Philistines had been allotted to the tribes of Judah and Dan, in the time of Joshua
(Josh. xiii. 3,4; xv. 45, 46), yet, notwithstanding the fact that Judah and Simeon conquered
Ekron, together with Gaza and Askelon, after the death of Joshua (Judges i, 18), the Israelites
did not obtain any permanent possession.”—(Kei/).


“And there was peace,” etc. ‘These words suggest what is in itself very probable, that
in this war the Amorites, finding the Philistines worse masters than the Israelites, made common
cause with Samuel, and assisted the Israelites in their wars against the Philistines,”—( Biblical
Commentary.)

Ver. 15. “And Samuel judged Israel.” ‘We must regard Samuel’s judging as a directing
and ordering, in accordance with the above act of repentance, of the inner affairs of the people,
who were by that religious act inwardly again purified. It consisted both in the administration
of right and justice according to the law of the Lord, and in government proper, in the wise
carrying out of measures that looked to the good of the people. During Saul’s life he kept
unchanged the position of a prophet, who employed the authority of the Divine will for the
direction of the national life—the mediating priestly position between God and the people; but
he also, as last judge, held in his hands the highest control of the theocracy and the kingdom.”
(Erdmann).

Ver. 16. “Bethel.” “A well-known city and holy place of central Palestine, twelve miles
from Jerusalem, on the road to Sichem, where its ruins still lie under the scarcely altered name
of Beitin.” (Smith’s Bib. Dictionary.) “Gilgal.” At least two places in ancient Palestine
were so named, one in the Jordan valley, between that river and Jericho (Josh. iv. 19), and one
south-west of Shiloh, now called Jiljilia (1 Kings ii. 1). It is impossible to decide which is the
place here mentioned. Dr. Erdmann says, “'The question must be decided in favour of the
former, for the reason that Samuel would certainly choose for such assemblies the place that was
consecrated by its historical association and religious importance.” Keil rather leans to the
opinion that it was the modern Jiljilia.

Ver. 17. “Ramah,” See note on chap. i. 1. “There he builded an altar.” Another
instance of Samuel’s deviation from the Levitical law. See note on verse 9.

9


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L


crn ere eu ENE MIN


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1 and 2.
CaRE FOR THE ARK oF Gop.


I. The judgments of God for contempt of His ordinances often make men
more careful in the treatment of them. If the subject of a well-ordered state
sets at nought its ordinances he finds himself visited with a penalty which
generally leads him to be more careful of his future conduct, He must rentler
honour where honour is due, whether it be to a person or to a law, or he will be
visited with punishment which, if he do not profit by himself, will prove a
salutary lesson to others. When a child has played with the fire until he has
been burnt, he is not only more careful for the rest of his life how he trifles with
it, but others learn a lesson from his sufferings and his scars. And when God
punishes men for lightly esteeming that which He has commanded them to
reverence, it is that those who suffer, and those who see them suffer, may fear
to fall into the same sin. A fear which brings reverence is a motive power in
the dispensation of the Gospel, as well as in that which preceded it. In the
New Testament cases of judgment are recorded which were as swift and terrible
as any found in Old Testament history. Men have needed, even in Gospel
times, to be taught reverence for holy beings and holy ordinances by punishment
which has worked fear. Ananias and Sapphira thought it a light matter to
“lie to the Holy Ghost,” and their sudden death wrought “great fear upon all
the Church” (Acts y. 11) which led to an increased reverence for the spirit of
God. Elymas poured contempt upon the message of salvation as iasdliok by
Paul, and was struck with blindness by the man whose heart’s desire and prayer
to God for all his countrymen was that they should be saved. Butthe judgment
which feli upon the Jew led to the salvation of the Gentile, and taught all who
beheld it that God will not hold them guiltless who scoff at the name of His
Son (Acts xiii. 6-12). In the case of the “seven sons of Sceva” (Acts xix,
13-17) men learnt that they must not lightly use the name of the Lord J esus,
and the effect of the ianitanent of those who did so was that when it “was
known to all the Jews and Greeks dwelling at Ephesus that fear Sell on them
ul, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. Men of every age have
needed to be taught not only that “God is love,” but that He is “a consuming
fire” (Heb. xii. 29), that it is indeed His love which leads Him to visit men
with judgment for contempt of His holy name and ordinances, in order that
others may see it and fear, as the visitation upon the men of Bethshemesh led
those of Kirjath-jearim to be more reverent in their treatment of the ark of
God. In all the after history of Israel we never hear of their being guilty of a
similar act. ‘I'he death of the Bethshemites was an effectual preventive of any
more attempts of this kind.


II. Those who minister in holy things are especially bound to live holy lives.
The men of Kirjath-jearim set apart a man for the special service of the ark.
“They sanctifieth. Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the Lord.” For every
service in the world some qualification is needed, and men are not made
custodians of men’s lives, or even of their property, unless they are believed to
possess the qualifications indispensable to the fulfilment of the duties of the
office. The setting apart of men in the Old Testament dispensation to the
service of the tabernacle sets forth the truth that those who minister in holy
things under the Gospel dispensation are especially bound to “come out from
the world and be separate,” in a spiritual sense, that whatever else they lack, a
high moral character is indispensable. It also suggests the need that such men
should remember the apostolic exhortation, and give themselves “ wholly ” to
the special work, and not “ entangle themselves with the affairs of this life”
(1 Tim. iv. 15; 2 Tim. ii, 4),

92


OHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





III. Men learn the value of Divine ordinances when they are deprived of
them. . When men have abundance of bread and water they have very little
sense of the value of these necessaries of life. But if they are wholly or even
partially deprived of them they realise how precious they really are. Want
makes us sensible of the blessing of abundance. Sickness teaches us to appre-
ciate the blessing of health, and days of gloom make us sensible how good a gift
of God is sunshine. And we never know the true value of religious ordinances
until we are deprived of them. Those whom sickness has long kept from the
house of God, or those who have sojourned in aland where there were no stated
Divine ordinances, testify to the truth of this. When the soul of a godly man
is shut away from God’s house, and has no opportunity of meeting Him in His
sanctuary, then the sigh goes up to Heaven “ How amiable are Thy tabernacles,
O Lord of Hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the
Lord ; my heart and my flesh cry out for the Living God. . . . Blessed are they
that dwell in Thy house: they will be still praising Thee... . Fora day in
Thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness” (Psalm Ixxxiv. 1-10).
This was David’s experience, and thousands since he penned these words have
used them to express their own feelings. Israel had for many years before this
time had special religious privileges—compared with the rest of the nations they
had had a plentiful supply of spiritual bread. But they had treated it as
they had treated the manna in the wilderness—familiarity had bred contempt,
and they had despised the means of grace, because they had been always in
their midst. But the absence of the ark from Shiloh had suspended all the
usual tabernacle-service, and the long famine of Divine ordinances caused them
to “lament after the Lord.”


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. Shiloh was wont to be the Jeremiah’s (Chap. xiii. 27), “Woe


place which was honoured with the
presence of the ark. Ever since the
wickedness of Eli’s sons, that was for-
lorn and desolate, and now Kirjath-
jearim succeeds to this privilege. It
did not stand with the royal liberty of
God, no, not under the law, to tie
himself unto places and persons. Un-
worthiness was ever a sufficient cause
of exchange. It was not yet His time
to stir from the Jews, yet He removed
from one province to another. Less
reason have we to think that so God will
reside among us, that none of our pro-
vocations can drive Him from us.—
Bp. Hall.


Ver. 2. The time was long ere
Samuel could bring them to this
solemn conversion related in the verses
following : so tough is the old Adam,
and so difficult a thing it is to work
upon such as are habituated and
hardened in sinful practices. Samuel’s
song had been, as was afterwards


unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou
not be made clean? When shall it
once be? ‘They refused to return
until God stopped them with the cross,
suffered the Philistines grievously to
oppress them, and then “ all the house
of Israel lamented after the law.” —
Trapp.

There is no mention of their lament-
ing after the Lord while He was gone,
but when He was returned and settled
in Kirjath-jearim. The mercies of God
draw more tears from His children
than his judgments do from His
enemies. ‘There is no better sign of
good nature or grace than to be won
to repentance with kindness; not to
think of God except we be beaten into
it, is servile. Because God was come
again to Israel, therefore Israel is
returned to God; if God had not
come first they had never come; if
He, that came to them, had not made
them come to Him, they had been ever
parted; they were cloyed with God
93


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


ee eee





while He was perpetually resident
with them; now that His absence
had made Him dainty, they cleave
to Him fervently and penitently in His
return. This was it that God meant
in His departure, a better welcome at
His coming back.—Bp. Hall.

I. The persons lamenting. God’s
peculiar people. These only love, and
mind God’s presence; when the lords
and cities of the Philistines are weary
of Him, and send Him away, yea,
and the inhabitants of Bethshemesh,
though a city of Levites belonging to
the Church of God, through their ill
management of matters send to get a
release, yet God’s Israel will look after
their God. II. The object they lament
after—not peace, plenty, or victory
over their enemies, but after the Lord.
Jehovah is the object of their affec-
tions; it is He whom they love, and
with whom they long for communion.
III. The universality of the number.
—all Israel. The whole house of
Israel come ; they that had woefully
degenerated and had gone after their
idols ; what a wonderful act of God’s
power and sovereignty was this upon
their spirits. By this He manifests
that He is the true God, and that
Samuel was His servant. . . Christians
should lament after the God of ordi-
nances, or God in ordinances.—I.
Because God is infinitely more worth


BOOK I,


than all ordinances; His presence is
prizable for itself. This is the marrow
of heaven, the want of this is hell,
and this the child of God knows.
Il. God purposely withdraws that
men may lament after Him. As when
a mother steps out of a child’s sight,
and when she seems to be gone, the
child raises a cry after her (Hos. v. 15).
“I will go and return to my place,
till they acknowledge their offence,
and seek my face; in their affliction
they will seek me early.” ITI. Bécause
sincere lamenting after the Lord may
occasion His return. He purposely
hovers, waits, and expects, that His
people may call Him back by their
prayers, entreaties, humiliation; not
as though God were moved, or changed
by men’s mournful complaints and out-
cries, but that such an earnest lament-
ing qualifies the subject, capacitates
for mercy, and puts souls into the con-
dition of the promise (Jer. xxix. 12),
—Oliver Heywood.

The blessing of national mourning
in a time of universal distress. (1)
Penitent recognition of the national
sin which has occasioned it. (2) Pain-
ful experience of the mighty hand which
has inflicted it. (8) Sorrowful, peni-
tent seeking after the Lord’s consola-
tion and help, which ends in Jinding.—
Lange's Commentary.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARA GRAPH.— Verses 3 and 4,


REPENTANCE,


I. Repentance is the lessening of a moral distance between God and man


by a moral turning of man to God.
When a man turns and walks in an


“If ye do return unto the Lord,” ete,
opposite direction he changes hig course,


and lessens the distance between himself and the point to which his back has
been hitherto turned, and from which he has been every moment getting farther
away. His face is now directed to an entirely opposite goal, and the distance
between him and that goal grows less at every step. Repentance is not a bodily


act—it is a turning of the heart.
hearts.”


“Tf ye do return unto the Lord with all your
Directly the heart turns to God in penitence and trust the moral


distance between that heart and God is lessened. That turning is the beginning
of a new course of life, which daily decreases the distance between the man and
his former way of life, and brings him nearer to God in his sympathies, and in
his character. And this goes on until there is entire conformity of the character
of God,—until the just nan becomes the perfect man, and all the moral distance


which Pig separated him from God ig annihilated.


Locally, God is as near te


OWAP, Vil HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





the sinner as He is to the saint. He was locally as near to the Israelites in
general as He was to Samuel in particular. “God is not far from every one of
us,” said Paul to the Athenians (Acts xvii. 27). Yet God was morally much
nearer to Paul than He was to any other man on Mars Hill, because Paul was
much more like God in character than they were. And there was also a great
gulf of moral difference between Samuel and his hearers, because there was a
wide culf between them and Jehovah in character and disposition. Paul had
once been far from the God whom He now served, and the Saviour for whom
he was now ready to die, but he had diminished that distance by repentance—
by an entire change in his feelings concerning Jesus of Nazareth, and by a
corresponding change of life. The people whom Samuel here exhorts were at
such a moral distance from God that they had become partakers of the debasing
idolatry of the Canaanites, and the worship of Baal had increased the natural
badness of the national character. As the road of iniquity is downhill, every
step in the road had not only brought them farther from God, but had increased
the speed at which they had departed farther and farther from Him. Samuel
here teaches that a turning of heart to God would be the beginning of a moral
transformation—it would at once begin to lessen the moral distance between
them and Jehovah, and becin to make a separation between them and the sinful
habits in which they had been living. He tells them in effect, what another
prophet afterwards told their descendants, that “The Lord's hand 1s not
shortened, that it cannot save: neither ts His ear heavy, that it cannot hear ;
but your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins
have hid His face from you” (Isa. lix. 1, 2).


II. Repentance is born of a sense of need. A local change of place is often
brought about by a sense of need. The man feels dissatisfied with what he
meets with in the road in which he is travelling, and his dissatisfaction leads
him to turn round and take another course. And so it is in a change of sowl-
direction. The prodigal’s sense of need led him to set his face towards his
father’s house, and Israel had now begun to feel that they wanted something as
a nation which Baal and Ashtaroth could not give them. They “lamented
after the Lord.” Such a feeling of want is a sign of a re-awakening conscience
—it is like the outcry of the man who was thought to be dead before the
surgeon’s knife touched him—it is a sign of returning consciousness. ‘I'he
very fact that he can feel leads to the hope that he may recover. He who
feels a sense of spiritual need is not morally dead—his conscience may have
been lying dormant for a long time, but its outcry is a sure sign that it is not
dead, and is often the first step to a true repentance.


II. Human exhortation is often helpful to repentance. If a man is
awakening to a sense of the moral separation which sin has made between ‘him
and God, the words of a godly man will often deepen the feeling and determine
him to turn to God. ‘The words of Peter on the day of Pentecost helped his
hearers to repentance. His words first pricked their hearts and then helped
them to accept Him whom they had crucified. Samuel’s words of exhortation
meeting the feeling of need in the hearts of Israel, encouraged and stimulated
their desire to return to God.


iV. Repentance is the result of a preparation of heart, and shows its reality
in the life. Samuel here speaks of two things as necessary to a turning
unto God. “Prepare your hearts,” and “put away Balaam and Ashtaroth.”
No thoughtful man makes any great change in his life without first making it
the subject of consideration, without counting the cost of what he is about
to do. He who thinks about leaving his native land, never to return, does not
set out upon his journey without well weighing the consequences of ge a step.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
Pb eS TER EN ADA LIB T 0! o


BOOK &.
OO


Changes in our modes and habits of life, if made without thought, are not likely


to be either satisfactory or beneficial.
ing to God by repentance it is es


And when a man begins to think of return-
ecially necessary that he should ponder deeply


what repentance is—what is involved in forsaking sin and becoming a servant


of God—in turning his back u
course. It was when the pro
arise and go to my father.”


thinking on his part about his past, his present, and his future,


on his old life, and beginning an entirely opposite
igal “came to himself” that he said, “J will
That expression implies that there had been much


Such thinking


deepens and strengthens moral resolution, and leads to prayer, and no change of


feeling is likely to end in that lasting change of heart and life
it has its birth in such a preparation. Samuel


repentance consists, unless


in which true


here insists on such a thoughtfulness and prayerfulness on the part of Israel


as indispensable to a true


and lasting return to God,
heart must be proved by a change of life.
continue to worship the gods of the Philistines. “


And repentance of
Israel could not return to God and
No man can serve two


masters” (Matt. vi. 24), and he who professes to desire the favour of God must
show the reality of his profession by putting off the service of Satan and the


“works of darkness” (Rom. xiii. 12), by putting away


everything in his life


that is contrary to the mind and will of God.


V. After repentance comes liberty.


Lord will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines,”


ce


man ig a slave to sin.
(John viii. 34)—he is tied


“If ye do return,” ete, .... “the
Every unrepentant


Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin”
and bound by evil habits and


passions. But the


formation of new and holy desires and habits frees him from the dominion of the
old ones, as the formation of the new leaf-buds on the tree pushes off the old


and withering leaves,
the latter lose_their hold ;


Baal to God is a type of the moral freedo


repents,


In proportion as the former increase in size and strength,
and in proportion as new habits, springing from a


which Israel gained by turning from


m which comes to every man who truly


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Samuel doth not presently cheer
them up, but presseth them to a
thorough reformation: and giveth
them to know that their sorrow must
bear some proportion to their sin.
See the like done by Peter in Acts ii.
37, 38.—Trapp.


Revivals of religion have been the:


blessed experience of the Church in
every era of its living history.

hether we trace its course in the
Old or New Testament, or in subse-
quent times, evidences of occasional
awakenings, with all their happy re-
sults, abound... . At Bochim, in
the early days of the Judges, a great
revival took place. In the days of
Samuel the Church of God was glad-
dened by another. Hezekiah’s reign
was oa signalised by the general


revival of religion; so was Josiah’s,
The nation of Judah was preserved
from idolatry by means of these great
awakenings. In the time of the build-
ing of the second Temple there was a
revival of religion, which wrought
most influentially. Pentecost stands
prominent in the history of revivals,
and throughout the last eighteen cen-
turies revivals have been occasional,
and form the most interesting portions
of the Church’s history... . , Two
features have generally marked these
periods of spiritual awakening,—the
power of prayer, and the power of
preaching. .... The revival under
Samuel was brought about by prayer
and preaching. To this man it is In-
strumentally to be traced. He wrestled
in secret and exhorted in public... .


OHAP. VIL





I. Samuel preached repentance. This
has ever been the theme in times of
attempted revival. It was the theme
of Noah’s alarm-cry to the gigantic
sinners of the old world. It was the
burden of Elijah’s prophetic message.
It was the voice in the wilderness
from the lips of John the Baptist. It
was the summons which the apostles
served in the name of Christ upona
godless world. It rang through Ger-
many by Luther’s lips of music, and
echoed among the Alpine valleys from
Luther’s patriotic soul. It was the
subject of Latimer’s blunt home-thrusts
at the practical heart of England, and
it thundered throughout Scotland from
the stern and fearless Knox. The
doctrine of repentance is the appendix
to every re-publication of the ten
commandments, and the preface to
every offer of the Gospel. So when
Samuel taught, this was his awakening
theme. ... II. Samuel sought fruits
for repentance. He did not rest satis-
fied with the expressed emotion. He
demanded instant reproof of expressed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


sincerity. ‘T'o give up evil ways is one
of the earliest signs of a penitent soul.
.... This is the trial of conviction.
You may profess anxiety to be saved,
and mourn over your sins; but so long
as you do not give up what comes
between your soul and God, you have
not sincerely repented. ... IIf. Samuel
urged a believing return to the Lord.
. .. . Repentance does not constitute


reformation. It is only the outer
court. By faith we enter into the
holy place. .... Faith is the re-


union of the soul to the Lord, So
when the Israelites gave up the false,
they returned to the true God. They
forsook the many and returned to the
The heart must have an
object. No person is without a god,
to whom all his efforts are devoted,

and on whom his affections are placed. —
It may be the world, or the creature,
or self, or some superstition, or else
the true God. . . . But the awakened
conscience finds no satisfaction in any-


thing less than the Lord.—Steel.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 5, 6, 15—17.
THE GaTHERING aT MIzPEH.


I. If a nation is to have strength and liberty it must have unity. “Gather
all Israel to Mizpeh.” If a human body is to be strong, and consequently free
to act, there must be a united action of all its members. Every limb and organ
must work harmoniously together. So with the human soul. All its powers
must gather themselves together—there must be a concentration of all its forces
—if there is to be any result of worth. Hence the Psalmist’s prayer—“ Unite
my heart to fear Thy name” (Psalm Ixxxvi. 11), and the Apostle’s declaration,
“This one thing I do” (Phil. iti. 13). And the same thing is true of any
corporate body, whether it be large or small, It will not have power unless its
action is united, and if a nation is not strong by unity it will not long be free.
Samuel here aims at the united action of the whole nation. This unity—1. /s
often brought about by a common calamity. Common afflictions and dangers
have a wonderful power to bring men together. If the reputation of a family
is attacked from without, all its members will forget little differences, and unite
to attack a common foe. ‘The Church of God needs nothing but a return of the
days of persecution to bring all its members into such a unity of spirit as would
astonish all her foes. It would then be seen how strong is the unseen bond
which unites them all to a common head, When a nation arrives at a great
crisis in its history—especially when it is threatened by a common foe—all
minor differences of opinion are forgotten for the time—all party distinctions
are laid aside and the nation acts as one man. It was the Philistine oppression
which brought the Israelites at this timeto such unanimous action. ae felt

g


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L





that this was not the time for “ Ephraim to envy Judah, nor Judah to vex
Ephraim ” (Isa, xi. 13). 2. Such unity can only be real and lasting by being
founded on right relations to God. ‘The fear of God is the only solid ground
of national unity. When each man is governed by a desire to serve God, a
oneness of aim and purpose in the nation must be the result, and in proportion
as such feelings sway a people, in such proportion will there be concord
in their assemblies, and unanimity in their actions. The unity of Israel at this
time was based upon a common conviction of transgression against God, and a
desire to return to Him; and in proportion as these feelings were deep and
heartfelt, there was ground upon which to build a real and permanent union
of the people. 3. L¢ is good for such a national unity to find expression in a
national assembly. Such a gathering increases the feeling of unity, and
encourages the spirit of the nation by giving it an opportunity of feeling its
strength. It likewise intimidates its foes. The national gathermg at Mizpeh
was helpful to the Israelites themselves, and was a just ground of apprehension
to their oppressors.


II. It is a great blessing to a nation to have a head who is both intellectually
and morally great. Men must have leaders, and it matters little by what
name a national leader is called—whether king, president, or prime minister,
provided he exercises his power with intellectual ability and for moral ends.
Such a man should, like Samuel, combine in himself something of the prophet,
the judge, and the priest. He teaches by his life, and by his words, he is a
judge inasmuch as he is a stern reprover of all wrong, and fails not to enforce
penalty for transgression of national law, and he is also a priest, for such a man
will not fail to bear on his heart before God in prayer those who look up to him
for guidance. Such a man is a true king of his nation, whether he wears a
crown or not. Samuel was such an uncrowned king—a true father of Israel, a
true shepherd of his people. As a prophet, he made known to them the will
of Jehovah ; as judge, he kept pure the fountains of justice; and as at Mizpeh
he “cried unto the Lord for Israel” (ver. 9), we may be sure that upon the
altar at Ramah he offered sacrifices, not only for his own sins, but also for those
of the people.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 5. Intercession to the Lord for
the salvation of others. 1. /ts exercise
unlimited, the individual as well as the
whole people being its subject (comp.
1 Tim. ii. 1, 2). 2. Its answer con-
ditioned by the need of salvation, and
the capacity for salvation of those for
whom it is made,


wicked one, salvation.—Lange’s Com-


mentary.


Ver. 16, 17. Simply the vice-regent
of God, and no king, Samuel had no
palace in Israel. No armed guards
protected the person, nor gorgeous
retinue attended the steps of Samuel,
No pomp of royalty disturbed the


Ver. 6. The penitent confession—
““We have sinned against the Lord.”
1. Who has to make tt, the individual,
family, congregation, church, the whole
people. 2. How is it to be made, with
attestation of its truth and uprightness
by deeds of repentance. 3. What are
its consequences, forgiveness of sin,
deliverance from the power of the

96


simple manner of his life, or distin-
guished him from other men; yet
there rose by his house in Ramah that
which proclaimed to all the land the
personal character of its ruler, and tha
principles upon which he was to con-
duct his government. In a way not
to be mistaken, Samuel associated the
throne with the altar, earthly power


OHAP. VIL


with piety, the good of the country
with the glory of God. ‘That altar had
& voice no man could mistake. In a
manner more expressive than pro-
clamation made by royal heralds with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


painted tabards and sounding trumpets,
it proclaimed to the tribes of Israel
that piety was to be the character,
and the will of God the rule, of his
government.—Guthrie.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPA,—Verses 712,
Tue Dereat oF THE PHILISTINES.


I. Opposition to the covenant-people of God furnishes occasion for the
fulfilment of the Divine promises. God had promised Abraham that He
would bring out His descendants from the land of their captivity with “great
substance,” and “judge the nation whom they should serve” (Gen. xv. 14), and
the opposition of Pharaoh furnished an occasion for the fulfilment of that
promise. The Lord had answered Samuel’s prayer for Israel’s freedom, and even
“while he was offering the burnt offering” the Philistines furnished an occasion
for the fulfilment of the promise by “drawing near to battle against Israel.” In
the history of a man’s individual life the opposition from Satanic and human
enemies often furnishes occasion to show that “ He ts faithful that promised”
(Heb. v. 23).


II. The covenant-promises of God are fulfilled also in answer to prayer.
When the time drew near for the redemption of Israel from Egypt, “their cry
went up to God by reason of the bondage”’ (Exod. ii. 23), and the prayer and
faith of Moses came in to help forward the fulfilment of the promise of
deliverance. When the seventy years’ captivity was nearly accomplished, the
supplication of Daniel was one instrument of bringing the fulfilment of God’s
purpose of mercy (Dan. ix.). When Gur Lord was about to leave the world
He promised to His disciples the gift of the Holy Ghost, but they understood
well that they must “continue in prayer and supplication” for that Divine gilt
(Acts i. 4,14). And the promises given to the individual Christian are all
fulfilled in answer to prayer. He is to “be careful for nothing ; but in every-
thing by prayer and supplication to let his requests be made known unto God”
(Phil. iv. 6). The promise had been made to Israel that if they put away their
strange gods and returned unto the Lord, He would deliver them out of
the hand of the Philistines ; but they were right in interpreting this promise as
to be fulfilled in answer to prayer, and, therefore, in beseeching Samuel to cease
not to cry unto the Lord for them.


III. Character has a mighty influence in bringing answers to prayer.
Why did Israel say to Samuel, “Cry unto the Lord our God for us?” It was
because they felt that “the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth
much” (James v. 16). Much of the availing power of prayer is in the character
that is linked to it. ‘The cry of Moses for his people was often more effectual
than the cry of the thousands of Israel. So mighty was his power with the
Eternal that, in answer to his intercession, “the Lord repented of the evil which
He thought to do unto His people” (Ex. xxxii. 14). If this be so in relation to
sinful men, how mighty must be the efficacy of the intercession of the sinless
Son of God on behalf of His disciples! If the prayers of men of like passions
with ourselves have an influence with God, how mighty must be the prayers of
the sinless and Divine man !


IV. Answers to prayer in the present should bring thanksgiving for like
blessings in the past. An act of kindness fror. a friend who has befriended us
many times before, brings back to our remembrance all his kind deeds in the
past, all the benefits that he has conferred in days that are gone aes again


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL. BOOK I.





before us every time we are recipients of his bounty. This is, or ought to
be, especially the case with gifts received from the hand of God, and especially
with good things given in answer to prayer. Thankfulness for the mercy of
to-day ought to be deepened by recalling the mercies of past days. When
Samuel looked back at the past history of his people, he recalled many instances
of God’s loving kindness to a people who had, notwithstanding, often rebelled
against Him. And the thought of the many Divine interpositions in the past
deepened his gratitude for the present deliverance. His “ hitherto,” speaks
his thanksgiving for all the help of God to Israel from the day in which they
left Egypt until the day which had just passed, and when any man bows before
God in gratitude for a present answer to prayer, he should connect it by a
hitherto with all that have gone before.


V. It is good for our gratitude to God to show itself in an external ‘orm.
We like to express our gratitude to a human friend in some practical form as
we thereby give a body, as it were, to that which is itself unseen. And it ig
good to testify our thankfulness to God by some external manifestation, as we
thereby perpetuate a remembrance of His goodness and make it known to
others. Samuel desired that God’s deliverance at this time should live in the


memory of the present generation, and be handed down to their descendants,
therefore he embodies his feeling in a pillar of remembrance—“ he took a stone,
and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it ‘ Kbenezer.’”


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 7. The Philistines come up, and
the Israelites fear, they that had not
the wit to fear, whilst they were not
friends to God, have not now the
grace of fearlessness, when they were
reconciled to God. SBoldness and fear
are commonly misplaced in the best
hearts; when we should tremble, we
are confident ; and when we should be
assured, we tremble. Why should
Israel have feared, since they had made
their peace with the Lord of Hosts ?
Nothing should affright those which
are upright with God : the peace which
pee had made with God was true,
but tender.—Bishop Hall.

1. How evil sometimes seems to come
out of good. The religious meeting of
the Israelites brought trouble upun
them from the Philistines. 2. How
good is at length brought out of that
evil. Israel could never be threatened
more seasonably than at this time,
when they were repenting and praying,
.. .. Bad policy for the Philistines
to make war upon Israel when they
were making their peace with God.—
flenry.


Ver, 8. An evidence of Samuel’s
100


habitual resort to God in prayer for
help. (See chap. xii. 19-23.) In
Psa. xcix. 6, Samuel is specially men-
tioned as given to prayer, and as
prevailing by prayer. “ Moses and
Aaron among His priests, and Samuel
among them that call upon His name:
these called upon the Lord, and He
heard them ;” and in Jer. xv. 1, God
says, “ Though Moses and Samuel
stood before Me, yet My mind could
not be towards this people.” Samuel
had been given by God in answer to
His wother’s prayers, and his whole
life seems to have been governed by a
sense of the power of prayer, to which
his birth was due... . 'The forty
year’s domination of the Philistines
over Israel could not be overthrown by
the supernatural strength of Samson,
but it was terminated by the prayers
of Samuel: so much more powerful
are the weapons of prayer in the hands
of righteous men than any arm of
flesh.— Wordsworth.


Ver. 9. It is difficult to reconcile
the severe judgments denounced and
inflicted for irregularities in the ritual
service, with the direct sanction and


BAP, Vil.


approval which attended the irregular
actions of Samuel and other prophets
with regard to the ritual observances.
The point is of importance, for it is
the action of the prophets from this
time forward upon public affairs which
gives to the history of the Jews their
peculiar character. .... lt would
appear then that the prophets, as men
divinely authorised and inspired, were
regarded as having a right to dispense
with the strict requirements of the law
on special and extraordinary occasions,
and that, as prompted by the Spirit,
it was lawful for them to do that which
would be most criminal in persons not
so authorised. And this authorised
departure, when occasion demanded,
from the strict requirements of the law
could not but operate beneficially on
the public mind. ‘Ihe rigid enforce-
ment of every jot and tittle of the law,
on ordinary occasions, might eventually
—without the presence of a corrective
and counteracting influence — have
created a sort of idolatry for the mere
fetter of the law, and of every ritual
detail, as in itself a divine thing. But
the permitted departures therefrom by
the prophets corrected this tendency,
by directing attention more to the
spiritual essence of these observances—
teaching, as Samuel himself expressly
declared on one occasion, that “ obe-
dience was better than sacrifice, and
to hearken than the fat of rams.” ‘I'he
diligent reader of the Scripture is aware
that this upholding of the spirit above
the mere letter of the ritual service
was a peculiar function of the prophets,
appearing with more and more dis-
tinctness as the time advances, until
at last the prophets declare with great
plainness of speech that the mere ritual
service in all its parts, and the most
sacred solemnities prescribed by the
law, were, in the nakedness of their
literal truth—apart from the spiritual
influences which should be connected
with them—not only unacceptable to
the Lord, but abomination in His
sight.—Kitto.

Samuel’s intercession was—I. The
most powerful means of aid. “ Prayer
moves the arm that moves the uni-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








verse.” It is the Divinely-appointed
means of assistance. It has the
promises which are “exceeding great
and precious” attached to it. IL. It
was a prayer in which they all hada
believing interest. . . . Many hearts
united in one exercise. ‘This gives
public prayer a wondrous power.
III. It was prayer to their covenant
God. They had just renewed their
covenant with God, and accepted Him
as theirs. “Cry unto our God for us.”
They knew to whom they addressed
their cry. It was to no unknown God
or imaginary Deity. IV. It was
prayer for a definite object. ‘They
specified their want—‘“‘that He will
save us out of the hand of the Philis-
tines” (ver. 8). ‘Too many pray in a
way so general as to exhibit little
interest in what they ask. But Israel
had a particular danger, hence they
had a particular request. Their prayer
arose from a felt necessity. ....
Prayer should have a fixed, definite
object. You should know what you
want, and let your felt want urge your
earnest cry. V. It was offered by a
sacrifice... .. The sinful can have
no claim upon the Holy, nor can they
approach without mediation. Hence
a system of mediation was established
when mercy was revealed. A media-
tion and an atonement were prefigured
in the old economy.—Steel,


Ver. 12. What a contrast between
the event now recorded at Ebenezer
and that recorded as having occurred
a few years before at the same place.
At that time Israel had the ark with
them, the visible sign of God’s presence,
but the Lord Himself had forsaken
them on account of their sins; and
Hophni and Phinehas were with the
ark, and they were discomfited with a
great slaughter, and the priests were
slain with the sword, and the ark of
God was taken. Now they have not
the ark, but they have repented of
their sins, and Samuel is with them ;
and the Lord hearkens to his prayers,
and the Philistines are smitten so that
they return no more into the coasts of
Israel during the days of el


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





Samuel sets up the great stone at
Ebenezer. Hence it appears that the
outward ordinances of a visible Church
are of no avail without holiness in the
worshippers, and that in the most dis-
tressed condition of the visible Church
God can raise up Samuels, and endue
them with extraordinary graces, and
enable them to do great acts, and give
comfort and victory to the Church of
God by their means.— Wordsworth.
The stone Ebenezer is a monument
of those revelations of the might and
the grace of a living God, occasioned
by sin and penitence, wandering and
return, which are the impelling power
in the whole political history of the
old covenant.—Lange’s Commentary.
It is of great consequence to cherish


BOOK L





lasting and grateful memorials of
God’s goodness to us, and of our
solemn engagements to him. What
God has done is too great to be for-
gotten, and too gracious to be over-
looked. I. Look upward, and see God
in your history. We should always
trace our mercies direct to the hand of
God, since, whatever be the agency,
He is the source. II. Look backward,
and remember past help. The text
supposes that help was needed, and
every Christian knows that his depen-
dence is constant. Mark the long
continuance of your mercies. Hitherto
may be for forty, fifty, or even sixty
years. III. Look forward. Thou shalt
see greater things than these.—7hodey,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18 and 14,
Victory, Rest, AND RESTORATION.


I. One decisive victory brings a long season of rest.


This victory at


Ebenezer brought peace to Israel for many years, and so the human soul, by a
decisive victory over one strong temptation, gains often a long season of rest


from the tempter’s snares.


He gives by such a victory such a proof to the


powers of evil of his moral courage that it is deemed hopeless to renew the


conflict while the soul remains so strong and watchful.


It is written concerning


the Son of God, after His decisive victory over the devil in the wilderness, that


the tempter “ departed from Him for a season” (Luke iv. 18).


The total defeat


he had experienced told him how vain it would be to renew the assault while the
being whom he desired to overthrow remained in His present frame of soul. In
all warfare it is best_ to decide at once who is to be the master of the field by
a decisive blow, and if a Christian desires any rest of soul there must be no
parleying with his spiritual enemies, he must—with the help of the same God
by whom Israel routed the Philistines at Ebenezer—let them know without delay


who is to be the conqueror.


Even then the devil will ‘‘ depart for a season”


only, but these seasons of repose will enable him to gather strength for the


next attack.


II. Victory brings restoration of that which has been lost by subjection.
When Israel had conquered her oppressors she regained the cities which had


been taken from her in the day of her subjection.


The human race does not


now possess all that belonged to it when God created the first man, and bade
him “replenish the earth and subdue it” (Gen. i. 28). God at first “put all


things under his feet” (Psalm viii, 6).
the absolute lord, either of the earth a
He has lost his rule


animal creation.
under him” (Heb. ii. 8).


But now it is plain that man is not


an the phenomena of nature, or of the
y sin.
But when man is restored to his original position in


“ We see not yet all things put


the universe by victory over sin, he will recover his lost rule over material


things.


There is to be a “ time oY restitution”


(Acts iii. 21), when the powers


which now hold man in subjection will be finally defeated, and he will recover
his former dominion, not only over himself, but over the world and over all the
creatures below him in the scale of creation.


102


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


The revival of religion has ever had
& most important bearing on social
and moral improvement. ‘The return
of man to God restores him to his
brother. Restoration to the earnest
and hearty performance of religious
duties towards God, leads to a corres-
ponding reformation in relative and
political duties. Those countries in
Hurope which have had the greatest


of despotism, and they possess the
greatest amount of domestic quiet. It
was the revival of religion which
secured the Protestant succession to
England, and many of the liberties we
now enjoy. It was the revival of reli-
gion that gave such a martyr-roll to
the Scottish Covenanters, and led to
the revolution settlement of 1688. In
Israel every revival of religion was


religious reforms, have advanced most
in liberty, civilisation, and commerce.
They are not trodden by the iron heel


succeeded by national prosperity and
political independence.—Aveel,





CHAPTER VIL


Currican anp Exposrrory Norzs.—Ver.1. “When Samuel was old.” Many expositors
consider that he was now about sixty years of age, others that he was not more than fifty-four.
It is plain that he lived for some time after this, and continued to exercise his judgeship.
“Be made his sons judges,” etc. “The reason assigned for the appointment of Samuel’s
sons as judges is his own advanced age. The inference which we might draw from this alone,
namely, that they were simply to support their father in the administration of justice, and that
Samuel had no intention of laying down his office, and still less of making the supreme office
of judge hereditary in his family, is still more apparent from the fact that they were stationed
as judges of the nation in Beersheba, which was on the southern border of Canaan” (Keil).


Ver. 2. “The name of his firstborn was Joel,” etc. “These names may be taken as
indications of the father’s pious feeling. ‘The first, Joel, ‘Jehovah is God,’ was, not improbably,
a protest against the idolatry of the Israelites. The name of the second son, Abiah, ‘Jehovah is
father,’ expresses trust in the fatherhood of God, an idea which hardly appears in the Old
Testament except in proper names” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary). “ Abiah records
doubtless the fervent aspiration of him who devised it as a name, and, we may hope, of many
who subsequently adopted it after that endearing and intimate relationship between God aad
the soul of man, which is truly expressed by the words father and child. It may be accepted as
a proof that believers in ancient days, though they had not possession of the perfect knowledge
of ‘the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ,’ or of the doctrine of the Holy Ghost,
nevertheless ‘ received the spirit of adoption,’ that God ‘sent forth the Spirit of His Son iato
their hearts, whereby they cried Abba, Father’” (Wilkinson’s Personal Names in the Bible).


Ver. 3. “His sons walked not in his ways.” “The question may arise, why Samue] was
not punished, as Eli, for the misconduct of his sons? But the answer is obvious. Not only
was the offence of Samuel’s sons of a far less heinous criminality, but Samuel might not kuow,
owing to this distance of Beersheba, anything of their delinquency” (Jt amteson ).


Ver 5. “Make us a king to judge us like all the nations.” “This request resembles so
completely the law of the king in Deut. xvii. 14, that the distinct allusion to it is unmistakable.
The custom of expressly quoting the book of the law is met with for the first time in the books
of the captivity. The elders simply desired what Jehovah had foretold through His servant Moses,
as a thing that would take place in the future and for which He had made provision” ( Kiel). See
also comments on this verse.


Ver. 6. “The thing displeased Samuel,” etc. “He did not, therefore, take it amiss that
they blamed the wrong-doiug of his sons, or that they referred to his age, and thus intimated
that he was no longer able to bear the whole burden of office” (Erdmann). “ Personal and
family feelings might affect his views of this public movement. But his dissatisfaction arose
principally from the proposed change being revolutionary in its character. Though it would not
entirely subvert their theocratic government, the appointment of a visible monarch would
necessarily tend to throw out of view their unseen King and Head” (Jamieson). (See also
comments on the verse.)

103


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L
Ce TEE


Ver. 11. “This will be the manner of the king,” t.¢., “the right or prerogative which
the king would claim, namely, such a king as was possessed by all the other nations, and such
an one as Israel desired in the place of its own God-king, #.¢., a king who would rule over hia
people with arbitrary and absolute power” (Keil). “The following is a very just and graphic
picture of the despotic governments which anciently were and still are found in the Hast, and
into conformity with which the Hebrew monarchy, notwithstanding the restrictions prescribed
by the law, gradually slid. Oriental sovereigns claim aright to the services of any of their
subjects at pleasure. The royal equipages throughout the East were generally, as in Persia they
still are, preceded and accompanied by a number of attendants on foot..... Cookery, baking,
and the kindred works are, in Eastern countries, female employments, and numbers of young
women are occupied with these offices in the palaces even of petty princes” (Jamieson).


Ver. 20. “The first part of this energetic answer implies that they were well aware of the
peculiarity of their civil government, by which their governors were only God’s vicegerents—
officers chosen and appointed by an unseen power—and they desired a visible head. The second
part of it expressed a strong preference for a permanent rather than an occasional or temporary
magistrate to consult their interests by his domestic administration, and, with regard to their
foreign relations, to keep a standing army, ready at all times, under his command, to repel the
encroachments or insults of neighbouring states. Perhaps, too, the corruptions that had
prevailed to so great an extent under the judges had originated » secret but strong desire to be
freed from the government of the priesthood, and they probably expected that, if released from
the authority of sacerdotal judges, they would find a regal government leas austere and rigid
than the old régime” (Jamieson).


Ver. 22. “Go ye every man,” etc. “We must here read between the lines that Samuej
communicated the Divine decision to the people, and, dismissing the elders, took into considera-
tion, in accordance with the Lord’s command, the necessary steps for the election of a king”
(Erdmann). “He gave them time to reconsider their request, as well knowing that Gcd’s
permission was a punishment” ( Wordsworth). “Such was their reverence for God, and theiz
confidence in His prophet, that, instead of ‘proceeding further to claim the right of popular
election, they departed in full and patient reliance on God’s time and way of granting their
request ” (Jamieson ),


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Veress 1—8,
SAMUEL THE FaTHER.


Samuel has been called the second Moses of Hebrew history, but though
their personal character and their life-work were very much alike, there are
some striking contrasts in their individual history. “Moses, for instance, was
not called to begin his great life-work until he was older than Samuel was at
the period of his history to which these verses refer, while this latter servant of
God entered upon his special service while he was a child. But he who came
last retained his bodily vigour much longer, for at the age of one hundred and
twenty years “his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated” (Deut.
xxxlv. 7), while Samuel, when not more than half so old, began to feel the infirmities
of age. Moses continued physically fit for service, yet was forbidden by God to
serve longer. Samuel became unfit for active service, and yet was permitted to
continue it. Both were compelled, the one by Divine command, the other by
bodily infirmity, to hand over their work to others, but Moses is happy in
finding a suitable successor, while Samuel is obliged to delegate his authority to
those who are very unfit to exercise it. Thus the life of the great law-giver
and that of the first of the prophets remarkably illustrate the variety of God’s
dealings with his servants, and lead us to ge, A when we contemplate His
providential leadings, “His ways are past Jinding out” (Rom. xi. 33). The
verses teach us—


I, That time is no respecter of character. Samuel grew infirm although he
was so good. Character is by far the most important thing on earth as well as
in heaven, yet the greatest saint as much as the greatest sinner realises in hig


own ne that “the creature is made subject to vanity” (Rom. viii. 20).


G@aP, Vim. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





at


In this respect Samuel, the elect servant of God, was no more highly favoured
than the most ungodly man in the kingdom of Israel. The “outer man” of
one as well as of the other was “perishing day by day” (2 Cor. iv. 16).


II. But the fact that it is so shows the necessity for the full adoption of
the body. (Rom. viii. 23). It must be shown that God is a respecter of per-
sons. ‘hat the same destiny should await the body of a saint, which has been
an instrument of righteousness, and that of a sinner, which has been altogether
devoted to the service of sin, does not accord with our conception of the justice
of God. ‘There is that within us which demands that, at some time or other,
there should be some difference made, and God in His revealed word tells us
that there will be. ‘The body of the saint will have an adoption-day—it will
be redeemed from the curse of sin (Rom. viii. 23), and will be “fashioned like
unto the glorious body” of the Son of God (Phil. iii. 21).


III. Family life is consistent with the highest spiritual attainments and
the most devoted spiritual service. Samuel the prophet of God was a husband
and father. The highest ideal of man is not that of a solitary creature bound
by no human ties, and fulfilling none of the social duties of life. But the most
ie manhood is that which is developed first of all in the head of a house-

old as the father of a family. When God first created man He did not con-
sider him complete until he became a social head, and it is as true now as it
was then that a man is not developed on all sides of his character until he takes
the position for which God evidently intended him, and fulfils the duties which
belong to that position. And this being so, it is obvious that such a life is no
hindrance to a man’s spiritual growth and to his most entire devotion to the
service of God. No man in Hebrew history stands before Samuel in purity of
life or singleness of aim; no man, excepting perhaps Moses, was more honoured.
by God as an intercessor on behalf of others, or was more entirely devoted to
the highest welfare of his people, yet he was the head of a household, he was a
husband and a father. Andif we look back upon the history of the Church of
God, we shall find that the greater number of her most devoted servants have
not been monks and nuns, but husbands and wives, fathers and mothers,


IV. The most godly men cannot transmit their godliness to their children.
Samuel’s sons “ walked not in his ways.” There were several reasons which we
should have supposed would lead them to do so. From their earliest days they
had been witnesses of their father’s godly life, and nothing is more powerful
than a good example. Yet in this case it had no influence; all Samuel’s
integrity was unable to win his sons to the practice of justice. Then there was
the position of responsibility in which they were placed. That they held a
position in the nation which was only second to that of their father was
favourable to the transmission of the virtues which he had displayed as judge of
Israel. But this was not the case. We cannot doubt that they also enjoyed
the blessing of a father’s prayers and instruction. If Samuel was in the habit
of bringing all Israel before God in prayer, it is certain that he did not omit to
make special intercession for his own children ; if he ceased not to instruct and
warn the entire nation, it is most unlikely that he failed to acquaint his children
with the law of God—with His dealings with the nation in the past—with
the judgment that he had been called to foretell concerning the sons of Eli, and
with the great promises which had been made to Israel if they were faithful to
their privileges. But he finds himself confronted with the fact that a holy seed
is born, not of the blood of prophets, nor of the will of man, but of God. Great
as are the moral advantages of being born into a godly family, more than the
mere fact of being so born, and of being surrounded by every holy influence, is
needed to subdue the will of fallen man, and make him a servant of poe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUBL,





BOOK &,





OUTLINES AND SUGGXSTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. Samuel began his acquain-
tance with God early, and continued
it long; he began it in his long coats,
and continued to his grey hairs: he
judged Israel all the days of his life.
God doth not use to put off His old
servants, their age endeareth them to
Him the more; if we be not unfaithful
to Him, He cannot be unconstant to
us.— Bishop Hall.


Ver. 3. It is amazing how this sin
covetousness perverts the moral
saculties. Gold, unlawfully got, sears
the conscience. Some of the loftiest
minds have been degraded by this sin.
Perhaps there was not a greater man
in his own age, or in any age, than
Lord Bacon. He is the father of modern
philosophy, and revolutionised the in-
quiries of the schools. . . . His works
must ever be read with profit, and they
contain a vast store of wisdom expressed
in the most felicitous language. Yet,
strange to relate, Lord Bacon was one
of the most unscrupulous lawyers, and
one of the most disreputable judges that
ever sat upon the English bench. . . .
This philosopher, who had written so
much in praise of virtue, was impeached
by the House of Commons, and found
ouilty of receiving bribes to the amount
of £100,100! “This glimpse of the
rise and fall of a great man,” says Dr.
Tweedie, “proclaims aloud the insuf-
ficiency of all but the grace and truth
of God to keep a man morally erect.—
Steel.
Perhaps Israel had never thought of
a king, if Samuel’s sons had not been
unlike their father. Who can promise
himself holy children, when the loins
of a Samuel and the education in the
temple yielded monsters? It is not
likely that good Samuel was faulty in
that indulgence for which his own
mouth had denounced God’s judg-
ments against Eli; yet this holy man
succeeds Eli in his cross, as well as in
his place, though not in his sin; and
is afflicted with a wicked succession.
God will let us find that grace is by
gift, not by inheritance, I fear Samuel
106


£


was too partial to nature in the sur-
rogation of his sons. I do not hear of
God’s allowance to this act; if this
had been God’s choice as well as his, it
had been like to have received more
blessing. . . . Even the best heart may
be blinded by affection.— Bp. Hall.

I. The children of good men do not
always walk in their parents’ ways:
It was not the peculiar affliction of
Samuel. ... It was early seen that
grace was not hereditary. In the
family of Adam, there was a Cain, a
murderer ; in that of Noah, a Ham,
who mocked his father; in that of
Abraham, an Ishmael, a scoffer at
religion; in that of Isaac, a profane
Esau. An incestuous Reuben, and a
bloody Simeon and Levi, distressed
the heart of good old Jacob; two
drunkards, Nadab and Abihu, were
found in the family of Aaron, “the
saint of God ;” and Hophni and Phi-
nehas brought disgrace and ruin upon
the house of Ei..... II, The
frequent recurrence of this fact need
excite no surprise in those who believe
in the corruptions of human nature
and the sovereignty of Divine Grace.
. . . The children of the godly are
by nature the children of wrath,
even as others.” . . . Something more
is necessary than parents can confer,
a change of heart, which God alone
can accomplish. .... III. Causes
why the children of godly parents
do not often walk in their parents’
ways. Although this is to be ac-
counted for by the corruption of human
nature, there are certain subordinate
causes.... 1. The untender and
uncircumspect conversation of parents,
: They will more readily copy
what is bad in your example, than
what is good and praiseworthy ... .
the bad example will be followed, the
good advice neglected. 2. Faults in
their education. Such as unjust par-
tiality, as in that of Isaac for Esau, and
of Rebekah for Jacob. . . . Or undue
indulgence, which seems to have been
the error of David, and the ruin of his
son Adonijah, . . . Excessive severity


°
(73


QHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Pe ol


is an error not less fatal, and perhaps even as exemplified in their desire for
as common. 3. The influence of bad aking, wasaresult of Samuel’s activity.
company and bad example in others. His former activity was an excellent
The ruin of multitudes has proceeded preparation for royalty. The conscious-
from want of caution in this matter.— ness of religious and civil union was
Peddie. powerfully re-awakened by his means.

An able king had only to reap what

Ver. 4. The unanimity of the people, he had sown.—Hengstenberg.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 4—23,
A Kina DesrrED AND GRANTED.


1. The generality of mankind prefer the visible to the invisible. There
have been men in all ages of the world who have chosen as their portion that
which is unseen in preference to what is seen, and they have done so on the
most reasonable and substantial grounds. ‘I'he Invisible King had more power
to influence the actions—to control the choice—of Moses than the visible and
mighty monarch of Egypt. He was so ruled by a desire to serve Him whom he
had never seen that he counted the wrath of Pharaoh as nothing in comparison.
In the day of battle his eye was not fixed upon the visible enemy, but it was
raised to that unseen friend whose help he sought for the people whom he led.
His whole life was an “ enduring as seeing Him who is invisible” (Heb. xi. 27).
Samuel also was ruled by an abiding sense of the presence of the Unseen King.
To Him he cried in the day of his people’s danger, and with reference to Him
he regulated his whole life. And in the present day, as in all past days, there
are those who are ruled, not by the things which are seen and temporal, but by
those which are unseen and eternal, who “endure as seeing Him who as
invisible? But these have always been in the minority—most men, like Israel
of old, prefer the visible and the seeming to the invisible and the real. Those
who have this preference justify it because it makes them like the majority.
“ Nay,” said Israel, “but we will have aking to reign over us, that we also
may be like all the nations” (vers, 19, 20). The influence of numbers has
always had great weight with mankind. ‘hey do not like to be singular, and
they find a reason for doing what they do, and for having what they desire, in
the fact that the generality of men have and do it. The great majority of the
Hebrew nation were unwilling to be different from the nations around them ;
those nations had a visible king, and although he was but a man like them-
selves, Israel desired to have such a king rather than render allegiance to God
only as their King.


II. Even when a desired thing is shown to be injurious, men will often
persist in desiring it. Sometimes a physician finds a patient who is so self-
willed that he will persist in desiring food which has been proved to be injurious
to him. And so a godless soul has sometimes the injurious consequences of a
certain course plainly set before him, and yet persists in his determination to
continue in it. Samuel, like a wise moral physician, laid before Israel the con-
sequences of persisting in their desire to have a king like the nations. But,
although he plainly pointed out to them the bondage to which they would
subject themselves by eratifying such a desire, they refused to relinquish it.
In the face of the remonstrances of one whom they knew desired their real
welfare, they held to their determination simply because it was theirs.


III. God, rather than force the human will, will grant petitions which
displease Him. God will not force any man to take His yoke. If oe persist


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L
fr a
in desiring a heavier one, He will often grant their desire. This was more than
once the case with the Hebrew nation. He once wrought a miracle to meet
their wishes, when they incurred His deep displeasure by desiring their own way
in preference to His. Is was an act of Divine judgment when He “gave them
quails to the full” (Numb. xi. 33), and in the instance before us God granted
their desire, but “He gave them aking in His anger” (Hosea xiii, 11), and -
[srael soon found that the gratification of their self-will brought its own punish-
ment, and that their self-imposed yoke was a very different one from that whick
their Divine King had laid upon them. But God leaves men free to choose or
to reject His guidance. He will have none but voluntary subjects.


IV. In the time of displeasure and perplexity we should take the cause of
both to God. Samuel, in this day of disappointment and uncertainty, “cried
unto the Lord ;” and every child of God should do the same. He is prompted
to this act by a spiritual instinct, and encouraged in it by the Divine promises,
It is an instinct in human nature to turn to the strong in seasons of weakness,
and to those who are wiser than we are in the season of perplexity. The child
runs to the parent for help, and the inexperienced turn to those who have more
wisdom than they have when they feel that their own wisdom is insufficient to
guide them. In times of great extremity almost every human creature instinc-
tively cries out for supernatural help, but when a man has a closer relation to
God than that which is common to every human creature—when he can look up
to Him and ery, Abba, Father—he not only turns his eye upward as naturally as
a flower opens its petals to the sun, but he is encouraged and emboldened to do
80 by the Divine promises of succour. God has commanded His children to
“call upon Him in the day of trouble,’ and has promised them deliverance
(Psa. 1.15). “ Because he hath set his love upon Me, therefore will I deliver
him: .. . . He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him: 1 will be with him
tn trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him” (Psa. xci. 14, 15). Samuel’s
experience at this time is an illustration of the truth of these Divine promises,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 5. The request of Israel brings
before us—I. A melancholy view of
the progress of degeneracy in a com-
munity. Looking at their history from
the time of their entrance into Canaan,
on the whole the scene presented is
that of successive generations rising up
to depart farther and farther from
God, and now we have the dismal
consummation in their effort to destroy,
as far as they were concerned, that
peculiar and interesting link between
themselves and God which existed in
the fact that besides being to them, as
He is to all creatures, their Supreme
Ruler, He condescended to act as such
in a direct and immediate form, stand-
ing actually, and to all intents and
purposes, in the same relation to them
as that which an earthly sovereign
sustains towards his subjects, . . . .
It was the sin of the fathers living

108 .


over again, but with greater intensity,
in the persons of the children. This
view of the case is, in a high de ree,
admonitory. None of us perhaps think
enough of the connexion between our-
selves and the future, and yet, when
we do, there is much that may well
fill our minds with awe. . . . Each
age exerts a very considerable influence
on that which succeeds it, and the
men of any particular age are respon-
sible in a very large and affecting
measure for the characteristics of the
period which may come after them.
In looking at the clamorous
assembly which the narrative brings
before us, we cannot recognise in that
crowd the immediate descendants of a
race of God-fearing fathers and of
God-honouring mothers. II. It teaches
us the perilousness of allowing our
thoughts to run in an improper direc:


OHAP. VII.


tion, and our wishes to centre upon
a wrong object. And this because of
the absorbing effect of one wrong
thought, and its consequent power to
throw into oblivion all those counter-
acting thoughts and objects which
from any other source might be sug-
gested. . . . Trace the progress of
this one wrong desire in Israel. Was
there nothing to be said on the other
side? Is it not exceedingly easy to
sonceive of the counteracting effect
which might have been presented to
such a wish by a recollection of their
actual privileges at the moment?
There is a matchless sublimity about
the very idea of a theocracy. But if
its sublimity did not appeal to their
moral sense, its peculiar advantageous-
ness might have appealed to their self-
regard. No other form of government
could be compared with it for beneficial
results to its subjects. For consider
what it involved—the equal accessible-
ness of the Sovereign to all His sub-
jects—the certainty of having the best
counsel under all circumstances—the
largest resources, both of power and
skill, at their command—the impossi-
bility of wrong motives affecting the
Sovereign’s acts—the freedom from the
ordinary burdens of government when
He was king who could say, ‘“‘ Every
beast in the forest is mine, and the
cattle upon a thousand hills.” . . Nor
did they admit another recollection
which might well have offered the
strongest contradiction to their one
wrong desire, even that of the faith ful-
ness and the loving-kindness with which
God, as their King, had ever treated
them. . . . Beware of the first mis-
direction of thought. Be sure you are
right at first in your plans and pur-
poses, because afterwards, by reason of
the very force by which wrong thoughts
indulged exclude all suggestions to the
contrary, it may be too late to alter.—


Miller.


Ver. 6. A beautiful example of
prayer to obtain the composure of
ruffled feelings and to have the judg-
ment directed aright by God’s Holy
Spirit, when it is in danger of being


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





overswayed by personal motives, —
Biblical Commentary. |

In this there was a twofold ungodly
element. (1). They desired a kin
instead of the God-established an
nobly-attested judge Samuel. .
The scheme is characterised as an in-
justice against Samuel, and therefore
asin against the Lord who sent him
(vers. 7, 8). (2). At the bottom of
the people’s desire for a king lay the
delusion that God was powerless to
help them, that the reason of their
subjection was not their sin, but a
fault in the constitution, that the
kingdom would be an aid tn addition
to God. This point of view appszars
oftener in the narrative than the
first (Isa. x. 18, 19; xii.).—Aengsten-
berg.


Ver. 7. It was not, then, the mere
desire for reform in civil polity. It
was the outburst in a new form of an
ancient sin; it was a new disguise for
a well-known delinquency ; it was of
a piece with their frequent backsliding,
Ungodliness was at the root of their
discontent. . ... God, who judgeth
the heart, recognised the former dis-
obedience in this new request. How
different it seemed, yet how radically
the same! Man would have judged
otherwise and imputed the desire to
other motives ; God, who is infallible,
attributed it to the same. It is well
to consider our motives for conduct,
this would enable us to detect an old
sin in a new form.—Steel.

The condescension of this answer is
very remaikable. Samuel’s wounded
feelings are soothed by being reminded
of the continual ingratitude of the
people to God Himself, upon whom,
in fact, a greater slight was put by
this request fora king “like the na-
tions,” than upon Samuel. It is in
the spirit of our Lord’s saying to the
apostles, “The disciple is not above
his Master, nor the servant above his
lord” (Matt. x. 24, comp. John xv.
18, 20).—Biblical Commentary.

Such an answer sounds at first most
strange, most perplexing! Hearken
unto them, for they have plas me.

10


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOE I.


i


Yield to them, because they are doing
a worse thing than you supposed they
i No contradiction
can seem greater. And yet no Jewish
statesman or prophet could do the work
that was given him to do, could be
God’s faithful witness, if he did not
enter into the very heart of this contra-
diction, if he did not mould his own
conduct according to the deep truth
that was implied in it. His impulse
was to maintain the order of things
which he found established in his day.
He believed that order was God’s order;
he dared not refer it to any lower
source. He administered that order
in this faith; if it forsook him, he
became careless and corrupt. Could
God’s order then be changed? Was He
not, by His very nature, the Un-
changable? Was it not the highest
duty to make the people feel that this
was His character? Was it not thus
that their own frivolity and passion
for change would be corrected? When
the impulse passes into reasoning you
cannot easily detect a flaw in it; and
yet it was stronger still while it was
still an impulse and did not pass into
reasoning. Nothing but prayer to the
unchangable God could show wherein
both were false and might lead to
falsehood. The unchangableness of
God is not to be confounded with the
rigidness of a rule or a system. If it
is so confounded, the purpose and
nature of His government are forgotten.
He—the Perfect and Absolute Will—
has created beings with wills, beings
made in His own image. He educates
them; He desires that they should
know His Will, that is to say, Himself.
They are to learn what they themselves
are, what they would make of them-
selves, what He would make of them,
partly by an experience of their own
wilfulness, partly by results which He
brings to pass in spite of that wilful-
ness, yea, by means of it. This is the
explanation of the paradox... “ Let
them know what the general of armies,
whom they crave for ag a deliverer,
will do to bring them into deeper
bondage, but do not resist a desire
which has in it a deeper meaning than
110


you know, which will produce im- |
mediate sorrows, but in which is
hidden a Divine purpose for the good
and not for the destruction of your
people.” In a very remarkable sense,
then, the vox populi was the vox Det,
even when the two voices seemed most
utterly out of harmony. The prophet
was not merely to notice the outward
and obvious discord between them ;
he was to listen with purged ears till
he found where one became really the
echo of the other.—Maurice.

The sin of Israel did mot consist
simply in wishing to have a king. God
had promised to Abraham that kings
should come out of him (Gen. xvii. 6),
and also to Jacob (Gen. xxxv. 11).
The Holy Spirit had prophesied by
Jacob that “the sceptre should not
depart from Judah until Shiloh come”
(Gen. xlix. 10); and Balaam, that a
“ sceptre should arise out of Israel”
(Numb. xxiv, 17); and God had pro-
vided certain laws for the kingdom
which should arise in Israel (Deut.
xvii. 15-20). But their sin consisted
in not waiting patiently for God’s time,
when He might think fit to give them
a king. It consisted in not leaving
the season of the kingdom and the
choice of a king in His hands. It con-
sisted in not asking Samuel to inquire
of God whether the time had arrived
when they might have a king; and in
presuming that they were themselves
the best judges of what conduced to
their own welfare, and needed not to
ask counsel of God. St. Paul notices
this in his historical address to the
synagogue of Antioch in Pisidia. “God
gave unto them judges about the space
of four hundred and fifty years, and
afterwards they desired a king” (Acts
xill, 20, 21). It consisted in the un-
thankfulness and discontent of the
people, dissatisfied with their present
condition, when “‘ God was their King.”
It consisted in an eager desire to be
“like all other nations,” who had
earthly kings; whereas they ought to
have deemed it a high privilege to be
unlike other nations, in that they had
been separated from all other people
(Lev. xx. 26) and chosen from out of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





other nations to be a peculiar treasure
to God above all people, a holy nation,
a kingdom of priests (Exod. xix. 5, 6),
**a special people unto the Lord their
God, above all people that are upon
the face of the earth” (Deut. vii. 6).
They thought lightly of this preroga-
tive, and, like a national Esau, they
profanely bartered their birthright for
what they deemed a temporal benefit.
— Wordsworth,


Ver. 8. Old sins are not forgotten
with God, if they are all the time kept
up and not repented of (Exod. xxxii.
84).— Wuertemb. Bible.


Ver. 18. Cries that will not be heard.
1. Self-will often brings us unto dis-
tress. 2. This distress makes us cry
to the Lord. 3. Such cries the Lord
does not promise to hear.—Zr. of
Lange's Commentary.

These words should make us tremble.
For they teach us that after having
for some time followed with delight
the wanderings of our own heart
against the advice of our counsellors,
we shall some day find ourselves in-
volved in many evils. This often
happens to men. One binds himself
in one way, and one in another—each
walks according to the desires of his
heart, and in the way which he has
marked out for himself, and is followed
by sorrows which compel him to cry to
heaven for help. But God will not
hear these cries, unless they are the
fruit of a true repentance, and then
the ills that are suffered in the path
which has been chosen are the just
punishment for our wilfulness in having
entered it.—De Sacy.


Ver. 19. Like little children, the
passions of a people are blind to the
future. ... ‘I'bus the sinner will have
his desire, though it imperil his soul
for ever. The avaricious will have

old, though it become his idol, and
his immortal spirit worship the golden
calf. The inebriate will have his
drink, though he degrade his being,
blast his character, beggar his family,
and damn his soul. —Steel.


So Ee AE


We will have a king. Why then,
you shall, saith God, for a mischief to
you (Hosea xiii. 11). You shall have
your will, and then I will have mine
another while. (See the like, Hosea
xiii, 11.)—T7rapp.


Ver. 21. Samuel can go back to God
with the same uprightness as he had
come from that sacred place. ‘The
tides of popular feeling did not bear
him away. He could stand alone in
his devotedness to God, if the people
should all reject the word of the Most
High. . . . He was willing to abide by
the Divine decision. His will was
according to God’s, High attainment
for a sinful man !—Steel.


Ver, 22. The history of the world
cannot produce another instance in
which a public determination was
formed to appoint a king, and yet no
one proposed either himself or any
other person to be king, but referred
the determination entirely to God.
Ambition of royal authority certainly
was not the motive in the leading
men whosupported this measure. The
whole of their proceedings, even in this
highly improper determination, shows
how fully convinced they were that
the law of Moses was from God,
and that, even in appointing a king,
His directions must be observed, or
rather, that the decision must be
referred implicitly to God Himself.—
Scott.

Few who rebuke so sharply and are
not followed, escape the animosity of
the people, but this man of God con-
ducted himself with such rectitude and
godliness as to come forth from the
ordeal with the confidence and respect
of all the people. . . . There are times
when such consistent piety would have
made him a martyr; nevertheless, it
insures respect, and 1s most likely to
invest its possessor with an invulner-
able character in the esteem of the
very people who often refused his
counsel, but had been often benefited
by his prayers.—Stéeel.

Samuel sorrowfully dismissed them
to their homes, that he might have

111


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


S00K Lb


rs


time to take the necessary .measures
for effecting this great change. . . It
was not the wish of the prophet to
leave them to all the consequences of
theirinfatuation. With wise and noble
patriotism it was henceforth his solici-
tude, while accomplishing their wishes,
to save them, as far as possible, from
the consequences they declared them-
selves willing to incur. And if, in the
result, we find the Hebrew monarchy
less absolute than generally amon

eastern nations—if the people retaine

possession of more of their national
and social rights than in other eastern
kingdoms—and if the strong exertion
of kingly power was, in after ages,
resented by them as a wrong instead
of being recognised as a just prero-
gative, it is entirely owing to the
sagacious care and forethought of
Samuel, acting under Divine direction,
in securing from utter destruction at
the outset the liberties which the


eople so wilfully cast into the fire.

n fact, the more we contemplate the
character of Samuel, the more its
greatness grows upon us, and the more
distinctly we recognise the most truly
illustrious character in Hebrew history
since Moses,—Kitto.

This history exhibits the relation of
the Divine will to the human will, when
the latter stands sinfully opposed to
the former. God never destroys the
freedom of the human will. He leaves
it to its free self-determination, but
when it has turned away from His will,
seeks to bring it back by the revelation
of His word. If this does not succeed,
human perversity must nevertheless
minister to the realisation of the plans
of His kingdom and salvation, and also,
in its evil consequences, bring punish-
ment, according to His righteous law,
on the sin which man thus freely
commits.—Lange’s Commentary.





CHAPTER


ix,


Crrrtoan axp Exrosrrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “Now, there was a man of Benjamin.”
“The elaborate genealogy of the Benjamite Kish, and the minute description of the figure of
his son Saul, are intended to indicate at the very outset the importance to which Saul attained
in relation to the people of Israel. Kish was the son of Abiel; this is in harmony with chap.
xiv. 51. But when, on the other hand, it is stated in 1 Chron. viii, 33, ix. 39, that Ner begat
Kish, the difference may be reconciled in the simplest manner, on the assumption that the Ner
mentioned there is not the father, but the grandfather, or a still more remote ancestor of Kish, |
as the intervening members are frequently passed over in the genealogies (Kiel). “A mighty
man of power,” rather, “a rich well-to-do man” (Erdmann),


Ver, 2. “Saul.” “Heb. Shaul ; ¢.c., desired, asked for: his name was an omen of his history”
(Wordsworth). “From his shoulders and upward.” “It is evident that he must have
been only a little under seven feet high” (Jamieson). See also note on chap. x. 23,


Ver. 3. “The asses of Kish,” etc. The probability is that the family of Kish, according to
the immemorial usage of Oriental shepherds in the purely pastoral regions, had let the animala
roam at large during the grazing season, at the close of which messengers were dispatched in
search of them. Such travelling searches are common; and as each owner has his stamp
marked on his cattle, the mention of it to the shepherds he meets gradually leads to the
discovery of the strayed animals, This ramble of Saul’s had nothing extraordinary in it, except
its superior directions and issue, which turned its uncertainty into certainty” (Jamieson).
“The superintendence of the cattle was anciently an occupation held in much esteem. It was
regarded as the proper office of a son, and by no means implies the smallness of Kish’s
Possessions or his want of servants. .... Among cattle in the East at all times, and especially
ere horses were used for riding, asses were esteemed of much impurtance, .... If such an
incident now happened in Palestine, it would be at once concluded that the animals had been
stolen, and it speaks well for the state of society in the times of Samuel, that this suspicion
never erossed the mind of Saul or his father” (Kio).


112


OHAP, Ix, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








Ver. 4. “And as he passed through Mount Ephraim,” etc. “ As Saul started in any
case from Gibeah of Benjamin, his own home (chap, x. 10-26, etc.), i.e. the present T'uliel el Phul,
which was an hour or an hour and a half to the north of Jerusalem, and went thence into the
mountains of Ephraim, he no doubt took a north-westerly direction, so that he crossed the
boundary of Benjamin somewhere between Bireh and Atarah, and passing through the crest
of the mountains of Ephraim, came out into the land of Shalisha. Shalisha is unquestionably
the country round Baal-shalisha (2 Kings iv. 42), which was situated, according to Eusebius,
fifteen Roman miles to the north of Lydda, and was therefore probably the country to the west
of Jiljilia, where three different wadys run into one large wady, called Kurawa; and according
to the probable conjecture of Thenius, it was from this fact that the district received the name
of Shalishi, or Three-land. . . . Since they went ou from Shaalim into the land of Benjamin,
ani then still further into the land of Zuph, on the south-west of Benjamin, they probably
turned eastwards from Shalishah into the country where we find Beni Mussah and Beni Salem
marked upon Robinson’s and V. de Velde’s maps, and where we must therefore look for the land
of Shaa/in, that they might proceed thence to explore the land of Benjamin from the north-east
to the south-west.” (Kei),


Ver. 5. “Land of Zuph.” Nothing is certainly known of the land of Zuph, but “we may
infer with certainty that it was on the south-west of the tribe-territory of Benjamin, from the
fact that, according to chap. x. 2, Saul and his companion passed Rachel’s tomb on their return
thence to their own home, and then came to the border of Benjamin.” ( Keil).


Ver, 6, “This city.” Some commentators suppose that this city was Ramah, Samuel’s
residence ; but Keil, Jamieson, Wordsworth, and others, consider that several circumstances are
against this supposition, especially the mention of Rachel’s sepulchre in chap. x. 2. “Per-
adventure he can show us our way,” etc. ‘“ We may fancy that the man and his master
either entertained a very high sense of the importance of their asses, or a very low one of the
prophetic office; but the man would scarcely have reached this conclusion unless it were
notorious that Samuel had often been consulted respecting things lost or stolen. We may
therefore infer that, at the commencement of the prophetic office in the person of Samuel, it
was usual, in order to encourage confidence in their higher vaticinations, and to prevent that
dangerous resort to heathen divinations, for the prophets to afford counsel when required in
matters of private concernment.” ( Kitio ).


Ver. 7. “What shall we bring the man?” “Then, as now in the East, it would have been
the height of rudeness and indecorum for anyone to present himself before a superior or even an
equal, without some present, more or less, according to his degree, not by any means as a fee or
a bribe, but in testimony of his homage, respect, or compliments” (Kitto). “This does not
exclude the supposition that the prophets depended for support on these voluntary gifts.”
(Erdmann ).


Ver. 8. “Fourth part of shekel of silver.” “Rather more than sixpence. Contrary to
our western notions, money is in the East the most acceptable form in which a present can be
made to a man of rank.”’ (Jumieson ).


Ver. 9. “These words are manifestly a gloss inserted in the older narrative to explain the use
of the term Seer. One among many instances which prove how the very letter of the
contemporary narrative was preserved by those who in later times compiled the histories.
(Biblical Commentary). “Prophet.” “Seer.” “There has been much discussion as to the
distinction between these two words; and it is not easy to decide the question, for in
some passages, as here, they appear to be used synonymously, or as appliea to the same
individuals, whereas in others they are contrasted (1 Chr. xxix. 29, Isa, xxix. 10, xxx. 10).
The first, from the verb to see, sufficiently shows that the power of the person arose from mental
vision. The second, from a verb to bubdle up, as a spring or fountain, signifies that the message
which the Nabi (prophet) delivered was derived from God ; and hence it is always rendered a
“ prophet.” Accordingly Havernick (Introduction to the Old Testament) considers the first
term as marking the receptive act of revelation, and the second as describing the office of the
prophets—that of communicating the word of God. Hence, after the institution of the schools
by Samuel, it became the official title of the prophets ; and the two functions were united in, or
performed by the same person.” (Jamieson). “This statement has special interest in connection
with the history of the prophetic work in Israel... .. The change of name from Roeh (seer) to
Nabi (prophet) and Chozeh (gazer) had its ground probably in the development of the religious
constitution. Up to some time before the author of “ Samuel ” wrote, the non-sacerdotal, non-
Levitical religious teacher was one distinguished by seeing visions, or by seeing into the will
of God. This is God’s definition of the prophet in Numb. xii. 6 ; it Is involved in 1 Samuel
iii. 1. 15, and in the visions of the patriarchs. The Law of Moses was the complete and
sufficient guile for life and worship, and it was only in special individual matters that the
divine direction was given, and then it was through the medium of a vision. He who saw the
vision was a Rogh, and it was natural enough that he should be consulted by the mcm about

Ly


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.





many matters. But in process of time the mechanicalness and deadness to which the legal ritual
constantly tended called forth an order of men who expounded and enforced the spirituality of the
law, speaking as God bade them, speaking for God, entering as a prominent element into the
religious life of the nation. He who thus spake was a Nabi, and as he, too, might have visions,
he was sometimes called Choseh the gazer..... As this speaker for God gradually took the
place of the old seer of visions, the word Nabi replaced Roch in popular usage. It seems that
the change began in or about Samuel’s time, and was completed about three centuries later,
Roeh still maintaining itself in the language, though rarely used. On the other hand, Nabi
may have been used infrequently in early times in reference to Abraham and Moses, and have
become afterwards the common term, or the occurrence of the word in the Pentateuch may be
the transference of a late word to earlier times.” (Tranar. of Lange's Commentary ).


Ver, 12. “High place.” Of such “ Bamoth,” or holy places on heights, where the people
assembled for sacrifice and prayer, there were several during the unquiet times of the judges,
especially after the central Sanctuary at Shiloh ceased to exist, till the building of the Temple
(comp. vii. 9; x. 8; xiii. 8; xvi. 2, etc.), as, indeed, the patriarchs sacrificed on high places
(Gen. xii. 8). It was not till after the building of the Temple that the high-place worship,
which easily degenerated into idolatry, was completely done away with” (2 Kings xxiii, 4-23)
(Erdmann ).


Ver. 18. “To eat.” This was a sacrificial feast following a peace offering.
Ver. 15. “Told Samuel in his ear,” lit., had uncovered his ear. See on chap. iil. 7s


Vers. 16, 17, “The reason here assigned for the establishment of a monarchy is by no means
at variance with the displeasure which God had expressed to Samuel at the desire of the people
for a king; since this displeasure had reference to the state of heart from which the desire had
sprung.” (Keil)


Ver. 17. “This same shall reign,” literally shall restrain, “This characteristises his
government as a sharp and strict one.” (Lrdmann),


Ver. 19. “Go up before me.” “Letting a person go in front was a sign of high esteem .”
(Keil).

Ver. 20. “On whom is all the desire of Israel,” not all that Israel desires, but all that
Israel possesses of what is precious or worth desiring. See Hag, ii. 7 (Keil ).


Ver. 21. “ The smallest of the tribes,” etc. “The tribe of Benjamin, originally the smallest
of all the tribes (Numb, i.), if Ephraim and Manasseh are reckoned as one tribe, had been nearly
annihilated by the civil war recorded in Judges xx, It had, of course, not recovered from that
calamity in the time of Samuel.” (Biblical Commentary).


Ver, 22. “He brought them into the parlour,” t.¢., the apartment set apart for the most
distinguished guests, the rest of the people no doubt encamped in the open aie


Ver. 24. “ The shoulder.” “Tf it was the right shoulder, then Samuel, to whose share it
fell, as performing the functions of priest (Lev. vii. 32), gave Saul of his own portion ; or, if it
were the left shoulder, then he admitted Saul to the next share after his own.” (Wordsworth ).


Ver. 25. “Upon the top of the house.” “Not surely for privacy, as some expound its
for the house-top was the proverbial expression for publicity (Isa. xv. 3; Luke xii. 3), but in
order to let all the people of the city see the honour done to the stranger by the great prophet.”
(Biblical Commentary ).


Ver. 26, “Samuel called Saul from the top of the house,” rather to the top of the
house. Saul was most likely sleeping on the roof, a common sleeping place in summer in the
East, and Samuel called to him from below within the house.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verees 1-14.
Savz’s Szarcu ror tHE Logr Asses,


I, This narrative reveals the action of the natural and the supernatural in
the Divine Providence. There is no part of the globe on which we live that is
not under the influence of the sun—the centre of the solar system. If there
are caves and valleys where no sunshine can enter, the daylight finds its way
into cen or if they are closed agains’ the light, they are still influenced by


O@AP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





>


the sun’s gravitating power, for there is no particle of the globe that is hid from
this hold of the sun upon it. And as surely as there is an all-pervading
influence from the sun upon the entire material globe, so there is a providence
from which no creature of God is shut out—there is no thing nor person upon
whom His providence has not a hold. Hach blade of grass is fed with its drop of
dew under the supervision of its Creator—the lilies are each clothed by His hand,
and He notes each sparrow that falls to the ground as well as the downfall of
the mightiest monarch. When we read the narrative before us we can but be
impressed with the fact that there is a providence ruling in the earth. But the
Providence of God embraces both natural and supernatural agencies. There are
incidents in human life which appear to us to be the natural outcome of ordinary
circumstances, and some such incidents are related in this narrative. No farmer
would think it a marvel if his cattle strayed beyond the boundaries of home
nor would a fisherman be surprised if his boat now and then slipped its cable
and drifted a little way from its anchorage. If the child of some fond parent is
lost in the great city no one thinks that it is a supernatural occurrence.
Although the cattle do not stray without God’s knowledge, and no boat that
slips from its anchorage, or child that wanders from its home, is outside His
providence, yet these are all events which happen within the circle of His
ordinary and every-day working and permission. And go it was an occurrence
inside God’s ordinary providence that the father of Israel’s king-elect should
lose his asses. Although they were not lost without the Divine knowledge, and
there was an intention that their loss should be the first link in a chain which
included supernatural elements, the event itself was a common occurrence. But
God intended that a great finding should come out of a comparatively insignificant
loss. The straying of the asses was linked with the revelation to Samuel, and
this last event was of a supernatural character. The first link of a chain-cable
is a long way from the last, but they are intimately connected, and form parts
of one whole. The one may be above the water, and in sight, and the other
next to the anchor in the bed of the river, but they are both parts of the same
chain. So the supernatural revelation to Samuel was the link out of sight, and
in the region of the higher law of God’s working, and the loss of the asses was
the visible link in the lower law, but the one was as much a part of the chain
which brought Saul to his kingdom as the other was. Thus the natural and
supernatural are interlaced in the Providence of God to bring to pass His

urposes, as the soul and body of a man are linked together in order to enable
hit to live his life upon the earth.


II. The narrative reveals to us some of the characteristics of the first king of
Israel. 1. His personal appearance was a reflection of the nation’s desire.
When we see a man’s ideal we know what it is that he considers of most value,
his ideal is a mirrot which tells us what he regards as of highest worth. Ifa
nation is free to elect its own representatives, we can learn what qualities or
gifts in men it esteems most highly by becoming acquainted with those whom
it has chosen. Although Israel did not choose their own king, God gave them
one who was a mirror of their minds—one who revealed what they held in
highest esteem. They did not want a man like Samuel—a man of moral and
spiritual force whose prayer was more invincible than Saul’s sword. ren
desired a king unlike God, one whom they could see when they went fort.
to battle, and who would at least impress their enemies by a commanding
bodily presence. And God gave them their hearts’ desire in this “goodly
young man, who, so far as stature went, was “higher than any of the
people.” 2. Saul had also some good points in his character. He was a man
who honoured his father. Kish said to Saul his son, “Take now one of the
servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses,” and he appears to Pap


MMENTARY: SAMUEL,
RS a a ee ep Bp ee Fe ee


without demur. Obedience to human parents, when they do not require
anything wrong, is pleasing to God and an indication of some moral excellence
under any circumstances. But the obedience is more praiseworthy when
the child has arrived at manhood, and still more so if the man is qualified
for higher employment, and yet sinks his own will in that of his parent, and
performs some lowly duty in obedience to his desire. Saul, though a grown
man, and evidently fitted for a more dignified employment, goes willingly to
seek lost asses in obedience to his father’s desire, and thus shows that he pos-
sesses a truly filial spirit. He was “faithful in that which was least” (Luke
xvi. 10). He was also evidently desirous to spare no pains to carry out his
father’s wishes. He pursued his journey from place to place over many weary
miles, until all the provisions and nearly all the money with which he and his
servant had set out were exhausted (vers, 7,8). He did not content himself
with such a search as might have contented many men and have fulfilled the
letter of his father’s injunction, he was intent upon obeying the spirit of it also,
and only thought of giving up the search when he knew his lengthened absence
would cause anxiety at home. In this, too, he showed himself as mindful of
his father’s feelings, and as unwilling to give him trouble, as he was ready to
obey him. Many a young man, when he had once set out upon such a journey,
would have consulted his own fancy and his own ease in his return, but Saul
was of a better sort. His willingness to be advised by his servant is also an
indication that he was not a haughty, proud young man—that he did not look
upon those who were beneath him in station as necessarily inferior to him in
wisdom. All that we read of Saul in this chapter is indicative of a good
natural disposition,


BOOK L


GUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Vers. 1-14. The first test to which
God subjects His servant. It embraces
two main points. (1). Whether with
certain natural talents and advantages
which God has given us he will in
humility and quiet obedience do the
work enjoined upon him. (2), Whe-
ther when his work proves useless he
will seek help from the seer of God.
The Most High God appoints a testing
for His servant Saul, and so whoever
is summoned to the service of God
knows that for him also there must be
a testing.— Disselhoff.


Vers. 1, 2. Samuel is the chief figure
of the transitional period which opens
the history of the monarchy. But
there is another upon whom the char-
acter of the epoch is impressed still
more strongly—who belongs to this
period especially, and could belong to
no other. Saul is the first king of
Israel. In him that new and strange
tdea became impersonated. In him
we feel that we have made a marked

116


advance in the history from the patri-
arch and nomadic state, which concerng
us mainly by its contrast with our own,
to that fixed and settled state which
has more or less pervaded the whole
condition of the Church ever since,
But, although in outward form Saul
belonged to the new epoch, although
even in spirit he from time to time
threw himself into it, yet on the whole
he is a product of the earlier condition,
Whilst Samuel’s existence comprehends
and overlaps both periods in the calm-
ness of a higher elevation, the career
of Saul derives its peculiar interest
from the fact that it is the eddy in
in which both streams converge. In
that vortex he struggles—the centre
of events and persons greater than
himself; and in that struggle he ig
borne down and lost. He is, we
may say, the first character of Jewish
history which we are able to trace out
in any minuteuess of detail He is
the first with regard to wkom we can
make out that whole connection of a


GHAP, Ix.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





large family—father, uncle, cousins,
sons, grandsons—which, as a modern
historian (Palgrave) well observes, is
so important in making us feel that
we have acquired a real acquaintance
with any personage of past times.—
Stanley.


Ver. 2. Saul was mighty in person,
overlooking the rest of the people in
stature, no less than he should do in
dignity. ‘The senses of the Israelites
could not but be well pleased for the
time, howsoever their hearts were after-
ward: when men are carried with
outward shows, it is a sign that God
means them a delusion.— Bishop Hall.


Vers. 3,4. Since, from God’s conceal-
ment of the future, we cannot tell what
He may intend to do with us and by
us, it is our duty to hold ourselves in
readiness to undertake any service
which He may require us to render,
to enter upon any position He may
call upon us to fill, When we see
Saul taken from the quiet discharge of
the common duties of life, and placed
upon the throne of Israel, we see the
truth set forth—in an extreme case we
admit, but therefore only the more
impressively—that it is utterly im-
possible for us to predict what God
may have in store for us. Of all the
ara or probable events which might

ave happened to Saul, that of becoming
king would most certainly have been set
down by himself as least likely to occur.
.... And it would not be difficult
for us to fix on positions and duties,
respecting which, if a fellow-creature
were to intimate even the most distant
prospect of their ever forming part of
our personal history, we should have
our reply ready at once, that it was as
little likely as that we should be called
to fill the throne of these realms. Yet
these may be actually in store for us.
... + But there are certain qualifi-
cations which are requisite alike for all
positions, and which render us, in @
good measure, ready for any service.
Such, for instance, are diligence and


fidelity in meeting the claims of our
tee condition, whatever it may
.—Miller.


Ver. 6. Most people would rather
be told their fortune than told their
duty ; how to be rich than how to be
saved, If it were the business of men
of God to direct for the recovery of
lost asses, they would be consulted
much more than they are, now that it
is their business to direct for the
recovery of lost souls—J/att. Henry.

Great is the benefit of a wise and
religious attendant ; such a one puta
us into those duties and actions which
are most expedient and least thought
of. If Saul had not had a discreet
servant he had returned but as wise as
he came; now he is drawn in to con-
sult with the man of God, and hears
more than he hoped for. Saul was now
a sufficient journey from his father’s
house; yet his religious servant, in
this remoteness, takes knowledge of
the place where the prophet dwells,
and how honourably doth he mention
him to his master.


Vers. 12, 13. This meeting was not
more a sacrifice than it was a feast ;
these two agree well; we have never
so much cause to rejoice in feasting as
when we have duly served our God.
The sacrifice was a feast to God, the
other to men; the body may eat and
drink with contentment when the soul
hath been first fed. . . . The sacri-
fice was before consecrated when it was
offered to God, but it was not conse-
crated to them till Samuel blessed it;
his blessing made that meat holy
to the guests which was formerly
hallowed to God. . . . It is an un-
mannerly godlessness to take God's
creatures without the leave of their
Maker, and well may God withhold
his blessing from them which have not
the grace to ask it... . . Every
Christian may sanctify his own meat ;
but where those are present that are
peculiarly sanctified to God, this ser-
vice is fittest for them.— Bp. Hall


Aly


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L











MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 15—27.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT To SavuL or THE Destiny THat Awarrep Ho
I, God has respect to the freedom of the human will. Although God had


decided that Saul should be king of Israel, He would not do violence to his will,


and oblige him to take the office against his inclination.


All the dealings of


Samuel with Saul on the occasion of this their first meeting were designed to
impress him with the fact that great honour and responsibility were in store for
him, and to lead him to acquiesce in the will of God concerning him. He was
led gradually to accept as true the startling announcement with which Samuel
greeted him, that upon him and upon his father’s house was all the desire of


Israel,


Little by little the reality must have dawned upon him, and little by


little, we may suppose, he was made willing to fall in with the Divine plan


concerning him. We can well understand


how far from his thoughts it was


that, in seeking his father’s asses, he should find a crown, and how inclined he
would be to think that the prophet was mistaken when he intimated that some
great promotion was in store for him. But when he found himself in the place
of honour at the table of the chief magistrate of Israel, he must have begun to
think that some great change awaited him, and it is probable that any lingering
doubts were banished, and all his future made plain to him in the private com-
munion which Samuel held with him on the following morning. Tn all these
dealings with Saul we see how God has regard to the human will, which He has


made free,


II. In the reception which Samuel gave to Saul we have an instance of


true humility.


Hitherto Samuel had been the first man in Israel ; to him had


belonged, and to him had been accorded the place of highest honour, and the
choicest viands on the occasions of public assembly, but now he, although an
aged man, not only willingly gives way to the young man who is in some things
to take his place, but is the person who informs him of his call to the throne,


and is the first to do him honour,


No man could have acquitted himself with


such grace and dignity under such circumstances, if he had not been possessed


by the spirit of true humility,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 15, 27. The history of Saul’s
call brings before our eyes three
points: (1) What an abundant bles-
sing there is for obedience—the call to
the service of God. (2) What a great
danger lies hid in this blessing—idle
self-exaltation because of this call. (3)
To what a blessed stillness the danger
leads when overcome—to preparation
for the calling.—Disselhoff.


Ver. 17. What an intimate commu-
nion Samuel must have held with his
God! A constant familiarity seems
to have existed between them.—A.
Clarke.


Ver. 22. How kindly doth Samuel
418


entertain and invite Saul! Yet it was
he only that should receive wrong by
the future royalty of Saul. . . Wise
and holy men, as they are not ambi-
tious of their own burden, so they are
not unwilling to be eased, when God
pleaseth to discharge them; neither
can they envy those whom God lifteth
above their heads. They make an
idol of honour that are troubled at
their own freedom, or grudge at the
promotion of others.—Bp. Hall.

The heads of the tribes accompanied
Samuel to the altar, and then sat
around his board. The chief of the
government was godly in both alike,
and he could hold the sweetest fellow.
ship with those who were officially hig


CHAP. IX.





inferiors in land. He lost not the
respect of the people for his piety by
his conduct at table, nor ad the
majesty of law provoke contempt by
iamraed of judge with people, —


_ Vers, 26, 27. Saul must wait pa-
tiently until God shall bring him out


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL.





of concealment and make it manifest
who he was. So should we also, if
God has lent us gifts and wishes them
to remain concealed with us, not be
displeased at the fact that they are
not recognised, but quietly wait until
the Lord Himself, as it seemeth Him
ood, carries further the matter that
e has begun.—Berlenberger Bible.





CHAPTER X,


Critica axD Exposrrory Norss.—Ver. 1. “Then Samuel took a vial of oil,” ete.
“The vial is a narrow-necked vessel, from which the oil flowed in drops, The oil, we must
suppose, was not of the ordinary sort, but the holy anointing oil (Exod. xxix. 7; xxx. 23-33 ;
xxvii. 29), which, according to the law, was used in the consecration of the sacred vessels and
the priests... . . . On account of the significance of the oil in priestly consecration, Samuel
would have used no other in the consecration of the sacred person of the theocratic king,
Anointing as a solemn usage in the consecration of a king is referred to as early as Judges ix.
8-15, and (besides Saul here) is expressly mentioned as performed on David, Absalom, Solomon,
Joash, Jehoahaz, and Jehu. In case of regular succession the anointing was supposed to
continue its effect, whence is explained the fact that only the above kings are mentioned as
having been anointed. . . . The anointed was consecrated, sanctified to God; .. . it signifies,
further, the equipment with the powers and gifts of the Spirit of God.” (Zrdmann). “And
kissed him.” “Subjects of rank were wont to kiss a new king in token of homage and subjec-
tion—just as among us the hand of a sovereign is kissed now. There was, no doubt, something
of this in the kiss of Samuel; but, under the peculiar circumstances, there must have been
something more. It was also the kiss of congratulation upon the dignity to which he had been
raised ; and while it indicated the dignified respect of Samuel to the man appointed to reign
over the house of Israel, it also testified his cbeerful acquiescence in the appointment.” (Kitto).


Ver. 2. “Rachel’s sepulchre” near Bethlehem (Gen. xxxv. 16). ‘After the allotment of
the country to the several tribes, the territory of the Benjamites was extended by a long strip
far into the south, to include the sepulchre of their beloved ancestress.” (Stanley ).


Ver. 3. “The plain of Tabor,” rather, the oak, or terebinth of Tabor. The site is unknown,
“Three men going up to Bethel.” Evidently to make an offering to God. “ Bethel had
been a consecrated place for the worship of God since the days of the patriarchs, in consequence
of the revelations He had made to Abraham and Jacob (see Gen. xii, 8; xiii. 3, 45; xxviii. 18,
etc.). In Bethel, therefore, there was an altar; it was one of the places where the people
saerificed to the Lord, and where Samuel at this time held court.” (Zrdmann).


Ver. 4. “And give the two loaves.” “That this surprising prelude to all future royal gifte
Is taken from bread of offering points to the fact, that in future some of the wealth of the land,
which has hitherto gone undivided to the sanctuary, will go to the king.” (Ewald). “An omen
that God Himself would feed and sustain him, if he would only obey Him.” ( Wordsworth).


Ver. 5. “Hill of God,” rather, Gibeah of God, Saul’s home. “Two things are clear; one,
that Saul had got home when he got to Gibeah of God, for no further journeying is so much as
hinted at, and the same word describes his home at ver. 26: the other, that there was a high
place at Gibeah just above the city.” (Biblical Commentary). “A company of prophets.”
« Here is the first mention of an influential institution which owes its origin to this period, viz.,
the schools of the prophets... . . Even if the schools of the prophets had begun to form them-
selves before the time of Samuel, which we have the less reason to doubt, since the book of
Judges bears adequate testimony to the existence of prophets, and since it lay in the nature of
the thing that individuals bound themselves together as closely as possible and joined in a
common activity against the spirit of the time, yet we cannot suppose that there
was any great extension and formal organisation of the institution previous to Samuel, from
what is said in 1 Sam. iii 1. Add to this the sporadic character of the activity of the prophets,
which we learn from the Book of Judges. Finally, in favour of Samuel te


che HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. ROOK I





established the schools of the prophets, we have the fact that we no longer
meet with them except in the kingdom of Israel. This circumstance cannot be attributed
to lack of information. The fact of our not meeting with them in the kingdom of Judah leads
us to infer that they did not exist, and if this were the case, it is impossible to suppose that the
schools of the prophets had taken deep root before Samuel. They appear as an institution
established by him for a temporary object, and only continued, where necessity demanded it, in
the kingdom of Israel, whose relations were, in many respects, similar to those in Samuel’s time,
where the prophethood occupied quite another position than in the kingdom of Judah, not being
a mere supplement to the activity of the Levitical priesthood, but possessing the entire respon-
sibility of maintaining the Kingdom of God in Israel. The principal passages referring to the
schools of the prophets, besides this one, are 1 Kings xix. 20, 21; 2 Kings ii. 5, iv. 38, vi. 1.
The designation is an awkward one, liable to cause misunderstanding. No instruction was given
in the schools of the prophets, they were regular and organised societies, Taking all these
passages together it becomes evident that they were in many respects a kind of monkish
institution. Those who were educated there had a kind of common dwelling and a common
table ; the most distinguished of the prophets standing at its head as spiritual fathers. Music
was employed as a principal means of edification, and of awakening prophetic inspiration. But
what distinguishes the schools of the prophets from the cloisters, or at least from a great number
of them, is their thorough practical tendency. They were hearths of spiritnal life to Israel.
Their aim was not to encourage a contemplative life, but to rouse the nation to activity ; every
prophetic disciple was a missionary.” (Hengstenberg). “With a psaltery,” etc. The psaltery
was a kind of lyre with ten or twelve strings, triangular in form. The tadret, or tabourine, or
timbrel (Exod. xv. 21) was a species of hand drum. The pipe was a kind of flute, and the
harp another stringed instrument resembling the psaltery. “They shall prophesy,” The
emphasis rests on the words “ and they were prophesying,” they were in a condition of ecstatic
inspiration in which, singing or speaking, with accompaniment of music, they gave expression
to the overflowing feeling with which their hearts were filled from above by the controlling
Spirit.” (Zrdmann),


Ver. 6. “ The spirit of the Lord will come upon thee,” lit., rush upon thee. “This phrase
is used of those who, under the influence of Divine inspiration, uttered truths supernaturally
revealed to them, in a lofty, poetic style, or who celebrated in exalted strains of praise the
glorious deeds of Jehovah to His church. In this latter sense it is applied to Miriam
(Exod. xv. 20, 21), to the seventy elders (Numb, xi. 29), and to the choir of young prophets, to
which Saul joined himself, and in whose sacred employment he participated” (cf, Luke i, 65,
end). (Jamieson). “Shalt be turned into another man.” “ This expression is a remarkable
one, and occurs nowhere else. Doubtless it describes the change in point of mental power and
energy which would result from the influx of the Spirit of the Lord. In the case of Samson it
was a supernatural bodily strength, in the case of Saul a capacity for ruling and leading the people,
of which before he was destitute, which the Spirit wrought in him. The change in the mental
power of the apostles, as described in Acts i, 8, is analogous. The change is described in verse 9,
by saying that “ God gave him another heart.” The heart in the Hebrew acceptation points more
to intellect and courage than to the affections and conscience.” ( Biblical Commentary). “Ecstatic
states,” says Tholuck, “have something infectious about them. The excitementspreads involuntarily,
as in the American revivals and the preaching mania in Sweden, even to persons in whose state
of mind there is no affinity to anything of the kind. But in the instance before us there was
something more than psychical infection, The Spirit of Jehovah, which manifested itself in the
prophesying of the prophets, was to pass over to Saul, so that he would prophesy along with
them, and was entirely to transform him. This transformation is not, indeed, to be regarded as
regeneration in the Christian sense, but as a change resembling regeneration, which affected the
entire disposition of mind, and by which Saul was lifted out of his former modes of thought and
feeling, which were confined within a narrow earthly sphere, into the far higher sphere of his
new royal culling, was filled with kingly thoughts in relation to the service of God, and received
another heart.” ( Kiel).


Ver. 7. “Do as occasion serve thee.” “ For God is with thee, and I will not intrude upon
thee with imperious dictations on each several occasion, but I will leave thee to the free exercise
of thy royal authority.” ( Wordsworth ps


Ver. 8. “Thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal,” etc. “This, according to Josephus,
was to be a standing rule for the observance of Saul while the prophet and he lived—that in
every great crisis, as a hostile incursion into the country, he should repair to Gilgal, where he
was to remain seven days, to afford time for the tribes on both sides of Jordan to assemble, and
Samuel to reach it.” (Jamieson ). “Considering that at least two years elapsed between this
time and that referred to in chap. xiii. 8-18; considering that Saul and Samuel had met at ~
Gilgal, and offered peace-offerings to the Lord on one occasion between the times referred to in
the two passages, it seems quite impossible that this verse can refer to the meeting spoken of in
chap. xiii. 8-10.” (Biblical Commentary ),

Vers, 9and 10. See on verse 6.

120


GaP. X, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





Ver. 11. “Is Saul also among the prophets?” “ According to its origin, here given,
this proverb does not merely express surprise at the sudden unexpected calling of a man to
another calling in life, or to a high and honourable position. The personal and moral qualities
of Saul, perhaps the religious-moral character of his family, or, at least, the mean opinion that
was entertained of Saul’s qualities and capacities, intellectually, religiously, and morally, formed
the yround of surprise at his sudden assumption of the prophetic character.” (Zrdmenn).


Ver. 12. “Who is their father?” A somewhat obscure phrase. The Septuagint and
some other versions read, ‘ Who 1s his father ?’ 1.e., Who would have expected the sen of Kish
to be found among the prophets? Other readings, as the authorised version, understand father
to refer to the head of the prophets, and the question to reflect blame upon him for admitting
such a person as Saul into the company of the prophets, Wordsworth paraphrases, ‘ Who is the
father of the prophets? Not man, but God. And God can make even Saul, whom ye despise,
to be a prophet also.’ Kiel—‘Is their father a prophet, then?’ te, have they the prophetic
spirit by virtue of their birth? ‘The speaker declares,’ says Bunsen, ‘against the con-
temptuous remark about the son of Kish, that the prophets, too, owed their gift to no peculiarly
lofty lineage, Saul also might, therefore, receive this gift as a gift from God, not as a
patrimony.”


Ver. 13. “When he had made an end of prophesying.” “The gift, therefore, in his
case, was transitory, not permanent, as in Samuel’s: compare the case of Eldad and Medad,
and the other elders, as contrasted with that of Moses” (Numb. xi. 25). (Wordsworth), “The
high place,’ whence the prophets had just descended. “Saul went up thither to pray and
sacrifice in the holy place after his great experiences of the Divine favour and goodness, and so
after his return home first to give God the glory before he returned to his family-life. He joined
the descending company of the prophets in their solemn procession ; but when his participation
in the utterances of the prophetic inspiration were over, his look rested on the sacred height
whence the men had descended, and the impulse of the spirit of the Lord forced him up thither,
that, after the extraordinary offering he had made with the prophets, he might make the ordinary
offering, and engage in worship.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 16. “Of the matter of the kingdom ..... he told him not.” “This is to be
referred, not to Saul’s unassuming modesty, humility, or modesty (Keil and Ewald), or prudence
(Themius), or apprehension of his uncle’s incredulity and envy, but to the fact that Samuel, by
his manner of imparting the divine revelation, had clearly and expressly given him to understand
(ix. 25, 27) that it was meant in the first instance for him alone, and that it was not the Divine
will that he should share it with others.” (Zrdmann).


Ver. 17. “ Mizpeh.” See on chap. vii. 9. ‘Unto the Lord.” ‘“Implying the presence of
the ark, or the tabernacle, or the High Priest’s ephod.”’ Comp. ver. 19.” (Biblical Commentary ).


Ver. 20 “The family of Matri . ... and Saul the son of Kish was taken.” ‘ When
the heads of the households in this family came, and ajter the different individuals in the
households were taken, the lot fell upon Saul the son of Kish. The historian proceeds at once
to the final result of the casting of the lots, without describing the intermediate steps any
further. .... As the result of the lot was regarded as a divine decision, not only was Saul to
be accredited by this act as the king appointed by the Lord, but he himself was also to be the
more fully assured of his own election on the part of God.” (Keil). “How the lots were cast is
not said ; commonly it was by throwing tablets (Josh. xviii. 6, 8, etc.), but sometimes by
drawing from a vessel.” (Numb. xxxiii. 54). The latter seems to have been the method here
employed.” (Zrdmann).


Ver. 22. “They inquired of the Lord. ... andthe Lord answered.” “The inquiry
was made through the high priest, by means of the Urim and Thummim. There can be no
doubt that in a gathering of the people for so important a purpose, the high priest would also
be present, even though this is not expressly stated.” (Keil), “The high-priest’s office was
vacant, some other, not Samuel, who pe over the assembly and the election, but a priest,
in the high priestly robes, conducted the solemn inquiry, which was exclusively the privilege of
the priests.” (Erdmann), “If the man should yet come hither; ” rather, has any one ¢!s¢
come hither ? i.e., besides those here present among whom Saul was not to be found.” (Zrdmann ).
“ Ameng the stuff.” “Rather, the baggage. The assembly was like a camp, and the baggage of
‘the whole congregation was probably collected in one place, where the waggons were arranged
for protection.” (Biblical Commentary). “The ground was his diffidence and shyness in respect
to appearing publicly before the whole people. Nagelsbach rightly remarks that his hiding
behind the baggage during the election is not in conflict with the account of his change of mind,
At so decisive a moment, which turns the eyes of all on one with the most diverse feelings, the
heart of the most courageous man may well beat.” (H#rdmann).


Ver. 23. “He was higher than any of the people,” etc. “When in battle much less
depended on military skill than upon the bodily prowess of the chief in single mar or in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. SAMUEL. BOOK 1,





the partial actions with which most battles commenced, it was natural that the people should
take pride in the gigantic proportions of their leader, as calculated to strike terror into the
enemy, and confidence into his followers ; besides, it was no mean advantage that the crest of
the leader should, from his tallness, be seen from afar by his people. The prevalence of this
feeling of regard for personal bulk and stature is seen in the sculptures of ancient Egypt,
Assyria, and Persia, and even in the modern paintings of the last-named nation, in which the
sovereign is invested with gigantic proportions in comparison with the persons around him.”
(Kitto).


Ver, 24. ‘God save the king.” Rather, le the king live. The Hebrew is equivalent to
the French Vive le Roi.


Ver, 25. “Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom.” On the first
establishment of the kingdom it was possible to make conditions and to impose restrictions, to
which any future king, royal by birth, and on whom the crown devolved by hereditary right,
would not very willingly submit. There can be no doubt that the people, under the infatuation
which now possessed them, would have put themselves under the monarchy without any condi-
tions whatever, and it is entirely owing to the wise forethought of Samuel, acting under the
Divine direction, that this evil was averted, and the kings of Israel did not become absolute and
irresponsible masters of the lives and properties of their subjects.” (Kitto). “This law of the
kingdom is not identical with the manner of the king described by Samuel in chap. viii. 11-18.
The Hebrew word rendered manner in both places is méshpat, which properly means judgment,
right, law, that which is strictly de jure ; but it also signifies usage, manner, custom, that which
is de facto, and the mishpat of the kingdom here expresses the former, but the mishpat of the
king in chap. viii. comprehends also the latter.” ( Wordsworth), “In content it was no doubt
essentially the same with the law of the king in Deut. xvii. 14-20, especially verses 19, 20, and
therefore related to the divinely-established rights and duties of the theocratic king, the
fulfilment of which the people were authorised to demand from him.” (Erdmann). “Wrote
it in a book.” “We find here the first trace, after the written records of Moses, of writing
among the prophets, long before the literary activity to which we owe what we have now.”
(Erdmann). “aid it up before the Lord.” “It was, no doubt, placed in the tabernacle,
where the law of Moses was also deposited.” (Keil),


Ver. 26. “A band of men,” etc. ; rather, the host ; but “here it does not a large
military force, but a crowd of brave men whose hearts God had touched to give him a royal
escort, and show their readiness to serve him.” (Keil)


Ver. 27. “Children of Belial” (see on chap. ii. 12). “Presents,” Minchah. “The token
of homage and acknowledgment from the subject to the sovereign, and from the tributary nation
to their suzerain” (see 2 Sam! viii. 2, 6; Judges iii, 17, 18; 1 Kings iv, 21, etc.), (Biblical
Commentary). “But he held his peace.” Literally, “He was as being deaf,” i.¢, he acted
as if he had not heard.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH—Verses 1-10,


Tae Private ConsecRATION oF SAUL, AND THE MiracuLous ATTESTATION
TO HIs CALL.


I. The most eventful forces of human life often begin in secret. The great
forces in nature begin in secret. The mightiest cedar of Lebanon put
forth its first tiny germ beneath the earth, and while men _ slept
showed itself above ground, and received its first anointing of the
dew when no human eye was there to look on. And the great men who
have become mighty forces in the world have had their characters moulded
and the direction of their lives determined by incidents unnoticed by the
world. They became kings among their fellows, but their anointing took
place in secret. They began their career buried in obscurity, and their first
coming to the light was a circumstance unnoticed by any. It was not till God
publicly called them to His service by the voice of His providence that men
recognised who and what they were. So the anointing of the first king of Israel
was witnessed by no one except those engaged in the transaction. The conse-
cration of this man, whose name has ever since had a place in human history,
was performed in the most private manner. The first act in the establishment

122


OHaP. x. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL.





of this kingdom, like that of many others, came not with observation. Our Lord
teaches that this is an especial characteristic of the gospel kingdom, both in the
world and in the heart. He, Ss king, made His first appearance upon the earth
in a stable in the presence of one or two humble peasants, and received His first
adoration from shepherds as He lay ina manger. “ The kingdom of heaven is
like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field ; which,
indeed, ts the least of all seeds; but when it is grown, it is the greatest among
herbs” (Matt. xiii, 31, 32). And the beginning of Christ’s kingdom in the
individual heart is marked by the same characteristic. ‘I'he anointing of the
Spirit which seals a human soul to God takes place unobserved by others—the
ordination to be a king unto God (Rev. i. 6) is a private transaction between
the soul and Him who has called it out of darkness to light—it is like the
hiding of the leaven—an unnoticed act—only known to others by its effects
(Matt. xii. 33). Ananias the disciple at Damascus was the only human being
who was made cognisant of the fact that Saul of Tarsus had uttered his first
es to Jesus of Nazareth ; but what an eventful force was then set in motion—

ow mighty have been the influences which have ever since been flowing from
that act of consecration to God—from the anointing of that mighty king in tha
Church of Christ.


II, Epochs in the history of the Church, and in the history of individual
souls, are generally preceded and followed by signs. The exodus of Israel
from Egypt was preceded by supernatural events, and signs and wonders followed
that epoch in their history. The manifestation of God in the burning bush,
and the miracles done in Egypt, ushered in their national birth, which was
followed by the Divine manifestation in the pillar of cloud and by the giving of
bread from heaven, water from the rock, etc. At the epoch in the world’s
history created by the bringing into the world the first-begotten Son of God
(Heb. i. 6), there were signs preceding and following in gifts of the Holy Ghost
and angelic visits to lowly men and women (Luke i. 11, 20, 24, 28, 41, 67;
ii. 9, 27, 38), and before his entrance on His public ministry, which was marked
by miracles from beginning to end, there was the supernatural manifestations
connected with His baptism. The entrance of the apostles upon their great
work was an epoch in the history of the world and of the Church, and signs
preceded it on the day of Pentecost and followed it in the conversion of three
thousand souls, as well as in the miracles of healing, and of resurrection, and of
judgment connected with their ministry and with that of others associated with
them (Acts iii. 7; v. 1-11; v. 8; viii. 13; ix. 40; xili, 11; xv. 3; xix. 11, etc.) .
“ The word which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, was confirmed
unto us by them that heard Him, God also bearing them witness, both with signs
and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to
His own will” (Heb. ii. 4). The anointing of Saul marked a great epoch in
the history of the Hebrew nation, and it was in accordance with the general rule
of God’s government that it should be preceded and followed by signs, some of
@ more private nature, and others, especially that of Saul’s endowment with the
spirit of prophecy, of a public character. And the same truth holds good as to
epochs in the individual soul. When that soul enters into entirely new con-
ditions by entering into new relations to God, signs follow and precede the
entrance. Like those before mentioned, some are known only to the man
himself, but some are evident to onlookers, Pricking of conscience—an
awakening to the sense of the burden of unpardoned sin, is a sign from heaven.
This sign evidently preceded and accompanied the conversion of the great
Apostle of the Gentiles (Acts ix. 5, 11), and it is found in a greater or less degree
whenever a soul is turned “from the power of Satan unto God.” But more
public signs follow in the new life of those who believe—signs which are not only

128


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.





for the confirmation of their own faith, but for evidence to those who believe not.
{n connection with the new life to which Saul was now called, the signs which
went before and followed his consecration not only confirmed his own faith in the
teally Divine nature of his call, but some of them were so evident to others also
as to make them conscious that a great change had passed over him. In many
respects he was another man. And the new life which follows the new birth is
the most convincing testimony to the truth that there is a Spirit of God working
in the world, ‘The words of Christ,” says Neander, “assure us that the com-
munication of the life of God to men was the greatest of all miracles, the essence
and aim of all; and further, that it was to be the standing miracle of all after
ages.


III. Signs accompanying a message from God are intended to lead toa
practical result. They are to confirm faith and to lead to the exercise of the
gifts entrusted. ‘And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that
thou shalt do as occasion serve thee” (ver. 7). This was the intention of the
sign given to Moses in the burning bush. He was to go to Pharaoh in the
certainty that God was with him, and he was to demand the deliverance of his

eople, and become their leader and lawgiver. The signs here vouchsafed to
Raul were to lead him to the exercise of his newly-acquired gifts—they were an
encouragement and a call to him to use the powers which God now implanted
within him. So the signs given to the apostles on the day of Pentecost were
not simply events to be marvelled at, but the newly-gotten gifts which they
signified were to be used for the joy of the receivers, the glory of the Giver, and
the blessing of others. The remarkable signs which accompanied the conversion
of the New Testament Saul were a call to him to “bear the name” of Him who
had appeared to him “before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel,”
even wnen the bearing of it involved the suffering of “great things” for the
sake of his Lord (Acts ix. 15, 16). And so it is with every man who is called
out of darkness into marvellous light—by life and word he is expected to show
forth the praises of Him who has called him (1 Pet. ii. 9).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. The natural basis for this
symbolism of oil is its power to dis-
ponte light and life, joy and healing,

y which it sets forth the Spirit’s dis-
pensation of light and ke and the
therein contained gifts and powers.
And in the historical development of
the theocracy and of the Divine reve-
lations which point to the perfecting
and fulfilment of the theocracy in the
new covenant, the symbolic anointing
of theocratic kings, priests, and pro-
phets, as sign of the impartation of the
an of God and its powers, is the type,
that is, the historical foretokening and
prefiguring of the anointing of the Spirit
without measure (John iii. 34), and with
the Spirit of might (Acts x. 38) by
which Jesus was “the Christ,” the
anointed of God for the New Testa-
mental kingdom of God, first as King

124


of His kingdom, and then as chief Pro-
phet and Priest. Samuel’s word, “ 7he
Lord hath anointed thee,” signifies that
God Himself, of His free grace, dispenses
the powers and gifts of His Spirit, when
He calls to an office in His kingdom
and service.—Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 1-9. How the Lord fits His
chosen ones for the kingly calling in
His kingdom. 1. By quiet instruction
by means of His word He brings them
into a right knowledge of the tasks He
assigns. 2. By the anointing of His
Spirit He imparts to them the needful
power and strength therefore. 3. By
the production of infallible signs He
gives them a just certainty and joyous
confidence, Zhe signs of Divine guid-
ance along the paths of human life on
earth, how they—1. Pointing back-


OHAP, x,


wards, remind us of grace in past
times (the holy places); 2. Pointing
upwards, admonish us to lift up the
heart from worthless, earthly things to
higher good; 3. Pointing forwards,
demand a new life in the Spirit ; and
4. Call on us to look into our own heart,
while for the work of renewal of the
whole man they promise the gifts and
powers of the Spirit from above. Zhe
appearance of special Divine signs in
human life—1. Whence coming? Or-
dered in time by God’s wise Providence,
not springing from chance, not aimless ;
decreed in His eternal purpose, not
accidental, not groundless; sent as
messengers of His holy and gracious
will, not meaningless. 2. To whom
applying ? To him who lets himself
be guided by God; to him who holds
still when God is guiding him, and to
him who lets God speak to him by His
word. 3. What signifying? Reminding
of the saving and gracious presence of
God (partly in the past, partly in the
present: God is with thee). Pointing
to our tasks, which under the guidance
of the Lord are to be fulfilled (vers.
1, 8). Lzxhorting to a renewal of the
whole inner life through the power of
the Holy Ghost (vers. 6-9).—Lange’s
Commentary.


Ver. 6. The Spirit of the Lord will
come upon thee. 1. A great word of

omise, which applies to everyone that
is called to the kingdom of God.
2. A wonderful event of the inner life
which occurs and is experienced only
under definite conditions. 3. The
beginning of a new life which takes
place by the change of the heart.—
Lange's Commentary.


Ver. 7. The great word, “God is
with thee.” 1. The infallible signs,
which assure us of it. 2. The consoling
strength which the heart thereby re-
ceives. 3. The mighty impulse to do
according to God’s good pleasure, which
lies therein. 4. The earnest exhor-
tation which is thereby given in all
the occurrences of human life to mark
the will of the Lord therein made
known.—Lange’s Commentary.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


ey


Vers. 6-8. What the royal anointing
gives, and what it demands, 1. It
makes the anointed one fit for all that
his office may lay upon him. 2, It
demands that the anointed one should
now do nothing more according to mis
own choice, but everything according
to the direction and will of God.—
Disselhoff.


Ver. 9. He has no longer the heart
of a husbandman, concerned only
about his corn and cattle, but the
heart of a statesman, a general, and a
prince, whom God calls to any service
He will make fit for it.—Henry.

Saul had another heart, but he had
not a new heart. He gave evidence ot
possessing the gifts of kingship, but
none of the grace of holy living. While
he could henceforth command armies
and practise diplomacy, he cared not
for keeping a conscience void of offence
toward God and man..... It is not
enough to have natural endowments,
or learned attainments of skill or
wisdom. These may be possessed in
the highest degree, while the soul ig
unrenewed and unreconciled to God.—
Steel.

Before Saul’s election he occupied a
very low standpoint, intellectually and
spiritually. He scarcely knew any-
thing of Samuel, the centre of all
higher Israelitish life. Nothing moves
him to make acquaintance with the
celebrated prophet but anxiety respect-
ing the lost asses. ... . But we see
that there was a decisive change in
Saul’s life—that in the parable of the
sower he belonged not to the first class,
but to the third.—Hengsienberg.


Ver. 10. Saul, by conversing with
prophets, prophesied: see the power
and profit of holy company. ‘Those
that live within the sunshine of religion
cannot but be somewhat coloured of
their beams.—Zrapp.

The Spirit bloweth where it listeth
(John iii. 8), and the power of the
Holy Ghost manifested itself by sudden
effusions before the day of Pentecost ;
but on the day of Pentecost the Holy -
Spirit was sert from heaven by Christ

125


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I,





sua Jere eI NAGE LD
to His church, to abide with her for even of the whole wor»), For when
ever (John xiv. 16).— Wordsworth, the breath of the Holy Ghost cama


As of Saul it is written when the upon it, it was cast into a new mould
Spirit came upon him, “he was changed presently, and became a new world.—
into @ new man;” this holds true Bishop Andrewes,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THF PARAGRAPH.—Verses 11-12 and 27,
SAUL AMONG THE PropHers,


I. God often accomplishes his purposes by agencies both unlooked for and
despised. That a Hebrew slave should be taken from a dungeon and made lord
of Egypt was no doubt an event as undesired as it was unexpected by the nobles
of Pharaoh’s court, and that this despised younger brother should be the
instrument of saving all his house from starvation was as equally far from the
desire and expectation of Jacob’s elder sons. That another Hebrew youth
should be educated and fitted in Pharaoh’s court to become the axe which
should be laid at the root of the tyranny of Egypt, was another event which
men little expected to come to pass, and which crossed the wishes and desires of
many. And it as little accorded with the expectation and wish of the majority
of the Israelites who knew Saul the son of Kish that he should be found first
among the prophets and then upon the throne. Those who had known the
young man from his youth never expected to see him in any other position than
that in which he had grown to manhood, and a larger number were as surprised
as they were disappointed when they found that a member of the smallest tribe
of Israel, and one who had given no proof of his power to rule, was to be
elevated to the throne of the nation. But this has been the general method of
the Divine working in the world. Not only in the establishment of the Gospel
kingdom but in the accomplishment of most of His purposes, which are indeed
all subservient to that one great Divine purpose—“ God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise ; and God hath chosen the weak things
of the world to confound the things which are mighty ; and base things of the
world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which
are not, to bring to nought things that are ; that no flesh should glory in His
presence” (1 Cor. i, 27-29. Men look in the high places of the earth for those
who are to do the great things of the world, but God puts His hand upon some
obscure and despised and unlikely instrument and uses him for the work that
“they may see, and know, and consider, that the hand of the Lord hath done
this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it” (Isa. xli. 20).


II. The way in which men ought to regard this method of the Divine
working. There are many men among the teachers of the Church of God who
have been raised from a much more lowly position. Yet when another from a
similar position reveals that God has bestowed gifts and graces upon him also,
those who can boast no higher origin exclaim with astonishment and scorn, “ Is
Saul also among the prophets?” It behoves all who ask such a question to
consider the origin of all intellectual and spiritual endowments—to remember
that they are all bestowed by the common Father, who is not accountable to
them for the distribution of them. But the spirit which would exclude some
from a participation in them manifested itself very early in the Church of God.
When “the Lord took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it unto the
seventy elders:” and “ they prophesied and di not cease,” and “ Kidad and
Medad prophesied in the camp, there ran a young man and told Moses, and said,
Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp. And Joshua the son of Nun, the
servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lard, Moses,

126


OHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





forbid them” (Numb. xi. 25-28). But Moses remembered and acknowledged
“who hath made man’s mouth, and who maketh the dumb, or the seeing, or the
blind” (Exod. iv. 11)—he knew whose was the Spirit which had rested so
abundantly upon him, and that all the servants of God had one common Father,
and he therefore answered, “ Hnviest thou for my sake? Would God that all
the Lord’s people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon
them” (Numb. xi. 29). This is the attitude which becomes all God’s servants
to take when they behold a Saul among the prophets—it behoves them all to
ask the question asked by one in the days of Saul, “ But who is their father ?”
It was as great a surprise to the disciples at Jerusalem to hear of the New
Testament Saul among the preachers as it was for the inhabitants of Gibeah to
see the Old Testament Saul among the prophets. But the surprise in both
cases arose from forgetfulness of the truth contained in the heart-searching
question afterwards put by that great apostle to the Corinthian church—“ For
who maketh thee to differ from one another? and what hast thou that thou didst
not receive? now tf thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst
not received tt?” (1 Cor. iv. 7).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 11, 12. Let not the worst be for the present, be too much relied on ;
despaired of, yet let not an external for Saul among the prophets was Sau
show of devotion, and a sudden change _ still_—Henry.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.-—- Verses 17—20,
Saut’s Pustic REcoGNITION.


I—It is a mark of the greatest folly and ingratitude to forsake old and
tried friends for those who are new and untried. This was what Israel was
now doing. ‘They were setting aside an old and faithful human friend in the
person of Samuel for the young man of whom they knew nothing except that he
was endowed with a fine physical frame. But they were guilty of far greater
sin and folly..Although God had elected their king, yet we have seen (see on chap.
viii. 6-22) He had only done so because He would not compel them to acquiesce
in His plans for their welfare ; and in insisting upon having “a king like the
nations,” they had forsaken him who “ Himself had saved them out of all their
adversities and tribulation,” who had “delivered them out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and _ of them that oppressed
them ” (vers. 18, 19). God had indeed. been a friend whose faithfulness had
been tried and found unfailing, and in desiring a human king Israel gave proof
of how ungrateful men can be, and how an apparent advantage and a wrong
desire indulged in can blind men to their own interest.


II. Those who are thus foolish and ungrateful often find that those whom
they have rejected are still indispensable to their welfare. Israel had still to
look to Samuel to guard them against some of the evil fruits which would spring
from their own self-will. To him they owed the preservation of some national
liberty—he alone it was who was able to tell them the “manner of the
kingdom,” and who “ wrote it in a book” and laid it up for the use of future
generations, And they had to look to the King whom they had. forsaken to
preserve the life and to give success to the king whom they had chosen in His
place. It is vain for men to try and free themselves from obligations even to
good men—they must either directly or indirectly be indebted to ys But

7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK 1,


tn OR


it is far more useless and foolish for men to try and do without God, while every
ae gift which they enjoy comes from Him in whom they “live and move and


ave their being.”


On the first day when Israel set out to do without God,


they are found appealing to Him for guidance and help.
III. Those prove themselves to be true friends who are Willing still to help


those who have thus rejected them.


That God was still careful for the interests


of the children whom He had “nourished and brought up,” but who “had
rebelled against Him” (Isa. i. 2)—that He was still kind to these “wnthankful


and evil” (Luke vi. 35) Israelites—shows how infinitely good and gracious


He is, and how unfailing is His


friendship,


and that Samuel should have


borne himself as he did under the circumstances shows that he was a true


and real patriot and friend.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 22. I cannot blame Saul for
hiding himself from a kingdom, espe-
cially of Israel. Honour is heavy when
it comes on the best terms; how
should it be otherwise, when all men’s
cares are cast on one; but most of all
in a troubled estate? No man can
put to sea without danger, but he that
launcheth forth in a tempest expecteth
the hardest event. Such was the con-
dition of Israel... . . Well did Saul
know the difference between a peaceful
government and the perilous and
wearisome tumults of war. The
quietest throne is full of cares, the
perplexed of dangers. Cares and
dangers drove Saul into this corner, to
hide his head from a crown: these
made him choose rather to lie obscurely
among the baggage of his tent than to
sit gloriously in the throne of state.—
Bp. Hail.

Whether this act of Saul arose from
a culpable distrust of God, or an ex-
cessive diffidence in himself, we cannot
determine, but it forms a singular con-
trast with the spirit that marks his
after life; his eager and extreme
jealousy of a rival, both in his power
and popularity. ‘'I'his should convince
us how little we know of ourselves till
placed in circumstances that may call
forth our peculiar tempers or passions ;
for often we are as different persons
at different periods of our lives, as
Saul at this juncture from Saul after
the lapse of some years, when with un-
governable violence he sought the life

128


of David, dreading him as a competitor
for the throne.—Lindsay.


Ver. 25. In the Word of God there
is a clear definition of the rights of the
ruled as well as of the rights of the
ruler. No man is at liberty to tyran-
nize over another. . It is a
solemn thought that all our engage-
ments are laid up before the Lord.
They are held in all their integrity by
him, and he never fails to fulfil his
part.—Steel.


Ver. 26. This verbal declaration of
God was not enough. There must
also be an actual one. God’s election
is not vain and feeble ; if it be real, it
must prove itself in the gifts and deeds
of him who is chosen. The people
felt this, even those who acknowledged
the election with all their heart. Saul
himself also felt it. Both waited for
the future actual ratification (chap.
xi.). Until then everything remained
as it had been.—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 27. If Saul had attached an
overweening importance to himself we
should have seen a very different
course of conduct. But it was the
absence of this which saved him. The
utterances of the men of Belial pro-
ceeded on the presumption that at the
moment self-importance was the pro-
minent principle at work in Saul’s
heart ; it was a shaft aimed at this, as
they imagined that it would not only


OHAP, X,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





be there, but uppermost. Mistaken,
however, as to the mark, they failed
in hitting and wounding... . Many
are the blessings attendant on humility,
and among them this is not the least,
that it denies opportunity to those
who would seek to wound us through
pride.—A/iller.
Notwithstanding that they (1) ques-
tioned his capacity, (2) despised his
ower,(3) refused him homage and help,
s was as though he were deaf, thereby
showing (1) self-control, (2) prudence,
(3) humility. Apply this to (1) public
officers, (2) employers of servants and
other subordinates, (3) persons in
society, (4) church officials. There isa
high sense in which God acts thus, and
bad men imagine that He is really
deaf. (Psalm Ixxiii.; xciv. 7; Job
xxii. 18).—TZranslator of Lange’s Com-
mentary.


Ver. 26. Saul was to have one other
proof that without hesitation he might
in all the future of his life seek and
find his all in God. What is a man
without friends, especially if he have
great responsibilities pressing around
him, and great cares devolving on him?
And who are our best friends? Not
those who talk about us the most—not
those who trumpet our praises and
advertise our talents; but those who
think of us in our homes, and who
come, knowing we are careworn, to ask
if they can help us, and who stand
ready to do us a service which only
God’s eye can see, a kindness the
knowledge of which is confined to our
house, and to the chambers of the
heart made glad by this persional
attention. If ever man wanted such
attentions it must have been Saul,
when he found himself all at once king
over Israel. . . . The election is over,
the excitement is past, its bustle sub-
sided. He must go home as well as


the rest of the people; but, ah! in
how different a state of mind from
theirs. Men can often bear up in
public under circumstances beneath
which they break down immediately
when alone. ... . Real friends know
this, and hence they will not say,
because they see a man keep up in
public, “ Ah, he is quite equal to his
duties ; he will do very well now, we
may leave him,” but rather they will,
because he has kept up before others,
expect it is all the more probable that
he will not do so in private, and they
will think of him at home, and they
will follow him thither with their
prayers at least; but if the opportunity
serves, with their presence too. 'Ihey
will show that they have hearts—hearts
in the worthiest sense of the term—
and that their hearts have been indeed
touched. All this comes before us in
the history. Saul is not allowed to
go home alone. No; he must be sus-
tained by sympathy and friendship ;
he shall not feel solitary, he shall not
go unattended. But mark that word
—God. ven these emotions of sym-
pathy—these proofs of attachment—
these manifestations of heart—are not,
by the historian, allowed to pass before
us as just the natural working of men’s
own minds under the peculiar circum-
stances of the case. God was in them.
God excited them, and in the fact that
God touched their hearts and disposed
them favourably, Saul was to gain a
new encouragement, a new assurance
of being in the path of duty. ‘This
power, too, which God _ possesses of
touching the hearts of men, is one
which it were well if we more distinctly
recognised and completely confided in.
.... Itis much better, easier, safer,
more dignified to get at men’s hearts
through God's power over ivem, than
to seek their good opinion by any
lower effort.—-J/idler,


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK tL.
ST SET RUA a femal Ws ghee pe Nes SE koh Ls ea a


_ CHAPTER XI


Carrioat aND Exposrrory Norszs.—Ver. 1. “Nahash.” He was king of the children of
Ammon, as appears from chap. xii. 12; 2 Sam. x. 1, 2, xvii. 27. He seems to have been con-
nected with the family of David, since Abigail, David’s sister, was the daughter (perhaps
meaning grand-daughter), of Nahash (2 Sam. xvii. 25; 1 Chron. ii, 16,17), and perhaps, in
consequence of this connection, was very friendly to David. Even after the destructive war
with his son Harun, in which Uriah fell, and when David was in flight and banishment, we find
another son of Nahash, Shobi, showing him marked kindness. (Biblical Dictionary.) “According
to chap. xii. 12, the threatening war with the Ammonites was the immediate occasion of the
demand for aking. Naturally therefore, Nahash, having before made his preparations, entered
the Israelitish territory soon after the king was chosen and confirmed.” (Hrdmann.) “Jabesh=
Gilead.” According to Josephus, this city was the capital of Gilead, and was probably on the site
of the present ruins of El-Deir, on the south side of the Wady Jabis, not far to the north of
Helaweh, near the ancient road that leads to Beisan. The Ammonites had long claimed the
right to the possession of Gilead, and had been subdued by Jephthah.


Ver. 2. “On this contition,” etc. “The left eye would be covered with the shield in battle:
the right eye was needed for aiming the spear ; they would therefore be no better than blind if
they lost their right eye.” (Wordsworth.) “ay it for a reproach,” ete “He sought to
avenge upon the people of Israel the shame of the defeat which Jephthah had inflicted on the
Ammonites,” (Kiel, )


Ver. 3. “If there is no one who saves us,” “The assumption of this as possible, and the
fact that they sent to every region of Israel, shows that in this transition-period from the Judges
to the King-dom, in spite of what Samuel had done to inspire unity of action, the old division of
powers in tribal isolation and the consequent weakness against enemies still continued.(Zrdmann.)


Ver. 4. “Yold the tidings in the ears of the people.” Hither they were not aware of
the election of Saul, as Keil supposes, or they did not approve of his appointment, or he was not
in Gibeah and did not return from his ordinary occupation until the message had been delivered.


Ver. 5. “What aileth the people?” Even the men of Gibeah did not apply to Saul, which
seems to show that he was not held in much esteem in his native city.


Ver. 6. “And the Spirit of God.” This time the Spirit of God came upon him, as upon the
Judges before him, as a Spirit of supernatural energy and power—compare Judges iii, 10, v. 34,
xi. 29, etce.—( Biblical Dictionary ).


Ver. 7, “And he took a yoke of oxen,” etc. “This was @ symbolical action, which struck
the mind more than words could have done” (Clericus), and “was suited to the character and
habits of an agricultural and pastoral people.” ( Jamicson.) “After Samuel.” “The introduction
of Samuel’s name is a proof that Saul, even as king, still recognised the authority which Samuel
possessed in Israel as prophet of Jehovah.” (Kiel.) “And the fear of the Lord fell,” ete.
“ Jehovah is not equivalent to Elohim, nor is the fear of Jehovah in the sense of fear of His
punishment, but a fear inspired by Jehovah.” (Kiel.) “The Spirit of the Lord, which impelled
Saul to this noble and vigorous action, so strangely contrasted with his former quiet life behind
the plough, laid hold at the same time on the whole nation, so that it was suddenly lifted up, as
it were involuntarily, in the uniting and strengthening power of this Spirit from above, to a new
life before God (in His fear) and within itself (in unity and union) against the enemies of the
theocracy.” (Hrdmann. )


Ver. 8. “Bezek.” “In the tribe of Issachar, in the plain of Jezreel, not far from Bethshean,
at about as great an elevation as Jabesh, according to Eusebius (Onomasticon) seventeen
Roman miles north of Nablous, on the road to Scythopolis.” (Erdmann.) “The children of
Israel,” etc. “This separate mention of Israel and Judah smacks of the times that followed
the division of the Israelites into two kingdoms.” (Clericus.) “The numbers will not appear
too large if we bear in mind that the allusion is not to a regular army, but that Saul had
summoned all the people to a general levy.” (Keil.) “That the large and powerful tribe of
Judah has the relatively small number (30,000) of warriors over against the 300,000 of Israel,
is due to the fact that a large part of its territory was in the possession of the Philistines, ag
to whose further advance more care had to be taken, now that the north-eastern frontier of the
country was threatened by the Ammonites.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 11. “On the morrow,” ete. “Crossing the Jordan—probably by the u i
Wady Jabis, which comes down from the east into the J ert Ohne Bere cre ps rete
Saul marched his army, all night according to Josephus, thirty furlongs.” (Jamieson.) “Tpte
the midst of the host.” “Of the Ammonites who had gone forth to meet the sally of the
men of ino and found themselves between them and Saul’s companies,” ( Wordsworth.)


OHAP, XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
a


“They which remained were scattered.” Josephus adds that they made a great slanghter—
Nahash being amongst the number of the slain—and pursued the fugitives in a complete rout
across the desert.” (Jamieson.)


Ver, 12. “And the people said unto Samuel.” “To whom they still looked as their ruler,
and whose presence is mentioned to show Saul’s moderation and clemency at this time ; for it
was not Samuel but Saul who interfered to rescue those who had despised him.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 13. “And Saul said.” “An evidence that Saul was beginning to gain confidence
under the influence of the Spirit of God.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 14. “Gilgal.” Doubtless the Gilgal mentioned in chapter x. 1. Most commentators
think it was the one in the Jordan valley. See notes on chapter vii. 16. “ A very appropriate
place, formerly the camp of Joshua (Josh. v. 9 and vi, 10), and connected with those glorious
victories which God had wrought by his hand when He first settled Israel in Canaan.”
(Wordsworth. )


Ver. 15. “And there they made Saul king before the Lord.” “These words mean nothing
more than the solemn announcement and presentation of Saul before the nation as divinely
appointed king in consequence of the divine legitimation given by his brilliant exploit against
the Ammonites. The ‘before the Lord’ indicates the essential difference between this act,
and the proclamation and homage at Mizpah, marking the religious act of installation sealed
with @ solemn offering, by which Saul was formerly and solemnly consecrated to his office by the
invisible God-king.” (Zrdmann.) “The late period at which the regal form of government
was established in Israel is an evidence of the Divine origin of the law, which in a certain
degree provides for it, and restrains it. It was not unproductive of advantage to the permanent
interests of religion that this great change was delayed by Providence until the Mosaic law had
subsisted long enough to prove that its first establishment had not originated in any human
policy, and that its subsequent support was independent of any human power.” ( Graves.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-8,
Tur AmMonitTE INVASION OF JABESH-GILEAD.


I. Times of weakness are times of undesired visitation, When a’ man is
commercially weak, and when he has least desire to see the face of those who
will add to his embarrassments, then is the time when they are most certain to
visit him. A visit from his creditors would not affright him if he had where-
with to meet their demands, but the very fact that his resources are inadequate
makes them more likely to visit him. specially if he has a creditor who is
unkindly disposed towards him, that creditor’s visit will be most undesired ;
but a visit from him may be most certainly looked for. So there are times
when the soul is depressed—when many things seem to combine to make a man
morally weak, and that is the time when he may most certainly expect a visit
from his great spiritual adversary. ‘The tempter, by bringing up all his forces
to assault the soul at such a time, reveals his watchful subtlety and his power
to measure the resources of the human soul. In times of mental weakness
from weakness of body, or from especially harassing circumstances, we feel least
of all to desire to have to do battle with a strong temptation; yet then is the
time when it is almost certain to assault us. The devil came to Christ when He
was physically weak from forty days’ fasting, and when, without doubt, His
human soul was depressed in consequence (Matt. iv. 2). And again, when He
hung upon the cross in great pain of body and sorrow of soul, he tempted Him
through his emissaries with the taunt, “ He saved others, Himself He cannot
save ; if Thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross” (Mark xv. 30).
The geographical position of Jabesh-Gilead made its inhabitants at all times
less able to defend themselves from the common national enemies than the
pecple on the other side of Jordan. Being so far from the centre of govern-
ment, they were at all times peculiarly exposed to danger. They do not appear
at this time to have taken part in the national movement towards auty whick


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L














ee


had drawn together and strengthened the great mass of the Israelitish nation,
and they were consequently much less able to defend themselves than most of
their fellow-countrymen. As a natural consequence, their enemies chose this
time to invade them and to insult them. At a time when, by reason of their
tribal isolation ag well as their defenceless geographical position, they had most
to dread from a visit of the Ammonites, at this time the visit was made.


II. Times of weakness subject men to the insolence of their enemies. A con-
sciousness that we are strong, either physically or in our circumstances, has a
wonderful tendency to make men treat us civilly. A consciousness that we are
spiritually strong will tend to make our spiritual and invisible enemies less
daring in their assaults, A pugilist, in the presence of one who is his equal in
strength and stature, restrains his natural insolence. If he meets a man who is
bigger and stronger than himself, he becomes quite deferential. But bring him
face to face with a man of half his own size and strength, and he will probably
insult him. And so it is with the strength and weakness of social position. The
wise man says that “the rich man’s wealth is his strong city” (Prov. x. 15), and
in this he often shelters himself as in a fortress, and shoots forth arrows of
scornful contempt and insolence upon those who are socially dependent upon
him, and who are consequently too weak to retaliate. And what is true in
relation to individuals is true also of nations. The strong nations of the earth
are, alas! often found insolently regardless of the rights of those who are too
weak to defend their own liberties. Nahash would not have confronted the
men of Jabesh-Gilead with so insolent an air, and proposed to them terms so
humiliating, if they had not been in his eyes in so defenceless a condition.


III. Times of visitation from insolent enemies should drive us to the strong
for help. It was wise of the men of Gilead not to attempt to meet their enemies
in their own strength. It is most unwise of men to be too proud to acknowledge
their own weakness. While it is unmanly to be always depending upon others
for help—while a man is bound to exert himself to the utmost to free himself
from difficulties—a refusal to seek help from a stronger fellow-creature is some-
times sinful. God has ordained that the strength of some should supplement
the weakness of others, and the inequality of men in this respect is intended to
bind them to each other. When, therefore, a man in distress from which he
cannot extricate himself, chooses ruin rather than the aid of a stronger arm
than his own, he refuses to fall in with a Divine ordination. And this truth
can be extended to the help which can come only from an arm which is stronger
than the arm of flesh. ‘Times of especial trial and temptation should make
men feel their dependence upon Omnipotent strength, and if they do not drive
them to seek help from the strong God, they fail to fulfil the design of Him
who either sent them for that purpose, or permitted them to happen that He
might be glorified in delivering those who call upon Him in distress,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Verse 2. In spiritual things this is
precisely what is done bythe Bishop
of Rome. He is a “Nahash the
Ammonite” in the Catholic Church of
Christ. He requires of all Christians
to make a surrender of their reason,
conscience, and their will (which belong

182


to their Master, Christ) as the price of
communion with himself. If we are
willing to allow him to “thrust out
our right eyes,” then he w'll allow us
to communicate with hims«if, but uot
otherwise.— Wordsworth,


BWAP, XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 4—15,
Savu’s First Victory.


i. Men need an occasion to reveal their qualifications for special and
txaportant service. Much power lies hidden in the world, because it has never
met with an occasion to call it out—because it has never been brought into
contact with the combination of circumstances needed to make it manifest. The
vower by which men send their thoughts round the world by the telegraph wire,
or make their words audible at a distance by means of the telephone, has been
in the world ever since its creation, but it has only been made manifest in
modern times, because men have only lately learned how to give it an occasion
to reveal its mighty and wonderful.capabilities. If one saw an acorn or a corn-
seed for the first time, and was ignorant of the process of germination, he would
not dream of the wondrous capabilities which lay hidden within them. And if
they were always kept above the ground or planted in an unsuitable soil, or if
the rean and sun never reached them, the hidden power within them would
remain hidden for ever. And so it is with the mental and spiritual capabilities
of men, ‘They may be there, but they need an occasion to call them forth. A
soldier may be possessed of courage enough to head a forlorn hope, or of en-
darance enough to sustain a long-continued siege, but if his lot is cast in a time
cf peace, his capabilities in this direction will never be known even to himself.
There are to-day many members of the Church militant who are as courageous
and faithful as the martyrs of the fifteenth century—many good soldiers of
Jesus Christ who would prove themselves as valiant for the truth as those who
hava gealed it with their blood in bygone ages. But the spiritual power within
them is hidden even from themselves, because the occasion to reveal it is
wanting. It is evident that at this period of Saul’s history the people of Israel
were ignorant of his mental ability—they did not think he possessed the courage
and the tact necessary to lead them to battle and to victory, but the attack of
the Ammonite host furnished the needed occasion for the revelation of what was
in him,

YI. When God hus called a man to any special work, he need not seek the
occasion, because the occasion will seek him. When.a vessel has been
built for the ocean it will be certain to find an occasion to show what it is made
of—the elements will seek it out and test the strength of its timbers and its
power to weather the storm. Every wave that lashes its sides will furnish
an occasion for it to prove what it cando. So when God has destined a man
to any special service in the world, there is no need for that man to go out of
his way to find an occasion to reveal what is in him. He who called him to the
work will likewise give him the opportunity to reveal what he is fit for. Saul
had been anointed to the kingship of Israel by the prophet of God, and his
appointment had been ratified by lot, which was also an expression of the
Divine will. He could, therefore, have felt no doubt in the matter. But he
did not seek an occasion of displaying his fitness for the post of honour and
responsibility to which he had been called, but returned to the occupation of
his early life apparently in the belief that the occasion would not be wanting in
which he might prove his ability to fulfil the duties of his new position. And
the occasion sought him when the men of Gibeah told him the tidings brought
by the messengers of Jabesh. So if any man feels that God has called him to
any special work in the world, he need not seek an occasion to prove his fitness
for it, for if there has been the call, He who called him will not let the occasion
be wanting. If he gives himself up to Divine guidance, and faithfully discharges
the duty which comes next to hand, God will take care of the ah Paul


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.











doubtless knew that God had chosen him to bear his name “ before kings” (Acta
ix. 15), but he did not go out of his way to find an occasion to do it. He who
had destined him to the service provided the opportunity for him (Acts xxvi. 2,
2 Tim. iv. 16).


III. The action of one man is needed to make many men one in action. Men
must have leaders—they must have some one around whom they can rally as a
centre of unity if they are to band together to do anything in the world. And
when one man of energy and ability concentrates all his own powers to a certain
end, other men of less energy and ability will concentrate around him, and their
united efforts will become a mighty power. The people of Israel at this time do
not appear to have been unwilling to help their brethren of Gilead, but they
did nothing but weep until Saul took the initiative and called upon them to
follow him. When Saul’s spirit was stirred within him by the Spirit of God to
summon all Israel into the field, the fear of the Lord fell upon the people, and
they came out “‘as one man” (see marginal rendering). Granted that there was
a supernatural influence at work here, is not the Spirit of God behind all such
great movements when their aim is the freedom of the human race or of any
part of it? And does not God always move the mass to united action by first
moving the heart of one man to take bold and decisive action? The decisive
action of Luther at Worms was the fruit of the movement of the Spirit of God
upon his soul, and it was the means of inciting the Protestant princes of
Germany to united action in the defence of religious liberty.


IV. A conquest of personal enemies by forgiveness is more honourable to a
man than a conquest of national enemies by the sword. One of Saul’s successors
has left it upon record that “he who ruleth his spirit is better than he that
taketh a city” (Prov. xvi. 32); and it is so because the first victory is more
difficult to win, and is far more complete and lasting than the second. There
are many men who are physically courageous with a kind of animal courage, who
would not miss an opportunity to avenge a personal insult if the occasion
offered—it is harder to overcome malice in the heart than an enemy on the field.
But he who can do the first overcomes his enemy far more completely, for in the
latter case it is only the body of the enemy which is overpowered by superior
physical strength, and he will be ever on the watch to renew the attack. But
to overcome a man by forgiveness takes the man’s heart captive, and, by turning
him into a friend, makes it certain that the conquest is a lasting one. Saul
showed his fitness to be a king by his brilliant victory over the Ammonites, but he
showed it more by his victory over himself when he said, concerning his former
personal enemies, “ There shall not a man be put to death this day.”


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 6. Withoutthiszeal noanointed excitability, from a momentary ebulli-


one may be found. For this word will
always hold good: “Cursed be he that
doeth the work of the Lord slothfully,”
(or negligently) (Jer. xlviii. 10). But
in truth zeal alone is not the right or-
nament of the warriors of Christ.
Prove thy zeal, whether it is not per-
haps mixed with flesh and blood, or
even proceeds altogether from this
fountain, and: know that zeal for the
Lord’s cause should not flow from mere


134


tion of natural compassion, or from being
overcome by human displeasure and
anger. Not the strange fire which the
sons of Aaron took, but the fire from
the holy altar, the Spirit of God—
let us learn ‘ from Saul !—must
overmaster, inflame, inspire ug—
Disselhoff. ss :


Ver. 7, There are two sorts of fear,
One is a selfish, reward seeking fear,


OHAP. XE


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





In this we are caring for ourselves, and
that is properly human fear. But
there is also a fear of the Lord, the
fear that one has for His sake alone,
when one fears lest the Lord has been
grieved through our own sins, or those
of others, or lest we or others should
not have sufficiently glorified Him in
ourselves.—Berlenberger Bible.


Ver. 9. Bold assurance of faith, which
in a great undertaking, anticipates its
success as an accomplished fact.—
Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 13. The victory over the foe
is to Saul nothing but a saving act of
God Himself. He regards himself as
simply the instrument of God. This
is the ground for the rejection of the
demand ; none should die that day.
Thereby he gained a victory (1) over
himself—he restrains himself in the
exercise of a right ; (2) over the anger
of those who demanded that justice
should be executed; (3) over his former
opponents; (4) over the whole people,
who must have been carried along by
him in the path of noble moral con-
duct, and lifted above themselves to
the height on which he stood.—Lange’s
Commentary.


As in God, so in His deputies,


mercy and justice should be insepara-
ble; wheresoever these two go asunder,
government follows them into distrac-
tion and ends in ruin. If it had been
a wrong offered to Samuel, the for-
bearance of the revenge had not been
so commendable, although on the day
of so happy a deliverance perhaps it
had not been unseasonable; a man
hath reason to be most bold with him-
self; it is no praise of mercy, since it
is a fault of justice to remit another
man’s satisfaction; his own hesmay.—
Bp. Hall.


Ver. 15. How many instructive
memorials of God’s power and love to
His people might suggest themselves
to Saul at Gilgal (see Critical Notes).
How many pledges and earnests to
himself if he imitated Joshua in faith
and obedience to God, especially at
Gilgal !— Wordsworth.

How absurdly are our judgments led
away by merely outward circumstances,
Saul was not less the King of Israel, when
following his herds at Gibeah, than
when returning from the conquest of
the Ammonites. His title rested on the
Divine appointment, and was not more
sacred because surrounded by the
lustre of a victory; yet it appeared so
in the eyes of the Israelites.— Lindsay.





CHAPTER XII.


Crrrrcan any Exposrrory Nores.—Ver. 1. “And Samuel said,” etc. “The time and
place of the following address are not given, but it is evident from the connection with the
preceding chapter, and still more from the introduction and the entire contents of the address,
that it was delivered on the renewal of the monarchy at Gilgal.”( Keil.) “I have hearkened.”
etc. These words correspond exactly to the words in chap. viii. 7,21. Samuel at the same
time testifies indirectly to the fact that he had therein obeyed the command of God: “ Hearken
to the voice of the people.” (Erdmann.) “ By appointing a great part of this chapter (viz. to
ver. 22) to be read in the synagogues as a Haphtarah to Numbers xvi., xvii. and xviii., the
ancient Hebrew Church suggests the parallel between this speech of Samuel and the address
of Moses in reply to Korah and his rebellious associates.” (Wordsworth. )


Ver. 2. “My sons are with you.” “They are reduced to the condition of private persons,
and are subjects of the king, as ye are.” (Wordsworth.) “ Perhaps only an amplification of the
words ‘J am old and grey-headed.’ His grown-up sons were evidences of his age. Possibly,
however, a tinge of mortified feeling at the rejection of himself and his family, mixed with a
desire to recommend his sons to the good-will of the nation, is at the bottom of this mention
of them.” (Biblical Commentary.) ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 1
—.—— Eee


Ver. 8. “Witvess against me.” “The venerable judge, in resigning his magisterial authority,
challenged the most minute inquiry into every act of his administration. . . History scarcely
anywhere presents a more striking example of the moral sublime. Grotius compares Samuel to
Aristides.” (Jamieson.) “What Samuel here affirms of his official career stands in direct con
trast with what is said in chap, viii. 8, of the blameworthy conduct of his sons; since it is
inconceivable that he did not know, and had not now in mind the covetousness and perversion of
judgment and the resulting discontent of the people, which was a co-factor in their desire for a
royal government. The mode, as well as the fact and contents of the following justification,
naturally suggest the statement in chap. viii. 3, and lead to the conclusion that this was the
occasion of this (otherwise surprising) justification of his official career, on which in the eyes of
the people a shadow had fallen in consequence of the opposite conduct of his sons.” (Erdmann. )
“His anointed:” *‘7.¢., of course, king Saul. The title Messiah, or anointed, had been given to
the High Priests (Lev. iv. 8-5, ete.), and in Hannah’s prophetic song and in the prophecy of the
man of God sent to Eli, prophetic mention had been made of God’s anointed ; but this must be
noted as the earliest instance of an actual king of Israel bearing the title of God’s Christ, and
thus typifying the true Messiah or Christ of God. The application of the term anointed to Saul,
makes it probable that he had been publicly anointed by Samuel at Gilgal. The secret anointing,
mentioned at chap. x. i., would not be notorious enough to explain the phrase to the whole people
of Israel.” BiblicalCommentary.) “To blind mine eyes therewith,” rather “that I should hide
mine eyes at him.” “The thought is not that the judge covers his eyes from the copher (or
ransom) that he may not see the bribe, but that he covers his eyes with it, so as not to see aad
aot to punish the crime committed.” (Keil.) “I will restore,” Compare Zaccheus’s saying,
Luke xix. 8, (Biblical Commentary. )


Ver, 6. “It is the Lord that advanced, etc.” Literally made, ¢.e., appointed them to their
office. “The word make is to be understood of those excellent gifts which God had bestowed on
Moses and his brother Aaron, that He might use their ministry in leading the people out of
Egypt.” (Calvin.) “Observe the constant reference to the Exodus as the well-known turning
point of their national life.” ( Biblical Commentary, )


Ver. 7. “Stand still, that I may reascn with you.” “Both verbs have a forensic sense.
They would be better rendered stand up (as if in a court of justice) that I may contend with you
before the Lord. Samuel is, as it were, the advocate of Jehovah, vindicating the righteousness
of His dealings with Israel, and throwing all the blame of their calamities on themselves
(compare Stephen’s speech, Acts vii.).” (Biblical Commentary.)

Ver. 9. “Samuel here introduces individual facts from the times of the Judges, but only


prominent events as they occurred to him, neglecting their order, which was in itself unessential.”
( Erdmann.)


Ver. 11. “Bedan.” This name does not occur in the book of J. udges, and only in one other
lace in the Bible (1 Chron. vii. 17). As Samuel here places it between the names of two well-
own Hebrew deliverers, many commentators agree with Kiel in believing that it is a copyist’s
error for Barak, the Hebrew letters in both words being nearly identical in form. Samuel,
Some commentators here substitute Samson, thinking it more natural than that the prophet
should mention himself, and omit the greatest of the judges. But Erdmann remarks that
“Samuel could mention himself without exciting surprise, because he was conscious of hig high
mission as judge and deliverer, and the profound significance of his office for the history of
Israel was universally recognised. By this mention of himself he honours not himself but the
Lord, who had made him (like Moses and Aaron before) what he was (comp. vers. 6-9),
Besides, it was under him that the yoke of the forty years dominion of the Philistines was
broken, which work of deliverance Samuel was only able to begin.”


Ver. 12. “And when ye saw that Nahash.” “It hence appears not improbable that Nahash
had made incursions into the Hebrew territory before the Israelites had demanded a king, and
after his election had returned, and begun the siege of Jabesh.” ( Clericus),


Ver. 14. “Translate Zf ye will fear the Lord, and serve Him, and obey His voice, so as not to


rebel against the mouth of the Lord, and will be (both you and your king that reiyns over you)
followers after the Lord your God.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 17. “Is it not wheat-harvest to-day?” The wheat-harvest occurs in Palestine between
the middle of May and the middle of June. “In ordinary seasons, from the cessation of the
showers in spring until their commencement in October and November, rain never falls, and the


sky is usually serene.” ( Robinson. J) “Thunderings, as ‘the voices of God’ (Exod. ix, 28), are
the harbingers of judgment.” (Keil. )


Ver. 18, “Feared the Lord and Samuel.” “ Compare the very similar phrase (Exod. xiv. 31).”

( Biblical Commentary.) “ Samuel is added because he—as before by his word, go by his intro-

duction of this manifestation, wonderful and contrary to the ordinary course of nature, of God’a

wrath—had displayed himself as instrument of the Judicial power and glory of the God-king.”
(Erdmann. )
136


CHAP, x11. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








irae ng oie things,” é¢., the idols, “because they are vain ;” literally emptiness, 6.6.


Ver. 22, “For His great name's sake,” “i,¢., for the great name which He had acquired in
the sight of all the nations by the marvellous guidance of Israel thus far to preserve it against
misapprehension and blasphemy.” ( Keil. )


Ver. 24. “How great things,” etc. Some refer this to the miracle mentioned in verse 18, but
the immediate connection seems to refer it to the mighty deliverances of which Samuel has just
been reminding them,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
Samvuet’s Pusiio RESIGNATION OF HIS OFFICE.


I. A change of relationship or position naturally suggests a review of the
past- When, on a journey, we have for some time been travelling in one direc-
tion, and we suddenly come to a turn in the road, we very naturally stand for a
moment and look at the path which we have trodden, and which we are now
about to quit. If we are journeying in a country with which we are unac-
re such a review will probably be useful to us—it will help us to a more

efinite conception of our whereabouts, So when a man is about to enter into
new relationships, whether of a private or public character, it is natural that he
should look back upon the path which he has trodden up to the present
moment, and if he do this in a right spirit it will be helpful to him in the
future. It is good for a man to do this when he is about to undertake a position
of responsibility, whether public or private; and it is good for him to do it also
when he is about to resign any office of trust, whether to a single master or to
his country. Happy will he be if at such a time he can, with Samuel, call God
to witness that he has performed his duties faithfully. Samuel had, during a
long life, been God’s vicegerent in Israel; his public work was now about to
cease, and consequently his relationship to the nation would be changed, It is
not in egotism or boastfulness that he recalls the manner in which he has dis-
charged his trust, or reminds them that by him (ver. 11) God had delivered
thein out of the hand of their enemies—such a review of the past was natural
and right. But Samuel not only looks back upon the road by which he has
arrived at the present turning-point in his life, he also bids the people whom
he is addressing recall the steps by which they, as a nation, had arrived at the
position in which they now stood. His relationship to them was about to
undergo a change, which was in some respects the natural result of his advancing

ears, although it was partly due to the late national movement. But they had
ty their own choice taken an entirely new position, and assumed entirely new
responsibilities ; and although their sinful self-willed action in the past could
not be recalled, yet many sins and much misery might be avoided in the future
if they now gratefully and humbly remembered all the way by which the Lord
cheir God had led them,


II. Whenever a nation rejects God, such rejection will be followed by signs of
God's displeasure. The miracle which followed Samuel’s words was a confirma-
tion of their truth, It wasa token that he was expressing the feelings of the
Divine mind regarding Israel’s conduct. The conception which Israel now had
of a king was not God’s conception, and their desire to have a king like the
nations was a rejection of their Divine and invisible King. Hence this token of
His displeasure. In later days this same nation rejected this Divine King when
He came to them in human flesh, and they themselves then became what they
have ever since remained—a sign to the entire human race of the ae of not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.





improving national privileges. Nations who do not find a God and King after
their own heart in Him who is their rightful sovereign will make one after their
own likeness (Psa. 1. 21) ; but signs will not be wanting of His displeasure,


III. The servants of God sin against Him when they neglect to pray for
their fellow countrymen. 1. They ought to pray for them because they are
their fellow creatures. Paul, speaking by inspiration, desires that “ supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men. . . Jor
this ts good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth” (1 Tim. ii. 1,3. 4.)
2. Because national love ought to be an element in the character of every godly
man. ‘he best men are ever deeply interested in the welfare of the nation to
which they belong. Paul’s love to “his brethren, his kinsmen according to the
flesh,” notwithstanding all that he had suffered at their hands, was intense
(Rom. ix. 1-3). And he who is a true patriot cannot serve his country so
effectually in any other way as by praying for the godliness of the people, for a
nation’s greatness depends upon the relation of its individual members to the
Living God.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 2. I have hearkened to your
voice, which was so violent and impe-
tuous. Now you must hearken to my
voice, and be told that after your
peace-offerings God hath still a quarrel
with you.— Trapp.

God will not let his people run away
with the arrearages of their sins, but,
when they least think of it, calls them
to account. All this while was God
angry with their rejection of Samuel ;
yet, as if there had been nothing but
peace, He gives them a victory over
their enemies, He gives way to their
joy in their election. .... od may
be angry enough with us, while we out-
wardly prosper: it is the wisdom of
God to take His best advantages ; He
suffers us to go on till we should come
to enjoy the fruit of our sin, till we
seem past the danger either of con-
science or of punishment ; then, even
when we begin to be past the feeling
of our sin, we shall begin to feel His
displeasure for our sins, This is only
where He loves, where He would both
forgive and reclaim: He hath now to
do with His Israel; but where He
means utter vengeance, He lets men
harden themselves to a reprobate
senselessness, and make up their own
measure without contradiction as pur-
posing to reckon with them bus once
for ever.—Bp. Hall,

138


Vers. 2, 3. Samuel’s life is both an
example and arebuke. 1. Anexample,
T’o stand forth and make go successful
an appeal must have presented to Saul
an illustrious example of personal ex-
cellence and of public probity. He
thus saw that it was possible to live in
high places and be a righteous man ;
to administer the state, and retain in-
tegrity ; to direct the concerns of mil-
lions, and receive their spontaneous
and unanimous approval—truths which
few governors have ever found... . .
He was also an example to the whole
people ; for the same goodness that
made him faithful, with his many
talents and his many trusts, could
supply them with ability to use theirs
with fidelity. 2. A rebuke. The un-
impeachable life of Samuel was a great
rebuke to Israel. They had not im-
proved his ministry, and had grown
weary of so godly a regime ashis. . . ,
Every good man’s life condemns the
an that refuses to follow his way.—

teel,


Ver. 9. When God’s people abandon
Hin, He, by virtue of the same right-
eousness which blesses them if they
are faithful, abandons them to their
enemies, who enslave and oppress
them. The “selling” refers to the
right of the father to sell his children


OHAP, XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


KS erect


as slaves, here exercised by God as the
extremest paternal right, as it were.
(Judges ii. 14; iii. 8; iv. 2,9. Deut,
xxxil.10. Isa.L1; li. 3. Ezek. xxx.
- 12.)—Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 13. In this declaration is set
forth the origin of Saul’s kingly posi>
tion—(1) on its human side, by the
words: Whom ye have chosen; (2)


on its divine side, by the words:


Behold, the Lord hath set a king over
you—your demand sprang from an
evil root, yet hath the Lord grarted
it ; this king, though chosen and de-
manded by you, is yet alone the work
of God. by these words is confirmed
the truth, that the Lord is and re-
mains king.—/rdmann,


Vers, 14, 15. With whom or against
whom is the hand of the Lord? The
answer to this question depends
on the following considerations:—1.
whether one has, or has not, given
himself to be the Lord’s with his
whole heart—/(a) in true fear of God,

b) im true service of God. 2.

ether one is, or is not, in his
will thoroughly obedient to the will
of the Lord—(a) hearkening uncon-
ditionally to His word, (6) not resisting
His commandments, 3. Whether one
is, or is not, in his whole walk ready
to follow the Lord in His guidance—
es keeping in the way pointed out by

im, (6) keeping in view the goal set
up by Him.—Lange’s Commentary.

Here is a precedent for preachers,
who must one while chide their people,
another while comfort them, and always
pray for them. They must turn them-
selves into all shapes and fashions of
speech and of spirit to bring men home
to God. This is an excellent way of
preaching, to mingle promises with


threatenings. Sour and sweet makes
the best sauce.—Zrapp.
Verses 16—19. I. Unseasonable


weather is one of God’s punishments.
We suffer sometimes from lack of rain
to moisten the earth and prevent the
wiseries of drought. Such a calamity
was inflicted upon Israel on account of


sin in the days of Elijah (1 Kings
xvii. 1). At other times rain is un-
seasonable and injurious, as was the
case in the present instance. It comes
at the call of the prophet, to mar the
fruits of the earth, and to injure the
harvest, that the people “ might
poe their wickedness to be great.”
I. We must ask for fair and sea-
sonable weather upon no other con-
dition than that of repentance.
We must bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, if we expect that the earth
should bring forth fruits meet for our
sustenance; for God sometimes sees
fit to withhold these blessings, to make
us know their worth by the want of
them. He is sometimes pleased to
send us an abundance of good things
to see how we will use them, and
whether we will grow better by them.
But if we consume them upon our
lusts, as Israel did here, instead of
having more, that which we have shall
be taken away.—Matthew Hole,

Men have so many ways of shifting
off their own guilt that unless they be
taken in the act they will hardly
confess it, and when convicted of the
fact they will deny the fault or the mea-
sure. ‘I'o cut off all excuses, therefore,
Samuel appeals to God, the highest
judge, for His sentence, and dares
trust to a miraculous conviction. Had
not Samuel before consulted with his
Maker, and received warrant for this
act, that would have been presumption
which was now a noble improvement
of faith. . Rather than
Israel shall go clear away with a sin,
God will accuse and arraign them from
heaven. No sooner hath Samuel's
voice ceased than God’s voice begins,
Every crack of thunder spake ven-
geance against the rebellious Israelites,
and every drop of rain was a witness of
their sin. Now they found that they
had displeased Him who rules in heaven
by rejecting the man who ruled for
Him on earth.— Bishop Hall.

The elements are exclusively under
the control of the Creator, and He
alone can say what shall be in relation
to the clouds; yet for special ends—
generally moral ends—they have occa-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


BOOK LE





sionally been placed for a season at
the service of men. '‘I'his instance is
a parallel to that which occurred in
Egypt (Exod. ix. 23),

The revelation of the Lord’s power
through Samuel has for its aim—I.
To glorify the name of God, and to
exhibit the people’s high calling as
chosen people and God’s property.
Il. To show more strikingly the peo-
ple’s sin and thereby induce sincere
repentance. III. To show the peni-
tent people the source of consolation
and help, and fix in their hearts the
ground of hope for future salvation.—
Lange’s Commentary.


Vers. 20, 21. A threefold word of
exhortation to penitent sinners. 1. A
word reminding of past sin. “ Ye have
done all this wickedness.” 2. A word
consolingly pointing to Divine grace.
“Fear not.” 3. A word exhorting to
fidelity. “Turn not aside from the
Lord.” —Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 23. In this Samuel sets a
glorious example to all rulers, showing
them that they should not be led
astray by the ingratitude of their sub-
ordinates or subjects, and give up on
that account all interest in their wel-
fare, but should rather persevere all
the more in their anxiety for them.—
Berlenberger Bible.

Moses and Samuel are specified by
God as having extraordinary power
with Him (Jer. xv. 1); and why?
Because they prayed for their enemies,
— Wordsworth,


Ver, 24. I. Fear and service go
together. Serve the Lord in fear,
saith David (Psa. ii. 11); Fear the
Lord and serve Him, saith Joshua
(Josh. xxiv. 14) ; and, fear ever before
service ; for that, unless our service
proceed from fear, it is hollow and
worthless Behold the same
tongue that bade them not fear (ver.
20), now bids them fear; and the
same Spirit that tells us they feared
exceedingly (ver. 18), now enjoins
them to fear more. What shall we
make aha Their other fear was


8h O)\\, 16!) see


at the best initial; for now they
began to repent: and, as one says of
this kind of fear, that it hath two
eyes fixed upon two divers objects, so
nad this of theirs: one eye looked
upon the rain and thunder, the other
looked up to the God that sent it.
The one of these is borrowed of the
slavish or hostile fear, as Basil calls it,
the other of the filial; for the slavish
fear casts both eyes upon the punish-
ment ; the filial looks with both eyes
upon the party offended. Samuel
would rectify and perfect this affec-
tion, and would bring them from the
fear of slaves, through the fear of peni-
tents, to the fear of sons: and indeed
one of these makes way for another.
It is true that perfect love thrusts oul
fear; but it is as true that fear brings
in that perfect love which is joined
with the reverence of sons: like the
needle or bristle, as one compares it,
draws in the thread after it. The
compunction of fear, saith Grevory,
fits the mind for the compunction of
love. We shall never rejoice truly in
God except it be with trembling;
except we have quaked at His thunder,
we shall never joy in His sunshine.
. . .. IL. As our service must be
grounded on fear, so our fear must be
reduced to service. Indeed, the worst
kind of fear is that we call servile ;
but the best fear is the fear of servants ;
for there is no servant of God but fears
filially. And God hath no son but he
serves, .... We all know what ser-
vice means ; for we all are, or were, I
imagine, either servants or masters, or
servants of the public, or masters of
servants, or all these. We cannot,
therefore, be ignorant either of what
we require of ours, or what our supe-
riors require of us. If service con-
sisted only in wearing of liveries, in
taking of wages, in making of courte-
sies, and kissing of hands, there were
nothing more easy or more common.
.... But be not deceived: the life
of service is work: the work ot a
Christian is obedience to the law of
God.— Bp, Hall.


Ver. 25. I. If there be a moral





governor of the universe, sin must
rovoke him. II. If sin provoke God,

eis able to punish it. III. Bodies
of men are punishable in this world
only ; in .eternity there are no fami-
lies, churches, nations. If, therefore, a
country is to be destroyed, it is tried,


and condemned, and executed here. -


IV. There is a tendency in the very


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





nature of sin to injure and ruin a
country. It violates all the duties of
relative life; it destroys subordina-
tion ; it relaxes the ties which bind
mankind together, and makes them
selfish and mean ; it renders men ene-
mies to each other,’ Social welfare
cannot survive the death of morals
and virtue.—Jay,.





CHAPTER XIII.


Ver. 1. A literal rendering of the Hebrew text in this verse would stand thus—Ssul was
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned » and two years over Israel. The Hebrew
numerals have evidently fallen out, and nearly all commentators agree that this verse, according
to the custom in the history of the kings (2 Sam. ii. 10, v. 4; 1 Kings xiv. 21, xxii. 42; 2 Kings
viii. 26) originally gave the age at which Saul began to reign and the number of years that his
reign lasted. Some, however, understand that Saul had been publicly made king by Samuel one
year before the events recorded in the preceding chapter, and that when he had reigned two

ears, he did what is recorded in this chapter. Bishop Hervey, who agrees with Keil and Erdmann
in adopting the first-named view, says, in the Biblical Commentary, “ There is no certain clue to
the exact numbers to be supplied; but Saul may have been about thirty at his accession, as a
scholion to the Sept. has it, and have reigned some thirty-two years, since we know that his
grandson Mephibosheth was five years old at Saul’s death (2 Sam. iv. 4) : and thirty-two added
to the seven and a half years between the death of Saul and that of Ishbosheth, makes up the
forty years assigned to Saul’s dynasty in Acts xiii. 21. Neither is there any clue to the interval
of time between the events recorded in the preceding chapter and those which follow in this and
succeeding chapters. But the appearance of Jonathan as a warrior (ver. 2) compared with the
mention of Saul as a young man at chap. ix. 2 implies an interval of not less than ten or fifteen
years, perhaps more.” Keil and Erdmann, however, agree in placing the acts of Saul recorded in
verse 2 immediately after the events narrated in the last chapter. As no other summoning of
the people is mentioned before except that for the Ammonite war, and as a gathering of all the
fighting population is implied in the last clause of verse 2, they assume as probable that it was
at Gilgal, immediately after a renewal of the monarchy, that Saul resolved at once to make war
upon the Philistines.


Ver. 2. “Michmash.” “This town has been identified with great probability with a village
which still bears the name of Muhkmas, about seven miles north of Jerusalem, on the northern
edge of the great Wady Suweinit, which forms the main pass of communication between the
central highlands on which the village stands, and the Jordan valley at Jericho.” (Biblical
Dictionary.) “Mount Bethel.” ‘The ancient town of Bethel was situated on very high
ground, about 10 miles west of Jerusalem, in the same direction as Michmash. Mount Bethel
was probably the mountain range upon which the city was situated.” ‘ Jonathan.” Here
mentioned for the first time. “A name which means, gift of Jehovah. In name and character
he is the Nathaniel of this history.” (Wordsworth.) “Gibeah of Benjamin.” The residence
of Saul, probably the present 'uliel-cl-Ful, “a conspicuous eminence just four miles north of
Jerusalem to the right of the road.” (Biblical Dictionary.)


Ver. 3. “Geba.” “Identified by most writers with the modern Jeba, standing on the south
side of the Wady-Suweinit, exactly opposite to Michmash. “Let the Hebrews hear,” etc.
“ Not only as a joyful message, but also as an indirect summons to the whole nation to rise,”
(Keil.)


Ver. 5, “Thirty thousand chariots.” The immense disproportion which this number
bears to the people, and the fact that the Syriac and Arabic versions read three thousand, has
led most critics to suppose that there is here an error in the Hebrew manuscripts, “Solomon
had only fourteen hundred chariots, which are mentioned as a large number (2 Chron. i. 14).
Some suppose the baggage waggons are included in the number. Probably the Philistines may
have engaged other nations, the enemies of Israel, to fight with them, and this supposition is
confirmed by the mention of the number of the people ‘as the sand,’ etc., and also by the
confusion of the army, which is mentioned in chap. xiv. 20, and which was due in part to the
fact that it was composed of various nations.” (Wordsworth. ) 141


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I.





Ver. 6. “When the men of Israel saw that they were ina strait,”ete. “The position
of matters seems to have been this : ~The Philistines were in possession of the village of Geba, on
the south side of the Wady Suweinit. In their front across the Wady, which is here about
a mile wide, and divided by several swells lower than the side eminences, was Saul in the town
of Michmash, and holding also Mount Bethel—the heights on the north of the great Wady—as
far as Beitin (Bethel) itself. South of the Philistine camp, and about three miles in its rear, was
Jonathan, in Gibeah-of-Benjamin, with a thousand chosen warriors. The first step was taken
by Jonathan, who drove out the Philistines from Geba by a feat of arms which at once procured
for him immense reputation. But in the meantime it increased the difficulties of Israel, for the
Philistines hearing of their reverse, and advancing with an enormous armament, pushed Saul’s
little force before them out of Bethel and Michmash and down the eastern passes to Gilgal, near
Jericho, in the Jordan valley. They then established themselves at Michmash, formerly the
 head-quarters of Saul, and from thence sent out their bands of plunderers north, west, and east
(verses 17,18). But nothing could dislodge Jonathan from his main stronghold in the south. As
far aa we can disentangle the complexities of the story, he soon relinquished Geba and consoli-
dated his little force in Gibeah, where he was joinnd by his father, with Samuel the prophet and
Ahiah the priest, who, perhaps, remembering the former fate of the ark, had brought down the
sacred ephod from Shiloh (chap. xiv. 3). These three had made their way up from Gilgal with
a force sorely diminished from desertion to the Philistine camp and flight (ver, 7 and chap. xiv.
21)—a mere remnant of the people following in the rear of the little band (ver. 15). Then
occurred the feat of the hero and his armour-bearer (chap. xiv.) (Biblical Dictionary). “The
people did hide themselves,”etc. “The broken ridges of the neighbourhood would afford
abundant hiding-places. The rocks are perforated in every direction with crevices and fissures,
sunk deep in the rocky soil, subterranean granaries or dry wells in the adjoining flelds.”
(Jamieson.)


Ver. 8. “And he tarried seven days,” etc. See note on chap. x. 8. “This appointment
seeras to have been for a trial of faith and obedience.” (Biblical Commentary.) Samuel came on
the seventh day, but not until towards its clore. “And he ofleced,” etc. The words do not
necessarily imply that Saul did this with his own hand; it is quite possible that he merely com-
manded the priest to do it. If so, his sin was simply that of disobedience to the command of
God, as given by Samuel. Dean Stanley, Dr. Kitto, and others, think that he was guilty of the
double offence of usurping the office of the priest and of disobedience to the Divine word,
Wordsworth observes that “Samuel does not animadvert to any such intrusion on Saul’s part.”


Ver. 14. “The Lord hath sought him a man” “Tt is natural to infer from this that
David, who of course is indicated, was already grown to man’s estate, as we know his friend
Jonathan was. But as David was only thirty years old when he began to reign, the incident
here related must have occurred during the last ten or fifteen years of Saul’s reign.” ( Biblical
Commentary.) ;


Ver. 15. “Six hundred men.” “Saul had therefore, by his hasty, disobedient conduct, not
attained his purpose of holding the people together. The declaration, ‘Thou hast done foolishly,
is thus confirmed.” (Erdmann.)


Vers. 16-23. “The following account is no doubt connected with the foregoing, ao far as
facts are concerned, inasmuch as Jonathan’s brave, heroic deed terminated the war for which
Saul had entreated the help of God by his sacrifice at Gilgal ; but it is not formally connected
een)” 80 as to form a compact and complete account of the successive stages of the war.”
(Keil.


_, Ver. 17. “The spoilers came out,” etc. The places here mentioned, so far as they can be
identified, lay respectively on the north, west, and east—that is to say, the predatory bands
sallying from Michmash ravaged through the valleys which radiate from it in those directions.


Ver. 19. “There was no smith,” ets, This policy of disarming the natives has often
(Bea antes “So Porsenna allowed the Romans iron implements for agriculture only.”
rdmann,


Ver. 20. “Share, coulter,” ete. “In Isaiah ii. 4, and Joel iii. 10, the word here rendered coulter
is rendered ploughshare, and the word here rendered share, from its etymology, must have that
meaning; we must therefore suppose there was some difference in the two implements which
cannot now be ascertained. ‘The worn signifying mattock, or some such cutting instrument,
is nearly identical with that rendered share.” (Biblical Dictionary.)


Ver. 21. The meaning of this verse is obscure, and the renderings of it very diverse
Gesenius and many Hebrew scholars read “ And so there was dulness or notching of the edge.”
“ The parenthesis indicates that the result of the hurdensome necessity of going to the Philis-
tines was that many tools became useless by dulness, so that even this poorer sort of arms did
the Israelites not much service at the breaking out of the war.” (Bunsen.) A ene ae


142


OHAP, Xin. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





Ver. 22. “So ... there was neither sword nor spear found” “They had no weapons
of defence but their rude implements of husbandry. But by means of these a bold energetic
militia could do great execution ; and in the well-known instances of the royalist peasantry of
La Vendee or the Hays of Cramond, in Scotland, we have examples of the alert and effective
manner in which a pastoral or agricultwal people can arm themselves at a moment’s notice.”
(Jamieson.) K


Ver. 23 “The passage of Michmash.” ‘The open valley between Geba and Michmash (see
note on verse6). “It is about a mile broad at this point, but contracts in its descent eastward
to the Jordan into a narrow, precipitous defile.” (/amieson.)


MAIN HOMILETICS 9” THE CHAPTER,
Savux’s First Act oF DIsoBEDIENCE.


I. Humiliation of a nation following distrust of God. Saul “chose him
three thousand men,” etc. This band of men seems to have been intended to
act as a body-guard to Saul and his son, «nd to form a kind of standing army for
the defence of the nation. In this act Ss ul was only following the general custom
of human monarchs, who need the arms and strength of their subjects to protect
themselves and to help them to defend their country. But this was quite a
new thing in Israel, and it was a humi’iation for the nation. It had hitherto
been their glory that their king neede! no arm of flesh to protect his person,
nor any standing army to defend them from their enemies. He who had legions
of angels to do His bidding could well lispense with the service of a human body-
guard, and so long as they continued obedient to His word there was no
need of a standing army in their niidst to defend them from their enemies.
Even when they had through disobedience been given over for a season into the
hands of the heathen, their might and invisible King had always raised up
deliverers so soon as they had by confession and promises of amendment returned
to Him. ‘I'his act of Saul must have forcibly reminded the Hebrew nation that
they had now indeed got what they desired—a ‘‘king like all the nations ”
(chap. viii 4), and if they had reflected they would have felt humiliated in
contrasting the comparative weakness of even the brave and warlike Saul with the
omnipotent strength which they had rejected. But an act of distrust in
Divine power is always followed by humiliation.


II. Humiliation of a monarch following disobedience to God. God is a
ruler who demands and deserves unconditional obedience. An absolute
monarch ought to be so wise that all the wisdom of all his subjects put together
is not equal to that which he possesses. And His goodness ought so to exceed
the goodness of the best and most benevolent subjects of his realm that all his
plans and purposes, and hence all his commands, will be more adapted to the
welfare of every citizen than any plans which their united wisdom and benevo-
lence could form. Unless a ruler can establish beyond doubt that he is
thus immeasurably superior to all whom he desires to obey him, he has no right
to demand from them unconditional obedience. But if such an one can be
found, itis surely to the interest of all whom he commands to render it. God is
such a King—the “ King who can do no wrong,”—and as such He demands and
deserves obedience to all His commands although his subjects may not always
see why He so commands them. ‘This absolute obedience was the condition
upon which alone He had promised to continue to be with Israel and with
Israel’s king (chap. xii. 14, 15). His past. dealings with the nation, as Samuel
had reminded them at Gilgal, fully justified this demand upon their loyalty,
and Saul’s individual experience ought to have made him deeply sensible that
nothing less would be accepted by that Absolute Ruler who had placed him on
the throne. That the command came te Saul through the word ye Samuel

1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 2,





made no difference—the command of a king is none the less binding because
it is delivered through the mouth of a subject, and Saul knew full well that
God spoke through the mouth of His prophet. Consider—1. The root of
this act of disobedience. It was distrust. It is quite evident that Saul had
been commanded to remain at Gilgal until Samuel should arrive, and to
postpone the sacrifices which were to precede any action against the
Philistines until the prophet’s arrival. There is no doubt that Saul
would then have received Divine direction as to his future movements,
and that the expedition against the national enemies would have been followed
by signs of the Divine approval. But Samuel’s arrival was delayed until the
last day of the appointed time without doubt to test Saul’s faith in the Divine
word. Help on all occasions and in all extremities had been most certainly
promised him on condition that he, the king, as well as his people, followed after
the Lord (chap. xii. 14); and an opportunity was now afforded him of proving
whether he believed the promise. By his own confession he doubted it. “Thou
camest not within the days appointed, and the Philistines gathered themselves
together to Michmash, therefore said I, the Philistines will come down upon me
at Gilgal.” This was saying, in effect, that he doubted whether God and God’s
prophet would be as good as their word. The dishonour offered to Samuel waa
in reality a dishonour offered to God, inasmuch as he was doubtless acting under
Divine direction—a fact of which it was impossible that Saul could be ignorant.
The step from distrust to disobedience is easily taken—indeed the one is almost
certain to lead to the other. While there is an unshaken confidence in the
character of another there will be a loyal adherence to his commands, for confi-
dence in his character and wisdom will beget an assurance that he will only
command what is just and right. And this is especially true of man in his
attitude towards God; hence it is the great aim of the tempter of men to
beget in them distrust of God, in order to lead them to disobedience to God.
He did this with our first parents. All the questions which he put to Eve
evidently had for their object the infusion into her mind of a suspicion
whether, after all, God was the benevolent Being she had hitherto believed
Him to be. If Saul’s confidence in God had been firm, we should have
never had this record upon the page of Bible history. 2. The punishment
which tt brought upon Saul. At first sight it may appear a very severe
one. That Saul should be rejected by God from being the founder
of a kingly dynasty for a single act of disobedience may seem upon the surface
to be a sentence out of proportion to the gravity of the act. But it must be
remembered that disobedience to a plain command is a very great sin. Saul
could not plead as an excuse that he had misunderstood what he was required
to do, or that the will of God had been implied rather than expressed ; he does,
in fact, put in neither of these excuses, He admits that he knew what his
directions were, and that he had knowingly and deliberately acted in opposition
tothem. Asin the disobedience of the first man, the plainness of the command,
“Thou shalt not eat of it” (Gen. ii. 17), made the eating an act of open defiance
of the sovereignty of Jehovah, so it was in this case. The man who had been
raised from herding cattle to be God’s vicegerent in Israel, here lifts the standard
of open rebellion against his Sovereign. ‘Then, again, an act of disobedience is
aggravated by the high position of the offender. A common soldier who dis-
obeys martial law is punished for his crime ; but if the commander of the army
violates it, he meets with a much more severe sentence, Men recognise the fact
that the transgression of such a man deserves a heavier pena ty, because his high
and representative position makes his observance of law doubly obligatory. Such
a man ought to be a living embodiment of obedience; he ought to show to those
who are socially beneath him a life in perfect accordance with every jot and tittle

the ayn by which his very position implies that he is governed. Saul as king


/
é


OHAP, XIIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





of Israel was bound by obligations above all his subjects to observe every Divine
command with the strictest fidelity. Upon his acts depended to a very great extent
the moral tone of the entire nation—if he treated the word of the Lord as a word
to be regarded or set aside as his humour dictated, many of his subjects would
surely do the same. The welfare of the Hebrew commonwealth demanded
therefore that so open and glaring act of defiance should be visited with a public
and severe penalty. The spirit in which Saul met Samuel’s question, ‘“ What
hast thou done?” shows also that there was no repentance after the deed ‘The
words of the prophet seem framed to beget some acknowledgment of
guilt—the very sight of the man who had been the channei by which all the
favours of Jehovah had come to him, and from whose mouth he hid received
50 many messages from the Most High God was calculated to beget in him
some sense of his guilt. But there is no parallel to David’s—“I have sinned
against the Lord” (2. Sam. xii. 13)—he meets Samuel’s question with words
which have no ring of repentance about them—-which show no sense of the
greatness of the sin he had committed. When we consider all the circumstances
which surround this act we can see that the sentence was not heavier than the
sin. 3. [ts woeful miscarriage in the immediate future. Saul’s excuse for the
act was the urgency of the situation—the danger which threatened the people
at the hand of the Philistines. He pleads that he had disobeyed God in order to
obtain from Him a fulfilment of His promises—that he hoped by breaking His
law to bring that success to his arms which had been promised only on condition
of obedience. Well might Samuel say, “Thou hast done foolishly,” and the
foolishness of sin was soon afterwards the bitter experience of both king and
people. In nature God has certain laws, or established methods of working, by
which good things come into the hand of men. But men mustwork in harmony
with them and not in opposition to them if they would: be partakers of the
good. Ifa man expected to obtain the same results by acts which were in direct
opposition to the known and established laws of the universe, he would be
accounted nothing less than a madman. And there are physical laws the
defiance of which all men know will not only be followed by no gain but with
physical loss. No rational man thinks that he can throw himself over a
peer for instance, and escape bodily injury and pain. Disobedience to the

ws which govern matter can never bring the same results as obedience, and men
never expect that it willdoso. They know that if they “break” this hedge, “a
serpent will bite them” (Eccles. x. 8). Butmany a man, besides the first king of
Israel, has acted as if he expected that observance and non-observance of moral
law would be followed by the same results. Saul desired to defeat the Philistines,
and God had promised to stand by him and his army so long as they clave to
Him. But Saul here acts as thougs he expected to obtain the same blessing
by forsaking God as by following Him! He offers a burnt offering to the Being
whom he is defying, and looks for the same results as if he were walking in
obedience to His word. But God’s moral laws, like his physical ones, go as
straight forward as the mighty wheels in Ezekiel’s vision (Ezek. i 17). Yea,
they are far more fixed and unalterable, and the penalty of breaking them far more
certain. God has suspended the laws of His physical universe, but never one
of the laws of His moral kingdom. It is a law as firm as the throne of God,
that “whatsoever a man soweth,” in moral acts, “that he shall also reap”
(Gal. vi. 7), and men only make manifest their exceeding foolishness by
expecting otherwise. When Saul found his two thousand men diminish to six
hundred, and when the whole land was devastated by incursions of the beathen
spoilers, both king and people knew from bitter experience that he does wisely
who keeps the commandments of the Lord, and that there is no folly to comes
pare with the foolishness of sin.


& 146


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOE Z


eee
OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Vers, 8, 13. The first test of faith,
which Saul had to submit to, was a
theocratic necessity; for Saul must
first prove to the Lord by deeds that
he wished to be unconditionally subject
to the Lord’s will, to yield obedience to
His word which was to be revealed to
him by prophets, and to trust alone to
His help. Such tests as Saul had to
stand, are, in the life of princes and
peoples, and of individuals, in the
church as in every member of God’s
people, a divine significance; failure
to stand them leads many from the
Lord, brings to naught God’s purposes,
results in misfortune and destruction,
The individual elements of Saul’s pro-
bation, the typical significance of
which elements for all times and cir-
cumstances of the kingdom of God is
obvious, are found partly in his out-
ward position, partly in his inner life,
The external position of Saul, as to
time and place, was one of extreme
distress. This distressing and
dangerous position gave occasion in his
heart to the temptation to act contrary
to God’s will and command. In the
first place fear of the threatening
danger seized on his heart; to fear
joined itself tmpatience, which pre-
vented him from waiting out the time
appointed by Samuel; this produced
ungutet in his mind, which drove him
to take self-willed measures to help
himself, and dissipated more and more
his trust in God; then came sophistécal
calculation by his carnally obscured
understanding; his heart frame to-
wards God of immovable trust and
unconditional obedience was given up.
It was the root of wnbelief from which
all this sprang.—Lange’s Commentary.

Sin is not estimated by God
according to its outward form, but
according to the amount and extent of
the principle of evil embodied in that
form. There may be as much of
downright rebellion against God in
what men would call a little sin, as in
a series of what men would call flagrant
offences. And when we say of a re-
oe of God that it was so small

14


a matter as to render it marvellous
that God should visit its violation with
a penalty, we should remember that
the smaller it was the more readily
ought obedience to have been rendered,
and the greater the proof of a wrong
disposition, when obedience was re-
fused, even in a@ little thing. IL
The first wrong step is always marked
by a peculiarity of evil which does not
attach to any subsequent offences.
Men are accustomed to palliate the first
offence, because it is the first; a more
accurate estimate would show that
this habit of judging is thoroughly
erroneous and fallacious, There is
more to keep a man from committing
a first offence, than there is to keep
him from committing a second or any
other criminal act. ‘The impression of
the command is at least one degree
deeper than it can possibly be after
it has been trifled with. The first sin
involves the taking up of a new
position, and this is harder work than to
maintain it. It is assuming a character
of disobedience, and this requires more
hardihood than to wear it when it has
once been put on. It is breaking
through consistency, which is a strong
barrier so long as it remans unbroken;
but if once broken through sin becomes
easy. All these things call on us, in
fairness, to reverse our judgments on
first offences; they suggest that these
have an aggravation about them which
belong not to other sins ; and we thus
are the less surprised that God, whose
every judgment is right, should have
visited Saul’s first offence with peculiar
displeasure.— Miller.

Our faith is most commendable in
the last act; it is no praise to hold
out until we be hard driven; then,
when we are forsaken of means, to live
by faith in our God is worthy of a
crown.— Bp. Hall.

I. This portion of Scripture history
teaches us the danger of infringing or
trifling with the Divine commandments
on the plea of necessity, . . . .
There are many who would hesitate at
the employment of dishonest, or even


owaP. XIII,





questionablemeans for the advancement
of their interests generally, who would
nevertheless occasionally, and under
difficult and trying circumstances,
dispense with the Divine law, and plead
the peculiar necessity of the case for
their justification. They are too apt to
suppose that such a deviation from their
known duty is rendered necessary, and
excusable, from the urgency of their
peculiar situation. . . . . Could
there be any case of greater urgency
than Saul’s? Who can pretend to
show a greater or more plausible neces-


sity for deviating from a command of


God? Yet his plea was utterly vain.
II. The infatuation of supposing that,
while disregarding the essentials of
religion, faith and obedience, he could
satisfy God with its forms. . . . %
All external rites and forms are only
valuable as means conducive to in-
ternal and practical piety; and, con-
sequently, are so far from compensating
for the want of this, that, without it,
they become an unmeaning and un-
availing service.—Lindsay.


Ver. 13. It may probably strike
many readers that foolishness is not
exactly the term they would have em-
ployed in characterising the conduct
of the king. They would have thought
of “presumption,” ot “self-will,” of
“ distrust,” and other like terms, but
scarcely of foolishness. But the pro-

het’s word is the right one after all
tt goes to the root of the matter.
. . . « In his view and in that of
all sacred writers, the lowest depths of
human foolishness—its most astonish-
ing and incredible manifestation—was
in disobedience to the Lord’s com-
mandment. ‘here are two kinds of
fools prominently noticed in Scrip-
ture—the fool who denies that there
tg any God—and the fool who does
not obey God, though he dees not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





deny His existence. . . . . And
yet, if we probe the matter closely, we
shall find that there is scarcely more
than an impalpable film of real dif.
ference between them. . . . One
may as well believe there is no God
as not obey Him.—Xitio.


Ver. 14. The phrase “a man after
God’s own heart,” has no reference to
the piety or virtues of private and
personal character; for no mere man
In that respect has come up to the
standard of the Divine law. It is
used solely with regard to official
fidelity in the service of Jehovah
in Israel (chap. i1.35); and David was
certainly entitled to be characterised
as “‘a man after God’s own heart,”
from lis ardent zeal and undeviating
exertions for the interests of the true
religion, in opposition to idolatry.—
Jamieson.

1. A man devout, not merely by
fits and starts, but profoundly and
habitually. 2. A man not self-willed,
who would rule according to the com-
mand of God through the prophets.
3. A man who, when he had done wrong,
would penitently submit to God's
chastenings, invincibly trust in God’s

oodness, and faithfully strive to
ive more according to God’s will.
(In these and similar points Saul and
David might be contrasted).—7rans-
lator of Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 15. Saul’s sinful act in offering
sacrifice lest the people should be
scattered from him, failed of its pur-
pose. Wordly policy does not attain
even its own temporal ends (See John
xi. 48). “If we let this man thus
alone, the Romans will come and take
away both our place and nation.”
They did not let Jesus alone; and
therefore the Romans did come, end
destroyed them.— Wordswortn,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK tL





_ CHAPTER XIV.


CrriTi0aL AND Exposrroxy Norrs. Ver.1. “Garrison of the Philistines.” The advanced
post mentioned in chap, xiii, 28. For the situation of the armies see note on chap. xiii. 6.


Ver, 2, “A pomegranate tree,” ete., rather the pomegranate, a well-known tree. “Accord-
ing to Judges xx. 45, a rock near Gibeah bore the name ‘Rock of the pomegranate’ (Rimmon),
and was well adapted for a fortified position. It is a natural supposition that the same rock is
meant here, named after the well-known pomegranate.” (Erdmann.) This is the more probable
because a pomegranate tree is not sufficiently high to admit of the erection of a tent beneath ite
branches. “Migron.” A place of this name is mentioned in Isa. x. 28. Its exact site is not
known, but it lay in this neighbourhood. It may be, however, that this spot is another of the
same name, as the word signifies a precipice, and the entire district is rocky and precipitous.
“Six hundred men.” “His forces, then, had not increased since he came to Gibeah, as might
have been expected.” (Wordsworth)


Ver. 8, “Ahiah, the son of Ahitub.” This man was therefore a great-grandson of Eli,
He is generally snpposed to be the same person as Abimelech, mentioned in chap. xxii. 9,11. The
signification of Abijah (as it ought to be written) is “Friend of J ehovah,” and that of Abimelech
is Friend of the King, vis, of Jehovah. It is quite possible, however, that Ahiah may have
died without sons, and been succeeded by a brother named Abimelech. “The Lord’s priest in
Shiloh.” “As Eli was so emphatically known and described as God’s priest in Shiloh, and as
there is every reason to believe that Shiloh was no longer the seat of the ark (see chap xxii.; 1
Chron. xiii. 3-5), it is far better to refer these words to Eli. ... This fragment of genealogy is a
very valuable help to the chronology. The grandson of Phinehas, the son of Eli, was now High
Priest ; and Samuel, who was probably a few years older than Ahitub, was now an uvld man, All
this indicates period of about fifty years or upward from the taking of the ark by the Philistines,”
(Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 4. “Between the passages,” ete. The ground is thus described by Robinson in hia
Biblical Researches—“ In the gorge or valley are two hills of a conical or rather spherical form,
having steep rocky sides, with small wadies running up behind each, so as almost to isolate them.
One is on the side towards Geba, and the other on the side towards Michmash. These would
seem to be the two rocks mentioned in Jonathan’s adventure. They are not indeed so sharp as
the language of Scripture would seem to imply, but they are the only rocks of the kind in the
vicinity.” In his Later Researches he says, “The ridges on either side of the valley exhibit two
elevated points which project into the great wady ; and the easternmost of these bluffs on each
side were probably the outposts of the two garrisons of the Philistines and the Israelites. The
road passes around the eastern side of the southern hill, the post of Israel, and then strikes over
the western part of the northern one, the post of the Philistines and the scene of Jonathan’s
adventure. These hills struck us now, more than formerly, as of sharp ascent, and as appropriate
to the circumstances of the narrative. They are isolated cliffs in the valley, except so far as the
pay i the enr of which they are found, connected them back with the higher ground on
each side.


Ver. 6. These uncircumcised. “It is remarkable that this epithet, used as a term of reproach,
is confined almost exclusively to the Philistines. This is probably an indication of the long
continued oppression of the Israelites by the Philistines, and their frequent wars.” (Biblical
Commentary.) “May be.” “This indicates not a doubt but the humility which was coupled
with Jonathan’s heroic spirit.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 10. “This shall be a sign,” etc. “ All attempts to bring Jonathan’s conduct within
the rules of ordinary human action are vain. Though it is not expressly said, as in the case of
Gideon (Judges vi. 34), Othniel (iii. 10), and others, that the Spirit of the Lord came upon him,
yet the whole course of the narrative, especially verses 18-16, indicates an extraordinary Divine
interposition and tends to place Jonathan on the same platform as the judges and gaviours of
Israel.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 11, “Behotd the Hebrews come forth.” “As it could not occur to the sentries
that two men had come with hostile designs, it was a natural conclusion that they were Israelite
deserters ; and hence no attempt was made to hinder their ascent, or stone them, as they were
scrambling up the ridge.” (Jamieson.) “Come up to us,” etc. “They hoped to have sport
with them, not supposing that they could there climb the rock.” (Clericus.)


Ver.14. “Twenty men within, as it were, an half acre of land.” Rather a half furrow of

a yoke of land. “This indicates the position of the fallen, after Jonathan, pressing impetuously on

had struck them down one after another, and his armour-bearer after him, had killed thoes that

were not dead. This occurred in the space of about half a furrow in a piece of land which one

with a yoke of oxen could plough in a day.” ( Erdmann.) “Their terror and flights
148


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


| ee rrr


are perfectly conceivable, if we consider that the outposts of the Philistines were so stationed
upon the top of the ridge of the steep mountain wall that they could not see how many were
following, and the Philistines could not imagine it possible that two Hebrews would have
ventured to climb the rock alone and make an attack upon them. Sallust relates a similar
occurrence in connection with the scaling of a castle in the Numidian war. Bell. Jugurtha
c. 89, 90.” (Keil.)


Ver. 15. “The earth quaked.” Keil and others think that it merely trembled “ with the
noise and tumult of the frightened foe,” but there can be no reason why it should not be under-
stood to describe a real earthquake—a supernatural interposition of God. “Just as a strong
east wind ” divided the waters of the Red Sea; just as the great hailstones smote the Canaanites
to deat ei at the going down of Bethhoron” (Josh. x. 11), as “ the stars in their courses fought
against Sisers ;” “as the Lord thundered with a great thunder . . . and discomfited the
Philistines at Ebenezer (chap. viii. 10), . . . so now the earth quaked at the presence of
the Lord who fought for Jonathan.” (Biblical Commentary.) “A very great trembling ”—
‘a trembling of God,” ée, “a supernatural terror infused by God into the Philistines.” (Kiel.)


Ver. 16. “The watchmen of Saul looked.” This shows that the distance between the two
encampments was not great. “The multitude melted away.” The Hebrew text is here very
obscure. Multitude may be rendered tumult. Many read “the multitude,” or “the tumult,
dispersed hither and thither.”


Ver. 18. “Bring hither the ark of God.” “Many expositors, thinking it extremely im-
probable that the ark had been removed from Kirjath-jearim, where it was afterwards found by
David (2 Sam. vi. 2, 3), regard the Hebrew text as here incorrect, and follow the Septuagint
reading of ephod. It must, however, be remembered that the Chaldee, the Syriac, the Arabic,
and the Vulgate support the authorised version. It has been remarked that if Saul had spoken
of the ark he would not have said ‘bring hither,” but ‘carry forward,’ nor would he afterwards
have commanded the high priest to ‘withdraw his hand.” (Zr. of Lange’s Commentary.) Dr.
Erdmann, Wordsworth, and others, see no reason to doubt the correctness of the Hebrew MSS.


Ver. 19. “Withdraw thine hand” Saul, seeing the battle waa growing hotter, resolved to
go forward without delay.


Ver. 21, “The Hebrews.” These might have been prisoners held by the Philistines.
“They are called Hebrews, according to the name which was current among foreigners.” (Keil.)


Ver. 23, “Bethaven.” On the mountains of Benjamin, lying east of Bethel, and between it
and Michmash, “ According to ver. 31 the Philistines fled westward from Michmash to Ajalon.
But if we bear in mind that the camp of the Philistines was on the eastern side of Michmash,
before Bethaven, according to chap. xiii. 5, and that tc Israelites forced their way into it from
the south, we shall see that the battle might easily have spread out beyond Bethaven, and that
eventually the main body of the enemy might have fled out as far as Ajalon, and have been
pursued to that point by the victorious Israelites.” (Keil.)


Ver. 24. “Adjured the people.” He made them take an oath.


Ver. 25. “Honey upon the ground.” Eastern countries abound with wild bees, who
deposit their combs in the hollows of the trees. “Large combs may be seen hanging on the
trees, as you pass along, full of honey.” (Roberts.) The same thing may be seen in some parts
of Europe, especially in Spain.


Ver. 27. “ Jonathan heard not,” and therefore was not bound by his father’s oath ; could
not be said to have transgressed it. “In the eagerness of pursuit he would not stop to do more
than ‘ put forth the end of the rod.’” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver, 81. “Aijalon, or Ajalon.” “There is no donbt that the town has been discovered by Dr.
Robinson in the modern Yalo, a little to the north of the Jaffa road, and about fourteen miles
out of Jerusalem. It stands on the side of a long hill which forms the southern boundary of s
fine valley of cornfields which there seems no reason for doubting was the valley which
witnessed the defeat of the Canaanites.” (Smith’s Biblical Dictionary.) See also Keil’s note on
verse 23. “Aijalon would be from fifteen to twenty miles from Michmash.” (1b, Commentary.)


Ver. 32. “With the blood,” “ blood being on the bodies because they were on the ground.”
{Zrdmann).

Ver. 33. “Sin against the Lord.” A breach of the law. Lev. fii. 17, vii. 26, xix. 26, etc.
ne prohibition was still older than the law of Moses,” Genesis ix. 4, (Biblical Commentary.)
*‘ Shey were painfully conscientious in keeping the king’s order, for fear of the curse, but had
no scruple in transgressing God’s command.” (Jamieson). “Roll a great stone,” “ By laying
the animal’s head upon the stone, the blood oozed out on the ground, and sufficient evidence
was afforded that the ox or sheep was dead before it was attempted to eat it,” cn a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L
i


Ver. 34. “ As everywhere before, so here, the people display unconditional obedience to
Saul.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 35. “And Saul built an altar.” “ He began to build it,” .¢., he built this altar at the
beginning, or as the first altar. (Kedl.) “It seems to be implied that though he had reigned
three vears, and had been enabled by God to gain many victories, yet he had not made any
such acknowledgement of gratitude to God for his suecesses, and that he had ascribed the credit
of them to himself.” (Wordsworth.) “He began to build an altar to the Lord, but did not
finish it, in his haste to pursue the Philistines that night, as it follows in verse 36.” (Biblical
Commentary.)


Ver, 36, “Let us go down.” “Saul rushes on in his wild desire of revenge, perhaps incited
by the consciousness of having committed a gross folly, and thereby hindered the victory. . . .
According to Jonathan’s statement (verse 30) the defeat was not total.” (Erdmann.) “Then
said the priest.” “Ahiah seems to have been in doubt that Saul’s hasty impetuosity was not
‘working the righteousness of God,’ and with equal courage and faithfulness, worthy of his
office as the priest, when every one else yielded to Saul’s humour, proposed that they should
draw near to God to inquire of Him.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 37. “Asked counsel.” By the Urim and Thummim attached to the ephod of the High
Priest. (See Judges xviii, 5, 1 Chron. x. 13, Hosea iv. 12, 1 Sam. x. 22.)


Ver. 38, “Know and seo wherein this sin.” Which Saul infers from God’s silence,


Ver. 39. “For, as the Lord liveth.” “Saul’s rashness becomes more and more apparent.”
(Biblical Commentary.) “Not aman answered him.” “The silence of the people is a sign
of their conviction that Jonathan had done nothing wrong.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 40. “Do what seemeth good,” Another evidence of the people’s submission. (See
verses 34 and 36.)


Ver. 41. “A perfect lot.” Lot is not in the original. It should be rendered “ Give perfect-
ness, or truth,” i.e, reveal Thy will. But it is clear from the sequel that Saul did not now
inquire of the Lord by the Urim and Thummim, but appealed to the lot.


Ver. 42, “Jonathan was taken.” “What Jonathan had done was not wrong in itself, but
became so simply on account of the oath with which Saul had forbidden it. But Jonathan did
not hear the oath, and therefore had not even consciously transgressed. Nevertheless a curse
lay upon Israel, which was to be brought to light as a warning to the culprit, Therefore
Jehovah had given no reply to Saul. But when the lot, which had the force of a Divine verdict,
fell upon Jonathan, sentence of death was not thereby pronounced on him by God, but it was
simply made manifest that through his transgression of his father’s oath, with which he was not
acquainted, guilt had been brought upon Israel. The breach of a command issued with a solemn
oath, even when it took place unconsciously, excited the wrath of God, as being a profanation of
the Divine name. But such asin could only rest as guilt upon the man who had committed,
or the man who had occasioned it. Now, where the command in question was one of God
Himself, there could be no question that, even in the case of unconscious transgression, the sin
fell upon the transgressor, and it was necessary that it should either be expiated by him, or
forgiven him. But where the command of a man had been unconsciously transgressed, the guilt
might also fall upon the man who issued the command, that is to say, if he did it without being
authorised or empowered by God. In the present instance Saul had issued the prohibition
without Divine authority, and had made it obligatory upon the people by a solemn oath, The
people had conscientiously obeyed the command, but Jonathan had transgressed it without
being aware of it. For this Saul was about to punish him with death, but the people opposed it,
They not only pronounced Jonathan innocent, but they also exclaimed that he had gained tha
victory for Israel with God (ver. 45). In this fact (Jonathan's victory) there was a Divine
verdict. And Saul could not fail to recognise now that it was not J onathan, but he himself who
had sinned, and through his arbitrary and despotic command had brought guilt upon Israel, on
account of which God had given him no reply.” ( Keil.) ;


Ver. 45. “So the people rescued Jonathan,” “Observe the humiliation to which Saul
is reduced by his disobedience and by the ‘consequent withdrawal of Divine grace, and by his
rashness and infatuation, The son is raised above the father, and the people above the king.”
( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 46, “Then San) went up.” “Saul desisted from further it of the Philistines,
with whose overtk row, so far as it could be effected under the har consequences of his blind
zeal, he had to be >ntented. The Philistines went back to their own land, In spite of this
serious defeat their strength wes xot broken (comp. ver. 52). The fact that Saul desisted from
pursuit shows that he understood the Lord’s silence as a denial, and was obliged to recognise ag
the cause of it, not Jonathan’s conduct, but his own arbitrary and rash procedure.” (Erdmann.)

1éu


@mAP. XIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





Ver. 47. “So Saul took the kingdom.” “As Saul had first of all secured a recognition
of himself as king on the part of all the tribes of Israel by his victories over the Ammonites at
Jabesh (chap. xi. 12), so it was through the victory which he had gained over the Philistines, and
by which these obstinate foes of Israel were driven back into their own land, that he firat acquired
the kingship over Israel, 2.¢., first really secured the regal authority over the Israelites . . . . The
war against the Ammonites is described in chap. xi.; but with the Philistines Saul had to wage
war all the days of his life (ver. 52). The other wars are none of them more fully described,
simply because they were of no importance to the kingdom of God.” (Keil.) Dr. Erdmann takes
a different view of these words. He says: “The words do not stand in pragmatical connection
with the preceding narrative of the battle against the Philistines, as if the intention was to state
that thus Saul gained royal authority. His accession to the throne is mentioned merely as
starting-point for the historical-statistical statement of the various wars which he carried on from
the beginning of his government , . . . What is said of them before and after this is determined
by the theocratic point of view, and is designed to show how Saul, in fulfilling his royal calling
(essentially a warlike one), came into principal conflict with the theocratic task and significance
of the kingdom, and therefore incurred of necessity the judgment of God.” “There seems to be
something of disapprobation in this expression, as if Saul took it as his own, rather than received
it from God.” (Wordsworth.) “Zobah.” “This was one of the petty Aramean kingdoms
flourishing at this time (Psa. title). It seems to have been situated between Damascus and
the Euphrates. The details given in 2 Sam. viii. 3-8, 12: x. 6-8; 2 Chron. viii. 3, show it to
have been a wealthy and powerful tribe, and to have asserted its independence in Solomon’s
reign.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 49. “Ishni.” Abinadab stands for this name in chap. xxxi.2; 1 Chron. viii. 33: ix. 39.
In the passages in Chronicles there is a fourth son mentioned, named Esh-baal, who is doubtless
the one called Ish-bosheth in 2 Sam. ii. 8 It is impossible to say why he is not mentioned here.


Ver. 51. This verse should be read: “ And Kish the father of Saul, and Ner the father of
Abner, were the sons of Abies.”


Ver. 52. “ When Saul saw any strong man,” ete, “This remark is probably made in
anticipation of David’s being taken into Saul’s service, xvi. 18,193 xviii. 2, where the expressions
are the same as here.” (Biblical Commentary.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-16
JoNATHAN’s VICTORY OVER THE PHILISTINES,


This victory—I. Reveals the character ef Jonathan. His words and his
deeds proclaim him to have been a man of physical courage, and of humble
piety. These two elements united in the character of one man make him as
perfect a specimen of manhood as it is possible to find. The possession of either
characteristic—and especially of the latter—gives to its possessor a claim on
our respect. Courage—an absence of fear in the presence of bodily danger—
a willingness to expose one’s body to risk for the sake of gaining a certain end
—is a quality which is not met with in every person, and it deserves to be
acknowledged and honoured wherever it is found. But there are many
physically brave men who have no godliness: God, in whom they live and move
and have their being, is never acknowledged by them, and their deeds of daring
are undertaken and accomplished without any thought of seeking His help or
rendering to Him thanksgiving for deliverance. And it cannot be denied that
there are godly men who are naturally timid in the presence of bodily danger—
that, although godliness has a tendency to make a man brave in every sense of
the word, it does not so change his natural disposition as to make one who is
constitutionally fearful bold and daring in a remarkable degree. But when a
courageous man is a man of God—when his deeds of daring are undertaken in
dependence upon God, and when he acknowledges Him in all his ways, he is a
man in the highest sense of the word, and a consciousness of God’s favour
increases his natural courage and makes him willing to do and to dare anything
in the path of duty. That Saul was a physically brave man we have abundant
proof, But he had now been for some time in the field, and ag page


HAOMILETI C COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L





done nothing. So far as can be gathered from the Scripture record, he had
remained inactive since his interview with Samuel. We can but contrast his
present hesitation with his decision in relation to the Ammonite invasion, and
see in the change which had come over him how departure from God may make
a naturally courageous man timid and hesitating. But Jonathan evidently
added to his father’s natural bravery a spirit of humble dependence upon God,
and reminds us of Israel’s first warlike leader Joshua, in whom were also united
these two noble characteristics. ‘ Let us go over to the Philistines’ garrison”
speaks for the courage of the warrior-prince, while “It may be that the Lord
will work for us” tells of his godly character.


II. Reveals God’s approval of His servant’s undertaking. This vic-
tory of Jonathan’s is one among the many instances upon record in the
history of God’s Church of the special seal of Divine approval which is always
set upon eminent faith. Old Testament history gives many illustrations of the
truth of the Saviour’s words, “AU things are possible to Him that believeth”
(Mark ix. 23), and the success which crowned this undertaking makes it a
striking one. It is instructive to notice the increasingly evident marks of
Divine approval which were vouchsafed to Jonathan on this occasion. God first
condescends to give His servant just enough encouragement to lead him to
persevere in his project by accepting the sign which he had proposed. Here
was just enough token of God’s approval to lead him to go on, but not enough
to do away with the exercise of faith. A man of less confidence in God might
have faltered here, and have been tempted to regard the Philistines’ invitation
as only a remarkable coincidence. But Jonathan’s faith was strong enough to
see in it a token that “the Lord had delivered the enemy into the hand of
Israel,” and the faith which could discern the Divine approval in an incident
apparently so trivial was soon to receive an abundant reward in an unmistakable
manifestation of Jehovah’s presence in the terror-stricken host, and in the
quaking earth. This is the method of Divine working generally. God always
looks with approval upon undertakings which are born of confidence in His
power and goodness, but although He may, during their progress, vouchsafe
sufficient tokens of His power and presence to encourage the hearts of His
servants, He may withhold His most decisive and unmistakable manifestations
until their courage and faith have been abundantly tested.


OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 6. Divine power of faith,
which makes a man more than men!
The question is not what Jonathan
can do, but what God can do,
whose power is not in the means,
but_in Himself. O admirable faith
in Jonathan, whom neither the steep-
ness of rocks nor the multitude
of enemies can dissuade from such an
assault !—Bp. Hall.

Hope, founded on faith. 1. It is
certain,—a matter of faith—that the
Lord can save by many or by few. 2.


152


It may be a matter of hope that He
will work for us. (People often say:
“T have faith that we shall succeed
in this enterprise.” That is not pro-
perly a matter of faith, but only of
hope. We believe that God can give
success when it is His will; we are
persuaded that our enterprise ig
righteous and would have ‘desirable
results ; therefore we hope it may be
God's will to give us success).—Jrans-
lator of Lange's Commentary,


OHAP. XIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 17—46,
Savut’s Rasnness.


The whole of Saul’s conduct in relation to Jonathan’s victory shows us @ man
acting from passion rather than from principle. Such action in any man must
end in mischief, but it is far more mischievous when he holds any position of
responsibility and influence—when the destinies of others are largely in his hand.
It isa sight which makes one sad to see a noble vessel tossing on a stormy sea
with no hand upon the wheel to direct her course, and therefore at the mercy of
every wind and wave. Although she is a lifeless object we seem almost to
pity her when we reflect that a firm hand upon the rudder would give her all
she needs to rise superior to the storm and steer straight to her haven. But
how much sadder is the sight of a gifted man—one upon whom God has bestowed
many opportunities of usefulness and capabilities of using them—throwing them
all aside and drifting through life like an unpiloted vessel at the mercy of
every wave of passionate impulse, because he will not make the will of God the
guide of his life. But if the vessel was not only going to destruction herself but
was laden with passengers who would in all probability share her fate, the
greatness of the misfortune would be increased a thousand fold. And so it is
when a man who does not make his duty the guiding principle of his life holds
to a great extent the happiness or misery of his fellow-creatures in his power.
Such a man not only wrecks his own life but involves them in distress and per-
haps in ruin. Saul here presents us with a sad example of such characters.
Instead of riding victoriously over the difficulties which beset the nation at this
time, and possibly winning for himself and for them a season of rest from
foreign oppression, he drifts towards the rocks himsclf and involves them in
imminent danger because he rejects the hand which would have piloted him in
safety. Such a man—


I. Throws away God-given opportunities. Here was an opportunity which,
if rightly used, might have entirely subdued the power of the Philistines. The
Divine recognition of Jonathan’s faith and courage was shown by miraculous
signs, which struck them with terror and led to a “ very great discomfiture,”
But the victory could not be followed up because the people were faint from
want of food, the consequence of Saul’s unreasonably exacting from them a vow
to fast until the evening—a vow which had its origin in nothing higher than a
spirit of passionate revenge. ‘The opportunity thus lost never returned during
the life of Saul, for it is recorded that “there was sore war against the Philistines
all his days” (ver. 52).


II. Is always filled with a sense of his own importance. Saul did not come
into the field until the rout of the enemy had set in—he only had to follow up
the victory which was the fruit of Jonathan’s faith and the interposition of God.
We should hardly expect to hear a man under such circumstances speaking
much about himself and dictating to others as though all the glory of the day
was due to his valour. But with Saul there is no word of recognition of the
services of his son nor ascription of praise to the God of battles. ‘The work was
his, and the aim that he had in view was personal revenge—“ that I may be
avenged on mine enemies” (ver. 24). A man who does not give to God the
glory due unto Him is always prone to be vain-glorious.


IU. Will refuse to acknowledge himself in the wrong. even when his own
nature and God ITimself declare him to be so. Saul could hardly have been
without some natural affection for his noble son, yet he would have seen him
dig rather than confess that he had acted foolishly and sinfully. oo had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK 2


a a


been in a condition of spirit to listen to the voice of God, he might have


discerned as plainly as


his subjects did that God had been that day with


Jonathan, and that the sin which caused Him to vouchsafe no answer to his


inquiry was with him and not with his


son,


But @ man under the dominion of


his passions is as deaf to the voice of God as he is to that of his own better
nature, which is indeed itself a voice of God.


IV. Must be humiliated in the end. Saul’s vows and oaths were only like
straws in the stream when the people’s sense of justice was aroused. If he was
blind to all his own interests, and deaf to the voice of reason and of God, they
were not. Up to this moment they had yielded to him an unwavering obedience,
but now they make a firm stand. Saul may say to Jonathan, “Thou shalt
surely die ;” but he is met with the united voice of the people, “ There shall


not one hair of his head fall to the ground.”


How sad a contrast his position


here to that which he held after the Ammonite victory (chap. xi. 12-14). He


who would not humble himself before God is


decision of his subjects,


now compelled to submit to the


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 18. Saul is a speciemen of
that class of persons who show a cer-
tain reverence and zeal for the ouwd-
ward forms of religion, and cherish
even a superstitious reliance on them,
but are not careful to cherish the
inner spirit of vital religion, without
which all outward forms and ordi-
nances, even though instituted by God
Himself, are mere “ sounding brass
and a tinkling cymbal” (1 Cor. xiii,
12).— Wordsworth.

Hypocrites in a strait repair to God,
not so much to serve Him as to
serve themselves upon Him; for at
another time they think themselves
men good enough, and act as if they
were petty gods within themselves,—
Trapp.


Ver. 19. The neglect of prayer was
the beginning of Saul’s fall, as all the

athers interpret that place where it
is said that Saul commanded the
priest to withdraw his hand from the
ark, ‘I'here are some who with Saul
will call for the ark, and will presently
cry “ Away with it!” that. is, will
begin their prayers, and will break
them off in the midst of any occa-
sion.— Bp. Andrews,

Saul will consult theark: h ypocrites,
when they have leisure, will perhaps
be holy. But when the tumult was
aroused aly piety decreased. The

1


ark must give place to arms, Worldly
minds regard holy duties no further
than they stand with their own
carnal purposes. Saul, who would
before wilfully sacrifice ere he fought
(chap. xii. 9), will now, in the other
extreme, fight in a wilful indevotion.—
Bp. Hall.

The courage of Jonathan had already
achieved the victory, while Saul was
talking about what was to be done ;
s0 much more successful was the faith
and obedience of the son, than the
worldly policy and formal indifference
of the father.— Wordsworth.


Ver. 39. Those who are indulgent
to their own sins are generally severe
in animadverting on the sins of others,
and such as most disrezard God’s
authority are most impatient when
their own commands appear to be
slighted. —Scote.


Vers. 24-46, There is here a six-
fold testimony against Saul. 1. The
word of his own mouth: “Till I have
avenged myself on mine enemies,
2. The word of his gon: “ My father
hath troubled the land.” ‘3, The
failure of the pursuit of the Philistines,
4. The Lord’s silence when He was
inquired of. 5. The silence of the
people at his oath, 6, The decision
of the people, by which God’s decision


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





was made apparent, and Saul’s conflict
with the Lord and himself shown to be
a conflict also with the people, who
recognised God’s hand and will better
than he. On God’s side there are not
lacking co-working means by which
man, when he detaches himself from
God, may be brought to consider him-
self and return to God. And if he
do not return, it is because of the
energy with which the human will
persistently follows its own path, and
rejects all God’s exhortations and in-
fluences.—Lange’s Commentary.

This narrative allows us to draw
some general inferences as to the
character of Saul’s personal religion
at this time. 1. It leads us to per-
ceive how strangely partial his religion
was in its operation. The faint and
distressed state of the people led them,
as soon as they had the opportunity,
to eat the animals which they had
slain, “in their blood.” And Saul
immediately took steps to prevent the
continuance of this infringement of
the ritual. So far, of course, he was
right. But the eagerness with which
he condemned the sin of the people
contrasts strangely with the moral
obtuseness which prevented him from
seeing that his own folly had been the
occasion of their sin. . . . . His
religion was of that order which allows
its professor to be vastly more affected
by something outward and formal,
than by the indulgence, within him-
self, of a wrong and impious state of
mind. It puts us in mind of that
most thorough manifestation of hypo-
crisy, when the betrayers of Jesus
shrank back with sanctimonious step


from the threshold of the judgment-
hall, and would not set foot within it,
“lest they should be defiled ; but that
they might eat the passover.” And
yet although their consciences would
not allow them to do this, the very
same consciences, when Pilate came
out to them and declared that Jesus
was innocent, presented no obstacle to
their murderous cry, “Crucify Him !”
... + Oh! strange admixture of care
for external proprieties with downright
inward guilt! .. . Nothing so blunts
the moral sense.. . . as the idea that
ceremonial acts independently of holi-
ness of heart constitute real religion ;
..... high-toned morality declines
just in proportion as mere ceremonial
religion assumes the sway... . 2. It
does not appear to have been charac-
terised by the slightest self-suspicion.
.... It never seems to have entered
his mind that he could by any possi-
bility have been in the wrong ; but he
was most ready to suppose that any
one else might be to blame... . One
would have thought that if anything
could have brought him to a sense of
his error, it would have been the dis-
covery that his rash decree and oath
had implicated his own son in liability
to suffering and death. Our indig-
nation rises when we hear him say,
“God do so and more also,” etc. and
we are ready to exclaim, “ What!
another oath? Has not one done
mischief enough? Cannot you see it?
Do you not feel it?” Nothing can
exceed the hardening influence of that
professed religion which leaves a man
unsuspicious and ignorant of himself.
—NMiller.


OO


CHAPTER XV.


Carmoat axp Exposrrony Norzs.—“ Samuel also said to Saul.” “This verse fa not to
be connected chronologically with chap. xii. but continues the narrative of chaps. xiii. and xiv.


The solemn reminder of Saul’s royal anointing, ; hat end
It points to the fact that the following commission 18


refers not to xi. 15, but to ix. 15, x. 1.


a Divine command communicated by the appointed organ,


and of Samuel’s Divine mission to that end,


the prophet of God, and that the


bearer of the royal office has here to perform a theocratic mission with unconditional obedience.
The me stands firat (such is the order of the Hebrew) in order to give prominence 4 iy official


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L
i a ea TNL TO SA


authority, as bearer of which Samuel must have felt obliged by Saul’s past conduct to assert
Yimself over against him.” (£rdmann.) “Several years had been passed in unsuccessful military
sperations against troublesome neighbours, and during these years Saul had been left to act in
&® great measure at his own discretion as an independent prince. Now a new test is proposed of
his possessing the character of a theocratic monarch in Israel; and in announcing the duty
required of him, Samuel brought before him his official station as the Lord’s vicegerent, and the
peculiar obligation under which he was laid to act in that capacity. He had formerly done
wrong, for which a severe rebuke and threatening were administered to him. Now an
opportunity was afforded him of retrieving that error.” (Jamieson.)





Ver, 2. “I remember.” Rather, “I have looked upon” (Keil), or “I have considered, or
noted.” (Zrdmann.) “Amalek.” The Amalekites were a wild, warlike, desert-people, dwelling
south and south-west of Judea, in Arabia Petrea, descended from the same ancestor as the
Edomites, and took their name from Esau’s grandson Amalek (Gen. xxxvi. 12-16 ; 1 Chron. i. 36).
God’s command goes back to their first hostilities (Exod. xvii.), which were often afterwards
repeated in their alliance with the Canaanites (Numb, xiv. 40 s.q.), with the Moabites (Judges
iii. 13), and with the Midianites (Judges vii. 12), the Amalekites, according to ver. 33, having
newly made an inroad, with robbery and murder, into the Israelitish territory.” (Zrdmann.)


Yer. 8. “Utterly destroy.” Fiterally, “put everything under the ban.” “The ban, of
which we have here a notable instance, was an old custom, existing probably before Moses, but
formulated, regulated, and extended by him. In its simplest form it was the devotion to God
of any object, living or dead... .. When an Israelite or the whole congregation wished to
devote to God anything—maa, beast, or field—whether for the honour of God or to get rid of an
injurious or accursed thing, it was brought and offered to the priest, and could not then be
redeemed (Lev. xxvii. 28) ; if living, it must be put to death. A deep consciousness of man’s
sin and God’s holiness underlay this law. The wicked thing, contrary to the spiritual theocratic
life of God’s people, must be removed, must be committed to him who was ruler and judge of
God’s people. And so the custom had a breadth of use as well as of meaning which it never
had in other ancient nations. .... To spare the devoted thing was a grave offence, calling
down the vengeance of God. In later times the ban was, doubtless under prophetic direction,
softened, and in the New Testament times the infliction of death had quite ceased.” (Translator
of Lange's Commentary.)


Ver.4, “Telaim.” Most likely the same as Telem (Josh. xv. 21, 24), @ city lying on the
eastern border of Judah, and therefore near the territory of the Amalekites. “Ten thousand
men of Judah.” “This implies that the two hundred thousand were from the other tribes.”
(Keil.) “The separate mention of the men of Judah shows. how little union there was between
Judah and Ephraim even at this time; a circumstance which throws light upon the whole after
history. (See 2Sam. xi.11). ‘The presence of these men arose, no doubt, from their tribe being
the chief sufferers from the inroads of the Amalekites,” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 6, “‘Kenites.” A tribe first mentioned in Gen. xv. 19. “Their origin is hidden from
us, but we may fairly infer that they were a branch of the larger nation of Midian, from the
fact that Jethro, who in Exod. ii. 15, etc., is represented as priest or prince of Midian, and is in
Judges i. 16: iv. 11, as distinctly said to have been a Kenite. . . They were therefore descended
immediately from Abraham by his wife Keturah, and in this relationship and the connection with
Moses we find the key to their continued alliance with Israel. The important services rendered
by the sheikh of the Kenites to Moses during a time of great pressure and difficulty, were
rewarded by a promise of firm friendship between the two nations (Numb. x. 82). And this promise
was gratefully remembered long after (1 Sam. xv. 8). The connection then commenced lasted as
firmly as a connection could last between a settled people like Israel and one whose tendencies
were so nomadic as the Kenites. They seem to have accompanied the Israelites in their wander-
sags (Num. xxiv. 21, 22, ete.\. .. But these over, they forsook the neighbourhood of the towns
and betook themselves to freer air—to ‘the wilderness of J udah, which is to the south of Arad!
(Judges i. 16), where ‘they dwelt among the people’ of the district—the Amalekites, who wan-
dered in that dry region, and among whom they were living when Saul made his expedition
there.” (Sirsth’s Biblical Dictionary.)


Ver. 7. “Bavilah—Shur.” “ Havilah, according to Gen. xxv. 18, the boundary of the
Ishmaelites, probably therefore in the south-east on the border of Arabia Petrea and Arabia
Felix. ..... Shur is the present wilderness of Jifar, the portion of the Arabian desert
bordering on Egypt, into which the Israelites entered after the exodus (Ex. xv. 22). Saul thus
smote the Amalekites through their territory from south-east towards the west and north-west.”
(Erdmunn.)


Ver. 8. “Agag.’ “ Rvidently a reduplicate variety of the Egyptian Hak (ruler). This was
She common title of the Amalekite king. Saul spared him probably to enjoy the glory of
‘isplaying so distinguished a captive. Josephus distinctly asserts that the beauty and tallness
af his body made go fine an appearance, and Saul admired it go mueh, that he thought him

156 | )


OHAP. EV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMIRY.





worthy of preservation (cf. 1 Kings xx. $2-34).” (Jamieson) “All the peopte.” “That is,
speaking generally, some survived, of course; the Amalekites appear afterwards, xxvii. & |


xxx. 1; 2 Samuel viii. 12. Their complete annihilation is mentioned in 1 Chron. iv. 43.”
(Zrdmann.)


Ver. 9. “Fatlings.” Literally of the second sort. Kimchi and others understand the word ta
denote animals of the second birth, which were thought better than others.


Ver.10. “It repenteth me.” “The anthropopathio expression for the change of the
Divine procedure into the opposite of what the holy and righteous will of God had determined
under the condition of holy and righteous conduct by men when on man’s side there has been
a change to the opposite of this condition without repentance,” (Erdmann.) See also comments
on this verse. “It grieved Samuel and he cried unto the Lord,” etc, Literally “ It
burned (in) him,” é.e., his wrath was kindled. “ Many grave thoughts seem to have presented
themselves at once to Samuel and disturbed his mind, when he reflected upon the dishonour
which might be heaped upon the name of God, and the occasion which the deposition and
rejection of Saul would furnish to wicked men for blaspheming God. For Saul had_ been
anointed by the ministry of Samuel, and he had been chosen by God Himself from all the

ple, and called by Him to the throne. If, therefore, he was nevertheless deposed, it seemed
Fikety that so much would be detracted from the authority of Samuel and the confidence of the
people in his teaching, and moreover that the worship of God would be overturned, and the
greatest disturbance ensue; in fact, that universal confusion would break in upon the nation.
These were probably the grounds upon which Samuel’s great indignation rested.” (Calvin.)
“The object of Saul’s prayer was doubtless not release from the fulfilment of the Divine
command, but the exemption of Saul from the sentence of rejection and the forgiveness of his
disobedience.” (Hrdmann).


Ver. 12. “When Samuel rose.” “It does not appear clearly where Samuel was, but
probably at his own home.” (Biblical Commentary.) “Carmel,” A city south-east of Hebron,
on the mountains of Judah (Josh. xv. 55), now called Kurmul. “A place.” “Rather, a
monument or trophy. The Hebrew word yad means a hand, but we have a certain clue to the
meaning, monument or trophy, not only in the verb here used, ‘set up,’ but in 2 Sam. xviii. 18,
where we are told that the marble pillar which Absalom set up was called Yad Absalom.”
(Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 13. “Samuel came to Saul.” “In the place (Gilgal) where he had solemnly pledged
Saul and the people to unconditional obedience, he now executes judgment for disobedience to
the Divine will.” (Zrdinann.) “1 have porformed,” ete. “Self-will and rashness have
hitherto been Saul’s chief faults, He now seems to add falsehood and hypocrisy.” (Biblical
Commentary.)


Ver. 15. “The people spared,” ete. “The falsehood and hypocrisy of these words lay
upon the very surface; for even if the cattle spared were really intended as sacrifices to the Lord,
not only the people, but Saul also, would have had their own interests in view (vid. ver. 9), since
the flesh of thank-offerings was appropriated to sacrificial meals.” (Keil.) “Every word uttered
by Saul seems to indicate the breaking down of his moral character. There is something
thoroughly mean in his attempt to shift the responsibility of what was done from his own kingly -
shoulders to those of the people, One feels that after the scene so forcibly described in this
chapter, Saul must have forfeited his own self-respect, and that his downward career was hence-
forth almost inevitable.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 17. “When thou wast little.” ‘The reference here to Saul’s own words (chap. ix.
21), is beyond doubt. It is the humiliating reminder to the haughty Saul of the low position
whence he had been elevated to the headship of Israel, and of the modesty and humility which
he then possessed.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver.18. “Sinners.” “As though God would justify his commission to destroy them. So
it nia of the men of Sodom, that they were sinners before the Lord. (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 19. “Fly upon.” “ Expreasive of eagerness, passionate craving.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 21. “The Lord thy God.” “As if he had been showing honour to Samuel, as well as
to God, when he was disobeying both.” (Wordsworth.) “ As if he had more zeal for the glory of
God than was felt by Samuel.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 22. “Hath the Lord,” etc. “This fundamental ethical truth is affirmed, with
unmistakable reference to these words of Samuel, in the classical passages Pea. 1 8-1 4;
li. 18, 19; Isa. i.1]; Micah vi. 6-8; Hosea vi. 6; Jer. vi. 20. (Erdmann. ) There is a
poetical rhythm in the original, which gives it the tone of a Divine oracle uttered by the Spirit
of God, imparting to it an awful solemnity, and making it sink deep in the memory of the
hearers in all generations.” (Wordsworth.) 167


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL. BOOK %


es


Ver. 23. Literally, “ Rebellion is the sin of soothsaying, and opposition is heathenism and
idolatry.” =~
Ver. 25. “Pardon my sin.” “ Ho offers this prayer to Samuel, notto God.” “Turn again


with me.” “ According to ver. 30, to show him honour before the elders of the people, and
before Israel, that his rejection might not be known.” (Keil.)


Ver. 29. “The strength of Israel.” A phrase which occurs only here. It means glory,
erpetuity, trust. “The Hebrew word, Netsah, signifies what is bright or shines continually,
and therefore what may be relied upon—as the sun, or stars.” (Wordsworth.)


Ver. 31. “So Samuel turned again.” “ Not, of course, to yield to his selfish opposition
to God’s honour, but to preserve unimpaired in the eyes of the people the position of Saul’s
kingdom, which, though theocratically rejected, yet still in fact by God’s will remained, and
especially not to be wanting in the sacrifice of the people.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 32. “And Agag came unto him delicately.” The phrase is obscure, The last
word is derived from a verb, meaning to live daintily, softly. Wordsworth translates, ‘ joyfully.’
Can it mean fawningly, flatteringly, with a view of appeasing Samuel ?” (Biblical Commentary.
“The bitterness of death is passed.” Some commentators see in these words of Agag a heroic
contempt of death, and others an assumed courageousness. Most, however, think that Agag,
not having been slain by Saul, felt sure that Samuel would spare his life.


Ver. 88. “As thy sword,” etc. “From these words it is very evident that Agag had
carried on his wars with great cruelty, and had therefore forfeited his life according to the
lex Talionis.” (Keil.) “Before the Lord,” i.¢., before the altar of Jehovah there; for the
slaying of Agag, being the execution of a ban, was an act performed for the glory of God.” (Keil.}


Ver. 85. “ And Samuel came no more.” “The Hebrew is, “eaw him no more, ’ £¢.,, did
not visit him, which does not contradict chap. xix. 24.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH,—Verses 1-8,
Tue SENTENCE AGAINST AMALEK,


I. National sins may bring national retribution long after the individuals
who committed the sins have left the world. Both history and revelation
teach us that God deals with nations as a whole as well as with men individu-
ally, and that the sin of one generation may bring penalty upon another. If a
man deals a murderous blow to another and is not brought to justice until
long after the crime has been committed, the judge will not overlook the crime
because it was not committed yesterday, or a few days or weeks ago—however
long the transgressor may go unpunished the penalty of the transgression hangs
over him until he has undergone the punishment which it deserves. The words
of God in this chapter show that he proceeds on the same principle in relation
to nations, Many ages had passed away since “ Amalek laid wait for Israel in
the way, when he came up out of Egypt,” and the men who were guilty of the
deed had long since left the earth. Yet the mention of it here shows that the
sentence here passed upon the nation had special reference to that national sin
which had been committed so long ago. At the same time we must remember
that the Amalekites of the timeof Saul were possessed by the same spirit of hatred
to Israel as their forefathers were—although no reference is here made to their
later attacks upon the Hebrew people, we know from other passages (See
critical Notes) that the Amalekites now were no less cruel and murderous in
disposition than their forefathers in the days of Moses. Ifa man was brought to
the bar of a human judge for a crime committed in his youth, and it was
proven that he has since lived for years the life of a peaceable citizen, it might
seem hard to make him now suffer for a deed done so long ago, but if during
the intervening years he had been adding crime to crime he will deserve to have
all his misdeeds taken into account when the day of reckoning comes. So it
was mene at this time. The present character of the nation was such


GHP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.








that it fully deserved the sentence here passed upon it even if the ancient sin
had not been remembered by God. When our Lord pronounced His terrible
woe upon the Jewish nation of His day (Luke xi. 47-52), and foretold that “the
blood of all the prophets would be required of that generation,” He expressly
declares that this terrible retribution would fall upon them because they
“allowed the deeds of their fathers,’—in other words, because they were
animated by the same spirit and were guilty of the same sins. It was doubtless
the same in the case of the Amalekites.


II. The authority from which all national retribution proceeds. “Thus saith
the Lord of Hosts, .. . now go and smite Amalek.” Whoever or whatever
may be the instrumental cause of national judgment for national sin, God is
the original and first cause. It is He who sets his servants “over the nations
and over the kingdoms, to root out and to pull down, and to destroy and to
throw down, to build and to plant (Jer.i. 10). ‘The executioners of His will
may be entirely unconscious that they are carrying out the designs of a Supreme
Ruler of the universe in following the devices of their own hearts, but they are
doing it as really as if they were knowingly obeying a Divine command.
“ Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it?” (Amos iii. 6).
When we hear that a monarch or a government has declared war against a
nation, we judge of the righteousness or unrighteousness of the act from what
we know of the character of the man or the number of men who are responsible
for it. If we know them to be men who are lovers of humanity—if we know
that they are pre-eminently just and benevolent, and incapable of being
actuated by any unworthy motives, we shall conclude that they have strong
and sufficient reasons for the step, and that although it must bring much
sorrow and suffering, they believe that it will prevent more misery than it
occasions. . In this light we ought to look at all the wars which were commanded
or sanctioned by Divine authority in the early ages of the world. If a human
monarch or human government had given such a command as we here find
given to Saul, we should be bound to look at the command through what we
knew of his character and disposition, and if we knew him to be a man of
integrity and benevolence to conclude that he had good ground for taking such
a step. We cannot do less when we read such a sentence as that here issued
against Amalek. We know that God loves the creatures whom He has made—
that He is a God of peace, and that He desires “ peace on earth.” If the men
of the ancient world could rest assured that the Judge of all the earth would
and could do nothing but right (Gen. xviii. 25), he who possesses the New
Testament record ought not to have the shadow of a doubt that all His dealings
with men have at all times been actuated by the purest love and the highest
wisdom; and that however stern and terrible some of them seem to us, they
are in reality dispensations of mercy. In looking at the acts of the most
perfect of human kind, we could not be certain of the perfect purity and
wisdom of them all; but the same inspired Book which records these acts
of retributive justice reveals to us so much of the Divine character as to make
it certain that the final verdict of all His creatures will be—“ Just and true
are Thy ways, Thou King of saints” (Rev. xv. 3).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


There are some particular precepts precepts. But it is easy to see that
in Scripture given to particular persons, all these are of such a kind as that
requiring actions which would be im- the precept changes the whole nature
moral and vicious were it not for such of the case, and of the Oa and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK


Sh


both constitutes and shows that not to
be unjust or immoral which, prior to
the precept, must have appeared and
really have been so; which may well be,
since none of these preceptsare contrary
to immutable morality. If it were
commanded to cultivate the principles,
and act from the spirit of treachery,
ingratitude, cruelty, the command
would not alter the natureof the case or
of the action in any of these instances.
But itis quite otherwise in precepts


which require only the doing an ex«
ternal action: for instance, takingaway
the property or life of any. For men
have no right to either life or property,
but what arises solely from the grant
of God; when this grant is revoked,
they cease to have any right at all in
either; and when this revocation is
made known, as surely it is possible it
may be, it must cease to be unjust to
deprive them of either.—Lp. Butler.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE P4RAGRAPH.—Voerses 10—12,


SAMUEL’s PRAYER.


I, There is a strong conviction in the mind of the best men that prayer
has an influence upon the Divine mind. This arises, first, from their knowledge


of the Divine character and the Divine command.


They know that God has


commanded His creatures to draw near to Him and pour out their hearts before
Him, and they know also that He is infinitely just and good. They therefore
conclude that He would not require them to perform any unmeaning act—
that if He commands them to pray He is open to influence from their prayers,
Secondly, their own past experience and the record of the experience of other


praying sou!s confirms this conviction.


If a man has waited upon God in the


past and has received into his life the blessings which he has asked of God, it
will be very difficult, if not impossible, to convince him that there was not a con-
viction between his prayer and the blessing. And the records of the Church
of God in all ages are full of the testimonies of God’s servants that they have
cried unto the Lord and He has heard them and given them their heart’s
desire. Samuel was evidently governed by a conviction that prayer was a
power with God. His own name was to him a constant igowen of the power


of prayer—his whole life had been a life of prayer, and he ha


in times past


received blessings, both for himself and others, in answer to his petitions, In
looking back, also, wpon the history of Israel in the past, he could recall many
times when judgments had been turned aside and blessings had descended in
answer to the prayer of the people as a whole or to the request of one man on


behalf of the entire nation.


He would especially remember how,


more than


once, the prayer of Moses for rebellious and disobedient Israel had prevailed
with God, and his whole soul was penetrated by a conviction that prayer had


an influence upon the mind of the Eternal.


When, therefore, God made known


to him the new offence of which Sau! had been guilty, and His purpose concern-
Ing him, Samuel did not think it useless to supplicate God long and earnestly
to avert the sentence which He had passed on the offender or in some degree to
mitigate its severity. The best men in all ages have done the same in similar
circumstances under the influence of the same strong conviction of the


power of prayer.


II. There are characters for whom the prayers of the best men cannot
Prevail. The man who begs a physician to restore his friend to health must


remember that all does not rest with the physician.


If his prescriptions were


infallible, there must be co-operation on the part of the patient if they are to be


of any avail.


If he declines to fall in with the healer’s method of cure, he


makes ena friend’s prayer powerless by his own wilfulness, God Himself implieg


OBAP. XV. HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: SAMUEL.








that Samuel and Moses were most powerful intercessors with Him on behalf of
His ancient people (Jer. xv. 1), yet there were times when even their pleadirigs
failed, not because the Divine arm was shortened or the Divine ear deaf to their
intercessions, but because the wilfulness of those for whom they prayed rendered
it impossible to answer their supplications. God has often broken through the
laws of His material universe in answer to the requests of [lis servants, but the
laws of His moral kingdom are unalterable and cannot be broken through. If
. Saul in his unrepentant condition had been permitted to go unpunished, a moral
law would have been broken. Samuel’s prayers had done much for him in the
past, and if there had been any disposition on his part to turn to God and again
submit to His will, they might have even now prevailed for him, but his own
persistent obstinacy and self-will made even the petitions of this mighty inter-
cessor with God powerless in his case.


IIJ. When the servants of God become convinced that their prayers cannot
be answered, they ought to become fully enlisted on the side of God’s purpose
although it is not on the side of their desire. Samuel earnestly desired that
the purpose of God concerning Saul should not be carried out, and he prayed
fervently that his desire might be granted; but when he found that it could not
be, although his grief was long and deep (see verse 35 and chap. xvi. 1), he gave
himself unreservedly into the hand of God, and prepared hnaself to carry to
Saul the Divine message which he delivered with the authority and faithfulness
which befitted his prophetic office. The fervent intercessor is changed into the
inflexible judge when he becomes convinced that it is not consistent with the
Divine will to grant him his heart’s desire. It should be so with God’s servants
at all times and under all circumstances. They are not forbidden—they are
indeed encouraged—to make known their requests unto God with fervour ;
they may plead with Him with all their heart for the person or the plan that
lies near their heart, but when they become convinced that their prayer can
not be answered, they ought to cheerfully accept the position, and be willing to
lend themselves, heart and soul, to the purpose and plan of God, although
it is directly opposed to their previous desires.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 11. Wilfulness, the sin of Saul.
Saul’s temptation and fall consisted in
a certain perverseness of mind, founded
on some obscure feelings of self-impor-
tance, very commonly observable in
human nature, and sometimes called

ride—a perverseness which shows
itself in a reluctance absolutely to
relinquish its own independence of
action, in cases where dependence is a
duty, and which interferes a little, and
alters a little, as if with a view of
satisfying its own fancied dignity,
though it is afraid altogether to oppose
itself to the voice of God. Should
this seem at first sight to be a trifling
fault, it is more worth while to trace
its operation in the history of Saul.
If a tree is known by its fruit, it is a
great sin... .. In contemplating the


miserable termination of a history
which promised well in the beginning,
it should be observed how clearly the
failure of the Divine purpose is attri-
butable to man. .... No one could
be selected in talents and conduct
more suitable for maintaining political
power at home than the reserved,
mysterious monarch whom God gave
to His people ; none more suitable for
striking terror into the surrounding
nations than a commander gifted with
his coolness and promptness in action.
But he fell from his election because
of unbelief—because he would take
another part, and not the very part
which was actually assigned him in
the decrees of the Most High—J. #.
Newman.

“Samuel cried unto the Lord all

161


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


night.” Was this warrantable? It
was a mistaken, but surely’ not a
criminal, urgency ; for might he not
with reason be supposed to receive the
dreadful announcement as a frowning
barrier over which faith had to wrestle ?
. .- « He might not arrest the evil of
Saul’s fate ; the erring monarch must
himself be a penitent suppliant ere
that can be remedied. He might not


BOOE &


the season of probation was over for
that. But he might mitigate the con-
sequences of the sin to Saul and his
people. The soul of the king might
be brought to repentance and be saved,
though with the loss of his dynasty.
. . . Who can tell how much Saul was
indebted to that prayer of Samuel for
the mercies and escapes and successer
of his subsequent career.—Steed.


keep the crown in the family of Saul;


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPHS.—Verses 4-9, and 18-22
Savt’s Seconp Act oF DIsoBEDIENCE.


I. God will not accept a partial obedience to any of His commands, There
is nothing strange or unreasonable in this. If a human ruler gives a command,
he will not be satisfied if the person to whom he gives it obeys it just so far as
it suits his convenience or agrees with his fancy and no farther. Anything less
than a whole obedience is no obedience in the estimation of a fellow-creature.
If a soldier receives an order from his general to execute a certain military
movement, he is not expected to consult his own wishes or his own judgment,
but he must sink his own will entirely in the will of his superior, and fulfil his
command to the very letter. However stern may be the work to be done,
whatever sacrifice of personal feeling may be involved, anything less than an
observance of the commandment in its entirety will be counted as grave a crime
as the non-observance of the whole. If a father directs his son to perform a
given task, and the son executes about half of that which is required of him,
the father will consider that his command has been disobeyed. If this is the
case with human superiors, it cannot be expected that the Holy and All-wise
God, whose commands—however stern they may sometimes seem—are always
perfectly just and good, will be satisfied with less than an entire obedience to
His commands. He is surrounded by ten thousand faithful and mighty angelic
servants, who render to him a perfect and unquestioning service, and although
imperfect and sinful creatures cannot offer to Him a service equal to theirs, yet
there are Divine commands which men are able to carry out to the letter, and
which they must so carry out if they would not incur the penalty of disobedient
servants of the Most High. Such a command was that which was here given
to Saul—it was one which he could obey—one for the non-observance of which
he could not plead inability—one which he did not attempt to say he was
unable to perform. His partial obedience was rejected—his non-observance of
all the details of the Divine command was accounted as direct an act of defiance
of God's directions as if he had taken no action whatever against the Amalekites,
And so God will ever account compliance with His commands, which is measured
not by His requirements but by man’s inclinations,


II. Where the condition is not fulfilled which is included in the Divine plan
of blessing, God repents, not by changing His mind, but by changing His
method in relation to the sinner. It is obvious that God cannot undergo a
change of disposition or of motive. He is perfect in goodness, and therefore, in
all His dealings with His creatures He must always hav their welfare in view.
He must always be willing to do for them that which is best for their highest
interests. It is not possible for the Ruler of the world to act from any of the
unworthy motives which sometimes influence men in their conduct towards
each sas And being as infinite in wisdom as He is in goodness, He can hava


GHAP. XV, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


no better plans than His original plans, no second thoughts which are better
than His first. When, therefore, God speaks of Himself as repenting, He
speaks of a change of His dealings with a man, which are the result of a change
in that man’s attitude towards Himself. Such a change is quite compatible
with an unchangeable character and disposition, and is, indeed, the result of it.
To men of the same character God’s attitude is the same now as it was ages
ago, and it will be the same to the end of time, and when a man’s relations to
God are altered it is in consequence of a change in himself, and not in the
unchangeable God. There was no change in God when, in consequence of Saul’s
non-compliance with the conditions of kingship, God rejected him from being
king over Israel. He had been anointed by “the Lord to be captain over His
inheritance” (chap. x. 1)—in other words to be His vicegerent in Israel, and
when he refused to act in that capacity God proved His own unchangeableness
by changing His method of dealing with him. A purpose of blessing on the
part of God towards men always includes a condition to be fulfilled on their
part, and a purpose of judgment always includes a continuance on the part of
the sinner of the conduct which has provoked the judgment. ‘This is the ex-

lanation of the repentance of God in relation to the men of the old world, and
in relation to the Ninevites. In the first case God sent judgment because the
offenders refused to repent, and in the second instance He revoked His sentence
of judgment because the men of Nineveh were willing to forsake their sins and
return to Him for pardon. (See Gen. vi. 5, 6; Jonah iii. 10).


III. Obedience is better than the offering to God of any other sacrifice. 1.
Because it is a sacrifice of far higher value. Obedience is the giving up of the
will to the will of another—it is therefore the sacrifice of the whole man. When
a man has given himself thus to God, he has offered to Him all that he has to
offer—all his powers of soul and body as well as all his material possessions. ‘This
was the sacrifice which Adam offered to his Maker before he sinned, and this is
the offering which has been for ages offered to God by His sons who have never
at any time resisted His will. This is far more precious, and therefore far more
acceptable to the Lord, than “‘ thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil”
(Micah vi. 7), because it is a spiritual and moral sacrifice. 2. ¢ ts a sacrifice
which can be offered at any time and in any place. The sacrifices of the
Levitical law were required to be offered in certain places. A man who desired
to sacrifice to the Lord could only do so by coming up to the place appointed,
and hence his offerings could only be made at intervals. But obedience is a
sacrifice which can always be rendered to God—an expression of love to Him
which can be made everywhere and always. 3. /é ts a sacrifice which every
man can offer for himself. Even in Israel there might have been men at times
too poor to be able to bring the least costly material offering to the altar of the
Lord; but none is ever too poor to offer his will to God—to give himself up to
His guidance and submit to His commands. And this is a sacrifice in which
there is no need of the intervention of a third person—an offering in which every
man can be his own priest. 4. It is the sacrifice which alone can make any
other sacrifice acceptable. All other offerings without this are “ vain oblations,”
and even “an abomination” (Isa. i. 13) unto Him who owns “every beast of
the forest ané the cattle upon a thousand hills” (Psalm 1.10). To expect a
Holy and Spiritual Being to be willing to accept anything less than the offering
of the heart, is to expect Him to be satisfied with less than would often content
a fellow-creature. Many a man would spurn a gift which was not an outcome of
inward feeling, and yet Giod’s creatures sometimes act as if they thought their
Maker could be bribed by such an offering,


168


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


BOOK &





OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 6. Thus does every good thing
reward itself; nothing remains for-
gotten ; often in later centuries the
seed sown in an old past yet every-
where comes upgloriously, and children
and children’s children derive advan-
tage from the good done by their
fathers.— Schlier.

He that is not less in mercy than in
justice, as he challenged Amalek’s sin
of their succeeding generations so he
derives the recompense of Jethro’s
kindness unto his far descended issue.

Sat If we sow good works, suc-
cession shall reap them, and we shall
be happy in making themso. . . .
It is the manner of God, first to sepa-
rate before He judge, as a good hus-
bandman weeds his corn ere it be ripe
for the sickle, and goes to the fan ere
he goes to the fire . Why
should we not imitate God, and sepa-
rate ourselves, that we may not be
judged ; separate not one Kenite from
another, but every Kenite from among
the Amalekites, else if we will needs
live with Amalek we cannot think
much to die with him.—Bp. Hall.


Ver. 18. Here is a proof that a man
may be blinded by his own self-will,
and that he may imagine that his own
way is right, while it is leading him to
the gates of death. — Wordsworth.

Could Saul think that Samuel knew
of the asses that were lost, and did not
know of the oxen and sheep that were
spared ? ee Much less, when
we have to do with God Himself, should
dissimulation presume either of safety
or of secresy. Can the God that made
the heart not know it? Can He that
comprehends all things be shut out of
our close corners? Saul was otherwise
crafty enough, yet herein his simplicity
is palpable. Sin can besot even the
wisest man ; and there was never but
folly in wickedness No man
brags so much of holiness as he who
wants it. True obedience is joined
ever with humility and fear of unknown
errors. Falsehood is bold, and can
say, “I have fulfilled the command-
ment of the Lord.”—Bp, Hall.

164


Ver. 14. Let us aim after such a
walk and conversation as that we can
be natural in our demeanour, and not
artificial and forced; such a life as
will bear inspection behind the scenes,
and as will not compel those who watch
for souls to ask, as they look around,
What meaneth this or that? .
and while asking the question to feel
the sad truth of the matter to be, that
the thing which calls forth the question
is in our own case, ag it was in Saul’s,
only so much spared of that which
God has commanded us to subdue and
destroy, so much permitted to live
which God had required us to conquer
and to slay.—J/iller.


Ver. 16. We must not look to what
hypocrites say of themselves, put to
what God’s word says of them.—S.
Schinid. .


Ver. 17. Observe the contrast be-
tween Saul and Paul. Saul of Gibeah
lost an earthly kingdom by pride, but
Saul of Tarsus gained a heavenly king-
dom by humility (1 Cor. xv. 10).—
Wordsworth.

There is an ingratitude in every sin,
and that is to be considered. Good
turns aggravate unkindness, and our
offences are increased by our obliga-
tions.— Trapp.


Ver. 20. Men are apt to cry out
with Saul, “I have obeyed the com-
mandment of the Lord ; but, alas,
when it comes to be examined, how
have they obeyed Him? . . . Possibly
they have, with Saul, destroyed the
Amalekites ; have constantly and
openly opposed the declared enemies
of religion, Moreover, perhaps, what-
ever was vile and refuse that they
have destroyed utterly. Whatever
sins did not easily beset them, nor offer
them strong temptations, these sing
they have both heartily avoided them-
selves, and severely condemned in
other men. But the best of the shee
and of the oxen, the things qhich
were dear to them, like a right hand
or a right eye, these they could not


CHAP. XV,





spare. .... And yet, as Saul en-.
deavoured to transfer the blame upon
the people, so, in the other case also,
it is not the men themselves, it is not
their reason and judgment, that
chooses the sin, but their inferior ap-
petites, their passions and affections
choose it for them, and drive them
into it, even perhaps in a manner
against their wills—Dr. S. Clark.


Vers. 22, 23. It was as much as to
say that the sum and substance of
Divine worship consisted in obedience,
with which it should always begin, and
that sacrifices were, so to speak, simple
appendices, the force and worth of
which were not so great as obedience
to the precepts of God. —Calvin.,

All conscious disobedience is actually
idolatry, because it makes self-will, the
human I, into a God. So that all
manifest opposition to the word and
commandment of God is, like idolatry,
a rejection of the true God.— Keil.

This saying of Samuel came literally
true in Saul’s case. ‘Through disobe-
dience he was forsaken of God, and
became a prey to the Evil Spirit, and
was led on in time to resort to witch-
craft (chap. xxvii. 7), and perhaps to
consult seraphim (see chap. xix. 13).
Here is a solemn warning for these
latter days.— Wordsworth.

When the Lord expressly says “Thou
shalt,” and His rational creature dares
to persist in saying “I will not,” whether
the contest be about an apple or a king-
dom, it is stubbornness and rebellion.
—Scott.

May we then take good care that,
even when we mean to render the Lord
service or obedience, we yet beware of
our choice and fancy, and follow only
the traces of the Divine will. Obedience
is the mother-grace, tke parent of all
virtues. It makes the eye see, the ear
hear, the heart think, the memory re-
member, the mouth speak, the foot go,
the hand work, and the whole man do
that, yea that alone, which is conformed
to the will of God. . . It is impossible
for him who is not obedient to God to
lay any command upon men. ‘That is
what these words (‘lhe Lord hath


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


rejected thee,”) and the aim of God
therein mean. The authorities must
not proceed from their own will and
notion, but in everything must take
God’s word and will for their rule. If
He does not drive apostate rulers from
their position, like as He did Nebu-
chadnezzar, but leaves them ruling, as
He also did Saul for a while, yet they
are and rewain rejected in His sight,
and vainly write themselves “by the
grace of God,” when He Himself does
not so acknowledge them.— Berlenber-
ger Bible.

God rejects Saul from being king
over Israel who had rejected God from
being King over Saul_—7. Adams.

Every ceremonial law is moral; the
outward act is never enjoined but for
the sake of the inward thing, what it
pictures—represents, Never is there
body without spirit. But the fleshly
sense would have none of the spirit,
and laid hold solely of the body, which,
thus isolated, becaine a corpse. —Heng-
stenberg.

It is a holier and a better thing to
do one’s duty, than to make duties for
one’s self and then set about them,—
Spurgeon.

Why was sacrifice good, but because
it was commanded ? What difference
was there betwixt slaughter and sacri-
fice but obedience ?—&p. Hail.

Saul lived to give in his own person
the painful but the clearest evidence
of the identity, as far as concerns a
common origin and principle of action,
which may exist between two very
different crimes. . . ‘he same disposi-
tion which evinced itself in those acts
of rebellion, which he committed all
the while he was crying down witch-
craft, induced him to do the very
thing which he censured when occasion
pressed... ‘I'he security against our
being guilty of any particular form of
transgression is not that we condemn
it, but that the evil principle within us
which excites to its commission, is sub-
dued and removed by Divine grace.—
Miller.


Vers, 4-23. The fall of King Sanl
shows : (1) How unrepented and only
165


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





whitewashed sin at the first severe
temptation breaks out as manifest and
criminal self-seeking. (2) How this
self-seeking is so blinding as to tell
itself and others the lie that it is a
labour for the Lord.—J. Disselhoff.
We may see in the history of Saul
how important it is that we should
make the most of the opportunities
which God sets before us. ‘I'here came
to the son of Kish a tidal time of
favour, which, if he had only recog-


BOOK L





nised and improved it might have
carried him, not only to greatness, but
to goodness. But he proved faithless
to the trust committed to him, and
became in the end a worse man than
he would have been if no such privi-
leges had been conferred upon him.
. . . His career is a melancholy illus-
tration of the truth of the Saviour’s
words: “From him that hath not,
shall be taken away even that he
hath."—Dr, W. M. Taylor.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 24—88,
Savx’s ConFEsSsION,


I. Saul’s confession of sin was satisfactory as to word. “I havesinned,” is
the acknowledgement of responsibility and accountability. “Ihave transgressed
the commandment of the Lord,” is an acknowledgment on the part of man that
there is a Being who has a right to lay down laws for the guidance of His creatures.
There are men in the world who deny that there is such a thing as sin—who affirm
that they are creatures of necessity, and are therefore undeserving of blame for any
action. But Saul here admits his personal responsibility, and allows that his
negative sin—his non-observance of a plain command—was a positive trans-
gression. ‘True it is that he admits this with reluctance, and that he involves
the people in the act of disobedience, But whether he speaks the truth or not
in relation to them, he does not now attempt to palliate his sin by laying the
blame directly on them. He acknowledges his own personal guilt in the same
words as David used to express his deep and heartfelt repentance, and as the
pouen uttered when he came first to himself and then to his father’s home,

0 far as the language of the confession goes it leaves nothing to be desired.


II. It is possible to use words which express true repentance and yet lack
the spirit of it. A dead body is complete so far as the form goes, no limb is
wanting, and all the beauty of the most perfect symmetry of form may be there.
But it 1s only a corpse notwithstanding, and because the living spirit is wanting
even the form will vanish after a time. Soaman may usc a “form of sound
words” (2 ‘Tim. i. 13) which in language may leave nothing to be desired,
He may acknowledge that he is a sinner, and that he merits punishment, and
his language may be that of general humility, and yet the spirit of true
repentance may be absent. But the wear and tear of human life will soon make
apparent whether the outward form isinhabited by a living soul or whether it is
only a lifeless body. If itis a true repentance the actions proper to it will
follow, but if it is not, the very form will cease to exist, and the man who once
had the form of repentance without the power will cease even to possess the
form, and become more and more subject to the law of sin and death. Even
Pharaoh said, “I have sinned ” (Exod. ix, 27), but in his mouth the words were
not the outcome of a sense of sin, and he soon became too hardened even for
such a formal confession. So was it with Saul. We here see him preserving
some outward form of godliness although he was “denying the power thereof’
(2 Tim, iii. 5), and later on in his life he repeats this confession (chap. xxvi. 21),
but as on neither occasions it was dictated by the spirit of true and godly
sorrow for sin, there came a time in hig life when even the formal confession
vanished from his lips) The words of repentance were not wanting, but there


OHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAM VEL.





was no correspondence between the language and the deeds—it was left to

another to carry into effect the Divine commandment which Saul here confesses

he had transgressed, but which it does not appear that he now made any

attempt to obey. It was left to Samuel to do the work of Saul, and thus to

aa that there was one man in Israel who would carry out to the letter the
idding of Jehovah.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Beware of a Saul's confession. That
ea may do this, it is necessary to

ow two things. 1. What a Saul’s
confession is, 2. What a Saul’s con-
fession works.—J. Disselhoff.

He confesseth not till the sin be
wrung from his mouth; he seeks his
peace out of himself, and relies more
upon another’s virtue than upon his
own penitence; he would cloak his
guiltiness with the holiness of another's
presence ; he is more tormented with
the danger and damage of the sin than
with the offence; he cares to hold in
with men, in what terms soever he
stands with God.— Bp. Hall.


Ver. 29. The heathen saw God as
@ passionate, capricious, changeable
Being, who could be angered and ap-
peased by men. The Jewish prophets
saw Him as a God whose ways were
equal, who was unchangeable, whose
decrees were perpetual, who was not
to be bought off by sacrifice, but by
righteous dealing, and who would re-
move the punishment when the causes


which brought it on were taken away.
In their own words, when men re-
pented, God would repent..... A
boat rows against the stream, the cur-
rent punishes it. . ... ‘The boat
turns and goes with the stream, the
current assists it. . . . . But the cur-
rent is the same, it has not changed—
only the boat has changed its relation-
ship to the current. Neither does God
change. We change, and the same
law which executed itself in punish-
ment now expresses itself in reward.—
Brooke.


Ver. 30. If Saul had been really
penitent, he would have prayed to be
humbled rather than to be honoured.
—St. Gregory.

Many men pass (é.¢., care) 80 little
for their consciences, yet stand so
much upon their credit. As Saul, who
using no diligence to regain the favour
of God, was yet very solicitous that
his honour might be preserved in the
opinion of the people.—Bp. Sanderson.


CHAPTER XVL


Crrrmoan ap Exrosrrory Norzs.—Ver. 1.


“ How long wilt thou mourn,” ete. “These


words show that the prophet had not yet been able to reconcile himself to the hidden ways of


the Lord ; that he was still afraid that


the people and kingdom of God would suffer from the


rejection of Saul, and that he continued to mourn for Saul, not merely from his own personal
attachment to the fallen king, but also, and perhaps still more, from anxiety for the wellare of


Israel.” (Keil). ‘Thine horn.”


(Biblical Commentary. )


“A different word from the vial spoken of at chap. x. 1.”
“ Horns were anciently used for holding liquors, which were sometimes


drunk out of them. They were hung up on the walls of rooms or the poles of tents.” (Jamieson.)


“ Jesse the Bethlehemite.”


“The genealogy of Jesse is traced to Boaz (Ruth iv. 18-21).


But the object was merely to prove that he was a link in the Messianic chain of descent, and it
is left thaws unknown whether Jesse was the eldest of Obed and Boaz’s family, or ® younger


gon.” ( Jamieson.)


“TI have provided.” “The language is remarkable and seems to imply a


difference between this and the former king. Saul was the people’s choice, ... . the next was


to be of God’s nomination.” (Jamicson.)


67


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAM VEL, BOOK I.
eg


‘Ver. 2. “How can I go,” eto, “The sacred historian does not conceal-the fact that Samuel
was afraid ... . here is an evidence of veracity.” (Wordsworth.) “This fear on the part of
the prophet, who did not generally show himself either hesitating or timid, can only be explained,
as we may see from ver. 14, on the supposition that Saul was already given up to the power of
the evil spirit, so that the very worst might be dreaded from his madness if he discovered that
Samuel had anointed another king. That there was some foundation for Samuel’s anxiety, we
may infer from the fact that the Lord did not blame him for his fear, but pointed out the way
by which he might anoint David without attracting attention.” (Keil.) Say, Iam come to
sacrifice,” etc. “There is here an appearance of duplicity sanctioned by Divine authority
which it is important for us to examine. It was the purpose of God that David should be
anointed at this time as Saul’s successor, and as the ancestor and type of His Christ. It was
not the purpose of God that Samuel should stir up a civil war by setting up David as Saul’s
rival. Secrecy, therefore, was a necessary part of the transaction. But secrecy and concealment
are not the same as duplicity and falsehood. Concealment of a good purpose for a good purpose
is clearly justifiable, e.g. in war, in medical treatment, in State policy, and in the ordinary affairs
of life. In the providential government of the world, and in God’s dealings with individuals,
concealment of His purpose till the proper time for its development is the rule rather than the
exception, and must be so.” (Biblical Commentary. )


Ver. 4. “The elders trembled,” etc. “The anxious inquiry of the elders presupposes that
even in the time of Saul the prophet Samuel was frequently in the habit of coming unexpectedly
to one place and another, for the purpose of reproving and punishing wrong-doing and sin.”
(Keil.) “They might have been conscious of secret guilt, and supposed that Samuel coming
among them as the judicial vicegerent of God, was about to investigate and punish the
commission of some crime. The inhabitants of this place have long been proverbial for their
refractory spirit; for even in modern times they have been often at variance with the
reigning power.” (Hardy’s Notices of the Holy Land. )


. Ver. 5. “am come to sacrifice unto the Lord.” “It is evident from this that the
prophet was accustomed to turn his visits to account by offering sacrifices, and so building up
the people in fellowship with the Lord.” (Keil.) “Sanctify yourselves,” By the preparation
prescribed in Exod, xix. 14,15, “He sanctified Jesse,” etc., ie, he took care that they
were sanctified.


Ver. 7, “The Lord said.” “In like manner the Lord in the days of His flesh read and
answered men’s thoughts.” Compare Matt. xii. 25, Luke v. 22, ete. (Biblical Commentary. )
“Outward appearance.” Literally the eyes. ‘The eyes, as contrasted with the heart, are
figuratively employed to denote the outward form.” (Keil).


Ver. 9, “Shammah” The name is written Shimeah, 2 Sam. xiii. 3; and Shimma, 1 Chron.
fi. 13, xx. 7. The proper orthography is probably that in 2 Sam. xiii. 3. He was the third 80a
of Jesse, and father of Jonadab “a very subtil man, Ammon’s friend,” 2 Sam. xiii, 8, and of
Jonathan who slew a giant of Gath, 1 Chron, xx. 6,7. (Biblical Commentary. )


Ver. 10, “Seven,” ic. including the three who had already passed. It appears from this,
and from chap. xvii. 12, that Jesse had eight sons; but in 1 Chron. ii, 13-15, only seven are
ascribed to him.” (Bibical Commentary). “Samuel said to Jesse.” “It is not till this verse
that the words ‘to Jesse’ are added, expressly indicating an address of Samuel to him. It does
not, however, follow from these words, that Samuel made Jesse a sharer of the divine secret vine
That address to Jesse is merely a negative declaration that the divine selection, with which
Samuel was concerned, and which in the absence of express intimation of its nature might refer
to the prophetic office, rested on none of these seven sons,” (Erdmann).


Ver. 11. “Sit down;” literally, turn round, or surround, te. not sit at the table. “The
ancient Hebrews sat round a low table with their legs crossed, as the modern Orientals do, for
the luxurious practice of reclining was not introduced into Judea until a late period of Old
Testament history.” (Jamieson.)


Ver. 12. “Ruddy,” red, or auburn-haired, This was regarded as a mark of beauty in a
eeny where the hair was generally black. Josephus refers the expression to his tawny com-
Pp. eX10L.,


Ver. 18. “Then Samuel took the horn of oll,” etc. “There is nothing recorded concern-
ing any words of Samuel to David at the time of the anointing, and in explanation of ita
meaning, as in the case of Saul (chap. x. i). In all probability Samuel said nothing at the time
since, according to ver. 2, he had good reason for keeping the matter secret, not only on his own
account, but also for David’s sake ; so that even the brethren of David, who were present, knew
nothing about the meaning and object of the anointing, but may have imagined that Samuel
merely intended to consecrate David as a pupil of the prophet’s. At the same time we can
hardly ee that Samuel left Jesse, and even David, in uncertainty as to the object of bis


HAP. XVI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


ee EEE EEE EEaa ERED


mission, and of the anointing which he had performed. He may have communicated all this to
both of them without letting the other sons know.” (Keil.) “And the Spirit of the Lord
came upon David.” “The youth entered upon a new stage in the development of his inner
life which was wholly consecrated to God, The rich talents wherewith he was endowed from
his birth received on all sides fresh unfolding. The law, the holy records of the books of Moses,
in which he had been instructed from his earliest years, opened themselves to his enlightened
eyes more and more. The peaceful stillness of nature amid which, tending his father’s flocks,
he spent his days, and often, also, the mild, starry nights, favoured his penetration into the
secrets of the Divine revelation. His heart, moved and directed from above, already poured
itself out in sacred song and poem, which he sang to the accompaniment of his harp, to the
praise of that God before whom, from his childhood, he had learned to bow the knee ; and it
may well be assumed that even then, amid that rural loneliness, psalms streamed forth from his
heart, such as the eighth, which overflows with adoring wonder at the condescension and grace
with which the glorious Creator of heaven and earth has concerned Himself with frail man.”
(Krummacher.)


Ver. 14, “An evil spirit from the Lord.” “This spirit is, according to the narrative, not the
condition itself of gloomy melancholy and torturing anguish, but an objective power which
produced it. It is a wicked spiritual power, which came upon him as the opposite of the good
holy spirit which he once possessed, and goaded him to rage and madness, finding its occasion
in the conflict within his soul, and in the passionateness of his nature, which, after the spirit of
the Lord left him, was unbridled. It came on Saul from the Lord; that is, the Lord gave him
over to the power and might of this spirit as punishment for his disobedience and defiant self-
will.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 18. “A mighty valiant man,” etc, David’s reputation for courage, etc., was already
very great. Doubtless since the Spirit of the Lord came upon him his natural qualities and
powers had been greatly enhanced. His feat of killing the lion and the bear (chap. xvii. 34, 36)
had been performed, like Sampson’s feats of strength, under the same supernatural infiuence,
and was probably more or less known.” (Biblical Commentary.)

Ver. 20. “An Ass,” ete. The Hebrew is an ass of bread. Reland adduces a great number of
quotations from Greek writers, showing that the ancients used a bottle with two long handles,
which, from their resemblance to asses’ ears, were called (dvos) asses ; and the Greek poet
Sosibus says of one of his heroes, “ He ate three times in the space of a single day three great
asses of bread, which Casaubon understood to signify the lading of three asses, whereas the true
meaning is the contents of three vases or jars called asses.” (Jamieson.) “ These presents
show how simple were the customs of Israel, and in the court of Saul at that time.” (Kevl.)

Ver. 21. “His Armour-bearer.” “This choice, being an expression of the king's partiality
ghows how honourable the office was held to be.” (Jamieson.)

Ver. 23. “Harp.” “The kuinor, not the large heavy instrument denoted by the word harp
amongst us, but the lyre, a light, portable instrument resembling a bow in shape ”’ (Jamieson).
“Saul was retreshed,” etc. “ Bochard has collected many passages from profane writers,
which speak of the medicinal effects of music on the mind and body, especially as appeasing
anger, and soothing and pacifying a troubled spirit,” (Biblecal Dictionary.) “ Did the music
banish the demon? Not so, but the higher frame of mind into which the king was brought by
it sufficed to limit at least the sphere of the operation of the evil spirit within him .. . Besides,
the silent intercessions which David sent up to heaven on the wings of the music of his harp
must have contributed not @ little to the results with which his melodies were crowned ”
(Krummacher).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.--Verses 1—8,
Samvuet’s Visit to BeTuLEeneEM. |


I. God helps man to a better condition by the instrumentality of man. Those
parts of the earth that are by nature useless to man, may by cultivation be made
to minister to his comfort. Weeds and unfruitful trees may be uprooted, and
trees yielding fruit and herbs for the service of man may take their place. But
man himself must work the change. If the desert is to rejoice and blossom as
the rose, human instrumentality must exert itself. And so is it in matters
relating to man’s spiritual and moral well-being. If a moral wilderness is to be
transformed into a garden of the Lord, God uses men, or a man, to do the work.
Israel was now suffering from. the misrule of a king who would not be ruled by
God, and God purposed to bring about a change, to maugurate a new eS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 2.





era for the people, both materially and spiritually. And He chose a man to
indicate His rejection of the king who had brought no blessing to the nation,
and to point out him who was to lift it to a higher condition of prosperity both
morally and commercially. Samuel, in the hand of God, was the man who
uprooted the fruitless tree and planted in its place one which was to bear fruit
for Israel’s sustenance and growth. So the higher and more blessed rule of the
gospel dispensation was proclaimed to humanity by man. The state of man by
nature is a state of moral misrule—of spiritual unfruitfulness ; and to man was
entrusted the work of proclaiming to the world deliverance from the dominion
of the powers of darkness and the advent of a new King of men, under whose
beneficent rule first the wilderness of individual hearts, and then by degrees all the
moral wastes upon the face of the earth shall break forth into spiritual fruitful-
ness and beauty. When Our Lord commissioned His Apostles to “Go into al]
the world and preach the Gospel to every creature” (Mark xvi. 15), He com-
manded them to proclaim the accession of a new Sovereign, under whose
government all the subjects of all the kingdoms of the world might, if they were
willing, be lifted into the glorious liberty of the children of God. He has
ordained that by human lips this new era shall be made known to man—that
ne human instrumentality men shall learn who it is that is God’s Anointed
ne.


II. Those who are instruments of good to man sometimes shrink from the
work which God calls them to do. And Samuel said, “How can I go?”
God’s methods of making His children instruments of good to others are often
most perplexing and painful to them, and tasks are given them to perform from
which they draw back in fear and trembling. Joseph was made an instrument
of great blessing both to the nation of Egypt and to his own family, but the way
in which he became such a benefactor was a very rough one, and if he could
have seen it lying before him without seeing the goal to which it would bring
him, he would probably have asked Samuel’s question, “How can I go?”
When Moses was called by (od to go and stand before Pharaoh, he drew back
from the mission with which God charged him with such persistency that “ the
anger of the Lord was kindled against him” (Exod. iv. 13), although in his
case the reluctance apparently arose rather from a sense of his own inability
than from fear of evil to his own person. Yet in his case as in that of Samuel
the cause of the shrinking back was the same, viz., a momentary failure of that
full confidence in God which was an eminent feature in the characters of both
these good men, The hesitation in both was but a transient cloud which only
dimmed for a very short season the almost perfect obedience which each of them
rendered to their God. It sufficed to show that both were men of like passions
and infirmities with ourselves, and links them with God’s honoured servants in
all ages, all of whom have their hours of faithlessness and consequently of fear.


III, The true servants of God in such circumstances tell out their perplexity
and fear to God Himself. This is a certain cure for attacks of cowardice arising
from mistrust of God’s power and wisdom. When Jonah was entrusted with a
distasteful and perilous task there is no record that he made known to God his
weakness and fear. He took counsel with no one but himself, and the result
was ignominious defeat. But neither Moses nor Samuel seek, like the son of
Amittai, to “flee from the presence of the Lord” (Jonah i. 3), but to the Lord
Himself they make known their fears and their reasons for wavering. And the
result in both cases is the same—their faith rises to the emergency, and in the
protection and help afforded to them in performing the duty enjoined upon
them they have a fresh proof that God never sends His servants to “warfare at
their own charges.”

170


GHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





IV. Those who are instruments of good to their fellow-creatures are often
regarded by them with distrust and suspicion. No man in the land of Israel
could have had any reason to regard Samuel in any other light than in that of
a true friend, yet the elders of the town meet him with the question, “ Comest
thou peaceably?” A consciousness of guilt is often at the bottom of this dis-
trust and dislike. The entrance of a faithful man of God into some circles or
localities is unwelcome because his very presence arouses in the ungodly a sense
of their guilt. The feeling may not be very clearly defined even to themselves,
but it is the cause which makes them dislike the company of such aman, The
officer of justice, whether he be clothed in a policeman’s uniform or a judge's
ermine, is regarded by an innocent man as a “minister of God for good”
(Rom. xiii. 4). But the guilty man does not feel at rest in his presence.
Samuel was a man of God whose very presence was enough to arouse in guilty
men a sense of their deserts, and he was also a judge in Israel whose visit to
Bethlehem might have been regarded with fear by the villagers, because they
knew that they had been guilty of outward acts of disobedience to the law of
God. Or their distrustful reception of Samuel might have arisen from a suspi-
cion that he was to be the instrument of a change of rule in Israel. Men are
often so little alive to their true interests, and so averse to any change, that
they resent any disturbance in the existing order of things, even although it
would bring much blessing to themselves. The Bethlehemites might have been
certain that any change which came to them from God through Samuel would
be for good, and not for evil, and yet fear of Saul and an unwillingness to be
disturbed might have made them prefer the rule of their present unworthy
monarch to a new order of government. A fear of immediate unpleasant conse-
quences and a cowardly and unworthy content with things as they are has often
made men regard with suspicion and with positive hatred those who have desired
to bring them under a better rule—those who have endeavoured to free them
individually from the tyranny of Satan, or, nationally from bondage to Satan’s
emissaries. The reformers of all ages, both in the Church and in the State,
have been coldly welcomed by the majority of those to whom God has made
them instruments of blessing. But this need not be a matter of either surprise
or discouragement when we remember that those whom the Son of God came to
make “free indeed” (John viii. 36) cried, “ Orucify Him! crucify Him!” and
that His great apostle whose heart’s desire and prayer was for the salvation of
his fellow-countrymen (Rom. x. 1) received from them this sentence, “ Away
with such a fellow from the earth, for tt is not fit that He should live ” (Acts


xxii, 22),


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 1. It is an unnatural senseless-
ness not to be affected with the dan-
gers, with the sins, of our governors.
God did not blame this sorrow, but
moderated it. Itwas not the affection
He forbade but the measure. In this
is the difference betwixt good men and
evil; that evil men mourn not for
their own sins, good men do so mourn
for the sins of others that they will
hardly be taken off. If Samuel mourn
because Saul hath cast away God by his
ain he must cease to mourn because


God hath cast away Saul from reigning
over Israel in His just punishment.
good heart hath learned to rest itself
apon the justice of God’s decree, and
forgets all earthly respects when it
looks up to heaven.—Bp. Hall.

The affairs of the kingdom of God
go their way without break or halt
according to God’s high thoughts and
decrees, though human sin and its
attendant judgment (as in Saul’s case),
or human weakness (as in Samuel's
inordinate grief for Saul), ra seem


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





to hinder the plans of the Divine wis-
dom. But it is also precisely by
human sin and foolishness that the
history of God’s kingdom under the
guidance of the Divine wisdom and
providence receives new occasions and
impulses to wider and higher develop-
ment according to the aims which God
sets before Himself.—Lange’s Com-
mentary.
' God demands in the souls He sets
apart for Himself and for the guidance
of others, such a dying toall things that
He does not allow them to regard any
other interest than His, whatever
reason may be alleged.— Berlenberger
Bible.

Remedies for improper mourning.


1, Submission to the will of God (“1


have rejected him”), 2. Diligence in
present work for God (“Fill thy horn
and go”). 38. Hope that God will
bring a better future (“I have provided
me a king”)—Translator of Lange’s
Commentary.

In the providence of God, there is a
blessed arrangement by which the new
duties and cares which are occasioned
by bereavements, losses, or disappoint-
ments become the means of alleviating
distress and improving the soul... .
Persous in public positions are sum-
moned from their humiliation and
melancholy, induced by the defeat of
favourite scheies, to endeavour to
retrieve their influence, and do some
good before they die. ‘The sense of
personal and relative responsibility is
thus made by God to rebuke and eure
a sorrow deemed incousolable....
1. Lhere is a duty to the Lord. +...


Bj0K I.





It would not be reverent to quarrel
with His providence: it would be
disobedient and impious... 2. There
ts a duty to your own soul, “ Fill
thine horn with oil,” and go to the
new duties to which you are called,
that it may be well with yourself,
3. There is a duty to others. Samuel
had something more to live for than
his own interest. His grief was a
public calamity. The sorrow into
which he was plunged might do
injury .... When there are others
to care for, our grief must not be
immoderate,—Steel.


Ver. 2. Perhaps desire of full direc-
tion drew from him this question, but
not without a mixture of diffidence ;
for the manner of doing it doth not
so much trouble him ag the success,
It is not to be expected that the most
faithful hearts should be always in an
equal height of resolution: God does
not chide Samuel, but instruct him.—
Bishop Hail.


Ver. 4. Hundreds of years after this,
when the heavenly light was seen in
the same place by the shepherds, they
too were “sore afraid ;” but there wag
as little to fear in the one case as in
the other; for in both there was a
provided sacrifice, and in both the
mission was one of peace; yea, ag
Samuel came to anoint David to be
a king, so the angel-heralded Jesus
appeared “to make us kings and
priests unto our Lord and His Father.”
—Dr. W. M. Taylor,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 6—12,


Tur ANOINTING or Davy.


I. There is a tendency in even the best men to be carried away by


appearances.
Samuel said at once,


Because Eliab’s countenance was comely and his stature imposing,
“Surely the Lord’s anointed is before me.”


Yet he


knew nothing of Eliab’s inner man, and he knew from the sad example of Saul


that external beauty was uo guarantee of internal worth,


The estimate that


men form of human character must always be grounded on outward manifesta-
tions, just as the physician forms his estimate of _the state of a man’s health
from the symptoms which present themselves to his observation, They cannot


172


CHAP. XVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





do as God can—penetrate into the hidden recesses of both soul and body, and
read there as in a book the exact condition of the physical and moral nature.
Man should therefore be very careful in pronouncing a judyment or forming
an opinion concerning his fellow-man, remembering the “Lord seeth not as
man seeth; he should not be hasty to decide, but should wait until the
character has had time to develop itself—until long experience and observation
have in some measure qualified him to be a judge in the matter. ‘To argue
that because a man possesses gifts of person or of intellect he is also the
possessor of moral worth, is more foolish than to argue that a man is wealthy
because he is dressed in gay clothing, and yet everyone of us is prone to be
influenced more than we ought to be by outward appearance, and to form our
judgments of those we meet upon very insufficient grounds. Even this prophet
of God was not free from this weakness.


II. However men may err in their estimate of men, God’s estimate will
decide who is to come uppermost. No member of Jesse’s household thought
it worth while to call the shepherd-boy in to partake of the sacrificial feast, or
to bring him under the notice of the man of God ; but the feast notwithstanding
had to be delayed until his arrival, and it was concerning him that Samuel
heard the Divine voice, saying, “ Arise, anoint him, for this is he.” There is
always a levelling force at work in the universe, which only needs time to place
each man where he ought to be—lifting up this one and putting down the
other—making the last first and the first last according to the moral worth of
each. ‘This levelling force is the hand of God, who will see to it that no true
man of worth shall lack position and opportunity to let the light that is in him
shine forth to the glory of God, and the govd of his fellow-creatures, God’s
election and approval is not always so perceptible to the eye of man as it was in
the case of Jesse’s youngest son, but it is always as real and as certain, Some
men do not reach their destined throne among their fellows until they have left
the world; they must pass away from earth before men can realise that
a king has been among them. It may bo that many who have lived and
died in obscurity are yet awaiting their coronation day, or they may
have been elected to high and honourable service in another world. How-
ever this may be there is a deeply-rooted conviction in all who confide
in the righteousness of the Judge of all the earth, that no moral king shall
miss his throne. Appearances may be strongly against it, but appearances
were likewise strongly against the fact that the despised and crucified Nazarene
carpenter was He who at the right hand of God should judge the world and
receive the homage of the universe. But time has made the one truth certain,
and it will establish the other. It must be so—l. Because God can never be
ignorant of what His creatures are best fitted for. 2. Because no selfish motive
or lack of power can ever interfere with the justice of His dealings. 3. Because
the infinite goodness of God must make Him ever in Javour of using any good
that He finds in His creatures for the benefit of the race. The subject teaches
us—(1.) That moral worth is the true beauty. All the beauty of material things
is but a shadow of a higher beauty—of that beauty which makes God the most
beautiful Being in the universe. As He is a Spirit, and cannot be apprehended
by our senses, that which makes Him the object of admiration and worship to
the best of His creatures is that beauty of goodness which appeals to their
spiritual nature. And the truest and highest beauty of men or angels is that
beauty which is of the same kind as God's. (II.) We should form our standard
of excellence upon God’s standard. “To honour and exalt a man for any
superiority of physical beauty or birth, is to render him homage for that for
which he is not responsible, and 1s souseaner most foolish. Yet it is a
mistake into which men often fall. But in this respect, as im many ee: God’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAM VEL,


BOOK L





thoughts are not as man’s thoughts, neither are His ways our ways. If we are
wise we shall, so far as finite creatures can, make God’s standard of excellence
ours, by looking not at the outward appearance nor regarding external circum-
stances, but by giving our honour and coufidence to those who poasess the


“beauty of the Lord God” (Psa. xe. 17).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Vers. 6,12. Difficulty of selecting
men for important positions. 1. Causes
(a). Intrinsic difficulty of properly
estimating character. (b). Manage-
ment of partial friends. 2. Lessons
(a). To avoid haste in deciding.
(b.) To make diligent inquiries.—
Translator of Lange's Commentary.


Vers. 6, 7. So when godly men see
their neighbours lovely in their lives,
civil in their practices, high in their
profession, strict in performances, they,
according to their duty, say, inwardly
at least, Surely the Lord’s anointed is
before Him, these are the blessed of
the Lord, anointed to the kingdom of
heaven; but God may often answer
them, Look not on their profession or
their performances, for I see their
hearts, that they serve not me, but
themselves of me Observe
at what a high rate that which is
nothing worth is valued in a time of
famine. Truly so, there is such a
scarcity of true godliness, that godly
men, who exceedingly long for the
advancement of Christ and Christianity
in men’s hearts and houses, prize and
encourage anything that cometh near
it.—Swinnock.


Ver. 7. Muscularity is not Christi-
anity, and bodily beauty is not holiness,
Not how you look, but what you are,
ought to be the first care of your lives;
for if you have a selfish disposition, a
sordid soul, or a sinful life, your out-
ward beauty will be like “a jewel in a
swine’s snout,” and your bodily vigour
will only be like the strength of a safe
in which nothing worth preserving is
locked up.—Dr. W. M. Taylor.

Objectors to the history of the Old
Testament have dwelt much upon the
title, cH man after God’s own

7


which is continually given to David.
“Ts he not,” they have said, “directly
chargeable with adultery and murder
.. . . Isthis the man whom a righteous
God would declare to be the object of
His special complacency?” . .. .
Divines have met these questions with
an answer of this kind: “The epithet
which you complain of belongs not to
David personally but officially . :
He did the work he was appointed to
do. He fulfilled God’s counsel. So
far he was a man after God’s own
heart.” A very little reflec-
tion upon the words themselves, still
more a slight study of the history of
David, should surely have prevented
any man from employing this kind of
apology. . “God trieth the reins,”
That general principle is here applied
expressly to the case of David.—
Maurice.

I. A solemn thought. He knows
fully all that characterises the inward
and spiritual nature of man. II. How
comforting! You may be misunder-
stood by men. Your purest motives
may be misinterpreted. . . But there
is an appeal to the Judge of all—
Steel,


Ver. 11. One of our greatest poeta
once remembered this question of
Samuel’s after he had studied and
mastered the writings of the most
prominent philosophers and wise men
of this world, and had found in none
of them anything stable and aatis-
factory. Then with scorn he wrote
these lines :

“ Ach ich war auch in diesem Falle!
Ais ich die Weisen hért’und las 3
Da jeder diese Welten alle
Mit seiner Menschenspaune mary
Da fragt ’ich ! Aber sind sie dag


Sind das die Knaben alle f”


GHAP. XVI-





This case was mine too when at leisure,
What all the sages wrote I read,
When with their small wits they would
measure
The wealth of worlds around us spread :
I thought of Samuel then, when he
Made Jesse’s sons in row appear,
And when the seven were counted, said,
Are all thy children here }
Goethe,


O that this prince of poets had not
after all omitted to count in One /—
Krummacher.

It was certainly not by accident that
the son on whom the Divine choice fell
was at the very moment keeping his
father’s sheep. .... His early em-
pec had a direct and Divine

earing on the latter. ... 1. Asa
shepherd, the sense of responsibility to
another was powerfully called into ex-
ercise. The flock was not his own. In
keeping it he was acting merely as his
father’s servant. .... The servant-
Jeeling thus beautifully called into
play was transferred, in full integrity,
to the higher sphere of the kingdom.
. . - 2. The shepherd-occupation of
David led him, from its very nature,
to seek the welfare of the flock. It de-
manded unceasing attention to its
condition as a whole, and to the state
of each several animal; frequent ex-
posure to danger, and constant readi-
ness to sacrifice his own ease or
comfort, . . . . These were the ideas
of duty with which David became
familiar as a shepherd. And when his
charge was changed these ideas of duty
remaining in his heart, and influencing
his public conduct, made him the emi-
nent ruler he became. ... 3. In his
office ag @ shepherd David had con-
stantly to study the tncrease and
improvement of the flock. It was not
enough for the shepherd to keep the
flock as he got it. The flock was not
pvt kept unless every season

rought a great increase to its number.
Thesame thought manifestly influenced
David’s kingly administration. He
constantly consulted for the progres-
sive improvement and elevation of his
people. ... 4. The shepherd employ-
ment of David, by leading him to give
special attention to tha weak, helpless,


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY : SAMUEL.





a le


and distressed of the flock, trained him
for one of the most blessed and Christ-
like functions of a godly ruler.—
Blaikie.

When we look forward in the light
of Divine revelation, the early part of
David’s consecrated life contains many
typical elements as factual prophecies
or pre-figurations of the future. His
shepherd life—continued after he was
anointed, in which on the one hand,
self-consecrated, he immerses himself
in the contemplation of God’s reve-
lation in nature and in His word, and
on the other hand must be ready at
any moment to meet the greatest
dangers, and exhibit boldness and
prowess (xvii. 34-37)—presents on
these two sides types of his religious
life as king, the Spirit of God developing
on the basis of this double natural
ground two sides of his character which
not merely co-exist but are interwoven
with each other: (1) éntensively the
innermost concentration and immersion
of his thoughtful meditative heart into
the depths of God’s revelation of His
power, grace, and wisdom in nature,
word, history, and into the depths of
the sinful human heart, whence sprang
in his psalms partly the inspired praise
of God, with furtherance and deepening
of the knowledge of God, partly ad
vance in the natural grace, lacking
condition of the human heart; (2)
extensively his admirable energy and
heroic courage in the life of conflict
which he had evermore to lead. In
the hiddenness of his royal calling from
the people, the gradual ripening of his
inner life for his office, and the lowli-
ness of the sphere whence he was raised
to the throne, he is a type of Christ,
who sprang from him according to the
flesh .... passes His holy youth in

rivacy, and then at the end of this
ivine-human development steps forth
from the lowliness of a natural human
life as the King of Israel, who com-
pletes in his person and work God’s
revelations for the establishment of
His kingdom on earth, and therein
enters on the war of subjugation
against the ungodly world.—Lange’s
Commentary.
476


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—18,
SavuL AND Davi.


L Both the Spirit of God and the agents of Satan seek congenial soil for
their operations, When the Spirit of the Lord came upon David, He found a
heart prepared to receive His influence and to profit by it. David had already
yielded himself up to those ordinary influences of the Holy Spirit which come to
men in general, and he was therefore capable of receiving and being blest by a
special outpouring of that same gracious and sanctifying power, to fit him for a
sacred office and a special work. Those who have received into their minds the
elementary principles of a science, or the rudiments of a language, possess a basis
upon which a teacher may lay other truths concerning the same science or
language ; and so the pupil who has diligently mastered the alphabet of any
branch of knowledge is the one most likely to be rewarded with further instruc-
tion. So the man who has profited by the spiritual light which has been already
afforded him is in the way to receive a further revelation—he who has opened
his heart to receive the teachings of Christ which have been given him has
basis upon which the Spirit of God can operate to his further enlightenment.
The ingenuous confession of Nathaniel (John i 40) showed that he was fit to
receive greater knowledge, and to be made acquainted with greater and more
glorious truths concerning Christ and His Kingdom; and hence the Saviour’s
promise : “ Thou shalt see greater things than these”’ (ver. 50). The confession
of Peter in Czesarea Philippi (Matt. xvi. 16) showed that he had mastered the
first lesson in connection with the Kingship of Christ; and because he thus gave
proof of having made good use of the evidence concerning his Divine Master
which had already been given him, he was permitted to receive more and more,
and at last to be an “eyewitness of His Majesty when He received Strom His
Father honour and glory in the holy mount” (2 Peter i. 16,17). If Peter and
his brother Apostles had not already yielded themselves up to the teachings
which flowed from the every-day manifestations of their Lord, we may be sure
they would not have been permitted to receive the higher revelation of His
transfiguration. So was it with David. The Spirit of God found in him a basis
upon which to raise a superstructure of such a character as would fit him to be
a worthy ruler of the chosen people, and a type of Him who should hereafter
rule the whole Israel of God (Micah v. 2). Saul also had been wrought upon by
the Spirit of God, but although he had thereby become intellectually stronger
and more fit for the kingly office, the more blessed and sanctifying influences of
that Holy Spirit had found no receptive soil upon which to operate. Elis heart
was like the rocky ground of our Lord’s parable, where the few plants which
ppeune up soon withered away because they had no root (Matt. xiii. 6); and
the powers of evil never leave such a heart untenanted. When a man resists
the Holy Ghost as Saul did, He ceases at length to strive with him, and the Evil
One, finding the house empty, sends his agents to take up their abode there, and
so “the last state of that man is worse than the first” (Luke xi, 26). :


II. The powers of evil are under Divine rule. A monarch has under his
aceptre uot only those obedient subjects who find their truest freedom in
observing the statutes of the realm, but also the lawless and disobedient who
yield him no willing service. Yet this latter class do serve by compulsion—ag
criminals and prisoners they may be used to do work which the free citizen
could not do so well, and so they also may unwillingly render service to the
king. So the powers of evil are subjects of the King of kings as truly as the
angels of light ; and although they are rebels against His righteous rule, they
can do goening without His permission, and sometimes in following the dictates


OwaP. Xvi. HOMILETIO QOMMENTARY; SAMUU!.





of their own evil natures they undesignedly fulfil God’s purposes. This was
remarkably the case in the experience of Job. Satan could only distress and
afflict Job by Divine permission, and while he seemed to be only working out
his own evil intentions, he was really fulfilling a Divine purpose towards a
godly man. And the spirits of darkness are also made instruments of God’s
chastisement, especially in relation to men who are in rebellion against Him.
We can conceive that this terrible but necessary work in a world of sinners
could not be done by a good angel as it can be done by a fallen and malignant
spirit; this we know from the teaching of Scripture in this passage, and in
others, that God does so over-rule the malignity of evil spirits and evil men ag
to make them executioners of His judgments upon other sinners, ‘The evil
spirit which now troubled Saul was from the Lord in the sense that it was
permitted to be an instrument of chastisement for his disobedience.


III, Even when God chastises for disobedience, He leaves some influences
within reach of the offender to modify the punishment. Saul was not wholly
forsaken of God while he was not wholly forsaken of men, for men “ are that to
us, and no more, than God permits them to be” (Henry). Saul, a prey to
his own evil passions, and to the malice of his spiritual adversary, could hardly
have been at this time a good master or a man calculated to attract friends, yet
there were those still around him who were sorry for him in his affliction, and
who were anxious to alleviate his suffering. And so it is generally. When
men, by a course of wilful transgression of Divine laws have brought upon
themselves the penalty of mental or physical suffering, some kindly heart and
hand is permitted by God to be moved in their behalf, and human sympathy
anu help lessens in some measure the weight of the deserved chastisement,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 13. Here was the sign that all intelligible. In such a time of retro-


the inward discipline and preparation
of David had an object, another object
than merely to make him a faithful
keeper of sheep, or even a wise and
righteous man. But a Divine sign is
not a mere ceremony. It would be
deceitful and insincere if there were
not a present blessing denoted by it,
the communication of an actual power
to fit the man for tasks to which he
has not hitherto been appointed. From
that day forward there was a power
within David stirring him to thoughts
and acts which connected him directly
with Israelites, with human beings.
. .. » There is a time in men’s lives,
before they enter upon some great
work to which they have been conse-
crated, a time when they are permitted
to look back upon the years which
they have already past, to see them no
longer as fragments, but as linked to-
gether, as having a Divine purpose
running through them which makes
gven their incoherences and discords


spection, when the future is seen mir-
rored in the past, David may have
found his harp much more than the
mere solace of lonely hours, the mere
response to his inward sorrows and
thanksgivings. He may have begun
to know that he was speaking for other
men as well as for himself; that there
were close and intimate fibres uniting
men utterly unlike and separated by
tracts of time and space ; that there is
some mysterious source of these sympa-
thies, some living centre who holds
together the different portions of each
man’s life, and in whom there is a
general human life of which all may
ee The Spirit of God, which

ad taken possession of David, may
have been teaching him these lessons
and inspiring the song which was the
utterance of them before he was pre-
pared to come forth as the actual
deliverer. And that Spirit will assu-
redly have been preparing him for his
after conflicts, by making him feel that

V7


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


——


he had, even then, enemies most fierce
to struggle with, subjects most. turbu-
lent to subdue. The invisible God
does not make known to man that He
is his shepherd, without making known
to him also that there are invisible
owers more fearful than bears and
ions, which would tear his flock asun-
der, which would bring each separate
sheep into the valley of the shadow of
dexthie Maurien


Ver. 14. The Power of darkness,
which is personal, and in souls in the
condition of that in which Saul’s now
was, finds all open for his operations,
wrought in him with greater energy to
deepen yet more and more that dread-
ful gulf which separated the king from
Jehovah, eternally enthroned in the
heavens; yea, to increase the estrange-
ment of the miserable man from God
yet more and more till it became a
demoniacal hatred of God.—Krum-
macher,

In regard to the negative or privative
declaration that “the Spirit of the
Lord had departed from Samuel,” we
may take it to mean that God with-
drew from him all those special aids
which, in connection with his anointing
to the royal office, had been conferred
upon him. Perhaps, also, we may in-
clude in it the taking from him of those
gracious influences of the Holy Spirit,
without which a man becomes, in the
saddest and solemnest of all senses,
“abandoned.” This is what Paul has
described as a “ being given over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient” (Rom. i, 28),
and what, in the simple Saxon of our
common speech, we call, “a being left
to one’s self.” The Saviour has said,
“From him that hath not shall be
taken away even that he hath.” Now,
in Saul, we have a deeply suggestive
instance of the execution of this sen-
tence.—Dr. W. M. Taylor.

Man is governed by the Spirit from
above, or by the spirit from beneath ;
there is no third course. For he is as
little isolated in the invisible as in the
visible world ; he must be part of the
bia of the one or the other of the

78


BOOK I.





invisible worlds ; he belongs either to
the kingdom of light or to the kingdom
of darkness ; he is guided either by the
Spirit of the Lord or by the evil spirit,
according as he decides for a permanent
attitude of heart and direction of will
to this side or that.—Lange’s Com-
mentary.

Whether any more be meant by this
than that God, for Saul’s hardened im-
penitence, withdrew His restraining
and guiding grace, and left him a prey
to his own passions, I cannot take
upon me to say. This only I am sure
of, that no man living needs a heavier
chastisement from Almighty God than
the letting his own passions loose upon
him. The consequence to the mind, I
apprehend, would in that case be
much the same as it would be to the
body, if the restraining power of the
air were removed, and all the muscles,
vessels, and humours left to the full
freedom of their own powers and ten-
dencies.— Delany.


Vers. 15, 18. Does not the penetra-
tion of these people excite our surprise?
Are we not astonished at the far-
reaching enlightenment which they
manifest of the existence of a world of
fallen spirits, whom Jehovah is wont
to make use of, not seldom, for putting
to trial His own people, as well as for
visiting with punishment the wicked ?
Must we not conclude that they were
indeed already acquainted with the
book of Job, and that it was a con-
stituent part of their holy canonical
books? An Israelite adhered to his
Bibleunderall circumstances, even when
he was destitute of spiritual life and
his conduct was condemned by it .
They recommend to him the power of
music as a means for relieving his mind,
but with a wise discriminating judg-
ment regarding itg character. ike
The servants knew well the power of
music to produce, according to its
kind and quality, not less the most
depraved than the holiest impressions,
Music can unfetter the most destruc-
tive passions ; but it can also, at least
for a time, tame and mitigate the
wildest storms of the human heart.


OHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





The music which the servants of the
king thought of was not that which
pleases the world, and which only
opens the door to unclean spirits, but
such as, animated by a nobler inspira-
tion, might insensibly elevate the soul
by its harmonious melody, as on angel’s
wings, towards heaven. They thought
of the harp, then the most solemn
instrument of music, and on the melo-
dies which were wont to sound forth in
the sanctuary at the time of the sacred
festivals of Israel—Krummacher.

If they had said, “Sir, you know
that this evil comes from that God
whom you have offended, there can
be no hope but in reconcilement . .
labour your peace with Him by a
serious humiliation, make means to
Samuel to further the atonement,”
they had been wise counsellors, divine
physicians: whereas now, they do but
skin over the sore, and leave it rankled


at the bottom. The cure must ever
proceed in the same steps with the
disease, else in vain we shall seem to
heal: there is no safety in the redress
of evils but to strike at the root.—
Bp. Hall.

We see here, distinctly marked,
these two things, the plan of God and
the libertyofman . . . . David,
in his devotion to his harp, had no
thought of thereby rising to the royal
favour; the servant wko mentioned
his name to Saul had no idea of the
fact that he was already anointed to
be Saul’s successor ; yet each, in his
own way, and by working out the
choice of his own free will, was helping
on the fulfilment of the purposes of
God. So it is still, the only difference
being that, in ordinary history, we are
not always thus permitted to see the
different agencies at work.—Dr. W.
M. Taylor.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19-28


Davi at Court.


We here have—

I, Saul an instrument of good to David. David was one day to sit upon the
throne of Israel, and although he already possessed many qualities of mind and
heart which fitted him for such a position, the transition from the home at
Bethlehem to the palace was a very great one, and the man who was to experi-
ence it needed some intervening training. It was expedient that he should
have some experience of the life of the court before he became its head, and, in
the providence of God, the man whom he was to succeed was the instrument by
whom he gained that experience.


II. David a means of blessing to Saul. Saul, miserable and God-forsaken
though he was, was not yet beyond the soothing power of sacred music, and it
was ordained by God that David’s skill and piety should administer this passing
comfort to his spirit. Music seems to have been left to us by God to remind us—
1. Of the moral harmony of the heavenly world, All the inhabitants of the
city of God live in a state of concord as perfect and as morally beautiful as the
most exquisite music. There creatures of various gifts and diverse dispositions
so perfectly agree with each other that no note of discord is ever heard, and the
diversity of each only heightens the harmony of the whole. 2. Of the harmony
that once ruled in the human soul. The soul of man has not always been torn
asunder by conflicting passions, or by the promptings of good on the one side and
of evil on the other. Conscience did not always assume the position of a
sentine and stand with drawn sword to avenge the first transgression of the law
writtea upon the human heart. ‘There was a time when conscience had only
one work to do—to approve of human deeds and so add to puuen happiness
instead of being also compelled by human sinfulness to take the attitude of a
reprover and a judge, and so increase the discord within the human soul.
Music reminds us of what man’s inner life was when God first co. him


HMOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L





&


morally in His own image—when every faculty and feeling and desire was in
perfect harmony with each other, and with all that is beautiful and good, 3.
Of the harmony of the Divine nature, In proportion as the Christian’s heart
and life approaches perfect conformity to the will of God, he finds a music
within the soul which passeth all understanding. If he could look back upon
all his past life and feel conscious that he had never wronged either himself, or
his neighbour, or his God, and if he could feel confident that his whole tuture
would be as perfect as his past, how blessed would be the harmony within !
This is the experience of God—this makes Him ever and perfectly blessed—this
makes His whole being perfectly free from any shadow of discord, and constitutes
music a type of the harmonious blending of all the glorious attributes of His
character. a

III. Music, by shadowing forth these moral truths, is intended to comfort
and to elevate mankind. If, when the soul is cast down by sorrow or degraded
by sin, it will yield itself to the influence of this gift of God, rays of light will
penetrate the darkness, and a dew of hope will fall upon the scorched soul. If
even Saul became for a season delivered from the bondage of evil, when he
listened to the sweet sounds of David’s harp, music must be one agency to lift
the soul of man into communion with the unseen world and the unseen God,
and so to do something towards restoring it to its original harmony. That it
has such # tendency we have abundant evidence from the testimony of
experience. ‘‘ Music,” says Luther, “is one of the fairest and most glorious
gilts of God, to which Satan is a bitter enemy, for it removes from the heart
the weight of sorrow and the fascinations of evil thought. Music is a kind
and gentle sort of discipline, it refines the passion and improves the under-
standing.” And in most of the revivals of spiritual life in the Church of God,
music has been one of the agencies employed. It follows therefore that
redeemed men ought to cultivate a knowledge of music, and render thanks unto
God for having left us this reminder of heaven and of Himself,


ILLUSTRATIONS OF VERSE 23.


Philip the Fifth of Spain and the musician


This remarkable instance of the power of
Farinelli, in the last century. The king was


music over the mind is in conformity with the


experiments of physicians, and with various
intimations which may be found in ancient
authors... Inthe Mémoires of the French
Academy of Sciences for 1707, are recorded
many accounts of diseases which, havirg
obstinately resisted the remedies prescribed
by the most able of the faculty, at length
yielded to the powerful impressions of harmony.
One of these is the case of a person who was
seized with fever, which soon threw him into
a very violent delirium, almost without any
interval, accompanied by bitter cries, by tears,
by terrors, and by an almost constant wakeful-
ness. On the third day, a hint that fell from
himself suggested the idea of trying the effect
of music, Gradually, as the strain proceeded,
his troubled visage relaxed into a most serene
expression, his restless eyes became tranquil,
his convulsions ceased, and the fever absolutely
left him. It is true that when the music was
discontinued his symptoms returned ; but by
frequent repetitions of the experiment, during
which the delirium always ceased, the power
of the disease was broken, and the habits of a
sound mind re-established. Six days sufficed
to accomplish a cure ... More remarkable,


es well as more truly parallel, is the case of
180


seized with a total dejection of spirits, which
made him refuse to be shaved, and incapable
of appearing in council or of attending to any
affairs, he queen, after all other methods
had been essayed, thought of trying what
might be effected by the influence of riuxic,
to which the king was known to be highly
susceptible. We have no doubt that this ex-
periment was suggested to her by this case of
Saul and David. The celebrated musician
Farinelli was invited to Spain, and it was
contrived that there should be a concert in a
room adjoining the king’s apartment, in which
the artist should perform one of his captivating
songs. ‘Ihe king appeared surprised at first,
then greatly moved, and at the end of the
second air he summoned the musiciar. to his
apartment and, loading him with compliments,
asked him how he could reward such talents,
Farinelli, previously tutored, answered that he
desired nothing but that his majesty would
permit his attendant to shave and dress him,
and that he would endeavour to make his
appearance in the council as usual. The king
yielded, and from this time his disease gave
vith and Farinelli had the honour of the cure,
eto,


GHAP, XVL





ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEE.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVS COMMENTS,


Ver. 19. While David followed the
sheep he had ample time at his disposal,
but instead of letting it go by in idle-
ness, or frittering it away in spasmodic
study, now of this thing now of that,
he specially concentrated his attention
on the art of music, until he acquired
rare skill and excellence in playing
upon the harp, and it was through this
self-taught attainment that he was first
talled forth into public life. It is of
immense consequence that the young
people of these days should see the
necessity of acting in a similar manner.
. . . . It is a preparation for future
eminence. It is interesting to observe
how many have passed through this
very gate to usefulness and honour.—
Dr. W. M. Taylor.


Ver. 23. There is a mystery and a
meaning in music we can never either
expound or explore; and it is felt that
those natures which are the greatest
burden and mystery to themselves find
most the solace of song in the combi-
nations of all sweet sounds; we have
known this, it is not always that in
joyfulness of heart we sing... .

ave known a woman, disappointed
and forsaken, flying to her piano; her
fingers rushing over the keys have
given liberation to her spirit, and the
chords opened the sealed well of tears,
and the rains descended and the floods
came. And something like this is a
very general experience. Hence we
have poetry for all cultured people
and hymns for holy people ; and do we
not know what it is to become happy
while we sing ?—//ood.

It was a song without words whose
soothing melody fell upon the ear of


the king. Words corresponding to the
music would have produced the con-
trary result to that which was aimed
at, and might even have increased the
ill temper of the king. There are even
yet men enough of this sort—persons
without faith, yea, at variance both
with God and the world — whom
solemn music is able most powerfully
to delight, and in whom it awakens, at
least for the time, dispositions which
border on devotion and piety, while
yet the words which correspond to the
sacred melody would produce in them
the very opposite effect. What is
manifest from this, but that in the
soul of such persons the last point at
which they may be touched by that
which is sacred has not yet wholly
decayed away ?—Krummacher.

It was a mere foreshadow, on a com-
paratively low and earthly ground,
of the wondrous way in which David,
as the Psalmist, was afterwards to
provide the true “oil of joy for the
mourner,” and to become a guide to
the downcast soul “from the horrible
pit,” up to the third heaven of joy and
peace.— Blaikie.

The music was more than a mere
palliative. It brought back for a time
the sense of a true order, a secret,
inward harmony, an assurance that it
is near to every man, and that he may
enter into it. A wonderful message,
no doubt, to a king or a common man,
better than a great multitude of words,
a continual prophecy that there is a
deliverer who can take the vulture
from the heart, and unbind the sufferer
from the rock; but not (as many, I
suppose, must bitterly know) the de-
liverer itself.—AMaurice.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOR ft.





CHAPTER XVII.


CrimitoaL aND Exrosrrory Nores.—Ver. 1. “The Philistines gathered together their
armies.” Jamieson considers that this was twenty-seven years after their overthrow at Mich-
mash. “Shochoh,” now Shuwetkek, a village in the hilly region between the mountains of
Judah and the plain of Philistia, about eleven miles south-west of Jerusalem and of Bethlehem.
“Azekah.” Not certainly identified, but probably the same as Zakariyeh, another site of
ancient ruins, about two miles distant, on the same side of the valley. “ Ephes-dammim,”
now Damém, four miles north-east of Shuweikek.


Ver. 2. “Valley of Elah,” or the Terebiuth Valley. “ A long, broad, depressed plain, lying
between two parallel ranges of hills. The terebiuth, the shittimwood (the butin of the Arabs) :
probably some remarkable tree of this species which grew there. It is now Wady-es-Sumt,
valley of the acacia tree, with which at present it abounds. This valley, formed by the junction
of three lateral ones—viz., Wady-el-Musfrr from the east, Wady-es-Sttr from the south, and
another, name unknown, from the north—opens into the great Wady-Strar, anciently the
Valley of Sorek. It is a fertile plain flanked on the north and south by lowly hills, and abound-
ing with grain produce, except in the spots covered by acacia thickets and olive plantations,
Robinson states that the largest terebiuth he saw in all the country was in Wady-es-Sir, a little
above the spot where it emerges into Wady-es-Simt.” (Jamieson. )


Ver. 4. “Champion.” Literally, the man in the midst, the middleman—one who advances
between two armies to decide the battle by single combat. Wordsworth renders it “the mediator,”
“Six cubits and a span.” The cubit is variously computed at eighteen or twenty-one inches.
The height of Goliath cannot therefore be certainly estimated, but must have been from nine to

. ten-and-a-half feet. ‘According to the calculation made by Thenius, about nine feet two inches
Parisian measure; # great height no doubt, though not altogether unparalleled, and hardly
greater than that of the great uncle of Iren, who came to Berlin in the year 1857. According
to Pliny, the giant Pusia and the giant Secundilla, who lived in the time of Augustus, were ten
feet three inches (Roman) in height; and a Jew is mentioned by Josephus who was seven cubits
in height, i.¢., ten Parisian feet, or if the cubits are Roman, nine-and-a-half.” (Kiel. )


Ver. 5. “Coat of mail.” Literally, a scale-corslet. A corslet made of metal plates over-
lapping each other like the scale of a fish, “Five thousand shekels.” The copper shekel is
estimated to have weighed about an ounce. ‘“ According to Thenius, the cuirass of Augustus the
roo which has been preserved in the historical museum at Dresden, weighed fifty-five pounds.”

Kid.)


Ver. 6. “Greaves.” “ Boots for the defence of the leg, rising to nearly the knee, and with-
out feet, terminating at the ankle ; made of bull’s hide, leather, wood, or in one plate of metal,
but rounded to the shape of the leg, and often lined with felt or sponge. Some of the ancient
greaves, however, did not come so far up as the knee.” (Jamieson. ) “Target.” Rather a
tance or short spear. ‘'Thenius proposes to alter the expression ‘between his shoulders,’ because
it does not appear applicable to a spear or javelin, which Goliath must have suspended by a strap,
but only to a small shield slung over his back. . . But the difficulty founded upon the expression
has been fully met by Bochart, in the examples which he cites from Homer, Virgil, etc., to prove
that the ancients carried their own swords slung over their shoulders, And J osephus understood
the expression in this way. Goliath had no need of any shield to cover his back, as this was
sufficiently protected by his coat of mail. Moreover, the allusion to the same piece of armour in
ver. 45 evidently points to an offensive weapon, and not to a shield.” ( Kiel.)


Ver. 7. “Weaver’s beam.” “Rather under five feet long.” (Jamieson.) “One bearing
a shield.” Rather, the shield. “In consequence of their great size and weight, the Oriental
warrior had a trusty and skilful friend, whose office it was to bear the large shield.” (Jamieson. )


‘Ver. 8, “Am I not a Philistine?” Rather, the Philistine. “The meaning is, Why
would you engage in battle with us? I am the man who represents the strength of the
Philistines, and ye are only servants of Saul. If ye have heroes, choose one out, that we may
decide the matter in a single combat.” ( Keil. )


Ver 10. “2 defy ;” or, “I have mocked.” (Keil.) “ Goliath’s scorn and contempt of Israel
lay not merely in the reproach that they were Saul’s slaves, and in the tone of his words, but
in the challenge itself, because it was not answered.” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 12. “The full account of the person and family of David tells what we already know
from chap. xvi., and yet reads as if nothing had been said of his origin. This suggests that
the redactor of the book here appends and works in a narrative concerning David, which began
with the family history, and then related the combat with Goliath, and its occasion. This view
is peers sapported by the ‘that’ or ‘this,’ which is evidently added to connect the words


OAP, XVII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





with chap, xvi. 1. The last words of the verse relating to Jesse the Ephrathite (that is, of
Ephrath, the old name for Bethlehem, Gen. xlviii. 7) are difficult. ... It seems best with
Grotius, Thenius, after Sept., Vulg.. Syr., Arab., to substitute ‘in years,’ instead of the text
and render ‘he was advanced in years.’” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 15. “But David went and returned.” Rather he “was going and returning,” 4.¢.
“he went backwards and forwards from Saul to feed his father’s sheep in Bethlehem, so that he
was not in the permanent service of Saul, but at that very time was with his father.” (Keil.)
“This he could do, since Saul was not always in the gloomy state which required David’s harp.
e--. As totally unpractised in war (so chap. xvi. supposes him to be) David, notwithstanding
his enrolment among the court-esquires (armour-bearers), could not be needed by Saul in war,
and he needed not to be taken along for his music, because in the midst of military affairs Saul’s
mind was concentrated on one point, held by one thought.” ( Erdmann. )


Ver. 17. “Take now for thy brethren.” “In those days campaigns rarely lasted above
a few days. The soldiers were volunteers or militia, who were supplied with provisions from
time to time by their friends at home. The Arab women still carry provisions to their husbands
when out on fighting expeditions.” (Jamieson.)


Ver. 18. “Ten Cheeses,” or “slices of curdled milk.” “Oriental cheeses are very small,
resembling in shape and size our penny loaves, as the cheeses of the ancient Hebrews seem
also to have been (cf. Job x. 10; Psalm Ixxxvi. 15), and although they are frequently made of
0 soft a consistence as to resemble curds, those which David carried seem to have been fully
formed, pressed, and sufficiently dried to admit of their being carried.” (Jamieson.) ‘ Talze
their pledge.” “This was a token which, though David had seen them, would be of especial
value to the father’s heart as an immediate sign from their own hands that they were alive and
well (in place of a letter).” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 19. This should be read as part of Jesse’s address to David substituting are for the
“were’’ of the English version.


Ver. 20. “Keeper.” “The only instance in which the hired shepherd is distinguished
from the master or one of the family.” (Jamieson.) “Trench.” Or “waggon-rampart,”
doubtless a kind of rude fortification formed by a line of waggons and chariots.


Ver. 22. “His carriage,” 1.¢., his baggage.


Ver, 25. “We must conclude that Saul actually made these promises although nothing is after-
wards said of their fulfilment, especially as the same thing is repeated in Ver. 27. From Saul’s
tendency to rash and exaggerated action, and from his changeableness, we can easily understand
both the promise and his unwillingness to perform it.” (Hrdmann.)


Ver. 26. “Who is this uncireumcized Philistine?” “These words contain the ground
of the preceding thought that the insult offered to Israel must be wiped out. This ground lies
in the contrast between the stand-point of the Philistine as an uncircumcised who has no com-
munity with the living God and the stand-point of this covenant people . . . « The kving
God is emphasized over against the dead idols of the Philistines.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 28. “Eliab’s questions express the thought (1) Thou hast nothing to do here, indicating
a haughty, quick judging nature, and (2) reproach David with neglect of duty.” (Zrdmann.)
“Thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.” “Such an idea could not have
occurred to him had not the warlike tastes of David already been well known to his family. It
is more than probable, from this and other circumstances, that he had already wished to join in
the first instance with his brothers, but had not been allowed by his friends to do so. But this
is hardly sufficient to account for the expressions of Eliab, which must have been founded on a
wider experience ; and to those who have studied the character of David it will appear almost
certain that he had often been led to speak of his desire to see Israel rid of the oppressors who
had laid her honour in the dust, and of his hope to take some part in the great work of rending
the Philistine yoke from her fair neck.” (Kitio.)


Ver. 29. “Is there not a cause?” Rather, “Js there not acord#” “Ts not this word per-
mitted me? Can I not seek information by such a word?” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 34. “A lion and a bear.” “ At present lions do not exist in Palestine, although they
must in ancient times have been numerous. The lion of Palestine was in all probability the
Asiatic variety described by Aristotle and Pliny, as distinguished by its short, curly mane. It
was less daring than the longer-maned species, but when driven by hunger it not only ventured
to attack the flocks in the desert in the presence of the shepherd (Isa. xxxi. 4), but laid waste
towns and villages (2 Kings xvii. 25, 26). The shepherds sometimes ventured to encounter the
lion single-handed, and the vivid figure employed by Amos (chap. ill. 12), the am of


_HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK f.





Tekoa, was but the transcript of a scene which he must have often witnessed. The variety of
the Asiatic bear which inhabits the Himalayas is especially ferocious, and it is probable that
the same species among the mountains of Armenia is the animal of Scripture.” ( Bidlical
Dictionary.) :


Ver. 36. “Thy servant slew,” etc. “These useful feats of David seem to have been per-
formed with no weapon more effective than the rude staves usually carried in the hand of an
Eastern shepherd, particularly the iron-headed club (Psa. xxiii. 4). ‘I have known,’ says Dr.
Wilson (Lands of the Bible) ‘a shepherd in India encounter with it a tiger which he found
mangling one of his goats. It is much in use among the Fellahin of Wady Misa, and the Arabs
in general.’” ( Jamieson.)


Ver. 38. “Saul armed David,” etc. David must therefore have been near the stature of
Saul, or he could not have worn his armour; it might, however, have been a loose corslet,
or capable of a change by tightening.


Ver. 40. “His sling.” “The sling consisted of a double rope, with a thong, probably of
leather, to receive the stone, The slinger held a second stone in his left hand. Shepherds in
the East carry a sling and stones still for the purpose both of driving away and killing the
enemies of the flock. It was and is a favourite weapon in Syria and Arabia.” (Jamieson. )
Some of the Fathers of the Church, and a few modern commentators, see in this encounter of
David and Goliath a type of our Lord’s encounter with Satan. Wordsworth says, ‘“‘So our
David, the Good Shepherd, went forth to meet the enemy, not with sword or spear but with a
pastoral staff, nor did He put forth His Divine power by any miraculous exercise of it against
the tempter. . . . He chose five stones out of the brook; He took the five books of Moses
out of the flowing streams of Judaism,” etc., etc.


Ver, 43, “Am I a dog,” etc. “The staff was ordinarily employed not against men but
beasts. . . . Similar are the scornful defiances which warriors of antiquity mutually gave
at the beginning of a combat.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 45. “The Lord of Hosts,” etc. Jehovah Sabaoth (see on chap. i. 8). “The name of
the Lord is for David the totality of all the revelations by which the living God has made Him-
self known and named among His people. Of these elements, which form the conception of the
name of God, he here—suitably to the situation—adduces those which characterise Him in
respect to His warlike and ruling power as captain and conqueror of His people.” (Psa. xxiv. 10.)
(£rdmann.)


Ver, 49. “The stone sunk.” Wordsworth thinks that here a supernatural power was
put forth,


Ver. 52. “The valley,” etc. As no name is given to this valley, and as the Hebrew word for
Gath is very similar, both Keil and Erdmann think that Gath ought to stand here, as in the follow-
ing verse. “This direction of the flight resulted from the nature of the country. The Wady Sumt,
where the conflict took place, passes northward from Socoh, turns after two or three miles west-
ward by the villiage Sakarieh, emptying into the Wady Simchim. About a mile from this is
the village of Aijur, which is held to be ancient Gath, and so the Philistines fled through that
valley that Robinson also traversed when he journeyed from Jerusalem to Gath. Another
portion of the Philistines remained in Wady Sumt and fled northward, where the Wady Sumt
takes the name of Wady Surar, in which lies the present city Akir.” (Stahelin). (Travellers
are not quite agreed as to the site of Gath).


Ver. 54. “And David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to Jerusalem,”
etc. “The word translated tent is an antiquated term for dwelling place. The reference is to
David’s house at Bethlehem, to which he returned with his booty after the defeat of Goliath,
There is no anachronism in these statements, for the assertion made by some, that Jerusalem
was not yet in the possession of the Israelites, rests upon a confusion between the citadel of
Jebus upon Zion, which was still in the hands of the Jebusites, and the city of J erusalem, in
which Israelites had dwelt for a long time. (See Josh. xv. 63 and Judg. i. 8). Nor is there any
contradiction between this statement and chap, xxi. 9, where Goliath’s sword is said to have been
kept in the tabernacle at Nob: for it is not affirmed that David kept Goliath’s armour in his
own home but only that he took it thither. . . . Again, the statement in chap. xviii. 2, to the
effect that after David’s victory over Goliath Saul did not allow him to return to his father’s
house any more, is by no means at variance with this explanation of the verse before us. For
the statement in question must be understood as signifying that from that time forward Saul
did not allow David to return to his father’s house as he had done before.” (Keil).


Ver. 55. “Whose son is this youth?” etc. Some critics regard these last four verses as
an interpolation, as well as the paragraph between verses 12-31, Their opinion is founded upon
apparent indiscrepancies in the narrative, most of which have been met in the comments. Keil and

184


OHAP. XViz. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


other commentators see no reason for doubting their genuineness. The following are their solutions
of the apparent contradiction in this question of Saul, to the statement in chap. xvi. 21-23. “It
is only necessary to admit that David's absence at home had been long (and there is no exact
chronological datum); that Saul had rarely seen him except in moments of madness; that Abner
had been absent from court when David was there 3 and that the personal appearance of the
latter had changed (suppositions which, taken singly or together, are not improbable), and Saul’s
ignorance becomes natural.” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary.) Wordsworth likewise suggests
that David now appeared, not as before in the costume of a courtier or warrior, but in the homely
dress of a shepherd, and that Saul’s question does not necessarily imply ignorance of David, as
he asks not his name, but the name of his father. ‘He had promised that whosoever killed the
Philistine should have his own daughter in marriage, and he naturally wished to know the
parentage of his future son-in-law.” Dr. Jamieson adds to these the suggestion that “the rumour
of Samuel’s commission to anoint another king, and his journey to Bethlehem for that object,
together with the fact that David had come from that village, and the suspicion, after the con-
quest of Goliath, which procured him so much glory throughout the nation, that David was
destined for the throne, might have so excited his jealousy that he dissembled, and, pretending
not to know him, kept his vigilant eye upon him with # view to accomplish the destruction of
this young and formidable rival.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH,—Verses 12—29,
Davw’s Visit to THE Camp.


I. The truly great will not allow social advancement and natural gifts to
interfere with the obedience which is due to parents. Ifa man is lifted toa
higher condition of social life because he is mentally or morally greater than
the rest of his family, that very greatness will lead him to render due honour to
his parents, and this will be best shown by his obedience to their lawful com-
mands. If aman deems that because he has risen in social life, or because he
is intellectually superior to his father, he is absolved from a son’s duty, he gives
@ convincing proof that he is not a truly great man, for he lacks that first
element of greatness, viz., goodness. In this point Saul and David stand on a
level, for both manifested a spirit of filial obedience (see chap. ix. 8, 4). David
must have been conscious that he was destined for some great and honourable
position in the kingdom, but he was not unduly elated by it, nor did he consider
himself thereby freed from his duty to his father. In this he showed himself
worthy to be a type of a far greater man—of that Divine Son of David who for
many years of His life was subject to His human parents (Luke ii. 51), and in
so doing has left an example to all sons and daughters, especially to those who
are consciously mentally or morally greater than their parents.


II, Inferior spirits are always envious at the elevation of their superiors,
and the envy is deep in proportion as the relationship is near. Eliab had
seen Samuel anoint David, and although he might not have understood the full
significance of the act, he had never recovered the shock he had then sustained.
at seeing his younger brother preferred before him. He now gives full proof
how inferior he was to that despised and hated brother by revealing the envy
that ruled his own spirit. It was this demon which prompted him so to mis-
construe David’s words and actions. If we look at the most beautiful human
face through a coloured and distorted medium we do not see it as it is, for that
through which we look imparts to it its own hue and misrepresents the true
outline. So it is impossible rightly to estimate a character if we look at it
under the influence of envy. Seen through that distorted medium, actions

erformed from the purest motives, and words the most blameless, will be mis-
judged and misrepresented. Thus it was that Eliab so misjudged his brother.
And the devil] is not less malignant, but rather more so, when the objects of
its hatred are a man’s own flesh and blood. A man shows himself thus blind to
his own interests, for the elevation of one member of a family often nee to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book 1,





elevation of the rest. Eliab might have considered that the honour thus con-
ferred upon David would reflect.some honour upon his brethren also—that he
was himself raised in the elevation of his brother. But envy does not allow a
man to reason, and the more nearly related the person who awakens envy is to
the envious man the more does the latter seem to feel that he has been wronged.
It is to David that Jesse’s family owe their place in the Scripture record and in
the annals of their nation. If it had not been for him we should never have
heard the name of Jesse or his sons. Through him the name of his father is
for ever coupled with the name that is above every name (Isa. xi. 1-9), and yet
envy and reproach was his portion among his brethren,


III. Envy and insolence will be silenced by meekness and truth. David
here uses weapons against his brother which were as effectual to silence him as
his sling was to slay the giant. He has but to appeal to the facts, first that he
has come there in obedience to his father’s command, and secondly that the
Philistine giant has been for many days asking for an Israelite to fight him and
none has answered his challenge. “Is there not a cause?” says David, “‘ Have
I come without an errand?” and “Is there not a need that some one else
should come into the camp besides those who are already in it?” ‘I'o this
question of David, asked without any upbrading, Eliab must have found it
difficult to reply—there was nothing in it to provoke him to further wrath, but
orca IDE to awaken him to reason. David here displays his forbearance and

is wisdom.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver, 28. Eliab sought for the splinter
in his brother’s eye, and was not aware
of the beam in his own. The very
things with which he charged his
brother—presumption and wickedness
of heart—were most apparent in his
scornful reproof.—Kiel.

While all David’s thought and feel-
ing is on the great national disgrace
and its removal, and his mind is con-
cerned with plans for saving the honour
of Israel and Israel’s God, Eliab in his
low and blind zeal thinks only of the
flock of sheep and the possible loss of
them from lack of oversight; the type
of a narrow soul, incapable of great
thoughts and deeds.—Lange’s Com-
mentary.

In times of general formality and
lukewarmness, every degree of zeal
which implies a readiness to go further
or venture more in the cause of God
than others do will be censured as pride
and ambition, and by none more than
near relations and negligent superiors ;
and such censures will seldom be un-
mingled with unjust insinuations,
slanders, and attempts to blacken a
man’s character.—Scoté.

186


It is quarrel enough, amongst many,
to a good action, that it is not their
own ; there is no enemy so ready, or so
spiteful as the domestical. The malice
of strangers is simple, but of a brother
it is mixt with envy. The more un-
natural any quality is, the more ex-
treme it is; a cold wind from the
south is intolerable. David’s first
victory is of himself, next of his brother.
He overcomes himself in a patient for-
bearance, he overcomes the malicious
rage of his brother with the mildness
of his answer. If David had wanted
spirit, he had not been troubled with
the insultation of a Philistine . :
That which would have stirred the
choler of another, allayeth his. It
was a brother that wronged him, and
that his eldest. Neither was this
time to quarrel with a brother, while
the Philistines’ swords were drawn,
and Goliath was challenging. O that
these two motives could induce us to
peace! If we have injury in our
person, in our cause, it is from brethren;
and the Philistines look on,.— Bishop
Hall.


CHAP. XVII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1\—11, 830—b8,


ae





Fara IN THE SEEN AND IN THE UNSEEN.


This narrative furnishes us—

I. With examples of faith in the seen and temporal. Such was the faitn—-
1. Of Goliath. ‘The tendency of all men is to put confidence in that which
they can apprehend with their senses—that which appeals to their outward man.
Physical strength—material greatness of any kind—anything that belongs to
the seen and temporal—are the objects of their trust. In their opinion the
race is always to the physically swift and the battle to the strong ; they believe
with the first Napoleon that “ Providence is always on the side of great batta-
lions,” and in their estimate of things the unseen God goes for nothing because
He is unseen. ‘The faith of the Philistine was not in any unseen power—not
even in the false gods of his own nation—but in his own arm of flesh—in his
own extraordinary size and bodily strength. In this he is but a type of the
great majority of men in all ages and in all nations—not only those who possess
no written revelation of the unseen God, but of the far greater proportion of
those who profess to believe in His existence. 2. Of Saul. Even Saul was
dismayed when he heard the words of the Philistine (ver. 11), even he sought
to restrain the shepherd youth from going forth to meet the man of war,
although he knew that the latter was an “ uncircumcised Philistine,” and that
David’s confidence was in the living God. One of the first duties of a man in
Saul’s position is to acquaint himself with the history of the nation whom
he rules, and lay to heart the lessons to be gained from it. And it could
not be that he was ignorant of the great heroes of Israel who had gone before
him—of Abraham, who with God for his shield had been able with three
hundred men to put to flight the armies of the aliens—of Moses, who forsook
Egypt and led Israel through the Red Sea because “‘ he endured, as seeing Him
who is invisible”—of Gideon, of Barak, of Samson, and of Jephthah, who
“through faith subdued kingdoms and obtained promises” (Heb. xi. 32, 33).
How much was there in God’s dealings with his forefathers to inspire him with
hope and confidence in the unseen Jehovah, and to remind him that two are
enough for any conflict if one is the Living God. If Saul had been in any
degree worthy of his title and his position he would have been the first to accept
the challenge of the heathen, and would have rejoiced in the opportunity of
adding his own name to the long roll of Hebrew heroes who had proved over
and over again how much more there is on the side of him who trusts in the
Unseen and Eternal than on the side of those whose confidence is in the seen
and temporal. But instead of this he furnishes an example of cowardice which
had its root in the unbelief which had been the curse of almost all his kingly
life, and which had brought upon him his present misery. ‘There had been a
short bright spot in his career when he, too, had been conscious that it was the
“Lord who wrought salvation in Israel,” and when he had fought and conquered
in that assurance (chap. xi. 11-13). But the clouds of unbelief had long since
obscured his vision of the unseen and the real, and made him a slave to the
seen and the seeming. We cannot wonder that the armies of Israel manifested
the same disposition. When the head is diseased the body will be affected
also, when the well is poisoned the streams will be impure, and when the head
of a community has no faith in God the moral disease is likely to run through

all ranks and conditions of men beneath him. Seeing that unbelief in the
unseen made Saul a coward, it is not surprising to find his army manifesting
the same craven fear of the giant of Gath. We kave—


II. An example of faith in the unseen and eternal. 1. This faith was


founded upon an exverience of Divine help in past dangere, If a man has been
187


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.
ee NEI Tees ce a


in great peril of mind, body, or estate, and has in the day of his extremity been
delivered by a frieudly and powerful arm, he carries about with him ever after a
consciousness of that deliverance and a faith in the person who saved him
which nothing can destroy. If he is ever brought again into like circumstances
or even into a more perilous position he will naturally turn again for help where
he found it before. When a nation has been delivered from the hand of her
enemies mainly by the courage of one heart and the skill of one ruling mind,
she will instinctively confide in the same leader in her next time of danger.
The eye of faith looks back upon past deliverances and sees in them the hand of
God—this being so, in the next day of peril and need she appeals for help to
the same Almighty source and confidently expects to receive it. ‘I'lis is a most
logical resolution—“ Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow
of Thy wings will I make my refuge.” (Psalm lxiii. 7). If we have present con-
fidence in an arm of flesh because of help afforded in the past, how much more
should we have faith in an unchangeable God in a present time of need when
we can recall instances of His gracious interposition in past necessities. 'T’his is
the argument of David, and such has ever been and ever will be the argument
of faith, “‘ The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the
paw of the bear, He will deliver me out of the hand of the Philistine.” But
only a man accustomed to discern an unseen hand in all the events of his life
would have seen God in the deliverance from the lion and the bear, and only
such an one therefore could have drawn hope and confidence from it for the
present greater peril. David’s life had been a life of faith in the unseen, and
such a man is ready for any emergency. All the deliverances of his past life
had been referred to the living God, and therefore he was not now afraid to
trust Him for a greater and more important victory. 2. This faith adopted
the means most likely to lead to a victorious issue. The faith of David was not
the faith of # fanatic nor of one who interprets all God’s promises without
reference to conditions to be observed by man. He took a common-sense view
of the matter, and used the best weapons within his reach to bring God into
co-operation with his faith and his effort. The sling was the only weapon which
was at all adapted to David’s use under the circumstances. It would have been
madness and presumption for the shepherd youth to have attempted a close
encounter with Saul’s weapons or with any weapons of that kind. But he had
been accustomed from his childhood to use the sling which was especiaily
adapted for use at a long range, and with which an expert could take a most
certain aim (Judges xx. 16). He had no need to come within reach of the
Philistine’s sword or measure himself with him in a hand-to-hand combat. ‘The
very distance at which he stood would compensate for his inferior weight and
add to the force of the blow, and the stone could be aimed at the only part of
the giant’s body which was unprotected by armour, viz., his forehead. Although
we may see a supernatural hand in the issue of the event, we must remember
that the effort of David was in harmony with natural laws and not against them,
and that his confidence in God did not lead him to neglect the use of means,
and those the very best at his disposal. The men of the strongest faith are the
least given to presumption, but always put forth well-directed effort.





III. Faith in the unseen and Eternal justified: by results. The expectations
and desires of faith rest upon a solid foundation. ‘The faith of David rested upon
the Divine promises looked at in the light of the Divine faithfulness, and it was
so stren;thened by his own experience that he ventured confidently to predict
the result before it came to pass (ver. 26). At this period of his history his
desires were in entire sympathy with God, and he had therefore full ground for
his confident prophecy that the Lord would deliver Israel’s enemy into his hand,
And ae fully justified his strong confidence, and showed that God regards


OHAP, XVII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





such a bold reliance upon Himself with especial favour. The faith of God's
children in all ages rests upon the same foundation, and whenever the Church
of God is threatened by some apparently mighty foe they have the same warrant
as David had for predicting beforehand that victory shall be on their side


because they are on the side of God,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


That the world hostile to God’s
kingdom can long unpunished visit its
scorn on the truth of the eternal and
living God, is commonly a result of
the inner weakness, disorder, and timi-
dity of the members of the kingdom of
God. When, therefore, there arises a
man from their midst who, with
mighty word and deed, encounters and
conquers the foe, this is a direct inter-
position of God’s hand in the develop-
ment of His kingdom, and such a man
is His chosen instrument for the
casting down of the haughty worldly
powers, and for a new gathering to-
gether and elevation of His people —
Lange’s Commentary.

When we think of the tribal inheri-
tance of Judah, still in a large degree
retained by the Philistines, who ever
and anon arose to reclaim it all, and
sometimes nearly succeeded, we have
a striking analogy to the heart of the
believer, wherein divers sins and lusts
do still contend for the mastery ; and
sometimes one of them, attaining
Goliath-like proportions, threatens to
enslave him altogether. Each of us
has his own giant to fight, and here,
too, it must be single combat, with no
one to help us but He who went forth
with the stripling David. .... Or,
yet again, in contending with external
evils, we may sometimes feel that they
have assumed such magnitude as to
appal us. Thus, which of us is not
brought almost to a standstill when he
surveys the ignorance, infidelity, etc.,
by which we are surrounded ¢ It seems
to us sometimes, in moments of depres-
sion, as if these evils were stalking
forth defiantly before the armies of
the Living God, and laughing them,
Goliath-like, to scorn; and our courage
is apt to cool as we contemplate this
show of force. But the God of David


liveth, and He will still give us success,
The great danger that besets the
Christian at such times is that of at-
tempting to fight with the world’s
weapons. ‘The worldling will always
overcome him when he does so, be-
cause the Christian in such armour is
not at home... . . Let him go forth
with the cross of Christ in his hand,
and by that he will conquer; but if he
seek a lower weapon, and try to fight
with force of law, or with earthly phi-
losophy, or with mere social expedients,
he will inevitably fail. What David's
sling and stone were in the valley of
Elah, that is the cross of Christ in the
theological controversies, and_ social
wranglings, and moral antagonisms of
our age.—Dr. W. M. Taylor.


Ver. 10. Degenerate professors of re-
ligion often receive just rebukes from
most decided enemies, .. . In human
accomplishments the opposers of the
truth of God have frequently possessed
an undisputed superiority; confiding
in this they have defied, and still do
defy, the advocates of spiritual truth
to engage with them.—AScott.


Ver. 11. The time was when Saul
slew forty thousand Philistines in one
day, and perhaps Goliath was in that
discomfiture ; and now one Philistine
is suffered by him to brave all Israel
for forty days. Whence is this differ-
ence? The Spirit of God, the spirit of
fortitude, was now departed from him.
Saul was not more above himself when
God was with him, than he is below
others now that he is left of God.
Valour is not merely of nature; nature
is ever like itself; he that is once
valiaut should never turn coward. But
now we see the greatest spirits incon-
stant. . . He that is the God of

189


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK I.


_—_——— ees


Hosts gives and takes away man’s
hearts at His pleasure. Neither ig it
otherwise in our spiritual combats. . .
We have no strength but what is given
us; and if the Author of all good gifts
remit His hand for our humiliation,
either we fight not, or are foiled.—Bp.
Hall.


Ver. 32. While base hearts are moved
by example, the want of example is
encouragement enough to an heroical
mind ; therefore is David ready to un-
dertake the quarrel, because no man
else dare to do it... . Even so, O
Saviour, when all the generations of
“men run away affrighted from the
powers of death and darkness, Thou
alone hast undertaken and confounded
them.—Bp. Hall.


Ver. 37. In this recognition of God
and confidence in Him, with which
David entered upon public life, we
have the root of the difference between
him and Saul. . . . The tendency of
Saul’s life was towards himself; any-
thing inconsistent with that in him, or
about him, was but fitful and spas-
modic. But it was just the reverse
with David. ‘The leaning of his soul
was toward God, and though at times
self and sin sadly and terribly asserted
their power, yet these things were only
occasional, and out of keeping with
the usual course and current of his
character. His sins, like Saul’s im-
pulses towards good things, were but
occasional eruptions of that which it
was the habit of his soul to repress;
his piety, like Saul’s impiety, was the
principle of his life —Dr, W.M. Taylor,

To God he ascribes, not only hig
success in life, but his physical prowess.
. . . And we must pause, ere we call
such utterances mere Eastern metaphor.
It is far move probable they were meant
as, and were literal truths. David was
not likely to have been a man of brute
gigantic strength. So delicate a brain
was probably coupled to a delicate body.
Such a nature, at the same time, would
be the very one most capable under the
influence—call it boldly inspiration—
of a great and patriotic cause, of great

199


dangers and great purposes ; capable, ]
say, at moments, of accesses of almost
superhuman energy, which he ascribed,
and most rightly, to the inspiration of
God.— Kingsley,


Ver. 39. Let Saul’s coat be never so
rich, and his armour never go strong,
what is David the better if they fit him
not? It is not to be inquired how
excellent anything is, but how proper.
Those things which are helps to some
may be encumbrances to others. An
unmeet good may be as inconvenient
as an accustomed evil. If we could
wish another man’s honour, when we
feel the weight of his cares we should
be glad to be in our own coat.— Bp.
Hall.

History has presented many and
diverse examples in the sphere of the
spiritual life similar to this heroic
march of David. Luther, in opposi-
tion to timid learned men, threw aside
the heavy armour of scholastic wisdom,
and stepping forward in freedom van-
quished the giant of Rome with the
five heads of his catechism. And other
witnesses and combatants of the Church
have with holy courage broken through
the restraints of homiletic or liturgic
forms, and in the free effusions and
creations of their divinely anointed
spirits, have given the tone to a new
and more animating style of preaching,
and thereby have opened the way to a
new quickening and elevating of the
life of the Church into greater fruit-
fulness.— Krummacher.


Ver, 44, Was ever such a proof given
of the sin and folly of boasting, as in
the case of Goliath? And yet, as we
would say, how natural it was in him !
We can almost sympathise with his
disappointment when he found that
the champion who was to meet him
was so little “worthy of his steel.”
We can almost admire the chivalrous
spirit that scattered defiance among a
host of enemies. But just ag it is so
natural, and because it is so natural,
is this spirit of boasting dangerous.
In the spiritual conflict it is the surest
presage of defeat. It was the Goliath


OHaP, xViz,





spirit that puffed up the apostle Peter,
when he said to his Master, “‘ Lord, I
will go with ‘hee to prison and to
death.” It is the same spirit against
which the apostle Paul gives his re-
markable warning, “Let him that
thinketh he standeth, take heed lest
he fall.” —Blatkie.


Vers. 48-54. The defeats which are
prepared for the world by the kingdom
of God: 1. Through what sort of com-
batants? Through such as (a), like
David, heroically lead the van of God’s
host and decide the conflict (vers. 48),
and (b) such as bravely bring up the
rear, perseveringly pursuing the al-
ready smitten foe. 2. With what sort
of weapons? (a) With weapons which
they themselves have according to their
calling through God’s grace, and wield
in reliance on God’s help (ver. 49), and
(6) with weapons which they take from
the foe, in order to give him the
finishing stroke with his own weapon
(vers. 50, 51). 3. With what result ?
Annihilation of his power on his own
ground (ver. 52), and in respect to the
booty, rich gains (vers. 53, 54).—
Lange's Commentary.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


ee ee


Ver. 51. What needed David load
himself with an unnecessary weapon ?
one sword can serve both Goliath and
him. If Goliath had a man to bear
his shield, David hath Goliath to bear
his sword, wherewith that proud, blas-
phemous head is severed from his
shoulders, Nothing more honours
God than’ the turning of wicked men’s
forces against themselves. There are
none of His enemies but carry with
them their own destruction. Thus
didst Thou, O Son of David, foil
Satan with his own weapon: that
whereby he meant destruction to Thee
and us, vanquished him through Thy
mighty power, and raised Thee to that
glorious triumph and super-exaltation
wherein Thou art, wherein we shall be
with Thee.—Bishop Hall.


Ver. 54. David brings the head of
the Philistine champion in triumph to
Jerusalem. Our David, Jesus Christ,
ascended in triumph to the heavenly
Jerusalem, bearing His trophies with-
Him, “leading captivity captive ”
(Psa, Ixviii. 18; Ephes. iv. 8.)— Words-
worth,


——————


CHAPTER XVIII.


Crrnoan axp Expostrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “The soul of Jonathan was knit,” literaily,


“ chained itself.” (Kel).


bound together by the band of love.” ( Clericus).


“Tn almost all languages friendship is considered as a union of souls


“Loved him as his own soul.” “To the


conception of firmness is here added the idea of innerness of friendship, the complete dentijica-


tion of essence of two souls.” (Hrdmann).


Ver. 2. “Would let him go no more home.” See last comments on ver. 54 of the pre-


ceding chapter.


Ver. 3. “Made a covenant.” “Such covenants of brotherhood are frequent in the East.
They are ratified by certain ceremonies, and in presence of witnesses, that the persons covenanting


will be sworn brothers for life.” (Jameson ).


Ver, 4. “Stripped himself of the robe,” etc.


“The mention of several weapons, which


together make a complete war outfit, suggests that Jonathan wished to honour David as the military


hero. .


. . His clothing David with his own war-


dress sets aside the barrier which his rank and


position would raise between them in the first instance on the common ground of the theocratic
chivalry, as whose representatives they had come to love one another.” (Erdmann). “The


gift of one’s own garment, espec


jally by a prince to a subject, is in the East still the highest


mark of honour.” (Philippson). See Esther vi. 8.


Ver. 5. “David went out.”


not only from the following account, which me


but also from the statement of the position of
saceess,” (Erdmann).


“That this refers to war and not to general business is plain,
ntions not only military undertakings for Saul,
general which he received in consequence of his


191


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK f.





Ver. 6. “When David was returned.” “The as they came refers to the return of
the whole army from the happily-ended war (comp. ch. xvii. 53); at the same time is
mentioned David’s return, with especial reference to this victory over Goliath, which had
determined the successful issue of the war, in order to bring into its proper historical connection
the honour which then accrued to him. This return of David, therefore (along with the whole
army), is not synchronous with his return to Saul in chap. xvii. 57 immediately after the killing
of the giant, but occurred after the victory over the whole Philistine army was completed wire
There is, therefore, no contradiction between the statement that Saul kept David by him and
gave him a military command, and the following statement that in consequence of the honour
shown David he conceived a lasting hatred against him” (Ardmann). “The women came
out.” “This is a characteristic trait of Oriental manners. On the return of friends long
absent, and particularly on the return of a victorious army, bands of women an children issue
from the towns and villages to form a triumphal procession to celebrate the victory, and as they
go along, gratify the soldiers with dancing, instrumental music, and extempore songs, in honour
of the generals who have earned the highest distinction” (Jamieson). ‘“‘Tabrets, or timbrels.”
“Musical instruments resembling the modern tambourine.” “Joy.” “This word, standing
between two instruments of music, must denote the joyful cry which accompanied the beating
of the tabrets” (Zrdmann), “Instruments of music,” rather “ triangles.”


Ver. 9. “Eyed him.” “ Looked askance at him.” (Kiel.)


Ver. 10. “He prophesied.” Rather, “he raved” (0 Keil and Erdmann). “Saul’s condition
is neither that of simple madness nor that of true prophecy. He is under the control of a power
higher than himself, but it is an evil power. ‘For the precise expression of this supernaturally-
determined condition of mind and soul, in which the whole spiritual energy of the man moves
freely, yet in a sphere into which it is supernaturally brought, becoming for the time one with
the spirit, the Hebrew has no other word than naba, and the English no other word than pro-
phecy.” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 11. “Saul cast the javelin.” “David’s eluding him twice presupposes that Saul hurled
the javelin twice, that is to say, he probably swung it twice without letting it go out of his hand—
a supposition which is raised into certainty by the fact that it is not stated here that the javelin
entered the wall, as in chap. xix. 10.” (Keil.) “If Saul actually threw the spear, we could not
understand David’s twice retiring. Saul held the spear in his hand, and David stood so near
him that he could save himself only by withdrawing.” (Bunsen.)


Ver. 13. “Captain over a thousand.” This is a different military position from that men-
tioned in ver. 5; whether it was a promotion cannot be determined.


Ver. 19. “ Adriel the Meholathite.” Nothing is known of this man.


Ver. 21. “In the one of the twain.” Literally, in two. Some commentators therefore
understand that Saul offers his two daughters to David, purposing to take Merab from Adriel,
and so lead David to make a double marriage. But the words may be rendered “a second
time,” and Kiel renders it “In a second way thou mayest become my son-in-law.”


Ver. 22. “Saul commanded his servants.” David evidently paid no attention to Saul’s
second proposal, having so recently proved his fickleness with regard to Merab. Saul is there-
fore obliged to employ some of his courtiers to persuade David.


Ver. 25. “Desireth not any dowry.” “In Eastern countries the husband purchases his
wife either by gifts or service. As neither David nor his family were in circumstances to give a
suitable dowry for a princess, the king intimated that he would be graciously pleased to accept
some gallant deed in the public service.” (Jamieson.)  Foreskins.” Why not heads?
Here is a sign of Saul’s suspicious and malignant spirit ; he, judging from himeelf, impiously
suspected that David would go forth and destroy some of the Israelites, Saul’s own subjects, as
he himself desired to destroy David, his own deliverer ; and the foreskins were required asa
proof that they who were killed were not Israelites. This passage, and 2 Sam, i. 20, where the
Philistines are styled “the uncircumcised,” seems directly at variance with a well-known state-
ment by Herodotus of the fact that circumcision was practised, not only by the Egyptians and
Ethiopians, but by the Syrians of Palestine and the Phenicians, But the two statements,
though apparently conflicting, are capable of becoming adjusted. Subsequently to the time of
Saul a great change took place in the population of the Philistine cities, and a considerable
Egyptian element practising circumcision had probably been introduced.” ( Jamieson.)


Ver. 26. “The days were not expired ;” that is, “the time to the marriage, or the time
set by Saul for the performance of the warlike deed.” '(Erdmann.) es


Ver. 30. “The princes of the Philistines went forth” “To battle, in order to avenge
David's act, and perhaps supposing (as the Rabbis suggest) that accorling to the Hebrew law
he would claim exemption from warfare for a year after his marriage.” %Wordsworth. )

192


GHAP. XVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.--Verses 1—4,
Davin AND JONATHAN.


I. The possession of analogous moral qualities will breed mutual love.
There are material substances which have a singular affinity for each other
hecause there are elements in each which are mutually attractive. The steel
filings in the midst of a mass of other material will find their way to the magnet
if it is placed anywhere near to them, and cleave to it with persistent force.
And there are many bodies which possess elements which give them so strong
an affinity the one for the other, that when the chemist places them together
they lose their separate identity and the hitherto distinct substances become
but one. So human characteristics and qualities—especially human excellences
—form a basis of mutual affinity between those who are like-minded. A bold
and courageous man is attracted to another who shows that he is also bold and
courageous, and a man of strong emotions feels a drawing to another of an
emotional nature. Jonathan and David evidently possessed some kindred
excellences of character. If the shepherd boy had shown his courageous faith
by meeting the giant single handed, the prince had displayed the same trustful
boldness when he scaled the rock and entered the Philistine garrison, and they
were evidently both possessed by an ardent concern tor the welfare of their
people, and by that humility of heart which is an accompaniment of all true
greatness. When, therefore, the youthful son of Jesse stood before Saul, and
both by his bearing and his word revealed what motives had prompted his action,
the presence of kindred qualities in the breast of J onathan sent his sou} out to
David, and that friendship was formed which will be renowned so long as the
world shall last.


II. Love based upon affinity of soul is strong and will bear a great strain.
Jonathan loved David “as his own soul.” Self-love is strong and deep and is a
Divinely commanded love. We are but obeying an instinct implanted within


us by God when we manifest a due regard to our own personal welfare—in fact
it is inconceivable that any being should be a stranger to such a feeling. Our
Lord Himself tells us that our own spiritual well-being is to be the first object
of our care when He asks, “ What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?”
(Matt. xvi. 27), and it is natural and right that our lower and secondary
interests should be dear to us also. But there is a love which sets all these
latter below the interests and the welfare of another, and such a love was that
which David bore to Jonathan. It affords an example of the intensity to which
love often grows when it is founded upon similarity of moral tastes and aspira-
tions. It is then often equal to any test which can be brought to bear upon it,
and forms a tie stronger than mere blood relation, making a man willing to
forego all his earthly advantages for the good of his friend. The brook which
is but a few inches deep will soon dry up under the rays of the suiminer’s sun,
or freeze when visited by the frosts of winter, but the deep broad river rolls on
without being affected by either. So there are superficial friendships which
vanish altogether when circumstances change, but the love born of kinship of
soul outlives all the heats of prosperity and the frosts of adversity. Such was
the love which Jonathan bore to David—a love which was as deep and abiding
when his friend was an outlaw and a fugitive as when he was the favourite of
the court, and a love which took no account of the fact that David was destined
to occupy the place which Jonathan had once hoped to fill, and the duties of
which he was fully competent to discharge. Although he never sat upon 4
throne, Jonathan’s conduct to his rival gives full proof of his kingly eae
ts)


AOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





BOOK L





OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 1-4. Jonathan, the man of
generous soul, 1, Generous in ad-
miring. (a) Not jealous, though his
own military fame is eclipsed. (6)
Fully appreciating the merit of a new
and obscure man. ‘c) Admiring not
only a brilliant exploit, but modest,
grateful, and devout words, 2, Gene-
rous in proposing friendship where he
might so naturally have indulged
jealousy (as his father did). 38. Gene-
rous in giving what was not only
valuable and suitable to his friend’s
present wants, but honourable as being
associated with himself. Generosity,
shown in mutual appreciation and
mutual benefits, is the basis of sweet
and lasting friendships, and in general
is one of the noblest traits of human
character.—Z7rans. of Lange’s Commen-
tary.

This was not a worldly friendship
in which one, in loving another, in
reality loves only himself and his own
personal interests, but one of a higher
nature, which formed the uniting bond.
They loved each other truly in God, to
whose service they had devoted them-
selves in the hours of holy consecration,
.... and friendship which thus
grows up and blossoms, rooting itself
in a similarity of sanctified disposi-
tions, takes a first place among our
earthly blessings and possessions. There
that communion of heart so unites to-
gether that one man becomes to
another like a living canal, through
which the inner life pours forth to him
a stream of enriching and never-failin
fulness of refreshing consolations nd
enjoyments. .... A Cleophas and
his companion on the way to Emmaus :
a Peter and the disciple who lay on
Jesus’ bosom ; a Paul and his Timothy
—how lovely are these double stars of
sacred history pouring forth their rays
upon us from heaven... . . Whoever
is the object of such affectionate
friendship, let him esteem it as a
treasure of high and precious worth,
Whoever, on the contrary, complains
that he enjoys no such friendship, let
him seek the cause of this, not in

194


others, but in himself; since to him,
without doubt, there are a-wanting, if
not every endeavour after that which
is noble, yet at least the heart-attract-
ing virtues of humility, of purity, and
love-—Krummacher,

There are, I fear, few such friendships
between those who are nearly equals in
eminence in the same profession. The
proverb says, that “ two of a trade never
agree,” and it takes high-toned principle
to rejoice in the rise, to an equal posi-
tion with ourselves, of one who is in
the same calling with us. Provided
there be sufficient distance between us,
either in excellence, or success, the
difficulty is not felt on either side,
The young statesman, just entering on
public life, has neither jealousy nor
envy of the veteran leader who has by
genius and perseverance made his way
to the front rank of politicians, and
the leader, in his turn, feels it easy to
be cordial and encouraging to the young
aspirant. But let the one see the other
as nearly as possible on a level with
himself, even in his own chosen depart-
ment of excellence, and feel that he
must probably soon consent to be second
to him, and the case is altered. Then,
almost in spite of themselves, jealousies
and envyings will spring up between
them ; they will look askance at each
other, and though they may not break
out into open foes, there will be what
I may call a sort of armed watchfulness
between them, and a very little matter
will set them in direct antagonism.
The nearer individuals come into com-
petition with each other, the greater is
their tendency to be spiteful toward
each other. It is easy to be a patron,
and, stooping down from a lofty height,
to take by the hand some struggling
beginner ; it is easy, too, to be an
admiring pupil of one who is acknow-
ledged to be a great way above us ; but
it is a much harder, and therefore a
much nobler thing, to be the warm
appreciative friend of one who is in
the same calling with ourselves, and
who is bidding fair to outshine and
surpass us. It was a very generous


CHAP, XVIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





and noble thing that Jonathan did,
when he took to his heart the youth-
ful David.—Dr. W. M. Tayjlor.
Similitude of dispositions and es-
tates ties the fastest knots of affection.
A wise soul hath piercing eyes, and
hath quickly discerned the likeness of
itself in another ; as we do no sooner
look into the glass of water, but face
answers to face, and, where it sees a
perfect resemblance of itself, cannot
choose but love it with the same
affection that it reflects upon itself.
Noman saw David that day, which
had so much cause to disaffect him ;
none in Israel should be a loser by
Dayid’s success, but Jonathan. Saul
was sure enough settled for histime :
only his successor should forego all
that which David should gain ; so as
none but David stands in Jonathan’s
light; and yet all this cannot abate
one jot or dram of his love. Where
God uniteth hearts, carnal respects
are too weak to dissever them, since
that, which breaks off affection,
must needs be stronger than that
which conjoineth it.— Bishop Hail.
In merciful adaptation to the infirmi-
ties of his human spirit, God opened
to David this stream in the desert,
and allowed him to refresh himself
with its pleasant water; but to show
him, at the same time, that such
supplies could not be permanently re-


lied on, and that his great dependence
must be placed, not on the fellowship
of mortal man, but of the ever-living
and ever-loving God, Jonathan and
he were doomed, after the briefest
period of companionship, to a life-long
separation, and the friendship which
had promised to be a perpetual solace
to his trials, only aggravated their
severity when Providence deprived him
of its comforts... In another view,
David’s intercourse with Jonathan
served an important purpose in his
training. The very sight he had of
Saul’s outrageous wickedness might
have nursed a self-righteous feeling—
might have encouraged the thought
so natural to man, that as Saul was
rejected by God for his wickedness, so
David was chosen for his goodness,
The remembrance of Jonathan’s singu-
lar virtues and graces was fitted to
rebuke this thought ; for, if regard to
human goodness had decided God’s
course in the matter, why should
Jonathan not have been chosen ?
From the self-righteous ground on
which he might have been tempted to
stand, David would thus be thrown
back on the providence of God, and
in deepest humility constrained to
acknowledge that it was by God’s grace
only that he was made to differ from
others,— Blaikie,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 5—80,
Davin’s ADVANCEMENT AND Savt’s DEcLINE,


I. The method of David’s external elevation. It may be regarded as a general
social law, that men who possess gifts which fit them for prominent and powerful
positions amongst their fellow men, find their way sooner or later to those posi-
tions. And, although we recognise the operation of an overruling and Divine
Providence in this fact, in relation to all men, yet it is not accomplished by any
special interposition of the hand of God, but is the outcome of a natural law,
The generality of men can discern, and are willing to acknowledge real greatness
in their fellow creatures, and a man who is worthy of honour will, as a rule, be
honoured. And if his social position has been an obscure one, he will soon be
called to fill one which is more prominent. But the first step in his elevation
will be in the hearts and consciences of his fellow men, and the other will follow as a
necessary consequence. David’s exaltation in the estimation of the people must
have begun immediately after his victory over Goliath, and therefore, before
Saul conferred any distinction upon kim. He was elevated by the eae of his


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK f,


fellow-subjects before he was set over them by the king, and it is not unlikely
the known sentiment of the nation had some influence upon Saul’s treatment of
him. For at this period the external honours bestowed by the monarch seem
to have kept pace with the growing esteem of the people, and to have been the
seal of their regard. Even the courtiers, who were the most likely to be displeased
with this new favourite of the king and people, “accepted” the youthful shep-
herd boy, and veteran warriors yielded to him their willing obedience. The
whole narrative is a lesson on the only effectual means of obtaining elevation in
life, namely, to seek to deserve it.


II. The method of Saul’s internal downfall. Although this chapter leaves
Saul where it finds him as to external position, yet it gives in detail some of the
steps by which he descended from one moral platform of character to others
lower and lower still. As David grew more and more fitted for the position he
was to fill, so Saul, by the deterioration of his character, became more and more
disqualified to be king of Israel. He reveals himself first as a jealous man. It
became more and more apparent to him that David’s popularity was increasing,
and the inevitable consequence of allowing his mind to dwell upon this fact was
the awakening within him of, perhaps, the most tormenting passion that can
dwell in a human soul. It is not an easy thing for a man to feel no bitterness
of spirit when he finds that another is gradually displacing him from a position
of influence and honour which was once exclusively his own, and that the esteem
and love which have hitherto been accorded to him are now being transferred
to a successor. It requires great self-abnegation, and much unselfish love,
to enable anyone in such circumstances to say without a pang, “He
must increase, but { must decrease,” and the task is difficult in proportion
as the man who is being supplanted feels that he deserves to be so.
Saul must have felt that it was his own lack of faith and obedience that
had alienated the confidence of Israel, but he was only mortified, not humbled,
by the consciousness. In such a state of mind he could not see David’s rise
without that painful sense of his own loss which constitutes jealousy. ‘The step
from jealousy to envy is soon taken. When impatience of rivalry developes into
hatred of the rival the more deadly demon of envy has taken hold of the man,
and when he yields himself to its sway no crime is too great for him to commit,
A man may invite into his home a visitor of questionable character, and offer
him a seat at his board and at his fireside, and feel confident that no harm will
come of it. But he may one day find that he has been entertaining his mur-
derer. It behoves us to beware whom we admit into our house, but it is far
more important that we should beware what feelings we harbour in our minds,
and many a man who has at first only admitted jealousy as a passing guest has
found to his cost that he has by so doing given place to a devil that has mur-
dered his happiness, and perhaps ruined his character entirely. It was so with
Saul. He had already taken more than one downward step, and now, by
pedis to jealousy and envy, he descends lower still, For envy soon transforms

im into a murderer in intention, though not in action, and henceforward gives
him no rest, but hurries him on from one desperate act to another, until he
becomes his own murderer on the mountains of Gilboa. Probably no human
life whose history has been recorded reads to us so plainly as Saul’s the terribly
fatal consequences that may be involved in the first departure from the path of
right. The man who, in his early public life, revealed a noble indifference to
personal wrongs (chaps. x. 27, xi. 13), became in after years a miserable slave to
envy, and allowed this passion so to rule him that the one aim of his life became
the murder of an innocent man and of one whom he knew was especially
honoured and approved by God.


198


GaP. XVIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


In the character-pictures which it
represents to us (as is clear in the his-
tory of Saul and David), Holy Serip-
ture never exhibits a pause in religious-
moral life, but always holds up the
mighty “Hither.” .... “Or,” which
man has to decide,—either forward on
the way in which man walks at the
hand of God with giving up of his own
will and humble obedience to the will
of God, or backwards with uncheckable
step, when man puts God’s guidance
from him, and, following his own will,
suffers not God’s will to be accomplished
in, on, and through himselfi—Lange’s
Commentary.

We can scarcely conceive of a single
trying situation in life in which David,
at some period of his earthly course,
did not find himself placed. Even for
his own sake, that he might not be too
much elevated by the abundant favours
that were heaped upon him, he stood
in need of being continually reminded
of his dependence on Him who dwells
in the high and holy place, and with
those who are of broken and contrite
spirit. Besides this, however, David
was to become, even for thousands
of years, a beloved and comforting
companion to the oppressed and
the miserable of every kind, and
therefore from him must no cup of
affliction pass untasted. Through what
depths of affliction might not his way
have led him? But into every darkness
which cast its shadow around him the
light of the opened heavens penetrated ;
and after every storm which raged
against him there followed the gentle
breathings of Divine consolation, that
all his followers on their pathway of
sorrow might thereby be encouraged.
Thus is he qualified for being the harper
for all afilicted and oppressed souls,
just as he once was for the king of

srael ; and to this day it is true, that
wherever the melody of his psalms
sounds and echoes in the heart, there
the shadows of sorrow and sadness are
scattered, and courage, and peace, and
joy return and take possession of the
soul— Krummacher.


We may gather up some lessons for
our modern life from this ancient
chapter of sacred history.

In the first place we may see the
evil of centring our thoughts and plans
entirely on ourselves, ‘This was the
reot of Saul’s misery. He was one of
the most ardent sel/ists that ever lived.
He had made self his god. He looked
only and always at his own interests.
“How will this affect me?” was his
constant question as each new event
transpired ; and whensoever he ima-
gined that he was to be injured by any
other man’s elevation or advancement,
he was stirred up to seek his ruin.
Thus he was ever moody and unhappy.
He hugged himself to his heart, and
as a punishment God left him to him-
self, and no companionship could have
been more miserable.

We may see here, in the second
place, that the servant of God may
expect to encounter adversity in an
‘early stage of his career. David was
not to be cradled for his future work
in the lap of luxury. He was “to
learn in suffering what he taught in
song.” He was not to be like “a bird
on a bough, singing forth free and off-
hand, never knowing the troubles of
other men ;” but, led through trials
of his own, he was stimulated and
inspired to sing of them in strains
which, because they came “from the
heart of man, speak to all men’s
hearts.” .

Lastly, we may learn here that the
wisest course in time of danger is to
do faithfully our daily duty, and leave
our case with God. David went about
his work, behaved himself wisely, and
let God take care of him. On other
occasions, as we shall see, he had some-
times recourse to questionable expe-
dients and sinful practices, for self-
protection ; but in the present instance
he walked steadily on in the right
path.—Dr. W. Ad. Taylor.


Ver. 6. A patriotic celebration of
the victory in Israel was certainly now
in every respect appropriate; but it

197


HOMILETIC-COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOR 1.





ought to have been of another alto-
gether different and more worthy sort
than that now celebrated by tlie people.
The songs of praise ought to have as-
cended before all to the Lord, who, for
this end, made use of the humble,
unarmed shepherd boy as his instru-
ment, that he might so much the more
make it distinctly appear that it was
his arm of almighty power which had
saved Israel. ‘lhe people mistook this,
and they idolised the instrument. But
is not this very error, which lament-
ably proves a deep estrangement from
God, a conspicuous feature of the pre-
sent generation, which has invented
the expression, “ hero-worship,” and
among whom we not seldom see this
deification of men rise up even to
madness? Well and good: let men
celebrate their heroes, immortalise their
memory in monuments, weave laurel
crowns for all who have made them-
selves serviceable to the common weal,
or who have extended the empire of
elevating and salutory ideas by the
power of their creative mental endow-
ments,—only let them not forget first
to give praise to the Father of Spirits
for all that is great and noble and rich
in blessing, which the children of men
accomplish; for from him cometh down
every good and every perfect gift ; and,
above all others, let them render to
him, in prostrate humility, the homage
which is his due; let them keep in
moderation the rendering of praise to
mortal men.— Krummacher,


Ver 9. For every great and good
work a man must expect to be envied
by his neighbour; no distinction or
pre-eminence can be so unexceptionally
obtained, but it will expose the possessor
to slander or malice, and perhaps to the
most fatal consequences. But such
trials are very useful to those who love
God ; they serve as a counterpoise to
the honour put upon them, and check
the growth of pride and attachment to
the world; they exercise them to faith,
patience, meekness, and communion
with God; they give them a fair oppor-
tunity of exemplifying the amiable na-
tuza of true godliness, by acting with

198


wisdom and propriety in the most diffi
cult circumstances ; they make way for
increasing experience of the Lord’s
faithfulness, in restraining their enemies,
raising them up friends, and affording
them His gracious protection.—Scotté.


Ver. 10. “Saul,” says the history,
“betook himself to prophesying; 4.¢.,
there appeared in him the dark image
of that agitation under which the pro-
phets poured forth their discourses and
sayings when overpowered by the might
of the Holy Spirit, which for the mo-
ment raised them, if not above their
own consciousness, at least above their
understanding. Saul wandered and
raged about his palace like one
bereft of reason, and saw in his un-
believing imagination, full of suspicions,
visions which at one time made him
tremble and shudder, and at another
hurried him on to madness and wild
outbreaks of passion.

Were it granted us, in our own im-
mediate circles of society, to look every-
where behind the curtain, how often
would such-like scenes meet our view—
scenes of wild overflowings of a wounded
sense of honour, or of unbridled anger
because of some loss sustained, or of
burning and heart-consuming envy, so
that we could not forbear to use the
expression “demoniacal” as fittingly
designating such paroxysms.—Krum-
macher,


Ver. 12. One would have thought
rather, that David should have been
afraid of Saul, because the devil was so
strong with him, than that Saul should
beafraid of David, because the Lord was
with him; yet we find all the fear in ©
Saul of David, none in David of Saul.
Hatred and fear are ordinary com-
panions. David had wisdom and faith
to dispel his fears ; Saul had nothing
but infidelity, and dejected, self-con-
demned, distempered thoughts, which
must needs nourish them; yet Saul
could not fear any hurt from David,
whom he found go loyaland serviceable;
he fears only too much good unto David;
and the envious fear is much more than


the distrustful —Bp. Hall.


OHAP. XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


a


CHAPTER XIX.


Crrrroan aND Exrosrrory Norrs.—Ver. I. “And Saul spake . . that they should
kill David.” Rather, “ that he intended to kill David.” ay ¥


Ver. 2. “Until the morning.” Rather, “in the morning.”


Ver. 3, “In the field.” “David was to conceal himself in the field, near to where Jonathan
would converse with his father about him; not that he might hear the conversation in his
hiding-place, but that Jonathan might immediately report to him the result of his conversation,
without there being any necessity for his going far away from his father, so as to excite suspicion
that he was in league with David.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 5. “Ho did put his life fm his hand.” “The Hebrew word means the palm or
hollow of the hand—the hand as receptacle, not as instrument. Perhaps alluding to David’s
hand which swung the sling against the giant, upon the firmness and certainty of which his life
depended.” (Lanye’s Commentary.)


Ver, 9. “The evil spirit from the Lord (Jehovah .? “While this evil spirit is in ch.
xvi. 15 and ch. xviii. 10 referred to Elohim, the Deity in general Jehovah is here affirmed to
be its sender, because Saul’s condition, which was there only ascribed in general to a higher
Divine causality in respect to his person, is here regarded as a judgment of the Covenant-God of
Israel on the reprobate king who hardens his heart against God.” (#rdmann.)


Ver. 11. “To slay him in the morning.” “We may guess that only the fear of alarming
the town, and of rousing the populace to rescue their favourite hero, prevented Saul from
directing them to break into the house and slay David there.” (Kitto.)


Ver. 13. “Image.” Literally, the teraphim as in Gen. xxxv. 2, evidently household gods
which were still in use to some extent among the Israelites. See Judges xvii. 5; xviii. 14, etc,
“The plural here represents a single image which it seems must have had the human form, at
least as to head and face, though the size may have varied since Rachel concealed it under the
camel-saddle.” (Erdmann.) “Pillow.” The word so rendered occurs only here, and is derived
from the Hebrew verb Cabar, to plait or braid, Hence it means something bound together or
woven, evidently a portion of the bed-furniture, which Michal so arranged as to make her
deception more complete.


Ver 17. Michal evidently here pretends that her own life would have been in danger from
her husband if she had not allowed him to escape,


Ver. 18. “Naioth.” “This word signifies dwellings, but it is here in a certain sense a proper
name applied to the coenobium of the pupils of the prophets who had assembled round Samuel
in the neighbourhood of Ramah. ‘The plural form points to the fact that this coenobium con-
sisted of a considerable number of dwelling-places or houses, connected together by a hedge or
wall.” ( Kiel.)

Ver. 20. “Prophets.” “It is to be noted that we have here prophets who in inspired dis-
course give forth their inner life, filled with the Holy Ghost, not sons of the prophets as in
2 Kings iv. 38, etc., who as scholars and learners sit at the feet of their master and teacher.
The prophetic community here, therefore, under Samuel as head, is not yet a prophetic school to
educate young men for the prophetic calling, but is a prophetic seminary in which, under
Samuel’s guidance, in an externally strictly ordered, yet internally free association, the pro-
phetic powers are practised and strengthened, mutually incite, nourish, and further one another,
and the prophetic charisma finds ever new nourishment and new growth by this common holy
discipline.” (Hrdmann.) See also notes on Chap. X. “They also prophesied.” ‘The
condition of Saul’s messengers is that of ecstatic ravishment, into which they were brought by
the overpowering might of the inspired song, or word of the prophets.” (H#rdmann.)


Ver, 22. “A great well,” etc. Rather, “Zhe great cistern,” some well-known spot in a
locality now unknown.


Ver. 23. “Prophesied until he came,” etc. “The difference between Saul and his messen-
gers was simply that the inspiration came on him as he was approaching the residence of the
prophet, and that it attained a higher grade, and lasted longer, completely suppressing his self-
consciousness.” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 24. “Lay naked,” i.¢., divested of his robe or upper garment. “The throwing off of
the clothing was the effect of the heat of the body produced by internal excitement.”
( Erdmann.) ice


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK L





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—1,
JONATHAN'S INTERCESSION FoR Davmn.


I. The man who is related both to the offended person and to the offender
is specially qualified to be a mediator between them. If a man would be a
successful intercessor he must be acquainted with the nature and disposition of
him with whom he intercedes, and he must have sympathy with the person for
whom he intercedes. If he is linked by the ties of blood or friendship to one or
both parties, he will know much better than a stranger how to frame his peti-
tion—he will be acquainted with the arguments which will be most influential
with the one on behalf of the other, and his own relationship to both and his
consequent interest in both will of itself form a reason why his suit should be
regarded. David was fortunate in having for his intercessor the man who,
above all others in Israel, was most fitted to mediate between him and Saul.
His love for David had brought him into such near fellowship with him that he
was qualified to be a judge of the aims and motives which actuated him and to
pronounce him innocent or guilty, and he was so near akin to Saul that he
could approach him with freedom and without fear of being suspected of having
any motive prejudicial to his father’s honour and welfare. Hence his appeal
was listened to, and David was, at least for a time, restored to favour. ‘I'he
relation of Christ to men on the one hand, and to His Divine Father on the
other, constitutes His special and peculiar qualification to be the Mediator
between God and man. Having been made like unto His brethren, He can
sympathise with human frailties and understand human needs, and as the only-
begotten of the Father he can have access to Him as no finite creature can.


II. Those who truly love will find that in human life occasions of proving
their love will not be wanting. So many and so great are human needs, and so
varied the experiences through which most men are called to pass, that those
who love us will often find opportunity of showing their unselfish regard, and of
proving that they are friends indeed by being friends in need. And if the love
is a reality it will be equal to the demand made upon it, and will rejoice in being
able, by self-denial, to help its object in the day of adversity. Jonathan had
made a covenant with David in the day when the young shepherd was the hero
of the hour, and when Saul himself looked favourably upon him ; but now the
clouds are beginning to gather around him, and Jonathan finds an occasion to
show his love in a manner which involves much more self-denial than the
giving of “his garments even to his sword and his bow.” It needed much
courage for even a son to face a man like Saul and to assert the innocence
of him who had now begun to be an object of suspicion and jealousy. When
men are so entirely governed by their passions and moods it is a dangerous thing
to tell them that they are in the wrong, especially if they are in the possession
of so much irresponsible power as an Eastern monarch is, Yet this
Jonathan dared to do not only on this occasion but on others when his father’s
temper was more implacable than even now, and he thereby proved that his love
for his friend was real and very strong.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


How good it is to hear such words their noble purpose breathe already
as these spoker by Jonathan, which, something of the spirit of New Testa-
in their peaceful, gentle tone, their ment times. And yet, as John ata
reverential utterance, contradicting in later period testifies in his Gospel.
nothing the duty of @ child, and in “'The Holy Ghost was not yet given,

200


GaP, xix,


—a truth which we ought particularly
to keep in mind in all the opinions and
estimates we form of the morals of the
men of Old Testament times, The here-
ditary nature of man, fallen in Adam,
had then allowed to it a much wider
scope than in the post-pentecostal days
of the New Covenant. The natural
affections and passions shot forth, when
once they broke through the barriers
of the Divine commandments, into
monstrous, gigantic manifestations and
wild forms, which may be compared to
the luxurious growth of the primeval
forests. Saul, with his colossal hatred,
and his jealousy breathing forth fire
and flames, may be regarded as a wit-
ness of this fact. ... Yet it is un-
doubtedly true that, even during the
Mosaic economy, individual personages
appeared like shining meteors, lovely
and rich in promise, who present them-
selves before us as prophetic types of
believers of a@ future age. TT'o this
class belonged Abraham, Moses, Joshua,
and certainly now also our Jonathan.
The example of disinterested friend-
ship, rooting itself in love to God,
which the latter presents to us, remains
at least as a fitting model for Christian
times, wherein even its equal is not
frequently to be found. —Krummacher.


Ver. 6. How could Saul say, he
should die, whom he could accuse of
nothing but faithfulness? Why should
he design him to death, which had
given life to all Israel? Ofttimes
wicked men’s judgments are forced to
yield unto that truth against which
their affections maintain a rebellion.
Even the fo. st hearts do sometimes
entertain good motions: like as, on


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


en nS


the contrary, the holiest souls give way
sometimes to the suggestions of evil,
The flashes of lightning may be dis-
cerned in the darkest prisons. But if’
good thoughts look into a wicked heart,
they stay not there ; as those that like
not their lodging, they are soon gone:
hardly anything distinguishes betwixt
ood and evil, but continuance. ‘The
ight that shines into a holy heart is
constant, like that of the sun, which
keeps due times, and varies not his
course for any of these sublunary
occasions,— Bishop Hall.

Draw from this the extreme danger
of trifling with the name and attributes
of God—of using imprecations and
oaths, ag mere expletives in ordinary


conversation, without either reverence


or meaning... An irreverent fami-
liarity with sacred things, as in all
other instances, is but one step removed
from contempt. Such, unhappily, was
the case with Saul. “As the Lord
liveth,” was an expression so frequently
on his lips, that, it may be feared, its
solemn import was soon but little felt
or understood. Hence, we ge
in the chapter before us with what
facility he disregarded the obligation
of his oath, when exposed to tempta-
tion... . He who is not afraid thus
solemnly to trifle with his Maker, will
not fear to violate the most sacred
obligations towards his neighbour . . .
Beware, then, of destroying, or weaken-
ing in any degree, your reverence for
God, which is the foundation of all
religion and all morality. Be assured,
there is no more certain way of effecting
this, than a profane and inconsiderate
use of His holy name.—Lindsay.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Vorses 8-17.


Davin’s First Fiicut,


I, Human transgressors are surrounded by divinely raised barriers intended
to prevent their departure from the right way. A soldier weary of the hard-


ships of the camp forms a plan to desert
himself to dishonour and to punishment.


his regiment, and thus to expose
But all around him are stationed


sentinels who stand to prevent him from doing what would ruin all his prospects


for life.


It is well for him if the thought of the cold steel which encompasses


201


HOMILLTIC-COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOKA





him leads him to dismiss the idea from his mind—if the opposition which he
knows he should meet with makes him pause and allow the purpose to die.
But should he persist he will not succeed in making good his escape without
encountering many’a bayonet and bullet, each of which is a witness against him
bearing testimony that he is a transgressor against martial law. In likemanner God
puts sentinels in the path of men which are intended to keep them from breaking
through moral laws, and by the opposition which they offer to transgression to
eonvince them of the self-destroying nature of sin, First and foremost stands
the voice of conscience, and then, it may be, the pleadings of family affection,
the arguments of reason and even the warnings of self-interest. Saul was sur-
rounded by such divinely raised barriers, which he broke down one after another.
His conscience and his reason echoing the remonstrance of Jonathan, had but
lately stood across his path, and for a time had turned him from his purpose.
But he had silenced them again, and now the opposition of his daughter, like
another sentinel, rises up before him, and hinders him from staining his hands
with innocent blood. Michal’s interposition surely reminded him that the man
whose life he sought was not an obscure subject and a stranger but one whom
his own act had made the husband of his daughter and a member of the royal
household, and therefore one who, from family and political interests, had a
claim upon him even if he was not open to influence from higher motives. Each
admonition and hindrance which Saul encountered was a witness against him,
and warned him that he was pursuing a path of self-destruction.


II. Those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake may serve God better
by fleeing than by fighting. It costs a courageous man much more to flee
than to fight, and yet there are times and circumstances when the voice
of duty commands the former rather than the latter. ‘The commander
may feel a strong desire to encounter the enemy, and yet he may feel
that a retreat for the present may ensure a victory with less loss of life
in the future. Or he may long to attack a certain stronghold and yet
he may feel assured that if he delay, it will shortly be surrendered without
bloodshed. In both cases he wiil be acting wrongly if he allows his
Physical courage and martial ardour to get the better of his humanity. It will

e better to expose himself to the charge of cowardice than to do that which
will be least for the honour of his God and his country. Up to this period of
his life David had never turned his back upon an enemy, or retreated when
exposed to personal danger, excepting so far as to avoid the javelin of Saul.
It must have been harder for him to flee with the help of a woman than it
would have been to remain and face the messengers of the king. But he
doubtless felt that the course which was least in accordance with his feelings
was most in accordance with his duty. If he had come forward in open opposi-
tion to Saul he could scarcely have failed to rally many friends to his side, but
a civil war might have been the result. He therefore chose the course which,
though more apparently humiliating to himself, was most conducive to the
welfare of his country, and therefore most pleasing to God. In all cases of a similar
nature—whenever a servant of God finds himself the subject of unjust treatment—
it becomes him to consider not his own personal feelings first, nor even his
stay and present reputation merely, but the welfare of his country and the
onour of his God.


III. Even good men are sometimes under obligations to unscrupulous and
godless persons. Michal was destitute of the pure and lofty motives which
governed David, yet at this time she was the instrument of his deliverance. In
bringing about the end she desired she did not hesitate to endeavour to clear
herself - Sa expense of her husband, and thus to deprive herself of all claim

2


OHAP, XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





a


to our admiration and sympathy. Yet, as David was then situated, he was
compelled to be indebted to her exertions, and to let her misrepresentation of
his character go unchallenged. There is more than one way of testifying our
regawd for a friend in a position similar to that in which David was then placed.
We may be bold enough openly to avow our affection for them, and take the
consequences of so doing. Or we may prefer to show our love by sharing their
misfortunes—by casting in our lot with theirs, and being willing to fare as they
fare. Or we may only have so low a regard for them as to be willing to serve
them only so far as we can do it without involving ourselves in trouble for their
sakes, ‘This last kind of regard was all apparently that Michal had for David.
Jonathan did not scruple openly to seek to save his friend’s life, and to risk his
father’s displeasure in so doing. Michal was willing to save his life if she could
do it without exposing herself to Saul’s anger ; she loved him enough to aid his
escape, but not enough to take the blame upon herself. She did not even love
him enough to share his exile, although she probably knew that he was the
anointed king of Israel; she had some regard for his life, but none for his
honour, or she would not have charged the absent hero with threatening to be-
come her murderer (ver. 17), and so have shielded herself under his blackened
reputation. It mattered not to her that she was thus giving Saul some pretext
for seeking his life—that she was thus wounding her husband in a more deadly
manner than her father’s sword would have done. ‘I'he meanness of the act
shows us to what a contemptible instrument a noble man may sometimes be in-
debted for a service. Michal’s conduct, in contrast with that of her brother,
gave David just ground to say in after days, “ ZAy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women” (2 Sam. i. 26).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


As the crystal vessel, though cast
into its proper and permanent form, is
unfit for use until it has been recom-
mitted to the furnace, and, by the pro-
cess of annealing, adapted for the rough
process of ordinary usage, so the cha-
racter of David, elevated and beautiful
although it had already appeared, was
as yet too soft for the strain and pres-
sure of a royal position ; years had to
be spent in annealing it... . The
great purpose of God, in David’s early
trials, seems to have been to develop
and mature those gifts and graces that
were to fit him for a royal position.

. 1. In this view, first of all it
was most necessary that the spirit of
trust in God, and all the graces de-
pending on it and derived from it,
should be exercised and nurtured to
the highest measure of strength and
endurance. . . . . and no discipline
could have been better fitted than
David’s for impressing this lesson. . .
9. Another important grace which
David’s early trials seem designed to


promote was the spirit of calm self=
government under circumstances the
most trying and agitating. ‘The germ
of this grace (as of the former) was
exhibited in the combat with Goliath ;
but it too required to be strengthened
into a steady, constant habit, ere he was
qualified to hold the reins of govern-
ment. . . . 3. The close and painful
contact into which he was brought in
these early trials with his predecessor,
Saul, was obviously designed to serve
a very important purpose. The same
trials endured at the hand of another
man would not have had the same
effect. . . . If anything could have
made him shudder at the thought of a
ruler abandoned by (tod, and driving
at nothing but the gratification of his
own base passions, it was being himself
the victim of those passions, receiving
in his own person the blows aimed by
Saul’s ungovernable fury.— Blackie.


Ver. 16. The falsehood of Michal,
by which she deceived her father Saul,
203


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK I.


ne


was a retribution on him ; it was the
fruit of his own evil example, teaching
her to practise deceit by his own acts :
see chap. xviii. 17, 19, 20, 21. His
falsehood and treachery recoiled on him-
self, as Laban’s falsehood and treachery
against Jacob recoiled on Laban him-
self by the conduct of his daughters
to him (Gen. xxxi. 14-20, 35). Saul
had cheated David of his wife, as
Laban had cheated Jacob of his wife.
The daughters of Laban and Saul

ractised against their fathers the
ee of deceit which they had
learned at their own homes.— Words-
worth,


Ver. 17. But how shall Michal
answer this mockage unto her furious
father? Hitherto she hath done like
David’s wife; now she begins to be
Saul’s daughter: “He said to me,
Let me go, or else I will kill thee.”
She, whose wit had delivered her
husband from the sword of her father,
now turns the edge of her father’s


wrath from herself to her husband,
His absence made her presume of his
safety. If Michal had not been of
Saul’s plot, he had never expostulated
with her in those terms: ‘‘ Why hast
thou let mine enemy escape?” Neither
had she framed that answer, “ He said,
Let me go” .... Asshe loved her
husband better than her father, so she
loved herself better than her husband:
she saved her husband by a wile; and
now she saves herself by a lie, and
loses half the thank of her deliverance
by an officious slander. Her act was
good, but she wants courage to main-
tain it, and therefore seeks to the weak
shelter of untruth. Those that do
good offices, not out of conscience, but
good nature or civility, if they meet
an affront of danger, seldom come off
cleanly, but are ready to catch at all
excuses, though base, though injurious;
because their grounds are not strong
enough to bear them out in suffering
for that which they have well done, —
Bishop Hall.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF VERSES 18 azxé 19
Davi’s Visit To RaMaH.


I. The godly naturally seek the society of the godly in times of trouble. A
‘desire to conform to the will of God is the basis of all true godliness, and those
who are ruled by this desire are bound together by a common bond and are
often involved in a common persecution. Under such circumstances it is natural
and wise for them to seek each other’s society that they may strengthen each
other by mutual sympathy and help, and especially that those who have had
much experience may encourage and advise those who have but lately entered
upon life. Sailors who in tempestuous weather put into harbour are likely to
find sympathy and help from veteran seamen who once themselves ploughed the
ocean—while they listen to the tale of their experience they gain fresh courage
to meet new storms and perhaps valuable hints as to the best means of steering
their vessel in dangerous waters. ‘Ihe common desire to serve their common
God had created a strong tie between the aged prophet Samuel and the youthful
warrior David, and when the latter found himself compelled by Saul’s envy to flee
from home, it was natural he should seek the abode of one who had been driven
into retirement by the same godless man. We can imagine what help David
would gain from his aged friend at this time—how Samuel would strengthen
his faith and animate his courage by reminding him of the word of the
Lord which had come to him as God’s prophet in past days (chap. xvi. 1),
and how he would likewise, out of the experience of a long public life,
give David much valuable counsel concerning not only the future imme-
niately before him, but touching that more distant day when he should
do longer be an outcast fleeing for his life but the ruler of Israel. During his
thort stay at Ramah he was strengthened for the long sojourn in the wilderness
shat came after, and he doubtless fully realised the truth that, “as iron
304 ;


@HAP. XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





eee


sharpeneth iron, 90 a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.” And in
such times of communion the gain is never on one side only. If the younger
are helped and instructed by the elder, the elder are cheered and comforted
by the younger. The veteran servants of God are gladdened by the energy
and fervour of the younger men, and rejoice when they see others rising
up to fill the places which they once occupied. We may be sure that Samuel
gladly welcomed his young friend even although the visit was brought about by
painful circumstances. In his retirement he doubtless often still grieved over
the failure of his hopes concerning Saul, but when he saw David he would be
cheered by the certainty that here was one who would not disappoint his
expectations but would prove himself a faithful ruler of Israel,


II. When the godly find each other thus mutually helpful one grea

the existence of the visible church is attained. Ona gear: aim a st one
human father is to make his children mutually helpful to each other. Indeed
one great reason for the existence of the family seems to be the formation of
such strong and tender ties between the brothers and sisters, as shall enable
them by the love which they bear to each other to lighten each other’s burdens
as they journey through life. Those who are the objects of such love know well
how often it has cheered them in the day of adversity and nerved them to face
fresh trials and perplexities. And the children of God ought to look upon
themselves as part of the one great “ family in heaven and earth,” and to count


it their duty to extend their sympathy and counsel to every afflicted member of
that family. For this is indeed one of the great reasons why God’s children are
required to form themselves into a community, and are required to make public
profession of their faith in him. By so doing they become known to each other
and are enabled to animate each other’s love and stimulate each other to per-


severe in the ways of godliness.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Besides this intercourse with Samuel,
the pursuits of the sons of the prophets,
alike in their practice of music and
poetry, and in the study of the Word
of God, were just such as David would
most thoroughly enjoy, and as would
most materially tend to soothe his
spirit after the trials through which he
had just passed, and brace it for the
difficulties which lay before him. I
do not presume to fix either the date
or the authorship of all the produc-
tions which have been brought together
into the one book of the Psalms, but if
the 119th Psalm came from the pen of
David, as multitudes believe, then I
do not wonder that many have con-
nected its composition with his resi-
dence in the school of the prophets at
Naioth. The calm in which he then
found himself, and the studies which
he then prosecuted, might well have
led his musings in the direction of that
alphabetic ode, while there are in it
not @ few expressions which, to say the


least, may have particular reference to
the dangers out of which he had so
recently escaped, and by which he was
still threatened. Such, for example,
are the following: “‘ Princes also did
sit and speak against me; but thy ser-
vant did meditate in thy statutes.”
“The proud have had me in derision,
yet have I not declined from thy law.”
“Trouble and anguish have taken hold
on me; yet thy commandments are
my delights.” Then, in regard to his
present enjoyment, we may quote these
lines: “O how love I thy law! it is
my meditation all the day.” “The
law of thy mouth is better unto me
than thousands of gold or silver ;”
and in reference to God’s dealings with
him, he says, “I know, O Lord, that
thy judgments are right, and that thou
in faithfulness hast afflicted me.” “Tt
1s good for me that I have been afflic-
ted ; that I might learn thy statutes.”
Dr. W. Md. Taylor.


205


HOMILETIC. COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 1
Ae eee





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 20-24,
SavL AMONG THE PRopners,


I. Institutions for the study of the oracles of God are the outcome of human
need. Hach individual man is a creature of manifold needs, Being a compound
of matter and mind, possessing a material and a spiritual nature, he has many
wants—bodily wants, intellectual wants, and moral wants. There is a wide field
open, therefore, to those who devote their lives to ministering to his wants.
They may make it their business to feed or clothe his body, and in doing so
their special object is to supply that material which shall be best adapted for
the purpose ; or they may make bodily health the object of their aim, and spend
their lives in studying how to promote or restore it, Others study man’s intel-
lectual needs, and endeavour to find out how best to develop his mental powers,
or to satisfy his mental appetites. But man is more than body and intellect, :
he is also conscience, and unless he finds satisfaction for this moral part of his
being, he goes through life with his deepest need unsatisfied. It is only natural
therefore that some men should feel called upon to devote their lives and energies
to endeavouring to show their fellow creatures how this deepest and most pressing
of all their many needs can be met. And as there are institutions whose object it
is to fit men to be useful to others in respect of their bodily and intellectual wants,
it seems fit and proper that there should be similar institutions calculated to
render men more fit to deal with the moral wants of their fellows. If there are
schools for the training of bodily healers, and for those who are to educate the
intellectual part of man, there ought surely to be schools for those who desire
to be instrumental in healing and in training his moral nature. Such institu-
tions seem to be the natural outcome of human need. The one object of study
in such communities is, of course, the only book which can meet man’s spiritual
wants—that beok which contains a revelation of the Divine will and purpose
concerning him. Other things are studied, but all tending to the one end, that
of throwing light upon the Divine oracles. As the schools of the prophets found
in Israel were born of the human needs of that earlier day, so our modern reli-
gious training institutions are the outcome of a felt present need. And
although they differ greatly in many respects they agree in having for their aim
the study of the Word of God, and the diffusion of its truths among mankind,
so that the needs of each soul may be met.


IT. Such institutions ought to be places in which the operation of the Spirit
of God is very manifest. Men who have to deal with this greatest need of fallen
humanity have to encounter obstacles which are not met with by those who
seek to supply the needs of man’s lower nature. Men are willing and eager to
satisfy their bodily appetites, and to be healed of their bodily diseases, and many
are glad to obtain food and training for their minds, but the majority of men
are indifferent as to their spiritual needs and turn with aversion from any effort
made to heal their moral diseases. Hence those who essay to labour for this end
must be aided by a power which is more than human, even by that power of
the spirit of God which is mighty in convincing of sin and in healing the sinner.
Every prophet of God, in whatever age he lives, must be able, in some degree,
to adopt the words of the greatest and the Divine Prophet when He said, “ Zhe
Spirit of the Lord is upon me because He hath anointed me to preach the gospel
to the poor, He hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to
the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord” (Luke iv. 18,19). Without
this mighty reinforcement he will not prevail against the natural opposition of
the a heart to God and goodness. This mighty spirit evidently rested in


GHaP. XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





a special and remarkable manner upon the school of the prophets over which
Samuel presided, it worked in and through the first New 'l'estament prophets
in a similar manner, and without the influence of that same Divine Person no
man, however richly he may be endowed in other respects, can be instrumental
in communicating spiritual life to others. While, therefore, all godly men in all
ages need and possess the help of the spirit of God, the sons of the prophets need
His help in a special manner, and there is every reason for them to expect to
receive it if the conditions for its reception be fulfilled.


III. Men may be wrought upon by the Spirit of God without becoming
morally better. ‘I'his was not the first time that Saul had been found among
the prophets, and had been the subject of that supernatural influence which
was present with them. On the first occasion it seems likely that he was a
willing subject of this Divine influence, and that he gladly yielded himself to its
power. That first endowment was probably an earnest of what might have been
bestowed on him had he continued willing to be guided by the Holy Ghost. He
would then have been from time to time favoured with these special manifestations
of the Divine presence in such a way as would have enlightened his spiritual
understanding, and altogether exalted his moral nature and made him more and
more fit to be the representative of God to the people of Israel. But such had
not been the case, and this last exercise of the Spirit of God upon him seems
to have been at least without the consent of his will and possibly against it. It
has rather the aspect of a visitation of Divine judgment than of Divine favour,
and is a solemn illustration of the truth that even this great gift of the Father
of Lights may be bestowed in a certain form and degree, without its receiver
becoming a renewed man. “ Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord,
have we not prophesied in Thy name? and in Thy name cast out devils? and in
Thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them,
I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity” (Matt. vii. 22, 23).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 20 21. By these “prophesy-
ings” we are not to understand, as
we are already aware, a foretelling of
future things, but a pouring forth of
the heart: under the impulse of the
Holy Spirit, in lively songs of praise of
God, and of His wonderful works. With
anointed lips, and with an animated
oratory, they praised the mighty deeds
through which Jehovah had from of
old made Himself glorious to His
people. In responsive chorus they
gang—with the harmonious accompani-
ment of harps, flutes, cymbals, and
trumpets—sacred songs to the honour
of God, and called down in earnest
prayers upon themselves and all the
people the blessings of the Almighty,
and the fire-streams of His Spirit.
From time to time it pleased God, in
the days of the Old Covenant, to bring
into prominence the exalted life of
His own children in contrast with the


children of this world, abandoned by
the Spirit, and unable to rise above
the earth, in so unmistakable and
overpowering a manner, that in view
of it even the most blinded among the
people might gain some apprehension
of the de, th to which they had fallen
from the elevated height of their
former calling. At the same time, from
these inspired ones there went forth
among the people a light to show in
what sense the Lord, by the coming
of the Messiah—for whom they were
then waiting—would create a “new
thing in the earth,” and what was
meant by the regeneration and puri-
fying of the world, which would
be brought about by the advent of
the Messiah... .. Even among the
roughest and wildest spirits in Israel,
the religious feeling was in only a few
instances so completely dead that it
could not be kindled up out of ita
207


HOMILETIG COUMENTARY; SAMUEL,


BOOE i.





ashes, although only temporarily, when
touched by the right spark. ‘There
are even at the present day,‘in our
own fatherland, districts of the Church
where almost a similar thing may be
said of those who belong to it. In
times of great spiritual awakening, or
even of only solemn Church festivals,
one sees persons who, on account of
their spiritual dulness and their tho-
rough worldliness of character, were
believed to be incapable of being lifted
up into the kingdom of God, suddenly
glow with devotion and with zeal for
the service of God when brought into
fellowship with believers. This sudden
religious elevation to which they are
thus drawn along with them, shows
itself, as a rule, to be by no means
steadfast and enduring. But they also
“prophesy ” a while with the congre-
gation of the saints, and perhaps even
rise higher than many of them, in the
heat and enthusiasm of their religious
profession. It not seldom happens
even that they who are only passing
travellers, when they breathe the air
of such a district, feel themselves, be-
fore they are awate of it, deeply inte-
rested in religious and ecclesiastical
matters, Moreover, the religious ele-
vation of mind on the part of the royal
messengers at Naioth may be attributed
partly to the appearance of the aged
Samuel, the man of God, known and
highly venerated throughout the whole
land. Itis enough that at that time
they could not venture on any account
to rush with violence into the midst of
of the solemn scenes to which they had
come. How could they by any possi-
bility lay hands on him whom Saul
hated in so unrighteous a manner, and
who was so visibly under the protecting
care of God,—the young hero by the
side of Samuel ?—Krummacher.


Ver. 24. Mark here, how men who
are themselves godless observe and
criticise the characters of those who
join themselves with the people of God.
“Is Saul also among the prophets?”
said the wits of Israel, when they heard
of what occurred at Naioth. Now
this a have been as honourable to


Saul, as it came to be dishonourable
to him, if only he had in his after
history proved himself sincerely re-
solved to do the will of God. ‘Thus,
when we say of another Saul, “Is Paul
also among the apostles?” we mean
no reproach to the man of Tarsus, but
only desire thereby to magnify the
riches of divine grace, which trans-
formed him from a persecutor of the
Church into a preacher of the Gospel ;
and had this occasion been the turning-
oint in the history of the King of
srael, as the prostration at Damascus
was the crisis in the life of the Christian
apostle, the proverb before us would
have been one of honour, and not of
disgrace. Unhappily, however, by his
after conduct Saul gave occasion to
men to speak of his insincerity and
wickedness, and so, “Saul among the -
prophets” is, even yet, jeeringly said
y us, when we mean to indicate that
& godless, Christless man has found his
way into the membership or ministry
of the Church. Now this proverb,
thus understood, is two-edged. It
speaks to those who are as yet outside
of the Church, and says to them, “If
ou are not really and truly Christ’s ;
if you do not love the Lord and desire
to serve him, then do not seek to enter
the Church.” But it speaks also to
those who are within, and says to them,
“If in your hearts you are conscious
that you are none of Christ’s, and if in
our conduct you are dishonouring
is name, then go out from the Church.
It is not for such as you; and your
continuance in it will only make men
say, ‘Is Saul among the prophets?’
They who have named the name of
Christ should depart from iniquity.”—
Dr. W. M. Taylor.

In reviewing the narrative over
which we have come, we are im-
pressed with the proof, which is here
furnished, of the diversified resources
which Jehovah has at command for
the protection of His people. Again
and again Saul attempts to take
David’s life, but always without
success; and each time the means
by which David was delivered are
different. At first he is defended by


OwmaP, XIX. —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





God’s blessing on his own valour
against the Philistines; then he is
indebted for his safety to the mediation
of Jonathan; then to the agency of
Michal ; and finally to the miraculous
work of God’s own Holy Spirit. In
the subsequent portion of the history,
we shall find that the same principle
holds, and that in each new peril he is
preserved by some new instrumentality.
When God purposes to protect a man,
He is at no loss for the means of
carrying out Hisdesign. He may find
them in what seems to us mortals the
most unexpected places, and they may
work in what appears to us to be a
very strange—it may be, also, a very
sinful manner; yet the purpose is
accomplished, while yet the liberty of
the different agents is not infringed.—
Dr, W. M. Taylor.


Ver. 24. In connection with chap x.
11. There has been some moment, some
one fleeting moment, in the life of
every man, even the most thoughtless,
when he has had dreamsof better things,
when he has heard the voices of the
prophets coming with their harp and
their tabret down the hill, when he
has joined their company and caught
their strains. There may have been a

. time when it has been said of him,
“What! is he too among the prophets?”
Has he found that life isreal.....


That hour, that moment, was the hour,
the moment of thy life, friend and
brother. To that God would raise,
assimilate the whole of it. Oh! do not
let the sluggish turbid current of your
ordinary days seem to you that which
truly represent to you what you are,
what you are able to be... .. but if
you should have succeeded in quenching
that voice of love which you once heard
speaking in your heart, and now can
hear nothing but hoarse and dissonant
voices of evil omen,—oh yet be sure
that the spirit of God does not desert
the work of His own hands, that He is
still hovering about the habitation in
which He desires to dwell. And if,
when you meet with old friends from
whom you have been long estranged,
there should come back something of
the youthful impulse, some of those
heart yearnings and songs of hope you
poured forth then, though mixed with
turbulence and confusion, and hardly
to be distinguished from madness, yet
the question may be asked again, “ Is
he too among the prophets?” and
it is a God will answer the question as
it was not answered before, if you desire
not the power of the prophets, but
their obedience, not that you may
speak inspired words, but that you
may have the humble and contrite
heart which He does not despise.—
Maurice.





CHAPTER XX,


Crrricat any Exrosrrory Norrs.—Ver. 1. “And David fled,” while Saul was still under
the power of the prophetic influence. ‘Nothing could be a better evidence of his innocence than
his thus putting himself in Jonathan’s power. Perhaps something passed between Samuel and
Saul on the subject, since it appears from verses 5, 25, 27, that Saul expected David at the feast
of the new moon.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 2. “Why should my father hide this thing from me?” This remark supposes that
the intimate relation between Jonathan and David had been concealed, as far as possible, from
Saul.” (Erdmann.) “Jonathan, it would seem, clung to a hope that the extraordinary scene
at Naioth might have wrought a sanctified improvement on Saul’s temper and feelings.”
(Jamieson.) Or, “he might regard the late attempt on David as the result of a new but
temporary access of rage, and remembering his distinct oath in his lucid intervals, might suppose
that he would not in a quiet state of mind resvlve on and execute such a murder. (rdmann.)


Ver. 8, “Moreover :” rather “ again.”
P 209


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I.





Ver. 5. “'To-morrow is the new moon,” etc. “This request implies that Saul gave a feast
at the new moon, and therefore that the new moon was not merely a religious festival, according
to the law in Numb. x. 10, xxviii. 11, 15, but that it was kept as a civil festival also, and in the
latter character for two days ; as we may infer both from the fact that David reckoned to the
third evening, é.e., the evening of the third day from the day then present... . it does not
follow, that because Saul supposed that David might have absented himself the first day on
account of Levitical uncleanness, therefore the royal feast was a sacrificial meal. It was evidently
contrary to social propriety to take part in a public feast in a state of Levitical uncleanness, even
though it is not expressly forbidden in the law.” (Keil. )


Ver. 6. “A yearly sacrifice.” “In the then disorganised condition of public worship, to
which David himself first gave regular form, family usages of this sort, after the manner of other
nations, had established themselves, which were contrary to the prescriptions concerning the unity
of Divine worship.” ( Von Gerlach. }


Ver. 8. “Covenant of the Lord.” “ Because it was not only made with invocation of the
Lord’s name, but also had its deepest ground and origin in God, and its consecration in their
life-like communion with God,” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 11. “ Come, let us go out,” etc. “The scene of this memorable conference was,” as
Porter describes it (Handbook, p. 324), “a shallow valley between Gibeah (Tell el Falil) and
Nob, breaking down on the east in rocky declivities into Wady Suleim. Behind some of the
rocks in it David could easily lie hid, and yet see Jonathan descending from the city above.”
(Jamieson. )


Ver, 12. “O Lord God of Israel.” This is not a prayer, but an invocation—a calling upon
God to witness to his sincerity.


Vers. 14,15. “Of the various explanations of this difficult passage only the two following
are worthy of consideration. The one understands a question to the end of ver. 14, ‘And wilt
thou not, if I yet live, wilt thou not show me the kindness of the Lord, that I die not?’
Ver. 15 cannot, then, be a part of the question, but must be taken as the subjoined expression
of confident expectation: ‘And thou wilt not cut off thy kindness,’ etc. But this sudden,
abrupt transition to a question, and then, again, to direct discourse, is strange, even if these
vacillations and diversities of discourse are referred to Jonathan’s excited feeling. The second
explanation, which is the preferable one, introduces a wish by a slight change in the pointing of
the Hebrew. Jonathan, having invoked a blessing on David, thus expresses his wish for himself:

And wouldst thou, if I still live, wouldst thou show me the kindness of God, and not, if I die,
not cut off thy love from my house for ever?’ So Syr., Arab., Maur., Then., Ew., Keil.”
(Zrdmann.) Jonathan’s request was fulfilled. See 2 Sam., chap. ix.


Ver. 16. “So Jonathan made a covenant,” etc., “namely, by bringing David to promise
kindness to his family for ever.” (Keil.) The second clause is generally understood to be a
continuation of the historian’s words, and is rendered, “ And Jehovah required it at the hand
of David’s enemies,” 4.¢., Jonathan’s words were fulfilled. So Keil and others.


Ver. 17. This verse is generally understood to mean that Jonathan made his love to David
the ground of his request, or (Trans. of Lange's Commentary) “his love to David made him
anxious to maintain friendly relations between their houses.”


Ver. 19. “When theu hast stayed three days.” “ Either with your family in Bethlehem,
or wherever you find it convenient.” (Jamieson.) “Come down quickly.” The Hebrew
here is literally “ Come down very,’ but our authorised rendering seems to accord better with the
sense than any other. Erdmann remarks that it might be necessary to insist on a quick descent
to the place of meeting on account of the danger of being observed. “When the business,”
ete. Literally “on the day of the deed.” Gesenius refers it to the attempt of Saul to kill David,
narrated in chap. xix 2, and Jonathan’s effort to save his friend on that occasion. Erdmann
coincides in this view. “Ezel.” The stone of departure. (Gesenius.) “So called, probably,
from its being the spot whence David separated from his friend.” (Jamieson. )


Ver. 23. “The matter.” Rather, “the word.” “This refers not merely to the sign agreed
upon, but to the whole matter, including the renewal of the bond of friendship.” (Keil)
Behold, the Lord is between,” etc. See Gen. xxxi. 49.


Ver. 24. “So David hid himself,” etc. Some expositors think that David went first to
Bethlehem, others that the visit to his father’s house was entirely a fabrication. “Meat,” 1.6,
ood of any kind,


Ver. 25. “A seat by the wall.” “The left-hand corner at the upper end of a room was,
and still a in the East, the most honourable place. The person seated there has his left arm
0


GHAP. XX. BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SANIT ET.





confined by the wall but his right hand is at full liberty. From Abner’s position next the king,
and David’s seat being left empty, it would seem that a state etiquette was observed at the
royal table, each of the courtiers and ministers having places assigned to them according to their
respective gradations of rank.” (Jamieson), “Jonathan arose.” Kiel understands here that
when Abner entered Jonathan rose from his seat by the side of Saul and gave up his place to
Abner, others that he arose and seated Abner on the other side of Saul in David’s vacant place
in order that the latter might not be missed. This latter suggestion seems, however, to be
contradicted by the last clause of the verse which states that David’s place was empty.


Ver. 27. “The son of Jesse.” ‘Saul seems to hate the name of David and in contempt
he calls him the son of Jesse.” (Wordsworth).


Ver. 30. “Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman.” “This is a striking oriental
form of abuse, the counterpart of that ancient benediction (Luke xi. 27). Saul was not angry
with his wife; it was the son only upon whom he meant by this style of address to discharge
his resentment ; and the principle upon which it is founded seems to be that of a genuine filial
instinct ; it is a more inexpiable offence to hear the name and character of a parent traduced
than any personal reproach. In every Eastern family the great object of devotion and respect
is the mother. There are familiar expressions which show this very strongly. ‘Pull my father’s
beard, but do not speak ill of my mother,’ ‘Strike me, but do not curse my mother.’” (Jamieson).


Ver. 31. “He shali surely die.” Literally, “he is a son of death.”


Ver. 34. “He was grieved for David.” ‘The generosity of Jonathan’s character is very
apparent. He did not resent the injury and insult offered to himself so much as the wrong done
to his friend.” (Biblical Commentary).

Ver. 38. “ While in vers. 20-22, this procedure is summarily described of three arrows, the
account here is of one.. .. We must suppose that Jonathan did so with each of the three
arrows.” (Erdmann),

Ver. 40. “Artillery,” i.e, his bows and arrows. “The French word artilierie signifies


archery, and the term is still used in England, in the designation of the “ artillery company of
London,” the association of archers, though they have long disused bows and arrows,”
(Jamieson).

Ver. 41. “A place toward the south.” “An unintelligible description; one expects a
repetition of the description of David’s hiding-place in verse 19. The word rendered toward is
the same as that rendered near in ver. 19, but instead of the stone Hzel following, there comes
the inexplicable “the south,” (negeb) a word with which the adverb near is never joined, as it
never is either with any other denoting a quarter of the heavens. ‘T’he Sept. in both places
read argab or ergab, a word meaning a heap of stones. If this is the true reading, David's
hiding-place was either a natural cavernous rock which was called argab, or some ruin of an
ancient building, equally suited for a hiding place.” (Biblical Commentary).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER,
Sauu’s DISPLEASURE AGAINST JONATHAN.


Here we have— - : }
I. A strengthening of friendship between David and Jonathan. Two things


contributed to this. 1. An act of confidence on the part of David. It shows
how entire was the trust that David had in his friend’s fidelity, that in his
extremity at this time he sought his presence and help. That he was to dis-
place Jonathan on the throne of Israel was probably a fact which both of them
now recognised, and in a friendship less perfect it would have had the effect. of
making David somewhat doubtful of the continuance of Jonathan’s regard. But
he shows that he has fully gauged the exceeding love which left no room in
Jonathan’s heart for any feeling of rivalry, and the very fact that he confided
go entirely in his friend formed a new link in the already strong chain which
pound them together. Where there is a sincere and unselfish love at the foun-
dation of friendship, acts of mutual confidence increase and strengthen it.
2. A new act of self-denial on the part of Jonathan. Jonathan had before
ventured to plead with his father on behalf of David. He had done more—he


had fearlossly asserted his innocence, and now, although his method ess


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUBL, 600K &


epi egre hg  a


was different, it was evidently regarded by Saul as a declaration of friendship
for David. And in proportion as Saul’s wrath grew more fixed, so was the
danger propa eal increased of those who showed him any favour. How
dangerous it now was for Jonathan to defend him was apparent when his father’s
anger went so far as an attempt to slay him. But this new exposure to danger
for his friend’s sake would only cement the friendship on both sides. It is
almost certain that David came to hear of Jonathan’s narrow escape from Saul’s
javelin, and the thought that the risk had been run on his account must have
deepened his grateful love. But the same risk and danger would have had a
deepening influence also on Jonathan’s love for David, for every act of self-
denial for another gives us a new interest in him, and makes our affection for
him stronger than before. It is like new wood placed upon a fire—it gives new
life to that which is already burning, and increases the volume of the whole.


II. A widening of the distance between Saul andhisson. Jonathan’s filial
respect for his father is as bright a feature in his character as his devotion to his
friend. It manifests itself in his temperate remonstrance with his father when
himself condemned to death by his unreasoning rashness (see chap. xiv. 43), and
when the same blind passion was prompting Saul to seek the life of David. In
this chapter also it is displayed in his unwillingness to believe David’s assertion
that Saul still sought his life. But the infatuation which had made a breach
between the monarch and probably his most courageous and faithful subject,
now creates one between the father and his most noble and dutiful son. It may
well be supposed that the relations of Saul and Jonathan were never, after the
eecurrence here related, what they were before, and Saul’s conduct is a striking
illustration of the infatuation of wilful sin, which leads a man to cut off from
his life one by one his truest sources of blessing and happiness.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Friendship among theservantsofGod. know it. If, notwithstanding, the


Three questions: 1. Wherein is friend-
ship among the servants of God
grounded ?—It is a covenant in the
Lord. 2. What perils threaten even
friendship among the servants of God ?
—That one friend,overlooking another’s
sin, may do for his sake what is not
right in the sight of God. 3. What
blessing rests upon friendship among
the servants of God ?—It teaches un-
envying joy with them that rejoice,
and faithful mourning and forbearing
with them that mourn.—J. Disselhoff.


Ver. 3. It must not be forgotten
that, to believers under the Old
Covenant especially, Death was not
yet the angel with the palm-branch of
peace, as we to whom “life and im-
mortality are brought to light by the
Gospel” know it, or at least ought to

212


thought that there is “but a step
between us and death” fills us also
with horror, as too frequently happens,
how shall we venture to blame the
man living under the Old ‘Testament
economy, if we hear him, in his trying
situation, express the wish that he
might escape at least that form of
death which was intended for him ?—
Krummacher.


Ver. 4. Here friendship goes too far.
It is wrong to promise unconditional
compliance with the wishes of another,
He may err in judgment and ask what
is unwise, or may be misled by interest
and ask what is wrong. And, besides,
every man is solemnly bound to exer-
cise his own judgment and conscience
in the direction of his own conduct,
Jonathan was led by thts promise to


OHAP. XX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





tell a falsehood which his father de-
tected, and was thereby the more en-
raged.—Zrans. of Lange's Commen-


tary.


Ver. 8. So long as one sees before
him ordinary ways and means of es-
caping from danger, he should make
use of them, and not look for extraor-
dinary help from God, that he may
not tempt God.—Starke,


Ver. 17. True love delights in re-
ceiving and giving repeated and strong
assurances. ‘This is very different from
the repeated assurance which distrust


demands.—Trans. of Lange's Com-
mentary.


Ver. 41. Strong men weeping. 1.
Great occasion for it here. (a). Per-
sonal separation. (6). Mad injustice
of their father. (c). Prospect of a
bitter conflict. 2. Not unbecoming
when on sufficient occasion, Com-
patible (a). With manly courage and
spirit. David and Jonathan were cer-
tainly brave. (0b), With great self-
control (ch. xvii. 29; xviii, 14; xx.
32). (c). With living trust in Provi-
dence (ver. 22).—TZrans. of Lange’s
Commentarg.





CHAPTER XXL


Crrrroat and Eixposrrory Norgs.—Ver. 1. The position of Nob cannot now be determined,
only from Isa. x. 28-33, we gather that it was on the road northward between Jerusalem and
Anathoth. Porter identifies its site with “a low peaked dell a little to the right of the northern
road and opposite to Si4/4@t. He found there several cisterns hewn in the rock, large building
stones, and various other indications of an ancient town.” (Smith’s Biblical Dictionary). Others
place it at the modern village of Zl-Isawiyeh, about a mile north-west of Jerusalem, but the
objection to this spot is that the words of Isaiah imply that it was nearer the city of Jerusalem.
“ Ahimelech.” Most likely the same as the Ahiah mentioned in chap. xiv. 3 (see notes on
that chapter). In Mark ii. 26 Abiathar the son of Ahimelech (see chap. xxii. 20) is said to be
the person who was high-priest at the time when David ate the shew-bread. Professor Hackett
in the Biblical Dictionary shews that in 2 Sam. viii. 17, and in 1 Chron. xxiv. 3, 6, 31,
the two names are confused with each other, and the same is probably the case in Mark.
It is possible that father and son might have borne both names, or, as Hackett suggests,
“ Abiathar might have been the person who persuaded his father to allow him to have the shew-
bread, and it is probable the loaves were Abiathar’s (Lev. xxiv. 9), and given by him with his
own hand to David.” “Why art thou alone?” As the son-in-law of the king it would be
unusual for David to travel unattended. “We must presume that Ahimelech knew of Saul’s
hatred to David but not of the most recent occurrences.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 2. “I have appointed my servants.” “This was probably true. It is scarcely
credible that a person of David’s rank and consideration should not have secured some atten-
dants and followers. .. .. Moreover, our Lord (Mark ii. 26) distinctly asserts that the priest
gave the shew-bread to David, and ‘them that were with him.’” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 4. “There is no common bread.” “Common as opposed to holy. Thus the English
word is also used in Acts x. 14, 15, 28..... It gives an idea of the depressed condition of the
priesthood at this time that Ahimelech should have had no bread at hand except the shew-bread.”
(Biblical Commentary.) “If the young men,” etc. “ Thereby the principle of the legal pre-
scription of Levitical purity was satisfied, inasmuch as the circumstances—the lack of ordinary
bread, the haste which the alleged important commission of the king required, the duty of aiding
in the execution as much as possible, and the pious behaviour of David in inquiring the Lord’s
will at the holy place—seemed to justify » deviation from the rule concerning the eating of the


shew-bread.” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 6. “The vessels of the young men are holy,” etc. This phrase to the end of the
verse is very obscure, and has been variously rendered and understood. Some understand the
word vessel in the New Testament sense of body, others of the clothes of the men, or other
articles connected with their person. It is generally admitted that the word translated in a
manner should be rendered way. The principal renderings of the clause are as ak ae When


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL, book L


i eee ——


I came out the young men’s things were holy (Levitieally clean) ; and if tt ts an unholy way, tt
becomes even holy through the instrument, i.¢., on the supposition of the important royal mission,
upon which David pretended to be sent ; the way is sanctified before God, when he, his chosen
servant, is the instrument.” ‘This is Keil’s rendering. Erdmann’s reading is similar, under-
standing the unholy way, however, to refer not to David's enterprise, but to the act of ceremonial
illegality of eating the shew-bread, and the word translated vessel at the end of the verse to refer
to Ahimelech. “ And though this is the manner of common bread (i. though itis treating it
like common bread to give it to me), yet swrely to-day the bread in the vessel ts holy, (1.¢., there is
fresh shew-bread baked and put on the table in place of what you give us; the day being Friday,
as is indicated in the verse following.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 6. “That was taken from before the Lord,” etc. “It seems to be mentioned as an
alleviating fact, that the bread had already been taken away from before the Lord, having
remained on the table in the holy place seven days according to the law.” (Hrdmann.)


Ver. 7. “Detained before the Lord,” i.e, at the tabernacle, either for the purpose of
purification, or as a proselyte received by circumcision, or in the fulfilment of a vow, or for
suspected leprosy. “It is not impossible that Doeg may have been in custody or in sanctuary
for some crime.” (Biblical Dictionary.) “ Edomite, the chiefest of the herdsmen.” “ He
had probably come over with Saul in his wars with Edom.” (Hwald.) “On account of the
importance which still attached in Saul’s time to the possession of herds as a family power,
Doeg’s position must have been an important one,” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 8. “I have neither brought my sword.” That in such pressing danger David
fled without arms, is to be explained on the ground that “he feared he would be recognised, or
as an armed man concealing himself by suspected (Clericus), or that he fed in great haste.”
(Erdmann. )

Ver. 9. “In a cloth behind the ephod.” “A sign of the great value attached to this
dedicatory offering.” (Keil.) “There is none like that.” “Not only for its size and
superior temper, but for its being a pledge of the Divine favour to him, and a constant stimulus
to his faith.” ( Jamieson.)

Ver. 10. “Fled that day.” ‘ He only stayed in Nob long enough to get arms and food . .
We do not know whether he had already determined to go into Philistia, or now first suddenly
resolved upon it, possibly in consequence of Doeg’s unexpected appearance.” ( EHramann.)
Achish, or Abimelech. (See Psa. xxxiv.) This last was the standing title of the Philistian princes
ef Gath. (See Gen. xxvi. 1.) ‘ As some years had passed since the defeat of Goliath, and the
conqueror of Goliath was probably not known personally to many of the Philistines, he might
hope that he should not be recognised in Gath, and that he might receive a welcome there as a
fugitive who had been driven away by Saul, the leading foe of the Philistines.” (Ktel. )


Ver. 11. “The King,” #.¢., the hero, They could not have known of his Divine election.


Ver. 15. “Shall this fellow come?” etc. ‘“ Whether Achish had David taken over the
border, or at any rate out of the town; or whether David went away of his own accord; or
whether he was taken away by his servants, is not mentioned, as being of no importance to the
narrative.’ (Keil.) Note—“ From this narrative it appears that David and the Philistines
understood one another’s language, as on other grounds it is probable that the Hebrew and
Philistine dialects were nearly identical.” (7. of Lange's Commentary.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE OHAPTER.
Davw’s Fiigst to GatTu.


I. Men who have courageously encountered a formidable enemy may be
found fleeing before a meaner foe. In military history we have records of
fue which have overtaken armies which had hitherto been renowned for

ravery, and for these temporary failures of courage no adequate reason can be
assigned. The fact is there, but it does not admit of full explanation, And it
is the same sometimes with men individually, whether they are fighting against
foes of flesh and blood or against less tangible but not less real opponents. The
heart of the bravest man may sometimes give way, and give way when there
does not seem so much real danger as at a former period when he showed no
sign of eg In the case both ef the many and the one the panic may be


CHAP. XX2 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUHL.





—_—


partly attributable to an overwrought state of the imagination, which magnifies
the present peril and adds to the real foes “ an army of phantoms, vast and wan.”
Or it may arise from the struggle having lasted long, and then the spirit which
could rise to a high pitch of enthusiasm for a single encounter finds itself
unequal to the task of sustaining itself at so high a level of heroism. ‘These
suggestions apply to cases in which the courage displayed appears to have a
purely human origin, and to those when the great deeds of valour have been
performed by the inspiration of strong faith in an unseen God. And they are
quite as applicable to the warfare of every-day life as they are to that which is
“with confused noise and garments rolled in blood.” For the world is full of
men and women fighting every day of their lives against adverse circumstances
outside of them or against sin within them, with a fortitude that gives them full
title to be ranked among the heroes of their age. But whoever are the warriors,
and in whatever kind of warfare they may be engaged, they do sometimes flee
from a lesser foe after having conquered a greater. It was so with David now.
The sword of Saul was more terrible to him than the sword of Goliath had been.
He had fearlessly looked in the face of the giant, but though he bad been helped
to slay this most formidable foe, and all the trust that he then placed in the
arm of Jehovah had been fully justified, he is now seen fleeing before the man
who had quailed before the Philistine, and faith seems now to have no abode in
his soul, not so much as a resting-place for the sole of her foot. Without doubt
he permitted his mind to dwell upon Saul’s malignity, and upon the many
agents whom he could employ against him, to the exclusion of the signal token
of Divine help which had been afforded him in the valley of Elah, and the
assurance of Divine protection of which the anointing oil had been a pledge.
And thus neglecting by meditation upon God’s past goodness to stay himself
apon the Divine arm in the present, he becomes a prey to his over-wrought
imagination, and presents himself before us in his full manhood in a much less
admirable light than in the days of his youth. We must not forget, however,
that stronger faith in God is required to sustain a man in a long-continued
trial or in a succession of trials than to carry him victoriously through one
which, although it makes a great demand upon him for the moment, is soon
over. And this helps us to understand David’s failure at this time, and to
sympathise with his frailty though we may not excuse his sin,


II. The rear of losing a lesser life may lead men to imperil a life which is
greater. There is a life of the body and there is a condition of character which
is moral life, and though it is natural and right for men to be careful in a
measure of the former, yet a desire to preserve it should never lead to the
sacrifice of the latter. ‘The sword of the most bitter enemy is less to be dreaded
than the sword of conscience. ‘The most terrible bodily death is infinitely
preferable to wounding the moral sense and perhaps doing permanent injury to
the character. The retaining of bodily life is by no means necessary to a blessed
existence, but existence can nowhere be blessed if there is not integrity of soul.
Hence our Lord warns His disciples not to be over-solicitous concerning the life
of the body, lest by so doing they endanger a higher and more precious life.
“ For whosoever will save his life shall lose tt ; but whosoever will lose his life
for my sake, the same shall save it.” (Luke ix. 24). Here loss is gain and gain
is loss, Nevertheless, so strong is the love of bodily life, and so instinctively do
men shrink from a violent death, that even good and true men have not seldom
yielded for a time to the temptation to endanger the most precious for that
which is comparatively worthless. David did so when he lied to Ahimelech in
order to obtain from him the succour that he needed, and when he feigned
madness in the presence of the Philistine nobles. In both cases he inflicted
upon himself far more grievous and real injury than any that Saul a have


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, ‘BOOK EL





dealt out to him. His enemy’s sword could only have killed his body, but his
sin damaged his soul. No weapon forged by man ean take away peace of mind,
but wilful transgression must fill a man with remorse if his conscience is at all
awake, and a man like David could hardly fail to reproach himself afterwards
for having thus wandered from the path of rectitude. But even if he did not
do so, the harm done to his moral nature was the same and even greater, inas-
much as unrepented sin deadens the conscience and makes further trangression
more easy. When a man is suffering acute pain from a dangerous wound his
life may be in great danger, but if while the wound is unhealed there is no pain,
the surgeon has good reason to fear that mortification has set in and that all
hope of life is past. So in the moral nature that wound which is followed by
no pain is the most fatal.


III. A Divine law which is limited and temporary must yield to one which
is universal and permanent. Our Lord Himself justifies the action of David
and Ahimelech in the matter of the shew-bread (Mark ii. 25), on the principle
that the happiness and well-being of man is the end of all God's laws concerning
them, and that therefore if a merely ceremonial law interferes with that it
must be for the time set aside. Possibly David’s words in verse 5 may also have
some such meaning. (See Critical Notes.) All the ceremonial laws given to
Israel by God had for their end the elevation of a nation of idolatrous slaves to
a higher moral level by creating within them a sense of their own sinfulness
and of God’s infinite majesty and purity, and their own highest interests were
bound up in the strict observance of them. But just because the end of all
was mans good, so it followed that if in a particular case that good was only te
be obtained by a temporary violation of the ceremonial observance, that
violation was in accordance with the will of God. Ahimelech showed that he
understood the real intention of the law of the shew-bread when he broke it
to satisfy the needs of hungry men, for he acted on the principle that the
ceremonial laws were made for man and not man for the ceremonial laws, and
thus in a measure anticipated Our Saviour’s exposition of them. Although all
the details connected with the Jewish worship were symbols of unchangeable
truths and of immutable moral laws, they were symbols only, and therefore the
laws of their observance were at all times subordinate to those universal and
changeless moral laws which never clash with each other, and the violation of
which no exigency can ever justify.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Mingling of good and evil in David's
character. ) Though a brave and
devout man, he falls into grievous
falsehood and degrading deception,
through cowardly fear and lack of
trust in God. A warning to us.
Compare Neh. xiii. 26; 1 Cor. x. 12.
(2) Though so weak and erring, he
remembers God’s help in the past (ver.
9), cries to Him now (Psa. xxxiv. 6),
rejoices in Him anew (bid, ver. 1),
and resolves henceforth to speak truth
and to do good (¢bid, vers. 13, 14) ;
compare Pga. lvi. 18. An encourage-
ment to ts ; compare 1 John ii, 1.

21


Ver. 2. Who can look to pass this

ilgrimage without infirmities, when

avid dissembleth to Ahimelech? A
weak man’s rules may be better than
the best man’s actions. God lets us
see some blemishes in His holiest ser-
vants, that we may neither be too
highly conceited of flesh and blood, nor
too much dejected when we have been
miscarried into sin. Hitherto hath
David gone upright ; now he begins tu
halt with the priest of God, and under
pretence of Saul’s employment, draws
that favour from Ahimelech which
shall afterwards cost him his head.


GaaP. XXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





What could Ahimelech have thought
too dear for God’s anointed, God’s
champion? It is not like but that, if
David had sincerely opened himself to
the priest as he had done to the pro-
phet, Ahimelech would have seconded
Samuel in some secret and safe succour
of so unjust a distress, whereas he is
now, by a false colour, led to that
kindness which shall be prejudicial to
his life. Extremities of evil are com-
monly inconsiderate ; either for that
we have not leisure to our thoughts, or
perhaps (so we may be perplexed) not
thoughts to our leisure. What would
David have given afterwards to have
redeemed this oversight !—Bp. Hall.

There is nothing will keep a man
from sin more surely than confidence
in God; but despair is the most
dangerous condition into which one
can fall. While faith and hope last,
there will be energy, and watchfulness,
and purity; but with despair come
recklessness and folly. We are saved
by hope ; but when we despair of God’s
help, we run into extremes of wicked-
ness. When a merchant is in difficulties,
there is no great danger so long as he
believes that he can retrieve himself,
and hopes that he will come out all
right. But when he falls into despair,
he becomes regardless alike of God or
man, and runs headlong into practices
of which in other circumstances he
would never have thought, thereby
destroying alike his character and
future —Dr. W. MW. Taylor.


Vers. 10-15. David had lost his faith
in Jehovah, and put his confidence in
Achish, and nothing more salutary
could have happened to him_ than
such a reception as that which was
given to him at Gath, When a youth
is going on a wrong course the best
thing that can befall him is failure and
disgrace, and the worst thing that can
come to him is what the world calls
success. If he succeed the probability
is that he will go farther astray than
ever; but if he fail there is hope that
he will return to the right path, and
seek alliance with Jehovah. This last
was the case with David in the instance


before us, if at least we may judge of
the effect which his experience produced
upon him, from the songs which he
wrote with special reference to the in-
cidents at which we have been looking.
The titles of the 34th and 56th Psalms
connect these odes with David’s resi-
dence in Gath ; and though there are
few acknowledgments of sin in them,
yet they indicate that, as the result
and outcome of his trials, he was led to
look away from all earthly helpers to
the Lord alone. ‘This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him and
saved him out of all his troubles.”
Perhaps, too, there may be an implied
condemnation of the course which he
had been pursuing, and a virtual reso-
lution to abstain from it in the future,
when he says, “‘ What man is he that
desireth life, and loveth many days,
that he may see good? Keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guile. Depart from evil, and
do good ; seek peace, and pursue it.”
And it is scarcely possible to doubt
that, from his own penitence for the
sins of which he had just been guilty,
and his own experience of God’s favour
when he returned to him, he was led
to sing, “'The Lord is nigh unto them
that are of a broken heart; and saveth
such as be of a contrite spirit. Many
are the afflictions of the righteous:
but the Lord delivereth him out of
them all.”

It may appear strange that all this
should have happened immediately
after his pleasant and profitable sojourn
with Samuel at the school of the pro-
phets. But perhaps the very contrast
between his happiness at Naioth and
his continual suspense at Gibeah, where
he felt himself to be like one standing
on the very edge of an active volcano,
may help to account for his depression.
In any case it is by no means an un-
common experience that times of great
spiritual elevation are followed by pe-
riods of deep dejection. Every height
has its hollow; and as Peter went from
the first Lord’s Supper to his denial of
the Master, David went from Naioth
to Nob, and from Nob to Gath. It is
& suggestive incident, bidding us be

217


HOMILET?L COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK i,


a ee


always on our guard against tempta-
tion, and then, most of all, when we
have been enjoying the most exalted
privileges.—Dr. W. M. Taylor.

It is always a dangerous course when
believers betake themselves in their
necessities to the children of this world
for protection and help. Without
taking into account that too easily in
the circle of such benefactors and
deliverers do they lose their balance,
and, making court to them for their
favour, yield to the temptation to
disown their faith, and in word and
conduct to place themselves on an
equality with the world, such a step
gives to the latter occasion secretly to
triumph, and they who are so willing
to be called “the chosen,” when dis-
tress comes upon them know not how


to be contented with their God and
his help alone, but gladly permit them-
selves to seek for aid from those to
whom they do not even concede the
name of brethren. Never will they
succeed in truly reconciling the enemies
of their faith by means of affected ac-
commodation to them and their forms
of life; for, according to the well-
known testimony of God, the enmity
between those who are “after the
flesh,” and those who are “after the
spirit,” is a fied principle, and though
covered with many a fair garland of
courtesy and politeness, yet, even when
universal love bears the sceptre in the
heart of God’s children, that enmity
cannot be abolished till regenerating
grace has made of the “ twain one.”—
Krummacher,





CHAPTER XXIL


Critr0aL ann Expository Norrs.— Ver, 1. “ Adullam.”


“The site of Adullam (mentioned


in Josh. xv. 35, etc) has not yet been identified, but from the mention of itin the above and
other passages in proximity with other known towns, it is likely that it was near Deir Débban,


five or six miles north of Eleutheropolis. .


- The limestone cliffs of the whole of that locality


are pierced with extensive excavations (Robinson ii. 23, 51-53), some one of which was possibly


the refuge of David.” (Abridged from Smith’


8 Biblical Dictionary), The general opinion of


commentators and travellers agree with this, but Thomson supports the ancient view that it was
near the village Khureitein, five miles south-east of Bethlehem, and thus describes his visit to
that spot : “ Leaving our horse in charge of wild Arabs, and taking one for a guide, we started
for the cave, having a fearful gorge below, gigantic cliffs above, and a path winding along a


shelf of the rock, narrow enough to make the nervous among us shudder,


At length from a


great rock hanging on the edge of this shelf, we sprang by a long leap into a low window which
opened into the perpendicular face of the cliff. We were then within the hold of David, and
creeping half doubled through a narrow crevice for a few rods, we stood beneath the dark vault


of the first grand chamber of this mysterious and oppressive cavern,
lights did little more than make the damp darkness visible,


Our whole collection of
After groping about as long as we


had time to spare, we returned to the light of day, fully convinced that, with David and hig
lion-hearted followers inside, all the strength of Israel under Saul could not have forced an


entrance—would not even have attempted it.”


Ver. 2. “ Everyone that was discontented,” etc. Literally, bitter in soul, as in chap. £. 10
“* The comparison of this body with Catiline’s followers (Clericus, Thenius) supposes that David's
retinue was of a similar character with Catiline’s, a riotous, adventure-seeking rabble. But
there is nothing in the narrative to support such a supposition, and David’s position as to them,


and to Saul, is decidedly against it. ...


. Hengstenberg (on Psa. vii. 10) rightly remarks


David’s war with Saul was one not of individuals, but of parties; the wicked espoused Saul’s
side, the righteous David’s ; compare the much misunderstood passage 1 Sam. xxii. 2. The
distressed persons were those who were persecuted under Saul’s government on account of their
love for David. The debtors were such as, under Saul’s arbitrary misrule, were oppressed by
their creditors, and received from the government no protection against the violation of the law
of loan and interest (Exod. xxii. 25, Lev. xxv. 36, Deut. xxiii, 19). They were ‘ bitter of soul,’
not as ‘desirous of new things,’ not as merely dissatisfied with their present condition (Clericus),
but ‘as those whose anxiety of soul over the ever-worsening condition of the kingdom under


Baul, drove them to a leader from whom for the future they might hope for better things,


318


CHAP, XXIL, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


i ee





({Zw.) Comp. Jephthah’s fugitive life and retinue of “poor empty persons.” (Zrdmann.)
“Four hundred men.” “A list of the principal among them is given in 1 Chron, xii. 8-18,
and some of their acts are described in 2 Sam. xxiii. 13-22.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 8. “Mizpeh of Moab.” “ Mizpeh ; literally a watch-tower or mountain height com-
manding a very extensive prospect. Here it is probably a proper name belonging to a mountain
fastness on the high land which bounded the Arboth Moab on the eastern side of the Dead Sea,
most likely on the mountains of Abarim or Pisgah (Deut. xxxiv. 1), and which could easily be
reached from the country round Bethlehem by crossing the Jordan near the point where it
entered the Dead Sea.” (Keil.) “Perhaps he resorted to Moab for refuge because his ances-
tress Ruth was from that country.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 4. “The hold.” This fastness could not have been the cave of Adullam, because in
the next verse we read that David was commanded to return to Judah, but it was probably the
same refuge to which David had taken his parents.


Ver. 5. “Gad.” It must remain a matter for conjecture whether Gad had gone with David
to Adullam, or whether he now comes to him for the first time with a special Divine message.
“Get thee into the land of Judah.” Keil thinks that “ David was not to seek for refuge
outside the land ; not only that he might not be estranged from his fatherland and the people
of Israel, which would have been opposed to his calling to be King of Israel, but also that he
wizht learn to trust entirely in the Lord as his only refuge and fortress.” But Erdmann sees
tes reason for this direction in the fact that “the Philistines were now making plundering
incursions into the south of Judah, help and protection against them was needed, and this David
and his valiant band could give, and thus fulfil part of the theocratic calling in respect of which
the distracted, arbitrary rule of Saul was now impotent.” “Forest of Hareth.” An unknown
region. Josephus calls it the city of Hareth. It was probably a weedy district in the mountains
of Judah.

Ver. 6. “Abode under.a tree,” etc. Rather, was sitting under a tamarisk tree upon tae
height. (For Ramah see Notes on chap.i. 1.) “ Oriental princes frequently sit with their court
under some shady canopy in the open air. A spear was the early sceptre, as we are informed by
Justin . . . Saul’s spear might be distinguished from common spears by its length as well as its
decorations ; and that this was likely to be the case may be inferred from the relics of Egypt and
Assyria.” (Jamieson.) “All his servants.” “It was therefore a full assembly of the


personnel of the court.” (Erdmann.)
Ver.7. “Ye Benjamites.” “Showing how isolated the tribes still were, and how, for the
most part, Saul was surrounded by his own tribesmen only.” ( Biblical Commentary.) “In


Saul’s words there is the latent seuse: Will he, of another tribe, reward you, as I have done to
you, my fellow tribesmen ? Will he not ratner favour his tribesmen, the men of Judah! Will


it not be to your interest to stand on my side #” (Erdmann.)
Ver. 9. “Which was set over the servants,” etc. As this does not agree with the position


assigned to Doeg in the former chapter, some render the clause “And he stood with the servants,”
ete: Keil thinks that Doeg had been invested with the office of marshal of the court.


Ver. 10. “He inquired of the Lord,” etc. Some think this was untrue, but the words of
Ahimelech in verse 15 seem to admit the fact.

Ver. 14. “Faithful,” rather proved, tried. “Goeth at thy bidding.” Probably this should
be read, “Has access to thy private audience.’ The Hebrew word is so rendered elsewhere.
(See 2 Sam. xxiii, 23, and 1 Chron. xi. 25.)

Ver. 15. “Did I then begin,” etc. The most obvious meaning of these words is, “ Was it
the first time that I had inquired of the Lord for David concerning enterprises with which the
king had entrusted him ?” So Keil, Erdmann, and others. Some however (Bib. Commentary, etc.)
understand Ahimelech to deny having done such a thing on the ground that this was a duty


which he owed to the king only.
Ver. 17. “Footmen,” é.¢., runners, halberdiers.


Ver. 18. “A linen ephod.” “The allusion to the priestly clothing, like the repetition of
the expression, ‘priests of Ji ehovah,’ serves to bring out into its true light the crime of the blood-
thirsty Saul and his executioner Doeg.” (Keil.)

Ver. 20. “Abiathar.” How he esca_ ed can only be conjectured, Bishop Patrick suggests
that he was left in charge of the sanctuary when the other priests obeyed Saul’s summons.


Nors.—‘‘ During this first period of David's life as outlaw, several incidenta


occurred which are not mentioned in this narra4+ve. We learn ae San.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


a





xxiii. 13 that three of his chief heroes came to him in the cave of Adullam, one
of whom was his nephew Abishai, afterwards a famous general. A little after
(1 Chron. xi. 15-19) occurred that noble act of loving daring, when the “three
mightiest” broke through the Philistine army and brought their leader water
from the well of Bethlehem, for which he longed. ‘This was while he was in
the “hold,” and at this time apparently came to him the stout band of lion-
faced, gazelle-footed Gadites, who swam the Jordan when its banks overflowed,
and scattered all enemies before them (1 Chron. xii. 8-15), and an enthusiastic
body of men of Judah and Benjamin, for whose friendship Amasai answered


"1 a passionate speech (1 Chron. xii, 8-15).—/(Trans. of Lange’s Commentary).


MAIN HOMILETIO8 OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1—4,


Tae Cave or ADULLAM.


I, Oppressive rule transforms good subjects into outlaws. When those who
ure in authority disregard those universal laws of righteousness and beneficence
which are equally binding upon every man, they must not expect obedience from
those under their rule; their injustice will create a lawlessness in the governed
classes which, although it is rebellion against them, may be obedience to a higher
and juster rule. David had been a loyal servant to King Saul, and had given
full proof of true patriotism, but the oppression which he had undergone, and
the danger to which he was exposed through Saul’s injustice compelled him to
take up the position of an outlaw. He had once and again gone forth at the
peril of his own life to defend the throne of the king, but justice to himself now
demanded that he should take up arms in self-defence. It is most probable
also that those who joined him were men who had likewise been transformed by
oppression from obedient subjects into rebels. Before we condemn men for
resistance to authority we must know what is the nature of the authority they
resist.


II. Common suffering is a strong bond of union. There are many influences
which tend to bridge over the differences which divide men—differences of birth,
of education, of character and dispositiom—but perhaps there is nothing which
does this so effectually as a common calamity. If a vessel is in danger of
sinking, the paszengers who have hitherto been separated by distinctions of rank
recognise their common brotherhood and forget all minor differences in their
common danger. When a city is besieged the noble in the palace and the
artisan in the workshop exchange words and looks of sympathy as they recognise
their common peril. In the band which gathered to David in the cave of
Adullam there were doubtless men who would have never united in any common
action if they had not been suffering from a common calamity—the misrule of
Saul. Separated from each other and from David by every variety of circum-
stance and disposition, they were one with him and with each other in
indignation against oppression, and in determination to defend their lives and
liberties. Times of prosperity are not favourable to the promotion of union
among men, but times of adversity often bring them very near together,


III. Relationship to great men has its penalties as well as its advantages. I¢
was doubtless a proud day for Jesse when he became aware that he was to be the
head of a royal house, but the immediate consequences were not pleasant. Ifhe
had not been related to the chosen king of Israel, he would doubtless have been
permitted to remain unmolested in his quiet village home, but because he was
the father of David he was obliged to flee from his native land. When the
storm oo the highest trees are most exposed to its violence, and if they


OHAP, XXII,


HOMI LETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUED.


a a


fall they bring down with them those which stand near. So, in times of national
disquietude, the most prominent men are most in danger, and those who are
related to them are endangered by their relationship. There are, therefore,
drawbacks as well as advantages in belonging to the family of a great man.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


If it benoved a ruler to know the
heart of his subjects—their sorrow,
their wrongs, their crimes—to know
them and to sympathise with them,
this was surely as precious a part of
his schooling as the solitude of his
boyhood, or as any intercourse he had
with easy men who had never faced
the misery of the world, and had never
had any motive to quarrel with its
laws. He was now among the lowest
of those whom he would afterwards
have to govern—not hearing at a dis-
tance of their doings and sufferings,
but partaking in them livingly, realis-
ing the influences which were disposing
them to evil. And here he was ac-
quiring more real reverence for law
and order, more understanding of their
nature, than those can ever arrive at
who have never known the need of
them from the want of them. He was
bringing his wild followers under a
loving discipline and government which
they had never experienced ; he was
‘teaching them to confess a law which
no tyrant had created, no anarchy
could set aside.—Maurice.

Who can fail to recognise in David,
as he here appears, a remarkable type
of the Divine Prince of Peace, who ata
future age would go forth from his
house. As David then stood, so Christ,
his illustrious descendant, “according
to the flesh,” now stands almost every-
where, misapprehended by the world
where not hated and persecuted, and
only surrounded by a little band of
devoted followers, comparatively small


and insignificant, and for the most part
contemptible in the eyes of the world,
and,moreover, reviled by bitter enemies,
.. . The dwelling-place of the exalted
Son of David upon earth is meanwhile
as unlike to a splendid royal palace as
was David’s cave of Adullam to a
proud lordly mansion. The true
Church is as yet concealed under a
dark covering, yea, as with a widow’s
veil. Her Lord is not yet present to
the sight. Her people walk by faith
and not by sight, and know that they
are surrounded by the powers of dark-
ness, against whom - their weapons of
war are to be laid aside neither by day
nor by night. A world stands in arms
against the decided foliowers of the
crucified King of Glory, and they are
dealt with as very outlaws, on whom
anyone may lay his hands. But even
to them also the time comes when, as
our fugitive must exchange the cave
of Adullam for the gorgeous palace on
Mount Zion, even so for those who are
not offended at the “form of a servant”
assumed by the Divine Son of David,
and at the lowly aspect of His kingdom
upon earth, the simple dwelling in
which the Church now gathers together
shall become transformed into a glorious
building, irradiated with heavenly splen-
dour, whose dome shall tower upward
into the ever-opened heavens, whose
pillars shall encompass the whole earth,
and whose inhabitants, after they have
waited patiently with their Head here
below, shall reign with Him for ever.—
Krummacher.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF VERSB &.


Tue Propuet Gap.


I. God does not leave His servants in their times of danger and perplexity


without help and guidance.


“ Unto the upright there ariseth light in the


darkness” (Psa. exii. 4), and light often comes to men as it now came to David


431


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.





bv means of a man of God. For the very presence of such a man is light in
the cloudy and dark day. It will encourage the dejected soul to hold fast
its confidence in God, and will, exercise a restraining influence when we are
exposed to the temptation to turn aside from the path of right which great trial
sometimes brings. David had yielded to such a temptation once, but Gad’s
companionship would be likely to prevent another such fall. ‘The presence of
a prophet of God in the hold was a token of God’s good will, and as such was a
light in the darkness. And the counsel of such a man at such a time is a light
which not only cheers, but guides. God can guide His servants, as He can feed
them, in many different ways. As He has fed them direct from heaven, so He
has guided them by a voice direct from the invisible world. He has fed men
by the instrumentality of angels, and He has guided them by such an instru-
mentality. But He more generally helps man by man, and this was the method
He employed here.

II. When God’s children have good reason to believe that the light that thus
ariseth is a light from heaven, it is wise to follow its guidance implicitly. It is
the first duty of a benighted traveller to make sure whether the light upon his
path is an ignis-fatwus luring him to destruction, or the lamp of a friend point
ing to the highway of safety. When he has made sure that it is the latter, he
will only reveal his foolishness if he neglects to walk in the way which it reveals
as the right one. Gad was doubtless well known to David; he was in all
probability one of that company at Ramah who had grown up around Samuel,
and upon whom the prophetic spirit had descended in such a manner as to
qualify him to give counsel and guidance to the elect king of Israel, and David,
in his unhesitating obedience to his word, acts with true humility and wisdom.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


It is to be noted here as an interest-
ing fact, that in the hold of Adullam
and in the wilderness of Judah we have,
side by side, representatives of the
oracular and the prophetical methods
of the communication of the will of
God to men; and that, in the life of
David, as a whole, we have the era of
the transition from the one to the other.
Up to this time the priest had been the
most important personage in the nation,
and the onlyrecognised channel through
which God indicated his will to the
people. ‘True, there had been great
outstanding prophets, like Moses and
Samuel ; but the former wasan exception
to all rules as being the leader of the
Exodus ; and the latter, from his train-
ing under Eli, was as much a priest as
he was a prophet. ‘True, again, in the
time of the Judges there was Deborah,
the prophetess ; but she was raised up
in connection with a particular crisis in
the history of her people. The general

tem, however, was, that when the
head of the nation, whether judge or
king, wished, at any special emergency,

223 .


to ask counsel of the Lord, the inquiry
was made through the priest, and the,
answer was given by the Urim and
Thummim. But now the prophet, as
a standing official personage, comes into
prominence, and the mind of God begins
to be made known through his human
individuality, and not through any
such visible media as those which were
connected with the priestly breastplate.

In the hold and in the wilderness,
David received divine directionsthrough
both channels, but gradually, even in
his life, the breastplate oracle disappears
or falls into desuetude ; and from the
reign of Solomon downward we have no
mention made of its employment in the
Jewish annals, In the same gradual
manner the prophet waxes into pre-
eminence, Gad and Nathan preparing
the w.y for Elijah and Elisha, and these,
in their turn, giving place to Isaiah
and Jeremiah, who were succeeded, in
the days of the exile, by Ezekiel and
Daniel ; and in the era of the Restora-
tion by Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.

Now, if we think out this subject a


GHaP. xxi,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





little more fully, we shall see that in
the life of David a distinct forward step
was taken in the education of the
people of God, from the first rudiments
of external symbolism, on toward that
system of spiritual simplicity under
which we now live in the Gospel dis-
pensation. . . . The call for faith was
increased when the Urim and Thum-
min ceased, and the prophets came
speaking in God’sname, giving gradually
fewer and fewer specific directions as to
particular matters, and more and more
proclaiming great spiritual principles,
And now there is, more than ever, a
demand for faith, when, under the New
Testament economy, the way into the
holiest is made manifest to every be-
liever, and the answers to the soul’s
inquiries are given not by any objective
oracle, but by the Christian’s study of
God’s Word, as that is interpreted by the
providences that are without him, and
the Spirit of God that is dwelling within
him. Hence, when we read the history of
David’s sojourn in the cave, or of his
wanderings in the wilderness, and see
the priest Abiathar on his right hand,
and the prophet Gad on his left, we
feel that we are standing on one of the
great landing-places of that stairway


eRe ere


of education, up which God led His
people from the childhood of walking
by sight, to the glorious liberty, and
graceful movement, of that spiritual
manhood which walks continually by
faith—Dr. W. Md. Taylor.

The Lord will never permit any prince
who is heartily disposed to conduct the
affairs of his government in his name,
to be at any time altogether without
some such Gad among his soldiers or
officers around him—some man who,
because he seeks not his own, unites the
most incorruptible fidelity with his
allegiance, and by whose mouth the
Lord, as often as the foot of the prince
is like to slip, will by his warnings and
his counsel show to him the right and
safe way. Woe to the land on the steps
of whose throne there is not found, in .
the circle of dignified officers surround-
ing the ruler, at least one man whe
bears not only in his profession, but at
the same time also in his entire
consecrated personality, the stamp of a
man of God, and who knows at the
right time to throw the weight of the
divine word and commandment into
the balance-scales of the government!
Krummacher,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 6-23.
Tay SLAUGHTER OF THE PRIESTS.


I. Jealousy is a medium through which the best friends are transformed


into foes,


It matters not how beautiful the human face—if looked at through


a distorted medium it will present the appearance of deformity and ugliness,
and will probably look more like a monster than a man. And the passion of
jealousy has the same distorting effect upon human character, and upon human
actions and purposes. Elijah was the truest friend that king Ahab possessed,
and the most self-denying patriot then living in his kingdom; but Ahab’s
jealousy made him appear as his personal enemy, and as the troubler of Israel


(2 Kings xviii. 18 ; xxi. 20).


Jonathan and David were men of rare nobility


of character, and Saul’s faithful sons and servants, yet his unreasoning jealousy


transformed them into bitter foes.


II. The vilest purposes will not fail for lack of instruments. — Jealousy ig
a passion which has given birth to some of the darkest purposes which the heart


miscarry for want of instruments.


of man has ever conceived; but, alas! the blackest plots rarely, if ever,


A man bent upon murder can find a weapon


of iron or stone to execute the deed, if be cannot lay his hand upon a well-
tempered sword or a diamond-hilted dagger ; and although the conscience of


Saul’s Hebrew servants revolted against his


inhuman command, Doeg the


Edomite was at hand to do the deed of blood,


223


sh vd LETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK te
Sad ae le ee ee

III. The noble and ignoble deeds of men unite to fulfil the Divine purposes,
The use man makes of his freedom of action seals him as a saint or a sinner F
but whether his acts be godlike or devilish, they are used by God to carry out
His purposes. Often God’s creatures are the conscious executors of His will,
and knowingly and intentionally carry out His designs, but sometimes even
His own servants are unconscious instruments of His plans. The terrible
incident with which this chapter closes was a fulfilment of the sentence long
ago passed upon the house of Eli (chap. ii. 31), but the Divine sentence was
fulfilled by the united action of men whose lives were governed by very different
motives, and whose deeds ranged from the lowest depth of moral depravity to
high moral heroism. The inhumanity and devilishness of Doeg and Saul, the
lying of David, and the courageous boldness of Ahimelech, united all un-
consciously to themselves to fulfil the purpose of God.





OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Pictures of human nature.—1. A
man in authority, whose misfortunes,
though due to his own fault, make
him suspicious and cruelly unjust
(ver. 8-16). 2. A basely ambitious
man, who seeks to build himself up by
ruining others (ver. 9, 10, 18, comp.
Psa. lu.). 38, An innocent man ac-
cused, who defends himself both with
forcible argument (ver. 14) and with
dignified denial (ver. 15). 4. A good,
but erring man, who mournfully sees
that his sin has brought destruction on
his friends.—Zransr. of Lange’s Com-
mentary.


Vers. 18, 19. Behold in this history
how impossible it is to arrest the con-
sequences of our evil actions. David
lied to Ahimelech, probably thinking
aot only to secure his own safety there-
by, but also to keep the priest from
being involved with him in the dis-
pleasure of Saul. But mark what
ensued. Eighty-five priests, together
with all the inhabitants of Nob, “ both
men and women, children and suck-
lings,” were put to death for this sin
of which he, and not they, had been
guilty. I have no doubt that when
David heard of all this he would
willingly have given all that, he had, ay,
even his hopes of one day sitting on the
throne of ek if he could have re-
called the evil which he had spoken,
and undone its dismal consequences.
But it was impossible. he lie had
gone forth from him ; and having done

224


so, it was no longer under his control,
but would go on producing its diabolical
fruits, And so it is yet. We eannot
arrest the consequences of the evil
which we do. Whether we will or not,
it will continue to work on. We may,
indeed, repent of our sin; we may even,
through the grace of God for Christ’s
sake, have the assurance that we are
forgiven for it; but the sin itself will.
go on working its deadly results, You
may as soon think of staying an ava-
lanche midway in its descent from the
Alpine ridge, and so saving the village
in the valley from destruction, or of
stopping the bullet midway in its flicht
from the musket to the heart of him
who will be destroyed by it, as think of
arresting the consequences of the evil
which you once have done.—Dr, W.
M. Taylor.

O the wise and deep judgments of
the Almighty! God owed a revenge
to the house of Eli, and now, by the
delation of Doeg, He takes occasion to
pay it. It was just in God, which in

oeg was most unjust. Saul’s cruelty,
and the treachery of Doeg, do not lose
one dram of their guilt by the counsel
of God ; neither doth the holy counsel
of God gather any blemish by their
wickedness. If it had pleased God to
inflict death upon them sooner, without
any pretence of occasion, His justice
had been clear from all imputations;
now, if Saul and Doeg be instead of a
pestilence or fever, who can cavil ?—~
By. Hall,


OMAP, XXIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUCEL.





CHAPTER XXIII.


Crrrraan AND Expostrory Norms.—Ver. 1. “Keilah.” A city of Judah, mentioned in
Josh, xv. 44, and identified by Lieut. Van de Velde with a site containing ruins, and now called
Kila, a few miles from Hebron. (See Smith’s Biblical Dictionary.)


Ver. 2. “Inquired of the Lord.” (See verse 6.) “Save Keilah.” These words are a
promise of victory.


Ver. 3. “We be afraid,” eto. “As persecuted fugitives, we are always in danger from
Saul, and now shall we march against the Philistine ranks ?’? (Erdmann. )


Ver. 6. “This verse is a supplementary historical explanation relative to the possibility of the
inquiry of the Lord in verses 2 and 8, which was not possible without the hivh-priestly cape or
ephod, to which was attached the Urim and Thummim.” (Erdmann.) ‘The words are not to
be understood as signifying that Abiathar did not come to David till he was in Keilah, but that,
when he fled after David (chap. xxii. 20), he met with him as he was already preparing for the
march to Keilah, and immediately proceeded with him thither.” ( Keil.)


Vers. 9-12. “It is evident from these verses that when the will of God was sought through
the Urim and Thummin, the person making the inquiry placed the matter before God in prayer,
and received an answer—-but always to one particular question. For when David had asked the
two questions given in verse 11, he received the answer to the second question only, and had to
ask the first again.” ( Keil.) .


Ver. 18. “They went whithersoever,” etc. Lit. “They wandered about where they
wandered about, i.e., wherever they could go without danger.” (Keil. )


Ver. 14. “Wilderness of Ziph.” “A mountainous and sequestered region was generally
called a wilderness, and took its name from some large town in the district. Two miles south-
east of Hebron, and in the midst of a level plain, is Tell Ziph, an isolated and conical hillock,
about one hundred feet high, probably the acropulis (Van de Velde), or the ruins ( Robinson) of
the ancient city of Ziph, from which the surrounding wilderness was called. It seems, anciently,
to have been covered by an extensive wood.” (Jamicson.) “Every day.” “ Hither as long
as he lived” (Keil), or “continually.” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 16. “Strengthened his hand,” etc. “By the recollection of the Divine promises,
and of their mutual covenant.” (Jamieson. J


Ver. 17. “Saul, my father, knoweth.” “The assurance of this must have forced itself
involuntarily upon the mind of Saul, both from his own rejection, as foretold by Samuel, and
also from the marvellous success of David in all his undertakings.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 19. “Then came up the Ziphites.” “There is no spot from which you can obtain a
better view of David’s wandering backwards and forwards in the desert than from the hill of
Ziph, which affords a true panorama. The Ziphites could see David and his men moving to and
fro in the mountains of the desert of Ziph, and could also perceive how he showed himself in
the distance upon the hill Hachilah, on the south side of Ziph (which lies to the right by the
desert), whereupon they sent as quickly as possible to Saul, and betrayed to him the hiding-
place of his enemy.” {Van de Velde. )


Ver. 24 “Desert of Maon, in the plain, on the south of Jeshimon.” Rather, “On
the south or right hand of the desert. This lay farther south, The name still exists— Main,
eight miles south-east of Hebron.” (Erdmann.) “ The mountain plateau seems here to end.
It is true the summit ridge of the southern hills runs out a long way farther towards the south-
west, but towards the south-east the ground sinks more and more down toa table-land of a
lower level, which is called the plain to the right hand of the wilderness.” ( Van de Velde.)
“On descending the hills, south-east of Maon, a wide prospect opened up before us over the
country towards the Dead Sea, and on the south. The extensive tract we now overlooked had
much of the general character of that around Beersheba, with which, indeed, it, is connected,
stretching off in that direction around the south-western termination of the long ridge which we
were now crossing. This tract has apparently » lower level than the enclosed plain behind us
around Carmel.” (Dr. Robinson. )


Ver. 25. “Into a rock.” Rather “ He descended tne rock.” “ Probably the conical moun-
tain of Main, or Maon, the top of which is now surrounded with ruins.” ( Robinson.) It is
evidently the same as that mentioned ip the next vers, along which David was escaping on one


aide, while Saul was secking him on ihe other,
9 225


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL, BOOK £.





Ver, 28. “Selah-hammahlekoth.” Keil, Gesenius, and others explain this name to signify
“rock of smoothness ”—from chalak, to be smooth, and hence to slip away, to escape. But the
word also means to divide, and many expositors attach this meaning to it here because it
separated Saul and David from each other.


Ver. 29. “Engedi.” The present Ainjiddy, or goat-fowntain, from the number of chamois
which are found in the district. It is on the western shore of the Dead Sea, about thirteen miles
north-west of Maon, “The steep mountains are intersected by wadys running down in deep
ravines to the sea.” (Keil.) ‘On all sides,” says Robinson, “the country is full of caverns,
which now serve as lurking-places for outlaws.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-6,
Davip Detivers Keman.


I. The indulgence of enmity towards one makes men neglect their duty to
the many. It is very dangerous for the passengers in a vessel if those in com-
mand are at enmity with each other, or if the captain is filled with envy of those
who divide with him the responsibility of directing the ship. When such is the
case, he is likely to be laying plans to injure the man whom he hates when he
ought to be concerning himself about the safety of those committed to his care,
and a storm, which ought to have found him well prepared, descends upon him
unexpectedly, and places all the lives on board in jeopardy. His lawless hatred
to one individual makes him forget what he owes to many. The warrior king
of Israel at this time was so possessed by his enmity to David that he permitted
one of his frontier towns to be threatened and the lives of its inhabitants to be
endangered without making an effort on their behalf. How is it that his conduct
on this occasion differs so widely from his prompt aud brave action on behalf of
Ramoth Gilead (chap. xi.) in the beginning of his reign, and why was the appeal
for help at this time made to David and not to him? Was it not because the demon
of envy had stifled his sense of duty and every generous and patriotic emotion ?
So long as he could satisfy his feelings of revenge against David he cared not if
half his kingdom became a prey to the Philistines. His personal enmity to one
man left no room for any concern about the welfare of the nation committed to
his charge. This thing repeats itself from age to age. Men charged with heavy
responsibilities in relation to their fellow-creatures allow a personal enmity to
engross the energies which ought to be employed on their behalf, and myriads
suffer on account of a quarrel between two individual men ; or, as in the case
before us, because one only is filled with a deadly hatred towards a supposed.
rival, And this devil of envy is not active merely among men who make no
pretensions to godliness, or even to those who are mere pretenders, Envy at
the promotion of a better man, and a desire, unconsciously indulged it may be,
to lessen or extinguish his influence, has often led a shepherd of the flock of God
to leave the sheep open to the attacks of their foes while he has been engaged
in some private and personal quarrel.


II. In critical periods the want of faith on the part of the many gives an
occasion for the display of faith on the part of one. The fearfulness and
distrust of David’s followers at the time bring into fuller relief the courage and
faith of David himself, and it often happens in critical periods of human history
that this is the case. When an eclipse of the sun is witnessed by men who are
quite unacquainted with the laws of nature by which it is caused, it often fills
them with distrust and fear, but such a phenomenon gives rise to no terror or
doubt in the mind of one who is acquainted with natural laws, His superior
knowledge keeps his faith in them unshaken during the crisis; he feels quite
sure that the sun is still shining in all its glory, although it is hidden from
human sight at the present moment. And the ignorant terror of the many
make ue peogntened confidence of the one the more striking. Something like


cate. ¥xi1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





this often takes place in the region of God’s providential workings, A dark
dispensation overshadows @ community, and men who are ignorant of the
character of God and of the unchangeable nature of His moral laws are fille:|
with fear, while those who have made themselves acquainted with the method
and reasons of His dealings stay themselves upon His faithfulness, and are certain
that His wisdom and love are as active in the cloudy day of adversity as when
all looks bright and prosperous. And their faith shines all the more brightly
because of the ignorance and unbelief all around them. So did the faith of
David at this time in contrast with the distrust of his men. A common sense of
wrong had drawn them to throw in their lot with him, but although they pro-
bably admired his courage they did not share it because they lacked the faith
in God which he possessed. They looked only at the difficulties and dangers
which surrounded them, and he looked through these difficulties and dangers to
the God whom he knew and whom he therefore trusted.


IiI The faith and obedience of one good man in times of trial make him the
refuge and the deliverer ofmany. When we are saddened and perplexed by looking
at the misery which may come to many by the unfaithfulness of one man, we
must remember also how much good also comes to many by the faithfulness of
one. Although no man can transgress the laws of God without involving
others in the consequences of his wrong-doing, no man can obey the Divine
commands without being a blessing to many. If the people of Keilah were
brought into danger by the sin of one man they owed their deliverance to the
faith and obedience of one man, for no Israelitish army would have gone up
against the Philistines at this time if the son of Jesse had not rallied his forces
to the attack. ‘I'his dependence of the destinies of the many upon the character
of one has its bright, therefore, as well as its dark side.


@UTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 2. Had David been governed
by personal considerations, he would
have suffered the Philistines to take
their course. It was occupation enough
to defend himself,—to preserve his own
life from the relentless malice that pur-
sued him. Besides, the defence of the
kingdom did not properly devolve on
him, but on Saul, whom it might be

olicy to embarrass as much as possible
in order to draw off his attention from
the object of his bitter persecution.
he more the country was left exposed
to such attacks the more odious would
Saul be rendered in the eyes of the
people, and the more popular might
David become. But he was a stranger
fal such unworthy views. He saw
Ws country invaded, and he thought
no more of hisown wrongs: he sawit dis-
tressed, and he determined if possible
to relieve it, although he was thus
strengthening the hands of his most
virulent enemy.—Lindsay.

Ver. 8. David's difficulties were not
ever, though his personal anxieties


were at an end when God’s will was
made known to him. He was not act-
ing alone—he had four hundred men
with him, most of them probably ani-
mated by a very different spirit from
his. A leader of other men often finds
his greatest difficulty not in deciding
what should be done, but in prevailing
upon them to do it. Especially is this
the case if he be a spiritual man, and
they carnal men ; he bent on following
the will of God, they the inclinations
of their hearts. It is sad when such a
division exists in families . . . and we
know of no course which the godly
head of a house, opposed by an un-
willing family, could take with more
advantage than that now taken by
David. Let all be made to understand
that the will of God is the rule by
which he is resolved to act. Let him
solemnly appeal to them, whether they
are prepared to set up another; let
him use the best means for ascertaining
God’s will, and then let him fearlessly
go torward.—blazkie.
227


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I.
ee


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-12,
Saut Marcues Aqarnst Kertan To Sez Davin.


I. Men often put a false interpretation upon circumstances. Saul never
made a greater mistake than when he said of David in Keilah, “God hath
delivered him into mine hand.” If this was indeed his belief, it shows us kow
very greatly men may err in their interpretation of the events of Providence,
and how far they may be from a right conception of the light in which Ged
regards both their character and their actions. It seems impossible that Saul
could either have misunderstood or forgotten the word of the Lord delivered
to him by Samuel; and yet he here speaks as though his pursuit of David was
undertaken with the Divine approval, and puts an entirely false meaning upon
his present position. When men misinterpret human language, they do so
either through ignorance or wilfulness, A man who is but imperfectly
acquainted with a language may put a false construction on words spoken or
written, and so come to a false conclusion as to the intention of the speaker
or writer. So sometimes men, through ignorance, misread God’s providential
dealings. Job’s friends entirely misinterpreted the circumstances in which they
found the patriarch, concluding that his afflictions were to punish his sin when
they were to develop and strengthen his godliness; and other men, who have
had no revelation from God, have often doubtless erred in like manner. But
by far the most destructive and the greater number of such misinterpretations
arise not from ignorance but from wilfulness, as was certainly the case with Saul
at this time. Such a wilful mistake was made by the Egyptian host at the Red
Sea, when they said of Israel “They are entangled in the land, the wilderness
hath shut them in.” The miracles of judgment which had just been wrought
in the land of Egypt spoke concerning the character and purposes of the Lord
God of the Hebrews in language which could only be wilfully misinterpreted, and
hence they had only themselves to blame for their destruction. But such mis-
readings of God’s providential dealings have not been confined to Old Testament
times. We need not wonder that they have been abundant in the history of
the Christian Church, when we remember how men misinterpreted the death of
Him who founded it, and concluded, when they saw Him hanging upon the cross,
that “ Himself He could not save.”


I¥. For a good man in such circumstances there is always a final court
of appeal. A child when misjudged or perplexed goes to his father for a verdict
or an explanation concerning that which troubles him. To his young mind the
wisdom and the goodness resident in his parent constitute him the judge in all
disputes, and the one who can solve all difficulties. Every good man thus
instinctively turns to God when a wrong interpretation is put either upon his
character or his circumstance, or upon both. Conscious of his own sincerity, and
fully persuaded, even in the nitidst of his perplexities, of the wisdom and
righteousness of his Heavenly Father, he looks heavenward for help and guidance
when every human support fails him. Even Job, amid the terrible storm of
afflictions which drew from him many expressions of impatience, and some which
seem to impugn the justice of the Most High, ever and anon turns from the
charges and expostulations of his mistaken human friends to Him whom he feels
in his inmost soul is the final court of appeal, and the only Judge to whom he
can safely commit his cause. So David here, perplexed no doubt by the provi-
dence which seemed to grow darker at every step, and pained at the ingratitude
of the men upon whose gratitude and friendship he must surely have counted,
turns ane and again to his Father in heaven, and by his appeals and inquiries

22


GHAP. XXIIt.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





shows that, although the waves and the billows of adversity are all around him,
his faith has not lost her hold, and that he can still hear the “ voice of the Lord
upon the waters,” and see Him “ sitting on the flood” (Psalm xxix),


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


The men of Keilah were neither
chivalrous nor grateful. They regarded
their own interests as supreme. Like
many in our own day, they might pro-
fess to aim after the greatest happiness
of the greatest number, but when you
came to analyse their views, you would
find that with them, to use the words
of Joseph Hume, “ the greatest number
was number one!” It was not for their
advantage to serve David, aud they
did not serve him; and I am free to
say that all my observation and expe-
rience convince me that a large pro-
pee of the present generation would

ave done as they were willing to do.
Of course that does not excuse them,
but it should make us cautious as to
what we say in their condemnation,
lest, haply, we may some day be judged
out of our own mouths. Gratitude,
chivalry, enthusiasm for the cause of
the wronged—what are these words in
the mouths of many to-day but words?
they sound well, and they are very fine
so long as they cost nothing; but let
adherence to them put property or life
in peril, and too many would cling to
the property and the life, and let the
others go. Ye who condemn the in-
habitants of Keilah because they were
willing to betray David, how long would
you show gratitude at the risk of the
loss of all things? It was a disgrace
to them that they would not stand by
him who had delivered them ; but is
it anything less to us, when we allow
our worldly interests to blind us to the
obligations under which we lie to those
who beiriended us in our time of need ?
Is it anything less to us when, tor the
sake of tashion, or fortune, or 1ame, we
turn our backs upon the Christ, who
has borne the agony of Gethsemane
and Calvary on our behalf? Idolatry
of self is as hideous now as it was in
David’s time. Let those who are guilty
of it, therefore, look here, and, in the


pitiful poltroonery of the men of Keilah
they will see how mean and contemp-
tible they look—Dr. W. M. Zaylor.


Ver. 12. Here is a second inquiry.
God loveth to be often sought unto by
Ilis praying people (Luke xviii. 1),
and therefore answereth them by de-
grees, that He may frequently hear
from them. ‘Thus the cloud empties
not itself at a sudden burst, but dis-
solveth upon the earth drop after drop.
Lrapp.

Whereas the Lord answereth, that
Saul would come down to Keilah, and
that the men of Keilah would deliver
David into Saul’s hands, and yet
neither of these came to pass; hence
it cannot be inferred that the predic-
tions of the Lord are uncertain, for
the Lord’s answer is here to be under-
stood conditionally. . . . A difference
is here to be made between the pre-
science of God and the predestination :
for the Lord as well seeth what shall
be done as what is likely to be done
in respect of the second causes; but
His decree of predestination is only of
those things which shall most certainly
be effected.— Wallet.

The origin of the thirty-first Psalm
is to be traced to this period of
wandering, although there is nothing
contained in the title of it which
authorises this supposition. We meet,
however, with many passages in the
psalm which quite correspond with the
circumstances in which David was then
placed. he singer begins with the
humble but confiding prayer that God
would never let him be put to shame
(he was so at that time, when the
citizens of Keilah would no longer
suffer him to dwell amongst them) ; but
that he would deliver him (the guiltless
outlaw) in his righteousness. He prays
that the Lord would bow down His ear
to him. and deliver him speedily, and

229


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK L





be a strong rock to him, and a protecting
fortress. ‘The imagery here is plainly
suggested by the wild scenes of nature
which surrounded the singer. He
prays that, for his name’s sake, the
Lord would lead him and graciously
be near him in the pathless and
inhospitable wilderness, and that he
would guard his feet from the net which
they had laid on all sides to catch him.
“Into thine hand,” he continues, “I
commit my spirit : thou hast redeemed
me, O Lord God of truth,” namely,
from the violence to which they would
surrenderme. Moreover, David speaks
of himself as one who was forsaken by
all the world, and was covered with
unmerited reproaches and_ slanders.
He was even guilty of high treason,
and had placed himself in opposition


to the greatest part of the people,
because he was the object of the king’s
displeasure. Yet he is far from speaking
of himself as free from all guilt. He
feels himself as a poor sinner before
God, and, with a sigh, gives utterance
to the prayer, “Have mercy upon me, O
Lord.” Nevertheless he trusted in His
mercy whom he confidently called his
God; and, after giving praise to the
Lord for all the wonderful goodness and
the help which he had hitherto vouch-
safed to him “in his flight,” he
concludes with this call to his brethren
in the faith : “ O love the Lord, all ye
his saints: for the Lord preserveth a
faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the
proud doer. Be of good courage, and
He shall strengthen your heart, all ye
that hope in the Lord.” —Krummacher.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 18-18,
JonatHan’s Visir T David IN THE WILDERNESS OF ZIPH,


We have here—


I. A man in the sorest need of human friendship. It is scarcely possible
to exaggerate the need in which David stood at this time of human
sympathy. It has been often said that nothing gives a human spirit so
much pain as ingratitude, and David was now proving how ungrateful men can
be when prompted by motives of self-interest. He had just saved the in-
habitants of Keilah from a great calamity, and if he looked for some active proof
of their good will on his behalf, it was certainly not expecting very much.
He might have reasonably counted on their help when his hour of need came;
and when he became aware that this would not be given he would have hardly
thought it possible for them to go beyond a cowardly neutrality. But the
Divine oracle had assured him that these base specimens of humanity were
prepared to deliver him up into the hands of the king at his command. Such
an experience as this tests to the utmost a man’s faith in humanity, and more
than anything else tends to harden the heart and embitter the spirit. And
when it has this effect, it does not bring the soul nearer to God. A true and
tender human friend at such a time will often make it easier for a man to believe
in Divine faithfulness and compassion, and form the link between a broken spirit
and the Great Healer. David evidently needed such a friend at this moment,


II. A friend fully equal to the needs of friendship. If the treachery of the
men of Keilah was sufficient almost to destroy David’s faith in his fellow-men,
the stedfastness of Jonathan was a more weiglity influence on the other side.
A feebler friendship might have satisfied itself with the remembrance of having
given proofs of love in the past, or at least with sending to David an assurance
of present sympathy ; but Jonathan’s self-sacrificing love embraced every
occasion of serving lis friend to the utmost of his power, and hence he is found
in person in the wilderness with the outlaw whom his father seeks, and cheers
David by putting him in mind of the declared purpose of God concerning him,
although it included his own loss of worldly power and influence. When David

230


OHAP. XXIIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,





received this new assurance of his friend’s unselfish and undying regard, it must
surely have driven away all the mistrust in God which was makiny him fear ;
for if a man of like passions with himself would be thus true to his plighted
word, he would not dare to harbour the thought that Jonathan’s God and his
own God would fail him.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver 16, The distinguishing power
of a crue man. What is the distinguish-
ing power which a true man has? 'l'o
destroy life? Brutes can do this. ‘l'o
weaken faith, and shake confidence ?
A child can do this, What then? Zo
strengthen a brother's heart in God!
. . . But how can a true man strengthen
a depressed brother thus? First: by
a truthful exposition of Gods method
of governing the fallen in this world.
The gospel unfolds that method; shows
that it is to the true corrective, not
penal ; remedial, not destructive ; in-
troductory, not final. Secondly :
By a practical expression of genuine
sympathy. Nothing in the world is
more strengthening to a tried soul than
the practical manifestation of true
sympathy. One breath of it infuses
new life to thesoul—energizes the heart.
Thirdly : By a devout intercession with
heaven. Paulprayed that the Ephesians
might be “ strengthened with all might
in the inner man.” The highest func-
tion of a true friend. It is one thing to
have the power to strengthen, and
another thing to use it-when and where
required. He who uses it is the truest
friend. Jonathan proved his friendship
to David by tracking him out in the
lonely wood, and there, in the depths


of solitude, in the sanctuary of wild,
majestic nature, in-breathing invigora-
ting thoughts about God. Let us, in
imavination, go into this wood aud see
Jonathan acting the friend. He meets
David, with a heavy gloom upon his
brow, only able to speak in sighs and
tears. First, perhaps, Jonathan makes a
few consolatory remarks about the great
providence of God. Then, secondly,
perhaps he refers him to the trials of
good men who have passed away—
Abraham and Jacob, Moses and Samuel.
Then, thirdly, perhaps he reminds him
of the past kindness of God to him ag
an individual . . . . And then
perhaps he kneels down under the
shadow of some old tree and prays with
him and for him. ‘This is the way to
strengthen souls, and he is the true man
who acts thus—Dr. David Thomas.


Ver. 17. It was doubtless well
ordered by God’s good providence that
Jonathan’s noble sentiments were uot
subjected to the unnatural strain of
such a situation, but that he died a
soldier’s death, fighting gallantly for his
country, before anything had happened
to disturb the perfect beauty of his
friendship for David.— Biblical Com-
mentary.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19—29.


Tur TREACHERY OF THE ZIPHITES.


I. The calamity of one man an occasion of revealing the baseness of others.
There is much latent baseness in the world which only lacks a favourable oppor-


tunity to manifest itself. Fear of puni


shment or defeat is at the root of the


outwardly virtuous conduct of many men, and they only need to have these


restraints removed to show what they really are. (
‘his instrument only registers the state of the


barometer is to the weather.


Occasion is to men what the


atmosphere, but has no part in generating either the calm or the storm—they


would be the same if the indicator had no existence.


‘hese men of Ziph were not


worse men when they betrayed David than they had been before, but his defence-


231


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL, BOOK 1.
a a eE


less and straitened condition was the occasion which tested their character and
revealed their baseness. If he had simply come to them as a man in distress
through no fault of his own it would have been a pitiful meanness on their part
to betray him. But they could not be ignorant of the debt of gratitude t ey,
in common with the rest of their countrymen, owed to him. Since the day
when he slew the Philistine whose name spread terror through all the hosts of
Israel, he had again and again defeated their much-dreaded foes, and at this
moment had just returned from delivering Keilah. His life since his early youth
had been spent in the service of his country, and if the Ziphites had possessed
a spark of gratitude they would have striven to lighten his hardships, But, far
from doing this, they went out of their way to betray, not only an innocent
man, but one to whom they were deeply indebted. ‘This one act is an infallible
and a sufficient revelation of their character as a community,


II. The evil purposes of evil men defeated by others of a like character.
Doubtless the Ziphites thought the success of their plan was certain; and Saul
wust have felt assured that this time his prey would not escape. And as his
enemies closed around him, David bimself must have well nigh given up all
hope of escape. But at this critical moment his deliverance was wrought by
men who had every reason to desire his downfall, and who would have gladly
taken his life if they had found an opportunity to do so. The Philistines
certainly hated David as much as the Ziphites did, but at this moment they ©
unconsciously delivered him from the danger to which the treachery of the
latter had exposed him. The incident affords an example of the way in which
bad men often unconsciously fulfil the purposes of God, and frustrate the plans
of those who are one with them in their opposition to righteousness. Saul
suddenly found himself in the hands of circumstances which compelled him to
forego for this time the satisfaction of his private jealousy, and thus this bad
monarch, and his equally bad subjects, were prevented from taking the blood of
an innocent man by other men as bad as themselves. But behind all these
human wills and purposes a Divine will and a Divine purpose were in operation,
and God was using His enemies to save His servant,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


At the time when David received
tidings that the Ziphites had betrayed
him, his soul poured itself forth in the
fifty-fourth Psalm. Here he first
directs his eye from the earth, where
faithlessness and wickedness so much
surrounded him, upwards to heaven,
and prays to God that He would save
and judge him (¢.¢. justify him), since
the people of his own tribe had risen
up against him as enemies, yea, like
the heathen. But not less does he
give utterance to his confidence, that


the Lord would be his helper and would
uphold his soul, and that the wicked-
ness of his enemies would recoil upon
themselves. “Cut them off in Thy
truth,” he cries out; adding, “I will
freely sacrifice unto Thee ; I will praise
Thy name, O Lord, for it is good ;”
and concludes with the words of joyful
confidence, “‘ For He hath delivered me
out of all trouble; and mine eye hath
seen His desire upon mine enemies.” —
Krummacher,


Gitar, XXIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


A EE ee ee


CHAPTER XXIV.


Crrrroat axp Exrostrory Norrs—vVer. 2 “Rocks of the wild goats,” or thex-rocks.
Probably not a name for any particular rock, but a general term applied to *he locality on
account of the number of ibexes, or wild goats, found there.


Ver. 3. “Sheepcotes.” These are still to be seen at the mouth of the caves in this region,
and are made by piling up stones in a circle and covering them with thorns. “To cover his
feet,” i.¢., to obey a call of nature, when Orientals usually cover their feet. (Keil, Erdmann,
and others.) There are many caves in this district where men might easily remain concealed
from the view of a person entering. “The largest cave,” says Lieut. Lynch (American Explo-
ration of the Dead Sea), “that we entered at Engedi could contain thirty men, and has a long
low and narrow gallery running from one side, which would be invisible when the sun does not
shine through the entrance.”


Ver. 4. “Behold the day,” etc. “This can here be understood only in the general sense of
the Divine ordering of « favourable opportunity. A reference to a definite Divine declaration is
not in the words themselves. Some cite | Sam. xvi. 28; xvi. 1-12; and also xx. 153 xxili. 175
but it is not probable that David’s men would know this. Of any other promise we have no
mention.” (Lange’s Commentary.) “Saul’s robe.” His long outer mantle (metl), probahly
laid aside by Saul whea he entered the cave.


Ver. 6. “The Lord forbid.” J iterally, “far be it from me from Jehovah,” 4.¢., on Jehovah’s
account. “It is a religious ground which restrains David.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 8. The closeness of the precipitous rocks and the depth of the ravines or wadies between
them, together with the remarkable purity of the air, made it quite easy for David thus to con-
verse with Saul at a distance sufficient to ensure his own safety. “My lord the King.”
“This address indicates the double point of view whence David, in what follows, declares by
deed and by word his relation and attitude to Saul. He recognises and honours Saul as his lord
to whom he is bound to be subject ; in calling him lord he declares himself guiltless of insur-
rection against him. In the king he sees the anointed of the Lord, the bearer of the holy
theocratic office, in which character he was inviolable.” (Erdmann.)

Ver. 13. “As saith the proverd,” etc. “The meaning is, only a wicked man would wish
to avenge himself, I do not.” (Keil.) “A prophetic speech. Thy death will not be from me,
who have no such thoughts, but from the wicked. And so it was. Saul perished by his own
wicked hand.” ( Wordsworth.)

Ver. 14. “A flea.” Literally, a single flea. “By these similes David meant to describe
himself as a perfectly harmless and insignificant man, of whom Saul had no occasion to be
afraid, and whom it was beneath his dignity to pursue.” (Keil.)

Ver. 16. “And Saul lifted up his voice.” “There is no hypocrisy or pretence here. Saul,
tossed powerless hither and thither by fierce passions and without harmony of soul-life, is here
laid hold of in a hidden corner of his heart, where he was still accessible to the power of truth,
and involuntarily yields to this nobler arousing of his soul, though it is not destined to be per-
manent.” (Erdmann.)

Ver. 20. “ How did Saul come to this knowledge which he here expresses, and which Jonathan
had already affirmed that his father had? (xxiii. 17.) Not through direct Divine revelation, but
by the observation that all his undertakings against David were unsuccessful, and that David,
in respect to his persecutions, was under special Divine protection, coupled with the recollection
of what Samuel had once said to him in the name of God respecting his rejection for disobe-
dience.” (Zrdmann.)

Ver. 21. “My name,” etc. “A name is exterminated when the whole of the descendants are
destroyed —a thing of frequent occurrence in the Bast in connection with a change of dynasties,
and one which occurred again and again even in the kingdom of the ten tribes. See 1 Kings
xv. 28 sq. ; xvi. 11 sqq.; 2 Kings x.” (Keil.)

Ver. 22. “The hold.” “The word here so translated is used to denote the mountainous part
of the desert of Judah. It is different in chap. xxii. 5.” (Keil.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1=/,


DAVID SPARES SAUL IN THE CAVE.


I. Here isan example of the power of hatred to sustain the zeal of the wicked.
We often speak of the power of righteous convictions and emotions to sustain
men in a course of righte¢ 1s action in the face of much opposition and many

233


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :; SAMUEL. Book i.

Pe MNO MR IE oe
defeats, and we rejoice to: think that history furnishes us with many bright
illustrations of this trath. But we cannot deny that wicked men have also
shown much courage and patience in the pursuit of their evil designs, impelled
by the power of evil passions and principles. And of all these passions, perhaps
hatred, and especially hatred of those whom the hater has wronged, is the most
potent. This is the motive power that keeps alive the zealous activity of the
great adversary of the human race. Satan first wronged man by tempting him
to sin, and throughout all the ages since has been unceasing in his hatred to the
creatures whom he has wronged and untiring in his efforts to compass their ruin.
Such a passion possessed Saul at this time. His hatred of David was not
appeased by the wrong which he had done him inthe past, but seemed to gather
strength with every fresh crime committed against him, and sustained him in
his purpose to take his life if possible, notwithstanding all the checks and
hindrances hitherto received. Since the day when he mistrusted David’s motive
of action in the defeat of Goliath, he had found in his malice inspiration sufficient
to keep him ever eager to compass his destruction, and he could not have set
about this new pursuit with more determination and energy if God, instead of
having constantly checkmated him in the past, had given him a Divine com-
mission to seek and to destroy the son of Jesse. The untiring zeal of such a
man under the influence of such a motive, ought to read a lesson to all who,
professing to be animated by love to men and zeal for righteousness, often be-
come weary and faint-hearted if they meet with repeated disappointments.


II, An example of the power of faith in God to abide God’s time of vindication.
To a man who harboured a spirit of revenge such an opportunity as now presented
itself to David to take the hfe of his adversary could hardly have been resisted.
But revenge and retaliation are more frequently found in alliance with guilt than
with innocence. The man who is wrongfully accused is generally more ready to
forgive his accuser than the man who is guilty of the crime laid to his charge,
because the latter is, as a rule, more likely to be governed by passion, and the
former to be ruled by conscience. But the temptation here presented to David
by the peculiar circumstances of the case, and seconded by the persuasions of his
followers, did not take the form of an act of private revenge. We do not know
what took place in David’s spirit when he found Saul so completely in his power,
but if there arose within him any sudden impulse to take action against his
persecutor, we may safely conclude that it sought to justify itself on the same
ground as that urged by his men, viz., that in so doing he would be only taking a
lawful advantage of a remarkable providence. And it was this which formed the
strength of the temptation. As we saw in the preceding chapter (see on verses
7 to 12) men are atall times prone to interpret circumstances in accordance with
their own inclinations, rather than by the hght of Divine laws, and nothing but
a strong faith in God could have saved David at this time from falling into this
snare. - The man who was now at his mercy was avowedly seeking his life, and
might it not therefore be lawful to slay him in self-defence, nay, might he not
have been given into his hand for this very purpose? 'l'his was not the argument
of one man only, but of many, and numbers strengthen the weight of argument,
Then David knew, what his men did not know, that he was also the anointed of
the Lord, and was destined by Jehovah to succeed Saul as king of Israel. Was
not the time now come when by Saul’s death peace might be restored to the
kingdom which he neglected to gratify his private enmity? And would not
David bring a blessing to the entire nation by executing the sentence which had
long since been pronounced against the man who had proved so faithless to the
great trust committed to him? Such questions and arguments from within and
without came up for solution in the short space of time given to David for decision,
but a man who, like David, lives a life of dependence upon God and of confidence

234


OHAP. XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


cc a TD


in Him, does not find it so difficult after all to find out what he ought to do and


to do it.


v aT . . . . . . .
The key to David's conduct in these circumstances is found in his firm »


persuasion that his cause was in the hands of the Divine and Righteous Ruler of


all men, who would not suffer wrong to prevail over right in the end.


“ Lhe


Lord judge between me and thee, and see and plead my cause.” ‘This was the
shield of faith upon which David turned aside the darts of temptation which now


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 8. If Saul had known his own
opportunities, how David and his men
had interred themselves, he had saved
a treble labour of chase, of execution,
and. burial ; for had he but stopped the
mouth of that cave, his enemies had
laid themselves down in their own
graves. ‘The wisdom of God thinks fit
to hide from evil men and spirits those
means and seasons which might be, if
they had been taken, most prejudicial
to his own. We had been oft foiled if
Satan could but have known our hearts.
Sometimes we lie open to evils, and
happy it is for us that He only knows
it who pities instead of tempting us.
Bp. Hall.

Ver. 4. Providential purpose, ap-
parent and real, 1. What was here
the apparent purpose of God? ‘To
give an injured man the opportunity
of delivering and avenging himself. ..
2. How did he know that such could
not be the purpose of Providence?
Because it would involve his doing
what would be wrong in itself. An
enlightened and tender conscience must
check our interpretationsof Providence.
8. What was the real Providential pur-
pose? As usual, it was manifold : we
can see the following points; (a). To
make him more conscientious by obey-
ing conscience under sore temptation
(vers. 5 and 6). (6). To present a
noble example to his rude followers and
the people at large (vers. 6,10). (¢).
T'o furnish a most convincing proof that
he was wrongly accused (vers. 9-11).
(d). To give him ground for a confident
appeal to Providence in future (ver. 12
eq.; comp. chap. xxvi. 23-24). (¢).
T'o heighten his reputation for loyalty
and magnanimity, and smooth the way
to his finally becoming king.—Lange’s
Commen


Ver. 5. His conscience, which keeps
court in every faculty of the soul,
checked him, such was his tenderness
then. Bee-masters tell us that those
are the best hives that make the
greatest noise ; so is that the best con-
science that checketh for the smallest
sins. Good men are afraid of the least
show of sin, being jealous over them-
selves with a godly jealousy.—7Zrapp.


Ver. 7. Revenge is unquestionably
one of the strongest and most impe-
tuous, as it is plainly one of the darkest
passions in the heart of man. Of all
the tragedies of which this earth has
been the scene, the wildest have sprung
from the exercise of revenge ; of all the
crimes that have disgraced humanity,
the darkest have had this foul passion
for their mother; and perhaps the
bitterest remorse with which man’s
bosom has ever been torn, is that
which has followed the deeds of re-
venge. Dark and dreadful, too, though
this passion be, nothing comes less
welcome than the call to check it ; and
once it is fairly roused, life itself would
often be parted with more readily than
the savage gratification which it craves.
Nowhere have its frightful fruits been
more clearly shown than in that beau-
tiful island of the Mediterranean cele-
brated as the birthplace of the first
Napoleon. For hundreds of years
Corsica has sustained a lofty reputation
for its patriotism and dauntless valour ;
age after age has produced fresh crops
of heroes, worthy of being ranked with
those of any land ; but in spite of the
richness of its soil, the beauty of its
climate, and the fearless spirit of its
people, the country is most miserable ;
its plains are uncultivated, its inha-
bitants are kept in constant misery by

235


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


el ee





family feuds that never heal, and that
are constantly breaking out with fresh
vehemence, through the influence of
an organised system of revenge, that
under the name of the vendetta has
become one of the institutions of the
country, ; It is only when we
think of such awful fruits of the spirit
of revenge that we become truly alive
to the singular excellence of the spirit
of forbearance which David remarkably
displayed. We see the striking con-
trast between nature and grace—be-
tween the heart of man as sin hag
made it, and the heart of man as grace
renews it. . Yet while we freely
award the tribute of admiration, let us
not forget that the field is one upon
which similar victories are always to
be won.— Blackie,


Ver. 8. David follows Saul from the
cave more joyous now than after the
conquest of Goliath. Indeed, this last
victory was the more glorious one—
the spoils were more precious, the
trophies more honourable. Then, he
had needed a sling, stones, and battle
array ; this time his reason had been
a sufficient weapon—without arms he


BOOK L


had won the victory, without having
shed blood he had erected the trophy.
He came forth, therefore, not carrying
the head of a Philistine, but a mortified
heart, a conquered anger; and it was
not to Jerusalem that he consecrated
his spoils, but to heaven, to the city
on high. We see no women coming
forth to meet him with songs of praise,
but the angels applauded his deed and
admired his wisdom and piety. For
he returned after having given many
wounds to his adversary; not to Saul,
whom he had saved, but to his real
enemy, the devil, whom he had pierced
through with many thrusts, For as
our anger and lust and our mutual
collisions rejoice the devil, so peace
and concord and victory over passion
grieve and conquer him who hates
peace and is the father of jealousy. -
David comes forth, then, from the
cavern with a crown upon his head , ,
it is not the diadem of Saul, but the
crown of justice which adorns him—it
is not the royal purple which enwraps
him, but a wisdom more than human,
before which the most gorgeous robe
becomes pale.—Chrysostom,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH .— Verses 8-15,


Davin’s VInvICATION oF HimsetF To Savt,


I. This vindication of David reveals that he still considered himself a


subject of the king of Israel.


The best and wisest men are always the least
ready to rebel against those in authority,
more severe test than that of men who
ability. A son who is far above his father


and their obedience will stand a much
are their inferiors in character and
in excellence and wisdom will be far


more loyal to his weak and erring parent than one who is like him in character,


and a subject who is morally and


intellectually superior to his ruler will bear


more before he renounces his allegiance than one who is less intelligent and


godly. Noble and good men in all ages have been


tried both in their public


and private relationships by the incapacity and wickedness of those in authority
over them, and it has sometimes become their duty to disown such authority
and renounce their alleziance to such rule, but this is a step that is taken with
the most reluctance by the men who seem to have the most right to take ik It


seems to us, when we read


this history, that of all the men in Israel at this


time, David was the least bound to acknowledge Saul as his lord and king. No


man in the kingdom had


here shows him still
bad only taken arms


236


deserved Saul’s gratitude so much and none had
received such ingratitude and cruelty at his hand.


Yet David’s mode of address


acknowledging himself Saul’s subject, and reveals that he
in self-detence, and not in defiance. The spirit of thig


CHAP. XXIV. HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
SS nONE-Re ammeneaeasacmmmmeerseeereae eee ne


Old Testament servant of God was the same as that which animated the apostles
and martyrs of the Christian Church (Rom. xiii. 1; Titus iii, 1), and had its
root in the same recognition of God as the Supreme Ruler and Judge of all men.


II. His conduct shows that he considered Saul’s position worthy of outward
tokens of respect. When it is impossible to respect a man for what he is, we
may sometimes feel bound to honour him for what he has been, or for what he
now represents. A heap of ruined stones may have nothing in their present
appearance to awaken interest, but if they are the remains of a city once famous
for its beauty, thinking men cannot look at them without emotion, Ora building
which has never had any pretensions to architectural beauty may awaken a
feeling almost of reverence because it represents something of far more value
and dignity than itself. So when David bowed himself before Saul it could
hardly have been in token of respect for any moral excellence now found in him,
but must have rather been in honour of what he once was and of what he even
now represented. He was still the Lord’s anointed—the man whom God had
Himself appointed to rule over His people Israel, and there had been a time
when he had seemed not unworthy of the honour thus put upon him. And
David, like every other godly man, was ever ready to render honour wherever it
was due, whether to place or person, whether to individual excellence or to
“powers ordained of God” (Rom. xiii. 1.)


III. Yet David’s vindication contains an appeal to Saul’s reason and to
God's justice, Reverence for Saul as aking, and a sense of his own duty asa
subject, did not degenerate into that servility which seems to ignore the fact
that the higher the position the greater the obligation, and to forget that there
is a Judge before whose bar all human distinctions fade away. David did not |
think it incompatible with his acknowledgment of Saul as his lord to remon-
strate with him on his foolishness, and to remind him that there was a King to
whom both the persecutor and the persecuted would have to render an account,

_ and whose judgment would certainly be according to truth. ‘I'he most genuine
loyalty is always found associated with self-respect and with faith in God, and
they are the most faithful servants of kings who do not fear to show them
wherein they err, and who can with confidence commit their cause to Him who
will one day certainly render every man according to his works. For neither of
the two causes, one or the other of which sometimes operates in the decisions of
a human judge and leads him to pronounce an unjust sentence, can ever have
any place in the Divine administration. A man may condemn the innocent or
Justify the guilty through ignorance, or from wickedness. He may not be
acquainted with all the facts of the case, or some selfish or other evil motive
may lead him to pronounce a false verdict. But it is the joy of every lover of
truth and righteousness to know that this can never be the case with God. He
who searches and knows everyone of His creatures can never be mistaken in His
judgment, and He who is infinitely above them, both in nature and in character,
can have no motive or desire to wrong anyone of them in the smallest degree.
Hence the assurance with which men in all ages have turned to Him when they
have been wronged by their fellow-creatures, and have said, with David, “ Zhe
Lord, therefore, be judge, and see, and plead my cause.”


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 10. It by no means follows anointing. God does not stand in the
that all kings are God’s lieutenants in same special relation to other nations
the sense in which Saul was, or lie under as he did to the Jews. Magistracy is
the same sacred charm of divine still the ordinance of God, a i is left


HOMILETICCOMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK 1.





to communities to choose both the form
of government and the individuals
who are to exercise it. Nations have
power to choose their governors, and,
unless there be a special arrangement
to the contrary, they have power to
discontinuethem. . . . Thus viewed,
the consideration that influenced David
resolves itself into a principle of wider


application. It was the fruit of that
profound reverence for God’s will, and
that thorongh confidence in God’s
providential government, and in the
holy principles on which it is conducted,
that characterised David in all his
better periods and that will ever
characterise the humble and consistent
Christian. — Blaikie.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 16—22,
Tus Errect or Davip’s Conpucr upon SAvL.


I. Here is a righteous emotion and a sincere confession of sin produced by
godlike conduct. The ice upon the lake may be very strong and thick, but
there is a strength of sunlight that will dissolve it ; and the iron may be very
hard and cold, but there is an intensity of heat that will make it glow and even
melt it. So the conscience may be as it were frozen over by indulgence in some
evil passion, and all the soul hardened by a long course of sin; but there are
manifestations of goodness that will melt the stubborn will, and awaken into life
the better part of the man although it may be only for a season. Circumstances
sometimes bring such a man into such contact with a godly character that he
cannot avoid seeing the contrast between what he is and what he might and
ought to be; and the effect of the vision is to awaken a feeling of contrition,
and it may be to extort from him a confession of his guilt. Such a time now
came to Saul. The feeling of jealousy against David had gained such an
ascendancy in his soul as to stifle all his better feelings, and even the voices of
reason and conscience ; but this meeting, and David’s godlike behaviour, caused
him for a moment to see himself in a true light, and to discern how great a gulf
of character there was between him and the man whom he was hating even unto
blood. For a short season the magnanimity of David asserted its power over his
pitiless foe, and melted him into contrition and confession.


II. But this righteous emotion and sincere confession failed to produce true
repentance. Where there is beautiful blossom we may hope in due time to see
the fruit, and whenever we rejoice over the ripened fruit we know it began with
the blossom, but the blossom is not the fruit, and we know that, alas, many a fair
blossom fails to bring forth that which it seems to promise. So is it with con-
trition for sin and sincere repentance, the one must precede the other, and when
we see the first we hope it may prove to be that godly sorrow which worketh
repentance (2 Cor..vii. 10). But we know that it 1s not always so, and Saul’s
conduct here and on a subsequent occasion shows how even strong and sincere
emotion may be felt and yet not pass into life and action, and so fail to benefit
the character and even make repentance more difficult. Every conviction
of sin which leaves the man no better than before does not leave him as it found
him, but in a worse condition, even as the bar of iron which has been in the
furnace is harder than one which has never yet been heated.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 16. What change is thisthat David’s name (chap. xxii. 7)—who
takes place all at once? He who but hated even his name—makes him one
letelycouldnot bring himselftomention of his family by calling him his son}

238 |


GHAP, xxIVv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


te


What more happy fortune than that
which now befel David, who transforms
his would-be murderer into his father,
who changes the wolf into the lamb,
who is able to extinguish this angry
conflagration, to make a calm succeed
the tempest, and to heal this fever of
ae in the soul? David’s words

ad brought about this revolution.
Saul says not, “It is thou who
speakest, my son David,” but “ J¢ ds
thy voice, my son David,” for the mere
sound of his voice was enough to soften
him. And as a father, who, after a
long absence, hears the voice of his
child, needs not to see him to be
awakened to emotion, so Saul, after
the words of David penetrating his
heart, chased away his hatred, recog-
nised in David the man of God, and,
cured of his evil passion, felt himself
possessed by another emotion ; his
malice had disappeared, and joy and
affection had taken its place. Just as
in the darkness of night we do not
perceive the presence of our friend,
but when the daylight comes we recog-
nise him even afar off, so while we are
evilly disposed towards each other, we
listen to each other’s words, and look
upon one another in the spirit of pre-
judice, but when we are cured of our
malice, the voice which before sounded


harsh and angry becomes soft and
pleasant to our ears, and the counte-
nance which seemed repulsive and un-
welcome is now lovely and attractive.
—A bridged from Chrysostom.


Ver. 17. He should have said, Thou
art righteous, but I am wicked ; but
the utmost he will own is this, Thou
art more righteous than I. Bad men
will commonly go no further than this
in their confessions ; they will own they
are not so good as some others are:
there are those that are better than
they and more righteous.—Henry.


Ver. 18. Saul for the present spake
as he thought. But good thoughts
make but a thoroughfare of wicked
hearts: they stay not there, as those
that like not their lodging.—T'rapp.

Saul’s sense of David’s generosity
must be very strong when he beseeche:
God to reward it. Indeed, Saul had
no equivalent to give David for the
kindness shown him, and therefore he
refers him to God for retribution. For
if, after this, he should even save
David’s life, yet still he could only save
the life of his best benefactor, whereas
David both spared and saved the life
of his most mortal enemy.— Delany.





CHAPTER XXvV.


Critica anp Expository Notus.—Ver. 1. “And Samuel died.” Josephus says that
“Samuel governed and presided over the people alone, after the death of Eli, twelve years, and
eighteen years in conjunction with Saul, the king.” He likewise adds, ‘‘ They wept for him a
very great number of days, not looking on it as a sorrow for the death of another man, but as
that in which they were everyone of themselves concerned. He was a righteous man, and
gentle in his nature, and on that account he was very dear to God.” “In his house,” 1.¢., in
a court or garden attached to his house. “ Every respectable family in the Kast still has its own
house of the dead, and often this is in a little detached garden, consisting of a small stone
building, where there is no rock, resembling a house. It has neither door nor window,
(Cf. 1 Kings ii. 34; Job xxx, 23.) (Jamieson.) “David arose,” etc. It might be that David
felt himself in more danger now that the restraint which Samuel might have exercised over Saul
was removed, or, as Keil suggests, the wilderness of J udah might no longer afford sustenance ta
him and his large body of six hundred men. The wilderness of Paran seems to have been a
somewhat undefined tract of country extending from the southern border of Canaan to the
Sinaitic desert on the south, the wilderness of Shur on the west, and the territory of Edom on
the east. The examination of the various Scripture references to this region seems to show that
the term was sometimes used for the entire wilderness tract of this district. (See Smith's


Biblioal Dictionary.) 38


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book





Ver. 2. “Maon.” A city of Judah (Josh. xv. 55), situated on a hill now called Tell Ma'in,
about seven or eight miles south of Hebron. It is now in ruins. “Carmel.” This word
literally means a fertile region, and is applied also to the promontory on the north-east of
Palestine, famous in the history of Elijah. ‘The place here so named is the present Aurmul and
its neighbourhood, about a mile north-west of Maon. David had before taken shelter near
Maon, (See the notes on chapter xxiii. 24.)


Ver. 8. “Nabal,” t.e., fool. (See ver. 25.) Keil thinks it could hardly have been this man’s
proper name, but was @ popular designation on account of his folly. “Of the house of
Caleb.” Literally he was a Calebite (Wordsworth), and as the word means “a dog man,
and Josephus, among others, understand it to mean “a doggish, cynical man. But Caleb's pow
session lay in this region, and, as Erdmann remarks, the two former statements sufficiently
characterise his disposition, and a third would be out of keeping with the simplicity of the
description. Moreover, “the statement of his origin accords with this importance, as a man
‘great’ by his riches, and it is introduced as something new by the words ‘and he,’ which
would not suit the continuation of his moral portraiture.’ We may therefore conclude that
Nabal was descended from the ancient hero of Israel, and he was, then, of the same tribe a8
David.


Ver. 5. “Go to Nabal and greet him,” etc. “In all these particulars, when we were at
Kermul and were in the midst of scenes memorable for the adventures of David, we were deeply
struck with the truth and strength of the biblical description of manners and customs, almost
identically the same as those that exist at the present day. On such a festive occasion as @
sheepshearing near a town or village, an Arab Sheikh of the neighbouring desert would hardly
fail to put in a word either in person or by message, and his message would be a transcript of
that of David to Nabal.” (Dr. Robinson.)


Ver. 6. “To him that liveth.” The words in prosperity it will be seen are supplied by our
translators. The Hebrew phrase is obscure and has been very variously rendered, but the most
satisfactory explanation seems to be that in which the word translated liveth is taken as a
substantive, and the whole understood as a salutation. So Keil, Luther, ete.


Ver. 7. “Neither was there aught missing,” etc. “These words may refer to the pro-
tection afforded the herdsmen by David's people against the predatory desert tribes ; for such
protection against thieving attacks (which came expressly from the south) is expressly affirmed
in verses 16, 21. (Zrdmann.) “Thus, even in his outlawry, David showed himself the protector
of his people.” (Keil.)


Ver. 8. A good day, é.¢., a festive day. Sheepshearing was conducted as a festival (comp.
Gen. xxxviii. 12; 2 Sam. xiii, 23), when stvangers and the poor were feasted.


Ver. 9. “ Ceased,” rather, rested or sat down, to await the fulfilment of their request.


Ver. 11. “My bread and my water,” etc. “The mention of water indicates a country
where water was scarce, Compare the earnestness with which Caleb’s daughter in this very
country begged of her father the springs of water.” Josh. xv. 19. (Biblical Comeueiaeet


Ver. 18. “Bottles,” 4.e., goatskins, capable of holding a large quantity. “Clusters ef
raisins,” rather, raisin cakes, “Fig cakes,” “pressed figs joined together.” (Keil.)


Ver. 20. “By the covert.” “Probably a hollow between two peaks of a mountain. This
would explain the use of the word to come down, with reference both to Abigail, who approached
on one side, and David, who came on the other.” (Keil.)


Ver. 22. “This oath, in which the punishment of God is not called down upon the swearer
himself (God do so to me), as it generally is, but upon the enemies of David, is analogous to that
in chap. iii. 17, where punishment is threatened upon the person addressed, who is there made
to swear ; except that here, as the oath could not be uttered in the ears of the person addressed,
upon whom it was to fall, the enemies generally are mentioned instead of to thee. ‘Chere is no
doubt, therefore, as to the correctness of the text.” (Keil.)


Ver. 26. “Let thine enemtes,” etc. “That is, thou standest under God’s protection and
guidance, so that all who as thine enemies will, like Nabal, do thee evil, shall, like him, become
fools and fall under God’s punishment.” (Zrdmann.) “She reminds David of the promise of
God. Not that she prophesies, but that she has gathered it from the general promises of the
word of God. The promise referred to is that whoever does good to his enemies and takes no
vengeance upon them, God Himself will avenge him upon his enemies, according to the saying,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay.” (Seb. Schmidt.)

240


SHAP. XXV HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.











Ver. 28. ‘*Evil hath not been found,” é.¢, misfortune, not wickedness; that thought ts
sot expressed until verse 31.


Ver. 29. “Bundle of life,” rather, the bundle of the living. “The metaphor is taken from
the custom of binding up valuable things in a bundle to prevent their being injured.” (Kew. )

The m ‘ile of the sling,” literally, the cup of the sling, the cavity in which the stone was
placed. his figure is adopted in Jer. x. 18, “I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at
this once.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 30. “When the Lord shall have done.” “ From these words it appears to follow
that Abigail had received certain information of the anointing of David, and his designation to
be the future king, probably through Samuel or one of the pupils of the prophets. ‘here is
nothing to preclude this assumption, even if it cannot be historically sustained. Abigail manifests
such an advance and maturity in the life of faith as could only have been derived from intercourse
with the prophets, It is expressly stated with regard tu Elijah and Elisha, that at certain times
the pious assembled together around the prophets. What prevents us from assuming the same
with regard to Samuel? ‘The absence of any distinct testimony to that effect is amply
compensated for by the brief, and for the most part casual notices that are given of the influence
which Samuel exerted upon all Israel.” (etl. )


Ver. 31. “That this shall be no grief unto thee.” “ Like a wise woman, ahe reserves
her strongest arguments till the last.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 36. “Merry with him,” literally, therewith, ic, on account of the feast.


Ver. 37. “A stone.” Anger, or fear, or both combined with the excesses of the debauch,
probably brought on a stroke of apoplexy, although his subsoquent death is said to have been
by the hand of the Lord (ver. 38).


Ver. 39. “ Pleaded the cause,” etc. “The figure is of a case in law, which is settled by the
judicial decision. The ‘law-cause of my reproach,’ that is, the reproach offered to me, on
account of which the Lord had to appear against Nabal as Judge and Avenger. Connect ‘from
the hand’ with ‘pleaded,’ not with ‘my reproach,’ and render pregnantly ‘he has conducted
my cause to a conclusion out of the hand,’ that is, he has collected the costs from the condemned
person, and has settled the matter by the infliction of the proper punishment.” (#rdmann.)
“ And David sent,” etc. “This unceremonious proceeding was quite in the style of Kastern
monarchs, who no sooner take a fancy for a lady than they despatch a messenger to intimate
their royal wishes that she should henceforth reside in the palace, and her duty is implicitly to
obey. David’s conduct shows that the manner of the Eastern nations were already imitated by
the great men in Israel, and that the morality of the times, which God permitted, gave its
sanction to the practice of polygamy. . . . The fact of a woman in her wealthy circumstances so
willingly forming a matrimonial alliance with David, shows that the A scgsies he occupied, while
erpatriated in the wilderness, was far more elevated and comfortable is generally imagined.”
(Jamieson.)


Ver. 43. “ David took,” rather, had taken. “ The expression also points to David's marriage
with Michal, the daughter of Saul.” (Keil.) “ Jezreel.” Not Jezreel in the tribe of Issachar
(Josh. xix. 18), but the one mentioned in Josh. xv. 58, not far from Maon.


Ver. 44. “Phalti.” Called Phaltiel in 2 Sam. iif. 15. But Michal returned to David after
Saul’s death. “Gallim.” A place between Gibeah of Saul and Jerusalem (Isa. x. 30).


Note.—Delany draws an analogy between the character and history of David at this time and
the legend of Orpheus in Thrace. He says: “ I beg only to premise and to submit to the reader’s
consideration whether, if he saw two historical pictures (the only two of the kind extant in the
world), all whose outlines, parts, proportions, principal figures, actions, and attitudes, were
exactly the same, but the colouring and other circumstantials different, and one of these con-
fessedly ancient and a true original, and the other demonstrably later, but the date and the
author uncertain—whether he would not conclude the later to be in truth no other than a copy
of the original.” He quotes ancient writers to prove that Orpheus was not a Thracian, and
instances his traditional beauty, his skill in music and song, his success in softening the infernal
king, etc., as so many points of agreement between the two. Referring Psalm cxx. to David’s
sojourn at this time in or near the country of the Edomites, he quotes the Arab tradition that
stones and birds were obedient to him, though he could not reclaim the wild men of the desert
(Psa. cxx.), and the legend concerning Orpheus, which pictures the rocks, beasts, and birds as
obedient to him, although he could not civilise the Thraclans, For the full argument in favouz


ef this view see Delany’s “ Life of David.”
RB 341


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK L


either a a a
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Veres 1.
Toe DEATH OF SAMUEL.


Y. The death of the righteous often seems unseasonable in relation to the
living. It is often so in family and social life. Children especially need a kind
and strong hand to guide and train them, and when their father’s or their
mother’s hand is such an one, their removal by death seems most inopportune
and an unmitigated calamity. We think how much better it would have been
for the family if the parent’s life had been prolonged for a little season, until
the children’s characters were more established, and they were altogether more
fitted to face the world alone. And the same thing often takes place in national
life. A great and good man is removed when it seems as if the country in which
he has been so great a power for good must suffer irreparable loss by his removal,
and that the time of his departure is the time when the nation most needs him
Samuel’s death at this time seemed a most unseasonable event so far as the wel-
fare of Israel was concerned. Although he had retired from public life, he could
hardly fail still to exert some power for good over Saul, and the universal
lamentation at his death shows that the respect of the people was undiminished,
and, therefore, his influence upon them was still great and salutary. Looking
from a human stand-point, it seemed especially desirable that his life should be
prolonged until David had succeeded to the throne, and peace and order had
taken the place of the present misrule and anarchy.


II. But the value of the life of the righteous often becomes more manifest at
his death, and so the lessons of his life more influential. The sun rises upon
the earth morning by morning, and its coming is so regular and certain that
men take its appearance and all the light and heat that it brings as a matter
of course, and do not realise how many and how inestimable are the blessings
that it bestows, or how indispensable it 1s to our well-being. But if there came
a morning when the sun did not rise, and if it were known that it would shine
upon the world no more, how the value of sunlight would come home to every
man, and how universal would be the lamentation over its absence. So it is
often with a good man’s influence. It is so constant, so unobtrusive, and yet so
fraught with blessing, that none realise what he is and what he does until he is
gone, and then they know his value by his loss. But the awakening to a sense
of his worth gives force to the lessons of his life—both to those of deed and
word—and so he being dead still speaks, and often to more attentive and
obedient ears than when living. This is doubtless the key to what often seems
at first sight so mysterious and dark a providence, the death of the righteous
when their life seems so much needed. It is quite possible it was so in Samuel’s
case. It is certain that the people who had disregarded his advice were the
same who now lamented him, and it may be that their sense of loss brouvht
home more powerfully to their hearts and consciences the truths which he had
taught them in the days which were past.


OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


The aged man is laid aside, and
sinks out of the popular view; and
wnen, at length, he dies, people are
startled as they recall how great a man
be was in his prime, how great a work
he did. a is something to live so that

242


one’s death will be truly mourned by a
whole people. The old, who sadly
think themselves forgotten, may find
solace, not only in reviewing the past,
but also in the persuasion that yet
once again they will be vividly remem-


OHAP. XXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUKi.





bered, while the younger should strive
to anticipate that coming time, and
show respect and affection while it
can be fully enjoyed.—7Zranslator of
Lange's Commentary.


Tue Gevnerat Erreor oF SaMvEL’s
WHOLE CAREER.


Observe what his position was, and
how he filled it. He was not a founder
of a new state of things, like Moses,
oor a champion of the existing order,
like Elijah or Jeremiah. He stood,
literally, between the two—between
the living and the dead, between the
past and future, the old and the new,
with that sympathy for each which, at
such a period, is tha best hope for any
permanent solution of the questions
which torment it. He had been
brought up and nurtured in the old
system. . His early dedication
to the sanctuary belonged to that age
of vows of which we saw the excess in
the rash vows of Jephthah, of Saul,
and the assembly at Mizpeh: in the
more regular, but still peculiar and
eccentric devotion of Samson to the
life of a Nazarite. . . . He was
also the last of the Judges, of that long
succession who had been raised up from

thniel downwards to effect special
deliverances, (1 Sam. vii. 12.) .. .
But he must be regarded as the first
representative of the new epoch which
was dawning on the country. He is
explicitly described as Samuel, the
Prophet. (Acta iii. 24, xiii, 20.)
ae. By the ancient name of seer—
older than any other designation of
the prophetic office—he was known in
his own and after times, . . and
he is the beginning of that prophetical
dispensation which ran parallel with


the monarchy from the first to the last
king. And, unlike Moses or
Deborah, or any previous saint or
teacher of the Jewish Church, he grew
up for this office from his earliest years,
Nake: His work and his life are the
counterparts of each other, . . ,
and his mission ig an example of the
special mission which such characters
are called upon to fulfil, In propor-
tion as the different stages of life have
sprung naturally and spontaneously
out of each other, without any abrupt
revulsion, each serves as a foundation
upon which the other may stand—each
makes the foundation of the other
more sure and stable. In proportion
as our own foundation is thus stable,
and as our own minds and hearts have
grown up thus gradually and firmly,
without any violent disturbance or
wrench to one side or to the other ; in
that proportion is it the more possible
to view with calmness and moderation
the difficulties and differences cf others
—to avail ourselves of the new methods
and new characters that the advance
of time throws in our way, kes
to preserve and to communicate the
childlike faith—changed, doubtless, in
form, but the same in spirit—in which
we first knelt in humble prayer for
ourselves and others, and drank in the
first impressions of God and heaven.
The call may come to us in many
ways; it may tell us of the change of
the priesthood, of the fall of the earthly
sanctuary, of the rise of strange
thoughts, of the beginning of a new
epoch. Happy are they who are able
to perceive the signs of the times, and
to answer without fear or trembling,
“Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth,”
—Dean Stanley.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 2—43.


Napal, Davin, anp ABIGAIL.


In this narrative we have—


I. Selfishness refusing to acknowledge the rights of others,


As in the


human body no member or organ exists for itself but each for the good of the
other and to contribute its part to the wellbeing of the whole, so in the
Divine ideal of the human family each member i intended to live, not te


248


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL. Boog 2,


aa pe ee


minister to his personal gratification, lut to do his or her part in promoting the
welfare of the entire race. And as the health and consequent comfort of each
bodily member is the reward of this rightful discharge of relative functions, so
every man and woman who recognises and strives to discharge his or her relative
duties will reap the recompense in individual comfort and peace of soul,
Differences and inequalities of gifts and varieties of providential dealings make
such a mutual ministry absolutely necessary, and doubtless have this end in
view among others, to bind men more closely to each other by compelling a
mutual dependence and obligation. But Nabal here stauds before us as the
impersonation of that large majority of mankind who deny such obligations,
and refuse to recognise their position as that of stewards of the gifts with
which God has entrusted them. Nabal here looks upon his abundance as
his own peculiar and rightful possession ; “he says,” remarks Wordsworth,
“my bread, my meat, my water, my shearers, as if anything were really
his own and not lent him by God;” and men generally forget that each
human creature has some right to tlie produce of that earth which was given
by God to the children of men (Psa. cxv. 16) for their sustenance and enjoyment.
This churlish sheepmaster was really indebted to David and his men for services
actually rendered ; if they had not been “a wall” unto Nabal’s men “ night
and day, while they were keeping the sheep,” (ver. 16) he would have had a
smaller flock to shear and perhaps the loss of useful servants to deplore, but he
was not at a loss for an excuse for refusing to consider these services. He makes
the very condition of need which strengthened David’s claim an excuse for re-
fusing to satisfy it, and insinuating that David’s present untoward circumstances
are the fruit of misconduct, disclaims all knowledge of him, and implies that
this in itself is a sufficient reason for letting him and his followers suffer, These
have always been favourite arguments in the mouth of selfishness against helping
those in need. If a man is poor, it is convenient to assume that it is the con-
sequence of crime, and even if that fact cannot be proved, ignorance of who he
is or whence he came is held to be sufficient to absolve from all obligations in
relation to him. But God will not admit such pleas. He has both in word and
deed declared them null and void. In the laws given for the government of the
Hebrew commonwealth, special arrangements were made to ensure to each and
all a due proportion of material good. ‘The enactments connected with the year
of jubilee were doubtless intended to secure this end and to prevent families
from sinking into a condition of permanent and hopeless poverty. And although
misfortune and trials are inseparable from the conditions of the present life, and
were the lot of some of God’s chosen people as well as of others, he who had
Waxen poor was still to be regarded as a brother and treated as such (Lev, xxv.
25), and the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow were to be provided for at
the penalty of forfeiting the Divine blessing (Deut. xxiv. 19-21). In the
instance before us, God, by a special visitation of judgment, made it manifest
that His commands cannot be set at nought with impunity,


II. Righteous indignation at wrong degenerating into an unrighteous
spirit of retaliation, Ithas been well said that there are no errors so mischievous
as those which are the perversions of truth, and it is also true that no sinful
emotions are so dangerous as those which have their origin in feelings which are
natural and right, Affection, for instance, is a God-implanted instinct of the
soul, but it may run into idolatry of the beloved object, And careful provision
for one’s own house is enjoined by Paul (1 Tim. v. 8), but it may degenerate
into worldliness and covetousness, and it is often difficult for erring human
creatures to hold the balance between the right and the wrong in these and other
cases. David found it so at this time. Indignation at Nabal’s injustice was
lawful, but he did not stop there. No doubt the suddenness of the provocation

244


OHAP. XXV. AOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


ns








had something to do with his hasty and sinful resolve. The vessel that is struck
in a sudden squallis in greater danger than one in which the captain has foreseen
the storm and has therefore prepared for it. After all, Nabal had not wronged
David so much as Saul had, and yet there is more of vindictive feeling in this
utterance against the foolish sheepmaster than he ever manifested against his
royal father-in-law. But then he knew what to expect from Saul, whereas he
probably expected qnite different treatment from Nabal. Apart from the fact
that sheepshearing was the customary season of large and generous entertainment
of all comers, it is plain that Nabal was indebted to David and his men, and it
seems impossible, too, seeing that his wife was evidently well acquainted with
David’s history and character, that he could have been so ignorant of them as
he pretended to be. Therefore David had good reason to look for a different
reception of his message, and was fully justified in feeling himself wronged. But
he was not justified in giving way to a spirit of revenge and still less in purposing
to make many innocent people suffer for the guilt of one person. In this, as in
other seasons of trial, the man after God’s own heart shows himself to be of “like
passions as we are” (James v. 17), and apt to allow lawful desire and virtuous


emotion to drift into very positive and even great transgression.


III. Godly prudence averting the consequences of selfishness. Prudence has
been defined as “right knowledge in special cases—the practical realisation of the
higher principle of knowledge found in wisdom.” When wisdom decrees that a
certain thing is to be done, or a certain word spoken, prudence decides upon the
best time and place and manner of doing the deed or speaking the word. If we
apply this definition to Abigail’s action at this time we shall find it is characterised
by a rare prudence as to choice of time and place. Many a one can see what ought
to have been done when the time is past for doing it. Many can act wisely and
well after time for mature deliberation, but there are emergencies which admit
of no delay for maturing plans. Abigail was in such an emergency now. ‘There
could be no delay if her household were to be saved from slaughter, and David
from the commission of a great crime. She had to “make haste ” in all her
preparations, and to decide upon her line of argument with David while on her
way to meet him, and she doubtless desired to encounter him on ground where he
was in possession rather than on her own domain. She would thus come before
him in the character of a suppliant, throwing herself more entirely on his generosity
than if she had awaited his arrival nearer home, and it would be less humiliating
to him and to his men to yield to her demands in such circumstances than if they
had turned back when already at her gate. Manya good intention has failed of
success, and many a wise word has fallen unheeded to the ground, because there
has not been a due regard to the place as well as the time of executing the one
or uttering the other. But Abigail did not err in this respect. Her prudence
was most conspicuous, however, in the arguments she used to turn David from
his purpose. ‘There is no surer way of winning over an enemy than to recognise
and acknowledge that he has good ground of displeasure. When he sees that
we can to some extent excuse, and even justify him, he feels that he has a fair
foe to deal with, and a great part of the gulf that separated us is bridged over
at once. Abigail begins her address to David by freely admitting that he had
been very badly treated by her husband, and that he had just cause of displeasure.
This must have had a powerful influence upon him, and he must have quickly
discerned that she was of a spirit quite different from that of her foolish husband,
She then appeals to the deepest emotions and strongest motives of her adversary.
She was happy in having to contend with a man who, although liable to err in
word and action, was, like herself, a true servant of Jehovah, who would not
deliberately be guilty of transgressing the Divine law. When a godly person
has such a one to deal with, they know from their own experience oe argu-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,


BOoK ft.


OE ————


ments will be of most weight.


They know that such a man or woman is in the


habit of committing his or her cause to God, and that in their inmost soul they


are assured that it 1s safe with Him.


They know how bitter to such are the


upbraidings of conscience after wrong done, and how one such act of a good man,


although repented of and


forgiven, will sometimes sadden all his future life,


Abigail, by reminding David of all these things, recalled his better self, and enabled
his reason and conscience and faith to re-assume their mastery over him. He
would have been a hardened man who could have resisted such an appeal—with


a man of David’s devout spirit it was impossible.


His words of gratitude to this


good woman and to the God whose messenger she was, shows how complete was


the conquest.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 3. Even the line of faithful
Caleb will afford an ill-conditioned
Nabal. Virtue is not, like unto lands,
inheritable-—Bp. Hail.


Ver, 11. Our Lord describing the
Nabal (or fool) of the gospel; who
had said “I have no room where to
bestow my fruits; I will pull down my
barns, etc., adds that God said unto
him, “'l'hou fool (thou second Nabal),
this night shall thy soul be required of
thee, and then whose shall those things
be which thou hast provided ” (Luke
xii. 17-20.— Wordsworth.


Ver. 12. Some understand this verse,
that all the righteous are bound to-
gether as in a bundle, being of the
same faith, religion, affection ; whereas
the wicked do fall off from one another,
are never soundly conjoined and
coupled together. 2. Some refer it
unto the next lite, that David should
be bound up with the Lord among Hig
saints. 3. Some, that he should have
a sure house to him and hig posterity,
who should be as fast bound to con-
tinue as a bundle surely tied together.
4. But it is rather to be understood of
David’s preservation, even in this life,
as the words show both going before
and following ; for before Abigail spake
of Saul’s rising against David, and after
she saith that God shall cast out his
enemies. . . . Yet the words have also
a fit relation unto eternal life.— Willet.


Ver. 31. There was no need that Abi-
gail should add to her,words the prayer,
246


“Remember thine handmaid.” The
impression which her address produced
in the soul of David was powerful and
decisive. Like one walking in a dream,
who wakens up at the sound of his name,
and suddenly, with horror, sees himself
on the brink of a giddy precipice, and
overflowing with thanks towards his
deliverer, retraces his steps,—such was
now the state of David’s mind. Besides,
he had learned to his humiliation, as
well as also to his safety, to know one
side of his temperament, which till
now he had not been so clearly con-
scious of. As long as life lasts he will
not forget this march towards Carmel.
And we, perhaps, do not err if we
suppose that what he once experienced
at Carmel hovered before his soul, as
often as in his psalms, particularly in
the seventeenth, the eighteenth, the
thirty-seventh, and the sixty-sixth, he
raised his cry to the Lord as a God
who “holdeth our soul in life, and
suffereth not our feet to be moved.’?—
Krummacher,


Ver. 38. Let us note the suggestive
contrast which is here presented in the
deaths of Samuel and Nabal, On the
one hand, we have a good man, taken
to his reward after a long life spent in
the service of his God, and a whole
nation gathers to weep around his tomb.
On the other, we have a surly, selfish,
sottish man called to his account, and
no tear is shed over his grave; but
instead, a feeling of relief is experienced
by all who were connected with him,
for they are all conscious that they will


GHAP. XXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


be the happier for his absence. In the
one case, the life on earth was but the
prelude to a higher, holier, and more
useful existence in the heavenly world ;
in the other, the earthly character was
but the germ out of which would
spring, in the state beyond, a deeper,
darker, and more repulsive wickedness
even than that which he had manifested
here. I do not think that David wrote
the 37th Psalm at this particular date,
since, from one expression which it
contains, he seems to have penned that
ode in his old age ; but, whensoever it
was written, it is hard for me to believe
that he had not before his mind at the
time the contrast between Nabal and
Samuel which this history so vividly
presents. What could be more appro-
priate to Nabal than these words: “I
have seen the wicked in great power,
and spreading himself like a green bay
tree. Yet he passed away, and lo, he
was not: yea, I sought him, but he
could not be found.” And surely David
thought of Samuel when he wrote this
verse: “Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright : for the end of that
man is peace.”

Now, the practical question for us is,
To which of these two classes do we
belong? Alas, there are many in these
days whose lives are inflicting a
constant martyrdom on all who have
the misfortune to be nearly related to
them, and whose deaths, while full of
sadness to themselves, would yet be a
blessing and a relief to their friends as
ridding them of a constant and fearful
misery. ‘A living cross is heavier
than a dead one ;” and there are few
who have to carry a weightier or
sharper cross than the wives and
families of these Nabals, whose intem-
perance has brutified them into harsh,
unfeeling cruelty.—Dr. W. Df. Taylor.


Ver. 32. A good heart is easily
stayed from sinning, and is glad when
it finds occasion to be crossed in ill
purposes. Those secret checks, which
are raised within itself, do readily
conspire with all outward retentives :
it never yielded to a wicked motion
without much reluctation ; and when


it is overcome it is but with half a
consent : whereas perverse and obdu-
rate sinners, by reason they take full
delight in evil, and have already in
their conceit swallowed the pleasure of
sin, abide not to be resisted, running
on headily in those wicked courses they
have propounded, in spite of opposition ;
and, if they be forcibly stopped in their
way, they grow sullen and mutinous.
David had not only vowed, but deeply
sworn, the death of Nabal, and all his
family, to the very dog that lay at his
door ; yet now he praiseth God, that
hath given the occasion and grace to
violate it. Wicked vows are ill made,
but worse kept. Our tongue cannot
tie us tocommitsin. Good men think
themselves happy, that since they had
not the grace to deny sin, yet they had
not the opportunity to accomplish
it.— Bp. Hall.

Observe the contrast between David
and Herod. David is deterred by the
expostulations of Abigail, a prudent
and fair woman, from keeping his oath
and putting to death an evil man,
Nabal, and he blesses God for it,
Herod is urged by Herodias and her
mother, two fair women in countenance
but foul in heart, to keep his rash oath,
and to put to death a holy man, John
the Baptist ; and he suffered remorse
for doing so, and afterwards fell into a
greater sin, and mocked the Divine
David (Luke xxiii, 11), and came to
a miserable end.— Wordsworth.


Verses 2-40. The history of David's
collision with Nabal—not a very flat-
tering chapter in the history of his life
—is inserted between the history of
his two great victories over the spirit
of revenge and impatience ; and by
the guidance of the Divine Spirit the
historian seems so to have arranged
the narrative, for the purpose of showing
us how the servant of God may conquer
in a great fight and yet be overcome in
asmall. The history of all warfare is
full of such cases. In the presence of
a great enemy the utmost vigilance is
maintained ; every effort is strained,
every stimulus is applied. In. the
presence of a small foe the spirit of

aT


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Book L





confidence and security leaves every
position unguarded, and often paves
the way for signal defeat. In the
spiritual warfare nothing can be more
common.— Blavkte,


Verses 32, 33. Prevention of sin ts
one 2f the greatest mercies that God
can vouchsafe a man in this world.
1. From the deplorable condition of
the sinner, before that mercy prevents
him. He is in the direct way of death
and destruction, and wholly unable to
help himself. . . . A man under
the drift of any passion will still follow
the impulse of it until something inter-
pose, and by a stronger impulse turn
him another way ; but in this case we
can find no principle within him strong
enough . . . for if it be any, it
must be either (1) the judgment of his
reason, or (2) the free choice of his
will, and while a man is engaged in
any sinful purpose, through the pre-
valence of passion, he fully approves
. of whatsoever he is carried on to do in
the full strength of it. While David's
heart was full of his revengeful design,
it had blinded and perverted his reason
so far that it told him that the bloody
purpose he was going to execute was
just and becoming. 2. It is
perfectly free grace for if
things concur, and providence cuts not
off the opportunity, the act of sin must
needs follow. Because every
commission of sin introduces into the
soul a certain degree of hardness, and
an aptness to continue in it. It is
much more difficult to throw out than
not to let in. Sin taken into
the soul is like liquor poured into a
vessel ; so much of it as it fills, it also
seasons. The touch and tincture go
together. So that although the body
of the liquor should be poured out
again, yet still it leaves that tang
behind it which makes the vessel fitter
for that, than for any other. . . .
And every commission imprints upon
the soul a further proneness to sin as
drinking both quenches the present
thirst and provokes it for the future,
3. The only thing that can entitle to
pardon—repentance—is not in the

248


sinner’s power .. . forthis is the
sinner’s hard lot, that the same thing
that makes him need repentance makes
him also in danger of not obtaining it,
4, The greatness of this preventing
mercy is eminently proved from those
advantages accruing to the soul from
the prevention of sin above what can
be had from the bare pardon of it.
First: Of the clearing of a man’s con-
dition; and secondly: Of the satis-
faction of his mind. So much
of prevention, so much of innocence.
: . Sometimes God may suffer the
soul but just to begin the sinful pro-
duction by reflecting upon a sin
suggested with some complacency ;
which is to conceive sin, and then He
may extinguish it, . . Or He
may permit it to pass into purpose and
then make it prove abortive by stifling
it... . Or He may let it come even
to the birth, by strong endeavour to
commit it, and yet then deny it strength
to bring forth. Or God may suffer it
to be born, and pass from endeavour
into commission ; and this is the last
step but one, and that is, the frequent
repetition which settles into a habit of
sin. . . . But wherever God may
turn the fatal stream it is a vast mercy.
: Now, when grace keeps a man
from sin he certainly knows that it is
BOA Des but grace may seal the
sinner’s pardon and yet have left no
transcript of that pardon in his breast.
The handwriting may be cancelled in
the court of heaven, and yet the indict-
ment run on in the court of conscience
‘ so that though the pardoned
and the innocent may be equally safe,
they cannot, without rare privilege, be
equally cheerful. : Here is
an unfailing criterion by which every
man may discover the disposition of
his own heart. David over-
looks the rich and seasonable present
of Abigail, though pressed with hunger
and travel ; but her advice, which dis-
armed his rage and calmed his revenge,
draws forth his high gratulations.—
South.

This is one of the earliest cases re-
corded in the Bible in which the
interests of the employer and the em-


it


GAP. XX¥.





ployed—the man of wealth and the man
of work—stood, or seemed to stand, in
antagonism to each other. It was a
period in which an old system of things
was breaking up; and the new one was
not yet established, but a kind of right
had grown up, irregular enough, but
sufficient to establish a claim on Nabal
for remuneration—a new claim, not
admitted by him, reckoned by him an
exaction, which could be enforced by
no law, only by that law which is above
all statute law, deciding according to
emergencies, an undefinable instinctive
sense of fairness and justice. In modern
language the rights of labour were in
conflict with the rights of property.
Observe the fearful hopeless character
of the struggle. The question had come
to this: Whether David, with his fero-
cious six hundred mountaineers, united
by the sense of wrong, or Nabal with
his well fed and trained hirelings, bound
by interest, not love, to his cause, were
stronger? Which was the more power-
ful, want whetted by insult, or selfish-
ness pampered by indulgence: they
who wished to keep by force or they
who wished to take? An awful and
uncertain spectacle, but the spectacle
which is exhibited in every country
where rights are keenly felt and duties
lightly.

I. The causes of this false social
state. 1. False basis upon which social
superiority was supposed to rest.
Throughout Nabal’s conduct was built
upon an assumption of his own superi-
ority. He wasa man of wealth. David
was dependent upon his own daily
efforts. Was not this enough to
settle the question of inferiority and
superiority? The evils of poverty are
comparative—they depend on climate
—they depend on contrast. Where ali
suffer equally, men bear hardship with
cheerfulness ; but where the luxury of
enjoyment is out of all proportion
monopolised by the few, when wealth
or rank assumes an insulting domineer-
ing character, then the falsehood of
superiority can be tolerated no longer.
It was this which here brought matters
to a crisis, 2 A false conception
concerning rights. It would be un-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





just to Nabal to represent this as an act
of wilful oppression. David’s demand
appeared an invasion of his rights—a
dictation with respect to that which was
his own. There was something to be
said for him. It was the view of his class,
had descended to him from his parents,
and it is hard to see through the false-
hood of any system by which we profit
and which is upheld by general consent,
especially when good men, too, uphold
it. Onthe other hand, David and his
men were not slow to perceive that they
had their rights over that property of
Nabal’s. The harvest was in part
David’s harvest, for without David: it
never could have been reaped. The
sheep were in part David’s sheep, for
without David not a sheep would have
been spared by the marauders of the
hill. The right which the soldier has
by law to his pay was the right which
David had by unwritten law, a right
resting on the fact that his services
wereindispensable. Now when it comes
to this, rights against rights, there is
no determination of the question but
by overwhelming numbers, or blood,
and it is difficult to say to which side
in such a quarrel we should wish well.
If the rich man succeeds he will bind
the chain more severely and surely
upon the crushed serf, and the victory
of the lawless with the memory of past
wrongs to avenge is almost more
sanguinary than the victory of those
who have had power long and whose

power has been defied.
II. The message of the Church to
the man of wealth. It contains those
rinciples which, carried out, realise the
Bisa Order of Society—not creating
the facts of our hamanity—simply
making them known. And because
these principles are externally true we
find in Abigail’s conduct towards David
the very principles which the Church
of Christ has given tothe world. 1. The
spiritual dignity of man as man.
David was the poor man, but the high-
born lady admits his worth, Here isa
truth revealed. Worth does not mean
what a man is worth—you must find
some better definition. his is the very
truth revealed in the Incarnation,

249


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


soe


Christ, the King of humanity, is the poor
woman’s son. 2. The law of sacrifice,
Abigail did not heal the grievance with
smooth words. You might have said
half of her provision would have been
enough. But liberality is a most real
economy. We wrong Abigail, however,
if we call this economy or calculation ;
it would have failed on this principle.
Ten times this sum from Nabal would
not have arrested the revenge, but
David felt that these were uot the gifts
of a sordid calculation, but of a gene-
rous heart. This is the attractive
power of that great law whose highest
expression is the cross. 3. The matter
of rightful influence. Very remarkable
ig David’s demeanour towards Nabal as
contrasted with his demeanour towards
Abigail. It was not, therefore, against
the wealthy class, but against indivi-
duals of the class, that the wrath of
these men burned. ‘There is reverence
for superiors, if only it can be shown
that they are superiors. It is deeply
rooted in the heart of humanity—you
cannot tear it out. Civilisation, science,
progress, only change its direction:
they do not weaken its force. Emanci-
ation from false lords only sets the
eae free to honour true ones. The
free-born David will not do honour to
Nabal. But behold, he has found a
something nobler than himself, and in
gratitude and profound respect he bows
to that. To conclude. Doubtless David
was wrong, and yet for one text in the
Bible which requires submission and
pee from the poor, you will find a
undred which denounce the vices of
the rich, and woe to us if we have for-
gotten that David’s, not Nabal’s, is the
cause of God.—A bridged from F. W.
Robertson's Sermons, Vol. I.


Ver. 40-44. Abigail’s meeting with
David under the covert of the hill .
and David’s chivalrous answer to
her chivalrous appeal—all the scene,
which painters have so often delighted
to draw, is a forefeeling, a prophecy, as
it were, of the Christian chivalry of
after ages. The scene is most human


va


250





‘ BOOK 1.


—


and most divine; and we are not shocked
to hear that after Nabal’s death the
fair and rich lady joins her fortune to
that of the wild outlaw, and becomes
his wife, to wander by wood and wold.
But, amid all the simple and sacred
beauty of that scene, we cannot forget,
we must not forget, that Abigail is but
one wife of many, that there is an
element of pure, single, all-absorbing
love absent, at least in David’s heart,
which was present in the hearts of our
forefathers in many a like case, and
which they have handed down to us ag
a heirloom, as precious as that of our
laws and liberties. And all this was
sin unto David, and, like all sin, brought
with it its own punishment. I do not
mean to assign his exact amount of
moral responsibility. Our Lord forbids
us to do that, and least of all, to a man
who only acted according to his light,
and the fashion of his race and age.
But we must fix it very clearly in our
minds, that sins may be punished in
this life, even though he who commits
them is not aware that they are sins.
If you are ignorant that fire burns,
your ignorance will not prevent your
hand from suffering if you put it into
the fire. Sin, ¢pdpria, means
first, it seems to me, a missing of the
mark, end, or aim of our existence ; a
falling short of the law, the ideal, the
good works which God has prepared
beforehand for us to walk in, and every
such sin, conscious or unconscious, must
avenge itself by the Divine laws of the
universe, No miracle is needed.
. . . God’s laws are far too well
made for Him to need to break them
a second time because a sinner hag
broken them already. They avenge
themselves. And so dues polygamy.
It did in the case of David. ook at
what he might have been . , . living
together with a helpmate worthy of
him in godly love to his life’send .. .
and what was the fact? The indulgence
of his passions—seemingly harmless at
first—becomes most harmful and he
commits a complication of crimes.—


Kingsley.


CHAP. XXVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





CHAPTER XXVI.


CarmioaL anp Exrository Norrs.—The fact that the incidents related in this chapter agree
fm some points with those narrated in chapters xxiii. xxiv. has led Ewald, Thenius, and others
to conclude that the historian has given two accounts of the same event. But a writer who
could thus repeat himself in the general, while professing to give an account of events in their
proper order, and at the same time could vary so much in detail, would be quite unworthy of
confidence. And, as Keil shows, the details, after all, differ greatly. “ When David was be-
trayed the first time, he drew back into the desert of Maon before the advance of Saul, and,
being completely surrounded upon one of the mountains there, was only saved from being taken
prisoner by the advance of the Philistines. (Chap. xxiii, 25-28.) But on the second occasion
Saul encamped upon the hill of Hachilah, whilst David had secretly drawn back into the ad-
joining desert, from which he crept secretly into Saul’s encampment. . . . On the first
occasion Saul entered a cave in the desert of Engedi, whilst David and his men were concealed
in the interior. . . . The second time David went with Abishai into the encampment of
Saul, upon the hill of Hachilah. . . . It is true that on both occasions David’s men told
him that God had given his enemy into his hand; but the first time they added, ‘Do to him
what seemeth good in thy sight ;’ and David cut off the lappel of Saul’s coat, whereupon his
conscience smote him. . . . In the second instance, on the contrary, David called two of his
heroes to go with him into the camp of his sleeping foe, and then went thither with Abishai,
who thereupon said, ‘God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand ; let me alone, that I
may pierce him with the spear.’ But David rejected this proposal, and merely took away the
spear and water-bowl that were at Saul’s head. And, notwithstanding that the words of David
and the replies of Saul agree in certain general thoughts, yet they differ entirely in the main.
On the first oceasion David showed the king that his life had been in his power, and yet he had
spared him, to dispe! the illusion that he was seeking his life. On the second he asked the king
why he was pursuing him, and called upon him to desist. But Saul was so affected the first
time tnat ne wept aloud, and openly declared that David would obtain the kingdom, and asked
aim to promise on cath that when he did he would not destroy his family. The second time he
only declared that he had sinned and acted foolishly, and would do David no more harm, and
that David would undertake and prevail, but he neither shed tears, nor brought himself to speak
of David’s ascending the throne, so that he was evidently much more hardened than before.”
As to the moral unlikelihood that Saul would have made a second attempt upon David's life
after being treated so generously by him, such conduct on his part seems quite in keeping with
his vacillating character on other occasions. On this subject Nagelsbach remarks, “ ‘That Saul
marched against David a second time is easily explained, even although he was no moral
monster (as Thenius affirms he must have been in such a case). His hatred to David was so
deeply rooted that it could be only temporarily suppressed by that magnanimous deed, not ex-
tinguished.” It is indeed plain, from David’s conduct after the first remonstrance with Saul,
that he placed little or no reliance upon his professions of repentance.


Ver. 1. “Bill of Hachilah.” Sce on chap. xxiii. 19. Jamieson suggests that one reason
for David's returning to this locality might have been to be near Abigail’s possessions. “Before
Jeshimon.” Jeshimon literally signifies “the waste or wilderness ;” before should be “in the
face of,” o¢ “ scuth of.”


Ver. 2. “Three thousand chosen men.” “The permanent guard whose formation is
mentioned in chap. xiii. 2.” (Erdmann.) “Went down.” “Though Gibeah, as its name
imports, stood on an elevated position, and the desert of Ziph may have been higher than Gibeah,
it was still necessary to descend in leaving the latter places hence Saul ‘ went down’ into the
wilderness of Ziph,” (Jamieson.)


Vor. 3. “David abode in the wilderness.” “That is, he had withdrawn from the hill
Hachilah (where the Ziphites reported him as being, and Saul sought first to attack him) farther
into the wilderness, and was then on the highland (compare ver. 6, ‘who will go down with me! )
while Saul was encamped on the road to the plain” (ver. 3, “ by the way.”) (Zrdmann.) “ He
saw.” Rather, he learned, or perceived by the report of his spies.


Ver. 5. “abner.” “'The Hebrew Ab signifies futher ; but the captain of Saul’s host
may have been so called in honour of some ancestor, without any reference to the meaning
of the word. Another explanation has been suggested. ‘In Abner there are two pure
Gomeric roots, and ab is the contrary of father, for it is expressly stated—Abner, son of
Ner, etc. The ab ir of course the ab or ap of the Appu of Italy and of the Cymry of
Britain—son ; Abner, son of strength; or in Latin, Appius Nero ;_ and as we know that
the Appii Claudii Nerones were a pure Umbrian family, we have In the centre of Pales-
tine, B.c. 1000, and in the centre of Italy, B.o. at least 700, two Gomeric families of precisely
the same name derived from their common family language (Japhetic) in the most natural
way conceivable. It is utterly ixapossible that the Jewish writer, whoever “git herd could


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL. BOOK L


ieee ee
have devised such # coincidence, or imagined its ethnological significance. He wrote down the
simple fact. We know how to explain it, but this very knowledge is a confirmation of the pro-
phetic utterance of Noah.’” (Geni ix. 27.) (“ Vindication of the Mosaic Ethnology of Europe.”)
(Jamieson.) “Trench.” Literally “the place of wagons,” (See on chap. xvii. 20.)


Ver. 6. “ Ahimelech the Hittite.” This man is only mentioned here. “The Hittites, a
Canaanitish people, already settled around Hebron in Abraham’s time (Gen. xv. 23), dwelt, after
the return of the Israelites from Egypt, in the hill country of Judah with the Amorites, reaching
as far north as towards Bethel (J udges ii. 26), subdued but not exterminated by the Israelites.
A portion of them had maintained a certain independence” (1 Kings ix. 20, x. 293 2 Kings
vii. 6). (EZrdmamn.) Uriah was also a Hittite. “Abishai.” The nephew of David (see
1 Chron. ii. 16), and afterwards one of his famous generals (2 Sam. xviii, 2, etc.)


Ver. 8. “I will not smite him a second time.” Abishai could have easily pinned David
to the ground with one thrust of his sword, and no second blow would have been needed.


Ver. 10. “The Lord shall smite him,” etc. Rather, uniess the Lord shall amite, etc. So
Keil, Thenius, and others.


Ver. 11. “The spear that is at his bolster and the cruse of water.” “T noticed at
all the encampments which we passed that the sheik’s tent was distinguished from the rest by a
tall spear stuck upright in the front of it; and it is the custom, when a party is out on an
excursion for robbery or for war, that when they halt to rest, the spot where the chief reclineg
or rests is thus designated, The whole of the scene in 1 Sam. xxvi. 7, is perfectly natural, even
to the deep sleep into which all had fallen, so that David and Abishai could walk among them in
safety. The Arabs sleep heavily, especially when fatigued. Often, when travelling, my mule-
teers and servants have agreed to watch together in places thought to be dangerous ; but in
every instance I soon found them to be fast asleep, and generally their slumbers were so profound
that I could not only walk among them without their waking, but might have taken the very
aba with which they were covered. Then the cruse of water at Saul’s head is in exact accordance
with the customs of the people at this day. No one ventures to travel over these deserts without
their cruse of water, and it is very common to place it at the bolster, so that the owner can reach
it during the night. The Arabs eat their dinner in the evening, and it is generally of such a
nature as to create thirst ; and the quantity of water which they drink is enormous. (Zhomson’s
Land end the Book.)


Verses 13, 14. “And David stood,” etc. The purity of the air of Palestine would render
this quite easy. Dr. Thomson says, “There are thousands of ravines where the whole scene
could be enacted, every word be heard, and yet the speaker be quite beyond the reach of his
enemies.” “David had, no doubt, reconnoitered the camp from the opposite hill, and then gone
down to st (ver. 6), and returned after the deed was accomplished. The statement that this
mountain was afar off, so that there was a great space between David and Saul, not only favours
the accuracy of the historical tradition, but shows that David reckoned far less now upon any
change in the state of Saul’s mind than he had done before when he followed Saul from the
eave without hesitation, and called after him; and that in fact he rather feared that Saul should
endeavour to get him into his power as soon as he woke from his sleep.” (Keil.)


Ver. 15. “Art thou not a man?” t.¢., ® warrior. “This incidental reference to Abner's
eminence as @ warrior is borne out by his whole history. At the same time, David’s bantering
tone, coupled with verse 19, makes it probable that he considered Abner his enemy ; the latter’s
great influence with Saul might have prevented the persecution of David. Abner may have
feared David as a rival; his opposition to him is shown after Saul’s death.” (Biblical Com-
mentary.) ‘For there came one of the people,” etc. “These reproaches cast at Abner
were intended to show to Saul, who might, at anyrate, possibly hear, and who, in fact, did hear,
tes aks was a more faithful defender of his life than his closest and most zealous servants,”
(Ked.


Ver. 16. “Worthy to die.” Literally, sons of death.


Ver.19. “If the Lord have stirred thee up,” etc. “David’s word is based on the concep-
tion that God sometimes incites men to evil, (Comp. 2 Sam. xvi. 10 and 2 Sam. xxiv. 1.) The
idea that evil is, from one point of view, to be referred to God as its cause, is not a product of
later times, but is sarly found in connection with the idea of the Divine ordering of the world, in
which evil must serve God in order to bring about His saving help (Gen. i. 20, comp. with xiv.
7, 8), and reveal His judicial glory (Exod. ix. 16). David therefore supposed the case that Saul’s
hatred towards him rests on the Divine causality (comp. ch. xviii. 10, xix. 9), where the evil spirit
from the Lord which has come upon Saul is said to be the cause of his hate to David. The
Divine incitement to evil consists, according to David’s view, in the fact that Saul, sunk deep
in sin by his own fault, is further given over by God toevil in that opportunity is given him to
develop in deeds the evil of his heart.” (Erdmann.j Keil’s remarks on this phrase are sub-

252


OHAP. XXVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


i


stantially the same, and he adds, “ The instigation of sinner to evil is simply one peculiar way.
in which God, as a general rule, punishes sin through sinners ; for God only instigates to evil
actions, such as have drawn down the wrath of God upon them in consequence of their sins.
When David supposes the fact that Jehovah has instigated Saul against him, he acknowledges,
implicity at least, that he himself is a sinner, whom the Lord may be intending to punish, though
without lessening Saul’s wrong by this indirect confession.” “Let him accept an offering.”
Literally, let him smell an offering. (cf. Gen. viii. 21). “The meaning is, let Saul appease the
wrath of God by the presentation of acceptable sacrifices. What sacrifices they are that please
God is shown in Psa. li. 18, 19, and it is cersainly not by accident merely that David uses the
word minchah, the technical expression ia the law for the bloodiess sacrifice. whick sets forth the
sanctification of life in good works.” ( Keil.) ‘The sense is: pray to God that He take
the temptation from thee.” (Bunsen.) “Cursed be they,” etc. “David does not utter a
wish, but states a fact, he does not pray that they may be cursed, but he asserts that they are
incurring a curse from God.” (Wordsworth.) “Saying, go, serve other gods.” “ The idea
implied is, that Jehovah could only be worshipped in Canaan, at the sanctuary consecrated to
Him, because it was only there that He manifested Himself to His people.” (Keil.) “Weare
not to understand that David’s enemies were accustomed to use these words, but David was
thinking of deeds rather than words.” (Calvin.)


Ver. 20. “As when one doth hunt a partridge.” “ Me, isolated from God’s people, far
from all association, a fugitive by thy machinations on the mountain heights, thou seekest at all
costs to destroy, as one hunts a single fugitive partridge on the mountains only to kill it at all
costs, while otherwise from its insignificance it would not be hunted since partridges are found in
the fields in flocks.” (Erdmann.) People in the east, in hunting the partridge and other game
birds, pursue them till observing them becoming languid and fatigued, after they have been put
up two or three times, they rush upon the birds stealthily and knock them down with bludgeons.
(Shaw's Travels.) It was exactly in this manner that Saul was persecuting David ; he drove him
from time to time from his hiding-place, hoping to render him weary of his life or obtain an
opportunity of accomplishing his destruction. (Jamieson.)


Ver. 23. “To every van.” Keil and Erdmann translate to the man—i.e., to David him-
self. “'These words are nota sounding of his own praises, but merely the testimony of a good
conscience in the presence of an enemy.” (Keil.)


Ver. 24. “Let my life.” Keil and Erdmann read “so will my life.”


Ver, 25. “Thou wilt both undertake,” etc. Here Saul does not express a changed dis-
osition, love instead of the old enmity, but the fleeting better feeling which David’s conduct
ad induced, and which compelled him to affirm that David would come forth victorious through

the Lord’s help out of all the straits of his persecution. The content and character of Saul’s
words in chap. xxiv. 16-22, are very different.” (Erdmann.) “David went his way,” attaching
no worth to Saul’s acknowledgment of wrong. “Saul returned to his place. ” Some expositors
make a contrast between this expression and that in chap. xxiv. 22, in which Saul is said to have
gone home after his interview with David, and understand that this time he did not desist even
for a season from his pursuit.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
Daviw’s Visit To Savt’s Camp.


I. There is a tendency in good to repeat itself in the soul of a good man.
Good deeds are not a sure indication of a good character, for a wicked man may
perform such from motives which are not good. Nor does one good deed, even
if done from a worthy motive, make a goed character. But one such action
performed from a desire to do right in the sight of God lays the foundation for
another and another, and such a repetition establishes that right habit of thinking
and feeling and doing which constitute a godlike and holy character. And it is
a strengthening reflection for all who are engaged in the struggle against the
evil within them that every temptation met and conquered makes the next
victory more easy, and every godlike and divine impulse obeyed gives an increase
to the power and dominion of good in the soul. David's conduct here is a witness
of this tendency of good to repeat itself. Since Saul was last in his eed every
day had increased the provocation which he had suffered at the ae of hiy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 1


sO


persecutor, who had now added to his other crimes that of pursuing the man
who had so lately spared his life. If David’s former act of forbearance had not
been dictated by right principle—if his entire attitude to Saul from the beginning
of his persecution had not been the outcome of a spirit under the influence of
the Spirit of God, he would have broken down under the long continuance of
the demand upon his forbearance, and this last proof of Saul’s ingratitude and
inextinguishable enmity would have been too much for him to forgive, but as
David was a godly man, it was as easy for him to spare Saul’s life in the
camp as it had been in the cave, and possibly this time the temptation was more
easily overcome than on the former occasion.


II. There is a tendency in evil to repeat itself in the soul of a wicked man.
If the good within becomes stronger by repetition, it is no less certain that the
strength of sin increases in proportion as it is indulged in, and a sinful tendency
or habit which once only bound a man as by a silken thread may come to fetter
him as with an iron chain. The first few snowflakes that fall upon the earth are
not noticed much, and can be easily swept away, even by achild, but continuing
to fall hour after hour they will form a barrier which it may be well-nigh im-
possible to penetrate. So the first seeds of any sinful passion may enter into a
human soul without producing any marked effect upon the life, and almost with-
out the consciousness of the soul itself ; but one sinful thought or feeling, if un-
checked and harboured, will be quickly followed by another and another of the
same character, until the man in whose spirit they have found a resting place
becomes, before he is aware, a moral slave. Saul appears to afford a melancholy
instance of such a process, _ Permitting jealous feelings towards David to find a


history gives no reason to suppose that any radical change took place in his feelings
towards him. If he had followed up his former conviction and confession of
sin by struggle against it he would have found repentance then less difficult
than now, and would not have added this darkest blot to the character he had
already dimmed by many transgressions,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver, 12. Behold now, once more, Saul’s sceptre, and here we see before
our David, as he goes away with Saul’s us a dim pre-intimation of that fact.—
spear, the emblem of his sovereign Krummacher.
power. At that moment he presents a Ver. 19. It was part of Saul’s
symbolically significant appearance, punishment that he was constrained to
Unconsciously he prophesied of his own persecute David, and in go doing he
future, while he stands before us as suffered more than David—consuming
the projected shadow of that form in hatred, fear, the perpetual conscious-
which we must one day behold him. ness of the fruitlessness of all his
In the counsel of the Invisible Watcher, measures—all this was perfect torture
\t was, indeed, irrevocably concluded to him. Doubtless he would willingly
that ee heinite should inherit have been freed from it, but there wag


OHAP. XXVL


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





only one way in which he could obtain
this freedom, viz., by true repentance ;
and this way he refused to take. Be-
cause he would not desist from sin in
general. he could not become free from
this special form of sin. ‘This was his
fate. David’s piety is seen in the fact
that he characterises it as the greatest
sorrow inflicted on him by his enemies
that they oblived him to leave the
land of the Lord and go out into the
heathen world, depriving him of the
blesseduess of religious communion.—
Hengstenberg.


Verse 21. How wonderful is the
effect of asingle flash of lightning, when
previously the heavens had been veiled
in deepest gloom, and the darksome
night had thrown over all nature its
dreariest mantle. How completely, for
a moment, itliftsthat mantle . . .
Houses, trees, streets—they burst upon
you ; you seem never to have seen them
so distinctly before. And yet
it is but fora moment; while you look
the flash is gone. It lasted
long enough to make you feel its effect
and then departed, “T have
played the fool and erred exceedingly ;”
tells of such asudden gleam. ‘To our
view, it lays open in a moment the
whole features of Saul’s history, as he
saw them himself. Nothing
escapes him ; each avenue opens up its
concealment, each pathway reveals the
footsteps imprinted upon it . and
then the gloom returned. . . . It
was not the dawn of true repentance,
gradually unfolding reason for encour-
agement, and losing itself in brighter
hopes and lasting joy, but it was the
sudden flash which conscience, excited,
will send through a soul, preliminary
only to a deeper despair—to hopeless
ruin, I. Saul’s history justi-
fies this expression inasmuch as his
public life was marked by a continued
attempt at thorough independence of
God. . . This was folly—jirst, be-
cause it wassubversive of all that reason
and wisdom suggested. For the very
being of a God is of itself sufficiently
indicative of the place which the crea-
tures of that God should occupy. .. .


The laws of nature, in regard to matter,
allow ne interference with them which
would subvert the relative conditions
of strength and weakness, independence
and dependence, without such results
as would expose the folly of the at-
tempt. . . . And on the same principle
must there be read out the condemna-
tion of downright folly when man so
acts as to take upon himself the right
to dictate for his own guidance. .. .
What is this but an attempt to subvert
what is fixed irrevocably ? .. . Besides,
secondly, it is not less against our own
interests to put our own will in the
place of God’s. . . . Did Saul get on
as well without God as with Him ?
And did ever the history of a single
individual justify the supposition that
this was possible?. .. Il. There was
one particular course of action which
was at this moment more especially
present to Saul’s view... . In many
respects he had erred ; in one respect
most especially so. . .. 1. His folly
and error censisted in treating a man
as his enemy who was, in reality, his
best friend. . . How often is this mis-
take committed. How often do we see
men making the least welcome those
who have the highest title to their con-
fidence, because they would do them
real good; and treating as most wel-
come those whose influence on them
is plainly prejudicial. ‘he man who
would not allow David in his sight,
promoted Doeg the Edomite. ... 2.
Saul’s folly also consisted in attempting
by this conduct towards David to fly in
the face of those Divine arrangements
to which, however humiliating in their
character, he was bound in meekness
to submit. . . . Never does a man
commit himself to a harder, and at the
same time more fruitless, enterprise
thanwhen he fights against God’s provi-
dential arrangements—when, for in-
stance, God is evidently calling on him
to give up some scheme for his own
exaltation or his family’s aggrandise
ment, and requiring him to take a
humbler le »l, and he will grasp tight'y
and hold tenaciously the position whic

everything combines to tell him is for
another. Nothing too, is a greater

259


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK £.


SR me Ee


temptation toa man to do unprincipled
things than such an attempt. . .. But
it is a fruitless work, however long
maintained.— Miller,


Ver. 25. Saul is here also “ among
the prophets,” and foretells David’s
exaltation and victory, “ Vicisti ; Naz-
arene !” was the exclamation of Julian.
— Wordsworth.

Before we pass away from Saul’s
persecution of David, an interesting
inquiry presents itself, which may be
answered by the help of one of the
Psalms. How came it, one is tempted
to ask, that Saul was thus at one time
so friendly to David, and. at another
filled with such bitter enmity against
him? Much of this was owing, doubt-
less, to the impulsive, wayward, and
capricious disposition which, as we have
seen, grew upon him after his rejection
by Samuel.

But this will not explain it all. An
impulse will go on in a man until it
exhausts itself; but it will then leave
him, at least, indifferent, and something
else will be required to account for the
rapid reversal of his feelings, when we
see him change in a short time from
grateful appreciation to fierce antago-
nism. ie then, shall we find that
something in the case of Saul? The
answer seems to me to be furnished by
the inscription to the 7th Psalm, which,
from its similarity to David’s utterances
to Saul on the occasions which
have been before us, has been by
most expositors connected with these
events. It is entitled “Shiggaion of
David, which he sang unto the Lord,
concerning the words of Cush the
Benjamite.” That is “a dithyrambic
ode of David concerning the words of
Cush.” Now if we adopt the conjecture
that Cush was one of Saul’s confidential
adherents, and that he had set himself
deliberately and malignantly to poison
his master’s mind in reference to David,
by inventing all manner of false asser_
tions, and indulging in every variety of
significant innuendoes concernin him,
we have an explanation at once, oft many
statements in the narrative, of the
vacillations in the dispositian of Saul,

256


and of the character of the Psalm
to which the title belongs. ate
When the king was alone, away from
the influence of this black-hearted
sycophant, David’s noble and frank
ingenuousness produced its appropriate
impression on his heart; but when
David disappeared, and this Cush
resumed his insinuating supremacy,
then Saul’s heart was again estranged,
and he vowed vengeance on the son of
Jesse. Of course, if Saul had not been
weak, this effect would not have been
produced upon him; but, in the
circumstances, we can see how the
larger measure of the guilt belonged to
Cush, and can understand why, while
David spared the king, his heart was
full of abhorrence of the part which
was played by the false-hearted Ben-
jamite—Dr. W. M. Taylor.

A few words may suitably be added
in connection with these signal vic-
tories of David over the spirit of
revenge, respecting what have been
called his vindictive or imprecatory
Psalms. ... When loud complaints
are made of the vindictive character
of some of the Psalms of David, and
when all the more favourable explana-
tions of some of these Psalms are
rejected with contempt, objectors may
be fairly challenged to show how they
can reconcile the view taken by them
of these Psalms with the elevated
generosity and forbearance that were
80 conspicuous in David’s general
character. Saul was not the only
enemy of David’s, or of God’s, that
experienced his forbearance. Absalom,
Shemei, and other bitter opponents of
himself and of the cause of tru th, shared
the same generous treatment, It may
surely be held as established that, so
far as David was concerned, no feeling of
personal revenge could have led him to
use the language or breathe the spirit
of the imprecatory Psalms. It can
easily be proved that many, where
individuals seem at first to be the
objects of denunciation, in point of fact
either do not contemplate the case of
ee iacaal at all, or make use of them
cenielly as signs or types of principles,
The fifth Psalm, for esas


G@HAP. XXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





appears to be a denunciation of the
Psalmist’s personal enemies. But in
Rom. iii. 13 the words are quoted as
part of a proof of the universal cor-
ruption of mankind. The proof would
be palpably irrelevant if the language
of the Psalmist applied only to his
personal and public enemies, But it is
not irrelevant if these enemies were
viewed as types or signs of those
principles and habits of sin which
infest the world. . . Still, we
freely admit that among the impre-
catory Psalms there are several where
living persons are the objects of the
most earnest imprecations. What is
to be said of these? ‘The least strained
seems also the best explanation of them.
They are the expression of holy indig-
nation at those wicked men who were
opposing every good work, and en-
couraging, for their own vile ends, all
that was wicked and destructive ; they
convey the earnest desire which every
good man must have, that such persons


‘to have been awakened in them.


may be arrested, overthrown, and
punished, in their impious and per-
nicious career. In some cases, the
mode of punishment is that of the well-
known lea-talionis. Our ears
tingle at the mention of them ; we can
hardly read the 137th Psalm without
a shudder, but the sense of the perfect
justice of the law was so deeply im-
pressed on the minds of pious Jews,
that no such feeling of horror appears
The
judicial aspect prevailed over the
personal.— Blazkie.

Note.— It was during this sojourn of David
in the wilderness that the Gadites, mentioned
in 1 Chron. xii. 8-14, enlisted themselves in
his service, and probably in the interval
between the event recorded in this chapter
and that which opens the next, that there
came to him some belonging to his own tribe
of Judah, and also some of the tribe of
Benjamin to which Saul belonged (1 Chron.
xii, 16-18). These occurrences show that
Saul was gradually losing his hold upon the
people, and that their confidence in David was
increasing.


CHAPTER XXVII.


Crrrroat axp Exrosrrory Nores.—Ver. 1. “Saul shall despair,” or “desist
“The idea of the word is, to give a thing up as impossible or useless.” (EZrdmann.)


Ver. 2. “Achish, son of Maoch.” The particular description of the family of Achish have
led some to suppose that he is not the person mentioned in chap. xxi. 10, but that Achish was
@ common name for the Philistine kings. If he is identical with the monarch mentioned in
1 Kings ii. 39 as the son of Maachah, he must have reigned more than fifty years, which, of
course, is not impossible. “Gath had been before conquered by the Israelites (1 Sam. vii. 14),
but appears here, and at xxi. 10 sg., as the residence of an independent king hostile to Saul.
See 1 Chron. xviii, 1, which states that David afterwards conquered it.” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 8. “Every man with his household.” This expression forcibly marks the
difference in David's circumstances now and on his former visit to Gath. Then he was alone
and feared for his safety, now he is the leader of a large retinue who bring their families and
settle down in the country. “Perhaps at this time he formed the friendship with Ittai the Gittite
which appears in 2 Sam, xv. 19.” (Biblical Commentary.)


from me.”


Ver. 5. “Give me a place,” etc. “David asked such a city as property 3 in ver. 6 it is
expressly stated that Achish gave it to him for a possession. David’s alleged reason for the
request is that it was not suitable for him, Achish’s servant and subject, to remain in the capital
city with his large retinue.” (Hrdmann. ) “David subtly suggests the expensiveness of his
residence in Gath ; his real motive was to be out of the way of observation, so as to play the
part of Saul’s enemy without acting against him.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 6, “Ziklag.” This city was in the territory originally assigned to Judah, but after-
wards taken from them and allotted to Simeon (see Joshua xix. 5-9), but it is uncertain whether
it had ever been really possessed by the people of Isracl. It must have been in the south, and
chap. xxx. 1 seems to favour the opinion that it was close to the Amalekite border. But it is
difficult to reconcile this with the fact which Mr. Grove remarks follows from — - 10 and

8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.


SS


21 in chap, xxx. that it was north of the brook Besor, and travellers and biblical scholars are
divided in their conclusions respecting its site. Some have suggested that there were two places
of the same name. .


Ver. 7. “The country of the Philistines.” “The word rendered country is peculiar. It
is not has-Shefelah, as it must have been had Ziklag stood on the ordinary lowland of Philistia,
but has-Sédeh, which Dean Stanley renders the field. The only conclusion seems to be that
Ziklag was in the south or Negeb country, with a portion of which the Philistines had a con-
nection which may have lasted from the times of their residence there in the days of Abraham
and Isaac.” (Smith's Bib. Dictionary. )


Ver. 7. “A full year,” etc, Or a year of days. Although this word is sometimes
rendered “a considerable time, it signifies,” says Keil, “ strictly speaking, a term of days which
amounted to a full year (as in Lev. xxv. 29; see also 1 Sam. i, 8, 20; ii. 19).


Ver. 8. “The Geshurites,” etc. “The district of the Geshurites (to be distinguished from
the little Aramean kingdom of Geshur, 2 Sam. xv. 8, etc. ; and from the northern Geshurites,
near Hermon on the border of Bashan, Deut. iii. 14, etc.) lay south of Philistia near the district
of the Amalekites.” (Hrdmann.) The Gerzites cannot be identified, and are not the same ag
the inhubitants of Gerzer (Josh. x. 83) who dwelt in the west of Ephraim. “As thou goest
to Shur,” literally, where from old thy coming is to Shur. “Shur is the desert of J ifar, which
is situated in front of Egypt.” (Keil.) The clause is very difficult to render, and Erdmann
reads, “‘ David invaded the Amalekites (for these were the inhabitants of the land who inhabited
of old) as far as Shur and Egypt.” “The object of this attack is not mentioned, as being a
matter of indifference to the chief object of the history ; but it is no doubt to be sought for in
plundering incursions made by these tribes into the land of Israel. For David wonld hardly
have entered upon a war in the situation in which he was placed at that time without some
such occasion, seeing that it would be almost sure to bring him into suspicion with Achish and
endanger his safety.” (Keil. )


Ver. 9. “And came to Achish.” Probably, “to deliver him a portion of the spoil ”
(Erdmann ), and “to deceive him as to the true character of the enterprise,” (Keil. )


Ver. 10. “The verb said, like the ‘ went up’ in Verse 8, here expresses customary, repeated
acting. The meaning is, Achish used to say: Against whom have ye made an incursion this time?”
(Erdmann.) “David said, against the south of Judah,” etc. “ All the tribes mentioned
here, and in verse 8, dwelt near one another in the district bordering on the Negeb (south
country) of Judah, and stretching between the hill country of Judah and the Arabian desert.
(See Josh. xv. 21.) David’s expeditions were really against the tribes named in verse 8, who
extended close into the south of Judah. It was his interest, however, to make Achish believe
that he had made an expedition against Saul, and consequently against the men of Judah.
- + + . This deception was made possible only by the fact that those tribes dwelt so near
together.” ( Erdmann.)


Ver. 11. “So did David." These words conclude the sentence, and ought to be entirely
separated from what follows—the next clause not being a part of the preceding speech, but the
words of the historian. “So will be,” rather “So (was) his manner.”


‘ MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
Tue Consequences or Distrust.


I. Present circumstances of trial may lead men entirely to fgnore past
tokens of Divine favour. The conduct of David at this time is a remarkable
illustration that this is true not only of men of ordinary faith and courage, but
of those also who generally rise far above the level. We can but regard David
with all his faults, as a man of eminent faith in the character and word of God.
and yet we find him here for the second time (see chap. xxi.) as full of distrust,
not to say despair, as the weakest servant of God could ever be. Looking at
all the deliverances of the past, and remembering all the signal tokens of
the Divine favour which had been granted to him, we should have expected
to hear him exclaim, “Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the
shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast”
(Pea. Rae ; lvii. 1). But when we consider how strong is the influence of


CHAP. XXVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


a nee ust





the present and the seen upon the human spirit—how much more real seems
the danger of to-day than the word spoken perhaps long ago—we do not wonder
so much to hear him say, “I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul.”
The remedy for such an error is to be found in reflection. By the use of memory
we can recall the past, and assure ourselves that it is as much a part of our lives
as the present, and by reason we can become convinced that any promise of God
is as worthy of confidence now as when it was uttered. If David had considered
who it was that had elected him from the midst of his brethren and caused him
to be anointed by Samuel, and how signal had been the deliverances which he
had since experienced, he would have brought his memory and his reason to the
aid of his faith, and so have saved himself from the moral failure recorded in
this chapter.


Il. Faith in the heart is closely connected with integrity in the life.
It is doubtless true that there are men in the world who have no hold upon the
invisible God and are yet honest and honourable in their dealings with their
fellow men. But however much a man may love goodness for its own sake, and
however keen may be his perception between right and wrong, he will have
special seasons in his life in which he will find it very hard to discern the right
and to hold fast to it if he have no power stronger than his own to rely upon.
There are times in the history of every life when nothing but a confidence that
One stronger than ourselves is on our side will keep us from giving up the
struggle to do right as hopeless and worthless, and make us proof against the
suggestion of the tempter that we can gain something by taking our cause into
our own hands. As soon as David lost his conviction that God had him in His
care and keeping, he naturally ceased to seek direction from Him, and becoming
a law to himself, entered upon a course of cruelty and deception. (On this
subject see also on chap. xxi. page 214).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Asa punishment for histransgression,
he, who had hitherto been an object of
fear and hatred to King Saul, must now
be the object only of his contempt.
Briefly but significantly the history
records, “ And it was told Saul that
David was fled to Gath ; and he sought
no more again for him.” It is plainly
indicated by these words that Saul
believed he had henceforth to regard
the coward as in noway an object of fear
to him. Moreover, David appeared now
as a friend of the Philistines, and,
consequently, asatraitorto his country ;
and without doubt Saul flattered him-
self with the hope that he would be
acknowledged as such by the whole of
Israel, and would be forced to renounce
for ever the prospect of the throne of
Israel. ‘‘ Saul sought no more again
for him,” but yet he thought about him
with scornful contempt. Hitherto his
satellites had seen him vomiting forth
fire and flame against David ; now they


heard from his lips perhaps only such
mocking words as these : “‘ The deserter
assigned. to himself once the right name
when he designated himself as only a
flea before me, and asa timid partridge
on the mountains.” O, the disgrace
which fastened itself to the heels of our
friend in this course now pursued by
him! Perhaps he was many a time
ashamed of himself, when it came into
his consciousness how he, when he was
only the terrified prey in the wilderness,
against which horse and horseman were
sent out, was yet an altogether different
man from what he was now in hia
supposed hiding-place among the Philis-
tines. Some such stratagem, however,
isalmostalways practised when believers
become suitors for the favour and help
of the children of this world. That
they should, when distress comes, make
“flesh their arm” at all, will give their
enemies cause to triumph. And too
fiequently, indeed, do the malevolent
259


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK i.


i ————


find occasion for rejoicing over such
conduct. Quickly do they discern that,
in orderto gaintheirfavour, the “pious”
change their language in their presence,
that they carefully abstain from the
mode of speech in common use among
the “ brotherhood,” and that they even
accommodate themselves to many of the
views of their opponents, which directly
contradict the Word of God ; and take
refuge in ambiguous phraseology and
so-called mental reservation, that they
might not be guilty of an open and
complete rejection of the faith. 0,
the contemptible treachery which
Christians, by such conduct, are guilty
of towards the Gospel !—Krummacher.

If Achish were a Philistine, yet he
was David’s friend, yea, his patron;
and if he had been neither, it had not
become David to be false. The infir-
mities of God’s children never appear
but in their extremities. It is hard
for the best man to say how far he will
be tempted. If a man will put him-
self among Philistines, he cannot


promise to come forth innocent.—
Bishop Hall.

From this section of the history we
are also taught how the very highest
attainments of believers are no security
against a speedy fall, Seldom has
grace been more triumphant than when
David refrained from lifting his hand
against Saul—yet his declension at
Gath is the very next incident that
the Spirit has recorded.—Blaikie.

We cannot blame David because he
made expeditions against Canaanitish
races and Amalekites, neither are we
justified in at once accusing him of
cruelty towards the conquered, The
accusation would have had some founda-
tion if he had been actuated merely by
the prudential motives given in chap.
xxvii, 11. But this was certainly not
the case. ‘The principal reason is
rather to be sought in the Mosaic law,
which declares these races to be under
the curse. But it is impossible to
justify his equivocation.—engstenberg.








CHAPTER XXVIIL


CrrricaL axD Expostrory Nores.—Ver. 1. “Know thou assuredly.” Some expositors
regard these words of Achish as designed to try David : others think they express the entire
confidence which the king placed in him,


Ver. 2. “Surely thou shalt know,” or Assuredly, or Therefore thou shalt know. Evidently
David found himself in a dilemma and gives an ambiguous answer, “Keeper of mine head,”
t.¢., “captain of my body-guard—an office of great trust and high honour.” (Jamieson.) The
narrative here breaks off and is continued in chapter xxix., the historian meanwhile turning aside
to relate the effect which this Philistine invasion had upon Saul.


Ver. 8. “Saul had put away,” ¢.e., long before the event about to be recorded. He had
expelled them from his kingdom, but the Levitical law was, “Thou shalt not suffer a witch to
live.” (Exod. xxii. 18; Lev. xx. 27.) The strong deuunciations uttered by God against these
people seem to afford a strong proof that they were not simply deceivers of the people, but were
really in direct and close communication with the spirits of evil.


Ver. 4. “Shunem.” Now called Solam or Sulem, a village situated on the southern declivity
of the so-called Little Hermon, which forms the northern boundary of the valley of Jezreel,
“Gilboa,” a mountain range on the opposite side of the valley. “The Philistines clung as
usual to the plain, which was most suitable for those war chariots of which their military
armament principally consisted, and they took up an advantageous position for the free and
effective use of that force in action. That of the Hebrews was badly selected.” (Jamieson.)
“ The ground slopes down gradually from Shunem to the very base of Gilboa at the fountain,
while the hillside rises steeply from the plain. The Philistine had all the advantage of the
gentle descent in their attack —both front and flank of the Israelites were exposed to their onset,
and the a of flight almost completely cut off by the steep hill behind” (Porter.)

260


OBaP. XXVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.








Ver. 6. “Neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.” “In the order of arrange-
ments of these three vehicles of revelation there is a progression from the less to the greater,
since in the Old Testament a subordinate position is certainly assigned to the dream as the
medium of Divine influence on the inner life, which in sleep loses the power of self-manifestation,
and sinks into a state of the extremest passivity. Urim is the abbreviation of Urim and
Thummim (Exod. xxviii. 30: Num. xxvii. 21), which, as the high-priestly medium of inquiring
the Divine will, stands between the revealing dreams and the prophetic testimony. But since the
murder of the priests in Nob, the external apparatus, the Zphod with the Urim and Thummim
had been in David’s camp (see chap. xxii, 20, xxiii, 6, xxx. 7), and uothing is anywhere said of
another high priest than Abiathar, who had fled to David. ‘Thenius thence concludes that this
section contradicts the narrative of chap. xxiii. . . . but after the catastrophe at Nob, Saul
may well have had a new Ephod with Urim and Thummim prepared (Keil), and this is the more
natural from Saul’s independent mode of procedure in matters of religious service, and the pro-
bability that in his heated theocratic zeal he did not suffer the public service at the tabernacle
to cease after the murder of the priests. . . . . Intercourse between Saul and the prophets
had doubtless been broken off since the beginning of Saul’s persecution of David (chap. xix.),
while it continued between David and the prophets so far as circumstances permitted (chap.
xxii. 5 sq.) But in his anxiety and despair Saul had now again turned to them for aid. Proof
that application was made to prophets not only in great theocratical matters, but also in personal
affairs, is found in chaps. ix 6 sq.; 1 Kings xiv. 1 sq.; 2 Kingsi. 3.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 7. “A woman that hath,” etc. ; literally “a woman, a mistress of Ob,” ¢.¢., of “a spirit
by which the dead are conjured up.” (Hrdmann.) “ Ob signifies properly a leathern bottle, and
is applied in several passages of Scripture to magicians, because, being possessed by an evil spirit,
and swollen by inhalation of some gaseous substance, which made them pant and heave, they
spoke with a soft hollow voice, as out of a leathern bottle.” (Jamieson.) “Endor.” On the
northern declivity of Little Hermon, so that the Philistine camp lay between it and Gilboa,
Dr. Thomson remarks, “Poor Saul! It was a fearful ride that dark night. . . . He
probably kept to the east of Jezreel, crossed the valley below Ain Jalh, and thence over the
shoulder of this Jebel-ed-Dfhy (Little Hermon) to Endor, but it must have been perilous in the
extreme, and nothing could have induced Saul to venture thither but the agony of despair.”


Vers. 11 to 19. Biblical students take three different views of the event here narrated. Some
regard the whole as a mere deception ; others think that Samuel really appeared, while many
believe that an evil spirit was permitted by God to assume the appearance of the prophet. We
accept the latter view, but subjoin the arguments used in favour of the other two. Dr. Chandler
says: “The more thoroughly I consider it, the more thoroughly I am convinced that there was
no appearance of any kind of spirit, or phantom, at all, and that Samuel was not consulted nor
gave any answers .. . indeed, there are so many marks of imposture and deceit, that may be
observed throughout the entire relation, as that I have no doubt but that this conference was
entirely carried on by Saul and the old witch, without the help of any spirit whatever....
This affair was transacted by night, the time most proper to manage deceptions of this kind—
when persons are most liable to be impressed hy fear and imposed on by their own imaginations.
. . . Also, even Samuel himself doth not seem to have known anything of God’s raising him
from the dead, for he saith nothing about it . . . but expressly blames Saul for disturbing him
and bringing him up... . If he had known that God had brought him up, he
would not have complained of being disquieted by Saul. Now as Samuel knew,
as well as Saul, that consulting the dead was absolutely unlawful, surely it became the
prophet to reprove him for doing it, and to let him know that, though he appeared, it was
not by virtue of her art, but by the immediate power of God. . . . Iustead of this, he shows
himself displeased with Saul for doing it, and thereby excludes God from having any hand in
it’? Dr. Chandler further points out that no third person was apparently present at the
interview between Saul and the woman, and that Saul himself saw nothing, and only concluded
that it was the prophet from the description given by the woman, who had no doubt been
acquainted with Samuel’s appearance during his life. He argues that she must have known who
her visitor was before she consented te employ her incantations, and that she merely concealed
her knowledge for a time in order that she might appear to have gained it from Samuel ; also, that
there was nothing in her reply to Saul that his own account of himself would not have
suggested. Notwithstanding these and other objections, many modern expositors agree with
Jewish commentators, and with Origen, Ambrose, and others, in supposing that Samuel did
really appear to Saul. “ This view,” says Dr. Hengstenberg, “ is in harmony with the narrative,
For (1) the author says, in verse 14, that Saul perceived, not fancied, it was Samuel. (2.) The
words which are put into the mouth of the apparition are fully worthy of Samuel, and
quite unsuitable for an evil spirit. (3.) The appearing one foretells things which no human
acuteness could have foreseen.” Archbishop Trench, and others, in adopting this view, consider
the appearance of Samuel in answer to enchantments as a fulfilment of the threat afterwards
uttered, “ Everyone of the house of Israel which separateth himself from Me, and setteth up his
idols in his heart, and puttech the stumbling-block of his iniquity before his face, oe a toe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK &





to enquire of him concerning Me, I the Lord will answer him by Myself.” (Ezek. xiv. 7.)
ut notwithstanding the considerations which seem to favour this view, we agree with Luther,
Grotius, and other theologians of the Reformation, in believing that it was Satan himself, or one
of his agents, who appeared to the woman and spoke to Saul. For, as Dr. Erdmann remarks
(though in support of a different opinion), “it is expressly said in ver. 6 that God answered Saul
no more, and that for this reason, he turned from God to a sorceress. An immediate Divine
miracle is assumed, which is to be brought into union with the anti-godly attempt of the
sorceress and an open act of godlessness or God-forgetfulness on the part of Saul. Support would
thus be given to the superstitious opinion that departed spirits may be summoned, while the
fundamental view of the Old Testament everywhere is that a return of the dead to the land of
the living is not possible.” He further remarks that such an appearance—if God had really
been willing to permit it—could no longer have had any religious ethical end, seeing that the
means for rousing Saul to repentance were exhausted, nor any theocratic end, seeing that Saul’s
rejection as king had already been repeatedly announced. On the other hand there can be no
doubt of the intimate connection between witchcraft or sorcery and the spirits of evil. The
stern denunciations of God against it prove that it was not a fancy but a fact. The damsel who
brought her masters much gain by soothsaying, mentioned in Acts xvi. 16, is said to have been
possessed by an evil spirit, and miraculous deeds of a certain kind are, in the Bible, attributed to
such servants of Satan, as in the case of the Egyptians (Exod. vii. 11-22. In the New Testa-
ment it is said that “Satan fashioneth himself into an angel of light” (2 Cor. xi. 14), and his
working is declared to be “with all power and signs and lying wonders” (2 Thess. ii. 9). The
reproof given to Saul is no argument against the speaker being an evil spirit ; we know the
Devil can quote the Word of God to serve his purpose (Matt. iv. 6), and he only did to Saul
what many a wicked man has done to a fellow-creature whom he has tempted and brought
to ruin—taunted him with the fruit of his evil deeds, N either to our mind does the fact that
the Scripture narrative says Samuel spoke affect the argument, as Old Testament writers often
simply describe things as they appear to be.


Ver. 238. “ The bed.” Rather the divan—a cushioned bench, extending along the wall of the
room still found in the Hast.


Ver. 24. “She hasted,” etc. “The cookery was performed with singular despatch, . . .
But this was not uncommon (see Gen. xviii. 7-8 3; Judges xiii. 1 ; Luke xv. 27-29), and is still
practised in the tents of the Bedouins. A sheep or calf is brought and killed in the presence of
the guests, and then, having been thrust into a large cauldron swung over the fire, the contents
are taken out and placed on an immense tray, and served up amid a mass of roasted corn, boiled
rice, and curdled or sour milk.” (Jamieson. J)


Verses 1 and 2 will be considered with the next chaper,
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 3-28.


SavUL AND THE Woman or Enpor.


I, The day of grace has its limits. It is a day. Our Lord spoke to the
pene of Jerusalem of a day, or a season, of God-given opportunity, which when
e addressed them was gone to return no more (Luke xix. 42). When the rich
man “Lifted up his eyes . . . and said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me,”
the answer that came back to him was: “ Between us and you there is a great
gulf fixed” (Luke xvi. 22-26). And some men by constant rejection of Divine
commands and invitations create such a gulf on this side of death—a gulf only
to be filled up by true repentance, for which, alas! they have no inclination,
“Try what repentance can ; what can it not?
Yet what can it when one cannot repent !”
Saul was a man to whom God had given a grand opportunity: to lead a noble and
blessed life, by raising him to a high social position and endowing him with
special gifts to discharge its duties ; but he had now outlived the day of God
gracious favour, and is an illustration of that most terrible of Divine threaten-
ings : “Because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, ana
no man regarded ; but ye have set at nought my counsel, and would none of my
reproof; L also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear
cometh” ete, (Proverbs i, 24-28).
262


OHAP. XXVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





II. If men refuse the light of God’s truth they will be given over to the
darkness of spiritual delusion. The word of God and human history unite in
declaring that he who does not become God’s free servant will, in some form, be
enslaved by Satan. Saul had long ago, by disobedience to God, laid himself
open to such a dominion of the evil one as showed itself in his malice towards
David, and now, in inspired language, his “deceived heart hath so turned him
aside that he cannot deliver his soul nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand”
(Isa. xliv. 20), and he seeks counsel and comfort through the instrumentality of
a witch. Those who rejected the Incarnate Son of God, and the truth taught
by His apostles, became an easy prey to the false messiahs and prophets who
followed (Matt. xxiv. 24; 1 John iv. 1), and Paul tells us that God would send
to those who believed not the truth “ strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie” (2 Thess. ii. 11). his has been the portion of the rejectors of God’s
revealed will, both in ancient and modern times. If Saul had taken heed to the
“ Word of the Lord spoken by Samuel” when the prophet was alive, he would
not have desired or thought it possible to speak to him now by means which
God had declared to be “an abomination,” (Deut. Xvili. 10-12) and those who
in modern times are willing to walk by the light of the same word spoken in
“ these last days by the Son of God” (Heb. i. 1.) do not feel any wish or need
to receive instruction or consolation by means of spirit-rapping, and so become
the dupes either of false men or lying spirits. ‘I'o all such the message
of God is “ Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with
sparks; walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks that ye have kindled.
This shall ye have of mine hand ; ye shall lie down in sorrow, (Isa. 1. 11.)


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 3-5. Even the worst men may
sometimes make head against some
sins. Saul hath expelled the sorcerers
out of the land of Israel, and hath for-
bidden magic upon pain of death. He
that had no care to expel Satan out of
his own heart, yet will seem to drive
him out of his kingdom. That we see
wicked men oppose themselves to some
sins, there is neither marvel nor com-
fort init. No doubt Satan made sport
at this edict of Saul: what cares he
to be banished in sorcery, while he is
entertained in malice? He knew and
found Saul his, while he resisted ; and
smiled to yield thus far unto his vassal.
If we quit not all sins, he will be con-
tent we should either abandon or per-
secute some.

Where there is no place for holy fear,
there will be place for the servile. ‘I'he
graceless heart of Saul was astonished
at the Philistines, yet was never moved
at the frowns of that God whose anger
sent them, nor of those sins of his which
procured them.—Bp. Hall.


Ver. 7. This consulting with the


witch of Endor on the part of Israel’s
anointed king was probably as nearly
the sin against the Holy Ghost as it
was possible for one under the old
covenant, and before the Day of Pen-
tecost, to commit.—7rench.


Ver. 14. And he stooped? with his
face to the ground. 'This is what the
devil aimed at ; and it is well observed
that every one that consulteth with
Satan worshippeth him, though he bow
not. Neither doth that evil spirit
desire any other reverence than to be
sought unto.—Trapp.


Ver. 16-19. I could wonder to hear
Satan preach thus prophetically if I
did not know that as he was once a
good angel, so he can still act what he
was. While Saul was in consultation
of sparing Agag, we shall never find
that Satan would lay any olock in his
way—yea, then he was a prompt orator
to induce him into that sin ; now that
it is past and gone he can lade Saul
with fearful denunciations of judg-
ment. ‘Till we have sinned, Satan is a

263


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK L.





parasite ; when we have sinned, he is
a tyrant. What cares he to flatter
any more when he hath what he would?
Now, his only work is to terrify and
confound, that he may enjoy what he
hath won. How much better it is
serving that Master, who, when we are
most dejected with the conscience of
evil, heartens us with inward comfort,
and speaks peace to the soul in the
midst of tumult !—Bp. Hall.

Shall thou and thy sons be with me ;
z.é. in the state of the dead. Hereby
also this old deceiver would persuade
Saul that the souls of all men, as well
good as bad, go to the same place ;
seeking thereby to blot out of him all
knowledge and apprehension of eternal
life.— Trapp.

It is a grievous miscalculation which
men make, when, conscious that life is
passing on in the neglect of God and
duty, they reckon within themselves a
certain power which they imagine the
approach of death will have to awaken
their attention to religious duties, and
to bring with it a disposition to attend
to religious duties. There is
in such immediate prospects no neces-
sary power to move the heart. j
Did Saul’s approaching end awaken his
conscience or soften his heart ?— Miller.


Ver. 7-20. All human art has
failed to portray, all human history
has failed to record, a despair deeper
and more tragic than his, who, having
forsaken God and being of God for-
saken, is now seeking to move hell since
heaven is inexorable to him; and in-
finitely guilty as he is, assuredly there
is something unutterably pathetic in
that yearning of the disanointed king,
now in his utter desolation, to change
words once more with the friend and
counsellor of his youth, and, if he
must hear his doom, to hear it from
no other lips but his. . . I know
not whether the world has anything to
show at all so mournful as the spectacle
which we have here: namely, the
gradual breaking down under the wear
and tear of the world, under the in-
fluence of unresisted temptations, of a
lofty soul. . . Yet as many among

264


us as are old enough to have been able
to watch the development of lives, can
hardly have failed to note on the one
side some who, giving little promise at
the commencement of their career,
have yet afterwards risen into clearness
of purpose and dignity of aim. . . .
while others of much rarer and ampler
gifts have contracted their
aims and lowered their standard.
What isthe explanation . . . of
the Jacobs, who, with many and most
serious faults, are yet elevated and
exalted into Israel princes with God;
and of the Esaus, who, not without a
certain native generosity, separate
themselves off in the end from all which
is highest, and truest, and best? The
explanation is not far to seek. Rei’
Jacob, with all his faults . had
yet a side on which he was turned
towards God . . . which was exactly
what Esau had not. Dwell a little, I
beseech you onthat word. . . . a
profane person. . . . (Heb. xii.
16)—one that is, without a fane, with-
out a sanctuary in his soul ; for whom
all things were common, common as
the outer court of some temple, which,
unfenced and unguarded, is trodden
and trampled on by the careless foot of
every passer by. A Take, I be-
seech you, the lesson which the Sauls
and Esaus have bequeathed us. Build
on no good thing which you find in
yourselves, There is only one
pledge for the permanence of any good
thing that isin you—namely, that you
bring it to God, and that you receive
it back from God, with that higher
consecration that He can give it: not
now any more a virtue of this world,
but a grace of the kingdom of heaven,
Trench.


Ver. 21-25. Even in a sorceress,
with all her deceptions and delusions,
her wild and dreadful life, the true
woman comes out at the mute appeal
of misery. How kindly persuasive her
words; how prompt her hospitable
labours. We take leave of her, as she
took leave of the ruined king, with a
pitying heart.—Tvranslator of Lange's
Commentary.


OtaP. xxrx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


ne ND


CHAPTER XXIX.


CrrrioaL AND Exposrrory Norss.--“Aphek.” This place must either have been situated
in the plain of Jezreel or Esdraelon, or on the road thither, and therefore must not be confounded
with the cities mentioned in Josh. xii, 18, xix. 80, and 1 Kings xx. 26. It is generally considered
that it was neither identical with the Aphek mentioned in chap. iv. of this book, but Mr. Grove
(Smith’s Bib, Dict.) thinks it may have been the same place, and that the Philistines were then
on their march to Jeareel by the road which still exists. “A fountain in Jezreel,” rather
“ the fountain.” Now “ Ain Jaldt,” the fountain of Goliah (probably so called because it was
the reputed scene of the defeat of Goliah), a large and copious spring, which, from under a
cavern in the conglomerate rock which there forms the base of Gilboa, forms a beautiful and
limpid pool of more than forty feet in diameter. ‘There is every reason,” says Robinson, “ to
regard this as the ancient fountain of Jezreel, where, too, in the days of the crusades, Saladin
and the Christians successively encamped.”


Ver. 3. “Then said the princes,” i.¢.,, the princes of the other cities of Philistia, not the
courtiers of Achish. “As it is said in ver. 11 that David returned to the land of the Philistines,
and according to chap. xxx. 1 they reached Ziklag after a three days’ march, the objection must
have been made on Israelitish soil, or near the Palestinian border.” (Hrdmann.)

Ver. 8. “These days, or these years.” An indefinite statement of time.

Ver. 4. “et him not go down.” “Go down is a regular technical military expression,
derived from the necessity in that military country of going into the plain to fight.” (Hrdmann.)


_ Ver. 6. “As the Lord liveth.” This oath is to be explained not by the fact that a Hebrew
is here the narrator, or that Achish had learned to know and honour the God of Israel, but by
his desire to attest more strongly the truth of his words.” (Hrdmann.)


Ver. 8. “My lord,” etc. “These words might be understood as meaning either Achish or
Saul.” ( Keil.)
Ver. 10. “Thy master’s servants,” i.¢., the subjects of Saul.


Note.—We learn from 1 Chron. xii. 19-22 that when David was leaving Aphek he received
into his band a large number of fresh adherents from the tribe of Manasseh, seven of whom
were afterwards captains in the army of Israel. It is uncertain whether these men joined David
before a after the battle of Gilboa; some have conjectured that they were fugitives from that
fatal fiel


MAIN HOMILETICS OF CHAPTER XXVIII, 1 and 2, and CHAPTER XXIX,
Tax PRovIDENCE oF Gop anD May.


I. The short-sightedness of the providence of man. Even godly men are
sometimes so unlike their better selves as to take the responsibility of their lives
out of God’s hand into their own, and by ordering their actions without any
reference to His will, to become, as it were, their own providence. Saul, in
common with all who have never exercised a real faith in God, had done this
throughout the greater part of his public life, and his endeavour to be independent
of his God had resulted, as it always must, in being enslaved by the devil. David
at this time gives up trust in God and seeking His guidance, and trusts in his
own sagacity to guide him and secure him from evil. But in providing for the
safety of his body he did great damage to his character, and found that the act
of deception with which he began this method of preservation, must even be
followed by another and another sin so long as he was unwilling to return to
God’s way. We can well believe that when he first began to shape his own
course, he did not expect to find himself one day marching against his countrymen
with the enemies of Israel and God. But when a man thus takes his life into his
own keeping, he knows not what a net of spiritual danger he begins to weave for
himself.


Il. The forbearance and the omnipotence of the providence of God. It is
put just to David to suppose that he was at least ill at ease, perhaps Me ate
2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK


fe ener ee


when he found himself in the position described in this chapter—a position so


entirely unworthy of him, and go dishonouring to God, and
could not have set himself free without incurring disgrace and danger.


one from which he
But the


God who had taken him from the sheepfold to feed His people, here displays His


forbearance no less than His power.
have the most pity for


‘he men who have the most moral strength
human weakness, and are the most ready to help a


wandering soul to return to the right path, and if we reason upwards we know
that the best of all beings must be more pitiful and more ready. And as His
omnipotence is as great as His power, it is always possible for Him to make a
way of escape for His children, and this He will do even when their sin hag
brought them into perplexity and disgrace, if He sees that they are in a condition
of soul to profit by such a deliverance. That He delivered David on this occasion
is not less a proof of His pity than of His wisdom.


OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Let us here learn that the too great
favour of great rulers, in so far as they
are not richer in the fear of God than
Achish, toward a man who desires to
walk in the footsteps of the faith of
Abraham, is especially dangerous. They
exact altogether too great a tax for
the favour which they bestow. If they
are kind, one must be in all things
accommodating to them—the tender
conscience may say to that what it will.
In the bonds of their favour one walks
as a prisoner. The mistrust of the
Philistine princes helped David out of
the difficulty into which he had hurried
himself through the favour of Achish,
So the favour of godless nobles, when
it is blended with somewhat of Jear, is
more advantageous than their favour
alone. The godless nobleman, who is
an enemy of God, must know that he
has as a servant a friend of God, a ser-
vant of Jesus Christ, an upright and
believing son of Abraham, to whom he
dare impute no folly and wickedness,
Consequently this servant must not
dissemble as David did with Achish,
but Preis his faith, trusting in God
at all times. Achish, who was formerly
a worshipper of idols, solemnly assured
David by Jehovah that he pleased him,
and said to him that he regarded him
as upright ; yea, that he was pleasing
in his sight as an angel of God. But
he held him as an enemy of Israel, and
this David indeed was not. But that
David was held as one was the result
of his own culpable hypocrisy. Let
the whole truth be confessed where

266


occasion is given for it; and if one
indeed finds it advisable to hold back
a part of it, let him at least say nothing
contrary to it; otherwise sooner or
later he brings himself into great
danger,

What wholesome effects are produced
under God's guidance by that inter-
course which in the world is indispen-
sably necessary between those who have
part in God's kingdom and those who
stand aloof from it. I. For those
who stand aloof from the kingdom of
God: (1) That they involuntarily give
honour to the living God ; (2) That
they recognise in those who belong to
His kingdom the power of a higher
divine character, and are compelled to
bow before that power (ver, 9); (3)
That in themselves the remains of a
divine image again come forward, and
they find pleasure in that which is
ethically good and beautiful. II, For
those who have part in God’s kingdom
themselves: (1) The consoling con-
ception that even they who stand aloof
from God’s kingdom have to serve as
instruments for the fulfilment of the
Divine purposes (Prov. XVi-7), (2) The
wonderful confirmation of the truth
that all things must work together for
good to them that love God. (3)
Humbling self-knowledge in respect to
their own sins and faults, in view of
the morally noble behaviour of those
who stard aloof from the kingdom of
God, whue they themselves are wanting
therein. — Zrans. of Lange's Com
mentary.


OHAP. XXX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


a


CHAPTER XXX.


Ver.1. “The south,” or the Neged, the south country, so called by the Israelites
the southern part of Palentine. ster try, 7 ne as being


Ver.2. “They slew not any.” Not from motives of humanity, but because they reserved
them for slaves.


_ Ver. 6. “The people spake,” etc. “ Because they sought the occasion of their calamity in
his connection with Achish, with which many of his adherents may very probably have been
dissatisfied.” (Keil.)


Ver.9. “The brook Besor.” “Supposed to be Wady Sheriah, the deep bed of a winter
torrent, which is distinctly traceable from the adjoining heights, in its sinuous course up to its
source, far away in the distant hills of Judah. It is about thirty yards in width, and is flanked
by high precipitous banks, pouring in the rainy season a copious volume of muddy water into the
sea, but dwindling to a few stagnant pools in the dry season. The verdant bank of a stream
naturally offered a convenient rest to the soldiers who, through fatigue, were unable to continue
the pursuit.” (Jamieson.)


er 11, “An Egyptian” Taken by the Amalekites from his own country and retained as
® slave.


Ver. 11. “Bread,” rather food, the kind being afterwards specified,


Ver. 12. “Cake of Figs,” etc. See on chap. xxv. 18. “Three days,” etc. According to
the Oriental mode of reckoning, three consecutive parts of days were reckoned three days ”
(Jonah i. 7 ; Matt, xii. 40, etc.). (Jamieson.)


Ver. 14. “Cherithites.” Doubtless a Philistine tribe (see Ezek. xxv. 16; Zeph. ii. 5).
“Caleb.” That portion of the Negeb which belonged to Caleb's family. “The three regions
which the Amalekites invaded are named from West to Hast. We hence see that the plunder-
ing expedition extended over the whole south country.” (Z£rdmann.)


Ver. 15. “God.” Elohim, not as in the case of Achish, by Jehovah.


Ver. 17. “From the twilight,” etc. Keil understands this to mean from one evening
until the following one ; but it seems more reasonable to refer the twilight to the early dawn,
and so to conclude that the pursuit only lasted one day, and that David surprised them by a
night march ; to the evening, etc., may be read toward the next day, which according to Hebrew
reckoning began in the evening. (See Erdmann.)


Ver. 20. The second olause of this verse is not, in the original, connected with the first, neither
is the word other in the original. The verse is obscure, but the context shows that David not only
recovered his own cattle, but took some from the Amalekites. (See verses 26-31.)


Ver. 23. “My brethren.” “By this address he speaks to their hearts, and at the same time
alludes to the fraternal relation in which they all stand to one another.” (Erdmann.)


Ver, 25. “So it was,” etc. A similar law in Num. xxxi. 27, only there the division is
between the soldiery and those who stayed at home, the former having the advantage. David’s
rule was perhaps a special application of the general principle ; it was in force in the time of the
Maccabees. (Transl. of Lange's Commentary.)


Verses 27-31. The inhabitants of the cities and villages here enumerated had without doubt
shown kindness to David during his wanderings in the wilderness of Judah ; they were all, so far


as they can be identified, situated in the territory of J udah and Simeon, and with the exception
of Hebron (see on 2 Sam. ii. 1), they are unimportant. Bethel is not the famous city of that name,
but probably Bethuel (1 Chron. iv. 80), or Bethul, in the tribe of Simeon (Josh. xix. 4)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.
Davm AVENGES THE PLUNDER AND BuRnina oF ZIKLAG.
I. Return to the path of duty will not ensure deliverance from all the


consequences of transgression. We may well take for grante1 that David had
. ; . 267


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I,


i ae aN cP a


seen the folly and sin of taking his own counsel and ordering his own path,
instead of seeking for Divine. guidance and resting in the Divine promise ; and
that he left the camp of Achish, feeling that his “soul had escaped as a bird
out of the snare of the fowler;” that “the snare was broken,” and that his
“help was in the name of the Lord who made heaven and earth” (Psa. cxxiv.
7, 8). But when he found what a calamity had befallen his family and his
followers during his absence, and when he was upbraided as the cause of the
misfortune, he learned a lesson which was repeated with a terrible emphasis in
his later life, that the effects of sin often long outlive repentance and pardon.


II, But return to God in the way of duty will deliver from the worst conse-
quences of transgression. Herein lies the all-important difference between
Saul and David at this time. They had both been found in places entirely
inconsistent with their calling, and unworthy of the honour which God had put
upon them, and in both lack of faith in God was the cause of their fall. And
chastisement had come to both in consequence—not only had Saul been brought
into great straits, but David also had found himself in a position which to him
must have been one of most painful perplexity. But here the analogy between
them ceases, and the contrast begins. The retribution which came upon Saul
drove him to yet more daring disobedience to God, even to an act of the most
open defiance of His authority; but the retribution which fell upon David
brought him back to the path of obedience, and when he was again in it the
wall of separation which his sin had built up between God and his soul was
broken down, and he could again look up to Jehovah for direction in his
difficulties. Although he had not yet paid all the enalty of his wandering, the
worst effect of it was done away with when he coal in confidence inquire of the
Lord in His appointed way. Henry says, “The only way to flee from God is to
flee to Him,” and David, in common with all who have known both the bitter-
ness of sin and the sweetness of pardon, proved this now and on many other
occasions, :


ITI, A sudden transition from adversity to prosperity is a revelation of
character. The sunlight not only causes the flowers to spring out of the
ground, but it also draws forth many creeping things which the frost held
hidden beneath the surface. And prosperity has the same twofold effect upon
human souls, While it enlarges the heart of the truly great man, and causes
him to remember with gratitude the friends who have helped him in the time
of need, it often narrows the ignoble soul, and makes a selfish man more selfish
than he was before. For men are not covetous because they are poor, nor
liberal because they have abundance ; that which a man hus does not make him
what he is, or wealth and a bountiful disposition would always go together.
The sudden good fortune which came at this time to David and his followers
revealed the difference in their disposition ; for while he desired that as many as
possible should share in it, they would have withholden a portion from those of
their own company who had been unable to go with them to the battle. But
the root of this difference is to be found in this case, as in all similar cases, in
the opposite view which men take of the wealth which they possess. In David’s
estimation it was “ that which the Lord hath given us” (verse 23) ; in the eyes
of his men it was “the spoil which we have recovered” (verse 22). It is only
when men receive all from God that they use it for God, and in go doing make
their abundance a blessing and not a curse to themselves,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 6. The holy man here liveth winter retreateth to the root, and there
when his heart dieth. As the sap in is preserved, so the saint in crosses
268


OHAP. XXX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





retireth to God, the fountain of his
life ; and go is comforted. When
David’s table of earthly comforts,
which for a long time at best had been
but indifferencly spread for him, was
quite empty, he fetcheth sweetmeats
out of his heavenly closet. . . .
The saint in the sharpest winter sits
at a good fire. When abused by
strangers he can complain to and com-
fort himself in his Father.—Swinnock.


Ver. 8. If it was a duty under the
Old Testament, in an enterprise per-
taining to war, thus to turn first to
God before resolving on anything, that
yet the spirit of the Old Testament
carried along with it, and did not abso-
lutely forbid, how much more among
Christians under the New Testament
should nothing of the sort be done
without the Divine consent.— Berlen-


berger Bible.


Ver. 13. Here is a warning to
Christian nations, who have, what the
Amalekites had not, a clear revelation
of God’s will in the Gospel with regard
to slavery. It may be expected that
he will visit them with retribution in
mysterious ways of His Providence,
when they least anticipate it, for acts
of cruelty to slaves.— Wordsworth.


Ver. 24. This decree, that they
who for good reasons (see ver. 21) tarry
with the stuff shall share alike wit
those who go down to the battle, is not
without its meaning.

In the heavenly Church of God,

s His state

Is kingly ; thousands at his bidding speed,

And post o’er land and ocean without rest:

They also serve who only stand and wait.”

—NMilton.

Moses, praying on the hill, contri-
buted to the victory even more than
Joshua fighting on the plain. And in
the Christian Church provision ought





to be made for prayer and meditation,
and for patient study of God’s word,
as well as for the more active exercise
of pastoral duties (see 1 Tim. iv, 13,
2 Tim. iv. 13).—Wordsworth.

Those thatrepresent God upon earth,
should resemble him in their proceed-
ings. It is the just mercy of our God
to measure us by our wills, not by our
abilities ; to recompense us graciously,
according to the truth of our desires
and endeavours ; and to account that
performed by us, which He only letteth
us from performing. It were wide with
us, if sometimes purpose did not supply
actions. While our heart faulteth not,
we that, through spiritual sickness, are
fain to bide by the stuff, shall share both
in grace and glory with the victors.—
Bishop Hall.


Verses 1-26. Two Pictures, I. The
sorrowful return. 1. He had left home
without seeking the Lord’s guidance—
apparently to fight against the Lord’s
people—uncertain and unhappy. 2. He
had returned, because distrusted, and
sent away in dishonour. 3. He found
his home in ashes and his family carried
away captive. 4. His personal wretch-
edness was enhanced by the natural
wrath of his friends. II. The subse-
quent joyful return. I. He leaves with
explicit Divine direction and promise
—to fight national as well as private
enemies—hopeful and happy. 2. He
returns victorious and honoured. 3. He
has regained greater wealth than hehad
lost. 4. His personal joy is increased
by the privilege of sending gifts to his
friends. And what unites the two
pictures? His sorrowful return led
him to deep penitence, revived faith,
and humble prayer, and from these
resulted the joyful return. Sore afilic-
tions, when rightly borne, often open
the way to life’s sweetest joy.— Z7rans-
lator of Lange's Commentary.


269


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK 1.


a a


_OHAPTER XXXL


Ver. 1, “In Mount Gilboa.” Most likely the actual battle took place on the plain, and the
Israelites sought refuge on the mountain,


Ver. 3. “Sore wounded.” Hebrew scholars generally translate here sore afraid, or he was
alarmed or trembled greatly.


Ver. 3. “He was sore afraid.” The armourbearer was responsible for the king’s life.
Jewish traditions say that this man was Doeg.


Ver. 6. “All bis men.” In 1 Chron. x. 6 it is “all his house.” “Certainly Abner, who
was no doubt in the battle, had not fallen, but that is not inconsistent with the statement, since
he, as Saul’s general, belonged strictly speaking neither to the house nor to the men, by which
term we must understand the soldiers who were near the king’s person, his body-guard, as it
were.” (EHrdmann.)


Ver.7. “The men of Israel on the other side,” etc. “The plain is the lowland between
Mount Gilboa and Little Hermon, the continuation of the plain of Jezreel, into which the battle
passed, . . . The Jordan with its west bank terrain formed the border. Those who from the
station of the narrator (which we must take with Kiel to be the battlefield) dwelt beyond, that
is, opposite him on the monntain terrain beside the plain and in the Jordan flats ” (Erdmann)
were those who fled. “Came and dwelt.” Not immediately ; but this district eventually
fell into their hands,


Ver. 9, “And sent.” Hebrew scholars here read sent them, é.¢., the weapons and the head
of Saul and probably those of his sons.


Ver. 10. “Ashtaroth.” The plural form of Ashtoreth, the principal female divinity of the
Pheenicians, as Baal was the principal male divinity, identical with the Astarte of the Greeks and
Romans, who was by many ancient writers identified with the goddess Venus, as well as algo
with the planet of that name. (See Smith’s Bib. Dict.) “Beth-ghan.” The present Beisan, in
the Jordan valley, twelve miles south of the Sea of Galilee and four miles west of the Jordan.
The royal heads, we learn from 1 Chron. x, 10, were fixed in the temple of Dagon. “Thus the
trophies of their great victory were divided among their several deities.” (J ‘amieson.)


Ver. 11. “Jabesh-Gilead.” See on chap. xi. 1.


Ver. 12. “Went all night.” “Considering that Bethshan is about three hours distance,
and by a narrow upland passage to the west of the J ordan, the whole being a journey of about
twelve miles, they must have made all expedition to travel thither, to carry off the headless
bodies and return to their own side of the Jordan in the course of a single night.” (Jamieson.)
“Burnt them.” This was not a Hebrew custom, and was either resorted to to prevent any
further insult from the Philistines or, more likely, seeing that only the flesh was burned, becanse
of the mangled and decomposed condition of the corpses.


Ver. 13. “A tree,” rather the tamarisk, the article indicating that the site was well-known,
David afterwards caused the bones to be removed to Saul’s family burial place (2 Sam. xxi, 11-14),


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1-9,
Tue Dereat at Gizpoa.


I, The culminating calamity of many resulting from the answering of a
self-willed prayer. The unanswered request of a child by his parent is often
the greatest act of kindness that parent can bestow ; unhappy, indeed, would
that child be who had all he asked for, and no parent who has any regard for
only the bodily life of his offspring ever thinks of granting all their requests.
And with parents whose concern for their children extends to their intellectual
and moral well-being it is often needful to deny more petitions than they grant.
It is exactly so with men and God; if men had at all times received from Him
all ae ete ignorance ah as desired the human race would before
how have become extinct through its own sin aud sonsequent misery, But

370 g quent misery sd


OHAP. XXXL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





the father of the prodigal did not refuse the request of his wayward son, but let
him taste the fruit of having what he demanded, so God sometimes answers the
self-willed prayers both of individuals and of nations, that they may know from
experience whether they or God know best. As the swine-herding in the far
country was the outcome of the answer to “Give me the portion of goods that
falleth to me,” so was this fatal day on Gilboa the outcome of the answer to
“ Nay, but we will have a king.” “I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took
him away in my wrath.” (Hosea xiii. 11.) So must it always be with those
who well have what God would rather not give.


II. A calamity involving both the innocent and the guilty. One man, at
least, who fell at Gilboa was innocent of both the national and individual sin
which brought the judgment. The king of Israel had forsaken God, and there-
fore the once brave man trembled and fled before those whom—with the con-
sciousness of God on his side—he would have faced and defied, and so the
heathen foe triumphed over God’s anointed. And whatever may have been the
character of the others who fell, Jonathan’s fate was not the result of his personal
transgression but of his father’s sin, and says to us in plain language that no
sinner harms only himself, and that the good often in this world suffer because
of the bad. All relationships of life have some influence upon our earthly
destiny, but none is so potent for good or ill as that whith the parent holds to
his child. But if Jonathan isa sad illustration of this truth, he is also a cheering


proof that if ason must suffer for his father’s character he need not walk in
that father’s footsteps.


III A calamity which failed to change the heart of the greatest sufferet
in it. The last act of Saul is in keeping with the one in which he first openly
departed from God. His disobedience in the early part of his reign proclaimed
a man who would choose his own method of life rather than the Divine purpose
concerning him, and even this last and crushing judgment failed to break his
self-will, and he who would not leave the ordering of his life to God would
neither let Him ordain the manner of his death. So also as the prominent
thought in the matter of the Amalekites was not the sin against God but the
disgrace before men, now it is not the retribution which awaited his spirit, but
the dishonour which might come to his body. It is the same man who fears
now nothing so much as the sword of the uncircumcised, as formerly dreaded
most the loss of position among his subjects (chap. xv. 30).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 2. 1. God would hereby com-
plete the vexation of Saul in his dying
moments and the judgment that was
to be executed upon his house. If the
family must fall, Jonathan must fall
with it. 2. He would hereby make
David’s way to the crown more clear
and open. For though Jonathan him-
self would have cheerfully resigned all
his title and interest to him, yet it is
very probable that many of the people
would have made use of his name for
the support of the house of Saul...
8. God would hereby show us that the
difference between good and bad is to


be made in the other world, not in this,
—Henry.


Ver. 4. In this way did Saul shrink
from adversity ; he went forth glorying
in his majesty, the anointed of the
Lord, king over the chosen people of
God; the battle turns against him, he
is sore-wounded of the archers and

. seeks in death a cure for the
anguish of wounds and the shame of
defeat. What would the world
now have been if it had always been
said, “because the archers smite me
sore, and the battle goes against me, I

271


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK &





will die?” Alas! man has gained all
his joy by his pains; misery, hunger,
and nakedness have been his teachers,
and goaded him on to the glories of
civilised life; take from him his un-
yielding spirit, and if he had lived at
all, he would have lived the most suffer-
ing creature of the forest.—Sydney
Smith.

The evil spirit had said, the evening
before, “ To morrow thou shalt be with
me;” and now Saul hasteth to make
the devil no liar; rather than fail, he
gives himself his own mittimus, O the
woful extremities of a despairing soul,


plunging him ever into a greater
mischief, to avoid the less! He
might have been a patient in another's
violence, and faultless ; now, while he
will needs act the Philistine’s part upon
himself, he lived and died a murderer :
the case is deadly, when the prisoner
breaks the jail, and will not stay for
his delivery; and though we may not
pass sentence upon such a soul, yet upon
the fact we may: the soul may possibly
repent in the parting; the act is
heinous, and such as, without repent-
ance, kills the soul— Bp. Hall.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 8—18,
THE GRATITUDE oF THE MEN or JapesH GILEAD.


I. The courageous impulses of grateful hearts. Gratitude may be almost
regarded as an instinct of human nature, for it springs up spontaneously in the
breast of man in answer to benefits received. He who does not experience this
emotion must be hardened below the brute, for even some of the lower animals
will remember benefits conferred, and love him who has done them a service,
But the strength and length of the gratitude will depend much on the disposition
and character. All men are prone to forget benefits conferred long ago, and
only true and loyal hearts keep their memory green, and are found willing to
recognise them at their own risk. Many years had passed since Saul earned
the gratitude of the men of Jabesh Gilead, and his later life had tended rather
to efface than to perpetuate the recollection of that act of bravery. And very
considerable must have been the danger which they now encountered in rendering
him this last service—the only one which could now be rendered to one who had
put himself beyond any other. But their gratitude and courage were equal to
the occasion, and shed the only ray of light that brightens this dark picture,


II, The lasting influence of a good deed. The life that had begun in so
much promise had ended in gloom, and it seems almost impossible to recognise
in this fearful and despairing man the brave soldier-king by whom, at Jabesh,
“the Lord had wrought salvation in Israel” (chap. xi. 13). But in this day of
his shame, and when he is justly reaping the reward of his evil deeds, this good
one is not to be forgotten but receives its reward. ‘Truly,

“The evil that men do lives after them,”


but so also, happily, does the good.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


This book began with the birth of


pretends to have the disposal of.—
Samuel, but now it ends with the death


Henry.


of Saul, the comparing of which two

together will teach us to prefer the

honour that comes from God before

any of the honours which this world
272


In the greatness and the reverse of
the house of Saul is the culmination
and catastrophe of the tribeof Benjamin,
The Christian fathers used to dwell on


GHAP, XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL





the old prediction which describes the
character of that tribe, “ Benjamin
shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning
he shall devour the prey, and in the
evening he shall devour the spoil.”
These words well sum up the strange
union of fierceness and of gentleness,
of sudden resolves for good or evil,
which run, as hereditary qualities do
often run, through the whole history
of that frontier clan. Such were its
wild adventures in the times of the
Judges; such was Saul, its first king ;
such was Shemei, of the house of Saul,
in his bitterness and his repentance ;
such was the divided allegiance of the
tribe to the rival houses of Judah and
Ephraim ; such was the union of ten-
derness and vindictiveness in the
character of Mordecai and Esther, if
not actual descendants of Shemei and
Kish, as they appear in the history of


Saul, at least claiming to be of the
same tribe, and reckoning among the
list of their ancestors the same re-
nowned names. And is it a mere fancy
to trace with those same Christian
writers the last faint likeness of this
mixed history, when, after a lapse of
many centuries, the tribe once more
for a moment rises to our view; in the
second Saul, also of the tribe of Ben-
jamin ? Saul of Tarsus, who, like the
first, was at one time moved by a zeal
bordering almost upon frenzy, and who,
like the first, startled all his contem-
poraries by appearing among the
Prophets the herald of the faith which
once he destroyed ; but, unlike the
first, persevered in that faith to the
end the likeness in the Christian Church,
not of what Saul was, but of what he
might have been.—Stanley.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.





_ BOOK II.


CHAPTER I.


Crirican AND Exposrrory Norzs.—Ver. 6. “The chariots and horsemen.” It has been
remarked that it is extremely unlikely that chariots and horsemen pursued the Israelites
on to the mountains, and this statement has been generally regarded as a part of the falsehood
of the whole story, which is throughout at variance with the account in the last chapter.


Ver. 7. “Here am I,” eto. This statement also, as Kiel remarks, has about it the air of
untruth, for it is extremely improbable that Saul would have no Israelite by his side to whom to
address his request,


Ver. 9. “Anguish.” From a verb meaning to interweave, or work together; hence some
translate “My cuirass hindereth me,” etc., but Keil, Erdmann, Kunchi, and others cramp.
Gesenius reads, giddiness, vertig.


Ver. 10. “Crown,” rather diadem. “A small metallic cap or wreath, which encircled the
temples, serving the purpose of a helmet, with a very small horn projecting in front, as the
emblem of power.” “Bracelet,” i.e. “the armlet worn above the elbow, an ancient mark of
royal dignity.” (Jaméeson.)


Ver. 12. “The people of Jehovah” and the House of Israel are distinguished from one
another, according to the twofold attitude of Israel, which furnished a double ground for
mourning. Those who had fallen were first of all members of the people of Jehovah, and
secondly, fellow-countrymen. (Keil.) “They were, therefore, associated with them both according
to the flesh and according to the spirit, and for that reason they mourned the more.” (Schmidt.)


Ver. 18, “A Stranger,” etc. te. “An Amalekite who had emigrated to Israel.” (Keil).
Although most Bible students regard the Amalekite’s story as untrue, yet Josephus adopts it.
Wordsworth thinks it may be supplementary to the former account, and that though Saul was
the author of his own death, inasmuch as he did what he could to destroy himself, yet he was
despatched at last by the Amalekite, and remarks, “If the story be true, it is worthy of remark
that Saul owed his death to ane of that nation of Amalek, which he had been commanded by
God to destroy.”


Ver. 15-16. Although some commentators think that this action of David was a political one,
most believe that he was moved by a higher motive, and that according to Erdmann “ he acted
theocratically with perfect justice in slaying with holy anger the murderer of the Lord’s anointed.”


Ver. 17. “Lamented—Lamentation.” These words must be understood in a technical sense.
- » «» This lamentation has a peculiar interest as being the only specimen preserved to us of
David’s secular poetry. (Bib. Commentary. )


Ver. 18. “The bow.” This is the name given to the dirge probably on account of its war-
like character. “The use of.” These words are improperly inserted in the English version,
“The Book of Jasher,” Or, the book of the righteous or the “upright ones.” “It was in
existence before the Books of Joshua and Samuel (Josh. x. 13), and contained (judging from the
extracts) a collection of songs on specially remarkable events of the Israclitish history, together
with a celebration of the prominently pious men whose names were connected with these events.”
( vibes Other conjectures have been formed about this book, but they appear unworthy of
attention.


_Ver. 19. “ The ode” (which here begins) “is arranged in three strophes, which gradually
diminish in force and sweep (viz., verses 19=24, 25-26, 27), and in which the vehemence of
sorrow is gradually modified, and finally dies away. Each strophe opens with the exclamation
How are the mighty fallen} The first contains all that had to be said in praise of the fallen
heroes ; the deepest mourning for their death, ete. The second commemorates the friendship
between David and Jonathan, The third simply utters the last sigh, with which the ele
becomes silent.” (Kiel.) S


Ver. 19. Some read the first stanza, “ Thy glory, O Israel, upon th ights (4s in.”
De Wette, Kitto, Stanley, and others, for glory eae and Ewald He ocr
« But this,” says Erdmann, “in the absence in the song of any comparison with the gazelle, or
any allusion to its swiftness and agility, is untenable, because the song speaks throughout not of
one hero but of two. As the composition has the ring of a hero song in honour of these two,
who were, in fact, the hero glory of Israel, we must render the word glory, ornament.”


274


CHAP. L AOMILETIU COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


eee


Ver. 20. “Gath, Askelon.” “These two Philistine cities as the most prominent, are named
for the whole land, which they represent (Gath very near, Askelon at a distance on the sea.”’)
(Zrdmann.) “Lest the daughters,” etc. Referring to the Oriental custom of the celebration
of victories by the women of the nation. (1 Sam. xviii. 6, etc.)


Ver. 21. “Fields of offerings,” or of first-fruits, te. fields from which were taken the
first-fruits, which were, of course, the most fruitful. The last clause of this verse should be read
without the italics in the authorised version—“ The shield of Saul not anointed with oil.” It was
customary to clean and polish the shield with oil (see Isa. xxi. 5), and this expression denotes its
defilement and unfitness for war consequent upon the defeat of its owner.


Ver. 24. “With delights,” “or with lovelinesses ; .¢., in a lovely manner.” (Keil.) All
the adornments here enumerated were probably the spoils of war.


Ver. 25. “O Jonathan.” “David’s union of heart with his friend differences this lament
sharply from the foregoing over him and Saul as heroes.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 27. “ Weapons of war.” Not the materials of warfare but the heroes themselves,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAFH.—Versss 1-16.
Tse Decetver DeEcEIVED.


I. Those who plan to deceive others are often deceived by means of their
own plan. This is a principle of Divine working which is continually mani-
festing itself. When the sons of Jacob laid a plot to rid themselves of their
brother, and to prevent the fulfilment of his dreams, the deception which they
thus practised on their father was the first step by which Joseph ascended to
the rulership of Egypt. In the case before us we have a man who, having con+
ceived a plan of deception, brought it forth in falsehood, hoping thereby to gain
a great reward. But this scheme of his, instead of bringing him the praise and
the preferment for which it had been planned, brought him the condemnation
and death which his deception merited as much as the deed for which David
judged and punished him.


II. Bad men judge others by their own moral standard. The untoward
issue of this plan of the Amalekite arose from his mismeasurement of the man
with whom he had to deal. He knew what his own feelings would be if he were
in David’s case, and had no other rule by which to judge actions except the
amount of fancied good or ill they brought to himself. So is it with all bad
men, Their own supposed interest is the measure of all things—self is first,
and often last, and if righteousness and mercy mingle at all with their plans
and purposes, it is only when they do not hinder the main object of their
existence. Hence they cannot understand a man who sorrows over anything
that is not a personal and material loss, and still more are they puzzled to com-
prehend him who is displeased at a deed which brings him gain, or who grievea
over the fall of others when that fall is a stepping-stone to his own elevation,
his heathen of the olden time was not farther removed from David’s stand-
point of action than men of the world now are from that of the spiritual man,


OUTLINES AND 8UGGBSTIVE COMMENTS.


David’s course in this matter was
the best policy for him ; but we have
ao right to conclude from that fact
that he was led to it by considerations
of policy. He had himself shown, on
an occasion of great temptation, that


reverence for the Lord’s anointed of

which he here speaks. The fact that

“honesty is the best policy” will not

of itself alone make a man honest ;

but neither does it prevent a man’s

being honest, or give us a right to
275


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





suspect a good man’s motives. —7ransr.
of Lange's Commentary.

David had been long waiting for the
crown, and now it is brought him by
an Amalekite. See how God can serve
his own purpose of kindness to his
people, even by designing men who
aim at nothing but to set up them-
selves.— Henry.

There is something very humilia-
ting—something peculiarly distressing,
because felt to be deeply degrading,
in this very circumstance of having
been so misunderstood and misjudged


BOOK It.





as to have been supposed capable of
finding gratification in acting out
principles which rule minds of another
order, and of sympathising with the
courses to which these principles con-
duct. There is scarcely a trial which
is more hard to endure, or which
pierces the heart with so deep a pang,
than thus to find one’s self standing
in the estimation of a man whose
feelings and principles are low, on that
same low platform which marks his
own moral position, and side by side
with himself.—Miller,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 17-27.
Davim’s LAMENT OVER SAUL AND JONATHAN,


I. The truly great can separate the man and the enemy. We cannot do
David the injustice to suppose that any of the language which he here uses is
anything but the expression of the feelings of his heart—that any word of praise
which occurs here is used merely for effect, or is an exaggeration of what he felt
to be truth. How, then, was it possible for him so to regard the man who had
now for so many years made him an exile—who had made his youth and early
manhood a season of unceasing anxiety and danger? To be able honestly to
render such a tribute to Saul’s memory, David must have been able to look at
the man quite apart from the treatment which he had received from him—to
put entirely aside the hatred with which he knew Saul regarded him, and to
look at him not only without prejudice but with pity, and thus sincerely to
mourn over his sins and his sorrows.


II, The truly great think their own advancement as nothing compared
with God’s honour. The first and ruling emotion in the breasts of most men
in David’s place would have been—if not gratification at the downfall of an
enemy, yet of exultation at being delivered from his persecution and being once
more free to return in safety to his native land. And with the remembrance of
the anointing oil upon his head, no one in whom all thoughts of a personal
nature were not swallowed up in anxiety for the public good could have
avoided looking forward with anticipation to the issue of this great event. But
such a man as David found more matter of mourning in the triumph of the
uncircumcised than of rejoicing in his own altered prospects. It was more to
him that the God of Israel had been dishonoured in the eyes of the heathen
than that the heavy cloud was lifted from his own future, In all his conduct
at this time he showed that true nobility which is only possible to him who
makes God, and not himself, the centre of the universe.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


I believe it is not dangerous but
safe, not a homage to falsehood but to
truth, in our judgments of those who
are departed, to follow David’s example.
We may dwell upon bright and hal-

276


lowed moments of lives that have beer.
darkened by many shadows, polluted
by many sins; these moments may be
welcomed as revelations to us of what
God intended His creature to be; we


GHAP. I.





may feel that there has been a loveliness
in them which God gave them, and
which their own evil could not take
away. We may think of this loveliness
as if it expressed the inner purpose of
their existence ; the rest may be for us
as though it were not. As Nature, with
her old mosses and her new spring
foliage, hides the ruins which man has
made, and gives to the fallen tower
and broken cloister a beauty scarcely
less than that which belonged to them
in their prime, so human love may be
at work too, “softening and concealing,
and busy with her hand in healing”
the rents that have been made in God’s
nobler temple, the habitation of His
own Spirit.— Maurice.


Verse 12. The only deep mourning
for Saul, with the exception of that of
the Jabeshites, proceeded from the
man whom he had hated and perse-
~ euted for so many years even to the
time of his death; just as David's
successor wept over the fall of Jerusa-
jem, even when it was about to destroy
himself.— Von Gerlach.


Ver. 26. Passing the love of woman ?
How can that be? we of these days
shall say. What love can pass that,
saving the boundless love of Him who
stooped from heaven to earth that He
might die on the cross for us ? No.
David, when he sang these words, knew
not the depth of a woman’s love. And
we shall have a right so to speak. The
indefeasible and divine right which is
bestowed by fact. As a fact we do not
find among the ancient Jews that ex-
alting and purifying ideal of the rela-
tions between man and woman which
is to be found, thank God, in these
days, in almost every British work of
fiction or fancy. It is enunciated, re-
member always, in the oldest Hebrew
document. On the very threshold of
the Bible it is enunciated in its most
ideal purity and perfection. But in
practice it was never fulfilled. :
Abraham had Sarah his princess wife.
But he has others. . And so las
David in like wise, to the grief and harm
both of him and Abraham.—Kingsley.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





If ever to the human heart of David
the throne had seemed desirable as the
height of worldly grandeur, detestable
in the last degree would such a feeling
now appear, when the same act that
opened it up to him deprived him of
his dearest friend—his sweetest source
of earthly joy. The only way in which
it was possible for David to enjoy his
new position was by losing sight of self;
by identifying himself more closely than
ever with his people; by regarding the
throne only as a position for more self-
denying labours for the good of others.
And in this song there is evidence of
the great strength and activity of this
feeling. . Thus both by the
afflictions that saddened his heart and


‘by the stroke of prosperity that raised


him to the throne, David was impelled
to that course of action which is the
best safeguard under God against the
baneful influences both of adversity
and prosperity.— Blaikie.
These words of the song,—
“Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askelon,”
have, since that time, in the circles of
the faithful, become a proverb. It is
frequently heard when one of their
community has failed to take heed to
his ways, and therefore has given rise
to a scandal. Would that that call
were more faithfully observed than is
for the most part the case! Would
that the honoar of the spiritual Zion
lay always as near to the heart of the
children of the kingdom as did that of
the earthly to the heart of David! But
how often does it happen that they
even strive to disclose before the world
the weaknesses of their brethren, and
thus, by a repetition of the wickedness
of Ham, become traitors to the Church
which Christ has purchased with His
own blood. Thus they make them-
selves guilty of bringing deshonour upon
the Gospel, while they open the gates
to such dishonour through their per-
haps altogether malicious tale-bearing,
and to their own great prejudice dis-
own the charity which “ believeth all
things, and hopeth all things,” and
also “ covereth a multitude of aina.”—
Krummacher.
9717


HOMIZLETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUED, 600K Ti
Se EE ET
CHAPTER II,


CririoaL and Expository Norss,—Ver. 1. “Hebron.” “A city of Judah, situated among
the mountains (Josh. xx. 7), twenty Roman miles south of Jerusalem, and the same distance
north of Beersheba. Hebron is one of the most ancient cities of the world still existing, and
in this respect it was the rival of Damascus. . . . It was a well-known city when Abraham
entered Canaan 3,780 years ago (Gen. xiii. 18). . . . Sarah died here, and here is the famous
Cave of Machpelah, the burying-place of the patriarchs. . . . At the division of Canaan it
was given to Caleb (Josh. x. 36), and was assigned to the Levites and made a city of refuge. . .
Its modern name is el-Khulil, i.e. the friend, the same designation as is given to Abraham by the
Mohammedans, . . . It now contains about 5,000 inhabitants, of whom some fifty families
are Jews. It is picturesquely situated in a narrow valley surrounded by hills, whose sides are
still clothed with luxurious vineyards.” (Smith’s Bible Dictionary.) “This city must now have
had for David a very special importance, which appeared all the clearer from the Divine decision,
and in respect to his future life became indubitable 3 here now was to be fulfilled the old
patriarchal promise (Gen, xlix. 8, s.q.) the establishment of the theocratic kingdom in the tribe
of Judah.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 8, “Cities of Hebron.” “The places belonging to the territory of Hebron.”


Ver. 4. “And the men of Judah came,” etc, As the throne was now vacant by Saul’s
death—the crown never entailed upon his descendants, and his whole family rejected at God,
who first advanced him to the kingdom—David, without injuring the rights of any person what-
soever, might have taken any just and honourable measures to have gained over the tribes to his
interest and secured the succession, as the election of a new king now devolved upon the nation,
even if he had not previously been designed by God the supreme governor of Israel, . . But ag
this circumstance of the consecration was known throughout the whole nation, it was natural for
the tribe of Judah to seize the opportunity of Saul’s death, and acknowledge him whom God had
pointed out as their king. . . . It is also probable that they were further induced because of the
ancient prophecy (Gen. xlix.10). . . . This tribe was also the most powerful and respectable
of all the twelve, and as they had a right to choose their own prince they might reasonably have
expected that the other tribes would follow their example. (Chandler. )








Ver. 6. “Kindness,” or favour, “in general the gracious love that God shows His people on
the ground of His covenant with them. Truth is the trustworthiness and attestation of all His
promises.” (Hrdmann.) As this expression of thanks involved the solemn recognition of the
departed king—by which David divested himself of even the appearance of a rebellion—the
announcement of the anointing he had received contained an indirect summons to the Jabeshites
to recognise him as their king now.” (Keil.) “I also will,” ete. It is incorrect to render
this in the future. It may be rendered “J greet you with blessing,” viz., the prayer already
uttered,


Ver. 7. “Be ye valiant.” Literally, be ye sons of force or strength. “The opposite are
‘men of Belial,’ that is, of no force of character.” (Biblical Commentary.) “ His exhortation
to valour and courage is intelligible only on the supposition that he gives them to understand
that for them also he has taken Saul’s place as king, and that they must valiantly espouse his
cause against his enemies. . . . It is not clear whether Ishbosheth had at this time been set
up as king by Abner. But from verse 9 (which states that Gilead was one of the districts gained
by Abner for Ishbosheth) it is evident that David, seeing Abner’s movement thither (comp,
1 Sam. xxvi. 7), must have been concerned to secure to himself the capital city (Jabesh) of this
province. Whether he succeeded in this is questionable.” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 8. “Took Ishbosheth.” Rather had taken. “ Ishbosheth had probably been in the
battle of Gilboa, and fled with Abner across the J ordan after the battle had been lost.” (Keil.)
“Mahanaim.” On the eastern side of the J ordan, north of the brook Jabbok (Gen. xxxii. 2, 3),
Ishbosheth or “ Esh-baal ” (see 1 Chron. viii. 38). Literally son of Baal. “Tt seems probable
that the name Baul (lord) was in early times given to the God of Israel, and proper names were
formed from it afterwards. When the worship of the false Baal was introduced into Israel the
change into Bosheth, or shame, was made. Possibly this change was made by later editors and
scribes, and the original form was retained in the Book of Chronicles because this book was leaa
‘ead than the prophetic historical books,” (Zransr. of Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 9. “Over,” rather sor, etc, The use of this preposition seems to indicate that the
title was assumed before the places named realiy became subject to Ishbosheth, “ Gilead,”
the whole of trans-Jordanic Israelitish territory. “ Ashurites.” This name cannot be identified,
and commentators vary greatly in the opinions concerning the people here referred to,
“Jezreel.” The plain as well as tka city, so-called, which had just been occupied by the
Philistines, and therefore must have needed to be re-conquered by Abner, “ All Israel,” te,
all the rest excepting Judah.


278


GHAP, I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


EN TE AP SI VS SE an oss=-=z ara NEET SEIN OIE


Ver. 16. *Two years.” It is not quite clear how these words are to be understood, inas-
much as it seems certain that Ishbosheth was proclaimed king immediately after Saul’s deata,
and we know that he reigned until the time (seven and a half years later) when David became king
over all Israel. He reiyned two years, may be understood to mean that five years and a half
were occupied in re-conquering the territory from the Philistines, so that Ishbosheth was only a
nominal king during that period. Or the last clause of verse 10 and verse 11 may be regarded
as a parenthesis, and the two years taken as referring to the time which elapsed before the
event recorded in the foilowing paragraph. Each of these interpretations has been adopted by
eminent Biblical scholars, but the latter seems most in keepiug with the movement of Abner
which is now recorded.


Ver. 12. To “Gibeon.” Now “£l-Jib” in the western part of Benjamin, about six miles
north of Jerusalem. He came here, doubtless, with the view of subduing Judah also to the
rule of Ishbosheth, and it is remarked by Erdmann that he would not have taken this
step if he had not already subdued the Philistines.


; Ver, 13. “Joab, the son of Zeruiah.” This man here for the first time comes forward
in the history of David. “He had no doubt already, as his brother Abishai, had a
military training with his uncle, and had taken a prominent position among his warriors, else
he would not now appear as the chief leader of David’s forces. In the roll of heroes, in
chap. xxiii. 8, his name is not given, probably because his name already stood above them all as
general, as we may conjecture from chap. xxiii. 18, 24.” (Erdmann.) Zeruiah was David's
sister, and is most likely named, instead of her husband, to show J oab’s relation to David.
“The pool cf Gibeon.” A spring still “ issues in a cave excavated in the limestone rock, so
as to form a large reservoir. In the trees farther down are the remains of a pool or tank of
considerable size, probably, says Dr. Robinson, 120 feet by 100.” (Biblical Dictionary.) This
is the “ great water” mentioned by Jeremiah (chap. xli. 12).


Ver. 14. “Play.” Here used to denote the war-play of single combat. (Keil.)


Ver. 15. “ Went over.” They probably met at some intermediate place. (Zransr. of Lange's
Commentary.)


Ver. 16. “Helkath-hazgurim,” i.e, The fied of knives, or sharp edges. Everyone must
recall to mind the similar combat of the Horatii and the Curatii of Roman history (Livy i. 25).
“ These single combats still occur among the Arabs.” (Trans. of Lange's Commentary. )


Ver, 17. “Asore battle.” Consequent upon the undecisive nature of the single combat.


Ver. 21. “And Abner said,” etc. Abner’s speaking supposes that Asahel had already
overtaken him. “Take bis armour,” i.., after slaying him.


Ver. 22. “How, then, should I,” etc. “Abner did not want to put the young hero te
death, out of regard for Joab and their former friendship.” (Keil.)


Ver. 23. “The hinder end of the spear.” He used the hinder end from his desire to spare
Asahel’s life. But owing to his great strength and prowess, the wooden end which was more or
less pointed to enable the owner to stick it into the ground (1 Sam. xxvii, 7), ran into his body.”
(Biblical Commentary.)

Ver. 24.“Ammah.” . . . “Giah.” Nothing further is known about these places.


Ver. 27. “If thou,” etc. “If thou hadst not by that challenge given the signal for th.
battle, then early in the morning one side would have retreated before the other, and the battle
would not have occurred. . . . In Joab’s address and bearing it may be seen that he would
not have made the attack, but that his march against Abner was simply to protect the territory
of Judah.” (Erdmann.) Keil, Lightfoot, Patrick, Wordsworth, and others agree with
Erdmann’s interpretation, but others understand Joab to say, “ Even if thou hadst not spoken,
the pursuit would have ceased to-morrow morning.”

Ver. 29. “The plain,” or the “ Arabah,” the deep gorge of the Jordan. “ Having marched
first from the battle-field directly east towards J ericho.” (Erdmann.) “ Ail Bithron,” rather
“ All the Bithron.” As the word signifies a cutting, it was probably a name given to some
ravine between Jordan and Mahanaim.

Ver. 31. “Three hundred and threeseore.” “ This striking disproportion in the numbers
may be accounted for from the fact that in. Joab’s army there were none but brave and well-tried
who had gathered round David a long time before: whereas in Abner’s army there were
only the remnants of those who had been beaten upon Gilboa, and who had been still further
weakened and depressed by their attempts to recover the land which was occupied by the
Philistines.” (Ked.)

Ver. 32. “They buried him.” Bethlehem lay only a little to the left of the road betweep
Gibeon and Hebron, and about fifteen miles from the latter nlace. gh

27


men,


iene


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK IX.
i EL eT eee
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verees 1—I,


WaltTIna FoR ORDERS.


In David’s conduct here we have :—

I, A recognition that God knows the best time to fulfil His promises. Many
promises are given both by human fathers and by the Divine Father to their
children without any specification of the time when they will be fulfilled, and
this for a good reason. For such a reservation on the part of the human parents
or of God serves to test faith in a superior wisdom, and to work submission to a
higher will, and so to foster and increase a truly filial spirit. And so the child
or the man is by the uncertainty being fitted and prepared to receive the

romised blessing in a right spirit—a spirit of grateful dependence which brings
He nearer to the giver. David had long before been promised the throne of
Israel—the anointing of Samuel had been such a promise, and both Saul and
Jonathan had declared that such was the intention of God. At times he had
seemed to doubt it, and but lately his want of faith had led him into sin, but
he had doubtless upon the whole regarded it as certain that the time would come
when he should be king. And now that time seemed to have arrived, but the
discipline of the past had borne the fruit for which it was given, and David’s
confidence in God, and dependence upon Him, were not now marred by any
intrusion of his own desires or opinions. By this inquiry of the Lord, he said
most emphatically, “ My times are in thy hand” (Psa, xxxi. 15), and recognised
by his conduct that it was not for him to judge when God should fulfil His word.
We cannot do justice to the completeness of David’s self-surrender at this time,
unless we contemplate the irksomeness of his present position, the strength of
the desire he must have had to return to his own country, and the opportunity
which Saul’s death seemed to open up to him. Most men would have been
unable to control their impatience, and would have counted every delay—even
such a delay as this of David—as so much gain to the opposite party, but David
had learned that time spent in waiting upon God is only such a delay as that
which the traveller in the desert makes when he stands still to take his bearings
by the stars—a delay which is the truest way to speed him on his journey,


II, That when that time has come, the fulfilment will only be accomplished
by man’s active and obedient co-operation. Although the time and the
method of working are to be left to God, all the working is not to be left to
Him. Faith in God makes a man willing to wait when it is God’s will, but it
makes him equally willing to be up and doing when the time for action has
come. When God gave Canaan to the Israelites at first, although it was in
fulfilment of a promise made long before, yet they were obliged to go up and
fight for the land before they could possess it, and to fight according to the
directions given them by God. David here shows that he does not expect God
to fulfil His word to him except by means of his own active and unconditional
obedience. Although the sovereignty of Israel was secure to him, he knew that
he must use means to secure it, and that the means must be those which God
appointed and no other. By his questions he doubly binds himself to do what-
ever God commands and to go wherever He directs ; for if when we know the
will of God we are bound to do it, we are surely under a double obligation
when we ask for guidance.


OUTLINES 4ND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. The form inwhich hemade Judah was to his own mind ; probably
the inquiry shows how clear the expedi- it was also the earnest advice of hig
ency of going up ta sne of the cities of followers ; there seemed no doubt or

280


CaP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





difficulty as to its being the proper
course; but all the more on thataccount
does his devout and pious spirit shine
out, in his asking direction from God.
Prayer, on this occasion, was not the
resort of one whom all other refuge
failed, but the first resort of one by
whom the guidance of God was regarded
as all-important.—Blaikie.

The time now came when David’s
faith in the existence of a righteous
kingdom, which had its ground in the
unseen world, and which might exhibit
itself really, though not perfectly in
this, was to be brought to the severest
of all trials... .. The new mode of
government for which the people craved
so earnestly had been tried—they had
become like the countries round about
—these countries were now their
masters. They had gained such a king
as they had imagined —a leader of their
hosts. They had lost law, discipline,
and fellowship; now their hosts had
perished. Could there come order out
of this chaos? Whence was it to come ?
From a band of freebooters? ‘That was
to be seen. If the chief of this band
thought of setting up a dominion for
himself, of making his followers posses-
sors of the lands from which, they had
been driven out, of putting down his
private enemies, of rising, by the arms
of his soldiers and the choice of a
faction, to. be a tyrant, his life would be
merely a vulgar tale such as age after
age has to record. But if
David took this miserable country of
his fathers into his hands, not as a prize
which he had won but as a heavy and
awful trust committed tohim. . . .
then, however hopeless the materials
with which he had to work, and which
he had to mould, he might believe
confidently that he should be in his
own day the restorer of Israel, and the
witness and prophet of the complete
restoration of it and mankind. This
was the man after God’s own heart—
the man who thoroughly believed in
God as a living and righteous Being ;
who in all changes clung to that con-
viction; who could act upon it, live
upon it ; who could give himself up to
be used as he pleased . . ~ who


s


could walk on in darkness secure of
nothing but this, that truth must pre-
vail at last, and that he was sent into
the world to live and die that it might
prevail.— Maurice.

God sends him to Hebron, a city of
Judah; neither will David go up thither
alone, but he takes with him all his
men, with their whole households:
they shall take such part as himself;
as they had shared with him in his
misery, so they shall now in his
prosperity : neither doth he take ad-
vantage of their late mutiny, which
was yet fresh and green, to cashier those
unthankful and ungracious followers ;
but, pardoning their secret rebellions,
he makes them partakers of his good
success, Thus doth our heavenly leader,
whom David prefigured, take us to
reign with Him, who have suffered with
Him. Passing by our manifold in-
firmities, as if they had not been, He
removeth us from the land of our
banishment, and the ashes of our for-
lorn Ziklag, to the Hebron of our peace
and glory: the expectation of this day
must, as it did with David’s soldiers,
digest all our sorrows.— Bp. Hall.

We can see that Hebron is a fit
place. ‘he city of Abraham, Caleb,
and the Levites—a city of refuge—
the principal town in David’s tribe,
and somewhat remote from Saul’s tribe
—and David had taken pains to con-
ciliate its inhabitants (1 Sam. xxx. 31).
Divine directions are seen to coincide
with true human wisdom wherever we
sufficiently understand the facts—
Transr. of Lange's Commentary.

In that orderly he begins at God,
we see that it is not sufficient to have
good causes public or private, but in
like manner it is requisite to prosecute
them aright, otherwise a good cause in
the matter may became evil in the
preposterous (inverted in order) form,
albeit the reciprocant be never true,
that a good form may make an evil
cause good in substance.—Guild.

Psalm xxvii. is traditionally referred
to this part of David’s life. (‘The
lxx. gives as the title, “ Before the
anoiting,”) and the courageous and
hopeful spirit which it breathes, the

281


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,


BOOK i.


sonfident expectation that a better
day was at hand, whilst it lends itself
to the manifold applications of our own
later days, well serves as an introduc-
tion to the new crisis in the history of
David and the Jewish Church which
is now at hand.—Stanley.

In that Judah apart from all Israel
anointed David their king, being war-
ranted herein by the promises of God
concerning the pre-eminence of that
tribe, and by the manifest declaration
of God’s will concerning David, there-
fore having and following the warrant
of God’s will and word herein, they are
not the division or schism makers, but
Israel wanting the same though the
greater multitude by far. It is not
they, then, who separate themselves
from the company or persons of men,
but who separate themselves from the
truth, and God’s word (which is the
touchstone thereof) that are schisma-
tical or rent-makers in the Church,
and all those who follow the direction
of it (as Judah doth here) assuredly
shall go aright, where such as contemn
the same, and with Israel glory in
multitude, shall go astray.— Guild.


Verses 5-7. People were persuaded
by it that this man, uninfluenced by
the low spirit of revenge and malice,
knew how to forgive and to forget, and
that all the wrongs and injuries which
he had experienced had not the power
to obscure to him the dignity and
sacredness of his predecessor, as the
anointed of the Lord. Moreover, by


that conduct of David, the decided
impression was produced among the
people that they might expect from
him a humane government, whilst he
would also honour the lowliest and
most insignificant praiseworthy actions
which might be anywhere done in the
land, with a thankful recognition of
their worth.— Krummacher.

Grace and truth (ver. 6) are the
fundamental attributes of God which
set forth His relation to the people of
Israel as the covenant people. Grace
is the special exhibition of His love by
which He (1) chooses the people, (2)
establishes the covenant with them,
and (3) in this covenant relation im-
parts favour and salvation. Truth is
God’s love unchanging and continuing
over against the people’s sin—love that
(1) does not suffer the choice of free-
grace to fail, (2) maintains the covenant,
and (3) fulfils uncurtailed the promises
that correspond to the covenant rela-
tion. Compare Exod. xxxii. 6; Psalm
xxv. 10.—Lange’s Commentary.

Livery human work well-pleasing to
God, wrought out of genuine love and
truth, is a reflection of God’s love and
truth, of which the heart has had
experience, an offering brought to the
Lord, the impulsion of which has come
from this inwardly experienced love
and truth, an object of God’s love and
truth which repays with blessing and
salvation, and of men’s honouring
recognition in respect to its ethical
value.—Lange’s Commentary.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH .— Verses 8-32,


ABNER’S OpposITION TO DAVID.


Y, Self-will is a sin that dies hard.


We should have thought betore ex-


perience that the humiliating disaster at Gilboa would have been sufficient to
bring Abner and the men of Israel into grateful submission to God’s will concerning


the person who was to be their ruler,
own lives, and having to mourn the best
have been expected they would gladly w
look for God’s protection and their own
their own way was yet so much dearer t
they were willing to enter upon all th
himself afterwards confesses (chap. iii.
David to translate the kingdom from th


282


Having but barely escaped with their
and bravest of their kindred, it might


elcome one under whose rule they might
consequent security and comfort.
o them than God’s way that to have it
e miseries of a civil war.
9), knew that the Lord had sworn unto
e house of Saul, yet he is here found the


But


Abner, as he


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





most prominent person concerned in the elevation of Ishbosheth to the kingship.
If his followers could plead ignorance of the Divine will in the matter, their
(eader could not, and his act must be regarded as a declaration that, whatever
God had said, he would do as he pleased. He was not, however, we may well
believe, so honest 2 man ag to permit himself thus to interpret his own conduct,
but probably sheltered himself behind some plea of necessity or policy. The sin
of Abner and his followers is the sin of all men who, when the will of God is
plainly revealed either by His word or providence, set up their own in opposition
to it—who, when the finger-post of duty points in one direction, choose another
because they are so deluded as to fancy there is something to be gained by it.


II. The sin of one often affects the destiny of many. All the bloodshed
by the pool of Gibeon on this day must be laid to the account of one man.
Joab spoke truly when he said (ver. 27) that Abner’s word was the spark that
lighted the fire of battle which afterwards raged so fiercely, and with such
special fatality among his own men. Although each man had to some extent
the power of individual choice when he followed his general into the field, yet
position and ability give some so great an influence over others that the few
who possess them have the many in a large measure in their hands, and are the
makers of their weal or woe, so far at least as this life is concerned. If such
a man as Abner had not put forth arival to David, we may conclude with
certainty that there would have been no organised opposition to him, and this
murderous affray and the civil strife of the following years would have been
avoided. The same may be said of most of the wars that have cursed tlie
world. They have almost all been to gratify the ambition of one or two, and
thousands have been the sufferers. ‘This dependence of the many upon the few
is one of the facts of human life, and often one of its mysteries. If not an
ordination of God, it is certainly a Divine permission ; and unless society were
all upon a dead level it is hard to see how it could be otherwise. And although
this incident shows its dark side, we know it has a bright one—a side which will
efface the darkness when all leaders and rulers of men have learnt of Him who
rules to save and to redeem souls from deceit and violence, and in whose sight
the blood of His followers is precious. (Psa. Ixxii. 13, 14.)


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Even the Amalekite could carry the
crown to him as the true owner: yet
there wants not an Abner to resist him,
and the title of an Ishbosheth to colour
his resistance. If any of Saul’s house
could have made challenge to the
crown, it should have been Mephi-
bosheth, the son of Jonathan, who, it
seems, had too much of his father’s
blood to be a competitor with David:
the question is, not who may claim the
most right, but who may best serve
the faction : neither was Ishbosheth
any otherthan Abner’s stale.— Bp. Hall.


Ver. 10. When David came into
possession of his kingdom, even yet he
remained quiet awhile, without con-
aidering how he might increase it,


because he cast all this care upon
Divine Providence. He thus shames
the behaviour of those spiritual men,
who, when they recognise that God
wishes to do something through them,
are constantly making attempts and
all sorts of beginnings to see whether
they may, perhaps, achieve the work,
and are never willing in patience and
self-forgetfulness to wait on God, until
God Himself performs His will. ‘The
hour must come itself, and so it must
simply be waited for.—Berlenberger
Bible.


Ver. 13. A righteous war is a royal
duty, from which no prince can venture
to withdraw, even if it were fraternal
war. It may have come hard to David

283


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK I.





to take up war against his brothers,
and yet he could not do otherwise.
God the Lord had Himself given the
arms into his hand.—Schlier.


Ver. 23. See here (1). How often
death comes upon us by ways that we
Jeast suspect. Who would fear the
hand of a flying enemy, or the butt-
end of a spear? (2). How we are
often betrayed by the accomplishments
we are proud of. Asahel’s swiftness,
which he presumed so much upon, did
him no kindness, but forwarded his
fate.— Henry.


Verses 18-23. (A Sunday-school
address.) The rash young prince.
1. He had a shining gift (ver. 18).
In ancient warfare more were often
slain in the pursuit than in the battle;
and so swiftness of foot was important
in a warrior. 2. He was ambitious—
pursuing the distinguished general of
the enemy. 3. He had decision and
perseverance—turning not to the right


or left, and yielding to no persuasion.
4. He fancied himself superior to an
old man—a common and natural, but
grave fault in the young. 5. He was
slain as the penalty of self-confidence
aud rashness—besetting sins of many
gifted youths.—Zranslator of Lange’s
Commentary.


Ver. 26. This may have been a mere
stroke of policy, or it may have been the
promptings of conscience bringing home
the guilt of the slaughter to himself.
What he probably meant was, that
matters might remain as they were,
Ishbosheth reigning over the ten tribes,
and David over Judah. . . . He who
had been so keen for war in the morn-
ing, was still more keen for peace in
the evening, for it is not easy for a man
with even a shred of conscience to think
of nearly four hundred of his own
brethren lying dead on the field of
battle, and to remember that the re-
sponsibility of the terrific slaughter
lies at his own door.— Blaikie,


CHAPTER IIL


CriricaL AnD Exrosrrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “The war.”
wtate of hostility in which they continued to stand towards one another.”


Called Daniel in 1 Chron. iii, 1.


Ver. 3. “ Chiliab.”


“ Not continual fighting, but the
( Keil.)


“Probably had two names.” (Keil, )


“Geshur.” A small independent kingdom in Syria.


Ver. 4. Nothing is known of the origin of these wives of David, nor of the one mentioned


in the following verse,


Ver. 5. “David's wife.”


This appendage to Eglah has led some to conjecture that Michal


is here intended ; but Keil and others think it merely serves as a fitting conclusion to the list.


Ver. 6, “That Abner,” etc, Keil here reads and Abner, making verses 6 and 7 into one
sentence, expanded by the introduction of circumstantial clauses ; the conjunction before sasd


(se. Ishbosheth said), must then be translated that.. “Wherefore hast thou.”


As the harem


of an Oriental king becomes the property of his successor, such an act on the part of Abner


would be an act of political treason.


Ver. 8. “Then was Abner very wroth,” etc. He neither admits nor denies the charge,
and most expositors regard him as guilty of the act ; but as Erdmann remarks, it ‘‘seems rather
the outflow of passionate self-will and presumptuous contempt towards Ishbosheth” than an


attempt to secure the throne.
idea that he had such an intention.


Ver. 9. “As the Lord hath sworn.”
as Abner here speaks of.


His subsequent conduct towards David seems to contradict the


We have no record of any formal Divine oath such
“But the promise of God is equivalent to an oath, as God is the, true


God, who can neither lie nor deceive” (1 Sam. xv. 29, ets.).


284


OMAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





Ver. 10. “From Dan even to Beersheba,” i.¢., throughout the entire land, from north
to south. (Judges xx. 1, etc.)


Ver. 11. “And he could not answer,” etc, “This characterises Ishboseth sufficiently
for the whole situation. Having with an effort plucked up courage to ask that reproachful
question, he here shows the greatest feebleness, cowardice, and timidity towards Abner. This
also contributes to the explanation of what is said in ver. 1 concerning the house of Saul.”
(Erdmann.)


Ver. 12. “On his behalf.” Two general renderings of this phrase are found in the ancient
versions, viz., in his place, equivalent to the English version, and “ tmmediately” or “on the
spot.” Kel adopts the first, but Hrdmann the latter, remarking that it accords well with
Abner’s passionate excitement in ver. 9, and that the former translation makes a superfluous
phrase. “Whose is the land?” Some expositors (Schmidt, Keil, Ewald, etc.) understand
Abner to declare by this question that the land belonged to David by virtue of his anointing ;
but others (Erdmann, Thenius, etc.) think that the following words indicate that Abner con-
sidered the land was virtually in Ais hand. “ This,” says Erdmann, “is quite in keeping with
his proud, haughty nature, as hitherto manifested in his words and conduct, and also with the
facts of the case, since, in fact, the whole land, except Judah, was still subject to Saul’s house,
that is, to him (Abner) as dictator.”


Ver. 13. “One thing I require.” ‘This condition was imposed by David, not only
because Michal had been unjustly taken away by Saul, . . . so that he could demand her
back again with perfect justice, . . . but probably on political grounds also, namely, be-
cause the renewal of his marriage to the king’s daughter would show to all Israel that he
cherished no hatred in his heart towards the fallen king.” (Keil.) ‘‘ He was led to a re-union
partly by love (‘she loved him,’ 1 Sam. xviii. 27; xix. 11 sg.),and . .. as king he could not,
in the presence of the people, leave Michal in a relation into which eke had been forced against
her will.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 15. “Phaltiel.” (See 1 Sam. xxv. 44.)


Ver. 16. ‘‘Bahurim.” A village near Jerusalem, north east, on the road between the Mount
of Olives and Gilgal. Phaltiel followed his wife to the border of David’s kingdom.


Ver. 17. “Yo sought for David in times past.” “A striking testimony to the fact
that outside of Judah also there had been a favourable sentiment towards David, against which
Abner had energetically established and hitherto maintained Ishbosheth’s authority.” (£rd-
mann.) (See 1 Chron. xii.) “The Lord had spoken.” “Abner either had some expression
used by one of the prophets (Samuel or Gad) in his mind . . . or he regarded the anointing
of David by Samuel by command of the Lord, and the marvellous success of all that David had
attempted, as a practical declaration on the part of God.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 19. “The ears of Benjamin.” Because the family of Saul belonged to this tribe,
and they had enjoyed many advantages in consequence. See 1 Sam. xxii.7. “Also... also.”
These denote mutualness, and point out the close connection and relation between the negotiation
earried on with Benjamin as the tribe most important for David, and the earnest conversation
that Abner therefore had with David (in the ears of David).


Ver. 20. “Twenty men.” “As representatives of all Israel.” (Keil.) “A feast.” “Not
merely an entertainment, but of the nature of a league.” (Patrick.)


Ver. 21. “I will arise,” etc. The gradation in these words is characteristic of the rapidity,
excitedness, and energy that we everywhere find in Abner.” (Zrdmann.) “A league.” “This
was not to consist in the establishment of a constitution after the nature of a constitutional
monarchy, which is wholly foreign to the theocratic kingdom ; but they are to vow to obey
David as the king given them by the Lord, he promising to govern them as the theocratic
king.” (Erdmaenn.) “Thine heart desireth.” David had indicated the desire of his heart
in his message to the Jabeshites. (Hrdmann.)


Ver. 22. “Joab came from pursuing,” etc. ‘“ Whither, it is not said, but probably out-
side the Israelitish territory near the tribe of Judah. In the incomplete organisation of David's
court such expeditions were necessary for the support of the large army... . Probably Abner
had purposely chosen the time when Joab with the army was absent to carry out his plan.”
(Erdmann.)

Vers. 24 and 25. Joab may have spoken what he believed to be the truth concerning Abner,
or he was prompted by a fear that the older and more renowned general would take his place at
the head of David’s army.


Ver. 26. “The Well of Sirah.” According to Josephus, only about two and a half English
giles from Hebron. 285


HOMILET(C COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK Il.


—_—_—— eee


Ver. 27. “When Abner was returned.” Joab probably used David’s name to recall
him. “Abner’s conduct bespeaks‘his entire reliance upon David's good faith.” (Biblical
Commentary.)


Ver, 27. “In the gate.” Literally “to the middle of the gate.” It was no doubt roofed®
and “ Joab drew Abner to the middle of the inner gate space because it was not so light there,
and one could better escape the notice of the passers-by.” (Erdmann.) “For the blood of
Asahel.” This was no doubt the plea which Joab used 3 but Abner had slain Asahel in battle
and in self-defence, and Josephus and most commentators ascribe the murder to jealousy.


Ver, 29. “Let it rest.” Literally, turn, or be hurled. “This strong expression, instead of
the ordinary ‘let it come,’ answers to the enormity of the crime and the energy of David's
righteous anger.” (Hrdmann.) “Hath an issue.’ “One that pines away miserably with
seminal or mucous flow. Compare Lev. xv. 2.” (Erdmann.) “That leaneth on a staff.”
This last word means a distaff, aud many scholars take this phrase to designate an effeminate or
weakly person. “The Greeks also had their ‘ Hercules with the distaff’ as a type of unmanly
feebleness, and for a warrior like Joab there could be no worse wish than that there might be a
distaf-holder among his descendants.” (Bottcher.) In favour of this reading, Erdmann remarks
that one that holds a staff is not necessarily a cripple, since the staff was held by rulers, by old
men, by travellers, and by shepherds (Judges vy. 14; Numb. xxi. 18 3 Zech, viii. 4; Luke vi. 3;
Micah vii. 14, etc.), and that where a cripple is described with a staff the expression is different
(Exod, xxi. 19.) However, Gesenius, Ewald, Phillippson, Keil, and others render the word
crutch or staf. Ancient Jewish writers regard this imprecation of David's as sinful.


Ver. 31. “Before Abner.” In the presence of his corpse. They were to take part in the
funeral procession.


Ver. 83. “A fool” A nabdal, or worthless man.


Ver. 84. “Thy hands were not bound.” This means, either “Thou hadst not mace
thyself guilty of any crime, so as to die like a malefactor, in chains and bonds” (Keil ), OY,
“with free hands, with which he might have defended himself 3 with free feet, with which he
might have escaped from overpowering force. Without suspecting evil, he was attacked and
murdered as  defenceless man.” (Erdmann. ))


Ver. 85. “To eat meat.” .“It is uncertain whether David was to eat with the people
(cf. chap. xif. 17), i.¢, to take part in the funeral meal that was held after the burial, or whether
the people simply urged him to take some food for the purpose of soothing his own sorrow.”


(Keil.)


Ver. 38. “A prince,” ete. A prince by reason of his position—a great man because of his
intellectual endowments.


Ver. 39, “Weak, though anointed.” Most commentators understand David to mean
that he was too weak—too lately come into power—to be able to visit upon Joab and his brother
the just reward of their crime, but Erdmann objects to this view—(1). Because it would have
been very unwise to acknowledge his fear before such men 3 and (2). Because it would have been
untrue, for he who had conquered Abner, and who had the people on his side, must have
possessed the power to punish Joab, He understands the first adjective to signify soft, and hard
to apply, not to the contrast between himself and the sons of Zeruiah as to political situation
ate to disposition. While he, though a king, is absorbed in grief, they are unmoved and
indifferent,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1—21,
ABNER'S Revoir to Davp,


I. When the will of God and the will of men are contending, however long
the struggle, the issue is not doubtful. In the preceding chapter we have the
history of a contest in which the combatants were so equally matched that neither
could conquer the other, but death claimed victory over both. This is not go
very uncommon a case where there is an equality of resolution and resource and
patience, and where neither side has any right to call in reinforcements from the
God of right. But that episode in the warfare between Judah and Israel was
not a type of the final issue of the struggle. It was the will of God that that
bie ee be protracted for years, both to perfect the patience and faith of


+


GiHas, ri. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





David, and to show the men of Israel where their true interest lay. But even
had the men of Judah been as inferior to their opponents in bravery and skill as
they probably were in numbers—if every one of Ishbosheth’s supporters had been
an Abner and their number multiplied a thousandfold—it could have availed
nothing in the long run, for they were fighting against the purpose and plan of
God. This must be the issue of every contest of a like character. It may be
good for the servants of God that the struggle be lengthened from years into
centuries, but victory on the side of those who are on the side of God is only a
question of time.


II. Men who consult God’s will in some acts of their life are sometimes
strangely forgetful to doitin others. We take it as certain that David con-
sulted only his own desires or his own idea of what would conduce to his honour
and prosperity when he multiplied the number of his wives, and even took one
at least from outside his own nation. Although we have no reason to suppose
he broke any express Divine command in so doing, yet it was evidently a
violation of God’s original intention, and an imitation of the customs of the
heathen monarchs, and such an alliance with them was in direct opposition to
that separation from them and their ways which is commanded by the law of
Moses. If he had been as careful to inquire of the Lord concerning this matter
as he was in others, how much domestic misery might he have escaped. But all
good men omit sometimes to obey the command, “ In al/ thy ways acknowledge
Him,” and, following their own inclination instead of hearkening to the voice of
God, sow seeds of evil which afterwards yield them very bitter fruit. (On this
subject see also on chap. i. 2.)


III. A good deed done from a wrong motive is of no value tothe doer. By
their fruits ye shall know them (Matt. vii. 16) is the word of Divine wisdom, and
yet it is quite true, as F. W. Robertson remarks, that we must not always judge
a man by his deeds, but the deeds by the man. The repentance which follows
when a good man does wrong must be taken into account, and the motive that
goes before when a bad man does right must be considered, before passing judg-
ment. When Abner came over to David’s side he was performing an act of
tardy justice, but it was nut the fruit of repentance. It was prompted by no
desire to repair the wrong of the past, but by a determination to avenge an
offence in the present. ‘The same motive moved him to make friends with
David as induced him to set Ishbosheth upon the throne, and, therefore, no more
moral value can be attached to the one action than to the other. The declara-
tion, “the Lord hath sworn to David” did not come from the lips of one who
consulted the Divine will, but from one who made his own ambition his rule of
life, and Abner only confesses his guilt when he utters it, because he makes it
plain that he did not sin through ignorance.


IV. Those who receive from others what they have no right to bestow will
find punishment in being compelled to relinquish it. Two men in this chapter
are in this case. Ishbosheth received his crown, and Phaltiel his wife from men
who were wronging others when they bestowed them, and the issue in both is
what it must ever be under such circumstances. Every gift given by man which
is not at the same time given by God is not bestowed upon its righful owner, and
will sooner or later be taken from the unlawful possessor to become the property
of him to whom it belongs. However far and with whatever force a stone is
thrown into the air, we feel that its return to the earth is certain. Whatever
may be the height to which it ascends, we know there will come a moment when
its return journey will begin, and its fall will be more rapid than its rise. So,
however great may be the power and strength which is behind unjust promotion,
and however long we may hold a gift which belongs to another, ee a law


HOMILEVIC COUMENTARY: SAMUZL,


BOK fi.


above all ot! ors which can only be held at abeyance for a limited time, and when


that limit has


been reached the law will assert its dominion, and the work of


restitution will often be as sudden as it is painful. Phaltiel must have known
he was wronging David to take his wife, and Ishbosheth knew also that he had
no right to the throne, but the one thought himself secure in the power of Saul,
and the other trusted to the ability of Abner. The day of reckoning came for
both, and they had both cause to bitterly regret they had accepted favours from


men who had no right to bestow them.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. What grievous tales of dis-
tress are folded up in these brief words,
Probably it was only irregular war,
without much bloodshed; the war of
skirmish and surprises, not of pitched
battles or protracted sieges, or desperate
assaults ; but many a pillaged town
and many a homestead laid in ashes,
and many a heart crushed in despair
or maddened to fury, and many a deep
and deadly curse and fearful vow of
vengeance would everywhere follow the
track of war. And it was war of the
most distressing and demoralising kind.
-—not foreign, but civil. Great national
wars are usually attended by one
counteracting benefit—they soften the
keenness of private quarrels. But when
parties in the same nation are fighting
with each other, private quarrels, in-
stead of being healed, are only exas-
perated in greater bitterness. In the
painful war, therefore, in which David
was engaged, he was deprived of the
comfort of reflecting that whatever
ravages it was producing abroad, it was
drawing men’s hearts closer to each
other at home, and sweetening the
breath of domestic society.— Blaikie.


Ver. 8. In the variance of these
two, we see there is no solid and con-
stant friendship among the wicked, for
that which is in God is only like unto
Him, immutable and sure, and worthy
of the name ef amity, the other being
more properly conspiracies.— Guild.


Ver. 13. In David’s yielding and
acceptation of Abner’s offer we see
that, albeit he hath a good cause, yet
he neglects no occasion of secondary
means offered, which is an example of
imitation, for as men are said to con-
temn God who rely altogether upon
seconds, so are they to be thought to
tempt God, who altogether reject the
use of lawful seconds.—Guild,


Ver. 16. From this occurrence it
is clear that, among the wild briars of
unsettled family relationships by which
Israel was then overgrown, here aad
there also the flowers of a true genuine
love and fidelity were to be met with.
They bloomed, indeed, in the house of
David, but their growth was not an-
hindered, and he did not remain un-
touched by the curse which the Lord
had attached to the crime of polygamy
in Israel. Krummacher.


Ver. 18. Abner wins the heart of
Israel, by showing God’s charter for
him whom he had so long opposed.
Hypocrites make use of God for their
own purposes, and care ouly to make
Divine authority a colour for their own
designs. No man ever heard Abner
godly till now; neither had he been
so at this time, if he had not intended
a revengeful departure from Ishbosheth,
Nothing is more odious than to make
religion a stalking-horse to policy.—
Lishop Hall.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 22-89.


THe Murper or ABNER.


I. Unprincipled men judge others by themselves,


A man looking in a glass


sees a reflection of himself—not perhaps of the man he ought to be or might
have been, but exactly what he is. So a bad man is apt to think, when he looks


288


OHAP. IIT. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,








upon his brother, that he is but a reflection of himself in character, that his
motives, and hopes, and intentions are the same as his own. Not being accus-
tomed himself to act from principle, but in all things to put his own supposed
interest in the foremost place, he thinks every other man must do the same.
This was the way in which Joab regarded Abner and his conduct. He knew
that if he were in Abner’s place he should not hesitate to do what he now
charged him with doing if he thought he should gain by it, and was, or pre-
tended to be, far more suspicious of his honesty than David was. Or if he
really believed that Abner was in earnest in his professions of loyalty to David,
still judging bim by his own standard, he looked forward to what would happen
in the future. He knew that in the same circumstances he should endeavour
to supplant all David’s old servants, and never rest till he attained to the
highest honour the king could bestow. That would involve a decrease of his
power—a prospect his ambitious spirit could not brook. Hence his anger and
his revenge.


II. In God’s government of the world, one bad man is often the means
of removing another. Neither God nor godlike creatures delight in destructive
work—they love to build up rather than to destroy—to dispense reward rather
than retribution. But as in the natural world the ground must be cleared of
weeds if the corn is to have space to grow, so the power of evil men must
be limited, and they sometimes removed from the earth, that the good
may live and multiply. And this work of removal is often done by their own
kind, and it is the only work for God that they can do. Wicked men cannot
bring any positive blessing upon the world, but they can be used in this negative
way to lessen the evil and make room for the work of the good. When the
fire burns up the weeds and clears the ground for the sower, one destructive
force in nature is used to destroy another, and when one bad man, in his self-
seeking and passion, ends the career of another, he is the unconscious instru-
ment in the hands of God of clearing the ground for the work of godly men. So
was it with Joab in relation to Abner—both were godless, and consequently
hindrances to the progress and happiness of the kingdom of God in Israel, and
when one was permitted to fall by the sword of the other, one moral destroyer
was used for the destruction of another that God’s servant might find the place
and do the work allotted to him.


III. Although one man is thus the retribution of God to another, the
responsibility of the deed rests upon himself. Every human action must be
judged, not by its consequences, but by its character. Men have sometimes
murdered one whom they rightly judged to be an enemy of their country ; but
even if the belief was correct, neither it nor the good consequences arising from
the deed affected its morality. The belief may be right and the consequences
may be according to the belief, but the end can never justify the use of means
which are contrary to the command of God. Still less can the results of such
an act as that of Joab’s justify the doer or lessen his guilt in the smallest
degree. Joab was a murderer, although he was a sword of retribution in the
hand of God. If he had slain Abner because he believed him to be a traitor to
David and an enemy to God, the motives which actuated him could not have
absolved him from blood-guiltiness. Still less can the fact of Abner’s guilt
justify a deed done purely from motives of revenge and jealousy, although
that deed brought just punishment to a bad man, he fact that God overrules
men’s sin to further His purposes, does not do away with the sinfulness
(See also chapter iv.)


wv 289


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK If,


——_—_—_— SS ee


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Verses 28, 29. These words have
often been regarded as an expression of
exaggerated passion . . . but David
here wishes nothing more than what
the law predicts, and it can never be
sinful to wish God to do what, in
accordance with His will, He must do.
The extension of the curse to the
descendants clearly refers to the threat-
enings of the law; and in both cases
the offensive character disappears, if
we only remember that whoever by
true repentance freed himself from
connection with the guilt was also
exempted from participation in the
punishment.—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 38. This verse has been made
the text of many sermons on the death
of great men. We subjoin the outline
of one. I. A man has fallen. Ido
not mean a mere male human indi-
vidual, one whom the tailor rather
than the mantua maker clothes,—a
walking thing that wears a hat. I
speak of that which God meant when
He said, “Let us make man in our
image, after our likeness.” Marred
sadly now by the concussion of
that fearful fall, but capable of restora-
tion through the cross, and justifying
well, in the renewal of its fair propor-
tions and its countenance erect, the
sacred record, “God has made man
upright ”—a man that has a mind and
uses it—a man that has a heart and
yields to it—a man that shapes his
circumstances—a man that cares not
for himself . , a man to make
occasions—a man to meet emergencies
—a man to dare not only but to bear.

II. A great man has fallen.
A great man first must be a man, and
then must find or make the occasion to
be great. In every man that és a man
there is, potentially, a great man.

Il. A prince has fallen. A
prince in place. The head, as the
word simply means, of twenty millions
of free people, so constituted and de-
clared by their own choice and act. A
prince in rank , a prince in
power. . . a prince in quiet

290 .


dignity—a prince in calm indomitable
resolution—a, prince in utter disregard
of consequences, when the right is seen
and done. . . . “Know ye not”
—who does not know, who does not
feel, who does not own that it is so?—
Bishop Doane on the Death of Presi-
dent Laylor of the United States. 1850.


Ver. 39. David was weak, not so
much because Joab was strong, as be-
cause he himself shrank from doing
what he knew to be right in the case.
Had he put Joab to death, public
opinion would have sustained him in
the execution of justice ; and even if
it had not, he would have had the in-
ward witness that he was doing his duty
to the State. For a magistrate to be
weak, is to be wicked. He is set to
administer and execute the law without
fear or favour; and whensoever he
swerves from justice from either cause,
he is a traitor at once to God and to
the commonwealth. “ Weak!” this is
not to speak like a man, not to say a
king.— Taylor,

It seems surprising that David, who
was then in the flower of his age, and
who had long been distinguished for
his courage and skill as a military
leader, should now decline into a subor-
dinate position as a warrior, and that
Joab should occupy the principal place
in the wars of Israel and should exercise
a dominant influence over David, so
that the king was constrained to say
this. . . . Was this unhappy con-
dition a consequence of his polygamy ?
Was this multiplication of wives, con-
trary to God’s command, a cause of
effeminacy and softness? Did it dis-
quality him for the hardness of the field,
and afford an opportunity for such bold,
ambitious,and insidious persons as J oab,
who profited by his weakness and
favoured it, to gain a mastery over him ?
- « . If David had done what his
conscience told him was right, and what
he did to the murderers of Ishbosheth :
if he had fully trusted God, and done
Justice with courage, according to God’s


law (Gen. ix. 6); relying on God,


OHaP. Tit. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


————————_—_—_—_—_—_—————— i,


and not looking tothe carnal advantages
he derived from the military skill of
Joab and Abishai, he would probably
have prevented other murders, such as
that of Ishbosheth and Amasa ; and he
would have been spared the sorrow of


giving on his deathbed the warrant of
execution against Joab to be put in
effect by Solomon. “Impunity invites
to greater crimes.” “He is cruel to
the innocent who spares the guilty.”—
Wordsworth,


CHAPTER IV.


Critical anp Exrostrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “His hands were feeble,” literally “his hands


slackened,” i.e., “ he lost the power and courage to act asa king.” (Keil.) “Troubled,” or
“* confounded.”


Ver. 2. “Saul’s son.” “Noteworthy is this designation for Ishbosheth.” (Zrdmann.)
“Captains,” etc. “The part that these two men play, as well as Abner’s conduct, suggests
the supposition that the firm military organisation that Saul had called into being had relaxed,
and a disintegration of the army into separate bodies under adventurers and partisans was im-
minent, if it had not already occurred.” (Hrdmann.) “Beeroth.” Probably the present village
of Bireh (Josh. ix. 17), about seven miles north of Jerusalem, and close to the western frontier
of Benjamin.


Ver. 3. “Fled to Gittain.” Where this place was or why the Benjamites fled there is not

own ; some have suggested that the flight took place at the time of the Philistine invasion
mentioned in 1 Sam. xxxi. 7. In Neh. xi. 38, a Gittaim is mentioned as being inhabited by
Benjamites after the exile, but it may not be the same place.


Ver. 4. “Mephibosheth,” or Meribaal (Baal’s fighter) ; see 1 Chron. viii. 34. His name was
changed doubtless for the same reason as Eshbaal was changed to Ishbosheth (see on chap. ii. &).
This fact is here introduced to show that Ishbosheth was the last of Saul’s family who could make
any pretensions to the throne, as, according to Oriental notions, the physical infirmity of Mephi-
bosheth unfitted him for the duties of sovereignty.


Ver. 5. “On a bed,” etc., literally on the mid-day bed, in a quiet, cool, retired pert of the
house, both the hour and the place favouring their deed of bloodshed.


Ver. 6. “Fetched wheat.” The grain for the supply of their soldiers was evidently kept
in the house of the king. “It is still a custom in the East to allow the soldiers a certain
quantity of corn, together with some pay.” (Jamieson.)


Ver. 7. “ As the thread of the narrative was broken by the explanatory remarks in ver. 6, it
is resumed here by the repetition of some of the words. When Thenius, therefore, attempts to
prove the ‘ evident corruption of the Masoretic text’ by appealing to the nonsense of relating
the murder of Ishbosheth, etc., twice over, he is altogether wrong, and has measured the pecu
liarities of Hebrew historians by the standard adopted by ourown. J. P. F. Konigsfeldt has.
given the true explanation when he says:—‘ The Hebrews often repeat in this way for the
purpose of relating something fresh, as for example in this instance, their carrying off the head.’
Compare with this chap. iii. 22, 23, where the arrival of Joab is mentioned twice in two
successive verses ; or chap. v. 1-3, and many other passages.” (Aiel.) “The plain,” te. the
Arabah, or Valley of the Jordan, as in chap. ii. 29,


Ver. 8. “The king.” Notice that David is always here so termed, while in respect to
Ishbosheth the title is always avoided.” (E£rdmann.) “Thine enemy, which sought,” etc.
These words may refer to Ishbosheth, but are generally understood in reference to Saul.
Nothing is said in the history of any attempt of Ishbosheth to slay David. (See also on ver. 11.)


Ver. 11. “How much more,” etc. “The form of the thought is a progression from the
less to the greater. If I executed in Ziklag him who avowed. having killed at his own request
on the battlefield mine enemy Saul, under whose persecutions the Lord delivered me from all
adversity, how much more must I demand at your hands the blood of this righteous man whom
ye murderously slew in his house on his bed.” (Hrdmann.) “Righteous person.” “The
assumption of the regal power which Abner had forced upon Ishbosheth was not a capital
crime in the existing state of things.” (Hvel.) “Require his blood.” “On this phrase see
Gen. ix. 5, according to which God is Himself the avenyer of blood. (Comp. Psa. ix. 13.)
David recognises himself as king in God’s service, and as His instrument.” (Zrdmann.)


291


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK fi.


an an TT TR df 0 Re Soe a aS


Ver. 12. “Cut off,” ete. Becatise the hands and feet were the offending members. Such
unishment is still common in Hastern countries. “The pool,” etc. “Outside the town of
Hebron is a pool of good water, which, being below the level of the adjoining ground, is
accessible by flights of steps at each corner; and there is another reservoir at a little distance,
both of which are very ancient. One or other of these must certainly be the pool referred to,
The exposure of the mutilated relics at the pool was owing to its being a place of public


resort.” (Jamieson.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
Tax Murper or IsHBosHETH.


This chapter further illustrates the teaching of the preceding one, inasmuch
as it—

I. Gives two examples of the unconscious co-operation of human actions and
Divine purpose. The nurse of Mephibosheth obeyed a Divine instinct when
she sought to save her charge from the danger which surrounded him, And she
probably did save him from death at the hand of the Philistines, being so far
permitted by God to succeed in her praiseworthy endeavour. Mephibosheth
was spared to receive from David the tribute of gratitude which he deserved for
his father’s sake, but an apparent accident prevented the execution of the full
intention. The child was saved, but saved to be a hopeless cripple for the rest
of his days, and we can well imagine that his nurse felt long and deep grief in
consequence. But most likely her fall was the means of preventing the son of
Jonathan from coming into collision with his father’s friend, and so bringing
upon himself the fate which befel his uncle. T'o the miscarriage of the planus of
man concerning him he probably owed the blessing of living a peaceful and
honoured life instead of one of turmoil and disappointment. The event which
to his friends seemed so untoward was an intervention of his father’s God on his
behalf, and a meeting and co-operation of the Divine and the human in a
purpose of mercy towards him and towards the nation. For the lameness of
Mephibosheth, as well as the death of Ishbosheth, was the removal of a hindrance
to David’s peaceful accession. The thoughts suggested by this latter event are
the same as those upon the murder of Abner in the preceding chapter.


II. It shows the true standard by which to judge human actions. David,
like the true man he was, looked at the deed of violence done to Ishbosheth not
in the light of the relation in which it stood to himself, but in its relation to
the eternal principles of right and wrong. As in the case of Saul (see page 276)
he could separate the man from the opponent, and, as in the murder of Abner,
he allowed no plausible excuse or plea to blind him to the real nature of the


crime. On this subject see also page 289.
OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.
Ver. 1. Cursed is the man that The contrast is striking between the


trusteth in men, and maketh flesh his
arm. 1. Because of the frailty of all
human supports, with which fall the
hopes based on them. 2. Because of the
faithlessness of men, in whom blind
confidence is placed instead of putting
confidence in the faithfulness of the
Lord. 8. Because of the danger and ruin
of body and soul to which one thereby
exposes himself.-Lange’s Commentary.
292


conduct of Ishbosheth under difficulty
and that of David. In the history of
David we have repeatedly found his
faith faltering, and we have seen him
overcome for the time by the spirit of
distrust. But these occasions occurred
in the midst of protracted and terrible
struggles ; they were exceptions to his
usual bearing; faith commonly bore him
up in his darkest trials. Ishbosheth, on


OHaP. Iv,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





the other hand, had no resource—no
sustaining power whatever under visible
reverses. David’s slips were like the
temporary retiring of the gallant soldier,
when, fagged and weary, he is driven
back for a few moments by superior
numbers; but as soon as he has
recovered his breath, dashes on un-
daunted to the conflict. Ishbosheth’s
failure was like the conduct of the
soldier who lays down his arms and
rushes from the field as soon as he has
begun to taste the bitter storm and
cruel reverses of the war. With all
his slips and failures, there was some-
thing in the demeanour of David that
showed him to be cast in another mould
from that of other men. He was
habitually aiming at a higher standard,
and upheld by the consciousness of a
higher strength.— Blaikie.


Ver. 8. How evil seeks deceitfully to
clothe itself with the appearance of good.
1. By falsehood, in alleging something
evil in others as a pretext to make
itself appear right and good. 2. By
hypocrisy, in representing itself as in
harmony with God’s word and will.
8. By the pretence of having promoted
the interests of another. — Lange’s
Commentary.

How important it is that our con-
duct should be regulated by general
laws, clearly and strictly defined—not
dependent on the capricious judgment
of each individual in his particular case,
or loosely accommodated to particular
circumstances. ‘There seems to be no
crime so flagrant but that some are
found not only to commit it, under the
influence of temptation, but to commit
it without scruple or compunction, by
contriving to persuade the conscience
that theirs is a particular case.—


Lindsay.


Ver. 11. Charity teaches us to make
the best, not only of our friends, but of
our enemies, and to think those may
be righteous persons who yet in some
instances do us wrong.—J//enry.


Ver. 12. These rapid instantaneous
executions by order of David have
raised a painful feeling in pious hearts.
Granting that the retribution was justly
deserved, and granting that a rapid
execution was necessary to make a due
impression on the people, it may be
asked—How could David, as a pious
man, hurry sinners into the presence of
their Judge without leaving them a
moment to ask mercy, or giving them
one affectionate exhortation to re-
pentance? ‘The question is one of
very great difficulty, and with our
present light it hardly admits of a
satisfactory answer. ‘I'he difficulty
arises from our ignorance of the precise
views which prevailed in Old Testament
times in regard to the future world. It
is certain that David and other pious
men believed in a future life, and must
often have thought about it; but how
far they were ordinarily under the
power of the world to come—how far,
for example, the future life was present —
to their thoughts in connection with
such men as Baanah and Rechab—is a
problem which we have not materials
to solve. The abrupt procedure of
David on this and similar occasions
favours the supposition that in their
ordinary frames of mind, when not
specially exercised in spiritual con-
templation to the utmost stretch of
their powers, they had a much less
vivid impression of the future than we
have now.... The Old Testament
did not hide life and immortality from
the view of faith, but it was the New
Testament that brought them clearly
to light.— Blaikie.


293


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK it.





CHAPTER V.


CritioaL anp Expostrory Norres.—Ver. 1. “Then, ete. “The tenor of the history leads
us to hold with Ewald that the recognition of David as king over all Israel occurred immediately
after Ishbosheth’s death, against Stabelin, who thinks that there was an interval of several years
after his death, during which all the tribes gradually came over to David.” (£rdmann.) “ Thy
bone,” etc., z.¢., thy blood relations descended from one common ancestor. “ The alliance of
David with the Philistines had raised so painful a suspicion respecting his patriotic attachment
to Israel, and his protracted residence within the Philistine territory had led to so widespread a
belief that he had become a naturalised Philistine, as to have created powerful obstacles to the
univérsal recognition of his claims to the throne. The people of Israel had, to a large extent,
taken up this impression, and acted in opposition to him as a supposed alien. But time, as well
as the tenor of David’s administration in Judah, had dispelled their doubts and proved him to
their satisfaction to be in heart and soul an Israelite.” (Jamvieson.)


Ver. 2. “BLeddest out,” etc. Most expositors refer this to David’s military leadership
“The Lord said” (see on chap. iii. 17) “ feed,” or, shepherd, i.e, rule them. “ This is the
first time we find a governor described in Scripture as pastor of the people; afterwards the
name is much used by the prophets, particularly Ezek. xxxiv. 23, and in many other places.”
(Patrick.) The designation is also used in Homer. “Captain,” rather leader, prince. “The
first and third grounds answer exactly to the precept in Deut. xvii. 15, ‘Thou shalt make him
king over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose ;’ out of the midst of thy brethren shalt thou
make a king over thee.” (Hrdmann.) “A league,” etc. “The relation of both parties to the
Lord is indicated by the phrase ‘ before the Lord.’” (Erdmann.) “ There was probably gradually
established among king and people some recognition of mutual rights and duties—an unwritten,
or, possibly in part, a written law. This would not be out of harmony with the theocratic con-
ception of the government. Philippson points out some apparent indications (as 1 Kings xii.)
of such a law.” (Zransr. of Lange’s Commentary.) See also notes on 1 Sam. x. 25. “They
anointed David.” “'l'o which the chronicler adds (1 Chr. xi. 3) ‘ according to the word of the
Lord by Samuel,’ an explanatory addition referring to the Lord’s command to Samuel to anoint
David king over Israel. David’s anvinting by Samuel is now confirmed by the anointing of the
people, they having expressly and solemnly recognised his Divine call to be king over Israel.”
(Erdmann)


Ver. 4. “Thirty years old.” “The age of David shows that the events related from
1 Sam. xiii. to the end of the book did not occupy above ten years—four years in Saul’s service,
four years of wandering, one year and fcur months among the Philistines, and a few months
after Saul’s death.” (Bzblical Commentary.)


Ver. 6. “Went to Jerusalem.” “ That this took place immediately after the anointing of
David as king of Israel is apparent not only from the fact that the account follows directly
afterwards, but also from the circumstance that, according to verse 5, David reigned in Jerusalem
just as many years as he was king over all Israel.” (Keid.) ‘“ Whether David was directed by
the special guidance of the Holy Spirit, or whether he was left solely to his own judgment
regarding it, we cannot but admire the wisdom of the arrangement he made in the choice of
Jerusalem in contrast to the shortsighted policy of Saul in reference to the same matter. The
son of Kish set up his court in his native town of Gibeah—a place of no intrinsic importance—
and bearing reproach among the pecple as having been the scene of one of the foulest outrages
ever committed in the land. Moreover, it was within the territory of his own tribe of Benjamin,
and his preference for it was apt to provoke the jealousy of the others. David, however, pro-
ceeded upon other and more statesmanlike principles. He would not continue in Hebron. No

*doubt that city was equally sacred to all the people, from its connection with their common
father Abraham, but it had been recognised as the special capital of Judah; and if David had
remained in it, some overzealous partisan of Judah might have said that the other tribes had
beeu merely annexed to or absorbed in the little kingdom which for seven years and a half had
its seat of government there. Hence, just as in our own times Victor Emanuel, when he was
called to the throne of a united Italy, removed his capital first from Turin to Florence, and
afterward from Florence to Rome, feeling that it was due to the other portions of his people
that he should be no longer a mere Sardinian or Tuscan prince, so David wisely considered that
a regard to the feelings of the other tribes demanded that some other city than Hebron should
be chosen as the metropolis. But in determining what place should be selected, many difficulties
would present themselves, Bethlehem, though dearer to him than all other cities, could not be
thought of; and if he had gone into the territory of any other tribe than his own he might have
been liable to the imputation of partiality, and might have provoked jealousy throughout eleven-
twelfths of his dominions, In these circumstances the easiest solution of the difficulty would be
to get hold of some place of requisite strength and importance not presently identified with any
of the tribes, and in the acquirement of which all of them might have a share. Sucha place
was the fortress of Zion, held by the tribe of the Jebusites, whom, up to this time, no army


294


OHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL é
cee ee NOS Se OS WY ie Rr ee Pe A ET ON ays ee
had been able to dislodge. It was situated at the extreme verge of the territory of Judah,
where it abutted on that of Benjamin, and belonged, properly speaking, to neither. ( Taylor.)
“The Jebusites.” “These belonged to the great Canaanitish race (Gen. x. 6) who dwelt,
when the Israelites took possession of Palestine, in the mountain district of Judah. (Comp.
Numb. xiii. 30, Josh. xi. 3.) Neither Joshua who conquered them in a battle (Josh. xi. 3 sq.),
nor the children of Judah, who only got possession of the lower city (Judges i. 8; comp.
Josephus Ant. V. 2, 2), nor the Benjamites, to whom the city had been assigned (Josh, xviii. 28)
could conquer the strong citadel of Jebus on Mount Zion.” (Erdmann.) “The blind and
the lame.” It is impossible to decide with certainty to what or to whom this expression refers,
Some, including several Jewish expositors, and Luther, regard it as describing the idols of the
Jebusites, which they had placed upon their battlements, and upon which they relied for
defence, and whom they knew the Israelites regarded with scorn. (See Psa. cxv. 4 sg.) The
most probable interpretation seems to be that the Jebusites felt so secure in their citadel, shut in
as it was by deep valleys on three sides, that they taunted the men of Israel with the assurance
that blind and lame men would suffice to keep them out. Keil and most modern scholars thus
interpret it. Wordsworth, however, objects to it on the ground that if the reference was to such
persons they would have been pitied, and not hated (see ver. 8) by David.


Ver. 7. “The stronghold of Zion.” ‘There is great difference of opinion as to which
height was originally known as Mount Zion. It is certain that from the time of Constantine
the name has been given to the western hill, on which has always stood the city of J erusalem,
but Mr. Fergusson, in his article on Jerusalem in the Biblical Dictionary, produces a mass of
evidence in favour of identifying the ancient Mount Zion with the eastern hill (now called
Mount Moriah), upon which the Temple was built, and to which he says it is certain the name
was exclusively applied up to the time of the destruction of the city by Titus. He adduces in
proof the words of Psa. xxviii. 2, and other passages, in which Zion is spoken of as a holy place
in such terms as are never applied to Jerusalem (Psa. ii. 6, cxxxii. 13, Joel iii, 27, etc.), and
others in which he thinks Zion is spoken of as a separate city from Jerusalem, (Psa. li. 18
Zech. i. 17, etc.) “The Rabbis,” he adds, “with one accord place the Temple on Mount Zion,”
and contends that the transference of the name Zion from the western to the eastern hill solves
all the difficulties which have hitherto surrounded the identification of many sites mentioned in
Sacred History.


Ver. 8. “The gutter.” The cataract or waterfall. (So Keil and Erdmann.) Some under-
stand simply a declivity ; but the first rendering agrees with the meaning which must be given
to the Hebrew word in Psalm xliii. 8, which is the only other place in which it occurs.
“Hated,” etc. This clause may be rendered who hate, but the other rendering is the more
probable. Erdmann remarks, “‘ Both these admissible renderings point to the fact that the
Israelites had to maintain a furious, embittered combat with the enemy.” But the entire
passage is very obscure, and has received various interpretations, “Wherefore they said”
is generally taken to mean that these classes were excluded from the Temple, but for that:
assertion we have no proof, and it is hard to see what this proverb could have to do with the
Temple, which was not at that time in existence. The true explanation seems to be, “The
blind and the lame are there—let him enter the place if he can:”’ a proverb which came to be
current with regard to any fortress that was reputed to be impregnable. ( Taylor.)


Ver. 9. “So David dwelt,” literally, sat down. Whichever eminence is here referred to,
this was the foundation of that city which was to become the most memorable in the history of
the world. “Those only,’ says Dean Stanley, “who reflect on what Jerusalem has since
been to the world can appreciate the grandeur of the moment when it passed from the
hands of the Jebusites, and became ‘the city of David.’” Its situation is in keeping with
its history, and is thus described by Dean Stanley. “ The situation of Jerusalem is in several
respects singular among the cities of Palestine. Its elevation is remarkable, not from its
being on the summit of one of the numerous hills of Judea, like most of the towns and
villages, but because it is on the edge of one of the highest table-lands of the country......
From the south, the approach is by a slight descent (Hebron being higher still), but from
every other side the ascent is perpetual; and, to the traveller approaching Jerusalem from the
west or east, it must always have presented the appearance . . . beyond any important
city that has ever existed on the earth, of @ mountain city ; breathing, as compared with the
sultry plains of the Jordan or of the coast, a mountain air ; enthroned, as compared with Jericho
or Damascus, Gaza or Tyre, on a mountain fastness. In this respect it concentrated in itself the
character of the whole country of which it was to be the capital—the “ mountain throne ”—the
**mountain sanctuary” of God. . . . Again, Jerusalem was on the ridge, the broadest and
most strongly marked ridge of the backbone of the complicated hills which extend through the
whole country from the desert to the plain of Esdraelon. Every wanderer, every conqueror, every
traveller who has trod the central route of Palestine from north to south must have passed through
the table-land of Jerusalem. . . . Abraham, as he journeyed from Bethel to Hebron—
Jacob, as he wandered on his lonely exile from Beersheba to Bethel; . . . Joshua, as he
force? his way from Jericho, and met the kings in battle at Gibeom 3 the Philistines, as they


295


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK IL








came up from the maritime plain and pitched in Michmash ; no less than Pompey, when in later
times he came up from the valley of the Jordan, or the Crusaders when they came from Tyre
with the express purpose of attacking Jerusalem—must all have crossed the territory of Jebus.
Ancient writers thought Jerusalem to be so much in the midst of the then known world that
they called it literally “the navel of the earth.” “In reference,” says Dr. Jamieson, “to the
actual circumstances and after history of the Jews, Jerusalem was, of all sites in the country,
the best that could be chosen ; and yet on its mountain height, far away from the roads between
the great empires, and accessible only by steep and winding passes, it was secluded, so that it was
freed, as it now is, from any necessary implication in the great movements of the world. So secluded,
and yet so central, it was marvellously fitted as the scene of the events that were to be transacted in
it. “Millo,” or “the filling.” “At any rate some kind of fortification, probably a large tower or
castle. The name probably originated in the fact that through this tower or castle the fortifica-
tion of the city, or the surrounding wall, was filled or completed. It was probably a well-known
fortress erected by the Jebusites.” (Keil.)


Ver. 11. “Hiram.” From 2 Chron. ii. 2,and 1 Kings v. 15, it seems clear that this is the
same man who was afterwards Solomon’s ally. Hence some have supposed that this embassy
was not sent until a long time after the conquest of Zion, and that the arrangement of the events
in this chapter is “topical rather than strictly chronological.” (Keil.) As Hiram was still
reigning twenty years after the erection of the temple (1 Kings ix. 10), Keil places this embassy
from six to ten years after David’s accession to the sovereignty of the entire kingdom. “Cedar
trees.” The eastern part of Lebanon (Antilibanus), which belonged to Israel, did not produce
— trees ; but the north-western range, belonging to Phenicia, was then covered with cedar

orests.


Ver. 18. “Out of,” etc, In J erusalem, as in 1 Chron, xiv.


Ver. 14. “Shammuah,” etc. These are the sons of Bathsheba, although there is a slight
difference in the termination of two of the names in 1 Chron. iii. 5.


Vers. 15 and 16, There are seven names here and nine in 1 Chron. fil, Keil suggests that
the two first-named, Eliphat and Nogah, died in infancy, and that two younger children received
the same nameg,


Ver. 17. “To the hold.” Keil and others understand this to refer to some mountain
fortress outside the citadel of Zion, and Keil further contends that this event must have there-
fore taken place before the Jebusites were driven out, as it is most unlikely David would have
quitted the fortification to attack the enemy. Erdmann considers that it refers to the citadel
itself, and thinks the expression “went down” is not against this view, for, “though the citadel
was so high than one ascended from it on all sides, yet its plateau was by no means a horizontal
plain, but was made up of higher and lower parts, and David of course made his residence upon
the highest and safest part, the most favourable position for a military outlook, while the fortifi-
cations must have necessarily lain upon the relatively lower north-western side, and with this agrees
the fact that the Philistines advanced to the attack from the west.” Maurer remarks, “David
was not yet certain whether to defend himself at the walls, or to advance to meet the enemy.”


Ver. 18. “Valley of Rephaim.” Many writers identify this locality with a fruitful plain
nearly three miles long by two wide, lying to the south-west of J erusalem, and only separated from
the valley of Hinnom by a narrow ridge of land. But Mr. Grove (Bib. Dictionary) contenda
that it does not answer to the description of the Hebrew word, which always designates an
enclosed valley. It was the scene of some of David’s most remarkable adventures, It doubtlesg
derived its name from the ancient Rephaim, or giants. (Josh. xv. 8, etc.)


Ver. 20. “Baal-perazim.” The place of breaches, or bursts. (See ver. 20.) “There may
have been previously a sanctuary of Baal on this spot.” (Bib, Dict.)


Ver. 21. “Images.” Probably small tutelary deities which they brought with them into
the field for protection.


Ver. 23, “Mulberry trees.” “Baca-shrubs.” From baca, to weep. Hence either some
drooping tree like the weeping willow, or one which sheds gum like the balsam. The Arabg
now give the name to a tree of the latter kind, from which, if a leaf is broken off, there flows
sap like a white tear.


Ver 24. “The sound of a going.” Asif an army was advancing. “The word signifies
® majestic stately tread or stepping, often used of God. (Paa. xviii, 7.) (Tr, of Lange's
Commentary. )


Ver. 25. “Geba.” Probably Gibeah of Saul or of Benjamin, a city to the north of
Benjamin, the present Jebs, “Gazer,” or Gezer, at the extreme north of the Philisting
country.


296


OHAP. ¥. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


ay
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1-5.
Davip cHoseN Kina ovER ALL IsraxL,


Y, Those who prove their right to rule by their conduct will in due time
find subjects to maintain their sovereignty. ‘The divine right of kings must
be sought and found in what men are’ and in what they have done or can do.
Those who claim to be leaders and rulers of men claim to be God’s vicegerents,
and as such must produce their credentials—proofs of intellectual and moral
worth. If no man can represent a human monarch without credentials, much
more are they to be demanded when a man assumes the headship of a nation or
@ community and claims authority over it in the name of the King of kings.
And those of character and ability are the only ones that will be accepted in the
long run, and none but these will command an allegiance worth having. David
had to wait long before the whole nation recognised his right to reign, but in all
these years of waiting he was adding to his credentials, and by a series of brave
and righteous deeds was increasing the strength of his claim to the throne until
it became irresistible, and the whole nation was forced to acknowledge that he
whom God had chosen to shepherd it was fully worthy of the high honour to
which he was called. So it has ever been and will be. Although no prophet is
sent to anoint the head of him whom God now calls to similar service, yet every
divinely appointed king of men, possessing as he does these qualifications to
rule, will in due time be placed upon a throne by willing subjects.


II. The special qualifications demanded by God in a king or ruler. God
expresses His idea of the relationship of a king to His people by the use of the
word shepherd, and thus entirely removes the office from that of the despot who
uses his people for his own selfish ends instead of using his life for their welfare.
We learn from the words of Jacob, in Gen. xl. 34 sq., what were the duties of
an Eastern shepherd, and how stern was the life he led—how far removed his
lot was from one of indolence and self-indulgence. ‘This is the symbol which
the Divine King uses when speaking of David, and repeats constantly in the
Old ‘Testament writings to show what He demands from those whom He calls to
rule. Such a call does not mean exemption from care and toil, but a large
increase of such burdens. In His eyes the honour is not in being served, but in
rendering service, and the larger sphere and the more elevated position involve
heavier duties and larger qualifications. Shepherds of men are expected to be
willing to follow the example of the Great Shepherd, who proved Himself the
true King of men by giving Himself for the flock. And for this work a
special knowledge is also needed, As a man must be possessed of some special
knowledge to be a successful shepherd, so a ruler of men must be possessed of
special knowledge. Christ is the pre-eminent ruler of men because He knows
them-—because He needs not that any should “testify of any man” whom He
is shepherding. (John ii, 25, x. 14). And it behoves him who is called by God
to be an under-shepherd to make men in general—and especially those under
his care—the objects of his thoughtful study, that he may become acquainted
wlth their dispositions and needs. ‘I'o do this he must have also a loving
sympathy with them, We are none of us strangers to the feeling of regard which
often springs up in men towards animals dependent on them, and therefore we
can imagine that a faithful shepherd has some affection for his sheep. ‘T'his is
indispensable in human shepherds, for to Jove men is to understand them, and to
love them is to be willing to suffer for them, and will beget love in return in any
men worthy of the name. ‘The Great Shepherd had as much love for men as
He had knowledge of them, and therefore “all kings shall fall down before
Him, all nations shall serve Him.” (Psa, Ixxii. 11). Every elevation in life
brings with the honour a due proportion of increased duties and responsibilities,


and such an exaltation as that which David experienced was heavily weighted
with them. i


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


Book i.


FD


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 8. During all this time he was
sedulously engaged in completing the
discipline of the rough men who had
shared his desert fortunes, and preparing
them for the higher service on which
they were afterwards to enter. Can
we imagine a position better adapted
for this purpose? For was it not the
most sacred place in the whole country ?
Was it not on that very ground...
that for more than two centuries their
ancestors had guarded their high
deposit, maintained the divine testi-
mony, and manifested the divine order
of human life? Did not the treasured
sepulchre there, upon that hill, which
was already ancient and worn, with the
passing of eleven centuries over its
covered surface, contain their dust ?
— Drew.

Not all at once did David pass from
the shepherd life of Bethlehem to the
throne of Jerusalem. There wasa long,
and weary, and trying road to be
traversed by him after his anointing by
Samuel, before he reached the lofty
elevation for which he was designated
and consecrated by the prophets oil.
He was not cradled in luxury, nor
dandled in affluence, but his character
was hardened by trial, and his judg-
ment was matured by frequently recur-
ring emergency. From the very first,
indeed, he was “prudent in matters,”
but such a history as his could not but
stimulate and sharpen his natural
abilities, His military genius, which
was destined yet to show itself on many
a glorious field as he extended his
dominion “from sea to sea, and from
the river to the ends of the land,” had
been quickened and developed by his
experiences in the long war with the
house of Saul; and his knowledge of
human nature, an acquirement so need-
ful for one who was to be a ruler of men,
had been increased by his dealing with
his followers in the hold, and with his
enemies in diplomacy; while, best of
all, his confidence in God had been
strengthened by his manifold trials, in
and through which he had been sus-
tained by the divine grace, and out of
which he had been delivered by the

298


divine hand. But it is not different
yet. Success is not usually a sudden
thing, or, if it be so, it is not a whole-
some thing. Generally speaking, it ig
a matter of time, and trial, and dili-
gence, and study. The heat of the
conservatory, which brings the flower
rapidly to maturity, does also nurse it
into weakness,.so that its beauty is only
short-lived ; but the plant that grows
in the open air isstrengthened while it
grows, and is able to withstand even
the biting winter’s cold. Resistance is
necessary to the development of power ;
and the greatest misfortune that can
befall a youth is to have no difficulties
whatever with which to contend. It is
by overmastering obstacles that a man’s
character is mainly made. Hence, let
no one be discouraged who is called in
early life to struggle with adversity.
He is thereby only making himself for
his future life-work. Notina day, nor
in @ year, nor in many years, do we
reach the throne of our individual
power, the sphere of our personal and
peculiar labour. We graduate up to it
through trial, and each new difficulty
surmounted is not only a new step in
the ladder upward, but also a new
qualification for the work that is
before “Uist ete

Nor does this principle hold merely
of the early part of our earthly life ag
related to the later. It will be illus-
trated also in our earthly life as con-
nected with a heavenly. If we be
Christ’s, it is no doubt true that He is
preparing a place for each of us; but
it is just as true that, through the dis-
cipline of our daily difficulties, he is
preparing each of us for our own par-
ticular place ; and the characters we
are forming here will find their appro-
priate employment and development in
the work which in heaven will be
assigned tous. . . . Thus by the
leverage of this principle we lift our
earthly lives up to the very level of
heaven itself; and every experience we
are passing through now becomes a
preparation for our eternal royalty at
Christ's right hand.—7Zaylor,


CRAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Doe —————————Ee enna


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 6-25.
Tar Conquest OF JERUSALEM AND THE DEFEAT OF THE PHILISTINE,


I, Mao's true security and strength lies not in his possession of the seen,
but in his relation to the unseen. When David and his men advanced upon
the fortified city of Jerusalem, all appearances were against them and for
the Jebusites. ‘To the eye of sense it seemed impossible that this hitherto
impregnable fort should yield to the attack of any army. When we remember
what it cost the legions of Rome to reduce it by siege, we can form some idea
how altogether unlikely it appeared that such a force as that which David led
could carry it by assault. If there had been no agencies at work beyond those
which appealed to the eye of sense, we can well believe that the boast of the
Jebusites would have been justified by the result. But a power was with the
men of Israel of which the dwellers in Jerusalem took no account. The God
of battles was on the side of the former, and He had decreed that for purposes
of mercy to the world at large, the stronghold of Zion should become the city
of David. It was not gained by him by strength of arm or skill in warfare,
but given to him as a servant of the Lord God of Hosts. And when he was
established there he dwelt securely, not by reason of the towers and walls which
he built round about, but because the same God established and exalted him
for His people’s sake. But though we read that David perceived this truth
(verse 12), is there not reason to fear that his trust in the unseen and real was
far from perfect and undivided? In the multiplication of wives and concubines,
after the manner of the heathen nations, there seems to be a reaching out after
some apparent but unreal sources of strength, which afterwards proved them-
selves to be indeed elements of insecurity and weakness. Assuming that his
action in this matter must have been prompted in great measure by political
motives, and remembering the disastrous consequences which followed, we learn
bow fatal is any attempt to look for success and security anywhere but in the
service of God.


II. The enemies of God’s kingdom on the earth are undaunted and persevering
in the face of continued defeats. ‘The conquest of the Jebusites, although so
striking and complete, did not prevent the Philistine host from seeking David,
and the entire rout of their army at Baal-perazim did not discourarge them
from coming up yet again. In the struggle that is ever waging between the
Church of God and her foes, the servants of God have ever found their
enemies as undaunted by reverses as were these people by the previous successes
of David. It might have been thought that his name, associated as it had so
often been with such signal disaster to this nation, would have ensured te him
exemption from their attacks, but this was so far from being the case that they
hesitated not to attack him even now when his position was stronger and his
followers more numerous than ever. ‘he courage and pertinacity of these
Philistines were worthy of a better cause, and the same may be said of many a
host since which has arrayed itself against the Lord and against His anointed.
The history of the world plainly teaches us that it is not only those who fight
for God and right who can persevere in the face of defeats, for their opponents
have often proved to be equal to them in this respect. It behoves them to see
to it that they never surpass them.


III. Those who follow God’s commands will have Him go before with
needful help. In both the instances before us, David, as was his custom, asked
euidance from above. By this act he acknowledged that he did not érus¢ in his
bow, and that he knew his sword could not save him (Psa. xl. 6), and that he
went forth now, as in the days of his youth (1 Sam. xvil. 45), only as lah


s2OMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK IL.


—_—_—_—_—_———


of the Lord God of Israel. And the result of this reverent waiting upon God


for direction was what it always was and ever will be.


God never commands


His people to go where He will not go before them, and never sends them to
battle for Him at their own charges. But while they see to it that they keep
close to the Divine directions and patiently fulfil the conditions imposed by
Divine wisdom, they must be energetic in doing their part, and “ bestir”
{ver. 24) themselves to make use of the intervention of God on their behalf.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 9. The establishment of David’s
capital . . . illustrates the principles
upon which his kingdom stood, and
shows wherein it differed from the
great Asiatic empires which were con-
temporary with it. The first sign of
the unity of these monarchies was the
building of some great city . . . the
inhabitants felt they were a people
because they were encompassed with
walls The commonwealth of
Israel began in open plains and pas-
tures. A smgle man, who had not a
foot of earth for his possession, was its
founder. . . Only after centuries of
conflicts, discomfitures, humiliations,
they acquired a king, and a city which
he could make the centre of their tribes
. . . . Here are the two kinds of
civilisation ; the civic life is in one the
beginning, in the other the result of a
long process. But in the first you
have a despotism which becomes more
expansive and oppressive from day to
day .. . in the other sometimes a
weary struggle, but it is the struggle
of spirits, a struggle for life. And God
Himself is helping that struggle. . .
and bringing out of confusion a real, at
last even something of a visible and
outward unity.— Maurice,


Ver. 12. his language, some may
think, would have been more suitable
and pious if an extraordinary, evidently
miraculous, event had raised David to
the throne of Israel. Such an event
might have enabled him to perceive
that he was divinely elected to reign ;
he might have continued to reign with
the same comfortable assurance. But
he appears to have risen quite as slowly
—under the same course of accidents—
as other leaders, . . . What man

300


who has not taken some very outra-
geous method of establishing his power,
might not say that the Lord had
bestowed his dominion upon him, if
that phrase became the lips of the
shepherd sovereign ? This is a question
which I am not able to answer. I do
not know what king might not safely
adopt these words and ought not to
adopt them. The danger, I fancy, is
in the idle use of them when no definite
meaning is attached to them. So far
from admitting that David would have
had more righ, to think and speak as
he did, if —_.¢ angel suddenly appear-
ing had jaced the crown upon his
head, 7 apprehend that the strength
and liveliness of his conviction arose
from . , the successiveness, the
continuity, of the steps in his history,
which assured him that God’s hand
had been directing the whole. One
startling event . . . he might have re-
ferred to chance, or to the rare irregular
interference of an omnipotent Being.
Only such a Being as the Lord’ God of
Abraham . could have woven
the web of his destinies. . . . The
two clauses of the sentence are in-
separably connected. A government
which a man wins for himself he uses
for himself. That which he inwardly
and practically acknowledges as con-
ferred upon him by a righteous Being
cannot be intended for himself. , :
The deepest lesson which David had
learnt was that he himself was under
government ; that in his heart and
will was the inmost circle of that
authority which the winds and the
sea, the moon and the stars, obeyed,
: To understand that the em-
pire over wills and hearts is the highest
which man can exercise, leauge it ig


OHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


A a a


the highest which God exercises; to
understand that his empire cannot be
one of rough compulsion, because God’s
is not of that kind; to understand
that the necessity for stern, quick, in-
evitable punisliment, arises from the
unwillingness of men to abide under a
yoke of grace and gentleness; to un-
derstand that the law looks terrible
and overwhelming to the wrong-doer,
just because he has shaken off his rela-
tion to the Person from whom law
issues, in whom dwells all humanity
and sympathy, all forgiveness and re-
claiming mercy—this was the highest
privilege of a Jewish king, that upon
which the rightful exercise of all his
functions depended.— Maurice.


Vers. 23, 24. The rustling of the
Lord’s approaching help in the tops of
the trees. 1. Dost thou wait for it at
His bidding? 2. Dost thou hear it
with the right heed? 3. Dost thou
understand it in the right sense? 4.
Dost thou follow it without delay ?—
Lange's Commentary.

These words are important for us
also, in a figurative sense, in our war-
fare with the children of unbelief in
this world. They teach us that in our
ywn strength, and merely with the
human weapons of reason and science,
we are not to make war against the
adversary. Success can only be calcu-
lated upon when the conflict is under-
taken under the influence of the Holy
Spirit of God, breathed forth and in
the immediate blessed experience of
the gracious presence of the Lord, and
of the truth of his Word. Then there
breaks forth from our hearts that which
we call “ testimony ;” —a speaking
from the present enjoyment of salva-
tion ; a speaking arising from a com-
prehensive, vital, powerful conception
of the infallibility of that for which the
undertaking has been begun ; a speak-
ing of the whole animated personality,


This breaks through the enemy. No


bulwark of science falsely so called
withstands this.—Krummacher.


Verses 22-25. We cannot but be
struck, in thisnarrative, with the humble
piety of David in asking guidance from
the Lord, and with his willingness im-
plicitly to obey the commands which
he received. Nor can we fail to observe
the clear and explicit nature of the
answers which he received from the Urim
and ‘'hummim. The ancient heathens
had their oracles in connection with the
temples in which they worshipped their
divinities ; but the responses given at
these places to those who consulted
them were generally expressed so am-
biguously that no great guidance was
ee by them, and they could not be

alsified by any event....... But

here, in the replies given by the sacred
breastplate, there is no obscurity.
Everything is definite and clear, and
David could have no hesitation as to
his duty in each case. Of course, there
is not now any such means of obtaining
the unerring guidance of God as David
then enjoyed, in so far as the contin-
gencies of our daily lives are concerned;
but still, in answer to prayer, God will
lead us in the right way, provided only
we unfeignedly commit ourselves to
Him, and willingly accept His direction
step by step. Here is the warrant on
which every one of us is entitled to
proceed : “If any of you lack wisdom,
let him ask of God, that giveth to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not, and
and it shall be given him.” Let us,
therefore, use the Bible and the throne
of grace as David employed the Urim
and Thummim, and we may depend
upon it that, even as “the sound of a
going in the tops of the mulberry trees”
indicated to him when he was to ad-
vance, there will be something, either
within ourselves or in the arrangement
of God’s providence external to us,
which will guide us,—TZaylor,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK II.








“CHAPTER VI.


CritioaL AND Expository Norms.—Verse 1, ‘Chosen Men.” Keil understands this
wsembly to have been composed of representatives of the ntire nation, but the use of the word
sgain seems to point to a military gathering. Thenius remarks that we learn from this “that
David already in a certain sense maintained a standing army.”


Ver. 2. “All the people,” etc. “These are not the above-named thirty thousand warriors,
but besides them, the representatives of the whole nation gathered to the festival as described
in 1 Chron. xiii. 1-16, where nothing is said of a military body ; while here in our passage the
preliminary conference with the heads of families is passed over, and only a summary statement
made as to the accompaniment of the ark by the people.” (Hrdmann.) “ Baale of Judah.”
From 1 Chron. xiii. 6, we know that this was Kirjath-jearim where the ark was carried before
the death of Samuel. It still retained its ancient Canaanitish name (Josh. xv. 9, 60) in con-
junction with the one given by the Israelites. “It lay on the border between Judah and
Benjamin, westward on the border of the latter tribe and about eight miles west of Jerusalem.”
(Erdmann.) “Whose name,” etc. The rendering of this phrase is difficult ; it is probably
“over which, or upon which, the Name is ealled (or invoked) the Nume of Jehovah, etc. “The
name of God denotes all the operations of God through which He attests His personal presence
in that relation into which he has entered to man, :.e., the whole of His divine self-manifestation,
or of that side of the divine nature which is turned towards men.”—( Herzog.)


Ver. 8. “Anew cart.” This mode of conveyance was in direct opposition to the Divine
requirement (Numb. vii. 9), and was probably borrowed from a custom of the Philistines and
others, who are supposed to have had sacred carts on which to carry about their gods.
“Abinadab.” The ark had been standing in the house of Abinadab from the time when the
Philistines sent it back into the land of Israel, ¢.e., about seventy years, viz. twenty to the
victory of Ebenezer (1 Sam. vii.), forty years under Samuel and Saul, and about ten years under
David. The further statement that Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, drove the cart may
easily be reconciled with this. These two sons were either born about the time when the ark
was taken to Abinadab’s house, or at a subsequent period ; or else the term sons is used, as is
frequently the case, in the sense of grandsons, (Keil and others.) “Gibeah,” rather, the hill.


Ver. 4. “Accompanying the ark.” Literally, with the ark. This sentence not fitting
the sone, most critics suppose a copyist’s error, and omit either the whole of ver. 4, or the first
tlause of it.


Ver. 5. “Played.” Literally, were sporting, t.e., dancing to vocal and instrumental music.
“All manner of instruments,” etc. Literally, with all manner of cypress-woods, which
makes no sense, hence many critics adopt the reading of the Septuagint, “wish might and with
songs,” as in 1 Chron. xiii, 8. “Harps” (kinnor). A stringed instrument, which apparentiy
more resembled the guitar than our modern harp, since it was played on in walking.
“Psalteries” (nelc/). (See 1 Sam. x. 5.) “Timbrel” (toph). A species of hand-drum or
tambourine. “Cornet” (menana). An instrument which consisted of two rods fastened
together at one end, upon which rings were hung which made a tinkling sound when shaken.


Ver. 6. “Nachon’s threshing floor.” Nachon is not a proper name. Erdmann translates
“a fixed threshing floor,” i.e. “one which did not change its place like a summer floor (Dan. ii,
35), and therefore probably had a roof.” Keil and others read “the threshing floor of smiting, or
of the stroke, conjecturing that it was so called from the incident which took place there,
“ Shook it.” rather, stumbled, thereby making it likely that the cart would be overturned.


Ver. 7. “Error.” “ None could so much as look at the ark, much less touch it (Numb. iv.
15, 16, 20), without peril of life.”


Ver. 8. “Displeased.” “The word denotes angry excitement.” (Erdmann. ) On further
reflection, David could not fail to discover where the cause of Uzzah’s offence, which he had
stoned for with his life, really had lain, and that it had actually arisen from the fact that he
(David) and those about him had decided to disregard the distinct instructions of the law with
regard to the handling of the ark.” (Keil.) “Perez-uzzah,” or the rent or breach of Uzzah.
The situation of this place is unknown, but Josephus says that it retained its name in his day.


Ver. 9. “Afraid.” “ David’s excitement at what had occurred was soon changed into fear of
the Lord.” (Keil.) “Obededom the Gittite.” A Levite of the family of the Korahites, who
descended from Kohath (comp. Exod. vi. 16, 18, 21, with 1 Chron. xxvi. 4); he was therefore
one of the family whose special duty it was tu bear the ark. He is generally supposed to have
been called the Gittite from his birthplace, the Levitical city of Gathrimmon, in the tribe of Dan
(Ji osh, xix. 45). The name of this man is literally serving, or servant of, Edom. “It may be
surmised that he, or some ancestor of his, had once been in servitude to the Edomites.” (Trener,
of Lange’s Commentary.) ney

302


GHAP. Vi. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : SAMUEL











Ver. 13. ¢6* They that bare.?? This shows that the Divine requirements were now strictly
complied with. (See 1 Chrun. xy. 11-15.) ** Six paces.?? This ‘s sometimes understood to
mean that a fresh sacrifice was offered at every six paces, but there is nothing in the text to
favour such an assumption—the plaim statement is that as soon as the bearers had advanced the
first six paces, the. offerings took place. (So. Keil, Erdmann, and others.)


Ver, 14. “David danced.” “As emotions of joy or sorrow express themselves in move:
ments or gestures of the body, efforts have been made among all nations, but especially
among those of the south and east, in proportion as they seem more demonstrative, to reduce to
measure and to strengthen by unison the more pleasurable—those of joy. The dance is spoken
of in holy Scripture universally as symbolical of rejoicing . . . and in the earlier
period is found combined with some song or refrain (Exod. xv. 20, etc.) . . . more
especially in those outbursts of popular feeling which cannot find vent in voice or gesture
singly. Nor is there any more strongly popular element traceable in the religion of the ancient
Jews than the opportunity so given to a prophet or prophetess to enkindle enthusiasm . <
more especially among the women, themselves most easily stirred and most capable of exciting
others. The dance was regarded even by the Romans as the worship of the body . . . and
Plato certainly reckons dancing as part of gymnastics. So far was the feeling of the purest
period of antiquity from attaching the notion of effeminacy to dancing that the ideas of this
and of warlike exercises are mutually interwoven.” (Smith’s Biblical Dictionary.) “A linen
ephod.” “The white ephod was, strictly speaking, a priestly costume, althongh in the law it is
not prescribed as the dress to be worn by them when performing their official duties, but rather
as the dress which denoted the priestly character of the wearer (see at 1 Sam. xxii. 18); and
for this reason it was worn by David in connection with these festivities ea the head of the
priestly nation of Israel.” (Keil.)


Ver. 16. “Micha ~ etc. As has been remarked on verse 14, the women of the Jewish
nation, and especially those nearly related to the heroes of the occasion, were accustomed to take
the most prominent part in the demonstration (Exod. xv. 20, Judges xi. 84), hence Michal should
herself have led the female choir and have come out to meet David and the ark, and her absence
shows, in a very marked manner, her want of religious sympathy. Keil remarks that “in
David she only loved the brave hero and exalted king,” not the servant of God.


Ver. 17. “In his place,” etc. “That is, in the space marked off according to the
tabernacle which still stood in Gibeon, in the Holy of Holies.” (Erdmann.) “ Why did not
David remove the mosaic tabernacle to Mount Zion at the same time as the ark of the covenant
and so restore the divinely-established sanctuary in its integrity? ‘This question can only be
answered by conjectures. One of the principal motives for allowing the existing separation oi
the ark from the tabernacle to continue may have been that, during the time the two sanctuaries
had been separated two high priests had arisen, one of whom officiated at the tabernacle of
Gibeon, whilst the other (Abiathar) had been the channel of all Divine communications to David
during his persecution, and had also officiated as high priest in his camp; so that he could nc
more think of deposing him from the office which he had hitherto filled, in consequence of the
reorganisation of the legal worship, than he could of deposing Zadok, of the line of Eleazar, the
officiating high priest at Gibeon. Moreover, David may from the very first have regarded
the service which he instituted at Zion as merely a provisional arrangement.” (Keil.) “Davia
offered.” “Of course not in his own person, but through the priests.” (rdmann.)


Ver. 18. “He blessed,” etc. “Not the Aaronic blessing (Numb. vi. 22), which pertained
only to the high priest, but, like Solomon’s (1 Kings viii. 55), a concluding benedictory address
to the whole people.” (Hrdmann.)


Ver. 19. “A piece,” etc. The words of flesh have no counterpart in the Hebrew ; moat
translators read a measure or cup, and may signify anything (probably here a portion of the
sacrifice) measured out. A flagon of wine is not in the original, which ought to have been
rendered a grape or raisin cake, t.e., dried grapes pressed into a cake,


Ver. 20. ‘Uncovered himself in the eyes of the hand-maids.” This means simply
that David exchanged his royal robes for the simple and comparatively short priestly dress and led
the female choir which Michal should have led herself. Some have suggested that in the word
handmaids Michal refers to the other wives of David, of whom she was probably jealous. here
is no equivalent in Hebrew to the word shamelessly, and the words naked and uncovered are often
used by sacred and other ancient writers in a comparative and limited seuse,


Ver. 21. “Before the Lord.” “This expression denotes the holiest and highest point of
view whence David’s procedure in this festival is to be judged and estimated.” (Ardmann.)


Ver. 22. “I will yet be more vile,” etc. “David, having opposed to Michal’s ‘in the
eyes of the maids’ his ‘in the presence of the Lord,’ places himself before the Lord on the same
level with the maids, expressing by the repeated with (translated of in Eng. vers.) his fellowship

303


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book i.





and equality with these humble folk-and pointing to the honour which he with them would have
before the Lord.” (Lrdmann.) So also in substance Keil, though some scholars contend that
the Hebrew proposition may be rendered of or before, and explain that David refers to the
honour which he received and valued from those whom Michal despised.


Ver. 23. “No child.” As is well known, the greatest humiliation which could befal any
oriental woman, and especially one who might have hoped to be the mother of the heir to the
throne. Some have, however, supposed that she had children before this event,


Norr.—Psalms xiv., xv., xxiii, and xxiv. are referred by Hengstenberg to this occasion
Dean Stanley says, “No less than seven Psalms, either in their traditional titles, or in the
irresistible evidence of their contents, bear traces of this festival. The 29th (by its title in
the Sept.) is said to be on the ‘going forth of the tabernacle.’ As the tabernacle was never
moved from Gibeon in David’s time, the ark is probably meant. The others are the 15th, 24th,
30th, 68th, 132nd, 141st.” (See also his remarks in the Suggestive Comments.) The manner
in which Psalm xxiv. was probably sung is thns described by Dr. Kitto :—“ The chief musician,
who seems to have been the king himself, appears to have begun the sacred lay with a solemn
and sonorous recital of these sentences, ‘The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the
world, and they that dwell therein. For He hath founded it upon the seas, and established it
upon the floods.’ The chorus of vocal music appears then to have taken up the song, and sung
the same words ina more tuneful and elaborate manner; and the instruments fell in with
them, raising the mighty declaration to heaven. We may presume that the chorus then
divided, each singing in their turns, and both joining at the close, ‘For He hath founded it
upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.” This part of the music may be supposed to
have lasted until the procession reached the foot of Zion, or came in sight of it, which, from the
nature of the inclosed site, cannot be till one comes quite near to it. Then the king must be
supposed to have stepped forth and begun again, in a solemn and earnest tone, ‘ Who shall
ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall shall stand in His holy place!’ to which the
first chorus responds, ‘He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart ; who hath not lifted up his
soul unto vanity. nor sworn deccitfully.’ And then the second chorus gives its reply, ‘ He shall
receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.’ This part
of the song may, in like manner, be supposed to have lasted till they reached the gate of the
city, when the king began again in this grand and exalted strain, ‘ Lift up your heads, O ye
gates; and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in;’ which
would be repeated then, in the same way as before, by the general chorus. The persons having
charge of the gates ask, ‘ Who is this King of glory?’ to which the first chorus answers, ‘ It is
Jehovah, strong and mighty: Jehovah, mighty in battle ;’ which the second chorus then
repeats in like manner as before, closing with the grand refrain, ‘ He is the king of glory: He is
the King of glory.’ We must now suppose the instruments to take up the same notes, and
continue sounding them to the entrance of the tabernacle (or tent) which David had prepared,
There the king again begins: ‘ Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye ever-
lasting doors ; and the King of glory shall come in.’ This is followed and answered as before—
all closing by the instruments sounding, and the people shouting, ‘ He is the King of glory.’”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER,
Tue REMOVAL OF THE ARK TO ZIom.


In this chapter we have—


I, Extraordinary religious emotions overflowing into extraordinary modes
of expression. When a river has been long pent up and impeded in its flow,
the removal of the dam at last is the signal for an extraordinary rush of the
waters—such a rush as will make it impossible to confine them within the
ordinary and appointed channels, but must for a time cause them to overflow
the river banks. David’s soul had long been filled with deep gratitude to God
for the extraordinary blessings which had been bestowed upon him, and this
gratitude had kindled within him lofty and holy aspirations and desires which
until now he had been unable fully to express. But now that the obstacles are
removed and he finds himself established over Israel, elected alike by God and
man to shepherd the chosen people, his deep emotion breaks throuch all
conventionalities, and his gratitude for the past and hope for the future are too
deep a strong to keep within the limits of ordinary expression, and the


OHAP. VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
SN ee eS ee ane Oe ES Or


overflow of feeling must for a time have a wider channel, There are ever
and anon such souls as that of David rising above the dead level of ordinary
religious experience, who are at times the subjects of such deep religious
enthusiasm as to demand extraordinary and special modes of expressing it,


II. Extraordinary religious emotion expressing itself by a deed of permanent
and beneficent influence. he gold in the molten state is gold, and has a
certain value; but if it is to be useful to mankind the glowing liquid metal
must pass into solid coin. So feeling is good, and its outward and personal
manifestation is lawful and right. But if it begin and end there, it is like
gold which is always in the crucible, and never makes the world the richer by
its existence, David’s deep emotion did not expend itself in singing and dancing
before the Lord. ‘I'hese were but the accompaniments to a deed by which he
gave a permanent expression to his feelings, and brought down blessing upon
all under his influence. The removal of the ark to Zion at the earliest
opportunity after the settlement of the kingdom was not only a testimony to
David's own faith in Jehovah, but a call to all Israel to restore the God of their
fathers to His rightful place in their midst, and so to build their national unity
upon a secure foundation. If we had no other guarantee for the reality and
purity of David’s religious fervour, this great national act would be sufficient to
show its genuineness and worth. Thus far we have looked only at the bright
points of the picture ; we must also regard the shadows init, The circumstances
surrounding the death of Uzzah teach us—


Ill. That under the influence of strong emotion we are in danger of being
betrayed into irreverence, Though we allow the pent-up river some extension
of its ordinary bounds, it must be prevented if possible from exceeding all limits
and so becoming a means of destruction instead of blessing. _But here is the
difficulty and the danger. So is it with us all when our emotional nature has
full sway over us in matters connected with the service and worship of God.
When we are wholly occupied in contemplating His infinite love and condescen-
sion, we are apt to lose sight of His awful holiness and majesty, and our joy
betrays us into irreverence and neglect of some plain command. It must have
been such a transport of feeling which tended to make David at this time so
strangely neglectful of God’s express command respecting the ark. We must
not forget that the general confusion of the country, and the long banishment
of the ark from the public service of God, had no doubt tended to render even
the best men less conversant with the Divine requirements than they would
have been in happier times, but it seems strange that such a man as David
should not have been careful to observe all things written in the book of the
law upon this matter. We can only account for it by remembering how prone even
_ good men are to perform one holy duty at the expense of another, and either
to approach God in worship with irreverent familiarity or to stand too far off in
mere external observance of forms and ceremonies, From the closing incident
in the chapter we learn—


IV. How impossible it is for hearts untouched by love to God to enter
into the feelings of one under its dominion. To Michal the transports of
David seemed more like the excitement of a madman, and his expressions of
deep feeling foolish and degrading performances. But this was because she
lacked that sympathy with him which is the only key to the soul of another,
and without which all its deepest and holiest experiences must remain a
mystery. And sympathy is only possible where there is some similarity of
feeling and experience, and there is none between a godly and a godless person
upon the most vital and soul-stirring subjects. Michal could as little enter
into David’s feelings as Judas could into those of Mary when she Sie: ey box

z


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 1





of perfume over the head of-her Lord, or as Festus could into those of Paul
when the prisoner in bonds discoursed with such glowing enthusiasm to those
who sat in pomp upon the judgment seat. To those who have no Spiritual life
religious fervour is looked upon either as fanaticism or hypocrisy, and the
purest actions attributed to the most unworthy motives. ‘his is a trial to
which all eminent servants of God are exposed, and sometimes, as in the case
before us, it comes through those who are near and dear according to the flesh,
though far off according to the spirit. “ Zhe natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him ; neither can he
‘now them, because they are spiritually discerned,” (1 Cor. ii. 14.)


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. What a contrast to the
ordinary rule of public life, and of
private life too! Where shall we find
the public men, whose first concern is
for the honour of God, and who really
believe that the favour of the Highest
is the true palladium of their country’s
welfare? Or when, im private life,
shall the rule be reversed, to give to
temporal interests and worldly comforts
the first share of attention—while the
cause of Christ . . . is either wholly
neglected, or served with mere scraps
and fragments? “If I be a father,
where is mine honour? and if I be a
master, where is my fear ?—Blaikie,


Ver. 6. It must be men’s care “that
their deeds may be made manifest that
they are wrought in God” (John iii. 21),
Two things make a good Christian—
good actions and good aims. A good
aim maketh not a bad action good, as
here, and yet a bad aim maketh a good
action bad, as we see in Jehu.— Trapp,

A man would think this act deserved
commendation rather than punishment,
for, alas! what should he have done?
The ark had long sojourned in his
father’s house, and he and his brother
had done (at least as he conceived)
acceptable service about- it. In this
present removal, by the king’s appoint-
ment (at least by his consent) as his
brother went before to guide, so his
place was behind to attend and help.
. . . He saw the oxen staygering, the
cart shaking, the ark rolling and he
(as it should seem) next at hand, and
who would not have put forth his hand
in such a case? Had the ark actually

806


fallen through his neglect, would not
the whole multitude have cried shame
upon him and perchance done worse
unto him? ‘The Philistines would have
blasphemed, that the ark of the God
of Israel had now at length caught a
fall, as well as their Dagon had formerly
before the ark. Devotion in the people
would have been abated, religion scan-
dalized, God’s ordinances and holy
mysteries less reverenced and esteemed.
But infinite such pretensions weigh
nothing, where the law of God, and
obedience required of man are laid in
the contrary scale—Bp. Prideauz.


Ver. 7. The special moral of this
warning is, that no one, on the plea of
zeal for the ark of God’s Church, should
resort to doubtful expedients and un-
lawful means for the attainment of his
end, Let him not say, that for the
advancement of the Church of God, all
acts are pleasing to Him. No; if the
vessel of the Church is tossed with
storms, the disciples may not approach
and touch Him with familiar jrre-
verence in order to awake Him who
sleeps as man, but who sees all things
as God. Here is the trial of their faith.
Let them tarry the Lord’s leisure, and
He will rise and succour them, and
bless them for their trust in Him.—
Wordsworth.

You must rather leave the ark of the
Church to shake, if so it please God,
than put unworthy hands to hold it
up.—Lord Bacon.

This interruption of a joyful festival
was to everyone a new admonition, that
the kindness and grace of God are never


GHaP. VL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





alone, but are always accompanied by
his holiness. God never permits it that
anyone should sin, and yet, sinning,
should rejoice and be glad before him.
If his benevolence tends to draw us
aside to levity and presumption, we will
soon see Him exchange gentleness for
severity, though He thereby imbitter
to us the fairest day of our lives. In
educating us, God cares more that we
should fear Him (with the more of a
child-like spirit the better) as the Holy
One, and as demanding holiness in us,
than that we should always prosecute
our pilgrimage-journey here below with
unclouded joy. He therefore causes it
frequently to happen that we are
compelled, in the midst of the super-
abundance of our prosperity and of our
joy, suddenly to join in the lamentation
of Job, “Thou art become cruel to me ;
with thy strong hand thou opposest
thyself against me.”—Krummacher.

Uzzah here was struck down at the
inauguration of anew era in the Jewish
worship; and Ananias and Sapphira
were punished in the same way in the
early infancy of the Christian Church.

Now the connection of this latter
case with that of Uzzah here will show
you how we in these days can be guilty
of Uzzah’s sin. The Corinthians were
guilty of it when, forgetting the sacred
character of the Lord’s Supper, they
became intoxicated at the table of the
Lord ; and we shall be guilty of it if,
with hearts estranged from God, and
lives which are inconsistent with His
Word, we presume to connect ourselves
with His Church, and take part in the
management of its affairs. David,
therefore, rightly read the meaning of
the breach of Uzzah when, in addition
to rectifying his error by putting the
ark on the shoulders of the priests, he
sang these words: ‘ Who shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord ? or who shall
stand in His holy place? He that
hath clean hands and a pure heart ;”
and unless we who are members of the
Church have this character, we shall be
guilty of Uzzah’s sin.— Taylor.


Ver. 8. A man displeased with
God; thinking himself wiser, more


kind, more just than God. Really,
perhaps, vexed that his grand solem-
nity was interrupted, his rejoicing
people disappointed, his prestige da-
maged, his enemies encouraged. Often
when men complain of Providence on
“high moral” grounds, they are in
fact mainly influenced by some secret
personal feeling. Now highly elated
with spiritual pride, at once angry and
self-complacent, and presently dejected,
irritated and disposed to give up alto-
gether. (Ver. 9.) When any pro.
mising religious enterprise of which
we have had the lead is disastrously
interrupted, we are tempted to find
fault with Providence,—77. of Lange’s
Commentary.


Ver. 9. I do not hear David say,
Surely this man is guilty of some secret
sin that the world knows not; God
hath met with him, there is no danger
to us; why should I be discouraged to
see God just? We may go on safely
and prosper. But here his foot stays,
and his hand falls from his instrument,
and his tongue is ready to tax his own
unworthiness : “How shall the ark of
the Lord come unto me?” That heart
is carnal and proud that thinks any
man worse than himself. David’s fear
stays his progress: perhaps he might
have proceeded with good success, but
he dares not venture where he sees
such a deadly check. It is better to
be too fearful than too forward in those
affairs which do immediately concern
God. As it is not good to refrain from
holy businesses, so it is worse to do
them ill: awfulness is a safe interpreter
of God’s secret actions, and a wise
guide of ours.—Bp. Hall.


Ver. 11. See here the courage and
faith of Obed-edom ; he knew that the
presence of the ark had been disastrous
to Dagon, and had brought plagues on
the Philistines, and that the men of
Bethshemesh had been struck dead for
looking into it, and that Uzzah had
been smitten for touching it ; and yet
he gladly welcomed it and harboured
it for three months, and God blessed
him for his faith. Obed-edom well

807


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK If.





knew that though “God is a consuming
fire” to those who treat Him with irre-
verence, He is infinite in mercy to
those who obey Him. ‘The Gadarenes,
smitten with fear, besought Jesus to
depart out of their coasts, and we do
not hear that He ever visited them
again. But Zaccheus, animated by love,
received him gladly, and Jesus said,
“This day 1s salvation come to this
house.” (Luke xix. 9.) All divine
things are set, as Christ Himself was,
“for the fall and rising again of many
in Israel” (Luke ii. 34), they are a
savour (or odour) of death unto death
to those who reject or despise them,
but “an odour of life unto life” to
those who love them. (2 Cor. ii. 16).
— Wordsworth,

While the ark brought the plague
everyone was glad to be rid of it ; but
when it brought a blessing to Obed-
edom, they looked upon it as worthy
of entertainment. Many will own a
blessing ark, a prospering truth ; but
he is an Obed-edom indeed that will
own a persecuted, tossed, banished ark,


—Trapp.


Ver. 12. When pious men who have
been betrayed into unwarrantable con-
duct have had time for self-examina-
tion, searching the Scriptures and
prayer, they will discover and confess
their mistakes and be reduced to a
better temper; they will justify God
in His corrections ; they will be con-
vinced that'safety and comfort consist,
not in absenting themselves from His
ordinances, or in declining dangerous
services, but in attending to their duty
In @ proper spirit and manner. They
will profit by their own errors.—Scott.


Vers. 14-15. Now the sweet singer
of Israel revives his holy music, and
adds both more spirit and more pomp
to so devout a business. I did not
before hear of trumpets, nor dancing,
nor shouting, nor sacrifice, nor the linen
ephod. The sense of God’s past dis-
pleasure doubles our careto please Him,
and our joy in His recovered appro-
bation ; we never make so much of our
health as after sickness, nor ever are so

808


officious to our friend as after an
unkindness.— Bp. Hall.

Evidently this service was not looked
on as a toilsome one, but asa happy
occasion, admirably adapted to raise
the spirits and cheer the heart. What
was the nature of the service? . . .
In spirit it was bringing God into the
very midst of the nation; and on the
most prominent pedestal the couutry
now supplied, setting up # constant
memento of the presence of the Holy
One. . . To those who knew Him
as their reconciled Father, the service
was inexpressibly attractive. Why
should there not be more joy in the
worship of this gracious God? Why
should our praises not be, at times at
least, more lively, fitted to express and
deepen such feelings of exuberant
delight in the presence of @ covenant
God ?—Blatkie.


Vera. 13-19. This was the greatest
day of David’s life. Its significance in
his career is marked by his own pre-
eminent position: Conqueror, Poet,
Musician, Priest, in one.. . . But
the Psalms which directly and indirectly
spring out of this event reveal a deeper
meaning than the mere outward ritual.
It was felt to be a turning point in the
history of the nation. It recalled even
the great epoch of the passage through
the wilderness. It awoke again the
inspiriting strains of the heroic career
(Psa. Ixviii. 7-9, comp. Judges v. 4) of
the Judges. . . . Thatglory which
fled when the ark was taken was now
returning. From the lofty towers the
warders cry, “Who is this King of
Glory?” ‘The old heathen gates will
not at once recognise this new comer.
The answer comes back, as if to prove
by the victories of David the right of
the name to Him who now comes to
His own again, Jehovah, the Lord, the
Mighty One. . . . Thisis the solemn
inauguration of that great name by
which the Divine Nature was especially
known under the monarchy. As, before,
under the patriarchs, it had been known
as Llohim, the strong ones’—as through
Moses it had been Jehovah—the
Kternal,—so, now, in this new epoch


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





of civilisation, of armies, of all the com-
tesa machinery of second causes, of

hurch and State, there was to be a
new name expressive of a wider range
of vision opening on the minds of the
people. Not merely the Eternal
solitary existence— but the Maker and
Sustainer of the host of heaven and
earth . . . were now attracting the
attention and wonder of men. Not
merely the Eternal Lord of the solitary
human soul, but the Leader and
Sustainer of the hosts of battle, of the
hierarchy of war and peacethat gathered
round the court of the kings of Israel.
ee This great change is briefly
declared in corresponding phrase in the
historical narrative which tells how
David “brought up the ark of God
whose name is called by the name of
the Lord of Hosts.” This was indeed
as the 68th Psalm describes it, a second
Exodus, David, was, on that day, the
founder not of freedom only, but of
empire—not of religion only, but of a
Church and commonwealth.— Dean
Stanley.

The ark had been the witness to the
people that they were one people, be-
cause they had the one God dwelling
in the midst of them while they were
shifting their tents continually in the
wilderness. It was to be the same
truth to those who were dwelling in
settled habitations. . It spoke
to them, as it had to the others, of a
permanent Being, of a righteous Being,
always above His creatures, always de-
siring fellowship with them, a fellowship
which they could only realise when
they were seeking to be like Him.
“ Lord, who shall ascend to Thy taber-
nacle?” “ who shall dwell in Thy holy
hill?” —so spake David as he brought
the ark to its resting place. ‘Even
he that hath clean hands and a pure
heart.” The moral being of
the nation, then, as of each individual
in it, stood in the confession of a
person absolutely good, the ground of
all goocaess in His creatures, acces-
sible to them while they sought Him
with fear and reverence as the King,
Protector, Friend, of each and all.—
Maurice.


Ver. 19. This was a most characte-
ristic act—an index of that delight in
the comfort and welfare of his people
that marked the character of David.
It may be that the practice is liable to
abuse, yet it was a pleasing
feature of this memorable occasion. It
has a lesson especially appropriate to
wealthy Christians on occasions of law-
ful rejoicings. In the olden time the
festival of Christmas used to be thus
observed, and there were far worse
things about the old feudal system
than the flowing hospitality which used
to make poor men feel that times of
refreshing for the soul opened men’s
hearts to their bodily wants. It would
be quite in the spirit of David’s exam-
ple for wealthy Christians to make
communion seasons and similar occa-
sions times of ample distribution.—
Blaikie.


Ver. 20. Let us learn from the
conduct of David in retiring to blew
his house, that public religious services
should not be allowed by us to interfere
with the discharge of the duties of
family religion. After such a day as
that which we have attempted to
describe, David might have imagined
that he had a good excuse for omitting
all domestic worship; but it rather
seemed that the devotions of the day
gave him new zest for the exercises of
the family altar. And this is what
always ought to be. It is to be feared,
however, that many among us content
themselves with a mere go-to-meeting
piety, and seem to believe that religion
consists in a round of public religious
services. They attend all manner of
holy convocations. You see them at
every important devotional meeting
you take part in. But they rarely
enter the closet ; they never bless their
houses; and their lives are just ag
selfish and unspiritual as are those of
multitudes who make no profession of
attachment to Jesus whatever. | do
not make light of the ordinances of
God’s worship; on the contrary, I
believe them to be most serviceable in
feeding the fire of piety within the
heart. But what I mean oe say is,

30


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


BOOK





that piety does not consist in-attending
on these means of grace, and that our
engagement in public services must
never be made an excuse by us for the
neglect of household duties. “ Why
did you not come to church last night,”
said one working-man to another, on a
Monday morning ; “our minister was
preaching a third sermon on the duty
of family religion ; why did you not
come?” “Because,” was the reply, “I
was at home doing it.” I would like
to see not ess earnestness in attendance
at the sanctuary but more of this “at
home doing it.” —7Zaylor,

A man may be as zealous as he
pleases about what relates to this life
only, and yet be had in admiration;
but to be zealous in religion seems
to be regarded a mark of imbecility,
Devotion to God alone is regarded as
something degrading—something un-
worthy the dignity of man—which
renders him a fit subject for the finger
of scorn to point at—for the ridicule
or contempt of a world that lieth in
wickedness.—Jindsay.


Ver. 21. It is hard for the best men
to recriminate without some tincture
of tartness, and to keep quick the fire
of zeal without some smoke of sin,—


Trapp.


Vers. 21, 22. If David had not
loved Michal dearly, he had never
stood upon those points with Abner:
he knew that if Abner came to him,
the kingdom of Israel would accom-
pany him; and yet he sends him the
charge of not seeing his face, except he
brought Michal, Saul’s daughter, with
him ; as if he would not regard the
crown of Israel while he wanted that
wife of his: yet here he takes her up
roundly, as if she had been an enemy.
All relations are aloof off, in comparison
of that betwixt God and the soul:
“He that loves father, or mother, or
wife, or child, better than me (saith
our Saviour), is not worthy of me.’”—
Bp. Hall.

1. We should be afraid of censuring
the devotion of others, though it may
not — with our own sentiments,

10


because, for aught that we know, the
heart may be upright in it, and who
are we, to despise those whom God has
accepted? 2. If we can approve our-
selves to God in what we do in religion,
and do it as before the Lord, we need
not value the censures and reproaches
of men. 3. The more we are vilified
for well-doing the more resolute we
should be in it, and hold our religion
the faster, and bind it the closer to us,
for the endeavours of Satan’s agents to
shake us and to shame us out of it—
Henry.


Vers. 14-22. In the portrait of David,
as it here appears to our view, several
essential marks of a true state of grace
unveil themselves before us. There are
these five. We may describe them
thus, in the language of the New
Testament :—(1.) Joy in Christ ; (2.)
separation from the world; (3.) the
open confession of the crucificd one;
(4.) love to the people of God ; aud (5.)
bearing willingly the shame of the cross.
But how frequently does one meet
such ill-temper as that of Micbal even
at the present day! It displays itself
when at any time one belonging to the
higher ranks of life, who has been
brought, through the grace of God,
from the “broad way,” salutes in the
time of his “first love” every com-
panion in the faith as a brother, and
is happiest among those who, whether
they be distinguished in rank or lowly,
rejoice like himself in the Lord ;
worships in the same fellowship, and
joins with them in spiritual songs ;
meeting familiarly with the lowliest
among them, asif birth, position, rank,
and social etiquette were the most
indifferent things in the world. How
frequently does one also see relationg
and friends change their demeanour
towards such as disregard the conven-
tional boundaries, and convert it into
hateful mockery! That king himself
did not escape such scorn whom history
has adorned with the name of the
“Confessor,” and who once, when in
the presence of an assembly of believing
preachers, gave free expression in high
excitement to the feelings of his heart,


OBaP. Vi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





glowing with love to Christ, “I know
well,” he said, “it is not politic for me
to say what I now utter in your
presence ;” but he did not, on that
account, fora moment check the flow
of his thoughts and feelings, But this
state of pious elewation of mind never


was on that day of festal joy. But he
is deserving of pity who understands
not the flapping of the eagle’s wings,
by which souls consecrated to God are
in times of particular visitations ot
grace lifted up above all the boundaries


of their common life, and placed in a


condition where, in the emotions that
till them, they rise above all earthly
things.— Krummacher,


continues long. It soon gives place to
the accustomed calm and uniform
course of thought. David is not
alway so lofty in his experience as he


CHAPTER VIL


Crrmoat anp Exposrrony Norzs.—Ver. 1. * When the king sat in his house,” ete., ic.
the palace mentioned in chap. v. 11. Many commentators place the events of this chapter later
on in the life of David, inasmuch as they think it could not be said at this period that he had
“rest from all his enemies,” yet nearly all agree in understanding from ver. 11 that Solomon was,
not born at the time. It therefore seems necessary to understand the rest spoken of as only a
temporary interval of peace (for he was more or less involved in war until the end of his life),
and if so, the conception of building a temple to Jehovah seems to follow here most naturally.
It is quite in keeping with David’s devout character, and just what we should expect from him,
that his first interval of repose should be occupied with such a purpose.


Ver. 2. “Nathan, the prophet.” This prophet here appears for the first time, and it is
evident that he sustained a similar relation to David as Samuel and Gad had done, and as the
latter still continued to do (see chap. xxiv. 11-19). “If the expression first and lastin 2 Chron.
ix. 29 is to be taken literally, he must have lived late into the life of Solomon, in which case he
must have been considerably younger than David. At any rate he seems to have been the
younger of the two prophets who accompanied him, and may be considered as the latest direct
representative of the schools of Samuel. ‘The peculiar affix of ‘the prophet’ as distinguished
from the ‘seer’ given to Samuel and Gad (1 Chron. xxix. 29) shows his identification with the
later view of the prophetic office indicated in 1 Sam, ix. 9.” (Dean Stanley.) Most bible scholars
consider that this part of the book of Samuel is at least compiled from Nathan’s work mentioned
in 1 Chron. xxix. 29, Within curtains, literally, within the tent-cloth,


Ver. 3. “Nathan said,” etc, This answer shows that, even if David did not expressly state
his intention, Nathan understood his purpose to build the temple, and sanctioned his design
“from his own feelings, not by Divine revelation.” ( Michaelis. )


Ver. 4. “That night.” The one following the day in which the conversation took place.
“The Word of the Lord came.” “By the conversation held with David during the day,
Nathan's soul with all its thoughts and feelings was concentrated on David's great and holy
purpose; this was the psychological basis for the Divine inspiration.” ( Erdmann) “Shalt
thou,” cte, “The question involves a negative reply.” (Keil. )


Ver. 6,7. Here “ Jehovah gives two reasons why David's proposal should not be carried out
. . . but this does not involve any blame as though there had been any presumption on David's
part. . . but simply showed that it was not because of any negligence on the part of the former
eaders of the people that they had not thought of erecting a temple, and that even now the time


for such » work had not yet come.” (Keil)


Ver. 11. “And as since,” etc. The first clause of this verse should be connected with veres
10, thus, neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as before and as since, or
from the day, es.


Ver 8-11. “The connection between these verses and verses 5-7 1s as follows: ‘Thou shalt
not build a house for Me, but I, who have from the very beginning glorified myself in thee and
my people, will build a house for thee. . . . The kingdom of God in Israel first acquired its


rest and conaolation through the efforts of David. , . and the conquest of ie and the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK IL





elevation of this fortress into the palace of the king formed the commencement of the establish-
ment of the kingdom of God. But this commencement received its first pledge of perpetuity
from the Divine assurance that the throne of David should be established for all future time,
And this the Lord was about to accomplish. He would build David a house, and then his seed
should build the house of the Lord. No definite reason is assigned why David himself was not
to build the temple; we learn this first from 1 Chron. xxii. 8. . . . But this did not involve
David in any blame . . . but inasmuch as these wars were necessary and inevitable, they
were practical proofs that David’s kingdom and government were not yet established, and theres
fore that the time for the building of the temple had not yet come.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 12. “Thy seed.” “Not the whole posterity, as is clear from the explanatory words
in 1 Chron. xvii, 11, mor merely a single individual, but a selection from the posterity.”
(Brdmann.)


Ver. 14. “A father,” etc. This denotes in the first place the most cordial mutual love,
which attests its enduring character by fidelity, and demonstrates its existence towards the Lord
by active obedience. But besides this ethical relation of David’s seed to God we must, from the
connection, note—jirst, the origin, or descent of the son from the father. The seed of David,
entrusted with everlasting kingly dignity, has, as such, his origin in the will of God—owes his
origin to the Divine choice and call (comp. Psa. ii. 7, lxxxix. 27, 28). Secondly, in the desig-
nations father and son is denoted community of possession. The seed as son receives dominion
from the father as heir, and as this dominion is an everlasting one he will, as son and heir, reign
for ever in the possession of the kingdom. The father’s kingdom is an unlimited one, embracing
the whole world ; so in the idea of sonship there lies, along with everlastingness, the idea of all-
embracing-world-dominion.” (Hrdmann.)


Ver. 14. “With the rod of men,” etc, Such punishments as are inflicted on all men
when they sin. Grace is not to release David and the Davidic line from this universal
human lot, is not to be for them a charter to sin.” (Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 15. “As I took it from Saul,” etc. “The contrast is between the punishment of
sin in individuals and the favour that remains permanently with the family, whereby the Divine
promise becomes an unconditional one.” ( Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 16. “For ever.” It is obvious that this promise related primarily to Solomon, and
had a certain fulfilment in him and in his reign. . . . . At the same time, the substance
of the promise is not fully exhausted in him. The threefold repetition of the expression
“for ever,” the establishment of the kingdom and throne of David for ever, points incontro-
vertibly beyond the time of Solomon, and to the eternal continuance of the seed of David.
- . » « We must not reduce the idea of eternity to the popular notion of a long incalculable
period, but must take it in an absolute sense as it is evidently understood in Psa. Ixxxix, 30,
No earthly kingdom, and no posterity of any single man, has eternal duration like the heaven
and the earth; but the different families of men become extinct as the different earthly
kingdoms perish. The posterity of David, therefore, could only last for ever by running out in
a person who lives for ever; ze. by culminating in the Messiah, . . . . The promise
consequently refers to the posterity of David, commencing with Solomon and closing with
Christ ; so that by the seed we are not to understand Solomon alone, with the kings who
succeeded him, nor Christ alone to the exclusion of the earthly kings of David’s family ; nor is
the allusion to Solomon and Christ to be regarded as a double allusion to two different
objecta.” (Kei.)


Ver. 17. “Words.” . . . “Vision.” “The words, as the content of God’s revelation
to Nathan, are distinguished from the vision as indication of its form and mode.” (Erdmann. )
“ The vision (a communication received in a waking condition) is constantly distinguished from
a@ revelation ina dream.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 18, “Sat,” rather tarried. “Even if the verb be rendered sat, it is not necessary to
suppose that David remained sitting.” (Bib. Commentary.) “ Yet sitting under such circum-
stance would be a respectful attitude, and elsewhere we have no proof in Scripture of a
customary attitude in prayer.” (Tr. of Lange’s Commentary. )


Ver. 19. “Banner of man.” Rather the law of man, ¢¢., according to Keil, “the law

hich determines or regulates the conduct of men.” The explanations of this phrase are very
varied and numerous. Keil, Grotius, Thenius, De Witte, Hengstenberg, and others, with some
differences, understand it to refer to the condescension of Jehovah in treating David as one
human creature might treat another, and think the parallel text in Chron., chap. xvii. 17
confirms this view. .u.u..y -<positors give it a direct Messianic reference, and others thus para
phrase it ; “It is not thus that men act towards one anothcr, but Thy ways, O Lord, are above
men’s ways.” But the objection to this and to the meaning given above is that the word
tranalated law is in these cases rather taken as manner or custom, which it does not signify,

812


iar. Vin. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,
Erdmann says “ This must be referred to the Divine determination that the everlasting kingdom
here spoken of is to be in connection with his house. This is the Divine torah or prescription
which is to hold for a weak insignificant man and his seed, for poor human creatures.” Similarly
Von Gerlach; “Such a law Thou establishest for a man and his house, viz., that Thou promisest


- wae So also Bunsen; ‘*Of so grand a promise hast Thou, O God, thought


Ver. 21. “For Thy word’s sake.” “This must contain an allusion to the earlier promises
of God, or the Messianic prophecies generally, particularly Gen. xlix. 10, and Numb. xxiv. 17 sqq.
For the fact that David recognised the connection between the promise communicated to him by
Nathan and Jacob’s prophecy is evident from 1 Chron. xxviii. 4, where he refers to his election
as king as being the consequence of Judah’s election ag ruler.” ( Keil.)


Ver, 28. “Whom God.” Elohim here stands with a plural verb, as often elsewhere when
heathen idols are referred to (as Exod. xxxii. 4-8), because the thought is here intended to be
expressed that there is no other nation which the deity worshipped by it redeemed as Jehovah
redeemed Israel. (So Keil, Erdmann, etc.) “For you.” If this reading is correct, David’s
et turning from addressing God to addressing the nation must be attributed to his deep

on,


as 29. “Let the house,” eto, rather “ Will the house,” é¢, God has said it, and it will


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-7,
Davin FORBIDDEN To Buinp THE TEMPLE.


I. A good man’s desire may be in harmony with the mind of God, yet its
accomplishment may be contrary to the Divine will. It must always be right
and always pleasing to a good father for his son to desire to honour him and to
express by some outward act his sense of love and gratitude. But while the
feeling is in itself most acceptable to him, he may desire it to take some other
form of expressing itself, or he may see that some other season will be a more
fitting one for this particular outward expression of his child’s love and
reverence. ‘I'he feeling which prompts the desire must be right at all seasons,
but the accomplishment of the desire may be unseasonable or undesirable. So
it was with David’s desire and purpose at this period. It was most fitting and
could not but be pleasing to God that David should desire to build Him a house
far more beautiful than his own palace. We should feel that David was out of
harmony with himself if he had sat contentedly in his palace while the ark of
God was within curtains. And it is plain that the feelings which gave birth to
his purpose were very acceptable to God, as all grateful emotion and desire to
express them must ever be. Yet he was forbidden to carry out his design. Let
no good man, then, ever think that, because his desire is not fulfilled it is dis-
pleasing to God. It may be quite the opposite. ‘I'he gratitude and reverence that
desires to do something for the glory of God must be most pleasing to such a
God as ours; but although the feeling may be genuine and the motive pure,
He may see reasons for not permitting the purpose to be carried out.


II, Those who instruct others in the oracles of God may be right in their
general interpretation of the Divine will, and yet wrong in their application
to special instances. very servant of God is sure that it is the will of God
that His glory shall be the ruling aim, and His service the first thought in the
life of His children. But he may sometimes be mistaken as to the best methods
of promoting that glory or the best time for undertaking a special service, and
he must not therefore be dogmatic on these matters. Nathan was quite right
in encouraging David in his endeavours to bring his own people and the surround-
ing nations into more intimate relation with the God of Israel. Like that of
all the: good in all ages his prayer was “ Let the people praise Thee, O God;


313


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book ii.


ee ee LO


let all the peopls praise Thee.” . But right as he was in the general principle, he
erred in the special application on this occasion. Although it was quite true
that the Lord was with David in the sense of approval of his general feeling, He
was not with him in the sense that He would permit him to undertake this par-
ticular work,


III. But when God’s servants sincerely desire to do His will, He will not per-
mit them to remain long in ignorance. If a father knows that his children only
need to know what is right in order to do it, it would surely be cruel of him te
tet them remain in ignorance. And when our Heavenly Father sees in His
children such integrity of heart that they joyfully acquiesce in His purposes con-
cerning themselves, and desire above all other things His guidance, we cannot
for a moment suppose He will withhold from them a revelation of His will.
When they are permitted to err, it must be because there is some self-will which
prevents entire singleness of purpose—some alloy mixed with the pure gold of
desire right in the main. David and Nathan were very soon put in full posses-
sion of God’s mind in respect to the building of the temple, and that it was so
is a proof of their undivided loyalty to the Divine will, and a pledge that all who
are like minded shall be as certainly instructed in the work they are to do and
the part they are to fulfil,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 2. The sentiment underlying
these words was in the highest degree
honourable to David. ‘hey indicate
that he felt it to be a moral anomaly,
if not a species of dishonesty, that he
should look so well after his own
personal comfort and regal dignity,
while yet the house of God was but a
tent. It were well, in these days, that
we all shared these convictions, for we
are too apt to lavish our wealth ex-
clusively upon our own enjoyment and
indulgence, forgetful of the higher
claims which God and His cause have
upon us. I gay not, indeed, that it is
wrong for a man to take such a position
in society as his riches warrant him to
assume, or that there is sin in spending
money on our residences, or in sur-
rounding ourselves with the treasures
of human wisdom in books, or the
triumphs of human art in pictures or
statuary ; but I do say that our gifts
to the cause of God ought to be at least
abreast of our expenditure for these
other things ; and that if we so cripple
ourselves by our extravagance on house,
or dress, or luxuries, as to render it
impossible for us to do anything for the
promotion of the Gospel abroad, or for
the instruction of the ignorant at home,
we are “verily guilty concerning our

814


brethren,” and before our God. The
principle here acknowledged by David
is a thoroughly sound one, and though
he was discouraged from applying it in
the particular way on which he had set
his heart, we must not suppose that his
feelings, as expressed to Nathan, were
wrong. On the contrary, the spiritual
instinct in him was true, and God de-
clared that ‘it was well that it was in
hisheart.” Now what wasthis principle?
It was this, that in proportion as we
increase our expenditure upon our-
selves for the comforts and the elegan-
cies of life, we ought to increase our
offerings to God for the carrying on of
worksof faith and labours of love among
our fellow-men. If we can afford to
enter a larger dwelling, we ought to
make ourselves afford to add propor-
tionately to our contributions for all
good objects. If we allow ourselves to
gratify our taste in the purchase of a
new picture or a new book, we should
feel impelled to do just so much more
for the gratification of the impulse of
Christian benevolence. The value of
this principle, when rightly understood,
and conscientiously carried out, will be
very great. It will act in two ways.
On the one hand, it will keep us from
hampering ourselves in our benevolence


OHAP. VIL


by personal extravagance, and so be a
check on that tendency to luxury which
Is manifested even in many Christian
households, On the other hand, it will
impel us to add to our gifts to the
Lord Jesus Christ ; since every time
we do anything for ourselves there will
be a new call made upon us to do more
for Him.— Taylor.

David was not one of those easy-
minded men who are content to keep
things just as they are, but one of those
who are ever pressing onward, and
urging others towards progress, im-
provement, development. A most use-
ful order of mind it is, especially when
duly ballasted by minds in which
caution is more predominant. The
world would stagnate—the church
would settle down into the poorest and
tamest society on earth, if such men
were not raised up, with their trumpet-
tongues and burning hearts, to rouse
their fellows to high and lofty enter-
prise. — Blaikie.


Ver. 4. God will not suffer His
dear children to lie long in error; but
if in anything they be otherwise minded,
He will reveal even this unto them
(Phil. iii. 15).—7Zrapp.


Vers. 4 and 5. God demands not so
much splendid outward service, but
rather an inner and honest service of
the heart (Isa. iv. 24.)—Schmid.

God is much more desirous of giving
to us than of receiving from us—
Wuert. Bible.

The true house of God is His people ;
there would He make His abode in the
hearts of His own. A human heart
that opens itself to God is a temple
more pleasing to Him than the stateliest
structure of gold and marble, and a
church that really has the Lord dwell-
ing in its midst is in the sight of God
more precious than the noblest showy
vuilding which sets all the world a
wondering.—Schlier,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,
ar





Ver. 6. The curtained tabernacle
had been specially designed by God to
wean His people from those sensuous
ideas of worship to which the gorgeous
temples of Egypt had accustomed them;
and to give them the true notion of a
spiritual service, along with the visible
emblem of a present God. The time
had not quite arrived for changing this
simple arrangement, and as long as
it was God’s pleasure to dwell in the
tabernacle so long might David expect
that His grace might be shed forth
most abundantly there. And so, when-
ever it seems to be indicated by God
in His providence that a body of wor-
shippers should remain in a tent-like
building, they may expect that He will
then shine forth in the fulness of His
grace.— Blaikie.


Ver. 8. God signified His good
acceptance by calling him His servant
David ; for at another time when he
had offended it was plain David. (Chap.
xxiv. 12.) I took thee from the sheep-
cote. So that thou needest not to
doubt of my love, though I use not thy
service in this particular. To be ruler
over my people. Do this well, and thou
needest not be idle—7Zrapp.


Ver. 9. Fame. 1. Fame is a gift
of God’s providence—hence to be en-
joyed with humility. 2. Fame is one
of God’s noblest gifts—hence it may
be desired and earnestly sought if
righteously. 3. Fame, like all other
ifts, has weighty responsibilities—

ence to be used for the good of men
and the glory of God.—TZranslator of
Lange’s Commentary.


Ver. 11. This thought contains the
deep general truth that God must first
of all build a man’s house before the
man can build God’s house, and applies
it especially to the kingdom of Israel.
—Keil,


316


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK EL





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12-16,


Tux Messranic Promisz to Davi.


This promise—

I. Reveals the special purpose of God in the election of David. As the
king now sits in his palace of cedar, God takes him back to the days when as a
youth he followed the sheep. During all the years that had intervened, and in
all the manifold experiences through which he had passed, he had been the
object of special Divine care and guidance. His life had been such that,
however he might have sometimes yielded to despair in the past, he must have
now felt deeply conscious, upon looking back, that he had been highly favoured
above all the men of his nation. Doubtless he was more gifted than most—
perhaps than any,—but the gifts that fitted him for the throne were from the
same Divine giver, and only increased his obligation. But he is here reminded
that he had not been made thus great for his own sake alone, or chiefly. He
was to use all that had been bestowed upon him for the people over whom he
had been called to rule, and was to be the founder of a race through whom not
only Israel but all the families of the earth were to be blessed. This is always
the purpose of God’s electing grace, whether of the individual or the nation.
Men receive special favours that they may dispense special blessings, and are
intended to be, not like those lakes in which a mighty river is ever emptying
itself, and yet from which no stream ever flows, but like the fountain-head of
that river which, as fast as it is fed by the mountain snows, sends forth its .
waters and becomes a channel of blessing to all around. The spirit of many of
David’s psalms reveal that he entered fully into the Divine purpose of his
election, but the spirit of many, both of his immediate and remote descendants,
shows that they utterly failed to discern it.


II. It reveals the progressive nature of the Divine dispensations in relation
to man. A dim outline is here given to Nathan by prophetic vision of a kingdom
far more glorious than that which David founded. We, who live after the
earthly sceptre has departed from Judah, can fill in the details, and recognise in
David's Lord the only Son who could establish his house for ever. In the king-
dom of God under the Old ‘I'estament, the name of David takes a high place.
and among the kings of Istael he holds a deserved pre-eminence, on account of
the great national blessings which attended his powerful and beneficent rule.
But One who descended from him according to the flesh has, by the majesty of
His person, and the excellence of His character, and the transcendent glory
of His kingdom, caused the name of David to sink into nothing in
comparison, The kingdom of Christ endures because it is founded upon a
purely spiritual basis ; it knows no limit of time or place because its laws have
their origin in the eternal moral necessity of the universe, For its King rules
always and everywhere because His throne is in the heart of each of His subjects,
“He shall judge the poor of the people, He shall save the children of the needy,
and break in pieces the oppressor ;” and therefore “ He shall be feared ag long
as the sun and moon endure.” “He shall spare the poor and needy” and
“redeem their soul from deceit and violence,” and the name of such a King
must “endure for ever” and “be continued as long as the sun” (Psa. Lxii),
His name is called “Jesus; for He shall save His people from their sins,”
and as a necessary consequence, “ He shall reign over the house of Jacob
jor ever, and of His kingdom there shall be no end.” (Luke ii. 33). David
was elected by God to shepherd Israel, and his reign was upon the whole
fraught with blessing to his subjects. But the dispensation in which he
ministered was, in comparison with that of the New Testament, only as

816


OHaP. VIL _ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





the acorn to the oak, and he could as little conceive of the glory of these
latter days as we could picture to ourselves some monarch of the forest, if we
had never seen anything more than the tiny seed which enfolds its germ. And
God has yet more in reserve for the race for whom the Great Shepherd laid
down His life. We as little comprehend what wonders of grace and glory are
yet to be unfolded under the reign of Christ, as David comprehended all that
was included in the word of the Lord which came to Nathan. We have the
King of whom it spake, and who can never be succeeded by another ; but we
have no conception of the infinite possibilities yet hidden in God in connection


with that kingdom which can never be removed but abideth for ever.


6< Eye


hath not” yet “ seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him” (1 Cor. ii. 9).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


In considering this prophecy we need
to bear in mind the peculiar form of
therevelationsrespecting Messiah which
God communicated to David. 'l'o other
prophets, revelations of the Messiah
were made oljectively—apart from
themselves ; they were shown Christ
and His day afar off ; they had no more
personal relation to the thing revealed
than other believers around them. But
when revelations of Messiah were made
to David, they were usually connected
with something in his own life, history,
or experience; they had a shadowy
foundation in something subjective or
pesonal to himself; that thing enlarged,
purified, glorified, constituted the
revelation of Christ. This was in keep-
ing with the typical relation which
David and his kingdom had to Christ
and His kingdom. As this was the
character of the revelations made to
David respecting Christ, so also was it
the character of many of his prophetic
songs. Melting and shading
insensibly into each other as the twe
classes of objectsdo, itisoften extremely
difficult to say which of them is meant.
— Blaikie.

It is plain that the building of a
house of rest for the ark was designed
to stand out prominently in the sight
of Israel as a great and mighty under-
taking—as a work of sufficient magni-
tude and importance to form the one
great enterprise of a king who could
give himself to it without distraction
or disturbance. Such was obviously
the impression which the Divine ap-


pointment, regarding the building of a
house for the name of God, must have
made upon the minds of the people of
Israel—the church of that day ; and
the reason why David was forbidden
and Solomon permitted to build that
house is still more clearly unfolded to
us now that the promises and predictions
connected with that work have been and
are in the way of being fulfilled... .
David was honoured to be an eminent
type of the Messiah, inasmuch as, by
his trials, hisconflicts,and hisconquests,
he did very significantly prefigure a
suffering, but at the same time, a trium-
phant Saviour. This however, was only
one aspect of Christ’s kingly office . . .
there is another view—even the relation
in which, as king, He stands to His
church. This view God was
also graciously pleased to typify or pre-
figure in the kingly office as it had been
established in Israel ; and we cannot
fail to perceive the wisdom which pro-
vided that this should be done, not in
the person of the same king who was
employed to represent Christ in His
conflict and His victory, but in that of
another who should be pre-eminently
a peaceful king.— Gordon.

The fulfilment of the great and
gracious promise of God to David in
Christ the Son of David 1. In His
person, He is not merely David's seed—
seed of the woman—Abraham’s seed,
but also God’s Son. 2. In His office,
He is King over the kingdom of God,
King of all Kings. 3. In His possession
of power, He has an everlayting king-

817


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BoOoE 1.


——————————————— ee


dom, to Him is given all power in
heaven and onearth. 4. In His work.
He builds for the name of God the
Father a house, a spiritual temple in
humanity, out of living stones. (Comp.
John ii, 19.)—Lange’s Commentary.

Why is there this frequent repetition
in this promise? (Verses 13 and 16).
‘Three times is the perpetuity declared.
Why is this? It is to meet the diffi-
culties of our faith, arising from the
lengthened suspension of the promise,
and the apparent improbability of
Christ’s everlasting monarchy.—Bicker-
steth.

We have seen that David was himself
a prophecy of Christ. It follows from
that, therefore, that the Temple which
he so desired to build is a prophecy of
the Church. With all its grandeur
under Solomon, that stately building
was, after all, only a type of that more
glorious spiritual fabric which is “built
upon the foundation of the apostles
and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief corner-stone, in whom all the
building, fitly framed together, groweth
into an holy temple in the Lord.”
Now, in the erection of this living
temple we may all take part. When
by faith in Jesus Christ we become
united to Him, and receive the Holy
Spirit into our hearts, we, as it were,
build ourselves, or, in another aspect
of it, are built by God, as living stones
into that glorious edifice which Jehovah
through the ages is rearing for His own
eternal abode. When, again, by our
instrumentality, either directly in the
efforts which we put forth at home, or
indirectly through the labours of those
whom we sustain abroad, we work for
the conversion of others, we are en gaged
as under-builders, on the same spiritual
edifice, David would have counted it
the highest privilege of his life if he
had been permitted to build the Temple
on Moriah ; and even after the pro-
hibition came by the mouth of N athan,
it was the joy of his latter years to
collect materials wherewith Solomon,
his son, might raise a house worthy of
Jehovah's worship. Nay, more, in the
days of Solomon himself, after the
Gorgeous structure had been raised,


Ss


everyone who had done anything, how-
ever small, in the way of helping on
its erection, was invested with a pecu-
liar honour in the eyes of his fellow-
countrymen. As the Psalm expresses
it: “A man was famous according aa
he had lifted axes upon the thick trees.”
But a higher privilege, and a more
lasting renown, will be the portion of
him who assists in the most humble
capacity in the uprearing of that Church
which is to be “ for a habitation of God
through the Spirit.” “They that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and
ever.” — Taylor.


Ver. 13. Where Jesus reigns in
power men must yield obedience of
some sort. His kingdom, moreover, is
no house of cards or dynasty of days «
it is as lasting as the lights of heaven ;
days and nights will cease before He
abdicates His throne. Neither sun nor
moon as yet manifest any failure in
their radiance, nor are there any signs
of decrepitude in the Kingdom of J esus,
it is but in its youth, and is evidently
the coming power, the rising sun. . . .
Throughout all generations shall the
throne of the Redeemer stand. Hu-
manity shall not wear out the religion
of the Incarnate God. No infidelity
shall wither it away, nor superstition
smother it ; it shall rise immortal from
what seemed its grave; as the true
phenix, it shall revive from its ashes,
As long as there are men on earth
Christ shall have a throne among them,
Instead of the fathers shall be the
children. Each generation shall have
a regeneration in its midst, let Pope
and devil do what they may. Even at
this hour we have the tokens of Hia
eternal power ; since He ascended to
His throne eighteen hundred years ago,
His dominion has not been overturned,
though the mightiest of empires have
gone like visions of the night. We
see on the shores of time the wrecks of
the Caesars, the relics of the Moguls
and the last remnant of the Ottomans,
Charlemagne, Maximilian, Napoleon,
how they flit like shadows before ug |


OHAP, Vil.


HOMILETIV COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.


SS chennai


They were and are not ; but Jesus for
ever is. As for the houses of Ho-
henzollern, Guelph, or Hapsburg, they
have their hour ; but the Son of David
has all hours and ages as His own.—
Spurgeon,


Ver. 16. The advantages of civil
government contrasted with the blessings
of the spiritualkingdom of Jesus Christ.
1. The first and primary advantage
expected from every well constituted
human government is security, and
the sense of security. . . . Whatever
may be the imperfections attaching to
various modes of government, the worst
is preferable to a state of society desti-
tute of public authority and law; in
such a state there can exist not only
no security, but no tranquillity... .
But the utmost that can be enjoyed
under any form of civil power is a most
imperfect shadow of the safety which
Jesus Christ bestows upon the subjects
of His spiritual reign. .. 2. The second
benefit expected from human govern-
ment is liberty. So far as this advan-
tage is consistent with the former,
the more largely it is enjoyed the better,
Every diminution of our liberty, ex-
cept such as is necessary to our protec-
tion from evils which might otherwise
be apprehended, is itself just so much
redundant evil. . . . Restraint that
connot be justified by the production
of some greater benefit than could be
attained without it, is not imperfection,
it is injustice... . But suppose the
utmost degree of civil liberty to be
enjoyed, what is that in comparison
with that real spiritual freedom which
Jesus Christ confers? ... From the
moment the Christian enters into the
kingdom of grace and truth, he leaves
his bonds behind ; invigorated with a
Divine strength he purposes and it
stands fast ; he triumphs over himself ;
is victorious over the world... .


tramples upon the greatest tyrants—
the powers of darkness... . 3. The
next advantage froma good government
is plenty. To secure this is sometimes
beyond human power and policy. . . .
In general it may be asserted that
human laws should not interfere too
much. . . . Everyone should be left
at liberty, as far as possible, to
choose his own way in pursuing his
prosperity, . . . . . Under the
best systems of government there
must remain many cases of want and
distress; but in the kingdom of Jesus
Christ there exists an infinite plenty
for all the wants of the soul. ithe
4. A tendency to improvement in its
soctal institutions ought to accompany
every weil-ordered government. The
best of those institutions are such as
will be at once permanent and pro-
gressive by their intrinsic wisdom and
excellence—by their adaptation to all
the varying circumstances of the nation
—by their power of providing for pos-
sible emergencies—they will gradually
rise from security to convenience, and
then exalt convenience into ornament—
into just refinement and diffused illu-
mination, . The gospel empire
possesses within itself interminable
energies and tendencies to benefit its
subjects. All those elysian
images of prophecy which paint with
so much beauty the latter days of the
world, are nothing in their substantial
fulfilment but the impress of Jesus
Christ on the minds and manners of
mankind—the image of Christianity
embodied in society, and righteousness
dwelling in the new-created universe.
sales 5. The fifth and last element
is stability ; this is the crown of all its
other advantages. Nothing can be
wanting to such a reign but that it
should last; and this is what the text
emphatically expresses.—/tobt. Hall.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 77—2%
Daviw’s THANKSGIVING AND PRAYER.


I, The bestowal of new honours should awaken a new sense of humility.
The vessel that carries much sail and looks well above the water, should have


319


HOMILE1IC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. _oHAP. Lt





mueh ballast below the water-line. Only some heavy weight in the hold will
give the needful steadiness to the ship. So the soul that receives from God many
and great gifts, and is honoured by Him in a special manner, needs to be well
ballasted, lest, being too highly exalted, it make shipwreck on the rock of pride.
But if the man be in right relations to God, a sense of his unworthiness and of
the increase of responsibility which each new gift and honour brings, will be to
him what the iron and stone in the hold are to the full-rigged ship. With David,
humility seems ever to have kept pace with the honour bestowed upon him by
God. On the day when he was first brought before Saul as the deliverer of his
people from the Philistine giant, his words and bearing show that he
possessed that spirit of dependence upon God which is only found in those
who have formed a lowly, and therefore a right estimate of themselves. We find
no trace of any other spirit in him at any period of his history up to this
crowning day of his life, when it was revealed to him that he was to be, not
only a great and mighty monarch himself, but the ancestor of one who should
rule a far more mighty and enduring empire. The manner in which he receives
the revelation shows how well fitted he was to carry with a steady hand the
overflowing cup of blessing held out to him,


II. Prayer for the fulfilment of Divine promises is a law of the kingdom
of God. The promise that God gave to David concerning the Messiah was
certain to be fulfilled ; no power in the universe could prevent it. But many
things are included in the certainty of its fulfilment, and prayer is one—the
prayers of all the faithful who lived before the coming of Christ. The very
longing of these souls for some more complete manifestation of God than they
possessed was in itself a prophecy of it, and the assurance which they received
of the coming blessing did by no means cause them to cease to pray for it, but
gave them matter for supplication and a motive to continue in it. David here
feels no inconsistency in asking that what God has promised shall come to pass,
but links his prayer to the Divine word, and makes the promise the basis of the

etition: “ And now O Lord God, the word that Thou hast spoken concerning

hy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as Thou
hast said.” (Ver. 25.) “ And now O Lord God, . . . Thy words be true,
and Thou hast promised this goodness unto Thy servant: 7) heréfore now let it
please Thee to bless the house of Thy servant. (Verses 28 and 29.) So Daniel,
when he understood that the time was drawing nigh for the return of the
captives from Babylon “ set his face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fastings” (Dan. ix. 3), and besought the Lord “to hearken,
and do, and defer not” (ver. 19) to fulfil the promise which He had made by
Jeremiah. And this not because Daniel had any misgivings concerning the
faithfulness of Jehovah, but because that very faithfulness furnished him with
the ground for his appeal. The same connection between Divine promises and
human prayers is taught and practised in the dispensation of the New Testament,
We know that the kingdom of God will “ come,” and His will one day “be done
as in heaven, 80 on earth,” yet our Lord commands His disciples to pray constantly
for this blessed result. Paul declares in Rom. x. 1, that his “ heart’s desire and
prayer to God for Israel ts, that they might be saved, and in the next chapter
(ver. 26) says that it is the purpose and plan of God when the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in, that “all Israel shall be saved.” Promise and petition are
indissolubly lined together in the Divine economy, and as Dr. Chalmers remarks,
“God's prophecies tell us what ought to be the subject of our prayers,”


GHAP. VIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,


SI
OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS. |


Ver. 17. Wesee the fidelity of the
Lord’s prophet, which all His servants
in the ministry should imitate, and that
he is not ashamed to recall and recant
what formerly he had said to David
upon better ground and information
from the Lord. Which should teach
all men humbly to submit to truth, and
quit error and not to stand upon their
own credit, in maintaining what once
they have professed without retracta-
tion.— Guild.

Here there presents itself to us a
striking testimony of the reality of
immediate divine revelations. David
and Nathan united, according to their
best knowledge and conscience, in a
truly piousand holy work, and suddenly
they renounce their cherished purpose,
whose execution everything appeared to
counsel. Why did they giveup thenoble
intention? Not certainly of their own
accord, but rather because God the
Lord gave forth his voice regarding it,
and interposed immediately his veto.
And how should the living personal
God, who has given to man the power
of speech, not himself be able to speak
tothe children of men? No argument
that can stand the test can be urged to
the coutrary.—Krummacher.

This revelation is an epoch-making
one for David’s inner life. It brought
an entirely new element into his life,
which as the Psalms show, moved him
powerfully David saw _ its
meaning more and more clearly when
he compared the promise with the
Messianic idea which had been handed
down from the fathers, and finally
attained to perfect certainty by the
further inner disclosures attached to
this fundamental promise, with which
he was occupied day and night. Psa. ii.
and Psa. cx. afford special proof that
such spiritual disclosures were really
given to him. The Messianic hope,
which had -experienced no further
development since Gen. xlix, now
acquired much greater fulness and life.
It had a substratum for further develop-
ment, hallowed by God Himself, in the
kingdom already in existence, and


?


especially in David’s personality and
fortunes. —Hengstenberg.

The narrative shows that the
Messianic sense of the prediction was
not only understood, but that it filled
David’s heart with the warmest emotions
of gratitude and delight. We found
this remark partly on the elevated
strain of David’s thanksgiving . . .
It is abrupt, impassioned, sublime. I¢
is the language of one who has been
raised to the same lofty pedestal as
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the illus-
trious fathers of the nation, and made
to occupy the same relation to the Seed
of the Woman. Both in spirit and in
sentimentthere isa close correspondence
between this thanksgiving and that of
the Virgin Mary. Generally, the
announcement was understood by the
pope as a prediction of the Messiah.

enceforth the Hope of Israel was
known as the Son of David. — Blaikie,


Ver. 25. There are two ways wherein
David's faith works. I. By believing
the Divine word. “Thou hast said.”
The object and ground of faith is the
Divine saying—it is not upon thus
saith a man, or thus saith a minister,
nay, nor thus saith an angel. Divine
faith can stand only upon a Divine
testimony. If you have faith, then
you have received the word, not as the
word of man, but, as it is indeed, the
Word of God. II. Haith acts by plead-
ing the accomplishment of the promise.
e Bo as Thou hast said.” It is the
business of faith to put God to His
word, 1. To plead upon the mercy
that made the promise. 2. Upon the
truth that is to make out the promise.
8. Upon the power of the Promiser,
4. Upon the Blood of the Covenant,
5. Upon the love of God to Christ.—
Lirskine.


Ver. 29. Blessed conviction! What
matters it that our offspring be suc-
cessful in business, or rise in the world,
or form high connections, or accumu-
late great fortunes, if there be no grace .
in their hearts, enlightening, refining,
Yr 321


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK ki,





and enlarging their moral faculties; would bea Divine and spiritual one?


and what matters it though the world
pity them, and scorn and hate them,
if Christ be in them the hope of glory.
Blatkie. ;


In what sense, I shall be asked, did
David expect that his sons’ kingdom


In what sense an earthly and magnifi-
cent one? I answer—he looked for
no earthly magnificence which was not
the manifestation of an inward and
spiritual dominion; he feared ne
earthly magnificence, which was a
manifestation of it.—/aurice,





CHAPTER VIIL


CrrricaL aNd Exposrrony Norrs.—Ver. 1. “Metheg-ammah,.” This fs a very obscure
word, and has been very variously translated. “Metheg” is a “bridle,” and “ammah ” is
translated mother by Keil, Erdmann, Phillipson, and Wordsworth. Gesenius says this word is
always used in a figurative sense as the head, or foundation of a thing, and agrees with the
scholars above named in understanding it here to signify a capital or chief city. If so, to take
the bridle can only mean to subdue, and this entire rendering is borne out by the parallel passage
in 1 Chron. xviii. 1. Hiivernick, Michaelis, Ewald, and others translate erm-bridle, but attach


the same meaning to the words.


Ver 2. “Moab.” Nothing is known of the cause or history of this war.
former friend (1 Sam. xxii. 3, 4) had been succeeded by a ruler of a different spirit.


Probably David's
“ Probably


in this war occurred what is mentioned in 1 Chron. xi. 22 of Benaiah, one of David’s heroes.”


(Erdmann). “ Thus he fulfilled Balaam’s prophecy in part” (Numb. xxiv. 17).


(Wordsworth. )


“Measured them,” ‘This refers to a well-known practice of Eastern kings, to command their
prisoners of war, particularly those who had greatly incensed the victors, to lie down on the
ground, and then to put to death a certain portion of them, which was determined by lot, but
most commonly by a measuring line. This usage was not, perhaps, usually practised by the people
of God; but Jewish writers assert that the cause of this particular severity against Moab was
their having massacred David’s parents and family.” (Jamieson .)


Ver. 3. “Hadadezor.”


Hadad was the sun-god of the Syrians, and the name signifies


Hadad our help. “Zobah.” A portion of Syria forming a separate kingdom in the time of


Saul, David, and Solomon. See 1 Sam. xiv. 47,


It is difficult to define its exact position and


limits, but there seems to be grounds for regarding it as lying chiefly east of Coele-Syria, and


extending thence north-east and east, towards,


Dictionary. “As he went.”


evident from the use of the word recover. David


if not even to, the Euphrates. Simath’s Bid,


That these words refer to Hadadezer and not to David seema


had not possessed territory in this direction,


Ver. 4. “Seven hundred horsemen.” As the word chariots does not appear in the original
text, the actual reading here is 1700 horsemen, whereas in Chronicles 7000 horsemen and 1000
chariots are mentioned. Most scholars agree that the word “chariots” has been accidentally
omitted, and the numeral for a thousand confounded with one denoting a hundred. For “in the
plains of Syria seven thousand horsemen would be a much juster proportion to twenty thousand


foot than seventeen hundred”’ (Keil, Thenius,etc.),
chariot-horses, thereby implying the use of chario
word translated chariot-horses denotes all anim


ts in the engagement.
als used for riding.


and, further on, David is said to have lamed the
“ Houghed,” etc. The
“The reason of this mutila-


tion was, that horses being forbidden by the Mosaic constitution to the Hebrews, bothin war and
agriculture, it was of no use to keep them; and their neighbours, placing much dependence on
cavalry, but having, for want of a native breed, to procure them by purchase, the greatest
damage that could be done to them was to render their horses unserviceable in war.” (Jamieson).
“ He reserved a hundred of them, not for war, but fora triumph or guard; whether or not this
reservation was illegal and ungodly is not said. (Translator of Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 7.
ex “his immediate guard.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 8 The cities here mentioned are unknown.


“The servants of Hadadezer.” Either his “ governors and vassal princes ” (Keil)


“ Brass,” rather, copper. “ Some centuries
onvnentary.)


before this copper was carried in quantities from Syria to Egypt.” (Bid. C.


Ver. 9.


Ver. 10.
as Joram is an Israclitish name.


322


“Hamath.” The principal city of upper Syria in the valley of the Orontes,
“Joram.” Called Haderam in Chronicles, and this Is moat likely the true reading,


*


OHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMURL.
AE Me


Ver. 18. “ The Syrians in the valley of gait.” As the valley of aalt, near the Dead Sea,
is at so great a distance from Syria, either Hdom must be here substituted for Aram (here rendered
Syrians), or the words “and Zdom” must be inserted before “ the valley of salt.” The sequel
agrees with this reading. “The facts were probably these: Whilst David, or rather Israel,
was entangled in the war with the Ammonites and Aramens, the Edomites seized upon
the opportunity which appeared to them a very favourable one to invade the land of Israel, and
advanced as far as the southern extremity of the Dead Sea. As soon, therefore, as the Arameans
were defeatel and subjugated, and the Israelitish army had returned from this war, David
ordered it to march against the Edomites, and defeated them in the valley of salt.” (Keil.)


Ver. 16. “Jehoshaphat.” Nothing farther is known of thisman. “ Recorder.” Literally,
one who calls to remembrance, therefore most likely one who recorded the most important
events of the nation. Keil and some others liken the office to that of the “ magister memorice of
the later Romans, or the waka nuvis of the Persian court, who keeps a record of everything that
takes place around the king, furnishes him with an account of all that occurs in his kingdom,
places his visé upon all the king’s commands, and keeps a special protocol of all these things,”


Ver. 17. “Zadok.” A descendant of Aaron’s son Eleazar (1 Chron. v. 29-34, vi. 37, 38).
“Ahimelech.” It is strange to find this name in connection with Zadok in the priesthood, as
both before and after this time Abiathar is himself mentioned as the priest (1 Sam. xxii. 20, ete. ;
1 Kings i. 7, etc.) As the father of Abiathar was named Ahimelech some have proposed to
transpose the names, but this would not solve the difficulty in 1 Chron. xxiv. 3, 6, 31. But the
preferable solution appears to be that held by Keil, Wordsworth, Bertbean, and others, that
Abiathar had a son of the same name as his (Abiathar’s) father, who with Zadok assisted in the
priestly duties. “The historian states,” says Wordsworth, “that Zadok and Ahimelech were
priests ; not, aa in our version, the priests. He supposes the reader to know the notorious fact
that Abiathar was the priest. But he tells us, in addition to Abiathar the High Priest, Zadok
and Ahimelech officiated as priests, just as we read of “the two sons of Eli priests of the Lord.”
(1 Sam. i 8.) Abiathar and Ahimelech descended from Tthamar, Aaron’s younger gon.
*Soribe.” Probably the State-secretary.


Ver. 18. “Benaiah.” A mighty warrior mentioned in chap. xxiii. 20. Cherithites and
Pelethites. The first of these words is from a verb meaning to cut down or exterminate, and
probably points to one duty of these men, viz., that of executioners. Pelethites is derived from
a word signifying to run, to hasten, and intimates that they had to carry the royal orders to
distant places. They were evidently David’s body-guard. Some have derived the names from
the Philistines, and from a Philistine tribe mentioned 1 Sam. xxx. 14, but the derivation seems
far-fetched. “Chief rulers.” The same word, used in 1 Kings iv. 5 and translated “ principal
officer,” is afterwards explained as “the king’s friend.” It probably signifies eonfidential
advisers.


¢








MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
Daviw’s CoNnQueEsts.


I. However long the conflict continues between the kingdom of God and the
enemies of that kingdom, the final issue is not doubtful. ‘The land of Palestine
had long since been given by God to the descendants of Abraham, who then
constituted the Church of God upon the earth. But from the days of Joshua
until the reign of David, the struggle between the old inhabitants and the new
had been continued with varying success. There had been dark days when
Israel had been almost entirely subdued by her enemies, yet she had never lost
her footing in the promised land; and now, under David, she saw herself the
mistress of Jerusalem in the heart of the kingdom, and her foes subdued on every
side. So it must and shall be in every contest of the Church of the Living God
with those who oppose her, She will be subject to varying fortunes, and will
sometimes appear to sink too low to rise again ; but she shall eventually subdue
all her enemies, and instead of the Church militant shall become the Church
triumphant.


II. The victory of the kingdom of God depends upon the fulfilment of moral
conditions. The success of the Philistines and the other nations against Israel
had arisen from the moral degeneracy of the latter—from their neglect to fulfil
the conditions upon which God had promised them a peacefu! occupation of the
land. And David now subdued them, and brought in a iong period of rest, not
because he was a mighty and skilful warrior, but because he was a 2 faith


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book 2%





in the Unseen, and one who, on the whole, was sincere in his devotion and
undivided in his service to God. It is because the nominal members of God’s
kingdom in the world have not fulfilled His conditions of success that the victory
of the Cross is so long delayed and the Gospel makes so little progress among the
nations. ‘The earth has been given to Christ and His people, and the Great
David will one day subdue all things to Himself and put an end to the conflict.
But the “coming of the kingdom” is retarded by the want of faith in the
so-called disciples of Christ, and by their apathy and worldliness—by their
attempts to serve other gods beside Jehovah, and by their unwillingness to deny
themselves for the cause they profess to have at heart.


III. However diversified the enemies of God may be, they are one in opposition
to Him and to His rule. There are birds of prey wearing a variety of plumage
and exhibiting other differences which show them to belong to different families.
But they have one and the same instinct, and though they may sometimes be found
fighting with each other, a desire after the carcase is common to all. The people
mentioned here as warring against Israel were of different races, and inhabited
different lands, and doubtless often warred against each other ; but they were
one in their hatred of Israel and opposition to David. They are typical of the
enemies of the spiritual Israel and of those who oppose the progress of the
kingdom of David’s Son and Lord. Men who differ in all other points are found
agreeing in this, and although, like Herod and Pilate, they may be opposed to
each other on other matters, they will often be found, likethem, uniting for this end.


IV. Yet, when the Church of God has temporal ascendancy and external
poe some who care not for her principles will court her friendship,

hen David had subdued many nations the king of Hamath saluted and blessed
him and so showed himself an exception to the general rule mentioned above.
But this friendship for David was not founded on religious sympathy, but on
hatred of a rival, and on policy. So the hatred between the enemies of God may
sometimes for a time be more active than their enmity to His kingdom ; but
friendship arising from such a source will only last while the Church is in
temporal prosperity. Like the multitudes who shouted “ Hosanna!” during the
brief moment of Christ’s popularity, and melted away or joined in crying “ Away
with Him,” in the hour of darkness, they will ever be found on the side which has
the outward ascendancy.


V. Those who do the work of preparation and those who inherit and carry
on their labour are one in the kingdom of God. The man who fells the tree,
and digs up the roots, and plans out: the ground for a city, is a co-worker with
him who raises the walls and builds the palaces. Without the toil of the first
the work of the latter could not be accomplished, but there is danger that, when
the whole is finished, the part which the first labourer had in the work may be
forgotten. David, in what we may believe was far less congenial work than the
building of a temple would have been, made the building of that temple
possible, and, by the establishment of an orderly system of Divine worship and
service, educated the spiritual perceptions of the people, so that, when
they possessed a more permanent and gorgeous house of God, they might under-
stand that it was but the means to an end—only the outward and visible sign
of an inward and unseen reality—of that worship of the heart and homage of
the life, without which all other gifts and service are not only worthless in the
sight of God, but an insult and an abomination. Let no worker for God be
discouraged because he cannot do the completed work upon which he has set his
heart, it is a law of the Divine kingdom that one man “sows and another reaps.”
The sowing is not the most joyous part of the work, but for this very reason
it may ure honourable, and is that without which the »ther could not exist,


GHAP. VIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


ee ea Sl Ae
OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


The transitions of the Bible, like
those of actual life, are often singu-
larly abrupt ; that which now hurries
us from the scene of elevated commu-
nion with Heaven, to the confused
noise and dismal struggles of a battle-
field, is peculiarly startling. . . . It is
#n instructive fact that the history of
these wars occupy so small a portion
of the Bible. A single verse is all that
can be afforded to most of them. Had
they been narrated at length, they
would probably have formed a narra-
tive that would have placed David,
as a captain, on a level with Cyrus,
Hannibal, or Alexander. It ig one of
the less noticed proofs of the inspira-
tion of the Old Testament, that such
dazzling transactions as these are
passed over so briefly. There is no
other history in the world where more
space would be occupied in describing
the carrying of an ark to its perma-
nent resting-place than in narrating
Seven great military campaigns, It


would be beyond the power of humar
nature to resist the temptation to
describe great battles,—the story of
which is always read with such interest,
and which reflect so much earthly glory
on one’s nation.— Blaikie,


Vers, 15-18. In the minds of most
readers of the Bible, the name of David,
king of Israel, is associated mainly
with military power, poetic genius, and
personal piety ; and only on the rarest
occasions do we hear any reference
made to his administrative ability.
Yet in this last quality he was at least
as remarkable as in any one of the
others ; and great injustice is done to
him if we leave out of view the emi-
nent services which he rendered to his
country by the exercise of his govern-
ment and his organising faculties... .
More than Charlemagne did for Europe,
or Alfred for England, David accom-
plished for the tribes of Israel.—.
Taylor.





CHAPTER IX


Carrioan aND Exposrrory Nores.—Ver.1. “And David said.” This sould not have
occurred until David had reigned many years, seeing that Mephibosheth was only five years old
when his father died, and was now a father himself. (See ver. 12 and chap. iv. 4.)


Ver. 3. “The kindness of God.” This expression is understood by some as “love and
kindness shown in God, and for God’s sake,” (Keil) ; by others as “a kindness such as God
Himself shows,” (Zrdmann) ; while Patrick takes the expression as a superlative form to denote
simply very great kindness. Wordsworth paraphrases it “love for the Lord’s sake, and in the
Lord’s sight, and according to the Lord’s example.”

Ver. 4. “Lodebar.” From chap. xvii. 27 we learn that this was beyond Jordan, near
Mahanaim ; it is generally thought to be identical with Lidbir or Debir, mentioned in Josh.
xiii. 26. From the same source we learn that Machir was a man of position and wealth,


Ver.7. “Fear not.” Mephibosheth’s alarm may have arisen merely from “ the simplicity
and bashfulness of a youth who had lived in a nomad country, and who was awed by the
splendour of a court,” (Jamieson), or from the fear that David was about to follow the custom of
criental rulers, and slay all the representatives of the royal family which he had displaced.
“All the Land,” etc. “It is evident from these words that the landed property belonging to
Saul had either fallen to David as crown lands, or had been taken possession of by distant
relations after the death of Saul” (Kevl.)

Ver. 8. “A dead dog.” “Mephibosheth’s early misfortunes threw a shade over his whole
life, and his personal deformity—as is often the case when it has been the result of accident—
seems to have exercised a depressing and depreciatory influence on his character (see also chap.
xix. 26, 28).” (Smith's Bib. Dict.)

Ver. 10. “ Although a daily guest at the royal table, Mephibosheth had to make provision
aa a royal prince for the iseenwide of his own family and servants.” (Keit.) aes


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK ii.


a A


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.


Daviy AND MEPHIBOSHETH.


I. The merit of a dead parent is often a channel of blessing to the living
child. Other things being equal, it is doubtless a blessing to descend from
parents of gentle blood—from those who belong to the nobility of this world.
Any member of such a family, if he be at all worthy of the name he bears, finds
that name a fortune in itself in respect to the earthly and tempural advantages
it confers upon him. But such a man does not monopolize all the honour and
respect shown to children on account of their parentage. Men who cannot
boast of a long pedigree, but who can rejoice in the greater honour of descending
from the morally great, have often found the goodness of their departed father
or mother bearing fruit for them, their sons and daughters, long after their
parents have left the world. It is a principle which has received a Divine sanc-
tion, for God who declares that He visits the sins of the fathers upon the chil-
dren (Exod. xx 5), has, both by word and deed, repeatedly blessed the children
for the father’s sake. (Gen. xxvi. 4, 5, xxviii. 13, etc.). In the case of Mephi-
bosheth, the principle had not until now fully asserted itself. The son of one
whose nature was as noble as his birth was princely, and whose heroic submission
to the Divine will and devoted friendship have been very rarely equalled and
never surpassed, Mephibosheth seems hitherto to have come sadly short of what
was due to him as the sole surviving heir of Jonathan. ‘Those who protected
his helpless infancy and sheltered him in his crippled manhood may have been
in part actuated by regard for his father, but none owed him so much as David,
who now at last discharges the debt and makes his friend’s child feel that, after
all, God had not forgotten to care for the son of a faithful servant.


II. True friendship rejoices to find a child to receive the gratitude which
it would have rendered to the dead father. If Jonathan had lived until this
day of David’s exaltation, he would have been satisfied to be David’s friend—to
be next unto him (1 Sam. xxiii. 17) in the kingdom of Israel, and David would
have known how to estimate such unselfish loyalty and must have regarded such
a friend with profound and admiring gratitude. We may be sure that nothing
would have been wanting on David’s side which could give expression to the
feelings which must have filled his soul. But the calamity which had deprived
Mephibosheth of his father had removed David’s beloved friend, and all that he
could now do was to put the son in the father’s place. This he did so far as it
was possible. He could not rejoice in the presence of Jonathan at his table, but
Mephibosheth should take his place and keep his father’s memory green in the
king’s heart. None who is truly grateful to a friend for favours in the past will
make that friend’s death an excuse for neglecting to acknowledge and to repay
the debt of gratitude. A true man will feel it his duty and his delight to place
any who belong to his benefactor in that benefactor’s place, and to do that
relatively which he can no longer do personally.


III. Elevation to power should be embraced as a God-given opportunity
for repaying past favours. When David first received kindly notice from
Jonathan he was but an unknown youth who could only give grateful love in
return for the prince’s favour. And as the years rolled on and he became more
known only to be more in need of a true friend, Jonathan’s brotherly faithfulness
was often his only source of human counsel and cheer. But now times had
changed, and David was on the throne of Israel, while Jonathan’s child was an
exile and apparently dependent upon the bounty of others, and so an opportunity
was ee the king to testify his grateful remembrance of past kindnesses


OwapP. 1x.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





It would be well if all men who rise from obscurity to fame and power were to
make their elevation a like opportunity of remembering those who befriended them
in their days of adversity, and of testifying their gratitude to them. If they
neglect to do this, they omit to perform a most sacred duty, and show themselves
wanting in one of the main elements of a noble disposition.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


This fragment of history may be
looked upon in two lights. I. As
supplying a fine illustration of human
friendship. . . . Jonathan was
still fresh in the heart of David. Death
cannot really deprive us of our friends
after all. Memory holds them, enshrines
them, presses them to the heart, makes
them more real to us after death than
before. Friendship gives a
common interest: what our friend
loves, we love ; His children in a sense
are ours. . . . Il. Asa faint
tmage of Divine love to the world. . . .
We are warranted I presume, to use
facts in human history, as Jesus used
the waving cornfields, etc. . . . to
illustrate spiritual and Divine facts.
Besides, the good in man ts a Divine
emanation, and the best means of giving
an idea of God. I see more of the
Eternal in a true kindness of a holy
man—such kindness as David now
displays—than in any part of material
nature I fael justified there-
fore, in looking upon David’s conduct
towards Mephibosheth as serving to
illustrate God's conduct towards our
ruined world. . . . 1. The kind-
ness wasunsought. The son of Jonathan
did not make any application. . ..
Did the world seek the gift of God?
wey. 2. The kindness was in con-
sideration of someone else. It was “for
Jonathan’s sake.” . . . Christ is not
the cause of God’s love, but He is the
channel. . . . 3. The results of
the kindness are illustrative of the


Divine. It found out Mephibosheth.
; Christ came to seek and to
Bave. The apostles were sent


out in search of God’s objects of love.
: God’s love searches out men.
Providence, conscience, and the Gospel,
are His messengers. . It restored
to him his patrimonial inheritance.

. « God's love restores us to our


lost possessions, Salvation is “ paradise
regained” etc. Jt exalted to distin-
guished honours. ‘ And thou shalt eat
bread at my table continually.” “If
any man hear my voice, | will come in
unto him,” ete.—Dr. David Thomas.


Ver. 1. Good men should seck
opportunities of doing good. The
liberal deviseth liberal things (Isa.
xxxii. 8.) For the most proper objects
of our kindness and charity are such as
will not be frequently met with without
inquiry. The most necessitous are the
least clamorous. David had too long
forgotten his obligations to Jonathan,
but now, at length, they are brought to
his mind. It is good sometimes to

toink ourselves whether there be any
promises or engayements that»we have
neglected to make good ; better do it
late than never.— Henry.

We must also see where Jesus our
fast friend hath any receivers; that
since our goodness extendeth not to
Him, we may show Him kindness in
His people, who are His seed and
prolong His days upon earth. (Isa. iii.
10, Psa. xvi. 3.—Zrapp.

Ver. 8. Humiliation is a right use of
God's affliction. What if he was born
great ? If the sin of his grandfather hath
lost his estate, and the hand of his nurse
hath deformed and disabled his person,
he now forgets what he was, and calls
himself worse than he is, “a dog.”
Yet, ‘a living dog is better than a dead
lion.” There is dignity and comfort in
life ; Mephibosheth is therefore a dead
dog unto David. It is not for us to
nourish the same spirits in our adverse
estate, that we found in our highest
prosperity. What use bave we made
of God’s hand, if we be nat the lower
with our fall? God intends we should
carry our cross, not make a fire of it to
warm us: it is no bearing up our saua

32t


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


me


in a tempest. Good David cannot
disesteem Mephibosheth ever the more
for disparaging himself ; he loves and
honours this humility in the son of
Jonathan. There is no more certain
way to glory and advancement, than a
lowly dejection of ourselves._By. Hall.


Ver. 13. Here also we see that the
“sure mercies of David ” overflowed on
the faithful and humble-minded in the
family of Saul. Mephibosheth, the


BOOK Yt.





son of Jonathan, was admitted te
partake in the royal prerogatives of
David’s son, and to sit continually at
David’s table ; and so it will be with
the Jews ; when theyare Mephibosheths
in faith and humility, they will be
Mephibosheths in honour, they will be
admitted to share in the glory of the
‘rue David in the Church militant
here and _ triumphant _hereafter.—
Wordsworth,


CHAPTER X.


CriticaL and Expository Norzs.—Ver. 2.


“Nahash.” This may be the same Nahash


mentioned in 1 Sam. xi. ; but as this was probably forty years after the event there recorded, it


is more likely a son of the same name.


“As his father showed kindness,”


What this


kindness was, or when shown is nowhere recorded ; most likely some friendly act in the days of


David’s exile.


Ver. 3. “The city.”


Rabbah, or Rabbath-Ammon the capital city, which wae a city of


much importance from these days until the fourth century. Its position and defences would


make it necessary that an enemy proposing to besiege it should examine it from within.


The


remains of this city which still exist are among the most remarkable in Syria ; and although
most of the buildings are said to be Roman, the citidel is said to be much more ancient, aud
Mr. Oliphant (Land of Gilead) refers some of the fortifications to the days of David.


“Shaved off,” etc.


“Cutting off a person’s beard is regarded by the Arabs as an indignity


quite equal to flogging and branding among ourselves. Many would rather die than have their


beards shaved off.


Niebuhr relates a similar occurrence as having taken place in modern times,


In the year 1764, a pretender to the Persian throne, named Kerim Khan, sent ambassadors to
the prince of Bendervigk, on the Persian gulf, to demand tribute of him 3 but he in return
cut off the ambassador's beards. Kerim Khan was so enraged at this, that he made war upon
the prince and took the city.” (Keil) “ ‘The Iraelites, except the priests, wore no breeches ;


80 much the grosser, therefore, was the second insult.”


Probably identical with the present Rubaibeh, about twenty-five


Ver. 6. “Beth-rehob.”


miles N.E. of Damascus, “Tobah,” see on chap. viii. 3.


Maacha.”


(Erdmann).


“King Maacha,” rather, “king of


A territory on the northern border of Bashan, on the south-west declivity of Her-


mon. (Deut. iii. 14.) “Ish-tob.” Rather the men of Tob, a region near the Ammonite territory,


where Jephthah took refuge.


(Judges xi. 5.) Its exact location cannot be fixed.


Twenty


thousand footmen.” The account of the composition of the forces differs here from that in


Chronicles, no chariots being here mentioned. There are copyists’ errors in both texts.
Syrian troops consisted neither of footmen alone,


For the
nor of chariots and horsemen alone, but of


infantry, cavalry, and war chariots, as is evident, not only from chap. viii. 4, and 1 Chron. xviii. 4,


but also from the close of our narrative.”


(Keil.)


Ver, 8. “ Here the position of the Syrians in the fidld, t.e., on the broad plain of Medeba, is
clearly distinguished from the Ammonites before the city, so that the position of Joab’s army is


clear. He could (see ver. 9) be attacked both in front and rear.”


Ver. 12. “The cities of our God.”


(£rdmann.)


“Joab aud Abishai were about to fight, in order


that Jehovah’s possessions might not fall into the hands of the heathen, and become subject ta


sheir gods.” (Keil. )


Ver. 138.
the cause,”


Ver. 14. “Joab returned.”
in the season to besiege Rabbah.
he bad not the materials for a siege,”


228


“They fled.”
(Grotius.)


“As often happens for those that fight for pay alone, and not for


As may be inferred from chap. xi. 1, because it was too late
“ Or also because the Syrians were not sufficiently broken, or
(Biblical Commentary.)


GHAP. xX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


tl


Ver. 16. “Hadarezer.” (See on chap. viii. 3.) “The river.” The Euphrates. This
king had tributaries in Mesopotamia. (See chap. viii 3) “Helam.” The locality of this
place is not known. “As this is the same battle that, according to 1 Chron. xviii. 3, was
fought at Hamath, it must be across the Jordan, (see ver. 17), not on the Euphrates, but further
west than Hamath.” (Hrdmann.) For Hamath, see chap. viii. 9.


Ver. 18. “Seven hundred chariots,” etc. (See Keil’s remark at the close of ver. 6.)
He and other scholars consider that in this chapter we have simply a more circumstantial
account of the war of which the result is given in chap. viii. In support of this view it is
urged that in the former chapter David is said to have subdued the Syrians and the children of
Ammon, and there is nothing said here of a revolt from an authority previously acquired, but
the circumstances which led to the subjugation of Ammon are here fully related on account of
its connection with the death of Uriah in the next chapter.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.
David AND THE AMMONITES,


I. The wisdom and virtues of the parent are not necessarily found inthe child.
Although we have no further information concerning the father of Hanun than
that which is furnished by the words of David, they are sufficient to show that
he was a far wiser and better man than his son. It is reasonable to suppose that
he showed kindness to David at that period in David’s life when nothing but a
kindly disposition could have prompted him to the deed—when the present king
of Israel was not ina position either to resent an insult or reward a service
rendered. We may fairly then assume that this former king of the Ammonites
was a man whose character was above the level of the monarchs by whom he was
surrounded, and it is possible that, as a descendant of Lot, he cherished some
regard for the nation of Israel, and some reverence for Israel’s God. But the
conduct of his son is a proof of the painful truth that neither wisdom nor moral
worth are hereditary. If Hanun had been only politically wise he would have
given David’s ambassadors a different reception. If goodwill to his father’s old
ally did not move him to continue the friendship, a wise man would have seen it
would be politic to do so. For David was now a king himself, and a king whom
it was worth while to propitiate. When, therefore, Hanun not merely cast from
him an opportunity of strengthening his kingdom by alliance with David, but
added great insult to his rejection, he showed himself as weak as he was wicked,
and an unworthy son of a worthy parent.


II. Those who are in the wrong are often the first to strike the blow
which leads to war. It does not appear that David took any steps to avenge
the insult offered to himself and to his country—he probably felt he could
afford to let it pass, and was willing to leave the Ammonites and their king in
the hand of God. But Hanun and his followers measured David by their own
standard, and concluding that he would be filled with feelings of revenge,
hastened to follow up their first act of defiance by another, which compelled
David to take action against them. ‘hus they forced upon Israel the battle
which ended in their own destruction, for David would have failed in his duty
had he not have now dealt out retribution. This principal is ever in operation
in the various spheres of human life. Even in the play-ground the boy who is
in the wrong is often more eager than the companion whom he has offended to
settle the dispute by blows, and ascending to the unequal contest which rebellious
man wages with his Maker, we find that all the defiance and active insolence is
on the side of the offending human creature, and all the long-suffering and for-
pearance on that of the God against whom he has sinned. Let all in such case
beware, lest, like these Ammonites, they force the sword of retribution to


descend upon them,
329


HUMILELIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL, BOOR ft.


i


III. If those who are im the wrong are bold, much more should those whe
are in the right show courage and determination. ‘hese Syrians and
Ammonites were engaged in an unjust war—they had no possible excuse for the
attack they made upon Israel, and therefore they could have had no conviction of
being in the right to sustain them. Yet they came to the contest with bold
hearts—veniuring their liberties and their lives in a wrong cause. As we have
before had occasion to notice, men will be brave in trying to advance wrong as
well as in defending what is right. But seeing that they who are engaged in
fighting for the righteous cause have God and conscience on their side, if
behoves them at all times to equal, if not to surpass, their opponents in courage
and devotion. Joab could here draw inspiration from the certainty that he waa
fighting for God in fighting against the heathen, and this thought enabled him
to be of good cheer, and leave the issue in God’s hands. Although he was not
s true servant of God, he was at this time engaged in a service for God’s people,
and the consciousness of this seems to have lifted him for a time above his
ordinary frame of mind, and filled him with a real religious devotion. If Joab
could be thus animated and strengthened, surely no truly godly man ought to
fear or falter in the day of righteous conflict.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 3. It is hard for a wicked heart
to think well of any other ; because it
can think none better than itself and
knows itself evil— Bp. Hall.


Ver. 5. 1. We must beware. of
casting pearls before swine (ver. 2).
The Ammonites must have been known
to David as a cruel and barbarous
people. 2. Nothing is so offensive as a
wanton insult in return for respect and
kindness, 38. The gravest men are
sensitive to ridicule of their personal
appearance, 4. All persons of noble
nature are considerate of the feelings
of others. 5. Time heals many ills, —
Tr. of Lange's Commentary.


Ver. 6. It is one of the mad
principles of wickedness, that it.is a
weakness to relent, and rather to die
than yield. Even ill causes, once
undertaken, must be upheld, although
with blood ; whereas the gracious heart,
finding his own mistaking, doth not
only remit of an ungrounded dis-
pleasure, but studies to be revenged of
itself, and to give satisfaction to the
offended.— Bp. Hall.

That is the way with an evil
conscience ; it flees before it is hunted.
(Job xv. 20.)—Oramer.


Ver. 12, That soldier can never
$39


answer it to God, that strikes not more
as a Justiciar, than as an enemy ; neither
doth he content himself with his own
courage, but he animates others. The
tongue of a commander fights more
than his hand. It is enough for private
men to exercise what life and limbs
they have: a good leader must, out of
his own abundance, put life and spirits
into all others : if a lion lead sheep into
the field, there is hope of victory.
Lastly, when he hath done his best, he
resolves to depend upon God for the
issue, not trusting to his sword, or his
bow, but to the providence of the
Almighty, for success, as a man reli-
giously awful, and awfully confident,
while there should be no want in their
own endeavours. He knew well that
the race was not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong ; therefore he looka
up above the hills whence cometh hig
salvation, All valour is cowardice to
that which is built upon religion —
Bp. Hall.


Joab was a selfish, unscrupulous,
unprincipled man; yet in entering
upon a perilous battle he talks piously,
So do almost all civilrulers and generals
mm any great emergency; not only
because they know that the people feel
their dependence upon God, but becausa
in the hour of trial they feel it therm-


GHAP. X.


selves. Such language under such
circumstances does not clearly prove
one to be devout, or to be hypocritical ;
it expresses a feeling which may be
genuine, though transient and super-
ficial —T7r. of Langs’s Commentary.

_ 1. Courage is an essential character-
istic of a good soldier—not a savage
ferocious violence ; not a foolhardy in-
sensibility of danger, or headstrong rash-
ness to rush into it; not the fury of
inflamed passions broke loose from the
government of reason; but calm de-
liberate rational courage; a steady,
judicious, thoughtful fortitude; the
courage of a man, and not of a tiger.
. . . This will render men vigilant and
cautious against surprises, prudent and
deliberate in concerting their measures,
and steady and resolute in executing
them. . . . II. It is of great
importance to excite and keep up
courage in such an expedition that we
should be fully satisfied that we engage
in a righteous cause—and in a cause of
great moment; for we cannot prosecute
a suspected, or wicked scheme which
our own minds condemn, but with
hesitation and timorous apprehensions ;
and we cannot engage with spirit and
resolution in a trifling scheme, from
which we can expect no consequences
worth our vigorous pursuit. ee
The consideration of the justness and
importance of the cause may also
encourage hope that the Lord of Hosts
will espouse it, and render its guardians
successful. The event, however, is in
His hands as the closing words of the
text suggest. They may be looked
upon in various views; as 1. The
language of uncertainty and modesty.
: . Such language becomes us in
all our undertakings ; itsoundscreature-
like, and God approves of such self-
diffident humility. . - 2. It may
be expressive of a firm persuasion that
the event of war entirely depends upon
the providence of God. ¢.d. Let us
do our best; but after all, let us be
sensible, that the success does not
depend upon us. . . . It is no
great exploit of faith to believe this ;
it is but a small advance upon atheism
and downright infidelity. . . . &


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


It may express an humble submission
to the disposal of providence, let the
event turn out as it would we have not
the disposal of the event, nor do we
know what it will be; but Jehovah
knows and that is enough. . . 4.
These words, in their connection, may
intimate, that, let the event be what
it will, it will afford us satisfaction
to think that we have done the best
we could. g.d. We cannot command
success : but let us do all in our power
to obtain it, and we have reason to hope
we shall not be disappointed ; but if it
should please God to render all our
endeavours vain, still we shall have the
generous pleasure to reflect, that we
have not been accessory to the ruin of
our country, but have done all we could
for its deliverance.—Mrom a sermon
by President Davies of New Jersey,
preached on the invasion of British
America by the French, 1756,


Ver. 13. Joab provided for the worst,
and put the case that the Syrians or
Ammonites might prove too strong for
him; but he proved too strong for
them both. We do not hinder our
successes by preparing for disappoint-
ment.—(Henry).


Ver. 1-19. One injustice produces
another, and drags men on irretardably
to destruction by the resulting chain
of sins and injustices.—(Lange’s Com-
mentary).

Our Psalter contains several songs
which betray an undeniable reference
to the last: wars and victories of David.
’ . To these belong, in the first
place the sixtieth in which
he begins by looking back on the in-
vasion of the Syrians, im which lis
army had to lament sorrowful losses,
and on all the terrors of war which had
spread over the land. “O God, Thou
hast cast us off, etc. . . Thou
hast given a banner, etc. (1.6.
Thou didst give them deliverance, and
didst raise up that before them like
an encouraging banner).” . . . He
concludes with “God hath spoken in
His holiness” (glorious promises hag
He given to me); “therefore” (4.6

a3)


HROMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.





on the ground of them) “ I will rejoice:
I will divide” (to Israel) ‘“‘Shechem ”
(the land on this side of Jordan), and
mete out the valley of Succoth” (the
land on the farthest side of Jordan).
The whole land David regards as his
possession. But why does he name
only these two places? He names them
x. denoting the two portions of the
land, with a retrospective reference to
the patriarch Jacob, who, after his
return from Mesopotamia, settled first
in Succoth, and then afterwards in
Shechem, and there built an altar,
thus foreshadowing the taking posses-
sion of the land at a later period.

The twentieth Psalm is a Davidic
war song, belonging to the same days,
. . . also the forty-fourth, and we
have in the sixty-eighth Psalm, an
animated song of triumph, which has
reference, with its whole contents, to
the issue, so glorious for Israel, of that
most fearful of all their wars, the Syro-
Ammonitish. The Psalmist begins it
with joyful expressions of praise to
Jehovah as the Protector of the right-
eous, and the inflexible Judge of the
wicked. Then he recalls to remem-
brance the mighty deeds by which God


BOOK IL


had granted to his people after the
conquest of Canaan till the erection of
the tabernacle on Mount Zion. After
a description of the glory of God, who,
as the King of all kings sat enthroned
in majesty on His holy hill of Zion, and

again shown himself, in the sub-
jugation of all the enemies of His
people, that He was the God of Israel,
the Psalmist describes the festal pro-
cession in which the holy thing, the
ark of the covenant, which had accom-
panied the army into the field during
the Ammonitish war, was brought back
again to Jerusalem. He names severa)
tribes, among others those of Benjamin
and Judah, Zebulun and Naphtali,
which took part in this procession, as
representatives of the whole nation.
Then he sees in spirit the veil raised
from the most distant future, and all
the nations of the earth bending under
the sceptre of the God of Israel. Then
the song becomes Messianic, and closes
with these words : “Ascribe ye strength
unto God: His excellency is over Israel,
and His strength is in the clouds. O
God, Thou art terrible out of Thy holy
places: the God of Israel is He that
giveth strength and power unto His





had made himself glorious to Israel people. Blessed be God!”—(Krem-
during their marchings in the wilder- macher).
ness, and the peaceful days which he

CHAPTER XI.


OnitigaL AnD Expostrory Norges. Verl. “ After the year,” etc., rather, at the return of
the year, 1.¢., in the spring when kings were accustomed to begin military operations. “His


servants,” the military chieftans about his person.


children of Ammon.’
Yand far and near by incursion parties.”


“All Israel,” i.¢., the whole army. “The


“ Tt was usual, when some strong point was attacked, to ravage the
(Zrdmann.)


Ver. 2, “In an eveningtide,” ete. When the mid-day rest was over, and noon was past,
* Walked upon the roof.” This was an eastern custom, and the place and hour often used for
eeligious meditation. “Sawa woman,” etc. Either at the well in the court-yard of her house


or, as some suggest, in her chamber, the casements being open.


“In either case, the place waa


rivate, visible only from a neighbouring roof ; and in the East people refrain from looking down
oh a roof into neighbouring courts, so that it is an unfounded suggestion that Bathsheba was


' purposely bathing in an exposed place in order to attract the king’s gaze.”


Commentary.)


(Tr. of Lange's


Ver. 3, “Bathsheba.” . . “ Eliam.” In 1 Chron. iii. 5, she is called Bathshua, daughter of


Ammiel. “Ammiel has the same meaning as Eliam, and is, indeed, the same word, its compound
parts being inverted, and means “ God’s people.” ( Wordsworth.) From 2 Sam. xxiii. 34, where Elian
is called the son of Ahithophel, it is supposed by some that Bathsheba was the grand-daughter
of David’s counsellor, and that this may explain his adherence to Absalom, “Uriah the Hittite,”
One of David's heroes. The Hittites were dwelling in Palestine, aa far back as the days of Abra
wn, (Gen. xv. 20, xxiii. 7.)
333


OHAP. XI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


SSS


Ver. 4. “David sent,” etc. “David had probably hoped that she was unmarried, but now
that his passion was inflamed the knowledge that she was a wife did not deter him from his
urpose.” ( Wordsworth.) ““'The narrative leads us to infer that Bathsheba came and submitted
erself to David without opposition. She was moved doubtless by vanity and ambition in not
venturing to refuse the demand of the king.” (Hrdmann,) “For she was purified,” etc.
Rather, when she was purified, etc., she returned. (See Lev. xv. 18.)


Ver. 5. “And sent and told David.” Adultery was punishable with death. “This in-
volved an appeal to him to take the necessary steps to avert the evil consequences of the sin.”


Ver. 8. “Wash thy feet,” eto. “These words contained an intimation that he was to go
éo his own home.” (Keil.)


Ver. 9. “Slept at the door,” etc. “In the guard room (1 Kings xiv. 27, 28) with the
toyal court officials or the bodyguard. It is possible that he did this merely out of zeal of
service, but also his suspicions may have been already aroused, and he may have heard something
of the affair with Bathsheba.” (Hrdmann.)


Ver.11. “The ark,” etc. This seems to indicate that the ark had accompanied the army,
© As thou livest,” etc. Literally, by thy life and the life of thy soul. “ This is not a tautology,
but a strengthening of the oath by a repetition of the thought.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 16. “When Joab observed,” literally, watched. ‘“ We must understand from this a
ure different from the usual siege, # nearer approach, which challenged the warriors in the
city to a sally.” ( Bunsen.)


Ver. 17. “And Uriah the Hittite died also.” “Joab could foresee that this would
happen from the dangerousness of the post. In becoming the instrument of David's murderous
artifice, Joab needed not to know the ground of the order. As obedient servant of the king, he
carried out the order unhesitatingly, inasmuch as it was an order of the commander of the army
in relation to a soldier who might have committed some grave offence against him, and whose
seemingly accidental death might be desired by him for special reasons.” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 20. “If so be that the king’s wrath,” etc. ‘“ Joab assumed that David might
express his displeasure at the fact that Joab had sacrificed a number of his warriors by
approaching close to the wall, if such should be the case, to announce Uriah’s death to the king,
for the purpose of mitigating his wrath.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 27. “When the mourning was,past,” etc. The usual mourning of the Israelites
lasted seven days. (Gen. i. 10; 1 Sam. xxxi. 13.) It is not known whether it was longer in
the case of widowhood. It is obvious that David would make Bathsheba his wife as early aa


possible,
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.


Davw’s Fan.


I. Times of prosperity and inactivity are times of special temptation,
In all the days of David’s adversity he maintained an unsullied reputation. In
this day of his prosperity he was guilty of a series ef the vlavkest crimes. Men
by great successes in life become a special mark for the great enemy of the race,
and the more so in proportion as they have hitherto been loyal to God and
goodness. At such times the path of active duty is the least likely to lead into
temptation, If David had been at this time at the head of his army it is likely
he would have escaped this dark stain upon his life, for plenty of work isa
preventive of certain kinds of sin, While a brook is in motion its waters are
pure, but if their flow is stopped they become stagnant ; so there are men who
cannot pass from a life of activity to one of repose without degenerating in
character. It seems as though David, with all his intense devotion and deep
religious emotion, was of this class. He had been on the throne for a consider-
able number of years, but untii now had probably had little leisure, and the
constant demands upon his energies had kept the arrows of the ate from


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK If.


piercing the weak place in his armour. How much safer he would have been in
the thickest of the fight before Rabbath-Ammon than upon his house-top in
Jerusalem.


II. Even good men have evil tendencies, of whose strength they have na
conception. A vessel filled with gunpowder looks very trim, and clean, and safe,
but the black powder is there in the hold, only needing a single spark to make
its power felt. A lake seems filled with the purest water, but a stone cast into
it will stir up the mud at the bottom and change it into a thick and turbid
pool. A tendency to a certain disease may lie dormant for years in the con-
stitution, and suddenly circumstances may favour its rapid development, and it
may carry off its victim in a few days. So is it with the human soul. If any
human eye had marked David as he sought his roof on this day, could they
have dreamedth at there were the possibilities of such a fall within him? Had he
any conception himself of the strength of his passion, and the weakness of his
will on the side of righteousness ?


ITI. If sin is not resisted when in the heart it will sooner or later become
manifest in the life. When the sensual thought in relation to Bathsheba
entered David’s heart he did not bid it depart, but dallied with it until even
the knowledge that she was the wife of another seemed no obstacle to him.
Even the best man while in this world needs ever to stand sentinel over bis
inner life, lest before he is aware a sinful desire lay hold of him and speedily


pass from the region of thought into that of action.


For sin never remains


hidden in the soul unless it is fought and congue there. If the spring be not


cleansed the streams must reveal the fact, an


must betray it.


if the root be not good the fruit


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. This entire campaign, with
the siege of a capital, and the slaying
of thousands, interests us now only as
the occasion of David's series of great
sins. And in truth the striking excel-
lencies or faults of one great and good
man, when permanently recorded and
widely read, become more important to
the welfare of the human race than
the overthrow of cities or kingdoms.—
Tr. of Lange’s Commentary.

While Joab is busy laying siege to
Rabbah, Satan is to David, and far
sooner prevailed.— 7rapp.


Ver. 2. There can be no safety to
that soul, where the senses are let loose,
He can never keep his covenant with
God, that makes not a covenant with
his eyes.— Bp. Hall.

David had once prayed, “ Turn awa
miue eyes from beholding vanity ; ”
and should have still continu is
suit : that as he might keep a door in
God’s rie so God would keep the


doors and windows of his —those other-
wise windows of wickedness, and loop-
holes of lust, the eyes ; through which
the old serpent easily windeth himself
into the heart, and maketh himself
master of the whole man. This made
good Job to step from a prayer into a
vow (Job xxxi. 1). Yea, from a vow
to an imprecation (ver. 7.), as knowing
the danger of irregular glancing, or in-
ordinate gazing.—Trapp.


Ver. 3. David should rather have
taken an antidote of mortification, be-
fore the venom of lust had got to the
vitals. But it is hard for him who
hath fallen down the ladder of hell for
a round or two, to stop or step back
till he come to the bottom, without
extraordinary help from the hand of
Heaven. Can a man commit one sin
more, and but one sin more ?—Trapp.


Ver. 4. Had Bathsheba been mind-
ful of her matrimonial fidelity, perhaps


CHAP. Xt.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; SAMUEL.





David had been soon checked in his
inordinate desire ; her facility furthers
the sin. The first motioner of evil is
most faulty ; but as in quarrels, so in
offences, the second blow (which is the
consent) makes the fray. Sin is not
acted alone ; if but one party be wise,
both escape. It is no excuse to say, I
was tempted, though by the great,
though bythe holy and learned : almost
allsinnersaremisled by that transformed
angel of light. ‘The action is that we
must regard, not the person. Let the
mover be never so glorious, if he stir
us to evil, he must be entertained with
defiance.— Bp. Hall.


Ver. 15. David hath forgotten that
himself was in like sort betrayed in his
master’s intention, upon the dowry of
the Philistines’ foreskins. I fear to
ask, who ever noted so foul a plot in
David’s rejected predecessor? Uriah
must be the messenger of his owndeath,
Joab must be a traitor to his friend,
the host of God must shamefully turn
their backs upon the Ammonites, all
that Israelitish blood must be shed,
that murder must be seconded with
dissimulation : and all this to hide one
adultery. O God, thou hadst never
suffered so dear a favourite of thine to
fall so fearfully, if thou hadst not meant
to make him an universal example to
mankind, of not presuming, of not
despairing. How can we presume of
not sinning, or despair for sinning, when
we find so great a saint thus fallen,
thus risen !—Bp. Hall.

It is a sign of the irresistible power
of conscience, and an involuntary self-
condemnation, when a man seeks in
every way to conceal his sin from men,
but to extenuate and justify it before
God, and on the other hand unwilling-
ness to make confession has its deepest
ground in the pride of the human heart,
which increases in proportion as the
man becomes involved in sin, and the
evil in him develops itself from the
slightest beginnings into a power that
exercises dominion over the whole inner
life. ‘‘ Whosoever commits sin, he is
the servant of sin."—Zr. of Lange's
Commentary.





cadet


Ver, 11. Even the best actions are
not always seasonable, much less the
indifferent. He that ever takes liberty
to do what he may, shall offend no less
than he that sometimes takes liberty
to do what he may not.

If anything, the ark of God is fittest
to lead our tunes; according as that
is either distressed, or prospereth,
should we frame our mirth or mourn-
ing. To dwell in ceiled houses, while
the temple lies waste, is the ground of
God’s just quarrel.— Bp. Hall.


Vers. 1-27. It has been said, “ But
such a sin is so unlike David’s cha-
racter.”’ Doubtless it was, on the
theory that David was a character
mingled of good and evil. But on
David’s own theory, that he was an
utterly weak person without the help
of God, the act is perfectly like David.
It is David’s self. It is what David
would naturally do when he had left
hold of God. Had he left hold of God
in the wilderness he would have be-
come a mere robber-chieftain. He
does leave hold of God in his palace of
Zion, and he becomes a mere Eastern
despot.— Kingsley.

Let it be noted that when Satan
comes to a man, he makes his appeal
to that particular part of his nature


where passion is strongest and prin- —


ciple is weakest. Now in David what
that was might be very easily discovered.
From an early period of his career, he
had been especially susceptible in the
very matter in which now he fell.
This is evident from his marriage of
Abigail, and also from the great lati-
tude in which he allowed himself, after
his settlement in Jerusalem, in respect
to his harem. Polygamy, though not
forbidden by the Mosaic law, was re-
gulated and discouraged; but David
proceeded as if it had been a perfectly
warrantable and legitimate thing, and
this conduct on his part undoubtedly
tended to weaken his impression of the
sanctity of marriage. That sense of
delicacy and chastity, which has such
a purifying and preserving influence
on the life, could not flourish side by
side with the polygamy in which he
835


|


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK I.


0


permitted himself; and so, though he
thought not of it at the time, his
taking of many wives to himself pre-
pared the way for the revolting iniquity
which he committed. Here, then, in
the moral weakness which constant
prosperity had created, in the oppor-
tunity which idleness afforded to
temptation, and in the blunted sensi-
bility which polygamy had super-
induced, we see how David was so
easily overcome,

But it may be asked, How can you
account for such enormous iniquity in
such a man as we have seen that David
was? ‘To this I answer, that we may
explain it by the absence for the time
bemg of that restraining influence
which his better nature was wont to
exercise over his life. Passion had de-
throned conscience; and then, owing
to the intensity of his character, and
the general greatness of the man, his
sins became as much blacker than
those of others, as his good qualities
were greater than theirs. In every
good man there are still two natures
striving for the mastery. ‘‘ The flesh
lusteth against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh.” The new
nature is generally in the ascendant,
but sometimes the old evil nature will
re-assert its supremacy, and the effect
of this temporary revolution will be
determined by the temperament and
characteristics of the individual. Now
there are some men in whom every-
thing is on a large scale. When their
good nature is uppermost, they overtop
all others in holiness; but if, un-
happily, they should be thrown off
their guard, and the old man should
gain the mastery, some dreadful
wickedness may be expected. ‘This is
all the more likely to be the case if
the quality of intensity be added to
their greatness ; for a man with such
& temperament is never anything by
haf. But it was just thus with David.
He was a man of great intensity and
pre-eminent energy. He was in every
respect above ordinary men; and go
when, for the time, the fleshly nature
was the stronger within him, the sins
which he committed were as much

336


greater than those of common mep, as
in other circumstances his excellencies
were nobler than theirs. We often
make great mistakes in judging of the
characters of others, because we ignore
all these considerations; and many
well-conducted persons among us get
great credit for their good moral cha-
racter, while the truth is that they are
blameless not so much because they
have higher-toned principles than
others, as because they have feeble,
timid natures, that are too cautious or
too weak to let them go very far either
into holiness or into sin. But David
was not one of these. Everything
about. him was intense; and hence,
when he sinned, he did it in such a
way as to make well-nigh the most
hardened shudder. In all this, ob-
serve, I-am not extenuating David’s
guilt. It is one thing to explain, it is
another thing to excuse. A man of
David’s nature ought to be more pe-
culiarly on his guard than other men.
The express train, dashing along at
furious speed, will do more mischief if
it runs off the line than the slow-going
horse-car in our city streets. Everyone
understands that; but everyone de-
mands, in consequence, that the driver
of the one shall be proportionately
more watchful than that of the other.
Now with such a nature as David had,
and knew that he had, he ought to
have been supremely on his guard,
while again the privileges which he
had received from God rendered it
both easy and practicable for him to
be vigilant.— Taylor.

Thus far the story belongs to the
usual crimes of an Eastern despot.
Detestable as was the double guilt of
this dark story, we must still remem-
ber that David was not an Alfred or a
Saint Louis. He was an Eastern king,
exposed to all the temptations of a
king of Ammon or Damascus then—of
a sultan of Bagdad or Constantinople
in modern times, What follows, how-
ever, could have been found nowhere
in the ancient world, but in the Jewish
monarchy.—Stazley.

For a king to take the wife of a poor
man—how light a fault may this have


GHAP. XI,


privileges which David possessed. Sup-
posing there was a fixed law against
adultery, did this law apply to the
ruler of the land? Was he not in
some sense above law? Such are the
arguments and sophistries which would
occur to one who was wrestling with his
conscience either to give him leave to
commit a wrong, or not to torment him
for it when it was done. And then, if
the husband of this woman stood in the
way of the full gratification of his pur-
pose, or of the concealment of it, was
there anything strange that he, who
was exposing thousands of his subjects
to the chances of battle and death,
should expose this one? Why was his
life more precious than that of any
other Israelite ? Was it precious simply
because it was so convenient to his
master than he should lose it? And so
the deeds were done. . . . And David,
no doubt, performed all his official
tasks as before, went daily to the ser-
vices of the tabernacle, was probably
most severe in enforcing punishment
upon all wrong doers.—Aaurice.


Ver. 27. Such is the solemn quali-
fication which the Holy Scriptures
append to a record of successful wicked-
ness. . . . From the moment when
a lawless desire first planted itself in
David’s heart, till the full completion
of that desire in the sinful act and its
consequences, there had not been one
single impediment in the way of his
gratification which had not been easily,
triumphantly surmounted ; not one
mnisgiving of conscience obstinately
importunate; not one agent in the
crime reluctant or inaccessible to
persuasion ; not one adverse circum-
stance to interfere with the exact
order of the meditated plan. . . .
“ But the thing displeased the Lord.”
This is the point of contrast between
the text and its immediate context ;
between the smooth and easy course of
king David’s transgression, and the few
emphatic words which close the record
and carry the question from the judg-
ment of earth to the tribunal of
heaven . . . The words first of all


_ HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUER
ods Ag al a eR


appeared to one with the power and.





———as


afford a testimony to the perfect insight
of God into our hearts and lives, to
His . . . present observation of
them, His | cera upon them both
present and future Every
single thing that we say and do either
pleases or displeases God. If it has no
other value, it is made pleasing to Him
by a pervading spirit of faith, by an
habitual regard to Him, on the part of
him who does it, or displeasing, what-
ever its apparent merit, by the habitual
absence of this spirit, . God
for a whole year looked upon David with
disapprobation and disfavour. It is not
said that David was aware of this. The
contrary is rather to be inferred. P
But we see clearly that all the
prayers and all the praises of that whole
year went for nothing with Him te
whom they were addressed, :
It is a solemn thought that there are
multitudes with whom this is so all
their life long ; multitudes with whom
this is so for an integral portion, it may
be, of their threescore years and ten.
eee But it is not only upon our
intercourse with God that this deplor-
able condition acts so fatally : it puts
our life all wrong: it is impossible that
anything can be inits place. . . .
Remember, finally, this state is not
necessarily, nor perhaps, commonly, a
temporary state. It may last till death :
and then:—! It is the tendency of
such a state to prolong, to perpetuate
itself ; it contains in itself a blinding,
searing, deadening power. . . . If
these things be so, let us not disguise it.
Our eternal life depends upon knowing
the truth ; first the truth of man, and
then the truth of God ; first our state
as it is, and then the change promised.
Vaughan.

Even in David’s fall Satan igs de-
feated and God is glorified by means
of Satan’s devices, which appears as
follows, vig.:—1. We have here a
strong proof of the veracity of Holy
Scripture. David’s sin was committed
in private. He was a king, a powerful
king, beloved by his people, and—as is
clear from his penitential Psalms—he
was sincerely contrite for his sins; and
in the rest of his life he did that which


837


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





was right in the sight of the Lord
(1 Kings xv. 5). Besides, one of the
worst consequences of the publication
of his sin would be that he would have
given great occasion to the enemies of
‘he Lord to blaspheme (ch. xii. 14).
Might it not therefore have been ex-
pected that a veil would have been
thrown over his sin, and that it would
not have been exposed to the eyes of
the world in Holy Writ? If Holy
Scripture had been the work of man,
the considerations would have probably
prevailed, and David’s sin would not
have been exposed to our view; or, if
it had been revealed the historian
would have extenuated it, as many of
the Hebrew Rabbis have done. But
the Author of this book is the Holy
Ghost. . . . He reminds us that
we have to do with One who is no
respecter of persons. . . . and in
reading the Bible we have the satisfac-
tion of knowing that in it there is no
suppression of facts, no disguise or
extenuation from worldly motives; that
in the Bible alone we have the revela-
tion of the perfect Historian, “Ve guid
falst dicere audeat, ne quid wert non
audiat.” . . 2. This history is
also a moral test of the readers of the
Bible. The consequence of David's


BOOK I,





sin is stated by Nathan (chap. xii. 14).
But woe to the enemies of the Lord!
Woe to those who blaspheme Him!
For it is written, “All thine enemies,
O Lord, shall feel thine hand,” ete.
(Psa. xxi. 8). The enemies of the Lord
may turn the food of Scripture into
poison, and may abuse David’s sin into
an occasion of selling themselves into
the hands of the tempter, but the
Sriends of God will take warning from
his fall. . . and thus will derive a
blessing from the Divine record. . .
8. If David’s sin had not been recorded
we should have been astonished, per-
plexed, and staggered by the series of
tribulations which followed him hence-
forth to the grave. But this sad scene
explains them all. . . If wehada
similar view of men’s secret sins, if we
had a clear insight into our own as
they are seen by God, the anomalies
of the present state of things in this
world would in a great measure dis-
appear. . . . 4. The failings of a
David and a Solomon reminds us also
that no human examples are to be
substituted for the Divine law as a
rule of life, and that there is no spot-
less example but that of Christ—
Wordsworth,





CHAPTER XI.


CrrrioaL awp Exvosrrory Norss. Ver. 3. “ Was unto him,” etc. “The custom of keeping
pet sheep in the house, as we keep lap-dogs, is still met with among the Arabs.” (Keil.) “As
a poor man he had the means of buying only one little lamb, which he was now raising, and
which he loved the more as it was his only property.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 5. “Shail surely die,” or, “deserves to die.” “ Because the forcible robbery of a poor
man’s pet lamb was almost as bad as man-stealing.” (Keid.) “Wour-fold.” This was the com-
pensation demanded by the Mosaic law. (Exod. xxi. 87.)


Ver.7. “Thus saith the Lord.” “Just as in the parable the sin is traced to its root-—
namely, insatiable covetousness —so now, in the words of Jehovah which follow, the prophet brings
out in the most unsparing manner this hidden background of all sins.” (Keil.)


Ver. 8. “Thy master’s wives.” It #* = general custom in the East for a king to succeed
to his predecessor’s harem, aud these words seem to show it was permitted to the kings of Israel.
“ Bishop Patrick and others give the later Jewish understanding of the law or custom ; the king
and no other person fell heir to the property and harem of his predecessor, but it did not follow
that he actually married the inmates of the harem ; they might be merely a part of the establish»
ment. If it was a son that succeeded his father, he treated these women with reverence ; if no
blood relation existed between the two kings, the successor might actually take the womer
as his wives.” (Phillipson.) “ As to the morality of the act, it was the natural result of a poly:
gacaous poh and morally in the aame category with it.” (Tv. of Lange's Commentary.)


OiiaP. X11, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





sued


Ver. 9. “Slain.” “This word to murder in the Hebrew is stronger than the one translated
to kill in the former clause. “ With the sword of . . . Ammon.” That David used the
heathen to commit the deed, added to the guilt.

Ver. 10. “Never depart.” “That is, as long as the house or posterity of David shall last.
+ + « The bloody sword appears in the murder of the incestuous Ammon by Absalom
(ch. xiii. 28, 29), in the death of the rebel Absalom (ch. xiii-xiv.), and in the execution of
Adonijah.” (Zrdmann.) “Thou has despised Me.” “ This is here said instead of “Thou hast
despised the word of the Lord.’ For in His word the Lord Himself reveals Himself.” (Erdmann. )


Ver. 11, “ will take thy wives.” The two crimes of murder and adultery were to be
visited by distinct and separate punishments. (See chap. xvi, 22.)


Ver. 18. “Thou shalt not die.” What is the exact meaning of these words as applied to
David? . . . The application of the law (Lev. xx. 10; Deut. xxii. 22) to an absolute
Eastern monarch is out of the question, and if it were not, such an application would utterly
mar the force of the passage. It is obvious, too, to observe that the criminal’s death in the

arable must represent some analogous punishment in the wider field in which the real events
fs , where the criminal was above human laws, and Almighty God was the Judge. In other
words, the desth of the soul is certainly meant, as in Ezek. xviii. 4, 18, ete. (Bidlical
Commentary.)


Ver. 14. “The enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.” “Transgression of God’s com-
mand by the king himself must lead the heathen to heap shame and reproach on Israel and ita
God ; and there must therefore be expiation by punishment.” (Erdmann.)

“ Not only to the heathen, but also to the unbelievitg among the Israelites.” (Keil.) The
external sufferings of David would be to all such blasphemers a witness to the holiness and
justice of God. “ David was also to discern in it a distinct token of the grace of God.” (Keil.)


Ver. 15. “The Lord struck the child.” It appeara that Nathan did not visit David
until after the birth of Bathsheba’s child, and therefore that David’s impenitent state of mind
lasted for many months.


Ver. 16. “Besought God.” “In the case of a man whose penitence was so earnest and so
deep, the prayer for the preservation of his child must have sprung from some other source than
excessive love of any created object. His great desire was to avert the stroke, as a sign of the
wrath of God, in the hope that he might be able to discern, in the preservation of the child, a
proof of Divine favour consequent upon the restoration of his fellowship with God.” (Vow
Gerlach.) “Went in.” Rather, “he came,” not into the house of the Lord (ver. 20 is proof
to the contrary), but into his house, or into his chamber.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 17. “The elders.” Asin Gen. xxiv. 2, his oldest and most trusted servants.


Ver. 21. “What thing is this?” “This state of mind is fully explained in Psalm l.,
though his servants could not comprehend it.” (Keil.)


Vers. 15-22. “In this short passage the Divine names are used with greater variation than
usual. Werse 15 has “ Jehovah” (the Lord); verse 16 has “God;” and in verse 22 the
Hebrew text has “ Jehovah,” where in our version is God. Whether the sacred historian was
guided in the employment of these names by some unknown principle, or he used them indiscri-
minately it is difficult to decide.” (Jamieson. )


Ver. 23. “Ishall goto Him.” Wordsworth sees in these words “an evidence of David’s
belief in the personal identity of risen saints, and in everlasting recognition in a future state.”
It seems quite evident that at least “ the continued existence of the child’s soul in Sheol is here
assumed, and the hope of re-union with it expressed.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 24. “She bareason.” “In all probability Solomon was not born until after the
capture of Rabbah and the termination of the Ammonitish war. His birth is simply mentioned
here because of its connection with what immeaiately precedes.” (Keil.) “Solomon,” i.e. the
man of peace (Keil.) It was probably given “ from the wish that peace might be allotted to him
as Giod’s gift, in contrast with the continual wars of his father’s life.” (Hrdmann.) Oras Keil
and others remark, “ because David regarded his birth asa pledge that he should now become @
partaker again of peace with God.”


Ver. 25. “He sent.” Expositors differ as to whether Jehovah or David is the subject
here. It seems most in mospiie with the construction to read with Kiel ond others,
“ Jehovah loved him, and sent,” etc. . . . . ‘“‘andhe (Nathan, in obedience to the Divine
direction) called,” etc. Some however make David the first subject, and understand the verb
sent in the sense of delivered; &.¢., David committed the child to the care of Nathan, and Nathan

ve him his higher name. Others again make David the subject of both verbs. “Jedidiah,

» beloved of Jehovah, ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL. BOOK 11.
i


‘Wer. 26. The narrative now returns to chapter xi. 1. “The royal city.” From verse 29
It appears that Rabbah was not wholly captured until David came, and unless “ the whole result
is here summarily stated in advance” (Erdmann), this seizure must refer to that part called in


the next verse the water city.

Ver. 27. “The city of waters,” or, the water city. The ruins of this city (see note on
chap. x. 3) show that it lay on both sides of a narrow valley, through which runs a stream which
is a tributary to the river Jabbok. The citadel still stands on the northern declivity. Apparently,
Joab took all the city with the exception of this stronghold.


Ver. 28. “It be called after my name.” Erdmann, Keil, and others, prefer to read
“and my name be named upon it ;’’ i.c.. I receive the honour of the capture. ‘“Joab’s conduct
here is either that of a devoted servant, wishing to give his master honour or shield him from
popular disfavour (on account of Bathsheba), or that of an adroit courtier who will not run the
risk of exciting his king’s envy by too much success (see 1 Sam. xviii. 6-8).—(Tr. of Lange's
Commentary. )


a


Ver. 29. “All the people,” é.e., all the men of war who had remained behind in the land 3
from which we may see that Joab’s besieging army had been considerably weakened during the
long siege, and at the capture of the water-city.” (eil.)


Ver. 36. “Their king’s crown.” “So that he was either taken prisoner, or slain at the
capture of the city.” (Kel.) “Ataient,’ etc. “ About 100 English pounds.” (Tr. of Lange's
Commentary.) “This heavy crown of gold and precious stones might have been worn during
the coronation by a strong man like David. In many places now weights scarcely less heavy
are borue on the head even by women. We need not therefore suppose that the weight is
accidentally exaggerated,” (etl), or that “the crown was supported on the throne above the
head.” (Clericus.) ( Erdmann.)


Ver. 31. “Under saws,” etc. This must be rendered “he cut them in two with the saw.”
The other instruments mentioned denote also cutting tools. “The brick-kiln.” Keil under-
stands that they were burned in the brick-kiln, but some expositors read with Kimchi, “he
passed them through Maicham,” i.e., the place where the Ammonites laid human sacrifices in the
arms of the red-hot image of their god, Moloch. (See Lev. xviii. 21.) But many contend that
the Hebrew text cannot be so translated, and its true signification is very uncertain,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1-18,


Davip’s REPENTANCE.


I, The first step in David’s return to God is taken by God Himself. “The
Lord sent Nathan.” The man who has fallen into a pit and broken his limbs
must have help from without. It is useless to expect him to climb out unaided
—someone must come and lift him out if he is ever again to find himself on the
spot whence he fell. The first. step to recovery must come from outside and from
above himself. David had fallen by his own want of vigilance into a horrible pit
of sin ; his moral backbone was broken (Psa. li. 8), and he could no longer stand
upright before his conscience and God, and the longer this state continued the
deeper did he sink into the mire of moral insensibility. Some help must come
from without if he is ever to recover, in any degrée, his lost position—some
means must be taken to awaken within him, first a sense of guilt and then a hope
of pardon. God sends the means and thus takes the first step towards recon-
ciliation between Himself and David, and He does the same we believe in all
similar cases. ‘'he tendency of sin is either to harden the transgresgor or to fill
him with despair. He either tries to palliate his guilt or he is so overwhelmed
by the consciousness of it that he becomes hopeless of ever being free from either
its penalty or its power. But provision has been made by God to meet both
states of mind. He has sent a greater than Nathan, and in Christ (2 Cor v. 19)
has taken the first step in reconciling the world unto Himself.


II. The means used are wonderfully adapted to attain the end desired,
There is no parable of the Old Testament that can be compared with that of
the “ ae Its skill in concealing its application reminds one of our Lord’y


oHaP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





parable of the vineyard and the wicked husbandmen, (Mark xii, 1-12) and in
practical application to the heart and conscience it has never been surpassed.
A consideration of the analogy and contrast which it sets forth as existing
between Uriah and David shows how fitted it was to set before the latter the
aggravated guilt of his deed. 1. 7he analogy. The men in the parable were,
in some respects, on an equality ; they were fellow-men and fellow-citizens.
“There were two men in one city.” So David and Uriah, although one was a
king and the other asubject, were ona level on the common ground of humanity,
and were both subject to the laws, political, social, and religious which had
been given by God to the nation which regarded Jerusalem as the seat of
government. David was by birth a member of the highly favoured nation to
whom God had given laws direct from heaven, and Uriah by choice was a citizen
of the city of the great king, and stood in this sense on a level with his royal
master, as did the poor man of the parable with his oppressive fellow-
citizen. 2. The contrast. “The one rich and the other poor.” Wealth
means power to gratify one’s desires, to execute one’s purposes to a great
extent. Poverty often means the necessity of submission to the will of those
socially above us even though they be beneath us in every other respect,
It was so with the oppressor and the oppressed in the parable, and it was so
with Uriah and David. ‘The king’s position made it possible for him to indulge
his lawless desires without hindrance. The position of Uriah put his domestic
happiness and his life at his master’s disposal, and this inequality aggravated
David’s crime. ‘The parable seems to hint at a further contrast. “The rich man had
exceeding many flocks and herds, but the poor man had nothing save one little
ewe lamb.” David had many wives ; we infer from the narrative that Uriah had
but one. His love was therefore deeper, because purer, than that of David.
The owner of many wives could not gauge the deep affection of the husband of
one wife, even as the rich man of the parable could not understand the feeling
with which his poor neighbour regarded his only lamb. Both the points of
resemblance and of contrast were calculated to set the many aggravations of
David’s sin before him when once his conscience began to awake from its long
slumber. Until this moment David had evidently never looked his crime in the
face ; now it was so placed before him that he saw it in all its enormity, stripped
of any palliation or excuse which he might have thrown over it, if he had known
it for his own. It is also probable that Nathan, who was evidently much
esteemed by David, had in past days informed the king of deeds of injustice
committed by his rich subjects against their poorer brethren. Add to this the
fact that Nathan had been the mouthpiece of God’s goodwill to David and his
house, and we shall see how adapted were both the messenger and the message—
first to secure the desired attention, and then to produce the needed conviction,
The whole transaction is an exhibition of the manifold wisdom and the gracious
condescension which ever marks the dealings of God with his erring creatures,
aud puts into the mouth of every restored wanderer the song, “ The Lord ts
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.” (Psa. ciii. 8).
III, God’s pardon of the sin follows immediately upon David’s confession.
This is the law of the kingdom of God, both before and since the death of the
Sinbearer—‘“ Jf we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins.” (1 Jobni. 9.) In the narrative before us the same verse contains the
acknowledgement of the guilt and its remission ;—it seems as though David had
hardly uttered his confession before he received an assurance that he was
pardoned,—that is, that the worst effect of sin—the displeasure of God—was
removed. ‘This by no means, as we see from David’s subsequent history, frees
the transgressor from all the penalty of his transgression, but it opens or reopens
the way of access to a merciful God, and gives a different aspect to all the
obastisement that follows. If David had, in his ~wn words, still “ yeh pines Y


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOR ii,





cy


before God, (Psa. xxxiii.), he would have had no place of refuge in the cala-
mities of his after life; but having acknowledged his iniquity, he was able to
look for help to the very hand that smote him. This is the great and vital
difference between the afflictions of the forgiven and the unforgiven sinner.
The former must still suffer many of the consequences of sin, but the deadly
sting is gone from them, and although the sentence pronounced at the fall is
not reversed for him any more than for the latter, his relations to the Lawgiver are
those of a forgiven child instead of a rebel subject. David’s history shows how
ready God is to let a man pass from the one position to the other.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. He must be of God’s send-
ing that shall effectually awaken con-
science and speak to the heart. Nathan
the prophet is here purposely sent to
let good David feel the bruise of his
fall. . . . If God’s best children have
been sometimes suffered to sleep in sin,
at last he awakeneth them in a fright.
Now because men that are awakened
hastily out of a deep and sweet sleep
are apt to take it ill, and to brawl with
their best friends, wise Nathan begin-
neth his reproof, not in plain terms, but
by an allegory... . and it is most
likely he did it privately, that he might
the more easily work and win upon
him. . . . Private admonition saith
one, is the pastor’s privy purse, as
princes have theirs, besides their public
disbursements.—Trapp.


Ver. 2. The greater was his sin, since
pressed with no necessity. What need
had the angels to leave their first estate
and habitation? (Jude 6.) What need
had Adam to reach after a deity ?
What need had Ahab to covet Naboth’s
vineyard ? etc. It is no small aggra-
vation of a man’s sin to fall into it
without strong temptation.— Trapp.


Vers. 3-5. It is most instructive to
observe that Nathan in his parable
calls attention, not to the sensuality
aud cruelty of David’s crime, but simply
to its intense and brutal selfishness. . .
Remember this, even as regards the
special sin of which David was guilty.
Many, perhaps, who would excuse them-
selves on other grounds for the ruin
which, by the indulgence of their own
passions, they help to bring upon the
souls and bodies of their fellow-crea-

342


tures, might be startled, as was David,
if once they could be convinced of its
mean PEE selfish baseness.—Dean
Stanley.


Vers. 5and6. This energy of virtue,
this mighty effort to get credit with
oneself for a lively sense of right and
hatred of injustice—who does not re-
cognise it? Who should not tremble
when he thinks—the evil spirit who
prompts to this consummate deceit and
hypocrisy is near tome? I am tempted
continually to fly from the light which
would show me the foul spots in my
own soul, by projecting them outside
of me, and pronouncing sentence upon
them in another man.—Maurice.

I. Impartial reason is ever ready to
condemn any flagrant iniquity. There
is as discernable a difference between
good and evil as between white and
black, when nothing interposes to ob-
struct the sight, or misrepresent the
object. When a particular case happens
to be entangled with something of
nicety, there may be room for doubt,
or need of consideration, but in general
men can pass judgment readily and
boldly. David wanted not the wisdom
of an angel to discern what common
sense would have dictated in a like case.
But—Il. The prejudices of interest
and lust, may, and do hinder men from
discerning, or at least distinguishing
tn practice between right and wrong,
even in the plainest cases. Such was
most apparently the case with David.
There was no room for comparison be-
tween two injuries of a size so unequal.
He who was so tenderly sensible of
what the poor man was supposed to
suffer, could not possibly be ignorant


OHAP. XI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


er


of how much the injured Uriah must
have suffered. In the heat of his in-
dignation uae a supposed oppressor,
he put on the severity of a judge more
rigorous than the law directed. And
this when he had been guilty of a
eruelty which left not the possibility
of restitution. III, Although men do
sometimes suffer themselves to commit
gross sins, in open contradiction to
their own inward light, yet all noto-
rious iniquity stands condemned by the
universal verdict of mankind. It is no
easy matter to bribe the reason and
warp the judgment so far as to make
men advocate their own irregularities ;
but let sinners once sit in judgment
on each other, and they will all come
in condemnation in their turns, and all
with equal justice. While the affec-
tions are unengaged, and temptation
at a distance, nature recoils at the
very thought of a great enormity.
(See 2 Kings viii. 13.) It is probable
had David been foretold by Nathan
how he would act in the matter of
Uriah, he would have answered him in
the words of Hazael, “Is thy servant
a dog that he should do this thing ?”—
Dean Moss,


Vers. 5-7. I. Alen as sinners are
frequently ignorant of their own
characters. . . . Although there
is no subject of more vital interest to
man than himself, and none which he
has such facilities for studying, yet of
nothing is he more ignorant. . . .
When Christ warned Peter of his denial
of Him, the apostle exclaimed “Though
all men deny thee, yet will not I deny
thee ;” but within a few hours Peter
repeatedly, and with oaths, denied his
Master. . . . . Why are we 80
ignorant of our own characters? I
may mention three reasons :—First,
The lack of a sin-resisting force. “Sin,”
says Caird, in his admirable sermon on
Self-Ignorance, “can be truly measured
only when it is resisted.” Steam is an
illustration. So long as it is allowed
to pass away freely and unrestrained
from the boiling vessel its power is in-
appreciable ; but resist it, endeavour
to confine it, and it will gather a force


that will shiver you to atoms. Con-
science is the sin-resisting force, and
this in the sinner is weak, ete. Secondly,
The infirmity of the sin-detecting
power. Conscience is this power, and
by depravity it often gets deadened so
that it does not feel or see. If the
thermometer is frozen, how can you
tell the temperature of the air? .

Thirdly, The repulsiveness of a sin-
polluted heart. Man feels that all
things within are not right. He sus-
pects that there are disease, danger,
and a lurking enemy there, and
he keeps away. He regards his own
heart as the insolvent debtor regards
his ledger, etc. II. Zhe men who are
most ignorant of themselves are most
severe in their judgment of others... .
This principle is illustrated also in the
parable of the houseliolders (Matt. XXi,
33-42); in the history of Caiaphas
(Mark xiv. 63); and in the conduct
of the Pharisee in the temple, in rela-
tion to the Publican. He that has
the “beam” in his own eye sees the
“mote” in his brother’s eye... .
Ill. However self-ignorant a man may
be, a period of self-recognition must
come. ...- I have read in ancient
history of a dumb prince who had
never spoken a word in all his life,
till one day he saw an enemy draw a
sword against his father; apd as he
beheld the fatal blow descending, the
terrible feeling unlocked his tongue
and made him speak. So it will be
with all dumb consciences soon, The
period of self-recognition came to some
of the murderers of Christ on the
day of Pentecost ; and they cried out,
“Men and brethren, what shall we
do?” It came to Paul, and he ex-
claimed, “ What things were gain to
me, I counted loss.” When God
touches the conscience, the man stands


self-revealed.
Awakened conscience acts the artist ;
Uses the Sun of Heaven’s law
To photograph the sinner’s life,
Then holds it up a life-like picture—
A hideous monster to the affrighted eye.
—Dr, David Thomas.


Ver. 13. Two things are to be
remarked in connection with David’a
343


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


hOOR IE,





penitential utterance. 1. That he re-
garded social wrongs as sins against
the Lord. All that appears to us in
the crimes of which he was con-
victed was purely social. . . . .
Still, inasmuch as social order is a
Divine institution, wrongs against
society are sins against God. ‘I'hings
are right and wrong between man and
man because Heaven has willed them
so . . . . and the sinner’s grief,
when conscience is aroused, is not so
much that he has injured man, as that
he has insulted his Maker. “ Against
Thee, 'I'hee only have I sinned.”
2. That he felt that he himself was re-
sponsible for the commission of those
sins. THe does not refer to the tempter
or the temptation,—does not say a
word about necessity and the influence
of circumstances upon his organisation ;
no, no! all this will do very well when
conscience is sleeping for the intellect
to speculate about. But conscience
despises your fatalism, dashes its logi-
cal fabrics to pieces. “I have sinned.”

Taking Nathan’s language
as expressing forgiveness of sin, the
following remarks are suggested.
1. Horgiveness is a real act. It ig
hot a mere vision, or an idea of a
superstitious mind, nor @ mere figure


of speech ;—it is a “‘ putting away of .


sin”... . 2. Horgiveness is an
act performed by the Lord, suas
None can forgive men’s sins but the
Lord. . . . . 3. Forgiveness is
an act which delivers from death.
“The wages of sin isdeath.” . , A
“Thou shalt not die”; even thy
physical dissolution shall be only a
sleep. 4. Forgiveness is an act de-
lee on repentance. a ean Nee

epent, that your sins may be blotted
out, etc. 5. Horgiveness is an act with
which the true minister has much to do.
Whilst we repudiate the doctrine of
priestly absolution, we hold it to be
the right and duty of every true
minister of Christ to do what Nathan
now did,—Declare Divine forgiveness
to Him who has proved the genuine-
ness of his penitence,—Dr. David
Thomas.

It may seem to some, that a peni-

B44


tence thus suddenly produced could be
neither very deep nor very thorough.
But to those who think thus, three
things must be said.

First: an impression may be pro-
duced in a moment which will remain
indelible. We have heard, for example,
of one who, as he was travelling in an
Alpine region at midnight, saw for an
instant, by the brilliancy of a flash of
lightning, that he was in such a position
that another step would have been over
a fearful precipice, and the effect upon
him was that he started back and
waited for the morning dawn. Now
such a flash of lightning into the dark-
ness of David’s soul, this “Thou art
the man,” of Nathan’s, was to him.
It revealed to him, by its momentary
brilliance, the full aggravation of his
iniquity. He did not need or desire a
second sight of it. ‘That was enough
to stir him up to hatred of his sin, and
of himself.

But, second : we must, in connection
with this narrative, read the Psalins to
which David’s penitence gave birth,
namely, the 51st and the 32nd; and
if these are not the genuine utterances
of a passionate sincerity, where shall
we find that quality in any literature?
Admirably has Chandler said of the
Sist Psalm: “The heart appears in
every line; and the bitter anguish of
a wounded conscience discovers itself
by the most natural and convincing
symbols. Let but the Psalm be read
without prejudice, and with a view
only to collect the real sentiments
expressed in it, and the disposition of
heart that appears throughout the
whole of it, and no man of candour, I
am confident, will ever suspect that it
was the dictate of hypocrisy, or could
be penned from any other motive but
a strong conviction of the heinousnesg
of his offence, and the earnest desire
of God’s forgiveness, and being re-
strained from the commission of the
like transgressions for the future.
Furthermore, as another evidence of
the genuineness of David’s repentance,
we point to the words of Nathan,
“The Lord also hath put away thy
sin,” and ark if the prophet, ag


OHAP. XII.





Jehovah’s representative, would have
said anything like that if the penitence
of David had not been sincere. whe
What, really, is the distinction be-
tween the people of God and the
wicked on the earth? Is it that the
- one class commit no sins, while the
other fall into iniquity? No; the
godly man does sin. No one will be
more ready to acknowledge that than
himself. The difference, therefore,
is not there. Itliesin this: that when
the child of God falls into sin, he rises
out of it and leaves it, and cries to God
for pardon, purity, and help ; but when
the ungodly man falls into sin, he con-
tinues in it, and delights in it, as does
the sow in her wallowing in the mire.
It is a poor, shallow philosophy, there-
fore, that sneers at such a history as
this of David; nay, it is worse even
than that : it is the very spirit of Satan,
rejoicing, as it does, in the iniquity of
others. On this point, however, I
gladly avail myself of the language of
a living writer, not usually considered
to have any very strong bias in favour
of the Scriptural views of men and
things —I mean Thomas Carlyle.
“Faults!” says this author, in his
"Lecture on the Hero as Prophet ;”
“the greatest of faults, I should say, is
to be conscious of none. Readers of
the Bible, above all, one would think
might know better. Who is called
there the man according to God’s own
heart? David, the Hebrew king, had
fallen into sins enough ; blackest crimes;
there was no want of sins, And there-
upon unbelievers sneer and ask, ‘ Is
this your man according to God’s heart?’
The sneer, I must say, seems to me but
a shallow one. What are faults ? what
are the outward details of a life, if
the inner secret of it—the remorse,
temptations, true, often baffled, never-
ending struggle of it—be forgotten ?
‘It is not in man that walketh to
direct his steps.’ Of all acts, is not,
for aman, repentance the most Divine?
The deadliest sin, I say were that same
supercilious consciousness of no sin.
hat is death. The heart so conscious
is divorced from sincerity, humility,
and fact—is dead. It is pure, as dead


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


= oe


dry sand is pure. David’s life and his-
tory, as written for us in those Psalms
of his, I consider to be the truest
emblem ever given of a man’s moral
progress and warfare here below. All
earnest souls will ever discern in it the
faithful struggle of an earnest human
soul toward what is good and_ best.
Struggle often baffled sore, baffled down
into entire wreck, yet a struggle never
ended ; ever with tears, repentance,
true, unconquerable purpose begun
anew. Poor human nature! Is not a
man’s walking in truth always that
—‘ a, succession of falls?’ Man can do
no other. In this wild element of a
life, he has to struggle upward: now
fallen, now abased ; and ever with tears,
repentance, and bleeding heart, he has
to rise again, struggle again, still on-
ward. That his struggle be a faithful,
unconquerable one, that is the question
of questions.” — 7 aylor.

The greatest griefs are not most
verbal. Saul confessed his sin more
largely, less effectually. God cares
not for phrases, but for affections.
The first piece of our amends to God
for sinning is the acknowledgment of
sin: he can do little, that in a just
offence cannot accuse himself. If we
cannot be so good as we would, it is
reason we should do God so much
right, as to say how evil we are. And
why was not this done sooner? It is
strange to see how easily sin gets into
the heart; how hardly it gets out of
the mouth: is it because sin, like unto
Satan, where it hath got possession, is
desirous to hold it, and knows that it
is fully ejected by a free confession #
or because, in a guiltiness of deformity,
it hides itself in the breast where it is
once entertained, and hates the light ?
or because the tongue is so feed with
self-love, that it is loath to be drawn
unto any verdict against the heart or
hands? or is it out of an idle misprision
of shame, which, while it should be
placed in offending, is misplaced in
disclosing of our offence?—Bp. Hall.


Vers. 5-13. The sin of David, and
his unconsciousness of his own sin—
and go also his repentance through the

345


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEG,


BOOK I.





disclosure to him of his own sin—are
exactly what are most likely to take
place in characters like his, like ours,
made up of mixed forms of good and
evil. The hardened, depraved, worldly
man is not ignorant of his sin; he
knows it, defends it, he is accustomed
to it. But the good man, or the man
who is half good and half bad—he
overlooks his sin. His good deeds
conceal his bad deeds, often even from
others, more often still from himself.
. . . Forothers, this history teaches
us to regard with tenderness the faults,
the sins, the crimes, of those who,
gifted with great and noble qualities,
are, by that strange union of strength
and weakness which we so often see,
betrayed into acts which more ordinary,
commonplace characters avoid or escape.
We need not, nor dare, deny their sin
. . . but we must thankfully acknow-
ledge the background, the atmosphere,
80 to speak, of excellence which renders
a return from such sins possible. . . .
And for ourselves, let us remember that
such a foundation of good as there was
in David’s character is never thrown
away. If it is not able to resist the
trial altogether, it will at least be best
able to recover from it. David’s fall
sufficiently teaches us, not to rely on
our religious principle, however sound,
nor to trust in our religious zeal, how-
ever fervent ; but his repentance bids
us humbly hope that whatever good
purposes and sincere prayers and faith
in God, and love of Christ, we have
been able to retain amid the changes
and chances of the world, will stand in
the evil day, and do us good service
still ; there will be something to which


we can appeal with the certainty of
some response when the first flush of
passion, the first cloud of self-deceit
has passed away.— Dean Stanley.

Another view of the effect of David’s
humiliation may be noticed, not as if
it were a matter of certainty, but
rather as a suggestion for study and
consideration. There is reason to think
that this new exercise of David’s soul
—his deep sense of sin, and bitter ex-
perience of its fruits—fitted him for a
most important function, which he
would now begin to fulfil more espe-
cially than heretofore. These exercises
of his soul enabled him to become more
suitably the type of the sin-bearing
Jesus, and to give utterance to
those feelings of deep oppression and
agonizing grief that, in their fullest
and deepest meaning, none could a
propriate but the Man of Sorrows. Up
to this time David had had compara-
tively little acquaintance with the
burden of sin; . . . . but no
one could in any measure foreshadow
the Messiah without a deep personal
acquaintance with the burden of guilt.
- « . . Inone aspect it may bea
startling thing to suggest that a time
of writhing under the horrors of guilt
fitted David better to become the type
of the sinless One. But in another
aspect the statement is no paradox.
sees It is not meant that either
in kind or degree David’s feelings were
identical with the suffering Messiah,
but only that the resemblance was such
that the language which was suggested
by the one was suitable, and shown te
be suitable, to express the other.—
Blaikie.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—28,


Davin’s PunisHMeEnt,


I. A sinful deed committed by a child of God must be punished to vindicate
the justice of the Divine government. The human king and father who claima
to be the representative and executor of law is bound to begin at home, and
exact strict obedience from the members of his own family before he deals with
those outside his household. For if his home discipline be lax, and he overlook
transgressions in his children that he would punish in other men, he loses hig
gua as a Just and impartial ruler. Indeed, those who stand most nearly


CHAP, XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: 8AMu Bu.





related to him are rightly counted more blameworthy than others if they violate
the law, inasmuch as their near relation implies a more perfect knowledge of
what ought to be done, and therefore a more binding obligation. It is especially
needful, therefore, that their sins be visited with the deserved penalty, and such
a visitation is quite consistent with personal forgiveness of the offender. God,
who claims to be the supreme ruler of all the nations, chose the Hebrew people
as His especial inheritance, and selected David from the rest of the nation to
stand in a peculiar and intimate relation to Himself. All the nation was under
special obligation to obey the laws of God, and David was bound to obedience
by even stronger ties than any of his subjects. As an Israelite he was called
upon to show to the heathen around an example of godly living, and as the
chosen king of Israel, and the professing servant of Jehovah, he was bound to be
a living revelation of God’s law to his own people. If his great sin had not been
openly punished, and if the punishment had not been heavy, the reputation of the
Divine Law-giver would have suffered. ‘Therefore, although his sin was “ put
away” upon confession, justice demanded all the suffering that followed. ‘This
law is of necessity in constant operation in the government of God. “ You only
have L known of all the families of the earth ; therefore I will punish you for all
aid iniguities.” (Amos iii. 3.) Peculiar privileges and distinguishing marks of

ivine favour are not licences to sin, but reasons why it cannot be lightly
passed over.

II. The result of an unlawful deed soon changes from a source of pleasure
into one of pain. The thief who succeeds in capturing his booty congratulates
himself upon all the enjoyment he hopes to purchase with it. But it may be
that he presently stumbles beneath its weight, and so enables the officer of
justice to overtake and capture him, and thus the very largeness of the gain
that he secured for an hour becomes the means of days and months of sorrow.
It is not always, nor generally, that retribution follows so quickly upon the heels
of wrong-doing, but whether its results be en joyed for a longer or shorter period,
they will one day be the cause of bitterness. David was allowed to enjoy, so
far as a guilty conscience would permit him, the fruits of his sinful union with
Bathsheba for a short time. It is evident that the child that was born to him
was a source of joy to his heart. But soon that very source of his gladness was
smitten, and the fountain whence the streams of pleasure had flowed now sent
forth only bitter waters. From what we know of David we may conclude that
the sufferings of an innocent child would have given him pain under any circum-
stances, but how great an addition to his mental suffering must it have been to
remember that, in this instance, his guilty passion was the cause of all. This
leads to the remembrance—


III. That those who commit the sin are not the only sufferers from it.
This is an inevitable, although sad, consequence of that relativity between
human creatures which is also the cause of so many blessings. As none can
gay where the effects of sin will end in relation to his own soul, so it is impos-
sible to calculate how far its evil influence will extend in relation to otliers.
Sometimes, as in the case before us, only bodily suffering is entailed upon the
child by the transgressions of the parent, but often, alas, the sin of the father
bears more deadly fruit in the moral contamination which it communicates to
the children. David’s infant child suffered bodily pain and death because of
the iniquity of its parents, and no man—especially no parent—can sin without
bringing misery of some kind upon those related to him. Our children, and
others connected with us, can, by Divine help, free themselves from the moral con-
sequences of our wrong-doing, but the law which binds our sin and their bodily
or mental suffering together is one which cannot be broken in the present lite,
Blessed be God it can reach no further ; but surely it reaches far enough to


ad]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK Il.





furnish an all-powerful motive to every man to pray, ‘‘ Lead me not into tempta-


tion.”


If men will not hear the voice which cries “ Do thyself no harm,” and


will contend that they may do what they please with their own souls, can they
find even the shadow of an excuse for bringing pain and loss upon others, even
though that pain and loss be only temporal ?


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE OOMMENTS.


Ver. 14. This observation gives us
an insight into the whole position of
David. In him the good principle had
attained to supremacy; the godless
party had seen this with terror; and
now they mocked piety in its repre-
sentative, who, because he held this
position, ought to have kept watch
over his heart the more carefully.—
Hengstenberg.


Ver. 15. It is solemnizing to think
that the one sinless member of the
family—sinless as to actual sin—is the
first to reap the deadly wages of sin.
It leads the thoughts straight to the
doctrine of imputed guilt; it makes
us think of mankind as one great tree
with ten thousand branches ; and when
the faithless root sends up poison in-
stead of nourishment, it is the youngest
and tenderest branchlet that first droops
and dies.— Blaikie.


Ver. 16. We like to read these
words, for they tell us that David,
though an erring son of God, was yet
a son. <A godless man would have
been driven farther from Jehovah by
these troubles, and might have been
led to make proclamation of his utter
atheism; but David went to God.
The more heavily he felt the rod, the
nearer he crept to him who used it.
He fled from God to God. He hid
himself from God in God. This shows
that his sin was out of the usual course
of his nature. It was like the deflection
of the needle, due to certain causes,
which at the time he permitted to have
influence over him ; but, these causes
removed, his old polarity of soul re-
turned, and in his time of trouble he
called on Jehovah. This was his habit.
Repeatedly in his Psalms has he em-
ployed language which olearly indicates

848


that God was regarded by him as a
strong rock, whereunto, in time of trial,
he continually resorted. Thus we have
him saying, on one occasion, of his
enemies: “ For my love they are my
adversaries: but I give myself unto
prayer ;” and again, “From the end
of the earth will I cry unto Thee, when
my heart is overwhelmed : lead me to
the rock that is higher than I.”—
Taylor.


Ver. 18. Repentance may come too
late—is respect of temporal chastise-
ments, which are yet not penal, but
medicinal. (1 Cor. xi. 32.) Thus
Moses and Aaron were kept out of
Canaan for their disobedience at the
waters of Meribah.—Trapp.


Ver. 20. A godly man saith Amen
to God’s Amen; and putteth his fiat
and placel to God’s. (Acts xxi. 14.)—
Trapp.

It is worthy of particular observa-
tion that the first step of the Psalmist
in the day of his sorrow is “to the
house of the Lord.” His conduct is
worthy of imitation. I know not
where the children of sorrow shoulé
go, if not to the house of their
heavenly Father. It is in the holinese
of the sanctuary that this “ beauty ” is
found which the prophet was to give
instead of ashes to those ‘ who
mourned in Zion.” It is in the sacred
vessels of the temple that the “ oil of
joy” is kept which God’s people are to
have “for mourning.”— By. Dehon,


Ver, 22. God was gracious to him
in that the child did not live. How
could he ever have looked upon him
without grief and shame? How oft da
God’s children find themselves crossed
with a blessing' and ont he contrary


Trapp.


GHAP. XIE,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


EE SY


Ver. 23. We may learn from David’s
words here, that we may cherish the
most unwavering assurance of the
salvation of those who die in infancy.
Even in the comparative darkness of
the Jewish dispensation, the Psalmist
had the fullest persuasion of the eternal
welfare of his baby-boy ; and, under
the Gospel economy, there are many
things revealed which tend to make
the doctrine of infant salvation perfectly
indubitable. Not to refer to the fact
that, as they have committed no actual
transgressions, little children do not
personally deserve condemnation, and
may, therefore, presumably be regarded
as included in the provisions of the
covenant of grace, there are certain
things which to my mind place the
doctrine to which I refer beyond all
question.

In the first place, there seems to me
a moral impossibility involved in the
very thought of infants being consigned
to perdition. For what are the elements
in the punishment of the lost? So far
as we know, they are these two, memory
and conscience, But in an infant
conscience is virtually non-existent.
Moral agency and responsibility have
not yet been developed, and so there
can be no such thing to it as remorse.

Again : memory has nothing of guilt
in an infant’s life to recall, and so it
seems to me to be utterly impossible to
connect retribution of any sort in the
other world with those who have been
taken from the present in the stage of
infancy.

But, in the second place, there are

ositive indications that infants are
included in the work of Christ. I
grant at once that there is no one
passage which in so many words makes
the assertion that all who die in infancy
are eternally saved; but then we may
not wonder at the absence of such a
declaration, since it would have been
liable to great abuse ; and we do not
need to regret that we have it not,
because there are many passages which
very clearly imply it. Thus Jesus said
of infants, “ Of such is the kingdom of
heaven.” ‘This does not mean only, as
gome would have us to believe, that the


kingdom of heaven consists of persons
resembling little children. The word
translated “of such” has evidently a
definitereferenceto children themselves,
and has elsewhere beenemployed in that
way by the Saviour himself.— Taylor.

The issue of things doth more fully
show the will of God than the predic-
tion: God never did anything but
what He would; He hath sometimes
foretold that for trial which His secret
will intended not: He would foretell
it; He would not effect it; because
He would therefore foretell it that He
might not effect it. His predictions of
outward evils are not always absolute ;
His actions are. David well sees, by
the event, what the decree of God was
concerning his child, which now he
could not strive against without a vain
impatience. Till we know the deter-
mination of the Almighty, it is free
for us to strive in our prayers; to
strive with Him, not against Him:
when once we know them, it is our
duty to sit down in a silent contenta-
tion.— Bp, Hall.

Whether David clearly expressed
faith in the immortality of the soul or
not, we know that the thing is true;
and . . . even the heathen derived
consolation from the reflection that
they should meet their friends in a
conscious state of existence. And a
saying in Cicero, De Senectute, which
he puts into the mouth of Cato of
Utica, has been often quoted, and is
universally admired: “ O happy day”
(says he) “when I shall quit this im-
pure and corrupt multitude, and join
myself to that Divine company and
council of souls who have quitted the
earth before me! ‘There I shall find,
not only those illustrious personages to
whom I have spoken, but alse my
Cato, who I can say was one of the
best men ever born, and whom none
ever excelled in virtue and piety. I
have placed his body on that funeral
pile whereon he ought to have laid
mine. But his soul has not Jeft me;
and without losing sight of me, he has
only gone before me into a country
where he saw I should soon rejoin


him.”—A. Clarke.
349


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK I.





Ver. 24. Yea, sons, and David’s best both in his name and in his reign,
sons came of Bathsheba, because they This may be for comfort to such as
were the fruit of their humiliation. have leaped rashly into marriage; yea,
Nathan, of whom came Christ (Luke have entered into that holy ordinance
iii.), is ranked before Solomon (2 Sam. of God through the devil's portal, if
v. 14; 1 Chron. ili. 5, and xiv. 4), but for that they be after soundly humbled
Solomon was the elder brother by Bath- Trapp.
sheba, and a notable type of Christ,


MAIN HOMILETIC8 OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 26—81,
Tar Finat Conquest or AMMON.


I. To forego honour in favour of another is often as prudent as it is kind.
If @ man is beneath us in social position, or is less known or esteemed than we
are, we ought to be able sometimes to stand back a little in order that he may
be raised or brought forward and reap some of the benefits of which we have
enjoyed so large a share. It is surely not a great self-denial for him who has
won many prizes in the race of life, now and then to slacken his pace so that a
less favoured person may taste the sweets of victory. But when those with
whom we are engaged are our equals or superiors, prudence sometimes dictates
such a course when benevolence does not prompt it. Those who feel themselves
on a level with us, or know that they stand above us in many respects, are more
likely to be jealous of our successes, and to look on us with suspicion if we leave
them too far or too constantly behind in the contest for renown. If we desire
to retain their goodwill we must sometimes put aside our just claims in their
favour. The previous and the subsequent history of Joab lead us to incline to
the view that his conduct at this time was actuated by this latter motive. He
mighé certainly have acted as he did out of kindness of heart. If this event
happened—as is most likely—before David’s repentance, Joab must have seen
how ill at ease his master was, or, if the occurrence took place after the message
of Nathan, David would still be in a depressed state of mind, and it is possible
that Joab suggested his expedition against Rabbah to divert him from his
gloomy thoughts. Or David’s reputation among his subjects may have suffered
by his sinful conduct, and his general may have resorted to this expedient to
restore the king to his old place in their esteem by reviving his military fame. But

‘we think his proposal was dictated rather by prudence. David had already some-

what against him in the murder of Abner, and had doubtless marked him as an
ambitious and unscrupulous man. Joab could not be unconscious of the deep
offence he had given to David when he slew Abner, and was too wise a politician
not to know how far he might go and yet retain his position at the head of the
army. So, although he had a perfect right to complete the undertaking which
he had carried so far, he showed great wisdom in now giving it into David’s
hands, and thus laying him under a new obligation to continue his favours.


II. External success is no criterion by which to judge how a man stands in
relation to the favour of God. By the conquest of Rabbah David completed that
series of victories which made him secure against all his heathen foes, When
the crown of the king of Ammon was placed upon his head and he returned to
Jerusalem laden with spoil, those who measure how far a man’s ways please the
Lord_by the amount of temporal success which He grants him, would say that
now David was enjoying more of the Divine favour than ever before. But there
can be little doubt that this campaign was undertaken while the heavy displeasure
of God was resting upon David, and even if it did not take place until after hig
repentance, all this outward splendour stands in sad contrast to the inward gloom
which ai have overshadowed David's spirit when he thought of the terribie


GwAP. XH. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, -


Ae ond Se nee en ee Le eee


sentence, “The sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast
despised Me.” David the shepherd and the fugitive was really enjoying far more
of the Divine approval and favour than David the conqueror of Ammon, and this
episode of his life is another illustration of a truth we are prone to forget even
in the light of the Cross, that a man’s external circumstances are no indication
of his standing in the kingdom of God.


III. Isolated actions of men are often strangely at variance with their
character as a whole. As we read this paragraph, we seem to want to transpose


the names of the actors—to put into David's mouth the words of Joab, and to
make Joab responsible for all that is here ascribed to David. Such a change
would harmonize entirely with the characters of the two men regarded in their


entirety. As the record stands,
as strangely in his lips as the
harmony with his general spirit.


how false would be the estimate we should form of their characters.


the apparently unsel‘ish words of Joab sound
boastful and cruel deeds of David seem out of
If we knew no more of either of these men,


But all


who are observant of men in general, and especially of their own lives, know


well how often very good men act inconsistently with their profession,
in individual instances, they suffer when


it not unfrequently happens that,


and how


compared with men who are morally far below them. A bad man sometimes
seems to rise above himself, and really does so at times, and even the best of


men often fall far below their better nature.


It behoves us, therefore, always to


abstain from passing hasty judgments, and to look at a man’s deeds in the light


of the general tenor of his life.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


The whole conduct of David at
Rabbah is strange and painful. It
was not creditable to be roused to an
enterprise by an appeal to his love of
fame; he might have left Joab to
complete the conquest and enjoy the
honour which his sword had substan-
tially won. It was unworthy of him
to go through the empty ceremony of
being crowned with the diadem of the
Ammonitish king, as if he set an extra-
ordinary value on having so precious a
crown upon his head. Above all, it
was very terrible to show so harsh a
spirit in disposing of his prisoners of
war. Butall this is quite likely to have
happened if David had not yet come
to repentance. When a man’s con-
science is ill at ease, hia temper is


commonly sullen and irritable. Feeling
himself pursued by an enemy whom he
dare not face, he avoids solitude and
reflection—he courts bustle and busi-
ness, and every kind of exciting and
engrossing occupation. Uncomfortable
and unhappy in his inmost soul, he is
just in the temper to become savage
and cruel when crossed. The
whole occurrence shows that want of
humility, admiration, love, and obe-
dience towards God, tells darkly upon
the whole life and character.— Blatkve.


Ver. 28. Do we the like by Jesus
Christ, when we get any victory over
our spiritual enemies, let him have the
whole glory; say we as those two
disciples in Acts iii, 12-16.—Zrapp.


HOMIALLTIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK





CHAPTER XIIL


Criricat awp Exposrrory Nores.—Ver. 1. “Absalom” and “Tamar” were the children
of Maacha, and “Amnon ” was David’s eldest son by Ahinoam the Jezreelitess (see chap iii 2, 3).


Ver. 2. “Was so vexed,” etc. Literally, “it became narrow or strait to Amnon unto
becoming sick,” t.e., his desire wrought upon him and affected his health. “He thought it hard,”
etc., rather, tt seemed impossible to him to do anything to her. Tamar, as all Eastern women
ave, was of course kept in close seclusion, she was also evidently modest and reserved. “ Though
Amnon’s passion was forbidden by the law (Lev. xviii. 11), yet, with the sanction of Abraham’s
example (Gen, xx, 12), and the common practice in neighbouring countries for princes to marry
their half-sisters, he seems not to have considered it an improper connection.” (Jamieson.)
Ewald remarks that Amnon’s character and conduct were doubtless affected by the fact that he
was the firstborn son, and that his mother was not of noble origin.


Ver. 3. “Jonadab.” Although none of David’s brothers were promoted to places of honour
and emolument under government, probably from the feeling of alienation which existed between
the king and them, David seems to have acted in a kindly spirit towards their children ; and the
case of Jonadab is one of several known instances in whieh he had these young relatives about
his court. (Jamiéeson.)


Ver. 4. “Day to day.” Lit. from morning to morning. “His aspect was more wretched
in the morning after a night made sleepless by torturing passions.” (Hrdmann). “A finely
chosen point in the description of his malady, from which also it appears that Jonadab was, if
not his house-mate, at least his daily companion.” ( Thenius ). “My brother Absalom’s
sister.” “In Eastern countries, where polygamy prevails, the girls are considered to be under
the special care and protection of the uterine brother, who is the guardian of their interests and
their honour, even more than their father himself (see Gen. xxxiv. 6-25). (Jamieson).


Ver. 6. “Cakes.” Literally heart cakes. “Whether they received their name from their
heart-like shape, or their heart-strengthening power, is undecided. The word is lebibah and the
Hebrew for heart is eb.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 7. “Amnon’s house.” “It is evident that the king’s children lived in different houses,
Probably each of the king’s wives lived with their children in a different compartment of the
palace.” (Keil), “Dress him meat.” “The cakes seem to have been a kind of fancy bread,
in the preparation of which oriental ladies take great delight.” (Jamieson),


Acs 9. “Apan.” The Peas it of this word is uncertain, and many scholars think it is a
name for some preparation of food. “ Have out all men,” etc, This mi ht have been simp!
regarded as the whim of a sick man. > om”


Ver. 12. “¥olly.” “The words recall Gen, xxxiv. 7, where the expression folly (nebalah) is
first used to denote a want of chastity. Such a sin was altogether out of keeping with the
calling and holiness of Israel.” (Keil. )


Ver. 18. This is generally understood to be an expedient resorted to by Tamar, by which sh
sought to “ escape from the hands of Amnon by any means in her even andl to avoid intone
him still more, and driving him to sin, by precluding all hope of Marriage.” (Clericus.)


Ver. 15. “Then Amnon hated her.” “This sudden chan hich i
* : xo a ge, which may be fully explained
from a psychological point of view, and is still frequent. lified i i i
wicking proof tat leet Genel inn, © (Keil. q y exemplified in actual life, furnishes a


Ver, 16. “This evil,” etc. This entire hrase is very obscure, and h i
rendered, Erdmann supposes an Gammihed: sentence pales Tamar wee oe
Amnon, Keil understands her to say, “Do not add to the great wrong which thou hast i
me the still greater one of thrusting me away,” and adds, “Tamar calls his sending her away a
ee evil than the one already done to her, because it would inevitably be supposed that she


ad been guilty of some shameful conduct herself,—that th i
@leceia ule war pertactio toe eit,—that the seduction had come from her,—


Ver.17. “Then he called,” etc. “Thus leadi:
done something shameful.” (Erdmann. ) % ng the servant to suppose that Tamar had


Ver. 18. “A garment,” etc. Rather, “a long dress with sleeves.’ “Th
garment covered only the upper arm, while this covered the whole arm, and oak the pine OE
the armless outer garment or robe.” (Erdmann. )_ “For in this manner,” etc, Translate—
" Thus did the king's daughters, the virgins, clothe themselves with robes.” “The writer inserts this
352


OmAP. XIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUBL.





remark to show that, notwithstanding this dress, by which a king’s daughter could at once be
recognised, Amnon’s servant treated Tamar like a common woman.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 19. “Laid her hand on her head,” etc. “As a sign that the hand of God was
resting on her as it were, vid. Jer. ii. 87.” ( Keil.)


Ver. 20. “Been with thee?” A euphemism for what had taken place. See Gen. xxxix. 10.
“ Bold now thy peace.” ‘ Because he was determined to take revenge, but wished to conceal
his plan of vengeance for the time.” (Keil.) ‘“ Desolate,” 1.¢., “as one laid waste, with the joy
of her life hopelessly destroyed. It cannot be proved that the word ever means single or
solitary.” (Keil.)


Ver. 22. “Neither good nor bad.” Not a single word, as in Gen. xxiv. 50.


Ver. 23. “Had sheep-shearers.” See on 1 Sam. xxv. 8. “Baalhazor.” This place cannot
be exactly identified. “Ephraim.” No city of this name is mentioned in the Old Testament.
Erdmann contends that the use of the preposition shows that a city is meant, and Eusebiue says
that there was one of that name eight miles north of Jerusalem. Keil, however, understands
the clause to “ point to a situation on the border of the tribe-territory of Ephraim.”


Ver. 25. “Blessed him,” ¢.e., wished him a pleasant and successful feast,” see 1 Sam. xxv. 14.
(Kiel). “Be chargeable.” “The first intimation in history of the ruinous expense of royal
visits.” (Kitto).


Ver. 26. “My brother Amnon.” “The first-born, as thy representative.” (Thenius).
“ Why should he go?” Seeing that David eventually yielded, it is, as Kiel remarks, uncertain
whether he had any suspicion of foul-play, but it is well known that the long delay of the act
of revenge would be quite in accordance with the spirit of Hastern nations, Erdmann remarks that
David’s yielding is an indication of weakness.


Ver. 29. “As David had weakly left Amnon’s crime unpunished, Absalom held it his duty
to take vengeance on Amnon, and maintain his sister’s honour. This feeling does not, however,
exclude the motive of selfish ambition in Absalom; by the death of Amnon he would be one
step nearer to the succession to the throne; there may, indeed, have been another brother, ©
Chileab, older than he (chap. iii. 3), but probably (to judge from Absalom’s conduct, chap. xv. 1-6)
he was no longer alive. Absalom’s ambition, which afterwards led him into rebellion, probably
welcomed this pretext for putting Amnon, the heir to the throne, out of the way.” (£rdmann).
“Mule.” “This is the first mention of a mule in Scripture. The meaning of Gen. xxxvi. 24 is
questionable. Compare below, chap. xviii. 9 ; 1 Kings i. 33. The breeding of mules was
forbidden to the Hebrews (Lev. xix. 19) ; but their use was regarded as lawful.” ( Wordsworth ).


Ver. 81, “Servants,” i.¢., Courtiers.


Ver. 32. “By appointment,” etc. Rather, “ On Absalom’s mouth was it laid,” eto. Hither
one could infer from his words what his intention was or, according to Thenius “one could see
it in him, for the movements of the soul are seen (next to the look) most clearly about the
mouth.”


Ver. 34. “Behind him.” “ That is, according to well-known usus loquendi (see Exod. iii. 1,
comp. with Isa. ix. 11; Job xxiii. 8) simply from the west, since in front means geographically
the east. “By the way of the hill,” or rather, from the side of the mountain, is probably
Mount Zion. The princes came not from the north, but from the west, because the return by
this route was easier and quicker. (Hrdmann).


Ver. 37. “Talmai.” The father of Maacha, Absalom’s mother (see chap. iii. 8).


i is verse begins with a difficult clause, which renders its meaning very obscure
A pean isa Dr. J reise “being feminine, does not refer to David, neither is it correct
to say that David longed to go forth to Absalom ; for there is no ground to suppose that he
entertained either an intention or a wish to visit his exiled son, The clause should be rendered,
The anger of David ceased to go forth,” etc. Erdmann and Keil translate, David held back, or
did not go forth,” ete. ; and the former remarks, in support of this rendering, that “ David could
have sent for A®salom if he wanted him, and that, so far from feeling any love-longing towards
Absalom, David was permanently set against him, as appears from the fact that after Joab had
got him back it was two years before the king would see him.” This view necessitates a reading
of chap. xiv. 1 directly opposite to the English translation, which conveys the idea that David
did long to recall Absalom, but was prevented from doing so by ju and political con-
siderations. (See on that verse.)

2a 853


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, "BOOK i,


— A SSeS
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER.


THe Sin anp MurpER oF AMNOR.


I. Children who have both a bad and good example are more inclined to
follow the former than the latter. This truth is seen in little things as well as
in great, and the reason is the same in both cases. Ifa child who is learning
to draw has both a good and bad specimen set before him he will be much more
likely to imitate the bad than the good, because it is always easier to make
crooked lines than straight ones, and to produce a faulty piece of work than
one that is perfect of its kind. And so it is in higher and more important
things. Ifa parent is guilty of transgression at one period of his life, or con-
tinually indulges in one bad habit, he is more likely to see his children copy
him in that respect than in those things in which he fulfils his duty and is
blameless, inasmuch as it needs no effort on their part to do wrong, but it is
sometimes a great struggle to do right. This law was in operation to its fullest
extent in the case before us. Amnon and Absalom had seen their father do
many noble deeds. For many years David had lived before his children a life
consistent with his high calling and profession. But, so far as we know, none
of the children who were witnesses of these things walked in the same path ;
but these two elder sons who might have been expected to profit most by his
good example were not slow to imitate his crimes. This is not so surprising as
it is sad, when we remember that every one of us comes into the world with a
tendency to go the wrong way, and that a man has only to give himself up to
the rule of his passions in order to become a monster of iniquity while it is
hard work to fight against our evil tendencies, and more than human strength
is needed to overcome them. Amnon and Absalom had only to make no
resistance to evil suggestions—only to give impure and malicious thoughts a
lodging-place in their hearts—and the work was done. The seeds were sure not
to lie dormant but in due time to germinate and bring forth the fruit of
wickedness after their own kind. It is this indwelling evil inclination in
every human soul which makes it so much more certain that our evil deeds
will be copied than that our goodness will be imitated, and which should there-
fore make every child of God doubly watchful over all his actions for the sake
of others as well as for his own. For how doubly bitter is the sorrow of a good
parent over an erring child if he ever find himself in the position to which
David’s sin had now brought him.


II. Those who violate the sanctity of their neighbours’ homes do so at the
peril of their own family honour and peace. here is a law in the spiritual as
in the physical world, that like will produce like. ‘The law of the vegetable
kingdom, that each herb should yield seed after its kind and thus multiply its
own likeness, has its counterpart in the moral kingdom, and it is found that
sin not only propagates sin in general but sins of the same class. And thus
retribution of the severest kind, and yet in accordance with the strictest
justice, is brought home to the offender. By the base and brutal conduct of
Amnon and the murderous revenge of Absalom the entire household of David
was afflicted and his family honour and peace destroyed. But Amnon was
only indulging the same unlawful desires to which his father had sacrificed the
honour of Bathsheba and the life of Uriah, and Absalom’s murder of his guilty
brother was certainly not a blacker crime than David’s sacrifice of his faithful
servant. And if the deeds of these young men brought desolation into David's
home eh only did what David had himself done in the case of Uriah, Let


OHAP. XiIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





men beware how they trample on these sacred rights, for they may be sure that
God will now, as then, vidicate them in a like manner.


III. Those who do not bridle their animal passions become a compound of
brute and demon. In this transaction Amnon exhibits all the propensities of
the animal, and adds to them the maliciousness of the devil. He was not
content with accomplishing by violence the ruin of his young and innocent
sister, but he was base enough to lay upon her all the disgrace of the crime.
We might have thought that when he descended to the level of the beast
he wight have remained there, and at least have shown the regard for his victim
which a beast would have done. But a man is not a beast, and therefore
when he lets his animal nature get the upper hand he suffers by comparison.
That which is natural to the creature without reason and conscience is sin
to those created in the image of God, and it is vain fer any man to think
that unlawful indulgence of the body will ever fail to degrade the spirit.
There have been those in all ages who have taught otherwise, and especially
with regard to the sin here under consideration. But if the word of God
did not emphatically contradict this doctrine (1 Cor. vi. 15-20, etc.) the
experience of life would show its fallacy. Sin against the body is sin against
the whole man, and that which is sensual, unless very speedily repented of, soon
leads to that which is devilish.


IV. The freedom and power given and permitted to the wicked in this
world is a strong argument for the existence of another life The weak and
the virtuous among men are here often at the mercy of those who are strong
and wicked ; the former often suffer grievous wrong by reason of the liberty
which the latter have to carry out their evil purposes. Herod, the base liber-
tine, had power to imprison and to slay John, the greatest of the prophets, thus
violating every sense of justice, and the kings and potentates of every age have
always had it more or less within their power to persecute the moral salt of the
earth because they had the greater physical force at their command. And in
the narrow circles of social and domestic life the same things have happened
ever since Cain slew his brother Abel, because his own works were evil and
his brother’s righteous. The story of Amnon and Tamar is always being
repeated in its main features, and the strong man is ever using the weaker
woman to satisfy his guilty passion and then casting her forth to bear the
shame alone. Does not the sense of justice within us call for a hereafter to
set these things right and to give compensation and punishment according
to men’s deserts? The partial retribution which is dealt out here and now
is an earnest that a more complete system of rewards and punishments exists
in the future life, and that a day is at hand when full restitution shall be
made to those who have here been the innocent victims of the wicked and
powerful.


V. When those in authority do not punish crime they betray their trust
and give occasion to greater wickedness, A man in David's position is not
at liberty to consult his own feeling as to the punishment of the transgressor.
As God’s minister, he is set for the terror of evil doers and for the praise of
them that do well, and a failure of duty in this direction makes him a partaker
of the evil deed. If he bear the sword in vain and withold his hand when he
ought to strike, he will find that he will only give opportunity and encourage-
ment to other lawless men, and, like David, he will have two offenders instead
of one. If he had punished Amnon as he deserved he might not have had ta
mourn the rebellion and death of Absalom.


855


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





BOOK I,


rl





OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 4. He saith not, my sister, for
shame; sin is a blushful business, —
Trapp.


Ver. 1-39. David had his wives
and concubines, No divine edict told
him that such indulgence was unlaw-
ful. For, thanks be to God, though
He makes use of edicts and statutes,
it is not by these mainly that He rules
the universe. ‘he Bible is, from first
to last, the history of a practical
education ; God leading men by slow


degrees to enter into His mind and
purposes and to mould their own into
conformity with His. If we want ex-
emplifications of all the miseries and
curses which spring from the mixture
of families and the degradations of
women in a court and country where
polygamy exist, David’s history sup-
plies them. No maxims of morality
can be half so effectual as a faithful
record of terrible facts like these.—
Maurice.





CHAPTER XIV.


CrirrcaL aND Exposrrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “Now Joab,” ete. Most commentators attribute
Joab’s action in this matter to motives of self-interest. It appears highly probably that
Absalom was now the heir to the throne (see on chap. xiii. 29), and Joab was therefore anxious


to secure his goodwill by being of service to him.


“Toward Absalom.” Most scholars, in


accordance with the Syriac, the Septuagent, and the Vulgate versions, sustain the English
reading here, but Erdmann and Keil contend that the preposition here used has the sense of


against in this place. The latter says => written with 0Y and without any verb, only occurs


again in Dan. xi. 28, where it means against.


He further remarks that, “if Joab had noticed


the re-awakening of David’s good feeling towards Absalom, there would have been no necessitw
for him to bring the cunning woman from Tekoah to induce him to consent to Absalom’s return,
Moreover, David would not in that case have refused to allow Absalom to see his face for two


whole years after his return.”


Ver.2. “Tekoah.”


Now Tekue, about five miles south of Bethlehem and the home of the


prophet Amos. “ According to the Talmud, there were important oil plantations in the neigh-
bourhood, and the women there were noted for their shrewdness.”( Philippson.)


Ver. 7. “The heir also.” “These words are added to the preceding (we will kill him) by
reason of the second thought that characterises the blood-revenge, namely, that while they kill


him for blood-vengeance, they wish at the same time to destroy the surviving heir.


The woman’s


purpose is not only to bring out the design of the kinsman in their blood-avenging as harshly as
possible, but also, with reference to David’s hostile feeling to Absalom, to emphasize the point
that the latter is the heir to David’s throne, and to save him as such from his father’s anger,”


(Erdmann.) “ Quench my coal.”
denote the last remnant.” (Keil).


Ver. 8. “Go to thine house,” etc,


“The burning coal with which one kindles a fresh fire to


This declaration on the part of the king was perfectly


just. If the brothers had quarrelled and one had killed the other in the heat of the quarrel, it
was right that he should be defended from the avenger of blood, because it could not be assumed


that there was any previous intention to murder.
applied as yet to David’s conduct towards Absalom.”


This declaration, therefore, could not be
(Keil.)


Ver, 9. “The iniquity be on me,” ie, “If it be wrong not to carry out the blood-


shedding.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 11. “Let the king remember the Lord,” etc.


Either she desires David to con-


firm his promise by an oath or she reminds him of the great mercy which God had extended te


Himself in pardoning the murder of Uriah.
356


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.
SS eS nsec


Ver. 13. “Against the people of God.” The ambiguity of this phrase has led some to
render it, “ Why dost thou propose such things towards the people of God,” i.e, such protection
towards me and my son.” But most critics reject this rendering. Erdmann understands by
the people of God, the nation who would suffer by the rejection of one who would one day be
their King,

Ver. 14. “We must needs die,” etc. Thenius refers these words to Amnon’s death with
the meaning, “ he had to die sometime, and all you can now do against the murderer will not
restore him to life.” But most writers understand the woman to mean “ Absalom may die in
banishment and then your pardon may come too late,” or “As life is so short and uncertain
do not embitter it by enmity.” “Neither doth God respect,” etc. Rather. “God doth not
take away any soul, but thinks thoughts, not to banish a banished one.” “An argument from
God’s procedure with the sinner. He does né& take away the soul (life) of one that is banished,
condemned for sin, so as thus to banish him for ever. These words must have brought to
David’s recollection God’s mercy towards himself.” (Erdmann.) “ This is one of the noblest
and profoundest declarations of the Scripture. God, who has determined us to death, neverthe-
less does =ot deprive us of life, of personality, but has the holy purpose to receive against the
banished, the sinful.” (Philippson. ) This (last) explanation makes the first half of the verse
merely introductory to the thought in the second, merely a relative sentence containing an
affirmation about God ; this is not so probable as the view which makes the first half a separate
argument, The argument, though powerful, is false; the human Judge cannot set aside the
demands of justice, though God may pardon the sinner.” (Z'ranslator of Lang’s Commentary.)


Ver. 15. “The people have made me afraid,” ¢.e. Her kinsfolk who demanded her son.
“The woman returns again to her own affairs, to make the King believe that nothing but her
destress led her to speak thus.” (Keil. )


Ver. 17. “ Comfortable,” literally, for rest, t.e., shall givemerest. “ Angel of God.” “The
angel of the covenant, the mediator of divine grace to the covenant nation.” (Ked.) “To
discern good and bad.” “This affirms two things. 1. In every case brought before him, the
king, he will impartially hear both sides. 2. He helps the oppressed.” (Erdmann.) “There
is a great deal of artifice in all this. For to presume upon the kindness of another and expect
gracious answers from their noble qualities is very moving.” (Patrick).


Ver. 19. “None can turn to the right,” etc. ic. The king always hits the right point
She compliments the king on the sagacity which enabled him to penetrate the secret,


Ver. 20. “ To fetch about this form,” etc. Erdmann translates this, “ Tu turn the face of
the thing, %.¢., to change the relation of Absalom to his father.” Keil renders, “ To turn the
appearance of the king,” understanding thereby, to disguise the affair in the finest way.


Ver. 23. “Hath fulfilled the request.” These words are generally understood to indicate
that Joab had repeatedly pleaded for Absalom’s return.


Ver. 24. “et him not see my face.” “This was no real pardon. David's anger still con-
tinued. It is a natural surmise that this was because Absalom showed no repentance and did
not ask for forgiveness.” (Erdmann.) ‘His own house.” His being obliged to send for Joab
suggests that Absalom was confined to his house.


Ver. 26. “He polled his head,” 2.¢., cut his hair. “Two hundred shekels after the
king’s weight.” The king’s shekel is probably a different weight from the sacred shekel, and
probaly less than that. Kitto mentions reading of a lady’s hair that weighed more than four
pounds ; and, if two hundred shekels is not more than this, it is a possible weight. The ancients
were accustomed to bestow much care on the hair.” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 27. “Three sons.” From the fact that, contrary to custom, the names of these sons
are not given, and from chap. xviii. 1 it is concluded that they died in infancy.


Ver. 30. “Set the field on fire.” Some commentators regard this act of Absalom as an
expedient to bring him face to face with Joab; and others look upon it merely as an act of
angry revenge.


Ver. 32. “Let me see the king’s face.” Rather, “J will see,” etc. “Being sure that
if he could do that all would be gained ; such wr his confidence in the tender-heartedness of
David.” (Wordsworth.) ‘The message sent by /.t:.1lom through Joab to his father contain—
1, A reproach, ‘Why am I come from Ges} uj !’ Why didst thou send for me if Iam
not permitted to appear before thee? 2. A repaiiation of the indulgence shown him in the
permission granted him to return home: ‘it were better for me that I were still there.
8. A self-willed demand, ‘and now I will see the king’s face,’ 4. A defiant chullenge.
‘If there be iniquity in me, let him kill me.’ From the tone of his speech he does not
allow that he has done wrong, but relies on the right he thinks he has against his father, who
had been too indulgent to Amnon.” SJrdmann.)

857


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK fi.


eg ES
MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-24,


Tur Return oF ABSALOM.


I. The most mischievous reasoning is that which is a compound of truth and
falsehood. When an argument is wholly founded on an untruth, the conscience
not entirely blinded can pass sentence upon it without hesitation, and if a man ©
yield to such an argument, he does so with his eyes wide open. But where, as
in the case before us, many undeniable facts are pleaded in favour of acts which
at best are of doubtful character, only the most honest and unprejudiced can see
through the delusion. ‘lhe assertions of this wise woman were perfectly true.
Those who grant mercy abroad should begin at home, and enmity ought to die
before those who are at enmity die. The long forbearance and abounding
mercy of God are also blessed and undeniable facts, and all these considerations
might have been lawfully urged upon David in relation to any private act in
which Absalom had sinned only against his father. But he had transgressed
that Divine law which it was David’s special duty to uphold, and against which
the king sinned when he permitted it to be violated with impunity. No human
executor of law is actuated by a feeling of personal enmity, but is simply a
representative of laws, which, if they are just, are necessary safeguards of society,
and as such, are approved and even commanded by God. Such a man fails in
his duty both to God and man if he allow personal feelings to influence his
conduct either for or against the offender. We cannot gather from the history
(see Critical Notes) what David’s real feelings were in relation to his son, and
therefore cannot tell what effect the argument of this parable had upon him ;
but it is an excellent sample of many of the sophistries by which people in all
ages and under all circumstances seek to justify what is contrary to Justice when
it is agreeable to their inclinations and likely to promote their interests.


II. Those who are conscious of having committed great sins are not fit
to deal with other offenders. The immediate result of this parable was a
half-measure which made matters worse than they were before, and leave us in
as much doubt as ever as to David’s real motives and feelings. It was more
trying and irritating to Absalom to be banished from bis father’s presence in
Jerusalem than in Geshur, and if his message to him was defiant there was
reason in it, for it seemed mockery to recall him merely to make him a prisoner
or keep him in disgrace at home. But all David’s weakness and unsteadiness of
piper in dealing with his sons arose from the consciousness that when one

ecame an adulterer and the other a murderer, they were only following his
example. Such a man is as unfit to deal rightly with a transgressor as he who
is smitten with paralysis is unable to administer corporal chastisement.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 14. It is by right of this apt
beautiful saying that the wise woman of
of 'l'ekoah holds an earthly immortality.
Ah, how God must have bound us each
to each; what subtle far-reaching links
must bind all the children of Adam
into one; how solemn and mysterious
an influence the humblest of us may
exert on all, when the obscure pro-

859


phetess of that dark age and distant
land can still touch our hearts and
shape our thoughts. The larger
and more general application, tie
principle of the words I take to be,
“Don’t fret over the inevitable, the
irreparable. ‘I'he past is past and can-
not be recalled; therefore be more
intent on a wise use of the present,


OHaP. XIV.





Instead of crying over spilt water or
trying in vain to gather it up from the
dust, betake you to the fountain of
living water, drink of the untainted
perennial spring. Let your feet wear
a track that shall guide other feet to
its pure waters. Let your example be
a standing invitation to your neigh-
bours, that they also may repair to the
fountain which no dust can defile, and
drink of the clear life-giving waters
which flow on for ever.” 1. Apply
this principle to the limited facts of
death and bereavemént. . . Fretting
will not alter the inevitable. We
must accept it whether with our
will or against it. Let us then
accept it with a patient cheerfulness
which will take the sting out of it.
Tis weak, ’tis useless, to sit down and
weep over spilt water, when we have
yet a long steep path to climb, and
many around us who look to us for
guidance and refreshment... . But
it is not difficult to understand how
many might say, “ Why remind me
that it is of no use to cry over spilt
water?” I know it, and bence my
tears. I weep the more because I
weep in vain.” . . . But we may find
in the wise woman’s words a larger and
more consolatory meaning than any of
which she was conscious. ... For,
observe ; this spilt water of hers—what
after all becomes of it? Though we
cannot raise it up again, it neverthe-
tess does rise again ; no particle of it
is lost. For a little while it lies in the
dust and helps to make that fruitful.
But it will be gathered up again; it
must be. It will be drawn up into the
skies to form a gracious cloud, which
by and bye will fall in enriching
showers and will be again lifted to the
skies, again to fall, again to rise—so
passing into a life of perpetual service.
. , . And God, our sun ,will shine upon
our departed ones and will raise, purify,
and ennoble them, consecrating them
to an eternal service. . . . II. [/we
bring the more general application of
this principle home to our experience,
we shall find it has instruction for all,
and not only for the bereaved... .

we recall the past, and as the years


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





pass, and the inevitable changes ensue,
we are too apt to spend time in crying
over spilt water and in trying to gather
it up again, and when we are haunted
with the ghosts of lost opportunities
and past sins, we are filled with a
regret singularly like the sorrow of
bereavement, and like that it is very
apt to weaken us still more, and to
interpose between us and the duties
we have still to discharge. :
It is vain to mourn that we are
what we are. The weaker we are the
more need to husband our strength;
the more frequent and ample the op-
portunities we have missed, the more
we should strive to improve those
which are still open tous.... We
are assuredly to repent of our sins and
mistakes, but the true cleansing virtue
of repentance does not lie in the tears
we shed but in the amendment which,
trusting to a higher strength than our
own, we hopefully attempt. And in
nothing perhaps is the healthy bracing
spirit of the gospel more conspicuous
than in this, that when we are truly
sorry for our sins, we find that it isa
sorrow that worketh life; that while
we are still mourning over our mani-
fold offences it virtually says, “‘ Leave
all those with Him who has made an
atonement for the sin of the world.”
.... Nay, more, though we cannot
gather up the spilt water, God can and
does. ‘I'he sun of His love shines
down on the earth on which it has
fallen, and lo, it rises from the earth
in new and purer forms! All the use-
ful and helpful elements of our past
experience are gathered up by Him,
and detached from the polluting dust
with which they were blent, and the
very tears we have shed are drawn up
into the spiritual heaven, to fall in
fertilising showers on ground barren
but for them; and as they fall the
Sun of Righteousness shines full upon
them, and lo, a new bow of hope
stretches across our brightening heaven,
giving us the welcome assurance that,
unfruitful as we have been in the past,
henceforth seed-time and harvest shall
never fail us.—(Samuel Cow, abridged).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL. BOOK Il.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 25-88,


Daviw’s REconcILIATION TO HIs Son,


I. The difference between the godly and the ungodly is manifested by the
different light in which they regard their sins, This truth becomes very
apparent if we compare the behaviour of Absalom at this time with that of hig
father after his great fall. We cannot say that the sin of the ungodly son was
greater than that of his godly parent—indeed we are compelled to admit that
the opposite was the case. Although no rightful excuse can be found for any
wrong deed, Absalom could plead some extenuations of his crime and might
even slave invested it with a show of justice. But nothing can be said which
can in any degree make David’s guilt look less. And it must be confessed that
in later days the godly man sometimes falls into more gross sin than his ungodly
brother. But the grand line of demarcation is found in the difference in their
conduct in relation to it. The one acknowledges and mourns over his fault,
and perhaps, like David, goes with broken bones all the rest of his days, while
the other either fails to see that he has done anything wrong or else excuses it
on the plea of necessity or expediency. While all the acts of David, after his
great sin, are pervaded more or less by a consciousness of his own unworthiness,
we find in Absalom no trace of any regret that he was guilty of his brother’s
blood. On the contrary, all his subsequent actions are marked by the same
unscrupulousness. ‘The same regard for his own supposed interest and entire
disregard of what he owed to other men or to God are displayed in every deed
that is recorded of him, and make him a striking example of the radical
difference which exists between the natural and the spiritual man even when
the latter falls sadly below the moral standard we might reasonably expect
him to maintain,


II. To restore a wrong-doer to favour unconditionally, is a sin against
the person forgiven. The prodigal whom the father welcomed back returned
with a confession upon his lips and such contrition in his heart as showed that
his restoration to his old place in the home would be a blessing to himself and
others. But if he had been re-instated without any acknowledgment that he
had sinned, it would have been not only useless but injurious to him. If he
had not felt the sinfulness of the past, he would have wandered again into the
far country if a tempting prospect had been held out to him, and his last state
would have doubtless been worse than the first. The elder brother might have
justly complained at such an unconditional blotting out of the past, and would

ave rightly urged that it did harm both to the sinner and to the innocent man,
This is not God’s method. With Him it ig—« If we confess our sins, He is
faithful and just to forgive” (1 John i, 9). “ Repent and be converted (turn
to God) that your sins may be blotted out” (Acts iii, Hy For it is only the
repentant to whom God’s forgiveness can be of any use. In Absalom’s case wa
see the consequence of his restoration to favour without any acknowledgment
of his guilt—it gave him ample opportunity to organise and complete those
rebellious designs which resulted in his downfall and ruin, and was therefore not
only unjust but unkind,


Gwar. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEFE.


a


CHAPTER XV.


Critica axp Exposrrory Norss. Ver. 1. “After this.” Keil, Erdmann and Thenius
attach the idea of tmmediateness to the Hebrew adverb here used, but other scholars consider
this doubtful. The word occurs only here, in chap. iii, 28, and in 1 Chron. xxxii. 23, and its
precise meaning cannot therefore be determined by usage. “ Chariots,” i.¢., “a state carriage.”
(Keil.) “Fifty men.” “These runners are accustomed to precede the equipage of persons of
distinction in Oriental countries. They usually carry a staff or baton, which they constantly
wave about them, and strike right and left to clear the way, especially in the streets of Oriental
cities which are always narrow and crowded. . . . They can keep on ata rapid pace, with
the equipage which they precede, for many miles without stoppage, their feet covered with dust
and frequently bleeding from wounds. In ancient times fifty of these runners formed the usual
attendance upon royalty. See 1 Kings i. 5.” (Jamieson).


Ver. 2. “Rose up early,” etc. “The gate here referred to is the gate of the royal palace,
whither those came that sought the decision of the king in law matters. (Zrdmann). Malcolm-
son says that Oriental ministers hold their levees before western people of rank rise from their


_ Ver. 8. “(No man,” etc. Lit. “ No hearer for thee on the part of the king.” The hearet
signifies the judicial officer, who heard complainants and examined into their different causes
for the purpose of laying them before the king.” (Keil.)


Ver. 4. “O that I were,” etc. Lit. “ Who will make me,” ete.


Ver. 6. “So Absalom stole,” etc. ‘The phrase may also mean to deceive the heart, ag
in Gen. xxxi. 20; but the connection shows that the meaning here is to bring a person over
to one’s side secretly and by stratagem.” (Erdmann and Keil.)


Ver.7. “After forty years.” It seems imposssble to read forty in this connection as it
eannot be understvod either of David’s reign or Absalom’s age, a8 David's entire reign was only
forty years and a half, and Absalom was born after his father became king. Almost all com-
mentators read four years, but the chronology here must evidently be regarded as uncertain.


Ver. 7. “Hebron.” “ Probably assigning as a reason that he was born there, but really because
his father had been made king there, and also possibly because there may hays been many
persons there who had been displeased by the removal of the court to Jerusalem.” ¢ &eil.)


Ver. 8. “Serve the Lord.” Rather to do a service, explained by Josephus to mean to offer
asacrifice, ‘We have here an example of sacrificial feasting, not in connection with the
tabernacle (as in 1 Sam. xx. 6), an indication that the strict law of Leviticus (Lev. xvii. 3, 4,
and Deut, xii. 13, 14) was not in practical operation, else David would have objected to sacri-
Ycing in Hebron.” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary.)


Ver. 9. “Go in peace.” “That David observed nothing of all this till the startling news
reached him that the heart of Israel was turned towards Absalom, cannot be reckoned to his
disadvantage, since so ancient and simple a kingdom had nothing like our modern state police ;
{t is rather a mark of the noble-minded security that we elsewhere see in him, that he gives so
free scope to his beloved son, who might be regarded as first-born and heir-apparent.” (wald.)


Ver. 10. “Spies.” “So called because they were first of all to find out the feeling of the
people and only execute their commission where they could reckon on support. (Keil.) “The
érumpet.” “We must suppose that there were various stations where the summons was
sepeated.” (Cohen.)


Ver. 11. “Two hundred men.” “Courtiers such as usually accompanied kings and kings’
sons on their journeys.” (Erdmann.) “Called,” t.¢., invited to the sacrificial feast. “Knew not
anything,” é.¢., were ignorant of the conspiracy.


Ver. 12. “Giloh.” Upon the mountains of Judah and a little to the south of Hebron (Josh.
xv. 51). ‘“Ahithophel had no doubt been previously initiated into Absalom’s plans, and had
probably gone to his native city merely that he might come to him with greater ease, since his
general place of abode, as king’s councillor, must have been in Jerusalem.” (Keil.) On the
possible cause of Ahithophel’s desertion of David, see notes on chap. xi. 3.


Ver. 14. “Let us flee.” “David's immediate flight is to be explained by the reason that he
‘himself gives, by the fact that he sees that the fulfilment of Nathan’s prophecy SF ag


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book 11,
neem


misfortune is now beginning, that the punishment cannot be warded off, and that to stay in the
city will only occasion much bloodshed.” (Erdmann.) “To leave the city would be to gain
the advantage of his military skill and of the discipline of his tried warriors in the open
country.” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary).


Ver. 15. “Servants,” i.¢, soldiers. (Lange's Commentary.)


Ver.17. “A place that was far off.” Literally, “ The house of the distance.” Probabay
& proper name given to a house in the neighbourhood of the city, and on the road to J. ericho,
which was called ‘ the farthest house,’ viz., from the city.” (Keil.)


Ver. 18. “ Cherithites,” etc. See note on chap. viii. 18. % Gittites,” Most scholars
identify this body of men with the Gibborim or mighty men mentioned in chap. xvi. 6. Some
suppose that Gittite is a corruption of Gibborim. It is not likely that they were all natives of
Gath, although they are said to have followed David thence. Most commentators consider that
this body-guard was formed of David’s first faithful followers (1 Sam. xxii, 2), kept always up
to the number of six hundred by the addition of other trusted and valiant soldiers,





Ver. 19, “A stranger,” etc. “Do you remain with whoever is or shall be king, since there is
no necessity for you as a stranger to take sides at all,” (Keil) or, “ You may remain quiet and see
whom God shall appoint as king, and whether it be I or Absalom 3 you can serve the one whom
God shall choose.” (Schmidt). “ Stranger—not an Israelite 3 emigrant or exile—one not in his
native land.” (Hrdmann). Some suppose that the latter noun signifies that Ittai was a captive
or & hostage taken in war, but his position in David's army is against such a supposition.


Ver. 20. “ Mercy and truth.” From this and from Ittai’s saying, “As the Lord lives,” it is
probable that Ittai, with his whole house, had already become a believer in the God of Israel.”
(£rdmann.)


Ver. 22. “Pass over,” rather, pass on, (Keil.) “The little ones.” “It is characteristic
ot Oriental people that they carry their whole family along with them in all their migrations.”
(Jamieson.)


Ver. 23. “Kidron.” This mountain torrent, which only flows during the rainy season, runs
through the valley of Jehoshaphat, between the eastern side of J erusalem and the Mount of
Olives. “Afterwards passed over by the son of David, the King of Israel, when He was
rejected by Jerusalem.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 24. “Zadok” and Abiathar. (See notes on chap. viii. 17.) “Zadok is placed before
Abiathar by the historian, although Abiathar was the High Priest, either because Zadok, as the
younger man, took the lead in bearing the ark, or perhaps because Abiathar was already
beginning to show some signs of lukewarmness and disaffection towards David and his cause,
The writer composed the history at a time when it was a well-known fact that Abiathar was
deposed by Solomon for disloyalty, and Zadok was placed in his room (See 1 Kings i. 7, ii. 35.)
(Wordsworth.) Keil and Erdmann consider that Abiathar did not join the procession until all
the people had passed out of the city, and therefore his name could not have been placed first
here. But the same order is observed in verse 29. “Went up.” “That is, to the summit of the
Mount of Olives, where the ark was set down.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 27. “Art not thou,” etc., rather, “Thou seer.” On this word see note on 1 Sam. ix. 9,
David’s reasons for so naming Zadok is found in verse 25 seg. Through him David is to learn
whether the Lord will again take him into favour and restore him to Jerusalem ; that is,
Zadok was to act as seer for him.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 28. “The plain,” rather the Sords, the place where the Jordan could be crossed.


Ver. 30. “The ascent of Olivet.” “J osephus reckons the distance from Jeru

top of the mount at five stadia, and Luke (Acts i. 12) says it was a Sabbath day’s j jay oe
same pathway over that pre has been followed ever since that memorable day.” (J
“His head covered.” Jovering the head is the symbol of the mind sorr i
itself, wholly withdrawn from the outer world. Cons Esther vi. 12, a
(Erdmann.) “See examples of King Darius having his head covered, 2 Curtius, lib. iv. car
10, sec. 83, and lib. v. cap. 12, sec. 8, (Jamieson.) “ Bare-foot.” While all covered the head,
this sign of mourning appears to have been adopted by David only either “ag & penitent *
(Zwald), or “to manifest his humiliation in the sight of God.” (Thenius).


Ver. 82. “Where he worshipped.” Rather where men worshipned, ete d
been one of the “ high places” which then existed in Palestine. “ Hashai the Avs gets
ver, 37, chap. xvi. 16, and 1 Chron. xxvii. 33. Keil and others consider him to have been a
privy councillor, He was probably a native of the city of Ezek. (See Josh, xvi, 2.)
862


oHaP. XV. ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


eee ee


Ver. 33. “A burden,” “He was probably avery old man.” (Keil).


Ver. 34. “¥ will be thy servant.” “his was not honest, but it was according to the policy
practised in those days, avd indeed in all ages ; which Procopins Gazaens approves 50 far as to


say that ‘a lie told fora good end is equivalent to truth.” But I dare not justify such doctrine.”
(Patrick). re


Ver. 36. “Zadok,” etc. “This was not an ordinary stratagem ; these men were not simply
apies, but we can avoid calling them traitors by supposing that the priests were not recognised
as ad rerents of Absalom, but as indifferent non-combatants, or as friends of David.” (Translates
of Lange's Commentary).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER,
Tig REBELLION UNDER ABSALOM.


Ye have here—

I. An aggravated crime ‘The rebellion of Absalom against his father
would have been an act of great wickedness in whatever manner he had carried
it out, but the cloak which he used to conceal it added to his guilt. He must
have been a bad man indeed to conspire against his father’s throne ; but to
dress up his base designs in the garb of patriotism, and even of piety, added
hypocrisy to his other sins. But there appears to be no limit to the extent to
which men will veil a vicious act in the semblance of a virtuous deed, and thus
give proof of the great depravity of which human nature is capable.


II, An aggravated calamity. If Absalom’s guilt was increased by the
attendant circumstances so was David’s sorrow. ‘here was, first, the quarter
from which it came. It was no small addition to the severity of the trial that
the evil sprang from David’s own house—that the rebel was one of his own
children and apparently a son for whom he had a deep atfection, And added
to this was the fact that Absalom was aided and encouraged by one in whom
David had placed implicit confidence, his “ familiar friend,” Ahithophel, whose
faithfulness, it seems, he had never doubted (Psalm xli, 9). David had been
warned to look for trouble, and for trouble from his own family ; but he could
hardly have expected so heavy a calamity as the one which now befel him nor
is it likely he had ever thought it possible that Absalom and Ahithophel would
be the chief instruments of his chastisement. ‘Then, again, it must have been
a bitter surprise and mortification to David to find that so many of his people
were ready to renounce their allegiance to him and to follow one who was in all
respects his inferior, sad who had no claims upon their gratitude. Faulty as
David had been in his iater years, and just as might have been the charge brought
avainst him by Awealom (ver. 3), his rule upon the whole had been productive
of great good to the nation, whereas Absalom had done nothing for it. Yet, when
the standard of rebellion was raised, many men gathered toit who doubtless owed
much to the efforts which David had made to benefit the people aud thus
showed themselves capable of great ingratidude. And we all know that
unkindness from such a quarter is much harder to bear than when it comes
from the band of strangers. But by far the greatest aggravation of David's
trial must have been the consciousness that he had brought it on himself. It
was no arbitrary sentence which God passed upon him when He warned him
that evil would come from his own house. If David’s household had been
ordered more in accordance with the will of God, and his own personal life been
under more strict discipline, it is more than probable he would have had no
such sons as Amnon and Absalom, and no subjects so faithless as Ahithophel
and those who followed with him, But even if then such circumstances had
arisen, the father and tlie king ‘would have found strong consolation in the
reflection thet he was in no sense blameworthy. But he could not ae this


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. . BOOK I, ~


See


strongest support in trial but had this burden in addition to_all the others, that

e was only reaping as he had sown. And, alas! although he alone was
responsible for the sowing, many besides himself had to taste the bitter fruit,
To a man like David, this must have been an inexpressible grief, To any true-
hearted man or woman it is far easier to suffer than to be the means of bringing
suffering upon others, even when it is a matter of pure misfortune. But surely
nothing can cause such agony of mind as to look upon the miseries of others and
to feel that we are the cause of it, and that by our own transgression, Davia
now saw his kingdom rent by civil war with all its attendant desolations, and
knew that he, and he only, was to blame ; and as we look upon this man after


their conscience and who have never, like him, acknowledged their transgressions
and sought to be cleansed from their sin,


III. Calamity lightened by the faithfulness of friends and by confidence
in God. If Absalom and hig followers afford painful examples of human
hypocrisy and ingratitude and make us ashamed of our manhood, the
unselfishness and fidelity of Ittai and other servants of David more than
redeem it from the disgrace, Although there are many false and cowardly
men in the world, there are also ‘many brave and noble ones, and times
of trial, whether personal or national, are times of self-revelation which
bring to light the real character of both the good and bad. If it had
not been for Absalom and Ahithophel’s treachery, David would never have


this faithfulness on the part of man would bea pledge of the faithfulness of
God, and a confirmation of the truth of his own words, “ Unto the upright there
ariseth light in the darkness,”

But David’s own conduct and temper under the trial, tended also to lighten
the affliction. Behind the wrong-doing of man he sees the righteousness of
God and acknowledges the justice of the permissive providence which allowed
such a calamity to overtake him. And although he knows that he is being


forgiven. Any man who is able thus to meet affliction, finds its sting removed
but a soul which cannot see a Divine hand behind the dark cloud, or, seeing it,


does not recognise it as a hand of justice and love, is indeed in a sad case,
Many as were the aggravations of David’s calamity, it had this greaten:


alleviation.


864


OHAP, XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


Viti ce


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 2. The plot which Absalom
was working out required a great
amount of sapping and mining—a
kind of labour extremely trying, and
demanding much patience and self-
command, Yet for years, apparently,
he persevered in it, upheld and en-
couraged by the one hope of ultimate
success. How much wiser in their
generation are the children of this
world than the children of light! If
for wicked or selfish ends men toil
with so much perseverance, how should
good men labour in the service of God !
— Blackie.


Ver. 19. David’s general desertion
by his own people—the tribe of Judah
—and the attention which he received
from comparative strangers fore-
shadowed the Lord’s own experience,
when betrayed by Judas, denied by
Peter, and forsaken by all the apostles,
His only sympathy seemed to come
from the weeping women, and when
strangers like Nicodemus and Joseph
were left to attend his funeral._—
Blackie,


Ver. 31. This text is a glass where-
in God’s justice is plainly to be seen.
David had formerly falsely forsaken
Uriah, and now God suffers Ahitho-
phel to forsake David.... I. Let
us learn when our friends forsake us,
to enter into a serious scrutiny with
our own souls. Hast thou never
played false or foul with thy friend, if
not in action yet in intention? Dost
thou not mean to prove base if put to
the trial ? If so, know thy false friend
hath only got the start of thee. ....
II. The most politic heads have not
always the faithfullest hearts. . . .
While David swayed the sceptre, who
more loyal to him than Ahithophel ?
and once David is in banishment,
he falls first to Absalom ; he loved to
worship the sun rising; yea, while,
David, the true sun, was but overcast
with a cloud, he falls adoring a blazing


star—acomet. . . . That cement
which conglutinates hearts is grace and
goodness, whereof many politic heads
are utterly devoid (1 Cor. i. 26), and
politic men make their own profit the
rule and square of their lives. :

Do not, then, undervalue the love of
those who are of mean and inferior
parts. Wise men have made use of
such servants and found them more
manageable and more profitable;
though their judgments were weaker,
their affections might be stronger than
wiser men. III. False friends will
forsake thee in times of adversity. He
that believeth that all those who smile
on him and promise fair in time of
prosperity will perform it in time of
his want may as well believe that all
the leaves that be on trees at Mid-
summer will hang there as fresh and
as fair on New Year’s Day. Come we
now to consider what good uses one
may make to himself from the unfaith-
fulness of friends when they forsake us.
1. Consider with thyself whether thou
hast not been faulty in entertaining
tale-bearers, and lending a listening
ear to them. Solomon says, “A
whisperer separateth chief friends ”
(Prov. xvi. 28.) . 2. If herein
thy conscience accuse thee not,
examine thyself, whether there was
not a ewsum principium in the first
initiation of your love. How came you
first acquainted. . . . Didst ¢hou first
purchase his favour with the price of a
sin? For, know, friends unjustly
gotten are not long comfortably en-
joyed.... We see King Hezekiah,
who procured Sennacherib’s love by
his sacrilege, enjoyed not that purchase
which he made God and His temple
pay for. (2 Kings xviii. 16.)... 3.
If there has been no fault in the in-
clination, examine hath there been
none in the continuance of your
friendship? Hast thou not committed
many sins to hold in with him?.. .
Hast thou not flattered him in his
faults, or at leastwise by thy silence

365


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





consented to him. ... If Amnon,
in cold blood viewing the heinousnesa
of his offence, so hated Tamar, who
only concurred passively in his trans-
gression, how may our friends justly
hate us, if haply we have been the
causers, movers, and procurers of our
badness! ... 4. Hast thounot idola-
trised to thy friend? Hath he not
totally monopolised thy soul? It is
just with God that those wooden
pillars should break, on whom we lay
too much heft. 5. Hast thou not
undervalued thy friend? ... If 80,
God hath taught the worth of a pearl
by losing it. And this often comes to
pass, though not in our friends volun-
tary deserting us, yet when God takes
them away by death... 6. It may
be God suffers thy friends to prove un-
faithful to thee, to make thee stick
more closely to Himself. Excellent to
this purpose is Micah vii. 5-7. As if
he had said, “Is the world come to
this bad pass that one must be far
from trusting their nearest friends?
It is well, then, I have one fast Friend
on whom I may rely, the God of
heaven.” I must confess these words
of the prophet are principally meant
of the time of persecution, but they
contain an eternal truth, whereof good
use may be made at any time.—7hos,
Fuller.


Ver. 34. In the midst of such piety
and resignation, it is strange to find
David asking his friend thus to act a
dishonest part, and play the spy. We
are not called to vindicate his conduct.
The Scriptures simply record it; and
we must not suppose that everything
here is approved which is not directly,
aud in so many words, condemned.
But we may say two things by way of
debarring hasty judgment here. First
—and I am using now the words of
Professor Plumptre: “Slowly in the
character of any people; more slowly


866


BOOK I.





still in that of any Eastern people;
most slowly of all, perhaps, in that of
Israel, have men risen to the excellence
of veracity. We must not think that
the king’s religion was a hypocrisy be-
cause it did not bear at once the fruit
of the spotless honor and unswerving
truth which mark the highest forms of
Christian goodness. ‘The Christian
Church herself has to notice many
like inconsistencies among her crowned
martyrs.” Second: let us not forget
what those means are by which, even
in these modern days, with all our
Christian loftiness of character, we seek
to countermine and check political
rebellion. Some years ago, while I
was a resident in Liverpool, there was
great talk of Fenianism. We heard
of plots for the taking of the ancient
city of Chester, and the burning of
ships in our own docks. How did we
hear of them? _ By spies, who feigned
themselves Fenians for the time! and
the man whose astuteness made these
discoveries through means of Hushai-
like instruments was rewarded by
being made a companion of the Most
Honorable Order of the Bath! Ob-
serve, I do not vindicate either David
or these modern officers. I simply
state the facts, and beg to say, that if
men, with the New Testament in their
hands, can do such things, we ought to
be tender in our treatment cf David
here.— Taylor.


Vers. 16-27. There is nu single
day in the Jewish history of which so
elaborate an account remains as of
this memorable flight. There is none,
we may add, that combines so many of
David's characteristics—his patience,
his high-spirited religion, his gener-
osity, his calculations: we miss ouly
his daring courage. Was it crushed,
for the moment, by the weight of
parental grief, or bitter remorse ?—
Stanley.


SHAD, EVE. ' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMURL,.


SE Be : an


CHAPTER XVI.


Crrrican anp Exposttory Norrs.—Ver. 1. “Met him.” © Ziba had therefore gone on in
advance of the army (as Hushai did) in order more easily to secure David’s attention after the
first disorder was over.” (Hrdmann.) “Bunches of raisins,” ¢.¢., raisin cakes, “Summer
fruits,” probably fig-cakes, asin 1 Sam. xxv. 18. “A bottle,” a skin,


Ver.2. “The asses,” etc. “The manner of Ziba’s trick was this (chap. xix. 26).
Mephibosheth, learning of David’s flight, had ordered asses saddled for himself and his servants,
in order to repair to the king in token of his faithful attachment. Ziba had taken the asses
together with the presents intended by Mephibosheth for the king, come to the latter, and left
the helpless Mephibosheth in the lurch.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 5. “Bahurim.” (See note on chap. iii. 16).
Ver. 6. “On his right hand,” eto. 4e., “On the right and left of the king.” (Keil).


Ver.7. “Come out,” etc., or “ Away, away.” “Thou bloody man.” “He may possibly have
attribute!‘ David the murder of Ishbosheth and Abner,” (Keil.) “ Other, less probably,
think also »! Saul and Jonathan, and even of Uriah.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 8. “The Lord,” etc. “Shimei is so far devout end religious that he ascribes the present
state of things wholly to Jehovah, but he ignores Samuel’s sentence of rejection (1 Sam. xv.)
and otherwise shows a bad spirit.” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary). “Taken in thy
mischief,” rather “thou art in thy misfortune.”


Ver. 10. “What have I?” etc. Lit., “ What to me and you?” i.e, what feelings and desires
have we in common. It is evident that Joab also desired to put Shimei to death. “The Lord
hath said,” etc. “ By allowing him to do so. Since nothing happens against, or without the
will of Him.” (Wordsworth.) In the East they make use of bold figures, much less common
among us, although not altogether unknown. They speak of the mediate cause without saying
it is the mediate cause, and use the very expression which denotes the immediate cause, We
should regard Shimei as an instrument in the hands of Providence. In the East they go a far
greater length. There God has done and commanded all that men do contrary to His command-
ments.” (Jamieson.)


Ver. 12. “Affiiction.” Some translate this word into “ eye,” and understand David to refer
to his tears; but the correct translation appears to be “ ¢nzquity,” on which Erdmann remarks,
“ God’s looking upon his iniquity ” can then only be a gracious and merciful looking.


Ver. 14. “Weary.” Ayephim. Most scholars regard this as the name of a place since, if it
is rendered weary, there is no mention of the place referred to by the word there, Jamieson,
however, remarks that the absence of the particle of motion favours the English version. There
is no other mention of a place of this name but that, as Kiel remarks, applies to many other
places whose existence is never called in question.


Ver. 15. “Men of Israel.” “Very significant : The old malcontents, chap. ii, 8, 9.”
(Thenius).


Ver. 20. “Give counsel,” etc, This is the first cabinet council on record.” (Jamieson).


Ver. 21. “Go in unto,” etc. “ This advice was.sagacious enough. Lying with the king’s
concubines was an appropriation of the royal harem, and, as such, a complete usurpation of the
throne (see at chap. iii. 7) which would render any reconciliation between Absalom and his
father utterly impossible, and therefore would of necessity instigate the followers of Absalom
with all the greater firmness. This was what Ahithophel hoped to attain by his advice.
For unless the breach was too great to be healed, with the affection of David towards his
sons, which might in reality be called weakness, it was always a possible thing that
he should forgive Absalom, and in this case Ahithophel would be the one to suffer
But under the superintendence of God this advice was to effect the fulfilment of the threat held,
over David in chap. xii. 8.” (Keil.) Perhaps Ahithophel was also avenging the wrong done to
Bathsheba. (See note on chap. xi. 3.)


Ver. 22. “The top of the house.” The same roof where David’s look at Bathsheba led
him into the path of sin.


Ver. 23. “The oracle of God.” That is, the counsel of Ahithophel had almost the weight
of a Divine command with both father and son. as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, souk i,





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1x4.
Tur TREACHERY OF Zr1BA,


I. Benevolent acts are often performed from motives of policy and some-
times at another man’s expense. Although it is not our business at all times
to inquire minutely into the sources whence men obtain the means of doing
deeds of charity and apparent kindness, or to be severe in passing judgment
upon them, the interests of truth and justice sometimes demand such an in-
vestigation and sentence. For instance, in olden times, the smuggler and the
highwayman were sometimes lavish in giving of the fruits of their dishonesty to
the poor and needy, but in doing so they gave what did not belong to them and
therefore deserved blame, and not praise. And men now-a-days often
give away what they have gotten by means quite as unlawful, though more
outwardly respectable. We can hardly suppose that in any such case what
is given is given from a right motive. In the case of Ziba, the motive
for his liberality was evidently as corrupt as its source. We cannot believe
that he was prompted by the same feelings as were David’s other benefactors.
The character of the man forbids such a supposition, and we must conclude
that he was farsighted enough to see that David would be victorious,
and credulous enough to think that he would not discover his falsehood. Like
the unjust steward of our Lord’s parable, he could well afford to be generous at
his master’s expense, and although his selfishness might be less palpable, his
dishonesty warrants us in concluding it was quite as real,


II. The best of men often err in their judgment of others. David here looks
upon Ziba as his true friend, and upon Mephibosheth as a most ungrateful man.
In this we know he was altogether mistaken, yet how entirely were appearances _
in favour of his opinion. In these days, in a civilized country, @ man could not
suffer such @ wrong as Mephibosheth here suffered at the hand of David, for he
would not be condemned without an opportunity of defending himself, but in
other forms men often suffer much from the calumny and mistakes of others. A
wicked and designing person, for his own selfish ends, falsely accuses a good man
to his friend, the accused person is ignorant of the charge, circumstances seem
against him, and the very esteem in which his friend has hitherto held him seems
to increase his indignation at the supposed treachery. For, if David had not had so
great a regard for Mephibosheth, he would not have been stung so keenly by his
supposed desertion, and probably would not have go hastily passed so severe a
sentence upon him. In view of his error let us learn to be slow in believing
evil of any, especially of those whom we have hitherto had reason to regard ag
honest and true, and let us be thankful that above and over all human judges
there is One who cannot err in His judgment, because “ He shall not judge by
the sight of His eyes, neither reprove (decide) after the hearing of His ears,
he Judge with righteousness and reprove (decide) with equity.” (Isa.
XL, 5, 4).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 4. Flatterers are generally treachery and ingratitude have been
backbiters ; for it is as easy to them experienced, men are apt to become
to forge slanders of the absent as too suspicious, and to listen to every
to pretend affection and respect for plausible tale of calumny. The
the aa - + + © When much mind being greatly agitated, views


OHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





everything through a false medium,
and we are naturally most precipi-
tate when least capable of judging
aright.—sScott.

There is often more danger, and
therefore more need of caution, with
those who profess an especial regard


for us, than with those who are avowed
enemies. It is the remark of an old
writer (Fuller), that “ Ziba’s gifts did
David more harm than Shimei’s curses,
for those betrayed him into an act of
injustice, whilst these reproved his
patience,” —Lindsay.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH —Verees 5-19.


Summer cursina Davm,


I. The day of adversity is the day when we may look for insult from the
mean-spirited. We hear nothing of Shimei in the day of David’s prosperity,
although the deeds for which he upbraided him had been done long before. A
truly noble man will reprove another from a sense of duty, and will do it with-
out considering what the consequences to himself may be. There are also many
men who, although they will not risk their own safety by rebuking the real or
supposed faults of those who have power to punish them for so doing, have too
much humanity in them to do so when their respective positions are reversed.
But, alas for our human nature! there are those also who, like the cur, which
only barks when he thinks the object of his dislike has no means of defence,
gladly avail themselves of another’s misfortune to charge him with all manner
of iniquity. Although David, as it appears from the narrative, had even now
the means of avenging himself, it is quite evident from what took place after-
wards that Shimei would not have acted as he did if he had not felt tolerably
secure,


II. The manner and circumstances in which an accusation is made, and
the spirit in which it is borne, will often help us to decide as to its truth or
falsehood. If we knew nothing of David before this event, as we know nothing
of Shimei, we should conclude that he did not deserve the character here given
to him. Great as his fall had been on the one great transgression of his life,
the charges brought against him by Shimei, were false—he was not a blood-
thirsty tyrant who had risen to power by injustice and cruelty. But where
there is manifest cowardice, we may safely conclude—without any other proof—
that there is falsehood. ‘The more meekly, too, an accusation is borne, the less
likely is it to be true, Such a spirit as David here displays never goes hand in
hand with such selfish ambition as Shimei here lays to his charge, and the
accuser here is as surely condemned out of his own mouth, and by his own
conduct, as the accused man justifies himself by his humble words and by his
patient forbearance.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 5. There is nosmall cruelty in
the picking out of a time for mischief ;
that word would scarce gall at one
season, which at another killeth. — The
same shaft flying with the wind pierces
deep, which against it can hardly find
strength te, stick upright. ‘The valour
and justice of children condemn it for
injuriously cooperating against their


2B


adversary when he is once down, It 18
the murder of the tongue to insult
upon those whom God hath humbled,
and to draw blood of that back which
is yet blue from the hand of the
Almighty.—Bp. Hall.

Was not David rightly punished by
Shimei’s railing, for his hearkening so
readily to Ziba’s flattering ee not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK It.





he justly spoiled of his honours, who
had so unjustly spoiled Mephibosheth
of his good ?—Trapp.


Ver. 11. Even while David laments
the rebellion of his son, he gains by it,
and makes that the argument of his
patience, which was the exercise of it :
“ Behold my son, which came forth of
my bowels, seeketh my life ; how much
more now may this Benjamite do it ?”
The wickedness of an Absalom may rob
his father of comfort, but shall help to
add to his father’s goodness, It is the
advantage of great crosses, that they
swallow up the less. One man’s sin
cannot be excused by another’s, the
lesser by the greater. If Absalom bea
traitor, Shimei may not curse and
rebel ; but the passion conceived from
the indignity of a stranger, may be
abated by the harder measure of our
own ; if wecan therefore suffer, because
we have suffered, we have profited by
our affliction. A weak heart faints
with every addition of succeeding


trouble; the strong recollects itself,
and is grown so skilful, that it bears off
one mischief with another.—Bp. fall,


Ver. 12. According to His usual
dealing with His poor afflicted. How-
soever, if He bring not down His will
to theirs, He will bring up their will
to His, which will make infinite amends
for all their patience.—7rapp.

We may here learn how falsely and
wickedly men sometimes wrest the
providence of God, to justify their un-
just surmises, and gratify their male-
volent passions. Many who are them-
selves living without God in the world,
have, at the same time, no scruple in
speaking of the calamities which befal
others, as Divine judgments. . . Job’s
friends condemned him on this false
principle, and our Lord censures a
similar rash judgment which some in
His day had formed of certain others,
in consequence of their extraordinary
sufferings.— Lindsay.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 20-28.


AHITHOPHEL’s COUNSEL.


I. When all the plans of the wicked have been worked out, God’s counsel
will be found to prevail. Sometimes a man may permit a thief to escape from
his grasp and run away from him because he knows that in front of him is a


precipice, and that every step he takes brings him nearer to his final fall.


He


has only to let him pursue his own course and he will be the author of his own
ruin. So, when men break away from God, and seem to think they can leave


Him out of their calculations,


He sometimes leaves them entirely to


their own devices, and they become their own destroyers, and at the same time


fulfil the Divine purposes.


At this crisis in the history of the people of Israel


it might have seemed to some good men that God had entirely withdrawn from


the nation, and that these bad men were having their own way
The last assumption was true, but not the first—Ahithophel and


in everything.
Absalom met


with no hindrance as yet in the execution of their designs, but God was looking
on and seeing in them the instruments of His will, as they unconsciously


executed a part of the sentence against David.


(chap. xii. 11),


II. The sin which the parent commits in secret will probably be committed


openly by the child. Children show th
and often go far beyond their teachers i


emselves apt pupils in the school of vice,
n the wrong direction.


None of David’s


virtues were reproduced in Absalom, but his deed of sin was not only closely
imitated but far exceeded, and what the father did in secret the son did not
blush to do in the sight of all Israel. Let no parent or any man deceive himself
by eae that those under his influence will stop in the path of sin just


OHAaP, XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


; :


where ne stopped—it is a downward road and they who set out upon it neither
know where they will stop themselves, nor can they stay the course of those who
may follow in their steps. Let the father or mother who breaks God’s law and
bluslies for the sin, think how likely it is that their child may make a boast of
the same deed of shame.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


It is not improbable that Ahithophel
remembered God’s denunciation against
David by the prophet Nathan, and
therefore considered it a deep stroke of
policy thus to take adwantage of exist-
ing circumstances, to establish the
Divine purposes. He might hope per-
haps, thus to enconrage a belief, that
Absalom was a chosen instrument in
the hands of God for the execution of
His judgments, and consequently, that
all opposition to him was both wicked
and fruitless. But Ahithophel with all
his wisdom, was not wise enough to


not the secret purposes, but the revealed
precepts of God ; that a man may be
fulfillling the former, yet incurring
God’ssevere displeasure by transgressing
the latter.— Lindsay.


Ver. 23. David’s chief counsellors
were God’s testimonies (Psa. cxix. 24)
to these as to the test he brought all
counsel given him, whether by Ahitho-
phel or any other . . . Absalom
and his adherents followed Ahithophel’s
counsel, howsoever, as infallible, because
it was for their purpose.—Zrapp.


know that the rule of man’s conduct is





CHAPTER XVIL


Crrmoa, asp Eixposirory Notzs. Ver.1. “This night.” “The night following David's
flight and Absalom’s entrance into Jerusalem, as we may see very clearly from ver. 16.” (Keil.


Ver. 3. “Bring back,” “ Ahithophel regards Absalom’s government as the only lawful one
to which those fugitives must submit ; their flight is in his eyes an act of insubordination, frox
which they are to be brought back.’—(Erdmann and others). “Tho man whom thor.
seekest,” etc. This is a very obscure phrase, but many expositors understand it to mean—“ the
removel of David is tantamount to the return of all the people to thee.”


Ver. 7.


Ver. 8. “Will not lodge,” etc. So that it would be impossible to surprise and elay him, as
Ahithophel suggests. :


Ver. 9 “Some of them be overthrown,” etc. Hushai suggests that David, from his hiding
place will surprise and defeat Absalom’s followers. “ It is likely that Absalom was not a man
of courage, and Hushai, knowing this, adroitly magnified the terror of the prowess of David and
his men.” (Biblical Commentary).


Ver. 11. “Thine cwa person.” Hushai insinuates that Ahithophel by his counsel had
been indulging in an egotistical vaunting. Ahithophel had said, “ J will arise ; J will come
upon him,” etc. ; and he insinuates also that Ahithophel had been desirous of robbing Absalom
of the glory of the victory over David, and of assuming it to himself. And thus Hushai
practises on Absalom’s vain glory and self love. (Wordsworth).


Ver. .2. “Asthe dew.” ‘This figure, together with that of the sand, fitly sets forth the
swift and quiet settling of the huge host upon the enemy. And with this accords perfectly the
statement of the success of the attack.” (#rdmann).


Ver lo, “Draw it into the river.” A bold hyperbole, designed to produce a momentary
aifeck.
RIA


“ At this time.” “His former advice was good (chap. xvi. 21), but not this.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK iL


een a ee ee a Se


Ver, 14. “The Lord had appointed,” etc. ‘ All that Hushai had said about the bravery
and heroism of David and his followers was well founded. The deception lay in the assumption
that all the people from Dan to Beersheba would crowd around Absalom as one man ; whereas
it might easily be foreseen that after the first excitement of the revolution was over, and greater’
calmness ensued, a large part of the nation and army would gather around David. But such @
possibility as this never entered into the minds of Ahithophel and his supporters. It was im
this that the Divine sentence was seen.” (Keil.)


Ver.16. “The plains,” Rather, the fords or ferries. “Lest the king,” etc. Lit., lest
there be a swallowing up. “ Hither destruction to the king, it will fall upon him, or, if we supply
the subject from the previous clause, that it (the transit) may not be swallowed up or cut off
from the king.” (Keil.)


Ver. 17, “En-rogel.” Or “ Fuller's fountain.” Many identify this with the modern foun-
tain of Job, or Nehemiah, situated at the junction of the Valleys of Kedron and Hinnon, but
Josephus describes the incident recorded in 1 Kings i. 9, as taking place in the royal garden, and
Dr. Bonar identifies En-rogel with the present “ Fountain of the Virgin,” the perennial source
from which the pool of Siloam is supplied. Among other arguments in favour of this view he
remarks that the fountain of Job is a well and not a spring, and that it is too far off from
Jerusalem and from the road over Olivet to Jordan and too much in view of the city to meet
the requirements of this chapter. Mr. Grove (Biblical Dictionary) adds to these considerations
the fact that the Fountain of the Virgin is still the great resort of the women of Jerusalem
for washing and treading their clothes, and that Rogel is generally held to be derived from
the Hebrew Ragel to tread. “ Wench.” Hebrew, the maid servant, one belonging to the high
priest’s household.


Ver. 18. “A well.” “A cistern, then empty. It seems to have been summer time.”
(Wordsworth.)


Ver.19. “The woman.” The man’s wife. “Ground corn.” Groats or peeled barley.
The article before the noun indicates that she was occupied at the time with the grain.
Josephus says she laid fleeces of wool over the men.


Ver, 21. “The water,” t¢. the Jordan. “The circumstances of that distressing flight,
aggravated by the lone hour of midnight, and the roar of the numerous cataracts of the J ordan,
are graphically depicted in Psalms xlii. and xliii., which, although bearing the name of the
sons of Korah, represent vividly and fully the feelings of the disconsolate but pious monarch.”
(Jamicson.) “Mahanaim.” (See on chap. ii. 8.) “Probably a fortified city.” (Keil.)


Ver. 25. “Am Israelite.” Rather, as in 1 Chron. ii. 17, an Ishmaelite. He was an
illegitimate son. “ From the description here given of Abigail as a daughter of Nahash and
sister of Zeruiah, not of David, some of the earlier commentators have very justly concluded
that Abigail and Zeruiah were only step-sisters of David, é.¢., daughters of his mother by
Nahash and not by Jesse.” (Keil). Otherwise we must either take Nahash as a woman’s name


or as another name for David’s father.


Ver. 27. “Shobi.” ‘ Possibly a son of Nahash, the deceased king of the Ammonites, and
brother of Hanun, who was defeated by David (chap. x. 1), and one of those to whom David
had shown kindness when Rabbah was taken.” (Keil). “Machir.” (See chap. ix. 4.)
“Rogelim.” Only mentioned here and in chap. xix. 82, and otherwise unknown.


Ver. 28. “Basona.” Metal vessels for cooking.

Ver. 29. “Butter.” “Rather, curdled milk, which being mixed with the honey, forms @
light and refreshing beverage.” (Song Sol. iv. 11). (Jamieson). “Cheese of kine.” “ Slices
of coagulated milk.” (Jamieson).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1-26,
Tae Deara or AHITHOPHEL,


The account given here of Ahithophel is very brief, and is a record of only a
few weeks of his life, yet it is enough to enable us to see what manner of man
he was. He exhibits in a large degree three characteristics found in most god-
Jess men—in men who are not governed by a desire to please God—who are, in
fact, so far as it is possible, a law unto themselves.


CHAP, 2011 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





sou


‘ I. They are fickle men, If self-interest be the guiding principle of a man’s
life, even his most intimate acquaintance can never be quite certain what kis
next step in life may be. For a man who makes his temporal well-being the
pole-star of life will not be sure long together which is the road to it. What
may seem expedient to-day may appear inexpedient to-morrow, and he will often
be found giving up the pursuit of one prize to follow after another which looks
more tempting. ‘The downward road is not only broad, but it has many by-

aths and windings, so that one never knows exactly where to find him who walks
in it. Only the man who follows after righteousness—who takes God and his
conscience for his guides, can be safely trusted in as unchangeable in the great
ae and direction of his life. Ahithophel had been implicitly trusted by

avid, and there had doubtless been a time when it would have seemed impossible
to others and perhaps to himself that he should even be found among the king’s
enemies, But circumstances had changed, and Ahithophel had changed his
front with them.


Il. They are proud men. This sin is, perhaps, at the root of all ungodliness,
for it was the sin of the angels that kept not their first estate and “is,” says
Thomas Adams, “the first thing that lives and the last that diesin us.” In
some form or other it is a characteristic of all ungodly souls, leading them, as it
did Ahithophel, to be mortified at any depreciation of themselves and their
doings, and oftentimes hurrying them on to some desperate deed of wickedness.
While their wishes are followed and their advice sought before all others, they
are content and active, but as soon as they meet with a check they are driven
by conflicting passions like a vessel struck by cross seas, and like it, shipwreck is
often the end. Like every other form of ungodliness, pride is a foolish passion
which recoils upon him who gives it the mastery over him. The counsel of
Ahithophel had hitherto been as the oracle of God, first to David and then
to Absalom, but a little reflection might have shown him that his present
master was, like himself, governed by no sense of duty or motives of gratitude,
and was not likely to be more true to him than he himself had been to David.
It was then very unlikely that Absalom would give him unlimited control over
the rebellion any longer than his supposed interest was served by it. This is
the way of the world, and he who does not take it into account in the shaping
of his life is us unwise a man as he who puts out to sea expecting no contrary
winds, But it is only in the service of the world that pride can be gratified at
all; there is no place for it in the service of God. Pride, then, in all cases, as
in the one before us, “ goeth before destruction ”—the destruction of the proud
man’s schemes and sometimes of himself.


III. They are cowardly men. What a despicable exodus from the world
does Ahithophel make! He is afraid to face the consequences of his own
actions. Probably the rebellion would never have gone to the length which it
did if Ahithophel had not been associated with it, and now, at the most critical
point he leaves it to the direction of others, because he foresees its defeat.
How different is the attitude of a man who embarks in an enterprise from a
godly motive! He knows that he is not responsible for its success or failure,
but only for his own faithfulness unto the end, and as he has not undertaken
the cause to promote his own ends or gratify personal ambition, his own fate is
the last thing that he thinks about. This enables him to meet reverses with
fortitude and to be defeated without being disgraced. But those who are
prompted by Ahithophel’s motives find themselves in the day of adversity
destitute of that sustaining principle without which there can be no true and
lasting courage, and often close very ignominiously a career which was once
influential and prosperous, poe


HOMILETIV COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK fi.


Ay ons :
i IS hE EER Ue ea


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 5. It was not unwise in Ab-
salom to seek the advice of another
experienced counsellor algo (Prov. xxiv.
6) ; his fault was that he did not know
which advice to follow, and was misled
by high sounding and flattering words.
In choosing counsellors, and in judging
of their counsel, lies great part of the
wisdom of life—Translator of Lange's
Commentary.


Ver. 23. What a mixture do we
find here of wisdom and madness!
Ahithophel will needs hang himself :
there is madness: he will yet set his
house in order ; there igan act of wis-
dom. And could it be possible that
he, who was so wise as to set his house
in order, should be so mad as to hang
himself? that he should be careful to
order his house, who regarded not to
order his impotent passions? that he
should care for his house who cared
not for either body or soul? How
vain it is for a man to be wise, if
he be not wise in God! How pre-
posterous are the cares of idle world-
lings, that prefer all other things to
themselves, and, while they look at
what they have in their coffers, forget


what they have in their breasts !—
Bp. Hall.

This is the first recorded case of
deliberate suicide. Saul, already mort-
ally wounded on the battle-field, fell
upon his sword, but this is the earliest
instance in history of premeditated self-
murder. Perhaps there was a mingling
of remorse with those other emotions
of pride. He had left a master who
loved and valued him, who, indeed,
regarded him as his equal and guide,
and he had transferred his services to
one who, as he now discovered, had not
the wisdom to appreciate his worth,
but preferred the gaudy glitter of
empty rhetoric to the substantial wis-
dom of unadorned speech. This con-
trast, thus forced upon him, might
awaken his conscience to the value of
the friendship which he had forfeited
when he turned against David, until at
length remorse and shame so over-
whelmed him, that, like a deeper
traitor, of whom he wag only the
feeble prototype, he could not endure
life, and hurried himself into eternity.
It never occurred to him to ask, “If I
cannot face David, how shall I look
upon Jehovah ?”—Dr, Taylor,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 25-29


Davip at Mananam.


I. That help is the most effectual which is most fitted to supply the
present need. Although the seat of David’s distress at this time was in the


mind rather than in the body, the


oodwill of his friends in Gilead could have


been expressed in no more acceptable manner at this moment than by giving to


him and his followers food and the means of bodily rest.
past day must have told greatly upon David's body, and he, i


The events of the


That is the true and real sympathy which discerns the most pressing


need of the present moment, and hastens to supply it to the best of its ability.
For those wrung with the deepest anguish of soul cannot ignore the demands of


the body,


and solace to a wounded spirit sometimes enters by this channel.


When Elijah, in bitterness of soul, lay down in the wilderness and prayed for
death, the first step which God took to restore his spiritual strength was to


provide food for his body (1 Kings xix. 6-8),


The goodwill, also, which ig


expressed by such a ministration, is a direct balm to a soul in sorrow,


374


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


i


CHAP. XVII.


II. Even self-love should prompt men to a generous treatment of those
beneath them. ‘The reversals of position which are continually taking place in
human life ought to teach men wisdom in this matter. Human beings are
continually changing places, the servant becomes the master, and he who rules
to-day may soon be at the mercy of those whom he now commands, When
David set the crown of Ammon upon his own head (chap. xii. 30) it did not
seem likely that in a few years he would be a fugitive from his kingdom and
indebted to the good offices of an Ammonite prince. But this bad now come to
pass, and any kindness which he then showed to those whom he conquered was
now returned with interest, or, if he had upon that occasion been unduly harsh,
the magnanimity of Nahash must have smitten him with remorse. If we would
in adversity receive the favours of others without self-reproach we must beware
eer we forget the claims of those over whom for a time God has
exalted us.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


The same God that raised enmity to
David from his own loins, procured
him favour from foreigners : strangers
shall relieve him, whom his own son
persecutes : here is not a loss, but an
exchange of love. Had Absalom been
a son of Ammon, and Shobi a son of
David, David had found no cause of
complaint. If God takes with one
hand, he gives with another; while
that divine bounty serves us in good
meat, though not in our dishes, we have
good reason to be thankful. No sooner
is David come to Mahanaim, than Bar-
zillai, Machir, and Shobi, refresh him
with provisions. Who ever saw any
child of God left utterly destitute ?
Whosoever be the messenger of our
aid, we know whence he comes:
heaven shall want power, and earth
means, before any of the household of
faith shall want maintenance.—Zp.
Hall.

The faithfulness of human love is
not only the copy, but also the means
and instrument of the Divine love,
granted to those who bow humbly
beneath God’s hand and wholly trust
Him.—Lange’s Commentary.

David was received with kindness in
the land of Gilead, on the east of
Jordan, at a time when he was driven by
his own son out of his own capital, Jeru-
salem, in his own tribe. The Jews re-
jected Christ, but the gospel was
gladly received by Samaritans (Acts
viii. 4-6) and by the Gentiles (Acts
xiii, 46-48 ; xxviii. 28).— Wordsworth.


It has been conjectured with much
probability that as the first sleep of
that evening was commemorated in
the fourth Psalm, so in the third is
expressed the feeling of David’s thank-
fulness at the final close of those
twenty-four hours, of which every
detail has been handed down, as if
with the consciousness of their impor-
tance at the time. He had “laid him
down in peace” that night and slept ;
for in that great defection of man
“the Lord alone had caused him to
dwell in safety.” ‘he tradition of the
Septuagint ascribes the 143rd Psalm
to the time “when his son was pur-
suing him.” Some at least of its
contents might well belong to that
night (verses 2, 8). There is another
group of Psalms, the 41st, the 55th,
the 69th, and the 109th, in which a
long popular belief has seen an ampli-
fication of David’s bitter cry, “ O Lord,
turn the counsel of Ahithophel into
foolishness.” Many of the circum-
stances agree. ‘The dreadful impreca-
tions in these Psalms—unequalled for
vehemence in any other part of the
sacred writings—correspond with the
passion of David’s own expressions.
The greatness, too, of Ahithophel
himself in the history is worthy of the
importance ascribed to the object of
those awful maledictions. That
oracular wisdom which made his
house a kind of shrine (chap. xv. 31)
seems to move the spirit of the sacred
writer with an involuntary yp renstis

37


HC iLLiiTIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK It.
en
Everywhere he is treated witha touch whom the religious sentiment of man-
of awful reverence. When he dies, kind has placed under its ban. When
the interest of the plot ceases, and his “ he hanged himself, and died ” he
death is given with an awful grandeur, was buried, not like an excommuni-
quite unlike the mixture of the terrible cated outcast, but like a venerable
and the contemptible which has some- Patriarch ‘in the sepulchre of his
times gathered round the end of those father.’ ”— Stanley,








CHAPTER XVIIL


CrrtioaL awp Exprosrrony Nores. Ver. 1. “David numbered,” ete, “The hardy
Ynountaineers of Gilead came in great numbers at the call of their chieftains.” —(Jamieson.)
Josephus says the army numbered about 4000.


Ver. 6. The situation of this battle-ground is much disputed. Erdmann thinks the name can
be understood only of the forest covering the mountains of Ephraim mentioned in Josh. xvii.
15-18, and Keil agrees with him ; but against this view the majority of writers on the subject
urge the statement that Absalom encamped in Gilead (chap. xvii. 26.), and the fact that the
army returned to Mahanaim after the battle (chap. xix. 3,15). The expression in verse 3, “thet
thou succour us out of the city” is also strongly in favour of the assumption that the battle took
place in Gilead. But if so, there is no satisfactory answer to the question why the site bore this
designation. Mr. Groves suggests (Bib. Dict.) that the forest may have been so called after this
battle on account of the conspicuous part which the tribe- of Ephraim probably took in the
rebellion. Grotius suggests that the name was derived from the slaughter of the Ephraimites by
Jephthah in the neighbourhood (Judges xii. 1-8), and Dean Stanley and others, that there was a
settlement of Ephraim there in connection with the neighbouring brother tribe of Manasseh,


Ver7. “People of Israel.” “This designation, together with the immense slwugntes
efterwards, shows the large extent to which the people were enlisted in this unhappy civil
contest.” —(Jameison.) “Twenty thousand men,” It is commonly supposed that Absalom’s
army was far larger than David’ . . . A great loss, yet not improbable under the circum-
stances. The victory may be accounted for by the superior organisation of David’s troops and
the superior generalship of his army-leaders.”—/( Translator of Lange's Commentary.)


Ver. 8. “The wood devoured.” “Most likely the woody region was full of ravines,
Pies and marshes, into which the flying foe was pursued, and where so many perished.”—
(Keil).


Ver. 9. “Met.” Rather, Came upon, found himself among. “A mule.” Lit. “ upon the
mule.” Josephus says that it was the king's mule. Compare 1 Kings i. 38, 38, 44, where the
riding upon the king’s mule is represented as an act of royal authority.—/( Wordsworth ),
“Oak.” “ Terebinth.? “ Probably Quercus diyilope, Valonia Oak, for which Gilead and Bashan
were famous.”—Jameison. * Caught hold.” Lit., made itself fast in. There is no mention
made here of the hair of Absalom being the cause of his entanglement. hat would be covered
by his helmet.


Ver. 11. “A girdle.” “A girdle, curiously and richly wrought, was among the ancient
Hebrews a mark of honour, and sometimes bestowed as a reward of military merit.” ( Jamieson.)


Ver. 13. “ Otherwise,” etc, Rather, “ Or, had I dealt deceitfully against his life, i.e, have
wrought falsehood by killing him, inasmuch as T should then have acted against the express
prohibition of the king. The words, ‘and nothing is hid from the king, form a parenthesis ;
the apo-dosis begins with, ‘end thou,’” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 14. “Darts.” The Hebrew word means a sharp, wooden staff, “ This explains the
reason for his taking three, whereas one javelin or dart would have been sufficient 3 and also the
fact that Absalom was not slain, notwithstanding their being thrust at his heart. The last
clause of this verse belongs to what follows :—“ Still living in the midst of the terebinth, ten young
men,” etc. ( Keil.)


Ver.17, “aid.” Rather, threw. “The people of the East indicate their detestation of
the mor" of an infamous person by throwing stones at the place where he is buried. The


O@aP. xvii HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.








—_


b Pap is increased by the gradual accumulation of stones which passers-by add to it.” (Jamieson.)
(See also, Joshua viii. 26, 29). “ All Israel.” Absalom’s army.


Ver, 18. “The king’s dale.” The valley of the Kidron, or Jehoshaphat, so called from
the events recorded in Gen. xiv. 17. “No son.” Those mentioned in chap. xiv. 27 must have
died, or were born after the erection of the pillar. “Absalom’s place.” Irt., hand, that
which pointed him out. “ And perhaps, also, as being his handiwork.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 21. “Cushi.” It is uncertain whether this is a proper name for an Israelite, or whether
it signifies a descendant of Cush. “Ihe form of the name rather favours the latter view, in
which case it would suggest the idea of a Moorish slave in the service ofoab.” (Keil.) “He
sent an Ethiopian, thinking it small damage if he received hurt of the king.” ((rotius.)


Ver. 22. “No tidings ready.” “ The message is not a reward—bringiny one,” (Erdmann.)
" Thou wilt not carry @ good message.” (Luther.) “Thou hast not idings suficient,” that is—
“ The Cushite has already carried the news.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 23. “The plain.” The Jordan valley. Those who contend that the battle was fought
on the west of the Jordan, think that this statement confirms their view. But those who favour
the general opinion, contend that if the battle were on the eastern side of the river, Ahimaaz
might still have found a quicker way to Mahanaim by way of the Jordan valley; and that the
expression intimates that Cushi did not take that route which he would have done, had he been
on the west of Jordan,


Ver. 24. “The two gates.” “The outer and inner gate of the fortified city wall, between
which there was a small court.” (Keil.)


Ver. 25. “Tidings.” “ Good tidings.” If the army had been defeated there would have
been many as fugitives,


Ver. 27. “Good man.” One whom Joab would not have sent as a messenger of evil.
Ver. 28. “All is well.” Heb. Shalom, Peace/ The usual Hebrew salutation,


Ver. 33. “The chamber,” etc. A sequestered part of the building to which a person can
retire for meditation and undisturbed solitude.” (Dr. Shaw.) “O my son.” “To understand
this passionate utterance of anguish, we must bear in mind not only the excessive tenderncss, or
rather weakness, of David’s paternal affection for his son, but also his anger that Joab and his
generals should have paid so little regard to his command to deal gently with Absalom. With
the king’s excitable temperament, this entirely prevented him from taking a just and correct
view of the crime of his rebel son, which merited death, and of the penal justice of God which
had been manifest in his destruction.” (Keil.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE CHAPTER,


Tur DeatH or ABSALOM.


I. The wicked are successful only until they have fulfilled God’s purposes,
Hitherto all Absalom’s plans had prospered. Great numbers—possibly a large
majority (see note on verse 7) of the people of Israel—had gathered to his
standard ; he had entered the capital without resistance and had apparently
secured an efficient leader of his army. So far he was allowed to proceed with-
out check, because he was the instrument in God’s hand of executing His
sentence upon David. But his mission was now fulfilled. David had received
his chastisement with becoming submission, and given full evidence of his
sincere and hearty repentance, and now God has no more work for Absalom to
do, and permits so insignificant a thing as the branch of a tree to seize and
hold him until he receives the doom he deserves. ‘This is the lot of all ungodly
men. Unwilling to be workers with God—having no sympathy with His
desires and aims—they shall yet unconsciously work for Him, while they follow
the lead of their own unlawful passions. In this sense God called Nebuchad-
neazar his “servant” (Jer. xxv., 9; xxvii, 6; xliii., 10) because while he was


pursuing his own ambitious designs, he was unconsciously inflicting the
OTS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book fi.


chastisement necessary to Israel’s moral restoration; but when he and his
descendants had accomplished the work their power was given into other hands.
It is ever so when the rulers of the world take “ counsel agawnst the Lord and
against His anointed” (Psa. ii.)—for a time all their plans seem to prosper, but
when they have fulfilled the counsel of the most High, the word goes forth :—
“fHitherto shalt thou come, but no further; and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed.” (Job xxxviii. 11.)


II, There are depths of human affection which no ingratitude can exhaust.
The strength of human love is measured by the demands made upon it. We
cannot certify that the well is deep from which we only draw a few buckets of
water, but if it yields abundantly after an unusual demand has been made
upon it, we know certainly that it must be fed from an almost inexhaustible source,
There is an ordinary natural affection which will bear an ordinary strain,
but gives way under the pressure of great unkindness or even neglect. But,
as in the case of David, there is a human love so strong and deep that no
cruelty can dry it up or even lessen its intensity. If Absalom had been


David’s most dutiful son he could have scarcely uttered a more pathetic
lament over him ; although he had received at his hands as much dishonour


and insult as it was possible for one
heart still acknowledges the tie between them and first
traitor’s life and then bitterly mourns the failure of his effort,


man could thus


man to offer to another, the father’s


tries to save the
Perhaps no


retain his tenderness towards an erring child unless he had


himself been made sensible of the love of the Divine Father towards himself, a
deep consciousness of our own ingratitude to God and of His infinite patience
and mercy to us must make us long-suffering and pitiful, and even loving towards


those who sin against us.


This sense of the love of God is the living spring


whence must flow unfailing springs of tenderness towards all men, and especially
towards those related to us by natural ties, and streams so fed are not dried up
by their wrong-doing. David’s love, we know, was fed by such a fountain, and


hence its depth and strength.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS,


Ver. 4. So meekly doth David submit
himself to the will of his men. Afilic-
tion and meekness grow both on the
same root in a holy tongue.—TZrapp,


Vers. 1-4. Whatever fears of Divine
desertion might occasionally darken
the soul of David, between the day of
his flight and the battle, it is certain
that these visitations of alarm did not
restrain him from prayer. . The
immediate answer to prayer, in the
present emergency, consisted to a large
extent in the spirit of wisdom and
counsel poured out upon David and
his friends. Every step they took was
taken with prudence, while every move-
ment of their opponents was a blunder.
It was wise in David, as we have already
seen, to cross the Jordan and retire to

88


Gilead ; it was wise in him to make
Mahanaim his head-quarters ; it was
wise, as we shall by and bye see to
have a wood in the neighbourhood of
the battle-field ; and it was wise too,
to make the arrangements that were
actually adopted, in expectation of the
enemy’s attack. . . . It is instructive
to mark this ; because there is a lurk-
ing feeling in the minds of some, that
it 1s not so proper to pray for wisdom
as for other and more spiritual gifts,
And yet it is very certain that sound
discretion is one of the gifts we are
most specially invited to ask, and
which believers through the merits of
Christ, may most certainly expect.—
Blaikie.


Vers. 4-8. Easy gained, easy lost


OHAP. XVIII.





Absalom’s example shows that. And
to-day also, in great as in small things,
how can it be otherwise ?—Schlier.


Ver. 10. When the hour of Absa-
loms’s calamities arrived it found him
without asingle friend! Even Saul
had his armour-bearer at his side when
he fled over the mountains of Gilboa ;
but not an armour-bearer, not a
servant, not a friend, not a single
human being attended Absalom as he
hastened from the battle-field. It
could hardly be that he was last of all
his army. Riding on a mule, he must
have made more speed than most.
Many of those who flocked to his
standard must have passed him as he
hung with his hair entangled in the
prickly oak ; but not one would spare
the time to help him: intent on
saving himself, each one left him to
his fate. The world has seldom
witnessed a more striking instance of
retribution than in the fate of
Absalom. As Saul had destroyed all
the wizards in the land, and could
hardly find one when he desired their
help ; so Absalom had made havoe of
the loyal hearts of the kingdom, and
when he needed a loyal heart not one
could he obtain. If he had secured
but one heart by honest means, it
would have served him in better stead
than all that he had stolen.— Blaikie.


Ver. 14. It was the purpose of the
Lord that Absalom should perish, and
in the person of Joab God found a
fitting instrument for carrying His
purpose into effect. How often have
we occasion to remark the intrepid
boldness of the ways of Providence.
The mind of God is a wonderful com-
bination of qualities; with a tenderness
more soft than that of the most affec-
tionate woman, it combines a courage
more fearless than that of the most
iron-hearted warrior. When once it
appears to God that some dreadful
blow is necessary for the greater good
of an individual or the world, He
advances to strike it with an unhesi-
tating and unshrinking step.....
But it is not always when such things





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





must be done that God finds an instru-
ment for doing them, animated by the
same spirit of mingled firmness and
tenderness as Himself. Nay, it is not
often that He does so. Firm men are
not commonly tender; tender men
are not commonly firm. The separa-
tion is the usual result of human
imperfection. The instruments God
has to employ for His sterner judg-
ments are commonly men of little
compassion, of firm nerve, and relent-
less purpose. Such was His instrument
in the death of Absalom.— Blaikie.


Ver. 18. So did Absalom esteem
himself, that he thought it would be a
wrong to the world to want the
memorial of so goodly a person. God
had denied him sons ; how just it was
that he should want a son, who had
robbed his father of a son, who would
have robbed himself of a father, his
father of a kingdom! It had been
pity so poisonous a plant should have
been fruitful: his pride shall supply
nature ; he rears up a stately pillar in
the king’s dale, and calls it by his own
name, that he might live in deadstones,
who could not survive in living issue ;
and now behold this curious pile ends
in a rude heap, which speaks no
language but the shame of that carcass
which it covers. Hear this, ye glorious
fools, that care not to perpetuate any
memory of yourselves to the world,
but of ill-deserving greatness; the best
of this affectation is vanity; the worst,
infamy and dishonour; whereas the
memorial of the just shall be blessed :
and if his humility shall refuse an
epitaph, and choose to hide himself
under the bare earth, God Himself
shall engrave his name upon the pillar
of eternity.


Vers. 9-18. Absalom and David
did each his utmost, and showed what
he could do ; how bad it is possible for
a child to be to the best of fathers,
and how good it is possible for a father
to be to the worst of children ; as if it
were designed to be a resemblance of
man’s wickedness towards God, and
God’s mercy towards man, of which it

879


NOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK TY.





is hard to say which is more amazing.
—Henry.

Heaven-wide opposites that cannot be
reconciled. I. God’s strict righteousness,
when the measure of His holy wrath is
full, and human compassion, when the
measure of Divine patience and long-
suffering is full. II. Rude exercise of
power, which inself-will and recklessness
destroys a human life, and tender con-
scientiousness, which fears to strive
against God by attempts upon a human
life. III. The honour, which man in
his pride prepares for himself before
the world, and the shame, with which
God punishes such pride.— Lange’s
Commentary.

Justly was he lift up to the oak,
who had lift up himself against his
father and sovereign; justly ishe pierced
with darts, who had pierced his father’s
veart with so many sorrows; justly is
he mangled, who hath dismembered
and divided all Israel; justly is he
stoned, who not only cursed, but pur-
sued his own parent.— Bp. Hall.

What is this we hear? that he,
whose life Israel valued at ten thousand
of theirs, should be exchanged with a
traitor’s: that a good king, whose life
was sought, should wish to lay it down
for the preservation of his murderer.
The best men have not wont to be the
least passionate. But what shall we
say to that love of thine, O Saviour,
who hast said of us wretched traitors,
not “ Would God I had died for you!”
but, I will die, I do die, I have died
for you. O love, like thyself, infinite,
incomprehensible, whereat the angels
of heaven stand yet amazed, where-
with thy saints are ravished !—Bp.
Hail.

When the infant of Bathsheba died,
he could say, “I shall go to him 3” but
on this occasion there is no such com-
forting assurance. Absalom’s sun had
gone down in thickest darkness; no
one ray of hope remained to relieve
the gloom of his father’s heart; and
none but those who have been called
to mourn in similar circumstances can
tell how bitter is a grief like that,

But worse than either of these in-
gredients in this cup of anguish would


9


be, as I think, the consciousness in
David’s heart, that if he had himself
been all he ought to have been, his son
might not thus have perished. Was
there no connection between his own
reat trespass and Absalom’s iniquity ?
if he had been less foolishly indulgent,
Absalom might never have rebelled,
Nay, if he had been wiser, even after
Absalom’s fratricidal guilt, probably
he had not stung him into revolt.
Such thoughts and questionings as
these, would, I doubt not, intensify
the sadness of the Psalmist in this
trying hour; and it becomes every
parent among us to see that in his
training of his children, and in his life
before them, there is nothing that may
tend to ruin them. David now pro-
fesses, and I believe with truth, to
desire that he had died for Absalom ;
but that was a vain wish. He ought
to have lived more for Absalom. He
ought, by his own character, to have
taught him to love holiness, or, at all
events, he ought to have seen that
there was nothing in his own conduct:
to encourage his son in wickedness or
to provoke him to wrath; and then,
though Absalom had made shipwreck,
he might have had the consolation
that he had done his utmost to pre-
vent such a catastrophe.— 7 aylor.

We must bring David’s terrible grief
to the standard of God’s Word, and try
to apportion to it in due measure its
need of praise and of blame. ‘l'o begin
with the least agreeable element. We
cannot but be struck with the absence
of what had kept him so calm in the
climax of his public trials—the absenca
of any recognition of the hand of God,
and of any expression of submission to
his will. . His uncontrolled
vehemence confirms a former remark,
that in domestic matters, the Divine
will was not regarded as his rule so
much as in his public undertakings, It
was not so regarded actively in con-
sidering what ought to be done, nor
passively, in bearing what had to be
borne. . . . In the agony of his private
grief he forgot the public welfare of his
kingdom. Noble and generous though
the wish was—“ Would God I had died





OHAP. XVIII.





for thee ”—it was not on public grounds
a wish that could be justified. — Blaikie,

David mourning over Absalom. I.
Wherein it wasright. (a) Parent love
is indestructible. (6) Absalom was not
wholly bad, and his faults.had been
ageravated by the misconduct of
others. (c) David was conscious that
all this was a chastening required by
his own sin. II, Wherein it was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


a ea


wrong. (a) In that it excluded grati-
tude to his faithful and brave followers.
(6) In preventing attention to the
pressing duties of his position. (¢) In
causing him to overlook the fact that
so long as Absalom lived the kingdom
could have no peace. (d) In so far ag
it was not tempered by submission to
the will of Jehovah.—7Zranslator o)
Lange's Commentary.





CHAPTER XIX.


Crrrican ann Expostrory Notes.—Ver. 1, Comp. xviii. 83. The purpose of the informant
was, “it seems, to explain to Joab and the army why the king did not come forth to greet his
returning victorious warriors.” (Erdmann.)


Vers. 2,3. “These men’s hearty participation in the sorrow of their beloved king, for whom
they had perilled their lives, soon changed into gloomy dissatisfaction at the fact that the king,
absorbed in his private grief, did not deign to bestow a look upon them, The description of the
manner in which the troops, thus dissatisfied, returned to the city, is pyschologically very fine.”
(Erdmaenn.)


Ver. 4. “Covered his face.” See on chap. xv. 20. “Aloud voice.” According to the
open and violent mode of expressing grief common in the East (and so also the heroes of the
liliad) ; there are striking illustrations of this in the Arabian Nights.” (Z'ranslator of Lange’s
Commentary.)

Ver, 5. “Thou hast shamed,” etc. “ By deceiving their hopes that thou wouldest rejoice in
the victory.” (Keil.)


Ver.6 “perceive,” etc. Joab dissects David’s words of lamentation with inexorable
cruelty, and draws thence with his intellectual acuteness and the grim bitterness of his rude
nature, consequences that are seemingly logical, yet lay far from David’s nature, though his
conduct looked like what he was reproached with.” (Hrdmann. )


Ver.7. “Speak comfortably.” Lit., Speak to the heart. “There will not tarry one.”
“This threat, grounded as it was on Joab’s unbounded popularity with the army, showed him
to be a dangerous person ; and that circumstance, together with the violation of an express order
to deal gently for his sake with Absalom, produced in David's mind a settled hatred, which was
strongly manifested in his last directions to Solomon.” (Jamieson.)


8. “The people came,” etc., i.¢,, “the troops marched before the king, who (as we
ete from the Mens manifested his good will both in looks and words” (Keil).
“Jsrael.” “It is the other tribes, excepting Judah, that are meant.” (£rdmann.) “To his
tent,” i.¢, gone home. It has been remarked that the use of this expression must have been
handed down from the days of the wilderness-journeyings, when Israel did actually dwell


in tents.


Ver. 9. “At strife,” etc. “The kingdom was completely disorganised. The sentiments
of the three different parties are represented in this and the following verse—the royalists, the
adherents of Absalom, who had been very numerous, and those who were indifferent to the


Davidio dynasty.” (Jamieson.)


.10. “Why speak ye not?” “The people are re-assembled after their dispersion 5
alee “ie pabiisibren -siapeates zealously together about the restoration to the throne, to which
they had raised the insurgent Absalom by the act of anointing. They reproach one another for
doing nothing to restore the king. In their hearis, therefore, they feel the grievous wrong they
have done an anointed of the Lord, as is shown indirectly by their words, in which David's
great deeds and the terrible misfortunes of the time just past are mentioned. here


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK M1.


SSS

Ver. 11. “Why are ye the last?” “The backwardness of Judah in the movement ig
explained by the fact that the insurrection started in J udah, and Absalom was first recognised
as king in Jerusalem,” (Erdmann.) “Conscious that they had ofiended David, and fearing
Absalom’s garrison in Zion, they did not dare to recall him,” (Cornelius or Lapide.)


———





Ver. 13. “Captain of the host,” etc. Very different opinions are held concerning this
action of David. Ewald considers that it “was not only a wise and politic act, but strictly con-
sidered no injustice to Joab, who, long notorious by his military roughness had now shown such
disobedience to the royal command in the case of Absalom as could not be pardoned without
offence to the royal dignity.” On the ether hand Keil says, “It was not only unwise, but
unjust, to give to Amasa, the traitor-general of the rebels, a promise on oath that he should be
commander-iu-chief in the place of Joab; for ven if the promise was only given privately at
first, the fact that it had been given could not remain a secret from J. oab very long, and would
be sure to stir up his ambition, and lead him to the commission of fresh crimes. . . . For
however Joab might have excited David’s anger by slaying Absalom, and by the offensive man-
ner in which he had reproved the king, David ought to have suppressed his anger in existing
circumstances,”


Ver. 14. “The partial severance of the kingdom which David apprehended from the cold-
ness and inaction of Judah, was nearly produced by the sudden impetuosity of their zeal in the
cause of royalty.” (Jamieson.) “Throughout this narrative the tribal feeling which never
wholly disappeared, is apparent, see 12, chap. xx. 4, xvi. 8.” (Translator of Lange’s Commen-
tary.)


Ver. 15. “To Jordan.” From Mahanaim to the eastern bank of the river. Gilgal, weat
of the Jordan below Jericho. “The place consecrated by the historical associations of Joshua
and of Samuel, Josh. v. 9 ; ix. 6; x. 6; 1 Sam. vii. 16 3 xv. 33.” (Wordsworth.)


Ver. 16, “Came down.” From the mountainous table-land into the Jordan valley.”
(Erdmann.)


Ver. 17, “A thousand men.” “To show what force he could raise for or against the king,”
(Jamieson.) “‘ They show the consideration which Shimei enjoyed in the tribe of Benjamin,
and testify that a change had taken place in the former hostile feeling of this tribe towards


David, comp. ver. 31.” (Erdmann.)


Ver. 17. “‘Went over.” Rather, “they hasted or pressed over,” “Before the king,”
rather, tn the presence, etc. They passed over to the eastern bank, probably through a ford.


Ver. 18. “A ferry-boat.” “ Probably rafts, which are still used on that part of the river,
Josephus calls it a bridge of boats.” (Jamieson.) “As he was come over.” Keil, Bunsen
and others refer this pronoun to David and read “as he (the king) was about,” etc. Erdmann
understands it to refer to Shimei. Both place the transaction on the eastern bank of the river,


Ver. 29. “The house of Joseph.” “The rest of the tribes with the exception of Judah,
This designation of the tribes that opposed Judah by the name of the leading tribe (Joseph.
Josh xvi. 1) was as old as the jealousy between these tribes and J. udah, which did not commence
with the division of the kingdom but was simply confirmed thereby into a permanent distinction,
(Keil.) “ He might have employed this phrase in order to exculpate his own tribe, by insinuat-
ing that it was drawn away by the preponderating influence of the great house of J. oseph.”
(Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 22. “Ye sons,” etc. This expression shows that it was Joab’s proposal also,
“Adversaries.” “TLit., a satan (See Numb. xxii, 22 3 comp. Matt. xvi, 23). (Zrdmann.)
‘To-day.” David appears to lay stress upon this word—to-day, the day of restoration when he
himself was receiving tokens of Divine forgiveness. “Iam this day king.” David will show
mercy, not because he has now become king and has the right to pardon, but because he sees in
his restoration to his kingdom a proof of restoration to the Divine favour, and by showing favour
to Shemei as his right will fulfil the obligation of gratitude to the Lord.” (Zrdmana.)


Ver. 24. “Dressed his feet,” etc. Lit., had not “made his feet and his beard,” 4.€., not
washed his feet or arranged his beard. (See Ezek. xxiv, 17). “The Hebrews cut off the hair


on the upper lip and cheeks, but in mourning let it grow carelessly, as on the chin. There are —_


various modes of trimming the beard, but whatever the mode it is always done with the greatest
care, and a small comb is usually carried for the purpose.” (Jamieson).


Ver. 25. “He was come to Jerusalem.” Most modern expositors read here “ When
Jerusalem (i.¢., the inhabitants of the city) came to meet, etc. So Kiel and Erdmann. A few
change the proposition—when he was come from, eto,


Ver. 26. “I will saddle,” etc, This is the literal rendering, but as Erdmann remarks “ the
882 ae


OHaP, XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.











lame prince could not have thought of going himself to saddle the ass, and in all languages the
expression “to do a thing” is equivalent to have it done. It is therefore better to translate
“7 will cause to be saddled.”


Ver. 27. “He slandered.” Mephibosheth had not merely inferred this from David's
words, and the tone in whivh they were spoken, but had certainly found it out long ago, since
Ziba would not delay very long to put David’s assurance, that all the possessions of Mephibosh-
eth should belong to him, in force against his master.” (Keil), “An angel,” etc., t.¢., “he sees
all just as it really is” (Keél) or, “he knows what is truth and right.”” (Zrdmann).


Ver. 29. “ Why speakest thou,” etc. Some see in these words of David a disbelief in the
explanation of Mephibosheth, and others an expression of displeasure against Ziba. But they
seem rather to express David’s vexation at his former hasty decision, and, at the same time, his
lack of courage to confess himself wholly in the wrong on that occasion.


Ver. 29. “have said,” etc. Some expositors think that David here goes back to the first
arrangement mentioned in chap. ix. 7-10., whereby Ziba, as the tiller, would of course have an
interest in the produce. But Keil remarks that the words here are directly at variance with
the first promise : “ J will restore thee all the land of Saul,” etc. The half-measure here adopted
was, says Erdmann, “only a half-exculpation of an innocent man, and David was herein
probably controlled by political considerations, being unwilling to make the respectable and
influential Ziba his enemy.” “Jerome says, that the later Jews believed the division of
David’s kingdom was an act of retributive justice for the unequal measure awarded to Mephi-
bosheth.” (Jamieson.)


Ver. 35. “Can I discern.” Perhaps “ intellectually too dull to be useful as a counsellor.”
(Zrdmann) or simply too weak in body to enjoy the luxuries of a court.


Ver. 37. “Chimham.” According to Josephus, his son. This is confirmed by 1 Kings ii. 7.


Ver. 40. “alf Israel.” “The thousand Benjamites who came with Shimei, and other
Israelites who dwelt near.” (Keil and others).


Ver. 41. “All the men,” etc. The representatives of the other tribes. This is generally
understood to have taken place at Gilgal.


Ver. 42. “Have we eaten,” etc, i.e, Have you reason to be envious of us because we
have enjoyed advantages that yon were deprived of ” (Hrdmann).


Ver. 43. “That our advice,” Both Keil and Erdmann read here “ And was not my word
fiest to bring back the king.” From verses 10 and 11, it appears that they were the first to pro-
pose David’s recall.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-15}
Daviw’s ReEsToRATION.


I. A good man must beware lest sorrow make him forgetful of duty.
David’s deep grief at the death of Absalom made him insensible for a time to
the claims of both God and man. He has now an abundant answer to his
prayer, “O Lord, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness,” yet his
distress at the means by which his desire is accomplished is so great as to banish
from his soul all sense of gratitude to God. The death of the rebel Jeader was
the only way by which peace could be restored to the nation and the throne to
the king, and was therefore an event which David should have regarded from
other points of view beside the parental one. But, omitting to do this, his
natural grief over an unworthy child is allowed to swallow up other emotions
which should also have had a place in his soul, and which would have made
him more alive to his duty to others. David’s fault here is one of which all in
similar circumstances should beware. If we allow our thoughts to dwell entirely
upon a personal loss, we shall forget both our gains and the gratitude and
service we owe to God and our fellow-creatures, and thus show ourselves both
self-willed and selfish. Immoderate and absorbir g sorrow 1s a Saree upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUBL. Book ti





the dealings of God, and no private sorrow can absolve a man from his obliga-
tions to others, especially when he has received from them much sympathy and
devotion.


II. An ungodly man may sometimes administer needed rebuke to a servant
of God. Only men of very high spiritual attainments and well-balanced
character behave themselves at all times in such a manner as to deserve no
reproach from the ungodly. David was perhaps the most godly man of his age,
yet he well-merited the reproof which he now received from the unprincipled
Joab. Although exception may be taken to the spirit of Joab’s words, none
can gainsay their truth. It was altogether unworthy of David to ignore, as he
did at this time, the obligations which lay upon him as the anointed king of
Israel and the object of so much loyal devotion. A great crisis in the history
of the nation had now arrived, and if Joab had not roused him to action the
consequences might have been most disastrous. David showed himself a true
man by not refusing to listen to truth when spoken in anger ; but, having brought
Joab’s accusations to the bar of conscience, and found himself guilty,
he forthwith obeyed the call of duty, although it came to him by s0
unwelcome a messenger. Herein he manifested the true spirit of a child of
God, who should ever be willing to acknowledge himself wrong even when
the admission is felt to be very humiliating. But let us bear in mind it should
be his aim to be so watchful as not to lay himself open to such reproof as
David here merited and received from Joab. It was good neither for David
nor for Joab, that the latter should be able more than once to convict the
better man of wrong, and it is probably never for the interests of righteousness
vhen a man of God and an unspiritual man stand in such a relation to each
other.


III. A policy founded on injustice may have «& short-lived success. It can
hardly be doubted that David’s motive in promoting Amasa was a political
one,—that he ventured upon so unjust a measure out of no regard for his
late enemy, but in the hope of reconciling those who had lately followed
him in the rebellion. It certainly can be regarded in no other light than
as an act of gross injustice to Joab, who had just won the victory which
restored David to his throne. But, though it bore bitter fruit later on,
for the moment it succeeded in bringing back the men of Judah who had
revolted. It seems, however, impossible that those who had been faithful
to him through all his trial could have seen the promotion of Amasa without a
feeling of disappointment and mistrust. Yet the immediate result did not
justify that most certain truth that what is morally wrong can never be
politically right. ‘The real and permanent results of any action may be long in
manifesting themselves, and may often seem at first to be far different from
what they really are, which shows how unsafe it is to make the apparent success
or failure of a deed the standard by which to judge of its morality,


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Vers. 1-8. The sinfulness of un-
measured grief. Wherein it con-
sists and manifests itself. 1. As re-
gards the Lord, in ignoring the gracious
gifts which He sends us along with and
amid our sufferings, aud in frustrating
is gracious design to purify us by

384


suffering from all selfishness, 9, Ag
regards our neighbour, in slighting and
violating the duties of love that we owe
Him. 3. As regards our own heart
and conscience, in reckoning the powers
of spirit apd will by exhausting emotion
and enervating inactivity. II. /ow


CHAP, XIX,


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


a


té must be overcome. 1. Through the
word of earnest admonition, which
gives pain. 2. By energetically rising
up to new life and faithful discharge of
the duties of our calling. 3, By ac-
cepting the consolation and strength
which come from above through the
spirit of God.— _Lange’s Commentary.


Vers. 11-15. Could not David him-
self go back with the victorious arm
he had with him in Gilead? He could,
no doubt ; but—1. He would go back
a8 a prince, with the consent and
unanimous approbation of the people,
and not as a conqueror forcing his way.
He would restore their liberties and
not take occasion to seize them or en-
croach upon them. 2. He would go
back in peace and safety, and be sure
that he should meet with no difficulty
or opposition on his return, and there-
fore would be well satisfied that the
people were well affected to him before
he would stir. 3. He would go back
in honour and like himself, and there-
fore would go back, not at the head of
his forces, but in the arms of his sub-
jects, for the prince that has wisdom
and goodness enough to make himself
his people’s darling, without doubt
makes a much better figure than the
prince that has strength enough to
make himself his people’s terror. y
Our Lord Jesus will rule in those that
invite Him to the throne in their
hearts and not till He is mvited. He
first bows the heart and makes it
willing in the day of His power, and
then rules in the midst of his enemies
(Psa. cx., 2, 3).—Henry.

One of the best proofs, it seems
to me, that David’s schooling was


effectual, is this, that all his family
griefs, his experience of his own evil,
the desertion of his subjects, did not
lead him to fancy that he should be
following a course acceptable to God,
if he retired to the deserts, or ceased
to be a shepherd of Israel, instead of
doing the work which was appointed
for him. It shows how healthy and
true his repentance and faith were
that he again set himself to organise
the people and to fight their battles,
to feed them and rule them with all
his power ;_ when a religious prudence
or self-interest might have whispered,
“Do thy best to make amends by
services to God for the ills thou hast
done; save thyself whatever become
of thy people Israel.” ‘These ungodly
suggestions, the like of which came as
angels of light to so many Christian
monarchs in the middle ages, and sent
them to do penance for their evils and
to seek a crown of glory in monasteries,
may have presented themselves to the
man after God’s own heart. If they
did, he proved his title to the name by
rejecting them. He showed that he
could trust God to put him in the
position that was best for him, that he
knew God did not put him into the
world to provide either for his body or
his soul, but to glorify His name and
to bless His creatures.—/aurice.


Ver. 14. So it will one day be
with the Jewish nation, which is now
serving an Absalom of their own will,
but will then greet the return of their
true king, and say, “Blessed be the
kingdom of our father David that
cometh in the name of the Lord.” .
(Mark xi. 9, 10).— Wordsworth.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 16-40,


Suimel, MEPHIBOSHETH, AND BARZILLAI,


David on his way back to his capital exhibits in his conduct and experience
some of the penalties, the dangers, and the blessings of prosperity.


I, One of its penalties. The man who had most bitterly insulted David in
his day of adversity was the first to render him homage on his restoration to


power.


Taking into account the change in David’s circumstances, we can
26 385


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I.
an T Rasp maa SRS cee OIC


scarcely be doing Shimei an injustice if we assume that he was much
more real when he was cursing and stoning the fugitive king than when
he was asking pardon at the feet of the victorious monarch. It is one of the
blessings of adversity that men then reveal their real feelings towards us; we
are not sought by the hypocrite, or the self-seeker, when there is nothing to be
gained by serving us or professing to esteem us. And on the other hand, all.
who are prosperous to any great extent, must pay the penalty of sometimes
being in doubt about the sincerity of some of those who court their favour
and sound their praises. The more exalted the position, the more likeli-
hood there is of attracting false friends and of finding it difficult to discern
between the real and the seeming in those who surround us, and it is one of
the trials which those in high places must always have to bear. It meets
David on the very threshold of his return to prosperity.


II. One of its dangers. The treatment which David gives to Mephibosheth
exhibits an indifference to the feelings of the son of Jonathan, and an amount
of injustice which are very unworthy of him. Almost all students of the Bible
agree in accepting Mephibosheth’s explanation as the truth of the matter—the
meekness with which he submits to David’s decision reminds us of the unselfish
spirit of his father, and makes us feel sure that he had been the victim of a false
and designing man. How painful, then, must have been the reception which
David gave him, granting him no opportunity of proving his innocence and
fidelity, but dismissing him with the implication at least that he and his
traitorous servant stood on a level in David’s estimation. Various motives
have been assigned to account for David’s unworthy conduct in this
matter. Some think he acted from motives of policy (see critical notes), and
others that he was irritated by the consciousness that he had been deceived
by Ziba, yet was unwilling to confess himself wrong. But in whatever light
we regard his action we must find David guilty of an arbitrary exercise of rights
which might belong to him legally, but which were no more morally his than if
he had been ina private station. If Mephibosheth had had only the ordinary
claim of a subject, David could have had no moral right to dispose of his case in
this summary manner, and deprive him of half his estate without good reason,
But it would have been difficult for David to find any man in the land to whom
he owed so much as to the son of Jonathan, and his obligation was not lessened
but increased by the error of judgment into which he had lately fallen. The
fact that he had passed so unjust a sentence upon him on the former occasion
made it his duty now to make every reparation in his power, instead of
which he treats him with a haughty indifference, if not with disdain. This in-
difference to the feelings and claims of those whose destinies are in their hands
is a sin to which men in power are especially prone ; when their deeds are not |
liable to be called in question by their fellow men they are apt to act as though
their will was the rule of the universe, and to forget that the higher the posi-
tion the greater the responsibility. David at this time seems to have thus
fallen into this common temptation.


III. One of its greatest blessings. There can be no more blessed gift of
wealth or power than the ability which it affords a man to show gratitude
to those who have befriended him in his time of need. It is always
more blessed to give than to receive, but it is a special joy to a grate=
ful heart to repay those whose kindness has cheered it in the dark
days of sorrow, and to show them that we know how to value the most
precious gift which one human creature can bestow upon another. David
experienced this joy when he found himself in a position to say to
aoe : Whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that will la unto thee,” and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEE,





we may be sure that he did not fail to fulfil his promise to the son, although


unable to do so to the father.


We can but desire that he who rewarded


Barzillai’s fidelity in the person of Chinham, had remembered to repay Jonathan’s
love by being generous to Mephibosheth. In this inconsistency of David—
in this mingling of dutiful remembrance and ungrateful forgetfulness, we see


how far removed are the best
marked the Perfect Man, Christ Jesus,


men from that symmetry of character which


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 30. It is just a soul capable of
such noble self-denial that feels most
keenly the sting of any suspicion of its
love or fidelity, and as no further
reference is made to Mephibosheth in
the sacred narrative, especially as
David gives no charge concerning him
to Solomon at his death eight years
later, it is not unlikely that he did
not long survive the grief and pain
that Ziba’s treachery caused him.—
Taylor.

Mephibosheth thought, perhaps, of
the word of the law, that God visits
sins on children unto the third and
fourth generation.— Peter Martyr.


Vers. 31-40. The picture and ex-
ample of a venerable and pious old
age. 1. Blessed of God, it devotes
the temporal goods it has received to
the service of compassionate brotherly
love, far from all avarice ; 2. Honoured
by men, it desires not the vain honour
of this world far from all ambition;
3. Near the grave, it longs only for
home, far from all disposition to find
blessedness in this life; 4. But as
long as God grants life, even with
failing powers it still serves the Lord
and His kingdom, and in this service
honours him by the devotion even of
its dearest—far from all self-sceking.
—Lange’s Commentary

Baraillai’s words remind us of the
influence that age produces upon men.
I. A mellowness of heart. “here is
a feeling soft and subdued running
through the words of this patriarchal
Gideonite. Old Time has, I think,
generally this effect on the hearts of
men, ‘ Men, like peaches and pears,”
says Holmes, “grow sweet a little
while before they begin to decay. I


don’t know what it is—whether a
spontaneous change, mental or bodily,
or whether it is through the experience
of the thanklessness of critical honesty,
but it is a fact that most writers,
except sour and unsuccessful ones, get
tired of finding fault at about the time
they are beginning to grow old. At
thirty we are all trying to cut our
names in big letters upon the wall
of this tenement of life; twenty years
later we have carved them or shut up
our jack-knives. Then we are ready
to help others and care less to hinder
any, because nobody’s elbows are in
our way. Do you know that in the
gradual passage from maturity to help-
lessness the harshest characters have
sometimes a period in which they are
gentle and placid as young children ?
I have heard it said, but I cannot be
sponsor for its truth, that the famous
chieftain, Lochiel, was rocked in a
cradle like a baby in his old age.”
Time produces upon men.—II. An in-
disposition for exertion. It seems
benevolently arranged that, as the
limbs get feeble and incapable of action,
the inclination to exertion decreases
too. ‘The patriarch, therefore, gets
reconciled to his position. The mind
ceases to will what the body is inca-
pable of performing. A craving for
rest creeps over the frame as years
advance. It is well that it should be
so, in order that the soul may calmly
ponder upon questions of its imperish-
able interests and that death may come
with no sudden shock. If age brings
on this indisposition to effort, let us
work while we can—work while the
mind is active and the limbs are blithe.
Time produces upon men—III. A lack
of interest in the world. At one time .


Leh
«


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK





an invitation to attend in state a king instinct glowing in the breast of an
to his capital would have been a very old man. After the romantic wander-
strong temptation to this very great ings of a long life, time brings the
man, but now such an invitation has spirit back to the home of the child-
no attraction ; he declines the king’s hood, and makes it yearn to sleep the
pressing offer. To an old man the long sleep of death by the side of
world is a plum that has lost its bloom “father and mother.” Here is a re-
—an orange that has been sucked till buke to worldliness. What if you
the peel is dry. Time produces upon amass a princely fortune? Whilst it
men—IV. An incapacity for earthly will not make you happy, either m
enjoyments. Years not only stealaway the morning of your youth or the
our strength, but our relish for earthly zenith of your noon, it will be utterly
pleasures. In this I see divine bene- worthless to you if you live to old age.
volence, for it means a loosening of Here is too, an argument for religion.
the bonds that link us to this mortal Form an alliance with those eternal
state. Time produces upon men—V. principles that will make your spirits
An interest in the dead. “Let thy young and strong amidst the infirmities
servant, I pray thee, turn back again of age—Dr. David Thomas.

that I may die in my own city and be The subject of verses 41 to 43 belongs
buried in the grave with my father to the next chapter.

aod my mother.” Here is the filial


CHAPTER X3


° Carrroan AND Exposrrory Norzs.—‘'There,’ “In Gilgal, at the assembly of the tribes;
the word indicates directly the place ; indirectly the time of the following history.” (Erdmann),
“A man of Belial’ A worthless man. ‘ He was,” says Luther, “one of the great rogues
of the high nobility, who had a large retinue among the people, and consideration or name, as
Catiline in Rome.” “A Benjamite.” ‘Probably one of the rabid Sauline party, if he were
rot, as is possible, of Saul’s own family.” (Erdmann) “To histents.” “See on Chap. xix. 8.”


Ver. 2. “Went up.” “From the plain of Gilgal to the hill country of Ephraim.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 3. “Idving in widowhood.” Lit. In widowhood of life. Probably meaning so long
as their lifetime, or it may mean during the lifetime of David. ‘They were not divorced, for
they were guiltless ; but they were no longer publicly recognised as David’s wives ; nor was
their confinement to a sequestered life a very heavy doom in a region where women have never
been arzustomed to go much abroad.” (Jamieson).


Ver. 4. “Said to Amasa.” Thus appointing him to the position which he has promised
him in chap, xix. 13.


Ver. 5. “He tarried,.” ‘Hither because he met with distrust and opposition among the
people, and could not so soon execute his commission ; or, because he did not wish to make
haste, and nourished in his breast traitorous designs.” (Hrdmann),


Ver. 6. “Abishai.” “ Joab’s was still David’s official commander-in-chief, but David speaks


to Abishai rather than to him, because he wished to have nothing to do with the latter on —


account of his crabbedness, and further knew that he would take Amasa’s appointment ill.” —
(Erdmann). “Servants, soldiers.” ‘The standing army in distinction from the levy of the

ple for which Amasa was sent.” (Hrdmann). “scape us.” The verb means “ to take
away,’ and the phrase has been variously rendered, escape, turn away, and tear out, our eye.
This latter rendering (adopted by Keil, Thenius and others) is taken to be equivalent to
“geverely injure us.” But it seems more probable that one of the other readings is more
eorrect, and that the expression means to elude the sight—to eacape.

388


HAP, xx, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEE.
Le


Ver. 7. “Joab’s men.” Some have thought it strange that those who went out with
Abishai should be so designated, and have, therefore, without sufficient reason, substituted
Joab’s name for that of his brother in verse 6. But from what follows, Joab appears to have
marched with his brother to the field, “Cherethites,” etc. (see on chap. viii. 18). “The
mighty men.” Gibborim. “The six hundred heroes mentioned in chap. xv. 18.” (Erdmann.)


Ver, 8. “The great stone,” etc. Doubtless an isolated rock of considerable size. Gibeon
lay north-west of Jerusalem, in the mountains of Ephraim, whither Sheba (verse 2), had gone.”
(Lrdmann). “Went before,” rather came towards. “Joab’s garment.” “The minute
description of Joab’s military dress and arms is intended to make it clear how he could suddenly
kill Amasa without anyone’s noticing his purpose.” (Zrdmann). “His loins.” “This state-
ment receives ample illustration from the Assyrian sculptures on which warriors are depicted,
their swords not upon the thigh, but on the loin or side.” (Jamieson.) “Fell out.” Josephus
explains that Joab purposely allowed it to drop out so that stooping to raise it at the moment
when he saluted Amasa, he might hold it naked in his hand ready for action, without exciting
suspicion.


Ver. 9. “By the beard.” A mode of salutation in the East. Kissing the beard is also a
token of great respect and goodwill. “My brother.” “He was his first cousin.” (Biblical
Commentary).


Ver. 10. “Fifth rib.” “Rather the abdomen.” (Keil), “Joab and Abishai.” “The
connection of the two favour the view that Joab had gone out at the head of the body of
troops under Abishai.” (Z£rdmann),


Ver. 11. “By him,” 2.¢,, Amasa, no doubt by Joab’s command. “ He that favoureth,”
etc. This was said to the men whom Amasa had gathered, and who came on ignorant at first
of their leader’s fall, and then of the cause of his death. This plan of Joab identifies his cause
with that of David.


Ver. 14. “Abel.” Lit., meadow, and the name of several places in Palestine, but from
its proximity to Beth-Maachah (with which it is sometimes joined, verse 15, 1 Kings xv. 20,
2 Kings xv. 29), known to be the present Christian village of Abilel-Kamh (wheat meadow) in
the extreme north of the country.


Ver. 15. “They.” “Him.” Evidently the first pronoun refers to Joab and his followers,
and the second to Sheba, “A bank.” “The first preparation for a siege was the construction
of a causeway, or embankment, for wheeling the battering rams and other military machines
cluse to the walls,” (Jamieson). “It,” 4.¢., the embankment, “ in the trench,” rather, by the wall,


Ver. 16. “A wise woman.” (See chap. xiv. 2). Some suppose her to have been, like
Deborah, a judge or leader.


Ver. 18. “They were wont,” etc. These words are variously explained, but the most
natural construction appears to be that Abel had formerly been famed for the wisdom of its
inhabitants, and that it was unfair to besiege the city without consulting them. Erdmann
observes that ‘negotiation before laying siege to a city (and a foreign city, indeed), such as the
woman here refers to, is prescribed in the law. (Deut. xx. 10 sq.q, comp. Numb. xxi. 21.)


Ver. 19. “A mother.” A chief city. (See on chap. viii.1), The villages surrounding
such a.city were called her daughters. (See the margin in Numb, xxi. 25, 32) ete.


Ver. 21, “Hath lifted,” etc. Some have supposed that the inhabitants of Abel now learned
for the firat time of the guilt of Sheba.


Ver. 22. “The woman went,” etc. To report the result of her parley, and to counsel the
inhabitants to give up Sheba. “And Joab returned,” etc. “The issue of this occurrence,
how David received the victorious Joab, is omitted in our present narrative ; he was, doubtless,
now also forbearing to a man who as a soldier was indispensable to him, and who, with all hix
punishment—deserving savagery, always meant well for his government.” (Hwald.)


Ver. 23. “The enumeration of David’s cabinet is here given to show that the governmenh
was Te-established in its wonted course.” (Jamieson.) ‘“Benaiah” (see on chap. viii. 18).


Ver. 24. “Adoram,.” Or Adoniram. “The nature of his office is indicated 1 Kings v. 27 sq
compared with 1 Kings iv. 6.” (Hrdmann.) He continued in office until the time of Rehoboam
(see 1 Kings xii. 18, and is called Hadoram in 2 Chron. x. 18).


Ver. 25. “Ira.” Not mentioned elsewhere. For his office see on chap. vill, 18, where
David’s sons are mentioned as holding such a position. The other names and offices enumerated
are alike in both places,

889


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : SAMUEL.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Chapter xiz.,
THE REBELLION OF SHEBA.


I. The fidelity of those who serve from self-interest cannot be depended on
fora single day. All the acts of the men of Israel at this time seem to have
been inspired by one consideration only, viz., What line of policy looks most likely
to promote our interests? There was no question as to their duty, either to God
or man. Hence they rallied to the standard of Absalom when he bid fair to
overturn the throne of his father, returned to David when they found they had
embarked in a losing cause, and revolted again from him the first moment all
did not fall out in accordance with their wishes. So little are those to be
depended on who have no hivher rule of life, and so greatly are those to be
pitied who put their trust in them. “ We have ten parts in David,” said they,
and, almost in the same breath, We have no part in him. To-day, Hosanna,
to-morrow, Cruci/y.— Henry.


II. The unreasoning discontent of the multitude is the opportunity of the
selfish and ambitious leader. ‘There are always men quick to take advantage
of the passion and ignorance of their fellow creatures, and to use them as
stepping stones for their own aggrandisement. But for the foolish petulance of
the men of Israel on this occasion, this son of Bichri would have never had even
the pitiful notoriety which he thereby acquired ; and there have been many like
him in all ages who have only risen from obscurity by similar means. It would
have been indeed for the peace of the world if all such reckless men had met
with as speedy a downfall as did Sheba, but they have often lived long enough
to involve many more ina common ruin. Before men give themselves up to the
leadership of another they should consider well whither he is leading them and
what guarantees he can give that his motives are pure. But they cannot do this
if they themselves are under the dominion of pride and envy, as the men of
Israel were at this time. Where any unruly passion is in the ascendant, the
voices of reason and conscience are not listened to, and downfall of some kind
must come.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Chap. xix., vers. 41 to 43. In the
conduct of the different tribes on this
occasion, we may see a faithful picture
of what is every day to be witnessed in
the world around us. While some
men, although convinced of the proper
course to pursue, are still talking
about their intentions—are consulting
with their own interests—resolving,
and hesitating, and again resolving—
yet, after all doing nothing effectually;


others like the tribe of Judah, when
once persuaded of their duty, admit
no farther argument on its expediency,
but act with promptitude and decision.
This forward zeal, however, gave great
umbrage to the rest of Israel, for, like
other worldly characters, it was not so
much the good itself that they desired
to see done, as to have themselves the
credit of performing it.—Lindsay,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 8-18,


Davin’s Return to J ERUSALEM AND THE MURDER OF AMASA,


I The consequences of violating God’s laws are not in this life confined to


him who violate them. David had no


890


sooner returned to his city and hig


an a
Rigs NA dealt
ANA Lee NY


OHAP. xx. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,





palace than he found himself confronted with a difficulty arising out of a double
transgression, As we have before had occasion to remark (see on 1 Samuel i., 2,
etc.), polygamy was a violation of God’s intention with regard to marriage,
which brought great sorrow upon David and upon others. The practice of
concubinage seems a much farther remove from the Divine ideal, and a nearer
approach to the customs of the heathen nations, and must in any case have often
been felt to be a hardship by the woman. But David’s great transgression en-
tailed upon the women of his harem a heavier penalty than was common to
such a position. It it true they were Eastern women, and therefore less alive
to their humiliation by Absalom than women of this age and nation would be in
similar circumstances, but they were women, and we have no reason to suppose
they were entirely destitute of the instincts and desires proper to their sex.
Upon them the consequences of David’s transgression fell very heavily, and
endured to the end of life. The certainty that in this sense, as in many others,
no sea liveth to himself, ought to be a strong motive to keep us from forbidden
pat


II. The consciousness of even pardoned guilt makes one in power weak and
cowardly towards similar offenders. One of the most bitter elements in David’s
cup of affliction after his fall must have been to see his own evil deeds so
faithfully imitated by those around him, and to feel unable to deal out
the punishment they deserved. Amnon closely copied his adultery and
Absalom his act of murder, without his being able to deal with either as he
could have done if he had himself been innocent. And now when he probably
hoped he had reaped the last of the harvest from that fatal sowing of sin, he
sees his deed reproduced by Joab with startling similarity. The master had not
scrupled to remove by violent means one who stood in his way, and it could
not be expected that his less scrupulous servant would falter on the same line
of action. Truly Joab bad known the way before (chap. iii. 27), but he could be
bolder now that David had gone the same road. David had been able to declare
himself guiltless before the Lord from the blood of Abner, but he is silent
concerning the death of Amasa, remembering without doubt how he had once
commanded Joab to commit as cowardly acrime. It must have surely been
this sense of blood-guiltiness which sealed his lips at this time, and almost
compelled him henceforth to accept in silence whatever measures Joab thought
fit to adopt, and to leave to his son the odious task of reckoning with him,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14-26.
Tar DratH OF SHEBA.


I. A peace-maker is a blessing, both to the victors and the vanquished,
A victorious commander may deservedly win great praise when he wins a great
battle, because he may really be the means of bringing peace to a nation. Yet
the blood of many may cry against him, because he can only gain his end by
the loss of many, and the tears and maledictions of those whom he defeats
mingle with the rejoicings of those whom he saves. And not only so, the blood
of many of his own faithful followers must flow to win him reputation and
success, so that, if he be a truly humane man, he will feel indeed that “there is
nothing so terrible as a victory except a defeat,” and will rejoice greatly if
wrongs can be put right in any other way. Greatly are they to be held in
honour, who, by wise words and deeds, avert so great a catastrophe as war,
especially that most terrible form of it—civil war. It was Joab’s good fortune
to have such a mediator at the siege of Abel—one who had sara good


HOMILETIVU COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK II.








sense and influence enough with both parties to put an end to the strife withous
injury to the innocent on either side. For this good office this nameless woman
deserves to be held in honourable remembrance now, as she doubtless was by her
fellow-countrymen of her own day. To her must be awarded the blessing of the
peace-makers—to be “ called the children of God.”


II. The life of one man is sometimes justly sacrificed to secure the life of
many. Sheba had no reason to complain that the citizens of Abel bought their
own safety with his head. Although it is cowardly and wrong at all times to
act upon the doctrine of Cairaphas (John xi. 50) and save many at the expense
of one, yet it is right to do this when the one man is the sole cause of the
impending calamity, when the mass of the people have been misled and injured
' by him, and when there can be no safety for them while he lives. Such appears
to have been the state of things in relation to Sheba and the inhabitants of
Abel, and therefore they only acted in accordance with a recognised and just
law when they delivered his head to Joab.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 20. Joab, in the prosecution
of war, does not seem chargeable with

eculiar “swiftness to shed blood,”
inasmuch as he could exclaim, as if
indignant of the imputation, “Far be
it from me that I should swallow up or
destroy!” But when his private and
personal interests were affected, he
then gave full scope to his furious pas-
sions, without regard either to God or
men. A man’s general conduct may
be good, and even exemplary, so that
on the whole he may move in the
world with reputation and usefulness,


lead him on to crime and infamy,—
Lindsay.

Spiritually the case is ours; every
man’s breast is as a city inclosed ;
every sin is as a traitor that lurks
within those walls. God calls to us
for Sheba’s head, neither hath he any
quarrel to our person, but for our sin.
If we love the head of our traitor
above the life of our soul, we shall


justly perish in the vengeance. We
cannot be more willing to part with
our sin than our merciful God is to


withdraw his judgments, —Bp. Hail,


yet one indulged lust or passion may





CHAPTER XXL


CriTicaL aND Exposrrory Norzs.—Ver. 1. “Then.” Rather, And, consequently there ts
nothing to indicate the period when the events here recorded took place, and many commenta-
tors consider that the words, “in the days of David ” are “ expressly inserted to denote that they
are not narrated in their chronological order.” (Biblical Commentary). Keil says, “ This occur-
rence certainly did not take place in the closing years of David’s reign; on the other hand, it is
evident from the remark in verse 7, to the effect that Mephibosheth was spared, that it happened
after David had received tidings of Mephibosheth.” “Three years.” “For the first two
seasons the scarcity did not cause much anxiety, since David and the officers of his government
probably regarded it as the natural consequence of neglecting the cultivation of the land during
the troubles occasioned by Absalom and Sheba, and hoped that the internal resources of the
country would be sufficient to supply the wants of the population.” (Jamieson), ‘His bloody
house,” rather “the house of blood-guiltiness.” This expression is in apposition to Saul, and
determines the meaning more precisely.” (Keil). “He slew.” Nothing is said elsewhere of -
this deed. The covenant made with these people is described in Josh. ix. 3, ag. q.


Ver. 4. “No silver,” etc, ‘“ Money payments as a compensation for blood-guilt were very
tommon among many nations, Thus the law of Edward the Elder, in England, regulated the
392


OHAP, XXY, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,
ae





wer-gyld to be paid by the slayer upon the principle, “If anyone be slain, let him be paid for
according to his birth.” (Bvblical Commentary). “Neither for us,” etc., rather, not to us does
it pertain to kill, ete., t.¢., “itis not permitted us without more ado to execute blood-revenge for
the murder of our people.” (Erdmann), “What ye shall say,” etc, “Assuming the
necessity of blood-expiation.” (Hrdmann).


Ver. 5. “The man that consumed,” etc, “It appears then that Saul had broken the
power of the tribe by his bath of blood.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 6. “Seven men,” eto “A sacred number, denoting the performance of a work of
God.” (Keil). “ According to Numb, xxxv. 31-33, homicide was to be expiated by death
but the death of the murderer, not of his kindred ; it is, however, intimated in verse 1, that
Saul’s kindred had shared in the murderous deed. (Translator of Lange's Commentary).
“ Hang thee up,” etc., i.e, Crucify them. “Whom the Lord did choose” or, the chosen of
the Lord. Exception has been taken to this designation of Saul, and other renderings have
been proposed, But the expression seems to indicate that “if Saul was the chosen of the
Jehovah, his actions ought to have been more in accordance with his divine election (Keil), and


that all the more must there be such expiation to the Lord for his sin as the Lord’s anointed.”
(Erdmann). ;


Ver. 7. “The king spared,” etc. “The calamity brought upon Israel by Saul’s breach of
the oath to the Gibeonites would make David doubly careful in the matter of his own oath to
Jonathan.” (Biblical Commentary). “Rizpah.” (See chap. iii. 7). “Michal.” Nearly all
commentators agree that this is an error of memory or a copyist’s mistake, seeing that Merob,
Saul’s eldest daughter, was the wife of Adriel, and it seems almost certain that Michal had no
children. (See on chap. vi. 23). Jamieson says that Kennicott has shown that two Hebrew
MLSS. read Merab instead of Michal.


Ver. 9. “The hill,” ete, In or near Gibeah, the home of Saul, (1 Sam.x. 5). “Before
the Lord,” i.¢., ina place devoted to the worship of Jehovah. ‘It is true that God had said
that the children should not be put to death for the parents (Deut. xxiv. 16); but this law,
while it controlled the action of the magistrate, did not restrain God, who required and accepted
the expiation.” (Wordsworth).


Ver. 9. “The barley harvest.” “In the valley of the Jordan this takes place in the last
half of April. (Jamieson.)


Ver. 10. “Until water dropped,” etc. The early rain usually began in October. But rain
may have been sent earlier as a token of forgiveness. The reason of the bodies being left
unburied, contrary to Deut. xxi. 23, probably was that the death of these men being the expiation .
of a violated oath they were to remain until the fall of rain should give the assurance that God’s
anger was appeased and the national sin forgiven.” (Biblical Commentary.)


Ver. 14. “And the bones,” etc. Although not expressly stated, it is implied that the
remains of the crucified men were interred at the same time and place, if not actually in the
same tomb. “Zelah.” The situation of this city is unknown,


Ver. 15. “Moreover,” or, and. “Yet,” rather, again. “This refers generally to earlier
wars with the Philistines, and has probably been taken without alteration from the chronicles
employed by our author, where the account which follows was attached to notices of other wars.”
(Keil.) ‘Probably this fragment belongs chronologically in the group chap. v. 18-25, in favout
of which is the fact that David is here already king of all Israel, since he is called (verse 17)
She light of Israel.” (Erdmann.) But see also on verse 17.


Ver. 16. “Ishbi-benob.” Many scholars understand this name to mean “the dweller on
the rock.” If this rendering be correct, he probably lived in some mountain fastness. “The
giant,” rather Raphah, a proper name for the ancestor of the giant race described in Deut. ii,
11, 20, etc. “Three hundred shekels.” About eight pounds, half the weight of Goliath’s
(1 Sam. xvii. 7). “A new sword.” The last word is not in the Hebrew and the better
rendering is “he was newly armed.”


Ver. 17. “The light of Israel.” ‘“ David had become the light of Israel from the fact that
Jehovah was his light (chap. xxii. 29), or, according to the parallel passage in Psa, xviii 29,
that Jehovah had lighted his lamp and enlightened his darkness, i¢., had lifted him out of a
state of humiliation and obscurity into one of honour and glory.” (Keil.) This address of
David’s men seems to be against the assumption that the event here narrated occurred early in
David’s reign.


Ver. 18. “Gob.” In 1 Chron. xx, 4, this is said to have taken place at Gezer. Itis
gisctally supposed Gob was a small place near Gezer. “ Sibbechai.” mame he 1 Chron,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK i.





xxvii. 11, the leader of a division of David’s army. “Hushathite.” “In 1 Chron. xxvii. 1],
Sibbecai is said to have belonged to the Zarhites, that is (probably) the descendants of Zerah,
of the tribe of Judah. So far this is in accordance with a connection between this and Hushah,
@ name apparently of a place (1 Chron. iv. 4), in the genealogies of Judah. (Smith’s Biblical
Dictionary). It seems quite as probable that Hushah was the name of an ancestor. Josephus
says that Sibbechai was a Hittite. ‘“‘Saph,” or Sippax, (1 Chron. xx. 5). Miss Rogers, in
Domestic Life in Palestine, says, “I saw a number of Arabs belonging to the valley of Urtaa,
with their chief, a tall, powerful man, called Sheikh Saph, whose family, according to social
tradition, has for ages been distinguished for the height and strength of its men.”


Ver. 19. This verse in the original says that Hinathan slew Goliath, etc., but it is evidently a

ecord of the same occurrence as that narrated in 1 Chron. xx. 5, which is most likely the correct

reading, although, according to Gesenius, Goliath means simply a stranger, an exile, and might,
therefore, have described all the members of a family or tribe.


Ver. 20, “Six fingers,” etc. Such men have been met with elsewhere. Pliny (Hist.
Nat. xi." 43), speaks of certain six-fingered Romans (sedigiti), This peculiarity is even here
ditary in some families. (Keil). “Was born,” eto., t.¢., was also a descendant of Raphah.
Shimeah, or Shammah, Jesse’s third son. (1 Sam. xvi. 9, chap. xiii. 3).


Ver. 22. A postscript, summing up the preceding verses. “By the hand ef David*
Evidently only in the sense that he commanded the heroes who slew these giants,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-9.


Savt’s Breaow or CovENANT WITH THE GIBEONITES PUNISHED IN HIS


DESCENDANTS,


I.—Natural laws work or rest as God’s servants. The Bible refers all
the workings of the natural world to the will of God. It claims for Him the
power to set in motion or to stay the operation of any one or of all the forces of
nature as He sees fit. They are not the masters of our earth or of man, but
servants obeying Him who is Lord of all. It is true that man will sometimes
ignorantly or wilfully pervert and arrest the action of those laws which are to
some extent within the reach of his influence, but this does not affect their
divine origin, When, therefore, certain ordinary gifts of nature are withheld
—when, as was most likely the case in the present instance, rain or sunshine
do not visit the earth and quicken the seed into life and growth, those who
believe in the God of the Bible refer the event, not to an impersonal law, but to
a living Ruler of the universe. Indeed, apart from all scriptural teaching, it
seems impossible for men who think to come to any other conclusion, for laws
necessarily include a law-giver, and it is impossible to conceive of such a being
as in any way fettered by his own methods of working. David was a true
ee as well as a devout believer, when he looked to the Lord as the oniy

eing who could give rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, or command the
pos to withhold their blessings and so bring dearth and famine upon the
and.


_ Ul. The cause of the suspension of beneficent natural laws is to be found not
in God but in man. When David inquired of the Lord concerning the repeated
dearth in the land, he evidently did so with the conviction that the cause of the
dispensation was to be found notin the good nature of God but in the bad
nature of man. He had formed such an estimate of the character of Jehovah
as to be sure that He would not afflict his children willingly, or withdraw from
them any of His gifts out of caprice, still less out of a desire to cause them pain
or suffering. For no good human creature would be guilty of such conduct, and
it would be blasphemy to ascribe to the ever-blessed God that which we should
euler a a fellow man. If a loving father withholds from his child his


OHAP. XXI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL,


ee re es ee ee
accustomed provision for his needs, all unprejudiced minds at once conclrde
that the reason is to be found, not in the disposition of the parent, but in the
character of the child. So God declared of old it was with Him and Israel, and so
it must ever be with Him and all His creatures, All His withholdings of good
gifts or infliction of positive ills are, either directly or indirectly, the outcome
of man’s sin, and are either for his correction or instruction, either to bring him
back to the ways of God or to quicken and direct his steps after his return.


III. The punishment of sin is not remitted because it is celuyed. The chief
actor in this crime had long since left the earth, and had not in his own person
received special retribution for this special act, but had been altogether rejected
by God for an almost life-long disobedience to His cop.mands. But there were
most likely many still living who had been Saul’s willing instruments on this
occasion, and they now learnt that this unrighteous deed had not been forgotten
by God, although He had s0 long kept silence coscerning it. It is not more
certain that the stone thrown into the air will return to the earth than that
retribution will follow sin, and, although endividuals may escape in this world,
the crimes of families, and other communities rerely fail to be punished in the
present life, although that punishment may be so long delayed as to pass over
many of those who are guilty. This fact in God’s government is closely linked
with another, viz. :


IV. That one generation of men often suffer for crimes for which other
generations are also responsible. It was so in the case of Saul and the
Gibeonites. However guilty Saul’s sons might be in this matter, they were not
the only guilty persons, nor were they so guilty as their father, yet upon them
only fell the penalty for this particular crime. Many generations of Evyptians
oppressed the children of Israel, yet only those who lived in the days of the
Exodus suffered for it. Many generations of Jews were guilty of killing the
prophets, but Christ tola those who lived in His day that the righteous blood of
all was upon their heads. (Matthew xxiii. 35). In secular history we have
many similar cases, and if we ask if such a law be just, we can only answer that
the God of all the earth can have no motive for wronging any of His creatures,
and that there is another world wherein all these apparent inequalities will find
their level. Such a law of entail has a bright as well as a dark side, for the
blessed influence of righteous deeds descends also, and one great end of such a
law in the Divine government is evidently to deter men from iniquity by the
consideration of the misery they may bring upon their posterity.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. There are things deeper and
truer than any such philosophy, and
among these I place the spiritual
instincts of the human heart. Why is
it, we are disposed to ask, that in
almost all languages pestilence has
been called by a name which—like
our own word plague, which means a
stroke—directiy points to God’s agency
in its appearance ? and whence comes
it that, when a people are enduring
such a calamity, there is a general
thought of God among them, and their
resolution becomes that of Jeremiah:


‘ Let us search, and try our ways, and
turn again unto the Lord?” Do not
these things, and others like them,
point to the fact that, by the mystic
Intuitions of the soul, God is recognised
in all such visitations? and while we
take into account the laws of external
nature, shall we refuse to pay regard
to the nature that is within us ?—Dr,
Taylor.

Let no one think it strange that the
penalty should come thus, in famine,
upon an entire nation, after a new
generation had sprung er For a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


nation’s history is a unit; and as there
can be no such thing as retribution of
a nation in the future state, it follows
that if punishment for national sins is
to be inflicted at all, it must fall in the
subsequent earthly history of the nation
that committed them. ‘The generation
which was alive in France at the eras
of the massacre of St. Bartholomew and
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes
was a different one from that which
lived at the time of the first Revolu-
tion ; yet in the events of the latter,
with its Reign of Terror and rivers of
blood, we have the undoubted con-
sequences of the former. Many genera-
tions have come and gone in Spain
since the days of Philip and the great
Armada, yet we can not doubt that
the miserable condition of that land
for more than a century—a condition
out of which its inhabitants find it hard
even now to emerge—was due to the
sins of those who knew not the day of
their visitation, and suppressed the
Protestantism which, but for the In-
quisition, would have arisen among
them, and enabled them to lead the van
of European progress. The English
occupants of India in 1857 were not
the same as those who, under Clive
and Hastings, and others, so un-
righteously obtained possession of
large portions of that empire; nay,
they were in many instances men of
another order and a nobler nature;
yet upon these, ay, even upon the
heads of sainted missionaries who repu-
diated and condemned the cruelty and
craft of the first invaders, the terrible
Nemesis of the mutiny did fall—
Dr. Taylor.

Fools look only who stands on the
next stair or step, but Jacob, when he
saw the angels ascending and descend-
ing, he inquired who stood on the top
of the ladder and sent them to and fro.
Ezekiel also inquireth who standeth on
the top of the wheel. Whatever is
the instrument of our sufferings, let
God be looked upon as the chief agent.

: The whole people suffered for
Saul’s sin, either because they ap-
proved it, or at least bewailed it not,
neither did what: they could to hinder

8°


BOOK IL


it, whereby they became accessory.—
Trapp.


Ver. 2. Leal to Israel, not to God,
whose law, nevertheless, he might seem
to have on his side (Deut. viii. 16,
ete.). And yet he might also
be moved to this by covetousness to
gain their lands and goods. . . .
The hypocrite is fitly compared to the
eagle, which soareth aloft, not for any
love of heaven, for her eye is all the
while upon the prey which by this
means she spieth sooner, and seizeth
upon better.— 7Zrapp.


Vers. 1-9. Our feelings, fluenced
by the Gospel, recoil from this pro-
ceeding. The implacableness of the
Gibeonites astonishes us ; and also the
compliance of the king appears to us to
be in violent contrariety to his whole
disposition, as well as to the state of
mind in which he was at the time.
But let it always be remembered that
it was the economy of the law under
which those things were done, and
with the character of which they
harmonised ; and that the care of
God, in his educating of the human
race, aimed above all things at this—
that He should be recognised and
feared as the Holy One and the Just.
To this divine purpose David must
bend himself, and make full account
of it, whatever inner conflict it may
cost him. The great guilt of the house
of Saul—perjury and murder at the
same time—demanded blood, according
to the inviolable law of God’s kingdom,
Already, indeed, that house, laden
with sins, had been smitten by many
judgments; but yet by none which
discovered itself at the first glance to
every one among the people, as a
requital for that most culpable of all
their crimes, the murder of the
innocent Gibeonites. ‘This special
chastisement must not be omitted,
For the prevention of doubtful inter-
pretations in Israel, and for the
heightening of esteem for every iota
of the divine law, it must follow all
that went before; and it truly did
follow. The majesty and inexorable


rigour of the law, as it was in Israel
divinely manifested, was scarcely ever
more brightly, and in a more alarming
manner, brought to view than it was
on this oscasion.—Krummacher.

Little did the Gibeonites think that
God had so taken to heart their
wrongs, that for their sakes all Israel
should suffer. Even when we think
not of it, is the righteous Judge
avenging our unrighteous vexations.
Our hard measures cannot be hid
from Him ; His returns are hid from
us. It is sufficient for us, that God can
be no more neglective than ignorant of
our sufferings.—Bp. Hall.

We may learn from this history—

I. What should in every case be
the effect of temporal troubles, and
afflictive dispensations. They have
not answered their first purpose, till
they have brought us to God. Had
David sooner “inquired of the Lord,”
he and his people had been sooner
relieved from their distress ; but while
their hearts continued hard, and their
consciences at ease, the evil not only
continued, but continued to increase.
Such, in general, is our conduct under
the calamities of life, The mind is too
deeply depressed—too fondly attached
to present objects, to rise at once to
Him who orders all things, both in
heaven and earth. While we are
passionately repining,—looking around
for modes of relief, or for the sources
of our suffering, we are too much
occupied with secondary and external
causes, to think of the sinful cause in
ourselves, which may have drawn down
upon us these troubles... . . Where-
ever God afflicts, there He speaks,—
not indeed always in anger, more fre-
quently in mercy. .... Yet in such
admonitions He will not be disregarded ;
every successive stroke will be yet
heavier and heavier, till it either
draw us to Him or drive us from Him.
Il. The danger of trifling with oaths
and solemn engagements. .... God
would teach us, by this instance of
just severity, that His honour is im-
plicated in every oath, and that he
will exact an awful retribution for the
violation of such solemn engagements,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





The very insignificance of the injured
party, as here, may be'a farther reason
with Him for taking the cause upon
Himself. In confirmation of
this, we have another striking example
in Scripture. In the days of Zede-
kiah a solemn treaty had been ratified
with the King of Babylon, upon these
humiliating conditions, “ that the king-
dom might be base, that it might not
lift itself up, but that, by keeping of
his covenant it might stand.” Zede-
kiah, thinking to throw off this yoke,
rebelled. .... Therefore, thus saith
the Lord God: As I live, surely mine
oath that he hath despised, and my
covenant that he hath broken, even it
will I recompense upon his own head.”
(Ezek. xvii. 19).—Lindsay.

This whole narrative strikes us as
extraordinary, at first almost staggers
us. It places David in a strange light,
it seems at first to place God in a
strange light, but on a closer examina-
tion its mystery vanishes, and it is
seen to harmonise both with the
character of David and the righteous
judgment of God. What was
Saul’s motive in attacking the Gibeon-
ites? ‘here is reason to believe that
when he saw his own popularity de-
clining and David’s advancing, he had
recourse to base, unscrupulous methods
for increasing his own (see 1 Sam. xxii.
7,8). Evidently he had rewarded his
servants, especially those of his own
tribe, with fields and vineyards ; but
how had he got them? In no other
way that wé can suppose than by
robbing the Gibeonites of theirs. . . .
Probably he would give the larger
share to the members of his family,
but to prevent the transaction from
having a mean personal aspect, he
might so arrange that the people
generally should have a share of the
spoil, If this was the way in
which the transaction was gone about,
it was fair that the nation should be
visited with chastisement. . . . .
No remonstrance had gone forth
against the deed. . ‘Ihe authors
of tke outrage might now be dead,
but their children were quietly living
on the plunder. Even David himself

397


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


was not free from blame. When he
came to the throne he should have
seen justice done to this injured
people. The famine was,
therefore, a retribution deserved both
by David and his people. It was a
lesson on the consequences of riches
gained by robbery. It was to show
that perfidy and theft cost far more
than they bring in. . . We now come
to the main difficulty in this transaction.
Where was the justice, it may be asked,
of this frightful execution? Why
should these unoffending men be
punished so terribly for the long-
forgotten sin of their father? It is
not the rule of Scripture. “The son
shall not bear the iniquity of his father,
but every man shall bear his own
iniquity.” On the other hand, it may
be said, is it not a rule of God’s govern-
ment? “I, the Lord, am a jealous
God, visiting the iniquities of the
fathers upon the children, etc.?” There
is no real contradiction between these
seeminely conflicting rules. In the
righteous judgments of God every man
has to bear his own iniquity. Saul
had to bear every atom of his... .
There is no such thing as a son bearing
the iniquity of his father in the sense


BOOK IL





of relieving the father of the load. . .
But there is a law that often operates
in the government of God. When a
father isaddicted toasin . . . it often
gets ingrained, as it were, into the very
substance of the race, and. . . in cases
where the iniquity of the fathers ig
visited upon future generations, it will
commonly be found that the children
have served themselves heirs to the
sins of their fathers... . It was the
blood that lay upon the house, as well
as on Saul personally, that cried to
heaven for vengeance. ‘I'he sons that
were given up to justice were probably
living and fattening upon the fruits of
that unprincipled massacre. . . . And
if it should be said that, in going into
this transaction, David appears to have
felt little or no horror, we must
remember how sparing the Scriptures
are in their mention of men’s feelings
in such matters. He may have felt
much that is not here expressed ; or,
if he did feel less concern about this
deed of death than might have been
expected, we must remember how
familiar he had been all his life with
the most ghastly scenes and how much
familiarity tends to deaden the ordinary
sensibilities of our nature.— Blaikie,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 10-14,
Rizpaw anp Dav.


I. Deep affliction often brings forth a nobility of character which would
otherwise remain latent. It is not likely that Rizpah showed herself to be in
any respect a remarkable woman before this great bereavement. She manifested
es no exceptional amount of affection for her children, and is hardly
ikely to have herself sounded the depths of her maternal love. But when
paneed into this deep sorrow she revealed a self-sacrificing devotion, which
ifted her at once far above the level of ordinary humanity. ‘The death of her
children awakened within her a noble heroism which would in all probability
have lain dormant under less trying circumstances. This is not an uncommon
occurrence. Men and women who seem very commonplace while no special
demand is made upon their better nature, often rise into true heroes and
heroines in the day of extraordinary trial, when the emotional side of their
nature is called upon to assert itself.


II. Such nobility of character forms a common meeting ground for those
otherwise widely sundered. There was little in common between David and
Saul’s concubine. ‘The king had scarcely before this felt any interest, much
less er na for Rizpah. But being himself a noble man and capable of


ORAP. XXI, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





great self-devotion, this display of deep love and grief bridged over, for a time
at least, the gulf that had hitherto divided them. Men are not unfrequently
surprised into the discovery that some, from whom in all other respects they are
as widely sundered as the poles, are one with them in deep and noble emotion
which breaks down the wall of partition raised by opposing interests and
differing circumstances. ‘The father who mourned for Absalom as David did
could not fail to be touched by such sorrow as Rizpah’s, and for the moment we
may well believe their common humanity made them forget all past differences.


OUTLINES AND 8UGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


It must be borne in mind that the
famine did not cease with the hanging
of the sons of Saul. .... For three
long months the bereaved daughter of
Aiah held her watch. .... But still
the Lord was not entreated for the
land... . . But though private piety
is all too weak to avert God’s judg-
ments on a guilty nation, it is of force
to draw down from heaven a private
blessing, and is never wholly unavailing.
Deep, we may well believe, were the
communings which Rizpah held with


moved by her affecting piety, buried
the bones of her sons with those of
Saul and Jonathan... . and after
that, God was entreated for the
land. .... Both the infliction and
removal of this scourge of famine
afford a striking proof how deeply the
well-being and happiness of nations
may be affected by the personal
character of their rulers, and conse-
quently, what just reason we have to
attend to the Apostle’s exhortation.
(1 Tim. ii. 2.)—7Z. A. L., Dean o7
Kaeter.


God in her awful loneliness, and fervent
her supplications. ... . And David,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 15-22.


Daviw’s WARRIORS.


I. Men’s qualifications for service differ at different periods of life. When a
man is young his body answers to his will as the well-built vessel answers to
her helm, going hither and thither in obedience to every behest of the soul as
the ship turns to obey every motion of the wheel. But as years pass on the
body becomes a less ready instrument of the human will, and we are all made
painfully conscious that our ability to perform falls far more below our desires
and aims than in the days of youth. At whatever period in David’s life the
event took place which is recorded in verses 15 to 17, it is certain that it must
point to a time when the strength of his outer man was no longer equal to that
of his inner, when he lacked neither the courage nor the skill to face and fight
a foe, but when he found that his powers of endurance were not so great as they
had once been. ‘T'o will was present with him still, but how to perform what he
willed le found not. But if David had no longer the physical gifts which had
distinguished his earlier days, he had other and far more needful qualifications |
for his present duties which he could not have possessed when he was a young.
man. ‘here is this compensation given to all faithful men when they feel their
bodily powers decline, that they now are far richer in all those gifts and graces
which can only be gained by a long experience,—that their knowledge of God, of
themselves, and of their fellow-men, having grown with their years, they can
now serve their generation in a higher capacity than a physical one, inasmuch
as wisdom to guide is more rare and precious than ability to act. David was
more truly a light to Israel now than when he slew Goliath or captured the
stronghold of Zion. SE al vacate gore aa fos


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK it


See ee


II. Men fall in with the purpose of God when they recognise the fact that
a diversity of gifts tends to the common good. David and his warriors seem
to have shown true wisdom concerning this matter, The king acknowledged
that he was now not able to do as well on the field of battle as they were, and
was content to confine himself to other duties, while they, freely rendering such
services as they were able, declared that what they could do was as nothing in
comparison with the worth of his services, Such a spirit tends to create that
bond between men which was doubtless one great end which God had in view
when He made them to differ so much in mental and physical endowments.
By making it impossible for them to be independent of each other’s services,
the Father of the Universe would bring them into that fellowship without which
they can not fulfil the destiny which He desires for them.


—— peeps


CHAPIER XXIL


CrrrioaL anp Expository Notrs, Ver. 1. This Psalm, with a few unimportant variations,
is identical with the eighteenth in the Psalter. Wordsworth suggests that the modifications which
there appear, where the title has “to the chief musician,” may be accounted for from the
circumstance that in the present chapter the song appears as used by David for his own private
devotions ; and in the Psalm xviii., it exhibits the form in which he delivered it for the general
liturgical use of the Hebrew Church. The genuineness of the Psalm is acknowledged by all
critics, except Olshausen and Hupfield, but there is a difference of opinion as to the time when
it was composed. Keil thinks it belongs to David’s later years, The “ Biblical Commentary ”
refers it “to the early part of David’s reign, when he was recently established upon the
throne ;” and Erdmann says “the time of composition (the reference in verse 51 to 2 Sam. vii.
being unmistakeable) cannot be before the date when David, on the ground of the promise given
him through Nathan, could be sure that his dominion, despite all opposition, was immovable, and
that the throne of Israel would remain for ever with his house. The words of the title agree
with the description of victories in verses 29-46, and point to a time when David had established
his kingdom by war, and forced heathen princes to do homage (comp. verses 44-49). But aa
God’s victorious help against external enemies is celebrated in the second part of the song, and
the joyous tone of exultation shows that David’s heart is taken up with tkz gloriousness of that
help, it is a fair assumption that the song was written not after the toil of Absalom’s con-

piracy and the succeeding events, but immediately after the victorious wars narrated in chaps,
viii, and x.” “Spake unto the Lord,” etc. “These expressions are borrowed from
Exod. xv. 1, and Deut. xxxi. 30. This is the more observable because the Psalm contains
obvious allusions to the song of Moses in Deuteronomy.” (Alexander). “The hand of Saul.”
“ Not because Saul was the last of his enemies, but rather because he was first, both in power and
importance.” (Alexander). “The poet’s imagination, in its contemplation of the two principal
periods of war, moves backwards, presenting first the external wars, which were the nearest and
then the internal, with Saul and his house.” (Zrdmann.)


Ver. 2. “My rock” Sela, my rock-cleft, a place for refuge ; not the same word as that
used in verse 3. “ First and frequently used by David, who had often found refuge on a sela in
his persecution ; indeed, it is only once used by any other writer (Isa. xxxii. 2) in the Old
Testament, in a figurative sense, and there the metaphor is derived from the shadow and not
from the height of the rock.” (Wordsworth.) “Wy deliverer.”’ “The explanation of the
foregoing figures. Whilst David took refuge in rocks, he placed his hope of safety not in their
naccessible character, but in God the Lord.” (Kett). =


Ver. 3. “God of my rock.” Rather my rock-God. The word here rendered rock (tsur)
indicates what is solid and immovable. “Horn.” “A term borrowed from animals which
have their strength and defensive weapons in their horns.” (Kiel and others), “Not only a
protection against attack (as a shield), but also a weapon of attack.” (Erdmann).


Ver. 4. a sa Rican “Shall be saved.”” Not to be taken as future, but as “ indefinite
as to time, the English general present.” (Trans. of Lange’s Commentary). “Worthy to be
praised.” Rather the praised one, * ;


400


OHAP, XxIt, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUEL.
She i ee ee ere
Ver. 6. “Hell.” _ Sheol, the under world, the place of departed spirits, “Inthe wide old
English sense, a poetical equivalent to death.” (Alexander.) Prevented, rather encountered.


Ver. 7. Temple. Better, palace, “for Jehovah is here represented as s King enthroned
m heaven.” (£rdmann.) The Hebrew word means both,


Ver, 8. “The earth shook,” etc. A few writers understand the following as a description

& real storm, and refer it to a battle with the Syrians when a storm occurred (2 Sam. vii. 5),

ut most agree with Kiel that it is a poetical description of David’s deliverance which “had its

type in the miraculous phenomenon which accompanied the descent of God upon Sinai, and

which suggested, as in Judges v. 4, 5, the idea of a terrible storm that the saving hand of God

trom heaven was so obviously manifested, that the deliverance experienced by him could be
poetically described as a miraculous interposition on the part of God.”


Ver. 9. “Smoke,” etc. The figurative idea is that of snorting or violent breathing, which
indicates the rising of wrath.” (Keil and others.) Tholuck sees in the picture thus far an


image ‘“‘to be referred to the rising of the storm-cloud, and the flashes of sheet-lightning which
announces the storm.”


Ver. 10. “Bowed the heavens.” A picture of the low hanging storm-clouds, at whose
approach the heaven seems to bend down to the earth.” (Erdmann.) ‘‘Came down.” “The
scene here seems to be transferred from heaven to earth, where the Psalmist sees not only the
Divine operation, but the personal presence of Jehovah.” (Alexander). Darkness, rather
gloom. A poetical expression applied to thick clouds and vapours. (Alexander.)


Ver. 11. “A cherub,” “The cherubim of the Mosaic system were visible representations
of the whole class of creatures superior to man, The singular form seems to be used here to
convey the indefinite idea of a superhuman, yet created being. As earthly kings are carried by
inferior animals, so the heavenly King is here described as being borne through the air in His
descent by beings intermediate between Himself and man.” (Alexander.) “The poetical figure
is borrowed from the fact that God was enthroned between the two cherubim upon the lid of
the ark of the covenant, and above their outspread wings, As the idea of His ‘ dwelling between
the cherubim’ (chap. vi. 2, etc.) was founded upon this typical manifestation of the gracious
presence of God in the Most Holy place, so here David thus depicts the descent of Jehovah,
Picturing the cherub as a throne upon which God appears in the clouds of heaven, though
without imagining Him as riding upon a sphinx or driving in a chariot-throne. Such notions
are precluded by the addition of the term, ‘did fly.’” (Keil.


Ver. 12, “ Pavilions,” tc, tents or coverts. Alexander takes this as expressive of the
brightness insupportable by mortal sight ; Keil thinks that it represents Jehovah as hiding His
face from man in wrath. “Dark waters.” Literally, water gatherings, or watery darkness.
“A beautiful description of clouds charged with rain.” (Alexander.) “Thick clouds,” or
cloud-thicket. ‘This second noun is used only in the plural, and seems properly to designate the
whole body of vapours constituting the visible heavens or sky.” (Alezander.)


Ver. 13. “Through,” or out of, were kindled, rather burned.


Ver. 14. “Thundered.” “Uttered His voice.” The second clause is a poetical repetition
of the first. (Alexander)


Ver. 15, “Arrows.” “The lightnings of the last clause may be understood as explaining
the arrows of the first.” (Alexander.) “Discomfited.” “The standing expression for the
destruction of the foe accomplished by the miraculous interposition of God.” (K cul.)


Ver, 16.. “ The breakers of death” and the streams of evil, have, according to verse 6, over-
whelmed David. Under the image of water-waves he has thus depicted the dangers that have
threatened his life, The Lord in revealing His anger against his enemies, saves him by laying
bare the depths of the sea to which he had sunk, and uncovering the foundations of the earth
by the storm-wind of His wrath. Thither descending from on high the Lord seized him and
drew him forth from the waves as described in the following verses.” (Delitzsch and Erdmann.)
Some writers also see here a reference to the early history of Moses. “The verb to draw,” says
Dr. Jamieson, “naturally suggests it.” “ Luther,” says Hengstenberg, “ already called attention
to this reference. It is the more important as Moses was a type of the Israelitish people ; the
waters an image of the hostile oppression to which he was exposed ; and the event, a prophecy
constantly fulfilling itself under different circumstances.”


Ver. 18, Here is a transition from the figurative to the literal.


Ver. 19. Prevented. (See on verse 6). “Day of calamity,” Most writers think the
time of Saul’s persecution is here specially intended. i
2D


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK Il.


.


ee





Ver. 20. “Large place.” *Lit. the broad, a condition of freedom and safety in contrast
with the straits and dangers of the past.


Ver. 21. The Lord rewarded, or, requited. Alexander in Psalm xviii. translates the verbs of
this clause into the future tense: “They have reference,” he says, “to the condition of the
Psalmist under his afflictions, and the hopes which he was even then enabled to cherish.”
“Cleanness of hands.” Dr. Jamieson sees here a special reference to David’s refusal to
injure Saul, or to free himself by any unrighteous act.


Ver. 22. “Ways of the Lord.” “The rules of human conduct given in His law.” (Erdmanr.)
“Wickedly departed,” etc. Literally, “wicked from God.” “The combination of the
verb and preposition shows clearly that the essential idea in the writer’s mind was that of
apostasy or total abjuration of God’s service.” (Alexander.)


Ver. 23. “Judgments.” Rights. (Keil.) Judicial decisions. (Alexander.) The verbs


here are in the present tense.


Ver. 24, “ Mine iniquity.” “That to which I am naturally prone, An undoubted con-
fession of corruption.” (Alezander.) “An indirect testimony to indwelling sinfulness.”
(Erdmann.)


Ver. 25. “Therefore,” etc. “This verse shows clearly that the futures in verse 21 must
be strictly understood.” (Alexander.)


Ven 26. “Merciful,” or gracious.


Ver. 27. “Pure,” or genuine. (Keil.) “Unsavoury.” Better, perverse, or crooked. “The
resemblance of the last clause of this verse to Lev. xxvi. 28, 24, makes it highly probable that
the whole form of this singular dictum was suggested by that passage, the rather as this Psalm
abounds in allusions to the Pentateuch and imitations of it.” (Alexander.)


Ver. 28. “Thou.” This word is emphatic. ‘ However men may despise thy afflicted
people, I know that thou wilt save them.’ (Alexander.)


Ver. 29. “Lamp.” “While light is always the symbol of good fortune and well-being
(Job xviii. 5), the burning lamp denotes the source of lasting happiness and joyful strength,’
(Job xviii. 6; Ps. cxxxii. 17; compare Isaiah xlii. 3; xliii. 17). (#rdmann.)


Ver. 30. “By thee.” Literally, in thee. ‘ By the first noun David means the hostile bands
he has encountered ; by the second, the fortified places he has conquered.” (£rdmann.)


Ver. 31. “ Perfect,” 1.e., blameless, free from all taint of injustice, “Tried.” As metals
are by fire, and thus proved to be genuine. ‘“ Buckler,” ¢.¢., shield.


Ver. 32. “A Rock.” “He adopts the language of Moses in his song in Deut. xxxii.
4, 15, 18, 30, 31, in all of which places the word fsur, rock, is applied to God; and that is the
first passage in the Bible, and the only chapter in the Pentateuch, where that figure is used, and
it is next adopted in 1 Sam. ii 2. In the present chapter the figure is used four times, in
verses 8, 32, 47 twice, and in chap, xxiii. 3. These are the only places up to this point in the
Hebrew Bible where the word ¢sur is thus used, and they serve to mark the connection between
the hymns of Moses, of Hannah, and of David.” ( Wordsworth.)


Ver. 33. “My strength.” Better, fortress. ‘“‘Maketh my way,” etc. Erdmann and
Keil read, “ He leads the perfect, or innocent, on his way.” Alexander explains it, “ Who gives
my conduct the perfection which belongs to 2.”


Ver. 34, “Hinds.” The female gazelle, noted for her agility and swiftness. Probably
alluding to David’s speed in pursuit of his enemies. “ A figurative element lies in what is here
said of fleetness, which becomes quite obvious when we take it along with the last clause.
David points to the quick and unrestrained course of his conquests just as in verse 29.
(Jamieson.) ‘“‘High places.” Hither the strongholds taken from the enemy (Hengstenberg),
or those of his own land which he held securely, and from which he ruled as king. (Keit.)


Ver. 35. “Steel” Rather, brass or bronze. Both skill and strength are the gifts recorded —
in this verse,


Ver. 36. “Gentleness.” Keil and Erdmann read “ hearing,” i.e., favourable acceptance of
a request. Alexander translates ‘“ condescension,” Hengstenberg “ lowliness.”


Ver. 37. “Enlarged my steps,” %.¢., given me ample room to walk without hindrance,
“Feet.” Rather, ankles, The whole verse expresses safe guidance,


402


OHAP. XXII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Mi i= ee
Vers. 88, 89, A picture of » victory where the enemy is entirely vanquished.


Ver. 40. “Thou hast girded.” “ As warriors bind up all their garments and fortify thei
loins, that they may be more fitted for strenuous effort.” - (Jamieson.) “Subdued,” eta
Literally, “ didst make to bow the knee.”


Ver. 41. “The neck,” or “the back.” Made them turn to flee. (See Ex. xxiii, 27.)


Ver. 43, “As the dust.” “This language may be only expressive of that contempt in
which ancient conquerors were wont to indulge when speaking of their foes. But it is literally
true that they might soon be reduced as small as dust. The bodies of slain enemies that lis
exposed without the rites of burial on the field or streets, soon become the prey of dogs or
vultures, and the bones, stripped of all flesh, blanch in the warm climate, where they are not
long in being crumbled to dust, and so trodden under the feet of their masters.” Jamieson.)


Ver. 44, “Strivings,” or contests, This may especially refer to the internal conflicts in
David’s own kingdom. (So Keil and Alexander.) “The closing words of this psalm, and its
obvious connection with the promises in 2 Sam. vii., show that the anticipation of the last clausa
of the psalm was not limited to David’s personal triumphs, either at home or abroad, but meant
to comprehend the victories of his successors, and especially of Him in whom the royal line waw
at once to end and be perpetuated.” (Alexander.)


Ver. 45. “The stranger.” Or, “the sons of outland,” 4.¢., foreigners, “ Submit.” Literally,
hee, .¢., yield a feigned obedience. “As soon as they hear.” This may mean, “they will
submit at the mere report, or when they hear the command they will obey,” implying pezsonal
presence,


Ver. 47. “The Lord liveth.” In contrast to imaginary gods or dead idols. Some modern
expositors understand this to be equivalent to the acclamation uttered at the coronation of an
earthly monarch, but Keil, Alexander, Erdmann, and others, point out that this would be
{nappropriate to any but a mortal being. They take it simply as a declaration which “itself is
to be taken as praise of God” (Keil), for “ praising God is simply ascribing to Him the glorious
perfections which belong to Him; we have only to give Him what is His own.” (Hengstenberg.)
“Blessed,” ¢.¢., praised, or worthy to be praised. “Rock.” (Sce on verses 2 and 32.)


Ver. 49. “The violent man.” Most writers take this to refer in the first instance to Saul,
but to him as typical of a class,


Ver. 50. “ Among the heathen,” Or, the nations. ‘“ This indicates that David’s experienced
mercies were so great, that the praise of them should not be confined within the narrow bounds
of Palestine. He can only have a proper auditory in the nations of the whole earth.”
(Hengstenberg.) ‘Paul was therefore perfectly justified in quoting the verse in Rom. xvi. 9,
along with Deut, xxxii. 43 and Ps. cxvii. 1, as a proof that the salvation of God was, intended
for Gentiles also.” (Keil.)


Ver. 51. “His king .. . His anointed.” “The king whose salvation the Lord had
magnified was not David as an individual, but David and his seed for ever—that is to say, the
royal family of David which culminated in Christ. David could thus sing praises on the ground
of the promise which he had received (chap. vii. 12-16), and which is repeated almost verbatim
in the last clause of this verse.” (Keil.)


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1-19.
Daviw’s Sona or THANKSGIVING.—Parrt I.


I, Deep gratitude in the heart will find its way to the lip. It seems altogether
unnatural that any being should experience real and deep emotion without in
some way making it manifest to others—we should as soon expect to see the cup
filled above the brim without ruuning over as to find a man with a heart over-
flowing with grateful love who gave no expression to his feeling. ‘The one
seems as great a contradiction of the laws of our soul-life as the other does of
the physical world outside of us. True it is that speech is not the only index
of what men feel, and there are often many words where there is little or no
emotion, still there appears to be a divinely ordained connection between all
deep stirring of the inner life—especially when it is of a joyous ee ime


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. Book i.





the utterance of it in speech, so that the experience of each man may be helpful
to all, and individual joy be increased by the sympathy of others. It is so in
the heavenly world, for there we are told the redeemed Church gives expression
to its grateful love in songs of praise, and it was so with David. Even while
surrounded with much to sadden him, he could not look back upon a life se
filled with tokens of Divine favour without bursting forth into a song of thanks-
giving, which, although addressed in the first instance to Jehovah, was doubtless
intended also to be a testimony to his fellow-men. .


II. Fhe foundation of all joy in God is found in a conviction of His personal
interest in the individual man. The key-note of this psalm, and, indeed, of
the whole psalter, is a sense of personal relationship to an Almighty and Loving
Father; not simply a share in a general providence which extends to all, or even
to a few, but of special interposition and guidance on behalf of one man as truly
if he were the sole object of God’s care. ‘There are many ascriptions of praise
in the Bible to God as the God of nations and of all created beings, but there
are many in which the writers confine themselves principally, and often entirely,
to celebrating His goodness to them as individual men and women, and this
not because they were selfish, entirely or chiefly occupied with their own con-
cerns and thinking little of the needs of others. In this song David makes no —
mention of anybody but himself, and yet we know he had the welfare of his
people very near his heart, and grieved deeply when his sin brought trouble
upon them (see chap. xxiv. 17). Nehemiah gave up his place in the king’s
palace to devote himself to his people, yet he could not feel heart-satisfaction
merely in the help God gave to him as one of a nation, but craved a special and
individual remembrance also (see Neh. v. 19, xiv. 14, 22, 31). Nor is this
feeling confined to Old Testament saints. Paul was, perhaps, the most self-
forgetful man who has ever lived, vet, amidst all his praises for the riches of
Christ’s mercy to the world, his gratitude is never deeper than when he speaks
of the Saviour who “loved Aim and gave himself for him” (Gal. ii. 20); and
he never penned a more glowing ascription of praise to God than when he
contemplated the abundant grace which had been manifested to himself
personally (1 Tim. i. 12-17). The Bible does not require men to ignore their
individuality, on the contrary Christ himself appeals to that Divinely-implanted
self-love, which is so far removed from selfishness (Mark viii. 36), that those
who obey its instincts are never at rest unless they can persuade others to
partake of the same blessedness. An unshaken confidence that God is his God
im a personal and direct sense, is the only foundation for that rest and satisfac- —
tion of the spirit without which no obedience to God or service to man can ever
be rendered.


III. No material similitude is too strong to express soul-experience. The
ocean-depths are great, but they are not too great to set forth the deep agony
into which a soul is sometimes plunged by remorse or by a sense of God’s
displeasure. ‘I'he waves of the sea are often rough, and buffet the weary
swimmer until his bodily strength entirely fails him; but they are not rougher
than the waves of adverse circumstances which often overwhelm his soul. God’s
hand was seen very plainly when He drew Moses out of the water and made a
way for Israel through the sea, but when David looked back on his eventful life
he felt that Divine interposition was as plainly seen in the deliverances which —
he had experienced. Storm and fire and earthquake are wonderful manifesta-
tious of the power of God, but they are not so mighty nor so glorious as the
omnipotence which rules in the world of spirit, and works all things there also —
according to the counsel of His own will. It is great to still the noise of the
waves, oe it is greater to keep in check the passions of evil men (Ps, lxv. 7),


CHAP, XXIT.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL


a er


and more glorious to rule over the the countless myriads that people the globe


than to ride upon the wings of the wind.


Therefore no metaphor that David


here uses can even adequately set forth what he desires to express, because
nothing that belongs to the world of sense can perfectly represent the unseen


and the spiritual.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. God lets out His mercies to
us for this rent of our praises, and is
content we have the benefit of them,
so He have the glory.—7rapp.

The mention of Saul in the title
does not indicate that the Psalm was
composed in David’s early life, but
rather that, even though thirty years
had gone since his persecution by the
son of Kish, the deliverances which he
then experienced had not faded from
his memory, but still stood out before
him as the greatest mercies which he
had ever received. We are prone to
forget past favors. The benefactors of
our youth are not always remembered
in our after years; and in the crowd
and conflict of events in our later
history we have too often little
thought to spare, and few thanks to
express, for our early mercies. We do
not enough consider that, in mounting
the ladder of life, it is often more
difficult to set our foot on the first
round than to take any single step
thereafter ; and, therefore, that those
who aided us in the beginning have
given us by far the most effectual
assistance, But it was not so with
David, for as he sits here looking back
on his career, his first conflicts seem
still his greatest; and much as he
blessed God for after-kindness, he
places high above all the other favors
which he had received his deliverance
out of the hand of SauL—Dr. Taylor.


Ver. 2. In the chapter that imme-
diately follows the names of David's
great captains are faithfully recorded
and their exploits duly chronicled, but
in his address to God there does not
occur the name of a single human
being. . . . . In the intensity of
the gaze which is fixed on him who is
irvisible, the eye of faith lost sight for


a time of the human instruments
through whom much of the work was
done. He who in the depths of his
penitence saw but One injured Being,
and said “ Against Thee, 'I‘hee only
have I sinned ;” now at the height of
his prosperity sees but one gracious
Being.— Blaikie.


Vers. 2, 3. It pleased holy David
more that God was his strength than
that God gave him strength; that
God was his deliverer than that he
was delivered ; that God was his for-
tress, buckler, horn, his high tower,
than that he gave him the effect of
all these. It pleases all the saints
more that God is their salvation,
whether temporal or eternal, than that
he saves them; the saints look more
at God than at all that is God’s.—
Caryl.

This is no vain repetition, neither is
it a straining after effect, like that of
the young orator who piles epithet
upon epithet, weakening only where
he meant to strengthen ; but it is an
attempt to describe, from many sides,
that which he felt could not be fully
shown from any single standpoint. He
means to say, that for every sort of
peril in which he had been placed, God
had been a protection appropriate
thereto; as if he had said, “those
whom God intends to succour and
defend are not only safe against one
kind of danger, but are, as it were,
surrounded by impregnable ramparts
on all sides; so that, should a thou-
sand deaths be presented to tlieir
view, they ought not to be afraid even
at this formidable array.” Nor is this
many-sided description of God’s pro-
tection without its value to us; for
though we may have proved his power
to help us in one way, we are apt


405


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUBL.





to fall into despair when some new
danger threatens us, and therefore it
is reassuring to have David’s testi:
mony to the fact that those whom God
shields are incased all round, and will
have perfect protection in every emer-
gency.—Dr. W. M. Taylor.


Ver. 4. When David called on God
in danger, he very specially set Him
before his mind as “worthy to be
praised.” A very remarkable habit
this, and the key to many of his
spiritual triumphs. He first sets before
his mind the gracious, encouraging,
reassuring aspects of God’s character,
then asks deliverance from his enemies,
—Blatkie.

This doctrine is in tribulation the
most ennobling and truly golden. One
cannot believe what assistance such
praise to God is in pressing danger.
For as soon as you begin to praise
God, the sense of the evil will also
begin to abate, the comfort of your
heart will grow, and God will be called
upon with confidence.—Luther.


Vers. 4-7. The cordial intercourse
of prayer between the Old Testament
saints and their covenant-God is the
factual proof of the positive self-revela-
tion of the personal, living God, without
whose initiative such over-springing of
the chasm between the holy God and
sinful man were impossible, and also
the most striking refutation of the
false view that the religion of the old
covenant presents an absolute chasm
between God and man. The real life
communion between the heart that
goes immediately to its God in prayer
and the God who hears such prayer,
is, on the one hand, in contrast to
ye extra testamental religion of the
pre-Christian world, alone founded on
God’s positive historical self-revelation
* his people and the thereby estab-
lished covenant relation between them,
and, on the other hand, as sporadic
anticipation of the life-communion
with God established by the New
Testament Mediator, it is a factual
prophecy of the religious ethical life-
communion (culminating in prayer)

406


between man redeemed by Christ and
His heavenly Father.—2rdmann.


Ver. 7. Prayer is that postern-gate
which is left open even when the city
is straitly beseiged by the enemy; it
is that way upward from the pit of
despair to which the spiritual miner
flies at once when the floods from
beneath break forth upon him. Observe
that he calls, then he cries—prayer
grows in vehemence as it proceeds.
Note also that he first invokes his


God under the name of Jehovah, and.


then advances to a more familiar name
—‘‘ My God.” Thus, faith increases
by exercise, and He who we first viewed
as Lord may soon be our God in
covenant, . . Above the noise of
the raging billows of death or the
barking dogs of hell, the feeblest cry
of a true believer will be heard in
heaven. Far up within the bejewelled
walls and through the gates of pearl
the cry of the suffering suppliant was
heard. Music of angels and harmony
of seraphs availed not to drown or even
impair the voice of that humble call.
The King heard it in His palace of
light unsufferable, and lent a willing
ear to the cry of his beloved child.—
Spurgeon.

If you listen even to David’s harp
you shall hear as many hearse-like
airs as carols, and the pencil of the
Holy Ghost hath laboured more in
describing the afflictions of Job than
the felicities of Solomon, Prosperity
is not without many fears and distastes,
and adversity is not without comforts
and hopes. Wesee in needlework and
embroideries it is more pleasing to
have a lively work upon a sad and
solemn ground than to have a dark
and melancholy work upon a light-
some ground. Judge, therefore, of the
pleasures of the heart by the pleasures
of the eye. Certainly, virtue is like


precious odours—most fragrant when _


they are crushed ; for prosperity doth
best discover vice, but adversity doth
best discover virtue.—Lord Bacon.


Ver, 12. Blessed is the darkness
which encurtains my Gad. If I may


*


HOMIEETIOC COMMENTARY: BAMUBL.


Re


not see Him, it is sweet to know that
He is working in secret for my eternal
ood. Even fools can believe that
od is abroad in the sunshine and in
the calm, but faith is wise and discerns
them in the terrible darkness and
threatening storm.—Spurgeon.


Vers. 1, 19. The means by which
this deliverance was achieved were, as
far as we know, those which we see in
the books of Samuel—the turns and
chances of Providence, his own extra-
ordinary activity, the faithfulness of
his followers, the unexpected increase
of his friends. But the act of deliver-
ance itself is described in language
which belongs to the descent upon
Mount Sinai and the passage of the
Red Sea. It was the exodus, though
of asingle human soul, yet of a soul
which reflected the whole nation, It
was the giving of a second law, though


through the living tablets of a heart
deeper and vaster than the whole
legislation of Moses. It was the be-
yinning of a new dispensation.— Dean
Staniey.

At the basis of the symbolism of
nature lies the idea that certain pecu-
liarities in the nature and action of
God correspond with it. Thence God
Himself is at times described as present
and active in these phenomena of
nature, not merely accompanied by
them, and in bold but contemplative
expressions the stirring up and expres-
sion of his wrath is represented as the
kindling of His light—nature in all
the turns of fiery and flaming figures.

. . . These natural phenomena,
not so much in themselves as under
certain circumstances and more par-
ticular forms, form partly the symbol,
partly the means of a Theophany.—
Dr, Moll.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verecs 20-28,
Davw’s Sona.—Paarrt II.


I. Men are to be judged by the spirit of their lives, and not by isolated
actions. It is evident that we must read David’s words here concerning himself
in the light of others found elsewhere, and then we shall understand that he
does not claim to have been faultless even in his outward life, or to have merited
the distinguishing marks of divine favour that he had received. (See Suggestive
Comments.) He can only be recording his consciousuess of a generally faithful
discharge of his public duties and of a life which had, upon the whole, been
governed by pure and holy motives. If a man holds a fort against an enemy
for many years, and is upon one occasion overpowered and taken prisoner, even
if it be by his own negligence, he cannot be classed with him who treacherously
parleys with the foe and betrays his trust for selfish ends, He must be regarded
as blameworthy, but if he make every possible effort to retrieve his failure he
cannot be treated as a deserter. David’s reputation was sadly tarnished by
his being surprised through being found morally asleep by the tempter when he
ought to have been awake and standing upon his watch-tower. But though he
was at that time captured by the devil at his will, and remained for some time
tied and bound in the camp of the enemy, the 51st Psalm reveals his efforts to
escape, and his desire, so far as it was possible, to regain his old position and
again serve God in serving his people. God’s subsequent treatment of David
reveals that He did not judge him by this fall, or even by repeated false steps,
bat by the general spirit and intent of his whole life, and the heart and conscience
of every upright man testify to the justice of the divine verdict. It has been
remarked that the disobedience of Saul in the matter of the sacrifice (1 Sam. xiii.)
bears no comparison in itself to the crimes of David in relation to Uriah, yet it
seems to have been visited by a far heavier penalty. We can only explain the

407


HOM:LETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEE, BOOK mf,








different treatment of the two offenders upon the principle just considered. (See
also on this subject, page 360.)


II, The character of man influences the conduct of God. David here teaches this
truth by connecting his own faithfulness and integrity with the gracious dealings
of God towards him, making, in fact, the one dependent on the other. Valuable
possessions of any kind give a man worth and importance in the eyes of others
Even material wealth increases a man’s worth in the estimation of his fellow
men—because such an addition to his existence enables him to do what poorer
men cannot do, he is treated with more consideration, and his life is regarded
as more precious. The gifts and possessions of the intellect more justly give
value to him to whom they belong—great knowledge and mental ability can be
so beneficial to the community at large that he who has them is held in high
estimation, and men who can appreciate such a person delight to honour him.
But much more does moral excellence make a man precious in the sight of other
good men. They look upon character as the real and personal and eternal
possession, and value human creatures only in proportion as they are holy and
true. ‘his they do, not only because of the sympathy which must exist
between all who are united in desire and aim, but because of the beneficial
influence of such a character—because of the blessed use of such a life in the
world and in the universe. It would be strange indeed if we found this rule
reversed as we ascended in the moral scale—if the infinitely good God did not
set a high price upon human character, and deal with men accordingly. True
is it that he can discern flaws and imperfections in the best of human creatures,
but His moral perfection does not prevent Him from looking with approval upon
those who love and seek after righteousness, however morally weak they may be.
He not only loves them for all that is God-like within them, but for the efforts
they make to uphold and advance His kingdom in the world. Such being the
regard in which they are held by God, it must be that His dealings with them
are in accordance with His gracious approval of them, and there must, therefore,
be 3 special and intimate connection between human character and Divine
conduct,


III. Upon the character and conduct of men depends their view of the
character and conduct of God. Many commentators do not think this idea is
expressed in verses 26 and 27, but that they only express the truth just dwelt
upon, viz., “that God’s objective, real conduct towards men, according to His
retributive justice, corresponds exactly to man’s ethical conduct towards God”
(Lrdmann). But David may also here refer to the undoubted fact that every
man’s conception of God depends upon his own condition of heart and conscience,
Men see each other through the same medium. The face that looks into the
mirror is the same that is seen reflected ; there are laws which forbid that dis-
torted or unlovely features should give back a beautiful and pleasing reflection.
And there are also laws which make all other men appear morally unattractive
and even disagreeable to a wicked or even an unloving man. He who lives for
self thinks everybody whom he meets is a selfish being, and the proud and
angry man is always complaining of the pride and bad temper of those around
him, here is some objective foundation for these conceptions, inasmuch as
evil passions in ourselves call forth and foster the same in others and the
reverse ; and there is a sense in which even the unchanging and righteous God,
as we have already seen, must really manifest a side of His perfect character to
the unholy and rebellious which differs from that which is seen by those who love
Him and desire to serve Him. But apart from the actual fact, all the ways of
the Almighty seem hard and often unjust to those who will not fall in with Hig
maa blessing them, and the more they rebel wader the yoke the heavier


GAP, XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEi.





it must really become.


The old statute is still in force :—“ Jf ye will not be


reformed by me in these things, but will walk contrary unto me, then will f walk
contrary unto you” (Lev. xxvi. 23, 24), but every man who is unreconciled to
God regards even His most merciful dispensations and laws from a false stand-
oo and often transfers his own unrighteousness to the spotless character of his


aker.


OUTLINES AND 8UGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 21. Albeit the dispensations
of Divine grace are to the fullest degree
sovereign and irrespective of human
merit, yet in the dealings of Providence
there is often discernible a rule of
justice by which theinjured are avenged
and the righteous ultimately triumph.
David’s early troubles arose from the
wicked malice of envious Saul, who, no
doubt, prosecuted his persecutions
under cover of charges brought against
the character of the man after God’s
own heart. These charges David de-
clares to have been utterly false, and
asserts that he possessed a grace-given
righteousness which the Lord had
graciously rewarded in defiance of all
his calumniators. Before God, the
man after God’s own heart wasa humble
sinner; but before his slanderers he
could, with unblushing face, speak of
the cleanness of has hae and the
righteousness of his life. He knows
little of the sanctifying power of Divine
grace who is not, at the bar of human
equity, able to plead innocence. There
is no self-righteousness in an honest
man knowing that he is honest, nor
even in his believing that God rewarded
him in Providence because of his
honesty, for such is often a most evident
matter of fact. It is not at all an
opposition to the doctrine of salvation
by grace, and no sort of evidence of a
Pharisaic spirit, when a gracious man,
having been slandered, stoutly main-
‘tains his own integrity and vigorously
defends his character. A godly man
has a clear conscience, and knows him-
self to be upright. Is he to deny his
own consciousness, and to despise the
work of the Holy Ghost, by hypocriti-
cally making himself out to be worse
than he is? A godly man prizes his
integrity very highly, or else he would


not be a godly man at all; is he to be
called proud because he would not
readily lose the jewel of a reputable
character? A godly man can see that
in the long run uprightness and truth
are sure to bring their own reward ;
may he not, when he sees that reward
bestowed in his own case, praise the
Lord for it? Yea, rather must he not
show forth the faithfulness and good-
ness of his God? Read the cluster of
expressions in this and the following
verses as the song of a good conscience,
after having safely outridden a storm
of obloquy, persecution, and abuse, and
there will be no fear of our upbraiding
the writer as one who set too high a
price upon his own moral character.—
Spurgeon.


Ver. 22. That is, with a purpose
and resolution to continue in the way
of sinning, and that is the property of
sincerity. A man indeed may be
overtaken and surprised in a tempta-
tion, but it is not with a resolution to
forsake God and to cleave unto the
sin, or rest in it. He will not sleep in
it, spare it, or favour it; that is, to do
wickedly against God, to have a double
heart and a double eye; to look upon
two objects, partly at God and partly
at sin ; so to keep God as to keep some
sin also, as it is with all false-hearted
men in the world. They look not
upon God alone, let them pretend to
religion never so much, but upon
something else together with God ; as
Herod regarded John, but regarded
his Herodias more; and the young
man in the gospel, comes to Christ,
yet he looks after his estate; and
Judas followed Christ, yet looks after
the bag; this is to depart wickedly
Srom God.—W, Strong.


HOMILETIC COMMiLNTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK i.


aur


Ver. 24. Keep himself! Who made
man his own keeper? "Tis the Lord
that is his keeper; He is the keeper
of Israel and the preserver of men. If
@ man cannot keep himself from
sorrow, how can he keep himself from
sin? God indeed in our first conver-
sion works upon us as He works upon
the earth, or Adam’s body in paradise,
before He breathed a soul into it, or
wade a living creature ; such a power
as Christ put forth on Lazarus in his
grave, for we are dead in trespasses
and sins; but yet, being living, he
must walk and act of himself, the Lord
will have us to co-operate together with
Him, for we are built upon Christ,
not as dead, but as “ living stones,”
(1 Pet. ii. 5).—W. Strong.

There is “JZ have” and “J have
not,” both of which must be blended
in a truly sanctified life ; constraining
and restraining grace must each take
its share.—Spurgeon.

Mark “from mine iniquity.” The
godless man, though he do much, will
be sure to fail here, and the godly man
will strike home here wherever he be
favourable. A horse that is not sound,
but foundered, will favour one foot, if
not more; the lapwing, some observe
will cry and make a great noise, but it
is when she is farthest from her nest ;
the hypocrite may keep a great stir
about many sins, but there is one sin
which he meddleth not with. There
is, says a learned divine, no greater
argument of unsound repentance than
indulgent thoughts and reserved de-
light and complacency in a master-sin.
As some grounds are most proper soils
to breed and nourish some particular
weeds, so are some men’s hearts for
some particular sins, and the devil
holds them as fast by this sin as by ten
thousand. The creature may
do much by the command of God, but
there is old stir and pulling before this
sin be separated from him. If this be
once done thoroughly the man is con-
verted truly.—Swinnock.


Ver. 25. God first gives us holiness
and then rewards us for it. We are
His workmanship-—vessels made unto

410


honour, and when made the honour is
not withheld from the vessel; though, in
fact, it all belongs to the Potter upon
whose wheel it was fashioned. ‘The
prize is awarded to the flower at the
show, but the gardener reared it; the
child wing the prize from the school-
master, but the real honour of his
schooling lieswith the master, although,
instead of receiving, he gives tbe
reward.—Spurgeon.


Ver. 26. Note that even the mer-
ciful need mercy. No amount of
generosity to the poor or forgiveness to
enemies can set us beyond the need of
mercy.— Spurgeon.


Vers. 22-25. What David here
extols is not the ground upon which
he personally, as a sinner, obtained the
favour of God, but the ground on
which he, as the public champion of a
great cause, enjoyed God’s counten-
ance, while he was honestly and faith-
fully maintaining that cause. ‘There
could be no self-praise in the lieutenant
of a ship saying to his captain, “I
adhered to your instructions in every
point, and my success was complete.”
There would have been no self-
righteousness in such a man as Luther
saying, ‘‘I constantly maintained the
principles of the Bible—God crowned
my labours with success;” for the
honour in such cases is not claimed
by the person acting, it is given to
his superior, by whose instructions he
has acted . . . . No other spirit than
this can with consistency be claimed
for David.— Blaikie.

The current of his moral being
flowed on in the channel of everlasting
right. His sins were only wavelets on
the stream, which the winds of tempta-
tion occasionally dashed over the
embankments.—Dr, David Thomas.

As you may see a proportion between
sins and punishments which are the
rewards of them, so that you can say,
such a sin brought forth this affliction,
it is so like its father ; so you might
see the like proportions between your
pores and your walking with God
and God’s answers to you and His


“CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTAKY : SAMUEL.





dealings with you. So did David.
According to the cleanness, etc. His
speech denotes some similitude or like-
ness, a8, for example, the more by ends
or carnal desires you had in praying,
and the more you mingled of these with
your holy desires, and the more want
of zeal, fervency, etc., were found in
your prayers, the more you shall, it
may be, find of bitterness mingled
with the mercy, when it is granted,
and so much imperfection, and want
of comfort in it. So says David in
this psalm, “‘ With the pure thou wilt
show thyself pure.” Pure prayers have
pure blessing, and @ contra, “ With the
froward thou wilt show Thyself fro-
ward.” And, again, as you in prayer
sometimes slackened and grew cold, so
you might see the business in like
manner to cool and cast backward, as,
when Moses’ hands were down Amalek
prevailed, and when they were lifted
up Israel had the better. A man finds
in praying that his suit sometimes
sticks, and goes not on as he expected ;
but, on the contrary, when he was
stirred up to pray, then still he found
things to go well. By this a man may
clearly see that it was the prayer which
God did hear and regarded. Thus,
likewise, when a man sees hills and
dales in a business, fair hopes often,
and then all dashed again, and the
thing in the end brought to pass, let
him look back upon his prayers. Didst
thou not in like manner just thus deal
with God? When thou hadst prayed
earnestly, and thought thou hadst
even carried it, then dash all again by
interposing some sin, and thus again
and again. Herein God would have
you observe a proportion, and it may
help you to discern how and when they
are obtained by prayer, because God
deals thus with you therein in such a
proportion to your prayers—T. Good-
win.


Vers. 26, 27. If men will deal
plainly with God, He will deal plainly
with them. He that is upright m


~


performing his duty shall find God
upright in performmg His promises.
It is God’s way to carry to men as
they carry to Him, If thou hast a
design to please Him, He will havea
design to please thee; if thou wilt
echo to Him when He calls, He will
echu to thee when thou callest.—
tt. Steele.

Even as the sun which, unto eyes
being sound and without disease, is
very pleasant and wholesome, but unto
the same eyes, when they are feeble,
sore, and weak, is very troublesome
and hurtful, yet the sun is ever all
one and the self-same that it was
before ; so God, who hath ever shown
Himself benign and bountiful to those
who are kind and tender-hearted to-
wards His saints, is merciful to those
who show mercy. But unto the same
men, when they fall into wickedness
and show themselves full of beastly
cruelty, the Lord showeth Himself to
be very wrathful and angry, and yet is
one and the same immutable God from
everlasting to everlasting.—Cawdray.

But doth the Lord take colour from
everyone He meets, or change His
temper as the company changes?
That’s the weakness of sinful man.
He cannot do so with whom is no
variableness nor shadow of changing.
God is pure and upright with the un-
clean and hypocritical, as well as with
the pure and upright, and His actions
show Him to be so. God shows Him-
self froward with the froward, when
He deals with them as He has said
He will deal with the froward—deny
them and reject them. God shows
Himself pure with the pure when He
deals with them as He has said He
will—hear them and accept them.
Though there be nothing in purity
and sincerity which deserveth mercy,
yet we cannot expect mercy without
them. Our comforts are not grounded
upon our graces, but they are the
fruits or consequences of our graces,~~


Caryl,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK I.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 29-40.
Daviw’s Sona.—Parrt III.


I. God can disperse the darkness of man’s ignorance and cheer the night
of his sorrow. ‘There are but few thoughtful human creatures who do not
feel themselves in need of some clue to guide them in their walk through
life and of some hand stronger than man’s to lift them up when earth’s
sorrows seem to weigh them to the ground ; of something, in short, of a spiritual
kind which shall be to their inner sense what the light is to their bodily vision.
The godly in all ages have testified that their God can and does supply this
want—that what the sun is to the physical nature of man the Creator of the
sun is able and willing to be to the souls of His creatures, He reveals Himself
as the Light of men and the Sun of Righteousness, and those who have put Him
to the test declare that enough spiritual enlightenment and joy and strength
are found in Him to satisfy all their needs. Light is a revealing power—It
reveals us to ourselves. Without the light of day we could not know what we
do of our own bodily structure and appearance. Light reveals itself to us while
it reveals us to ourselves. There is this twofold revelation ever in operation
wherever a ray of light falls. Those who walk in the light of God feel that as
He reveals Himself to them, He reveals them unto themselves, and that know-
ledge of Him goes hand-in-hand with right conceptions of their own nature,
and needs, and destiny. Light is a gladdening influence. Apart from all its
life-giving power, the rays of the sun help to revive the sad at heart, and even
the rays of a lamp or candle are cheering after long-continued darkness, So
God can and does give a gladness of soul to His children which uplifts them in
the dark and cloudy day of adversity, and causes them to joy in Him when all
earthly sources of comfort are dried up. It was in God as this fountain of
enlightenment and joy that David had found the moral strength to war life’s
warfare and the courage to return to the conflict after defeat and almost despair.


II, God’s ways with men, and His word to them, will stand the utmost test
which can be applied to them. Only those who will not trust God find flaws
in His dealings, and charge Him with non-fulfilment of His promises. Those
who put themselves under His guidance by opening their hearts to receive His
word, enter upon such an experience of His wisdom and love, that the more they
know, and the longer they live, the more settled is their conviction that the
Judge of all the earth always has and ever must do right to every one of His
creatures, and thus the more exultant is their song of hope for the future,
David's testimony here is one with all who have exercised the same trust in God,
and obeyed Him in the same spirit. The details and the form of expression
change from age to age, but the principle and the spirit must ever be one.
To David, God is the “ stock” whose “way is perfect,” and whose “ word is
tried,” to those around the sea of glass He is the “ Holy and True One, just and
true in His ways.” (Rev. vi. 10; xv. 3.) But none ean arrive at this assurance
without putting Him to the test. The sun would be what it is if no man upon
the face of the earth opened his eyes to receive its light—the ocean would be as
able to float the navies of the world if no vessel ever ventured upon its waters.
To know the glory of either, and their adaptation to his needs, man must put
them to the test. And as he must do with the creatures of God, so must He do
in relation to God Himself.


III, The perfection of God’s nature is manifested for the perfecting and
uplifting of His creatures. ‘The elevation of God above sinful men, and Fig
413


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.





A


separation from them by reason of the great moral gulf between them and Him,
is always dwelt upon, both by God Himself and by His inspired messengers, as a
ground of hope and a reason for joy. ‘True the High and Lofty One stands
alone in His purity and glory, as the snowy mountain peak, unsullied by the
impurities of the lower earth, is isolated from it by its height and grandeur; but
as from i¢ pour down abundant streams to give life to the dwellers below, so
from Him flow rivers of grace to revive and glorify His needy children. The
arm of His power is not outstretched with the desire to subdue by omnipotent
force, but to upraise by gentleness ; His Almighty strength is not displayed for
the purpose of filling men with terror, but to encourage them to flee to Him for
shelter, and to draw from Him the help they must have if they are to triumph
over the powers of evil. All who rightly apprehend God do as David does here,
see in His perfection and might matter for triumphant praise because they feel
that they have been used to raise them in the past, and are assured that by
them they will at last be more than conquerors.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 29. Even the children of the
day sometimes need candle-light. In
the darkest hour light will arise;
a candle shall be lit, it will be a com-
fort such as we may fittingly use with-
out dishonesty—it will be our own
candle. Yet God Himself will find
the holy fire with which the candle
shall burn. Our evidences are our
own, but their comfortable light is
from above. Candles which are lit by
God the devil cannot blow out. All
candles are not shining, and so there
are some graces which yield no present
comfort, but it is well to have candles
which may by-and-bye be lit, and it is
well to possess grace which may yet
afford us cheering evidences.—Spur-
geon.


Ver. 30, God’s warriors may ex-
pect to have a taste of every form of
fighting, and must by the power of
faith determine to quit themselves like
men, but it behoves them to be very
careful to lay all their laurels at
Jehovah’s feet, each one of them say-
ing “by my God have I wrought this
valiant deed.” —Spurgeon.


Ver. 31. This is the language of
one who, in his own history, combines,
in a very high degree, the character of
the saint, the poet, the hero and the

rince. 'The testimony of such a man
is worth having on aay subject, especi-


ally on the greatest of all subjects—
Gop. The authors’ testimony may
apply—I. To the way which God pre-
scribes. He prescribes a way—a course
of action—for all the creatures He hag
made. . . The stars, the ocean,
insects, brutes, and souls of every kind,
from the least to the greatest, have
each their “ way ” marked out, and the
highest science attests that the way is
“perfect.” But the course or the way
which is prescribed for man is what
the writer refers to. First. The way
which is prescribed for our moral con-
duct is perfect. Who can improve the
decalogue ? How perfect in justice and
in compass is the golden rule, “ What-
soever ye would?” etc. Secondly. The
way that ts prescribed for our spirituar
restoration is perfect. What is the
way ? Here it is: ‘ What the law
could not do,” etc. ‘‘God so loved
the world,” etc. Faith in Christ is the

rescribed way. ‘I'his way is “ perfect ”
In its wisdom; it is in every way
adapted. “Perfect” in its justece—it
honours the righteousness of God.
“ Perfect” in its suficiency — it is
adequate to the needs of each man and
all. [I. To the way which God pursues,
God has a method of action. He acts,
not by caprice or impulse, but by an
eternal settled plan. It is but a little
of that plan we van see; but so far as
our knowledge of the order of nature,
the history of providence, and the pro-

413


HIOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


ee A SSS eerenioroese ne noes


visions of redemption extends, we join
in the testimony of the text and say :
“His way is perfect. First His method
of procedure is perfect in conception.
We have not the full draft of this plan.
An infinitesimal section only comes
under our eye. The Architect of the
great building presents you with a
whole plan, and you may understand
it and see the superstructure on paper.
Thus God has not acted, and if He
had given us the whole plan we could
not have scanned the millionth part.
What we see, however, we feel to be
perfect. Secondly. His method of pro-
cedure is perfect tn execution. What
His infinite benevolence prompted and
His infinite wisdom conceived, His
Almightiness carried out with perfec-
tion. A conviction of the perfection
of God’s way (1) is essential to our
well-being. Without this we cannot
supremely love and trust Him. (2) Is
the most attainable of beliefs. Our
reason, conscience, Bible, observation,
experience, all concur in urging this
on the soul—this, the grandest of all
conclusions. (3) Must flash on every
sinner’s nature sooner or later. If
not here in the day of grace, yonder in
the period of retribution.—Dr. David
Thomas.

Ver. 34, When our thoughts are
nimble and our spirits rapid, let us not
forget that our best beloved’s hand has
given us the choice favour. . . .
We, too, have had our high places of
honour, service, temptation and danger,
but hitherto we have been kept from
falling.— Spurgeon.


Ver. 36. Gentleness in a deity—
what other religion ever took up such
a thought? When the coarse mind of
sin makes up gods and a religion by its
own natural light, the gods, it will be
seen, reveal both the coarseness and the
sin together, as they properly should.
They are made great as being great in
force, and terrible resentments. . . ,
Just opposite to all these, the God of
Revelation, the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, contrives to be a
gentle being; even hiding His power
and withholding the stress of His will,

41°


that He may put confidence and courage
in the feelings of His children. . . ,
What, then, do we mean by gentleness #
To call it sweetness of temper, kindness,
patience, flexibility, indecisiveness, does
not really distinguish it. When you
speak, for example, of dealing gently
with an enemy, you mean that instead
of trying to force a point straight
through with him you will give him
time, and ply him indirectly with suck
methods and modes of forbearance as
will put him on different thoughts and
finally turn him to a better mind,
Here, then, lies the true conception of
God’s gentleness... . It means that
He does not set Himself, as a Ruler, tc
drive His purpose straight through,
but that, consciously wise and Hehe
. . « He is only too great to fly at His
adversary, and force him to the wall
if he does not instantly surrender ;
that, instead of coming down upon
him thus, in the manner of direct
onset, to carry his immediate submis-
sion by storm, He lays gentle siege ta
him, waiting for his willing assent and
choice. . That we may havc
it in true estimation, observe how fai
off it is from the practice and even
the capacity generally of mankind
We can do almost anything more
readily than consent to any sort of
indirection, when we are resisted in
the exercise of authority or encounter
another at some point of violated
right, To redress the injury by
gentleness, to humble an adversary by
the circuitous approach of forbearance
and a siege of true suggestion—that is
not the manner of men, but only of
God. 535.4 How openly He takes this
attitude in the Scriptures. When our
first father breaks through law by his
act of sin, He does not strike him
down by His thunders, but He holds
them back, comes to Him even by a
word of promise, and sends him forth
into a world unparadised by guilt, to
work, and suffer, and learn, and, when
he will, to turn and live. . . What
we call the Gospel is only a translation,
80 to speak, of the gentleness of God—
a matter in the world of fact, answer-
ing to a higher matter, antecedent, ia


Giaar, xxi


os ee





—


the magnanimity of God. I do not
say that it isa mere effusion of Divine
sentiment, apart from all counsel and
government. .... It is at once the
crown of God’s purposes and of His
governmental order, And... . that
wondrous indirection of grace, the
incarnate life and cross of Jesus, is the
very plan to carry the precept of law
by precepts higher than force, by
feeling and character, and sacrifice.
, . . « 80, too, the Holy Spirit. ...
working efficiently, and, in a certain
sense in the man, or subject, circles
round the will, doing it respect by
laying no force upon it, and only
raising appeals to it from what He
puts in the mind, the conscience, the
memory, the sense of want, the fears
excited, the aspirations kindled... .
Holding this view. . . we ought
to find that God’s whole management
of us and the world corresponds. Is
itso?.... Where is the gentleness
of God in the unpitying, inexorable,
fated powers of the world? ... . Just
here. Able to use force, He
can use character, and time, and kind-
ness. Real gentleness supposes counsel,
order, end, and a determinate will.
Not even a weak woman can be pro-
perly called gentle. .... See how
it goes with us in God’s manage-
ment of our experience. Doing every-
thing to work on our feeling, tempera-
ment, thought, will, and so on our
eternal character He still does nothing
by direct impulsion. It is with us
here in everything as it was with
Jonah when the Lord sent him to
Nineveh. .... Jonah steers straight
the other way, and there puts to sea,
sailing off upon it, and then under it,
and through the belly of hell, and
comes to land nobody knows where.
After much perambulation he gets to
Nineveh, and gives his message dog-
gedly, finally to be tamed by a turn
of hot weather and the withering of a
gourd. . . . The subject culminates in
the end God has in view, which is to
make us great. He certainly has a
different opinion of greatness from that
which is commonly held by men—a
much higher respeot for the capabili-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


ate 5





ties of our human nature, and much
higher designs concerning it... . . We
do not understand Him, in fact, till
we conceive it as a truth that He wants
to make us great in will in the breadth
and freedom of our intellect, great in
courage, enthusiasm, self-respect, firm-
ness, superiority to things and matters
of condition, great in sacrifice and
beneficence, great in sonship with
Himself, great in being raised to such
common counsel and such intimate
unity with Him in His ends—that we
do, in fact, reign with Him. seus
His object is to gain our will in such a
manner as to save it, and make it
finally a thousand-fold stouter in good,
. » «. and to recover our intellect
by bidding us to set it for seeing by a
wholly right intent and a willingness
even to die for the truth, Stes
and so He manages to save all the
attributes of force and magnanimity
within us while reducing us to love
and obedience.

Easy enough were it for Him to lay
His force upon us, and dash our obsti-
nacy to the ground. He might not
thrust us into love, He could not into
courage and confidence, but He might
instantly crush out all wilfulness for
ever. But He wants no slaves
about His throne, and there-
fore refuses to subdue us unless by
some such method that we may seem,
in a certain other sense, to subdue
ourselves.— Bushnell.


Ver. 37. It is no small mercy to be
brought into full Christian liberty and
enlargement, but it is a still greater
favour to be enabled to walk worthily
in such liberty, not being permitted to
slip with our feet. ‘To stand upon
the rock of affliction is the result of
gracious upholding, but that aid is
quite as much needed in the luxurious
plains of prosperity.—Spurgeon.


Ver, 42. As nature prompteth men
in an extremity to look up for help,
but because it is but the prayer of
flesh for ease, and not of the spirit for
grace, and a good use of calamities,
and not but in extreme despair of help

415


HOMILULVIC COMMENTARY - SAMUEL,


SREP RAIEIRUMEEGa erremcuan Maen ee ST


——





elsewhere, therefore God hears them
not. “They looked,” etc., gd. If
they could have made any other shift,
God should never have heard of them.
Trapp.


Ver. 45. In many cases the gospel
is speedily received by hearts appa-
rently unprepared for it. Those whe
have never heard the gospel before
have been charmed by its rst message,
and yielded obedience to it; while


BOOK


others, alas, who are accustomed to ita
Joyful sound, are rather hardened than
softened by its teachings. The grace
of God sometimes runs ag fire among
stubble, and a nation is born in a day.
“ Love at first sight” is no uncommon
thing when Jesus is the wooer. He
can write Czsar’s message without
boasting, Veni, vidi, vici; His gospel
is sometimes no sooner heard than
believed.— Spurgeon.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 47-81,


Davw’s Sona.—Parr IY,


I. That Jehovah lives
All that David has said


ought to be enough to satisfy every human soul.
or can say is wrapped up in the words, “The Lord


liveth.” That God lives is a sufficient guarantee, not only that His children
will live, but that the best that is possible will be done for them and with them,
Man feels conscious that he does not exist of himself and that he needs a
stronger, a better, a higher life than his own upon which he can rest and whence


he can draw supplies,
testify,


In God, those who
“With Thee is the fountain of life,


seek, find this need supplied—they
tn thy light shall we see light”


(Ps, xxxvi. 9). They feel that the bodily and the spiritual life they now
possess is from this living Jehovah, that He who gave them existence has given


them what alone makes it worth having,


nature (2 Pet. i. 4), and


@ participation in His own Divine


they rejoice in the confidence that while He lives
they shall also live in the highest and best


sense of the word.- ‘The life of God


is a life separated from all injustice and unkindness, and it is a life not merely


without any shadow of unrighteousness but


This be
a ground for hope and exultation,


a life of active justice and mercy.


ing so, His existence ought to be for all men what it was to the Psalmist,
We cannot explain all the mysteries of His


dealings with the children of men, some of Daviil’s own words here do but
remind us that clouds and darkness are often round about Him, but the simple
fact of the existenve of such a God is @ rock upon which we may rest.


II, Every human life lived to purpose is lived in dependence upon the


living God,


It is David’s constant testimony that so far as he had fulfilled the


high destiny to which he had been called, he had done go by remembering that he


was nothing and that


God was everything,
his watchword on the day when he slew the


“The Lord is my strength,” was
giant, and, with few exceptions, it


_ continued to be so until the hour in which he went “ the way of all the earth ”


(1 Kings ii. 2).


He has left it upon record that every deed of his life that had


been worth doing had been done in dependence upon the Lord who took him


from the sheepfold and who had never


failed him whenever he had sought Hig
help, Every man who has lived a life worth living


has lived it by putting hig


trust in David’s God, and every life has been worth living that has been go lived.


they try to stand alone, and how biessed and honoured is the memory of many a
wly servant of God, who, when on earth, lived a life of faith, and therefore waa


OHAP. XXIL


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: SAMUED.





enabled to fulfil the end of his being.


But it is not only obscure lives that have


been thus en-nobled—all the greatest names that adorn the pages of human
history belong te those who have said with David, “ God is my strength and
nower” and with Paul, “ Yet not I, but Christ liveth in me” (Gal ii. 20).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver, 47. A certain sense of solitari-
ness grows upon a man as he becomes
older. Those who were venerable in
his youthful days, and to whom he
looked for counsel, are one by one
carried to the tomb. The companions
of his early manhood fall at his side,
He comes at length to a time when he
does not care to make many new
friends; and when he reaches the
limit of three-score years and ten, he
begins to feel himself almost a stranger,
even in the place where he has spent
his life. Perhaps a king, more than
most other men, will realize this ex-
perience. The poet has spoken of
“the lonely glory of a throne.” The
monarch has no equals, and, from the
nature of the case, can have few con-
fidants and counsellors, except such as
are venerable for age. But as his
reign wears on, one after another of
these early friends are taken away;
and as each is removed, he is apt to
think that a part of himself has been
withdrawn from him, Thus loneliness
steals over him, and he comes at
length to be, like Moses among the
tribes, the solitary survivor of a buried
generation. Something like this, I
doubt not, was felt by David. as he
advanced into old age. Samuel was
gone ; Jonathan was no more; Ahi-
thophel had proved a traitor; Joab
had become a thorn in his side; but
there was One always true, and it was
with no ordinary emotion, we may be
sure, that out of his earthly solitude
he sang of his fidelity and deathless-
ness: “The Lord liveth, and blessed
be my rock, and exalted be the God of
my salvation.” Let the aged among
us fall back on this assurance, and
find their solace in the companionship
of the Most High. He hath said, “I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee.”
—Dr Taylor,

25


Why do you not boast in your God
and bear up yourselves big with your
expectations from him? Do you not
see young heirs to great estates act
and spend accordingly? And why
shall you, being the King of Heaven’s
son, be lean and ragged from day to
day, as though you were not worth a
groat? Qh, sirs, live upon your por-
tion; chide yourselves for living be-
side what you have! ‘here are great
and precious promises ; rich, enriching
mercies ; you may make use of God’s
all-sufficiency ; you can blame none
but yourselves if you be defective or
discouraged. Ask your faint-
ing spirits under pressing outward
sorrows, is not God alive? And why,
then, doth not thy soul revive? Why
doth thy heart die within thee when
comforts die? Cannot a living God
support thy dying hopes ?— Oliver
Heywood, '


Ver. 50. Paul cites this verse (Rom.
xv. 9). This is clear evidence that
David’s Lord is here, but David is here
too, and is to be viewed as an example
of a holy soul making its boast in God,
even in the presence of ungodly men.
Who are the despisers of God that we
should stop our mouths for them ?
We will sing to our God whether they
like it or no, and force upon them the
knowledge of His goodness. ‘T'oo much
politeness to traitors may be treason to
our King.—Spurgeon.

Whole chapter. This psalm is called
by Michaelis more artificial, and less
truly terrible, than the Mosaic odes.
In structure it may be so, but aurely
not in spirit. It appears to many be-
sides us, one of the most magnificent
lyrical raptures in the Scriptures. As
if the poet had dipped his pen in “ the
brightness of that light which was
before his eye; 80 he describes the

44.7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; SAMUBL,


BOeK II.





descending God. Perhaps it may be
objected that the modus is hardly
worthy of the vindew—to deliver David
from his enemies, could Deity ever be
imagined to come down? But the
objector knows not the character of
the ancient Hebrew mind. God in
His view had not to descend from
heaven ; He was nigh—a cloud like
a man’s hand might conceal—a cry, a
look, might bring him down. And why
should not David’s fancy clothe Him,
as He came, in a panoply befitting
His dignity, in clouds spangled with
coals of fire? If he was to descend,
why not in state? The proof of the
grandeur of this psalm is in the fact
that it has borne the test of almost
every translation, and made doggerel
itself erect itself and become Divine.
Even Sternhold and Hopkins its fiery
whirlwind lifts up, purifies, touches


into true power and then throws down,
helpless and panting, upon their ancient
common. Perhaps its great charm,
apart from the poetry of the descent,
is the exquisite and subtle alternation
of J and Thou. We have spoken of

arallelism, as the key to the mechan-
ism of Hebrew song We find this
existing between David and God—the
delivered and the Deliverer—beauti-
fully pursued throughout the whole of
this psalm. . . . It has been in-
geniously argued that the existence of
the £ suggests inevitably as a polar
opposite the thought of the Zhou, that
the personality of man proves thus
the personality of God ; but, be this as
it may, David's perception of that per-
sonality is nowhere so intense as here,
He seems not only to see, but to feel
and touch, the object of his gratitude
and worship.—Gilijilan,


CHAPTER XXIII


CrrricaL axp Exrosrrony Notes. Ver. 1. Words, rather, Divine sayings, é.¢., prophets


etterances. Keil thus translates the verse;


“ Divine saying of David the son of J esse,
Divine saying of the man, the highly exalted
Of the anointed of the God of Jacob,” ete,


* The following words of David are thereby announced to be a peculiarly prophetic declaration
which rests on an inspeaking of God by His Spirit to His soul.” (Erdmann). This introduction
to the prophetic announcement rests, both as to form and substance, upon the last sayings of
Balaam concerning the future history of Israel. (Num. xxiv. 3-15). This not only shows to what
extent David had occupied himself with the utterances of the earlier men of God concerning
Israel’s future, but indicates, at the same time, that his own prophetic utterance was intended
to be a further expansion of Balaam’s prophecy concerning the star out of Jacob and the sceptre
of Israel. Like Balaam, he calls his prophecy a Divine saying, or oracle, as a revelation which


he had received direct from God.
like Balaam the son of Beor, a man with clos


(Num. xxiv. 8). But the recipient of this revelation waa not,
ed eye, whose eyes had been opened by a vision


of the Almighty, but “the man who was raised up on high,” #.e,, whom God had lifted up out of
humiliation to be the ruler of His people, yea, even to be the head of the nations, Chap. xxii.


44). (Kiel),


“A statement of the grounds on which it was to be expected that he would be


employed as an agent of God in the utterance of this important prophecy.”—(Jamieson).


Ver. 2. “ Spake,” Rather, speaketh, t.e.,in the following revelation. “On my tongue.” The
parallelism here employed is obviously gradational, in which the idea introduced in the former


member is continued, but amplified in the latter.


(Henderson, ) “ While in verse 1 the pe.


phetic organ of the Divine saying is doubly characterised, verse 2 sets forth in two-fold expression


the two-fold Divine medium of the inspired prophetic word.”


Ver. 3. “God


(£rdmann.)


Rock.” “To indicate that the contents of His prophecy relate t


the salvation of the people of Israel, and are guarantced by the faithfulness of God.” (Kei;


“Said . . . Speaks.” Rather, “ Saith


keth.” “Be that ruleth.” This


should be—“ 4 ruler over men—just—A ruler in the fear of God” It evidently refers exalusively


418


GHaP. XX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


—_


to the Messiah, asin Isa. xi. 2, 3. and is a sentence abrupt and isolated ; not, as Erdmann remarks,
syntactically connected either with verse 2 or 4.





Ver. 4, All the figures in this verse express the blessings of the Messiah’s rain, He is not
personally, as the English version makes it appear, the subject of the verse.


Ver.5. “Although . . . . yet.” Here, again, the English version must be rejected.
The verse read correctly is—‘ For ts not my house so with God. For He hath made with me am
everlasting covenant, provided with all, and attested. For all my salvation and all good pleasure
should He not make it to grow? ‘The covenant referred to is the promise made in chap. vii. 12,
which is said to be guarded or provided with all that can secure its fulfilment. “ My salvation,
t.¢., the salvation promised, assured to me and my seed. The pleasure must be taken (as the
salvation is from God) as—what is well-pleasing to God, not—what is well-pleasing to me.”
( Erdmann, )


Vers. 6,7. “As thorns are extirpated out of a land that is about to be brought under culture,
so wicked men will disappear from the kingdom of the Messiah—the wicked enemies and
persecutors of this kingdom of righteousness, They resemble those prickly thorny plants which
are twisted together, whose spires point in every direction, and are so sharp and strong that
they cannot be approached without danger ; but hard instruments and violent means must be
taken to destroy or uproot them. (Jamieson) “In the same place.” “ Where they dwell, or,
rs oe spot. (Kimchi and Kiel.) Erdmann’ and: others read, “80 that there should be an end
9 Md»


Ver.8. “Tachmonite” Rather, Ben Hachmoni, of the family of Hachmon, not as in
1 Chron. xxvii. 32, a son, because in verse 2 of that chapter, Zabdiel is mentioned as his father.
“Chief,” “not leader, but most distinguished.” (Hrdmann.) “Captains,” or knights,
(Erdmann.) “Eight hundred.” “ This is not to be understood as signifying that he killed
eight hundred men at one blow, but that in a battle he threw his spear again and again at
the foe, until eight hundred men had been slain. The Chronicles gives three hundred instead
of eight hundred ; and as that number occurs again in verse 18, it probably found its way from
that verse into this in the book of Chronicles.


Vers. 9-11. There are some variations between the reading here and in the parallel account
in 1 Chron. xi., but many of the apparent discrepancies are easily accounted for when we
remember that they may be independent records, and are not necessarily copied one from the
other. “Only to spoil,” é.¢., they had nothing to do but enter in and enjoy the fruits of the
victory. Hararite, “perhaps the mountaineer.” (Wordsworth). A troop. Erdmann,
Ewald, and Thenius translate this word as the name of the place, viz, Lehi. (See Judges xv.
9). Lentiles, “In the Chronicles it is added there was barley there. Doubtless the field (or
large plain) was sown with both; the independence of the two writers is thus shown.”


( Wordsworth).


Ver. 13. Three of the thirty ehicfs; or, the three chiefs of the thirty. The thirty are those
enumerated at the end of the chapter. Thirty-one (or thirty-two) are there mentioned, and more
in Chronicles, but this was evidently a name for a certain corps of men, which, as Kiel suggests,
possibly at first numbered exactly thirty, but which would at times receive additions in the
different wars in which David was engaged. Adullam. “ According to the situation here
described, this exploit occurred in the Philistine war, narrated in chap. v. 17, sq.” (Erdmann).


Ver, 15. Well of Bethlehem. “An ancient cistern, with four or five holes in the solid
rock, at about ten minutes’ distance to the north of the eastern corner of the hill of Bethlehem,
is pointed out by the natives as Bir-Daoud—David’s well. Dr. Robinson doubts the identity
of the well ; but others think that there are no good grounds for doing so. Certainly, considering
this to be the ancient well, Bethlehem must have once extended ten minutes further to the
north, and must have lain, in times of old, not as now on the summit, but on the northern rise
of the hill; for the well is by, or (1 Chron. xi. 7) at the gate, (Jamieson), “J find in the
descriptions of travellers that the common opinion is, that David’s captains had come from the
south-east, in order to obtain, at the risk of their lives, the so much longed for water 3 while it
is supposed that David was then himself in the great cave that is not far from the south-east of
Bethlehem ; which cave is generally held to have been that of Adullam. But (Josh. xv. 35).
Adullam lay “in the valley ”—that is, in the undulating plain at the western base of the
mountains of Judea, and consequently to the south-west of Jerusalem. j Be this as it may,
David's three men had, in any case, to break through the host of the Philistines in order to reach
the well; and the position of Bir-Daoud agrees well with this. ( Van de Velde): Dr.
Thomson (Land and the Book) says that Bethlehem is now poorly supplied with water


Ver. 17. “In jeopardy,” etc., for the price of their souls, 4.c., at the risk of their lives, “ The
water drawn and fetched at the risk of their lives is compared to the soul itself, and the soul is
in the blood. (Lev. xvii.11.) Drinking this water, therefore, would be nothing else than


inki (Keil.
drinking their blood.” (Keil.) pee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK i.
ph aE AS A


Ver. 19. Chief among three, As the historian says further on that, neither Abishai nos
Benniah attained unto the three (so the Heb.) ; it seems better to read here chief umong thirty, t.e.,
they distinguished themselves among those heroes, but were not so renowned as those mentioned


in verses 8-12.


Ver. 20. “Lion-like men.” Literally, Ariels, or Lions of God. The Arabs and Persians so
designate every remarkably brave men, and these were doubtless two celebrated Moabitish
warriors. “Pit,” or Cistern. ‘The lion had been driven into the neighbourhood of human
habitations by a heavy fall of snow, and had taken refuge in a cistern.” (Keil and others.)





Ver. 21. “An Egyptian.” Better The Egyptian, some well-known man, celebrated for his
strength and stature. “A goodly man,” lit. a man of appearances or (as in Chronicles) 2 man
of measure.

Ver. 22. “Three mighty.” Here also it seems necessary to read Thirty instead of Three.
(See on ver. 19.)

Ver. 24-39. Most of these names are not further known. “Shammah.” Must not be
confounded with the Shammahs mentioned in vers. 11 and 83. (Keil.) “Ittai.” “Must be
distinguished from the Gathite.” (Keil.) “ Eliphelet,” etc. Many Hebrew scholars consider
that there is here a slight error, as there ia no reason why the grandfather’s name should be
given in addition to that of the father, and it better suits the grammatical form of some of the
words to read— Eliphelet the son of Ur; Hepher the Maachathite, thus adding one to the list.


Ver. 89. “Thirty-seven.” “This number is correct, as there were three in the first class
(verses 8-12), two in the second (verses 18-23), and thirty-two in the third (verses 24-39), since
ia 84 contains three names according to the amended text.” (Kiel.) (See above ou

‘iphelet),


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH,— Verses 1-3.


Daviw’s PRopHEcy.


I. That God has spoken to man is a fact of human history. Reflection
upon the a of things around us, and especially upon the nature and needs
of man, would lead us to expect that God would break the silence of eternity
and let His voice be heard by the children of time. When a vessel is built to
sail upon unknown seas, the builder and owner of the ship does not consider her
complete without the compass, by means of which she can make her way safely
to distant ports and so fulfil the end for which she came into existence. A good
human father, knowing the moral perils to which his children are exposed, will
not leave them without the benefits of such moral instruction as he is able to
impart to them. He would be a cruel man indeed if he permitted his children
to grow ay whens giving them the benefits of his own larger experience and
superior knowledge—without furnishing them with the best rules for the
guidance of their lives which he was able to frame. Men find themselves
strangers on the earth—compelled, whether they will or no, to cross the stormy
and mysterious sea of life, and they naturally look to Him to whom they owe
their being for some guidance to a haven of rest and satisfaction at the close of -
the voyage. They know how carefully a good earthly father provides, so far as
he is able, for all the needs of his children ; and reasoning from the creature to
the Creator, they conclude that God must have so provided for their spiritual
needs, especially as He so bountifully and constantly supplies their bodily wants,
Thoughtful men in past ages were driven to the conclusion that @od would thus
speak to men ; and we, who possess the book which claims to be the revelation
of His mind and will, accept it because reason and analogy lead us to feel that
such a revelation must be, and that the Bible records an undoubted fact when it
declares that it has taken pkace.


II. That God should speak by one man to many, and by so f is i
sage” with the social constitution of all ‘htays deugnd ape poasieet
a


OHAP, XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





partments of life we find that blessings come to man through man—that the
gifts of God as arule do not come to us direct from heaven, but through the
medium and ministration of those who are bone of our bone and flesh of our
flesh. Not only so, but the most precious and valued benefits do not come
through every man or any man, but through men who seem to be specially gifted
and elected to be the channels of such good things. One great scientific
discoverer is the means of bringing enlightenment and elevation to many
generations, another unfolds a secret by which the pain and suffering of thousands
1s lessened or done away with. A great statesman brings peace and prosperity
to the homes of hundreds of his countrymen, and a philanthrophist lifts up a
generation of down-trodden men and women, and causes them to sing for joy.
When God gave to man that greatest of His gifts—a knowledge of Himself—He
did but work in harmony with His own constituted methods when He made
known His will first to prophets and apostles, that through human hearts and
by human lps the goodwill of God to the race might be made known.


ITI. What God has spoken reveals His desire that the rule of heaven should
become the rule of earth. One reason why the rule of heaven is the rule of
justice is because its King can make no mistake as to what justice really is,
Human creatures in power are sometimes unjust through ignorance of the
merits of the case. ‘They cannot be so perfectly acquainted with all the cir-
cumstances of those under their authority as to act at all times with strict
impartiality. But blessed be God, it is not so with Him. He who made man
knews what is in him and around him, and cannot therefore err in His
judgment. And all that He has said and done shows Him to be no less desirous
thar capable of thus dealing righteously with the children of men. He has
found the Ruler who alone is able to bring about this reign of righteousness
upon the earth. His beloved Son can misjudge none through ignorance, and
His perfect holiness makes it certain He will not abuse the power which He
holds in His hand. In His life and death we read the desires and purposes of
God concerning us, and when He speaks we hear the voice of Him who sits
upon the throne of the universe, saying, “A just God and a Saviour, there is
none beside Me” (Isa. xlv. 21). In proportion as men listen to Him, and follow
His guidance, will heaven be begun upon earth, and the darkness of sin and
sorrow be dispersed by the rise of this Sun of Righteousness. It is to this
end that “ God spake in times past by the prophets,” and has “in these last
days spoken by His Son.” (Heb. i. 1.)


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver, 1. Religion, it has been con- battled fields of earth and to tne peity


tended, is not the proper theme of
poetry. . .. . But if poetry be
adapted to body forth the noblest
conceptions, and to breathe the lan-
guage of stirring emotion, where is the
theme that presents a field so sublime
as religion, or awakens emotions so
fervent? .... The most daring
flights fall far short of the elevation
which such themes will justify ; the
most glowing language cannot exagge-
rate such emotion. Must the noblest
forms of language be restricted to em-


strifes and achievements of men? ., .
No, let poetry rise amid the roll of
cherubic wheels and the rushing of
cherubic wings; let her glow with
seraphic ardour and learn seraphic
strains ; let her celebrate the redeem-
ing work, and put hymns into the lips
of those who, struggling with emotions
which they have no language to utter,
find in the bold and tender stanzas
which consecrated talent has put forth,
the impassioned strains that both ex-
press and excite their piety. Were
423


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


x


BOOK I.





examples asked it might be shown that
poetry is the selected form in which
prophets embodied their inspired vati-
cinations, and the Psalms might be
adduced ag sc many lyrical composi-
tions exclusively dedicated to devotion.
—John tly.


Ver. 4. The chief idea of the em-
blem—the grass shining clearly after
rain—is that of growth—fresh, healthy,
beautiful development and progress—
steady, silent advance in holiness, In
individuals under his precious influence
the graces of the new creation are seen
ripening, the understanding becoming
more clear, the will more firm, the con-
science more vigorous, the habits more
holy, the temper more serene, the
affections more pure, the desires more
heavenly. In communities conversions
are multiplied, and souls advance
steadily in holy beauties ; intelligence
spreads, love triumphs over selfishness,
and the expansive, genial spirit of
Christ drives out the bitter spirit of
strife and the dry spirit of mammon.—
Blaikie.

Like the spring, so is also the reign
of grace, a joyous, busy time, wherein
Messiah makes us righteous and God-
fearing, so that we become green,
blooming, fragrant, and grow and be-
come fruitful. And now go so; Who
lives in spring he dies no more; who
dies in winter he lives no more, for the
sun goes away from the latter; but
to the former the sun rises up of which
David prophesies. Where the sun,
Christ, does not shine clear, the spring
also is not pleasant; but Moses with
the law’s thunder makes everything
dreadful and quite deadly. But here,
in Messiah’s time, says David, when
He shall reign over Israel itself, with
grace to make us righteous and save
us, it will be as delightful as the best
time in spring, when before day there
has been a delightful warm rain, that
is, the consoling gospel has been
preached, and quickly thereupon the
sun, Christ, comes up in our heart
through right faith without Moses’
clouds and thunder and lightning.
Then all proceeds to grow, to be green

422


and blooming, and the day is rich in
joy and peace.—Luther.


Vers. 6 and 7. Some regard Christ's
sceptre as one of mercy only, but the
uniform representation of the Bible is
different. ‘There is an ominous com-
bination of mercy and judgment in
this, as in most predictions of Christ’s
kingly glory. In the bosom of one of
Isaiah’s sweetest promises, the Messiah
declares that He was anointed to pro-
claim “the day of vengeance of our
God.” .... It could not be other-
wise. The union of mercy and judg-
ment is the inevitable result of that
righteousness which is the foundation of
His government. Sin is the abominable
thing which He hates. ‘To separate
men from sin is the grand object of
Hisrule. For this end, He draws His
people into union with Himself; ....
but as for those who refuse to part
with their sin,. ... the sin that is
within them cannot abide in His holy
kingdom, and as they refuse to let
their sin be destroyed and their per-
sons saved, nothing remains but that
they and their sins perish together.—
Blaikie.


Vers. 1-7. True preaching is alwajs
@ prophetic testimony. I. As to its
origin: the spirit of the Lord speaks
through it. II. As to its contents:
the word of the Lord is upon its
tongue. III. As to its subjects: the
mysteries of God’s saving purpose,
which only God’s Spirit can explain ;
the great deeds of God’s grace, which
can be proclaimed only on the ground
of personal, inner experience, and of
one’s own seeing and hearing ; and the
future affairs of God’s kingdom, in the
manifestation of Divine salvation and
Divine judgment, which only the eye
illuminated by the light and of the
Spirit can behold.—Ardmann.

The prophetic photograph of the


‘future ruler in the prophecy of David


auswers in its outlines to the counter-
part of the fulfilment in Christ, and
this :—I. In respect to His personal
appearing, perfect righteousness, and
holiness in complete fear of God (re-


OHAP, XXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUBL.


Pe aS I ee


ligious ethical perfection). II. In
respect to the extent of His royal
dominion, He is ruler over men, univer-
sality of world dominion. III. In
respect to the foundations of His king-
dom, the promises of God. IV. In
respect to the activity and effects of
his royal rule, on the one hand in the
enlightening, warming, animating, and
fructifying light of his manifestations
of grace and blessings of salvation ; on
the other hand, in the fire of His
judgment consuming all ungodliness.
—Hrdmann.

The prophetic element, which ap-
pears in David’s Messianic psalms,
comes out most strongly here. In
Nathan’s promise and prophecy David
is merely passively receptive, and his
prayer is only the echo of the Divine
word he has received, but here he
rises to the highest prophetic action,


bearing towards the Divine saying (the
Newm), by which he receives an imme-
diate revelation in plastic form of
what he had previously received as a
promise through Nathan.—Lrdmaun.
A blessed end, when, in looking back
upon the path of life that lies behind,
one has nothing to utter but gratitude
and praise ; when, in looking around
upon his own life’s acquisiiions and
his possession of salvation, all self-
glorying is silent, and only the testi-
mony to God’s grace and mercy, that
has done all and given all, comes upon
the lips. When, in looking forward
into the future of God’s kingdom upon
earth, on the ground of the grace ex-
perienced in life, one’s faith becomes a
prophet, beholding the ways along
which the Lord brought His Kingdom
through darkness to light; through
conflict to victory.—Ardmann.


which pre-supposes indeed a passive


MAIN HOMILETICS OF TRE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 8-89,
Tae Micgury Men anp Tur Wet or Bera.enem.


f. There is a loyalty in noble natures which seeks occasions of self-sacrifice.
Satan very greatly belied even our fallen human nature when he said, * Skin
for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life” (Job ii. 4). Here
he shows either his ignorance or his malice, for millions of men and women have
proved its falsity. No generation has ever lived upon the earth in which some have
not been found willing to risk their lives, not merely in obedience to the voice
of conscience, or out of gratitude to Christ and for the sake of spreading His
gospel, but as David’s mighty men did here, with a devotion which seemed on
the watch for an opportunity to manifest its depth, We should have good
reason to admire these warriors if they had fought their way to Bethlehem’s
gate to rescue their master from the hands of the Philistines, or to procure for
him some necessary food or drink. Such a deed would have entitled them to
receive the well-done of faithful servants and would have established their claim
to David’s grateful iove. But in braving death to gratify a passing wish of their
king they went far beyond the strictest requirements of duty, and their conduct is
a striking proof of the fact that the noblest natures find their purest gratification
in self-sacrifice—in laying all that they have and are at the feet of another.


II. Those who are the objects of deep affection should be watchful of the
claims they make uponit. David's desire was perfectly natural and lawful, and
it was not wrong to express it. But it was certainly somewhat inconsiderate,
seeing that he must have known the kind of men who surrounded him.
Probably, however, he did not dream that the utterance of his wish would have
such a result, and we may well believe that his experience now made him more
careful in the future when such prave and loving friends were near. It behoves
all who are deeply and tenderly loved to be very mindful how strong such love

423


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 14


x











4s and how much it will do and bear for the object of its love. True it is that
self-devotion raises and gladdens the soul that exercises it, but none but the
utterly mean man could use this truth to excuse his own selfishness. Let such
an one remember that he loses in proportion as the other gains, and let all be
so anxious to find out and gratify the desires of those who love them as to
have no room to express their own.


III. Heroic deeds have a tendency to beget others after their kind It is
quite possible that David’s mighty men became what they were through associa-
tion with him. He had set them many noble examples of bravery and self-
forgetfulness, and they had been apt pupils of a worthy master. And now their
deed of loyal daring begets in him one of the same kind. When men thus seek
to equal and out-do each other in bringing their lower nature into subjection to
the higher, and in seeking who shall be the greater in acts of loving service,
then, indeed, is a warfare carried on which is all gain and no loss, and where
both sides gain a victory worth having.


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


I. Thethree warriors must besurveyed
as servants of David, men engaged to
obey his commands and execute his
will to the utmost of their power. And
their conduct then appears very ad-
mirable, as far removed as can well be
imagined from that calculating and
niggardly obedience which betrays a
disposition to do the least possible, to
render as little to a master as that
master can be prevailed on to accept.

Caergae David might have sum-
moned the bravest of his battalions
and bidden them attempt the forcing
a passage to the well, but he simply
uttered a wish, . . . and it was
sufficient for the bold and true-hearted
men, . . . ‘There is an example
set to every man who is called upon
for obedience, which fits the history
before us to be inscribed on our
kitchens, our shops, and our churches.
The example lies in their not having
waited for a command, but acted on a
wish, and there is no man to whom the
term servant applies—and it applies
to every man, at least with reference
to God—who would not do well to
ponder the example. . Consider
men generally as the servants of God.

te e dealeth with us as with
children, ro‘her not laying down an
express Lio pt for every possible case,
but *uptusing in us a principle which
wil’ siways lead to our considering


what will be pleasing to Himself, and
to our taking His pleasure as our rule.

. . . And the Christian should
search for the least indication of God’s
will, and give it all the form of a posi-
tive statute. ... II. Then what care
should there be that nothing may be
said m joke which may be taken in
earnest, nothing even hinted at as our
belief or desire which we would not
have acted upon by those who hear
our words. It is specially to children
that this remark applies; for they
may be supposed to have all that
submissiveness to authority and that
willingness to oblige which dis-
tinguished David’s warriors, as well
as the inability of discriminating a
casual expression from an actual
direction. There may occur
precisely what occurred with David’s
servants, It is not that the monarch
has commanded his warriors to dare
death . or even wished them
to undertake the rash and perilous
enterprise. It is only that, without
reflection or thought, he gave utter-
ance to something that was passing in
his mind, and that those about him
overheard the inconsiderate expression.
And do you mark that young person,
who is devoting himself with unesl-
culating eagerness to some worldly
pursuit. . . . . The parent never
wished him thus to squander his

424


OHAP. XXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


SAMUEL,





powers; the parent never thought
that he would . . . . but was
apt to give words to feelings which he
would never have breathed, had he
remembered the possibility of their
being received as genuine, or inter-
preted as laudable. Ill. But
the genuineness of the repentance of
Dates. oe alee proved® by
his refusal to derive benefit from his
ate ns . And we are now
concerned with the question as to
what is binding on a man, if, with the
advantages, procured by a fault, lying
at his disposal, the water from the well
of Bethlehem sparkling before him, he
become convinced of hisfault? .. .

Is he to drink of the water, to enjoy
the advantages? It may often bea
hard question, but we do not see how
there can be any true penitence, where
what has been wrongfully obtained is
kept and used. . . . Let the case
be that which is not unlikely to occur
amid the complicated interests ofagreat
mercantile community. . . . We
cannot think it enough to give large
sums in charity as an atonement or
reparation. . . Zaccheus made


an accurate distinction between resti- —


tution and almsgiving ; he would give
alms of that only which had been
honourably obtained; the rest he
returned, with large interest, to those
from whom it had been unfairly pro-


cured. And though it might be im-
possible for the trader to make restitu-
tion precisely to the parties who have
been injured, we do not see how, with
his conscience accusing him of having
done wrong, he can lawfully appropriate
any share of the profits any more than
David could have lawfully drunk of
the water procured at his ill-advised
wish.—Canon Melville.

A knightly deed this! But was it
not rather foolhardiness, if not down-
right servility, and was not this expend-
ing courage recklessly, and dealing
wastefully with human life?  ‘l'his
Fee resembles that with which

udas Iscariot presumed to censure the
anointing of Mary at Bethany. True
love has its measure in itself, and in
its modes of manifestation puts itself
beyond all criticism.—Krummacher.

In David’s conduct to the herves
that bring him water from Bethlehem
at the risk of their lives are set forth
these three things :—I. Noble modesty,
which regards the love-offering of one’s
neighbour as too dear and valuable for
ones self and declines to receive it.
II. Sincere humility before the Lord,
which lays the honour at His feet as
He to whom alone it belongs. IIL.
A clear view and tender estimation of
the infinite moral worth of human life
in men’s relations towards one another
and towards God.— 4Lrdmane.


CHAPTER XXIV.


Ver. 1. “Again.”


Evidently referring to the famine mentioned in chap. xxi. 1-14.


“Jsrael.” Some special national guilt not specified must be here referred to. If, as most
writers suppose, this occurred in the closing years of David’s life it may be the rebellion under
Absalom, “He.” Attempts have been made to translate here impersonally, David was moved,
etc. ; and in Chronicles the instigation is attributed to Satan. But the grammatical construction
will not admit of any other rendering, and the expression has parallels in other parts of
Scripture, and must be read in the light of what is revealed to us of the Divine character.
(See 1 Sum. xxvi. 19, 2 Sam. xvi. 10.) On these passages Kiel says : “‘ They show that God only
instigates those who have sinned against Him to evil deeds ; and therefore that the instigation
e-nsists in the fact that God compels sinners to manifest the wickedness of their hearts in
deeds, or furnishes the opportunity and occasion for the unfolding and practical manifestation of
the evil desires of his heart, tnat the sinner may either be brought to the knowledge of his
more evil ways and also to repentance, through the evil deed and its consequences, or if the
heart should be hardened still more by the evil deed, that it may become ripe for the judgment


425


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL, BOOK 1.


of death. Erdmann remarks that “the conception that God incites to sin in the Old Testament
belongs to the same circle of thought as the idea, carried over by Paul into the New Testament,
of man’s hardening in sin as a Divine act. The hardening pertains only to the inner being, to
heart and disposition (which becomes insusceptible to the influences of the Divine word and
spirit), to the will, which persistently sets itself against God’s holy will, to the ethical habits of the
whole personality, eto. . . . The Divine incitement to evil on the other hand refers to individual
acts, and consists not in God’s producing evil, which would be inconsistent with his holiness
(comp. James i., 19), but in his occasioning the evil to break forth from the hidden depths of
the heart and realise itself in deed, though this need neither pre-suppose nor induce hardening,
but is rather intended to be the mean and avenue to the salvation and bettering of the sinner.”
Hengstenberg’s comments on Psalm xli. 6 apply well to this subject. “Sin pertains, indeed, to
man. He may always free himself from it by penitence. But if he does not repent, then the
forms in which sin exhibits itself are no longer under his control, but under God’s dispensation,”
etc, But it is perhaps safer to leave this very difficult subject by saying, in the words of the
American translator of Lange’s Commentary, that “there is here involved the whole subject of
the co-relation of Divine and human action, about which we can only insist on the two unhar-
monisable facts of the absolute efficient control of God, and the complete independence of
man.” (See also Hengstenberg on verse 8.)





Ver, 2. “Number,” or muster. From verse 9 it appears that this numbering was of a
military character, and the aim of David was, most likely, to ascertain the fighting power of


the people,


Ver. 3, “How many soever,” literaliy, as it ds. Joab’s words show that this census was
quite different from that taken by Moses at the command of God. (Exod, xxx. 12; Numbers
i. and xxvi) He evidently regarded it at least as impolitic. Several views are held as to the
nature of David’s sin in the act, but, as Erdmann remarks, Joab’s remonstrance “ indicates
David’s purpose to be to please himself with the exhibition of the imposing military strength of
the people ; and the ungodly feature, therefore, was its motive, David’s haughty estimation of
himself and his people. His sin was one both of the lust of the eyes and pride) Ruste noes
Doubtless he who had led Israel to so lofty a height, forgetting himself before the Lord,
had a proud desire to exhibit the splendid array of his people’s military strength, as a
pledge of the further advance of his house and people, and of the further development
of the promise in Deut. xxxiii, 29.” “The nature of David’s sin is declared by the
sacred writer, saying that it was prompted by Satan, the author of pride and unbelief;
»».. it was the sin of lack of faith in God, and in Fis protection; it was the sin of self
confidence, vain glory, and reliance on an arm of flesh.” (Vordsworth), “ Warlike thoughts
certainly stand in the back-ground ; if we fail to see this, we lose the key to the whole
transaction. David feeds his heart on the great numbers, on the thought of what his sucegssora
on the throne would be able to attain with such power. From its first origin Israel was called
to the supremacy of the world. Already this assurance was given (Deut, xxxiii. 29). David
now thought he could rise, step by step, to such elevation without the help of God, who had
provided for the beginni. ;. The records should bear witness to all time that he had laid a
solid foundation for this great work of the future. Had his perception been clear, he would not
have disregarded the special hint contained in the law respecting the danger connected with the
numbering of the people, In Exod. xxx. 11, it is ordained that on the numbering of the peopie
every Israelite should bring a ransom, “that there be no plague among them, when thou
numberest them.” By this they would be released, as it were, from the death incurred by their
proud arrogance. It reminded them of the danger of forgetting human weakness, so imminent
where an individual feels himself the member of » large whole. ..... With this feeling even
the Romans presented offerings of atonement at their census. ... . In Psa. xxx., which has
reference to this event, David himself describes the state of his mind, which offered a point of
contact for the temptation According to this, confidence was the melancholy root of sin, both
in David and the nation. Soft indolence, says Calvin, had taken possession of his mind, so that
he had no inclination for prayer, nor any dependence on the mercy of God, but trusted too
much to his past fortune. Where this corrupt disposition is found in the soul, God’s influence
making use of Satan as its instrument, leads the corrupt germ to its development, rousing to
action that which slumbers in the soul in order to bring about the retributive judgment in which
man, if othv:wise well intentioned, learns fully to recognise his sinful condition, and is moved
to repentance. The question is not one of simple permission on the part of God, but of a real
action, and that of a nature which each one may still perceive in his own tendencies, Whoever
once yields to his sinful disposition is infallibly involved in the sinful deed which leads to
retributive judgment, however much he may strive against it,” (Hengstenderg.)


Ver. 5. “Pitched,” i.¢., encamped in the open cvuntry because of the great numbers whe
would assemble. “Aroer. , . river of Gad.” Rather, the “ brook-valley,” etc. There
was another Aroer in Reuben, and one mentioned only in 1 Sam. xxx. 28. This town is
generally considered to be identical with the one near Rabbah mentioned in N um, xxxii, 34 and
Joshua Sc Some travellers identify it with the modern Ayra, but there is much uncer.

42 .


OHAP. XXIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,





tainty about its precise position. ‘“Jazer.” Mentioned several times in Joshua and in
Numbers, and sometimes spelt Ja-azer. “It was known to Eusebius and Jerome, and its
position is laid down with minuteness in the Onanasticon as ten Roman miles west of Phila-
delphi and fifteen from Heshbon,.” (Biblical Dictionary.) Modern travellers are divided as to
its exact site,


Ver. 6. “Gilead.” The mountainous district on both sides of the Jabbok. “'Tahtim-
Hodshi,” This word is very obscure, and neither ancient nor modern translators can discern
any meaning in it, either as a proper name or asa descriptive phrase. It is generally agreed
that the text is incorrect. “ Dan-jaan.” “ There seems no reason to doubt that the well-known
Dan is intended. We have no record of any other Dan in the north, and even if this were not the
case, Dan, as the accepted northern limit of the nation, was too important a place to escape
mention in such a list as that in the text.” (Biblical Dictionary.) The Vulgate reads Dan-jaar,
which Gesenius translates Dan in the wood, This description agrees with the character of the
country.


Ver. 7. “Tyre,” etc, That is, in the region afterwards called Galilee, in which it appears the
heathen nations were not exterminated but tributary. (So Keil and others.) “ The division
into Hivites and Canaanites is remarkable; perhaps these were the most prominent of the
surviving native races.” (Translator of Lange’s Commentary).


Ver, 8. Gone through, ta. “According to 1 Chron. xxi. 6, the census was not extended
into Benjamin and Levi, “ because the king’s word was an abomination to Joab,” and according
to 1 Chron. xxvii 24, Joab did not finish his task because the plague broke out before he had
finished,


Ver. 9. Eight hundred thousand. ... . Five hundred thousand These numbers
do not agree with those given in Chronicles where a higher number is given for Israel and
a lower for Judah (1,100,000 and 470,000). Some think there were two countings, one
according to the private lists in the cities and villages, the other from the public registers, or
that Chronicles includes the non-Israelites among the people. “The numbers are given in
thousands, and thurefore are only approximate statements in round numbers ; and the difference
in two texts arose chiefly from the fact, that the statements were merely founded upon oral
tradition, since, according to 1 Chron. xxvii. 24, the result of the census was not inserted in the
annals of the kingdom. ‘There is no ground, however, for regarding the numbers as exaggerated,
if we only bear in mind that the entire population of a land amounts to about four times the
number of those who are fit for military service, and, therefore, 1,3'0,000, or even a million and
a half, would only represent a total population of five or six millions—a number which could
undoubtedly have been sustained in Palestine, according to thoroughly reliable testimony as to
its unusual fertility.” (Keil). “In this muster of Israel it is probable the standing army of
David (1 Chron. xxvii.), which had before been numbered, is not reckoned, but it is inserted in
the Chronicles. This standing army consisted of 12x 24,000am288,000 men, who, with their
chiliarchs and twelve generals, will make 300,000; and if these are added to the 800,000
mentioned here, the numbers in both places would coincide.” (Wordsworth). With regard to the
difference in the number allotted to the tribes of Judah, Wordsworth suggests that “perhaps
David had 30,000 stationed with him at Jerusalem, and the other 470,000 were mustered by


Joab.”


Ver.11. “For,” rather, end. It is not intended that God’s visit produced the conviction in
David’s mind.

Ver. 18. “Seven years.” In Chronicles the number is three, which some expositors prefer
as agreeing better with the connection, viz., three evils to choose from, and each lasting through
three divisions of time. But, as Keil remarks: “This agreement favours the seven rather than
the three, which is open to the suspicion of being intentionally made to conform to the rest.”
Some suggest that in the Chronicles three successive years to come were offered ; and that the
seven here include the three former years of famine, which, with the year then in course, would
make seven,


Ver.14. “The hand of men.” “Tt is not easy to see how this applies to famine ; probably
inasmuch as it tends more or less to create dependence upon those who are still in possession of
the means of life.” (Keil.) “ War and famine would not have hurt David’s own person. With
noble disinterestedness he chose pestilence, in which he himself would be exposed to death no
less than his subjects.” (Zheoderet.)


Ver. 15.. “The time appointed.” A doubtful rendering, and some translate “to the time
of the evening sacrifice,” objecting that the pestilence did not. last three days. But the phrase
“time appointed” may even then be taken to refer to the appointed hour of evening sacrifice,
or it may be as Erdmann suggests that “the narrator combining and, in the Hebrew fashion,
anticipating what follows, means by this expression to say that God in His mercy hie the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL. BOOK IL


—————————— —— eSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSeE"E


pestilence to go on only to a determined point of time within the three days.” “Seventy
thousand.” If the pestilence only lasted part of a day its violence was greater than any on
record. It is recorded by Diodorus that in the siege of Syracuse 100,000 soldiers in the
Carthaginian army died within a short time.


Ver. 16. “The angel.” Verse 17 affirms that David saw the angel. This then is no
poetic figure, but a statement of a supernatural event, which removes the pestilence from the
region of ordinary visitations of a similar nature. “Jerusalem.” “The pestilence seems to
have broken out at opposite extremities of the country, and to have advanced with gigantic
strides until it was ready to concentrate its violence upon Jerusalem.” (Jamieson.) “Lord
repented.” (See on 1 Sam. xv.10.) “Threshing-place.” These places were in the open
air, and usually outside the town or city, and on an eminence, if possible, in order to catch the
wind, which was utilised to winnow the corn. “Araunah the Jebusite.” Oalled Ornan in
the Chronicles, one of the old inhabitants of the land, who, having apparently become a
worshipper of Jehovah, retained his possessions in the city,


Ver. 17, “And David.” According to Chronicles, the elders also clothed in sackcloth were
with David at the time. “I have sinned.” “‘Ihe punishment was sent for the people’s own
sin, though David's sin was the immediate occasion of its execution.” (Von Gerlach.)


Ver. 23. “As a king.” The readings here differ somewhat. If we take it as translated in
the English version, we must understand that Araunah belonged to the royal family of the
Jebusites, an important fact which, as Thenius remarks, ‘ would not have been stated in a
single word.” Another reading is : “All this gives Araunah, the servant of my lord the king, to
the king.” Keil asserts that the noun is a vocative: All this gweth Araunah, O king, to the king.


Ver. 24. Fifty shekels, In Chronicles the sum is six hundred shekels of gold. No attempts
that have been made to reconcile these statements are satisfactory, and it seems better to
suppose ® corruption of the text in one of the records, “ Apparently the statement in Chronicles
is the more correct of the two ; for if we consider that Abraham paid four hundred shekels of
silver for the site of a family burial-place, at a time when the land was very thinly populated,
and therefore land must have been much cheaper than it was in David’s time, the sum.
of fifty shekels of silver (about £6) appears too low a price.” (Keil), “But it should be
remembered that the field for which Abraham gave four hundred shekels was of considerable
size, comprising the cave at one end, and also timber, perhaps several acres in all, whereas the
threshing floor was probably not one hundred feet in diameter. The explanation given by
Bochart (which is far the best) may possibly be true, that the fifty shekels here mentioned were
gold shekels, each worth twelve silver shekels, so that the fifty gold shekels are equal to the six
hundred silver ; and that our text should be rendered, David bought the threshing-floor and the
oxen for money, viz, fifty shekels, and that the passage in Chronicles should be rendered, gold
shekels of the value (or weight) of six hundred shekeis,


Ver. 25. “There.” As we learn from 2 Chron, ifi, 1, on Mount Moriah, afterwards the site
of Bolomen’s temple. (See Critical Notes on chap. v. 7.)


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE CHAPTER.
THe NUMBERING OF THE PEOPLE.


I. The motive and spirit of a deed determine its moral character. From the
human standpoint the act of David appears quite harmless, even if inexpedient
or impolitic. It belongs to quite a different class from his adultery and
murder, because those deeds at once shock the moral sense of everyone who has
any spark of moral sensitiveness within him, while this arouses no auch emotion.
Yet God here convicts His servant of a great wrong, and David acknowledges
the justice of the sentence. We must, therefore, look behind the outward
action to the inward state of mind which prompted it, and find there the
iniquity of which David confesses himself guilty. But this is in accordance
with all the teachings of Holy Writ from the days of the fall to those of Christ,
The deed which first brought death into the world and all our woe was one
which in itself was trivial, and under other circumstances would have been
innocent. But as an act of disobedience to a plain command it was a great
transgression, heavily weighted with terrible, yet Justly-merited, retribution,

428


CHAP. XXIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


Looking on the bright side of this doctrine, how small a thing it is to give a
thirsty fellow creature a cup of cold water, and how often it may be done
without having any moral significance. But Our Lord tells us there is a spirit
and a motive which make this ordinary and simple act of great moral value and
worthy of His notice and reward. So His anointing by Mary of Bethany. The
deed itself was not so very remarkable, it was not to human eyes a very great
act of devotion. But the acceptance which it met with from Him who read the
heart of the doer seals it as one of no ordinary spiritual worth. In this, as in
many other points, the religion of the Bible differs from and transcends all
other systems. It enters into a man’s soul and takes cognizance of what passes
there, and condemns or justifies accordingly.


II. Very godly men are sometimes strangely inconsistent with themselves.
Notwithstanding his deep spiritual experience and his ardent spiritual desires
and emotions, David had very strong tendencies to obey the lust of the flesh,
the lust. of the eye, and the pride of life. It seems almost impossible that the
man who penned the 23rd Psalm could have ever been an adulterer and a
murderer. It is, perhaps, more surprising at first sight that he who wrote the
5ist Psalm could afterwards, in apostolic language, have fallen into such a
“snare of the devil” as that in which we here find him. Yet every godly man.
who searches his own spirit knows how much there is still within him ready to
respond to the suggestions of the evil one, and every Christian’s life unites with
that of David in testifying to the universality of the experience of Paul—ZJ
delight in the law of God after thé inward man; but I see another law in my
members warring against the law of my mind and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin which is in my members (Rom. vii. 22, 23).


III. A man’s attitude after sin settles the question of character, and his
position in relation to God. A child’s character can be better estimated
by the way in which he behaves under his father’s just displeasure than
by counting the actual number of his transgressions. So is it with God’s
children. ‘The godly flee to God when they have sinned ; the ungodly flee from
Him (Psalm xxxiii. 1-8 ; 1 John 1-8). (On this thought see also on chap. xiv.
25-33, page 360. On the remonstrance of Joab see on chap xix. 1-15, page
384. On David's chastisement see on chap. xii. 14-25, page 346).


OUTLINES AND SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS.


Ver. 1. The Scripture is most care- ascertaining the armed forces of the


ful that we should feel the reality of
Divine intimations, that we should
refer them to their true source, and
yet that we should understand how
possible it is for a man to pervert
them and found wrong inferences upon
them, if his own mind is not in a
thoroughly pure and healthy condition.
The thought that it was a blessing to
be the head of a growing and thriving
people—this was Divine. The thought
that it was well for a ruler to be ac-
quainted with the condition and re-
sources of his people—this was Divine.
.. . But the determination, just then,
to send forth officers for the sake of


land—this was the thought of a self-
exalted man... . I do not know any-
thing so instructive to usif we use them
as we ought, as these passages in the
Bible, which teach us that all good
thoughts, counsels, just works, come
from the Spirit of God, and at the
same time that we are in most immi
nent peril every moment of turning the
Divine suggestions into sin, by allowing
our selfish and impure conceits and
rash generalizations to mix with them.
—NMaurice.


Ver. 12. The chastisement was not
sent while he was in a state of insensi-
429


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL,


BOOK i.


ne ETE ennennn en ee!


bility to his sin, but after he awoke to
a sense of it. It is not while the child
is in a state of proud and hardened
impenitence that the rod may be ap-
lied with most hope of success, but
when conscience has begun to speak
out, and soft relentings to appear.
Dealing with conscience and appeals to
the heart must ordinarily precede the
infliction of punishment.—laikie,


Ver. 14. Whatever correction is
necessary to God’s creatures, it is their
request that He may be the immediate
dispenser of it. 1. Because He is the
fountain of mercy, and limits the
punishment to the necessity. 2. He
chastises to reclaim and not to revenge.
3. What comes from the hand of the
Lord melts the heart and humbles the
soul, as the rod in the hand of man
can never do.

We do well believe thee, O David,
that thou wert in a wonderful strait ;
this very liberty is no otlier than
fetters; thou needest not have famine;
thou needest not have the sword ;
thou needest not have pestilence;
one of them thou must have ; there
is misery in all; there is misery in
any; thou and thy people can die
but once, and once they must die,
either by famine, war, or pestilence.
O God, how vainly do we hope to pass
gver our sins with impunity, when
all the favour that David and Israel
can receive is to choose their bane!
—Bishop Hall.


Ver. 10. “See then, David, thou
hast gained thy purpose. What a
power is this that is placed at thy
disposal! A population of six mil-
lions, the inhabitants of the little
tribes of Levi and Benjamin not being
reckoned.. What great things mayest
thou now undertake! Who may dare
raise his head so loftily as thou mayest,
and who is there that may sit on his
throne so free from care and so securely
as thou dost?” So many in spirit
might perhaps say to him. But what
happens? Instead of glorying, the
king bends his head, descends in silence
from his seat, and withdraws into one

430


of his more remote chambers ; and now
listen !—“‘I have sinned greatly in
that I have done,” he cries out with
deep emotion of heart: ‘and now, I
beseech thee, O Lord, take away the
iniquity of thy servant, for I have
done very foolishly!” Wonderful t
That very thing from which David
promised to himself kingly joy, now
brings him only bitter sorrow, and that
which ought to have added to his dig-
nity, suddenly humbles him in deepest
debasement. But this does not surprise
us, As thesun always breaks through
the clouds which encompass it, so the
conscience, when once it is awakened
and enlightened by the Spirit of God,
always comes forth again victoriously
out of every eclipse, and frees itself
from every entanglement, and asserts
anew its authority as a judge. Yea,
in believers it constantly increases in
tenderness, and becomes more and
more like the apple of the eye, to which
the smallest mote gives annoyance ;
nor can there be any rest obtained tall
it isremoved. ‘I'he world cannot com-
prehend how so many things which it
thinks unimportant and small fill the
children of God with such deep shame
and make them so sad. “ What is
there so serious,” it is perhaps said to
them, “in examining thy treasures, or
in seeking the favour of this or that
influential man, or taking a lottery-
ticket? Where is there a Divine
command which thou hast thereby
transgressed?” And, indeed, those
who thus speak are not conscious where
such a Divine precept is. But they
know it well who have transgressed it,
Their heart has forsaken the Lord
and distrusted his power and love.—
Krummacher.

What then, was David’s sin? He
will needs have Israel and Judah num-
bered. Surely there is no malignity in
numbers; neither is it unfit for a
prince to know his own strength. Thig
is not the first time that Israel had
gone under a reckoning. The act
offends not, but the misaffection ; the
same thing had been commendably
done out of a princely providence,
which now, through the curiosity,


OHAP. XXIV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


ee EZ EN


pees misconfidence of the doer, proves
einously vicious. ‘I'hose actions,
which are in themselves indifferent,
receive either their life or their bane
from the intentions of the agent.
Moses numbereth the people with
thanks, David with displeasure, Those
sins which carry the smoothest fore-
heads and have the most honest appear-
ances, may more provoke the wrath of
God than those which bear the most
abomination in their faces. How many
thousand wickednesses passed through
the hands of Israel, which we men
would rather have branded out for
judgment than this of David’s! The
righteous judge of the world censures
sins, not by their ill looks, but by their
foul hearts —Béshop Hall.


Ver. 24. The principle that comes
out in these words is one that will
sweep the whole circle of worship, and
work, and gifts, and personal religious
life. I. Worship. For in our buwild-
$ngs, in our service of praise and prayer,
preaching and hearing, we are to give
our best in effort, in intelligence, in all
things, facing and resisting every tempt-
ation to the contrary, with the words,
“Shall I offer,” ete. II. Work. Not
to schemes only that are pleasant, and
in times that are convenient, and by
proxies that are easily obtainable will
the true worker of God devote himself,
Ill. Gifts. Not with careless gifts,
almost covertly given, or the smallest
coin dealt out niggardly, can he give
who says, “Shall I offer?” etc. IV.
Personal religion. There is meanness
and ingratitude in the spint that
relegates all religious care to the
leisure of Sunday, or of the sick-room,
or of the infirmities of old age. Why
should we not offer to God that which
costs us nothing? Three questions
may throw light uponit. 1. How far
what costs you nothing és any benefit
to yourself? Such may be of some
benefit, But only what “costs some-
thing” call out, (1) highest motives
and employs (2) all faculties. 2. How
far what costs you nothing has much
influence upon the world? Sacrifice is
the subtle and tremendous element


needed in all great influence. In the
home, in the Church, in the state, they
only climb true thrones, and wear rea]
crowns, who have the spirit of sacrifice.
The Saviour Himself relied upon that
—“I, if I be lifted up, will draw,” ete.”
So does the Eternal Father of men, for
He has made “Christ,” whois incarnate
sacrifice, “the power of God.” 3. How
far what costs you nothing is acceptable
to God? Christ’s praise of the poor
widow’s gift, God’s acceptance of the
sacrifice of Christ—sufficiently indicate
the Divine estimate of self-denial. And
since that service which costs us some-
thing has the pulses of reality, the
glow of love, and the reflection of
Christ—it surely is acceptable to God.
—U. R. Thomas.


Vers. 24, 25. An altar must be
built in the threshing-floor of Araunah
the Jebusite ; lo, in that very hill,
where the angel held the sword of
Abraham from killing his son, doth
God now hold the sword of the angel
from killing his people! Upon this
very ground shall the temple after
stand : here shall be the holy altar,
which shall send up the acceptable
oblations of God’s people in succeeding
generations.

O God, what was the threshing-floor
of a Jebusite to thee above all other
soils ? what virtue, what merit was in
this earth ? As in places, so in persons
it is not to be heeded what they are
but what thou wilt; that is worthiest,
which thou pleasest to accept.—Bp.
Hall.

It is very remarkable that before
the outward foundations of the temple
were laid, God’s forgiving mercy was
by God factually declared to be its
spiritual foundation.—Hengstenberg.


Vers. 1-25. Whom does the Lord
smite for his sins $ Him who—1. Lets
his heart be emitten by God’s earnest-
ness and goodness, and takes to heart
the greatness of his sin in contrast to
God’s loving kindness. 2. Recognises
his sin, in the light of God’s word, asa
transgression of His Holy will, and—8.
Maintains in his sinning and in spite

431


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: SAMUEL.


BOOK Ii.





of it the fundamental direction of his
beart towards the living God, and has
bevn preserved from falling away into
conplete unbelief.—Hrdmann.

true and hearty repentance is pre-
serwed in the life of God’s children. 1.
In the penitent confession of their sin
and gwilt before the yudgment seat of
God. 2. In fleeing for refuge to the
torgivmg grace of God. 3. In humbly
bowing under the punitive justice of
vod. 4. Ina confidence which even
amid Divine judgements does not waver
in the delivering merey of God.—
Airdmann.,

The gradual succession in the inner
life of a penitent sinner under the
chastening of God’s love. 1. Reproving
consctence. 2. Penitent conscience,
& Heariy prayer for forgirerass. §


Humble bowing beneath, the punish-


ment imposed. 5. Umreserved sub«
mission to the Divine mercy. — Lrd-
mann.

This history leads us to notice—
I. The severity of God in punishing
sin. The sin which David committed
was exceeding great. It was manifest
even to so wicked a man as Joab. His
punishment was proportionately severe.
What shall we therefore think of sin ?
Is it so light a matter as men generally
imagine? II. Zhe goodness of God in
pardoning sin. David evinced true
contrition by pleading that the punish-
ment might fall on him the guilty one,
and not on his innocent people. Ins
stantly did God command the anges w
stay his hand


INDEX OF SUBJECTS:


pacn
AccusaTIon, False, How to meet eee eee eee Seo een SSD 16
Actions, isolated, not the standard of character ... eco see aa 403


» Motive of, determine their character ... “se coe eco 428


Advancement, True a3 ae Sas ase wae aoe coe 196
Adversity reveals enemies... re des ois oes ae 2-231, 269
ms » hidden excellence ise ass aoe nae eos 76, 398
Affection, Examples of strong ... nee ae see ay 00378, 423
Appearances often deceptive ons ase Ree oes ve eee 172
Pe cannot deceive God ... aes oes cea eee ose 173
Atonement, Conscience feels need of — «ee eee rf sen Es 86


BEWEFICENCE, dishonest 100 see, wuss wwe wens BEB
Birth of a child, Importance of coe eco ooo ecco coo eco 18


» natural, no guarantee of character eee toe cea aes 40
Blessings may be turned into curses —-. eae op age ose 86
Bravery in a bad cause not uncommon =e. eae wee see eee 72


Body, Resurrection of the, necessary = «. eae a aes Sed oe 105


CALAMITIES, Aggravations of eee cco eso eas ene ooo 862


a Amelioration of =... oes sos A ace baa $63
of may involve both innocent and guilty... uae aes 271
a not always soften ... la wee ooo Ses ies 271
Calling, God's, will be made plain avs sae wee ves us 133


Character of man influences conduct of God ___... ase eee ee 408
a men’s conception of God ese son 408
Children blest for parent’s sake... pe See Sasi Beer eee) OG
» May imitate sin of parents =~. one des eee ae 370

re not always like parents ... vee ene Gee ee $105, 212, 329
Circumstances often misinterpreted eco ee cee ‘bien ieh Ree 223


a INDEX OF SUBJECT.





Claims, just, not always to be enforced ... eae aes
Confession not repentance... soe coe eee ove
Courage with humility... one ose bea sae

» Of best men may fail ... eso ose ase


Day of grace has its limits... ooo


een eee ey

Death of the righteous... ae -oe eos oe
Deceiver may be deceived ... ese os ore eve
Deed, good, lasting influence of a ove ses “ae
o may be done from bad motive “ee ree
Desires may be granted in displeasure... ane oes
» good, not always granted ... eee Mo oe
Discontent, popular ; its tendency ots aes a
Disobedience, Penalty of ... sss ove a we
Distrust, Fruit of ... ae eee eae oat aes
Dispensations, Divine, progressive... ees aks aoe


Diversity of gifts, Intention of «+. coo one See


ELECTION, God’s purpose in seal) ieod dane eae
Elevation, moral, of man; its source ... ane ‘ae
Emotion, religious ; its expression and dangers .. ae


a Ungodly cannot sympathise wits aaa
Enemies of God sometimes used to fulfil His purposes ..


os » unite against Him aoe sae Ree

» of the good, Portion of the eee oie ose

» attack in times of weakness ws PAS
Enmity, Effects of ... Pra ae aes ane és3
Epochs in life of men and communities ... ase aes
Evil men thwart each other sae one ae oa
»» powers ruled by God ... eee cee woe eee
»» tendencies in good men aoe eee eee wee


99 Tendency of, to repeat itself... coe ooo eco


Fartvre in lawful undertakings, Reasons for so. _— eee
Faith, A failure of... aoe ces eos asa one
» Opportunities of ... abe ous eco nek
» Connection between, integrity and eee ee
»» Victories of ... aye a AS ooo
Family life, no hindrance to woiaal life A SETVICE ese
Fleeing, sometimes better than fighting ... oo ose
Forgiveness, honourable... ose eee ay aes
Forgiven sin, may be punished .. ove Ni ay


PaGE
ue 350
+166, 238
pas 152
avo, EUS
esi 262
wee 242
Se 275
bas 273
os 287
---107, 270
ee 313
be 390
ae 143
+0143, 258
wes 316
eas 400
eee 816
<a 412
oe 305
a 305
eas 99
= 824
Se 87
aos 131
sae 226
ces 123
ees 232
sas 176
Pa 335
aoe 254
see 69
nee 215
co 226
ae 259
+152, 187
eee 105
ae 202
aan 134


+++267, 346


INDEX OF SUBJECTS. iif





; , PAGE
Friendship, true elements of sostumiitessiis oaseslc cet i Sean.) vigeekOonaat


» Capabilities Of... coe ooo eee eee eee 00 193; 211
, Proofs of een eee eee eee eee eee eo200, 326


GENEILOGY, VOlUG Of &, <ccc\ || cee.) | ees. | eve. te) see. eee 7
Generosity has its prudent side ... ate aoe aes tse eese RO
Gifts not graces «se eee ees hy ec ese oe 207
»» Diversity of, jiteniion “of eee one bee eee eee eee 400
God, His being and character  «. a sey hie ane dee us jesse condee
» useless to contend with ooo ane ses nae aes as 33
» His silent working ... ase ose Ses a ose eae 79
» unchangeable... ove eve ove eee oes “ed eee 85, 162
» Forbearance of aos See aks aes ae swe eae 128


» the refuge of the perplexed ... eo tee ae ake oe 228
» His ways and word will stand the test =. see Sue coe 412


» has spoken to man ... a aoe coe eee oes con 420
» Hisdesire forman ... mee see eee sae ase eos 421

» Views of, influenced by character ... ses We Ate nee 408

» Existence of, a source of human satisfaction aes ae cee 416
Dependence upon, only source of moral success... oo cee 416
Godly, sometimes rebuked by ungodly ... see a oes eae 384
» may be debtors to ungodly ase ae ee ae aoe 202

» _ help each other in trouble... eee See oe ane ae 204

» men, often inconsistent ... coe ae ae so. 287, 351, 429
Good, Tendency of, to repeat itself eas ay oe She oe 254
Gratitude gives courage --- ae Pe see tee eee eee Me ATE
ee good to give personal expression to ... ove wee coe 106

6 of the heart must find its way to the i eee ess oes 403
Greatness, True «-- “ie aes aie - ne am cee $76


Guidance, Divine .-- ooo ooo ooo eee eee eos 221, 314, 412


Harrep, a sustaining power ooo cae aoe ote os See 233
Heart, Sin in the, must be resisted soe ae Re Uae hae 334
Help, Seasonable ... awe ra nee Ae eee ese ss 374
Heroic deeds beget others... = oe eee Sena") wee wis te tena yy |


Home, Serving God at ecoe eee eee eee eee coe eco 91
Humility, True eee eee ece eee eee eee eee ---118, 126
a Honour should produce ses ove soe ees see 319


InconsistTENorEs of good men ~— ewe aes woe ere due! 287, 351, 429
Indignation, Righteous, may degenerate --- woe eee eee a 244
Ingratitude, Nature of eae eee eee coo ooo e00 eee 51


iv INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


| ‘ AOC ES,


Ingratitude, Penalty of... eee
Integrity, connection of faith and...
Intercession, Duty of eco ese


JEALovsw, in whom found . ooo
ie Danger of aes aus
Ee Effects of eee ooo
Joy in God, its foundation... ose


Judgments on the godly will extend to the ung


a on good men by bad ...


KNOWLEDGE God's, infinite... eee


Laws, Temporary and permanente.
» Natural, God’s servants


» Cause of suspension of beneficial


Liberty, Foundation of true ae
Licentiousness, its degrading power
Life, God the Author of ... ake
Light, Moral, consequence of refusing
» God the source of ... sae
Love, Strength of parental... +e
» Strong obligations of its objects


May, Influence of one... Fe
» helped by man ONE gh Fe
» must work with God... gus
» God speaks by, to man HAS
Marriage, as instituted by God ...
Mediator, Qualifications fora as.


Meekness, Power of ae aka
Mercy with chastisement ... ses
Messenger, A Divine eee ae
Ministry, True... ae


% in holy things, Training for

‘ Obligations of ... ae
Miracles, not always convincing ...
Misjudgment of others... see
Motives, Importance of  .. a
Music, Influence of... — ,.. eee


ee es


cor


eee
eee
e000
ees


odly


PAaGa
eco cco ooo 127
eco eos eco 259
cco eee ooo 138
ooo eco ove 185
eco eee ooo 196
ace eco ese 223
eee see eve 404
ee ove ove 82
woe A cece 275
eee eo6 Seo £8
com ee oe 21¢
eee eve ose 394
ace eco ooo 394
eee wee ece 96
one won ee 41, 355
ove ses ene 30
eco one ase 263
eee sae wee 412
one eve coe 378
eve ooo oes 423
wae eee 000134, 227
a6 ue Sa 169
AS mee ese 280
cee ee coe 420
ial) Sadek i ga 9
Se eo |
eee eve eee 186
oon eee wos 177
See ven see 50
ee CAS eee 44
eve eee on 206
as gag eta 92
ee bak es 80
oe 15, 1


eee


ge


6, 177, 288, 368


428
e179


INDEX OF SUBJECTS. v


—_—_—_—_— eee


PAGE

National discontent, an opportunity for the ambitious... ove ove 390
) sin eco eco eee eco eee eee eee 000158, 395

= » authority of its retribution ies eos eee sue 159


.y) unity, Need of eco eee eco eee eso eee eee 97
Nobility of nature, common meeting ground ... se vee eee 898


. » seeks occasions of self-sacrifice  . sx. «. 423
OBEDIENCE, when unblest .. ove ooo eee ooo e0e ese 68
na partial, useless... oe eco eee oes aes ooo 162

ma best sacrifice, Why? 2 es. eee en eos wee 163

« to parents eee ooo eee ove eee ooo eee 185

a insures help... o80 bee abe wwe ooo ooo 299
Occasions needed to reveal men ... cen oa isd vee as 133
Omission, Sin of... ae aes eae pats oow aie woe 62
Oppression breeds rebellion ss ape ove eae oss ose, «220
Ordinances of God must be reverenced eco eve soe wee eco 92
- valued when lost cos eee ose wee ooo ooo 93


Prace-Maxzr, a double blessing ... 0 sen nen wesiewe—t(‘éS YUL
Position, Social, to be respected ... soe eee ane eee ove 237
Possessions, Unlawful, must be relinquished eee ‘ele pies iene 287
Power brings obligation... oes see eee aie eee nee 326
Praise, Duty of _ ... oe ove ese aes ooo wee wwe 25, 99
Prayer, Elements of true ... eve seo) wes soe ove ove 11

» Character gives weight to... ase ave apes soo ase 99

» Duty of intercessory ey YE wae ti ess eee 138


» Conviction of the good in relation to soo _— exe AS aaa fey 160
»  & law of God’s kingdom ... See “ae ote Sew.) eae, O20
»” when unavailing coe 200 ove eco eco eee ooo 160


» must be offered in submission «+. ove aos nee eee 1$1
» Promises fulfilled in answer to ee ove wee coe eee 99, 320


»  8elf-willed, Consequence of owe ose ee sad a 270
Promises of God _ ... ass se ake eee aoe coe ooo 75
id » fulfilled in answer to prayer ... oe. = ove wee: 99, 3.20
is » fulfilled by means of the ungodly _—..... eee eee 99, 289


Prosperity brings false friends _... ay eee ess oes ee «= 2A
$4 brings special temptation ... Pa eager es ess os §=—s- 888
Providence of God ... dns ase see ose see 82, 115, 126, 265
- » Endof... wae UP bes sie”, [viene Paileae eee 34
ie of man... coe soe ooo eee eee ae eee 265
Prudence, Value of... see wee gaa ees eee ace aes 245
Prudent sometimes to forego just claims... 000 ss. ves wee 8350)


w INDEX OF SUBJECTS.





PAGE

Punishment of sin ... ose eco eco oes coe ooo eve 52
nA »  afuler’s duty .. wae oat as Pe ooo 855

» not remitted harenee delayed coe Aes oon 395

Purposes, God’s, fulfilled by unlikely means «4. 0 wow ae +126, 224
~ and human instrumentality  . ooo eco $292, 370, 377


Quatirications for service differ at different periods of life «=. ee §«=6._-« 899


Reasonina, Mischievous ... oak eee aoe ae Sue ave 858
Rejecting God, Consequences of ... ee eee eee eae oan 137
Relationship, natural, without like character... ave aes aaa 71
» Penalties of aos cae eae ose soe 220

Repenkants: Elements of true... oes cee ace on ee 82, 94
as God’s acceptance of ... ane tee Bae ove eee 85, 341

Pa Exhortation, helpful to one bbe wae aaa vas 95

s God’s, nature of _... aes see one ae <e 162

a Rewards of ... eve eee ae ase wu mee 268


God brings men to ... ove ate aes sue eee 340

Ronibaca! National... ae oes sas oes eae +159, 395
Review, the past, good to ... Sale Sen Ba Ses oe rat 137
Ruler, Qualifications of a good ... are dee sea ace eee 46, 297
» True, will find obedient subjects ... See oa ape eee 296


Sacririce of one for many, when just... coe see bone Bes 392


7 Divine compensation for eee cee obs evs eae 45

a Self-influence of eee ae See wee eee aa 424
Satan, where he seeks to work ... ace Sea ose ase eee 176
Secret forces in life... sae ses ace nae soe aes ass 122
Selfishness, Punishment of... ae Ns see Ges 005 eee 243
Self-interest, an insecure foundation of trust ... one oan ue 390
Self-will, Consequences of ... eas 4s ese Seclanwices oe 153
a Strength of aes ae eas ees See = = 282
Servants of God sometimes shrink from duty ... cae ies eee 170
» Often misunderstood ... eee eee = see 171

Biaue from God, Intention of _—... eae bee eee tee oa 124
Sin, Power of oo tee aoe see. Wanless Ses ase ecw = 40, 44
» beyond human intercession ... see ase aoe a wae AT
» National: ue Bes cee eo aes coe a eee 158
confessed without repentance ee BS ees eee 5) 166

» Of one injures many ... coe sas oe ove eos 283, 347, 390


» Pleasure of, short lived Ae oe oy se ees aes 847


INDEX OF SUBJEOTR | vii





‘ PAGE
Sin, Divine barriers to... Ree eee See eas och ay 201


», unfits to deal with other offenders ... has See a +358, 391
» differently viewed by godly and ungodly ... an ave +0360, 429
»» must be repented of before forgiveness  ... aoe wee ese 360


» punishment of... eee he ee Sa ae ee eee 52, 395
Spirit of God, where He works... tee Se. a ee es 176
3 5 may influence without sanctifying sa oes ous 207

» Of a man’s life, the standard of character oy wae aes 407
Sorrow must not hinder duty... “oh aa ae oa ove 883
»» human, God can cheer in... eee Nee fe a ae 412
Soul-experience, Metaphors expressing ... es es ee aoe 404
Standard, true, of human actions eae won Rae see see 292
Submission, Grace of es sie Ses ae ane a ees 62, 161
Success not always token of Divine favour Sie aes eve see 350
» false, short-lived ... are net aes a eee ae 384
Supernatural and the natural _... bee ae one aes eae 115
23 manifestations not always lead to godliness eas one 207


Superstition, Effects of Ses ees a ee ae cS 71


TIME no respecter of character... oe ore Gee ae ach 104
Training early: its advantages ... ees aed aoe on te 58
Transitions in life reveal men —... eee eee eee ns eee 268
Trust in God, when practical _... eae AS ete bes ac 280


Unaopty Man, Characteristics of an ... sae eee ee ooo 878


Unity, Need of national ... oy ai ves ree ses woe oF
» Misfortune bond of an wee sae ee “3 aes 220
Unseen, Voice of the see see tie oe ae aa eae 58
oe Reality of the... “ef abe ; ae 60

a not generally preferred to the seen... ae ses at 107

‘ PAM MEON CHOU Naor Wat, | opr = eve, 9) Cagnesw ake 132, 299
Victory, Defeat may be better than ... ay: es Po os 69
% the best ... cA PRE se nek ay aes wes 134

sg Blessings following ees aoe Ae be ws See 102

* of faith ... ee as eee dee ee see 187

ss of God’s kingdom on earth dependent on moral conditions ... 323
Vindication of an innocent man ... oe eee sae ae bas 237
Vows, Use and obligation of oss ees so Gee ees eco 21


Wak, generally begun by those in the wrong 2. 9 sn sees «83229


Viii INDEX OF SUBJECTS
ee





PAGE -

Wealth, one of its penalties, and one of its dangers and blessings . . .385, 386
Wicked, Freedom of, argument from ... dwa itis weit 355
Workers for God, Oneness of ... is aise sis eats 324
Worst purposes find instruments .. pa ores Pere eee: 223


YourTHFUL training, Blessings of .. oon oo on oe 58
Young, Godliness in the .. ° © exo © om © om © eno coe 44















Em ye


‘ein














=


FP 8S491 Pos /vol?—Stt™S#
| The Preacher s complete homiletical com 1





GL
FG
V7
| THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
a a i f t Q we {Ce SG 2














tt4*hhanbad., WEALD ASALEDEE DS SD 2 PID ATOR
CELLS SS LAMP EP Ae EL EEEED Sa ,
CO EEA P ELLA EL PL LS VLIASPESA ELLY
4 OOP AALS AA AA dh dbba Aaa
Aes As AAPA ADE AADAAAAED EDS SS
ae ADEA AA ALAEEASDEE DEEL SE SG
TP ee ee ee
aad MAE SEALE ELLIS ELLE
ah bsad Nea ie Wr i ie
tA adda AA AAA EPIL IDDAAAADEDD DDD AD ase
AEE PLA SELE LBERLP ELS ELL LEP LPP AEE
VAL ELL TIF ERRO REE TMT Te Ie el a
BESS BULA LEL ED LSS
ELI DALLES






















































Pe,
Lee ee
Pay


far
ae


DOE ELE AIA ET ee
if LEE SSS Sy
OLE EEE EEL EE 4 bey Otte tA tPA EMR ed
Atti ft SALE ELE ALES IEG Pa tad ESE TL EELS Ly

UI OT Or Te tt ai









ery ae ae
PEPE LE OS
















y y VISIO PLEAS TR EL RS betes

ay SEES LESS CELE Ie PEELED ELS LAL EEL ET CLE

CLAD CLEA E UES ede CEPA ht hd CESSES : IPP DIGS aa aad *
LUPE DDL Se eee as itd

MEGA MERE EEL LE





















OL EEE SESS
CREE EEE ED
PEE TL EET ae ey
BE LALA EES ser
PEVERBE PELL ds









BAGS PR ARD


£ PE ey aay


























































: CHICANE Os EEN
LET ATI a Re nde be Ba oT
‘ Ae DROOU EER UTED UU OO eae
ERY OTN SOON ANAS ONES OS Oe Oh
x NAS REO DAAATRCSEAE I Ta 06 FPS ONES BAIN OTR Rah ieee APA TARA PEON Cah
$ 3 f : RON POTSDAM RO RE PAPER EPA OSLER ICDS ORR DL PDC RE APD DADS IO DODD
. SES NSSE TEENS as SN AES ADE WAS FEN GN ELTA OU ON TEEN :
? Sao SESE ELS OOOO EER
: 5 RNY aes st. PAU RUSS SOA
RRC atei eiee ata tats SOA Sy ee
See EES NAR SS SS
: pe ex A > ACA AN Nae Ot
‘ say
% SUES etch ach ae ent A Pa TN SRN A, WISSEL Ea Oe
¥ . a Berea et SDN DS RN hr ea PDn LRRD ARATE ASAT DDS ALGO DN HE












Woe at
Stata thts St tate


SOO
SOO aS SO EY,
‘ SOAS:

SONS,








stirs tart th ta
eA
See

ALIN
es
Rea
Rey
Oe
aati)


























YOY
SOS SAR ’
SE RNR LL ETLULY alah WHR RTL

AAR









EAA RAMEE REET TUS TT
SAWS ay

rm OIA Ny
. SANS
