t  lUltluUlUUl  IM  fit 

ihia  inUHnumw\4iH" 
'  ■    'odfltuu-^n^K 

it  lUUHI- 

.luiiiiiitt' 

llItUUMIl 

■■  imum 


til' 


ttiiitiitiu 
!(t!!i(H!  ^'  I 


<tltMll)M 
uluitMii. 

iiiniktiua 
^■tiim  itjn 

ItltMM  U: 

.•ti'Miabiii 


il  li  Ml  U 

^-  U  UlUt 

((11411 II 


i 


iittm 


IfUllUt'  Il  , 
(jltUMt  «M 


IttilMI-  II 

,-.-,  IMHiUl  I 

fEiu  m  (  ni 
iniutiit'it!!    - 
imjfiiii»M(i 


iii'jii 

■'IIHI 


HHHIItlj 


HjiiMUi 

IifU  Ui  (  lit  il 
Hith(«  I  111  II, 
lEiii  It  (  111  id 
mmi  mmu  .  ,. 

(Jiiiiilliiijiijiiip 
liiiittiiiiiiiuil; 

mum  iiKthitiiii 

iitiitiii 

IHIIIIM 


M«(fl' 

111 

m 


.,   .^^  .milHIMHllum  111  UliillllllUimiUtHJ  ^Mil^Ui<HlM' 

.,,-.  ,,ijjii-liniiiJuuMUii  h\  ilf!  ti-"»Jiti!iiujtiiiiHi4u-(.iuUiiwi  141. 
:tiM(iinuiii4-t<llltJii-i«lni  'I  1    ni'tiiuunjiiiUHiMiJiMUjniu'"' 

liilitlHMlUtUMHlllMnliitlaMI    UIKU  iMUIlUd  WlU^tNUlUl    (jlj 

l(nf(*nHW«(gM*nimiH(uiii  uumui  uinii  ntninjuuKuiifii 

•iMj]! '[[{'"''  jiiMi(N«iumt  HI  ui  iiuiiimimf'«*(-mnmi|MU(uiUf' 


irfiK  itiiiiti  m. 


inUIIIIIIIUni  IKWMIIIIIIll   11   'illiHIUK  UIUN   (NI 

.-,.. ,    ,,,    .  (iiuniMnnii  II  luuuiiiin  uMJUMMiHUiiimni  0 

uM4in)t  juunnii  iiiifiiniiiniii  iiiiiitiinjuJiMiuiuutinni  luiun 
iii{jutiiU(ii4nu  uiuujtiiiuui  iuiiujiuiuiu  4uui  4'ini4'i!iiH  i  t 
uiuituHi-iiiniuiiiiuuiiuiiniiitniiu  iiuu  -i^HJiniKi  uiutt  1  mh' 
.t4UHiUHH(UM(IUll  unitUtu 


Uf|iHH-Wi    <H*I  4   l-w-t  !4h 


iliii"  • 


h4l{l>  HI  Hit 


lUlMH  i^ 

■>au(((  ' 
iiimlH. 

1! 


IIMUNW 

u*m»H 


Mimi' 

.  itUtHi 

I  luiiui 

IU4UM1I  .. 

I  iiniiiuai 

HHUil!  ■' 

A  tiutni 

1  imi'-' 


(fi  mil 

mk 


111 


iMiimai  liiiM  <4iiiuimiiM4i(!4Hi«mii'iiu 


.,..jim(Hiui(.m4i(Uuitii4uiuHmwi  iiiHiuuu 

4  UUUUUllU4{liMlUaillll44U(IU|[UlllUIIIUU4.1iUi 

I  (uiiui  umjiHuiudtiiuuiuiui  (iuuuH-(-UH>iir 
i(iiiutm(U((Ui(tiiuu(ijU(iU'i(nu  tiurittt-iMtiiiU 

4U»iU(lU(lU  llU(lM4lH(mlllliUWt*W(MUWfff''' 
.  WillUflUlMlUuUlilf  HIlUlllfiHUlUtUfilUumi 
1  ItllUlltHOlUlilUtHf    T...-t.-^ 

iiimijiuiiu  limr 

. -ii  , 

mi  ttiHKui  -.,.., 

-  i  uiMuumuiui 

1  till  [  iiuiimi^H 

,,.m(jm  m  tnim 

44  i  ihumw.:  n(f(4 

■' '^Uiim 

14  mil 


M(4t4umfll4  44*4m(l(lUH44HiimUf«J4H.14H4n 
lHlimUi44Hi«4*(H4ui  au4H'(4Htt|  lillWi  *    -l 

mu4(i!fmitm4iuii(4m(4uufn-M)MU4(4[ijt  i  * 


Ui!UtlHH«ll(U«H441tUU14imHW 
4l4U4MlH44imrH(M4lHU((rm4|H(Ui(  (  H  1 

4H(44HiiuHim(iiui[H(imiiiJia  i         i     i  t 

4niiii44i(uiuin*'^4""''"*m'"  '  '      ',   ^  '■ 
:4i4ta4S4iU«tmiii4i4((HniHum  1        aii  1 

mHHWH!((4i4M4<    (mHUi(iM4M  l         M  f{  r     J 
i«mHm-'4-ftM4t(HMfl4H4(lU  lUH  1      1  m4  1UU4 

H)H44iU41iu(ihUu((uhhi(  'imi  i(Hiuii4ica  u- 


ta\ 


i\vm\  \\mm\  4kiuu4i*H+!U4iim4m,«ii4i-iuntiiu  niUnf-iUy'     u 
,n     "f(luuSl4m4m4ia4U4(m4«U(iHuuu4i(m4<Hiniau(  i 

i  14,     1  l44.4l4lH<4f4m'«  4*'"'+illt^'"  '"l^i"'  HlffH*  M«t(imMt(4,  U'l 

ii  I  uiKimmml4iiiUilti4|ii(mMii(ai  ilmidma  iim  iiiii  lui  )44   h  i'    ' 

Hu  nHiiImiiimiSnlMi4uUmi+--' *■"" 

m4fijiilmi4«4iii'a4Hwii4/»i'  ■ 

MMJlluUlllljlllKlMKtUmttt* 


„.,.,4UH4iii  i'4iti  Kii.fuimi-'Hmiii-'mi-'Nt-tK-i     urn    h  ii 
14/im  ii!iim4HHmi(.H[U£4-(<4WiHu«mumiiJt4iHJi  i^f  mi 

{t[U4m4lu-H4iltC(|lHlilU«4f4in'|t4tU  mW-(Ut4ft4  4WiJ     t4  J 

U4iii(n4Uu44Miitui!i44H4riuKmiu4tr«IiMUi4MH  441^1(11 441   i'"|"f'-'f  ]-iii   ""'  ,  « 
.HM4HHiiiuu44iia4i»ni44HiHti('mi4ii4iIii4]4ii  Hiiui  imiUii  UfmW'Hf  4|(;  usw^i 

immuijuiiu  ii44UMmta4l4  iiiiii  im4i»  wMNf^tit  [tft^i'i  ^^mua^mt"  m^a^ji^ii^ 


u'liitiuHiuiiiiuiiiimffMiiiiiU) 

!li'!iii!!l!<!!i«  (ff;ii;|[|l!!lll;ilil  .'il'ti;'i!;;;i,"H 


.,-,  MFlUlilaitlU  It    UH4  MH  f     -«i(U-r<*.l 
Utilt4H-tl+'U  lln  WiW  m  (HtU  liH4'Ut!H  H-t 

■-  ■■-    ((W4(    M      liM    --44  W(  44    H    t  I^ 

<   aU(-'U(!4       (mCHU-i  I     lUU     L( 

Ilf    U  )    4    '  fl  nu  f  (    (1/    +  4U 

UUmifUr      it  ;(U  U      111  11  t  4t  [HI  Utl  )      1    414 

4f!(!!  ii((f  >    4  44(1  t(4<-<i  (.     (K  [r4J  ((      iruf    u  ' 

UlUll  lii!44MlitUl    t+4ai)  <l     U  <(i  [|      lU  ii  1  It. 

14  ilUimwifWillrH'UMd'in  liM     )Im(    flK  4(-Mm 

.HUlHI4IHi4(!(<i*4tl  4aii>M£l^ '■'" 

■■^44|44HaH(4iHli  4(!jl)a 


.4iHalHll444lli  I  (I   at  ( 
(imimt!f.Uil4M4(U  ■{4iUIHitHa' 

■liKW^tHmai'a  aiu!imi(ri'    ■ 
441  aaa4i4m!aaU(fa-   '-- 


Hi  mm  imm  ^ 

ai  mm  \ii\    ' ' 


(fU(44uillrHtlil 

la  iU4}na!j 
ftaHtiJ")i)i> 

IfltijMMHaiL 

liEilfjH  lij  -^ 


m. 


4t-f4(  (  (4  44  414(,^MU1 

Ua  Hiaiiiua  Utai  <  i' 
■■■  (ui((  1  naifai  ! '' 
4i(a  4  lauiai.t  ■ 
III   uuian'it^a 
..  ,  lUi  utat  a  iaa 

44 


,.t 


!i 


4UH  uwti  ftua  It     1  i 
liHt  a  a  4a(f  i  tnaa  i  i 
r  u  M  (     fa  m  '     i      a-  ■ 
a  aaUci  Hill  a  n  k   < 


u(4a(  Hi4<l«       i  1 '  lit  £« 
rutuut  a-ta{«ta>4i(i4iai' 


„  ij!- 

4i|[  «a  atf  [444-4444 


.[a(-f4-  iu  MU  a'i  4  at  i 
fm|-t4ai  Uum-  k  f4f -t  , 
Sit  faiJ444«a'  t-*  tn  a  a       i 


itHli 


mil  raj  i, 

m  4Ij  U!  a  !t 

iii 


mm 


"■"■■■'dunuf: 


4HHr  Hf(i(U'Mt1 
fHItflUHHll  p 

ItlllllllilWH 


...iimniai 

..ji!iifHlina 
iiiiiHMriiuiiuaai 

!!iir 


aaaaaaai 

Ul'4tJ-!4ailH  ( 

aiinntaaaai 


J4IHHI-,-    . 

i44m4.n-i4  'iH-. 
pami4miMaHi 

puuw-ii-- ■ 

fiJaaiHi' 

14i.iU44)l,c..,   .   -, 

iHiHaiianiM-iiS 

l4rl4ailU4aj4HHii 

uiHititiiujimitl 
tmjH(N4ttM  ifli 
'iraHMJia(M«*'= 

^■-  jlj,'---' 


Ui(4i4U4L  '  -IHVi 


..,i«   4t*t.«*4-'^t«tJ:W    — -  --i-  --  "-.c 

ti4M4(4i-WHfl-t-t-r4{imtI-'444-tiV.-<t'.-J-'-<  .tf?tf;f  "^i  '. 


44i4K«4^-H-t 
■ifH-V'  "■' 
rl-m4-ti 


.4H4j4i4mi4«wtH«-*fi  -'■'"^ 

t|«4-Hi4-^-''— - 


ii-!i44S'«-t4«-t4till  4tia«44f4(44  4 


4Uu]4)l)^it<H^4H4im4f'' '""" *  "*  ''^  ^" 

44  ffiwtlnJUjT-aWl'Wi'l  I  !'il«4!4-i4H444ilHtmtl4i44i-tfl4mHa-'L      -'HH-'-H.-'  H  -f 

.,j...>v«»...,r  .."-. ,,H...^v -.,... .......,--  tauaiiiKWHit'ittt-aaHiH  < ' 

ualtHa  ml  auaui4tiiLiaiaauinaitM.44t4-iH4ia4(Ht(J44W4i44Htt44ta-U4.  ut 

j4iiaiJ44Huauiaaiiuaauti4" ■■''■■■■■■ ...w. .,,,.,,,  ,,„,„,,.,,,,,.  ,,n       i 

]  44(U  i4-/iia '''  ....i-.i. 

„  ..  mm  ua4- 

Hia  tmu  iu44. ,_. 

"lai  !  iu44 ' 


i4aita4Hatia.a-iua4tt  tutma-ataa  ' 


Rfi^attau4^l^i,laHa  i  aaatHiJHia!  aiaaaaai  aaaaa-iaaH-Lii 
maHaaamia  u aiiUii!  aiu  4iiaa<ajaa  fauiuuaiaiUi uU  4 

iiiiiiiiiiilKlii  Jiiiti'awiiiiifi  «irJir,iii!i;f>t'!; ;  ijt^ 

■!+  4l-Hlf^l  latiitiajJaafiaa  aitataiaiaa  u aa  aataa   laataiti  a  H4a  a  4 1  1 

fill 


■"uaia44aiaaaat  nia 


.  naiaaaai-)uauaa«aatuaai  ana  t 
I  t  aiaiiiaaaiHii   iaaJaiiaaa-ai     lu  4 
laaiaaaaia'niati'!  laaaaii.a.ui. 
laaatutaaaiUH  aa 


h^liJ!fSI'!!!U!l!ml'iliJiiiiail  aiUraiaf^itaaaaair'iiaiaa'  i  4 'ii-iaiaaiaaaL  an 

HI!!  I  !!!!<^"1!!  (l!!f',lTH,('..,U,,i..r,.SJHii,|,(  tnaiaaaa  (taaia.  (  -tin 
iliiai  laMaaauataaaiM  n  ii  1 


1  aaaia  i  t  1  a 


.  ,  'taauaa 

I'lfi  aiwHuaa  , .. 

11  tujaaiaia  laaaitajiaa  au  - 
(Ml  uaaiiaaaii.  ajaa  i  lai   ■■ 
litiaitaai  1  aaaiaaanaanaUa  1  1 


ai  Ml  ti  laaii' 


[_052G68j 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104960 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF   GLOUCESTER; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E, 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


REY.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

nCAK   AND   RURAL  DEAN   OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND   EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TCk   THE   LORD 
BISHOP  OF   GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL  ; 

AND  BY  THE 

REY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


HEBREWS. 

By   rev.    J.    BARMBT,    B.D., 

VICAR  OF  PITTINOTON. 

^ontiletic0 : 
By    REY.    C.    JERDAN,   M.A.,LL.B. 

i|omilies  bg  tJariouB  ^ntl)ors: 

REV.   W.  JONES,  REV.    D.   YOUNG,   B.A, 

REV.  C.   NEW,  REV.  J.  S.   BRIGHT. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  EPISTLE   OP 

PAUL  TO  THE  HEBEEWS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I.  The  Date  of  the  Epistlb. 

TnonaH  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  not  in  all  quarters  received 
unreservedly  into  the  canon  from  the  first,  and  though  its  authorship  is 
still  uncertain,  yet  none  can  reasonably  douht  its  early  origin  in  the  later 
period  of  the  apostolic  age.  The  evidence  is  both  internal  and  external. 
The  frequent  allusions  in  it  to  Judaism,  with  its  ritual,  as  a  still  existing 
system,  are  such  as  to  render  highly  improbable  any  date  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  a.d.  70.  It  is  true  that  the  mere  use  of  verbs 
in  the  present  with  reference  to  the  temple  services  would  not  be  in  itself 
conclusive ;  for  this  usage  continued  after  the  destruction  of  the  temple, 
being  found  in  Josephus,  'Ant.,'  iii.  9,  10;  in  Barnab.,  7,  etc.;  in  'Epist. 
ad  Diogn.,'  3 ;  in  the  Talmud ;  and  in  the  Epistle  of  Clement  of  Rome  to 
the  Corinthians  (see  Bishop  Lightfoot's  note  on  oh.  xli.  of  that  epistle). 
But  we  observe,  further,  the  pervading  tone  of  warning  to  the  readers 
against  being  drawn  back  into  Judaism,  as  though  they  were  still  sur- 
rounded by  their  old  associations,  and  the  total  absence  of  reference  to 
any  breaking  up  of  the  ancient  polity,  such  as  might  have  been  certainly 
expected  if  the  event  had  taken  place.  Thus  we  may  safely  take  the 
above  date,  a.d.  70,  as  a  terminus  ad  quem,  being  only  two  years  after  the 
martyrdom  of  St.  Paul,  and  many  before  the  death  of  St.  John.  Strong  also 
is  the  external  evidence  of  an  early  date.  Clement  of  Eome,  about  whom 
there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  he  was  a  disciple  of  the  apostles  and 
that  he  superintended  the  Church  of  Eome  not  long  at  least  after  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paul  had  suffered,  and  whose  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is 
undeniably  genuine,  uses  language  in  that  epistle  which  proves  his  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Of  his  quotations,  or  references, 
more  will  be  said  below  uuder  the  head  of  "  Canonicity."  Then  the  Peshito, 
or  Syriao  Version  of  the  New  Testament,  which  is  nuiversally  assigned 

HEBBBWS.  h 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


to  the  most  remote  Christian  antiquity,  includes  this  Epistle,  Further, 
Clement  of  Alexandria  (who  presided  over  the  catechetical  school  there  at 
the  close  of  the  second  century )_ not  only  himself  mentions  it,  and  quotes  it 
often  as  St.  Paul's,  but  speaks  also  of  his  own  master  and  predecessor, 
Paiitsenus,  having  expressed  his  views  about  it:  "as  the  blessed  presbyter 
used  to  say,"  etc.  (Eusebius,  vi.  14,  quoting  from  Clement's  '  Hypotyposes'). 
Of  the  testimony  of  the  Alexandrian  Fathers  more  will  be  said  under  the 
head  of  "  Authorship."  Enough  now  for  our  present  purpose  to  observe 
that  the  Epistle  is  hereby  proved  to  have  been  well  known  and  received 
in  the  Alexandrian  Gliurch  in  the  time  of  Pantasnus,  who  takes  us  up  very 
clDse  to  the  apostolic  age;  and  though  the  learned  there,  as  will  be  seen, 
came  afterwards  to  question  St.  Paul's  direct  authorship,  yet  its  antiquity 
was  never  doubted. 

While  internal  evidence,  as  above  noticed,  seems  to  preclude  any  date 
later  than  a.d.  70,  bo  does  it,  on  the  other  hand,  any  very  much  earlier. 
For  the  readers  are  addressed  as  members  of  a  Church  of  old  standing :  they 
are  reminded  of  "the  former  days,"  when  they  had  been  at  first  "illumi- 
nated," and  of  persecution  endured  in  the  past ;  suflficient  time  had  elapsed  for 
them  to  show  serious  signs  of  wavering  from  their  early  steadfastness ;  and 
their  "  leaders,  who  had  spoken  to  them  the  Word  of  God,"  had  already 
passed  away,  being  referred  to  in  terms  that  suggest  the  idea  of  martyrdom 
(ch.  xiii.  7).  If  we  could  be  sure  of  an  allusion  here,  among  others,  to  James 
the  Just  (called  "Bishop  of  Jerusalem,*"  and  the  acknowledged  leader 
of  the  Hebrew  Christians),  we  should  have  a  definite  terminus  a  qtio  in 
A.D.  62,  at  the  Passover  of  which  year,  according  to  Josephus  and  Eusebius, 
James  was  martyred.  This  allusion  cannot,  however,  be  more  than  a 
probability.  All  we  can  allege  confidently  is  that  the  Epistle,  from  its 
contents,  must  have  been  written  a  considerable  number  of  j-ears  after  the 
community  addressed  had  received  the  faitli,  and  hence,  if  during  St.  Panl's 
life,  not  long  before  its  close.  Some  time  between  a.d.  62  and  70  would 
very,  well  suit  the  conditions. 

II.  The  Authorship  of  thb  Epistle. 

Be  it  observed,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  Epistle  is  itself  anonymous. 
The  writer  never  mentions  his  own  name  or  intimates  who  he  is.  Hence 
the  questions  of  authorship  and  of  canonicity  may,  in  this  case,  be  kept 
distinct.  This  could  not  be  in  the  case  of  any  of  St.  Paul's  undoubted 
Epistles,  in  all  of  which  he  gives  his  own  name  and  designation,  and  often 
alludes  in  detail  to  his  ciruumstanct's  at  the  time  of  writing  and  his  rela- 
tions to  the  persons  addressed.  In  such  cases  denial  of  the  alleged  author- 
ship would  involve  denial  of  the  writing  being  what  it  professes  to  be,  and 

'  See  Epiplianius  (' Hseres.,' Ixxviii.) ;  Chrysostom  (' Horn.' xi.,  in  1  Cor.  vii.)  ;  Proolus 
('  De  Trad.  Div.  Liturg.') ;  Photius  ('  Ep.'  157) ;  Eusebius  ('  Hiet.  EocL,'  ii.  23) ;  Clem. 
Alex.  ('  Hypotyposes,'  bk.  vi.,  apad  Eusebium, '  Hist.  Eool.,*  ii.  1). 


THE  EFISTLB  TO  THE  HEBBEWa 


hence  of  its  claim  to  be  included  in  the  canon  as  genuine  and  authoritative. 
But  it  is  not  so  in  the  case  before  us.  Nor  does  deference  to  the  judgment 
or  consentient  traditions  of  the  Church  require  us  to  conclude  St.  Paul  to 
have  been  the  author.  The  very  title,  "  The  Epistle  of  Paul  the  Apostle  to 
the  Hebrews,"  is  not  ancient:  the  earlier  title  was  simply  IIpos 'E^Spofous. 
So  in  all  the  most  ancient  manuscripts,  and  so  referred  to  by  Origen,  quoted 
by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  vi.  25),  and,  though  the  tradition  of  St.  Paul's 
authorship  was  undoubtedly  a  very  early  one,  yet  it  was  not  in  primitive 
times,  any  more  than  in  our  own,  considered  conclusive  by  those  who  were 
competent  to  judge,  including  Fathers  of  the  highest  repute  from  the  second 
century  downwards. 

The  earliest  known  allusion  to  the  authorship  of  the  Epistle  is  that  of 
Clement  of  Alexandria,  already  referred  to  as  having  often  quoted  it  in  liis 
extant  works,  spoken  of  it  himself,  and  recorded  something  that  Pautaenus 
before  him  had  said  of  it.  We  are  indebted  to  Eusebius  for  the  preservation 
of  this  interesting  reference  to  the  '  Hypotyposes '  of  Clement : — "  In  the 
'  Hypotyposes,'  to  speak  briefly,  he  (i.e.  Clemens  Alexandrinus)  has  given  » 
compressed  account  of  the  whole  testamentary  Scripture,  not  omitting  even 
the  disputed  books ;  I  mean  the  Epistle  of  Jude  and  the  rest  of  the  catholic 
Epistles,  and  that  of  Barnabas,  and  the  so-called  Apocalypse  of  Peter.  And 
as  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  he  says  that  it  is  Paul's,  but  that  it  was 
■written  to  the  Hebrews  in  the  Hebrew  language,  and  that  Luke  translated 
it  carefully  and  published  it  to  the  Greeks ;  that  consequently  there  is  found 
the  same  colour,  with  regard  to  style,  in  this  Epistle  and  in  the  Acts ;  but 
that  it  is  not  prefaced  by  '  Paul  the  apostle '  with  good  reason ;  •  for '  (says 
he)  '  as  he  was  sending  it  to  the  Hebrews,  who  had  conceived  a  prejudice 
against  him  and  suspected  him,  he  very  wisely  did  not  repel  them  at  the 
beginning  by  appending  his  name.'  Then  he  goes  on  to  say, '  But,'  as  the 
blessed  presbyter  before  now  used  to  say,  'since  the  Lord  was  sent  to 
the  Hebrews,  as  being  the  Apostle  of  the  Almighty,  Paul,  out  of  modesty,  as 
having  been  sent  to  the  Gentiles,  does  not  inscribe  himself  apostle  of  the 
Hebrews,  both  because  of  the  honour  due  to  the  Lord,  and  because  of  its 
being  a  work  of  supererogation  that  he  wrote  also  to  the  Hebrews,  being 
herald  and  apostle  of  the  Gentiles ' "  (Eusebius, '  Hist.  Eool.,'  vi.  14).* 

"The  blessed  presbyter"  referred  to  may  be  concluded  to  have  been 
Fantaenns,  to  whose  teaching  Clement  acknowledged  himself  to  have  been 
especially  indebted :  "  who  also  in  the  '  Hypotyposes,'  which  he  composed, 
makes  mention  by  name  of  Pantsenus  as  his  master"  (Eusebius,  'Hist. 
Eccl.,'  V.  11 ;  cf.  vi.  13).  Also  in  his  '  Stromates '  (i.  8  11)  Clement,  speaking 
of  his  various  teachers  in  various  places,  says  that  he  found  at  last  in  Egypt 
the  true  master  for  whom  he  had  before  sought  in  vain,  meaning  undoubtedly 
this  same  Fantaenus,  whom  Eusebius,  speaking  of  the  time  of  Commodus 
(aj>.  180 — 192),  mentions  as  the  leading  teacher  at  Alexandria  ('Hist. 

■  The  later  Greek  Fathers,  after  St.  Paul  had  oome  to  be  accepted  aa  the  writer^  gin 
generally  thii  reason  for  the  absence  of  his  name  (see  '  Catenie,*  edit.  Oiam«r) 


ENTllODUCTION  TO 


EcoL,'  T.  10).  Jerome  also  ('In  Catal.,'  36)  Bpeaks  of  Pantsenus  thus: 
"  Pantsenus,  stoicae  sectae  philosoplius,  juxta  quandam  veterem  in  Alexandria 
consuetudinem,  ubi  a  Marco  Evangelista  semper  ecolesiastioi  fuere  doctoreg, 
tantea  prudentiae  et  eruJitionis  tam  in  Soripturia  diviais,  quam  in  saeotilari 
literatura,  fuit,  ut  in  Iniliam  quoqne  .  .  .  mitteretur."  It  would  appear, 
then,  that  Clement,  on  coming  to  Alexandria,  found  Pantsenus  presiding 
over  the  famous  catechetical  school  there,  whom,  according  to  Eusebius  and 
others,  he  succeeded  in  his  ofiSoe.  The  period  of  Clement's  presidency 
having  been  circ.  a.d.  190 — 203,  it  thus  is  evident  that,  certainly  not  long 
after  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was 
received  in  the  Alexandrian  Church  as  one  of  St  Paul's ;  and  of  course  the 
presumption  is  that  it  had  been  handed  down  as  such  from  a  much  earlier 
date  (cf.  Origen's  words,  quoted  below,  about  "  the  ancients "  having  so 
transmitted  it).  This  distinct  early  tradition  is  plainly  of  great  impor- 
tance in  the  argument  as  to  authorship. 

It  appears,  further,  from  the  above  quotation  that  the  Alexandrian 
Boholars  had  observed  certain  peculiarities  in  the  Epistle,  distinguishing 
it  from  others  by  St.  Paul.  All  that  Pantaenus  is  said  to  have  remarked 
on  was  its  being,  unlike  the  rest,  anonymous ;  and  this  he  had  his  own 
way  of  accounting  for.  After  him  Clement  suggested  a  further  expla- 
nation, and  was  also  struck  by  ihe  style  being  iinlike  St.  Paul,  and 
reminding  him  rather  of  St  Luke.  He  therefore  maintained,  having 
possibly  started,  the  view  of  the  Greek  Epistle  being  a  translation  by 
that  evangelist  from  a  Hebrew  original.  It  does  not  appear  from  the 
way  in  which  Eusebius  quotes  him,  as  above,  that  this  was  more  than  his 
own  opinion,  or  that  he  had  anything  beyond  internal  evidence  to  go  upon, 
though  DelitzBch  thinks  otherwise.  His  view,  in  any  case,  is  untenable, 
since  the  Epistle  has  distinct  internal  evidence  of  being  an  original  com- 
position in  Greek.  And  so  Origen,  a  still  abler  and  more  distinguished 
man,  who  succeeded  Clement  as  head  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  seems  to 
have  clearly  seen,  Eusebius  being  again  our  authority.  After  an  account  of 
Origen's  catalogue  of  the  canonical  books,  the  historian  proceeds, "  In  addition 
to  these  things,  concerning  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  he  (Origen)  sets 
forth  in  his  homilies  upon  it  as  follows:  'That  the  style  (xapaKT^p  rrji 
\ef£(os)  of  the  Epistle  entitled  to  the  Hebrews  has  not  the  rudeness  in  speech 
(to  iv  Xoyio  iSiaynKov)  of  the  apostle,  who  acknowledged  himself  to  be  rude 
in  speech  (iSkutt/v  tu  Xoym :  see  2  Cor.  xi.  6),  that  is,  in  his  diction,  but  that 
the  Epistle  is  more  purely  Greek  in  composition  (jjwOia-et  t^s  Xcfeeos),  every 
one  who'is  competent  to  judge  of  differences  of  diction  would  acknowledge. 
Again,  that  the  thoughts  of  the  Epistle  are  wonderful,  and  not  second  to 
the  acknowledged  apostolic  writings,  this,  too,  every  one  that  gives  atten- 
tion to  the  reading  of  the  apostolic  writings  would  agree.'  Then,  after 
other  things,  he  adds,  further, '  But  I,  to  declare  my  own  opinion,  should 
say  that  the  thoughts  are  the  apostle's,  but  the  diction  and  composition 
that  of  some  one  who  recorded  from  memory  the  apostle's  teaching,  and. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


aa  it  were,  interpreted  [or  'wrote  a  commentary  on,'  irxo\coypa<^^(rovTos] 
what  had  been  spoken  by  his  master,  ii,  then,  any  Church  receives  this 
Epistle  as  Paul's,  let  it  be  well  esteemed,  even  also  on  this  account  [i.e.  let 
it  not  on  this  account  lose  the  credit  due  to  it  as  a  witness  to  the  truth] ; 
for  not  without  good  reason  (ov  yap  et/cij)  have  the  men  of  old  handed  it 
down  as  Paul's.  But  as  to  who  wrote  the  Epistle,  the  truth  God  knows. 
The  account  that  has  reached  us  is,  on  the  part  of  some,  that  Clement,  who 
became  Bishop  of  the  Eomans,  wrote  the  Epistle ;  on  the  part  of  others, 
that  Luke,  who  wrote  the  Gospel  and  the  Acts,  did  so ' "  (Eusebius,  '  Hist. 
Eccl.,'  vi.  26). 

Now,  let  us  here  observe  that  Origen  does  not,  any  more  than  his  pre- 
decessors, dispute  the  essentially  Pauline  origin  of  the  Epistle.  Of  this 
he  is  satisfied,  both  on  the  ground  of  the  ancient  tradition  to  which  he 
properly  attaches  great  importance,  and  also  on  the  ground  of  the  idea* 
of  the  Epistle  being  so  entirely  worthy  of  the  great  apostle.  He  only 
feels  himself  convinced,  in  view  of  the  Greek  idiom,  and  the  general  style, 
that  Paul  could  not  have  been  the  actual  writer.  His  theory  is  com- 
patible with  the  Epistle  having  been  written  either  during  the  apostle's 
life  and  with  his  knowledge  and  sanction,  or  after  his  death  by  a  disciple 
who  had  taken  notes  of  his  teaching,  or  at  any  rate  retained  it  in  his 
mind.  Further,  he  evidently  attaches  no  value  to  the  opinions  which  had 
become  current  in  his'time  as  to  one  person  rather  than  another  having  been 
the  actual  writer.  He  was  too  sound  a  critic  to  consider  (as  Clement  seems 
to  have  done)  mere  coincidences  of  phraseology  cogent  evidences  in  favour  of 
St.  Luke.  All  ho  can  be  sure  of  is  that  the  Epistle  had  not  been  written 
by  St.  Paul  himself,  though  he  has  no  doubt  of  its  being  Pauline,  i.e.  a 
true  embodiment  of  St.  Paul's  teaching.  Now,  the  opinion  of  Origen, 
thus  expressed,  is  of  peculiar  value ;  not  only  on  account  of  the  early  age 
in  which  he  lived,  with  all  the  facts  that  could  be  then  known  before  him, 
but  also  because  of  his  competence  to  form  a  sound  judgment  on  such  a 
subject;  and  the  fact  of  his  having  been  an  original  and  somewhat  free 
thinker  adds  to,  rather  than  detracts  from,  the  value  of  his  verdict.  His 
well-considered  words  express,  in  fact,  the  state  of  the  case  as  it  remains 
to  the  present  day,  subsequent  inquiries  having  thrown  little  further  light 
upon  it. 

After  Origen,  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (oh.  A.D.  264-5),  the  bishop* 
who  succeeded  him,  and  all  the  ecclesiastical  writers  of  Egypt,  Syria,  and 
the  East  generally,  cite  the  Epistle  without  hesitation  as  St.  Paul's.  Ariusi 
too,  and  the  early  Arians  so  accepted  it;  and  if  some  of  the  later  Arians 
rejected  it  as  such,  it  appears  to  have  been  only  on  controversial  grounds. 
See  Epiphanius,  '  Heres.,'  69 ;  and  Theodoret,  in  the  preface  to  his  commen- 
tary on  the  Epistle,  who  says,  "It  is  no  wonder  that  those  who  are  infected 
with  the  Arian  malady  should  rage  against  the  apostolic  writings,  separating 
the  Epist%  to  the  Hebrews  from  the  rest,  and  calling  it  spurious."  EuM- 
bius  also,  expressing  the  unanimous  judgment  of  the  East,  places  it  (though 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


not  without  allusion  to  the  doubts,  to  be  noticed  presently,  entertained  by 
the  Church  of  Eome)  among  the  indisputable  Pauline  writings  ('  Hist. 
Eccl.,'  iii.  3;  iii.  25).  He  is  aware,  however,  of  the  difJSoulties  attending 
the  supposition  that  the  Greek  Epistle  as  it  stands  was  written  by  St. 
Paul,  and  gives  the  translation  theory  (which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  held 
by  Clement  of  Alexandria)  as  the  current  one  in  his  day,  or  at  any  rate 
as  what  he  had  himself  got  hold  of:  "For  Paul  having  written  to  the 
Hebrews  in  their  native  language,  some  say  that  Luke  the  evangelist, 
and  others  that  this  same  Clement  (i.e.  of  Eome),  translated  the  writing." 
He  adds  his  own  opinion  in  favour  of  Clement  having  been  the  translator,  on 
the  ground  of  resemblance,  in  diction  and  thought,  between  his  undoubted 
epistle  to  the  Corinthians  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  What  he 
thus  says  is  only  of  value  as  testimony  to  the  acceptance  of  the  Epistle 
throughout  the  East  as  essentially  Pauline.  His  own  notions,  as  to  its 
being  a  translation,  and  Clement  the  translator,  need  carry  little  weight 
with  us ;  those  of  Origen  (which,  though  he  himself  records  them,  he  does 
not  seem  to  have  appreciated)  of  course  outweigh  them  greatly. 

In  the  West,  however,  there  was  not  for  some  centuries  any  such  general 
acceptance  of  the  Epistle  as  Pauline.  Though  Clement's  use  of  it,  above 
referred  to,  shows  that  it  was  certainly  known  at  Eome  at  the  end  of  the 
first  century,  yet  it  is  plain  that  the  later  Western  Fathers,  till  the  fourth 
century,  did  not  recognize  it  as  having  the  authority  of  St.  Paul.  In  the 
Muratorian  Fragment,  composed  probably  not  long  after  A.D.  170,^  though 
we  cannot  conclude,  the  document  being  so  defective,  that  the  Epistle  was 
not  originally  mentioned,  yet  it  cannot  have  been  included  among  St. 
Paul's ;  for  in  the  extant  passage  which  refers  to  these  we  read,  "  Cum 
il>se  beatus  apostolus  Paulus,  sequens  prodecessoris  sui  Johannis  ordinem 
nonnisi  nominatim  septem  eoclesiis  scribat  ordine  tali  ;  ad  Corinthios 
prima,  ad  Ephesias  secunda,  ad  Philippenses  tertia,  ad  Colossenses  quarta, 
ad  Galatas  quinta,  ad  Thessalonicenses  sexta,  ad  Eomanos  septima.  .  .  , 
Verum  ad  Philemonem  unam,  et  ad  Titum  unam,  et  ad  Timotheum  duas 
pro  affectu  et  dileotione.  .  .  .  Fertur  etiam  ad  Laodioenses  [alia],  alia  ad 
Alexandrines,  Pauli  nomine  finctse  ad  h«resim  Maroionis,  et  alia  plura  quae 
in  catholicam  ecolesiam  reoipi  non  potest."  Thus,  if  it  was  mentioned  at 
all  in  some  part  of  the  Fragment  now  missing,  it  cannot  have  been  ranked 
among  the  real  or  reputed  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.*  Further,  Photiua  ('  Bibl. 
Cod  ,'  121)  quotes  Hippolytus  (a.d.  200)  as  denying  the  Epistle  to  be  by 
St.  Paul ;  and  ('  Bibl.  Cod.,'  232)  he  gives  an  extract  from  the  tritheist 
Stephanus  (surnamed  o  ToySapos),  in  which  the  same  is  said  of  Irenueus 

•  On  the  Muratorian  Fragment,  see  Westoott's  '  Canon  of  the  New  Testament,'  pt  i. 
1 12,  and  Appendix  0. 

•  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  spurious  Epistle  to  the  Alexandrians  mentioned  in  the 
Fragment  might  be  our  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which  had  been,  perhaps,  addressed  to  the 
Jews  of  Alexandria;  in  which  case  the  early  familiarity  with  it  in  that  place  wonld  be 
accounted  for.  But  our  Mionymous  Epistle  could  hardly  be  tpokan  of  M  ''^aulriiomiiu 
fincta,"  OT  described  as  bearing  on  the  heresy  of  Marcion. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  yU 

also.  Irensens  might  be  snpposed  likely,  from  Ms  original  training  in  Asia 
Minor,  to  have  held  to  the  Eastern  tradition  and  opinion ;  hut  it  does  not 
follow  that  this  would  be  so  after  his  connection  with  the  Western  Church 
m  Gaul;  and  it  is  observable  that  in  his  extant  works  (with  the  exception 
of  "verbo  rirtutis  suse"  in  his  '  H»res.,'  ii.  30,  9)  there  appears  to  be 
no  obvious  allusion  to  the  Epistle,  though,  on  the  other  hand,  Eusebius 
('  Hist.  Ecol.,'  V.  26)  says  that  he  spoke  of  it  and  quoted  it  in  one  of  hia 
now  lost  works ;  which  still  proves  only  that  he  was  acquainted  with  it. 
The  mere  negative  evidence  of  a  work  not  being  quoted  may,  however, 
easily  be  pressed  too  far,  and  might  often  lead,  if  relied  on,  to  erroneous 
conclusions.  Hence  also  the  silence  of  Novatian  in  his  extant  writings  is 
not  in  itself  conclusive,  though  the  Epistle  contain  passages  which  might 
have  served  his  controversial  purposes.  But  we  have,  in  this  case,  plenty 
of  positive  evidence,  besides  that  already  adduced,  of  the  general  opinion 
of  the  Western  Church.  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  vi.  20),  speaking  of  a 
dialogue  by  Caius,  "a  very  eloquent  man,"  delivered  at  Eome,  under 
Zephyrinus  against  Proolus  (a  Montanist),  says  of  this  Caius  that  he 
"  mentions  only  thirteen  Epistles  of  the  holy  apostle,  not  classing  that  to 
the  Hebrews  with  the  rest,  as  even  yet  some  of  the  Eomans  do  not  allow 
it  to  be  a  work  of  the  apostle."  Jerome  ('  De  Vir  Illustr.,'  o.  56)  confirms 
this  testimony,  and  gives  the  date  of  Zephyrinus,  under  whom  Caius  wrotei 
viz.  the  reign  of  Caracalla  (a.d.  211 — 217)._  To  the  same  period  belongs 
the  testimony  of  TertuUian,  who  is  singular  in  distinctly  assigning  the 
Epistle  to  another  author  than  St.  Paul,  viz.  Barnabas :  "  Extat  enim  et 
Bamabaa  titulus  ad  Hebraeos,  a  Deo  satis  auctorati  viri,  ut  quern  Paulus 
juxta  se  constituerit  in  abstinentise  tenore  [1  Cor.  ix.  6].  .  .  .  Et  utique 
receptior  apud  ecclesias  epistola  Barnabae  illo  apocrypho  Pastore  maechorum." 
And  that  he  refers  to  our  Epistle  appears  from  his  going  on  to  quote  it 
thus :  "  Monens  itaque  disoipulos  omissis  omnibus  initiis  ad  perfectionem 
magis  tendere,  Impossibile  est  enim,  inquit,  eos  qui  semel  illuminati  sunt," 
"etc.  (TertuUian,  'De  Pudicit.,' c.  xx.).>  He  thus  distinctly  assigns  it,  not 
to  Paul,  but  to  Barnabas,  and  also  implies  that,  though  he  himself  accepted 
it  as  sufficiently  authoritative,  it  was  not  so  accepted  by  all  Churches :  it 
was  only  "  more  received  "  than  the  apocryphal  '  Shepherd,'  attributed 
also  to  Barnabas.  Cyprian  also  (ob.  a.d.  258)  speaks  only  of  Epistles  by 
St.  Paul,  "  ad  septem  ecclesias  ; "  Victorinus  (ob.  ciro.  303)  does  the  same ; 
and,  lastly,  Jerome  (ob.  420)  distinctly  says,  "  Earn  Latinorum  consuetude 
non  recipit  inter  sciipturas  canonicas"  (Ep.  129,  'Ad  Dardanum').  Its 
non-acceptance  as  canonical,  which  Jerome  thus  alleges,  and  which  is  other- 
wise confirmed,  was  doubtless  due  mainly,  if  not  entirely,  to  the  fact  that 
it  was  not  recognized  as  having  the  authority  of  St.  Paul ;  it  was  because 
its  authorship  had  been  questioned,  as  appears  from  the  testimonies  adduced 
above,  that  it  was  not  included  in  the  accepted  canon. 

But  before  the  end  of  the  fourth  century,  during  the  latter  part  of  which 
Jerome  thus  wrote,  the  Epistle  came'to  be  accepted  as  Pauline  in  the  West  aa 


INTRODUOTION  TO 


well  as  in  tlie  East.  Athanasitis  (ob.  373),  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  (ob.  403),  Gre- 
gory Nazianzen  (ob.  389-90),  tbe  canon  of  the  Council  of  Laodicea  (364), 
and  the  eighty-fifth  of  the  ApostoUo  Canons,  reckon  fourteen  Epistles  of 
St.  Paul.  So  also  the  Council  of  Carthage  (419),  of  Hippo  Begins  (393),  of 
Carthage  (397) ;  Innocent  I.  in  his  '  Ep.  ad  Exsuperium '  (405),  and  Gelasius 
(494).  Ambrose  also  (ob.  397),  Eufinus  (ob.  ciro.  411),  Gaudentius  and 
Faustinus,  refer  to  the  Epistle  as  St.  Paul's.  Thenceforth  the  Epistle 
retained  its  place  in  the  canon  as  one  of  St.  Paul's  without  dispute,  till 
the  question  was  again  raised  in  the  sixteenth  century.  Jerome  himself 
doubtless  contributed  to  this  result  by  drawing  attention  to  the  tradition 
and  opinion  of  the  East,  and  by  giving  expression  to  his  own  conclusions- 
He  thus  sums  up  the  views  that  had  been  held  on  the  subject :  "  Epistola 
autem  quae  fertur  ad  Hebrasos  non  ejus  creditur  propter  styli  sermonisque 
dissonantiam,  sed  vel  Barnabae  juxta  TertuUianum,  vel  Lucee  evangelist® 
juxta  quosdam,  vel  dementis  Bomanse  postea  ecclesi®  episcopi,  qnem  aiunt 
sententias  Pauli  proprio  ordinasse  at  ornasse  sermone.  Vel  oerte  quia 
Paulus  scribebat  ad  Hebrseos  et,  propter  invidiam  Bui  apud  eos  nominis, 
titulum  in  principio  salutationis  amputaverit.  Scripserat  nt  Hebraeus 
Hebraice,  id  est  suo  eloquio  dissertissime,  ut  ea  quae  eloquenter  scripta 
f  uerant  in  Hebr»o  eloquentius  verterentur  in  Grfficam,  et  banc  causam  esse 
quod  a  cseteris  Pauli  epistolis  disorepare  videatur"  ('De  Vir  Illustr.,' 
c.  5).  He  evidently  had  before  him  in  this  summary  what  Clement  of 
Alexandria  and  Origen,  as  well  as  others,  had  said  ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  in  the  end  he  gives,  as  held  by  some,  a  view  intermediate  between 
that  of  Clement,  who  took  the  Greek  Epistle  to  be  a  mere  translation  from 
St.  Paul's  Hebrew,  and  that  of  Origen,  who  seems  to  have  regarded  it  as  an 
original  composition  founded  only  on  notes  or  recollections  of  the  apostle's 
teaching.  For  the  view  here  given  is  that  an  actual  Hebrew  letter  by 
St.  Paul  had  been,  not  simply  translated,  but  rewritten  in  Greek  in  a 
more  eloquent  style ;  and  apparently  that  St.  Paul  had  written  his  original 
with  an  intention  that  this  should  be  done  by  some  other  hand.  Thus  the' 
form  and  style  of  the  Epistle  is  reconciled  more  fully  than  it  is  by  Origen 
with  the  tradition  of  the  Pauline  authorship.  Further,  Jerome  thus  expresses 
his  own  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  Epistle's  claim  to  acceptance  in  the 
West:  "Illud  nostris  dicendum  est,  banc  epistolam  quae  inscribitur  ad 
Hebra30s  non  solum  ab  ecclesiis  Orientis  sed  ab  omnibus  retio  ecclesiasticis 
Grseci  sermonis  scriptoribus  quasi  Pauli  Apostoli  suscipi,  licet  plerique 
earn  vel  Barnabea  vel  Clementis  arbitrentur,  et  nihil  interesse  cujus  sit, 
quum  ecclesiastici  viri  sit,  et  quotidie  ecclesiarum  leotionum  celebretur. 
Quod  si  earn  Latinorum  consuetude  non  recipit  inter  scripturas  canonicas. 
nee  Gra3Corum  quidem  ecclesiae  Apocalypsim  Johannis  eadem  libertate 
suscipiunt,  et  tamen  nos  utrumque  suscipimus,  nequaquam  hujus  temporis 
consuetudinem  sed  veterum  scriptorura  auotoritatem  sequentes,  qui  plerum- 
que  utriusque  abutuntur  testimoniis,  non  ut  interdum  de  apooryphis  facere 
Bolent  (quippe  qui  et  gentilitium  literarum  raro  utantur  exemplis),  sed 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


qnasi  oanonioia  et  ecolesiastiois  **  (Ep.  129,  *Ad  Dardannm').  The  drift 
of  this  is  that,  notwithstanding  the  Latin  nse,  the  acceptance  of  the 
Epistle  by  the  whole  East,  and  its  being  quoted  as  canonical  by  the  Greek 
Fathers,  justifies  its  reception  into  the  canon,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  so 
received.  He  adduces  as  a  parallel  case  that  of  the  Apocalypse,  whioh 
had  been  regarded  in  the  East  as  was  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  in  the 
West ;  but  both  had  been  alike  quoted  by  ancient  writers  as  canonical  and 
authoritative  (not  merely  as  they  occasionally  refer  to  apocryphal  or  even 
profane  writings),  and  therefore  he  holds  that  both  should  be  alike  received. 
He  expresses  no  opinion  as  to  the  author  of  the  Epistle,  considering  the 
question  of  no  importance  as  long  as  it  was  some  one  whose  writings  might 
claim  a  place  in  the  sacred  canon.  But  his  deciding  distinctly  for  the 
Epistle's  canonicity  would  deprive  of  its  main  interest  the  comparatively 
unimportant  question  of  its  authorship,  and  so  it  came  to  pass  that  the 
Eastern  tradition  was  afterwards  accepted  generally. 

That  other  great  and  influential  theologian  of  the  same  age,  St.  Augustine 
(ob.  430),  took  and  expressed  a  similar  view  of  the  Epistle,  apparently 
not  caring  to  question  the  Pauline  authorship.  In  one  passage,  after  laying 
down  a  rule  to  guide  the  reader  in  his  estimate  of  canonical  books,  to  the 
effect  that  such  as  are  received  by  all  Catholic  Churches  are  to  be  preferred 
to  those  which  some  do  not  receive,  and  that  of  the  latter  those  whioh 
"  plures  gravioresque  ecclesiae  "  receive  are  to  be  ranked  above  the  rest,  he 
proceeds  to  reckon  in  the  canon  fourteen  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  ('  De  Doctrina 
Christiana,'  ii.  8).  Elsewhere  he  speaks  of  being  especially  moved  by  the 
authority  of  the  Eastern  Churches  ("  magisqne  me  movet  auctoritas  eccle- 
siarum  Orientalium  ")  to  accept  this  Epistle,  "  quamquam  nonnnllis  incerta 
sit "  ('  De  Peccatorum  Meritis  et  Eemissione,'  i.  27).  In  his '  De  Civitate  Dei ' 
(xvi.  22)  he  also  says  of  it,  "  qu&  teste  usi  sunt  illnstres  oatholicsa  regulsB 
defensores ; "  and  in  his  works  he  often  quotes  it,  though  generally  ayoiding 
mention  of  St.  Paul  as  the  writer. 

The  Epistle  having  thus  come  at  last  to  be  folly  received  into  the  Western 
canon  along  with  the  undoubted  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  it  was  afterwards,  in 
the  uncritical  ages  that  followed,  regarded  without  question  as  one  of  his. 
But  with  the  revival  of  inquiry  and  independent  thought  at  the  beginning 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  old  doubts,  as  was  to  be  expected,  revived 
also,  being  suggested  by  study  of  patristic  literature,  as  well  as  by  observa- 
tion of  the  style  of  the  Epistle  itself.  A  full  accouat  of  the  views  expressed 
by  the  varicms  leading  theologians  then  and  subsequently  will  be  found  in 
Alford's  *  Prolegomena '  to  the  Epistle.  In  the  Eoman  obedience,  Ludovicus 
Vives,  a  Spanish  theologian,  and  Cardinal  Cajetan,  appear  among  the  early 
doubters;  and  even  after  the  Council  of  Trent  had  to  a  certain  extent 
closed  the  question  by  requiring  tinder  anathema  belief  in  the  Pauline 
authorship,  Bellarmine  and  Estius  did  not  feel  precluded  from  assigning  the 
matter  only,  and  not  the  language,  to  St.  Paul.  Erasmus  was  decided 
against  St.  Paul's  authorship,  and  gave  his  reasons  at  length,  founded  both 


iUTEODUOTION  TO 


on  ancient  authority  and  on  internal  evidence.  Like  St.  Jerome  of  old,  lie 
regarded  the  question  as  of  little  moment,  and  would  not,  lie  says,  have 
written  so  much  about  it  but  for  the  outcry  raised  against  every  doubt  of 
the  received  view,  as  if  doubt  were  heresy.  "  If,"  says  he,  "  the  Church 
certainly  defines  it  to  be  Paul's,  I  willingly  render  my  intellect  captive  to 
the  obedience  of  faith  ;  but,  as  far  as  my  own  judgment  is  concerned,  it  does 
not  seem  to  me  to  be  his."  The  more  decided  Eeformers,  Luther,  Calvin, 
Melaucthon,  the  Magdeburg  Centuriators,  and  at  first  Beza,  were  of  the  same 
opinion  ;  Luther  being  memorable,  not  only  for  his  decided  view,  but  also 
for  suggesting  a  new  name,  that  of  ApoUos,  as  most  likely,  in  his  judg- 
ment, to  have  been  the  actual  writer.  Subsequently,  among  Protestants  as 
well  as  Catholics,  there  was  a  growing  tendency  to  acquiesce  in  the  old 
traditional  view,  and  even  to  make  a  point  of  it — notably  so  among  our  own 
divines,  usually  inclined  to  be  conservative,  and  to  shrink  from  disturbing 
accepted  views.  In  comparatively  recent  times  the  question  has  been  again 
opened  among  the  German  divines,  the  great  majority  of  whom  (Bengei, 
Stowe,  and  Hofmann  being  exceptions)  have  been,  and  are  still,  decidedly 
against  St.  Paul  having  been  the  writer.  Among  ourselves,  however,  his 
direct  authorship  has  ever  bad,  and  still  has,  many  defenders,  the  most 
recent  being  the  commentator  on  the  Epistle  in  the  lately  published 
'  Speaker's  Commentary.* 

To  sum  up  the  several  views  that  have  been  and  may  be  held,  with  brief 
notice  of  the  main  reasons  for  or  against  each,  we  may  state  them  thus — 

1.  That  St.  Paul  wrote  the  Epistle  in  Greek  as  it  stands. 

This  view  rests  really  on  the  single  ground  of  the  old  tradition  in  the  East. 
But  what  does  this  amount  to  ?  All  we  know  accurately  is  that  at  Alexan- 
dria, in  the  second  century,  the  Epistle,  being  itself  anonymous,  had  been 
handed  down,  and  was  generally  received,  as  one  of  St.  Paul's ;  but  that  the 
learned  there  even  then  were  not  thereby  convinced  that  he  had  actually 
written  it :  they  were  distinctly  of  opinion  that,  at  any  rate,  the  Greek  was 
not  his ;  and  the  greatest  of  them,  Origen,  did  not  think  he  had  been  in  any 
sense  the  actual  writer.  Why  should  we  set  more  store  by  the  tradition  than 
those  competent  persons  who  were  in  a  better  position  for  judging  of  its 
value  ?  It  may  in  any  case  without  difficulty  be  accounted  for.  Eeoeived 
early,  itself  unnamed,  with  others  bearing  the  apostle's  name,  representing 
and  emanating  from  the  same  school  of  thought  and  teaching — actually 
written,  if  not  by  St.  Paul,  at  any  rate  by  one  of  his  disciples  or  associates 
— the  Epistle  might  easily  come  to  be  generally  read  and  accepted,  in  the 
absence  of  any  discriminative  criticism,  as,  like  the  rest,  St.  Paul's.  The 
tradition,  then,  is  not  valid  evidence  for  more  than  this — but  for  this  it 
is  valid,  confirming  the  internal  evidence,  as  Origen  perceived — that  the 
Epistle  was  in  origin  Pauline,  though  not  of  necessity  St.  Paul's. 

The  internal  evidence  of  some  other  actual  writer  than  St.  Paul  does  not 
rest  solely  or  principally  on  the  number  of  words  and  expressions  in  the 
ISpistle  which  are  not  found  in  St.  Paul's  acknowledged  writings.    Differ- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBBEWa 


week  of  tHs  kind  may  be  made  too  mnoli  of  as  proof  of  different  anthor- 
^ip ;  there  are  a  considerable  number  of  uTra^  Xeyd/Lieva  in  some  of  St.  Faul'i 
undoubted  Epistles,  and  especially  in  the  Pastorals,  which  are  the  latest. 
The  same  writer  may  greatly  vary  his  words  and  phrases  in  different 
works  and  at  different  times,  in  accordance  with  his  train  of  thought, 
surrounding  influence  and  associations,  books  lately  read,  or  the  subjects 
treated.  Hence  the  lists  that  have  been  made  of  words  or  phrases  common 
to  this  Epistle  and  St.  Luke  alone,  or  to  this  Epistle  and  St.  Paul  alone,  or 
found  in  this  Epistle  and  in  St.  Paul's  own  speeches  as  recorded  by  St.  Luke, 
are  not,  whatever  their  value,  important  for  the  main  argument,  the  essen- 
tial point  of  which  is  that  the  whole  Greek  style  of  the  Epistle  is  different 
from  that  of  St.  Paul's  acknowledged  writings — more  classical  in  its  idiom, 
as  well  as  more  finished  and  rhetorical ;  and  also  that  the  studied  arrange- 
ment of  the  thoughts  and  arguments,  the  systematic  plan  of  the  whole 
work,  is  unlike  the  way  of  writing  so  characteristic  of  the  great  apostle. 
It  may  indeed  be  said  that,  when  St.  Paul  set  himself  to  the  careful  compo- 
sition of  a  work  which,  though  in  epistolary  form,  was  meant  as  a  lasting 
treatise  on  a  great  subject,  he  would  be  likely  to  depart  from  his  usual 
epistolary  style,  and  that  a  man  of  his  learning  and  versatile  powers 
would,  even  humanly  speaking,  be  capable  of  adopting  both  the  language 
and  the  arrangement  suitable  to  his  purpose.  This  consideration  would 
have  decided  weight  in  the  way  of  explanation  if  there  were  any  really  valid 
external  evidence  of  his  having  been  the  actual  writer.  In  the  absence  of 
such  the  internal  evidence  retains  its  force,  to  be  felt  by  appreciative 
students  rather  than  explained.  If  any  at  the  present  day  are  insensible  to 
it,  they  may  at  any  rate  be  reminded  of  the  impression  it  has  made  on  the 
great  scholars  and  theologians  of  antiquity,  as  well  as  of  more  recent  times. 
On  the  whole,  the  right  conclusion  :)_seems  to  be  that  the  view  of  St.  Paul 
having  written  the  Epistle  as  it  stands  in  Greek  is  decidedly  improbable, 
though  still  not  untenable. 

2.  That  the  Greek  Epistle  is  ft  translation  from  ft  Hebrew  original  by 
St.  Paul. 

This  view,  as  has  been  already  intimated,  is  certainly  untenable.  For  not 
only  are  there  in  the  Epistle  essentially  Greek  phrases,  such  as  could  not 
well  have  been  the  mere  equivalents  of  any  Hebrew  ones,  but  the  whole  has 
the  unmistakable  ring,  convincing  to  scholars,  of  an  original  composition 
— that  of  one  who  had  both  thought  and  expressed  himself  in  the  Greek 
language.  Further,  in  the  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament  the  Septua- 
gint  is  almost  uniformly  followed,  and  this  in  cases  where  it  varies  irom 
the  Hebrew  text ;  and  sometimes  such  variations  are  foUowod  up  in  such 
sort  that  the  very  argument  depends  upon  them.  Such  use  of  the  Septua- 
gint  seems  quite  incompatible  Mrith  the  idea  of  the  Epistle  having  been 
written  originally  in  Hebrew. 

3.  That  St.  Paul  supplied  the  ideas  of  the  Epistle,  which  another  penoa, 
with  his  knowledge  and  sanction,  put  into  their  present  form. 


Ill  INTRODUOTION  TO 

ThiB  is  a  fnlly  tenable  view,  being  virtually  that  expressed,  as  has  been 
seen,  by  Jerome.  It  is  no  valid  objection  to  it  that  St.  Paul's  undoubted 
Epistles  are  not  equally  coloured  by  the  modes  of  thought  of  the  Alexan- 
drian Jewish  philosophy,  of  which  Philo  is  the  notable  exponent.  For  they 
are  occasionally  so  coloured,  though  not  to  the  same  extent  (of.  e.g.  Gal.  !▼• 
22,  etc. ;  Col.  i.  16,  etc.).  And,  further,  any  stronger  colour  of  this  kind 
that  may  be  perceptible  in  the  Epistle  might  be  due  in  part  to  the  writer 
himself  carrying  out  in  his  own  way  the  suggestions  of  St.  Paul. 

This  view  is  consistent  with  the  supposition  that  the  Epistle  was  sent 
to  its  destination  by  the  apostle  himself,  endorsed  by  him,  and  recognized 
from  the  first  as  having  his  authority ;  and  thus  the  Eastern  tradition 
would  be  fully  accounted  for  and  justified.  If  so,  it  is  also  surely  possible 
(though  the  idea  does  not  appear  to  have  commended  itself  to  commentators) 
that  the  concluding  verses,  from  ch.  xiii.  18  to  the  end,  in  which  the  first 
person  is  for' the  first  time  used,  and^which  remind  us  peculiarly  of  St.  Paul, 
were  dictated  by  himself  in  his  own  name,  the  final  "grace"  being,  as  in  other 
cases,  his  authenticating  autograph.  In  this  case  the  expression  in  ver.  22, 
"  I  have  written  unto  you  in  few  words,"  may  refer  only  to  what  had  thus 
been  appended  by  himself. 

4.  That  the  Epistle  was  written,  independently  of  St.  Paul,  by  some 
associate  who  was  familiar  with  his  teaching,  and  gave  his  own  expression 
to  it. 

This  is  Origen's  view,  and  is  also  tenable.  It  does  not,  however,  so  fully 
account  as  that  last  given  for  the  tradition  of  the  Epistle  being  St.  Paul's. 
It  may,  if  it  were  so,  have  been  composed  either  during  the  apostle's  life  or 
shortly  after  his  death ;  but  in  the  latter  case  very  shortly,  if  the  conclusion 
arrived  at  under  "  Date  of  the  Epistle  "  be  correct. 

As  to  who  the  actual  writer  might  be,  if  it  was  not  St.  Paul,  four  have 
been  especially  suggested,  viz.  Luke,  Clement  of  Bome,  Barnabas,  and 
ApoUos.  It  does  not  appear  that  any  of  their  names  had  been  handed 
down  by  tradition,  or  were  even  more  than  conjectures  on  the  ground  of 
likelihood,  though  all,  except  ApoUos,  had,  as  we  have  seen,  very  early 
mention. 

(1)  LuKB.  He  seems  to  have  been  thought  of  by  Clement  of  Alexandria 
and  others,  because  of  the  purer  Greek  of  the  Epistle  resembling  his,  and  its 
containing  words  and  phrases  which  are  peculiar  elsewhere  to  his  Gospel 
and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  and  also,  we  may  suppose,  because  of  his  dose 
association  with  St.  Paul  as  his  companion,  and  the  tradition  of  his  Gospel 
having  been  written  under  St.  Paul's  direction.  These  are  good  grounds 
for  the  conjecture,  but  still,  as  far  as  we  know,  it  was  conjecture  only. 

(2)  Clement  of  Bome.  He,  as  we  have  seen,  was  thought  of  in  early 
days,  being  named  by  Origen  as  being,  as  well  as  St.  Luke,  one  of  the 
then  reputed  writers.  If  there  was  at  tbat  time  good  reason  to  believe 
that  the  Epistle  had  been  sent  from  Bome,  the  name  of  Clement  might 
naturally  tuggest  itself  as  of  one  who  had  been  associated  with  the  apostk 


THE   EPISTLE   TO  THE   HEBREWS.  xiil 

during  his  last  residence  there,  and  who  was  ruler  of  the  Eoman  Church 
immediately  or  soon  after  his  martyrdom.  Still  more  if  he  were  the  same 
Clement  as  is  mentioned  by  St.  Paul  (Phil.  iv.  3).  Further,  the  occurrence 
in  Clement's  undoubted  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  of  both  ideas  and  language 
taken  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  appears  to  have  confirmed  tlie 
supposition.  This  last  oiroumstance  led  Ensebius  (a  Hebrew  original 
being  supposed)  to  think  him  more  likely  than  St.  Luke  to  have  been  the 
translator.  "Some  say  that  Luke  the  evangelist,  and  others  that  this 
same  Clement,  translated  the  writing ;  which  may  be  rather  true,  from  the 
epistle  of  Clement  and  that  to  the  Hebrews  preserving  the  same  style  of 
diction,  and  from  the  thoughts  in  the  two  compositions  not  being  far  apart " 
('  Hist.  Ecol.,'  iii.  36).  So  also  Euthelius  (ciro.  460),  purporting  to  give 
the  favourite  view :  "  For  (the  Epistle)  having  been  written  to  the  Hebrews 
in  their  own  language  is  said  to  have  been  afterwards  translated,  according 
to  some  by  Luke,  but  according  to  the  majority  by  Clement;  for  it  preserves 
his  style"  (oh.  ii.).  But  the  theory  of  the  Greek  Epistle  being  a  mere 
translation  being  abandoned,  the  style  of  Clement  certainly  does  not  really 
suggest  him  as  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  All  that  appears 
is  that  he  was  acquainted  with  it,  and  cited  it,  and  introduced  some  of  its 
thoughts  and  language;  but  his  own  writing  exhibits  nothing  of  that 
powerful  grasp,  close  reasoning,  systematic  arrangement,  and  eloquence  of 
expression,  which  mark  the  Epistle.  Further,  if  he  had  been  the  writer, 
some  tradition  to  that  effect  might  have  been  expected  to  linger  in  the 
Boman  Church.  But  that  Church  seems  hardly  to  have  known  anything 
about  the  Epistle  in  the  age  after  him,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  long  hesitated 
about  even  receiving  it  at  all. 

(8)  Babnabas.  As  a  Levite,  and  hence  likely  to  be  well  versed  in  Jewish 
ritual ;  as  St.  Paul's  original  associate,  and  with  him  from  the  first  opposed 
to  the  exclusive  Judaists ;  as  "  a  good  man,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of 
faith,"  and  with  an  effectual  power  of  exhortation  (Acts  vi.  23,  24) ; — he 
may,  for  aught  we  know,  have  been  a  fit  and  capable  person  to  be  inspired 
for  the  writing  of  such  an  Epistle  as  this  is.  Nor  does  the  breach  at  one 
time  between  him  and  St.  Paul  (Acts  xv.),  or  his  temporary  vacillation 
at  Antiooh  (Gal.  ii.  13),  preclude  his  having  become  again  the  associate 
of  the  great  apostle  and  the  exponent  of  his  teaching.  We  have,  however, 
no  knowledge  of  this,  or  of  St.  Barnabas's  style  and  natural  powers  as  a 
writer,  none  of  his  genuine  utterances,  written  or  spoken,  being  on  record. 
Thus  the  only  real  ground  for  the  suppositioa  of  Barnabas  is  the  assertion 
of  Tertullian,  which  is  certainly  remarkable  as  being  made  positively  and 
not  as  a  conjecture  only.  It  would  carry  more  weight  than  it  does,  did  we 
know  that  he  had  any  real  ground  for  it  except  his  own  opinion  or  that 
of  others  in  his  day,  or  if  writers  after  him  had  seemed  to  attach  impor- 
tance to  it. 

(4)  Apollos  :  first  suggested  by  Luther,  and  since  taken  up  with  con- 
siderable confidence  by  many.    This  is  certainly  a  very  tempting  hypothesis ; 


xiv  INTEODUOTION  TO 


th«  main,  and  thii  rerj  lerions,  objection  to  it  being  tiiat  none  of  the 
ancients  seem  to  haye  thought  of  him  at  all.  Apollos  is  described  (Aots 
xyiii.  24)  as  "  a  Jew,  an  Alexandrian  by  race,  an  eloquent  man  [Xoytos, 
which  may  mean  either  •  eloquent '  or  '  learned ' — «ither  meaning  suits  the 
writer  of  the  Epistle],  and  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,"  and  one  who 
"  mightily  convinced  the  Jews, . . .  showing  by  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  was 
the  Christ."  Every  word  here  is  applicable  to  such  a  man  as  the  writer 
seems  to  have  been.  Further,  the  relation  of  Apollos  and  his  teaching 
to  St.  Paul  and  his  teaching,  as  alluded  to  by  St.  Paul  himself,  corresponde 
to  the  relation  of  this  Epistle  to  St.  Paul's  undoubted  ones.  It  appears, 
from  the  first  three  chapters  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  that 
the  party  at  Corinth  which  called  itself  that  of  Apollos  depreciated 
St.  Paul's  preaching  in  comparison  with  his,  as  being  too  simple  and  rude, 
and  deficient  in  "  the  wisdom  of  this  world ; "  and  yet  it  is  evident  from 
what  St.  Paul  says  that  the  teaching  of  Apollos,  though  different  in  form, 
was  essentially  the  same  as  his:  "I  planted;  Apollos  watered."  What 
is  thus  said  of  the  preaching  of  Apollos  in  relation  to  the  preaching  of 
St.  Paul  is  just  what  might  be  said  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  in  relation 
to  the  Epistles  which  we  know  to  have  been  written  by  St.  PauL  Such  are 
the  very  plausible  reasons  for  assigning  the  Epistle  to  Apollos.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  none  of  the  ancients,  who  may  be  supposed 
to  have  known  more  of  the  probabilities  than  we  do,  seem  even  to  have 
named  him,  remains  a  serious  objection  to  the  supposition. 

KL  Thi  Canonicitt  or  thb  Epthtt.*, 

Its  claim  to  be  included  in  the  canon  as  inspired  and  anthoritative  Ii, 
as  has  been  already  observed,  independent  of  its  authorship.  It  is  enough 
that  it  should  have  been  written  by  one  of  the  gifted  ones,  during  the 
period  of  the  special  activity  of  the  inspiring  Spirit ;  else  were  the  Aots  of 
the  Apostles  and  the  Gospels  of  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  to  be  accounted 
uncanonical,  none  of  these  claiming  apostolic  authorship.  Now,  that  its 
date  was  in  the  apostolic  age,  when  the  inspiring  Spirit  was  in  fall  activity, 
has  been  shown  above.  We  therefore  require  only  to  be  further  satisfied 
of  its  early  acceptance  as  canonical,  and  of  its  having  in  itself  no  internal 
evidence  of  being  otherwise.  As  to  early  acceptance,  there  is,  as  has  been 
seen,  no  doubt  of  it  as  far  as  the  whole  of  the  East  was  concerned :  the 
slowness  of  the  West  to  receive  it  without  reserve  has  alone  to  be  accounted 
for.     On  this  point  we  observe— 

1.  That  the  earliest  Eoman  Father,  St.  Clement,  was  certainly  acquainted 
with  it,  and  quoted  it  in  the  same  way  as  he  did  other  books  included  in 
the  canon.  It  is  true,  his  quotations  or  references  are  anonymous ;  but 
so  are  they  also  in  other  cases ;  and  so  are  those  of  the  apostolic  Fathers 
generally.  It  was  not  their  Way  to  quote  explicitly  and  exactly,  but  rather 
to  interweave  language  that  had  become  current  in  the  Church  as  authori- 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


tative  into  the  texture  of  their  own  writings  (see  Westoott,  'On  the  Osnon 
of  the  New  Testament,'  pt.  i.  p.  47).  And  bo  Clement  nses  the  language 
of  this  Epistle  in  the  same  way  as  he  does  that  of  undoubted  Epistles  of 
St.  Paul  and  of  other  New  Testament  Scripture.  It  does  not  henoe  follow 
that  the  canon  of  the  New  Testament  had  at  that  time  become  definitely 
fixed;  but  it  does  follow  that  many  at  least  of  the  documents  now  included 
in  the  canon  were  already  well  known  and  regarded  as  authoritatiye,  and 
that  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  among  them.' 

To  this  testimony  of  Clement  may  be  added  that  of  Justin  Martyr  in 
the  middle  of  the  second  century,  who,  though  a  native  of  Palestine,  went 
to  reside  in  Eome,  probably  wrote  there,  and  certainly  suffered  there.  In 
his  '  Apology '  he  four  times  calls  Christ  *'  the  Son  and  Apostle  of  God  " 
(oh.  14;  82;  and  83).  Now,  the  title  Apostle  being  found  applied  to 
Christ  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  only  (ch.  iii.  1),  while  that  of  Son 
pervades  it,  it  seems  likely  that  he  is  quoting  from  it :  and,  identifying 
Christ  with  the  Angel  who  spoke  to  Moses,  he  speaks  of  the  two  titles, 
Angd  and  Apostle,  as  though  equally  sanctioned  by  Divine  authority. 
"  And  the  Word  of  God  is  his  Son,  as  we  have  before  said.  He  is  also 
called  the  Angel  (who  declares)  and  the  Apostle  (who  is  sent)."  Again, 
"  Now  these  words  have  been  spoken  to  show  that  the  Son  of  God  and 
Apostle  is  Jesus  Christ,  who  before  was  the  Word,  ''and  appeared  sometimes 
in  the  form  of  fire,"  eto.  Again,  "  The  Jews,  therefore,  who  always  thought 
that  it  was  the  Father  of  all  things  that  spoke  to  Moses,  whereas  he  who 
spoke  to  him  was  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  also  called  the  Angel  and  the 
Apostle,  are  justly  upbraided,"  eto.  Such  language  affords  at  any  rate 
a  presumption  that  Justin  Martyr  regarded  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  as 
on  a  par  in  authoiity  with  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  Other  apparent 
references  to  the  Epistle  by  Justin  Martyr  are  found  in  '  Dial,  ad  Tryph.,' 
oh.  13  (of.  Heb.  iv.  13,  etc.),  and  oh.  34  (of.  Heb.  viii.,  ejic). 

There  being  such  evidence  (notably  and  positively  that  of  Clement) 
of  a  recognition  of  the  Epistle  at  Borne  in  the  second  century,  the  doubt 
about  it  which  prevailed  afterwards  is  remarkable,  and  calls  for  explanation. 
It  may  have  been  that,  though  Clement  was  familiar  with  it  (having, 
perhaps,  been  privy  to  its  original  composition),  no  copy  of  it  had  been 
preserved  in  the  Eoman  Church,  nor  any  distinct  tradition  about  it,  possibly 
Jbeoause,  being  addressed  to  Hebrews  (presumably  in  the  East),  it  was 
not  felt  to  concern  the  Boman  Christians.  Consequently,  when  it  after- 
wards reached  Borne  from  the  East  as  one  of  St.  Paul's,  its  anonymousness 

*  The  following  are  the  principal  references  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  by  St.  Clement : 
In  oh.  XXXvi,,"Os  &y  laraiyairfLa  ttjs  iitya\a)(rivris  outoB  roaoiTif  iiel(wv  ^(TtI)'  AyyiXay  Sctf 
'  Suvpopdrepoy  ivo/ia  KeK\npov6ii.r]Kev  (cf.  Heb.  i.  3,  4).  Further  references  in  the  remaindei 
of  oh.  zxxvL  are  no  less  obvious.  In  cb.  xvii.,  M»v<r^r  rnvris-  tv  ihtf  t^  otxif  iKXfiBri 
(of.  Heb.  iii.  2) ;  also  OTtiws  iv  iipinairtv  alvtiois  koI  /tijAvrois  irepitTriTiiffav,  etc  (of.  Heb.  xj, 
37).  In  ch.  xliiL,  'O  iMxipios  tktt^i  itpiirar  iv  i\tf  t#  of/cy  Moivo'qi  t4  SiaTeray/iiva  airif 
irivTa  itnuifidiraTo  iv  rats  lepius  Pi$\lots,  etc.  Other  distinct  lesemblftnaes  of  thought  and 
expression  will  be  found  in  oh.  i     x. ;  xii. ;  Iriii 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


and  its  unlikeness  to  the  apostle's  known  writings  might  naturally  indnce 
suspicion  that  it  was  not  what  it  was  said  to  be  ;  and  such  suspicion  would 
be  confirmed  when  it  came  to  be  known  that  even  in  the  East  its  authorship 
was  questioned.  The  Westerns,not  having,  as  the  Easterns  had,  any  tradition 
of  their  own  in  its  favour,  might  not  unreasonably  hesitate  on  such  grounds 
about  receiving  it  at  all  into  their  canon.  For  be  it  observed — and  this  is 
an  important  consideration — that — 

2.  It  was  apparently  only  because  its  authorship  was  questioned  that  its 
claim  to  canonicity  was  in  the  first  instance  questioned  too.  And  tlien,  as 
time  went  on,  the  reluctance  thus  arising  seems  to  have  been  strengthened 
by  heretical  misinterpretations  of  some  passages  contained  in  it.  The 
phrase,  rS  iroi-^oravTi  avrbv,  in  oh.  iii.  2  had  been  taken  in  a  sense  favourable 
to  Arianism ;  and  oh.  vi.  4,  etc.,  had  been  used  in  support  of  Novatianism. 
"  Et  in  ea  quia  rhetorice  scripsit,  sermone  plausibili  inde  non  putant  esse 
ejusdem  apostoli ;  et  quia  et  factum  Christum  dicit  in  ea  (ch.  iii.  2)  inde 
non  legitur ;  de  psanitentia  autem  propter  Novatianos  aeqae  "  (Philastrius, 
'  De  Hseres.,'  89).  Ambrose  also,  in  his  '  De  Psenitentia,'  defends  ch.  vi.  4, 
etc.,  from  the  Novatian  misapplication  of  it. 

The  long  hesitation  of  the  Western  Church  being  thus  accounted  for,  the 
Epistle's  claim  to  full  canonicity  is  not  really  a£fected  by  it ;  especially  as 
this  claim  came  at  length  to  be  fully  recognized  in  the  West  as  well  aa  in 
the  East  in  spite  of  former  prejudices. 

Ab  to  the  internal  evidence  of  the  Epistle  itself,  it  is  not  only  not  against, 
but  strongly  in  favour  of,  its  claim  to  canonicity.  The  marked  distinction 
between  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament  and  the  few  that  have  come 
down  to  us  from  the  8ub-apostolio  age  has  often  been  observed  and  com- 
mented on.  The  difference  consists,  not  only  in  the  tone  of  authority  that 
pervades  the  former,  but  also  in  their  entire  complexion  as  compositions  of 
a  higher  order.  We  feel  ourselves,  as  we  read  them,  as  if  walking  in  a 
purer  and  more  heavenly  atmosphere,  peculiar  to  the  apostolic  age.  Without 
attempting  to  define  this  difference  further,  which  none  can  fail  to  recognize, 
we  may  say,  without  hesitation,  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  takes  rank 
in  this  regard  with  the  other  writings  of  the  New  Testament  canon.  Tliis 
Origen  felt  when  ho  spoke  of  the  thoughts  of  the  Epistle  being  "  wonderful, 
and  not  second  to  the  acknowledged  apostolic  writings."  Its  peculiar  inspi- 
ration is  further  the  more  apparent  from  there  being  other  writings  of  some- 
what similar  character,  not  far  distant  from  it  in  point  of  time,  with  which 
we  may  compare  it.  For  it  is,  among  the  Epistles,  peculiarly  tinged  with 
the  mode  of  thought  of  the  religious  philosophy  of  the  Alexandrian  school, 
and  may  therefore  be  put  in  contrast  with  other  writings,  whether  Jewish 
or  Christian,  belonging  to  that  school.  With  them  purporting  to  discover 
in  the  records  and  ritual  of  the  Old  Testament  a  meaning  beyond  the  letter,, 
and  to  find  in  Judaism  the  germ  and  prophecy  of  a  religion  for  all  humanity, 
it  avoids  all  far-fetched  and  fanciful  interpretations  such  as  are  found 
elsewhere,  aad,  while  adopting  many   of  the  ideas  of  th»    'Alexandrine 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBEEW8.  r>l« 

theoflophy,  makes  them  Buhservient  only  to  the  elucidation  of  the  aaxof 
essential  gospel  as  is  preached,  though  in  various  forms  of  expression 
throughout  the  New  Testament  canon.  How  easily  that  theosophy,  when 
taken  up  by  Christians,  might  lead  to  perversions  of  the  gospel  is  apparent 
from  the  Gnostic  heresies  that  so  soon  arose  out  of  it.  But  not  a  shadow 
of  a  tendency  to  such  perversion  is  found  in  this  Epistle.  We  have,  too, 
in  the  so-called  Epistle  of  Barnabas — a  document  of  very  early  date,  thongb 
of  unknown  authorship — a  specimen  of  the  treatment  of  Old  Testament 
symbolism  even  by  an  orthodox  writer  without  the  guidance  of  inspiration 
in  the  next  succeeding  age.  In  it,  too,  the  ancient  history  and  ritual  are 
mystically  interpreted  after  the  manner  of  the  Alexandrine  school;  but, 
whereas  in  the  canonical  Epistle  the  Old  Testament  is  treated  in  a  broad 
and  intelligent  spirit,  and  with  regard  to  its  essential  drift  and  purport,  in 
the  other  particular  passages  are  arbitrarily  taken,  and  often  fanciful  mean- 
ings drawn  out  of  them  which  they  will  not  legitimately  bear.  (On  the 
essential  difference  between  the  two  Epistles,  which  must  bo  obvious  to  all 
appreciative  readers,  see  Westoott,  *  On  the  Canon  of  the  New  Testament,' 
pt.  i.  p.  41.) 

IV.   To   WHOM  AND  WHENCE  THE  EpISTLE  WAS  SENT. 

All  we  can  be  sure  of  is  that  it  was  originally  sent  to  Christians  of  Jewish 
race,  residing  in  some  definite  locality.  This  last  conclusion  follows  from 
the  reference  to  the  past  experience  of  the  persons  addressed  (ch.  vi.  10, 
etc. ;  X.  32),  and  to  their  departed  leaders  (ch.  xiii.  7),  and  from  the  writer's 
expressed  intention  to  visit  them  (oh.  xiii.  19,  23).  It  was,  therefore,  not 
an  encyclical  Epistle  to  all  Hebrew  Churches,  though  it  may  have  been 
intended  to  be  generally  circulated,  so  as  to  be  of  nse  to  all.  But  what 
Church  or  group  of  Churches  it  was  first  meant  for  can  only  be  surmised. 
The  designation  Hebrews  ('E^Spaioi)  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  to  denote 
those  who  adhered  to  the  Hebrew  language  in  public  worship  and  to  the 
national  Hebrew  customs  and  traditions,  in  opposition  to  the  Hdlenizing  Jews, 
called  "EAAi^i'ia-rat  (Acts  vi.  1 ;  of.  ix.  29 ;  xi.  20) ;  but  also,  in  its  more 
*■  general  and  proper  sense,  to  denote  all  of  Hebrew  race  (2  Cor.  xi.  22;  Phil. 
iiL  5).  Hence  it  cannot  be  concluded  from  the  title,  Upos  'E/Spat'ous,  that  the 
Jewish  converts  in  Palestine  rather  than  elsewhere  were  addressed.  Nor, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  the  fact  of  the  Epistle  having  been  written  in  Greek, 
and  of  the  LXX.  being  always  quoted,  an  argument  against  this  supposi- 
tion. For  Greek  as  well  as  Aramaic  was  at  that  time  spoken  in  Palestine, 
and  was  the  language  of  Christian  literature  from  the  first.  It  is  remarkable 
in  this  connection  that  Justin  Martyr,  though  born  at  Flavia  Neapolis  (the 
ancient  Sichem)  in  Palestine,  probably  at  the  close  of  the  first  century, 
shows  no  signs  of  being  acquainted  with  the  vernacular  language  of  his 
country,  and  even  in  arguing  with  the  Jew  Trypho  refers  only  to  the  LXX. 
ChrysosttHU,  ftnd  the  Greek  Fathers  generally  suppose  the  Churobet  vf 

EEBBEW8.  -  r  • 


xviii  INTBODUOTION  TO 


Palestine  to  be  addressed,  and  this  appears  still  to  be  the  prevailing  view, 
being  that  which  most  naturally  suggests  itself,  and  at  least  as  probable  aj 
any  other.  Alford,  indeed,  argues  at  considerable  length  against  it,  and  in 
favour  of  the  Epistle  having  been  addressed  to  Borne ;  but  his  reasoning  ii 
by  no  means  convincing. 

Nor  can  we  determine  with  any  certainty  the  looaUty  from  which  the 
Epistle  was  sent.  The  expression, "  They  of  Italy  (oJ  Airo  t^s  IraXias)  salute 
you  "  (ch.  xiii.  24),  does  not  settle  the  question  whether  the  writer  was  or  was 
not  in  Italy  when  he  wrote.  It  may  mean  either  persons  who  had  come  from 
Italy  or  simply  Italians.  In  favour  of  the  latter  meaning,  of.  Acts  x.  23, 
t5>v  iiro  lomnjs:  xii.  1,  rmv  airo  t^s «KK\ij(rios:  xvii.  13,  ol  a.7rb  t^s  ©eereroXoi'i'/o/s: 
xxi.  27,  ot  airo  T^s  'Ao-t'as  'lowSaioi.  With  these  instances  before  us  (all  being 
from  St.  Luke,  whose  language  that  of  the  Epistle  bo  constantly  resembles), 
we  may  most  naturally  take  the  phrase  to  mean  the  Hebrews,  or  the 
Christians  generally,  who  were  of  Italy ;  and  if  so,  to  suppose  the  writer 
to  have  been  himself  in  Italy,  possibly  in  Bome,  when  he  thus  sent 
salutations  from  them.  He  could  not,  in  fact,  have  used  a  more  appropriate 
expression,  if  this  were  the  case.  This  expression,  then,  'seems  to  afford  a 
probability,  though  not  a  certainty,  that  it  was  so.  The  familiarity  of  the 
Roman  Clement  with  the  Epistle,  though  no  copy  of  it  seems  to  have 
been  preserved  in  the  Boman  Church,  may  further  be  thus  accounted  for. 

V.  The  FimFOSx  abd  Scbject  of  the  Episiu. 

It  is  not,  in  original  intention,  au  expository  treatise  so  much  as  • 
hortatory  letter,  though  so  large  a  part  of  it  is  devoted  to  exposition.  It 
does  indeed  supply,  for  us  and  for  all  ages,  an  invaluable  treatise  on  the 
Law  in  relation  to  Christ ;  but  its  main  purpose  was  originally  hortatory, 
the  expositions  throughout  leading  up  to  the  hortations,  which  come  in,  as 
the  Epistle  goes  on,  with  increasing  force. 

We  may  better  understand  this  its  immediate  purpose,  if  we  call  to  mind 
the  original  relation  of  the  Church  to  Judaism  and  the  changes  in  that 
relation  which  had  by  degrees  ensued. 

The  first  Christians  at  Jerusalem  regarded  themselves  as  still  belonging 
to  the  religious  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and,  with  the  apostles,  attended 
the  temple  daily  (Acts  ii.  46).  They  were  slow  also  to  rise  above  the  idea 
of  the  gospel  being  intended  for  the  house  of  Israel  only :  "  They  which 
were  scattered  abroad  upon  the  persecution  that  arose  about  Stephen"  for 
the  most  part  "  preached  the  Word  to  none  but  unto  the  Jews  only  "  (Acts 
xi.  19).  The  Samaritans  had  indeed  been  preached  to  (Acts  viii.),  but  the 
speaking  to  Greeks  at  Antioch  by  "  some  who  were  men  of  Oyprufl  and 
Cyrene  "  (Acts  xi.  20)  is  mentioned  as  something  new  and  unusual ;  even 
Peter  would  have  hesitated  to  receive  Cornelius  into  the  Church  without  the 
special  enlightenment  of  that  memorable  vision  (Acta  x.).  His  reception, 
sanctioned  by  signs  from  above,  and  approved  at  length  by  "tluiae  of  th« 


THB  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBSBWS.  six 

eironmoision  "  at  Jernsalem  (Acts  zi.  18),  was  an  important  event ;  thenoe- 
forth  the  principle  was  established  that  Gentiles  were  admissible  equally 
with  Jews  to  the  privileges  of  the  new  covenant;  and  so  no  offence  was  taken 
at  Jeroealem  when,  especially  through  the  preaching  of  Paul  and  Barnabas, 
large  numbers  came  straight  from  heathenism  into  the  Church.  But  still 
a  question  remained  as  to  the  terms  of  admission.  The  strict  Hebrew  party 
at  Jerusalem  insisted  on  their  being  oircnmoised,  and  keeping  the  Law  of 
Moses;  they  would  hav«  them  members  of  the  Jewish  as  well  as  of  the 
Christian  Churoh,  after  the  manner  of  proselytes  of  the  gate.  The  Coundl 
held  at  Jerusalem  nnder  the  presidency  of  St.  James,  attended  by  Paul  and 
Barnabas  as  advocates  of  freedom,  and  addressed  in  the  same  sense  by  St. 
Peter,  decided  that  no  such  burden  ought  to  be  laid  on  the  Gentile  converts; 
only  a  few  legal  restrictions  being  for  the  time  enjoined,  apparently  for  the 
avoidance  of  offence.  This  was  a  second  important  step  in  advance.  But 
it  did  not  dose  the  controversy.  The  party  of  Judaista,  pleading,  it  would 
seem,  however  unjustifiably,  the  support  of  St.  James  (see  Gal.  ii.  12),  still 
maintained  their  position,  and  endeavoured  everywhere  to  thwart  and 
depreciate  St.  Paul.  So  great  was  their  influence,  and  so  strong  the  feeling 
in  Jewish  circles  against  associating  with  unoiroumoiBed  converts,  that 
even  Peter  and  Barnabas  were  at  one  time  induced  to  temporize  (GaL  ii. 
11 — 14).  Paul,  however,  stood  firm  in  asserting  and  acting  on  the  principle 
that  Christianity  had  become  independent  of  Judaism,  that  justification 
waa  through  faith  in  Christ  and  not  through  the  works  of  the  Law,  and 
that  to  admit  of  any  compromise  would  be  to  preach  another  gospel.  It 
was  throngh  him,  humanly  speaking,  that  the  true  conception  of  what  the 
gospel  meant  eventually  triumphed,  and  that  the  Church  emerged  from 
those  once  bitter  contests,  not  a  sect  of  Judaism,  but  catholic  for  all 
mankind.  Still,  even  St.  Paul  was  very  tender  towards  conscientious 
Jewish  prejudices ;  whatever  he  could  do  to  conciliate  without  the  sacrifice 
of  principle  he  did :  unto  the  Jews  he  became  as  a  Jew,  that  he  might  gain 
the  Jews  (1  Cor.  ix.  20);  he  "took  and  circumcised"  Timothy  (which  he 
could  do  without  inconsistency  in  the  case  of  one  whose  mother  was  a 
Jewess)  "  because  of  the  Jews  which  were  in  those  quarters  "  (Acts  xvi.  3) ; 
he  himself  went  throngh  a  ceremonial  observance  at  Jerusalem  in  deference 
to  the  many  believers  there  who  were  zealous  for  the  Law  (Acts  zxi.  20 — 
27) ;  he  was  willing  that  Jewish  Christians  should  aot  up  to  their  own 
convictions  as  long  as  they  would  leave  others  free ;  and  towards  those  who 
did  so,  though  regarding  them  as  weak  brethren,  he  earnestly  enjoined 
tolerance  and  tenderness  (Bom.  xiv.;  1  Cor.  x.  23,  etc.).  And  in  thus 
acting  he  was  wise  as  well  as  charitable.  For  we  can  well  understand  how 
hard  it  would  be  for  the  Jews  to  give  up  their  deeply  seated  hereditary 
prejudices,  and  how  it  would  not  have  been  desirable  to  subject  them  to  so 
great  a  shock  as  would  have  been  caused  by  requiring  them  all  at  once  to 
Aowb 

B«t  whan  the  Epistia  to  the  Hebrews  was  written,  the  time  had  oome 


mTRODtJOTION  TO 


for  »  complete  and  final  aeverance  from  the  ancient  order.  For  now  the 
predicted  judgment  was  impending  on  Jerusalem,  the  temple  was  about  to 
be  destroyed  for  ever,  the  whole  sacrificial  system  connected  therewith  to 
cease,  and  the  nation  to  be  scattered  through  the  world  without  a  home  in 
Palestine.  Full  time  was  it  now  for  Christ's  followers  fully  to  perceive 
that  from  the  old  dispeneatiou,  never  more  than  provisional,  the  gloiy  was 
passed  away ;  to  come  entirely  out  of  the  once  holy  but  now  doomed  city ;  to 
lean  no  longer  on  the  tottering  fabric  of  the  temple,  lest  their  very  faith 
should  be  shattered  in  its  downfall.  And  there  seems  to  have  been  at  that 
time  a  peculiar  need  for  the  note  of  warning  to  be  loud  and  rousing.  For 
it  appears  from  passages  in  the  Epistle  that  some,  at  leasts  of  the  Hebrew 
Christians  had  shown  signs  of  retrogression  rather  than  of  advance;  they 
had  not  only  failed  to  make  the  progress  they  should  have  done  in  apprecia- 
tion of  the  true  meaning  of  the  gospel, — ^they  were  even  in  danger  of  falling 
back  from  it  to  their  old  position.  It  is  not  difScult  to  understand  how 
this  might  be.  As  the  principles  of  which  St.  Paul  had  been  the  great 
advocate  more  and  more  prevailed,  and  as  the  Church  seemed  to  be  drifting 
more  and  more  away  from  Israelite  nationality,  those  who  still  cling  fondly 
to  old  associations  might  easily  become  alarmed  lest  the  stream  should  be 
carrying  them  they  knew  not  whither.  Hence  a  reaction  in  some  qnai'teis 
would  be  likely  to  set  in,  not  without  risk,  such  as  is  hinted  at  as  possible, 
uf  entire  relapse  from  Christianity.  Then  in  such  as  were  thus  wavering 
the  continued  persecutions  to  which  Christians  were  subjected,  -and  the 
increasing  obloquy  in  which  they  were  held  by  their  fellow-countrymen, 
and  the  seemingly  long  delay  of  Christ's  coming  which  they  had  once 
believed  to  be, dose  at  hand,  would  increase  doubt  and  faintness  of  heart, 
and  cause  the  very  faith  in  Christ  of  some  to  fail.  It  does  not  appear 
from  the  Epistle  that  this  state  of  feeling  was  general  among  the  Hebrew 
Christians — being  only  hinted  at  delicately  from  time  to  time,  and  then  at 
once  hopefully  repudiated— but  it  evidently  did  prevail  with  some.  For  a 
final  earnest  warning  to  such  as  these,  and  for  the  encouragement  and  con- 
firmation in  the  faith  of  others,  the  Epistle  was  in  the  first  place  written; 
and  it  is  admirably  adapted  for  its  purpose.  For  its  main  purport  is  to 
show,  from  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  themselves,  that  the  Mosaic 
dispensation  was  from  the  first  only  preparatory  for  and  prophetio  of  a 
higher  one  to  come  which  was  entirely  to  supersede  it,  and  that  Christ  had 
come  as  the  one  only  true  High  Priest  for  all  mankind,  the  true  fiilfilment 
of  all  ancient  ritual  and  prophecy,  the  satisfaction  of  all  human  needa,  to 
renounce  whom  would  be  to  renounce  salvation. 

It  is  evident  from  the  above  review  how  entirely  an  Epistle  with  such  « 
drift,  and  written  with  such  a  purpose,  reflects  the  mind  and  spirit  of  St. 
Paul,  whatever  may  be  said  of  the  language  and  the  treatment  of  the 
subject  handled.  It  expresses  essentially  the  view  of  the  relation  of  tha 
gospel  to  the  Law,  and  of  the  office  and  work  of  Christ,  of  which  he  had 
been  ever  the  distinguished  champion ;  and  its  warnings  and  exhortations 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  «x! 

are  stiob  M  be  wotild  bo  likely  to  desire  earnestly  to  address  to  his  com- 
patriots, in  ■whom  bo  took  so  deep  an  interest  (of.  Eom.  x.  1,  etc.),  in  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  time.  And  thus  the  conclusion,  on  other 
other  grounds  also  probable,  that  the  Epistle  was  at  any  rate  written  by 
one  who,  whether  directly  instructed  for  the  purpose  by  himself  or  not,  had 
imbibed  the  spirit  of  his  teaching,  is  very  strongly  confirmed.  Nor  is  this 
conchision  inconsistent  with  the  fact  of  his  having  felt  himself  to  be 
peculiarly  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  and  been  previously  anxious  not  to 
invade  the  province  of  the  apostles  of  the  circumcision.  For  the  original 
leaders  of  the  Hebrews  addressed  wore  no  longer  with  them  to  exhort  and 
guide  them  (see  oh.  xiii.  7),  and  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  time 
would  account  for  and  justify  an  exceptional  appeal.  And  lastly  we  may 
observe  that  the  sort  of  apology  in  the  concluding  chapter  for  addressing 
"  the  word  of  exhortation  "  to  the  readers,  and  the  fear  implied  lest  it  might 
not  be  well  taken  by  all,  support  the  idea  of  the  iource  of  the  Epistle 
having  been  such  aa  is  supposed. 

The  rendering, of  the  text  of  the  Epistle  given  in  the  first  place  in  the 
following  Exposition  is,  as  a  general  rule,  that  of  the.  Authorized  Version, 
other  translations  being  resen  i  for  notieo  in  the  comments.  This  rule 
has  not,  however,  been  uniformly  foHowed  in  cases  where  an  alteratioa  hta 
appeared  neceissary  for  bringing  o'\  the  true  sense  of  •  passaga^ 


THE  EPISTLE   OF 


PAUL  TO  THE  HEBEEWS. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Vers.  1 — 4. — Exordium,  intimating  in  a 
lacceBsion  of  choice  and  pregnant  phrases, 
the  drift  of  the  Epistle ;  a  condensed  sum- 
mary of  the  coming  argument,  It  briefly 
anticipates  the  views  to  be  set  forth  in  the 
seqnel,  of  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ 
excelling  far,  and  being  destined  to  super- 
■ede,  all  that  had  preceded  it,  as  being  the 
ultimate  Divine  manifestation  in  the  Son, 
according  to  the  full  meaning  of  the  term 
Involved  in  ancient  prophecy; — of  the 
atemal  Divinity  of  him  who  was  thus  re- 
vealed in  time  bm  Som' — of  his  accomplishing, 
as  such,  the  reality  signified  by  the  ancient 
priesthood ;  and  of  bia  exaltation,  as  such, 
to  his  predestined  glory  and  dominion  on 
high.  We  find  in  the  introduction  to  some 
of  St.  Faul'f  Epistles  somewhat  similar 
adumbrations  of  bis  subject,  but  none  so 
finished  and  rhetorical  as  this.  And  if  its 
style  affords  an  argument,  as  far  as  it  goes, 
against  the  immediate  FauUne  authorship 
of  the  Epistle,  still  more  does  it  appear 
almost  conclusive  against  the  view  of  its 
being  a  translation.  Not  merely  the  allite- 
ration in  TToKvfiepus  Kal  ■tro\vTp6Tras,  but 
the  Greek  structure  of  the  whole,  with  its 
rhythmical  flow,  betokens  an  original  com- 
position. The  rolling  music  of  the  language 
cannot,  of  course,  be  reproduced  in  an 
English  translation. 

Yer.  1. — Betaining  the  order  of  the  words 
in  the  original,  we  may  translate,  In  many 
portions,  and  in  many  modes  of  old  Ood 
having  ipokon  to  the  fathers  in  the  prophets. 
noXvutpm  itol  iro\vTp6Tra>s — not  a  mere  alli- 
terative redundancy,  denoting  variously! — 
the  writer's  nsnal  choice  use  of  words  forbids 
this  supposition.  Nor  is  the  iiepus  of  the 
first  adverb  to  be  taken  (as  in  the  A.Y.)  to 
denote  portions  of  time: — this  is  not  the 
propel  meaning  af  the  compound.    Nor  (for 


the  same  reason)  does  it  denote  various 
degrees  of  prophetic  inspiration,  out  (on 
etymological  as  well  as  logical  grounds) 
the  various  portions  of  the  preparatory  levo- 
lation  to  "the  fathers."  It  was  not  one 
utterance,  but  many  utterances ;  given,  in 
fact,  at  divers  times,  though  it  is  to  the 
diversity  of  the  utterances,  and  not  of  the 
times,  that  the  expression  points.  Then 
the  second  adverb  denotes  the  various  modes 
of  the  several  former  revelations — ^not  neces- 
sarily or  exclusively  the  rabbinical  dis- 
tinction between  dream,  vision,  inspiration, 
voices,  angels;  or  that  between  the  visions 
and  dreams  of  prophets  and  the  "  mouth  to 
mouth"  revelation  to  Moses,  referred  to 
in  Numb.  xii.  6 — 9 ;  but  rather  the  various 
characters  or  forms  of  the  various  utterances 
in  themselves.  Some  were  in  the  way  of 
primeval  promises;  some  of  glimpses  into 
the  Divine  righteousness,  as  in  the  Law 
given  from  Mount  Sinai;  some  of  significant 
ritual,  as  in  the  same  Law ;  some  of  typical 
history  and  typical  persons,  spoken  of  imder 
inspiration  as  representing  an  unfulfilled 
ideal;  some  of  the  yearnings  and  aspira- 
tions, or  distinct  predictions,  of  psalmists 
and  of  prophets.  But  all  these  were  but 
partial,  fragmentary,  auticipatory  utter- 
ances, leading  up  to  and  adumbrating  the 
one  complete,  all-absorbing  "speaking  of 
God  to  us  in  the  Son,"  which  is  placed  in 
contrast  with  them  all.  If  the  subsequent 
treatment  in  this  Epistle  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment utterances  is  to  be  taken  as  a  key  for 
unlocking  the  meaning  of  the  exordium, 
such  ideas  were  in  the  writer's  mind  when  he 
thus  wrote.  "  noM/fiepas  pertinet  ad  mate- 
riam,  -noKvTpSwas  ad  formam  "  (Bengel).  0/ 
old;  i.e.  in  the  ages  comprised  Id  the  Old 
Testament  record.  Though  it  is  true  that 
God  has  revealed  himself  variously  since 
the  world  was  made  to  other  than  the  saints 
of  the  Old  Testament,  Mid  tlMu^  ha  oeased 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW& 


[cm.  1. 1— !*• 


not  to  speak  in  gome  way  to  his  people 
between  the  times  of  Malaohi  and  of  Christ, 
yet  both  the  expression,  "to  the  fathers," 
and  the  instances  of  Divine  utterances  given 
subsequently  in  the  Epistle,  restrict  us  in 
our  interpretation  to  the  Uld  Testament 
canon.  Addressing  Hebrews,  it  is  from 
this  that  the  writer  argues.  Saving  spoken;  a 
word  used  elsewhere  to  express  all  me  ways 
in  which  God  has  made  himself,  his  will, 
and  his  counsels,  known  (cf.  Matt,  x,  20; 
Luke  i.  45,  70;  John  ii.  29;  Acts  iii.  21; 
vii.  6).  To  the  fathers  ;  the  ancestors  of  the 
Jews  in  respect  both  of  race  and  of  faith ; 
tlie  saints  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  word 
had  a  well-understood  meaning  (cf.  Matt. 
xxiii.  30;  Luke  1.  55,  72;  xi.  47;  and 
especially  Eom.  ix.  5).  For  the  double 
sense  of  the  term  "father,"  thus  used,  see 
John  viji.  56,  "  your  father  Abraham ; "  but 
again,  John  vlii.  39,  "If  ye  were  Abraham's 
children,  ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abra- 
ham ; "  and  also  Bom.  iv.  and  Gal.  iii.  7. 
But  this  distinction  between  physical  and 
spiritual  ancestry  does  not  come  in  here. 
In  the  propliets.  The  word  "prophet "  must 
be  taken  here  in  a  general  sense ;  not  con- 
fined to  the  prophets  distinctively  so  called, 
as  in  Luke  xxiv.  41,  "  Moses,  the  prophets, 
and  the  psalms."  For  both  Moses  and  the 
psalms  are  quoted  in  the  sequel,  to  illustrate 
the  ancient  utterances.  n/>i><f>^T7)s  means, 
both  in  classical  and  Hellenistic  Greek  (as 
does  the  Hebrew  k*3],  of  which  irpa<piiTris 
is  the  eqnlTalent),  not  a  /oreteller,  bnt  a 
/orfAteller  of  the  mind  of  God,  an  inspired 
exponnder  (cf.  Ai^s  irpotp^rris  4aT\  Aortas 
TraTf6s,  JEscn., '  Eum.,'  19 ;  and  Exod.  vii.  1, 
"  See  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh,  and 
Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet "). 
Observe  also  the  sense  of  ■npo(fnyrda  in  St. 
Paul'i  Epistles  (especially  1  Cor.  ziv.).  In 
this  sense  Moses,  David,  and  all  through 
whom  God  in  any  way  spoke  to  man,  were 
prophets.  On  the  exact  force  of  the  preposi- 
tion iv,  many  views  have  been  entertained. 
It  does  not  mean  "in  the  books  of  the 
prophets,"  —  the  corresponding  "in  the 
Son  "  precludes  this ;  nor  that  God  by  his 
Spirit  spoke  within  the  prophets, — this  idea 
does  not  come  in  naturally  here;  nor  is  "the 
Son  "  presented  afterwards  as  one  in  whom 
the  Godhead  dwelt,  so  much  as  being  him- 
self a  manifestation  of  God;  nor  may 
we  take  iv  as  simply  a  Hellenism  for 
Si4, — the  writer  does  not  use  prepositions 
imUscriminately.  'Er  (as  Alford  explains 
it)  differs  from  Sick  as  denoting  the  element 
in  which  this  speaking  takes  place.  This 
use  of  the  preposition  is  found  also  in  classi- 
cal Greek ;  cf.  ariiiaiveiv  iv  o'ucvois,  frequent 
in  Xenophon ;  in  the  New  Testament,  cf. 
"Ev  T^  tipxovn   tSiv   Sainovlat  ^lc/3a'AAct  t4 

SaWm'^  (Matt.  iz.  31:> 


Ver.  2.— In  these  last  days.  The  true 
reading  being  4it'  itrx^rou  ray  vufpHv 
roiraiv,  not  e-n'  iaxirav,  as  in  the  TextUfl 
Keoeptus,  translate,  at  the  end  of  these  daw. 
The  Received  Text  would,  indeed,  give  the 
same  meaning,  the  position  of  the  article 
denoting  "the  last  of  these  days,"  not "  these 
last  days."  The  reference  appears  to  be  to 
the  common  rabbinical  division  of  time  into 
dliiy  ouTor,  and  oiiiy  jueXAmi',  or  ipx^ft^fyoti 
the  former  denoting  the  pre-Messianic,  the 
latter  the  Messianic  period.  Thus  "these 
days "  is  equivalent  to  oiiii'  otros,  "  the 
present  age,"  and  the  whole  expression  to 
4irl  <rvyT€\euf  ray  aldviav,  "  at  the  end  of  the 
ages"  (infra,  ch.  ix.  26);  cf.  1  Cor.  x.  11, " fop 
our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the 
ages  are  come."  The  term,  al&v  fieWuy,  is 
also  used  in  this  Epistle  (vi.  5)  ;  cf.  il.  5, 
T^y  o'tKovixfyTiy  rijv  fi.4?\Aovaa».  For  allusions 
elsewhere  to  the  two  periods,  of.  Matt.  xii. 
32  ;  Mark  x.  30 ;  Luke  xviii.  30 ;  xx.  35 ; 
Eph.  i.  21 ;  Titus  ii.  12.  Cf.  also  in  Old 
Testament,  Isa.  ix.  6,  where,  for  "Everlasting 
Father,"  Cod.  Alex,  has  iroT^p  toO  /ie\\6yTos 
aluyos.  A  subject  of  discussion  hag  been 
the  point  of  division  between  the  two  ages— 
whether  the  commencement  of  the  Christian 
dispensation,  ushered  in  by  the  exaltation 
of  Christ,  or  his  second  advent.  The  con- 
ception in  the  Jewish  mind,  founded  on 
Messianic  prophecy,  would,  of  course,  be  un- 
defined. It  would  only  be  that  the  coming 
of  the  Messiah  would  inaugurate  a  new 
order  of  things.  But  how  did  the  New 
Testament  writers  after  Christ's  ascension 
conceive  the  two  ages?  Did  they  regard 
themselves  as  living  at  the  end  of  the 
former  age  or  at  the  beginning  of  the  new 
one  7  The  passage  before  ns  does  not  help 
to  settle  the  question,  nor  does  ch.  ix.26;  for 
the  reference  in  both  cases  is  to  the  histori- 
cal manifestation  of  Christ  before  his  ascen- 
sion. But  others  of  the  passages  cited 
above  seem  certainly  to  imply  that  "the 
coming  age"  was  regarded  as  still  fntore. 
It  has  been  said,  indeed,  with  regard  to  this 
apparent  inference  &om  some  of  them,  that 
the  writers  were  regarding  their  own  age 
from  the  old  Jewish  standing-point  when 
they  spoke  of  it  as  future,  or  only  used  well- 
known  phrases  to  denote  the  two  ages, 
though  they  were  no  longer  strictly  applic- 
able (see  Alford's  note  on  ch.  iL  5).  But 
this  explanation  cannot  well  be  made  to 
apply  to  such  passages  as  1  Cor.  x.  11  and 
Eph.  i.  21,  or  to  those  in  the  Gospels.  It 
would  appear  from  them  that  it  was  not  till 
the  trapoiiTta  (or,  as  it  is  designated  in  the 
pastoral  Epistles,  the  ini^iyeia)  of  Christ 
that  "  the  coming  age  "  of  prophecy  was  re- 
garded as  destined  to  begin,  ushering  in 
"new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein 
dwelleth   righteousness"  (a  Pet  iiL  13\ 


OH.  I.  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


Btlll,  though  "  that  day  "  was  in  the  future, 
the  first  corning  of  Christ  had  been,  as  it 
were,  its  dawn,  signifying  its  approach  and 
preparing  believers  for  meeting  it.  "The 
darkness  was  passing  away ;  the  true  light 
was  already  shining"  (1  John  ii.  8).  Hence 
the  apostolic  writers  ■ometimes  speak  as 
if  already  in  the  "  coming  age ; "  as  being 
already  citizens  of  heaven  (Phil.  iii.  20) ;  as 
already  "made  to  sit  with  Christ  in  the 
huavenly  places"  (Eph.  i.  6);  having  already 
"tested  the  powers  of  the  age  to  come  "  (oh. 
vi.  5).  In  a  certain  sense  they  felt  them- 
selves in  the  new  order  of  things,  though, 
strictly  speaking,  they  still  regarded  their 
own  age  as  but  the  end  of  tlie  old  one, 
irradiated  by  the  light  of  the  new.  To 
understand  fully  their  language  on  tlie 
subject,  we  should  remember  that  they  sup- 
posed the  second  advent  to  be  more  im- 
minent than  it  was.  St.  Paul,  at  one  time 
certainly,  thought  that  it  mi{^ht  be  before 
his  own  death  (2  Cor.  v.  4 ;  1  Tliess.  iv.  15). 
Thus  they  might  naturally  speak  of  their 
own  time  as  the  conclusion  of  the  former 
age,  though  regarding  the  second  advent 
as  the  commencement  of  the  new  one.  But 
the  prolongation  of  "  the  end  of  these  days," 
unforeseen  by  them,  does  not  affect  the 
essence  of  their  teaching  on  the  subject. 
In  the  Divine  counsels  "  one  day  is  as  a 
thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as 
one  day."  Hath  spoken  unto  us  (more 
properly,  tpdke  to  ««)  in  his  Son.  "  His  "  is 
here  properly  supplied  to  give  the  meaning 
of  tv  vi^.  The  rendering,  a  Son,  which 
seems  to  have  tlie  advantage  of  literalism, 
would  be  misleading  if  it  suggested  the  idea 
of  one  among  many  sons,  or  a  son  iu  the 
same  sense  in  which  others  are  sons.  For 
though  the  designation,  "son  of  God,"  is 
undoubtedly  used  in  subordinate  senses — 
applied  e.g.  to  Adam,  to  angels,  to  good 
men,  to  Christians — yet  what  follows  in  the 
Epistle  fixes  its  peculiar  meaning  here. 
The  entire  drift  of  the  earlier  part  of  the 
Epistle  is  to  show  that  the  idea  involved  in 
the  word  "  Son,"  as  applied  to  the  Messiah 
in  prophecy,  is  that  of  a  relation  to  God  far 
above  that  of  the  angels  or  of  Moses,  and 
altogether  unique  in  its  character.  This 
idea  must  have  been  in  the  writer's  mind 
when  he  selected  the  phrases  of  his  exor- 
dium. Nor  is  the  article  Irequired  for  the 
sense  intended.  Its  omission,  in  fact,  brings 
it  out.  'Ey  r0  vi^  would  have  drawn  especial 
attention  to  "the  personage  in  whom  God 
spake ;  iv  vi^  does  so  rather  to  the  mode  of  the 
speaking — It  is  equivalent  to  **  iu  one  who 
was  Son."  SoN-revelation  (as  afterwards 
explained),  is  contrasted  with  previous  pro- 
phetic revelations  (c£  for  omission  of  the 
article  before  v'lbt,  oh,  iii  6;  t.  8 ;  vii.  28). 
Whom  hs  appointed  (or,  eimttUuted)  heir 


of  all  things ;  not,  as  in  the  A.  V.,  "  hath  ap- 
pointed." The  verb  is  in  the  aorist,  and 
here  the  indefinite  sense  of  the  aorist 
should  be  preserved.  "  Convenienter  statim 
sub  Filii  nomen  memoratur  hsereditas " 
(Bengel).  Two  questions  arise.  (1)  Was  it 
iu  respect  of  his  eternal  Divinity,  or  of  his 
manifestation  in  time,  that  the  Son  was  ap- 
pointed "  Heir  of  all  things  "  ?  (2)  When  is 
God  to  be  conceived  as  so  appointing  him  ? 
t.e.  What  is  the  time,  if  any,  to  be  assigned  to 
the  indefinite  aorist  ?  In  answer  to  question 
(1)  the  second  alternative  is  to  be  pre- 
ferred. For  (a)  his  eternal  pre-existence 
has  not  yet  been  touched  upon :  it  is  intro- 
duced, as  it  were  parenthetically,  in  the 
next  and  following  clauses.  (6)  Though  the 
term  Son  is  legitimately  used  in  theology  to 
denote  the  eternal  relation  to  the  Father 
expressed  by  the  ti.6yos  of  St.  John,  yet  its 
application  in  this  Epistle  and  in  the  New 
Testament  generally  (exceptinj;,  perhaps,  the 
/lovoyiviis  vlhs  peculiar  to  St.  John,  on 
which  see  Bull,  'Jud.  Eccl.  Oath.,'  v.  4, 
etc.),  is  to  the  Word  made  flesh,  to  the  Son 
as  manifested  in  the  Christ.  And  hence  it 
is  to  him  as  such  that  we  may  conclude  the 
heirship  to  be  here  assigned,  (c)  This  is 
the  view  carried  out  in  the  sequel  of  the 
Epistle,  where  the  Son  is  represented  as 
attaining  the  universal  dominion  assigned  to 
him  after,  and  in  consequence  of,  his  human 
obedience.  The  conclusion  of  the  exordium 
in  itself  expresses  this ;  for  it  is  not  till  after 
he  had  made  purification  of  sins  that  he  is 
said  to  have  "  sat  down,"  etc. ;  i.e.  entered 
on  his  inheritance;  having  become  (yei/S- 
fiems,  not  &»)  "  so  much  better,"  etc.  This 
is  the  view  of  Ohrysostom,  Theod^ret,  and  the 
Fathers  generally  (of.  the  cognate  passage, 
Phil.  ii.  9).  (2)  It  seems  best  to  refer  the 
aorist  edriKc,  not  to  any  definite  time,  as 
that  of  the  prophetic  utterances  afterwards 
cited,  or  that  of.  the  actual  exaltation  of 
Christ,  but  indefinitely  to  the  eternal  coun- 
sels, which  were  indeed  declared  and  ful- 
filled in  time,  but  were  themselves  in 
apxv-  A  similar  use  of  the  aorist,  coupled 
with  other  aorists  pointing,  to  events  in  timr, 
is  found  in  Rom.  viii.  29,  30.  What  this 
heirship  of  all  things  implies  will  appear  in 
the  sequel.  By  whom  also  he  made  the 
worlds.  Interposed  clause  to  complete  the 
true  conception  of  the  Son;  showing  who 
and  what  he  was  originally  and  essentially 
through  whom  God  "spake"  in  time, and 
who,  as  Son,  inherited.  Here  certainly,  and 
in  the  expressions  which  follow,  we  have  the 
same  doctrine  as  that  of  the  \6yos  of  St. 
John.  And  the  testimony  of  tlM  New 
Testament  to  the  pre-existence  and  deity  of 
Christ  is  the  more  striking  from  our  finding 
the  same  essential  idea  under  different 
forms  of  expression,  and  in  writings  differ- 


THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBBEW& 


[OH.  1. 1—14. 


mg  m>  matib  from  eaoh  other  in  oharacter 
and  style.  He  who  appeared  in  the  world 
as  Ohnst  is,  in  the  first  place,  here  said  (as 
by  St.  John  i.  3)  to  have  been  the  Agent 
of  creation;  of.  Col.  i  15 — 17,  where  the 
original  creative  agency  of  "the  Son  of 
his  love  "  is  emphatically  set  forth,  as  well 
as  his  being  "  the  Head  of  the  body,  the 
Church."  This  cognate  passage  is  of  weight 
against  the  view  of  interpreters  who  would 
take  the  one  before  us  as  referring  to  the 
initiation  of  the  gospel  ages;  with  re- 
spect to  which  view  see  also  the  quotation 
from  Bull  given  below  under  ver.  3.  Here 
Tolis  aluvas  is  equivalent  to  "the  worlds,"  as  in 
the  A.V.  For  though  the  primary  meaning  of 
oii^K  has  reference  to  time — limited  in  periods, 
or  unlimited  in  eternity — it  is  used  to  de- 
note also  the  whole  system  of  things  called 
into  being  by  the  Creator  in  time  and 
through  which  alone  we  are  able  to  con- 
ceive time.  "Oi  aiaves,  txcula,  pro  rerum 
creatarum  universitate  est  Eebraismus" 
(Bull);  cf.  ch.  xi.  3,  KarapriaBat  rohs 
alavai  piifiaTt  OcoS:  also  1  Cor.  ii.  7,  trpti 
Tuv  cUdvuv.  and  2  Tim.  1.  9;  Titui  L  2, 

Ver.  3. — Who,  being,  etc.  The  participle 
iiv — not  yev6nevos,  as  in  vei.  4— denotes  (as 
does  still  more  forcibly  iiripxiev  in  the 
cognate  passage,  Phil.  ii.  6)  what  the  Son 
is  in  himself  essentially  and  independently 
of  his  manifestation  in  time.  This  tran- 
scendent idea  is  conveyed  by  two  metaphori- 
cal expressions,  differing  in  the  metaphors 
used,  but  concurrent  in  meaning.  The 
brightness  of  his  gloiy.  The  word  S<!{a 
(translated  "  glory"),  though  not  in  classical 
Greek  carrying  with  it  the  idea  of  light, 
is  used  in  the  LXX.  for  the  Hebrew  lisi, 
whioh  denotes  the  splendour  surrounding 
God;  manifested  on  Mount  Sinai,  in  the 
holy  of  holies,  in  the  visions  of  EzeMel, 
etc. ;  and  regarded  as  existing  eternally 
"above  the  heavens"  (cf.  Exod.  xxiv.  15; 
xl.  31;  1  Kings  viii.  11;  Ezek.  viii.  4; 
Ps.  xxiv.  7,  8,  etc.).  But  the  full  blaze  of 
this  glory,  accompanying  "  the  face  "  of  God, 
even  Moses  was  not  allowed  to  see ;  for  no 
man  could  see  Jiim  and  live.  Moses  was 
hidden  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock  while  the 
Lord's  glory  passed  by,  and  saw  only  its 
outskirts,  i.e.  the  radiance  left  behind  after 
it  had  passed;  hearini;  meanwhile  a  procla- 
mation of  the  moral  attributes  of  Deity,  by  a 
perception  of  which  he  might  best  sOe  God 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  18,  etc.).  Similarly  in  the 
New  Testament.  There  also,  as  on  Sinai, 
in  the  tabernacle,  and  in  prophetic  vision, 
the  glory  of  God  is  occasionally  manifested 
under  the  form  of  an  unearthly  radiance ; 
as  in  the  vision  of  the  shepherds  (Luke 
ii.  9X  the  Transfiguration  (Luke  ix.  28, 
etc.),  the  ecstasy  of  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  55). 


But  in  ItseW,  as  It  surrounds  "the  face"  ot 
God,  it  is  still  invisible  and  unapproachable; 
cf.  John  i.  18,  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at 
any  time ;  "  1  John  L  5,  "  God  is  Light ; " 
1  Tim.  vi.  16,  "  Dwelling  m  the  light  which 
no  man  can  approach  unto  ((pSis  airp6imov), 
whom  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can  see,"  It 
denotes  really,  under  the  image  of  eternal, 
self-existent,  unapproachable  light,  the 
ineffable  Divine  perfection,  the  essence  of 
Deity,  which  is  beyond  himian  ken.  "  Sem- 
pitema  ejus  virtus  et  divinitas"  (Bengel).  Of 
this  glory  the  Sou  is  the  diraiyaaiia — a  word 
not  occurring  elsewhere  in  the  New-Testa- 
ment, but  used  by  the  Alexandrian  writers. 
The  verb  dirmiyaCa  means  "to  radiate,"  "  to 
beam  forth  brightness ; "  and  dtraiyairna, 
according  to  the  proper  meaning  of  nouns 
so  formed,  should  mean  the  brightness 
beamed  forth — this  rather  than  its  reflec- 
tion from  another  object,  as  the  sun's  light  is 
reflected  from  a  cloud.  So  the  noun  is 
used  in  Wisd.  vii.  26,  as  applied  to  ^oipia, 
which  is  there  personified  in  a  manner  sug- 
gestive of  the  doctrine  of  the  A.6yos: 
'Ar/tis  ydp  irrl  rqi  roS  Seov  Svydfieas  koI 
dir6^^out  rrjs  roS  TavToKpdropos  S6^7js  elAi- 
Kpiviis  .  .  .  dnaiycurfia  yhp  iarX  tpanhs  alSiov." 
And  Philo  speaks  of  the  breath  of  life 
breathed  into  man  (G«n.  U.  7)  as  t^s 
IMKuplas  Kol  TpuT/iaKaplca  ^iatvs  airaiyairim 
(•  De  Spec.  Leg.,'  §  11).  AJs,  then,  the  eradi- 
ated' brightness  is  to  the  source  of  light, 
so  is  the  Son,  in  his  eternal  being,  to  the 
Father.  It  is,  so  to  speak,  begotten  of  the 
source,  and  of  one  substance  with  it,  and 
yet  distinguishable  from  it;  being  that 
through  which  its  glory  is  made  manifest, 
and  through  whioh  it  enlightens  all  things. 
The  Person  of  the  Son  is  thus  represented, 
not  as  of  one  apart  from  God,  irradiated  by 
bis  glory,  but  as  himself  the  sheen  of  his 
glory ;  cf.  John  1.  14,  "  We  beheld  his 
glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of 
the  Father;"  also  John  i.  4 ;  i.  9.  The  above 
is  the  view  taken  by  the  Fathers  generally, 
and  expressed  in  the  Church's  Greedy 
4)us  iK  iptaTds.  And  express  Image  of  his 
inbstanoe;  not  "  of  his  person,"  as  in  the 
A.V.  The  latter  rendering  is  due  to  the  long- 
accepted  theological  use  of  the  word  vir6- 
irTa<rij  in  the  sense  of  personal  subsistence,  as 
applied  to  each  of  the  Three  in  One.  What  the 
Latins  called  persona  the  Greeks  at  length 
agreed  to  call  hypostasis,  while  the  Greek 
oi(ria  (equivalent  to  essentia)  and  the  Latin 
substantia  (though  the  latter  word  etymo- 
logically  corresponds  with  hypostasis)  were 
used  as  equivalents  in  meaning.  But  it 
was  long  after  the  apostolic  age  that  this 
scientific  use  of  the  word  became  fixed. 
After  as  well  as  before  the  Kicene  Council 
usia  was  sometimes  used  to  denote  what  wa 
mean  by   person,  and  hypostasis  to  denote 


OB.  1. 1—14.] 


THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW& 


wbat  we  mean  by  the  mlHanet  of  the 
Godhead;  and  hence  came  misunderstand- 
]ngs  during  the  Arian  oontroTersy.  Boll 
(<  Def.  Fid.  Nio.,'  iL  9.  11)  gives  a  catena 
of  instances  of  this  uncertain  usage.  The 
definite  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  thongh 
apparent  in  the  New  Testament,  had  not 
as  yet  come  under  discussion  at  the  time 
of  the  writing  of  this  Epistle,  or  been  as  yet 
scientifically  formulated;  and  hence  we  must 
tal^e  the  word  in  its  general  and  original 
sense,  the  same  as  that  now  attacli'ed  to  its 
etymological  equivalent,  $ubstaniia.  It 
means  literally,  "a  standing  nnder,"  and  ii 
used  (1)  in  a  physical  sense,  for  "  founda- 
tion," as  in  Pa.  Izix.  2,  "  I  sink  in  deep 
mire  where  there  is  no  standing,"  where 
the  LXX.  has  vw6<rTa<risi  (2)  metaphoric- 
ally, for  ••  confidence"  or  "certainty,"  as 
below,  eh.  iii.  15  and  2  Cor.  iz.  4;  (3) 
metaphysically,  for  that  which  underlies 
the  phenomena  of  things  and  constitutes 
their  essential  being.  Of  the  substance, 
nnderstood  in  the  last  sense,  of  God  the 
Son  is  the  xopitT^p,  which  word  expresses 
a  similar  kind  of  relation  to  the  Diviae 
•nbslance  as  aira^air/ua  does  to  the  Divine 
glory.  Derived  from  xapiitrff"  (equivalent  to 
"mark,"  "grave,"  or  "stamp,"  with  an 
engraven  or  imprinted  character),  its  proper 
meaning  is  the  perceptible  image  on 
the  material  so  stamped  or  engraved,  of 
which  it  thus  becomes  the  x''P''triip.  Thus 
the  "  image  and  superscription  "  on  a  coiu 
is  its  x<</"tKTJ)p,  manifesting  what  the  coiu 
is.  The  instance  of  the  tribute  money 
(Matt.  zxii.  20)  at  once  occurs  to  ns :  our 
Lord  pointed  to  the  x^pa^T^p  on  the  coin 
as  manifesting  its  iTrSaraait,  as  being 
Ciesar's  money.  Thus  also  the  lineaments 
of  a  countenance  are  called  its  x«f>iiKTJ)p,  as 
in  Herod.,  i.  116,  *0  xapaKT^p  rov  vpoir^ov, 
A  passage  in  Philo  is  illustrative  of  the 
sense  intended ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
(both  with  regard  to  the  expression  before 
us  and  to  the  preceding  iraiyaa-iia)  that 
the  Alexandrian  theologians  are  important 
guides  to  the  interpretation  of  phrases  in 
this  Epistle,  their  influence  on  its  modes  of 
thought  and  expression  being  perceptible. 
He  says  ('De  Plant.  Noe^,'  §  5)  that  Moses 
called  the  rational  soul  the  image  (eiKSva) 
of  the  Divine  and  Invisible,  as  being 
oOtrtwdutray  koI  Tvircodeiffav  a(ppay'tSt  Qeov,  tjs 
6  xapaKT^p  iarly  i  iiSios  \6yos.  Here,  be  it 
observed,  xafwrV  is  used  for  the  form  or 
lineament  of  the  Divine  seal  itself,  not  for 
the  copy  stamped  on  the  plastic  material. 
And  it  is  applied,  as  here,  to  the  "  Eternal 
Word,"  as  being  the  manifestation  of  what 
the  unseen  Godhead  is.  Hence  it  would 
be  wrong  to  understand  the  word,  as  some 
have  done,  as  denoting  the  form  impressed 
by  one  substance  on  another — as  though 


the  Impression  left  on  the  wax  were  the 
XapaKTiip  of  the  seal.     This  misoonoeption 
would  mislead  (as  might  also  Itwaiyaviia, 
if  rendered  "  reflection ")  in  that  it  wonld 
seem  to  represent  the  Son  as  distinct  from 
God,  though  stamped  with  his  likeness  and 
irradiated  by  his  glory.    Arian  views  about 
the  Son,  or  even  mere  humanitarian  views 
about  the  Christ,  might  thus  seem  ooan- 
tenanced.     The  two  words  dvadyairna  and 
XapaKTiip,  as  has  been  said,  express  a  similar 
relation  to  S6^a  and  iTr6aTa(ns  respectively, 
and  convey  the  same  general  idea  of  the 
Son's  eternal  relation  to  the  Father.     But 
both  are,  of  course,  but  figures,  each  ne- 
cessarily   inadequate,    of  the   inscrutable 
reality.     If  wo  may  distinguish  between 
them,   it   may   be   said   that  the  former 
especially  intimates  the  view  of  the  opera- 
tion and   energy  of  the   Godhead  being 
through  the  Son,  whUe  the  latter  more 
distinctly  brings  out  the  idea  of  the  Son 
being  the  Manifestation  of  what  the  God- 
head is,  and  especially  of  what  it  Is  to  us. 
And  upholding  all  things.     We  have  here 
still  the  present  participle,  denoting  tiia 
intrinsic   operation    of  him  who   was  re- 
vealed as  SoK.    Though  the  word  (pipeir,  in 
the  sense  of  upholding  or  sustaining  crea- 
tion, does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the,  New 
Testament,  it  can  hardly  have  any  other 
meaning  here,  considering  the  context   Wa 
find  a  similar  use  of  it  in  Numb.  xL  14; 
Deut.  i.  9,  "  to  bear  (ipepsm)  all  this  people 
alone."  And  in  the  later  Greek  and  rabbini- 
cal writers  parallels  are  found.    Chrysostom 
interprets  <l>4pay  as  meaning  KvPepyAy,  tA 
SiatrLTrTovTa  ffvyKparay,  which  comes  to  the 
same  thingas  "upholding"  or  "sustaining." 
The  meaning  is  that  not  only  were  "the 
worlds  "  made  through  him ;  in  his  Divine 
nature  he  ever  "  upholds  "  the  "  all  things  " 
which   were   made  through    him,   and  of 
which,  as  Son,  he  was  appointed  "Heir;" 
cf.  CoL  i.  17,  "  And  in  him  all  things  con- 
sist."    And  this  upholding  operation  miut 
not  be  supposed  to  have  been  in  abeyance 
during  the  period  of  his  humiliation.    He 
was  still  what  he  had  been  eternally,  though 
he  had  "emptied  himself"  of  the  state  and 
prerogatives   of  Deity    (PhiL    ii  7);    ct 
(though  the  text   is   somewhat  doubtful) 
John  iii.  13,  "  The  Son  of  man,  which  is  {&y) 
in  heaven."    By  the  word  (^■fi/MTi)  of  his 
power  is  an  expression  elsewhere  used  of 
tlie  voluntas  efficax  of  Deity — the  utterance 
of  Divine  power;  cf.  oh.  li.  3,  "  The  worlds 
were  framed  by  the  Word  (^^fton)  of  God." 
The  writer  could  hardly  have  used  it  in  this 
connection,  if  speaking  of  a  created  being. 
As  to  the  reference  of  "  his  "  before  "  power," 
whether  to  the  subject  of  the  sentence  or  to 
God,  there  is  the  same  ambiguity  in  the 
Greek  as  in  the  English  tnnslation.    Evaa 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


[oh.  1. 1 — 14. 


if  airov  be  intended,  and  not  airoS  (and  the 
former  is  most  likely,  since  the  pronoun, 
though  it  be  reflective,  is  not  emphatically 
so),  it  may  with  grammatical  propriety  refer 
either,  like  the  previous  almS,  to  God,  or  to 
him  who  thus  upholds  all  things.  In  either 
oase  the  general  meaning  of  the  clause  re- 
mains the  same.  Enough  has  been  said  on 
the  whole  series  of  phrases  which  is  thus 
concluded  to  show  the  unteuableneas  of  the 
Socinian  interpretation,  which  would  refer 
them  only  to  Christ  in  the  flesh  and  to  the 
Christian  dispensation.  On  such  interpre- 
tation of  the  first  of  them  Bull  remarks, 
"Interpretatio  Socinistarum,  Deum  nempe 
dici  per  Filiam  ssecula  condidisse,  quod 
per  ipsum  genus  humanum  reformavit 
et  restauravit,  et  in  novum  quemdam  sta- 
tum  transtulit,  prodigiosum  est  commentum. 
Sane  juramento  aliquis  tuto  afiirmare  possit, 
ex  Hebreeis,  ad  quns  scripta  fuit  ilia  cpistola, 
ne  unum  quidem  fuiese,  qui  scriptoris  verba 
hoc  sensu  intellexerit,  aut  vel  per  somaium 
cogitaverit,  per  Tobs  aluvas,  lascula,  significa- 
tum  fuisse  tantum  genus  humanum,  nedum 
ejus  partem  illam,  cui  tunc  temporis  evan- 
gelii  lux  effulserat"  ('JTud.  Eccl.  Cath.,'  v. 
8).  When  he  had  made  purification  of  sins. 
(So,  according  to  the  best-supported  and  now 
generally  accepted  text.)  The  aorist  is  now 
resumed,  denoting  an  act  in  time — the  act 
accompli»hed  by  him  as  incarnate  Son, 
previons  to  and  necessary  for  his  entering 
on  the  inheritance  appointed  to  him  as  such. 
This  act,  the  grand  purpose  of  the  Incar- 
nation, was  atonement.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  cleansing  efiieuted  by  atone- 
ment, and  not  the  mere  moral  reformation 
of  believers,  is  meant  here  hy  purification  of 
sins.  The  sequel  of  the  Epistle^  being,  as 
aforesaid,  the  full  expression  of  the  drSt  of 
the  exordium,  is  sufBcient  proof  of  this. 
For  in  it  Christ  is  exhibited  at  great  length 
as  the  true  High  Priest  of  humanity,  accom- 
plishing truly  what  the  Jewish  priesthood 
signified ;  and  as  having  "  sat  down  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in 
the  heavens,"  in  virtue  of  his  accomplished 
atonement  (ch.  viiL  1 ;  x.  12).  Nor  would 
the  Hebrew  readers  to  whom  the  Epistle  was 
addressed  be  likely  to  understand  Hadapta-fiiv 
("  purification ")  in  any  other  sense  than 
this.  The  verb  xaSaplCeip  is  the  LXX. 
equivalent  for  the  Hebrew  nnt?,  frequent  in 
the  Old  Testament  for  ceremonial  cleans- 
ing, the  result  of  atoning  sacrifice;  in 
which  sense  it  is  accordingly  used  in  ch.  x. 
of  this  Epistle.  The  theory  of  the  Jewish 
ceremonial  law  was  that  tlie  whole  congrega- 
tion, including  the  priests  themselves,  were 
too  much  polluted  by  sin  to  approach  the 
holy  God  who  dwelt  between  tlie  cherubim. 
Therefore  sacrifices  were  ordained  to  make 
atonement  for  them.    The  word  for  "  making 


atonement  for"  (Greek,  tXairKfrfat)  to  in 
Hebrew  IM,  which  means  properly  "to 
cover;"  i.t.  to  cover  sin  from  the  sight  of 
God.  And  the  result  of  such  atonement 
was  called  "  purification,"  or  "  cleansing." 
This  appears  clearly  in  Lev.  xvi.,  where 
the  ceremonies  of  the  great  Day  of  Atone- 
ment are  detailed.  After  an  account  of  the 
various  sacrifices  of  atonement,  for  the  high 
priest  and  his  house,  for  the  people,  and 
for  the  holy  place  itself  polluted  by  their 
sins,  we  read  (ver.  19),  "And  he  shall 
sprinkle  of  the  blood  upon  it  [i.e.  the  altar] 
with  his  finger  seven  times,  and  eleanie  it 
(fradapiEi),  and  hallow  it  frum  the  uneleanneu 
(tuv  dKoSapamii)  of  Ihe  children  of  Israel." 
And  finally  (ver.  30),  "For  on  that  day 
shall  the  priest  make  an  atonement  for  you, 
to  cleanse  you  (itaBaplaai),  that  ye  may  be 
clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  Lord." 
It  is  to  be  observed,  further,  that  it  is 
especially  the  meaning  of  the  ceremonial 
of  the  Day  of  Atonement  that  Christ  .is 
spoken  of  afterwards  in  the  Epistle  as 
having  fulfilled.  For  the  phrase,  ironitrcf/icfos 
KaSapuTfiby  aimprilnv,  cf.  Job  viL  21,  Aiarf 
ovK  ivot^aa  t^i  laioiilas  KiiBnv,  Kol  KaSapur/ihy 
T^t  aiiaprias  iwv.  Ita  meaning  in  the  Epistle 
may  be  that  Christ,  by  his  death,  brought 
into  being  and.  established  a  permanent 
parification  of  sins — "  a  fountain  open  for 
sin  and  for  uncleanness  "  (Zech.  xiii.  1) — ^in 
his  blood,  which  is  regarded  aa  now  ever 
oflfered  at  the  heavenly  mercy-seat  (oh.  ix. 
12)  and  sprinkled  on  the  redeemed  below 
(ch.  ix.  14,  22).  Thus  the  distinction, 
observed  above,  between  the  atonement 
(iKaaiibs),  of  sacrifice  and  its  application  for 
cleansing  (jtaBaptaubs)  would  be  preserved 
(cf.  1  John  i.  7  and  Rev.  vii.  14).  Bat 
down ;  i.e.  entered  on  his  inheritance  of  all 
things;  not  simply  in  the  sense  of  resuming 
his  pristine  glory,  but  of  obtaining  the  pre- 
eminence denoted  in  prophecy  as  appointed 
to  the  Son,  human  as  well  as  Divine,  ami 
won  by  obedience  and  accomplished  atone- 
ment. And  this  his  supreme  exaltation 
(as  will  be  seen  hereafter)  carries  with  it 
the  idea  of  an  exaltation  of  humanity,  of 
which  he  was  the  High  Priest  and  Represen- 
tative. But  be  it  observed  that  there  is  no 
change  in  the  subject  of  the  sentence.  He 
who  "  sat  down  on  high  "  after  making  puri- 
fication is  the  same  with  him  through  whom 
the  worlds  were  made,  and  whose  eternal 
Divinity  has  been  expressed  by  the  present 
participles.  This  identification  supports 
the  orthodox  position  of  there  being  but  one 
personality  in  Christ,  notwithstanding  the 
two  natures,  and  justifies,  against  Nestorian- 
ism,  the  term  eeoroKos  as  applied  to  the 
blessed  Virgin,  with  other  cognate  expres- 
sions accepted  in  orthodox  theology,  such 
as,  "God  suffered,"  though  in  his  hnman, 


CH.  I.  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


not  hit  Divine,  nature ;  "God  shed  his 
blood"  (of.  Phil.  ii.  9,  eta.).  On  the  right 
hand  of  the  Uajesty  on  high.  The  expres- 
sion is  taken  from  Fa.  ox.  1,  afterwards 
cited  in  this  Epistle,  and  prominently  re- 
ferred to  in  like  manner  by  St.  Paul.  The 
figUre  is  suggested  by  the  custom  of  Oriental 
kings,  who  placed  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  throne  a  son  whom  they  associated  with 
themselves  in  the  prerogatives  of  royalty. 
Occurring  as  it  does  first  in  a  Messinnic 
psalm,  the  phrase  is  never  applied  to  the 
Son's  original  relation  to  the  Father  "  before 
the  ages,"  but  only  to  his  exaltation  as  the 
Christ  (on  which  see  Bleek).  The  same 
idea  seems  expressed  by  our  Lord's  own 
words,  "  All  authority  hath  been  given  unto 
me  in  heaven  and  in  earth"  (Matt,  xxviii. 
18).  But  in  the  end,  according  to  St.  Paul 
(1  Cor.  XT.  24,  28),  this  peculiar  "king- 
ship "  of  the  Son  will  cease,  the  redemptive 
purpose  being  accomplished.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that,  both  here  and  afterwards 
(oh.  viii.  1),  a  fine  periphrasis  is  used  for 
"light hand  of  God;"  "the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  high  "  and  "  the  right  hand 
of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens." 
This  may  be  regarded,  not  only  as  character- 
istic of  the  eloquent  style  of  the  Epistle,  but 
also  as  implying  an  avoidan<'.e  of  too  local 
or  physical  a  view  of  the  session  spoken  of. 
It  is  apparent  elsewhere  liow  tlie  writer  sees 
in  the  figures  used  to  denote  heavenly  things 
only  signs,  level  to  our  comprehension,  of 
corresponding  realities  beyond  our  ken. 

Yer.  4. — ^Having  heoome  by  so  much  better 
than  the  angels  as  he  hath  inherited  a  more 
excellent  name  than  they  (Sitvpoparfpov  nap' 
aiiTobs).  (For  the  same  Greek  form  of  com- 
parison, see  eh.  i.  9 ;  iii.  3.)  "  Ilapa  ingentem 
proeter  cseteroa  excellentiam  denotat "  (Ben- 
gel).  This  verse,  though,  in  respect  of  gram- 
matical construction,  it  is  the  conclusion  of 
the  exordium,  serves  as  the  thesis  of  the 
first  section  of  the  argument  to  follow,  the 
drift  of  which  is  to  show  the  Son's  superiority 
to  the  angels.  The  mention  of  the  angels 
comes  naturally  after  the  allusion  to  Fs.  ex., 
viewed  and  quoted  as  it  is  afterwards  in 
connection  with  Ps.  viii.,  in  which  "  a  little 
Unoer  than  the  angels "  is  taken  to  denote 
the  state  previoui  to  the  exaltation ;  and  it 
is  preparatory  also  for  the  argument  that 
follows.  The  more  distinguished  name,  ex- 
pressing the  measure  of  superiority  to  the 
angels,  is  (as  the  sequel  shows)  the  name  of 
Son,  assigned  (as  aforesaid)  to  the  Messiah 
in  prophecy,  and  so,  with  all  that  it  implies, 
"  inherited  "  by  him  in  time  according  to  the 
Divine  purpose.  Observe  the  perfect,  "  halh 
jlherited,"  instead  of  the  aorist  as  hitherto, 
denotes,  with  the  usual  force  of  the  Greek 
tense,  the  continuance  of  the  inheritance 
obtai;ied.   If  we  have  entered  into  the  view 


all  along  taken  by  the  writer,  we  shall  see 
no  difficulty  in  the  Son  being  said  to  have 
ieeome  better  than  the  angels  at  the  time  of 
his  exaltation,  as  thougii  lie  had  been  below 
them  before.  So  he  had  in  respect  of  bis 
assumed  humanity,  and  it  is  to  the  Son  de- 
noted in  prophecy  to  be  humanly  manifested 
in  time  that  the  whole  sentence  in  its  main 
purport  refers.  As  such,  having  been,  with 
us,  lower  than  the  angels,  he  heoame  greater, 
the  interposed  references  to  his  eternal  per- 
sonality retaining  their  full  force  notwith- 
standing. But  why  should  the  name  of  Son 
in  itself  imply  superiority  to  the  angels? 
Angels  themselves  are,  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, called  "  sons  of  God."  It  has  been 
suggested  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  was 
not  aware  of  the  angels  being  so  designated, 
since  the  LXX.,  from  which  he  invariably 
quotes,  renders  n'SiJ  '33  by  dyyi\oi.  But 
this  is  not  so  invariably.  In  Gen.  vt  1 ; 
Ps.  xxix.  1 ;  and  Izxxix.  7,  we  find  vlot  @eov. 
And,  whatever  be  the  application  of  the 
words  in  each  of  these  passages,  they  at  any 
rate  occur  in  the  LXX.  as  denoting  others 
than  the  Messiah.  Nor,  in  any  case,  would 
it  be  easily  supposable  that  one  so  versed 
in  biblical  lore  as  the  writer  must  have 
been  had  been  thus  misled  in  so  important 
a  point  of  his  argument.  The  fact  is  that 
hia  argument,  properly  understood,  is  quite 
consistent  with  a  full  knowledge  of  the  fact 
that  others  as  well  as  the  Messiah  are  so 
desig)]ated.  For  it  is  not  merely  the  term 
"Son"  as  applied  to  the  Messiah  in  pro- 
phecy, but  the  unique  manner  in  which  it 
is  so  applied,  that  is  insisted  on  in  what 
follows.  The  form  of  his  commencement 
shows  this.  He  dnes  not  say,  "  Whom,  ex- 
cppt  the  Messiah,  did  he  ever  call  Son?" 
but,  "To  which  of  the  angels  did  he  ever 
speak  as  follows,  Thou  art  my  Son;  this 
day  have  1  begotten  thee  ?  "  In  language 
generally  the  meaning  of  a  word  may  de- 
pend very  materially  on  the  context  in  which 
it  occurs  and  other  determining  circum- 
stances. Indeed,  the  mere  use  of  the  title 
in  the  singular,  "  my  Son,"  carries  with  it 
a  different  idea  from  its  use  in  the  plural  of 
a  class  of  beings.  But  this  is  not  all.  A 
series  of  passages  from  the  Old  Testament 
is  adduced  by  way  of  expressly  showing 
that  the  sonship  assigned  to  the  Messiah 
carries  with  it  the  idea  of  a  relation  to 
God  altogether  beyond  any  ever  assigned  to 
angels.  Such  is  the  position  of  the  vrritor. 
We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  how  he  makes  it 
good. 

Yer.  5— ch.  iii.  1. — The  Son  superior 
TO  THE  Angels.  Here  the  argumentation 
of  the  Epistle  begins,  the  thesis  of  the  first 
section  of  the  argument  having  been  given, 
as  aforesai<l,  in  the  preceding  verse,  that 
"  the  Son  is  superior  to  the  angels."    The 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  1. 1—14 


second  section  begins  at  ch.  iii.  1,  the  thesis 
being  that  "  the  Son  is  superior  to  Moses." 
Through  angels  and  Moses  tlie  Law  was 
given:  " Ordained  through  anijels  in  the 
hand  of  a  mediator"  (Gal.  iii.  19),  the  "  me- 
diator" being  Moses.  To  ehow  that  the 
Sov,  in  the  Old  Testament  itself,  is  repre- 
sented as  above  both,  is  to  show,  what  it  is 
the  main  purpose  of  the  whole  Epistle  to 
establish,  that  the  gospel,  given  through 
the  Son,  is  above  the  Law,  and  intended  to 
supersede  it.  The  conclusion  is  that  the 
gospel  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  the 
liAw  as  does  the  Son  to  angels,  who  are 
but  "  ministering  spirits,"  and  to  Moses,  who 
was  but  a  "  servant."  With  regard  to  the 
agenny  of  angels  in  the  giving  of  the  Law, 
we  do  not  find  it  so  evident  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  might  have  been  expected  from  the 
references  to  it  in  the  New.  The  "  angel  of 
Lord,"  who  appeared  to  Moses  (Bxod.  iii.  2) 
and  went  before  the  people  (Exod.  xiv.  19 ; 
zxiil  20,  etc.),  seems  in  the  earlier  books  of 
the  Bible  to  signify  a  certain  presence  and 
manifestation  of  the  Lobd  himself,  rather 
than  a  created  minister  of  his  will  (see  Gen. 
xvl  7, 13 ;  xxii.  15, 16 ;  Exod.  iii.  2,  4 ;  xxiii. 
20,  21 ;  cf.  Acts  vii.  31,  35,  38) ;  and  this  has 
been  identified  by  theologians  with  the 
Word,  not  yet  incarnate,  tlirough  whom  all 
Divine  communications  have  been  made  to 
men.  It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that, 
after  the  sin  of  the  golden  calf,  a  distinction 
seems  to  be  made  between  the  presence  of 
the  Lobd  with  his  people  and  that  of  the 
angel  to  be  thenceforth  tent  before  them 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  2,  3).  Ebrard  sees  in  the 
"  angel  of  the  Lord  "  generally,  though 
understood  as  signifying  a  Divine  presence, 
a  justification  of  the  statement  that  the  Law 
was  given  "  through  angels,"  on  the  ground 
that,  though  God  did  so  manifest  himself,  it 
was  not  a  direct  manifestation,  as  in  ihe 
Son,  bnt  through  forms  borrowed  from  the 
sphere  of  the  angels.  It  was  an  angelo- 
phany,  denoting  an  unseen  Divine  presence, 
not  a  true  fheophany.  The  only  distinct  al- 
lusion to  "angels,"  in  the  plural,  in  connec- 
tion with  the  giving  of  the  Law,  is  in  Dent, 
xxxiii.  2,  "  He  came  with  ten  thousands 
of  saints ; "  with  which  oomp.  Ps.  Ixviii.  17. 
But  there  i*  no  doubt  that  it  came  after- 
wards to  be  the  accepted  rabbinical  view 
tlwt  the  diapensers  of  the  Law  were  angeli 

Seotion  L 
Thttit:  Christ  gnperior  to  the  angel*. 

Division  1  (ch.  i.  6— ii.  1). 
The  name  Son,  as  applied  to  the  typloal 
theocratic  kings,  and  in  its  final  reference 
and  full  meaning  (as  you  all  acknowledge) 
pointing  to  the  Messiah,  expresses  a  position 
altogether  above  any  assigned  anywhere  to 
tageb.   The  8om  is  represented  as  one  asso- 


— whether  as  attendiints  on  the  Divine 
Majesty,  or  as  agents  of  the  fiery  phenomena 
on  Mount  Sinai  (natur.d  operations  being 
often  attributed  to  angels),  or  as  the  utterers 
of  the  voice  tliat  was  heard.  "  Looutus  est 
Dens  per  angelos  "  (  Bengel).  And  the  writers 
of  the  New  Testameut  plainly  recognize  this 
view  (see  below,  ch.  ii.  2  ;  Acts  vii.  53  ; 
Gal.  iii.  19).  Hence  our  author  takes  for 
granted  that  his  readers  vrill  understand  and 
recognize  it,  and  so  implies  it  in  his  argu- 
ment, expressing,  as  it  does,  a  true  conception 
of  the  nature  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation, 
and  especially  of  its  relation  to  the  gospel. 
To  resume  our  view  of  the  argument  that 
follows.  The  first  seotion  (as  aforesaid)  is 
from  ch.  i  5  to  iii.  1,  having  for  its  thesis 
tlie  superiority  of  the  Son  to  angeU.  The 
second  section  is  from  ch.  iii.  1  to  v.  1,  hav- 
ing for  its  thesis  the  superiority  of  the  Son  to 
Moses.  Each  section  consists  of  two  main 
divisions,  between  which  in  each  case  an 
appropriate  exhortation  is  interposed;  the 
first  division  in  each  case  treating  of  what 
the  Son  is  in  his  own  person,  the  second  oi 
his  work  for  man ;  and  both  sections  leading 
separately  to  the  conclusion  that  he  is  the 
High  Priest  of  humanity.  Then,  in  ch.  v., 
the  subject  of  his  priesthood  is  taken  up. 
Ebrard  happily  illustrates  the  symmetrical 
plan  of  the  argument  thus :  "  The  author, 
having  thus  been  led  from  these  two  dif- 
ferent starting-points  to  the  idea  of  the  ap- 
X'^peis,  now  proceeds  to  place  on  the  two 
first  parts,  which  may  be  viewed  as  the  pil- 
lars of  the  arch,  the  third  part,  which  forms 
the  keystone."  In  this  third  part  it  begins 
to  be  shown,  at  oh.  v.  1,  how  Christ  fulfilled 
in  his  humanity  the  essential  idea  of  priest- 
hood. But,  for  reasons  that  will  appear,  the 
full  doctrine  of  his  eternal  priesthood  is  not 
entered  upon  till  ch.  vii.  1 — ^x.  19,  which  may 
be  called  the  central  portion  of  the  whole 
Epistle.  The  remainder  (ch.  x.  20 — end) 
may  be  distinguished  from  the  rest  as  being 
the  distinctly  hortatory  part  (though  hor- 
tation  has  been  frequently  interposed  in  the 
argument),  being  mainly  devoted  to  prac- 
tical application  of  the  doctrine  that  has 
been  establuhed.  The  following  plan  of 
the  argument  of  the  first  two  sections, 
showing^  the  parallelism  between  them, 
may  assist  ns  in  entering  into  it  as  it  pro. 
oeeds: — 

Section  II. 
Thesis    Christ  superior  to  Mosei. 
Division  1  (oh.  Ui.  1 — 7), 
Moses  is  represented  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  bnt  a  sonant  in  the  home  of  God 
The  Son  b  lord  over  the  house. 


on.  1 1—14,1 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBBEWBb 


eiated  with  God  in  his  majesty,  a  Bharer  of 
his  eTcrlasting  throne.  Angols  are  referred 
to  only  ns  ministering  spirits  or  attendant 
worshippers  at  the  Son's  advent. 

Interpoied  exiiartation  (oh,  ii.  1 — 5). 
This  being  so,  beware  of  not  appreciating 
the  revelation  now  given  in  tlie  Sou.  If 
Irangreseion  of  the  Law  given  through 
angels  was  so  severely  visited,  what  will  be 
the  consequence  of  neglecting  this,  accre- 
dited to  us  ati  it  has  been  ? 

Division  2  (ch.  ii.  5 — iii.  1). 
The  Son  also,  bnt  never  angels,  is  denoted 
in  prophecy  as  Lord  of  the  coming  age.  For 
the  eighth  psalm  (based  on  and  carrying 
out  the  idea  of  the  acconnt  in  Genesis  of 
the  original  creation)  assigns  a  supremacy 
over  all  created  things  to  man.  Man,  as  he 
is  now,  does  not  fulfil  the  ideal  of  his  des- 
tiny. Bat  Christ,  as  Son  of  man,  in  his 
exaltation,  does.  And  in  him  man  atlains 
liii  destined  dignity  forfeited  through  sin. 
His  humiliation,  suffering  and  death  were 
for  the  purpose  of  thus  raising  man.  His 
humiliation  with  this  end  was  a  design 
worthy  of  God",  and  in  accordance  with  the 
purport  of  Messianic  prophecy.  For  such 
prophecy  intimates  association  and  sym- 
pathy of  the  Messiah  with  his  human 
bretliien.  Thus  Christ,  the  Son,  is  the 
sympathizing  High  Priest  of  humanity. 

Ver.  5. — For  to  which  of  the  angeli  said 
He  at  anytime.    Observe  the  form  of  the 

Question,  which  has  been  already  noticed, 
t  is  not,  "When  were  angols  ever  called 
sons?"  but  to  this  effect:  "To  which  of 
them  did  he  ever  speak  (individually)  in 
the  following  remarkable  terms  ?  "  The  first 
quotation  is  from  Ps.  ii.  7 ;  the  second  from 
2  Bam.  vii.  14.  The  second  having  had  un- 
doubtedly a  primary  reference  to  Solomon, 
and  the  first  presumably  to  some  king  of 
Israel,  probably  to  David,  we  may  here 
properly  pause  to  consider  the  principle  of 
the  application  of  such  passages  to  Christ. 
It  must  be  allowed  that,  not  only  in  this 
Epistle,  but  in  the  New  Testament  gene- 
rally, sayings  which  liaJ  a  primary  refer- 
ence to  events  or  personages  in  the  past, 
are  applied  directly  to  Christ ;  and  in  some 
cases  where  the  justness  of  tlie  application 
may  not  be  to  all  of  us  at  first  sight 
obvious.  With  regard  to  this  usage,  Ben  gel 
says,  "  Veri  interpretes  verborum  divinnrum 
sunt  apostoli;  etiamsi  nos  sine  illis  talem 
sententiam  non  assigneremur."  But  such 
applications  are  plainly  not  arbitrary.  They 
rest  on  a  principle  of  interpretation  whicli  it 
iaof  importance  for  us  to  understand.  First, 
we  may  observe  that  the  method  was  not  ori- 
ginated by  the  New  Testament  writers;  it  was 
one  received  among  the  Jews  of  their  time, 
who  Mw  throughout  the  Old  Testament  auti- 


Interposed  exhortation  (ch.  iil  7 — ^It.  1). 

This  being  so,  beware  of  hardening  your 
hearts,  like  thu  Israelites  under  Mo^es.  If 
they  faileil,  through  unbelief,  of  entering 
into  the  rest  offered  to  them,  you  may  simi- 
larly fail  of  entering  into  the  rest  intended 
for  you. 

Division  2  (ch.  iv.  1 — v.  1). 

A  rest,  symbolized  by  that  of  the  pro- 
mised land,  is  still  offered  to  you,  and  you 
may  enter  into  it.  The  ninetieth  psalm 
shows  that  the  rest  into  which  Joshua  led 
the  Israelites  was  not  the  final  one  intended 
for  God's  people.  The  true  rest  is  the  rest 
of  God  himself  ("  my  rest,"  Ps.  xc),  spoken 
of  in  the  account  of  the  creation — the  sab- 
bath rest  of  eternity.  Christ,  after  sharing 
our  human  trials,  has  passed  into  that  eter- 
nal rest,  and  won  an  entrance  into  it  for 
us.  Thus,  again,  a  renewed  exhortation 
being  interposed,  Christ,  the  Son,  is  again 
set  forth  as  the  sympathizing  High  Priest 
«/  humanity. 


dpations  of  the  Messiah.  This  appears  both 
from  rabbinical  literature  and  also  from 
tlie  New  Testament  itself.  For  instance, 
the  priests  and  scribes  consulted  by  Herod 
(Matt,  ii  5)  referred  Micah  v.  2  as  a  matter 
of  course  to  the  Messiah  ;  and  the  Pharisees 
(Matt.  xxii.  44)  never  thought  of  disputing 
the  application  of  Ps.  ex.  to  him.  And  not 
only  BO.  The  Old  Testament  itself  sug- 
gests and  exemplifies  such  applications. 
For  students  of  the  prophetic  writings  must 
be  aware  how  utterances  that  had  a  pri- 
mary fulfilment  in  one  age  are  sometimes 
taken  up  in  a  subsequent  one  as  though 
yet  to  be  fulfilled,  their  scope  enlarged, 
and  their  final  reference  often  thrown  for- 
ward to  "that  day" — the  IMessianio  age 
^— which  alone  terminates  the  view  of  the 
later  prophets.  Now,  it  has  been  said,  in 
explanation  of  this  mode  of  treatment,  that 
prophecy  often  had  a  double  meaning,  re- 
ferring partly  to  one  thing  and  partly  to 
another;  or  several  meanings,  with  refer- 
ence to  several  different  things.  But  this 
way  of  putting  the  matter  is  unsatisfac- 
tory. Bacon  better  hit  the  mark,  when,  in 
a  well-known  passage  in  his  '  Advancement 
of  Learning'  (bk.  ii.),  he  spoke  of  "that 
latitude  which  is  agreeable  and  familiar 
unto  Divine  prophecies,  being  of  the  nature 
of  their  Author,  with  whom  a  thousand  years 
are  but  as  one  day,  and  therefore  are  not 


10 


THiS  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEBWSk 


[OB.  L  1—14 


fulfilled  punctnally  at  once,  but  have  spring- 
ing and  gerraiiiant  accomplishment  thnmgli- 
out  many  ages ;  though  the  height  or  fulness 
of  them  may  refer  to  some  one  age."    We 
may  put  it  thus :    It  was  of  the  nature  of 
prophetic  inspiration  to  lift  tlie  seer  above 
and  beyond  liis  immediate  subject  to  the 
contemplation  of  some  grand  ideal,  which  it 
suggested  to  his  vision,  and  more  or  less  per- 
fectly fulfilled.    He  has,  for  instance,  as  the 
basis  of  his  vision,  a  David,  a  Solomon,  a 
Hezekiah,  or  a  Zciubbabel;  he  has  as  its 
framework  the  circumstances  of  his  own  time 
or  of  the  time  near  at  hand ;  but  we  find  his 
language,  as  he  proceeds,  rising  far  above 
his  vision's  original  scope,  and  applicable 
to  those  comprised  within  it  only  so  far  as 
they  embody  and  realize  the  ideal  which  they 
represent  to  his  mind.    Hence  the  taking 
up  of  old  prophecies  by  succeeding  prophets, 
their  enlargement  and  reapplication  to  new 
fulfilments ;  and  tliis,  too,  in  terms  trans- 
cending the  reality  of  these  new  fulfilments ; 
as,  for  instance,  when  Isaiah,  taking  up  the 
idea  of  Nathan'i  message  to  David  (2  Sam. 
vii.),  applies  it  apparently  to  a  son  and  a  reign 
to  be  looked  for  in  his  own  age,  but  at  length 
in  language  which  can  have  no  other  than  a 
Messianic  reference  (Iga.  ix.  6,  etc.;   xi.  1, 
etc. ;  of.  Jer.  xxxiii.  15).   Hence,  lastly,  the 
application  in  the  New  Testament  of  all  such 
ancient  utterances  at  once  to  Christ,  as  being 
the  final  and  complete  fulfilment  of  the  ideal 
of  prophecy,   the  true  Antitype  of  all  the 
types.  _  A  clear  perception  of  tliis  view  of 
Uie  drift  of  prophecy  will  remove  difficultiei 
that  have  been  felt  as  to  the  apjilication  of 
naany  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament, 
in  this  Kpistle  and    elsewhere,  to  Christ. 
Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
thee ;  a  quotation  from  Ps.  ii.  7.    This  psalm 
is  expressly  quoted  as  David's  in  Acts  iv. 
25,  and  has  internal  evidence  of  being  his, 
and  of  having  had  primary  reference,  to  his 
reign.     For  tHe  mention  of  Zion  (ver.G)  pre- 
cludes an  earlier  date,  while  the  circum- 
stances of  warfare  alluded  to  do  not  agree  with 
the  peaceful  reign  of  Solomon,  nor  the  picture 
of  undivided  empire  with  any  period  after 
the  secession  of  the  ten  tribes.    Further,  the 
rising  and  consequent  subjugation  by  David 
of  subject  races,  described  in  2  Sam.  viii., 
presents  to  us  a  stute  of  things  very  likely  to 
nave  suggested  the  psalm ;  and  to  this  period 
of  David's  reign  it  is  usually  referred  with 
probability  by  modem  commentators.    But 
the  question  of  date  and  authorship  is  not 
material  to  our  view  of  the  prophetic  meaning 
of  the  psalm.     Taking  it  to  be  David's,  we 
find  as  follows :    There  is  a  rebellious  con- 
federation of  subject  kings  against  the  do- 
minion of  the  King  of  Israel,  who  is  spoken  of 
as  "  the  Anointed  "  of  the  LoBU.    In  view  of 
their  hostile  preparations,  the  Lobd  in  heaven 


is  conceived  as  laughing  to  scorn  their  de- 
vices against  him  whom  he  himself  had  en- 
throned on  Zion.    Then  the  king  spenks,  "  I 
will  declare  the  decree  [or, '  I  will  tell  of  a 
decree '] ;  the  Loud  said  unto  me.  Thou  art 
my  Son ;  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.    Ask 
of  mo,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  nations  for 
thine  inheritance,  and  for  thy  possession  the 
ends  of  the  earth."    Then  follows  an  admo- 
nition to  the  rebels  to  do  homage  to  this 
Son,  submission  to  whom  is  submission  to 
the  Loud,  and  whose  anger  is  as  the  Lobd's 
anger.     Now,  it  Is  evident  that  the  language 
used  transcends  literal  applicatiofl  to  any 
earthly  king.     Hence  some  commentators 
have  been  led  to  suppose  that  it  had  no  even 
primary  reference  to  one,  being  simply  pro- 
phetic of  the  Messiah,  though  suggested  by 
the  ciTonmstances  of    David's  day.     Thus 
Ebrard,  supporting  his  view  by  the  assump- 
tion (which  is  usually  made)  of  the  message 
of  Nathan  to  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  14)  being 
the  "  decree  "  referred  to  in  the  psalm,  and 
the  foundation  of  the  confidence  expressed 
in  it.     He  argues  that  it  was  not  to  David, 
but  to  his  posterity  (p'lT ),  that  the  position 
of  sonship  was  assigned,  and  eternal  do-, 
minion  promised ;  and  hence  that  David  in 
this  psalm  (which  he  considers  to  have  beer 
certainly  by  him)  must  have  been  speaking, 
not  in  his  own  name,  but  in  that  of  his  seed 
after  him,  looking  adoringly  forward  to  the 
fulfilment  of  that  glorious  hope  in  the  distant 
future  (2  Sam.  vii.  19).   Thns,  he  concludes, 
the  insurrection  of  the  Syrians  forms  merely 
the  occasion,  but  not  the  ohjed  and  import, 
of  the  second  psalm.     But,  even  if  the  raes- 
6age_  of  Nathan  were  certainly  the  basis  of 
the  idea  of  the  psalm,  we  find  an  instance  of 
the  express  application  of  that  message  t»  - 
David  himself,  as  well  as  to  bis  poster. ty,  in 
Ps.  Ixxxix.  (see  vers.  20— 2-<).    It  may  be, 
however,  that  the  reference  in  the  psalm  is 
to  some  Divine  intimation,  possibly  to  some 
prophecy  or  oracular  utterance,  delivered  to 
David  himself  at  the  time  of  the  inaiigma- 
tion  of  his  own  sovereignty,  and  long  before 
Nathan's  message.    In  any  case,  it  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  genius  of  prophecy,  as 
above  explained,  that  the  words  should  have 
had  a  primary  reference  to  David  himself,  so 
far  forth  as  he  imperfectly  fulfilled  their 
meaning.    The  main  thing  to  be  observed 
is  that  they  represent  an  ideal  of  sonship 
and  unlimited  sovereignty  beyond  any  that 
could,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  be  considered  as 
fulfilled  in  David.    And  this  view  of  its 
meaning,  suggested  by  the  psalm  itself,  is 
confirmed  by  the  use  made  of  it  in  later 
Son]  iture.    For  it  is  evident  that  this  psalm, 
together  with  the  passage  from  2  Sam.  vii. 
(to  be  cited  next)  is  made  the  basis  of  a  long 
series  of  Messianic  prophecies  (of.  2  Sam. 
xxm.  \,  etc. ;  Pa.  ox. ;  Ixxxii. ;  oxxni. ;  Isai 


OH.  L  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


11 


tIL— Ix. ;  xl.  1, 10 ;  Jer.  xziii.  5 ;  zxziii.  15 ; 
Micah  iv. — v. ;  Zeoh.  vi.  12,  etc.).  Its  appli- 
cation to  Christ  in  the  New  TeBtament  is 
distinct  and  frequent  (cf.  Acts  iv.  25 ;  xiii. 
33 ;  Bev.  ii.  27 ;  xii.  5 ;  six.  15).  As  to  the 
phrase,  "This  day  have  I  begotten  thee," 
there  ii  *  difl'erence  of  view  among  both 
ftnoient  and  modem  expositors.  The  word 
"begotten"  (7c7^i/j'7)ico)  naturally  suggests 
fiavoyii/iis,  and  is  hence  taken  by  some  as 
referring  to  the  eternal  generation  of  the 
Son ;  in  which  case  it  can  have  had  no  ap- 
plication in  any  conceivable  sense  to  the 
human  type.  "  This  day  "  has  also  in  this 
case  to  be  explained  as  denoting  the  ever- 
present  to-day  of  eternity.  So  Origen,  in  a 
striking  passage,  "  It  is  said  to  him  by  God, 
to  whom  it  is  always  to-day.  For  God  has  no 
evening,  nor  (as  I  deem)  any  morning,  but 
the  time  which  is  coextensive  with  his  own 
unbegolteu  and  eternal  life  is  (if  I  may  so 
speak)  the  day  in  which  the  Son  is  begotten, 
there  being  thus  found  no  beginning  of  his 
generation,  as  neither  is  there  of  the  day." 
AthanasiuB  takes  the  same  view ;  also  Basil, 
Frimasius,  Thomas  Aquinas,  and  many 
others.  The  main  objection  to  it  is  the  in- 
applicability of  such  a  meaning  of  the  words, 
sven  in  a  subordinate  sense,  to  David  or  any 
other  king  of  Israel.  Alford,  indeed,  urges 
that  this  meaning  agrees  best  with  the  con- 
text in  the  Epistle,  on  the  ground  that  the 
eternal  being  of  the  Son,  having  been  stated 
in  the  exordium,  might  be  expected  to  be  re- 
ferred  to  in  the  proof.  But  this  is  hardly  to 
the  point.  The  writer  has  now  begun  his 
argument  from  tlie  Old  Testament,  and  is 
engaged  in  showing  the  idea  involved  in  the 
term  Son  as  applied  therein  to  the  Messiah. 
This,  therefore,  and  not  what  he  has  said 
previously,  is  what  we  have  to  regard  in 
our  interpretation;  and  the  most  obviovis 
view  of  the  phrase,  as  it  occurs  in  the  psalm 
itself,  is  to  regard  it  as  a  figure  denoting 
forcibly  the  paternity  of  God  ;  cf.  Jer.  ii.  27, 
"  They  say  to  the  wood.  Thou  art  my  father ; 
to  the  stone,  Thou  hast  begotten  me."  It 
expresses  the  idea  that  the  "  Son  of  God  " 
spoken  of  derives  his  existence  as  such 
from  him,  and  not  from  human  ancestry. 
Chrysostom,  among  the  ancient*,  under- 
stands the  phrase  as  thus  referring  to  the 
Bonship  assigned  to  the  Messiah  in  time, 
and  not  to  his  eternal  being.  This  view 
being  taken,  "  this  day,"  in  refirence  to  the 
king,  5ttay  mean  the  day  of  the  "  decree,"  or 
that  of  his  enthronement  on  Mount  Zion. 
In  reference  to  Christ  it  has  been  variously 
understood  of  the  time  of  his  incarnation, 
or  resurrection,  or  ascension.  If  it  be  thought 
necessary  to  assign  any  definite  time  to  it  in 
its  application  to  Christ,  the  view  of  its  being 
the  day  of  the  resurrection  u  supported  by 
Buoh  passages  as  Ool,  L  18,  TpuTdroKos  Ik  tSv 


wtKpav ;  and  Rom.  i.  4,  toO  6pi(r$4vTos  vtov  8eou 
fy  SwA/xit  . .  .  e|  avatrrdiffews  veKpScv ',  cf.  Acta 
ii.  30  and  Acts  xiii.  32,  etc.,  "  The  promise 
that  was  made  unto  the  fathers,  God  hath 
fulfilled  the  same  unto  their  children,  in 
that  he  hath  raised  up  Jesus  again  :  as  it  is 
also  written  in  the  second  psalm.  Thou  art 
my  Son;  this  day  liave  I  begotten  thee." 
This  last  text,  be  it  observed,  is  almost  oon- 
olusive  against  the  eternal  generation  being 
understood  as  referred  to ;  as  is  also  the  ap- 
plication of  the  same  text  infra,  ch.  v.  5, 
where  it  is  quoted  in  proof  of  Christ's  ap- 
pointment to  the  eternal  priesthood.  ["  The 
title  of  begetting  is  ofttimes  in  sacred  lan- 
guage to  be  measured,  not  by  the  scale  of 
philosophers'  or  naturalists'  dialect,  but  of 
moral  or  civil  language  or  interpretation. 
For  they  that  are  sons  by  adoption  only,  or 
next  heirs  by  reversion  to  a  crown  or  dignity, 
are  said  to  be  begotten  of  those  which  adopt 
them,  or  of  whom  they  be  the  immediate 
heirs  or  successors :  and  in  this  sense  in  the 
sacred  genealogy  (Matt.  i.  12)  Jeconiah  is 
said  to  have  begutten  Salathiel.  So  that 
David  upon  his  own  occasions  (whether  upon 
his  anointing  to  the  crown  of  Judah  in 
Hebron,  or  of  Israel  in  Zion)  might  in  the 
literal  sense  avouch  these  words  of  himself, 
'I  will  preach  the  law  whereof  the  Lord 
hath  said  unto  me.  Thou  art  my  son;  this 
day  have  I  begotten  thee.'  For  David  to 
call  the  day  of  his  coronatioa,  or  of  his 
designation  to  the  crown  of  Judah,  or  of  all 
Israel,  his  birthday,  or  begetting  of  God, 
by  whose  special  power  and  providence  he 
was  crowned,  is  not  so  harsh  as  some  haply 
would  deem  it  that  either  know  not  or  con- 
sider not  that  it  was  usual  in  other  states 
or  kingdoms  beside  Judah  to  celebrate 
two  natales  dies,  two  solemn  nativities  or 
birthdays  in  honour  of  their  kings  and 
emperors :  the  one  they  called  diem  natalem 
imperatoria,  the  other  diem  natalem  imperii ; 
the  one  the  birthday  of  the  emperor  when 
he  was  bom  of  his  natural  mother,  the  other 
the  birthday  of  him  as  he  was  emperor,  which 
we  call  the  coronation  day.  The  reason 
might  hold  more  peculiar  in  David  than  in 
any  other  princes,  because  he  was  the  first 
of  all  the  seed  of  Abraham  that  took  posses- 
sion of  the  hill  of  Zion,  and  settled  the 
kingdom  of  Judah,  prophesied  of  by  his 
father  Jacob,  upon  himself  and  hii  pos- 
terity. .  .  .  Thus  Ego  hodie  genui  te,  with 
submission  of  ray  opinion  to  better  judg- 
ment, is  a  prediction  typically  prophetical, 
which  kind  of  prediction,  as  hath  been 
observed  before,  is  the  most  concludent; 
and  this  one  of  the  highest  rank  in  that 
kind;  that  is,  an  oracle  truly  meant  of 
David  according  to  the  literal  sense,  and 
yet  fulfilled  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  Qod.  by 
his  resurrection  bam  the  imd,  bttli  ao- 


12 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW& 


[oh.  1. 1—14. 


cording  to  the  moBt  exquisite  literal  and  the 
mystical  and  principally  intended  sense  " 
(T.  Jackson's  '  Works,'  bk.  ix.  ch.  xixi.  6,  7, 
Oxford  edition,  1844,  voL  viii.  p.  411).] 
And  again,  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he 
shall  be  to  me  a  Son  (2  Sam.  vii  14);  from 
Nathan's  message  to  David,  which  has  been 
spoken  of  above.  The  words  do  not  in  them- 
selves express  so  unique  a  sonship  as  those 
used  in  the  psalm ;  but,  viewed  in  connection 
with  the  psalm,  with  their  own  context,  and 
with  subsequent  pruphecy,  they  suggest  the 
same  meaning.  David  had  Tormed  the  design 
of  building  a  temple ;  Nathan,  by  the  word 
of  the  LoBD,  forbids  his  doing  so,  but  tells 
him  that  his  "  seed  "  after  him  should  build 
a  house  for  the  Lord's  Name,  and  that  the 
Lord  would  establish  the  throne  of  his  king- 
dom for  ever."  Then  comes  the  text, "  I 
will  be  to  him  a  father,  and  he  shall  be  to 
me  a  son ;  "  followed  by,  "  If  he  commit 
iniquity,  I  will  oliastise  him  with  the  rod  of 
men  .  .  .  bat  my  mercy  shall  not  depart 
away  from  him.  .  .  .  And  thine  house  and 
tby  kingdom  shall  be  established  for  ever 
before  thee  :  thy  throne  shall  be  established 
for  ever."  Now,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
there  was  a  primary  and  partial  fulfilment 
of  this  promise  in  Solomon,  who  built  tbs 
temple  after  David's  death.  He  took  it  to 
himself,  so  fai  as  it  was  applicable  to  him, 
after  his  completion  of  the  temple  (1  Kings 
viii.  17,  etc.).  But  it  is  equally  evident  that 
its  meaning  could  not  be  exhausted  in  him. 
The  eternity  assigned  to  the  throne  of  the 
kingdom  points  to  a  distant  as  well  as  an 
immediate  fulfilment,  and  the  word  trans- 
lated "  seed "  (Hebrew,  yn;),  though  ap- 
plicable in  a  concrete  sense  to  an  individual 
offspring  (of.  Gen.  iv.  25 ;  1  Sam.  i.  11),  is 
properly  a  collective  noun,  denoting  "  pos- 
terity," and  thus  naturally  lends  itself  to  a 
far-reaching  application.  The  consideration, 
however,  of  especial  weight  in  support  of 
such  application  is  that  psalmists  and 
prophets  cease  not  to  make  this  original 
promise  the  basis  of  Messianic  prophecy. 
Se«,  not  only  Fs.  iL,  which  may  or  may  not 
refer  to  it,  but  also  Ps.  Ixxxix.  and  cxxxil, 
together  with  other  passages  which  have 
been  referred  to  in  connection  with  the 
second  psalm.  Thus  we  may  properly  apply 
to  this  particular  passage  the  view  of  the 
meaning  of  prophecy  which  has  been  set  forth 
in  general  terms  above,  according  to  wljich 
we  most  regard  Solomon,  with  respect  to  the 
sonship  assigned  to  him  as  well  as  to  his  king- 
dom and  the  house  which  he  was  to  build,  as 
but  a  type  and  imperfect  realization  of  a 
grand  ideal  to  be  in  due  time  fulfilled. 

Ver.  6. — And  again,  when  he  bringeth  in 
the  first-begotten  into  the  world,  he  saith, 
And  let  all  the  angels  of  God  worsUp  him. 
The  most  obvious  translation  «t  th«  Greek 


here  seems  at  first  sight  to  be,  *  But  whenerer 
he  [<.«.  God]  shall  again  bring  [or,  'bring 
back']  the  Firstborn  into  the  inhabited  world, 
he  saith ;  "  STav  elira-ydyri  denoting  the  in- 
definiteness  of  future  time,  and  the  position 
of  irdKiy  connecting  it  most  naturaUy  with 
tlirayiyf.  If  such  be  the  force  of  iriTuv,  the 
reference  must  be  to  the  second  advent; 
which,  however,  is  not  suggested  by  the 
context,  in  which  there  has  been  no  mention 
of  a  first  advent,  but  only  of  the  assigna- 
tion to  the  Messiah  of  the  name  of  Sok. 
This  supposed  reference  to  a  second  advent 
may  be  avoided  by  disconnecting  WAiv  in 
sense  from  thayiyt),  and  taking  it  (as  in  the 
verse  immediately  preceding,  and  elsewhere 
in  the  Epistle)  as  only  introducing  a  new 
quotation.  And  the  Greek  will  bear  this 
interpretation,  though  the  order  of  the 
words,  taken  by  themselves,  is  against  it. 
The  "  Firstborn  "  (7rp»T<(TOKos)  is  evidently 
the  Son  previously  spoken  of;  the  word  is 
BO  applied  (Fs.  Ixzxiz.  27)  in  a  passage  un- 
doubtedly founded  on  the  text  last  quoted. 
The  same  word  is  applied  in  the  New 
Testament  to  Christ,  as  "the  Firstborn 
among  many  brethren,"  "  the  Firstborn  of 
every  creature,"  "the  Firstborn  from  the 
dead"  (Bom.  viii.  29 ;  Col.  i.  15,  18).  And 
the  idea  conveyed  by  these  passages  may 
have  been  in  the  writer's  mind,  and  intended 
to  be  understood  by  his  Christian  readers. 
But  for  the  immediate  purpose  of  his  argu- 
ment he  may  be  supposed  to  refer  only  to 
this  designation  as  applied  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment to  the  Sou  already  spoken  of.  Thus 
the  meaning  may  be,  "But,  again,  with 
reference  to  the  time  when  he  shall  introduce 
this  Soif,  the  Firstborn,  into  our  inhabited 
world,  he  speaks  thus  of  the  angels."  Or 
it  may  be,  "  But  whenever  he  shall  bring  a 
second  time  into  the  world  the  Firstborn 
who  has  already  once  appeared,  he  speaks 
thus  of  the  angels."  But  the  first  meaning 
seems  more  suitable  to  the  general  context. 
The  force  of  the  writer's  argument  is  the 
same,  whichever  view  we  take;  the  point 
being  that,  at  the  time  of  the  advent  of  the 
BoN,  whatever  advent  may  be  meant,  the 
angels  appear  only  as  attendant  worshippers. 
As  to  the  understood  nominative  to  "  saith," 
we  may  suppose  it  to  be  "  God,"  as  in  ver. 
6.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  Aeyei, 
without  an  expressed  nominative,  is  a  usual 
formula  for  introducing  a  scriptural  quota- 
tion. The  question  remains— What  is  the 
text  quoted,  and  liow  can  it  be  understood 
as  bearing  the  meaning  here  assigned  to  itJ 
In  the  Hebrew  Bible  we  find  nothing  like 
it,  except  in  Fs.  xovii.  7,  "Worship  him, 
aU  ye  gods,"  A.V. ;  where  the  LXX.  has 
■KpoaKvvitrarf  out$  'xivTa  oi  2Y7cAai  eeoS. 
But  in  Deut.  xxiiL  43  we  find  in  the 
LXX.,  though  not  in  the  Masoretio  text,  inU 


CH.  I.  1 — 14.J 


THE  EPISTLE  to  THE  HEBREWS. 


II 


■mpoaKvvi)a&riMar  ahr^  irdvTes  t-yyeKoi  BtoS  i 
the  very  words,  inolnding  tho  introductoTy 
Koi,  which  are  quoted.  Hence,  the  quota- 
tions in  this  Epistle  heing  mainly  from  the 
LXX.,  we  may  conclude  that  this  is  the  text 
referred  to.  It  occurs  towards  the  end  of 
the  Song  of  Moses,  in  connection  with  its 
concluding  picture  of  the  Lobd's  final 
triumph,  in  which  the  nations  are  called 
apon  to  rejoice  with  his  people,  when  he 
would  aTenge  the  blood  of  his  servants,  and 
render  vengeance  to  his  adversaries,  and 
make  atonement  for  (Greek,  ^/cKoflopiel)  his 
land  and  for  his  people.  Viewed  in  the 
light  of  later  prophecy,  this  triumph  is 
identified  with  that  of  the  Messiah's  king- 
dom, and  is  tlierefore  that  of  the  time  of 
bringing  "  the  Firstborn  into  the  world."  Of. 
Bom.  XV.  10,  where  "  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles," 
etc.,  from  the  same  passage,  is  applied  to 
the  time  of  Christ.  It  is  no  objection  to  the 
quotation  that,  as  it  stands  in  the  Epistle, 
-'  the  Firstborn,"  though  not  mentioned  in 
the  original,  seems  to  be  regarded  as  the 
o6;ec(  of  the  angels'  worsliip.  The  passage 
18  simply  cited  as  it  stands,  the  reader  being 
left  to  draw  his  own  inference ;  and  the  main 
point  of  it  is  that  the  angels  in  "  that  day  " 
are  not,  like  the  Son,  sharers  of  the  throne, 
but  only  worshippers. 

Yer.  7. — ^And  of  the  angels  he  saith.  Who 
maketh  his  angels  spirits,  and  his  ministers 
a  flame  of  fire.  A  further  intimation  of  the 
position  assigned  in  the  Old  Testament  to 
angels,  contrasted  by  means  of  n^  and  Sh, 
with  forther  quotations  with  reference  to 
the  Son.  A  difSculty  has  been  felt  with 
regard  to  this  passage  (cited,  as  usual,  ftom 
the  LXX.)  on  the  ground  of  the  original 
Hebrew  being  supposed  not  to  bear  the 
meaning  assigned  to  it.  Hence  the  writer 
of  the  Epistle  is  said  to  have  made  use  of 
an  erroneous  rendering  for  the  purpose  of 
his  argument.  Certainly  the  context  of  the 
psalm,  in  whicli  God  is  represented  as  array- 
ing himself  in  the  glories  and  operating 
through  the  powers  of  natiue,  suggests  no 
other  meaning  than  that  he  uses  the  winds 
as  liis  messengers,  etc.,  in  the  same  poetical 
sense  in  which  he  was  said  in  the  preceding 
verse  to  make  the  clouds  his  chariot;  c£ 
Ps.  ozlviii.  8,  "Fire  and  hail,  snow  and 
vapours,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  word." 
If  so,  there  is  no  necessary  reference  in  the 
original  psalm  to  angels.  But  it  is  to  be 
observed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  struc- 
ture of  ver.  4  is  not  in  the  Hebrew  identical 
with  that  of  "  he  makelh  the  clouds  his 
chariot"  in  ver.  3,  and  hence,  in  itself, 
suggests  some  difference  of  meaning.  For 
(1)  a  different  verb  is  used;  and  (2)  the 
wder  of  the  accusatives  following  the  verb 
is  reversed;  in  both  which  respecti  the 
LXX.  correctly  follows  the  Hebrew.     In 


ver.  3  the  verb  is  n*  (a  nflels  in  the  LXX.), 
the  primary  meaning  of  which  is  "  to  set," 
"to  place,"  and,  when  followed  by  two  accu- 
satives as  object  and  predicate,  denotes  "to 
constitute  or  render  a  person  or  thing  what 
the  predicate  expresses."  In  ver.  4  the  verb 
is  n»!{  (4  iroiHv  in  the  LXX.),  the  primary 
meaning  of  which,  when  used  actively,  is 
"  to  form,"  "  to  fabricate."  It  is  used  of 
Grod  making  the  heaven  and  the  earth  (Gen. 
i.  7,  16 ;  ii.  2,  etc.).  When  elsewhere,  as 
here,  it  is  followed  by  two  accusatives,  one 
of  them  (which  may  come  either  first  o; 
second  in  order)  is  found  to  denote  tht 
material  out  of  which  anytliing  is  formed 
Thus  Bxod.  xxxviii.  3,  'He  made  all  tht 
vessels  (of)  brass"  (of.  Exod.  xxx.  25, 
xxxvi.  14;  xxxvii  15,  23).  Hence  an 
obvious  meaning  of  ver.  4,  so  far  as  the 
mere  language  is  concerned,  would  be,  "  He 
maketh  [or,  '  formeth ']  his  messengers  [or, 
'  angels ']  of  winds,  and  his  ministers  of  a 
flaming  fire."  (Winds  certainly,  not  epirits, 
because  of  the  context.  But  here  the  Greek 
Ttviiliara  is,  in  itself,  as  ambiguous  as  the 
Hebrew  ninn,  and  was  as  probably  meant  to 
denote  un'ruJs.)  According  to  this  rendering, 
the  meaning  of  the  verse  would  seem  to  be 
that,  out  of  the  natural  elements  of  wind 
and  fire,  some  special  agencies  are  called 
into  being  or  operation ;  not  simply  that 
winds  and  fire  generally  are  used  for  God's 
purposes.  The  change  of  phraseology  be- 
tween vers.  3  and  4  certainly  suggests 
some  change  in  the  idea  of  the  psalmist. 
What,  then,  are  these  agencies?  What  is 
meant  by  the  "  messengers  "  and  "  minis- 
ters "  connected  with  the  elements  of  wind 
and  fire  ?  The  author  of  the  Epistle  (and 
probably  the  LXX.  too,  though  the  words 
iryyeKoi  and  \iiTovprfoX  are,  in  themselves, 
as  ambiguous  as  the  Hebrew)  saw  in  these 
words  a  reference  to  the  angels,  who  are 
denoted  by  the  same  two  words  in  Ps.  ciii. 
20,  21,  and  who  are  undoubtedly  spoken  of 
elsewliere  in  the  Old  Testament  as  operating 
in  the  forces  of  nature  (as  in  the  death  of 
the  Egyptian  firstborn,  the  pestilence  in  the 
time  of  David,  and  the  destruction  of  Sen- 
nacherib's army),  and  seem,  in  some  sense, 
to  be  identified  with  the  winds  themselves 
in  Ps.  xviii.  10,  "  He  rode  upon  a  cherub, 
and  did  fly  :  yea,  he  did  fly  upon  the  wings 
of  the  wind ; "  and  in  Ps.  xxxv.  6,  "  Let 
them  be  as  chaff  before  the  wind ;  and  let 
the  angel  of  the  Loed  cliase  them."  We 
say  that  the  LXX.,  as  well  as  the  author  of 
the  Epistle,  probably  intended  to  express 
this  meaning.  It  is,  indeed,  more  than  pro- 
bable ;  for,  ambiguous  as  may  be  the  words 
dyyeKot  and  Xeirovpyol  in  ihemseltes,  the 
structure  of  the  Greek  sentence  (in  which 
"  his  angels  "  and  "  his  ministers "  are 
the  objects,  and  "winds"  and  "flames  oi 


14 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE    HEBREWS, 


[OH,  I.  1—14. 


Ore "  the  predicates),  seems  to  necessitate 
this  meaning,  which  is  further  probable 
from  what  we  Jmow  of  Alexandrian  angelo- 
logy.  It  may  thus  well  be  that,  whether  or 
not  the  LXX.  (renilering,  as  it  does,  the 
Hebrew  word  for  word)  gives  the  exact 
force  of  the  original  phrase,  it  hits  its  essen- 
tial meaning,  as  intimating  angelic  agency 
in  nature.  And  the  learned  Jews  of  Alex- 
nndria,  followed  as  they  are  by  the  later 
rabbis  generally,  and  by  the  writer  of  this 
Epistle,  were,  to  say  the  least,  as  likely  to 
uudersland  the  Hebrew  as  any  modem 
Bcnolari.  The  question,  however,  is  not, 
after  all,  of  great  importance.  For  let  us 
grant  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  un- 
wittingly adduced  an  erroneous  rendering  in 
the  course  of  his  argument.  What  then  ? 
It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  in- 
spiration of  the  saered  wj-iters  was  such  as 
to  enlighten  them  in  matters  of  Hebrew 
criticism.  If  it  guarded  them  from  erro- 
neous teaching,  it  was  suiHcient  for  its  pur- 
pose. And  ta  this  case  the  passage,  as 
cited,  at  any  rate  expresses  well  the  general 
doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament  about  angels, 
viz.  that,  unlike  the  Son,  they  are  but 
subordinate  agents  of  the  Divine  purposes, 
and  connected  especially  with  the  operations 
of  nature.  It  is  to  be  observed,  too,  that  the 
quotations  generally  in  this  Epistle  are  ad- 
duced, not  as  exhaustive  proofs,  but  rather 
as  suggestive  of  the  general  teaching  of  the 
Uld  Testament,  witli  which  the  readers  are 
supposed  to  be  familiar. 

Vers,  8 — 13. — Two  more  quotations  from 
the  psalms  with  reference  to  the  Son  ad- 
duced in  contrast. 

Vers.  8,  9. — But  nnto  the  Son  he  saith. 
The  preposition  here  translated  "  nnto "  is 
Trphs,  as  in  ver.  7,  there  translated  "  of."  As 
is  evident  from  its  use  in  ver.  7,  it  does  not 
imply  ot  necessity  that  the  persons  spoken 
of  are  addreesed  in  the  quotations,  though  it 
is  so  in  this  second  case.  The  force  of  the 
preposition  itselt  need  only  be  "  in  reference 
to.  The  first  quotation  is  from  Ps.  xlv.  6, 7. 
The  psalm  was  evidently  written  origin- 
ally as  an  epithalamium  on  the  occasion  of 
the  marriage  of  some  king  of  Israel  to  some 
foreign  princess.  The  general  and  probable 
opinion  is  that  the  king  was  Solomon.  His 
marriage  with  Pharaoh's  daughter  may 
liave  been  the  occasion.  The  view  taken 
by  some  (ai  Hengstenberg),  that  the  psalm 
had  no  original  reference  to  an  actual 
I  iiarriage,  being  purely  a  Messianic  prophecy, 
is  inconsistent  both  with  its  own  contents 
<ad  with  the  analogy  of  other  Messianic 
jisalmi  (see  what  was  said  on  this  head  with 
lefeienoe  to  Ps.  ii.).  Thoie  who  enter  into 
the  view  of  Messianic  prophecy  that  has 
been  given  above,  will  have  no  difficulty  in 
perceiving  the  justneH  of  the  application  of 


this  psalm  to  Christ,  notwithstanding  its 
primary  import.  Like  Ps.  ii.,  it  presents 
(in  parts  at  least)  an  ideal  picture,  suggested 
only  and  imperfectly  realized  by  the  tempo- 
rary type ;  an  ideal  of  which  we  find  the  germ 
in  2  Sam.  vii.,  and  the  amplification  in  later 
propliecy.  Further,  the  title,  "  For  the  pre- 
centor" ("To  the  chief  musician,"  A.V.), 
sliows  that  the  psalm  was  used  in  the 
temple  services,  and  thus,  whatever  might 
be  the  occasion  of  its  composition,  was 
understood  by  the  Jews  of  old  as  having  an 
ulterior  meaning.  Further,  there  is  possibly 
(as  Delitzsoh  points  out)  a  reference  to  the 
psalm  as  Messianic  in  Isa.  Ixi.  1 — 3,  where 
"  tlie  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  "  the  Anointed," 
gives  the  "oil  of  gladness"  for  mourning;  and 
in  ix.  5,  where  the  words  of  the  psalm, "  God  " 
(ver.  6)  and  "mighty"  (ver.  3)  are  com- 
pounded for  a  designation  of  the  Messiah ; 
also  in  Zech.  xii.  8,  where  it  is  prophesied 
that  in  the  latter  days  "  the  house  of  David  " 
shall  be  "as  God."  The  Messianic  inter- 
pretation is  undoubtedly  ancient.  The 
Chaldee  paraphrast  (on  ver.  3)  writes,  "  Thy 
beauty,  O  King  Messiah,  is  greater  than  that 
of  the  sons  of  men."  Thy  throne,  0  Ood,  is 
for  ever  and  ever.  Attempts  have  been  made 
to  evade  the  conclusion  that  the  king  is  here 
addressed  as  "God,"  (1)  by  taking  the 
clause  81S  a  parenthetic  address  to  God  him- 
self ;  (2)  by  regarding  "  Giod  "  as  appended  to 
"  throne,"  or  as  the  predicate  of  the  sentence ; 
i.e.  translating  either  ''  Thy  tlirone-of-God 
is,"  ete.  (according  to  the  sense  of  1  Chron. 
zxix.  23,  "  Solomon  gat  on  the  throne  of  the 
Lord  as  king"),  or  "  Thj*throne  is  God  [t.e. 
Divine]  for  ever  and  ever."  As  to  (1),  the 
context  repudiates  it.  As  to  (2),  it  is  a 
question  whether  the  Hebrew  is  patient  of 
the  supposed  construction.  At  any  rate, 
"  God  "  is  understood  as  a  vocative  in  the 
LXX.  as  well  as  in  the  Epistle,  in  which  the 
LXX.  is  quoted  (for  the  use  ot  the  nomiuH- 
tive  form,  &  @ihs,  in  a  vocative  sense,  cf. 
Luke  xviii.  11,13;  Matt,  xxvii.  2'.l;  Mark 
ix.  25 ;  Luke  viii.  54 ;  xii.  32) ;  snd  in  the 
Chaldee  paraphrase,  and  all  nncient  versions, 
it  is  understood  so  also.  Probably  no  other 
interpretation  would  have  been  thought  of 
but  for  the  diflSculty  of  supposing  an  earthly 
king  to  be  thus  addressed.  It  is  to  be  ob- 
served, however,  that  the  other  rendering 
would  express  essentially  the  same  idea,  and 
be  sufBcient  for  the  argument.  In  either 
case  the  throne  of  the  Son  is  represented  as 
God's  throne,  and  eternal.  The  only  dif- 
ference is  that  the  vocative  rendering  makes 
more  marked  and  manifest  the  ideal  view  of 
his  subject  taken  by  the  psalmist.  For  it 
is  most  unlikely  that  a  biud  of  the  sanctuary, 
a  worshipper  of  the  jealous  (Sod  of  Israel, 
would  have  so  apostrophized  any  earthly 
king  except  as  prefiguring  "  a  greater  tban 


OH.  1.  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


IS 


Solomon"  to  come.  It  is  true  that  Irings 
are  elsewhere  called  "gods  "  in  the  pluiul  (aa 
in  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6,  referred  to  by  our  Lord, 
John  X.  35) ;  but  the  solemn  addressing  of 
an  individual  king  by  this  title  is  (if  the 
vocative  rendering  be  correct)  peculiar  to 
this  psalm.  The  passage  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  13) 
adduced  in  abatement  of  the  signifiotince  of 
the  title,  where  the  apparition  of  Samuel  is 
desoribed  by  the  witch  of  Endor  as  "  Elohim 
ascending  out  of  the  eaith,"  is  not  a  parallel 
case.  The  word  "  Elohim  "  has  a  compre- 
hensive  meaning,  depending  on  context  for 
its  precise  significance.  If  voeatively  used 
in  a  solemn  address  to  a  king  sitting  upon 
an  everlasting  tlirone,  it  surely  implies  tlie 
assigning  of  Divine  honours  to  the  king  so 
addressed.  In  this  case  still  more  is  implied 
than  in  Ps.  ii.,  where  the  King  is  spoken  of 
as  God's  Son,  enthroned  on  Zion,  the  Son 
being  here  addressed  as  himself  "  Eloliim." 
It  may  be  that  the  inspiring  Spirit  suggested 
language  to  the  psalmist  beyond  his  own 
comprehension  at  the  time  of  utterance  (see 

1  Pet.  i.  10,  11).  It  may  be  added  that  the 
ultimate  Messianic  reference  of  the  expres- 
sion is  confirmed  by  Isa.  ix.  6,  where  tho  title 
El-Oibbor {"Mighty  God,"  A.V.)  distinctly 
used  of  God  himself  in  x.  21  (cf.  Deut.  x. 
17 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  18  ;  Neh.  ix.  32  ;  Ps.  xxiv. 
8),  is  applied  to  the  Messiah.  A  sceptre  of 
righteousnesB  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom. 
In  this  and  the  following  clause  is  expressed 
the  important  idea  that  the  ideal  throne  of 
the  Son  is  founded  on  righteousness,  whence 
comes  also  his  peculiar  unction  with  "the 
oil  of  gladness."  Only  so  far  as  Solomon 
or  other  theocratic  kings  exemplified  the 
Divine  righteousness,  did  they  approach  the 
ideal  position  assigned  to  the  Son.  Cf.  the 
latter  part  ot  ver.  14  in  the  original  promise, 

2  Sam.  vii.,  and  especially  2  Sam.  xxiii.  3, 
etc.,  in  the  "  last  words  of  David."  Observe 
also  the  prominence  of  the  idea  in  Ps.  Ixxii. 
and  in  later  prophecy  (cf.  Isa.  ix.  7 ;  xi.  2, 
etc.).  Therefore,  God,  even  thy  God.  The 
first  "  God  "  here  may  be  again  in  the  voca- 
tive, as  in  the  preceding  verse,  or  it  may  be 
as  the  A.V.  fakes  it  (cf.  Ps.  xliii.  4 ;  I.  7). 
Hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oU  of  gladness 
above  thy  fellows.  The  primary  reference 
is,  not  to  the  king's  coronation  (as  in  Ps. 
IxxxLX.  20),  but  to  unction  as  symbolical 
of  blessing  and  joy,  connected  with  the 
costom  of  anointing  the  he. id  at  feasts  (cf. 
Deut.  xxviii.  40 jPs. xxiii.  5;  xcii.lO;  Cant. 
i.  12 ;  Matt.  vi.  17).  "  Thy  fellows,"  in  its 
original  reference,  seems  most  naturally  to 
mean  "  thy  associates  in  royidty,"  "  other 
kings ;"  cf.  Pe.  Ixxix.  27,  "I  will  make  him 
my  Firstborn,  higher  than  the  kings  of  tlie 
earth."  Or  it  might  mean  the  companions 
of  the  bridegroom,  the  Trnpaviixcpwi.  The 
lalter  reference  lends  itself  readily  to  the 


fulfilment  in  Christ,  the  Bridegroom  of  the 
Church,  whose  irapai'6fii,<pm  the  redeemed  are ; 
themselves  also  being,  after  their  measure, 
Xptaroi  (of.  1  John  ii.  20,  27).  But  they  are 
also  made  "  Icings  and  priests  unto  Gtod  "  by 
Christ  (Rev.  i.  6 ;  v.  10) ;  so  that  either  of 
the  supposed  original  references  may  be 
shown  to  be  typical,  if  it  be  thought  necessary 
to  find  a  definite  fulfilment  of  all  tho  details 
of  the  address  to  the  theocratic  king.  The 
view  that  in  the  fulfilment  the  angels  are 
to  be  understood  as  Christ's  neT6xoi  is  in- 
admissible. There  is  nothing  in  the  psalm 
to  suggest  the  thought  of  them,  nor  does  the 
way  in  which  they  are  contrasted  with  the 
Son  in  this  chapter  admit  of  their  being 
here  spoken  of  as  his  iii-r6xoi.  Men,  in  the 
next  chapter,  are  so  spoken  of. 

Vers.  10— 12.— And,  Thou,  Lord,  in  the 
beginning,  etc.  The  bearing  of  this  quota- 
tion (from  Ps.  cii.  25 — 27)  on  the  argument 
in  hand  is  not  at  first  sight  obvious ;  since, 
in  the  psalm,  the  address  is  plainly  to  God, 
without  any  mention  of,  or  apparent  refer- 
ence to,  the  Son.  The  psalm  is  entitled, 
"  A  prayer  of  the  afflicted,  when  he  is 
overwhelmed,  and  poureth  out  his  complaint 
before  the  Loud."  It  seems  likely,  from  its 
contents,  to  have  been  written  by  some 
suffering  saint  during  the  Babylonian  capti- 
vity :  for  its  purport  is  a  prayer,  rising  into 
confident  expectation  for  deliverance  from  a 
state  of  deep  affliction,  Israel  being  in 
captivity  and  Jerusalem  in  ruins.  The 
prayed-foT  and  expected  deliverance,  por- 
trayed in  vers.  1 6 — 24,  corresponds  so  closely, 
both  in  thought  and  expression,  with  that 
pictured  in  the  lalter  chapters  of  Isaiah 
(beginning  at  ch,  xl.),that  we  cannot  hesitate 
in  assigning  the  same  meaning  to  both. 
There  is,  for  instance,  the  looking  down  of 
the  LoBD  from  heaven  to  behold  the  affliction 
of  his  people  (of.  Isa.  Ixiii.  15);  the  setting 
free  of  captives  (cf.  Isa.  xlii.  7 ;  Ixi.  1) ;  the 
rebuilding  and  restoration  of  Zion,  and  in 
connection  with  this  the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles  to  serve  the  Lord  with  Israel  (cf. 
Isa.  xl.  — Ixvi. ;  and  especially  lii.  19 ;  Ix. 
2).  These  are  specimens  of  the  general 
correspondence  between  the  two  pictures, 
which  must  be  evident  to  all  who  have 
studied  both.  But  the  ultimate  reference  of 
Isaiah's  prophecy  is  certainly  Messianic : 
wherefore  that  of  the  psalm  may  be  con-, 
eluded  to  be  tlie  same.  And  thus  we  have 
made  one  step  in  explanation  of  the  applic- 
ability of  this  quotation  to  the  argument  of 
the  Epistle  in  confirming  its  ultimate  refer- 
ence to  the  Messiah's  Etdvent ;  to  the  final 
realization  of  the  ideal  of  the  Son,  typified 
by  theocratic  kings.  But  we  have  still  to 
account  for  the  apparent  application  to  the 
Son  of  what,  in  the  original  psalm,  shows  no 
sign  of  being  addreased  to  him.    One  view 


16 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


[oh.  l  1—1* 


b  that  there  is  no  intention  in  the  Epistle  of 
quoting  it  as  addressed  to  him,  tlie  phrase, 
irpbs  rhv  m6v  (as  hiis  been  seem  not  of 
necessity  implying  suoli  intention.  Accord- 
ing to  this  view,  the  point  of  the  quotation 
is  that  the  Messianic  salvation  is  made  to 
rest  solely  on  the  eternity  and  immutability 
of  God — of  him  who,  as  he  created  all  at 
first,  80,  ihougli  heaven  and  earth  should 
pass  away,  remains  unchanged.  And  the 
charatter  of  the  salvation,  thus  regarded,  is 
conceived  to  carry  with  it  the  transcendent 
Buper-angelio  dignity  of  its  accomplisher, 
the  Son.  So,  in  eifect,  Ebrard,  who  dwells 
on  this  as  one  example  of  the  general 
character  of  apostolical  exegesis,  as  opposed 
to  rabbinical,  in  that,  instead  of  drawing 
inferences,  often  arbitrary,  from  isolated 
words  or  phrases,  the  aposiolic  interpreters 
draw  all  tlieir  arguments  from  fhe  spirit  of 
the  passages  considered  in  their  connection, 
and  this  with  a  depth  of  intuition  peculiar 
to  themselTes.  Other  commentators  con- 
lider  it  more  consistent  with  both  the  context 
and  the  argument  to  see,  in  the  Epistle  at 
least,  an  intended  address  to  tlie  Son.  If 
this  be  so,  our  conclusion  must  be  that  this 
application  of  the  psalmist's  words  is  the 
inspired  writer's  own ;  since  it  is  certainly 
not  apparent  in  the  psalm.  It  by  no  means 
follows  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  foisted, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  a  false  mean- 
ing into  the  psalm.  Even  apart  from  the 
consideration  of  his  being  an  inspired  con- 
tributor to  the  New  Testament  canon,  he 
was  too  learned  in  Scripture,  and  too  able  a 
reasoner,  to  adduce  an  evidently  untenable 
argument.  He  may  be  understood  as  him- 
•elf  applying  the  passage  in  away  which  he 
does  not  mean  to  imply  was  intended  by 
the  psalmist.  His  drift  may  be,  "  You  have 
g(  en  how  in  Ps.  ilv.  the  Sou  is  addressed  as 
God,  and  as  having  an  eternal  throne.  Yea, 
■o  Divine  is  he  that  the  address  to  the  ever- 
lasting God  himself  in  another  psalm  pro- 
phetic of  his  advent  may  be  truly  recognized 
as  an  address  to  him."  Whichever  view  we 
take  of  this  difficult  passage,  this  at  any 
rate  is  evident — that  tlie  inspired  writer  of 
the  Epistle,  apart  from  the  question  of  the 
relevancy  of  quotation  in  the  way  of  argu- 
ment, associated  Christ  in  his  own  mind  with 
the  uncliangeable  Creator  of  all  things. 

Ver.  18. — But  to  which  of  the  angels  said 
he  (properly,  hath  he  said)  at  any  time,  Sit 
on  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  thine  enemies 
thy  footstool  ?  A  final  and  crowning  quota- 
tion is  tlius  adduced,  in  the  form  in  which  the 
first  quotation  referring  to  the  Son  (ver.  5) 
had  heen  introduced,  to  complete  the  view 
of  his  superiority  to  the  angels.  The  quota- 
tion is  from  Ps.  ex.,  the  reference  of  which 
to  the  Messiah  i>  settled  beyond  controversy 
to  Christian  believera,  not  only  by  iti  being 


qnoted  or  alluded  to  more  frequently  than 
any  other  psalm  with  that  reference  in  the 
New  Testament  (Acts  ii.  34;  vii.  55,  5*; 
Eom.  viii.  3i;  Eph.i.  20— 22;  1  Pet.  iii.  22; 
ch.  i.  3,  13,  14;  viii.  1;  x.  12,  13),  and  by 
the  introduction  of  its  language  into  the 
Church's  earliest  Creeds,  but  also  by  the 
authority  of  our  Lord  himself,  as  recorded 
by  all  the  three  synoptical  evangelists, 
(Matt.  xxii.  41 ;  Mark  xii.  35 ;  Luke  xx. 
41).  Hence  readers  of  this  Commentary  will 
not  require  a  confutation  of  the  argument! 
of  any  modern  rationalistic  critics  who  have 
disputed  the  Iklessianio  meaning  of  the 
psalm.  Their  arguments  rest  really  on 
their  a  priori  denial  of  a  "spirit  of 
prophecy  "  in  the  psalms  generally ;  in  their 
refusal  to  recognize,  what  the  later  prophets 
recognized,  an  unfulfilled  ideal  in  what  th« 
psalmists  wrote  of  theocratic  kings.  Let 
us  once  recognize  this,  and  we  shall  per- 
ceive in  this  psalm  peculiar  marks  of  the 
spirit  of  prophecy,  reaching  beyond  any 
contemporary  fulfilment,  not  only  in  the 
assignment  to  the  King  of  a  seat  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  heavenly  throne,  but  also  in 
his  remarkable  designation  as  •  "Priest 
after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,"  ef  which 
more  will  be  said  under  eh.  t.  and  vii.  of 
this  Epistle.  It  is  to  be  observed  also  how 
prophets,  long  after  the  psalm  was  written, 
regarded  its  ideal  as  still  awaiting  fulfil- 
ment; e.^r.  Daniel  (vii.  13,  etc),  whose  vision 
of  the  Son  of  man  brought  near  before  the 
Ancient  of  days,  and  having  an  everlasting 
dominion  given  him,  is  referred  to  by  our 
Lord  (Matt.  xxvi.  64)  in  connection  with 
the  psalm,  as  awaiting  fulfilment  in  himself; 
and  Zechariah  (vi.  12,  etc.),  who  takes  up 
the  idea  of  the  psalm  in  speaking  of  the 
Branch,  who  was  to  unite  in  himself  royalty 
and  priesthood.  The  psalm  is  entitled,  "  A 
psalm  of  David."  Though  this  title  is  pre- 
fixed to  some  psalms  the  contents  of  which 
suggest  a  later  date,  and  is  not,  therefore, 
considered  proof  of  authorship,  it  proves  at 
least  the  tradition  and  belief  of  the  Jews 
when  the  Hebrew  Psalter  was  arranged  in 
its  existing  form.  But  we  hare  in  this  case 
evidence  in  the  three  Gospels  of  its  universal 
acceptance  as  a  psalm  of  David  by  the  Jews 
in  the  time  of  our  Lord ;  and,  what  is  of 
more  weight,  of  his  liaving  himself  referred 
to  it  as  such.  The  whole  point  of  his 
argument  with  the  Pharisees  depends  on 
the  acknowledgment  of  David  being  the 
spealser,  'as  well  as  of  the  Messiah  being 
the  Person  spoken  of.  None  of  the  Pharisees 
thought  of  disputing  either  of  these  premisses; 
they  were  evidently  received  as  indisput- 
able ;  nor  can  it  be  conceived  (as  has  been 
irreverently  suggested)  that  our  Lord  did 
not  thus  give  his  own  sanction  to  their  truth. 
Nor,  further,  is  there  in  the  psalm  itself  vtj 


OH.  I.  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


17 


internal  evidence  againit  its  Davidio  author- 
ship, though,  but  for  the  above  testimony  to 
the  contrary,  it  might  have  been  the  com- 
position of  a  prophet  of  David's  day,  or 
written  by  David  for  use  by  his  people — the 
term,  "my  lord,"  having  thus  a  primary 
reference  to  him.  In  either  of  these  cases 
we  might  suppose  the  original  conception 
of  ver.  1  to  have  been  that  of  David  himself 
being  enthroned  on  Zion  at  the  side  of  the 
"  King  of  glory  "  (Ps.  xxiv.)  who  had  "  come 
in ; "  while  ver.  4  might  possibly  have  been 
suggested  by  David's  organization  of  the 
Burvices  of  the  tabernacle,  and  by  the 
personal  pari  he  took  ia  the  ritual  when 
the  ark  was  removed  to  Zion.  Even  so,  the 
quotation  would  answer  the  purpose  of 
the  argument  according  to  the  view  of  the 
drift  of  Messianic  psalms  which  has  been 
explained  above.  But,  even  independently 
of  the  distinct  import  of  our  Lord's  words, 
there  are  reasons  (pointed  out  by  Delitzsch) 
against  the  supposition  of  even  a  primary 
reference  to  David  in  the  words,  "  my  lord." 
Two  may  be  mentioned :  ^1)  that  the  assign- 
ment of  sacerdotal  functions  to  an  earthly 
king  is  contrary  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the 
Old  Testament ;  (2)  that  God's  own  throne 
is  elsewhere  represented  as,  not  in  Zion,  but 
above  the  heavens.  Now,  the  conclusion 
thus  arrived  at,  that  David  himself  is  speak- 
ing throughout  the  psalm  of  another  than 
himself,  gives  a  peculiar  force  to  this  final 
quotation,  in  that  the  Antitype  is  distin- 
guished from  and  raised  above  the  type 
more  evidently  than  in  other  Messianic 
psalms.  In  others  (as  we  have  regarded 
them)  the  typical  king  himself  is  the 
primary  object  in  view,  though  ideally 
glorified  so  as  to  foreshadow  One  greater 
than  himself;  here  the  typical  king  seems 
to  have  a  distinct  vision  of  the  Messiah  apart 
from  himself,  and  speaks  of  him  as  his  lord. 
It  does  not  follow  that  David's  own  position 
and  circumstances  did  not  form  a  basis  for 
hia  vision.    W«  perceive  traces  of  them  in 


"  the  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion,"  and 
in  the  picture  which  follows  of  the  sub- 
mission of  heathen  kings  after  warfare  and 
slaughter.  But  vers.  1  and  4  point  still 
to  another  than  himself  whom  he  fore- 
sees in  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  The  psalm 
begins,  literally  translated,  "The  voice  [or, 
'oracle,'  Hebrew  cw]  ot  Jehovah  to  my  lord, 
Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand,"  etc.  This 
sounds  like  more  than  a  mere  echo  of 
Nathan's  message,  the  language  being 
different  and  still  more  significant.  And 
that  such  a  vision  of  a  future  fulfilment 
of  the  promise  was  not  foreign  to  the  mind 
of  David  appears  from  his  "last  words" 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  1,  etc.),  where  also  the  signifi- 
cant word  D^j  is  used.  And  now,  mark  what 
the  language  of  this  "oracle"  implies — not 
merely  the  enthronement  of  the  Son  on  Zion 
as  God's  Vicegerent,  but  his  session  at  the 
right  hand  of  God  himself,  i.e  "  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high ; "  God's  own 
throne  being  ever  (as  has  bieen  said  above) 
regarded  as  above  the  heavens,  or,  if  on 
earth,  above  the  cherubim.  Such,  then, 
being  the  meaning  of  the  "  oracle  "  (and  it 
is  the  meaning  uniformly  given  it  in. the 
New  Testament),  well  may  it  be  adduced 
as  the  final  and  crowning  proof  of  the 
position  above  the  angels  assigned  to  the 
Son  in  prophecy. 

"Ver.  14. — Are  they  not  all,  etc.  ?  A  final 
expression,  adduced  in  contrast,  of  the 
position  and  office  of  the  angels,  as  seen 
above.  The  A.V.  suggests  the  idea,  not 
conveyed  by  the  Greek,  of  guardian  angels. 
The  more  correct  translation  is,  Are  they  not 
all  ministering  (^AeirovpyiKo)  spirits,  for  service 
(eii  Siaxoviai')  sent  forth,  on  aecount  of  those 
toho  are  to  (5io  rovs  fieWovras)  inherit  salva- 
tion t  The  allusion  is  generally  to  their 
office  of  subordinate  ministration  in  further- 
ance of  the  Divine  purposes  of  human  salva- 
tion ;  the  continuance  of  such  office  being 
denoted  by  the  present  participle,  oMtrrtAf 
Kififya. 


HOMILETICa. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  two  revelaUon$,  In  this  sublime  exordium,  which  strikes  the  key- 
note of  his  doctrinal  teaching,  the  writer  takes  for  granted  :  1.  The  inspiration  of  the 
Scriptures.  "  God  hath  spoken."  How  aw"ful  this  truth,  yet  how  blessed  I  With  what 
a  clear  ringing  note  of  certainty  the  author  assumes  it  1  The  Scriptures  put  forth 
no  theory  of  inspirjition,  but  they  everywhere  claim  to  declare  the  mind  and  will  of 
God.  2.  The  inierdqaendenee  of  the  two  revelations.  It  is  the  same  God  who  has 
"  spoken  "  in  both.  The  new  does  not  ignore  or  contradict  the  old  ;  it  rests  upon  it, 
develops  it,  and  completes  it.  The  Old  Testament,  no  less  than  the  New,  will  bear 
every  trial  to  which  it  may  be  subjected  by  either  the  lower  or  the  higher  criticism. 

I.  The  Old  Testament  revelation  ohabacteeized.  It  is :  1.  Ancient.  "  Of 
old  time  unto  the  fathers."  "Since  the  world  began"  (Acts  iii.  21).  For  nearly 
four  hundred  years  now  God  had  ceased  speaking ;  it  was  more  than  fifteen 
hundred  since  tiie  first  part  of  the  Old  Testament  had  been  written  {  and  it  was  over 

BEBBKWk.  o 


li  THE  EPISTLE  to  THE  SEBBBWS.  [oh.  1. 1—14. 

four  thousand  years  at  the  very  least  since  God  had  begun  to  speak.  2.  Qiven  "  in  the 
prophets"  A  prophet  is  a  forth-speaker — a  spokesman — one  who  speaks  for  another. 
The  prophetic  formula  was,  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah."  God's  prophets  were  men ;  ha 
conveyed  his  message  to  his  people  through  human  mincis  and  hearts.  No  prophet 
wrote  as  an  automaton  ;  his  ou  n  faculties  wrought,  and  his  ink-horn  was  dashed  with 
his  heart's  blood.  It  is  very  beautiful  to  see  the  prophets  rising  up,  one  after  another, 
in  these  far-past  days.  Together  they  form  a  "  goodly  fellowship ;  "  each  was  the 
noblest  spirit  of  his  time.  Z.  Fraymentary.  "  By  divers  portions."  God  had  given 
the  former  revelation  part  by  part.  He  delivered  it  in  connection  with  temporary 
dispensations — the  Adamic,  the  Abrahamic,  and  the  Mosaic.  He  gave  it  first  by  oral 
communication,  and  latterly  by  Scripture.  The  Old  Testament  grew  slowly;  it  took 
more  than  a  millennium  to  complete  it,  and  at  least  twenty-seven  different  writers 
contributed  to  it.  The  revelation,  though  of  priceless  value,  was  always  fragmentary 
and  imperfect ;  it  was  meant  to  be  progressive  and  preparatory.  God  gave  one  truth 
to  one  age,  and  another  to  a  succeeding  aga  The  promises  of  redemption  became  the 
longer  the  more  definite.  4.  Multiform.  "  In  divers  manners  " — in  manifold  fashion. 
Now  God  spoke  by  dreams,  now  by  visions,  now  by  voices,  now  by  angels,  now  by 
similitudes,  now  by  Urim,  now  by  sacrifices  and  lustrations,  now  by  putting  a  burning 
wonl  into  the  prophet's  soul.  How  various  too,  is  the  literature  of  the  Old  Testament ' 
Scriptures  I  Now  it  is  historical,  now  biographical,  now  legislative,  now  prophetic, 
now  philosophic,  now  poetical ;  as  varied  as  the  fresh  mind  of  every  contributor,  and 
yet  revealing  all  through  the  one  eternal  Mind. 

II.  The  New  Tbstamekt  revelation  contrabted  with  the  Old.  The  writer 
merely  suggests  this  contrast,  leaving  its  details  to  be  wrought  out  in  the  me<litation  ot 
his  readers.  Unlike  the  Old,  the  New  Testament  revelation  is :  1.  Recent  and  final. 
"  At  the  end  of  these  days  unto  us."  This  refers  to  the  close  of  the  Mosaic  economy. 
Judaism,  like  the  older  dispensations  which  preceded  it,  had  got  worn  out,  and  in  its 
turn  had  passed  away ;  but  the  Christian  dispensation  is  the  final  one,  to  be  consum- 
mated only  at  the  second  advent.  So,  the  new  economy  shall  be  ever  present  and 
always  new,  because  not  to  be  superseded  so  long  as  the  world  lasts.  2.  Given  "tn  hit 
Son."  What  an  element  of  stupendous  contrast !  The  prophets  were  only  inspired  men : 
this  is  a  Divine  Person.  The  prophets  were  only  servants ;  this  is  the  Son.  The  prophets 
were  only  God's  spokesmen ;  this  is  God  himself  speaking.  The  Son  is  the  Logos — 
the  "  Word,"  the  manifested  God.  What  a  view  is  presented  in  the  following  clauses 
of  his  Divine  dignity  and  his  mediatorial  majesty  1  This  first  grand  sentence  of  the 
Epistle  reminds  us- of  the  scene  on  the  holy  mount.  It  points  us  away  from  Moses 
and  Elijah,  as  did  the  voice  from  the  excellent  glory,  saying  to  our  souls,  "This 
is  my  beloved  Son :  hear  ye  him."  3.  Comphte  and  perfect.  The  New  Testament 
presents  the  truth,  not  fragmentarily,  as  the  Old  Testament  did,  but  in  finished 
form  and  in  undivided  fulness.  It  was  entirely  written  by  eight  or  nine  men  belonging 
to  one  generation.  It  contains  a  richer  revelation  of  more  developed  truth  than 
that  which  is  found  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  In  the  Son  of  God,  speaking  to  us 
through  his  apostles  and  evangelists,  we  see  revelation  full-orbed  at  last.  For 
eighteen  centuries  now  the  canon  has  been  complete ;  and,  thus,  progress  in  theology 
can  be  made  only  as  the  result  of  better  understanding  of  what  God  has  already 
given  us.  The  laureate's  "  King  in  the  Christ  that  is  to  be,"  cannot  refer  with 
propriety  to  any  Christ  that  is  unrevealed.  4.  Simple  and  dear.  The  Old 
Testament  revelation  was  moltiform — like  a  painted  window,  covered  over  with 
many-coloured  and  beautiful  emblems;  that  of  the  New  Testament  is  like  a 
window  of  pure  clear  glass,  through  which  we  gaze  upon  the  unveiled  glory  of  heaven. 
The  water  of  life  trickled  through  the  Old  Testament  in  a  variety  of  tiny  streamlets ; 
it  runs  in  the  New  Testament  with  the  flow  of  a  broad  pellucid  river.  Christ  and  his 
apostles  "  use  great  plainness  of  speech."  The  New  Testament  is  much  shorter  than 
the  Old,  but  it  is  more  inward,  evangelical,  and  spiritual.  It  is  a  better  revelation 
as  well  as  a.  later  one;  for  it  contains  the  substance  rather  than  the  shadows—the 
heavenly  things  rather  than  only  their  patterns.  Preaching  is  a  very  simple  ordinance. 
The  two  sacraments  constitute  the  entire  Christian  ritual.  The  Old  Testament 
"  veil  18  done  away  in  Christ." 

In  oonoliuion :  1.  Great  as  were  the  privileges  ot  the  ancient  Hebrews  (Bom.  ix. 


cu.  L 1— 14.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  19 

4,  6),  how  much  higher  are  ours  (Matt.  xiii.  16,  17) !  2.  How  much  heavier,  accord- 
ingly, are  our  responsibilities  (Heb.  xii.  25)1  What  base  ingratitude  in  any  one 
not  to  listen  to  the  Sou  of  God,  and  to  refuse  to  shape  his  life  in  accordance  with 
the  complete  and  glorious  circle  of  Christian  truth  1 

Vers.  2 — 4. — The  glory  of  the  Ood-Man.  So  soon  as  the  apostle  mentions  the 
"  Son,"  there  spreads  out  before  his  mind  a  vast  expanse  of  the  territory  of  revelation 
— the  loftiest  shining  table-land  of  truth  which  the  Scriptures  open  to  our  gaze. 
Indeed,  this  sentence  supplies  a  sublime  basis  fur  all  true  Christology.  It  describes  at 
once  the  Redeemer's  essential  glory  as  the  pre-existent  One,  and  his  mediatorial  glory 
as  the  incarnate  Messiah, 

I.  The  glory  .of  Christ  in  relation  to  God.  The  clauses  which  speak  of  this 
solemnize  us  by  their  mystery,  and  dazzle  us  by  their  splendour.  1.  He  is  the  Son  of 
God.  (Ver.  2.)  "  Son  "  is  not  merely  an  official  title ;  it  designates  the  natural  and 
eternal  relation  of  the  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead  to  the  First.  Christ  is  God's 
"  only-begotten  Son  " — his  Son  in  a  sense  absolutely  unique,  as  implying  sameness  of 
essence  with  the  Father.  2.  He  t«  the  Manifestation  of  God.  (Ver.  3.)  "  The  efful- 
gence of  his  glory ; " — ».e.  Christ  is  an  eternal  radiation  of  splendour  from  the  majesty 
of  the  absolute  Jehovah,  He  is  "Light  of  [from]  light."  The  rays  which  stream 
from  the  sun  reveal  the  sun  itself;  so  Christ  is  the  ever-visible  radiance  of  the 
unapproachable  Light.  We  have  but  to  look  to  him  who  is  "  the  Word  "  for  a 
display  of  the  attributes  and  perfections  of  Deity.  3.  He  it  the  Counterpart  of  Ood. 
(Ver.  3.)  "The  very  image  of  his  substance,"  t.e.  the  adequate  imprint  of  his 
substantial  essence.  The  Shechinah  in  the  tabernacle  had  not  the  personal  form 
of  God ;  but  the  Son  bears  his  real  and  perfect  likeness.  Chri.st  has  upon  himself  the 
exact  impress  of  Deity.  He  is  the  Blather's  alter  ego — ^his  very  imago.  "In  him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  So  perfectly  does  the  Son  bear  the 
impress  of  God,  that  he  could  say,  "  He  that  hath  seen  mo  hath  seen  the  Father." 

II.  The  qlori  of  Christ  in  eelation  to  the  cnivbrsb.  What  is  said  on 
this  point  proves  his  Deity,  the  very  same  acts  and  prerogatives  being  elsewhere 
ascribed  to  God.  1.  He  is  its  Creator.  (Ver.  2.)  The  life  of  the  Goil-Man  did  not 
begin  only  nineteen  centuries  ago.  He  Is  himself  "  the  Beginning" — ^the  Alpha — the 
Firstborn  before  every  creature  (Col.  i.  15 — 18).  He  made  the  natural  universe — every 
star  that  adorns  the  arch  of  night.  He  ordained  all  periods  and  dispensations  ("  ages  ") 
— all  geological  formations,  all  histoiical  eras,  all  economies  of  religion.  2.  He  is  its 
Sustainer.  (Ver.  3.)  It  is  his  fiat  that  holds  the  universe  together.  "  In  him  all 
things  consist."  On  his  fingers  hang  the  suns  and  systems  of  immensity.  It  is  the 
Lord  Christ  who  adjusts  and  governs  all  the  tremendous  forces — physical,  intellectual, 
and  spiritual — which  operate  throughout  creation.  The  pulses  of  universal  life  are 
regulated  by  the  throbbing  of  his  mighty  heart.  He  is  the  Soul  of  providence,  and 
the  Centre  of  history.  3.  He  is  its  Possessor.  "  Whom  he  appointed  Heir  of  all  things." 
(Ver.  2.)  As  the  Son  of  God,  Christ  received  this  appointment  and  gift  in  the  past 
eternity.  As  the  God-Man,  his  Father  has  constituted  him,  by  another  deed  of  gift, 
the  mediatorial  Monarch  of  the  universe.  The  keys  of  death  and  of  Hades  hang  at  his 
girdle.  He  is  the  Li)rd  of  angels.  He  has  "  authority  over  all  flesh."  His  own  people 
are  his  peculiar  inheritance, — the  very  jewels  of  his  crown. 

III.  The  gloey  of  Christ  in  relation  to  the  Church.  The  Lord's  mediatorial 
honours  have  cast  a  new  lustre  over  even  his  original  renown.  1.  He  is  its  Prophet. 
(Ver.  2.)  It  is  as  the  Teacher  of  the  Church  that  the  writer  introduces  his  name 
in  this  magnificent  prologue.  The  eternal  "Logos" — the  manifestation  and  countei- 
part  of  God — has  become  "  the  light  of  the  world."  When  on  earth  he  taught  his 
followers  by  personal  instruction;  and  now  that  he  is  in  heaven,  he  enlightens  the 
Church  by  his  Word  and  by  the  influences  of  his  Spirit.  2.  He  is  its  Priest.  (Ver.  3.) 
Jesus  is  more  than  a  teacher,  and  his  gospel  is  iiiore  than  simply  a  philosophy. 
Mankind,  being  sinners,  have  not  liberty  of  access  to  God;  we  need  some  one  to 
approach  God  on  our  behalf.  We  n  qmre  a  priest,  and  an  altar  with  a  sacrifice  on  it, 
in  order  to  the  "  purification  of  sins."  Now,  Chii~t  is  our  Priest.  He  made  "purifica- 
tion" ei;^liteen  centuries  ago  by  his  life  in  Palestine  and  his  death  on  Calvary.  He 
iccomplished  a  work  of  expiation — an  objective  atonement.      And  the  efficacy  of  hia 


aO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [cH.  1. 1— 14. 

sacrifice  is  ciiiefly  due  to  tlie  infinite  dignity  of  hia  person  as  "  the  efiiilgeDce  of 
God's  glory,  and  the  very  image  of  his  substance."  3.  He  it  its  King.  (Ver.  3.) 
This  royalty  is  the  reward  of  his  work  of  "  purification."  Having  loade  perfect 
satisfaction  for  human  sin,  he  ascended  on  high  and  sat  down  upon  the  throne  of 
sovereign  authority.  From  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  as  the  place  of  super- 
eminent  dignity  and  power,  he  rules  his  people  by  the  might  of  his  cross.  The 
"  Heir  of  all  things "  is  fully  qualified  to  be  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  Head 
over  all  for  the  advantage  of  the  Church.  The  loftiest  seraph  is  immeasurably 
his  inferior.  Jesus  has  been  raised  as  high  above  Michael  and  Gabriel  as  he  was 
eternally  above  them,  and  as  he  therefore  inherited  a  more  illustrious  name  than 
they  (ver.  4). 

Ill  conclusion,  why  does  the  apostle  expatiate  thus  upon  the  greatness  and 
glory  of  the  Prophet  of  the  New  Testament  ?  Not  merely  because  he  delights  to 
do  so;  but  rather,  also,  to  attract  our  hearts  to  the  love  and  worship  and  service 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  whose  creatures  we  are,  and  to  whom  we  belong  by  the  purchase  of 
his  blessed  blood. 

Vers.  4 — 14. — Christ  greater  than  the  angels.  The  Jews  used  to  boast  that  their 
Law  had  been  given  at  Sinai  by  the  instrumentality  of  angels;  and  they  concluded 
from  this  that  the  Mosaic  dispensation  would  continue  as  long  as  the  world  itself. 
But  the  apostle  asserts  here  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant, 
is  immeasurably  greater  than  the  angels ;  and  he  supports  his  assertion  with  abundant 
evidence  from  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  Ver.  4  supplies  us  with  the  key  to  this  whole 
passage.  The  quotations  which  follow  illustrate  from  the  Old  Testament  the  two 
statements  of  that  verse,  while  they  also  justify  the  glorious  titles  and  prerogatives 
directly  ascribed  to  the  Redeemer  in  vers.  2  and  3. 

L  Christ  has  had  from  eternity  an  essential  nature  higher  than  the 
ANGBliS.  "  He  hath  inherited  a  more  excellent  name  than  they."  Names  in  modern 
times  are  generally  quite  inexpressive — mere  labels  affixed  to  individuals  to  distinguish 
them  from  others;  but  among  the  Jews  it  was  otherwise.  The  names  of  God, 
especially,  symbolized  attributes  pt  his  character.  So,  Christ's  "  Name  "  expresses  his 
nature.  1.  He  is  God's  Son.  (Ver.  5.)  In  Ps.  ii.  we  hear  his  own  voice  rehearsing 
from  his  Father's  counsel  the  decree  of  his  eternal  sonship.  That  decree  dates  from 
everlasting ;  but  it  was  to  be  "  declared  "  again  and  again,  and  particularly  by  the  event 
of  his  resurrection  (Rom.  i.  4).  Even  Nathan  the  prophet  had  proclaimed  it  to 
David  (2  Sam.  vii.  14)  in  his  prophecy  respecting  Solomon  and  "a  greater  than 
Solomon."  2.  He  is  Elohim.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  The  two  highest  Old  Testament  names  of 
God  are  Elohim  and  Jehovah:  none  are  more  distinctive  of  Deity  than  these.  So 
Ps.  xlv.  6  is  one  of  the  great  proof-texts  for  the  supreme  divinity  of  Christ.  There 
the  psalmist  addresses  the  coming  mediatorial  King  as  God  himself,  by-and-by  to  he 
clothed  in  human  nature.  He  was  to  fulfil  all  righteousness  for  man,  and  to  be  invested 
as  the  God-Man  with  the  sceptre  of  supreme  authority  above  all  his  brethren  of 
mankind.  3.  He  is  Jehovah.  (Vers.  10 — 12.)  The  idea  conveyed  by  this  Divine  name 
is  that  of  self-existence.  Now,  the  apostle  does  not  hesitate  here  to  apply  to  Christ 
the  language  of  Ps.  cii. — a  Jehovistic  psalm — in  celebration  of  the  eternity  and 
majesty  of  the  Eternal.  The  Covenant- Deliverer  of  captive  Zion  is  none  other  than 
Jehovah  Jesus.  It  was  he  who  created  the  universe ;  and  he  shall  remain  unchanged 
— th«  everlasting  Stay  and  Strength  of  his  children — after  the  heavens  shall  be  no 
more.  For  he  is  the  I  Am.  Immutability  is  one  of  his  glories.  Contrast  now  with 
thi»  the  name  and  nature  of  the  angels.  God  nowhere  addresses  any  one  of  them  as  hia 
"  Son."  No  angel  is  called  Jehovah.  None  receives  the  name  Elohim  in  the  way  in 
which  this  appellation  is  given  to  Christ.  Instead  of  that,  the  angels  are  created 
beings  (ver.  7).  They  are  servants  of  God,  who  in  their  qualities  and  iises  resemble 
the  winds  and  the  liglitning.  The  cherubim  fly  swiftly  like  the  "winds;"  the 
seraphim  burn  with  holy  ardour  like  a  "flame  of  fire."  The  Son  of  God  is  not  the 
peer  of  the  angels :  he  is  Jehovah  Elohim ;  and  the  loftiest  spirits  in  the  heavenly 
hierarchy  are  his  creatures. 

II.  Christ  has  been  baisbd  in  time  to  a  peopobtionatblt  higheb  official 
POBTTioN.    "  Having  become  by  so  much  better  than  the  angels."    He  became  superioi 


BH.  Ll— 14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  .  21 

to  the  angels  in  his  official  capacity  as  the  God-Man  Mediator — as  much  superior  as 
he  ^ad  been  from  the  beginning  in  his  essential  nature.  His  mediatorial  pre-eminence 
began  clearly  to  appear  nineteen  hundred  years  ago,  in  connection  both  with  hia 
humiliation  and  his  exaltation.  1.  Wlien  on  earth,  Jesus  received  angelic  worship. 
(Ver.  6.)  This  had  been  predicted  in  Ps.  xcvii.  And,  accordingly,  when  Christ 
became  incarnate,  angels  thronged  round  his  manger-cradle,  proclaiming  his  advent, 
and  celebrating  it  in  a  burst  of  choral  praise.  Angels  ministeied  to  him  after  the 
temptation,  and  sustained  him  under  his  great  agony.  Angels  attended  at  hia  resur- 
rection, and  haunted  for  a  time  his  empty  tomb.  Angels  encompassed  him  in  his  final 
ascension  to  glory.  2.  Now,  in  heaven,  lie  sits  on  Ood's  right  hand.  (Ver.  13.)  His 
official  exaltation  had  been  predicted  in  Ps.  ex.  God  never  said,  "  Sit  thou  on  my 
right  hand  "  to  any  angel,  tA  to  any  creature.  Therefore  the  illustrious  Priest-King  of 
that  psalm  is  not  a  creature ;  and,  if  not  a  creature,  he  must  be  the  Creator.  The 
session  of  the  Mediator  at  the  right  hand  of  Jehovah  implies  that  the  entire  universe 
is  subject  to  hia  sceptre.  He  employs  the  holy  angels,  and  he  controls  and  restrains 
the  "  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness."  Contrast  now  with  this  the  official  position  of 
the  angels  (ver.  14).  (1)  They  are  "ministering  spirits"  to  the  Mediator  of  the  new 
covenant.  They  stand  before  the  throne  upon  which  he  si*  — waiting  his  commands, 
and  eager  to  do  his  pleasure.  (2)  He  employs  their  serviot  ^  behalf  of  those  "  that 
shall  inherit  salvation."  The  angels  encamp  round  about  be.  ''ers ;  they  watch  over 
little  children ;  they  are  instruments  of  good  to  the  poor  and  thv  'nrsaken ;  they  carry 
away  the  spirits  of  the  departed  into  Abraham's  bosom ;  they  will  Uher  the  saints  at 
the  final  judgment. 

Learn  in  conclusion :  1.  T%e  fienary  inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 
The  author  quotes  what  Nathan  and  David  and  the  other  psalmists  said,  as  being  the 
words  of  God  himself.  He  is  evidently  fully  persuaded  that  the  Old  Testament  writers 
express  with  superhuman  insight  the  very  mind  of  God  regarding  his  incarnate  Son. 
2.  The  reality  of  the  angel  world  and  of  angel  help.  It  seems  to  be  always  difficult 
for  the  Church  to  hold,  in  its  scriptural  purity,  the  doctrine  of  the  angels.  On  this 
subject  may  be  noticed  the  rationalistic  error,  the  Gnostic  error,  the  Eomish  error,  and 
the  Protestant  error.  Many  Protestants  give  no  place  in  their  living  faith  to  the  truth 
about  the  angels.  3.  The  necessity  of  living  for  the  glory  of  our  Divine  Sedeemer. 
An  intellectual  persuasion  of  hia  true  Godhead  is  not  enough  ;  we  must  take  home  the 
sublime  Christology  of  this  chapter  to  our  hearts,  and  allow  it,  by  its  power  reigning 
within  tts,  to  mould  and  guide  our  entire  lives. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  i.—OoWs  revelation  of  redemptive  truth  to  man.  "  God,  who  at  sundry 
times'  and  in  divers  manners,"  etc.  God  has  spoken  to  man.  A  very  significant  fact. 
It  suggests  the  Divine  interest  in  his  human  creatures.  It  teaches  that  man  is  capable 
of  receiving  communications  from  the  infinite  Mind.  He  can  understand,  appreciate, 
and  appropriate  to  his  unspeakable  advantage  the  thoughts  of  God  concerning  him. 
He  is  under  obligations  to  do  so.  Man's  attitude  towards  the  communications  of  God 
should  be  that  of  devout  attention  and  earnest  investigation.  Our  text  teaches  that 
Ood's  revelation,  of  redemptive  truth  to  man — 

L  Was  made  throuoh  man.  "  God  .  .  .  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the 
prophets ; "  Revised  Version,  "  in  the  prophets-."  The  prophets  were  not  simply 
predictors  of  future  events ;  the  word  is  applied  to  the  sacred  lawgiver,  historians, 
poets,  etc.  God  spake  in  them  and  through  them  to  the  fathers.  "It  was  the  very 
condition  of  the  prophet's  inspiration,"  says  Robertson,  "  that  he  should  be  one  with 
the  people.  So  far  from  making  him  superhuman,  it  made  him  more  man.  He  felt 
with  more  exquisite  sensitiveness  all  that  belongs  to  man,  else  he  could  not  have  been 
a  prophet.  His  insight  into  things  was  the  result  of  that  very  weakness,  sensitiveness, 
and  susceptibility  so  tremblingly  alive.  He  burned  with  their  thoughts,  and  expressed 
them.  He  was  obliged  by  the  very  sensitiveness  of  his  humanity  to  have  a  more  entire 
dependence  and  a  more  perfect  sympathy  than  other  men.  ...  He  was  more  man,  just 
because  more  Divine — more  a  Son  of  man,  because  more  •  Son  of  God." 


23  THE  BPISTCB  TO  THE  HEBEEW3.  [oh.  1. 1—14. 

II.  Wab  made  osaduallt.  "At  sundry  times;"  Revised  Verfflon,  "by  diyera 
portions."  The  revelation  was  given  piecemeal,  by  fragments,  in  and  by  various 
persons,  and  in  diSerent  ages.  Very  gradual  was  the  revelation  of  redemptive  truthvto 
man.  God's  first  communication  (Gen.  iii.  15)  was  like  the  evening  star,  serene  and 
solitary ;  the  fuller  communications  of  the  patriarchal  age  were  like  the  starry  hosts  of 
night ;  the  revelations  made  to  Moses  were  like  the  light  of  the  fair  and  full-orbed 
moon,  in  which  that  of  the  stars  is  lost ;  and  those  made  by  succeeding  prophets  were 
like  the  dawn  of  the  day,  when  the  moon  grows  pale  and  dim  ;  and  ther  supreme  revela- 
tion was  like  the  radiance  of  the  sun  shining  in  noontide  splendour.  This  gradualness 
of  revelation  may  be  seen  in  many  things,  e.g. :  1.  The  character  of  God.  Very  gradual 
was  the  unfolding  of  the  nature  and  character  of  the  Divine  Being  to  man.  The 
measure  of  the  revelation  was  adapted  to  the  measure  of  the  human  capacity.  Jesus, 
the  Son,  revealed  the  essence  and  heart  of  the  Father.  "  God  is  a  Spirit."  Parable  of 
the  prodigal  son.  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  2,  The  salvation 
of  man  and  its  method.  3.  True  human  character  and  blessedness  (of.  Deut.  xxviii. 
1 — 14  with  Matt.  V.  1 — 12).  4.  The  immortality  of  man.  We  find  in  the  Bible 
longings  for  immortality,  inquiries  after  it,  hints  concerning  it,  anticipations  of  it,  but 
not  until  tlie  final  revelation  in  Christ  was  it  brought  into  clear  and  assured  light  (2 
Tim.  i.  10).  This  gradualness  of  the  Divine  unfoldment  should  be  remembered  by  us 
as  we  study  the  Divine  communications.  Let  us  not  expect  to  find  in  the  earlier 
portions  what  the  later  alone  can  contain,  or  put  to  Moses  inquiries  which  only  the  Son 
can  reply  to. 

III.  Was  made  vabiously.  "In  divers  manners."  This  is  true:  1.  Of  Ooi's 
communications  to  the  propJiets.  He  communicated  with  them  by  Urim  and  Thummim, 
by  dreams,  visions,  ecstasies,  by  quickening  and  directing  their  thoughts,  etc.  God  is 
not  limited  as  to  his  modes  of  access  to  and  influence  over  the  minds  of  men.  He  can 
call  them  into  active  exercise,  impress  them  with  deep  convictions,  etc.  2,  0/  the 
communications  of  the  prophets  to  men.  They  spoke  in  prose  and  poetry,  in  parable 
and  proverb,  in  history  and  prediction,  in  forcible  reasoning  and  glowing  eloquence. 
Each  prophet  also  has  his  own  style.  God's  revelations  in  the  Bible  and  in  nature  are 
alike  in  this,  that  they  are  characterized  by  endless  and  delightful  variety.  In  nature 
we  have  the  majestic  mountain  and  the  lowly  valley,  the  massive  oak  and  the  modest 
daisy,  the  serene  stars  and  the  storm-driven  clouds,  the  booming  ocean  and  the 
rippling  rivulet.     Equally  great  and  beautiful  is  the  variety  in  the  sacred  Scriptures. 

IV.  Is  CHABACTBBizED  BY  UKiTT.  The  revelation  was  given  "  by  divers  portions  and 
in  divers  manners;"  it  came  through  different  men  and  in  widely  distant  ages;  yet 
all  the  portions  are  in  substantial  agreement.  The  voices  are  many  and  various,  but 
they  meet  and  combine  in  one  sweet  and  sublime  harmony.  In  the  different  portions  of 
the  revelation  we  discover  unity  of  character — every  portion  is  spiritual,  pure,  sacred ; 
unity  of  direction— ts^ery  portion  points  to  the  last  great  revelation,  the  Divine  Son ; 
unity  of  ^Mrpose— to  make  man  "  wise  unto  salvation."  We  conclude,  then,  that  while 
the  speakers  were  many,  the  inspiring  Mind  was  One  only.  Or,  keeping  more  closely 
to  the  phraseology  of  the  text,  though  the  voices  were  many,  the  Speaker  was  but  one. 
In  this  marvellous  unity  in  such  great  diversity,  we  have  the  basis  of  a  cogent  argument 
for  the  Divine  origin  of  the  sacred  Scriptures. 

V.  Tb  perfected  IK  HI8  SoN.  "  God  .  .  .  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us 
by  hU  Son ; "  Revised  Version,  "  hath  at  the  end  of  these  days  spoken  unto  us  in  his 
Son."  The  revelations  made  in  and  by  the  prophets  were  imperfect.  "  They  were 
various  in  nature  and  form,  fragments  of  the  whole  truth,  presented  in  manifold  forms, 
in  shifting  lines  of  separated  colour.  Christ  is  the  full  revelation  of  God,  himself  the 
pure  Light,  uniting  in  his  one  Person  the  whole  spectrum  "  (Alford).  It  is  quite  appro- 
priate that  the  perfect  revelation  should  be  made  in  and  thi  ough  the  Divine  Son.  The 
Son  will  he  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  Father,  and  therefore  able  to  declare  his  wilL 
The  Son  will  resemble  the  Father,  and  therefore  be  able  to  manifest  him.  "  No  man 
hath  seen  God  at  any  time;  the  only  begotten  Son,"  etc.  No  one  knoweth  "the 
Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  willeth  to  reveal  him ;"  "  He  that 
hath  Been  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  The  Divine  revelations  of  redemptive  truth  to 
man  culminate  in  him.  No  new  or  further  revelations  will  be  granted  unto  us;  but 
to  the  duvout,  patient,  and  earnest  student,  new  and  brighter  light  will  stream  forth 


OH.  1.1— 14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  21 

from  the  revelations  already  given.  Many  of  the  utterances  of  the  Son  are  as  yet  t  oly 
very  partially  and  imperfectly  understood  even  by  his  most  advanced  pupils.  His 
words  are  of  inexhaustible  significance ;  and  that  significance  will  become  increasii^  {ly 
manifest  to  the  prayerful  and  patient  inquirer. 

CoNOLtrsiON.  Let  us  rejoice  that  we  have  this  latest  and  brightest  revelation  of  Gk  id, 
this  clearest  utterance  of  his  will  concerning  us  and  our  salvation.  Let  us  heartily 
accept  this  revelation.  It  is  truly  accepted  only  when  it  is  acted  upon;  i.e.  when  ue 
have  received  the  Son  of  God  as  our  Saviour  and  Lord. — W.  J. 

Vers.  2, 8. — The  transcendent  glory  of  the  Scm  of  God.  "  His  Son,  whom  he  hat  h 
appointed  Heir  of  all  things,"  etc.  The  Divine  Son,  the  last  and  brightest  revelation  a  f 
(Jod  to  man,  is  here  set  before  us  as  supremely  glorious  in  several  respects. 

I.  In  the  vastnbss  of  his  possessions.  "  Whom  he  appointed  heir  of  all  things.' ' 
Because  he  is  the  Son  of  God  he  is  constituted  Heir  of  all  things.  The  whole  universe 
is  his.  _  "  He  is  Lord  of  all."  "  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine ; "  "  All  mine 
are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine."  His  lordship  is  universal.  His  possessions  are 
unlimited.  His  wealth  is  infinite.  What  an  encouragement  we  have  in  this  to  trust 
in  him  1  "  The  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ "  are  available  for  the  supply  of  all  who 
follow  him. 

n.  In  the  greatness  of  his  works.  1.  He  is  the  Creator  of  all  things.  "  By 
whom  also  he  made  the  worlds."  The  innumerable  worlds  in  the  universe  of  God 
were  made  by  the  Divine  Son  as  the  "  acting  Power  and  personal  Instrument "  of  the 
Father.  Alford :  "  The  universe,  as  well  in  its  great  primseval  conditions — the  reaches 
of  space  and  the  ages  of  time,  as  in  all  material  objects  and  all  successive  events,  which 
furnish  out  and  people  space  and  time,  God  made  by  Christ."  He  "  laid  the  foundations 
of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  his  hands."  "  All  things  were  made  by 
him,  and  without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  hath  been  piade  ; "  "  In  him  were 
all  things  created,  in  the  heavens  and  upon  the  earth,"  etc.  (Col.  i.  16).  All  creatures 
in  all  worlds  were  created  by  him.  Creation  is  a  revelation  of  his  mind  and  might. 
The  glory  of  creation,  rightly  understood,  is  the  glory  of  the  Creator — the  Son  of  God. 
2.  He  is  the  Sustainer  of  all  things.  "  And  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
power."  The  universe  which  he  created  is  upheld  and  preserved  in  being  by  the 
expression  of  his  almighty  power.  "  In  him  all  things  consist ; "  they  are  held  together 
by  him.  The  universe  is  neither  self-sustaining  nor  is  it  forsaken  by  God.  It  is  not 
a  great  piece  of  mechanism  constructed  by  the  Creator,  and  then  left  to  work  of  itself, 
or  to  be  worked  by  others.  His  almighty  energy  is  always  and  everywhere  present 
in  it.  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  How  stupendous  the  conception 
that  the  boundless  universe,  with  its  countless  worlds  and  much  more  countless 
inhabitants,  is  constantly  sustained  in  existence  and  in  beautiful  order  by  the  word 
which  utters  his  power  I  3.  He  is  the  Saviour  from  sin.  "  He  by  himself  purged  our 
sins ; "  Eevised  Version,  "  He  made  purification  of  sins."  This  does  not  mean  purifi- 
cation by  the  moral  influence  of  his  teaching  and  example.  There  is  a  reference  to  the 
purifications  of  the  Levitical  law,  by  which  ceremonial  uncleaimess  was  typically 
removed.  "According  to  the  Law,  I  may  almost  say,  all  things  are  cleansed  with 
blood,  and  apart  from  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission.  ...  He  put  away  sin 
by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  "  In  the  atonement,"  says  Ebrard,  "  in  the  gracious  cover- 
ing of  the  guilt  of  sin,  consists  pwrijication  in  the  scriptural  sense.  So  that  an 
Israelitish  reader,  a  Christian  Jew,  would  never,  on  reading  the  words  KaSapiajiAy  -roieiy, 
think  on  what  we  commonly  call  '  moral  amelioration,'  which,  if  not  springing  out  of 
the  living  ground  of  a  heart  recinciled  to  God,  is  mere  self-deceit,  and  only  external 
avoidance  of  evident  transgression ;  but  the  KaSapia/ids  which  Christ  brought  in  would, 
in  the  sense  of  our  author  and  his  readers,  only  be  understood  of  that  gracious  atone- 
ment for  all  guilt  of  sin  of  all  mankind,  which  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour  has 
completed  for  us  by  his  sinless  sufferings  and  death ;  and  out  of  which  flows  forth  to 
us,  as  from  a  fountain,  all  power  to  love  in  return,  all  love  to  him,  our  heavenly 
Pattern,  and  all  hatred  of  sin  which  caused  his  death."  This  atonement  is  completed. 
It  admits  of  no  repetition ;  and  nothing  can  be  added  unto  it.  "  When  he  had  made 
purification  of  sins."  The  purification  is  finished,  and  it  is  perfect.  Thus  we  see  that 
in  his  works^  as  Creator,  Sustainer,  and  Saviour,  our  Lord  is  supremely  glorious. 


2*  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWi  [oh.  1, 1— 14 


III.  In  the  Divmrnr  of  his  being.  "  Who  being  the  Brightness  of  his  glory,  and 
the  express  Image  of  his  person ; "  Revised  Version,  "  the  effulaence  of  his  gjory,  and 
the  very  Image  of  his  substance."  These  words  suggest:  1.  That  the  Son  is  of  one 
essence  with  the  Father.  Canon  Liddon  :  "  That  lie  is  one  with  God  as  having 
streamed  forth  eternally  from  the  Father's  essence,  like  a  ray  of  light  from  the  parent 
fire  with  which  it  is  unbrokenly  joined,  is  implied  in  the  expression  imiyairiux  t^i 
Siins."  Let  us  not  think  of  this  glory  as  a  material  thing.  It  is  moral  and  spiritual. 
Moses  prayed, "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory.  And  he  said,I  will  make  all  my  good- 
ness pass  before  thee,"  etc.  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18—23).  Beyond  this,  perhaps,  it  becomes  us 
not  to  speak  of  the  glory  of  the  Divine  essence ;  it  is  mysterious,  ineffable.  Jehovah 
said  to  Moses,  "  While  my  glory  passeth  by,  I  will  put  thee  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock,  and 
will  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  I  pass  by,"  etc.  (of.  1  Tim.  vi.  16).  2.  That  the  Son 
is  the  perfect  revelation  of  the  Father.  He  is  "  the  very  Image  of  his  substance,"  or 
essential  being.  The  word  x''P<'i"'hp  signifies  the  impression  produced  by  a  stamp,  a  seal, 
or  a  die.  As  the  impression  on  the  wax  corresponds  with  the  engraving  on  the  seal,  so 
the  Divine  Son  is  the  perfect  likeness  of  the  essence  of  the  Father.  Hence  he  said, 
"  He  that  beholdeth  me  beholdeth  him  that  sent  me."  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath 
seen  the  Father."  And  St.  Paul,  "  He  is  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God."  3.  2%o<  the 
Son  is  personally  distinct  from  the  Father.  As  the  impression  on  the  wax  is  quite 
distinct  from  the  seal  by  which  it  was  made,  so  the  figure  suggests  that  our  Lord 
is  "  personally  distinct  from  him  of  whose  essence  he  is  the  adequate  imprint." 

IV.  In  the  exaltation  op  his  position.  "  Sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high."  1.  Here  is  a  glorious  position.  "  At  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high."  This  is  spoken  of  his  exaltation  as  the  Messiah  and  in  his  human 
nature,  after  the  completion  of  his  work  upon  earth  and  his  ascension  into  heaven. 
"  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  he  endured  the  cross,"  etc.  (ch.  xii.  2).  "  Being 
in  the  form  of  God,  he  counted  it  not  a  prize  to  be  of  an  equality  with  God,"  etc.  (Phil. 
ii.  6—11).  2.  Here  is  the  highest  realm.  "On  high;"  i.e.  in  heaven.  "Christ 
entered  .  •  .  into  heaven  itself"  (ch.  ix.  24).  "  Heaven,  in  Holy  Scripture,  signifies  .  .  . 
usually,  that  sphere  of  the  created  world  of  space  and  time,  where  the  union  of  God 
with  the  personal  creature  is  not  severed  by  sin,  where  no  death  reigns,  where  the 
glorification  of  the  body  is  not  a  mere  hope  of  the  future  "  (Ebiard).  Into  that  sphere 
our  Lord  in  his  crucified  but  now  risen  and  glorified  humanity  has  entered,  and  is 
enthroned  "on  the  right  hand  of  God,  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being  made 
subject  unto  him  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  22).  3.  Here  is  a  waiting  attitude.  "Sat  down."  "Sit 
thou  on  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool."  He  is  waiting  for 
all  things  to  be  subjected  unto  him,  "  in  the  majestic  certainty  of  his  triumph  over  all 
who  shall  oppose  the  advance  of  his  kingdom." 

Conclusion.  1.  In  him  who  "  made  purification  of  sins  "  let  us  trust  as  our  Saviour. 
2.  Unto  him  who  is  essentially  Divine  let  ui  render  the  fuU  homage  of  our  heart  and 
Ufe.—W.  J. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Uie  exaltation  of  the  Bon  of  God  above  the  angels  of  God,  "  Being 
made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,"  etc.  The  angels  of  God  are  great  and  exalted 
beings.  Our  Lord  spake  of  them  as  "  holy  angels  "  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  David  said  they 
"  excel  in  strength "  (Ps.  ciii.  20).  St.  Paul  designates  them  "  his  mighty  angels " 
(2  Thess.  i.  7).  Deeds  involving  stupendous  power  are  ascribed  to  them  (Isa.  xxxvii. 
36 ;  Acts  xii.  7 — 11).  They  are  said  to  be  "  full  of  eyes,"  to  indicate  their  great  intel- 
ligence (Rev.  iv.  6,  8).  They  are  represented  as  occupying  a  most  exalted  position  and 
offering  the  highest  worship  (Isa.  vi.  1 — 3).  In  their  ranks  the  highest  order  of 
created  beings  is  to  be  found  (Eph.  i.  21 ;  Col.  i,  16).  But  our  Lord  is  greater  than  the 
angeli. 

I.  In  the  fbk-eminenoe  of  his  name.  "He  hath  inherited  a  more  excellent 
name  than  they."  1.  The  pre-eminent  name — the  Son  of  God,  This  appears  from 
ver.  5,  "  For  unto  which  of  the  angels,"  etc.  ?  The  first  quotation  is  from  Ps.  ii.,  which 
is  generally  regarded  as  Messianic.  The  second  is  from  2  Sam.  vii.  14,  which  is  applic- 
able primarily  to  Solomon,  but  principally  to  him  who  is  both  "  the  Root  and  the 
Offspring  of  David."  Angels  are  called  "  sons  of  God"  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  (Job  i 
6 ;  ii.  1 ;  xxxviii.  7) ;  so  also  are  true  Christians  (John  i.  12 ;  1  John  iii.  1, 2).     But  to 


BH.  1.1-14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEWS.  25 

One  only  is  given  the  title  tlte  Son  of  God,  even  to  "  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,"  and  of  whom  the  Father  speaks  as  "  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  It  is  probable  that  in  this  name  there  is  a  depth  of  sig- 
nificance, a  height  of  dignity,  and  a  fulness  of  glory  of  which  at  present  we  hav» 
little  or  no  conception.  2.  77te  acquisition  of  this  name.  "  He  hath  by  inheritance 
obtained"  it.  "He  hath  inherited  "  it :  (1)  Because  of  his  relation  to  the  Father. 
It  belongs  to  him  by  his  very  Being,  "  by  virtue  of  his  Divine  filiation.  Angels  may 
be,  in  an  inferior  sense,  the  sons  of  God  by  creation ;  but  they  cannot  inherit  that 
title,  for  this  plain  reason,  that  they  are  created,  not  begotten ;  whilst  our  Lord  inherits 
the  '  more  excellent  name,*  because  he  is  begotten,  not  created."  (2)  And,  perhaps, 
because  it  was  promised  to  him  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures ;  as  in  the  passages 
quoted  in  our  text. 

IL  In  the  cobbbsfondino  fbg-eminence  of  his  nature.  Names  and  titles  in 
the  sacred  writings,  generally  speaking,  are  neither  given  for  their  euphony,  nor  are 
they  merely  complimentary,  but  they  express  realities  in  the  circumstances,  or  cha- 
racter, or  calling  of  the  person  to  whom  they  are  applied.  This  is  especially  the  case 
in  respect  to  the  Son  of  God.  "  The  dignity  of  his  titles  is  indicative  of  his  essential 
rank."  He  is  called  the  Son  of  God  because  he  is  the  Son  of  God  in  a  peculiar  and 
exclusive  sense.    The  name  is  indicative  of  his  nature,  which  is  essentially  Divine. 

III.  In  his  cosbespondino  pbe-eminence  as  Mediatob.  "  Being  made  so  much 
better  than  the  angels,  as  he  hath,"  etc. ;  Revised  Version,  "  Having  become  by  so 
much  better  than  tlie  angels,"  etc.  The  "having  become  "  refers  to  the  exaltation  of 
our  Lord  in  his  humanity.  In  like  manner  it  seems  to  us  that  the  "  This  day  have  I 
begotten  thee  "  refers  to  his  resurrection  from  the  dead.  St.  Paul  certainly  applied  the 
words  thus  (Acts  xiii.  32,  33).  And  he  writes,  God's  "  Son,  who  was  bom  of  the  seed 
of  David  according  to  the  flesh,  who  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  by 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  even  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  And  St.  John  speaks  of 
"  Jesus  Christ,  the  First-begotten  of  the  dead  "  (Rev.  i.  5).  We  conclude,  then,  that 
"  begotten  "  is  used  figuratively,  and  that  by  it  is  intended  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  from  the  dead,  by  which  lie  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  and 
his  exaltation  to  his  mediatorial  throne.  And  this  brings  us  to  our  present  point,  which 
the  fourth  verse  teaches  us,  that  the  exaltation  of  our  Loird  consequent  upon  the  com- 
pletion of  his  redemptive  work  upon  earth  is  commensurate  with  the  exaltation  of  his 
essential  nature;  or,  that  his  glory  as  Mediator  corresponds  with  the  dignity  of  his 
name  and  nature.  Alford :  "  Observe,  that  the  Kpehrav  yeri/iLeyos  is  not  identical  with 
the  KtKK7ipov6fi7iK)iy,  but  in  proportion  to  it :  the  triumphant  issue  of  his  mediation  is 
consonant  to  the  glorious  name  which  is  his  by  inheritance  ;  but  which,  in  the  fulness 
of  its  present  inconceivable  glory,  has  been  put  on  and  taken  up  by  him  in  the  his- 
torical process  of  his  mediatorial  humiliation  and  triumph."  The  redemption  of 
humanity  was  an  undertaking  beyond  all  human  power,  and  transcending  even  angelic 
wisdom,  love,  and  might.  Its  accomplishment  demanded  the  resources  of  Godhead. 
Uur  Lord  has  redeemed  man  in  a  manner  worthy  of  himself  as  Son  of  God,  and  his  exal- 
tation as  Redeemer  corresponds  with  the  pre-eminence  of  his  transcendent  Name.  And 
more,  this  "  exaltation  must  be  conceived  of  as  belonging,  not  to  his  humanity  only, 
but  to  the  entire  undivided  person  of  Christ,  now  resuming  the  fulness  and  glory  of  the 
Godhead  (John  xvii.  6),  and  in  addition  to  this  having  taken  into  the  Godhead  the 
manhood,  now  glorified  by  his  obedience,  atonement,  and  victory  (see  Bph.  L  20 — 22  ; 
Phil.  ii.  6—9 ;  Acts  ii.  86  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21,  22).  The  Son  of  God  before  his  incarnation 
was  Head  over  creation ;  but  after  his  work  in  the  flesh  he  had  become  also  Head  oj 
creation,  inasmuch  as  his  glorified  body,  in  which  he  triumphs  sitting  at  God's  right 
hand,  is  itself  created,  and  is  the  sum  and  the  centre  of  creation  "  (Alford). 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  his  pre-eminence  as  Mediator  inspire  us  with  confidence  in  him 
as  our  Saviour.  2.  Let  his  essential  pre-eminence  inspire  us  with  adoring  reverence 
toward*  him, — W.  J. 

Ver.  6. — The  Son  of  Ood  the  Recipient  of  the  worship  of  the  angels.  "And  again, 
when  he  bringeth  in  the  First-begotten,"  etc.  This  verse,  as  Ebrard  remarks,  "  is 
unquestionably  one  of  the  most  difficult  in  the  whole  Epistle."  We  have  in  it :  1.  An 
augutt  relationship.    "  His  First-begotten."    This  title  is  appropriately  applied  to  the 


26  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  lim.Ll—14^ 

Son  of  Qod:  (1)  Becanse  he  existed  before  all  creatures.  "He  Is  the  Firstborn  of  all 
creation  "  (Col.  i.  15);  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word."  (2)  Because  it  was  given  to 
him  in  prophecy.  "  I  will  make  him  my  Firstborn,"  etc.  (Ps.  Ixixlx.  27).  (3)  Because 
of  his  miraculous  conception  (see  Matt.  i.  18 — 2B ;  Luke  i.  30 — 35).  (4)  Because  ol 
his  resurrection  from  the  dead.'  "  He  is  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead  "  (Col.  L  18 ;  Rev. 
L  6).  And  it  may  well  be  that  in  this  place  all  these  applications  of  the  title  are  com- 
bined in  setting  forth  the  unique  and  august  relation  of  the  Divine  Son  to  the  God  ai.i 
Father.  2.  A  remarkable  epoch.  "  And  again,  when  he  bringeth  in  the  First-begotten 
into  the  world."  There  is  much  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  whit  event  in  the  history  of 
the  Son  of  God  is  referred  to  here.  Some  take  it  as  denoting  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord.  Others,  his  second  coming ;  as  Alford,  who  translates,  "  But  when  he  again 
hath  introduced  the  First-begotten  into  the  world."  And  others,  bis  incarnation.  "  It 
cannot  be  '  a  second  bringing  in  of  the  Firstborn  into  the  world '  that  is  here  spoken 
of,"  says  Ebrard,  "  seeing  that  nothing  has  been  said  of  a  first."  This  seems  to  us  the 
correct  interpretation.  It  is  very  significant  that  the  heavenly  intelligences  should  be 
summoned  to  worship  him  "  even  when  he  was  entering  upon  his  profound  self-humi- 
liation." The  angel  Gabriel  foretold  his  birth  (Luke  i.  26),  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
announced  it,  and  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  celebrated  it  in  joyful  worship- 
song  (ii.  9 — 14).  This  introduction  of  the  First-begotten  into  the  inhabited  world  is 
the  greatest  epoch  in  history.  Antecedent  ages  looked  onward  to  it ;  subsequent  ages 
date  from  it,  and  have  been  influenced  by  it  to  a  degree  far  surpassing  human  concep- 
tion. 3.  A  significant  command.  "  He  saith.  And  let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship 
him,"  Whether  these  words  are  quoted  from  Deut.  xxxii.  43  (Septuagint)  or  Ps. 
xcvii.  7,  or  whether  both  passages  were  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  we  shall  not  attempt 
to  determine.  To  us  it  seems  most  probable  that  he  quotes  from  Deuteronomy.  But 
we  turn  to  the  homiletic  suggestions  of  the  quotation. 

L  Angels  wobship,  thebefobb  wobshif  is  becomiko  m  all  iNTELUOEirr  beihcm. 
Angels  are  the  highest  created  beings.  If  worship  is  necessary  for  them,  it  is  necessary 
for  those  also  who  are  less  in  their  faculties  and  lower  in  their  positions,  yet  capable  of 
reverent  approach  to  the  Supreme  Being.  Man  needs  worship  for  the  right  and  har- 
monious development  of  his  being.  Without  worship  the  highest  powers  of  his  nature 
will  decline  and  die  for  want  of  exercise,  and  its  holiest  possibilities  will  not  even  be 
attempted.  Moreover,  since  worship  is  appropriate  and  becomia,^  in  the  angels  of  God, 
it  is  not  less  so  in  his  human  creatures.  fTo  attitude  is  more  befitting  in  us  than  that 
of  adoration. 

•  II.  Angels  wobship  the  Son  of  God,  thebefobe  he  is  woetht  of  the  worship 
OF  ALL  intblliqent  BEINGS.  We  make  this  statement  on  the  following  grounds  : — 
1.  Angeh,  by  virtue  of  their  intelligence,  are  capable  of  estimating  his  claims  to  their 
worship.  2.  Angels,  because  of  their  holiness,  would  not  pay  their  worship  to  one  who 
was  not  worthy  of  it.  Hence,  in  worshipping  the  First-begotten  of  the  Father,  they 
are  sn  example  to  us.     Their  worship  attests  his  worthiness. 

IIL  "All  the  angels  op  God  worship"  the  Son  of  God,  there pobb  he  is 
wobtht  of  the  worship  of  even  the  highest  cbbatubes.  Angels  even  of  thi 
highest  rank  worship  him  (Isa.  vi.  1 — 3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  22 ;  Rev.  v.  11 — 14).  Hence  we 
infer  that  the  most  intelligent,  the  wisest,  the  mightiest,  the  most  exalted  of  men 
should  worship  him. 

IV.  Angels  abe  undbb  obligations  to  worship  the  Son  of  God,  but  man  is 
undee  more  and  miqhmeb  obligations  to  wqRSHip  HIM.  Angels  are  commanded 
to  worship  him.  •'  He  saith.  Let  all  the  angels,"  etc.  They  worship  him  because  of 
what  he  is  in  himself;  because  he  is  essentially  Divine,  and  supremely,  infinitely 
perfect—"  the  effulgence  of  the  Fathei-'s  glory,"  etc.  They  worship  him  also  because  of 
what  he  is  in  relation  to  them.  He  is  their  Creator  and  Sustainer.  These  reasons  for 
worshipping  the  Son  apply  to  us  as  much  as  to  these  heavenly  intelligences ;  and,  in 
addition  to  these,  we  are  impelled  to  worship  him  by  a  motive  more  tender  in  its  cha- 
racter and  more  mighty  in  its  constraining  force  than  any  of  these.  He  is  our  Savioui. 
He  gave  himself  for  us.  He  died  for  us.  He  redeemed  us  with  his  own  precious  blood, 
And  now  "  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  How  sacred  and  strong,  then, 
aio  the  obligations  which  bind  us  to  worship  him  I  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  hath 
*  Buggested  by  Alford,  «n  looo. 


OH.  1. 1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  27 

been  slain  to  receive  the  power,"  etc.  (Rev.  v.  12);  "0  come  let  iu  sing  onto  the 
Lord,"  etc.  (Ps.  xov.  1—7)  I— W.  J. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  Son  and  the  angeh.  "  And  of  the  angels  he  saith,  Who  maketh 
his  angels,"  etc.  Here  are  two  quotations  from  the  Psalms ;  the  first  f  im  Ps.  ciy.  4, 
the  second  from  Ps.  xlv.  6,  7.  Whether  the  latter  Psalm  applied  prima,  .ly  to  Solomon 
or  any  other  king  of  ancient  Israel  or  not,  it  seems  to  us  quite  clear  that  it  applies  to 
the  ideal  King,  the  Messiah.  Our  text  presents  additional  illustrations  of  the  great 
superiority  of  the  Son  to  the  angels. 

I.  The  angels  abe  messengers  of  GfoD,  the  Son  is  himself  God.  They  art 
messengers  who  execute  his  behests.  "  His  angels  do  his  commandments,  hearkening 
unto  the  voice  of  his  word  "  (ct  Dan,  ix.  21 ;  Luke  i.  19,  26).  But  the  Son  is  called 
God  by  the  Father.  "  Unto  the  Son  he  saith.  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever." 
Since  God  the  Father  thus  addresses  him  he  must  really  be  God ;  for  he  calls  persons 
and  things  by  names  which  correspond  to  their  natures.  There  is  a  wide  interval 
between  the  most  honoured  messenger  and  the  only  begotten  Son  and  Heir  of  the 
Father,  between  the  highest  of  created  beings  and  the  uncreated  God. 

II.  The  angels  are  servants,  the  Son  is  the  Sovereign.  They  are  "  his  minis- 
ters." They  serve  him  swiftly  and  joyfully.  All  their  service  is  religious  in  its  spirit. 
Their  work  is  indeed  worship.  But,  however  important  the  nature  of  their  service, 
however  exalted  its  spirit,  however  perfect  its  performance,  they  are  still  servants  and 
subjects.  But  the  Son  is  the  Sovereign,  The  Father  saith  unto  him,  "  Thy  throne,  0 
God,  is  for  ever  and  ever,"  etc  The  throne  and  sceptre  are  symbols  of  royal  authority. 
"  All  authority  hath  been  given  unto  me,"  said  our  Lord,  "  in  heaven  and  on  earth ; " 
"  I  sat  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne ; ".,"  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all." 

IIL  The  angels  serve  in  the  phenomena  and  forces  ov  nature,  the  Son 
reigns  eiqhteously  in  a  BPiRiTUAti  EMPIRE.  "  Who  maketh  his  angels  winds,  and 
his  ministers  a  flame  of  fire."  These  words  are  variously  interpreted.  Dean  Perowne 
(on  Ps.  civ.  4)  says,  "  He  clothes  his  messengers  with  the  might,  the  swiftness,  the  all- 
pervading  subtilty  of  wind  and  fire."  Alford's  exposition  is  different :  "  He  makes  his 
messengers  winds,  i.e.  he  causes  his  messengers  to  act  in  or  by  means  of  the  winds ;  his 
servants  flames  of  fire,  i.e.  commissions  them  to  assume  the  agency  or  form  of  flame 
for  his  purposes."  And  Ebrard :  "  Throughout  the  New  Testament  (for  example.  Bom, 
viii.  38 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  22)  the  angels,  at  least  a  class  of  them,  are  regarded  as  Suyrf/jcit  of 
God,t.e.  as  personal  creatures  furnished  with  peculiar  powers,  through  whom  God  works 
wonders  in  the  kingdom  of  nature,  and  whom  he  accordingly  '  makes  to  be  storm- 
winds  and  flames  of  fire,"  in  as  far  as  he  lets  them,  so  to  speak,  incorporate  themselves 
with  these  elements  and  operations  of  nature.  It  is  a  truth  declared  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures  of  great  speculative  importance,  that  the  miracles  of  nature,  for  example  the 
lightnings  and  trumpet-sounds  on  Sinai,  are  not  wrouyld  immediately  and  directly 
by  God,  the  Governor  of  the  world,  but  are  called  forth  at  his  will  by  exalted  creatures 
specially  qualified  for  this  work.  This  position  the  angels  hold  ;  they  are  there  to  work 
terrible  wonders  in  the  sphere  of  nature  before  the  eyes  of  a  yet  uncultivated  people." 
But  the  relalion  of  the  Son  to  man  is  spiritual,  and  his  rule  is  supremely  righteous. 
The  eighth  verse  gives  us  three  ideas  concerning  his  government.  1.  It  is  perfectly 
righteous.  "  The  sceptre  of  uprightness  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom."  (1)  His  rule 
over  man  as  an  individual  is  righteous.  All  his  requirements  are  in  harmony  with  and 
tend  to  jiromote  our  well-being.  In  keeping  his  commandments  "  there  is  great 
reward."  (2)  His  rule  over  man  in  his  social  relations  is  righteous.  •  What  could  be 
more  equitable  or  more  wise  than  the  great  rule  laid  down  by  our  Lord  for  the  regula- 
tion of  our  conduct  toward  each  other  ? — "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men 
should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them."  (3)  His  rule  over  man  in  his  relations  to 
God  is  righteous.  He  requires  us  to  obey,  reverence,  and  love  God.  Is  it  not  reason- 
able and  equitable  that  the  most  excellent  and  gracious  Being  should  be  loved?  that  th« 
greatest  and  most  glorious  Being  should  be  reverenced  ?  that  our  Creator,  Sustainer,  and 
Sovereign  should  be  ol  eyed?  "  The  Law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  ia  holy  and 
just  and  good."  His  reign  is  not  only  equitable,  but  benevolent.  2.  Jt  isperfeetty 
righteous  heeause  of  his  love  of  righteousness.  He  reigns  in  uprightness,  not  as  a  matter 
of  policy,  but  of  principle ;  this  grand  feature  of  his  government  iioingi  from  hii  owa 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [ca.  1. 1— 14. 


infinite  affection  for  righteousness,  and  the  perfect  righteousness  of  his  character. 

"Thou  hast  '  "  "  '       "' 

righteousness.' 

Grpd,  is  for  ever  i 

is  established  by  righteousness."    Earthly 

"  Empires  wane  and  nax, 
Are  founded,  flourish,  and  decay." 

But "  of  the  increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end,"  etc.  (Isa.  ix. 
7).  "  He  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever ;  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall 
be  no  end." 

IV.  The  jot  of  the  angels  is  M0OH  infbbiob  to  that  op  the  Son.  "There- 
fore God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows." 
Notice :  1.  The  nature  of  this  anointing.  "  Anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness." 
This  anointing  dt)es  not  indicate  the  inauguration  of  our  Lord  to  his  mediatorial  office. 
The  figure  is  taken  from  the  custom  of  anointing  the  head  of  the  guests  at  festivals 
(Ps.  xxiii.  5),  and  is  intended  to  set  forth  the  supreme  joy  of  the  Son  upon  the  com- 
pletion of  his  redemptive  work,  and  his  exaltation  to  "  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 
on  high."  2.  The  reason  of  this  anointing.  "  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness,  and 
hated  iniquity ;  therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee."  Because  of  the  perfec- 
tion of  his  character,  and  of  his  life  and  work  upon  earth,  the  Father  has  blessed  him 
with  supreme  joy.  3.  The  extent  of  this  anointing.  "  Above  thy  fellows,"  or  associates. 
Since  the  design  of  the  writer  is  to  exhibit  the  superiority  of  the  Son  "  to  the  angels, 
we  must,  I  think,  take  jutTiJ^oui  as  representing  other  heavenly  beings,  partakers  in  the 
same  glorious  and  sinless  state  with  himself,  though  not  in .  the  strict  sense  his 
'fellows.'"'  His  joy  is  deeper,  higher,  greater,  intenser  than  that  of  any  angel. 
Behold,  then,  how  much  greater  is  the  Son  than  the  angels  in  all  the  points  which  have 
come  under  our  notice  I — W.  J. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — TAe  Son  and  tJie  universe.  "And,  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning 
hast  laid  the  foundation,"  etc.  The  main  subject  of  the  writer  is  still  the  same — the 
superiority  of  the  Son  to  the  angels;  and  he  here  adduces  further  proofs  of  his 
superiority  by  setting  forth  the  relations  of  the  Sou  to  the  universe,  in  words  which  he 
quotes  from  Ps.  cii.  25 — 27. 

L  The  Son  is  the  Cbeatob  of  the  unitebse.  "  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast 
laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  thy  hands."  Notice 
here :  1.  His  existence  before  the  universe.  In  the  beginning  he  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  earth.  When  was  that  ?  Six  thousand  years  ago  ?  Nay,  millions  of  years  ago. 
The  expression  takes  us  "  back  to  the  fathomless  abyss  of  ages  of  ages."  Yet  the 
existence  of  the  Son  takes  us  back  beyond  that,  to  us,  incomprehensibly  remote  period. 
As  the  artist  must  have  existed  before  the  picture  which  he  painted,  and  the  architect 
before  the  edifice  which  he  designed,  so  the  Son  existed  before  the  universe  which  he 
made.  "  His  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting."  2  His  agency  in 
the  creation  of  the  universe.  He  "  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth,"  etc.  The  heavens 
and  the  earth  have  not  always  existed ;  they  had  a  beginning.  They  were  not  self- 
originated,  but  were  made  by  Another.  In  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  they  were 
created  by  our  Lord.  He  did  not  merely  arrange  or  form  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
out  of  pre-existent  materials ;  he  created  them.  He  "  laid  the  foundation."  He  began 
at  the  beginning,  etc. 

II.  He  PBESiDEs  ovEB  THE  ORANOEB  OF  THE  0NIVEBBE.  "  They  all  shall  wax  old  as 
doth  a  garment ;  and  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  shall  be  changed." 
Changes  are  ever  going  on  in  the  universe.  Spring  with  its  fresh  and  youthful  beauty 
passes  into  the  glowing  and  gorgeous  summer,  etc.  There  are  changes  in  the  earth 
and  in  the  seas.  Even  the  mountains,  which  seem  so  stable  and  immutable,  are  subject 
to  change.  Suns  and  stars  also  are  mutable.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  growing 
old ;  they  have  had  their  infancy  and  youth,  etc  These  changes  are  not  effected  by 
blind,  unintelligent  forces  or  laws.  The  Son  of  Gnd  superintends  all  of  them.  He  is 
the  Framer  of  all  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  the  Force  of  all  her  forces,    fis  ii  the 

*  Bm  Alfoid's  note  in  support  of  tliis  Interpretation, 


tte.1.1— 14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  29 

Sustainer  as  well  as  the  Creator  of  the  universe.  To  the  thoughtful  and  devout  man 
this  fact  imparts  a  deeper,  tenderer  interest  and  attraction  to  the  changes  which  take 
place  iu  nature.  Uiir  gracious  Saviour  and  Lord  is  also  the  Superintendent  and 
Sovereign  of  the  universe. 

IIL  He  is  unchanqeablk  amidst  thb  ohanoes  of  the  universe.  "  But  thou  art 
the  same."  He  is  the  same  in  his  being  and  character,  in  his  will  and  purposes. 
Presiding  over  a  universe  in  which  all  things  are  continually  changing,  yet  with  him 
there  "  is  no  variableness  or  shadow  of  turning."  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  He  is  the  same  in  knowledge.  His  understanding  is  infinite,  and 
he  knoweth  all  things.  He  is  the  same  in  purpose.  The  writer  of  this  Epistle  speaks 
of  "  the  immutability  of  his  counsel."  "  He  is  of  one  mind."  He  is  the  same  in 
affection.  "  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed,  but  my  kindness 
shall  not  depart  from  thee,  nor  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed."  "  Having 
loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  imto  the  end."  What  an 
inspiration  this  supplies  to  trust  in  him  I  It  was  thus,  indeed,  that  these  words  were 
originally  employed  by  the  psalmist;  for,  as  Bbrard  points  out,  it  is  not  "his  unchange- 
ableness  as  the  immaterial  Spirit  that  is  spoken  of  (in  Ps.  cii.  27),  but  the  unchange- 
ableness  of  Jehovah  in  his  acts,  in  his  relation  to  Israel,  in  a  word,  the  Divine 
covenant-faithfulness."  And  upon  this  the  psalmist  bases  his  hope  of  the  restoration 
of  prosperity  to  Israel.  Because  he  is  immutable  in  his  character  and  purposes  and 
relation  to  his  people,  we  may  safely  confide  in  him.  "He  abideth  faithful;  for  he 
cannot  deny  himself." 

IV.  He  survives  the  dissolution  op  the  universe.  "They  shall  perish;  but  thou 
remainest.  .  .  •  And  thy  years  shall  not  fail."  We  do  not  think  that  the  annihilation 
of  the  heavens  and  earth  is  taught  here,  but  that  their  present  form  and  aspect  shall 
pass  away.  Their  substance  will  remain,  but  their  present  appearance  will  perish. 
"The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief;  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away 
with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  be  dissolved  with  fervent  heat,  and  the  earth 
and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up." 

"  The  cloud-oapped  towers,  the  gorgeous  palaeei, 
The  solemn  temples,  the  great  globe  itself, 
Yea,  all  which  it  inherit,  shall  dissolve; 
And,  like  this  insubstantial  pageant  faded. 
Leave  not  a  rook  behind." 


But  the  Lord  shall  remain  for  ever  and  ever.  As  he  existed  before  the  universe,  so 
'shall  he  exist  when  its  present  forms  have  disappeared  for  ever.  He  is  "  from  ever- 
lasting to  everlasting."  "  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last,  and  the  Living  One ;  and  I  was 
dead,  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore." 

CoNOLUSiON.  How  immeasurably  greater,  then,  is  the  Son  than  the  angels  I  They 
could  not  create  a  world ;  but  he  created  the  entire  universe.  They  have  no  sovereign 
control  over  the  transformations  of  any  world  ;  but  he  is  the  supreme  Agent  effecting 
all  the  changes  in  every  province  of  all  worlds.  Tliey  change;  their  knowledge  changes 
by  way  of  increase,  and  with  new  discoveries  they  have  new  admirations ;  their  affec- 
tions also  change,  growing  more  deep  and  intense ;  but  he  is  superior  to  all  change 
— the  Immutable.  They  are  not  essentially  immortal;  their  continued  existence 
depends  upon  him ;  but  he  is  essentially  immortal — "  the  living  One,"  the  Eternal. 
Seeing  that  the  Son  of  Ood  is  immutable  and  eternal,  we  have  the  strongest  encourage- 
ment to  trust  in  him  at  all  times.  Both  in  his  power  and  in  his  willingness  to  save  he 
is  ever  the  same,  and  "  he  ever  liveth."    His  "  years  shall  not  fail." — W.  J. 

Vers.  13, 14. — Hie  sovereignty  of  the  Son  and  the  service  of  the  angels.  "  But  to 
which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,"  etc.  ?  The  writer  is  still  treating  of  the  pre- 
eminence of  the  Son  over  the  angels ;  and  he  shows  it  in  the  facts  that  he  is  a  Sovereign 
and  they  are  servants. 

L  The  sovereignty  op  the  Son  of  God.  "  But  to  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at 
any  time,  sit  on  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool?"  This 
quotation  the  writer  makes  from  Fs.  ex.    This  psalm  is  confessedly  Measianio,    It  is 


30  THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE  HEBREW B.  lob- >•  1— In- 

frequently quoted  in  the  New  Testament  as  applying  to  our  Lord.  "  And  no  psalm 
more  clearly  finds  its  ultimate  reference  and  completion  only  in  Christ."  The  quotation 
teaches  that :  1.  The  Son  is  eaiaUed  to  the  mediatorial  throne.  "  Sit  thou  on  my  right 
hand."  "  He  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  (See  our  notes  on 
"  The  exaltation  of  his  position  "  as  stated  in  ver.  3.)  2.  He  is  exalted  by  the  highest 
will.  "  But  to  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,"  etc.  ?  "  The  Lord  said 
unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,"  etc. ;  "  Him  God  exalted  with  his  right 
hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  3.  Ee  is  exalted  with  the  suUimest  expectation. 
"Till  I  make  thine  enemies  the  footstool  of  thy  feet."  Here  are  several  points.  (1) 
Our  Lord  has  enemies;  e.g.  ignorance,  superstition,  unhelief,  vice,  crime,  wicked  men, 
etc.  (2)  These  enemies  will  certainly  he  subjugated  to  him.  Their  subjugation  is 
guaranteed  by  the  Most  High :  "  Till  I  make,"  etc.  (3)  These  enemies  will  be  com- 
pletely subjugated  to  him.  "  Thine  enemies  the  footstool  of  thy  feet."  The  reference 
is  to  the  ancient  custom  of  conquerors  placing  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of  vanquished 
nobles  or  princes  in  token  of  their  complete  subjection  (cf.  Josh.  x.  24).  (4)  He  is 
waiting  their  subjugation  with  assured  expectation. 

II.  The  service  of  the  angels  op  God.  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits," 
etc.  ?  Kotice  :  X.  The  nature  of  the  angels.  "  Spirits."  We  do  not  enter  upon  the 
question  whether  angels  are  pure  spirits  or  not.  It  seems  to  us  that  they  are  not 
without  some  form  or  vesture ;  that  they  are  not  "  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon." 
Their  bodies  are  spiritual.  "  There  is  a  natural  body,  there  is  also  a  spiritual  body." 
Angelic  forms  are  not  gross  and  material,  but  refined  and  ethereaL  They  do  not 
impede  their  activities  or  clog  their  aspirations,  but  are  the  exquisite  vesture  of  their 
being  and  the  suitable  vehicle  of  their  power.  (On  the  qualities  of  these  spirits,  see 
introduction  of  our  homily  on  vers.  3,  4.)  2.  The  office  of  the  angels.  "  Ministering 
spirits."  (1)  They  are  servants  of  God.  Alford :  "  The  SiHKoj/fo  is  not  a  waiting  upon 
men,  but  a  fulfilment  of  their  office  as  Siixovoi  cf  God."  And  Bobert  Hall:  "  They  are 
not  the  servants  of  the  Church,  but  the  servants  of  Christ  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Church."  They  are  "  ministers  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure  "  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21).  (2) 
They  are  servants  of  God  on  behalf  of  his  people.  "  Sent  forth  to  minister  for  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation; "  or,  "  Sent  forth  for  ministry  on  account  of  those  who 
shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."  Christians  are  called  "  heirs  of  salvation  "  because  they 
"  are  children  of  God  ;  and  if  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with 
Christ"  (Rom.  viii.  14- — 17).  And  the  salvation  which  they  shall  inherit  is  not  mere 
deliverance  from  danger  or  release  from  the  penalty  of  sin ;  but  complete  and  ever- 
lasting salvation ;  transformation  into  the  image  and  participation  in  the  blessednesa 
of  the  Lord.  Unto  these  children  of  GroA  angels  minister.  The  nature  of  their 
ministry  in  ancient  times  we  are  able  to  gather  from  the  Bible ;  e.g.  to  Lot  (Qeo.  xix.) ;  * 
to  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  4—8)  ;  to  Elisha  (2  Kings  vi.  16,  17) ;  to  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.  22 ; 
ix.  20—27 ;  x.  10—21) ;  to  Zacharias  (Luke  i.  11—20) ;  to  Mary  (Luke  i.  26—38);  to 
the  shepherds  (Luke  ii.  9 — 14) ;  to  Mary  Magdalene  and  other  women  (Luke  xxiv. 
4 — 7;  John  xx.  11 — 13);  to  the  apostles  immediately  after  the  Ascension  (Acts  i. 
10, 11) ;  to  the  apostles  in  prison  (Acts  v.  19,  20);  to  St  Peter  (Acts  xii.  7 — 10) ;  to 
St.  Paul  (Acts  xxvii.  23,  24).  They  also  ministered  to  our  Lord  after  his  temptation 
in  the  wilderness  (Matt.  iv.  11),  and  in  his  agony  in  Gethsemane  (Luke  xxii.  43). 
And  there  are  statements  of  Holy  Scripture  which  bear  upon  their  ministry.  "  The 
angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear  him,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxxiv,  7) ; 
"  He  shall  ^ve  his  angels  charge  over  thee,"  etc.  (Ps.  xci.  11, 12).  They  minister  to 
us  now  chiefly  by  their  influence  upon  our  spirits.  They  quicken  within  us  true 
thoughts  and  pure  feelings ;  they  help  us  to  detect  Satanic  suggestions  and  to  repel 
Satanic  solicitations;  they  inspire  the  timid  with  courage,  and  whisper  hope  to  the 
despondent — 

•  And  the  wearied  heart  grows  strong. 

As  an  angel  strengthened  him. 

Fainting  in  the  garden  dim 
'Neath  tlie  world's  vast  woe  and  wrong." 

(Johann  Bist.) 

They  snggeit  caution  and  watchfulness  to  the  unwary;  by  their  serene  invisible 
presence  they  solace  the  sufferer;  and  they  serve  about  the  dying  bed  ot  the  saint, 


OH.  1. 1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  3] 

»nd  convey  the  emancipated  spirit  to  its  heavenly  rest.  "  Lazarus  .  ,  .  was  carried  by 
the  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom."  (3)  They  are  commissioned  by  God  for  this  service 
He  appoints  to  each  one  his  sphere  of  ministry ;  and  by  him  they  are  "  seat  forth  "  ti 
fulfil  their  commissionB. 

"Oh,  th'  exceeding  grace 
Of  highest  God  that  loves  his  creatures  so, 
And  all  his  works  with  mercy  doth  embraee^ 
That  bleesed  angels  he  sends  to  and  fro. 
To  serve  to  wicked  man,  to  serve  his  wicked  tott 

"  How  oft  do  they  their  silver  bowers  leave. 
To  come  to  succour  us  that  succour  want  I 
How  oft  do  they  with  golden  pinions  cleave 
The  flitting  skies,  like  flying  pursuivant, 
Against  foul  flends  to  aid  us  militant  t 
They  for  us  Ught,  and  watch,  and  duly  ward. 
And  their  bright  squadrons  round  about  us  plant  t 
And  all  for  love,  and  nothing  for  reward. 
Oh,  why  should  heavenly  God  to  men  have  such  regard  f* 

(Spenser.) 

CoNOLnsioN.  Learn  !  1.  The  dignity  of  the  Christian.  Angels  minister  unto  him. 
God  cares  for  him ;  for  he  sends  forth  the  angels  to  promote  his  interests.  2.  The 
dignity  of  service.  Angels,  the  highest  orders  of  created  beings,  serve  God  by  minis- 
tering unto  little  children,  distressed  Christians,  and  afflicted  saints.  3.  The  supreme 
dignity  of  the  Son  of  Ood.  He  "  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and 
to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many ;  "  and  now  he  "  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  having 
gone  into  heaven ;  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  him." 
Well  does  Dr.  J.  H.  Newman  say,  "  When  we  survey  Almighty  God  surrounded  by  his 
holy  angels,  his  thousand  thousands  of  ministering  spirits,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten 
thousaud  standing  before  him,  the  idea  of  his  awful  majesty  rises  before  us  more 
powerfully  and  impressively.  We  begin  to  see  how  little  we  are,  how  altogether  mean 
and  worthless  in  ourselves,  and  how  high  he  is  and  fearful.  The  very  lowest  of  his 
angels  is  indefinitely  above  us  in  this  our  present  state ;  how  high,  then,  must  he 
the  Lord  of  angels  1  The  very  seraphim  hide  their  faces  before  his  glory,  while  they 
praise  him ;  how  shamefaced,  then,  should  sinners  be  when  they  come  into  his 
presence ! " — W.  J. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  two  Testaments  a  progressive  revelation  of  Ood.  These  verses  form 
the  key-note  of  the  Epistle.  The  Hebrew  Christians  were  being  cast  out  from  Jewish 
worship  and  fellowship.  To  be  excluded  from  the  temple,  the  centre  of  national 
unity,  the  home  of  the  people  to  whom  pertained  "  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the 
covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises,  and  the 
fathers,"  was  to  be  reduced  to  the  level  of  the  uncovenanted  Gentiles.  The  writer 
encourages  them  in  their  trial  by  exhibiting  the  far  greater  glory  of  him  to  whom  they 
had  come  than  that  they  had  been  called  to  leave.  Moreover,  the  old  dispensation  was 
liasteiiing  to  its  end;  Judaism  was  dying  out;  the  temple-worship  was  about  to  cease. 
'I'he  writer  foretells  this  in  prophetic  symbolism  (ch.  xii.  26,  27).  Thus  he  seems  to 
stand  on  the  ruins  of  an  old  world.  But  the  Epistle  is  to  show  a  new  world  rising  from 
its  ashes — the  first  done  away  that  the  second  may  be  established.  The  stars  are  fadino;, 
hut  only  because  the  sun  has  risen ;  the  types  are  cast  aside,  but  because  the  reality  has 
come.  Priest  and  sacrifice,  altar  and  temple,  national  greatness  and  sacred  lineage, — they 
are  all  going.  "  Let  them  go,"  says  he, "  for  in  their  place  has  appeared  with  unspeakable 
glory  the  great  fulfilment  of  them  all — the  Lord  Jesus,  who  abideth  for  ever."  That  is 
the  substance  of  the  Epistle — the  glory  of  the  old  economy  fulfilled  and  surpassed  in 
Christ.  The  subsequent  chapters  are  but  "  a  prolonged  echo  of  this  opening  strain." 
The  subject  of  these  words  is — J%e  iivo  Testaments  a  progressive  revelation  of  Ood, 

L  Thet  tbaoh  that  in  Holy  Scriptdre  God  has  spoken  to  man.  "  He  spake 
...  he  hath  spoken."  We  might  expect  Ood  to  speak  because  a  revelation  is  necessary 
Th«  world  needs  God,  perishes  without  him,  cries  out  after  him.    The  world  cannot 


as  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oh.  1. 1— It 


find  God;  to  the  utmost  earthly  wisdom  he  is  unknown.  God  is  a  God  of  goodness 
and  love;  his  works  declare  it;  then  God  must  reveal  himself  to  man.  1.  ScriMura 
declares  itself  to  he  God's  voice.  Christ  and  the  apostles  afBrm  this  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. You  cannot  believe  in  Christ  without  accepting  the  Old  Testament  as  an 
infallible  declaration  of  the  Divine  will ;  for  so  he  accepted  it.  They  also  affirm  this  of 
their  own  teaching  in  the  New  Testament :  "  We  speak  not  in  the  words  which  man's 
wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth."  2.  The  effects  of  Scripture 
prove  that  this  witness  it  hears  to  itself  is  trite.  As  the  apostles  proved  their  mission  by 
"  signs,  and  wonders,  and  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  so  does  the 
Bible ;  that  it  is  a  divinely  inspired  utterance  is  proved  by  Divine  results.  It  meets 
the  complicated  needs  of  human  nature,  satisfies  the  heart,  opens  blind  eyes,  casts  out 
evil  spirits,  transforms  the  character,  regenerates  the  world,  turns  the  wilderness  into 
paradise.    It  does  what  only  God  can  do ;  then  God  is  in  it. 

II.  They  tbach  that  in  the  Lobd  Jesus  Christ  wb  hatb  God'b  pebfeot 
BTTBEANCB  TO  MAN.  "  God  .  .  .  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son." 
1,  Since  Ood  is  the  Author  of  both  revelations,  we  may  expect  to  find  the  new  in  the  old. 
"  God  spake  to  the  fathers  .  .  .  God  hath  spoken  to  us."  And  God  is  One;  then  we 
must  expect  to  find  the  revelation  one.  Scripture  is  not  two  books,  but  a  unity.  See 
this  in  its  outline ;  it  begins  with,  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the 
earth ; "  it  ends  with  the  creation  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth.  It  begins  with  the 
story  of  man's  expulsion  from  the  garden — paradise  lost ;  it  ends  with  the  vision  of 
redeemed  man  dwelling  under  the  tree  of  life,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  the  water  of 
life — paradise  regained ;  and  between  the  beginning  and  the  end  we  have  the  steps  by 
which  that  develops  into  this.  Thus  the  New  Testament  and  the  Old  throw  mutu^ 
light  on  each  other;  we  cannot  sever  them  without  hurt.  He  who  only  reads  one 
knows  neither.  2.  Since  Christ  is  the  Substance  of  the  Hew  Testament,  the  new  revela- 
tion ivill  he  a  distinct  advance  on  the  old.  The  text  contrasts  as  well  as  compares  them. 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  Christ  may  be  said  to  be  the  Substance  of  the  Old  Testament 
— "  To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness;"  and  we  do  not  understand  it  unless  we  read 
it  with  Christ  as  the  key.  But  in  a  far  higher  sense  is  he  the  Substance  of  the  New. 
"  God  spake  to  the  fathers  in  many  parts,"  i.e.  in  fragments.  One  aspect  of  truth  was 
seen  in  one  type,  another  in  another;  they  needed  to  be  combined  if  the  fuU  truth  was 
to  be  known.  "  And  in  divers  ways"  by  types,  prophecies,  requirements,  providences, 
angelic  ministry,  human  teachers,  etc. ;  thus  the  old  revelation  had  great  disadvantages. 
Mark  the  contrast :  "  Ee  hath  spoken  unto  us  hy  his  Son."  No  longer  in  fragments  or 
by  many  voices,  but  by  one  living  Person,  the  embodiment  of  the  Father's  thoughts 
concerning  us ;  "  the  Word  "  made  flesh.  Christ  not  only  the  Messenger,  but  the  Message. 
3.  Since  Christ  is  God  the  Son,  there  can  he  no  revelation  beyond  what  i»  given  in  him. 
As  long  as  God  spoke  by  human  teachers  a  greater  and  better  might  arise ;  but  when 
he  spake  by  his  Son  the  climax  was  reached.  The  Son  knows  the  Father  perfectly, 
and  can  make  no  mistake  as  to  the  mind  of  the  Father.  To  know  how  God  feels 
about  men,  learn  of  Christ.  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son :  hear  him."  To  know  what  God 
is,  look  at  Christ.  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  To  know  what  God 
would  give,  study  Christ.  He  is  God's  "  unspeakable  Gift ; "  "  in  him  are  hid  all  the 
treasures,"  etc.  All  that  CK)d  has  to  say  to  us  we  hear  in  Jesus,  and  there  can  be 
nothing  beyond  that. 

III.  Thet  teach  that,  in  havtno  bpokbn  to  man,  God  has  plaoed  him  undgb 
solemn  kbbponsibilitt.  "  God  hath  spoken  i "  What  then  1  1.  If  God  has  spoken,  it 
leaves  man's  ignorance  without  excuse.  No  one  with  this  Book  need  be  in  ignorance 
on  Divine  things.  If  God  has  spoken  it  is  to  teach  us  something;  then  he  cannot  have 
spoken  so  unintelligibly  that  we  cannot  understand  him.  If  he  has  spoken  here,  we 
may  rely  on  this  Book  as  on  a  rock.  Distinguish  between  human  interpetatioa  of 
truth  and  the  truth  itself ;  but  when  you  have  discovered  the  truth,  hold  it  and  assert 
it  positively.  What  is  truth?  What  God  hath  said.  2.  If  God  Jias  spoken,  hit  Word 
must  he  man's  ultimate  authority.  We  must  have  infallibility  or  we  can  have  no  rest. 
Where  is  it  ?  The  Church  in  her  history  has  proved  that  she  is  not  infallible.  Man's 
moral  consciousness  proves  that  it  is  not  infallible,  for  the  "  inner  light "  in  different 
men  points  in  different  directions,  is  perverted  by  sin,  bribed  into  silence,  educated  into 
error.    There  is  no  infallibility  if  it  be  not  in  the  Bible.     But  it  is  her«^  for  hen 


oa.  1.1— U.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  33 

God  hath  spoken.  Then  find  your  creed  in  it,  and  base  your  life  on  it,  making  it  in  all 
niattcra  the  final  and  authoritative  court  of  appeal.  It  must  be  madness  to  oppose 
personal  opinion  or  expediency  to  what  the  Lord  says.  3.  If  Ood  his  spoken,  irreverence 
and  neglect  of  Scripture  are  man's  loss  and  shame.  "  God  hath  spoken !  "  Then  with 
what  solemnity  should  we  listen  to  his  voice ;  with  what  constancy  should  we  draw 
near  to  this  temple  to  hear  his  will ;  and  with  what  awe,  taking  our  shoes  from  our  feet, 
as  on  holy  ground  1  Think  of  God  speaking,  and  no  "Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant 
heareth,"  rising  from  our  heart !  Are  you  neglecting  Scripture  ?  Remember  God  has 
no  other  voice  after  this ;  Christ  is  his  last  appeal  to  men.  "  Having,  therefore,  one  Son, 
his  well-beloved,  he  sent  him  last  unto  them,  saying,  They  will  reverence  my  Son." 
"  God  hath  tn  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son ; "  to  be  deaf  to  that  last 
appeal  is  to  hare  God  speechless  to  us  for  ever. — 0.  K. 

Vers.  2,  3, — 3%«  surpassing  glory  of  Christ,  who  is  the  Substance  of  the  Christian 
revelation,  I.  This  fassage  bets  fobth  the  perfect  Deitt  of  Cheist.  If  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not  here,  it  is  at  least  implied  that  in  the  Godhead  there  are 
more  Persons  than  one.  "  God  hath  spoken  by  his  Son ; "  "  God  hath  appointed  him ; " 
"  Through  him  God  made,"  etc.  Then  the  Father  and  Son  are  distinct  Persons.  But, 
as  clearly,  they  are  one  God,  for  there  are  statements  here  with  reference  to  the  Son 
which  could  not  be  made  of  one  less  than  Deity.  The  Deity  of  Christ  is  here  set 
forth  in  three  particulars.  1.  In  his  possession  of  the  Divine  nature,  "  The  effulgence 
of  his  glory,  the  very  image  of  his  substance."  Not  "  the  brightness  of  his  glory,"  as 
though  there  were  one  point  where  God's  glory  is  greatest,  and  that  point  Christ ;  but 
"  the  effulgence,"  the  shining  forth  of  what  else  would  be  hidden.  The  beams  of  light 
are  the  effulgence  of  the  sun ;  without  them  we  could  not  see  the  sun  or  know  be  is 
there.  So  Christ  is  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  Not  "  the  image  of  God,"  as  though 
parallel  with  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image ;"  but  "  the  very  image  of  his  substance." 
The  idea  is  that  of  a  showing  forth  what  else  would  be  concealed.  "  The  Image  of  the 
invisible  God ; "  "  No  man  hath  seen  God,"  ...  the  only  begotten  .  .  .  hath  declared 
him."  Christ  is  the  showing  forth,  shining  forth  on  man  of  God,  so  that  "  he  that  hath 
seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  But  this  would  be  impossible  unless  he  were  himself 
God,  A  created  being  can  utter  something  abou,t  Qoi,  or  bear  faint  resemblance 
to  him,  but  he  who  reveals  God  perfectly  must  be  God's  coequal  self.  2.  In  his  fulfil- 
ment of  the  Divine  work.  "  Through  whom  he  made  the  worlds,  .  .  .  upholding  all 
things  by  the  word  of  his  power."  Only  God  can  create.  But  "  all  things  were  made 
by  Christ ;  without  him  was  not,"  etc.  Take  the  hundred  and  fourth  psalm,  "  the 
natural  theology  of  the  Jews,"  and  in  every  verse  in  which  David  speaks  of  the  natural 
world  subsisting  on  God's  bounty  you  may  insert  the  word  "  Jesus."  Where  Coleridge, 
in  his  '  Ode  to  Sunrise  in  the  Vale  of  Chamounix,'  makes  snow-clad  peak,  and  thundering 
avalanche,  and  mysterious  glacier,  and  verdant  valley,  and  azure  sky,  echo  back  the  one 
word  "God,"  we  may  substitute  the  word  "  Jesus."  Isaiah  heard  the  angels  sing, "  Holy, 
holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory."  But  "  this  spake 
he  of  Jesus ; "  that  greatness  is  that  of  Deity.  3.  In  his  occupation  of  the  Diving 
position,  "  Whom  he  hath  appointed  Heir  of  all  things."  Christ  on  the  throne  of  the 
universe,  "  Lord  of  all."  That  involves  a  right  to  the  homage  of  all,  the  position  of 
Controller  of  all,  and  the  end  for  which  all  things  exist.  That  can  only  be  true  of  God. 
"  Jehovah  reigneth :  he  doeth  his  will,"  etc. ;  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God, 
and  him  only ;  "  "  The  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  himself."  Christ  can  look  abroad 
on  every  thing  that  is  and  happens,  and  say, "  It  is  mine."  And  when  the  end  comes,  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thousands  of  angels  will  be  heard  crying, 
"  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and 
honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing; "  and  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven  and  on  the 
earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  are  in  them,  will  respond,  "  Blessing,  and 
honour,  and  glory,.and  power  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne." 

II.  This  fasbaoe  sets  foisth  the  union  op  Deity  and  humanitt  in  one  QLOBioirs 
Pkbboh.  No  word  about  Christ's  humanity,  but  the  idea  is  here.  The  passage  could  not 
liave  been  written  had  not  God  become  man.  For  it  declares  his  Godhead.  Then  he  was 
God  from  everlasting.  But  mark  the  expressions  :  "  Appointed  Heir  of  all  things; " 
"  Made  better  than  the  angela."  Neither  of  those  expressions  can  you  apply  to  Deity. 
bkbbewi  B 


U  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HE6BEW&  [oh.  1. 1—14. 

As  God,  Christ  has  an  inalienable  property  in  the  universe,  and  cannot  he  "appointed" 
heir  to  it ;  so,  too,  be  is  better  than  the  angels,  and  cannot  be  "  made  "  better.  He  who 
can  be  "  appointed  heir  "  and  •"  made  better  "  must  be  a  creature.  Here,  then,  is  a  great 
mystery  ;  there  must  be  a  sense  in  which  Christ  who  was  God,  was  also,  at  some  time, 
a  creature.  This  would  be  inexplicable  but  for  our  knowledge  of  the  Incarnation.  See 
what  this  points  to.  1.  The  assumption  hy  him  of  human  nature.  We  depend  for 
our  knowledge  of  that  entirely  on  Scripture ;  but  there  it  is  stated  plainly,  "  The  Word 
was  God  ...  the  Word  was  made  flesh."  He  who  creates  and  upholds  and  is  Heir  of 
all  things,  he  who  is  "  the  effulgence,"  etc.,  was  bom,  and  lived,  and  suffered,  and  worked, 
and  obeyed,  and  died,  and  was  buried  as  man.  2.  The  necessity  for  ih<  union  of  these  two 
natures  for  his  mediatorial  work.  Apart  from  the  Incarnation  Christ  could  be  no  Saviour. 
Since  the  Law  had  been  given  to  man,  man  must  keep  it  if  God's  moral  government  is 
to  be  vindicated ;  and  since  man  had  broken  the  Law,  by  man  must  the  penalty  be 
endured.  The  Saviour,  therefore,  must  be  man.  But  the  race  bad  sinned ;  no  man, 
therefore,  could  redeem  his  brother ;  none,  moreover,  who  was  not  under  personal  obliga- 
tion to  fulfil  the  Law.  The  Saviour,  therefore,  must  be  Gbd.  The  Incarnation  alone  met 
the  necessity.  3.  The  reassumpUon  of  Divine  glory  in  the  capacity  of  Mediator,  Christ 
ascended  to  the  throne  of  the  universe  as  Qod-Man ;  that  explains  his  being  "appointed" 
to  that  position.  As  God  he  bad  an  inalienable  ri^ht  to  it ;  his  appointment  to  it  was 
in  that  twofold  nature  he  had  adopted  as  Redeemer ;  he  was  always  "  Head  over  all 
things,"  but  on  his  ascension  he  was  made  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church."  He 
has  now  received  his  eternal  glory  for  the  good  of  his  people.  All  he  is  and  has  as  God, 
he  holds  in  pursuance  of  his  redemptive  work.  What  a  future  for  the  world,  when  the 
glory  and  resoui'ces  of  the  Godhead  are  given  over  to  secure  its  salvation  I  What 
security  and  benediction  for  the  people  of  God  I 

III.  This  passage  betb  forth  the  belation  of  this  olobioub  Person  to  a 
SINFUL  WORLD.  The  worth  of  dwelling  on  the  glory  of  Christ  is  in  the  fact  of  the 
relation  he  has  entered  into  with  regard  to  men;  to  cherish  the  thought  of  his 
greatness  is  to  find  redemption  glow  with  a  new  meaning.  What  is  Christ  to  man  as 
Bedeemer?  The  Old  Testament  speaks  of  him  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  All 
these  are  in  our  text.  "  God  hath  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son " — there  is  Christ  our 
Prophet.  "  He  made  purification  of  sins" — there  is  Christ  our  Priest.  "  He  sat  down 
on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  " — there  is  Christ  our  King,  1,  Think  of  his 
prophetic  work  in  the  light  of  his  glorious  nature.  What  does  he  teach?  He  is  not 
merely  the  voice,  he  is  "  the  Word."  He  himself  is  what  God  says  to  us ;  the  substance 
of  the  gospel  is  just  Christ.  How  much  we  hear  in  him  when  we  know  that  he  who, 
as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  was  humbled,  sorrowful,  bruised,  accursed  for  us,  was  the  God  of 
such  surpassing  glory  1  In  proportion  as  we  understand  that  glory  will  be  the  force  and 
sweetness  of  the  message  heard  in  beholding  Jesus,  that  "  God  is  love."  2.  2%tfUfc  of 
his  priestly  work  in  the  light  of  his  glorious  nature.  The  expression,  "  he  made 
purification  of  sins,"  was  used  in  the  sense  in  which  the  Hebrews  woidd  naturally 
understand  it — the  sense  of  cleansing  of  sin  by  sacrifice — and  evidently  refers  to  Christ's 
substitutionary  sacrifice,  "  the  offering  of  his  body  once  for  all."  But  what  wonderful 
light  beams  on  that  redemption  when  we  know  the  glory  of  him  who  made  it  I  What 
grace  is  in  it  then  I  what  security  I  It  is  the  glory  of  Jesus  that  makes  him  able  to  save 
the  worst.  It  is  because  he  is  God  that  his  blood  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  3.  Think 
of  his  kingly  work  in  the  light  of  his  glorious  nature.  The  sitting  down  on  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  must  refer  to  his  mediatorial  kingship,  for  it  was  after  he 
had  made  purification  of  sins.  But  thmk  of  the  glory  of  that,  kingship.  Christ  "  Heir 
of  all  things  "/or  K».  For  us  he  is  Lord  of  providence;  then  providence  is  on  our 
side.  For  ns  he  is  Lord  of  all  temporal  resources ;  then  the  supply  of  our  needs  is 
assured.  For  us  he  is  Lord  of  the  spiritual  world ;  then  no  foe  above  our  strength 
shall  assail  us.  He  who  on  the  highest  throne  is  crowned  with  glory  is  as  truly  there 
for  us  as  for  us  he  was  crowned  with  thorns.  The  hand  which  now  fields  the  sceptre 
of  the  universe,  wields  it  as  truly  for  us  as  for  us  it  was  pierced  at  Calvary.  WhsX 
safety,  what  blessing,  that  means  for  the  Church  I 

We  cannot  speak  of  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  God  as  we  would,  nor  think  of  it  ai  it  is ; 
but  we  may  meditate  on  it,  rejoice  in  it,  try  to  understand  it  better,  and  praise  him  for 
it,  till  in  the  fuller  light  and  with  the  fuller  powers  of  the  higher  world— 


NLLl— U].  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  86 


•*  We  at  his  feet  shall  fall, 
Join  in  the  everlasting  song, 
And  oiown  him  Loid  of  M." 

aw. 

Vers.  4—14. — The  greatneti  of  <Ae  angels  revealing  the  greatness  of  the  Lord.  Our 
ideas  with  regard  to  the  angels  are  mostly  vague,  or  pfoetic,  or  formal,  never  evoking 
holy  thought  or  inspiring  praise,  or  hreathing]on  our  soul  an  hour's  calm,  or  strengthening 
us  to  strike  a  blow  at  sin.  We  think  there  is  notliing  practical  about  the  doctrine  of 
angels,  and  so  we  pass  it  by.  We  have  Christ,  we  say ;  we  do  pot  need  the  angels ; 
they  who  have  the  king  overlook  the  courtiers.  Yet  a  considerable  portion  of  Scripture 
is  occupied  with  instruction  concerning  them.  So  we  conclude  there  is  great  spiritual 
worth  in  the  Bible  doctrine  of  angels,  if  we  understand  it  right.  What  this  is  we  may 
gather  from  the  purpose  of  the  passage  before  us.  To  discover  the  reason  for  which 
the  writer  here  dwells  on  it  at  length  is  to  have  the  key  to  the  question — What  benefit 
can  this  doctrine  afford  to  our  spiritual  life?  The  writer's  aim  is  to  show  that  the 
new  revelation  is  better  than  the  old,  and  to  this  end  he  sets  forth  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  greatness  of  Christ  is  his  theme,  and  in  unfolding  this  he 
begins  with  the  doctrine  of  angels ;  and  there  we  see  the  use  of  the  doctrine.  By  an 
adequate  knowledge  of  the  angels  we  arrive  at  a  more  adequate  knowledge  of  Christ ; 
their  greatness,  who  are  his  creatures  and  servants,  affords  a  fuller  conception  of  his. 
own  glorious  majesty.  The  subject,  therefore,  is — The  greatness  of  the  angels  revealing 
the  greatness  of  the  Lord. 

L  The  greatness  of  the  anoels.  This  is  implied  in  the  fourth  verse — ''  having 
become  by  so  much  better  than  the  angels."  Unless  they  were  most  exalted,  the 
writer  could  not  venture  to  bring  Christ  into  comparison  with  them.  How  great  must 
they  be  of  whom  it  can  be  written  that  Cbiist  is  greater  I  Let  us  think  of  them  briefly. 
We  might  almost  assume,  apart  from  Scripture,  that  angelic  beings  exist.  In  other 
departments  of  nature  there  is  a  regular  gradation  from  lower  to  higher  forms  of  life ; 
it  is  therefore  improbable  that  man  is  the  only  creature  of  his  order.  Man's  powers 
are  so  limited  that  there  is  evidently  room  for  a  race,  or  indeed  for  an  ascending  series 
of  races^  of  intelligent  beings  superior  to  man.  Moreover,  when  we  consider  the  great- 
ness of  God,  and  the  worship  and  love  and  service  due  to  him,  it  is  hardly  conceivable 
that  the  dwellers  on  one  small  planet  are  the  only  creatures  in  the  universe  capable  of 
rendering  these.  Nor  can  we  imagine  that,  if  man  had  not  been  created,  God  would 
have  been  left  without  worshippers,  or  that  when  men  fell  there  were  none  left  to 
praise  him.  When  we  turn  to  Scripture  this  assumption  is  confirmed.  There  we  read 
of  "  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named, 
not  only  in  this  world ; "  an  "  innumerable  company  of  angels ; "  angel  and  archangel, 
cherubim  and  seraphim ;  "  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thou- 
sands." 1.  Tkinh  of  the  sublime  position  of  these  celestial  beings.  As  in  Isa.  vi.  1 — 3 
or  Bey.  y.  11.  They  have  nearest  access  to  Jehovah,  surround  his  throne,  attend  his 
Person,  behold  his  glory.  That  future  blessedness  which  is  the  highest  hope  of  the 
people  of  God  is  already  inherited,  to  a  great  degree,  by  the  angels.  They  are  at  home 
in  heaven.  2.  Think  of  their  holy  character.  With  no  human  imperfection,  no  stain 
of  sin,  for  ever  beholding  the  holiness  of  the  Most  Holy,  how  perfectly  they  must  reflect 
his  holy  image  1 

"Eternal  Light  I  Eternal  Light  I 
How  pure  the  soul  must  be 
That  stands  within  thy  searching  sigh^ 
And  shrinks  not,  but  with  calm  delight 
Can  live  and  look  on  thee  I " 

S.  Vkinh  of  their  glorious  nature.  "His  countenance  was  like  lightning,  and  his 
raiment  white  as  snow,  and  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  became  as  dead  men ; "  "  I  saw 
another  mighty  angel  clothed  virith  a  cloud ;  and  a  rainbow  was  upon  his  heaid,  andhis 
face  was  as  it  were  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire."  The  "  living  creatures  "  were 
"  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind."  Some  are  called  "  seraphim,"  i.e.  burning  ones. 
The  cherubim  were  described  by  a  combined  symbol  of  man,  lion,  eagle,  ox,  i.e.  utmost 
intelligenoe^  strength,  flight,  and  service.     4.    Think  of  their  exalted  work.     Se« 


M  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEWS.  [cm.j.l—U. 

instances  in  Scripture  of  the  varied  and  high  missions  of  judgment  and  mercy  and 
ministry  on  which  they  are  sent.  They  serve  the  King  ceaselessly.  Our  prayer  for 
earth  is  that  the  Divine  will  may  be  done  here  as  in  heaven.  Jacob's  vision  is  always 
being  fulfilled,  and  the  ancient  hymn  of  the  Church,  "  To  thee  all  angels  cry  aloud, 
the  heavens,"  etc. 

II.  The  greatness  of  the  angels  reveals  the  greatness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  That  is  the  substance  of  vers.  5 — 13.  These  verses  consist  of  a  series  ot 
quotations  from  the  Book  of  Psalms.  Prom  certain  psalins  (which  were  applied  to 
(Jlirist)  the  writer  draws  certain  statements  with  regard  to  our  Lord  and  the  angels, 
and  he  uses  these  to  show  that  the  greatness  of  the  angels  illustrates  the  surpassing 
greatness  of  the  Redeemer.  There  are,  thus,  three  lines  of  contrast  drawn  here.  1. 
Christ  is  the  Ood  whom  these  exalted  angels  worship.  (Vers.  5, 6.)  In  a  sense  peculiar 
to  himself  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  Ood  the  Son.  Others  may  be  sons  of  God,  but  he 
is  the  "  Ordy-hegotten,"  which  must  mean  equality  and  oneness  with  the  Father ;  for  he 
who  commands,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only,"  says  also  ot 
Christ,  "  And  let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him."  Christ  the  supreme  Object  of 
the  worship  of  these  exalted  and  innumerable  angelic  beings.  Eank  above  rank,  angel 
and  archangel,  principality  and  power,  cherubim  and  seraphim,  rise  in  the  order  of  being 
and  glory,  these  above  those,  others  higher  still,  and  still  others  higher,  till  the  highest 
rank  of  created  majesty  and  splendour  is  reached.  But  far  above  the  highest  is  one 
glorious  central  throne,  round  which  these  countless  hosts  all  circle,  and  before  which 
they  bow  in  worship — and  the  Lamb  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  2.  Christ  is  the 
Creator  from  whose  hands  they  came.  (Ver.  7.)  In  the  great  powers  of  nature  are  depicted 
the  resistless  might  and  rapid  movement  of  the  heavenly  hosts  as  they  sweep  through 
space,  unrestrained  by  the  laws  that  bind  us  lower  creatures.  But  however  great  they 
be,  they  owe  all  to  him,  the  Son,  whose  handiwork  they  are.  "  He  maketh  his  angels 
winds."  As  the  work  extols  the  worker,  and  the  greater  the  work  the  more  glorious 
the  worker  is  seen  to  be,  so  of  all  created  things  none  more  truly  extols  him  by  whom 
all  were  made,  than  the  exceeding  glory  of  the  angelic  host.  3.  Christ  is  the  King 
whose  will  they  perform.  (Vers.  8 — 14.)  The  idea  here  is  in  the  main  that  Christ  is 
the  King,  righteous,  eternal,  universal,  victorious.  The  angels  only  stand  as  servants 
before  him,  or  fly  at  his  bidding.  How  great  must  the  King  be  that  has  such  a 
retinue  (see  Eph.  i.  20 — 22) !  Angels  escorted  him  on  his  ascension ;  attend  him  in 
his  redeeming  work,  and  rejoice  with  him  over  repentant  sinners  ;  fly  from  his  presence  to 
minister  to  his  people ;  when  he  comes  in  judgment  he  "  will  bring  all  the  holy  angels 
with  him."  How  great  the  King  served  by  myriads  of  such  servants  as  these,  and 
leading  in  his  train  princes,  powers,  potentates,  dominions,  of  such  surpassing  glory ! 

III.  The  greatness  of  Christ  and  the  angels  reveals  the  greatness  of  the 
Christian  believer.  See  what  a  practical  truth  we  have  been  considering.  The 
apostle  closes  this  sublime  description  of  Christ  with  its  bearing  on  "  the  heirs  of 
salvation."  This  chapter  leads  up  to  them.  Very  suggestive  that  it  does  close  with  that 
word.  The  greater  the  angels  are,  the  greater  Christ  is.  The  greater  Christ,  our  Helper, 
Friend,  Saviour,  Sanctifier,  is,  the  greater  we,  his  people,  are.  See  here :  1.  Hie  believer's 
greatness  in  being  made,  in  so  glorious  a  universe,  the  subject  of  Divine  love.  How 
great  the  contrast  between  man  and  the  angels  1  And  of  them  the  universe  is  full. 
This  shows  the  marvel  of  the  grace  which  fixed  its  love  on  the  fallen  sons  of  Adam. 
Why  should  our  lower  and  comparatively  insignificant  race  be  the  object  of  redeeming 
mercy?  "  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him?"  How  great  is  man 
when  he  becomes  the  object  of  such  love  I  2.  The  believer's  greatness  in  the  exalted 
relationship  between  him  and  the  celestial  beings.  Take  the  first  verse  of  this  passage  : 
Christ  "became  so  much  better  thanthe  angels  ; "  that  can  only  refer  to  him  as  God- 
Man,  for  as  God  he  was  better  than  the  angels.  Christ,  then,  holds  this  position  as 
Mediator;  that  te,  for  us;  the  greatness  of  Christ  is  on  our  behalf.  Take  the  last 
verse  of  the  passage :  "  Are  they  not  all,"  etc.  ?  All  the  angels,  however  high  their  rank, 
wait  unseen  on  us,  doing  their  Lord's  will.  However  lowly  the  "heir  of  salvation" 
may  be,  angelic  messengers  are  passing  from  the  tlirone  to  him  perpetually,  upholding, 
guiding,  protecting,  comforting,  enriching.  "  Cherubim  rally  at  his  side,  and  the  Captain 
of  that  host  is  God."  How  great  is  the  believer,  heir  with  such  a  King,  and  attended 
by  such  ministrants  I     3.  The  believer's  greatness  in  the  glory  of  that  future  state  a/ 


OH.  11—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS.  S'> 

w^^ch  angelie  life  affords  a  glimpie.  Christ  said  that  in  the  resurrection  we  should  be 
"  equal  to  the  angels."  What  may  that  mean  of  new  powers,  dignity,  service,  holiness, 
and  all  immortal  1  But  the  tenor  of  Scripture  affirms  that  we  shall  surpass  the  angels. 
They  are  servants,  we  are  sons — "  joint-heirs  with  Christ."  They  bow  before  his  throne, 
we  are  to  sit  thereon.  How  great  is  "  the  heir  of  salvation  "  I  This  unspeakable  glory 
is  the  end  of  his  journey,  and  the  King  of  kings  himself,  and  the  celestial  hosts,  his 
convoy  by  the  way  1 — 0.  N. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Christ  as  Prophet  of  the  Church.  This  Epistle  was  written  to  those 
Jewish  Christians  who  were  in  danger  of  relapsing  from  their  profession  of  foith  in 
Jesus  and  returning  to  the  sacrifices  and  ceremooies  of  the  Jewish  Law.  If  we  consider 
that  they  had  been  brought  up  In  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Mosaic  rites  as  being  of 
Divine  origin,  with  the  power  of  early  impressions ;  that  it  was  a  vast  step  from  Moses 
to  the  simple  and  spiritual  system  of  the  gospel;  that  there  were  many  forms  of 
persecution  to  be  endured,  and  that  the  love  of  many  waxed  cold,  it  will  appear  that 
such  an  Epistle  was  necessary,  and  admirably  adapted,  by  its  assertion  of  the  superiority 
of  Christ  to  all  the  prophets  mnd  priests  of  the  past,  to  prevent  apostasy  and  restore 
and  confirm  their  faith. 

I.  Hebe  abe  found  the  fboobebsiveiiess  of  Divine  bevelation.  God  conveyed 
I'OrtionB  of  truth  to  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  and  the  prophets ;  and  in  divers 
manners,  as  in  vision  to  Abraham,  face  to  face  to  Moses,  by  Urim  and  Thummim, 
by  proverb  and  psalm,  and  by  prediction  and  apocalyptic  images.  Tbis  was  gradual 
revelation,  and  was  suited  to  the  ages  of  the  Church  before  Christ  came,  who  treated 
his  disciples  in  this  way  and  said,  "  I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye 
cannot  bear  them  now  "  (John  xvi.  12). 

II.  Note  the  pebfection  or  Chbist  as  the  Pbophet  of  the  Chuboh.  This  is 
to  he  seen  in  his  superiority  to  all  preceding  teachers  who  were  sent  by  the  Divine 
Spiiit  to  make  known  the  will  of  Qoi,  He  was  the  Son :  1.  In  his  resemblance  to  his 
Father  in  creative  energy.  "  Without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."  2. 
In  resemblance  of  sustaining  power,  by  which  he  upholds  all  law,  preserves  all  harmony 
in  creation,  and  maintains  all  life,  from  the  highest  seraphs  to  the  humblest  believers, 
and  even  to  the  lowest  forms  of  existence.  3.  EeserMance  in  personal  glory.  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his  person  ; 
the  latter  idea  drawn  from  the  monarch's  portrait  stamped  upon  golden  coin.  Such 
words  are  the  best  human  language  supplies ;  and  the  treasures  of  these  Divine  ideas 
are  put  in  the  earthen  vessels  of  our  speech,  and  fall  infinitely  below  the  sublime 
reality.  Our  Lord's  condition  on  the  holy  mount  best  illustrates  the  thought  of  his 
resemblance  to  the  glory  of  his  Father,  when  the  inefiable  resplendence  which  streamed 
from  himself  appeared  to  add  emphasis  to  the  words,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen 
the  Father."  4.  Eesemllance  of  power  of  enjoyment.  He  is  to  be  "  Heir  of  all  things." 
Abraham  was  to  be  heir  of  the  world ;  but  here  is  a  wider  inheritance,  which  no  finite 
mind  can  ever  grasp.  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  the  Heir  of  all  the  results  of  his  incarnation, 
ministry,  and  sacrifice.  He  is  to  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied ;  and 
through  eternal  ages  he  will  receive  the  gratitude  and  adoration  of  a  "  number  that  no 
man  can  number."   All  judgment  is  committed  to  him,  and  on  his  head  are  many  crowns. 

III.  Obbebve  the  febfeotion  of  Chbist  as  the  Fbiest.  There  is  here  a  suggested 
contrast  to  priests  of  the  Jewish  Law,  It  is  said  he  purged  our  sins  by  himself;  then 
he  stands  before  us  as  the  One  in  opposition  to  the  many  who  did  not  continue  by  reason 
of  death.  Aaron,  Eli,  Zadok,  and  Joshua  successively  disappear.  There  is  a  contrast 
between  other  priests  and  our  Lord,  who  did  not  offer  victims,  as  sheep,  goats,  lambs, 
and  kids ;  but  offered  himself  through  the  eternal  Spirit.  There  is  unlikeness  inas- 
much as  the  services  of  the  ancient  priests  did  not  purify  the  conscience  ;  but  the  sacrifice 
of  our  Lord  cleanses  by  faith  from  aU  sin,  restores  to  the  Divine  favour,  and  imparts 
the  enjoyment  of  Christian  hope.  There  is  a  contrast  between  the  priests  of  the  old 
Law  in  respect  of  dignity.  The  ancient  ministers  of  the  temple  had  to  offer  for  their 
own  sins,  and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  people  ;  oiu"  Lord  was  "  holy,  harmless,  separate 
from  sinners."  The  descendants  of  Aaron  had  to  minister  in  the  holy  of  holies  when 
it  was  darkened  by  the  smoke  of  sweet  incense,  and  none  dare  to  sit  down  near  the 
mercy-seat;  but  the  Redeemer  sits  down  "  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high." 


38  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  .oh.  1. 1— H 


Once  more,  the  Jewish  high  priests  ministered  for  their  own  nation,  while  other  popula- 
tloDS  in  Egypt,  Arabia,  and  Syria  had  no  share  in  their  service ;  but  our  Lord  is  exalted, 
and  sits  a  priest  upon  his  throne,  and  a  multitude  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and 
people,  and  tongues  enjoy  the  benefit  and  blessing  of  his  ministry. — B. 

Vers.  4 — ^9. —  Christ  superior  to  the  angeh.  As  angels  had  an  important  ministry 
under  the  Law  of  Moses,  it  was  desirable  to  show  the  Christians  who  had  been  drawn 
from  Judaism,  and  were  disposed  to  return  to  it,  the  superiority  of  our  Lord  to  them 
in  their  nature  and  ofBce. 

L  This  appeabs  in  the  globt  of  his  Name,  which  is  his  by  nature  and  inheritance. 
Angels  are  called  "  sons  of  God,"  and  rejoiced  as  creation  with  its  wonders  rose  before 
their  view.  Israel  was  named  "  Jehovah's  firstborn  "  and  his  "  children ; "  and  magis- 
trates and  judges  were,  as  bearing  the  Divine  image  of  authority,  called  "  sons  of  God." 
But  no  monarch  or  angel  is  called  "  the  Son,"  and  this  our  Lord  seems  to  recognize. 
When  about  to  ascend  from  earth  he  said, "  I  ascend  unto  my  Father  and  your  Father, 
to  my  God  and  your  God  "  (John  xx.  17). 

IL  The  botaltt  of  the  Son  of  God  is  asserted.  It  is  said  in  Ps.  ii.  7,  "  This 
day  have  I  begotten  thee ; "  and  in  2  Sam.  vii.  14  it  is  written,  "  I  will  be  to  him  a 
Father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  a  son."  These  passages  declare  in  a  prophetic  manner 
the  ap[iointment  of  our  Lord  to  the  office  and  dignity  of  a  King.  He  is  placed  above 
all  angels,  and  is  described  as  an  all-conquering  Monarch.  The  promise  originally 
made  to  David  is  fulfilled  in  the  person  of  our  Lord,  who,  according  to  the  angel's 
message  to  Mary,  should  be  called  "  the  Son  of  the  Most  High,"  and  should  reign  over 
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever  (Luke  i.  33).  "  All  power  was  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and 
inearth."  After  Daniel  had  seen  visions  of  the  worldly  empires  represented  by  fierce 
monsters,  he  beheld  the  form  of  the  Son  of  man,  whose  dominion  should  last  for  ever. 

HI.  The  futdbb  manifestation  of  his  olobt  is  announced,  according  to  eminent 
authorities,  in  the  words,  "  when  he  shall  have  brought  his  First-begotten  into  the 
world."  This  refers  to  his  second  coming,  when  "  he  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his 
Father  with  his  holy  angels."  There  is  to  be  a  sublime  and  unrivalled  manifestation 
of  his  majesty,  when  myriads  of  the  angels  shall  come  to  swell  bis  triumph  and  to 
attend  him,  as  ministers  and  servants  of  state  attend  their  monarch  on  occasions  of 
public  importance. 

IV.  Cheist  is  the  Object  of  adobation  to  angels.  The  text,  "Let  all  the  angels  of 
Gbd  worship  him,"  is  derived  from  the  Septuagint  translation  of  Deut.  xxxii.  43,  which 
is  a  part  of  a  grand  prophetic  outline  of  the  future  of  Israel.  To  offer  worship  pre- 
supposes that  he  who  bends  the  knee  is  inferior  to  the  person  who  is  honoured.  St. 
Peter  refused  worship,  and  said  to  Cornelius ;  "  Stand  up ;  for  I  also  am  a  man."  St.  John 
fell  down  at  the  feet  of  the  angel  and  was  counselled  to  worship  God.  Here,  as  a  proof 
of  the  unutterable  superiority  of  our  Lord,  we  are  told  that  the  mighty  angels,  princi- 
palities, and  powers  are  commanded  to  pay  homage  to  him  who  is  Lord  of  all. 

V.  The  globt  of  his  kingly  chakactbb  and  edlb  justifies  theib  adoration. 
The  proof  is  drawn  from  the  ancient  prophecy  of  the  forty-fifth  psalm,  which  was  placed 
in  the  liturgy  of  the  Jewish  Church.  Here  we  note  the  perfect  holiness  of  Jesus  Christ, . 
who  always  loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity,  and  whose  words,  works,  and 
sufferings  shone  with  the  Divine  beauty  of  holiness.  His  sceptre  was  one  of  uprightness, 
and  was  a  contrast  to  the  crooked  policy  and  cruel  oppression  of  some  earthly  monarchs. 
God  anointed  him  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  all  his  fellows  in  the  royal  line  of 
David — with  the  joy  of  his  exaltation  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,  where 
he  has  an  enduring  throne. 

"  The  seas  shall  waste,  the  skies  tn  smoke  decay. 
Books  fall  to  dust,  and  mountains  melt  away ; 
But  fixed  his  Word,  his  saving  power  remains  ; 
Thy  realm  for  ever  lasts,  thy  own  Messiah  reigns  I" 

The  angels  are  ministers  in  his  glorious  kingaom,  and  fly  with  the  force  of  mighty 
winds  and  with  the  swiftness  of  the  lightning-flame.  He  saith,  "  Go,"  and  they  go  • 
"  Come,"  and  thoy  come ;  "  Do  this,"  aud  they  do  it ;  for  all  are  his  servants. — B. 


CH.  1. 1— 14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  89 


Vers.  10 — 12. — ^These  verses  affirm  tke  glory  of  Christ  in  his  creative  potper,  and  in 
the  unchangeableness  of  his  nature.  The  quotation  from  Ps.  cii.  is  cited  with  fearlesii 
confidence  as  belonging  to  him  "  who  was  God,"  and  was  "  with  God,"  and  without 
whom  "was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."  This  truth,  addressed  to  Christian 
Jews  by  a  Jewish  writer,  is  the  most  conclusive  proof  that  it  was  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  raise  their  minds,  so  jealous  for  the  honour  of  Jehovah,  to  an  understanding 
and  cordial  aoknowlerlgment  of  the  sublime  mystery  of  the  glorious  Three-One.  Our 
Lord  is  immutable  and  always  like  himself,  and  therefore  stands  in  riglitful  contrast 
to  angels ;  and  to  men,  who  are  exposed  to  changes  in  action  and  feeling,  and  now 
are  weak  and  then  strong,  now  sorrowful  for  sin  and  then  rejoice  in  forgiveness  and 
recovered  peace.  He  is  ever  the  same,  and  amid  the  vicissitudes  in  which  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth  will  be  overthrown,  and  the  fabric  of  heaven  will  become  like  some 
threadbare  and  worn-out  garment,  he  will  be  unchangeable.-  This  truth  is  repeated 
at  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  in  words  well  known  to  Christian  hearts,  which  declare  that 
"  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  This  thought  was 
full  of  the  richest  consolation  to  those  who  looked  with  anxious  eyes  at  the  disap- 
pearance of  the  Mosaic  Law ;  and  is  an  abiding  justification  of  the  faith  and  hope  of 
believers,  who  have  begun  a  career  of  spiritual  life  which  must  be  marked  by  changes 
now,  changes  in  death  and  the  resuiTection,  and  through  the  experiences  of  eternity; 
for  his  word  remains  in  all  its  validity  and  power,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live 
also."— B. 

Vers.  13,  14. — The  contrast  between  our  Lord  and  the  angels  reappears  in  the 
impressive  quotation  from  Ps.  ex.,  which  is  so  entirely  Messianic  that  it  is  alluded  to 
no  less  than  ten  times  in  the  range  of  the  New  Testament.  It  affirms  the  superiority 
and  supremacy  of  our  Lord  in  so  conclusive  a  manner  that  no  ingenuity  of  perverse 
interpretation  can  successfully  apply  it  to  any  monarch,  priest,  or  warrior  whatsoever. 
All  enemies  who  steadfastly  resist  his  claim  must  be  overthrown  by  his  righteous  and 
sovereign  might.  Some  have  been  brought  down  and  are  now  under  his  feet.  Bebellious 
Jerusalem  was  overthrown.  Western  idolatries  have  left  their  witness  to  his  power  in 
broken  columns  and  deserted  temples.  Hereafter  systems  of  evil,  false  philosophies, 
corrupt  institutions,  impenitent  and  irreconcilable  men,  and  probably  some  nations, 
must  yield  to  his  judicial  sentence  and  final  punishment.  Some  things  he  will  dash  in 
pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel.  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father;  but  the  angels 
are  ministering  spirits,  and  go  forth  at  his  bidding  to  assist  and  protect  those  who 
shall  in  time  enjoy  the  fulness  of  salvation. — B. 

Ter.  1. — Cfod  ipeaking  to  men.  I.  The  oenbral  truth  that  Qod  speaks  to  hei;. 
The  possibility  is  assumed  of  such  a  communication  from  God  to  men.  Nothing  less 
can  be  meant  than  this — that  even  as  one  man  can  clearly  make  known  the  thoughts 
and  wishes  that  are  in  him  to  another,  so  God  can  communicate  his  thoughts  and  wishes 
to  a  being  with  a  nature  like  man.  It  is  quite  allowable  to  say  that  a  voice  of  God 
speaks  forth  from  the  things  he  has  made,  just,  as  a  Toice  speaks  forth  from  our  works 
and  actions ;  but  beyond  all  voices  we  thus  infer  there  is  surely  a  direct  utterance  of 
Gk)d.  What  an  inspiring  thought,  that  at  any  moment  a  voice  may  come  to  the  heart 
of  man  out  of  the  infinite  depths,  not  heard  indeed  by  the  outward  ear,  but  still  making 
evident  that  it  is  not  something  imagined  from  within,  or  something  that  rises  from  a 
purely  human  and  earthly  level !  Thus  we  may  classify  the  words  that  are  spoken  to  a 
man :  1.  There  is  soliloquy.  When  a  man  listens  to  his  own  heart,  to  its  suggestions, 
its  apologies,  its  sjjeculations,  its  putting  of  pros  and  c<ms.  There  are  things  said  and 
listened  to  which  dare  not  come  out  in  audible  speech.  2.  The  speech  of  men  to  each 
other,  full  of  limitations  and  imperfections,  only  too  often  trifling,  frivolous,  barbed  with 
sneering,  contempt,  envy,  jealousy.  3.  The  speech  of  God  to  men,  of  which  the  first 
chief  thing  to  be  noticed  is  that  jt  does  come  from  above ;  not  from  the  confusion  toitt  in, 
or  the  confusion  ivithout  and  around. 

II.  God  speaking  to  oebtain  men  by  prophets.  This  Epistle  went  forth  originally 
within  the  limits  of  a  nation.  The  writer  is  writing  to  Hebrews ;  he  at  once  bids  them 
look  to  the  past,  the  distant  past,  and  yet  the  past  out  of  which  their  present  had  come. 
They  had  to  consider  their  fathers,  and  thuu  tke  succession  in  which  they  themselves 


40  THE  EPIBTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWrt.  [oh.  1. 1—14 

Btood.  Aa  they  looked  back  they  looked  along  a  line  illuminated  by  a  special  and 
heavenly  light.  The  sacred  books,  the  Scriptures  which  they  have  to  search,  are  per- 
vaded by  the  recorded  speeches  and  acts  of  Jehovah  ;  so  that  if  these  speeches  and  acts 
be  cut  out,  all  the  rest  drops  into  incoherent  fraj;ments.  Surely  this  description  of  God 
here  gives  us  one  of  the  rules  whereby  we  are  profitably  to  read  the  Old  Testament.  Wo 
have  in  the  Old  Testament  God  speaking  to  the  fathers — ^to  the  fathers  in  many  genera- 
tions, to  the  fathers  in  different  circumstances ;  we  have  words  to  Israel  in  its  beginnings, 
words  to  it  in  its  bondage,  in  its  wilderness  and  tent-life,  in  its  settlement,  in  its  glory 
as  a  united  kingdom,  in  its  civil  discord  and  separation,  in  its  idolatries,  in  its  time  ot 
desolation  by  foreigners,  and  its  final  exile.  Hence  the  opportunities  for  warning  and 
threatening  on  the  one  hand,  and  consolation  and  promise  on  the  other.  It  must  also 
be  considered  how  God  spoke  to  each  generation  of  the  fathers  by  men  belonging  to 
that  generation.  What  was  true  of  the  fathers  was  true  of  the  prophets ;  one  genera- 
tion goeth  and  another  cometb.  We  must  not  measure  the  prophetic  work  by  the 
writings  that  have  been  preserved.  There  must  have  been  many,  many  prophets 
beyond  the  few  whose  names  we  know,  and  some  day  all  their  faithfulness  and  useful- 
ness may  be  revealed.  In  any  case,  we  can  estimate  the  class  from  the  specimens,  and 
while  we  estimate  we  glorify  the  class,  seeing  what  God  can  do  through  the  agency  of 
brother  men — picked  men,  it  is  true,  but  still  entirely  men  of  like  passions  with  our- 
selves ;  and  thus,  while  we  see  the  glory  of  the  prophets,  we  see  also  their  limitations. 
The  prophet  lives,  speaks,  dies,  and  his  work  is  done.  When  he  dies  another  living 
man  must  rise,  who  has  a  sensible  contact  with  his  fellow-man.  New  times  bring  new 
needs,  and  new  needs  have  to  be  met  by  new  voices.  Prophecy  is  in  many  parts 
and  after  many  fashions,  it  is  spoken  to  many  generations  by  many  prophets ;  but  note 
behind  all  the  uniting  force.  It  is  one  God  who  speaks  in  all  and  to  all.  There  is 
variety,  advance,  light,  at  the  beginning,  ever  increasing  toward  the  perfect  day,  but 
nowhere  any  discord,  any  contradiction.  In  studying  the  Old  Testament  it  is  wisdom 
to  feel  sure  that  there  is  harmony  in  its  utterances,  if  only  we  can  find  that  harmony  out. 
III.  God  speaking  to  vs  by  his  Son.  Jesus,  of  course,  was  a  Prophet ;  One  who  came 
from  God,  had  the  Spirit  of  God  in  him,  and  spoke  the  words  of  God.  But  he  was  not 
a  prophet  as  his  predecessors  were.  The  marks  of  frailty,  ignorance,  and  sin  are  on 
them.  Manward  they  may  be  faithful  enough,  speaking  every  word  Jehovah  has 
put  in  their  mouths,  whatever  the  peril,  whatever  the  pain.  But  Godward,  what  a 
difference  between  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  and  Jesus  I  Jesus  never  speaks 
out  of  such  ignorance  and  despondency  aa  does  Elijah.  The  words  of  Isaiah  in  tI.  6 — 7, 
how  strangely  they  would  sound  if  imagined  ascending  from  Jesus  I  God  has  spoken 
to  us  by  a  Son.  The  one  ever-living  Son,  as  contrasted  with  the  many-dying  prophets. 
The  prophet  had  his  day,  a  glorious  day  if  he  was  faithful,  but  brief  at  the  longest. 
The  day  of  Jesus,  as  God's  Speaker  to  men,  is  described  in  that  later  expression  of  the 
Epistle — "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Jesus  ever  liveth,  not  only  to 
make  intercession  for  us,  but  as  the  well-beloved  Son  of  God,  to  speak  to  us  the  words  oi 
his  Father.  The  words  of  Jesus,  inwrought  as  they  are  with  the  very  substance  of  the 
New  Testament,  are  ever  to  be  taken  as  the  word  of  a  being  still  living,  still  in  contact 
with  men,  still  making  one  in  every  company  gathered  together  in  his  Name,  still 
saying,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  all  the  days,  even  to  the  consummation  of  the  age." — Y. 

Ver.  2. — Jesiu  Inheritor  of  all  thing*.  One  position  suggests  another.  The  idea  of 
Bonship  naturally  leads  on  to  the  idea  of  inheritance.  Among  the  Israelites  especially 
would  this  be  so,  for  inheritance  is  much  spoken  of  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  son 
looks  forward  to  inherit  and  control  the  father's  possessions.  Thus,  while  the  individual 
cannot  defy  death,  the  race  can  in  a  modified  kind  of  way.  And  so  this  passion  of  man 
for  transmitting  his  property  to  his  posterity  is  here  used  to  begin  that  glorifying 
description  of  Jesus  which  runs  through  this  Epistle.  Jesus  is  a  Son,  and  if  a  Son,  then 
an  Heir.  Moreover,  inheritance  is  according  to  the  father's  possessions.  Jesus  is  Heir 
of  all  things,  because  his  Father  is  Maker  of  all  things.  We  shall  do  well  also,  in  con- 
sidering this  word  "  heir  "  inserted  in  this  particular  place,  to  bear  in  mind  the  parable 
of  the  wicked  husbandmen  (Matt.  xxi.  33).  There  is  little  doubt  that  it  was  is 
the  mind  of  the  writer,  and  the  slightest  hint  to  the  wise  is  enough.  Thoughtful 
readers  of  the  Epistle  who  knew  their  Gospels  would  be  quick  enough  to  take  the°hint. 


OH.  1. 1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  4J 

For  when  thus  a  mention  had  been  made  of  Gh)d  speaking  in  the  prophets,  and  them 
speaking  in  the  Son,  there  was  obviously  further  sujigesteii  how  these  prophets  had  been 
treated,  and  finally  how  the  Sou  himself  had  been  treated.  As  to  how  the  prophets 
were  treated,  read  onward  from  ch.  xi.  32,  And  now  the  Heir  comes  forward.  Thus 
we  are  at  once  brought  face  to  face  with  a  claim.  We  are  not  allowed  time  to  plume 
ourselves  on  privileges,  in  that,  while  former  generations  had  only  prophets  to  speak 
to  them,  we  have  a  Son.  The  claim  is  the  same,  whether  it  be  made  through  the 
humblest  of  the  prophets — even  through  a  murmuring  Jonah — or  through  Jesus,  the 
Son  of  God.  It  is  a  claim  on  us  for  the  result  of  our  work  in  the  great  inheritance. 
Jesus  is  Heir  of  all  things,  therefore  Heir  of  that  little  section  in  which  wo  have  been 
working.  Let  it  also  be  recollected  that  Jesus,  in  beinj;  Heir  of  all  things,  makes  us  as 
children  of  God — joint-heirs.  Every  one  who  lives  for  Christ  enriches  all  the  sons  of 
God.  Jesus  is  Heir  of  all  things  that  he  may  make  believers  in  him  sliarers  with  him 
according  to  the  widest  6f  their  capacities  and  Ojiportunities.  What  a  glorious  picture 
of  deep,  exhaustless  satisfactiun  is  here,  and  how  much  beyond  the  dreams,  generous 
as  they  are  often  reckoned  to  be,  of  an  earthly  communism  1 — Y. 

Ver.  3. — Jesus  as  (he  Brightness  of  Ood's  glory.  L  Thb  glory  of  Ck)D  o  mani- 
fested TO  MEN.  Our  relations  of  dependence  upon  God  are  exalted  by  our  perception 
(if  him  upon  whom  we  depend.  It  is  not  as  if  a  hand  stretched  out  of  the  unseen, 
laying  before  us  our  daily  bread,  and  then  withdrawing  itself,  as  if  it  concerned  us 
nothing  to  know  the  Giver  provided  only  we  got  the  gift.  God  is  desirous  that  we 
should  both  know  him,  the  Giver,  and  as  much  of  his  glory  as  it  is  possible  for  man  to 
know.  "  The  glory  of  God"  could  not  have  been  an  unfamiliar  phrase  to  Hebrew  Chris- 
tians. The  glory  of  Jehovah  appeared  to  the  cliildren  of  Israel  just  before  the  giving  of 
the  manna  (Bxod.  xvi.  10).  Also  on  Mount  Sinai,  at  the  giving  of  the  Law.  Also 
when  the  tabernacle  was  conjpleted  the  glory  of  Jehovah  so  filled  it  that  Moses  was  not 
able  to  enter  (Exod.  xl.  35).  When  Sulumon  built  a  house  for  Jehovah,  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  so  filled  the  house  that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister.  Consider  also 
the  crowns  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel.  Every  created  thing  has  its  glory,  and  though  there 
are  times  when  that  glory  may  be  in  retirement,  yet  there  are  other  times  when  the 
glory  comes  forth  into  full  manifestation.  How  much  more,  then,  must  there  be  • 
suitable  and  sufBcient  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God  hijpself  I 

II.  The  full  manifestation  of  God's  glory  is  in  Jesub.  The  expression  here, 
"  brightness,"  or  rather  "  effulgence,"  is  in  harmony  with  all  those  numerous  passages 
in  which  light  is  connected  with  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  light 
which  we  see  is  but  the  expression  of  an  invisible  existence  behind  it.  We  speak  of  the 
rays  of  the  sun;  but  what  is  the  sun  itself  but  condensed  radiance?  And  so  when  we 
come  to  Jesus  and  think  of  the  light  streaming  forth  from  him  upon  human  ignorance, 
misery,  and  despair,  we  are  reminded  by  the  way  in  which  he  is  here  spoken  of  that 
Jesus  is  not  to  be  considered  by  himself.  By  him  the  invisible  is  made  visible.  The 
love  of  the  Father  becomes  a  radiant,  communicable. emotion  in  the  incarnate  life  of  the 
Son.  All  those  bursts  of  intolerable  light  which  filled  the  tabernacle  were  but  symbols 
of  tliat  true  light,  the  effulgence  of  the  Divine  glory,  which  lighteth  every  man  coming 
into  the  world,  and  which  has  dwelt  among  us  in  flesh  as  in  a  tabernacle.  Blessed  are 
those  who  cau  see  this  Divine  effulgence,  and  discern  the  difference  between  it  and  the 
effulgence  of  other  lights.  The  dwellers  in  the  immediate  district  where  Jesus  had  been 
brought  up  never  thought  of  explaining  the  wonders  of  his  life  by  the  fact  that  he  was 
tlie  iwaiyaaiM  of  the  Divine  glory.  Many  thought  it  a  sufficient  explanation  to  say  that 
lie  was  Elijah,  or  Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  prophets.  Consider  in  connection  the  words 
of  Paul  in  2  Cor.  iv.,  where  he  speaks  of  the  god  of  this  world  blinding  the  minds  of 
unbelievers,  so  that  there  should  not  shine  unto  them  the  illumination  of  the  gospel  of 
the  glory  of  Christ  who  is  the  Image  of  God ;  and  then  he  goes  om  to  speak  of  how  the 
God  who  commanded  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness  has  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  illumi- 
nate them  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. — Y. 

Ver.  3. — Jesus  as  the  express  Image  of  the  Divine  substance.  The  more  we  ponder 
the  various  teims  used  for  describing  Jesus  in  the  introduction  to  this  Epistle,  the  more 
we  see  how  the  writer  is  striving  to  glorify  Jesus  by  separating  him  from  the  common 


42  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBBWa  [oh.  i.  1—14 


mass  of  men  and  presenting  him  to  our  thoughts  in  the  most  intimate  relation  with 
Gud.  It  is  meant  to  be  regarded  as  a  relation  of  the  closest  correspondence  in  all 
possible  ways.  To  say  that  God  is  the  Father  and  Jesus  the  Son  is  not  enough ;  for 
the  son  does  not  always  resemble  the  father ;  indeed,  the  deep  differences  between  son 
and  father  are  but  too  often  emphasized  by  the  natural  relation  between  them.  Hence 
the  multiplication  of  terms  to  indicate  the  closeness  of  correspondence  between  Jesus 
and  God.  They  are  bound  in  one,  even  as  the  ray  of  light  with  the  source  from  which 
that  ray  emanates.  And  then  conies  this  peculiarly  difficult  expression  concerning  the 
XofoKT^p  and  the  foroffTtJirii.  Evidently  no  English  words  can  set  forth  exactly  the 
meaning  either  of  the  Greek  words  themselves  or  of  the  .relation  indicated  by  them. 
AVe  can  only  make  a  guess  at  the  writer's  drift.  He  is  referring,  we  may  take  it,  to 
the  connection  between  form  and  essence.  Every  essence  has  its  approximate  form, 
and  every  form  indicates  a  peculiar  essence.  Thus  we  always  find  the  essence  of 
humanity  along  with  a  certain  kind  of  body,  a  certain  shape,  a  certain  arrangement  of 
organs,  a  certain  quality  of  intelligence ;  and  wherever  we  see  these  signs  we  infer  a 
peculiar  essence  underneath.  We  can  know  nothing  of  the  essence  apart  I'rom  the  form 
it  takes,  nor  can  we  imagine  the  form  continuing  without  the  essence.  Form  and 
essence  make  up  the  unity.  Even  so  the  vi^riter  of  this  Epistle  seems  to  look  upon  the 
unity  which  is  constituted  when  God,  the  Essence,  flows  out  to  us  in  the  form  furnished 
by  the  person  of  JesuB. — ^T. 

Ver.  3. — Reality  over  against  phenomena.  It  is  yery  striking  to  notice  in  this  third 
verse  that  the  assertions  with  respect  to  Jesus  are  not  at  all  the  assertions  that  would 
have  been  made  by  the  bulk  of  his  contemporaries.  They  did  not  see  all  this  glury 
being  manifested,  this  essence  of  divinity  shaping  itself,  this  mighty  sustaining  of  all 
things,  this  cleansing  away  of  sin,  this  assumption  of  a  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high.  Have  we  not  to  notice  again  and  again  in  the  level  of  ordinary  life 
that  what  a  man  seems  to  the  multitude  to  be  doing  is  not  at  all  the  thing  he  is  really 
doing  ?  Many  of  the  Cumberland  peasants  could  see  in  Wordsworth  only  an  idle  man, 
who  spent  much  of  his  time  rambling  about  and  muttering  to  himself.  All  the  poems 
that  came  out  of  his  musings  and  mutterings  they  would  reckon  as  nothing  at  alL 
And  assuredly  the  most  conspicuous  instance  of  this  lack  of  understanding  is  to  be 
found  in  the  view  that  many  have  of  Jesus.  They  see  nothing  of  the  glorious  natiure, 
the  far-reaching  power,  the  cleansing  sacrifice,  the  lofty  exaltation ;  and  yet  all  these  are 
realities.  Take,  for  instance,  that  which  is  here  spoken  of  Jesus :  "  He  made  through 
himself  a  purification  of  our  sins."  The  Hebrew  was  in  the  habit  of  connecting  purifi- 
cation of  sin  with  certain  outward  appearances.  He  expected  to  see  a  priest  known  by 
his  garments,  an  altar  known  by  its  construction.  It  Jesus  had  been  bound,  like  a 
human  sacrificial  victim,  on  an  altar  and  slain  by  a  priest,  then  many  would  have  had 
no  difficulty  in  thinking  of  him  as  a  sacrifice.  If  we  would  get  to  truth,  we  must  break 
away  from  appearances  and  get  to  the  essence  of  everything  Christ  hag  said  and  done. 
Things  are  not  what  they  seem.  Have  we  not  the  best  of  evidence  in  our  senses  every 
day  that  the  sun  goes  round  the  earth  ?  Yet  it  can  be  proved  by  flawless  logic,  to  him 
that  will  understand,  that  the  earth  goes  round  the  sun.  Realities  contradict  appear- 
ances. The  natural  man  has  his  standard  of  life,  movement,  possibility;  and  the 
spiritual  man,  taught  and  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  has  his  standard. — Y. 

Vers.  4 — 13. — Christ  exalted  above  the  angels.  L  Consideb  the  anqelio  dignitt. 
The  word  "angel"  as  employed  here  to  be  taken  in  a  very  wide  sense,  as  "angel" 
primarily  denotes  office  and  service  rather  than  nature.  Jesus  himself,  looked  at  from 
a  certain  point  of  view,  was  an  angel,  a  messenger,  an  evangelist.  God  can  make  a 
messenger,  as  we  are  reminded  in  this  passage,  from  the  winds  and  the  flame  of  fire : 
e.g.  the  burning  bush  was  a  messenger  to  Moses.  But  doubtless  there  is  also  a  special 
reference  to  those  who  in  the  Scriptures  are  peculiarly  indicated  by  the  word  "  angel." 
Such  a  being  came  twice  to  Hagar  in  her  need,  and  stayed  Abraham  when  he  was  on 
the  point  of  slaying  Isaac  in  sacrifice.  The  angels  Jacob  saw  ascending  and  descending 
are  not  to  be  taken  as  merely  creatures  of  a  dream.  An  angel  touched  the  great  Elijah 
in  his  solitude  and  despair,  and  more  than  once  directed  him  in  his  goings.  Notice, 
also,  the  glorious  appearing  to  Manoah  and  his  wife.    Nor  must  the  dreact/vH  errand* 


OH.  1. 1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  48 


of  angels  be  forgotten — their  connection  with  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  of  Sen- 
nacherib's army.  These  are  the  visitations  mentioned,  but  how  many  more  there  may 
have  been  unrecorded!  The  angelic  visitations  of  the  New  Testament  must  par- 
ticularly be  recollected,  because  they  were  fresh  to  the  knowledge  of  writer  and  readera 
of  this  Epistle.  And  if  we  are  not  to  set  down  these  manifestations  to  mere  hallucina- 
tion, then  it  is  plain  that  the  beings  manifested  must  have  belonged  to  a  glorious  order. 
Such  a  being,  breaking  suddenly  upon  the  vision  of  a  man,  could  not  but  awe,  and 
might  even  terrify.  Of  such  a  one  it  might  even  be  said,  "  Surely  this  is  a  son  of 
God."  But  that  would  be  a  fallacy,  springing  from  mere  magnificence  of  appearance. 
And  yet  it  is  a  fallacy  which,  in  other  shapes,  will  ever  deceive  the  judgment  of  men 
till  they  put  that  judgment  under  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Men  of  great 
intellectual  power,  men  of  genius,  are  reckoned  to  have  in  them  something  that  lifts 
them  for  ever  above  common  men.  Whereas  the  dazzling  brightness  and  beauty 
flowing  from  them  should  put  us  on  our  guard.  In  the  Divine  order  of  existence  the 
spiritual  man  is  ever  higher  than  the  natural  man,  although  the  natural  man  may  look 
far  more  imposing.  Mary  saw  an  angel  once,  and  probably  the  glory  from  him  appealing 
to  the  senses  was  such  as  she  did  not  see  in  her  own  Son  all  the  time  he  was  on  earth. 
Angels  are  to  be  taken  as  the  crowning  illustration  of  all  that  is  most  magnificent  and 
impressive  in  the  way  of  outward  splendour. 

II.  The  elevation  of  Jbsus  above  the  akgem.  To  emphasize  this,  the  writer 
appeals  to  certain  passages  from  the  Old  Testament  Scripture.  The  line  of  his  appeal 
is  plain.  He  assumed  that  these  passages  related  to  the  Christ.  He  knew,  and  his 
readers  knew,  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  and  hence  they  all  feel  that  God  himself  has 
exalted  Jesus  in  his  "Fny  far  above  all  principality  and  power.  And  it  must  have  been 
a  very  practical  thing  in  those  days  thus  to  insist  on  the  supremacy  of  Christ  over 
angela.  For,  as  there  were  pseudo-Christs,  so  there  was  danger  of  pseudo-angels. 
The  devil  appearing  as  an  angel  of  light  may  not  have  been  the  mere  figure  it  seems  to  us. 
Paul  hints  at  the  possibility  of  an  angel  from  heaven  preaching  some  other  gospel. 
There  might  be  a  splendid  appearance  seeming  to  have  authority  in  it.  Spirits  liad  to 
be  tried  whether  they  were  of  God.  We  know  from  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians 
liow  the  wonderful  attracted  men  rather  than  the  useful.  And  so  we  need  to  be 
reminded  that  it  is  not  an  angel,  purposely  glorious  to  the  outward  eye  and  appearing 
occasionally  to  a  Zacharias  or  a  Mary,  or  even  as  that  terrible  form  who  rolled  back  the 
door  of  the  sepulchre  and  made  the  keepers  shake  and  become  as  dead  men,  who  is 
nearest  God  in  heaven.  The  meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  moving  about  among  men,  despised 
and  rejected,  so  that  they  see  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  him,  is  far  above  the 
angels.  And,  indeed,  he  also  in  due  time  and  for  certain  purposes  can  appear  in  a 
visible  glory  which  makes  all  angelic  glory  seem  a  common  and  feeble  thing  (Her.  i. 
12— 16X— Y. 

Ver.  14. — The  minion  of  the  angels.  I.  The  HABirnAL  post  op  the  anoelb.  They 
are  ministering  spirits,  literally,  "liturgical  spirits."  The  work  of  the  priests  and 
Levites  in  connection  with  tabernacle  and  temple  was  known  as  a  liturgical  work. 
Again  and  again  in  the  Septuagint  the  work  of  Aaron  and  his  subordinates  is  indicated 
by  this  verb,  \eiToupyeiv.  As  the  angels  are  called  liturgical  spirits,  so  the  priest  and 
his  subordinates  might  have  been  called  liturgical  men.  They  were  the  men  who,  on 
behalf  of  all  the  people,  managed  things  pertaining  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  So  in 
several  passages  the  officials  connected  with  the  court  of  a  king  are  known  as  liturgi — 
liturgical  men.  And  if  we  would  see  what  is  meant  by  calling  the  angels  liturgical 
spirits,  we  cannot  do  better  than  consider,  first  of  all,  Isa.  vi.  2,  3.  There  we  read  of 
the  six-winged  seraphim,  who  cried  one  to  another  and  said,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the 
Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory."  Saying  this,  they  were  engaged  in 
liturgical  service.  Then  turn  to  Eev.  iv.,  where  we  read  of  the  four  living  things,  each, 
like  the  seraphim,  six-winged,  who  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy, 
Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  These  four  living  things 
were  also  engaged  in  liturgical  services.  What  priest  and  Levite  were  on  earth,  angels 
were  and  are  in  heaven.  Nor  angels  alone.  The  spirits  of  4ihe  just  made  perfect  are 
joined  to  seraphim,  and  all  others  of  the  heavenly  host  by  whatever  name  they  may  b« 
called,  in  liturgical  service. 


(4 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[CH.  0.  1—18. 


II.  Thb  special  bgrtiob  of  the  AHGEL8.  Thesc  liturgical  spirits  are  sent  forth  on 
errands  of  helpfulness  to  God's  people  on  earth  in  their  times  of  emergency.  They  are 
sent  I'ortb  to  minister  to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation — heirs  of  salvation,  but 
not  yet  rejoicing  in  a  deliverance  from  eyery  sort  of  evil.  We  are  saved  by  hope ;  we 
are  in  process  of  salvation,  but  the  process  involves  trials  and  sufferings.  We  are  not 
without  notable  instances  of  what  is  meant  by  angelic  service  to  the  heirs  of  salvation. 
Jesus  himself  was,  in  a  certain  sense,  an  heir  of  salvation.  He  had  to  be  saved  from 
this  body  of  death,  if  not  from  this  body  of  sin.  And  concerning  him  we  read  how,  at 
the  close  of  the  temptation,  angels  came  and  ministered  to  him.  Then,  more  important 
still,  because  the  service  is  more  definitely  indicated,  is  the  opening  of  the  prison  doors 
to  liberate  the  apostles  (Acts  iv.  19),  and  the  after-opening  to  deliver  Peter  from  the 
hands  of  Herod  (Acts  xii.  7).  And  though  comparatively  few  such  instances  of  Siiucovia 
be  recorded,  that  is  not  to  say  that  only  a  few  happened.  Not  is  it  to  be  said  that 
angelic  service  has  ceased.  Angels  may  render  very  important  and  comforting  services 
to  men,  although  they  themselves  may  not  be  seen. 

III.  The  example  angels  thus  oivb  to  Chbistians.  Angels  Bnd  their  habitual 
employ  in  adoring  God,  in  serving  him  in  heavenly  worship.  But  from  worship  they 
may  at  any  moment  be  turned  to  work,  and  work  most  agreeable  to  the  will  and 
pleasure  of  their  Master,  doing  something  which  will  be  felt  as  a  help  by  some  one  who 
is  dear  to  Christ.  The  \etTovpyttt  fits  for  the  Suucovta,  and  the  SmKovla,  faithfully  ren- 
dered, sends  back  with  fresh  zest  to  the  ?ittTovpyta.  There  is  a  place  for  both ;  and  we, 
who  have  also  to  go  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation,  shall  find  our  minislry 
all  the  more  effectual  if  only  it  can  be  truly  said  of  us,  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word, 
that  we  are  liturgical  Christians.  That  man  whose  reading  of  the  Scriptures  has  in  it 
not  only  quantity  but  quality,  not  only  recollection  of  words  but  increasing  perception 
of  meaning,  who  reads  that  he  may  understand  and  obey — such  a  one  is  a  liturgical 
Christian,  He  is  constantly  enriching  bis  heart,  getting  nearer  to  God,  and,  as  a  maiter 
of  course,  better  able  to  serve  men.  We  must  always  be  serving  Qtid,  whether  in 
those  things  which  have  the  formal  look  of  Divine  service,  or  in  those  which  may  look 
nothing  more  than  a  temporal  ministry  to  men.  We  may  at  the  same  time  be  \etTovpyoi 
towards  God  and  SiaKoral  towards  men ;  we  can  pray  without  ceasing,  and  also  follow 
in  th«  footsteps  of  him  who  came,  not  to  be  ministered  to,  but  to  minister.— ¥. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  n. 


Vers.  1 — 5. — Intebposed  Exhobtatiom, 
■■  explained  above. 

Yer.  1. — On  this  acooont  (i.e.  on  account 
of  what  has  been  seen  of  the  Son's  supe- 
riority to  the  angels)  we  ought  (or,  we  are 
boumd)  more  abundantly  to  give  heed  to  the 
things  that  we  have  heard  (i.e.  the  gospel 
that  has  been  preached  to  us  in  the  Son), 
lest  at  any  time  (or,  Zest  haply)  we  let  them 
slip  {Ttkthei,  float  pad  them).  The  word  vapa^- 
pvu/uy  (aorist  subjunctive  from  itapaft^da) 
denotes  flowing  or  floating  past  anything. 
The  allusion  is  to  the  danger,  incidental  to 
those  to  whom  the  Bpistle  was  addressed, 
of  failing  to  recognize  the  transoendent 
character  of  the  gospel  revelation,  missing 
it  through  inadvertence,  drifting  away 
ftim  iL 

Vers.  2,  3. — For  if  the  word  that  was 
spoken  through  angels  (i.e.  the  Law)  was 
made  (or,  proved)  steadfast  (i.e.  as  explained 
in  the  next  clause,  ratifled  «y  just  visitation 
of  every  transgression  and  disobedience), 


how  shall  we  (Christiana)  escape,  if  vi 
negleot  bo  great  salvation  1  The  danger  of 
neglect  must  be  in  proportion  to  the  dignity 
of  the  revelation.  The  readers  are  now 
further  reminded  of  the  manner  in  which 
the  gospel  had  been  made  known  to  them, 
and  Deen  ratified  in  their  own  experience, 
by  way  of  enhancing  the  danger  of  dis- 
regarding it.  Which  (not  the  simple  rela- 
tive pronoun  %,  but  fJTis,  which  denotes 
always,  when  so  used,  some  general  idea  in 
the  antecedent,  equivalent  to  "being  such 
as"),  having  at  the  first  begun  to  be  spoken 
through  the  lord  (opposed  to  "the  word 
spoken  through  angels"  in  the  preceding 
verse.  Its  beginning  was  through  the  Lord 
himself,  i.e.  Christ  the  Son,  not  thiough  in- 
termediate agency.  'O  KiSpioi  is  a  special 
designation  of  Christ  in  the  New  Testament ; 
and,  though  not  in  itself  proving  belief  in  his 
divinity,  is  signiflcant  as  being  constantly 
used  also  as  a  designation  of  God,  and  sub- 
stituted in  the  LXX.  for  m,T.  It  has  a 
special  emphasis  here  as  expressing  th« 
majesty  of  Christ),  was  oonfiruad  (^^c0aui0^ 


ofi.  n.  1—18.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


it 


answering  to  iyevero  ${Pa!os  in  the  former 
verse)  unto  us  by  them  that  heard  (t.e. 
hy  the  apostles  and  others  who  knew  Christ 
in  the  flesh).  Here  the  writer  ranks  himself 
among  those  who  had  not  heard  Christ  him- 
self; his  doing  which  has  been  considered 
to  afford  a  presumption  against  St.  Paul 
having  been  the  writer.  For,  though  not  an 
eye-witness  of  Christ's  ministry,  he  is  in  the 
habit  elsewhere  of  insisting  strongly  on  his 
having  received  his  "  knowledge  of  the 
mystery,"  not  from  men  or  through  men, 
but  by  direct  revelation  from  the  ascended 
Saviour  (of.  Gal.  i.  1, 12).  Still,  he  d(ies  not 
deny  elsewhere  that  for  the  facts  of  Christ's 
history  he  was  indebted  to  the  testimony  of 
others  (of.  1  Oor.  xt.  3,  etc.).  It  was  rather 
the  meaning  of  the  mystery  that  he  had 
learnt  from  heaven. 

Ver.  4. — God  also  bearing  them  witness ; 
rather,  Ood  allesting  with  them.  The  word 
is  trvveTTtfiaprupoi'i'Tos,  a  double  compound, 
meaning  to  attest  jointly  with  others.  Tho 
idea  is  tlmt  the  hearers  of  "  the  Lord"  testi- 
fied, and  God  attested  their  testimony  by 
,  the  signs  that  accompanied  their  ministry. 
The  passage  is  instructive  as  expressing  the 
grounds  of  acceptance  of  the  gospel.  Its 
truth  was  already  "confirmed"  to  believers 
by  the  testimony  of  unimpeachable  wit- 
nesses to  that  which,  so  attested,  carried 
with  it  its  own  evidence.  But  the  signs  at- 
tending the  apostolic  ministry  were  granted 
for  further  attestation.  Thus  "  signs  and 
wonders,"  the  craving  for  which  as  a  con- 
dition of  belief  was  so  condemned  by  our 
Lord,  have  their  true  evidential  value 
assigned  them.  They  did  not  furnish  the 
original  basis  of  belief,  which  rested  on 
Christ  himself,  bis  Person,  and  his  work,  as 
unimpeachably  attested.  They  oame  in  only 
as  suitable  accompaniments  of  a  Divine 
dispensation,  and  as  additional  confirma- 
tions. The  apologists  of  the  last  generation 
were  given  to  rest  the  evidence  of  Chris- 
tianity too  exclusively  on  miracles.  The 
tendency  of  the  present  age  is  to  dwell 
rather  on  its  internal  evidence,  aud,  so  far 
as  it  can  be  done,  to  explain  away  the 
miracles.  They  are  not  to  be  explained 
away,  having  been,  as  has  been  said,  fitting 
accompaniments  and  confirmations  of  such  a 
dispensation  as  the  gospel  was.  But  to  us, 
as  well  as  to  those  early  believers,  they  are 
not  the  f  rst  or  main  ground  of  our  belief. 
To  us,  as  to  them,  Christ  and  his  gospel, 
testified  to  as  they  are  by  "  them  that  heard," 
are  their  own  sufficient  evidence.  Indeed, 
the  cogency  of  the  "  signs  "  in  the  way  of 
evidence  is  less  now  than  formerly,  since 
they  too  have  now  passed  into  the  category 
of  things  that  rest  on  testimony.  The  evi- 
dential counterpart  to  them  in  our  case  is 
the  continued  attestation  whiobGod  gives  to 


the  gospel  in  its  living  power  on  the  souls  of 
men,  and  its  results  in  the  world  before  our 
eyes.  It  is  thus  that  our  faitli  is  strength- 
ened in  "  the  salvation  at  first  spoken 
through  tlie  Lord,  and  confirmed  to  us  by 
them  that  heard."  Four  expressions  are 
used  for  tlie  miraculous  accompaniments  of 
the  first  preaching  of  the  gospel,  denoting, 
apparently,  not  bo  much  diiiferent  classes  of 
miracles,  as  different  ways  of  regarding 
(hem.  They  were  (1)  signs  (o-ij^uera),  attesting 
the  truth  of  what  was  preached ;  (2)  wonders 
(repara),  something  out  of  the  common 
course  of  things,  arresting  attention ;  (3) 
divers  powers  (iromlXai  Smiiieis),  varying 
manifestations  of  a  Divine  power  at  work ; 
(4)  distributions  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (nvevixdros 
ayiov  ii.fpiaii.oi),  gifts  of  the  Spirit  to  indi- 
vidual Christians  apportioned  variously — the 
last  expression  having  especial  reference  to 
tho  x^P'i''/^'''''"  of  the  apostolic  Church,  so 
often  alluded  to  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  'The 
phrsise,  with  that  which  follows,  according 
to  his  own  will,  is  peculiarly  Pauline,  and 
confirms  the  conclusion  that  the  writer, 
tliough  not  necessarily  St.  Paul  himself,  waa 
at  any  rate  one  of  the  circle  influenced  by 
his  teaching. 

Ver.  5. — Here  the  second  division  ot  the 
first  section  of  the  argument,  according  to 
the  summary  given  above  (ch.  i.  2),  begins. 
But  it  is  also  connected  logically  with  the 
interposed  exhortation,  the  sequence  of 
thought  being  as  follows  :  "  How  shall  we 
escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  " — 
For  (as  an  additional  reason)  not  to  angels 
(but  to  the  Son,  as  wiU  be  seen)  did  he 
(God)  subject  the  world  to  oome,  whereof  we 
speak,  "  The  world  to  come  (?)  oikou/iect) 
if  iie\\ov<ra)  "  must  be  understood,  in  accord- 
ance w  th  what  has  been  said  above  in  ex- 
planation of  "the  last  of  these  days"  (ch.  i. 
1),  as  referring  to  the  age  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  foretold  in  prophecy.  The  word 
/ieWovaav  does  not  in  itself  necessarily 
imply  futurity  from  the  writer's  standpoint, 
though,  according  to  what  was  said  above, 
the  complete  fulfilment  of  the  prophetic 
anticipation  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  second 
advent,  whatever  earnest  and  foretaste  of  it 
there  may  be  already  under  the  gospel  dis- 
pensation. The  word  oLKovii4vT)v  (sub  y)ip) 
is  the  same  as  was  used  (ch.  i.  6)' in  refer- 
ence to  the  Son's  advent,  denoting  the  sphere 
of  created  things  over  which  he  should 
reign.  And  it  is  suitably  used  here  with  a 
view  to  the  coming  quotation  from  Ps.  viii., 
in  which  the  primary  idea  is  man's  supre- 
macy over  the  inhabited  globe.  The  whole 
phrase  may  be  taken  to  express  the  same 
idea  as  the  "  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth, 
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  "  (of.  2  Pet. 
iii.  13). 

Ver.  6.— But  one  In  a  eertalu  plao*  (or, 


46 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[CH.  u.  1— la 


lOTTiewhare)  testified,  saying.  The  phiase 
does  not  imply  uncertainty  aa  to  the  passage 
cited.  It  is  one  used  by  Fhilo  when  exact 
reference  if  not  necessary.  It  is  equivalent 
to  "  but  we  do  find  the  following  testimony 
with  regard  to  man."  We  say  to  man ;  for 
the  eighth  psalm,  from  which  tlie  citation 
comes,  evidently  refers  to  man  generally ; 
not  primarily  or  distinctively  to  tbe  Messiah. 
Kor  does  it  appear  to  have  been  ranked  1^ 
the  Jews  among  the  Messianio  psalms.  It 
would  be  arbitrary  interpretation  to  assign 
to  it  (as  some  have  done)  an  original  mean- 
ing of  wliich  it  contains  no  signs.  This  being 
the  case,  how  are  we  to  explain  its  appli- 
cation to  Christ,  which  is  not  confined  to  this 
passage,  but  is  fovmd  also  in  1  Oor,  xv,  27  ? 
There  is  no  real  difficulty.  True,  the  psalm 
•peEiks  of  man  only ;  but  it  is  of  man  re- 
garded according  to  the  ideal  position  as- 
signed to  him  in  Gen.  i.,  as  God's  vicegerent. 
Man  as  he  now  is  (says  the  writer  of  this 
Epistle)  does  not  fulfil  this  ideal;  but 
Christ,  the  Son  of  man,  and  the  Exalter  of 
humanity,  does.  Therefore  in  him  we  find 
the  complete  fulfilment  of  the  meaning  of 
the  psalm.  If  it  be  still  objected  that  the 
application  (in  which  sovereignty  over  all 
created  things  is  inferred)  transcends  the 
meaning  of  the  psalm,  which  refers  to  this 
earth  only — irid/ra  in  ver.  6.  of  the  psalm 
being  taken  in  •  wider  sense  than  seems 
justified  by  the  following  verses,  which 
confine  the  application  to  earthly  creatures, 
it  may  be  replied  (1)  that  the  idea  of  the 
psalmist  is  to  be  gathered,  not  only  from 
Gen.  i.  28,  which  he  quotes,  but,  further, 
&om  the  whole  purport  of  Gen.  i.,  of  which 
the  psalm  is  a  lyrical  expression,  including 
the  conception  of  man  haviiig  been  made  in 
God's  image,  and  invested  with  a  sovereignty 
little  short  of  Divine;  (2)  that,  if  the 
application  does  transcend  the  scope  of  the 
psalm,  it  was  open  to  an  inspired  writer  of 
the  New  Testament  thus  to  extend  its 
meaning,  as  seen  in  the  new  light  from 
Christ.  Taking  the  latter  view,  we  have 
but  to  put  the  argument  thus,  in  order  to 
see  its  force  and  legitimacy:  In  Ps.  viii. 
(read  in  connection  with  Gen.  i.,  on  which 
it  is  founded)  a  position  is  assigned  to  man 
which  at  present  he  does  not  realize;  but 
its  whole  idea  is  fulfilled,  and  more  than 
fulfilled,  in  Christ.  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  the  original  reference  of  the  psalm  to 
man  generally  is  not  only  evident  in  itself, 
but  also  essential  to  the  writer's  argument. 
For  he  is  now  passing  from  the  view  set 
forth  in  ch.  i.,  of  what  the  Son  is  in  himself, 
(o  the  further  view  of  his  participation  in 
humanity,  in  order  to  exalt  humanity  to  the 
position  forfeited  through  sin ;  and  thus  (as 
has  been  shown  in  the  foregomg  summary) 
ht  lead  np  to  the  idea  of  his  being  our  grecU 


High  Priest.  What  i*  man,  that  thou  art 
mindful  of  him  t  or  the  son  of  man,  that  thou 
Tisitest  him)  In  the  psalm  this  exclama- 
tion comes  after  a  contemplation  of  the 
starry  heavens,  which  had  impressed  the 
psalmist's  mind  with  a  sense  of  God's  trans- 
cendent glory.  In  contrast  with  this  glory, 
man's  insignificance  and  unworthiness  occur 
to  him,  as  they  have  similarly  occurred  to 
many ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  thought  of 
the  nigh  position  assigned  to  man  in  the 
account  of  the  creation,  on  which  position  ho 
next  enlarges.  He  asks  how  it  can  be  that 
man,  being  what  he  is  now,  can  be  of  such 
high  estate.  Thus  the  Epistle  carries  out 
truly  the  idea  of  the  psalm,  which  is  that 
man's  appointed  position  in  the  scale  of 
things  is  beyond  what  he  seems  now  to 
realize. 

Yer.  7. — Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels.  Here  the  LXX.  takes  Eh- 
him  (being  a  plural  form)  to  mean  "  angels ; " 
as  also  in  Ps.  xcvii.  7  and  oxxxviii.  1.  The 
more  correct  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  may 
be,  "thou  madest  him  a  little  short  of  God," 
with  reference  to  his  having  been  made  "  in 
God's  image,"  "after  God's  likeness,"  and 
having  dominion  over  creation  given  him. 
But,  if  so,  Elohim  must  be  understood  in  its 
abstract  sense  of  "Divinity"  (so  Gesenius), 
rather  than  as  denoting  the  Supreme  Being. 
Otherwise,  "  thyself"  would  have  been  the 
more  appropriate  expression,  the  psalm  be- 
ing addressed  to  God.  The  argument  is 
not  affected  by  the  difference  of  translation. 
Indeed,  the  latter  rendering  enhances  still 
more  the  position  assigned  to  man.  Thou 
orownedst  him  with  glory  and  worship,  and 
didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands. 
The  latter  clause  of  this  sentence,  which  is 
found  in  the  LXX.,  but  not  in  the  Hebrew,  is 
omitted  in  several  codices.  It  is  not  wanted 
for  the  purpose  of  tlie  argument. 

Ver.  8. — Thou  hast  put  all  tilings  In  luV 
jection  under  his  feet.  For  in  that  he  put 
all  things  in  subjection  under  him,  etc  Here 
the  argument  from  the  psalm  begins .  It  is 
to  the  following  effect ;  For  the  sal  jeoUon 
of  all  thing!,  in  the  Creator's  design,  to  man 
leaves  nothing  exempted  from  hi*  lOTe- 
leignty.  But  we  do  not  see  man,  ••  he  is 
upon  earth  now,  occupying  this  implied 
position  of  complete  sovereignty.  Th*^fore 
the  full  idea  of  the  psalm  awaits  fulfilment 
And  we  Christians  find  its  complete  Mlfil- 
luent  in  him  who,  having  become  a  man 
like  us,  and  is  made  with  us  "  a  little  li>wer 
than  the  angels,"  is  now,  as  man,  and  for 
man,"crowned  with  glory  and  honour,"  at  Uie 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  Oi  wo 
may  put  it  thus :  In  the  present  oikov/u*v)j 
man  is  not  supreme  over  "  all  things  "  in  Ae 
sense  denoted;  but  in  the  oiKovfiipTi  to  oc««e 
"of  which  we  speak,"  with  ita  far  wisie* 


OH,  XL  1—18.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW& 


47 


bearings,  he  is,  In  the  Fergon  of  Christ,  over 
"  Ekll  things  "  thus  supreme.  Therefore  in 
Christ  alone  does  man  attain  his  appointed 
destiny.  We  may  here  observe  how,  even 
without  the  enlightenment  of  Scripture, 
man's  own  oonBcioasness  reveals  tu  him  an 
ideal  of  his  position  in  creation  wbicli,  in 
his  present  stete,  he  does  not  realize.  The 
strange  apparent  contradiction  between  man 
as  be  is  and  man  as  be  feels  he  should  be, 
between  experience  and  oonacience,  between 
the  facts  and  the  ideal  of  humanity,  has 
long  been  patent  to  philosophers  as  well  as 
divine*. 

Ver.  9. — The  phrase  $pa.xi  rt,  where  it 
occurs  in  this  verse  with  reference  to  Christ's 
temporary  humiliation,  is  by  many  taken  to 
mean  "for  a  little  while,"  on  the  ground 
tbat  this  meaning  suits  best  the  application 
to  Christ,  though  its  most  obvious  meaning 
in  the  psalm  (quoted  in  ver.  7)  is,  as  in  the 
A. v.,  •'  a  little."  The  Greek  in  itself  will 
bear  either  meaning ;  and  if  "  a  little  "  be, 
IS  it  seems  to  be,  the  original  meaning 
in  the  psalm,  there .  is  no  necessity  for 
supposing  a  departure  from  it.  All  that 
tlie  writer  need  be  supposed  to  intimate 
is  tbat  Christ,  through  his  incarnation, 
took  man's  position  as  represented  in  the 
psalm.  For  the  suffering  of  death.  So  the 
A.V.  renders,  connecting  the  words  by 
punctuation  with  the  clause  preceding ; 
the  idea  being  supposed  to  be  that  Christ 
was  "made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels" 
with  a  view  to  the  "  suffering  of  death;"  i.e. 
because  of  the  "  suffering  of  d^ath  "  which 
he  bad  to  undergo.  But  the  proper  force  of 
Si&  with  the  accusative  is  better  preserved, 
and  a  better  meaning  given  to  the  passage, 
by  connecting  iii  rh  irddTt/xa  rod  0av&Tov 
with  the  clause  that  follows,  and  translating, 
Bnt  we  see  him  who  has  been  made  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  Jesus,  because  of  the 
suffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour.  His  crowning  was  the  consequence 
of  his  suffering ;  because  of  his  suffering  he 
was  crowned  ;  he  won,  as  man,  and  in  virtue 
of  his  human  obedience  unto  death,  his 
position  of  "  glory  and  honour."  Exactly 
the  same  idea  is  found  in  ch.  v.  7,  etc., 
where  the  purpose  and  resnlt  of  Christ's  suf- 
fering, liere  anticipated,  are  more  explicitly 
set  forth  (cf.  also  ch.  lii.  2).  This  view,  too, 
suits  the  drift  of  the  passage  before  ns,  which 
is  that  human  nature  has  been  exalted  in 
the  Person  of  Christ.  That  he,  by  the  grace 
of  Ood,  should  taste  death  for  every  man. 
Two  questions  arise  here :  (1)  As  to  the  mean- 
ing of  the  expression,  "  that  he  should  taste 
death,"  etc. ;  (2)  as  to  the  true  reading,  as 
well  as  the  meaning,  of  the  phrase  translated 
"by  the  grace  of  God."  As  to  (1),  the 
clause  is  introdnced  by  2irus,  followed  by 
the  snbjunotiTe,  ixas  yeiir^Tot :  and  the  con- 


struction of  the  sentence  eviilently  connects 
it,  not  with  it\aTTaiJ.ivov,  but  with  iaTeipava- 
liivof.  It  is,  "Because  of  the  suffering  of 
death  crowned  witli  glory  and  honour,  in 
order  that  for  [i.e.  iu  belialf  of]  all  he  may 
taste  of  death."  Now,  the  fact  tbat  the  actual 
death  was  previous  to  the  crowning  sug- 
gests reference,  not  so  much  to  it  as  to  its 
permanent  efScacy:  and,  farther,  the  em- 
phatic words  are  fm%p  irarTds,  as  shown  by 
their  position  in  the  sentence;  and  thus 
the  idea  seems  to  be,  "  In  order  tbat  for 
all  his  tasting  of  death  may  be  availing." 
And  he  may  even  be  regarded  as  still 
tasting  of  death  after  bis  crowning,  in  the 
sense  of  knowing  its  taste  through  his 
human  experience,  and  so  perfectly  sym- 
pathizing with  mortal  man  (cf.  ch.  v.  15, 
and  below  in  this  chapter,  vers.  14,  15).  It 
is  a  further  question  whether  iravrbs  should 
be  here  taken  as  masculine,  as  in  the  A.V.,  or, 
like  the  preceding  navra,  as  neuter,  in  the 
sense  of  "  all  creation."  The  latter  render- 
ing seems  in  itself  more  natural,  though  "  all 
mankind"  must  be  conceived  as  the  main 
idea  in  the  writer's  view.  At  the  same  time, 
it  is  to  be  remembered  how  the  redemption 
is  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  availing  for  crea- 
tion generally,  for  the  restitution  of  univer- 
sal harmony  (of.  Bom.  viii.  19,  etc. ;  Eph. 
i.  10,  20,  etc.).  A  further  reason  for  under- 
standing iravrhs  in  the  wider  sense  will 
appear  in  our  examination  of  the  phrase  next 
to  be  considered.  (2)  As  to  the  reading 
xipiTt  eeoS.  It  is  found  in  all  existing  manu- 
scripts except  in  one  uncial  of  the  tenth 
century  (Codex  Uffenbach,  cited  as  M),  in  a 
scholium  to  Codex  67,  and  in  a  codex  of  the 
Peschito.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Origen, 
an  earlier  authority  than  any  manuscript, 
speaks  of  the  prevalent  reading  in  his  time 
being  x^p}'  0eov,xiip"'i  being  found  only  in 
some  copies  (ir  ■nmv  ivriyp&ipoii).  Theo- 
doret,  Theodoma  of  Mopsnestia,  and  the 
Nestorians  also  read  x"P^^  '•  ^°<1  ^^^  Latin 
Fathers,Ambrose,Fulgentia8,andotherB,have 
€ibtque  as  its  equivalent.  Jerome  also  speaki 
of  the  reading  ahique,  but  as  occurring 
only  "  in  quibusdam  exemplaribus  " — thus 
reversing  in  his  day  what  Origen  had  said 
two  centuries  earlier  as  to  the  comparative 
prevalence  of  the  two  readings.  The  charge 
made  by  Marius  Mercator,  Theophylact,  and 
CEcumenius  against  the  Nestorians,  that 
they  had  introduced  the  reading  xw^ls  in  sup- 
port of  their  own  views,  is  evidently  unten- 
able, since  the  testimony  of  Origen  proves  its 
prevalence  long  before  the  Nestorian  contro- 
versy. It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  very  pro- 
bable tbat  the  use  made  of  this  reading  by 
the  Nestorians  was  a  cause  of  tlie  other 
being  clung  to  by  the  orthodox,  and  being 
retained  almost  exclusively  in  the  exist- 
ing oodices.     And  this  probability  greatly 


48 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


[oh,,  n.  1^8. 


weakens  the  force  of  the  evidence  of  the 
manusuripts  as  to  the  original  reading. 
That  both  were  very  early  ones  is  evident ; 
but  that  x'°p'^  ^^^  fi^  original  one  is 
probable  for  two  reasons:  (1)  that  Origen 
testifies  to  its  prevalence  in  his  early  day, 
and  accepts  it  as  at  least  equally  probable 
with  the  other;  and  (2)  that  transcribers 
were  more  likely  to  change  the  unusual  and 
eoinewhat  difficult  x™/''*  'oto  the  familiar 
and  easy  x"P'ti  than  vice  vend.  Theodoras 
of  Mopsuestia  thus  accounts  for  the  rearling 
xaptTi,  which  he  rejects  very  decidedly.  He 
cays  that  some  persons,  not  observing  the 
lequence  of  the  passage,  had  laughably 
changed  the  true  rending,  because  they  did 
not  understand  it,  into  one  that  seemed  easy 
to  them.  If  xop'Ti  be  the  true  reading,  the 
meaning  is  plain  enough;  it  expresses  the 
view,  often  reiterated  by  St.  Paul,  of  the  whole 
work  of  redemption  being  "  of  grace."  The 
objection  to  it,  on  internal  grounds,  is  that 
the  introduction  of  this  view  here  seems 
flat  and  purposeless,  as  Theodoras  of  Mop- 
Buestia  forcibly  contends  in  his  argument 
against  the  reading.  Xaph,  then,  being 
adopted,  the  question  remains  whether  to 
connect  X'"P^  @^°<'  (.^^  Theodorus  of  Mopsu- 
estia does,  and  as  the  Nestorians  must  have 
<i9Be)  with  yeiirjiTat  Savdrov,  or  with  {nrip 
TovTifs.  If  taken  with  the  former,  its  pur- 
pose must  he  to  exclude  the  Godhead  in 
Chribt  from  participation  in  the  taste  of  death. 
Sume  further  explain  by  reference  to  the  cry 
from  the  cross,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"  But  such  reference 
does  not  suit  the  view  above  taken  of  the 
intended  meaning  of  ifircoi  yeitrriTai  Savdrov. 
Taken  with  dw^p  vavrds  (as  is  rather  sug- 
gested by  the  tirrangement  of  the  sentence,  in 
which  this  is' the  emphatic  phrase),  it  gives 
the  meaning, "  that  for  all  except  God  he  may 
taste  of  death" — this  parenthetical  excep- 
tion of  the  Divine  Being  himself  being 
similar  to  that  which  St.  Paul  sees  reason  for 
inserting  in  his  application  of  the  same  psalm 
to  Christ;  AtjXoi/  on  ^Krhs  tow  inrordCavTOs 
aiira  rh  ttdvra  (1  Cor.  XV.  27).  So  Origen 
takes  it :  £2  tc  Hi  "  x<»plt  StoD  irlf  vavrht 
iyeiaaro  Savdroy,"  oiix6vor  ivip  iyBpiiTrur 
aiT^BaveVj  &\\^  Kal  i^rfp  rSiv  KoatSav  XoytKUf, 
Also  Theodoret :  'Tirep  dwivTcw  rolnv  rh 
ouiTiipiov  uTTC/tciyc  vdBoi,  X"?^'  ©foB'  (utyij 
yip  ri  teia  (piira  ttji  tvrfvSev  yevo/neinis 
eepaiteias  dvfvSelit.  The  latter  Father  ex- 
plains the  wide  sense  in  which  it  follows 
that  lm\p  iravT^s  must  be  understood  by 
referring  to  what  St.  Paul  says  (Bom.  viii. 
21)  of  creation  itself  being  delivered  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption  through  Christ, 
and  to  the  rejoicing  of  angels  in  the  salva- 
tion of  man. 

Ver.  10. — ^For  it  became  Um,  for  whom 
CSiik  with  aocusatiTflt  »•  all  things,  and 


through  whom  (Sick  with  genitive)  are  all 
things  («.e.  God),  in  bringing  many  sons 
unto  glory,  to  make  the  Captain  of  theii 
salvation  perfect  through  sufferings.  This 
refers  to  what  was  said  in  the  preceding  verse, 
of  Christ  having  been  crowned  with  glory 
on  account  of  his  snifering  of  death,  and  of 
his  tasting  death  for  all.  That'  he  should 
attain  through  human  suffering  even  unto 
death  to  his  own  perfected  state  of  glory,  as 
being  the  Leader  of  human  sons  whom  the 
one  Father  of  all  wonld  bring  to  glory,  was  a 
design  worthy  of  him  for  whom  and  through 
whom  are  all  things — suitable  to  what  we 
conceive  of  him  and  of  his  way  of  working. 
The  word  lirpcirc  is  nsed  in  the  same  sense 
not  un&equently  in  the  LXX.  It  is  pro- 
bably used  here  with  some  view  to  "the 
offence  of  the  cross,"  which  might  stUl 
linger  in  the  minds  of  some  of  the  Hebrew 
Christians.  In  the  argument  that  follows, 
supported  still  by  reference  to  Old  Tester 
ment  anticipations,  the  vrriter  not  only  meets 
possible  objections  lingering  in  the  Hebrew 
mind,  bnt  also  carries  on  and  completes  the 
view  of  the  Son  which  it  is  his  purpose  to 
inculcate,  leading  up  (as  aforesaid)  to  the 
final  position  of  his  being  the  High  Priest 
of  humanity. 

Ver.  11. — ^For  both  he  that  sanotifleth 
(•'.e.  Christ,  the  &px<)7^0  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  '"^* 
sanctified  (is.  the  "many  sons"  who  are 
brought  unto  glory)  are  all  of  one  (^(  ivhs, 
i.e.  of  God).  The  idea  expressed  here  by 
the  verb  ayu^C"!  to  sanctify,  may  be  deter- 
mined by  comparison  with  ch.  ix.  13,  14; 
X.  14,  29 ;  and  xiii  12  (Tra  ayidirri  Sik  rod 
iSlov  at/idTos  rhv  \a6y);  oC  John  xvii.  9. 
It  is  not  the  idea,  to  ns  most  familiar,  of 
moral  sanctification  through  the  Holy  Spirit, 
but  that  of  the  redeemed  being  brought  into  • 
new  relation  to  God,  halloweil  for  "  glory," 
through  redemption ;  whence  all  Christians 
are  called  iytot.  'Aytd((iv  is  the  equivalent 
in  the  LXX.  of  the  Hebrew  c'np^,  which  is 
applied  to  the  hallowing  of  both  the  sacrifices 
and  the  peopl*  to  God's  service.  As  an 
atoning  sacrifice,  Christ  thus  hallowed  him* 
self  (John  xvii.  19),  that  thus  he  might 
hallow  the  "many  sons."  'E{  Iras  must 
certainly  be  taken  as  referring  to  God,  not 
(as  some  take  it)  to  Abraham  or  Adam.  For 
the  necessity  of  the  Son  taking  part  of  flesh 
and  blood  in  order  to  accomplish  the  re- 
demption is  not  introduced  till  ver.  14.  So 
far  the  common  fatherhood  spoken  of  has 
been  that  of  him  "  for  whom  are  all  things 
and  by  whom  are  all  things,"  who,  "in 
bringing  many  totu  to  glory,"  has  perfected 
"  the  Captain  of  their  salvation."  The  idea 
is  that  it  was  meet  that  the  Captain  should 
be  perfected  through  human  sufferings, sine* 
both  he  and  the  "many  sons"  are  of  <ma 
Divine  Father ;  in  theii  relation  of  tooshiy 


en.  n.  1 — 18.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


4S 


(with  whatever  difference  of  manner  and 
degree)  they  are  associated  together.  Be  it 
observed,  however,  that  it  is  not  the  original 
relation  to  God  of  the  "  Sanctifler  "  and  the 
"  sanctified,"  but  their  relation  to  him  in  the 
redemption,  that  is  denoted  by  ^{  ci/6s. 
The  common  son  ship  does  not  consist  in 
this,  that  he  is  Son  by  eternal  generation 
and  (hey  by  creation.  It  has  been  seen 
above  that  the  term  vios  is  not  applied  to 
Christ  in  this  Epiistle  with  reference  to  his 
eternal  Being,  but  to  his  incarnation ;  and 
the  human  "  sons  "  are  not  regarded  as  such 
till  made  so  by  redemption.  'O  ayui(ay,  and 
ot  ayta^ofiirot  rule  the  sense  of  ^{  ^t>6s.  The 
view  is  that  the  one  Father  sent  the  Son 
into  the  world  to  be  the  Firstborn  of  many 
sons.  The  expression,  frequent  in  the  Pen- 
tateuch, "  I  am  he  that  sanctiiieth,"  may  be 
cited  in  illustration  of  the  meaning  of  the 
passage.  For  which  cause  he  is  not  ashamed 
to  call  them  brethren ;  t.e.  in  the  Messianic 
utterances  of  the  Old  Testament,  to  which, 
in  accordance  with  the  plan  and  purpose  of 
the  Epistle,  reference  is  again  made  for 
proof.  The  point  of  the  quotations  that 
follow  (vers.  12,  13)  Is  that  the  Messiah, 
notwithstanding  the  position  above  the 
angels,  shown  above  to  be  assigned  to  him, 
is  represented  also  as  associating  himself 
with  men  as  bretliren,  in  dependence  on  one 
heavenly  Father. 

Ver,  12. — ^I  wiU  declare  thy  Name  unto  my 
brethren,  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  (or, 
congregatimi)  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee. 
This  first  citation  is  from  Ps.  xxii.  22, 
quoted,  it  would  seem,  from  memory  or 
from  a  text  of  the  LXX.  different  from  ours, 
Si7|7^<ra/ia(  being  changed  to  hrayyeXS,  but 
with  no  difference  of  meaning.  The  psalm 
is  attributed  by  tradition  to  David,  being 
entitled  "  a  psalm  of  David."  Delitzsoh 
and  Ebrard  accept  it  as  certainly  his,  con- 
cluding, from  its  position  in  the  first  book  of 
the  psalms  (i. — Ixxii.),  that  it  was  included 
in  the  collection  made  by  David  himself 
(cf.  2  Chron.  xxiii.  18  with  Ps.  Ixxii.  20). 
Others,  as  recently  Perowne,  think  that  the 
fact  of  the  siift'ering  and  humiliation  de- 
scribed, being  be.\ond  any  experienced  by 
David  himself,  pnints  to  some  other  unknown 
author.  The  conclusion,  however,  does  not 
necessarily  follow.  David,  writing  "  in 
Spirit,"  when  under  persecution  by  Saul, 
may  be  conceived  as  drawing  a  picture,  with 
regard  botii  to  present  humiliation  and  to 
expected  triumph,  beyond  the  facts  of  his 
own  case,  taking  his  own  experience  as 
typical  of  a  higher  fulfilment.  And  the 
minute  details  of  the  suffering  described, 
answering  so  remarkably  to  thecircumstances 
of  the  Crucifixion,  certainly  suggest  the  idea 
of  a  distinct  prophetic  vision.  Still,  there  is 
no  reason  for  concluding  that  the  psalm 
HEBRBWB. 


was  not,  like  other  Messianic  psalmi,  iup;- 
gested  by  and  founded  on  the  writer's  own 
circumstances  aod  experience.  Delitzscli 
siiys  well,  "  The  way  of  sorrows  by  which 
David  mounted  to  his  earthly  tlirone  was  a 
type  of  that  Via  Dolorosa  by  which  Jesus, 
the  Son  of  David,  passed  before  ascending 
to  tlie  right  hand  of  the  Fattier."  There  is 
no  psalm  of  which  the  idtimate  Messianic 
reference  is  to  Christian  believers  more 
undoubted.  The  first  words  of  it  were 
uttered  by  Jesus  himself  from  the  cross 
(Matt,  xxvii.  4G) ;  and  for  its  fulfilment 
in  him,  recognized  by  the  evangelists,  see 
Matt,  xxvii.  39,  43 ;  John  xix.  23,  28.  The 
general  [luiport  of  the  psalm  is  as  follows : 
A  persecuted  sufferer,  under  a  feeling  ol 
being  forsaken  by  God,  pours  out  his  com- 
plaint, and  prays  for  succour ;  suddenly,  at 
the  end  of  ver.  21,  the  tone  of  the  psalm 
changes  into  one  of  confident  anticipation  of 
deliverance  and  triumph,  when  the  psalmist 
shall  praise  the  Lord  in  the  congregation  of 
his  brethren,  when  all  that  fear  the  Lord 
shall  join  him  in  praise,  when  the  "ends  of  the 
earth"  shall  turn  to  the  Lord,  and  "  all  the 
families  of  the  nations  "  shall  worship  with 
Israel.  The  close  agreement  of  the  latter 
part  of  the  psalm  with  the  Messianic  antici- 
pations of  prophecy  is  obvious,  and  would  in 
itself  determine  its  Messianic  import.  The 
marked  difference  between  this  psalm  and 
those  previously  quoted  is  that  the  typical 
psalmist  appears  here  as  a  human  sufferer 
previously  to  his  triumpli,  thus  anticipating 
the  similar  view  of  the  Messiah  in  prophecy, 
as  notably  in  Isa.  liii.  And  hence  this 
psalm  is  suitably  quoted  here  as  a  striking 
and  early  anticipation  of  a  Messiah  "per- 
fected through  sufferings,"  and  associated 
in  sympathy  with  human  "  brethren,"  the 
verse  actually  quoted,  in  which  "  he  is  not 
ashamed  to  call  them  brethren,"  being 
sufficient  to  remind  the  readers  of  tlie  whole 
of  this  aspect  of  Messianic  prophecy. 

Ver.  13. — And  again,  I  will  put  my  trust 
in  him.  There  are  two  passages  of  the  Old 
Testament  from  which  this  may  be  a  cita- 
tion— 2  Sam.  xxii.  3  and  Isa.  viii.  17.  In 
either  case  the  original  is  slightly  altered 
in  the  citation,  probably  with  a  purpose; 
the  emphatic  4yi>  being  prefixed,  and  lo-o^uai 
being  (suitably  after  this  addition)  placed 
before  instead  of  after  vewoiSiis.  The  pur- 
pose of  this  change  may  be  to  bring  into 
prominence  the  thuught  that  the  Messiah 
himself,  in  his  humanity,  puts  his  trust  in 
God  as  well  as  the  "  bretlu-en  "  with  whom 
he  associates  himself.  The  passage  in 
2  Sam.  xxii.  3  is  from  the  psalm  of  David, 
written  "  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  had  • 
delivered  him  out  of  the  hand  of  all  his 
enemies,  and  out  of  the  hand  of  Saul."  It 
ia  given  also  in  the  Book  of  Psalms  as  Fa 


50 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  ilI— la 


xvlll.,  where  the  LXX.  leads  i\ina  iv'  aMv 
instead  of  TreiroiBws  etro^at  iir'  avr^  '.  80  that,  if 
the  quotation  ie  from  the  psalm,  it  is  taken 
from  the  liistorioal  book.  But  is  the  quotation 
from  the  psalm  or  from  leaiah  ?  If  from  the 
former,  it  serves  (if  Ps.  xxii.  is  also  David's) 
to  complete  the  type  of  the  same  royal 
sufferer,  showing  him  reliant  on  God  along 
with  his  brethren  in  the  day  of  success,  as 
well  as  during  previous  trial.  Most  com- 
ji.enlators,  however,  suppose  the  quotation 
to  be  from  Isaiah,  inasmuch  as  the  following 
one  is  from  him,  not  only  coming  immedi- 
ately after  the  first  in  the  original,  but  also 
dependent  on  it  for  its  meaning.  Nor  is 
the  introduction  of  the  second  quotation  by 
Kol  nixiv  conclusive  against  its  being  the 
continuation  of  tlie  same  original  passage, 
since  it  introduces  a  new  idea,  to  which 
attention  may  be  thus  drawn.  Possibly  the 
writer,  familiar  as  he  was  with  the  Old 
Testament,  had  both  passages  in  his  view, 
the  phrase  common  to  both  serving  as  a 
connecting  link  between  David  and  Isaiah. 
And  again,  Behold  I  and  the  children  which 
God  hath  given  me.  The  applicability  of 
the  whole  passage  in  Isaiah  (viii.  17,  18) 
to  the  writer's  argument  is  not  at  first  sight 
obvious.  It  occurs  in  connection  with  the 
memorable  message  to  Ahaz,  on  the  occasion 
of  the  confederacy  of  Bezin  and  Pekah 
against  Judah,  in  the  course  of  which  the 
prophet  foretells  (vii.  14)  the  birth  of 
Immanuel.  In  ch.  viii.  and  ix.  he  expands 
this  message,  rising  into  a  vein  of  undoubted 
Messianic  prophecy  (see  especially  Isa.  ix. 
1—8).  In  the  midst  of  general  dismay  and 
disbelief  the  prophet  stands  firm  and  un- 
daunted, presenting  himself  as  a  sign  as 
well  as  a  messenger  of  the  salvation  which 
he  foretells :  "  Behold,  I  and  the  children 
whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me  are  for  sigtu 
and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  The  "  children "  thus  associated 
with  himself  as  signs  appear  to  have  been 
his  two  sons,  with  their  symbolical  names, 
Shear-jashub  and  Maher-shalal-hash-baz, 
the  first  of  whom  he  had  been  commanded 
to  take  with  him  (vii.  3)  on  his  first  visit 
to  Ahaz,  and  the  second  of  whom  (viii.  3) 
had  been  borne  to  him  by  the  "  prophetess," 
and  named  under  a  Divine  command.  His 
own  name  also  may  be  regarded  in  the 
"  sign  "  as  symbolical,  meaning  "  Jehovah'a 
salvation."  If,  then,  the  words  of  vers.  17, 
18  ar»  quoted  as  those  of  the  prophet  him- 
self (and  they  are  certainly  his  own  in  our 
Hebrew  text),  he  is  viewed  as  himself  a 
sign,  in  the  sense  of  type,  of  the  Immanuel 
to  come.  And  the  point  of  the  quotation 
is  that,  to  oomplete  such  typical  sign,  it 
was  required  that  "  the  children  God  had 
given  him  "  should  be  combined  with  him 
in  th«  lepieseatatioB.    They  represent  the 


tXtXipal,  the  iyiaCo/ifvoi,  OB  Isaiah  does  the 
vtbs,  the  aytd^av,  all  being  together  4^  Ms, 
If  it  be  objected  that  the  children  given  tc 
Isaiah  were  his  own  offspring,  and  not 
"  bretliren,"  as  in  the  antitype,  it  may  be 
replied  that  it  is  not  the  human  paternity 
of  the  "children,"  but  their  having  been 
given  by  God  to  the  prophet  to  be  "  signs  " 
along  with  him,  that  is  the  prominent 
idea  in  the  original  passage,  and  that, 
thus  viewed,  the  words  of  Isaiah  have  their 
close  counterpart  in  those  of  our  Lord; 
"  The  men  wliich  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the 
world;  thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest 
them  me  "  (John  xvii.  6,  9, 11,  12).  Such, 
then,  may  be  the  ground  for  assigning  the 
utterance  to  Christ,  justified  by  the  Messi- 
anic character  of  Old  Testament  prophecy 
in  general,  according  to  which  "  tlie  historic 
sense  of  thu  utterance  doesnot  exclude  thepur- 
poseof  prophecy;  but  leaves  typical  references 
open  which  declare  themselves  historically 
by  some  corresponding  Messianio  fact,  and 
hence  are  recognized  afterwards  from  the 
point  of  view  of  hibtorio  fulfilment "  (Meyer). 
But  when  we  refer  to  the  LXX.  (which  in 
the  passage  before  us  varies  greatly  fi-om 
the  Hebrew)  we  find  a  further  reason.  The 
LXX.  lias  (Isa.  viii.  IG,  17, 18)  "Then  shall 
be  manifest  those  that  seal  the  Law  that  one 
should  not  learn  it.  And  he  will  say  (xal 
ipiT),  I  will  wait  upon  God,  who  has  turned 
away  his  face  from  the  house  of  Israel,  and 
I  will  put  my  trust  in  him.  Lo  I  and  the 
children  which  God  hath  given  me."  Here, 
in  the  absence  of  any  preceding  nominative 
in  the  singular  to  be  the  subject  of  epei,  the 
writer  of  the  Epistle  may  have  understood 
the  Messiah  to  he  the  speaker;  and  the 
Seventy  also  may  have  so  intended  the  ex- 
pression. The  general  drift  of  the  passage, 
as  interpreted  in  the  Epistle,  remains  Uie 
same,  though  the  LXX.  more  distinctly 
suggests  and  justifies  its  application  to 
Christ.  The  only  difference  is  that,  accord- 
ing to  the  Hebrew,  the  prophet  speaks  and 
is  regarded  as  a  type;  according  to  the 
LXX.,  the  Antitype  himself  is  introduced  as 
speaking,  and  declaring  the  type  of  Isaiah 
to  be  fulfilled  in  himselJf. 

Vers.  H,  15.— Forasmuch  then  ai  the 
children  are  partakers  of  (literally,  have  been 
made  partaken  of;  i.e.  so  made  as  to  share 
alike),  blood  and  flesh  (this  is  the  order  of 
the  words,  as  in  Eph.  vi.  12,  according  to 
the  great  preponderance  of  authority;  De- 
litzsch  sees  in  it  a  reference  to  "  the  blood- 
shedding  for  the  sake  of  which  the  Saviour 
entered  into  the  fellowship  of  bodily  Ufa 
with  us  "),  he  also  himself  likewise  (rather, 
•n  like  manner;  i.e.  with  "the  children") 
took  part  in  the  same ;  that  through  death 
Ke  might  destroy  (icaTapyViii  equivalent  to 
**  bring  to  noaght,"  *■  lender  impotent  as 


CR.  n.  1—18.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBBEW8. 


n 


though  not  existing ; "  the  vord  ia  ftoqnent 
with  St.  Paul)  him  that  had  (or,  has)  the 
power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver 
(«'.«.  from  bondage)  all  those  who  through 
fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subjeot 
to  bandage.  Here  the  purpose  of  the  Incar- 
nation is  set  forth  as  requiring  the  com 
plete  association  of  the  8on  with  human 
brethren  to  which  prophecy  liad  pointed. 
But  more  is  now  declared  than  the  pro- 
phecieS'SO  far  quoted  have  implied;  and 
thus  is  introduced  (by  way  of  anticipation, 
as  is  usual  in  the  Epistle)  the  doctrine  of 
atonement,  which  is  to  be  dwelt  on  after- 
wards. For  the  object  of  Christ's  becoming 
one  of  us  is  now  further  said  to  be  that  by 
dying  he  might  effect  redemption.  Tlie 
"children"  in  ver.  14  are  the  irmS/o  of  tho 
type  in  Isaiah,  fulfilled  in  the  "many  sons  " 
to  be  "sanctified"  and  brought  to  glory. 
(We  may  observe,  by  the  way,  the  differ- 
eoce  between  the  words  used  of  their 
participation  in  human  nature  and  of 
(Jhrist'S — KtKoiyaKe  and  fieriirxf  '•  the  aorist 
in  the  latter  case  expresses  his  sharing 
what  was  not  his  before,  and  so  distinctly 
implies  his  pre-existeuce.)  For  understand- 
ing the  account  here  given  of  the  purpose  of 
the  Incarnation,  we  must  remember  thai 
death,  originally  announced  (Gen.  ii.  17)  as 
the  penalty  of  transgression,  is  regarded  in 
the  New  Testament  (notably  by  St.  Paul) 
as  the  sign  of  the  continual  dominion  of  sin 
over  the  human  race.  Thus  in  Rom.  v.  12, 
15  the  mere  fact  that  all  men  "  from  Adam 
to  Moses  "  had  died  is  adduced  as  sufiicient 
pruof  that  all  were  under  condemnation  as 
sinners.  Whatever  further  idea  is  implied  in 
the  word  "  death  " — such  as  aUeuation  from 
God  in  whom  is  life  eternal,  or  any  "  black- 
ness of  darkness "  thereupon  ensuing  in  the 
world  beyond  the  grave — of  man's  subjection 
or  liability  to  all  this  his  natural  death  is 
regarded  as  the  sign.  It  is  to  be  remem 
bered,  too,  that  "the  devil,"  through  whom  it 
was  that  sin  first  entered,  and  death  through 
sin,  is  revealed  to  us  generally  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  evil  (i  ■irovrip6s),  and,  as  such, 
the  primeval  manslayer  (iyepantoKTSms  air* 
ipxvOi  wiih  power  given  him  over  death, 
the  penalty  of  sin,  as  long  as  man  remains 
in  his  dominion,  unredeemed.  Till  redemp- 
tion cast  a  new  light  upon  the  gloom  of  death, 
man  was  all  his  life  long  in  fear  of  it ;  its 
shadow  was  upon  him  from  his  birth;  it 
loomed  ever  before  him  as  a  passing  into 
darkness,  unrelieved  by  hope.  We  know 
well  how  the  hopeless  dismalness  of  death 
was  a  commonplace  with  the  classical 
poets,  and  how,  even  no^  the  natural  man 
ehrinks  from  it  as  the  last  great  evil.  But 
Christ,  human,  yet  sinless,  died  for  all  man- 
kind, and,  so  dying,  wrested  from  the  devil 
hia  power  ovei  death,  and  emancipated  be- 


lievers from  their  state  of  bondage  "  (as  te 
which,  see  below).  On  particular  expressiong 
in  this  passage  we  may  remark :  (1)  That, 
"having  the  power  of  death,"  which  has 
been  variously  interpreted,  may  be  taken  in 
the  usual  sense  of  ^x^***  tpdros  nvos,  viz. 
"  having  power,  or  dominion,  over."  Satan 
has  had  the  dominion  over  death  allowed 
him  because  of  human  sin.  And  it  may  be 
observed  that  elsewhere,  not  only  death,  but 
other  woes  that  fiesh  is  heir  to — its  pre- 
cursors and  harbingers — are  attributed  to 
Patanio  agency  (of.  John  i.  12 ;  ii.  6 ;  Luke 
xiii.  16;  1  Cor.  v.  5).  (2)  Christ  is  not 
here  said  to  have  as  yet  abolished  death 
itself;  only  to  have  rendered  impotent  him 
that  had  the  power  of  it ;  for  natural  death 
still  "  reigns,"  though  to  believers  it  has  no 
"sting."  In  the  end  (according  to  1  Cor. 
XV.  26;  Rev.  xx.  14;  xxi.  4)  death  itself 
will  be  destroyed,  ti  one  passage,  indeed, 
it  is  spuken  of  by  St.  Paul  as  already 
abolished  (kotopt^o'oi'tos  iiiv  rhv  BivnTov, 
2  Tim.  i.  10);  but  this  is  in  the  way  of 
anticipation :  death  is  already  vanquislied 
and  disarmed  to  believers.  (3)  The  bondage 
(SouAe(a)  spoken  of  is  the  condition  of  un- 
redeemed man,  often  so  designated  by  St. 
Paul.  See  Kom.  vii.  and  viii.,  where  mau'i 
bondage  (felt  when  conscience  is  awake)  to 
"  the  law  of  sin  in  the  members,"  and  big 
emnncipation  from  it  through  faith,  are  de- 
scribed; and  especially  viii.  15,  16,  17 
("  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of 
bondage  agaia  to  fear,"  etc.),  as  elucidating 
this  passage.  (4;  The  word  ivoxos,  followed 
by  the  genitive  (Sou\€/as),  expresses  here 
more  than  "  liability  to ; "  it  implies  present 
implication,  equivalent  to  "in  hold  to." 
The  A.V.,  "subject  to,"  expresses  the  idea 
adequately. 

Vers.  16, 17.— For  verily,  etc.  The  A.V. 
(following  the  ancient  interpreters)  takes 
this  verse  as  referring  to  the  Incarnation. 
But  (1)  eiri\.aiJ.Pa,vi<rSat  aufpixaTos,  and,  still 
more,  eiriKafi^civeirQai  ayysKtay,  seems  an 
awkward  way  of  expressing  "  to  assume 
the  nature  of."  The  usual  sense  of  the 
verb,  followed  by  a  genitive,  is  "to  take 
hold  of,"  as  iiriXa/iPdviffBai  x^'P^'  (Acts 
xxiii.  19 ;  Mark  viii.  23) ;  and  especially  in 
the  sense  of  "  succouring "  (of.  Matt.  xiv. 
31;  ch.  viii.  9;  Isa.  xxxi.  32,  'Ev  ijfiepcf 
hiriXhix^oHiVOv  fxov  ttis  x^^P^^  UvtwvI  and 
Ecclus.  iT.  11,  "H  aoipla  iiri\aiiffdyerat  tSv 
CnToivrav  out^c.  (2)  The  present  tense  of 
the  verb  is  inappropriate  to  the  past  act  of  the 
Incarnation,  which  has,  moreover,  been  suffi- 
ciently declared  in  ver.  14.  (3)  Tlie  sequence 
of  thought  in  the  following  verse  is  not  easily 
intelligible  if  the  Incarnation  be  the  subject 
of  this :  "  Whence  it  behoved  him  to  be  made 
like  unto  his  brethren ; " — this  does  not  follow 
from  bis  hnvimg  become  incarnate ;  we  should 


52 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  n.  1 — 18, 


rather  sa;  that  his  incarnation  was  the  means 
of  Ills  being  made  like  them.  Translate, 
tberetoro,  observing  the  position  of  the  sub- 
stantives before  the  verbs.  For  not,  1  ween, 
angels  doth  he  lay  hold  of  (to  succour  them), 
bnt  the  seed  of  Abraham  he  doth  lay  hold  of. 
The  allusion  is  to  its  being  the  human 
"  children  of  promise,"  and  not  angels,  tliat 
are  aenoted  in  prophecy  as  being,  and 
acknowledged  to  be,  the  object  of  the 
Messianic  redemption.  Tlie  expression, 
"  the  seed  of  Abraham,"  is,  of  course, 
not  intended  to  exclude  the  Gentiles:  it 
is  appropriately  used  in  reference  to  the 
Messianic  promises  of  the  Old  Testament 
(ef.  Gen  xxiii.  18 ;  Isa.  xli.  8) :  and  the 
extension  of  its  meaning  to  "  all  them  that 
believe "  would  be  aa  familiar  to  the  first 
readers  of  the  Epistle  as  to  us  (cf.  Matt.  iii. 
9 ;  John  viii.  39  ;  Rom.  iv.  11,  16).  The  con- 
clusion of  ver.  17  (which  repeats  virtually 
what  has  been  alleged  before,  after  reason 
given)  now  naturally  follows :  Whence  it 
behoved  him  in  all  things  to  be  assimilated 
to  his  brethren ;  t.e.  to  the  race  which  was 
the  object  of  his  redemptive  succour.  But, 
further,  why  the  need  of  this  entire  assimi- 


lation, to  the  extent  of  participation  in  suf- 
fering unto  death  ?  That  he  might  become 
a  merciful  (or,  compassionate)  high  priest,  in 
things  pertaining  to  God,  to  make  propitia- 
tion for  the  sins  of  the  people.  It  was  that 
he  might  be  fully  constituted  as  the  High 
Priest  of  humanity.  Here,  according  to 
the  manner  of  the  Epistle,  the  view  ot 
priesthood,  to  be  afterwards  set  forth  si 
length,  is  briefly  hinted.  It  is  taken  up  in  oh. 
v.,  after  the  conclusion  that  Christ  is  man's 
Iligli  Priest  has  been  reached  by  another  line 
of  iirgument  (see  preceding  summary).  In 
ch.  V.  one  of  tlie  essentials  of  a  true  high 
priest  (whose  office  is  to  mediate  for  man  in 
tilings  pertaining  to  God)  is  set  forth  as 
being  that  he  should  be  of  the  same  race 
and  nature  with  tliose  for  whom  be  mediates, 
and  able  in  all  respects  to  sympathize  with 
them :  and  this  view  ifl  here  foreshadowed. 

Ver.  18. — Such  power  of  sympathy  Christ, 
by  undergoing  human  suffering  and  temp- 
tation, acquired.  Tor  in  that  (or,  wherein') 
he  hath  suffered  himself  being  tempted  (or 
having  been  himself  tempted  in  that  wherein 
he  hciih  svffered),  he  ia  able  to  sncoour  them 
that  are  tempted. 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers.  1^-4. — A  solemn  parenthetical  warning.  Out  of  solicitude  for  the  spiritual 
well-being  of  his  readers,  the  writer  pauses  here  for  a  moment,  to  enforce  upon  them  the 
necessity  of  holding  fast  the  New  Testament  salvation.  He  does  so  in  words  which  are 
burning  with  urgency. 

I.  The  dutt.  How  prone  men  are  to  "neglect  the  great  salvation  "  (ver.  3)  !  All 
classes  of  sinners  do  so — the  blasphemer,  the  infidel,  the  self-righteous  man,  the  respect- 
able worldling,  the  procrastinator.  Thousands  of  church-going  people  ignore  the  gospel, 
out  of  love  of  the  world  and  secret  repugnance  to  Christ  and  his  cross.  Even  believers 
themselves  are  very  prone  to  "  drift  away  from"  (ver.  1)  their  anchorage  in  the  gospel 
verities.  The  early  Hebrew  Christians  were  strongly  tempted  to  relapse  into  Judaism ; 
our  besetting  danger  is  that  we  allow  ourselves  to  glide  with  the  multitude  down  the 
swift  current  of  worldliness  and  indifference.  We  need,  therefore,  "  to  give  the  more 
earnest  heed."  Want  of  hcedfulness  on  the  part  of  professing  believers  is  a  great  evil 
of  our  time.  "My  people  doth  not  consider."  What  a  blessing  would  dawn  upon  the 
Church,  were  all  its  members  to  begin  to  "  search  the  Scriptures,"  and  to  make  intense 
application  of  mind  and  heart  to  the  spiritual  study  of  saving  truth  1  Only  thus  will 
Christian  faith  both  live  and  grow.  Only  thus  may  one's  life  be  a  life  of  real  devotion 
to  the  Redeemer.  Only  by  discharging  this  duty  of  constant  watchfulness  will  a 
believer  be  preserved  from  apostasy. 

II.  Tub  motives  bt  which  it  is  enforced.  "  Therefore  "  (ver.  1) ;  i.e.  on  account 
of  all  that  has  been  said  in  the  previous  chapter.  1.  The  greatness  of  the  gospel.  "So 
great  salvation  (ver.  3).  What  an  unfathomable  depth  of  meaning  underlies  this  little 
word  "  «o  "  I  The  new  revelation  far  transcends  the  old,  inasmuch  as  in  the  Son  we  have 
received  a  visible  manifestation  of  God,  an  adequate  atonement  for  sin,  an  intelligible 
exhibition  of  the  spirituality  of  religious  service,  a  perfect  expression  of  the  dignity  oi 
man,  and  a  clear  revelation  of  eternal  life.  Especially  does  the  new  economy  excel  the 
old  in  the  distinctness  with  which  it  exhibits  "salvation"  as  its  characteristic  feature. 
The  gospel  proclaims  the  love  of  God.  It  offers  pardon.  It  breathes  a  new  life  into 
the  soul.  It  rescues  from  the  despotism  of  sin.  It  promises  a  glorious  immortality. 
And  at  what  an  inflnite  expenditure  has  this  salvation  been  provided  1  It  cost  the 
incarnation  of  Christ,  together  with  his  obedience,  sufferings,  and  death.    It  costs  still 


«B.n.l— 18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  68 

the  pleadings  and  strlTings  of  the  Spirit,  2.  The  dignity  of  its  Jirst  Preacher.  "  At 
the  first  spoken  through  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3).  In  oh,  i,  the  writer  has  unfolded  and 
illustrated  from  Scripture  the  glory  of  Christ.  He  is  greater  than  the  prophets  of  tks 
Old  Testament,  and  more  eminent  than  the  angels  by  whose  ministrations  the  Sinaitie 
Law  had  been  proclaimed.  He  is  the  Son  of  God — ^his  visible  maai  Testation  and  his  exact 
counterpart.  He  made  and  sustains  and  possesses  the  universe.  He  is  not  only  tiie 
Prophet  of  the  Church  ;  he  is  its  atoning  Priest  and  its  exalted  King.  And  this  first 
Preacher  continues  with  the  Church  as  its  perennial  Prophet.  He  speaks  to  us  to-day 
and  always  by  his  Word  and  Spirit.    3.  The  attestations  which  it  has  received.    (Vers. 

3,  4.)  The  Church  has  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  and  early  evangelists  to  the  facts 
and  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  These  were  even  sealed  from  heaven  by  the  miracles  of 
Christ  and  his  apostles,  as  well  as  by  gifts  from  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  distributed 
among  the  early  Christians.  But  we  have  now  far  greater  witness  than  these.  The 
highest  evidence  of  the  trnth  is  the  truth  itself.  The  history  of  the  Church  has  been 
an  ever-cumulating  attestation  of  Christianity.  Myriads  of  believers  have  certified  the 
gospel  by  their  experience  of  its  power  within  their  hearts.  It  has  been  attested  from 
millions  of  death-beds.     "  We  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses." 

4.  The  inevitable  doom  of  those  who  neglect  it.  (Vers.  2,  S  )  If  the  Law,  given  by 
angels,  could  not  be  violated  with  impunity,  how  much  more  ci  rtain  and  dreadful  must 
be  the  ruin  of  all  who  reject  the  message  of  mercy  spoken  by  the  lips  of  the  Lord 
himself  (ch.  x.  28 — 31)  I  Escape  for  such  is  plainly  im|x>ssible.  For  did  not  man's 
redemption  cost  the  tears  and  groans  and  blood  of  the  Redeemer  ?  Had  these  not 
been  indispensably  necessary,  they  would  not  have  been  expended.  And  what  can 
any  despiser  of  them  propose  to  put  in  their  place  ?  Let  professing  Christians  remember 
that  they  will  miss  salvation  if  they  merely  neglect  it.  As  the  farmer  will  lose  his 
harvest  by  simple  neglect,  as  the  business  man  will  become  bankrupt  by  simple  neglect, 
as  the  scholar  will  strip  himself  of  his  attainments  by  simple  neglect,  M  the  surest  way 
by  which  to  accomplish  the  irremediable  ruin  of  the  soul  is  just  to  "  neglect  so  great 
salvation." 

In  conclusion,  these  four  motives  to  heedfulness  are  the  very  strongest  that  can  be 
urged.  The  Three  Persons  of  the  Trinity  all  speak  to  us  in  them.  They  remind  us  at 
once  of  the  unutterable  love  of  God,  and  of  the  power  of  his  anger.  They  appeal  to  the 
most  sacred  interests  of  our  souls.  If  we  are  not  aroused  by  these  motives,  aven  God 
himself  can  do  no  more  for  ua. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  royalty  of  man.  The  apostle,  in  beginning  to  touch  upon  the 
hi^miliation  and  death  of  Christ,  shows  that  these  arrangements  brought  him  no  dis- 
honour. God  had  subordinated  the  new  dispensation,  not  to  angels,  but  to  man  (ver. 
6) ;  and  human  nature,  restored  in  Christ  to  its  imperial  dignity,  is  destined  to  ultimate 
exaltation  above  angelic  nature. 

L  Man'b  native  sovereiontt.  The  writer  cites,  in  illustration  of  this,  the  testimony 
of  Ps.  viii.  (vers.  6 — 8).  Here  we  have :  1.  Man's  lofty  nature.  (Ver.  7.)  Humanity 
had  a  splendid  origin.  Though  clothed  meanwhile  in  a  mortal  body,  our  nature  did  not 
crawl  up  to  its  present  position  from  primeval  "  sentient  slime ; "  it  belonged  from  the 
beginning  to  the  same  order  of  being  as  God  its  Maker.  The  first  man  was  not  a  savage. 
He  wore  the  crown  of  reason  and  conscience  and  moral  freedom.  In  his  spiritual  and 
immortal  nature  he  was  made  in  the  image  of  God.  God  was  "  mindful  of  him,"  and 
"  risitcd  him."  2.  His  kingly  prerogative.  "And  didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy 
hands"  (ver.  7).  In  bestowing  upon  man  this  illustrious  kinship  with  himself,  God 
placed  in  his  hand  the  sceptre  of  authority  over  all  the  creatures.  The  world  was 
made  that  he  might  be  its  master,  and  rule  over  it  as  God's  viceroy.  3.  Ris  universal 
dominion.  "Thou  didst  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet "  (ver.  8).  Not 
the  inferior  animals  only,  as  Ps.  viii.  might  lead  us  to  conclude;  but,  as  we  learn 
here,  as  well  as  from  1  Cor.  zv.  27,  the  entire  visible  and  invisible  universe.  Even  the 
world  of  angels  is  by-and-by  through  Christ  to  be  subordinated  to  man.  It  is  only 
"  for  a  little  while  "  that  man  is  to  remain  "  lower  "  than  they. 

II.  Hi8  FAILUEE  TO  BEALIZB  HIS  sovBRBiGNTT.  "  But  now  WO  See  not  yet  all  things 
subjected  to  him  "  (ver.  8).  1.  His  nature  is  dehased,  Man's  course  in  the  world  has 
not  been  one  of  continuous  upward  development.    So  fur  from  that,  it  has  bean  •  ooutm 


54  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  [oh.  n.  1— 1& 

of  deterioration  from  the  golden  age  of  Ms  original  matnritjr.  "  The  crown  is  fallen 
from  our  head."  Man  used  his  freedom  to  destroy  his  innocence.  His  spiritual  nature 
is  in  ruins.  He  is  the  slave  of  his  own  evil  passions.  He  feels  far  away  from  Ood,and 
he  has  lost  all  fellowship  with  him.  2.  HiB  authority  it  resisted.  So  soon  as  Adam 
rebelled  against  God,  nature  began  to  renounce  allegiance  to  him.  Having  lost  his 
purity,  he  forfeited  the  lordship  which  had  been  his  birthright.  Since  the  Fall,  man  has 
not  been  able  to  master  even  the  material  world.  Uncivilized  nations  live  in  ignorance 
of  many  of  the  simplest  physical  laws ;  and  the  most  advanced  rather  wrestle  with  the 
forces  of  nature  than  command  them.  3.  Eis  power  is  partial.  How  impotent  man 
is  in  presence  of  earthquake  and  tempest  I  Frost  and  snow  are  mightier  than  he. 
Wild  beasts  defy  him.  Insect  hordes  destroy  his  harvests.  Disease  and  death  triumph 
over  him.  Man  cannot  rule  his  own  spirit;  and  as  for  dominion  over  the  spiritual 
world  beyond  himself,  he  is  unable  to  see  how  such  a  thing  can  be  possible  at  alL 

III.  His  RE-coBONATiON  IN  Christ.  (Ver.  9.)  The  apostle's  comment  upon  David's 
words  fills  them  with  new  light  and  glory,  by  showing  how  their  fulfilment  centres  in 
Jesus.  He  has  become  the  focus  of  man's  destined  royalty.  L  The  life  of  Jesus  exhibits 
the  Divine  ideal  of  man.  We  understand  what  is  meant  by  our  creation  in  God's 
image  when  we  "  behold  "  him.  He  has  lifted  our  crown  from  the  dust,  and  set  it 
upon  his  own  head.  Think  of  his  life  of  spotless  purity  and  holy  familiarity  with  God 
during  the  years  in  which  he  continued  "  a  little  lower  than  the  angels."  He  was, 
while  on  earth,  the  Second  Adam — the  Son  of  man — the  Type  of  imperial  manhood. 
While  in  the  world  he  exercised  dominion  over  the  creatures ;  and  at  length  he  was 
exalted  to  God's  right  band,  where  our  faith  now  sees  him.  2.  Eis  death  gives  man 
power  to  reach  up  to  that  ideal.  Jesus  voluntarily  submitted  to  his  h\imiliation  and 
sufferings  and  death  that  he  might  put  away  the  sin  which  has  robbed  man  of  crown 
and  sceptre.  In  tasting  death  be  drank  up  the  curse.  His  sacrifice  has  vindicated  the 
righteousness  and  justice  of  God,  and  his  blood  has  power  to  renew  and  sanctify  the 
human  soul.  So,  those  who  become  united  to  him  in  his  death  are  delivered  from  the 
thraldom  of  sin,  and  participate  with  him  in  his  kingdom  (Rev.  L  5,  6).  3.  Eia  glory 
is  the  pledge  of  man's  restored  dominion.  The  last  clause  of  ver.  9  reminds  us  that 
seeing  J'esus  has  himself  triumphed  over  death,  the  benefits  of  his  death  have  become, 
by  virtue  of  his  exaltation,  available  for  all.  His  people,  being  one  with  him,  shaU 
partake  of  all  the  **  glory  and  honour "  with  which,  as  the  God-Man,  he  has  been 
"crowned."  Man's  restoration  to  imperial  power  is  already  being  foreshadowed  on 
earth,  in  the  increasing  triumphs  of  science  and  art  among  Christian  nations,  and  in 
the  gradual  victory  of  what  is  moral  and  spiritual  over  brute  force  and  evil  passion. 
And  in  heaven  the  saints  shall  reign  with  Christ.  They  shall  stand  nearer  the  throne 
than  the  seraphim.  They  "  shall  judge  angels."  The  whole  of  Christ's  vast  empire 
shall  be  theirs  (1  Cor.  iiL  21—23). 

In  conclusion,  let  us :  1.  Cherish  the  scriptural  idea  of  man's  dignity.  2.  Remember 
that  we  can  realize  our  destiny  only  in  Christ  3.  Seek  a  saving  interest  in  his  atoning 
death.  4.  Consecrate  soul  and  life  to  his  service.  6.  Imitate  him  as  the  pattern  Man. 
6.  Live  in  a  manner  befitting  the  great  hope  which  we  have  in  him. 

Ver.  Id.— The  necessity  of  Chrises  sufferings.  The  Saviour's  sufferings,  while  he  was 
on  earth,  were :  1.  Numerous,  They  covered  his  whole  life,  and  culminated  in  hii 
"  tasting  death."  2.  Various,  He  suffered  in  body  and  mind  and  heart,  and  at 
the  hands  of  earth  and  hell  and  heaven.  Bnt  his  severest  sorrows  were  spiritual — 
"  the  travail  of  his  souL"  3.  Unparalleled,  His  were  the  substitutionary  sufferings 
of  a  perfectly  holy  human  nature  in  most  intimate  identity  with  God.  4.  Divinely 
inflicted.  It  is  implied  here  that  "  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him."  The  humiliation 
of  Christ,  so  far  from  being  incompatible  with  his  headship,  was.  indispensable  in  order 
thereto.    He  required  to  mSet — 

L  That  hk  mioht  vihdioatk  the  olobt  of  the  Divinb  ohabaotbs.  The  glory 
of  God  himself  is  the  ultimate  reason,  as  his  will  is  the  law,  of  all  things.  "  It  became 
him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  through  whom  are  all  things;"  i.e.  the  moral 
character  of  God  rendered  it  needful  that  Jesus  should  taste  death,  if  sinful  man  was 
to  be  saved.  The  necessity  of  the  atonement  did  not  arise  only  from  the  oxigpncies  of 
€hxl's  moral  government    It  was  not  effected  merely  that  its  power  might  soften  the 


OH.  n.l— la]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  55 

dnner's  heart  into  repentance.  Rather,  it  was  demanded  by  the  perfections  and  charac- 
ter of  God  iiimself.  The  aufferiagg  of  Christ  "  became"  God's  justice,  which  could  not 
connire  at  our  guilt;  his  truth,  which  necessitated  the  infliction  of  the  threatened 
punishment ;  his  holiness,  which  could  have  no  pleasure  in  the  friendship  of  degraded 
sinnen ;  his  mercy,  which  yearned  for  our  salvation.  Not  only  so,  but  the  sufferings 
of  Ohriat,  in  rendering  the  salvation  of  sinners  consistent  with  God's  character,  have  at 
the  same  time  been  the  means  of  gloriously  illustrating  the  Divine  attributes,  of  reveal- 
ing them  in  their  beautiful  harmony  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  10,  11),  and  thus  of  covering  them 
with  new  splendour  to  the  view  of  an  admiring  universe. 

IL  That  hb  laanr  obtain  his  own  olobt  ab  Mediatob.  Christ,  "  the  Author  of 
our  salvation,"  was  "  made  perfect  through  sufferings ; "  i.e.  it  was  through  his  "  obe- 
dience unto  death"  that  he  became  fuUy  qualified  for  his  work  as  Saviour,  and  was 
exalted  to  heaven  for  its  accomplishment.  He  must  needs  suffer  for  the  honour  of  God 
and  for  the  good  of  man,  before  he  could  put  on  the  lustrous  robes  of  his  mediatorial 
majesty.  His  glory  is  the  recompense  which  his  Father  has  given  him  for  his  sufferings. 
Only  after  making  satisfaction  on  the  cross  for  human  An  could  Jesus  ascend  to  that 
immeasnrable  height  of  supreme  authority  upon  which,  as  the  God-Man,  he  now  sits 
•nthroned. 

UL  That  he  uiaHT  acoohplibh  thb  olobt  or  God's  bbdeemed  ohildbbn.  It  was 
the  purpose  of  God  to  "  bring  many  sons  unto  glory."  He  desired  to  raise  our  fallen 
humanity  from  the  dust,  and  crown  it  anew  "  with  glory  and  honour."  But  this  could 
only  be  effected  through  Christ  as  the  "  Author  of  salvation."  It  is  through  him  alone 
that  a  sinner,  estranged  from  God,  can  be  made  spiritually  a  "son"  of  God,  and 
exchange  his  career  of  guilt  and  enmity  for  that  life  of  grace  which  shall  at  length  be 
consummated  in  gloiy.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  necessary  in  order  to  the  pacifica- 
tion of  the  human  conscience,  the  restoration  of  man's  sonship,  and  the  recovery  of  his 
eternal  inheritance.  And  they  shall  be  effectual  for  these  ends.  Christ,  God's  Servant, 
"  shall  justify  many ; "  he  shall  bring  to  glory  such  multitudes  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues,  as  to  entitle  him  to  be  called  with  fullest  emphasis 
the  Saviour  of  men  and  the  Redeemer  of  the  world. 

Vers.  11 — 18. — Jetui  owr  Brother.  Here  the  writer  expands  the  statement  of 
ver.  10,  and  confirms  it  by  suitable  arguments.  This  closing  paragraph  of  the  first 
section  of  the  Epistle  emphasizes  the  fact  that  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  King  of 
angels  (ch.  L),  is  also  as  Mediator  our  brother  Man. 

I.  The  bbothebhood  of  Christ.  First,  stated  abstractly  (ver.  11).  Next, 
illustrated  from  Old  Testament  Scripture  (vers.  12, 13),  the  Messianic  passages  quoted 
being  Fs.  xxiL  22 ;  Ps.  xviiL  2 ;  Isa.  viii.  18.  Then,  verified  from  the  lacts  and 
events  of  the  Saviour's  earthly  life  (vers.  14 — 18).  This  endearing  brotherhood  is : 
1.  A  brotherhood  of  tiature.  "  All  of  one  "  (ver.  11) ;  of  one  nature,  of  one  race,  of 
one  Father.  He  "partook  of  flesh  and  blood"  (ver.  14);  i.e,  he  became  man.  He 
took  his  place  as  one  of  "  the  children "  by  being  born.  He  had  a  human  body, 
subject,  like  ours,  to  pleasure  and  pain,  to  hunger  and  thirst,  to  suffering  and  death. 
And  he  had  a  human  soul,  which  thought  and  felt,  loved  and  hated,  was  joyful  and  sad, 
and  which  acknowledged  its  dependence  upon  the  Father  of  spirits.  2.  A  brotherhood 
of  condition,  "In  like  manner"  (ver.  14);  i.e.  in  a  manner  almost  similar.  Jesus  had 
no  nimbus  round  his  head,  such  as  the  painters  give  him.  God  sent  him  "  in  the  like- 
ness of  sinful  flesh ; "  for,  though  his  human  nature  was  perfectly  pure,  it  was  exposed 
to  those  infirmities  and  sufferings  which  in  all  other  sons  of  Adam  result  from  sin. 
3.  A  brotherhood  of  experience.  "  It  behoved  him  in  all  things  to  be  made  like  unto 
his  brethren  "  (ver.  17).  So  he  actually  passed  through  a  complete  course  of  pain  and 
trial  and  temptation,  which  ended  only  with  his  death.  He  travelled  over  the  entire 
range,  and  fathomed  all  the  depths,  of  human  suffering.  "  He  himself  hath  suffered, 
being  tempted"  (ver.  18).  He  went  through  every  human  experience  of  poverty,  toil, 
pain,  disappointment,  insult,  persecution;  through  every  sorrow  which  arises  in  a 
pure  mind  from  constant  contact  with  sinners ;  and  through  every  form  of  Satanic 
temptation.  4,  A  brotherhood  of  love.  "  Not  of  angels  doth  he  take  hold  "  (ver.-16), 
to  help  and  save  them :  then  what  a  wonder  of  grace  it  is  that  he  became  the  Redeemer 
of  mortal  man!    It  was  from  love  to  ua  that  he  " partook "  so  readily  of  "  flesh  and 


Si  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  u,  i_ia 

blood,"  that  by  tbk  means  he  might  raise  humanity  to  a  higher  pinnacle  of  gisry  than 
any  on  which  the  loftiest  angel  can  set  foot.  It  is  because  of  this  love  "  beyond  » 
brother's  "  that  even  now  he  does  not  disdain  "  to  call  us  brethren  "  (ver,  11). 

II.  The  pubfoseb  accomplished  bt  Chbist'b  brothebhood.  Some  expressions  in 
the  passage  state  these  generally.  (1)  "He  taketh  hold  of  the  seed  of  Abraham" 
(ver.  16),  to  pluck  them  from  sin  and  Satan.  (2)  "  That  he  might  be  a  merciful  and 
faithful  High  Priest"  (ver.  17):  here  we  meet  tliis  famous  title  of  Christ,  "High 
Priest,"  for  the  first  time — a  title  which  strikes  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle,  and 
which  is  not  given  to  him  in  any  other  book  of  the  New  Testament.  (3)  "  He  that 
Banctifleth  "  (ver.  11).  Christ  became  incarnate  that  he  might  consecrate  his  people  by 
delivering  them  from  sin.  Or,  more  in  detail,  he  became  our  brother :  1.  To  expiate 
$in8.  (Ver.  17.)  By  his  death  in  our  nature  he  has  offered  to  God  a  perfect  satisfac- 
tion for  the  sin  of  the  world.  The  perfection  of  his  sacrifice  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
he  who  suffered  is  the  same  glorious  personage  who  is  described  in  ch.  i.  as  the 
Son  of  God,  the  eternal  Jehovah,  the  Creator  and  Possessor  of  the  universe.  2."  To 
deliver  from  death  and  Satan.  (Vers.  14,  15.)  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin ; "  but 
death  is  powerless  to  harm  the  new  life  of  those  who  are  cleansed  with  the  atoning  blood. 
Sin  was  introduced  at  first  by  the  devil,  and  death  through  sin,  and  so  death  is 
associated  with  the  devil's  usurpation ;  but  Jesus  has  "  bruised  the  serpent's  head," 
rendering  him  impotent  in  relation  to  "  the  children  "  who  are  to  be  brought  to  glory. 
They  are  emancipated  by  their  elder  Brother  from  death's  power  and  fear.  3.  To 
enable  him  to  sympathize  with  his  people.  (Vers.  17, 18.)  He  passed,  as  our  Brother- 
Man,  through  every  variety  of  trial  and  sorrow,  that  we  may  learn  to  have  confidence 
in  him,  as  being  fully  able  to  sustain  and  cheer  us  amid  the  darkest  experiences  of  afflic- 
tion (oh.  iv.  15, 16).  4.  To  "  bring  many  sons  unto  glory."  (Ver.  10.)  Jesus  is  our 
Moses  and  Joshua.  He  became  our  Brother  that  he  might  be  our  Leader  through  the 
wilderness  of  this  world  up  to  the  heavenly  Canaan.  Had  he  not  "  partaken  of  flesh 
and  blood,"  there  would  have  been  no  inheritance  for  us.  "  The  humanization  of  God 
is  the  divinization  of  man." 

Lessons.  1.  The  native  value  of  human  nature,  as  seen  in  the  fact  that  Christ  has 
assumed  it,  to  redeem  it.  2.  "  Thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  Gift."  3.  How 
great  the  madness  of  the  man  who  rejects  Christ's  offered  brotherhood  I  4.  The  necessity 
of  union  with  Christ  by  faith,  if  we  would  have  him  claim  us  as  his  brethren.  5.  The 
comfort  of  knowing,  in  our  days  of  trouble,  that  the  God-Man  cherishes  for  us  the  love 
of  a  brother.    6.  The  duty  of  loving  our  brethren  in  Christ  (ch.  xiiL  1^ 

HOMILIES  BT  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Veri.  1—4. — The  superior  privileges  of  Christians.  "  Therefore  we  ought  to  give  the 
more  earnest  heed  to," etc.  The  "therefore"  connects  this  chapter  with  the  preceding. 
Because  the  Son  of  God  is  immeasurably  greater  than  the  angels, "  we  ought  to  give  the 
more  earnest  heed  to  the  things  which  we  have  heard,"  etc.  Our  text  presents  to  ns 
a  view  of  the  superior  privileges  and  the  more  solemn  responsibilities  of  Christians  as 
compared  with  those  who  lived  in  the  earlier  dispensation.  We  shall  confine  our 
attention  at  pre.sent  to  the  former  portion  of  the  subject,  which  we  may  state  thus  —The 
privileges  of  this  Christian  dispensation  are  much  supeiior  to  those  of  the  Mosaic 
economy. 

1.  The  baklieb  revelation  was  made  bt  angels,  the  later  by  the  Lobd. 
The  Law  was  a  "  word  spoken  by  angels."  The  Law  came  from  God,  but  it  was 
given  to  Moses  by  the  mediation  and  ministry  of  angels.  They  were  present  and 
assisted  at  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai.  The  testimony  of  Scripture  upon  this  point 
is  conclusive  (see  Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  17 ;  Acts  vii.  53 ;  Gal.  iii.  19).  And 
Josephus  says,  "  Our  best  maxims  and  most  excellent  laws  we  have  learned  of  God  by 
means  of  angels."  And  Philo :  "  There  were  present  at  the  giving  of  the  Law,  visible 
■ounds,  animated  and  splendid,  flames  of  fire,  spirits,  trumpets,  and  Divine  mei. 
running  hither  and  hither."  But  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  was  by  the  Son  of  God 
— "  having  at  the  first  been  spoken  by  the  Lord."  "  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus 
Christ."  Inasmuch  as  the  Son  is  higher  than  the  angels,  insomuch  is  the  revelation  of 
the  gospel  higher  than  that  of  the  Law. 


,  a  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  67 


IL  ThB  KABLIEB  BEVELATIOK  was  confirmed  it  iITFEBNATiniA&  Aim  TERBDLE 
nONB,  THB  IiATBB  BT  MORE  NUMBKOUS  AND  GBAOIOUB  SnPEBNATURAI.  BIQNS.     Very  awful 

and  alarmiDg  were  the  extraordinary  phenomena  at  the  giving  of  the  Law.  "  The 
mount  burned  with  fire,"  etc.  (oh.  xiL  18 — 21).  "  And  Mount  Sinai  wag  altogether  on 
»  smoke,"  etc.  (Exod.  xix.  18).  But  the  gospel  revelation  is  more  abundantly  and  more 
convincingly  confirmed.  "  Glod  also  bearing  witness,  both  with  signs  and  wonders,"  etc. 
(ver.  4).  The  miraculous  confirmations  of  the  Christian  revelation  were :  1.  More  nume- 
rous than  those  of  the  revelation  of  the  Law.  The  Saviour's  public  ministry  was  marked 
by  an  almost  unbroken  series  of  miraculous  works.  2.  More  marvellous.  To  raise  the 
dead  to  life  again  with  a  word  is  far  more  wonderful  than  all  the  fire  and  smoke,  the 
thunderings  and  trumpetings  and  tremblings  of  Sinai.  3.  More  various.  The  miracles 
of  Sinai  seem  to  have  been  limited  to  the  phenomena  and  forces  of  nature.  But  those 
which  were  wrought  by  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  related  to  nature's  forces,  to  nature's 
products,  to  diseases  of  the  body,  to  diseases  of  the  mind,  to  evil  spirits,  to  life  and  death. 
4.  Mm'e  beneficent.  At  the  giving  of  the  Law  the  miracles  were  amazing  and  alarming, 
and  fitted  to  impress  and  awe  an  uncultivated  people.  But  the  miracles  associated  with 
the  promulgation  of  the  gospel,  while  even  more  amazing,  were  also  gracious  and  helpful, 
beneficent  and  rich  in  blessing,  and  fitted,  not  to  terrify,  but  to  attract  and  exalt  and 
purify.  As  confirmed  by  these  superior  signs,  the  gospel  revelation  is  higher  than 
that  of  the  Law. 

m.     ThB   EABLIEB  BEVELATION  WAB   in  the   LETTEB,   the   LATEB   WAS    IN  A   LIFE. 

The  Sinaitic  Law  was  written ;  but  the  revelation  made  by  the  Lord  was  not  merely 
in  word,  but  in  tone  and  accent,  in  gesture  and  expression  of  countenance,  in  involun- 
tary influence  and  voluntary  action.  The  greatest  revelations  are  never  verbal,  but  always 
vital.  The  deepest  emotions  cannot  be  expressed  in  any  words.  The  highest  truth  far 
transcends  the  utterance  of  the  loftiest  eloquence  of  the  tongue  or  the  pen ;  it  can  be 
expressed  only  as  it  is  lived.  Thus  "the  greatest  truth  of  the  gospel  is  Christ  himself 
— a  human  body  become  the  organ  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  revealing,  under  the 
conditions  of  an  earthly  life,  the  glory  of  God."  And  when  even  his  life  in  the  human 
body  could  not  adequately  express  the  riches  of  the  grace  of  God,  he  laid  down  his  life, 
and  perfected  his  revelation  by  voluntarily  dying,  "  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he 
might  bring  us  to  God."  And  now  "  God  commendeth  hia  own  love  towards  us,  in 
that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 

IV.  The  bablieb  revelation  was  of  Law  only,  the  later  is  of  a  "great 
SALVATION."  "The  word  spoken  through  angels"  consisted  chiefly  of  commands  and 
prohibitions ;  it  expressed  the  authoritative  "  Thou  shalt,"  and  "  Thou  slialt  not ; "  and 
it  promised  to  the  obedient  life  and  prosperity,  to  the  disobedient  pniiishment  and  death. 
But  ours  is  a  revelation  of  grace.  The  gospel  does  not  abrogate  moral  law ;  it  rather 
insists  upon  its  sacred  authority,  its  great  comprehensiveness,  its  intense  spirituality, 
and  its  pure  benevolence.  We  have  law  still,  but  it  is  law  steeped  in  love.  The  gospel 
is  also  a  revelation  of  forgiveness  of  sin  for  the  penitent,  of  •  new  life  for  the  believer 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  inspiration  and  power  for  those  who  desire  help  to 
Serve  God ;  in  a  word,  it  is  the  free  offer  of  a  "  great  salvation."  Let  us  briefly  contem- 
plate this  "  great  salvation."  It  is :  1.  Salvation  from  great  evils.  We  have  gazed 
upon  the  crumbling  ruins  of  what  was  once  a  spacious  and  massive  castle,  or  upon  the 
venerable  remnants  of  some  ancient  temple,  and  while  we  have  pictured  to  ourselves  the 
scenes  of  which  they  had  been  the  theatre  in  olden  days,  a  feeling  of  mournfnlness  has 
stolen  over  us.  We  have  thought  of  the  brave  doings  connected  with  the  old  castle- 
hunting,  fighting,  feasting,  singing,  dancing,  love-making — all  gone.  We  have  thought 
of  the  earnest  and  eloquent  pleadmgs  of  the  servant  of  God  in  the  temple,  of  the  waves 
of  music  from  pealing  organ  and  living  voices,  of  the  devout,  yearning,  sorrowing, 
rejoicing  hearts  of  worshippers,  now  all  gone.  Nought  but  ruins  remain.  How  mourn- 
ful and  "oppressive  I  These  are  faint  pictures  of  the  calamities  which  have  befallen  our 
nature  through  sin.  The  original  dignity  and  glory,  heroism  and  harmony,  purity  and 
peace  of  human  nature  have  been  lost  by  sin.  And  by  sin  it  has  become  subject  to  guilt 
and  fear,  shame  and  suffering,  death  and  dread  of  measureless  woe  hereafter.  But  most 
terrible  of  all  is  sin  itself.  The  sinfulness,  the  degradation,  and  prostitution  of  our 
powers  and  our  being,— these  are  our  greatest  curse.  Can  this  fallen  temple  be  rebuilt? 
f^,    Is  there  %  salvation  great  enough  to  deliver  from  these  dread  evils ?  Yes ;  "so 


n  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oh,  n.  1—18, 

great  salvation  "  is  this.  2.  Salvation  hy  great  Agents  and  means.  Not  by  angels  or 
by  men,  but  by  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the 
world  unto  himself; "  "  What  the  Law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son,"  etc.  (Eom.  viii.  3,  4).  The  "  strong  Son  of  God  " 
is  the  great  Saviour  ot  men.  Then  think  of  the  distinguished  means  which  he 
employed  in  effecting  salvation.  His  marvellous  incarnation,  his  simple  and  sublime 
teaching,  his  holy  and  beautiful  life,  his  sacrificial  sufferings  and  death,  etc.  "  Ye  were 
redeemed,  not  with  corruptible  things,"  etc.  And  in  bringing  this  salvation  near  to 
men's  hearts  another  great  Agent  is  employed,  even  the  Hoiy  Spirit  (see  John  xv.  26, 
27 ;  xvi.  7 — 15).  3.  Salvation  to  great  glory.  This  salvation  raises  man  to  a  more 
glorious  condition  than  was  his  before  he  ruined  himself  by  sin.  It  saves  from  the 
lowest  degradation  to  the  highest  perfection.  It  rescues  from  hell  and  introduces  to 
heaven.  It  includes  pardon,  peace,  purity,  perpetual  progress,  fellowship  with  God,  etc. 
4.  Salvation  of  a  great  multitude.  "  Many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west,"  etc. 
(Matt.  Tiii.  11).  Our  Lord  will  bring  "  many  sons  unto  glory."  "  In  my  Father's 
house  are  many  mansions;"  "I  saw,  and  behold,  a  great  multitude  which  no  man 
could  number,"  etc.  (Eev.  vii,  9,  10).  "So  great  salvation."  How  immeasurably 
greater,  then,  are  our  privileges  than  those  of  the  men  who  lived  under  the  Mosaic 
economy  I — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  1—4. — Tfie  more  solemn  responsibilities  of  Ghristia/ns.  "Therefore  we  ought 
to  give  the  more  earnest  heed,"  etc.  As  a  necessary  sequel  to  our  former  homily  on 
these  verses,  let  us  now  consider — 

I.  That  they  to  whom  abb  offered  the  qebatbb  fbtvileoes  of  this  Cebibtiak 

DISPENSATION  ABE  UNDER  GREATER  OBLIGATIONS  THAN  THEY  OF  THE  EARLIER  DISPEN- 
SATION WERE.  In  human  relations  as  well  as  in  the  Divine  government  this  principle 
is  generally  acknowledged  and  acted  upon,  that  "  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of 
him  shall  much  be  required  ;  and  to  whom  they  commit  much,  of  him  will  they  ask 
the  more."  This  principle  underlies  the  reasoning  of  our  text.  Our  greater  privileges 
bring  us  under  greater  responsibilities  in  this  way.  1.  The  more  amply  verified 
revelation  has  the  more  imperative  daim  on  our  helief.  The  more  convincing  the 
evidence  by  which  a  truth  is  supported,  the  more  binding  is  the  obligation  to  believe 
that  truth.  To  doubt  the  truth  of  that  which  bears  the  manifest  seal  of  God  is  to 
rebel  against  the  Divine  claims  upon  our  credence.  2.  TAe  more  gracious  revelation 
has  the  greater  claim  upon  our  loving  acceptance.  The  gospel  appeals  not  only  to  the 
reason  and  conscience,  as  the  Law  did,  but  also  to  the  heart.  It  is  fitted  to  inspire  us 
with  gratitude;  it  would  enkindle  our  affections;  it  would  secure  our  willing  obedience 
by  first  eliciting  our  hearty  trust  in  God.  And  this  involves  an  increase  of  our  obliga- 
tiona  3.  T?iat  our  responsibilities  are  measured  iy  our  privileges  is  an  immutable 
pritimple  of  the  Divine  government.  "  That  servant  which  knew  his  lord's  will,''  etc. 
(Luke  xiL  47,48) ;  "A  man  that  hath  set  at  nought  Moses'  Law,"  etc.  (ch.  x.  28, 29) ; 
"  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh,"  etc.  (ch.  xii.  25).  Very  great  are  our 
advantages,  equally  great  are  our  responsibilities. 
11/  That  if  these  greater  privileges,  with  theie  oorbbspondino  obligations, 

ABB   disregarded   BY  US,  A  TERRIBLE    RETRIBUTION  WILL   OVERTAKE   US.      "  HoW  shall 

we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation?"  1.  We  may  neglect  this  salvation. 
Though  it  is  provided  for  us,  offered  to  us  freely,  and  we  are  entreated  to  accept  it,  yet 
we  may  neglect  it.  (1)  The  fact  of  our  moral  agency  shows  this.  (2)  The  method  of 
God's  dealing  with  us  shows  it.  He  respects  our  moral  freedom.  He  invites,  entreats, 
reasons  with,  warns,  and  draws  us;  but  he  does  not  force  or  compel  us.  (3)  The 
hypothesis  of  the  text  also  shows  this.  The  "  lest "  (ver.  1)  shows  that  we  may  "  be 
diverted  from  "  (Alford),  or  "  drift  away  from  "  (Revised  Version),  "  the  things  which 
we  have  heard."  The  "  if"  (ver.  3)  shows  that  we  may  "neglect  so  great  salvation." 
2.  Should  we  neglect  this  salvation,  nothing  can  avert  from  us  a  terrible  retribution.. 
"  How  shall  we  escape  ?  "  etc.  A  forcible  way  of  expressing  the  impossibility  of  escape. 
Under  the  Law  "  spoken  through  angels  "  retribution  was  certain — "  every  transgres- 
sion and  disobedience  received  a  just  recompense  of  reward."  How  much  more  certain 
is  it  under  the  gospel  1  The  far  superior  dignity  of  him  thiough  whom  it  was  first 
spoken  attests  with  greater  force  the  reliableness  of  its  retributions.    The  increased 


OH.  n.  1— la]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  59 

evidence  by  which  it  ii  confirmed  witnesses  to  the  increased  certainty  of  the  punishment 
of  those  who  neglect  it.  The  very  grace  which  has  provided  and  which  offers  the 
"  great  salvation "  renders  the  punishment  of  those  who  reject  it  more  certain  and 
inexpressibly  more  terrible.  Their  punishment  is  more  certain,  for  their  guilt  is 
greater ;  for  the  same  reason  it  will  be  more  terrible  also.  It  will  be  punishment  from 
One  who  in  infinite  love  has  done  everything  which  he  could  do  to  save  us.  It  will  be 
"  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  How,  then,  "  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great 
salvation  "  ?  Can  your  temporal  resources  open  up  a  way  for  your  escape  ?  Can  your 
own  arm  save  you  ?  "  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God  ?  "  Can  education,  or  science,  or 
philosophy  save  youV  There  is  but  one  Saviour  from  sin,  even  Jesus.  Accepting 
him,  we  shall  be  saved  with  "  so  great  salvation."  Neglecting  him  and  his  salvation, 
we  shall  be  lost.  You  need  not  toil  to  secure  your  ruin.  Neglect  alone  is  sufficient  to 
bring  you  under  the  most  terrible  condemnation  and  punishment.  Disregard  the 
offered  salvation,  and  all  the  dread  conseq^uences  of  sin  will  fall  upon  you  with  pitiless 
and  inflexible  severity.  "  Therefore  we  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the 
things  which  we  have  heard,"  etc.—- W.  J. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — Tke  Divine  destiny  for  man.  "  For  unto  the  angels  bath  he  not  pnt 
in  subjection,"  etc.  The  writer  now  resumes  the  subject  of  the  exaltation  of  the  Son 
of  God  over  the  holy  angels.  He  proceeds  to  show  that  in  that  human  nature  in  which 
he  suffered  death,  he  is  raised  to  supreme  glory  and  authority^  and  that  man  also  is 
exalted  in  and  through  him.    Notice — 

L  The  destint  fob  which  man  was  created.  In  certain  aspects  of  his  being 
man  seems  to  be  an  insignificant  creature,  and  to  occupy  a  comparatively  mean  position 
in  the  universe.  The  psalmist,  who  is  quoted  In  the  text,  refers  to  this :  "  When  I 
consider  thy  heavens,  .  .  .  what  is  man?"  etc.  The  word  translated  "man" 
denotes  the  weakness  and  frailty  of  our  nature ;  and  the  words  translated  "  son  o^ 
man  "  point  to  man  as  "  formed  of  the  dust  of  the  ground."  Yet  there  are  aspects  in 
which  man  is  great ;  and  the  destiny  for  which  God  created  him  is  a  glorious  one. 
That  destiny  is  briefly  Indicated  in  this  quotation  from  Ps.  vili.  8.  It  consists  in : 
1.  A  high  place  in  the  Divine  regard,  hs  evidence  of  this  we  have  a  twofold  fact. 
(1)  God  graciously  thinks  of  man.  "Thou  art  mindful  of  him;"  "I  know  the 
thoughts  that  I  think  toward  you,  salth  the  Lord,  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  evil." 
God's  care  of  man,  which  is  manifested  in  the  provision  which  he  has  made  for  him, 
witnesses  to  his  thought  of  him.  What  significance  it  gives  to  our  life  when  we  reflect 
that  the  Infiirlte  thinks  upon  us  and  cares  for  us  1  How  the  fact  tends  to  exalt  our 
nature  1  What  a  consolation  and  Inspiration  it  should  be  to  us  I  "I  am  poor  and 
needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me."  (2)  God  graciously  visits  man.  "  Thou 
visitest  him."  The  word  used  indicates  a  kindly  visitation,  as  of  "  a  physician  visiting 
the  sick."  His  visitation  preserveth  our  spirits.  His  visits  bring  light  and  refresh- 
ment and  joy.  "  His  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning,  and  he  shall  come  unto  us 
as  the  rain,"  etc.  His  visits  are  redemptive.  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  for 
he  hath  visited  and  redeemed  his  people."  2.  An  exalted  rank  in  creation.  "  Thou 
raadest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels."  We  have  already  called  attention  to  the 
distinguished  rank  of  angels  in  the  universe.*  Man  is  only  a  little  lower  than  th^. 
"God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him."  Man's 
nature  is  intdhctiuil.  He  can  reason,  reflect,  etc.  It  is  spiritual.  The  body  ia  the 
vesture  of  that  which  comes  from  God  and  returns  to  him.  "  There  is  a  spirit  in 
man,"  etc.  It  is  moraJ.  He  can  vmderstand  and  feel  the  heinousness  of  the  morally 
wrong,  the  majesty  of  the  morally  right.  Conscience  speaks  within  him.  It  is 
religious.  He  can  love,  admire,  and  adore.  It  ia  oaf  ible  of  endless  progress.  If  man 
attains  unto  his  Divine  destiny  he  will  for  ever  have  to  say,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear 
what  we  shall  be."  Truly,  "  Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels ;  "  "  a 
little  less  than  Divine."  3.  A  position  of  kingly  majesty  and  authority  in  this  world. 
(1)  Here  is  regal  majesty.  "  Thou  orownedst  him  with  glory  and  honour."  The 
figure  of  coronation  is  intended  to  set  forth  the  royal  majesty  which  was  conferred  upon 
man,  as  of  a  kingly  crown.  Amongst  creatures  in  this  world  he  b  royal  in  his  faculties 
and  capacities,  and  in  his  position,     (2)  Here  is  regal  authority,     "  Thou  didst  put  aU 

•  On  oh.  L  4,  ft. 


eO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  laa.  n.  1—18. 

things  in  subjection  nnder  his  feet'eto.  The  psalmist  In  the  original  passage  •mplifies 
this  "  all  things : "  "  All  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field,"  etc.  There 
is  a  reference  to  Gen.  i.  26 — 28, "  Let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,"  etc. 
In  this  world  man  is  God's  vicegerent.  He  was  made  by  his  Creator  to  exerciie 
dominion  over  all  things  and  all  creatures  here. 

IL  Thb  failube  of  man  to  rbaiiIzb  his  tbdb  destint.  "  Bat  now  we  see  not 
yet  all  things  put  under  him."  It  is  unmistakably  clear  that  at  present  man's 
sovereignty  in  the  world  is  not  complete.  The  sceptre  has  slipped  from  his  grasp. 
His  dominion  is  contested.  He  has  to  contend  against  the  creatures  that  were  put  in 
subjection  unto  him.  The  forces  of  nature  sometimes  scorn  his  authority  and  defy  his 
power.  Man  has  not  now  complete  rule  over  his  own  being.  His  passions  are  some- 
times insurgent  against  his  principles.  His  senses  are  not  always  subordinate  to  his 
spirit.  His  appetites  war  against  his  aspirations.  Sin  has  discrowned  man.  He  has 
lost  his  purity,  therefore  has  he  lost  his  power.  In  his  present  condition  he  is  far  from 
realizing  his  glorious  destiny. 

111.  Thb  Divinb  means  fob  en  ablins  mas  to  bealize  his  destint.  "But  we 
see  Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  etc.  1.  The  Son  of  Ood  has 
taken  upon  himself  human  nature.  "  We  behold  him  who  hath  been  made  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  even  Jesus."  "  Who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  deemed  not  his 
equality  with  God  a  thing  to  grasp  at,  but  emptied  himself,  taking  upon  him  the  form 
of  a  servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness  of  men."  As  man  was  "  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,"  so,  in  becoming  man,  our  Lord  also  was  "  made  a  little  lower  than  the 
angels."  2.  In  his  human  nature  he  endured  death.  "  That  he  by  the  grace  of  Gt>d 
should  taste  death  for  every  man."  (1)  The  death  of  Jesus  was  voluntary.  In  big 
case  death  was  not  inevitable.  He  was  not  forced  to  die.  "  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I 
may  take  it  again.  No  one  taketh  it  away  from  me,"  etc ;  "  The  Son  of  man  came  .  .  . 
to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many ;  "  "  Christ  Jesus  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all." 
The  voluntariness  was  essential  to  the  inSuence  of  his  death  as  an  atonement  and  as  an 
Inspiration.  (2)  The  death  of  Jesus  was  for  the  benefit  of  man.  "  Taste  death  for 
every  man."  In  this  place  "for"  (4»ep)  does  not  mean  "instead  of,"  but  "on  behalf 
of."  Alford  well  says, "  Where  this  ordinary  meaning  of  tnt4f  suffices,  that  of  vicarious- 
ness  must  not  be  introduced.  Sometimes,  as  e.g.  2  Cor.  t.  15,  it  is  necessary.  But  here 
clearly  not,  the  whole  argument  proceeding,  not  on  the  vicariousness  of  Christ's  sacrifice, 
but  on  the  benefits  which  we  derive  from  his  personal  suffering  for  us  in  humanity ;  not 
on  his  substitution  for  us,  but  on  his  community  with  us."  He  cBed  for  "  every  man." 
The  benefits  of  his  death,  its  inspiring  and  redeeming  power,  are  available  "  for  every 
man  " — for  the  poorest,  the  obscurest,  the  wickedest,  etc.  (3)  The  death  of  Jesus  for 
man  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  kindness  of  God.  "  That  he  by  the  grace  of  God  should 
taste,"  etc.  Our  salvation  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  unmerited  kindness  and  love  of  God 
towards  us.  "  The  grace  of  God  hath  appeared,  bringing  salvation  unto  all  men." 
"  When  the  kindness  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  his  love  toward  man,  appeared,  not  by 
works  done  in  righteousness,"  etc. ;  "God  commendeth  his  own  love  toward  us,"  etc. 
3.  On  account  of  his  endurance  of  death  he  has  been  raised  to  supreme  glory  and 
authority.  "  Because  of  the  suffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  His 
exaltation  to  this  might  and  majesty  is  in  consequence  of  his  voluntary  humiliation  and 
suffering  and  death.  "  He  humbled  himself,  becoming  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore  also  God  highly  exalted  him,"  etc.  This  was  necessary 
to  the  perfection  of  his  redemptive  work.  "  On  the  triumphant  issue  of  his  sufferings 
their  efficacy  depends."  4.  Be  has  been  exalted  to  this  supreme  position  as  the  Head  oj 
humanity.  Not  the  angelic  but  the  human  nature  bas  God  raised  to  the  throne.  "  For 
not  unto  the  angels  did  he  subject  the  world  to  come,  whereof  we  speak."  This  Christian 
economy,  this  new  world  of  redemption  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  in  all  its 
developments,  is  placed  under  our  Lord.  In  our  humanity,  and  as  our  Head  and  Fore- 
runner, he  is  enthroned  the  King  in  the  new  realm  of  Divine  grace.  Humanity  ia 
crowned  in  him.  Through  him  alone  can  we  realize  our  glorious  destiny.  We  must : 
(1)  Believe  in  him.  Our  text  intimates  this.  "  We  behold  him  .  .  ,  even  Jesus." 
Thia  "behold"  does  not  express  an  indifferent,  uninterested  sight  of  him;  but  the 
eamwt  look  of  faith,  the  believing  contemplation  of  him.  By  faith  we  become  one  with 
him.    (2)  Imitate  him.    The  sacrifice  of  the  cross  leads  to  the  splendoor  of  the  orown. 


OH,  n.1— 18.J  THE  EPISllB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  61 


The  true  sovereignty  is  reached  only  by  the  way  of  service.    "  If  so  be  that  we  suffer 
with  Mm.  that  we  may  be  also  glorified  with  him." — W.  J. 

Ver.  10. — P«rf»dUm  through  luffering.  "For  it  became  him,  for  whom  are  all 
things/'  etc. 

I.  The  FEBFBonoN  of  the  Bedeeugb  was  attained  through  suFFEBiNa.  "  Perfect 
through  suffering."  The  perfection  here  spoken  of  does  not  refer  to  his  character  as 
Son  of  God,  but  as  Mediator — "the  Captain  of  our  salvation."  "The  perfecting  of 
Christ  was  the  bringing  him  to  that  glory  which  was  his  proposed  and  destined  end." 
Made  "perfect  through  suffering  "is  similar  in  meaning  to  "because  of  the  suffering  of 
death  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  Only  through  suffering  could  he  enter  upon 
his  mediatorial  glory.  Two  thoughts  are  8ug°;ested.  1.  Before  he  could  attain  unto 
his  mediatorial  glory  his  character  and  work  as  Redeemer  mutt  he  complete.  2.  Suffering 
was  essential  to  the  completeness  of  his  character  and  work  as  Redeemer,  He  must 
suffer  in  order  that  he  might  (1)  sympathize  with  his  suffering  people  (ver.  18);  (2) 
present  %  perfect  example  to  his  suB'ering  people  (1  Pet.  ii.  21 — 24);  (3)  reconcile 
sinners  to  Qod.  The  exhibition  of  infinite  love — love  that  gives  up  life  itself,  and  that 
for  enemies — ^was  necessary  to  remove  the  alienation  of  man's  heart  from  God,  and  to 
enkindle  love  to  him  in  its  stead.  And  the  exhibition  of  perfect  obedience — obedience 
even  unto  death — was  necessary  to  establish  and  honour  in  this  world  the  Law  of  God 
which  man  had  broken.  So  our  Saviour  was  perfected  tlirough  suffering ;  he  passed 
through  sharpest  trials  to  sublimest  triumphs. 

II.  This  mode  of  BEAOHma  perfection  consists  with  the  charaotbb  of  the 
GREAT  God  and  Father.  "  It  became  him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by  whom 
are  all  things,"  etc.  God  the  Father  is  here  represented  as :  1.  The  great  First  Cause 
of  all  things.  "  By  whom  are  all  things."  He  is  the  Source  and  Origin  of  the  entire 
universe.  2.  The  great  Final  Cause  cf  all  things.  "  For  whom  are  all  things."  All 
things  in  the  universe  are  for  his  glory.  Creation,  providence,  redemption,  are  all 
designed  and  all  tend  to  promote  the  glory  of  the  great  Father.  The  words  under 
consideration  are  sometimes  used  of  the  Saviour,  and  they  are  true  of  him;  but  they 
are  even  more  applicable  to  God  "  the  Father,  who  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the 
world."  "  For  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  unto  him,  are  all  things.  To  him  lie  the 
glory  for  ever.  Amen."  3.  The  great  Author  and  Designer  of  salvation,  with  its  agents, 
means,  and  methods.  Our  Lord  is  spoken  of  in  the  text  as  the  "  Captain  [Revised 
Version, '  Author ']  of  salvation."  But,  traced  to  its  source  and  origin,  salvation  takes  us 
up  to  the  eternal  Father.  And  "  it  became  him  "  that  he  should  so  order  the  agencies 
and  methods  of  salvation  that  the  Saviour  should  be  perfected  through  suffering.  Such  an 
arrangement  was  not  fatalistic  or  arbitrary,  but  suited  to  the  object  in  view,  the  means 
being  adapted  to  the  end,  and  in  thorough  harmony  with  the  character  and  perfections 
of  God — his  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  love.  The  Hebrew  Christians,  whom  the  writer 
is  addressing,  felt  the  offence  of  the  cross.  There  were  times  when  in  some  measure 
"Christ  crucified"  was  still  "a  stumbling-block"  to  them,  or  at  least  they  were  in 
danger  of  this.  And  so  the  writer  aigues  that  the  attainment  of  the  crown  by  the 
endurance  of  the  cross  was  an  arrangement  worthy  of  God,  and  therefore  the  ful61meut 
of  this  arrangement  could  not  be  unworthy  of  the  Saviour.  We  have  said  that  the 
means  were  adapted  to  the  end;  the  perfection  could  not  have  been  attained  without 
the  sufferings.  But,  more,  the  sufferings  were  in  complete  conformity  to  the  being  and 
character  of  God.  He  is  not  a  cold,  impassive  Beholder  of  human  sin  and  misery. 
He  suffers  by  reason  of  man's  sin  and  woe  (cf.  Isa.  Ixiii.  9 ;  Hos.  xi.  8).  Christ  in  his 
sufferings  reveals  to  our  race  how  God  had  felt  towards  us  in  all  preceding  ages. 

III.  This  mode  of  beaching  perfection  is  exemplaby  fob  all  true  Christians. 
1.  The  exalted  relation  of  true  Christians.  They  are  "sons"  of  God,  not  simply 
because  he  is  "  the  Father  of  their  spirits,"  but  also  by  adoption  (of.  Rom.  viii.  14 — IV ; 
1  John  iii.  1 — 3).  2.  The  vast  number  of  true  Christians.  "  Many  sons  unto  glory." 
There  have  been  ages  when  the  number  of  the  true  and  good  has  been  comparatively 
small.  But,  as  the  result  of  Christ's  mediation,  the  saved  will  be  so  many  that  no 
human  arithmetic  can  count  them,  no  human  mind  grasp  the  glorious  total.  Many 
things  encourage  this  belief;  e.g.  (1)  the  inexhaustible  provisions  of  Divine  grace  in 
Jesus  Christ;  (2)  the  immense  numbers  of  the  race  who  die  in  infancy,  and  through 


62  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBREWa  [oh,  n.  1— la 

the  SaTiour  are  received  into  gloiy ;  (3)  the  prevalence  of  true  religion  throughout  the 
world,  which  is  being  rapidly  accomplished,  and  the  triumph  of  Divine  grace  over 
human  sin,  which  may  be  continued  for  many  long  ages  before  the  end  of  this  dispen- 
sation ; — these  and  other  things  encourage  the  belief  that  our  Lord  will  lead  to  glory  an 
overwhelming  majority  of  our  race.  3.  The  inspiring  relation  which  oar  Lord  sustains 
to  true  ChrMians.  He  is  "the  Captain  [Bevised  Version,'  Author']  of  their  salva- 
tion," The  word  in  this  place  certainly  has  a  deeper  significance  than  "captain"  or 
leader.  Salvation  originated  in  the  heart  of  God,  but  it  was  accomplished  by  Christ, 
Uo  redeemed  us  unto  God  by  his  blood ;  and  now  he  inspires  and  empowers  and  leads 
us  onward  to  complete  victory.  4,  The  iUustriom  destiny  to  which  he  leads  true  Chris- 
tians. "  Unto  glory."  This  is  the  crowning  result  of  their  salvation.  They  shall  be 
sharers  in  the  blessedness  and  majesty  of  God  to  the  fullest  extent  of  which  they  are 
capable  (cf.  John  xvii.  22 — 24 ;  Rev.  iii.  21),  6,  The  pathway  by  which  he  leads  them 
to  their  destiny.  Like  himself,  they  also  must  be  made  "  perfect  through  sufferings." 
"  If  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him  "  (cf.  1  Pet.  v.  10, 11).  Wherefore,  let  us 
not  be  afraid  of  suffering.  Only  let  us  be  sure  that  we  suffer  with  oar  SavJonr  uul  in 
his  spirit ;  so  shall  we  ultimately  share  his  bliss  and  glory. — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  11, 12. — The  oneness  of  the  Sanctifier  and  the  sanctified.  "For  both  he  that 
sanctifieth  and  they  who  are,"  etc, 

I,  The  oneness  of  oub  Lobd  with  man,  "  Both  he  that  sanctifieth  and  they  who 
-are  sanctified  are  all  of  one,"  1,  Our  Lord  is  of  one  nature  with  man.  This  is  what 
many  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  writer  in  this  place.  The  Saviour  was  truly 
human.  As  a  man,  he  hungered  and  thirsted,  ate  and  drank,  was  wearied  and  slept, 
sorrowed  and  wept,  suffered  and  died.  His  humanity  was  a  real  thing.  2.  But  unity 
o/  spiritual  relation  seems  to  be  set  forth  here.  The  text  certainly  points  to  something 
higher  than  the  mere  physical  oneness  of  Christ  with  all  men.  It  is  not  his  relation  to 
all  men  that  is  here  expressed,  but  his  relation  as  Sanctifier  to  all  who  are  being  sanctified 
through  him.  It  is  this  union  of  spiritual  relationship  which  is  here  meant.  The 
Sanctifier  and  the  sanctified  are  all  of  one  God  and  Father.  They  "  are  all  the  children 
of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus ; "  they  "  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption,"  etc. 
Our  Lord  not  only  stooped  down  to  our  nature,  but  he  lifts  our  nature  into  fellowship 
and  oneness  with  God.  Thus  the  Sanctifier  and  they  who  are  being  sanctified  are  all 
of  one  "  God,  the  spiritual  Father  as  of  Clirist,  so  also  of  those  who  are  descended  firom 
Christ"  (cf.  John  xx.  17). 

II,  The  work  of  odb  Lobo  vob  kan.  He  is  here  represented  a*  the  Sanctifier  ot 
his  people.  The  word  used  in  the  text  suggests  the  ideas  of:  1,  Expiation.  It  does 
not  seem  to  us  that  we  are  warranted  in  making  this  interpretation  oxdusive  of 
others  (as  M.  Stuart  does,  who  translates  "  both  he  who  maketh  expiation  and  tiiey 
for  whom  expiation  is  made").  But  kyiiia  may  point  to  the  atoning  death  of  Christ 
"  While  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  through  the  death  of  lus  Son." 
"  God  reconciled  us  to  himself  through  Christ."  Sanctification  is  impossible  apart  from 
reconciliation  to  God,  and  that  reconciliation  is  effected  by  means  of  the  death  of 
Christ.  "  We  have  been  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ " 
(ch.  X.  10).  2.  Consecration.  They  who  are  sanctified  hare  consecrated  themselves  to 
God.  They  are  devoted  to  him ;  they  do  not  live  with  common  aims  or  for  common 
ends ;  but  at  all  times,  and  even  in  commonest  duties,  they  live  for  God  and  for  his 
glory.  They  have  presented  themselves  "  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God," 
etc.  3.  TransforiTMtion.  "  They  who  are  sanctified ; "  literally,  "  they  who  are  being 
sanctified,"  are  being  made  true  and  right  in  word  and  deed,  in  thought  and  feeling. 
They  are  not  sinless  or  perfect.  Their  sanctification  is  not  yet  complete,  but  it  is  in 
progress.  They  are  being  transformed  into  the  image  of  their  Lord  and  Saviour,  But 
bow  can  our  Lord  be  said  to  be  the  Sanctifier?  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  great  Agent  in 
the  transforming  process ;  but  the  expiation  or  atonement  was  made  by  Christ.  And 
while  consecration,  or  dedication  to  God,  is  the  act  of  the  Christian,  the  mighty  impulse 
from  which  that  act  springs  comes  from  the  Christ.  And  in  the  transforming  work 
Christ  sends  "  the  sanctifying  Spirit ;  he  is  the  Head  of  all  sanctifying  influences. 
The  Spirit  sanctifieth  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ." 

IIL  Thk  0ONDE8OBNSIOM  OF  OUB  LoBD  TowABDa  lUH.    "For  wlich  cause  h*  is  not 


OH.  11.1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  63 

asbamed  to  call  them  brethren,  saying,  I  will  declare  thy  Name  unto  my  brethren," 
etc.  Though  he  is  "  Lord  of  men  as  well  as  angels,"  he  calls  his  people  his  brethren. 
Notwithstanding  the  lowliness  of  their  condition  and  the  crudeness  and  imperfection  of 
their  character,  he  graciously  acknowledges  them  as  his  brethren  (cf.  Matt,  xxviii.  10 ; 
John  XX.  17). 
CoNOLUBioB.    L  Eere  is  encouragement  to  address  our  Lord  in  our  iimet  iffnttd. 

"  Though  now  ascended  up  on  high, 
He  bendi  on  earth  a  Brother's  eye ; " 

aad  he  hns  a  brother's  heart  towards  us.  2.  Eere  is  reason  why  we  should  con/ess  him 
as  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  Since  he  acliuowledges  us  as  his  brethren,  let  us  humbly 
and  heartily  acknowledge  him  as  our  Saviour  and  Sovereign.  3.  Here  is  reason  for 
acknowledging  the  lowliest  Christian  as  our  brother.  Shall  we  refuse  to  recognize  as 
our  spiritual  kindred  those  whom  our  Lord  calls  his  brethren  ?  4.  Here  is  incitement  to 
the  cultivation  of  holiness.  Since  Christ  is  engaged  in  our  sanctification, "  let  ua  cleanse 
ourselves  from  all  defilement  of  flesh  and  spirit,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  vii.  1). — W.  J. 

Vers.  14,  IS. — The  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  Ood.  "  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children 
are  partakers,"  etc. 

L  The  great  fact  of  thb  ikoabkation  of  thb  Soh  of  God.  "  Forasmuch  then  as 
the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  in  like  manner  partook  of 
the  same."  These  words  suggest :  1.  The  reality  of  our  Lord^s  human  nature.  He 
partook  of  om-  flesh  and  blood.  His  body  was  real,  and  not  merely  phenomenal.  His 
physical  experiences — e.g.  weariness,  hunger,  thirst,  pain,  death — were  real,  not  pretended. 
His  human  soul  also,  with  its  sympathies  and  antipathies,  was  genuine.  2.  Apeculiarity 
of  our  Lord's  human  nature.  His  human  nature  was  voluntarily  assumed.  He  partook 
of  flesh  and  blood.  We  could  not  apply  these  words  to  Moses  or  to  St.  Paul  without 
manifest  absurdity.  We  had  no  choice  as  to  whether  we  should  be  or  not  be,  or  what 
we  should  be ;  whether  we  should  exist  at  all.  or,  if  we  were  to  exist,  what  form  of 
existence  should  be  ours.  But  he  had.  We  were  brought  into  this  world  without  our 
will ;  he  "  came  into  the  world  "  of  his  own  will.  "  He  emptied  himself,  taking  the 
form  of  a  servant."  This  implies  ;  (1)  His  existence  befot*)  his  incarnation.  "  His  goings 
forth  were  from  of  old,  from  everlasiing."  (2)  His  power  over  his  own  existence.  He 
could  take  upon  himself  what  form  of  existence  he  pleased.  He  had  power  over  his 
life.  He  had  "power  to  lay  it  down,  and  power  to  take  it  a^  in."  (3)  His  deep 
interest  in  human  existence.     "  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakea  he  became  poor,"  etc. 

II.  The  grand  design  of  the  inoabnation  of  the  Soil  of  God.  "  That  throug 
death  he  might  bring  to  nought  him  that,"  etc.  1,  Our  Lord  became  man  in  order 
that  he  might  die.  All  other  men  die  because  they  are  human,  and  their  death  is 
unavoidable ;  but  he  assumed  our  nature  for  the  express  purpose  of  acquiring  the 
capability  of  death.  His  death  was  of  atupendous  importance.  He  looked  forward  to 
it ;  he  preannounced  it  to  his  disciples ;  he  deliberately  advanced  to  it ;  he  vdluntarily 
endured  it.  2.  Our  Lord  died  in  order  that  he  might  vanquish  death.  "  That  through 
death  he  might  bring  to  nought  him  that  had,"  etc.  He  does  this  (1)  By  the  abolition 
of  Satan's  power  over  death.  Satan  may  be  said  to  have  the  power  of  death,  inasmuch 
as :  (a)  Daith,  as  we  know  it,  is  the  result  of  sin,  and  he  introduced  sin  into  our  world, 
aud  is  actively  engaged  in  propagating  it.  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  But  for  sin,  it 
might,  havo  been  "  a  gentle  wafting  to  immortal  life."  (6)  He  kindles  the  passions 
which  lead  on  to  death;  e.g,  anger  and  revenge,  which  often  result  in  murder ;  lust  of 
territory,  which  often  causes  war,  etc.  (c)  He  inspires  the  mind  with  terror  in  the 
anticipation  of  fleath.  The  gloomy  and  dreadful  ideas  which  are  frequently  associated 
with  death  are  probably  suggested  by  him.  Our  Lord  died  to  render  this  power  of 
Satan  ineffective,  and  in  this  respect  to  bring  him  to  nought.  How  his  death  effects 
this  we  will  inquire  shortly.  (2)  By  the  emancipation  of  man  from  the  thraldom  of  the 
dread  of  death.  Men  recoil  in  alarm  from  death  for  several  reasons ;  e.g. :  (o)  The 
supposed  anguish  of  dying.  A  good  Christian  who  was  drawing  near  to  the  river 
of  death  said, "  I  hare  no  doubt  of  going  to  heaven  ;  but  oh,  the  crossing,  the  crossing  I " 
(&)  The  painful  separations  which  death  musrr.  Tennyson  truly  expressef  the  feeling 
Of  many  in  thia  resjpect— ' 


64  IBE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  n.  1— 1» 

"  For  this  alone  on  Death  I  wreak 

The  wrath  that  gamers  in  my  heart; 
He  puts  our  lives  so  far  apart 
We  cannot  hear  each  other  speak." 

(e)  tb»  •ppalling  luyateiy  as  to  what  lies  beyond  death — 

"  The  dread  of  something  after  death. 
The  nndiscover'd  country,  from  whose  bourn 
No  traveller  retuiM." 

(d)  The  solemn  judgment  to  which  it  leads.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die, 
and  after  that,  judgment."  The  dread  of  death,  for  these  and  other  reasons,  holds  men 
in  bondage,  enslaves  them ;  they  cannot  shake  it  off.  Our  Lord  died  to  set  them  frea 
from  this  thraldom.  But  how  does  his  death  effect  this  ?  He  was  "  manifested  to  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  As  an  atonement  for  sin,  his  death  removes  ths 
guilt  of  all  who  heartily  believe  on  him.  Death  is  no  longer  penal  to  them.  For  them 
"  the  sting  of  death  "  is  taken  away.  Again,  since  Christ  died  and  rose  again  from  th« 
dead,  death  wears  a  new  aspect  to  the  Christian.  It  is  no  longer  the  end  of  oui 
existence,  but  an  onward  and  upward  step  in  our  existence.  It  means  not  repression, 
but  development ;  not  loss,  but  gain  ;  not  the  way  to  darkness  and  misery,  but  to 
light  and  joy.  Death  to  the  Christian  is  no  longer  "  the  king  of  terrors,"  but  the  kind 
servant  of  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  lite. 

"  Death  is  the  crown  of  life : 
Were  death  denied,  poor  man  would  live  in  voln  { 
Were  death  denied,  to  live  would  not  be  life ; 
Were  death  denied,  even  fools  would  wish  to  die. 
Death  wounds  to  cure ;  we  fall,  we  rise,  we  reign  I 
Spring  from  our  fetters ;  fasten  in  the  skies. 
Where  blooming  Eden  witheiB  in  our  sight. 
Death  gives  us  more  than  was  in  Eden  lost. 
This  kmg  of  terrors  is  the  prince  of  peace." 

(Young.) 

Thus,  by  his  own  voluntary  death,  the  Son  of  God  brings  to  nought  Satan's  power  ol 
death,  and  sets  free  the  captives  of  the  dread  of  death.  Death  itself  remains,  but  its 
character  and  aspect  to  the  Christian  are  completely  changed.  The  evil  of  death  is 
vanquished,  and  transformed  into  blessing.  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  ua  the 
victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." — ^W.  J. 

Ver,  16. — TTie  reasons  why  Ghrint  redeemed  men  rather  than  cmgeU.  "  For  verily  he 
took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,"  etc.  The  rendering  of  the  Revised  Version  gives 
the  true  meaning :  "  For  verily  not  of  angels  doth  he  take  hold,  but  he  taketh  hold  ol 
the  seed  of  Abraham."  The  text  starts  a  very  grave  inquiry.  Why  did  Christ  oorae 
to  the  help  of  lost  men  in  preference  to  that  of  lost  angels?  Seeing  that  both  were 
fallen,  both  were  in  a  state  of  sin  and  misery,  and  neither  were  able  to  save  themselves, 
nor  had  any  claim  upon  his  pity  and  power,  why  did  the  Divine  Being  determine  to 
raise  and  restore  lost  men,  while  leaving  lost  angels  in  darkness  and  ndn  ?  First  ws 
will  endeavour  to  answer  this  inquiry  neyatively. 

I.  Not  because  that,  while  men  needed  help,  angels  did  not  need  it.  Man 
needed  Divine  redemption.  A  sinner,  he  needs  forgiveness ;  lost,  he  needs  restoration, 
etc.  The  sacred  Scriptures,  the  history  of  our  race,  and  our  personal  eapetience,  unite 
in  affirming  our  need  of  the  saving  help  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Word  of  Gtod  assures  us 
that  there  are  angels  who  also  need  help.  It  tells  of  a  number  of  fitUen,  sinful,  suffering 
angelic  beings  who  are  reserved  in  bondage  and  darkness  until  the  day  of  finsil  account 
(see  John  viii.  44  j  2  Pet.  ii.  4  ;  1  John  iii.  8 ;  Jude  6 ;  Rev.  xx.  10).  Their  need  is  as 
great  as  man's. 

II.  Not  bboaitsb  angels  wbbb  in  anv  way  inferiob  to  men  eitheb  in  ratdbb 
OB  ability.  To  us  it  would  have  seemed  probable  that,  if  only  one  of  the  two  races 
of  sinners  was  to  be  saved,  the  preference  would  have  been  given  to  the  greater  of  the 
two.     Regarding  the  matter  from  our  standpoint,  the  greater  and  more  glorious  a 


CH.  u.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWB.  65 

being  is  the  more  worthy  Is  he  of  redemption,  and  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  lore 
expended  in  his  redemption  will  lead  to  richer  results.  It  was  not  on  this  principle 
that  God,  in  his  Son,  came  to  the  help  of  men  and  Dot  to  that  of  angels.  In  being  and 
capacity  we  believe  that  angels  are  greater  than  men.  In  our  remarks  on  the  preceding 
chapter  *  we  endeavoured  to  show  that  angels  are  the  highest  orders  of  created  beings. 
And  the  fall  of  angels  did  not  strip  them  of  their  power.  And  since  angels  are  greater 
than  men,  it  follows  that  their  fall  must  have  been  greater.  Their  immense  powers 
being  perverted  render  them  mightier  for  mischief  than  beings  of  inferior  powers 
could  be.  Hence  how  great  was  their  need  of  help  I  And  if  restored  to  their  original 
condition,  would  not  their  restoration  bring  greater  glory  to  their  Restorer  than  the 
restoration  of  beings  who  are  lower  in  the  scale  of  being  ? 

III.  Not  because  angels,  if  left  without  help,  would  suffer  less  than  mm 
woiTLD  HAVE  DONE  IF  THEY  HAD  BEEN  SO  LEFT.  The  greatest  Sufferings  are  not  those 
of  the  body,  but  those  of  the  mind  and  heart.  And  the  measure  of  suffering  endured 
by  any  one  is  regulated  by  his  mental  and  moral  capacity.  Therefore,  if  our  estimate  of 
angelic  capacity  be  correct,  being  left  without  redemption  the  sufferings  of  angels  will 
be  greater  than  man's  would  have  been  if  he  had  been  so  left.  Their  vast  powers 
must  be  terrible  instruments  of  self-torture.  Their  remembrance  of  the  irrevocable 
past  must  also  augment  their  misery.  Their  recollection  of  their  lost  heritage  must 
greatly  increase  the  anguish  which  afflicts  them.  But  we  have  no  such  memories. 
Only  two  of  our  race  experienced  the  joys  of  that  Eden  from  which  sin  has  exiled  us. 
We  know  not  the  peace  and  bliss  of  the  human  heart  in  its  original  state.  Hence  we 
conclude  that  the  sufferings  of  angels  are  greater  than  those  of  men  would  have  been 
if  they  had  been  left  without  the  saving  help  of  God. 

IV.  Not  BE0AU8K  of  an  abbitrabt  sovebbigntt  on  the  pakt  of  God.  The 
sovereignty  of  God  is  the  sovereignty  of  infinite  wisdom  and  love.  To  say  that  he 
chose  to  restore  mankind  and  to  leave  angels  to  their  dread  doom  because  of  his 
sovereignty  it  unsatisfactory.  He  made  the  choice  in  his  sovereignty ;  but  what  was 
the  reason  for  the  exercise  of  bis  sovereignty  in  this  particular  way  ?  He  is  absolutely 
independent;  but  he  ever  acts  from  wise  and  worthy  reasons,  and  never  from  caprice 
or  for  the  mere  assertion  of  his  sovereignty.  We  may  not  he  able  always  to 
discover  the  reasons  of  his  decisions  and  deeds ;  but  there  are  reasons,  and  perfect 
ones,  for  them  all,  though  we  see  them  not. 

Thus  far,  then,  we  have  met  with  no  good  ground  why  the  Deity  should  have 
determined  to  save  lost  men  rather  than  lost  angels.  Our  examination  would  have  led 
us  to  conclude  rather,  that  if  one  race  was  to  be  helped  and  the  other  abandoned,  the 
angelic  sinners  would  have  been  elected  to  the  blessing.  Let  us  now  answer  the 
inquiry  which  is  before  us  affirmatively. 

I.  Because  the  quilt  of  fallen  angels  was  gkbateb  than  that  of  man.  We 
attach  much  greater  guilt  to  one  who  commits  a  crime  with  little  or  no  temptation, 
than  we  do  to  one  who  commits  the  same  crime  under  the  influence  of  powerful 
temptation.  Now,  Satan  was  not  tempted  to  sin  by  any  force  without  himself.  We 
cannot  trace  the  origin  of  sin  beyond  Satan.  How  inexpressibly  guilty  must  he  be  who 
generated  the  first  sinful  thought,  and  that  in  a  universe  of  light  and  holiness  1  But 
man,  in  the  young  days  of  his  innocence,  was  tempted  to  sin  by  a  subtle,  powerful 
being.  The  temptation  was  presented  in  a  pleasing  and  persuasive  form ;  it  appealed 
at  once  to  the  sense  of  taste,  to  the  love  of  beauty,  and  to  the  desire  for  knowledge ; 
and  man  yielded  to  it,  and  fell.  But  his  guilt  appears  to  us  to  be  far  less  than  that  of 
the  angels  who  sinned.  Is  it  not  a  reasouable  conclusion  that  God  marks  the  degrees 
of  guilt,  notes  every  aggravating  or  extenuating  circumstance,  and  treats  the  offender 
accordingly  ? 

II.  Because  evert  fallen  angel  consented  to  the  teansqbession  bt  which 

THEY  FELL,  WHILE  MAN,  THROUGH  THE  LAWS  OP  HIS  BEING,  SUFFERS  FROM  THK  SIN 
OF  THE  FIRST  TRANSGRESSORS  TO  WHICH  THEY  ALONE  CONSENTED.      The  sin  of  the  angels 

affected  only  tliose  of  their  number  who  were  guilty  of  actual  participation  therein. 
But  the  condition  of  every  man  is  greatly  affected  through  the  sin  of  the  first  parents 
of  our  race.    The  way  in  which  men  are  brought  into  being  differs  from  that  of  angels. 

'  See  oni  homily  on  vera.  4,  5 ;  and  on  ver.  A 
■KBBSWI.  - 


66  THE  liPISTLi:  TO  THE  HEBBBWS.  [oh.  n.  1—18. 

Generation  obtains  Mnongst  men,  bnt  not  amongst  angela.  We  are  bom  with  an 
inclination,  a  bias,  to  ttiat  which  is  evil.  Were  it  not  for  the  grace  of  God,  that 
inclination  would  be  irresistible.  If  Christ  had  not  come  to  our  help,  we  must  have 
been  utterly  ruined  by  reason  of  a  transgression  for  which  we  could  not  possibly  have 
been  in  any  way  responsible.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  very  powerful  reason  why  God 
should  provide  redemption  for  man  rather  than  for  angels. 
III.  Because  the  pbefebenoe  shown  to  man  fdkkishes  a  stbiking  illttbtbation 

OF    DlVIKE    JUSTICE,    WHICH    EXERCISES    A    8ALUTABT    INFLUENCE   ON   BOTH   UNFALIiEN 

ANGELS  AND  BEDEEMED  HEN.  Had  the  preference  been  given  to  fallen  angels  it  would 
not  have  set  forth  the  justice  of  God.  It  could  not  have  been  just  to  have  provided 
help  for  the  guiltier  race  while  leaving  the  less  guilty  race  to  perish;  or  to  have 
redeemed  those  who  individually  consented  to  the  rebellion,  while  resigning  to  ruin 
untold  millions  who  took  no  part  in  the  sin  by  which  their  race  fell.  But  in  the  pre- 
ference given  to  fallen  man,  we  have  a  clear  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  Qoi.  The 
fact  that  he  has  left  fallen  angels  to  their  righteous  doom,  being  known  to  the  unfallen 
universe,  will  bind  the  good  more  firmly  in  their  allegiance  to  the  Almighty.  And  a 
knowledge  of  the  great  price  with  which  fallen  men  were  redeemed  will  so  impress  the 
saved  with  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  justice  of  God,  and  the  benevolence  of  the  Divine' 
Law,  and  the  love  of  the  heavenly  Father,  as  to  secure  their  everlasting  and  ever- 
growing loyalty  to  God.  Thus  even  we,  with  our  dim  perceptions  and  feeble  reason, 
can  discover  wise  and  worthy  reasons  for  the  Divine  choice  of  lost  man  for  redemption 
rather  than  of  lost  angels.  "Just  and  true  are  all  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints;" 
"  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of  God  I "  etc. 
(Rom.  xi.  33 — 36).  Two  inferences  of  great  importance  are  deducible  from  our  subject. 
1.  That  the  guilt  of  those  who  reject  the  proffered  hdp  of  Christ  is  greater  than  that 
of  fallen  angels.  How  great  soever  the  guilt  of  demons  may  be,  they  nave  not  incurred 
that  of  rejecting  the  gracious  offers  of  pardon  and  restoration.  But  those  men  who 
neglect  the  great  salvation  must  quench  the  Holy  Spirit,  harden  their  hearts  against 
the  drawings  of  the  Saviour's  love,  and  the  grace  of  the  Divine  Father,  etc.  Of  such 
sin  even  demons  are  not  guilty.  2.  That  the  blessedness  of  those  viho  accept  the  hdp 
of  Christ  wHl  he  greater,  in  some  respects,  than  that  of  holy  avgels.  Angels  have  many 
joys,  but  the  joy  of  redemption  they  know  not;  man  alone  knows  tlmt  joy;  and  it 
appears  to  us  that  of  all  joys  it  must  be  the  deepest,  tenderest,  intensest.  Let  us 
personally  avail  ourselves  of  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. — W.  J. 

Vers.  17, 18. — Ow  great  High  Priest — hit  functions  and  qualificatiotu.  "Where- 
fore in  all  things  it  behoved  him,"  etc. 

I.  The  FUNCTIONS  of  oub  qbeat  High  Priest.  1.  To  make  atonement  for  won  as 
a  sinner.  "  A  High  Priest  ...  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people." 
Various  are  the  renderings  of  this  clause.  Revised  Version,  "  to  make  propitiation  ; " 
Alford,  "to  make  expiation;"  Ebrard,  and  Stuart  also,  "to  make  atonement." 
Ebrard  says,  "  'l\&(rKe(recu  comes  from  7Aaos.  .  .  .  *I\aoi  denotes,  not  the  internal  dis- 
position of  God  towards  man,  but  the  actual,  positive  expression  and  radiation  of 
that  feeling  which  first  becomes  again  possible  towards  the  redeemed ;  and  2A((4rK«r0ai 
means  to  make  it  again  possible  for  God  to  be  X\aos,  i.e.  to  make  a  real  atonement  for 
real  guilt."  Whence  arises  this  need  of  atonement  ?  Not  because  God  was  indisposed 
to  forgive  and  save  man.  It  has  been  well  said  by  Delitzsch,  "  As  the  Old  Testament 
nowhere  says  that  sacrifice  propitiated  God's  wrath,  lest  it  should  be  thought  that 
sacrifice  was  an  act  by  which,  as  such,  man  influenced  God  to  show  him  grace ;  so  also 
the  New.  Testament  never  says  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  propitiated  Gbd's  wrath,  lest 
it  may  be  thought  that  it  was  an  act  anticipatory  ol'  God's  gracious  purpose,  which 
obtained,  and,  so  to  speak,  forced  from  God,  previously  reluctant,  without  his  own  con- 
currence, grace  instead  of  wrath."  The  death  of  Jesus  Christ  for  us  was  the  expression 
of  the  love  of  God  towards  us,  and  not  its  procuring  cause.  Why,  then,  was  the  sacrifice 
of  the  cross  necessary  to  the  forgiveness  of  our  sin  and  the  sanctification  of  our 
being?  (1)  To  maintain  the  majestic  authority  of  God's  Law.  Obedience  to  Uw  is  an 
indispensable  condition  of  moral  well-oeing.  Man  cannot  be  saved  except  In  harmony 
with  it.  The  perfect  obedience  ot  our  Lord,  who  was  "oiiedient  even  unto  deaib,  yea, 
I  lie  death  of  tlio  cross,"  is  the  most  strikmg  and  significant  testimony  "  that  the  Law 


CW.II.1— 18.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  «7 

Is  holy,  and  th«  commandment  boly,  and  just,  and  good."  (2)  To  meet  the  dee]! 
needs  of  man's  spiritual  nature.  Man  needs  the  removal  of  his  alienation  from  God. 
His  dns  have  separated  between  him  and  his  God.  He  is  alienated  and  an  enemy  in 
his  mind  by  wicked  works.  And  the  death  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father  was 
necessary  to  reconcile  him  to  God.  That  death  was  both  "  a  response  to  the  imperious 
claims  of  the  eternal  law  of  righteousness,  and  the  final  appeal  of  the  Divine  love  to 
the  conscience  and  affections  of  the  human  race."  That  appeal  moves  man's  heart, 
and  awakens  within  it  love  to  God.  Moreover,  man  needs  the  satisfaction  of  the 
instinct  of  right  now  awakened  within  him.  The  truly  penitent  soul,  knowing  that  sin 
is  rightly  followed  by  suffering,  and  if  persisted  in  leads  to  death,  and,  hating  sin  in 
itself,  would  fain  suffer  as  an  atonement  for  its  sins  and  as  a  homage  to  goodness  and 
truth.  Such  a  penitent  soul  feels  that  "without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  The  awakened  conscience  cries  out  for  atonement.  Our  Lord's  death 
for  sin,  the  voluntary  svirrender  of  his  life  upon  the  cross  for  us,  meets  this  deep 
and  urgent  need  of  the  religious  heart.  2.  To  succour  man  as  o  sufferer.  Man 
needs  a  High  Priest  who  "is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted."  The  word 
"tempted"  is  used  in  two  senses  in  the  Bible.  (1)  Tested,  proved,  with  a  good 
intent,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  1).  St.  James  also  writes  of  tempta- 
tions of  this  kind  (Jas.  i.  2,  3).  (2)  Tempted  with  evil  intent,  or  solicitation  to  sin. 
In  both  these  senses  man  is  tempted.  He  is  tried  by  suffering  and  sorrow,  by 
physical  pain  and  spiritual  conflict.  He  is  also  assailed  by  subtle  solicitations  to 
sin.  He  requires  a  High  Priest  who  will  be  able  to  help  him  in  these  trying 
experiences;  one  who  will  give  him  sympathy  in  his  sorrows,  inspire  him  with 
patience  in  his  trials,  and  with  spiritual  discernment  and  strength  in  his  temptations 
to  sin.    Such  are  the  functions  of  our  great  High  Priest. 

II.  The  qualifications  of  our  obgat  High  Pbiebt.  1.  He  must  share  our  nature 
in  order  that  he  might  make  atonement  for  us  as  sinners.  The  perfect  obedience  which 
our  Lord  rendered  to  the  holy  will  of  God,  the  painful  sufferings  which  he  patiently 
endured,  and  the  terrible  death  which  he  voluntarily  submitted  to,  could  not  have 
constituted  an  atonement  for  us  had  he  not  previously  taken  upon  himself  our  nature. 
"  Wherefore  it  behoved  him  in  all  things  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren."  It  was 
morally  necessary  that  he  should  share  our  nature  if  he  would  efficiently  serve  ns  as 
our  High  Priest.  2.  He  must  share  our  trials  in  order  that  he  might  succour  us  in  oar 
sufferings.  Our  High  Priest  must  be  "  merciful,"  so  as  to  feel  compassion  for  suffering 
and  tempted  men.  He  must  be  "  faithful,"  so  as  to  elicit  and  retain  the  confidence 
of  those  whom  he  represents  before  God.  He  must  himself  suffer  temptation,  that 
he  may  efficiently  help  the  tempted.  Both  classes  of  temptation  assailed  him.  He 
was  tempted  by  Satanic  suggestion  and  argument  and  inducement.  He  was  tried  by 
severest  physical  pains,  and  by  spiritual  sorrows  which  grew  into  the  great  over- 
whelming agony.  "  A  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.  .  .  .  Surely  he 
hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows."  Hence  he  is  able  to  succour  them 
that  are  tempted.  He  can  not  only  feel  for  them,  but  with  them.  By  his  personal 
experience  of  our  sufferings  he  has  acquired  the  power  of  sympathy  with  us  in  them. 
"  As  God,  he  knows  what  is  in  us ;  but  as  man,  he  feels  it  also."  "  Sympathy," 
says  Burke,  "  may  be  considered  as  a  sort  of  substitution,  by  which  we  are  put  into 
the  place  of  another  man,  and  affected  in  many  respects  as  he  is  affected."  Thus  our 
great  High  Priest  sympathizes  with  his  tried  people.  "  In  all  their  affliction  he  is 
afflicted."  He  succours  as  well  as  sympathizes ;  he  inspires  with  courage  as  well  as 
regards  with  compassion ;  and  in  our  weakness  he  makes  us  stroEg  in  himself  "  and 
in  the  power  of  his  might."  Having  such  a  High  Priest,  let  us  trust  him  heartily 
and  at  all  times. — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — An  exhortation  against  drifting  away  from  the  glorious  Son  of  Ood. 
This  passage  is  evidently  a  parenthesis,  no  link  in  the  argument.  Like  the  acknow- 
ledged Epistles  of  Paul,  this  is  characterized  by  frequent  sudden  and  brief  departures 
from  the  general  outline  of  thought.  Like  a  river,  the  outline  is  clear  from  beginning 
to  end,  but  here  and  there  are  small  side  channels  into  which  the  strefim  is  swiftly, 
involuntarily  drawn,  to  rejoin  the  main  current  a  little  lower  down.  One  of  these  we 
have  before  ua.    The  interjection  of  this  passage  is  rery  natural.     The  last  chapter 


68  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEl  EEWS.  [oh.  n.  1—18, 

ended  with  "  the  heirs  of  salvation  j "  the  writer  has  brought  his  hearers  to  this  point 
— the  grandeur  of  the  salvation  they  inherit.  But,  remember,  he  has  one  object  before 
him,  the  confirmation  of  the  Hebrews  wavering  under  the  pressure  of  persecution.  He 
doesn't  write  merely  as  a  logician,  but  as  an  anxious  friend ;  he  cannot,  therefore,  wait  to 
enforce  the  application  of  his  argument  when  he  reaches  the  end,  but  drops  the  thread 
of  his  idea  for  a  moment  to  break  out  in  an  earnest  appeal  that  this  great  salvation 
should  be  cleaved  to.  1.  Observe  that  he  is  not  writing  to  the  ungodly,  hut  to  a 
Christian  Church.  However  suituble  these  words  as  an  address  to  the  ungodly,  they 
are  here  spoken  to  professing  Christians  who  had  taken  a  bold  stand  for  Christ  and  the 
gospel  (cli.  X.  32 — 34).  2.  Observe  that  the  literal  rendering  of  the  end  of  the  first 
verse  is  "  lest  (U  any  time  we  drift  away."  The  words,  "  from  them,"  italicized  in 
the  Revised  Version,  are  misleading.  The  drifting  away  that  is  deprecated  is,  not 
"  from  the  things  that  were  heard,"  but /row  Christ.  Subject — An  exhortation  against 
drifting  away  from  the  glorious  Son  of  Ood. 

I.  To  DBIFT  AWAT  FBOU  GbBIST  IS  FEARFULLY  P08SIBLB.      It  U   K) :   1.   BeCaUSe  the 

soul  is  not  always  moored  to  Christ  wh»n  it  is  brought  to  Christ.  We  regard  it  a 
doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  that  the  true  believer  cannot  be  lost,  that  the  salvation 
which  on  faith  in  Christ  he  receives  is  for  ever,  the  might  of  Christ  to  supply  all  that 
is  necessary  to  salvation  being  the  warrant  of  it.  Why,  then,  are  these  professing 
Christians  warned  against  drifting  away  from  Christ  ?  It  is  possible  to  be  brought  to 
Christ  without  being  anchored  to  him.  A  number  of  iniiuences  may  lead  one  close  to 
the  Redeemer,  between  whom  and  Christ  there  is,  nevertheless,  no  vital  union,  and  as 
long  as  the  tide  runs  that  way  his  safety  may  not  be  suspected  even  by  himself,  but  let 
the  tide  turn  and  his  lack  of  union  becomes  apparent  and  he  may  drift  away  and  be  lost. 

2.  Because  powerful  adverse  currents  tend  to  carry  the  soul  from  the  Saviour.  Some- 
times the  current  leads  toward  Christ.  It  had  been  so  with  these  professing  Hebrews. 
But  it  is  not  always  that  way ;  difficulties  occur,  winds  of  temptation  blow,  the  tide  of 
worldly  custom  runs  high,  the  unseen  force  of  depraved  inclination  gathers  power;  and 
then,  however  strong  the  cable,  however  firmly  it  may  bind  shore  and  ship  together, 
it  will  creak  and  strain,  and  every  fibre  of  it  be  needed  to  hold  the  ship  in  safety. 
But  what  if  there  be  no  cable,  no  vital  faith,  in  that  day  ?  Then  the  soul  will  inevi- 
tably part  company  with  Christ, 'leaving  the  harbour  where  it  has  lain  so  long,  and 
be  seen  (when  such  a  storm  shall  blow  as  has  never  blown  on  it  yet)  drifting  away. 

3.  Because  the  departure  of  the  soul  from  Christ  may  he  for  some  time  imperceptible. 
Drifting  away  is  a  departure  silent,  gradual,  unnoticeable.  At  sunset  the  ship  is 
close  to  shore  and  all  is  safe ;  without  a  warning  it  drops  into  the  tide,  and  swings 
round,  and  with  no  sound  but  the  ripple  of  the  water  is  carried  down  the  stream  to  the 
open  sea,  and  the  crew  may  sleep  through  it  all.  So,  departure  from  Christ  may  be  as 
involuntary  and  quiet  as  that;  a  silent,  ceaseless,  unconscious  creeping  back  to  old 
habits.  There  is  its  danger.  Drifting  away  means  leaving  Christ  without  knowing  it, 
till  we  find  ourselves  far  out  at  sea,  and  a  tide  we  cannot  resist  bearing  us  still  further 
away.  You  have  seen  men  who  were  once  close  to  Christ,  but  whilst  they  slept  they 
have  unconsciously  glided  away,  and  by  the  current  of  worldliness  been  carried  into 
the  rapids  and  whirled  along  fiister  and  faster,  only  waking  to  stare  wildly  at  their 
helplessness,  and  close  hands  and  eyes  in  despair  for  the  final  plunge  into  the 
eternal  gulf. 

II.  To  DRIFT  AWAT  FBOM  ChRIST  MUST  END  IN  HOPELESS  BniN.       If  We  drift  away 

"  how  shall  we  escape  "  ?  1.  To  drift  away  from  Christ  is  to  leave  the  only  Refuge 
from  our  sin's  consequences.  "  For  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  steadfast,  and  every 
transgression, .  .  .  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  The  point 
is,  we  are  condemned  already ;  apart  from  the  great  salvation  we  are  in  the  position  of 
those  whose  transgressions  and  disobediences  were  followed  by  righteous  judgment. 
But  under  these  circumstances  a  "great  salvation"  has  been  provided.  "Great," 
indeed!  A  full  and  everlasting  remission  of  all  sin,  the  enjoyment  of  God's  fatherly 
favotir,  the  transformation  of  our  moral  nature,  a  tranquil  conscience,  a  bright  and 
glorious  hope  fur  eternity  ;  and  all  this  free  to  whosoever  will  accept  it.  Now,  if  man 
is  under  condemnation  apart  from  this,  what  must  he  be  if,  this  having  been  secured 
and  oflered  to  him,  he  ignores  and  neglects  it?  To  suffer  ourselves  to  drift  away  from 
Christ  is  to  add  to  the  madness  of  leaving  the  only  haven  of  securitjr,  the  guilt  of 


CH.  ii.l_18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  69 

refusing  that  grace  which  would  have  saved  us  had  we  let  it,  2.  To  drift  away  from 
GhrUt  it  to  disregard  the  supreme  dignify  of  him  who  offers  the  salvation  to  us. 
"  So  great  salvation,  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord."  The  point  is 
the  dignity  of  him  who  brings  the  salvation  to  us.  Angels  were  employed  in  the 
ministrations  of  the  old  dispensation  ;  "  The  Law  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of 
a  mediator."  But  he  who  has  brought  the  word  in  these  last  days  is  God  the  Sou.  He 
has  spoken  it  by  being  it;  and  then  by  uttering  it — uttering  it  to  our  hearts  by  his 
Spirit.  The  overtures  of  salvation  are  not  made  by  man  to  God,  but  by  God  to  man ; 
it  ia  not  the  condemned  rebel  that  appeals  to  the  oifended  Sovereign  for  salvation,  but 
the  offended  Sovereign  appealing  to  the  rebel.  What  a  spectacle— God,  as  it  were,  on 
his  knees  before  men,  beseeching  them  to  be  saved  I  "  As  though  God  did  beseech 
you,"  etc.  Seehow  that  adds  to  man's  guilt,  and  the  certainty  of  his  ruin  if  he  drifts 
away  from  Christ.  3.  To  drift  away  from  Christ  is  to  close  our  eyes  wilfidly  to  the 
urgency  of  hit  claims.  "  Which,  having  at  the  first  been  spoken  through  the  Lord, 
was  confirmed  unto,"  ete.  (vers.  3,  4).  The  abundant  proof  they  had  received  as  to  the 
divinity  of  this  Word  of  salvation  is  the  point  here.  Man  has  received  the  utmost 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  What  he  has  seen  of  its  results  in  the  lives  and 
characters  of  others  is,  of  itself  overwhelming  assurance  that  it  is  of  God ;  and  when 
he  hears  it  preached  he  knows  it  is  from  above,  he  knows  its  worth,  he  knows  its 
claim.  Think  of  what  it  ia  to  leave  Christ  after  that ;  to  depart  from  him,  though  you 
know  the  right  he  has  to  you,  and  the  blessings  he  wants  to  impart ;  to  be  lost,  not  in 
the  dark,  but  in  the  light !  The  apostle  gathers  up  these  arguments  against  leaving 
Christ,  in  this  earnest  appeal  to  reason  and  conscience :  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we 
neglect  so  great  salvation?"  There  is  no  answer  to  that.  "  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in 
hither  vrithout  a  wedding  garment  ?    And  he  was  speechless." 

IIL   To  DEUT  AW  AT   FBOM   ChBIST  IS  PREVENTED  BY  BAENE8T  HEED   TO  HIS  WOBD. 

"  We  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the  things  that  were  heard,  lest  haply  we 
drift  away."  Faith  is  the  cable  which  alone  can  moor  us  to  Christ ;  but  the  Word  of 
God  has  a  vital  bearing  on  faith;  therefore,  where  the  Scriptures  are  neglected,  there  is 
the  utmost  peril  of  drifting  away.  1.  Only  hy  ewrnest  heed  to  Divine  truth  can  you 
discover  whether,  in  yaw  soul,  faith  exists.  You  think  it  does,  but  you  may  be 
deceived ;  then  search  here  for  the  fruits  and  evidences  of  faith  ;  then  see  if  they  exist 
in  your  heart  and  life.  If  you  would  know  whether  you  have  faith,  you  must  bring 
yourstilf  to  the  test  this  Book  affords.  2.  Only  hy  earnest  heed  to  Divine  truth  can  you 
create  faith  where  it  does  not  exist.  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 
Word  of  God."  To  make  light  of  this  Book  is  to  remain  faithless.  3.  Only  hy  earnest 
lieed  to  Divine  truth  can  faith  he  maintained  where  it  does  exist.  How  does  Christ 
maintain  faith  in  the  soul,  but  by  the  means  he  has  appointed?  He  gives  grace 
through  the  means  of  grace.  To  neglect  the  means,  therefore,  is  to  lose  the  grace. 
Scripture  declares  the  Divine  Word  to  be  the  means  employed  for  our  sanctification. 
Faith  is  the  cable  that  holds  the  soul  to  the  Eedeemer.  The  Word  creates  and 
maintains  the  faith.  "  Therefore  we  ought  to  give,"  etc.  "  Drift  away  I "  Away 
from  Christ,  the  only  Haven ;  drift  away  into  the  wild,  wintry,  shoreless  sea  of  doom — 
drifted  away  by  the  currents  of  worldliness  and  care.  We  drift  away  silently  and 
imperceptibly ;  are  you  sure  you  are  securely  moored  to  the  Rock  of  ages  ? — C.  N. 

Vera.  6 — ^10. —  7%c  dignity  of  human  nature  shows  that  the  Incarnation  was  not 
degrading  to  the  Godhead.  The  apostle  proceeds  v/ith  his  argument  broken  off  at 
end  of  the  first  chapter.  The  first  chapter  deals  with  the  Deity  of  Christ ;  the  second 
with  his  humanity ;  thus  the  Epistle  is  based  on  the  fact  of  the  dual  nature  of  our 
Lord.  Having  spoken  of  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  he  has  to  meet  the  objection  which 
presented  itself  with  great  force  to  the  Hebrews.  Why  should  this  glorious  Being 
stoop  to  the  humiliation  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  f  To  the  Jew,  Christ  crucified  was  a 
stumbling-block  (see  John  x.  30 — 33 ;  xii.  32 — 34).  The  writer  needs  to  justify  the 
Incarnation.  (Observe,  he  does  not  attempt  to  prove  the  real  humanity  of  Jesus. 
Clearly  the  Hebrews  did  not  share  subsequent  doubts  on  this  point,  for  there  is  not  a 
word  in  the  Epistle — though  it  is  based  on  the  fact — to  prove  that  Jesus  was  man;  it  is 
assumed,  than  which  there  can  be  no  stronger  evidence  of  it,  for  if  the  Hebrews, 
Christ's  contemporaries,  cherished  no  doubts  with  regard  to  it,  the  Inter  doubts  of  others 


70  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  n.  1—18. 

are  worth  nothing.)  In  justifying  the  Incarnation,  the  writer  uses  in  this  chapter 
four  progressive  arguments,  closely  woven  together  yet  distinct.  The  first  is  in  this 
passage.  Suhject — The  dignity  of  human  nature  shows  that  the  Incarnation  was  not 
degrading  to  the  Godhead.  True,  Christ  did  assume  human  nature,  and  that  was  an 
act  of  infinite  condescension ;  hut  there  was  no  degradation  in  it,  for  consider  how 
suhlime  this  nature  is  in  God's  estimate. 

L  The  dignity  of  human  nathkb  and  man'b  failubb  to  attain  it.  (Vers.  5— 
8.)  (Ohserve  marginal  readings  in  Revised  Version,  ver.  6,  "  the  inhabited  earth  ; " 
ver.  7,  "  for  a  little  while.")  In  proof  of  this  dignity,  the  writer  quotes  from  their  own 
Scriptures.  (Observe  that  this  Epistle  is  very  remaikable  for  its  quotations  from  the 
Old  Testament.  Many  of  the  Epistles  addressed  to  Gentile  believers  have  no  quota- 
tions, but  in  this  they  are  found  in  almost  every  page.  To  the  Jew  the  Scriptures  were 
a  final  authority,  so  in  writing  to  them  each  successive  step  of  the  argument  is  based 
thereun.)  He  bids  them,  therefore,  read  in  the  eighth  psalm  how  lofty  is  God's  idea 
with  regard  to  man.  The  picture  drawn  there  may  he  ideal,  may  never  have  been 
reached;  but  it  is  God's  idea,  and  being  so,  some  day  it  shall  be  fulfilled.  What, 
then,  is  the  proper  dignity  of  humanity  ?  what  the  place  in  the  universe  to  be  filled  by 
this  wondrous  being,  man,  who  in  himself,  unlike  God's  other  works,  is  a  combination 
of  the  material  and  the  spiritual  ?  The  psalm  specifies  in  token  of  man's  greatness : 
1.  Eis  lordship  over  creation.  "Thou  didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands; 
thou  didst  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet."  Man  is  not  one  of  innu- 
merable beings  made  to  people  the  earth ;  not  a  link  in  an  endless  series,  as  though  up  to 
him  all  previous  things  have  led,  and  from  him  others  higher  still  shall  be  evolved.  The 
world  was  made  for  him,  made  and  furnished  (see  Gen.  i.)  to  be  his  home,  the  scene  of 
bis  education,  the  means  of  his  discipline,  the  minister  to  his  happiness.  Man  is 
greater,  in  God's  sight,  than  all  the  woilds ;  he  was  made  to  be  a  crowned  and  sceptred 
king,  with  them  for  his  servants;  he  was  made  in  God's  image  to  have  dominion  over 
them  all.  2.  His  fellowship  with  Ood.  "  Man,  thou  art  mindful  of  him  .  .  .  the 
son  of  man,  thou  visitest  him  1 "  God  rejoices  in  all  the  works  of  his  hands,  but  how 
different  his  feeling  towards  men  I  They  are  to  have  communion  with  him,  which 
involves  similarity  of  nature;  they  are  taught  to  pray,  "Our  Father,  which  art  in 
heaven.**  The  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  is  the  picture  of  his  attitude  with  regard  to 
them — his  sorrow,  and  joy,  and  welcome,  and  fellowship,  and  care.  How  great  that 
nature  ot  which  this  is  true !  3.  Eis  destiny  to  be  higher  than  the  angels.  "  Thou 
madest  him,  for  a  little  while,  lower  than  the  angels ;  .  .  .  thou  didst  put  all  things  . . . 
unoer  his  feet."  Nothing  is  left  out ;  angels,  principalities,  powers,  are  included.  How 
great  the  angels ;  how  sublime  the  idea  Scripture  gives  of  them !  But  man  is  only  made 
lower  than  they  for  a  little  while.  He  is  the  son,  they  are  the  servants.  4.  Sis 
redemption  secured  at  so  great  a  price.  "Jesus  .  .  .  should  taste  death  for  every 
man."  How  great  is  he  of  whom  Christ  could  say,  "  I  will  give  my  heavenly  crown  for 
liim  ;  1  will  pass  through  the  humiliation  of  a  sorrowful  human  life  for  him ;  I  will  how 
my  head  in  accursed  death  for  him;  I  will  forfeit  my  Father's  favour  for  him!"  But 
this  glorious  dignity  is  not  yet  reached,  "  But  now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  sub- 
jected to  him."  If  we  compare  the  eighth  psalm  with  the  actual  condition  of  things,  it 
reads  like  a  satire.  Traces  of  man's  greatness  are  seen  in  his  moral  nature  and  achieve- 
ments ;  but  when  we  behold  the  poverty,  ignorance,  disease,  misery,  crime,  sin,  which 
abonnd  under  the  sun,  and  compare  them  with  the  magnificent  ideal  of  Scripture,  the 
distance  of  the  actual  from  the  ideal  seems  too  great  to  be  destroyed. 

II,  The  assumption  op  human  nature  bt  Christ,  and  its  perfection  beached 
D)  HIM.  "But  we  behold  him  who  hath  been  made  for  a  little  while  lower  than 
the  angels,  even  Jesus,  because  of  the  suffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory  and 
honoui.  This  ideal  psalm  is  realized  in  Christ;  all  that  man  was  to  be  we  see  in 
Jesus.  1.  Christ  cammed  thai  nature  which  is  lower  than  the  angels.  Mark  the 
contrast  between  this  and  the  substance  of  the  first  chapter.  This  is  the  first  chapter  : 
Christ  "  so  much  better  than  the  angels."  This  is  the  second :  "  Jesus,  made  for  a  little 
while  lower  than  the  angels."  How  great  the  contrast  between  the  angels  who  heralded 
his  birth,  and  the  feeble  babe ;  between  the  angels  who  ministered  to  him,  and  the  Isnely 
Man  worn  with  conflict ;  between  the  angels  who  strengthened  him  in  Gethsemane,  and 
the  Man  of  sorrows,  whose  sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blsod ;  between  the  angels 


CH.n.1— la]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  Tl 

vho  kept  bis  tomb,  and  that  lifeless  body  i  Think  of  the  Lord  of  angels  needing  angelic 
minlBtr^  I 

•HiB  earnest  prayer,  his  deepening  groans, 
Were  heard  before  angelic  thrones ; 

Amazement  wrapped  the  sky ! 
•Go,  strengthen  Christ,"  the  Father  saidt 
Th'  astonished  seraph  bowed  his  head. 
And  left  the  realms  on  high." 

8.  Christ  has  lifted  that  nature  far  higher  thorn  the  angels,  "  We  behold  him  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour."  ,  When  Christ  returned  to  his  native  position,  he  retained  his 
human  nature  for  evermore;  as  when  he  trod  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  and  hills  of 
Galilee—"  this  same  Jesus."  Exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  he  is  still  "  the 
Man,"  the  man  wearing  his  human  body,  that  body  spiritual  in  the  like  of  which 
Moses  and  Elias  appeared  at  the  Tninsfiguration,  and  the  saints  will  be  enwrapped  at 
the  resurrection.  It  is  thus,  as  man,  he  is  exalted  King  over  all.  To  him,  as  man, 
every  knee  doth  bow  in  heaven,  and  shall  bow  on  earth ;  on  his  head,  as  man,  are  many 
crowns ;  in  his  human  hand  rests  the  sceptre  which  rules  the  universe ;  and  before  him, 
as  man,  the  hosts  of  heaven  continually  do  cry, "  Thou  art  the  King  of  glory,  0  Christ." 
3.  Christ's  ability  for  this  was  due  to  the  suffering  of  death.  Christ  inherits  the  throne 
of  heaven  as  man,  as  the  meritorious  reward  of  his  sufferings.  So  Isaiah  (liii.  11, 12) ;  so 
Paul  (Phil.  ii.  6 — 11).  What  Christ  is  in  his  mediatorial  capacity  he  is  because  he  died; 
apart  from  his  death,  he  would  have  no  power  to  be  or  do  anything  for  man.  Man  has 
failed  to  be  what  God  meant  him  to  be ;  Christ  has  become  it  all ;  and  through  the 
suffering  of  death  retains  it  all  for  evermore. 

III.  The  perfection  of  human  nature  in  Christ  is  the  pledge  op  its  per- 
fection IN  his  people.  That  is  evidently  the  idea  here :  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things 
subjected  to  [man],  but  we  behold  Jesus  .  .  .  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  The 
truth  is  that  whereas  we  are  groaning  in  our  failure  to  reach  the  eighth-psalm  ideal, 
Christ  has  attained  that  sublimity  which  human  nature  ought  to  reach  ;  and  through 
him  we  shall  one  day  attain  it  too.  The  littleness  under  which  we  labour  we  shall 
shake  off,  and  rise  to  that  grand  summit  in  which  there  will  be  only  One  above  us,  Ood 
over  all ;  the  pledge  of  this  being  that  that  summit  is  already  reached  by  Christ  as  man. 
1.  The  perfection  of  human  nature  in  Christ  is  the  tohen  of  the  complete  removal  of  man's 
disabilities.  God  was  unable  to  fulfil  his  ideal  for  man,  because  sin  forfeited  exaltation 
and  incurred  abasement.  Christ  undertook,  as  man's  Kepresentative,  to  remove  the  sin 
by  an  atoning  death.  The  exaltation  of  Jesus  from  the  sepulchre  to  the  throne  was  the 
proof  that  the  atonement  was  sufficient.  Now  the  hindrance  to  God  fulfilling  his 
purpose  for  man  is  removed :  the  eighth-psalm  ideal  is  that  purpose ;  that  ideal  will, 
therefore,  be  attained.  2.  The  perfection  of  human  nature  in  Christ  is  the  assurance  of 
all  power  in  the  hands  of  the  Mediator.  Christ  raised  to  supreme  authority  as  God- 
Man,  means  that  all  the  authority  he  possesses  is  to  be  used  in  his  redemptive  work. 
Then,  depend  upon  it,  ha  will  redeem  perfectly ;  he  will  save  up  to  the  highest  point  of 
salvation  of  which  man  is  capable,  and  which  even  God  desires.  There  can  be  no  fear 
of  his  peiiple  reaching  the  eighth-psalm  ideal  when  they  know  that  on  purpose  to 
raise  them  to  it,  Christ,  in  the  nature  and  character  of  Saviour,  has  been  placed  on  the 
highest  throne.  3.  The  perfection  of  human  nature  in  Christ  is  the  promise  of  perfec- 
tion to  all  who  are  to  be  made  like  him.  His  people  are  to  be  "glorified  together"  with 
him,  sit  with  him  on  his  throne,  become  like  him  when  they  see  him.  See  here  what 
Christ  is ;  learn  thereby  what  man  in  him  shall  be ;  for  Christ  in  glory  is  but  the  First- 
fruits  of  perfected  humanity. — C.  N. 

Ver.  10. — The  Incarnation,  being  the  mdy  means  of  securing  perfect  salvation  for  men, 
was  becoming  to  God.  This  is  the  second  argument  by  which  the  writer  justifies  the 
Incarnation.  In  the  previous  five  verses  he  has  shown  that  it  was  not  degrading  to  the 
Godhead.  From  that  he  advances  to  affirm  here  that  it  was  actually  becoming ;  for  the 
stress  of  this  text  is  in  the  words,  "  It  became  him."  Note  that  the  expression, "  Author 
of  their  salvation,"  is  simply  equivalent  to  their  Saviour.  Also  that  the  word  "  perfect " 
does  not  refer  to  the  perfection  of  Christ's  character ;  that  was  eternally  perfect ;  no 
nifierings  oould  make  Christ  better  than  he  was.    You  must  apply  the  term  to  kit 


72  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  Loh.  n.  1— 18. 

abUity  to  save.  Apart  from  his  humiliation  he  could  not  have  teen  a  perfect  Saviour. 
The  apostle  says,  therefore,  that  to  make  Christ  perfect  as  a  Saviour,  through  humilia- 
tion, was  In  harmony  with  the  perfections  of  God.  Subject — The  Incarnation,  being 
the  ortiymtans  of  securing  perfect  salvation  for  men,  was  becoming  to  Ood. 

L  It  bsoame  God  to  sayi.  That  is  the  lowest  step  in  the  argument,  and  does  not 
need  proof,  God  does  save,  that  is  certain ;  then  it  must  become  him  to  save,  for  he  can 
do  nothing  which  is  unbecoming.  But  think  of  what  the  text  implies  about  this  salva- 
tion which  it  becomes  God  to  give.  1.  Salvation  originates  in  him.  "  Through  whom 
are  all  things."  Salvation  is  the  outcome  of  his  will.  Not  suggested  by  human  supplica-  _ 
tion ;  not  claimed  by  the  recovered  righteousness  of  any  that  had  fallen ;  not  extorted  by 
the  atonement  of  some  gracious  Saviour.  It  came  from  himself.  "  God  so  loved  the  world," 
etc.  There  salvation  is  traced  back  to  its  source,  and  revealed  as  his  act.  The  desire  to 
save,  the  method  of  saving,  the  work  of  saving,  the  whole  transaction  from  beginning  to 
end,  is  of  God.  2.  Salvation  glorifies  him.  "  For  whom  are  all  things."  Everything  he 
does  is  for  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will  and  the  glory  of  his  Name.  What  a  beautiful 
light  that  throws  upon  redemption  I  How  it  falsifies  the  idea  that  God  is  unwilling 
to  save  1  God  has  so  identified  himself  with  man,  so  fixed  his  love  on  him,  that  he 
is  not  happy  if  man  remains  unsaved.  The  salvation  he  has  devised — we  say  it  is  for 
man ;  Scripture  says  it  is  for  God.  3.  Salvation  is  gratuitous  from  him.  He  provides 
•  "perfect"  Saviour — One  who  should  do  it  all.  Salvation  is  a  gift,  all  done  for  man, 
ao  that  man  in  his  helplessness  has  only  to  receive.  God  saves  men  for  nothing.  Put 
■11  this  together.  God  saves ;  this  salvation  originates  with  him ;  glorifies  him ;  is 
gratuitous  firom  him.  That  is  the  kind  of  salvation  which  he  bestows.  Then  this  is 
the  point — such  a  salvation  as  that  beccones  God.  Then  see  what  kind  of  a  Ood  ours 
it.  What  must  he  be  of  whose  nature  this  is  the  outcome ;  of  whose  thought  and 
love  this  is  the  fitting  expression ;  of  whose  character  this  is  the  suitable  revelation  ; 
who  is  never  more  perfectly  revealed  than  in  Christ  crucified ;  of  whom  it  can  be  said, 
such  a  salvation  "  became  him  "  ? 

II.  It  became  God  to  pbovidb  a  fbrfect  Savioub.  "  It  became  him  to  make  the 
Author  of  their  salvation  perfect."  Nothing  less  than  a  perfect  Saviour  would  become 
God.  "  As  for  God,  his  way  is  perfect."  Being  perfect  in  himself,  he  can  devise 
nothing  imperfect.  Being  perfect  in  his  resources,  he  cannot  fail  to  accomplish  perfectly 
all  he  devises.  It  is  so  in  everything.  Then  we  are  sure  that,  in  his  greatest  work,  he 
whom  he  sends  as  Redeemer  will  be  so  minutely  perfect  that  the  utmost  Divine  wisdom 
and  human  need  can  never  discover  a  particular  in  which  he  could  be  made  more 
efficient.  Less  than  that  could  not  become  God.  All  things  ore  to  show  forth  his 
glory.  But  his  redeeming  work  is  his  crowning  work ;  by  it  pre-eminently  is  to  be 
manifested  his  transcendent  greatness,  and  evoked  the  sweetest  and  most  triumphant 
song  of  eternity.  Then  this  must  be  the  most  complete  work  which  even  God  can  do ; 
anything  unfinished  here  could  not  become  him.  Moreover,  consider  that  he  bestows 
other  blessings  more  than  royally.  His  bestowments  surpass  our  need.  His  measure  of 
giving  is  "  exceeding  abundantly  above,"  etc.  But  the  Saviour  is  his  unspeakable  Gift, 
the  highest  expression  of  his  mercy.  It  is  inconceivable,  then,  that  he  who  outdoes  our 
need  in  everything  else  should  under-supply  it  in  his  greatest  gift  of  all.  It  is  evident 
that  less  than  a  perfect  Saviour  could  not  become  him.  But  what  is  necessary  to  a 
perfect  Saviour? — for  this,  whatever  it  be,  we  shall  find  in  Christ.  1.  A  perfect  Saviour 
mutt  perfectly  remove  tin't  penalty.  The  penalty  of  sin  must  be  dealt  with  first.  Sin's 
power  cannot  be  removed  until  the  penalty  is  gone.  That  penalty  is  an  awful  reality. 
"  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed,"  etc. ;  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death ;  "  "  The  wicked  shall 
be  turned,"  etc  Then,  if  he  who  comes  forth  to  save  is  a  perfect  Saviour,  he  must  be  able 
to  remove  every  whit  of  that  penalty  for  evermore,  and  able  to  do  it  by  himself.  Christ 
cUums  to  do  that.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation,"  etc.  2.  A  perfect  Saviour 
mutt  secure  perfect  holiness  in  t?ie  taved.  For  there  is  no  salvation  but  holiness.  Man 
is  Burrounded  by  temptations,  and  the  slave  of  corrupt  dispositions,  and  painfully  far 
from  God's  ideal.  If  he  who  comes  to  save  is  a  perfect  Saviour,  he  must  be  able  to 
deUver  us  from  sin's  power,  and  lead  us  up  to  that  sanctification  which  is  God's  will 
concerning  ue.  He  must  be  able  to  do  it  perfectly,  however  low  we  have  fallen,  or 
however  helpless  we  have  become.  Christ  claims  to  do  that.  "  0  wretched  man,"  etc.  I 
8,  A  perfect  Saviour  mutt  preserve  us  from  the  peril*  (/  the  way,  and  lead  us  to  tie 


OH.  n.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  7a 

perfect  glory.  For  between  us  and  the  celestial  city  are  dangers  any  of  which  is  enougb 
to  swallow  us  up.  But  if  he  who  comes  to  save  is  a  perfect  Saviour,  he  must  lead  us 
safely  through  all  these,  and  not  leave  us  till  he  has  brought  us  within  the  golden 
gates  where  no  foe  can  enter.  Christ  claims  to  do  that.  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to 
the  uttermost,"  etc.  4,  A  perfect  Saviour  and  a  perfect  salvation  in  Aim^what  a  pillow 
for  weary  man  to  lay  his  head  upon  1  It  must  be  so,  for  "  it  became  him  to  make  the 
Author  of  our  salvation  perfect." 

III.  It  became  God  to  make  thk  Saviour  PBKrEOT  through  bufferings.  Does 
not  the  text  imply  that  God  was  shut  up  to  this  mode  of  saving  ?  "  It  became  him," 
for  whom  are  all  things,  and  through  whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing,"  etc.  That  is, 
God's  boundless  resources,  his  unlimited  power  aud  wisdom,  were  of  no  avail  here ;  only 
through  Christ  crucified  was  salvation  possible.  Observe  that  it  did  not  become  God  to 
save  in  any  other  way,  because :  1.  Only  thus  could  salvation  be  in  harmony  with  his 
majesty.  Men  say  such  condescension  as  is  implied  in  the  Deity  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
is  derogatory  to  the  Godhead ;  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  majesty  of  the  Most  High 
should  stoop  to  such  a  depth.  But  all  God's  attributes  are  equal ;  his  condescension, 
therefore,  must  be  as  great  as  his  majesty.  Because  his  majesty  is  infinite,  no  less  than 
infinite  condescension  would  become  him.  2.  Only  thus  could  salvation  be  in  harmony 
with  his  holiness.  The  salvation  God  gives  must  be  consistent  with  his  infinite  dis- 
pleasure at  sin.  His  attributes  are  inseparable ;  all  that  God  is  is  in  every  part  of  him, 
and  every  deed.  As  he  cannot  do  what  is  notlove,  neither  can  he  do  what  is  not  holiness. 
He  could  not,  then,  pardon  sin  without  at  the  same  time  uttering  his  abhorrence  of  sin. 
How  could  he  do  this  apart  from  the  cross  ?  3.  Only  thus  could  salvation  be  in  harmony 
with  his  justice.  The  problem  to  be  solved  was — how  to  be  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour ; " 
true  to  the  honour  of  his  Law,  the  rectitude  of  his  government,  the  integrity  of  his  word, 
and  at  the  same  time  extend  mercy  to  the  sinner ;  how  at  once  fulfil  and  yet  remit  the 
threatened  penalty  ?  No  salvation  could  become  him  in  which  those  requirements  were 
not  equally  met.  How  could  they  be  met  but  in  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  of  Christ — 
"  the  Just  for  the  unjust"?  (Beware  of  the  theory  that  the  atonement  was  unjust 
because  God  thereby  punished  the  innocent  for  the  guilty.  That  is  not  true ;  God 
never  did  that.  He  took  the  suffering  on  himself.  He  who  atoned  was  God.)  4.  Only 
thus  could  salvation  be  in  harmony  with  his  l^ve.  For  one  end  of  the  atonement  was  to 
reveal  God's  love,  and  so  make  holiness  possible  to  man ;  for  of  that  holiness  God's  love 
is  the  mainspring.  The  atonement,  therefore,  must  be  the  highest  expression  of  Divine 
love.  That  was  only  reached  at  Calvary.  It  therefore  became  God  to  make  the 
Saviour  perfect  through  sufferings.     Is  not  "  the  offence  of  the  cross  "  removed  now  f 

IV.  It  became  God,  through  this  Savioub  perfected  by  sufferings,  to  bring 
MANT  SONS  UNTO  GLORY.  1.  It  becomes  him  to  make  use  of  this  perfected  S^tuiour  to  the 
full.  Having  made  Christ  a  Saviour  at  such  cost,  it  would  not  become  him  not  to  make 
the  greatest  use  of  him.  To  make  such  sacrifice  to  get  the  power  to  save  and  then  not 
to  use  that  power  would  be  inconsistent,  would  cancel  his  own  undertaking.  In  con- 
sistency Qod  cannot  withhold  giving  this  perfect  salvation  to  whosoever  will.  2.  It 
oecomes  him  to  reward  this  perfected  Saviour  to  the  utmost.  What  shall  be  the  recom- 
pense for  the  Redeemer's  sufferings  ?  What  result  shall  become  such  woe  as  his  ?  I 
see  in  distant  vision  "many  sons  brought  unto  glory;  "  "a  great  multitude,  which  no 
man  can  number,"  etc.     Yea, "  he  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  sovd,  and  be,"  etc. — -0.  N. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  Incarnation  a  necessity  of  the  redeeming  work  of  Ghrist.  A  third 
argument  to  justify  the  Incarnation.  The  writer  has  already  shown,  first,  that  the 
Incarnation  was  not  degrading ;  and  second,  that  it  was  actually  becoming  ;  he  here  goes 
on  to  say  that  it  was  necessary.  Subject — The  Incarnation  a  necessity  of  the  redeem- 
ing work  of  Ghrist. 

I.  OuE  Lord  on  earth  was  a  Man  amongst  men.  (Ver.  11.)  "  Parliook  of  th» 
same"  (ver.  14).  As  usual,  the  writer  appeals  to  the  Jewish  Scriptures;  they  assert, 
he  says,  the  humanity  of  the  Messiah.  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  is  based  on. 
the  entire  revelation  (f  Ood.  It  does  not  depend  on  "  proof-texts,"  but  underlies  the 
whole  Book ;  it  is  the  truth  which  gives  unity  to  the  whole,  so  that  if  it  be  removed 
the  Scriptures  fall  to  pieces  and  are  inexplicable.  How  delicately  it  is  woven  into  the 
web  of  Scriptuie  ini  peri  adcs  the  whole  fabric,  is  seen  in  the  particular  texts  the  apostle 


74  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  n.  1— la 


quotes  here.  They  are  not  the  texts  we  should  have  chosen — indeed,  we  should 
hardly  have  applied  tliem  to  Christ ;  but  he  who,  like  the  writer,  is  taught  by  the  Spirit, 
and  has  deepest  spiritual  insight  into  these  pages,  discerns  Christ  where  others  do  not, 
as  Jesus  did  when  "  begintiing  at  Moses  and  all,"  etc.  The  Old  Testament  begins  with 
the  uromise,  "  The  seed  of  the  woman,"  etc.,  goes  on  to  state  that  he  should  be  of  the 
stock  of  Abraham,  tribe  of  Judah,  family  of  David,  born  of  a  virgin  in  Bethlehem,  be 
a  Man  of  sorrows,  bear  the  chastisement  of  sins,  and  pour  out  his  soul  unto  death ;  and 
then  it  closes  with  the  declaration  that  ho  is  about  to  come,  and  that  liis  coming  should 
be  preceded  by  his  forerunner.  Then  the  Gospels  come  in  as  the  counterpart  and  fulfil- 
ment of  all  that,  and  tliere  is  not  an  Epistle  which  follows  which  is  not  based  on  the 
fact  with  which  Paul  opens  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (i.  3).  This  doctrine  is  the  key  to 
the  Bible  ;  and  no  wonder,  for  this  is  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  "  God  was  manifest 
ill  the  flesh."  2.  This  doctrine  involves  that  Christ  was  at  the  same  time  possessed  q/ 
two  distinct  natures.  That  is  hinted  at  here,  ia  "  not  ashamed  to  call  [men]  brethren," 
which  intimates  an  act  of  condescension  which  could  not  be  fulfilled  by  one  who  was 
merely  man.  You  cannot  imagine,  it  affirmed,  e.g.  of  Moses,  or  Elijah,  or  Paul,  or 
John,  that  they  were  "  not  ashamed,"  etc. ;  the  bond  of  brotherhood  in  their  case 
existed  of  necessity^  and  theie  could  be  no  humility  in  admitting  it,  as  is  implied  with 
regard  to  Jesus.  The  words  are  meaningless,  unless  he  was  by  nature  far  exalted  above 
man,  and  assumed  man's  nature  voluntarily.  Thus  the  writer  who  declares  Christ's 
manhood  plainly  implies  that  Christ  was  more  than  man.  He  who  walked  the  earth 
in  human  nature  was  at  the  same  time  the  most  high  God.  It  is  not  that  he  laid 
aside  his  Godhead.  He  could  not  do  that;  God  cannot  undeify  himself.  Being  God 
before  the  Incarnation  (as  he  said,  "  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am  "),  he  was  God  on  earth 
as  he  must  be  for  ever.  How  it  could  be  we  know  not,  but  our  ignorance  of  the  mode 
does  not  prove  impossibility.  He  who  "  in  the  beginninj;  was  God  .  .  .  was  made 
flesh."  3.  The  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  asserts  that,  jiutwllhsfandlny  Ohrisfs  Oodhead, 
he  was  a  real  man.  In  opposition  to  the  later  theories  that  his  body  was  a  phantom, 
or  that  his  soul  was  not  human,  the  writer  asserts  here  that  Christ  was  man  in  every 
respect  save  sin.  Are  not  the  particular  texts  quoted  here  chosen  to  prove  this  exhaus- 
tively? Man  is  a  trinity — body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  if  Christ  was  man,  he  was  human  in 
these  respects.  "Behold  I  and  the  children  which  thou  hast  given  me.  Forasmuch  as 
the  children  are  sharers  in  flesh  and  blood."  In  the  Old  Testament  the  Messiah  calls  men 
his  children ;  that  points  to  likeness  in  physical  nature.  Christ  was  born,  grew,  needed 
food  and  rest,  sweat  diops  of  blood,  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  lay  in  the  tomb,  bore  nail 
and  spear  marks.  Christ  had  a  human  hody.  Again,  "I  will  declare  thy  Name  imtu 
my  brethren."  Does  not  that-^"  bietlu'en  " — point  to  what  we  call  sold,  the  seat  of  affec- 
tion, emotion,  thought,  conscience,  etc.?  He  increased  in  wisdnm,  was  moved  \\  ith  com- 
passion. "  Jesus  loved  Martha  and  her  sister  and  Lazarus ;"  "Jesus  wei  t."  Christ  had 
a  human  soul.  Again,  "  In  the  midst  of  the  congr  gation  will  I  sing  thy  praise,"  and 
aiain,  "  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him."*  Clirist  worshipping  God,  and  trusting  God ! 
Doesn't  that  refer  to  what  we  call  spirit,  that  part  of  our  nature  by  which  we  are 
brought  into  fellowship  with  the  Most  High  ?  Christ's  spiritual  life  was  wrought  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  as  ours  is,  tempted  by  our  tempter,  cherished  by  the  same  Divine  Word, 
needed  communion  with  the  Father,  prayed  and  worshipped  and  trusted  as  ours  do. 
Christ  had  a  human  spirit.  Body,  soul,  and  spirit,  he  was  Man  amongst  men.  Bewiire 
of  supposing  that,  because  he  was  God  at  the  same  time,  his  Godhead  in  any  way 
lessened  the  infirmities  and  necessities,  of  his  humanity ;  he  would  not  have  been  true 
nian  had  it  been  so,  and  could  have  been  no  example  to  men.  As  God,  there  was  the 
hiding  of  his  power  in  his  humanity.  Christ  entered  on  his  work,  and  fulHlled  it  in  the 
positioil  in  which  Adam  stood  before  he  fell. 

II.  Only  as  man  could  he  deliver  men  fbom  bondaqb.  (Vers.  14,  15.)  A 
confessedly  difficult  verse.  1.  Death  is  curse.  This  text  is  made  difficult  of  compre- 
hension, because  it  is  read  as  though  it  referred  to  the  fear  which  Christians  ofien  have 
of  dying.  We  must  remove  that  idea  from  the  text.  The  writer  is  dealing  with  what 
is  much  more  fundamental  than  that.  Observe,  the  text  does  not  speak  of  bondage  to 
the  fear  of  death,  but  of  bon;lage  to  Satan  through  the  fear  of  death.  The  death  here 
spoken  of  is  death  in  its  main  idea.  Death  as  curse ;  death  as  witnessing  to  man's  sinful 
condition ;  death  as  the  declaration  that  he  is  under  cundemuation.    Man's  fear  of  death 


OH.  n.  1—18.]  THE  EHSTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  75 

is  but  atiotlier  name  for  his  sense  of  guilt,  his  knowledge  that  he  ig  vinder  the  onne  of 
the  Aliiiighiy.  2.  The  curse,  ieing  removed,  man  is  set  free  to  holiness.  Holiness  is 
the  end  of  Christ's  work.  The  passage  begins  with,  "  He  that  sanctifieth  and  they  that 
are  sanctified."  To  sanctify  us  was  his  aim.  But  holiness  is  impossible  where  the 
"fear  of  deatli,"  i.e.  a  sense  of  being  under  the  curse,  is.  There  is  only  one  principle 
from  which  holiness  can  spring — love  to  God  (that  is  the  difference  between  morality 
and  holiness).  But  we  can  never  love  him  till  we  know  that  he  loves  us — know,  i.e., 
that  the  curse  is  removed.  Holiness,  however,  is  possible  then;  then  obedience  is 
voluntary,  service  joyous,  surrender  easy,  resemblance  to  him  certain.  3.  Being  set  free 
to  holiness,  Satan's  power  is  gone.  He  is  here  said  to  have  "  the  power  of  death  " — a 
remarkable  expression,  to  which  we  must  not  attach  the  wrong  meaning.  Satan  cannot 
inflict  death,  has  no  dominion  over  death.  Christ  says,  "  I  have  the  keys,"  etc.  But 
"  fear  of  denth,"  i.e.  sense  of  being  under  the  curse,  is  the  power  Satan  wields  to  keep 
men  in  bondage.  He  blinds  them  to  Divine  love,  tells  them  God  is  angry  with  them, 
is  a  hard  Master,  has  no  claim  on  them,  and  the  result  is  that  men  continue  in  sin.  But 
when  their  eyes  are  open  to  see  he  is  a  liar,  that  the  curse  is  removed,  that  God  is  love, 
that  God  in  Christ  is  able  to  extend  mercy,  then  the  soul  breaks  away  from  his  bonds 
into  that  holiness  which  is  liberty,  and  Satan's  power  ends.  4.  This  could  only  be 
accomplished  hy  Ghiisfs  humanity.  Only  by  Christ  becoming  man  could  the  sense  oi 
curse  be  taken  away.  Its  removal  required  that  the  curse  should  be  endured  by  a  sub- 
stitute ;  but  no  substitute  could  be  accepted  in  man's  stead  who  was  not  of  man's  kind, 
and  the  Law  must  be  obeyed  by  the  nature  to  which  it  was  given,  and  its  penalty 
endured  by  the  nature  to  which  it  was  due.  Moreover,  if  Christ  is  to  suffer  and  die, 
he  must  have  a  nature  capable  of  suffering  and  death.  So  the  holiness  of  men  is  based 
on  the  humanity  of  Jesns. 

in.  As  IT  WAS  MEN  Christ  sought  to  redeem,  his  manhood  was  therefosb  a 
NECESSITY.  (Ver.  16.)  The  Old  Version,  owing  to  the  words  in  italics,  gi-eatly  mysti- 
fies this  verse ;  as  it  stands  in  the  Revised  Version  it  is  the  natural  completioA  of  the 
writer's  aijument.  The  "  taking  hold ''  (or,  "  laying  hold")  is  the  laying  hold  to  save. 
Christ  assumed  human  nature,  not  angelic,  because  he  is  the  Saviour,  not  of  angels,  but 
of  men.  1.  Christ  passed  hy  the  necessities  of  fallen  angels.  Here  is  a  great  mystery. 
Why  did  not  Christ  save  fallen  angels  ?  We  cannot  tell.  There  may  be  a  wide  differ- 
ence between  the  sins  of  devils  and  the  sins  of  men.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the 
one  love  evil  for  its  own  sake,  as  when  the  tempter  in  the  garden  would  wreck  the 
world  ;  and  that  the  other  love  it  for  some  fancied  good  it  brings,  as  when  the  woman 
thought  she  saw  a  good,  and  therefore  put  forth  her  hand  and  sinned.  There  may  be 
some  such  radical  difference  which  makes  salvation  possible  only  in  the  one  case,  but 
we  are  not  told ;  all  we  know  is  "the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate,  he  hath 
reserved  in  everlasting  chains,  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day." 
"  He  took  not  hold  of  angels."  2.  Christ  stretched  out  his  redeeming  hand  to  man. 
He  "  laid  hold  of  the  seed  of  Abraham ; "  as  a  shepherd  overtakes  a  sheep  that  is  run- 
ning away,  lays  hold  of  it,  lays  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing,  and  declares,  "  My  sheep 
shall  never  perish,  neither,"  etc.  Mark  the  condescension  of  the  Saviour,  and  the  exal» 
tation  of  the  human  race.  We  are  lost  in  astonishment  as  we  see  Christ  pass  by  the 
myriads  of  celestial  beings  that  had  fallen,  and  set  his  heart  on  laying  hold  of  us,  that 
he  might  raise  us  as  much  higher  than  they,  as  the  children  of  the  king  are  higher 
than  his  servants.  This  involved  the  necessity  of  the  Incarnation.  But  more — it  reveals 
an  unutterable  de -ire  on  Christ's  part  that  man  should  be  saved,  and  the  iaai  that  man 
maybe  saved  if  lie  will. — C.  N. 

Vers.  17, 18. — Christ's  humanity  the  result  of  his  desire  to  le  more  than  a  Saviour 
from  sin.  The  climax  of  the  argument  for  the  consistency  of  our  Lord's  humanity. 
Observe  in  exposition  :  1.  That  "  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people  "  is  not  the 
central  idea  of  these  verses.  That  has  already  been  dealt  with.  Here  we  have  a  new 
thought — Christ's  dbility  to  succour  the  tempted.  2.  That  our  Lord's  humanity  could 
not  make  him  a  merciful  and  faithl'ul  High  Priest.  He  was  that  already,  but  thus  he 
proved  himself  to  be  this.  3.  That  the  word  "  tempted  "  here  is  not  to  l>e  confined  to 
the  meaning  of  solicitation  to  sin. 

L  CHKIST,  IK   THE   ENDDBANCE  OF    TRIAL,   WAS  MADE    IN    ALL    THmOB  UEB     \JWBi 


76  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  u.  1—18 

HIS  BEETHREN ;  that  IS,  he  passed  through  every  class  of  human  sufiering.  1.  Then 
were  the  sufferings  which  came  through  human  frailty.  Christ  had  no  sin,  but  he 
experienced  those  forms  of  suffering  to  wliich  innocent  human  nature  is  exposed,  such 
as  poverty,  weariness,  dependence,  pain,  fear  of  death.  We  get  through  our  trials  more 
easily  heoause  we  do  not  foresee  them ;  but  Christ  foresaw  his,  and  they  were  intensified 
as  he  drew  nearer  his  end.  His  life  was  a  conscious  advance  into  deeper  gloom.  2. 
There  were  the  sufferings  which  came  through  his  holy  nature.  Thirty-three  years  in  a 
world  of  sin  must  have  been  continuous  pain  to  the  Holy  One  of  God.  Suffering  in  the 
presence  of  evil  is  in  proportion  to  our  holiness  and  our  aversion  to  evil.  Chiist  not  only 
saw  a  world  wandering  away  from  God,  but  he  kaevf  what  was  in  man  ;  he  not  only 
saw  the  malice  on  men's  faces  and  the  guilt  in  thsir  lives ;  he  read  the  thoughts  and 
intents  ot  the  heart.  And,  still  worse,  he  felt  the  hot  breath  of  the  aroh-tempter  on 
his  cheek,  and  heard  the  whispering  of  his  hateful  suggestions.  3.  There  were  the 
sufferings  which  came  through  his  love  to  man.  The  pain  of  sympathy.  If  Love  has 
her  deep  joys,  she  has,  too,  her  deep  griefs ;  if  she  wears  a  crown  of  triumph,  she  wears, 
too,  a  crown  of  thorns.  Love  is  afiflicted  in  all  the  afflictions  of  her  beloved.  What 
must  have  been  the  suffering  of  immeasurable  Love  in  witnessing  the  woes  ol  man  ! 

II.  This  endueanoe  op  our  trials  peoves  that  Chbist  will  be  merciful  and 
FAITHFUL  IN  HIS  POSITIOK  AS  HiGH  Priest.  1.  Christ  making  propitiation  holds  the 
position  of  Eigh  Priest.  Christ's  high  priesthood  is  only  glanced  at  here,  stated  to  rest 
something  on  it.  As  the  high  priest  alone  could  offer  the  sacrifice  on  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, 80  Christ,  offering  the  one  atoning  sacrifice,  showed  himself  to  be  High  Priest. 
And  the  main  idea  in  that  is  that  the  high  priest  was  essentially  the  mediator  between 
God  and  man.  As  God's  representative  he  acted  for  God  toward  the  people ;  as  the 
people's  representative  he  acted  for  them  toward  God.  Christ,  then,  holds  this  position. 
He  conveys  the  Father's  gifts  to  us,  and  our  need  to  the  Father.  It  depends  entirely  on 
him  whether  we  receive  the  gifts  ot  Heaven.  2,  If,  holding  that  position,  he  would 
deal  with  us  in  mercy,  all  we  rieed  is  assured.  There  is  nothing  he  cannot  secure  for  us, 
if  he  wilL  The  question  depends  on  whether  he  has  sympathetic  feeling  towards  ns  in 
our  grief.  Is  Christ  the  Mediator  compassionate  ?  3.  The  great  proof  of  his  compassion 
is  that  for  our  succour  he  endured  so  much  more  than  was  necessary  for  mere  propitia- 
tion. Our  Lord's  iocarnation  and  death  were  necessary  for  atonement,  but  he  endured 
much  beside  that,  going  down  to  the  lowest  state  of  innocent  human  experience.  Much 
of  his  suffering  was  an  extra  burden  voluntarily  assumed  with  a  view  to  man's  comfort 
in  sorrow.  He  cared  so  much  about  our  griefs  that  in  order  to  allay  them  he  passed 
through  them  himself.     We  cannot  doubt  his  heart  after  that. 

III.  This  proof  op  his  Hxan  priestly  comi'assion  ib  able  to  succour  his  people 
when  thet  are  tried.  1.  It  enables  them  to  trust  his  sympathy,  for  he  has  experi- 
enced their  pains.  Christ's  suffering  has  not  made  him  more  sympathetic.  His  know- 
ledge and  sympathy  were  perfect  before ;  but  it  gives  us  more  confidence  in  going  to  him 
for  succour.  2.  It  enables  them  to  expect  aid  from  him,  for  he  suffered  that  he  might 
aid.  Why,  his  poverty,  bereavement,  weariness,  loneliness,  shame,  being  misunder- 
stood, but  that  he  might  succour  us  I  Then,  will  he  not  succour  us  ?  S.  It  enables  them 
to  anticipate  victory  through  him,  for  Ae  conquered  in  all  his  woe.  Who  can  aid  us  in 
our  difficulties,  like  him  who  has  already  trodden  these  difficulties  underfoot?  What 
aid  can  be  more  satisfactory  than  bis  who  wears  the  laurels  of  victory  over  those  very 
evils  which  assail  us  ?    Our  foe  will  fly  when  he  sees  his  Conqueror  on  our  side.— C.  N; 

Vers.  1 — i. — Hie  glory  of  the  Oospel.  I.  Hebb  abb  to  bb  seen  the  sufebiob 
gloet  of  the  gospel  to  the  Law  in  the  person  op  its  Revealer.  There  are  frequent 
proofs  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  adaptations  of  means  and  ends  both  in  the  spheres 
of  providence  and  the  institutions  of  worship.  When  Jehovah  published  the  Law  from 
Sinai,  the  angels  were  mediators  between  himselt  and  the  tribes  of  Israel;  as  it  is  written 
in  Deut.  xxxiii.  2,  "  The  Lord  came  from  Sinai,  and  rose  up  fi-om  Seir  unto  them  ;  he 
shined  forth  from  Mount  Paran,  and  he  came  with  ten  thousands  of  tis  saints  or  angels." 
Stephen  remarks  that  "  the  people  received  the  Law  by  the  disposition,  or  ministry,  of 
angels,"  who  probably,  by  vocal  utterance,  proclaimed  the  commands  which  required  and 
shaped  the  obedience  of  the  Hebrew  race.  This  was  au  august  and  sublime  ministTT, 
and  raised  the  giving  of  the  Law  above  the  great  events  and  important  crises  of  •wtiily 


OH.  II.  1—18.]  THE  EHSTlE  TO  THE  HBBEEWS.  77 

affairs,  whether  they  were  the  gaining  of  victoriei,  the  founding  of  cities,  or  the  coro- 
nation of  monarchs.  There  are  many  ranks,  orders,  and  principalities  among  the 
angels,  who  are  pre-eminent  for  their  wisdom,  power,  and  holiness ;  but  they  must  all 
yield  to  One  who  is  far  above  them  all.  This  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  alone  was  able  to 
convey,  with  sufficient  clearness,  attraction,  and  power,  all  the  sacred  truths  which  con- 
cern the  character  of  God,  the  character  of  man,  and  the  way  of  bringing  the  sinner 
into  a  state  of  reconciliation  now,  and  into  the  possession  of  eternal  life  hereafter.  He 
said,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father ;  "  and  in  all  the  acts  of  his  public 
ministry  uid  bis  sacrificial  death  he  revealed  God  as  he  had  never  been  known  before. 

"  He  is  the  Eternal  Image  briglit, 
Where  angels  view  the  Father's  light; 
And  there  in  him  the  humblest  swun 
May  lead  his  holy  lesson  plain." 

The  glory  of  oar  Lord  is  further  displayed  by  the  confirmation  of  his  work  by  the 
Divine  Spirit,  who  enabled  the  apostles  and  others  to  work  miracles  of  healing,  and  gave 
those  supernatural  powers  which  were  an  indisputable  authentication  that  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  true  Messiah.  These  miracles  transcended  the  usual  course  of  human  experi- 
ence— were  signs  of  the  connection  of  the  gospel  with  Divine  power,  and  were  fitted  to 
awaken  wholesome  wonder  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  heard  the  truth.  It  need  occasion 
no  surprise  that  apostles  and  early  believers  should  feel  an  unshaken  confidence  in  their 
own  convictions,  and  desire  to  implant  similar  convictions  in  the  hearts  of  others.  The 
transmission  of  gospel  truth  thus  began  with  Christ,  and  through  apostles  and  those 
who  heard  the  apostles,  repeated  the  same  facts  and  doctrines  to  others ;  and  so  the 
lamp  of  light  has  been  handed  on  from  one  believer  to  another,  and  from  one  generation 
to  another ;  and  practically  calling  attention  to  the  glory  of  the  Transfiguration,  in  which 
we  hear  the  voice,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son  :  hear  him." 

II.  There  follows  the  solemn  eesponsibilitt  of  hearing  and  obetino  the 
VOICE  OF  Jesus  Christ.  Wherever  the  Word  of  God  comes  there  is  an  altered  relation 
of  the  soul  towards  its  Divine  Author,  and  serious  indebtedness  to  him  for  the  use  of 
so  precious  a  talent.  Caution  and  prayer  are  necessary,  lest  the  truths  which  our  Lord 
proclaimed  should  silently  evaporate  from  the  soul  like  morning  dew,  and  leave  the 
spirit  dry  and  barren.  They  may,  amid  the  -pressure  of  worldly  affairs,  the  attractions 
of  this  life,  and  the  agency  of  Satan,  who  carries  away  the  seed  sown,  he  lost  for  all  the 
purposes  of  salvation.  There  must  be  decisive  and  intentional  acts  of  meditation, 
prayer,  and  obedience,  and  then  they  will  not  slip  away  from  us.  They  should  be  held 
as  the  miser  holds  his  gold,  lest  the  cunning  and  violence  of  men  should  rob  him  of  his 
treasure.  The  gravity  of  this  question  enhanced  by  the  certainty  that  neglect  will  be 
punished ;  for  if  the  offenders  against  a  law  published  by  angels  "  died  without  mercy  " 
(Heb.  X.  8),  then  those  who  disobey  the  will  of  the  Lord,  who  is  infinitely  above  angels, 
must  meet  with  a  tremendous  penalty  and  retribution ;  because  to  offend  him  is,  in  a 
sense,  to  tread  underfoot  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  and  do  despite  to  the  Spirit  of 
grace.  To  turn  aside  from  him  is  to  reject  unutterable  grace ;  and  to  undervalue  the 
labours,  sufferings,  and  martyrdoms  of  apostles,  faithful  preachers  of  the  gospel,  and 
the  life  and  prayers  of  believers,  and  to  incur  the  judicial  anger  of  him  who  requires  all 
men  "  to  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  The  question  is  asked, 
"  How  shall  we  escape  ?  "  The  reply  must  he,  "  There  is  no  escape."  It  is  the  great 
salvation,  because  it  is  the  fruit  of  an  eternal  purpose,  revealed  by  holy  prophets,  illus- 
trated by  various  types,  wrought  out  by  the  incarnation,  ministry,  and  sorrow  of  Jesus, 
who  drank  the  bitter  and  brimming  cup  in  Gethsemane  and  on  the  cross ;  and  has 
engaged  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  co-operation  of  the  Church  of  God.  It  is 
great  in  the  range  of  its  present  blessings  and  in  the  prospects  of  everlasting  life. 
"  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  Conscience  answers, "  There 
is  no  escape." — B. 

Vers.  5 — 9. — The  hvman  nature  of  omr  Lord  foreshadowed  and  his  sovereignty  over 
all  things  realized  through  his  sufferings  and  death.  The  author  pursues  his  argument, 
which  is  to  show  the  indisputable  superiority  of  our  Lord  to  the  angels,  unto  whom  the 
kingdom  of  grace  is  not  made  subject.     In  the  quotation  from  the  eighth  psalm  thera 


78  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  ii.  1—18. 

is  declared  the  conclescension  and  goodness  of  God  towards  man  in  appointing  him 
to  be  the  lonl  and  ruler  of  creation.  When  Jehovah  pronounced  the  blessin'i;  upon 
Noah  and  his  sons,  he  said,  "  And  the  fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you  shall  be  upon 
every  beast  of  the  enrth,  and  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air,  upon  all  that  moveth  upon 
the  earth,  and  upon  all  the  fishes  ot  the  sea;  into  your  hand  are  they  delivered" 
(Gen.  ix.  2).  This  sublime  promise  is  realized  in  the  exaltation  of  the  Son  of  God, 
who  was  made  for  a  short  time  lower  than  the  angels  ;  and  yet,  even  in  his  state  ol 
humiliation,  showed  his  kingly  power  over  the  diseases  of  men,  the  storms  of  the  sky, 
and  the  fishes  of  the  sea.  But  there  is  the  plain  fact  that  all  things  are  not  put 
ander  men ;  yet  we  see  Jesus  of  Nazareth  made  lower  than  the  angels  that  he  should 
,ulfil  the  purposes  of  eternal  grace,  taste  death  in  its  unutterable  bitterness  and  agony 
that  life  might  be  offered  to  mankind,  and  now  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  There 
is  a  sacred  lesson  conveyed  to  Jewish  Christiana  in  the  allusion  to  the  death  of  our 
Lord,  since  the  offence  of  the  cross  was  likely  to  disturb  their  faith,  and  lead  them  to 
surrender  a  truth  which  was  a  stumbling-block  to  many  of  their  countrymen.  Jesus 
passed  through  this  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  to  reach  the  throne  where  he  is  now 
exalted,  angels,  principalities,  and  powers,  believers  and  unbelievers,  being  now  subject 
unto  him.  The  glory  and  honour  which  he  has  attained  '  raise  him  far  above  all 
patriarchs,  priescs,  prophets,  and  the  whole  angelic  world;  and  therefore  those  that  kiss 
the  Son,  in  unlimited  trust  and  loving  obedience,  may  expect  all  the  blessedueas  now 
and  hereafter  from  their  faith  in  the  Bedeemer. — B. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — His  exaltation  endears  his  association  wUh  MsfoUowen.  There  is  » 
Divine  becomingness  and  suitability  in  the  process  of  salvation,  which  suggests  that  as 
the  Leader  of  believing  souls  should  pass  through  sorrow  and  gain  his  oflScial  perfectness 
through  sufferings  which  show  at  what  a  cost  redemption  was  procured,  they  qualify 
him  to  become  an  Example  to  which  Christians  are  to  be  CQuformcd.  He  reached  his 
glory  through  distress  and  agony,  and  his  followers  are  through  much  tribulation  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  He  showed  himself  to  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High 
Priest,  by  his  tender  compassion  for  men,  and  his  fulfilment  of  promise,  pi'ophecy,  and 
type;  for  he  was  "  the  end  of  the  Law  for  righteousness."  Looking  unto  Jesus  we  over- 
come impatience  and  complaint,  and  waiting  upon  him  we  renew  our  strength ;  for  "  it 
we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him."  Motives  to  sustain  us  in  this  career 
are  supplied  in  these  verses,  which  consist  of  his  gracious  avowal  of  his  followers  ao  his 
brethren,  of  whom  he  is  not  ashamed.  'J'hey  "  are  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
the  flesh,  nor  of  the  wiU  of  man,  but  of  God,"  and  are  sanctified  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  to 
a  life  of  separation  from  evil  and  consecration  to  all  holiness  of  life.  If  Joseph  was  not 
ashamed  of  his  brethren — for  they  had  all  one  father — and  presented  them  to  Pharaoh, 
much  more  will  our  Lord  avow  his  brethren  by  expressing  his  love  to  thera  and  vindi- 
cation of  them.  They  are  now  somewhat  like  him,  and  are  conformed  to  him  as  the 
Firstborn  among  many  brethren.  They  are  not  of  the  world,  as  he  was  not  of  the 
world,  and  being  joined  to  him  are  one  Spirit.  This  truth  is  confirmed  and  illustrated 
by  quotations  from  the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  first  is  from  the  twenty- 
second  psalm  (ver.  22),  where  he  afRrrns,  "  I  will  declare  thy  Name  unto  my  brethren." 
These  words  denote  that  our  Lord  would  be  the  Teacher  of  his  brethren,  and  are  con- 
firmed by  his  declaration  in  John  xvii.  26,  where  he  said,  "  And  I  have  declared  unto 
them  thy  Name,  and  will  declare  it ;  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me  may 
be  in  them,  and  I  in  them."  Then,  like  his  brethren,  he  would  confide  in  Jehovah,  as 
it  is  written  in  Isa.  xii.  2,  "  I  will  trust  in  him."  The  citations  end  with  one  drawn 
from  Isa.  viii.  18,  "  Behold,  I  and  the  children  which  thou  hast  given  me,"  which  are  the 
words  of  the  prophet  in  a  time  of  prevalent  unbelief,  when  he  and  his  children  who  had 
received  symbolical  names  were  witnesses  for  the  truth  of  God.  Considering  the  past 
work  of  Christ  in  suffering  to  bring  many  sons  unto  glory,  and  his  joy  in  claiming 
relationship  with  them,  we  conclude  that  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren. — B. 

Vers.  14 — 18. — Here  we  have  stated  the  sublime  results  of  the  incarnation  and  death 
of  Christ  in  their  influence  upon  the  present  temptation  and  death  of  ielievers.  Our 
Lord  did  not  assume  an  angelic  nature,  which  would  have  necessarily  set  him  at 
eome  distance  from  us,  since  the  experiences  of  those  sinless  and  exalted  beings  would 


OH.  II.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  79 

have  been  to  some  degree  inconceivable  by  us.  He  took  hold  of  the  Beed  of  Abraham, 
and  enshrined  his  Divine  nature  in  human  flesh  and  blood,  and  felt  all  the  innocent 
emotions  and  sensations  of  our  race.  He  was  hungry  and  thirsty,  he  was  weary  and 
slept,  and  wept  and  rejoiced  like  his  brethren.  Then  he  felt  the  pangs  of  death,  by 
which  he  achieved  a  happy  and  invaluable  change  in  our  views  of  departure  from  tiiis 
world.  Death  had  derived  its  terror  from  Satan,  who  prompted  men  to  sin  and  then 
alarmed  them  with  the  fear  of  condemnation  and  punishment.  Under  the  Law  many 
regarded  death  with  trembling  and  anxiety;  and  righteous  men  like  llezeldah  shrank 
from  the  approach  of  the  "king  of  terrors."  It  was  bondage  whioli  restrained  from 
enjoyment,  and  made  life  like  a  man  wearing  fetters  from  which  he  could  not  get  free. 
■J'he  death  of  our  Lord  seemed  the  masterpiece  of  Satan  ;  but  it  became  the  cause  of  his 
most  humiliating  overthrow,  for  ever  after  those  who  believe  in  Jesus  may  walk  with 
serene  confidence,  in  the  light  of  the  Redeemer's  victory,  towards  their  eternal  rest,  and 
realiM  the  words,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  wlilch  die  in  the  Lord." 

■  O  precious  ransom  I  which  once  paid. 
That  Consummatum  est  was  said, 
And  said  by  him  that  said  no  more, 
But  sealed  it  with  his  sacred  breath  I 
Thou,  then,  that  hast  dispurged  our  soore, 
And  dying  met  the  death  of  death, 
Be  now,  while  on  thy  Name  we  call, 
Our  Life,  our  Strength,  our  Joy,  our  All." 

(Sir  H.  Wctton. 

Being  msde  like  unto  his  brethren  in  the  participation  of  their  nature,  he  made,  as 
a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest,  reconciliation  for  them  by  his  sacrificial  death.  By 
his  oblation  he  revealed  the  Divine  displeasure  against  sin,  and  made  a  way  for  those 
who  were  once  rebels  to  become  reconciled  to  the  character  of  Uod,  his  methods  of 
salvation,  and  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  privileges  and  hopes  of  the  Christian  life.  He 
passed  through  a  career  of  temptation  in  which  Satan  strove  to  overthrow  him,  the 
world  endeavoured  to  turn  him  away  from  his  work,  and  his  fierce  enemies,  the 
Pharisees,  strove  to  frustrate  his  gracious  designs.  He  was  alone  in  the  vastness  of 
the  temptations  he  endured,  and  carried,  without  any  earthly  sympathy,  the  vast  burden 
of  his  sorrows.  Now,  from  his  vast  and  painful  experience,  he  is  able  <«  sympathize 
with  all  who  are  tempted,  and  to  cheer  them  with  the  truth  that,  should  every  heart 
around  be  unmoved,  and  every  ear  closed  to  their  griefs,  he  feels  for  them  with  a 
vividness  and  certainty  which  may  awaken  confidence,  and  increase  their  joy  in  the 
Lord.— B. 

Ver.  Z,—OocPs  stvre  Judgment  on  those  who  neglect  the  great  salvation.  I.  Note  the 
APPEAL  TO  HiSTOBY.  In  the  history  of  the  Hebrew  people  God  had  shown  the  validity 
and  seriousness  of  his  messages.  Those  to  whom  the  message  had  come  had  been 
disposed  to  slight  it,  either  because  of  the  improbability  of  the  matter,  or  the  mean 
appearance  of  the  messenger.  And  behind  both  of  these  considerations  it  might  also  be 
that  the  message  was  very  unpalatable.  But  however  the  message  might  appear  to  men, 
it  was  God's  message,  therefore  necessary  to  be  sent.  The  steadfast  word  through  the 
angels  we  must  take  with  a  very  wide  significance,  as  including  the  prophets,  though 
angels  are  specially  mentioned  because  being  so  reverently  regarded  by  the  Hebrews. 
There  was  an  A  fortiori  argument  as  applied  to  the  message  that  came  through  the 
Son. 

II.  Note  the  great  transgression  and  wsobbdibnce  wb  may  commit.  We 
may  be  negligent  of  the  great  salvation.  Our  own  personality,  with  its  great  powers 
and  with  the  claims  which  God  has  upon  it,  we  may  allow  to  go  to  wreck  and  ruin, 
instead  of  subinitting  to  the  process  whereby  God  would  save  us,  and  make  us  capable 
of  glorifying  him  in  a  perfect  way.  The  man  who  in  any  physical  peril  should  steadil}' 
neglect  whatever  means  of  escape  were  put  in  his  way,  if  he  perished,  would  be  held  to 
have  in  him  the  spirit  of  the  suicide.  He  who  takes  active  steps  against  his  own  life 
is  held  to  be  committing  a  crime  against  society ;  but  he  who  neglects  his  physical 
welfare  is  also  sinning  against  society,  though  society  cannot  define  his  offence  so  a» 


80  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ah.  n.  1— W 

to  punish  him.  But  Qod,  we  know,  can  specify  offences  as  we  cannot;  and  here  is  one, 
that  when  a  man  has  spiritual  and  eternal  salvation  laid  before  him  he  yet  neglects 
it.  And  the  more  we  study  this  state  of  negligence,  the  more  we  shall  see  how  great 
a  sin  it  involves. 

III.  The  inevitable  punishment  which  will  comb  fob  such  neolect.  How 
shall  we  escape  it?  It  is  a  question  parallel  to  that  of  Paul  in  Rom.  ii.  3,  "  How  .shalt 
thou  escape  the  judgment  of  God  ?  "  The  question  is  not  of  escaping  from  the  danger 
by  some  other  means  than  what  God  has  provided.  It  is  as  to  how  we  shall  get  away 
from  God's  doom  upon  us  for  deliberately  and  persistently  neglecting  his  loving  pro- 
visions. How  often  New  Testament  exhortations  make  us  face  the  thought  of  the 
great  judgment-seat  I  We  see  what  a  serious  thing  in  the  sight  of  God  simple  negli- 
gence is.  It  is  in  heavenly  affairs  as  in  earthly,  probably  more  harm  is  done  by 
negligence  of  the  good  than  by  actual  commission  of  the  evil.  Let  there  be  strongest 
emphasis  and  deepest  penitence  in  the  confession,  "  We  have  not  done  the  things  we 
ought  to  have  done." 

IV.  The  exhoetation  to  attbntiom.  We  must  give  more  earnest  heed  to  the 
things  that  have  been  heard.  How  close  this  exhortation  comes !  Things  not  only 
spoken  but  heard.  The  excuse  is  not  permitted  that  we  have  not  heard  of  these  things. 
It  is  what  we  have  heard,  but  have  failed  to  treat  rightly,  to  cherish  and  hold  fast 
which  constitutes  our  peculiar  responsibility.  Over  against  actual  negligence  there 
is  the  demand  for  close,  continual  attention.  The  meaning  of  salvation  and  the  means 
of  salvation  are  not  to  be  discovered  by  listless  hearts.  We  are  attending  too  much 
to  the  wrong  things — things  that,  in  comparison  with  the  so  great  salvation,  are  but 
as  the  fables  and  endless  genealogies,  attention  to  which  Paul  contemptuously  con- 
demned. And  those  who  have  to  proclaim  this  salvation  would  do  well  to  attend  to  that 
other  oDunsel  of  Paul  to  Timothy,  "  Give  heed  to  reading,  exhortation,  teaching,"  and 
so  all  of  us  need  to  be  readers,  learners,  and  especially  submissiTe  to  the  rapiie\rira  oi 
the  Holy  Ghost.— Y. 

Vers.  3,  4. — The  completeness  with  which  the  great  salvation  is  made  known.    The 

justness  of  God's  visitation  on  those  who  neglect  the  great  salvation  lies  in  this,  that 
the  salvation  has  been  so  fully  and  variously  proclaimed.  Certainly  this  held  in  the 
instance  of  all  to  whom  this  Epistle  was  addressed;  certainly  it  iiolds  of  all  who  can 
read  the  New  Testament.  With  the  Testament  before  us,  it  is  our  business,  as  prudent 
people,  to  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  the  explanations,  assurances,  exhortations 
it  contains  on  this  matter  of  salvation. 

I.  This  salvation  was  spoken  of  thkough  the  Lobd  ;  i.e,  throi^h  Jesus.  Doubt- 
less the  reference  heie  is  specially  to  those  solemn  and  awful  intimations  he  gave  to  his 
disciples  of  the  approaching  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
was  itself  only  a  type  of  a  destruction  more  dreadful  still.  The  worst  thing  was,  not 
the  destruction  of  the  buildings,  but  the  spiritual  ruin  of  those  who  dwelt  in  them. 
This  was  the  thing  to  be  feared,  that  believers  in  Jesus  should  get  infected  by  the  law- 
less life  around  them,  or  should  take  unbelieving  and  self-indulgent  ways  to  get  away 
from  peril.  Therefore  the  Lord  proclaimed  salvation  to  him  who  would  endure  to  the 
ond.  His  own  resurrection  from  the  dead  after  men  had  done  tlieir  very  worst  and  got 
untrammelled  their  fullest  opportunities,  was  itself  an  assurance  of  safety  to  those  who 
fully  trusted  in  him. 

II.  The  Word  of  this  salvation  confirmed  bt  listeners.  We  feel  there  must 
be  a  parallelism  between  the  ;8ej8oioi  of  ver.  2  and  the  igtPauieiii  of  ver.  3.  The  same 
God  who  gave  authority  to  his  messengers  of  old,  and  put  on  them  a  certain  kind  of 
honour  by  showing,  in  severe  treatment  of  those  who  rejected  them,  the  Divine  origin 
of  their  message,  also  gave  authority  to  certain  persons  to  continue  that  news  of 
salvation  which  Jesus  had  first  of  all  made  known.  Jesus  himself  passed  these  persons 
through  a  manifold  and  searching  discipline  to  qualify  them  for  their  work.  He  said 
many  things  to  the  common  crowd,  but  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  he  spoke  for 
a  while  only  to  a  chosen  and  docile  circle ;  until  at  last  the  hour  came  when  these 
listeners  had  to  spread  far  and  wide  the  same  truths,  for  a  benefit  to  every  one  who 
would  attend  to  them.  Jesus,  in  the  greatness  of  his  unique  power, began — audit  ii 
evar  the  first  step  which  is  most  difBcult;  others  came  and  continued  his  work  on  bis 


OH.  n.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  81 


lines,  and  made  some  at  least  of  their  auditors  in  everj  place  to  feel  that  what  they  said 
rested  on  a  sure  foundation  of  a  reality. 

III.  An  explicit  statement  of  how  this  confiumation  was  pboduobd.  Never 
let  us  forget  that  the  apostles  were  peculiarly  witness-bearers  (Luke  xxiv,  48 ;  Acts  i. 
8).  Again  and  again  this  is  the  apostolic  claim  ia  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Therefore 
it  is  quite  the  thing  to  he  expected  that  God  should  be  introduced,  bearing  his  testimony 
along  with  them.  Certain  things  were  done,  manifestly  transcending  human  power, 
and  manifestly  full  of  a  Divine  presence  and  intent  to  those  who  regarded  them  with 
an  honest  heart.  It  is  part  of  the  love  of  God  that  he  seeks  all  means  to  strengthen 
our  hearts  in  keeping  hold  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Evidence  is  nothing  without 
a  spirit  to  appreciate  it;  but  God  knew  that  wheresoever  the  gospel  went  there  would 
be  some  appreciating  spirits,  and  to  them  the  truih  came  by  agencies  such  as  bore  it 
forward  to  an  abirling  home  in  their  hearts.  Evidence,  of  course,  changes  as  the  ages 
change ;  bat  truth  is  ever  the  same.  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  has  not  been  altered ; 
the  need  which  that  truth  came  to  supply  remains  undiminished;  and  so  we  may  be 
sure  God  is  testifying  still  concerning  that  truth,  the  testimony  being  such  that  it 
satisfies  the  intellect  because  first  of  all  it  feeds  and  comforts  the  heart.— T. 

Vera.  8,  9. — The  seen  present  as  a  ground  of  confidence  in  the  unseen  future.  The 
confidence  of  one  who  believes  in  Messianic  prophecy  is  that  all  things  are  as  good  as 
subjected  to  the  Christ  beca\ise  God  has  declared  this  as  his  design.  What  we  see  is 
greatly  short  of  subjection,  and  the  subjected  part  we  fail  to  see ;  we  cannot  rest  our 
eyes  upon  it  properly,  because  their  attention  is  distracted  by  the  sight  of  so  much 
defiance,  rebillion,  and  attempt  at  self-government  in  the  far  greater  part  of  what  ought 
to  be  subject  to  Christ.  All  the  more  need  to  find  in  what  we  may  see  the  assurance  and 
promise  of  the  unseen.  We  do  see — for  that  is  what  the  words  amount  to — a  humanized, 
a  dying,  and  a  risen  Christ.  "  Crowned  with  glory  and  honour  "  is  but  a  periphrasis  for 
the  resurrection,  an  iudication  of  one  of  the  'things  God  did  in  raising  his  Son  Jesus. 

I.  What  we  see  shows  us  the  power  which  can  produce  the  desired  unseen. 
God,  in  saying  that  all  things  shall  be  subjected  to  Christ,  asserts  authority.  But  by 
the  course  of  his  Son  Jesus  on  earth  he  also  manifested  pouoer.  He  took  as  it  were  a 
small  section  of  time  and  space,  and  there  gave  us  gracious  illustration  of  what  he  is  ever 
doing,  some  of  it  in  the  realm  of  the  seen,  but  much  more  in  that  of  the  unseen.  What 
power  there  is  in  the  Incarnation  I  For  obvious  reasons  the  Incarnation  is  mostly  con- 
nected with  thoughts  of  God's  condescension,  and  the  lowly-heartedness  of  Jesus 
himselt.  But  these  considerations  must  not  bliud  us  to  the  Incarnation  as  an  illustration 
of  God's  power.  There  is  a  mysterious  power  in  making  Jesus  lower  than  the  angels, 
and  if  it  be  true  that  there  is  a  causal  connection  between  sin  and  death  as  a  painful 
experience,  then  some  peculiar  power  must  be  involved  in  bringing  the  sinless  Jesus  in 
contact  with  the  pain  of  death.  Then,  of  course,  there  is  the  instance  of  power,  most 
impressive  and  most  cheering  to  us,  in  the  raising  of  Jesus  from  the  dead.  If  only  we 
can  really  btlieve  that  God  has  power  over  the  grave,  we  shall  believe  ia  his  final 
conquest  of  all  that  can  hurt  his  people. 

II.  What  we  see  shows  us  the  purpose  ever  working  towards  thb  desired 
unseen.  The  grace  of  God  is  manifest  as  well  as  the  power  of  God.  Jesus  not  only 
died ;  he  tasted  of  death  for  every  one — for  every  one  who  could  benefit  by  the  tasting 
of  it.  He  tasted  of  it  that  by  his  resurrection  he  might  show  it  was  not  the  remediless 
poison  men  reckoned  it  to  be.  In  his  love  he  tasted  death,  as  much  as  to  say  to  men, 
"  Eear  not."  We  have  the  Divine  purposes  in  words,  but  those  words  are  onlythe  more 
perfect  expressions  of  what  we  might  infer  from  the  works.  It;  is  true  that  "  through 
the  ages  one  increasing  purpn.se  runs  " — a  purpose  much  higher  than  that  any  individual 
man  might  form,  or  ttie  combination  of  any  men. 

HI.  What  we  see  shows  us  patience  waitino  for  the  desired  unseen. 
Great  is  the  patience  of  God — a  contrast  to  our  impatience,  our  haste,  our  discontent, 
if  we  cannot  get  immediate  results.  The  fulness  of  time  has  to  be  waited  for  before 
the  Christ  can  enter  tlie  world ;  the  fulness  of  manhood  has  to  be  waited  for  till  he  can 
begin  to  teach.  Jesus  himself  must  have  his  own  time  of  sufiicient  seed-sowing  before 
he  can  go  to  Jerusalem  for  the  final  scene.  Delay,  procrastination,  postponement, 
's  what  God  cannot  tolerate  where  there  ought  to  be  decision,  bat  for  great  stepi  to  be 
bebbewb.  €1 


82  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  [ch.  n.  1— 18. 


taken  in  his  own  mighty  plans  he  can  wait  the  proper  time.  If  we  do  not  yet  see  all 
things  subjected  to  Jesus,  if  indeed  the  struggle  seems  often  quite  the  other  way,  then 
there  is  all  the  more  need  for  us  to  look  at  the  career  of  Jesus  from  Bethlehem  to 
Calvary  as  an  illustration  of  how  God  can  wait.  In  making  up  the  cup  which  Jesus 
drank,  many  ingredients  had  to  be  waited  for. — Y. 

Ver.  10. — The  Father  hringing  the  sons  to  glory.    Observe — 

I.  The  teems  in  which  the  Father  is  here  described.  Pntlierhood  is,  of  course, 
iraplit'd  when  sonship  i.s  spoken  of;  and  this  Father  is  the  Being  "for  whom  are  all 
things,  and  by  whom  are  all  things."  Here  is  the  great  unity  towards  which,  consciously 
or  unconsciously,  all  things  are  tending.  Here  is  the  cause  of  all  existence,  compared 
with  whom  all  other  causes  that  men  analyze  and  apportion  are  but  as  the  merest 
instruments.  The  assertion  here  is,  of  course,  not  a  scientific  truth  ;  it  is  the  dictum  of 
the  Spirit,  the  Ht^aven-inspired  feeling  with  which  we  look  up  to  the  Father  of  our 
Teacher,  Jesus.  All  things,  not  for  me,  or  you,  or  for  a  class,  a  nation,  a  race,'an  age,  or 
even  the  total  of  human  beings,  but  for  God.  The  consummation  is  not  on  earth,  but 
in  heaven.  In  the  light  of  such  a  description  of  God,  what  wonder  is  it  that  increasing 
science  should  mean  the  increasing  knowledge  of  harmony,  the  discovery  of  ever- 
deepening  connections  between  things  that  seem  on  the  surface  quite  unconnected  ? 

II.  A  purpose  op  him  who  is  so  DESCRIBED.  All  things  are  for  him.  The  question  is 
— Do  we  obediently  recognize  that  stamp  and  superscription  on  ourselves  which  indicates 
that  we  are  for  him  ?  Everything  which  in  its  actual  existence  is  just  what  God  wants 
it  to  be  is  moving  towards  its  glory.  The  seed  moves  to  its  glory  in  the  flower,  the  flower 
to  its  glory  in  the  fruit.  TJnfallen  man  would  have  had  to  be  brought  to  glory — the 
glory  of  the  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  Society  was  meant  to  develop  into  a  collection 
of  men  and  women  having  in  them  the  same  beautiful  spirit  as  was  in  Jesus.  And  that 
is!  the  purpose  still,  only  what  should  have  come  through  a  natural  growth  has  to  begin 
with  a  regeneration.  Constantly  in  the  New  Testament  is  this  basis-truth  starting 
up,  to  remind  us  of  its  connection  with  all  a  Christian's  efforts,  all  a  Christian's  hopes. 
God  transforms  us  from  his  creatures  into  his  children,  and  then  leads  us  onward  to 
■iliry.  All  who  are  seeking  glory  save  in  the  way  of  sonship  are  seeking  what  will 
prove  a  mockery  when  they  find  it.  "  Bringing  many  sons  to  glory."  In  this  word 
"  many  "  there  is  cause  for  rejoicing  and  careful  reflection.  It  is  not  enough  to  say 
that  men  are  brought.  They  are  brought  as  sons ;  nor  are  they  as  a  scattered  few,  one 
here  and  there  in  a  generation.  They  are  many.  How  many  is  not  the  question. 
Here  is  answered  in  a  measure  the  query  of  the  disciples,  "  Are  the  saved  few  ?  "  No, 
they  are  always  many — more  than  we  suppose,  guessing  by  the  mere  appearance  of 
things. 

III.  How  THE  Leader  of  this  band  op  children  is  fitted  for  his  work.  The 
apxiry^s-  He  who  starts  the  com|  any,  giving  them  the  direction.  We  are  the  sons  of 
God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but  we  know  the  way  in^which 
we  are  going,  and  who  is  before  us,  responsible  for  that  way  being  right.  The  true 
guide,  the  true  leader,  is  he  who  himself  has  been  all  the  way.  This  alone  will  save 
him  from  being  a  blind  leader  of  the  blind.  He  who  would  lead  us  must  have  gone  in 
the  way  in  whioli  we  have  to  go.  And  because  our  way  is  of  necessity  a  way  of 
suffering,  his  had  to  become  the  same.  The  way  of  man  in  any  case  is  a  way  of 
sufferiug,  and  if  he  has  chosen  the  motto,  "  For  Christ's  sake,"  then  in  proportion  as 
that  motto  is  written  on  his  heart,  in  that  same  proportion  would  some  sort  of  special 
trial  be  his  lot.  And  so  our  very  attachment  to  Christ  is  in  a  sense  the  means  of 
bringing  more  suffering  to  him.  The  trilth  that  Christians  are  persecuted  for  Christ's 
sake  has  its  corresponding  truth,  that  Christ  was  persecuted  for  God's  sake.  Jesus  M 
perfected  as  a  Leader  by  submitting  to  everything  that  in  this  world  could  come  upo"!  the 
outward  man.  He  showed  that,  there  was  a  way,  not  round  danger,  but  through  danger, 
to  an  abiding  safety  beyond.  He  did  not  evade  the  darkness  of  the  grave — he  went 
into  it ;  vanished,  as  most  thought,  for  ever,  and  yet  to  emerge  into  everlasting  light. 
Well  may  he  ever  sound  in  our  ears  those  words  of  duty,  promise,  and  hope,  "Follow 
me."— ¥. 

Ver.  1.1. — Christ  and  his  brethren.    In  the  eleventh  verse  there  is  brought  in  i  ne>> 


OH.  n.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  83 

idea.  The  Author  of  salvation  is  now  described  in  relation  to  his  followers  as  the 
Sanctifier,  and  these  followers  as  the  sanctified.  Jesus  it  is  who  sets  us  apart  for  God, 
and  sets  us  apart  by  making  a  real  diffeieuce  between  us  and  those  who  do  not  believe 
in  him.  In  other  words,  if  there  is  no  real  diflercnce  between  ua  and  the  unbeliever, 
then  we  cannot  reckon  ourselves  among  the  sanctified.  Sanctifioation  cannot  consist 
in  taking  so  many,  irrespective  of  character  or  of  any  cliange  which  may  be  working  in 
them.  Jesus  and  all  mankind  are  of  one  so  far  as  a  common  humanity  is  concerned, 
and  this  is  a  conlition  for  the  further  unity;  but  something  more  is  needed.  He  who 
sanctifies  is  first  of  all  sanctified  himself — sanctified  by  the  mystery  of  his  birth,  and  by 
the  Divine  testimony  at  his  baptism,  and  so  on  by  everything  that  lifl^ed  him  to  a 
unique  eminence  among  men.  And  all  human  beings  who  have  the  same  Spirit  of  God 
working  in  them  are  thus  reckoned  for  brethren  of  Jesus ;  and  "  he  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  them  brethren."  Though  they  be  far  below  him  in  elevation  of  character  and 
perception  of  truth,  yet  the  relation  is  there,  and  the  very  way  to  make  things  better  is 
to  recognize  the  relation  and  found  an  appeal  unon  it.  Our  sanctifying  Brother  looks 
upon  us  in  onr  imperfections,  and  cheers  us  with  the  thought  that  we  stiall  become 
like  him.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  but  how  ashamed  we  ought  to  be 
that  we  are  so  unworthy  of  him  I  Christ  is  far  more  intent  on  working  out  the  possi- 
bilities of  our  hfe  than  we  are  ourselves. — Y. 

Ver.  14. — Christ  rolling  death  of  its  terrors.  L  Obsebvk  a  reason  fob  the 
Incarnation.  When  we  look  at  all  the  Son  of  God  achieved  by  the  Incarnation,  we 
see  what  an  eminently  reasonable  thing  it  was.  This  seems  to  be  forgotten  by  those 
who  stumble  at  what  they  feel  sure  is  a  natural  impossihility — that  Jesus  should  have 
come  into  the  world  as  he  did.  But  if  great  ends  were  achieved  by  the  Son  of  God 
thus  stooping  from  his  glory,  entering  the  world  as  a  babe,  living  a  human  life  and 
dying  a  human  death,  then,  when  we  remember  how  God  is  love,  surely  such  extraordi- 
nary things  become  credible.  If  we  can  help  people,  we  are  bound  to  do  everything 
that  lies  in  our  power  to  help  them.  And  may  we  not  reverently  say  that  a  similar 
obligation  lies  with  the  Divine  Being?  He  knows  what  is  most  for  our  help,  and  does 
everything  in  his  own  wise  time  and  way ;  and  when  it  is  done  it  ia  for  us  to  search 
and  see  how  it  is  just  the  thing  that  needed  to  be  done. 

II.  Christ  became  a  human  being  like  us  in  order  that  he  might  die. 
This  strong  way  of  putting  the  thing  is  necessary,  in  order  to  bring  out  the  greatness 
of  Christ's  work  with  respect  to  death.  With  us  death  is  the  end  of  life,  but  by  no 
means  to  be  looked  on  as  a  result  of  life — a  thing  to  be  aimed  at.  But  in  the  case  of 
Jesus  it  was  a  great  end  to  be  reached.  Jesus  might  have  lived  in  the  world  for  many 
years,  teaching  men,  healing  their  sicknesses,  gladdening  their  lives  in  many  ways,  and 
then,  Enoch-fashion,  he  might  have  been  translated  that  he  should  not  see  death.  But 
if  this  had  happened,  the  great  end  would  have  been  missed. 

III.  The  results  achieved  by  the  death  of  Christ.  Not  all  the  results,  of 
course;  two  are  mentiontd  here.  Christ  died  for  men — that  is  the  great  general  truth; 
and  it  is  the  way  of  God  in  the  Scriptures  to  put  one  aspect  of  a  truth  in  one  place 
and  another  in  another.  1.  Christ  in  dying  brings  to  nothing  him  who  has  the  might 
of  death.  It  is  the  devil  who  gives  death  its  mighty  power.  Unseen  by  us,  and  by  us 
incomprehensible,  he  works  out  his  evil  pleasure.  And  so  Jesus  had  to  go  into  the 
unseen  world  and  conquer  him.  We  can  only  know  that  there  has  been  a  struggle  at  all 
by  what  we  see  of  the  results.  We  know  that  he  died,  we  know  that  he  rose  again ;  but 
all  that  happened  in  order  to  make  his  rising  practicaVile  is  utterly  beyond  us.  This 
is  just  one  of  the  passages  which  make  us  feel  how  little  we  know,  and  how  humble 
and  diffident  and  cautious  of  speech  we  should  be  before  the  great  unknown.  The 
practical  thing  is  that  we  should  have  a  firm  assurance  in  our  hearts  of  how  Christ  has 
mastered  the  power  of  death,  whencesoever  that  power  may  come.  2.  The  deliveranca 
of  those  enslaved  by  the  fear  of  death.  Christ  comes  to  bring  liberty.  The  progress  of 
true  Christianity  is  constantly  enlarging  the  liberty  of  the  individual.  And  here  is  one 
way  in  which  the  individual  is  bound,  self-fettered ;  and  too  often  the  more  he  allows 
himself  to  think,  the  more  firmly  the  chains  get  fastened.  He  asks  himself  what  is  to 
come  after  death.  So  far  is  it  from  being  certiain  that  death  means  utter  discontinuance 
of  life,  that  many  are  in  trouble  just  because  of  the  uncertainty.    Then  others  cling  to 


84  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  m.  1—19, 


life  just  because  life  holds  all  that  is  certain  to  them.  All  their  treasures  are  stored 
up  on  earth,  for  they  have  no  notion  of  any  other  storehouse.  It  is,  indeed,  miserable 
work  to  have  everything  dependent  on  so  uncertain  a  tenure  as  that  of  natural  life. 
But  Jesus  comes  and  opens  tlie  prison-door.  That  is  all  he  can  do.  By  his  death  he 
has  made  deliverance  possible  from  the  fear  of  death.  But  man's  confused  heart  goes 
on  fearing  even  when  the  objects  of  its  fear  are  turned  into  em[)ty  phantoms. — Y. 

Vers.  17,18. —  The  Incarnatfonneeded  for  an  efficient  priesthood.  I.  Wherein  ah 
EFFICIENT  PRIESTHOOD  LIES.  The  high  priest  is  the  representative  of  man  before  God. 
There  are  certain  things  which,  as  from  God,  are  directed  towards  man;  there  are 
certain  other  things  which,  as  from  men,  are  directed  towards  God.  These  things  are 
summed  up,  or  rather  the  most  important  of  them  is  specified,  in  the  making  reconciliation 
for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Tlie  word  is  the  same  as  the  publican  used  in  saying,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner!"  The  thing  needed  is  that  these  sins  should  be  mentioned 
before  God  in  their  full  reality  and  extent,  and  some  sin  offering  made  exactly  corre- 
spondent to  them.  And  for  all  this  there  is  further  needed  on  the  part  of  tlie  high 
priest  two  great  qualities — pity  and  fidelity.  The  priest  must  pity  his  fellow-men  as 
sinners,  and  to  do  this  requires  a  very  special  exaltation  of  the  heart.  A  man  might 
easily  pity  his  fellow-men  for  their  physical  pains  and  weaknesses,  who  would  look  with 
indifference  on  their  alienation  from  God  and  the  unrest  of  thdr  hearts  within  them. 
Then  as  to  the  fidelity  required  in  the  priesthood,  this  is  best  seen  in  the  elaborate 
instructions  given  concerning  priestly  duties  by  Moses ;  a  sacrifice  in  which  the  least 
prescribed  detail  had  been  neglected  was  as  no  sacrifice  at  all. 

IT.  The  defects  of  existino  priesthoods.  It  is  not  exactly  said  that  the  long  line 
of  Aaron  and  his  descendants  had  furnished  a  priesthood  lacking  in  tenderness  and 
faithfulness ;  but  this  is  at  least  suggested,  and  it  is  certainly  true.  If,  indeed,  a  merciful 
and  faithful  priesthood  had  been  possible  without  making  the  humanity  of  Jesus  to 
intervene,  we  are  sure  such  intervention  would  not  have  occurred,  for  it  is  by  no  means 
the  way  of  God  to  supersede  what  is  doing  it«  work  eflSoiently.  But  the  high  priest 
hitherto  had  been  taken  from  among  men,  and  he  was  taken  with  all  his  infirmities 
upon  him.  He  might  have  no  due  sense  of  sin.  Judged  by  the  state  of  his  heart, 
thousands  for  whom  he  acted  might  be  nearer  to  God  than  him.  The  priest  lay 
exposed  to  just  this  peculiar  temptation  of  having  a  lamentably  inadequate  sense  of  the 
sins  of  his  fellow-men.  Thus  sacrifice  became  an  unreal,  perfunctory  thing — altogether 
of  the  hand,  and  not  at  all  of  the  heart. 

III.    How   IT  WAS  THAT  JbSUS   BECAME  AN  EFFICIENT  HlQH  PrIBST.      Here  WO  mUSt 

look  at  Jesus  historically.  Strange  it  is  to  remember,  in  the  light  of  the  emphatic 
assertions  of  his  priesthood  contained  in  this  Epistle,  how  he  never  stood  at  any  altar 
in  Jerusalem,  never  entered  the  holy  of  holies.  And  yet  all  the  time  he  was  preparing 
for  priesthood  and  for  sacrifice.  He  was  declaring,  by  all  his  ceaseless  words  and  acts 
of  mercy,  by  all  his  faithfulness  to  truth,  his  fitness  to  be  the  High  Priest.  For  perfect 
compassion  and  perfect  fidelity,  these  constitute  the  vocation  to  the  priestly  office. 
And  it  must  be  one  of  ourselves  who  shows  them.  Jesus,  as  Son  of  God,  had  some- 
thing which  every  descendant  of  Aaron  had  lacked ;  bub  until  he  became  in  all  respects 
like  his  brethren,  the  most  sinful  of  men  had  something  which  Jesus  lacked.  What 
wonder  is  it  that  angelic  visits  ceased  once  the  humanity  of  Jesus  became  demonstrated 
and  glorified !  Angels,  whatever  their  desire  might  be,  could  never  come  so  close  to  us 
as  Jesus— could  never  know  as  he  knows,  man  like  us,  looking  into  our  hearU  with 
human  eyes  and  yet  with  Divine  penetration. — ^Y., 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  ra. 

The  Bon  superior  to  Mobbb. 

Here  begins  the  seoond  section  of  the 

argument  of  the   first  four  chapters  (see 

eummary    given    nndei    oh.    L    5).     But 


though  a  new  branch  of  the  argument 
begins,  it  is  linked,  after  the  artistio 
manner  of  the  Epistle,  to  what  haa  gone 
before  in  a  continuous  chain  of  thought. 
This  sequence  is  denoted  by  the  initiatory 
idfi'. 


OH.  in.  1—19.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS, 


65 


Yer.  1. — ^Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  par- 
taken of  a  heavenly  calling,  consider  the 
Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  confession, 
Jesus  (Xpio-Tbi/ before 'Iijo-oSk  is  ill  supported, 
and  to  be  rejected  from  the  text).  Eeferenoe 
to  what  has  gone  before  ie  perceptible 
tliToiighout  this  verse.  The  persons  ad- 
dressed are  "holy,"  as  being  among  the 
"  sanctified  "  (ch.  ii.  11)  ;  "  brethren,"  as 
being,  with  the  writer,  in  tliis  relation  to 
Christ  (ch.  ii.  11,  12,  13,  17) ;  their  calling 
is  a  heavenly  one,  being  from  Ifeaven  (ch. 
i.  1)  and  to  heaven  (uh.  ii.  10).  Jesus  is 
their  "  Apostle,"  as  having  been  sent  into  the 
world,  as  above  set  forth,  from  God ;  their 
"  High  Priest,"  as  implied,  tliough  not  dis- 
tinctly expressed,  at  the  end  of  oh.  ii., 
which  led  up  to  the  idea.  "Jesus "  ii 
added  at  the  end  in  apposition,  so  as  to 
fix  attention  on  him,  as  the  bearer  of  these 
titles,  who  was  known  by  that  name  in  the 
flesh.  On  the  title  "Apostle,"  we  may 
observe  that,  though  it  is  nowhere  else  in 
the  New  Testament  applied  to  Christ,  yet 
its  idea  with  respect  to  him  is  frequent  both 
In  this  Epistle  and  elsewhere  (of.  Luke 
iv.  43 ;  ix.  48  ;  x.  16 ;  John  xvii.  3, 18,  etc.). 
The  word  6tio\oyla  (translated  "confession;" 
in  the  A.V.,  "  profession  ")  is  generally  used 
for  the  Christian's  avowal  of  his  faith  before 
men  (of.  ch.  iv.  14;  x.  23;  2  Cor.  ix.  18; 
1  Tim.  vi.  12).  The  genitive  here  depends 
on  both  the  preceding  substantives,  its 
force  probably  being  that  Jesus,  as  Apostle 
and  High  Priest,  is  the  object  of  our  con- 
fession of  faith.  On  Jesus,  then,  being 
such,  the  readers  are  called  to  fix  earnestly 
their  mental  gaze,  and  in  doing  so  take 
further  note  of  his  superiority  to  Moses, 
which  is  the  subject  of  what  follows. 

Ver.  2. — ^Who  was  faithful  (or,  a>  being 
faithful)  to  him  that  appointed  (literally, 
made)  him,  as  also  Uoses  was  in  all  his 
house.  The  reference  is  to  what  was  said 
of  Mooes  (Numb.  xii.  7),  "My  servant 
Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in  all  mine 
house,"  and  serves  aptly  to  introduce  the 
intended  comparison  of  Christ  with  him. 
In  respect  of  faitlifulness  to  him  who  con- 
stituted him  in  his  office,  Christ  resembles 
Moses ;  in  respect  to  his  office  itself,  it  is  to 
be  shown  that  he  is  far  above  him.  Observe 
(1)  that  "his  house  "  means  God's  house,  as 
is  plain  from  the  text  cited,  i.e.  the  house 
of  him  who  appointed  him ;  (2)  that  "  in  all 
his  house  "  has  reference  to  Moses  only, 
not  to  Christ;  for  the  main  point  of  what 
follows  is  that  Christ  is  over  God's  house, 
not  in  it,  as  Moses  was.  As  to  the  verb 
Ttoi-l]<rayTa  (translated  in  A.V. "  appointed  "), 
it  may  have  been  suggested  by  1  Sam.  xii. 
6,  where  the  LXX.  reads  Kipios  S  voltia'as 
rhv  Vlavariv  Kol  riv  'Aapiiv,  the  Hebrew  verb 
being  n'^V,  which  seems  to  mean  in  this 


ease  "constitute,"  not  "creata'"  (to  Ge- 
senius).  The  preceding  words,  dvSirroXov  ku) 
apX'fpfc,  though  it  is  not  necessary  to  supply 
them  as  understood,  may  be  taken  here  to  rule 
the  meaning  of  voiTiaavTi  (of.  for  a  similar 
use  of  the  verb  withoiit  a  second  accusative 
following,  Mark  iii.  14,  ical  Inoi-nae  tdSetca. 
Thus  the  Arian  inference  from  the  word, 
that  Christ  is  represented  as  a  creature,  is 
groundless*-  Nor  need  reference  be  sup- 
posed to  his  human  birth  or  conception,  the 
temporalis  generatio  of  the  man  Jesus 
(Athanasius,  Ambrose,  and  other  Fathers). 
Ceitainly  not  to  his  eternal  generation  (as 
Bleek  and  Lunemann);  such  reference  is 
foreign  to  the  idea  of  the  passage;  nor 
could  the  word  iroieiV  with  any  propriety  be 
BO  used. 

Ver.  8. — For  of  more  glory  than  Moses 
hath  this  man  (so  A.V.,  for  oStos,  sup- 
plying "man,"  though  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  the  humanity  of  the  person  spoken  of 
is  not  expressed  in  the  original)  been 
counted  worthy  (ri^luTm :  cf.  Luke  vii.  7 ; 
1  Tim.  V.  17;  ch.  x.  24;  2  Thess.  i.  11),  by 
so  much  as  more  honour  than  the  house  hath 
he  that  built  (oT,_estahlished)  it.  Here  the 
account  of  Christ's  superiority  to  Moses 
begins.  On  the  several  expressions  used 
we  remark  :  (1)  The  initiatory  yap  connects 
the  sentence  logically  with  Karavo-liffaTe  in 
ver.  1,  and  thus  retains  its  usual  sense  of 
"  for."  (2)  The  form  of  comparison  in  the 
Greek,  ■n-Aefoi'os  vapct,  is  the  same  as  in  ch. 
i.  4,  where  the  account  of  Christ's  superiority 
to  angels  began  (on  which  see  smara).  (3) 
The  "  glory  "  (SS^a)  here  assigned  to  Christ 
is  the  "  glory  and  honour  "  spoken  of  above 
as  attained  by  him  in  consequence  of  his 
human  obedience  (cf.  ch.  ii.  9,  "because 
of  the  suffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory 
and  honour").  This,  rather  than  "the  glory 
he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world 
was "  (John  xvii.  5),  is  suggested  by  the 
word  ^IfwToi,  as  well  as  by  the  drift  of  the 
preceding  chapters.  We  may  suppose  also 
a  reference,  in  contrast,  to  the  toansitory 
"  glory "  on  the  countenance  of  Mobos  (^ 
KaTapyov/ievri),  which  is  Contrasted  (2  Cor. 
iii.)  with  the  inrcpffaWoiari  So^a  in  Christ. 
We  observe,  further,  that  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  verse  Tifiii  is  substituted  for  So'fo,  as 
more  suitable  to  the  mundane  comparison 
of  a  house  and  its  builder.  (4)  Karao-KeuafEiv 
may  include  the  idea  of  fitting  up  and 
furnishing  a  house  as  well  as  building  it. 
But  what  is  the  drift  of  the  intended 
argument?  It  is  usual,  with  the  Fathers 
generally,  to  suppose  that  Christ  (oStos)  is 
intended  to  be  denoted  as  the  Builder  or 
Bstablisher  of  the  house  in  which  Moses 
was  a  servant,  and  that  the  argument  is 
that  he,  as  such,  is  necessarily  greater  than 
the  servant,  who  was  but  a  part  of  the 


M 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


[oh,  m.  1—19. 


Iiouse,  or  hoiiBehoId,  thus  establiehed.  Otnos, 
it  is  to  be  observed,  may  include  in  its 
meaning  the  familia,  as  well  as  the  house 
itself,  as  KaTao-neuct^tiv  may  include  the  idea 
of  constituting  the  whole  establishment  (cf. 
infra,  "  whose  house  we  are ").  Among 
moderns,  Hofmann  and  Delitzsch  deny  this 
identification  of  i  KaTatrKeviaas  with  o8toi  : 
against  which  there  are  the  following  reasons : 
(1)  The  Son  has  not  been  represented  so 
far  in  the  Epistle  as  tlie  originator  of  the 
economy  of  redemption,  Notwithstanding 
distinct  intimations  of  his  eternal  pre-exist- 
ent  Deity  (as  in  ch.  i.  1.  2,  10),  it  has  been 
as  the  Messiah,  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest, 
manifested  in  time,  and  passing  through 
humanity  to  glory,  that  he  has  betn  regarded 
in  the  preceding  argument.  Nor  is  there 
any  proof  here  adduced  of  his  bein^  the 
Builder  of  the  "  house,"  so  as  to  justify  the 
conclusion  on  this  ground  of  his  glory  being 
gieater  than  tliat  of  Moses.  (2)  Tl'ie  word 
ri^iaiTcu  ("has  been  counted  worthy  of  ")  sug- 
gests (as  has  been  already  remarked)  refer- 
ence to  the  glory  won  by  him,  "  on  account 
of  the  suffering  of  death,"  rather  than  to 
his  pristine  glory  as  the  Divine  Builder. 

(3)  Klsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  when 
tiie  Church  is  referred  to  under  the  figure  of 
a  house,  it  is  spoken  of  as  God's  building 
(cf.  ch.  X.  21 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  15;  1  Cor.  iii.  !), 
16 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  22 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17 ; 
ii.  5).    It  is  never  spoken  of  as  Christ's.* 

(4)  The  wording  of  ver.  3  does  not  necessi- 
tate th^  identification  of  i  KarairKcuairas 
with  oStos.  Kaff  iaov  means  "  so  far  as ;  "  it 
implies  only  that  the  glory  of  Christ  is 
greater  than  that  of  Moses,  t'li  proportion  at 
the  honour  of  the  builder  is  greater  than 
that  of  the  house.  (5)  The  identification 
increases  tlie  difScnIty  of  understanding  the 
relevance  to  the  argument  of  ver.  4,  of 
which  more  will  be  said  presently.  Taking, 
then,  6  KaraaKevdaas  to  denote  God  the 
Father^.we  may  state  the  argument  thus : 
God  is  the  Builder,  or  Founder,  of  his  own 
house.  Christ  has  been  already  shown  to 
be  his  Son,  associated  with  him  in  dignity 
and  power,  and,  as  such.  Lord  ovtr  his 
Father's  house.  Moses,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  appears  fiom  Numb.  xii.  7,  was  but  a 
servant  in  Uod's  house.  As,  then,  the 
Founder  is  to  the  house,  so  is  the  Son  and 
Lord  to  a  servant  in  it;  the  Son  partaking 
of  the  glory  of  the  Founder;  the  servant  only 
of  that  of  the  house  in  which  he  serves. 
According  to  this  view  of  the  argument,  the 

•  Our  Lord's  own  words  (M.itt.  xvi.  18), 
"  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church," 
may  be  quoted  as  an  exception.  But  still 
the  fact  remains  that  elsewhere,  when  the 
Church  is  spoken  of  as  a  house,  the  word  used 
For  the  builder  is  "  God." 


premisses  have  been  established,  and  the 
conclusion  follows ;  the  relation  of  Christ  to 
the  Builder  of  the  house  has  been  set  forth 
in  the  preceding  chapter,  and  may  be  now 
assumed ;  that  of  Moses  is  sufSciently 
shown  by  the  quotation  from  the  Penta- 
teuch. Thus  also  vers.  5  and  6  are  found 
to  carry  out  naturally  the  idea  here  intro- 
duced, instead  of  unexpectedly  starting  a 
different  one. 

Ver.  4. — ^For  every  honse  is  builded  (or, 
established)  by  some  one ;  but  he  that  built 
(or,  established)  aU  things  is  God.  Of  thu 
second  clause  of  this  verse  "  God  "  is  rightly 
taken  by  modern  commentators  as  the  sub- 
ject, not  the  predicate,  though  the  Fathers 
generally  take  it  otherwise.  Thns  Theo- 
doret,  regarding  S  irdvTa  KaraaKeuiaas  as  a 
designation  ot  Christ,  views  this  clanse  as 
an  assertion  of  his  Deity  on  the  ground  of 
his  being  the  Founder  of  all  things.  But 
this  view  introduces  an  idea  out  of  keeping 
with  the  argument,  and  especially  with  the 
preceding  expression,  "  faithful  to  him  who 
appointed  him,"  in  which  Christ,  in  his 
ofSce  as  the  Christ,  is  distinguished  from 
the  Creator  of  all,  who  appointed  him  to 
that  office.  The  verse  seems  to  be  interposed 
in  elucidation  of  the  preceding  b  Karairiceud- 
ras  avTov,  to  make  it  clear  that  the  Foimder 
of  the  house  spoken  of  U  God  himself,  and 
thus  to  give  full  effect  to  the  proportiOTiste 
glory  of  Christ  in  comparison  with  that  of 
Moses.  Thus:  the  glory  of  Christ  is 
greater  than  that  of  Moses  by  so  much  as 
the  honour  of  the  founder  of  a  house  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  house ; — of  the 
founder,  we  say ;  for  every  house  has  some 
founder  :  but  Gfod  is  the  original  Founder  of 
all  things,  and  therefore  of  necessity  the 
Founder  of  this  house  of  his  own  in  which 
Moses  was  a  servant  The  verse,  thus  inter- 
preted, seems  (as  intimated  above)  to  fall  in 
with  the  train  of  thought  more  naturally 
than  it  can  be  shown  to  do  if  Christ  is 
regarded  as  the  Builder.  Fossibly  "all 
things"  may  be  purposely  used  to  denote 
the  house  itself  over  which  Christ,  as  Son, 
is  Lord.  For,  though  the  expression  seems 
too  wide  for  the  limited  house  in  which 
Moses  was  »  servant,  it  is  not  so  for  the 
expanded  and  consummated  house  over 
which  Chrifct  in  glory  reigns;  cf.  oh.  i.  2, 
"Whom  he  appointed  Heir  of  aU  things;" 
and  oh.  ii.  8,  "  Thou  hast  put  all  things  in 
subjection  under  his  feet;"  the  last  being 
■  said  in  especial  connection  with  the  "  glory 
and  honour  "  wherewith  Christ  "  has  been 
counted  worthy"  to  be  crowned.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  confine  the  meaning  of  "  God's 
house  "  to  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  or  to 
assign  to  it  (as  some  have  done)  two  separate 
meanings  in  the  oases  of  Moses  and  ot 
Christ.    It  may  be  regarded  as  a  comprehen- 


CH.  in.  1—19.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


67 


Bive  tenn,  including  in  its  general  meaning 
tlie  Law,  the  gospel,  and  the  final  consnmma- 
Hon — the  whole  dispensation  of  redemption, 
lieginning  with  the  Law,  and  completed  at 
the  second  advent.  Moses  held  office  in  its 
early  stage,  and  there  only  as  a  servant ;  in 
its  ultimate  development  it  comprises  "all 
things,"  and  over  "all  things,"  thus  com- 
prised, Chriiit,  as  Son,  has  been  shown  to  be 
by  inheritance  absolute  Lord. 

Vers.  5,  6. — And  Moses  verily  was  faithful 
in  all  his  house,  as  a  servant,  for  a  testimony 
of  those  things  which  were  afterwards  to  be 
spoken;  but  Christ,  as  Son  over  his  house. 
Wo  Jiave  already  anticipated  the  explana- 
tion of  this  passage,  which,  according  to  the 
view  taken  above,  is  a  setting  forth  of  the 
distinction  between  Christ  and  Hoses  in- 
tended from  the  first ;  that  of  one  being  "  Son 
over,"  the  other  but  "  servant  in,"  the  bouse 
of  God.  The  rendering  of  the  A.V.,  "hit 
(mm  house,"  in  ver.  6,  where  Christ  is  spoken 
of,  is  not  justifiable.  It  is  true  that  we 
have  no  means  of  knowing  whether  avrov  or 
auToC  was  intended,  and  that  even  mrov 
might,  according  to  the  usage  of  Hellenistic 
Greek,  refer  to  Christ ;  but  if  the  writer  had 
so  intended  it,  he  might  easily  have  avoided 
ambiguity  by  writing  IoutoS,  etc.  He  has 
not  done  so;  and,  therefore,  it  is  most 
natural  to  take  "  his  house "  in  the  same 
sense  throughout  the  passage ;  via.  as  "  God's 
house,"  referred  to  in  M  umb.  xii.  7,  whence 
the  expression  is  taken.  We  observe  further 
that  "  the  things  that  were  afterwards  to  be 
spoken  (tSc  \a\i]S-i)aoii.ivav)  "  must  be  taken 
as  denoting  the  future  "  speaking  "  of  God 
to  miin  "in  his  Son"  (cf.  ch.  i.  1);  not,  as 
some  interpret,  the  speaking  through  Moses 
himself  in  the  Law.  Moses  was  inferior  to 
Christ,  not  only  in  respect  to  his  personal 
position  as  a  servant,  but  also  in  respect  to 
his  work  as  such ;  which  was  only  to  testify 
beforehand,  typically  and  prophetically,  to 
a  fuller  revelatiun  to  come.  Whose  house 
we  are.  Here  begins  the  transition  to  the 
warning  intended  when  tlie  "  holy  brethren  " 
were  first  called  on  to  "  consider  the  Apostle 
and  High  Triest  of  our  confession,"  who  has 
now  been  seen  to  be  so  much  greater  than 
Moses.  We  Christians  constitute  this  com- 
pleted "house  of  Goil,"  over  which  Christ 
reigns  as  Son;  if  only  warned  by  the  ex- 
ample of  the  Israelites  under  Moses,  we 
forfeit  not  our  higher  calling.  This  con- 
dition is  expressed  by  If  we  hold  fast  the 
oonfldenoe  (or,  our  confidence)  and  the  re- 
joicing (rather,  boast)  of  the  (i.e.  our)  hope 
firm  unto  the  end.  Tlafi^riffui  (often  rendered 
"boldness;"  see  below,  ch.  iv.  16;  x.  19, 
35)  is  the  confidence  felt  by  assured  be- 
lievers; Kaixfll"^  is  the  boast  thereupon 
ensuing.  This  word  (as  also  Kauxa<rSai)  is 
often  used  by  St  Paul  (cf.  Bom.  It.  2 ;  t. 


2;  1  Cor.  t.  6:  ix.  15;  2  Cor.  i.  14;  t.  12; 
ix.  3;  Gal.  vi.  4;  Phil.  i.  26;  ii.  16).  Its 
proper  meaning  is  not  (as  is  by  many  sup- 
posed) the  materiel  gloriandi,  but  the  uttered 
boast  itself  (see  note  on  1  Cor.  v.  6,  in 
the  'Speaker's  Commentary').  The  con- 
cluding words,  li^xP'  TeAouj  0e$aiav,  are 
omitted  in  the  Codex  Vatican,  and,  notwith- 
standing the  preponderance  of  authority  in 
their  favour,  may  have  been  interpolated  (as 
is  supposed  by  Mill,  Tischendorf,  Alford, 
and  Delitzscb)  from  ver.  14,  especially  as 
the  reading  is  not  $e$alov,  so  as  to  agree 
with  the  substantive  immediately  preceduig, 
but  PePaiav,  as  in  ver.  14. 

Vers.  7  — 11. — Wherefore,    as  the  Holy 
Ghost  saith.  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  yonr  hearts.    The  warning,  thus 
led  up  to,  is  now  introduced  by  a  long  quota- 
tion from  Ps.  xcv.,  which  is  cited  at  length, 
because  the  writer  is  about  to  dwell  on  its 
whole  significance  in  the  remainder  of  this 
and  also  in  the  succeeding  chapter.     The 
warning  is  connected  by  Sth  with  the  con- 
clusion of  ver.  6.    Stnce  our  continuing  to 
be  God's  house  is  on  the  condition  of  our 
steadfastness,  therefore  beware  of  failing,  as 
the  Israelites  referred  to  by  the  psalmist 
did.    With  regard  to  the  construction  of  ti  le 
passage,  there  is  some  difficulty  in  discover- 
ing the  apodcisis  to  the  initiatory  xaBibs  {"as 
saith  tlie  Holy  Ghost").    It  seems  best  to 
suppose  one  understood,  being  suggested  by 
"  harden  not  your  hearts,"  which  occurs  in 
the  midst  of  the  quotation.     Sentences  thus 
grammatically  incomplete  are  in  the  style  of 
St.  Paul.     Otherwise  the  apodosis  must  bo 
found  in  /SAtTreTe  (ver.  12),  the  long  inter- 
vening passage  being  parenthetical.    It  is, 
after  all,  only  a  question  of  grammatical 
construction ;  in  any  case  the  general  mean- 
ing is  clear.    As  to  the  successive  clauses  of 
the  quotation  from  Ps.  xcv.  (vers.  7 — 11),  it 
is  to  be  observed  that  (1)  "  If  ye  will  hear 
his    voice"    may   probably   mean    in    the 
Hebrew,  "  Oh  that  ye  would  hear  his  voice  I " 
But  the  Greek  of  the  LXX.,  cited  in  the 
Epistle,  is  capable  of  the  same  meaning. 
Here,  again,  the  meaning  of  the  particular 
phrase  does  not  atfect  the  drift  of  the  pas- 
sage.    (2)  "  Harden  not  your  hearts "  ex- 
presses the  obduration  which  ensues  from 
resistance  of  grace.   Elsewhere  such  judicial 
hardening  is  attributed  to  God;  as  whtn  lie 
is  said  to  have  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart 
(cf.  Isa.  vi.  9,  etc. ;  Matt.  xiii.  13).    The  two 
modes  of  expression  involve  no  diiference  of 
doctrine.      It    is    God's    doing   as    being 
judicial ;    man's  as  being  due  to  his  own 
perversity.     As  in  the  provocation,  in  the 
day  of  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness. 
Here  kot^  t^v  rifxepav,  which  is  from  the 
LXX.,  may  mean  "  at  the  time  of"  (cf.  Acts 
xvi.  25,  /card  t!)  fieaoi/vKTiov),  or  "  according 


8S 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[cH.  m.  1 — 19. 


to,"  i.e.  "  after  the  manner  of."  The  former 
agrees  best  with  the  Hebrew  psalm,  which 
lias  "  As  at  Meribah,  as  on  the  day  of 
Massah  in  the  wilderness,"  referring  to  the 
two  places  called  by  these  names  from 
what  occurred  there,  when  the  people  mur- 
mured for  want  of  water.  The  first  oocar- 
rence  was  at  Rephidim,  in  the  wilderness 
of  Sin,  at  the  commencement  of  the  wan- 
dering (Exod.  xvii.  1 — 8);  the  second  was 
in  the  wilderness  of  Zin,  near  Kadesh, 
towards  the  end  of  the  forty  years  (Numb. 
XX.  1 — 14),  Both  names  are  assigned  to  the 
former  place  in  Exod.  xvii.  7 ;  but  elsewhere 
they  are  distinguished  (see  Deut.  zxziii.  8). 
In  the  text,  following  the  LXX.,  equiva- 
lents of  the  Hebrew  names  are  given, 
Massah  being  rendered  literally  by  ireipatr- 
111.6s:  Meribah  (equivalent  to  "strife")  by 
the  unusual  word  irapamKp(urn6s,  which 
occurs  only  here  and  in  the  psalm,  though 
the  verb  TraparnKpaiva  is  common  in  the  LXX. 
The  root  of  the  word  being  7riKf>bs  ("  bitter  "), 
it  may  possibly  have  been  suggested  by  the 
occurrence  at  Marah  (equivalent  to  "  bitter- 
ness "),  where  there  was  also  a  murmuring 
about  water  (Exod.  zv.  23),  iriKpia  being  the 
LXX.  equivalent  of  Marah.  (3)  When  (oS  in 
the  sense  of  Sirov,  as  is  common  in  the  LXX. 
and  Xew  Testament)  your  fathers  tempted 
me,  proved  me,  and  saw  my  works  forty  years. 
In  place  of  the  reading  of  the  Textus  Be- 
ceptus,  iSomiaaaiv  jue  ("  proved  me"),  which 
agrees  with  the  LXX,,  the  authority  of 
manuscripts  is  in  favour  of  iv  SoKi/iaaiif. 
This  again,  like  the  other  variations  of 
reading,  is  of  no  importance  with  regard  to 
the  meaning.  But  further,  in  the  original 
Hebrew,  and  apparently  in  the  LXX., 
"forty  years"  is  connected  with  the  clause 
thatfollows:  "forty  years  long  was  I  grieved," 
etc. ;  whereas,  in  the  text,  the  interposition 
of  Sih  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  10,  neces- 
sitates its  connection  with  "  saw  my  works." 
It  is  possible  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle 
intended  a  reference  to  the  corresponding 
forty  years  from  the  manifestation  of  Christ 
to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  were 
drawing  to  their  close  at  the  time  of  writing, 
and  dnring  which  the  Israelites  of  bis  day 
were  trying  God  by  their  rejection  of  the 
gospel,  or,  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  believers 
addressed,  by  their  wavering  allegiance  to 
it.  The  supposition  that  this  idea  was  in 
the  writer's  mind  is  supported  by  the  fact 
that  Jewish  writers  refer  to  the  psalm  aa 
assigning  forty  years  for  the  days  of  the 
Xeniah  (see  reference  in  Bleeh,  Delitzsch, 
Alford,  etc.).  That  the  writer  had  an  inten- 
tion in  his  variation  from  the  original  is  the 
more  likely  from  his  following  it  correctly 
afterwards  in  ver.  17.  (4)  As  I  sware  in  my 
wrath,  If  they  shall  enter  into  my  rest.  The 
reference  here  is  to  Numbw  xiv.  21,  etc.,  be- 


ginning with  the  Divine  oath,  "  As  truly  as 
I  live,"  which  is  again  repeated  in  ver.  28. 
The  occasion  was  not  the  murmuring  either 
at  Massah  or  at  Meribah,  but  the  general 
rebellion  of  the  whole  congregation  after  the 
return  of  the  spies,  betokening  a  universal 
spirit  of  iirio-Tfo  (of.  ver.  19).  "  If  tliey  shall 
enter  (e<  fiVeXErfo-ocTai)  "  is  an  elliptical  form 
of  oath,  expressing  strong  negation. 

Ver.  12. — ^Take  heed  (literally,  see),  bre- 
thren, lest  haply  there  should  he  (literally, 
shall  be)  in  any  one  of  yon  an  evil  heart  of 
unbelief,  in  falling  away  from  the  living 
God.  Here  begins  definitely  the  hortatory 
application  of  the  warning  of  the  ninety- 
fifth  psalm.  Its  drift,  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter,  is :  You,  being  called  under  the  Son 
to  a  far  higher  position  than  your  fathers 
under  Moses  were,  but  the  retention  of  your 
position  being,  as  theirs  was,  conditional  on 
your  faithfulness,  see  that  you  do  not  forfeit 
it,  as  some  of  you  may  be  in  danger  of 
doing.  That  you  may,  if  you  are  not  care- 
ful, is  shown  by  the  very  warning  of  the 
■  psalm,  and  by  the  example  of  your  fathers, 
referred  to  in  the  psalm,  all  of  whom,  though 
called,  failed  of  attainment  through  unbelief. 
It  is  implied  all  along  that  the  "  to-day  " 
of  the  psalm  includes  the  present  day  of 
grace,  and  points  to  a  truer  rest  than  that  of 
Canaan,  still  offered  to  the  faithful.  But 
the  full  bringing  out  of  this  thought  is 
reserved  for  the  next  chapter.  On  the  lan- 
guage of  ver.  12  we  observe:  (I)  The  same 
form  of  warning,  /SXeirere  iiij,  occurs  infra 
ch.  xii.  25,  but  then,  suitably  to  the  context, 
followed  by  a  subjunctive.  Here  the  future 
indicative  which  follows,  /i^Trore  ?<rToi,  de- 
notes a  fact  in  the  future,  distinctly  appre- 
hended as  possible  (cf.  Col.  ii.  8).  It  had 
not  ensued  as  yet,  nor  does  the  writer  antici- 
pate the  probability  of  its  being  the  case 
with  all  his  readers;  but  in  the  state  of 
feeling  with  regard  to  the  gospel  among  the 
Hebrew  Christians  which  the  whole  Epistle 
was  intended  to  counteract,  he  sees  ground 
for  fearing  it  in  the  case  of  some.  Their 
present  wavering  might  result  in  apostasy. 
(2)  It  is  not  necessary  to  analyze  the  ex- 
pression, "  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,"  so  as  to 
settle  whether  the  evil  heart  is  regarded  as 
the  result  of  unbelief,  or  unbelief  of  the  evil 
heart;  the  main  point  to  be  observed  is  that 
unbelief  is  connected  with  moral  culpability, 
as  is  implied  further  in  ver.  13.  The  un- 
belief so  condemned  in  Holy  Scripture  !■ 
not  mere  intellectual  incapacity ;  it  is  con- 
demned only  80  far  as  man  is  responsible  for 
it  on  account  of  his  own  wilful  perversity  or 
carelessness.  (3)  The  outcome  of  such  "  evil 
heart  of  unbelief,"  if  allowed  to  become 
fixed  and  permanent,  will  be  apostasy  (i.ir6. 
arrivat :  cf.  Luke  viii.  13 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1 )  from 
"  the  living  God,"  &om  him  who  is  Eternal 


OH,  III.  1—19.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBEBW8. 


89 


Life  and  the  Source  of  all  life  and  salvation. 
The  thought  of  the  momentous  consequence 
of  the  falling  away  of  Christians  after  light 
enjoyed  is  prominent  in  the  Epistle  (see 
especially  eh.  vi.  4,  etc. ;  x.  26,  etc.).  The 
expression, "the living  God,"  further  directs 
attention  to  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  Old 
Testament,  in  which  he  is  continually  ao 
designated,  and  to  the  thought  that  it  is  the 
same  God  who  has  revealed  liimself  finally 
in  the  Son.  Addressing  Hebrew  Christians, 
the  writer  may  mean  to  say, "  In  apostatizing 
from  Chriot  you  would  be  cutting  yourselves 
off  from  the  God  of  your  whole  ancestral 
faith."  There  may  he  an  intended  allusion, 
too,  to  the  oath,  already  refeiied  to,  of  Numb. 
xiv.  21,  28,  the  form  of  which  in  the  original 
is,"  As  I  live"(fM  4yii,\e'^fi  Kipios,  LXX.). 
Ver.  13. — But  exhort  one  another  (literally, 
yourselves,  as  in  .Col.  iii.  16,  the  idea  being 
that  of  the  responsibility  of  the  believers 
themselves  in  keeping  their  own  faith  alive  ; 
the  Church  must  keep  itself  from  apostasy 
by  the  mutual  admonitions  of  its  members), 
^7  by  day,  bo  long  as  it  is  called  To-day 
(i.«.  while  the  "  To-day,"  tb  a-fi/iepov,  of  the 
psalm  is  still  called  so,  KaKurai :  while  you 
are  still  living  day  by  day  within  the  limit 
of  its  meaning);  lest  any  one  of  you  be 
hardened  (still  referring  to  the  warning  of 
the  psalm)  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  Here 
again,  as  in  ver.  12,  the  possible  result  of 
obdurate  unbelief  is  distinctly  traced  to 
moral  culpability.  Sin  is  a  deceiver  (cf. 
Hom.  vii.  11 ;  Eph.  iv.  22) ;  it  distorts  the 
spiritual  vision,  causes  us  to  take  false  views 
of  things,  and  to  lose  our  clear  view  of  truth ; 
and  continued  dalliance  with  sin  may 
have  its  result  in  final  obduracy,  which,  as 
above  remarked,  is  our  own  doing  as  it 
comes  of  our  sin,  God's  doing  as  it  comes  of 
his  judgment.  The  sin  contemplated  in  the 
case  of  the  Hebrew  Christians  as  not  unlikely 
to  have  its  result  in  obduracy  was,  not  only 
imperfect  appreciation  of  the  true  character 
of  the  gospel  revelation,  and  consequent  re- 
missness in  mutual  admonition  and  atten- 
dance at  Christian  worship  (cli.  x.  25),  but 
also,  as  a  further  consequence  of  such  remiss- 
ness, failuie  in  the  moral  purity  of  life,  the 
active  charity,  the  disentanglement  from  the 
world,  and  the  endurance  of  persecution, 
required  of  Christians.  This  appears  from 
the  earnest  exhortations  that  follow  after- 
wards against  all  such  shortcomings  (see 
especially  oh.  x.  19—26,  32—39;  xii.  1 
— 18;  ziii  1 — 20).  It  was  especially  by 
oonscientiooB  perseverance  in  the  religious 
life  that  they  might  hope  to  keep  their  re- 
ligious faith  steadfast  and  unclouded  to  the 
end ;  in  accordanue  with  Christ's  own  saying, 
"  If  any  man  will  do  (fle'Xi)  noi^iii)  his  Will, 
be  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be 


Ver.  14. — ror  we  are  beoome  partakers  (or, 
partners)  of  Christ,  if  only  we  hold  fast  the 
beginning  of  our  confidence  firm  nnto  the 
end.  This  is  a  repetition  in  another  form  of 
the  assertion  of  our  position  as  Christians, 
with  the  appended  condition,  in  ver.  6.  It 
is  a  question  whether  litToxoi  XptaTov  means 
that  we  partake  of  Christ  as  being  in  com- 
munion with  him,  or  that  we  are  partakers 
with  him  of  the  glory  he  has  won  for  us  (cf. 
<ruyKKripoy6fwt  Xpurrov,  Rom.  viii.  17).  Kie 
first  is  undoubtedly  the  ordinary  sense  of 
lieroxos  with  a  genitive  in  classical  Greek, 
and  generally  in  the  New  Testament  (of.  e.g. 
infra,  oh.  vi.  4,  Mct(Jxo''s  Tlvii/iaTos  aylov), 
and  is  on  this  ground  maintained  by  Bleek, 
Alford,  and  others;  but  in  the  LXX. /ietoxos, 
followed  by  a  genitive,  is  as  undoubtedly 
used  for  "  partner  "  or  "  companion ; "  of.  Ps. 
Oxix.  63,  Meroxos  ^7^  €tjui  TrdiTUV  Tciv  tfto^ov- 
fiivanxre:  SoB.  iv.  17,  Miroxos  elS<i\a>v '.  and 
especially  Ps.  xlv.  7,  Meroxovs  crou,  which  has 
been  already  cited  (ch.  i.  9),  and  justifies, 
M  it  may  have  suggested,  the  expression 
in  this  sense  here.  Cf.  dso  in  the  New 
Testament,  Luke  v.  7,  where  nerixos,  though 
without  an  expressed  genitive  following, 
occurs  in  the  sense  of  "  partner."  Further, 
the  second  sense  accords  better  than  the  first 
with  the  view  of  our  relation  to  Christ  so 
far  set  forth  in  the  Epistle.  (2)  On  the  word 
iirSarcuris  (translated  "confidence"),  see 
what  was  said  under  ch.  i.  3.  All  the 
ancient  interpreters  understood  it  here  in 
the  same  general  sense  as  in  the  former 
passage — that  of  substance  or  subsistence, 
either  as  denoting  our  subsistence  as 
members  of  Christ,  or  our  faith  regarded  as 
the  substance  of  our  Christian  life,  or  with 
other  modifications  of  the  general  meaning. 
Modern  commentators  agree  in  understand- 
ing merely  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is 
found  to  be  commonly  used  by  the  Alexan- 
drian writers— that  of  confidence,  derived 
from  the  physical  conception  of  a  firm 
foundation.  It  thus  corresponds  with  the 
Tra^^ria-tav  of  ver.  6.  (3)  "  The  beginning  " 
(tV  apxV)  of  this  confidence  refers  to  the 
earlier  stage  of  the  experiences  of  the 
Hebrew  Christians,  before  their  faith  had 
shown  any  signs  of  wavering.  There  is  no 
BuflSoient  ground  for  Ebrard's  inference  from 
this  expression,  that  the  Epistle  was  not 
addressed  to  the  Hebrew  Church  at  large, 
which  was  the  oldest  of  all  Churches,  but  to 
"  a  circle  of  catechumens  and  neophytes." 
The  phrase  does  not  imply  that  the  "  begin- 
ning" was  recent.  All  it  need  mean  is, 
"  Go  on  as  you  began."  Further,  we  find, 
in  ch.  V.  12,  a  distinct  intimation  that  the 
Church  addressed  is  one  of  old  standing. 
(4)  "Unto  the  end  "  may  have  an  individual 
reference  to  the  end  of  life,  or  (the  Church 
being  addressed  as  a  community  expecting 


90 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEW& 


[oh.  in.  1 — ^19. 


the  second  advent)  a  general  one  to  the 
close  of  the  period  of  grace  during  which 
"it  is  called  To-day." 

Ver.  15. — ^While  it  is  said,  To-day,  eto. 
Commentators  have  found  unnecessary  diffi- 
cidty  in  determining  the  connection  of  4v  t$ 
htyetrSai.  Many,  taking  the  words  as  the 
beginning  of  a  new  sentence,  have  been  at 
pains  to  discover  the  apodosis  to  them. 
Ohrysosfejm,  Grotius,  BosenmuUer,  and 
others  find  it  in  (pofirieajxev  olv,  ch.  iv.  1; 
notwithstanding  the  oZv,  which  seems  evi- 
dently to  introduce  a  new  sentence,  and  the 
long  parenthesis  which,  on  this  supposition, 
intervenes.  Others  find  it  in  ^nJ;  <TKK-i\pvpT]Te 
("harden  not  your  hearts"),  in  the  middle 
of  the  citation  of  ver.  16,  as  if  the  writer  of 
the  Epistle  adopted  these  words  as  his  own. 
Delitzsch  finds  it  in  ver.  16,  taken  as  an 
interrogation  {riva,  not  rices :  see  below)  ; 
thus:  "  When  it  is  said,  To-day  .  .  .harden 
not  your  hearts  as  in  the  provocation,  .  .  . 
who  did  provoke?  Nay,  did  not  all?" 
The  -yap  after  tIvss  he  accounts  for  by  its 
idiomatic  use  found  in  such  ^lassages  as 
Acts  viii.  31 ;  six.  35,  conveying  the  sense 
of  the  English,  "  Why,  who  did  provoke  ?  " 
But  this  uee  of  yap,  obvious  in  the  texts 
adduced  as  parallel,  would  be  forced  here ; 
the  structure  of  the  sentence  does  not  easily 
lend  itself  to  it.  Still,  this  is  the  view  taken 
by  Tholuck,  Bleek,  De  Wette,  Lunemann, 
and  others,  as  well  as  Delitzsch.  But,  not- 
withstanding such  weighty  support,  ditfi- 
culties  are  surely  best  avoided  by  taking 
iv  ry  Ae'7f  trflai,  not  as  commencing  a  new 
sentence,  but  in  connection  with  yet.  14 
preceding,  as  it  seems  most  natural  to  take 
it  ia  the  absence  of  any  connecting  particle 
to  mark  a  new  proposition.  In  this  case 
the  translation  of  the  A.Y.  gives  a  fully 
satisfactory  sense :  "  If  we  hold  fast  the 
beginning  of  our  confidence  firm  unto  the 
end,  vrhUe  it  i(  still  being  said.  To-day," 
etc.;  i.e.  (as  in  ver.  13)  "so  long  as  it  is 
called  To-day."  Ebrard,  Alford,  and  others, 
taking  the  same  view  of  the  connection  of 
the  words,  prefer  the  translation,  "  In  that 
it  is  said."  But  the  other  seems  more  in 
accordance  with  the  thought  pervading  the 
passage. 

Vers.  16 — 19. — For  who,  when  they  heard, 
provoked  1  Nay,  did  not  ajl  those  who  oame 
out  of  Egypt  by  Hoses  t  That  both  these 
clauses  are  interrogative,  and  not  as  taken 
in  the  A.V.,  is  now  the  prevalent  view. 
The  reasons  for  thus  understanding  them 
are  (1)  the  analogy  of  the  two  following 
verses,  both  of  which  are  interrogative,  and 
in  the  first  of  which  a  question  is  similarly 
answered  by  putting  another;  and  (2)  the 
sense  requiied.  If  the  clauses  were  asser- 
tions, they  could  only  be  meant  to  express 
that  the  proTocation  was  not  universal,  Inap- 


much  as  Joshua  and  Caleb  (and  it  might  be 
some  few  others)  remained  faithful.  But 
to  eay  this  is  niineoessary  and  irrelevant 
to  the  argument,  the  drift  of  which  is  to 
warn  by  "the  example  of  unbelief;"  and 
could  TWM  ("some")  possibly  be  used  to 
denote  the  whole  congregation  with  the 
exception  of  so  few?  It  is  to  be  observed, 
too,  that  the  oW  oii  at  the  beginning  of  the 
second  clause  is  a  proper  Greek  expression 
(equivalent  to  "  nay ")  in  the  case  of  one 
question  being  answered  by  another  (of. 
Luke  xvii.  7,  8).  This  verse,  then  (yhp 
retaining  its  usual  sense  of  "  for  "),  begins  a 
proof,  put  in  the  form  of  a  series  of  ques- 
tions, of  the  preceding  implied  proposition, 
▼iz.  that  the  retention  of  Christian  privilege 
is  dependent  on  perseverance,  and  th<it  the 
privilege  may  be  forfeited.  In  order  to 
show  this  fully,  the  history  of  Numb,  xiv., 
referred  to  in  the  warning 'of  the  psalm,  is 
examined  in  connection  with  the  successive 
expressions  of  the  warning;  and  it  thus 
appears  that  all  who  came  out  of  Egypt  by 
Moses  (the  small  exception  of  the  faithful 
spies  being  disregarded)  provoked  God,  and 
so  forfeited  their  privilege,  and  that  the 
cause  of  their  failure  was  sin,  disobedience, 
and,  at  the  root  of  all,  unbelief.  The  con- 
clusion is  obvious  that,  as  their  example  is 
held  out  in  the  psalm  as  a  warning  to  us, 
we  may,  all  or  any  of  us,  similarly  forfeit 
our  higher  calling.  That  the  psalm  is  a 
waruing  to  us,  the  r^st  it  points  to  being 
the  rest  won  for  us  by  Christ,  is  more  fully 
shown  in  the  following  chapter.  We  observe 
how  the  leading  words  in  Ps.  xcv.  are  taken 
in  succession  in  the  three  successive  yerses 
— napaiTiKpaafi^s  in  ver.  16,  •trpoa'^x.^tffa  in 
Ter.  17,  H/ioffa  in  ver.  18 — and  how  answers 
to  the  three  questions  suggested  by  these 
words  are  found  in  Numb.  xiv. — to  the  first, 
in  vers.  2,  10,  etc.,  "oH  the  children  of 
Israel,"  "oHthecongregation;"  tothesecond, 
iu  vers.  29 — 34,  with  citation  of  the  words 
nsed ;  to  the  third,  iu  vers.  21 — 24.  It  is 
to  be  observed,  further,  that  it  is  not  simply 
i-nia-rta,  but  its  exhibition  in  actual  sin  and 
disobedience  (rois  a/j.apT'tjtraa-i,  rots  oireiS^- 
aaai),  that  is  spoken  of  as  calling  forth  the 
Divine  wrath  and  the  Divine  oath.  The 
■ecoud  of  the  above  words  implies  more 
than  "believed  not"  (as  in  the  A.V.); 
6,-Kii6e!v  differs  from  ajrumw  in  implying 
disobedience  or  contumacy.  And  tliis  view 
of  the  case  of  the  Israelites  agrees  entirely 
with  the  historical  record,  where  au  actual 
rebellion  is  spoken  of — a  refusal  to  go  on 
with  the  work  they  had  been  called  to. 
It  suits  also  the  application  to  the  caae  of 
the  Hebrew  Christians,  among  whom  (as 
has  been  said)  it  was  not  only  wavering  of 
faith,  but,  as  its  consequence,  remissness  in 
moral  duty  and  in  the  facing  of  trial,  of 


cfl.  HI.  1— 19.J 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBEEWa 


•1 


which  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  had  per- 
ceived Bymptoms,  and  on  the  ground  of 
which  he  warns  them  to  take  heed  lest 
growing  indifference  should  be  hardened 
into  apostasy.  But  in  both  instances,  as 
faith  is  tlie  root  of  all  virtue,  lo  want  of  it 


was  the  canse,  and  again  the  growing  result, 
of  moral  decadence.  And  so  the  argument 
is  summed  up  in  the  concluding  verse.  And 
we  see  that  they  eoold  not  enter  in  beoanse 
of  unbelief. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Consider  Jetus.  The  exhortation  of  this  verse  marks  the  transition  from 
the  first  section  of  the  treatise  to  those  which  follow.  Its  reference  is  both  retrospective 
and  prospective.  Indeed,  the  whole  Epistle  says  in  effect,  "  Consider  what  is  written 
herein  concerning  Jesus ;  for  he  is  greater  than  the  prophets,  greater  than  the  angels, 
greater  than  Moses  and  Joshua,  greater  than  Aaron,  and  pre-eminent  among  the  heroes 
of  faith." 

I.  A  DESCBIPTION  OF  Chbist.  1.  2%«  "  ApostW  of  ihe  gospel.  Jesus,  the  Son  of 
God  (and  no  longer  prophets  or  angels),  is  now  the  Divine  Ambassador  to  men.  God 
has  sent  him  to  us,  as  he  sent  Moses  (Bxod.  iii.)  to  the  ancient  Israelites  (ch.  iii. ;  iv. 
1—13).  It  is  singularly  appropriate  that  Christ,  the  Sent  of  Qod,  should  be  called 
God's  "Apostle."  2.  The  "  High  Priest"  of  the  Ghv/rch.  As  ouv  Mediator,  Jesus  draws 
near  to  God  for  us.  He  expiates,  propitiates,  reconciles,  and  intercedes  (ch.  iv.  14 — 
X.  18).  Through  Christ,  as  Apostle,  God  holds  intercourse  with  us ;  and  through  Christ, 
as  High  Priest,  we  hold  intercourse  with  God. 

II.  A  DESCBIPTION  OP  CHRIST'S  PEOPLE.  1.  "  Eoly  brethren."  This  phrase  evidently 
looks  back  to  ch.  ii.  11  and  following  verses.  Believers  are  so  styled  on  account  of 
their  common  oneness  with  Christ,  their  Sanctifier  and  elder  Brother.  2.  "  Partakers 
tf  a  heavenly  calling."  This  refers  to  the  sovereign  gift  of  regeneration,  and  of  the 
blessings  flowing  from  it,  which  all  believers  have  received.  The  "  calling "  is 
"  heavenly,"  because  it  has  come  from  heaven ;  it  creates  heaven  within  us;  and  it  con- 
ducts to  heaven.  3.  Confessors  of  Christ.  Jesus  expects  his  people  to  make  an  open 
and  proud  avowal  of  attachment  to  him  as  their  Teacher  and  Priest.  Believers  confess 
him  by  connecting  themselves  with  his  Church,  by  sitting  at  his  table  of  communion, 
by  defending  his  honour,  by  spreading  his  truth,  and  especially  by  reflecting  his  likeness 
in  their  lives. 

III.  A  DUTY  OF  Christ's  people  towards  bim.  Christianity  centres  in  Christ;  in 
fact,  Christ  liimself  is  Christianity.  '  Personal  religion  does  not  consist  in  any  merely 
intelU'Ctual  acceptance  of  gospel  truth ;  it  is  a  life  of  loving  devotion  to  the  living 
Saviour.  How  necessary,  then,  that  we  "  consider  Jesus,"  earnestly,  intensely,  habitually, 
and  make  the  study  of  him  the  main  interest  and  business  of  life!  We  must "  consider  " 
him :  1.  To  know  him.  We  are  saved  through  faith  in  Christ ;  but  knowledge  is 
necessary  in  order  to  faith.  If  we  would  know  the  Redeemer  in  his  Person,  natures, 
offices,  and  work,  we  must  "  consider"  him.  2.  To  love  him.  A  Christian  is  one  who 
loves  Christ ;  but  this  love  will  fill  his  heart  only  in  so  far  as  he  gazes  admiringly  upon 
the  God-Man,  who  loved  him  and  gave  himself  for  him.  3.  To  serve  him.  If  we 
truly  love  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  this  love  will  control  and  dominate  our  life.  But,  in 
order  to  know  his  will,  our  "eyes"  must  always  "look  unto  the  hand  of, our  Master." 
4.  To  become  like  him.  Sanctifloation  can  be  effected  only  by  always  "  looking  unto 
Jesus  "  for  mercy  and  grace  and  aid,  until  we  fltially  attain  the  prize  of  the  heavenly 
calling. 

Conclusion.  This  subject  suggests  a  test  of  character.  Do  I  belong  to  the  holy 
brotherhood?  Have  I  accepted  the  heavenly  calling?  Do  I  confess  Christ  with  my 
lip  and  in  my  life  ?    Is  the  contemplation  of  Jesus  my  most  cherished  desire  ? 

Vers.  2 — Q,— 'Christ  greater  than  Moses.  It  was  a  delicate  thing  to  utter  such  a 
thought  even  to  many  of  the  Jews  who  had  embraced  Christianity,  for  the  whole 
Hebrew  nation  guarded  with  intense  jealousy  the  name  and  fame  of  Moses.  But  the 
writer  acknowledges  to  the  full  the  lofty  dignity  and  splendid  gervices  of  the  ancient 
lawgiver,  and  ttien  proceeds  to  show  that  Jesus  Christ  has  been  counted  worthy  oK 
Still  greater  honour. 


92  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS  [pa.  m.  1—19. 

I.  Chbist'8  similarity  to  Moses.  (Ver.  2.)  The  very  fact  of  a  compavison  being 
instituted  between  Jesus  and  Moses  reminds  us  of  Moses'  greatness.  Moses  had  a 
romantic  personal  history ;  his  character  was  adorned  with  the  grandest  gifts  of  grace 
and  genius;  and  he  accomplished  an  illustrious  life-work.  He  was  a  type  of  Christ 
both  in  character  and  career.  The  Jews  venerated  him  almost  to  idolatry  as  their 
deliverer,  leader,  lawgiver,  prophet,  and  advocate  with  God.  Now,  Christ  was  "a 
Prophet  like  unto  Moses "  (Deut.  xviii.  15).  He  is  the  Moses  of  the  New  Testament. 
Ver.  2  suggests  points  of  resemblance  between  the  two.  1.  Each  introduced  a  new 
dispensation.  "  The  Law  was  given  by  Moses ;  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 
The  Jews  were  "  baptized  unto  Moses ; "  Christians  are  "  baptized  into  Christ."  The 
writings  of  Moses  are  to  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  what  the  granite  formation  is 
to  the  other  strata  of  the  earth's  crust ;  so  the  written  life  of- Christ  is  the  foundation 
of  New  Testament  Scripture.  2.  Each  was  divinely  commissioned  and  supported  in 
his  worlc.  Moses,  with  his  marvellous  gifts,  was  raised  up  and  trained  and  called  by 
Providence  to  his  life- task ;  and  so  was  Jesus.  Moses  enjoyed  peculiarly  intimate  inter- 
course with  God,  for  "  the  Lord  knew  him  face  to  face ; "  and  so  did  Jesus.  3.  Each  was 
divinely  recognized  as  "faithful.''  Fidelity  to  duty  is  the  crown  and  flower  of  character. 
"  My  seivant  Moses  is  faithful  in  all  mine  house  "  (Numb.  xii.  7).  "  This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased :  hear  ye  him"  (Matt.  xvii.  5). 

II.  Christ's  superiokitt  to  Moses.  (Vers.  3 — 6.)  It  was  right  that  the  memory 
of  the  lawgiver  should  be  cherished  with  profound  veneration ;  but,  behold,  a  greater 
than  Moses  is  here.  Jesus  has  merited  still  larger  honour.  1.  Christ  is  the  "  Builder  " 
of  the  Church;  Moses  wa$  only  one  of  the  stones  in  it.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  The  Son  of  God, 
"  through  whom  also  he  made  the  ages"  (ch.  i.  2),  is  the  real  Founder  of  every  dispen- 
sation of  religion.  He  redeemed  the  Old  Testament  Church,  not  less  than  the  New, 
with  his  blood,  and  caused  it  to  grow  by  his  Spirit.  Moses  only  introduced  the 
Hebrew  economy;  it  was  God  in  Christ  who  founded  it.  Moses  was  a  constituent 
member  of  the  Jewish  Church,  i.e.  a  ransomed  sinner,  saved  by  grace  like  other  men ; 
a  "living  stone"  built  into  the  spiritual  house  by  Christ  the  Master-Builder.  2.  Christ 
iia  " Son" set" over  God^s house;"  Moses  was  only  a  "servant"  within  it.  (Vers.  5, 6.) 
Moses  ministered  in  the  Church  as  a  confidential  house-steward,  or  honoured  upper- 
servant  ;  but  Christ  entered  it  as  its  Master,  to  preside  over  it  by  virtue  of  his  Divine 
sonship.  The  author  has  already  expatiated  on  this  theme  in  ch.  i. ;  and  surely  Jesus, 
the  Apostle  of  Christianity,  is  more  renowned  than  Moses,  seeing  that  he  is  the  very 
Image  of  God,  and  the  Lord  of  all  the  angels.  3.  Ciirist  is  the  incarnate  "  Word  of 
Ood ; "  Moses  was  only  his  forerunner.  (Ver.  5.)  Moses  bore  "  testimony  "  to  "  those 
things  which  were  afterward  to  be  spoken"— to  the  new  and  final  revelation  to  be  made 
at  last,  when  God  should  speak  "  in  his  Son  "  (ch.  i.  2).  "  Moses  was  the  harbinger, 
Christ  the  illustrious  Prince  himself;  the  revelations  of  Moses  were  the  faint  twilight  o( 
the  morning,  those  of  Christ  the  full  splendour  of  noonday ;  the  institutions  of  Mosea 
were  the  scaffolding,  those  of  Christ  the  finished  fabric  of  religious  truth  "  (Lindsay). 

Closing  pkactioal  refj.ection.  (Ver.  6.)  If  we  remain  perseveringly  steadfast  in 
our  gospel  faith,  and  joyful  in  our  spiritual  hope,  we  have  therein  the  evidence  that  we 
ourselves  belong  to  God's  houe,  the  Church. 

Vers.  7 — 19. — Beware  of  unbelief.  Eminent  and  honoured  though  Moses  had  been, 
the  generation  of  Hebrews  whom  he  led  out  of  Egypt  became  unbelieving  and  dis- 
obedient, and  were  in  consequence  overtaken  by  a  dreadful  doom.  So  the  writer  of 
this  Epistle,  realizing  the  strong  teni  ,jtations  to  relapse  into  Judaism  which  beset  the 
Hebrew  Christians,  warns  them  against  the  still  more  dreadful  consequences  of  apostasy 
from  discipleship  to  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  A  besetting  spiritual  danger.  It  is  that  of  losing  our  participation  in  God's 
house;  or,  more  particularly,  of :  1.  Present  unbelief .  (Ver.  12.)  Unbelief  is  distrust 
of  God,  want  of  faith  in  the  Divine  promise  and  providence,  and  especially  refusal 
personally  to  confide  in  the  Lord  Jesus  as  "  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  con- 
fession." Unbelief  may  either  presume  upon  God's  mercy,  or  despair  of  it,  or  neglect 
it.  2.  Growing  hardness  of  heart.  (Ver.  8.)  "  With  the  heart  man  bclieveth  unto 
righteousness ; "  and  the  heart  also  is  the  fountain  of  sin.  Acts  of  refusal  to  listen  to 
Clod's  voice  petrify  into  habits,  so  that  the  heart  becomes  the  longer  the  more  careless. 


oa.  m.  1— 19.]  I'HE  EPISTLE  TO  TflE  HEBREWS.  93 

impenitent,  and  disobedient.  3.  Final  apostasy.  (Ver.  12.)  As  acts  produce  habits , 
so  habits  form  character.  A  human  heart  indurated  by  unbelief,  and  confirmed  in 
moral  insensibility,  will  lapse  either  into  atheism,  or  immorality,  or  settled  worldliness ; 
and,  unless  Divine  grace  interpose,  will  for  ever  "  fall  away  from  the  living  God."  This 
danger  easily  besets  us  all — much  more  easily  than  many  professing  Christians  suspect. 
"  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

II.  A  STBiKiNQ  HI8T0RI0AI.  WABNiNO.  (Vers.  7 — 11.)  This  the  apostle  introduces 
ill  words  borrowed  from  Ps.  xcv.,  which  describe  the  career  of  the  Israelites  of  Moses' 
day,  in  the  wilderness.  They  had,  as  a  people,  been  :  1.  IJigUy  privileged.  (Ver.  9.) 
As  the  result  of  the  ten  plagues  of  Egypt,  and  by  means  of  their  magnificent  march 
through  the  Bed  Sea,  they  had  been  emancipated  from  slavery.  They  "  saw  God's 
works  forty  years,"  in  the  falling  manna,  in  the  water  from  the  rook  that  followed 
them,  in  tneir  raiment  which  did  not  wear  out,  and  in  the  cloudy  pillar  which  accom- 
])anied  them  on  their  journeys.  Yet  they  were :  2.  Habitually  faithless.  (Vers.  8,  9, 
16.)  They  despised  these  abiding  miracles,  and  demanded  other  signs  as  a  condition 
of  believing.  They  doubted  and  grumbled ;  they  longed  to  return  again  to  Egypt ; 
they  refused  at  God's  command  to  go  up  to  take  possession  of  Canaan ;  and  at  last  they 
fell  into  the  idolatries  of  the  heathen  around.  Zin,  Kephidim,  Taberah,  Kadesh-barnea, 
and  Shittim  are  names  which  remind  us  how  the  ransomed  Jews  did  "  alway  err  in 
their  heart."  They  were  obstinate  and  unanimous  in  their  apostasy  (vers.  16, 17).  So 
they  were ;  3.  Hopelessly  doomed.  (Vers.  11,  17 — 19.)  The  words  of  the  psalm,  "  I 
sware  in  my  wrath,"  reflect  the  intensity  and  depth  of  the  Divine  displeasure ;  and  the 
language  borrowed  from  the  history,  _"  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness  "  (Numb, 
xiv.  29,  32),  suggests  the  deep  misery  of  the  retribution  which  fell  upon  that  entire 
generation.  But  a  ruin  still  more  fearful  shall  be  the  portion  of  all  who  refuse  or 
despise  the  gospel  spoken  by  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  "  Apostle  "  greater  than  Moses. 

III.  An  earnest  pbactioal  counsel.  "  Take  heed,  brethren  "  (ver.  12).  This 
exhortation  is,  in  fact,  the  key-note  of  the  whole  Epistle ;  it  is  the  chord  which  rules  the 
strain.  While  the  grace  of  God  does  not  allow  any  real  Christian  to  backslide  irretriev- 
ably, he  preserves  his  people  from  apostasy  by  the  use  of  means  suited  to  their  rational 
and  moral  nature.  So,  here,  the  Holy  Spirit  exhorts  every  individual  believer  (ver.  12) 
to  "  take  heed."  If  we  would  not  "  fall  away  from  the  living  God,"  we  must :  1.  "  Hear 
his  voice."  (Vers.  7,  15.)  That  voice  speaks  to  us  now  in  the  sweet  and  glorious 
gospel,  and  tells  us  of  far  grander  "  works  "  than  those  which  were  wrought  for  ancient 
Israel.  "  God  hath  spoken  unto  us  in  his  Son"  (ch.  i.  2).  To  obey  his  voice  will  at 
once  soften  and  strengthen  our  hearts.  It  will  make  us  large-hearted  as  well  as  tender- 
hearted. 2.  "  Exhort  one  another,"  (Ver.  13.)  Christians  are  associated  in  Church 
fellowship  that  they  may  promote  one  another's  welfare.  The  Church  is  a  spiritual 
mutual  benefit  society.  Friendly  counsel  and  admonition  are  a  valuable  safeguard  against 
apostasy.  Two  considerations  which  should  stimulate  to  this  duty  are  mentioned  :  (1) 
the  shortness  of  life;  (2)  the  insidiousness  of  sin.  3.  Continue  "firm,  unto  the  end." 
(Ver.  14.)  It  is  dangerous  for  a  believer  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  consciousness  of  his 
original  conversion ;  he  ought  to  be  constantly  turning  from  sin  to  Christ.  It  is  unwise 
for  him  to  lay  stress  on  past  frames  and  feelings;  he  must  cherish  through  life  an 
always-fresh  and  living  "  confidence "  in  the  Saviour — a  faith  which  more  and  more 
certifies  itself  by  the  ripening  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  He  must  remain  ever  on  his  guard 
against  unbelief.  Only  by  persevering  steadfastness  will  any  one  who  has  accepted  the 
"  heaTenly  calling  "  finally  enter  into  the  heavenly  "  rest" 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Z%e  siiblimest  contemplation.  "  Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  partaken  of  a 
heavenly  calling,"  etc. 

L  Thb  ohabactekization  of  Christians.  1.  They  are  fraternal  in  relation. 
"  Brethren."  These  Hebrew  Christians  were  brethren  in  a  twofold  sense  to  the  writer 
of  the  Epistle — first,  as  being  his  kindred  according  to  the  flesh ;  and  next,  as  being 
of  the  same  religious  faith.  Every  Christian  is  a  member  of  a  glorious  brotherhood. 
yife  an  brothers  inasmuch  as  we  have  all  one  Father  and  one  elder  Brother  |  we  are 


»4  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oh.  m.  1—19. 

animated  by  one  Spirit  j  we  are  tending  to  one  home,  our  "  Fatho.'s  honse."  Let  us 
endeavour  to  realize  this  relationship,  and  to  practically  express  its  spirit.  "  Love  the 
brotherhood."  2.  They  are  consecrated  in  chancter.  "  Holy  brethren."  By  applying 
to  them  the  term  "  holy,"  the  writer  does  not  affirm  that  all  those  whom  he  was  address- 
ing were  in  a  state  of  sinless  purity.  The  adjective  conveys  two  ideas — consecration 
and  transformation.  Christians  are  holy  because  they  have  consecrated  themselves  to 
the  Lord,  and  are  being  transformed  into  moral  resemblance  to  him.*  3.  'ITiey  are 
exalted  in  privilege.  "Partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling."  This  calling  "is  the 
invitation  given  on  the  part  of  God  and  Christ  to  men,  to  come  and  partake  of  the 
blessings  proffered  "  in  the  gospel.  Id  two  senses  it  is  "  a  lieavenly  calling."  (1)  It  is 
heavenly  in  its  origin  ;  a  calling  from  heaven.  The  holy  voices  and  gracious  invita- 
tions are  from  above.  All  saving  influences  and  impulses  are  from  Gh>d.  (2)  It  is 
heavenward  in  its  end  ;  a  calling  to  heaven.  Spiritual,  sublime,  eternal,  heavenly,  are 
the  blessings  to  which  we  are  called.  It  is  "  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus." 
The  "  partakers  "  of  this  calling  are  not  those  who  have  merely  heard  the  call  to  gospel 
blessings,  but  those  who  have  both  heard  and  accepted  that  call. 

II.  The  ohabaotebization  of  the  Lobd  and  Sayioub.  1.  B«  i$  "  the  Apostle  oj 
our  confession,"  There  is  here  a  comparison  of  Jesus  with  Moses.  Moses  was  "  sent " 
of  God  to  be  the  emancipator,  chieftain,  and  ruler  of  the  Israelites  (see  Exod.  iii.  10, 12, 
14, 15).  In  this  sense  he  was  an  apostle  of  God.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Sent  of  God  (see 
John  iii.  34 ;  v.  36,  37 ;  vi.  29 ;  x.  36 ;  xvii.  18).  He  was  sent  on  •  still  grander 
mission  of  redemption  (see  Isa.  Ixi.  1 — 3).  Moreover,  the  Jews  designated  the  minister 
of  the  synagogue,  who  had  the  charge  of  its  affairs  and  presided  over  them,  an  apostle. 
And  in  the  verse  following  our  text  the  writer  goes  on  to  speak  of  Jesus  and  Moses  as 
each  presiding  over  the  affairs  of  a  house.  In  this  sense  also  our  Loid  is  "  the  Apostle 
of  our  confession."  He  is  sent,  not  only  to  emancipate,  but  also  to  rule  over  his  Church ; 
to  be  both  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  2.  He  i$  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  confession." 
Here  the  comparison  is  with  Aaron.  As  Aaron  was  high  priest  of  the  Jews,  and,  as 
such,  made  expiation  for  the  sins  of  the  people,  so  our  Saviour  has  made  atonement  for 
the  sins  of  the  world  by  the  offering  of  himself  in  sacrifice.  Through  him  we  approach 
unto  God.  He  maketh  intercession  for  us.  He  pleads  with  us  and  in  us  and  tor  us. 
Through  him  we  shall  rise  to  heaven.  As  the  Apostle,  he  is  the  Representative  of  God 
to  men ;  as  the  High  Priest,  he  is  the  Bepresentative  of  men  with  God.  3.  Se  is  J$eus. 
There  is  perhaps  a  reference  here  to  Joshua,  the  great  general  of  the  Israelites,  who  led 
them  into  the  promised  land.  "Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus :  for  he  shall  save  his 
people  from  their  sins.*    How  great,  then,  is  our  Lord  and  Saviour ! 

III.  The  attitude  which  Chbistiaks  should  maintain  towards  tueib  Lobo  and 
Saviour.  "  Wherefore,  holy  brethi'en  .  .  .  consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest,"  etc 
1.  77ie  argument.  "  Wherefore,"  t.e.  because  we  have  in  Jesus  such  "  a  merciful  an>l 
taithful  High  Priest,"  such  a  mighty  and  gracious  Helper,  we  should  attentively  con- 
sider him.  And  such  consideration  would  be  likely  to  strengthen  the  Christian  faith  of 
any  who  were  in  danger  of  falling  back  into  Judaism;  for  they  would  find  him  a  greater 
Apostle  than  Moses,  a  greater  High  Priest  than  Aaron,  a  greater  "Captain  of  salvation  " 
I  han  Joshua.  The  great  principle  is  this,  that  the  greatest  safeguard  against  weariness, 
discouragement,  and  apostasy  is  an  earnest  consideration  of  Jesus;  a  believing,  steadfast, 
looking  unto  him.  2.  The  exercise.  "  Consider  the  Apostle,"  etc.  Contemplate  him  as 
"  the  Apostle  of  our  confession."  How  much  greater  is  he  than  Moses  1  Moses  did  not 
lead  the  people  into  the  promised  land,  or  even  enter  therein  himself;  but  Jesus  has 
entered  heaven  as  our  Forerunner,  has  led  multitudes  into  its  blessedness,  will  lead  all 
his  people  there.  Contemplate  him  as  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  confession."  How  much 
greater  is  he  than  Aaron  I  Aaron's  priesthood  was  imperfect,  typical,  preparatory ;  but 
our  Lord's  is  gloriously  perfect.  By  his  sacrifice  he  has  made  fiUl  atonement;  his 
intercession  is  divinely  efficacious.  Contemplate  him  as  our  Saviour,  "  Jesni."  He  is 
"  mighty  to  save ; "  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,"  etc.  Here  is  the  sublimest  con- 
templation. In  weakness  and  weariness  consider  Jaim,  and  you  will  be  strengthened 
and  animated.  In  darkness  consider  him,  and  the  night  will  shine  even  as  the  day. 
In  Aa  consider  him,  and  you  will  seek  and  obtain  forgiveness.  In  sorrow  consider  him, 
and  th«  troubled  heart  will  grow  calm  and  restful.    In  death  consider  him,  and  his  rod 

I  See  our  notes  on  oh.  ii  U. 


CH.  in.  1—19.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  9S 


and  staff  will  comfort  you,  and  he  himself  will  lead  you  through  its  dark  portals  into 
the  joys  aud  glories  of  heaven.  Let  this  be  oar  constant  attitude — "looking  unto 
Jesus."— W.  J. 

Ver.  8, — The  Church,  Qod!»  temple.  "But  Christ  as  a  Son  over  Ui  house;  whose 
house  are  we,"  etc.     Observe — 

I.  The  Chukoh  is  the  temple  op  God.  It  is  here  designated  "  his  house."  And 
St.  Paul  speaks  of  "the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God." 
Individual  Christians  are  spoken  of  as  temples  of  God  (1  Cor.  iii.  16).  And  the  whole 
company  of  Christians  are  spoken  of  as  "a  holy  temple"  (Eph.  ii.  20 — 22),  and  "a 
spiritual  house"  (1  Pet.  ii.  6).  The- figure  suggests  several  ideas;  e.g.:  1.  Design  for 
its  construction.  The  tabernsicle  was  built  and  furnished  by  Moses  in  accordance  with 
minute  directions  from  God.  "  Look  that  thou  make  them  after  their  pattern,  which 
was  showed  thee  in  the  mount"  (Bxod.  xxv.).  Solomon  erected  and  furnished  the 
temple  from  plans  which  he  received  from  his  father  David,  and  for  the  making  of 
which  David  was  divinely  instructed.  "All  this,  said  David,  the  Lord  made  me 
understand  in  writing  by  his  hand  upon  me,  even  all  the  works  of  this  pattern  " 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  11 — 19).  And  of  the  sublime  spiritual  temple  God  himself  is  the 
great  Architect.  This  spiritual  house,  from  its  foundation  to  its  topstone,  is  being 
built  after  the  Divine  plan.  Hence,  we  may  infer,  it  will  be  strong  and  stable,  sublime 
and  beautiful,  etc.  2.  Cohesion  of  its  several  portions.  This  glorious  edifice  is  "  fitly 
framed  together."  There  is  unity  of  design,  unity  of  construction,  etc.  The  Church 
of  Christ  is  one  in  a  unity  more  true  and  deep  than  that  of  any  outward  forms,  or 
symbols,  or  organizations.  It  is  one  in  its  filial  relation  to  the  great  Father,  in  its 
faith  in  the  redeeming  Son,  as  being  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  as  consecrated 
to  the  glorious  cause  of  Christ.  In  these  respects  all  true  Christians  are  one.  3.  Inhabi- 
tation hy  God.  God  dwelt  in  symbol  in  the  tabernacle  of  Moses  and  in  the  temple  of 
Solomon.  The  sacred  Shechinah  was  there  in  the  holy  of  holies.  By  his  Spirit  he 
dwells  in  every  Christian.  "  Ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth 
in  you."  He  dwells  also  in  the  Church  as  a  whole.  In  Christ  Jesus  "  ye  are  builded 
together  for  a  habitation  of  God  in  the  Spirit." 

II.  Christ  is  the  Builder  of  this  temple.  In  ver.  3  he  is  spoken  of  as  "  he  that 
built  the  house."  "  On  this  rock,"  said  he,  "  I  will  build  my  Church."  Christians 
"  are  his  workmanship ; "  they  "  are  God's  building."  "  The  Lord  added  to  the  Church 
daily  those  that  were  being  saved."  All  other  labourers  on  the  glorious  edifice  work 
under  him.  He  allots  them  their  respective  duties,  appoints  them  their  sphere  of  opera- 
tion, sustains  them  in  their  work,  and  crowns  their  work  with  success.  Passing  to 
another  figure,  Paul  "  planted,  ApoUos  watered ;  but  God  gave  the  increase." 

III.  Christ  is  the  Lobd  of  this  temple.  Our  text  teaches  that  Christ  aa  a  Son  is 
over  this  house  of  God.  He  is  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church  "  (Eph.  i.  22). 
"  The  Church  is  subject  to  Christ "  (Eph.  v.  23,  24).  "  He  is  the  Head  of  the  body,  the 
Church  .  .  ,  that  in  all  things  he  might  have  the  pre-eminence."  "One  is  your  Master, 
even  the  Christ."  His  authority  is  supreme  in  the  Church,  higher  than  that  of  con- 
ferences or  councils,  synods  or  convocations,  archbishops  or  popes;  and  it  should  be 
recognized  as  such  and  loyally  obeyed.  He  ordained  the  laws  of  the  Church;  he 
instituted  its  sacraments,  etc. 

IV.  Pkesonal  incoepobation  in  this  temple  is  conditionau  "  Whose  house  are 
we,  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence,"  etc.  Here  are  two  conditions:  1.  The  maintenance 
of  assured  Christian  confidence.  This  confidence,  or  boldness,  as  Ebrard  says,  "  is 
nothing  else  than  the  ir(<rT(s  itself  in  its  most  direct  and  most  practical  expression, 
manifesting  itself  as  the  inward  power  of  the  peace  which  dwells  in  the  heart,  in  circum- 
stances of  outward  difficulty.  ...  It  denotes  that  joyful  boldness  which  flows  from 
within  and  is  victorious  over  unfavourable  circumstances;  it  is  joyfulness  felt  in  situa* 
tions  in  which  others  would  despair ;  hence  it  is  the  immediate  fruit  of  the  objective 
peace  obtained  with  God  through  the  atonement."  2.  2%e  maintenance  of  their  exultant 
hope.  "  If  we  hold  fast  the  .  .  .  glorifying  of  our  hope."  Here  also  Ebrard's  note  is 
excellent.  "The  Jews  boasted  of  their  descent  from  Abraham  (John  viii.),  of  their 
temple  and  priesthood,  of  their  being  the  chosen  people  of  God— all  palpable  and  manifest 
advantages.    The  poor  Christians  had  nothicg  of  the  kind  is  which  they  covld  glory. 


9«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWSb  toa-ntl— !& 

Regarded  by  the  Gentiles  as  a  Jewish  sect,  by  the  Jews  as  apostates  from  the  people  of 
Israel,  forming  no  state,  no  people,  without  rulers,  without  a  head  except  One  who 
was  crucified,  the  refuse  and  offscouring  of  the  people,  they  had  nothing  of  which  to 
boast  but  the  glory  which  they  iioped  to  receive."  But  how  splendid  a  hope  was  theirs! 
— the  hope  of  perfect  holiness  and  of  perfect  blessedness.  And  such  a  hope  is  ours. 
Let  us,  then,  "  hold  fast  our  confidence  and  the  glorying  of  our  hope  firm  unto  the  end." 
—W.J. 

Vers.  7, 8. — On  htaring  Qod's  voice.  "The  Holy  Ghost  saith.  To-day  If  ye  will  hear 
his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts."  Introduction.  The  witness  of  the  New  Testament 
to  the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  Old.  "  The  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  (Ps.  xcv.  7—11).  We 
have  in  the  text — 

I.  A  GREAT  FACT  IMPLIED.  That  God  spcaks  to  man.  The  "  if  "  does  not  indicate 
uncertainty  as  to  the  Divine  voice,  but  as  to  man's  attention  to  this  voice.  There  is  no 
question  as  to  whether  God  will  speak  to  mau  or  not,  but  whether  man  will  heed  his 
communications.  Notice:!.  The  object  for  which  Ood  speaJcs  to  man.  This  object  is 
that  man  may  be  saved.  The  Divine  voice  proclaims  and  proffers  a  "  great  salvation," 
and  publishes  redemptive  truth  to  man.  2.  Hie  organs  hy  which  he  tpeaks  to  man. 
(1)  By  the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  especially  in  the  life  and  teachings  of  his  Son,  Jesus 
Christ,  as  recorded  therein.  "  God  .  .  .  hath  at  the  end  of  these  days  spoken  unto  us 
in  his  Son."  (2)  By  Christian  ministries,  especially  the  preaching  of  his  gospel.  "We 
are  ambassadors  on  behalf  of  Christ,  as  though  God  were  entreating  by  us,"  etc.  (2  Cor. 
V.  20).  (3)  By  the  voice  of  our  conscience.  In  its  approbation  of  the  right  and  its 
condemnation  of  the  wrong,  God  speaks  to  us.  (4)  By  the  events  of  his  providence. 
(5)  By  the  influences  of  his  holy  Spirit.  He  speaks  within  the  sorfl  of  man.  He 
imparts  emphasis  and  energy  to  the  other  voices  by  which  God  addresses  us.  3.  The 
frequency  with  which  he  speaks  to  man.  Our  text  implies  that  he  speaks  to  us  daily. 
And  surely  by  some  one  or  more  of  these  voices,  every  day  he  addresses  to  us  some 
prohibition  or  persuasion,  some  caution  or  encouragement,  some  precept  or  promise, 
some  invitation  or  warning.  Were  our  susceptibility  to  Divine  influences  greater,  we 
should  ever  hear  the  utterances  of  the  Divine  voice. 

II.  A  MOMENTOUS  DUTY  EXPBBSSBD.  Our  duty  IB  to  hear  Ghid's  Toice.  Consider : 
1.  The  signification  of  hearing  Ood^e  voice.  It  is  not  mere  hearing  that  is  meant 
here,  but  earnest  attention  to  God's  voice,  hearty  belief  in  his  communications,  and 
willing  obedience  to  his  commands.  2.  Ihe  seaxon  for  hearing  God's  voice.  "To-day;" 
i.e.  now.  (1)  Because  life  is  uncertain.  "  Te  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow. 
For  what  is  your  life?"  etc.  (Jas.  iv.  14).  (2)  Because  procrastination  is  perilous. 
The  postponement  of  our  duty  to-day  facilitates  a  further  postponement  of  it  to-mor- 
row. (3)  Because  it  is  a  present  duty,  and  to  defer  the  performance  of  it  is,  therefore, 
sinfuL  We  ought  to  attend  to  God's  voice  now.  The  urgency  of  this  duty  is 
suggested  in  the  text.  In  the  psalm  from  which  it  is  quoted,  our  text  "  is  virtually 
tlie  expression  of  a  wish, '  To-day  if  ye  will  but  hearken  to  his  voice  1 ' "  or,  "  Oh  that 
ye  might  this  day  hearken  to  his  voice  1 "  The  pathos  and  earnestness  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  puts  into  this  wish  suggests  the  deep  importance  of  the  duty ;  eL  Ps. 
Ixxxi.  13,  "  Oh  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto  me  1 "  etc. 

HI.  A  SOLEMN  CAUTION  GIVEN.  "  Harden  not  your  hearts."  The  sapling  is  pliant ; 
it  may  be  bent  and  trained  as  to  the  direction  and  form  of  its  growth.  The  full-grown 
tree  is  fixed  in  form,  firm  in  texture,  and  unbending  in  its  resistance ;  it  is  hardened. 
Men  harden  their  hearts  by  disregarding  the  voice  of  God,  by  not  recognizing  the 
authority  of  their  consciences,  by  postponing  the  performance  of  religious  duties,  by 
neglecting  the  great  salvation,  and  by  practically  despising  or  resisting  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  men  who  were  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,  because  of 
the  hardening  of  their  heart,"  and  "  who  being  past  feeling  "  had  abandoned  themselves 
to  persistent  and  active  wickedness.  For  such  moral  insensibility  what  hope  remains? 
"  Oh  that  ye  might  this  day  hearken  to  his  voicol" — W.  J. 

Ver.  12. — Apostasy.    "  Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you,"  eto.    Our 
text  leads  us  to  consider — 
I.  Apostasy  vs  rb  vatubb.    "Departing  from  the  living  Qod.*    1.  TkU  dyparture 


OH.  m.  1—19.]  THE  EPI8TLK  TO  THE  HBBREWa  61 

is  not  local.  In  this  respect  separation  from  the  Divine  presence  is  impossible. 
"  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  Spirit  ?  or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence  ?  "  etc. 
(Ps.  cxxxix.  7 — 12).  2.  TTiis  departure  is  not  theological.  The  corruption  of  a  man's 
creed  will  almost  certainly  be  followed  by  deterioration  of  his  character  and  conduct ; 
yet  a  man  may  retain  his  hold  of  a  true  creed,  and  at  the  same  time  Vie  falling  away 
from  the  living  God.  3.  This  departure  is  not  ecclesiastical.  Membership  and  activity 
in  the  visible  Church  of  Christ  may  be  fully  maintained  even  while  one  is  departing 
from  God.  Apostasy  may  exist  in  the  heart  long  before  it  is  manifested  in  action. 
4.  This  departure  is  spiritual.  It  is  a  falling  away  from  the  living  God  in  sympathy 
and  in  service.  "  They  do  alway  err  in  their  heart "  (ver.  10).  It  is  the  decline  of 
love  and  loyalty  to  God. 

II.  Apostasy  in  its  root.  "An  evil  heart  of  unbelief."  Confiilence  in  God  is 
essential  to  union  with  him  or  love  to  him.  Let  any  one  doubt  God's  existence  or 
character,  that  he  is  wise  and  righteous  and  good,  and  that  man's  sympathy  with  God 
will  speedily  perish.  His  apostasy  has  already  begun.  Doubt  of  our  friends  will  be 
the  death  of  our  friendship.  And  unbelief  towards  God  must  lead  to  spiritual  aliena- 
tion from  him,  and  that  alienation  persisted  in  must  issue  in  spiritual  death.  It  is  ot 
the  utmost  importance  that  we  firmly  grasp  the  truth  that  this  unbelief  is  not  intellec- 
tual, hut  morcd  ;  it  is  not  the  doubt  of  the  inquiring  mind,  but  of  the  wandering  heart. 
It  is  the  faith  of  the  heart  that  unites  man  with  God.  "  If  thou  shalt  believe  in  thy 
heart  that  God  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved ;  for  with  the  heart  man 
believeth  unto  righteousness,"  etc.  It  is  the  unbelief  of  the  heart  that  separates  man 
from  God.    "An  evil  heart  of  mibelief." 

III.  Apostasy  in  its  peril.  There  is  the  danger  of:  1.  Drifting  further  away 
from  God.  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  remain  stationary  in  our  relation  to  him.  We 
are  ever  either  drawing;  nearer  to  him  or  departing  further  from  him.  In  this  "  falling 
away  from  the  living  God"  the  soul  falls  lower  and  lower.  2.  Deprivation  of  spiritual 
blessings.  Unbelief  excludes  the  soul  from  the  rest  of  God.  The  peace  of  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  the  rest  and  joy  of  affections  centred  in  God,  the  comfort  of  Christian  hope, 
and  the  blessedness  of  true  progress,  are  forfeited  by  the  unbeliever.  3.  The  death  of 
the  soul.  The  soul  lives  only  as  it  is  united  vnth  God,  and  its  union  with  him  is 
impossible  apart  from  faith  in  him.  "Departing  from  the  living  God,"  its  death  is 
inevitable.  What  a  death  is  that!  A  man  in  whom  truth  and  trust,  purity  and  love, 
righteousness  and  reverence,  moral  effort  and  aspiration,  are  extinct.     What  a  death! 

IV.  Apostasy  in  its  prevention.  "  Take  heed,  brethren,"  etc.  1.  Guard  against 
the  insidious  advances  of  unbelief.  ' "  Watch  and  pray,"  etc.  2.  Seek  the  increase  of 
your  faith  in  God  and  of  your  love  to  him.  A  nearer  approach  to  God  is  the  surest 
preventive  of  apostasy  from  him. 

Conclusion.  Is  "  thy  heart  right  in  the  sight  of  God  "  ?  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all 
diligence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life." — W.  J. 

Ver.  13. — An  awful  peril  and  an  inspired  preventive.  "But  exhort  one  another 
daily,  while  it  is  called  To-day,"  etc.     We  discover  in  these  words — 

I.  An  awful  peril.  "  Lest  any  one  of  you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of 
sin."  The  danger  is  that  of  growing  into  a  condition  of  moral  obduracy,  of  becoming 
"  past  feeling."  The  greatness  of  this  peril  largely  arises  from  two  facts.  1.  That  this 
condition  is  generally  reached  gradually.  Men  do  not  become  hardened  in  sin  by  one 
act  of  wickedness.  Moral  insensibilitv  is  the  result  of  a  process.  The  progress  may 
sometimes  be  distinctly  traced.  (1)  The  hardening  of  the  will  against  certain  Divine 
commands,  as  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh  (Exod.  v.  2).  The  refusal  to  do  a  manifest  duty. 
(2)  The  hardening  of  the  entire  moral  disposition  in  sin.  In  this  stage  the  straggle 
against  temptation  to  sin  is  renounced,  and  the  effort  to  be  and  to  do  what  is  true  and 
right  is  given  up  (cf.  Bph.  iv.  18,  19).  (3)  The  hardening  of  the  heart  against  the 
influences  of  Divine  grace.  In  this  stage  the  offers  of  the  gospel  are  rejected ;  unbelief 
becomes  positive  and  active  *  (cf.  Acts  vii.  51).  How  inexpressibly  terrible  is  such  a 
condition  of  soul !  2.  Thut  this  condition  is  generally  reached  insidiously.  "  Hardened 
by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."    Sin  never  approaches  the  soul  in  its  true  aqiect.    It 

*  SuggeBtod  by  Ebiard,  tn  he. 

EEBKEWI.  X 


98  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWa  [ea.  m.  1— 19. 

assuipes  attractive  disguises ;  it  propounds  plausible  reasons ;  it  exhibits  fascinating 
yet  fictitious  prospects.  For  example,  to  those  wlio  are  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of 
God,"  and  who  are  almost  entirely  decided  to  serve  him  heartily  and  wholly,  the 
deceitful  and  dangerous  suggestion  is  presented  that  to-morrow  will  be  more  favourable 
in  circumstances  than  to-day  for  begmniug  a  decided  Christian  life,  that  a  more  "  con- 
venient season  "  for  genufaie  personal  religion  will  speedily  arrive.  And  so  the  holy 
decision  and  consecration  are  deferred ;  procrastination  becomes  hiibitual ;  the  heart 
hardens  in  procrastination.  Again,  to  the  Christian  the  temptation  to  unbelief  is  never 
presented  in  its  real  character,  or  it  would  be  rejected  immediately  and  decisively.  It 
approaches  the  heart  in  fair  forms,  and  with  a  show  of  reasonableness  and  righteousness. 
Thus,  if  a  man  be  not  on  his  guard,  the  hardening  process  will  have  begun  ere  he  is 
aware  of  it.     Hence  the  awful  peril. 

II.  An  inspibbd  preventive.  "  Exhort  one  another  daily,  while  it  is  called  To- 
day." 1.  The  nature  of  this  preventive.  "  Exhort  one  another."  The  word  translated 
"exhort"  indicates  two  exercises.  (1)  Admonition  of  each  other.  Stuart  translates, 
"  Admonish  one  another."  Let  Christians  warn  each  other  when  they  detect  impending 
dangers.  (2)  Encouragement  of  each  other.  Let  Christians  endeavour  to  inspire  their 
disheartened  brethren  with  new  hopes,  to  comfort  their  troubled  brethren  with 
Christian  consolations.  "  Wherefore,  lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  down,"  etc.  (ch.  xii. 
12, 13).  Christians,  being  children  of  one  Father,  disciples  of  one  Master,  members  of 
one  great  community,  exposed  to  similar  perils,  sustained  by  similar  influences,  and 
inspired  by  common  hopes,  ought  thus  to  "  exhort  one  another."  Moreover,  there  is  a 
preventive  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse  against  this  dread  peril  which  each  one 
must  exercise  for  himself.  "  Take  heed."  Be  watchful,  etc.  2.  The  season  for  the 
exercise  of  this  preventive.  "  Exhort  one  another  daily,"  or,  "  day  by  day."  Mutual 
oversight  and  help  should  be  continuous.  Watchfulness  and  prayer  and  Christian 
effort  must  not  be  irregular  or  intermittent,  but  steady  and  constant ;  not  occasioqal 
sxercises,  but  abiding  dispositions.  3.  The  limit  to  the  exercise  of  this  preventive. 
"  While  it  is  called  To-day."  This  may  mean  while  our  present  form  of  life  shall  last ; 
as  in  our  Lord's  words,  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent  me,  while  it  is  day," 
etc  Or  it  may  mean  while  the  day  of  grace  continues.  Adopting  either  interpretation, 
the  season  for  this  mutual  exhortation  is  limited  and  uncertain.  "  We  have  but  an 
uncertain  season  for  the  due  performance  of  most  certain  duties ;  how  long  it  will  be  called 
To-day,  we  l^now  not ;  the  day  of  life  is  uncertain,  and  so  is  the  day  of  the  gospel ;  a 
summer's  day  for  clearness,  a  wintei-'s  day  for  shortness ;  our  working  day  is  a  wasting 
day."  Let  the  solemn  gravity  of  the  peril  lead  each  of  us  to  a  diligent  as*  of  the 
Heaven-inspired  preventive, — W.  J. 

Ver.  19. — The  dread  disahility.    "So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of 

inbelief."    Our  text — 

1.  Refutes  several  assigned  reasons  foe  man's  failxtbe  to  attain  saltation. 
If  any  one  does  not  enter  the  spiritual  rest  which  God  has  graciously  provided  for  man, 
it  is :  1.  Not  by  reason  of  anything  in  the  purposes  or  predestinoitions  of  Ood,  His 
purposes  are  the  purposes  of  a  Being  of  perfect  righteousness,  and  of  infinite  wisdom 
and  love.  He  could  not  ordain  an  evil  thing,  or  have  any  intentions  which  are  inimical 
to  the  well-being  of  his  creatures;  for  he  is  God — the  Supremely  Good  (cf.  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4 — 6).  2.  Not  by  reason  of  any  deficiency  in  Ood's  redemptive 
provisions.  These  are  abundant,  inexhaustible,  and  entirely  free.  The  atonement  of . 
Jesus  Christ,  which  is  perfectly  adapted  to  reconcile  man  to  God,  is  as  efiScacious  for  a 
nnllion  hearts  as  it  is  for  one  (cf.  Isa.  Iv.  1,  2,  6,  7 ;  Matt.  xxii.  1 — 10 ;  Luke  xiv. 
18 — 23;  Johniii.  14 — 17;  Rev.  xiiL  17).  3.  Not  by  reason  of  any  inability  to  accept 
Orid's  redemjitive  provisions.  'J'he  condition  upon  which  salvation  is  appropriated  by 
man  is  sincere  and  hearty  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Every  sane  man  can  comply 
with  this  condition  if  he  wilL  4.  Not  by  reason  of  any  deficiency  of  evidence  for  the 
essential  truths  of  Christianity.  The  Christian  religion  is  founded  upon  facts,  which 
are  as  well  attested  as  any  facts  of  history. 

IL  Affirms  the  thhe  reason  for  van's  failube  to  attain  salvation.  "  They 
were  not  able  to  enter  in  because  of  unbelief,"  This  unbeli^  is  not  intellectual  or 
theoietical,  but  practical,  and  resulting  in  disobedience.    The  uniielief  of  the  Israeutes 


OH.  m.  1—19.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  99 

here  spoken  of  totally  unfitted  them  for  entering  the  promised  land  (see  Numb.  xiv. 
1 — i,  22,  23,  26 — 35).  Their  unbelief  had  stripped  them  of  hope  and  of  courage,  and 
reduced  them  to  humiliating  despondency  and  cowaidice.  No  one  can  enter  upon  any 
worthy  inheritance  without  the  exercise  of  faith.  For  the  discovery  of  new  countries, 
for  the  exploration  of  unknown  lands,  for  the  carrying  out  of  great  reformations  or 
ameliorations,  for  the  perfecting  of  beneficent  inventions,  for  the  aocomplishment  of 
every  worthy  and  noble  enterprise,  the  possession  and  exercise  of  faith  is  indispensable. 
The  attainment  of  salvation  is  impossible  apart  from  faith.  Unbelief  it  is  which 
excludes  men  from  the  true  rest  of  the  soul.  They  are  "  not  able  to  enter  in  because  of 
unbelief."  This  is  the  dread  disability,  the  unwillingness  to  heartily  and  practically 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  may  have  life."  If  any 
man  Is  not  saved,  he  alone  is  to  blame.  He  is  diseased,  yet  be  turns  aside  from  the 
remedy.  He  is  condemned,  yet  he  rel'uses  to  accept  the  offered  pardon.  He  is  self- 
destroyed. — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — B.~The  superiority  of  Christ  to  Moses  the  reason  why  they  should  cleave 
to  Christ.  The  writer  has  met  the  objection  to  Christianity  raised  by  the  supposed 
want  of  dignity  in  its  Founder,  as  opposed  to  the  gre  itness  of  the  angels  through  whom 
the  old  dispensation  was  said  to  be  "  ordained."  He  proceeds  to  deal  with  another 
objertion.  "  The  Law  was  ordained  through  angels  by  the  hand  of  a  mediator ; "  but,  he 
says,  however  great  this  mediator  was,  Christ  is  greater  still.  Subject — The  superiority 
>f  Christ  to  Moses  the  reason  why  they  should  cleave  to  Christ. 

I.  All  that  Moses  was  to  God's  people,  Christ  is.  A  very  delicate  subject. 
To  exhibit  Moses  in  a  subordinate  position  was  to  touch  a  point  on  which  the  Hebieu  s 
were  very  sensitive.  The  writer,  therefore,  begins  by  simply  speaking  of  Christ  as,  at 
least,  on  a  level  with  Moses.  1.  Moses  and  Christ  were  successively  the  divinely 
appointed  heads  of  Israel.  "House"  equivalent  to  "household."  Both  Moses  and 
Christ  successively  presided  over,  administered  the  affairs  of,  the  household  of  God  on 
earth.  The  New  Testament  often  draws  a  parallel  in  some  kind  between  Moses  and 
Christ:  "As  Moses  lifted,"  etc.;  "  The  Law  was  given  by,"  etc.;  "  They  sing  the  song 
of  Moses,"  etc.  This  parallel  is  more  sharply  drawn  in  the  affirmation  that  Moses 
and  Christ  occupied  this  position  in  the  twofold  capacity  of  "Apostle  and  High  Priest." 
The  two  aspects  of  the  mediatorial  position :  an  apostle  is  one  sent  of  God  to  represent 
him  to  the  people,  and  the  high  priest  is  one  appointed  to  represent  the  people  before 
God.  Moses  fulfilled  this  dual  position  with  regard  to  Israel ;  but  the  Hebrews  had  lost 
nothing  in  advancing  from  him  to  Christ,  for  they  had  all  this  in  Jesus.  2.  Moses  and 
Christ  were  hoth  faithful  in  their  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  appointment.  Not,  "  Each 
w?,s  personally  faithful,"  but "  Each  perfectly  fulfilled  the  part  allotted  to  him ; "  so  that 
if  Moses  did  less  than  Jesus  (as  may  presently  appear),  he  did  all  that  was  incumbent 
ju  him  as  administrator  of  the  old  economy,  'i'he  wiiter  is  careful  not  to  sink  Moses 
that  he  may  exalt  Jesus.  (We  need  not  undervalue  any  of  God's  gifts  in  order  to  extul 
Christ.) 

II.  Whilst  Christ  is  all  that  Moses  was,  he  is  also  mobb.  Prom  the  resem- 
blance he  proceeds  carefully  to  the  superiority.  1.  Moses  was  but  a  part  of  the  house- 
hold; Christ  is  the  Founder  of  it.  Moses  was  born  into  the  family  which  existtd  before 
him,  and  had  to  share  its  privileges,  duties,  responsibilities,  etc.  But  God  was  the 
Founder  of  the  family,  ami  Jesus  has  before  been  shown  to  be  God.  He  must, 
therefore,  be  greater  than  Moses.  (All  the  beauty  in  anything  we  love  must  be 
more  fully  in  Christ,  because  it  originates  in  him.)  'i.  Moses  was  hut  a  servant  to 
the  house ;  Christ  is  Lord  of  it,  Moses  only  did  w  hat  he  was  bidden :  "  The  Lord 
said  unto  Moses."  What  he  did  for  the  nation  was  not  due  to  him,  but  was  the 
carrying  out  of  the  will  of  another,  and  therefore  the  reverence  and  thankfulness 
,iveu  to  him  were  really  due  to  the  Master  whose  instrument  he  was.  And 
chat  Master  was  Christ.  By  so  much  is  Christ  better  than  Moses.  (Do  we  think  of 
cbat  when  anything  ministers  to  our  well-being,  that  it  is  only  a  servant. — aU  things 
oume  of  Qod  ?)  3.  Moses  was  hut  a  symbolic  witness  in  the  house ;  Christ  was  the 
lealized  Life  of  it.  "  Moses  was  for  a  testimony  of  those  things  which  were  afterwards 
to  be  spoken."  He  and  his  work  were  symbolic  of  things  to  come — a  dead  symbol.  The 
contrast  is  drawn  in  ver.  6 :  "  Christ,  whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  our  boldnea.s 


JOO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREVFIS.  [cm.  m.  1—19, 

and  the  glorying,"  etc. ;  that  i8,  the  Church  is  a  living  organism,  whose.life  ia  Christ ; 
Christ's  family  are  such  by  a  living  faith  which  binds  each  member  of  it  to  him. 
Christ  is  the  quickening  Spirit  to  which  Moses,  as  a  symbol,  pointed.  (Everything  we 
value  on  earth  is  only  a  symbol  of  something  better  in  Christ.  Happy  we  if,  ere  the 
evanescent  symbol  fades,  we  have  grasped  the  reality ;  if,  when  Moses  passes  out  of  sight, 
Jesus  is  left !) 

III.  The  consideration  ok  the  bupbbiobitv  op  Christ  ib  the  power  to  ooNriRM 
THE  wavekebs  IN  THEIR  ALLEGIANCE  TO  HIM.  Chrlst  is  better  than  Moses ;  therefore, 
ye  wavering  Hebrews,  cleave  to  Christ: — that  is  the  idea.   The  practical  lesson  is,  that : 

1.  Moses,  in  the  case  of  Israel,  corresponds  with  anything  which  in  our  case  competes 
with  Christ.  What  Moses  was  to  them  many  an  object  is  to  us,  and  we  stand  hesi- 
tating between  it  and  our  Lord.  2.  Then,  rememher  that  all  that  is  to  he  found  in  this 
object  is  to  be  found  in  Christ,  cmd  much  more.  Whatever  good  it  promises  us  is  but 
t]ic  shadow  of  a  greater  good  in  him.  3.  2%en,  when  we  are  tempted  to  leave  Christ 
for  anything,  our  safely  ii  in  considering  him.  If  we  leave  him  it  is  because  we  do  not 
know  him,  and  that  is  because  we  do  not  reflect  upon  him.  As  you  "  consider  him," 
and  he  turns  on  you  a  sad  look,  asking,  "  Will  ye  also  go  away?"  you  will  answer 
decidedly,  joyously,  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall,"  etc.  ?— 0.  N. 

Vers.  7 — 19.— The  comparison  of  Christ  and  Moses  suggest*  the  possibility  of  apostasy 
from  Christ.  As  Christ  and  Moses  occupied  similar  positions  as  leaders  of  the  house- 
hold of  God,  and  Israel  was  faithless  under  the  leadership  of  Moses,  and  came  to  ruin 
as  the  result,  so  it  is  possible  that,  under  the  leadership  3f  Christ,  there  may  be  the 
same  infidelity  and  the  same  bitter  end. 

I.  The  FEAR  OF  AFOSTAST  FBOH  Christ.  This  solemn  exhortation  is  written  to 
professing  Christians ;  and  swih  professors  (see  oh.  x.  32 — 34)  I  Their  piety  was  of 
such  a  nature  that  onlookers  could  not  doubt  it ;  yet,  says  the  apostle,  even  these  may 
apostatize.  Members  of  the  Church,  this  speaks  to  you.  "  Take  heed."  This  possi- 
bility is  enforced :  1.  By  Scripture  warnings  against  the  repetition  of  the  wilderness-sin. 
For  what  means  the  quotation  here  from  Ps.  xcv.,  and  the  four-times  repeated 
"  to-day  "  ?  Not  that  the  day  of  grace  is  short  and  may  speedily  terminate,  but  rather 
that  it  was  possible  for  the  men  of  the  writer's  time  to  repeat  the  sin  of  their  fathers  in 
the  wilderness.  That  sin  was  not  confined  to  those  who  came  out  of  Egypt ;  for,  five 
hundred  years  afterwards,  David  said  to  Israel,  "  To-day  it  may  be  true  of  you."  Sc 
the  writer  here  says,  "Learn  from  your  Scriptures  that  the  guilt  of  your  forefathers,  the 
awfid  effects  of  which  you  know  so  well,  may  be  repeated  by  other  generations.  Beware, 
therefore,  lest  it  be  repeated  in  you."  We  have  the  same  reason  for  godly  fear.  What 
mean  the  parables  of  wheat  and  tares,  and  wise  and  foolish  virgins ;  the  declaration, 
"  Many  will  say  unto  me  in  that  day,"  etc. ;  the  assurance  that  at  the  judgment  many 
will  be  surprised  to  find  themselves  on  the  left  hand  of  the  Jud^je ;  and  such  passages 
as  in  this  Epistle  (vL  14),  but  that  the  wilderness-sin  may  be  true  of  to-day's  Church  ? 

2.  By  the  subtlety  of  the  sin  of  unbelief.  "  Take  heed  lest,"  etc. ;  "  Lest  any  of  you  be 
hardened  by  the,"  etc. ;  as  though  this  sia  could  grow  upon  the  soul  that  is  unaware  of 
it.  It  ii  easy  to  mistake  the  nature  of  faith  and  the  fruits  of  faith,  and  to  have  a 
spirit  of  unbelief,  the  one  deadly  sin,  without  knowing  it.  3.  By  the  fact  that  con- 
tinuance is  the  test  of  true  faith.  "  We  are  partakers  of  Christ  if  we  hold  our  begun 
confidence,"  etc.  Where  vital  faith  exists  it  endures,  the  continued  mediation  of  Christ 
for  his  people  being  the  grouud  of  this.  But  it  is  not  uncommon  for  professors  to  think 
themselves  to  be  Christians  because  of  what  they  were.  As  long  as  there  are  members 
of  the  Church  whose  hope  is  of  this  character,  the  Church  will  have  those  in  it  who 
apostatize  from  the  living  God.    " Lord,  is  it  I  ?" 

II.  Thb  eviIi  of  apostasy  from  Christ.  1.  To  apostatize  from  Christ  is  to  depart 
from  the  living  Ood.  (Ver.  12.)  We  cannot  leave  Jesus  without  losing  God.  "  No  man 
Cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me,"  To  relinquish  Christ  is  to  be  rejected  of  God. 
"  He  that  believeth  not  the  Son,  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  2.  To  apostatize 
from  Christ  reveals  an  extraordinary  degree  of  inward  evil.  "An  evil  heart  of 
unbelief."  Is  unbelief,  then,  so  very  evil?  It  is  the  relinquishing  the  Son  of  God; 
it  is  the  making  God  a  liar;  it  is  (in  the  case  of  an  apostate)  the  breaking  away  from 
Chritt,  not  held  fast  even  by  the  glory  uf  the  fuller  vision.    3.  To  apostatize  from 


0H.IIL1— 19.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  101 

Christ  it  to  fail  of  the  rest  to  which  he  leads.  "  For  to  whom  sware  he/'  etc.  Rejection 
from  Christ  is  the  one  deadly  sin.  "  This  is  the  condemnation ; "  "  He  that  believeth  not 
is,"  etc. ;  "  And  this  is  the  condeu^nation,  that  light,"  eto.  How  much  more  so  in  tha 
case  of  the  apostate  1  "  I  saw,"  said  Bunyan,  "  that  from  the  very  gate  of  heaven 
there  was  a  path  down  to  helL" 

III.  Thk  prevention  op  apostast  from  Christ.  There  is  only  one  means — cleave 
to  Christ.  Apostasy  springs  from  unbelief;  its  antidote  is  faith.  How  can  a  persistent 
faith  be  maintained?  1.  Faith  depends  gre  itly  on  the  condition  of  the  heart.  "  They 
do  err  in  their  heart;"  the  passage  is  full  of  that.  Men  do  not,  for  the  most  part,  leave 
Christ  because  of  conscious  hostility  to  him,  or  a  desire  to  depart ;  it  is  rather  because 
the  lust  of  other  things  entering  in  blinds  them  to  his  beauty,  and  insensibly  draws 
them  from  his  service.  2.  Faith  must  he  shielded  from  outside  injlttencet  which  tend 
to  weaken  it.  "Take  heed."  There  are  enemies  to  faith  outside  as  well  as  in — 
pleasures,  companionships,  literature.  3.  Faith  must  be  supplied  with  its  natural  food. 
"Exhort  one  another,"  eto.  That  is,  presertt  the  truth.  The  food  of  faith  is  truth, 
and  in  order  to  produce  or  maintain  faith  we  must  present  truth  to  the  mind.  Let 
Scripture  be  unstudied,  and  faith  will  die. — C.  N. 

Vert.  1—B.—I%e  superiority  of  Christ,  L  Here  wb  have  the  pbb-bminbnoe  op 
Chbist  over  the  Jewish  lawgiver  asserted.  Having  proved  that  our  Lord  was  by 
nature  and  by  his  worli  infinitely  above  tlie  angels,  and  that  his  assuming  our  flesh 
qualified  him  to  be  the  great  High  Priest,  it  was  desirable  to  show  that  he  was  immeasur- 
ably greater  than  Moses,  who  was  the  human  mi^diator  in  establishment  of  the  covenant 
and  Law.  The  apostle  knew  the  lustre  with  which  the  name  and  ministry  of  Moses  were 
always  surrounded  in  the  minds  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  therefore  with  admirable 
wisdom  he  proceeds  to  claim  for  Jesus  Christ  his  rightful  ascendancy  and  special  glory. 
Jewish  believers  are  addressed  as  "  holy  brethren  "  and  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling, 
which  differed  from  the  calling  which  invited  the  tribes  to  march  and  take  possession 
o  Canaan.  It  is  heavenly  because  it  comes  to  them  from  heaven  and  calls  them  to 
heaven,  and  is  heard  continually  by  the  spiritual  ear  of  those  who  are  advancing  to  the 
"  rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God."  Moses  had  a  glory  which  was  that  of 
fidelity  to  the  thoughts  and  ideas  of  Jehovah,  who  said  to  him,  "  See  that  thou  make 
all  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed  to  thee  in  the  mount."  When  the  tabernacle 
was  finished  God  looked  upon  the  work  and  blessed  it,  because  it  faithfully  realized 
his  design.  He  was  faithful  in  receiving  communications  from  God  and  delivering 
them  to  the  people,  and  in  publishing  the  laws  respecting  saciifices,  ceremonies,  and  social 
life.  He  uttered  predictions  respecting  the  future  course  of  Israel  and  the  character 
and  ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  could  say,  as  Paul  said,  "  That  which  I  have 
received  of  the  Lord  have  I  delivered  unto  you."  He  was  faithful  to  the  interests  of 
the  peo"pl«,  and  in  a  time  of  danger  from  the  righteous  anger  of  Jehovah  was  willing  to 
die  for  them  (Exod.  xxxii,  32).  He  was  a  servant  in  the  house,  and  ministered  under 
him  who  was  its  Architect  and  Builder.  Our  Lord  rises  infinitely  above  Mcses,  because 
he  is  a  Son,  and  by  his  dignity  and  nature  is  far  above  all  angels,  all  patriarchs,  and 
prophets,  and  even  Moses  himself,  who  spake  to  God  "  face  to  face."  This  is  confirmed 
by  the  eventg  of  the  Transfiguration,  for  when  Moses  and  Elijah  were  with  him  in  glory 
the  voice  was  heard,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son :  hear  him."  The  apostle  invites  us  to 
consider  the  sublime  edifice  of  the  Church,  which  is  the  work  of  God,  who  created  all 
things,  in  which  Jesus  Christ  has  a  special  and  glorious  ministry  as  the  Son  of  the 
Father.  He  is  faithful  as  Moses  was  in  the  range  of  his  Divine  communications,  and 
said,  "Whatsoever  I  speak  therefore,  even  as  the  Father  said  to  me,  so  I  speak" 
(John  xii.  50).  He  came  to  do  the  Father's  will  in  his  mighty  and  sacrificial  sorrows, 
and  drank  the  bitter  Cup  that  we  might  drink  the  cup  of  blessing.  He  promised  to  see 
his  disciples  again,  and  to  pour  out  the  Spirit  upon  them.  St.  Peter  stood  with  joy  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  affirmed,  "  He  hath  shed  forth  that  which  ye  now  see  and 
hear,"  The  existence  of  his  Church  proves  his  faithfulness;  for  the  gates  of  hell  have 
not  prevailed  against  it ;  and  "  blessed  are  all  they  that  trust  in  him." 

It  The  need  and  advantage  op  reverent  consideration  op  his  glory.  To 
"consider  "  signifies  to  withdraw  from  the  excitement  and  turbulence  of  human  life  to  look 
steadily  at  tho  Soil  of  Qtoi,  and  resemble,  in  some  dej^ree,  the  astronomer  who  enters 


102  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  iii.  1—19. 

into  his  obserratory  to  gaze  in  silence  on  the  glory  of  the  hearens  ahove.  It  wa* 
needful  for  Jewish  Christians  to  look  to  the  glory  of  Christ,  as  the  best  way  to  counteract 
the  discouragements  which  arose  from  the  opposition  of  the  synagogue  and  of  those  to 
whom  the  cross  of  Christ  was  a  stumbling-block  and  an  offence.  The  truth  of  his  priest- 
hood was  to  be  acknowledged,  and  the  glory  of  his  apostleship  was  to  be  confessed ;  for 
he  was  sent  by  the  Father  to  reveal  his  will  and  claim  our  faith ;  and  "  whosoever  will 
not  hear  this  Prophet  shall  be  destroyed  from  among  the  people."  If  the  steady  con- 
templation of  Jesus  Christ  was  necessary  fur  Jewish  believers,  it  is  equally  so  for 
ourselves.  It  is  by  beholding  him  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image  of  constancy, 
and  hold  fast  the  cheerful  confidence  with  which  we  began  the  career,  and  cherish  the 
exaltation  of  our  hope  to  the  end  of  our  earthly  life.  Then  tiiose  who  die  in  the  Lord 
gain  the  precious  recompense  of  the  congratulation  and  welcome  of  the  Redeemer,  who 
will  greet  them  with  those  sacred  words,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant :  enter 
thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  Believers  are  besought  by  the  endearing  appeal  to 
their  brotherhood  to  be  faithful  to  him  who  was  faithful  as  a  Son,  to  whom  they  are 
predestinated  to  be  conformed ;  and  as  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  we  should 
strive  to  please  him  who  encourages  us  to  be  faithful  unto  death,  and  he  will  give  us 
"  the  crown  of  life." — B. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — There  it  an  example  here  of  the  resources  and  adaptation  of  Old  Testa- 
ment Scripture  to  New  Testament  conditions.  The  sacred  writer  turns  to  the  ninety- 
fifth  psalm  to  give  force  to  his  remonstrances,,  and  cautions  against  unbelief  and 
disobedience.  This  part  of  the  Psalter  contains  an  impressive  description  of  the 
conduct  of  the  ancient  tribes  of  Israel  in  their  passage  from  Kgypt  to  Canaan.  There 
were  two  occasions  on  which  the  hardness  of  their  hearts  was  specially  and  painfully 
manifest.  The  first  of  these  was  their  unbelief  at  Rephidim  (Bxod.  xvii.  1 — 17),  when 
they  murmured  against  God  and  against  his  servant  Moses,  and  chode  with  the  man  of 
Godrespectingtheir  want  of  water;  and  the  place  was  called  Massah  ("  temptation")  and 
Meribah  ("  striving  "  or  "  contention  ").  A  similar  occurrence  took  place  at  Kadesh,  when 
the  people  murmured  again,  and  when  supply  of  water  was  miraculously  obtained ;  it 
was  called  "water  of  Meribah"  (Numb.  xxi.  13).  These  acts  of  unbelief  sprang  from 
hardness  of  heart,  which  the  thought  of  the  Divine  deliverances  wrought  for  them  and 
the  designs  of  love  revealed  to  them  failed  to  overcome.  The  goodness  of  God  did  not 
lead  them  to  repentance,  but  after  their  hardness  and  impenitent  heart  they  "treasured 
up  to  themselves  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God."  They  tempted  God,  and  proved  him  to  find  whether  he  was  able 
to  do  great  things,  and  whether  he  was  the  supreme  Ruler  of  them  and  all  creatures. 
They  found  that  he  was  of  one  mind,  and  none  could  turn  him.  "  Harden  not  your 
hearts,"  was  the  counsel  given  by  the  psalmist ;  and  by  Isaiah,  whose  mission,  through 
unbelief  in  the  people  of  Judah,  was  a  "savour  of  death  unto  death."  The  prophets, 
and  Jesus  Christ  the  great  Prophet,  repeated  and  urged  the  same  counsel  upon  the 
attention  of  the  Jewish  people,  and  urged  it  in  vain.  Jehovah  was  grieved  and  vexed 
with  the  former  generation ;  and  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God  wept  over  Jerusalem, 
and  said,  "If  thou  hadst  known  .  .  .  the  things  that  make  for  thy  peace!  but  now 
they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes."  The  punishment  of  tlie  murmurers  in  the  wilderness 
was  that  they  should  not  enter  into  the  rest  of  Canaan,  which  was  designed  for  the 
obedient  and  those  who  should  become  a  "kingdom  of  priests."  There  is  probably 
a  sacred  meaning  in  the  choice  of  the  psalm,  which  specially  refers  to  forty  years, 
which  length  of  time  was  nearly  the  period  which  elapsed  from  the  crucifixion  of 
our  Lord  to  the  predicted  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and 
cessation  of  sacrifices,  and  the  captivity  and  dispersion  of  the  people.  Holding  up 
the  examples  and  punishment  of  unbelief  before  the  eyes  of  Jewish  believers,  the 
Holy  Spirit  taught  them  to  remember  the  severity  of  God,  and  to  fear  lest  their 
apostasy  from  Christ  should  Bhut  them  out  from  the  higher  and  more  glorious  rest 
of  heaven. — ^B. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — There  is  here  asserted  the  need  of  mutual  exhortation  to  avoid  unbelief 
and  follow  Christ  fully.  Apart  fiom  the  labours  of  the  ministers  of  the  gospe',  who 
were  to  teach  that  Christ  was  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  there  was  to 


CH.  in.  1—19.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW&  103 

be  brotlierly  lore  among  Christians,  who  were  affectionately  to  warn  each  other  against 
the  evils  of  departing  from  the  truths  and  profession  of  the  gospel.  Their  counsel  wai 
to  be  directed  to  the  state  of  the  heart,  which  if  unbelieving  was  an  "  evil  heart,"  and 
therefore  full  of  guile,  pride,  readiness  to  receive  objections  against  the  gospel,  and 
willingness  to  yield  to  the  blinding  influence  of  Satan.  It  would  lead  them  to  depart 
from  the  living  God,  and  conduct  them  to  ceremonies,  and  produce  works  which 
had  no  Divine  life  in  them.  This  work  of  friendly  exhortation  was  to  be  done  at  once, 
"  while  it  is  called  To-day ;  "  and  whatsoever  their  hand  found  to  do  they  were  to  do  with 
all  their  might ;  for  sin  was  full  of  allurement,  and  promised,  as  it  did  in  Paradise,  large 
illumination,  freedom,  and  pleasure.  It  would  be  bitterness  in  the  end,  and  the  song 
of  the  syren  would  allure  to  destruction.  The  hardening  would,  if  unchecked,  go  on 
with  imperceptible  advance,  and  would  silently  desolate  the  conscience,  understanding, 
and  heart.  This  was  to  be  avoided  by  perseverance  in  acts  of  faith  and  unlimited  con- 
fidence in  Jesus  Christ,  who  inclined  them  to  begin  the  course  to  the  Upper  kingdom  o( 
God.  As  they  had  "  received  Christ  they  were  to  walk  in  him,"  and  then  they  would 
partake  of  his  Spirit,  and  share  the  blessedness  which,  as  a  Forerunner,  he  has  gone 
to  prepare.  They  would  share  in  the  joy  he  has  promised  to  confer  upon  the  brave  and 
immovable  in  their  profession,  who  shall  "  sit  down  with  him  in  his  throne,  as  he  has 
overcome,  and  sits  down  with  his  Father  in  his  throne."— B. 

Vers.  15 — 19. — As  redemption  from  Egypt  did  not  protect  Iiraelfrom  punishment, 
so  misbelief  in  Christians  will  be  visited  with  the  Divine  displeasure  and  final  failure. 
The  sacred  writer  refers  us  to  the  psalm  from  which  he  had  drawn  such  affecting  exhor- 
tations to  steadfastness  in  the  spiritual  life,  and  now  advances  to  enforce  the  lessons  of 
earnestness  by  a  series  of  weighty  inquiries  derived  from  the  overthrow  of  many  Israel- 
ites in  the  desert.  The  ideas  resemble  those  of  Paul,  who  in  1  Cor.  x.  1 — 5  instructs  us 
that  the  Hebrews  were  baptized  unto  Moses,  and  ate  spiritual  meat  and  drank  spiritual 
drink,  and  yet  many  were  overthro^vn  in  the  wilderness.  The  first  question  is  (in  the 
Revised  Version)— Who  were  they  that  did  provoke  at  Meribah  and  awakened  the  Divine 
displeasure?  This  inquiry  is  answered  by  another.  Did  they  not  all  come  out  of  Egypt, 
and  while  the  destroying  angel  was  abroad  their  families  were  safe ;  when  the  sea 
opposed  their  march  it  was  dried  up  to  give  them  passage,  and  when  the  enemies 
pursued  them  with  rage  and  breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter,  were  they  not 
redeemed  ?  These  were  they  who  added  the  baseness  of  ingratitude  to  the  sin  of  unbeUef. 
Another  inqvury  follows,  which  is — With  whom  was  he  displeased,  and  was  it  not  with 
those  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness  ?  It  is  the  historic  realization  of  a  truth 
penned  many  centuries  afterwards  by  St.  James,  who  writes, "  Lust,  when  it  hath  con- 
ceived, bringeth  forth  sin ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  These 
unbelievers  died  under  the  frown  of  Jehovah,  and  left  their  sad  experience  as  a  beacon 
to  warn  against  sins  which  provoked  the  Divine  anger  and  laid  them  low  in  the 
dust  of  death.  The  inquiry  advances  once  more,  and  asks — Who  were  they  who  were 
denied  the  privilege  of  entering  upon  the  much-desired  inheritance  of  Canaan  ?  There 
is  an  awfulness  in  the  oath  which  Jehovah  takes,  that  the  unbelieving  Hebrews  should 
not  enter  the  pleasant  land,  with  its  fertile  soil,  its  pastures,  its  vineyards,  its  brooks  and 
streams,  and  the  margin  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  There  is  no  secret  in  the  cause  of 
their  failure,  as  there  is  no  secret  in  the  cause  of  Christian  success.  They  could  not 
enter  in  because  of  unbelief,  which,  while  it  barred  their  entrance  into  Canaan,  excludes 
men  from  the  "  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  If  these 
sad  and  awful  punishments  overtook  Israel  according  to  the  flesh,  then  the  truth  which 
the  author  designed  to  teach  is  that  redemption  from  sin,  condemnation,  must,  to 
secure  all  the  fruits  and  issues  of  the  gospel,  be  associated  with  humble  and  perse- 
vering fidelity  to  our  profession  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. — ^B. 

Ver.  1. — Heavenly  things.  There  are  four  heavenly  things  spoken  of  in  this  Epistle 
which  it  may  be  well  here  to  connect  together. 

L  The  heavenly  oallino.  Elsewhere  the  upward  calling.  A  voice  out  of  the  pure, 
the  abiding,  the  unchangeable.  A  voice  of  love,  pity,  invitation,  authority,  such  as  could 
Dot  sound  from  anywhere  in  this  distracted,  defiled  world, 

IL  The  heavenly  sift.  The  S^pea — the  free  donation  of  Gk>d ;  the  gift  bestowed  fm 


104  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  m.  1—19. 

men  to  taste  and  live  by ;  the  bread  of  eternal  life.  Remember  what  James  says,  that 
"  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above  "  (i.  17). 

m.  The  heavenly  oodntry.  The  fatherland ;  the  rwrpls  of  the  Christian.  The 
voice  from  heaven  calls  us  there.  The  heavenly  gift  is  for  our  provision  by  the  way ; 
the  manna  of  our  desert  life  (ch.  xi.  16). 

IV.  The  heavenly  Jbkusalem.  Where  aU  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  fatherland  is 
concentrated.  The-  treasures  of  a  land  are  represented  in  its  capital  city.  Jerusalem 
gave  a  site  for  the  temple,  a  palace  for  the  king  (ch.  xiL  22). — ^Y. 

Ver.  1. — What  Christ  ittow.  I.  Consideb  the  people  hebb  addressed,  and  the 
bpeaeeb  in  belation  to  them.  Amid  the  endless,  fruitless  discussion  as  to  the  author- 
ship of  this  Epistle,  so  much  at  least  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  conclude,  that  the  author 
was  a  Hebretv  Christian,  not  a  Gentile  one.  The  Hebrews  were  now  divided  into  what 
might  be  called  Christian  Hebrews  and  non-Christian  Hebrews — Hebrews  of  the  gospel 
and  Hebrews  of  the  Law — and  in  addressing  the  Christian  Hebrews  the  wiiter  implies 
certain  profound  distinctions.  He  calls  them :  1.  Brethren.  This  not  a  mere  word  of 
courtesy.  It  acknowledged  the  relation  between  writer  and  readers ;  it  indicated  the 
writer's  interest;  he  had  a  certain  claim  to  be  listened  to.  »And,  to  put  this  brotherhood 
beyond  doubt,  there  is  the  subsc  qiuent  "  our."  Then  there  is  the  brotherhood  of  the 
readers  to  one  another,  and  their  brotherhood  to  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Huly ;  or  perhnps 
better  taken  as  a  substantive — saints;  men  with  the  stamp  of  consecration  on  them. 
The  Jewish  nation  was  a  holy  nation,  holy  by  nature ;  and  now  these  believers,  with 
the  Holy  Spirit's  work  going  on  in  them,  were  twice  holy,  3.  Partakers  of  a  heavenly 
calling.  (This  expression  noticed  more  particularly  in  a  separate  homily.)  4.  Those 
who  have  made  an  acknowledgment,  a  profession,  with  respect  to  Christ. 

II.  Consideb  the  implied  faballel  with  the  bxpekibncbs  op  the  Hbbbew  nation. 
All  Hebrews  were  hreihren  in  this  sense,  that  they  had  descended  from  one  father, 
Abraham.  They  were  holy  by  the  consecration  of  Jehovah's  historical  dealings  with 
them.  God  had  not  dealt  so  with  any  other  nation.  They  were  partakers  of  a  heavenly 
calling.  It  was  a  voice  of  God,  not  some  self-dictated  impulse,  which  sent  out  Abiatiam 
and  directed  and  bounded  the  track  of  his  posterity.  And,  most  important  of  all,  the 
Hebrew  nation  made  their  acknowledgment  of  apostle  and  high  priest.  Hhe  apostle  was 
Moses,  and  of  the  high  priest  Aaron  may  be  taken  as  representative.  Though  while 
liring  Moses  had  been  only  too  often  the  object  of  hatred,  jealousy,  rebellion,  he  had 
now  come  to  be  vehemently  acknowledged.  It  could  not  be  too  much  proclaimed 
by  the  Hebrews  of  the  Law  that  he  was  the  sent  of  God- 

IIL  Consideb  the  Apostle  and  High  Peiest  op  oub  peopession.  The  Hebrews  of 
the  gospel  had  only  one  Person  to  consider,  where  the  Hebrews  of  the  Law  had  two. 
The  matter  is  one  for  consideration — close  and  penetrating  application  of  the  mind. 
Consideration  as  opposed  to  negligence,  as  opposed  to  superficiality ;  sufficient  examina- 
tion as  opposed  to  insuEScient.  To  obey  the  exhortation  meant  to  bend  the  mind  to 
all  the  subsequent  arguments  and  illustrations  of  the  Epistle.  The  writer  was  going  to 
exhibit  the  results  of  his  own  consideration.  And  though  the  interest  and  responsibility  - 
of  this  consideration  is  special  to  Jews,  yet  it  is  well  for  all  Gentiles  to  consider  how 
thoroughly  Jesus  is  a  sent  Person.  Moses  was  clearly  a  sent  person ;  there  is  nothing 
to  show  that  in  himself  he  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  gifts.  By  so  much  as  the  nature 
of  Jesus  is  richer  and  purer  than  that  of  Moses,  we  reed  to  be  ou  our  guard  against  for- 
getting that  he  is  a  sent  Person.  We  must  acknowledge  him  as  such  ;  the  supreme 
Sent  One,  out  of  the  infinite,  the  eternal,  the  unseen. — Y. 

Ver.  8. — WTiat  we  are  to  Christ.  To  us  Christ  is  related  as  Apostle  and  High 
Priest  (ver.  1).  To  Christ  we  are  related  as  the  house  where  he  holds  the  unique 
position  of  Son,  Heir,  Director. 

I.    We  ABE  MOBE  TO  ChBIST  THAN   EVEB  HIS.  BBETHEEH  COULD  BE   TO  MoSES.      MoSeS 

had  great  authority,  honourable  position,  but  he  was  never  as  a  son  over  his  own  house. 
Moses  at  best  was  the  steward,  and  even  he  had  checks  which  reminded  him  that  he 
was  but  the  first  among  servants,  not  an  all-controlling  lord.  And  yet  he  was  a  man 
to  be  honoured.  Mark  this  in  the  Epistle,  that  its  writer,  in  exalting  Christ,  exalted 
Moses  also  j  whereas  the  enemies  of  Christ  only  exalted  Moses,  that  by  the  same  move- 


OM.in.1— 19.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  106 

ment  they  might  correspondingly  depreciate  Christ.  The  nation  of  Israel  wu  m  the 
house  where  Moses  dwelt  as  appointed  responsible  director  and  custodian,  A  serTWit 
certainly,  but  a  servant  of  a  peculiar  kind.  He  is  called  Bepdiray.  Nowhere  else  in  the 
New  Testament  is  a  servant  called  by  this  name  ;  it  is  as  it'  there  must  be  a  unique 
description  for  a  unique  relation.  If  simple  servitude  had  been  all  needing  to  be 
signified,  SoSaos  would  have  done ;  if  simple  ministry,  SidKovos  would  have  done.  But 
Moset  hu  a  servant-name  to  himself;  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Among  all  the  servants  of 
Grod  there  has  been  none  greater  than  Moses."  The  word  indicates  at  one  and  the  same 
time  service  and  the  greatest  responsibility  that  could  rest  on  mere  man.  Moses  was 
the  great  steward  of  God  in  God's  house  for  the  time  being,  even  the  people  of  Israel. 
Compare  him  with  the  man  spoken  of  as  Joseph's  steward  (Gen.  xliii.  19 ;  xliv.  4). 
Consider  also  the  question  of  Jesus  in  Luke  xii,  42  :  "  Who  then  is  that  faithful  and 
wise  steward  (oiKoy(J/ioi),  whom  his  lord  shall  make  ruler  over  his  household  (flepon-efo)  ?  " 
"  It  is  required  in  a  steward  that  he  shall  be  found  faithful."  Thus  the  nation  of  Israel 
was  a  great  deal  to  Moses,  but  not  so  much  as  we  are  to  Christ.  We  are  for  the  use  o! 
Christ,  at  his  disposal,  under  his  control,  in  a  way  far  transcending  the  control  whicli 
Moses  had  over  Israel.  Moses  died  and  Joshua  succeeded.  Joshua  died  and  others 
succeeded.  But  as  a  Son  over  his  house,  over  the  successive  generations  of  Christians, 
Jeaus  is,  emphatically,  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." 

II.  The  conditions  which  make  us  abidingly  the  house  of  Christ.  We  are  the 
house  of  Christ  who  is  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  a  great  destiny  to  feel  that  we  are  of  use 
and  service  to  him.  But  the  use  and  service  depend  on  our  perseverance.  Christ  asks 
great,  arduous,  necessarily  painful  things  from  his  household.  Not  that  he  rejoices  in 
pain^every thing  but  that;  but  to  hold  a  place  under  him  requires  faithfulness  in 
extremities.  His  household  may  have  to  resist  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin.  As 
to  the  members  of  Christ's  household,  Christ  has  infused  into  their  hearts  an  ex-pectation 
of  serving  him  amid  surroundings  and  conditions  far  different  to  those  of  the  present 
service.  And  this  expectation  is  one  which  at  times  makes  them  confident  and  also 
free  of  speech  in  their  approaches  to  their  Master.  It  is  an  expectation  in  which  they 
can  glory  as  the  world  looks  curiously  on  them,  because  of  present  things  they  give  up 
for  the  sake  of  the  expectation.  But  here  is  the  peril  lest  the  confidence  and  the 
expectation  sink  so  low  in  the  heart  as  to  lose  power  over  the  life.  Moses  was  faithful 
in  his  house,  but  the  house  was  not  faithful.  The  privations  and  delays  of  the  wilder-' 
ness  well-nigh  killed  the  joy  of  liberty  from  Egyptian  bondage,  and  the  noble  aspira- 
tions towards  the  land  promised  by  Jehovah.  Jesug  will  be  faithful  in  the  household 
of  God ;  and  some  in  that  household  will  always  be  faithful  to  Jesus,  through  what- 
ever dubious  and  protracted  experiences.  The  point  is  one  for  the  individual.  Will 
he,  through  impatience  and  want  of  the  single  eye,  the  straightforward  gaze,  lose  his 
place  and  promution  in  the  household  of  God  ? — Y. 

Ver.  12. — The  evil  heart  of  unhelief.  I.  The  need  of  wabnino.  The  state  of 
things  indicated  is  repudiated  by  many  in  whom  it  obtains.  Those  in  whom  unbelief 
is  most  deeply  seated  think  themselves  real  believers  in  whatever  is  reasonable  and 
true.  Therefore  warning  is  needed — affectionate  warning,  it  will  be  observed.  The 
readers  are  again  addressed  as  "  brethren."  Also  individual  examination  is  suggested. 
Men  have  fallen  from  what  seemed  the  strongest  faith  into  the  most  shameful  apostasies. 
A  brother,  sent  of  God,  warns  us  to  be  on  our  guard. 

IL  The  deep-seated  mischief.  There  may  be  outward  discipleship  and  service, 
but  a  heart  not  trusting  in  the  living  God.  There  may  be  abundant  manifestations  uf 
the  Divine  love  and  power,  but  the  heart  may  be  so  subdued  to  worldly  considerations 
that  nothing  shown  by  God  can  produce  its  proper  impression.  We  believe  too  much 
in  living  men,  in  their  power  to  help  or  to  hinder;  we  trim  everything  to  catch  their 
favour  or  keep  in  their  good  graces.  And  meantime  the  living  God  is  as  if  he  were 
not.  If  at  any  moment  we  have  been  in  real  connection  with  his  infinite  grace  and 
power,  there  is  something  in  our  hearts  which  tends  to  draw  us  gradually  away. 
Nothing  is  more  absurd  than  unbelief  in  God,  and  yet  nothing  is  harder  than  practical 
faith.  And  to  get  rid  of  unbelief  we  need  to  have  the  heart  renewed  and  inspired. 
We  readily  see  the  need  of  heart-renewal  if  it  be  some  other  sin  that  is  in  question — if 
it  be  malicious,  or  selfisli,  or  sensual  feeling  that  we  want  to  get  rid  o&     And  so  our 


10« 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  IV.  1 — 16. 


prayer  should  be,  "  Make  us  feel  that  unbelief  is  sin,  moral  malady,  a  something  that 
needs  to  be  cured  by  the  turning  of  the  lieart  to  God."  There  is  manifestation  of  truth 
enough,  evidence  enough  ;  the  lack  lies  in  our  disposition.— Y. 

Ver.  13. — The  deceit/uJness  of  sin.  It  matters  little  whether  we  take  the  reference 
here  as  to  the  sin  of  unbelief  specially,  or  to  sin  in  general.  All  sin  is  deceiving  in  its 
lieginningi.  The  seed  hides  mucli  which  the  sower  cannot  understand  until  he  is 
compelled  to  reap  the  fruit.  And  his  only  safety  is  to  trust  a  timely  warning,  and 
liave  nothing  to  do  with  the  seed.  And  though  to  each  of  us  individually  some  tbrnis 
of  sin  appear  not  at  all  deceitful,  yet  we  are  deceived  by  others.  Some  form  of  sin  is 
deceitful  to  every  one  of  us.  The  great  enemy  of  man  considers  us  according  to  our 
individuality.  There  are  temptations  for  the  appetite,  temptations  for  the  senses, 
temptations  for  the  intellect. 

I.  Wb  should  best  in  the  conviction  that  sin  is  a  decbitfuIj  thing.  We 
cannot  be  too  cautious,  too  observant,  in  pursuing  our  path  through  this  coraplicatod 
world.  Agencies  are  always  at  work  to  make  the  worse  appear  the  better  reason. 
Things  visible,  whether  things  attractive  or  repulsive,  press  upon  our  eyes;  and  con- 
cerning the  attractive  we  find  ourselves  saying,  "  This  is  worth  making  ours  even  at  a 
great  price ; "  concerning  the  repulsive,  "  This  is  to  be  avoided  at  whatever  cost."  The 
world  around  us  speaks  with  a  voice  that  discountcniinces  things  invisible  and  Divine. 
If  we  begin  to  act  as  hearing  a  voice  from  heaven,  others  say  they  have  heard  no  voice ; 
whereupon  we  are  easily  persuaded  that  no  voice  really  spoke.  Sometimes  sin  dresses 
itself  up  in  the  guise  of  liberality  and  charity,  and  again  it  is  found  beneath  the 
appearance  of  zeal  for  God  and  goodness.  If  there  is  no  danger  that  we  should  be 
tempted  into  any  kind  of  vicious  living,  then  most  of  all  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  to 
he  feared;  Before  the  readers  of  this  Epistle  a  great  historical  example  was  put,  drawn 
from  the  conduct  of  their  own  ancestors.  The  behaviour  of  the  children  of  Israel  in 
the  wilderness  is  an  illustration,  on  a  great  scale,  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin ;  especially 
of  the  proneness  of  the  heart  to  fall  into  unbelief  with  respect  to  spiritual  thiiigs.  It 
might  have  seemed  safe  to  predict  that,  after  all  the  great  Divine  deliverance  of  which 
they  had  been  objects,  they  would  have  steadily  gone  on  in  the  way  of  obedience ; 
whereas  only  a  very  short  time  elapses  before  they  are  found  believing  the  wishes 
of  their  own  hearts  rather  than  the  word  of  God  through  Muses.  "  Let  him  that 
standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  Those  who  are  fallen  to-day  were  stauditjg  yesterday, 
and  some  standing  to-day  will  be  fallen  to-morrow.  And  if  we  are  nol  among  the 
fallen,  it  will  be  because  we  are  giving  daily  practical  heed  to  this  truth  concerning  the 
deceitfulness  of  sin. 

II.  How  ARE  WB  TO  GUARD  AGAINST  THIS  DECEITFULNESS?  All  that  the  Writer  says 
Justin  this  part  of  the  Epistle  is  negative — at  least,  it  seems  negative.  But  that  simply 
means  the  iteration  and  reiteration  of  the  danger  of  unbelief.  No  one  knows  better 
than  the  writer  that  we  cannot  guard  against  unbelief  in  a  negative  way.  The  only 
way  of  getting  better  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  is  to  rise  above  it,  and  be  so  intent  on 
our  Saviour's  business  as  to  have  no  time,  no  inclinatioo,  to  attend  to  what  sin  may 
have  to  iay. — T, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

A  Best  still  offered  to  Chbibtiaks. 

Ver.  1.— Let  ns  fear,  therefore,  lest,  a 
promise  being  stiU  left  of  entering  into  his 
rest,  any  one  of  yon  should  seem  to  have 
come  short.  This  verse  is  a  renewed  warn- 
ing against  remissness,  based  (as  is  shown 
by  the  connecting  oiv)  on  the  preceding 
argument,  but  introducing  also,  by  means 
of  the  clause,  KaTaAeiira/icVi)ii  etc,  a  new 


thought,  the  elucidation  of  which  i*  the 
subject  of  what  follows.  The  new  thought 
is  that  the  true  "  rest  of  God,"  typified  only 
by  the  rest  of  Canaan,  remains  still  for  the 
attainment  of  Christians.  That  this  is  the 
case  has  not  yet  been  shown ;  and  hence 
the  clause,  "  a  promise  being  still  left,"  etc., 
does  not  point  to  a  conclusion  already 
arrived  at,  but  to  what  is  coming.  The 
new  thought  is  taken  up  in  ver.  2,  and  what 
has  been  thus  intimated  in  ver.  1  is  nsserted 
as  a  conclusion  after  prurf  in  ver.  9,  Ji^a 


OH.  IV.  1—16.] 


TUE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBfiEWft. 


107 


iiro\tfir«Tai,  etc.  A  different  view  of  the 
drift  of  the  warning  in  this  verse,  main- 
tained very  decidedly  by  Ebrard,  demands 
attention.  It  rests  on  the  interpretation  of 
SoK^  tiaTepi]Kivai,  which  is  taken  to  mean 
"  should  think  that  he  has  come  too  late," 
I.e.  for  the  promise  of  tlie  rest,  under  the 
idea  that  its  meaning  had  been  exhriuated 
in  the  rest  of  Canaan.  It  may  be  said  in 
support  of  this  view  tliat  such  is  the  most 
obvious  meaning  of  tlie  phrase;  that  ioKuv 
in  the  New  Testament  most  commonly 
means  "think"  or  "suppose;"  that  the 
primary  sense  of  vaTeptiv  is  that  of  being 
behindhand,  either  in  place  or  in  time; 
and  that  tlie  perfect  iffTepTJKfvaL  is  thus 
accounted  for,  whereas,  according  to  tlie 
usual  interpretation,  the  whole  phrase  is 
unsuitable :  why  was  not  fio-Tepiio-T)  written, 
if  a  mere  warning  against  remissness  was 
intended?  Further,  it  miiy  be  said  that 
what  iinmoiliately  follows  is  in  favour  of 
this  view  of  the  purport  of  the  caution  in 
ver.  1,  being  an  evident  carryin;!;  out  of  its 
idea.  Thus  the  verse  is  supposed  to  be  not 
at  all  a  continuation  of  the  previous  hortatory 
section,  but  ralher  serving  as  the  thesis  of 
the  coming  argumentative  section,  though 
put  in  tlie  form  of  a  caution  because  im- 
perfect appreciation  of  the  view  to  be  now 
established  was  at  the  root  of  the  danger 
of  the  Hebrew  Christians.  Some  of  them 
at  least  did  not  fully  grasp  the  true 
chariicter  of  the  gospel  as  being  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  old  dispensation,  the  realization 
of  its  types  and  promises.  They  were 
inclined  to  rest  in  the  Law  as  a  revelation 
to  which  the  gospel  was  only  supplemen- 
tary, and  hence  to  regard  the  promised 
land,  the  offer  of  which  was  before  their 
time,  as  the  only  rest  intended;  and  there- 
fore the  writer,  after  adducing  the  example 
of  the  Israelites  under  Moses  as  a  warning 
against  remissness,  prefaces  his  exposition 
of  the  true  rest  of  God  by  a  warning  against 
misapprehending  it.  But  against  this  view 
of  the  meaning  of  Sok^  iirrtpiiKti'm  there 
an  the  following  reasons:  (1)  The  word 
(poff'fidiDiJ.iv  suggests  rather  (like  iSAeircTf) 
a  warning  against  conduct  that  might  lead 
to  forfeiture  than  a  correction  of  an  in- 
adequate conception ;  and  ovv  connects  the 
warning  with  what  has  gone  before,  in 
which  the  view  of  what  the  true  rest  is  has 
not  entered.  (2)  Though  Sofccii/  is  most 
frequently  used  in  the  New  Testament  in 
its  sense  of  "thinking,"  "seeming  to  one's 
self,"  yet  it  has  there,  as  in  Greek  generally, 
the  sense  also  of  "  appearing,"  "  seeming  to 
others;"  and  certainly,  as  far  as  the  word 
itself  is  concerned,  may  have  this  sense 
here.  Also  the  verb  iarepiiv,  though  its 
primary  idea  (as  of  iixTfpos)  is  that  of 
"coming  after,    ia  nevertheless  invariably 


used  in  the  New  Testament  to  express 
"deficiency,"  or  "falling  short"  (cf.  espe- 
cially in  this  Epistle,  oh.  zii.  15) :  it  is 
never  elsewhere  (though  capable  of  the 
meaning)  used  to  express  lateness  in  time. 
(3)  The  phrase,  8oKp  v<rTepi\Kfvai,  in  the 
sense  of  "  seem  to  have  fallen  short "  (rather 
than  vcrTepiiar))  is  capable  of  being  accounted 
for.  One  explanation  of  it,  adopted  by 
Alford,  is  indeed  hardly  tenable.  He 
accounts  for  the  past  tense  by  supposing 
reference  to  the  final  judgment ;  taking  it 
to  mean,  "  lest  any  one  of  you  should  then 
appear  [t.e.  be  found]  to  have  fallen  short." 
But  the  word  SoK^ty,  which,  however  used, 
refers,  not  to  what  is  made  evident,  but  to 
what  is  thought  or  seems,  refuses  to  be  thus 
misinterpreted.  It  is  better  to  take  it  as  a 
softening  expression.  We  may  suppose  that 
the  writer  (with  a  delicacy  that  reminds  us 
of  St.  Paul)  was  unwilling  to  imply  his  own 
expectation  of  any  failure ;  and  so  he  only 
bids  his  readers  beware  of  so  living  as  even 
to  present  the  appearance  of  it  or  suggest 
the  thought  of  it  to  others.  According  to 
this  view,  the  tense  of  iiarepiiKivai  is  in- 
telligible, the  supposed  deficiency  spoken  of 
being  previous  to  its  being  perceived  or  sus- 
pected. It  is  not  necessary  to  supply  an 
understood  genitive,  such  as  "  the  promise," 
or  "  the  rest,"  after  v., .  epfiicevcu.  It  may  be 
used  (as  elsewhere)  absolutely,  to  express 
deficiency  or  failure ;  i.e.  in  the  conditions 
required  for  attainment.  One  view  of  its 
meaning  is  tliat  it  has  reference  to  the  idea 
of  being  behindhand  in  a  race:  but  there 
is  nothing  in  the  context  to  suggest  this 
figure.  (4)  It  is  not  necessary  that  ver.  1 
should  express  only  the  idea  of  the  following 
argument ;  it  does  sufiieiently  express  it  in 
the  clause,  KaTa\enrafiev7]s,  etc. ;  and  it  is 
in  the  style  of  this  Epistle  to  connect  new 
trains  of  argument  by  a  continuous  chain 
of  thought  with  what  has  gone  before  (cf. 
the  beginning  of  ch.  ii.  and  iii.).  Though 
there  is  uncertainty  as  to  the  sequence  of 
thought  in  the  several  clauses  of  the  follow- 
ing argument  (vers.  2 — 11),  its  general  drift 
is  clear.  Its  leading  ideas  are  these :  The 
invitation  to  enter  God's  rest  contained  in 
the  psalm  shows  that  the  rest  of  Canaan, 
which,  though  forfeited  under  Moses,  had 
long  been  actually  attained  under  Joshua, 
was  not  the  final  rest  intended.  What, 
then,  is  meant  by  this  remarkable  term, 
"  my  rest,"  i.e.  God's  own  rest  ?  Our  thoughts 
go  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  Bible, 
where  a  rest  of  Goil  himself  is  spoken  of; 
where  he  is  said  to  have  rested  on .  the 
seventh  day  from  all  his  works.  Participa- 
tion, then,  in  tliat  heavenly  rest — a  true 
sabbath  rest  with  God — is  what  the  term 
implies.  Thougli  this  rest  began  "from 
the  foundation  of  the  world,"  man's  destined 


106 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  IV.  1—16. 


eliare  in  it;,  however  long  delayed,  was 
intimated  by  the  typical  history  of  the 
Israelites  UTider  Moses,  and  by  tlie  warning 
and  renewed  invitation  of  the  psalm.  This 
renewed  invitation  makes  it  plain  that  it  i» 
still  attainable  by  God's  people.  It  has  at 
last  been  made  attainable  by  Christ,  who, 
as  our  great  High  Priest,  has  himself 
entered  it,  and  leads  lis  into  it  if  we  are 
but  faithful. 

Ver,  2. — ^For  truly  we  have  had  good 
tidings  (or,  o  gospel)  preached  unto  us,  even 
as  also  they :  but  the  word  of  hearing  did 
not  profit  them,  not  being  mingled  by  faith 
with  those  that  heard  it.  The  meanirn^ 
and  purpose  of  the  first  part  of  this  verse  is 
plain,  as  is  also  the  general  intention  of  the 
second;  viz.  to  account  parenthetically  for 
the  gospel  to  the  Israelites  under  Moses 
having  failed  of  its  purpose,  and  at  t^ie 
same  time  to  renew  the  warning  of  tlieir 
example  with  respect  to  the  gospel  now 
preaolied  to  Christians.  But  the  passage 
is  still  one  of  singular  diificulty,  on  account 
botli  of  the  various  readings  of  it,  and  of  the 
peculiarity  of  the  language  vised  whatever 
reading  be  adopted.  With  respect  to  the 
various  readings,  the  main  and  indeed  only 
important  question  is  between  (1)  a-vyKciepa- 
fj.4vos,  agreeing  with  \6yos  n/to^j,  and  (2) 
auyK€Kpa^evovs,  agreeing  with  iKsivovs,  The 
variation  between  cvyKeKpafi.  and  avyKc- 
K^paaii.,  being  only  different  forms  of  the 
participle,  does  not  affect  the  meaning. 
Then  the  readings  tUv  aKovtriprav  and  tois 
aKQvaQftffiv  for  to7s  aKoinratrt  rest  on  such 
slight  authority,  and  are  so  likely  to  have 
been  substitutions  (the  latter  to  make  the 
reading  tTvyKeKpafievovs  intelligible),  that 
they  need  not  be  considered.  (1)  The 
reading  of  the  Textus  Eeceptus,  following 
the  Vulgate,  ig  iiii  <rvyKfKpaii4iios  Tjj  irfffrci 
ToJs  axovaaa-iv.  But  (2)  the  great  prepon- 
derance of  ancient  authority  (including 
that  of  all  the  uncial  manuscripts  except 
N)  supports  {ruyK€KpafjL€Vovs  or  truyKCKkpaff- 
IJ-ei/ovs.  The  latter,  theu,  must  be  ac- 
cepted as  the  true  reading,  if  authority 
alone  is  to  be  our  guide.  But  tlien  comes 
the  difBoulty  of  making  any  sense  of  it. 
The  only  way  of  doing  so  is  to  understand 
To7s  iLKoiiTacny  (,"  those  who  heard")  in  the 
sense  of  "  those  who  hearkened  ;"  the  sense 
of  the  passage  being  "  The  word  of  hearing 
did  not  profit  them,  because  they  were  not 
united  by  faitl  i  with  those  who  not  only  heard, 
but  liearkened  and  obeyed."  Most  of  the 
Fathers,  riading  auyiceKpcLfievovs,  take  to7s 
aKoiaaaiv  to  refer  in  this  sense  to  Caleb  and 
Joshua.  But,  if  what  has  been  said  above 
be  true  as  to  the.se  exceptions  to  the  general 
unbelief  not  having  been  in  the  writer's 
mind,  such  an  allusion  is  highly  improbable. 
Some  (Alford,  e.g.)  take  reli  iKoivainy  with 


no  historical  reference,  but  ag  denoting 
hcarkeners  generally.  Alford,  however, 
though  adopting  this  as  the  best  solution 
of  an  acknowledged  difficulty,  confesses 
himself  not  satisfied  witli  it,  as  well  he  may. 
A  very  serious  objection  to  either  view, 
even  apart  from  the  strangeness  of  tlie 
whole  expression  if  such  be  its  meanijg, 
is  that,  though  the  verb  axoieiv  is  certainly 
used  elsewhere  in  the  sense  thus  assigned 
to  it,  the  whole  context  here  suggests  a 
different  one.  Of.  gurpra  (ch.  iii.  16),  tivcs 
yap  aKoiffavTiS  nape-jrlKpavav ',  and  especially 
i  \6yos  Trjs  aKorjs  immediately  preceding. 
'AKorjs,  denoting  hearing  only,  seems  to  have 
suggested  the  use  of  the  participle  axoiiratriv, 
to  which  it  would  therefore  be  most  un- 
natural to  assign  a  different .  meaning.  If, 
then,  all  devices  for  making  sense  of  the 
best  supported  text  prove  unsatisfactory, 
and  if  the  Textus  Eeceptus  gives  an  in- 
telligible meaning,  we  might  surely  be 
justified  in  adopting  the  latter,  however 
ill  supported.  Internal  evidence  (though 
great  caution  should  be  used  in  our  estimate 
of  it)  need  not  yield  entirely  to  external, 
nor  common  sense  to  authority,  in  the  de- 
termination of  true  readings.  But  in  this 
case  the  argument  from  internal  probability 
has  now  been  strengthened  by  the  discovery 
of  the  reading  (TuvKEKepair/ieVos  in  the  Sinaitio 
Codex  (N).  This,  then,  being  adopted, 
though  the  expression  be  peculiar,  the 
meaning  is  no  longer  obscnre,  whether  we 
take  T^  vlffrei  or  to7s  iLKoiffatrtv  as  governed 
by  ffvyxeKpaiifpos.  It  may  be  either  that 
"  the  word  of  hearing  did  not  profit  them 
because  it  was  not  mingled  with  their  faith 
to  those  that  heard; "  or  "because  it  was  not 
mingled  by  faith  with  those  that  heard  it." 
In  the  latter  case  the  idea  is  that  of  the 
necessity  of  the  spoken  word  entering  the 
heart,  and  being  (so  to  speak)  assimilated 
by  the  hearers  Ihrougli  the  instrumentality 
of  faith,  in  order  to  profit  them. 

Ver.  3. — For  we  do  enter  into  the  rest,  w« 
who  have  believed  (of  maTeiiravres,  the  his- 
torical aorist,  pointing  to  the  time  when 
Christians  became  believers ;  with  a  refer- 
ence also  to  T])  TrftTTEi  in  the  preceding 
verse:  but  the  emphasis  is  on  the  first  word 
in  the  sentence,  eiaepxipieDa :  "  For  we  Chris- 
tian believers  have  an  entrance  into  tlie  rest 
intended  ") :  even  as  he  hath  said.  As  I  sware 
in  my  wrath,  If  they  shall  enter  into  my 
rest ;  although  the  works  were  finished  firom 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  This  seems  to 
be  a  concise  enunciation  of  the  proof,  un- 
folded in  the  verses  that  follow,  of  the  true 
rest  being  one  into  which  Christians  have 
still  an  entrance.  The  idea  is  that,  though 
God's  own  rest  had  been  from  the  beginning, 
and  man  had  not  yet  entered  it,  yet  the 
possibility  of  his  doing  so  had  not  ceased  to 


OH.  IT.  1—16.] 


THE   BPISTLJi  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


109 


be  intimated :  it  had  continued  open  poten- 
tially to  man. 

Veri.  4,  5. — Tor  he  hath  said  somewhere 
(irou :  cf.  ch.  ii.  6)  of  the  seventh  day  on 
this  wise,  And  God  rested  the  seventh  day 
from  all  his  works ;  and  in  this  place  again, 
If  they  aball  enter  into  my  rest.  Here  the 
argument  is  carried  oxtt.  The  first  passage 
quoted  showB  what  must  be  understood  by 
the  "rest  of  God ; "  the  second  shows  that 
it  still  remaius  open,  that  "it  remaineth 
that  some  should  enter  thereinto."  This 
being  the  case — 

Vers.  6,  7. — Since  therefore  it  remains 
that  some  shonld  enter  into  it,  and  they  to 
whom  the  good  tidings  were  before  preached 
entered  not  in  heoanse  of  disobedienoe,  he 
again  defineth  a  certain  day,  saying  in  David, 
after  so  long  a  time.  To-day ;  an  it  hath  been 
before  said,  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
etc.  The  continued  openness  of  the  rest, 
and  the  failure  of  the  Israelites  of  old  to 
enter  it,  are  the  reasons  why  a  further  day 
for  entering  was  defined  in  the  psalm.  But 
here  the  thought  is  suggested  that  the  Israel- 
ites had  not  finally  failed,  for  that,  though 
those  under  Moses  did  so,  the  next  gene- 
ration under  Joshua  did  attain  the  promised 
land.  No,  it  is  replied ;  the  rest  of  the 
promised  land  was  but  a  type  after  all ;  it 
was  not  the  true  rest  of  God :  otherwise  the 
psalmist  could  not  have  still  assigned  a  day 
for  entering  it  lo  long  after  the  arrival  at 
Shiloh;— 

"Vera.  8, 9.— For  if  Joshua  had  given  them 
rest,  he  would  not  have  spoken  afterward  of 
another  day.  The  conclusion  is  now  drawn : 
There  remaineth  therefore  a  sabbath  rest  for 
the  people  of  God ;  the  true  nature  of  the  rest 
intended  being  beautifully  denoted  by  the 
word  <ra;3j8aTi(rjiiAj,  which  refers  to  the  Divine 
rest  "from  the  foundation  of  the  world," 
while  the  offer  of  it  to  true  believers  always, 
and  not  to  the  Israelites  only,  is  intimated 
by  the  phrase,  "  the  people  of  God." 

Ver.  10. — For  he  that  is  entered  into  his  rest 
(God'i,  ae  before)  hath  himself  also  rested 
from  bis  works,  as  from  his  own  God.  There 
are  two  ways  of  understanding  this  verse. 
Its  general  intention  is,  indeed,  clear.  It  ac- 
counts for  the  use  of  the  word  ffa^^aruriihs 
which  precedes,  expressing  that  the  true 
meaning  of  "  God's  rest "  is  not  satisfied  by 
any  earthly  rest,  but  only  by  one  like  his. 
The  question  is  whether  the  verse  is  to  be 
taken  as  a  general  proposition  or  as  refer- 
ring specifically  to  Christ.  In  favour  of  the 
latter  view  is  the  aorist  KaTeiraviTfv.  The 
literal  translation  would  be  "He  that 
entered  .  .  .  himself  also  rested."  Ebrard, 
on  this  ground,  strenuously  defends  the 
reference  to  Christ ;  and  also  on  the  ground 
of  parallelism  with  ch.  ii.  9  in  the  first 
division  of  the  general  argument.    In  the 


first  division  (ch,  ii.)  the  course  of  thought 
was — Dominion  over  creation  has  been 
assigned  to  man :  man  has  not  attained  it : 
Jesus  has ;  and  in  Jesus  man  fulfils  his 
destiny.  In  this  second  division  the  corre- 
sponding course  of  thought  is— God's  rest 
has  been  offered  fo  man :  man  has  not  at- 
tained it :  Jesus  has ;  and  in  Jesus  man  may 
enter  it.  And  thus  (as  has  been  explained 
above)  the  conclusion  iiiat  Jesus  Is  the  High 
Priest  of  humanity  is  led  up  to  by  two 
parallel  lines  of  argument.  But  the  third 
of  the  propositions  of  the  second  line  of 
argument  (corresponding  to  ch.  ii.  9  in  the 
first)  is  not  distinctly  expressed  unless  it  be 
in  the  verse  before  us;  and  therefore  this 
verse,  on  this  ground  as  well  as  that  of  the 
use  of  the  aorist,  is  taken  to  refer  to  Christ. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  argued  (Bleek,  De 
Wette,  Delitzsch,  etc.)  that,  if  a  specific 
reference  to  Christ  had  been  intended,  he 
would  have  been  mentioned,  so  as  to  make 
the  meaning  clear ;  and  secondly,  that  the 
aorist  KaTcTrauffe  is  legitimate,  though  the 
proposition  be  a  general  one.  Delitzsch 
explains  it  thus :  "  The  author  might  have 
written  KaraTra^ci  or  (more  classically) 
KarairciravTiu :  but  he  has  taken  up  into  the 
main  proposition  the  Karfiravcrev,  which 
properly  belongs  (according  to  Gen.  IL  2) 
to  the  clause  of  comparison :  whosoever  has 
entered  God's  rest,  of  him  the  Kareiravfriv 
airb  Tuv  epywv  ainov  holds  good  in  the  same 
manner  as  of  God."  And,  further,  it  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  Greek  aorist  may 
sometimes  be  put  for  the  present, "  to  express 
an  action  completely  determined,  every 
doubt  as  to  its  truth  and  unalterableness 
being  removed"  (Matthiss,  'Gr.  Gram.,'  § 
506).  In  this  instance  the  idea  might  be — 
he  that  has  entered  into  God's  rest  rested, 
when  he  so  entered,  from  all  his  works,  etc. 
On  the  whole,  it  appears  that  specific  refer- 
ence to  Christ  is  not  apparent  from  the  im- 
mediate context,  or  required  by  the  mere 
language  used.  StiU,  in  consideration  of  the 
general  argument,  we  may  take  the  writer 
to  have  meant  his  readers  to  understand 
that  it  was  Christ  who  had  so  entered  the 
rest  of  God,  so  as  to  lead  God's  people 
into  it.  That  this  ii  so  appears  from 
ver.  14,  "Exoi'Tci  ody  apx^cpia  ix4yav,  Sie- 
\7i\vd6ra  robs  ovpavoiis,  which  seems  to 
require  that  preceding  link  of  thought. — 
Among  man's  deepest  feelings  is  a  longing 
for  rest.  Haply  in  the  freshness  and  ardour 
of  early  life  not  deeply  felt,  it  recurs  from 
time  to  time,  and  grows  stronger  with 
advancing  years.  Nothing  in  life  fully 
satisfies  this  longing.  Labours,  distresses, 
disappointments,  anxieties,  never  allow  the 
desired  repose.  Few  there  are  whose  hearts 
have  not  sometimes  echoed  the  psalmist's 
words,  "  Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove  I  for 


110 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  IV.  1 — ;6 


then  would  I  flee  away,  and  be  at  rest ! " 
Many  since  Job  have  felt  something  of  his 
longing  to  be  where  "  the  wicked  cease  from 
troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest."  Is 
there  to  be  no  satisfaction  ever  of  this  deep 
human  craving  ?  Holy  Scripture  meets  it 
as  it  meets  all  others.  It  spoke  of  a  rest  of 
God  above  creation  from  the  beginning  of 
time ;  it  intimated  man's  part  and  interest 
in  it  by  the  weekly  sabbath  which  he  was  to 
keep  with  God.  But  this  was,  after  all,  but 
a  symbol  and  earnest  of  something  unat- 
tained.  At  length  a  fuller  realization  of 
the  longed-for  rest  was  held  out  to  the 
chosen  people,  and  the  promised  land  was 
pictured  beforehand  in  the  colours  of  an 
earthly  Paradise.  Forfeited,  when  first 
offered,  through  the  people's  unworthiness 
(representing  by  an  historical  parable  the 
bar  to  man's  entrance  into  the  eternal  rest), 
it  was  attained  at  last.  But  the  true  rest 
still  came  not.  Canaan,  like  tlie  sabbath, 
proved  bat  a  symbol  of  something  unat- 
tained.  Tet  the  old  longing  for  rest  went 
on,  and  inspired  men  went  on  proclaiming  it 
as  attainable  and  still  to  come.  The  irre- 
pressible craving,  the  suggestive  symbols, 
the  prophetic  anticipations,  are  all  fuliilled 
in  Christ.  He,  when  he  had  passed  with  us 
through  this  earthly  scene  of  labour,  en- 
tered, with  our  nature,  into  that  eternal  rest 
of  God,  to  prepare  a  place  for  us,  having  by 
his  atonement  removed  the  bar  to  human 
entrance.  Through  our  faith  in  him  we  are 
assured  that  our  deep-seated  craving  for 
satisfaction  unattained  as  yet,  which  we 
express  by  the  term  "  rest,"  is  a  true  inward 
prophecy,  and  that,  though  we  find  it  not  here, 
we  may  through  him,  if  we  are  faithful, 
confidently  expect  it  there,  where  "beyond 
these  voices  there  is  peace." 

There  now  follows  (vera.  11 — 14)  a 
renewal  of  the  warning  of  ch.  iii.  7 — ^iv.  1, 
urged  now  with  increased  force  in  view 
of  the  danger  of  slighting  such  a  reve- 
lation as  the  gospel  has  been  shown  to  be; 
after  which  (ver.  14,  etc.)  come  words  of 
encouragement,  based  on  the  view,  now  a 
■econd  time  arrived  at,  of  Christ  being  our 
great  High  Priest.  And  thus  the  expo- 
sition of  his  priesthood,  which  follows  in 
ch.  v.,  is  led  up  to. 

Yer.  11.^— Let  ns  therefore  do  onr  diligence 
((TTTovSiirafiei/,  so  translated  in  A.Y.  2  Tim. 
iv.  9,  21)  to  enter  into  that  rest,  lest  any  one 
fall  after  the  same  example  of  disobedience 
(aneiBeias:  not  intiTTlas,  which  means  "un- 
belief"). It  is  a  question,  though  not  at 
all  affecting  the  general  sense  of  the  passage, 
whether  ie  t^  outw  iiroielyfiaTi  neaji  should 
not  be  translated  "fall  into  the  same 
example."     nlitreiy  iw  haa  undoubtedly  the 


sense  of  "  to  fall  into,"  and  is  frequently  so 
used  in  the  LXX.,  and  the  subordinate 
position  of  mari  in  the  sentence — between 
virohtiyiraTi  and  t^s  aiiei9flas — is  against  its 
being  used  absolutely  as  the  emphatic  word. 
If  so,  the  meaning  will  be  "  fall  into  the 
same  exemplar  of  disobedience,"  i.e.  the 
kind  of  disobedience  of  which  that  of  the 
Israelites  was  a  sample.  This  interpre- 
tation of  the  phrase,  being  that  of  the 
Vulgate,  is  supported  by  Alford,  Davison, 
Liinemann ;  though  most  modern  commen- 
tators (Bengel,  Bleek,  De  Wette,  Tholuck, 
Delitzsch,  Wordsworth),  with  Chrysostom, 
take  irecTi  absolutely,  as  in  Bom.  xi.  11 
(ruat,  Bengel),  and  4»  t$  outS  vTroSiiyfiari 
as  meaning,  "so  as  to  present  tlie  same  (i.e. 
a  like)  example  of  disobedience,"  the  4v, 
according  to  Delitzsch,  being  the  iv  of  state 
or  condition.  The  warning  is  next  enforced 
by  a  vivid  representation  of  the  penetrating 
and  resistless  power  of  the  "  Word  of  God." 
The  question  arises  whether  "  the  Word  of 
God"  is  here  to  be  understood  in  St.  Jolm's 
sense  of  the  Hypostatio  Word,  i.e.  the  Stcond 
Person  of  the  holy  Trinity,  who  became 
incarnate  in  Christ.  It  is  so  understood 
by  the  Fathers  generally ;  and  the  fact  ol 
this  Epistle  being  tinged  generally  with  the 
thought  and  terminology  of  Philo  (whose 
use  of  the  word  \6yos,  derived  from  the 
Platonic  philosophy  in  combination  with 
Jewish  theology,  seems  to  anticipite  in  some 
degree,  however  vaguely,  the  doctiine  of 
St.  John)  gives  some  countenance  to  the 
view.  But  against  it  are  the  following 
considerations : — (1)  Christ  is  not  elsewhere 
in  this  Epistle  designated  as  "  the  Wokd  " 
but  as  "  the  Son."  His  eternal  relation  to  the 
Father,  though  otherwise  plainly  intimated, 
is  not  expressed  by  this  term,  as  it  was  by 
St.  John.  (2)  The  description  of  the  Word, 
as  "  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"  is 
not  suitable  to  the  Hypostatic  Word  him- 
self, but  rather  to  the  utterance  of  his 
power.  Thus  in  Eev.  i.  16,  "  the  Son  oi 
man,"  and  in  Kev.  xix.  15,  "  he  whose  name 
is  called  the  Word  of  God,"  has  a  "  sharp 
two-edged  sword  proceeding  out  of  his 
mouth."  The  sword  is  not  himself,  but  that 
which  "  came  forth  out  of  his  mouth."  Cf. 
Isa.  xi.  4, "  He  shall  smite  the  earth  with 
the  rod  of  his  mouth,  and  witli  the  breath 
of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the  wicked ;"  cf. 
also  Eph.  vi.  17,  "The  sword  of  the  Spirit, 
which  is  the  Word  of  God."  Hence,  not- 
withstanding the  prevailing  view  of  the 
Fathers,  it  seems  bist  to  understaml  the  term 
here  as  meaning  generally  tlie  Divine  utter- 
ance, without  definite  reference  to  the  Hypo- 
static Word.  It  was  the  Word  of  God,  in 
this  sense,  that  debarred  the  ancient  Israel- 
ites from  their  rest,  and  doomed  them  in  the 
wilderness ;  it  is  the  same  Word  which  still 
more,  as  being  uttered  in  the  Son,  is  sc 


OH.  IT.  1— 16.J 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


HI 


learcliing  and  resistless  now.  True,  it  is 
through  the  Hypostatic  Word  that  the  God- 
head has  ever  operated,  of  old  as  well  as 
now,  being  God's  eternal  utterance  of  him- 
Belf:  the  only  question  is  whether  this  truth 
is  here  intended  to  be  expressed,  or,  in 
other  words,  whether  \6yos  has  here  the 
personal  sense  in  which  St.  John  uses  the 
term.  It  is  possible  that  the  writer  passes 
in  thought  to  a  personal  sense  in  the 
eviiiriov  airov  of  ver.  13,  where  auToD  may 
refer  to  6  x6yos  preceding,  rather  than  to 
Tov  ©eoB.  But  certainly  at  the  beginning  of 
the  passage  this  specific  sense  does  not  seem 
to  be  suggested  either  by  the  context  or 
the  language  us(  d. 

Ver.  12. — Tor  living  is  the  Word  of  God, 
and  powerful  (or,  effectual;  of.  Philem.  6; 
1  Cor.  xvi.  9),  and  sharper  than  any  two- 
edged  sword,  and  piercing  even  to  the  di- 
viding of  Bonl  and  spirit,  of  both  joints  and 
marrow,  and  a  disoemer  of  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart  Observe  how  the  pre- 
dicates form  a  climax.  The  Word  of  God 
is,  first,  living,  instinct  with  the  life  of  the 
living  God  who  utters  it,  itself  a  living 
power  (of.  \iyta  Qavra,  Acts  vii.  38);  then, 
not  only  so,  but  also  operative,  effective  of 
its  purpose;  then,  in  this  its  operation, 
more  keenly  gutting  than  any  sword ; 
cutting  so  as  to  penetrate  through  and 
through — through  the  whole  inner  bein^  of 
man  to  its  inmost  depths ;  then,  in  doing 
so,  discerning  and  opening  to  judgment  all 
the  secrets  of  his  oonsoiousness.  This  de- 
scription of  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God  ii 
given  as  a  reason  for  the  warning,  airovSi- 
aiofiev,  etc.,  "  Let  us  give  diligence,"  etc. ; 
for,  If  we  slight  the  Word  of  God,  we  can 
have  no  escape  from  its  irresistible  opera- 
tion ;  we  shall  be  thoroughly  exposed  and 
inevitably  judged.  The  view  of  the  Word 
of  God  having  a  sharply  cutting  operation 
is  found  in  Philo,  from  whom  Bleek  cites  a 
series  of  passages  connate  to  this  in  the 
Epistle.  Cf.  especially  one  in  the  treatise, 
'Quia  Rerum  Divinorum  Hsares. :'  T^  roixft 
Tttiif  trvfiTrdfTav  avrov  \6ytp'  8s,  ets  r^y 
o^ordriiv  4K0V))9e!»  aKii.i\v,  Stalpav  ouSejroTe 
\-ll-yet  Tck  0(<j-9))t4  irAvra,  ineiSdv  Se  /ne'x/"  tSv 
ariiiav  Kol  Keyojiivav  a/xepwii  Sie^^KBri,  etc. 
And  for  the  comparison  to  a  sword,  cf.  (as 
above  referred  to)  Eph.  vi.  17 ;  Eev.  i.  16 ; 
six.  15;  and  Isa.  xi.  4.  The  true  reading 
of  the  part  of  the  sentence,  "  of  soul  and 
spirit "  etc.,  is  \fivxvs  Kai  irvfifiaros  apfiSiv  -re 
Kol  iivtKHiv,  the  re  of  the  Textus  Eeceptus 
after  ijiux^s  being  ill  supported.  The 
second  n,  after  apii.S>v,  Is  therefore  most 
naturally  taken,  and  so  as  to  give  the  best 
sense,  in  the  sense  of  "both,"  not  "and;" 
t.e.  the  second  clause  is  not  to  be  taken  as 
denoting  a  further  dividing— of  the  bodily 
parts  as  well  as  of  the  soul  and  spirit,  but 


as  expressing,  by  recurrence  to  the  figure  of 
a  sword,  the  thoroughness  of  the  division  of 
soul  and  spirit.  Further,  the  division  spoken 
of  is  sun  ly  not  of  the  soul  from  the  spirit, 
aa  some  have  taken  it.  Delitzseh,  e.g.,  ex- 
plains to  this  eifect — that  in  fallen  man 
his  TTVfvim,  which  proceeded  from  God  and 
carries  in  itself  the  Divine  image,  has 
become,  "as  it  were,  extinguished;"  that 
"  through  the  operation  of  grace  man  re- 
calls to  mind  his  own  true  nature,  thougli 
shattered  by  sin;"  "tliat  heavenly  nature 
of  man  reappoars  when  Clirist  is  formed 
in  him;"  and  tlius  the  Word  of  God 
"marks  out  and  separates"  the  wv^vfia  in 
him  from  the  ^vxii  in  wliich  it  had  been, 
"as  it  were,  extinguislicd."  Then,  taking 
the  clause,  ap/i&y  re  teal  pLviXtiv,  to  express  a 
further  proetss  of  dissection,  he  explains  by 
saying  tliat  the  Word  of  God  "  exhibits  to 
man  the  fact  that  ungodly  powers  are  work- 
ing also  in  his  bodily  frame,  which  has 
now  in  every  joint  and  chord  and  marrow 
becume  the  seat  of  sin  and  death,  and  so 
"  goes  on  to  scrutinize  "his  bodily  as  wel  I 
as  his  spiritual  part,"  and  "  lays  bare  before 
tlie  eyes  of  God  and  before  his  own  the 
whole  man  thus  described."  But  the  ide.i 
of  the  separation,  in  the  above  sense,  of  the 
■mieviia  from  the  '(ivx^,  even  if  tenable,  is 
certainly  far-fetched,  and  that  of  the  cor- 
poreal dissection  supposed  is  hardly  intel- 
ligible. Further,  the  "dividing"  of  the 
bodily  parts  spoken  of  in  the  text  (whether 
an  illustration  or  a  further  process)  does  not 
Buggest  the  separation  of  one  part  from 
another,  since  a  sword  does  not  divide  the 
joints  or  the  limbs  (whichever  be  meant  by 
apM"")  from  the  marrow,  though  it  may 
penetrate  both.  We  may  explain  thus  :  It 
is  well  known  that  St.  Paul  divides  man's 
complex  nature  into  body,  soul,  and  spirit — 
aS)p.a,  "("'X'!'  'f fi'M"  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  His 
bodily  organization  (<rai(ua)  is  not  apparently 
here  under  consideration,  except  in  regard 
to  the  figure  of  the  sword ;  the  '^ivxh  >*  his 
animal  life  or  soul,  the  seat(so  to  spe«k)of  his 
sensations,  and  of  his  natural  affections  and 
desires ;  his  ttveC/uo  is  the  more  Divine  part  of 
his  nature,  in  virtue  of  which  he  has  a  con- 
science, aspires  after  holiness,  apprehends 
spiritual  mysteries,  holds  communion  with 
God,  and  is  influenced  by  the  Divine  Spirit. 
The  idea,  then,  is  that,  as  a  very  keen  sword 
not  only  cuts  thiough  tho  joints  dividing 
bone  from  bone,  but  also  through  the  bones 
themselves  into  the  marrow  within  them,  so 
the  Word  of  God  penetrates  and  discloses 
not  only  the  ij/ux^  but  the  irvevita  too, 
"  piercing  tlirough  soul  and  spirit,  yea  [with 
reference  to  the  illustration  used]  through 
both  joints  [or,  'limbs']  and  marrow." 
Ehrard,  taking  apinSiv  in  the  senae  of"  limbs  " 
(a  sense  in  which  the  word  is  uaed,  though 


Ill 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


[oh.  rr.  1—16. 


that  of  "joints  "  is  Its  proper  and  more  usual 
one),  regards  these  and  the  "  marrow  "  as 
corresponding  respectively  to  the  if^ux^l  and 
the  t'eirC/ia:  the  ^'''X^  hein^  understood  as 
"  something  lying  deep  in  man,  the  vyevfia 
lying  still  deeper."  Thus  as  a  very  trench- 
ant sword  cuts  through,  not  only  the  limbs, 
but  also  the  marrow  within  them,  so  the 
Word  of  God  penetrates,  not  only  that 
part  of  human  consciousness  which  is  ex- 
pressed by  ipvxh,  but  also  that  deeper  and 
more  inward  part  which  is  expressed  by 
irvev/ia.  But  the  £;eneral  sense  of  the  pas- 
sago  is  plain  enough  without  our  supposing 
this  strict  analogy  to  have  been  intended. 
Expositors,  in  their  analysis  of  the  meaning 
of  passages,  may  often  detect  more  than  the 
autiior  thought  of.  On  KptTiiehs  4vBvt>.'i)<rtav 
(translated  "  a  discerner  of  "),  of.  1  Cor.  xiv. 
24,  25,  where  the  effects  of  the  Word  of 
God,  brought  to  bear  through  the  gift  of 
prophecy  on  one  without  the  gift  entering 
into  a  congregation  of  prophesying  Chris- 
tians, are  thus  described :  "  he  is  convinced  of 
all,  he  is  judged  [rather,  '  examined,"  '  scrn- 
tinized,'  avaKpiverai]  of  all;  the  secrets  of 
his  heart  are  made  manifest ;  and  so  falling 
down  on  his  face  he  will  worship  God,  and 
report  that  God  is  in  you  [or,  *  among  you  *] 
of  a  truth."  So  searching  and  judicial  is 
the  power  of  the  Word  of  God,  that  it 
reaches  and  discloses  the  inmost  depths 
of  a  man's  consciousness — discloses  them 
to  himself,  and,  though  he  should  resist, 
leaves  him  without  escape,  exposed  and 
judged. 

Ver.  13. — Neither  is  there  any  creature 
that  is  not  manifest  in  bis  sight;  hut  all 
things  are  naked  and  laid  open  unto  the 
eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  The 
main  difBculty  in  this  verse  is  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  word  rerpox'jX'irjttf''"  (trans- 
lated "  laid  open  ").  The  verb  Tpaxi)X(f(i) 
(which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament or  LXX.,  but  is,  with  its  compound 
iKrpax'n^iC<",  not  uncommon  in  Philo  and 
Joseplms)  has  in  classical  Greek  the  sense 
of  "  seizing  by  the  throat,"  or  "  bending 
back  the  neck,"  as  in  wrestling.  And  this, 
with  the  further  idea  of  "overthrowing"  or 
"  laying  prostrate,"  is  the  prevailing  sense 
In  Philo,  from  whom  Wetstein  quotes  many 
passages  in  illustration.  Taking,  then,  with 
most  modern  commentators,  the  sense  of 
bending  back  the  neck  as  the  primary  one, 
we  have  only  to  consider  what  secondary 
meaning  is  here  to  be  attached  to  it  Some 
take  the  idea  to  be  that  of  being  thrown  on 
the  ground  supine,  so  as  to  be  thoroughly 
exposed  to  view.  So  Bengel :  "  TpaxijAifw, 
reeupino,  Grsece  et  Latine  dioitur  pro 
patefacio.  Corpora  quse  prona  jacent  vix 
nuda  censentur ;  nam  se  ipsa  teguut :  resu- 
pinata,  secundum  partes  nobilissimas  quas- 


que  et  distincti-ssimas  visui  patent."  Many 
(Eisner,  Wolf,  Baumgarten,  Kuinoel,  Bret- 
schneidor,  Bleek,  De  Wette,  etc.,  following 
Perizonius,  on  .ffilian, '  Var.  Hist.,'  xii.  58) 
see  an  allusion  to  the  Boman  custom  of  ex- 
posing criminals  "  reduoto  capite,"  "  retortis 
cervioibus,"  so  that  all  might  see  their  faces 
(see  Suetonius,  'Vitel.,*  17;  Pliny,  'Panegyr.,' 
34.  3).  There  is,  however,  no  other  known 
instance  of  the  Greek  verb  being  used  with 
this  reference,  which  there  seems  to  be  no 
necessity  for  assuming.  Tlie  idea  may  be 
simply  the  general  one  thus  expressed  by 
Delitzsch,  "  that  whatever  shamefaced  crea- 
ture bowB  its  head,  and  would  fain  with- 
draw and  cloak  itself  from  the  eyes  of  God, 
has  indeed  the  throat,  as  it  were,  bent  back 
before  those  eyes,  with  no  possibility  of 
esciipe,  exposed  and  naked  to  their  view." 
Many  of  the  ancients  (Olirysoatom,  Theo- 
doret,  CEcumenius,  Theophylaot)  saw  in  re- 
Tpaxv^KTfj-^va  a  reference  to  the  treatment  of 
sacrificial  victims,  as  being  smitten  on  the 
neck  or  hung  by  the  neck  for  the  purpose 
of  being  flayed  from  the  neck  downwards,  or 
cut  open  thence,  so  as  to  expose  the  entrails 
to  view.  But  no  instance  is  known  of  such 
use  of  the  word  rpaxv^'C^t  the  idea  of  which 
may  have  been  suggested  to  commentators 
by  the  figure  of  the  sword  in  the  verse  pre- 
ceding; which  figure,  however,  theie  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  continued  in  ver.  13,  the 
idea  of  which  is  simply  complete  exposure, 
introduced  by  ovk  dipaviis.  The  ancients 
take  the  concluding  expression,  rphs  tv  ri/uv 
6  \iyos,  as  meaning  "  to  whom  our  account 
must  be  given,"  t.e.  "to  whom  we  are  re- 
sponsible as  our  judge" — ^in  the  sense  of 
\6yov  5iS(i>'oi.  The  A.V.  seemg  better  to 
give  the  general  idea  of  relation  by  the 
apt  phrase,  "  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 
Of  course,  \iyos  here  has  no  reference  to  the 
Word  of  God,  the  recurrence  of  the  word,  in 
a  subordinate  sense,  being  merely  accidental. 
Ver.  14.  —  To  the  interposed  minatory 
warning  of  the  three  preceding  verses  now 
succeeds  encouragement,  based  on  the  view, 
which  has  been  now  a  second  time  led  up  to, 
of  Christ  being  our  great  High  Priest,  who 
can  both  sympathize  and  succour.  Tlie 
passage  answers  closely  in  thought  to  the 
conclusion  of  oh.  ii.,  and  might  naturally 
have  foUoyred  there ;  but  that,  before  taking 
up  the  subject  of  Christ's  priesthood,  the 
writer  had  another  line  of  thought  to  pursue, 
leading  up  (as  has  been  explained)  to  the 
same  conclusion.  The  oSv  at  the  beginning 
of  ver.  14  either  connects  Kparw/ifv  ("  let  us 
hold  fast ")  with  the  verses  immediately  pre- 
cedlng^n  the  sense,  "  The  Word  of  God 
being  so  searching  and  resistless,  let  us 
therefore  hold  fast,"  etc., — in  which  case  the 
participial  clause  exoi/rer,  etc.,  is  a  confirma- 
tion of  this  exhortation  (so  Delitzsoh);  or 


OH.  IV.  1—16.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWa 


113 


IB  connected  logically  with  the  participial 
clause  as  a  resumption  of  the  whole  pre- 
ceding argument.  Certainly  the  idea  of 
the  participial  clause  is  the  prominent  one 
in  the  writer's  mind,  what  follows  being  an 
expansion  of  it.  And  the  position  of  oSv  sug- 
gests this  connection.  It  is  to  be  observed 
that,  after  the  manner  of  the  Epistle,  this 
concluding  exhortation  serves  also  as  a 
transition  to  the  subject  of  the  following 
chapters,  and  anticipates  in  some  degree 
what  is  to  be  set  forth,  though  all  the 
expressions  used  have  some  ground  in  what 
has  gone  before.  Having  then  a  great  High 
Priest  who  hath  passed  through  the  heavens, 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  hold  fast  oar 
confession.  The  rendering  of  Sie\ri\v96Ta 
Tobs  ovfiavois  in  the  A.V.  ("  is  passed  into  the 
heavens  ")  is  evidently  wrong.  The  idea  is 
that  Christ  has  passed  through  the  inter- 
mediate heavens  to  tlie  immeiliate  presence 
of  God — to  the  sphere  of  the  eternal  <raP$a.- 
Tur/ihs,  In  his  use  of  the  plural,  roiij  oipavois, 
the  writer  may  have  had  in  his  mind  the 
Jewish  view  of  an  ascending  series  of 
created  heavens.  Clemens  Alexandrinus, 
e.g.  speaks  of  seven :  'Ettto  oipavoiis  oSs  Tives 
aplBiiOviri  tear'  e-iravdffacriy.  Cf.  also  "  the 
heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  "  (Deut. 
X.  14;  2  Chron.  vL  18;  Neh.  ix.  6),  and 
"  who  hast  set  ttiy  glory  above  the  heavens  " 
(Ps.  viii.  1),  also  "  the  third  heaven,"  into 
which  St.  Paul  was  rapt  (2  Cor.  xii.  2). 
Gf.  also  Eph.  iv.  10,  *0  dva^ds  vvepdvat  itdvTsav 
ruv  ovpavaVf  %va  vKripd^arj  ra  iravTa,  The 
conception  of  the  phrase  is  that,  what- 
ever spheres  of  created  heavens  intervene 
between  our  earth  and  the  eternal  uncreated, 
beyond  them  to  it  Christ  has  gone,— into 
"  heaven  itself  (auTiv  rhf  oipaviv) ; "  "  be- 
fore the  face  of  God"  (ch.  ix.  24).  From 
this  expression,  together  with  Eph.  iv.  10 
(above  quoted),  is  rightly  deduced  the  doc- 
trine of  Christ's  ubiquity  even  in  his  human 
nature.  For,  carrying  that  nature  with  him 
and  still  retaining  it,  he  is  spoken  of  as 
having  passed  to  the  region  which  admits 
no  idea  of  limitation,  and  so  as  to  "  fill  all 
things."  The  obvious  bearing  of  this  doc- 
trine on  that  of  jjiie  presence  in  the  Eucharist 
may  be  noted  in  passing.  (It  is  to  be  ob- 
served that  "  the  heavens  "  in  the  plural  is 
used  (oh.  viii.  1)  of  the  seat  of  the  Divine 
majesty  itself  to  which  Christ  has  gone.  It 
is  the  word  ii(\TiKv66ta  that  determines  the 
meaning  here.)  The  designation,  "Jesus 
the  Son  of  God,"  draws  attention  first  to  the 
man  Jesus  who  was  known  by  that  name  in 
the  flesh,  and  secondly  to  the  "more  ex- 
cellent name,"  above  expatiated  on,  in  virtue 
of  which  he  "hath  passed  through  the 
heavens."  The  conclusion  follows  that  it 
is  the  human  Jesus,  with  his  humanity, 
who,  being  also  the  Son  of  God,  has  so 

HEBREWS. 


through."  There  may  potsibly  (as 
some  think)  be  an  intention  of  contrasting 
him  with  Joshua  ('Ijjo-ous,  ver.  8),  who  won 
the  entrance  into  the  typical  rest.  But  it 
is  not  necessary  to  suppose  this  ;  vers.  8  and 
14  are  at  too  great  a  distance  from  each 
other  to  suggest  a  connection  of  thought 
between  them ;  and  besides  'Iricroiv  occurred 
similarly  at  the  end  of  ch.  iii.  1,  before  any 
mention  of  Joshua.  The  epithet  fieyav  after 
apxiepea  distinguishes  Christ  from  all  other 
high  priests  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  20,  Thv  iroi^iciia 
Tuv  TTpo^irav  n-hv  fifyap).  The  high  priest  of 
the  Law  ppssed  tl  trough  tlie  veil  to  the 
earthly  symbol  of  the  eternal  glory;  the 
"  great  High  Priest "  lias  passed  through 
the  heavens  to  the  eternal  glory  itself.  As 
to  S/ioKoylas,  cf.  on  oh.  iii.  1.  In  considera- 
tion of  having  such  a  High  Priest,  who,  »s  is 
expressed  in  what  follows,  can  both  sympa- 
thize and  succour,  the  readers  are  exhorted 
to  "  hold  fast,"  not  only  their  inward  faith, 
but  their  "  confession  "  of  it  before  men.  A 
besetting  danger  of  the  Hebrew  Christians 
was  that  of  shiinking  from  a  full  and  open 
confession  under  the  influence  of  gainsaying 
or  persecution. 

Ver.  15. — For  we  have  not  an  High  Priest 
which  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
our  infirmities ;  but  one  that  hath  been  in 
all  things  tempted  like  as  we  are,  without 
sin.  The  power  of  sympathy  (a-ufnrae^crat) 
of  our  great  High  Priest  is  not  adduced  to 
di^itinguish  him  from  other  high  priests, 
but  to  express,  in  this  respect,  his  resem- 
blance to  them ;  community  of  nature  and 
feeling  with  those  for  whom  he  mediates 
being  essential  to  the  conception  of  a 
high  priest  (see  ver.  2).  The  sequence  of 
thought  is,  "  Let  us  hold  fast  our  confession, 
not  moved  from  it  by  the  thought  of  the 
superhuman  gi'eatness  of  this  High  Priest 
of  ours,  who  hath  passed  through  the 
heavens;  for  he  can  still  sympathize  with 
our  infirmities  (oo-flcceiais),  having  under- 
gone our  trials."  'AirStVeia  in  the  New 
Testament  denotes  both  bodily  infirmity, 
such  as  disease  (cf.  Matt.  viii.  17 ;  Luke  v. 
15;  John  V.  5;  xL4;  Acts  xxviii.  9 ;  1  Tim. 
V.  23),  and  also  the  general  weakness  uf 
human  nature  as  opposed  to  Divine  power, 
Siva/iis  (of.  Eom.  viii.  26 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  23 ;  2  Cor. 
xii.  5,  9 ;  xiii.  4).  St.  Paul  seems  to  have 
had  regard  to  acBiveia  in  a  comprehensive 
Bense— including  chronic  malady  (his  "  thorn 
in  the  flesh  "),  liability  to  calamities,  "  fear 
and  trembling,"  temptation  to  sin — when 
he  spoke  (2  Cor.  xii.  5,  9)  of  glorying  in  his 
infirmities  that  the  power  of  Christ  might 
rest  upon  him.  With  all  human  aadivfiai, 
of  whatever  kind,  Christ  can  sympathize  in 
virtue  of  his  own  human  experience :  "  Him- 
self took  our  infirmities  (aaBeviias)  and  bare 
our  sicknesses"  (Matt.  viii.  17);  "himsel; 


114 


THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[CH.  IV.  1—16. 


iarmptiBii  ^|  i.(TBfV€(as,  though  ho  now  Uvea 
(K  Suvdufcas  0€oC"  (2  Cor.  xiii.  4).  The  latter 
part  of  the  verse  corresponds  in  meaning 
with  ch.  ii.  18,  but  with  further  delineation 
of  the  temptation  undergone  by  Clirist. 
The  conoluiling  x^p''  a/^-aprlas  (beet  taken 
in  connection  with  icaff  6ixoi6rr\Ta,  wliich  it 
immediately  fuUows,  rather  thun  with  koto 
irdvTtt)  is  not  a  categorical  assertion  of 
Christ's  sinlessness,  though  it  implies  it, 
but  an  exclusion  of  the  idea  of  sin  from  the 
liiieness  spoken  of.  His  temptation  was 
after  the  Miene^s  of  ours,  "  apart  from  sin," 
or  "sin  except."  For  similar  expressions, 
thougli  not  with  definite  reference  to  temp- 
tation, cf.  ch.  ix.  28 ;  vii.  26.  But  how  is 
the  exception  of  sin  to  be  understood  ?  Is 
it  that,  though,  like  us,  tempted,  he,  unlike 
us,  resisted  temiitation  ?  Or  is  it  that  h  is 
sinless  nnture  was  incapable  of  being  even 
solicited  by  sin  ?  Now,  the  verb  ireLpd^ai 
means  sometimes  "  to  tempt  to  sin,"  as  Satan 
or  our  own  lusts  tempt  us  (cf.  1  Cor.  vii.  5; 
1  Thess.  iii.  5;  Jas.  i.  13,  etc.);  and  also 
"  to  prove,"  "  to  try,"  "to  test  faithfulness," 
as  in  1  Cor.  i.  13  ;  ch.  xi.  37,  etc.,  in  wijioli 
sense,  with  relerence  especiiilly  to  afflictive 
trials,  the  noun  neipacrixos  is  commonly  used 
(cf.  Luke  viii,  13;  xxii.  18;  Acts  xx.  19; 
Gal.  i v.  14 ;  1  Pet  iv.  12 ;  Jas.  i.  12).  That 
Christ  was  not  only  subjected  to  neipaa/Mos 
in  this  latter  sense,  but  was  also  directly 
assailed  by  the  tempter  to  Bin  (d  Tretpd(uii>), 
appears  from  the  Gospel  record.  But  here 
comes  iu  a  diHiculty.  There  can,  we  con- 
ceive, be  no  real  temptation  where  there  is 
no  liability  to  the  sin  suggested  by  tempta- 
tion, still  less  where  there  is  no  possibility 
of  sinning.  But  can  we  imagine  any  such 
liability,  or  even  possibility,  in  the  case  of 
the  Divine  and  Sinless  One  ?  If  not,  wherein 
did  the  temptation  consist  ?  How  could  it 
be  at  all  like  ours,  or  one  through  his  own 
experience  of  which  he  can  sympiithize  with 
us  ?  It  was  for  njaintaining,  on  the  strength 
of  such  considerations,  the  theoietic  pecca- 
bility of  Christ,  that  Irving  was  expelled  as 
heretical  finm  the  Presbyterian  communion. 
The  question  has  undoubtedly  its  serious 
difSculties  in  common  with  the  whole  sub- 


ject of  the  Divine  and  hnmsn  In  Christ. 
The  following  thoughts  may,  however,  aid 
solution.  That  Christ,  in  his  human  nature, 
partook  of  all  the  original  affections  of 
humanity  —  hope,  fear,  desire,  joy,  grief, 
indignation,  shrinking  from  suffering,  and 
the  like — is  apparent,  not  only  from  his  life, 
but  also  from  the  fact  that  his  assumption 
of  our  humanity  would  have  otherwise  been 
incomplete.  Such  aifections  are  not  in  them- 
selves sinful ;  they  only  are  so  when,  under 
temptation,  any  of  them  beonme  inordinate, 
and  serve  as  motives  to  transgression  of 
duty.  He,  in  virtue  of  his  Divine  person- 
ality, could  not  through  them  be  seduced 
into  sin;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he 
could  not,  in  his  human  nature,  feel  their 
power  to  seduce,  or  rather  the  power  of  the 
tempter  to  seduce  through  them,  and  thus 
have  personal  experience  of  man's  tempta- 
tion. St.  John  says  of  one  "  bom  of  God  "  that 
he  "  doth  not  comraM;  sin ;  for  his  seed 
remaineth  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin,  because 
he  is  born  of  (Jod  "  (1  John  iii.  9).  He 
does  not  mean  that  the  regenerate  Christian 
is  not  exposed  to,  and  dois  not  feel,  the 
power  of  temptation ;  only  that,  so  far  forth 
as  he  lives  in  the  new  life  Irom  God,  he  is 
proof  against  it ;  he  gives  no  internal  assent 
to  the  seduction  of  the  tempter ;  and  so 
"  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not "  (ver. 
18).  What  is  thus  said  oi  one  "  born  of 
God"  may  be  said  much  more,  and  without 
any  qualification,  of  the  Son  of  God,  without 
denying  that  he  too  experienced  the  power 
of  temptation,  though  altogether  proof 
against  it.  Bengel  says,  "  Quomodo  autem, 
sine  peccato  tentatus,  compati  potest  tentatis 
cum  peccato  1  In  intellectu  multo  acrius 
auima  salvatoris  percepit  imagines  tentantes 
quara  nos  infirrai :  in  voluntate  tarn  celeriter 
incursum  earum  retudit  quam  ignis  aquse 
guttulam  sibi  objectam.  Expertus  est 
igitur  qua  virtute  sit  opus  ad  tentationcs 
vincendas.  Compati  potest  nam  et  sine 
peccato,  et  tamen  vere  est  tentatus." 

Ver.  16. — Let  us  therefore  come  boldly 
(literally,  with  boldness)  unto  the  throne  of 
giaoe,  that  we  may  obtain  meroy,  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  seed. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 11. — ITke  gospel  rest.  In  this  passage  the  writer  explains  what  is  to  be 
anderstood  by  the  "rest"  to  which  God  had  invited  his  ancient  penple,  and  urges  the 
Hebrews  of  his  own  day  to  strive  to  attain  it  as  the  most  Divine  of  all  blessings. 

I,  The  eest  of  God.  "  His  rest"  (ver.  1);  "  my  rest"  (vers.  3,  5).  Rest  belongs 
essentially  to  God,  for  he  is  all-perfect  and  self-harmonious.  Being  infinite  in  purity 
and  love,  in  knowledge  and  power,  he  is  the  God  of  peace,  and  dwells  in  undisturbed 
repose.  The  rest  of  G-ud  is  mirrored  in  the  institution  of  the  sabbath  (ver.  4),  which 
commemorates  his  satisfaction  at  the  close  of  his  world-making,  when  he  saw  that  hi.s 
works  "  answered  his  great  idea,"  and  were  "  very  good."    God's  own  sabbath  rest  "  is 


OH.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  116 

the  lubstratum  and  basis  of  all  peace  and  rest — the  pledge  of  an  ultimate  and  Batisfactory 
purpose  in  creation  "  (Dr.  Saphir). 

II.  The  rest  of  God  promised  to  man.  This  "  promise  "  (ver.  1)  is  the  result 
of  God's  fatherly  love.  For  man,  although  he  has  fallen  from  his  rest,  is  still  the  child 
of  God,  beloved  in  spite  of  his  sad  apostasy,  and  pitied  on  account  of  liis  weary  moiling 
in  the  pursuits  of  sin.  The  sabbath  instituted  at  the  creation  was  not  this  rest  (vers. 
3 — 5),  but  only  a  sign  and  seal  of  it.  Neither  did  the  possession  of  the  promised  land 
involve  the  realization  of  the  promised  rest  (vers.  6 — 9)  ;  for  Israel  had  never  lor  any 
time  a  restful  life  in  Canaan,  and  King  David,  nearly  five  hundred  years  after  the 
Hebrew  occupation,  speaks  of  entrance  into  God's  rest  as  a  blessing  which  was  still 
future  (vers.  7,  8).  However,  the  settlement  of  Israel  in  the  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey  was  an  adumbration  of  the  gospel  rest.  And  thus  God  himself  said  of  Zion, 
"  This  is  my  rest  for  ever." 

III.  The  best  of  God  realized  in  Christ.    The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Joshua  of  our 
.  confession.     He  was  indeed  the  Hope  of  the  Jewish  Church  also  in  the  time  of  the  first 

Joshua,  whether  the  people  realized  him  to  be  such  or  not.  If  we  follow  him  as  our 
"  Leader  and  Commander,"  our  hearts,  even  in  this  weary,  changeful  world,  will  enti^r  into 
true  spiritual  rest  (ver.  3).  Christ  brings  us  rest  from  guilt,  rest  from  self-righteous 
striving,  rest  from  wants,  rest  from  fears,  rest  amidst  life's  burdens.  In  his  "  obedience 
unto  death  "  he  laboured  and  was  heavy  laden  that  he  might  give  us  rest.  If  we  stay 
our  minds  on  him,  we  shall  be  "kept  in  perfect  peace  j "  if  we  trust  in  him,  we  sliall 
learn  to  rejoice  that  "  the  lines  are  fallen  unto  us  in  pleasant  places,  and  that  we  have 
a  goodly  heritage." 

IV.  The  rest  or  God  consummated  in  heaven.  Although  God  has  provided 
for  us  even  in  this  world  perfect  rest  in  Christ,  the  limitntion  of  our  nature  prevents 
us  meanwhile  from  fully  enjoying  it ;  and  our  besetting  sins  may  continue  until  the 
end  to  disturb  our  tranquillity.  But  in  the  heavenly  world  the  saints  shall  be  set  free 
for  ever  from  sin  and  temptation,  from  anxiety  and  sorrow.  They  shall  enter  there 
into  the  perfect  sabbath-rest  of  God,  and  shall  dwell  in  it  throughout  eternity  (ver.  9). 
His  love  shall  abide  upon  his  people^  and  their  perfected  love  to  him  shall  spring  up 
within  them  unto  everlasting  life. 

In  conclusion,  if  we  would  acquire  and  possess  this  inheritance,  we  must :  1.  Cherish 
godly  "  Tear  "  (ver.  1).  '2.  Cultivate  faith  in  Christ  (ver.  3).  3.  Be  "  united  by  faith 
with  I  hem  that  hear  "  (ver.  2) — the  Calebs  and  the  Joshuas.  4.  "  Give  diligence  to  enter 
into  "  the  eternal  rest  (ver.  11)  by  "  following  the  Lord  fully." 

Vers.  12,  13. — The  power  of  the  Divine  Word.  The  writer  urges  here  that  If  the 
Word  of  God  condemned  the  unbelieving  Jews  in  the  Sinaitic  desert,  it  will  judge  and 
condemn  us  also,  should  we  prove  unfaithful.  The  original  reference  is,  of  course,  not 
to  the  written  Word ;  but,  in  applying  the  passage  to  ourselves,  we  can  think  only  of 
the  promises  and  warnings  of  Holy  Scripture. 

I.  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  WoRD  OF  GoD.  (Vcr.  12.)  The  representation  is  very 
vivid  and  impressive.  The  Word  is,  as  it  were,  a  magistrate ;  it  judges  actions,  sifts 
motives,  pronounces  sentences.  As  such  it  is :  1.  Living.  It  is  "  the  breath  of  his 
lips" — God-breathed;  and  so  it  is  never  "a  dead  letter,"  but  always  quick  with 
spiritual  life,  and  ready  to  quicken.  What  Luther  said  of  Paul's  writings  is  true  of 
all  Scripture :  its  words  "  are  not  dead  words ;  they  are  living  creatures,  and  have  hands 
and  feet."  2.  Energetic.  The  actual  power  of  the  Word  is  as  great  as  the  authority 
which  it  claims.  It  is,  indeed,  the  supreme  power  among  men.  In  the  moral  sphere  it 
dominates  the  thought  of  the  world.  To  the  individual  soul  it  is  like  "  a  fire  "  and 
"  a  hammer."  It  is  "sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword" — two-edged,  because  it  both 
punishes  as  a  sword  and  heals  as  a  surgeon's  knife.  3.  Heart-dissecting.  The  Word 
pierces  into  the  deepest  recesses  of  man's  being.  It  pricks  men  in  their  hearts.  It  parts 
"soul  and  spirit,"  "joints  and  marrow;"  i.e.  it  separates  the  animal  soul  from  the 
angel-spirit  in  human  nature.  It  gives  sensibility  and  power  to  the  heavenward  side 
of  our  being ;  and  eriables  us  to  distinuuish  what  in  us  is  carnal  and  must  be  subdued. 
It  marks  off  to  the  believer's  consciousness  "  the  works  of  the  iiesh  "  from  "  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit."  4.  All-discerning.  The  sacred  writers  evince  a  profounder  knowledge 
of  human  nature  than  even  Shakespeare  or  Goethe.    God's  Word  ia  the  touchstone  of 


lie  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oa  rr.  1— 1«. 

eharacter.  Bather  It  Is  an  eye  which  detects  the  true  spiritual  condition  of  every  one 
upon  whom  it  gazes.  That  awful  eye  never  closes.  It  reads  tha  most  secret  thoughts 
and  desires  of  the  soul,  and  pronounces  judgment  upon  the  impenitent  for  doom.  Even 
the  manner  In  which  a  man  treats  the  promises  and  threatenings  of  the  Bible  shows 
what  that  man  ig, 

•  Eye  of  God's  Word  I  where'er  we  tant. 
Ever  upon  us  I    Thy  keen  gaze 
Can  all  the  depths  of  sin  discern. 
Unravel  every  bosom's  maze. 

•Who  that  has  felt  thy  glance  of  dread 

Thrill  through  his  heart's  remotest  celli^ 
About  his  path,  about  his  bed, 

Can  doubt  what  spirit  in  thee  dwells  ?  " 

(Keble.) 

n.  Thb  sboret  op  its  powbb.  (Ver.  13.)  Holy  Scripture  is  thns  energetic  and 
efficacious  because  it  is  the  Word  of  the  Omniscient.  It  derives  from  him  "  who  knows 
what  is  in  man  "  its  subtle  insight  into  character,  and  its  deep  hold  upon  the  world's 
life.  The  all-seeing  Judge,  "with  whom  we  have  to  do,"  has  invested  his  Word  with 
its  marvellous  magi.-terial  power.  As  the  teachings  of  Scripture  are  an  exact  transcript 
of  the  nature  and  will  of  God,  even  the  bare  Word  itself  exercises  as  a  Book  transcendent 
moral  influence  over  men.  But,  when  accompanied  with  the  supernatural  energy  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  upon  which  it  depends  for  its  efficacy  as  a  means  of  grace,  Holy  Scripture 
becomes  the  very  omnipotence  of  the  Omnipotent,  to  arouse,  convict,  and  condemn, 
as  well  as  to  comfort,  sanctify,  and  save. 

CoKCLusiON.  1.  Let  ministers  "  preach  the  Word."  The  faithful  exhibition  of  the 
truth  will  lay  bare  the  hearts  of  those  who  hear,  and  sometimes  so  thoroughly  that 
individuals  will  conclude  that  their  experiences  must  have  been  reported  beforehand 
to  the  preacher.  And  without  solid  spiritual  instruction  no  Church  will  receive  blessing 
or  power.  2.  Let  all  hearers  of  the  gospel  "tremble  at  the  Word."  Every  human 
heart  should  submit  with  holy  awe  to  its  inspection,  and  allow  its  teachings  to  determine 
belief,  mould  character,  and  control  conduct. 

Ters.  14 — 16. — Christ's  sympathy  and  help.  This  passage  is  one  of  the  great  sign- 
posts of  the  Epistle.  In  ch.  i.,  ii.  the  writer  has  discussed  the  superiority  of  Christ  as 
a  King  to  angels ;  and  in  ch.  iii.,  iv.  his  superiority  as  a  Prophet  to  Moses.  Ue  now 
proceeds  to  discourse  more  at  length  of  his  superiority  as  a  Priest  to  Aaron. 

L  A  TWOFOLD  STATEMENT  OF  DocTBiNB.  This  double  Statement  concerns  the 
cardinal  truth  of  the  Saviour's  priesthood.  1.  Its  outer  aspect.  (Ver.  14.)  Fallen, 
sinful  man  needs  a  priest  to  act  for  him  before  God,  and  the  world  has  sought  for  one 
long  and  earnestly.  The  Jewish  religion  embodied  an  elaborate  priesthood;  and  its 
types  have  at  length  been  stereotyped  under  the  Christian  disjiensation.  Every  believer 
is  now  a  priest  unto  God ;  and  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Arch-Priest  of  the  Church.  The 
author  here  encourages  the  Hebrew  converts  to  steadfastness,  by  reminding  them  of 
the  reality  and  majesty  of  Christ's  priesthood.  He  is  "  a  great  High  Priest" — the  Arche- 
type and  Antitype  of  the  Jewish  pontiff.  His  majesty  appears  when  we  consider :  (1) 
Where  he  is.  Ho  "hath  passed  through  the  heavens."  Aaron  went  once  a  year 
through  the  blue  veil  into  the  sanctum  sanctorum  of  the  tabernacle;  but  our  High 
Priest,  after  offering  up  himself  as  an  expiatory  sacrifice  in  the  outer  court  of  this  world, 
has  passed  through  the  blue  curtain  of  the  sky  into  the  heaven  of  heaven.  He  sits 
officially  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  wearing  both  the  priestly  mitre  and  the  kingly  diadem. 
(2)  Who  he  is.  "  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God."  His  greatness  is  personal,  as  well  as  official. 
He  is  a  real  man,  bearing  the  human  name,  Jesus ;  but  he  is  at  the  same  time  the  true 
God,  the  possessor  of  a  Divine  and  eternal  sonship.  2.  Its  inner  aspect,  (Ver.  15.) 
This  verse  oi)ens  up  before  us  the  secret  workings  of  the  Redeemer's  heart.  It  speaks 
•f  his  priestly  sympathy.  Sympathy  is  a  great  power  in  human  life.  It  bulks  so 
largely  that  an  eminent  Scottish  thinker,  Adam  Smith,  makes  it  the  basis  of  his  whole 
system  of  morals.    Now,  says  the  apostle,  the  Saviour's  unparalleled  greatness  does  not 


«H.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLK  TO  THE  HEBKEWS.  Ill 

by  any  means  render  him  incapable  of  sympathy.  Although  he  has  passed  throngh  the 
heavens,  "  heaven  lies  about  us,"  and  thus  he  is  very  near  us.  Although  he  left  the 
world  nineteen  hundred  years  ago,  he  is  yet  "  with  us  alway."  Although  he  is  the  Son 
of  God,  he  has  a  human  soul — a  soul  intensely  human — which  underwent  a  complete 
curriculum  of  trial,  and  graduated  to  its  glory  through  suffering.  Although  he  was 
"  witliout  sin,"  bis  earthly  life  was  a  life  of  constant  temptation,  as  well  as  of  constant 
and  culminating  sorrow  because  of  sin.  So  he  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities" — our  infirmities  of  health,  of  temper,  of  devotion,  of  resolution,  of  service. 
He  knows  experimentally  the  precise  force  of  every  evil  suggestion  which  may  try  us. 
As  the  Head  of  the  Church,  he  is  its  great  Nerve-centre ;  and  he  that  toucheth  any 
one  of  his  people  "  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye." 

II.  A  TWOFOLD  ENFORCEMENT  OF  DnTT.  ,  The  double  exhortation  corresponds  to 
the  two  aspects  of  the  doctrine  respectively.  The  apostle  exhorts  to:  1.  Steadfast 
confession.  (Ver.  14.)  The  early  Hebrew  Christians  found  it  very  difficult  openly  to 
confess  Christ ;  for  their  unbelieving  countrymen  treated  all  who  did  so  as  renegades 
from  Israel,  and  apostates  from  Israel's  God.  But  fidelity  to  the  truth  was  necessary 
I  hen,  and  it  is  equally  necessary  now.  Every  believer  is  bound  publicly  to  confess 
Christ.  He  must  do  so  for  Christ's  sake,  for  his  own  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  his 
fellow-men.  2.  Constant  supplication.  (Ver.  16.)  To  the  universe  at  large  God's 
throne  is  a  throne  of  majesty  ;  to  sinners,  it  is  a  throne  of  judgment ;  to  believers,  the 
presence  of  Christ  at  God's  right  hand  makes  it  a  "  throne  of  grace."  And  the  thought 
oi  our  High  Priest's  tender  sympathy  should  fill  us  with  holy  confidence  to  go  daily 
and  hourly  into  the  Divine  presence  for  the  supplies  which  we  need.  What  a  joy  to 
know  that  we  have  a  Friend  at  court,  and  that  he  is  our  Sovereign's  Son  1  As  often  as 
we  look  up  to  his  open,  loving  face,  we  may  use  all  "liberty  of  speech"  ia  asking 
pardoning  mercy  for  the  past  and  helping  grace  for  the  future. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOESL 

Ver.  \,—Fear  of  failing  to  realize  the  promised  rest.  "  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,  a 
promise  being  left,"  etc.     Let  us  notice — 

I.  The  great  promise.  "  A  promise  being  left  of  entering  into  his  rest."  Later 
in  the  chapter  (vers.  6 — 9)  the  writer  shows  from  the  Old  Testament  that  such  a 
promise  was  left  to  Christians.  The  rest  promised  is  God's  rest-r-"  his  rest ; "  because  : 
1.  It  oorresponds  with  his.  (1)  It  is  not  the  rest  of  inactivity,  but  of  harmonious 
activities.  "  My  Father,"  said  Christ,  "  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  The  highest 
rest  is  not  in  quiescence,  but  in  unwearying  and  joyfd  endeavours ;  and  it  is  illustrated, 
not  by  the  stillness  and  silence  of  the  sepulchre,  but  by  the  swift  and  serene  move- 
uienti  of  the  planets. 

«  Absence  of  oconpation  is  not  rest ; 
A  mind  quite  vacant  is  a  mind  diitrest." 

(Oowper.) 

Robertson  well  says,  "  In  creation  the  rest  of  God  is  exhibited  as  a  sense  of  power 
which  nothing  wearies."  (2)  It  is  not  material,  but  spiritual;  not  of  the  senses,  but 
of  the  soul.  -  He  who  has  this  rest  will  have  peace  in  his  spirit  even  when  sorely  pained 
in  his  body.  Like  St.  Taul,  he  may  be  enabled  even  to  glory  in  physical  "  infirmities, 
that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  "  him.  (3)  It  is  not  in  circumstances,  but  in 
the  being.  Circumstances  are  variable,  uncertain,  unreliable;  no  real  and  abiding 
rest  can  spring  from  them  or  depend  upon  them.  But  the  rest  which  is  promised  in 
the  sacred  Word  is  not  dependent  upon  circumstances  or  upon  any  outward  things. 
It  is  %  deep  inward  rest  even  amidst  outward  conflict. 

"  And  central  peace  subsisting  at  the  heart 
Of  endless  agitation." 

(Wordsworth.) 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  me  ye  may  have  peace.  In  the  world 
ye  have  tribulation,"  etc.  2.  It  ia  conferred  by  him.  God  is  the  Giver  of  this  rest. 
He  bestows  it  (1)  throngh  the  mediation  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.    Through  him  he 


118  THE  EPIBTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  it.  1—16. 

removes  the  hindrances  to  this  rest ;  t.g.  guilt,  servile  fear,  distmst  of  God,  etc.  And 
he  inspires  the  spiritual  conditions  and  constituents  of  this  rest ;  e,g.  the  assurance  of 
pardon,  the  possession  of  peace,  the  exercise  of  confidence  in  Gxid,  etc.  "  Come  unto 
me,  all  ye  that  Iai>our  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,"  etc. ;  "  Peace 
I  leave  with  you ;  my  peace  I  give  unto  you,"  etc.  Gk)d  bestows  this  rest  (2)  by  the 
agency  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  He  brings  the  redemptive  powers  of  the  go3[)el  into 
relation  with  the  hearts' of  men.  "He  shall  take  of  mine,  said  our  Lord,  "and  shall 
declare  it  unto  you."    How  great  and  gracious  is  this  promise ! 

XL  The  gbate  posbibiutt,  "  Lest  any  one  of  you  should  seem  to  have  come  short 
of  it."  The  grave  possibility  is  that  when  the  great  testing-time  shall  come  any  one 
should  be  found  without  a  personal  participation  in  the  promised  rest.  The  word 
"seem"  does  not  indicate  the  apparent -as  distinguished  from  the  real;  but  is,  as 
Alford  says,  "  a  mild  term,  conveying  indeed  a  sterner  intimation  behind  it."  But 
liow  should  any  one  come  short  of  the  promised  rest?  Clearly  by  unbelief,  even  as 
the  Israelites  who  left  Egypt  came  short  of  the  rest  of  Canaan.  To  these  Hebrew 
Christians  there  was  more  than  a  possibility  of  the  failure  of  their  faith  in  Jesus  Clirist. 
His  system  had  no  imposing  ceremonial,  no  pomp  or  pageantry  to  commend  it,  as 
J  udaism  had.  He  himself  was  despised  and  rejected  by  the  conventionally  and  officially 
great  and  noble,  and  was  condemned  and  cruciBed.  The  claims  of  Christianity  upon 
tiie  acceptance  of  men  were  spiritual,  and  could  only  be  spiritually  discerned.  Hence 
the  danger  of  those  to  whom  the  text  was  primarily  addressed.  And  still  men  are  in 
danger  of  coming  short  of  the  attainment  of  the  great  promise.  This  peril  arises  from 
the  temptation  to  seek  satisfaction  in  visible  and  material  things  rather  than  in  invisible 
and  spiritual  things ;  or  to  seek  for  ease  and  happiness  rather  than  for  peace  and  rest ; 
or  to  seek  for  rest  in  the  creature  rather  than  in  the  Creator.  Or  the  danger  may  arise 
from  the  temptation  to  absorption  in  present  pursuits  without  due  consideration  of 
t,heir  relation  to  the  future  and  the  etemaL 

in.  The  solemn  exhortation.  "Let  us  therefore  fear,"  etc.  This  fear  is  not 
synonymous  with  dread  or  terror;  but  it  indicates  a  humble,  reverent,  watchful, 
prayerful  spirit.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  eta  How 
would  this  fear  guard  one  against  coming  short  of  the  promised  rest  ?  1.  This  fear 
is  the  antithesis  and  corrective  of  self-will  and  presumption.  In  humility  there  is 
security.  "Gird  yourselves  with  humility;  for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth 
grace  to  the  humble."  2.  Hiis  fear  mil  lead  to  wariness  and  watchfulness.  It  will 
incite  to  the  exercise  of  caution  and  care.  3.  This  fear  will  lead  to  distrust  of  self  and 
confidence  in  Qod.  "  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence ;  and  his  children 
shall  have  a  place  of  refuge."  And  he  who  puts  his  trust  in  God  shall  not  fail  to  attain 
unto  the  promised  rest.    "  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,"  etc. — W.  J. 

Ver.  3. — Rest  a  present  possession  of  the  Christian  Idiever.  "  For  wo  which  have 
believed  do  enter  into  rest."  The  use  of  the  present  tense  here  ("  do  enter  ")  has  caused 
some  difficulty  to  some  expositors.  Alford  explains  the  test  thus,  that  they  are  to 
enter  into  the  rest  who  at  the  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  shall  be  found  to 
have  believed.  Stuart  points  out  that  in  "  the  idiom  of  the  Bible,  the  present  tense  is 
often  used  as  a  universal  tense,  embracing  time  past,  present,  and  future."  It  is 
indisputable  that  the  words  of  the  text,  taken  alone,  suggest  the  subject  which  is  stated 
above.  And  if  further  justification  of  our  application  of  the  text  be  needed,  we  may 
adduce  two  facts.  1.  That  our  Lord  promises  rest — and,  as  we  understand  him,  present 
rest — to  those  who  believe  in  him  (Matt.  xi.  28 — 30).  2.  That  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  admits  the  soul  into  rest  here  and  now  is  a  fact  of  Christian  consciousness.  So 
we  proceed  to  consider  the  rest  which  is  the  present  privilege  and  possession  of  those 
who  intelligently  and  heartily  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  Rest  fbom  the  guilt  and  burden  of  bin  is  attained  by  faith  in  tub 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  reveals  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  towards  the  sinner.  He 
delivers  those  who  trust  him  from  the  condemnation  of  the  holy  Law  which  they  have 
broken  (John  iii.  14 — 18 ;  Rom.  viii.  1).  He  freely  and  fully  forgave  the  sinners  who 
penitently  approached  unto  him  (Matt.  ix.  2 ;  Luke  vii.  48 — 50).  He  imparts  freedom 
from  the  bondage  of  sin  (John  viii.  31 — 36;  Rom.  vi.  12 — ^22).  And  from  this 
forgiveness  and  freedom  from  sin  there  follows  rest  from  the  dread  of  the  punishmeni 


CH.IV.  1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  119 

of  Bin.    Thus,  as  regards  the  guilt  and  bondage  and  punishment  of  sin,  they  who  believe 
in  the  Saviour  "  do  enter  into  rest." 

II.  Best  from  the  pbbssurk  op  temporal  anxieties  is  attained  by  faith  in 
THE  Lord  Jesub  Christ.  There  is  much  of  mental  disquietude  and  distress  amongst 
men  as  to  the  possibilities  of  their  physical  life  and  their  temporal  circumstances. 
What  if  their  health  should  fail  1  if  heavy  losses  should  befall  them !  if  gaunt  poverty 
or  dreary  destitution  should  overtake  them!  Now,  our  Lord's  teaching  as  to  the 
paternal  providence  of  God,  when  it  is  truly  believed,  delivers  the  soul  from  these 
distressing  apprehensions  and  corroding  cares  (see  Matt.  vi.  25 — 34 ;  z.  29 — 31 ;  Luke 
xii.  6,  7,  22—31). 

III.  Rest  from  the  disturbance  and  distress  of  belf-will  is  attained  by 
FAITH  IN  THE  LoRD  Jesus  Chbist.  Much  of  life's  uurest  and  sorrow  springs  from 
the  absence  of  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  God  ;  much  of  positive  distress  arises  from  the 
opposition  of  our  will  to  his  holy  will.  Faith  in  our  Lord  delivers  from  this.  His 
revelation  of  the  Divine  fatherhood,  when  it  is  heartily  accepted,  leads  to  acquiescence 
in  the  Father's  will,  and  that  is  rest,  as  he  himself  teaches  (Matt  xL  25—30).  We  are 
led  into  the  truth  that 

•  Onr  wills  are  cum,  we  know  not  how; 
Out  wills  are  ours,  to  make  them  thine." 

(TennygoD.) 
And  then  into  the  higher  experience  of 

•'The  heart  at  rert 
When  all  without  tumultuous  soems— 
That  trusts  a  higher  wiU,  and  dcema 
That  higher  will,  not  mine,  the  best 

"  O  blessed  life — ^heart  mind,  and  soul, 
From  self-borii  aims  and  wishes  free, 
In  all  at  one  with  Deity, 
And  loyal  to  the  Lord's  controL" 

(MatKM.) 

IV.  Rest  from  unsatisfied  affections  n  attained  by  faith  nr  the  Lobd 
Jesus  Christ.  One  of  the  deepest  needs  of  the  human  heart  is  to  love  and  to  be  loved 
in  return.  Unreciprocated  and  misdirected  affections  cause  some  of  the  bitterest  griefs 
of  human  life.  Our  Lord  summons  us  to  set  our  supreme  affections  upon  God  (Mark 
xii.  29,  30).  As  the  Object  of  our  highest  and  holiest  love,  God  satisfies,  inspires,  and 
delights  the  soul ;  for  he  is  supremely  good  and  beautifuL  He  reciprocates  our 
offectiona ;  be  ia  unchangeable,  and  he  ever  livetb. 

*Oh  for  that  choicest  blesBing 
Of  living  in  thy  love. 
And  thus  on  earth  possessing 
The  peace  of  heaven  above! 
Oh  for  the  bliss  that  by  it 

The  soul  securely  knowi| 
The  holy  calm  andi  quiet 
Of  faith's  serene  repose  I " 

(MonselL) 

V.  Rest  from  the  sorest  borrows  of  bereavement  and  froh  the  dread  of 
death  is  attained  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Concerning  our  beloved 
departed,  "  Jesus  saith.  Thy  brother  shall  rise  again.  ...  1  am  the  Resurrection  and 
the  Life,"  etc.  He  has  taken  the  sting  from  death  and  the  victory  from  the  grave 
(1  Cor.  XV.  54—57).  "  Our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and 
iucoiruption  to  light  throu^^h  the  gospel."    And  now  to  the  genuine  Christian 

"  There  is  no  death  t    What  seems  so  is  transitiODa 
This  life  of  mortal  breath 
Is  but  a  suburb  of  the  life  elysian. 
Whose  portal  we  call  death." 

(Longfellow,) 


120  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWSw  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 

To  enter  into  and  enjoy  this  spiritual  rest  Is  a  privilege  available  to  as  here  and  now. 
"  For  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  that  rest." — W.  J. 

Ver.  9,— Best  a  future  portion  of  the  Christian  believer.  *  There  remainetb 
therefore  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God."  We  have  already  spoken  of  the  rest  which  is 
the  present  privilege  ot  the  Christian;  "We  which  have  believed  do  enter  into,  that 
rest.  But  that  does  not  satisfy  all  our  desire  and  aspiration.  We  crave  a  deeper, 
fuller,  more  perfect  rest  than  we  enjoy  here.  The  higher  life  at  present  is  one  of  intense 
and,  at  times,  almost  painful  longing.  Without  the  prospect  of  somelhing  better  than 
our  present  best,  our  life  would  not  be  satisf.ictory.  "  There  remainetb  therefore  a  rest 
[a  keeping  of  sabbath]  for  the  people  of  God."  This  rest  which  is  reserved  is  richer, 
fuller,  more  glorious  than  that  which  is  at  present  realized.  The  words  used  to  express 
them  suggest  this.  The  chief  meaning  of  KaTaTroucrij  (ver.  3)  is  cessation,  as  from  work, 
pain,  etc.  The  rest  which  it  indicates  is  mainly  negative.  But  <roj3;3oT«r/»^i  (ver.  9) 
indicates  a  sabbath  festal  celebration,  a  holy  keeping  of  sabbath  ;  it  comprises  the  rest 
of  ver.  3  and  considerably  more.  Let  us  consider  what  this  sabbath  rest  which  remains 
for  the  people  of  God  consists  in. 

L  In  the  absence  op  all  those  disturbino  influbnces  which'  chaeacterizb 
ODB  pbbsent  state.  This  is  the  negative  aspect  of  the  rest,  or  what  we  shall  rest 
from.  1.  Rest  from  the  struggle  against  sin.  The  people  of  God  in  heaven  are  more 
than  conquerors  over  sin  and  Satan  "through  him  that  loved"  them.  The  great 
tempter,  and  solicitation  to  sin,  will  be  entirely  and  eternally  excluded  from  that  bright 
and  blessed  world.  "  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth,"  etc. 
2.  Best  from  suffering,  hoth  physical  and  mental.  "  They  shall  hunger  no  more, 
neither  thirst  any  more  "  (Rev.  vii.  16, 17).  "  The  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick." 
"  And  God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  their  eyes,"  etc.  (Rev.  xxi.  4).  3.  Best  from 
ike  mystery  and  burden,  of  life.  In  our  present  state  there  are  seasons  of  darkness  and 
perplexity  when  trust  and  hope  in  God  involve  painful  effort  to  some  souls.  Such 
efforts  will  not  be  demanded  in  the  blessed  hereafter.  Much  that  to  us  is  now  obscure 
will  then  be  perfectly  clear.  The  pure  light  of  eternity  will  chase  away  the  grim 
shadows  of  time ;  and  what  is  to  us  unknown  in  heaven  will  awaken  neither  dread  nor 
doubt.  4.  Best  from  toilsome,  anxious,  discouraging  labour.  No  more  men  and 
women  and  children  compelled  to  labour  on  long  after  their  physical  powers  are  tired 
out.  No  more  forcing  of  the  brain  to  continued  effort  when  it  already  aches  wearily  by 
reason  of  its  toils.  No  further  summons  to  works'of  social  or  moral  amelioration,  which 
must  be  prosecuted  despite  difficulty,  discouragement,  opposition,  and  seeming  failure. 
The  sabbath  rest  which  remainetb  for  the  people  of  God  precludes  all  these  things. 

II.  Im  the  presence  op  all  the  harmonious  and  blessed  conditions  and  oie- 
otTMSTANOES  WHICH  ODE  KATCBE  CRAVES.  This  is  the  positivc  aspect  of  our  rest,  or 
what  we  shall  rest  in.  1.  In  the  conformity  of  our  character  to  that  of  Ood.  Purity 
is  peace.  Holiness  is  rest.  The  perfectly  holy  is  the  infinitely  and  ever-blessed  God. 
The  saints  in  heaven  "  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  ol 
the  Lamb."  Nor  is  their  holiness  the  mere  negation  of  moral  evil,  but  a  positive  and 
active  condition  of  their  being.  Their  thoughts,  sympathies,  aspirations,  services,  are 
all  true  and  pure  and  benevolent.  They  are  spiritually  transformed  into  the  image  of 
the  Lord.  And  in  this  there  is  rest  and  blessedness.  "  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I 
awake  with  thy  likeness."  2.  In  the  progress  of  our  being  towards  Ood.  Stagnation 
is  not  rest.  Stationariness  is  not  rest;  it  is  stillness,  inaction,  but  not  rest.  But 
harmonious  growth  is  both  restful  and  joyous.  One  of  the  constituents  of  the  future 
rest  of  the  good  is  growth — growth  in  mind  and  heart  and  spirit,  in  thought,  and 
affection,  and  reverence,  and  holy  action.  In  endless  approximation  to  the  inflnitely 
Holy  One  will  man  find  the  rest  and  perfection  of  his  being.  3.  In  the  continuous  service 
of  Ood.  As  this  rest  is  a  "  keeping  of  sabbath,"  it  cannot  mean  a  complete  cessation 
of  activity.  Inactivity  is  not  rest.  "  Sloth  yieldeth  not  happiness ;  the  bliss  q£  a  spirit 
is  action." 

■  An  angel's  wing  would  droop  if  long  at  rest, 
And  God  himself,  inactive,  were  no  longer  blest." 

So  we  read  of  the  bright  future  that  "  his  servants  shall  serve  him,  and  they  shall  see 


OH.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  121 

his  &ce.*  "  They  are  before  the  throne  of  God ;  and  they  serve  him  day  and  night  in 
his  temple."  T.  Aquinas  speaks  of  this  service  as  videre,  amare,  et  laudare.  But  it 
must  not  be  limited  to  these  exercises.  Enough  for  us  to  know  that  there  will  be 
services  for  us  to  render — continuous  services,  blessed  services,  and  all  of  them  in  the 
service  of  our  God.  The  rest  and  joy  of  this  service  will  appear  if  we  consider :  (1)  Its 
inspiration.  Love  to  God  is  the  impulse  of  every  action,  and  transforms  every  duty 
into  a  delight.  (2)  Its  nature.  Every  service  will  be  sacred.  The  spirit  in  which  it 
is  done  will  make  all  the  work  religious,  worshipful.  (3)  Its  conditions.  Freedom 
from  all  obstruction,  from  all  restraint,  and  from  all  fatigue.  4.  In  conscious  and 
continuotu  communion  with  God.  "  He  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his 
people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  their  God,  .  .  .  And  they  shall  see  his  face." 
"  We  shall  see  him  even  m  he  is."  All  the  redeemed  in  heaven  are  through  Christ 
perfectly  one  with  God  in  sympathies,  purposes,  principles,  and  joys.  God  alone  can 
satisfy  them.  In  him  they  rest  with  deepest,  holiest  blessedness.  They  are  "  for  ever 
with  the  Lord."  "In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy;  at  thy  right  hand  there  are 
pleasures  for  evermore."  This  rest  is  "reserved  for  the  people  of  God,"  Only  the 
sincere  and  hearty  believers  in  Jesus  Christ  will  ever  enter  upon  it.  The  character  of 
the  rest  is  conclusive  as  to  this  question.  To  ezpeiieuce  the  perfect  rest  of  the  glorious 
future  we  must  first  experience  the  spiritual  rest  which  is  available  unto  us  at 
present.— W.  J. 

Ver,  12.— Characteristics  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  "  For  the  Word  of  God  is  quick 
and  powerful,"  etc.  We  take  "  the  Word  of  God  "  here  as  meaning  the  sacred  Scriptures, 
and  the  text  as  presenting  to  our  notice  several  characteristics  of  them. 

I.  Thb  vitality  of  God's  Word.  "  The  Word  of  God  is  quick,"  or, "  living.''  Some- 
times the  written  Word  is  spoken  of  aa  a  "  dead  letter ; "  but  with  at  least  equal  pro- 
]  iriety  it  may  be  spoken  of  as  a  "  living  Word."  "  The  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and 
abidetji.  For  all  flesh  is  as  grass,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  23 — 25).  We  mention  three  evidences 
of  the  vitality  of  the  Word  of  God.  1.  Its  continued  and  unimpaired  existence 
notwithstanding  innumerable,  persistent,  and  powerful  assaults.  If  these  writings  had 
not  been  instinct  with  a  Divine  life  they  would  have  been  destroyed  long  ere  this. 
2.  Iti  adaptation  to  aU  ages  and  all  peoples.  This  book  is  as  true  and  living  for  us 
to-day  as  it  was  for  the  men  of  the  second  century  of  our  era ;  it  is  as  applicable  to  the 
European  as  to  the  Asiatic.  3.  Its  inexhaustille  interest.  Like  God's  book  of  nature, 
it  is  endless  in  its  significance  and  undiminishing  in  its  attractiveness.  Dr.  Payne 
Smith  has  well  said,  "  For  nearly  eighteen  centuries  men  have  thought  and  written 
upon  that  one  Book,  and  if  for  eighteen  more  centuries  men  so  write,  yet  will  there 
still  remain  much  that  calls  for  fresh  examination  and  fuller  inquiry ;  new  knowledge 
to  be  won,  old  truths  to  be  better  and  more  fully  understood.  The  books  of  men  have 
their  day,  and  then  grow  obsolete.  God's  Word  is  like  himself, '  the  same  yesterday, 
and  to-day,  and  for  ever.'  Time  passes  over  it,  but  it  ages  not.  Its  power  is  as  fresh 
as  if  God  spake  it  but  yesterday." 

II.  The  bnebqt  of  God's  Woed.  "  Quick,  and  powerful,"  or  wtive,  or  energizing. 
This  power  is  seen :  1.  In  the  conviction  of  men  of  sin.  "  Is  not  my  Word  like  a 
hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock  in  pieces?"  Its  exhibition  of  infinite  mercy  has 
melted  many  a  stubborn  soul  into  genuine  penitence.  2.  In  the  conversion  of  sinners. 
"  The  Law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul."  It  is  the  instrument  of  spiritual 
regeneration.  "Being  bom  again,  not  of  cori'uptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the 
Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth."  3.  In  the  correction  of  faults  and  errors. 
"  Every  Scripture  inspired  of  God  is-  also  profitable  for  teaching,  for  reproof,  for 
correction,"  etc,  4.  In  the  consolation  of  the  mourner.  "  Whatsoever  things  were 
written  aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning,  that  through  patience  and  through 
comfort  of  the  Scriptures  we  might  have  hope."  "  He  that  prophesieth  speaketh  unto 
men  edification,  and  comfort,  and  consolation,"  "Comfort  one  another  with  these 
words,"  6,  In  the  sanctification  of  the  believer.  "Sanctify  them  in  the  truth :  thy 
Word  is  truth,"  "  Ye  are  clean  through  the  Word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you." 
"  Sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word."  "  Ye  have  purified 
your  souls  in  obeying  the  truth." 

IIL  Thb  penetbation  of  God's  Wob».  "  And  sharper  than  any  two-edged  iword,* 


122  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oh.  it.  1— 1« 

etc.  The  Word  of  God  is  frequently  compared  to  a  sword.  "  The  sword  of  the  Spirit, 
which  is  the  Word  of  God."  And  to  a  two-edged  sword.  "  Out  of  his  mouth  went  a 
sharp  two-edged  sword."  "  As  it  is  from  the  mouth  that  man's  word  proceeds ;  so  this 
sword,  not  wielded  in  the  hand,  but  proceeding  from  the  mouth  of  the  Son  of  God,  is 
his  Word  (of.  Isa.  xlix.  2)."  Here  are  two  suggestions  concerning  the  penetration  ot 
God's  Word.  1.  It  searches  the  whole  of  man's  iiature.  The  "  soul,"  i.e.  man's  animal 
soul ;  "  spirit,"  ije,  man's  religious  spirit.  By  the  former  he  is  related  to  the  brute 
creation  ;  by  the  latter  he  is  related  to  angels  and  to  Gk)d  himself,  who  is  the 
"  Father  of  spirits."  The  Word  enters  the  heart  and  makes  an  impression  there ;  it 
pierces  through  even  to  the  spirit,  and  works  mightily  there.  It  divides  "  both  joints 
and  marrow;"  it  investigates  the  most  interior  and  hidden  parts  of  man's  being.  2. 
It  searches  the  whole  of  man's  nature  most  rigorously.  "  Even  to  the  dividing  of  soul  and 
spirit ;"  not  dividing  the  soul  from  the  spirit,  but  dividing  the  soul  itself  and  the  spirit 
itself.  This  Word  is  not  as  an  ordinary  sword,  but  is  "  sharper  than  any  two-edged 
sword ; "  and  it  does  not  as  an  ordinary  sword  cut  to  the  bone,  but  through  the  bones 
and  through  the  innermost  marrow.  So  thoroughly  and  rigorously  does  the  Word  of 
God  search  man's  moral  nature. 

IV.  The  discrimination  or  God's  Wobd.  "  And  is  a  discemer  of  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart."  It  exercises  a  critical  and  separating  power  upon  the  thoughts 
and  ideas,  opinions  and  priticiples,  of  the  heart.  And  it  discovers  to  men  the  true  moral 
chai'acter  of  their  thoughts  and  intents,  their  opinions  and  principles.  The  Word  of 
God  frequently  reveals  man  to  himself.  "The  Bible,"  says  Dr.  Parker,  "exposes  the 
very  innermost  recesses  of  human  nature ;  sets  a  light  where  no  other  hand  ever  placed 
a  candle ;  lights  up  the  pathways  of  our  most  secret  life  and  thought ;  and  we  begin  to 
feel  that  the  book  we  must  shut  up  when  we  are  going  to  do  evil  is  OocPs  Book.  This 
is  the  great  hold,  the  sovereign  mastery,  which  the  Book  of  God  has  over  the  ages — that 
it  knows  us ;  that  it  gives  articulation  to  our  dumb  reproaches ;  that  it  puts  into  the 
best  words  the  things  we  reap  against  ourselves  and  cannot  fully  explain.  Esaias  knows 
ns ;  Jeremiah  has  analyzed  and  dissected  and  anatomized  us.  If  any  man  would  know 
the  human  heart,  he  must  read  the  human  heart  in  God's  Book," 

"  The  sacred  page 
With  calm  attention  scan  I    If  on  thy  soul, 
As  tliou  dost  read,  a  ray  of  purer  light 
Break  in — oh,  check  it  not ;  give  it  full  BCop«  I 
Admitted,  it  will  break  the  clouds  which  long 
Have  dimmed  thy  sight,  and  lead  thee,  till  at  lasli 
Convictions,  like  the  sun's  meridian  beams. 
Illuminate  thy  mind." 

(Samuel  Hayei.) 

W.J. 

Ver.  13.— T^  omniscietiee  of  Ood.  "Neither  is  there  any  creature  that  U  not 
manifest,"  etc. 

I.  The  univebbalitt  of  God'b  knowledob.  "  There  is  no  creature  that  is  not 
manifest  in  his  sight:  but  all  things,"  etc.  All  created  things,  high  and  low,  great 
and  small,  visible  and  invisible,  are  comprehended  in  this  word  "creature."  "His 
understanding  is  infinite."  Nothing  is  too  great  for  his  comprehension;  nothing 
too  small  for  his  notice  (Pa.  L  11) ;  nothing  too  hidden  for  his  penetration  (Ps.  cxxxix. 
11,  12). 

II.  The  minuteness  and  exhaustivbness  of  God's  knowledge.  "All  things 
are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him,"  etc.  1.  He  sees  all  thini/s  as  they  really 
are,  "  All  things  are  naked  imto  "  his  eyes.  He  beholds  them  without  any  covering 
or  disguise.  Things  and  persons  are  cloaked,  concealed,  and  made  to  appear  other 
than  they  are  amongst  men;  but  none  of  these  things  can  impose  upon  him, 
2.  He  sees  all  things  thoroughly,  completely.  "All  things  are  naked  and  opened 
unto,"  etc. ;  Revised  Version,  "  laid  open  before  the  eyes,"  etc.  The  word  rendered 
"  opened "  is  a  difficult  one.  Alford  adopts  the  meaning  "  to  lay  prostrate."  He 
says,  "  This  is  the  simplest  and  most  frequent  sense  in  the  classical  writers,  1 
regard   the  word  as  signifying  entire  prostration  and   subjugation  under  the  ey« 


0H.1T.  1— 16.]  THK  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  125 

of  God ;  not  only  naked,  stripped  of  all  covering  and  concealment,  but  also  laid 
prostrate  in  their  exposure  before  his  eye."  He  translates,  "  lying  open  unto."  Ebrard 
adopts  the  interpretation,  "  to  bend  any  one's  neck  backwards,  and  thereby  to  lay 
bare  the  throat ;  hence  in  general,  to  lay  bare."  Others  interpret  it  to  lay  open,  as  a 
body,  by  an  anatomist,  or  as  an  animal  by  a  sacrifloing  priest.  But  whatever  may  be 
the  exact  figure,  the  meaning  conveyed  by  the  tigure  is  quite  clear,  viz.  that  God  knows 
all  things  thoroughly  (cf.  Job  xxxi.  4 ;  xxxiv.  21 ;  Ps.  Ivi.  8 ;  cxxxix.  1 — 5 ;  Prov.  v. 
21 ;  XV.  11 ;  Jer.  xvii.  10). 

ni.  The  special  siaNiFioANCE  and  impoiitanok  of  God's  knowledge  to  han. 
He  is  the  God  "with  whom  we  have  to  do."  Not  "unto  whom  wo  must  render  our 
account."  The  clause  expresses  a  more  compreliensive  relation  than  that.  It  expresses 
"  our  whole  concern  and  relation  with  God."  The  Divine  omniscicuou  has  very  important 
practical  bearings  upon  us.  1.  As  an  effectual  rebuke  to  the  pride  which  springtfrom 
knowledge  or  from  intellectual  attainments.  Compared  with  the  knowledge  of  "  him 
with  whoih  we  have  to  do,"  what  does  the  most  intelligent  man  know  ?  "  We  are  but 
of  yesterday,  and  know  nothing."  2.  As  a  check  upon  sin,  whether  in  thought  and 
feeling,  or  in  word  and  action.  (See  Job  xxxiv.  21,  22 ;  Ps.  xc.  8 ;  Eccles.  xii.  14.) 
3.  As  an  encouragement  to  trust  in  him.  (See  2  Chron.  xvi.  9  ;  Matt.  vi.  32 ;  x. 
29 — 31.)  4.  .48  a  great  consolation  when  misinterpreted  or  slandered.  (See  Job  xvi. 
19;  xxiii.  10;  Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  6.)  5.  As  a  great  comfort  and  support  in  affliction  and 
trial.  (See  Ps.  Ixxviii.  39  ;  ciii.  13,  14.)  6.  As  a  guarantee  of  the  triumph  of  his  cause. 
His  plans  were  formed  with  a  full  knowledge  of  every  possible  ob^tacle  or  opposition  ; 
and  they  anticipate  and  provide  for  the  utilization  of  such  opposition  for  their  own 
furtherance  and  realization. — W.  J. 

Yer.  14.—^  summons  to  steadfastness.  "  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  High 
Priest,"  etc. 

I.  The  duty  to  which  we  are  summoned.  "  Let  us  hold  fast  our  confession,"  i.e. 
of  the  Christian  faith,  1.  Danger  of  renouncing  this  confession  is  implied.  We  have 
already  pointed  out  that  these  Hebrew  Christians  were  in  considerable  peril  in  this 
resjjeot.*  This  danger  arises  (1)  from  opposition  from  without;  or  (2)  from  subtle 
solicitation,  which  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  opposition;  or  (3)  from  negligence 
on  our  part.  2.  Effort  to  retain  this  confession  is  enjoined.  "  Let  us  hold  fast  our 
confession."  This  includes :  (1)  Perseverance  in  the  Christian  faith ;  a  resolute 
cleaving  to  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour  and  Lord.  (2)  Perseverance  in  the  Christian 
fellowship;  association  with  Christian  people;  frequenting  Christian  assemblies.  (3) 
Perseverance  in  the  Christian  practice ;  the  continued  embodiment  of  Christ's  pre- 
cepts in  the  life  and  conduct.  This  demands  effort ;  e.g.  watching,  praying,  believing, 
working. 

II.  The  motive  by  which  we  abb  strengthened.  These  Hebrew  Christians  were 
encouraged  to  hold  fast  their  confession  because  they  had  in  Jesus  Christ  a  perfect  High 
Priest.  The  pre-eminence  of  his  priesthood  is  adduced  as  a  motive  to  their  perseverance, 
and  to  ours.  1.  Se  is  pre-eminent  in  his  office,  "  A  great  High  Priest."  As  Alford 
expounds,  the  "one  archetypal  High  Priest — One  above  all."  2.  He  is  pre-eminent  in 
his  access.  "Who  hath  passed  tlnough  the  heavens."  The  Jewish  high  priest  passed 
behind  the  veil  into  the  most  holy  place ;  but  the  great  High  Priest  has  passed  through 
"  the  planetary  heavens,  the  heavens  of  the  fixed  stars  and  the  angels,"  unto  the  very 
presence  and  throne  of  God.  "  He  is  gone,"  says  Ebrard,  "  into  the  dwelling-place  in 
space  of  the  absolute,  finished,  absolutely  undisturbed  revelation  of  the  Father."  And 
he  is  there  as  our  Kepresentative,  and  as  our  Forerunner.  This  implies  tlie  perfection 
of  his  work  upon  earth  (cf.  ch.  i.  3 ;  ix.  12,  24 — 26).  3.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  his 
Person.  "  Jesus  the  Son  of  God."  Jesus,  the  gracious  and  sympathetic  Saviour  of 
men.  "The  Son  of  God," supreme  in  dignity,  authority, and  power.  Here,  then, is  a 
motive  to  strengthen  us  to  "  hold  fast  our  confession."  Our  great  High  Priest  is  perfect  ; 
he  knows  our  difficulties  and  temptations ;  he  sympathizes  with  us;  he  succours  us ; 
he  is  now  in  the  presence  of  God  on  our  behrjf ;  "  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  fur 
us,"    Jjet  hi*  sympathy  and  help  inspire  us  to  fidelity  and  perseverance. — W.  J. 

*  Bee  onr  homily  on  ch  It  L 


1:^4  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oH.  it.  1—16 

Ver.  16. — The  Christian's  approach  to  the  throne  of  grace.  "  Let  us  therefore  oome 
boldly  unto  the  throne,"  etc.     Our  text  suggests  the  following  observations  ^— 

I.  Man's  great  need  is  mebct.  "That  we  may  receive  mercy"  is  our  great 
requirement.  This  will  be  obvious  if  we  reflect  for  a  moment  on  our  position  in  relation 
to  the  government  of  Gdd.  Intelligent  beings  who  have  maintained  their  integrity  and 
their  loyalty  to  God,  and  are  fulfilling  his  design  concerning  them,  do  not  need  mercy. 
Mercy  implies  demerit  or  ill  desert  on  the  part  of  tliose  to  whom  it  is  granted.  It  is 
the  mode  of  the  Divine  goodness  to  the  unworthy  and  the  evil.  Because  we  are  sinners 
we  require  mercy.  We  have  no  claim  to  God's  favour ;  we  do  not  merit  the  blessings  ot 
his  goodness ;  by  sin  we  have  forfeited  our  title  to  his  favour,  and  have  deserved  his 
wrath.  "  Every  sinner  stands  in  need  oi forbearing  mercy.  The  sentence  of  death  is 
upon  all ;  all  are  under  condemnation.  Each  sinner  stands  in  need  of  preventing 
mercy.  Inclined  to  evil  from  nature  and  habit,  unless  held  back  by  preventing  grace, 
he  is  continually  falling  into  sin.  The  sinner  stands  in  need  oi forgiving  mercy.  If  he 
obtain  not  this,  he  must  perish."  All  our  salvation  may  be  said  to  flow  from  the  mercy 
of  God.  How  great,  then,  is  our  need  of  mercy !  Without  it,  we  are  lost.  Having  it, 
we  have  salvation. 

II.  Man  has  seasons  op  special  need.  "  And  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need." 
Alford:  "  Grace  to  help  while  yet  there  is  time."  Rendall;  "  Grace  for  timely  help." 
The  meaning  is,  to  find  grace  for  seasonable  or  opportune  help;  and  thus  suggesting  the 
truth  that  there  are  seasons  when  man  specially  requires  the  help  of  Divine  grace.  We 
are  e\'er  dependent  upon  the  mercy  of  God ;  but  not  unfrequently  we  are  pressed  by 
temptations,  or  beset  by  danger,  or  assailed  by  dark  doubts,  or  standing  in  slippery 
places,  and  at  such  times  we  specially  need  the  mercy  and  grace  of  God.  1.  There 
are  times  of  temptation  to  sin,  when  our  moral  weakness  is  extreme,  and  our  spiritual 
foes  are  persistent,  and  the  tendency  to  sin  which  is  within  us  is  roused  into  activity, 
la  such  sc  asons  how  pressing  is  our  need  of  succouring  grace !  2.  There  are  trials 
arising  from  worldly  prosperity..  Prosperity  in  temporal  affairs  has  occasioned 
spiritual  injury  to  many.  It  brings  with  it  temptations  to  luxury,  and  to  guilty  con- 
formity to  the  world,  and  to  spiritual  sloth,  and  false  security,  and  presumptuous  sell- 
reliance.  It  is  a  season  of  special  need.  3.  There  are  trials  arising  from  temporal 
adversity.  In  the  hour  of  failure  and  defeat  many  a  good  man  has  felt  with  Asaph, 
"  Verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,"  etc.  With  poverty  there  come,  sometimes, 
temptations  to  reiiroach  God,  or  to  despivir  of  his  goodness,  or  to  resort  to  unlawful  or 
unworthy  means  to  obtain  temporal  supplies.  Hence  our  need  of  grace.  4.  There  are 
trials  arising  from  bodily  afflictions.  Sanctified  sufferings  are  a  blessing;  unsanctified, 
they  are  only  an  evil,  and  a  very  great  evil.  If  we  rebel  against  the  hand  that 
afflicts  us,  we  shall  grow  hard  in  heart,  bitter  in  temper,  impatient  and  distrustful, 
and  probably  some  one  will  suggest  to  us  that  we  "curse  God,  and  die."  Here  is 
a  season  of  peculiar  need.  5.  Trials  arising  from  the  bereavements  of  friendship. 
When  death  comes  very  near  to  us,  it  is  accompanied  with  temptations  to  doubt 
the  reality  of  the  life  beyond,  to  question  the  wisdom  ahd  love  of  God,  etc.  6.  Trials 
of  our  own  dying  hour.  Great  is  the  mystery  which  surrounds  death.  The  moment 
of  dissolution  must  be  very  solemn.  Who  can  overcome  then  without  "grace  for 
timely  help"? 

HI.  There  is  a  throne  whence  the  merot  and  orace  wb  need  mat  be 
obtained.  "  The  throne  of  grace  "  is  the  throne  of  God ;  but  of  God,  not  as  an  august 
and  awful  Ruler,  but  as  a  gracious  Father.  It  is  the  throne  whence  he  bestows  the 
blessings  of  mercy  and  grace  to  those  who  seek  him.  The  treasures  of  his  mercy  and 
grace  are  inexhaustible,  and  he  delights  in  communicating  them  to  others.  We  have 
not  to  overcome  any  disinclination  to  bless  us  on  his  part.  He  gives  freely ;  he  gives 
bountifully ;  he  delights  in  giving. 

IV.  Wk  have  ample  enooubaqement  to  approach  the  throne  op  gbacb. 
"  Let  us  therefore  draw  near  with  boldness  unto  the  throne  of  grace."  We  have  freedom 
of  access  to  the  throne,  and  we  may  have  freedom  of  speech  with  him  who  sits  thereon. 
We  may  draw  near  to  God  with  confidence.  This  we  have,  or  may  have,  through  om 
great  High  Priest.  He  has  revealed  the  infinite  love  of  the  Father  toward  us,  and  his 
delight  in  blessing  us ;  he  is  the  perfect  "  Mediator  between  God  and  man ;"  he  was  "  in 
ill  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin,"  and  he  is  able  "  to  sympathize  with 


OH.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEWS.  1:25 

oui  infirmities ; "  and  he  now  wears  our  nature  in  heaven  hy  hii  Father's  throne.    "  Let 
us  therefore  draw  iiear  with  holdness,"  etc. — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  more  terrible  remit  of  apostasy  from  Ghrist  seen  in  the  letter  rest 
to  which  Christ  leads.  Still  dealing  with  the  superiority  of  Christ  to  Moses.  Having 
shown  the  possibility  of  departing  from  Christ  as  they  did  from  Moses,  he  goes  on  to  show 
that,  since  Christ  was  greater  than  Moses,  the  evil  of  departing  from  him  was  so  much 
more  terrible.  There  is  a  Divine  promise  of  rest  unexhausted  in  Old  Testament  times, 
and  only  fulfilled  through  faith  in  Christ.  "  Let  us  fear  therefore,  lest  a  promise 
being  left  of  entering  into  his  rest,  anyone  of  you  should  seem  to  come  short  of  it.  For, 
indeed,  we  have  had  good  tidings  preached  unto  us,  even  as  also  they.  But  the  Word  of 
hearing  did  not  profit  them,  because  it  was  not  united  by  faith  with  them  that  heard. 
For  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  that  rest."  This  is  proved  (as  usual')  from 
their  own  Scriptures.  "  Even  as  he  hath  said,  As  I  sware  in  my  wrath,  if  they  shall 
enter  into  my  rest,  although  the  works  were  finished  from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
That  is,  the  promised  share  in  God's  rest  cannot  be  that  after  his  creative  work,  for  it 
had  not  been  enjoyed  two  thousand  years  after  the  creation  ;  nor  could  it  be  the  rest  of 
Canaan,  for  long  after  the  entrance  into  Canaan,  David,  in  the  ninety-firth  psalm,  speaks 
of  it  as  still  unpossessed.  "  He  again  defiueth,"  etc.  What  then  ?  "  There  remaineth 
therefore  a  rest,"  etc. 

L  Thb  certainty  of  Divine  best  to  the  Chitkoh  of  Christ.  This  is  rest  on 
earth,  for  "  we  who  have  believed  do,"  etc.  This  is  also  rest  in  heaven,  for  "  let  us 
labour  therefore,"  etc.  But  these  two  are  one.  Yet  so  much  better  is  the  latter,  the 
believer  being  ever  able  to  say, "  There  remaineth  a  rest,"  etc.,  that  we  refer  this  mainly 
to  the  rest  of  the  eternal  world.  And  this  is  certain :  1.  Because  Ood  continues  his 
work  till  it  is  perfected.  "  God  did  rest  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works,"  because 
they  were  complete.  It  reminds  us  that  God  always  perfects  what  he  begins — that 
is  a  necessity  of  his  nature.  Now  he  has  begun  his  work  wherever  "repentance 
toward  God,  and  faith  toward,"  etc.,  are ;  then  he  will  perfect  it.  That  makes  our 
future  rest  certain,  for  perfection  brings  rest.  Our  sabbath  must  follow  our  perfection. 
2.  Because  the  promised  rest  has  not  yet  teen  reached.  The  argument  applies  to  us  as 
to  the  Hebrew.  We  may  have  been  persuaded  into  the  Christian  life  by  "Come 
unto  me,  and  1  will  give  you  rest,"  but  our  experience  is  far  below  what  is  thus 
assured  to  the  believer.  Where  we  have  most  it  falls  short  of  the  promise.  Then  the 
promise  has  yet  to  be  fulfilled,  3.  Because  Christ  rests  after  his  redemptive  work. 
"  For  he  that  has  entered  into  his  rest " — i.e.  Christ — "  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his 
own  works,  as  God  did  from  his."  As  the  Father  rested  after  his  creative  work,  so  did 
the  Son  after  his  work  of  redemption,  and  for  the  same  reason.  It  was  because  he 
could  say,  "  It  is  finished,"  that  "  he  sat  down  at,"  etc.  If,  then,  Christ  only  rested 
because  he  had  made  oxa  perfect  redemption  secure,  we  know  we  shall  enter  into  rest. 
The  vision  of  the  Redeemer  resting  from  his  work  conveys  the  utmost  assurance  that 
to  his  people  the  blessings  of  redemption,  in  their  height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and 
breailth,  are  as  sure  as  though  they  possessed  them. 

II.  The  blessedness  of  the  Divine  rest  which  appertains  to  the  Church  of 
Christ.  The  English  word  "  rest "  occurs  nine  times  in  the  context,  but  in  the  ninth 
verse  a  difi'ereiit  Greek  word  is  used,  which  (as  it  is  said  to  occur  nowhere  else  in  Greek 
literature  except  in  one  passage  of  Plutarch)  may  be  said  to  have  been  coined  for  the 
occasion — sahbaiismos,  a  sabbath-keeping.  No  word  could  convey  a  deeper  sense  of  rest  to 
the  Hebrews ;  for  they  had  a  seventh-day  sabbath,  and  every  seventh  year  a  sabbath  year, 
and  every  seventh  seven  years  of  sabbaths  the  year  of  jubilee.  See  here  the  kind  of 
rest  to  which  Jesus  leads  his  people.  1.  It  will  he  rest  in  finished  labour.  Whatever 
inward  rest  his  people  have  now,  they  have  also  much  outer  weariness — weariness  of 
labour,  sorrow,  conflict,  advanced  age.  Christ  leads  to  rest  from  this.  Best  for  the 
weary  brain,  the  aching  heart,  the  tired  feet,  the  tempted  spirit,  the  weight  of  years ; 
the  world's  sounds  all  hushed,  and  the  world's  work  laid  aside ;  Sunday  morning  after 
the  week's  toil-r— a  sahbath-keeping.  2.  It  will  be  rest  in  Divine  fellowship.  Rest 
with  God.  Not  simply  life's  business  suspended  and  its  shops  closed,  but  the  multitude 
gathered  in  the  place  of  prayer  to  keep  holy  day  in  communion  with  God.  "K  they 
shall  enter  into  my  rest."     In  Christ,  God  and  his  people  find  a  common  rest    That 


128  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 

Divine  fellowship  will  he  the  true  sabbath-keeping.  3.  It  will  be  rest  in  holy  service. 
Sabbath  days  to  his  people  are  days  of  sacred  work.  So  in  heaven  "  they  serve  him  day 
and  night."  One  kind  of  work  over,  but  another  taken  up,  and  only  in  this  work  will 
our  spirit  rest.  Doing  nothing  rests  the  body,  but  the  heart  and  mind  only  rest  when 
their  faculties  are  in  full  employ.  There,  lessons  to  learn,  mysteries  to  comprehend, 
service  to  render,  attainments  to  pursue,  gifts  to  receive,  talents  to  expend,  and  all 
absorbed  in  the  spirit  of  worship.  God  first,  last,  midst,  and  without  end.  What  rest 
that  will  be — work  which  never  becomes  toil,  nor  seeks  repose  I  That  will  be  sabbath- 
keeping. 

III.  The  feab  of  Losicia  this  Divinb  best  which  bhodld  animate  the  Chuech. 
That  the  burden  of  the  passage.  Its  first  word,  "  Let  us  fear,  lest,"  etc.,  and  its  last^ 
"  Let  us  labour,"  etc.  This  fear  not  inconsistent  with  the  certainty  of  rest  to  Christ's 
people,  because  it  is  a  question  whether  we  have  a  right  to  the  assurance  of  his  people. 
Therefore  "  fear."  1.  The  fact  of  Israel  failing  to  enter  Canaan  is  held  up  to  the 
Church  at  a  warning.  Even  those  who  had  received  all  the  mercies  given  to  ancient 
Israel  could  die  as  outcasts  in  the  wilderness.  2.  The  means  hy  which  alone  that  rest 
can  he  obtained  are  dearly  defined.  Faith ;  but  faith  manifests  itself  by  obedience 
(ver.  6).  See  Revised  Version.  "  Faith  "  and  "  Obedience  "  are  here  used  almost 
interchangeably,  as  though  they  were  the  same.  The  existence  of  faith  is  proved  by 
consecrated  life.  If  the  way  to  rest  were  manifold,  we  need  not  so  much  fear,  but  it  is 
one,  only  one — "  faith  which  worketh."  3.  TAe  blessedness  of  the  promised  rest  makes 
failttre  to  reach  it  the  more  terrible.  If  it  were  sad  to  lose  the  rest  of  Canaan,  what 
to  lose  the  rest  of  heaven  1  What  to  be  for  evermore  a  companion  of  "Sabbathless 
Satan"!— O.N. 

Vers.  12 — IG.—Ute  Word  of  Ood  discovering,  the  great  High  Priest  delivering  from, 
the  apostates  sin.  This  completes  the  argument  in  this  section  (ch.  iii.  and  iv.)  on  the 
sin  of  apostasy.  Having  brought  his  readers  face  to  face  with  the  awful  peril  of 
departure  from  the  Son  of  Goc^  we  might  suppose  the  vrriter  had  reached  the  limit 
of  the  subject.  But  not  so ;  he  goes  on  to  say  that  this  sin  and  doom  may  be  true  of 
some  whose  defection  is  hidden  in  the  heart.  But  he  cannot  relinquish  the  subject 
there.  This  searching  admonition  closes  with  the  revelation  of  the  great  High  Priest, 
who  will  deliyer  those  who  come  to  him  from  the  guilt  of  apostasy.  Subject — The 
Word  of  Ood  diieovering,  the  great  High  Priest  delivering  from,  the  apostate's 
sin. 

L  Thk  Woed  op  God  detects  akd  judoes  the  sin  of  apostasy.  "  The  Word  of 
Grod"  here  probably  alludes  to  that  particular  word  in  the  ninety-fifth  psalm,  on 
which,  in  both  these  chapters,  the  writer  has  built  his  argument.  1.  This  Word  is 
permanent.  "  Quick,"  i.e.  not  dead.  The  Word  of  threatening  to  Israel  lives  still. 
It  has  not  to  do  only  with  a  former  generation.  Time  makes  no  difference  to  what 
God  has  said.  His  Word  never  dies ;  it  is  as  true  now  as  when  it  was  uttered.  The 
principles  which  underlie  the  Divine  sayings  are  everlasting.  2.  2'Ats  Word  is  efficient. 
"Powerful,"  or  active.  Its  utterances  are  always  followed  by  corresponding  results. 
Laws  in  an  earthly  statute-book  may  not  be  executed ;  he  who  made  them  may  not 
have  intended  to  enforce  them,  or  has  changed  his  mind  about  them,  or  has  lost  the 
power  to  carry  them  into  effect.  It  can  never  be  so  with  the  Divine  laws.  God  "  is 
not  man,  that  he  should  lie,  nor  the  son,"  etc.  ..."  hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  do 
it?"  He  is  always  in  one  mind,  and  nothing  can  change  him.  Men  forget  that 
because  of  his  long-suffering ;  but  it  is  true.  3.  This  Word  is  destructive.  "  Sharper 
than,"  etc.  To  divide  the  soul  from  the  spirit  is  equal  to  the  parting  of  the  body  from 
the  spirit ;  it  is  another  expression  for  "  to  produce  death."  And  this  is  said  to  be  in 
the  most  painful  way.  Nothing  could  produce  intenser  pain  or  more  certain  deatli 
than  the  "dividing  asunder  of  the  joints  and  marrow."  The  figure  declares  that  the 
threatenings  of  God  will  be  executed  with  an  awful  inteusity  of  suffering  and  com- 
pleteness of  destruction.  4.  This  Word  is  penetrating.  "  Quick  to  discern,"  etc.  (the 
sudden  transition  from  the  penetrating  power  of  the  Word  to  that  of  God  is  natural. 
The  habitual  thought  of  Scripture  in  this  Epistle  is  that  of  a  direct  Divine  utterance  ; 
God  and  his  Word  are  one).  "  Naked,  and  laid  open,"  paraphrased  by  "  turned 
inside  oui"    Its  demands  have  as  much  to  do  with  heart  as  life,  with  principles  aa 


OH.  nr.  1— 18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS.  127 


doings.  There  may  be  no  outward  departure,  but  inner  backsliding ;  and  if  bo,  the 
Word  discovers  and  judges  it. 

II.  From  the  bin  op  apostasy  oub  High  Pkiest  is  able  to  deliver  us.  How 
delightful  to  be  able  to  turn  from  the  preceding  to  this :  "  Having;  a  great,  etc. " ! 
E'rom  the  fears  excited  we  are  bidden  to  look  up  to  our  Priest-King  in  the  heavens. 
1.  The  guilt  of  apostasy  needs  atonement.  That  need  is  met  in  the  vision  of  Jesus 
as  High  Priest  passed  within  the  veil,  to  present  on  our  behalf  the  blood  of  sprinkling;, 
which  cries  for  and  secures  mercy.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth," 
etc.  2.  The  temptation  to  apostasy  needs  help.  That  need,  also,  is  met  in  the  vision 
of  Jesus  as  High  Priest,  Intercessor.  He  bears  no  jewelled  names  on  his  breast,  but 
his  people's  names  are  giaven  on  those  hands  ever  stretolied  toivard  the  throne  in 
prayer.  "  Sin]on,  Simon,  Satan  hath,"  etc.  Therefore  "  let  ns  liold  fast."  3.  Thu 
resistance  of  apostasy  needs  sympathy.  To  refuse  to  be  unfaithful  often  brings  suffering. 
To  cleave  to  Christ  meant  to  these  Hebrews  the  spoiling  of  tlieir  goods,  etc.  The  nee  1 
that  brings  solace  and  help  is  also  met  in  the  vision  of  Christ  as  High  Priest.  The 
"  yet  without  sin  "  draws  him  nearer ;  for,  to  maintain  a  sinless  heart  and  character,  he 
must  have  experienced  the  keenest  pains  of  self-crucifixioa  and  temptation,  and  there- 
fore knows  this  suffeiing  at  its  gieatest,  and  "  is  able  to  succour  those,"  etc. 

III.  To  OBTAIN   OUB  HlOH  PbIEST's   DELIVEKINQ   HELP  WE  MUST  DRAW  NBAB  TO  THE 

THRONE  OF  GRACE.  1.  He  who  has  apostalizei  is  invited,  for  Christ  is  the  sinner't 
High  Priest,  "We  have  a  High  Priest."  Who?  "Jesus  belongs  to  the  sinner.'' 
He  is  given  to  save ;  then  he  belongs  to  the  man  who  needs  saving.  Have  we  part  in 
his  sacrifice?  is  answered  by  another  question — Do  you  need  it?  Let  such  draw 
near.  2.  He  who  has  suffered  in  resisting  apostasy  is  invited,  for  we  may  comt 
"saying  all."  "  Let  us  draw  near  with  boldness;"  literally,  "saying  all."  We  cannot 
tell  our  fears,  sufferings,  temptations,  victories,  to  any  creatnre,  and  our  hearts  get  full 
for  want  of  one  to  understand  our  deepest  experience.  Then  we  may  go  to  Christ,  and 
at  his  feet  make  a  clean  breast  of  everything,  "saying  all."  "  Pour  out  your  hearts 
before  him,"  etc.  Let  such  draw  near.  3.  He  who  is  tempted  to  apostasy  is  invited, 
for  here  "mercy  and  grace"  a/re  given.  Mercy  and  grace  are  free — free  to  the  unde- 
serving;. Mercy  for  the  past,  grace  for  the  future.  Let  those  whose  gin  and  infirmity 
and  circumstances  need  these  draw  near,  for  such  are  welcome. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Believers  in  Israd  and  in  Christ.    I.  The  resemblance  between  the 

PROMISE    AND  PROSPECT  OF   ANCIENT  ISRAEL   AND   BELIEVERS  IN  ChRIST.      The  Hebrew 

people  had  a  promise  which  was  given  to  Abraham  as  trustee  for  his  descendants,  which 
was  that  after  many  years  of  suffering  in  Egypt  they  should  be  released  from  slavery  and 
oppression,  and  be  led  to  the  rest  and  enjoyment  of  Canaan.  It  was  a  promise  which 
signifies  the  spontaneous  declaration  of  the  kindness  and  mercy  of  Jehovah,  and  flowed 
from  his  love  toward  Israel.  It  is  a  beam  from  the  "  Father  of  lights,"  who  prevents  us 
with  the  blessings  of  goodness,  and  meets  us  with  the  offers  of  grace  and  loving-kindness. 
This  thought  pervades  the  gospel,  which  is  the  free  and  unsolicited  gilt  of  God  to  the 
world ;  for  there  was  no  cry  of  spiritual  distress  and  no  agony  of  jeniorse  which  prompted 
men  to  desire  salvation.  The  whole  of  the  Christian  system  is  suffused  with  the  light 
and  beauty  of  the  "  promises  of  him  who  cannot  lie."  This  requiied  on  the  part  of  Israel 
suitable  and  becoming  exertion.  They  were  to  set  forth  from  Egypt,  and  then  listen 
to  his  Law  at  Sinai,  and  march  under  the  Divine  guidance,  that  God  might  bring  upon 
them  all  that  he  had  spoken.  Similarly  believers  in  our  Lord  are  to  "  work  out  their 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  and  are  to  leave  the  things  that  are  behind  and 
reach  forth  to  those  that  are  before.  Israel  had  one  thing  to  do  ;  and  those  who  believe 
in  Christ  are  to  seek  the  end  of  their  faith  in  their  admittance  into  the  Father's  house, 
where,  instead  of  perishable  tent  and  frequent  change,  there  are  many  mansions  of 
stability  and  eternal  peace.  It  is  a  promise  of  rest.  The  Hebrews  felt  that  in  Egypt 
they  did  not  belong  to  the  nation  in  whose  country  they  dwelt.  They  had  no  thought 
of  permanence,  no  civil  freedom,  no  security  of  person,  and  no  fruit  from  their  exacted 
labours.  It  may  be  believed  that  the  promise  and  prospect  of  Canaan  silently 
influenced  their  hearts  and  quickened  desires  for  emancipation.  The  prospect  of  rest 
began  to  be  very  precious  as  suffering  abounded ;  and  at  the  appointed  time  they  rose 
to  commence  the  journey  to  the  promised  laud.    Those  who  believe  in  the  Captain  of 


128  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWa  [oh.  iv.  1— 1& 

salvation  have  a  Diviner  hope,  and  are  taught  to  look  for  a  Divine  and  eternal  rest, 
which  shall  embrace  more  blessedness  than  we  can  at  present  imagine.  It  stands  in 
happy  contrast  to  the  toil  of  daily  life  and  the  sight  of  imperfection  in  ourselves  and 
others.  It  signifies  rest  from  the  stern  duties  of  the  mortiScation  and  crucifixion  of  the 
flesh.  It  is  freedom  from  the  changeableness  of  our  present  life,  in  which  there  is 
nothing  stable  in  our  emotions,  our  relationships,  and  the  society  of  which  we  form  a 
part.  It  is  a  blessed  contrast  to  the  mixed  condition  of  the  present  state  in  which 
there  are  evil  men  and  frequent  doubts.  Believers  often  look  towards  this  divinely 
promised  rest  to  encourage  patience  amidst  the  pressure  of  sickness  and  the  force  and 
frequency  of  temptation.  It  is,  therefore,  no  wonder  that  Bichard  Baxter,  who  was 
burdened  with  frequent  sickness,  and  tried  by  the  controversies  and  troubles  of  his 
day,  should  find  relief  in  writing  his  '  Saint's  Rest,'  which  was  at  once  the  fruit  of  his 
painful  experience  and  his  spiritual  desire  for  the  rest  of  heaven. 

II.  The  caution  given  to  Christians  lest  they  besbmblb  ancient  Isbasl  in 
THEIR  FAILURE  TO  GAIN  THEIR  REST.  The  prospcct  of  Canaan  was  a  gospel,  or  good 
tidings,  to  the  Hebrews,  since  it  assured  them  of  a  happy  change  in  their  condition.  It 
brought  before  them  the  hope  of  freedom  and  the  possession  of  a  land  which  had  a  fertile 
soil  and  a  genial  climate.  It  promised  them  the  blessing  of  the  Divine  protection, 
ordinances  of  worship,  and  life  closed  in  peace  and  hope  of  the  future.  This  was  good 
tidings  to  them.  Good  tidings  of  great  joy  are  made  known  to  lu.  They  were 
announced  by  our  Lord,  who  came  to  seek  and  save  that  which  was  lost,  and  to 
offer  the  blessings  of  salvation  from  sin  now,  and  the  perfection  of  our  nature  in 
the  life  and  immortality  which  he  has  brought  to  light.  He  offers  us  pardon, 
justification,  and  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  who  becomes  the  earnest  of  the 
purchased  possession.  Many  of  the  people  who  started  from  Egypt  never  reached 
Canaan ;  and  Moses  saw  that  many  year  after  year  died  and  were  buried  in  the 
wilderness,  and  exclaimed,  "  We  are  consumed  by  thine  anger,  and  by  thy  wrath 
are  we  troubled."  They  failed  in  faith,  and  doubted  the  promises  of  the  God  of 
their  fathers.  Had  they  believed  their  faith  would  have  been  turned  into  sight,  and 
their  hope  into  happy  fruition.  The  Word  did  not  profit  them,  for  they  came  short  of 
the  rest  and  blessedness  of  Canaan.  The  warning  which  was  given  to  Jewish  believers, 
and  la  conveyed  through  them  to  others  of  succeeding  ages,  reminds  us  of  the  vast  and 
fatal  effects  of  unbelief^  The  truth  which  they  heard  was  not  felt  and  held  as  a  Divine 
utterance.  It  teaches  us  that  the  gospel  should  be  so  admitted  to  influence  and  govern 
us,  that  it  should  be  a  part  of  our  nature,  as  food  received  and  digested  becomes  a  part 
of  our  living  structure.  It  is  faith  which  gives  it  a  presence  and  power  in  the  vital 
forces  of  our  souls.  It  unites  the  truth  to  our  spiritual  nature  with  a  close  and  blessed 
association ;  and  verifies  the  word  of  St.  James,  who  describes  it  as  "  the  engrafted 
Word,  which  is  able  to  save  our  souls,"  The  importance  of  faith  is  to  be  seen  in  ovu: 
Lord's  constant  requirement  of  its  presence  for  the  attainment  of  salvation.  The 
apostles  follow  in  his  hallowed  footsteps,  and  urge  believers  to  cherish  this  Divine  grace 
lest  their  career  should  end  in  disappointment  and  failure.  To  come  short  of  Canaan 
was  a  calamity,  because  there  was  a  loss  of  good,  and  life  was  closed  under  the  gloomy 
sense  of  transgression;  but  to  lose  the  glorious  inheritance  of  eternal  life  is  more  affect- 
ing as  the  awful  future  outweighs  the  small  and  fading  interests  of  the  life  that  now  is. 
The  possibility  of  such  a  loss  is  sufficient  to  awaken  fear. — B. 

Vers.  3 — 10. — The  course  of  Christian  effort  it  justified  In/  the  certainty  of  a 
future  rest.  In  these  verses  we  have  the  gradual  development  of  the  idea  of  rest, 
which  begins  with  the  sabbath  rest,  in  which  God  saw  that  all  that  he  had  made 
was  very  good,  and  he  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands.  To  keep  this  fact  before  the 
minds  of  Israel  he  ordained  the  celebration  of  the  weekly  sabbath,  in  which,  as  the 
Lord  of  time,  he  required  his  people  to  remit  their  daily  labours,  and  acknowledge  him 
as  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth.  The  next  advance  in  the  illustration  of  the  idea 
of  rest  was  the  prospect  of  Canaan  after  the  wandering  for  forty  years  in  the  wilderness. 
Many  Ikrough  unbelief  fell  short  of  its  attainment.  The  next  stage  of  progress  in  the 
unfolding  of  this  thought  is  that  in  which  the  psalmist  addresses  the  men  of  his  day, 
who  were  taught  to  look  forward  to  another  and  higher  rest.  This  would  have  been 
unneceiary  if  the  entrance  into  Canaan  under  the  leadership  of  Joshua  had  exhausted 


oh.it.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLK  TO  THE  HEBREWS  129 

this  Divine  thought.  There  remains,  after  all  these  illustrations  of  the  promise  of  rejst, 
something  yet  to  come.  This  is  the  method  of  Divine  wisdom  and  mercy  to  go  from 
one  stage  of  revelation  to  a  higher,  until  the  types  and  facts  of  the  past  find  their 
completeness  and  perfection  in  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  "  Howheit  that  was  not 
first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural;  then  that  which  is  spiritual"  (1  C)oi 
XV,  46).  '  All  J)ivine  thoughts  find  their  highest  realization  in  our  Lord,  who  said, 
"  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new,"  At  first  there  was  the  tabernacle  of  the  Divine 
presence,  then  the  material  temple  built  by  Solomon,  and  then  appears  at  last  the 
spiritual  and  mystic  temple  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail.  Amid 
all  the  changes  of  the  present  life  this  truth  of  the  future  rest  shines  with  a  steady  and 
cheering  ray.  It  is  for  the  people  of  God,  by  which  phrase  we  understand  a  brief 
description  of  such  as  have  undergone  a  spiritual  change  which  forbids  them  to  seek 
repose  in  the  world,  and  have  found  true  peace  in  Jesus  Clirist.  They  have  acquired  a 
spiritual  habit  of  faith  and  hope,  and  are  looking  for  a  "  city  that  hath  foundations, 
whose  Maker  and  Builder  is  God."  "  We  who  believe,"  saith  the  writer,  "  are  entering 
into  rest,  and  moving  towards  its  enjoyment,  because  it  is  an  enterprise  authorized  by 
our  Lord,  gives  dignity  to  our  present  life,  and  turns  our  brief  earthly  course  into  a  pre- 
paration for  eternal  joy.  They  have  ceased  from  their  own  works,  which  originally  were 
dead,  and  consisted  of  outward  ceremonies,  and  were  wrought  without  that  faith  which 
alone  makes  them  acceptable  to  God ;  for  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  him. 
Being  regenerated,  their  new  works  are  prompted  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  flow  from  love 
to  Christ,  and  are  filled  with  spiritual  life ;  for  '  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creature :  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all  things  are  become  new.' " — ^Bi, 

Vers.  11—13. — SuccetB.  L  The  exhortation  to  earnest  endeavovb  to  avoid 
FAILURE  AND  SECURE  SUCCESS.  The  believers  to  whom  these  words  were  addressed  were 
halting  between  two  opinions.  The  question  was  whether  they  should  go  back  to 
the  syuRgogue  and  the  temple,  and  thus  evade  trial,  or  go  forward  in  the  brave  and 
successful  profession  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  each  should  say,  "  Let  no  man  trouble  me : 
fur  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  No  other  subjects  could  approach 
these  in  importance,  because  they  related  to  the  life  of  the  spirit,  its  power  and  safety 
now,  and  its  eternal  happiness  in  the  life  to  come.  The  alternative  is  imaged  by  the 
fall  and  overthrow  in  the  wilderness,  and  its  lost  labour,  and  the  happy  and  successful 
entrance  into  the  promised  land.  It  was  not  a  vain  thing ;  it  was  for  their  life.  The 
writer  urges  believers  to  labour,  which  term  sets  forth  the  arduousness  of  the  enterprise 
and  involves  the  exercise  of  watchfulness  against  the  approach  of  foes,  resolute  self- 
repression,  frequent  prayer,  and  an  ample  and  constant  use  of  all  divinely  prescribed 
means  for  the  preservation  and  furtherance  of  the  spiritiial  life.  "  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force."  With  this  view  agrees  the 
counsel  of  Paul,  who  reminds  us  of  the  strife  of  men  in  the  arena  for  an  earthly  and 
fading  crown,  and  hints  at  the  severe  training  through  which  the  runners  pass,  the 
rigour  of  their  effort,  which  taxes  all  their  strength  of  limb  and  speed  of  foot ;  and 
therefore  believers  should,  in  view  of  an  immortal  prize,  labour  to  gain  the  approbation 
of  the  Judge,  and  realize  the  blessedness  of  Divine  success. 

II.  The  solemn  fact  with  which  the  exhortation  is  enforced.  This  is  the 
weighty  and  all-concerning  truth,  that  the  Word  of  Gud  with  which  ancient  Israel  had  to 
do  is  the  Word  which  affects  the  life  and  career  of  all  Christians.  It  is  believed  by  able 
expounders  of  the  Scriptures  that  as  every  word  must  have  a  speaker,  it  is  reasonable  to 
apply  this  passage  to  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  Word,  and  out  of  whose  mouth  there 
goes  the  sharp  two-edged  sword  (Rev.  i.  16).  It  is  quick,  or  living,  because  it  is  the 
abiding  and  unchangeable  will  of  our  Lord,  and,  when  written,  represents  his  mind 
concerning  God,  our  sinfulness,  our  opportunity  of  salvation  by  believing  in  him,  and 
our  prospects  of  eternal  life.  Men  die,  and  the  prophets,  apostles,  and  confessors  are 
removed  by  death;  but  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  It  is  active  and  power- 
ful, and  produces  changes  of  view  and  life.  It  awakens  prayer,  and  elicits  cheerful  and 
efficient  service  for  Christ.  The  Word  which  dwells  richly  in  believers  awakens  melody 
in  the  heart  as  unto  the  Lord.  It  is  divinely  penetrative,  and  enters  into'  the  secret 
places  of  the  soul.  There  is  an  impressive  example  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  where  "  one 
unlearned"  enters  the  assembly  and  "  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is  judged  of  all :  and 

HKBBEWB.  K 


130  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  it.  1—16. 

thus  the  secrets  of  his  heart  being  made  manifest ;  and  so  falling  down  on  his  face 
he  will  worship  God,  and  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth."  This  passage  has 
an  admonitory  aspect,  which  is  drawn  from  the  history  of  Israel.  The  word  of  con- 
demnation was  spoken,  and  the  unbelieTing  generation  died  in  the  wildemftss,  and 
funeral  after  funeral  passed  through  the  camp  to  the  wilderness  beyond ;  and  Moses 
said,  "  Thou  hast  set  our  iniquities  before  thee,  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  thy 
countenance"  (Ps.  xc.  8).  It  reminds  of  some  truths  regarding  ourselves  and  our 
condition  of  exposure  to  the  constant  observation  of  Jesus  Christ,  with  whom  we 
have  to  do.  It  declares  to  thoughtful  minds  that  while  we  are  what  we  are  only  as 
we  appear  to  him,  and  that  we  should  be  content  with  his  perfect  knowledge  of  us, 
there  is  to  be  a  final  and  solemn  appearance  before  him  to  whom  we  must  give  an 
account.  Apostles,  evangelists,  pastors,  and  all  Christians  must  appear  before  him,  to 
present  our  life  for  his  inspection  and  final  decision.  If  we  have  sought  first  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  his  righteousness ;  if  we  have  been  merciful  to  his  poor  and  persecuted 
followers ;  if  we  have  maintained  our  hold  of  the  gospel  amid  changes  of  public 
opinion ;  if  we  have  been  faithful  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God, — we  shall  give 
up  our  account  with  joy  and  not  with  grief. — B. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — Steadfastness.  I.  There  is  herb  encoubaoeuent  to  steadfastness 
FROM  THE  DioNiTT  AND  SPHERE  OF  OUR  Lord's  MINISTRY.  He  is  Called  the  great  High 
Priest,  who  stands  in  exalted  contrast  to  Aaron  and  all  his  successors  in  the  important 
duty  of  representing  the  people  before  God  and  representing  God  to  the  people.  This 
greatness  will  appear  in  the  arguments  and  discussions  which  follow,  in  which  the 
holiness  of  his  liie,  the  value  of  his  sacrifice,  and  the  influence  of  his  intercession  will 
be  explained  and  proved.  He  has  passed  into  the  heavens,  and  has  left  the  material  and 
earthly  tabernacle  behind  him  for  the  immediate  and  glorious  presence  of  God,  at  whose 
right  hand  he  sits  and  waits  till  all  his  enemies  are  made  his  footstool.  If  he  persevered 
through  trial  and  innumerable  sorrows  imtil  he  could  cry,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  reach 
the  unrivalled  exaltation  of  his  heavenly  priesthood,  in  the  exercise  of  which  he  is  not 
ashamed  of  his  brethren,  let  us  hold  fast  our  profession  of  him  in  the  world  below. 
If  the  synagogue  and  Sanhedrim  are  against  you,  so  might  the  thought  be  stated — 
Remember  that  the  glory  of  your  High  Priest,  and  his  love  to  you,  claims  and  justifies 
your  avowal  of  his  cause  and  your  attachment  to  his  Name. 

II.  Encohraoement  flows  from  the  sympathy  of  the  High  Priest.  The 
inspired  writer  returns  to  the  question  which  he  had  passingly  noticed  before,  and 
alludes  to  the  career  of  temptation  through  which  the  Redeemer  fought  his  way  to  the 
glory  which  awaited  him.  He  was  tried  by  the  loneliness  of  his  spirit,  for  none  could 
completely  understand  hira.  He  was  tempted  by  Pharisees  and  Sadducees.  He  was 
tempted  by  the  ingratitude  of  men.  He  was  specially  tempted  by  Satan,  who  strove  to 
turn  him  aside  from  his  work,  and  stain  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  was  to  take  away  the 
sin  of  the  world.  Some  of  his  temptations  were  beyond  the  reach  of  merely  human 
experience,  for  his  sorrows  and  burdens  were  such  that  it  may  be  said,  "  of  the  people 
there  was  none  with  him  ; "  "  he  trod  the  wine-press  alone."  He  passed  through  all 
his  trials  without  one  act  which  was  unworthy  of  his  Divine  character,  and  came  out 
of  the  furnace  of  temptation  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  This  qualifies 
him  to  sympathize  with  his  afilictod  followers.  Angels  and  archangels  can  from  their 
special  experience  offer  no  such  help  to  struggling  believers.  Sympathy  divides  our 
sorrows  and  heightens  our  joys;  and -that  which  our  Lord  affords  is  quick  in  its 
movements  and  efficient  in  its  influence.  He  showed  this  truth  to  Saul  on  the  way  to 
Damascus,  and  told  him  that  in  persecuting  his  disciples  he  was  actually  persecuting 
Iheir  glorified  Master.  If,  therefore,  the  synagogue  should  despise  and  ill  treat  them, 
let  them  turn  to  him  who  in  all  their  afflictions  is  afflicted,  and  whose  grace  can  support 
them.    Sympathy  should  inspire  them  with  Divine  confidence  and  hope. 

"He  knows  what  sore  temptations  mean, 
For  he  has  felt  the  same." 

III.  Bncouraobment  from  free  access  to  the  throne  of  oraob.  There  is  a 
precious  compass  and  variety  of  thought  in  this  appeal  to  Christian  experience.  Tlieie 
is  the  throne,  which  is  the  image  of  power,  where  Jehovah  sits  in  glory,  and  all 


«H.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  131 

•ngels,  all  creation,  all  proyidence  with  its  wide  range  and  marvellous  machinery,  all 
the  agencies  of  the  Church  and  the  gift  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  are  under  his  guidance.  It 
is  the  throne  of  grace,  and  stands  in  contrast  to  the  awfulness  of  Sinai,  and  the  solitary 
chamber  of  the  holy  of  holies,  into  which  the  high  priest  entered  once  a  year.  The 
throne  is  radiant  with  the  Divine  light,  and  love ;  for  "  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no 
darkness  at  all ;  "  and  "  God  is  love,"  and  is  exalted  that  he  may  be  gracious  unto  us. 
The  writer  invites  believers  to  come  with  boldness,  and  probably  suggests  a  contrast 
to  the  ancient  service  of  the  high  prieat  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  the  spirit  of 
bondage  in  which  many  of  the  Jewish  people  were  held.  The  Christian  state  is  one  of 
liberty  and  filial  love.  God  sends  forth  "  the  Spirit  of  his  Son,  crying,  Abba,  Father." 
Since  Christ  is  our  High  Priest,  and  the  throne  is  one  of  grace,  we  may  have  access  by 
one  Spirit  unto  the  Father,  and  speak  to  him  with  the  reverential  confidence  which  he 
invites  and  will  justify  by  affording  spiritual  help.  This  help  we  need  in  the  form  of 
mercy  to  pardon  the  faults  and  mistakes  of  our  life,  and  to  regain  the  waste  of  spiritual 
strength  in  the  warfare  and  collisions  of  life.  He  will  give  grace  in  cheering  proofs  of 
his  favour,  and  in  maintaining  our  fidelity  to  his  cause  amid  the  strain  of  temptation 
and  the  examples  of  failure  in  those  who  once  ran  well  and  have  been  hindered.  "  He 
will  give  grace  and  glory,  and  no  good  thing  will  be  withhold  from  them  that  walk 
uprightly."— B. 

Ver.  1. — The  two  gospels.  I.  The  fibst  oobpei..  That  which  was  proclaimed  to 
Abraham,  repeated,  enforced  to  his  posterity,  standing  before  them  in  the  way  of  duty 
and  of  hope,  even  in  the  darkest  days  of  Egyptian  bondage.  It  was  a  gospel  that 
proclaimed  rest,  settlement,  worship,  and  service  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  And  though 
special  attention  is  called  here  to  the  great  Abrahamic  and  Mosaic  promise  to  Israel, 
yet  be  it  also  noted  that  Gk>d  is  ever  a  Being  sending  forth  gospels  when  there  is  need 
of  them  and  ground  to  show  that  there  will  be  anything  substantial  in  them.  Never 
did  an  liyyt\os  go  forth  without  an  fiayyiAiov  of  some  sort.  It  is  we  that  turn  gospels 
into  the  worst  of  news,  because  in  benefiting  others  they  may  make  it  needful  for  us 
to  suffer.  And  yet  what  seems  bad  news  on  the  first  look  of  it  may  turn  out  in  the 
end  to  have  been  the  best  of  news.  The  good  news  which  Moses  brought  to  Israel  of 
the  impending  deliverance  from  servitude'  may  fairly  be  called,  in  common  parlance, 
bad  news  for  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians,  seeing  it  meant  national  humiliation,  the  loss 
of  so  much  useful  labour.  Yet  who  can  doubt  that  even  for  Egypt,  after  all  the 
calamities  of  the  plagues,  there  was  a  great  good  in  that  which  brought  good  to  Israel  ? 
A  gospel  prominently  set  forth  for  some  is  really  a  gospel  for  alL 

II.  The  second  gospel.  A  second,  and  yet  in  truth  it  was  nothing  but  the  fulness 
of  the  first.  Liberty  for  the  enslaved,  rest  for  the  weary,  a  secure  and  fruitful  inheritance 
for  the  true  children  of  Abraham,  those  of  like  faith  with  him, — these  are  the  promises 
of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  so  this  gospel,  an  everlasting  gospel,  remains  uttered 
forth,  wherever  the  need  of  man  presses.  This  is  one  of  the  great  uses  of  preaching, 
that  by  it  gospel  promises,  possibilities,  and  invitations  are  for  ever  sounding  forth  in 
the  ears  of  men.  The  complaint  is  that  preachers  are  ever  saying  the  same  old 
thing ;  yet  that  is  to  •  certain  extent  their  virtue  and  their  value.  The  ear  that  heard 
yesterday  belonged  to  a  man  who  rather  preferred  to  hear  the  gospel  coming  from 
worldly  wisdom ;  but  to-day  he  has  found  that  gospel  to  be  no  gospel,  and  the  true 
heavenly  message  not  heard  at  all,  or  only  half  heard,  is  received  in  all  its  pertinency, 
its  sweetness,  its  fulness.  The  throng  of  men  abounds  every  day  in  what  conventionally 
is  called  bad  news,  news  of  money  losses,  shattered  health,  ruined  reputation,  relatives 
and  friends  passed  away.  Over  against  these  how  supremely  important  to  feel  that  there 
is  always  good  news  in  this,  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  as  to  give  his  only  begotten 
Son,  ib&t  whosoever  belluveth  on  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life"  1 — ^Y. 

Ver.  2. — The  gospel  profitless  to  an  unbelieving  heart.  With  the  Israelites  their  sin 
was  not  so  much  actual  and  active  unbelief,  a  bold  denial  of  Jehovah's  truth,  as  the 
lack  of  an  actual  and  active  faith.  There  was  no  active  spiritual  energy  in  them  to 
meet  the  abundant  energy  of  their  liberating  and  guiding  God.  The  parable  of  the 
seed  in  the  four  kinds  of  ground  may  well  be  api>lied  to  them.  The  great  bulk  of  them 
Btave  not  the  slightest  real  attention  to  any  Divine  word  of  promise  or  duty,      Sobki 


138  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  nr.  1—16, 

doubtless  did  mean  to  be  docile,  obedient,  and  patient ;  and  a  few  at  least  must  have 
been  in  real  accord  with  Jehovah's  aim.  But  what  availed  a  few,  if  the  bulk  of  the 
people  sat  before  Jehovah  in  carnal  indifference  ?  If  we  would  profit  by  the  greater 
gospel  to  us — 

L  We  must  believb  it  to  be  tbub.  This  very  thing  we  think  we  do,  and  yet 
on  inquiry  we  find  we  do  it  not.  There  is  no  mistake  when  a  man  feels  he  is  dealina; 
with  realities.  And  the  way  in  which  we  not  seldom  talk  of  the  gospel  or  behave 
when  it  is  set  before  us  shows  that  to  us  it  is  no  reality.  And  yet,  just  because  it  is  a 
reality,  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  it  some  day.  True  strength,  peace,  and  blessedness 
lie  in  reconciliation  with  God.  To  believe  the  gospel  as  true  is  to  come  to  know  this  in 
time.  But  sooner  or  later  we  shall  have  to  know  that  strength,  peace,  and  blessednesa 
lie  nowhere  else. 

IL  Wb  must  believb  the  work  to  be  needful.  The  gospel  includes  purifica- 
tion, trial,  discipline,  service.  The  gospel  does  not  always  look  like  a  gospel.  For 
instance,  Jesus  says, "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away."  The  gospel  has  allowed 
its  heralds  and  its  recipients  to  be  put  in  prison  and  to  go  to  death.  Trust  is  needed 
in  the  reality  of  love  behind  the  appearance  of  indifference  ;  the  heart  of  the  believer 
feeling  God  to  be  near  when  to  the  worldly  spectators  it  may  seem  that  nothing  is  near 
but  trouble,  pain,  loss,  confusion.  We  have  to  trust  God  as  to  his  way,  hig  time,  or 
the  gospel  will  be  profitless  to  us. 

III.  Wb  mtjbt  get  out  of  oub  hearts  a  pkefbbence  pob  bblievino  the  false. 
As  our  eyes  look  oat  upon  the  world  with  its  opportunities  and  its  varied  scenes,  its 
paths  for  ambition  and  adventure,  we  make  gospels  for  ourselves  out  of  the  things  we 
see.  Nature  seems  full  of  evangelists,  and  we  believe  everything  they  have  to  say  ; 
and  then  at  last  discover  the  gospel  to  be  one  of  our  own  making.  For  the  time  the 
false  is  more  attractive  than  the  true,  and  we  mix  strong  faith  with  our  hearing  of  it. 
But  as  a  true  gospel  is  profitless  without  faith,  so  a  false  gospel  is  profitless,  however 
strong  the  faith  may  be.  God's  truth  cannot  do  without  our  faith,  nor  our  faith  without 
God's  truth.— Y. 

Ver.  9. — The  true  taVbatic  rest.  Note  here  the  word  employed — (raPPanvijAt,  This 
the  only  occurrence  of  the  word.  It  is  preced'ed  and  followed  by  another  word  for  rest — 
KartfirayiriT.  There  must  be  something  in  the  abrupt  utterance  for  just  once  of  this  word 
in  ver.  9.  The  different  word  must  emphasize  difference  of  meaning.  The  difference 
seems  to  lie  here,  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  rest  to  be  thought  of — one  the  rest  from 
toil  and  exertion,  the  rest  to  the  weary ;  the  other  rest  of  cessation  from  work,  because 
something  is  complete.    Thus  we  have  two  views  of  the  Christian's  future, 

I.  He  is  to  have  best  from  all  that  makes  life  weary.  The  aa^Saruriiis  must 
include  the  Kariiravaii ;  but,  then,  there  may  also  be  the  KOTrfirouirij  every  day  and  all 
day  long.  To  rest  the  body  after  toil  is  very  important,  but  more  important  is  it  to  be 
able  to  rest  the  heart.  There  are  only  too  many  who  get  no  proper  rest  of  body  on 
Sunday  because  their  hearts  are  lull  of  unrest.  It  is  more  than  can  be  expected  from 
imperfect  humanity  that  we  should  attain  this  constant  restfulness  of  spirit ;  but  let  it 
be  understood  that  the  cause  lies  in  our  imperfections,  and  not  in  any  absolute  necessity 
of  the  case.  Kest  is  begun  in  a  trustful  heart,  and  the  more  trust  the  more  rest.  Much 
of  the  weariness  of  life  comes  from  our  own  needless,  useless  struggling.  We  make 
toilsome  work  by  our  ambitions  and  our  fears.  People  prefer  the  toiling  and  the  care 
of  the  life  of  sight  to  the  rest  of  the  life  of  trust.     "  Eeturn  unto  thy  rest,  0  my  soul." 

II.  He  is  to  have  rest  after  completed  wore.  This  is  the  true  nfiParuriiis, 
Why  is  the  other  kind  of  rest,  the  rest  from  toil,  necessary  ?  Because  man  is  fallen. 
Reworks  not  according  to  the  pure,  original  power  of  his  creation,  but  under  constraint; 
duty  and  inclination  too  often  opposed ;  or,  if  not  in  opposition,  there  is  immense  friction 
between  them.  But  if  there  had  been  no  fall,  the  work  of  each  individual  man  would 
have  gone  on  calmlj',  equably,  till  it  was  done.  Then  the  o-afipaTta-nis  would  come. 
Look  at  man  on  parallel  lines  from  God.  God  works  out  the  great  scheme  and  order 
of  creation,  and  then  ceases  creating ;  but  he  is  not  weary  when  the  work  is  done,  God 
makes  men  in  his  own  image ;  and  the  universal  human  race  has  its  work  to  do,  with 
each  individual  working  in  his  proper  place.  Then,  when  the  work  is  done,  comes  tha 
Eabbatism.    Let  this  nobler  view  of  rest  be  ours.    In  the  heat  of  noonday  it  is  per- 


OB.  IT.  1-16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  183 

mittod  tliat  we  look  to  the  sunset  and  think  of  rest  from  tod.    But  let  ns  also  take 
.  pride  in  the  toork  we  have  to  do,  thinking  that  some  day,  by  the  Spirit  of  God  working 
in  ns,  the  workmanship  will  be  complete.    God  will  have  his  particular  sabbatism  in 
us ;  and  we,  complete  in  Christ,  shall  get  our  sabbatism  with  God. — T. 

Ver.  12. — Characteristics  of  the  Word  of  God.  What  is  the  connection  with  the 
context  ?  Is  it  not  this,  that  the  Word  of  God,  living  and  abiding  for  ever  (1  Pet. 
i.  23),  stands  in  its  constant  living  relation  to  every  generation  of  men?  So  far 
as  we  are  essentially  in  the  position  of  that  generation  which  came  out  of  Egypt, 
so  far  as  we  have  Divine  promises  before  us  the  conditions  of  which  we  may  neglect, 
so  far  are  we  the  objects  of  the  same  Word  of  God.  Essentially  the  same  Divine  visita^ 
tion,  judicial  visitation,  comes  on  all  who  fail  to  show  that  trust  which  is  their  duty. 
The  same  things  must  happen  to  all  who  will  not  believe  what  is  true  and  trust  what 
is  trustworthy. .  And  yet  what  is  here  said  of  the  Word  of  God  only  takes  a  threaten- 
ing aspect  if  we  choose  to  have  it  so.  The  Word  of  God  has  a  double  function.  It 
may  penetrate,  physician-like,  to  heal,  to  purify,  to  illuminate  the  depths  and  dark- 
nesses of  our  being,  or  it  may  penetrate  to  furnish  the  irresistible  evidence  for  our 
condemnation.  It  is  sufScient,  then,  that  we  look  at  the  characteristics  of  God's  Word 
in  themselves.    What  they  may  become  in  action  it  is  for  us  to  decide. 

I.  Thb  Wokd  op  Gk)D  IS  living.  Every  word  concerning  truth  and  duty,  every 
word  of  promise,  comfort,  revelation  of  the  unseen,  is  like  a  living  being  sent  out  into 
the  world,  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  so  that  none  of  us  knows  when,  with  'all  its 
fulness  of  life,  it  may  take  hold  of  us.  "  Moses,"  says  Stephen  in  his  great  discourse, 
"  received  the  lively  oracles  (\0710  fSi/To)  to  give  to  us."  It  is  well  that  we  should 
bear  in  mind  how  the  written  Scriptures,  though  an  invaluable  help,  are  not  an  abso- 
lute necessity.  Apart  from  the  living  Spirit  of  God  which  fills  them  with  life,  they 
would  be,  perhaps,  the  least  comprehensible,  the  most  perplexing,  of  antique  writings. 
Nor  must  we  be  forgetful  of  that  Divine  Logos  spoken  of  at  the  beginning  of  John's 
Gospel.  In  that  Logos  was  life — ^life  which  was  the  light  of  men.  The  Word  of  God 
finding  its  highest  expression,  the  expression  of  what  would  otherwise  be  inef&ble  in 
a  manifested  human  life ;  human,  yet  Divine  ;  Divine,  yet  human. 

II.  The  Wokd  of  God  la  powerful.  Powerful,  but  powerful  in  a  peculiar  way. 
Energetic,  shall  we  say  ?  Leaven — leavening  the  wliole  lump,  undermining  cherished 
principles  of  worldly  wisdom,  falsehoods,  prejudices,  superstitions,  and  putting  in  their 
place  the  Christian — the  true  and  the  rational.  Note  the  expression  of  Paul  in  2  Cor. 
iv.  12,  where  he  speaks  of  life  energizing  in  us. 

III.  Thb  Wobd  or  God  ib  penetrating.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  characteristic 
most  to  be  borne  in  mind,  considering  how  language  is  multiplied  and  varied  to  declare 
it.  The  sword  of  the  Spirit  is  the  Word  of  God.  Some  plain  word  of  God  with  the 
Spirit's  force  behind  it  is  a  sword,  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword ;  and  yet,  unlike 
the  carnal  weapon,  it  is  not  for  killing,  nor  for  mischief.  Here  is  the  penetrating 
power  which  reveals  all  secrets,  opens  out  all  mysteries.  It  hacks  its  way  in  and  in 
till  it  is  face  to  face  with  the  real  man.  Every  man  has,  as  it  were,  a  holy  of  holies 
with  respect  to  others.  They  cannot  get  behind  the  veil.  But  God  is  never  anywhere 
else  in  relation  to  us.  His  ways  are  past  finding  out  by  us.  But  all  our  ways  in 
e^sry  winding  are  known  to  him.  And  all  this  deep,  infallible  searching  is  for  our 
good. — Y. 

Ver.  14. — Ow  great  Eigh  Priest  passed  into  the  heaveni.  I.  Thb  com pasibon  implied. 
Oh.  ix.  helps  us  here.  There  the  writer  speaks  of  two  tabernacles — the  first  outside  the 
veil,  the  second  within.  Into  the  second  the  high  priest  went  alone  once  a  year. 
There,  away  from  the  sight  of  the  people,  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  containing 
the  tables  of  our  Law,  he  transacted  solemn  business  with  God  on  behalf  of  his  fellow- 
Israelites.  And  not  only  so,  this  high  priest  was  acknowledged  by  the  whole  people. 
They  believed,  or  professed  to  believe,  that  he  was  a  necessary  medium  of  communica- 
tion between  God  and  them.  And  so  he  was  for  the  time,  and  long  continued  so.  The 
bulk  of  the  Hebrew  people  at  the  time  this  Epistle  was  written  had  a  profound  regard, 
though  also  a  superstitious  and  servilepne,  for  the  person  of  the  high  priest.  There 
night  be  in  the  regard  very  little  of  inffJigenoe,  and  very  doubtful  advantage;  but  still, 


134  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  nr.  1—16 

there  it  was,  a  real  acknowledgment,  quite  enougli  out  of  which  to  make  a  striking 
illustration  of  him  who  is  the  real  great  High  Priest — Jesus,  the  Son  of  God.  He  also 
has  passed  through  and  gone  behind  a  veil,  the  veil  that  separates  the  seen  from  the 
unseen.  What  a  thought  of  the  unseen,  that  it  is  God's  true  holy  of  holies !  Doubtless 
there  is  a  special  reference  here  to  the  day  of  ascension,  when  Jesus  rose  from  the 
midst  of  his  disciples,  and  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight. 

11.  How  WE  ARE  TO  PBOFiT  BY  THIS  COMPARISON.  The  Comparison — the  parallel — 
was  easy  enough  to  these  Hebrew  Christians.  It  referred  them  to  traditions  and  « 
ritual  with  which  they  were  familiar  from  childhood.  They  saw  high  priests  con-, 
tinually.  But  we  know  nothing  of  a  priest,  an  altar,  a  sacrifice.  We  do  not  hear  the 
lowing  of  oxen  and  the  bleating  of  sheep  whose  lives  are  to  be  taken  away  in  the 
acceptable  worship  of  God.  We  could  not  bring  ourselves  to  think  that  such  things 
could  be  of  any  use.  Not  at  all  doubting  that  they  once  served  a  purpose,  we  know 
that  the  purpose  exists  no  longer.  Believing  that  they  were  once  somphow  necessary, 
that  is  all  we  can  say.  Our  experience  gives  us  nothing  whereby  we  may  understand 
the  necessity.  Thus  the  question  comes — How  are  we,  who  have  never  had  anything 
to  do  with  such  a  priest  as  Aaron,  or  any  of  his  posterity,  to  get  good  out  of  this  exhor- 
tation ?  What  sort  of  notion  are  we  to  represent  to  our  minds  when  we  ar«  told  to 
hold  fast  our  profession  in  a  great  High  Priest  passed  into  the  heavens,  when,  as  a 
matter  of  experience,  we  have  never  had  anything  to  do  with  priests  at  all  ?  It  would 
be  a  great  mistake  to  say  that  we  are  to  trouble  ourselves  no  more  about  the  priestly 
idea.  Though  we  cannot  make  the  forms  of  the  old  Jewish  priesthood  a  living  thing 
to  us,  still  we  can  surely  do  something  to  get  at  the  idea  which  lies  behind  all  priest- 
hood. We  are  often  misled  by  confownding  priesthood  with  'priestcraft.  The  indigna- 
tion of  every  honest  heart  cannot  be  too  strong  against  the  abomination,  priestcraft. 
But  why  an  abomination  ?  Just  because  it  is  the  degradation  of  a  good  thing.  Priest- 
hood is  simply  the  office  and  function  of  the  man  who  is  set  apart  to  act  on  behalf  of 
his  fellow-men  in  their  relations  to  God.  And  looking  at  what  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Old  Testament  with  respect  to  the  priestly  of&ce,  we  find  there  was  no  chance  for 
priestcraft.  The  true  priest  had  to  be  an  honest,  patient  man,  faithful  in  little  things, 
exact  in  minute  observances,  full  of  self-denial,  and  constantly  attentive  to  the  requests 
of  all  the  people.  The  very  Scriptures  which  exalt  priesthood  denounce  priestcraft. 
Priesthood  is  the  means  whereby  men  are  governed  and  blessed  spiritually ;  priestcraft 
the  means  whereby  they  are  spiritually  crushed,  and  their  consciences  made  slaves  to 
another  man's  will.  Priestcraft  is  only  to  be  got  rid  of  by  giving  the  true  priesthood 
its  full  force.  Allowing  ourselves  to  drift  into  the  idea  that  priesthood  is  obsolete,  we 
shall  never  get  rid  of  priestcraft ;  since  error  only  dies  out  as  truth  is  planted  by  its 
side,  drawing  away  from  the  roots  of  error  all  that  nourished  them.  The  priesthood  in 
ancient  Israel,  with  all  its  mere  outward  rites,  with  all  its  defects  and  lapses,  did  a 
great  service.  It  prepared  the  way  for  the  great  High  Priest  of  our  acknowledgment. 
And,  after  all,  priesthood  is  only  the  naine ;  it  is  the  thing  we  have  to  look  at.  Jesus 
is  he  who  answers  the  questions  no  one  on  earth  can  answer;  renders  the  services  no 
one  on  earth  can  render;  we  therefore  call  him  great  High  Priest.  Pretenders  may  come 
in,  and  by  their  doings  make  the  name  of  priest  hateful ;  but  the  work  of  the  true 
Priest  is  none  the  less  real.  And  the  exhortation  is  that  we  should  avail  ourselves  of 
that  work  to  the  very  fullest  extent.  Then  all  the  good  things  coming  to  us  by  nature 
will  be  crowned  by  this  best  thing  coming  through  grace.  Men  have  helped  us 
according  to  their  opportunity — ^loving,  self-denying  parents,  skilful  instructors, 
watchful  and  wise-hearted  friends,  great  men  who  have  revealed  themselves  in  books, 
making  us  feel  what  a  noble  thing  it  is  to  be  partakers  of  human  nature ;  and  then 
Jesus  of  Nazarelh  comes  in  at  last.  Priest  of  the  most  high  God,  abiding  for  ever,  and 
undertaking  to  satisfy  our  deepest  wants  out  of  the  immeasurable  fulness  of  Gbd. — Y. 

Vera.  15, 16. — The  helpful  nearness  to  man  of  the  true  High  Priest.  I.  The  implica- 
tion WITH  EEGAKD  TO  OTHER  PRIESTS.  Other  priests  are  lacking  in  proper  sympathy 
with  human  weakness.  They  are  lacking  in  a  sense  of  the  almost  omnipotence  of 
tempting  influence.  They  themselves,  in  all  important  respects,  are  no  better  than 
those  for  whom  they  act.  Not  that  they  are  to  blame  for  this ;  other  things  were  not 
expected  from  them.     They  were  only  to  be  part  of  bm  Instructive  and  impressive 


am.  ▼.  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


13a 


ceremonial  by  which  might  be  set  forth,  by  the  best  means  attainable  at  the  time, 
something  as  to  what  a  priest,  an  offering  and  an  approach  to  God,  ought  to  be.  The 
very  defects  of  the  priest  taken  from  among  men  emphasize  the  need  of  something 
immeasarably  better.  Sinful  men  should  be  able  to  sympathize  with  sinful  men;  but, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  tbey  very  frequently  are  unable  to  do  this  even  in  the  most  qualified 
way.  They  can  sympathize  in  a  measure  with  sioliness,  with  temporal  calamity ;  but 
too  often  for  sin,  for  crime,  for  vice,  they  have  nuthing  but  denunciation  with  resiject  to 
men.  There  is  a  hint  to  us  how  we  should  recollect  that  the  greater  sinner  a  man  is, 
the  greater  is  his  need  for  human  sympathy. 

II,  Thb  PEBFEcnoN  OF  FBiEBTLT  QUALITIES  FOUITD  IN  Ghrist.  In  him  there  is  all 
the  true  priest  needs.  He  is  attracted,  not  by  the  strong  side  of  human  nature,  but  by 
tlie  weak.  Easy  is  it  to  be  drawn  to  men  in  the  hours  of  their  full  life,  in  their  prime, 
when  thoy  are  strong  for  action  either  of  body  or  of  mind;  and  it  is  pleasant  to  look  at 
the  results  of  all  their  effort.  But  it  is  much  better,  difficult  though  it  be,  to  look  at 
man  in  big  hours  of  weakness  and  need ;  for  it  is  out  of  the  midst  of  bis  weakness  that 
his  highest  strength  is  to  be  attained.  And  so  Jesui  was  drawn  to  men  in  their  weak- 
ness. He  came,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  minister  to  those 
who  really  needed  ministry.  We  do  not  serve  rightly  when  we  serve  those  who  are 
quite  able  to  do  things  for  themselves.  This  is  only  to  increase  the  indolence  of  the 
world.  Christ  comes  to  give  the  help  that  but  for  his  coming  could  not  be  given.  He 
sympathizes  with  us  in  all  weakness,  in  poverty,  in  sickness,  in  feebleness  of  body  and 
harassing  circumstances.  But  his  sympathy  is  specially  with  us  in  temptation.  He 
was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  t.e.  his  temptation  was  a  real  thing ;  and  the 
temptation  he  had  to  suffer  was  one  suited  to  the  peculiarities  of  his  position  and  bis 
work.  We  are  to  think  here,  not  so  much  of  his  experiences  in  the  wilderness,  as  of 
Gethsemane  (ch.  v.  7).  The  temptations  of  the  wilderness  he  saw  through  at  once ; 
they  must  have  been  very  clumsy  artifices  in  his  eye.  But  Gethiemane  tried  him. 
The  pure  gold  went  into  the  furnace  there  that  its  purity  might  be  made  manifest. 
And  thus  it  was  shown  that  he  was  without  a  sin.  The  more  we  are  made  to  feel  our 
own  sin,  the  more  our  hearts  are  revealed,  the  closer  we  are  drawn  to  him  who  has  no 
sin,  and  who  shows  us  that  sin  is  no  essential  part  of  human  nature. 

III.  The  PEAcnoAL  result  of  these  considerations.  We  are  to  make  full  use  of 
the  Priest  thus  provided — a  Priest  not  of  our  finding  or  our  making.  He  has  not  come 
by  some  process  of  selection  and  training  employed  by  men,  but  is  of  Divine  appoint- 
ment; an  Apostle  from  the  throne  of  grace,  beseeching  us  to  accept  him  as  the  sufficient 
Interpreter  of  human  needs  and  human  peuitence.  Our  attitude  is  to  be  one  of  approach 
to  the  thron'e  of  grace,  thinking  of  it  as  such  ;  thinking  of  the  severities  of  God  and  the 
penal  aspects  of  law  as  only  grace  in  disguise.  Chastibement,  punishment,  pain,  are 
but  grace  not  understood.  We  must  have  boldness,  freeness,  a  strong  sense  of  the 
tdght  ^ven  us  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace.  We  must  have  a  sense  of  how  God 
wUI  treat  us.  He  will  not  only  put  us  into  a  better  state,  but  do  it  in  a  most 
compassionate  and  tender  way.  It  ia  conceivable  that  a  physician  might  perfectly 
cure  m  sick  person,  yet  do  it  all  like  a  machine,  without  any  manifestation  of  heart, 
without  a  single  kind  or  cheering  word.— Y, 


EXPOSITION.' 


CHAPTER  V. 
Tbx  Pbiestuood  of  OHmgr. 
The  purpose  of  the  first  part  of  this 
chapter  (vers.  1 — 10)  is  to  corroborate  the 
position  arrived  at  in  the  conclusion  of 
ch.  iv.,  viz.  that  we  have  in  Christ  a  true 
High  Priest  sufficient  for  all  our  needs. 
This  i*  done  by  analyzing  the  conception  of 
•  high  priest,  and  observing  tliat  Christ  in 


■11  respects  folfilg  It  And  thu  the  full 
exposition  of  Christ's  heavenly  priesthood 
above  that  of  Aaron  is  prepared  for.  But 
this  full  exposition  is  still  not  entered  on 
till  after  an  exhortation  (beginning  at  oh. 
V.  11),  longer  and  more  earnest  than  an; 
former  one,  called  for  by  the  slowness  of 
the  Hebrew  Christians  to  apprehend  the 
doctrine.  It  ia  at  length  taken  up  snd 
carried  out  in  oh.  vii. 


136 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  t.  l—U. 


The  intention  of  yen.  1 — 10  being  si 
above  explained,  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose 
any  contrast  intended  Iiere  between  the 
Aaronio  priesthood  and  that  of  Christ;  e.g. 
to  take  vers.  1 — 3  as  ueaniug,  Saman  high 
priests  can  sympathize  in  Tirtue  of  their 
own  infirmity, — otherwiee  Cbiist ;  or,  Htiman 
high  prieatg  have  need  of  atonement  for 
themselves,  — noi  lo  Christ.  The  main  drift, 
on  the  contrary,  is  that  all  recognized 
essentials  of  high  priesthood  are  found  in 
Christ  These  essentials  are  that,  the  high 
priest's  office  being  to  mediate  between  man 
and  Gtod,  (1)  he  should  be  of  the  same 
nature,  and  gympathetio  with  those  in 
-whose  behalf  he  mediates;  and  (2)  that  his 
credentials  should  be  Divine,  i.e.  that  God 
himself  ahould  have  appointed  him  to  hia 
offloe. 

Ver.  1. — ^For  areiy  Ugh  piieit,  f^om 
among  man  being  taken,  for  men  ii  oon- 
stitnted  in  the  things  pertaining  to  Qod, 
that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and  aaorlSoeB 
for  una.  Here  ^|  hvBpdntuiv  \aii0av6nfvos  is 
not  (as  the  rendering  of  the  A.y.  might 
suggest)  a  limitation  of  the  subject  of  the 
Bentenoe,  confining  it  to  merdy  human  high 
priests;  it  belongs  to  the  predicate,  ex- 
pressing what  is  true  of  every  high  priest. 
The  phrase  expresses  both  the  necessary  Au- 
■auinity  of  the  high  priest,  and  also  his  being 
set  apart  for  his  peculiar  office — KanPavi- 
fievos  i^.  The  order,  and  consequent  force, 
of  the  words  in  the  Greek  is  retained  in  the 
translation  given  above.  (For  the  expression, 
Tct  ff^i  Till'  e^iiv,  cf.  ch.  ii.  17;  Bom.  xv.  17.) 
The  purpose  for  which  the  high  priest  is 
constituted  in  this  relation  is  "  that  he  may 
offer  both  gifts  and  sucrifioei  for  lint " — a 
comprehensive  designation  of  sacerdotal 
functions,  the  essential  idea,  expressed  by 
ivip  uitafTiav,  being  otonenxTil  (of.  oh.  ii.  17, 
Eis  rii  IXdaKtaBai  roll  a/iapTlas  rsS  AaoS). 
The  difference  between  the  words  tapoy 
and  Suirta  is  that  the  fonner,  denoting 
properly  any  offering  regarded  as  a  gift,  U 
espeeiaily  applied  in  the  LXX.  to  the 
miackak  ("  meat  offering  ") ;  the  latter  (from 
0^  denotes  properly  "  a  bloody  sacrifice," 
and  is  generally  so  applied.  The  distinction, 
however,  ia  not  invariably  observed,  Sapov 
being  nsed  in  this  Epistle  (oh.  zi  4)  for 
Abel'a  sacrifice  and  (ch.  viii.  4)  for  all 
kinds  of  offerings,  while  8v<rla  in  the 
LXX.  denotes  (Gen,  iv.  8)  Cain's  unbloody 
oflkrnig  and  (Lev.  ii.  1)  the  uUnchah. 
Bat  here,  as  also  in  eh.  viii.  3  and  ix. 
9,  where  both  ate  named  (S&pa  re  koI 
Bualat),  we  may  eonelude  a  distinctive  re- 
jbraaoa  to  by  In^Mled  ta   the   unbloody 


and  bloody  offerings  of  the  Law  (cf.  Ps.  xl.  6, 
**  Sacrifice  and  offering  (Bi/alav  /col  irpo<ripopki>, 
LXX.)  tboo  didst  not  desire;"  Dan.  ix.  27, 
Suffla  Kal  mrorSii :  and  also  Jer.  xvii  26.  To 
both  inrepaftapTi&v  (depending,  not  on  dvtrtas, 
butonirpo(r<()€p7J)  applies.  For,  though  blood- 
sheclding  (ch.  ix.  22)  was  essential  for  atone- 
ment, the  unbloody  minchah  formed  part  of 
the  ceremony  of  expiation,  and  this  notably 
on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  so  specially 
referred  to  afterwards  in  the  Epistle  (see 
Numb.  xxix.  7 — 11). 

Yer.  2. — Who  can  have  compassion  on  the 
ignorant  and  erring;  for  that  he  himself 
Biso  is  compassed  with  infirmity.  It  is  not 
easy  to  find  a  satisfactory  English  equiva- 
lent for  lifTprnTraBitv,  translated  as  above  in 
the  A.y. ;  by  Alford,  "be  compassionate 
towards;"  in  the  margin  of  the  A-V., 
"reasonably  bear  with;"  by  the  recent 
Bevisers,  "bear  gently  with;"  by  Bengel, 
"  moderate  afflci"  The  compound  had  its 
origin,  doubtless,  in  the  peripatetic  school, 
denoting  the  right  mean  between  passionate- 
ness  and  Stoic  apathy,  being  the  application 
of  Aristotle's  /leffdrris  to  the  sphere  of  the 
passions.  ■  Thus  Diog.  Laert.  says  of  Aristotle, 
"E^TI  si  r^y  ffoiphv  fiij  etycu  /ihy  avafiTJ,  /lerpto' 
iraff^  th.  In  this  sense  Philo  uses  nerpto- 
itaSiis  to  express  Abraham's  sober  grief 
after  the  death  of  Sarah  (ii.  37)  and  Jacob's 
patience  under  his  afflictions  (ii.  45).  The 
verb,  followed,  as  here,  by  s  dative  of 
persons,  may  be  taken,  therefore,  to  denote 
moderation  of  feeling  towards  the  persons 
indicated,  such  moderation  being  especially 
opposed  in  the  case  before  us,  where  the 
persons  are  the  ignorant  and  erring,  to 
excess  of  severe  or  indignant  feeling.  Mode- 
ration, indeed,  in  this  regard  seems  to  have 
been  the  idea  generally  attached  to  the 
compound  (of.  Plut., '  De  Ira  Cohib.,'  p.  453, 
'Ayaa-Tijaat  ko)  irivai  icai  ^(uriaBai  K<d  Kop- 
reprjartu  rpairriTos  ivrl  nol  avyyyiip.t]S  koI 
lifTpmiraAcfas).  Josephus  also  speaks  of  the 
emperors  Vespasian  and  Titus  ai  jucrpio- 
■nadrtaiyrav  in  their  attitude  towards  the 
Jews  after  long  hostility  ('Ant.,'  xii  3. 
S)k  This,  then,  being  the  meaning  of  fix- 
TftoriBtla,  it  ia  obvious  how  the  capacity 
of  it  is  essential  to  the  idea  of  a  high 
priest  as  being  one  who  is  resorted  to  aa 
a  mediator  by  a  people  laden  with  in- 
firmities, to  represent  them  and  to  plead 
for  them.  It  is  not  of  necessity  implied 
that  every  high  priest  was  personally  /ie- 
rpumaBiis :  it  is  the  ideal  of  bis  office  that  is 
spoken  of.  And,  in  the  case  of  human  high 
priests,  this  ideal  was  fulfilled  by  their 
being  themselves  human,  encompassed 
themselves  with  the  infirmity  of  those  for 
whom  they  mediated^  Christ  also,  so  far, 
evidently  fulfils  the  condition.  For,  though 
he  ia  afterwards  distinguished  (eb.  vii.  28) 


OH.  T.  1—14.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS 


187 


from  priests  having  themselTes  infirmity, 
yet  he  had,  in  his  human  nature,  experienced 
what  it  was :  "  He  was  crucified  ^J  aaBevdas  " 
(2  Cor.  xiii.  4) ;  "  ECimself  took  our  infirmi- 
ties (oo-eece/as),  and  bare  our  sicknesses" 
(Matt.  viii.  17 ;  Tsa.  liii.  4) ;  the  agony  in  the 
garden  (whatever  its  mysterious  import,  of 
which  more  below)  expressed  personal  ex- 
perience of  human  airdeydtx.  Alford  denies 
that  i^ievtla,  in  the  sense  supposed  by  him 
to  be  here  iu tended,  can  be  attributed  to 
Glirist,  and  hence  that  ireplKeiTai  hrBiveiats 
can  apply  to  him  (but  see  above  on  ch. 
Iv.  15,  imd  below  on  vers.  3,  7). 

Ver.  3.  —And  by  reason  hereof  he  ought 
(or,  t>  hound,  bipiiKii),  as  for  the  people,  eo 
also  for  himself,  to  offer  for  sins.  This  obli- 
gation is  evident  in  the  case  of  the  high 
priests  of  the  Law.  Consequently,  their  sin 
offering  for  themselves,  in  the  tint  place, 
was  a  prominent  part  of  the  ceremonial  of 
the  Day  of  Atonement,  which  the  writer 
may  be  supposed  to  have  especially  in  view 
(Lev.  xvi.).  But  can  we  suppose  any  cor- 
responding necessity  in  the  case  of  Christ? 
The  argument  does  not  absolutely  require 
that  we  should,  since  the  obligation  of  the 
Levitical  high  priest  may  be  adduced  only 
in  proof  of  his  own  experience  of  haB^vtla. 
Christ,  though  under  no  such  obligation, 
might  still  fulfil  the  requi.'^ites  of  a  high 
priest,  expressed  in  the  case  of  sinful  high 
priests  by  the  obligation  to  ofier  for  tham- 
selves;  and  we  may  (as  Ebrard  says)  leave 
it  to  the  writer  to  show  bow  he  does  fulfil 
them.  Whether,  however,  there  was  in 
Christ's  own  experience  anything  corre- 
sponding to  the  higli  priest's  offering  for 
himself  will  be  considered  under  vers.  7,  8. 

Yer.  4. — And  no  man  taketh  this  honour 
unto  himself,  hut  being  called  of  Ood  (the  6 
of  Textus  Eeceptns  before  Ka^oin^vos — "  he 
that  is  called,"  as  in  A.V. — has  very  slight 
authority),  even  as  was  Aaron.  This  verse 
expresses  the  second  essential  of  a  high 
priest.  Divine  appointment,  for  assurance 
of  the  efficacy  of  his  mediation.  Of  course 
Aaron's  successors  derived  their  Divine  com- 
mission from  his  original  one  (cf.  Numb, 
xxi.  26;  zzvLlO— 14). 

Vers.  5, 6. — So  also  Christ  glorified  not  him- 
self to  be  made  a  High  Priest  Here  begins 
the  proof  that  Christ  fulfils  the  two  require- 
ments, that  mentioned  second  in  the  previous 
statement  being  taken  first  in  the  proof — 
ckiattically,  as  is  usual  in  this  Epistle.  The 
expression,  lauTdv  iSd^aare,  rather  than  t^x 
Ti/t^v  iKafif,  may  have  reference  to  the  glory 
wherewith  Christ  is  crowned  in  his  exalted 
position  as  Priest-King  (cf.  ch.  ii.  9).  But 
he  that  said  unto  him,  Thou  art  my  Son,  this 
day  have  I  begotten  thee.  As  he  saith  also  in 
another  place.  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever  after 
the  order  of  Kslchizedelc.    These  two  texts 


(Ps.  ii.  7 ;  ox.  4)  must  be  taken  together  for 
the  proof  required.  The  first  (commented 
on  under  ch.  i.  5)  shows  the  Lord's  appoint- 
ment of  Christ  to  his  kingly  ofl3ce  as  Sox ; 
the  second  shows  that  this  kingly  ofiSce 
carries  with  it,  also  by  Divine  appointment, 
an  eternal  priesthood.  Christ's  entry  into 
this  kingly  priesthood  is.  best  conceived  as 
inaugurated  by  his  resurrection,  after  accom- 
plishment of  human  obedience,  whereby  he 
fitted  himself  for  priesthood.  Before  this 
he  was  the  destined  High  Priest,  but  not 
the  "  perfected  "  High  Priest,  "  ever  living 
to  make  inteices.^ionforus."  It  is  not  during 
his  life  on  eai  th,  but  after  his  exaltation, 
that  he  is  spoken  of  as  the  High  Priest  of 
mankind.  In  his  sufferings  and  death  he 
was  consecrated  to  his  eternal  office.  This 
appears  from  vers.  9, 10,  and  also  from  Ps. 
ex.,  quoted  in  this  verse,  where  the  priest- 
hood after  the  order  of  Melchizedek  and  the 
exaltation  to  the  right  hand  of  Grod  are 
regarded  together.  See  also  what  was  said 
under  oh.  i.  5,  of  the  application  to  Christ 
of  the  other  text  quoted,  "  This  day  have  I 
begotten  thee."  The  Messianio  reference 
and  general  drift  of  Ps.  ox.  has  been  con- 
sidered under  ch.  i  13.  It  was  there  seen 
to  be  more  than  a  typical  prophecy,  David 
having  in  it  a  distinct  view  of  One  far 
greater  than  himself — of  the  Sox  to  eome, 
whom  he  cnlls  his  Lobd.  But  even  had  it. 
Hire  other  Messianic  psalms,  a  primary  refer- 
ence to  some  theocratic  king,  the  remarlcable 
import  of  ver.  4  would  in  itself  point  beyond 
one.  For,  though  David  organized  and  con- 
trolled the  priesthood  and  the  services  of  the 
sanctuary,  though  both  he  and  Solomon 
took  a  prominent  part  in  solemn  acts  of 
worship,  yet  neither  they  nor  any  other 
king  ass!imed  the  priestly  office,  which,  in 
its  essential  functions,  was  scrupulously  con- 
fined to  the  sons  of  Aaron.  The  judgment 
on  Uzziah  (2  Chron.  xzvi.  16—22)  is  a 
notable  evidence  of  the  importance  attached 
to  this  principle.  Yet  the  verse  before  ua 
assigns  a  true  priesthood  to  the  future  King, 
For  Melchizedek,  as  he  appears  in  Genesis, 
is  evidently  a  true  priest,  though  prior  to 
the  Aaronic  priesthood,  uniting  in  himself, 
according  to  the  system  of  the  patriarchal 
age,  the  royalty  and  the  priesthood  of  his 
race  ;  as  a  true  priest,  he  blessed  Abraham, 
and  received  tithes  from  him.  But  of  him, 
histurically  and  symbolically  regarded,  the 
consideration  must  be  reserved  for  ch.  vii., 
where  the  subject  is  taken  up.  Enough 
here  to  observe  that  in  Ps.  ex.  a  true  and 
everlasting  priesthood  is  assigned  to  the 
Son  in  union  with  his  exalted  royalty  at 
the  Lobd's  right  hand,  and  this  by  Divine 
appointment,  by  the  "  voice  "  or  "  oracle  "  of 
the  Lobd  (ver.  IX  confirmed  by  the  Lobp'i 
oath  (ver.  4). 


138 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[cH.  V.  1 — 14.- 


VeiB.  7, 8. — ^Who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh, 
when  he  had  offered  up  (ratlier,  when  he 
offered  up)  prayers  and  supplications  to  him 
that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death,  and 
was  heard  in  that  he  feared ;  though  he 
were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  obedience  by  the 
things  which  he  suffered.  Here  (according 
to  the  view  talcin  above  of  the  chiastio 
structure  of  the  jiassage)  we  have  the  ac- 
count of  how  Christ  fulfilled  the  human 
requirements  of  a  High  Priest,  referred  to 
in  vers.  2,  3.  This  main  intention  of 
vers.  7,  8  must  be  kept  in  mind  tor  a  proper 
understanding  of  them.  Christ  is  in  them 
regarded,  not  as  executing  his  priestly 
office,  but  as  being  prepared  and  conse- 
crated for  it.  His  eternal  priesthood  is 
conceived  as  entered  on  after  the  human  ex- 
perience which  is  the  subject  of  these  verses 
(cf.  Kal  Ti\ei<i0ei5  4y4v(TO  (ver.  9),  and  what 
was  said  under  ver.  5).  With  regard  to  the 
participial  aorists,  irpoacvcyKas,  fiffaKOvffBeis, 
it  is  a  misapprehension  of  their  proper  force 
to  regard  them  as  denoting  a  time  previous 
to  that  of  c/iafleK  in  ver.  8 ;  as  if  the  meaning 
were — shaving  in  Oethsemane  "offered,"  etc., 
and  "been  heard,"  he  afterwardt  "learnt 
obedience"  on  the  cross.  All  they  express 
is  that  in  offering,  etc.,  and  being  heard,  he 
learned  obedience.  The  iilea  of  subsequent 
time  does  not  come  in  till  ver.  9;  "and 
being  perfected,"  after  thus  learjiing  obe- 
dience, "he  became,"  etc.  Thus  tlie  only 
question  with  regard  to  time  in  vers.  7,  8  is 
whether  they  have  reference  to  the  agony  in 
the  garden  only,  or  both  to  the  agony  and 
the  cross.  That  tliuy  refer  mainly,  if  not 
exclusively,  to  the  agony  is  evident  from  the 
expressions  used,  corresponding  so  closely 
with  the  Gospel  history.  The  view  pre- 
sented is,  as  in  the  Gospels,  of  some  intense 
inward  struggle,  outwardly  manifested,  and 
expressing  itself  in  repeated  prayers  (observe 
the  plural,  Sc^ircij  kuI  iKerriptas)  aloud  foi 
deliverance.  It  it  true  that  the  Gospels,  a« 
we  have  them  now,  do  not  mention  tear$  ; 
but  these  too  are  quite  in  keeping  with  the 
bloody  iweat  ipeciiied  by  St.  Luke,  and 
Epiphanius  states  that  tlie  original  copies  of 
Luke  xxii.  43,  44  contained  the  verb  Ik- 
Aavcrc.  Some  interpreters  would  identify 
the  Kpavyf,  'arxvpd  of  ver.  7  with  the  "  loud 
voice  (<l>av^  iuyi\ri)  "  from  Uie  cross  (Matt. 
xxvii.  46;  Mark  xv.  34;  Luke  xxiii.  46). 
But  there  is  nothing  to  B\ig°;est  this;  the 
"strong  crying  and  tears"  evidently  denote 
the  manner  of  the  "  pr.iyers  and  supplica- 
tions;" and  the  thrice-repeated  prayer  in 
the  garden  recorded  by  the  evangelists 
may  be  well  conceived  to  have  been  tlius 
loudly  uttered,  so  as  to  be  hoard  by  the  three 
disciples,  a  stone's  cast  distant,  before  sleep 
overcame  them.  "  In  cruce  clamasse  dicitur; 
lachrymaiM  son  dicitui    Utium  horum  rei- 


picit  locum  Gethsemane"  (Bengel).  What, 
then,  as  seen  in  the  light  of  these  verses,  was 
the  moaning  of  the  "  prayer  and  supplica- 
tions "  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  ?  The 
expression,  top  Smdiievov  ffdC^iv  avTiv  iK  9a- 
vdrov,  corresponding  with  ndma  Sward  aoi 
of  IMark  xiv.  36,  confirms  the  view  that  the 
"cup"  which  he  prayed  might  pass  from 
liim,  was  the  death  before  him,  and  that  the 
purpurt  of  his  prayer  was,  not  to  be  raised 
frum  death  after  undergoing  it,  but  to  be 
saved  from  undergoing  it.  Such  is  the 
ordinary  meaning  of  aii^civ  Ik  Bardroi  in 
reference  to  one  still  alive  (cf.  Ps.  xxxiii. 
19 ;  Jas.  V.  20).  It  does  not  indeed  posi- 
tively follow  that,  because  he  prayed  to  One 
who  was  able  in  this  sense  to  save  him,  his 
prayer  was  that  he  might  be  in  this  sense 
saved.  It  is,  however,  the  natural  inference. 
But,  if  so,  two  difficulties  present  them- 
selves. (1)  How  was  such  a  prayer  consistent 
with  his  distinct  knowledge  that  death 
must  be  undergone,  and  liis  late  strong 
rebuke  to  Peter  for  venturing  to  dissuade 
him  from  it  ?  (2)  How  can  he  be  said  to 
have  been  heard  {ehaKomBsis),  since  he  was 
not  saved  from  death  in  the  sense  intended  ? 
To  the  first  of  these  questions  the  answer  is 
that  the  prayer  expressed,  not  the  deliberate 
desire  of  his  Divine  will,  but  only  the 
inevitable  shrinking  of  the  human  will 
from  such  an  ordeal  as  was  before  him.  As 
man,  be  experienced  this  shrinking  to  the 
full,  and  as  man  he  craved  deliverance, 
though  with  entire  submission  to  the  will 
of  the  Father.  His  human  will  did  not 
oppose  itself  to  the  Divine  will :  it  confoimed 
itself  in  the  end  entirely  to  it ;  but  this 
according  to  the  necessary  conditions  of 
humanity,  through  the  power  of  prayer. 
Had  it  not  been  so  with  him,  his  participa- 
tion in  human  nature  would  have  been 
incomplete ;  he  would  not  have  been  such 
as  to  be  "  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our 
infirmities,  being  in  all  things  tempted  like 
as  we  are;"  nor  would  he  have  stood  forth 
for  ever  as  the  great  Example  to  mankind. 
St.  John,  who  so  deeply  enters  into  and 
interprets  the  mind  of  Christ,  records  an 
utterance  before  the  agony  which  antici- 
pates its  meaning  (John  xii) :  "  The  hour 
is  come  "(ver.  23);  and  then  (ver.  27),  "Now 
is  my  aoul  troubled ;  and  what  shall  I  say  ? 
Father,  save  me  from  this  hour  [of.  aiiCfu'  it 
Safdrov] ;  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto 
this  hour.  Father,  glorify  thy  Name." 
Tlie  "hour"  was  that  of  the  drinking  of 
the  cup  (cf.  Mark  xiv.  35,  "  And  prayed 
t\i:d,  if  it  wore  possible,  the  hour  might  pass 
from  liim  ").  "  Father,  save  me  from  this 
hour  "  was  the  human  craving  of  the  agony; 
but  still,  "  Father,  glorify  thy  Name "  was 
the  essence  of  the  prayer ;  and  perfect  sub- 
mission to  the  Divine  will  wm  the  outcome 


ea.  V,  1— 14J 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


139 


»f  It,  after  this  troubling  of  his  human  soul. 
The  mystery  surrounding  the  whole  subject 
of  the  Diviue  and  human  in  Christ  remains 
still.      What  was  said   with    regard  to  it 
about  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness  (oh. 
iv.  15)  is  applicable  also  here.      If  it   be 
further  asked  how  it  was  that  Christ,  in  his 
humanity,  so  shrank  from  the  "  cup  "  before 
him,  seeing  that  mere  men  have  been  found 
to  face  death  calmly  in  its  most  appalling 
forms,   the    answer  may  be  found  in  the 
consideration  of  what  this  cup  implied.     It 
was  more  than  physical  death,  more  than 
physical  pain,  more  than  any  sorrow  that 
falls  to  the  lot  of  man.    Such  expressions  as 
'HploTO  AuircTirfloi  Kal  dSi|;uo«ri'  .  .  .  irep(Auiros 
tariv  ri  ^vxh  M-O"  '^"^  floviiTou  (Matt.  ZXTl.  37, 
38);  'HplBTO  iKSaixfiiiaBai  Ral  hSrmaveiv  QAsn^ 
xiv.  33);    Tiv6iuvos  iv  iyaviif  iKTeve<rTepov 
Trpoartix^To   (Luke  xxii.  44) ;  the  bloody 
sweat,  and  the  cry  of  "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " — convey  in 
themselves  the  impression  of  a  mysterious 
ordeal,  beyond  what  we  can  fathom,  under- 
gone by  the  atoning  Saviour  in  that  "hour" 
of  the  "  power  of  darkness."     Of  the  second 
difficulty  mentioned  above,  as  to  how  Christ 
was  "  heard,"  not  having  been  saved  "  from 
death "  in  the  apparent  sense  of  his  prayer, 
the  solution  may  be  that  the  prayer,  con- 
ditioned as  it  was  by  el  Svi/aThi/,  was  most 
tiuly    answered    by    the   angel     sent    to 
strengthen  him,  and  the  power  thenceforth 
given  him  to  "endure  the  cross,  despising 
the  shame."    "Mortem  ex  qu&  Pater  eum 
liberare  posset,  ne  moreretur,  tamen  subiit, 
voluntati  Patris  obediens :  ab  horrore  plane 
liberatus  est  per  exauditionem.  . . .  Exaudi- 
tu8  est,  non  ut  ne  biberet  calicem,  sed  ut  jam 
sine  ullo  horrore   biberet :  undo  etiam  per 
angelum  corroboratus  est "  (Bengel).     The 
example    to    ua    thus   becomes   the  more 
apparent.    For  we,  too,  praying  legitimately 
for  release  from  excessive  trial,  may  have 
our  prayer  best  answered  by  grace  given  to 
endure  the  trial,  and  by  "  a  happy  issue  " 
out  of  it;    as  was  the  case  with   Olirist. 
For  liis  bitter  passion  was  made  the  path  to 
eternal  glory ;    and  thus  in  the  Eesurreo- 
tion  too   his  prayer   was  answered.     The 
exact  meaning  of  il<raKovaSf\s  a-iri  tJs  eiiKa- 
pslas  is  not  easy  to  determine.     It  is  taken 
by  a  large   proportion  of  commentators  to 
mean   "deliverance  from   his  fear;"  fiaa- 
KovadeU  anh  being  supposed  to  be  a  con- 
structio  prasgnans  in  the  sense  of  "heard 
so  as  to    be    delivered,"  and   euAn/Scfa  to. 
denote  the  dread  experienced  in  Gethsemane. 
So  the  old  Italian  Versions,  and  Ambrose, 
"  exauditus  a  metu ; "  so  Bengel,  "  ab  hor- 
lore    liberatus    per    exauditionem."      This 
interpretation  is  upheld  by  Beza,  Grotius, 
Tholuok,    Hofmann,     Ebrard,    and    many 
othori.'    tome  of   whom,  less  tenably  (as 


Calvin,  Hammond,  Jaukson),  understand  eJ- 
\aPela  as  meaning,  not  the  fear  felt,  but 
the  thing  feared  :   "  ab  eo  quod  timebat " 
(Calvin).    The  objections  to  this  view  are 
(1)  the  doubtfulness  of  the  eonstructio  prag- 
nans  (the  instances  addnoed — lwliKova4  jiou 
tis  it\aT»(rii6v,  Pa,  cxviii.  5;   ifpdvTurfi.ili'oi 
,    ,  .   airk  awiiS'liirfiDS  irofiipas,  tih.  X,  22 — 
are  not  parallel) ;  and  (2;  the  sense  assigned 
to  evKapsia,  since  evAaPuaeai  and  its  deri- 
vatives, when  used  to  express  fear,  denote 
usually,  not  a  shrinking,  but   a   wary  or 
cautious   fear,    and  commonly  carry  with 
them  (in  this  Epistle  and  St.  Luke  espe- 
cially) the  idea  of  piety.   Thus  in  ch.  xi.  7, 
of  Xoah,  eiKaPnBe\s  xaTeaicevaae   kiPut6i>  : 
ch,  xii.  28,  juer'  alSovs  koI  fliXaPtati :  and  in 
Luke  ii.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  5 ;  viii.  2 ;  xxiL  12, 
tuAa/S^s  is  synonymous  with  fuaefi^s.     The 
rendering  hence  preferred  by  many,  having 
the  authority  of  Chrysostom,  and  among 
moderns    of  Liinemann,  Bleek,  Delltzsch, 
Alford,  and  others,  is  that  of  the  Vulgate, 
"exauditus  pro  sua  leverentia."    So  Vigi- 
lius,  "  propter  timorem ; "  the  A.V., "  heard 
in  that  he  feared,"  or,  as  in  the  margin, 
"  heard  for  his  piety ; "  and  in  the  recent 
revision,  "  for  his  godly  fear;  "  which  is  the 
A.V.'s  rendering  of  ei\a$ela  in  ch.  xii.  28. 
The  objection  to  the  use  of  anh  to  express 
the  cause  of  his  being  heard  is  met  by 
reference  to  the  frequent  usage  of  St.  Luke, 
whose  language  most  resembles  that  of  our 
Epistle.    Thus :  omb  toC  oxAou  (Luke  xix.  3); 
&-!rb  Ti)s  x'V'^^  (Luke  xxiv.  41  and  Acts  xii. 
14);  airh  toS  virvou  (Acts  XX.  9);  cmi  ttjs  S6^ris 
(Acts  xxii.  11).  The  phrase,  thus  understood, 
brings  out  tlie  more  markedly  the  thoroughly 
human  conditions  to  which  Christ  was  sub- 
jected.   It  was  not  in  right  of  his  sonship 
that  he  was  heard..    He  won  his  hearing  by 
his  human  piety ;  though  he  was  Son,  and 
as   such  knew  that   his  Father  heard  him 
always  (John  xi.  4i$),  he  learnt  humanly 
bis  lesson  of  obedience.    In  the  expression, 
KoCirep  &v  vliis.  Son  is  surely  meant  in  the 
peculiar  sense  in  which  it  has  all  along 
been  applied  to  Christ,  expressing  more 
than  tlut  his  relation  to  God  was  that  of 
any  son  to  a  father,  and  thus  we  perceive 
the  full  force  of  xaiir^p.    It  is  true  that  it 
was  not  till  after  the  Eesurrection  that  he 
attained  his  exalted  position   as  Son  (see 
under  ch.  i.  5  and  v.  5) ;  but  still  he  was 
all  along  the  Son,  in  virtue  of  his  origin  as 
well  as  of  his  destiny.     Of.  i\d\ri<Tfv  riijuv 
4v  vl^  (ch.  i.  9).  "Civ  vtos  does  not  indeed,  in 
itself,  express  that  he  was  the  Second  Person 
of  tlie  Trinity  (this  application  of  the  word 
vlbs  being  nowhere  found  in  the  Epistle) ; 
but  it   implies  that,  even  in  his  state  of 
humiliation,   he  was  more  than  man ;  for 
there  would  be  nothing  very  extraoidiiiary, 
so  as  to  justify  KnJntep,  is  the  ease  of  an 


I4d 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBRBWai 


[oh.  t.  1 — 14, 


ordinary  son  learning  obedience  to  his 
father  through  suffering.  Securring  now 
to  the  question  raised  under  T«r.  8,  whether 
the  high  priest's  obligation  to  offer  in  the 
first  place  for  himself  had  any  counterpart 
in  the  case  of  Clirist,  we  may  perceive 
snch  a  counterpart  in  the  agony,  as  above 
regarded.  For,  although  for  himself  Christ 
needed  no  atonement,  yet  the  "  prayers  and 
BuppHcationB"  were  offered  in  his  own  behalf, 
beiii°;  due  to  his  own  entire  participation 
in  the  conditions  of  humanity;  the  whole 
"  agony  and  bloody  sweat "  were  part  of 
his  own  preparation  and  consecration  for 
executing  the  ofBco  of  a  High  Priest  for 
others  ;  and,  like  the  Aaronio  priest's  offer- 
ing -for  himself,  they  were  the  sign  and 
•vidence  of  his  being  one  /aeTpia-iraBeiv  Swd- 
liems.  Thus  (x»clj  aitaprlas  being  all  along 
nnderstood)  they  answered  truly  to  the  pre- 
paratory part  of  Aaron's  original  consecra- 
tion (Lev.  viii.  14 — ix.  15),. or  to  the  high 
priest's  own  offering,  before  his  offering  for 
the  people  and  entering  behind  the  veil, 
on  the  Day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  xiv.  6).  It 
may  he  (though  not  necessarily  so)  that 
the  word  irpoaeviyKas  in  Ter.  7,  corre- 
sponding with  Ttfoa^ifioi  in  ver.  S,  is 
intended  to  suggest  this  analogy. 

Vers.  9, 10.— And  being  made  perfect,  he 
became  unto  all  them  that  obey  him  the 
Author  of  eternal  salvation;  called  (or  rather 
•o  addreaaed)  of  God  a  High  Priest  after 
the  order  of  Uelchizedek.  Here  TfXuaBih 
(translated  "  being  made  perfect ")  refers  to 
the  time  of  his  resurrection,  when  tlie  suffer- 
ings were  over  and  the  atonement  complete 
(of.  Luke  xiii.  32,  rp  rpfrp  rfKsiovmu).  The 
vord  may  be  used  in  its  general  sense  of 
jierfected,  ie.  "being  made  perfectly  that 
which  he  was  intended  to  become"  (De- 
litzsch).  In  such  sense  St.  Paul  nses  the 
word  of  himself,  Oux  8ti  IfSri  miKelaixai 
(Phil.  iii.  12).  Or  the  specific  sense  of 
priestly  consecration  may  be  here,  as  well  as 
in  ch.  ii.  10  and  vii.  28,  intended.  In  ch. 
Tii.  28  the  A.V.  renders  eU  rbv  a'luva  Texf- 
Xetu/ifvov  by  "consecrated  for  evermore." 
And  this  view  is  supported  by  passages  in 
the  LXX.,  where  the  word  reKcioxris  is  used 
with  special  reference  to  the  consecration  of 
the  high  priest.  Of.  ?»«  yhp  re\iia<rts  oifrij 
(Exod.  xxiz.  22) ;  toC  xptov  rris  Te\iui<reus, 
a  ioTiv  'Aapdv  (vers.  26,  27,  31) ;  TeAeiSo-oi 
Tttj  x^'ipas  a.iTuv(yeta.  29,  33,  35);  T5t  Svaias 
T^s  TEA.eic£ireais  (ver.  34);  -rbv  Seirepor  KpAir 
t3»  Te\etd<r«iis  (Lev.  viii.  22,  29) ;  Imh  toC 
iioi'oS  TTJs  Te\tui(re<iis  (ver.  26);  tA  6\oKaiTUfM 
TTJs  Te\ei<ia-eas  (ver.  28);  twj  fiii4pa  TrKripuSTi, 
Tjfi4pa  TeKeidiffeus  vfiwf  (ver.  83);  also  Lev. 
xxi  10,  where  the  high  priest— d  Upeiis  i 
^ueyas  inrh  r&v  i,Sf\<l)ay  airoS — ig  desotibed 
as  ToB  ^iri/cex";"^'""'  ^'^  '''V"  Ke(ptt\iii>  toB 
iKaiov  Tvv  XpifToi  «a)  rtnAcuo/tcVav  Mitrar 


rial  rk  i/utria.  See  also  Oesenius  on  tlie 
Hebrew  word  d's^o.  Hence,  and  in  view  of 
the  drift  of  the  passage  before  na,  Jackson 
very  decidedly  regards  TE\Ew9eii  in  ver.  9 
as  a  verbum  solenne,  denoting  specifically 
Ohrist's  consecration  to  his  eternal  office  of 
High  Priest.  So  also  Hammond  and  Whitby. 
Being  thus  perfected,  or  consecrated,  "he 
became,  for  ever  afterwards,  the  Author,  not 
of  mere  ceremonial  cleansing  or  temporary 
remission  of  guilt,  but  of  eternal  salvation; 
potentially  to  all  mankind  (cf.  iirip  jravThs, 
ch.  ii.  9),  and  e/eci»»el!y  to  "all  them  that  obey 
him ; "  being  addressed,  in  this  his  consum- 
mated position  (the  reference  being  to  Ps.  ex.) 
as  "  High  Priest  for  ever,"  etc.  Here  again 
we  perceive  that  it  is  not  till  after  the  Kesur- 
rection  that  the  prophetic  iiieal  of  the  Son 
at  God's  right  hand,  and  of  the  eternal 
High  Priest,  are  regarded  as  fully  realized. 
If  it  be  objected  that  his  high  priesthood 
must  have  begun  before  the  Besurrection  for 
his  death  upon  the  orosi  to  be  a  true  atone- 
ment, it  may  be  replied  that  his  one  oblatioil 
of  himself  upon  the  cross  at  once  consum- 
mated his  consecration  and  effected  the 
atonement.  Doubtless,  as  a  true  High 
Priest  on  earth,  he  thus  "offered  one  sa- 
crifice for  sins  for  ever  "  (ch.  i.  12) ;  all  that 
is  meant  above  is  that  it  was  not  till  after 
the  Besurrection  that  he  entered  on  hi* 
eternal  ofBce  of  mediation  in  virtue  of  that 
one  accomplished  sacrifice. 

Ver.  11— oh.  viL  I.— This  is  the  long 
admonitory  digression  (see  under  ver.  1)  felt 
by  the  writer  to  be  necessary  before  his 
exposition  of  kot4  rJif  t<£{u'  yie\x'C^^^i'- 
He  is  entering  on  a  new  theme,  higher  and 
less  level  to  the  comprehension  of  his  readers 
than  any  that  has  gone  before.  Even  so  far, 
we  have  seen  how  their  Jewish  prejudices 
had  evoked  admonitions,  frequently  inter- 
posed in  the  course  of  the  argument.  Much 
more  so  now,  when  it  is  to  be  shown  how 
the  priesthood  of  Christ  not  only  fulfils  the 
idea  of,  but  also  supersedes,  that  of  the  sons 
of  Aaron,  being  of  a  different  order  from 
theirs.  The  region  of  thought  to  be  entered 
now, 'being  that  of  "  the  mjstery  of  Christ," 
transcends  more  than  any  that  has  been  so 
far  entered  the  ordinary  conceptions  of 
traditional  Judaism.  Hence  the  writer's 
shrinking  from  entering  all  at  once  on  the 
subject  for  fear  of  not  being  even  under- 
stood ;  hence  his  earnest  warnings  to  his 
readers  as  to  the  necessity  of  advancing  to 
the  state  of  full-gro'wn  Christians  who  can 
discern  spiritual  things. 

Ver.  11 — oh.  vi.  20. — Intebfosbd  Ex- 
hortation. 

Ver.  11. — Of  whom  (the  most  obvions  an- 
tecedent being  Melchizedek,  but  with  regard 
to  his  typical  significance,  ag  referred  to  in 
Fg.  ox.)  we  have  many  things  to  say  (tba 


dtv.  ]— U] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THK  HEBREWS. 


141 


subject  itself  admits  a  lengthy  exposition) 
and  hard  of  interpretation,  seeing  ye  are 
beoome  (not,  as  in  A.V.,  "  ye  are  ")  dull  of 
hearing.  TLeir  dulness  b  the  reason  of  the 
\6yos  being  iuaepniivivTos.  It  was  not  that 
the  subject  was  in  itself  inexplicable,  or 
that  the  writer  was  incompetent  to  explain 
it ;  his  difficulty  was  in  adapting  the  inter- 
pretation to  the  Ciipaoity  of  his  readers : 
"  Non  scribentis,  sed  vestro  yitio"  (Bengel). 
It  seems  from  767iJi/aTe  ("ye  are  become"),  in 
this  and  the  f  uUowing  verse,  that  the  Hebrew 
Christians  had  even  retrograded  in  spiritual 
perception.  This  ia  easily  conceivable.  Ab, 
through  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  especially, 
the  tie  between  Christianity  and  Judaism 
became  more  and  more  broken,  there  was 
likely  to  be  a  certain  reaction  among  the 
Hebrew  Christians,  who,  having  gone  to  a 
certain  extent  with  the  tide  of  thought, 
became  conscious  how  far  it  was  carrying 
them.  They  would  be  inclined  to  cling  the 
more  fondly  to  their  old  associations  from 
the  fear  of  losing  them  altogether.  Such 
retrogressions  have  been  observable  in  other 
times  of  upheaval  of  old  ide&a. 

Vez.  12. — For  when,  by  reason  of  the  time 
((.«.  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  your 
conversion),  ye  onght  to  be  teachers,  ye 
have  need  that  some  one  teaoh  you  (or, 
OuU  cne  teach  you  which  he)  the  first  prin- 
ciples (literally,  the  elements  of  the  begin- 
ning) of  the  oraoles  of  God ;  and  are  become 
such  aa  have  need  of  milk,  and  not  of  solid 
food.  Tqs  &i>xv'  in  tbis  verse  seems  best 
taken  in  onion  with  to,  irrotx^ia,  rather  than 
with  TcoK  \ayiaiv;  the  phrase,  tA  aroixf^a 
rqs  &fix^i,meaning  "the  initiatory  elements" 
— ^the  A,  B,  C  of  Christian  teaching.  The 
word  \oyla  ("  oraoles  ") ,  is  used  elsewhere  for 
the  revelations  of  the  Old  Testament,  as 
Acts  vii.  38 ;  Bom.  iii.  2.  Here  its  meaning 
can  hardly  be  taken  a»  confined  to  them, 
since  the  first  principles  of  the  gospel  are 
being  spoken  of.  Still,  a  word  that  includes 
them  in  its  meaning  may  be  purposely  used 
by  way  of  intimating  that  the  elementi 
intended  are  those  of  Judaism  as  well  as 
Christianity,  or  of  the  latter  only  in  its  first 
emergence  out  of  Judaism.  And  accord- 
ingly, vers.  1,  2  of  oh.  vi.,  where  they  are 
enumerated,  are  (as  will  be  seen)  so  worded 
<a  to  imply  no  more  than  this ;  nor  are  the 
first  principles  there  mentioned  beyond  what 
an  enlightened  Jew  might  be  expected  to 
understand  readily.  Be  it  observed  that 
the  Hebrew  Church  need  not  be  supposed 
to  have  actually  lost  sight  of  these  first 
principles,  so  as  to  require  a  new  indoctri- 
nation into  them.  There  may  be  a  vein  of 
delicate  irony  in  what  is  said,  after  the 
manner  of  St.  Paul.  All  that  is  of  neces- 
sity implied  is  that  there  had  been  such  a 
(tilnre  in  seeing  what  these  principles  led  to 


Bs  to  suggest  the  necessity  of  their  being 
learnt  anew.  The  writer  does  not,  in  fact, 
as  he  goes  on,  require  them  to  be  learnt 
anew;  for  he  bids  his  readers  leave  them 
behind,  as  though  already  known,  and  pro- 
ceed from  them  to  perfection,  though  still 
with  some  misgiving  as  to  their  capability 
for  doing  so.  The  figure  of  milk  for  babea 
and  solid  food  for  full-grown  men,  to  illus- 
trate the  teaching  suitable  for  neophytes 
and  for  advanced  Christians,  is  found  also 
in  1  Cor.  iii.  1,  2 ;  and  that  of  vjiirios  in 

I  Cor.  xiv.  20;  Gal.  iv.  19;  Eph.  Iv.  14. 
This  correspondence,  though  no  proof  of 
the  Pauline  authorship,  is  among  the  evi- 
dences of  the  Pauline  character  of  th« 
Epistle. 

Ver.  13. — For  every  one  that  partaketh  of 
milk  is  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteous- 
ness :  for  he  is  a  babe.  Beason  for  saying 
that  they  are  such  as  have  need  of 
milk ;  for  milk  ia  the  nourishment  of 
infants,  and  he  that  is  an  infant  in  respect 
of  spiritual  growth  is  ivitpos  \iyiv  Smcuo- 
ainTis:  not  of  necessity  unacquainted  with 
it  altogether,  but  still  not  versed  in  it ;  he 
Im  but  a  tyro.  "  Word  of  righteousness  " 
may  be  taken  as  a  general  term  to  denote 
what  we  might  call  religious  lore ;  referring 
here  especially  to  the  gospel,  which  is  emi- 
nently the  revelation  of  the  "  righteousness 
of  God"  (Bom.   i.  17;    cf.    2  Cor.  iiL  9, 

II  StetKOvla  TTJs  StKaioffvvrjs  I  and  xi.  1 5, 
Siiicovoi  SMaioffivns);  but  not  excluding  a 
more  general  conception.  There  is  no  need 
to  suppose  an  exclusive  reference  to  the 
more  perfect  doctrine  in  opposition  to  the 
elements,  since,  of  the  whole  subject  of 
religious  knowledge,  the  vfinios  may  be  said 
to  be  tiireipos  in  the  sense  of  being  without 
the  matured  skill  that  experience  gives. 
Hence,  too,  we  are  certainly  not  justified  in 
finding  in  the  phrase  a  specific  allusion  to 
the  Pauline  doctrine  of  justification  by 
faith  only,  which  is  not  suggested  by  the 
context  or  by  what  follows.  Still  less  may 
we  (with  Delitzsoh)  so  ignore  the  notable 
significance  of  SiKcuoa-ii/ri  as  to  reduce  the  ex- 
pression to  a  synonym  for  "  rightly  framed, 
that  is  sound  and  orthodox  discourse." 

Ver.  14. — But  solid  food  is  for  them  that 
are  of  fall  age  (reK^lav,  equivalent  to 
" perfect; "  but  in  the  sense  of  maturity  of 
age  or  growth,  in  contrast  with  i/^irioi ;  as 
in  1  Cor.  xiv.  20 ;  of.  1  Cor.  ii.  6;  Eph.  iv. 
13;  Phil.  iii.  13),  those  who  by  reason  of 
use  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern 
good  and  evil.  Here  the  comparison  is 
carried  out  with  peculiar  aptness.  T&  al- 
aBirriipui  in  the  illustration  are  ihe  organs  of 
sense.  In  the  infant  the  digestive  organs, 
in  the  first  place,  exercised  in  the  begin- 
ning on  milk,  acquire  through  that  exercise 
the  power  of  assimilating  more  wlid  and 


142 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  v.  1 — 14» 


more  complex  food,  while  at  the  same  time 
its  sensitive  organs  generally,  also  throuji:h 
exercise^  become  consciously  disorimiaafire 
of  "good  and  evil"  (of.  Isa.  vii.  15,  16, 
where  "to  know  to  refuse  the  evil  and 
choose  the  good"  denotes,  as  if  prover- 
bially, the  age  after  early  childhood).  So, 
in  the  spiritual  sphere,  the  mental  faculties, 


exercised  at  first  on  simple  truths,  sliould 
acquire  by  practice  the  power  of  appre- 
hending and  distinguishing  between  higher 
and  more  recondite  ones.  It  was  because 
the  Hebrew  Christians  had  failed  thus  to 
bring  out  their  faculties  that  they  were 
open  to  the  charge  of  being  still  in  a  state 
(rf  infancy. 


HOMILETIC& 

Vers,  1—10. — The  high  priesthood  of  Chritt.  In  theM  Terses  the  author  proceed! 
with  his  discussion  of  the  priestly  character  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  typified  by 
the  Aaronical  priesthood. 

I.  What  a  man  pbiest  la.  The  office  is  a  most  honourable  one ;  it  is  referred  to  in 
ver.  4  as  "  the  honour."  This  will  appear  from  a  consideration  of  the  high  priest's 
functions  and  qualifications.  1.  His  functions.  The  most  important  of  these  are 
indicated  in  ver.  1.  (1)  He  acts  for  other  men  in  things  respecting  their  relations  to 
Ood,  The  root-idea  of  the  o£Bce  is  that,  while  access  to  Ood  is  denied  to  sinners  on 
the  ground  of  nature,  he  has  been  pleased  to  grant  it  in  connection  with  special  arrange- 
ments of  grace.  (2)  He  offers  sacrifices,  both  free-will  ofierings  and  sin  offerings.  As 
men  are  guilty,  this  is  indispensable ;  and  thus  in  common  speech  the  terms  "  priest " 
and  "sacrifice"  are  correlatives.  There  can  be  no  priest  without  a  sacrifice.  2.  His 
qualifications,  (1)  He  must  he  human  (ver.  1) — a  partaker  of  the  nature  that  is  to 
be  r^eemed.  (2)  He  must  be  humane  (rer.  2)— capable  of  considerate  sympathy 
with  the  people  for  whom  he  mediates.  How  sadly  opposite  in  character  to  this  have 
the  wwld's  priests  almost  always  been  I  How  dark  are  the  thoughts  suggested  by  the 
word  "  priestcraft "  1  Priests  have  been  arrogant,  cruel,  tyrants  over  conscience,  enemies 
of  progress,  patrons  of  ignorance  and  error.  But  the  typical  priest  is  a  man  of  culture 
and  refinement,  who  has  abjured  the  motto,  "  Odi  profanum  vulgus  et  arceo,"  and  who, 
realizing  his  own  frailty,  "can  bear  gently  with  the  ignorant  and  erring."  (3)  He 
must  have  a  sacrifice  (ver.  3)—"  somewhat  to  offer."  Without  a  sin  offering  priestly 
mediation  would  be  impotent,  and  the  holy  and  just  God  would  remain  inaccessible. 
(4)  He  must  le  appointed  by  Ood.  (Yer.  4.)  It  is  for  God  to  decide  whether  he  will 
allow  himself  to  be  approached  at  all  on  behalf  of  the  guilty,  and  it  belongs  to  him 
also  to  select  the  person  whose  mediation  will  be  acceptable  to  him. 

II.  The  bealitt  of  Christ's  high  priesthood.  The  apostle  goes  on  to  show — ^but 
arranging  his  thoughts  for  the  most  part  in  the  reverse  order — that  the  Lord  Jesus 
possesses  all  the  needful  qualifications  for  the  high  priesthood,  and  that  he  actually 
discharges  its  duties  (vers.  6—10).  1.  He  has  the  quali/ications  of  a  high  priest.  (1) 
He  was  appointed  by  Ood.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  The  reference  to  Ps.  ii.  suggests  his 
perfect  fitness  for  the  office,  and  the  quotation  from  Fs.  ex.  is  a  proof  of  his  ordination 
by  the  irrevocable  oath  of  God.  (2)  He  is  a  man.  (Vers.  7, 8.)  Although  Gk)d  said  to 
him,  "  My  Son,"  he  had  taken  "  tiie  form  of  a  servant,"  and  "  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  " 
had  "  learned  obedience."  (3)  He  it  able  to  sympathize.  (Vers.  7, 8.)  He  passed  through 
a  course  of  the  deepest  affliction  and  the  most  dreadful  temptation,  that  he  might 
acquire  the  necessary  experience  for  his  work.  He  "  suffered,  not  only  at  Nazareth 
and  Capernaum,  and  during  the  whole  period  of  his  public  ministry,  but  especially  by 
means  of  the  imparalleled  agonies  of  Gethsemane  and  Golgotha.  (4)  He  offered  himsdf 
as  a  saorifice.  (Vers.  7, 8.)  By  his  "  obedience  "  Jesus  effected  complete  reconciliation 
for  sin.  His  trembling  agony  in  the  garden  and  the  woe  which  he  bore  upon  the  tree 
are  inexplicable  on  the  principle  that  he  was  only  a  martyr,  or  on  any  other  principle 
than  that  in  some  mysterious  way  he  was  thus  bearing  the  wrath  of  God  against  sin. 
2.  He  discharges  the  duties  of  a  high  priest,  (Ver.  9.)  The  Saviour's  acquisition  of  all 
the  qualifications  "  made  him  perfect,"  t.e.  officially  all-accomplished  as  the  Priest  of 
mankind.  He  has  procured  for  us  everlasting  salvation,  and  he  bestows  it  upon  all 
who  obey  him  by  faith.  He  has  expiated  sin.  He  has  rendered  God  propitious.  He 
gives  his  people  access.  He  prays  to  God  for  them.  In  short,  ha  performs  M  the 
duties  of*  high  priest,  and  his  priesthood  has  superseded  every  other. 


OH.  T.  1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  U& 

III.  Thb  ooktbast  between  Christ's  priesthood  and  the  Aabonioal.  1.  Being 
personally  holy,  Jesus  needed  not  to  offer  any  sacrifice  for  himself  (ver.  3).  2,  He 
IS  both  Priest  and  Victim  (Ters.  7,  8).  3.  His  priesthood  really  procures  salvatioa 
(ver,  9),  and  not  merely  typically.  4.  It  is  of  a  higher  order  than  Aaron's,  and  was 
more  fully  represented  by  that  of  Melchizedek  (ver.  10) ;  for  it  is  (1)  intransferable  and 
eTerlasting ;  (2)  a  royal  priesthood,  Christ  being  King  as  well  as  Priest. 

Lessons.  1.  We,  being  guilty  and  sinful,  can  have  intercourse  with  God  only 
through  Christ  as  our  Priest,  2.  We  ought  to  cherish  absolute  confidence  in  his 
priestly  power  and  sympathy.  8.  Christian  ministers  are  not  "called  of  God  "to  be 
priests  (ver.  4),  and  must  beware  of  importing  sacerdotal  conceptions  into  the  idea 
which  they  entertain  of  their  office ;  yet  every  pastor  should,  like  the  model  high  priest 
of  ancient  times,  "  bear  gently  with  the  ignorant  and  erring." 

Vers.  11 — 14. — A  sharp  reproof/or  ignorance.  The  apostle,  having  used  the  expres- 
sion, "  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,"  remembers  that  his  readers  will  not  be  likely  to 
understand  it  without  careful  explanation.  So  he  pauses  in  his  argument  to  chide  them 
for  their  backwardness  in  religious  knowledge. 

I.  The  tbuths  of  revelation  are  profound  and  far-reaohing.  The  story  of 
God's  love  in  redemption  may,  no  doubt,  be  called  with  propriety  "  the  simple  gospel ; " 
but,  while  it  is  so,  it  exhibits  at  tlie  same  time  "the  manifold  wisdom  of  God."  The 
Bible  is  not  merely  a  book ;  it  is  a  literature.  It  does  not  simply  contain  a  message  of 
mercy ;  it  is  the  record  of  a  long  and  gradually  developing  process  of  redeeming  grace. 
It  may  be  studied  profoundly  from  many  different  standpoints,  as  e.g.  those  of  history, 
of  dogmatic  theology,  of  morals,  of  ecclesiology,  etc.  The  Bible  deals,  too,  with  all  the 
deepest  and  most  wonderful  of  themes,  such  as  the  human  soul,  the  problem  of  sin, 
God,  eternity,  and  immortality.  So  there  is  spiritual  food  in  Holy  Scripture,  at  once 
for  the  shallowest  and  the  profoundest  minds.  Revelation  supplies  not  only  "  milk  " 
for  "babes  in  Christ,"  t,e.  the-  alphabet  and  rudiments  of  religious  knowledge,  but 
"solid  food"  for  "full-grown  men,"  i.e.  materials  for  the  more  recondite  study  of 
Christianity  as  a  great  and  harmonious  system  of  Divine  truth. 

II.  Christians  differ  in  the  degree  of  their  spiritual  knowledge.  They  differ 
because :  1.  Some  are  "  habe$."  Believers  who  are  young  in  years,  and  those  of  maturer 
age  who  have  newly  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  require  to  be  fed  with  the 
"  milk  "  or  simplest  elements  of  religious  instruction.  2.  Some  are  "full-grown  men," 
who  can  relish  and  digest  the  "  solid  food  "  of  the  Word.  An  advanced  Christian  who 
is  a  diligent  student  of  Scripture  will  acquire  so  firm  a  grasp  of  truth  as  to  become 
qualified  to  act  the  part  of  a  "  teacher  "  in  the  Church  (ver.  12).  His  proficiency  in 
knowledge  will  sharpen  his  spiritual  perceptions,  so  that  he  will  learn  readily  to  dis- 
tinguish between  "good  and  evil"  in  doctrine  (ver.  14).  3.  Some  a/re  invalids.  The 
apostle  chides  his  Hebrew  readers  for  having  become  such,  as  the  result  of  their  disregard 
of  the  laws  of  spiritual  health.  It  was  now  many  years  since  they  had  first  believed, 
and  by  this  time  they  should  have  been  adults  in  Christian  knowledge — quick  of  appre- 
hension in  relation  to  the  higher  reaches  of  truth.  So  far,  however,  from  being  able  to 
assimilate  the  "solid  food"  of  the  Word,  they  had  degenerated  into  spiritual  weak-' 
lings  and  invalids.  They  heard  the  gospel  indolently  (vor.  11).  The  "solid  food" 
which  they  had  once  enjoyed  now  occasioned  them  the  miseries  of  dyspepsia.  They 
could  digest  nothing  but  gospel  "milk."  In  our  own  time,  too,  there  are  many  such 
invalids.  What  multitudes  attend  church  through  the  years,  and  yet  never  get 
beyond  the  attainments -of  the  sabbath  school  I  How  many  otherwise  intelligent  men 
are  quite  ignorant  of  the  organic  structure  of  the  Bible  I  How  many  betray  an  utter 
want  of  living  interest  in  the  doctrines  and  truths  of  the  New  Testament  I 

III.  Reasons  why  the  religious  knowledge  or  many  Christians  is  so  defective. 
The  Hebrews  were  "  dull  of  hearing  "  because  they  had  got  divided  in  heart  between  • 
Christianity  and  Judaism,  and  because  they  were  beset  with  temptations  to  apostatize 
from  a  faith  which  had  involved  them  in  much  trial.  Now,  our  temptations  are  sub- 
stantially similar.  Our  hearts  are  prone  to  try  to  serve  both  God  and  mammon ;  and 
we  are  tempted  to  avoid  very  intimate  acquaintance  with  a  religion  faithfulness  to 
which  demands  from  us  very  serious  sacrifices.  In  addition  to  these  fundamentaj 
reasons  others  may  be  indicated,  as  follows :  1.  The  want  of  earnest  Bible  study.     The 


144  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBBWa  [oh.  t.  1—14. 


hurry  of  the  a^e  acts  on  the  side  of  spiritual  ignorance.  Other  studies  and  pursnits  are 
clamorous  in  their  claiins ;  those  e.g.  of  business,  politics,  literature,  philosophy,  science, 
art.  Thus  many  Christians  do  not  read  the  Bible  systematically,  or  with  sufficient 
intellectual  effort.  The  larger  part  of  the  Old  Testament  is,  to  their  minds,  a  kind  of 
desert  of  Sahara.  Perhaps  they  interest  themselves  only  in  isolated  texts,  apart  from 
the  scope  of  tlie  passage  in  which  these  occur.  2.  Neglect  of  parentcU  instruction. 
Every  parent  is  bound  to  sow  the  seeds  of  Divine  truth  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  his 
children.  Where  this  duty  becomes  generally  neglected  the  rising  generation  can  only 
continue  one  of  spiritual  infants.  3.  Irregvlarittf  in  attendance  upon  OocP$  houn. 
(ph.  X.  25.)  Church-going  is  not  religion,  but  as  it  is  a  divinely  appointed  ordinance, 
a  man  need  not  expect  to  grow  in  grace  and  in  Christian  knowledge  without  it  4. 
Unedifying  preaching.  The  consecutive  exposition  of  Scripture  from  the  pulpit,  when 
wisely  and  skilfully  done,  trains  a  people  into  "  experience  of  the  Word  of  righteous- 
ness." The  congregation  which  receives  no  instruction  of  this  kind  may  be  expected  to 
become  "  dull .  of  hearing."  5.  Misconception  of  what  adequate  religious  knowledge  is. 
Many  good  people  judge  that,  having  apprehended  and  embraced  "  the  simple  gospel," 
they  have  finished  their  spiritual  education.  They  love  a  few  pet  texts  which  express 
"  the  rudiments  of  the  first  principles"  (ver.  12),  and  are  content  to  leave  the  rest  of  the 
Bible  alone.  They  count  it  a  virtue  to  relish  only  "  evangelistic  preaching,"  and  seem 
even  proud  of  occupying  always  only  the  first  form  in  the  school  of  Christ.  But  the 
fruit  of  their  neglect  of  the  truth  in  its  higher  and  deeper  and  broader  aspects  becomes 
apparent  in  the  imperfection  of  their  Christian  character,  and  In  their  lade  of  progress 
towards  perfection. 

IV.  The  iiepoRTAKOK  of  ah  nrriMATE  knowledoe  of  Chbistian  tbuth.  L  Beve- 
rence  to  (Jol  requires  it.  He  has  not  given  any  portion  of  his  Word  in  vain.  Intelligent 
Christians  dishonour  him  when  they  do  not  "  press  on  unto  perfection  "  as  students  of 
the  Bible  in  every  department  of  its  glorious  design  and  drift  and  method.  2.  Duty  to 
our  own  souls  requires  it.  If  we  would  not  become  spiritual  dwarfs,  but  "  full-grown 
men,"  we  must  "  search  the  Scriptures."  If  we  would  be  truly  happy  and  prosperous, 
we  must  "  meditate  on  God's  law  day  and  night."  3.  Usefulness  to  others  requires  it. 
Believers  who  iiave  become  established  in  knowledge  and  grace  are  expected  to  serve 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  "teachers"  (ver.  12).  A  Christian,  too,  should  be  "ready  always  to 
give  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  him  k  reason  concerning  the  hope  that  is  in 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2. — An  et$ential  qtmUfication  for  successful  ministry,  "  Who  can  hare  com- 
passion on  the  ignorant,"  etc  According  to  our  reading  of  the  New  Testament,  the 
Christian  ministry  is  not  a  priesthood  except  in  the  sense  that,  being  Christians, 
ministers  belong  to  that  "  holy  priesthood,"  that  "  royal  priesthood,"  of  which  every 
true  Christian  is  a  member.  Yet  there  were  certain  qualifications  of  the  Aaronic 
priesthood  which  are  indispensable  to  the  usefulness  of  the  Christian  ministry.  One 
of  these  is  mentioned  in  our  text;  its  nature  will  appear  as  we  proceed.  The  text 
suggests — 

I.  That  bins  differ  in  the  degree  of  their  ouilt.  In  this  respect  several  things 
have  to  be  taken  into  account.  1.  TTiere  are  differences  in  the  sins  themselves.  The 
wickedness  of  sins  of  presumption  is  far  greater  than  that  of  sins  of  ignorance  (of. 
Numb.  XV.  27 — 31).  Sins  of  rebellion  are  far  removed  from  sins  of  error.  The  persons 
mentioned  in  our  text  are  not  those  who  have  sinned  "  with  a  high  hand,"  but  "  the 
ignorant  and  erring"— those  who  have  sinned  by  reason  of  moral  "infirmity,"  or  who 
have  wandered  from  the  way  of  truth  and  duty  because  of  their  own  sfdritual  negli- 
•  gence.  Such  sinners  are  by  no  means  guiltless,  but  they  are  much  less  guilty  than 
some  others.  2.  There  are  differences  in  the  conditions  and  circumstances  in  which 
sins  are  commuted:  The  force  of  the  solicitation  to  sin,  the  strength  of  inherited 
tendency  to  certain  forms  of  moral  evil,  the  quality  of  the  moral  atmosphere  sur- 
rounding the  sinner, — these  greatly  differ  amon>;st  men ;  and  this  and  other  considera- 
tions must  be  carefully  weighed  before  the  guilt  of  any  sin  can  be  fairly  estimated. 
"  Two  persons  may  commit  the  same  identical  crime,  yet  the  guilt  may  be  inconceivably 


OH.  V.  1—14]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  145 

greater  in  the  one  case  than  the  other.  The  one  may  have  had  no  instniction,  no 
benefit  from  parental  culture,  no  faithful  admonitions,  no  holy  example  to  direct  and 
regulate,  no  warning  to  restrain,  no  encouragement  to  animate  in  the  path.  The  other 
may  have  been  surrounded  by  all  the  helps  and  inducements  to  right  consideration — to 
holy  fear,  to  correct  conduct— ^md  therefore  his  sin  is  marked  with  a  far  higher  degree 
of  aggravation  than  the  sin  of  the  other ;  and  thus,  in  the  sight  of  Qod,  the  judge  on 
the  bench  often  may  be  tar  more  guilty  than  the  criminal  at  the  bar." 

IL  The  wise  and  good  mikisteb  to  souls  will  pbactically  recognize  these 
DiFFEnEKOES  IN  THE  QUILT  OP  SINS.  Only  the  Omnisciiant  can  perfectly  discriminate 
in  this  respect,  yet  the  text  indicates  a  discrimination  and  consideration  which  every 
one  who  would  minister  helpfully  to  souls  will  endeavour  to  exercise.  1.  He  will  not 
harshly  condemn  sinners.  He  is  utTpuntaBiit.  On  the  one  band,  he  is  not  unfeeling ; 
on  the  other,  he  is  not  carried  away  by  his  feelings,  but  he  regulates  and  moderates  his 
feelings ;  he  has  control  over  his  passions.  2.  He  will  endeavour  to  discriminate  tins 
of  ignorance  and  error  from  sins  of  a  darker  hue.  He  will  deal  thoughtfully'  with 
souls,  not  regarding  all  sinners  as  equally  guilty  or  all  sins  as  equally  heinous.  In  so 
doing  he  will  be  following  precedents  of  unquestionable  authority.  Our  Lord  and  his 
apostles  thus  discriminated,  and  made  merciful  allowance  for  the  ignorance  and  error 
of  sinners  (see  Luke  xxiii.  34 ;  Acts  iii.  17 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  26).  3.  He  will 
treat  the  ignorant  and  the  erring  with  gentleness.  He  will "  have  compassion  on  the  igno- 
rant," etc. ;  margin,  "reasonably  bear  with;"  Revised  Version,  "who  can  bear  gently 
with  the  ignorant  and  erring."  How  beautiful  and  sublime  is  our  Saviour's  example  in 
this  respect  I  For  his  crucifiers  he  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do." 

III.  The  00NBCI0UBNE8B  or  his  own  hobal  infibmftt  should  nroucB  the  Christian 

MINISTER  TO   DEAL  THUS  OKNTLT   WITH  THE   laNOBANT    AND   THE   EBBIHa.      "  For  that 

he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infirmity."  1.  His  own  moral  infirmity  qiudifies  him 
vo  understand  the  moral  ignorances  and  errors  of  others.  He  has  had  to  contend 
against  sinful  inclinations  and  Satanic  temptations.  He  knows  from  his  own  experience 
how  easily  the  soul  is  sometimes  led  astray,  and  he  can  enter  into  the  moral  wanderings 
and  sorrowful  returnings  of  others.  2.  His  own  moral  infirmity  should  lead  him  to  be 
patient  and  gentle  with  the  ignorant  and  erring.  He  has  himself  required  and  receivei) 
forbearance  at  the  hands  of  both  God  and  man.  He  will  very  probably  need  similar 
forbearance  in  time  to  come.  How,  then,  can  he  be  intolerant  or  harsh  with  others  ? 
Our  own  need  of  mercy  and  patience  from  others,  and  pre-eminently  from  God,  should 
lead  us  to  be  merciful  and  patient  with  others. 

The  chief  lesson  of  our  subject  is  applicable  to  all  who  would  render  spiritual  services 
to  their  fellow-men.  Let  parents,  and  instructors  of  the  young,  and  preachers  of  the 
gospel,  and  pastors  of  Churches,  ever  remember  that  if  they  would  benefit  the  ignorant 
and  erring  they  must  be  forbearing  and  gentle  with  them.  Sternness  and  severity 
will  repel  and  discourage,  and  probably  aggravate  moral  infirmity  into  moral  perversity. 
But  patience  and  charity  will  encourage  worthy  hopes  in  the  breasts  of  those  who  have 
gone  astray,  and  restore  them  to  the  path  of  truth  and  duty,  and  inspire  them  to  more 
earnest  and  patient  efforts  in  Christian  life  and  service.  Be  it  oui%  not  to  condemn  the 
ignorant  and  erring,  but  to  instruct  and  restore  them. — W.  J. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  suffering  Saviour.  "Who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  when  he  bad 
offered,"  etc.    Our  text  suggests  the  following  observations : — 

I.  In    the  days'  op  HI3  flesh   OUB  LoBD  endured    severest   8UFFEBIN08.       "  The 

things  which  ho  siifi'ered"  induced  the  agonizing  prayer,  the  "strong  crying  and 
tears."  He  bore  the  common  sufferings  of  our  humanity ;  e.g.  hunger,  thirst,  weariness, 
etc.  He  suffered  firom  the  cruel  ingratitude  of  men,  from  the  base  slanders  of  "his 
enemies,  and  from  the  subtle  and  sinful  solicitations  of  Satan.  His  sensitive  and  holy 
soul  suffered  keenly  from  his  contact  with  so  much  of  sin  and  sorrow  and  pain  in  thivs 
world.  But  the  particular  reference  in  the  text  is  to  his  anguish  in  Gethsemane.  How 
sore  was  his  sorrow,  how  terrible  his  agony,  upon  that  occasion  1  "  He  began  to  be 
greatly  amazed  and  sore  troubled ;  and  he  saith.  My  soul  is  exceedingly  sorrowful,  even 
unfo  death." 

II.  In  his  BUFFKimnw  cub  Lord  bought  rrligf  in  fbatxb,     "  He  offered  a| 

HEBBEWB.  T; 


m  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  ton-^-l— *^ 

prayers  «nd  supplications,"  etc.  (ver,  7).  Notice:  1.  The  Being  to  whom  he  addreued 
his  prayer.  "Unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death,"  i.e.  to  the  great 
Sovereign  of  both  life  and  death  ;  "  the  God  in  whose  hand  our  breath  is,"  who  "  giveth 
to  all  life  and  breath  and  all  things,  ...  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being."  Our  Saviour  directed  his  prayer  to  his  Father,  saying,  "  0  my  Father," 
etc.  2.  The  object  which  he  sought  in  his  prayer.  This  is  not  mentioned  here ;  but  it 
is  in  the  narrative  of  the  conflict  in  Gethsemane.  "  0  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let 
this  cup  pass  away  from  me."  From  what  did  the  Saviour  recoil  so  shudderingly? 
Certainly  neither  from  mere  death,  nor  from  ^'  the  dread  of  something  after  death." 
The  pains  of  dissolution  could  not  have  affrighted  him,  and  beyond  death  there  was 
nothing  to  dismay  or  repel  him.  But  death,  with  all  the  dread  significance  and  terrible 
circumstances  such  as  awaited  him,  he  shrank  from  in  intense  spiritual  pain.  This  has 
been  forcibly  expressed  by  Dr.  Farrar :  "  It  was  something  far  deadlier  than  death. 
It  was  the  burden  and  the  mystery  of  the  world's  sin  which  lay  heavy  on  his  heart ;  it 
was  the  tasting,  in  the  Divine  humanity  of  a  sinless  life,  the  bitter  cup  which  sin  had 
poisoned ;  it  was  the  bowing  of  Godhead  to  endure  a  stroke  to  which  man's  apostasy 
had  lent  such  frightful  possibilities.  It  was  the  sense,  too,  of  how  virnlent,  how 
frightful,  must  have  been  the  force  of  evil  in  the  universe  of  Gud  which  could 
render  necessary  so  infinite  a  sacrifice.  It  was  the  endurance,  by  the  jierfectly 
guiltless,  of  the  worst  malice  which  human  hatred  could  devise  ;  it  was  to  experience, 
in  the  bosom  of  perfect  innocence  and  perfect  love,  all  that  was  detestable  in  human 
ingratitude,  all  tliat  was  pestilent  in  human  hypocrisy,  all  that  was  cruel  in  human 
rage.  It  was  to  brave  the  last  triumph  of  Satanic  spite  and  fury,  uniting  against 
his  lonely  head  all  the  flaming  arrows  of  Jewish  falsity  and  heathen  corruption — 
the  concentrated  wrath  of  the  rich  and  respectable,  the  yelling  fury  of  the  blind 
and  brutal  mob.  It  was  to  feel  that  his  own,  to  whom  be  came,  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light — that  the  race  of  the  chosen  people  could  be  wholly  absorbed  in 
one  insane  repulsion  against  infinite  goodness  and  purity  and  love.  Through  all 
this  he  passed  in  that  hour  which,  with  a  recoil  of  sinless  horror  beyond  our  capacity 
to  conceive,  foretasted  a  worse  bitterness  than  the  worst  bitterness  of  death." '  Tliis 
was  the  cup  which  he  prayed  might  pass  away  from  him.  3.  2%e  intensity  with 
which  he  urged  his  prayer.  This  is  indicated  (1)  by  the  fact  that  two  words,  which 
are  nearly  synonymous,  are  used  to  express  his  prayer.  He  "offered  up  prayers  and 
supplications."  The  conjunction  of  synonymous  words  is  "a  mode  of  expressing 
intensity,  which  is  very  frequent  in  the  sacred  writings."  (2)  By  his  "  strong 
crying."  The  loud  cries  were  the  expression  of  agonized,  feeling  and  of  earnest  entreaty. 
(3)  By  his  "  tears."  Great  natures  weep,  but  not  for  trifles.  Their  tears  indicate  deep 
emotion.  Our  Lord's  tears  in  Gethsemane  welled  up  from  a  "  soul  exceeding  sorrowful," 
and  were  significant  of  a  painful  fervency  of  supplication.  "Being  in  an  agony  he 
prnyed  more  earnestly,"  etc.  (Luke  xxii.  44). 

III.  In  answer  to  his  peatee  oub  Lobd  obtained  suppobt  in  his  buffebinos. 
I.  Hie  nature  of  the  answer  to  hia  prayer.  Not  exemption  from  the  cup,  but  victory 
over  the  dread  of  it,  and  support  in  drinking  it.  He  was  fortified  for  his  future 
sufferings  and  trials,  and  sustained  in  them.  "  There  appeared  unto  him  an  angel 
from  heaven,  strengthening  him."  His  personal  wishes  were  now  lost  in  the  perfect 
will  of  his  Father.  His  dread  anxieties  are  gone,  and  he  is  divinely  calm.  His 
trembling  fears  have  departed,  and  he  is  sublimely  courageous.  Henceforth,  even 
unto  the  bitter  end,  he  is  serene  in  sternest  sufferings,  patient  under  the  most 
irritating  provocations,  a  meek  yet  majestic  Conqueror.  Such  was  the  Father's  answer 
to  his  prayer.  And  every  true  prayer  which  is  offered  to  God  is  answered  by  him, 
though  not  always  by  granting  the  specific  requests  (cf.  2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 10).  2.  The 
reason  of  the  answer  to  his  prayer.  "And  was  heard  in  that  he  feared;"  margin, 
"for  his  piety;"  Revised  Verson,  "Having  been  heard  for  his  godly  fear;"  Alford, 
"  Having  been  heard  by  reason  of  his  reverent  submission."  His  pious  resignation  tc 
the  holy  will  of  his  Father  was  the  ground  upon  which  his  prayer  was  answered,  and 
the  victory  was  given  unto  him.  "Nevertheless,"  said  he,  "  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
Tliou  wUt.    . .  0  my  Father,  if  this  cannot  pass  away,  except  I  drink  ft,  thy  will  be 

'  ■  The  Life  of  Christ,'  oh.  Ivii 


OH.T.  1— 14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBllEWEk  147 

done."   When  ve  can  thus  say,  "Thy  will  be  done,"  we  have  already  an  instalment  of 
the  answer  to  our  prayers,  and  the  fulness  of  the  hlessing  will  not  tarry. 

IV.  Bt  his  suffisbinos  his  obedienok  to  the  holt  will  of  his  Father  wai 
PEEFEOTED.  "  Though  he  was  a  Son,  yet  learned  he  obedience  by,"  etc.  His  obe- 
dience as  a  Son  was  always  perfect.  His  obedience  here  spoken  of  is  obedience  in 
suffering.  As  his  obedience  became  more  difSoult,  involving  more  and  more  of  self- 
renunciation,  and  pain  ever  increasing  in  severity,  he  still  obeyed.  He  willed  to 
endure  the  sharpest,  sternest  sufferings  rather  than  fail  even  in  the  slightest  degree  in 
his  practical  loyalty  to  the  perfect  will  of  his  Father.  "  He  became  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  This  obedience  he  learned,  as  he  proceeded  step  by 
step  along  his  painful  path,  until  the  lesson  was  finished  and  the  obedience  was  con- 
summated on  tlie  cross.  All  Christ's  disciples  need  the  discipline  of  suffering  to  perfect 
them  in  the  practice  of  the  Father's  will  (cf.  Matt.  xvi.  24). — W.  J. 

Ver.  9. — Salvation — it»  Author  and  it*  recipients.  "  And  being  made  perfect,  he 
became  the  Author,"  etc.  The  subject  of  the  writer  in  this  part  of  his  Epistle  is  the  • 
high  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  treating  this  subject  he  dwells  upon  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  in  his  priestly  office,  and  a  certain  perfection  which  resulted  from  his  suffer- 
ings. He  was  God's  only  and  well-beloved  Son,  yet  he  was  not  exempt  from  suffering. 
"  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered."  We  must  not  suppose  that 
he  was  not  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  natiue  of  obedience,  or  that  he  did  not  fully 
recognize  the  duty  of  it,  or  that  he  was  in  any  way  indisposed  to  render  it,  before  he 
suffered.  The  meaning  is  that  though  he  was  so  highly  exalted  in  his  relationship  to 
the  Father,  yet  "  he  was  subjected  to  learn  experimentally  what  it  is  to  obey  in  the 
midst  of  suffering."  He  learned  the  lesson  perfectly.  He  "became  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."     Our  text  leads  us  to  consider  three  things. 

L  The  perfection  which  Christ  attained  through  suFPBRiNa.  "  And  having 
been  made  perfect."  Having  assumed  human  nature,  Christ  was  capable  of  suffering ; 
and  in  that  nature  he  did  indeed  suffer.  His  entire  life  upon  earth  was  one  of  humilia- 
tion and  sacrifice.  Beiug  sympathetic,  the  sufferings  of  men  were  a  constant  grief  to 
him.  Being  holy,  the  sins  of  men  constantly  stung  his  soul  with  pain.  At  the  last 
his  sufferings  deepened  into  awful  intensity.  In  G-ethsemane  his  sorrow  and  conflict 
almost  brought  down  his  human  nature  unto  death.  And  on  the  cross  his  pain  and 
woe  were  unutterable,  and  to  us  inconceivably  severe.  Of  all  sufferers  Christ  is  tTu 
Sufferer.  In  all  these  sufferings  he  was  obedient.  He  endured  them  voluntarily. 
Through  his  obedience  in  suffering  he  became  perfect..  The  author  of  our  salvation  was 
made  "perfect  through  sufferings"  (oh.  ii.  10).  This  acquired  perfection  was  not 
pertonal.  As  God  he  is  eternally  perfect ;  as  man  he  was  perfect  without  suffering. 
The  perfection  of  our  text  is  relative.  By  suffering  he  became  perfect  in  his  relation  to 
us  as  our  Saviour,  our  Intercessor,  our  great  High  Priest.  By  suffering :  1.  He  made  a 
perfect  atonement  for  sin.  2.  He  became  perfectly  qualified  to  sympathize  with  and  to 
succour  his  suffering  people.  (Cf.  ch.  iv.  14-— 16.)  3.  He  hecame  a  perfect  example  for  hia 
people  in  their  sufferings.  4.  He  entered  upon  his  perfect  triumph  and  glory.  (Of.  ch.  ii. 
9;  xii.  2;  Phil.  ii.  6— 11.) 

f '  The  great  end  both  of  Christ's  suffbrinq  and  of  his  perfection  acquired 
THROUGH  his  BUFFERING.  This  end  was  that  he  might  be  the  Author,  or  the  great  pro- 
curing cause,  of  a  perfect  salvation  for  men.  "  Being  made  perfect,  he  became  the  Author 
of  eternal  salvation."  Here  are  three  points.  1.  The  salvation.  Forgiveness  of  sin, 
freedom  from  condemnation,  deliverance  from  the  sovereignty  of  sin,  the  awakening  of 
a  new  ruling  principle  and  power  in  man,  conversion  into  a  condition  of  holiness,  peace 
and  joy,  entrance  into  heaven,  blessed  union  with  God.  2.  The  perpetuity  of  salvation. 
"  Eternal  salvation."  No  partial,  incomplete,  temporary  blessing ;  but  "  eternal  salva- 
tion " — "  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  .Jesus  with  eternal  glory."  Does  not  this,  at 
least,  suggest  that  there  is  no  falling  back  from  the  hand  of  Christ  into  the  power  of 
Satan?  Doubtless  man  always  can  do  so,  inasmuch  as  he  is  morally  free;  but  this 
"eternal  salvation"  establishes  man's  freedom,  yet  binds  it  to  holiness,  and  leads  him 
to  cry,  "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God."  This  blessing  shall  continue  when 
bonds  and  banks,  estates  and  fortunes,  coronets  and  crowns,  shall  have  perished. 
Bleised  be  the  Lord  for  his  "  eternal  salvation  "  1     3.  The  Author  of  salvation.     Ow 


148  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  v.  1—14. 

salvation  is  owing  to  Jesus  Clirist.  The  ministry  of  providence,  of  religiouB  ordinances^ 
and  of  good  men,  may  assist  us  in  availing  ourselves  of  this  salvation  ;  but  they  cannot 
save  UB ;  they  are  not  "  the  cause  of  salvation."  Our  salvation  originated  in  the 
infinite  love  of  God.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  Our  salvation  was  effected  by 
his  Son,  our  Saviour.  He  became  man,  taught,  laboured,  suffered,  lived,  died,  and  ever 
lives  to  save  us.  He  is  our  only  Saviour.  The  great  end  of  his  sufferings  was  our 
"  eternal  salvation." 

in.  The  EBCIPIBNT8  OF  THIS  SALVATION.  "  Uuto  all  them  that  obey  him."  This, 
of  course,  does  not  mean  that  we  merit  salvation  by  obeying  the  Saviour.  .But  those 
who  have  merely  some  doctrinal  knowledge  of  Christ  and  his  salvation,  those  who 
have  only  a  dead  faith  in  bim,  a  mere  intellectual  assent  to  the  great  facts  of  his  history 
and  teaching,  are  not  partakers  of  his  salvatioa.  As  he  attained  his  mediatoiial  perfec- 
tion and  glory  by  complete  and  hearty  obedience  to  his  Father,  so  must  man  obey  him 
if  we  would  attain  unto  "  eternal  salvation."  Salvation  is  found  in  obedience  to  him, 
because :  1.  True  and  saving  faith  inspires  the  Itfe  and  shapes  the  conduct.  (Of.  Acts 
XV.  9;  Rom.  xvi;26;  Gal.  v.  6;  Jas.  ii.  17— 26.)  2.  Christ  saves  men  from  their  sins. 
He  is  a  Prince  to  rule  us,  as  well  as  a  Saviour  to  deliver  us.  3.  All  who  are  being 
saved  by  Christ  love  him,  and  the  loving  heart  delights  to  obet/^  the  loved  One.  4.  The 
disobedient  cannot  enter  heaven.  Heaven  is  a  realm  of  perfect  ubedienoe  to  the  supreme 
will,  of  loyal  and  loving  devotion  to  God's  service.  Unless,  the  spirit  of  hearty 
obedience  be  ours,  we  are  out  of  sympathy  with  heaven. 

CoNOLunoii.  L  2ViM<  this  perfect  Saviour.  2.  Obey  him.  Copy  Ma  own  obedience. 
-W.J. 

Vers.  11 — 14.~8piritttal  cbtuseness,  "  Of  whom  we  have  many  things  to  say,*  etc. 
In  treating  oC  the  analogy  between  the  priesthood  of  Melchizedek  and  that  of  Christ, 
the  writer  was  hindered  by  the  spiritual  obtuseness  of  his  readers.  "  We  have  many 
things  to  say,  and  difficult  of  iuterpretation,  seeing  ye  are  become  dull  of  hearing." 
The  writer  found  it  difficult  to  explain  his  subject  to  them,  because  they  were  so  dull 
and  slow  in  their  apprehension.    Notice — 

L  Spibitdaii  obtuseness  is  sometimes  vest  obeat.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  the 
persons  here  addressed,  as  may  be  seen  by  contrasting  what  they  might  and  ought  to 
have  been  and  what  they  were.  They  should  have  been  able  to  have  taught  others ; 
they  really  needed  teaching  themselves,  and  that  of  the  most  elementary  kind.  "  When 
ye  ought  to  be  teachers,  ye  have  need  again  that  some  one  teach  you  the  rudiments  of 
the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God."  They  required  instructing  again  in  "  the 
beginnings  of  the  beginning  "  of  Christian  doctrine.  Moreover,  when  they  should  have 
been  men  in  spiritual  intelligence,  they  were  only  babes.  "  And  are  become  such  as  have 
need  of  milk,"  etc.  It  is  pitiful  andpainful  to  reflect  upon  the  prevalence  of  spiritual 
obtuseness  in  our  own  age.  Eow  many  Christians  are  perfectly  content  and  self- 
satisfied  having  only  the  barest  rudiments  of  Scripture  truth  I  Some  even  pride  them- 
selves  in  holding  "  the  truth,"  as  though  they  had  grasped  and  mastered  all  truth ; 
and  in  their  firm  adherence  to  "  the  simple  gospel,"  as  though  there  were  no  pro- 
fundities and  sublimities  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  fear  that  the  Bible  is 
far  more  widely  circulated  than  read,  and  far  more  extensively  read  than  studied  or 
understood. 

II.  Spibituai.  obtuseness  is  sometimes  sinful.  We  say  "  sometimes ; "  for  when 
this  dulness  of  perception  or  difBculty  of  apprehension  arises  from  original  deficiency 
of  faculty,  or  from  the  scarcity  of  opportunities  for  progress  in  acquaintance  with 
Christian  truth,  no  moral  blame  attaches  to  it.  It  is  deplorable,  but  not  censur- 
able. To  whom  only  little  is  given,  of  him  only  little  will  be  required.  But  in  tha 
case  before  ns  the  writer  says,  "For  when  by  reason  of  the  time  ye  ought  to  be 
teachers,"  etc.  Let  us  look  at  the  argument  expressed  or  implied  here.  1.  Time  and 
opportunities  for  progress  had  been  given  to  them.  "  By  reason  of  the  time  "  since  they 
became  Christians  they  should  have  made  sufficient  advancement  to  have  been  able  to 
have  instructed  others.  Therefore  the  time  must  have  been  considerable.  2.  Utere 
should  have  been  a  proportion  between  the  opportunities  afforded  and  the  progress  made. 
lius  is  clearly  implied  in  the  text.  It  is  also  righteous  and  reasonable.  3.  The  existence 
9f  eigirituaX  obtuttMU  notwithstanding  e]pportunHie$  <jf  frogresi  ie  maraUy  wrong. 


OH.  T.  1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  149 

Such  spiritual  dulness  ii  not  a  misfortune,  but  a  sin.  It  is  an  evidence  of  opportuni- 
ties of  progress  neglected,  of  responsibilities  unacknowledged  or  onfulfllled,  and,  it 
may  be,  of  sins  indulged  in.  Puity  of  heart  and  the  power  of  perceiving  spiritual 
truth  are  closely  related.  Slowness  of  spiritual  apprehension  often  arises  from  the  cor- 
ruption of  the  heart.  The  pure  heart  is  quick  and  true  in  its  perceptions.  "  Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  "  If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his  will,  he 
shall  know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  be  of  God."  Worldliness  of  spirit  also  dims  and 
diminishes  the  perceptive  powers  of  the  soul.  If  a  man's  eyes  are  ever  fixed  upon  the 
earth,  how  can  he  see  the  brilliance  and  beauty  of  the  starry  heavens?  If  a  man's 
affections  are  fixed  upon  the  material  and  perishable  things  of  this  present  world,  he 
will  gradually  lose  his  power  for  perceiving  the  ethereal  and  perennial  beauty  of 
religious  truth,  or  even  for  perceiving  such  truth  at  all. 

III.  Spibitual  obtcsbness  involves  SEBions  LOSS.  1.  Lon  to  the  community. 
In  cases  like  that  mentioned  in  the  text,  the  obtuse  persons  onght  to  be  able  to  teach 
others,  at  least  the  elementary  truths  of  Christianity.  Parents  should  be  able  to 
instruct  their  children;  the  Christian  should  be  able  to  help  his  friend  who  is  seeking 
for  life  and  truth,  etc.  2.  Loss  to  the  individual.  The  man  of  dull  spiritual  apprehen- 
sion loses  the  fuller  and  higher  teaching.  The  full  beauty  of  the  laQdscape  is  not  for  the 
man  of  diseased  or  impaired  physical  vision.  In  like  manner  the  beauty  and  sublimity 
of  Divine  truth  and  the  serene  splendours  of  holiness  are  invisible  to  those  who  are 
spiritually  obtuse.  Or,  changing  the  figure,  the  food  of  moral  manhood  is  not  for 
them ;  they  are  unable  to  assimilate  it,  and  must  needs  be  limited  to  the  dietary  of 
babyhood. 

'  Several  practical  and  profitable  reflections  arise  from  our  subject.  1.  The  need  of 
adaptation  in  Christian  teaching.  The  sacred  writings  contain  "  milk  for  babes," 
"  solid  food  for  full-grown  men,"  and  food  suited  for  all  the  intermediate  stages  of  the 
Christian  life.  The  wise  teacher  will  endeavour  to  distribute  to  each  the  food  suited 
to  his  condition.  2.  The  obligatoriness  of  progress  in  Christian  discipleship.  Infancy 
has  its  charms,  but  not  as  a  permanent  state.  Infancy  must  pass  on  by  orderly  deve- 
lopment into  manhood.  Continuous  spiritual  infancy  is  unnatural  and  sinful.  A 
permanent  milk  diet  in  the  spiritual  life  indicates  a  stationariness  which  is  unhealthy 
and  culpable  (of.  Eph.  iv.  11 — 15).  3.  In  the  mature  stage  of  Christian  life  there  is 
the  qualification  for  the  exercise  of  discrimination,  in  spiritual  things.  "  Full-grown 
men  by  reason  of  use  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  good  and  evil."  Their 
spiritual  faculties  are  trained  and  disciplined,  and  so  they  are  able  to  distinguish 
betwebn  the  true  and  false,  the  superior  and  the  inrerior,  In  Christian  teaching.  Alas, 
that  the  people  who  are  least  mature  are  generally  the  most  forward  in  exercising 
this  critical  function  1  4.  We  see  why  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  is  sometimes  compara- 
tively ineffectual.  In  some  instances  the  smallness  of  its  success  is  owing  to  the  want 
of  adaptation  in  the  ministry  itself;  in  others,  to  the  sinful  and  almost  insuperable 
spiritual  obtuseness  of  the  hearers  thereof. — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Christ's  Divine  appointment  to  the  high  priesthood  theftilfllment  of  one 
essential  qtialijication  for  that  position.  This  begins  the  third  great  section  of  the 
Epistle.  Section  i.  (ch.i.  and  ii.)  sets  forth  the  Deity  and  humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
Christ's  superiority  to  the  angels  through  whose  ministration  the  old  dispensatifa  was 
said  to  be  established.  Section  ii.  (ch.  iii.  and  iv.)  sets  forth  the  surpassing  greatness  of 
our  Lord  as  compared  with  Moses,  the  great  leader  o(  the  old  dispensation.  Sectiou 
iii.  (ch.  v. — x.)  sets  forth  our  Lord  greater  than  Aaron,  the  representative  of  the  purely 
religious  element  of  the  old  dispensation.  Clirist  infinitely  greater  than  all  these,  and 
therefore  the  new  covenant  in  him  infinitely  better  than  the  old — that  now  is  the  writer's 
argument.  The  first  ten  verses  of  ch.  v.  are  an  introduction  to  the  third  section. 
Before  Christ's  fulfilment  of  high  priestly  work  is  discussed,  it  is  necessary  to  show 
that  he  does  actually  hold  that  position.  Christ  is  really  High  Priest;  the  first  proof 
of  that  is  in  the  passage  before  us.  Subject — Christ's  Divine  appointment  to  the  high 
priesthood  the  fulfilment  of  one  essential  qualification  for  that  position. 

I.   CONBIDEB  THE  FACT  OF  MEDIATION  BETWEEN  GoD  AND  MAN.      The   high  priest  Was 

"appointed  for  men  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and 
sacrifices  for  gins."    "  Gifts  "  equivalent  to,  those  of  God  to  men — ^reconcUiation  and 


150  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBRBWa  [oh.  ▼.  1—14 

benediction.  "  Sacrifices  for  sins  "  equivalent  to,  those  of  men  to  God  ;  that  is,  he  was 
charged  to  manage  the  concerns  of  his  brethren  with  the  Most  High,  holding  an  inter- 
mediate position.  What  was  the  necessity  for  such  an  intermediary?  1.  It  was  a 
witness  to  the  sinfulness  of  man.  One  tribe  was  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the  taber- 
nacle. Only  one  family  of  this  might  enter  the  sacred  building,  Aaron  and  his  four 
sons;  five  persons  in  all. out  of  the  thousands  of  Israel,  and  these  only  permitted  to 
undertake  their  duties  after  solemn  rules  of  consecration.  But  of  this  family,  only  one 
might  pass  into  the  most  holy  place,  and  he  but  once  in  a  year,  and  then  only  in  a 
manner  which  must  have  impressed  him  deeply  with  the  sanctity  of  the  place.  Nothing 
could  more  clearly  show  the  distance  at  which  sin  had  placed  man  from  God.  2.  The 
fact  of  mediation  is  a  declaration  that  the  hroken  intercourse  between  Ood  and  man  can 
be  renewed.  In  Eden  God  communed  with  man,  but  sin  broke  this  communion.  Sinful 
man  could  only  say  with  Cain,  "  From  thy  face  shall  I  be  hid,  and  I  shall  be  a  fugitive 
and  a  vagabond."  But  when  the  doctrine  of  mediation  was  taught — and  that  must 
have  been  very  early,  for  it  underlies  the  idea  of  sacrifice — how  great  a  door  of  hope  was 
suddenly  opened  before  them !  The  inteivention  of  another  might  yet  be,  like  Jacob's 
ladder,  the  means  of  communication  between  heaven  and  earth.  3.  The  fact  of  media- 
tion M  a  testimony  to  the  principle  of  substitution.  This  principle  which  underlies  the 
New  Testament  system  no  less  underlies  the  Old ;  it  runs  through  the  entire  Word  of 
God  as  the  principle  which  keeps  it  together.  Mediation  is  representation.  The  high 
priest  represented  the  people  before  God.  God  treated  with  him  on  their  behalf.  What 
they  could  not  do  for  themselves,  he  did. 

II.  The  necessity  that  the  mediator  bhould  be  divinblt  appointed.  The 
stress  of  the  passage  is  on  the  word  "  appointed."  1.  This  is  necessary  to  ensure  the 
Divine  acceptance  ef  the  Mediator.  Man  has  no  rights,  no  power,  he  is  helpless  and 
undone,  entirely  dependent  on  the  mercy  of  the  offended  God.  He,  therefore,  can  have 
no  assurance  that  his  representative  will  be  accepted  apart  from  the  Divine  appoint- 
ment of  him ;  but  that  gives  perlect  assurance.  He  whom  God  has  appointed  to  draw 
near  to  him  on  our  behalf  cannot  draw  near  in  vain.  2.  This  Divine  appointment  is 
necessary  to  show  the  good  will  of  Ood  to  those  for  whom  mediation  is  made.  "  If  man 
appointed  his  own  mediator  it  would  only  show  his  yearning  after  God,  but  when  God 
appoints  the  mediator  it  shows  God's  yearning  alter  him."  Man  could  not  devise  the 
idea  of  one  to  present  his  case  before  God ;  the  will  would  be  wanting.  Before  there 
could  be  any  movement  towards  heaven,  God  himself  must  work ;  there  must  be  the 
upward  drawing  before  the  upward  tendency.  God  must  always  precede  our  desire  for 
him.  The  desire  for  a  mediator,  the  fact  of  a  divinely  appointed  Mediator,  prove  that 
God  is  on  our  side.  3.  This  Divine  appointment  is  necessary  to  secure  the  fulfilment  of 
the  mediatorial  work,  or,  at  least,  for  one  assurance  of  this.  We  expect  that  "  what  is  no 
one's  work  "  will  remain  undone.  A  special  appointment  is  necessary  if  we  are  to  enjoy 
confidence.  Now,  for  the  removal  of  our  doubts  as  to  whether  our  wants  really  are 
made  known  to  God,  the  sacrifice  for  our  sin  really  presented,  etc.,  there  is  the  fact 
that  one  Person  of  the  Divine  Trinity  has  been  set  apart  for  this  purpose.  That  being 
so,  not  in  the  least  particular  will  the  mediatorial  duties  be  unfulfilled. 

III.  The  fulfilment  of  tehs  necessity  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  So  also 
Christ,"  etc.  1.  The  Father  hath  appointed  Christ  to  this  work.  Could  our  case  be  in 
bettor  hands  ?  He  is  no  stranger  to  us.  We  have  seen  him,  and  walked  with  him, 
and  lived  with  him  in  the  Gospel  history.  Could  wo  choose,  with  whom  would  wo 
leave  ourselves  as  with  Jesus?  2.  The  Divine  dignity  of  Christ  adds  yet  greater  worth 
to  this  appointment.  "Thou  art  my  Son."  The  Divine  Son  has  free  access  to  the 
Father,  and  to  his  car  and  heart.  Whatheasks  the  Father  desires;  for  he  and  his  Father 
are  one.  For  him  to  plead  for  us  is  for  God  to  plead  with  himself  for  us.  Moreover, 
as  God  he  is  omniscient  and  untiring  and  infinitely- loving,  so  that  none  of  our  needs 
escape  him.  3.  The  fact  that  Christ  regards  this  position  as  one  of  glory  addt  still 
further  worth  to  the  Divine  appointment.  "Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be,"  etc. 
He  counts  it  a  glory  to  be  our  Mediator;  then  behold  how  he  loves  ual  How  certainly 
he  will  fulfil  this  work;  for  he  is  jealous  of  his  glory  1 — G.  N. 

Vers.  7 — 10. —  Christ's  human  experience  the  second  qualification  for  high  priestly 
luork.    The  second  proof  that  Christ  holds  the  high  priestly  position.    In  vera,  1,  2 


CB.T.1-.14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  151 

the  double  qualificati<ni  for  this  !•  ihown — a  qualification  Qodward  and  manward ;  ha 
must  bo  appointed  by  God,  and  able  to  sympathize  with  man.  Both  these  are  shown 
to  be  true  of  Christ,  and  that  he  is,  therefore,  officially  "  perfect "  (vers.  9, 10). 

L  The  nscebsity  that  the  high  priebt  should  have  febsonal  acquaimtance 
WITH  HnuAN  experience.  He  "  must  be  taken  from  among  men."  1.  Apart  frmn 
thit  he  could  be  no  true  representative  of  mankind.  Human  obedience  to  the  Divine 
Law  was  required  of  men.  Christ  undertook,  as  their  Representatiye,  to  meet  all 
requirements ;  that  made  the  Incarnation  a  necessity.  Christ  must  keep  the  Law  on 
the  same  footing  on  which  Adam  stood  when  he  came  from  QoA'a  hand.  So,  likewise, 
tiearing  man's  penalty,  he  must  assume  a  nature  which  could  die.  That  is,  he  must 
liecome  man.  2.  Apart  from  this  he  cotUd  not  secure  the  confidence  of  the  people.  Christ 
need  not  pass  through  human  experience  in  order  to  imderstand  it ;  he  understands  it 
by  his  omniscience.  But  the  infirmity  of  human  faith  can  better  confide  in  the 
sympathy  of  one  who,  it  knows,  has  personally  endured  its  trials. 

IL  The  rnuiLMSNT  of  this  QnALiFioATioN  in  the  Lobd  Jesus  Cebist.  "  Who 
in  the  days  of  his  flesh,"  etc.  1.  An  illustration  of  Chrisfs  deep  experience  of  human 
suffering.  The  reference  is,  evidently,  to  Gethsemano.  What  could  have  a£fected  the 
Saviour  then  so  intensely?  Not  the  anticipation  of  physical  anguish,  for  then  he  would 
have  fallen  lower  than  the  martyrs ;  not  the  dread  of  rejection  by  the  people,  for  he 
had  already  endured  that  with  great  calmness;  not  the  fear  of  the  act  of  death,  for  he 
spoke  of  that  with  joy  :  "  If  ye  loved  me  ye  would  rejoice,  because,"  etc.  It  could  only 
have  been  because  death  would  be  to  him  what  it  could  be  to  none  other — the  bearing 
of  the  world's  sin,  the  experience  of  sin's  doom.  But  why  does  the  writer  refer  to  this, 
but  because  it  is  the  culminating  point  of  our  Lord's  suffering  ?  He  leads  them  to  look 
at  Jesus  when  he  has  reached  the  deepest  depth  of  suffering  possible.  However  deep 
his  people's  darkness,  Jesus  has  gone  deeper  still.  He  knows  the  lowest,  therefore 
also  the  intermediate  stages.  2.  An  illustration  of  the  pain  involved  in  submitting 
oitr  will  to  Ood.  "  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered."  01)edience 
is  submission  of  the  will  to  Ood.  That  was  the  burden  of  the  prayer  in  Gethsemane. 
He  laid  his  will  absolutely  at  the  Father's  feet.  Christ  did  not  learn  to  be  obedient.  He 
came  to  do  God's  will ;  that  was  his  meat  and  drink.  He  did  always  (from  the  first) 
those  things  which  please  the  Father.  He  learned  obedience — came  to  know  what  it 
means  for  the  flesh  to  submit  ever  to  the  will  of  Heaven ;  what  it  is  to  obey  God 
amidst  human  frailties,  pains,  temptations.  3.  An  illustration  of  Ohrisfs  dependence 
for  fidelity  on  heavenly  helps.  He  prayed  to  be  saved  (not  "  from  ")  "  out  of  death ; " 
not  that  death  might  be  averted — for  his  prayer  "  was  heard  " — but  that  he  might  be 
delivered  out  of  it.  Divine  support  was  given,  and  a  glorious  resurrection.  Christ,  as 
man,  had  no  inherent  power  by  reason  of  his  Deity  for  what,  as  man,  he  had  to  do  and 
bear.  He  stood  on  man's  footing.  Perhaps  nothing  brings  him  closer  to  us  than  that 
for  all  he  needed  he  had  to  cling  to  God  in  trustful  supplication  as  we  have,  and 
receive  delivering  and  sustaining  grace  because  thereof  as  we  do. 

ILL  The  woeth  to  his  people  of  Christ's  fulfilment  of  this  qualification. 
He  was  thus  "  made  perfect " — perfect  as  to  his  fulness  for  high  priestly  work.  Then : 
1.  The  perfection  of  Ghrisfs  priesthood  makes  euery  other  priesthood  needless.  He  is 
"  a  high  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek ; "  not  in  the  Aaronic  order,  not  thus  for 
Israel  after  the  flesh,  but  "  for  all  those  who  obey  him,"  i.e.  submit  to  him.  Christ, 
High  Priest  for  every  sinner  who  yields  himself  to  him ;  and  for  this  he  is  perfect.  Then 
what  room  for  any  other  mediatoi:  ?  2.  The  power  of  sympathy  in  a  Ood  who  has 
himself  suffered.  For  perfect  repose  we  must  have  one  of  whose  fellow-feeling  we  are 
assured  by  bis  experience  of  our  own  trials.  If  we  only  knew  God  in  heaven,  we  might 
revere,  obey,  trust,  love  him ;  but  we  could  not  put  our  head  on  his  bosom  and  weep 
there.  But  when  we  see  that  there  is  not  a  trial  we  experience  whose  counterpart  we 
cannot  find  in  his  earthly  life,  we  can  rest  in  the  Lord.  3.  The  humiliation  and  woe  by 
which  alone  vwr  salvation  was  secured.  See  how  Christ  shrank  from  Calvary,  and  yet 
how  he  advanced  to  it  with  unswerving  willingness,  and  thus  "  became  the  Author," 
etc.  That  leaves  on  the  mind  two  deep  impressions  :  (1)  the  baseness  of  making  light 
of  what  was  bought  at  such  a  cost ;  and  (2)  the  terror  of  that  wrath  which  shall 
overtake  the  impenitent,  since  such  was  the  experience  of  the  Sod  of  God  when  1m 
stooped  to  the  penalty  of  sin. — C.  N. 


152  THE  EFISTLB  TO  THE  HEBBEW&  [oh.  ▼.1—14 

Ver.  11 — ch.  tL  8. — The  evS  of  inabUity  to  apprehend  the  deeper  trutht  about  Ohrht. 
This  begins  a  parenthesis  continued  to  end  of  ch.  vi.  The  writer  has  come  to  the  chief 
illustration  of  his  great  theme — ^the  pre-eminence  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  but  he  has  hardly 
entered  on  this  section  before  he  feels  himself  unable  to  give  full  utterance  to  what  he 
sees  of  the  Redeemer's  greatness,  because  of  the  dulness  of  spiritual  perception  in  his 
hearers.  He  fears  their  religious  condition  will  prevent  their  following  him  as  he  tries 
to  scale  the  more  inaccessible  heights,  and  he  cannot  restrain  an  utterance  of  sorrow, 
and  a  solemn  warning  of  the  connection  between  ignorance  of  these  things  and  apostasy 
from  the  Son  of  God.  The  subject  of  the  whole  parenthesis,  therefore,  is — The  danger  oj 
apostasy  which  lies  concealed  in  the  immature  apprehension  of  Christian  truth ;  but  of 
the  part,  in  these  verses,  the  following  is  the  aubject — The  evil  ofinabUity  to  apprehend 
the  deeper  truths  about  Christ, 

I.  The  the  abuses  of  tbuth  which  are  hidden  in  theLobd  Jesus.  "Of  whom 
we  have  many  things  to  say,"  etc.  Why  should  the  writer  preface  this  particular  part 
of  his  subject  with  a  reference  to  its  di£Sculty,  since  no  such  reference  is  attached 
to  the  equally  profound  truths  of  previous  chapters  ?  There  is  no  necessity  to  attach 
this  reference  only  to  what  follows ;  it  may  look  backward  as  well  as  forward.  The 
apostle  is  in  the  midst  of  his  theme — the  greatness,  the  fulness,  the  preciousness  of 
Christ,  which  he  knows  not  how  to  utter — and  is  more  likely  to  feel  its  difficulty  there 
than  at  the  beginning.  1.  The  treasures  hidden  in  Christ  are,  of  necessity,  infinitely 
great,  because  he  is  the  Bevelation  of  the  character  and  wHl  of  God.  "  In  him  dwelletti 
all  the  fulness  of  the  Q-odhead  bodily."  He  is  the  perfect  expression  of  God's  love 
to  man.  He  is  the  Fountain  of  all  good.  He  is  the  embodiment  of  what  the  Father 
desires  us  to  have  and  be.  He  is  the  utterance  of  what  God  would  say  to  man.  When 
we  think  of  Christ,  therefore,  we  are  but  children  standing  on  the  shore  of  an  ocean 
whose  further  side  has  never  been  seen  nor  reached,  and  whose  depth  no  human  line 
can  fathom.  2,  But,  in  as  far  a$  this  is  revealed  through  Ood's  Word,  it  is  intended  to 
be  understood.  It  will  require  an  endless  life  to  understand  it  perfectly.  Growing  know- 
ledge resulting  in  growing  gratitude,  love,  and  devotion, — this,  perpetuated  without 
end,  is  the  bright  future  before  us.  But,  however  much  we  cannot  know  in  the  present, 
Scripture  contains  a  revelation  of  such  fulness  in  the  Saviour  as  the  wisest  and  best 
have  not  yet  understood  and  appreciated ;  and  what  is  revealed  here  and  now,  is 
obviously  intended  here  and  now  to  be  apprehended.  We  cannot  overrate  the  Saviour's 
desire  to  reveal  himself,  the  deep  things  of  his  heart,  and  the  best  glories  of  his  nature 
to  his  beloved,  nor  the  Father's  will  th»t,  as  for  as  on  earth  it  can  be  received,  that 
revelation  should  be  theirs. 

U.  The  hindrances  to  oub  fobsessioh  or  these  tbeabttbeb.  "  How  !■  it  that 
ye  do  not  understand?"  Why  do  we  know  so  little  about  Christ?  Why  are  the 
Scriptures  to  us  to  a  great  extent  sealed  ?  This  passage  reveals  three  reasons  for  this. 
1.  /^ritual  feMeneu.  The  Hebrews  had  lost  their  early  re%ioas  vigour.  "  When  by 
reason  of  the  time  [since  ye  became  Christians]  ye  ought  to  be,"  etc.  Their  condition 
was  one  of  retrogression.  (See  what  they  had  been  once :  "  Te  endured  a  great  fight," 
etc.)  They  had  become  vadUating,  and  ready  to  return  to  Judaism.  A  feeble  and 
deteriorated  piety  was  one  reason  for  their  dulness  of  hearing.  That  is  natural.  Christ's 
riches  are  spiritual,  and  can  only  be  understood  by  spiritual  perception.  Let  spiritual 
power  decline,  and  ability  to  understand  Divine  truth  declines  with  it.  "  The  fear  of 
the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  ; "  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear 
him."  2.  Intellectual  prejudice.  They  desired  to  return  to  Judaism ;  its  ancient 
glories  still  fascinated  them,  and  they  were  predisposed  to  accept  any  teaching  aimed  to 
show  the  untruth  of  Christianity.  That  was  enough  to  account  for  their  being  dull  of 
hearing.  Scepticism  is  made,  more  than  by  anything  else,  by  unwillingness  to  receive 
the  truth.  The  mind  that  allows  its  personal  desires  to  decide  what  is  truth  must 
become  increasingly  incapable  of  discerning  truth  when  it  is  placed  before  it.  Nothing 
more  surely  blinds  than  prejudice.  3.  Sinful  inattention.  "  Every  one  that  partakes 
of  milk  [t.e,  not  able  to  partake  of  the  solid  food  of  Divine  truth]  is  without  experience 
[t.e.  has  not  made  himself  acquainted  by  observation  and  study]  of  the  Word  of 
righteousness ;  .  .  .  but  solid  food  is  for  full-grown  men,  even  those  who,"  etc.  That 
is,  spiritual  discernment,  an  apprehension  of  God's  deep  things,  is  the  result  of  use, 
Inaliility  to  understand  is  the  judgment  on  inattention.  Scripture  is  a  sealed  book 
to  the  heart  that  neglects  it. 


OH.  ▼.1—14.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  15i 

m.  ThK  mOEBSITY  FOB  THB  BBHOVAL  OF  THESE  HINDBANOES  OF  BPIBTTnAIi  HATUBITT 

IS  TO  BB  ATTAIKED.  1.  Fw  Ohrist,  as  revealed  in  the  Word,  is  spiritual  nourishment. 
The  truth  atout  Christ  is  "  milk "  and  "  strong  meat."  Christ  is  the  essence  of 
Scripture,  and  he  is  "  the  Bread  of  life."  What  nourishing  food  is  to  the  body,  therefore, 
the  Word  of  God  is  to  the  Divine  life  in  man.  On  participation  on  it  that  life  depends. 
2.  7'here  is  a  distitietion  drawn  here  between  those  truths  which  merely  sustain  and  those 
wAtcA  increase  life.  What  is  the  "  milk  "  ?  Those  iirsfc  necessary  principles  recorded 
in  ch.  vi.  1,  2.  There  we  have  the  essential  life-giving  points  (not  quite  such  a 
"  simple  gospel"  as  some  think !).  The  doctrines  of  repentance,  faith,  the  Holy  Spirit, 
Christian  service,  the  resurrection,  and  tlie  judgment, — these  are  the  "  milk."  What  is 
the  "  otrong  meat "  ?  The  deeper,  fuller  truths  about  Christ  set  forth  here — his  character, 
work,  relation,  grace,  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man,  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  with 
the  height  and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth  of  meaning  all  this  involves.  3. 
Christian  maturity  depends  on  the  partaking  of  truth  in  these  higher  forms.  They  ought 
to  be  "  babes  "  no  longer,  but  "  strong  men ; "  and  how  ?  "  Let  us  cease  to  speak  of 
the  first,"  etc.  The  method  by  which  this  Epistle  seeks  to  arouse  a  lukewarm  and 
enfeebled  Church  to  higher  things  is  the  presentation  of  these  higher  truths  con- 
cerning the  surpassing  glory  of  the  Son  of  God.  "  Grow  in  grace,  and  iai  the  know- 
ledge," etc.— C.  N. 

Vera.  1—3. — The  character  and  officeofthe  Aaronic  high  priest  foreshadotou  the  higher 
glory  tf  Jesus  Ohrist.  As  there  had  been  given  some  counsels  to  pray  for  Divine  help 
becanse  our  Lord  is  the  Divine  High  Priest,  the  thought  advances  to  show  the  true 
idea  of  a  high  priest  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  that  over  against  him  may  appear  in  his 
glory  the  character  of  him  who  was  one  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  The  ancient 
priest  was  taken  from  among  men  to  minister  in  spiritual  things,  as  others  are 
appointed  to  manage  temporal  matters ;  and  therefore  Paul  declares  that  the  ruler  is  a 
niiniBter  of  God  to  us  for  good.  It  was  the  office  of  the  priest  to  present  sacrifices  for 
sins  of  ignorance,  and  those  faults  which  arise  from  the  weakness  and  inclinations  of  our 
nature.  They  were  not  offered  for  such  daring  and  flagrant  transgressions  as  were 
committed  by  David  and  Manasseh,  who  by  faith  and  penitence  sought  and  obtained 
pardon  outside  the  ritual  of  the  Jewish  Law,  and  from  the  free  and  sovereign  mercy  of 
God.  The  sacrifices  for  ordinary  faults  were  presented  especially  on  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, when  the  people  bowed  in  penitence,  and  the  errors  of  the  past  year  were  forgiven. 
The  high  priest  himself  needed  the  advantage  of  the  atonement  which  was  vouchsafed 
through  the  sacrifices  which  he  offered  for  himself.  To  perform  his  office  with  success 
he  must  be,  since  he  was  beset  with  infirmity,  tender-hearted  without  being  indulgent 
to  evil,  and  firm  without  being  severe  and  unfeeling.  He  had  to  deal  with  men's  souls 
in  states  of  anxiety,  and,  knowing  his  own  frailties,  must  be  merciful  towards  others. 
Eli  charged  Hannah  with  intemperance  when  she  was  praying  with  fervour  for  a  gift 
which  God  only  could  bestow,  and  thoughtlessly  added  affliction  to  affliction ;  bnt  on  her 
appeal  he  relented,  and  said, "  Go  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  Israel  grant  thee  the  petition 
tliou  hast  asked  of  him"  (1  Sam.  i.  14 — ^17).  The  appointment  of  the  priest  is  a  proof 
of  the  merciful  interest  of  Jehovah  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  men,  and  his  willingness 
to  invite  them  to  enter  into  blessed  relations  with  himself. — B. 

Vers.  4 — 6.— -These  verses  show  us  the  honour  of  the  priesthood.  Aaron  was  divinely 
called  (Exod.  xxviii.  1),  and  was  endowed  with  gifts  and  qualifications  for  the  office. 
It  was  an  honour  to  approach  unto  God  in  the  sacred  uses  of  his  ministry ;  "for  blessed 
is  the  man  whom  thouchoosest  and  causest  to  approach  unto  thee."  He  transacted  the 
most  important  affairs  for  the  people,  and  made  reconciliation  for  them  on  the  Day  of 
Atonement.  He  revealed  and  interpreted  the  Divine  will  by  Urim  and  Thummim,  and 
his  lips  kept  knowledge.  He  represented  the  people  to  Jehovah,  and  carried  the  names 
of  the  children  of  Israel  on  his  breast  and  shoulders.  He  was  set  apart  by  the  sacred- 
nes8  of  his  office  from  many  of  the  cares  and  changes  of  human  life,  and  was  to  lead  a 
life  of  special  consecration  to  the  service  of  God.  Our  Lord  undertook  the  work  of  a 
priest  in  a  more  glorious  manner  than  was  suggested  by  the  most  holy  and  distinguished 
minister  of  the  ancient  Law.  All  the  aspects  of  honour  and  gracious  service  are  exalted 
u  Uim  to  an  unimaginable  degree.  He  is  at  the  ri^ht  hand  of  (he  Father,  ile  officiates 


IM  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oh.  t.  1—14. 

for  all  natioDS,  people,  and  tongues.  He  treats  the  successive  generations  of  believen 
with  constant  love,  and  imparts  Divine  help  in  worship.  He  is  the  final  and  most 
glorious  revelation  of  God  to  man.  He  exalts  and  enriches  the  life  of  his  followers  by 
the  tenderness  and  sympathy  of  his  nature,  and  inspires  them  with  resolution  to  come 
boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace. — B. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — SacrificiaJ  sorrow.  I.  Teebb  is  hebb  ah  AreEonsa  ouTtiirE  of  the 
SAOBiFioiAL  80BS0WS  OF  onB  LoBD.  Like  the  ancient  psalmists,  he  bows  in  solemn  and 
agonizing  prayer,  with  profuse  weeping,  that  the  cup  which  was  presented  to  him  in 
Gethsemane  might  be  removed  from  him.  It  was  a  bitter  and  brimming  cup  of  inde- 
scribable distress.  Scripture  gives  us  the  outward  signs  of  the  sorrow,  and  leaves  the  awful 
cause  in  solemn  silence.  This  must  have  been  from  his  standing  in  our  place  as  Surety 
and  Substitute.    He  was  heard ;  and  an  angel  from  heaven  appeared  to  strengthen  him. 

II.  These  is  the  contbabt  between  his  dionitt  as  the  Son  and  ths  fboof  or 
HiB  OBEDIENCE.  If  we  would  Understand  the  glory  of  his  sonship,  it  is  necessary  to 
turn  to  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle ;  yet  he  submitted,  and  learned,  not  by  painful 
failure  and  unsuccessful  attempts  to  obey  his  Father,  but  passed  through  the  whole 
circle  of  teaching,  working,  enduring  contradiction,  until  he  could  say, "  I  have  glorified 
thee  on  the  earth :  I  have  finished  the  work  thou  gavest  me  to  do." 

III.  The  Divine  febfectiok  and  issues  of  his  obedience.  He  passed  through 
his  Divine  consecration,  and  received  the  approving  voice  of  his  Father,  who  raised  him 
from  the  dead.  From  him  can  now  flow  eternal  salvation,  which  begins  here  in  redemp- 
tion from  guilt,  the  restraint  of  sin,  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  freedom  from  the  penal 
strokeof  death,  and  the  blessedness  of  eternal  life.  All  this  is  connected  with  obedience 
on  the  part  of  believers,  who,  while  they  trust  in  his  sacrifice,  yield  their  life  to  his 
authority  as  the  King  of  Zion.  He  was  "  called  of  God,"  The  appointment  is  valid  and 
unchangeable,  and  foreshadowed  by  the  ministry  and  office  of  Melchizedek. — B, 

Yers.  11 — 14. — Dulness  of  tplrUwUptrception,    L  Thbbe  ib  a  bepboof  fob  these 

belie  VERS   BECAUSE  THEY  CANNOT  HBAB,  AND  THBBEFOBE  CANNOT  TEACH,  THE  TBDTHS 

OF  THE  GOSPEL.  They  had  become,  through  slackness  ^and  yielding  both  to  the 
attractions  of  the  temple-worship  and  the  opposition  of  their  countrymen,  unable  to 
hear  the  weighty  truths  connected  with  Melchizedek,  the  illustrious  type  of  Christ.  To 
be  dull  of  hearing  the  sweet  sounds  of  joyous  nature  in  spring,  or  to  catch  imperfectly 
the  strains  of  sacreii  music,  would  be  a  loss ;  but  how  more  serious  is  the  loss  of  being 
unable  to  receive  inspired  communications  respecting  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  Alpha 
and  Omega  of  our  faith  and  hope !  The  painful  result  was  that  they  could  not  teach 
others,  and  "  give  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  was  in  them  with  meekness  and  fear." 
They  must,  therefore,  go  back  to  the  Christian  alphabet  and  learn  their  letters  afresh, 
and  begin  again  their  course  of  discipleship.  They  needed  some  one  who  was  advanced 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  Saviour ;  but  he  need  not  be  an  apostle,  a  prophet,  or  an 
evangelist.  Considering  how  much  the  diffusion  of  the  gospel  at  that  time  depended 
niion  the  living  voice,  their  inability  to  teach  was  a  loss  to  themselves  and  many  others. 

II.  They  abb  reproved  fob  the  non-impeovembnt  of  lono-oontinued  privileges. 
When  for  the  "  time,"  which  word  signifies  a  considerable  period,  during  which  they 
had  had  many  who  were  pastors,  and  spoke  the  Word  of  God.  They  had  had  public 
worship,  in  which  Christ  was  set  forth  evidently  crucified  before  them.  They  had 
often  been  invited  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  had  been  reminded  of  his  matchless 
fidelity  to  their  interests,  even  when  his.  holy  soul  encountered  billows  of  distress,  and 
deep  called  unto  deep,  and  the  awful  sorrows  of  the  cross  darkened  and  crushed  him. 
Miracles  had  been  wrought;  prophecies  interpreted  by  their  glorious  fulfilment;  and 
prayer  and  praise  had  difi'used  a  hallowed  influence.  Notwithstanding  the  richness  of 
the  soil,  the  regularity  of  the  rains,  and  the  bright  shining  of  the  sun,  the  vineyard 
produced  grapes  which  were  small,  acid,  and  unacceptable.  And  all  these  advantages, 
which  were  crowned  by  the  willingness  and  love  of  the  Divine  Spirit  to  encourage  ana 
bless  them,  they  were  "  dull  of  hearing  and  could  not  teach," 

III,  The  bepboof  affirms  the  sBBiona  personal  disadvantaseb  of  hbolbot. 
They  are  described  as  babes  which  need  simple  nourishment  and  must  be  fed  with 
milk,  which  ugnifiei  the  rudimentary  truths  of  the  gospeL    As  babes  they  are  unskil- 


OB.T.l-'U.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  155 

ful,  and  cannot  speak  the  Word  of  righteousness  with  distinct  and  powerful  utterance  ; 
for  he  who  would  speak  with  power  must  do  so  from  a  full  mind  and  a  large  experience. 
Such  as  these  helievers,  who  had  so  unprofitably  used  the  time  which  had  elapsed  from 
their  conversion,  are  only  fit  for  the  elementary  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  are  conse- 
quently unacquainted  with  the  vast  and  unsearchable  treasures  of  strength  laid  up  in 
Christ  for  the  comfort  and  joy  of  his  disciples.  The  perfect  and  full-grown  men  who 
use  their  senses  and  spiritual  powers  aright  are  privileged  to  "  eat  of  fat  things  full  of 
marrow,  and  drink  wine  on  the  lees  well  refined."  The  stronger  they  are,  the  more  they 
can  enjoy  of  the  rich  and  solid  comforts  and  supports  of  Divine  grace ;  and  are  thereby 
fitted  for  the  arduous  work  of  professing  the  gospel,  vindicating  its  claims,  and  illus- 
trating its  power. — B. 

Vers.  I-7-6. — ITie  qualijicationt  and  functions  of  the  true  priest.  I.  Hb  is  taken 
FBOU  AMONQ  HEN.  It  is  not  an  angelic  ministry.  The  true  humanity  of  Jesus  must 
ever  be  ein{Aasized.  A  perfect  man  is  needed  to  be  the  true  priest,  but  he  must  be  a 
man.  'And  the  reason  of  this  is  found  in  the  kind  of  work  he  has  to  do.  Especially 
in  that  part  of  it  which  concerns  the  sin  offering.  He  has  to  act  for  those  who,  begirt 
with  infirmity,  are  continually  showing  their  ignorance,  and  continually  wandering 
into  forbidden  paths.  He  should  have  imagination  enough  to  enter  measurably  into 
the  extent  of  their  sin. 

II.  He  is  taken  fbom  amonost  men  by  Dfvinb  appointment.  As  to  sacrifices,  God 
gave  through  Moses  general  instructions,  enough  to  secure  the  people  from  a  blunder- 
ing and  slovenly  presentation.  And  with  respect  to  the  priest,  he  might  have  pointed 
out  certain  qualifications  and  left  the  people  to  select.  But  that  there  might  be  no 
dispute  as  to  fitness,  he  chose  the  man  himself.  And  then  the  succession  to  the  office 
went  on  as  easy  a  process  as  any — that  of  natural  descent.  God  only  can  choose,  con- 
secrate,  and  qualify  the  true  priest. 

III.  He  is  an  offeeeb  op  gifts  and  sacrifioes  fob  bin.  Ho  is  the  habitual 
channel  through  which  man  recognizes  his  double  duty  to  God.  Man  has  to  present 
gifts  to  God ;  expressions  of  thanksgiving  and  signs  of  service ;  tokens  that  the  harvest 
which  man  gathers  is  the  result  of  Divine  bounty  as  well  as  of  human  effort.  And 
inasmuch  as  these  gifts,  material  things,  were  not  usable  by  God  directly,  they  had  to  go  to 
the  use  of  his  priests,  away  for  ever  from  the  common  use  of  men.  Then  along  with 
the  gifts  had  to  be  sacrifices  for  sin,  the  recognition  of  how  imperfect  the  very  best  gift 
must  be.  To  make  the  gift  without  the  sin  offering  was  presumption ;  it  argued  a 
conceited  satisfaction  with  what  one  had  done.  Nor  must  the  sin  offering  be  without 
the  gift,  on  pretence  that  nothing  could  be  given  worthy  of  God's  acceptance.  That 
would  have  been  adding  sin  to  sin.  We  must  give  our  best  to  God  through  Christ, 
however  poor  that  best  may  be. — Y. 

Yen.  7 — 9. — OetTisemane.  Here  we  have  Gethsemane,  apart  from  external  eircnm- 
stances — the  treachery  of  Judas,  the  apathy,  ignorance,  and  drowsiness  of  the  disciples. 
The  one  thing  of  supreme  importance  is  set  before  U8,  even  the  struggle  and  suffering 
in  the  heart  of  Jesus  himself.     Note — 

I.  The  elements  of  the  suffeking.  1.  J%e  possession  of  a  suffering  nature. 
This  struggle  happened  in  the  days  of  his  flesh.  It  was  nothing  Wonderful  that  he 
should  shrink  from  physical  pain,  especially  when  he  knew  it  was  to  be  such  pain  as 
of  the  scourging  and  the  cross.  2.  The  possession  of  a  sinless  nature.  To  find  a 
sinless  human  bring  shrinking  with  peculiar  horror  from  death,  accords  with  the  great 
theological  dictum  that  death  is  the  result  of  sin.  The  right  ot  Jesus  could  not  be  less 
than  to  pass  from  this  world  as  Enoch  did,  by  translation  into  glnry.  Death  is  the 
thing  from  which  he  shrinks.  And  full  of  life  as  Jesus  was,  life  of  the  whole  being, 
spiritual  jife  most  of  all,  how  should  he  not  shrink  from  death  ? 

II.  Intensity  of  the  suffebino.  This  is  shown  by  the  urgency  of  the  supplica- 
tions. Jesus  had  had  his  times  of  intercession,  his  times  for  sweet  remembrance  of 
his  disciples,  and  of  a  sinning,  sorrowing  world ;  but  now  here  is  a  prayer  out  of  keen 
personal  agony — agony  with  an  overpowering  effect  on  the  very  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart.  Here  in  Gethsemane  is  the  field  of  the  Lord's  supreme  temptation.  Ha 
who  Iwd  raised  others  from  the  dead,  it  was  not  for  him  to  submit  to  death  without 


156  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW8.  [en.  t.  1—14. 


clear  proof  that  such  was  the  will  of  his  Father.  We  have  to  suhinit.  We  look  oo 
death  as  a  constant  possibility ;  in  us  there  are  no  resources  for  warding  it  ofiF  or  recovei>' 
ing  UB  from  its  captivity,  as  there  were  in  Jesus.  Hence  the  considerations  vhich 
would  press  on  him,  "  Can  it  be  right  that  I  should  die  ?  Shall  I  let  myself  sink  ln«» 
the  hands  of  this  approaching  band,  and  finally  into  the  grasp  of  Pilate,  to  become 
jaasive  and  yielding  in  everything  save  spiritual  integrity?"  What  wonder  was  it 
that  in  such  a  struggle  of  the  heart  he  should  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  t 

IIL    SUOOESSFDL   ENDtTBANCB   OP   THE   SUFFBRINQ.      JeSUS   gOCS   into   thls   Struggle  of 

Gethsemane  with  one  great  practical  truth  in  his  heart,  viz.  that  his  Father's  will  was 
the  supreme  determining  guide  of  his  course.  Td  adopt  a  subsequent  metaphor  of  the 
Epistle,  this  was  his  anchor  within  the  veil.  That  will,  his  guide  hitherto,  had  led  him 
to  6ethsemane,  had  led  him  into  the  very  midst  of  plots  and  treacheries,  into  a  thick 
circle  of  the  wicked,  each  with  his  own  special  interest,  and  yet  all  wonderfully  com- 
bined in  bringing  Jesus  to  the  cross.  This  great  truth,  that  he  was  in  the  midst  ol 
these  things  by  God's  will,  kept  Jesus  as  on  the  rook  in  the  great  hour  of  his  tempta- 
tion. There  was  more  to  be  done  for  God's  glory  and  the  world's  good  through  death, 
than  through  mere  continuance  of  life.  A  dying  Jesus  is  infinitely  more  than  s 
translated  Enoch, 

lY.  Result  of  the  bufferiko.  His  obedience  becomes  the  measure  of  obedience  to 
others;  and  also  their  inspiration — the  thing  that  prompts  ever  to  ask  inquiringly, 
earnestly,  with  singleness  of  heart,  as  to  what  the  will  of  God  is.  To  the  right-hearted 
God  ever  gives  an  infallible  intimation ;  and  before  such  ever  stands  also  the  figure  of 
their  perfected  Leader.  By  the  will  of  God  he  went  to  the  cross,  yielded  to  death ;  and 
then  came  the  ascension,  the  passing  within  the  veil,  the  entrance  on  the  functions  of 
the  true  High  Priest.  And  so  he  became  the  cause  of  eternal  salvation — eternal  as 
distinguished  from  temporal.  To  Lazarus  he  had  once  been  the  cause  of  temporal 
salvation ;  but  Lazarus  would  die  again,  and  needed,  through  faith  and  obedience,  eternal 
salvation.  That  is  the  salvation  which  transcends  death.  Death  may  get  mixed  up 
with  the  process,  may  for  a  time  even  conceal,  or  at  least  dim,  the  reality ;  but  in  due 
course  death  is  left  behind,  and  eternal  salvation  shines  forth  in  all  its  Divine  glory. — ^Y, 

Ters.  11, 12. — A  special  hindranee  to  Chri$tian  truth.    We  have  her»— 

I.  A  LABGE  TOPIC.  Much  had  to  be  said  in  the  times  of  old  concerning  the  scope  of 
the  priesthood.  Many  instructions  had  to  be  given  as  to  various  offerings  and  various 
seasons.  Am)  lot  one  of  them  was  without  some  reference  to  the  higher  and  abiding 
priesthood  of  Jesus.  As  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  thought  of  all  the  tabernacle 
furniture  of  the  holy  of  holies — ark,  mercy-seat,  lamps,  table  of  shewbread,  altar  of 
burnt  offering,  priestly  garments,  ephod,  breastplate,  Urim  and  Thummim — and  con- 
sidered how  all  these  things  shadowed  forth  some  office,  some  relation,  of  Jesus,  what 
wonder  that  he  should  try  to  stir  up  the  languid  intellect  of  his  readers  by  announcing 
how  much  had  to  be  said  1  Multum  in  parvo,  it  is  true,  but  still  multum.  And  we 
have  to  rejoice  that  as  much  has  to  be  said,  so  in  the  New  Testament  much  is  said. 
No  time  is  spent  over  useless  knowledge  and  speculation,  things  conjectural,  things  to 
please;  everything  is  bent  to  setting  forth  the  large  needs  of  man  and  the  compre- 
hensive fulness  of  Christ. 

II.  A  SPECIAL  DIFFICULTY  IN  TEALiNQ  WITH  THE  TOPIC.  Those  who  are  addrsssed 
will  not  give  proper  attention.  We  are  reminded  of  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  He  that  hath 
ears  ...  let  him  hear."  Progress  in  the  ap[irehension  of  Christian  truth,  true  progress 
in  theology,  depends  on  our  own  disposition.  Great  attainments  in  human  sciences  are 
not  for  all,  or  even  for  many.  They  demand  a  certain  degree  of  intellectual  power,  a 
certain  amount  of  leisure,  and  perhaps  other  facilities  ;  so  that  it  is  quite  certain  all  men 
cannot  be  learned  any  more  than  all  can  be  rich.  But  God  has  made  progress  in 
Christian  truth  to  depend  on  the  state  of  the  heart.  He  has  ordered  things  so  that 
those  who  are  babes  in  this  world's  knowledge  may  be  as  giants  in  the  knowledge  ol 
God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Spiritual  things  are  spiritually  discerned ;  and  if  God  has  given 
his  Holy  Spirit  that  we  may  he  led  into  all  the  truth,  and  if  nevertheless  we  stumble 
among  misapprehensions,  then  assuredly  we  are  to  blame,  and  especially  will  blame  fall 
upon  US  when  the  element  of  time  is  brought  into  consideration.  Here  were  people 
who  had  had  gosjpel  truth  a  long  time  before  them,  and  yet  knew  little  more  than  the 


oa.  TL 1—20.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


1S7 


alphabet.  Still  learnere  when  they  ought  to  be  teachers  t  What  worse  reproach  could 
there  be — seeing  how  much  spiritual  ignorance  there  is  in  the  world,  and  how  much 
error,  and  how  many  there  are  busy  in  misleading  men?  Nor  must  wo  omit  to  notice 
how  this  gentle  yet  searching  rebuke  of  the  writer  here  shows  his  own  advanced  attain- 
ments. He  is  writing  of  things  which  he  well  understands,  and  knows  what  he  means. 
His  topics  are  not  mere  trifles.  They  are  very  practical,  and  point  forward  into  the 
developments  and  occupations  of  the  future. — Y, 

Vers.  12—14. — 3%e  powert  of  the  fuU-groum  OkrMiMi.  Here  ia  the  eloee  analogy 
between  the  natural  life  and  the  spiritual. 

I.  The  fboqsess  of  the  natubal  ufb.  At  birth  the  babe  finds  food  provided  for 
it,  without  effort,  without  thought — food  exactly  suited  to  its  infantile  state,  and  which 
it  makes  use  of  by  a  kind  of  instinct.  Nothing  is  expected  firom  it  save  that  which  it 
is  certain  to  do  by  a  law  of  its  nature.  But  this  season,  when  nothing  is  expected  from 
it,  is  only  a  season  of  preparing  for  the  day  when  much  will  be  expected.  Natiire  will 
not  always  provide  food  in  this  easy,  simple  fashion.  Milk  has  to  make  the  way  for 
solid  food,  and,  what  is  even  more  important,  food  to  be  chosen  by  us.  Whenever  we 
are  fit  to  choose,  God  leaves  us  to  choose,  not  between  the  pleasant  and  the  unpleasant, 
not  between  that  which  appeals  most  powerfully  to  the  taste,  and  that  which  is  plainer, 
si  mpler  fare ;  but,  as  the  writer  here  emphatically  puts  it,  between  the  good  and  the  bad. 
That  is  the  great  matter  to  decide  in  the  choice  of  food — Is  it  good  or  bad?  Will  it 
minister  to  growth,  health,  energy  of  function,  fulness  of  life,  length  of  days  ?  God 
leaves  us  to  settle  this.  He  gives  us,  without  our  choice,  a  suitable  food  up  to  the  time 
when  our  perceptions  are  sufficiently  trained  to  choose  for  ourselves.  Then  he  leaves 
UB  to  freedom  and  responsibility. 

II.  The  similab  pbooress  of  the  sfibitital  lifk.  There  Is  the  new  creature  in 
Christ  tTesus,  bom  again,  beginning  in  feebleness,  alive  to  new  and  heavenly  thinp,  and 
yet  hardly  knowing  for  a  while  what  that  life  is.  Needing  to  be  treated  with  great 
long-Bufiering  and  consideration  because  of  infirmity  (1  Cor.  iii.  2).  But,  as  in  the 
natural  man,  there  should  be  growth,  development  of  spiritual  perception  and  grasp,  so 
that  the  spiritual  man  may  come  to  discern  the  difference  between  the  true  and  the 
false,  the  fleshly  and  the  spiritual,  the  abiding  and  the  temporary,  the  earthly  and  the 
heavenly.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Bread  of  life.  .  Recollect  his  own  words,  all  important 
in  tbe  present  connection :  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his 
blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you.  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath 
eternal  life ;  and  I  will  rtuse  him  iip  at  the  last  day.  For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and 
my  blood  is  drink  indeed."  How  many,  spiritually  considered,  are  monstrosities  to  what 
they  ought  to  be !  The  natural  man,  nourished  by  proper  food,  full  of  life,  growing 
and  connecting  itself  with  a  thousand  things  around,  while  the  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus  within  is  but  a  starved  and  pining  babe.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  much  talk  of 
living  •  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of  God,  but  no  reality.— Y« 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  YL 


Veii.  I(  t.— Wherefore  (since  It  Is  so  In- 
eutubent  on  as  to  advance  out  of  the  state  of 
milk-fed  infants),  leaving  the  principles  of 
the  dootrine  of  Cluist,  let  us  press  on  unto 
perfeotion  (reAcKiTtiTa,  continuing  the  image 
of  maturity).  The  proper  translation  of  -rhv 
Tq!  ipxv!  '''<><>  XpKTToG  \6yov  is  doubtful,  the 
question  Iwing  whether  rqi  apxvf  is  to  be 
connected  with  \6yoy  as  an  adjective  genitive 
(so  taken,  as  above,  in  the  A.V. ;  cf.  ch.  v. 
12,  iTTOtxeia  t^i  dpxrjs),  or  with  toS  XpiaroS, 
the  word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ,  mean- 
ing discourse  concerning  the  first  principles 
ff  Christianity,  "  MUum  Ohriiti,  sciL  apnd 


disoentes  CSiristnB,  sMpe  qnippe  (Ariatus 
dicitur  Paulo  per  metonymiam  conoreti  pro 
Chriitianismo"  (Bengel).  A  further  ques- 
tion is  whether  the  writer  merely  expresses 
his  own  intention  of  proceeding  at  once  in 
this  Epistle  to  the  more  advanced  doctrine, 
or  whether  he  is  exhorting  his  readers  to 
make  spiritual  progress,  using  the  first 
person  plural,  (pepdfieda  (as  in  oh.  ii.  1  and 
IV.  1,  ipopiidctnev)  out  of  sympathetic  courtesy. 
The  correspondence  of  this  delicate  form  of 
exhortation  with  that  of  the  earlier  passages, 
the  very  words  ^6pii|U€flo,"letus  be  bomeon," 
"  press  forward  "  (implying  more  than  mere 
passing  to  a  new  line  of  thought),  and  tcAckj- 
riiTa  (which  expresses  personal  matuEityf  not 


158 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  n.  1—20. 


adTBDced  subject  of  diBconrse),  em  well  as 
the  earnest  warnings  that  follow  against 
falling  back,  seem  to  necessitate  the  second 
of  the  above  views  of  the  meaning  of  this 
verse.  The  writer  has,  indeed,  in  his  mind 
his  Intention  of  pr«iceeding  at  once  to  the 
perfect  doctrine;  for  he  hopes  that  what  he 
thus  exhorts  them  to  do  they  will  do,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  follow  him ;  but  exhortation, 
rather  than  his  own  intention,  is  surely  what 
the  verse  expresses.  Not  laying  again  the 
foundation  of  repentanoe  from  dead  works, 
and  of  faith  towards  Ood,  of  the  doctrine  of 
baptisms,  and  of  laying  on  of  hands,  and  of 
resuireotion  of  the  dead,  and  of  eternal 
judgment.  What  was  meant  by  ri  irroixf  <«, 
etc.,  and  riv  t^t  ipxvs,  etc.,  is  here  specified 
under  the  new  image  of  a  foundation  on 
which  a  saperstruotnie  should  be  raised 
(cf.  for  the  same  figure,  1  Cor.  iii.  II,  a  fur- 
ther instance  of  Pauline  modes  of  thought). 
Of  course  no  disparagement  of  the  importance 
of  this  foundation  is  implied :  it  is  necessary 
for  the  superstructure :  it  has  in  itself  the 
elements  of  the  superstructure,  which  rises 
from  it  in  the  way  of  growth.  What  is 
nie!\nt  is, "  With  us  this  foundation  has  been 
already  laid ;  I  will  not  suppose  any  need 
for  laying  it  anew :  let  us,  then,  go  on  to 
contemplate  and  understand  the  building 
that  rests  on  and  rises  from  it."  The  fun- 
damentals entunerated  are  six — two  essen- 
tial principles  of  the  religious  life,  and  four 
heads  of  doctrine ;  for  the  word  SiSax^s  rules 
/3airTir/tfivand  the  three  succeeding  genitives, 
but  not  iieravoias  and  Ttiarttits  which  precede. 
These  are  the  fundamentals,  or  first  princi- 
ples, of  Christianity;  but  (as  has  been 
intimated)  so  defined  as  to  express  no  more, 
by  the  language  used,  than  what  even  mi- 
lightened  Jews  might  accept  and  under- 
stand. Fully  understood,  they  carry  the 
Christian  superstructure ;  but  they  are  such 
as  a  "  babe "  in  Christ  might  rest  content 
with,  without  seeing  their  ultimate  bearing. 
The  principles  first  mentioned  ax&  repentance 
and  faith,  the  requisite  qualifications  for 
baptism,  the  essence  of  John  the  Baptist's 
teaching,  and  announced  by  Christ  at  the 
commencement  of  his  ministry  as  the  first 
steps  into  his  kingdom :  "  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  at  hand  :  repent  ye,  and  believe  the 
gospel "  (Mark  i.  15 ;  of.  also  Acts  xx.  21). 
By  the  dead  works,  from  which  repentanoe 
is  to  be,  the  Fathers  generally  understand 
simply  Hnfvl  works,  which  may  be  so  called 
because  of  sin  being  a  state  of  spiritual 
death,  and  having  death  for  its  wages  (of. 
*'dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Eph.  ii.  l),or 
as  being  in  themselves  barren  and  fruitless 
(of,  roir  ^py»t9  T97s  dpdppirots  rov  trKSrovs, 
Eph.  y.  11).  In  an  enumeration  of  elemen- 
tary principles  like  this,  the  allusion,  sup- 
posed by  •one  commentators,  to  the  deadness 


of  **  the  works  of  the  Law,"  as  set  forth  by 
St.  Paul,  is  not  likely  to  have  been  intended. 
The  faith  spoken  of  is  not  faith  in  Christ, 
but  simply  "  faith  towards  God,"  which  is, 
of  course,  the  foundation  and  necessary  pre- 
liminary of  Christian  faith.  The  reason  for 
the  expression  is  to  be  found  in  the  writer's 
intention  to  specify  only  the  first  principlea 
of  the  gospel,  in  which  the  Christian  was 
still  on  common  ground  with  the  Jew  (cf. 
John  xiv.  1,  "Ye  believe  in  God,  believe 
also  in  me").  The  four  fundamental  dootrtnea 
follow.  (1)  Of  baptimu.  Observe,  the 
word  is  not  piwrur/ia,  invariably  used  else- 
where for  Christian  baptism,  but  jSairTur/ubt, 
and  that  in  the  plural,  $airTi<ritSy.  In  other 
passages  fiairriirixol  denotes  the  various  lustra- 
tions practised  by  the  Jews — **  wathingB  at 
pots  and  cups  "  (Mark  vii.  8) ; "  divers  wosft- 
tn^s "  (ch.  ix.  10).  Hence  we  may  suppose 
these  to  be  included  in  the  general  idea,  and 
also  the  Jewish  baptism  of  proselytes.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  elementary  doctrines  of 
the  gospel  being  here  spoken  of,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  the  doctrine  of  Christian 
baptism  is  in  the  writer's  view,  but  only  with 
regard  to  the  first  simple  conception  of  its 
meaning,  which  it  had  in  common  with  other 
symbolical  washing),  the  significance  of 
which  was  understood  by  enlightened  Jews 
(of.  John  iii.  10,  "Art  thou  a  master  of 
Israel,  and  knowest  not  these  things?"). 
(2)  The  doctrine  of  laying  on  of  handi. 
This  also  was  a  Jewish  rite,  understood  as 
signifying  the  bestowal  of  blessing  and  of 
power  from  above  (cf .  Gen.  xlviiL  14 ;  DeuL 
xxiv.  9 ;  Mark  x.  13),  and  was,  as  well  as 
baptism,  adopted  into  the  Christian  Chnrch, 
acquiring  there  a  new  potency.  The  apostles 
practised  it  for  conferring  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit  after  baptism  (Acts  viii.  17;  xix.  6), 
for  ordination  (Acts  tL  6 ;  xiii.  8;  1  Tim. 
It.  14;  2  Tim.  L  S),  and  also  for  reconciling 
penitents  (1  Tim.  ▼.  22),  and  for  healing 
(Mark  xvi.  18 ;  Acts  zxviii.  8).  Mentioned 
here  immediately  after  "the  doctrine  of  bap- 
tisms," and  in  an  enumeration  of  elemente 
in  which  all  Christians  were  concerned,  we 
can  hardly  fiail  to  understand  special  refer- 
ence to  the  imposition  of  hands  after  bap- 
tism, i.e.  to  oonfirmation.  The  two  remaining 
doctrines  of  (3)  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
and  (4)  eternal  judgment,  were  also  under- 
stood and  generally  accepted  by  enlightened 
Jews,  and  at  the  same  time  are  necessary 
to  be  mentioned  for  a  complete  aoconnt 
of  the  foundations  of  the  Christian  faith. 
These  foundations  are^  as  has  been  seen — 
repentance  and  faith  (qualifying  for  admis- 
sion into  the  Church), and  then  the  doctrine 
of  remission  of  sins  (expressed  and  conveyed 
by  baptism),  of  enabling  grace  (expressed 
and  conveyed  by  oonfirmation),  of  the  life 
hereafter,  and  of  final  judgment    Of  tbeM 


<M.  TI.  1—20.] 


THE  EPISTLK  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


169 


an  elementary  conception  was  level  to  even 
babes  in  Clirist,  fresh  from  Jewish  training ; 
hilly  understood,  they  form  the  basis  of  the 
whole  structure  of  the  highest  Christian 
doctrine.  It  is  obvious  from  the  purport  of 
the  passage  why  neither  the  historical  arti- 
cles of  the  creeil  in  which  Christians  were 
instructed  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  1 — 8 ;  1  Tim.  iii 
16),  nor  the  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist  (which 
belonged  to  the  more  advanced  teaching), 
are  included  in  this  enumeration  of  the 
(TTOtxtia. 

Ver.  3. — And  this  will  we  do  (aL  let  us 
do ;  irotiiaunev,  A,  C,  D,  La°)  if  Ood  permit ; 
fe.  press  on  to  perfection,  as  aforesaid,  if 
only  (as  we  firmly  hope  and  trust,  see  ver.  6, 
etc.)  yon  are  still  in  a  state  in  which  God 
will  permit  advance ;  for  (as  is  set  forth  in 
the  following  verses)  there  may  be  a  retro- 
gression from  which  recovery  is  impossible. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — For  it  ia  impossible  for  those 
who  have  been  onoe  enlightened,  and  have 
tasted  of  the  heavenly  gUt,  and  have  been 
made  partakers  of  the  Holy  G-host,  and  have 
tasted  the  good  Word  of  God,  and  the  powers 
of  the  world  to  come,  and  have  fallen  away, 
to  renew  them  again  nnto  repentance ;  seeing 
they  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God 
afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame.  It  is 
not,  of  course,  implied  that  the  Hebrew 
Christians  had  fallen  into  the  condition  thug 
described,  or  were  near  it ;  only  that  such  a 
condition  might  be,  and  that,  if  tliey'went 
back  instead  of  advancing,  they  might  arrive 
at  it.  The  process  intimated  is  that  of 
complete  apostasy  from  the  faith  after  real 
conscious  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  of  grace.  In 
such  a  case  the  hopelessness  of  the  fall  is  in 
proportion  to  the  privileges  onoe  enjoyed. 
This  is  the  drift  of  the  passage,  though  other 
views  have  been  taken  of  its  meaning,  which 
will  be  noticed  below.  "  Once  enlightened  " 
denotes  the  first  apprehension  of  the  light, 
which  could  be  but  once ;  when  those  that 
saw  not  began  to  see  (John  v.  39) ;  when 
the  light  of  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ 
shone  once  for  all  upon  believers  (2Cor.iv.4); 
when  (according  to  the  cognate  passage,  ch. 
X.  26 ;  cf.  oh.  X.  32)  they  received  the  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.  The  verb  (jiteriCai  means  in 
the  LXX."  to  enlighten  by  instruction,"  and 
was  in  common  use  in  the  early  Church  to  ex- 
press the  enlightenment  that  accompanied 
baptism;  whence  baptism  itself  was  called 
tpoTtvitis.  Thus  Justin  Martyr  ('Apol.'  i.  62) 
says,  KaXetToi  Se  tqvto  rh  Xovrpov  <pwTiff/x6s,  ws 
<part^oti4v(ov  tV  ^ii^voiav  twv  ravra  fiavdaySv- 
rai>,  Cf.  the  title  of  Chrysostom's  'Hom.' 
xllX.,  Tlp6s  Tohs  ^eWovras  ipwriC^trOai,  Since 
the  expression  was  thus  commonly  used  as 
early  as  Justin  Martyr,  there  may  probably 
be  in  the  text  a  special  reference  tu  baptism 
as  the  occasion  of  the  enlightenment.  Bat, 
if  so,  mow  is  meant  by  the  phrase  than 


"  those  who  have  been  once  baptized : "  an 
inward  spiritual  illumination  is  pbiinly 
pointed  to;  and  it  would  not  have  been  said 
of  Simon  Magus  that  he  had  been  "once 
enlightened "  in  the  sense  intended.  And 
this  is  indeed  the  real  meaning  of  (pa>Tian6s 
as  applied  to  baptism  by  Justin  Martyr,  as 
his  explanation,  above  quoted,  shows.  So 
also  Chrysostom  ('  Hom.'  cxvL),  "  The  here- 
tics have  baptism,  but  not  enlightenmeintijpd- 
Turfio) ;  they  are  baptized  indeed  as  to  the 
body,  but  in  the  sou]  they  are  not  enlightened; 
as  also  Simon  was  baptized,  but  was  not  en- 
lightened." This  consideration  is  important 
In  view  of  one  misapplication  of  the  passage 
before  us,  which  will  be  noticed  below. 
But,  further,  those  whom  it  is  impossible  to 
renew  unto  repentance  are  sniiposcd  not  only 
to  have  been  enlightened,  but  also  to  have 
"tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,"  the  emphatic 
word  here  being  apparently  ynnTaiJLivovi : 
they  have  had  experience  as  well  as  know- 
ledge (cf.  Ps.  xxxiv.  8,  "  Oh,  taste  and  see 
that  the  Lord  is  good ; "  and  I  Pet.  ii.  3, 
"  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  XiOrd  is 
gracious  ").  The  word  "  gift "  (Swpea)  is  else- 
where used  both  for  that  of  redemption 
generally  (Bom.  v.  15 — 17),  and  especially, 
and  most  frequently,  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  (cf.  2  Cor.  ix.  15,  "  Thanks  be  to  God 
for  his  unspeakable  Gift").  They  have  be- 
come also  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  not 
merely  been  within  the  range  of  his  in- 
fluence, but  actually  shared  it ;  and  tasted 
(the  same  word  as  before,  iind  with  the 
same  meaning,  though  here  followed  by  an 
accusative)  what  is  further  spoken  of.  The 
expression  ^^juara  occurs,  Josh.  xxi.  45 ; 
xxiii.  15;  Zech.  i.  13,  for  gracious  Divine 
utterances.  The  idea  of  the  Word  of  God 
being  what  is  "  tasted  "  may  bo  suggested 
by  Deut  viii.  8,  quoted  by  our  Lord  in  Matt. 
iv.  4,  "Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone, 
but  by  every  word  that  prooeedeth  out  of 
the  mouth  of  God."  By  the  pwiers  (Suviixtis) 
are  to  be  especially  understood  (as  in  oh.  ii. 
4  and  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament)  the 
extraordinary  ones  in  which  the  gift  of  tlie 
Holy  Ghost  was  manifested,  the  x'V^"!""'^ 
of  the  apostolic  Church.  But  why  said  here 
to  be  /ieWovTos  alayos  ?  For  the  meaning 
of  this  expression,  see  nnder  ^irxiiTiuv  tuv 
ri/tfp&v  roirav  (ch.  i.  1^  and  o'tKov/ifuriy  t))i' 
fieWovaav  (ch.  ii.  5).  It  denotes  the  pre- 
dicted age  of  the  Messiah's  triumph.  And 
if  (as  has  appeared  most  probable,  and  as 
/ifKKoyros  here  seems  evidently  to  imply) 
that  age  was  regarded  as  still  future,  not 
properly  beginning  till  the  second  advent, 
still  the  "  powers  "  spoken  of  are  of  it,  being 
earnests  and  foretastes  of  a  new  order  of 
things  (cf.  Eph.  i.  14,  where  the  "Holy 
Spirit  of  promise  "  is  called  "  the  earnest  of  ■ 
our  inheritance ; "  also  2  Oor.  i.  22 ;  r.  5). 


160 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  vi.  1—20. 


There  are  other  passages  in  which  Christians 
are  regarded  as  already  in  the  dawn  of  the 
future  daybreak,  and  irradiated  by  the 
coming  glory.  The  faCing  away  (vapa-Tre- 
a-Svras)  after  such  enlightenment  and  such 
experience  meaus  (as  aforesaid)  total  apos- 
tasy from  the  faith.  This  appears  from  the 
expressions  that  follow,  and  still  more  from 
those  in  the  cognate  passage,  oh.  x.  26 — 31. 
"Non  rdapsot  modo  dicit  in  pristina,  sed 
nova  pemicie  preterlapsos  a  toto  statu  illo 
lautissimo,  timulque  a  fide,  $pe,  et  amore  " 
(Bengel).  Such  an  utter  apostasy  WM  pos- 
sible to  Hebrews  oscillating  between  Church 
and  synagogue :  they  might  be  so  drawn  at 
last  into  the  atmosphere  of  the  latter  as, 
with  the  unbelieving  Jews,  to  reject  with  con- 
tumely, and  so  to  themselves  recruoify,  the 
Son  of  .God.  The  force  of  "  to  themselves  " 
is  illustrated  by  Gal.  vi.  14,  wheie  St.  Paul 
says  that  he  so  glories  in  the  cross  of  Christ 
that  througb  Christ  the  world  is  crucified 
to  him,  and  he  to  the  world ;  i.e.  all  fellow- 
ship between  him  and  the  world  is  broken 
off.  So  here  the  eaurols  implies  the  breaking 
off  of  all  fellowship  with  what  a  man  is  said 
to  crucify.  "  They  crucify  again  the  Son 
ot  God,"  repeating  what  their  fathers  had 
done  formerly  when  they  gave  him  over  to 
the  death  of  the  cross;  and  this,  be  it 
observed,  still  more  culpably,  since  it  is 
after  personal  experience  proving  him  to  be 
"  tlie  Son  of  God."  And  they  not  only  make 
nim  as  one  dead  to  themselves:  they  also 
expose  bim  (^irupaieirynaTl^orTai  :  cf.  Numb. 
XXV.  4,  LXX.)  to  the  reproach  and  mockery 
of  the  world.  "  Ostentantes,  sail,  aliis 
(Bengel).  The  above  explanation  is  adopted 
from  Delitzsch.  Be  it  observed  next  what 
is  said  of  those  who  do  this — not  that  no 
repentance  can  henceforth  avail  them,  but 
that  even  unto  repentance  it  is  impossible  to 
renew  them.  Such  falling  away  after  such 
experience  precludes  the  possibility  of  re- 
pentance. On  such  persons  the  powers  of 
grace  have  been  exhausted.  It  is  not  in  the 
natorv  of  things  that  they  should  return  to 
Oirist,  er  see  the  things  that  belong  unto 
their  peace  any  more.  The  correspondence 
between  the  state  here  described  and  the 
oonsequenoe  of  the  "  blasphemy  against  the 
Holy  Ghost "  (Matt.  xii.  SI ;  Mark  iii.  28 ; 
Luke  xii.  10)  suggests  itself  at  once;  our 
Lord's  words,  in  speaking  of  that  unpardon- 
able sin,  being  rightly  supposed  to  point  to 
obduracy  in  spite  of  experience  of  the  Holy 
Spirit's  power.  Especially  obvious  ii  the 
correspondence  with  St  Luke's  account  of 
the  Saviour's  warning— one  of  the  not  un- 
frequent  instances  of  resemblance  between 
our  Epistle  and  the  writings  of  that  evange- 
list. For  St.  Luke  records  the  saying  as 
spoken,  not  to  the  Jews  on  the  occasion  of 
their  attributing  Okriif  •  worki  to  Beelze- 


bub, but  to  the  disciples  themselves,  after  a 
warning  to  them  against  "  the  leaven  of  the 
Pharisees,"  and  against  being  moved  by  the 
fear  of  men,  and  immediately  after  the  words, 
"He  that  denieth  me  before  men  shall  be 
denied  before  the  angels  of  God."  Compare 
also  the  "  sin  unto  death  "  spoken  of  by  St. 
John  (1  John  v.  16).  Misconceptions  of  the 
drift  of  this  passage,  once  prevalent,  or  pos- 
sible, remain  to  be  noticed.  (1)  It  has  been 
from  early  times  a  main  support  of  the  strict 
Church  discipline  according  to  which  deadly 
sin  committed  after  baptism  precludes  re- 
admission  to  Church  communion.  It  was  so 
cited  by  TertuUian  as  early  as  the  second 
century  (' De  Pudicitia,' o.  20),  and  in  the 
third  used  to  justiry  the  Novatians  in  their 
refusal  of  communion,  even  after  penance, 
to  the  lapsi.  The  passage,  as  above  ex- 
plained, was  really  irrelevant,  since  it  refers, 
not  to  the  treatment  by  the  Church  of 
penitents,  but  to  the  impossibility  of  some 
persons  being  brought  to  penitence  at  all. 
(2)  The  Catholic  -Fathers,  rightly  rejecting 
the  Novatian  position,  generally  nnderstood 
the  text  as  forbidding  the  iteration  of  bap- 
tism; thus  turning  it  against  the  Novatians, 
who  rebaptized  those  who  joined  their 
communion.  So  Ambrose,  Theodoret,  and 
others.  But,  though  their  position  on  this 
subject  was  in  itself  sound,  the  passage,  as 
above  explained,  is  as  irrelevant  to  it  a«  to 
that  of  the  Novatians.  (3)  This,  and  the 
other  texts  referred  to  in  connection  with  it, 
have  led  some  Christians  to  despair  of  sal- 
vation, however  anxious  for  it,  under  the 
idea  Uiat  they  had  themselves  committed 
the  unpardonable  sin.  This  desperate  view 
goes  beyond  that  of  the  Novatians,  who  only 
precluded  from  Church  communion,  not  of 
necessity  from  the  mercies  of  God  (Socrates, 
'  Hist.  Eool.,'  iv.  21).  But  the  very  state  of 
mind  of  those  who  entertain  such  fears  ia  a 
sign  that  theyare  not  of  thoM  to  whom  this 
text  applies.  They  cannot  have  entirely  fallen 
from  grace,  if  they  have  the  grace  to  repent 
and  long  for  pardon.  (4)  Calvin's  predestl- 
narian  views  compelled  him  and  hu  follow- 
ers to  do  violence  to  the  plain  meaning  of 
the  passage.  Holding  the  doctrine  of  the 
indefeetibility  of  grace,  which  involved  (a) 
that  one  really  regenerate  cannot  fall  away, 
and  (b)  that  oonsequently  one  who  &Ub 
■way  cannot  have  been  really  regenerate, 
he  had  to  explain  away  the  clauses  descrip- 
tive of  the  grace  enjoyed,  as  meaning  only  a 
superficial  experience  of  it  With  this  view 
he  laid  stress  on  the  word  yev<raii4nus  as 
meaning  "snmmis  labris  gustare."  Only 
dogmatic  prejudice  could  have  snggested 
such  a  sense  of  the  word  as  intended  in  this 
place,  any  more  than  in  oh.  ii.  9,  wheie  it  is 
plainly  inadmissible.  Nor  can  an  impartial 
reader  fail  to  see  in  the  whole  ^^"TtiB^itiin 


OH.  in.  1—20.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


161 


of  pTPgnant  elausei  an  intention  of  express- 
ing the  very  reverse  of  a  mere  apparent  and 
delusive  experience  of  saving  gruce.  The 
depth  of  the  experience  is,  in  tact,  a  measure 
of  the  hopelessness  of  the  fall.  Art.  XVI.  of 
the  English  Church  is  a  protest  against  all 
the  erroneous  conclusions  above  specified. 

Vers,  7,  8. — For  land  which  hath  drank  in 
the  oft- coming  rain  upon  it,  and  bringeth 
forth  herbs  meet  for  them  for  whom  (not,  aa 
in  A. v.,  "  by  whom  ")  it  is  also  tilled,  re- 
ceiveth  blessing  from  God;  but  if  it  beareth 
thorns  and  thistles  (not,  as  in  A-V.,  "  that 
which  beareth  "),  it  is  rejected,  and  nigh  unto 
cursing,  whose  end  is  to  be  burned  (literally, 
for  burning ;  of.  Isa.  xliv.  15,  tva,  §  di/epdmois 
eU  Ksuo'ii').  The  illustration  is  apt  and  close. 
Observe  that  the  "  land  which  hath  drunk," 
etc.,  is  the  subject  in  ver.  8,  as  well  aa  of 
ver.  7,  ai  is  shown  by  the  absence  of  an 
article  before  ix^ipovira.  Hence  the  unpro- 
ductive at  well  as  the  fruitful  boU  is  sup- 
posed to  have  received,  and  not  only  received 
but  imbibed  also,  abundant  supplies  of  rain. 
Its  failure  is  its  own  fault,  and  it  is  regarded 
as  responsible  for  it,  and  deserving  of  iti 
finixl  fate.  This  exactly  illustrates  the  ease 
of  those  who  "fall  away  "  after  not  only  re- 
ceiving abundantly,  but  also  taking  in  so  as 
to  be  filled  with  the  "  gracious  rain  "  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  only  difference  is  that  in 
their  case,  free-will  being  a  constituent  of 
their  productive  power,  the  responsibility 
figuratively  attributed  to  the  land  is  real 
(cf.  ^Kouaius  afiapravSyraPf  oh.  X.  26}.  For 
similar  illustrations  drawn  from  unproduo- 
tiveness  in  nature  in  spite  of  culture,  o£ 
Isa.  T.  4  and  Luke  xxviii.  23.  The  "  blessing 
from  God "  refers  to  the  view,  pervading 
the  Old  Testament,  of  fruitfulness  being  the 
result  and  sign  of  the  Divine  blessing  on  the 
land  (of.  Gen.  xxvii.  27,  "  The  smell  of  my 
son  is  as  the  smell  of  a  field  which  the  Lobd 
hath  blessed  ").  And  it  is  farther  implied 
that  incipient  fruitfulness  is  rewarded  by 
more  abundant  blessing,  according  to  oar 
Lord's  words,  Matt.  xiii.  12,  "Whosoever 
hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,"  and  John  xt. 
2,  "Every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he 
pnrgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more 
fruit."  The  "thoma  and  thistles,"  con- 
nected with  a  ouTse  on  the  ground,  seem 
suggested  by  Gen.  iii  17, 18,  'EirMaTdpaTos  ^ 
yrj  fv  Tois  'dpyots  aou . . .  iixMas  xa  IrpifSiJAaui 
iMwreKfl  <roi.  LXX.(cf. "  Cursed  shall  be  the 
fruit  of  thy  land,"  Dent,  xxviii.  18).  It  is  to 
be  observed,  further,  that  the  land,  though 
bearing  thorns  instead  of  fruit,  is  not  spoken 
of  as  yet  under  the  final  curse,  but  only  nigh 
unto  it,  so  as  to  avoid  even  a  remote  sugges- 
tion that  the  Hebrew  Christians  had  actually 
reached  the  hopeless  state.  But,  unless 
fruitfulness  should  ensue,  they  are  warned  of 
the  inevitable  end  by  the  fate  of  thorns  aud 
BXBBSWI. 


thistles,  which  is,  not  to  be  garnered,  but  to 
be  burnt  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  6,  "  The  sons  of 
Belial  shall  be  all  of  them  as  thorns  thrust 
away,  .  .  .  and  they  shall  be  utterly  burned 
with  fire  in  the  same  place; "  of  also  Deut. 
xxix.  23,  "  The  whole  land  thereof  is  brim- 
stune,  and  salt,  and  burning,  that  it  is  not 
sown,  nor  beareth,  nor  any  grass  groweth 
thereon  "—a  state  of  final  hopeless  barren- 
ness). 

Ver.  9.— But,  beloved,  we  are  persuaded, 
etc.  Here,  as  in  ch.  iv.  14,  warning  is  suc- 
ceeded by  words  of  encouragement  and  hope. 
The  reason  for  not  only  a  hope,  but  even  a 
persuasion,  that  God  will  keep  them  from 
apostasy,  vt  given  in  the  following  verse. 

Ver.  10. — TSoT  God  is  not  unrighteous  to 
forget  your  work  and  the  love  (roS  kSttov  in 
the  Textus  Beceptus  is  Ul  supported,  having, 
perhaps,  been  interpolated  from  1  Thess.  i.  3) 
which  ye  showed  towards  his  Name,  in  that 
ye  ministered  to  the  saints,  and  do  minister. 
It  appears  that  the  Hebrew  Christians  had 
formerly  (some  especial  occasion  being  pro- 
bably referred  to)  been  active  in  their 
charity  towards  fellow-Christians  in  distress, 
and  that  such  charity  had  not  ceased.  On  this 
is  grounded  the  persuasion  that  they  will  be 
kept  steadfast  in  the  faith.  Those  who  had 
so  shown  their  faith  by  their  works  woidd 
surely  not  be  allowed  to  lose  it.  The  very 
idea  of  the  Divine  justice  implies  that  the 
use  of  grace^  thus  evidenced,  will  be  re- 
warded by  continuance  of  grace.  Cf.  Phil, 
i.  6,  "  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that 
he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  yon 
will  perfect  it  (lirtTE\/<r6i)  nntil  the  day  of 
Jesus  Christ ; "  where  also  there  is  referenoa 
to  deeds  of  charity,  shown  in  the  case  of 
the  Fhilippians  by  tiieir  sympathy  with  the 
apostle  in  his  bonds,  which  charity  he  praya 
may  "  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  know- 
ledge and  in  all  discernment."  No  difiBculty 
need  be  felt  in  this  reference  to  God's  justice, 
as  though  it  involved  the  doctrine  of  human 
merit,  de  eongruo  or  de  eondigno,  claiming 
reward  as  of  debt.  The  simple  and  obvioua 
view,  that  Gk>d,  in  virtue  of  his  justice,  will 
be  most  gracious  to  those  who  have  used 
his  grace,  by  no  means  contravenes  the  doc- 
trine of  all  grace  being  the  free  gift  of  hia 
bounty  (of.  1  John  i.  9 ;  Rom.  ii.  6,  eto.). 
Observe,  too,  as  bearing  on  the  idea  of  thia 
passage,  how  the  will  to  do  the  will  of  God 
is  said  by  our  Lord  to  be  followed  by  know- 
ledge of  the  doctrine  (John  vii.  17),  and 
how  works  of  charity  are  the  very  testa  of 
the  final  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  31,  etc.). 

Ver.  11. — But  (however  hopeful  may  bo 
your  charity,  still  more  is  needed)  we  desire 
^iwiBv/iovixer — expressing  eamett  desire — ovs 
^iTre  deKw,  dW^  3  iraTpiKTJs  ^v  tpiKoffropyicfs  Koi 
itk4ov  tov  0i\etv,  iTTiSvfioOiiev,  Obrysostom) 
that  every  one  of  you  (all  of  you  without  ex- 


lea 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBRBWa. 


[oh.  tl  1—20. 


ceptioii)do  Bhowtbe  same  diligence  unto  the 
full  assurance  (or  simply  fidneu;  for  the 
meaning  of  vkripo^opla,  cf.  ch.  x.  22;  1 
Thess.  1.  5 ;  Ool.  ii.  2)  of  hope  even  to  the 
end  (t.e.  evince  the  same  diligence  in  this 
regard  as  you  liave  already  shown  in  your 
works  of  charity :  "  eandem  in  ape  et  flde 
quam  in  amore,"  Bengel). 

Ver.  12. — That  ye  heoome  not  slothful 
(_voi8pol,  the  same  word  as  was  ufled  in  oh.  v. 
11,  vaiflpol  Toij  &K0O1J.  There,  with  regard  to 
intelligence,  they  were  accused  of  hiiving 
already  become  so;  here,  where  a  hopeful 
view  is  taken  cf  tlieir  prospects,  the  writer 
delicately  avoids  implying  that  they  were  so 
yet  in  regard  to  their  desire  of  making 
progress),  but  followers  (i.e.  following  the 
example — surely  a  better  English  W(ird 
than  imitators)  of  them  who  through  faith 
and  patience  inherit  the  promises.  The 
present  participle  K\-i\povoiioivTa>v  does  not 
confine  the  sense  of  the  expression  to  those 
who  are  now  so  inheriting.  Abraham  being 
presently  adduced  as  an  example,  it  refers 
to  all  who  at  any  time  so  inherit,  equivalent 
to,  "  the  inheritors  of."  The  drift  is— Faith 
and  patience  are  ever  required  in  order  that 
the  Divine  promises,  however  Msured,  may 
be  inherited :  these  qualifications  (in  opposi- 
tion to  your  being  raSpot)  are  what  you  want 
for  securing  your  own  inheritance. 

Vers.  13—15. — For  when  God  made  promise 
to  Abraham,  because  he  could  swear  by  no 
greater,  he  sware  by  himself,  saying.  Surely 
blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  multiplying  I 
will  multiply  thee.  And  so,  having  patiently 
endured,  he  obtained  the  promise.  Abra- 
ham— the  ancestor  of  the  Hebrews,  the  first 
recipient  of  the  promises,  the  father  of  the 
faithful — is  now  appropriately  adduced  ea 
an  example.  He  (Gen.  xxii.  16),  as  iathe 
case  with  you  (Ps.  ex.),  was  assured  of  his 
inheritance  by  the  Divine  oath ;  and  bo  he 
obtained  it,  but  only  through  "faith  and 
patience."  You  have  the  like  assurance, 
tiut  attended  with  the  like  conditions.  And 
then  this  Divine  oath,  the  significance  of 
which  is  Bet  forth  in  vers.  16 — 18,  is  made 
a  link  of  connection  between  the  hortatory 
section  (ch.  v.  11 — vi.  20)  and  the  coming 
argument  about  Melchizedek.  This  is  one 
instance  of  the  artistic  way  in  which, 
throughout  the  Epistle,  the  interposed  hor- 
tatory passages  are  so  turned  as  to  connect 
the  divided  sections  of  the  argument.  But 
what  is  said  about  Abraham  (vers.  13, 14, 
19)  has  been  variously  understood.  It  is 
connected  with  ver.  12  thus:  "Be  ye  fol- 
lowers of  them  who  inherit  the  promises 
throngh  faith  and  patience  :  for  Grod,  in  his 
promise  to  Abraham,  fwore  by  himself  in 
confirmation  of  it ;  and  to  (ical  oSru)  through 
patience  he  obtained  the  promise.  Be  it 
Mt«  observed  that  luucptSviiiiffas  in  ver.  15 


("having  patiently  endured,"  A.V.)  eor- 
responds  with  SA  ixaicpoev)x,ias  in  vei  12, 
and  expresses  essentially  the  Bame  idea. 
The  aorist  participle  fmicpoeun'fiffas  does  not  in 
itself  imply  that  the  patience  was  previous 
to  the  obtaining;  it  expresses  only  that  by 
patiently  enduring  he  obtained.  Observe 
also  that  ko)  oUtoi  (cf.  Acts  viL  8;  xxvii. 
44 ;  xxviii.  14)  denotes  the  cmisequenee  from 
what  has  been  previously  stated;  i.e.  that 
liaxpoBuixi]ffas  freruxf  followed  from  the 
Divine  oath  ensuring  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise.  Both  his  eventually  obtaining  and 
his  patience  in  awaiting  fulfilment  were  in 
consequence  of  the  assuring  oath.  But  then 
how  and  when  did  Abraham  himself  obtain 
the  promise  ?  Not  even  the  temporal  fulfil- 
ment in  the  multiplication  of  his  seed  and 
the  inheritance  of  the  promised  land,  much 
less  the  spiritual  fulfilment  in  Christ,  was 
during  his  own  life.  Both  he  conid  but 
see  "afar  off."  In  respect  to  the  latter 
it  is  expressly  said  (oh.  xL  13,  39)  that  the 
patriarchs  did  not  receive  the  promises — 
/t^  Aoj8(ii/Tej  Tis  ejroyy(\las  !  ovk  eKOnlffajTo 
tV  iirayyeKlav.  What,  then,  is  meant  by 
lxaKpoBvni]<ras  ivirvxe  1  Bleek  understands 
the  time  of  the  oath  (Gen.  xxii.),  when  the 
promise  was  irrevocably  assured,  to  have 
been  the  time  of  obtaining.  But  more  than 
this  is  suggested  by  the  phrase,  iirervxfrri^ 
iirayy^Xlas  (cf.  ch.  xi.  33),  as  well  as  by  xai 
oira,  viz.  the  actual  attainment  of  the 
blessing  assured  to  him  by  oath.  There 
are  two  other  ways  of  explaining :  (1)  to 
identify  Abraham  with  his  seed,  in  whom, 
though  not  in  his  own  person,  he  may  be 
conceived  to  have  obtained, — of  which  view 
it  may  be  significant  that  irXiiBvvu  t&  mipiia 
aov  of  the  LXX.  (Gen.  xxii.  17)  is  changed 
in  the  Epistle  to  t^XiiSvvS)  ae :  (2)  to  regard 
Abraham,  still  alive  in  the  unseen  world, 
•8  himself  enjoying  the  fulfilment  of  the 
ancient  promise.  Bo  Delitzsch,  who,  dwell- 
ing on  the  thought  that  nothing  less  than 
the  blessing  of  Abraham  extended  to  the 
whole  world  (cf.  K\i]poii6iuis  toS  tiirium.  Bom. 
iv.  13)  can  be  regarded  as  complete  fulfil- 
ment, says,  "  God's  oath-sealed  word  of 
promise  is  now  fulfilled  in  Christ,  and  Abra- 
ham, while  living  on  in  the  unseen  world,  is 
conscious  of  and  enjoys  that  fulfilment,  and 
so  may  be  said  to  have  "  obtained  the  pro- 
mise." This  view  derives  some  support  from 
ch.  11,  13 — 16,  where  the  longings  of  the 
pilgrim  patriarchs  is  so  beautifully  repre- 
sented as  reaching  to  a  hearenly  fulfilment. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  aorist  Mtux^  is 
against  it,  and  hence  view  (1)  may  be  ac- 
cepted as  a  sntficient  explanation  of  the 
expression  (see  below,  or  ch.  xi.  89).  With 
regard  to  the  general  drift,  it  b  •bvions 
how  /ioKpoSviila,  as  well  as  Trtara,  in  respect 
to  the  proBiiie  first  made  to  hiw  **  in  Dhwr< 


OH.  Tl  1—20.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


163 


ran,"  is  strikingly  displayed  in  Abraham's 
recorded  life. 

Vers.  16 — 20. — For  men  swear   by  the 
greater:  and  of  every  dispute  of  theirs  (liter- 
ally, to  them),  the  oath  is  final  (literally,  an 
end)  for  oonflrmation  (eis  ffePalaa-iv  being 
connected  witli  iripas,  not,  as  in  the  A.V., 
with  SpKos).    Here  begins  the  explanation 
of  the  meaning  and  purpose  of  the  Divine 
oath,  already  cursorily  touched  on  in  ver. 
13.     God  thus,  for  full  assurance,  conde- 
scends to  the  form  of  confirmation  most 
binding  among  men  when  they  promise  to 
each  ottier.  They  appeal  to  one  greater  than 
themselves  to  intervene  between  them.    He, 
having  no  one  greater  than  himself  to  appeal 
to,  appeals  (so  to  speak)  to  his  own  immuta- 
bility, and  thus  may  be  said  to  intervene 
with  an   oath  (infirlTtvaty  tpKif  (ver.  17), 
the  verb  being  neuter,  with  the  sense  of 
"  mediate  "  or  "intervene,"  not,  aa  in  A.V., 
"  confirmed  it ").  The  reason  ii  not  that  the 
Divine  promise  is  not  in  itself  enough,  but 
that  Ood,  vrilling  to  show  more  abundantly 
to  the  heirs  of  the  promise  the  immutability 
of  his  counsel,  is  pleased  to  grant  them  this 
additional  confirmation;   that  by  two  im- 
mutable things  (first  the  promise,  in  itself 
Bufiicient ;  and  secondly  the  oath,  for  more 
abundant  assurance),  in  which  it  is  impossible 
for  Ood  to  lie,  we  may  have  a  strong  conso- 
lation (irapd«\ri<rui,  bearing  elsewhere  this 
sense,  and  also  that  of  exhortation,  as  in  ch. 
xii.  5 ;  xiii.  22 ;  which  latter  sense  is  nnder- 
stood  here  by  most  commentators  as  unit- 
ing best  the  drift  of  the  passage  with  the 
general  notion  of  encouragement)  who  have 
fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  tiie  hope  set 
before  ns.    The  course  of  thought  has  now 
passed  again  from  Abraham  to  Christians, 
the  Iraiisition  having  been  prepared  for  by 
the  general  expression,  toU  K\ripov6ii.ots  tt\s 
eway/exias  in  ver.  17.     Indeed,  the  oath  to 
him  was  an  assurance  to  us  also,  we  being 
the  final  inheritors  of  the  promised  blessing. 
Then  finally,  in  the  two  concluding  verses, 
the  subject  to  be  treated  in  ch.  vii  is  again 
beautifoUy  led  up  to  by  a  natural  sequence 
of  thought :  Which  (so.  nope)  we  have  as  an 
anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast, 
and  entering  into  that  which  is  within  the 
veil;  whither  U  a  Toierusutr  Jesus  en- 


tered for  ns,  become  a  High  Priest  for  ever 
after  the  order  of  Melohizedek.  Our  hope 
Q\ttIs),  regarded  in  ver.  18  objectively,  as- 
sumes here  a  subjective  sense:  it  is  our 
anchor  cast  upwards  beyond  the  heavens 
through  which  our  Forerunner  has  passed 
(cf,  ch.  iv.  14,  Sie\t\v66TaTobs  oipamhs),  and, 
in  virtue  of  the  promise  and  the  oath,  fixed 
there  secure  and  firm.  "  That  which  ia 
within  the  veil "  (KaraireTdjixaTos,  the  word 
invariably  denoting  the  veil  in  the  temple) 
is  the  heavenly  holy  of  holies,  of  which 
the  earthly  was  symbolical,  as  is  fully  set 
forth  in  oh.  viii.  This  first  mention  of  the 
veil  is  an  instance  of  the  manner  in  which, 
throughout  this  Epistle,  ideas  to  be  after- 
wards expanded  are  often  intimated  by  way 
of  preparation  beforehand. 
Instructive  in  this  chapter  is  the  view 

g resented  of  Divine  purpose  in  relation  to 
uman  will.  The  Divine  purpose  may  have 
been  evinced  by  supplies  of  grace  so  abun- 
dant as  to  remove  all  doubt  of  the  possibility 
of  success;  yet  through  the  human  will 
there  may  be  failure  :  the  very  Divine  oath 
may  have  ensured  fulfilment  of  the  promise ; 
yet,  as  to  Abraham,  so  to  individual  Chris- 
tians, faith  and  patience  are  the  oouditioni 
of  fulfilment.  It  is  evident  that  the  Divine 
purpose  and  the  Divine  promise  are  M  along 
referred  to,  not  to  dishearten  any  for  fear 
that  they  may  not  be  included  in  them, 
not  to  encourage  remissness  in  any  on 
'  the  ground  of  certainty  of  attainment, 
'  not  BO  as  to  suggest  any  idea  of  arbitrary 
selection  irrespective  of  desert,  but  simply 
to  incite  to  perseverance  on  the  ground  of 
assurance  of  success,  if  the  human  conditions 
are  fulfilled.  And  this  is  the  practical  ap- 
plication of  the  doctrine  of  predestination 
found  also  elsewhere  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles 
(cf.  Eom.  viii.  28—39).  Predestination  and 
free-will  may  be  to  human  reason  theoretic- 
ally irreconcilable,  though  reason,  as  well  as 
theology,  may'  compel  us  to  acknowledge 
both.  The  problem  may  properly  be  left 
unsolved,  as  among  the  many  deep  tilings 
of  God.  But  it  is  of  impurtance  to  observe 
how  the  doctrine  of  predestination  is  prac- 
tically applied  in  Scripture  ai  bearing  upon 
human  oonduot 


HOMILETICS. 

Ven.  1 — 8.— JTo  $tanding  itiU  in  religion.  This  thought  underlies  the  whole 
passage.  To  pass  into  God's  kingdom  means  to  move  with  it.  It  is  impossible  to 
maintain  a  halt  in  the  Christian  Ufa ;  to  stand  still  is  to  fall  away. 

I.  Th«  duty  of  pbbssino  on  nsTO  PERFECTION.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  This  perfection  ia 
twofold :  (1)  maturity  in  religious  knowledge,  as  a  means ;  (2)  full  development  of 
spiritual  life,  as  the  end.  It  U  sinful  to  remain  only  a  babe  in  Christ,  and  to  have  no 
wish  to  grow.    ITote.  that  to  "  leave  the  fiist  principles  "  does  not  mean  to  abandon 


16*  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW8.  [oh.  VL 1—20 


them.  Bather,  we  are  to  leave  them  as  a  tree  leaves  its  root,  and  yet  ne^er  lets  it  go  ; 
as  a  full-grown  man  leaves  slops  for  solid  food,  and  yet  does  not  abjure  the  use  of  millc ; 
as  a  building  leaves  its  "  foundation  "  (ver.  1),  and  yet  rests  its  whole  weight  upon  it. 
When  the  foundation-principles  are  once  securely  laid,  that  work  should  be  regarded  as 
settled  and  done  with ;  what  remains  is,  to  proceed  with  the  superstructure.  The 
apostle  instances,  in  vers.  1  and  2,  a  few  of  the  elementary  principles,  connecting 
them  together  in  couples.  1.  Two  inward  experiences.  (Ver.  1.)  Repentance  and 
faith,  being  indispensable  to  the  very  beginning  of  the  life  of  piety,  occupy  a  primary 
place  among  the  foundation-doctrines  of  Christianity.  2.  Thoo  outward  ceremonies. 
(Ver.  2.)  Rites  and  forms  are  merely  the  external  framework  of  religion. 
Advanced  piety  uses  them  only  as  means  and  helps  to  spirituality.  3.  Two  future 
events.  (Ver.  2.)  TTie  doctrines  of  the  resurrection  and  of  the  judgment,  with  its 
eternal  issues,  are  rudimentary  doctrines ;  because  the  idea  of  responsibility  to  the 
Supreme  is  one  of  the  simplest  conceptions  connected  with  religion.  Of  such  elements 
as  these  six  was  "  the  simple  gospel"  composed  in  the  apostolic  age.  If  to  our  minds 
these  clauses  savour  of  "strong  meat"  rather  than  of  "milk,"  is  not  that  an  indication 
that  Christians  in  these  times  are  troubled  with  weak  digestion  ?  We  need  grace  to 
appreciate  the  apostle's  admonition  (ver.  1)  and  to  realize  the  hope  which  he  expresses 
(ver.  3). 

II.  The  danger  of  snRiuKiNa  back  unto  perdition.  (Vera.  4 — 8.)  These  verses 
drop  from  the  apostle's  pen  like  live  thunderbolts.  There  is  a  solemnity  in  them 
which  it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate.  .  This  passage  is  confessedly  difficult — ^to  all,  at 
least,  who  accept  the  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints.  As  we  believe, 
however,  that  this  doctrine  is  very  clearly  taught  in  Scripture,  both  by  our  Lord  and 
his  apostles,  the  declension  here  referred  to  must  be  that  of  professed  believers  who 
were  never  true  believers.  Notice,  then :  1.  T%e  lofty  privileges  which  apostates  may 
enjoy.  (Vers.  4,  6.)  An  unrenewed  man  may  be  vpell  instructed  in  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  may  enjoy  the  study  of  saving  truth,  may  experience  the  operations  of  the 
Spirit,  may  be  filled  with  the  happiness  which  the  gospel  brings  (Matt.  xiii.  20),  and 
may  even  obtain  glimpses  of  the  eternal  glory.  But  these  attainments  will  avail  him 
nothing  so  long  as  he  remains  unrenewed.  Tliat  faith  is  spurious  and  ephemeral  which 
is  based  only  upon  the  moral  evidence  of  the  truth,  and  which  is  not  connected  with 
genuine  conversion  to  C(od.  2.  The  aggravated  wickedness  which  apostates  may 
commit,  (Ver.  6.)  They  may  "  fall  away "  finally  and  irretrievably.  "  By  their 
fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  Sooner  or  later  the  unfruitful  field  will  be  covered  with  a 
harvest  of  "  thorns  and  thistles  "  (ver.  8).  False  professors  may  abandon  the  gospel 
to  return  to  Judaism,  or  to  plunge  into  atheism,  or  to  sink  into  immorality,  or  to 
degenerate  into  worldliness.  And  in  the  bitterness  of  their  malice  against  the  cross  in 
which  they  once  professed  to  glory,  such  persons  take  rank  with  the  long  succession  of 
those  who  in  their  lives  repeat  spiritually  the  dreadful  crime  of  Calvary.  3.  The 
fearful  dtstruction  into  which  apostates  mo/y  foM.  (Vers.  6,  8.)  Deliberate  apostasy 
from  Christ,  on  the  part  of  one  who  has  known  him  intimately,  destroys  by  a  natural 
law  the  very  capacity  for  repentance  and  spiritual  life.  Confirmed  impenitence 
extinguishes  the  eyes  of  the  soul,  and  makes  the  heart  "  past  feeling."  High-handed, 
malicious  resistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  culminating  in  outspoken  blasphemy  of  himself 
and  his  work, — that  is  the  unpardonable  sin.  Those  who  commit  such  wickedness  are 
"rejected"  even  here;  and  their  final  doom  shall  resemble  that  of  the  barren  land, 
"  whose  end  is  to  be  burned." 

Learn,  in  conclusion,  that — in  spite  of  all  appearances — only  he  is  a  Christian  who 
has  undergone  the  new  birth,  and  who  is  living  the  new  life  of  likeness  to  Christ, 
which  flows  from  it. 

Vers.  9—20. — Another  exhortation  to  steadfastness.  Each  stage  in  the  argument  of 
the  Epistle  is  relieved  by  a  hortatory  passage  intended  to  confirm  and  cheer  the 
Hebrews  in  their  Christian  faith.  Indeed,  the  one  duty  upon  which  the  whole  book 
lays  stress  is  that  of  believing  steadfastness. 

I.  The  exhortation.  It  assuuies  various  forms.  1.  "  Be  not  sluggish."  (Vet.  12.) 
The  Hebrews,  in  the  perplexity  of  their  situation  by  reason  of  the  temptations  of 
Judaism,  had  begun  t4  sink  into  spiritual  listlessness.    We,  too,  are  extremely  prone 


CH.  VI.  1—20.]  THE  Ei-ISTLE  TO  THE  HEBllBWS.  165 

to  Gwry  our  Ohrlstian  profession  without  earnestness,  and  to  do  our  Christian  work 
without  energy.  2.  "Shorn  the  same  diligence."  (Ver,  11.)  The  Hebrews  had 
bestirred  themselves  in  bestowing  sympathy  and  succour  upon  their  afflicted  brethren, 
and  the  apostle  longs  to  see  them  equally  energetic  in  other  departments  of  Christian 
duty.  Success  in  spiritual  life,  as  in  any  other  sphere,  can  only  be  attained  in  connec- 
tion with  diligence.  3.  Seek  "  the  full  assurance  of  hope."  (Ver.  II.)  Tliey  must  not 
waver  between  Christianity  and  Judaism,  but  cherish  an  unfaltering  persuasion  of  the 
reality  of  gospel  blessings,  notwithstanding  that  the  full  fruition  of  these  Ib  reserved 
for  the  future  life. 

II.  SoHB  ENcouBAaEMENTO.  In  this  paragraph  the  apostle  does  not  prolong  the 
terrific  strain  of  the  preceding  verses.  To  continue  it  longer  would  have  but  depressed 
the  hearts  of  his  readers,  and  defeated  his  own  benignant  purpose  towards  them.  So, 
after  we  have,  as  it  were,  trodden  (vers.  4 — 8)  upon  the  hot  lava  of  a  volcano,  we  now 
enter  (ver,  9)  upon  a  smiling  and  beautiful  landscape,  all  carpeted  with  green  and 
blossoming  with  flowers.  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,"  expresses  the  spirit  of 
the  passage  now  before  ui.  We  have  here  a  variety  of  encouragements.  1.  The  fruit 
which  their  faith  had  borne  already.  (Vers.  9, 10.)  Brotherly  love  is  a  principal  trait 
of  the  Christian  character;  and  the  Hebrews  had  been  kind  to  their  afflicted  fellow- 
believers,  for  Jesus'  sake.  God  had  not  forgotten  their  liberality ;  and  to  the  apostle  it 
had  seemed  as  an  evidence  of  the  reality  of  their  conversion.  The  spiritual  attainments 
which  a  believer  has  already  reached  should  encourage  him  to  perseverance.  2.  The 
example  of  their  sainted  ancestors.  (Ver.  12.)  Inutation  occupies  a  principal  place  in 
our  life,  and  is  an  important  factor  in  the  development  of  character.  It  wields  immense 
power  in  the  domain  of  morals  and  religion.  So,  the  Bible  is  very  largely  a  Book  of 
biographies ;  and  these  are  given  us  to  incite  us  to  follow  the  footsteps  oi  the  good  and 
trus.  We,  as  well  as  these  Hebrew  converts,  should  be  "  imitators  "  of  the  peerage  of 
Old  Testament  heroes  (ch.  xi.).  And  we  of  this  century  should  imitate,  besides,  the 
great  soul-stars  of  Christendom,  the  fathers  of  our  own  Church,  the  sainted  men  of  our 
town,  the  departed  of  our  own  sanctuary,  and  of  our  own  fireside.  3.  OocFs  faith- 
fulness to  his  word  and  oath.  (Vers.  13 — 18.)  Having  singled  out  particularly  the 
steadfastness  of  Abraham,  and  quoted  God's  oath  to  him  (Gen.  xxii.  16 — 18),  the 
autlior  shows  that  this  oath  is  still  a  strong  encouragement  to  Abraham's  children  who 
have  embraced  Christianity.  For  the  Divine  promise  and  oath  to  Abraham  were 
spiritual  rather  than  temporal ;  they  have  been  continued  to  us ;  and  they  have  been 
confirmed  by  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  sealed  by  his  lesiirreotion  and  ascension  (2  Cor. 
i.  20).  4.  The  greatness  of  the  Christian's  hope.  (Vers.  19,  20.)  The  Jewish  temple 
and  the  institutions  of  the  theocracy  were  very  soon  to  pass  away  for  ever ;  so  that  it 
was  unreasonable  to  place  reliance  upon  them.  The  one  sure  anchorage  of  spiritual 
hope  is  in  that  heavenly  sanctuary  which  Jesus  has  entered  for  us  m  our  everlasting 
High  Priest. 

Vers.  19, 20. — Our  anchor  and  anchorage.  This  text  suggests,  first  of  all,  that  the 
Christian  life  is  a  life  of  storm.  It  is  exposed  to  storms  of  persecution,  of  doubt,  of  remorse, 
of  inward  corruption,  of  outward  adversity,  and  to  the  last  great  storm  of  death.  But, 
blessed  be  God,  believers  possess  complete  security  in  the  midst  of  these  storms. 

L  Ohbistian  hope  is  cub  anchor.  Of  the  three  great  abiding  graces — faith,  hope, 
love— hope  is  the  one  which  often  receives  least  prominence  in  our  thoughts.  Faith  is 
the  root,  and  love  the  full-blown  flower,  of  piety ;  whereas  hope  occupies  an  inter- 
mediate position.  Hope  is,  in  fact,  just  one  of  the  first  developments  of  faith — a  sprout 
from  the  root  of  faith.  The  object  of  faith  may  be  either  good  or  bad ;  but  the  object 
of  hope  is  always  good.  Hope  in  its  essence  is  just  the  desire  of  good,  with  the  expec- 
tation of  by-aud-by  obtaining  it.  Now,  hope  has  this  blessed  function — it  soothes  and 
calms  and  cheers  the  mind  in  the  midst  of  storm  and  trouble.  Even  natural  hope  is 
"  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul."  What  drudgery  would  the  world's  business  be  apart  from 
hope  I  Where  would  our  great  statesmen,  our  inventors  and  discoverers,  come  from, 
w«0  it  mot  for  hope? 

"  Every  gift  of  noble  origin 
b  breathed  npon  by  Hope's  perpetual  breath." 

(Wordsworth.) 


166  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oh.  Ti.  1—20. 

It  was  hope  that  huoyed  up  poor  Columhug,  and  that  inspired  the  lion-hearted  Li-ring. 
stone.  But,  as  ancient  seamen  called  the  strongest  anchor  of  their  ships  "  the  sacred 
anchor,"  and  reserved  it  as  "  the  last  hope  "  for  times  when  the  vessel  was  in  real  peril ; 
so,  gospel  hope  is  the  sacred  anchor  of  every  good  man.  And,  truly,  this  hope  is  the 
most  influential  of  all  hopes.  It  is  the  hope  of  eternal  life ; — the  hope  of  lookiog  upon 
Christ  in  his  glory,  of  seeing  the  King  in  his  heauty.  Notice,  also,  the  properties 
ascribed  to  this  anchor.  1.  It  is  sure.  In  substance  strong  and  firm,  and  of  weight 
proportionate  to  the  tonnage  of  the  vessel — ^in  every  way  worthy  of  the  greatness  of  our 
nature.  No  fear  that  it  may  fail :  this  "  hope  putteth  not  to  shame."  2.  It  i$  stead- 
fast. It  takes  a  firm  grip  of  the  holding-ground,  and  will  neither  break  nor  drag.  No 
force  of  wind  or  current  will  be  able  to  tear  it  from  its  hold.  How  comes  it  that 
spiritual  hope  has  these  essential  qualities  ?  It  is  "  both  sure  and  steadfast "  because 
it  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  therefore  good  and  perfect,  like  all  other  Divine  gifts.  It  is 
so,  also,  because  it  is  essentially  connected  with  the  cable  of  faith  in  the  promise  and 
oath  of  God. 

II.  Chbibt  in  heaven  is  oub  anohoraoe.  The  Saviour  hag  gone  before  us  into 
heaven,  through  the  blue  "  veil"  or  ocean  of  the  sky ;  and  our  hope  follows  him  thither. 
1.  Our  holding-ground  is  in  heaven.  Happy  are  all  who  are  convinced  that  there  is 
no  safe  anchorage  for  their  souls  anywhere  below  1  Each  of  us  has  had  many  earthly 
hopes  that  have  been  baffled  ;  but  the  hope  which  finds  its  object  in  heaven  is  "a  living 
hope."  Its  holding-ground  is  beyond  the  frontiers  of  change,  and  out  of  reach  of  the 
touch  of  death.  God  help  us  amid  the  storms  of  life  to  look,  not  so  much  down  upon 
the  fierce  floods  which  are  beating  about  our  feet,  but  rather  upward  to  the  quiet,  holy 
heaven,  and  to  our  great  Hope  that  is  there  1  2.  Our  holding-ground  is  Christ  himself 
in  his  perpetual  priesthood.  Even  heaven  is  nothing  at  all  to  the  believer  apart  from 
Christ.  The  Lord  Jesus  himself  is  "  our  Hope."  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  knows  all 
our  troubles,  and  has  power  to  control  and  subdue  them.  He  is  the  Son  of  man,  and 
full,  therefore,  of  warm,  human  sympathy.  He  is  our  "  High  Priest,"  ever-loving, 
interceding,  armed  with  authority  and  overflowing  with  tenderness.  And  he  is  our 
"  Forerunner,"  who  has  entered  heaven  in  our  name,  and  left  the  golden  gate  open 
behind  him,  because  he  has  arranged  that  we  are  to  follow  (John  xiv.  1 — 4). 

Learn,  in  conclusion :  1.  The  anchor  of  hope  does  not  quell  the  storm ;  what  it  does 
is  to  hold  fast  the  vessel.  2.  The  excellence  ^of  the  anchor  and  the  strength  of  the 
holding-ground  make  the  believer's  security  most  absolute.  3.  The  unner's  only  safety 
is  to  oast  anchor  in  Christ. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  mmmons  to  Christian  progress.     "  Therefore  leaving  {he  principles 

of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,"  etc.     Our  subject  has  two  main  branches. 

I.  The  BEGiNNiNO  ALRBABT  MADE  DJ  CHRISTIANITY.  Horc  are  SIX  first  principles 
or  elements  of  Christianity,  with  which  those  persons  to  whom  this  letter  is  addressed 
are  supposed  to  be  acquainted.  These  elementary  principles  may  be  classified  in  three 
groups  of  two  in  each  group.  (1)  Two  initial  experiences  of  the  Christian  life. 
(2)  Two  Christian  symbolic  customs.  (3)  Two  Christian  doctrines  of  future  events. 
Let  ns  briefly  notice  each  of  these  first  principles.  1.  "  Bepentance  from  dead  works." 
Expositors  differ  as  to  whether  these  are  the  works  of  the  Law,  or  the  works  of  sin, 
which  indicate  spiritual  death  and  lead  on  to  eternal  death.  Probably  the  writer 
means  the  observances  of  the  moral  and  ceremonial  laws  of  the  Jews,  by  which  they 
sought  to  attain  unto  righteousness  and  to  commend  themselves  unto  God.  And  in 
our  own  times  there  are  those  who  endeavour  by  the  performance  of  righteous  and 
praiseworthy  actions  to  merit  acceptance  with  God.  Such  works  are  dead  unless  they 
spring  from  a  heart  in  vital  sympathy  with  God.  Repentance  from  these  works  is  the 
renunciation  of  them  as  a  ground  of  acceptance  with  God,  and  the  withdrawal  of  our 
faith  from  them.  2.  "  Faith  toward  Ood."  That  this  is  the  Christian  faith  in  God  ii 
clear  from  the  earlier  clause — "  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ."  Probably,  as 
Alford  suggests,  the  best  exposition  of  this  faith  in  God  is  found  in  the  words  of 
St.  Paul :  "  To  him  that  worketh  not,  but  bclieveth  on  him  that  jnstifieth  the  ungodly. 


«H.  tt  1— 20.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBKEWa  167 

his  &ith  u  reckoned  for  righteousness  "  (Rom.  {▼.  6).  It  is  faith  in  God  as  revealed  in 
Jesus  Christ.  And  as  by  repentance  the  Christian  abandons  the  dead  works  of  the  Law 
as  a  reason  for  his  acceptance  with  God,  so  by  this  faith  he  enters  into  vital  and  saving 
relation  to  the  living  God.  3.  "  The  teaching  of  haptiims,"  or  washings.  There  are 
three,  or  more,  interpretations  of  this  clause.  That  the  baptisms  are  (1)  the  baptism 
of  John  and  the  Christian  baptism ;  (2)  the  baptism  of  water  and  that  of  the  Holy 
Spiiit;  (3)  the  various  washings  of  the  ceremonial  law  of  the  Jews,  and  probably 
including  the  baptism  of  John  and  Christian  baptism.  The  nature  and  significance  of 
tliese  washings  in  their  relation  to  Christianity  would  certainly  he  taught  to  Jewish 
converts  to  the  Christian  faith.  The  chief  point  for  us  is  this,  that  all  these  washings 
and  baptisms  were  symbols  of  spiritual  cleansing.  The  one  essential  baptism,  which 
is  also  the  fulfilment  of  all  other  baptisms,  is  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  4,  "  The  teaching 
of  th«  laying  on  of  hands."  This  may  mean,  as  Alford  says,  "  the  reference  and  import 
of  all  that  imposition  of  hands,  which  was  practised  under  the  Law,  and  found  in  some 
cases  its  continuance  under  the  gospel,"  To  us,  however,  it  seems  more  probable  that 
it  indicates  the  impartation  of  spiritual  gifts,  and  especially  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
of  which  the  laying  on  of  hands  was  the  outward  symbol,  m  in  Acts  viii,  15 — 17 ; 
xix.  6 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim,  i.  6.  6.  "  The  teaching  ^  resurrection  of  the  dead." 
This  doctrine  was  brought  into  clear  light  by  the  great  Teacher.  "  The  hour  is  coming, 
in  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice^"  etc.  (John  v.  23,  29).  The 
apostles  also  declared  it :  "  There  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just 
and  unjust."  Our  Lord's  resurrection  forcibly  confirmed  the  doctrine.  6.  "  The  teaching 
of  tternal  judgment."  A  future  and  general  judgment  is  certain.  Jesus  Christ 
pictorially  described  it  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — 16).  St.  Paul  asserted  it :  "  God  hath 
appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,"  etc. ;  "  Ws 
shall  all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ. . . .  Each  one  of  us  shall  give  account 
of  himself  to  God."  This  judgment  is  characterized  as  "  eternal,"  probably  because 
it  is  "  part  of  the  proceedings  of  eternity,  and  thus  bearing  the  character  and  stamp 
of  eternal,"  Its  awards,  moreover,  are  eternal  (Matt,  xxv,  46).  Now,  these  six  things 
belong  to  the  beginning  of  Christian  teaching  and  life ;  they  are  "  first  principles  of  the 
oracles  of  God."  And  they  are  to  be  left.  How  ?  Not  in  the  sense  of  discarding  them, 
but  of  advancing  beyond  them.  Or,  as  in  the  figure  employed  in  the  text,  they 
constitute  a  foundation,  and  are  to  be  left  behind  as  the  foundation  of  a  building  is  left 
as  the  superstructure  rises  towards  completeness.  "  When  we  have  once  become  settled 
in  the  first  principles  of  our  religion,"  says  John  Howe,  "  we  need  not  be  always 
exposing  them  to  a  continual  examination ;  for  when  shall  that  building  be  finished, 
the  foundations  of  which  must  be  every  day  torn  up  anew,  upon  pretence  of  further 
caution  and  more  diligent  search  ?  Or  when  will  he  reach  his  journey's  end,  who  is 
continually  vexed  with  causeless  anxieties  about  his  way,  and  whether  he  began  a  right 
course,  yea  or  no  ?  " 

II.  The  goal  tet  to  be  attained  dj  Cheistianitt,  "  Let  us  go  on  unto  per- 
fection," or  full  growth,  or  maturity.  This  may  be  said  to  comprise :  1,  Maturity  of 
Christian  knowledge.  Advancement  beyond  the  elementary  principles  unto  the  higher 
and  deeper  truths  of  the  oracles  of  God.  A  clearer  apprehension  and  a  wider  compre- 
hension of  religious  truth.  2.  Maturity  of  Christian  experience.  The  truth  appre- 
hended by  the  intellect  must  be  assimilated  by  the  heart  and  soul.  Mental  perceptions 
must  grow  into  spiritual  convictions.  From  repentance  and  faith  the  Christian  must 
press  on  into  the  enjoyment  of  "  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  Christ "  (cf.  Eph.  iii. 
16 — 19).  8.  Maturity  of  Christian  conduct.  The  truth  apprehended  by  the  intellect 
and  experienced  in  the  heart,  must  be  expressed  in  the  life  and  practice.  Growing 
reli^ous  faith  and  feeling  should  be  manifested  by  words  and  actions  of  ever-increasing 
conformity  to  the  holy  will  of  God.  In  this  respect  let  us  imitate  the  example  of 
St.  Paul :  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either  were  already  perfect,"  etc. 
(Phil.  iiL  12— 14).— W.  J. 

Ver.  3.— 2>«o  volente.  "  And  this  will  we  do,  if  God  pemut."  We  have  In  tliese 
words— 

I.  Ah  excellent  eesolution  bxpressbd.  1.  The  thing  resolved  upon  is  good. 
"This  will  we  do  I "  iA,  leave  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  press  on 


168  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oh.  vi.  1—20. 

unto  perfection.  Wishing  and  hoping  are  of  little  avail  without  resolution.  2.  The 
form  of  the  resolution  is  good.  "This  will  we  do."  The  writer  had  himself  long 
passed  beyond  the  elementary  principles  of  Christianity,  and  had  made  considerable 
progress  towards  perfection;  but,  placing  himself  by  the  side  of  his  reader's,  he  says, 
"  This  will  we  do."  It  is  far  more  inspiring  to  .say,  "  Let  us  do,"  than  to  say, "  Do  ye." 
11.  An  important  condition  recognized.  "  If  God  permit."  This  does  not 
indicate  any  doubt  on  the  part  of  the  writer  as  to  whether  Christian  progress  was 
in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  or  not.  But  it  is  a  becoming  acknowledgment 
of:  1.  The  absolute  sovereignty  of  God.  Our  times  are  in  his  hand.  "  Man  proposes, 
God  disposes."  The  apostles  frequently  realized  and  expressed  this.  St.  Pavd :  "  I 
will  return  again  unto  you,  if  God  will "  (Acts  xviii.  21 ;  see  also  Bom.  xv.  32 ;  1  Cor. 
iv.  19;  Jas.  iv.  15).  2.  The  uncertainty  of  human  life  and  opportunities.  "  God  in 
whose  hand  thy  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  thy  ways."  "Thou  takest  away  their 
breath,  they  die,  and  return  to  their  dust."  "  Ye  onght  to  say.  If  the  Lord  will,  we 
shall  both  live,  and  do  this,  or  that."  3.  Human  dependence  upon  the  Divine  will  and 
help.  In  the  matter  of  Christian  progress  we  depend  ujion  him  for  many  things;  t.g. 
for  the  preservation  of  our  reason,  the  continuance  of  the  means  of  grace,  the  help  of 
his  Holy  Spirit,  etc.  "  Apart  from  me,"  said  Christ,  "  ye  can  do  nothing."  Let  all  our 
plans  be  formed  in"  subordination  to  the  will  of  God.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should 
frequently  express  this  sentiment  in  words,  saying,  "If  God  will,"  or  "  Please  God,"  or 
"  If  God  permit,"  or  writing  "'  D.V."  Perhaps  tliese  expressions  are  most  frequently 
used  by  those  who  but  feebly  realize  their  dependence  upon  him.  It  is  to  be  feared 
that  as  used  by  many  they  are  empty  forms  of  speech,  and  that  in  the  sight  of  Heaven 
their  use  is  an  insincerity,  an  irreverence,  and  a  taking  of  the  holy  Name  in  vain. 
But  in  all  things  let  us  cultivate  the  spirit  of  humble  and  hearty  dependence  upon  the 
holy  will  of  God.— W.  J. 

Vers.  4 — Q.—The  rdapsefor  which  there  i$  no  restoration.  "For  it  is  impossible 
for  those  who  were  once  enlightened,"  etc.  Let  us  honestly  and  earnestly  endeavour  to 
lay  aside  our  theological  prepossessions,  and  to  apprehend  and  set  forth  the  meaning  of 
this  solemn  portion  of  sacred  Scripture.     We  have  in  the  text— 

I.  An  exalted  Christian  experience.  "  Those  who  were  once  enlightened,  and 
have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,"  etc.  Here  is  a  cumulative  experience  of  gospel 
blessings.  1.  Spiritual  illumination.  "Those  who  were  once  enlightened."  The 
mind  and  heart  of  the  unrenewed  man  ate  in  a  condition  of  spiritual  ignorance  and 
darkness.  The  wicked  are  "  darkened  in  their  understanding."  In  conversion  men 
"  turn  from  darkness  to  light."  In  the  case  described  in  the  text  man  has  been 
enlightened  as  to  his  spiritual  state,  his  need  of  salvation,  and  the  salvation  provided 
io  Jesus  Christ  (cf.  Eph.  i.  17,  18).  2.  Experience  of  gospel  blessings.  "  And  tasted 
of  the  heavenly  gift."  Tasted  is  not  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  a  mere  taste,  but  a 
personal  experience,  as  in  ch.  ii.  9,  "  Taste  death  for  every  man  ; "  and  1  Pet.  ii.  3,  "  If 
so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  In  the  case  before  us,  man,  through 
Christ,  experiences  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  peace  with  God,  and  spiritual  strength, 
3.  Participation  in  the  presence  and  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  And  were  made 
partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  They  share  in  his  instructing,  comforting,  sanctifying 
presence  anji  power.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  "  them  (1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  Bom.  viii. 
9).  4.  Experience  of  the  excellence  of  God's  Word,  "  And  tasted  the  good  Word  of 
God."  Probably  there  is  a  special  reference  to  the  comforting,  encouraging,  strength- 
ening power  of  the  inspired  Word.  Or  the  good  "  word  "  is  the  word  of  promise,  and 
the  tasting  of  it  is  the  experieuce  of  its  gracious  fulfilment.  The  use  of  the  Hebrew 
equivalents  supports  this  view  (see  Josh.  xxi.  45 ;  xxiii.  15  ;  Jer.  xxix.  10 ;  xxxiii.  14; 
Zech.  i.  13).  6.  Experience  of  the  spiritual  powers  of  the  gospel  age.  "  And  tasted 
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,"  or  "  the  age  to  come."  The  expression  "  signifies  a 
personal  experience  of  the  miulity  energy  and  saving  power  of  the  gospel."  Here,  then, 
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  exhibited  as  a  gracious  light  in  the  intellect,  a  blessed 
experience  in  the  heart,  and  a  practical  redemptive  power  in  the  life.  How  complete 
and  exalted  is  the  personal  Christian  experience  thus  delineated  1 

n.  An  AWFUii  spiritual  possibility.  "  If  they  shall  fall  away  .  «  .  they  crucify 
to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame."    1.  <y  fdUing 


aa.Ti.1— aa]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKBWa  169 

frvm  an  exalted  ^Mtuat  eondition.  We  have  ooticed  the  advanced  development  of 
Christian  character  and  the  full  enjoyment  of  Christian  privileges  sltetohed  by  the 
writer ;  and  now  he  speaks  of  falling  away  from  these  great  and  gracious  experiences. 
The  higher  the  exaltation  attained,  the  more  terrible  will  be  the  injury  sustained,  if  one 
should  fall  from  luch  a  height.  2.  0/  incurring  the  darkest  guilt.  ■"  They  crucify  to 
themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame."  The  crucifixion 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  blackest  crime  in  all  the  dark  annals  of  human  wrong-doing. 
And  if  any  one  having  really  and  richly  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  of  Christ 
should  fall  back  into  sin,  renouncing  Christ  and  Christianity,  he  would  repeat  in  spirit 
that  terrible  crime.  "  It  is  often  said,"  wrote  F.  W.  Robertson,  " '  My  sins  nailed  him 
to  the  tree.'  There  is  a  sense  in  which  this  contains  a  deep  truth.  .  ,  .  The  crisis  of 
the  conflict  between  the  kingdoms  of  good  and  evil  took  place  in  the  death  of  Christ: 
the  highest  manifestation  of  good  in  him,  the  highest  manifestation  of  evil  in  the 
persons  of  those  who  saw  the  divinest  excellence,  and  called  it  Satanic  eviL  To  call 
evil  good,  and  good  evil,  to  call  Divine  good  Satanic  wickedness, — there  is  no  state  lower 
than  this.  It  is  the  rottenness  of  the  core  of  the  heart ;  it  is  the  unpardonable  because 
irrecoverable  sin.  With  this  evil,  in  its  highest  development,  the  Son  of  man  came 
into  collision.  He  died  unto  sin.  The  prince  of  this  world  came  and  found  nothing 
congenial  in  him.  He  was  hia  victim,  not  his  subject.  So  far  as  I  belong  to  that 
kingdom  or  fight  in  that  warfare,  it  may  be  truly  said,  the  Saviour  died  by  my  sin.  .  .  . 
I  am  a  sharer  in  the  spirit  to  which  he  fell  a  victim." '  But  is  such  a  fall  as  this  really 
possible  ?  To  us  it  seems  that  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  and  the  moral  nature  of  man 
admit  of  but  one  reply  as  to  this  possibility.  (1)  The  hypothesis  of  the  text  is  not  an 
idle  one.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  should  have  inspired  the 
writer  to  mention  so  awful  a  fall  if  it  had  been  an  utter  impossibility.  (2)  The  many 
warnings  against  apostasy  which  are  addressed  to  Christians  in  the  sacred  Scriptures 
witness  to  the  possibility  of  such  apostasy.  This  letter  to  the  Hebrews  is  one  long  and 
powerful  warning,  persuasion,  and  exhortation  against  falling  away  from  Christ.  (3) 
The  constitution  of  our  nature  shows  this  fall  to  be  possible.  We  are  free  either  to 
loyally  serve  God  or  to  wickedly  rebel  against  him,  and  must  ever  remain  so,  or  moral 
distinctions  would  no  longer  be  applicable  to  us. 

III.  An  AFPALLiNa  MOBAL  IMPOSSIBILITY.  "  It  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again 
unto  repentance."  This  "  impossible "  may  not  be  enfeebled  into  "  very  difficult,"  or 
other  similar  expression,  as  may  be  seen  by  an  examination  of  the  other  passages  of  thii 
Epistle  in  which  it  is  found  (ch.  vi.  18 ;  x.  4 ;  xi.  6).  The  reason  of  this  impossibility  is 
the  moral  character  and  condition  of  those  of  whom  (should  there  ever  be  any  of  such  ■ 
character)  it  is  predicated.  Having  once  experienced  the  Divine  renewal,  they  have 
utterly  f^len  away  from  it,  and  now  scornfully  reject  the  only  power  by  which  their 
renewal  could  be  effected,  'i'he  mightiest  spiritual  influence  in  the  universe,  even  the 
love  of  God  in  the  death  of  Jesus  CBirist  for  the  salvation  of  sinners,  is  derided  by  them. 
"  They  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame." 
"  They  tear  him  out  of  the  recesses  of  their  liearts  where  he  had  fixed  bis  abode,  and 
exhibit  him  to  the  open  scoffs  and  reproach  of  the  world,  as  something  powerless  and 
common  "  (cf.  ch.  x.  29).  Dr.  Parker  forcibly  inquires,  "  If  men  have  insulted  God, 
poured  contempt  upon  his  Son,  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant  as  an  unworthy 
thing,  grieved  and  quenched  the  Holy  Spirit,  what  can  possibly  remain  of  a  remedial 
kind  ?  The  inquiry  is  one  on  which  reason  may  expend  its  powers.  What  remains 
after  Ood  has  been  exhausted?"  Let  the  Christian  earnestly  heed  the  solemn  warning 
of  O'lr  text.  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation ; "  "  Give  diligence 
to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure ;  for  doing  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall."  The 
surest  way  of  guarding  against  this  terrible  fall  is  to  aim  at  and  seek  to  realize  constant 
spiritual  progress,  "  Therefore  leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  let  ui 
go  on  unto  perfection,"  etc. — W.  J. 

Ver.  10. — Ministering  to  the  mints.  "For  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your 
work,"  etc.     Our  text  leads  us  to  consider  the  ministry  to  the  saints  in  three  aspects. 

I.  In  its  exkmplaby  exercise.  "Ye  ministered  unto  the  saints,  and  still  do 
minister."     1.  The  nature  of  this  ministry.     (1)  Probably  pecuniary  aid  to  the  poor. 

■  •  Life  and  Letters,'  1.  205. 


170  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBE:W&  [ckvlI— 20. 

Saints  may  be  in  secular  poverty.  Lazarus  the  taint  was  an  afflicted  bes:gar ;  the  man 
who  was  not  a  saint  was  "  rich,  clotlied  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously 
every  day."  "Did  not  God  choose  them  that  are  poor  as  to  the  world  to  hs  rich  in 
faith  ?  "  etc.  (Jas.  ii.  5).  The  persons  arldressed  in  our  Epistle  probably  sent  contributions 
of  money  to  certain  of  their  icUow-Chiistians  who  were  in  poverty  (see  Acts  xi.  29, 30 ; 
Rom.  XV.  25, 26  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  1 ;  2  Cor.  viii.,  ix.).  (2)  Sympathy  with  the  afflicted  and 
persecuted.  "  Becoming  partakers  with  them  that  were  so  used"  (i.e.  reproached  and 
persecuted).  "For  ye  both  had  compassion  on  them  that  were  in  bonds,"  etc.  (ch.  x. 
32 — 34).  A  worthy  tribute  tliis  to  most  noble  and  beautiful  conduct.  Such  minister- 
ing to  the  saints  was  especially  becoming  in  the  disciples  of  him  who  "bore  oiir  griefs 
and  carried  our  Borrows,"  and  who  "came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister," 
etc.  2.  JTke  continuousness  of  this  ministry.  "And  still  do  minister."  Their  kind 
feeling  did  not  expend  itself  in  one  effort  or  in  one  contribution.  Their  conduct  in  this 
respect  is  exemplary.  We  shall  do  well  if  we  imitate  them  (of.  Bom.  xii.  13 ;  GraL 
vi.  10 ;  ch.  xiii.  16 ;  1  John  iii.  17). 

II.  In  its  exalted  motive.  "The  love  which  ye  showed  towards  his  Name." 
They  ministered  to  the  saints  because  they  loved  God. '  This  is  the  noblest  of  motives. 
Let  US  consider  it.  It  involves :  1.  Gratitude  to  Ood.  They  ministered  to  those  who 
were  his,  because  he  had  done  so  much  for  them.  Gratitude  eagerly  inquires,  "What 
shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me  ?  "  We  serve  him  by  serving 
his  saints.  2.  Devotion  to  Ood.  This  ministry  was  expressive  of  more  than  gratitude 
to  God.  The  Christian's  love  to  God  is  more  than  gratitude  to  him.  It  includes 
reverent  admiration  of  him,  and  willing  consecration  to  him  of  the  heart's  holiest  feeling 
and  the  life's  best  service.  And  ministry  to  his  saints  for  the  love  which  we  have  for 
him  he  accepts  as  ministry  to  himself.  "Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Inasmuch  as  ye  have 
done  it,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  40,  45).  3.  Becognition  of  the  common  relalionship  to  God 
of  loth  the  givers  and  the  receivers  of  this  help.  They  showed  their  love  toward  his 
Name  by  this  ministry,  because  they  felt  that  they  and  those  to  whom  they  ministered 
were  alike  his  children.  They  realized  their  common  brotherhood,  hence  they  volun- 
tarily shared  their  afflictions.  Thb  is  the  most  exalted  motive  for  Christian  service- 
love  to  God.     It  is  most  disinterested,  most  inspiring,  most  sustaining. 

III.  Ih  MB  CERTAIN  BEWABD.  "  God  is  not  uurighteous  to  forget  your  work,"  etc 
But  did  this  ministry  to  the  saints  give  the  ministers  a  claim  upon  God  for  reward  ? 
Would  he  have  been  unjust  if  he  had  not  remembered  and  rewarded  their  works?  Two 
facts  compel  us  to  answer,  "  No; "  viz.  (1)  that  all  the  good  works  of  Christians  are 
imperfect;  (2)  that  the  inspiration  for  every  good  work  proceeds  from  him.  "The 
righteousness  of  God  spoken  of  in  our  passage,"  says  Ebrard,  "  is  that  which  leads, 
guides,  and  governs  every  man  according  to  the  particular  stage  of  development  which 
lie  occupies.  It  is  here  affirmed  of  God  that  he  does  not  give  np  to  perdition  a  man 
who  can  still  in  any  way  he  saved,  in  whom  the  new  life  is  not  yet  entirely  extinct, 
and  who  has  not  yet  entirely  fallen  away ;  but  that  he  seeks  to  draw  every  one  as  long 
as  they  will  allow  themselves  to  be  drawn."  It  would  not  be  just  in  God  to  withdraw 
his  gracious  assistance  from  one  who  was  producing  the  fruits  of  Christian  faith  ;  for 
he  has  pledged  his  word  that  he  will  save  such  persons.  He  will  not  forget  their  work 
and  labour  of  love,  "  God  will  not  forget  yon,  for  that  would  be  ceasing  to  be  God. 
If  God  were  to  forget  for  one  moment,  the  imiverse  would  grow  black — vanish — rush 
out  again  from  the  realm  of  law  and  order  into  chaos  and  night."  Most  encoura^iing 
are  the  declarations  of  this  truth  in  the  Bible  (see  Deut.  iv.  31 ;  Isa.  xlix.  14—16  ; 
ch.  xiii.  6).  This  not  forgetting  their  work  and  the  love  which  they  showed  toward  his 
Name  implies :  1.  Freservation  from  apostasy.  This  is  the  point  of  connection  with 
the  main  argument.  Their  production  of  the  firuits  of  Christian  faith  was  an  evidence 
that  they  were  not  falling  away  from  Christ.  And  God  would  keep  those  who  out  of 
love  to  him  ministered  to  his  saints.  2.  Generous  recognition  of  their  services.  Nothing 
is  overlooked,  nothing  of  Christian  work  is  unrecognized  or  unacknowledged  by  him. 
8.  Gracious  reward  of  their  services.    (See  Matt.  x.  42 ;  Mark  ix.  41.) 

CoNOLOSlON.  1.  An  example  of  Christian  ministry.  Imitate  it.  2.  An  example 
tf  a  sure  method  of  guarding  against  apostasy.  Do  not  think  of  apostasy,  but  of 
oontinuous  progress.  Produce  the  fruits  of  good  works  out  of  love  to  God,  and  you 
i«ost  effeetireljr  preoloda  spiritual  defection  cr  decline. — W.  Ht 


m.  n.  1—20.]  THB  BPISTLB  TO  THE  HBBRBWa  471 

Ver.  12. — Imitating  the  inlieritori  tf  the  promises.  "That  ye  be  not  slothful,  hut 
followerB  of  them,"  etc.  Great  ia  our  ignorance  as  to  the  life  and  condition  of  tbosa 
who  have  left  this  world.  The  ancient  heathens  speculated  as  to  the  state  and  circum- 
stances of  the  departed.  The  Old  Testament  Scriptures  afforded  some  light  on  the 
question ;  hut  not  very  much.  "  Our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  abolished  death,  and  brought 
Ivfe  and  incorruption  to  light  through  the  gospel."  But  still  at  times  anxious  inquiries 
arise  within  us.  When  the  awful  subject  has  been  pressed  upon  us  as  we  have  looked 
upon  some  one  passing  thiough  the  experience  of  death,  the  questions  arise,  "  Where 
is  he?  Where  are  the  departed?  And  what  are  they?  Are  they  asleep  or  awake? 
In  heaven  or  in  hell?  or  in  some  not  final,  intermediate  itate?"  In  addition  to  the 
light  which  comes  directly  from  Christ,  we  learn  from  our  text  that  the  good  have 
entered  upon  the  promised  blessings,  have  taken  possession  of  their  patrimony.  This 
should  afford  us  great  satisfaction  and  encouragement  We  may  profitably  dwell  upon 
three  facts  suggested  by  our  text. 

I.  ThEKB   are   those   who   have   ENTEKBD  upon   the    possession  of  THB   BLE8SIN08 

PROMISED  BY  GoD  TO  HIS  FAITHFUL  PEOPLE.  "  Them  who  through  faith  and  patience 
inherit  the  promises."  What  are  these  promises  ?  What  is  this  inheritance  ?  It  is 
variously  described,  "Perfection"  (ver.  1);  "the  joy  of  our  Lord"  (Matt.  xxv.  21); 
a  "mansion"  in  our  "Father's  house"  (John  xiv.  2);  the  rest  which  remain(th  for 
the  people  of  God  (ch.  iv.  9) ;  "  an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,"  etc.  (1  Pet. 
i.  4).  In  a  word,  it  is  "  eternal  life " — heaven.  There  are  some  who  have  taken 
possession  of  this  inheritance.  With  them  it  is  not  future,  but  present;  not  believed 
in,  but  realized ;  not  hopeii  for,  but  enjoyed.  The  eleventh  chapter  of  this  Epistle 
refers  to  a  great  number  who  have  entered  upon  the  inheritance.  St.  John  saw 
"  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,"  etc.  ( Kev.  viL  9, 10).  Millions 
more  have  joined  them  from  prison-otlls,  from  the  martyr's  gory  block  and  fiery  stake, 
from  dread  battle-fields,  from  wrecks  on  furious  seas,  from  the  wards  of  noble  hospitals, 
and  from  the  quiet  chambers  and  gentle  rainistries-of  loving  homes.  The  countless 
hosts  are  increasing  every  hour.     How  inspiring  is  this  fact  1 

II.  They  have  entbeed  upon  this  possession  by  the  bxbroisb  of  faith  and 
PATIBNCB.  Faith  in  the  existence  of  the  promised  blessings  and  in  the  promise  to 
bestow  them,  is  what  is  meant  here.  Faith  in  the  unseen,  in  the  future  life,  in 
heaven,  in  God  and  his  promises.  Many  who  inherit  tlie  promises  were  giants  in  faith 
(ch.  -xi.  33 — 35).  And  patience.  They  were  sorely  tried,  but  they  patiently  endured. 
They  had  to  wait  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises,  ami  they  waited  patiently.  But 
"patience"  here  does  not  simply  mean  passive  endurance,  but  active  fidelity;  not 
merely  quiet  waiting,  but  diligent  working.  It  is  "  patience  in  well-doing  "  (Rom.  ii. 
7).  By  these  means  they  entered  upon  the  inheritance — faith,  patience,  and  diligence ; 
believing,  waiting,  and  working. 

III.  These  inheritoks  of  the  fbohised  blessings  are  examples  to  us.  "  That 
ye  be  not  slothful,  but  imitators  of  them,"  etc.  We  are  greatly  influenced  by  examples. 
We  are  imitators  by  nature.  To  a  great  extent  we  have  become  what  we  are  by 
imitation.    Unconsciously  we  imitate  others.     Unconsciously  others  imitate  us.     But 

•as  to  intentional  imitation — whom  shall  we  imitate  ?  There  is  but  One  whom  we  may 
imitate  in  all  things  ;  but  one  perfect  Example.  But  to  a  certain  extent  all  holy  men 
are  examples  to  us;  all  who  have  entered  heaven  are  worthy  of  imitation  in  some 
respects.  We  tread  the  same  path  which  they  trod — "  the  King's  highway  of  holiness." 
We  aim  at  the  same  end — perfection,  eternal  life,  heaven.  They  have  gained  their 
end,  succeeded  in  their  pursuit,  reached  the  goal.  Let  us  imitate  them ;  1.  In  their 
faith.  Believe  in  God's  promises  of  perfection  and  blessedness.  But  this  involves 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  because  (1)  he  revealed  to  us  perfection,  eternal  life,  and  heaven  ; 
(2)  he  is  for  us  the  only  way  to  perfection  and  heaven.  "  In  none  other  is  there 
salvation,"  etc.  (Acts  iv.  12).  Hold  fast  your  confidence  in  eternal  life,  and  trust  in 
the  Lord  and  Saviour  for  its  attainment.  2.  Jn  their  patience.  In  darkness  and 
tempest,  in  sin  and  sorrow,  let  us  not  hise  heart  or  hope;  but  trust  and  wait.  And, 
like  theirs,  let  our  waiting  be  joined  with  working.  "  Be  not  slothful."  Their  lives 
were  active  and  earnest.  Shall  we  he  slothful  in  an  age  like  this  ?  slothful  in  a  lifo 
like  ours  ?  ilothful  when  heaven  is  at  stake  ?  Let  us  be  imitators  of  the  illustrious 
host  who  inherit  the  promises.      "Be  ye  steadfast,  immovable,  alwayi  abounding 


172  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  vi.  1— 20. 

in  the  work  of  the  Lord,"  etc  (1  Cor.  xv.  68).  Are  any  of  you  imitators  of  those  who 
inherit  the  thieatenings ?  Change  your  course;  for  your  way  is  evil  and  the  end 
terrible.     "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good,"  etc. — W.  J. 

Vers.  19,  20. — The  anchor  of  the  soul.  "Which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the 
soul,"  etc.  Christians  have  been  exhorted  to  imitate  "  them  who  through  faith  and 
patience  inherit  the  promises."  There  are  most  excellent  reasons  for  their  doing  so , 
for  God's  purposes  and  ])iomises  are  most  sure.  They  were  not  lightly  or  hastily  made  ; 
they  are  most  solemnly  confirmed;  they  are  "immutable  things,  in  which  it  is 
impossible  for  God  to  lie;"  and  they  supply  the  strongest  encouragement  to  the 
Christian's  hopes  (vers.  13 — 18).    Notice — 

L  The  object  of  the  Christian's  hope.  This  is  not  explicitly  stated  in  the  text ; 
but  it  is  implied  in  it,  and  it  may  be  gathered  from  the  argument  of  the  writer.  We 
may  define  it  as  the  attainment  of  his  destiny,  or  the  perfection  of  his  being.  But 
to  mention  some  particulars :  1.  Freedom  from  sin  and  suffering.  The  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  certainly  includes  deliverance  from  sin,  and  from  pain 
of  body,  and  distress  of  mind,  and  darkness  and  sorrow  of  spirit.  We  must  become  free 
from  sin,  or  our  salvation  will  be  neither  complete  nor  true ;  for  sin  would  mar  the  fairest 
realms,  and  fill  them  with  discord  and  misery.  2.  Attainment  of  spirituai  perfection. 
"Let  us  press  on  unto  perfection"  (ver.  1).  We  hope  for  more  clear,  more  correct, 
more  comprehensive  knowledge ;  for  purity  of  heart  which  will  be  perfect  in  its  kind, 
though  not  in  its  degree ;  for  love  which  shall  be  perfect  in  Uke  manner ;  and  for 
harmony  between  our  purposes  and  performances,  our  willing  and  doing.  We  are 
inspired  by  the  sublime  hope  of  becoming  like  unto  our  Lord  and  Saviour  (1  John  iii. 
2,  3).  3.  Enjoyment  of  heavenly  blessedness.  Through  Christ  God  will  bring  "  many 
sons  unto  glory."  Jesus  has  entered  heaven  as  our  Forerunner,  and  we  hope  to  follow 
him  thither.  We  are  "looking  for  the  blessed  hope,"  etc.  (Titus  ii.  13).  "God  hath 
begotten  us  again  unto  a  living  hope,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  L  3 — 5).  This  glorious  hope  is  "  set 
before  us"  as  a  prize  to  be  won;  it  is  "set  before  us"  to  animate  our  spirits,  to 
strengthen  our  hands  in  Christian  work,  and  to  quicken  our  feet  in  the  Christian  race, 
Contrast  this  with  any  inferior  object  of  hope;  e.g.  worldly  possessions,  worldly 
pleasures,  worldly  honours.  These  do  not  satisfy ;  that  does.  These  degrade  the  soul ; 
that  exalts  it.  These  will  fail  those  who  have  attained  and  cherished  them ;  that  will 
lead  to  splendid  and  perpetual  fulfilment. 

n.  Thb  kfluenob  of  the  Christian's  hope.  "Which  hope  we  hare  as  an 
anchor  of  the  bo\i1,  both  sure  and  steadfast,  and  entering  into  that  which  is  vrithin  the 
veil."  This  hope  is  the  stay  of  the  soul  amid  a  tumultuous  world.  It  is  clearly 
implied :  1.  That  tht  voyage  of  life  is  marked  by  storms.  These  storms  are  occasioned 
by  bodily  afflictions,  temporal  anxieties  and  losses,  family  trials,  domestic  and  social 
bereavements,  and  spiritual  conflicts.  2.  That  these  storms  try  and  imperil  the  sovl. 
There  is  danger  of  striking  upon  the  hidden  rock  of  some  subtle  and  insidious  sin,  of 
being  driven  by  the  wild  winds  of  passion  against  stern  and  stony  cliffs,  or  of  being 
hurried  helplessly  onward  by  fierce  storms  of  sorrow.  The  dangers  in  navigating  the 
sea  of  life  are  numerous  and  various.  Many  a  noble  soul  has  reached  the  desired  haven 
sore  damaged  in  life's  storms,  while  some,  alas  1  have  "  made  shipwreck  concerning  th« 
faith."  8.  That  the  Christian's  hope,  as  an  anchor,  toill  enable  him  safely  to  outride 
the  storms.  "  Which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast," 
etc  Ebrard's  note  seems  to  us  both  true  and  beautiful :  "  Two  figures  are  here,  not  so 
much  mixed  as,  in  a  very  elegant  manner,  combined.  The  author  might  compare  the 
world  to  a  sea,  the  soul  to  a  ship,  the  future  still  concealed  glory  to  the  covered 
bottom  of  the  sea,  the  remote  firm  land  stretching  beneath  the  water  and  covered  by 
the  water.  Or  he  might  compare  the  present  life  upon  earth  to  the  forecourt,  and  the 
future  blessedness  to  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  which  is  still,  as  it  were,  concealed  from 
us  by  a  veil.  He  has,  however,  combined  the  two  figures.  The  soul,  like  a  ship- 
wrecked mariner,  clings  to  an  anchor,  and  sees  not  where  the  cable  of  the  anchor  runs 
to,  where  it  is  made  fast ;  it  knows,  however,  that  it  is  firmly  fixed  behind  the  veil 
which  conceals  from  it  the  future  glory,  and  that  if  it  only  keeps  fast  hold  of  the 
anchor,  it  will,  in  due  time,  be  drawn  in  with  the  anchor  by  a  rescuing  hand  into  the 
holiest  of  aU."    Thii  hope  enables  the  Christian  in  deep  distress  to  say, "  Why  art 


oa  in.  1—20.]  THE  EBISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  17« 


thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul?"  (Fa.  xlii.  11).  And  in  wildest  storms  it  inspires  him  to 
sing,  "  God  is  our  Eefuge  and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  in  trouble,"  etc.  (Ps.  xM. 
1-3,  7> 

"Hope,  as  an  anchor  firm  and  sure,  Iiolda  fast 
The  Christian's  vessel,  and  defies  the  blast." 

(Cowper.) 

And  thus  "  we  »re  saved  by  hope." 

III.  The  assured  realization  op  the  Christian's  hopb.  Two  things  assure  us  of 
the  fulfilment  of  our  hope.  1.  The  character  of  the  anchor  and  the  anchorage.  The 
anchor  is  "  both  sure  and  steadfast,  and  entering  into  that  which  is  within  the  "eil " 
(of.  Rom.  V.  1 — 5 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  16 ;  1  Tim.  i.  1).  2.  The  pretence  of  Jesus  m  ovr 
Forerunner  in  heaven.  "  Within  the  veil,  whither  as  Forerunner  on  our  behalf  Jesus 
entered."  The  veil  spoken  of  is  that  which  divided  the  holy  of  holies  from  the  holy 
place.  "Within  the  veil"  is  a  figurative  expression  for  heaven.  The  presence  of 
the  Son  of  man  in  heaven  is  a  guarantee  of  the  realization  of  the  hope  of  every  believer 
in  him.  He  entered  heaven  as  our  Representative,  and  "  as  a  Forerunner  on  our 
behalf."  "  Where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  servant  be."  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you.  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  2,  3).  Mark,  then,  the 
absolute  necessity  of  vital  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  One  with  him  by  faith 
here,  we  shall  be  one  with  him  in  blessedness  hereafter.  "  Christ  in  you,  the  Hope  of 
glory.  .  .  .  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  When  Christ,  who  is  our  Life,  shall 
be  manifested,  then  shall  ye  also  with  him  be  manifested  in  glory." — W.  J. 

Vers.  4 — 10. — The  danger  of  apostaty  arising  from  immature  apprehension  of 
Christian  truth.  Continuation  of  the  paienthetical  clause  on  the  evil  of  inability  to 
apprehend  the  deeper  truths  about  Christ.  Wliutever  this  passage  means,  it  contains 
nothing  to  discourage  the  true  believer.  1.  Because  of  the  plain  declarations  that  the 
believer  cannot  perish.  This  is  not  a  confidence  based  on  isolated  texts,  though,  if  any 
truth  may  rest  on  such,  it  is  surely  this ;  but  it  rests  on  the  most  fundamental  facts  of 
Scripture,  viz.  the  purpose  of  the  Father  that  all  who  believe  should  be  saved ;  the 
mediation  of  the  Son  for  securing  the  continued  faith  of  his  people ;  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  to  the  same  end ;  the  fact  that  it  is  eternal  life  which  is  bestowed  on  faith.  2. 
Because  there  are  certain  considerations  here  which  are  often  overlooked;  e.g.  these 
words  were  written  on  purpose  to  encourage  the  Hebrews,  and  therefore  to  find  dis  • 
couragement  in  them  must  be  to  read  them  wrong ;  moreover,  whatever  evil  it  points 
to  is  with  regard  to  those  who  "  fall  away,"  and  not  those  who  fall ;  and  further,  what- 
ever impossibility  to  renew  the  apostate  this  speaks  of,  it  is  not  impossibility  on  God's 
part — it  is  of  man's  impossibility  that  he  is  speaking.  It  is  useless  to  reiterate  these 
fundamental  truths  to  those  who  close  their  ears  to  them ;  It  is  impossible  to  renew  them 
unto  repentance ;  but  God  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish."  "  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin;"  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come ;"  "The  things 
which  are  impossible  to  man  are  possible  to  God."  3.  Because  what  is  stated  of  tJie 
persons  referred  to  here  is  true  of  non-believers,  and  the  passage  therefore  may,  without 
difficulty,  be  applied  only  to  these}  e.g.  "were  once  enlightened;",  others  beside 
Christians  aie  enlightened,  as  Balaam,  "  the  man  whose  eyes  were  opened."  "  And 
have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,"  which,  as  John  Owen  says,  is  not  eating  nor 
digesting.  "  And  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; "  that  may  refer,  as  in 
Acts  xix.  2,  6,  to  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  were  given  to  other 
than  regenerate  men,  as  Judas.  "  And  have  tasted  of  the  good  Word  of  God,  and 
the  powers  of  the  age  to  come ; "  it  is  no  misuse  of  language  to  apply  this  to  those  who, 
by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  are  led  to  deep  feeling  and  serious  thought.  So,  however 
natural  it  may  be  to  apply  all  this  to  the  Christian,  it  does  not  necessarily  apply  to  him  ; 
and  when  we  find  the  tenor  of  Scripture  is  against  such  application,  we  accept  the  latter 
alternative  fearlessly.  Subject — The  danger  of  apostasy  arising  fntm  immature  appre- 
hension of  Christian  truth. 

I.  The  solemn  warning  of  the  danger  and  guilt  op  apostasy.  1.  liiese  men 
were  in  danger  of  "falling  away,"  or  there  would  he  no  meaning  in  the  apostles  words. 
He  would  not  have  written  the  Kpistle  if  he  had  not  feared.  He  does  not  say  the 
Christian  could  fall  away,  but  he  implies  that  these  men  could.    He  is  not  sure  of  their 


174  TME  EHSTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  L^h.  vi.  1-20. 

possession  of  vital  goflliness,  only  continuance  is  the  test  of  vitality.  All  outward 
Christian  characteristics  may  be  ours,  yet  the  apostate's  guilt  and  doom  may  be  ours. 
2.  But  this  "falhng  away"  is  in  reality  the  rejection  of  Christ.  "  They  crucify  to 
themselves  the  Sou  of  God  afresh; "  i.e.  reject  him,  repeat  in  effect  for  themselves  the  old 
cry,'"Away  with  him  1  crucify  him  I "  Note  that  to  turn  the  back  on  Christ  is  to  repeat 
the  guilt  of  the  men  of  eighteen  centuries  ago,  and  the  Saviour's  grief.  3.  And  thii 
rejection  is  followed  hy  the  final  Judgment  of  Ood.  "  For  the  land  which  hath  drum; 
in  the  rain,"  etc.,  equivalent  to  "  to  receive  Grod's  good  gifts,  and  bring  forth  fruit  as 
tlie  result,"  is  to  ensure  the  Divine  blessing ;  but  to  receive  them  and  only  produce 
thistles  is  to  stand  in  danger  of  God's  curse.  What  can  be  the  hope  of  the  rejecter  of 
God's  Son  ?  What  sin  can  be  greater,  or  doom  more  terrible  ?  The  rejection  of  Christ 
ia  the  great  danming  sin  of  all. 

II.  Thb  obaoious  hope  of  theib  preservation  from  the  sin  of  apostasy.  "  But, 
beloved,  we  are  persuaded,"  etc.  1.  Self-denying  service  for  Ood  may  he  an  evidence 
of  true  Christian  life.  Religious  activity  is  no  proof  of  Christiao  life,  but  it  affords 
reason  for  hope  that  the  life  is  there.  Where  there  is  no  religious  activity  there  is 
little  reason  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  vital  piety,  for  it  is  the  genius  of  Christianity 
to  spread  itself.  2.  One  reward  of  this  service  is  the  bestotoment  of  sustaining  and 
delivering  grace.  Our  works  cannot  claim  anything  of  God,  but  he  is  pleased  to  reward 
them;  and  what  if  the  reward  for  fidelity  in  a  few  things  should  be  grace  to  be  faithful 
in  many  things  1  In  heaven,  more  glory  will  be  the  reward  of  service ;  on  earth,  more 
grace. 

III.  The  nbcessaet  kffort,  if  apostasy  is  to  be  avoided.  The  tenth  verse  shows 
that  we  are  only  kept  from  "  falling  away"  by  Divine  grace;  but  since  God  gives  grace 
through  human  instrumentalities,  there  is  something  for  us  to  do  if  we  are  to  be  kept 
from  this  fatal  evil.  That  fact  is  recognized  here,  for  the  former  part  of  the  parenthesis 
must  be  read  with  this ;  there  we  get  the  antidote  to  the  tendency  to  apostatize. 
1.  Growth  in  the  Divine  life.  You  must  either  grow  or  decline.  Growth  !■  the  only 
safeguard  to  "  falling  away."  Those  whose  early  vigour  is  becoming  feebler  and 
feebler  are  on  the  road  to  prove  they  never  possessed  Divine  vitali  ty,  and  to  the  crucifixion 
to  themselves  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  This  growth  is  only  possible  through  the  deeper 
knowledge  of  Christ.  Growth  needs  solid  food.  Milk  may  sustain  life ;  only  solid  food 
can  build  up  life.  Growth  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  the  secret  of  growth  in  his 
likeness. — 0.  N. 

Ven.  11 — ^20. — The  injluence  of  hope  on  Christian  steadfastness.  The  third  part  of 
the  parenthesis.  To  the  solemn  waraing  against  apostasy  he  hastens  to  add  how  they 
can  t)e  delivered  from  the  evil,  and  tells  them  of  the  power  of  hope  on  Christian  stead- 
fastness. 

I.  The  writer  ENCouBAaES  the  cultivation  of  Christian  hope.  Ue  says  he  is 
full  of  hope  with  regard  to  them,  and  desires  that  they  would  cherish  that  hope  for 
themselves.  (Note :  It  is  remarkable,  if  the  previous  verses  are  aimed  against  assur- 
ance, that  they  should  occur  in  a  passage  which  reveals  the  writer's  ardent  desire  not 
to  destroy  assurance,  but  to  increase  it  I)  1.  Hope  must  be  preceded  by  faith.  The 
Epistle  is  addressed  to  those  who  have  faith,  and  to  these  it  is  said— Go  on  to  hope. 
Hope  is  higher  than  faith.  Faith  reveals ;  hope  anticipates.  2.  Hope  is,  to  a  great 
extent,  thefruit  of  spiritual  diligence,  "  Diligence  unto,"  eto.  It  is  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  ("  Abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost"),  but  it  is  also  spoken 
of  as  though  it  were  secured  by  human  diligence.  God  gives  this  fruit  in  the  soul's 
vineyard  to  human  toil.  Hope  can  be  cultivated  by  an  increase  of  Christian  know- 
ledge ;  its  lack  is  due  to  neglect  of  Scriptui  e.  Also  by  constant  meditation — meditation 
on  the  things  we  know  about.  Al  jo  by  the  right  use  of  the  discipline  of  sorrow,  for 
sorrow  carries  in  it  the  message,  "  Set  your  affections  on  things  above."  We  can  have 
hope  if  we  ue  willing  to  pay  the  price  for  it.  3.  Hope  tends  to  the  production  of  full 
assurance.  It  is  the  fruit  of  assi\rance,  and  bears  a  seed  which  sows  itself  in  the  heart, 
and  produces  assurance  in  its  turn  Earthly  hopes  do  not  tend  to  assurance — they  may 
disappoint ;  but  the  hope  based  on  Scripture  is  declared  to  be  the  work  of  the  Spirit ; 
and  since  he  could  not  deceive  us,  there  must  be  a  reality  corresponding  tc  this,  "  Jf 
it  were  not  to,  I  would  have  told  .vou." 


OL  TL 1— 20J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKBWi  lU 

n.  Thb  wbitkb  affirms  that  the  obound  op  Chbibtiah  hope  u  the  infalu- 
BiLiTY  OF  God's  Wobd  about  Christ.  In  showing  the  ground  on  which  hope  is 
possible,  the  case  of  Abraham  is  introduced  as  an  illustration.  He  wa3  a  conspicuous 
example  of  hope  (Rom.  iy.  18 ;  ch.  xi.  10),  and  his  hope  is  here  said  to  have  been 
founded  on  the  Divine  promise.  Thus:  1.  Christian  hope  is  based  on  the  Divine  Word. 
Not  on  experience,  feelings,  attainments — these  are  sand ;  but  on  the  infallible  truth  of 
God's  utterance — that  is  rock.  2.  This  Divine  Word  is  confirmed  by  an  oath.  God's 
oath  is  not  more  true  than  his  simple  declaration,  but  he  condescends  to  it  in  pity  for 
our  infirm  faith.  God  swears  by  himself,  i.e.  he  appeals  to  the  perfections  of  his  own 
nature.  Is  not  as  much  as  that  implied  in  every  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you"  ? 
Think  of  a  soul  refusing  to  trust  God  when — I  say  it  revereiiily — he  is  on  his  oathl 
3.  The  particular  Word  on  which  hope  is  based  is  the  Word  about  Chrisfs  high  priest- 
hood. Our  hope  is  fixed  on  that  whicli  is  within  the  veil,  that  is,  Jesus.  (Note : 
Before  this  parenthesis  begins,  the  apostle  was  resting  his  argument  on  Fs.  ox.,  "  The 
Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repent,  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,"  etc.  The  perpetual 
high  priesthood  of  Jesus  was  secured  by  the  Divine  oath.  In  this  passage,  therefore, 
the  writer  is,  no  doubt,  referring  to  the  same  oath  about  Christ,  with  which  the 
reference  to  Jesus  within  the  veil  corresponds.)  In  what  capacity  is  Jesus  within  the 
veil?  He  is  there  at  Redeemer,  presenting  his  atoning  blood  which  cries  for  mercy. 
He  is  there  as  Jntercessor,  the  High  Priest  with  the  graven  breastplate,  and  the  incense 
of  prevailing  prayer  for  his  people.  He  is  there  as  Forerunner,  pledge  of  his  people's 
exaltation :  "  Wliere  I  am,  there  shall  also,"  etc.  God  has  said,  promised,  sworn  all  this. 
What  an  infallible  ground  of  hope  for  those  who  simply  fiee  for  refuge  to  lay  hold 
thereof  I 

111.  The  wbiteb  points  out  the  power  of  this  Chbistiah  hope  to  pboduce 
Ohbistian  steadfastness.  "  Which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul."  They 
are  vacillating,  in  danger  of  falling  away.  Hope  can  hold  them  fast.  1.  Hope  prevails 
our  drifting  away  vrith  the  current.  In  Christ  we  have  reached  the  soul's  haven,  but 
even  tliere — idly  rocking  on  a  peaceful  sea — we  are  in  peril.  Life's  calm  may  lull  us 
to  slumber,  and  noiseless  currents  carry  us  away  to  where  he  is  not — where  the  soul 
makes  shipwreck,  and  is  saved  only  "  on  boards."  The  antidote  to  this  evil  is  in  the 
soul's  hope  fixed  on  Christ  within  the  veil,  the  affections  set  on  things  above,  "  where 
Christ,"  etc  2.  Hope  holds  us  safe  in  the  storms.  When  a  storm  is  gathering,  ships 
enter  the  bay  and  anchor  there  in  safety.  Storms  of  temptation,  and  sorrow  sweeping 
down  on  us  with  a  cruel  blast,  are  the  time  to  fix  our  hope — our  longing  desire,  calm 
confidence,  eager  anticipation — on  Christ  within  the  veil.  To  cast  out  anchor  then,  and 
wish  for  the  day,  is  to  ride  out  the  storm  unhurt.  3.  Hope  keeps  us  within  cheering 
sight  of  the  shore.  You  are  come  to  the  harbour,  but  not  permitted  to  enter ;  but  the 
anchor  of  hope  holds  you  fast  there,  and  the  sweet  aomu^  and  gracious  infinences  of 
the  fair  land,  to  be  yours  presently,  are  yours  now. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  1—S.— First  principles.  I.  Notice  the  first  pbinoipleb  of  the  TEACBnra 
which  these  believers  had  enjoyed.  The  foundations  had  been  laid  in  those  essential 
truths  which  embraced  "  faith  toward  God,"  whose  constant  presence,  glorious  character, 
and  matchless  love  in  Christ  Jesus  shone  upon  their  souls,  and  displaced  the  chill  and 
darkness  of  unbelief.  This  led  to  the  rejection  of  "dead  works,"  which  were  works  that 
had  no  life  of  God  in  tbem.  Then  followed  the  doctrine  of  baptisms;  and  they  were 
taught  the  difference  between  proselyte  baptism,  the  baptism  of  John,  and  that  which  was 
administered  in  "  the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  "  laying 
on  of  hands"  was  the  solemn  consecration  of  the  candidate  to  God ;  and  in  the  apostolic 
times  was  the  ceremony  connected  with  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  com- 
munication of  supernatural  powers  (Acts  viii.  17).  "  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  "  was 
declared  with  explicitness,  and  the  solemn  event  of  the  final  judgment  enforced,  in  which 
our  Lord  would  review  the  life  and  determine  the  future  condition  of  mankind.  These 
truths  involved  many  others  which  were  needfvil  to  complete  the  course,  and  doubtless 
embraced  the  atonement  of  our  Lord,  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  personal  and  social 
means  of  grace,  which  consist  of  prayer,  worship,  and  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's 
Supper.     From  such  a  foundation  there  should  arise  the  stable  fabric  of  a  noble  life. 

IL  The  exuobtation  to  advance  dependent  ufoh  the  Divine  PEfiiiissioN.    The 


116  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vt  1— Slfik 

inspired'  writer  places  himself  among  other  believers,  and  associates  his  purpose  and 
hope  to  advance  with  them  in  the  career  of  that^piritual  improvement  which  shall  b« 
crowned  with  final  success.  He  avows  that  opportunity  and  disposition  depend  upon 
God  alone.  It  might  be  that  some  to  whom  he  wrote  had  gone  so  far  back  and  had 
relapsed  into  such  conditions  of  neglect  and  apostasy  that  he  could  not  positively 
afSrm  that  they  would  be  awakened  to  a  nobler  life  and  an  ardent  pursuit  of  salvation. 
The  bodily  life  of  himself  and  others  was  totally  dependent  upon  the  will  of  God,  and 
even  at  the  longest  it  was  as  a  vapour,  that  appeareth  for  a  little  while  and  then  vanisheth 
away.  Since  there  are  signs  in  the  Epistle  that  Jewish  Christians  had  "no  continuing 
city,"  and  the  predicted  overthrow  and  destruction  of  Jerusalem  might  come  suddenly, 
and  the  opportunities  of  teacliing  and  worship  might  be  rudely  and  finally  ended,  it 
behoved  him  to  refer  to  the  permission  of  God  that  he  and  othen  might  pren  <«  to 
completer  knowledge,  larger  faith,  and  nobler  service. — B. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — 2%«  motives  to  peneverance  supplied  by  the  ii»  and  punishment  qf 
apostasy.  The  outlines  of  the  experience  of  some  who  have  gone  back  from  following 
Christ  are  very  full  and  distinct.  They  include  illumination,  by  which  they  were 
translated  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light.  They  had  tasted  of  the  heavenly 
gift  of  salvation,  and  had  been  justified  freely  by  his  grace.  The  Holy  Spiiit  had 
dwelt  within  hiro.  TTiey  had  tasted  the  good  Word  of  God  in  the  precious  promise  of 
eternal  life,  and  had  enjoyed  the  possession  of  some  miraculous  powers  which  are 
described  as  "the  powers  of  the  age  to  come."  Yet  they  fell  away,  and  became  bold  and 
defiant  contemners  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  repeated  as  far  as  they  could  the  crucifixion 
of  our  Lord  by  their  bitter  derision  of  his  claims  to  be  the  true  Messiah.  In  spirit  and 
speech  they  put  once  more  the  crown  of  thorns  on  his  brow,  the  reed  in  his  hand,  and 
cried,  "  Away  with  him  1 "  Such  daring  impiety  seems  to  present  an  example  of  the 
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  punished  with  judicial  blindness  and  impenitency 
now,  and  the  Divine  anger  in  the  life  to  come.  It  was  impossible  to  renew  them  again 
to  repentance,  since  they  refused  the  only  remedy  which  could  restore  them ;  and  may 
have  haply  resembled  some  of  the  serpent-bitten  Hebrews  in  the  desert  who  rejected 
the  Divine  provision  for  their  recoveiy,  and  paid  the  penalty  of  death  for  their  unbelief 
and  disobedience.  The  passage  concludes  with  an  illustration  drawn  from  the  cultiva- 
tion bestowed  on  different  kinds  of  soil.  One  is  watered  by  the  river  of  God,  which 
is  full  of  water  and  cherished  by  the  sunlight,  and  produces  crops  for  the  use  and 
comfort  of  man.  Such  soil  has  received  and  used  the  Divine  blesting,  and  is  an  object 
of  sabbatic  delight  to  him  who  rejoices  in  the  success  of  his  plant  and  the  comfort  of 
mankind.  Another  kind  of  soil  represents  that  nature  which,  with  all  the  aids  of 
heaven  and  opportunities  of  spiritual  good,  produces  objections  and  disobedience ;  and 
"  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked."  For  such  there  is  a  "  fearful 
looking  for  of  judgment,"  which  is  foreshadowed  in  the  curse  pronounced  upon  rebel- 
lious Israel  :  "And  that  whole  land  is  brimstone,  and  salt,  and  burning;  it  is  not  sown, 
nor  beareth,  nor  any  grass  groweth  therein,  like  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  and  Ghimorrah, 
Admah,  and  Zeboim,  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  his  anger,  and  in  his  wrath  "  (Deut. 
xxix.  23).  By  such  varied  motives  and  appeals  does  inspiration  warn  us  against  the 
sin  and  punishment  of  drawing  back  from  Christ,  and  encourage  us  by  the  blessedness 
of  abiding  with  him  for  safety  and  fruitfulness. — B, 

Vers.  9 — 12.— 'Confident  expectation.  L  Thb  rEBSUAsiON  and  peoop  of  theib  Hori- 
FUL  CONDITION.  Aftei  the  solemn  and  alarming  appeals  to  their  conscience,  the  inspired 
writer  addresses  them  with  brotherly  affection,  and,  having  styled  them  "beloved," 
expresses  his  ijersuasion  that  there  was  in  them  things  that  accompanied  salvation.  They 
gave  clear  evidence  that  they  were  in  Christ,  and  therefore  far  from  that  state  of  profane 
contempt  which  exposed  to  such  fearful  retribution.  This  persuasion  was  founded  upon 
their  persevering  love  to  believers ;  for  they  had  ministered  to  them,  and  continued  to 
express  their  kindness  to  the  poor  of  the  household  of  faith.  They  rendered  gracious 
sarvice  to  distressed  Christians  who,  in  times  of  persecution  and  amid  the  pressure  of 
poverty,  needed  their  help,  which  was  doubtless  tendered  with  sympathy  and  benignity 
of  manner.  Hereafter  they  would  hear  the  voice  of  their  Lord  saying  imto  them, 
"  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it 


OH.  TL 1—20.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  177 

unto  me."  Such  conduct  ihowed  faith,  courage,  and  kindness,  and  redounded  to  the 
honour  of  the  Name  of  God,  and  glorified  him  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  men. 
Mutual  love  among  Christians  was  noticed  as  a  peculiarity  and  distinction  by  Luoian 
and  the  Emperor  Julian.-  "  By  thig  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye 
have  love  one  to  another"  (John  xiii.  35).  In  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  would  not 
"break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax,"  the  author  of  the  Epistle 
notices  the  sic;na  of  their  spiritual  life,  and  instructs  them  to  look  forward  to  the  time 
when  they  who  cast  their  bread  on  the  waters  shall  find  it  after  many  days ;  for  God 
is  not  only  not  unrighteous  to  forget,  but  delighted  to  honour  and  recompense  all 
service  rendered  to  his  people  and  for  the  glory  of  his  Name. 

n.   The  EARNKSTEXHOBTATION  to  the  BEALIZATION  of  the  privilege  of  GHBISTIAlfr 

HOPE.  The  scope  of  the  appeal  reminds  us  of  the  words  of  Paul,  who  said  that  he  had 
not  attained ;  but,  leaving  the  things  that  were  behind,  he  was  pressing  forward  to  those 
that  were  before.  The  Ideal  Christian,  in  the  parable  of  our  Lord,  represents  unbroken 
progress  from  blade  to  ear,  and  from  the  ear  to  full  corn  in  the  ear.  Believers  are 
to  seek  the  full  assurance  of  hope,  which  has  a  mighty  and  purifying  power ;  for  "  we 
are  saved  by  hope ;  "  and  if  it  is  like  a  ship  with  outspread  sails  under  a  vigorous  breeze, 
the  vessel  moves  with  speed  to  the  desired  haven.  To  enjoy  this  hope  there  must  be 
a  resistance  to  that  torpor  and  drowsiness  which  lead  us  to  say,  "  A  little  more  sleep, 
a  little  more  slumber,  and  a  little  more  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep."  The  voice  of 
inspiration  is,  "  Be  vigilant ; "  "  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others ; "  "  Awake  thou  that 
sleepust,  and  arise,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  Ught."  Encouragement  is  supplied  to 
perseverance  from  the  success  which  others  have  attained.  "  The  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect "  are  already  reaping  the  blessed  results  of  their  earnest  pursuit  and 
unwearied  diligence.  Faith  prompted  them  to  begin  and  continue  the  career,  and  gave 
theni  patience  to  endure  the  contrast  between  present  trial  and  future  glory.  To 
stimulate  in  this  course,  believers  are  urged  to  imitate  their  example,  that  they  may 
share  in  the  blessedness  which  they  now  enjoy. — K 

Ters.  13 — ^20. — The  encowagemmtt  to  tihtrish  the  hope  tf  eternal  life.  These  osuma 
that  there  is  a  strong  disposition  in  men  to  doubt  the  veracity  of  the  Divine  promise, 
and  in  adorable  condescension  God  gives  us  ample  evidence  to  justify  our  faith  and 
perseverance.  It  must  be  confessed  that  the  abandonment  of  the  Jewish  Law,  separa- 
tion from  the  synagogue,  the  surrender  of  earthly  pleasure,  and  submission  to  manifold 
trials,  require  varied  reasons  to  convince  and  to  maintain  the  conviction  of  the  claims 
of  the  gospel.    The  encouragements  consist  of  the  following  facts  :— 

I.  The  example  of  the  pbomisb  akd  oath  vorrcHSAFED  TO  Abbaeam  ass  BDroa 
OLOBIODSLT  REALIZED.  The  patriarch  was  called  by  the  voice  of  God  to  offer  up  his 
son  on  Mount  Moriah.  It  was  the  highest  proof  of  his  faith  in  Jehovah,  and  although 
he  received  him  back  in  a  figure  of  a  nobler  sacrifice,  "to  will  was  present,"  and  God 
accepted  the  purpose  of  his  believing  souL  "  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  was  seen" 
that  where  there  was  the  sternest  trial  othis  faith  there  came  the  most  blessed  manifes- 
tations of  the  Divine  favour,  both  for  himself,  his  descendants  after  the  flesh,  and  his 
more  numerous  spiritual  progeny.  God  said,  "By  myself  have  I  sworn,  for  because 
thou  hast  done  tliis  thing,  and  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son :  that  in 
blessing  I  will  ble.ss  thee,  and  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the 
heaven,  and  as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  sea-shore  "  (Gen.  xxii.  16,  17).  He  waited 
patiently,  and  obtained  the  promise  in  the  birth  of  Isaac ;  and  afterwards  he  saw  the 
day  of  Christ,  the  seed  in  whom  all  nations  are  blessed.  The  latest  portions  of  the 
New  Testament  verify  the  promise  contained  in  the  earliest  part  of  the  Old;  and  John 
said,  after  the  sealing  of  the  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  of  the  tribes  of 
Israel,  "  After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,  of 
all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,  stood  before  the  throne,  and  before 
the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands ;  and  cried  with  a  loud 
voice,  saying.  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth upon  the  throne,  andimto  the  Lamb" 
(Uev.  vii.  9, 10).  "And  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  accord- 
ing to  the  promise  "  (Gal.  iii.  29). 

II.  The  extension  of  the  BLESSINQ  contained  in  the  FBOMISE,  and  lANOnONED 

BY  THE  OATH,  TO  AUi  BBLiEVEBB     The  words  of  grace  which  were  spoken  to  Atirahara 

HKBBEWBt  K 


178  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  {en.  tl  1—20 

retain  their  force  and  application  to  all  who  are  his  children  by  a  living  faith.  "  The  Word 
of  the  Lord  endnretfa  for  ever.  And  this  is  the  Word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached 
unto  us."  The  patriarch  was  the  heir  of  the  world,  a  trustee  for  the  future  generations 
of  believers.  The  oath  is  still  valid,  and  the  promise  is  made  by  One  who  cannot  lie, 
and  whose  self-sufficiency  and  omnipotence  raise  him  above  the  temptation  and  possibility 
of  deception.  The  oath  in  human  affairs  is  final,  and  is  an  end  of  all  strife ;  and,  to 
remove  all  doubt,  Jehovah  condescends  to  adopt  a  human  form  of  appeal,  to  assure 
believen  of  the  immovable  ground  of  confidence  which  they  possess  and  enjoy.  Tbe 
freeness  of  the  promise  tends  to  confirm  the  confidence  of  the  righteous;  for  it  is  the 
unexpected,  unextorted  utterance  of  Divine  love  to  cheer  and  inspire  believers  in  their 
way  to  heaven.  Both  furnish  strong  consolation,  which  is  adequate  to  disarm  all  earthly 
sorrows  and  assaults  of  their  terror,  and  recalls  those  cheering  images  of  the  Divine  love 
which  ancient  psalmists  often  introduce  in  their  exultation  and  gratitude  after  deliver- 
ance from  adversaries,  and  with  cheerful  hope  of  future  safety;  for  "He  that  dwelleth  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  most  High  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty.  1 
will  say  of  the  Lord,  He  is  my  Refuge  and  my  Fortress :  my  Qod ;  in  him  will  I 
truBt"(Pg.  xci.  1,  2). 

III.  The  poweb  and  connbotions  of  Chbistian  hope.  It  is  not  unnatural  to  imagine 
that  the  writer  may  have  thought  of  the  wild  and  stormy  ocean,  from  whose  waves  and 
turbulence  the  mariner  hastens. to  a  port  of  safety,  and  then  drops  his  anchor  in  the 
calm  waters  of  the  haven.  The  anchor  descends  below  and  grasps  the  solid  earth,  and 
holds  the  vessel  fast  amid  the  raging  of  the  wind  and  the  darkness  of  the  sky.  It 
resembles  hope  in  its  retentive  capacity,  which,  amid  winds  of  doctrine,  failure  of  some 
who  go  back  and  walk  no  more  with  Christ,  temptations  from  the  world,  tbe  flesh,  and 
the  devil,  keeps  the  believer  from  leaving  his  position  and  surrendering  his  profession  of 
the  gospel.  The  thought  of  the  anchor  is  qualified  by  the  connection  of  our  hope  with 
heaven,  which  our  Loid  has  entered.  It  attaches  itself  to  him  who  has  entered  as  the 
Forerunner.  Here  we  note  a  striking  and  glorious  difierence  between  the  high  priest  of 
the  temple  and  the  office  of  the  Redeemer.  The  Aaronic  high  priest  had  no  one  with 
him  in  the  holiest  of  all,  and  stood  and  ministered  in  awful  solitude  before  Ood.  Our 
Lord  is  the  Forerunner,  and  awaits  the  arrival  of  his  followers.  He  is  the  Captain  of 
salvation,  who  will  bring  many  f <  is  into  glory;  for  he  is  a  High  Priest  after  the  order 
of  Melchizedek,  who,  as  a  sublime  typ«  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  presented  to  oiir  considera- 
tion in  the  following  chapter. — ^B. 

Yen.  1 — 3. — Pressing  forward  to  ihe  end.  It  is  obvious  that  the  two  leading  words 
of  this  passage  are  those  respectively  rendered  "  principles  "  and  "  perfection."  They 
indicate  the  beginning  and  the  end.  Every  right  dpx4  looks  forward,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  to  a  Te\eiinis:  and  every  true  rtxtiiriis,  when  looked  into,  reveals  a  right 
ipxi-    Hence  we  have — 

L  The  bight  btabtino-foint.  Presuming  that  perfection  is  wanted,  we  must  start 
rightly;  and  there  is  here  indicated,  somewhat  in  detail,  what  that  right  start  is. 
True,  there  is  to  us  some  obscurity  in  the  detail.  We  cannot  be  sure  of  the  exact 
meaning  of  each  of  the  expressions,  but  of  the  great  general  drift  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
The  Hebrew  had  been  for  centuries  in  expectation  of  the  Christ.  The  beginning  of  the 
Christ  was  really  an  immemorial  thing.  The  Anointed  of  God,  bringing  in  his  train  all 
good  things,  had  been  proclaimed  by  Divine  messengers  and  accepted  by  the  people. 
And  here  in  these  details,  called  a  foundation,  are  set  forth  the  acts  showing  the  accept- 
ance of  the  Christ.  Note  how  these  details  can  be  classified.  There  is  what  we  turn 
from,  and  what  we  turn  toward.  In  the  proclamation  of  the  Christ  a  summons  to 
repentance  was  always  implied.  Turn  away  from  dead  works.  Works  of  the  hand,  and 
not  of  the  heart,  were  superstitious  externalities.  But  if  s  man  is  to  turn  away 
effectively  from  useless  endeavours,  he  must  have  some  definite  point  to  which  to  turn. 
And  so  there  is  the  mention  of  trust  in  God  as  well  as  repentance.  These  are  the  two 
really  important  points  in  considering  the  start  of  a  man's  connection  with  Christ. 
Promptly,  decidedly,  and  from  the  heart,  he  must  forsake  dead  worki;  and  in  the  same 
■pint  he  must  trust  in  the  living  God. 

II.  The  ooNTcnTAL  aiu.  Completeness  as  an  actual  thing  must  ever  he  before  the 
mind.     "Onward  and  upward"  is  tbe  burden  of  the  New  Testament  everywhere. 


OH.  Ti.  1—20.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  179 

Foundations  are  laid  that  buildi-nga  may  be  erected  on  them,  story  climbing  above  gtoryj 
till  at  last,  roofed  and  furnished,  they  are  ready  for  habitation  and  use.  Very  hard  work 
wag  it  to  get  these  Hebrews  to  see  how  the  old  dispensation  was  only  the  foundation  of 
the  new.  They  did  not  like  to  lose  sight  of  familiar  institutions  and  symbols.  But  in 
this  they  were  very  much  like  the  man  who  should  keep  to  childish  things.  Jesus 
himself  bad  his  time  of  initiation.  He  needed  not  to  repent  from  any  dead  works,  yet 
he  came  to  John  to  be  baptized  along  with  the  sinninir,  repentant  crowd.  And  when 
lie.haii  entered  on  his  work,  with  what  steadiness  he  went  on  1  There  was  no  standing 
still.  Everyday  not  only  brought  him  nearer  in  time  to  the  accomplishment  of  his 
decease  at  Jerusalem,  but  fitted  him  for  that  accomplishment ;  and  so  he  was  able  to 
say,  "  It  is  finished."  The  peril  in  our  case  is  thatVe  shall  go  on  and  on,  and  when 
the  time  comes  that  we  also  should  say,  "  It  is  finished,"  there  will  be  nothing  to  show 
but  foundations.  And  if  foundations  are  foundations  and  nothing  more,  then  they  are 
really  not  even  foundations.  They  are  but  melancholy  bits  of  waste,  on  which  is 
written,  "  This  man  began  to  build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish." — Y. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  critical  state  of  backsHderi.  Passages  like  this  we  naturally  avoid. 
There  is  reluctance  to  face  its  difficulties.  We  dread  lest  a  hasty  admissiDn  of  certain 
premisses  may  lead  us  to  terrible  conclusions.  But  since  bucksliding,  falling  away,  is  a 
melancholy  reality  among  believers,  it  is  above  all  things  needful  that  the  possible 
results  of  backsliding  should  be  considered.  The  backsliikr's  present  condition  we 
know  ;  but  one  thing  we  may  not  distinctly  apprehend  until  it  is  pressed  upon  us  by 
solemn  utterance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  is  the  fiiture  into  which  the  present  may 
lead, 

I.  The  baceblideb,  di  rAixiNO  awat,  has  rALL^N  fboh  ExcEEDiNa  OBEAT  imm- 
LEQEg.  He  who  was  enlightened  by  a  great  steady  light,  shining  on  him  once  for  all, 
has  yet  fallen  back  into  practical  darkness.  He  is  not  in  darkness  because  the  light  has 
gone,  but  because  he  has  shut  it  more  and  more  from  the  inward  eye.  The  light  is 
there,  more  and  more  rejoiced  in  by  persevering  believers,  but  he  has  become  willingly 
negligent  of  the  benefits.  The  free,  peculiar  gift  of  Heaven,  Jesus  Christ  himself,  once 
accepted,  is  now  despised.  The  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  the  great  Pentecostal  communica- 
tion dwellino;  with  the  backslider,  is  yet  shut  out  from  the  sympathies  of  his  heart. 
Renewing  and  sanctifying  work  has  ceased.  The  good  Word  of  God,  heavenly  truth, 
heavenly  promises,  all  that  God  has  given  as  daily  bread  for  the  hungering  inward  life, 
all  that  shows  how  man  liveth  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  proceeding  out 
of  the  mouth  of  God, — all  this  has  lost  its  relish.  The  powers  of  the  age  to  come,  so 
much  greater  than  any  powers  of  the  present  age,  are  little  by  little  lelt  unused.  We 
have  an  actual  instance  of  the  backslider  in  Demas.  "Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having 
loved  this  present  world."  Demas  had  been  put  in  the  midst  of  heavenly  \vrht  and 
heavenly  food — nay,  more ;  he  was  in  the  companionship  of  one  who  had  received  all 
these  heavenly  things  to  the  full,  and  profited  by  them  as  much  as  any  man  ever 
piofited.  It  is  not  a  little  treasure  from  which  the  backslider  turns,  under  the  dominion 
of  carnal  affections. 

II.  The  obeat  pboof  thereby  apfoeded  o>  human  weakness.  The  theory  o! 
many  is  that  if  good  things  lie  put  before  a  man  he  is  sure  at  last  to  welcome  them  to 
his  heart,  and  get  all  that  they  have  to  give,  e7en  to  their  innermost  influences.  But 
the  fact  for  which  God's  Spirit  would  ever  pre[iare  us  is  that  this  present  world  is  an 
object  very  fascinating.  These  glorious  gifts  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  mean  that  we 
must  persevere  in  an  arduous  and  lengthened  effort  to  get  at  their  fulness.  The  back- 
slider is  one  who  does  not  trouble  to  pierce  the  phenomena  of  grace,  and  so  lay  hold  of 
tjlie  s|jiritual  realities.  He  forgets  his  weakness,  or  rather  he  does  not  rightly  believe 
how  weak  he  is.  Here  is  a  new  meaning  of  the  saying,  that  when  we  are  weak  then 
we  are  strong ;  for,  knowing  our  weakness,  we  distrust  ourselves,  and  keep  ourselves 
open  to  the  inflowing  of  God. 

ni.  The  gbounds  of  hope  that  lie  hiddbn  in  this  passage.  It  is  impossible  to 
renew  the  backslider  again  to  repentance.  So  the  passage  plainly  says ;  and  if  we  take 
it  in  isolation  and  in  bald  literalness,  it  gives  the  backslider  but  a  poor  prospect.  And 
yet  the  backslider  is  the  very  one  who  needs  encouragement.  We  must  not,  therefore, 
let  this  word  "impossible"  so  fill  the  field  of  thought  aa  to  exclude  the  most  hopeful 


180  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oltlI— 20 

considerations.  JesuB  said  it  was  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  throngii  the  eye  of  a  needle 
than  for  a  rich  man  to  get  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  it  is  impossible  for  a 
camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle.  Therefore  it  is  impossible  for  a  rich  man  to 
e;et  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  must  be  distinctly  put  before  the  mind  what  a 
barrier  worldly  possessions  are ;  and  then  the  hope-inspiring  word  comes  in,  "  With 
God  all  things  are  possible."  Tea,  with  God  it  is  possible  to  tiim  the  backslider  into 
the  right  way  again,  and  set  him  forward  with  a  recovered  love  and  a  strengthened 
heart.  We  do  not  know  but  what  Demas  came  back  again,  and  furnished  in  the  end  a 
Drowning  proof  of  how  great  are  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come. — Y. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Teething  from  the  good  land  and  the  had.  Here  is  a  reminiscence  of  the 
parable  of  the  seed  in  the  four  kinds  of  ground.  The  soil  becomes  invested  with  a  kind 
of  personality.  One  thinks,  too,  of  that  fig  tree  which  the  Lord  withered  up.  And  it 
may  not  be  so  entirely  fanciful,  as  at  first  it  appears  to  give  land  a  sort  of  individuality ; 
so  that  one  piece  of  soil  will  behave  in  one  way,  and  another  in  another.  If,  for 
instance,  there  be  any  real  basis  for  the  reputation  attaching  to  certain  vintages,  it 
must  come  from  some  indefinable  quality  of  soil  At  any  rate,  we  can  imagine  two 
different  kinds  of  land,  such  as  are  set  before  us  in  this  passage. 

I.  We  are  to  imagine  two  men  put  into  exactly  bimilab  positions  with  bbsabd 
TO  THE  benefits  OP  UiviNB  GKACE.  Just  as  two  coutiguous  pieces  of  land  have  the 
same  copious  showers  falling  on  them,  so  two  men  may  come  under  the  same  religious 
influences.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  peculiar  spiritual  advantages  in  one  district  which 
are  lacking  in  another,  though  even  so  much  as  this  has  to  be  said  guardedly ;  for  we 
must  believe  that  in  the  end  all  men  shall  have  enough  light  to  throw  upon  them  the 
responsibility  of  neglecting  salvation.  But  one  thing  we  do  see,  that  men,  so  far  as 
we  can  judge,  under  the  same  spiritual  influences,  meet  those  influences  in  quite 
different  ways.  One  is  attentive,  the  other  negligent.  One  is  receptive,  the  other 
nnresponding.  Nay,  as  the  illustration  puts  it,  both  may  be  receptive,  but  differently 
receptive,  so  that  there  are  very  different  ultimate  results.  The  earth  is  represented  as 
drinking  in  the  oft-recurring  showers.  One  man  drinks  in  the  grace  and  truth  of  God 
so  that  they  energize  all  the  powers  of  his  heart,  and  he  puts  forth  corresponding  fruit. 
Another  drinks  in  God's  truth,  seems  to  appreciate  it,  but  when  the  result  is  looked  for 
nothing  comes  but  noxious  growths. 

II.  The  deolabation  of  besponsibilitt  and  corhespondiko  jodoment.  If  one 
man  is  fruitful  of  good  works,  and  another  fruitful  only  of  evil  ones,  then  God  will  treat 
the  men  correspondingly.  Compare  with  the  illustration  here,  the  parable  of  the 
talents.  God  is  not  arbitrary.  It  is  we  who  determine  how  Gk)d  shall  treat  us  ulti- 
mately, for  he  treats  men  on  great  eternal  principles.  It  is  for  men  to  be  wise  and 
diligent  in  time,  and  recognize  the  principles.  It  is  sometimes  asked  why  thorns  and 
briers  and  wasting  weeds  have  ever  had  existence.  The  answer  may  be  that  these 
were  first  of  all  made  to  be  illustrations  to  men.  Thorns  and  briers  are  burnt  without 
hesitation,  that  the  very  seeds  and  germs  of  them  may,  if  possible,  be  blotted  out  of 
existence.  And  if  men  will  put  out  from  their  lives — from  lives  that  have  been  so 
divinely  blessed — nothing  but  thorny  and  briery  products,  then  they  must  expect  these 
to  be  for  burning.  All  evil  things  must  perish.  Our  folly  is  in  building  up  the  evil 
which  must  go,  rather  than  the  good  which  will  remain. — Y. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Oreai  attention  needed  to  maintain  the  OhrisUan'a  hope.  I.  The 
wbitbb'b  tone  of  affectionate  solicitude.  He  who  has  twice  addressed  his  readers 
as  brethren,  now  calls  them  heloved.  His  affection  is  hitherto  implied ;  now  it  needs  for 
a  moment  to  be  asserted;  and  the  brotherhood  must  also  be  borne  in  mind,  though  not 
asserted.  The  readers  of  the  Epistle  might  ask,  "  Why  does  this  man  lecture  us  so, 
calling  us  woBpol,  and  exhibiting  to  us  such  dreadful  possibilities  of  disaster?"  The 
answer  is  that  he  does  it  all  in  true  brotherly  affection.  The  word  pointing  to  safety 
and  completeness  must  be  spoken  in  time.     Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend. 

II.  HiB  WORDS  OF  HOPE  AND  CONFIDENCE.  These  pcoplc  are  ill  a  state  by  no  means 
satisfactory  so  far  as  Christian  hope  and  aspiration  are  concerned,  lingering  among  the 
beginnings  instead  of  growing  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Olirist.  But 
■och  people  ought  always  to  be  approached  iu  a  conciliatory  and  encouraging  apirit 


OH.  VI.  1—20.]  THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  181 

The  writer  feels  he  has  good  gronnd  for  saying  that  the  doom  of  the  land  bringiDg 
forth  thorns  and  briers  will  not  be  theirs.  He  can  see  in  them  better  things — things 
that  belong  to  safety,  not  to  destruction.  Mark  how  the  spirit  of  Christianity  is  never 
a  fault-finding  spirit.  This  has  to  be  noticed  all  the  more  because  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  to  find  so  many  faults  in  men — in  the  Christian,  as  a  rule,  more  than  others.  But 
wherever  there  is  good  it  is  recognized  and  appreciated.  Thus  Paul,  who  had  so  many 
hard  things  to  say  to  the  Church  at  Corinth,  begins  by  thanking  God  that  this  same 
Church  came  behind  in  no  gift.  The  bright,  the  creditable,  the  hopeful  side  must 
always  be  looked  at.  Then  rebukes  and  warnings  from  an  evidently  pure  motive  will 
come  with  increased  force.  Notice,  too,  the  ground  for  this  hvpe.  These  people  are 
genuine  enough  so  far  as  the  spirit  of  practical  beneficence  is  concerned.  There  is  love 
in  their  hearts  towards  God  and  Christian  people.  They  have  ministered,  not  without 
toil,  to  the  wants  of  tlie  saints ;  nor  are  they  weary  in  well-doiug,  for  they  are  minister- 
ing still.  How  could  a  Christian  brother  speak  to  any  such  save  in  a  large-hearted 
spirit  of  hope? 

IIL  The  keed  of  a  dlliobnt  beoabd  to  the  Christian's  destiny.  We  may 
minister  to  saints  and  yet  not  be  in  full  sympathy  with  them.  He  who  ministers  to 
the  saints  does  a  good  thing  as  far  as  he  goes ;  but  the  pity  is  that  very  often  he  is 
ministering  to  those  who  have  a  far  blighter  hope  than  any  he  has.  There  are  many 
loving-hearted,  generous  people  in  the  world  who  are  not  Christians,  who  do  not  profess 
to  know  the  Christian's  repentance,  the  Christian's  faith,  the  Christian's  hope;  and  in 
the  particular  case  here  dealt  with  there  is  the  curious  contradiction  of  a  Christian  life 
existing  as  far  as  beneficence  is  concerned,  but  paralyzed  as  it  were  in  the  element  of 
hope.  Now,  here  is  one  sign  of  a  normal,  healthy  Christian  life,  namely,  that  it  is 
moving  under  the  full  assurance  of  hope.  We  should  be  looking  forward,  with  a 
constant  certainty  of  feeling,  to  the  glories,  the  blessedness,  and  the  perfection  which 
await  us.  And  this  hope  is  only  to  come  by  activity  of  heart  according  to  the  will  of 
God.  If  there  is  interest  in  Divine  truth,  increasing  spiritual-mindedness,  more  power 
to  discriminate  between  the  temporal  and  eternal,  the  seen  and  the  unseen,  the  outward 
man  and  the  inward  man,  then  hope  will  grow.  A  reasonably  hopeful  spirit  is  the 
sure  result  of  fidelity,  prayerfulness,  insight  into  the  purpose  of  the  work  of  Christ ; 
and  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  evidently  felt  that  to  be  without  this  special  Christian 
hopefulness  was  to  be  in  ft  position,  not  only  of  loss  and  suffering,  but  eren  of  peril 
unspeakable.— Y. 

Ver.  12. — Imitation  of  those  who  inherit  the  promises.  I.  Thobk  who  abb  to  bk 
IMITATED.  "  Followers  "  they  are  called  in  our  version,  but  they  are  followers  in  that 
particular  respect  which  is  known  as  imitation.  And  if  we  are  to  imitate,  we  must 
have  some  distinct  and  sufficient  view  of  those  whom  we  imitate.  Abraham  is  singled 
out  here,  and  truly  there  could  be  no  better  example  of  the  firm  believer  in  God's 
promises.  We  have  him  receiving  those  promises,  acting  upon  them  as  real  messages 
coming  from  a  veracious  Being ;  excluding  from  his  life  any  natural  purposes  of  his 
own,  and  becoming  the  wUling  and  docile  agent  of  the  purposes  of  God.  But,  after  all, 
he  is  only  one.  Wherever  we  see  any  one  who  has  grasped  a  promise  of  God,  feeling 
all  that  there  is  of  authority  and  supreme  importance  in  it,  there  we  look  for  the  habit 
(if  faith,  there  we  shall  find  a  long-suffering  endurance  of  the  consequent  trials.  When 
a  man  goes  forth  under  some  deep  conviction,  we  must  trace  that  conviction  to  its 
practical  result,  and  see  what  comes  of  it ;  for  only  so  shall  we  know  that  he  was  not 
believing  a  lie.  In  other  words,  we  must  gee  the  man  believing,  the  man  long- 
suffering,  the  man  inheriting  the  promises. 

II.  Why  we  are  to  imitate.  Because  promises  are  made  to  us  also.  This  was 
what  so  grieved  and  alarmed  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  that  he  saw  his  friends  indifferent 
to  the  promises  made  to  them.  It  is  worth  our  while  to  search  the  New  Testament 
through  and  see  how  it  abounds  in  promises.  Now,  these  promises  must  have  stood 
very  conspicuously  before  these  apostles — these  men  who  in  the  first  days  of  the  gospel 
had  such  peculiar  authority  to  proclaim  and  enforce  the  essential  elements  of  the 
Divine  message.  Hence  the  uncompromising,  searching  way  in  which  the  writer  here 
presses  a  duty  home.  It  is  the  same  God  who  in  Christ  Jesus  malies  promises  to  us, 
who  made  promises  so  solemnly  to  Abraham  of  old.    We  have  much  need  to  study  the 


182  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBBEWa  [OH,  ti.  1— 20. 

course  of  snch  men  as  Abraham  and  Moses ;  for  one  day  we  shall  be  asked  as  to  our 
treatment  of  the  promises  made  to  us  in  common  with  all  who  have  come  to  know  the 
New  Testament  Scriptures.  Moreorer,  it  will  be  asked  why  we  so  neglected  to  consider 
the  inheritors  of  the  promises. 

III.  How  WE  ABE  TO  iMiTATB.  By  showing  in  our  lives  the  same  qualities  as  thoea 
which  brought  the  inheritors  of  the  promises  to  their  inheritauce.  God  keeps  his 
promises  to  those  who  can  believe  and  wait.  Grod  said  after  the  Flood,  "  While  the 
earth  remaineth, seed-time  and  harvest  shall  not  cease."  But  this  very  promise  implied 
that  men  would  have  faith  to  sow  the  see.l  and  patici.ce  to  wait  for  the  harvest.  Here 
we  are  shown  what  God  means  by  imitation.  It  is  not  copying  outward  appearance, 
but  taking  into  the  heart  inward  principles,  which,  if  we  only  encourage  them  to  take 
root  and  get  fast  hold,  will  show  themselves  more  and  more,  keeping  to  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promises.  God's  truth  stands  before  us,  exhibited  in  manifold  ways,  solemnly, 
lovingly,  repeatedly.  The  first  question  is — Can  we  believe  it  ?  and  the  second — Can 
we  wait  God's  time  for  him  to  make  his  righteousness  clear  as  the  light  ?  God  is  true ; 
the  corresponding  attitude  on  our  part  is  to  believe  ever  more  deeply.  God  is  loving 
and  gracious;  the  corresponding  attitude  on  our  part  is  to  wait  as  serenely  and 
hopefully  as  we  can. — ^Y. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — The  anchor  of  the  sovH.  1.  Man's  peril  ahd  need.  This  Is  set 
before  us  in  the  striking  words,  "  fleeing  for  refuge."  There  is  one  sort  of  escape  by 
uetting  simply  out  of  bondage ;  there  is  another  by  reaching  a  place  of  perfect  security. 
Many  a  bird  has  escaped  from  a  cage  only  to  become  the  prey  of  some  wild  bird  or 
beast.  It  has  not  been  able  to  attain  a  refuge.  The  need  is  further  suggested  by  the 
word  "  anchor"  (see  Acts  xxvii.  29).  The  shipmen  fear  lest  the  ship  will  fall  on  the 
rocks,  and  so  they  flee  to  the  anchors,  of  which  they  cast  out  four.  There  is  the  need 
of  security ;  need  of  solid  holding-ground  for  the  anchor ;  need  of  an  anchor  which 
itself  will  not  give  way.  Vain  is  the  anchor  without  the  anchorage;  vain  the  anchorage 
without  the  anchor.  Anchor  itself,  and  cable,  and  connection  with  the  ground,  and 
connection  with  the  ship, — all  these  must  be  seen  to.  Moreover,  there  is  needed  a  calm 
sense  of  being  in  tlie  right  way ;  a  composing  assurance  that  when  the  anchor  is  thrown 
into  the  water  and  disappears  it  will  flnd  a  hold.  We  need  the  strong  irapXrXijo'u.  We 
need  to  have  a  Divine  power  pressing  on  our  hearts  the  right  thing  to  do ;  to  take 
from  ua  all  uncertainty,  vacillation,  trimming,  yielding  to  plausible  criticism  from 
others.  We  need  a  calm,  intelligent,  apt  use  of  the  saving  instruments  which  God 
puts  into  our  hands.  When  sailors  are  out  in  mid-ocean  they  do  not  fling  over  the 
anchor ;  and  when  they  are  close  to  the  rocks  they  do  not  behave  as  they  would  in 
mid-ocean. 

II.  God's  suFPiiT  fob  the  need.  Look  first  at  the  anchorage.  We  must  not  push 
the  metaphor  too  far.  The  one  great  point  in  it  is  that  it  gives  us  such  a  clear  illus- 
tration of  what  it  is  to  find  security  in  the  invisible.  The  anchorage-ground  is  some- 
thing unseen,  and  yet  it  gives  a  safety  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  anything  that  is 
seen.  Indeed,  the  seen  thiogs  are  full  of  danger.  There  are  the  rocks;  and  the  water 
in  which  the  ship  rests  will  not  resist  its  progress  towards  them.  And  so  our  great 
hold  and  safely  is  to  be  in  the  invisible.  We  are  to  make  sure  of  the  reality  of  God's 
plan ;  that  he  has  a  plan,  that  it  is  a  plan  immutable ;  that  it  is  indeed  a  plan  of  God, 
not  subject  to  the  collapses  which  come  through  human  caprice,  infirmity,  and  short- 
sightedness. Hence  God  announces  and  exhibits  his  plan  through  two  immutable 
things.  What  are  these?  Surely  one  of  them  is  the  oath  of  God.  We  know  that  a 
man,  always  veracious  and  deliberate  of  speech,  wants  to  be  taken  in  an  unusually 
serious  way  when  he  adds  to  what  he  has  to  say  a  solemn  adjuration.  And  of 
course,  when  God  speaks,  his  word  is  always  serious ;  but  he  has  his  own  way  of 
calling  man's  attention  to  its  seriousness.  Then  the  other  immutable  thing  is  surely 
the  priesthood,  the  Melchizedek  priesthood  of  Jesus.  Behind  tlie  veil  constituted  by 
the  visible  world  there  is  a  God  who  has  sworn  the  solemn  oath  with  respect  to  that 
inheritance  which  all  inherit  who  by  their  faith  are  children  of  Abraham ;  and  there 
also  is  the  great  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ, "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
The  anchorage  thus  being  given,  there  is  the  anchor  also  to  be  considered.  And  here 
we  ere  to  consider  tlie  ssnchor,  not  so  much  as  something  which  we  fling  into  the 


,vn.l— 28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBRBWa 


183 


unseen,  as  something  which  out  of  the  unseen  is  realized  to  u».  It  is  as  if,  when  a 
ship  is  drifting  towards  a  dangerous  shore,  a  beneficent  hand  should  suddenly  reach  out 
of  the  waves  and  fling  a  rope  to  be  fastened  to  the  ship.  Our  great  coufidence,  hope, 
and  joy  should  be  in  this,  that  Jesus,  vanished  into  the  unseen,  has  still  a  living  and 
active  connection  with  a  needy  world.  Note  how  full  this  whole  passage  is  of  stron'^ 
wards.  Examine  the  passage  in  the  original,  and  this  will  come  out  very  clearly. 
Strong  words  in  ordinary  speech  are  too  often  the  resort  of  weak  men ;  but  here  thoy 
have  to  be  used  at  every  turn  in  order  to  set  before  us  the  stable  anchorage  and  the 
Bolid,  well-forged  anchor  which  have  been  furnished  to  us  by  God  himself. — Y, 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  Vn. 
Thb  Fbiebt  after  the  Obdeb  or  Mel- 

CHIZEDEE. 

The  exposition  of  Christ's  heavenly  priest- 
hood is  now  at  length  taken  up  and  carried 
out.  It  extends  to  ch.  x.  19,  forming  the 
central  part  of  tlio  whole  Epistle ;  and  in 
the  course  of  it  is  set  forth  also  how  the 
whole  Jewish  economy  did  in  fact  only 
prefigure  and  prepare  for  this  one  availing 
priesthood  of  the  true  High  Priest  of 
mankind.  The  peculiar  thesis  of  ch.  vii.  is 
"  after  the  order  of  Melohizedek,"  the  ques- 
tion being— What  is  signified  by  this  desig- 
nation of  the  Messiah  in  the  hundred  and 
tenth  psalm?  The  remarkable  import  of 
that  psalm,  in  that  it  assigns  priesthood  as 
well  as  royalty  to  the  Son,  was  noted  under 
ch.  V.  6.  His  being  Priest  at  all  implies  a 
different  order  of  royalty  from  that  of  the 
theocratic  kings.  But  what  further  is 
aieant  by  his  priesthood  being  after  the 
order,  not  of  Aaron,  but  of  Melohizedek? 
Is  it  that  Melohizedek,  being  King  of  Salem 
as  well  as  priest  of  the  most  high  God,  is 
therefore  selected  as  the  most  suitable  type 
of  the  great  Priest-King  to  come?  Yes; 
but  there  is  more  in  it  than  this,  as  the 
writer  goes  on  to  show.  To  get  at  the  full 
import  of  the  expression  in  the  psalm,  he 
analyzus  what  we  are  told  about  Melchizedek 
in  Gen.  xiv.  (the  only  other  passage  from 
which  anything  is  known  of  him),  and 
considers  what  could  be  meant  in  the  psalm 
by  "a  priest  after  his  order,"  and  that  "  for 
ever."  Both  the  actual  history  and  the 
ideal  of  the  psalm  are  in  his  view  together ; 
and  from  the  two  combined  he  deduces  the 
intended  idea  of  "a  priest  for  ever  after 
the  order  of  Melohizedek." 

Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  shall  havs  no 


need  to  understand  anything  implied  as  to 

Melohizedek  himself  beyond  what  we  leam 
from  Genesis.  Some  commentators,  on  the 
strength  of  what  is  here  said  of  him,  have 
supposed  him  to  have  been  some  super- 
human being ;  and  many  theories  have  been 
propounded  as  to  who  and  what  he  was.  All 
such  views  have  arisen  from  a  misconception 
of  our  writer's  drift ;  from  regarding  the  re- 
presentation of  the  ideal  which  Melohizedek 
typified  as  part  of  the  account  of  what  he 
actually  was,  the  actual  and  the  ideal  being, 
in  fact,  somewhat  blended  in  the  exposition. 
That  no  more  is  implied  about  the  man 
himself  than  what  is  recorded  in  Genesis 
may  be  ooncluJed,  not  only  from  the  purport 
(rightly  understood)  of  the  passage  before 
us,  but  also  from  the  analogy  of  the  re.st  of 
the  Epistle, throughout  which  the  arguments 
are  based  on  the  contents  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment itself,  as  it  was  read  and  received 
by  the  Hebrew  Christians.  For  example, 
neither  Dayid,  nor  Solomon,  nor  Isaiah  are 
adduced  as  having  been  other  than  what 
the  sacred  record  represents  them  to  have 
been,  though  it  is  shown  that  what  is  said 
of  them  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy  points  to 
an  ideal  beyond  them. 

Vers.  1—3.— For  this  Melohizedek,  King  of 
Salem,  priest  of  the  most  high  Qod,  who  met 
Abraham  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the 
kings,  and  blessed  him ;  to  whom  also  Abra- 
ham divided  a  tenth  part  of  all  (this  descrip- 
tion belongs  to  the  subject  of  the  sentence, 
being  merely  a  recapitulation  of  the  facts 
recorded  in  Genesis,  the  language  of  tlje 
LXX.  being  used;  what  follows  belongs 
properly  to  the  predicate,  being  of  the 
nature  of  a  comment  on  the  facts  recorded) ; 
first,  being  by  interpretation  King  of  right- 
eousness (which  is  the  meaning  of  the  name 
Melchizedek),  and  then  also  ^ig  of  Salem, 
which  is,  King  of  peace  (the  very  names  of 
himself  and  his  kingdom  are  significant 
(cf.  Ps.  Ixxxv.  10:  Ixxii.  3;  Isa.  xxxii  17; 


184 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  yh.  1—28, 


Bom.  T.  I ;  where  righteousness  and  peace 
are  the  eharaoteristios  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom):  this  significance,  however,  is 
not  afterwards  made  a  point  of,  being  merely 
noticed  by  the  way);  without  father,  without 
mother,  without  genealogy,  having  neither 
beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life ;  but  made 
like  unto  the  Son  of  Ood ;  abideth  a  priest 
oontinnally.  It  is  this  language  especially 
that  has  been  supposed  to  involve  something 
more  t)ian  human  about  the  historical  Hel- 
chizedek.  But  we  have  only  to  enter  into 
the  mind  of  the  writer  to  see  that  it  is  not 
so.  For  it  is  the  ideal  of  the  psalm,  con- 
ceived as  suggested  by  the  historical  type, 
that  gives  its  ooloar  to  the  language  used. 
And,  indeed,  how  strangely  suggestive  is 
that  fragment  about  the  priestly  king  (Gen. 
xiv.  18 — 21)  80  unexpectedly  iuterposed  in 
tlie  life  of  Abraham  I  In  the  midst  of  a 
history  in  which  such  a  point  is  made  of 
the  parentage  and  descent  of  the  patriarchs 
of  Israel,  at  a  time  of  peculiar  glory  of  the 
first  and  greatest  of  them,  one  suddenly 
appears  on  the  scene,  a  priest  and  king, 
not  of  the  peculiar  race  at  all,  his  parentage 
and  ancestry  unrecorded  and  unknown,  who 
blesses  and  receives  tithes  from  Abraham, 
and  then  as  suddenly  disappears  from  view. 
We  hear  no  more  of  him;  as  about  his 
origin,  so  about  his  end.  Scripture  is  silent. 
And  so  he  "  abides  "  before  the  mind's  eye, 
apart  firom  any  before  or  after,  the  type  of 
an  unchanging  priesthood.  For  the  mean- 
ing of  the  word  a76i'coA((7j)Tos  (in  itself 
denoting  the  absence,  not  of  ancestors,  but 
of  a  traced  genealogy),  of.  ver.  6,  d  5^  fiii 
yivfoXoyb^jiiVQS  e|  awrwi'.  That  of  hm6.Tap^ 
hljefiTuip,  is  illustrated  by  the  Latin  ex- 
pression, "  NuUis  majoribus  ortas."  On 
"made  like  {i/ioioi/ievos)  unto  the  Son  of 
God,"  Chrysostom  says,  "  We  know  of  no 
beginning  or  end  in  either  case ;  in  the  one, 
because  none  are  recorded;  in  the  other, 
because  they  do  not  exist."  The  idea 
seems  to  be  that  Melchizedek  is  thus  assimi- 
lated to  Christ  in  the  sacred  record,  by  what 
it  leaves  untold  no  less  than  by  what  it 
tells.  It  is  not  said  that  he  is  like  him 
(6iio(os),  but  made  like  ( i/xow^/ievoy) ;  i.e. 
represented  in  such  wise  as  to  resemble  him. 
It  may  be  here  remarked  that,  though  the 
term  "  Son  of  God "  is  used  in  the  Epistle 
generally  to  denote  the  Messiah  as  mani- 
fested in  time,  his  essential  eternal  being 
is  here,  as  elsewhere,  distinctly  intimated; 
also  that  "the  Son  of  God"  is  regarded  as 
the  archetype  of  the  comparison:  "Non 
dicitur  Filius  Dei  assimilatus  Melchizedeko, 
sed  contra ;  nam  Filius  Dei  est  antiquior  et 
•lehetypus  "  (Bengel). 

Ver.  4. — Now  consider  how  great  this  man 
was,  unto  whom  Abraham,  the  patriarch, 
evea  garf   •  tenth  of  the   spoil*.     The 


typical  significance  of  Melchizedek  i*  now 
further  seen  in  what  passed  between  him 
and  Abraham,  in  respect  to  tithe  and  bless- 
ing, Alford's  inference,  that  mjA^Kos  oBtos, 
referring  as  it  does,  not  to  the  antitype,  but 
to  the  man  himself,  implies  some  mysterious 
greatness  beyond  what  appears  in  the'ori- 
ginal  record,  does  not  follow.  Of  one  who 
simply  blessed  and  received  tithes  from  the 
great  patriarch,  the  expression  is  not  too 
strong.  Observe  the  emphatic  position,  at 
the  end  of  the  Greek  sentence,  of  i  n-arpi- 
ipxnh  equivalent  to  "he,  the  patriarch." 
Abraham's  being  this,  the  father  and  repre- 
sentative of  the  chosen  race,  is  what  Is 
shown  in  what  follows  to  give  peculiar  sig- 
nificance to  the  transaction.  The  word  avpo- 
6ivia  (properly,  "  the  chief  spoils  "),  which 
is  not  in  the  LXK.,  seems  introduced  to 
enhance  the  picture :  "  Quae  Abrahami  pro- 
prie  fuerant,  nt  victoris  "  (Bengel). 

Vers.  5 — 7. — ^And  they  indeed  of  the  sons 
of  Levi  who  receive  the  office  of  priesthood 
have  oonunandment  to  receive  tithes  of  the 
people  according  to  the  Law,  that  is,  of  their 
brethren,  though  these  have  come  out  of  the 
loins  of  Abraham ;  but  he  whose  genealogy 
is  not  counted  from  them  hath  received  tithes 
of  Abraham.  As  much  as  to  say,  "  Let  it 
not  be  said  that  the  tithing  of  Abraham  by 
Melchizedek  implies  no  higher  priestly  pre- 
rogative than  the  tithing  of  Abraham's  de- 
scendants by  the  sons  of  Aaron ;  for  there 
is  this  difference  :  They,  in  virtue  only 
of  a  special  ordinance  of  the  Law,  not  of 
original  right,  were  allowed  to  tithe  their 
brethren,*  though  descended  from  the  same 
great  ancestor;  he,  though  not  of  them  or 
of  the  race  at  all,  in  virtue  of  his  own  in- 
herent dignity,  tithes  the  whole  race  as 
represented  in  its  patriarch."  (We  observe 
how,  in  place  of  the  aorist  cSoikc,  used  when 
the  mere  historical  incident  was  referred  to, 
we  have  here  the  perfect  ScSckiCtiuke  (as  also 
(i\6yriKe  in  what  follows,  and  SeSeKtiraiTiu  in 
ver.  9),  denoting  a  completed  act,  of  which 
the  effects  and  significance  remain ;  Mel- 
chizedek, who  represents  the  priesthood  after 
his  order,  being  viewed  in  permanent  rela- 
tion to  Abraham,  who  represents  the  chosen 
race.)  And  hath  blessed  him  that  hath  (t.e. 
the  holder  of)  the  promises.  But,  without 
all  controversy,  the  less  is  blessed  of  the 
better.     The  superiority  evidenced  by  be- 

'  There  is  no  essential  inaccuracy  in  what 
is  said  here  with  respect  to  the  law  of  tithes, 
viz.  that  the  priests  received  them  from  the 
people.  The  Levites,  in  fact,  received  them 
of  the  other  tribes,  and  paid  a  tithe  of  their 
tithes  to  the  priests  (Numb.  xvii.  24,  26 — 
28 ;  Neh.  x.  38).  The  priests  thus  received 
them  virtually  from  the  people,  though  not 
directly  at.  their  hand*. 


OH.   Til.  1 — i8.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


185 


stowal  of  blesring  no  less  than  by  receiving 
of  titbe  haying  been  thus  noticed,  the  con- 
trast  with  the  Levitical  priesthood  is  con- 
tinued in  the  following  verses. 

Yer.  8. — And  here  (in  the  case  of  the 
Levitical  priesthood)  men  that  die  (literally, 
dying  men)  receive  tithes ;  but  there  (in  the 
case  of  Melchizedek)  one  of  whom  it  is 
witnessed  that  he  liveth.  The  difference 
here  noted  is  between  a  succession  of  mortal 
priests  and  one  perpetually  living,  who  never 
loses  his  personal  claim,  which  is  inherent  in 
himself.  But  how  so  of  Melchizedek  ?  For 
it  is  to  him,  and  not  to  Christ  the  Antitype, 
that  the  words  evidently  apply.  Is  it  at 
length  implied  that  he  was  more  than  mortal 
man  ?  No,  if  only  for  this  reason ;  that  the 
witness  appealed  to  (jmpTvpoip.ivoi)  must  be 
that  of  Scripture,  which  nowhere  bears  such 
witness  of  the  Mstorical  Melchizedek.  The 
words,  ij.aprvpo6^5ios  Sre  ^,  are,  in  .fact,  only 
a  resumption  of  what  was  said  in  ver.  3: 
"  having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end 
of  life;"  and  bear  the  same  meaning;  viz. 
(as  above  explained)  that  he  passes  befcjre 
our  view  in  Genesis  with  no  mention  of 
either  death,  birth,  or  ancestry,  and  thus 
presented  the  ideal  of  "  a  priest  for  ever  "  to 
the  inspired  psalmist.  The  witness  referred 
to  is  that  of  the  record  in  Genesis,  viewed  in 
the  light  of  the  idea  of  the  psalm. 

Vers.  9,  10. — And,  so  to  say,  through 
Abraham  even  Levi,  who  receiveth  tithes, 
hath  paid  tithes.  For  he  was  yet  in  the 
loins  of  Ms  father,  when  Melchizedek  met 
him.  Or,  in  other  words,  "  Nay,  further, 
Melchizedek  may  be  said  to  have  tithed 
Levi  himself  and  his  priestly  tribe."  For, 
inasmuch  as  the  whole  position  of  Levi  and 
his  tribe,  in  the  old  dispensation,  came  by 
inheritance  from  the  great  patriarch  who 
received  the  promises,  the  subordination  of 
the  patriarch  to  one  above  himself  involved 
that  of  all  who  so  inherited.  It  is  not 
simply  the  physical  descent  of  Levi  from 
Abraham,  but  the  peculiar  position  of  the 
latter  as  "  the  patriarch,"  that  justifies  the 
assertion  that  Levi  paid  tithes  tldrough  him. 
And  thus,  while  we  remember  how  Abraham 
is  elsewhere  viewed  in  Scripture  as  the 
representative  of  the  chosen  people,  and 
also  how  the  lives  of  individual  patriarchs 
(notably  so  in  the  case  of  Jacob  and  Esau) 
are  so  told  and  referred  to  as  to  prefigure 
the  positions  and  fortunes  of  the  races  they 
represent,  we  may  recognize  in  this  asser- 
tion no  mere  rabbinical  fancy,  but  an  in- 
terpretation true  to  the  spirit  of  the  Old 
Testament.  Be  it  further  observed  that  the 
original  significance  of  Abraham's  action  as 
bearing  upon  his  descendants  is  enhanced 
by  the  fact  that,  while  it  was  after  the  re- 
ceiving of  the  promise,  it  was  before  the 
birth  of  Tsaaot    He,  and  oonsequentlv  his 


descendant  Levi,  was  yet  (?ti)  in  the  loins 
of  Abraham ;  on  which  point,  "  Proles  e  pa- 
rentis potestate  egressa  in  suam  venit  tute- 
1am :  sed  quoad  in  parentis  potestate,  imo  in 
lumbis  est,  illius  conditionem  sequitur" 
(Bengel). 

Vers.  11,  12. — If  then  peifeotion  (reXft- 
mffis  :  cf.  ovSev  yiip  ireXelaiiTev  S  viftos)  were 
through  the  Levitical  priesthood  (for  under  it 
(rather,  upon  it,  on  the  ground  of  it)  the 
people  hath  received  the  Law),  what  need 
was  there  that  another  (rather,  a  different) 
priest  should  rise  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chizedek, and  not  be  called  after  the  order 
of  Aaron?  For  the  priesthood  being 
changed,  there  is  made  of  necessity  a 
change  also  of  the  Law.  Here  a  further 
thought  is"  introduced.  So  far  the  supe- 
riority of  the  priesthood  after  the  order  of 
Melphizedek  to  the  Aaronio  has  been  shown, 
The  new  thought  is  that  the  very  mention 
in  the  psalm  of  a  different  order  of  priest- 
hood implies  that  the  old  order,  and  with 
it  the  whole  legal  dispensation  which  de- 
pended on  it,  was  imperfect  and  to  be  super- 
seded. This  is  the  general  drift  of  vers.  11, 
12,  though  the  sequence  of  thought  in  their 
several  clauses  is  not  easy  to  follow.  Ideas 
in  the  writer's  mind,  not  expressed,  seem 
necessary  to  be  understood.  In  the  paren- 
thetical clause  of  ver.  11,  iv'  outjji  and 
reiio/jLoSsTriTai  are  decidedly  to  be  preferred^ 
on  the  ground  of  authority,  to  iir'  ourp  and 
ytyojuoSETTjTo  of  the  I'extus  Keeeptus,  The 
meaning  of  the  clause  (whatever  be  the 
precise  thought  connecting  it  with  the  sen- 
tence in  which  it  stands)  is  that  the  whole 
Law  rested  on  the  institution  of  the  priest- 
hood ;  not  the  priests  only,  but  the  whole 
people  (4  \obs)f  received  their  Law  as 
grounded  on  it  On  the  same  idea  de- 
pends ver.  12,  where  it  is  said  that  a 
change  of  the  priesthood  involves  of  neces- 
sity a  change  of  the  Law. 

The  verses  next  following  serve  to  remove 
all  doubt  that  there  is  a  complete  change  of 
the  priesthood;  the  proofs  being,  not  only 
the  patent  fact  that  the  Messiah  is  of  the 
tribe,  not  of  Levi,  but  of  Judah  (vers.  13, 
14),  but  also,  for  more  abundant  evidence  of 
the  Divine  purpose,  that  significant  utter- 
ance, again  adduced,  about  his  being  after 
the  order,  not  of  Aaron,  but  of  Melchizedek 
(vers.  15, 16, 17). 

Vers.  13,  14. — For  he  of  whom  these 
things  are  spoken  pertaineth  to  (/teTe'o-xiKec : 
literally,  hath  partalcen  of;  cf.  /iereVxej  ch. 
ii.  14,  with  reference,  as  there,  to  Christ's 
assumption  of  humanity)  another  tribe,  of 
which  no  man  hath  (ever)  given  attendance 
at  the  altar.  For  it  is  evident  that  ooi  Lord 
hath  spmngr  ont  of  Jndah ;  as  to  which  tribe 


IM 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


[ciL  th.  1—28. 


Kosea  spake  notbin^  oonoernlng  priesthood 
(orprieett;  Itptuv  bei  ig  a  better-supported 
reading  than  the  Textus  Beceptua  Upa- 
aivTis).  Thil  is  spoken  of  as  evident  {i.e. 
plain  to  all,  irpiSriXoi'),  not  only  because  of 
the  well-known  prophecies  that  tlie  Messiah 
was  to  spring  froin  David,  but  still  more  (as 
is  shown  by  the  perfect  hvaThaTMev,  point- 
ing to  an  accomplished  fact,  and  by  the 
expression,  i  Kipms  tiiimv)  because  Jesus, 
lecognized  by  all  Christians  as  the  Messiah, 
was  known  to  have  so  sprung.  For  it  is  to 
Christian  believers,  with  whatever  Jewish 
prejudices,  not  to  unbelieving  Jews,  tliat 
the  Epistle  is  addressed.  It  is  important 
to  observe  that  the  Bavidic  descent  of  our 
Lord  is  spoken  of  as  an  acknowledged  fact, 
not  merely  ai  an  inference  from  prophecy. 
"We  have  here  a  most  significant  proof 
that  the  descent  of  Jesus  from  the  tribe  of 
Judah  was  a  well  and  universally  known 
fact  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem " 
(Ebrard).  "lUo  igitur  tempore  nulla  diffi- 
cultate  laborabat  genealogia  Jesu  Christi  : 
et  hoc  ipsum  difficultatibus  postea  exortis 
abunde  medetur  ""(Bengel).  The  verb  apa- 
rh-oKKiv  may  have  been  specially  suggested 
by  the  prophetic  figure  of  the  Branch  from 
J^he  root  of  Jesse  (see  Isa.  zi.  1 ;  and  Zech. 
iii.  8;  vi.  12,  where  the  LXX.  has  draroA)) 
for  'Branch:'  'AcaroAJ)  tvofxa  airS),Ka\  vTroxd- 
raSev  ouToB  &vaTt\u) ;  though  the  figure  of 
the  sunrise  is  more  frequently  meant  by  the 
word  when  applied  to  Christ's  appearance 
(cf  Numb.  xxiv.  17 ;  Isa.  Ix.  1 ;  Mai.  iv.  2  ; 
Luke  i.  78). 

Vers.  15 — 17. — ^And  it  b  yet  more  abun- 
dantly evident  (i.e.  the  proposition  of  ver.'12), 
if  after  the  likeness  of  Melohizedek  there 
ariseth  another  Priest,  who  is  made,  not  after 
the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  after 
the  power  of  an  endless  (indissoluble)  life. 
For  it  is  testified  (of  him),  Thou  art  a  Priest 
for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 
This  is  a  resumption  of  what  has  been  al- 
ready seen,  put  so  as  to  be  effective  for  the 
present  stage  of  the  argument.  The  old 
priesthood,  and  consequently  the  Law,  is 
changed  and  superseded,  not  only  because 
the  Priest  of  the  new  order  of  things  is  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah,  but  still  more  evidently 
because  his  priesthood  is  witnessed  to  as 
being  one  of  a  different  kind,  and  of  a  kind 
so  much  higher  and  diviner.  It  is  evident 
that  the  Antitype  of  Melchizedek,  the  subject 
of  the  hundred  and  tenth  psalm,  rather  than 
Melchizedek  himself,  suggests  here  the  lan- 
guage used.  (Observe  the  contrasts  between 
vofi6p  and  S^ra/iii^,  ffapKiKTJs  and  dKaTakuTov, 
ivToKris  and  ^<u?i.  The  idea  of  ch.  ix. 
8 — 15  is  in  these  few  pregnant  words  briefly 
anticipated,  after  the  manner  of  the  Epistle.) 

Vers.  18, 19. — For  there  is  verily  a  dis- 
lumnlling  of  the  oommandment  going  before 


for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  thereof 
(for  the  Law  made  nothing  perfect);  but 
[there  is  on  the  other  hand]  a  bringing  in 
thereupon  of  a  better  hope,  through  which 
we  draw  nigh  unto  God.  Such  is  certainly 
the  construction  of  the  sentence  (not  as  in 
tlie  A. v.);  ohSev  yhp,  etc.,  in  ver.  19  being 
parenthetical,  and  iirn(ra.yayi)  depending  on 
ylverai  in  ver.  18.  We  have  here  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  argument  of  the  vers.  11 — 18,  with 
a  further  expression  of  the  inherent  insuf- 
ficiency of  the  Law,  given  as  the  reason  of 
its  supersession ;  reminding  us  of  similar 
views  of  what  the  Law  was  worth  frequent 
in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  (cf.  Rom.  viii.  3; 
Oal.  iii.  10,  etc.).  The  final  clause,  Si'  ^s 
iyyiConei/  Tp  Bty,  leads  directly  up  to  the 
main  subject 'in  the  writer's  view,  viz.  the 
exposition  of  Chribt's  eternal  priesthood. 
But  two  proofs  are  first  to  be  given  of 
Christ's  priestliood  being,  unlike  the 
Aaronic,  thus  eternally  availing  to  bring  us 
near  to  God.  These  proofs  are  to  be  found 
in  the  Divine  oath  which  established  it, 
and  the  expression,  "  for  ever,"  in  Ps.  xc, 
once  more  adduced. 

Vers.  20 — 22. — And  inasmuch  as  not  with- 
out an  oath  [properly,  swearing  of  an  oath, 
dpKa/j.oa-las']  he  was  made  priest :  (for  they  in- 
deed have  been  made  priests  withont  an  oath; 
but  he  with  an  oath  by  Iiitii  that  saith  unto 
him,  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever);  by  so 
much  of  a  better  covenant  hath  Jesus  be- 
come surety.  The  significance  of  the  Divine 
oath,  in  connection  with  the  promise  to 
Abraham,  has  been  dwelt  on  above:  the 
oath  of  Ps.  ex.  is  here  similarly  referred  to, 
as  imitating  a  priesthood  that  rests  on  no 
mere  temporary  ordinance,  but  on  the  im- 
mutable Divinecounsels.  (Observe  the  first 
occurrence  here  of  the  word  Siofl^/o),  intro- 
ducing iu  the  way  of  hint  (as  is  usual  in 
the  Epistle)  an  idea  to  be  afterwards  ex- 
pandeil,  as  it  is  in  oh.  viii.  and  ix.  The 
meaning  of  the  word  will  be  considered 
below.) 

Vers.  23,  24. — And  they  indeed  have  been 
made  priests  many  in  number,  because  of 
being  by  death  hindered  from  continuing. 
But  he,  because  of  his  abiding  for  ever,  hath 
his  priesthood  unchangeable.  This  second 
point  of  contrast  has  already  been  twice 
touched  on — ver.  8,  with  respect  to  the  claim 
to  tithe ;  and  ver.  16,  with  respect  to  the 
order  of  priesthood :  here  it  is  with  especial 
reference  to  the  eternal  personality,  and 
hence  the  perpetual  and  complete  efficiency, 
of  oui-  one  Priest.  The  repetitions  are  not 
tautological,  having  each  time  difierent 
bearings.  The  contrast  here,  as  before,  is 
between  mortal  men  who  succeed  each  other 
in  the  office  of  priesthood,  and  One  who  has 
the  office  inherent  in  himself  for  ever.  The 
word    knapi^aToii   (translated    **  unobange. 


cH.  vn.  1—28.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


181 


able")  it  taken  by  iom©  in  an  intransitive 
Bense,  as  in  margin  of  the  A.V.,  that  doth 
not  pais  to  another,  equivalent  to  aSiiioxov- 
Tliis,  however,  is  not  the  proper  force  of 
this  late  Greek  word,  nor  does  the  sense  of 
the  passage  of  necessity  require  it. 

Ver.  25. — 'Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to 
save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto 
God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercessioa  for  them.  "We  again  observe 
how,  at  tlio  end  of  successive  stages  of  the 
argument,  thoughts  to  be  enlarged  on  after- 
wards are  brought  in.  Here  it  is  the  per- 
petual intercession  of  Christ  before  the 
heavenly  mercy^-seat.  In  the  view  of  his 
office  thus  arrived  at  there  is,  in  fact,  a 
transition  to  the  main  subject  set  forth  in 
the  three  chapters  that  follow ;  viz.  the  ful- 
filment in  Christ  of  the  ceremonial  of  tlje 
Law,  and  especially  of  the  high  priest's 
intercession  on  tlie  Day  of  Atonement.  And 
thus  from  Melchizcdek  the  train  of  thought 
passes  to  the  high  priest.  The  type  of  Ihe 
former  has  been  sufficiently  shown  to  be  ful- 
filled in  the  higher  order  of  Christ's  priest- 
hood ;  it  is  now  to  be  shown  how,  being  of 
such  higher  older,  it  is  the  antitype  of  the 
Aaronio  prie&thood  too,  accomplishing  what 
it  signified.  Hence  in  ver.  2G  the  word 
"high  priest"  (ctpx'fp^f's)  is  for  the  first 
time  introduced,  as  the  key-note  of  what  is 
coming. 

Swnmary  of  the  foregoing  argument. 

I.  (ch.  v.  1 — 11.)  What  does  the  Melchlze- 

dek  priesthood  of  Ps.  ex.  signify  ? 
1.  (vers.  1 — 4.)    One  not  depending  on 

human  ancestry,  and   one  for  ever 

abiding. 
S.  (vers.  4 — 11.)    One  of  a  higher  order 

than  that  of  Aaron ;  for : 

(1)  Melchizcdek,  being  of  a  race  apart, 
received  titlie  from  Abraham  the 
patriardh. 

(2)  Tills  denotes  a  higher  position  than 
that  of  the  Aaronic  priests,  who 
tithed  their  brethren  of  the  same 
race  with  themselves,  in  virtue  only 
of  a  special  ordinance. 

(3)  The  hUssing  of  Abraham  by  Mel- 
chizcdek is  similarly  significant. 

(4)  The  idea'  of  an  ever-living  priest 
with  a  right  to  tithe  transcends  that 
of  the  temporary  claims  of  a  succes- 
sion of  dying  men. 

(5)  Levi  himself  virtually  paid  tithe 
to  Melchizedek. 

IL  (vers.  11 — 18.)  The  Aaronic  priesthood, 
and  with  it  the  whole  dispensation 
based  upon  it,  is  thus  shown  to  have 
been  imperfect  and  transitory ;  for : 
L  Otherwise  a  priesthood  of  another 
order  would  not  h»ve  been  spoken  of 
hPi-ox. 


S.  Which  priesthood  is  evidently  distinct 
from  the  Aaronio,  our  Lord  being  of 
the  tribe,  not  of  Levi,  but  of  Judali. 

9.  What  has  been  seen  (vers.  5  and  8) 
as  to  the  Melchizedek  priesthood 
being  not  "  after  the  law  of  a  carnal 
commandment,  but  after  the  power 
of  an  endless  life,"  makes  this  "  more 
abundantly  evident." 

Conclusion  (vers.  18 — 20).  The  Aaronio 
priesthood  (being  in  itself  unprofit- 
able) is  therefore  now  superseded  by 
an  availing  one,  "  through  which  we 
draw  nigh  unto  God." 
IIL  (Vers.  20—26.)  Christ's  priesthood  i$ 
thus  availing ;  for  : 

1.  The  Divine  oath  (Fs.  ex.)  established 
it,  marking  it  as  resting  on  the 
eternal  Divine  counsels. 

S.  It  is  (as  shown  by  the  same  psalm) 
"  unchangeable."  The  one  Priest 
abides  for  ever. 

Conelusion  (ver.  25).  We  have,  therefore, 
in  him  at  last,  a  perfectly  availing 
and  eternal  interceding  High  Priest. 

Ver.  26. — Jor  such  a  High  Priest  became 
ns,  holy,  harmless,  undefined,  separated  from 
sinners,  and  made  higher  than  the  heavens. 
Such  a  High  Priest,  it  is  said,  for  us  was 
fitting.  The  same  word  eTrpeire  was  used  in 
ch.  ii.  10,  where  the  humiliation  of  Christ 
was  spoken  of.  It  was  there  said  that  tc 
make  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  perfect 
through  suffering  "became"  God — was 
befitting  to  what  we  conceive  of  the  Divine 
nature.  It  is  now  said  that  our  High 
Priest's  being  such  as  is  here  described 
"  became "  us — was  befitting  to  our  state 
and  needs.  That  he  should  be  both  human 
and  superhuman  was  in  all  respects  fitting — 
the  one  that  he  might  be  our  sympathizing 
brother;  the  other  that  his  intercession 
might  avail.  The  further  description  of  him 
in  tills  verse  is  suggested  by  the  qualifica- 
tions of  the  Aaronio  high  priest,  what  they 
typified  being  realized  in  Christ.  The  high 
priest  was  by  his  consecration  a  holy  person, 
ayios  (Lev.  ixi.  6,  8,  etc.) ;  he  bore  on  his 
mitre  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  (Exod.  xxxix. 
30) ;  he  must  be  without  personal  blemish 
(Lev.  xxi.  17,  etc.) ;  he  must  keep  himseU 
continually  from  all  ceremonial  pollution 
(Lev.  xxi.  and  xxii.) ;  he  must  purify  him- 
self by  a  sacrifice  for  himself  and  by  special 
ablutions  before  entering  the  holy  of  holioe 
(Lev.  xvi.);  when  there,  he  was  conceived 
as  in  God's  presence,  apart  from  the  world 
of  sinners  outside.  Christ  was  not  only 
£7105,  but  hffios,  personally  and  inwardly 
holy  (Christians  in  the  New  Testament  are 
all  called  07(01,  but  not  all  dcrioi :  for  the 
use  (if  which  word,  cf.  Titus  i.  8 ;  Acts  ii. 
27 ;  xiiL  84,  where  it  is  applied  to  Christ, 


188 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  vn.  1—28. 


rbv  iaiov  aovx  and  Rer.  XT.  4 — XTi.  5,  where 
it  is  applied  to  God  as  hia  special  attribute, 
3ti  iiivos  iaios);  Christ  was  actually  free 
from  evil  (ixaKos)  and  nndefiled  {6.)i.lav 
Tos)  by  any  contact  of  sin;  and  as  such 
he  baa  passed  to  God's  actual  presence  (of. 
8£eA.6Ai50OTa  to^s  ovpavohst  ch.  iv.  14),  se- 
parted  for  ever  from  the  world  of  sinners. 

Ver.  27. — Who  needeth  not  daily,  as  those 
high  priests,  to  offer  np  sacrifice,  first  for  his 
own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people's :  for  this 
he  did  once,  for  all,  when  he  offered  np  him- 
self. The  expression  "  daily  "  (woe'  iniipav) 
is  not  in  strictness  applicable  to  the  high 
priest,  who  did  not  offer  the  daily  sacrifice. 
The  reference  throughout  what  follows  being 
to  the  high  priest's  peculiar  functions  on 
the  Day  of  Atonement,  Ktn'  iviaurSv  might 
have  been  expected.  There  are  two  tenable 
solutions :  (1)  that  the  daily  offerings  of 
the  priests  are  regarded  as  made  by  the 
high  priest,  who  represented  the  whole 
priesthood,  on  the  principle,  qui  facit  per 
mlios  facit  per  te ;  (2)  that  KaB'  Tuiepiw  (as 
is  suggested  by  its  position  in  the  sentence) 
belongs  not  to  ot  apx'epfis,  but  only  to 
Christ :  "  who  has  no  need  daily,  as  the  high 
priests  have  yearly : "  for  his  intercession 
being  perpetual,  an  offering  on  his  part 
would  be  needed  daily,  if  needed  at  all. 
This  view  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the 
daily  sacrifices  are  not  spoken  of  in  the  Law 
as  including  a  special  one  in  the  first  place 
for  the  priest's  own  sin.  "This  he  did." 
Did  what?  Offer  for  his  own  sins  as  well 
as  for  the  people's  ?  Ko ;  for,  though  it  has 
been  seen  above  (eh.  v.  7)  how  the  high 
priest's  offering  for  himself  might  have  its 
counterpart  in  the  agony,  the  Sinless  One 
cannot  be  said  to  have  offered  for  sins  of 
liis  own.  And,  besides,  he  having  offered 
himself  (louTiK  anenyKas),  the  offering  could 
not  M  /or  himself.    We  nuut,  therefore. 


take  "this  he  did  "  ai  referring  only  to  the 
latter  part  of  the  preceding  clause,  while 
iavrby  "npofrfviyKas  answers  to  the  fonneir 
part;  or  as  implying  generally,  "did  all 
that  was  needed  for  atonement." 

Ver.  28. — For  the  Law  maketh  men  high 
priests,  having  infirmity;  hut  the  word  of 
the  oath,  which  was  after  the  law,  maketh 
the  Son,  perfected  for  evermore.  With  men 
(i.e.  a  succession  of  men ;  of.  ver.  8)  having 
infirmity  is  contrasted  the  one  Son,  for  ever 
perfected.  Tlie  absence  of  the  article  before 
vihs  does  not  imply  the  meaning  "  a  son ; " 
the  title  denotes  here,  as  throughout  the 
Epistle,  the  peculiar  Son  of  prophecy  (see 
under  ch.  i.  1).  There  is  here  no  denial  of 
his  complete  humanity,  though  he  is  plainly 
regarded  as  more  than  man.  Nor  is  his 
participation  in  human  aaBevna,  in  the  sense 
explained  under  ch.  v.,  denied.  His  implied 
freedom  from  it  may  mean  either  that  he 
never  had  any  inherent  in  himself,  none  due 
to  personal  imperfection,  or  that  now,  in  his 
exalted  state,  he  is  altogether  removed  from 
it.  In  both  these  senses  the  implication  is 
true ;  and  both  may  be  understood ;  but 
reT€\eia>fi4vov  being  here  opposed  to  t^ovras 
anBevelav  (as  v7ov  to  ivBpiirovs),  the  latter 
sense  may  be  conceived  to  have  been  espe- 
cially in  the  writer's  mind.  It  is,  in  fact,  our 
ever-living  High  Priest,  interceding  for  us 
above,  after  passing  through  human  experi- 
ence, and  after  atonement  completed,  that  is 
now  being  presented  to  our  view.  It  is  to 
be  observed,  lastly,  that  rere\imii4yov  in  this 
verse  may  be  intended  to  bear,  or  at  any  rate 
to  suggest,  the  special  sense  noted  under  ch. 
V.  9,  and  strenuously  maintained  by  Jackson, 
and  hence  to  be  not  incorrectly  rendered  by 
"conseotated"  in  the  A.V. ;  and  this  not- 
withstanding Alford's  protest  against  this 
rendering  as  "obliterating  both  lenie  and 
analogy  with  oh.  iL  10  and  T.  L" 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Mdchizedek.  The  author  here  returns  from  his  long  digression,  and 
enters  upon  the  central  theme  of  the  treatise. 

I.  What  we  know  about  Mblchizedek.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  1.  At  a  man.  (1)  From 
Scripture  statements.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  All  that  the  sacred  historian  records  of  him  is 
contained  in  three  verses  (Gen.  xiv.  18 — 20).  Yet  we  read  in  these,  as  in  the  passage 
before  us,  of  Melchizedek's  illustrious  personality,  his  twofold  office,  his  double  desig- 
nation, his  sudden  appearance,  his  priestly  blessing,  and  of  Abraham's  acknowledgment 
of  his  dignity.  (2)  From  Scripture  silence.  (Ver.  3.)  It  is  evident  that  the  writer 
believed  the  Old  Testament  to  be  inspired,  not  merely  in  its  general  drift,  but  also  in 
its  minutest  details.  He  is  persuaded  that  even  the  omissions  from  the  narrative  had 
been  arranged  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  From  this  passage,  therefore,  we  leam  our  duty,  not 
only  to  survey  the  Bible  in  its  broad  landscapes  of  truth,  and  to  study  its  general 
Btructuie  as  the  literary  record  of  a  supernatural  revelation,  but,  alongside  of  uiat,  to 
subject  Individual  passages,  as  we  have  opportunity,  to  microscopic  analymi.  "The 
omissions  about  Melchizodek  we  ao  important  that  Ter.  8  reads  almost  like  a  riddle. 


OH.  vn.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW*  189 

Such  omiisions  respecting  s  personage  so  exalted  are  contrary  to  Oriental  oustom. 
The  points  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  studiously  concealed  about  Melchizedek  are— 
his  personal  parentage,  his  priestly  pedigree,  and  the  dates  of  his  birth  and  death.  2. 
As  a  type.  (Ver.  3.)  The  brief  notice  of  Melchizedek  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  has 
been  framed  so  as  to  exhibit  in  him  as  striking  as  possible  a  prefiguration  of  Ohrist. 
Melchizedek  was  "  made  like  wnto  the  Son  of  Q-od,"  at  once  in  the  events  of  his  per- 
sonal career,  and  in  the  shape  given  to  the  Bible  narrative  respecting  him.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  both  "  King  of  righteousness  "  and  "  King  of  peace ; "  he  dispenses 
spiritual  peace  upon  a  basis  of  righteousness.  He  is  a  royal  Priest,  wearing  both  the 
mitre  and  the  diadem.  He  had  no  predecessor  in  his  office,  and  he  shall  have  no  suc- 
cessor. His  priesthood  is  of  older  date,  and  of  superior  dignity  to  that  of  LevL  In  all 
these  respects  Melchizedek  was  a  type  of  Christ. 

II.  The  supeeiobitt  of  Melohizedek'b  pbiesthood  to  the  LETrnoAii  fwbst- 
HOOD.  (Vers.  4 — 10.)  "Consider"  this,  says  the  apostle.  Although  the  theme  is 
recondite,  and  "  hard  of  interpretation  "  (ch.  v.  11),  it  deserves  careful  study,  since  it 
concerns  the  dignity  and  glory  of  the  Son  of  God  (Ps.  ex.  4).  1.  Melchizedek  i$ 
superior  to  Abraham,  th»  ancestor  of  the  Levitet.  (Vers.  4 — 7.)  No  Old  Testament 
name  is  more  illustrious  than  that  of "  Abraham,  the  patriarch ; "  no  heraldic  escutcheon 
could  boast  marks  of  greater  honour  than  that  which  bears  the  arms  of  "  the  father  of 
the  faithful  " — "the  friend  of  God."  Yet  we  see  this  venerated  founder  of  the  Hebrew 
nation  humbly  acknowledging  the  superiority  of  Melchizedek.  (1)  Abraham  paid 
tithes  to  him  (vers.  4 — 6).  Under  the  Levitical  law  tithes  were  due  from  the  people  to 
the  priests,  priests  and  people  being  brethren  by  race ;  but  here  we  have  a  Gentile 
pontiff  receiving  tithes  from  Abraham,  the  patriarch  offering  them  spontaneously.  (2) 
Melchizedek  pronounced  a  blessing  upon  Abraham  (vers.  6,  7).  This  also  implied 
Abraham's  spiritual  inferiority.  The  head  of  the  chosen  nation,  to  whom  God  had 
given  "  the  promises,"  stood  humbly  before  this  Hamite  priest  to  receive  his  blessing. 
2.  The  Levitical  priests  were  dying  men;  Melchizedek  appears  only  as  a  living  priest. 
(Ver.  8.)  Aaron  B  sons  obtained  the  sacerdotal  dignity  by  descent ;  they  died  and  suc- 
ceeded one  another.  But  Melchizedek's  priesthood  was  inherent  and  imderived.  He  is 
exhibited  on  the  inspired  page  only  as  a  living  priest,  in  order  that  his-  oCSce  may  the 
more  suitably  prefigure  the  intransferable  priesthood  of  Christ.  3.  2%e  Levitical  priests 
virtually  paid  tithes  to  Melchizedek.  (Vers.  9, 10.)  All  the  sacred  honour  with  which 
Aaron  and  his  sons  were  invested  was  derived  from  Abraham,  as  the  head  of  the  nation ; 
and  so,  when  Abraham  confessed  the  religious  superiority  of  Melchizedek,  the  long  line 
of  Aaronical  priests  may  in  a  sense  be  said  to  have  done  so  also. 

Learn  in  conclusion :  1.  The  unparalleled  majesty  and  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Abraham  was  greater  than  Aaron  ;  Melchizedek  was  greater  than  Abraham  ;  but  Christ 
is  infinitely  greater  than  Melchizedek.  2.  Christ's  priestly  benediction  is  more  effi- 
cacious than  that  of  Melchizedek.  He  has  been  sent  "  to  bless  us,  in  turning  away 
every  one  of  us  from  our  iniquities  "  (Acts  iiu  26).  3.  If  Abraham  gave  Melchizedek 
a  tithe  of  the  spoils,  should  not  we  dedicate  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christi  not  our  tithes 
only,  but  oar  all? 

Vers.  11 — 28. — Christ  greater  ihan  Aaron.  This  passage  is  really  just  a  commen- 
tary on  the  Old  Testament  oracle  contained  in  Ps.  ex.  4.  There  might  appropriately  be 
prefixed  to  it  as  a  motto  the  words,  "  Behold,  a  greater  than  Aaron  is  here." 

I.  The  iMPEEFEonoN  of  the  Levitioal  priesthood.  (Vers.  11—19.)  Aaron's 
mediation  could  not  satisfy  justice,  or  pacify  conscience,  or  sanctify  the  heart.  All  that 
it  could  do  was  to  exhibit  a  faint  adumbration  of  the  ideal  priesthood.  The  words  of 
Ps.  ox.  4  suggest  this  insufficiency,  for  they  contain  the  promise  of  the  Messianic 
priesthood.  1.  Jesus  was  of  other  descent.  (Vers.  11 — 14.)  He  belonged  to  the  tribe 
of  Judah ;  and  not,  like  Aaron's  sons,  to  the  ecclesiastical  tribe  of  Levi.  The  fact  of 
this  change  in  itself  proves  the  inefQcacy  of  the  hereditary  Hebrew  priesthood.  2.  Hit 
priesthood  is  of  everlasting  duration.  (Vers.  15 — 17.)  The  Jewish  priests  one  by  one 
succumbed  to  death ;  but  Jesus  Christ  is  himself  "  the  Life."  Life  resides  essentiiJly 
and  originally  in  him.  So  his  priesthood  is  abiding ;  his  official  dignity  remains  "  for 
ever."  From  this  it  follows  (vers.  18, 19)  that  the  Levitical  priesthood,  and  the  entire 
ceremonial  law  which  enshrined  it,  have  been  airnrmtcd;  and  in  their  stead  has  come 

'A 


190  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vn.  1—28. 

the  introduction  of  "a  better  hope '' — ^the  hope  of  an  efficient  priesthood,  of  a  dis- 
pensation both  spiritual  and  permanent,  and  thus  of  immediate  and  perfect  access 
to  God. 

II.  The  bupbeiomtt  of  Christ's  pbibsthood  to  the  Lbvitioal.  (Vers.  20 — 28.) 
Jesus  is  the  true  Priest  of  mankind,  for  whom  the  nations  have  been  waiting.  He  is 
the  Apostle  of  God  to  men,  and  the  prevailing  Intercessor  with  God  for  men.  This 
passage  reminds  us  how  infinitely  exalted  his  priesthood  is  above  that  of  Aaron.  1.  He 
was  consecrated  with  an  oath,  (Vers.  20 — 22.)  No  Levitioal  priest  was  installed  thus 
solemnly.  The  Divine  oath  shows  the  certainty  and  importance  and  immutability 
of  tlie  thini;  sworn.  It  reminds  us  that  the  priesthood  of  our  Lord  enters  into  the 
very  substance  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  2.  His  priesthood  is  intrans/eratle. 
(Vers.  23 — 25.)  The  Levitical  priesthood  had  this  defect,  that  it  required  to  be  con- 
veyed from  one  man  to  another.  But,  although  Christ  died,  his  death  did  not "  hinder 
him  from  continuing;"  it  did  not  even  temporarily  interrupt  the  exercise  of  his  priest- 
hood. For  he  died  voluntarily.  He  laid  himself  as  Victim  upon  the  altar.  And,  by 
dying,  he  conquered  death,  through  the  power  of  his  indissoluble  life.  So,  his  media- 
torial authority  is  intransferable.  3.  His  character  is  My.  (Ver.  26.)  The  Levitical 
priests  had  "  infirmity,"  and  needed  to  offer  sacrifices  first  for  their  own  sins.  Even  the 
most  pious  men  among  them  had  been,  of  course,  morally  imperfect ;  and  some  of  the 
high  priegts — such  as  Caiaphas — who  were  not  godly  men,  had  been  notorious  for  their 
wickedness.  But  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  confession"  has  a  pure  nature.  He  lived  on 
earth  a  stainless  life.  He  was  "  separated  from  sinners  ; "  t.e.  he  showed  on  every  side 
of  his  character  that  he  belonged  to  another  category  than  that  of  sinners.  And  his 
spotless  holiness  was  in  the  fullest  harmony  with  our  spiritual  need;  it  was,  indeed, 
indispensably  necessary,  and  in  eTery  way  most  "  becoming  "  and  beautiful,  in  relation 
to  us.  4.  His  sacrifice  Uperfedt.  (Vers.  27,  28.)  The  Jewish  priests  had  to  offer  up 
sacrifices  "  daUy " — "  the  same  sacrifices  year  by  year" — with  laborious  and  wearisome 
iteration.  But  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  in  itself  all-sufficient  to  expiate  guilt, 
cleanse  the  conscience,  and  purify  the  bouL  His  blood  has  virtue  to  atone,  for  it  is  the 
blood  of  God.  5.  He  minister$  in  the  real  sanctuary.  (Vers.  26,  28.)  Aaron's 
ministry  waa  carried  on  in  a  moving  tent  of  curtain-work  and  wood-work — ^a  tent,  too, 
which  seems  to  have  had  no  pavement  bnt  the  naked  ground.  His  successors,  likewise, 
served  in  what  was  at  best  a  perishable  "  sanctuary  of  this  world."  But  Jesus  now 
ministers  in  "  heaven  itself,"  the  most  holy  place  of  the  new  covenant.  (The  apostle 
emphasizes  this  point  in  ch.  viii.  1 — 6.) 

In  conclusion,  let  us  reflect  upon  this  central  thought  of  the  passage — the  immortal 
heavenly  life  of  our  High  Priest.  He  is  a  Divine  person ;  and  his  Divine  nature  is  the 
bans  of  hia  "  endless  life."    Hence  the  perfection  of  his  power  to  save. 

y«r.  25. — Salvation  to  the  utterTnost.  The  chief  point  in  this  verse  is  our  High 
Priest's  ability  to  save,  and  the  guarantee  which  his  perpetual  intercession  affordi 
regarding  that  ability.    What  does  this  continual  intercession  certify?    Pour  things. 

I.  He  has  the  ABiLiTT  OP  MERIT.  The  Saviour's  merit  arises  from  what  he  is, 
from  what  he  became,  and  from  what  he  has  done.  His  intercession  is  just  a  continual 
development  of  the  exhaustless  efficacy  of  his  life-work.  Our  Priest  is  the  eternal  Son 
of  God  clothed  in  human  nature.  His  work  on  earth  was  both  active  and  passive :  he 
obeyed  and  he  siifiered.  He  perfectly  fulfilled  the  Law,  and  he  fully  endured  the 
penalty  due  to  our  disobedience.  Upon  the  union  of  this  doing  and  dying  the  great 
structure  of  our  Intercessor's  ability  of  merit  is  sustained.  The  infinitude  of  his 
Divine  nature  invests  his  offering  with  boundless  value.  By  his  "obedience  unto 
death  "  he  sheathed  the  sword  of  justice  in  the  heart  of  mercy.  And,  when  he  had 
done  this,  he  went  boldly  up  to  heaven,  sprinkled  the  golden  altar  there  with  his  blood, 
and  took  his  place  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  The  fact  of  his  intercession  as  our 
risen  and  glorified  Saviour  shows  that  the  satisfaction  which  he  has  made  for  un  is 
perfect. 

n.  Hb  has  thb  abilitt  of  bioht.  A  true  priest  must  receive  his  appointment 
from  God.  So,  our  Lord's  session  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  is  in  itself  an 
evidence  of  the  validity  of  his  intercession.  We  know,  however,  that  Gcid  appointed 
him  to  hia  office  with  a  solemn  oath  (Ps.  ex.  4).    He  said  to  him,  on  the  day  when  be 


OH.  TH.  1—28.1  THE  EPISTLE  TO  1>   i  I  3BEEWa  191 


constituted  him  Priest-King,  "  Ask  of  me  "  (Pt,  k  S),  thus  expressly  authorizing  hii 
intercession.  We  cannot  famom  the  mystery  of  the  atonement ;  but  it  is  enough  to 
know  that  Christ's  sacred  blood  was  shed  for  our  s&Ivation  by  Divine  appointment;  and 
we  are  persuaded  that,  had  it  not  possessed  merit  enough  for  its  purpose,  it  would  never 
have  been  shed  at  all.  Jesus  sits  upon  his  priestly  throne,  and  does  his  priestly  work, 
by  Divine  right. 

lU.  Hb  has  thg  ABiLirT  OF  INFLUENOE.  He  possesscs  not  only  merit  and  right, 
but  also  power.  He  is  "  a  Priest  upon  his  throne."  And  it  was  more  than  a  mere 
external  statute  that  set  him  there.  Christ  is  our  Intercessor  in  virtue  of  "  the  power 
of  an  endless  life."  These  words  are  emphatic,  "He  ever  liveth."  He  conducts  our 
cause  in  heaven,  as  our  Advocate,  in  the  strength  of  the  imperishable  life  which  he  has 
possessed  from  eternity.  Enthroned  in  glory,  he  has  yet  power  upon  earth,  for  he  has 
sent  down  to  us  his  Holy  Spirit.  This  gift  is  the  direct  fruit  of  his  sacrifice  and  inter- 
cession. While  the  Saviour  intercedes  without  us,  his  Spirit  intercedes  within  us.  The 
work  of  the  "  other  Paraclete  "  is  complementary  of  that  of  the  first.  The  Holy  Ghost 
within  our  minds  and  hearts  bestows  all  the  communications  of  grace,  and  conducts  all 
the  preparations  for  glory  ;  but  he  does  so  as  the  agent  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  hia  work 
is  dependent  upon  our  High  Priest's  constant  pleadings  at  the  bar  of  God. 

IV.  He  has  th*  ability  of  sympathy.  Even  as  God,  the  Saviour  can  sympa- 
thize with  us;  for  our  nature  was  formed  in  the  likeness  of  our  Maker,  so  that  mau 
belongs  to  the  same  order  of  being  as  God  himself.  But  our  necessities  demanded 
more  than  the  sympathy  of  God.  How  sweet,  then,  to  remember  that  our  High  Priest 
is  also  a  man  I  He  is  a  woman's  Son,  and  therefore  in  a  true  sense  one  of  ourselves. 
His  earthly  life  was  full  of  experiences  substantially  the  same  as  ours ;  so  that  he 
knows  our  difficulties  and  sorrows  and  temptations.  He  is  careful  to  adapt  his  per- 
petual intercessions  to  the  currents  of  individual  experience.  Believers  can  approach 
him  with  confidence  in  the  spirit  of  the  exquisite  lines — 

"  Thou  OUT  throbbing  flesh  hast  worn. 
Thou  our  mortal  griefs  hast  bome^ 
Thou  hast  shed  the  human  tear : 
Gracious  Son  of  Mary,  hear  I " 

(Milman.) 

Amidst  his  nnparallelcd  exaltation,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  does  not  forget  the  humblesi 
of  his  people.  Our  High  Priest  has  every  name  that  is  dear  to  him  engraven  upon  his 
breastplate — written  upon  the  imperishable  tablet  of  his  loving  heart. 

CoNCLUsiOK.  1.  Let  us  retain  Jesus  as  our  Advocate.  2.  Let  us  tell  him  our  whole 
case,  and  commit  it  unreservedly  into  his  hands.  3.  Let  us  be  sure  of  his  ability  suc- 
cessfully to  plead  the  cause  of  his  clients. 

Ver.  26. — Separated  from  sinnen.  This  verse  exhibits  in  a  strong  clear  light  the 
moral  purity  of  our  High  Priest,  and  its  becomingness  in  relation  to  the  necessities  of 
his  people. 

I.  The  holiness  of  Chbist.  He  was  bom  without  entail  of  birth-sin.  His  boy- 
hood and  youth  were  stainless.  His  manhood  was  one  of  sinless  perfection.  His 
friends  regarded  him  as  faultless.  His  enemies  testified  to  his  purity  (Pilate,  Judas, 
the  devils  whom  he  cast  out).  Jesus  himself  claimed  to  be  holy  (John  viii.  46 ;  xiy. 
30) ;  and  he  never  confessed  sin,  or  begged  forgiveness.  The  voice  of  his  Father  from 
heaven  attested  him,  once  and  again,  to  be  the  Holy  One  of  God  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5). 
Notice :  1.  The  elements  of  his  holiness.  Three  adjectives  are  used,  referring  to  tliree 
different  departments  of  moral  character.  (1)  "  Holy,"  t.e.  pious  in  relation  to  God. 
Jesus  lived  the  life  of  ideal  godliness.  He  perfectly  obeyed  "  the  great  and  first 
commandment" — the  four  "words"  of  the  first  table  of  the  Law.  (2)  "Guileless," 
t.e.  just  and  kind  towards  his  fellow-men.  Jesus  perfectly  observed  the  six  precepts 
of  the  second  table.  He  injured  no  one.  He  "  went  about  doing  good."  (3)  "  Unde- 
filed,"  j.e.  personally  pure ;  uncontaminated  by  his  constant  contact  with  sinful  men ; 
holy  in  the  midst  of  sin,  temptation,  and  suffering.  2.  The  singularity  of  his 
holiness.  "Separated  from  sinners."  This  phrase  sustains  a  relation  of  contrast  to  the 
three  adjectirea.    It  indicates  the  unique  character  and  tlxe  matchless  harmony  of 


192  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oH.  TO.  1—28. 

the  Saviour's  moral  life.  It  expresses  his  solitariness  in  his  holiness.  If  the  human 
race  be  divided  into  two  classes — the  sinners  and  the  holy — all  the  rest  of  mankind 
must  take  rank  as  sinners,  while  Jesus  stands  by  himself  as  the  one  human  being  who 
was  holy.  3.  Tlie  reward  of  his  holiness.  "Made  higher  than  the  heavens."  His 
supreme  exaltation  has  set  him  more  visibly  apart  from  other  men  than  before.  It  was 
conferred  upon  him  as  the  reward  of  his  pure,  unworldly,  self-saciificing  life.  His 
mediatorial  tljrone  has  been  erected  in  the  new  heavens  of  the  new  covenant,  and  these 
are  liigher  than  any  heavens  formerly  known  to  mankind. 

II.  The  necessity  of  Christ's  holiness  in  kblation  to  our  salvation.  "Such 
a  High  Priest  became  us."  In  oh.-  ii.  10  we  read  of  what  in  this  connection  "  became  " 
God;  here,  of  what  "became"  man.  The  purity  of  the  Eedeemer  was  admirably 
adapted  to  the  necessities  of  pur  condition.  1.  That  he  might  be  a  true  manifestation 
of  Ood.  A  priest  is  a  mediator  or  middle-man  between  God  and  men  ;  and  it  is 
indispensable  that  he  should  be  in  perfect  sympathy  with  the  purity  of  the  Eternal. 
Holiness  is  the  crown  and  flower  of  the  Divine  perfections;  and  it  was  needful  that 
our  priest  should  reflect  that  holiness  in  his  own  character.  2.  That  his  sacrifice  might 
he  an  adequate  atonement  for  sin.  He  must  be  on  the  very  best  of  terms  with  the 
God  whom  we  have  offended.  His  expiation  must  be  satisfactory  to  Divine  justice. 
It  is  impossible  that  Jesus  could  have  atoned  for  us  bad  he  been  himself  morally  inflim, 
like  the  Jewish  high  priest.  He  could  only  purchase  our  reconciliation  by  offering 
himself  as  a  Victim,  without  spot  or  blemish,  upon  the  altar.  3.  That  he  might  leave 
us  a  perfect  example.  The  Christian  life  consists  in  the  imitation  of  Christ.  Believers 
follow  him  in  the  three  great  departments  of  moral  excellence  in  which  he  was  so 
absolutely  pure.  We  ought  to  copy  him  also  in  his  separatedness  from  the  world. 
Indeed,  bis  people  should  already  be  in  spiiit,  through  their  oneness  of  chwacter  with 
their  risen  Lord, "  made  higher  than  the  heavens." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOB& 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Melchizedeh  a  type  of  Christ.  "  For  this  Melchizedek,  King  of  Salem,* 
etc.  The  various  extraordinary  conjectures  as  to  the  personality  of  MelcUzedek  "  we 
may  safely  treat  as  fanciful  and  unueeded.  The  typology  connected  with  Melchizedek 
does  not  require  that  he  himself  should  be  regarded  as  any  superhuman  person,  but 
merely  exalts  the  human  circumstances  imder  which  he  appears  into  symbols  of  super- 
human things."  Everything  combines  to  show  that  Melchizedek  was  a  Canaanitish 
king  who  had  retained  the  worship  of  the  true  God  and  combined  in  his  own  person 
thie  ofBces  of  king  and  priest."  ^  And  the  statements  made  concerning  him  m  the 
third  verse  of  our  text  need  not  cause  us  any  diCBculty.  The  Levitical  priests  held 
their  ofBce  by  virtue  of  their  descent  from  Levi  and  Aaron.  A  clear  and  unquestionable 
genealogy  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  them.  On  the  return  of  the  Jews  from 
captivity  certain  persons  were  excluded  from  the  priesthood  because  they  could  not 
produce  their  pedigree  (Ezra  il.  61 — 63).  Now,  as  for  Melchizedek,  the  names  of  his 
parents  were  unknown,  his  name  was  not  mentioned  in  the  Hebrew  genealogies,  there 
was  no  record  of  his  birth  or  of  his  death,  and  no  mention  of  the  termination  of  his 
priesthood.  "  He  comes  forth  from  the  darkness  like  a  streak  of  light,  only  to  disappear 
immediately  in  the  darkness  again."  He  is  mentioned  in  our  text  as  a  type  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

I.  In  his  beoal  ohabaotbb  and  functions.  "  Melchizedek,  King  of  Salem  ...  by 
interpretation  King  of  righteousness,  and  King  of  peace."  In  the  reign  of  the  Ohilst : 
1.  Righteousness  is  the  firm  basis  of  peace.  It  is  true  in  government  as  in  other  things 
that  "  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle."  Stable 
peace  is  impossible  apart  from  righteousness.  Deep  craft,  subtle  diplomacy,  strong 
naval  and  military  forces,  are  miserable  guarantees  for  a  nation's  peace.  The  peace  and 
the  perpetuity  of  the  reign  of  Messiah  are  founded  upon  its  truth  and  righteousness. 
The  witness  of  Scripture  to  this  is  most  clear  and  conclusive  (see  Ps.  IxxiL  1 — 7 ; 
Isa.  ii.  4 ;  xi.  1 — 9 ;  xxxii.  17).  2.  Eiyhteousness  is  joined  with  peace.  Both  thes« 
qualities  characterize  his  administration.     Righteousness  ig  iirm,  infl^^iM^f,  almost 

*  Alfoid  on  Gen.  xiv.  18— 2% 


oa.TU.1— 28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  193 

stern ;  peace  is  mild,  merciful,  gentle.    In  the  Idngdom  of  our  Lord  "  mercy  and  truth 
meet  together,  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  eaoh  other." 

II.  In  his  bacbrdotal  chaiiacteb  and  functions.  Here  are  several  points  of 
analogy.  1.  In  the  authority  of  hi§  priesthood.  "  Melohizedek,  priest  of  God  Most 
High  .  .  .  without  father,  without  mother,"  etc.  He  was  not  a  priest  because  he  was 
descended  from  priests,  like  the  sons  of  Aaron.  He  received  his  priesthood  direct  from 
God.  It  was  based  upon  character,  not  upon  pedi^^ree.  It  was  "  an  independent 
priesthood,  having  its  root  in  his  own  person."  Even  so  was  the  priesthood  of  oui 
Lord  and  Saviour  (cf.  vers.  13 — 17  ;  oh.  v.  4 — 6).  2.  In  the  hleasiitgg  which  he  bestowed. 
Melcliizedek  bestowed  upon  Abraham  a  double  blessing,  and  in  each  portion  of  it  he 
prefigures  the  Christ.  (1)  He  ministered  to  his  physical  needs.  "  Melohizedek  met 
Abraham  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings,"  and  "  brought  forth  bread  and 
wine  "  unto  him ;  bread  representing  the  necessary  food  of  the  physical  life,  and  wine 
representing  the  delights  of  life — "  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man."  And 
our  Lord  cared  for  the  physical  needs  of  men.  He  had  compassion  on  the  hungry 
thousands,  and  fed  them ;  he  pitied  the  afflicted,  and  healed  them ;  he  sympathized 
with  their  social  pleasures,  and  contributed  to  them  by  turning  water  into  wine. 
(2)  Melohizedek  blessed  Abraham  spiritually  (Gen.  xiv.  19,  20).  Our  Lord  confers 
the  richest  spiritual  favours  upon  those  who  believe  in  him.  The  redemption  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  for  the  whole  of  man's  nature.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Melohizedek  blessed  the 
greatest  and  best  man  of  his  age  of  whom  we  have  any  record.  He  "  blessed  him 
that  hath  the  promises,"  etc.  (vers.  6,  7).  Our  Lord  blesses  the  highest  and  holiest  as 
well  as  the  lowest  and  most  sinful  of  men.  None  are  so  great  or  so  good  as  to  have 
outgrown  the  need  of  his  blessing.  3.  In  the  homage  which  he  received,  "  To  whom 
Abraham  divided  a  tenth  part  of  all  .  .  ■  unto  whom  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  out  of 
the  chief  spoils."  fie  did  this  either  as  an  act  of  homage  to  him  as  a  king,  and  as 
placing  himself  under  his  authority  and  protection,  or  as  an  acknowledgment  of  his 
character  and  position  as  "  priest  of  God  Most  High."  To  our  Priest  and  King  the 
mightiest  and  the  weakest,  the  greatest  and  the  smallest,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor, 
shall  pay  heartiest  and  humblest  homage  (see  Ps.  Ixxii.  10,  ll,  15, 17).  "  At  the  Name 
of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow,"  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  10, 11).  4.  In  the  duration  of  hi$  priest- 
hood. "Abideth  a  Priest  continually."  This  is  not  to  be  taken  literally  as  to 
Melohizedek.  Of  him  it  is  true  in  this  way,  there  is  no  record  of  the  termination  of 
his  priesthood  by  death  or  otherwise.  As  he  did  not  receive  it  from  his  ancestors,  it  was 
not  transmitted  to  his  descendants :  he  yielded  "  up  his  priesthood  to  no  one."  But  in 
a  higher  sense  his  great  Antitype  "  abideth  a  Priest  contmually."  Ho  is  "  a  Priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melohizedek."  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them 
that  draw  near  unto  God  through  him." — W.  J. 

Ver.  16. — The  constitution  of  our  great  High  Priest.  "Who  is  made,  not  after  the 
law  of  a  carnal  commandment,"  etc.  In  this  verse  there  is  a  triple  antithesis ;  law  is 
antithetical  to  power,  commandment  to  life,  and  carnal  to  indissoluble.  This  suggests 
the  following  observations  concerning  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  became 
Priest — 

I,  Not  bt  thk  operation  of  literal  "tAW,"  but  beoausb  of  his  bfibitual 
"  FOWEB."  Law  in  the  text  is  the  Levitical  Law,  with  the  fulfilment  of  which  the 
Jewish  priests  had  so  much  to  do.  It  was  a  thing  of  the  letter — a  written  thing ;  it 
possessed  no  inherent  power;  it  could  impart  no  spiritual  power.  By  this  law  the 
priests  of  the  Judaic  economy  were  constituted.  But  our  Lord  was  constituted  a  priest, 
not  by  this  law,  but  because  of  his  own  spiritual  energy.  He  was  in  himself  perfectly 
fitted  for  the  high  functions  of  this  holy  office.  Because  he  was  a  Divine  Being,  he  had 
power  to  represent  God  to  man ;  because  he  was  a  human  being,  he  had  power  to 
represent  man  to  God.  Inexhaustible  spiritual  strength  is  in  him  for  the  renewal  of 
the  lost  moral  power  of  those  whose  High  Priest  he  is.  Because  be  has  power  to 
redeem,  sympathize  with,  succour,  and  save  men,  he  was  made  tke  great  High  Priest 
for  men. 

II.  ^'OT  bt  ah  external  "commandment,"  but  by  his  inherent  "life." 
The  "  commandment "  is  that  part  of  the  Levitical  law  which  ordered  the  institution 
and  auccession  of  the  priesthood.    By  this  statute  the  descendants  of  Aaron  wtn 

bkbbkwb.  9 


194  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vn.  1— 2& 

appointed  priests,  irrespective  of  their  personal  character  and  qualifications  for  the 
office.  But  Jesus  was  made  a  priest,  not  by  that  commandment,  but  contrary  to  it, 
seeing  that  he  was  not  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  but  of  Judah.  It  was  because  of  his  inner 
life  that  he  was  constituted  the  High  Priest  of  humanity.  Being  what  he  was  and  is, 
he  could  do  no  other  than  take  up  our  cause,  suffer  for  us,  die  for  us,  and  appear  as  our 
Representative  with  the  Father.  This  truth  is  forcibly  expressed  by  Dr.  Bushnell : 
"Vicarious  sacrifice  belongs  to  no  office  or  imdertaking  outside  of  holy  characti-T,  but 
to  huly  character  itself.  Such  is  love  that  it  must  insert  itself  into  the  conditions, 
burden  itself  with  the  wants,  and  woes,  and  losses,  and  even  wrongs,  of  others.  It  waits 
for  no  atoning  office,  or  any  other  kind  of  office.  It  undertakes  because  it  is  love,  not 
because  a  project  is  raised  or  an  office  appointed.  It  goes  into  suffering  and  labour 
and  painful  sympathy,  because  its  own  everlasting  instinct  runs  that  way.  .  .  .  The 
true  and  simple  account  of  Christ's  suffering  is,  that  he  had  such  a  heart  as  would  not 
suffer  him  to  be  turned  away  from  us,  and  that  he  suffered  for  us  even  as  love  must 
willingly  suffer  for  its  enemy.  The  beauty  and  power  of  his  sacrifice  is,  that  he  suffers 
morally  and  because  of  his  simple  excellence,  and  not  to  fill  a  contrived  place  in  a 
scheme  of  legal  justification.  He  scarcely  minds  how  much  he  suffers  or  how,  if  only 
he  can  do  love's  work."  *  Because  of  his  peifect  puiily,  and  infinite  love  and  unspeak- 
able compassion,  he  necessarily  became  the  great  High  Priest  of  the  human  race. 

III.  Not  as  a  tempobaby  rnHcrioN,  but  as  a  pbemanent  eblation.  They 
who  were  made  priests  "  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment "  were  priests  only 
for  a  time.  One  generation  performed  the  duties  of  the  office  for  a  number  of  years, 
and  then  was  succeeded  in  those  duties  by  another  generation,  which  in  its  turn  would 
also  pass  away.  "  But  after  the  power  of  an  indissoluble  life  "  our  Saviour  was  made 
a  priest.  He  is  "  »  Priest  for  erer  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek."  By  its  nature  his 
life  is  perpetual ;  and  he  continues  for  ever  as  our  Hepresentative  with  God  (cf.  vers. 
23 — 25).  Because  of  the  perfection  of  this  priesthood,  human  salvation  in  glorious 
fulness  is  attainable.  Laws  and  ceremonies  alone  could  not  work  out  for  us  any  real 
deliverance  from  sin,  or  work  in  us  any  true  and  progressive  spiritual  life.  We  need 
vitality  and  power  in  any  system  or  person  who  would  render  to  us  effective  help.  And 
in  this  aspect  "  the  priesthood  of  Christ,"  as  Bushnell  says,  "  is  graduated  by  the  wants 
and  measures  of  the  human  soul ;  the  endless  life  in  which  he  comes  matches  and 
measures  the  endless  life  in  mankind  whose  fall  he  is  to  restore ;  providing  a  salvation 
as  strong  as  their  sin,  and  as  long  or  lasting  aa  the  run  of  their  immortality.  He  is 
able  thus  to  save  unto  the  uttermost."  His  life  is  reproductive.  His  power  is  com- 
municable. He  imparts  spiritual  energy  to  those  who  by  faith  are  one  with  him. 
Apart  from  him  we  can  do  nothing.  We  can  do  all  things  in  him  that  strengtheneth 
us.— W.  J. 

Yer.  19. — The  inability  and  capahUity  of  the  Law.  "  For  the  Law  made  nothing 
perfect,"  etc.  The  Law  spoken  of  is  the  ceremonial  Law,  as  we  see  from  the  preceding 
verse.  The  moral  Law  is  not  disannulled  in  Christianity.  Its  authority  is  maintained, 
its  sanctions  are  corroborated  by  our  Lord.  But  the  ceremonial  Law  was  abrogated  by 
Christ.    It  found  its  fulfilment,  and  so  was  done  away  in  Christianity.    Notice^ 

L  The  inability  of  the  Law.  It  was  weak  and  improfitable ;  it  made  nothing 
perfect.  1.  It  awakened  the  consciousness  ofguUt,  but  it  had  no  power  to  remove  that 
consciousness.  Its  sacrifices  proclaimed  man  a  sinner  and  needing  atonement  with  God ; 
but  they  would  not  ease  the  conscience  of  its  sad  sense  of  sin,  or  inspire  the  peace  of 
forgiveness  in  the  troubled  breast.  2.  It  showed  the  necessity  of  mediation  between  God 
and  man,  but  it  made  no  satisfactory  provision  for  that  necessity.  The  people  had  to 
approach  the  Most  High  through  the  priests ;  the  priests  alone  must  offer  their  sacrifices ; 
the  priests  alone  had  access  to  the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple.  The 
office  of  the  priesthood  exhibited  the  need  of  mediation,  but  it  was  not  an  adequate 
answer  to  that  need.  The  Judaic  priests  were  themselves  sinners ;  they  needed  te 
ofier  sacrifices  for  themselves ;  they  were  mortal  and  passed  away  by  death,  even  M 
other  men.  3.  It  presented  a  true  ideal  of  life  and  conduct,  but  it  afforded  no 
help  for  the  attainmetit  of  that  ideal.  The  Law  condemns  sin;  it  commands 
righteoiunesa.  But  how  shall  we  obey  its  commands  ?  "  To  will  is  present  with  me, 
'  '  The  VioariouB  Sacrifice,'  pt  L  oh.  t. 


•H.  Til.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  195 

but  to  do  that  which  is  good  is  not.  For  the  good  which  I  would  I  do  not :  but  the 
evil  which  I  would  not,  that  I  practise."  Can  the  Law  help  us  in  this  need  ?  Can  it 
inspire  us  with  strength  to  do  the  true  and  the  good?  It  has  no  power  to  convert,  or 
strengthen^  or  sanctify  the  soul.  It  shows  us  our  obligation,  but  it  affords  us  no  help 
to  discharge  it.  "  What  the  Law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh, 
etc.  (Bom.  viii.  3,  4). 

II.  The  capability  op  the  Law.  "The  Law  made  nothing  perfect,  bat  it  was 
the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope,  by  which  we  draw  nigh  unto  God."  We  adopt  the 
rendering  of  the  margin  of  the  Authorized  Version,  and  the  interpretation  of  Calvin, 
Ebrard,  et  al.,  that  the  Law  made  nothing  perfect,  but  it  prepared  the  way  for  the 
better  hope.*  This  hope  is  the  gospel  hope ;  the  hope  which  has  been  brought  in  by 
our  great  High  Priest.  The  Law  led  the  way  to  this.  "  The  Law  was  our  schoolmaster 
to  bring  us  unto  Christ."  "A  large  picture-book,"  as  Dr.  Binney  says,  "was  put 
before  the  scholars  in  the  splendid  objects  of  the  Levitical  institute.  The  series  of  things 
included  in  this  was  like  a  series  of  prints  arranged  in  order,  hound  and  gilded,  and 
spread  before  the  young,  wondering  eyes  of  a  number  of  children.  The  altar  with  its 
fire  and  blood;  the  laver  with  its  purifying  contents ;  the  saoriHee  with  the  penitent 
putting  upon  it  his  sin,  or  lifting  his  eyes  and  Ids  hands  to  heaven  ;  the  priest  in  the 
garments  expressive  of  humiliation,  or  in  his  gorgeous  robes  of  '  glory  and  beauty ; ' — 
these  things,  with  many  others  that  might  be  specified,  were  all  like  so  many  significant 
objects,  vividly  portrayed  on  the  several  leaves  of  an  immense  picture-book.  By 
familiarity  with  them  the  minds  of  the  learners  were  gradually  to  open  to  the  spiritual 
idea  contained  in  each;  or  were  to  be  prepared  for  apprehending  it  when,  'in  the 
fulness  of  time,'  it  should  be  revealed.  .  .  .  With  new  views  of  the  central  figure,  so 
much  the  theme  of  prophetic  song,  and  the  object  of  national  desire,  the  whole  of 
the  Levitical  system  undergoes  a  change.  It  comes  to  have  an  intention,  to  be  looked 
at  an  constructed  for  a  purpose,  which  gives  to  it  a  deeper  and  diviner  significance  than 
was  at  first  suspected.  Priest  and  sacrifice,. altar  and  propitiation,  cease  to  be  realities; 
they  are  imderstood  to  be  only  shadows  and  signs  of  what  was  to  be  found  substantially 
in  the  person  and  work,  the  acts  and  ofBces  of  the  great  High  Priest  of  our  profession." 
This  hope,  for  which  the  Law  prepared  the  way,  was  better  than  any  which  the  Law 
could  inspire.  1.  It  is  dearer  as  to  its  object.  The  Christian  hopes  for  perfection  of 
being ;  for  holiness  of  heart  and  life  here,  and  for  heaven  hereafter.  These  things  are 
brought  into  clearer  light  in  this  gospel  age  than  they  were  under  the  Law.  2.  It  it 
firmer  in  itsfoimdation.  It  rests  upon  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  Rock  upon  which  our 
confidence  and  expectation  are  based.  He  has  reveakd  God  the  Father  unto  us.  He 
has  rendered  perfect  obedience  to  the  holy  Law.  He  offered  himself  a  Sacrifice  for 
sin,  of  infinite  and  perpetual  efficacy.  He  ever  liveth  to  represent  us  in  heaven, 
whither  he  has  entered  as  our  Forerunner.  He  is  "  a  tried  Stone,  a  sure  Foundation  " 
for  the  hopes  of  men  to  rest  upon.  3.  It  is  more  hlessed  in  its  influence.  "  Through 
which  we  draw  nigh  unto  God.  The  Judaic  priesthood  tended  to  make  men  feel  their 
distance  from  God,  and  to  keep  them  at  a  distance.  The  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ 
brings  men  near  unto  him.  We  need  pot  now  the  human  priest  and  the  bleeding  victim 
for  our  acceptable  approach  to  the  Divine  Father.  Through  the  Saviour  we  may  draw 
nigh  unto  him  in  our  penitence  for  sin,  and  obtain  forgiveness ;  in  our  consecration  to 
him,  and  meet  with  gracious  acceptance;  in  the  presentation  of  our  needs  to  liim,  and 
receive  suitable  and  abundant  supplies ;  and  in  hallowed  communion  with  him,  and 
find  in  it  the  foretaste  and  earnest  of  heaven. — W.  J. 

Ver.  25. — Christ's  perfect  power  to  save.  "  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them 
to  the  uttermost,"  etc.     The  text  stiggests  the  following  observations : — 

I.  That  Christ's  savino  power  is  infinite.  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost."  Notice:  1.  The  nature  of  this  salvation.  It  may  be  viewed:  (1) 
Negatively.  It  is  deliverance  from  sin ;  not  merely  from  the  punishmont  of  sin,  but 
from  its  guilt,  its  pollution,  and  its  power.    (2)  Positively.    It  is  the  conference  of  eternal 

'  If  the  translation  of  the  Revised  Version,  and  the  interpretation  of  Alford,  Bleek,  et  aly 
be  preferred,  still  the  main  lines  of  thought  we  are  pursuing  would  be  suitable  by  taking 
vers.  18,  19  as  text,  and  maldng  the  chief  divisions:  1,  The  ubrogatiou  of  the  ceremoniiu 
law.    i.  The  introductiou  of  the  better  hope. 


196  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh,  vn.  1—24 


life.  By  eternal  life  we  do  not  mean  endless  existence,  for  that  may  become  •  curse ; 
but  life — holy,  harmonious,  progressive,  blessed,  perpetual  life.  "  He  that  believeth  on 
the  Son  hath  eternal  life."  "The  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal 
glory."  2.  The  perfection  of  this  salvation,  "Able  to  save  to  the  uttermost."  The 
word  rendered  "uttermost"  does  not  refer  to  the  duration,  but  to  the  perfection,  the 
completeness,  of  this  salvation.  Both  by  its  etymology  and  by  its  place  in  the  argument 
it  is  the  exact  antithesis  of  the  first  clause  in  ver.  19.  "  The  Law  made  nothing 
perfect ; "  but  "  he  is  able  to  save  perfectly,"  or  to  completeness,  "  them  that  come  unto 
God  by  him."  The  perfection  of  his  saving  power  authorizes  the  assertion  that  he  ia 
able  to  save:  (1)  The  most  wicked  characters.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  "a  blasphemer, 
and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious ; "  he  spake  of  himself  as  chief  of  sinners ;  yet  he 
obtained  mercy,  and  became  a  most  devoted  disciple  and  most  heroic  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ.  The  dying  robber  is  another  example  (Luke  zxiiu  42,  43).  Degraded 
drunkards,  profane  swearers,  grovelling  misers,  wilful  unbelievers,  cruel  oppressors,  in 
countless  numbers  have  been  saved  by  him.  None  are  so  deeply  sunk  in  the  horrible 
pit  of  sin  as  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  long  and  strong  arm  of  the  perfect  Saviour. 
He  is  "  mighty  to  save."  (2)  The  greatest  numbers.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  three 
thousand  souls  were  converted  and  added  to  the  Christian  Church.  St.  John  in  vision 
"  beheld  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,"  etc.  (Rev.  vii.  9,  10).  He 
is  able  to  save  countless  millions.  Were  the  nimiber  of  sinners  multiplied  a  thousand- 
fold he  would  still  be  able  to  save  them.  (3)  To  the  most  glorious  condition.  He 
does  not  leave  his  work  in  man  incomplete.  "  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  unto  him  against  that  day."  "  He  which  began  a  good  work  in  you  will 
perfect  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  How  glorious  must  that  character  be  which 
he  has  perfected  1  "  We  shall  be  like  him."  "  We  shall  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  We 
shall  enter  into  his  joy ;  we  shall  sit  down  with  him  upon  his  throne. 

II.  That  Christ's  satino  powbb  ib  ouabantbed  by  thb  pebpethitt  of  his 
PRIESTLY  OFFICE.  "Wherefore  also  he  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  .  .  . 
seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  The  chief  meaning  of  "  to  make 
intercession  "  is  to  appear  as  the  representative  of  another,  being  moved  to  do  so  by 
feeling  for  him  or  with  him.  Our  Saviour's  intercession  for  us  does  not  mean  that  he 
is  pleading  our  cause  with  One  who  is  ill  disposed  toward  us,  and  needs  to  be  placated 
by  him ;  or  that  he  is  supplicating  blessings  for  us  from  One  who  is  unwilling  to  bestow 
them  (John  xvL  26,  27).  But  he  does  represent  us  with  the  great  Father,  and  he  is 
deeply  and  tendoly  identified  with  us  in  feeling.  He  represents  us  because  he  sympa- 
thizes with  us.  But  in  our  text,  as  Alford  points  out,  the  intercession  "  implies  the 
whole  mediatorial  work,  which  the  exalted  Saviour  performs  for  his  own  with  his 
heavenly  Father,  either  by  reference  to 'his  past  death  of  blood  by  which  he  has  bought 
them  for  himself,  or  by  continued  intercession  for  them."  Christ's  perpetual  intercession 
signifies  that :  1.  The  efficacy  of  hit  work  for  men  is  perpetvul.  The  great  truths 
which  he  enunciated  concerning  life  and  duty,  sin  and  salvation,  holiness  and  Gk)d,  are 
vital  and  powerful  now  as  ever  they  were.  His  redemptive  work"  accomplished  upon 
earth  is  as  etScacious  now  as  ever  it  was.  His  ^oning  death  for  us  has  lost  none  of  its 
ancient  power  to  touch  and  subdue,  to  convert  and  sanctify,  the  soul  of  man.  "  The 
word  of  the  cross  is  the  power  of  God  "  still  to  save  them  that  believe.  2.  The  efficacy 
of  his  work  in  men  is  perpetual.  Our  Savionr  makes  intercession  with  us  as  well  as 
for  us.  He  speaks  and  works  within  us  for  our  salvation.  By  his  Holy  Spirit  he 
encourages  and  strengthens  his  people.  The  Spirit  guards  us  from  error  and  guides  us 
into  truth;  he  restiains  us  from  the  wrong  and  inspires  us  for  the  right,  etc.  Here, 
then,  is  the  guarantee  of  the  abiding  perfection  of  Christ's  saving  power :  he  is  our 
perpetual  representative  with  the  Divine  Father ;  the  efficacy  of  his  redeeming  work 
•nd  the  merit  of  his  sacrificial  death  are  unabated ;  and  by  his  Spirit  he  ia  aiill  a  living 
presence  and  power  amongst  men. 

III.  That  Christ's  savinq  powee  ib  made  available  on  the  simplest  condition. 
"To  save  them  .  .  .  that  draw  near  unto  God  through  him."  Moral  approach  to  God 
through  the'  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  condition  upon  which  this  salvation  ia 
bestowed.  It  is  implied  that  man  is  morally  remote  from  God.  "  Your  iniquities 
have  separated  between  you  and  your  God."  "  Ye  who  sometimes  were  for  off  ore 
made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ."    If  we  would  be  saved  we  miut  draw  near  nnto 


OH.  vn.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  197 

him.  1.  The  nature  of  this  wpproach.  It  is  not  merely  intellectual — the  apprehension 
of  the  truth  concerning  him.  It  is  a  Bympathetic  and  vital  approach  to  him.  It  is 
coming  to  him  in  humble  penitence  for  our  siu  that  we  may  obtain  forgiveness;  in 
grateful  affection  to  him  for  his  great  love  towards  us  ;  and  in  earnest  desire  to  obey 
and  serve  him.  2.  The  medium  of  this  approach.  "Through  him,"  «.e.  Jesus  Christ; 
because  (1)  he  removes  the  obstacles  which  prevented  our  appio.ich  to  God.  Our 
guilty  fears,  and  our  unworthy  suspicions  concerning  the  Father,  he  banishes.  (2)  He 
presents  attractions  which  encourage  our  approach  to  God.  He  reveals  the  willingnesa 
or  the  heavenly  Father  to  receive  and  welcome  and  bless  us.  "  Jesus  saith,  I  am  the 
Way,  and  the  Truth,  and  the  Life :  no  one  oometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  Me."  Thus 
our  subject  supplies  strong  encouragement  (1)  to  the  Christian  believer  to  "  press  on 
unto  perfection ; "  and  (2)  to  the  awakened  sinner  to  draw  near  unto  God  through 
Christ  in  assured  hope  of  complete  salvation. — W.  J. 

Vers.  26 — 28. — Hie  High  Friest  in  whom  man's  need  is  Trust.  "  For  such  a  High 
Priest  became  us,  holy,  harmless,"  etc.  By  way  of  introduction  let  us  glance  at  three 
truths  which  are  either  expressed  or  implied  in  the  text.  1.  That  man  needs  a  high 
•priest.  (1)  As  the  offerer  of  sacrifices  on  his  behalf.  The  awakened  conscience, 
sensible  of  its  guilt,  feeling  that  sin  merits  suffering,  cries  out  for  sacrifice  for  its  sin. 
(2)  As  his  representative  with  God.  The  sinner  who  is  alive  to  his  own  character  and 
condition  feels  that  he  needs  some  one  to  represent  him  with  the  holy  God.  2.  That 
the  high  priest  who  would  satisfactorily  meet  man's  need  should  possess  certain  qualities. 
Any  priest  will  not  do.  There  should  be  a  fitness  between  the  holder  of  the  office  and 
the  duties  of  the  office — between  the  priesthood  and  the  human  needs  to  which  it  would 
minister.  3.  That  these  qualities  are  found  in  Jesus  Christ.  His  priesthood  answers 
to  man's  needs.  "  Such  a  High  Priest  became  us,"  i.e.  was  suitable  to  us,  was  appro- 
priate to  our  condition  and  need.  Let  us  now  look  at  the  qualities  which  render  our 
Saviour  the  appropriate  High  Priest  for  man,  as  they  are  here  specified.  It  is  important 
to  remember  that  some  essential  attributes  of  our  great  High  Priest  have  already  been 
mentioned  in  this  Epistle  (ch.  iv.  16). 

I.  Hk  is  pbkfect  in  his  ohabaoteb.  "  For  such  a  High  Priest  became  ns,  holy, 
harmless,  undefiled,"  ate.  1.  Boly.  Our  Lord  was  truly  and  inwardly  holy.  His 
holiness  did  not  consist  merely  in  his  consecration  to  his  office,  but  in  the  perfect 
sanctiflcation  of  his  whole  being.  The  Jewish  high  priest  had  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord" 
inscribed  upon  his  mitre;  but  in  Christ  it  was  interwoven  with  every  fibre  of  his  being, 
and  stamped  upon  every  expression  of  his  life.  2.  Harmless.  The  Jewish  high  priest 
was  sinless  only  in  this  way,  that  he  ofiered  sacrifice  for  his  own  sin  before  offering  for 
the  sins  of  the  people,  and  that  he  cleansed  himself  ceremonially  before  appearing 
before  God  on  behalf  of  others.  But  Jesus  was  perfectly  free  from  sin.  In  all  his 
relations  with  men  he  was  guileless.  And  no  wrong  was  ever  done  by  him  in  any  way 
to  any  one.  3.  Undefiled.  Sin  is  a  polluting  thing.  Ceremonial  purity  was  required 
in  the  Jewish  high  priests.  But  our  Lord  was  undefiled  hoth  legally  and  morally. 
In  thought  and  feeling,  in  word  and  action,  in  inward  heart  and  outward  life,  he  was 
stainless.  The  Jewish  high  priests  needed  to  offer  sacrifices  for  their  own  sins;  but  our 
great  High  Friest  had  no  personal  guilt  to  expiate,  or  sins  to  confess,  or  impurities  to 
purge.  4.  Separate  from  sinners.  The  Jewish  high  priest  was  required  scrupulously 
to  refrain  from  association  with  any  person  who  was  ceremonially  unclean  (Lev.  xxi. 
10 — 15).  Our  Lord  was  "  separated  from  sinners."  We  do  not  regard  this  as  meaning 
local  separation.  He  did  not  shun  association  with  sinners  during  his  life  upon  earth. 
It  was  charged  against  him  by  the  self-righteous  religionists  of  his  day,  "  This  man 
receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth  with  them."  "  They  murmured,  saying,  He  is  gone  in  to 
lodge  with  a  man  that  is  a  sinner."  "  A  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners."  His  separa- 
tion from  sinners  was  far  higher  and  diviner  than  any  merely  local  or  physical  isolation. 
"  Christ  in  his  intercourse  with  sinners,"  as  Ebrard  says, "  remained  inwardly  free  from 
aU  participation  in  their  sinfulness,  inwardly  untouched  by  its  contagion  ;  notwith- 
standing that  he  mingled  with  men  in  all  their  varieties  of  character  and  situation,  he 
yet  never  let  drop,  for  a  moment,  that  inner  veil  of  chaste  holiness  which  separated  him 
from  sinners.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  expression, '  separate  from  sinners.' "  His 
njoral  health  was  so  vigorous,  his  spiritual  purity  so  intense,  that  he  could  associate 


198  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  loB.  va.  ].—2», 

with  the  morally  corrupt  and  degraded  without  contracting  even  the  slightest  moral 
defilement.  How  sublime  is  our  great  High  Priest  in  the  perfection  of  his  character ! 
Of  all  the  sons  of  men,  of  him  alone  can  it  be  said  that  he  was  "  holy,  harmless, 
undefiled,  separated  from  sinners."  How  immeasurably  superior  is  he  to  Aaron  and 
every  other  Jewish  high  priest  1  Their  perfection  was  only  ceremonial  and  symbolical; 
they  were  "  men  having  infirmity ; "  they  were  liable  to  sin ;  they  were  subject  to 
death,  and  to  the  termination  of  their  priesthood.  But  our  Saviour  had  no  moral 
infirmity.  In  his  character  and  conduct,  in  his  person  and  ofBce,  he  was  gloriously 
perfect.    He  is  now  "  perfected  for  evermore." 

II.  He  is  perfect  in  his  position.  "And  made  hicrher  than  the  heavens."  This 
exalted  position  which  our  great  Representative  occupies  has  already  engaged  our  atten- 
tion (see  on  ch.  i.  3;  ii.  9 ;  and  cf.  ch.  viii.  1 ;  Phil.  ii.  9 ;  Rev.  v.  12). 

III.  He  is  pekfect  dj  his  saorifiob.  "  He  needeth  not  daily,  like  those  high 
X>rie8t8,  to  offer  up  sacrifices,"  etc.  1.  The  value  of  the  offering.  "  He  offered  up  him- 
self." Alford  has  pointed  out  that "  this  is  the  first  place  in  the  Epistle  where  mention 
is  made  of  Christ's  having  offered  himself.  Henceforward  it  becomes  more  and  more 
familiar  to  the  reader;  'once  struck,  the  note  sounds  on  ever  louder  and  louder' 
(Delitzsch)."  The  value  of  this  offering  is  seen  in  two  things :  (1)  The  sacrifice  which  was 
offered — "  himself."  Not  a  thing,  but  a  person ;  not  a  sinful  person,  but  the  "  holy,  harm- 
less, undefiled"  One — the  richest,  most  beneficent,  and  most  blessed  personal  hfe.  (2)  The 
spirit  in  which  this  sacrifice  was  offered.  Our  Saviour  was  both  the  Sacrifice  and  tlie 
Priest ;  both  the  Offering  and  the  Offerer.  And  his  sacrifice  was  a  voluntary  one.  He 
freely  "  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all "  (cf  John  x.  17, 18).  2.  The  finality  of  the 
offering.  "This  he  did  once  for  all,  when  he  offered  up  himself."  His  sacrifice  will 
never  be  repeated.  (1)  Its  repetition  is  not  necessary.  The  Jewish  sacrifices  had  to  be 
repeated  day  after  day  and  year  after  year,  because  they  were  impeifeot.  But  the 
sacrifice  of  oiir  great  High  Priest  is  complete,  gloriously  and  perpetually  eflicaoious,  and 
needs  no  repetition,  and  admits  of  neither  improvement  nor  addition.  (2)  Its  repetition 
is  not  possible.  When  Christ  appears  again  it  will  be,  not  in  humiliation,  but  in  glory ; 
not  as  the  great  Sacrifice,  but  as  the  supreme  Sovereign. — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — ^10. — Christ  a  Priest  after  the  order  of  Mekhizedek.  The  writer  now 
returns  from  the  digression.  So  far  he  has  established  from  their  Scriptures  the  priest- 
hood of  Christ.  But  that  is  not  enough ;  that  is  no  reason  why  he  should  be  preferred 
to  Aaron.  He  proceeds,  then,  to  show  that,  however  great  Aaron  was,  Christ  was 
greater.  But  on  what  grounds  can  he  establish  this  to  the  satisfaction  of  a  Hebrew  ? 
He  rests  his  proof  entirely  on  those  Scriptures  which  the  Hebrew  accepted  as  authori- 
tative, and  two  pasages  (Ps.  ex.  and  Gen.  xiv.)  supply  him  with  all  he  needs.  The 
first  states  that  Christ  was  the  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek ;  the  second  that 
Abraham,  from  whom  all  Israel,  Aaron  included,  derived  their  greatness,  did  homage  to 
Melchizedek ;  and  thus  the  point  was  proved,  for  Aaron,  in  the  person  of  Abraham, 
acknowledged  Melohizedek's  superiority.  That  is  the  argument.  Subject — Christ  a 
Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 

I.  The  object  here  is  to  show  the  superiohitt  of  Christ's  priesthood  to  that 
OF  Aaron.  1.  We  have  the  story  of  Melchizedek,  the  priest  of  Salem,  to  whom  Abra- 
ham gave  a  tenth.  2.  This  story  shows  that  Melchizedek  was  greater  than  Aaron. 
Abraham,  the  head  of  their  nation,  recognized  Melchizedek  as  a  divinely  appointed 
priest — one  who  had  a  right  to  tithes  from  him,  and  the  power  to  bless  him.  The 
reception  of  tithes  by  the  Jewish  priests  was  "  the  acknowledged  symbol  of  their 
supremacy  over  their  brethren  "  (Dale).  But  here  was  one  who  received  tithes  from 
Abraham  himself!  "  And  without  contradiction  the  less  is  blessed  by  the  greater." 
So  that  in  Abraham  kneeling  before  the  righteous  King  of  Salem,  the  whole  Mosaic 
priesthood  practically  affirmed  its  inferiority  to  that  of  Melchizedek.  8.  But  Melchize- 
dek is  declared  to  he  a  type  of  Christ.  (Note :  Strange  that  for  a  thousand  years  this 
affirmation  should  have  lain  unnoticed  in  their  sacred  books  till  the  inspired  apostle 
throws  this  wondrous  light  upon  itl  How  much  is  hidden  in  the  Word  of  God  to  be 
revealed  yet,  to  our  surprise !) 

IL  Observe  the  poikts  m  which,  as  seen  in  the  priesthood  of  Melchizedek, 
the  superioeitt  of  Christ's  priesthood  to  that  of  Aabon  consists.     Christ  was' 


OH.  vn.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEBW&  199 

not  different  to  Aaron,  but  better ;  he  was  all  that  Aaron  was,  but  he  was  more.  We 
may  learn  from  this  ancient  king-priest  in  what  this  "  more "  consisted.  1.  Chrisfs 
priesthood  is  universal.  Aaron's  was  for  a  limited  circle — the  seed  of  Abraham  ;  but 
Melchizedek  represented  a  priesthood  which  had  a  world-wide  aspect,  existing  two 
thousand  years  before  Aaron.  Abel,  Noah,  Job,  were  priests  of  that  order.  So 
Christ  is  for  all  who  will.  His  gospel  is  glad  tidings,  not  for  a  few,  nor  for  a  section  of 
the  Church,  nor  for  certain  types  of  Christian  character,  but  for  all  people.  2.  Chrisft 
priesthood  is  continuous.  It  is  not  meant  that  Melchizedek  had  no  end  of  days,  but 
that  is  true  of  him  as  far  as  the  history  is  concerned.  We  do  not  read  that  he  died,  or 
that  his  priesthood  terminated;  and  this  serves  to  show  the  contrast  between  a  con- 
tinuous priesthood  and  one  which,  like  the  Aaronic,  was  continually  changing ;  not 
begun  till  thirty  years  of  age,  nor  continued  after  fifty,  and  only  exercised  at  parts  of 
the  year.  From  the  first,  Jesus  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors  ("  the  Lamb 
slain  before,"  etc.),  and  ever  liveth  for  this.  We  are  always  sure  of  him.  He  never 
sleeps,  nor  forgets,  nor  is  weary,  nor  gives  place  to  another.  3.  Christ's  priesthood  is 
royal.  Aaron  was  only  priest ;  Levi  was  king.  Melchizedek  was  both.  So  Jesus,  even 
on  the  cross  most  truly  fulfilling  his  priestly  work,  was  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King 
of  the  Jews,"  a  Priest  upon  his  throne.  A  priest  or  a  king  could  never  satisfy  us. 
We  need  both — priestly  sympathy  and  the  resources  of  royalty  ;  the  law  of  the  king 
proceeding  from  the  love  of  the  priest.  Christ  fulfils  his  priesthood  royally ;  he  is  no 
vain  friend  to  sinful  man.  Christ  fulfils  hit  kingship  mediatoridlly,  holding  all  his 
power  on  behalf  of  his  redemptive  work. 

HI.  Obsbkvb  bomb  op  thb  incidental  lessons  which  a  comparison  of  Chkist's- 
PRIESTHOOD  WITH  THAT  OF  Melohizbdbk  Buggbsts.  1.  That  righteotistiess  and  peace 
are  the  results  of  his  priestly  work.  "  Melchizedek  " — ^king  of  righteousness ;  "  King  of 
Salem  " — ^king  of  peace.  Righteousness  and  peace  are  the  end  of  the  atonir)g,  interced- 
ing work  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  That  he  has  a  right  to  the  priests  portion  from  his 
Church.  The  Jewish  priesthood  had  a  right  to  tithes  from  (not  those  who  dissented 
from  them,  not  idolaters,  but)  the  sacred  nation,  but  there  was  no  such  enactment  bind- 
ing on  Abraham;  his  was  a  free-will  offering.  Christ  has  a  right  to  our  offerings — and 
"  how  much  owest  thou  ?  " — but  he  only  accepts  the  free  offerings  of  a  grateful  heart. 
3.  That  Chrisft  priestly  henediction  is  granted  to  hit  weary  people.  The  great  Priest 
not  simply  goes  to  God  for  us  in  intercession,  but  comes  forth  from  God  to  us  in 
benediction.  Christ  is  ever  doing  for  us  what  Melchizedek  did  for  Abraham  when  he 
came  forth  to  greet  him  in  his  weariness  with  bread  and  wine. — C.  N. 

Vers.  11 — 25. —  Further  proofs  of  the  superiority  of  Chrisft  priesthood  involved  in 
the  symhol  of  Melchizedek.  Note:  The  word  "Law"  in  vers.  11, 12,  19  must  not  be 
understood  to  refer  to  the  Jewish  system,  but  simply  to  the  code  of  regulations  by 
which  the  priesthood  was  appointed.  The  apostle  is  thinking  throughout  the  chapter, 
not  of  the  Jewish  dispensation,  but  of  the  priesthood.  The  expression,  "  weak  and 
unprofitable,"  does  not  imply  that  there  was  failure  in  God's  former  method.  The 
regulations  about  the  Jewish  priesthood  were  intended  to  be  "  weak  and  improfitable ;  " 
that  was  their  benefit.  Only  thus  could  they  lead  on  to  the  heavenly  things  they 
foreshadowed. 

L  Consider  the  proofs  ih  thb  pabsagk  of  the  buferiobitt  of  Christ's  priest- 
hood. They  are  all  based  on  Ps.  ex.  4.  1.  The  Divine  oj^ointment  of  a  second  priest- 
hood by  a  different  mode  proves  its  superiority  to  the  former.  (Vers.  11 — 18.)  Their 
Scriptures  declared  that  the  Messiah  did  come  firom  a  different  tribe  to  Aaron,  and  was 
appointed  Priest  on  a  different  principle;  not  by  a  mere  physical  arrangement — sonsliip 
to  another,  a  "carnal  commandment,"  or  regulation — but  by  his  own  inherent  life. 
Since  God  couid  not  remove  what  was  perfect,  or  supersede  a  good  arrangement  by  a 
worse,  that  which  appeared  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  was  necessarily  superior  to  it. 
2.  The  greater  solemnity  of  the  appointment  of  this  second  priesthood  proves  its 
superiority  to  the  former.  (Vers.  20 — 22.)  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  appointed  by  a 
fimple  revelation  of  the  Divine  will  (Bxod.  xxviii.  1).  The  terms  of  the  appointment 
of  Jesus  are — "  The  Lord  sware,  and  will  not  repent."  When  God  purposed  what  was 
not  to  change  he  confirmed  it  by  an  oath,  and  probably  the  Jews  understood  that  well. 
Gh)d  is  "  never  npreseuted  in  Scripture  as  swearing  to  anything  but  what  is  fixed  and 


200  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vii.  1— 2a 

immutable''  (Dr.  Brown).  The  fact  that  Christ  was  made  priest  not  without  an  oath 
shows  that  his  priesthood  was  of  supreme  importaace.  3.  The  eternal  permanence  of 
this  second  priesthood  prooes  its  superiority  to  the  former.  (Vers.  23 — 25.)  The 
Jewish  priests  were  subject  to  human  frailties  and  imperfections ;  their  term  of  service 
swiftly  passed,  and  their  place  was  taken  by  another.  Indeed,  the  whole  family  might 
be  exterminated  (specially  when  at  first,  in  the  wilderness,  it  consisted  of  but  five  men) 
by  pestilence,  crime,  or  war,  and  Israel  would  find  itself,  as  to-day,  with  no  priest,  no 
iitonement,  no  mercy-seat,  no  mediator.  That  shows  the  inadequacy  of  that  priest- 
liood.  But  Christ  is  High  Priest  for  ever  "  according  to  the  power  of  an  indissoluble 
life."     How  superior  to  that  which  is  according  to  the  flesh  I    "  All  flesh  is  grass." 

II.  Glance  at  some  or  thk  practical  truths  involved  in  this  BUPERioKiTy. 
1.  That  the  Aaronic  priesthood  is  superseded  by  the  priesthood  of  Christ.  The  Bomish 
doctrine  that  an  order  of  men,  on  the  mythical  ground  that  they  can  trace  their  succes- 
sion to  the  apostles,  are  the  appointed  mediators  between  God  and  man,  is  a  repetition 
of  the  Levitical  system.  But  this  priesthood  is  unnecessary,  since  Christ  is  in  every 
point  superior  to  it,  and  they  who  have  Jesus  do  not  need  Aaron.  Moreover,  this 
carnal,  genealogical  priesthood  is  abolished  by  God,  and  shown  to  have  been  only  a 
temporary  expedient  at  the  best.  2.  That  what  the  old  dispensation  did  for  a  few,  the 
Christian  does  for  all.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  priests  are  those  who  draw  nigh  to 
God  (e.^.  Lev.  x.  3)  whilst  the  multitude  stood  without.  Contrast  ver.  10.  "  We  "  who 
are  not  of  Levi's  tribe,  but  simply  believers  in  Christ,  may  now  enter  the  Holiest  of  all 
— that  is,  Jwe  are  all  priests.  Christ's  high  priesthood  involves  the  priesthood  of  all 
believers.  "  Those  who  draw  nigh  to  God  "  is  the  Christian  name.  3.  That  what  the 
ceremonial  law  could  not  do,  Jesus  can.  Whilst  the  Levitical  system  was  "  weak  and 
unprofitable,"  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  brought  in  a  system  that  was  perfect.  The 
perfection  of  a  priestly  system  consisted  in  its  ability  to  bring  men  unto  God.  Men 
are  crying,  "  Nearer,  my  God,  to  tiiee,"  in  vain,  because  they  seek  it  through  human 
aid,  religious  ceremonies,  legal  observances;  they  have  gone  back  to  Judaism,  which 
is  dead  and  cannot  help  them.  Now  let  them  try  Jesus.  Where  Aaron  fails,  Jesus 
succeeds.  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to,"  etc. — C.  N. 

Vers.  26 — 28. — Ohrisfs  superiority  in  the  infinitt  perfection  of  his  personal  cha- 
racter. The  second  great  argument  for  Christ's  superiority  to  Aaron.  The  reason  for 
the  introduction  of  this  argument  here  is  probably  that  the  writer  is  still  thinking  of 
Ps.  ex.  The  psalm  speaks  of  Christ  exalted  to  the  highest  heavenly  position,  and  as  a 
Priest  for  ever.  Of  both  these  points  the  echo  rings  out  here  in  vers.  26  and  28. 
Here  is  sharply  drawn  the  picture  of  our  Lord's  personal  perfection  in  a  few  carefully 
moderate  words  (for  it  is  a  delicate  subject),  and  the  conclusion  is  apparent.  (Note  on 
word  "  daily  "  in  ver.  27.  The  high  priest  did  not  "  daily  "  ofier  sin  offerings ;  the 
morning  and  evening  sacrifices  were  not  offered  by  the  high  priest,  nor  were  they 
sacrifices  for  sin  but  in  a  secondary  sense,  as  they  were  burnt  offerings.  The  great 
expiatory  sacrifice  offered  by  the  high  priest  was  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  The  word 
"  daily  "  here  must  mean  day  after  day ;  one  day  of  atonement  after  another.) 

1.  The  personal  perfection  op  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "Holy,  harmless," 
etc. — so  many  aspects  of  the  sinlessness  of  Jesus.  The  Hebrew  probably  saw  here 
what  was  true  of  the  high  priest  symbolically,  spoken  of  Jesus  literally.  The  one  had 
inscribed  on  his  forehead  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  which  he  had  in  symbol ;  the 
other  was  "  the  Holy  One  of  God."  The  one  was  harmless  (literally,  "  without  evil "), 
lor  he  could  not  offer  for  others  till  his  own  sin  was  expiated,  but  that  was  only  an 
imputed  sinlessness ;  the  other  had  no  sins  to  offer  for.  The  one  was  "  undefiled," 
obliged  to  be  ceremonially  clean ;  the  other  was  in  himself "  without  blemish  and 
without  spot."  The  one"  was  ''  separate  from  sinners,"  excluded  for  seven  days  before  the 
Day  of  Atonement  even  from  his  own  family,  but  this  was  only  physical ;  the  other 
was  able  to  say, "  I  am  not  of  the  world."  1.  The  personal  perfection  of  Jesus  as  seen  in 
his  manifested  purity.  "  Holy,"  etc.,  represents  his  purity  from  different  standpoints. 
"  Holy,"  as  regards  his  relation  to  God ;  "  harmless,"  his  relation  to  man ;  "  undefiled," 
his  relation  to  himself;  "  separate,"  etc.,  the  sum  of  the  whole.  In  every  direction 
Jesus  was  without  sin.  And  so  much  was  apparent  to  the  men  of  his  day.  His 
enemies,  his  relatives,  his  disciples    all   bear  witness  to  this.     He  could  ask  of  all, 


OH.  Tn.  1-28,]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  201 


"  Which  of  you  convinoeth  me  of  sin  ? "  2.  The  perfection  of  Jesus  is  seen  in  hit 
persoTud  consciousness  of  sinlessness.  "Who  needeth  not,"  etc.  Christ  offered  no 
sacrifice  for  himself.  He  always  distinguished  between  himself  and  sinners.  "If  ye 
[not  *  we  *],  being  evil ; "  "  I  do  always  those  things  which,"  etc. ;  "  I  have  glorified  thee 
on  the  earth ; "  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Christ  knew  he  was  holy,  and  thut 
proves  that  he  was ;  for  confessedly  he  was,  at  least,  the  best  of  men,  and  the  holier 
a  man  becomes  the  more  sensible  he  is  of  failure.  3.  The  perfection  of  Jesus  is  seen  in 
the  Father's  endorsement  of  it,  "He  was  made  higher  than  the  heavens."  Consider 
that  in  connection  with  Christ's  claim  to  be  sinless.  His  resurrection  and  ascension 
and  enthronement  are  the  highest  pledge  of  the  perfection  he  asserted  for  himself. 

II,  This  personal  peufection  was  necessary  to  constitute  a  prefect  high 
PRIB8T,  "  Such  a  High  Priest  became  us."  Our  needs  are  beyond  the  help  of  any  one 
less,  1,  The  first  function  of  the  high  priest  was  to  offer  sacrifice.  Then  observe  how 
Chrisfs  holiness  perfcts  him  as  a  Siicrifice.  lie  could  not  have  atoned  for  others  if  he 
had  Bins  of  his  own ;  but  the  offering  of  the  Huly  One  had  an  inestimable  worth. 
That,  at  least,  vindicates  the  Law,  and  pa}  s  the  sinner's  debt,  however  great.  2.  The 
next  fnnction  of  the  high  priest  was  intercession.  Then  observe  how  Christ's  holiness 
perfects  him  as  an  Intercessor.  We  can  trust  in  no  mediator  till  we  know  he  is  on  good 
terms  with  the  king.  Because  Christ  is  the  Holy  One  of  God,  ho  has  perpetual  access 
to  the  Father;  his  will  and  the  Father's  are  the  sume,  and  the  Father  delights  in  grant- 
ing his  request,  Jesus  can  never  be  refused.  3.  The  third  function  of  the  high  priest 
was  to  instruct.  Then  observe  how  Chrisfs  holiness  perfects  him  as  a  Teacher.  It  is  in 
his  holiness  we  learn  what  most  of  all  we  need  to  know — God's  will  about  us.  We  look 
at  Jesus,  and  there  it  is.  Moreover,  looking  at  him  produces  the  same  holiness  in  us, 
for  looking  we  become  like, 

II  r.  Thus  perfected,  Christ  is  declared  by  the  Divine  oath  to  be  Hiqh  Priest 
FOB  eteb.  "The  word  of  the  oath,"  etc.  Notice  how  many  perfect  things  are  set 
forth  here.  1.  A  perfect  Sacrifice  for  sin.  "  By  one  offering  he  hath  for  ever,"  etc.  2. 
A  perfect  Sigh  Priest  to  impart  the  henefits  of  that  Sacrifice.  Our  tendency  is  to 
dwell  on  Christ's  earthly  life,  or  on  his  death ;  but  the  Epistles  dwell  most  on  his 
present  life.  And  that  is  the  view  of  our  Lord  he  desires  us  to  keep  most  (jrominent : 
"  1  am  he  that  liveth,"  etc. ;  "  Therefore  he  is  able  to  save,"  etc.  3.  A  perfect  promise  that 
Christ  wiU  do  all  this,  "Will,"  for  all  who  will  let  him,  for  all  "  who  come  unto  God  by 
him,"  i.e.  for  all  who  take  him  to  be  their  High  Priest,  God  pledges  his  oath  for  that. 
How  needlessly  men  are  lostl    They  are  not  called  to  risk  their  soul  on  a  trifie  I — C,  N, 

Verg,  1 — 3. — Melchizedek  a  typical  priest.  The  inspired  writer  now  resumes  his  con- 
sideration of  Melchizedek  as  a  type  of  our  Lord  as  Priest,  and  notes  the  fact  that  he 
itands  in  Old  Testament  Scripture  quite  alone,  and  has  no  genealogy  which  informs  us 
from  whom  he  sprang,  and  has  no  successor  to  whom  he  hands  over  Ins  piiestly  office. 
As  far  as  Scripture  narrative  is  concerned,  he  "  abideth  a  high  priest  continually."  The 
typical  resemblances  between  Melchizedek  and  our  Lord  are — 

L  The  sublime  solitariness  op  this  priest.  He  stands  alone  as  the  servant  and 
minister  of  the  mnst  high  God,  and  while  the  Jewish  priests  appear  like  the  columns 
of  a  temple,  Melchizedek  rises  as  an  obelisk,  which  by  its  loneliness  attracts  attention 
and  awakens  thought.  Our  Lord  is,  in  his  office,  foreshadowed  by  this  ancient  piiest ; 
for  he  stands  alone,  and  has  had  no  predecessor,  and  will  have  no  successor  as  High 
Priest  over  the  house  of  God. 

II.  The  universality  of  his  office  finds  its  counterpart  in  Jesus  Chbist. 
Melchizedek  was  a  priest  for  men  as  men,  and  before  the  separation  of  the  race  into  the 
two  classes  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  The  successors  of  Aaron  were  limited  in  their  minis- 
trations to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  but  the  Redeemer  is  the  Priest  for  the  race  of 
mankind:  "for  with  him  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek;  there  is  neither  bond  nor  fiee,  and 
there  is  neither  male  nor  female," 

III.  The  interest  displayed  by  Melchizedek  in  the  affairs  of  worshippers. 
Abraham  had  pursutdthe  kings  who  had  taken  captive  the  family  of  Lot,  and  carried 
off  much  spoil  from  the  inhabitants  of  S«dom.  On  his  return  the  priest  met  him  and 
his  wearied  troop  with  bread  and  wine,  and  blessed  tlie  patriarch  in  the  Name  of  the 
most  high  God,     In  like  Tnanner  our  Lord  has  an  abiding  interest  in  his  worshippers, 


202  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vn.  1— 2a 

whom  lie  delivers  from  evil,  maintains  in  sinritiial  vigour,  and  blesses  with  his  refresh- 
ments and  Divine  approbation.  As  Melchizedek  blessed  Abraham,  so  our  Lord  at  his 
departure  from  tlie  world  lifted  up  his  hands  and  blessed  his  disciples,  and  has  ever 
since  blessed  his  followers  with  needful  srace  and  supplies  of  spiritual  power. 

IV.  The  sionificancb  of  Melchizeukk's  names  is  realized  in  Christ.  1.  Our 
Lord  was  "  the  King  of  righteoiisness^  This  was  verified  in  his  personal  life,  in  which 
be  fulfilled  all  righteousness,  and 

"  In  his  life  the  Law  appears 
Drawn  out  in  living  characters." 

He  preached  righteousness  in  the  great  congregation,  and  everywhere  enforced  it  by  the 
sanction  and  authority  of  his  Father  in  h'  avcn.  He  urged  ihe  claims  of  righteousness 
I  pon  thought,  word,  and  act ;  in  the  synagogue  and  the  temple,  and  in  all  the  inter- 
ciiursc  of  life.  His  death  realized  the  i'leaof  eternal  righteousness  in  the  condemnation 
111  sin,  and  the  provision  of  a  way  of  salvation  in  which  God  could  "  be  just,  and  the  Jiis- 
lilier  ot  him  that  believeth  in  Christ."  All  his  subjects  were  to  be  righteous,  and  he  led 
tliem  to  look  for  new  hi  avens  and  a  new  eai  th,  in  wljioh  righteousness  should  for  ever 
ihvell.  2.  The  next  litle  which  Melchizedek  bore  was"  King  of  pence,"  and  this  was  realized 
gloriously  in  the  Saviour.  His  Divine  ministry  produced  peace  by  giving  repentance, 
which  is  the  rejection  of  unholy  and  rebellious  thoughts,  and  our  reconciliation  to  the 
thoughts  of  God.  Then  comes  peace  through  his  blood.  There  is  peace  from  the  con- 
stancy of  his  sujierintendenco  of  his  people,  and  the  certainty  of  his  efficient  interest  in 
their  daily  life,  whereby  he  makes  all  things  work  together  for  their  good.  He  will  lead 
them  forward  until  their  peace  shall  be  as  a  river,  and  their  righteousness  as  the  waves 
of  the  sea.  He  is  our  Peace,  who  brings  men  of  all  nations  to  the  fold  on  the  eternal 
bills,  and  there  shall  be  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd.— B. 

Vers.  4 — 10. — Christ  superior  to  Melchizedek.  I.  The  greatness  of  oub  Lord  is 
FORESHADOWED  BT  Melchizedek's  receivikq  TITHES  FROM  ABRAHAM.  As  the  repre- 
sentative of  Jehovah,  Abraliam  paid  tithes  to  this  distinguished  priest.  Tliere  is  here  an 
instance  of  that  corporate  principle  which  appears  in  the  writings  of  Paul,  who  afiii  ms 
that  by  the  sin  of  Adam  there  came  upon  the  race  spiritual  loss  and  exposure  to  death ; 
and  by  the  appearance  and  glorious  work  of  our  Lord  many  are  made  righteous  now, 
and  obtain  grace  which  reigns  unto  eternal  life.  Abraham  here  represents  the  Jewish 
!  eople  and  the  Jewish  priesthood,  who  in  the  person  of  their  illustrious  ancestor  acknow- 
icilges  the  authority  of  Melchizedek,  who  was  the  type  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  was  an 
impressive  argument  for  the  unrivalled  glory  of  Christ  as  a  Priest  that  the  tribe  of  Levi 
paid  tithes  to  him  who  foresha<lowed  him  whose  name  is  above  every  name.  Eeverting  to 
the  absence  of  all  mention  of  Melchizedek's  death  on  the  sacred  page,  there  is  a  contrast 
supplied  between  the  Leviteswho  receive  tithes  and  die,  but,  as  they  pass  through  their 
ministry,  pay  tithes  representatively  to  him  of  whom  "  it  is  witnc  ssed  that  he  liveth." 
Being  once  upon  the  right  track,  the  writer  discovers  abundant  proofs  of  the  superiority 
of  Christ  to  all  the  priesthood  of  the  earthly  temple,  and  finds  the  fulfilmeut  of  the 
words  of  him  who  promised  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  those  memorable  words,  "He 
shall  glorify  me  :  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you  "  (John  xvi.  14). 

II.  The  bupbbiobitt  of  Christ  typified  by  Melchizedek's  official  act  of 
blessing  Abraham.  The  object  of  this  branch  of  the  argument  is  to  show  the  pre- 
eminence of  the  type,  and  consequently  the  glory  of  the  Antitype.  Melchizedek  blessed 
Abraham  (Gen.  xiv.  19,  20)  in  an  act  of  solemn  prayer  to  the  most  higti  God.  There 
is  one  ritual  form  of  blessing  which  was  pronounced  by  Aaron  and  his  sons  in  these 
words :  "  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee :  the  Lord  make  his  face  shine  upon 
thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee  :  the  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give 
thee  peace"  (Numb.  vi.  24 — 26).  The  word  "  to  bless,"  in  Hebrew,  is  derived  from 
a  root  which  signifies  "  to  bend  the  knee,"  and  therefore  to  bow  before  him  who  invokes 
the  blessing  of  Jehovah,  which  "  maketh  rich,  and  addeth  no  sorrow  therewith."  The 
less  is  blessed  of  the  better  in  office,  spiritual  dignity,  and  connection  with  the  resources 
of  Heaven.  The  Hebrew  Christians  must  see,  as  we  may  see,  how  arguments,  illustra- 
tions, and  typical  events  multiply  to  increase  our  confidence  in  him  upon  whose  head 
are  tlie  many  crowns  of  realised  type,  fulfilled  prediction,  and  official  glory.     The  last 


OH.  VII,  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  203 

glimpse  of  our  Lord's  earthly  life  seems  to  giro  the  fiDishing  touch  to  this  suhject. 
"  For  it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  his  disciples,  he  was  parted  from  them,  and 
carried  up  into  heaven"  (Luke  xxiv.  51). — B. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — A  Divine  priesthood.    1,  The  Divine  wisdom  justified  by  the 

APPOINTMENT    OP    A    PEIEST    AFTER    THE    ORDER   OF    MeLOHIZEDBK.      Ihe   argument   is, 

that  if  perfection  had  been  realized  by  the  Law  of  Moses  there  would  have  been  no 
change  in  the  methods  of  worship  and  the  order  of  the  ministiy.  It  is  not  consistent 
with  the  wisdom  of  God  to  do  and  undo,  and  to  repair  imperfections  and  supply  defi- 
ciencies by  after-thoughts  and  supplementary  arrangements.  The  true  and  Divine 
purpose  of  the  Law  of  Moses  was  to  prepare  for  something  better.  It  was  our  scho  il- 
master  to  leari  us  to  Christ.  The  Jews  still  cling  to  it  as  an  unchangeable  institution, 
and  refuse  to  leave  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  for  the  Canaan  of  gospel  light  and  privilege. 
The  prediction  which  referred  to  another  Priest  who  should  be  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chizedek  was  a  proof  that  the  Aaronic  ministry  was  provisional,  and  therefore  another 
order  was  necessary  to  harmonize  with  that  reign  of  grace,  unexampled  wealth  of  privi- 
lege, and  cheering  prospects  of  eternal  life  which  the  gospel  provides  for  sinful  men. 
The  change  of  dispensation  is  no  proof  of  change  in  the  mind  of  God,  since  the  Jewisli 
Law  was  a  kind  of  parenthesis  which  gives  meaning  to  reve'ations  which  went  befoie 
and  followed  after;  and  the  old  tabernacle  yields  to  the  enduring  fabric  of  grace  against 
which  •'  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail." 

II.  The  change  of  priesthood  wa»  necessary  for  the  harmony  and  consistency 
OP  Divine  arrangements  in  worship.  It  I'leased  God  to  act  according  to  the  counsel 
of  his  own  will  in  the  distrihution  of  offices  in  the  worship  and  national  affairs  of  his 
ancient  people  Israel.  No  man  was  allowed  to  invade  them  who  did  not  belong  to  the 
families  and  tribes  which  he  chose  to  serve  him.  Hence  the  family  of  Levi  was 
appointed  to  be  priests,  and  members  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  were  ordained  to  be  kings 
over  the  nntion.  Daviil,  as  a  descendant  from  Jiidah,  received  many  promises,  and  was 
permitted  to  enjoy  prospects  of  the  future  dignity  of  his  seed — in  him  who  was  "  tin- 
Root  and  Offspring  of  David,  and  the  bright  and  morning  Star."  But  there  is  no  woul 
of  promise  that  any  of  his  tribe  should  minister  at  the  altar  and  stand  in  the  hoy 
of  holies  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  Uzziah,  one  of  the  kings  of  the  line  of  Judah, 
attempted  to  offer  incense,  and  was  in  the  presumi.tuous  act  smitten  with  leprosy,  ai.d 
was  thrust,  as  an  unclean  person,  from  the  temple  courts  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  20).  Mosi  s 
laid  down  the  law  of  the  priesthood,  and  in  none  of  the  manifold  details  of  priesthood, 
sacrifice,  and  worship,  nor  in  any  of  the  predictions  of  the  future  history  of  the  tribes, 
is  there  any  priestly  appointment  given  to  the  family  of  Judah.  The  law  must  be 
changed.  The  new  covenant  must  have  its  special  and  suitable  ministry,  and  in  the 
sphere  of  the  gospels  the  dignity,  sufficiency,  and  pre-eminence  of  Jesus  Christ  find 
their  suitable  exercise.  It  pleases  God  to  put  certain  things  together,  and  what  "  he 
hath  joined,  let  no  man  put  asunder." — B. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  increasing  evidence  of  the  appointment  of  our  Lord  to  he  an 
unchangeable  Priest.  This  is  to  be  found  in  the  Divine  oracle  proclaimed  in  the 
hundred  and  tenth  psalm.  The  distinction  of  Clirist's  priesthood  is  seen  in  the  differ- 
ence which  subsists  in  his  Divine  office  from  that  which  was  held  by  men  who  were 
made  priests  after  a  carnal  commandment,  which  had  to  do  with  ceremonials  and 
material  matters  chiefly,  and  who  were  mortal,  and  resembled  in  the  brevity  o( 
their  life  and  earthly  charge  the  institution  of  which  they  were  ministers.  Our  Loiil 
rises  infinitely  above  the  Jewish  priesthood,  because  he  is  appointed  "  after  the  power 
of  an  endless  life."  St.  John  beheld  him,  in  the  visions  of  Patmos,  in  the  splendour  of 
his  priestly  office  as  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls,  and  heard  him  say,  "I  am  he 
that  liveth,  and  was  dead  ;  and,  behold,,I  am  alive  for  evermore."  Amid  all  the  chan.L^c  s 
of  human  affairs  and  the  diversified  experiences  of  his  followers  he  is  "the  sanie 
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."— B. 

Vers.  18, 19. — The  weaTcness  and  unprofitableness  of  the  commandment  was  seen  in 
its  inability  to  cleanse  the  conscience  from  sin,  and  impart  spiritual  power  to  obey  the 
moral  Law.    It  was  therefore  removed  and  displaced,  and  publicly  disannulled  by  thfl 


iOi  THE  EPISTLE  TO.  THE  HEBUEWS.  [oh.  vn.  1— 2& 

rending  of  the  veil  when  our  Lord  died  upon  Calvary.  The  whole  Law,  priesthood,  and 
sacrifices  were  treated  as  the  brazen  serpent  in  the  wilderness  when  it  had  answered  the 
end  of  its  appointment  in  the  healing  of  those  who,  through  their  murmuring,  had  been 
bitten  and  were  exposed  to  death  under  the  frown  of  Jehovah.  It  is  not  consistent 
with  Divine  wisdom  and  love  to  maintain  a  useless  institution  like  Judaism  when  a 
better  covenant,  a  nobler  Priest,  and  a  holier  Sacrifice  have  been  appointed  for  the 
salvation  of  mankind.  While  the  Law  made  nothing  perfect  it  had  its  uses,  for  it  pre- 
pared the  way  for  the  introduction  of  a  better  hope  than  that  which  believers  had 
before  the  appointment  of  Chiist  to  be  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God.  In  the 
previous  parts  of  this  Epistle  there  are  impressive  allusions  to  the  privilege  of  drawing 
near  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  the  contrast  is  suggested  between  the  remoteness  in 
which  worshippers  stood  In  past  days  and  the  near  and  filial  approach  of  those  who 
draw  nigh  through  Christ.  Herein  is  the  saying  true,  "  The  Law  came  by  Moses ;  but 
grace  and  truth  by  Jesus  Christ."  To  draw  near  to  God  now  is  for  our  dark  and  per- 
plexed understandings  to  approach  the  Father  of  lights;  and  for  our  weak  and  faltering 
nature  to  lay  hold  of  that  strength  which  makes  us  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  run 
and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not  &int. — B. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — The  Divine  Priest.  I.  The  pbe-eminbnob  of  oub  Lobd's  fbiebthood 
ATTESTED  BT  THE  BOLEMNITT  OF  HIS  APPOINTMENT.  The  pnestsof  the  Mosaic  Law  Were 
placed  in  their  office  by  an  act  of  the  Divine  will,  and  the  order  of  their  consecration  was 
prescribed  by  the  lawgiver,  who  probably  superintended  the  process  which  fitted  them  to 
enter  upon  their  duties.  There  was  no  oath  jiroclaimed  on  the  occasion.  When  Christ 
was  appointed  there  was  an  oath,  which  was  conveyed  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Church 
by  David,  the  royal  prophet.  This  oath  declared  the  fixed  and  unchangeable  purpose  of 
God,  that  whatever  else  might  change,  the  ofiioe  of  the  high  priesthood  of  Christ  sliouid 
never  be  abrogated.  "  For  ever  his  word  is  settled  in  heaven."  It  is  only  on  occasions 
of  special  solemnity  that  oaths  are  taken  by  men  when  they  assume  weighty  and 
important  offices.  They  are  used  at  coronations  of  monarchs,  and  the  appointment  of 
judges  and  others  who  undertake  to  administer  faithfully  the  charges  which  they 
assume.  God  condescends  to  engage  by  oath  for  the  permanence  and  glory  of  the 
priesthood  of  Christ  that  he  shall  be  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 
Here  we  see  the  loving  care  of  God  to  invite  and  justify  our  trust  in  his  dear  Son.  It 
is  a  vast  and  large  confidence  which  he  claims,  and  includes  the  rejection  of  all  other 
confidences;  our  surrender  to  Christ  of  our  understanding,  will,  and  affections;  our 
influence,  time,  and  property ;  our  present  and  the  vast  future ;  and,  as  the  demand  is 
large,  there  is  all  evidence  and  provision  to  make  our  trust  in  the  High  Priest  a  reason- 
able service.  He  is  appointed  by  oath,  and  is  the  Surety  of  a  better  covenant;  and  so 
there  is  a  proportion  and  harmony  between  the  Surety  and  tlie  covenant  itself.  In  the 
scheme  of  redemption  God  hath  abounded  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence.  The  new  wine 
is  put  into  new  bottles,  and  the  consistency  of  all  arrangements  for  our  redemption 
proves  that  all  things  are  of  God. 

II.  The  AUTHORIZATION  OF  THE  FBiESTHOOD.  If  any  man  had  dared  to  approach 
Jehovah  in  the  solemnities  of  worship  without  his  express  appointment,  he  would  have 
been  punished  for  his  presumption.  This  is  proved  by  the  history  of  Uzziah  (2  Chron. 
xxvi.  16).  It  is  said  of  this  king  that  his  heart  was  lifted  up,  and,  against  the  remon- 
strances of  the  priests,  he  would  offer  incense,jand  so  combine  the  dignity  of  the 
priesthood  and  royalty  in  himself.  "Pride  went  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty 
spirit  before  a  fall,"  and  he  was  confined  as  a  leper  until  the  day  of  his  death.  The 
vocation  and  appointment  of  Aaron  were  disputed  by  the  Eeubenites  who  had  lost  the 
priesthood,  and  the  Levites  who  were  ambitions  of  higher  dignity ;  and  the  case  was 
decided  by  the  punishment  of  the  revolters,  and  the  miraculous  foliage,  blossoms,  and 
fruit  of  Aaron's  rod.  Jesus  Christ  has  the  high  and  supreme  authority  of  Jehovah  for  his 
appointment,  and  the  writer  quotes  the  second  psalm,  which  predicts  the  regal  glory  of 
the  Son,  who  was  "  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh ;  but  was  declar^  to  be  the 
Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead"  (Rom,  i.  3,  4).  Then  follows  a  quotation  from  another  Messianic  psalm,  which 
declares  that  he  is  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  The  order  of  Aaron 
was  too  narrow  and  too  imperfect  to  shadow  forth  the  unrivalled  dignity  and  worth  of 


flam.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  tO  THE  HEBREWS,  205 


him  who  Is  now  get  oyer  the  house  of  God.  This  latter  type  will  reappear  for  fiirther 
discussion,  and  therefore  we  rest  upon  this  declaration  of  the  eternal  will  which  appoints 
the  Bedccmer  to  be  the  High  Priest  for  the  race  of  mankind.  It  is  the  will  of  God, 
which  is  declared  in  solemn  prophecy ;  and  if  he  speaks,  it  is  done ;  "  he  commands,  and 
it  stands  fast." 

III.  The  oonsecbatiok  of  Chbist  to  bib  Ditink  office  as  a  Fbiest.  The  consecra- 
tion of  Aaron  and  the  priests  of  the  Mosaic  Law  was  very  elaborate  and  impressive,  but 
was  unaccompanied  with  any  distress  of  mind  and  suffering  of  the  flesh.  The  sonship 
of  our  Lord  was  eternal,  and  as  a  Son  he  came  from  heaven  to  assume  our  nature  and 
pass  through  a  career  of  sorrow  and  bitter  experience,  that  he  might  learn  and  prove  his 
obedience  to  his  Father.  "He  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  became 
obedient  unto  death,"  As  he  approached  the  close  of  his  public  ministry  the  agonies  of 
his  soul  began  to  multiply  in  number  and  increase  in  intensity.  His  prayer  in  Geth- 
semane  was  probably  present  to  the  mind  of  the  writer,  where  he  was  sorrowfiil  even 
unto  death,  and  implored,  if  it  were  possible, "  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  him."  He 
uttered  his  prayers  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  The  usual  manner  of  our  Lord's 
teaching  was  quiet  and  gentle,  for  he  did  not  lift  up  his  voice  nor  cause  it  to  be  beard 
in  the  streets ;  but  in  the  dire  and  inscrutable  distress  which  came  upon  him,  like 
Jacob  in  his  mysterious  wrestling,  he  wept  and  made  supplication.  He  was  heard  on 
account  of  his  godly  fear  or  piety.  It  may  be — for  we  would  be  cautious  and  reverential 
— that  he  was  saved  from  death  in  Gethsemane,  where  he  sweat  "  as  it  were  great  drops 
of  blood  falling  to  the  ground,"  by  the  ministry  of  a  mighty  angel  like  Gabriel  or 
Michael ;  or  that  he  was  delivered  from  the  insupportable  fear  of  the  death  of  shame 
and  agony  which  lay  before  him  on  Calvary.  He  was  heard  for  his  piety,  and  came  off 
more  than  a  conqueror.  Whatever  mystery  surrounds  this  solemn  fact,  the  lesson  is 
obvious  that  disciples  must  learn  obedience  in  imitation  of  their  Master;  that,  having 
overcome,  they  may  sit  down  with  him  in  his  throne.  "  Through  much  tribulation  we 
must  enter  the  kingdom."  Having  borne  the  sorrow,  he  has  obtained  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  him,  and  being  now  consecrated  by  his  sufferings  and  death,  he  is  perfectly 
fitted  for  his  mediatorial  office,  and  becomes  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  his 
obedient  followers,  and  leads  them  onward  to  the  glory  of  an  immortal  life.  This  is  the 
highest  and  most  glorious  illustration  of  the  methods  of  that  grace  which  was  seen  in 
the  life  of  Joseph,  into  whose  soul  the  iron  entered,  whom  the  word  of  the  Lord  tried ; 
but  afterwards  he  shone  in  the  light  of  wisdom,  became  the  saviour  of  millions  from 
the  pangs  of  famine  and  death,  kept  alive  the  chosen  seed,  and  prepared  for  the  higher 
revelations  of  Horeb  and  Calvary,  To  obviate  any  doubts  which  might  arise  from  so 
profound  a  humiliation  on  the  part  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  repeated  that  he  was  "  called 
of  Qod  a  High  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek." — B. 

Vers,  23 — 25. — The  immortal  priesthood  of  Ohritt  enhanced  6y  weighty  ootitiderations. 
The  first  Is  that  the  ancient  priesthood  passed  through  many  hands,  in  which  fact  there 
were  some  obvious  disadvantages.  Some  priests  were  so  neglectful  of  their  office  thn  t 
the  prophet  had  to  become  a  preacher  of  righteousness.  All  preachers  had  to  pass 
through  a  process  of  education  to  gain  fitness  for  their  ministry;  others  were  priests 
when  there  was  no  temple,  no  altar,  and  no  holy  of  holies.  Death  came  to  them  in 
ti;rn,  and  lifted  the  mitre  from  the  brow,  the  breastplate  from  the  breast,  and  closed  the 
lips  which  pronounced  the  priestly  benediction.  The  second  consideration  is  that  our 
Lord  has  an  unchangeable  appointment,  because  death  has  no  power  over  him  now  that  he 
has  taken  his  life  again.  There  Is  no  death  in  the  sublime  sphere  of  his  ministry.  He 
can  say,  "  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  "  Tlie  value 
of  this  unfailing  life  is  that  it  is  devoted  to  the  work  of  salvation.  He  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost  by  superintending  the  personal  life  of  his  followers,  and  supplying; 
them  with  Christian  peace  and  spiritual  power,  and  by  keeping  before  their  minds  hi  a 
idea  of  salvation.  He  can  infuse  his  own  precious  life  through  their  souls,  and  lead 
through  the  paths  of  fellowship  with  God,  evangelical  obedience,  and  gracious  discipline, 
until  they  are  saved  to  the  uttermost  and  attain  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  This 
is  associated  with  his  intercession,  of  which  we  have  a  sublime  and  affecting  example 
in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  If  others  condemn,  he  makes  interces- 
sion.   If  others  neglect  or  persecute,  he  is  their  friend  in  the  presence  of  God.    If  his 


206  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vn.  1—28 

people  are  in  the  outer  court  engaged  in  prayer,  he  is  within  the  veil  to  offer  acceptable 
incense.  By  his  undecaying  life  he  quietly  pursues  his  own  plans ;  and  by  the 
constancy  of  his  ministry  he  gives  a  unity  to  his  people  of  various  communiopB,  places 
of  abode,  and  ages  of  time,  who  thus  become  one  in  Christ  Jesus. — B. 

Vers.  26 — 28. — The  two  prier'}<<ods :  a  contrast.    I.  The  exalted  ahd  pebfeot 

CHAEACTEE   OF   ChEIST  IB   CONTttAsrf.'J   WITH    THAT   OP  THE   PRIESTS  OP  THE  OLD  LAW. 

There  was  a  Divine  fitness  in  the  appointment  of  our  Lord,  because,  as  we  learn  from  the 
evangelists,  he  was  holy,  and  full  of  lov4  to  God ;  and  so  pure  that  the  temptations  of 
Satan  and  the  wickedness  of  an  "  adulterous  generation  "  never  sullied  his  nature.  He 
was  harmless,  and  Pilate  asked  the  question,  "  Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done?"  In 
our  Lord  there  was  no  need  of  a  sin  offering  to  repair  his  relations  to  God.  Angels  who 
have  never  left  their  first  estate  need  no  sin  offerings,  for  they  have  never  transgressed 
the  Divine  Law.  By  the  perfect  purity  of  Christ's  nature  he  was  lifted  above  the  level 
of  the  necessities  of  sinful  men,  and  he  consequently  required  no  atonement  for  him- 
self. Had  he  been  imperfect,  and  his  sacrifice  of  limited  power,  he  must  have  suffered 
daily  to  remove  the  daily  accumulation  of  sin.  This  is  needless ;  for  by  one  Iioly  obla- 
tion, in  which  all  the  blessing  redounds  to  men,  he  has  provided  an  atonement  whlcli, 
like  an  inexhaustible  fountain  of  grace,  flows  day  and  night,  century  after  century,  to 
wash  away  sin  and  produce  Divine  peace  in  the  hearts  of  men. 

IL  Anothee  impeessiye  contrast  is  adduced  between  the  Lobo  Jesus  and 
THE  PEiESTs  OF  THE  LAW.  The  descendants  of  Aaron  are  desci  ibed  as  having  infirmity, 
which  denotes  the  weakness,  instability,  and  frailty  of  their  nature.  It  points  probably 
to  something  more  serious,  and  may  allude  to  the  serious  deficiencies  and  imperfections 
of  their  moral  character.  Some  of  them  were  grievously  unmindful  of  the  responsibility 
of  their  oEBce,  and  allowed  alien  altars  and  idolatrous  worship  to  defile  the  temple  ol 
Jehovah.  The  last  traces  of  the  priesthood  in  the  pages  of  Holy  Scripture  present  the 
unlovely  portraits  of  Caiaphas,  Annas,  and  others.  To  these  men  the  writer  does  not 
allude  by  name,  though  the  Christians  who  read  the  Epistle  might  feel  the  awful  force 
of  the  reference,  and  say,  "  How  is  the  fine  gold  changed  1 "  Tlie  high  priest  delivered 
Christ  to  Pilate,  and  had  the  greater  sin.  The  word  of  the  oath  appoints  our  Lord, 
who  was  consecrated  and  made  perfect  through  sufferings ;  and  therefore,  over  against 
the  weak,  sinful,  and  unworthy  priesthood  of  mortal  men,  the  Divine  Son  stands  in  the 
glory  of  bis  character  and  permaaence  and  effecU  of  ministry. — ^B. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — Hie  priesthood  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  It  id  evident 
that  the  whole  of  this  elaborate  argument  with  respect  to  Melchizedek  must  be  looked 
at  in  the  light  of  the  reference  to  Ps.  ex.  In  quoting  this  psalm,  the  writer  wag  on 
firm  ground  so  far  as  his  readers  were  concerned.  They  would  not  repudiate  the 
significance  of  this  utterance, -thut  it  must  have  some  weighty,  practical  meaning;  and 
it  was  his  to  show  them  what  that  meaning  was,  and  so  to  cheer  their  hearts  amid 
what  so  distressed  them — the  thought  of  having  to  give  up  entirely  the  ordinances  of 
Judaism.  There  are  the  two  orders  of  priesthood  :  the  order  of  Aaron,  and  the  order 
of  Mclcliizedek.  To  the  first  of  these  tlie  people  attached  great  moment,  and  rigliily 
so.  The  priest  was  a  depnsitary  of  saoiiflcial  commandments  and  practices,  the 
temporary  and  defective  nature  of  whicli  were  hidden  by  their  long  oontiminnoe.  To 
use  the  common  saying,  "  Possession  was  nine  points  of  the  law,'' and  so  it  was  needlul 
to  make  them  see  very  clearly  how  there  was  another  order  of  jiriesthood,  with  more 
stability  and  power  of  service  in  it  than  anything  the  Aarouio  priesthood  could  show. 
The  Aaronic  service,  by  showing  its  own  insufficiency,  was  doing  its  best  to  prepare 
for  the  service  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  As  to  who  Melchizedek  really  was,  it 
is  vain  to  inqisin^;  and  it  is  less  needful  to  know  because  it  is  the  office  and  not  the 
man  that  is  in  queition.  Indeed,  our  very  ignorance  is  part  of  the  fitness  of  the  type. 
Mysterious  in  his  origin  and  his  destiny,  stnrting  up  all  at  once  and  as  qnickly  dis- 
ajipearing,  of  whom  we  know  nothing  more  than  that  he  was  a  king  and  hauself  a 
priest,  he  becomes  a  very  fitting  type  of  that  Piiest  who  will  never  lay  down  his  office 
while  priesthood  is  needed.  The  abiding  character  of  the  priesthood  of  Je.sus  is  th»  one 
great  truth  that  we  are  to  learn  from  all  this  comparison  between  Melchizedek  «nil 
Aaron.    The  whole  of  this  chapter  was  of  supremo  impoitauce  at  the  time,  aud  it  /n;(y 


cfl.  vn.  1— 28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE   HEBREWS.  207 

(till  have  a  large  part  to  play  in  the  bringing  of  Jews  to  Jesus ;  but  it  can  hardly  be 
pretended  that  it  has  the  same  importance  to  us. — Y, 

Ver.  16. — The  power  of  an  endless  life.    "We  have  here  illustrated— 

I.  The  feebleness  of  that  which  depends  upon  the  flesh.  Here  the  particular 
institution  is  that  of  priesthood  ;  but  the  truth  obtains  with  regard  to  all  institutions 
dependent  on  the  limits  of  fleshly  human  nature  and  the  faculties  of  fallen  human 
nature.  The  law  of  the  Jewish  priesthood  was  a  law  that  had  to  take  particular 
notice  of  the  limitations  of  human  life.  The  office  was  held  by  a  man  whose  term  of 
office  at  the  longest  was  but  brief,  and  his  death  had  to  be  prepared  for,  and  his 
succes-^or  duly  initiated.  That  successor  was  a  son,  and  who  should  say  what  sort  of 
man  he  would  turn  out?  There  are  certain  things  law  can  do  and  certain  other 
things  it  cannot  do.  A  law  could  bo  made  setting  apurt  a  tribe  for  holy  service,  and  a 
family  for  priestly  service  ;  but  there  the  power  stopped.  No  law  can  secure  characler. 
No  law  can  secure  willing,  hearty,  devoted  service.  Indeed,  there  might  even  be  a 
show  of  fairness  in  men  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Levi  saying,  "  Why  should  we  be 
tied  down,  willing  or  unwilling,  to  this  work  of  the  altar  ?  "  Note  how  power  is 
contrasted  in  this  verse  with  law,  as  much  as  to  intimate  the  necessary  feebleness 
of  law.  Its  very  strength  in  one  direction  helps  to  constitute  its  feebleness  in  another. 
It  has  nothing  to  fall  back  upon  but  the  caprices  and  fluctuations  of  natural  character. 
It  brings  to  men  knowledge,  indeed;  but,  bringing  that,  brings  only  too  often  little  but 
exasperation,  irritation,  depression.  How  many  things  there  are  in  which  the  law  of 
the  fleshly  commandment  fails !  The  good  king  is  succeeded  by  the  bad  one.  The 
father  uses  his  possession  wisely ;  the  son  comes  in  to  squander,  neglect,  and  alienate 
The  father  makes  a  fortune  through  frugality  and  industry  ;  the  son  scatters  it  all  to 
the  winds. 

II.  The  00NTBA8TED  powEB  OF  THE  ENDLESS  LIFE.  The  Aarouic  piiest  stands 
as  the  great  representative  of  service  limited  by  the  necessary  boundaries  of  human 
nature.  Jesus  stands  forward  as  One  whose  service  is  unlimited  save  by  the  negligence 
or  the  unbelief  of  those  whom  he  seeks  to  save.  My  fellow-man  can  only  serve  me 
as  long  as  he  is  in  the  world,  and  even  while  in  the  world  he  may  be  cramped  in 
many  ways  so  that  his  service  becomes  an  almust  ineffectual  thing.  But  Jesus  has 
an  endless,  that  is  an  indissoluble  life.  Duration  is  not  the  only  thing  to  be  thought 
of.  There  might  be  an  immense  duration  of  comparative  uselessness.  To  say  that 
the  life  is  indissoluble  means  that  its  fulness  continues  unimpaired  in  the  slightest 
degree.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  ebbings  and  flowing.s ;  summci  fulness  of  sap,  and  winter 
subsidence.  Wherever  we  find  death  iu  the  service  of  the  brother  man,  we  find  life  in 
the  service  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  so  in  his  priesthood ;  so  in  his  kingship ;  so 
in  his  teaching;  so  in  bis  ministry. — T. 

Vers.  18, 19. — The  Law/ailing,  the  gospel  succeeding.  It  is  very  necessary  here  to 
turn  from  the  ordinary  version  to  the  revised  one,  for  the  ordinary  yersion  utterly 
hides  the  antithesis  which  is  the  very  essence  of  the  meaning.  On  one  side  there  is  a 
disannulling  of  the  Mosaic  commandment  with  respect  to  priesthood,  but  on  the  other 
side  there  is  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope.  These  two  elements  of  the  antithesis 
have,  therefore,  to  be  separately  considered. 

I.  The  disannulling  op  the  fleshly  commandment.  "  The  fleshly  commandment," 
as  it  is  called  in  ver.  16.  A  reason  is  given  for  the  disannulling.  The  changes  in  the 
Divine  economy  are  never  arbitrary.  Beasons  are  not  always  given  for  these  changes  ; 
but  when  we  can  understand  them  they  are  given,  and  thus  we  are  helped  to  believe 
in  the  wisdom  of  changes  which  we  have  not  knowledge  enough  to  understand.  The 
reason  has  a  twofold  aspect.  A  general  principle  is  stated,  and  there  is  a  particular 
illustration  of  it.  The  general  principle  is  that  the  Law  makes  nothing  perfect,  con- 
pletes  nothing;  the  particular  illustration  is  found  in  the  weakness  and  uselessness  ol 
the  commandment  which  called  into  exislence  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  No  institution 
can  plead  a  commandment  of  God  for  its  existence  when  it  has  manifestly  lost  its 
use.  The  commandment  was  useless  because  it  was  weak ;  and  then  the  uselessness 
reacted  on  the  weakness  and  made  it  weaker  still.  Men  ceased  to  look  to  the  priest- 
hood for  any  good  and  helpful  thing,  though  the  priesthood  kept  its  formal  place, 


208  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vu.  1—28 

because  there  wai  nothing  as  yet  to  act  as  a  suhstitute.  Then  the  question  may  ho 
asked — Why  give  a  commandment  which  was  weak  and  useless?  The  answer  lies  in 
that  word  "foregoing."  That  which  goes  before  implies  something  coming  after. 
The  Law  was  weak  and  useless  for  certain  things,  but  not,  therefore,  weak  and  useless 
for  all  things.  The  Law  came  like  light  shining  on  human  spiritual  darkness,  revealing 
dilapidation  and  corruption,  and  there  it  stopped ;  it  showed  the  thing  needing  to  be  done, 
and  in  the  very  showing  indicated  how  some  agency  would  come  in  due  time  to  do  it. 

n.  The  djtroddction  of  the  better  hope.  One  notices  a  change  of  term  here  as 
in  ver.  16.  Thcie  we  read  of  the  former  priest  according  to  the  law  of  a  fleshly  com- 
mandment, and  the  new  abiding  Priest  according  to  the  jiower  of  an  indissoluble  life. 
So  here,  that  which  is  put  away  is  a  commandment ;  that  which  is  brought  in  is  a 
hope.  The  old  commandment,  weak  and  useless,  left  men  in  despair  as  far  as  their 
natural  faculties  were  concerned.  The  new  Priest  steps  upon  the  scene,  needing  no 
commandment.  His  functions  are  the  appropriate  outcome  of  the  fulness  of  his  life. 
And,  coming  among  men,  he  comes  as  the  visible  immediate  stimulator  of  hope. 
Manifestly  he  has  relations  with  Gk>d,  channels  of  connection  with  the  Infinite  Purity, 
such  as  not  all  the  sum  of  Aaronic  priests  taken  together  had.  As  men  drew  near  to  some 
of  the  old  priests,  steeped  in  selfishness,  pride,  arrogance,  they  veritably  drew  nearer  to 
the  devil  from  whom  it  behoved  them  to  See ;  but  drawing  near  to  Jesus  it  waanot  pos- 
sible that  they  should  do  anything  else  than  in  the  same  movement  draw  near  to  Chid.— Y. 

Ver.  26. — The  Priest  made  separate  from  sinneri,     L  The  diffbrknoi  n  thh 

RESPECT   BETWEEN   THE  FBIEBTHOOD   OF  JeSUB   AND   THB  FBIEBTHOOD   OF  AABON.      Th« 

Aaronic  priest  was  also  made  separate  &om  sinners;  but  he  was  only  separated 
officially.  The  separation  lay  in  nothing  more  than  natural  descent  and  the  wearing 
of  priestly  vestments.  The  Aaronic  priest  indicated  in  a  feeble  symbolic  way  what 
a  true  priest  ought  to  be.  In  course  of  time,  indeed,  he  might  become  separated 
from  sinners  in  •  way  not  to  be  desired,  fenced  round  by  an  artificial  sanctity,  and 
Buperstitiously  regarded  as  if  he  had  in  him  nothing  less  than  the  Power  of  heaven  and 
hell.  But  Jesus  comes  separated  by  nature,  character,  and  by  many  outward  mani- 
festations of  these  things.  The  nearness  of  Jusus  to  men  has  already  been  insisted  on ; 
how  he  is  a  partaker  of  flesh  and  blood ;  how  he  is  in  all  points  tempted  as  men  are. 
And  what  is  then  stated,  in  a  collateral  way,  so  that  it  may  not  be  forgotten,  is  now,  at 
the  proper  place,  brought  out  and  put  to  the  front.  Jesus  is  nearer  to  the  universal 
man  than  any  priest  could  be ;  but  while  so  near  there  is  a  separation  that  goes  to  the 
very  depths  of  being.  This  is  what  gives  him  his  unique  power.  Moving  among  men, 
he  hears  their  cries  and  prayers,  sees  their  need;  but  he  receives  no  infection  from 
tlieir  narrowness,  selfishness,  degrading  thoughts.  Evil  passes  before  him,  but  only 
to  stir  up  into  greatest  activity  his  sympathy  with  those  who  suffer  from  the  evil ; 
that  evil  prevails  not  in  the  least  over  his  own  affections. 

IL  The  pbaotioal  bbsults  to  ns  of  this  differemci.  1.  HU  power  to  httf  ut  is 
always  manifest.  It  is  impossible  to  read  about  Jesus,  to  contemplate  him  hi  any 
attribute  whatever,  without  being  struck  with  the  two  united  aspects  of  his  person : 
first,  association  with  us ;  and  secondly,  difference  from  us.  We  are  drawn  close  to 
him  because  of  the  manifold  fulness  of  his  humanity  ;  and  then  being  drawn,  we  are 
made  to  feel  how  strong  his  hand  is,  and  what  a  perennial  Fountain  of  assistance  and 
blessedness  he  becomes.  2.  We  have  always  some  one  to  look  at,  to  lift  us  above  cynical 
thoughts  of  mankind.  How  easy  it  is  to  get  into  a  way  of  saying  that  human  nature 
is  a  very  poor  thing  at  its  best  1  We  cannot  get  the  flaws  and  meannesses  of  even  good 
men  out  of  our  recollection.  Now  here  is  the  separated  Man,  the  great  High  Priest,  to 
show  what  a  glorious  thing  human  nature  is  when  we  can  see  it  in  its  full  purity. 
Jesus  is  not  only  pure  himself,  but  he  can  purify  the  medium  through  which  he  is 
beheld.  Those  who  come  to  see  Jesus  as  he  is,  learn  to  think  better  and  more  hope- 
fully both  of  themselves  and  others.  3.  The  ideal  is  given  which  we  are  to  tetk  and  to 
reach.  Th«  great  High  Priest  stands  in  the  midst  of  sinful  men  to  whom  he  ministers, 
for  the  most  practical  purpose  of  making  them  like  himself^  He  is  separated  from 
sinners  in  order  that  sinners,  being  transformed  and  perfected,  may  not  be  separated 
from  him.  When  the  ideal  and  real  meet  in  one  person,  then  Uia  better  hope  is 
indeed  brought  in. — Y. 


m.  rxn.  1—13.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


209 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  vm. 

Oh.   Till.   1— X.  19. 

The  High  Priesthood  of  Christ  fulfils 
THE  Symbolism  of  tub  Aabonio,  and  is 

ALONE  AN  EtKRNAL   EeALITT. 

Christ's  heavenly  priesthood,  shown  above 
to  be  of  a  higher  order  than  that  of  Aaron, 
destined  to  supersede  it,  is  in  this  section  of 
the  Epistle  (as  intimated  in  the  concluding 
verses  of  ch.  vii.)  set  forth  in  full  as  the 
reality  foreshadowed  by  it.  The  two  priest- 
hoods are  compared  with  respect  to  (1)  their 
spheres,  (2)  their  functions,  (3)  their  eifocts ; 
and,  in  the  course  of  the  exposition,  the  two 
covenants  (SiaS^/cai)  to  which  they  respec- 
tively belong  are  explained  and  contrasted. 

Ver.  1. — Now  the  chief  matter  in  (or,  in 
regard  to)  the  things  -whieh  are  being  said 
is  (or,  to  sum  up  what  we  are  saying').  The 
word  Ke(pa.Kaiov  in  itself  may  mean  either 
"  summary  "  or  "  chief  point."  It  is  not 
"  the  sum  of  wliat  we  liave  spoken,"  as  in 
A.V.  "  Caput,  id  est  praeoipuum  .  .  .  dum 
hseo  omnia  de  archisacerdote  nostro  dicimus, 
caput  totius  sermonis,  ordine  ita  postulante, 
commeraoraudum  venit.  Conf.  eirl,  ver.  6; 
ch.  ix.  10,  15,  17;  x.  28"  (Bengel).  We 
have  such  a  High  Priest  (i.e.  such  as  has 
been  described ;  cf.  ch.  vii.  26),  who  sat 
down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the 
Majesty  (or,  of  Majesty)  in  the  heavens  (cf. 
ch.  i.  3,  and  what  was  there  said). 

Ver.  2. — ^A  minister  of  the  sanctuary  (jav 
ayiav,  neuter,  as  in  ch.  iz.  12,  equivalent  to 
"the  holy  places;"  cf.  oh.  ix.  8;  x.  19), 
and  of  the  true  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord 
pitched,  and  not  man.  The  sphere  of  Christ's 
priestly  ministration  (XuTovpyis,  \eiTovfiye'!y, 
AetTovpyia,  being  the  recognized  words  in 
the  LXX.  and  Josephus  for  denoting  sacer- 
dotal functions, — hence  Liturgy)  is  thus  in 
the  first  placB  pointed  to  as  being  a  heavenly 
one,  symbolized,  only  by  the  earthly  sanc- 
tuary. But  what  is  the  true  tabernacle,  in 
which  Christ  ministers  ?  Are  we  to  suppose 
that  an  actual  prototype  of  the  earthly 
tabernacle  is  regarded  as  existing  locally 
beyond  the  sky?  No;  it  is  only  implied 
that  there  are,  in  the  suprasensuous  sphere, 
facts  and  relations  which  are  symbolized 
and  made  level  to  our  comprehension'  by 
local  imagery.  Still,  there  may  be  conceived 
as  present  to  the  writer's  mind  an  ideal 
picture  of  a  heavenly  temple,  such  as  was 
seen  in  vision  by  prophets,  and  served  to  aid 

HEBREWS. 


their  conception  of  realities  beyond  their 
ken.  Thus  in  Ps.  xxix.,  where  the  thunder- 
storm is  described,  the  Loud  is  conceived,  in 
the  introductory  and  concluding  verses,  ns 
entlironed  above  it  in  his  heavenly  temple, 
sitting  there  a  King  for  ever,  and  woishi  |jped 
by  the  "  sons  of  God."  Thus  in  1  Kings 
xxii.  19  Michaiah  sees  in  vision  "the  Lord 
sitting  on  his  throne,  and  all  the  host,  of 
heaven  standing  by  him,  on  his  right  hand 
and  on  his  left."  In  Isa.  vi.  this  throne  is 
seen  as  the  distinct  counterpart  of  the 
mercy-seat  in  the  eartlily  temple,  with  the 
winged  forms  above  it,  and  the  "  house  " 
filled  with  the  smoke  of  incense,  and  live 
coals  upon  the  altar.  Ezekiel's  still  more 
remarkable  visions  (ch.  i.,  x.,  xi.)  are  in 
like  manner  enlargements  of  the  idea  of  the 
Sheehinah  in  the  holy  of  holies  (cf.  also  Ps. 
xi.  4;  Mieahi.  2;  Hub.  ii.  20).  Then  the 
visions  of  St.  John  in  the  Revelation  have 
the  same  basis ;  there  is  still  seen  a  glorious 
counterpart  above  of  the  temple  below; 
though  now  with  new  accessories,  expres- 
sive of  accomplished  redemption.  But 
that  St.  John's  visions  are  meant  only  ns 
imagery  representing  the  incomprehensible 
is  evident  thioughout,  and  especially  from 
the  ideal  description  of  the  holy  city  in 
Eev.  xxi.,  in  which  ver.  22  is  peculiarly 
significant :  "  And  I  saw  no  temple  therein  : 
for  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb 
are  the  temple  of  it."  In  the  same  way  is 
to  be  understood  the  "true  tabernacle." 
If,  as  we  may  suppose,  the  writer  had  before 
his  mind  the  prophetic  visions  of  such  a 
heavenly  temple,  he  entertains  them  only 
as  imaging  spiritual  facts  and  relations  in 
the  regions  of  eternity.  "  Which  the  Lord 
pitched,"  etc.,  may  have  reference  to  Isa. 
xlii.  5,  'O  ira»j(ras  rhy  oipiwdy  Koi  ir^{as 
airby,  LXX. 

Vers.  3,  4. — For  eTery  high  priest  is 
appointed  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices : 
wherefore  it  is  of  necessity  that  this  one 
also  have  somewhat  to  offer.  Tor  (rather, 
nay;  the  reading  niv  oiv  being  better  sup- 
ported than  the  Textus  Eeceptus  /*ev  yap) 
if  he  were  on  earth,  he  would  not  even  be  a 
priest,  seeing  there  are  those  who  offer  the 
gifts  according  to  the  Law.  These  verses  are 
in  proof  of  the  assertion  of  ver.  2,  viz. 
that  Christ  has  his  ministry  in  the  heavenly 
tabernacle.  He  has  been  shown  to  be  a 
High  Priest :  therefore  he  must  make  some 
offering,  this  being  the  very  purpose  of  a 
high  priest's  office  (cf.  oh.  v.  1).  But  where? 
Not  certainly  in  the  earthly  tabernacle, 
this  beiug  served  already,  and  exclusively 
sirved,  by  the  sons  of  Aaron.  There- 
fore it  must  be  in  the   heavenly  sphere 


210 


THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vui.  1—13. 


symbolized  by  tbe  earthly  tabernacle.  And 
then,  in  ver.5,that  tlicre  is  a  heavenly  reality, 
of  which  the  earthly  tabernacle  is  but  a 
•hadow,  is  shown  by  whit  was  said  of  the 
latter  whf;n  it  was  made.  (What  Christ  olVerg 
in  the  heavenly  sphere  is  surely  Ids  own 
atoning  saori6oe.  Some  commentators  liuve 
found  a  difficulty  in  tliis  concejition  on  the 
ground  that  this  hia  sacrifice  bad  been  com- 
pleted ODce  for  all  before  his  asoeiifiiou. 
True ;  but  he  is  regarded  as  carrying  its 
efficacy  with  liim  to  the  mercy-seat  above, 
and  so  for  ever  offering  it ;  even  as  it  is 
continually  commemorated  •iid  pleaded  in 
the  Eucharist  by  the  Cliurch  below.  And 
thus,  be  it  observed,  the  symboli.~m  of  the 
Day  of  Atonement  is  accurately  fulfilled. 
For  the  high  priest  did  not  sacrifice  within 
the  tabernacle;  he  only  carried  to  the  holy 
of  holies  the  blood,  representing  the  atoning 
efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  made  outside  betbre 
his  entrance.) 

Ver.  5. — Who  (i.e.  being  such  as  do  so; 
o'iTtves')  serve  a  copy  and  shadow  of  the 
heavenly  things  (6w6Seiy/ia  here,  as  in  ch. 
ix.  23,  means  "  representation,"  in  the  way  of 
( opy,  not  of  pattern.  "  Shadow  "  (trifia)  is 
ojipnsed  in  ch.  x.  1  to  elKiiv,  which  denutes 
the  reality,  and  in  Col.  ii.  17  to  aai/ia),  even 
as  Moses  is  admonished  of  God  when  about  to 
make  t'le  tabernacle  (literally,  to  complete  ; 
but  not  in  the  sense  of  finishing  a  thing 
begun,  but  of  carrying  out  a  design  to  entire 
completion);  for,  See,  saith  he,  that  thou 
make  all  tlungs  according  to  the  pattern  that 
was  showed  tiiee  in  the  mount.  For  the 
tmse  of  Kfxf>T)M"'''iiTTai,  according  to  Hel- 
lenistic usage, cf.  Blatt.  ii.  22,  "Being  warned 
of  God  in  a  dream  (xp77;MaTii7fl6ls  Se  ko.t' 
ump)."  The  reference  here  is  to  Exod.  xxv. 
40 ;  the  words  which  "  the  Lobd  spake  unto 
Moses."  Ilabbinieal  writers,  holding  the 
view  of  an  actual  heavenly  tabernacle,  the 
prototype  of  tiie  earthly  one,  have  concluded 
fiom  the  p;'ssagb  in  Exodus  that  Moses  had 
a  vision  of  it,  or  ti  at  a  visible  representation 
of  it  was  exhibited  to  him  on  the  mount. 
All  tliat  is  necessarily  implied  is  thut  he 
was  divinely  admonished  to  make  the  taber- 
nacle after  the  fashion  convoyed,  in  what- 
ever way,  to  his  apprehension  when  on  the 
nionnt,  so  that  it  might  be  a  true  representa- 
tion of  some  heavenly  reality  (cf.  Acts  vii.  44). 

Yer.  6. — But  now  (cui-!  in  its  usual  logical, 
not  temporal,  sense ;  of.  ch.  xi  16;  alsoii.  8; 
ix.  20;  xii.  2(>)  hath  he  obtained  a  more 
excellent  ministry,  by  how  much  also  he  is 
the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant,  which 
C^Tts,  equivalent  to  quippequie,  as  usual) 
hath  been  established  upon  better  promises. 
Here  the  idea  of  the  new  Siadiuri,  introduced 
first  in  the  way  of  anticipation  at  ch  vii 
22,  is  brought  to  the  front,  to  be  carried  out 
Ui  what  follows.    There  the  proved  superior 


greatness  of  the  predicted  priest  was  made 
the  measure  of  the  superior  excellence  of 
the  covenant  of  which  he  has  become 
Surety;  here  the  superior  excellence  of  the 
new  covenant,  which  is  now  to  be  shown  from 
prophecy,  is  made  tlie  measure  of  that  of 
Christ's  priestly  ministry,  which  has  just 
been  proved  to  be  of  neces.sity  in  the  sphere 
of  heavenly  realities  of  which  the  Jlosaio 
ritual  was  but  a  copy  and  shadow.  The  word 
here  used  is  not  tyyuos  ("surely"),  as  in  ch. 
vii.  22,  but  fieffirns  ("  mediator  ") ;  on  which 
it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  mediator  of  the 
old  covenant  was  not  Aaron,  but  Moses  (see 
Gai;  iii.  19):  it  was  he  that  intervened 
belw.en  God  and  the  congiegation  in  the 
establishment  of  the  covenant ;  and  thus, 
in  this  respect  also,  the  priesthood  of  the 
new  covenant  transcends  the  old  one,  in  that 
(as  was  shown  also  in  the  eailiei  part  of  the 
Epistle)  the  type  of  Moses,  as  well  as  of 
Aaron,  is  fulfilled  in  it.  The  word  yevofio- 
SeTr)Tai  ("  established  "  in  A. V. ;  "  enacted  " 
in  the  recent  E.V.)  expresses  the  promul- 
gation of  a  law — appositely  in  the  first 
place  to  the  Law  of  Moses,  which  con- 
stituted tbe  conditions  of  the  3ld  covenant ; 
but  also  to  the  description  of  the  new  cove- 
nant, which  follows  from  Jeremiah,  according 
to  whioli  the  law  remains,  but  to  be  writtm 
on  the  heart.  The  gospel  is  elsewhere  re- 
garded under  the  idea  of  law,  though  not  a 
law  of  bondage,  but  of  liberty — a  law,  not 
of  tbe  letter,  but  of  the  Spirit  (see  Bom.  iii. 
27;  viii.  2 ;  ix.  31 ;  Jas.  i.  25).  The  "  better 
promises"  are  such  as  the  passage  from 
Jeremiah,  quoted  below,  notably  represents. 
Other  passages  might  be  referred  to  (such  as 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  25,  etc. ;  xxxvii.  24,  etc.),  of 
similar  significance,  though  not  with  the 
same  marked  mention  of  a  new  covenant  to 
supersede  the  old  one.  This  memorable 
passage  (Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 85)  occurs  in  a 
distinct  section  of  Jeremiaij's  prophecies 
(xxx.,  xxxi.),  delivered  after  the  oonimence- 
ment  of  tlie  Captivity,  and  directed  to  be 
written  in  a  book.  The  subject  of  the 
whole  section  is  the  restoration  of  Israel, 
its  ultimate  Mesaiauic  reference  being 
patent  to  all  who  acknowledge  any  such  at 
all  in  prophecy.  In  evidence  of  this  there 
is  not  only  the  passage  before  us,  pointing 
tn  an  entirely  new  covenant  with  Israel 
and  the  ideal  tone  of  the  whole  prophecy, 
but  also,  in  particular,  the  view  of  all  tlie 
scattered  tribes,  not  Juduh  only— the  whole 
ideal  Israel— being  gathered  together  froin 
all  countries  to  Zion,  and  of  David  himself 
to  rule  over  them  as  king.  The  national 
and  local  framework,  which  the  picture  hai 
in  common  with  other  prophelio  visions  of 
the  coming  days,  is  of  course  no  difficulty 
to  tlrose  familiar  with  the  style  of  the  pro- 
phetic books. 


BH.  rai.  1—13.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa. 


211 


Ver.  7. — 7oi  if  that  first  coTenant  had 
been  faultless,  then  should  no  plaoe  have 
been  sought  for  a  second.  "  For  "  introduces 
this  sentence  as  a  reason  for  what  has  been 
already  said;  i.e.  for  a  6eKer  covenant  having 
been  spoken  of.  The  expression  might  be 
objected  to  by  Hebrew  readers  as  implying 
imperfection  in  the  original  Divine  covenant, 
"  Nay,"  says  the  writer,  *'  it  was  imperfect, 
it  was  not  faultless ;  for  prophecy  itself  de- 
clnres  this."  Should  it  be  further  objected 
that  in  the  prophecy  it  is  not  the  old  cove- 
nant Itself  that  is  found  fault  with,  but  the 
people  for  not  observing  it,  the  answer  would 
be  that  the  remedy  for  their  non-obseiTianoe 
being  the  substitution  of  a  new  one  that 
would  answer  its  purpose  better,  some  im- 
perfection in  the  old  one  is  implied.  This 
is  indeed  the  very  point  of  this  verse.  If 
it  be  asked,  further,  how  faultiness  in  the 
old  covenant  is  compatible  with  the  view  of 
its  Divine  origin,  the  answer  is  abundantly 
supplied  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  His  posi- 
tiun  constantly  is  that  tlie  Mosaic  Law, 
though  in  itself  "  holy,  just,  and  true,"  and 
aileqaate  to  its  purpose,  was  still  imperfect 
as  a  means  of  juotitioation.  It  was  but  a 
tonipiirary  dispensation,  with  a  purpose  of 
its  own,  intervening  between  the  original 
promise  to  Abraliam  and  the  fulfilment  of 
that  promise  in  Christ.  Thus  it  is  no  de- 
rogation to  itself  or  to  its  Author  to  charge 
it  with  "  weakness  and  unprofitableness  " 
for  a  iiutposo  it  was  never  meant  to  answer. 

Vurs.  8—12. — ror  finding  fault  trith  them 
(i.e.  the  people),  he  saith  (or,  as  some  take 
it,  finding  fault,  he  laith  to  Oiem),  Behold, 
the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will 
accomplish  upon  the  house  of  Israel  and  the 
house  of  Judah  a  new  covenant :  not  accord- 
ing to  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their 
fathers  in  the  day  when  I  took  them  by  the 
hand  to  lead  them  out  of  the  land  of  £gypt ; 
because  they  continued  not  in  my  covenant, 
and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith  the  Lord. 
For  this  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make 
virith  the  house  of  Israel  after  those  days, 
saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  put  my  laws  into 
their  mind,  and  write  them  in  their  hearts : 
and  I  will  he  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall 
be  to  me  a  people :  and  they  shall  not  teach 
every  man  his  neighbour,  and  every  man 
his  brother,  saying,  Know  the  Lord  :  for 
all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest.  For  I  wiU  he  merciful  to  their 
unrighteousness,  and  their  sins  and  their 
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more.  Tlie 
passage  is  quoted  from  the  LXX.,  with  a 
few  verbal  diiferenccs  which  do  not  affect 
the  meaning.  In  ver.  9  our  A.V.  renders 
the  original  in  Jeremiah  "  although  I  w.is 
an  Husband  unto  them,"  instead  of  "  and  1 
legarded  them  not  (^Kayii  iifisKijffa  avrwv)." 
Xbe  LXX.,  followed  m  the  text,  gives  the 


more  probable  meaning.     On  the   whole 
passage  be  it  observed :    1.  "  Behold,  the 
days  come,"  like  "  in  that  day,"  is  a  usual 
prophetic  plirase  for  denoting  the  iige  of  the 
Messiah.     2.  The  f  lilure  of  tlie  old  cove- 
nant is  attributed  in  tlie  first  place  to  the 
people's  not  continuing  in  it,  and  tlion,  as  a 
consequence,  to  the  Lord's  withdrawal  of 
liis  protection.     The  evidence  of  such  with- 
drawal immediately  before   the   prophet's 
view  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  the 
Babylonian  captivity.  8.  The  distinguishing 
characteristics  of  the  new  covenant  are  (1) 
God's  laws,  not  imposed  as  an  external  code, 
but  put  into  the  mind  and  written  on  the 
heart;  ('-')  the  general   knowledge  of  llie 
Loud  by  small  as  well  as  great,  witliout  the 
former  need  of  continual  admonition;  and 
(3)  as  the  originating  and  inspiring  cause 
of  all,  the  forgiveness  on  the  Lord's  part  o 
past  sins.    It  is  important  to  perceive  tliat 
this  last  characteristic  of  the  new  covenant, 
though  coming  last  in  order,  is  given  as  tlie 
reason  for  the  other  two;  for  this  is  a  first 
principle  of  the  gospel.    The  sense  of  for- 
giveness through  Christ,  of  acceptance  in 
the  Beloved,  is  ever  set  forth  as  the  inspir- 
ing principle  of  the  obedience  of  Christians. 
"  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us." 
And  hence  flow  the  two  results  denoted  in 
the  prophecy.    (1)  "  I  will  put  my  laws," 
etc. ;  ».e.  there  will  ensue,  through  the  in 
spiring  Spii-it,  &om  the  sense  of  forgive- 
ness in  Christ,  a  hearty  service  of  love  and 
loyalty ;  no  mere  mechanical  observance  of 
an  external  code.     Then,  (2)  "And  they 
shall  not  teach,"  etc. ;  i.e.  those  who  thus,  led 
by  the  Spirit,  give  themselves  to  such  hearty 
service,  will  acquire,  further,  an  immediate, 
and  as  it  were  instinctive,  "knowledge  of 
the  Lord,"  not  confined  to  "  the  wise  "  or 
"  the  scribe,"  but  the  personal  privilege  of 
even  the  "little  ones"  of  Christ  (cf.  iMatt. 
xi.  25,  "I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  hast  hid 
these  tilings  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and 
hast  revealed  them  unto  babes ; "  also  Jolin 
vi.  45,  "  It  is  written  in  the  prophets.  And 
they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God ; "  also  1 
Thess.  iv.  9,  "But  as  touching  brotherly 
love,  ye  need  not  that  I  write  unto  you  ;  for 
ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love 
one  anotlier;"    also  1  John  ii.  20,  "But 
ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One, 
and  ye  know  all  things").     It  is  not  to  br 
inferred  (as  has  been)  from  this  last  result 
that  a  distinct  order  of  ministry  is  no  es- 
sential constituent  of  the  Christhin  Chureh 
for  admonition  of  othor.o.     The  fact  that 
such  a  ministry  was  constituted  from  the 
first  in  all  the  Churches,  and  was  in  active 
operation  when  apostles  wrote  as  abcjve,  is 
in  itself  sufScient  disproof  of  such  a  view. 
All  that  is  implied  is   that  <M   fidthftii 


2J2 


THE  EriSTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[CH.  VIII.  1 — 13i 


believers,  Bmall  as  well  as  great  (using,  of 
course,  the  means  of  grace  and  edification 
piovided  for  them  in  the  Church),  shuuld 
themselves  have  inward  illumiiiatinn  and 
personal  communion  with  Gud.  Tliis  is 
indeed  a  peculiar  glory  of  the  Christian 
religion.  The  poorest  and  the  simplest 
believer  may  have  spiritual  perceptions  and 
spiritual  experience  of  his  own,  surpassing 
those  of  his  appointed  guides,  and  remain- 
ing hid  own  though  priests  and  teachers  be 
unfaithful.  "  I  am  small  and  despised"  (may 
the  Christian,  still  more  than  the  ancient 
psalmist,  say),  "  yet  do  not  I  forget  thy  pre- 
cepts." "  I  have  more  understanding  than 
all  my  teachers  ;  for  thy  testimonies  are  my 
meditation."  Observe,  lastly,  the  ideality  of 
the  whole  view  given  of  the  effects  of  the 
new  covenant.  It  presents  to  iu  the  pur- 
pose, the  potentiality,  of  the  new  dispen- 
sation, lather  than  results  to  be  fully 
rOiclized  in  this  world ;  though  still  actually 
realized  so  far  as  tlie  "glorious  light  of 
tiie  gospel"  illuminates  the  Oliuroh,  aud 
is  allowed  to  "sliine  into"  the  human 
heart.  This  remark  applies  to  all  Messianic 
prophecy. 

Yer.  13. — In  that  he  saith,  A  new  cove- 
nant, he  hath  made  the  first  old.  Bnt  that 
which  is  becoming  old  and  waxeth  aged  is 
nigh  nut*  vanishing  away.  "He  hath 
uiade  the  first  old"  (TreiroAaituKe)  refers  to 
the  time  of  Jeremiah's  prophecy,  not  of  the 
writing  of  the  lilpistle.    The  very  mention 


of  a  new  covenant  had  even  then  antiquated 
the  other.  It  thenceforth  survived  only 
under  the  category  of  old  as  opposed  to 
new ;  and  further  marked  with  the  grow- 
ing decrepitude  which  is  the  precursor  of 
dissolution.  This  further  idea  is  expressed 
by  the  present  participle  wakaioiiievoi>  (else- 
where applied  to  garments  that  are  wearing 
out ;  cf .  Ps.  cii.  27 ;  ch.  i  11 ;  Isa.  1.  9 ;  li-  6 ; 
Luke  xii.  33),  and  also  by  yripda-itov,  a  figure 
taken  from  the  advance  of  old  age  in  men. 
When  the  Epistle  was  written,  it  would 
not  have  been  spoken  of  as  "  waxing  old," 
but  as  defunct.  The  temple,  indeed,  was 
still  standing,  with  the  old  ritual  going  on ; 
but  it  had  become  but  as  the  stately  shrine 
of  a  lifeless  thing.  As  to  the  view  of  the 
antiquation  having  begun  even  in  the  pro- 
phetic age,  we  observe  that  the  propbets 
themselves  show  a  consciousness  of  this, 
in  tliat  their  growing  tendency  is  to  de- 
preciate rather  than  exalt  the  ceremonial 
Law,  and  to  put  mercy  above  sacrifice.  In 
fact,  the  Old  Testament  itself,  especially  in 
its  Liter  parts,  is  replete  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  new  covenant,  anticipated  in 
part,  though  not  to  be  fully  reveided  till 
Christ  appeared.  And  so,  when  he  did 
appear,  the  old  dispensation  had  already 
become  obsolete,  and  the  new  one  prepaied 
for ;  to  be  rejected  in  Israel  by  those  only 
who,  "in  the  reading  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment," had  "  the  veil  upon  their  heart." 


HOMILETICS. 

Veri,  1 — 6.— I7l«  chief  point.  This  passage  does  not  present  a  recapitulation  of  the 
topics  already  considered ;  it  emphasizes,  as  the  crowning  topic  in  connection  with  our 
Lord's  priesthood,  the  fact  that  he  has  been  "  made  higher  than  the  heavens." 

L  The  heavbnlt  majesty  of  cub  High  Pkiest.  (Ver.  1.)  He  dwells  now  in 
heaven,  his  native  home.  He  occupies  there  the  loftiest  place ;  for  he  shares  the  sove- 
reign authority  and  the  universal  dominion  of  the  absolute  God.  Aaron  exercised  his 
priesthood  in  an  earthly  sanctuary  made  by  men's  hands ;  Christ  ofBciates  as  our  Higk 
Pi-iest  in  the  eternal  uncreated  heavens.  Aaron,  when  he  entered  the  holy  of  holies 
once  a  year  on  the  great  Jewish  fast-day,  merely  ttood  for  a  short  time  before  the  sym- 
bolic throne — his  attitude  one  of  lowly  service  ;  but  Christ  has  "sat  down"  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Eternal — his  attitude  that  of  royal  government.  It  is  noticeable  that  in 
this  treatise  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  does  not  receive  the  prominence 
which  is  given  to  it  in  almost  every  Epistle  of  Paul.  Indeed,  it  is  only  once  mentioned 
(ch.  xiii.  20).  But  doubtless  the  reason  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  unique  design  of 
the  treatise.  This  book  alone,  of  all  the  books  of  Scripture,  expounds  the  doctrine 
of  the  priesthood  of  Christ;  and  it  brings  into  the  foreground,  accordingly,  only  those 
acts  which  he  performed  as  the  Antitype  of  Aaron — ^his  sacrifice  of  himself  in  the  outer 
court  of  this  world,  and  his  passing  within  the  blue  veil  of  heaven  to  sprinkle  his  blood 
upon  the  mercy-seat.  So  the  writer  dwells  only  upon  the  death  and  the  ascension  of 
the  Saviour. 

II.  His  heavenly  ministry.  (Vers.  2 — 6.)  The  ministry  of  the  Redeemer  is  not 
incompatible  with  his  majesty  ;  for  lie  performs  it  as  the  Plenipotentiary  of  the  God- 
head, and  in  virtue  of  his  session  at "  the  right  hand  of  the  throne."  The  heavenly 
sanctuary  in  which  Christ  officiates  is  here  contrasted  with  the  Hebrew  sanctuary.     Wa 


OH.  vm.  1—13.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBBEWS.  213 

»re  rominded  tbat  the  Mosaic  tabernacle  and  its  ritual  were  nothing  more  than  an 
adumbration  of  the  realities  of  the  true  tabernacle.  They  were  only  a  shadowy 
prophecy  of  the  priestly  ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  very  furniture  of  the  sacred 
tent  had  a  symbolic  meaning ;  and  every  article  was  formed  after  a  Divine  "  pattern  " 
(ver.  5) — the  snuffers  and  incense-spoons  as  well  as  the  magnificent  lamp-stand.  But 
how  different  the  scene  of  Christ's  continual  intercession  from  the  Jewish  tabernacle  or 
temple  1  Having  offered  himself  as  a  Sacrifice  upon  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  which 
had  been  set  up  on  Calvary,  he  had  to  appear  within  the  sanctuary  of  Gk)d  with  hia 
atoning  blood.  Not  being,  however,  a  high  priest  after  the  order  of  Aaron,  he  could 
not  go  for  this  purpose  into  the  temple  at  Jerusalem ;  so,  'if  he  was  to  continue  to  be 
"a  Priest  at  all"  (ver.  4),  it  behoved  him  to  seek  another  temple.  Jesus  accordingly 
ascended  to  heaven,  "  the  true  tabernacle ; "  and  he  carries  on  his  ministry  there  in 
"  the  sanctuary,"  i.e,  in  the  holy  of  holies  which  belongs  to  that  true  tabernacle  (ver.  2). 
The  Levitioal  high  priests  were  but  typical  mediators,  who  performed  typical  services  in 
connection  with  a  typical  sanctuary.  Jesus  is  the  anti-typical  High  Priest,  who  has 
offered  a  real  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  who  makes  prevailing  intercession  for  his  ponple 
within  the  true  archetypal  tabernacle.  His  ministry,  therefore,  is  "  more  excellent  " 
than  Aaron's. 

Lgbsomb.  1.  For  the  materialist.  The  Mosaic  tabernacle  was  a  "copy"  of  the 
celestial  sanctuary ;  but  are  not  all  nature  and  all  earthly  relations  just  an  adumbration 
of  thannBeenf 

«  What  if  earth 
Be  but  the  shadow  of  heaven,  and  things  thoiela 
Eaoh  to  other  like,  more  than  on  earth  is  thought?  " 

(Milton.) 

2.  For  the  taeerdotalist,  Jesus  is  the  one  mediating  Priest  of  the  New  Testament 
Church ;  and  even  he  is  no  longer  a  sacrificing  Priest.  He  bled  and  died  in  the  outer 
court  J  and  he  mediates  in  "  the  sanctuary  "  now  by  intercession.  3.  For  the  formalist. 
Qow  great  the  gnilt  of  the  man  who,  while  professing  to  1}e  a  Christian,  does  not  make 
the  priesthood  of  Christ  a  main  theme  of  his  thoughts,  and  the  joy  of  his  heart  1  4. 
For  the  Christian  leliever.  The  saint  should  more  and  more  rejuice  in  Jesus  as  hia 
Priest,  and  constantly  re-commit  his  soul  into  his  hands,  to  be  introduced  to  God  by 
him.  6.  For  the  gospd  minister.  While  the  teaching  of  the  pulpit  ought  to  range,  as 
far  as  possible,  over  the  wide  sweep  of  thought  which  is  embraced  in  the  orbit  of  the 
Bible,  the  doctrine  of  the  mediation  of  our  glorified  Redeemer  must  be  its  "  chief  point  " 
— the  key-stone  of  all  its  utterances,  whether  evangelical  or  ethical. 

Ten.  8^18. — The  new  covenant.  Here  we  have  another  of  the  broad  contrasts  which 
everywhere  meet  us  in  this  treatise.  In  those  Epistles  which  are  undoubtedly  Paul's, 
the  process  of  reasoning  resembles  the  movement  of  &file  of  soldiers ;  but  in  this  to  the 
Hebrews,  the  movement  resembles  rather  that  of  soldiers  in  rank.  The  writer  intro- 
duces his  contrast  between  the  covenants  with  the  remark  (ver.  6)  tbat  our  Lord's 
heavenly  ministry  as  greatly  excels  that  of  Aaron  as  the  new  covenant  which  he 
administers  is  superior  to  the  old. 

L  Thk  old  covenant  was  impbrfect.  "That  first  covenant"  (ver.  7)  does  aot 
refer  to  the  covenant  of  works,  which  was  made  with  Adam  in  Eden ;  but  to  the  Mosaic 
dispensation  of  the  economy  of  grace.  This  covenant  had  been  solemnly  inaugurated 
and  accepted  by  the  Jews  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  xxiv.  4 — 8)  ;  and  it  had 
been  repeatedly  renewed  in  later  times  (Josh.  xxiv.  24,  25;  2  Chron.  xv.  12;  2  Kings 
xi.  17 ;  2  Chron.  xxix. ;  Neh.  ix.,  x.).  It  was  not  "  faultless ;  "  that  is,  it  was  imperfect 
A3  a  dispensation  of  grace.  The  Mosaic  institutions  were  only  preparatory  to  those  of 
gospel  times.  They  were  legal  rather  than  evangelical,  and  sensuous  rather  than 
spiritual.  They  were  suited  to  the  nonage  of  the  Church  ;  and  "  Israel  was  a  child" 
when  Glod  "  took  him  by  the  hand  to  lead  him  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  "  (ver.  9 ; 
Hob.  xi.  1—4).  So  Judaism  taught  spiritual  truth  only  in  faint  outline.  Its  method 
was  that  of  spectacular  representation.  The  Law  was  "  our  tutor  to  bring  us  unto 
Chrto*"(Ghd.iii.  24). 

IL  A  FBOPBEOT  OF  IHB  NBW  COVENANT.    In  order  to  prove  from  the  Jewish  Serip- 


214  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  l<m.  viii.  1—13. 

tures  the  imperfection  of  the  "  first"  covenant,  and  to  describe  the  "  better  promises  " 
of  the  "  new  '  and  final  covenant,  the  writer  quotes  a  most  .striking  passage  from  tha 
Book  of  Jeremiah  (xxxi.  31 — 34).  This  oracle  was  given  when  the  Jews  of  Judab 
were  on  the  brink  of  the  Babylonish  captivity,  to  comfort  their  desolate  hearts  with 
the  cheering  hope  of  Messianic  times.  The  chosen  people  had  not  "  continued  "  in 
God's  covenant ;  and,  because  they  had  broken  it,  he  had  "  regarded  them  not  "  (ver.  9), 
but  allowed  first  Israel,  and  afterwards  .Judah,  to  be  carried  into  exile.  But  Jeremiah 
is  commissioned  to  announce  that,  notwithstanding  all,  God  in  his  wonderful  mercy 
"will  make  a  new  covenant"  (ver.  8),  with  the  whole  Hebrew  nation.  The  twelve 
tribes  shall  again  become  one  rod  in  his  hand.  And  all  Gentiles,  who  by  faith  belong 
to  the  true  Israel,  shall  share  the  blessing, 

in.  Oharaotbbistics  of  the  new  covenant.  What  are  the  "better  promises"? 
Jeremiah's  oracle  mentions  three,  1.  77ie  Law  written  on  the  heart.  (Ver.  10.)  The 
child  is  controlled  by  positive  external  precept ;  the  man  by  moral  and  spiritual  prin- 
ciple. During  the  pupilage  of  the  Church,  the  Divine  laws  were  written  "in  tables  of 
stone;"  but,  now  that  the  Church  has  come  to  manhood,  they  are  inscribed  "  in  tables 
that  are  hearts  of  flesh"  (2  Cor,  iii,  3).  The  ascendancy  of  ritualism  in  any  Christian 
Cliurch  means,  therefore,  a  return  to  the  "  childish  things  "  of  the  old  covenant — a  going 
back  to  the  swaddling-clothes  of  religious  babyhood.  2,  The  universal  knowledge  of 
Ood.  (Ver,  11,)  During  the  Jewish  dispensation,  the  average  Jew  had  only  an  exceed- 
ingly dim  apprehension  of  religiuus  truth,  whether  about  God  or  the  way  to  him,  or 
about  holiness  or  immortality.  But,  under  the  new  covenant,  spiritual  truth  shall 
become  the  longer  the  more  clearly  perceived,  and  the  more  widely  diffused.  For  now 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  great  Teacher  of  the  Church ;  and  he  does  not  impart  esoteric 
instruction  to  some  special  caste,  but  teaches  every  believer  "  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest,"  What,  then,  is  modem  ritualism,  but  a  return  to  the  dim  vision  of  the  old 
economy  ?  It  is  the  use  of  candles — sometimes  literally — in  broad  daylight.  3.  T/ie 
full  forgiveness  of  sins.  (Ver,  12.)  This  "  promise,"  although  introduced  last,  precedes 
the  other  two  in  actual  bestowment.  Sin  must  be  pardoned  and  cleansed  away  before 
the  Law  can  be  written  on  the  heart,  or  the  mind  flooded  with  spiritual  light.  None 
of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  could  expiate  moral  guilt ;  but  on  the  basis  of  Christ's  atone- 
ment God  now  imparts  that  forgiveness  which  is  the  precedent  condition  of  moral 
renewal  and  of  a  holy  life  (Ps.  cxxx.  4). 

Conclusion.  God  said  at  Sinai,  in  setting  up  the  "  first"  covenant,  "  Thou  shalt 
not "  (Exod.  XX.  3 — 17) ;  but  now,  in  ordering  the  new  covenant,  his  words  are,  "  I 
will"  (vers.  10 — 12).  And  what  does  this  change  of  language  imply?  "I  will" 
really  points  to  the  effusion  and  diffusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  was  poured  out  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  anniversary  of  the  giving  of  the  Law  from  Mount  Sinai.  It 
is  his  presence  within  the  New  Testament  Church  that  makes  the  new  covenant  so  vastly 
superior  to  the  old.  We  should  ask  ourselves  whether  our  bouIs  individually  are 
sharing  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  We  must  remember  also  that  the 
"  better  promises  "  imply  on  our  part  definite  duties  and  great  responsibilities.  And, 
as  regards  the  world,  we  must  be  persuaded  that  only  the  general  acceptance  of  the 
new  covenant  will  extirpate  by  the  roots  the  enormous  evils  which  still  afflict  society. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  6, — Three  letter  things.  "  But  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excellent  ministry," 
etc.  In  these  words  the  writer  states  in  brief  what  he  at  once  proceeds  to  illustrate  and 
establish  at  considerable  length,  from  this  point  on  to  ch,  x,  18,  We  may  perhaps  with 
advantage  take  a  general  glance  at  these  three  better  things,  leaving  their  particular 
examination  until  summoned  to  it  by  the  development  of  the  Epistle, 

I.  The  betteb  ministbt.  "  But  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excellent  ministry  " 
than  the  high  priests  of  the  Jewish  Church.  The  proposition  of  the  text  is  that  our 
Lord's  ministry  is  as  much  better  than  theirs  as  the  new  covenant  is  bettor  than  the 
old,  and  the  new  covenant  is  better  than  the  old  because  it  has  been  enacted  upon  better 
promises.  His  ministry  is  that  of  our  great  High  Priest,  or,  in  the  word  used  in  the 
text,  our  Mediator.    Let  us  mention  a  Tew  particulars  in  which  this  ministry  of  his 


OH.  vm.  1—13.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  «1S 

if  more  excellent  than  that  tt  th«  Jewish  high  priests.  1.  Became  'H  U  taeereised  in  * 
Mgher  sphere.  They  ministered  in  the  material  tabernacle  and  temple,  and  for  a  hrief 
season  once  a  year  were  permitted  to  enter  the  holy  of  holies  where  God  manifested  his 
presence  by  a  symbol ;  but  these  were  only  copies  and  shadows  of  the  heavenly  realities. 
Our  Saviour  is  a  Minister  of  the  heavenly  "  sanctuary,  and  of  the  true  tabernacle,  which 
the  Lord  pitched,  not  man."  He  "  appears  before  the  face  of  God  for  us."  2.  Beeaust 
it  extends  to  greater  numbers.  The  ministry  of  the  Jewish  high  priests  was  exercised 
for  the  Jews  only.  It  was  limited  to  their  own  race,  and  to  the  proselytes  to  their 
religion.  But  the  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ  is  for  all  mankind.  He  "  tasted  death  for 
every  man."  He  is  the  "  Mediator  between  God  and  men  "  of  every  nationality,  and 
every  race,  and  every  age,  etc.  3.  Because  it  is  enduring.  The  ministry  of  individual 
Jewish  high  priests  ended  at  their  death,  if  not  before ;  and  that  ministry  as  an  insti- 
tution waxed  old  and  vanished  away.  But  the  ministry  of  our  great  High  Priest  is  of 
perpetual  vitality  and  eflicacy.  His  mediation  will  never  be  superseded,  never  lose  its 
attractiveness  and  glory,  until  man  is  fitted  to  approach  God  without  a  mediator.  4. 
Because  it  secures  richer  results.  These  results,  or  some  of  them  at  least,  are  referred  t« 
in  the  "  better  promises."  The  results  of  the  ministry  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood,  lika 
its  functions,  were  to  a  great  extent  symlmlic  and  shadowy  rather  than  essential  and 
real.  But  through  the  ministry  of  the  Christ  we  obtain  real  benefits  and  essential 
blessings :  t.g.  reconciliation  with  God,  forgiveness,  etc. 

n.  The  better  covenant.  "  He  is  the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant."  But  what 
are  we  to  understand  by  the  word  "  covenant "  ?  As  used  in  human  relations  it  denotes 
a  compact  or  agreement  between  two  or  more  parties,  who  are  equal,  each  of  whom  has 
the  right  to  propose  alterations  in  the  terms  of  the  compact,  and  to  accept  or  reject  such 
terms.  In  this  sense  there  can  be  no  covenant  between  God  and  man ;  for  there  is  no 
equality 'between  the  parties,  and  man  cannot  reject  any  requirement  of  God  without 
committing  sin.  Perhaps  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  word  which  strictly  signifies 
covenant  is  not  used  in  the  New  Testament.  But  as  applied  to  God  and  man  the 
"  covenant "  denotes  his  method  of  revealing  himself  to  men,  and  his  will  concerning 
their  salvation,  his  arrangement  of  agencies  and  means  and  conditions  by  which  they 
may  be  saved.  "  The  word  '  covenant '  becomes  appropriate  iu  view  of  the  solemn 
assent  and  consent  with  which  man  accepts  God's  proposal,  involved  in  his  scheme 
or  plan.  In  this  context  the 'old  covenant 'is  the  scheme  revealed  to  Israel  under 
Moses ;  the  '  new '  is  the  gospel  scheme  involving  the  gift  and  work  of  both  the  Son 
and  the  Spirit  of  God."  The  old  covenant  was  good,  as  our  text  implies.  It  originated 
in  the  grace  of  God.  It  involved  on  his  part  condescension  towards  man.  It  was 
designed  and  fitted  to  benefit  and  bless  and  save  man.  It  promised  life  and  blessing  to 
those  who  complied  with  its  terms ;  and  its  promises  were  true.  But  the  new  covenant 
is  very  much  better  than  the  old.  This  will  appear  when  we  come  to  notice  the 
"  better  promises."  At  present  we  mention  only  two  aspects  of  its  superiority.  1.  It 
presents  a  more  spiritual  revelation  of  the  character  and  wiU  of  Qod,  Under  the  old 
covenant  nearly  everything  was  expressed  by  means  of  material  forms  and  symbols — 
nearly  everything  appealed  to  the  senses.  Its  laws,  its  ritual,  its  promised  blessings, 
pertained  largely  to  the  visible,  the  sensuous,  and  the  temporal.  It  was  a  revelation 
suited  to  the  cliildhood  and  youth  of  our  race.  But  the  new  covenant  gives  us  a  more 
spir.tual  manilestation  of  the  Divine  mind  and  will  j  it  is  a  revelation  for  the  manhood 
of  our  race.  It  proclaims  the  spirituality  of  God  and  of  liis  worship.  It  writes  ths 
Divine  law  upon  men's  hearts.  It  promises  spiritual  blessings.  2.  It  is  a  fuller 
txpression  of  the  grace  of  Ood.  (Of.  John  i.  14 — 18 ;  Eom.  iii.  24 ;  y.  21 ;  vi.  14.)  The 
next  division  of  our  subject  will  show  us  that  there  is  more  of  Divine  grace  manifested 
in  the  new  than  in  the  old  covenant. 

III.  The  better  pbomises.  "  A  better  covenant,  which  hath  been  enacted  upon 
better  promises."  The  promises  which  the  writer  has  chiefly  in  view  are  those  mentioned 
in  vers.  10 — 12.  Let  us  mention  some  of  these  better  promises  of  the  new  covenant. 
1.  It  proffers  strength  to  comply  with  its  own  conditions.  The  old  covenant  promised 
lilesbings  to  the  obedient ;  the  new  promises  blessings  to  enable  us  to  render  obedience. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  promised  to  incline  our  hearts  to  the  good,  to  strengthen  us  for  duty, 
etc.  2.  Justification  for  the  sinner  on  condition  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  (Cf.  Rom.  iii. 
20—26 ;  X.  5 — 10 ;  Gal.  iii.  10 — 14.)    3.  Sanctification  of  the  believer  by  the  Holy  l^rit. 


216  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  vm.  1— Ift. 

(Cf.  John  xiv.  16—18,  26  ;  xv.  26 ;  xvi.  7—15  ;  Rom.  xv.  13,  16 ;  2  Oor.  Hi.  18.)  4. 
Qlorification  o/ his  people  for  ever  in  the  future  state.  (Cf.  Rom.  viii.  17,  18,  30;  2  Cor. 
iv.  17 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  10;  1  Pet.  v.  10.)  Verily,  these  are  better  promises  than  those  of  the 
old  covenant.  And  the  covenant  to  which  they  belong  is  far  better  than  the  old  one. 
By  so  much,  also,  is  our  Lord's  ministry  better  than  that  of  the  Aaronio  high  priests. 
Let  us  give  earnest  heed  to  secure  oor  personal  interest  in  thia  new  and  "  better  cove- 
nant."—W.  J. 

Ver.  10. — Law  and  low  in  the  new  covenant.  "  For  thU  li  the  covenant  that  I 
will  make,"  etc.  The  paragraph  from  which  our  text  is  taken  is  a  quotation  from 
Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 34.  It  is  said  that  the  Lord  "  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the 
house  of  Israel  and  with  the  house  of  Judah  ; "  but  this  is  spoken,  not  of  Israel  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh,  but  of  the  spiritual  Israel — the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham  (cf.  Bom.  ii. 
28,  29  ;  ix.  6—8;  GaL  iii.  7—9).    Notice— 

I.  The  betelation  of  Law  in  the  new  covenant.  One  of  the  great  distinctioiis 
between  the  two  covenants  arises  from  the  materiality  of  the  old  one  and  the  spiritu- 
ality of  the  new  one.  In  nothing  is  this  more  manifest  than  in  the  matter  of  Law. 
Law  is  present  in  both  of  them.  But  in  the  old  it  was  engraved  upon  tables  of  stone  ; 
in  the  new  it  is  written  upon  the  hearts  of  men.  Under  the  old  the  people  were  lud 
"  by  the  hand,"  guided  by  visible  symbols;  under  the  new  they  are  led  by  the  heart, 
guided  by  spiritual  influences.  Our  text  sets  forth  certain  aspects  of  Law  in  the  new 
covenant.  1.  Law  present  in  the  mind.  "  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind."  In 
the  former  dispensation  Law  was  spoken  to  the  outward  ear,  it  was  made  visible  to  the 
bodily  eye ;  and  so  given,  it  was  often  soon  neglected  and  forgotten.  But  in  the 
present  dispensation,  to  those  who  have  by  faith  entered  into  covenant  relation  n  ith 
God,  Law  is  given  as  a  possession  of  their  spiritual  nature.  It  is  not  externalto  them, 
but  is  present  within  their  minds  as  a  rule  of  action  and  as  a  theme  for  meditation. 
2.  Law  treaswed  in  the  heart.  "And  on  their  heart  also  will  I  write  them."  When 
a  thing  is  highly  esteemed  by  ui,  or  when  a  cause  has  awakened  our  deep  interest,  we 
say  with  propriety  that  it  lies  near  our  heart.  With  greater  emphasis  and  deeper 
significance  do  we  say  the  same  of  one  whom  we  love.  So  in  the  new  covenant  Law 
holds  a  high  place ;  it  is  prized  and  loved.  It  is  loved  as  being  good  In  itself.  "  1'he 
Law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  holy,  and  righteous,  and  good."  It  is  loved,  also, 
as  being  the  expression  of  our  Father's  will.  There  wore  instances  under  the  old 
covenant  in  which  the  Law  was  loved  and  delighted  in,  but  they  were  rare  exceptions 
to  the  general  rule.  Under  the  new  covenant  the  Law  of  the  Lord  will  be  increasingly 
prized  and  loved  and  obeyed.  3.  Law  embodied  in  the  life.  "  Out  of  the  heirt  are 
the  issues  of  life."  Writing  the  Law  upon  the  heart  is  a  pictorial  way  of  expressing  the 
inspiration  of  a  disposition  to  obey  Law.  God  will  give  his  people  courage  to  profess 
his  laws,  "  and  power  to  put  them  in  practice ;  the  whole  habit  and  frame  of  their 
souls  shall  be  a  table  and  transcript  of  the  Law  of  God."  The  Law  which  they  love 
in  their  heart  they  will  express  in  their  lives.  This  ii  the  highest  revelation  of  Law, 
It  is  most  effective  in  relation  to  the  individual ;  it  ii  most  clear  in  relation  to  others, 
and  most  influential  also.  This  revelation  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  It  is  he 
who  illumines  the  mind,  inspires  the  heart,  etc. 

n.  The  expbebbion  of  love  in  the  new  covenant.  "  And  I  will  be  to  them  a 
God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people."  We  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  the  giving  of 
the  Law  unto  the  minda  and  hearts  of  God's  people  was  not  an  expression  of  his  love  ; 
for  such  in  truth  it  was.  But  here  is  a  brighter  manifestation  of  his  love.  Notice  : 
1.  Ood^s  relation  to  the  Christian.  "  I  will  be  to  them  a  God."  He  will  be  to  them 
all  that  they  could  desire  and  expect  to  find  in  their  God.  He  gives  himself  as  the 
chief  blessing  of  the  new  covenant.  He  will  be  to  his  people  "  as  great,  as  wise,  as 
powerful,  as  good  as  he  is  in  himself."  We  have  all  things  in  him  (1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23). 
We  have  his  wisdom  for  our  direction,  his  power  for  our  protection,  his  love  for  our 
spiritual  satisfaction  and  joy,  his  Spirit  for  out  instruction,  consolation,  and  sanctifica- 
tion,  his  heaven  for  our  abiding  and  blessed  home.  A  whole  library  dealing  with  these 
words  could  not  fully  express  the  number  and  preciousness  of  the  blessings  which  are 
comprehended  in  them — "  I  will  be  to  them  a  God."  2.  Th«  Christian's  relation  to 
Qod.    ."  And  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people."     This  ii  set  forth  as  our  privilege ;  and 


CH.  vm.  1— 13.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  TUB  HEBREWS.  217 

a  great  one  it  is.  But  the  privilege  has  its  obligations.  If  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  wo 
have  entered  into  this  covenant  relation  with  God,  we  have  the  right  to  expect  its 
blessings  from  him,  and  we  are  solemnly  bouud  to  fulfil  its  duties  to  him.  Our  duty 
to  which  the  covenant  binds  us  includes  (I)  supreme  affection  to  God  ;  (2)  reverent 
worship  of  him  ;  (3)  hearty  consecration  to  his  service ;  (4)  cheerful  compliance 
witli  his  wilL  May  we  be  enabled  both  to  perform  the  duties  and  to  enjoy  the 
privileges  of  this  gracious  covenant. — W.  J. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Knowhdge  and  mercy  in  the  new  covenant.  "  And  they  shall  not 
teach  every  man  his  neighbour,"  etc. 

L  Man's  knowledge  of  God  undbb  the  new  covenant.  "And  they  shall  not  teach 
every  man  his  fellow-citizen,  and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  Know  the  Lord,"  etc. 
We  have  here:  1.  The  highest  subject  of  knowledge.  "The  Lord:  all  shall  know  me." 
"This  is  life  eternal,  that  tliey  should  know  tliee  the  only  true  God,"  etc.  This 
knowledge  is:  (1)  Sublimest  in  its  character.  There  is  no  knowledge  so  exalted  as  this. 
Knowledge  of  astronomy  is  a  high  attainment ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  compared  with 
knowledge  of  him  who  made  the  stars  and  all  worlds,  and  who  sustains  them  and 
presides  over  them.  (2)  Widest  in  its  extent.  He  is  infinite,  and  can  never  be  fully 
known  by  man:  "The  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Christ,"  says  Dr.  Harris,  "is  the 
sum  of  all  science ;  this  is  the  only  knowledge  that  can  incorporate  and  mingle  with 
our  being ;  and  all  other  knowledge  is  real  only  so  far  as  it  is  symbolical  of  this."  (3) 
Mightiest  in  its  moral  influence.  It  transforms  the  character  of  those  who  possess  it 
(cf.  2  Cor.  iii.  18).  2.  The  purest  source  of  hnoioledge.  The  obligation  of  men  under 
the  old  covenant  to  impart  to  each  other  the  knowledge  of  God  is  implied  in  the  text. 
This  obligation  is  not  abolished  under  the  new  covenant ;  but  there  is  less  need  fur 
such  private  instruction  because  of  the  fri  quont  public  services  Of  qualified  ministers  of 
the  gospel.  Moreover,  the  text  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  communication  of  knowledge 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  The  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  assumed  under  this  covenant 
as  '  the  Spirit  of  truth,'  the  supreme  and  most  vital  Teacher  of  this  true  knowledge  of 
God.  For  the  covenant,  taken  in  the  large  sense  of  a  system  of  agencies,  is  definitely 
and  certainly  the  gosj.el  age  as  distinguished  from  the  Mosaic;  and  of  this  gospel  age 
or  dispensation,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  teach,  impress,  and  enforce  the  true 
knowledge  of  God,  is  the  centre  and  the  soul,  even  as  Jesus  is  the  centre  and  soul  of 
the  Christian  economy  considered  as  'the  Propitiation  for  our  sins,'  and  our  great  High 
Priest  before  the  throne  of  G  d.  The  results  as  given  here  come  of  his  teaching  and  of  no 
other  "  (H.  Cowles,  D.D.).  This  knowledge  does  not  spring  from  mere  human  conjecture, 
or  imagination,  or  investigation,  or  ratiocination ;  but  from  spiritual  revelation.  "  AIL 
thy  children  shall  be  taugtit  of  the  Lord."  "  Ye  have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One, 
and  ye  know  all  things  "  (1  John  ii.  20,  27).  3.  The  dear  apprehension  of  knowledge. 
Proceeding  from  so  cr)  slalline  a  source,  the  stream  will  be  clear.  If  our  mind  and  heart 
be  free  from  prejudice,  then  the  instruction  concerning  God  which  we  receive  from 
the  Word  and  the  Spirit  will  be  clear  and  correct ;  what  we  know  of  him  we  shall 
know  truly.  4.  The  wide  diffusion  of  knowledge.  "  All  shall  know  me,  fiom  the 
least  to  the  greatest  of  them."  Primarily  the  "  all  "  refers  to  the  "  people"  (ver.  10) 
of  God :  all  of  them  shall  know  him.  But  eventually  there  shall  be  a  universal 
difi'usion  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  This  the  sacred  Scriptures  distinctly  af&rm 
(Matt.  xxiv.  14  J  xxviii.  19;  Luke  xxiv.  47;  Ilev^xiv.  6). 

II.  God's  mercy  to  man  under  the  new  covenant.  "  For  I  will  he  merciful  to 
their  unrighteousness,  and  their  sins,"  etc.  Under  the  new  covenant  God  manifests 
his  rich  grace  in  the  way  in  which  he  forgives  sin.  We  have  here:  1.  The  source  of 
forgiveness.  "I  will  be  merciful."  Forgiveness  does  not  spring  from  man's  repent- 
ance, but  from  God's  mercy.  Eepentance  is  a  condition  of  forgiveness,  but  the  grace 
of  Got!  is  its  source.  Apart  from  his  grace  repentance  is  impossible  unto  us,  "  By 
grace  are  ye  saved,"  etc.  (cf.  Eph.  ii.  7 — 10).  2,  The  fulness  of  forgiveness.  He 
pardons  "  their  iniquities  and  their  sins."  He  cleanses  "from  all  unrighteousness." 
"  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  £i-om  all  sin,"  iSone  are  too  numerous, 
none  too  aggravated,  etc.  (cf.  Isa.  i.  18;  Iv.  7).  3.  The  inevocahleness  of  forgiveness. 
"  Their  sins  will  I  remember  no  more."  Strictly  speaking,  the  Infinite  Mind  cannot 
forget  an^  thing.    But  God  forgives  so  completely  that  the  sins  are  as  it  were  bimed  in 


218  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  vin.  1—11 

deep  oblivion.  His  forgiveness  is  irrevocable.  This  inspiring  truth  is  repeatedly  and 
impressively  expressed  in  the  Bible  (Ps.  ciii.  12 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  17  ;  xliii.  25 ;  xUt.  22 ; 
Micah  vii.  19).  This  rich,  abounding  mercy  is  the  reason  of  man's  fuller,  clear  know- 
ledge of  God.  There  was  mercy  in  the  old  covenant,  but  in  that  it  was  not  pre-eminent 
as  in.  the  new  one.  The  chief  feature  of  that  was  Law ;  the  chief  feature  of  this 
is  grace.  Forgiveness  leads  to  gratitude  and  love  to  the  Forgiver ;  and  love  leads 
to  the  clearer,  wider  knowledge  of  him.  If  you  would  know  God  truly,  intimately, 
deeply,  you  must  love  him. — W.  J. 

Ver.  13. — Decaying  and  departing.  "  Now  that  which  decayeth  and  waxeth  old," 
etc.  In  these  words  the  writer  states  a  general  principle  of  which  the  old  covenant 
was  an  illustration.  That  covenant  was  relatively  old,  because  a  new  one  had  been 
introduced;  it  was  also  absolutely  old,  and  had  not  "in  itself  the  strength  to  exist 
niiicli  longer."  When  anything  arrives  at  that  condition  its  end  is  not  far  off — it 
'•  is  nigh  unto  vanishing  away."  Let  us  indicate  a  few  of  the  applications  of  this 
principle.     It  is  applicable  to^ 

I.  Forms  of  keligious  oroanization.  In  our  text  it  la  thus  applied  to  the 
Mosaic  economy.  Many  of  our  present  religious  forms — forms  of  Church  government 
and  forms  of  worship — are  of  human  origin.  If  they  are  vital  and  suit  the  circum- 
stances and  conditions  of  this  age,  let  them  be  maintained ;  but  if  they  do  not, 
and  cannot  be  made  to  do  so,  by  all  means  let  them  go.  In  fact,  a  living  Church 
will  certainly  put  off  its  dead  forms  by  the  natural  expression  of  its  life.  The  late 
A.  J.  Scott  says  wisely  and  beautifiJly,  "  True  reverence  for  antiquity  seeks  a  Church 
presenting  the  clearest  image  of  eternity  in  the  midst  of  the  mutations  of  time.  This 
she  is  to  do  by  the  inward  vigour  of  the  essential  principles  of  her  life,  dropping 
off  forms  no  longer  useful,  as  the  oak  has  done  the  leaves  of  last  summer.  The 
live  oak  abides  the  same  l)y  its  vitality,  while  it  changes  form  and  dimensi(ms  by 
growth  ;  the  mass  of  squared  timber  has  lost  its  power  of  assimilation,  its  command  of 
resources;  death  enables  it  to  remain  unchanged  in  form,  till  death  brings  decay 
that  changes  form  and  substance.  What  is  dead  is  changed  from  without;  what 
lives  changes  from  within."  And  Dr.  Huntington  forcibly  says,  "When  religious 
lorms  have  first  been  devised,  a  certain  freshness  of  conviction  has  gone-  into  them 
that  has  made  them  vital.  But  presently  the  life  has  refused  to  stand  and  stagnate 
in  these  cisterns,  and  so  ebbed  away  and  souglit  out  new  channels.  The  mistake  has 
been  that  the  foims  have  insisted  on  standing,  after  the  life  within  was  gone;  and 
accordingly  their  figure  has  been  that  of  wooden  vessels  shrunk  and  dried  in  tlie  sun." 
Now,  where  the  vitality  has  gone,  let  the  form  go  also ;  for,  as  Carlyle  says,  "  the 
old  never  dies  till  all  the  soul  of  good  that  was  in  it  has  got  itself  transfused  into  the 
practical  new."    Let  the  dead  forms  pass  away — 

■  For  who  would  keep  an  ancient  form 
Through  which  the  spirit  breathes  no  more  7* 

(Tennyson.) 

n.  Forms  oy  reI/IQIOTTS  belief.  Much  that  is  said  above  on  religious  organizations 
i*  equally  applicable  to  religious  creeds.  As  Mr.  J.  A.  Froude  puts  it,  "  While  the 
essence  of  religion  remains  the  same,  the  mode  in  wliich  it  is  expressed  changes  and 
has  changed — changes  as  living  languages  change  and  become  dead,  as  institutions 
change,  as  forms  of  government  change,  as  opinions  on  all  things  in  heaven  and 
earth  change,  as  half  the  theories  held  at  this  time  among  ourselves  will  probalily 
change — that  is,  the  outward  and  mortal  part  of  them."  The  living  faith  of  the 
Church  may  need  restatement.  The  language  in  which  man's  apprehension  of  the 
great  verities  of  the  gospel  was  ex[iressed  in  past  ages  may  become  stiff,  cold,  unex- 
pressive,  and  obsolete  as  regards  the  apprehension  of  those  verities  in  this  age.  Then 
let  it  go.  And  reverently  in  the  living  language  of  to-day,  let  the  living  faith  of 
to-day  be  expressed.  The  living  faith — that  is  the  great  thing.  "  A  living  doctrine 
never  need  advertise  for  a  body,  nor  go  carefully  about  to  invent  one,  any  more  than  a 
young  oak  needs  to  advertise  for  a  tnrak  and  brandies.  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it 
bath  pleased  him.     Get  the  faith,  and  it  will  shape  a  form  of  its  own." 

III.  Human  ufb  iif  this  world.    If  life  be  so  far  prolonged,  the  time  comes  when 


OH.  vin.  1— 13.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS.  219 

the  human  form  becomes  old  and  waxeth  aged  and  is  nigh  unto  vanishing  away. 
"  The  days  of  our  years  are  threescore  years,  and  ten,"  etc.  (Ps.  xc.  10).  When  the 
earthly  house  of  our  taberaacle  is  worn  out  we  know  that  it  will  soon  he  dissolved. 
The  departing  vitality  tells  us  that  the  body  itself  will  soon  vanish  away.  Its 
decrepitude  heralds  its  disappearance.  This  is  a  reason :  1.  Why  the  aged  should  live  in 
readiness /or  their  departure  hence.  2.  Why  the  aged  should  be  treated  with  considerate 
kindness.  Their  age  has  a  claim  upon  our  respect,  unless  its  character  forbids  respect, 
and  then  it  should  elicit  our  pity.  Their  feebleness  makes  its  silent  and  touching 
appeal  to  us  for  support.  And  they  will  soon  be  beyond  our  sight  and  our  services. 
By  the  help  of  God  let  us  seek  so  to  live  that,  when  the  time  of  our  departure  draws 
near,  we  may  be  ready  to  leave  this  world,  having  finished  onr  work,  and  to  enter  upon 
the,  to  us,  unknown  future,  having  committed  ourselves  to  the  keeping  of  the  "  great 
God,  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Heaven  the  place  where  this  great  High  Priest  minister$.  Does  the 
writer  mean, "  This  is  the  summing  up,"  or  "  This  is  the  chief  point "  ?  We  accept  the 
latter,  and  that  we  have  here  no  recapitulation,  but  an  advance,  the  point  to  which  he 
has  been  coming  from  the  first.  Christ,  High  Priest ;  Christ,  High  Priest  greater  than 
Aaron.  So  far  we  have  come.  Subject — Beaven  the  place  where  this  great  High  Priest 
ministers.  From  this  comes  the  truth  to  which  he  has  been  looking  from  the  begin- 
ning, that  in  heaven,  as  the  true  holy  of  holies,  is  fulfilled  what  was  exhibited  in  type 
in  the  tabernacle. 

I.  The  assueanob  that  Christ  ib  fulfillinq  his  high  priestly  work  in 
HEAVEN.  "  We  have  a  High  Priest,"  etc.  Jesus  in  heaven,  acting  as  our  Representative, 
is  the  crowning  point  of  what  the  writer  has  to  say  about  our  Lord.  Is  not  that  the 
crowning  point  of  all  that  can  he  said  about  him  ?  Can  we  ever  know  the  full  blessed- 
ness of  Jesus  till,  in  our  habitual  thought  of  him,  he  who  lived  on  earth,  and  died,  and 
rose,  is  ever  seen  and  felt  to  be  living  for  us  in  the  heavenly  places?  1.  The  declarations 
of  Scripture  give  us  this  assurance.  That  is  intimated  in  the  use  made  here  of  Ps.  ex., 
the  whole  of  ch.  vii.  being  based  on  it — the  Messiah  was  to  be  a  Priest  at  God's  right 
hand.  The  same  word  gives  us  the  same  assurance ;  but  whereas  to  the  Jew  it  was 
prediction,  to  us  it  is  fulfilment.  "  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,"  declare  evange- 
lists and  apostles.  2.  The  discharge  of  his  priestly  functions  necessitates  this,  "  But 
[not  •  now ']  if  he  were  on  earth  he  would  not  be  a  priest  at  all,"  etc.  He  could  not 
discharge  his  priestly  duties  on  earth  ;  the  Law  would  forbid  it  of  one  not  of  the  tribe 
of  Levi.  If,  then,  he  is  Priest,  and  called  to  what  is  priestly,  and  this  cannot  be  on 
earth,  it  must  be  in  heaven,  for  there  is  no  other  place  where  he  could  legally  minister. 
But  we  Christians  get  the  assurance  that  Christ  in  heaven  is  acting  as  High  Priest,  in 
what  we  find  he  has  actiially  done  and  is  ever  doing.  He  sends  his  people  what  he 
promised  when  he  should  be  there.  Those  gifts  and  communications  come  to  them 
from  heaven  which  they  know  could  not  come  but  for  his  mediatorial  work.  3.  The 
fulfilment  of  sacred  types  demands  this.  (Ver.  5.)  A  very  important  statement,  for  it 
occurs  no  less  than  five  times  in  the  Pentateuch — proof  that  the  Jewish  ritual  was  but 
a  shadow  of  certain  Divine  realities.  The  ministry  of  the  priests,  therefore,  must  have 
its  celestial  counterpart.  The  high  priest,  after  the  sacrifice  on  the  Day  of  Atonement, 
entered  within  the  veil  to  present  the  atoning  blood  before  the  mercy-seat.  That  is  the 
type ;  then  the  fulfilment  must  be  in  Christ.  In  the  Book  of  Revelation  the  Christian 
sees  this  fulfilled  in  a  series  of  visions:  Christ  redeeming  the  world,  subduing  bis  foes, 
completing  his  Church,  and  all  this  through  his  exaltation  to  the  heavenly  throne. 

XL  The  exalted  position  in  hbateh  in  which  this  high  priestly  work  is 
BEING  fulfilled.  The  Hebrews  regarded  the  high  priestly  ministry  with  awe.  How 
the  majestic  contrast  drawn  here  must  have  arrested  their  attention,  and  surprised  them 
by  its  claim :  "  We  have  such,"  etc.  1  1.  It  implies  our  Lord's  equality  with  the 
Fath&r.  On  the  supreme  throne  only  Jehovah  can  sit ;  he  who  sits  with  him  as  his 
co-equal  must,  with  him,  be  one  God.  He  who  ascended  is  he  also  who  descended. 
The  Incarnation  was  the  condescension  of  God  himself.  Get  high  thoughts  of  Jesus, 
for  it  will  exalt  our  hope,  and  make  our  salvaiion  more  sure  to  our  mind,  and  reveal 
fresh  depths  in  the  Divine  mercy.  2.  This  also  implies  his  fearlessness  in  the  presence 
<jf  the  Father.     The  Jewish  priest  stood  and  trembled  and  adored  within  the  veiL 


220  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEWS.        [oh.  tul  1—13. 


Jesus  sat  down  on  the  throne.  Why  should  he  fear  ?  we  might  ask.  Because  he  went 
there  as  man's  Kepresentative.  The  L'ord  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all,  he 
bowed  his  head  in  death  under  the  awful  hurden,  he  then  ascended  into  heaven,  and 
sat  down  on  the  Father's  throne.  Then  how  certainly  he  had  put  away  sin  by  the 
offering  of  himself  1  3.  This  further  implies  his  possession  of  thefaBow  of  the  Father. 
He  sat  there — why  ?  Because  God  said  unto  him,  "  Sit  thou  at  my  right,"  etc.  The 
Father's  delight  must  indeed  be  fixed  on  him  he  aslts  to  share  his  throne.  Cut  it  is  as 
our  Mediator  he  is  exalted  thus.  Of  his  own  right,  by  his  own  Deity,  that  throne  was 
Lis ;  the  invitation  to  ascend  it  was  made  to  him  as  our  Representative.  That  gives 
utmost  encouragement  to  us.  The  welcome  given  to  Jesus  is  really  a  welcome  to  all 
prayers  for  his  people. 

III.  The  effect  which  thb  exaltation  of  Chbibt  ab  High  Priest  should 
HAVE  UPON  OUB  HEARTS.  1.  It  should  lead  us  to  inquire  whether  we  are  among  God^s 
Israel.  "  We  " — ^whom  does  that  include  ?  The  high  priest  entered  the  holiest  of  all  for 
every  Israelite ;  every  Israelite  could  say,  "  He  is  there  for  me."  Christ,  in  like  manner, 
appears  in  heaven  for  the  true  [not  the  typical]  Israel,  the  true  seed  of  Abraham,  they 
who  are  of  faith.  Faith  admits  into  God's  Israel,  and  for  all  these  Christ  is  High  Priest. 
Then,  are  we  of  these  ?  2.  It  should  make  us  feel  the  sufficiency  of  his  mediation. 
We  can  need  no  other  priest  if  we  have  Jesus,  and  no  other  sacrifice.  What  can  a  man 
on  earth  add  to  that  which  in  him  we  have  in  heaven  itself  I  3.  /(  should  auure  us  of 
the  supply  of  every  necessity.  Jesus,  who  has  the  Father's  ear,  is  at  the  Father's  right 
band ;  and  there  for  us.    Then  we  have  nothing  to  fear. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Christ  in  heaven,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant.  The  argument  of 
ch,  vii.  has  a  further  object  than  the  mere  proving  our  Lord's  superiority  to  Aaron. 
The  priesthood  being  altered  and  centred  in  him,  most  important  facts  bearing  on  tlie 
spiritual  position  of  the  Hebrews  grow  out  of  it.  The  priesthood  was  the  centre  of 
the  dispensation ;  they  stood  and  fell  together.  A  new  priesthood  means  a  new  and 
better  dispensation.  That  is  the  purport  of  ch.  viii. — ^z.  18,  where  this  idea  is  worked 
out  by  the  writer  in  three  particulars.  (1)  is  in  ch.  viii.  1 — 5.  If  the  priesthood  is  raised 
to  heaven,  then  heaven  is  the  true  tabernacle  and  the  old  is  abolished.  (2)  is  that  in 
these  verses;  subject — Christ  in  heaven,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant.  We  have 
a  Mediator  in  heaven ;  but  for  what  ends  does  he  mediate  ?  Kct  those  which  the 
former  priesthood  had  in  view,  for  since  they  were  appointed  for  them,  they  may  be 
assumed  to  have  been  sufficient  for  them.  It  must,  then,  be  for  some  higher  end,  for 
purposes  not  possible  under  Aaron.  The  writer  turns,  as  usual,  to  their  Scriptures,  and 
points  them  to  the  declaration  in  the  Book  of  Jeremiali,  "  Behold,  the  days  come,"  etc. 
A  new  and  better  covenant  was  promised  six  hundred  years  before.  Behold  in  Christ 
the  possibility  of  the  fulfilment  of  that  prediction ;  through  him  exalted  are  to  he 
bestowed  the  larger  blessings  promised  in  the  latter  days.  Moreover,  the  fact  of 
another  covenant  promised  proves  the  imperfection  and  temporary  character  of  what 
then  was.  At  the  moment  of  writing,  the  old  covenant  was  trembling  to  its  faU. 
That  generation  had  not  passed  till  the  venerable  symbols  of  the  old  ooTenant  had 
disappeared  from  the  earth  like  the  mist  of  the  morning. 

I.  God  has  hade  a  new  covenant  with  men.  A  covenant  is  an  agreement 
God  has  undertaken,  agreed,  covenanted  to  give  certain  blessings  to  men.  He  is  a  Gk>d 
in  covenant  with  the  race.  A  testament  is  a  will,  a  promise  to  be  fulfilled  after  death. 
It  is  a  covenant,  with  the  additional  idea  that  it  can  only  be  fulfilled  after  the'death  of 
him  who  makes  it.  In  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  (though  not  so  in  Old  Testamer.t) 
these  two  words  are  used  interchangeably  as  the  translation  of  one  word.  The  two 
"  testaments  "  are  God's  two  covenants,  which  can  only  be  fulfilled  through  the  events 
of  Calvary,  1.  The  history  of  the  Divine  covenant.  The  "  new "  covenant  was  only 
new  in  a  certain  sense  ;  in  reality  it  was  the  old — the  original  covenant  on  which  the 
Jewish  was  temporarily  grafted.  God's  covenant  was  one  from  beginning  to  end. 
First  made  in  Eden,  we  see  it  gradually  expanding  and  working  out,  till  in  the 
Apocalypse  we  have  its  perfect  consummation  in  a  redeemed  world.  The  covenant  with 
Abraham  was  a  separate  and  special  covenant  with  regard  to  his  seed  alone,  and  in  time 
to  be  absorbed  in  the  older  covenant  of  world-wide  aspect  2.  What  was  the  purpose 
f)fth»  Abrahamie  covenant  t    Owing  to  the  corrupt  state  of  the  world,  it  was  necessary 


m.  vin.  1—13.]  THE  EPIS  i'LE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  22.1 

that  a  nation  should  be  singled  out,  and  prepared  to  receive  the  Messiah  and  his 
gospel — a  nation  tlirough  wliioh  the  truth  should  spread  world-wiiie.  Hence  the 
covenant  with  Israel — a  covenant  of  Law  ;  wonderful  blessings  promised  on  obedience. 
This  tended  to  humiliation,  was  constantly  broken  nnd  renewed,  and  thus  carried  to 
the  heart  of  the  people  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  man's  inability  to  deliver  himself,  and 
his  need  of  redemption  through  another.  When  that  was  accomplished  it  was  no  more 
needed,  and  was  abolished,  and  only  the  original  covenant  remained. 

IL  Thk  perfection  of  the  new  covenant  is  seen  in  its  contbabt  to  the 
OLD.  The  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  quoted  here  contains  three  particulars  of  such  a 
contrast.  1.  A  conscience  pacified  hy  perfect  forgiveness.  The  twelfth  verse  begins 
with  "  for,"  and  contains  the  ground  of  the  preceding.  Forgiveness  first.  In  the 
Jewish  economy  the  expiation  of  sin  was  imperfect  and  temporary,  and  quite  unfit  to 
perfect  the  conscience  of  the  worshipper.  The  sacrifices  provided  a  kind  of  legal  pardon 
by  which  the  nation  was  kept  in  special  relation  to  Jehovah,  but  they  could  not  put 
away  moral  guilt ;  "  it  was  not  possible  that  the  blood,"  etc.  But  thei  new  covenant 
made  ample  provision  for  all  that  was  needed — a  forgiveness /ree  ("merciful"),  compre- 
hensive ("  iniquities  and  sins"),  irreversible  ("  remember  no  more  ),  a  forgiveness  that 
meant  the  annihilation  of  the  record  from  the  very  memory  of  lieaven.  2.  A  mind 
enlightened  by  direct  communion  with  Qod.  "  I  will  be  to  them,"  etc.  The  Jewish 
ritual  made  the  people  dependent  on  the  priests  for  their  knowleiige  of  Jehovah  ;  they 
might  not  enter  the  tabernacle,  nor  approach  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence;  for 
the  mass  of  Israel  clouds  and  darkness  were  round  about  God.  But  through  the  new 
covenant  we  all  have  "  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  3.  A  heart  willingly 
consecrated  to  the  Divine  service.  "  My  laws  in  their  mind  and  heart."  Even  under 
Judaism  some  were  able  to  say,"  Oh  how  I  love  thy  Law  ! "  but  it  was  not  so  with  the 
average  Jew.  To  him  the  Law  was  irksome  and  restraining.  He  inight  conform  to  it 
outwardly,  but  it  was  by  the  compulsion  of  fear,  or  a  slavish  sense  of  duty ;  his  obedience 
did  not  carry  his  heart  with  it.  But  under  the  new  covenant  there  is  a  new  nature  in 
harmony  with  the  Divine  will,  a  disposition  inclining  us  to  obedience.  "  Lord,  what 
wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?" 

III.  Bt  the  introduction  of  a  new  and  perfect  covenant,  the  old  is  dis- 
annulled. "  In  that  he  saith,  A  new,"  etc.  The  practical  lesson  for  to-day  in  this  is 
— You  are  living  under  the  new  covenant ;  see  to  it  that  you  possess  its  blessings.  1. 
Remember  the  high  character  of  these  blessings  covenanted  to  us.  Doubtful,  shadowy, 
paitial  forgiveness ;  the  intervention  of  the  priest  for  personal  knowledge  of  God ;  right- 
doing  .not  so  much  from  willingness  as  fear ; — that  was  the  old  covenant.  Are  not 
many  Christians  rather  living  under  this  than  under  the  new?  2.  Bememiber  the 
universal  possibility  of  these  blessings.  The  old  covenant  was  restrictive,  national, 
hereditary,  and  belonged  to  Abraham's  seed  only.  But  under  the  new  covenant 
oxclusiveness  has  vanished.  God  is  in  covenant  with  the  race.  His  promises  are  to 
"  every  creature."  The  rainbow  of  this  covenant  spans  the  world.  3.  Bemember  the 
certain  permanenot  of  these  blessings  secured  by  the  mediation  of  Christ.  As  Aaron 
was  the  mediator  of  the  old,  Christ  is  of  the  new  covenant ;  that  is,  its  blessings  are 
bestowed  through  him.  We  can  only  receive  them  from  his  pierced  hands,  and  as  the 
result  of  his  priestly  work.  But  he  is  ever  presenting  his  pleading  blood  liefore 
the  throne  on  his  people's  behalf,  therefore  they  shall  continue  for  ever.  Christ's 
continuance  is  the  pledge  of  their  continuance ;  "  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in," 
etc.— 0,  N. 

Vera.  1 — 5. — Here  we  have  the  substance  of  the  argument,  and  {lluitrationB  hitherto 
adduced.  It  was  the  aim  of  the  writer  to  show  from  prophecy,  and  the  nature  of  the 
priesthood,  and  sacrifices  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  the  unrivalled  and  peculiar  glory  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  in  these  few  verses  the  truths  of  the  preceding  ai'guments  are  recapitulated. 
It  hints  at  the  desirableness  of  reviewing  the  course  of  exposition,  and  the  advantage, 
well  known  to  all  teachers,  of  the  value  and  necessity  of  repeating  important  truths, 
that  the  things  which  have  been  uttered  may  not  be  misunderstood  or  forgotten.  In 
this  summary  we  have — 

I.  The  exclusive  olory  op  Christ  in  his  enthrokement.  He  is  seated  "  aa 
a  Priest  upon  his  throne/'  which  declares  a  decisive  contrast  to  the  brief  and  anxious 


222  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [cB.  vm.  1— li 

standing  of  the  high  priest  of  old,  who  once  a  year,  with  anxiety  and  trembling, 
apjieared  in  the  holy  of  holies  and  performed  the  service  of  sprinkling  the  blood  before 
the  mercy-seat  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  He  prepared,  as  the  Jews  say,  for  this  work 
with  considerable  solicitude,  and  returned  to  his  own  house  at  sunset  in  peace,  and 
rejoiced  that  the  solemn  service  had  been  legally  performed.  Our  Lord  is  seated  on  the 
throne  of  an  infinite  majesty,  and  rejoices  in  the  contrast  between  his  past  sorrowB  and 
his  present  glory.  It  was  a  blessed  change  for  Moses  to  leave  the  tending  of  his  flock 
and  going  after  the  lost  ami  wandering  sheep  amid  the  solitudes  of  Sinai,  and  afterwards 
to  commune  with  the  "  Father  of  lights,"  and  catch  the  transient  splendour  which 
honoured  him  as  a  servant  and  betokened  the  Divine  joy  of  his  soul  in  the  service  of 
Jehovah.  Our  Bedeemer  has  risen  to  a  glory  so  exalted  that  John,  when  in  Fatmos, 
sank  overpowered  before  the  vision  of  his  extraordinary  resplendence.  John  had  seen 
him  a  sufferer  upon  the  cross ;  but  then  he  saw  him  when  all  outcry  against  him  had 
for  ever  ceased.  There  was  no  crown  of  thorns  upon  his  brow,  and  death  had  been 
swallowed  up  in  victory.  Now  he  receives  the  due  and  predicted  reward  of  his  work, 
and  is  made  glad  with  the  light  of  his  Father's  countenance.  All  things  are  put  under 
him  for  his  body'i  sake,  which  is  the  Church.  On  his  head  are  many  crowns,  and  he 
sits  in  the  ineffable  light  and  glory  of  the  eternal  throne. 

II.  The  superior  place  in  which  his  ministet  is  carried  on.  This  is  in  the 
true  tabernacle,  and  is,  therefore,  universally  superior  to  that  reared  in  the  wilderness, 
which  was  made  of  wood,  brass,  gold,  silver,  goat's  hair,  scarlet  and  fine-twined  linen. 
This  sacred  tent  was  material,  and  the  work  of  men's  hands.  It  needed  an  annua! 
purification  because  sinful  men  worshipped  in  it,  and  sinful  priests  served  at  its  altar. 
Though  it  was  inferior  to  the  sphere  in  which  Christ  ministers,  it  had  a  sacred  meaning 
and  typical  significance,  because  it  was  made  alter  a  Divine  pattern.    The  voice  of 

.  Grud  to  Moses  was,  "  See  that  thou  make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed 
to  thee  in  the  mount."  It  assumes  that  all  merely  human  ideas  and  human  additions 
were  to  be  excluded  from  his  fabric.  The  thoughts  of  God  were  to  be  expressed,  and 
he  wafi  to  be  all  in  aU.  Moses  was  faithful  to  the  Divine  charge,  and  when  Jehovah 
looked  upon  the  tabernacle  he  blessed  it,  as  he  approved  and  blessed  his  own  creation 
at  the  beginning.  It  was  a  shadow  and  oatline  of  heavenly  realities.  Whether  Moses 
was  permitted  to  look  into  heaven  itself,  or  to  gaze  upon  some  sensuous  representation 
which  impressed  itself  in  all  its  details  upon  his  exact  and  capacious  memory,  we  cannot 
determine.  There  are  some  points  of  resemblance  which  deserve  attention.  In  heaven 
there  are  answering  realities  to  the  types  of  the  earthly  sanctuary.  In  both  there  is 
the  Divine  presence,  and  Ood  is  seated  on  a  throne  of  grace.  In  both  there  is  honour 
conferred  upon  the  Law.  It  was  customary,  observes  Ewald,  for  Egyptian  priests  to 
place  their  choicest  treasures  in  the  sacred  chest  in  the  temple,  and  God  placed  his 
Law  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  His  Law  is  ever  precious  in  his  sight.  In  both 
there  was  the  solemn  truth  of  sacrifice  and  atonement,  for  on  earth  there  was  the 
bleeding  victim,  and  in  heaven  "  the  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,"  Worshippers 
approach  through  sacrifice;  all  adoration  rises  to  God,  and  all  blessings  proceed  from 
him  through  priestly  service.  It  is  the  true  tabernacle  in  which  things  in  heaven  and 
things  in  earth  are  reconciled  through  Christ.  In  a  later  part  of  the  Epistle  there  is 
an  impressive  illustration  of  the  all-encompassing  extent  of  this  spiritual  building. 
"  Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem,  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  to  the  general  assembly  and 
Church  of  the  Firstborn,  which  are  written  in  heaven,  and  to  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and 
to  .  .  .  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that 
spoaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel "  (ch.  xii.  22 — 24). 

III.  Thk  Ditike  fbe-eminence  of  his  sacrifice  and  ministbt.  He  must  have 
something  to  offer ;  but  as  a  Priest  he  has  the  glory  of  offering  to  God  every  tear  of 
penitence,  every  act  of  consecrating  life  to  the  Divine  will  in  conversion,  every  prayer 
and  thanksgiving,  every  noble  surrender  of  wealth,  labour,  and  life  to  the  honour  and 
service  of  his  Father. 

IV.  Note  the  oohebence  and  harmony  of  these  Divine  arrangements.  God 
has  exalted  his  dear  Son  and  given  him  a  Name  above  evdry  name.  Before  him  the 
names  of  patriarchs,  lawgivers,  captains,  kings,  psalmists,  and  prophets  must  yield  a? 
the  stars  are  swallowed  in  the  light  of  the  mrming.    There  is  a  profound  suitability 


«H.  Tni.  1— 13.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  223 

and  reason  in  hii  exaltAtion,  Then  follows  tlie  suitability  of  the  sphere  of  his  ministry. 
The  narrow  dimensions  and  material  quality  of  the  old  tabernacle  were  fitted  for  Aaron 
and  his  descendants;  but  the  dignity  of  the  Redeemer  requires  a  loftier  and  more 
spacious  temple,  in  which  he  shall  exercise  the  office  of  a  Priest  over  the  whole  Church 
of  the  living  God.  The  former  priests  offered  animal  sacrifices  and  material  giftn ;  but 
he  prewnts  the  ipiritual  oblationi  of  Ms  redeemed  followers. — B. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — TTie  reasons  assigned  for  the  introduction  of  the  new  covenant.  Tlieso 
consist  of  the  suitability  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  engaged  in  the  administration  of  a 
higher  and  nobler  covenant  than  that  which  was  established  with  Israel  at  Sinai.  The 
more  excellent  ministry  and  the  more  excellent  covenant  go  together.  There  were 
promises  attached  to  the  observance  of  the  Mosaic  which  related  to  temporal  blessings, 
such  as  harvests,  vintages,  and  the  peace  and  quiet  of  the  land.  The  better  covenant 
is  founded  upon  better  promises,  and  requires  a  mediator  whose  character  corresponds 
to  the  higher  institution  of  Divine  grace.  The  next  reason  is  the  unsatisfactory  result 
of  the  former  covenant.  It  was  good  in  itself,  and  was,  as  everything  which  cometh 
from  the  Father  of  lights,  suitable  as  a  preparatory  institution,  while  the  Church  was 
under  tutors  and  governors.  Under  this  dispensation  there  was  frequent  idolatry, 
desecration  of  the  temple,  injustice,  and  prevalent  corruption.  Jeremiah  lived  to  see 
the  carrying  away  to  Babylon,  which  proved  the  Divine  displeasure  against  people 
whose  history  began  with  a  sublime  act  of  redemption  from  the  bondage  and  miseries 
of  Egypt;  which  act  should  have  been  an  abiding  cause  of  gratefvd  and  persevering 
obedience  to  him  who  by  signs  and  wonders  had  released  them  from  subjection  to 
a  cruel  power,  and  exalted  them  to  the  dignity  of  a  nation  which  "  was  born  in  a  day." 
While  Jeremiah  saw  the  sin  and  punishment  of  his  people,  he  found  in  the  promise 
of  a  new  and  better  covenant  the  consolation  which  sustained  his  soul,  and  provided 
encouragement  for  many  others.  The  new  covenant  contains  four  blessings  of  the 
highest  value. 

I.  The  iNBOBimoir  ot  thk  Law  or  Ood  in  the  heabt.  It  is  a  rsmark  of 
Ewald's  that  in  Egyptian  temples  there  were  arks,  or  sacred  chests,  into  which  the 
priests  put  everything  they  deemed  of  the  highest  value.  Jehovah  had  nothing  more 
precious  than  his  Law,  which,  being  the  expression  of  his  righteous  will,  and  for  the 
good  of  Israel,  was  placed  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  While  the  Law  was  in  the  sacred 
place  the  people  forgot  its  claims,  worshipped  false  gods,  and  were  guilty  of  many  trans- 
gressions. The  new  covenant  places  the  Law  in  the  heart,  and  thus  life  becomes  a 
scene  of  obedience,  a  cause  of  sincerity  in  worship,  and  by  its  constant  presence  preserves 
believers  from  offending  God,  and  produces  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  Paul  said, 
"  With  the  mind  I  serve  the  Law  of  God ;  and  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death." 

II.  The  next  privilege  it  secures  is  the  sacred  relation  which  subsists  between 
God  and  his  covenanted  people.  This  suggests  the  thought  of  king  and  subjerts. 
He,  as  the  King,  is  the  glory  of  the  true  Israel.  He  can  defend  them  from  assault,  can 
supply  all  their  needs  "  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  The  various 
images  of  his  connection  with  his  people  are  all  summed  up  in  this  term,  in  which  he 
undertakes  to  be  the  God  of  his  redeemed  ones.  If  the  ancient  subjects  of  Jehovah 
could  say,  "  The  Lord  is  our  Judge,  the  Lord  is  our  Lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our  King ; 
he  will  save  us,"  much  more  joyfully  may  Christians  exult  in  him  who  is  their 
covenant  God.  Those  who  enter  into  covenant  become  his  people  by  spiritual  civiliza- 
tion, and  differ  from  the  barbarous,  unorganized  tribes  of  the  earth.  As  his  subjects, 
they  reveal  the  character  of  the  government  under  which  they  live,  serve  the  high 
purposes  of  God,  and  are  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.  Their  citizenship 
is  in  heaven,  and  they  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  God. 

III.  There  is  the  enjoyment  of  essential  and  spiritual  knowledge.  It  cannot 
be  supposed  that  the  followers  of  Christ  will  ever  be  raised  above  the  need  of  ministerial 
help  and  instruction  in  the  things  of  God,  since  the  first  great  gift  bestowed  upon  the 
Church  included  apostles,  prophets,  pastors,  and  teachers.  It  is  therefore  presumable 
that  this  stlggests  the  fact  that  all  who  belong  to  the  ISTew  Testiiment  Church  will  not 
require  remonstrance  and  persuasion  to  acknowledge  the  fundamental  truths  of  true 
religion.    During  the  Law,  there  were  many  occasions  on  which  righteous  men  had 


224  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  vni.  1— 13, 

to  say  to  their  countrymen,  "  Know  the  Lord."  It  appears  from  a  passage  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians  (iv.  8)  to  mark  the  transition  Irora  idolatry  to  the  worship 
of  the  true  God.  "Howheit  then,  when  ye  knew  not  Goii,  ye  did  service  to  them 
which  by  nature  are  no  gods."  There  may  be  a  designed  allusion  to  the  people  in 
the  desert,  where,  in  addition  to  the  tabernacle,  there  was  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch, 
and  the  star  of  the  god  Eemphan.  The  new  covenant  secures  the  loyal  adhesion  of 
every  believer  to  this  fundamental  truth,  upon  which,  by  prayer,  reading,  and  attend- 
ance upon  an  enlightened  ministry,  the  soul  is  nourished  to  larger  strength,  brighter 
knowledge,  and  loftier  degrees  of  holiness. 

IV.  There  is  the  enjoyment  op  forgiveness.  It  was  not  possible  for  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  goats  to  take  away  sin.  The  blood  of  the  new  covenant,  shed  for  many 
for  the  remission  of  sins,  cleanses  from  all  stains,  and  produces  Divine  peace.  Looking 
at  forgiveness  in  the  light  of  the  Word  of  God,  it  is  an  invaluable  blessing.  It  releases 
us  from  evil  thoughts,  and  excuses  which  appeared  in  the  words  of  Adam  and  Eve,  and 
makes  the  spirit  to  be  "  without  guile."  It  disarms  the  power  of  temptation.  It 
introduces  those  who  are  forgiven  into  the  safe  and  joyful  state  of  justification,  with  all 
the  blessings  which  are  inseparably  connected  therewith.  It  engages  the  presence  and 
gracious  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  enriches  the  soul  with  fruits  of  righteousness, 
and  creates,  by  his  presence  and  power,  an  earnest  of  the  lile  to  come.  The  two 
covenants  cannot  stand  together  to  distract  the  attention  of  mankind,  and  create 
uncertainty  about  the  method  of  salvation.  As  the  Jews  did  not  pass  over  into  the 
blessedness  of  the  new  covenant,  God  removed  the  temple,  the  altar,  and  the  priest- 
hood by  an  act  of  righteous  judgment,  which  began  at  "  the  house  of  God  ;  "  and  in 
the  occupation  of  Jerusalem  by  an  alien  power,  and  the  su>peusion  of  sacrifices  for 
eighteen  centuries,  he  has  told  the  world  that  the  old  covenant  is  vanished  away. — B. 

Ver.  1. —  The  Minister  of  the  true  tabernacle,  hit  position  and  his  office,  I.  II is 
rosiTiON.  1.  It  is  in  the  heavens.  He  has  passed  through  the  veil  into  the  heavens. 
He  is  no  longer  a  localized  priest,  near  to  some  and  far  away  from  others,  but  is  in 
heaven,  which  is  near  to  all  of  us.  This  bringing  of  heaven  in  contact  with  every 
human  being  is  set  forth  by  the  teaching  of  the  natural  world.  No  one  man  has 
come  in  contact  with  more  than,  a  very  tiny  piece,  comparatively,  of  the  world  in 
which  he  lives ;  but  once  in  twenty-four  hours  every  man  in  the  world  sees  the  sun, 
which  is  the  great  visible  repiesentative  of  heavenly  resource  and  blessing.  2.  In,  the 
most  glorious  position  a  mediator  can  occupy.  He  is  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens.  This  throne  is  the  heavenly  cou-ntevparl  to  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  in  the  earthly  tabernacle.  3.  In  this  position  the  Eigh  Priest  Jesus  is 
seated.  Seated,  foi'  he  is  there  permanently.  Incessant  are  the  needs  of  that  human 
race  for  wliom  he  acts.     Seated  also  to  indicate  sonship,  heirship,  and  Divine  dignity. 

II.  His  offiob.  The  high  priest  is  a  liturgical  minister.  He  does  holy  offices  in 
connection  with  a  holy  structure,  on  behalf  of  the  people.  The  word  "true"  here  ia 
doubtless  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  holy  things  as  well  as  with  the  tabernacle 
itself.  Jesus  is  Minister  of  the  true  holy  things  in  the  true  tabernacle.  This  word 
"  true"  is  a  most  comprehensive  one,  as  showing  the  inward  compared  with  the  outward, 
the  essence  compared  with  the  form,  the  abiding  compared  with  the  changing,  type  as 
compared  with  antitype,  ends  that  are  spiritual  and  invisible,  as  compared  with  means 
that  are  material  and  visible.  Notice  the  frequency  of  this  word  a\ri0iy^s  in  the  New 
Testament.  We  read  of  the  true  riches,  the  true  light,  the  true  worshippers,  the  true 
bread,  the  true  vine,  the  true  God,  the  true  witness.  The  priesthood  of  Jesus  is  a  new 
and  perfect  thing,  and  indicates  a  new  and  perfect  system.  If  a  number  of  types  are 
related  together,  then  the  biinging  in  of  the  antitype  to  one  of  them  means  the  bringing 
in  of  all  the  other  antitypes.  God  has  a  glorious  place  of  abode  in  the  invisible  world, 
a  true  holy  of  holies,  where  Jesus  has  gone,  where  Jesus  remains ;  and  to  that  holy  of 
holies  all  true  wor8hii)pers  shall,  in  due  time,  be  gathered. — Y. 

Ver.  3. — The  high  priest— for  what  appointed.     I.  The  statement  a8  to  HiaH 

PEiESTi.Y  FUNCTION  IN  GENERAL.  All  high  priests,  whether  they  be  Aaronio  priests  or 
Jesus  hiniFolf,  are  appointed  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices.  Thus  the  classification  is  made 
of  offerings  for  God.     There  are  gifts,  the  expressions  of  thankfulness  and  devotion, 


cH.  VIII.  1—13.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  225 

which  may  be  offered,  which  ought  to  be  offered,  but  which  can  only  have  value  u 
they  come  spontaneously  and  of  free-wilL  To  give  them  ouly  in  response  to  a  Divine 
commandment  would  be  to  alter  their  character  altogether.  Their  very' name  indicates 
this,  as  being  not  simply  things  given,  but  Supa,  things  given  freely.  Then  there  are  also 
sacrifices,  the  purpose  of  which  is  more  paitioularly  defined  in  ver.  1,  where  they  are 
mentioned  as  sacrifices  for  sin.  And  all  this  volume  of  gratitude  and  penitence,  instead 
of  being  scattered  about  in  individual  manifestations,  left  to  each  one's  own  time  and 
place  and  manner,  was  reduced  to  order,  and  made  a  national  proceeding.  As  to  gifts, 
a  man  was  free  to  settle  in  his  own  mind  whether  he  would  give  or  not ;  but  if  he  gave, 
he  must  give  in  a  particular  way. 

II.  The  special  application  to  Jesus.  How  can  he  now  discharge  a  priestly 
office  in  respect  of  gifts  and  sacrifices  ?  With  respect  to  sacrifices  the  answer  is  given 
plainly,  not  only  in  this  Epistle,  biit  in  all  apostolic  teaching.  A  reference  to  ch.  ix.  14 
may  be  enough  to  illustrate  this.  Jesus,  the  true  High  Priest,  offered  up  himself  as  th« 
true  Sacrifice.  But  what  about  the  gifts  ?  These,  be  it  remembered,  we  still  have  t» 
provide.  A  sacrifice  for  sin  we  cannot  provide,  but  it  is  provided  for  us.  Gifts, 
however,  we  are  bound  to  bestow — gifts,  more  in  quantity  than  ever,  and  better  in 
quality,  seeing  that  our  obligations  are  added  to  by  Christ's  provision  of  a  sacrifice  for 
sins.  And  we  lay  these  gifts  on  God's  altar  when  most  of  all  we  serve  the  needy.  As 
it  is  true  that  he  who  gives  to  the  poor  lends  to  the  Lord,  so  he  who  gives  to  the 
needy  because  of  their  need,  hoping  for  nothing  again,  makes  an  offering  to  the  Lord. 
It  is  by  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  that  we  are  led  into  that  sort  of  gratitude  which  is 
acceptable  to  God.  The  gifts  which  are  most  acceptable  for  God  to  receive  are  those 
which  indicate  our  appreciation  of  his  spiritual  mercies.  It  is  a  poor  business  if  we 
have  not  received  more  from  God  than  the  things  which  he  bestows  equally  on  the 
good  and  the  evil,  the  just  and  the  unjust.  Our  best  gifts  are  those  which  promote 
the  cause  of  Christ,  which  are  offered  with  a  distinct  intention  towards  the  progress 
of  that  cause. — Y. 

Ver.  6. — A  verse  of  eomparinotu.  A  more  excellent  ministry — a  better  covenant- 
better  promises.  How  all  this  illustrates  the  way  of  God !  Whatever  he  appoints  and 
plans  is  good,  and  good  just  because  it  is  exactly  proportioned  to  good  ends.  But 
these  ends  have  to  be  measured  by  the  power  of  men  to  fall  in  with  them,  Man,  with 
his  limited  prospect,  reckons  to  be  an  end  what  God  reckons  as  only  the  means  to  a 
greater  end.  God  made  to  Israel  promises  of  a  land  of  inheritance  on  earth,  just  that 
they  might  thereby  be  prepared  in  time  to  see  that  there  was  something  much  better. 
Higher  demands  were  made,  a  completer  obedience  was  possible,  and  the  conditions 
existed  for  fulfilling  richer  promises.  And  of  this  new  state  of  things  Jesus,  as  the 
Meiiiator,  is  the  central  Figure ;  it  is  his  presence  and  his  power  that  make  the  new  state 
of  things  possible.  The  better  covenant  is  only  better  because  it  can  become  a  reality, 
and  Jesus  it  is  who  makes  the  reality.  The  old  covenant,  as  we  clearly  see,  was  a 
broken  covenant.  God  brought  his  people  into  the  land  of  promise ;  but,  after  all,  this 
could  not  be  called  the  keeping  of  his  promise.  His  promise  was  made  upon  conditions 
to  be  supplied  by  the  people  to  whom  the  promise  was  made.  They  did  not  supply 
these  conditions,  consequently  the  promise  could  not  be  fulfilled.  And  now,  instead  of 
Moses,  the  mere  proolaimer  of  law,  there  comes  Jesus  to  complete  law,  to  expand 
promises  into  their  spiritual  fulness,  and,  at  the  same  time,  act  as  a  Mediator  in  really 
receiving  these  promises  for  men.  If  God's  laws  are  to  be  written  upon  our  hearts,  it 
can  only  be  by  the  work  of  Jesus.  If  we  are  to  be  persuaded  into  a  living  interest  in 
God's  promises,  and  to  care  for  the  things  he  wants  us  to  care  for,  it  must  be  by  the 
work  of  Jesus.  He  only  can  inspire  us  individually  with  an  inclination  to  set  our 
names  to  the  new  covenant.  He  only  can  show  us  the  inward  realities  of  which  out- 
ward shows  are  but  the  parabolic  expression.  Beal  mediation,  bow  rich  it  is  in  results  1 
It  is  not  like  the  wire  along  which  electricity  travels,  a  mere  medium  of  communica- 
tion. It  is  a  medium  of  life  and  growth.  Jesus  Christ  Is  the  real  Mediator  in  living, 
abiding,  unbreakable,  necessary  communion  with  God,  and  in  the  same  sort  of  com- 
munion -with  man.  The  old  covenant  did  nothing  more  than  reveal  man's  utter 
deplorable  weakness  in  himself.  The  new  covenant  reveals  man's  strength  in  Jesua 
Cbrist.    Jesus  Christ  can  make  all  things  new ;  he  can  make  the  good  better ;  he  caa 

BEBBEWa.  4 


226 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  u.  1— 2a 


bring  living  realities  instead  of  living,  tantalizing  forms ;  he  can  make  man  stand  erect 
in  tlie  strength  of  liis  renewed  nature,  disposed  to  enter  into  covenant  with  God,  acd 
able  to  keep  the.  terms  of  the  covenant  he  has  made. — Y. 

Ver.  13. — The  advent  of  the  new  and  the  doom  of  the  old.  I.  We  hubt  iaok  at  thk 
OHABACTEB  OF  THE  NEW.  Mere  novclty  by  itself  counts  for  nothing.  Man's  new 
things  are  too  often  brought  in,  not  because  they  are  needed,  but  from  mere  restlessness, 
love  of  change,  and  self-gloiification.  The  right  principle  of  change  is  necessity,  super- 
seding the  old  because  it  has  done  its  work.  That  is  the  principle,  we  may  be  sure,  on 
which  God  acts.  Thus  we  must  not  too  readily  assume  that  the  introduction  of  the 
new  is  the  doom  of  the  old;  that  is,  using  the  word  "old"  in  the  sense  of  long- 
established.  Kew  philosophies,  new  schemes  of  the  universe,  rise  np  threatening  the 
long-established  gospel ;  but  in  time  the  philosophies  become  old,  unsatisfying,  and 
vanish  away,  while  the  gospel  remains,  still  welcome,  still  powerful. 

II.  God's  wisdom  m  doing  things  at  the  bioht  time.  God's  new  things  always 
come  in  at  the  fulness  of  time.  The  first  covenant  had  done  its  work,  but  those  who 
upheld  the  forms  of  it  were  the  last  to  see  this.  Nay,  more  ;  just  in  proportion  as 
the  inward  reality  vanished  did  they  cling  with  tenacity  to  the  outward  form.  If  it 
had  depended  on  the  rulers  of  Jerusalem  to  say  when  the  new  covenant  was  needed, 
it  would  have  been  a  long  time  in  coming.  Man  by  himself  cannot  he  trusted  to  say 
when  the  season  of  decrepitude  for  any  institution  has  come.  God  takes  the  laws  of 
necessary  change  into  ,his  own  hands,  and  makes  it  evident  to  those  who  have  eyes  U> 
see  that  his  new  things  have  not  come  without  necessity.  The  new  state  of  things 
needs  to  be  experienced  as  a  reality,  and  then  it  approves  itself  as  an  improvement  on 
the  old ;  it  becomes  plain  that  the  old  was  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  only  a  stage  toward 
the  attainment  of  the  new.  Whatsoever  new  thing  is  true  and  manifestly  serviceable 
must  make  its  way ;  and  it  is  well  for  its  own  sake  that  the  way  should  be  made  through 
difficulties  and  discouragements.  They  are  wise  who  can  see  in  time  tne  difference 
between  a  mere  novelty  and  a  novelty  that  has  conquest  and  resistless  growth  in  it. 
The  bringing  in  of  the  new  wlue-skins  is  the  doom  of  the  old  ones. — ¥ 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  IX. 


The  tphere  of  Christ's  "more  excellent 
ministry,"  as  the  "Mediator  of  a  better 
covenant,"  having  been  shown  to  be  else- 
where than  in  the  earthly  tabernacle,  the 
ministry  itself  is  now  contrasted  with  that 
of  the  superseded  priesthood.  With  this 
view  the  latter  is  described,  and  shown  to 
express  in  itself  its  own  insulEoienoy  and  to 
point  to  a  more  availing  one  to  come. 

Ver.  1. — Then  verily  (or,  turn  indeed)  the 
first  covenant  also  (or,  even  the  first  covenant) 
had  ordinances  of  divine  service,  and  a 
worldly  sanctuary  (rather  its  sanctuary  of 
this  world  (rd  ayiov  K0(rfieK6y).  The  definite 
article  points  to  the  well-known  one  of  the 
Mosaic  dispensation,  which,  unlike  the  true 
»ne,  was  in  its  bearings,  as  well  as  locally 
and  materially,  of  this  world  only).  This 
sanctuary  itself  is  now  first  described  in 
necessary  preparation  for  an  account  of 
priestly  ministrations  in  it. 

Vers.  2—5. — For  there  was  a  tabernacle 
made ;  the  first,  wherein  was  the  laudlestiok, 


and  the  table,  and  the  sbewbread ;  which  ii 
oalled  the  holy  place.  And  after  the  second 
veil,  the  tabernacle  which. is  oalled  the  hoi; 
of  holies ;  having  a  golden  censer,  and  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  with  gold, 
wherein  was  a  golden  pot  having  the  manna, 
and  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  the  tables 
of  the  covenant ;  and  over  it  the  cherubim 
of  glory  overshadowing  the  meroy-seat;  ot 
which  things  we  cannot  now  speak  particu- 
larly. The  tabernacle  as  a  whole  is  first 
spoken  of;  and  then  its  two  divisions,  called 
respectively  "  the  first "  and  "  the  second  " 
tabernacle.  The  account  of  them  is  from 
the  Pentateuch,  and  describes  them  as  they 
originally  were.  In  the  then  existing  temple 
there  were  neither  aik,  mercy-seat,  nor  cheru- 
bim, though  the  ceremonies  were  continued 
as  though  they  had  been  still  there.  The 
ark  had  been  removed  or  destroyed  in  the 
sack  by  the  Chaldeans,  and  was  never 
replaced  (for  the  Jewish  tradition  on  the 
subject,  see  2  Mace.  ii.  1 — 8).  Josephua 
says  ('  Bell.  Jud.,'  v.  5.  5)  that  in  the  temple 
of  his  day  there  was  nothing  whatever 
behind  the  veil  in  the  holy  of  holies  ;  and 
Tacitus  informs  us  ('  Hist.,'  v.  9)  that,  when 


OH.  II.  1—28.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW& 


227 


Pompey  entered  the  temple,  be  found  there 
"  vacuam  sedem  et  iuania  arcana."  A  stone 
basement  is  said  by  the  rabbis  to  have 
occupied  the  ark's  place,  called  "lapis 
fundationis."  In  the  "  first  tabernacle," 
called  "the  holy  place"  (Jiyia  probably,  not 
i.yla :  i.e.  a  neuter  plural,  equivalent  to  "  the 
holies "),  the  table  of  sbewbread  (with  its 
twelve  loaves  in  two  rows,  changed  weekly) 
stood  on  the  north  side,  i.e.  the  right  as  one 
approached  the  veil;  and  opposite  to  it,  on 
the  left,  the  seven-branched  golden  candle- 
stick, or  lamp-stand,  carrying  an  oil-lamp  on 
each  branch  (Ezod.  kxv.,  xxxvii.,  xl.).  Be- 
tween them,  close  to  the  veil  stood  the 
golden  altar  of  incense  (ibid.);  which,  never- 
theless, is  not  mentioned  here  as  part  of  the 
furniture  of  the  "first  tabernacle,"  being 
associated  with  the  "second,"  for  reasons 
which  will  be  seen.  The  "  second  veil "  was 
that  between  the  holy  place  and  the  holy 
of  holies  (Exod.  xxxvi.  35),  the  curtain  at 
the  entrance  of  the  holy  place  (Exod.  xxxvi, 
37)  being  regarded  as  the  first.  The  inner 
sanctuary  behind  this  second  veil  is  spoken 
of  as  having  (ix"""'^)  in  ^be  first  place  "  a 
golden  cemer,"  as  the  word  Buiuwriipiov  is 
translated  in  the  A.V.  (so  also  in  the 
Vulgate,  thuribulum).  But  it  assuredly 
meaus  the «'  golden  altar  of  incense,"  though 
this  stood  locally  outside  the  veU.  For  (1) 
otherwise  there  would  be  no  mention  at  all 
of  this  altar,  which  was  so  important  in  the 
symbolism  of  the  tabernacle,  and  so  promi- 
nent in  the  Pentateuch,  from  which  the 
whole  description  is  taken.  (2)  The  alter- 
native view  of  its  being  a  censer  reserved 
for  the  use  of  the  high  priest,  when  he 
entered  behind  the  veil  on  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment, has  no  support  fiom  the  Pentateuch, 
in  which  no  such  censei  is  mentioned  as  part 
of  the  standing  furniture  of  tlie  tabernacle, 
and  onne  of  gold  is  spoken  of  at  all ;  nor, 
had  it  been  so,  would  it  have  been  placed, 
any  more  than  the  altar  of  incense,  within 
the  veil,  since  the  high  priest  required  it  before 
he  entered.  (3)  Though'  the  word  itself, 
flu/tiaT^pioi'.oertainly  means  "censer,"  and  not 
"  altar  of  incense,"  in  tho  LXX.,  yet  in  the 
Hellenistic  writeis it ii otherwise.  Pbilo and 
Josephus,  and  also  Clemens  Alexandrinus 
and  Origen,  always  call  the  altar  of  incense 
eu/uariiptov  XP"""^"'  ^^^  ^^^  language  of 
the  Epistle  is  Hellenistic.  (4)  The  wording 
does  not  of  necessity  imply  that  what  is 
spoken  of  was  locally  within  the  veil :  it  is 
not  said  (as  where  the  actual  contenti  of  the 
"  first  tabernacle  "  and  of  the  ark  are  spoken 
of)  wAeretn  (ev  ^),  but  having  (lx'""''''% 
which  need  only  moan  having  ai  belonginrj 
to  it,  OM  connected  with  its  symbolism.  It 
was  an  appindage  to  the  holy  of  holies, 
though  not  actually  inside  it,  in  the  same 
way  (to  use  •  homely  illustration    given 


by  DelitzBch)  as  the  sign-board  of  •  shop 
belongs  to  the  shop  and  not  to  the  street. 
It  is,  indeed,  so  regarded  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. See  Exod.  xl.  5,  "  Thou  shalt  set  the 
altar  of  gold  for  the  incense  before  the  ark 
of  the  testimony ; "  also  Exod.  xxx.  6,  "  Be- 
fore the  mercy-seat  that  is  over  the  testi- 
mony ; "  and  1  Kings  vi.  22,  "  Tlie  alt  ar 
wliioh  was  by  the  oracle,"  or,  '*  belonging 
to  the  oracle ; "  of.  also  Isa.  vi.  6  and 
Bev.  viii.  3,  where,  in  the  visions  of  the 
heavenly  temple  based  upon  the  symbol- 
ism of  the  earthly,  the  altar  of  incense  is 
associated  with  the  Divine  throne.  And  it 
was  also  so  associated  in  the  ceremonial  of 
the  tabernacle.  The  smoke  of  the  incense 
daily  offered  on  it  was  supposed  to  penetrate 
the  veil  to  the  holy  of  holies,  representing 
the  sweet  savour  of  intercession  before  the 
mercy-seat  itself;  and  on  the  Day  of  Atoue- 
ment,  not  only  was  its  incense  taken  by  the 
high  priest  within  the  veil,  but  also  it,  as 
well  as  the  mercy-geat,  was  sprinkled  with 
the  atoning  blood.  Of  the  rest  of  the  things 
described  as  belonging  to  the  holy  of  holies 
it  is  to  he  observed  that,  though  none  of 
them  were  in  it  when  the  Epistle  was 
written,  yet  all  (except  the  pot  of  manna 
and  Aaron's  rod)  were  essential  to  its  signifi- 
cance, as  will  be  seen ;  and  all,  with  these 
two  exceptions,  were  in  Solomon's  temple 
as  well  as  in  the  original  tabernacle.  An 
objection  that  has  been  raised  to  the 
acouraoy  of  the  description,  on  the  ground 
that  the  pot  and  the  rod  are  not  said  iu  the 
Pentateuch  to  have  been  placed  inside  the 
ark,  is  groundless.  They  were  to  be  laid  up 
"  before  the  Lobd  "  (Exod.  xvi.  33) ;  "  before 
the  testimony  "  (Numb.  ivii.  10) ;  and  "  the 
testimony  "  elsewhere  means  the  tables  of 
the  Law  (Exod.  xxv.  16 ;  xxxi  18 ;  xL  20, 
etc.),  which  were  within  the  ark.  It  was 
most  likely  that  they  would  be  kept  for  safe 
preservation  in  the  same  place  with  the  "  tes- 
thnouy,"  before  which  they  were  ever  to  be. 
Further,  what  is  said  (1  Kings  viii.  9  and 
2  Chron.  t.  10)  of  there  being  nothing  in  the 
ark  but  the  two  tables  of  st»ne  when  it  was 
moved  into  Solomon's  temple,  is  no  proof 
that  nothing  else  had  been  originally  there. 
It  seems,  indeed,  rather  to  favour  the  idea 
that  there  had  been,  as  implying  that  some- 
thing more  might  have  been  expected  to  be 
found  there.  The  mercy-seat,  as  is  well 
known,  was  the  cover  of  the  ark,  over  which 
the  wings  of  the  two  cherubim  were  spread. 
The  expression,  "  cherubim  of  glory,"  pro- 
bably has  reference  to  the  luminons  cloud, 
significant  of  the  Divine  presence,  which, 
occasionally  at  least  (there  is  no  sufiicient 
ground  for  concluding  it  to  have  been  a  per- 
manent manifestation),  is  said  to  have  been 
seen  above  them.  The  cherubim,  whatever 
til    r  exact  significance,  are  represented  M 


228 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  IX.  1— 2a 


aocompaTiiments  of  the  Divine  glory  (of.  Iia. 
ri.  and  EJzek.  i.  and  z.). 

Yer.  6.— Now  these  things  being  tbns 
oidained  (A.V. ;  rather,  arranged  or  con- 
diluted;  it  is  the  same  word  ((toTao-KfutCfw) 
as  waa  used  in  ver.  2,  "  there  was  a  taber- 
nacle made;"  also  in  ch.  iiL  3,  4,  of  God's 
"  house ; "  on  which  see  supra),  the  priests 
go  in  oontinnally  into  the  first  tabernacle, 
acoomplishing  the  services.  (Observe  that 
here,  where  the  ministrations  are  described, 
present  tenses  ue  used;  perhaps  because 
these  ministrationB  were  still  going  on  when 
the  Epistle  was  written.)  The  continual 
services  in  the  "  first  tabernacle  "  were  (1) 
lighting  the  lamps  ever;  evening,  and 
trimming  them  every  morning  (Kxod.  xxvii. 
21;  XXX.  8;  Lev.  xxiv.  3);  (2)  renewing 
the  twelve  loaves  of  shewbread  every 
sabbath  (Lev.  xxiv.  5,  etc.) ;  (3)  burning 
incense  on  the  golden  altar  twice  daily,  when 
the  lamps  were  trimmed  and  lighted  (Exod. 
XXX.  7,  8),  at  the  time  of  the  morning  and 
evening  sacrifice,  the  people  meanwhile 
praying  outside  (Luke  i.  10). 

Vers.  7,  8. — But  into  the  second  the  high 
priest  alone,  onoe  in  the  year,  not  without 
blood,  which  he  ofFereth  for  himself  and  for 
th«  errors  (literally,  ignorancet ;  of.  ver.  2) 
of  the  people.  For  the  ceremonies  on  the  Day 
of  Atonement,  see  Ijev.  xvi.  They  may  be 
summarized,  in  their  main  characteristics, 
thus:  (1)  Tlie  high  priest  brought  to  the 
dofir  of  the  tabernacle  a  bullock  as  a  sin 
offering  for  himself,  and  two  goats  as  a  sin 
offering  for  the  people;  also  a  ram  as  a 
bnrnt  offering  for  himself,  and  a  ram  as  a 
burnt  offering  for  the  people.  (2)  After 
washing  and  arraying  himself  in  white 
linen  garments  (not  the  ordinary  ofiSuial 
dress),  he  cast  lots  on  the  two  goats  which 
were  for  the  people's  sin  offering— one  lot 
being  "  for  the  Lobd,"  the  other  "  for 
Azazel ; "  that  on  which  the  former  lot  fell 
being  for  SEUirifice,  the  other  to  be  set  free. 
(3)  He  socriQced  his  own  sin  offering,  en- 
tered the  huly  place  with  the  blood  thereof, 
filled  a  censer  with  burning  coals  from  the 
golilen  altar,  went  with  it  within  the  veil, 
sprinkling  incense  on  tlje  coals,  "  that  the 
cloud  of  the  incense  may  cover  the  mercy- 
seat,  that  he  die  not ; "  took  also  the  blood 
within  the  veil,  and  sprinkled  the  mercy- 
seut  therewith,  (4)  He  returned  outside 
the  tubernacle,  sacrificed  the  people's  sin 
offering,  i,e.  the  goat  that  was  "for  the 
Lobd,"  entered  the  holy  place  with  its  blood, 
and  proceeded  as  before;  sprinkling  also 
the  altar  of  Incense,  as  well  as  the  mercy- 
seat,  with  the  blood  of  both  sacrifices,  to 
"  hallow  it  from  the  uncleanness  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel."  (5)  He  again  returned 
outside  the  tabernacle,  laid  his  hands  on  the 
bMd  of  the  goat  "  ibr  Azazel,"  confessing 


over  him  "  all  the  iniquities  of  the  childre* 
of  Israel,  putting  them  on  the  head  of  the 
goat,"  and  sent  him  away  to  the  wilderness, 
where  he  was  to  be  let  go.  (6)  He  again 
entered  the  tabernacle,  where  he  put  off  his 
linen  garments,  and  left  them  there,  and 
then,  after  washing  again,  and  putting  on 
his  ordinary  official  dress,  saciificed  his  own 
and  the  people's  burnt  offering.  (7)  The 
bodies  of  tlie  two  sin  offerings  (the  bullock 
and  the  slain  goat)  were  talcen  outside  the 
camp,  and  there  entirely  consumed  by  fire. 
The  points  in  this  ceremonial  here  especially 
noted  are :  (1)  That  the  entrance  within  tlie 
veil  was  only  "  once  in  the  year,"  i.e.  on 
one  only  day  in  the  year;  for  on  that  day 
the  high  priest  entered  more  than  once.  The 
meaning  is  that  ordinarily,  except  on  that 
single  day,  approach  to  the  innermost  shrine 
was  closed  to  all.  (2)  That  even  on  that 
day  the  high  priest  alone  entered ;  neither 
the  people,  nor  even  the  priesthood  generally, 
ever  had  approach  to  the  holiest  of  all.  (3) 
That  even  he  could  not  enter  "  without 
blood ; "  neither  the  daily  sacrifices  nor  all 
the  ordinary  ceremonial  of  the  Law  availed 
for  bis  access :  lie  must  take  with  him  the 
blood  of  special  »in  offerings,  or  he  still  could 
not  enter  and  live.  (4)  This  blood  he 
offered  "  for  himself  and  for  the  ignorances  of 
the  people ; "  for  himself,  since  he  too  was 
"  compassed  with  infirmity,"  and  required 
atonement  (ver.  2),  and  also  for  the  people's 
ignorancet.  There  is  a  significance  in  this 
word.  It  was  not  the  sins  done  with  a 
high  hand  that  had  to  be  atoned  for  on  that 
day ;  these  were  either  visited  by  "  cutting 
off,"  or  atoned  for  in  ways  appointed  for  tlie 
purpose :  it  was  the  less  definite  and  un- 
detected sinfulness,  infecting  the  whole 
community,  and  rem:iining  after  all  cere- 
monial cleansing,  so  as  to  debar  them  from 
coming  "  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace," 
that  was  yearly  kept  in  remembrance  on 
the  Day  of  Atonement.  Hence  before  even 
the  high  priest  could  enter  and  not  die,  the 
mercy-seat  over  "the  testimony"  which  was 
within  the  ark  must  be  enveloped  with  the 
cloud  of  incense  and  sprinkled  with  the 
blood  which  "  covereth  sin  "  (the  verb  trans- 
lated "  make  atonement  for  "  means  properly 
"  cover  ").  The  sin  was  still  not  taken  away, 
only  "covered"  for  the  time;  for  the  holy 
of  holies  after  the  ceremony  remained  closed 
as  before,  and  the  same  rites  had  to  be 
repeated  at  each  yearly  entrance.  All  that 
was  expressed  was  an  ever-recurring  need  of 
atonement,  not  yet  effected  truly,  though 
symbolically  prefigured.  The  Holy  Ghost 
this  signifying,  that  the  way  into  the  holiest 
of  all  (so  the  A.V.,  giving  the  idea  correctly, 
though  the  expression  is  simply  tuv  ayiuv, 
which  might  denote  only  the  holy  place,  as 
in  ver.  2,  if  we  there  read  tyn  and  not  ayla. 


cii.  IX.  1—28.] 


THE  EPISTLli  TO  Tllli  KEBREWa 


229 


but  is  used  for  the  holy  of  holies  in  vers.  24, 
25,  and  for  its  heavenly  antitype  in  ver.  13. 
This  last, as  typified  in  the  earthly  sanctuary, 
is  what  is  intended  here)  hath  not  yet 
been  made  manifest,  while  as  the  first  taber- 
nacle is  yet  standing  (or  rather,  has  standing 
(iXoi<i"ns  ardiTiv) ;  lias  a  place  in  the  sym- 
bolical representation).  The  "  first  tabei- 
naele"  here  spoken  of  certainly  does  not 
mean  the  earthly  one  as  opposed  to  the 
heavenly,  but  what  the  oxpreesion  denotes 
throughout  the  chapter,  the  holy  place  in 
distinction  from  the  holy  of  holies.  How, 
then,  is  the  continued  existence  of  this  a 
sign  that  the  way  to  the  heavenly  holy  of 
holies  has  not  yet  been  made  manifest  ? 
Obviously  because  it  intervenes  between 
the  congregation  and  the  holy  of  holies  of 
the  earthly  tabernacle, debarring  all  approach 
to  the  latter,  and  even  hiding  it  from  their 
view.  Tills  debarring  intervention  signifies 
that  there  is  no  approaeli  for  them  as  yet  to 
what  the  holy  of  holies  symbolizes.  Further, 
the  ordinary  ministry  of  the  priests  them- 
selves did  not  extend  beyond  this  "first 
tabernacle:"  this  alone  was  the  sphere  of 
the  services  which  they  accomplished  daily ; 
and  so  the  very  fact  of  its  existing  for  tliis 
purpose  expressed  that  even  their  mediation 
was  not  availing  for  access  to  the  inner 
mercy-seat.  And  that  this  was  so  is  inti- 
mated with  peculiar  significance  by  the 
direction  that,  when  the  high  priest  alone 
entered  within  the  veil,  none  even  of  them 
should  be  in  the  holy  place  at  all,  so  as  to 
see  beyond  it :  "And  there  shall  be  no  man 
in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  when 
he  goeth  in  to  make  an  atonement  in  the 
holy  place  "  (Lev.  xvi.  17). 

Ver.  9. — Which  (fi-ns,  with  its  usual  force) 
is  a  parable  for  the  time  present  (i.e.  present 
as  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  the  old 
dispensation.  The  A.V.,  translating  "  then 
present,"  and  using  past  tenses  throughout, 
though  departing  from  literalism,  still  gives, 
we  conceive,  the  idea  correctly);  according  to 
which  (referring  to  "  parable,"  if  we  adopt 
the  best-supported  reading,  KaB'  ijv  The 
TextuB  BeceptuB,  followed  by  the  A.Y.,  has 
Kofl'  Sy,  referring  to  "  the  time  ")  are  oifered 
both  gifts  and  saorifioes  (cf.  ver.  1),  which 
cannot,  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience, 
make  him  tiiat  doth  the  service  (or,  "  the 
worshipper,"  the  idea  not  being  confined  to 
the  officiating  priest;  cf.  oh.^x.  2,  where  tovs 
KarpiiovTas  is  translated  "  the  worshippers") 
perfect.  The  emphatic  expression  here  is 
Kori  iruvilSri<ni>.  The  gifts  and  sacrifices  of 
tlie  Law  availed  in  themselves  only  for 
external  ceremonial  purification ;  they  did 
not  reach,  however  typical,  the  sphere  of 
man's  hiner  consciousness ;  they  could  not 
bring  about  that  sense  of  spiritual  accord 
wjth  God  which  is  spoken  of  in  Jer.  xxxi. 


•8  marking  the  new  covenant  (see  below, 
vers.  13,  14). 

Ver.  10.— Hendered  in  A.V., "  Which  stood 
only  in  {ii.6vov  ivV)  meats  and  drinks  and 
divers  washings,  and  carnal  ordinances  [koI 
SiKatdifiaffi  crapxhs,  Textus  Eeceptus],  im- 
posed on  them  (firiKet/ieva)  until  the  time  of 
reformation."  This  is  a  satisfactory  render- 
ing of  the  Textus  Eeceptus,  4itl  before 
"  meats,"  etc.,  being  taken  in  the  sense  of 
dependence,  and  iiriKeifiera  necessarily  as 
agreeing  with  "  gifts  and  sacrifices  "  (Scipd 
re  Kai  Bvirlai)  in  ver.  9.  But  there  are  other 
readings,  though  none,  any  more  than  that 
of  tlie  Textus  Beceptua,  to  be  decidedly  pre- 
ferred on  the  mere  ground  of  manuscript 
authority.  The  best  sense  seems  to  be 
given  by  that  of  Si/taitSyuara  instead  of  kuI 
Sucauiiittffi,  so  that  we  may  render  (eVl  being 
taken  in  the  sense  of  addition).  Being  only 
(with  meats  and  drinks  and  divers  wakings) 
carnal  ordinances,  imposed  until  the  time  of 
reformation.  We  thus  have  an  obvious 
neuter  plural  (SiKaidi/tara)  for  iiriKeiiitva  to 
agree  with,  and  we  avoid  the  ass'  rtion  that 
the  "  gifts  and  sacrifices"  of  the  Law 
"stood  only"  in  "meats,"  etc.  This  was 
not  so ;  their  essential  part  was  blood-shed- 
ding (aifiaT^Kxiac.,  ver.  22);  the  other 
things  here  mentioned  were  but  accom- 
paniments and  appendages.  The  "meats 
and  drinks  "  spoken  of  may  refer  mainly  to 
the  distinctions  between  clean  and  uncleun 
viands,  which  we  know  were  made  such  a 
point  of  by  the  Jews  of  the  apostolic  age 
(cf.  Col.  ii.  16—23;  Bom.  xiv.;  1  Cor.  viii.; 
also  Mark  vii.  15).  The  "  divers  washings  " 
(^aiTTiaixots)  may  be  taken  to  include  both 
the  ablutions  of  the  priests  before  sacrifice, 
and  those  enjoined  on  the  people  in  many 
parts  of  the  Law  after  ceremonial  defile- 
ment, which  kind  of  washings  had  been 
further  multiplied  variously  in  the  tradi- 
tional law  (cf.  Mark  vii.  3,  4,  8). 

Vers.  11,  12. — But  Christ  having  come 
{va.payev6ixivos,  of.  Matt,  iii,  1 ;  Luke  xii.  51) 
a  High  Fiiest  (or,  at  High  Priest)  of  the  - 
good  things  to  come,  through  the  greater 
and  more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with 
hands,  that  is  to  say,  not  of  this  creation 
{nTlaias),  nor  yet  tiirough  the  blood  of 
goats  and  calves,  but  through  his  own  blood, 
entered  in  once  for  all  (^</>i2Ta|)  into  the  holy 
place,  having  obtained  {iiip6.ii.(vos,  not  neces- 
sarily antecedent  to  eio-TJAeej/)  eternal  re- 
demption. On  the  futurity  expressed  (here 
and  ch.  x.  1)  by  "  the  good  things  to  come  " 
(the  reading  fieWSprav  being  preferred  to 
yivofiivaii),  see  under  ch.  i.  1  (eV  iax^rov 
Tuv  rjfiepwv  To&raiv)  and  ch.  ii.  5  (t^v  oIkov- 
fievriv  tV  iiiWovffav).  Here,  certainly,  the 
period  of  the  earthly  tabernacle  having  been 
the  temporal  standpoint  in  all  the  preceding 
verses,  futurity    with    regard  to   it    may 


230 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  Dt.  1 — 28. 


without  difficulty,  be  understood ;  and  hence 
"the  good  things"  may  still  be  regarded 
as  such  as  have  already  come  in  Christ.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  difficulty  in 
regarding  them  as  still  future.  For  the 
full  and  final  result  of  even  Christ's  per- 
fected high  priesthood  is  not  yet  come. 
But  what  is  "  the  greater  and  more  perfect 
tabernacle,"  through  which  he  entered  the 
heavenly  holy  of  holies  ?  It  seems  evident!  y, 
in  the  first  place,  to  be  connected  with 
elariKOey,  being  regarded  as  the  antitype  of 
that  "  first  tabernacle  "  through  which  the 
high  priests  on  earth  had  passed  in  order 
to  enter  within  the  veil ;  Sia  having  here  a 
local,  not  an  instrumental,  sense.  The  in- 
strumental sense  of  the  same  preposition 
in  the  next  clause  (Sii  rod  ISlott  at/iaTos)  is 
not  against  this  view.  In  English,  "  through 
his  own  blood  he  entered  through  the 
tabernacle  "  presents  no  difficulty,  though 
"  through "  is  used  in  two  different  senses. 
But  what  is  exactly  meant  by  the  taber- 
nacle through  which  Christ  has  passed? 
Bearing  in  mind  wliat  was  said  under  ch. 
viii.  2  of  the  prophetic  visions  of  a  heavenly 
temple — coiresponding  tn  the  earthly  one — 
and  that  the  epithet  axeipoiro/ijTos  is  applied 
also  (ver.  24)  by  implication  tb  the  counter- 
part of  the  holy  of  holies,  and  also  the 
expression  (ch.  iv.  14),  "having  passed 
through  the  heavens  (SieAijXufliiTa  tous  oipa- 
voiis),"  we  may  regard  it  as  denoting  the 
heavenly  region  beyond  this  visible  sphere 
of  things  (oil  Tairris  Trjs  KTiVeaiv),  intcrveuing 
between  the  latter  and  the  immeiliate  pre- 
sence, or  "face,"  of  God.  Thus  "  through 
the  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle" 
of  this  verse  answers  to  "  having  passed 
through  the  heavens"  of  oh.  iv.  14;  and 
"  entered  once  for  all  into  the  holy  place  " 
of  ver.  12  to  "entered  into  heaven  itself" 
(the  very  heaven)  of  ver.  24.  Thus  also 
the  symbolical  acts  of  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment are  successively,  and  in  due  order, 
fulfilled.  As  the  high  priest  first  sacrificed 
the  sin  ofiering  outside  the  tabernacle,  and 
then  passed  through  the  holy  to  the  holy 
of  holies,  so  Christ  first  offered  himself  in 
this  mundane  sphere  of  things,  and  then 
passed  through  the  heavens  to  the  heaven 
of  heavens.  Delitzsch,  taking  this  view, 
offers  a  still  more  definite  explanation;  thus: 
"  The  former  (tA  ayta)  is  that  eternal  heaven 
of  God  himself  (aOris  6  oipai/hs)  which  is 
his  own  Belt-manifested  eternal  glory  (John 
xvii.  5),  and  existed  before  all  worlds;  the 
latter  (fi  a-Krii'-fi)  is  the  heaven  of  the  blessed, 
in  which  he  shines  upon  his  creatures  in 
'  the  light  of  love ' — '  the  temple  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in  heaven'  of 
Kuv.  XV.  5,  which  the  apocalyptic  seer  beheld 
filled  witli  incense-smoke  from  'the  glory 
of  God,  and  from  hia  power.'"    There  are 


other  view!  of  what  is  meant  by  "the  greatei 
and  more  perfect  tabernacle."  The  most 
notable,  as  being  that  of  Chrysostom  and  the 
Fathers  generally,  is  that  it  means  Christ's 
human  nature,  which  he  assumed  before 
passing  to  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  on 
high.  This  view  is  suggested  by  his  having 
himself  ipoken  of  the  temple  of  his  body 
(John  ii.  21),  and  calling  it,  if  the  "  false 
witnesses"  at  his  trial  reported  him  truly, 
ax^ipoirolriTov  (Mark  xiv.  58);  by  the  ex- 
pression (John  i.  14),  "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  tabemaded  Q(TK-I]vattiv)  among 
us ; "  by  St.  Paul's  speaking  of  the  human 
body  as  a  tabemade  (2  Cor.  v.  1,  4) ;  and  by 
ch.  X.  19,  20,  where  the  "veil"  through 
which  we  have  "  a  new  and  living  way  into 
the  holy  place  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  " 
is  said  to  be  his  flesh.  There  is  thus  abun- 
dant ground  for  thinking  of  Christ's  body  as 
signified  by  a  tabernacle ;  and  the  expression 
in  ch.  X.  19,  20  goes  some  way  to  counte- 
nance such  an  interpretation  here.  The 
objection  to  it  is  that  it  seems  neither  sug- 
gested by  the  context  nor  conformable  to 
the  type  of  the  high  priest  on  the  Day  ol 
Atonement.  Fur,  if  the  human  body  of 
Christ  assumed  at  his  birth  is  meant,  he 
entered  into  that  before,  not  after,  his  aton- 
ing sacrifice ;  and  if,  with  Hofmann,  we  think 
rather  of  his  glorified  body,  in  what  sense 
in  accordance  with  the  type  can  it  be  said 
that  he  entered  through  it?  We  should 
rather  say  that  he  ascended  with  it  to  the 
right  hand  of  God.  The  further  points  of 
contrast  between  Christ's  entrance  and  that 
of  the  earthly  high  priests  are :  (1)  The  in- 
strumental medium  was  not  the  blood  of 
goats  and  calves  (specified  here  as  having 
been  the  sin  offerings  on  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment), but  hit  own  blood;  he  was  both 
Priest  and  Victim.  (2)  He  entered,  not 
yearly,  but  once  for  all;  there  was  no  need 
of  continual  repetition.  And  the  conclusion 
is  drawn  that  the  redemption  he  thus  wrought 
is  consequently  complete  and  eternal.  Tne 
first  of  these  contrasts  is  enlarged  on  from 
ver.  13  to  ver.  24;  the  second  (denoted  by 
4if>a7ra|)  is  taken  up  at  ver.  25.  On  the 
word  "redemption"  (Kirpains:  in  some 
other  passages  awoAirpuais)  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served that  it  means,  according  to  its  ety- 
mology, release  obtained  by  payment  of  a 
ransom  (\irpov),  and.  thus  in  itself  involves 
the  doctrine  of  atonement  according  to  the 
orthodox  view.  It  is  true  that  in  many 
Scripture  passages  it  is  used  (as  also  \u- 
TpoiaSai  and  AuTpojT^s)  in  a  more  general 
sense  to  express  deliverance  only,  but  nevej 
where  the  redemption  of  manlcind  by  Christ 
is  spoken  of.  In  such  cases  the  Kirpov  is 
often  distinctly  specified,  as  in  Matt.  ix.  2S 
and  Mark  x.  45,  "  his  life ; "  in  1  Tim.  ii.  6 
and  Titus  ii.  14,  "himself ;"  in  Eph    i  7- 


OH.  a,  1— 28.J 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


231 


Col.  i.  14 ;  1  Pet.  i  19,  "  hie  blood ; "  cf.  also 
infra,  ver.  14.  Aa  to  how  the  availing 
power  of  tlie  atonement  is  to  be  understood, 
more  will  be  Bold  under  the  verses  that 
follow. 

Ver.  13. — For  if  the  blood  of  goats  and 
bulla,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling 
those  that  have  been  defiled  {HtKoivafiiivovs, 
of.  Matt  XV.  11,  etc. ;  Acta  zzL  28),  sancti- 
fieth  to  the  purifying  (literally,  unto  the 
purity,  Ka0ap6TTiTa)  of  the  flesh.  In  addition 
to  the  sin  offerings  of  the  Day  of  Atonement, 
mention  is  here  made  of  the  red  lieifer, 
wliose  ashes  were  to  be  mixed  with  water 
for  the  purification  of  such  as  had  been 
ceremonially  defiled  by  contact  with  dead 
bodies  (for  account  of  which  see  Kumb.  six.). 
They  are  classed  together  because  both  were 
general  sin  offerings  for  the  whole  congre- 
gation, representing  the  idea  of  continual 
and  unavoidable  defilement  notwithstanding 
all  the  dail y  sacrifices;  the  difference  between 
them  being  that  the  ashes  were  reserved 
for  use  in  known  oases  of  constantly  recur- 
ring defilement,  the  sin  offerings  on  the  Day 
of  Atonement  were  for  general  sin  and  de- 
filement, known  or  unknown.  But  neither, 
in  themselves,  could  from  their  very  nature 
avail  for  more  than  outward  ceremonial 
cleansing — "  the  purity  of  the  flesh."  This, 
however,  they  did  avail  for ;  and,  if  so,  what 
must  the  cleansing  power  of  OAm<'»  offering 
be  ?  Its  deeper  efficacy  shall  appear  from 
consiileration  of  what  it  was. 

Ycr.  14. — How  mnoh  more  shall  the  blood 
of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit 
offered  hunself  withont  spot  to  God,  purify 
your  (al.  our)  conscience  from  dead  works 
to  serve  the  living  God  t  As  in  vers.  11, 12 
Christ's  entrance  was  contrasted  with  that 
of  the  high  priest,  so  here  is  the  sacrifice 
itself,  in  virtue  of  which  he  entered,  similarly 
contrasted.  The  points  of  contrast  to  which 
attention  is  drawn  are  these :  (1)  It  was  the 
blood,  not  of  beasts  that  perish,  but  of  Christ 
himself— <A«  Christ,  the  Hope  of  Israel, 
whose  Divine  prerogatives  have  been  set 
forth  in  the  preceding  chapters.  (2)  He 
offered  himself.  His  offering  was  a  voluntary 
self-oblation,  not  the  blood- shedding  of 
passive  victims.  (3)  His  offering  was  really 
«  spotless "  (tifucnos)  in  the  sense  of  nnZen 
— the  only  sense  that  can  satisfy  Divine 
justice — symbolized  only  by  the  absence  of 
material  blemish  in  the  ancient  sacrificea. 
(4)  And  this  he  did  "  through  the  eternal 
Spirit,"  This  expression,  which  comes  first 
in  order,  has  an  important  bearing  on  the 
meaning  of  the  whole  passage,  and  calls  for 
especial  consideration.  Be  it  observed,  first, 
that  the  words  are  "  the  eternal  Spirit,"  not 
"the  Holy  Spirit."  It  is  not  the  usual 
designation  )rf  the  Third  Person  of  the  Holy 
Trinity.    (The  reading  iyiov  for  atavlov  has 


not  much  authority  in  its  favour,  and  la, 
besides,  much  more  likely  to  have  been 
substituted  than  the  other.)  What,  then,  is 
meant  by  "the  eternal  Spirit,"  through 
which  Christ  offered  liimself  spotless? 
There  are  three  notable  texta  in  which  the 
Spirit  in  Christ  is  opposed  to  the  flesh : 
Eom.  i.  3,  ToS  yevoiiivov  in  mipiMTOs  Aa;8iS 
KOTtt  adpKa'  ToS  dpurBfvTos  vlov  06oS  4v  Swd/iei, 
Kara  Ili'eS^iia  aytoxrvyris,  ^J  dcatrxifirews  veKpav: 
1  Tim  iil  16,  '^<l>avepi9T]  iv  aapxi,  iSeKauiBri 
i»  jri/eii/iiOTi :  1  Pet.  iii  18,  SaraTtoflels  fi.'kv 
vapiil,  fttiDiroijjfleU  5e  ry  nvei/uiTi.  In  all  these 
passages  the  Spirit  is  that  Divine  element 
of  life  in  Christ,  distinct  from  the  human 
nature  which  he  assumed  of  the  seed  of 
David,  in  virtue  of  which  he  rose  from  the 
dead.  In  ua  men,  too,  according  to  St.  Paul, 
there  is  the  vyei/iA,  as  well  as  adpi  and 
ifiux^  (sometimes  imina  and  irip^  alone  are 
spoken  of) — the  higher  principle  of  life 
within  us,  in  virtue  of  which  we  can  have 
communion  with  God  and  be  influenced  by 
his  Holy  Spirit.  Any  act  of  acceptable  self- 
oblation  tlw.t  we  might  be  capable  of  would 
be  done  through  the  spirit  that  is  in  us,  to 
which  the  flesh  is  subdued.  Corresponding 
to  this  in  Christ  was  "  the  eternal  Spirit " — a 
truly  Divine  spiritual  Personality,  conjoined 
with  hia  assumed  humanity.  Through  this 
he  overcame  death,  it  being  impossible  that 
he  should  be  holden  of  it ;  through  thia,  too, 
he  offered  himself  a  willing  aacrifice,  aub- 
mitting  to  the  full  penally  of  human  sin 
in  obedience  to  the  Father'a  will.  Thus  ia 
prumiuontly  brought  to  view  the  spiritual 
aapect  of  the  atonement.  Its  especial  virtue 
is  said  to  lie,  not  in  the  mere  suffering  or  the 
mere  physical  blood-shedding  and  death 
upon  the  cross,  but  in  its  being  a  voluntary 
act  of  perfect  obedience  on  the  part  of  him 
who  was  the  Eepresentative  of  mnn,  and  in 
whom  "the  eternal  Spirit"  triumphed  over 
the  weakness  of  humanity.  The  agony  in  the 
garden  (see  under  ver.  7,  eto.)  is  illustrative 
of  this  view  of  the  virtue  of  the  atonement. 
There  we  perceive  "  the  eternal  Spirit "  in 
the  Saviour  completely  victorious  over 
natural  human  shrinking.  The  same  view 
appears  in  the  reference  to  Ps.  xl.  in  ch.  x., 
where  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God  " 
expresses  the  essential  principle  of  the 
availing  sacrifice  (see  below  on  ch.  x.  5,  etc.). 
Hence  follows  what  is  said  next  of  the  effect 
of  such  a  sacrifice  as  thia  was — to  purify,  not 
the  flesh,  but  the  conscience  (^amdSriarii'), 
meaning  "  man's  inner  consciousness  "  with 
regard  to  God  and  our  relations  to  him.  It 
belonged  essentially  to  the  spiritual  sphere 
of  things,  and  in  that  sphere  (as  waa  not 
the  case  with  the  old  aaoriflces)  must  be, 
and  is  felt  to  be,  ita  availing  power.  It 
was,  in  fact,  just  such  a  sacrifice  m  man's 
conscience,  if  enlightened,  feels  to  be  due  to 


232 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  DC.  1—28. 


Grod.  Man,  as  he  is  now,  cannot  make  it ; 
but  in  the  "  Ron  of  man  "  he  sees  it  made, 
anrl  thus  finds  at  last  the  idea  of  a  true  atone- 
ment fulfilled.  In  the  expression,  "dead 
works,"  there  may  be  an  intended  allusion 
to  the  dead  lodiea  from  the  pollution  of 
which  especially  tlie  "ashes  of  nn  heifer" 
purified ;  and  in  "  to  serve  "  (eis  rh  TiMrpeieip) 
there  is  an  evident  reference  to  the  legal 
type.  As  tlie  legal  sin  offering  purified  the 
tkih  from  the  contamination  of  contact  with 
tlie  dead,  so  that  the  Israelites,  thus  cleansed, 
might  offer  acceptable  worship,  so  Christ's 
.  offering  of  himself  fulfils  what  was  thus 
typified;  it  purifies  the  "conscience"  from 
the  contamination  of  "  dead  works,"  so  that 
we  may  offer  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  our  \oyiKii 
Aarpe^a (Rom.  xii.  1).  On  vsKpStv  ^pyajv,  see 
under  ch.  vi.  1.  Here,  the  idea  of  general 
pollution  pervading  the  whole  congregation 
having  been  prominent  in  what  precedes, 
we  may,  perhaps,  take  the  expression  as 
denoting  all  human  works  whatever  "  done 
before  the  grace  of  Christ  and  the  inspira- 
tion of  his  Spirit,"  all  being  regarded  as 
tainted  with  sin,  and  so  dead  for  the  purpose 
of  justification.  The  purification  from  them 
which  is  spoken  of  involves  (be  it  further 
observed)  both  justification  thi-ough  atone- 
ment and  sanetifioation  tlirough  grace :  the 
first,  since,  otiierwise,  the  very  meaning  of 
the  old  sin  offerings  would  not  he  fulfilled; 
the  second,  as  denoted  by  the  conclading 
clause,  "to  serve,"  etc.  The  second  is  the 
necessary  sequence  of  the  first.  Believeig 
are  not  only  "  cleansed  from  their  former 
sins,"  but  also  put  into  a  position  for  offering 
an  acceptable  service.  In  the  life  of  Christ 
in  whom  they  live,  and  who  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them,  they  can  hence- 
forth "serve  the  living  God."  There  is 
involved,  in  fact  (to  return  to  the  account  of 
the  new  covenant  in  Jer.  xxxi),both  oblivion 
of  past  sins  and  a  writing  of  ihe  Law  npon 
the  heart. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — And  for  this  cause  he  is  the 
Mediator  of  a  new  testament,  that  by  means 
of  death  (literally,  death  having  taken  place}, 
for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  that 
were  under  the  first  testament,  they  which 
are  called  may  receive  the  promise  of  the 
eternal,  inheritance.  Here  the  view  of  the 
gospel  as  a  new  SiaBriKri  (introdnced  first  in 
ch.  vii.  22,  and  enlarged  on  in  ch.  viii.  6 — 
13)  is  again  brought  in.  For  the  word  is 
still  SiaBiiifn,  though  here,  for  reasons  that 
will  appear,  rendered  "testament"  in  the 
A.V.  The  connecting  thought  here  is — It 
is  heeause  of  Christ's  sacrifice  having  been 
such  as  has  been  described,  that  he  is  the 
Mediator  of  that  new  and  better  covenant ; 
it  qualified  him  for  being  so.  A  sacrifice,  a 
death,  was  required  for  giving  it  validity 


(vers.  16 — 23),  and  the  character  of  his 
sacrifice  implies  a  better  covenant  than  the 
old,  even  such  a  one  as  Jeremiah  fore- 
told. Further,  the  purpose  of  his  death 
is  said  to  be  "for  the  redemption  of  the 
transgressions  that  were  under  the  first 
covenant."  For  in  the  [passage  of  Jeremiah 
the  defect  of  the  first  covenant  was  based  on 
the  transgression  of  its  conditions  by  man, 
while  under  the  new  one,  such  transgres- 
sions were  to  be  no  more  remembered.  But 
this  could  not  be  without  atonement  for 
them ;  the  whole  ceremonial  of  the  Law 
signified  this ;  and  also  that  such  atonement 
could  not  be  except  by  death.  The  death  of 
Christ  satisfied  this  requirement ;  and  so 
the  new  covenant  could  come  in.  So  far  the 
course  of  thought  is  clear.  Nor  is  there 
difficulty  in  understanding  the  purport  of 
ver.  18,  etc.,  taken  by  itself,  where  the 
"  blood-shedding  "  that  inaugurated  the  first 
covenant  is  regarded  as  typical  of  that  of 
Christ  in  the  inauguration  of  the  new  one. 
But  there  is  a  difficulty  about  the  intervening 
verses  (16,  17),  arising  from  the  apparent 
use  of  the  word  StaB-ljiai  in  a  new  sense,  not 
otherwise  suggested — that  of  testament  rather 
than  covenant.  The  verses  are,  as  given  in 
the  A.Y.,  For  where  a  testament  is,  there 
must  also  of  necessity  be  ((pepea^Sat,  a  word  of 
which  the  exact  meaning  is  not  clear ;  some 
interpret  "  be  brought  in,  or  proved,"  some 
"  be  understood,  implied  ")  the  death  of  the 
testator  (toD  Sia6eij.evov,  equivalent  to  "  him 
that  made  it").  For  a  testament  is  of  force 
after  men  are  dead  (lirl  veicpois) :  otherwise  it 
is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  testator 
liveth  (or,  for  doth  it  ever  avail  while  he  that 
made  if  liveth  1  iirel  li-finore :  cf.  ch.  i.  2; 
Bom.  iii.  6;  1  Cor.  xiv.  16;  John  vii.  26; 
Luke  iii  15).  Now,  the  word  Siafl^/oj  itself 
undoubtedly  may  bear  the  sense  of  "  testa- 
ment." Its  e;eneral  meaning  is  "  disposition," 
or  "  settlement ; "  and  it  may  denote  either  a 
compact  between  living  persons,  or  a  will  to 
take  effect  after  the  testator's  death.  In  the 
verses  before  us  it  appears  to  be  used  speci- 
fically in  the  latter  sense.  For  they  express 
general  propositions,  which  are  not  true  of 
all  covenants,  but  are  true  (according  to 
their  most  obvious  sense)  of  all  testaments. 
Further,  this  sense  is  distinctly  applicable 
to  the  new  Siafl^Kr),  regarded  as  the  dying 
Christ's  bequest  to  his  Church.  Hence, 
but  for  the  context,  we  should  naturally  so 
understand  it  in  these  verses.  The  dif- 
ficulties attending  this  sense  are :  (1)  The 
word  is  not  used  in  this  specific  sense  before 
or  afterwards  in  this  Epistle  or  in  Jer.  xxxi., 
which  is  the  basis  of  the  whole  argimient, 
or  elsewhere,  apparently,  either  in  the  Old 
Testament  or  the  New.  (2)  The  sense  does 
not  suit  the  ease  of  the  old  Siafl^/cTj,  which 
was  a  covenant  between  the  living  God  uid 


OH.  IX.  1—28.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW& 


233 


hb  people;  and  then  is  no  intimation  of 
two  Benees  being  intended  in  the  two  cases : 
indeed,  in  the  passage  before  us,  tho  same 
eenie  seems  to  be  distinctly  implied,  since  the 
blood-shedding  which  inaugurated  the  old  is 
at  >nce  (in  ver.  17)  spoken  of  as  answering 
to  the  death  which  inaugurated  the  new,  as 
though  death  inaugurated  both  in  the  same 
sense.  (3)  The  word,  in  the  sense  of  co- 
vemtut  (equivalent  to  the  Hebrew  berith),  is 
con  uon  in  the  LXX.,  expressing  an  idea 
fas  iliar  to  Jews  and  Jewish  CbristiaQS, 
wl  Ae  testamentary  dispositions  were,  as  far 
as  ire  know,  unfamiliar  to  the  Hebrews;  and, 
tl  /ugh  the  Boman  testamentary  law  may 
b  >ve  come  into  use  when  the  Epistle  was 
\kritten,  it  is  thought  unlikely  that  the 
writer,  addressing-  Hebrews,  would  have  re- 
ferred to  it  in  illustration  of  a  Divine  dis- 
pensation, or,  if  he  had,  have  used  a  word  so 
well  known  to  them  in  its  traditional  sense. 
(4)  Christ  is  called  (here  as  well  as  in  oh. 
xii.  24  and  xiii.  20)  the  Mediator  {fiealTiis) 
of  the  new  SiaB^Kri :  but  a  testament  does 
not  require  a  Mediator,  nor,  if  it  has  one, 
can  the  same  person  be  botli  mediator  and 
testator.  If,  however,  the  sense  of  testament 
should  seem  inevitable  here,  we  may  ex- 
plain as  follows.  Though  the  word  has  been 
used  so  far  in  a  general  sense,  yet  the  writer, 
on  the  suggestion  of  Bavirou  yemnemv  in 
ver.  15,  passes  in  thought  at  ver.  16  to  the 
specific  sense  of  testament,  as  suiting  the 
case  of  Christ,  the  language  he  uses  being 
sufficient  for  carrying  his  readers  with  him 
in  the  transition.  Further,  though  the  old 
SiaBiiKri  was  not  in  itself  a  testament,  yet  it 
was  typical  of  that  which  was;  its  whole 
ceremonial  foreshadowed  the  future  Testa- 
tor's death,  and  so,  in  a  typical  sense,  it 
might  also  itself  be  called  one.  Conse- 
quently, in  ver.  18,  the  inaugurating  sacri- 
hces  of  the  old  dispensation  are  regarded  as 
representing  the  death  of  the  testator ;  for 
they  prefigured  Christ,  through  whose  death 
the  "eternal  inheritance"  is  bequeathed 
to  man.  (In  accordance  with  this  view, 
the  Vulgate  renders  SiaSiiKrt  testamentum 
throughout  the  Epistle,  even  when  the  old 
dispensation  is  referred  to.)  As  to  6  SiaSe/ne- 
vos  (translated  "  the  testator"),  it  is,  accord- 
ing to  this  view,  ultimately  God  the  Father 
in  the  new  SiaiiiKTi,  as  well  as  in  the  old, 
though,  of  course,  the  Godhead  could  not 
die.  But  the  Father  having  placed  the 
whole  inheritance  destined  for  mankind  in 
the  hands  of  Christ  as  Mediator,  in  his  human 
death  the  testator  died.  And  thus  one  of 
the  difficulties  above  mentioned  may  be  met, 
viz.  that  of  Christ  being  regarded  both  as 
Testator  and  Mediator.  Christ  was,  in  fact, 
both — ^Testator,  in  that,  being  one  with 
God,  he  bequeathed  through  his  death  the 
kingdom  appointed  onto  him  by  the  Father ; 


Mediator,  in  that  it  wa«  through  his  Incarna- 
tion only  that  the  "  eternal  inheritance " 
willed  to  us, by  the  Father  could  be  trans- 
mitted in  the  way  of  testament.  So  in  effect 
Chrysostom  explains.  Apposite  to  this  view 
of  the  subject  are  his  own  words  (Luke  xxii. 
29),  "  And  I  appoint  (SiaTiee/iai)  unto  you  a 
kingdom,  as  my  Father  appointed  (Sie'flero) 
unto  me."  Here  we  have  the  same  verb 
(Siorlfiejiiai)  as  is  used  in  the  Epistle.  And 
though,  in  the  passage  from  St.  Luke,  the 
idea  of  a  testamentary  appointment  is  not 
necessarily  implied,  yet  it  is  naturally 
suggested  where  Christ  is  speaking  on  the 
eve  of,  and  with  reference  to,  his  death 
There  is,  however,  another  view  taken  (de- 
cidedly by  Whitby,  Ebrard,  and  in  the 
recent '  Speaker's  CommeJitary '),  according 
to  which  the  idea  of  a  testament  does  not 
come  in  at  all,  the  word  Smfl^io)  retaining 
here,  as  elsewhere,  its  usual  sense  ol  covenant. 
The  position  is  that,  though  the  propositions 
of  vers.  16, 17  are  not  true  of  all  covenants, 
yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  they  are  true 
of  any  covenant  between  God  and  man ; 
which  is  the  only  kind  of  covenant  that  the 
writer  has  in  view,  or  that  his  readers  would 
be  ledrto  think  of  by  the  previous  reference 
to  Jer.  xxxi.,  or  by  the  associations  of  the 
word  StaOiiKTi  aa  used  in  the  Old  Testament. 
The  sense  in  which  the  propositions  are 
true  of  such  a  covenant  is  thus  expressed  by 
Ebrard: "  Whenever  sinful  man  will  enter  into 
a  covenant  with  the  holy  God,  the  man  must 
first  die — mustfirst  atone  for  his  guilt  by  death 
(or  must  put  in  a  substitute  for  himself)." 
This  principle  is  expressed  (it  is  alleged),  not 
only  by  the  sacrifices  that  inaugurated  this 
covenant  of  the  Law,  but  also  wherever  a 
covenant  between  God  and  man  is  spoken  of 
in  the  Old  Testament ;  e.g.  in  the  covenant 
with  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  8,  etc.,  and  Gen 
xxii.).  In  the  case  of  covenants  betweer 
man  and  man  (as  between  Abraham  and 
Abimelech,  and  between  Jacob  and  Laban) 
there  was  no  need  of  slain  victims,  whose 
life  had  to  bo  given  for  that  of  one  of  the 
contracting  parties  ;  but  there  is  always 
expressed  such  need  in  the  case  of  a  cove- 
nant between  God  and  man.  Further,  the 
expression,  SiaB-fiK-q  eVl  vGKpois  fie^ala,  is, 
according  to  this  view,  illustrated  by  Ps.  1. 
5,  where  the  LXX.  has  robs  SiaTide/iei/ous 
riiv  Sia67)K7iv  avTov  evl  Bviriats  (in  the  Vul- 
gate, qui  ordinant  testamentum  ejus  super 
eacrijieiis).  The  same  preposition  eVl  is 
used  in  both  passages,  and  ivl  doaltus  is  sup- 
posed to  express  the  same  idea  as  ^Tri  veKjiois. 
This  passage  from  the  psalm  is  certainly 
much  to  the  point  in  suppoii  of  the  view 
before  us,  serving  moreover  to  .meet  in  some 
degree  one  principal  objection  to  it,  viz. 
that  it  requires  i  SiaBei^ivos  to  be  understood 
of  the  human  party  to  the  eoTenant,  and  not 


234 


THE  EPISTLK  TO  THE  HEBBEWa 


[oh.  a.  1— 2& 


of  its  Divine  Anthor.  Buoh  ig  not  the  most 
obvious  application  of  the  word,  nor  the  one 
sanctioned  by  the  quotation  from  Jeremiah, 
or  by  other  references  to  the  Divine  covenant 
(see  supra,  ch.  viii.  10,  and  also  Gen.  xv.  18 ; 
Ueut.  V.  2,  3;  Luke  xii.  29;  Acta  iii.  25; 
Fva  well  as  Exod.  xxiv.  8,  quoted  below 
(ver.  20),  where  Stedero,  not  ivereiKaTo,  is 
the  word  in  the  LXX.  But  such  is  the 
ripplication  in  Ps.  1.  5,  and  may  be  considered, 
tlierefore,  not  untenable.  The  writer  may, 
indeed,  have  had  the  expression  in  thepsalm 
in  his  mind  when  he  wrote  the  verses  before 
IIS.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that 
(iiffieulties  attend  both  the  views  that  have 
been  above  explained.  It  is  not  here  at- 
tempted to  decide  between  them. 

Ver.  18. — Wherefore  neither  hath  the 
first  (testament,  A.V. ;  or,  covenant)  been 
dedicated  withont  blood.  Here  the  blood 
of  slain  victims,  which  had  been  essential 
for  the  first  inauguration  of  the  old  ShhS-^kt), 
is  referred  to  as  expressing  the  principle  of 
vers.  16,  17,  viz.  that  there  must  be  death 
for  a  Siofl^io)  (in  whatever  sense  the  word 
may  be  intended,  whether  as  a  testament 
or  as  a  covenant  between  God  and  man)  to 
take  eflfeot.  Whichever  view  we  take  of 
the  intended  import  of  the  word,  the 
reference  is  equally  apposite  in  support 
of  the  introductory  proposition  of  ver.  15 ; 
which  is  to  the  effect  that  Christ's  death 
(ecwdrov  yivnivov),  fulfilling  the  symbolism 
of  the  old  inaugurating  sacrifices,  qualified 
him  as  Mediator  of  a  new  SiaSiiKri. 

Vers.  19,  20.  —  Tor  when  Moses  had 
spoken  every  precept  to  all  the  people 
according  to  the  Law,  he  took  the  blood  of 
the  calves  and  the  goats,  with  water  and 
scarlet  wool,  and  hyssop,  and  sprinkled 
both  the  book  itself  and  all  the  people, 
saying.  This  is  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
(A.V.  testament)  which  God  enjoined  unto 
you  (strictly,  to  yoit-ward ;  i.e.  enjoined  to 
uie  for  you).  The  reference  is  to  Exod. 
xxiv.  3 — 9,  where  the  account  is  given  of 
the  inauguration  of  the  covenant  between 
God  and  the  Israelites  through  Moses.  He 
"  came  and  told  the  people  all  the  words  of 
the  LoBD,  and  all  the  judgments:  and  all 
the  people  answered  witli  one  voice,  and 
said,  All  the  words  which  the  Lobu  hath 
said  will  we  do."  And  then  he  wrote  all 
tlie  words  of  the  Lobd  in  a  book,  and 
builded  an  altar  under  the  mount,  and 
sacrifices  were  offered,  and  iialf  of  the 
blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  altar,  and  tlie 
words  were  read  from  the  book,  and  again 
the  people  undertook  to  observe  them,  and 
the  other  half  of  tlje  blood  was  sprinkled 
on  the  people,  and  so  the  covenant  was 
ratified.  The  essential  part  of  the  whole 
ceremony  being  the  "blood-shedding,"  it  is 
of  BO  importance  for  the  general  argument 


that  the  acconnt  in  Exodus  is  not  exactly 
followed.    The  variations  from  it  are  these : 

(1)  The  mention  of  goats  as  well  as  calvpji 
or  bullocks — of  water — of  the  scarlet  wool 
and  hyssop — and  of  the  sprinkling  of  the 
book,  instead  of  the  altar,  as  in  Exodus, 

(2)  Tlie  words  spoken  by  Moses  are 
differently  given,  toBto  being  substituted 
for  iSoii,  i  @e6s  for  Kifpios,  and  cKeTeiAoTo  for 
Sie'fleTo.  On  these  variations  we  may  ob- 
serve that  the  mention  of  goats  may  have 
been  suggested  to  tlie  writer's  mind  by  the 
ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  pre- 
viously alluded  to;  and  it  is  not  ineonsistent 
with  the  account  in  Exodus,  where  the 
victims  used  for  the  "burnt  offerings"  are 
not  specified,  only  the  bullocks  for  ''peace 
offerings."  Nor  is  there  inconsistency  in 
the  other  additions  to  the  ceremonial.  The 
scarlet  wool  and  hyssop  were  the  usual 
instruments  of  aspersion  (a  bunch  of  the 
latter  being  apparently  bound  by  tlie 
former  to  a  stick  of  cedar ;  cf.  Exod.  xii.  22 ; 
Lev.  xiv.  50;  Numb.  xix.  6,  18).  It  may 
have  been  usual  to  mix  water  with  the 
blood  used  for  aspersion,  if  only  to  prevent 
coagulation  (see  Lightfoot  on  John  xix.  34), 
though  in  some  cases  certainly  also  with 
a  symbolical  meaning  (cf.  Lev.  xiv.  5,  50); 
and,  if  the  book  was,  as  it  was  likely  to  be, 
on  the  altar  when  the  latter  was  sprinkled 
(Exod.  xxiv.  6,  7),  it  would  itself  partake 
of  this  sprinkling,  and,  being  thus  conse- 
crated, would  be  then  taken  from  the  altar 
to  be  read  from  to  the  people  and  to  receive 
their  assent,  previously  to  the  sprinkling  of 
themselves  with  the  moiety  of  the  blood 
reserved.  Probably  the  whole  account,  ns 
here  given,  was  the  traditional  one  at  the 
time  of  writing  (see  below,  on  ver.  21). 
With  regard  to  the  slightly  altered  form 
of  the  words  spoken  by  Moses,  it  is  an 
interesting  suggestion  that  the  writer  may 
have  had  in  liis  mind  our  Lord's  corre- 
sponding words  in  the  institution  of  the 
Eucharist,  beginning  in  all  the  accounts 
with  TovTO,  and  being  thus  worded:  in  St. 
Luke,  TouTo  T^  TroTfiptov  71  Kutvii  SiafHiicri  iv 
T^  ai/xaTi  fiov,  rh  inrip  ifiwv  iKxviofiivov  ;  and 
in  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark,  ToSto  iari  tA 
aind  fiov,  rh  T?t  Kaivrjs  Siafl^KTjs,  tA  irep! 
roWav  iKxvv6fitvoy,  Bt.  Matthew  adding 
€11  &(pe(7iv  a/iapTmr,  That  Chrifct  in  these 
words  referred  to  those  of  Moses  is  obvious, 
speaking  of  his  own  outpoured  blood  as  the 
antitype  of  that  wherewith  the  old  SiaO-nx-n 
was  dedicated;  and  it  is  likely  that  the 
writer  of  the  Epistle  would  have  Christ's 
words  in  his  mind. 

Ver.  21.— Moreover  the  tabernacle  and  all 
the  vessels  of  the  ministry  be  sprinkled  in 
like  manner  with  the  blood.  This  refers  to 
a  subsequent  occasion,  the  tabernacle  not 
having  been  constructed  at  the  time  of  the 


OB.  IX.  1— 28.J 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


inauguration  of  tlie  covenant, — probably  to 
the  dedication  of  the  tabernacle,  enjoined 
Exod.  xl.,  and  described  Lev.  viii.  It  is 
true  that  no  sprinkling  of  the  tabernacle 
or  its  furniture  with  blood  is  mentioned  in 
ihe  Pentateuch ;  only  the  anointing  of  them 
with  oil  (Lev.  viii.  10).  But  the  garments 
of  Aaron  and  his  sons  are  said  on  that 
occasion  to  have  been  sprinkled  with  the 
blood  as  well  as  with  the  anointing  oil 
(ch.  viii.  30),  and  Josophus  ('  Ant.,'  iii.  8. 
6)  Bays  that  this  blood-sprinkling  WM 
extended  also  to  the  tabernacle  aud  its 
vessels  (tt^k  tc  trKtivh"  *"'  fi  irepl  airiii/ 
(TKeir\).  Here,  as  well  as  in  ver.  19,  our 
writer  may  be  supposed  to  follow  the  tra- 
ditional account,  with  which  there  is  still 
nothing  in  the  Pentateuch  inconsistent. 
Be  it  observed  again  that  the  force  of  the 
argument  does  not  depend  on  these  added 
details,  but  on  tlie  general  principle,  abun- 
dantly ;  expressed  in  the  original  record, 
which  is  asserted  in  the  following  verse. 

Ver.  22. — ^Aud  almost  (rather,  we  may 
almost  tay  that)  all  things  are  according  to 
the  Law  purified  with  blood;  and  without 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission. 
The  essmtlility  of  blood,  which  is  "the 
life  of  all  flesh,"  for  atonement  and  conse- 
quent remission,  is  emphatically  asserted  in 
Lev.  xvii.  11,  which  expresses  the  principle 
of  the  whole  sacrificial  ritual.  The  idea 
seems  to  be  that  the  life  of  man  is  forfeit 
to  Divine  justice  (cf.  Gen.  ii.  17),  and  so 
blood,  representing  life,  must  be  offered 
instead  of  his  life  for  atonement. 

Yer.  23. — It  was  therefore  necessary  (i.e. 
in  accordance  with  the  principle  above 
expressed)  that  the  patterns  (rather,  copiei, 
see  ch.  viii.  5,  supra)  of  things  in  the 
heavens  should  be  purified  with  these ;  but 
the  heavenly  things  themselves  with  better 
sacrifices  than  these.  According  to  the 
view  taken  under  ch.  viii.  2  and  oh.  ix.  11, 
"  the  heavenly  things  "  here  must  be  taken 
to  denote  the  correspouding  realities  in  the 
heavenly  sphere  of  things  to  which  Chdst 
has  gone.  But  how  can  they  themselves 
be  said  to  require  purification  or  cleansing? 
The  mundane  tabernacle  did,  being  itself 
conceived  as  polluted  by  human  sin ;  but 
how  so  of  the  unpolluted  heavenly  taber- 
nacle? The  answer  may  be  tliat  the 
expressions,  chosen  to  suit  the  case  of  the 
earthly  type,  need  not  be  pressed  in  all  their 
detailsasapplying  to  the  heavenly  sanctuary. 
With  regard  to  the  latter,  they  may  be 
meant  only  to  express  that,  though  it  be 
itself  pure,  yet  man  requires  purification 
for  access  to  it,  and  that  for  this  purpose 
"better  sacrifices"  are  required.  "In  hao 
apodosi  verbum  KaSaptfetrdat,  mundari, 
subauditum,  facit  hypallagem :  nam  cselestia 
per  se  lont  puia,  sed  nog  purificandi  f  uimus, 


ut  ilia  possemus  oapessere  "  (Bengcl).  The 
general  meaning  is  obvious  enough.  Com- 
mentators sometimes  raise  needless  difS- 
culties,  and  may  sometimes  even  miss  the 
essential  purport  of  a  passage  by  the  toi) 
constant  application  of  the  critical  micro- 
scope. If,  however,  it  be  thought  necessary 
to  find  a  sense  in  which  the  heavenly 
sanctuary  may  be  said  to  need  purification, 
the  idea  may  be  the  appeasing  of  Divine 
wrath  which  bars  the  entrance  of  mankind. 

Ver.  24. — ^Por  not  into  holy  places  made 
with  hands  did  Christ  enter,  which  are  figures 
(avrhvira,  antitypes)  of  the  true,  but  into 
heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of 
(literally,  hefore  the  face  of)  God  for  us.  This 
verse  confirms  the  view  that  "  the  heavenly 
things"  of  ver.  23  denoted  the  heavenly 
regions  into  which  Christ  is  entered.  °A7ia 
at  the  beginning  of  the  verse  may  be  better 
translated  "  holy  place  "  (as  at  vers.  12  and 
25)  rather  than  "places,"  since  here  the 
heavenly  counterpart  of  the  holy  of  holies, 
as  distinguished  from  the  "  first  tabernacle," 
appears  to  be  in  view,  viz.  "  heaven  itself," 
the  heaven  of  heavens,  the  immediate 
presence  or  "face"  of  God,  the  "throne  of 
the  Majesty  on  high,"  to  which  Christ 
passed  through  the  intermediate  heavens. 
There  he  now  (the  perpetual  nmo  of  the  new 
era  of  accomplished  redemption),  in  his 
humanity,  in  behalf  of  and  representing 
all  humanity,  beholds  for  ever  the  very  face 
of  the  eternal  God,  which  Moses  could  not 
see  and  live,  and  of  which  the  typical  high 
priest  saw  from  year  to  year  but  the  emblem, 
in  transitory  glimpses,  through  intervening 
clouds  of  incense.  The  word  avTlirv-na,  like 
iiroSelynara  in  ver.  23,  expresses  the  idea  of 
the  earthly  sanctuary  being  a  visible  repre- 
sentation answering  to  a  heavenly  reality. 
The  original  riitos-  (type)  was  shown  to 
Moses  in  the  mount  (ch.  viii.  5) ;  what  was 
constructed  by  him  on  the  earth  below  was 
the  antitype  to  it.  The  words  ruiros  and 
cidtItvitos  are  elsewhere  used  to  express 
respectively  a  prophetic  figure  of  a  fulfilment 
to  come  and  the  fulfilment  itself  (as  in  Bom. 
V.  14  and  1  Pet.  iii.  21,  baptism  in  the  latter 
text  being  regarded  as  the  aPTiruTrov  of  the 
Deluge),  but  still  with  the  same  idea  of  the 
type  being  prior  to  the  antitype,  the  latter 
answering  to  the  former. 

Vers.  25, 26.— Nor  yet  that  he  shonla  oflfer 
himself  often,  as  the  high  priest  entereth  into 
the  holy  place  every  year  with  blood  of  others 
(i.e.  blood  not  his  own,  aAAurpf^j) ;  for  then 
must  he  often  have  suffered  since  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world :  but  now  (probably  vwl,  not 
vvv,  meaning  "  as  it  is  ")  once  at  the  end  o< 
the  ages  hath  he  appeared  (raiher,  leen  mani  ■ 
felted,  ire<f>aveparai)  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sa- 
crifice of  himself.  Here  (as  above  noted)  the 
idea  of  i^iirai  in  Ter.  12  ia  taken  up.    That 


23« 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


[oh.  IX  1 — ^28. 


Christ's  offering  of  himself  h  once  for  all, 
needing  no  repetition,  follows  from  the  view 
of  it  already  given,  viz.  that  it  is  a  per- 
petual presentation  of  himself,  after  fully 
availing  sacrifice  of  himself,  before  the  very 
face  of  God.  That  this  is  of  necessity  once 
for  all  is  now  further  sliowu  by^  the  con- 
sideration that  repeated  offerings  of  himself 
would  involve  the  impossible  condition  of 
repeated  deaths.  Observe  that  "  offer  him- 
self" in  ver.  25  does  not  lefer  to  the  death 
upon  the  cross,  but  to  ihe  intercession  before 
tlie  eternal  mercy-seat  after  accomplished 
atonement,  answering  to  the  high  priest's 
entrance,  with  the  blood  of  previous  sacrifice, 
within  the  veU.  The  death  itself  is  denoted 
in  ver.  26  by  iraBeiv  ("suffered").  The 
argument  rests  on  the  piinciple,  already 
'established  as  being  signified  by  the  whole 
of  the  ancient  ritual,  that,  for  acceptable 
intercession  in  behalf  of  man,  previous  death 
or  blood-shedding  is  in  every  case  required. 
But  why  add  "  since  the  foundation  of  the 
world"?  We  must  supply  the  tlioiight  of 
the  retrospective  efficacy  of  Chribt's  atone- 
ment. Ever  since  sin  entered,  man  needed 
atonement,  signified,  but  not  effected,  by 
the  ancient  sacrifices.  Christ's  one  offering 
of  himself  has  supplied  this  primeval  need, 
availing,  not  only  for  the  present  and  future, 
but  also  for  all  past  ages.  This  view  was 
definitely  expressed,  with  reference  to 
"  transgressions  which  were  under  the  first 
covenant,"  in  ver.  15,  and,  though  not 
repeated  here,  is  prominent  in  the  writer's 
mind  (cf.  Eom.  iii.  25,  where  God's  righteous- 
ness is  said  to  have  been  shown  iu  Christ 
with  regard  to  "the  passing  over  of  sins 
done  aforetime,  in  the  forbearance  of  God," 
as  well  as  to  justification  of  believers  now ; 
also  Eom.  v.,  where  the  effect  of  Christ's 
obedience  is  declared  to  be  coextensive  with 
that  of  Adam's  transgresbion).  Tliis  view 
accounts  for  "since  the  foundation  of  the 
world,"  the  idea  being  that,  the  trans- 
gressiDns  requiring  atonement  having  been 
since  then,  repeated  deaths  since  then  would 
have  been  needed  had  not  Christ's  one 
offering  of  himself  availed  for  all  time,  just 
as  repeated  sacrifices  were  needed  for  the 
high  priest's  symbolical  yearly  interces- 
giouB.  The  question  is  not  asked,  nor  is 
any  reason  given,  why  this  one  all-sufficient 
offering  was  deferred  till  so  long  after  the 
need  began.  It  is  enough  to  know  that 
such  has  been,  in  fact,  the  Divine  will,  viz. 
that  not  till  the  fulness  of  time  was  come — 
not  till  the  end  (or  consummation)  of  the 
long  preceding  sinful  ages — should  the 
Bedeemer  once  for  all  be  manifested  for 
atonement.  The  phrase,  eirl  avvTeKila  rav 
aXdipav,  seems  certainly  to  imply  the  idea, 
otheiwise  kno\ia  to  have  been  prevalent  in 


the  apostolic  age,  of  the  end  of  all  things 
being  close  at  hand;  and  this  expectation 
further  accounts  for  the  reference  to  the 
past  rather  than  the  future  in  the  expression, 
"  since  the  foundation  of  the  world."  For, 
with  regard  to  the  future,  the  second  coming 
of  Christ  was  the  one  great  idea  present  to 
the  minds  of  Christians,  the  intervening 
time  being  regarded  by  them  as  but  the 
dawn  of  coming  day  (see,  on  this  hea/i, 
what  was  said  under  oh,  i.  2).  The  strong 
expression,  ets  aOerijffiv  ofiaprtas  (for  the 
sense  of  iSirtiais,  cf.  oh.  vii.  18,  where  it 
means  "  abrogation  "),  used  as  it  here  is  with 
reference  to  all  the  transgressions  of  the 
ages  past,  though  not  to  be  pressed  so  as 
to  invalidate  what  is  elsewliere  said  of  the 
future  penal  consequences  of  all  wilful  and 
unrepented  sin,  may  still  be  cited  among 
the  texts  supporting  the  view  of  those  who 
"  trust  the  larger  hope." 

Vers.  27,  28. — And  inasmuch  as  it  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  and  after 
tMs  judgment:  so  the  Christ  also,  once 
offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many,  shall  appear 
a  second  time,  without  sin,  to  them  that 
look  for  him,  unto  salvation.  The  Divine 
ordinance  concerning  mankind  in  general 
has  its  analogy  in  the  truth  concerning 
Christ,  who  was  made  like  unto  us  in  all 
things,  and  who  represents  humanity.  As 
human  life,  with  all  its  works,  comes  to  an 
end  in  death,  and  only  judgment  follows, 
so  Christ's  death  once  for  all  completed  his 
mlnibterial  work,  and  nothing  remains  for 
him  to  do  but  to  return  as  Judge  in  glory — 
he  judieaturus,  men  judicandi.  "  To  bear 
the  sins  of  many  "  is  taken  from  Isa.  liiL  12. 
For  similar  use  of  the  word  ava^/ip^iv,  cf. 
Numb.  xiv.  33,  LXX. ;  and  especially  1  Pet. 
ii.  24,  T&s  afjjxpTlas  rifiwv  aurbs  aviiveyKsv  kv 
T^  (TCofiaTi  avTov  eTrl  rb  ^uKov^  which  expresses 
the  idea  of  Christ's  taking  our  sins  upon 
himself  and  bearing  them  up  to  the  cross, 
and  no  removing  them.  The  ideas  of  hearing 
and  of  taking  away  may  thus  be  both 
implied.  In  contrast  with  this  is  the  x^P^' 
afiaprlas  ("  without,  or  apart  from,  sin")  when 
he  shall  appear  again.  For  then  he  will 
have  been,  as  ho  is  now,  removed  from  it 
altogether — &om  its  burden  and  its  sur- 
roundings ;  it  is  in  glory  only  that  he  will 
then  appear.  And  so  also  "to  them  that 
look  for  him  "  his  appearing  will  be  "  unto 
salvation"  only.  They,  too,  will  have  done 
with  sin.  The  insertion  of  the  words,  "  to 
them  tliat  look  for  him,"  precludes  the  con- 
clusion that  it  will  be  so  to  all.  The  many 
passages  that  express  the  doom  of  those 
who  shall  be  set  on  the  left  hand,  whatever 
they  imply,  retain  their  awful  meaning 
(cf.  especially  tn/ra,  oh.  x.  87X 


JH.IX.  1— 28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  237 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — ArrangementB  of  the  first  covenant.  Tho  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ii 
the  New  Testament  Leviticus.  In  itself,  the  book  of  the  Jewish  ritual  is  rather  dry 
reading.  "  Nothing  can  well  be  duller  or  more  dingy  than  the  appearance  of  a  stained- 
glass  cathedral  window  to  one  who  is  looking  on  it  from  the  outside  of  the  building ; 
but,  when  you  enter  and  gaze  at  it  from  within,  the  whole  is  aglow  with  beauty" 
(Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor).  Now,  from  this  Epistle  we  learn  to  read  Leviticus  with  the  bright 
gospel  sunlight  for  a  background,  and  we  thus  discover  how  rich  that  ancient  Scripture 
is,  in  instruction  regarding  the  way  of  access  to  God,  and  the  means  of  fellowship  with 
him. 

I.  The  Hebbew  banctuabt.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  The  tabernacle  was  the  Divine  palace, 
the  symbol  of  Jehovah's  residence  among  his  ancient  people.  There  was  a  gracious 
presence  of  God  in  Israel  which  other  nations  did  not  enjoy.  Mention  is  made  here  of 
the  two  chambers  of  the  sacred  tent,  each  of  which  had  a  "  veil "  covering  the  entrance, 
and  of  the  principal  articles  of  furniture  in  these  two  chambers  respectively.  1.  The  holy 
place.  (Ver.  2.)  This  anterior  apartment  was  oblong  in  shape,  being  thirty  feet  in  length, 
fifteen  in  width,  and  fifteen  in  height.    Three  articles  are  named  as  belonging  to  it. 

(1)  The  lamp-stand ;  symbol  of  the  spiritual  light  which  Christ  imparts  to  his  Church. 

(2)  The  table,  with  (3)  the  shewbread :  symbol  of  the  spiritual  meat  provided  by  God 
to  strengthen  for  his  service.  2.  The  holy  of  holies.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  This  innermost  recess 
of  the  sanctuary,  separated  from  the  outer  chamber  by  a  richly  wrought  curtain,  was 
the  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah.  It  was  a  smaller  apartment  than  the  other,  measuring 
fifteen  feet  in  length,  breadth,  and  height,  and  thus  forming  a  perfect  square.  Seven 
thiui;s  are  named  as  belonging  to  it.  (1)  Tho  golden  censer.  Whether  we  understand 
by  this  the  altar  of -incense  itself,  which  stood  in  the  holy  place  close  to  "  the  second 
veil,"  or  the  actual  censer  which  was  carried  from  the  altar  into  the  holy  of  holies  on 
the  Day  of  Atonement — in  either  case  the  symbol  is  that  of  the  heart's  devotion.  (2) 
The  ark.  This  was  the  most  sacred  piece  of  furniture  in  the  tabernacle ;  indeed,  the 
purpose  of  the  whole  structure  was  just  to  accommodate  the  ark,  as  the  central  symbol 
of  the  presence  and  majesty  of  the  covenant  God  of  Israel.  (3)  The  pot  of  manna : 
emblem  of  the  true  Bread  from  heaven,  which  feeds  the  mind  with  truth,  the  conscience 
with  righteousness,  and  the  heart  with  love.  (4)  Aaron's  staff:  a  type  of  the  intrans- 
ferable  priesthood  of  Christ,  and  a  symbol  of  the  spiritual  priesthood  of  believers.  (5) 
The  two  tables  of  the  Law ;  the  revelation  to  the  Jews  of  Jehovah's  righteous  will, 
which  should  be  written  on  the  hearts  of  men.  (0)  The  cherubim ;  representing  the 
angels,  and  siirrounrling  the  luminous  cloud  of  "  glory  "  which  appeared  above  the  ark. 
(7)  The  mercy-seat :  the  footstool  of  God,  and  the  propitiatory  lid  of  the  ark ;  which, 
sprinkled  with  atoning  blood,  covered  the  sins  of  the  people,  by  concealing  from  the 
Divine  eye  the  Law  which  they  had  violated.  The  Hebrew  sanctuary  in  its  innermost 
symbolism  thus  represented  the  wondrous  scheme  of  redemption.  It  shows  ua  God's 
throne  of  grace  standing  upon  his  righteousness  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  10). 

IL  Its  sebvices.  (Vers.  6, 7.)  While  the  outer  court  of  the  tabernacle  was  open  to 
the  whole  congregation  of  Israel,  except  to  such  as  might  at  any  time  be  ceremonially 
unclean,  only  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  allowed  to  minister  at  the  altar,  or  within  the 
sanctuary  proper.  1.  The  holy  place  was  for  the  daily  ministration  of  the  ordinary 
priests.  (Ver.  6.)  Their  duties  were  such  as  these:  They  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  sin 
offerings  before  the  "  second  veil ; "  they  lighted  and  fed  and  trimmed  the  seven  lamps 
of  the  candelabrum ;  they  offered  incense  upon  the  golden  altar ;  they  changed  the 
shewbread  every  sabbath  day.  2.  The  holy  of  holies  was  for  the  annual  ministration 
of  the  high  priest  alone,  (Ver.  7.)  None  of  the  ordinary  priests  ever  daved  to  enter  the 
inner  sanctuary,  or  even  to  look  into  it.  And  even  the  high  priest  could  only  do  so  on 
one  day  in  the  year — on  the  great  annual  fast  day,  the  Day  of  Atonement.  In  the  course 
of  that  day,  however,  he  went  into  the  holy  of  holies  at  least  three  times :  first,  with 
the  censer  and  incense ;  secondly,  with  the  blood  of  the  bullock,  for  his  own  and  the 
priests'  sins ;  and,  thirdly,  with  the  blood  of  the  goat,  for  the  people's  sins.  He  went  in 
"  not  without  blood,"  the  presentation  of  the  blood  being  necessary  to  the  completion 
of  the  saorificat 


238  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS  [ch.  ix.  1— 28. 

in.  The  8IQNIFI0AN0B  OF  BOTH.  (Vers.  8 — 10.)  These  verses  remind  us  that  the 
institutions  of  Judaism  were  established  by  the  Holy  Spirit  himself  as  a  symbol  of  Old 
Testament  facts,  and  as  a  prefiguration  of  the  privileges  of  the  new  covenant  spoken 
of  in  ch.  viii.  8 — 12.  It  was  not  Moses  who  ordained  the  Levitical  ceremonial ;  it  was 
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  by  this  means  the  Spirit  taught  the  great  truth  that  on  the 
ground  of  nature  access  to  God  is  barred  for  all  sinful  men ;  and  that  even  under  the 
"  first  covenant "  of  grace  this  blessing  was  only  most  imperfectly  realized.  The  division 
of  the  sacred  tent  into  two  apartments,  and  the  exclusion  of  the  ordinary  priests  from 
the  holy  of  holies,  illustrated  the  great  defect  of  the  old  covenant.  The  nature  of  the 
services,  too,  reflected  its  imperfections.  The  rites  of  Judaism  cleansed  the  body  from 
ceremonial  defilement;  but  they  could  not  wash  the  soul  from  sin.  They  involved, 
indeed,  a  continual  remembrance  of  sins,  rather  than  a  putting  away  of  sins  for  ever. 
And  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  the  tabernacle-worship  was  a  bright  promise  and 
prophecy  of  the  "  opening  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers "  at  the  time  of 
rectification  foretold  by  Jeremiah  (zxzi.  31 — 34). 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Superiority  of  the  new  covenant.  The  advent  of  the  Messiah  has 
removed  the  defects  suggested  by  the  Mosaic  ritual.  He  has  obtained  for  the  true 
Israel  those  great  spiritual  blessings  which  "  the  first  covenant "  was  powerless  to 
bestow.  These  verses  indicate  various  elements  of  superiority.  The  new  covenant 
has  provided — 

I.  A  BETTER  HiQH  Pbiest.  (Vcr.  11.)  Our  priestly  Mediator  is  "  Christ,"  the 
Anointed.  He  has  been  divinely  ordained,  equipped,  and  accredited.  He  is  a  better 
High  Priest  than  Aaron,  because  the  Minister  of  a  better  dispensation.  The  "  good 
things"  denote  the  blessings  of  the  new  covenant;  and  these  are  described  as  "  to 
come,"  because  they  had  been  always  promised  and  expected  in  connection  with  the 
advent  of  the  Messiah.  How  joyful  the  tidings  to  our  guilty,  sin-deflowered,  distracted 
world,  that  its  true  Priest  has  "come"!  He  has  assumed  our  nature;  he  has  lived 
and  died ;  he  has  risen  and  ascended ;  he  has  "  entered  in  once  for  all "  into  the  true 
sanctuary. 

IL  A  NOBLBB  TABEBNAOLB.  (Ver.  11.)  The  sacred  tent  of  the  Hebrews  had,  doubt- 
less, many  excellences.  It  was  a  costly  erection.  Its  arrangements  were  "  a  parable  " 
(ver.  9)  which  instructed  the  Jews  in  spiritual  truth.  The  ark  was  an  emblem  of  the 
Divine  majesty.  The  cherubic  figures  were  "cherubim  of  glory,"  for  Jehovah  dwelt  in 
symbol  between  them.  Yet,  after  all,  the  Jewish  tabernacle  was  only  an  eartlily 
structure.  It  was  "  made  with  hands."  But  our  High  Priest  ministers  in  "  the  greater 
and  more  perfect  tabernacle."  The  place  of  his  priestly  service  is  the  highest  heavens. 
The  true  tabernacle  is  "  not  of  this  creation ; "  it  is  in  the  unseen — ^in  the  immediate 
presence  of  Jehovah.  And  the  work  of  Christ  there  is  to  interpose  and  intercede  for 
his  people.  Every  act  of  saving  power  results  directly  from  the  expression  of  his  will, 
as  our  Advocate  at  the  bar  of  God. 

III.  A  BiCHEB  Sacbificb.  (Vers.  12 — 14.)  Salvation  comes  to  lu  as  the  result  of 
satisfaction  rendered  to  Divine  justice.  We  are  not  saved  by  receiving  Christ's  doctrine, 
or  by  observing  a  Christian  ritual,  or  by  following  Christ's  example,  or  by  imbibing 
moral  influence  from  him  as  a  Teacher  and  Martyr.  Christ  saves  us  "by  the  sacrificu 
of  himself."  As  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us,  and  as  "  the  blood  is  the  life,"  he  is  said  to 
have  "entered  into  the  holy  place"  "through  his  own  blood."  How  much  richer 
and  more  powerful  is  this  blood  than  that  which  was  shed  upon  the  brazen  altar  of  the 
tabernacle  1  The  latter  contained  only  the  principle  of  brute  life.  But  Christ's  is :  1. 
Human  blood.  Our  High  Priest  Is  a  real  man,  woman-born — our  own  mother's  Son. 
He  is  "  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh."  So  he  yielded  himself  up  intelligently 
and  voluntarily  as  our' Sacrifice.  2.  Soly  blood.  Jesus  "oH'ered  himself  without 
blemish  unto  God  "  (ver.  14).  His  earthly  life  was  absolutely  faultless.  He  is  the  only 
perfect  specimen  of  humanity  that  has  ever  lived  upon  earth — the  one  "  Son  of  man  " 
who  did  not  share  in  human  corruption  and  condemnation.  8.  Heavenly  blood.  The 
Man  Christ  Jesus  had  an  "eternal  Spirit"  (ver.  14);  i.e.  he  possessed  the  Divine  nature. 
He  is  personally  and  literally  God.  And  it  is  his  Deity  that  gives  to  his  death  its 
marvellous  significance.  No  creature-blood  could  atone  for  our  sins ;  but  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  is  of  infinite  value,  because  there  resides  in  him  "  the  power  of  an  endless  life," 


OH.  n.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  239 

IV.  A  MOKE  THonotiGH  OLEANsiNO.  (Vers.  13, 14.)  The  writer  concedes  that  the 
Levitical  sin  offerings  did  purify.  One  purpose  of  their  appointment  was  that  they 
might  effect  legal  or  ceremonial  cleansing.  "  The  blood  of  goats  and  bulls,"  which  was 
presented  for  the  collected  guilt  of  Israel  once  a  year,  consecrated  the  Jew  ceremoaitiliy 
to  the  worsliip  and  service  of  Jehovah.  In  like  manner  tlie  s^jrinkling  of  "  the  ashes  of 
a  red  heifer,"  mixed  with  water,  removed  legal  defilement  from  the  person  who  had 
touched  a  dead  body  (Numb.  xix.  2 — 9).  But  the  blood  of  Christ  purifies  from  a 
deeper  pollution.  It  cleanses  the  "  conscience."  It  la  the  G-od-provided  solvent  for  the 
stains  of  sin.    It  can 

"  Cleanse  the  stuifd  bosom  of  that  perilous  stuff 
Which  weighs  upon  the  heart" 

This  blood  purifies  from  "dead  works" — those  deeds  which  are  done  by  dead  souls, and 
which,  however  excellent  some  of  them  may  appear  when  viewed  in  themselves,  are 
yet  of  no  avail  to  recommend  to  the  Divine  favour.  Under  the  new  covenant  the 
conscience  is  cleansed  so  thoroughly  that  the  service  of  God  becomes  a  constant  joy  to 
the  believer's  soul.  The  Divine  statutes  become  his  "  songs,"  and  he  learns  to  "  run  in 
the  way  of  God's  commandments." 

V.  A  MORE  BLESSED  uEDEMPTioN.  Some  of  the  positive  elements  of  the  Christian 
salvation  are  indicated  in  these  verses.  Those  had  not  been  "  made  manifest "  under  the 
old  covenant.  1.  Perfect  access  to  Ood.  Thesubjeot  of  access  is  the  nerve- thought  of  this 
whole  section  of  the  treatise.  The  worshipper  under  the  new  covenant,  being  cleansed 
through  the  "  one  ofi'ering "  of  Christ,  is  admitted  into  the  immediate  presence  of 
Jehovah.  He  stands  within  the  "  second  veil,"  that  veil  being  now  "  rent  in  twain  " 
(Bom.  V.  1,  2).  2.  Full  freedom  to  serve  Ood.  (Ver.  14.)  A  guilt-stained  soul  can 
perform  only  "  dead  works ; "  but  the  spirit  that  is  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ's 
atonement  begins  immediately  to  be  of  use  to  its  Redeemer.  Our  High  Priest  has  shed 
his  blood,  not  only  to  reader  us  safe,  but  to  make  us  holy ;  not  only  to  deliver  us  from 
God's  wrath,  but  from  our  own  wickedness.  So  soon  as  Christ  destroys  "  the  body  of 
sin  "  within  us,  we  discover  that  it  is  our  "  reasonable  service"  to  present  our  persons 
"a  living  sacrifice."  3.  The  gift  of  eternal  life.  (Ver.  12.)  The  gospel  salvation  redeems 
both  soul  and  body,  finally  and  for  ever.  It  saves,  not  only  from  the  curse  of  the  Law, 
but  from  all  evil.  "  Eternal  redemption  "  expresses  the  sum  total  of  the  benefits  which 
accrue  from  Christ's  mediation,  and  includes  the  consummation  of  the  plan  of  grace  in 
the  heavenly  world.  It  denotes  "  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ- Jesus,  with  eternal 
glory." 

Vers.  15 — 22. — Ratification  ly  Hood.  Here  the  writer  pauses  in  his  argument 
regarding  the  superiority  of  Christ's  sacrifice  to  the  sacrifices  of  the  Law,  and  direct? 
attention  to  an  important  point  of  similarity  between  the  old  covenant  and  the  new. 
This  passage  is  a  serious  crux.  It  has  perplexed  the  most  eminent  commentators. 
The  great  question  is,  whether  Sm9/jKi)  should  be  translated  "  coveiian  t "  or  "  testament "  in 
vers.  16  and  17.  For  ourselves,  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  as  this  Greek  word 
does  not  bear  the  meaning  of  "  testament"  or  "  will"  in  any  other  part  of  Scripture,  and  a.« 
it  is  unquestionably  used  in  the  sense  of  "covenant"  in  the  immediate  context  (ch.  viii. 
6 — 13),  as  well  as  in  vers.  15,  18 — 20  of  this  very  passage,  we  are  compelled,  in  spite 
of  opposin;;  considerations,  to  attach  to  the  word  the  sense  of  "covenant"  in  vers.  16  anJ 
17  also.  Moses  did  not  make  a  will  at  Mount  Sinai,  the  provisions  of  which  could  only 
be  carried  into  effect  after  Ids  death.  Neither  did  Christ  speak  of  a  will  when  h- 
instituted  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the  upper  room — using  the  words  of  Moses.  The  one 
reference  throughout  the  paragiaph  before  us  is  to  a  covenant,  or  rather  to  the  two 
covenants  which  are  being  compared  and  contrasted  in  this  section  of  the  treatise.  It 
is  most  unfortunate  that  the  two  great  parts  into  which  Holy  Scripture  is  divided 
should  be  designated  among  the  English-speaking  nations  by  the  word  "  testaments," 
which  is  confessedly  a  mistranslation.  Bather,  the  Hebrew  oracles  ought  to  have  been 
called  "  The  Book  of  the  Old  Covenant ; "  and  the  Christian  Scriptures  "  The  Book  ol 
the  New  Covenant." 

I.    In    olden   times   covenants   WEBB    SEALED    BY    THE    DEATH   OP   VICTIMS.        "  For 

where  a  covenant  is,  there  must  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the  ratifying  victim.    Fur 


240  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  LoH*  ix.  1— 28. 

a  covenant  is  of  force  where  there  hath  been  death ;  for  doth  it  ever  avail  while  the 
ratifying  victim  liveth  ? "  (vers.  16,  17).  The  Hebrew  word  for  a  covenant  means 
primarily  "  a  cutting ; "  the  reference  being  to  a  common  custom  among  the  ancients  of 
dividing  into  two  the  animals  slain  for  the  purpose  of  ratification,  that  the  contracting 
parties  might  pass  between  the  pieces  (Gen.  xv,  9, 10, 17 ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  18, 19).  It  is 
certain  that  in  the  oldest  times  of  Scripture  history,  covenants  were  sealed  by  means  of 
saoiifice.  God's  covenant  with  Noah  (Gen.  viii.  20 — ix.  17),  and  his  covenant  with 
Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  9 — 21),  were  thus  ratified.  And  it  is  probable  that  the  prevalent 
custom  among  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  of  confirming  contracts  in  this  manner  originated 
in  the  Divine  appointment  of  animal  sacrifice  as  a  type  of  the  atonement  of  Christ. 

II.  The  "  FIRST  "  OB  Mosaic  covenant  was  thus  sealed.  (Vers.  18 — 22.)  This 
old  covenant,  made  at  Mount  Sinai,  comprised  the  ten  commandments  and  the  body 
of  laws  contained  in  Exod.  xxi. — xxiii.  These  laws  were  called  "The  Book  of  the 
Covenant."  They  were  the  first  rough  outline  of  the  Mosaic  code  which  Jehovah  gave 
to  his  people.  In  Exod.  xxiv.  3 — 8  there  is  a  description  of  the  ceremonial  which  is 
liere  referred  to.  The  awe-stricken  people  were  gathered  before  an  altar  erected  at  the 
foot  of  the  mountain.  The  book  of  the  covenant  was  read  over  to  them.  Twelve 
young  men,  acting  as  priests,  shed  the  blood  of  certain  propitiatory  victims.  Then 
Moses  spriuldfid  half  of  the  blood  upon  the  altar  and  upon  the  book  of  the  covenant, 
and  the  other  half  upon  the  assembled  multitude.  Some  of  the  circumstances  of  the 
ceremonial  which  are  alluded  to  in  ver.  19  are  not  mentioned  in  the  narrative  of 
Exodus;  but  the  writer  of  our  Epistle  refers  to  them  as  matter  of  well-known  and 
thoroughly  authenticated  Hebrew  tradition.  This  solemn  ratification  of  the  Sinaitio 
Law  shows  that  God  and  the  sinner  can  only  be  made  "at  one"  through  a  covenant  of 
blood ;  and  thus,  the  words  spoken  by  Moses-  when  ho  sprinkled  the  blood  (ver.  20) 
were  adopted  by  the  Saviour  in  instituting  the  Lord's  Supper  (Matt.  xxvi.  28),  to 
signify  the  confirmation  of  the  "new"  and  "eternal  covenant "  through  the  shedding 
of  his  own  blood.  But,  besides  this,  the  tabernacle  and  its  furniture  were  dedicated 
with  the  sprinkling  of  blood ;  and  blood  continued  to  be  used  *n  connection  with  nearly 
all  the  rites  of  which  the  tabernacle  was  the  centre  (vers.  21,  22).  The  ceremonial  Law 
was,  in  fact,  one  vast  system  of  blood-symbols.  The  crimson  streams  never  ceased  to 
flow  upon  the  brazen  altar ;  blood  was  put  upon  the  altar  of  incense ;  the  holy  of  holies 
itself  was  sprinkled  with  it.  There  was  blood  everywhere ; — no  access  to  God  except 
by  blood.  The  Jews  were  thus  taught,  with  solemn  and  continual  iteration,  that  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  can  only  be  obtained  by  means  of  a  substitutionary  atonement. 

III.  The  new  covenant  has  been  sealed  by  the  death  of  Christ.  (Ver.  16.) 
This  death  was  at  once  a  sacrifice  for  sin  and  a  covenant  offering.  The  blood  of 
Jesus  has  done  for  the  new  covenant,  in  sealing  it,  what  the  blood  of  the  Mosaic 
sacrifices  did  for  the  old.  His  death  as  the  ratifying  Victim  took  place  "of  necessity." 
It  was  necessary,  not  certainly  because  of  the  ancient  custom  of  sealing  covenants  by 
sacrifice ;  rather,  God  had  appointed  sacrifice,  and  employed  it  in  his  gracious  commu- 
nications with  his  ancient  people,  in  order  to  prefigure  thereby  the  true  meaning  and 
purpose  of  the  death  of  Christ.  The  necessity  of  the  atonement  was  neither  hypothetical, 
nor  governmental,  nor  a  necessity  of  expediency.  It  arose  out  of  the  nature  of  God,  as 
infinitely  holy,  just,  and  righteous.  "  For  this  cause  "  that  by  his  death  he  has  paid 
a  full  ransom  for  human  sin,  "  he  is  the  Mediator  of  a  new  covenant  "—of  that  better 
economy  promised  long  before  by  Jeremiah  (ch.  viii.  8 — 13).  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is 
of  such  transcendent  efficacy  that  it  has  availed  to  wash  away  the  guilt  of  all  God's 
people  who  lived  under  the  former  imperfect  covenant ;  as  well  as  to  secure  for  all  saints, 
whether  Jewish  or  Christian,  the  inestimable  gift  of  eternal  life. 

Lessons.  1.  We  should  avail  ourselves  of  the  benefits  of  the  new  covenant,  2.  Have 
confidence  that  all  its  promises  will  be  fulfilled.  3.  Cherish  grateful  love  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  has  sealed  the  covenant  with  his  blood.  4.  Celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper 
with  intelligence  and  joy.    6.  Consecrate  our  lives  to  the  service  of  our  Redeemer. 

Vers.  23 — 28. — Perfection  of  Christ's  atonement.  In  these  verses  the  writer  con- 
trasts the  incompleteness  of  the  Mosaic  sacrifices  with  the  finality  which  attache*  to 
the  sacrificial  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

L  Three  great  Christian  doctrines.     These  rest  respectively  upon  three  facts, 


OH.  IX.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  241 

— _^ — .^ —  1 

Tiz.  the  death  and  the  ascension  of  Christ,  which  are  matters  of  history ;  and  the 
second  advent,  which  is  still  future.  1.  Christ  died  as  a  Sacrifice  for  sin.  (Ver.  28.) 
His  death  was  a  stupendous  event — being  that  of  a  Divine  Person.  It  did  not  occur 
as  the  result  of  disease,  or  of  natural  decay.  It  was  not  an  accidental  death.  It  was 
judicially  inflicted.  Sentence  was  pronounced  upon  Jesus,  not  merely  in  the  high 
prie-st's  palace  and  in  Pilate's  jud^raent-hall,  but  in  the  court  of  heaven.  "It  pleased 
the  Lord  to  bruise  him ; "  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  2. 
He  ascended  to  heaven  as  our  Priest,  (Ver.  24.)  Of  the  three  offices  which  Jesus 
executes,  the  prophetical  occupied  the  most  prominent  place  while  he  was  on  earth  ; 
his  priestly  office  has  seemed  to  come  into  the  foreground  now  that  he  has  genu  to 
heaven ;  and  his  kingly  functions  will  appear  to  be  most  fully  discharged  after  tbfi 
second  advent.  Why  was  it  necessary  that  he  should  enter  heaven  as  our  Priest? 
(1)  To  purify  the  heavenly  tabernacle.  (Ver.  23.)  The  Hebrew  sanctuary  was  sprinkled 
with  blood  to  cleanse  it  from  ceremonial  pollution.  The  true  tabernacle  may  bo  said 
to  be  purified  with  Christ's  blood  in  this  sense,  that  his  atonement  has  made  it  a 
righteous  thing  for  God  to  receive  sinful  men  into  his  favour,  and  to  give  them  grace 
and  glory.  (2)  To  present  himself  before  Qod  as  our  Bepresentative.  (Ver.  24.)  He 
appears  "  before  the  face  of  God  for  us."  His  very  presence  in  heaven  is  a  perpetual 
and  prevalent  intercession.  On  the  basis  of  his  own  finished  work  he  introduces  each 
believer  to  the  Father,  and  acts  as  his  Advocate  before  the  throne.  He  lifts  up  in 
heaven  his  nail-pierced  hand,  and  pleads  for  "  mercy  "  to  us,  and  for  "  grace  to  help." 
3.  He  shall  come  again  to  consummate  the  salvation  of  his  people.  (Ver.  28.)  On  the  Day 
of  Atonement,  after  Aaron  had  sprinkled  the  mercy-seat  with  the  blood,  he  came  forth 
from  the  holy  of  holies,  reclothed  himself  in  his  splendid  vestments  of  blue  and  red 
and  purple,  trimmed  with  pomegranates  and  golden  bells,  and  appeared  outside  to  bless 
the  waiting  multitudes.  So  our  High  Priest,  although  he  still  tarries  in  the  heavenly 
tabernacle,  filling  it  with  the  fragrant  incense  of  his  intercession,  shall  appear  at  the 
end  of  the  ages,  wearing  the  robes  of  his  immortal  glory,  to  say  to  hia  expectant 
people,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father."  He  shall  appear  "  apart  from  sin."  When 
he  came  the  first  time,  he  was  "  made  to  be  sin  on  our  behalf,"  although  he  "  knew  no 
sin;"  but  at  his  second  advent  he  shall  not  again  assume  the  dreadful  burden.  He 
shall  appear  "  unto  salvation,"  ».«.  to  complete  the  redemption  of  his  people.  By  his 
first  coming  he  saved  their  souls ;  at  his  second  coming  he  shall  save  their  bodies.  Or, 
rather,  at  his  first  coming  he  paid  down  the  ransom-price  of  our  redemption  ;  while  at 
his  second  coming  he  shall  receive  the  final  instalment  of  his  purchased  possession. 

II.  The  dooteinal  focus  of  the  passage.  The  chief  point  of  thought  for  the 
sake  of  which  these  three  doctrines  are  adduced  is  marked  by  the  repetition  of  the  word 
"  once  "  in  vers.  26 — 28 ;  and  by  the  contrast  between  this  "  once  "  and  the  "  often  " 
or  "  year  by  year  "  of  ver.  25.  Christ  died  only  once ;  he  ascended  only  once  ;  he 
shall  come  again  only  once.  Why  is  it  that,  while  Aaron  entered  the  Hibrew  holy  of 
holies  every  year,  Jesus  Christ  has  gone  into  the  heavenly  sanctuary  "  jnce  for  all"? 
Two  reasons  are  assigned:  the  one,  that  to  repeat  his  sacrifice  would  be  unnatural ;  and 
the  other,  that  to  do  so  is  unnecessary.  1.  It  would  he  unnatural.  (Vers.  27,  28.)  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  man,  and  in  all  things  he  has  been  "  made  Xike  unto  his  brethren." 
Now,  it  is  a  human  thing  to  die  once ;  and  the  death  of  every  child  of  Adam  will  be 
followed  by  his  appearance  at  the  general  judgment.  So  "  it  was  in  harmony  with 
the  law  of  mortality  in  this  world  that  Christ  should  die  but  once.  There  would  have 
been  something  unnatural  in  his  dying  and  rising,  and  dying  and  rising,  again  and 
again  without  end"  (Dr.  Lindsay).  The  Lord's  death  and  his  second  advent  are 
parallel  arrangements  to  what  is  the  common  lot  of  man.  2.  It  is  unnecessary.  This 
reason  is  still  more  satisfying,  and  it  receives  great  prominence  in  the  verses  before  us. 
It  was  not  needful  that  Christ  should  die  and  ascend  and  come  again  oftener  than 
once ;  for :  (1)  He  has  effected  a  real  atonement  for  sin.  (Ver.  26.)  By  his  death  he  has 
"  put  away  sin."  He  has  accomplished  its  abolition.  That  is  to  say,  he  has  reconciled 
a  guilty  world  to  G-od,  and  procured  peace  of  conscience  for  the  believer.  His  obedi- 
ence and  sufferings  were  those  of  a  Divine  Person — of  him  who  is  "  the  Effulgence  of 
God's  glory,  and  the  very  Image  of  his  substance ; "  and  therefore  his  death  consti- 
tuted an  atonement,  not  only  of  transcendent  magnificence,  but  of  infinite  merit.  (2) 
UTie  efficacy  of  the  atonement  extends  over  all  the  past,    (Ver.  26.)    Its  saving  influence 

HBBBEW8.  ■ 


242  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  [oh.  ix  1— 2a 

.utl      .1  — • 

has  been  retrospective.  Daniel  and  David,  Elijah  and  Enoch,  Abraham  and  Adam, 
and  all  the  Old  Testament  saints,  lived  really  under  the  shadow  of  Calvary.  The  ci'oss 
of  Christ  has  been  powerful  to  redeem  from  "the  transgressions  that  were  under  the 
first  covenant "  (ver.  15).  And  any  devout  men  belonging  to  the  vast  heathen  world 
whom  God  may  have  accepted  notwithstanding  that  they  had  never  heard  the  gospel, 
have  been  saved  on  the  ground  of  that  one  atonement.  But  if  the  blood  which  was 
shed  once  had  virtue  to  cover  all  sin  in  the  past,  its  efBcaoy  may  be  expected  to  extend 
equally  into  the  future.  (3)  Christ's  atonement  has  opened  the  door  of  mercy  to  the 
world.  (Ver.  28.)  The  Saviour  has  borne  "  the  sins  of  many,"  i.e.  of  myriads,  of  man- 
kind in  general.  Although  he  cherishes  a  special  love  for  his  own  people,  and  although 
he  gave  himself  in  a  special  sense  for  them,  he  is  "the  Propitiation  for  the  whole 
world"  (1  John  ii.  2).  His  cross  points  out  the  way  of  life  to  all  men,  and  invites 
every  one  to  walk  in  that  way.  Not  one  sinner  shall  finally  perish  because  no  room 
could  be  found  for  him  in  the  great  atonement.  The  perdition  of  every  lost  man  shall 
be  entirely  his  own  fault.  And,  seeing  all  these  things  are  so^  it  Is  evident  that  Christ 
needed  to  offer  himself  but  once. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Ver*  4,  6. — T%e  ark  of  the  covenant,  a  symbol  of  redemptive  truth.  "The  ark  ot 
the  covenant  overlaid  round  about  with  gold,  wherein  .  .  .  were  the  tables  of  the 
covenant;  and  over  it  the  cherubims  of  glory  shadowing  the  mercy-seat."  Jewish 
solemnities  were  types  of  Christian  truths  and  relations.  The  furniture  of  their  sacred 
courts  possessed  symbolical  significance.  Their  religious  institutions  were  parables  of 
spiritual  and  saving  truths.  Deep  significance  of  this  kind  attached  to  the  ark  of  the 
covenant.  We  shall  regard  it  as  setting  forth  certain  facts  and  features  of  God's 
redemptive  relations  with  men.    In  it  we  discover— 

L  Thb  becoonition  op  Law  in  Gob's  bbdemptivs  bblatiokb  wrrH  men.  "  The 
ark  of  the  covenant  .  .  .  wherein  were  the  tables  of  the  covenant."  The  two  tables 
containing  the  ten  commandments,  in  accordance  with  Divine  directions,  were  deposited 
in  the  ark  (Exod.  xxv.  16,  21 ;  xl.  20).  Thus  Law  was  recognized  and  honoured  there: 
1.  As  a  sacred  thing.  The  tables  were  in  the  most  holy  place  and  in  the  most  vene- 
rated receptacle  which  that  place  contained.  Law  is  a  benevolent  thing,  a  holy  thing. 
It  is  at  the  very  centre  of  all  things.  In  the  material  universe,  in  human  history,  and 
in  Divine  redemption,  law  is  present  everywhere,  and  operative  everywhere.  It  is  of  a 
religious  nature,  of  a  Divine  nature.  2.  As  a  permanent  thing.  Ceremonial  laws  pass 
away ;  moral  laws  are  abiding.  The  "  ten  words "  given  on  Sinai  in  their  essential 
characteristics  are  as  binding  now  as  they  were  under  the  earlier  dispensation.  Our 
Lord  endorsed  and  enforced  them.  He  said,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc. 
(Matt.  xxii.  37 — 40).  The  everlasting  continuance  of  law  is  essential  to  the  order  and 
well-being  of  the  universe  of  God.  The  redemption  which  is  by  Christ  Jesus  aims  at 
the  establishment  of  the  Law  of  God  in  blessed  and  perpetual  supremacy,  and  the 
inspiration  and  confirmation  in  man  of  the  spirit  and  habit  of  cheerful  conformity  to 
that  Law.  There  is  law  in  heaven.  The  ark  of  the  covenant  is  there.  "  And  there 
was  opened  the  temple  of  God  that  is  is  heaven ;  and  there  was  seen  in  his  temple  the 
ark  of  his  covenant "  (liev.  xL  19).  3.  As  a  witness  against  man.  Man  had  broken 
this  holy  Law.  In  his  fallen  and  sinful  condition  he  could  not  thoroughly  keep  it. 
Hence  it  bore  witness  against  him.  The  tables  of  the  covenant  were  also  called  "  the 
two  tables  of  testimony,"  and  they  testified  to  the  transgressions  and  failures  of  men. 
"  By  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  And  in  this  way  the  Law  witnessed  to  man's 
need  (A  mercy  and  forgiveness  and  spiritual  power. 

IL  Thb  manifestation  of  gbacb  in  God's  bbdemptive  eelations  with  men. 
The  ark  of  the  covenant  was  covered,  and  the  covering  was  called  "  the  mercy-seat." 
The  word  which  is  here  rendered  "  mercy-seat "  is  applied  to  our  Saviour :  •'  Whom 
God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  Propitiation,"  etc.  (Rom.  iii.  25).  There  was  a  manifestation 
of  grace :  1.  In  the  mercy-seat  itself.  It  was  the  lid  of  the  chest  which  contained  the 
tables  of  the  Law.  Those  tables  testified  against  man,  and  the  mercy-seat  hid,  as  it 
were,  their  testimony  from  the  eyes  of  the  Holy  One  who  dwelt  between  (he  cherubim. 


CH.  IX.  1—28,]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  243 

The  mercy-secit  covered  and  concealed  the  accusing  tables.  Hence  arose  the  poetical 
viewof  forgiveness  as  a  covering  of  sin.  "  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven, 
whose  sin  is  covered."  2.  In  the  symbolical  atonement  which  was  made  upon  the  mercy- 
seat.  The  covering  of  the  tables  of  testimony  was  not  in  itself  sufHoient  to  put  away 
the  guilt  of  the  people.  For  this  atonement  also  was  necessary.  Hence  on  the  groat  Day 
of  Atonement  the  high  priest  was  required  to  sprinlile  the  blood  of'the  sin  offerings  upon 
the  mercy-seat  to  "  make  an  atonement,  because  of  the  unoleanness  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  and  because  of  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sins  "  (Lev.  xvi.  11 — 16).  To  the 
mercy-seat  in  this  aspect  there  is  reference  in  several  verses  of  the  Scripture,  or  at 
least  the  verb  used  in  these  verses  (haphar)  suggests  such  a  reference.  "  Our  trans- 
gressions, thou  shalt  purge  them  away"  (Ps.  Ixv.  3);  "He,  being  full  of  compassion, 
forgave  their  iniquity"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  38);  "To  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity  "  (D.m. 
ix.  24).  In  this  the  mercy-seat  pointed  to  the  Christ,  the  great  Atotieimnt,  the  true 
Propitiatory,  "  whom  God  set  forth  to  be  a  Propitiation,  through  faith  by  his  blood  " 
(Rom.  iii.  24 — 26).  Thus  the  manifestation  of  the  grace  of  God  in  his  redemptive 
relations  with  man  was  symbolized  in  the  covering  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  More- 
over, grace  and  Law  appear  here  as  connected  and  harmonious.  Rightly  understood. 
Law  itself  is  an  expression  of  Divine  grace,  and  Divine  grace  aims  to  establish  the 
universal  reign  of  Law,  which  is  but  another  word  for  the  reign  of  God.  The  mercy- 
seat  was  "  God's  throne  of  grace  founded  upon  Law."  Here  "  mercy  and  truth  are  met 
together,  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other." 

III.  ThB    attitude    and    action    07    ANGELS    IN    BESPECT    TO    God's    REDEMPTIVE 

RELATIONS  WITH  MEN.  "  Above  it  chcrubim  of  glory  overshadowing  the  mercy-seat." 
We  regard  the  cherubim  as  emblems  of  angelic  powers ;  and  their  position  here  sug- 
gests that  they  are :  1.  The  solemn  guardians  of  God's  huly  Law.  They  kept  constant 
watch  over  the  "  tables  of  testimony."  They  are  deeply  interested  in  the  maintenance 
of  moral  law.  They  "  are  in  Scripture  evermore  the  attendants,  and  bearers  up,  of  the 
throne  of  God,"  When  man  rebelled  against  the  authority  of  that  throne,  they  were 
appointed  ministers  for  punishing  the  transgressors  (Gen.  iii.  24).  2.  The  interested 
students  of  Ood's  redemptive  relations  with  msn.  The  cherubim  were  represented  as 
looking  intently  and  constantly  upon  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  "  Toward  the  mercy- 
seat  sliall  the  faces  of  the  cherubim  be,"  etc.  (Exod.  xxv.  20,  21).  "  Which  things  the 
angels  desire  to  look  into  "  (1  Pet.  i.  12).  "  Unto  the  principalities  and  the  powers  in 
the  heavenly  placed  is  made  known  through  the  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  " 
( lOph.  iii.  10).  3.  The  willing  servants  in  promoting  the  successful  issue  of  Ood's  redemp- 
tive relations  with  men.  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  do  service 
for  the  sake  of  them  that  shall  inherit  salvation  ?  "  (see  on  ch.  i.  14). 

IV.  The  revelation  of  the  presence  of  God  in  his  bbdemptivb  relations  with 
MEN.  "  Cherubim  of  glory,"  They  were  so  called  because  they  appeared  to  bear  up 
the  visible  symbol  of  the  presence  of  God,  which  in  the  Old  Testament  is  sometimes 
called  "  the  glory."  God  promised  to  commune  with  his  people  "  from  between  the 
two  cherubim  which  are  upon  the  ark  of  the  testimony  "  (Exod.  xxv.  22).  "  Moses 
heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking  unto  him  from  between  the  two  cherubim  "  (Numb. 
vii.  89).  God  was  said  to  "dwell  between  the  cherubim  "  (1  Sam.  iv.  4 ;  2  Sam.  vi. 
2  J  Ps.  Ixxx,  1 ;  xcix.  1).  God  sometimes  manifested  his  presence  here  in  a  luminous 
cloud,  which  the  Jews  called  the  Shechiuah,  and  here  he  was  always  thought  of  as 
present.  Jesus  Christ  our  Redeemer  is  the  true  Shechinah.  He  is  "  the  Effulgence  of 
the  Father's  glory,  and  the  very  Image  of  his  substance."  He  is  the  truest,  the  lii;;hest, 
the  fullest  manifestation  of  God  to  man.  And  in  spiritual  presence  God  dwells  with 
his  people  now.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  present  with  every  godly  soul.  And  Christians 
are  inspired  by  the  mighty  and  blessed  hope  that  when  this  life  in  the  boily  emis,  they 
will  follow  their  Forerunner  within  the  veil  and  see  God  "  even  as  he  is." — W.  J, 

Vers.  11, 12. — 3%e  pre-eminent  priesthood.  "  But  Christ  being  come  a  High  Priest 
of  good  things  to  come,"  etc.  Our  Lord  is  here  represented  as  the  pre-eminent  High 
Priest  in  three  respects. 

I.  Im  the  temple  in  which  he  ministers.  1.  The  temple  in  which  he  ministers  is 
itself  pre-e in inent.  He  has  "  entered  in  ouoe  for  all  into  the  holy  place."  He  ministeis 
ia  the  true  holy  of  holies,  of  which  the  Jewish  one  was  only  a  fi;^Dre.    He  is  not  in  the 


244  THE  EnSTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  [oh.  ix.  1— 2a 

Bymbolized,  but  in  the  veritable  and  immediate  pvesonce  of  God.  "  A  minister  of  th« 
sanctuary,  and  of  the  true  tabernacle,  wliich  the  Lord  pitched,  not  man."  "  Christ 
entered  not  into  a  holy  place  made  with  hands,  like  in  pattern  to  the  true  ;  but  into 
heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  before  the  fa  ;e  of  God  for  ug."  2.  The  access  to  this  tempi* 
is  pre-eminent.  The  Jewish  high  priest  entered  the  holy  of  holies  through  the  holy 
place.  Our  Lord  pas'sed  into  the  true  holy  of  holies  "through  the  greater  and  mora 
perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands."  It  seems  to  us  that  "  the  greater  and  more 
perfect  tabernacle"  cannot  mean  either  (1)  our  Lord's  human  body  or  his  human 
nature;  or  (2)  his  holy  life,  "his  perfect  inward  fulfilment  of  the  Law;"  or  (3)  hia 
glorified  body  ;  or  (4)  the  Church  on  earth.  No  interpretation  of  this  part  of  our  text  is 
without  its  difficulties ;  but  that  which  seems  to  us  to  be  the  true  one  is,  that  he  passed 
through  the  visible  heavens  as  through  an  outer  sanctuary  into  the  inner  sanctuary  of 
"  heaven  itself."  Our  "  great  High  Priest  hath  passed  through  the  heavens  "  (ch.  iv.  14), 
and  "sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  The  outer  sanctuary  of  the 
Jewish  temple  was  "  made  with  hands,"  small  and  imperfect ;  but  the  heavens  which 
Christ  passed  through  were  created  by  the  Divine  fiat,  and  they  are  immeasurably  vast 
and  unspeakably  glorious, 

n.  In  the  atonembmt  which  he  hade.  "  Nor  yet  through  the  blood  of  goats  and 
calves,  but  through  his  own  blood,  he  entered  in  once  for  all  into  the  holy  place."  The 
entering  in  through  blood  refers  to  the  blood  which  the  high  priests  took  into  the  holy  of 
holies  to  "  make  an  atonement "  (cf.  Lev.  xvi.  14 — 16).  Christ  is  represented  as  entering 
the  heavenly  sanctuary  through  blood.  Not  literally,  but  figuratively,  must  we  accept 
this.  He  complied  with  the  condition  of  entrance  into  the  perfect  sanctuary  as  our 
great  High  Priest.  He  made  atonement  for  sin  previous  to  his  appearing  "  before  the 
face  of  God  for  us,"  But,  unlike  the  Aaronic  high  priests,  he  needed  not  to  make  atone- 
ment for  himself.  For  us  and  for  all  men  he  made  the  pre-eminent  atonement — the 
perfect  atonement.  How?  1.  By  the  sacrifice  of  the  highest  life.  Not  animal,  but 
human  life.  Not  a  sinful  or  imperfect  human  life,  but  a  pure,  holy,  perfect  one.  He 
gave  his  own  life — the  undefiled,  the  highest,  the  sublimest,  the  supremely  beautiful 
life — as  an  atonement  for  the  sin  of  the  world.  2.  By  the  voluntary  sacrifice  of  the 
highest  life.  Christ  did  not  die  as  an  unwilling  Victim,  He  Ireely  gave  himselt  for  us. 
"  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  may  take  it  again.  No  one  taketh  it  away  from  mo,"  etc. 
(John  X.  17,  18),  "Through  his  own  blood,"  which  was  willingly  shed  for  us,  he 
efiected  human  redemption,  and  then  ascended  to  his  mediatorial  throne. 

Ill,  In  thb  blessings  which  he  obtained  fob  man.  1.  He  has  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us.  Man  was  in  bondage.  Wicked  powers  had  enslaved  him.  He  was 
the  thrall  of  corrupt  passions  and  sinful  habits ;  "  sold  under  sin ; "  "  the  slave  of  sin ;  " 
the  "  bond-servant  of  corruption."  Christ  redeemed  man  from  this  bondage.  He  paid 
our  ransom-price.  "  Ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  with  silver  or  gold  ; 
but  with  precious  blood,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot,  even  the  blood 
of  Christ."  He  is  the  great  Emancipator.  He  "proclaims  liberty  to  the  captives,  and 
the  opening  of  the  prison  to  the  bound."  He  delivers  from  the  condemnation,  from  the 
guilt,  from  the  defilement,  and  from  the  sovereignty  of  sin.  "  If  the  Son  shall  make 
you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  And  this  redemption  is  eternal.  Its  benefits  endure 
for  ever.  It  introduces  man  into  everlasting  liberty  and  light,  and  starts  him  upon  a 
career  of  endless  progress  and  blessedness.  2.  Se  is  "  a  High  Priest  of  the  good  things 
to  corned  These  good  things  are  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  age,  the  privileges  which 
Christians  now  onjoy.  Under  the  former  covenant  they  were  in  the  future ;  now  they 
are  a  present  possession.  They  who  lived  during  that  dispensation  had  the  figures  of 
gospel  blessings ;  we  have  the  very  blessings  themselves.  But  there  is  more  than  that 
here.  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  of  good  things  yet  to  come.  There  are  blessings  which 
we  hope  for  in  the  future,  and  shall  obtain  through  his  glorious  priesthood.  We  look 
forward  to  the  time  when  we  shall  enter  upon  "the  inheritance  incorruptible,  and 
undefiled,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  4,  5).  The  blessings  which  flow  to  man  from  his  priesthood 
are  inexhaustible  and  infinite.  Through  him  there  will  ever  be  "good  things  to  come  " 
fur  those  who  by  faith  are  interested  in  his  gracious  and  blessed  mediation. — W.  J. 

Vers.  13, 14. — OeremonUd  and  spiritual  cleansing,  "  Far  if  the  blood  of  bnlls  and 
of  goats,"  etc. 


OH.  rt  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  245 

L-  The  HxniAN  need  of  oleansino.  By  implication  our  text  teaches  the  moral  defile- 
ment of  man.  Both  under  the  Mosaic  and  under  the  Christian  dispensation  the  impurity 
was  moral.  But  in  the  earlier  dispensation  the  external  and  ceremonial  uncleanness 
was  made  most  conspicuous.  A  very  small  thing  led  to  this  defilement.  If  a  man 
unwittingly  walked  over  a  grave,  or  touched  a  dead  human  hody,  he  was  accounted 
unclean  seven  days  (cf.  Numb.  xix.  11 — 22).  This  was  designed  as  a  parable  of 
spiritual  uncleanness.  It  was  intended  to  lead  men  to  feel  the  contamination  of  sin. 
So  in  the  Christian  economy  it  is  the  internal  and  moral  impurity  that  is  exhibited,  and 
the  need  of  spiritual  cleansing  that  is  insisted  upon.  Sin  is  the  corrupting,  defiling, 
separating  thing.     The  great  need  is  a  clean  heart  and  a  right  spirit. 

IL  Thk  Divinb  methods  of  cleansino.  Our  text  brings  before  ug  two  methods, 
that  of  the  Mosaic  economy  and  that  of  the  Christian,  the  ceremonial  and  the  spiritual. 
(1)  Both  were  of  Divine  origin.  (2)  Both  involved  sacrifice  as  an  essential  element. 
But  in  other  respects  these  methods  were  widely  different.  Let  us  notice  the  method  : 
1.  In  the  earlier  dispensation.  (1)  The  $acriflce»  were  of  animal  life.  "  The  blood  of 
goats  and  of  bulls,  and  the  ashes  of  s  heifer,"  (2)  The  application  of  the  taorificei 
was  external  or  corporeal.  The  use  of  the  blood  of  goats  and  bulls  was  external 
and  visible  (Lev.  xvi.).  The  use  of  the  ashes  of  the  red  heifer  was  external  and  cor- 
poreal (Numb.  xix.).  Both  the  sacrifices  themselves  and  the  application  of  them  came 
within  the  region  of  the  senses.  2.  In  the  Christian  dispensation.  (1)  As  to  the  sacri- 
flee,  (o)  It  was  the  saciifice  of  a  human  life.  "  The  blood  of  Christ,  who  .  .  .  offered 
himself."  (i)  It  was  the  sacrifice  of  a  holy  human  life.  "  Christ  offered  himself  without 
blemish  unto  God"(cf.  ch.  vii.  26,  27;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  (c)  It  was  the  sacrifice 
of  the  holy  human  life  of  a  Divine  Person.  "The  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the 
eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  blemish  unto  God."  By  "  the  eternal  Spirit "  we 
understand,  "  not  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  dwelling  in  Christ,  nor  the  Holy  Spirit  given 
without  measure  to  Christ,  but  the  Divine  Spirit  of  the  Godhead  which  Christ  himself 
had,  and  was  in  his  inner  personahty'  (Alford,  in  loco).  Our  Lord's  Divine  nature 
acquiesced  in  the  redemptive  plan  and  purpose,  and  contributed  to  its  fulfilment.  "  It 
was  '  the  blood  of  Christ ;  *  of  the  whole  and  undivided  Christ,"  as  Bichard  Watson 
observes,  "  who  was  both  God  and  man.  For  though  a  Divine  nature  could  not  bleed  and 
die,  a  Divine  person  could.  This  distinction  is  to  be  kept  in  mind :  for,  the  person  being 
one,  the  acts  and  sufferings  of  each  nature  are  the  acts  and  sufferings  of  the  same  person, 
and  are  spoken  of  interchangeably."  "  His  blood,  though  not  the  blood  of  God,  yet  was 
the  blood  of  him  that  was  God."  The  chief  value  of  our  Saviour's  sacrifice  was  not  in 
the  physical  life  which  was  offered,  althongh  that  was  perfect,  but  in  the  spirit  in 
which  it  was  offered.  He  shed  his  blood  for  us  in  the  spirit  of  uttermost  and  perfect 
obedience  to  the  Divine  Father,  and  of  willing  sacrifice  for  the  accomplishment  of 
human  salvation.  And  this  spirit  of  obedience  and  self-sacrificing  love  was  eternal ;  not 
a  transient  mood  or  a  temporary  feeling,  but  his  eternal  disposition.  "  The  sacrifice  of 
Christ,"  says  Ebrard,  "  could  only  be  offered  in  the  power  of  eternal  spirit.  Only  the 
eternal  spirit  of  absolute  love,  holiness,  wisdom,  and  compassion  was  capable  of  enduring 
that  sacrificial  death."  (2)  The  application  of  thit  sacrifice  is  spiritual.  Its  efficacy  can 
be  realized  only  by  faith.  Not  literally  has  the  Christ  carried  his  blood  into  the  true 
holy  of  holies.  Not  literally  is  it  sprinkled  upon  the  consciences  of  men  for  their  puri- 
fication. The  redemptive  power  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  a  spiritual  force,  and  must  be 
spiritually  appropriated.   We  realize  it  by  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him  (Rom.  iii.  24 — ^26). 

III.  The  efficacy  of  these  methods  of  cleansing.  1.  The  sacrifice*  tf  the 
Jewish  ritual  were  efficacious  in  producing  ritualistic  purity.  Doubtless  there  were 
persons  who,  regarding  these  sacrifices  as  types  of  a  far  higher  sacrifice,  and  these 
cleansings  as  figures  of  a  spiritual  cleansing,  derived  spiritual  and  saving  benefits 
through  them.  To  these  benefits  the  text  does  not  refer,  but  to  the  national  and  cere- 
monial Mae  of  these  institutions.  They  "  sanctified  unto  the  cleanness  of  the  flesh." 
By  means  of  them  ceremonial  impurity  was  removed,  the  sepanition  consequent  upon 
that  impurity  was  brought  to  an  end,  and  the  cleansed  person  was  restored  to  the  con- 
gregation of  Israel.  2.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  far  more  efficacious  in  producing 
spiritual  purity,  "  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanse  your  conscience  ?  " 
etc.  By  "conscience"  in  this  place  we  do  not  understand  any  one  faculty  of  our 
■{vritual  nature,  but  our  entire  moral  consciousness  in  relation  to  God,  our  religious 


246  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  ix.  1— 28 

soul.  "  Dead  works  "  are  those  whicli  are  regarded  m  meiitorious  in  themselves,  and 
apart  from  the  disposition  and  motive  which  prompted  them.  They  do  not  proceed  from 
a  heart  alive  hy  faith  and  love.  No  living  spiritual  sentiment  hreathes  through  them. 
And  their  influence  on  the  soul  is  not  inspiring,  but  depressing.  They  have  no  fitness 
for  quickening  spiritual  aflFections  and  powers,  but  for  crushing  and  killing  them.  They, 
moreover,  tend  to  defile  man's  religious  nature.  As  the  touching  of  a  corpse,  or  the 
bone  of  a  dead  body,  or  treading  upou  a  grave,  defiled  a  man  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  so 
the  contact  of  these  dead  works  with  man's  soul  contaminates  it.  The  moral  influence 
of  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  away  this  contamination  (cf.  1  John  i.  6 — ^9).  The  holy 
and  infinite  love  of  God  manifested  in  the  death  of  Christ  for  us,  when  it  is  realized  by 
us,  burns  up  base  passions  and  impure  human  affections  and  unholy  desires.  It  acts 
within  us  as  a  fervent  and  purifying  fire.  And  it  inspires  the  soul  for  true  spiritual 
service.  It  "cleanses  the  conscience  from  dead  works  to  sei-ve  the  living  God."  The 
word  used  to  express  this  service  indicates  its  religiousness.  It  "denotes  in  the  New 
Testament  the  priestly  consecration  and  offering  up  of  the  whole  man  to  the  service 
of  God,  .  .  .  the  willing  priestly  oEferinc;  of  one's  self  to  God."  It  does  not  signify 
service  which  is  limited  to  religious  duties,  but  the  performance  of  every  duty  and  all 
duties  in  a  religious  spirit.  The  whole  life  is  consecrated  to  the  living  God,  and  all  its 
occupations  become  exalted  into  a  Divine  service  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  17).  "  How 
much  more,"  then,  "  shall  the  blood  of  Christ  ?"  etc.  In  the  ceremonial  cleansings  the 
connection  between  the  means  and  the  end  was  merely  symbolical  and  arbitrary  ;  but  in 
the  redemptive  influences  of  the  gospel  there  is  a  beautiful  and  sublime  fitness  for  the 
accomplishment  of  their  end.  The  infinite  righteousness  and  love  manifested  in  the  great 
self-sacrifice  of  the  Saviour  are  eminently  adapted  to  redeem  and  purify  man's  soul  from 
sin,  and  to  inspire  and  invigorate  him  for  the  willing  service  of  the  living  God.  Our  text 
corrects  two  errors  concerning  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  1.  It  corrects  the  error  of  those  who 
make  the  essence  of  that  sacrifice  to  consist  in  the  physical  sufferings  and  death  of  our 
Lord,  God  has  no  delight  in  mere  pain,  or  blood-shedding,  or  death.  In  themselves  these 
things  cannot  be  pleasing  to  God.  It  was  the  spirit  in  which  Christ  suffered  and  died 
that  made  his  death  a  Divine  sacrifice  and  a  mighty  power  of  spiritual  redemption.  2. 
It  corrects  the  error  of  those  who  depreciate  the  expression  of  the  Divine  spirit  of  self-sacri- 
fice in  the  life  and  death  of  our  Lord.  It  was  morally  necessary  that  he  should  give 
himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  us,  in  order  that  the  mighty  influence  of  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness and  love  might  be  brought  to  bear  upon  us  and  redeem  ns.  "  Behoved  it  not  the 
Christ  to  suffer  these  things?"  "Thus  it  behoved  the  Christ  to  sutfer,"  etc.  (Luke 
xxiv.  26,  46,  47).— W.  J. 

Ver.  22. — Forgiveness  through  sacrifice.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission." 
This  is  as  true  in  Christianity  as  it  was  in  Judaism.    The  text  suggests — 

I.  A  SAD  FACT.  Implied  in  the  text  and  in  the  whole  of  the  present  section  of  the 
Epistle  is  the  sad  fact  that  men  are  sinners,  needing  forgiveness  of  sin  and  cleansing  of 
soul.  Men  endeavour  by  various  methods  to  get  rid  of  this  fact  of  sin.  Some  attribute 
what  the  Bible  calls  sin  to  defective  social  arrangements.  Men,  say  they,  are  parts  of 
a  very  imperfect  and  faulty  organization,  and  their  errors  are  to  be  charged  against  the 
organization,  not  against  the  individuals  composing  it.  Others  denominate  sin  "  mis- 
direction "or  mistake,  thus  eliminating  the  element  of  will  and  m(iral  responsibility. 
Others  speak  of  it  as  "  imperfect  development."  Others  charge  all  personal  wrong- 
doing upon  the  force  of  temptation,  or  the  pressure  of  circumstances,  ignoring  the  fact 
that  solicitation  is  not  compulsion.  With  these  theories,  how  are  we  to  account  for  the 
self-reproaches  which  men  heap  upon  themselves  after  wrong-doing — for  the  fact  that 
men  do  blame  themselves  for  wrong-doing?  We  feel  that  we  have  sinned,  that  we  aie 
morally  free  and  re.sponsible  individually,  that  we  have  broken  a  holy  law,  that  we 
deserve  punishment.  The  penitent  heart  cries, "  Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned," 
etc. ;  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  the  sinner."  It  is  a  terrible  fact  that  sin  is  in  the  world, 
that  we  individually  are  sinners. 

XL  A  GBBAT  WANT.  Eemission  of  sins — forgiveness.  Man  everywhere  is  consciously 
guilty  before  God ;  everywhere  his  heart  cries  out  for  reconciliation  with  him,  and  for- 
giveness from  him.  Altars,  sacrifices,  pilgrimages,  penances,  all  witness  to  this 
Evidences  of  this  deep  need  are  in  our  pergonal  experience.    The  guilt,  the  consciousness 


CH.  nLl-28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  247 

that  we  have  offended  Gk)d,  the  dread  of  the  stroke  of  his  jnst  wrath,  the  aching  want 
of  his  forgiveness, — ^these  things  we  have  felt.  Who  shall  roll  away  the  burden  of  our 
guilt?  Who  will  give  us  peace?  etc.  Oh,  very  deep  is  this  need,  and  wide  as  the 
world ! 

III.  A  DrvtOTt  CONDITION,  "  Apart  from  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no, remission." 
Under  the  Mosaic  economy  atonement  for  sin  was  made  and  ceremonial  cleansing 
obtained  by  the  shedding  and  the  sprinkling  of  blood.  And  the  text  teaches  that  for- 
giveness of  sin  is  attainable,  but  only  through  the  shedding  of  blood.  What  is  the 
reason  for  this  condition  ?  The  sacred  Scriptures  assert  that  "  the  blood  is  the  life  " 
(Deut.  xiL  23).  "  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood :  and  I  have  given  it  to  you 
upon  the  altar  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls :  for  it  is  the  blood  that  maketh 
an  atonement  for  the  soul"  (Lev.  xvii.  11).  Now,  life  is  our  most  precious  pos- 
session. "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  be  give  for  his  life.*^  Thus  the  "  shedding 
of  blood  "  is  equivalent  to  the  giving  of  the  life.  And  to  say  that  we  are  "  redeemed 
by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ "  is  to  express  the  truth  that  we  are  redeemed  by  the 
sacrifice  of  his  pure  and  precious  and  perfect  life.  But  why  should  forgiveness  of 
sin  rest  upon  this  condition  of  sacrifice?  How  the  atonement  of  the  death  of  Christ 
is  related  to  the  Divine  Being  and  government  we  know  not.  But  in  relation  to  man 
and  the  forgiveness  of  sin  we  may  without  presumption  offer  one  or  two  observations. 
For^veness  cannot  be  granted  at  the  sacrifice  of  law  and  moral  order.  "  The  Law  is 
holy,  and  the  commandment  holy,  and  just,  and  good."  Man  must  be  brought  to 
recognize  this,  or  to  pardon  him  would  be  to  license  wrong-doing.  A  forgiveness  which 
did  not  respect  and  honour  the  law  and  order  of  God  would  sap  the  foundations  of  his 
government,  blight  his  universe,  and  prove  an  injury  to  man  himself.  How  shall  tlia 
Law  be  maintained  and  honoured  and  man  be  forgiven  1  God  has  supplied  the  answer. 
He  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  to  shed  his  blood  and  give  up  his  life  for  us  sinners,  as  a 
grand  declaration  that  Law  is  holy  and  righteous  and  good,  and  must  be  maintained,  and 
that  the  Lawgiver  is  the  righteous  and  loving  Father,  who  is  willing  to  forgive  all  men 
who  turn  from  sin  and  trust  the  Saviour.  Through  the  death  of  Christ  God  proclaims 
the  wickedness  of  sin,  the  goodness,  beauty,  and  majesty  of  Law,  and  his  own  infinite 
righteousness  and  love.  "  Apart  from  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  This 
is  not  an  arbitrarily  imposed  condition  of  forgiveness  of  sin.  The  necessities  of  the 
c^se  demand  it.  It  is  gracious  on  the  part  of  God  so  clearly  to  declare  it.  And  he  who 
declares  it  has  himself  provided  for  its  fulfilment.  "  Herein  is  love,"  etc.  (1  John  iv. 
9,  10)  ;  "  God  commendeth  his  own  love  toward  us,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  8).  "  Forgiveness 
of  sin  through  the  shedding  of  blood,  the  salvation  of  the  sinner  through  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Saviour,  is  the  Divine  and  the  only  true  method.  The  atonement  of  the  cross 
is  a  comprehensive  force  in  the  actual  redemption  of  the  world  from  evil." 

IV.  A  OL0BI0U8  FACT.  Forgiveness  is  attainable  unto  all  men.  The  blood  has  been 
shed,  Jesus  the  Christ  has  offered  up  his  most  precious  life  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  the 
Divine  condition  of  forgiveness  is  fulfilled,  and  forgiveness  is  now  within  the  reach  of 
every  man.  It  is  freely  offered  to  all  men,  and  upon  conditions  which  render  it  avail- 
able unto  every  man.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
llioughts,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  6,  7),  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."    "  If  we  confess  our  sins,"  etc.  (1  John  i.  9). 

Conclusion.  1.  There  is  no  forgiveness  for  us  apart  from  Jesus  Christ.  Our  works 
cannot  merit  it.  Presumptuous  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God,  as  though  he  were  regard- 
less of  law  and  order,  will  not  meet  with  it.  Future  obedience  as  an  atonement  for  past 
sins  cannot  secure  it.  Apart  from  Christ  we  cannot  obtain  it,  3,  Accept  heartily  the 
forgiveness  which  is  offered  to  us  through  him. —  W.  J. 

Ver.  24. — "Heaven  itself."  "For  Christ  entered  .  .  .  into  heaven  itself,  now  to 
appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."    Our  text  teaches— 

I.  That  heaven  itself  is  a  locality.  It  is  spoken  of  here  as  a  place  into 
which  Christ  entered.  In  his  glorified  body  he  entered  there,  and  we  cannot  conceive 
of  the  existence  of  a  body  apart  from  space  and  place.  Body  cannot  exist  apart  from 
place.  Our  Lord  said  to  his  disciples,  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  Doubtless 
the  blessedness  of  heaven  is  chiefly  a  thing  of  moral  condition,  not  of  circumstances  ; 
of  character,  not  of  locality.    If  a  person's  soul  be  impure,  sinful,  and  possessed  by 


248  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [en.  a.  1— 2a 

wicked  passions,  no  place  could  afford  him  joy.  To  such  a  one  "  heaven  itself  would 
be  a  place  of  intolerable  misery.  Heaven  as  a  state  is  in  the  holy  soul ;  but  there  is 
also  heaven  as  a  place  in  which  the  holy  dwell;  We  know  not  where  this  place  is. 
We  know  it  is  not  in  the  visible,  stellar  heavens ;  for  Christ  passed  through  them  (ch. 
iv.  14)  into  heaven  itself.  But  where  it  is  situated  we  know  not.  We  know  not  its 
aspects  or  the  character  of  its  scenery.  But  we  are  convinced  that  it  must  be 
supremely  beautiful.  There  are  scenes  of  exquisite  beauty  and  glorious  grandeur  and 
awful  sublimity  in  this  world.  And  we  cannot  but  believe  that  in  this  respect  heaven 
will,  at  least,  be  not  less  beautiful,  or  grand,  or  sublime.  Eaiher,  does  not  every 
consideration  encourage  the  belief  that  it  will  present  scenes  that  for  beauty  and 
sublimity,  grandeur  and  glory,  will  immeasurably  surpass  everything  that  we  know  at 
present? 

II.  That  heateh  itself  is  the  soEins  of  the  bufreue  manifestation  or  God. 
"  The  presence  of  God  "  is  manifested  there._  "  The  face  of  God  "  is  seen  there.  Mosis 
said  unto  Jehovah,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory ; "  and  he  was  answered, 
"  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face :  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me,  and  live.  .  .  .  Thou  shalt 
see  my  back  parts ;  but  my  face  shall  not  be  seen  "  (Bxod.  xxxiii.  18 — 23).  It  must, 
we  conceive,  in  one  sense  remain  for  ever  true  that  no  man  shall  see  the  unveiled  face 
of  God,  and  live.  "  Whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  But  it  is 
also  true  that  in  the  future  there  will  be  granted  nnto  his  people  a  spiritual  vision  ot 
God  of  much  greater  clearness  and  fulness  than  any  which  they  have  in  this  present 
state.  Their  "  future  life  will  be  spent  in  God's  presence,  in  a  sense  which  does  not 
apply  to  our  present  life."  For  this  the  intensely  religious  soul  of  David  yearned.  "  As 
for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness,"  etc.  (Ps.  xvii.  15).  With  ardent 
desire  St.  Paul  anticipated  that  he  should  see  him  "  face  to  face  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  And 
St.  John  was  thrilled  with  the  sublime  and  sanctifying  hope  that  he  should  "  see  him 
as  he  is "  (1  John  iiL  2).  At  present  we  see  him  through  his  works.  Creation  is  a 
revelation  of  his  might  and  majesty,  his  wisdom  and  goodness.  But  a  nearer  and 
clearer  vision  of  him  awaits  us  in  the  future.  In  that  future  our  perceptions  will  doubt- 
less be  more  quick  and  true,  more  comprehensive  and  strong,  than  they  are  at  present. 
Here  and  now  some  men  discern  signs  of  the  Divine  presence  and  catch  soonds  of  the 
Divine  voice,  where  others  recognize  nothing  Divine. 

"  Cleon  sees  no  charms  in  nature — in  a  daisy,  I ; 
deon  hears  no  anthem  ringing  in  the  sea  and  sky  i 
Kature  sings  to  me  for  ever — earnest  listener,  L 

But  the  perceptions  of  even  the  spiritual  and  thoughtful  man  here  are  dim  to  what  they 
will  be  hereafter.  Then  we  shall  see  him,  not  through  the  veil  of  flesh,  not  through  the 
clouds  which  our  doubts  and  sins  interpose  between  us  and  him,  but  with  the  clarified 
vision  of  the  pure  heart  (Matt.  v.  8).  This  vision  is  promised  unto  his  servants. 
"  His  servants  shall  serve  him ;  and  they  shall  see  his  face  "  (Rev.  zxii.  3,  4  ;  see  also 
Eev.  viL  15;  xxi.  3).  This  vision  of  God  is:  1.  Enrapturing.  "In  thy  presence  is 
fulness  of  joy  ;  at  thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore."  2.  Transforming. 
When  Moses  came  down  from  Mount  Sinai,  after  forty  days'  communion  with  God,  "  the 
skin  of  his  face  shone."  He  had  caught  something  of  the  glory  of  the  august  and  awful 
Being  with  whom  he  had  been  in  communication.  How  much  more  will  the  saints  in 
heaven  receive  of  his  glory  1  For  (1)  Moses  saw  only  his  "  back  parts,"  but  "  they 
shall  see  his  face."  (2)  Moses  saw  him  and  caught  of  his  glory  in  his  fleshly  and 
mortal  body,  hut  they  shall  see  him  in  their  spiritual  and  immortal  bodies.  (3)  Moses 
was  with  him  but  for  forty  days,  but  they  shall  be  with  him  for  ever.  For  this  vision 
is :  3.  Abiding.  In  heaven  itself  the  manifestation  of  God  will  not  be  occasional  oi 
intermittent,  but  regular  and  constant.  "  He  will  dwell  with  them,"  etc.  (Eev.  xxi.  3). 
IIL  That  heaven  itself  is  the  abode  of  the  Chkist  and  the  boenk  of  his 
PRESENT  MiNiSTBT.  "  Christ  entered  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  before  the  face  of 
God  for  us."  He  is  there  in  his  mediatorial  glory  (ch.  L  3 ;  viii.  1).  1.  He  is  there  as 
the  Bepresentative  of  man.  The  expression,  "  to  appear  In  the  presence  of  God  for  us," 
suggests  that  he  is  in  heaven  as  our  Eepresentative  or  Advocate  (cf.  ch.  vii.  25 ;  Bom. 
viii.  34)b    Af  the  Aaronic  high  priest,  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  went  into  the 


CH.  IX.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  249 

holy  of  holies  as  the  representative  of  the  people ;  so  our  Saviour,  "  when  he  had  mads 
puriflcation  of  sins,"  "  entered  into  heaven  itself,"  etc.  2.  He  is  there  continuously  as 
th«  Bepresentative  of  man.  The  meaning  of  the  "now  "is,  "from  the  point  of  time 
when  he  entered  heaven  as  our  High  Priest,  onward  indefinitely."  It  implies  the  con- 
tinuance of  his  appearance  hefore  the  face  of  God  for  us.  3.  He  it  there  as  the  Fore- 
runner of  man.    (QL  ch.  vi.  20  ;  John  xiv.  2,  3.) 

CoNCLTTSiON.  Let  us  seelc  for  heaven  in  the  soul,  or  we  can  never  be  admitted  into 
heaven  itself.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  8).  "  Follow  after  holi- 
ness," etc.  (ch.  xii.  14). — W.  J. 

Vera.  27,  28. — The  two  deaths,  and  the  two  appearings  after  death.    "  And  as  it  ia 

appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,"  etc.     The  writer  is  still  treating  of  the  completeness 

of  the  sacrifice  of  our  Saviour.     'I'hat  sacriiice  was  offered  once  for  all.     Being  perfect, 

it  needed  no  repetitioo.     And  now  he  shows  that   its  repetition  was  impossible. 

.  Notice— 

I.  Tmt  TWO  DEATHS.  The  death  of  man,  and  the  death  of  the  Christ.  They  are 
mentioned  together  here  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  Christ's  offering  of  himself  will  not 
be  repeated.  Notice  these  two  deaths  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  here  n>entioned. 
1.  The  death  of  man.  (1)  ITie  event  itself .  Seneca  aslis,  "What  is  death,  but  a  ceasing 
to  be  what  we  were  before  ?  We  were  kindled  and  put  out ;  we  die  daily,"  "  The  ces- 
sation of  the  vital  activities  is  death,  which  is  simply  another  name  for  discontinuance," 
says  Grindon.  And  Longfellow,  "'Tis  the  cessation  of  our  breath."  It  is  dissolution, 
the  separation  of  the  soul  and  body.  "  Then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  earth  as  it 
was,"  etc.  (Eccles.  xii.  7).  It  leads  to  great  and  momentous  changes  in  the  mode  and 
conditions  of  our  life.  (2)  The  certainty  of  the  event.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men," 
etc.  It  is  the  lot  assigned  to  us  by  the  great  Sovereign  of  being.  God,  says  Gumall, 
"to  prevent  all  escape,  hath  sown  the  seeds  of  death  in  our  very  constitution  and 
nature,  so  that  we  can  as  soon  run  from  ourselves  as  run  from  death.  We  need  no 
feller  to  come  with  a  hand  of  violence  and  hew  us  down;  there  is  in  the  tree  a  worm, 
which  grows  out  of  its  own  substance,  that  will  destroy  it ;  so  in  us,  those  infirmities  of 
nature  that  will  bring  us  down  to  the  dust."  "  No  man  hath  power  over  the  spirit  to 
retain  the  spirit,"  etc.  (EccleS.  viii.  8 ;  cf.  Pa.  xlix.  6 — 10).  (3)  The  solitariness  of  the 
event.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die."  This  death  occurs  but  once.  It  is  an 
event  which  can  never  be  repeated.  In  this  fact  we  have  a  reason  why  we  should  pre- 
pare for  it.  Many  actions  are  done  often  in  a  lifetime,  and  if  their  earliest  performance 
be  not  satisfactory,  we  may  do  them  better  afterwards.  Some  of  our  experiences  occur 
often,  and  if  at  first  we  were  not  prepared  for  them,  and  passed  through  them  without 
advantage,  or  with  disadvantage,  we  ma3'  prepare  for  their  recurrence,  and  then  pass 
through  them  with  decided  benefit.  But  death  is  an  experience  which  never  recurs ; 
let  us,  then,  prepare  for  it.  It  is  a  journey  which  we  shall  travel  only  once — "  the  way 
whence  we  shall  not  return ; "  therefore  let  us  be  in  readiness  for  it.  2.  The  death  of 
the  Christ.  "  So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many."  (1)  He  died  as  a 
Sacrifioefwr  tin.  "Offered  to  bear  the  sins."  He  bore  our  sins  in  his  feeling.  In  his 
heart  he  had  such  a  deep  sense  of  the  wickedness  of  human  sin  as  was  possible  only  to 
a  Being  of  perfect  holiness.  He  mourned  over  sin  with  dee[iest  sorrow  ;  he  condemned 
it  as  utterly  wicked  ;  and  he  sought  to  deliver  men  from  it.  He  also  bore  our  sins  in 
his  sufferings  and  in  his  death  upon  the  cross.  Here  he  was  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of 
many.  "  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  body  upon  the  tree,  ...  by  whose  stripes 
ye  were  healed  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,"  etc.  (Isa. 
liii.  5,  6,  12).  (2)  He  died  as  a  Sacrifice  for  the  tins  of  all  men.  "  To  bear  the  sins  of 
many."  Tlie  " many  "  signifies  men  in  general ;  all  men,  as  in  oh.  ii.  9 :  "By  the 
grace  of  God  he  should  taste  death  for  every  man."  So  also  teaches  St.  Paul :  "  He  that 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all."  "  And  he  died  for  all." 
"  Who  gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  all."  So  also  St.  John  (1  John  ii.  2).  And  our 
Lord  himself  (John  iii.  15,  16 ;  xii.  32).  (3)  He  died  as  a  Sacrifice  which  is  never  to  i? 
repeated,  (a)  Its  repetition  is  impossible.  As  man  can  die  only  once,  so  the  Christ  can 
only  be  offered  in  death  once.  (5)  Its  repetition  is  unnecessary.  His  offering  wa.? 
l>erfect  in  itself  and  in  its  efficacy ;  its  efficacy,  moreover,  is  perpetual,  so  that  it  neci^ 
not  he  repeated.    Qe»v«n  asks  no  moi^    Man  needs  no  iiiore. 


250  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [cH.  ix.  1— 2a 

"  Hia  precious  blood 
Bhall  never  lose  its  power, 
Till  the  whole  ransomed  Church  of  God 
Be  saved,  to  sin  no  more." 

(Cowper.) 

IL  Thb  two  APPEAMN08  AFTER  DEATH.  1.  The  appearing  of  man  afUr  dtaih. 
"It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  and  after  this,  judgment."  "We  must  all 
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  The  fact  of  human 
responsibility  to  God  suggests  the  coming  of  a  great  day  of  account.  The  Divine 
government  of  the  world,  and  the  inequalities  between  the  characters  and  conditions 
and  circumstances  of  men,  which  are  so  many  and  remarkable  at  present,  point  to 
the  necessity  of  such  a  day.  The  holy  Bible  declares  it  as  a  certainty  (cf.  Eccles.  xii. 
14;  Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46 ;  Acts  xvii.  31;  Eom.  xiv.  10 — 12).  How  unutterably  solemn 
the  consideration  that  all  the  myriads  of  the  dead  shall  appear  again  in  the  great  day, 
and  before  the  awful  and  holy  tribunal  of  the  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  mani  2.  The 
appearing  of  the  Christ  after  death.  "  The  Christ,  also,  having  been  offered  to  bear  the 
sins  of  many,  shall  appear  a  second  time,"  etc.  (1)  Be  mil  appear  again.  "  The 
Christ  shall  appear  a  second  time."  "  This  Jesus,  which  was  received  up  from  you  into 
heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner,"  etc.  (Acts  i.  11).  He  promised  his  disciples, 
"  I  will  come  again,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  3  ;  and  cf.  Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxiv.  30 ;  1  Thess.  i. 
10 ;  iv.  16 ;  2  Thess.  i.  10 ;  Rev.  i.  7).  (2)  Ee  will  appear  again  "  apart  from  sin." 
His  first  coming  was  distinctly  related  to  sin.  "  Him  who  knew  no  sin,  God  made  to 
be  sin  on  our  behalf" (2  Cor.  v.  21).  That  relation  and  character  is  completed, fulSlIed. 
"  Having  been  once  offered  to  bear  the  sin  of  many,"  his  personal  connection  with  it  is 
ended.  He  has  done  with  it.  His  next  coming  will  be  apart  from  sin,  and  in  great 
glory.  "  The  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  "  Looking 
for  the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  (3)  He  will 
appear  to  perfe^  the  salvation  of  his  people.  "  Unto  salvation."  Here  are  two  points : 
(a)  The  attitude  of  his  people  in  relation  to  his  coming.  "  Them  that  wait  for  him." 
This  implies :  (o)  Faith  in  his  coming.  "  We  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  20,  21).  (/5)  Desire  for  his  coming.  "  Even  so,  come.  Lord 
Jesus."  (y)  Expectation  of  his  coming.  They  "  wait  for  God's  Son.  from  heaven,"  etc. 
(1  Thess.  i.  10).  (6)  The  object  of  his  coming  in  relation  to  his  people.  "  Unto 
salvation."  To  perfect  their  salvation.  He  will  raise  their  bodies,  reunite  body  and 
soul,  receive  them  Into  his  glory.  He  will  say  unto  them,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,"  etc  They  shall  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.  "Wherefore,  beloved, 
seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  iii.  14). — W.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Passing  reference  to  the  symbolism  of  the  Jewish  tdbernctde.  The  third 
deduction  from  the  fact  that  Christ,  infinitely  greater  than  Aaron,  is  High  Priest  at  the 
right  hand  of  God :  The  abolition  of  the  Jewish  types  by  their  fulfilment  in  the  Redeemer. 
This  occupies  oh.  ix. — x.  18.  Subject — Passing  reference  to  the  symbolism,  of  the  Jewish 
tabernacle.  The  importance  of  the  tabernacle  is  obvious,  since  thirty-seven  chapters 
are  devoted  to  describe  it  and  its  services,  and  seven  times  it  is  said  to  have  been  made 
according  to  the  heavenly  pattern ;  so  much  so  that  when  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  has 
to  refer  to  what  was  typical  in  the  old  economy,  he  does  not  speak  of  the  temple,  but 
of  the  original  sanctuary.  Moreover,  but  for  the  tabernacle  and  its  services,  much 
of  what  is  most  important  in  the  New  Testament  would  be  unintelligible — the  veil, 
mercy-seat,  priest,  atonement.  Lamb  of  God,  etc.  The  tabernacle  standing  in  its  sacred 
enclosure  in  the  midst  of  the  vast  encampment,  with  the  cloudy  pillar  resting  upon  it, 
was  the  dwelling-place  of  Israel's  King.  At  Sinai  God  and  Israel  entered  into  solemn 
covenant.  He  was  to  be  their  King,  and  they  a  people  peculiarly  his  own,  and  from 
that  time  he  made  bis  visible  abode  among  them.  But  what  was  the  purpose  of  the 
particular  form  this  abode  assumed  ?  They  were  ignorant  of  him,  and  in  so  low  a 
condition  that  abstract  truth  was  insufficient  for  their  teaching ;  they  needed  heavenly 
things  in  pictures.  The  tabernacle,  therefore,  was  doubtless  designed  in  its  construc- 
tion to  meet  this  need.  It  would  convey  to  them  very  plainly  that  God  is  real,  one, 
theiri,  holy,  only  approachable  to  man  by  sacrifioc.    But  the  New  Testament  throws 


0H.I1.1— 28J  IHB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  251 

additional  light  on  this  ancient  sanctuary,  by  which  its  details  are  seen  to  be  profoundly 
symbolic  of  New  Testament  truth,  and  Christians  may  better  understand,  because  of  it, 
ti»eir  position  in  Christ,  The  Jewish  tabernacle  is  the  type  of  the  Christian  Chttrch 
(1  Cor.  iii.  16, 17;  2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Eph.  ii.  20—22).  The  Church,  founded  on  "the 
atonement  money"  (Scripture  name  for  the  hundred  silver  sockets  which  were  the 
foundation  of  the  tabernacle) ;  the  Church,  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit ; 
the  Church,  witness  to  the  world  of  the  reality,  character,  and  grace  of  God. 

I.  Thb  8YUB0I.ISH  IN  THE  JEWISH  TABERNACLE.  The  tabemacle  consisted  of  two 
apartments  separated  by  the  veil,  the  inner  one  called  "  the  holy  of  holies."  1.  The 
relation  of  Jehovah  to  the  Church,  as  seen  in  the  holy  of  holies.  Described  in  vers.  3 — 5. 
A  iaymbol  of  heaven,  as  in  Apocalypse  :  "  The  city  lieth  four  square,  and  the  length," 
etc. ;  "And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  for  the,"  etc.  Most  glorious  place,  seat 
and  throne  of  the  King,  where  celestial  beings  bow  in  his  presence  I  Most  holy  place, 
hidden  from  human  gaze,  inaccessible  save  through  the  atonement,  inaccessible  yet  so 
near;  only  a  veil  between,  which  a  breath  might  almost  waft  aside,  and  which  the  incense 
of  prayer  can  penetrate  I  Most  blessed  place,  for  there  our  great  High  Priest  ever 
carries  on  his  work  on  our  behalf!  How  well  is  the  tabernacle  a  type  of  this !  There 
was  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  nothing  more,  save  that  the  walls  and  ceiling  were 
draped  with  curtains  embroidered  with  cherubic  figures.  What  did  this  typify  ?  That 
(1)  OocPs  dealings  mth  his  people  are  hosed  on  Law.  The  tables  of  stone,  "  tables  of  the 
covenant,"  were  the  essential  contents  of  the  ark  (the  pot  of  manna  and  the  rod  were  not 
there  originally,  nor  were  they  found  there  when  the  ark  was  placed  in  the  temple). 
God's  relation  to  man  is  that  of  Sovereign  ;  from  his  throne  issue  the  commands  con- 
cerning what  man  should  be  and  do;  and  at  his  feet  lie  ever  the  requirements  he 
makes  of  man.  (2)  Provision  has  heen  made  for  covering  over  the  broken  Law  from  the 
tight  of  the  King.  The  mercy-seat  on  the  ark,  the  golden  slab  on  which  was  sprinkled 
the  sacrificial  blood  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  "  Mercy-seat ; "  literally,  "an  expiatory 
covering."  Looking  down  on  his  Law,  the  King  sees  the  Sacrifice,  and  where  he  used 
to  hear  a  testimony  of  guilt,  he  now  hears  a  plea  for  mercy.  (3)  The  result  of  this 
provision  is  the  perfection  of  his  people  in  his  presence.  The  cherubim  bowing  before 
his  glory  with  no  fear  but  that  of  reverence.  The  cherubim  set  forth  the  highest 
creature  perfection — head  of  man,  body  of  lion,  wings  of  eagle,  feet  of  ox ;  representing 
perfect  intelligence,  strength,  flight,  obedience ;  picture  of  man  perfected,  fallen  humanity 
in  its  restored  condition,  eternal  fellowship  with  God  with  completed  powers.  "  We 
have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God ;"  that  is  the  broken  Law.  "  Being  jus- 
tified freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus; "  that  is  the 
mercy-seat.  "  Whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified;"  that  is  the  cherubim.  2. 
T/ie  relation  of  the  Church  to  Jehovah,  as  seen  in  the  holy  place.  (Ver.  2.)  The  golden 
altar,  candlestick,  she wbread- table,  occupied  this  apartment.  (Note,  no  mention  of  the 
golden  altar  in  the  text,  but  in  the  fourth  verse  the  word  "censer"  signifies  anything 
that  holds  incense,  and  probably  should  be  rendered  "altar,"  as  we  read  of  no  censer 
belonging  to  the  holy  of  holies.  It  is  not  said  in  ver.  4  that  this  was  within  the  holy 
of  holies,  but  only  that  it  belonged  to  it ;  it  stood  close  to  the  veil,  its  incense  passed 
through  the  veil,  its  work  was  within  whilst  its  form  was  without.)  These  are  also 
part  of  the  type  of  the  Church;  the  Church  below,  as  the  former  the  Church  above. 
What  do  they  teach  about  the  Church  on  earth?  Eighteous  mercy  raising  us  to  per- 
fection with  him.  That  is  God's  part  of  the  covenant.  What  is  ours?  (1)  The  altar, 
that  it,  the  worship  of  the  Church.  Incense  in  Scripture  a  type  of  prayer.  The  altar 
sprinkled  with  atoning  blood  before  incense  could  be  offered ;  the  incense  rekindled  daily 
by  the  holy  fire  ;  the  fragrant  odour  passing  to  the  mercy-seat,  a  sacrifice  acceptable. 
What  a  type  of  prayer  smouldering  in  the  heart  all  through  the  day,  kindled  morning 
and  evening,  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ !  (2)  The  candlestick,  that  is,  the 
work  of  the  Church.  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  It  is  the  world's  night.  God 
lights  his  lamps,  that  thereby  the  world  may  see  what  it  would  see  of  spiritual  realities 
if  it  were  not  night.  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord."  (3)  2%e  shewbread,  that 
is,  the  consecration  of  the  Church.  Bread  represents  life.  These  twelve  loaves,  one  for 
each  tribe,  set  forth  the  Divine  demand  for  the  dedication  to  him  of  all  his  people.  He 
redeems  us  that  we  may  be  his.  "  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  and  rose,"  etc. 
"Truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father; "  that  is  the  altar.    "  Ye  were  sometima 


252  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS.  [oh,  U.  1— 2& 

darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord ; "  that  Is  the  candlestick.    "  I  beseech  jon, 
brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye,"  etc. ;  that  is  the  shewbread. 

IL  Thb  Chkistian  lessons  in  thb  symbolism.  1.  That  the  Church  it  the  dwelling- 
place  of  Qod.  The  symbolism  is  abolished ;  what  is  left  ?  Tlie  Christian  Church,  tlia 
spiritual  temple,  which  is  to  be  in  the  world  what  the  tabernacle  wag  in  Israel.  As 
once  God  dwelt  in  a  consecrated  temple,  now  be  dwells  in  consecrated  lives  ;  no 
more  worshipped  by  sacred  forms,  but  by  devout  hearts.  Symbolism  has  given  placu 
to  spirituality.  2.  That  the  true  Church  is  that  which  embodies  the  teaching  of  the 
holy  and  most  holy  places.  Or,  in  other  words,  the  true  Christian.  You  believe  in  what 
is  done  for  you  within  the  veil,  the  God  ward  aspect  of  Christian  life ;  but  to  that  do  you 
add  the  manward — worship,  service,  consecration?  3.  That  thtway  into  the  Church  it 
symbolized  in  the  types  of  the  old  sanctuary.  Between  the  entrance  to  the  tabernacle 
and  the  gate  of  the  court,  stood  the  brazen  altar  on  which  the  sacrifices  were  offered, 
and  the  brazen  layer.  No  entrance  to  the  Church  but  by  Christ's  work  and  the 
Spirit's— the  atoning  blood  and  the  laver  of  regeneration.— 0.  N. 

Vers.  6 — ^10. — Hie  symlolism  of  the  Jewish  sacrifices.  Only  a  partial  reference,  but 
enough  to  call  up  to  the  Hebrew  mind  the  round  of  sacred  offeringg  prescribed  in 

Leviticus. 

I.  Fbelihinabt  inquibieb  ab  to  bacsifice  js  oenebal.  1,  What  was  the  origin  of 
the  sacrificial  act  t  Did  it  originate  with  man  or  God?  In  fovour  of  the  former,  there 
is  the  fact  that  it  is  not  recorded  that  the  first  sacrifice  was  the  result  of  a  Divine 
call.  But  against  this,  we  are  told  that  the  first  recorded  sacrifice  was  offered  "  by 
faith  "  (Heb.  xi.  4),  and  faith  implies  a  Divine  revelation — "  faith  cometh  by  hearing, 
and  hearing,"  etc.  The  Divine  origin  of  the  act  is,  therefore,  implied.  Moreover,  the 
act  of  religious  sacrifice  is  practically  universal.  Does  not  that  imply  a  principle  wrouglit 
into  human  nature  by  its  Creator,  especially  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  act  is  one 
repugnant  to  human  feeling  ?  But,  more  than  all,  God's  covenant  with  men  is  based 
on  sacrifice,  and  it  is  surely  incredible  that  Jehovah  adopted  for  so  supreme  an  end 
what  man  had  first  suggested.  2.  What  was  the  mea/ning  the  Jew  attached  to  sacrificial 
rites  f  Whatever  shades  of  meaning  attached  to  different  offerings,  and  however  much 
or  little  spiritual  significance  to  any  of  them,  it  must,  at  least,  have  been  impressed  on 
the  Hebrew  mind  with  gieat  clearness  that  "  without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  was 
110  remission  of  sins,"  that  God's  people  only  remained  in  covenant  with  him  through 
the  eBicacy  of  a  substitutionary  victim.  That  was  the  basis  of  the  Jewish  system,  and 
was  before  the  people  in  various  forms  every  day,  and  could  hardly  be  missed.  How 
far  the  average  few  regaided  these  as  types  of  a  perfect  ^ciifice  to  be  made  hereafter, 
or  how  far  he  trusted  in  them,  cannot  be  said ;  but  at  least  the  pious  amongst  them 
understood  that  unless  the  physical  act  had  a  spiritual  antitype  it  was  unacceptable 
(Ps.  xl.  6—8 ;  I  7—15 ;  Isa.  i.  H— 15 ;  liii. ;  Jer.  vii.  21—23 ;  Hob.  vL  6 ;  Micah  vi. 
7 — 8).  3.  What  are  the  particular  truths  symbolized  in  the  various  sacrifices  t  The 
offerings  (except  those  which  applied  to  special  and  personal  matters)  were  of  five  kindB — 
sin,  trespass,  burnt,  meat,  and  peace  offerings.  It  must  be  remembered  that  these  were 
the  offerings  of  those  living  under  the  privileges  of  the  Day  of  Atonement;  in  other 
words,  of  a  people  already  in  covenant  with  Jehovah.  The  Day  of  Atonement  was  the 
one  day  on  which  expiation  was  made  for  all  sin,  and  Jehovah  showed  himself  still 
their  God.  That  day  was  unique,  and  was  to  the  nation  what  that  day  is  to  the 
believer  when,  on  his  first  faith  in  Christ,  he  is  admitted  into  God's  family.  By  the 
services  of  that  day  the  people  stood  justified  before  God,  in  covenant  relation  with  him. 
No  doubt  the  sum  of  the  five  offerings  is  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  is  essentially  the  Sacrifice 
in  whom  all  these  typical  sacrifices  are  gathered  up,  and  they  are  so  many  different 
aspects  of  his  work.  But  beside  this,  and  growing  out  of  it,  they  have  reference  to 
different  aspects  of  the  worshipper's  position.  On  the  Day  of  Atonement  the  sacrifices 
were  offered  for  the  people.  The  high  priest  did  it  all ;  but  in  these  other  offerings  the 
people  appear  as  actors,  and  there  is  a  sense  in  which  these  were  not  made /or  them,  but 
hy  them.  The  penitent  sinner  has  only  to  receive  ;  that  is  the  Day  of  Atonement.  The 
redeemed  saint  has  to  give ;  that  is  rejiresented  by  these  five  offerings.  The  saerifices, 
iktrrfore,  est  forth  different  aspects  (f  Chrisft  work,  revealing  different  aspects  if  ih* 
saint's  position. 


<l«.n.l— 28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  253 

n.  With  this  idea  of  thb  MEAsnufo  of  thb  sacrifices,  olahob  at  them 
SEPABATELY.  Whuu  a  Complete  round  of  sacrificial  offerings  was  required,  they  were 
generally  made  in  a  specified  order :  gin,  or  trespass,  or  occasionally  both ;  burnt ; 
meat ;  peace.  We  may  divide  these  into  three  groups.  1.  Sin  and  trespass  offering* 
setting  forth  the  worshipper's  need  of  expiation.  The  prominent  idea  in  both  these  is 
expiation.  Israel  stood  before  God  in  a  state  of  reconciliation,  yet  needing  constant 
pardon  for  offences  committed  in  that  state.  These  offerings  were  to  meet  that  need. 
"  He  that  is  cleansed  needeth  not  save  to,"  eto. ;  but  he  needs  that.  In  the  law  of 
these  offerings  (Ley.  iv.  and  v.)  we  have  sin  confessed,  judged,  requiring  blood-shed* 
ding,  atoned  for,  and  pardoned.  The  peculiarity  of  the  trespass  offering  was  that  it  was 
for  sins  which  admitted  of  some  sort  of  restitution.  The  teaching  of  these  offerings  is  that 
for  the  Christian's  sins  there  is  pardon  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  but  the  condition 
of  which  is  penitence  which  tries  to  undo  the  wrong  done.  "  I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus," 
etc. ;  that  is  the  sin  offering.  "  Lord,  if  I  have  wronged  any  man,  I  restore  unto  him 
fourfold;"  that  is  the  trespass  offering.  Where  these  are  combined  "  it  shall  be  forgiven 
him "  (Lev.  iv.).  2.  Burnt  and  meat  offerings  expressing  the  worshipper's  desire  for 
dedication.  These  are  classed  together  in  Scripture  (Numb.  xv.  3,  4),  and,  unlike  the 
former,  they  were  both  "  sweet  savour  offerings  unto  the  Lord."  The  law  of  the  burnt 
ofiering  is  in  Lev.  i.  This  was  the  perpetual  offering  of  God's  covenant  people,  being 
offered  every  morning  and  evening.  Every  sabbath,  every  month,  and  at  all  the  annual 
festivals,  and  indeed  all  through  the  night,  when  the  altar  was  required  for  no  other 
use,  this  sacrifice  was  slowly  consuming.  The  idea  of  sin  needing  expiation  was  here, 
but  was  not  the  prominent  one.  This  could  hardly  refer  to  less  than  iha,t  perpetual 
self-dedication  which  is  the  natural  result  cf  acceptance  hy  God.  (Heads,  legs,  and 
inwards  all  burnt — thoughts,  walk,  affections.)  With  this  was  joined  the  meat  offcrinL;;. 
"  Meat,"  equivalent  to  "  food."  Man's  food  is  symbolic  of  man's  life.  Here  we  have 
the  burnt  offering  over  again,  but  with  this  addition — pa/rt  of  it  was  hestowed  rni  the 
priest.  See  here  the  Christian  law  of  dedication-— a  whole  life  given  to  God,  but  in  being 
given  to  him  given  to  his  people.  Christ  was  both  Burnt  Offering  and  Meat  Offering. 
"  I  beseech  you  .  ,  .  present  yourselves,"  etc. ;  that  is  the  burnt  offering.  "  To  do  good 
and  to  communicate,"  etc.;  that  is  the  meat  offering.  3.  Tliepeace  offering  representing  the 
worshipper's  enjoyment  of  fellowship.  (Lev.  iii.)  Its  pecidiarity  is  that  it  was  divided 
into  three  parts ;  one  burnt,  as  God's  portion,  one  given  to  priests,  and  one  retained  by 
the  offerer,  who  might  invite  his  friends  to  partake  of  it.  The  idea  of  unworthiness 
was  represented  with  the  imposition  of  hands  and  sprinkled  blood ;  but  the  great  idea 
was  that,  notwithstanding  unworthiness,  peace  with  God  was  realized,  verified,  enjoyed 
in  fellowship.  It  was  the  token  that  the  offerer  was  admitted  to  a  standing  in  God's 
house,  a  seat  at  hii  table,  communion  and  friendship.  How  much  is  involved  when  a 
man  can  eat  together  with  God  and  his  family  1  This  is  fulfilled  in  Christ;  in  him 
God  and  man  find  common  food ;  and  when  we  partake  of  him  we  are  drawn  into 
closest  nearness  to  the  Father.  This  is  the  peace  offering — "  Truly  our  fellowship  ia 
with  the  Father."    Expiation,  dedication,  fellowship,  complete  Christian  life. 

III.  Sum  up  all  this  m  these  pbactical  wohds.  L  The  privileges  here  symbolized 
are  to  be  fulfilled  hy  the  Christian  Church.  "  See  here,"  gays  God  to  us,  "  the  blessings 
you  believers  may  enjoy  1 "  Do  we  enjoy  them  ?  Unless  we  do  we  are  no  better  for  living 
under  the'Christian  dispensation,  and  the  Jew  was  as  lich  as  we.  2.  These  privileges 
were  <ynly  possible  at  the  sacrificial  altar.  All  five  offerings  were  made  at  thn  brazen 
altar  used  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  All  our  Christian  privileges  flow  from  the  cross  of 
Christ,  and  can  only  be  fulfilled  as  we  fulfil  them  there.  3.  ITiese  privileges  only  belong 
to  those  for  whom  the  Bay  of  Atonernent  avails.  Only  for  them — but  for  them.  If  we 
cannot  offer  the  unpardoned  sinner  these,  we  can  offer  him  a  share  in  the  great  essential 
preceding  atoning  work. — 0.  N. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — 3%e  Day  of  Atonement  fulfilled,  and  its  imperfect  blessings  per- 
fected in  Christ.  In  dealing  with  the  abolition  of  the  types  of  the  old  economy  smce 
their  fulfilment  in  the  high  priesthood  of  Christ  (ch.  ix.— x.  18^,  the  writer  comes  here 
to  dwell  on  the  Jewish  Day  of  Atonement.  That  day  is  the  key  to  these  and  following 
verses,  and  the  most  forcible  illustration  of  our  Lord's  high  priestly  work.  This  day 
was  at  the  basis  of  the  Jewish  system ;  by  its  services,  Israel's  covenant  relation  to 


264  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  ix  1— 2a 

Jehovah  was  re-established  and  affirmed.  The  other  offerings  of  the  year  were  dependent 
on  this,  representing  the  various  spiritual  privileges  of  those  who  are  at  peace  with  the 
Most  High.  On  that  day,  not  only  was  atonement  made  for  the  people,  but  also  for 
the  priesthood,  and  the  altar  on  which  the  other  sacrifices  were  offered,  and  the  taber- 
nacle and  its  furniture,  implying  that  the  privileges  these  represented  were  only 
possible  through  the  atonement  made  then.  Had  there  been  no  Day  of  Atonement 
it  would  have  involved  the  extinction  of  their  peculiar  privileges  as  the  chosen  people. 
That  day  was  to  Israel  what  to  the  believer  that  day  is  when  in  faith  he  first  lays  his 
sins  on  Christ,  and  enters  the  number  of  the  redeemed.  Subject — The  Day  of  Atonement 
fulfilled,  and  its  imperfect  blessings  perfected  in  -Christ. 

.  L  The  impbbfeotiok  of  the  Old  Testament  type.  (Vers.  6 — 10.)  It  i«  here 
said  that  the  Divine  Spirit  was  the  Author  of  these  arrangements,  that  they  were  a 
representation  of  sacred  truth,  and  that  in  every  part  of  them  we  have  the  utterance  of 
a  thought  of  God — so  much  so  that  there  is,  probably,  no  fundamental  doctrine  of  the 
Kew  Testament  whose  striking  symbol  we  cannot  find  in  one  or  other  of  these  ancient 
ordinances.  Describe  the  Day  of  Atonement — the  penitence  which  was  to  usher  it  in  ; 
the  services  conducted  entirely  by  the  high  priest ;  the  two  sets  of  sacrifices,  the  sin 
and  burnt  offerings  for  himself  and  his  house,  and  those  for  the  people ;  the  slaying  the 
sin  offering  for  himself,  and  his  entrance  within  the  veil  with  the  blood  of  sprinkling  ; 
the  slaying  the  sin  offering  for  the  people,  and  his  second  entrance  within  the  veil, 
sprinkling  also  the  furniture  of  the  holy  place  as  he  passed  out ;  the  confession  of  sins 
over  the  head  of  the  scapegoat  and  its  being  sent  away  into  the  wilderness;  the 
putting  on  of  his  gorgeous  robes  and  presenting  the  burnt  offerings  (dedication  after 
expiation) ;  the  closing  of  the  ceremony  with  the  high  priestly  benediction.  Now, 
what  was  the  use  of  all  this  ?  1.  It  was  perfect  as  a  type.  It  is  not  possible  to  imagine 
a  more  perfect  parallel  than  exists  between  this  and  New  Testament  truth.  On  the 
sinner's  ude,  repentance,  faith,  holiness;  on  the  Saviour's  side,  the  substitutionary 
offering  of  himself,  the  passing  into  the  Father's  presence  to  plead  his  sacrifice,  and  then 
"  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far,"  etc.  2.  It  was  perfect  at  a  means  of  legal 
and  otremonial  cleansing.  God  has  in  all  ages  but  one  means  of  atonement.  The 
nation  was  not  a  nation  of  saved  persons  after  the  Day  of  Atonement ;  the  fact  that 
this  was  repeated  annually  showed  that  "  it  was  not  possible  for  the  blood  of  bulls  and 
goat«  to  take  away  Bin."  This  day  "  sanctified  unto  the  purifying  of  the  flesh  "  (ver. 
13)— "flesh"  as  opposed  to  spirit;  it  removed  legal  and  ceremonial  defilement,  and 
retained  the  nation  in  its  legal  standing  with  Jehovah.  3.  But  it  was  imperfect  for 
giving  accest  to  Ood,  "The  Holy  Ghost  this,"  etc.  Conscience  knows  that  no 
formalism,  no  human  works,  can  atone  for  sin  and  admit  to  the  Divine  favour ;  that 
when  the  Day  of  Atonement  has  done  its  best,  the  spirit  of  man  is  left  as  far  from 
Jehovah  as  it  was  before  ;  that  the  true  veil  remained  unrent. 

IL  The  febfeotion  of  the  New  Testament  Type.  Vers.  11, 12,  and  14  display 
the  wonderful  perfection  of  our  Lord's  sacrifice.  1.  His  Divine  appointment.  The  various 
titles  of  the  Saviour  are  not  used  at  random.  Here  he  is  called  Christ,  the  Anointed 
One— he  who  was  promised  by  God,  and  for  whom  the  ages  have  been  looking.  The 
substitution  of  another  in  our  stead  depends  for  its  efficacy  on  whether  God  will  accept 
him  in  that  capacity.  But  God  "  gave  his  Son ; "  God  "  made  him  to  be  a  Sin  Offering 
for  ns;"  God  "hath  set  him  forth  to  be  a  Propitiation."  "My  son,  God  \yill  provide 
himself  a  lamb ; "  twenty  centuries  later,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  t "  2.  Sis  Divine 
nature.  "  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit,"  etc.  Does  this  refer  to  the  Holy 
Ghost?  We  thii^  not.  That  name  is  given  to  him  nowhere  else,  and  it  is  not  easy  to 
see  the  bearing  of  that  idea  on  the  argument.  We  take  it  as  referring  to  the  eternal 
nature  of  Christ,  as  opposed  to  his  fleshly  nature.  "  Made  of  the  seed  of  David  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh,  but  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  according,"  etc. ;  "  A  Priest,  not 
after  the  lavr  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life." 
According  to  the  flesh,  he  is  Son  of  man  ;  according  to  his  eternal  spirit,  he  is  Son  of 
God.  The  efficacy  of  his  sacrifice  was  due  to  the  eternal  spirit  of  Godhead,  the  most 
extraordinary  feature  in  his  person.  He  who  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death  at  the 
world's  great  altar  for  man's  sin  was  God  himself,  making  the  atonement  his  righteous- 
ness required.  Hence  the  infinite  efficacy  of  that  atonement.  3.  Sis  Divine  unless- 
nest.    "  Withont  spot,"    He  can  bear  our  sins  because  he  had  none  of  his  own, 


OH.  IX.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  2«3 

III.  The  accomplishment  by  the  pbbpeot  bealitt  of  what  was  dipossibi.e 
TO  THE  IMPERFECT  TYPE.  (Vers.  13,  14.)  (The  word  "  serve "  refers  to  religious 
mimstratioD,  worship.)  Mark  the  contrast :  Let  the  silver  trumpets  herald  in  the  Day 
of  Atonement,  let  its  inspired  solemnities  be  all  fulSUed ;  and,  though  the  nation  is 
legally,  ceremonially  cleansed  thereby,  this  has  not  met  the  needs  nor  silenced  the 
fears  of  a  single  contrite  soul ;  not  one  of  their  number  is  spiritually  nearer  to  God,  and 
the  most  holy  place  is  still  inaccessible.  Now  turn  to  Calvary,  the  reality  to  which 
these  types  pointed,  and  what  is  the  result?  1.  Our  conscience  is  satisfied — satisfied 
because  it  knows  God  is  satisfied.  The  atonement,  then,  meets  every  requirement  of  the 
Divijie  Law;  not  even  Divine  righteousness  could  demand  a  greater.  In  it  every 
claim  of  our  conscience  is  intelligently  and  abundantly  met.  2,  The  way  into  tht 
Divine  presence  is  opened.  Sin  separates  between  God  and  us ;  but,  with  a  conscience 
satisfied  that  sin  is  put  away,  we  can  look  into  God's  face,  venture  to  his  side,  bo^v  at 
his  feet,  confide  in  his  welcome.  The  veil  of  the  temple  fell  to  as  before,  and  God  was 
still  hidden  from  man,  after  the  great  Jewish  day ;  but  when  the  true  atonement  had 
been  made,  the  veil  was  rent  in  twain,  the  way  into  the  holiest  was  made  manifest. 
To  the  question,  "  How  much  more  ?  "  the  utmost  thought  of  man  can  give  no  answer. 
— C.  N. 

Vers.  1 — 5j— Symbolism  of  the  tabernacle.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  there'is  a  constant  reference  to  the  tabernacle,  while  the  glory  of  the  temple  is 
not  noticed  and  explained.  This  may  arise  from  several  caiises,  of  which  the  following  may 
be  named  as  the  most  probable.  It  was  the  original  form  of  Divine  worship.  It  had  tlie 
attraction  of  antiquity.  It  was  connected  with  the  personal  history  of  Moses  and  Aaron. 
It  was  unpolluted  by  idolatry.  Here  the  writer  mentions  the  nature  and  furniture  of 
the  tabernacle,  whicjh  expressed  Divine  ideas  alone.  Moses  was,  to  use  a  modern  phrase, 
"  master  of  the  works ; "  but  the  plan  was  Divine,  and  supplied  by  him  who  sees  the  end 
from  the  beginning.  The,  principal  thoughts  which  this  passage  supplies  are  :  1.  The 
coTaaant  had  a  material  or  worldly  tabernacle  which  denotes  approachablenesa.  The 
ever-blessed  God  placed  his  tent  in  the  midst  of  the  tents  of  Israel  that  they  might  come 
to  him,  and  use  the  ordinances  of  Divine  service  for  their  forgiveness,  peace,  and  inter- 
course with  the  Father  of  spirits.  It  proclaims  the  truth  which  our  Lord  announced 
to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  that  God  seeketh  men  to  worship  him.  "  He  is  not,"  said 
Paul, "  far  from  every  one  of  us."  This  is  plainly  taught  by  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord, 
who  is  Immanuel — God  with  us.  2.  The  next  thought  is  that  of  mystery,  for  God  dwelt 
in  the  thick  darkness,  and  once  a  year  the  solemn  service  of  the  high  priest  was  per- 
formed with  sacred  awe.  Within  the  second  veil  Jehovah  dwelt,  and  taught  men  that, 
how  gracious  soever  he  was  to  come  near,  he  must  be  had  in  reverence  by  all  them  that 
are  round  about  him.  3.  The  appointment  of  the  candlestick  signifies  illumination  for 
service.  It  must  be  confessed  that  while  there  are  vast  and  inscrutable  mysteries,  those 
things  which  are  requisite  for  our  salvation  and  growth  in  grace  are  very  plainly 
revealed.  The  mystery  of  the  inner  holy  place  is  not  for  us  to  understand  ;  but  the 
things  that  are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  our  children,  that  we  may  do  all  the  words 
of  this  Law.  Our  Lord  said  to  a  man,  probably  of  a  serious  temper,  who  desired  to 
know  if  few  were  saved,  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate."  The  light  of  the  lamp 
was  for  the  service  of  the  priest,  and  Scripture  is  given  that  the  man  of  God  may  be 
throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works.  4.  Then  appears  the  thought  of  spiritual 
supply.  The  tables  of  shewbread  were  furnished  every  week,  and  the  priests  ate  of 
the  loaves  which  had  stood  seven  days  before  Gh)d  in  his  tabernacle.  God  blessed  the 
provision  of  his  house  j  but  the  arrangement  foreshadowed  that  supply  which  Christ 
claimed  to  be  when  he  called  himself  "  the  Bread  of  life."  "My  God,"  said  Paul, 
"shall  supply  all  your  need  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus"  (Phil.  iv. 
19).  6.  The  pot  of  manna  and  Aaron's  rod  presented  memorials  of  Divine  power. 
The  one  reminded  worshippers  of  that  all-sufficiency  which  supplied  the  wants  of 
myriads  with  daily  bread,  and  the  other  was  a  miraculous  act  which  terminated  ali 
disputes  about  the  priesthood.  Believers  now  can  look  up  to  the  throne  and  see  mora 
illustrious  proofs  of  power  in  the  glory  of  the  Redeemer,  who  was  proved  to  be  the  Son 
of  Gknl  with  power  by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  by  the  sight  of  the  number 
of  "  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,"  who  have  come  out  of  tribulation,  and  are  in  the 


266  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  fcH- 1=^.  i— 28 

joy  and  felicity  of  heaven.  6.  Then  follows  the  acceptdbleness  o/  prayer,  whick  ia 
denoted  by  the  golden  censer;  and  the  odours  represent  the  prayers  of  the  saints. 
Prayers  are  pleasant  to  God  from  the  sense  of  our  need,  and  therefore  humility  of  soul ; 
our  faith  in  his  interest  in  us,  and  our  desire  to  glorify  his  Name.  The  angel  said  to 
Cornelius,  "  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God."  7. 
And,  lastly,  this  furniture  signifies  mercy  and  adoration.  There  was  the  mercy-seat, 
under  which,  in  the  most  sacred  place,  was  the  Divine  Law.  Between  the  Law  and 
God  came  the  cover  of  the  ark,  which  was  spiinkled  with  sacrificial  blood,  and  through 
faith  in  the  arrangement  sins  were  forgiven.  This  is  realized  in  the  Redeemer,  who 
is  our  Propitiation ;  through  whom  we  have  redemption,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins. 
Then  the  cherubim  overshadowed  the  mercy-seat ;  for  the  angels  desire  to  look  into 
these  things,  and  bow  with  reverence  and  love  in  the  presence  of  God.  The  object  of 
all  revelation,  all  sacrifice,  all  the  work  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  all  the  sacred  power 
of  the  Spirit,  i>  to  prepare  believers  by  the  experiences  of  earth  for  the  adoration  of 
a.— B. 


Vers.  6—10. — Symloliim  of  the  sacrifices.  The  writer  declares  that  the  past  dis- 
pensation of  the  Law  was  a  parable  or  figure.  The  whole  of  this  Epistle  turns  upon  the 
interpretation  of  this  parable.  Our  Lord  employed  many  parables  to  set  forth  the  nature 
of  his  kingdom.  He  presented  many  aspects  and  features  and  processes  of  the  gospel ;  and 
the  meaning  of  these  things  he  explained  to  the  humble  and  docile  spirit  of  his  disciples. 
In  the  condition  of  the  Jews  under  the  Law,  there  was  the  exclusion  of  the  people  from 
the  first  tabernacle,  and  the  exclusion  of  the  priests  from  the  second,  or  holy  of  holies. 
The  high  priest,  once  a  year,  entered  with  awe  into  the  presence  of  God.  There  were 
constant  repetitions  of  the  same  service  which  could  not  take  away  sin.  There  was 
much  that  was  external  and  ceremonial,  and  had  respect  to  washings — purification 
from  the  defilement  that  arose  from  touching  certain  objects — and  there  was  a  sharp 
division  with  reference  to  meats  and  drinks.  All  these  things  were  parables,  and  when 
the  times  of  reformation  came,  their  object  was  seen,  because  a  parable  must  be  lifted 
to  the  higher  region  of  the  truth  which  it  is  designed  to  illustrate.  It  must  be 
inferior  to  the  object.  Here  was  a  sinful  priest  who  offered  his  errors,  and  therefore  we 
need  one  who  was  sinless  and  Divine.  The  repetition  of  the  sacrifice  suggests  the  need 
of  One  who  by  one  offering  should  take  away  sin.  It  suggested  the  need  of  greater 
light,  for  there  was  a  veil  which  hid  the  interior  of  the  holy  of  holies.  This  veil  was 
rent  at  the  death  of  Christ,  and  heaven  is  now  open  to  faith  and  worship. 

•  The  smoke  of  thine  atonement  here 

Darkened  the  sun  and  rent  the  veil. 
Hade  the  new  way  to  heaven  appear, 

And  showed  the  great  Invisible : 
Well  pleased  in  thee,  oni  God  looks  down, 
▲nd  calls  his  rebels  to  a  crown." 

It  leads  ns  to  consider  the  removal  of  all  exclusiveness ;  and  while  formerly  priest  and 
high  priest  alone  could  minister  in  the  tabernacle,  all  believers  are  now  kings  and 
priest*  unto  God.  It  teaches  us  how  needful  was  a  spiritual  system  to  displace  that 
which  had  to  do  with  the  outward  washing  and  distinctions  of  food ;  and  to  make  us 
know  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  meats  and  drinks,  but  in  "righteousness, 
peace,  and  Joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost." — B. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Chrisfs  eternal  priesthood.  Over  against  the  imperfection  and  material 
character  of  the  laws  of  Moses  which  concerned  meats,  drinks,  and  divers  washings, 
there  is  here  introduced  the  exalted  nature  and  e£Sciency  of  the  Redeemer's  priesthood. 

L  This  appears  in  thb  futubb  and  enduring  effectb  of  his  sacbifiok.  All 
his  oflice  relates  chiefly  to  eternity,  whereas  the  work  of  the  Levitical  priesthood  had  to 
do  with  annual  atonement,  purity  of  person,  and  temporal  blessings.  Our  Lord  directs 
our  thoughts  and  hopes  to  the  immeasurable  future  in  which  are  to  he  found  spiritual 
life,  holy  peace,  perfection  of  worship,  and  the  everlasting  presence  of  God,  These 
hlessings  will  always  be  good  things  to  come ;  for  with  Gtod  is  the  Fountain  of  life, 
and  in  his  light  shall  believers  always  see  light 


oa.tt.1— 28.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  257 

II.  The  exalted  sphere  of  his  mtnistbt.  The  old  tabernacle  was  made  with 
hands.  The  genius  of  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel,  the  work  of  carpenter,  spinner,  and 
weaver,  were  applied  to  make  the  holy  tent.  It  was  a  narrow  and  perishable  fabric. 
Our  Lord  is  now  in  heaven,  which  is  not  made  with  hands  and  by  the  assistance  of 
men  or  angels.  It  is  the  direct  creation  of  the  infinite  and  all-sufficient  power  of 
Jehovah,  where  his  holy  angels  and  archangels  dwell  and  worship.  The  place  is 
suitable  for  the  matchless  dignity  of  the  priest.  The  earthly  tabernacle  is  fit  for  the 
j^eakness  and  sin  of  the  earthly  minister,  but  heaven  with  its  brightness  and  purity  is 
the  proper  tabernacle  for  the  Son  of  God.  ' 

III.  The  bxjperiority  op  his  atonino  blood.  The  victims  whose  blood  was  shed 
were  unconscious  of  any  purpose  in  their  death.  There  was  no  willingness  and  no 
sympathy  with  the  object  of  the  sacrifice,  and  there  was  consequently  nothing  more 
than  subjection  to  physical  force,  which  deprived  the  death  of  moral  value.  Our  Lord 
offered  himself  a  willing  Sacrifice,  and  his  voluntary  surrender  to  death  has  imparted  to 
his  work  of  suffering  an  inconceivable  value  and  power.  He  is  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  who 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  He  is  now  in  the  holy  place  as  the  one,  all-sufficient 
High  Priest,  whose  one  sacrificial  act  has  a  vital  and  indestructible  force  in  the  govern- 
ment of  God  and  the  system  of  Divine  grace. 

IV.  The  finalitt  and  issues  op  his  sacbipioe.  He  entered  once,  and  is 
therefore  unlike  the  Jewish  priest,  who  went  in  to  the  holiest  of  all  year  after  year. 
It  is  the  glory  of  Christ  to  do  this  thing  once,  and  there  needs  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin. 
The  redemption  is  not  from  year  to  year,  but  it  has  eternal  issues  which,  beginning  by 
faith  in  him,  now  advances  in  constant  acts  of  redemption  through  life,  by  whiob 
believers  are  redeemed  from  evil  in  its  various  forms,  from  the  penal  stroke  of  death, 
and  from  all  the  effects,  traces,  and  influences  of  evil  for  evermore. — ^B. 

Vers.  13, 14. — Ceremonial  and  spiriituil  purification.  There  are  here — 
L  The  aerangbmbnts  foe  ceremonial  purification.  .A  red  heifer — the  coloui 
of  red  signifying  the  inflaming  nature  of  sin — was  to  be  slain  by  a  priest ;  but  not  the 
high  priest,  who  was  to  abstain  from  all  contact  with  death.  And  the  body  and  the 
blood  were  to  be  burnt  outside  the  camp.  Some  of  the  blood  was  sprinkled  towards 
the  tabemaele,  and  during  the  process  of  burning,  cedar  wood,  hyssop,  and  scarlet  wool 
were  thrown  into  the  fire.  The  ashes  were  laid  up  for  use  by  those  who  had  become 
ceremonially  unclean  by  touching  the  dead,  and  for  the  purification  of  the  house, 
furniture,  and  utensils  where  a  death  had  occurred.  Being  mixed  with  water  and 
sprinkled  upon  such  persons  and  homes,  on  the  third  and  seventh  day  the  defilement 
was  removed.  This  was  the  Divine  arrangement  for  the  purity  of  Israel,  and  those 
who  complied  with  the  will  of  God  enjoyed  liberty  of  approach  to  his  courts,  and  a 
share  in  the  blessings  of  the  tabernacle  and  priesthood. 

II.  The  bupebiob  olory  and  effect  op  the  bacrifiob  of  Chbibt.  The  writer 
had  previously  noticed  the  inferior  nature  and  limited  efiectof  animal  sacrifices;  and 
here  he  rises  from  the  blood  of  slain  beasts,  and  the  bodily  cleansing  they  secured,  to 
the  Divine  nature  of  our  Lord,  which  gives  an  untold  importance  to  his  death,  and 
ensures  the  highest  spiritual  results  in  the  purification  of  the  conscience.  By  the 
"  eternal  Spirit "  is  commonly  understood  that  glory  which  is  described  in  the 
commencement  of  the  Gospel  of  John.  It  is  probable  that  the  writer  looked  back 
to  the  passage  in  which  he  declares  that  Jesus  is  "  the  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory, 
and  express  Image  of  his  person."  It  reminds  us  of  his  transfiguration,  and  the 
glimpses  of  his  superhuman  dignity  and  power  which  lighted  up  his  earthly  ministry. 
It  is  a  thought  before  which  we  stand  in  silent  and  essential  wonder,  and  feel  that  it 
lifts  the  sacrifice  of  our  Lord  to  a  height  of  glory  which  transcends  our  clearest  vision. 
This  sacrifice  cleanses  the  conscience  from  "dead  works."  Death  in  the  Old  Testament 
always  suggests  pollution.  The  conscience  which  is  defiled  by  dead  works  sheds  a  clear 
and  penetrating  light  on  the  disqualifying  nature  of  sin,  and  the  exclusion  from  the 
service  of  God  which  it  produces.  The  precious  blood  of  Christ,  which  cleanses  the 
conscience,  makes  it  full  of  the  life  of  love,  gratitude,  and  filial  service.  The  fruit 
which  comes  from  life  is  holiness  now,  and  hereafter  it  is  everlasting  life.  It  opens 
the  prospect  of  fellowship  with  God,  who  is  the  "  living  God,"  and  communes  with  his 
people  from  off  the  mercy-seat.  'The  life  of  those  who  are  forgiven  turns  to  God,  and 
uebbewb.  B 


258  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  nc  1— 2& 

the  living  God  holds  fellowship  with  them,  which  is  the  high  privilege  of  believers  now, 
and  the  pledge  of  its  continuance  in  the  world  to  come. — B. 

Vers.  15 — 22. — "  The  Mediator  of  the  n«u)  Ustament."  The  ideas  coatalned  In  thii 
section  are — 

I.  The  twofold  effect  of  the  death  of  cub  Lobd.  The  free  surrender  of  his 
life  was  the  means  of  removing,  in  the  ca?e  of  believers,  the  hurdea  of  those  sins  which 
the  Mosaic  Law  could  not  talte  away,  'i'he  sins  committed  under  the  first  covenant 
were  not  forgiven  by  acts  of  sacrifice  and  the  aid  of  priestly  service,  which,  though 
ordaiued  by  Jehovah,  were  unequal  to  produce  peace  and  purity  of  conscience.  It  may 
be  that  there  is  a  retrospective  effect  of  the  death  of  Christ  which  furnished  the  ground 
of  the  dispensation  of  mercy  before  the  mystery  of  his  atonement  was  revealed. 
Considering  the  stress  which  is  laid  upon  the  value  of  forgiveness  in  the  Scripture,  the 
glory  of  Jesus  Christ  shines  in  the  fact  that  he  is  the  cause,  by  his  death  and 
mediatoiial  ofiice,  of  its  safe  and  secure  enjoyment.  The  next  effect  is  to  be  traced  in 
the  vocation  of  believers  to  an  eternal  inheritance,  which  is  to  stand  in  sublime 
contrast  to  Canaan,  respr-cting  which  the  Jews  say  (Isa.  Ixiii,  18),  "  The  people  of  thy 
holiness  have  possessed  it  but  a  little  while."  That  inheritance  was  defiled  by  idolatry, 
desolated  by  heathen  invaders,  and  ruled  over  by  the  pagan  power  of  Rome  ;  but  that 
to  which  our  Lord  calls  his  followers  is  an  "  inheiitance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and 
fadeth  not  away."  There  is  a  sublime  harmony  here  between  the  death  and  mediation 
of  our  Lord,  and  the  everlasting  effects  which  they  produce  and  secure. 

IL  The  vital  force  op  the  covenant  arises  from  the  death  of  Christ. 
Here  the  writer  passes  over  to  the  idea  of  a  testament  or  will  which  is  of  force  when 
the  testator  dies.  The  covenant  is  a  Divine  arrangement  which  includes  two  parties, 
for  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one;  but  God  is  One,  and  his  people  are  those  who, 
through  his  condescending  mercy,  stand  on  the  other  side  as  those  who  accept  and 
rejoice  in  the  arrangement.  .  The  mention  of  the  inheritance  suggests  the  thought  of 
a  testament,  by  which,  as  soon  as  the  testator  dies,  the  heir  enters  upon  the  enjoyment 
of  the  inheritance.  This  is  an  auxiliary  illustration  wljich  aids  us  to  understand  the 
mighty  love  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  ready  to  endure  the  woe  and  agony  of  the 
cross,  to  bequeath  to  us  the  blessing  of  forgiveness  now,  and  the  enjoyment  o( 
the  imperishable  inheritance  of  heaven  in  the  future  life. 

III.  The  confirmation  of  the  new  covenant  illustrated  bt  hibtobioal  facts. 
The  allusion  in  vers.  18 — ^22  is  to  the  original  establishment  of  the  covenant  with 
Israel  at  Sinai.  There  are  several  deviations  from  the  Mosaic  narrative  in  this  section. 
In  the  account  in  Exodus  there  is  no  mention  of  goats,  hyssop,  scarlet  wool,  the  book, 
the  tabernacle  and  its  vessels,  and  therefore  there  may  be  here  a  traditional  account ; 
or  the  writer  combined  several  subsequent  acts  of  Levitical  services  which  had  the  same 
signification  and  oliject.  The  essential  truth  contained  in  this  solemn  tran  saction  was 
the  afiplication  of  blood  to  ratify  the  covenant  which  was  made  between  God  and  his 
people  at  Sinai.  It  was  the  Divine  will  that  such  should  be  the  method,  according  to 
which  the  old  tabernacle,  the  chosen  nation,  and  the  first  covenant  should  be  consecrated, 
and  should  foretell  and  typify  future  events  of  the  highest  importance  for.  the  world 
"Without  shedding  of  blood  there  was  no  remission."  This  voice  was  heard  centurj 
after  century  in  the  services  of  the  Jewish  Law ;  and  now  that  Christ  has  become  "  tlio 
Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  the  truth  has  received  a  more 
solemn  confirmation.  If  he  is  rejected,  "  there  remaineth  no  more  a  sacrifice  for  sins." 
If  he  is  received  and  trusted  in,  there  is  peace  with  God,  and  hope  of  eternal  life.  The 
phrase  which  Moses  used,  "  This  is  the  blood  of  the  covenant,"  recalls  the  sacred  words 
of  Jesus,  who  said  when  he  took  the  cup  at  the  Passover  feast,  and  looked  forward  to 
the  covenant  of  grace,  "  This  is  my  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  is  shed  for  many  unto 
the  remission  of  sins." — B. 

Ver.  1. — The  orderly  arrangements  of  the  new  covenant  Evidently  a  double 
meaning  is  possible  to  the  adjective  koitiukSi'.  The  sanctuary  sheltered  within  the 
tabernacle  was  a  sanctuary  of  this  world ;  but  is  that  all  the  writer  means  by  the  word 
he  uses  here?  Surely  we  must  remember  the  antithesis  between  cosmos  and  chaos. 
The  furniture  <rf  the  sanctuary  was  not  a  collection  of  objects  placed  anywhere  and 


CH.  IX.  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWa  259 

anyhow.  There  was  as  much  symbolism  in  the  order  and  relation  of  these  objects  as 
in  the  objects  themselves.  All  worship  and  holy  service  had  to  he  according  to  Divine 
regulations.  And  as  all  was  KovuMhs  in  the  visible,  symbolic,  temporary  sanctuary,  so 
all  must  also  be  Kotr/uKis  in  the  sanctuary,  the  true  tabernacle. 

L  Wb  must  eecoqnizb  Christ's  place  in  this  sanotuakt.  The  new  covenant 
hag  its  sanctuary,  even  as  the  old,  and  that  sanctuary  is  to  be  found  wherever  Christ  is 
manifesting  himself  to  take  away  sin.  It  is  the  presence  of  Christ  that  makes  the 
holiest  place  we  know,  and  there  is  no  making  of  a  truly  holy  place  without  him.  In 
the  old  covenant,  everything  was  gathered  round  the  tables  of  th<t  Law  as  a  centre. 
They  expressed  the  will  of  God.  And  so  now  the  centre  of  our  relia;ious  life,  around 
which  all  is  to  be  gathered  in  orderly  relations,  is  to  be  found  in  Christ — at  once  a 
High  Priest  to  enter  into  the  true  holy  of  holies,  and  One  to  show  the  Law  of  God  in 
actual  working,  as  something  not  too  high  for  human  attainment.  We  are  to  worship 
and  serve  God  through  Christ,  and  there  is  no  other  way  whereby  we  may  become 
faultless  in  the  presence  of  his  glory. 

IL  Wb  must  recognize  our  own  place  in  the  sanotuabt.  What  are  we  doing 
in  the  way  of  orderly,  well-considered  daily  service?  Is  the  lamp  of  our  life  shining 
forth  every  day?  Do  we  help  to  spread  a  table  for  the  varied  necessities  of  men, 
remembering  that  whatsoever  we  do  for  them  is  done  for  Christ,  and  whatsoever  is 
done  for  Chiist  is  done  for  God  ?  There  is  to  be  a  measure  of  order  in  our  own  personal 
religious  life — repentance  leading  to  faith,  and  faith  opening  up  the  way  to  all  that  is 
holy,  pure,  and  Christ-like. — ^Y. 

Ver.  9. — The  parabolic  function  of  the  tabernacle  services.  The  tabernacle,  with  its 
contents  and  its  institutions,  was  one  great  parable  embracing  and  uniting  many 
subordinate  parables.  A  parable  looking  towards  the  time  of  the  new  covenant — the 
"  present  time,"  as  the  wriler  calls  it ;  or,  as  we  might  even  more  closely  render  it,  the 
impending  season.  For  in  God's  economy  the  new  state  of  things  is  to  be  ever  looked 
at  as  impending.  So  Christ  would  have  us,  who  rejoice  in  his  first  advent,  to  be  ever 
making  ready  for  his  second  one.  And  in  the  same  way  the  men  of  the  old  covenant 
iiad  to  be  on  the  look-out  for  the  initiation  of  the  new.  Rejoicing  in  what  Moses  had 
given  them,  they  looked  eagerly  for  what  Messiah  had  to  give;  and  in  the  mean  time 
Moses  had  given  them  parables  through  the  eye,  even  as  in  after  times  Christ  gave  his 
disci  [lies  parables  in  words.  Such  mode  was  suitable  for  the  time  and  the  purpose.  What 
parabolic  teaching  was  there,  then,  in  the  tabernacle  and  the  things  connected  with  it  ? 

I.  The  reality  of  God's  dwelling  with  men.  Each  Israelite  family  had  its 
tent,  and  Jehovah's  tent  was  in  the  midst  of  all,  a  centre  of  unity,  protection,  and 
glory.  Jehovah  was  the  Companion  of  his  people  in  all  their  pilgrimage  and  vicissitudes. 
It  is  only  as  we  recollect  this  that  we  get  at  the  full  significance  of  John's  expression 
concerning  the  Word  becoming  flesh  and  tabernacling  among  us,  full  of  grace  and  truth 
(John  i.  14).  The  glory  that  belonged  to  the  tabernacle  was  thus  a  parable  of  the 
Incarnation  glory. 

II.  The  possibilitt  of  satisfactory  intercourse  between  God  and  haw.  It 
was  dangerous  for  a  man  to  meddle  in  Divine  things  according  to  his  own  inclination 
and  his  own  wisdom.  Yet  he  could  not  stand  aside  and  neglect  Divine  things 
altogether.  Such  a  course  was  equally  dangerous  with  the  other.  But  if  he  would 
only  submit  to  the  way  of  Jehovah's  appointment,  attending  to  every  detail,  and 
striving  to  comprehend  the  undoubted  purpose  in  it,  then  he  was  assuredly  in  the  way 
of  safety.  He  was  doing  what  God  wanted  him  to  do  with  the  resources  then  within 
his  reach.  And  though  an  obedience  of  this  kind,  an  obedience  in  certain  external 
rites,  could  not  take  away  all  trouble  of  conscience,  yet  when  a  man  comprehended  that 
Jehovah  had  even  this  in  view,  he  would  feel  that  what  he  enjoyed  not  now  he  would 
enjoy  hereafter.  Though  the  blood  of  bulls  and  gnais  could  not  put  away  sin  and  wash 
out  the  heart's  deep  defilement,  yet  the  blood-shedding  was  not  in  vain,  if  it  intimated 
the  coming  of  something  that  would  take  away  sin. 

III.  The  fossibilitv  op  seal  bervicb.  In  itself,  the  elaborate  ritual  of  the 
tabeinacle  was  nothing.  Save  as  it  was  parabolic  and  provocative  of  hope  and 
aspiration,  it  could  not  be  called  other  than  a  waste  of  time.  "  What  mean  ye  by  this 
service?  "  was  a  question  which  might  well  be  put  to  every  Levitical  person  every  day. 


260  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  ix.  1— 2a 

But  when  the  service  of  the  high  priest  looked  forward  to  the  sacrificial  cleansing 
service  of  Christ  in  perpetuity,  and  when  the  service  of  all  the  subordinate  attendants 
looked  forward  to  the  daily  obedience  of  Christians,  faithful  in  little  things,  then 
•ssuredly  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  gets  lifted  above  a  mechanical  routine.  Under 
the  old  covenant,  a  whole  tribe,  separated  for  ritual  observance,  serving  Jehovah  in 
formal  religious  ordinances,  was  thereby  serving,  not  only  a  nation,  but  all  mankind. 
Serving  God  in  appearance,  the  Levlte  served  men  in  reality.  Now,  under  the  new 
covenant,  we  serve  God  in  serving  men.  The  Christian,  because  he  is  a  Christian,  has 
most  power  of  aU  men  to  serve  his  brother  man. — Y, 

Ver.  12. — The  eternal  redemption.  One  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  occurrence 
three  times  within  four  verses  of  the  word  "  eternal."  There  is  the  eternal  redemption, 
the  eternal  Sjiirit,  tlie  eternal  inheritance.  The  change  from  the  old  covenant  to  the 
new  was  also  an  escape  from  the  temporary  to  the  abiding.  In  the  old  covenant  there 
had  to  be  a  constant  succession  of  things,  each  lasting  for  a  little  time,  and  then  by 
the  nature  of  it  giving  way,  and  needing  something  new  to  fill  its  place.  "  Now,"  the 
writer  of  this  Epistle  seems  to  say,  "  all  good  things  have  become  eternal."  And  first 
there  is  the  eternal  redemption.     By  contrast,  then,  we  have  to  think  of — 

I.  A  REDEMPTION  WHICH  18  NOT  ETERNAL.  This  idea  of  redemption  and  ransom 
happily  an  unfamiliar  one  to  us.  But  there  was  a  time  when  people  perfectly  compre- 
hended the  continual  risk  to  themselves  and  their  property  from  the  attacks  of  strong 
robber-tribes,  who  would  take  a  man  away  and  keep  him  in  captivity  till  his  friends 
provided  a  ransom.  And  that  ransom  did  only  for  the  special  occasion ;  there  might 
come  another  captivity  which  would  need  its  own  ransom.  So  it  was  with  the  services 
of  the  old  covenant.  At  no  time  was  Israel  allowed  to  think  that  enough  of  beasts  had 
been  slain  on  the  altar.  No  sooner  was  one  accumulation  of  defilement  cleansed  away 
than  another  began  to  appear.  And  thus,  also,  no  sooner  did  the  priest  wipe  away  the 
blood  of  one  beast  than  he  began  to  make  ready  for  shedding  the  blood  of  another. 
The  task  was  endless,  and  no  satisfaction  or  peace  came  out  of  it,  save  the  satisfaction 
of  knowing  that  if  this  redemption  had  not  been  attended  to,  things  would  have  been 
infinitely  worse. 

II.  The  bedemftion  which  is  etebnal.  Christ  entered  once  for  all  into  the  holy 
place,  and  there  he  remains  in  perpetual  and  profoundly  fruitful  mediation  between 
God  and  man.  How  different  from  the  Jewish  priest,  slaying  his  victim,  and  then 
before  long  asking  for  another  I  The  whole  conditions  of  sacrifice  and  obedience  are 
altered.  Under  the  old  covenant  the  people  themselves  had  to  provide  the  sacrifices ; 
but  now  Jesus  comes,  providing  the  sacrifice  himself,  not  asking  us  to  do  anything  save 
to  accept,  humbly  and  gratefully,  the  completeness  of  his  own  service.  We  cannot 
provide  an  eternal  redemption  for  ourselves.  All  we  can  do  is  to  escape  for  the  time, 
and  to-morrow  we  must  face  to-morrow's  dangers.  What  a  grand  thing  to  understand 
in  our  very  hearts  that  Jesus  is  emphatically  the  Redeemer  1  We  are  not  ungrateful  for 
the  temporary  redemptions  of  life,  and  the  minor  redeemers ;  but  we  must  ever  take  care 
lest,  in  our  natural  solicitude  for  these  matters,  we  neglect  the  eternal  redemption  and 
the  eternal  Redeemer.  If  we  are  safe  in  vital  union  with  him,  then  what  are  all  other 
captivities  and  all  other  losses  ? — Y, 

Vers.  13,  14. — Christ  a  self-presented  Offering  to  purify  tht  consciences  of  men. 
I.  An  argument  from  the  less  to  the  greater.  The  writer  reminds  his  readers 
of  a  kind  of  cleansing  already  practised  by  them,  and  believed  to  be  efficacious  for  its 
purpose.  From  their  point  of  view,  they  had  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  something 
was  really  done  when  defiled  people  were  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats 
and  the  ashes  of  a  heifer.  Whatever  had  communicated  the  defilement  was  thus 
removed — in  a  mysterious  way,  it  is  true,  and  so  that  there  might  be  no  visible  sign  ; 
hut  still  there  was  the  feeling  and  the  faith  that  things  were  really  made  different. 
If,  then,  it  was  so  easy  to  believe  that  the  sacrifice  of  brute-life  produced  such  results, 
what  profound  and  i  ermanent  results  might  not  be  expected  to  flow  from  the  cleansing 
application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  For  in  the  one  case  it  was  the  blood  of  a  brute  beast 
poured  out  and  then  done  with  for  ever,  available  for  only  one  occasion,  and  needing  for 
t,he  next  occasion  that  another  beast  should  be  slain.     But  here  is  the  shedding  of  the 


OH.  IX.  1—28.]  ■         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  261 

blood  of  Christ,  the  centinuoua  and  accurate  presentation  of  the  Christ's  own  life  by 
Christ  himself.  Surely  the  writer  here  is  thinking  of  something  more  than  the  shedding 
of  the  blood  of  Christ's  natural  life  on  the  cross.  He  is  thinking  of  what  Christ  is 
doing  behind  the  veil,  on  the  eternal,  invisible  scene.  The  work,  whatever  it  is,  is  the 
work  done  by  Christ  through  an  eternal  Spirit.  He  is  continually  pouring  forth  his 
life  to  cleanse  the  consciences  of  believers.  Christ's  death  was  a  passing  into  the  holy 
of  holies,  to  go  on  with  the  deep  realities  of  which  the  holiest  offerings  of  the  old 
covenant  were  only  feeble  symbols.  The  writer  of  the  Epistle,  therefore,  wanted  his 
readers  to  appropriate  the  ineffably  great  results  of  what  Christ  was  doina;. 

II.  The  means  of  appropriation.  Clearly  the  appropriation  was  by  faith.  Indeed, 
all  the  good  that  could  come  through  any  cleansing  ceremony  of  the  old  covenant 
came  by  faith — often  superstitious  enough,  no  doubt,  and  having  little  or  no  result  in 
the  improvement  of  character ;  but  still  it  was  faith.  Faith  was  the  element  keeping 
these  ceremonials  in  existence  from  generation  to  generation.  If  nothing  more,  there 
was  at  least  the  faith  that  something  dreadful  would  happen  if  the  ceremonials  were 
discontinued.  If,  then,  men  will  only  labour  to  keep  themselves  in  living  connection  with 
the  ever-loving  Christ,  whose  life  is  all  the  more  fruitful  since  he  vanished  from  the 
eye  of  sense,  what  great  things  they  may  expect  1  Belief  in  Christ  is  Christ'*  own 
instrument  for  cleansing  the  heart,  so  that  there  may  not  any  more  go  out  of  Jt  the 
things  that  defile  a  man.  What  wonder  that  before  he  closes  his  Epistle  the  writer 
should  be  so  copious  in  extolling  the  triumphs  of  faith,  and  enforcing  the  need  of  it  in- 
all  the  relations  of  Christian  life  I — T. 

Ver.  15. — The  eternal  inheritance.  I.  Conbideb  the  temporal  inheritanob.  The 
land  of  Canaan,  which  was  connected  with  the  old  covenant.  This  land  could  only  be 
called  an  inheritance  in  a  typical  sense,  for  the  satisfactions  which  Israel  was  taught  to 
expect  did  not  come  in  reality.  For  as  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  could  not  take 
away  sin,  so  neither  could  any  mere  terrestrial  possession  ever  satisfy  a  human  spirit. 
This  land  was  but  the  standing-ground  for  a  time,  the  place  of  discipline  and  revelation. 
It  is  always  necessary  to  show  by  a  sufficient  experience  and  consideration  the 
inadequacy  of  earthly  things  for  those  whose  proper  kinship  is  with  heaven;  and  the 
more  clearly  this  inadequacy  appears,  the  more  clearly  will  it  appear  that  somewhere 
there  must  be  something  entirely  satisfying.  The  earthly  inheritance  proved  to  Israel 
a  constant  scene  of  struggle,  temptation,  and  loss ;  and  if,  by  some  happy  period  of 
lull,  an  Israelite  had  something  that  might  not  untruly  be  called  satisfaction  out  of  his 
inheritance,  yet  the  day  came  when  he  had  to  leave  it.  The  inheritance  was  a  more 
abiding  thing  than  the  possessor.  Thus,  in  any  message  of  comfort  from  God  to  his 
people,  it  could  not  fail  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  best  of  earthly  possessions  fall  far 
shprtof  what  a  loving  God  intends  for  his  separated  and  obedient  people. 

II,  Thb  attainment  or  the  eternal  inhebitance.  This  inheritance  may  well  be 
considered  in  a  twofold  aspect.  It  may  be  considered  as  something  within  us,  and  also 
as  something  without.  The  Israelite  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan  would  have 
deserved  something  nearer  the  name  of  reality  if  only  the  Israelite  had  been  first  of  all 
in  possession  of  himself.  But  he  was  at  the  mercy  of  his  lusts  and  selfish  inclinations. 
Beal  self-possession  means  heart-submisNion  to  God.  If  we  would  enter  on  the  real 
and  satisfying  inheritance,  God  must  first  of  all  enter  upon  his  proper  inheritance  in  us. 
Self-«m<roi,  which  suggests  something  like  the  caging  of  a  wild  beast,  must  be  exchanged 
for  sfMrSurrender.  And  all  this  is  to  come  through  the  searching  redemption  and 
cleansing  effected  by  Christ.  Then  are  we  ready  for  that  eternal  inheritance,  which 
is  also  externaL  Christ  only  can  redeem  us  from  present  limitations  and  corruptions, 
and  how  great  those  limitations  and  corruptions  are  we  have  as  yet  no  sufBcient  percep- 
tion. It  is  noteworthy  how  the  Ktrpavis  of  ver.  12  is  strengthened  into  the  airoXirpains 
of  ver.  15.  We  shal'  enter  on  an  eternal  inheritance,  suited  to  the  spirit  of  man — an 
infinite,  inexhaustible  possession ;  where  every  one  will  have  exceeding  abundance, 
from  which  he  can  never  be  parted,  and  of  which  he  will  never  grow  tiied.  In  comparison 
with  that  reality,  the  most  real  things  of  this  world  will  thin  away  into  dreams.  In 
comparison  with  its  everlastingness,  the  everlasting  hills  will  be  as  dissolving  clouds. — 1. 

Ver.  23. — The  death  of  Jesus  the  seal  of  the  new  covenant.    In  this  passage  th^ra  ii 


262  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  £oh.  n.  1— 2& 

allusion  to  an  ancient,  cherisiied  custom  of  making  a  covenant  over  a  slain  animal.  In 
tlie  liglit  of  this  custom  probably  we  must  ezpUin  Gen.  xv.  There  Abram  is  repre- 
sented as  dividing  a  heifer,  a  goat,  and  a  ram,  and  when  darkness  came  a  smoking 
furnace  and  a  burning  lamp  passed  between  the  pieces.  Then  follows  the  significant 
statement  that  in  the  same  day  Jehovah  made  a  covenant  with  Abram.  The  idea  in 
the  English  veision  of  a  testament  and  a  testator  is  not  so  much  misleading  as  meaning- 
less, for  there  is  no  reason  at  all  why  a  testament  should  be  referred  to,  but  every  reason 
why  the  writer  should  go  on  expounding  and  illustrating  the  new  covenant  as  compared 
with  the  old.  To  us,  of  course,  the  custom  here  mentioned  is  hardly  intelligible,  but 
the  mention  of  it  would  throw  a  great  deal  of  light  on  the  subject  at  the  time  tae 
reference  was  made.  The  custom  may  even  have  been  still  in  vogue,  and  human 
customs  have  evei  been  suburdinated  to  Divine  ends.  Hence  we.  have  here  a  special 
aspect  ot  the  death  of  Christ.     It  is  presented  as — 

The  seal  of  a  solemn  covenant  between  God  and  man.  The  very  existence 
of  Christ  is  a  covenant  between  the  Divine  and  the  human.  The  glorious  things  that 
were  in  Christ  because  of  the  Divine  Spirit  dwelling  in  him  are  promised  to  us  by  their 
very  presence  in  Christ.  All  the  good  things  coming  to  Christ  because  of  his  humanity 
are  e(3[ually  offered  to  us  because  of  our  humanity ;  and  all  that  Christ  did  in  his 
humanity  makes  us  responsible  for  doing  the  same.  The  promises  of  God  are  yea  and 
amen  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  may  also  add  that  the  obligations  of  man  are  defined  and 
settled  in  Christ  Jesus.  Thus  there  is  a  covenant,  and  we  may  well  look  on  the  death 
of  Christ  as  giving  that  covenant  shape  in  a  formal  transaction.  For  there  God  gave 
his  well-beloved  Son  to  death,  the  pledge  of  all  that  he  is  willing  to  give.  And  Jesus 
surrendered  himself  to  death,  giving  the  greatest  proof  of  obedience  and  devotion  which 
a  human  being  can  give.  Christ's  death  becomes  our  death,  the  pledge  of  an  individnal 
covenant  on  our  part,  if  only  we  choose  to  enter  into  it.  The  death  of  Christ  points 
out  a  solemn  duty  and  a  large  expectation.  And  if  the  death  of  Christ  is  a  seal  of  the 
covenant,  how  much  is  the  significance  of  that  seal  added  to  by  the  resurrection  and 
the  ascension  into  glory  1— -Y. 

Ver.  28. — The  differenee  between  Chrisfi  first  and  second  advent.  I.  The  first 
ADVENT.  Here  Christ  shares  the  common  lot  of  men ;  he  dies,  and  dies  once  for  all. 
There  is  no  dying  and  rising  and  dying  again.  He  is  offered  as  a  Sacrifice  once  for  all, 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many.  And  here,  of  course,  the  death  of  Christ  must  be  taken  as 
representing  the  whole  of  his  life  in  the  flesh.  His  life  in  every  hour  and  every  faculty 
was  vicarious.  He  was  ever  striving  to  show  that  he  could  neutralize  the  consequence 
of  sins  committed,  and  prevent  the  commission  of  sins  to  come.  His  great  aim  was, 
in  every  sense  of  the  expressiou,  to  take  away  sin.  And  from  his  place  of  power  and 
glory  on  high  this  is  his  aim  still.  No  matter  how  laden  the  conscience  may  be  with 
guilt  and  the  remembrance  of  folly,  no  matter  how  full  of  weakness  the  life,  Christ  has 
all  fulness  of  power  and  steadiness  of  disposition  to  restore  strength,  rectitude,  and 
purity.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  this  is  Christ's  present  work.  Christ  is  in  his 
Church  continually,  that  his  Church  may  have  success  in  setting  him  forth  as  taking 
away  the  sin  of  the  world.  Whenever  we  come  across  sin,  in  ourselves  or  in  others,  wo 
should  ever, view  it  in  relation  to  Christ.  Then  we  shall  be  filled  with  a  sense  both  of 
responsibility  and  hope.  Sin  is  not  a  burden  to  be  sullenly  endured,  but  to  be  removed 
by  faith  in  Christ. 

IL  The  second  advent.  In  Christ's  first  coming  everything  is  connected  with  sin. 
He  is  lilted  up  to  draw  sinners  to  him.  All  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  and  all  the  agencies 
of  the  gospel  are  employed  to  persuade  sinners  to  accept  the  sin-bearing,  sin-removing 
work  of  Christ.  But  he  is  coming  a  second  time,  altogether  apart  from  sin— coming  to 
deliver  into  everlasting  security  those  who  have  believed  in  him.  The  completeness 
of  salvation  is  always  looked  upon  in  the  New  Testament  as  a  thing  yet  to  come.  The 
promise  is  of  immediate  safety,  as  far  as  it  can  be  given  in  our  present  surroundings. 
It  is  our  own  fault  if  we  are  not  safe  from  backsliding,  temptation,  and  doctrinal  error. 
But  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word  sal\ .  ii,  we  are  saved,  as  Paul  says,  by  hope.  We 
are  hoping  for  full  possession  of  every  gouJ,  full  security  from  every  evil.  When  Christ 
has  taken  away  the  tin  of  the  worli^  be  will  take  away  the  peril,  the  insecurity,  of  the 
world. — Y. 


OH.  X.  1—89.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


263 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFTEB  X. 


Tew.  1 — 19. — Concluding  Sdiiiubt  m 

THE  ABOCMENT  with   ReSPECT  TO  ChBIST*8 

Eternal  Puiesthood. 

Ver.  1. — Vox  the  Law,  having  a  shadow  of 
the  good  things  to  oome,  and  not  the  veiy 
image  of  the  things,  can  never  with  the 
same  saorifioes  yeai  by  year,  which  they 
offer  oontinnally,  make  the  oomers  thereunto 
perfeot  The  Law  is  said  here  to  exhibit  • 
ihadoa  (aKidii)  of  Ihe  good  thingi  to  come 
(rSr  iuK\6yTa>v  iyaJBuv),  vis.  of  the  "  good 
things  "  of  which  Christ  is  oome  as  "  High 
Priest "  (ch.  iz.  11),  belonging  to  the  ni\Kia» 
ald'v  (ch.  vi.  S),  iiiWovaa  otKOviieyri  (ch.  ii. 
5),  which  is  still,  in  its  full  realization, 
future  to  us,  though  already  inaugurated  by 
Christ,  and  though  we  have  already  tasted 
the  power!  of  it  (ch.  vi.  5).  Similarly  (ch. 
viii.  5)  the  priests  under  the  Law  are  said 
to  have  served  a  copy  and  thadow  of  the 
heavenly  things ;  i.e.  of  the  heavenly  reali- 
ties to  be  revealed  iu  the  "coming  age." 
To  "  shadow "  is  opposed  "  very  image  " 
(6iK(!ra),  which  means,  not  a  representation 
apart  &om  the  things  (as  a  statue  or  portrait 
may  be  called  an  image),  but  (as  empha- 
sized by  aliriiy)  the  actual  presentment  of 
the  tilings  themselves;  which  were,  in  fact, 
.  archetypal  and  prior  to  the  shadows  of  the 
Law,  though  their  manifestation  was  re- 
served to  the  future  age.  Buch  is  the  sense 
of  eixiiy  in  Col.  iii.  10,  Kar'  iikSvu  tov  kt(- 
atwrot  airiy  I  and  Rom.  viii.  29,  aviiii6p<pous 
TTjs  (iitivot  ToS  uioS.  (Cf.  Col.  L  15,  where 
Christ  is  called  elxdiv  roi  6coS  roS  aopdrmi : 
cf.  also  Cul.  ii.  17,  where  iricih  is  opposed  to 
irciim— shadow  to  body.)  In  the  latter  part 
of  the  verse,  "  they,"  who  "  offer,"  are  the 
priests  of  the  Law;  "  the  comers  thereunto" 
(oi  irpocrepxoiifvoi)  are  the  people  who  resort 
to  the  rites.  "Make  perfect"  (reAewo-ai) 
means  full  accomplishment  for  them  of  what 
is  aimed  at :  in  tiiis  case,  remission  of  sin, 
and  acceptance  after  complete  atonement. 
The  verb  TeAeioDi/,  though  variously  applied, 
signifies  always  full  completion  of  the  pur- 
pose in  view  (cf.  eh.  vii.  19,  pilSev  y&p  irt- 
Kflairev  6  vd/ios).  (For  its  application  to 
Christ  himself,  see  under  ch.  ii.  10 ;  v.  9.) 

Vers.  2,  3. — For  then  (i.e.  had  it  been  so 
able)  would  they  (the  sacrifices)  not  have 
ceased  to  be  offered,  because  that  the  wor- 
shippers, having  been  once  purged,  should 
have  had  no  more  consoienoe  of  sins  1  But 
(on  the  contrary)  in  those  sacrifices  there  is 
a  remembrance  made  of  sins  year  by  year. 
The  very  annual  repetition  of  the  same  ex- 
piatory rites  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  ex- 


pressed in  itself  the  idea,  not  of  the  putting 
away  (ieernffis,  ch.  ix.  26)  or  oblivton  (ch. 
X.  17)  of  sin,  bnt  a  recalling  to  mind  <^  its 
continual  presence.  In  the  following  verse 
the  reason  of  this  is  found  in  the  nature  of 
the  sacrifices  tht^mselves ;  it  being  impossible 
for  the  blood  of  irrational  animals  to  cleanse 
moral  guilt:  it  could  only  avail  for  the 
"passing  over"  (Trdpea-iv,  Rom.  iii.  25)  of 
line,  as  symbolizing  an  effectual  atonement 
to  come  in  the  spiritual  sphere  of  things. 

Yer.  4. — ^For  it  is  not  possible  that  the 
blood  of  bnlls  and  of  goats  (specified  aa 
being  the  offerings  of  the  Day  of  Atonement) 
Bhonld  take  away  sins.  The  principle  of 
the  insufficiency  of  animal  sacrifices  having 
been  thus  expressed,  confirmation  of  it  is 
now  further  adduced  from  the  Old  Tes- 
tament itself,  together  with  a  prophetic 
anticipation  of  the  great  self-oblation  which 
was  to  take  their  place. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — ^Wherefore,  when  he  oom«th 
into  the  world,  he  saith,  Saoriflce  and  offio:- 
ing  thou  wooldest  not,  bnt  a  body  didst  thon 
prepare  me:  In  whole  burnt  offering  and 
offerings  for  sin  thou  hadat  no  pleasure: 
Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  am  oome  (in  the  Tolnme 
(i.e.  roll)  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me)  to 
do  thy  wiU,  0  God.  The  quotation  is  £n>m 
Ps.  xl.  6, 7,  8.  It  is  entitled  "  a  psalm  of 
David,"  nor  is  there  anything  in  the  psalm 
itself  incompatible  with  his  authorship.  The 
question  of  authorship  is,  however,  unim- 
portant ;  all  that  is  required  for  the  purpose 
of  the  quotation  being  that  it  should  have 
been  the  nttersnce  of  an  inspired  psalmist. 
The  primary  import  of  the  passage  quoted 
is  that  the  psalmist,  after  deliverance  from 
great  affliction,  for  which  he  gives  thanks^ 
expresses  his  desire  to  aet  on  the  lesson 
learnt  in  his  trouble  by  giving  himself 
entirely  to  God's  service.  And  the  service 
in  which  Qod  delights  he  declares  to  be,  not 
sacrifices  of  slain  beasts,  bnt  the  doing  of 
his  will,  the  ears  being  opened  to  his  Word, 
and  his  Law  being  within  the  heart.  Now, 
bearing  in  mind  what  was  said  under  eh. 
i.  5,  of  the  principle  on  which  words  used 
in  the  Old  Testament  with  a  primary  human 
reference  are  applied  in  the  New  Testament 
directly  to  Christ,  we  shall  have  no  difficulty 
in  understanding  such  application  here. 
The  psalmist,  it  may  be  allowed,  spoke  in 
his  own  person,  and  as  expressing  his  awn 
feelings  and  desires;  but,  writing  under  in- 
spiration, he  aspired  to  an  ideal  beyond  his 
own  attainment,  the  true  ideal  for  humanity 
to  be  realized  only  in  Christ.  The  ideal  is 
such  perfect  self-oblation  of  the  human  will 
to  God's  as  to  supersede  and  render  need- 
less the  existing  sacrifices,  whieh  an  ao. 


264 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  X.  1— 3a 


fcuowledged  to  be,  In  their  own  nature, 
valueless.  That  the  psalmist  did  not  really 
contemplate  the  fulfilment  of  this  ideal  in 
himself  is  evident  from  the  penitential  con- 
I'ossions  of  the  latter  verses  of  the  psalm. 
It  is  bnt  the  yearning  of  inspired  humanity 
I'nr  what  was  really  needed  for  reconciliation 
widi  G(i(l,  buoh  yearning  being  in  itself  a 
jirophecy.  H.  nee  what  was  thus  sp  ken  in 
(lie  Spirit  is  adduced  as  expressing  the 
mind  and  work  of  him  who  fulfilled  all 
I  hose  prophetic  yearnings,  and  effected,  as 
Jlan  and  for  man,  what  the  holy  men  of  old 
longed  to  do  but  could  not.  The  expres- 
sion, "  when  he  cometh  into  the  world,"  re- 
minds us  of  oh.  i.  6.  The  word  elcrepxif-evos , 
here  used,  is  connected  in  thought  with  the 
ijica  ("I  am  come")  in  the  quotation.  Idle 
lire  tl]C  inquiries  of  some  commentators  as  to 
the  precise  time,  either  before  or  after  the 
Incarnation,  at  which  our  Lord  is  to  be  con- 
ceived as  BO  speaking.  Enough  to  say  that 
his  purpose  in  coming  into  the  world  is  in 
these  significant  words  expressed.  It  is 
noteworthy,  in  regard  to  the  attribution  of 
this  utterance  to  him,  how  frequently  he  is 
recorded  to  have  spoken  of  having  come 
into  the  world  for  the  accomplishment  of  a 
purpose.  "  Venio,  vel  potius,  veni,  symbo- 
lum  quasi  Domini  Jesu  fuit"  (Bengel), 
(See  Matt.  v.  17  ;  x.  34, 35 ;  xviii.  11 ;  xx.  28  ; 
Mark  L  38 ;  Luke  ix.  56 ;  John  ix.  39  ; 
X.  10 ;  and  especially  for  close  agreement 
with  the  language  of  the  passage  before  us, 
John  vi.  38,  "I  came  down  from  heaven, 
not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him 
that  tent  me ; "  and  John  xii.  4G,  "  I  am 
come  a  light  into  the  world.")  The  psalm  is 
quoted  from  the  LXX.,  with  slight  vari- 
ation, not  worth  considering,  as  it  does  not 
affect  the  se  ise  of  the  passage.  But  the 
variation  of  the  LXX.  from  the  Hebrew 
text  requires  notice.  (I)  Instead  of  "  a  body 
didst  thou  prepare  for  me  (irujua  KaTTiprlcrai 
/lot) "  of  the  LXX.  and  the  quotation  from 
it,  the  Hebiew  has  "mine  ears  hast  thou 
opened;"  liteially,  "  ears  hast  thou  dug  for 
me,"  meaning  probably,  "  formed  the  cavity 
of  my  ears  through  which  thy  Word  may 
penetrate,"  equivalent  to  "  given  me  ears  to 
hear,"  with  reference,  of  course,  to  spiritual 
auscultation.  If  to  the  Hebrew  verb  nyi 
be  assigned  here  the  sense  of  piercing, 
rather  than  holhmng  out,  implying  mi 
entrance  affected  through  the  ears  already 
formed,  the  general  sense  remains  the  same. 
In  either  case  the  word  xarripTlffm  may  be 
accounted  for,  as  being  a  free  rendering, 
intended  to  give  the  meaning  of  the  figure. 
But  the  substitution  of  "  body  "  for  "  ears  " 
is  not  so  easily  accounted  for.  One  conjec- 
ture is  that  some  transcriber  of  the  Alex- 
andrian translation  of  the  Hebrew  had 
inadvertently  joined  the  last  letter  of  the  pre- 


ceding word,  ^SeArjiroj,  to  the  following  word, 
wTio,  and  that  the  TI  of  CnTIA  was  then 
changed  into  the  M  of  CnviA.,  so  as  to  make 
sense  of  the  word  thus  formed.  But  this 
is  only  conjecture.  That  some  copies  of  the 
LXX.  had  aria  appears  from  the  fact  that 
the  Vulgate,  translated  from  the  l.XX., 
reads  aures  per/ecisti  mihi,  and  that  some 
manusoripis  of  the  LXX.  still  have  aria, 
or  5to.  Thus  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  a-a/ia  was  a  wronp;  rendering  of  the 
Hebrew,  however  originating,  which  the 
writer  of  thu  Epistle  found  in  the  copies 
of  the  LXX.  which  he  used.  For  that 
he  himself  altered  the  word  to  suit  his 
purpose,  and  that  the  alteration  got  into 
copies  of  the  LXX.  from  the  Epistle,  is 
highly  improbable,  considering  the  general 
accuracy  of  his  quotations,  and  his  purpose 
of  proving  his  positions  from  the  sacred 
documents  to  which  his  readers  could  refer.  • 
As  to  the  unimportance  of  any  such  vari- 
ations from  the  original  Hebrew  in  the  quo- 
tations of  the  Epistle  from  the  LXX.,  as 
long  as  the  argument  is  not  affected,  see 
what  is  said  under  oh.  i.  7  with  respect  to 
the  quotation  from  Pb.  cir.  In  this  case 
the  Tariation  certainly  does  not  affect  the 
argument.  For  though  the  word  o-S/to  is 
certainly  taken  up  again  in  ver.  10  as  ap- 
plicable to  Christ,  yet  the  argument  of  the 
passage  by  no  means  rests  on  this  word,  but 
on  ekxriiia.  This  is  indeed  a  passage  (as 
was  observed  under  ch.  ix.  14)  notable  for 
the  very  fact  that  the  essence  of  the  aton&- 
ment  is  in  it  represented  as  consisting,  not 
so  much  in  its  physical  accompaniments  as 
in  its  being  a  spiritual  act  of  perfect  self- 
oblation.  (2)  The  more  probable  meaning 
of  the  phrase  translated  in  the  LXX.  and 
the  quotation,  "it  is  wriiten  o/me  (^eypait- 
Ttti  irepl  4ijlov)  "  is  in  the  Hebrew, "  it  is  pre- 
scribed unUi  me,"  i.e.  "  laid  on  me  as  a 
duty ; "  this  being  also  the  sense  in  which 
the  Siime  words  occur  in  2  Kings  xxii.  13, 
"  Great  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  because 
our  fathers  have  not  hearkened  unto  the 
words  of  this  book,  to  do  according  unto  all 
that  which  is  prescribed  to  us  ;  "  w  here  the 
LXX.  translates,  r^  yeypofifieva  Kaff  ifxaty. 
The  most  obvious  reference  of  the  Hebrew 
psalm  is  to  the  Book  of  the  Law  generally, 
in  which  the  duty  of  fulfilling  the  Divine 
will  is  enjoined,  rather  than  to  any  pro- 
pheey,  applied  by  the  writer  to  himself  in- 
dividually. If  so,  it  is  nut  necessary  to 
inquire  what  prophecy  about  himself  David 
might  have  had  in  view  ;  whether  e.g.  Gen. 
xlix.  10 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  17 ;  or  Dent  xvii.  14, 
et  seq.  But  the  phrase,  wepl  eiiov,  docs  cer- 
tainly rather  suggest  a  prophecy,  and  such 
suggestion  is  peculiarly  appriipriate  in  the 
application  to  Christ.  Well,  then,  if  here 
again  there  is    some    variation    from    tli* 


m  I.  1—88.] 


THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS- 


26S 


originnl  Hebrew  text,  it  ii  still  inoh  m  to 
leave  the  general  argument  intaot. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Saying  above  that  Saoiifices 
and  offerings  and  whole  burnt  offerings  and 
offerings  for  sin  thoa  wonldest  not,  neither 
hadst  pleasure  therein  (such  as  are  offered 
aocord^g  to  the  Law);  then  hath  he  said, 
L0|  I  oome  to  do  thy  will ;  i.e.  he  has  made 
this  second  assertion  while  making  the  first 
also.  The  purpose  of  thus  putting  it  is  to 
show  the  connection  between  the  two  as- 
sertions ;  that  fulfilment  of  God's  will  is 
spoken  of  as  a  suftstitute  for  sacrifices,  whose 
inutility  in  themselves  had  been  declared. 
Yes ;  he  taketh  away  the  first,  that  he  may 
establish  the  seoond.  In  the  which  will  (the 
Divine  will,  willing  our  redemption  through 
Christ,  and  perfectly  fulfillid  by  liim)  we 
have  been  sanctified  through  the  offering  of 
the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all.  For 
the  sense  to  be  attaclied  to  tlie  verb  ayidCa 
see  under  oh.  ii.  11.  is  not  our  progres- 
sive lanctiflcation  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that 
ia  intended,  b  the  lukUowiag  effentAd  fnr 
"!  oriTS  for  all,  as  denoted  by  the  perfect 
participle  T]yia(Tfi4vot. 

The  remainiler  of  this  concluding  sum- 
mary (vers.  11 — 19)  serves  to  weave  together 
the  various  threads  of  the  foregoing  argu- 
ment and  emphasize  the  result. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — And  every  priest  indeed 
•tandetii  daily  ministering  and  offering 
oftentimea  the  wme  sacrifices,  which  oan 
never  take  away  sins:  but  he,  having 
offered  one  saodfice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat 
down  on  the  right  hand  of  Ood ;  from  hence- 
forth expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  the 
footstool  of  his  feet.  Thus  with  the  one 
perfectly  acwrmplished  and  for  ever  availing 
sacrifice  is  brought  into  connection,  as  its 
result,  the  fulfilment  in  Christ  for  man  of 
tlie  ideal  of  Ps.  viii.  6  (which  was  set  forth 
in  ch.  ii.  5 — 10;  see  the  remarks  there 
made),  and  also  of  the  Son's  exaltation  to 
the  right  hand  of  God,  declared  in  Ps.  ox. 
(referred  to  in  ch.  i.  13,  and  brought  fully 
into  view  in  oh.  viii.  1,  after  the  chapter 
about  Melohizedek).  Be  it  observed  that 
the  priesthood  "after  the  order  of  Mel- 
ohizedek" in  itself  implied  this  exaltation, 
which  was  in  fact  inferred  from  it.  For  the 
priesthood  after  this  order,  having  been 
shown  to  be  eternal  and  unchangeable,  was 
further  seen,  from  Ps.  ex.,  to  be  conjoined  to 
the  eternal  royalty  at  Goil's  right  hand. 

Ver.  14. — For  by  one  offering  he  hath 
perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified. 
The  tense  of  the  participle  ayiaCofieyovs, 
instead  of  fiyia<rn4vovs,  aa  in  ver.  10,  does 
not  involve  a  different  sense  of  the  verb, 
viz.  the  ordinary  one  associated  with  the 
word  "sanctify."  Wlien  it  was  necessary 
to  express  by  the  word  itself  the  accom- 


plishment of  sanctiflcation  in  the  sense 
intended,  the  perfect  participle  was  used ; 
here  the  subjects  of  the  same  sanctiflcation 
are  denoted,  the  accomplishment  being 
expressed  by  Ttrt^eiwKe  (cf.  ol  ayia^ofievotf 
eh.  ii.  11).  The  meaning  of  rereKelaK^ 
("  hath  perfected  ")  may  be  talcen  as  ruled 
by  Toi/s  ayia^oiiivovs :  hath  perfrcted  them  as 
07101,  done  all  that  was  required  for  their 
being  such,  without  any  need  of  any  further 
offering  (cf.  mpra,  ch.  x.  1). 

Vers.  15— 18.— And  the  Holy  Ohost  also 
testifieth  to  ui :  for  after  that  he  hath  said, 
This  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with 
them  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord;  I  will 
put  my  laws  into  their  hearts,  and  in  their 
minds  will  I  write  them;  (then  saith  he), 
And  their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  re- 
member no  more.  Now  where  remission 
of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin. 
Tlie  apudosis  to  "  after  he  hath  said,"  not 
distinctly  marked  in  the  G  eek  or  in  the 
A.V.,  is  denoted  in  the  above  rendering  by 

.rf^n  $aith  ofl"  before  ver.  17.  Another 
view  is  that  it  begins  earlier  in  the  sentence, 
being  introduced  by  "  saith  the  Lord,"  whicli 
occurs  in  the  quotation  from  Jeremiah.  But 
this  is  improbable,  since  (1)  words  in  the 
quotation  itself  could  not  well  be  intended 
to  be  understood  as  the  quoter's  own;  (2) 
the  quotation  down  to  ver.  17  is  continuous, 
whereas  the  citation  of  ver.  17  is  in  the 
original  passage  of  Jeremiah  separated  from 
the  preceding  one;  (3)  the  logical  conclu- 
sion intended  to  be  drawn  requires  ver.  17 
to  be  the  apodosis.  For  the  writer's  pur- 
pose in  referring  once  more  to  Jeremiah's 
prediction  of  tlie  "  new  covenant "  ia  to  show 
from  it  the  completeness  and  finality  of 
Christ's  atonement;  and  this,  he  argues, 
follows  from  this  characteristic  of  the  "new 
covenant"  being  added  to  the  previous 
description  of  it — "Their  sins  and  iniqui- 
ties will  I  remember  no  more." 

Ch.  X.  19 — END. 

HOBTATOBT  FOBTION  Of  THE   EfISTLS. 

The  great  doctrine  of  Christ's  eternal 
priesthood  having  been  led  up  to,  estab- 
lished by  argument,  and  at  length  fully  ex- 
pounded,itremainsonly  to  press  the  practical 
result  of  a  belief  in  it  in  alternate  tones  of 
encouragement  and  of  warning. 

We  have  seen  that,  even  in  the  earlier 
chapters,  hortatory  passages  were  frequently 
interposed,  showing  the  purpose  all  along 
in  the  writer's  mind.  In  the  central  and 
deepest  part  of  the  argument  (ch.  vii.  1^ 
X.  19)  there  were  none,  close  and  uninter 
rupted  attention  to  the  course  of  thought 


266 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  X.  1— S9. 


being  then  demanded.  Bnt  now,  the  argu- 
ment being  completed,  the  previous  exhor- 
tations are  taken  up  again,  and  enforced  in 
consequently  fuller  and  deeper  tones.  The 
connection  of  thought  between  these  final 
admonitions  and  those  previously  interposed 
is  evident  vrhen  we  compare  the  very  ex- 
pressions in  ch.  X.  19 — 23  with  those  in  ch. 
iv.  14 — 16,  and  the  warnings  of  ch,  x.  26, 
etc.,  with  those  of  ch.  vi.  4,  etc  Thug 
appears,  as  in  other  ways  also,  the  carefully 
arranged  plan  of  the  Epistle,  different  in 
this  respect  from  the  undoubted  Epistles  of 
St.  Paul,  in  which  the  thoughts  generally 
follow  each  other  without  great  regard  to 
artistic  arrangement.  This,  however,  is  in 
itself  by  no  means  conclusive  against  St. 
Paul's  authorship,  since  there  would  be 
likely  to  be  just  this  difference  between  a 
set  treatise  composed  fur  a  purpose,  and  a 
letter  written  currente  cdlamo  by  the  same 
author.  It  does,  however,  mark  u  different 
class  of  composition,  and  is  suggestive,  as 
fur  as  it  goes,  of  a  different  writer. 

Vers.  19 — 21.— Having  therefore,  brethren, 
boldness  to  enter  (literally, /or  the  entrance^ 
into  the  holiest  (literally,  the  holies,  i.e.  the 
holy  place,  as  to  071a  is  translated  in  ch. 
ix.  25,  but  meaning,  there  as  here,  the  holy 
of  holies)  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  which 
(entrance)  he  consecrated  (or,  dedicated,  as  the 
same  verb  iyKcuvl^a  is  translated,  ch.  ix.  18, 
with  reference  to  the  Mosaic  tabernacle)  for 
us,  a  new  and  living  way,  throngh  the  veil, 
that  is  to  say,  Ms  flesh ;  and  having  a  great 
Priest  (lepe'o  iiiyav,  not  apx'^f^'h  high  priest ; 
but  a  priest  of  higher  order  than  any  earthly 
priest ;  cf.  ch.  v.  14,  apxicpia  iieyav)  over 
the  house  of  God.  The  epithet  irp6<r<parov 
("new")  applied  to  the  "way"  dedicated 
for  us  by  Christ,  though  meaning  originally, 
according  to  its  etymology,  "newly  slain," 
is  commonly  used  to  express  "  recent "  only. 
And  so  here.  It  is  a  new  way  in  lelation 
to  the  old  one  of  the  high  priest  through  the 
veil — a  way  untrodden  by  man  till  opened 
and  dedicate  d  by  "  tlie  great  Priest."  The 
epithet  Cacrav  ("living") applied  to  the  way 
distinguishes  it,  as  a  spirituiil  mode  of 
approach,  from  the  old  one.  "Opponitur 
exanimo.  Per  prosopopoeiam  vita  adscri- 
bitur  via,  ex  ipsa  vita  Christi,  qui  est  Via  " 
(Bengel;  see  John  xiv.  6).  But  what  is 
the  meaning  of  the  veil  {KaraTrfTaa-fia,  the 
word  always  used  of  the  veil  in  the  taber- 
nacle or  temple)  being  said  to  bo'  "his 
tlesh"?  The  idea  cannot  be  simjily  that 
he  passed  through  the  human  nature  assumed 
at  his  incarnation  to  the  heavenly  throne ; 


for  the  intended  eonnterpart  to  the  high 
priest's  passing  through  the  veil  mnat  have 
bren  after  the  completed  sacrifice.  It  is 
rather  that,  at  the  moment  of  death,  when, 
after  saying,  "  It  is  finished,"  he  "  gave  up 
the  ghost,"  the  human  fleih  (which  hud 
through  all  the  ages  been  as  a  veil  hiding 
"  the  unseen  "  from  man,  and  behind  which 
Chri&t  liimself  had  "tabernacled"  during 
Ills  liuman  life)  was,  as  it  were,  rent  asunder 
and  the  new  way  opened.  And  that  this 
was  so  was  signified  by  the  rending  in  twain 
of  the  veil  of  the  temple  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom,  mentioned  by  St.  Matthew  (xxvL 
51),  at  the  very  moment  of  the  death  npon 
the  cross.  This  incident  may  have  suggested 
to  the  writer  the  expression  used.  "Qnum 
primum  Christus  per  momentum  mortis 
transierat,  prsssto  fuit  mora  virtfu  et  vita. 
Tijs  aapKis  ouToE,  carnem  mam,  qua  item 
soissa  est,  ut  velum "  (Bengel)w  "  The 
house  of  God  "  in  vcr.  21  is  a  resumption  of 
the  thought  of  ch.  iii.  1—7,  where  Christ 
was  shown  to  be  greater  than  Moses,  as 
being  the  Son  over  the  house  of  God,  having 
(be  it  observed)  been  called  apx'fpetin  ver.  1. 
(For  the  comprehensive  meaning  of  the 
expression,  not  limited  either  to  the  Mosaic 
dispensation  or  the  visible  Cliurch,  see  what 
was  said  under  ch.  iii  4.)  On  the  now  firmly 
grounded  doctrinal  bases  of  (1)  open  access 
through  Christ  to  the  mercy-scat,  (2)  his 
ever-availing  intercession,  are  built  the 
exhortations  (1)  to  confidence,  (2)  to  per- 
sistence in  faith  and  corresponding  conduct. 
Yer.  22. — Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true 
heart  in  fall  assurance  of  faith,  having  our 
hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,  and 
our  body  washed  with  pure  water.  "  Let  us 
draw  near "  (Trpoirtpx^lifBa  )  is  a  liturgical 
phrase,  denoting  the  approach  of  the  people, 
after  ceremunisd  atonement,  to  the  earthly 
sanctuary  (cf.  ver.  1,  Toiis  Trpoaepxoiiivovs). 
We  may  now  draw  near  to  the  very  heavenly 
mercy-seat,  without  any  sense  of  a  bar  to 
our  doing  so  on  the  ground  of  consciousness 
of  sin.  In  Christ  we  are  to  see  accomplished 
all  that  is  needed  for  atonement.  But  there 
•re  conditions  also  required  in  ourselves, 
expressed  first  by  the  "  true  heart,"  and  the 
"  fulness  of  faith,"  and  then  by  the  clauses 
that  I'oUow.  These  clauses,  like  wpoaepx<i- 
jueflo,  have  a  liturgical  basis — that  of  the 
blood  sprinkling  (e.g.  of  the  people  with  the 
blood  of  the  covenant  under  Mount  Siuiii, 
ch.  ix.  19,  and  of  the  priests  on  their  con- 
secration. Lev.  viii.  23)  and  of  the  ablutions 
before  sacrificial  service  (Lev.  viii.  6 ;  ivi. 
4,  24;  Exod.  xxx.  39).  Hence  these  two 
participial  clauses  are  not  to  be  scparat,  J 
tioiu  eaoli  othir,  and  seem  best  to  be  botli 
taken  in  connection  witli  the  preceding 
■n-poKrepxiifi-^Ba.  "Having  our  hearts  sprinkled 
f^om  an  evil  conscience  "  means  our  having 


CH.  X.  1— 8»J 


THIi  £PISTm  TO  TOB  H£iiiB£WS. 


267 


the  inward  eonscionsneas  of  debarring  sin 
removed  through  the  blood  of  Christ ;  the 
"  full  assurance  of  faith  "  in  the  completed 
atonement,  and  the  "true  heart,"  being 
presupposed.  The  conjoined  clause,  /ca! 
KeXoviiivoi,  etc.,  is  capable  also  of  being 
figuratively  interpreted,  in  the  seneo  that 
"  our  sinful  bodies  "  have  been  "  made  clean," 
so  as  to  be  offered  throughlife  acceptably  as"a 
living  aaovifioe,"  as  well  as  "  our  souls  washed 
through  his  most  precious  blood."  Aud  tliis 
may  be  taken  as  implied.  But  the  terms 
hody  and  water  after  heartt  and  blood  cer- 
tainly suggest  a  direct  reference  to  baptism. 
And  such  definite  allusion  is  in  keeping 
with  references  elsewhere  to  the  beginning 
of  the  Christian  life  (see  Acts  ii.  88 ;  xxii. 
16;  Bom.  vi.  8,  4;  1  Cor.  zii.  13;  Gal.  iii. 
27;  Col,  li.  12;  1  Pet.  iii.  21).  The  passage 
last  referred  to  is  apposite  to  that  before  us 
in  that  with  an  undoubted  mention  of  bap- 
tism  is  conjoined  "the  answer  of  a  good 
conscience  toward  God." 

Vers.  23—25. — Let  ns  hold  fast  the  con- 
fession (tno\oylav,  see  ch.  iii.  1,  and  reff. ; 
also  oh.  iv.  14)  of  onr  hope  without  wavering 
(a/cXiK?,  agreeing  with  "confession");  for 
he  is  faithfol  that  promised :  and  let  ns 
consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto  love 
and  to  good  works ;  not  forsakiug  the  assem- 
blinj^  of  onraelves  together,  as  the  manner 
of  some  is ;  but  exhorting  one  another ;  and 
so  much  tiie  more,  as  ye  see  the  day  ap- 
proaching. The  readers,  having  been  ex- 
horted to  confidence  towards  God,  are 
further  warned  against  remissness  in  con- 
fession before  men,  or  in  their  duties  within 
the  Church  towards  each  other.  They  had 
once,  at  their  baptism, "  confessed  the  good 
confession"  (riiv  koAV  iitoXoylav,  1  Tim. 
vi.  12).  Let  not  the  recurrence  of  Jewish 
prejudices,  or  either  infiuence  or  persecution 
from  their  Jewish  compatriots,  or  any  delay 
of  the  Parovsia,  induce  them  to  waver  in 
maintaining  it.  Some  among  them  did, 
it  could  not  be  denied,  show  signs  of  such 
wavering,  notably  in  their  remiss  attendance 
at  Christian  worship :  let  the  faithful  give 
lieed  to  keeping  faith  alive  in  themselves 
and  others,  and  especially  through  the 
means  of  the  regular  Church  assemblies. 
That  by  r^r  iwirvyayayiiv  eavrSy  is  meant 
definitely  the  actual  assembling  together 
if  Christians  for  reading,  exhortation,  and 
worship  (such  as  is  referred  to  in  1  Cor.  xi. ; 
Jas.  ii.  2,  etc;  and  described  by  Justin 
Martyr,  •  Apol.,'  c.  87),  we  hold  confidently 
with  the  majority  of  commentators  and 
with  Ohryeostom.  The  word  iTturuyayuyii 
occurs  in  the  Kew  Testament  only  here  and 
2  The8s.ii  I,  where  it  denotes  the  gathering 
together  at  the  Parouiia.  In  2  Maco.  ii  7, 
where  alone  it  occnn  in  the  LXX.,  it 
espresiei  the  Mtnal  assembling  of  people 


together,  ai  does  the  verb  tmrwiym,  t>oth 
in  the  LXX.  and  the  New  Testament  (cf. 
Matt,  xxlii.  37;  xxiv.  31;  Mark  siii.  27; 
i.  33 ;  Luke  xii.  1).  Hence,  and  in  regard 
to  the  context  as  well  as  the  etymology  of 
the  word,  we  may  reject  the  less  detinife 
meaning,  by  some  here  assigned  to  it,  of 
Christian  communion  (conjugatio  jidelium), 
and  the  explanation  of  Bengel:  "Sensus 
est,  non  mode  debetis  synagogam  freqnen- 
tare,  nt  Judesi,  quod  lihentius  facitis,  sed 
etiam  episynagogam,  ut  Christiani.  Neque 
tamen  innuitur  prsecise  aggregatio  ad  unum 
locum,  aut  aggregatio  ad  nnamfidem;  sed, 
medio  sensn,  congregatio  mutua  per  amorem 
et  communicatio  publica  et  privata  offld- 
orum  Christianorum."  The  seen  approach 
of  the  second  advent  (r^r  vfi.4pav :  cf.  1  Cor 
iii.  13)  is  adduced  as  an  additional  argument 
against  remissness.  The  word  ffKiirerf 
seems  to  imply  more  than  the  general  belief 
in  its  imminence,  founded  on  the  language 
of  Christ.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  signs  of 
the  times  were  interpreted  as  denoting  its 
approach  (of.  1  John  ii.  18).  And  it  may 
be  that  they  were  rightly  so  interpreted  in 
reference  to  the  primary  fulfilment  of  our 
Saviour's  words,  though  to  that  only,  as  the 
event  proved.  The  blending  together  in 
the  discourses  of  Matt,  xxiv.,  Mark  xiii,, 
Lnke  xvii.  and  xxi.,  of  the  times  of  the  fall 
of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  final  day,  would 
naturally  lead  Christiana  to  regard  the 
signs  of  the  first  event  as  denoting  the 
other  also.  And  indeed  the  imminence  of 
the  first,  of  which  the  signs  were  really 
apparent,  was  in  itself  a  peculiar  reason 
why  the  Hebrew  Christians  should  stick 
resolutely  to  Christianity,  for  its  own  sake 
and  apart  from  Judaism.  Else  might  their 
whole  hold  on  Christ  be  loosened  in  the 
temple's  fall.  Thus,  though  the  writer 
might  share  in  the  mistaken  view  then 
prevalent  of  the  imminence  of  the  final  day, 
his  warning,  founded  on  the  supposed  signs 
of  it,  hits  well  the  peculiar  needs  of  his 
readers. 

Vers.  26—32. —  Solemn  warning  a$  to  the 
fearful  eonsequeneet  of  apostasy. 

Vers.  26,  27.— For  if  we  sin  wilfully  after 
that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  a  sacrifice 
for  sins,  but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for 
{ixioxh,  used  here  only ;  but  4k5sx<>I""  is 
frequent  in  the  Kew  Testament  in  sense 
of  "expect;"  e.?.  (upra,  ver.  13.  Hence  there 
seems  no  good  ground  for  disputing,  with 
Alford,  the  usual  rendering,  "expecta- 
tion") of  judgment,  and  fiery  indignation 
(vu^is  C^\os),  which  shall  devour  the  adver- 
saries. The  warning  passage  thus  begun 
closely  resembles  the  former  interposed  one, 
oh.  vi.  i — 9.  Both  have  been  similarly 
misapplied  (iM  notes  on  dt.  vL  i— 9) ;  bat 


THE  EFISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREW&  [OH.S.1— 80l 


Vrth  have  the  same  real  meaning,  which  Ig 
urther  oonflrraed  by  oompariDg  them  to- 
tjether.  The  purport  of  both  is  the  hope- 
lesaness  of  a  stale  of  apostajiv  ''-om  the  faith 
after  ftill  knowledge  and  full  enjoyment  of 
privilege;  both  are  led  up  to  by  cautions 
agninst  lemissness,  of  which  the  final  issue 
might  be  such  apostasy;  both  arc  followed 
by  the  expression  of  a  confident  hope, 
fuunded  on  past  faithfulness,  that  no  such 
apostasy  will  really  follow.  The  state  con- 
templated ia  here  expressed  by  ixovalas 
aiiapTaySyrov,  a,  phrase  which  in  itself 
might  at  first  sight  seem  to  support  one  of 
the  erroneous  views  of  the  drift  of  the 
passage,  viz.  that  all  wilful  lin  after  bap- 
tism or  grace  received  ia  unpardonable. 
But  it  is  first  to  be  observed  that  the 
participle  a,nainav6}nav  is  not  aoiist,  but 
present,  expressing  a  persistent  habit;  also 
that  the  whole  context  ia  eufBcient  to 
denote  the  kind  of  sin  intended.  For  (1) 
the  preceding  verses  have  pointed  to  laxity 
of  allegiance  to  Christ,  which  might  have 
further  consequences ;  (2)  the  illustration 
of  what  is  meant,  adduced  in  ver.  28  from 
the  Mosaic  Law,  is  (as  will  appear  under 
that  verse)  a  case  of  entire  apostasy — a  sin 
not  to  be  atoned  for  by  any  sacrifice,  but 
visited  by  "cutting  off;  "  (3) the  description 
in  ver.  29  of  the  sin  intended  implies  total 
repudiation  of  Christ.  Observe,  on  ckov- 
alas,  the  contrast  to  i,Kov<ilas  a/iapriveiy 
(Lev.  iv.  2,  27 ;  v.  15,  al.),  expressive  of  sins 
of  ignoranoe  or  infirmity.  Not  such  sins, 
but  deliberate  tin  with  a  high  hand,  is 
here  intended ;  and  further,  fur  the  reasons 
above  given,  one  of  this  nature  so  heinous 
as  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  sacrifice. 
From  all  such  considerations  it  appears 
that  iKovaiws  aiiapravSmay  here  expresses 
the  same  idea  as  vapmreiriirras  (ch.  vi.  6) 
and  awoffTTiyeu  Sltt^  Qeov  ^wyros  (ch.  iii,  12), 
viz.  final  obdurate  defection  from  the 
faith.  Further,  the  previous  conditions 
for  the  possibility  of  arriving  at  such  a 
hopeless  state,  set  forth  more  at  length  in 
vers.  4,  5  of  ch.  vi.,  are  here  shortly 
expressed  by  /i«t4  t4  Ao/BeTi/  rrty  ittiyvaaiv 
T^s  dxjjflefoi,  which  is  to  be  interpreted  in 
the  light  of  the  other  passage  (see  note 
thereon).  The  consequences  of  such  falling 
away  are  diflerently  stated  in  the  two 
passages.  In  eh.  vi.  it  was  the  impossibility 
of  renewal  unto  repentance;  here  it  is  the 
absence  of  any  further  atoning  sacrifice; 
and  this  in  keeping  with  what  has  been 
now  proved  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  having 
superseded  all  others  and  been  "once  for 
all."  The  drift  is  that,  if  this  is  deliberate  ly 
rejected  after  full  knowledge  of  it,  no  other 
is  left  to  have  recourse  to.  Then  the 
immediate  mention  of  "judgment"  is  in 
kseoinK  alto  witk  the  Mnolusion  of  ch.  ix. 


(see  note  on  oh.  ix.  27),  and  Is  immedUtely 

Buggested  here  by  -rifv  vntpay  of  ver.  25. 
The  fire  in  which  that  day  is  to  bp  rf>ve8led 
-V  "  nmmiTiPTit  figare  both  in  tbc  OM 
Testament  and  the  New ;  regarded  as  Itoth 
an  assaying  and  a  emmming  fire  (of. 
especially  1  Cor.  UL  13—16).  The  ex- 
pression, irupij  ^\as  ("  zeal,  or  indignation, 
of  fire  "),  not  only  expresses  the  vehemence 
of  the  flame,  but  also  implies  the  idea  of  the 
fire  itself  being  instinct  with  the  Divine 
wrath  or  jealousy  (as  f^Aoi,  equivalent  to 
DKip,  is  usually  translated  when  attributed 
to  God),  of  which  it  ial  the  symbol  (cf.  Ps. 
Ixxix.  5,  'EKKavB^aercu  Sis  irvp  i  ^Aat  /lou: 
Ezek.  xxxviii.  19,  'O  ^\os  /tou  in  mpl  r^j 
opyijs  fiov :  Zeph.  i.  18,  'Ev  wpl  Cv^ov  avrov : 
and  infra,  ch.  xii.  29,  "  Our  God  is  a  con- 
suming fire  ").  (For  ItrBifiv  itiWoyros  robt 
ivfyayrlovs,  of.  Isa.  xxvL  11,  Z^Aoi  A^jf/erai 
Xaiv  dira(S6vroK|  Kal  ySy  np  rots  iwtyayrlout 
fScrai.) 

Ver.  28. — One  that  hath  despised  (rather, 
$etat  naught)  Hoses'  Law  dieth  without  mercy 
under  (i.e.  at  the  word  of)  two  or  three 
witnesses.  The  reference  is  to  Deut.  xvii. 
2 — 7,  as  shown  by  the  mention  of  the  "  two 
or  three  witnesses  "  (ver.  6).  The  sin  there 
spoken  of  is  that  of  one  who  "  hath  vrrought 
wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the  Lobd,  in 
transgressing  his  covenant,  and  hath  gone 
and  served  other  gods,  and  worshipped 
them,  either  the  sun,  or  the  moon,  or  any 
of  the  host  of  heaven."  The  significance 
of  this  in  its  bearing  on  the  meaning  of 
anapTav6yTtiy  in  Ver.  26  lias  been  already 
noted. 

Vers.  29,  30. — Of  how  mnoh  sorer  punish- 
ment, suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  fhonght 
worthy,  who  hath  trodden  underfoot  the 
Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of 
the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was  sanctified, 
an  nnholy  thing  (koiv^v,  a  word  oominonly 
denoting  things  un«2eaa  ;  cf.  Mark  viL  2 ; 
Acts  X.  14,  28;  xi.  8;  Bom.  xiv.  14;  and 
lupra,  ch.  ix.  13 ;  and  so  probably  here, 
meaning  more  than  common,  i.e.  ordinary 
human  blood.  If  vilified  by  denial  of  its 
atoning  efficacy,  it  was  relegated  into  the 
class  of  unclean  things  themselves  requiring 
purification.  The  word  is  used  in  opposition 
to  rrftda-Bri),  and  hath  done  despite  unto  the 
Spirit  of  grace  t  It  has  beeu  already  re- 
marked how  these  very  strong  expressions 
(answering  to  those  in  ch.  vi.  6)  further 
denote  the  kind  of  sin  intended  by  a/iapra- 
v6yTav  in  ver.  26.  Three  characteristics  of 
it  are  given :  (1)  contumelious  repudiation 
of  Christ ;  (2)  vilification  of  his  atonement ; 
(3)  despite  to  the  Holy  Spirit  that  has  been 
given  and  enjoyed.  Citations  from  the  Old 
Testament  follow,  according  to  the  general 
plan  of  the  Epistl*,  to  show  that  thm  ia  a 


OH.  X.  1—39.] 


THE  Epistle  to  the  hebrews. 


268 


terrible  m  well  af  •  gracious  sUe  of  the 
nvelation  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  es- 
pecially (as  intimated  by  the  second  quota- 
tion) that  his  own  people  may  be  the  objects 
of  his  vengeance.  Tor  wa  know  him  that 
said,  Vengeance  belongetb  nnto  me,  I  will 
recompense,  saith  the  Lord.  And  again, 
The  Lord  shall  jndge  his  people.  Both 
citations  are  from  Ueut  xzxii.  35,  36,  tho 
second  being  introduced  also  into  Fs. 
czxxT.  14.  The  first  is  remarkable  as  a 
combination  of  the  texts  of  the  Hebrew  and 
the  LXX.,  neither  being  exactly  followed. 
The  Hebrew  has  (A.V.).  "  To  me  belongeth 
vengeance  and  recumpeuse ; "  the  LXX.,  '£i/ 
r)iiipa  eK3iKi{<rc<us  ivTuiroStiira.  And  in  the 
same  form  ai  in  the  text  the  passage  is 
cited  Bom.  zii.  19.  It  may  be,  in  this  and 
some  other  cases  of  variation  from  the 
LXX.,  that  a  text  different  from  ours  was 
used  by  the  New  Testament  writers.  The 
difference  here  is  quite  immaterial  with 
regard  to  the  drift  of  the  quotation. 

Yer.  31.— It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  living  God.  David,  when 
the  option  was  given  him,  preferred  falling 
into  the  hand  of  the  Lord  to  falling  into 
the  hand  of  man  (2  Sara.  xxiv.  14),  trusting 
in  the  greatneus  of  his  mercies.  But  the 
case  contemplated  here  is  that  of  its  being 
"  too  lato  to  cry  for  mercy,  when  it  is 
the  time  of  justice."  Fearful  (the  writer 
would  say)  is  the  thought  of  being  ex- 
posed, without  possibility  of  escape  or 
of  atonement,  to  the  wrath  of  the  Eternal 
Righteousness.  The  inspired  author  of  this 
Epistle  htid  evidently  an  awful  sense  of  the 
Divine  wrath  against  sin,  and  of  man's 
liability  to  it  without  atonement.  He  felt 
deeply  the  contradiction  between  humanity 
as  It  is  and  its  ideal  of  perfection;  and 
hence  the  wrath  attributed  to  God  in  Holy 
Writ  would  appear  to  him  as  inseparable 
from  a  just  conception  of  Divine  holiness. 
For  the  more  ardent  the  love  in  the  human 
heart  of  moral  good,  by  so  much  the  keener 
is  the  indignation  against  moral  evil,  and 
the  sense  of  the  righteousness  of  retribution. 
The  existence  of  such  evil  at  all  in  the  good 
God's  universe  is  indeed  a  mystery ;  but,  as 
long  as  it  is  there,  we  cannot  but  conceive 
the  face  of  the  holy  God  aa  set  utterly 
against  it;  and  so  any  revelation  to  us  of 
the  Divine  nature  would  be  imperfect  did 
it  not  include  the  idea  which  is  humanly  ex- 
]  reused  by  sueh  terms  as  "zeal,"  "jealousy," 
"  wrath," "vengeance."  Hence  came  the  long- 
felt  need  of  some  atonement,  to  reconcile 
sinful  man  to  the  eternal  holiness.  This 
need  was  expressed  of  old  by  the  institution 
of  sacrifice,  which,  however — as  is  so  cleaily 
perceived  in  this  Epistle — could  never  itself 
be  really  efficacious  in  the  spiritual  sphere 
of  things.    In  the  atonement  of  Chriat  (if 


rightly  apprehended)  is  found  at  last  a  true 
satisfaction  of  this  spiritual  need.  But, 
man's  concurrence  being  still  required,  the 
idea  of  Divine  wrath  remains  notwithstand- 
ing, as  operative  against  such  as,  in  de- 
liberate perversity  of  free-will,  after  full 
knowledge,  refuse  to  be  thus  reconciled. 
Hence  the  awful  anticipations  of  future 
judgment  on  some,  contained  in  this  Epistle. 
The  nature  and  duration  of  the  doom  to 
come,  on  such  as  remain  subject  to  it,  are 
in  these  passages  left  in  obscurity.  'They 
speak  only  of  ^epepi  ns  4KSoxi],  an  unde- 
fined expectation  of  something  terrible.  It 
may  be  observed,  however,  that,  whatever 
be  the  force  of  other  Scriptures  in  which  the 
flrt  of  that  day  ia  described  as  eternal  and 
unquenchable,  here  at  least  the  figure  of  a 
zeal  of  fire  to  devour  the  adversaries  seems 
in  itself  to  suggest  rather  utter  destruction 
than  perpetual  pain. 

Vers.  32— 39.— As  at  oh.  vi.  9,  the  tones 
of  solemn  warning,  founded  on  a  real  sense 
of  the  possibility  of  apostasy  in  some,  are 
now  relieved  by  a  better  hope.  In  ch.  vi.  9, 
et  leq.,  the  writer  expressed  his  own  con- 
fidence in  hii  readers  on  the  ground  of 
their  conduct  in  the  past;  here  he  reminds 
them  of  their  conduct  by  way  of  confirming 
their  own  steadfastness,  and  this  with  judg- 
ment as  well  as  delicacy ;  fur,  as  Theudoret 
remarks  on  this  passage,  "nothing  so  excites 
to  zeal  as  the  remembrance  of  one'i  own 
right  doings." 

Ver.  32. — Bat  oall  to  mind  the  former  days, 
in  which,  after  ye  were  enlightened,  ye  en- 
dured a  great  fight  of  afdictions;  rather, 
conflict  of  Bufferings.  On  ^naSepTes  ("  en- 
lightened"), cf.  ch.  vi.  4,  and  what  was 
said  there  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word. 
Hero  certainly  the  context  seems  naturally 
to  suggest  a  definite  reference  to  baptism, 
as  marking  the  date  of  the  commencement 
of  exposxire  to  persecution.  But  if  so,  not, 
of  course,  so  a*  to  exclude  the  idea  of  in- 
ward spiritual  enlightenment.  "Hie  primus 
erat  ingressusad  Christianismum;  baptismus 
apud  idoneoB  salutare  medium.  Existimo 
htec  instituta  divina  etiam  in  theoria  non 
tanti  sestimari  quanti  decebat.  Apud  ipsiim 
baptismwn  Christi  sancta  ejus  humanitas 
magnifice  illumiTuita  fuit"  (Bengel). 

Yer.  33. — Partly,  being  made  a  gazing- 
Btock  both  by  reproaches  and  afflictions ;  and 
partly,  having  become  partakers  with  them 
that  were  so  used.  On  ecarpi^o/ili/oi  (trans- 
lated "made  a  gazing-stock "),  of.  1  Cor. 
iv.  9,  @4aTpov  fytirliSrifiev  Tip  K6<riiip  (col  ayy4- 
Kois  Kol  avSpinrois.  The  figure  is  drawn 
from  the  Roman  amphitheatres,  where  per- 
sons doomed  to  death  were  exposed  to  the 
gaze  and  tlio  contumely  of  crowds;  and  the 
expression  may  not  be  wholly  lij-iurative,  but 
denote  the  actual  treatment  uf  Christians,  at 


270 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


[oh.  X.  1—39 


expreBBed  by  the  common  cry,  "  Christianos 
ad  leones  I "  The  phrase,  tSv  oBtojs  iva- 
aTpe(poixh(av  (translated  "them  that  were 
so  used"),  miglit  be  more  correctly  ren- 
dered (as  iroffrpeipec-Bat  is  elsewhere),  "them 
Sliat  so  had  their  conversation,"  i.e.  manner 
of  life.  For  the  word  is  not  used  in  a 
passive  sense,  but  as  equivalent  to  versari; 
of.  Matt.  xvii.  22 ;  2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  Eph.  ii.  3 ; 
ch.  xiii.  18;  also  Gal.  i.  13;  Eph.  iv.  22,  etc. 
(ava<rTpo<pii).  Tlie  Vulgate  has  taliter  con- 
versantium;  Wickliffe,  "men  living  so;" 
Tyndale  and  Cranmer, "  them  who  bo  passed 
their  time."  But  the  A.V.  may  give  the 
meaning  with  sufficient  correctness,  the 
main  thought  being  probably  the  experience 
of  the  persons  referred  to  rather  than  theit 
demeanour  under  it. 

Ver.  31. — ^For  ye  had  compaBsion  on  those 
who  were  in  bonds,  and  took  joyfully  the 
spoiling  of  yonr  goo'ds,  knowing  that  ye  have 
for  yourselves  a  better  possesBion,  and  an 
abiding  one.  For  to7s  Seaiilois,  the  Beceptui 
has  Tors  SEfT/toTs  nov,  which  the  A.V.,  so  as 
to  avoid  the  impropriety  of  expressing  sym- 
pathy with  the  bonds  themselves,  renders 
"me  in  my  bonds."  Even  apart  from 
manuscript  authority,  Sea-filots  is  evidently 
to  be  preferred,  both  as  suiting  the  verb 
trvveiradifffaTe  and  as  being  more  likely  to 
have  been  altered  to  the  common  Paulina 
expression,  Seffiiois  /lov,  than  viee  versa, 
especially  on  the  supposition  of  the  writer 
being  St.  Paul  himself.  Thus  no  evidence 
aa  to  the  authorship  of  the  Epistle  is  hence 
deducible.  The  allusion  is  to  persecutions 
of  Christian!,  under  which  the  Hebrews 
addressed  had  been  plundered,  and  had 
succouvkI  others  who  were  prtaoners  for  the 
fait!>  ds  4s  intimated  also  in  ch.  vi.  10. 
IW'.i'.G  than  one  such  persecution  might  be 
n  the  writer's  view,  including,  perhaps, 
that  after  the  stoning  of  Stephen  (Acts  viii. 
1 ;  zi.  19) ;  that  instituted  by  Herud  Agrippa, 
under  which  James  the  elder  sufiered  (Acts 
xii.);  that  which  led  to  the  martyrdom  of 
James  the  Just  (Josephua,  'Ant,'  xx.  9. 1) 
and  others. 

Vers.  35,  36.  —  Cast  not  away  therefore 
your  confidence,  which  hath  great  recom- 
pense of  reward.  Tor  ye  have  need  of 
patience  (or,  endurance),  that,  having  done 
the  wUl  of  God,  ye  may  receive  the  promise ; 
or,  doing  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive,  eto. 
The  aorist  participle  wot^ffavres  doei  not  of 
necessity  express  priority  to  the  receiving 
(cf.  oh,  Ti.  15,  liaKpoSv/aiiras  ivirvxe)-  The 
meaning  is  that  by  endurance  in  doing  the 
will  they  would  receive.  The  full  and  final 
enjoyment  of  what  is  promised  is  still  future 
and  conditioned  by  perseverance.  Observe 
the  difference  between  the  words  KoiiiCccBai, 
here  used,  and  imTvyxiiyeiv,  used  in  ch.  vi. 
15.      The    former    (oco.    «h.    xi.    19,    39; 


also  2  Oor.  t.  10;  Eph.  vi.  8;  Ool.  iii.  25; 
and  1  Pet.  i.  9)  means  the  actual  reception  ot 
what  is  denoted,  equivalent  to  sibi  acqui- 
rers; the  latter  {oce.  ch.  vi.  15;  xi.  33;  also 
Eom.  xi.  7;  Jas.  iv.  2)  means  only  "to 
attain  to,"  without  involving  full  possession. 
It  is  not  said  of  Abraham  (oh.  vi.  IS)  that  he 
hKonlaaro,  only  that  he  kirirvxe.  So  also  ot 
all  the  faithful  of  old  described  in  the  follow- 
ing chapter  (xi.  39).  And  even  to  believing 
Christians,  as  this  verse  shows,  the  KofUitreai 
is  still  future  and  contingent. 

Vers.  37, 38. — For  yet  a  little  (rather,  eery 
liitle)  while,  and  he  that  cometh  will  come, 
and  will  not  tarry.    But  the  jnst  shall  live 
by  faith :  and  if  he  draw  back,  my  soul  hath 
no  pleasure  in  him.    In  these  verses,  afte; 
the  manner  of  the  Epistle,  what  is  being 
urged  is  supported  by  an  Old  Testament 
quotation  (Hab.  ii.  3,  4),  its  drift  being  ( 1 ) 
the  certainty,  notwithstanding  delay,  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise;  (2)  the 
necessity  meanwhile  of  continuance  in  faith 
and  perseverance.     The  quotation  serves 
also  as  a  step  oi  transition  (this,  too,  after 
the  Epistle's  manner)  to  the  disquisition  on 
faith,  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  follow- 
ing chapter.    For  the  prophet  speaks  ot 
faitlt  as  what  the  righteous  one  is  to  live 
Dy  until  the  Lord  come.    It  was  faith — a 
fuller  faith— that  the  Hebrew  Christians 
wanted  to  preserve  them  from  the  faltering 
of  which  they  showed  some  signs;  and  the 
requiremenr  of  faith  was  no  new  thing — it 
bad  been  the  essential  principle  of  all  true 
religious  life  from  the  beginning,  and  thus 
is  led  np  to  the  review  which  follows  of  the 
Old  Testament  history,  showing  tliat  this 
had  always   been  so.     The  quotation,  as 
usual,  is  from  the  LXX.,  which,  in  this  case 
as  in  some  others,  differs  firom  the  Hebrew. 
But  here,  as  in  ver.  29,  lupra,  the  LXX.  is 
not   exactly   followed.     The    writer   cites 
freely,  so  as  to  apply  the  essential  meaning 
of  the  passage  to  his  purpose.    The  Prophet 
Habakkuk  (writing  probably  during    the 
long  evil  days  of   Manasseh)  had  in  his 
immediate  view  the  trials  of  faith  peculiar 
to  his  own  time — violence  and  iniquity  in 
Israel,  and  imminence  of  judgment  at  the 
hands  of  Chaldean  conqueror!,  under  which 
he  had  cried,  "O  Lord,  how  long?"    But 
he  stands  upon  his  watch  and  sits  upon  his 
tower,  to  look  out  what  the  Lobd  will  say 
to  him  in  answer  to  his  difficultiee.    And 
the  Lobd  autswered  him,  and  said,  "Write 
the  vision,  and  make  it  plain  upon  the 
tables,  that  he  may  run  that  readeth  it. 
For  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  appointed  time, 
but  at  the  end  it  shall  sptak,  and  not  lie 
l^rather, '  but  it  hasteth  to  the  end,  and  dotli 
not  lie']:   though  it  tarry,  wait  for   it; 
because  it  will  surely  come,  and  not  tarry 
[or,  'be  behiudheud'].     Behold,  hia  soul 


OH.  X.  1—39.] 


THE  EPISTLE   TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


t71 


that  is  lifted  np  b  not  upright  in  him  [or, 
'behold,  his  soul  is  lifted  up,  it  is  not 
upright  in  him*] :  but  the  just  shall  live  by 
his  faith."  The  drift  of  this  Divine  answer, 
which  inspired  the  song  of  joyful  confidence 
with  which  the  Book  of  Habakkuk  so  beau- 
tifully concludes,  is,  as  aforesaid,  that,  in 
spite  of  all  appearances,  the  prophetic  vision' 
will  ere  long  be  realized;  God's  promises 
to  the  righteous  will  certainly  be  fulfilled ; 
and  that  faith  meanwhile  must  be  their 
sustaining  principle.  The  variations  of  the 
LXX.  from  the  Hebrew  are :  (1)  'Epxa/ievos 
^|ei,  instead  of  "It  ({.«.  the  vision)  shall 
come;"  (2)  'Edx  foroirTe^ATjToi,  aix  evSoKeJ  fi 
i/'uX'i  /"■o"  ^v  airf,  instead  of  "Behold,  his 
soul,"  etc. ;  (3)  'O  ik  SmaiSs  fiov  Ik  via-reas 
frfffcTOi  (A),  or  Si  'O  SUaios  Ik  irinTeas  fiov 
fifo-EToi  (B),  instead  of  "  The  just  shall  live 
by  his  faith."  The  variations  in  the 
Epistle  from  the  LXX.  are :  (1)  'En  fuKpiv 
Saov  iaov  (fico.  Isa.  xxvi.  20),  interpolated 
at  the  beginning  of  the  quotation ;  (2)  'O 
(pxi/iffos  tor  ipxdinevos,  SO  as  to  denote  more 
distinctly  the  Messiah  who  was  to  come 
(cf.  Matt.  X.  3 ;  John  vi.  14) ;  here,  of  course, 
with  a  view  to  his  second  advent ;  (3)  the 
reversal  of  the  order  of  the  two  concluding 
clauses,  lebx  iTrotrrelKi)Tai  and  i  Sc  Sixouos: 
(4)  in  the  Textus  Beceptus  the  omission  of 


/(ov  after  either  tliuuat  or  ir((rr««tf  (aa  tha 
same  text  is  cited  by  St.  Paul,  Bom.  L  17 
and  Gal.  iii.  11).  There  is,  however,  good 
authority  fcr  reading  it  here  after  SUatos 
(equivalent  to  "  my  Kighteous  One  ").  None 
of  these  variations  from  the  LXX.  affeot  tha 
meaning  of  the  passage,  being  only  indi 
as  to  point  more  clearly  the  intended 
application.  One  of  the  Tariations  of  tha 
LXX.  from  the  Hebrew  flilv  ilirairrc(\i|rai, 
etc.)  does  alter  the  meaning  of  that  par- 
ticular clause,  though  not  the  general 
purport  of  the  whole  passage.  The  adop- 
tion here  of  the  LXX.  reading,  and  still 
more  the  fact  that  the  following  verse  de- 
pends npon  this  reading,  is  among  the 
strong  evidences  of  the  Epistle  having  been 
originally  written,  not  in  Hebrew,  oat  in 
Greek. 

Ver.  39. — Bnt  we  are  not  of  them  who 
draw  back  onto  perdition ;  bnt  of  them  that 
believe  nnto  the  saving  of  the  soul ;  literally, 
not  of  the  drawing  back  unto  .  .  ,  but  oj 
faith  unto,  etc.  Thus,  once  more  before 
proceeding  to  tlie  subject  now  before  him, 
the  writer  is  careful  to  disclaim  any  ruul 
expectation  of  dufection  in  his  readers,  and 
with  delicacy  he  includes  himself  with  then 
by  bis  OM  <h  the  nominative  pluiaL 


HOMILBTICa 

Yen.  1 — 18. — Clost  of  tht  argument.  This  concluding  pasiage  present!  little  mora 
than  a  re-statement  of  some  points  which  have  been  already  marked  in  the  discussion 
which  occupies  the  three  preceding  chapters.  The  kernel-thought  of  the  paragraph  is 
expressed  in  ver.  9 :  "He  taketh  away  the  first "  (the  Jewish  sacrifices),  "  that  he  may 
establish  the  second"  (redemption  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself). 

I,  The  inhebent  worthlessnebs  of  the  Letitioal  saorifioeb.  (Vers.  1—4.) 
Although  these  availed  to  remove  ceremonial  uncleanness,  and  were  the  appointed 
types  of  the  offering  of  Christ,  they  were  literally  useless  in  relation  to  the  highest  ends 
of  sacrifice.  The  apostle  notes  three  points.  1.  The  Levitical  offeringi  were  inade- 
quate even  as  representations  of  the  true  Sacrifice.  (Ver.  1.)  The  entire  Jewish  cere- 
monial— ^tabernacle,  priest,  victim — was  "  a  shadow  "  of  the  coming  blessings  of  the 
gospel  dispensation.  But  it  was  "  not  the  very  image  of  the  things ; "  it  presented  only 
a  rude  and  incomplete  sketch  of  the  great  facts  and  doctrines  of  Christianity.  Take 
one  point  as  an  example.  The  victims  under  the  Law  were  dragged  unwillingly  to  the 
altar ; — how  inaccurat«  this  feature  as  compared  with  the  loving  obedience  and  the 
voluntary  self-sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  1  2.  They  were  of  no  use  whatever  for  the 
removal  ef  guilt.  The  necessity  constantly  to  repeat  them  showed  this  (vers,  1,  2). 
And  so  did  the  nature  of  the  sacrifices  themselves.  Our  reason  readily  assents  to  the 
dt'claration  (ver.  4)  that  the  blood  of  beasts  can  never  expiate  the  sins  of  men.  Brute 
nature  is  incapable  of  spiritual  suffering.  Animal  sacrifices  could  not  adequately 
refiect  God's  hatred  of  sin.  They  could  not  vindicate  his  justice,  or  recompense  his 
Law.  Such  blood  has  no  virtue  to  pacify  the  conscience,  or  to  purify  the  soul.  3.  Their 
influence  went  to  perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  sins.  (Ver.  3.)  The  divinely  appointed 
repetition  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  showed  that  God  could  not  accept  them  as  a  real 
atonement,  and  therefore  could  not  forget  the  offences  of  the  worshippers.  It  was 
intended  also  to  press  l.ome  upon  the  consciences  of  the  people  the  thought  of  tha 
accumulated  arrears  of  unexpiated  sin. 

II,  Thk  inbebkht  valub  of  the  satisfaction  or  Chbist.   (Vers.  6 — 18.)  Through- 


272  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  X.  1-39. 

out  these  rerses  two  passages  are  cited  from  the  Old  Testament,  to  illustrate  the 
contrast  between  the  legal  offerings  and  the  atonement  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  infinite 
merit  of  his  sacrifice  is  conspicuous,  whatever  the  aspect  in  which  it  is  viewed.  1. 
Ohritf$  tatiafaetion  has  shown  that  obedience  is  the  true  sacrifici.  (Vers.  5 — 9.)  To 
illustrate  this  point  the  writer  quotes  from  a  Messianic  psalm  (Ps.  xl.  6 — 8).  God  ^ 
"  delights  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks,  or  of  lambs,  or  of  he-goats."  The  legal  sacrifices 
were  useful  only  as  types  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  his  blood  is  the  symbol  of  his 
own  perfect  obedience  as  our  Sulistitute.  His  sacrifice  of  himself  was  the  offering  of 
an  obedient  will.  He  was  "  obedient  unto  death."  The  "  ears  "  which  God  had  pierced 
for  him  (Ps.  xl.  6)  were  ever  swift  to  hear  the  Divine  commands,  and  the  "body" 
which  he  had  prepared  for  him  (Heb.  x.  5)  readily  submitted  itself  to  the  Divine  will. 
In  coming  to  the  world,  and  in  dying  for  man's  redemption,  Jesus  was  "  doing  the 
will"  of  his  Father.  His  voluntary  "obedience  unto  death"  has  swept  away  for  ever 
the  Levitical  sin  offerings,  and  his  people  can  now  serve  God  acceptably  only  by 
sprinkling  themselves  with  his  blood,  and  then  "presenting  their  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice."  2.  Christ's  satisfaction  has  accomplished  the  removal  of  guilt.  (Vers.  10 — 14.) 
His  people  are  "  sanctified,"  i.e.  cleansed  from  guilt,  "  through  the  offering  of  his  body 
once  for  all."  The  Aaronical  priests  always  stood  at  their  work ;  they  never  sat  down 
in  the  tabernacle.  Indeed,  no  seats  were  provided  for  them  there.  Their  constant 
standing  was  suggestive  of  the  fact  that  the  ever-repeated  sacrifices  were  of  no  avail  for 
the  pardon  of  transgression.  But  our  high  Priest,  after  his  one  offering  of  himself  as 
a  sacrificial  Victim,  sat  down  in  the  most  honourable  place  of  the  heavenly  holy  of 
holies,  and  still  continues  to  sit  there;  His  very  attitude  shows  that  he  has  fully 
accomplished  the  enrl  contemplated  by  his  sacrifice.  His  completed  atonement,  besides 
being  the  purchase  of  his  mediatorial  royalty  and  the  pledge  of  his  final  victory  over 
his  enemies,  has  also  "  perfected  "  his  people  "  for  ever  "  as  regards  their  justification. 
3.  Christ's  satis/action  taTces.  away  the  rememibranci  of  tin.  (Vers.  15—18.)  The 
Prophet  Jeremiah,  in  his  oracle  about  the  new  covenant,  bad  predicted  this  (Jer. 
xxxi.  34).  After  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  there  would  be  no  more  need  for  the  annual 
expiatory  rite  on  the  Day  of  Atonement — a  ceremony  which,  in  fact,  had  only  served 
to  bring  sins  to  remembrance.  Now  that  the  great  redemption  has  been  accomplished, 
the  iniquities  of  the  believer  are  really  swept  away  and  put  an  end  to.  God  blots 
them  out.  He  casts  them  behind  his  back.  He  makes  them  as  though  they  had  never 
been.  And  this  obliteration  evinces  the  absolute  perfection  of  th«  atonement,  and 
certifies  the  abolition  of  the  Hebrew  sacrifices. 

Vers.  19—25. — The  great  admonition.  Having  completed  his  elaborate  argument, 
and  concluded  the  doctrinal  pait  of  the  treatise,  the  author  warmly  exhorts  the 
Hebrews  to  maintain  their  Christian  steadfastness.  The  appeal  contained  in  these 
verses  collects  into  a  focus  of  intense  light  and  heat  the  main  teaching  of  this  weighty 
look,  'i'he  paragraph  before  us  may  be  regarded  as  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  Epistle. 
It  is  also  the  key-note  of  the  impressive  representations  and  the  loving  counsels  which 
occupy  the  remaining  pages. 

\.  The  believer's  PRIVILEGES.  (Vers.  19 — 21.)  The  word  "  therefore  "  introduces 
a  brief  summary  of  what  precedes  in  the  long  section  devoted  to  the  priesthood  of 
Christ  (ch,  iv.  14 — x.  18).  The  grand  substantive  blessing  of  the  gos|  el  is  that  of 
access  to  God ;  and  this  has  been  secured  in  connection  with :  1.  An  accepted  Sacrifice. 
(Ver.  19.)  Ch.  x.  1 — 18  treats  of  this.  Jesus  has  gone  into  heaven  w  tli  his  own 
bloud,  and  has  been  allowed  to  sprinkle  it  upon  the  mercy-seat.  His  blood  has  expiated 
ttie  sins  which  debarred  men  from  standing  in  the  Divjne  pvessence;  Washed  in  it, 
the  penitent  sinner  may  draw  near  to  God  with  confidence.  2.  An  opened  sanctwiry. 
(Vers.  19,  20.)  Ch.  ix.  discusses  this  branch  of  the  subject.  Christians  are  adniitted 
into  a  far  nobler  holy  of  holies  than  that  from  which  ancient  Israel  were  excluded. 
"A  new  and  living  way"  to  the  Father  has  been  opened  up 'by  Jesus;  and  it  shall 
always  be  "new,"  because,  in  fact,  the  "living"  Saviour  is  himself  the  Way.  The 
breaking  of  his  body  upon  the  cross  was  like  the  rending  of  "  the  veil,"  for  it  opened 
up  the  mercy-seat  to  man.  3.  A  glorious  Intercessor.  (Ver.  21.)  Ch.  vii.  treats  of 
the  might  and  majesty  of  this  "  great  Priest."  Througli  the  merit  of  Christ's  blood  the 
believer  takes  his  place  immediately  in  front  of  the  throne ;  and  then,  through  th« 


•H.X.1— 39.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWa  873 

mediation  of  tha  Saviour,  who  stands  by  his  side,  he  is  graciousljr  maiutaiued  in  Uiis 
positiou. 

**  Holiness  on  the  head, 
Light  and  perfections  on  the  breasti 
Barmonious  bells  below,  raising  the  deed 
Tu  lead  them  unto  life  and  rest : 

Thus  are  true  Aarons  drest, 
•  •  •  • 

"  Chiist  is  my  only  Ilend, 
My  alone  only  Ueart  atid  Breast, 
Uy  only  Music,  striking  me  ev'n  deadt 
That  to  the  old  man  I  may  rest, 
And  be  iu  him  new  dn-st." 

(George  Herbert) 

n.  The  DiTTiBS  WHICH  REST  DPON  THOSE  PRiviLEOES.  (Vers.  22 — 25.)  These  »re 
three  in  uumber,  each  being  introduced  with  the  woids, "  Let  us."  They  deal  with  our 
conduct  towards  God,  towards  the  world,  and  towards  the  Church.  Observance  of  them 
calls  into  exercise  respectively  the  three  great  graces  of  the  Pauline  theology,  the  duties 
being  those  of  faith  toward  God,  hope  exhibited  before  the  world,  and  love  to  our 
fellow-believers.  1.  The  duty  of  Divine  worship.  (Ver.  22.)  Worship  is  the  move- 
ment of  the  soul  towards  God,  To  "draw  near"  includes  every  form  which  It  is 
possible  for  acceptable  religious  service  to  assume.  The  apostle,  taking  for  granted  that 
his  readers  appreciate  the  inestimable  value  of  communion  with  God,  indicates  briefly 
the  qualifications  and  features  of  acceptable  worship.  (1)  Sincerity.  "  With  a  true 
heart."  Our  devotion  must  not  be  feigned.  We  must  not  be  hypocrites,  or  formalists, 
or  sacramentarians.  We  "  must  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  (2)  Confidence. 
"  In  fulness  of  faith.*"  Our  faith  in  the  way  of  access  must  be  entire  and  absolute. 
The  apostle  does  not  speak  here  of  assurance  of  one's  otvn  personal  salvation.  Whnt 
he  insists  upon  is,  that  true  faith  cannot  admit  of  any  doubt  as  to  its  object — that 
object  being  the  atonement  of  Christ,  and  his  priestly  work  within  the  opened  sanctuary 
of  heaven.  (3)  A  pacified  conscience.  "Having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 
conscience."  When  the  Aaronical  priests  were  installed  their  garments  were  sprinkled 
with  blood,  in  token  of  their  acceptance  as  ministers  of  the  sanctuary ;  w  the  blood  of 
Christ,  while  it  satisfies  Divine  justice,  satisfies  also  the  conscience  to  which  it  is 
applied,  delivers  the  soul  from  the  sting  of  sin,  and  qualifies  for  the  service  of  God. 
(4)  A  purified  heart.  "And  our  body  washed  with  pure  water."  A  brazen  vessel, 
called  the  laver,  which  was  used  for  the  ablutions  of  the  priests,  stood  in  the  outer  court 
between  the  altar  and  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  So,  hard  by  tlie  entrance  of  life, 
stands  the  baptismal  font;  and  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  career  is  for  the  soul  to 
be  washed  in  the  laver  of  regeneration.   It  is  the  "  pure  in  heart "  who  "  shall  see  God." 

2.  'J  he  duty  of  public  confession.  (Ver.  23.)  It  is  not  enough  that  we  cherish  deep 
religions  convictions,  and  that  we  maintain  a  constant  commerce  with  God  in  acts  of 
secret  prayer.  We  must  acknowledge  our  Christian  hope  before  men — with  our  lips  and 
by  our  lives,  and  in  the  observance  of  the  pulilic  ordinances  of  grace.  We  must  not  be 
ashamed  to  manifest  profound  spiritual  earnestness,  even  in  the  presence  of  a  persecuting 
world.  To  confess  our  hope  will  strengthen  it.  To  refuse  to  acknowledge  Christ  is  to 
deny  him.  And  our  confession  ought  to  be  a-  consistent  "  Yea."  We  are  unfaithful  if 
we  allow  it  to  sway  to  and  fro,  even  although  it  should  expose  us  to  obloquy  and 
danger.  Seeing  that  our  hope  is  grounded  upon  the  sure  promises  of  oar  Father  God, 
why  should  not  our  acknowledgment  of  the  truth  be  always  explicit  and  consistent? 

3.  The,  duty  of  Christian  fellowship.  (Vers.  24,  2,5.)  Brotherly  love  should  prevail 
among  believers  as  brethren  in  Christ.  Especially  should  those  who  are  ci  nnected 
with  the  same  congregation  cherish  a  kindly  and  affectionate  interest  in  one  another. 
Our  Ciiurch-membership  is  not  maintained  merely  for  one's  own  personal  edification. 
We  should  "  consider  one  another"  in  the  spirit  of  brotherly  love,  and  so  that  we  may 
be  mutually  helpful  to  each  other  in  the  Divine  life.  We  are  to  take  kindly  thought 
of  each  other's  excellences  and  defects,  needs  and  dangers,  trials  and  temptations,  and 
to  minister  aid  to  one  another  accordiugiy.  And  in  so  far  as  we  realize  the  bundi 
of  love  and  sympathy  which  unite  us  to  our  Christian  brethren,  will  we  prize  such 

BXBBBW8.  T 


274  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [ok.  x.  1— 8& 

opportnnities  of  intercourse  with  them  as  the  meetingB  of  the  Ohurch  afford.  One  great 
purpose  of  our  "  assembling  of  ourselves  together  "  is  to  provide  occasions  for  Christian 
conference  and  mutual  exhortation.  It  was  peculiarly  necessary  just  now  that  the 
Hebrew  believers  should  incite  one  another  "  unto  love  and  good  works,"  for  "  the  day  " 
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  final  collapse  of  the  Levitical  system  was  fast 
"  drawing  nigh."  Tha^  event  is  now  past,  but  another  and  more  tremendous  "  day  of 
the  Lord"  is  still  to  come.  We  ought  as  Christians  to  " consider"  and  " exhort "  one 
another  in  view  of  "  that  great  and  notable  day  "  on  which  Christ  shall  come  to  be  our 
Judge,  and  to  describe  with  his  sceptre  the  eternal  boundaries  of  being  and  destiny. 

Vers.  26 — 31. — The  guilt  and  doom  of  apostasy.  This  is  a  terrible  passage  even  to 
read.  It  is  fitted  to  fill  with  alarm  the  hearts  of  those  who  refuse  to  "draw  near"  to 
God,  or  confess  his  Name,  or  hold  communion  with  his  people.  It  is  introduced  here, 
like  the  similar  warning  in  ch.  vi.  4 — 8,  as  a  motive  to  Christian  steadfastness. 

I.  The  guilt  of  apostasy.  This  tremendous  sin  is  described :  1.  OeneraHy,  (Ver. 
26.)  The  context  shows  that  to  "  sin  wilfully "  refers  neither  to  any  isolated  act  of 
apostasy,  nor  to  any  other  peculiarly  heinous  transgression,  but  to  the  specific  sin  of 
finally  abandoning  Christianity.  The  question  here  is  not  about  the  destiny  of  the 
millions  of  heathendom,  who  have  never  heard  the  gospel.  The  Bible  does  not  encourage 
curiosity  regarding  them.  The  sin  spoken  of  is  that  of  the  man  who  had  "  received  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,"  and  who  has  rejected  the  gospel  after  having  perceived  its 
beauty,  realized  its  suitableness,  and  in  some  degree  experienced  its  power.  2.  More 
particularly.  (Ver.  29.)  Saving  knowledge  centres  in  the  revelation  -of  the  three 
Persons  of  the  Qodhead,  who  are  seen  in  the  gospel  working  together  to  accomplish  our 
redemption.  So  the  apostate  is  described  by  his  conduct  towards  each.  (1)  Towards 
the  Father.  He  "hath  trodden  underfoot  the  Son  of  God."  We  can  know  and 
approach  the  Father  only  through  the  Son ;  and,  therefore, "  whosoever  denieth  the  Son, 
the  same  hath  not  the  Father"  (1  John  IL  23).  (2)  Towarde  the  Saviour.  The 
apostate  tramples  upon  him,  and  "counts  his  blood  an  unholy  thing."  The  blood  of 
Jesus  mnst  he  either  on  the  heart  or  under  the  heel.  But  the  apostate  persistently 
despises  the  new  covenant.  He  treats  its  Divine  Mediator  as  if  he  were  a  malefactor. 
He  treads  underfoot  the  precious  cleansing  blood,  as  if  it  were  worthless  and  unclean. 
(3)  Towards  the  Spirit,  He  "  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace."  To  act 
thus  is  to  deny  to  the  Holy  Ghost  the  reverence  and  adoration  which  are  his  due.  It 
is  obstinately  and  maliciously  to  reject  him.  It  ia  to  treat  him  with  contempt,  and 
thereby  "  grieve  "  him  away  for  ever  from  the  souL  Persistently  to  despise  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  to  commit  the  unpardonable  sin. 

II.  The  doom  of  apostasy.  An  awful  punishment  shall  descend  upon  those  who 
sin  away  their  souls,  after  rejoicing  for  a  season  In  the  light  and  love  of  Christ.  The 
fearful  penalty  of  their  guilt  is  represented  here  in  different  aspects.  1.  Negatively. 
(Ver.  26.)  "  There  remaineth  no  more  a  sacrifice  for  sins."  Those  Hebrews,  in  pro- 
fessing Christianity,  had  renounced  the  Levitical  sacrifices.  But,  should  they  now 
reject  the  propitiation  of  Christ — the  only  possible  means  by  which  God's  justice  can 
be  satisfied  and  man's  guilt  cancelled — what  would  such  rejection  entail?  It  woiiM 
follow,  first  of  all,  that  the  guilt  of  their  ordinary  sins  against  the  Divine  Law  would 
remain  unpardoned,  and  that  even  on  that  ground  they  must  certainly  perish.  2. 
Fositivtly.  (Ver.  27.)  It  would  also  follow  that  the  guilt  of  thuir  special  sin  ol 
apostasy  would  bring  upon  them  a  heavier  penalty  than  that  which  shall  overtake  the 
other  "adversaries"  of  God.  This  tremendous  sin  may  fill  the  soul  even  here  with  a 
horror  of  great  darkness.  It  may  destroy  happiness  by  causing  scorpion  stings  of  con- 
science. It  may  cover  the  horizon  of  life  with  vague  anticipations  of  a  terrible  eternity. 
And,  whether  such  anticipations  be  present  or  not,  there  remains  the  devouring 
"  fierceness  of  fire"  itself.  Not  elemental  fire,  indeed ;  but  spiritual  loss,  final  reproba- 
tion, eternal  despair.  The  apostate  shall  be  shut  out  for  ever  from  the  presence  of  Gud, 
and  such  exclusion  is  itself  the  hell  of  hell.  3.  Comparatively.  (Vers.  28,  29.)  Under 
the  Mosaic  Law  any  Jew  who  lapsed  into  idolatry  was  to  be  stoned  to  death,  for  "  trans- 
gressing God's  covenant;"  and  this  stern  doom  was  admitted  to  be  just  (Deut.  xvii. 
2 — 7).  But,  asks  the  apostle,  are  not  apostates  trom  Christianity  guilty  of  a  vastly 
greater  sin?  and  shall  they  not  receive  a  mucli  more  dreadful  punishment?    He  refers 


<n.Z.l— 39.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW&  27S 

tha  matter  to  the  judgment  and  coDBcienoe  of  his  readers.  To  reject  the  gospel  b  • 
moro  heinous  crime  than  to  set  at  nought  the  Law.  To  tread  nndert'oot  the  eternal  Son 
of  Otoi  involves  more  aggiavated  guilt  than  to  turn  away  from  Moses,  who  was  a  merely 
human  messenger.  So,  if  the  sentence  of  death  for  rejecting  the  old  covenant  was  a 
righteoui  arrangement,  it  is  evident  that  the  Divine  justice  must  demand  a  retribution 
still  more  awful  for  tlie  more  terrible  sin  of  apostasy  from  the  new  covenant. 

III.  Ak  assertion  of  thb  majesty  of  God's  justice.  (Vers.  30,  31.)  "  We  know 
him."  The  gospel  itsell'  has  revealed  to  us  his  infinite  power,  his  inflexible  justice,  his 
ipotless  holiness,  his  absolute  faitbl'ulness.  We  know  that  he  has  said,  "Vengeance 
belongeth  unto  me,"  and  "  The  Lord  shall  judge  his  people  "  (Dent,  xxxii.  35,  36).  We 
know  his  prerogative  as  the  Governor  of  the  universe.  We  know  that  the  principle  of 
retribution  belongs  to  his  moral  nature.  And  we  know  that  he  defends  and  saves  his 
people  by  punishing  their  enemies.  Our  nineteenth  century,  no  less  than  the  first 
century,  stands  greatly  in  need  of  laithful  teaching  on  the  subject  of  retribution,  both 
as  a  principle  ot  moral  law  and  as  a  doctiine  of  Christianity.  For:  1.  The  spirit  of 
the  time  tempts  everywhere  to  a  life  of  self-indulgence,  rather  than  to  the  Christian  life 
of  self-denial.  And  habits  of  seir-pleasing  tend  to  bring  a  man  to  the  edge  of  the 
inclined  plane  wbich  slo|)es  towards  the  abyss  of  apostasy.  "  He  that  soweth  unto  his 
own  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  2.  The  spirit  of  the  time  tempts  even 
true  believers  to  misconceive  l;he  nature  of  the  Christian  life.  Many  speak  as  if  after 
their  conversion  ihey  should  have  no  experience  whatever  of  spiritual  unrest.  They 
forget  that  it  is  not  "  the  primrose  way  "  that  leaila  to  glory  ;  and  that,  while  the  new 
life  begins  with  an  Eden  and  ends  with  heaven,  "the  great  tribulation"  comes  between. 
The  passage  before  us,  in  warning  of  the  apostate's  sin  and  doom,  reminds  us  of  the 
difficulties  of  the  Christian  life.  3.  The  spirit  of  the  time  labours  to  thrust  into  the 
background  the  doctrine  of  retributive  justice.  But  this  great  principle  is  found  every- 
where :  in  nature,  in  providence,  in  history,  in  systems  of  civil  government,  in  the 
human  mind  and  conscience,  in  the  spiritual  experience  of  believers,  and  in  the  inspired 
Word  of  God.  The  justice  of  the  Almighty  is  asserted  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament,  with  peculiar  emphasis.  Those  religious  teachers,  therefore,  incur  a  terrible 
responsibility  who  try  to  persuade  their  fellow-sinners  that  it  is  by  no  means  such  "a 
fearful  thing  "  after  all  "  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  not  sent  any  such  message.  Rather,  he  has  solemnly  warned  us  to  "fear 
liim  "  (Luke  xiL  6).    And,  if  men  do  not  fear  the  living  God,  whom  will  they  fear? 

Vers.  32 — 39. — Persuasivet  to  steadfastness.  The  latter  part  of  this  chapter,  begin- 
ning with  ver.  26,  is  written  in  the  same  strain  as  ch.  vi.  4 — 20.  In  both  passages 
a  strong  denunciatory  warning  is  followed  by  a  tender  exhurtation,  expressive  of  the 
writer's  fond  hope  that  the  Hebrew  Christians  will  "stand  fast  in  the  Lord."  The 
pathetic  appeal  contained  in  the  verses  before  us  is  based  upon  three  grounds,  belon  j,ing 
respectively  to  the  past,  the  future,  and  the  present. 

I.  An  appeal  to  Chbistian  experience.  (Vers.  32 — 35.)  The  apostle  would 
have  his  readers  remember  their  first  love,  in  the  days  when  they  became  "  light  in  the 
Lord."  They  had  at  that  time  endured  perseculinn  bravely.  After  the  death  of 
Stephen  (Acts  viii.  1),  in  the  time  of  Herod  Agrippa  (Acts  xii.  1 — 19),  at  Thessalonica 
(1  Thess.  ii.  14),  at  Rome  (Horn.  xii.  12,  14),  and  elsewhere,  the  Hebrew  belieyen  had 
encountered  the  fierce  opposition  of  their  unbelieving  countrymen  and  of  the  Soman 
autliorities.  Their  calamities  had  been  such  as  to  make  them  a  public  spectacle. 
They  had  sufiered :  1.  In  their  character,  which  was  assailed  with  malignant  scorn. 
2.  In  their  persons,  for  they  were  subjected  to  bodily  torture.  3.  In  their  property. 
They  were  unjustly  deprived  of  their  possessions.  Yet  they  bore  the  loss  cheerfully, 
being  persuaded  that  their  true  and  permanent  treasure  was  in  heaven.  4.  By  reason 
of  their  practical  sympathy/  with  one  another.  They  had  brought  to  their  persecuted 
and  imprisoned  brethren  both  sympathetic  condolence  and  practical  help.  Kow,  the 
apostle  reminds  the  Hebrews  of  these  courageous  endurances,  in  order  to  stimulate  them 
stjll  to  sustain  their  Christian  valour.  They  had  not  allowed  their  early  conflicts  to  dim 
their  spiritual  joy.  They  had  run  well  Wtherto ;  what  should  hinder  them  now  from 
persevering  to  the  end?    Why  all^w  all  their  past  toils  and  trials  to  count  for  nothing? 

II.  A>  appeal  to  Christian  hopk.    (Vers.  35 — ^37.}    This  hope  is  presented  in  s 


276  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oi  X.  1— »9. 

twofold  aspect.  1.  The  hope  of  the  promised  reward.  (Vera.  35,  36.)  Theiw  w  • 
Christian  doctrine  of  recompense.  All  the  apostles  speak  of  it  in  their  Epistles  under 
one  fonn  or  another.  No  Christian,  of  course,  can  claim  any  reward  of  legal  right.  It 
is  the  gncious  gift  of  the  God  of  grace.  But  every  steadfast  believer  obtains  it  even 
here  on  earth ;  for  holiness  is  its  own  immediate  recompense.  And  he  shall  receive  it 
ill  eternal  reversion  hereafter;  for  his  shall  be  the  inconceivable  peace  and  purity,  and 
the  inexhaustible  joy  and  glory,  of  heaven.  2.  The  hope  of  Christ's  second  coming. 
{Wee.  37.)  The  apostle  here  employs  as  the  vehicle  of  his  tlioughts  the  words  given  to 
llabakkuk  by  which  a  former  genei'ation  of  Hebrews  had  been  encouraged  to  wait  for 
tlie  humiliation  of  their  Chaldean  oppressors  (Hab.  ii.  3).  Bnt  tlie  scope  of  the  passage 
requires  that  we  refer  the  "  coming  "  here  spoken  of  to  our  Lord's  second  advent.  As 
coniiiared  with  the  endless  ages  of  eternity,  during  which  his  peojile  are  to  enjoy  the 
"  great  recompense  of  reward,"  the  intervnl  which  must  elapse  before  his  personal 
return  te  the  world  may  well  be  described  as  "a  very  little  while."  The  apostles 
always  exhibit  the  second  coming  of  Christ  as  an  impending  event,  for  which  the 
believer  is  to  yearn  and  to  make  ready.  Death  is  only  a  parenthesis.  Our  duty  is  not 
80  much  to  prepare  to  die,  as  to  cherish  "  the  blessed  hope."  From  the  watch-tower  of 
prayer  let  us  look  out  for  the  signs  of  bis  appearing ;  and  thus  we  shall  forget  onr  trials, 
and  maintain  our  steadiastness. 

"Beyond  the  smiling  and  the  weeping^ 

Beyond  the  waking  and  the  sleeping, 

Beyoud  the  sowing  and  the  reaping. 

Love,  rest,  and  borne  I 

Sweet  hope  I 

Lord,  tarry  not,  but  come  I  * 

ni.  As  AFPXAii  TO  Christian  pbinoxfls.  (Vers.  38,  39.)  The  apostle,  ia  eon- 
eluding  with  an  expression  of  confidence  in  his  readers,  continues  to  borrow  the  words 
of  Habakkuk  (ii.  4).  He  thus  reminds  them  that  under  every  dispensation  faith  has 
been  the  instrument  of  salvation.  This  great  saying,  "The  just  shall  live  by  faith," 
has  become  historical.  In  the  time  of  Habakkuk  it  marked  off  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
from  heathenism;  in  the  apostolic  age  (Rom.  i.  17;  Gal.  iii.  11)  it  distinguished  the 
pure  gospel  from  legalism ;  at  the  Reformation  it  served  to  divide  scriptural  Chris- 
tianity from  Romanism.  These  six  words  were  to  Martin  Luther  the  golden  text  of  the 
Bible.  They  sounded  within  his  soul,  first,  as  he  sat  in  his  quiet  cell  at  Wittenberg  ; 
a  lecond  time  during  his  illness  at  Bologna ;  and  again  at  Rome,  when  he  was  climbing 
up  Pilate's  staircase  upon  his  knees.  It  was  in  connection  with  Luther's  perception 
of  the  meaning  of  this  text  that  the  great  idea  of  the  Reformation  began  to  possess 
his  souL  What,  then,  is  the  force  of  this  saying  of  Habakkuk  ?  Clearly  it  is  "not 
to  be  restricted  to  the  first  act  of  faith ;  the  statement  refers  to  the  entire  life  of  the 
believer.  Although  justified  by  faith  at  the  beginning,  his  justification  is  continued  by 
means  of  his  perseverance  in  living  faith  to  the  end  of  his  earthly  course.  The  whole. 
list  of  godly  achievements  referred  to  in  ch.  xi.  illustrates  how  faith  is  the  foundation 
of  a  life  of  holy  obedience  and  of  spiritual  triumph.  The  apostle,  therefore,  reminds  his 
readers  that  they  must  persistently  "  do  the  will  of  Gk)d  "  if  they  would  keep  themselves 
from  backsliding  unto  perdition.  Only  a  life  of  continued  faitli  will  secure  "  the  saving 
of  the  80ul."  Union  to  Christ,  justification,  participation  in  Christ's  life,  peace  of 
conscience,  sanctification,  the  certainty  of  final  redemption  from  all  evil, — these,  and 
every  other  Christian  experience,  are  the  effect  of  sustamed  and  habitual  faith.  It  is 
faiUi  alone  which  brings  ns'  to  the  Fountain  of  life,  and  keeps  us  there. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOB& 

Verib  6— 10.— 7%e  imperfect  tacrificet  and  the  perfect  Sacrifiot,  "  Wherefore  when 
he  Cometh  into  the  world,"  etc. 

I.  The  iupebfect  bacbifices.  The  imperfection  of  the  legal  sacrifices  has  been 
exhibited  already  with  considerable  fulness.  In  the  preceding  verses  of  this  chaiiter  it 
ia  pointed  out  that  they  were  mere  shadows  of  the  true  Sacrifice  ;  they  could  not  cleans* 


cn.Z.1— S9.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  271 

the  offerer!^  or  take  away  tlieir  sins.  Another  aspect  of  this  imperfection  la  tinmght 
into  view  in  our  text.  These  sacrifices  are  spoken  of  as  unacceptable  to  God. 
"  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not ;  .  .  .  sacrifices  and  offerings  and  whole  burnt 
Dfferings  and  sacrifices  for  sins  thou  wouldest  not,  neither  hadst  pleasure  therein;  the 
which  are  offered  according  to  the  Law,"  How  are  we  to  understand  this  ?  Were  not 
these  sacrifices  and  offerings  instituted  by  him  ?  When  the  Divine  intention  in  them 
wa»  realized,  and  they  were  offered  in  the  true  spirit,  they  were,  undoubtedly,  accept- 
able to  him.  When  the  sin  offering  was  the  manifestation  of  the  offerer's  penitence 
for  sin  and  desire  for  fors;iveness ;  when  the  burnt  offering  symbolized  the  self-consecra- 
tion of  the  offerer  to  Ood,  and  the  meat  offering  was  the  spontaneous  tribute  of  a 
thankful  heart  to  the  Giver  of  all  good,  then  they  were  well  pleasing  to  God.  But 
when  they  were  offered  as  though  the  offering  of  them  were  meritorious  on  the  part  of 
the  offerers,  or  as  substitutes  for  personal  obedience  and  service,  they  were  not  acceptable 
unto  God.  This  is  the  aspect  in  which  they  are  introduced  in  our  text^the  offering 
of  sacrifices  as  contrasted  with  the  rendering  of  willing  obedience  to  the  will  of  God. 
He  has  explicitly  and  repeatedly  declared  in  the  Scriptures  that  such  sacrifices  he  will 
not  accept  (cf  1  Sam.  xv.  22 ;  Ps.  1.  8—14 ;  li.  16—19 ;  Prov.  xxi.  3  ;  Isa.  i.  11—17 ; 
Jer.  vii.  21—23;  Hos.  vi.  6;  Micah  vi.  6—8;  Matt.  ix.  13;  Mark  xii.  33).  The 
principle  is  applicable  still.  God  will  not  accept  our  professions,  praiAics,  prayers,  or 
gifts  as  substitutes  for  faith,  love,  obedience,  and  self-consecration, 

IL  The  pekfect  Sacrifice.   "  Wherefore  when  he  cometh  into  the  world,  he  saith," 
etc.    The  per'ection  of  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  is  here  seen  in  several  particulars. 

1.  It  originated  with  Ood  the  Father.  "  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not,  but 
a  body  didst  thou  prepare  fur  me.  ...  He  taketh  away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish 
the  second."  Not  only  the  sacrifice  of  the  Christ,  but  his  whole  mission,  was  the  out- 
working of  the  counsel  and  plan  of  God.  The  Saviour  himself  was  the  great  Gift  of 
the  heavenly  Father  to  our  lost  world.     All  our  blessings  flow  from  the  throne  of  God. 

2.  It  expresses  the  most  perfect  obedience.  (1)  Obedience  in  the  highest  spirit.  With 
perfect  voluntariness  our  Lord  did  the  will  of  God  the  Father.  Freely  he  entered  uixm 
and  fulfilled  his  great  redemptive  mission.  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  am  come  to  do  thy 
will,  0  God."  More  forcibly  i.s  this  aspect  of  Christ's  work  expressed  in  the  psalm  from 
which  our  text  is  quoted :  "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God  ;  yea,  thy  Law  is  within 
my  heart."  "  Jesus  saith.  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish 
his  work."  "  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  th^  will  of  him 
that  sent  me."  He  found  deepest  and  purest  joy  in  doing  the  holy  will  of  God.  His 
own  will,  his  entire  being,  was  in  beautiful  and  blessed  accord  with  the  will  of  his 
Father.  His  obedience  was  not  in  word  and  action  only,  hut  in  thought,  feeling,  and 
volition.  In  the  sight  of  God  the  obedience  of  a  moral  being  is  never  true  except  it  be 
voluntary.  (2)  Obedience  in  the  fullest  extent.  Our  Lord  "fulfilled  all  righteous- 
ness." But  did  his  obedience  iitclude  suffering  and  sacrifice?  Our  text  returns  a 
decisive  reply.  "  A  body  didst  thou  prepare  for  me.  I  am  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God. 
In  which  will  we  have  been  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ 
once  for  all."  The  will  of  the  Father  included  the  suffering  and  death  of  the  Son  as  a 
sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  On  this  point  the  testimony  of  the  sacred  Scriptures 
is  clear  and  conclusive.  "  The  Son  of  man  came  to  give  his  life  a  Ransom  for  many  " 
(Matt.  XX.  28;  see  also  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  42;  Luke  xxiv.  26,  27,  44—47).  He  was 
"  obedient  even  unto  death,  yea,  the  death  of  the  cross."  But  even  here  it  was  not  the 
mtensity  of  the  sufferings  which  made  the  sacrifice  acceptable  unto  God,  but  the  piety 
of  the  spirit  in  which  they  were  endured.  The  sacrifice  was  perfect  because  it  was 
offered  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  the  Father."  "  It  is  monstrous  to  supjiose,"  said 
Dr.  Robert  Vaughan,  "  that  the  Deity  could  be  pleased  with  mere  suffering.  It  is  the 
spiritual  ea»ence  in  the  atonement  that  makes  it  to  be  what  it  is  to  us.  it  may  be 
accepted  is  certain,  that  in  the  gift  of  the  Son  of  God  we  have  the  brightest  isanifesta- 
tion  of  t'le  love  of  the  Father ;  and  that  in  the  willing  humiliation  and  grief  of  the 
Redeemer  we  have  the  tenderest  revelation  of  pity  towards  the  evil  and  unthankful, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  noblest  act  of  worship  ever  rendered  to  the  good  and  the 
holy.  In  this  sense  it  is  truly  by  the  borrows,  the  death,  the  cross  of  Christ,  that  we 
have  salvation.  It  has  been  his  will  to  become  thus  acquainted  with  grief,  and  to  die 
— to  die  the  death  of  the  cross — that  we  might  be  saved."    The  perfection  of  the 


278  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oh.  1. 1— 3a 

Sarlour's  lacrifice  was  In  the  Tolnntary  and  entire  surrender  of  himself  to  Ood. 
3.  It  aecomplishei  it$  Divine  design.  "  In  the  which  will  we  have  been  sanctified 
throu°;h  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all."  Ebrard  interprets 
sanctification  here  as  involving  "  both  justification  and  sanctification."  But  the  nse  of 
the  perfect  participle,  "  we  have  been  sanctified,"  "  expresses  not  our  subjective  sanctifi- 
cation, but  our  objective  reception  into  true  relationship  to  God,  and  into  the  actual 
fellowship  of  the  members  of  the  people  of  Ood  as  '  the  saints '  (ch.  vi.  10)  "  (Lange). 
By  his  one  great  offering  of  himself  our  Lord  has  provided  all  that  man  needs  for  tiu. 
forgiveness  of  his  sins, for  his  acceptance  with  God,  and  for  the  purifying  and  perfecting 
of  his  being.  Christ's  work  is  finished  and  perfect.  To  it  nothing  can  be  added  ;  in  it 
no  improvement  can  be  made.  Man's  great  business  in  relatioa  to  it  is  to  accept  of  it, 
and  become  perfected  (ver.  14)  through  it. — W.  J. 

Vers.  12, 13. — TTie  mcrifice  and  tovereignty  of  Ckriit.  "  But  this  Man,  after  he  had 
offered  one  sacrifice,"  etc. 

I.  The  sacbifiob  offered  by  ohbibt.  L  Edf-sacrifice.  The  Jewish  priests  ofTered 
goats,  lambs,  etc.  But  Jesus  Christ  "  gave  himself."  The  whole  of  his  life  upon  earth 
was  a  sacrifice.  The  sufferings  of  the  closing  scenes  were  sacrificial.  His  death  was 
sacrificial.  In  all  he  acted  with  entire  spontaneity  (John  x.  17,  18).  All  was  the 
outcome  of  the  infinite  love  wherewith  he  loved  us.  It  is  of  the  very  nature  of  love  to 
sacrifice  self  for  the  beloved.  I^o  sacrifice  is  so  Divine  as  that  of  self.  "  Greater 
love  hath  no  man  than  this,"  etc.  (John  xv.  13).  2.  Self -sacrifice  for  sin.  The  death 
of  Jesus  was  neither  (1)  a  mere  martyrdom ;  nor  (2)  an  offering  to  pacify  the  wrath  of 
God ;  but  (3)  it  was  a  "  sacrifice  for  sins."  "  He  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself."  "Christ  also  suffered  for  sins  once,  the  righteous  for  the 
unrighteous,"  etc.  3.  Self-sacrifice  for  sin  of  perpetual  efficacy,  "  He  offered  one 
sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever."  Christ's  sacrifice  was  offered  once  for  all.  It  needs  no 
repetition.  It  is  completely  efficacious  for  all  sins  of  all  men  for  ever  (cf.  ch.  ix. 
25 — 28).  It  seems  to  us  that  to  speak  of  "offering  Christ  upon  the  altar"  in  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  utterly  unscriptural,  and  a  reflection  on  the  sufficiency  of  the  "  one 
sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever  "  which  our  Lord  offered. 

n.  The  position  occupied  by  Christ.  "  Sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  Ood." 
This  position  is  suggestive  of:  1.  Best.  The  sitting  down  is  opposed  to  the  standing 
of  the  preceding  verse.  Christ's  sacrificial  work  is  completed.  The  sufferings  of  his 
earthly  life  are  over  for  ever.  The  toil  and  conflict  are  all  past.  He  has  finished 
the  work  that  was  given  him  to  do  (cf.  ch.  i.  3).  2.  J^onnur.  "  The  right  hand " 
is  the  position  of  honour.  He  is  "crowned  with  glory  and  honour"  (ch.  ii.  9;  cf. 
Phil.  ii.  6 — 11).  The  glory  of  redemption  is  his.  3.  His  exaltation  is  a  guarantee  that 
all  who  are  one  with  him  in  sacrifice  shall  he  one  with  him  in  sovereignty.  There  is  a 
cross  for  each  of  his  discijiles ;  there  is  also  a  crown  for  every  one  who  faithfully 
bears  that  cross  (cf.  Matt.  xvi.  24 ;  John  xii.  26 ;  Kom.  viii.  17 ;  Eev.  iii.  21). 

III.  The  expectation  entertained  by  Christ.  "  From  henceforth  expecting 
till  his  enemies  be  made  the  footstool  of  his  feet."  The  foes  of  oar  Lord  are  rebellious 
angels  and  rebellious  men.  All  persons  and  all  thngs' which  are  opposed  to  his 
character  and  sovereignty  are  his  enemies.  Ignorance,  the  darkness  of  the  mind,  is 
opposed  to  him  as  "  the  Light "  and  "  the  Truth."  Tyranny  is  opposed  to  him  as  the 
great  Emancipator.  He  proclaimed  the  universal  brotherhood  of  men.  Sin  is  opposed 
to  liim  as  the  Saviour  and  the  Sovereign  of  men.  Death  is  opposed  to  him  as  the  Life 
and  the  Lifegiver.  All  these  lie  will  completely  and  for  ever  vanquish.  "He  must 
reign  till  he  hath  put  all  his  enemies  under  his  feet."  Let  us  endeavour  to  realize  the 
certainty  of  this.  1.  History  points  to  it.  During  nearly  nineteen  centuries  the  spirit 
and  the  principles  of  Christ  have  been  advancing  and  gaining  strength  in  the  world. 
Tyrannical  despotisms  passing  away ;  free  governments  spreading ;  slavery  losing  its 
place  and  power;  liberty  and  the  recognition  of  human  brotherhood  constantly 
growing;  cruelties  and  oppressions  ever  decreasing;  Christian  charities  and  gene- 
rosities ever  increasing ;  the  night  of  ignorance  receding ;  the  day  of  intelligence 
advancing  and  brightening.  The  past  is  prophetic  of  the  complete  triumph  of  Christ. 
2.  The  spirU  of  the  age  points  to  it.  There  is  much  of  evil  in  the  age ;  but  tiiere  are 
also  uany  good  and  hope-inspiring  things.     The  age  is  one  of  broadening  freedom. 


CH.  X.1— 89.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWa  t79 

earnest  inquiry,  growing  intelligence,  and  many  and  ever-increasing  charities.  All 
these  are  in  harmony  with  Christianity,  results  of  Christianity ;  and  as  men 
advance  in  them  they  will  be  the  more  fitted  and  disposed  to  embrace  Christianity. 
8.  God's  Word  assures  it.  (See  Ps.  ii.  8 ;  Ixxii.  8—17 ;  Dan.  vii.  13, 14.)  4.  Christ  is 
waiting  for  it.  "  From  henceforth  expecting  " — implying  his  nndoubted  assurance  of 
it.    He  cannot  he  disappointed. — W.  J. 

Ver.  18. — Complete  forgivenesg  through  the  perfect  Sacriflee.  "  Now  where  remission 
of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin,"    Our  text  authorizes  three  observations. 

L  That  the  Saviour's  baceifiob  fob  bin  was  perfect.  This  is  implied  in  the 
text.  It  is  stated  more  than  once  in  the  preceding  argument.  To  prove  it  was  one  of 
the  great  objects  of  the  doctrinal  portion  of  this  letter.  It  has  already  come  under 
our  notice  in  several  of  our  homilies  (see  on  ch.  vii.  26 — 28 ;  iz.  11, 12 ;  ix.  18,  14 ; 
X.  6—10). 

XL  That  the  fosqitekess  of  sin  TasonoH  the  Savioub's  saobifiob  ib  ookflbte. 
This  completeness  is  exhibited  by  the  writer :  1.  £y  comparing  it  with  the  partial 
putting  away  of  sins  obtained  through  the  legal  sacrifices.  "  Sacrifices  which  can  never 
take  away  rins"  (ver.  11).  The  word  employed  here  signifies  "to  take  clean  away 
(of.  Acts  xxvii.  20),  i.e.  to  put  off  like  the  garment  which  clings  to  the  person,  or 
the  ring  on  the  finger;  as,  for  instance,  the  beseting  sin  of  xii.  1,  or  the  besetting 
infirmity  of  ver.  3.  The  sacred  writer  does  not  mean  to  say  that  sins  were  not 
forgiven  to  sacrificial  worshiiipers  under  the  Law ;  but  that  the  legal  sacrifices  had  no 
inward  spiritual  power  to  give  peace  to  the  conscience,  or  any  assured  sense  of 
^rdon,  purity  to  the  heart,  or  any  really  new  beginning  of  spiritual  life  (ch.  iz.  9). 
With  these  in  their  subject-matter  and  their  inadequacy,  ever  similar  and  oft-repeated 
sacrifices,  he  contrasts  (ver.  12)  the  'one  sacrifice  for  siue'  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  no 
other  than  himself"  (Delitzsch).  And  Alford,  "  The  (legal)  sacrifice  might  bring 
sense  of  partial  forgiveness ;  but  it  could  never  denude  tiie  offerer  of  sinfulness — strip 
off  and  take  away  his  guilt."  But  through  the  sacrifice  of  the  Christ  sin  is  really  taken 
away.  He  who  heartily  believes  in  him  is  reconcilrd  unto  Grod,  receives  absolute  and 
full  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  is  inspired  by  a  new  and  holy  affection,  even  supreme  love 
to  God.  And  this  affection  is  the  mightiest  antagonist  of  sin.  He  who  is  inspired  by 
it  is  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcomes  evil  with  good.  2.  By  the  repressions  which 
are  used  to  set  it  forth.  "  Their  4ns  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more  "  (see 
our  remarks  on  ch.  viii.  12).  Here  is  the  greatest  encouragement  to  sinners  to  seek 
forgiveness  from  God.  "There  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayest  l)e  feared. 
With  the  Lord  there  is  mercy,  and  with  him  is  plenteous  redemption."  "Let  the 
wiclsed  forsake  his  way,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  7). 

III.  That  the  Saviour's  sacrifice  will  neveb  be  bepbated.  "Now  where 
remission  of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin."  Being  perfect  in  itself  and  in 
its  efficacy,  his  sacrifice  needs  no  repetition  (see  remarlss  on  this  in  our  homilies  on  ch. 
vii.  26— S8  ;  ix.  27,  28 ;  x.  5—10). 

Learn  the  folly  of  looking  for  other  and  more  effective  means  of  salvation.  The 
grandest  and  most  convincing  proof  of  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us  has  been  given 
in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  No  greater  sacrifice,  no  more  constraining  influence,  ii 
possible.    Let  us  accept  the  perfect  Sacrifice,  and  the  all-su£5cient  Saviour.— W.  J. 

Vers.  19 — i2.—The  Christian's  access  to  the  holy  place.  "  Having  therefore,  brethren, 
boldness  to  enter  into,"  etc.  Hero  the  sacred  wiiier  enters  upon  the  last  great  division 
of  the  Epistle.  Having  closed  the  argumentative  portion,  he  opens  the  hortatory  and 
admonitory  part  of  his  work.  Our  text  is  an  exhortation  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  great 
privilege  of  access  to  the  presence  of  God  through  the  blood  of  Jesus.    We  have — 

L  A  DECiiABATiON  of  CHRISTIAN  PBiTii^EaE.  1.  What  the  privilege  is  in  itself. 
It  is  twofold.  (1)  The  right  of  approach  unto  the  presence  of  God.  We  may 
"  enter  into  the  holy  place."  There  is  a  reference  here  to  the  entrance  of  the  high 
priest  into  the  holy  of  holies  under  the  Mosaic  economy.  The  holy  place  in  the  text 
is  the  Divine  sanctuary,  "the  place  of  God's  essential  presence."  We  have  the 
privilege  of  access  into  his  presence.  We  have  this  at  present  in  prayer.  Even  now 
in  prayer,  and   spiritually,  we  may    "  reach   the  inmost    lacesses  of  the  Divine 


280  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  x.  1—39. 

sanctuary,  the  very  heart  of  God."  And  we  may  do  this  without  the  intervention 
ot  any  human  priesthood,  or  the  presentation  of  any  material  siicrifice.  Hereafter 
we  may  enter  into  his  presence  in  person.  Already  our  Lord  is  there.  And  ha 
prayed  for  his  disciples,  "  Father,  I  will  that  where  I  am,  they  also  may  bo  with 
lue."  Admission  into  the  manifested  presence  of  God  is  the  exalted  privilege  await- 
ing every  trne  Christian  in  the  future.  "We  shall  see  him  even  as  he  is." 
"  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness,"  etc.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy,'' 
etc.  (2)  Confidence  in  ajiproaching  the  presence  of  God.  We  have  "  boldness  to  enter 
into  the  holy  place."  This  boldness  is  not  rashness,  or  Irreverence,  or  unreverence. 
It  is  rather  a  holy  freedom  of  access  to  God  because  of  our  assurance  that  we  shall  be 
graciously  received  by  him.  See  this  in  the  exercise  of  prayer.  We  may  fireely 
express  our  wants  and  wishes  to  our  heavenly  Father ;  for,  being  our  Father,  he  will 
not  resent  our  filial  confidence,  but  will  welcome  us  the  more  because  of  it.  2.  How 
the  privilege  has  been  obtained/or  ut.  "  By  the  blood  of  Jesug."  It  ii  by  the  tacrifice 
of  Christ  that  we  have  the  light  of  access  to  the  presence  of  God.  And  it  ia  by 
the  infinite  love  of  God  manifested  in  that  sacrifice  that  we  have  confidence  In 
availing  ourselves  of  this  right.  Jn  a  word,  this  great  privilege  has  been  obtained 
for  us  through  the  mediation  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  This  is  here  represented 
as  a  way:  '"By  the  way  which  he  dedicated  for  us,  a  new  and  living  way,"  etc. 
The  description  is  instructive.  (1)  The  characteristics  of  the  way.  It  is  a  liew  way ; 
t.e.  newly  made,  recent,  or  newly  opened.  Truly  and  beautifully  Stier  says,  "No 
believer  under  the  Old  Testament  dared  or  could,  though  under  a  dispensation  of 
preparatory  grace,  approach  God  so  freely  and  openly,  so  fearlessly  and  joyfully,  eo 
closely  and  intimately,  as  we  now,  who  come  to  the  Father  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
his  Son."  It  is  a  livitifj  way.  "The  way  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment was  simply  a  lifeless  pavement  trodden  by  the  high  priest,  and  by  him 
alone;  the  way  opened  by  Jesus  Christ  is  one  that  really  leads  and  carries  all 
who  enter  it  into  the  heavenly  rest,  being.  In  fact,  the  reconciliation  of  mankind  with 
God,  once  and  for  ever  eflected  by  him  through  his  ascension  to  the  Father — 'a  living 
way,'  because  one  with  the  living  person  and  abiding  work  of  Jesus  Christ "  ^elitzsch). 
"Jesus  saith,  I  am  the  Way,"  etc.  (cf.  John  xiv.  1 — 6).  (2)  The  inauguration  of  this 
way.  "  Which  he  dedicated  for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh."  There 
is  a  comparison  between  the  flesh  of  our  Saviour  and  the  veil  which  separated  the  most 
holy  from  the  holy  place.  "  While  he  was  with  us  here  below,"  says  Delitzsch, "  the 
weak,  limit-bound,  and  mortal  flesh,  which  he  had  assumed  for  our  sakes,  hung  like  a 
curtain  between  him  and  the  Divine  sanctuary  into  which  he  would  enter ;  and  in 
order  to  such  entrance,  this  curtain  had  to  be  withdrawn  by  death,  even  as  the  high 
priest  had  to  draw  aside  the  temple  veil  in  order  to  make  bis  entry  to  the  holy  of 
holies.*  In  his  death  our  Lord  put  off  the  weak,  mortal  flesh ;  and  at  his  death  "  the 
veil  of^the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,"  laying  open  the  holy 
of  holies.  Dying,  our  Lord  laid  aside  those  conditions  of  body  which  could  not  be  taken 
into  heaven  itself,  and  removed  the  barriers  which  kept  us  from  God  (cf.  Col.  i.  21,  22). 
(3)  The  encouragement  to  tread  this  way.  "  And  having  a  great  Priest  over  the  liouse 
of  God."  The  description  is  suggestive.  "  A  great  Priest."  One  who  is  both  Priest 
and  King ;  "  a  royal  Priest  and  priestly  King."  He  is  "  over  the  house  of  God,"  »a 
the  Church ;  the  one  great  communion  of  saints  both  in  heaven  and  upon  earth ;  the 
Chiuch  triumphant  above  and  the  Church  militant  below.  Here  is  encouragement  to 
tread  the  new  and  living  way.  Our  great  Priest  has  trod  the  way  before  us.  He 
has  entered  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  and  abides  in  the  glorious  and  blessed  Presence. 
He  is  there  on  our  behalf;  as  our  Bepresentative,  as  our  Forerunner,  and  as  an  attrac- 
tion to  draw  his  people  thither  also. 

II.  An  exhobtatiom  to  avail  odrselveb  op  this  pbivileob.  **  Let  ui  draw  near  with 
a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith,"  etc.  Consider  how  we  are  to  avail  ourselves 
of  this  privilege.  L  With  perfect  tineerity.  "  With  a  true  heart."  A  heart  free  from 
hypocrisy  and  from  self-deception.  "  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  ihey  that  worship  him  must 
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  2.  With  asswed  confidence.  "  In  full  assurance  of 
faith."  Not  questioning  our  right  of  access,  or  the  certainty  of  our  gracious  acceptance, 
through  Christ.  Not  with  divided  confidence,  but  "infulnessoffaith"in Christ,  The 
filll  undivided  faith  is  required^  as  Ebrard  says, "  not  •  faith  such  m  (he  readerf  of  the 


(ni.z.1— S9.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW*  281 

Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  bad,  who  to  the  questions,  '  Is  Jesus  the  Messiah  ?  Is  he  the 
Son  of  God  ? '  replied  in  the  affirmative  indeed  with  head  and  mouth,  but  yet  were  not 
satisfied  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  but  thought  it  necessary  still  to  lean  on  the 
crutches  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices,  and  on  these  crutches  would  limp  Into  heaven,"  We 
fear  that  there  is  much  of  this  divided  faith  at  present,  or  at  least  a  great  lack 
of  "fulness  of  faith"  in  the  Saviour.  The  faith  of  some  is  divided  between  the  Christ 
and  the  Church,  or  some  human  priesthood ;  others,  between  the  Christ  and  the  sanc- 
tions of  reason  or  philosophy  ;  and  others,  between  the  Christ  and  what  they  conceive 
to  be  their  own  personal  merits.  If  we  would  draw  near  to  God  acceptably,  we  must 
do  so  "  in  full  assurance  of  faith  "  in  our  great  Priest  as  the  only  and  all-sufficient 
Mediator.  8.  With  purity  of  heart  and  life.  "  Having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from 
an  evil  conscience,  and  our  body  waslied  with  pure  water."  There  is  a  reference 
here  to  the  Levitical  purifications  (cf.  Exod.  xxix.  21 ;  Lev.  viii.  30 ;  xvi.  4,  24 ;  ch. 
ix.  13,  14,  21,  22  ;  1  Pet.  L  2).  And  in  the  last  clause  of  the  text  there  is  probably 
a  reference  to  Christian  baptism,  which  is  symbolic  of  spiritual  cleansing  (cf.  Acts 
xxii.  16).  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  to  approach  Gud  acceptably  we  must  be 
morally  pure  in  heart  and  in  action.  But  "  who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart 
clean,  I  am  pure  firom  my  sin?"  And  so  we  draw  near  to  God  at  present  trusting 
in  the  Christ  for  pardon  and  for  purity.  Through  him  we  are  justified  before  God 
by  faith,  and  have  daily  cleansing  for  daily  impurities.  And  hereafter  we  shall  draw 
near  to  his  blessed  presence  "  haying  washed  our  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  shall  appear  before  him  as  members  of  "  a  glorious  Church, 
not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  holy  and  without  blemish." 

Conclusion.  1.  How  great  are  our  privileges  of  present  access  to  God  in  prayer, 
and  hope  of  future  approach  to  him  in  person!  2.  How  solemn  are  our  obligations  to 
avail  ourselves  of  our  privileges,  and  to  walk  worthily  of  them !— W.  J. 

Ver.  2^.— Christian  fidelity,  "  Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith,"  etc 
I.  The  exhortation  to  Christian  fidelity.  "  Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of 
our  hope,  that  it  waver  nQt."  1.  The  ohj'ect  of  our  hope.  That  in  Christ  we  have  at 
present  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  the  right  of  approach  unto  God,  sanctifying  influences, 
etc.  That  through  Christ  we  shall  attain  unto  the  future  and  perfect  rest — the  sabbath- 
keeping  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God.  Or  in  brief,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
of  God,  and  that  in  him  we  haVe  salvation  in  its  beginnings  here  and  now,  and  shall 
have  it  in  perfection  hereafter.  2.  I'he  confession  of  our  hope.  (1)  The  confession 
made.  The  Christian  baptism  of  these  Hebrew  Christians  was  a  confession  of  their  faith 
in  Christ.  Wtien  the  hope  is  clear  and  assured,  it  "  cannot  remain  dumb ;  it  must 
speak,  and  give  a  reason  of  its  own  existence.  It  utters  itself  in  a  frank  confession, 
which  we  are  to  hold  fast."  This  confession  is  obligatory  upon  believers  in  Christ  Jesus 
(cf.  Matt.  X.  32,  33 ;  Luke  xii.  8,  9 ;  Kom.  x.  9,  10 ;  1  John  iv.  15).  (2)  The  confession 
maintained.  "  Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope,  that  it  waver  not."  It  is 
implied  that  there  was  adanger  of  their  relinquishing  it.  They  were  in  danger  by  reason 
of  persecution  (cf.  John  ix.  22) ;  and  by  lason  of  the  ritualistic  and  other  attractions  of 
Judaism,  and  the  simplicity  and  spirituality  of  Christianity.  And  a  clear,  consistent, 
and  steadfast  confession  of  our  Christian  hope  is  imperilled  to-day  by  not  a  few  influences. 
There  is  danger  from  Satanic  solicitation,  from  worldly  suggestion  and  example,  and 
from  the  inclinations  and  disinclinations  of  our  lower  nature.  Visible  and  material 
interests  would  draw  us  away  from  the  claims  of  the  invisible  and  spirituaL  Having 
so  much  to  do  with  seen  and  temporal  things,  there  is  danger  lest  we  relax  the  firmness 
of  our  grasp  on  the  unseen  and  eternal  verities.  There  is  danger,  too,  of  attempting  to 
base  our  hope  upon  Christ  and  something  else,  rather  than  upon  Christ  and  Christ 
alone.  "Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession,"  etc.  Let  there  be  no  uncertainty,  no  timidity, 
no  wavering,  in  our  acknowledgment  of  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour  and  Lord,  (a)  Our 
own  true  interests  enforce  the  exhortation  of  the  text.  (6)  The  great  company  of  the 
glorified  call  upon  us  to  "  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope,"  etc.  (c£  ch.  vi.  11, 12). 
(c)  God  himself  summons  us  to  fidelity  and  perseverance.  "Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life."  "  Hold  fast  that  which  thou  h;iot,  that 
no  one  take  thy  crown." 
lif  Th$  ^ncoubaoement  to  Christian  fidelity.   "  For  he  is  faithful  that  promised," 


2M  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  x.  1— 38i 

Many  are  the  promises  which  God  has  made  to  his  people.  Promises  to  the  penitent, 
the  tempted,  the  afflicted,  the  mourner,  the  weak,  the  perplexed,  etc.  Now,  all  these 
promises  are  perfectly  reliable.  Of  this  we  have  many  guarantees;  ».g.  i  1.  Hit  infinite 
intelligence.  "  When  he  promises  anything,  he  sees  everything  which  may  hinder, 
and  everything  which  may  promote  the  execution  of  it,  bo  that  he  cannot  discover 
anything  afterwards  that  may  move  him  to  take  up  after-thooghts :  he  hath  more 
wisdom  than  to  promise  anything  which  he  knows  he  cannot  accomplish."  2.  Hit 
almighty  power.  He  is  ahle  to  perform  all  and  everything  that  he  has  piomised. 
"  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovali  is  everlasting  strength."  3. 
Eis  perfect  faithfulness.  "It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie  "  (ch.  vL  18;  Titus  L  2). 
"  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie,"  etc.  (Numb,  xxiii.  19 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29).  "  With 
him  can  be  no  variation,  neither  shadow  that  is  cast  by  turning  "  (Jas.  i.  17).  "  How 
many  soever  be  the  promises  of  God,  in  Jesus  Christ  is  the  yea,"  etc.  (2  Oor.  i.  20). 
The  fidelity  of  God  to  his  glorious  promises  should  ensure  our  fidelity  in  tb«  confession 
of  our  hope  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.— W.  J. 

Ver.  24. — The  duty  and  design  of  mutual  consideration.  "And  let  ns  consider  one 
another  to  provoke  unto  love,"  etc  An  interesting  connection  of  our  text  with  the 
preceding  verses  of  this  paragraph  is  pointed  out  by  Delitzsoh.  "  How  beautifully  is 
the  exhortation  here  disposed  in  conformity  with  the  Pauline  triad  of  Christian  graces 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  13 ;  1  Thess.  L  3 ;  v.  8 ;  Col.  i.  4,  5)  I  First,  the  injunction  to  approach 
in  the  full  assurance  of  faith ;  then  that  to  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope ;  and 
now  a  third,  to  godly  rivalry  in  the  manifestation  of  Christian  love." 

L  The  dutt  of  mutual  oonbidbeation.  "Let  us  consider  one  another."  This 
exhortation  does  not  warrant  any  impertinent  interference  in  the  concerns  of  others,  or 
sanction  the  conduct  of  busybodies  and  gossips.  It  calls  upon  us  to  cherish  a  mutual 
regard,  and  to  exercise  a  kind  consideration  one  for  another.  We  should  consider  the 
wants,  weaknesses,  temptations,  trials,  successes,  failures,  and  varying  experiences  of  each 
other.  With  a  brother  in  his  shortcomings  and  sins  we  should  tie  patient  and  forbear- 
ing, slow  to  condemn,  but  quick  to  raise  and  restore.  "  Brethren,  even  if  a  man  be 
overtaken  in  any  trespass,"  etc.  (Gal.  vi.  1, 2).  With  each  other  we  should  sympathize 
in  our  respective  joys  and  sorrows.  Our  religious  duties,  motives,  aims,  trials,  joys, 
and  hopes  are  very  similar  in  their  character;  therefore  "let  us  consider  one  another," 
sympathize  with  one  another,  and  strengthen  one  another. 

II.  The  design  op  mutuaIi  consideration.  "  To  provoke  unto  love  and  good 
works."  "  To  provoke  "  is  here  used  in  a  good  sense — to  excite,  or  to  call  into  activity 
for  a  worthy  purpose.  "Consider  one  another"  in  order  to  produce  in  each  other  a 
generous  rivalry  in  love  and  good  works.  Mark  the  importance  of  these  two  things. 
1.  Love,  It  is  the  supreme  grace  of  Christian  character  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13).  It  is  the  most 
Christ-like.  It  is  the  most  God-like.  "  God  is  love."  It  is  that  which  most  truly 
represents  our  Saviour  to  the  world.  It  is  that  which  is  most  extolled  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures.  The  Bible  abounds  in  exhortations  to  love  one  another  and  to  love  God 
(Lev.  xix.  18,  34;  Deut.  vi.  6;  x.  19;  Matt.  xxii.  36—40;  John  xv.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xiii. ; 
Col.  iii.  14  ;  1  Tim.  i.  6;  1  Pet.  iv.  8;  1  John  iii.  11—24;  iv.  7—21).  On  earth  and 
in  time  love  exalts  and  imparts  an  attractive  lustre  and  beauty  to  the  character.  And 
it  qualifies  for  the  glories  of  heaven  and  eternity.  2.  Qood  works ;  beautiful  actions. 
Love  is  the  fountain  of  all  heauiiful  deeds.  Our  works  are  beautiful  in  proportion  as 
love  is  our  motive  and  inspiration  in  them.  That  which  is  done  selfishly,  grudgingly, 
or  in  the  spirit  of  a  hireling,  has  no  goodness  or  beauty.  Love  is  the  purest  and 
mightest  inspiration.  Ko  difficulties  deter  love;  no  dangers  appall  it;  no  toils  are  too 
arduous  or  prolonged  to  be  accomplished  by  it.  The  venturing  and  enduring  power  of 
love  is  wonderful.  And,  thank  God  1  illustrations  of  it  are  not  scarce.  See  it  in  the 
unwearying  vigil  and  the  unfailing  ministry  of  the  mother,  night  and  day,  day  and 
night,  by  the  couch  where  her  sick  child  lies ;  or  the  wife  by  the  bed  of  her  afflicted 
husband,  etc.  Love  delights  in  self-sacrificing  service  for  the  beloved.  "  Provoke  unto 
love  and  good  works."  To  teach  a  class  well  in  the  Sunday  or  the  Ragged  school ;  to 
visit  the  neglected,  the  sick,  and  the  dying ;  to  comfort  some  troubled  heart  or  cheer 
some  depressed  spirit;  to  perform  common  duties  with  diligence  and  fidelity,  or  irksome 
duties  with  cheerfulnesf ;  to  bear  physical  pain  or  social  trial  patiently ;  to  suffer  long 


0H.X.1-A9.]  TH£  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW&  28S 

by  reason  of  the  faults  of  others,  and  still  be  kind  to  them  ; — these  ar«  "  good  works," 
beautiful  works.  It  is  to  love  and  good  works  that  we  are  to  provoke  one  another,  and 
for  this  purpose  we  have  to  kindly  consider  each  other.  Put  no  obstacle  in  the  path  of 
any  true  worker,  hut  cheer  him,  strengthen  him.  Perhaps  the  best  way  to  stimulate 
others  to  love  and  good  works  is  to  set  a  good  example  in  respect  of  these  things.  Learn 
here  the  most  effective  method  of  preventing  strife  and  securing  unity  amongst 
Christian  brethren.  Kindly  mutual  consideration,  love,  and  good  wurka  preclude  dis- 
n^reement,  and  unite  hearts  in  lacred  and  blessed  fellowship. — W.  J. 

Ver.  26. — Warning  against  th»  neglect  of  social  worship.  "Not  forsaking  the 
assembling  of  ourselves  together,  as  the  custom  of  some  is ;  but  exhorting  one  another." 
Tliis  exhortation  is  not  a  positive  command,  but  arises  out  of  the  nature  of  things,  and 
the  need  of  man  as  a  spiritual  being.  Social  worship  does  not  become  obligatory 
because  it  is  commanded  in  the  Scriptures ;  but  we  are  exhorted  not  to  neglect  it  because 
it  is  needful  for  us.  The  obligation  springa  not  from  the  exhortation,  but  from  the 
necessities  of  our  being.    Let  us  consider — 

L  Man's  kged  of  social  worship.  1,  Man  needs  teorship.  A  god  is  a  necessity 
of  man's  being.  He  must  have  something  to  worship,,  even  if  it  he  only  a  fetich. 
This  arises  from  the  presence  and  influence  of  the  religious  and  devotional  elements  and 
faculties  in  human  nature.  As  these  are  refined  and  educated,  so  man  is  able  to  receive 
pure  and  exalted  ideas  of  God.  One  of  the  bitterest  of  human  wails  is,  "  Te  have  taken 
away  my  gods,  and  the  priest;  and  wbat  have  I  more?"  The  loss  of  even  a  false  god 
is  deemed  ruinous  by  those  who  confided  in  it.  The  cry  of  the  man  whose  religious 
nature  has  been  enlightened  by  Divine  revelation  is,  "  My  heart  and  my  flesh  crieth 
out  for  the  living  Gcd."  The  body  needs  the  exercise  of  manual  labour,  or  of  athletics, 
or  gymnastics,  or  it  becomes  weak  and  incapable.  The  mind  must  be  employed  in  the 
acquisition  of  truth,  in  reflection  upon  truth  and  life,  or  its  powers  must  be  called  forth 
in  some  other  way,  or  it  will  sink  into  a  condition  of  feebleness  and  decay.  And  the 
principle  is  equally  applicable  to  the  religions  souL  If  its  powers  be  not  employed  in 
the  worship  of  the  Divine  Being  and  in  the  effort  to  live  usefully  and  holily,  those 
powers  will  perish ;  the  eyes  of  the  soul  will  become  blind,  its  ears  deaf,  its  aspirations 
extinct.  Man  needs  worship  for  the  life  and  growth  of  his  own  religious  nature.  2. 
Man  needs  locicd  worship.  He  is  •  social  being.  His  heart  craves  friendship.  In 
sorrow  and  joy,  in  labour  and  rest,  we  long  for  companionship  and  sympathy.  We  are 
formed  for  fellowship  and  for  mutual  help.  Hence,  social  worship  is  a  necessity  of  our 
being.  This  need  was  divinely  recognized  in  Judaism,  and  provision  was  made  for  it 
in  the  temple,  in  the  great  religious  festivals,  etc.  Our  Lord  recognized  this  need  in 
various  ways  (Matt,  xviii.  17 — 20 ;  Jjuke  iv.  16).  So  also  did  the  apostles.  Even  in  the 
darkest  seasons  in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  God,  devoiit  souls  have  felt  this  need 
and  have  sought  satisfaction  for  it  "Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one 
to  another,"  etc.  (cf.  Mai.  iii.  13 — 17).  3.  Social  worship  is  often  very  beneficial  and 
blessed.  ~  Our  Lord  has  promised  that  the  unanimous  prayers  of  such  worshippers  shall 
be  answered,  and  that  he  himself  will  meet  with  them  (Matt,  xviii.  19,  20).  In  such 
assemblies  of  believers  devotion  and  holy  feeling  pass  from  heart  to  heart  until  all  hearts 
are  aglow.  Mutual  prayer  strengthens  the  weak  disciple.  One  man  is  cast  down 
and  almost  faithless,  but  his  faith  is  invigorated  and  his  soul  encouraged  by  the 
influence  of  another  who  is  believing  and  hopeful.  Nor  is  worship  the  only  engagement 
of  these  assemblies.  Our  text  speaks  of  mutual  exhortation.  "  Exhorting  one  another." 
Brotherly  counsel  and  encouragement  and  admonition  are  profitable  to  strengthen  faith, 
incite  to  diligence,  guard  against  declension,  and  promote  the  progress  of  the  soul. 

II.  Man's  neglect  of  social  worship.  "  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves 
together,  as  the  custom  of  some  is."  Notice :  1.  The  causes  of  t\is  neglect,  Ai  our 
Epistle  does  not  speak  of  the  neglect  of  worship  by  the  irreligious,  but  of  the  desertion 
of  the  Christian  assemblies  by  those  who  themselves  were  avowedly  Christians,  we 
shall  confine  our  attention  to  the  causes  of  the  neglect  ol  social  worship  by  those  who 
manifest  some  respect  for  religion.  (1)  The  necessity  of  social  worship  is  not  recognized, 
or  inadequately  recognized.  The  neolecter  says,  "  There  is  no  need  for  my  frequent 
attendance  at  church ;  I  can  read  the  Bible  or  a  sermon  by  my  own  fireside ;  and  as  for 
worship,  we  have  that  in  the  family."    But  reading  a  serm<<»  is  not  atteidanc*  «poa 


9M  TH>  KPtStLK  TO  THE  HEBBBW&  C<iH.x.l-Sd 

the  dirindj  InslituUd  preaching  of  the  gospel  And  bmily  worship  is  not  enough  for 
man  m  a  locial  being.  Religion  itself  ii  sociaL  As  we  need  friends  beyond  our  own 
domMtio  relations,  so  we  neM  in  religious  exercises  a  wider  circle  than  the  home  one. 
(2)  Absorption  in  temporal  and  worldly  affain  is  another  cause  of  the  neglect  of  the 
Christian  assemblies.  The  interests  and  occupations  of  this  world  and  time  fill  the 
whole  bang ;  spiritual  and  eternal  interests  are  disregarded ;  the  soul  and  its  needs  are 
neglected  j  thus  men  are  unjust  to  their  own  higher  nature.  (3)  Decline  in  the  spiritual 
life  is  another  cause  of  this  neglect.  2.  The  danger  tf  thi§  neglect.  They  whose 
custom  it  was  to  forsake  the  assemblies  of  Christians  were  not  yet  apostates  from  tbo 
Christian  &ith  and  confession.  But  the  admonition  and  exhortation  of  the  text  suggest 
that  they  were  in  danger  of  apostasy.  And  the  awful  warnings  which  immediately 
follow  more  plainly  indicate  the  dread  peril.  He  who  neglects  the  Christian  assemblies 
is  likely  ere  long  to  forsake  the  Christian  Church  and  renounce  the  Christian  faith,  and 
he  may  eren  go  on  to  tread  underfoot  the  Son  of  God,  and  do  despite  luto  the  Spirit 
of  grace.— W.  J. 

Vers.  26 — 29.— 7Ae  darkett  $tn  and  the  mo*t  dreadful  doom.  "For  if  we  sin  wil- 
fully after  that  we  have  received,"  etc.    These  solemn  words  set  before  ns— 

I.  A  BiH  or  THB  OBEATEST  EKORUiTT.  To  obtain  a  correct  view  of  the  dark  sin 
which  is  here  depicted,  let  us  notice :  1.  The  spiritual  experience  which  preceded  the 
sin.  Two  clauses  of  our  text  set  forth  a  personal  experience  of  genuine  religion. 
"  After  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  The  word  which  is  trans- 
lated "knowledge" — Myvwiru — as  Delitzsch  points  out,  cannot  mean  an  unreal  or 
false  knowledge,  but  a  genuine  and  intelligent  apprehension  of  the  truth.  "The  sacred 
writer,  therefore,  clearly  intimates  by  the  very  choice  of  the  word  that  it  is  not  a 
mere  outward  and  historical  knowledge  of  which  he  is  here  speaking,  but  an  inwani, 
quickening,  believing  apprehension  of  revealed  truth  (ch.  vi.  4 — 8)."  "  The  blood 
.  .  .  wherewith  he  was  sanctified."  In  the  case  supposed  the  man  "  had  advanced  so 
far  in  the  reality  of  the  spiritual  life,  that  this  blood  had  been  really  applied  to  bis 
heart  by  &ith,  and  its  hallowing  and  purifying  effects  were  visible  in  his  life  "  (Alford). 
2.  The  character  of  the  sin  itsdf.  The  sin  is  apostasy  from  Christianity,  after  having 
personally  experienced  its  power  and  preciousness.  But  see  how  it  is  here  sketched. 
(1)  Contemptuous  rejection  of  the  Divine  Redeemer.  "  Hath  trodden  underfoot  the  Son 
of  God."  The  expression  does  not  simply  mean  to  cast  a  thing  away  as  useless,  which 
is  afterwards  carelessly  trampled  on  by  men  (Matt  v.  13) ;  but  a  deliberate,  scornful, 
bitter  treading  down  of  a  thing.  So  terribly  wicked  is  the  rejection  of  the  Son  of  God 
which  our  text  sets  forth.  (2)  Profanation  of  the  sacrificial  blood  of  the  Saviour. 
"  Hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy 
thing."  The  blood  of  sacrifices  offered  under  the  Law  was  regarded  as  sacred,  and  a( 
having  cleansing  power  (Lev.  xvi.  19).  How  much  more  really  and  more  intensely 
holy  must  the  blood  of  Christ  be  (ch.  ix.  13, 14)  1  To  regard  this  blood  as  common,  or 
IS  tlie  blood  of  an  ordinary  man,  was  not  only  a  degradation  of  the  most  sacred  thing, 
but  also  an  admission  that  Jesus  was  deservedly  put  to  death;  for  if  his  was  the 
eommon  blood  of  a  mere  man,  he  was  a  blasphemer,  and  according  to  the  Jewish  Law 
deserved  death.  (3)  Insultation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  And  hath  done  despite  unto 
Ihe  Spirit  of  grace ; "  or,  "  insulted  the  Spirit  of  grace."  The  expression  designates 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Source  of  grace,  and  leads  us  to  think  of  him  as  a  living  am) 
loving  Person.  "  To  contemn  or  do  despite  to  this  Holy  Spirit  is  to  blaspheme  the 
whole  work  of  grace  of  which  one  has  once  been  the  subject,  and  to  exhibit  it  as  a  decep- 
tion and  a  lie.  It  is  profanely  to  contradict  the  very  truth  of  God,  and  draw  down  a 
vengeance  which  cannot  fail "  (Delitzsch).  S.  The  aggravations  of  the  tin.  The  pre- 
ceding experience  of  the  blessings  of  Christianity  sorely  aggravates  so  bitter  an  apostasy 
from  it.  But  the  sin  Is  further  aggravated  by  the  wilfulness,  deliberatenesa,  and  con- 
tinuousness  with  which  it  is  committed.  "The  sin  here  spoken  of  is  not  a  momentary 
or  short-lived  aberration,  from  which  the  infirm  but  sincere  believer  is  speedily- recalled 
by  the  convictions  of  the  Spirit,  but  one  wilfully  persisted  in."  "  If  we  sin  wilfully." 
Moreover,  it  is  not  an  act  or  acts  of  wilful  sin  committed  once,  or  more  than  once,  and 
then  repented  of,  which  is  here  set  forth ;  but  a  continuous  condition  of  tin.  The  use 
of  tlM  presant  pai-ticiple — ifutfrayirrmp — "indicates  perseverance  and  oeatinuance  in 


cu.  x,i— 39.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE  HEBREWS.  285 

apostasy."  It  is  not  a  case  of  ordinary  religious  backsliding  or  declension  from  Christ ; 
for  then  there  would  be  some  hope  of  repentance  and  encouragement  to  repent  (Jer. 
iii.  14 ;  Hos.  xiv.  4).  It  is  a  case  of  wilful,  deliberate,  contemptuous,  persistent  rejection 
of  Christ  and  of  Christianity,  after  having  known  his  truth  and  experienced  his  grace. 

II.   A  PUNISHMENT   OP   THE   M0ST>  TBBRIBLB  SEVEBITT.      1.    Tht  UtttT  loSS  of  the  hope 

of  spiritual  reforit^ation.  "  There  remaitieth  no  more  a  sacrifice  for  sins."  The  sacri- 
fices of  Judaism  to  which,  in  the  case  su|iposed,  the  apostate  returns  have  no  power  to 
tiike  away  sins.  The  ellicacy  of  the  sacrilice  of  the  Saviour  has  not  been  exhausted  by 
him,  but  he  has  deliberately  and  scornfully  rejected  it,  so  that  for  him  it  has  no  longer 
any  atoning  or  saving  power.  And  no  other  exists  for  him,  or  will  be  provided  for 
him.  When  a  man  wilfully,  contemptuously,  and  persistently  rejects  the  only  sacrifice 
through  which  salvation  may  be  attained,  what  hope  can  there  be  for  him  of  forgiveness 
and  spiritual  renewal  ?  2.  The  dreadf'id  anticipation  of  an  awful  judgment.  "  Thero 
remaineth  a  certain  fearful  expectation  of  judgment."  The  apostate  looks  forward 
with  dismay,  and  even  with  terror  at  times,  to  the  approaching  judgment  and  the 
righteous  retributions  which  will  follow.  His  punishment  is  already  begun  in  his 
alarming  anticipations  of  tlie  dread  penalties  awaiting  him  hereafter.  3.  2%e  infliction 
of  a  punishment  worse  than  death.  "  A  fierceness  of  fire  which  shall  devour  i  he 
adversaries.  A  man  that  hath  set  at  nought  Moses'  Law  dieth  without  compassion," 
etc.  If  an  Israelite  apostatized  from  Jehovah  to  idolatry,  when  "two  witnesses  or 
three  witnesses  "  testified  against  him,  he  was  to  be  stoned  to  death  (Deut.  xvii.  2 — 7). 
If  one  sought  to  seduce  another  to  idolatry,  the  person  so  tempted  was  to  take  the  lead 
in  stoning  the  tempter  to  death,  even  though  the  tempter  was  the  nearest  and  dearest 
relative,  or  a  friend  beloved  as  his  own  soul  (Deut.  ziii.  1 — 11),  But  for  the  apostate 
from  Christ  there  is  a  "much  sorer  punishment"  than  the  death  of  the  body  by 
stoning.  The  severity  of  the  punishment  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  clearness  of 
the  light  and  the  richness  of  the  grace  and  the  preciousness  of  the  privileges  rejected 
by  the  apostate.  "  The  wrath  of  Qod  burns  as  hotly  as  his  love,  and  strikes  no  less 
surely  than  justly."  Yet  it  seems  to  us  that  nothing  in  the  punishment  of  the  apos- 
tate can  be  darker  or  more  terrible  than  this,  that  for  him  "  there  remaineth  no  more  a 
sacrifice  for  sina."  "  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketb  be  Btaudeth  take  heed  lest  ho 
fall"— W.  J. 

Ver.  31. — Fdllitig  into  the  hands  of  God — a  contra^.  "It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  "  Let  me  fall  now  into  the  band  of  the  Lord  " 
(1  Chrou.  xxi.  13).  State  briefly  what  led  to  this  utterance  of  David.  The  taking  of 
the  census,  etc.  Wherein  was  the  sin  of  numbering  the  people  ?  Not  in  the  mere  act ; 
for  Israel  had  been  numbered  thrice  before  by  the  command  of  the  Lord.  But  David 
took  this  census  (1)  without  Divine  authority  or  sanction ;  (2)  from  motives  of  pride 
and  ostentation.  Perhaps  he  was  contemplating  schemes  of  foreign  conquest.  Cer- 
tainly the  motive  was  a  sinful  one,  and  therefore  the  act  was  siuiul.  God  was  dis- 
pleased thereliy,  and  he  determined  to  punish  the  king  and  his  people  for  this  and 
previous  sins,  e.g.  the  rebellions  in  which  the  people  had  joined.  He,  however,  sent 
Gad  the  seer  unto  David  to  give  him  the  choice  of  one  out  of  three  punishments 
(1  Chron.  xxi.  11 — 14).  With  becoming  humility  and  piety,  the  king  left  the  judg- 
ment in  the  hand  of  God.  He  prayed  that  he  might  "not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man," 
and  his  people  be  destroyed  three  months  before  their  foes;  but  whether  the  punish- 
ment should  be  "  three  years'  famine,  or  three  days  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  even  the 
pestilence,  in  the  land,"  he  left  to  the  decision  of  the  merciful  God.  "  David  said  unto 
Gad,"  etc,  (1  Chron.  xxi.  13).  After  these  words  the  text  from  our  Epistle  has  a 
strange  sound  :  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  The 
sacred  writer  has  been  treating  of  a  sin  of  extraordinary  wickedneis — apostasy  from 
Christ ;  and  apostasy  characterized,  not  by  ignorance,  but  by  despite  of  the  clearest  know- 
ledge ;  not  by  weakness,  but  by  wilfulness ;  not  by  transitoriness,  but  by  persistence. 
It  is  of  the  punishment  of  such  an  apostate  that  it  is  said,  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing,"  etc. 
"  The  hands  of  God  are  his  almighty  operations,  whether  in  love  or  wrath."  He  is 
"the  living  God"  because  he  is  self-existent;  his  existence  is  independent,  absolute, 
eternal.  So  "  the  hands  of  the  living  God  "  present  the  ideas  of  his  almightiness  and 
eternity.    How  fearful  to  fall  into  the  punitive  hands  of  such  a  Being  1    Man  may  bt 


28«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oh.  X.  1—39 

angry  with  me,  bnt  bis  power  is  limited,  and  he  dies,  and  then  he  'can  injurs  me  n« 
lunger ;  hut  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  avenging  hands  of  him  whose  power  is 
unlimited  and  whose  existence  is  endless— the  hands  of  the  almighty  and  eTer-living 
God.     Contrast  then  twofallinga  into  the  hand$  of  Ood. 

L  The  one  faiiLB  toluntarilt  into  Ch>D's  handb  ;  Tm  otheb,  oompulbobilt 
David  deliberately  and  freely  elected  to  leave  himself  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord ;  that 
was  his  choice.  But  the  wilfully  and  persistently  wicked  will  fall  into  bis  hands  as  the 
guilty  culprit  falls  into  the  bands  of  the  officers  of  the  law.  The  strong  band  of  Divine 
justice  will  seize  the  hardened  rebel  against  God,  and  from  that  grip  there  will  be  ao 
escape.    Of  our  own  free  will  let  us  now  fall  into  his  almighty  and  loving  hands, 

11.  The  one  falls  into  his  hands  nr  humble  penitence  ;  the  otheb,  m  hab- 
DBNED  niPKNlTENoa.  David  was  sincerely  and  deeply  repentant  of  bis  sin  (1  Chron. 
xxi.  8, 17).  But  in  -the  case  supposed  in  our  Epistle  the  sinner  wilfully  and  defiantly 
persists  in  known  and  terrible  sin,  and  is  arrested  by  the  Omnifiotenl  hands  as  a  darin> 
rebel.  And  we  have  sinned  and  deserved  God's  wrath.  How  shall  we  meet  him? 
in  penitence,  or  in  presumption  ?  "  He  is  wise  ill  heart,  and  mighty  in  strength,"  etc. 
(Job  ix.  4).     "  Kiss  the  Sun,  lest  he  be  angry,"  etc.  (Ps.  ii.  12). 

IIL  Thm  one  falls  into  uia  hands  fibult  xsnsTiNa  in  his  merct  ;  the  otheb, 
DEEPLT  nOADiNO  HIS  WRATH.  "  Davld  Said  .  . .  for  very  great  are  his  mercies."  He 
could  and  did  confide  in  the  love  of  God  even  In  his  judt<ment8.  But  when  the  des- 
perately wicked  fall  into  God's  hands  it  will  be  in  abject  terror  (cf.  ver.  27).  Again 
let  ui  imitate  David,  and  trust  God's  mercy,  not  man's.  "  If  you  are  accused,  it  is 
better  to  trust  him  for  justice  than  to  trust  men ;  if  you  are  guilty,  it  is  better  to  trust 
him  f«r  mercy  than  to  trust  men ;  if  yoa  are  miserahle,  it  is  better  to  trust  him  for 
deliverance  than  men." 

IV.  Thk  onk  falls  into  his  obastisino  hand;  the  otheb,  into  in  AVENoraa 
HANn,  David  and  his  people  were  to  be  punished,  but  the  punishment  was  paternal 
chastisement  for  tbeir  profit.  They  were  to  suffer  that  they  might  he  saved  as  a 
nation.  Bnt  veiy  difierent  is  the  punishment  of  the  wilful  and  persistent  sinner  (see 
vers.  26,  27,  30,  31).  What  is  our  relation  to  God?  Penitence,  or  persistence  in 
sin?  Humble  trust,  or  abject  terror?  We  must  fall  into  his  hands  somehow,  fiow 
shall  it  bat    "Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God?"    Let  it  be  thos— 

*  A  gnilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm. 
On  thy  kind  arms  I  fall ; 
Be  thou  my  Strength  and  Bighteousnea^ 
My  Savionr,  and  my  AIL" 

CWatta,) 

W.J. 

Yen,  9Z—Sij—Tke  reeoUection  of  past  sufferingi  an  encouragement  to  present  stead- 
fastness. "  But  call  to  remembrance  the  former  days,"  etc.  Our  subject  divides  itself 
into  two  main  branches. 

L  SUFFISRINOS  ENDUBED  FOB  THB   MAIIIITBNANOE  OF  THE   FAITH   IN   THE   PAST.       1. 

These  sufferingi  were  of  various  kinds.  (1)  SufTerings  in  their  own  persons,  (a) 
InSiction  of  physical  pain.  "Being  made  a  gazing-stock  by  afflictions."  The  afflic- 
tions, or  tribulations,  arose  from  active  and  bitter  persecutions.  And  these  weie 
inflicted  (as  the  word  translated  "gazing-stock,"  or  spectacle,  clearly  indicates)  in  the 
theatre  before  the  assembled  multitude,  that  to  the  physical  pain  might  be  added  the 
sense  of  shame.  (6)  Suhjection  to  undeserved  reproaches.  "  Being  made  a  gazing- 
stock  by  reproaches."  They  were  publicly  assailed  by  the  scornful  jeers  of  their  pet- 
secuton.  The  people  of  God  have  frequently  borne  the  bitterest  anguish  by  reason 
of  the  malignant  and  contemptuous  utterances  of  their  adversaries  (cf.  Ps.  xli.  5 — 9 ; 
xlii,  8,  1^  (c)  Spbliation  of  their  worldly  possessions.  "Ye  took  joyfully  the 
spoiling  of  Tour  goods,"  Ebrard  suggests  that  by  this  "  we  are  to  understand  what 
we  find  still  at  uiis  <'  ly  taking  place  in  the  sphere  of  the  Jewish  mission.  When  a 
Jew  allows  himself  determined  to  becume  a  Christian,  he  is  disinherited  by  his  rela- 
tioiM,  hia  share  in  the  property  is  withheld  from  him,  his  credit  and  every  source 
of  gria  withdrawn ;  he  falls  into  a  state  of  complete  destitution."  (2)  SufTerings  in 
symjiathjr  with  other  sufferers.    "Beeumin^  partakers  with  them  that  were  so  used. 


OL  X.  1—89.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBBWa  287 

For  ye  had  compassion  on  them  that  were  In  bonds."  In  a  truly  Christian  spirit  they 
sympathized  with  others  who  were  in  tribulation  ;  they  wept  with  those  who  wept ; 
tliey  made  common  cause  with  their  persecuted  brethren.  2,  Their  sufferings  were  of 
great  teveritj/.  They  "  endured  •  great  conflict  of  sufferings."  The  severity  of  the 
sufferings  of  the  early  Christians  is  witnessed  to  by  very  many  portions  of  the  New 
Testament  (Acts  T.  17—42  ;  vi.  9—15 ;  vii.  54—60 ;  yiii.  1 — 4 ;  ix.  1,  2 ;  xii.  1—5  ; 
xiv.  19  J  XYi.  19—24'  xxi.  27—32;  xxii.  24,  25;  1  Cor.  It.  9—13;  2  Cor.  iv.  8—11 ; 
xi.  23 — ^27 ;  1  Pet.  Iv.  1^  — 1» ;  lwr«  ii.  9,  10).  3.  Their  mfferingi  were  because  of 
their  Chrittianity.  "After  ye  were  illuminated,  ye  endured,"  etc.  This  enlighten- 
ment is  that  which  led  them  to  embrace  Cliristianity  anH  trust  in  Christ  (cf.  ch.  vi.  4). 
They  endured  persecutions  for  his  Nanio's  sake.  4.  Their  mfferingt  were  patiently 
endured.  "  Ya  endured  " — the  word  used  by  the  sacred  writer  indicates  endurance 
"  without  losing  heart  or  hope,"  They  "  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  posses- 
sions." Like  the  apostles  they  "rejoiced  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer 
shame  for  his  Name."  One  thing  which  sustained  them  in  this  noble  endurance  of 
cruel  persecutions  was  their  assurance  that  they  possessed  precious  and  imperishable 
treasures.  "  Knowing  that  ye  have  for  yourselves  a  better  possession  and  an  abiding 
one."  They  had  treasure  in  heaven  beyond  the  reach  of  their  mightiest  and  most 
malignant  enemies.  Three  things  concerning  this  possession. are  worthy  of  brief  notice. 
(1)  Its  certainty.  They  knew  that  it  existed,  and  existed  for  them ;  for  they  had  the 
earnest  of  it  in  their  hearts.  (2)  Its  superiority.  It  is  "  better  "  than  any  earthly 
possessions,  (3)  Its  perpetuity.  "  An  enduring  substance."  Heavenly  possessions 
are  inalienable  and  imperishable.  The  knowledge  that  they  had  these  sustained  them 
under  the  loss  of  earthly  possessions  and  sore  tribulations.  If  any  are  called  to  suffer 
in  the  cause  of  Jesus  Christ  in  these  days,  let  them  think  of  these  noble  endurers  of 
far  severer  afflictions,  and  gather  courage  and  patience  from  their  example, 

II.   SCfFERINSB    BKOALLBD    FOB    THB    MAINTENAHCX    OV    FAITH    iN    THB    rBBBKKT. 

"  Call  to  remembrance  the  former  days,  in  which,"  etc  It  is  Implied  that  they  were 
suffering  in  the  time  then  present  because  of  their  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
would  probably  have  to  suffer  for  some  time  (cf.  ch,  xii.  3—13),  They  are  exhorted  to 
call  to  mind  the  tribulations  which  they  had  already  borne  victoriously  to  inspire  them 
in  the  endurance  of  present  and  future  af&ictions,  and  to  preserve  them  from  apostasy. 
This  was  not  to  be  an  occasional  exercise,  but  a  constant  habit.  Hence  the  sacred 
writer  uses  the  present  tense,  the  force  of  which  is  thus  given  by  Alford,  "  Call  ever  to 
remenibrance  the  former  days."  But  how  would  this  recollection  of  past  trials  and  vic- 
tories assist  them  in  their  present  conflicts?  1.  All  the  fruit  of  their  former  lufferingi 
would  be  lost  if  thty  did  not  continue  faithful.  "  To  begin  in  faith,  but  not  to  endure, 
leads  to  useless  sacrifices,  vain  hopes,  and  fruitless  sufferings,"  These  Hebrew  Chris- 
tians had  already  borne  far  too  much  in  the  cause  of  Christ  for  them  to  abandon  that 
cause  now  because  they  were  called  to  bear  more  tribulation.  They  were  lii^e  capitalists 
who  had  invested  so  much  in  this  enterprise,  that  they  had  only  to  call  to  mind  the 
amount  of  their  investments  to  sar*  them  from  giving  up  their  interest  in  it  because 
other  calls  were  made  upon  them.  2.  All  the  help  afforded  them  informer  sufferings 
was  available  unto  them  still.  The  God  who  had  helped  them  in  the  past  would  not 
forsake  them  in  future  trials ;  for  he  is  ever  the  same — the  same  in  wisdom,  in  power, 
in  iai til  fulness,  in  goodness.  Thus,  the  recollection  of  former  deliverances  should  be  an 
inspiration  in  present  trials  and  for  future  difBcutties.  "All  the  historic  triumphs  of 
the  Divine  arm  stimulate  us  in  the  present  battle."  "  Because  thou  hast  been  my  Help, 
therefore  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice."  Thus  David  frequently  reasoned 
(cC  1  Sam,  xvii.  32 — 37).  And  thus  should  we  encourage  ourselves  in  God,  especially 
in  seasons  of  suSering  or  of  sorrow,  of  temptation  or  tribulation. — W.  J. 

Vers.  35 — 37. — Christian  fidelity  and  its  reward,  "  Cast  not  away  therefore  your 
confidence,  which  hath,"  etc.     We  have  in  our  text— 

I.  A  GREAT  EEWAED  FBOMISED.  "  Great  recompense  of  reward,  .  .  .  Te  might  receive 
the  promise."  By  "  the  promise  "  is  meant  here,  not  the  promise  itself,  but  the  blessings 
promised ;  not  the  word  of  promise,  for  this  they  had  already,  but  the  good  things 
which  that  word  assured  unto  them.  By  the  recompense  of  reward  and  the  promised 
blessings  we  understaud  one  and  the  same  thing ;  i.i. "  the  promise  of  the  eternal 


28d  THK  EFISTLfi  tO  tH£:  HEBBBWS.  tam.x.l—i^ 

inheritance"  (ch.  ix.  15),  "the  better  and  enduring  substance "  (Tor.  84).  It  ]•  the 
promise  of  eternal  life  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  life  is  characterized  by  (1)  purity ;  (2)  pro- 
gress ;  (3)  blessedness ;  (4)  perpetuity.  "  A  perpetuity  of  bliss  is  bliss."  This  life  is 
promised  to  every  believer  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  "  Whosoever  believeth  on  him 
shall  have  eternal  life."  This  life  the  Christian  believer  hag  now  in  its  imperfect  and 
early  stages ;  he  will  have  it  hereafter  in  its  fulness  and  perfection.  "  Your  life  i*  hid 
with  Christ  in  God.    When  Christ,  who  is  our  Life,"  etc.  (Col.  iii.  3). 

IL  A  OBEAT  DDTT  MENTIONED.  To  do  the  will  of  God.  This  must  precede  the 
reception  of  the  promised  blessings.  "  Having  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive 
the  promise."  If  we  combine  the  interpretation  of  several  expositors,  we  obtain  what 
we  regard  as  the  true  interpretation  of  "  the  will  of  God  "  here.  Thus  M.  Stuart :  "  To 
do  the  will  of  God  tiere,  is  to  obey  the  requirement,  to  believe  and  trust  in  Christ " 
(of.  John  tL  40).  Ebrard :  "  By  the  will  of  God,  in  this  context,  is  to  be  understood 
his  will  that  we  should  confess  Christ's  Name  before  men."  And  Delitzsch ;  "The  will 
of  God  is  .  .  .  our  steadfast  perseverance  in  faith  and  hope."  It  seems  to  us  that  the 
doing  the  will  of  God  includes  each  and  all  of  these  things — faith  in  Christ,  confession 
of  Christ,  and  continuance  in  Christ.  Moreover,  the  Christian  accepts  the  will  of  God 
as  the  authoritative  and  supreme  rule  of  his  life.  This  will  is  sovereign,  gracious,  and 
universally  binding.  Let  us  endeavour  to  do  it  willingly,  patiently,  and  cheerfully ;  for 
in  so  doing  it  our  duty  will  bicome  our  freedom,  dignity,  and  delight.  We  must  do  this 
will  if  we  would  receive  the  recompense  of  reward.  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto 
me.  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of 
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 

III.  A  GBEAT  NEED  EXFERiGNOED.  "  Cast  not  away  therefore  your  confidence.  .  .  . 
For  ye  have  need  of  patience,"  or  endurance.  The  confidence  which  ii  not  to  be  cast 
away  and  the  endurance  which  we  need  are,  if  not  iderjtical,  closely  related.  The  con- 
fidence is  perhaps  (as  Ebrard  suggests)  the  root,  and  patience  the  fruit,  the  endurance 
growing  out  of  the  confidence.  The  confidence  is  the  joyous  assurance  "  of  faith  and 
liope,  and  boldness  in  confessing  Christ."  We  must  not  cast  this  away,  as  a  dismayed 
soldier  casts  away  his  weapons;  for  we  shall  need  it  in  the  conflicts  which  yet  await 
us.  And  the  patience  is  "  that  unshaken,  unyielding,  patient  endurance  under  the 
pressure  of  trial  and  persecution,  that  steadfastness  of  faith,  apprehending  present 
blessings,  and  of  hope,  with  heaven-directed  eye  anticipating  the  glorious  future,  which 
obtains  what  it  waits  fqr."  Now  we  need  both  these  things,  the  confidence  and  the 
patience,  the  boldness  and  the  endurance ;  for :  1.  Our  spiritual  battles  are  not  all 
fought  yet.  We  still  have  foes  to  encounter ;  therefore  we  shall  need  our  confidence 
and  courage,  our  faith  and  hope.  2.  Our  various  trials  are  not  all  passed  through  yet. 
We  shall  have  to  meet  with  losses  and  sorrows,  to  suffer  afBictions,  to  be  beset  with 
difficulties,  to  bear  disappointments;  hence  we  "  have  need  of  patience."  3.  Our  pos- 
session of  the  promised  inheritance  is  not  attained  yet.  Perfect  purity  and  peace,  pro- 
gress and  blessedness,  are  not  ours  as  yet.  There  are  times  when  the  recompense  ot 
reward  seems  long  delayed,  and  our  sjnritual  ndvancement  towards  it  seems  slow ;  and 
we  have  need  of  patience  to  wait  and  hope,  and  to  work  while  we  wait. 

IV.  A  GREAT  BNOonBAGKMENT  PRESENTED.  "  Por  yet  a  Very  little  while,  and  he 
that  cometh  shall  come,  and  will  not  tarry."  The  end  of  our  trials  is  very  near.  The 
inheritance  of  the  promised  blessing  will  speedily  be  ours.  "  The  recompense  ot  the 
reward  comes  as  certainly  as  the  Lord  himself,  who  is  already  on  the  wajT*"  "  Be 
patient  therefore,  brethren,  ...  fur  the  coming  uf  the  Lord  is  at  haad." 

"  Stand  up  I  stand  up  for  Jesua  I 
Tlie  strife  will  not  be  long; 
This  day  the  noise  of  battle. 
The  next  the  victor's  song." 

(Duffleld.) 

W.J. 

Vet.  S8.— Life  hy  faith.  "  Now  the  just  shall  live  by  faith."  In  this  place  our  text 
means  that  by  persevering  faith  the  righteous  man  would  be  saved  fully  and  to  the  end. 
He  who  continued  in  the  exercise  of  faith  would  be  kept  safely  amidst  all  dangers  and 
all  temptatioiks  to  apostasy,  and  inherit  the  recompense  of  reward.    But  w«  profow  te 


CH.  X.  1—39.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  680 

regard  tha  text  as  the  statement  of  a  general  truth  of  the  Christian  life,  as  St.  Paul  uses 
it  in  Bom.  i.  17 ;  Oal.  iii.  11.    Thus  viewed,  it  presents  to  our  notice— 

I.  The  chabaotbb  specified.  This  is  marked  hy  two  leading  featurM  1. 
TtigMeoiisness.  "  The  ju.st,"  or  righteous.  The  righteousness  of  the  Christian  it  (1)  iu 
character.  He  possesses  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  is  accepted  by  God  through  Jesus 
Christ.  The  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  sets  forth  this  righteousness :  "  That  I  may  gain 
Chjist,  and  be  found  in  him,  not  having  a  righteousness  of  mine  own,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  9). 
The  righteousness  of  the  Christian  is  (2)  in  conduct.  "  He  that  doeth  rigliteousness,  is 
righteous"  (1  John  iii.  7, 10).  2.  Beligiownett.  The  Revised  Version  gives  our  text 
ihus :  "  But  my  righteous  one  shall  live  hy  faith."  This  we  regard  as  the  c  'treat  text. 
It  sets  before  us  one  who  is  godly  as  well  as  just,  whose  righteousness  is  joined  with 
reverence,  and  is  exalted  by  the  union.  A  man  cannot  be  righteous  towards  Ood 
without  being  religious.  Unless  we  worship  and  love  and  obey  him,  we  do  him  injus- 
-tice.  In  the  Christian  character  piety  and  principle,  righteousness  and  rererence,  must 
go  hand  in  hand. 

II.  The  life  mentioned.  We  are  not  acquainted  with  a  satisfactory  definition  of 
life.  The  things  of  deepest  significance  and  greatest  importance  defy  our  powers  of 
definition.  So  we  cannot  set  forth  adequately  in  a  sentence  the  life  spoken  of  in  the 
text.  It  is  far  more  than  physical  and  intellectual  existence  and  activity.  "  Know- 
ledge, truth,  love,  beauty,  goodness,  faith,  alone  can  give  vitality  to  the  mechanism  of 
existence."  The  life  of  true  personal  religion  is  that  whjoh  our  text  speaks  of.  It  is 
the  life  of  supreme  love  to  God,  the  life  of  Christ  in  man.  "  Christ,"  says  Canon 
Liddon,  "  is  the  quickening  Spirit  of  Christian  humanity ;  he  lives  in  Christians ;  he 
thinks  in  Christians ;  he  acts  through  Christians  and  with  Christians ;  he  is  indissolubly 
associated  with  every  movement  of  the  Christian's  deepest  life.  '  I  live,'  exclaims  the 
apostle;  'yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.'  This  felt  presence  of  Christ  it  is  which 
gives  both  its  form  and  its  force  to  the  sincere  Christian  life.  That  life  is  •  loyal 
homage  of  the  intellect,  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  will,  to  a  Divine  King,  with  whom 
will,  heart,  and  intellect  are  in  close  and  constant  communion,  and  frow  whom  there 
flows  forth,  through  the  Spirit  and  the  sacraments,  that  supply  of  light,  of  love,  and  of 
resolve  which  enriches  and  ennobles  the  Christian  soul." 

III.  The  heamb  of  this  life.  **  Shall  live  by  faith."  Brief  consideration  of  two 
points  is  essential.  1.  The  nature  of  thit  faith.  It  ii  far  more  than  the  assent  of  the 
reason,  or  apprehension  by  the  reason.  It  is  a  mora)  rather  than  an  intellectual  act. 
"  With  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  "  When  the  soul  in  very  truth 
responds  to  the  message  of  God,  the  complete  responsive  act  of  faith  is  threefold.  This 
act  proceeds  simultaneously  from  the  intelligence,  from'  the  heart,  and  from  the  wiU  oi 
the  believer.  His  intelligence  recognizes  the  unseen  object  as  •  fact.  Hia  heart 
embraces  the  object  thus  present  to  his  understanding ;  his  heart  opens  instinctively  and 
unhesitatingly  to  receive  a  ray  of  heavenly  light.  And  his  will  too  resigns  itself  to  the 
truth  before  it ;  it  places  the  soul  at  the  disposal  of  the  object  which  thus  rivets  its  eye 
and  conquers  its  affections."  *  2.  The  Object  of  thi$  faith.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  him- 
self is  the  grand  Object  of  the  faith  of  the  Christian.  We  accept  him  in  the  three  great 
relationships  which  he  sustains  to  his  true  disciples.  As  our  Prophet  we  exercise  faith 
in  him.  He  claimed  to  be  "  the  Truth."  On  all  questions  of  morality  and  religion,  of 
sin  and  salvation,  of  life  and  death,  we  bow  to  him  as  our  infallible  Teacher,  and  unhesi- 
tatingly accept  his  Word.  We  believe  in  him  as  our  Priest.  He  has  made  full  atone- 
ment for  sins ;  he  is  our  perfect  Representative  with  the  Father ;  he  is  our  tender,  com- 
passionate Saviour.  To  him  the  heart  turns  in  its  sins  for  forgiveness,  in  its  sorrows  for 
consolation.  We  loyally  accept  him  also  as  our  King.  He  is  the  Sovereign  of  our  will 
and  the  Lord  of  our  life.  We  believe  in  him  as  our 'moral  Master,  whose  authority  is 
supreme.  Thus  Christ  is  the  Object  of  the  Christian's  faith.  "  By  foith  the  soul  is  to 
be  moving  ever  towards  Christ,  resting  ever  upon  Christ,  living  ever  in  Christ.  Christ 
is  to  be  the  end,  the  support,  the  very  atmosphere  of  its  life."  He  who  thus  believes  in 
him  shall  have  eternal  lue  (John  iii.  16;  Eph.  iL  8).— W.  S. 

Yer.  1. — The  Law,  its  sermce  and  its  limits.     I.  The  aim  of  God.     To  make  men 
perfect.     All  God's  revelations  and  the  powers  belonging  to  them  have  this  for  their 
•  '  The  Divinity  of  our  Lord, '  by  Canon  Liddon. 

HEBREWS.  W 


290  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  x.  1—39. 

end,  to  take  Imperfect  men  (men  in  whom  there  are  all  Bort«  of  imperfections,  physical, 
intellectual,  spiritual,  men  who  have  mixed  with  their  nature  a  corrupt  and  debasing 
element)  and  make  them  perfect.  And  this  is  to  he  done  according  to  a  Divine  stan- 
dard of  perfection,  not  a  human  one.  Indeed,  that  human  excellence  should  attain  • 
Divine  standard  is  as  necessary  for  the  satisfaction  of  man  as  it  is  for  the  glory  of  God. 
All  that  is  instrumental  and  ministerial  about  human  life  is  to  be  measured  as  it  serves 
towards  the  perfecting  of  the  individual  man  in  true  godliness  and  Christian  character. 
And  we  must  ever  remember  this  in  ttie  midst  of  all  the  infirmities  and  lapses  of  our 
present  life.  We  are,  indeed,  strangely  blind  to  the  marvellous  possibilities  that  lie  hid 
in  every  human  being.  We  often  have  to  say  of  men  that  their  purposes  are  broken  off, 
but  forget  all  the  time  that  God's  purposes  for  men  may  all  be  fulfilled  if  only  they  are 
willing  to  be  co-workers  together  with  him. 

II.  Thb  bebtice  of  ths  Law.  The  Law,  taken  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense, 
including  commandments  as  to  conduct  on  the  one  hand,  and  ceremonies  on  the  other, 
was  of  immediate  service  in  two  ways.  It  made  men  dissatisfied  with  their  present 
selves,  and  intensely  anxious  to  be  better.  If  it  did  not  give  a  standard  of  life  posi- 
tively, it  was  something  that  it  gave  one  negatively.  One  of  the  great  merits  of  Ps. 
cxix.  is  in  showing  what  the  Law  could  do  by  way  of  stirring  up  spiritual  aspirations, 
and  filling  men  with  a  sublime  discontent.  For  what  the  writer  of  this  psalm  expresses, 
thriusands  must  have  felt.  Like  Paul,  they  wanted  to  do  good,  yet  evil  was  present 
with  them.  And  always,  to  many,  the  Law  must  have  been  indeed  a  shadow  of  good 
things  to  come,  a  proof  that  there  was  abiding  substance  which  would  one  day  be  mani- 
festoi. 

III.  Thi  UHTTb  or  tbi  Law.  The  Law  was  good  as  indicating  where  perfection 
lay;  hut  there  was  in  it  nothing  dynamic,  nothing  to  advance  men  one  stage  nearer  per- 
fection. Indeed,  the  Law,  apart  from  its  proper  sequel  in  Christ,  would  have  done 
harm  rather  than  good,  inasmuch  as  it  would  have  driven  men  to  despdr.  Perfection 
would  have  been  seen  across  an  impassable  abyss.  It  has  always  been  a  curse  of  fallen 
human  nature  that  what  God  gives  for  one  purpose  man  uses  for  another.  In  the  course 
of  ages  the  Jew  had  reduced  a  Law  meant  to  rouse  the  heart,  a  Law  that  in  the  very 
essence  of  it  was  spiritual,  to  a  mere  collection  of  external  ceremonies.  The  Law  was 
reckoned,  as  something  that  could  he  obeyed  with  the  hands  and  lips.  And  because 
men  bad  lost  the  main  part  of  the  Law,  the  Law  itself  must  have  fallen  into  disrepute 
with  many.  Outwardly  they  saw  a  profession  of  religion ;  inwardly  they  saw  a  sordid 
and  uncharitable  life.  And  even  the  gospel  may  be  misused  as  much  as  the  Law. 
There  may  be  an  outward  semblance  of  connection  with  Christ,  while  he  has  no  power 
over  the  heart.  Men  did  come  to  the  Law  seeking  perfection ;  all  Pharisees  were  not  bad 
men  at  heart ;  their  consciences  were  misled  by  traditional  teaching  as  to  the  importance 
of  ceremonies.  In  their  own  strength  they  did  their  very  best  to  obey.  What  ib 
wanted  is  that  we  should  really  come  to  Christ,  that  our  hearts  should  be  brought  fully 
under  the  regenerating  power  of  his  Spirit.  Then  shall  we  know  aoinething  of  stead}' 
and  joyous  approach  'to  perfection  ;  for  while  perfection  itself  may  only  come  by  slow 
degrees,  yet  Christ  surely  means  us  to  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  constantly  that 
we  are  in  the  right  way. — T. 

Yer.  8. — Beminding  men  of  iitu.  I.  The  hxed  of  buoh  a  behindeb.  Men  need 
to  be  impressed  with  the  fact  that  sin  is  sin,  something  special,  something  done  in 
defiance  of  Ood's  Law.  If  we  do  hurt  to  a  fellow-man,  even  if  he  condone  and  excuse, 
that  does  not  put  things  as  they  were  before.  God  would  have  us  to  consider  what  a 
serious  and  terrible  thing  it  is  that  we  should  do  wrong  at  all.  Then  also  we  need  to 
be  reminded  because  of  our  liability  to  forget.  Life  is  one  long  sin,  made  up  of  daily 
omissions  and  commissions  in  what  are  called  little  things.  We  see  well  enough  as 
each  day  is  passing  over  our  heads  what  wrong  words  we  have  spoken,  what  evil 
thoughte  we  hare  had  in  our  hearts ;  some  days  we  feel  deeply  enough  the  sin  of  ttw 
day ;  bat  soon  the  impression  is  gone.  The  total  of  life's  sin,  however,  still  remains, 
and  it  is  above  all  things  needful  that  we  should  not  forget  it.  Then  most  important 
of  all,  perhaps,  is  it  that  we  should  be  reminded  how  much  of  the  trouble  and  misery 
of  life  oomes  from  our  ignorance.  Bins  of  ignorance  were  specially  provided  for  iu  the 
Mosais  eooBOi^.    A  man  can  hardly  be  blamed  for  what  he  does  in  ignorance,  and 


OH.  X.1— 39.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  291 

uortainly  he  Is  in  a  very  different  position  from  one  who  lets  lust  and  prids  lead  him 
against  truth  and  light.  But  the  evil  done  in  ignorance  is  evil  none  the  less,  and  men 
need  to  be  wal<ened  up  to  consider  how  much  truth  and  righteousness  they  are  still 
ignorant  of.  The  past  is  not  done  with  because  it  is  past.  The  future  has  its  roots  in 
the  past,  and  this  yearly  reminder  of  sin  among  God's  people  of  old  should  teach  us  to 
desire  reminders  of  the  sin  of  life,  not  merely  at  particular  seasons,  but  as  often  as 
possible. 

II.  We  havk  oub  bemindess  of  bin.  Bodily  reminders  in  the  shape  of  disease 
and  weakness  consequent  on  evil  courses  of  life.  Reminders  in  the  feelings  of  the  heart 
consequent  on  disappointment  and  failure  from  selfish  courses  of  action.  Especially  the 
Christian,  the  devout  Christian,  has  his  reminders  at  the  Lord's  Supper.  Jesus  himself 
spoke  of  this  institution  as  an  kvinviiats.  It  was  to  remind  his  people  of  himself,  but 
this  very  reminding  included  many  things  beside.  Jesus  must  be  remembered  with 
certain  surroundings,  and  no  sinner  can  remember  him  rightly  without  rememliering 
his  sins  at  the  same  time. — Y. 

Vers.  19 — Wi,— Approaching  Ood.  I.  Why  the  affboaoh  is  to  bx  hadk.  There 
needed  the  statement  of  no  reason  here ;  the  necessity  of  approach  is  assumed.  The 
great  thing  required  was  to  substitute  a  new  ground  and  a  new  mode  of  approach  for  a 
ground  and  a  mode  which  had  become  useless,  nay,  even  harmful.  The  Israelite  had 
always  acknowledged  that  he  must  approach  Deity  in  some  way  or  other.  If  God  had 
not  appointed  a  certain  way  of  access  in  the  Levitical  ordinances,  the  Israelite  would 
have  taken  his  own  way.  Indeed,  it  is  lamentably  plain  that  too  much  he  did  take  his 
own  way.  He  had  to  be  turned  from  the  golden  calf  by  the  sharpest  of  chastisements, 
and  many  a  century  elapsed  before  image-worship  and  debasing  rites  lost  their  hold 
upon  him.  Moses  and  the  prophets,  say  all  the  representatives  of  Jehovah  under  the 
Qrst  covenant,  had  quite  as  hard  work  to  turn  away  their  fellow-countrymen  from 
image-worship  as  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  afterwards  had  to  turn  them  away  from 
types  to  antitypes,  from  shadow  to  substance,  and  from  a  temporary  discipline  to  its 
abiding  result  in  the  Christ.  The  approach  to  Gk>d  may  be  looked  at  as  either  a  need 
or  a  duty,  and  whichever  aspect  be  considered,  it  is  evident  that  a  loving,  foreseeing 
God  will  provide  the  way.  He  provides  the  right  way  to  the  right  end.  Let  us  try  to 
imagine  him  leaving  Israel  to  its  own  devices  when  it  escaped  from  Egypt.  The  people 
would  still  have  built  altars,  slain  sacrifices,  and  appointed  priests.  What  God  does  is 
to  deliver  the  conscience  from  the  tyranny  of  every  idolatry  and  bring  it  under  reason- 
able government  and  guidance.  He  frees  human  religious  customs  from  cruelty,  lust, 
superstition,  and  makes  them  typical  and  instructive.  And  now  we  come  to  the  means 
of  a  full  approach  to  God  in  Christ,  is  it  not  plain  that  all  this  is  to  supply  a  corre- 
sponding need  and  give  scope  for  acorresponding  duty  ?  Jesus  tells  us  there  is  a  true 
Vine;  so  there  is  a  true  altar,  a  true  sacrifice,  a  true  Priest.  The  image-worshipper, 
whose  darkened  heart  is  filled  with  falsehoods  about  the  nature  and  the  service  of  God, 
is  yet  faithful  to  what  he  thinks  to  be  right.  Shall  we  be  less  faithful,  who  have 
opportunities  for  such  service  and  such  blessing. 

II.  Thb  orocnd  of  approach.  The  spirit  of  man  has  to  find  its  entrance  into  the 
holy  place,  and  has  to  give  its  reason  for  confidenre  in  expecting  admission — a  reason 
which  every  man  must  apply  to  his  own  understauding,  so  as  to  make  bis  approach  as 
practical,  as  persevering,  as  possible.  It  is  not  expected  of  us,  who  have  no  experience 
of  the  details  of  Mosaic  sacrificial  institutions,  to  appreciate  all  the  details  here.  We 
have  not  to  be  won  away  from  sacrifices  of  beasts  and  dependence  on  an  earthly  priest. 
But,  nevertheless,  we  must  apprehend  that  the  only  ground  of  satisfactory  approach  to 
God  id  in  Christ.  There  is  no  way  to  reach  harmony  with  that  great  Being  in  whom 
is  light  and  no  darkness  at  all,  and  who  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  save  through 
Christ.  In  Christ  there  is  hope  for  the  sinner,  something  to  draw  him,  something  to 
lift  him  above  useless  resolutions  and  vain  struggles.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Way.  "  You 
have  come  to  Mount  Zion,"  says  the  writer  in  ch.  xii.  To  the  real  Zion,  which  is  part 
of  the  city  of  the  living  God.  But  we  are  brought  there  that  we  may  be  safely  and 
I'ermanently  introduced  into  the  true  holy  of  holies,  and  into  that  communion  with  th« 
G'<d  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  gives  purity  and  blessedness. 

TIL  TnE  uosi  of  appboaoh.    The  whole  man  must  be  united  in  a  true  approach 


^98  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  x.  1—39 

to  God.  It  k  NOW  that  we  hare  to  approach,  and  there  can  be  no  leparation  between 
the  inward  ud  the  outward  man.  The- heart  must  be  right  and  the  body  must  be 
right.  Mere  bodily  approach  could  never  have  profited  at  any  time,  save  to  the  extent 
that  it  freed  the  worshipper  from  the  penalties  of  complete  disobedience.  But  still 
bodily  approach  has  its  place.  With  the  body  we  have  to  serve  God ;  and  cleanliness  is 
not  only  a  wholesome  and  a  comfortable  thing — it  is  also  sacred.  People  have  some- 
times been  exposed  to  ridicule  by  quoting  the  common  saying,  "  Cleanliness  is  next  to 
godliness,"  as  being  from  the  Scriptures.  They  are  not  so  far  wrong,  for  that  is  what 
this  passage  virtually  says.  Then  with  a  true  heart,  and  a  vigorous,  prosperous  faith 
bearing  us  onwards,  we  shall  make  a  real  and  secure  progress  towards  possession  of  the 
mysteries  of  godliness. — T. 

Ter.  23. — 3%«  Christian's  stead/att  acknowledgment  of  his  hope,  I.  The  existehoe 
OF  ACTUAL  ACKNOWLEDOMBNT  IS  ASSUMED.  The  Writer  is  addressing  those  who  are 
avowedly  Christians.  Jesus  has  already  been  acknowledged  as  Apostle  and  High  Priest 
(ch.  iik  1),  and  already  an  exhortation  has  been  given  to  hold  fast  the  acknowledgment 
of  him.  In  the  first  age  of  Christianity,  the  breaking  away  from  Judaism  or  from 
Gentile  idolatry  could  not,  of  course,  be  concealed.  It  never  was  meant  to  be  paraded 
or  obtruded;  but,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  light  rising  in  the  midst  of  darkness 
must  manifest  itself.  Saul's  conversion  was  soon  known  in  Damascus.  The  Nicodemus- 
attitude,  however  excusable  at  first,  cannot  long  be  maintained.  It  must  advance  to 
acknowledgment  or  subside  into  spiritual  indifference.  Many  there  must  have  been 
who,  like  Timothy,  had  made  a  good  confession  before  many  witnesses ;  therrin,  as  Paul 
hinted,  following  the  example  of  Jesus  before  Pilate  (1  Tim.  vi.  12,  13). 

II.  The  bpeoial  fobm  of  ihe  aoknowlkdqment  here  referred  to.  It  is  the 
acknowledgment  of  a  hope.  These  Jewisli  Christians  have  made  all  their  expectation 
of  the  future  to  depend  on  Christ.  Hope  is  the  natural  and  proper  feeling  of  the  human 
breast;  men  hope  for  that  which  it  it  within  the  limit  of  human  ability  to  attain. 
And  when  Christ,  by  his  death  and  resurrection,  and  by  the  gift  of  his  Spirit,  has 
enlarged  that  limit,  then  the  hope  is  enlarged  and  elevated  also.  Christ  meant  that  a 
spiritual  and  lofty  hope  should  brighten  the  arduous  lives  of  his  servants ;  and  evidently 
his  first  apostles  had  such  a  hope  as  they  contemplated  the  possibilities  of  their  own 
lives.  In  referring  to  the  Christian  hope  here,  the  writer  is  but  continuing  the  strain 
running  through  the  previous  part  of  the  Epistle  (iii.  6 ;  vi.  11, 18 ;  vii.  19).  If  we 
do  not  get  hope  into  our  hearts  from  our  connection  with  Christ,  then  that  connection 
is  a  delusion. 

III.  Tbb  aoknowledoment  will  be  of  no  use  unless  it  is  held  fast.  We 
must  avow,  without  the  slightest  hesitation  or  vacillation,  the  confidence  and  expecta- 
tion we  have  from  our  connection  with  Christ.  And  we  can  only  make  the  avowal  if 
the  feeling  is  real,  deep,  and  based  on  a  proper  understanding  of  what  it  is  that  Christ 
promises.  Christ  is  not  bound  to  justify  all  our  hopes,  but  only  such  as  the  obedient 
and  spiritually  minded  ought  to  entertain.  Note  the  strong  words  which  the  writer 
uses  in  insisting  on  the  need  of  holding  fast  this  acknowledgment.  This  shows  what 
temptation  there  would  be  to  fall  away  from  it. 

IV.  The  obouhd  uiten  foe  holding  fast.  "  He  is  faithful  that  promised."  The 
word  of  one  who  has  done  such  things  as  Jesus,  and  manifested  such  a  character,  is 
the  very  best  ground  we  can  have.  The  faithfulness  of  Jesus  is  known  in  all  those 
points  whereby,  in  the  present  world,  it  can  be  tested.  When  he  speaks  of  the 
treasures  of  a  future  which  we  cannot  yet  test,  our  wisdom  is  to  hold  fast  to  him, 
and  not  listen  to  the  confused  utterances  of  men,  or  the  too  often  rebellious  promptings 
of  our  own  hearts. — Y. 

Vers.  24,  25. — Mutuality  in  tht  Christian  life.  The  exhortation  in  ver.  23  is  one  for 
individual  Christians,  looking  towards  their  Saviour  in  direct  connection  with  him  and 
towards  their  own  future.  But  so  soon  as  ever  we  feel  sure  that  we  are  keeping  right 
with  respect  to  Christ,  we  must  make  that  rightness  subservient  to  the  strengthening, 
the  comfort,  and  the  usefulness  of  our  fellow-Christians.  We  must  both  help  them  and 
look  for  help  to  them.  Mutual  help  for  common  needs  iy  eminently  a  Christian 
principle. 


OH.  X,  1—39.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa.  293 

I.  Wb  havb  to  consideb  one  anotheb,  <.«.  we  must  look  well  into  the  character, 
the  habits,  the  position,  the  abilities,  the  needs  of  all  whom  we  have  sufficient  oppor- 
tunity to  estimate.  We  must  get  an  honest  and  adequate  view.  We  must  not 
expect  too  much  from  them,  neither  must  we  let  them  off  with  too  little.  This 
knowledge  is  to  be  gained  by  real  consideration,  not  by  hearsay,  not  liastily,  not 
casually.  We  must  get  below  the  surface.  Such  a  consideration  as  this  may  have 
many  results. 

II.  The  SPECIAI  aim  here  to  be  kept  in  view.  "  To  provoke  unto  love  and  to 
good  works."  There  is  a  large  meaning  in  this  expression.  First  of  all  it  means 
that  when  we  look  at  the  needs  of  others,  especially  of  fellow-Cliristians,  when  we 
look  into  those  needs,  seeing  how  deep,  how  abiding,  how  discomposing  they  are,  we 
shall  be  stirred  up  to  a  very  passion  of  love  for  the  needy  and  a  consequent  doing 
of  good  works  for  their  relief.  And,  moreover,  when  the  consideration  is  what  it 
ought  to  be,  there  will  be  wisdom,  proportion,  true  economy,  adjustment  of  means 
to  ends,  in  the  good  works.  But  also  those  whom  we  consider  must  be  stirred  up  to 
have  love  in  their  own  hearts  and  good  works  in  their  hands. 

III.  A  PECULIAR  PERIL.  That  of  living  in  isolation.  Living  the  Christian  life 
in  isolation.  People  will  not  act  so  in  the  needs,  duties,  and  pleasures  of  common 
life.  They  will  gather  together  in  twos  or  threes,  or  any  number  that  may  be 
necessary.  But  their  religion  they  keep  to  themselves.  They  do  not  understand 
how  much  they  can  be  helped  by  mutual  edification.  Not  that  the  writer  supposes 
this  tendency  can  be  universal.  He  expressly  points  out  that  it  is  the  habit  of 
some.  Such  do  not  understand  their  obligations  and  their  needs ;  their  latent  ability 
to  comfort  others  on  the  one  hand,  or  their  latent  weakness,  their  certain  need  of 
comfort,  on  the  other. 

IV.  The  MEANS  op  this  mutual  bdipioatioh.  "Exhorting  one  another."  Real 
exhortation  is  to  be  made  by  virtue  of  the  Holy  Spirit  working  in  him  who  exhorts. 
It  must  not  have  its  sole  origin  in  experiences  and  energies  of  the  natural  man.  Ad 
exhortation  which  shall  be  truly  a  good  work  must  come  from  a  spiritual  man.  He 
only  discerns  the  reality  of  spiritual  truth ;  he  only  can  communicate  it  with  the 
requisite  force. 

v.  A  special  motive.  The  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  is  approaching.  This  day,  as 
we  know  from  ample  evidence,  was  believed  to  be  very  near  by  the  primitive  Christians. 
They  did  right  in  so  believing,  for  their  Lord  wanted  them  to  be  ever  reaiiy.  And  in 
any  case  the  practical  equivalent  of  that  day  is  not  far  off  from  each  Christian  in  his 
earthly  life.    His  opportunity  to  show  love  and  do  good  works  will  soon  be  over. — Y. 

Ver.  Sr. — Falling  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  I.  As  illustrated  in  histobt. 
The  whole  passage,  vers.  26 — 31,  is  a  very  serious  one  to  read,  insisting  as  it  does  on 
the  reality  of  Divine  retribution  upon  those  guilty  of  neglect  and  disobedience.  It  was 
evidently  necessary,  however,  to  deal  with  this  point  and  thus  make  the  comparison 
between  the  old  and  the  new  covenant  complete.  How  will  God  deal  with  those  who 
wilfully  neglect  the  ample  and  gracious  provisions  of  the  new  covenant?  The  first 
element  in  the  answer  is  given  by  inquiring  how  he  dealt  with  despisers  of  the  old 
covenant— despisers  of  Moses  as  Jehovah's  deputy  and  messenger.  A  great  deal  hangs 
on  the  word  wilfully.  Jehovah  has  always  been  long-suffering  with  ignorance  and 
thoughtlessnesD.  But  when  men  rise  like  Eoi:ah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  with  the 
purposes  of  rebellion  and  self-assertion  strong  in  their  heart,  knowing  what  they  are 
doing,  and  doing  it  deliberately  and  defiantly,  then  God  has  to  be  equally  assertive  of 
his  rij^htful  authority  and  the  rightful  authority  of  whomsoever  he  makes  his  repre- 
sentative. The  Jew  did  not  qneation  that  it  was  a  right  thing  that  the  despiser  of 
Moses'  Law  ghotild  die  without  full  under  two  or  three  witnesses.  Of  course  we  must 
guard  against  arguing  back  from  great  catastrophes  to  great  sins.  What  we  are  bound 
to  do  is  to  recognize  the  plain  asserted  connection  between  some  great  sins  and  the 
consequences  that  Ibllowed.  And  in. every  case,  to  every  individual,  the  consequences 
are  real ;  only  in  some  cases  the  consequences  have  been  made  terribly  conspicuous  by 
way  of  warning. 

II,  As  contrasted  with  the  impotence  of  other  hands  into  which  wk  hat 
f  ALL,    Jehovah,  the  living  Gud,  is  here  cuolrasted  with  lifeless  idols.     Jehovah,  tfa« 


294  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [oh.  x.  1—39 

GoA  who  makes  nDfailing,  righteovu,  potent  judgments,  as  contrasted  with  idolatroua 
priests  who  have  no  power  except  by  working  on  the  superstitions  fears  of  men. 
Attachment  to  Mosaic  institutions  had  hardened  into  something  little  better  thaa 
idolatry.  The  living  God  had  become  a  mere  name,  the  centre  of  a  mechanical  ritual. 
Men  stood  in  terror  of  their  own  traditional  delusions.  Or  they  stood  in  terror  of  one 
another  like  those  parents  of  the  blind  man,  who  feared  they  would  be  put  out  of  the 
synagogue  if  they  acknowledged  Jesus  as  the  Christ.  It  is  right  that  men  should  be 
afraid,  but  how  often  are  they  afraid  of  the  wrong  things  1  To  fall  into  the  hands  of 
men  must  have  a  dreadful  look  at  first,  but  when  the  position  is  fully  estimated  it  is  a 
mere  trifle.  The  really  fearful  thing  is  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  Qod.-  He  is 
something  very  different  from  an  empty  superstition  or  a  living  man. 

III.    As  CONNECTED   WITH   THE   IMMENSE   BIN  OP  WILFULLY   BEJECTTNO  JeBUS.      The 

writer  allows  us  to  be  under  no  mistake  as  to  what  he  means.  Whosoever  can  truly  say 
that  he  does  not  trample  underfoot  the  Son  of  God,  does  not  reckon  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  an  unholy  thing,  does  not  do  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace, — snch  a  one  Is  free. 
In  the  first  days  of  breaking  away  from  Judaism,  when  all  the  malevolence  and  bitter- 
ness of  the  worst  sort  of  Jews  came  into  play,  there  would  be  more  occasion  of  warning 
of  this  sort  than  now.  And  even  with  regard  to  such  men  there  is  another  side  to  be 
cunsidered.  Paul  was  once  bitter  and  malevolent  enough,  but  he  put  in  the  plea  that 
wliat  he  did  he  did  ignorantly,  in  unbelief.  Grod  only  can  judge  the  heart  of  a  man 
eu'Ugh  to  say  how  far  his  rejection  is  really  deliberate,  m  the  face  of  light  and 
knowledge.— Y, 

Ver.  34. — The  right  eitinaU  of  temporal  possession.  I.  Tmt  eight  estimate  itself. 
This  is  a  mean  between  extremes.  To  despise  worldly  pi  ssessions,  to  speak  of  them  as 
if  they  were  to  be  trampled  underfoot  as  always  worthless,  is  not  a  Christian  state  of 
mind.  The  worldly  man  overvalues  and  the  ascetic  undervalues.  The  Christian, 
taught  by  his  Master,  leaos  to  use  the  world  as  not  abusing.  It  is  not  well  in  ordinary 
circumstances  to  make  comparisons ;  a  wise  and  devout  man  will  use  everything  Ibr 
God  according  to  its  nature  and  its  scope.  But  there  may  come  a  time  when  the  man 
has  to  make  his  election  between  the  temporal  and  the  eternal,  between  what  the  world 
has  to  give  and  what  Christ  has  to  give.  Then  it  will  be  seen  where  the  affections  are. 
A  treasure  is  not  a  treasure  in  itself ;  it  is  a  treasure  relatively  to  its  possessor.  Where 
the  heart  is,  there  the  treasure  is.  One  may  see  the  pearl  of  great  price  where  another 
sees  a  trifle,  as  it  were  a  mere  nothing.  No  one  estimates  temporal  possessions  rightly 
unless  he  is  willing  to  sacrifice  them  for  eternal  interests.  There  is  only  one  answer  to 
the  question,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own 
soul?"  A  man  will  surrender  all  his  wealth  to  keep  his  life.  How  much  more,  then, 
should  he  be  willing  to  surrender  his  wealth  to  keep  his  spiritual  hope,  his  vital  con- 
nection with  the  boundless  spiritual  wealth  resident  in  Christ  ?  This  is  not  a  question 
for  the  few  rich  men  only ;  it  is  for  every  one  who  has  possessions  to  lose.  They  may 
not  have  to  be  given  up  outright ;  they  may  not  be  in  danger  of  loss  through  perse- 
tution;  but  they  may  have  to  be  risked  through  adopting  truly  Christian  principles 
of  life. 

II.  Those  who  abe  to  oain  the  biobt  estimate.  In  making  the  estimate, 
everything' di  ponds  on  the  life  and.  character  of  him  who  has  to  make  it.  The 
estimate  is  made,  if  one  may  say  so,  in  an  unconscious  kind  of  way.  It  is  a  personal, 
practical  dicision,  not  a  mere  i-pLCulalive  one  with  little  or  no  influence  on  the  life. 
The  decision  is  made,  and  some  of  the  consequences  of  it  attained,  before  the  critical 
character  ol  those  consequences  is  discerned.  In  great  moments  of  life  we  may  have 
to  decide  on  the  B|>uj  ol  the  moment;  and  the  only  man  who  can  decide  rightly  is 
the  siiiritual  man— he  whose  inner  eye  is  open  to  see  things  as  they  really  are.  The 
pearl  of  great  price  is  to  be  seen  intuitively  or  not  at  all.  There  must  be  s  firm 
resolution  fixed  in  the  heart  to  gain  and  to  keep  this  pearl  at  whatever  cost.  Once  we 
liavG  got  into  right  relaiions  with  Christ,  comparisons  between  his  claims  and  the 
claims  of  other  beings  are  not  hard  to  make.  In  making  comparisons  between  one 
temporal  jossessiou  and  another,  the  character  of  those  who  make  the  comparison 
may  or  may  not  be  a  matter  of  importance.  But  in  distinguishing  between  the 
temporal  and  the  eternal,  character  is  everything.    We  must  have  the  Spirit  of  CShrist 


tH.  X.  1— 39.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  295 

working  in  ns  most  energetically  if  we  would  be  lifted  above  all  danger  of  sacrificing 
ihe  eternal  to  the  temporal. — T. 

Ver.  36. — Something  to  do  and  something  to  wait  for.  I.  Something  m  the  past. 
"  Having  done  the  will  of  God."  The  writer  did  not  hereby  mean  that  his  readers  had 
done  all  the  will  of  God  ;  he  simply  recognized  the  fact  that  they  had  com|ilied  with 
the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  as  far  as  that  will  had  been  made  known  in  distinct 
words  and  could  be  complied  with  in  distinct  acts.  Jesus  had  been  proclaimed  to  them 
fis  the  Christ;  they  had  accepted  him  as  such  fully  and  practically;  they  had  welcomed 
him  as  the  FulflUer  of  the  Law  and  the  prophets.  They  had  received  his  Holy  Spirit. 
They  had  renounced  all  faith  in  Judaism  as  necessary  to  acceptable  service  of  God. 
Their  position  might  be  expressed  thus  :  "  We  have  done  the  will  of  God  as  far  as  it 
has  been  made  known  to  us;  if  there  be  anything  more  for  us  to  do  on  earth  let  us 
know,  and  we  will  do  it."  Now,  the  question  for  us  is — Have  we  got  as  far  as  these 
people?  They  were  standing  on  the  fact  that  what  they  knew  of  God's  will  they  had 
done.  Have  we  done  what  we  know  of  Gud's  will?  Or,  to  go  further  back  still — Have 
we  knowledge  of  what  it  is  that  God  wills  us  to  do  ?  We  all  have  to  wait,  but  what  is 
our  standing-place  as  we  wait?  That  will  make  all  the  difference.  Have  we  done  the 
whole  of  what  can  be  done  any  day?  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation."  The  five  wise  virgins  trimmed  their  lamps  and  filled  their  oil-vessels,  and 
then  they  could  wait  with  composure  and  confidence.  Long  as  Christ's  coming  seems 
to  the  truly  faithful,  it  will  come  all  too  soon  for  some. 

II.  SoMBTHiNO  IN  THE  PRESENT.  The  Spirit  of  patient  waiting.  It  must  have  been 
very  hard  to  wait  among  persecutors  and  unjust  spoliators.  The  second  coming  of  the 
Master  seemed  the  only  effectual  way  of  deliverance.  But  this  second  coming  was  a 
thing  to  be  waited  for,  until  it  came  in  the  fulness  of  time.  God  has  to  thitik  of  all 
individuals  and  all  generations.  God  has  to  make  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
every  man.  We  have  to  wait  for  others,  as  others  have  had  to  wait  for  ns.  The  prin- 
ciple is  laid  down  at  the  end  of  ch.  zi.  Meanwhile  waiting  is  not  altogether  waiting. 
Something  is  given  by  the  way.  Even  as  Jesus  had  ineffable  joys  and  satisfactions  in 
the  days  of  his  flesh,  there  are  like  experiences  for  us.  Patience  is  only  truly  patience 
when  it  is  combined  with  hope,  and  true  hope  built  on  faith  must  be  a  gladness  to  the 
heart. 

III,  SoMETHiNO  IN  THE  PtrTUBB.  Something  perfectly  definite  and  certain.  We 
know  not  how  long  we  may  have  to  wait,  but  at  the  end  of  the  waiting  there  is  some- 
thing worth  waiting  for.  Long  did  Israel  wait  in  Egyptian  bondage,  but  liberty  came 
at  last.  Long  did  Israel  wander  in  a  comparatively  little  tract  of  land,  but  the  settled 
life  of  Canaan  came  at  last.  Many  generations  lived  and  died  with  nothing  save 
gracious  prophecies  to  solace  them,  but  the  Christ  came  at  last.  And  so  Christ  will 
come  again  without  sin  unto  salvation. — T. 

Vers.  38,  39. — Z%e  just  man,  his  character  cmd  safety,  I.  The  oharaotbs  of 
THE  just  man.  It  was  inevitable,  in  an  Epistle  to  Jewish  Christians,  that  there  should 
be  some  reference  to  that  Pharisaic  righteousness  wliich  consisted  in  a  conformity  to 
certain  ritual  regulations.  There  was  the  man  just  after  the  Pharisee  fashion,  because 
of  his  scrupulosity  in  ceremonial  ob.servances ;  and  there  was  the  man  just  in  the  sight 
of  God,  because  he  believed  in  God  and  showed  his  faith  by  his  works.  These  Jewish 
Christians  were  righteous  men  because  they  were  believers.  They  had  been  brought 
fully  to  comprehend  that  while  God  cared  nothing  for  a  round  of  ceremonies,  he  valued 
in  the  highest  a  spirit  of  trust  in  him — a  spirit  able  to  break  away  from  the  common 
reliance  of  men  upon  seen  things,  and  to  live  as  seeing  him  that  is  invisible.  This  is 
the  only  sort  of  righteousness  that  changes  the  whole  of  character ;  for  if  a  man  really 
trusts  God,  then  men  will  be  able  to  trust  him  and  get  real  advantage  out  of  him. 

n.  The  bafett  of  the  just  man.  The  just  man  shall  live.  By  his  faith  he 
becomes  just  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  that  faith,  continuing  and  strengthening, 
preserves  him.  What  can  a  round  of  ceremonies  do  for  a  man  ?  The  moment  they 
lose  their  typical  character,  the  moment  they  cease  to  be  symbolic  of  spiritual  realities, 
that  same  moment  they  bring  the  heart  more  than  ever  in  bondage  to  the  senses.  The 
path  of  safety  has  always  been  the  path. entered  on  in  response  to  the  voice  from  or 


296 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  XI.  1—40. 


high.  To  the  evo  of  sense  it  may  have  seemed  a  needless  path,  or  a  foolish  path,  or  a 
perilous  path.  There  may  liave  heon  many  to  criticize  and  abuse.  The  only  stay  of 
the  heart  has  been  the  deep  conviction  that  the  way  was  God's  way,  and  that  in  the 
end  it  would  approve  itself  such.  This  truth,  that  the  way  of  faith  in  God  is  the  way 
of  safety,  is  amply  illustrated  in  the  following  chapter.  Whatever  the  believer  may 
lose,  he  keeps  the  chief  treasure. 

III.  The  GNnuBAKOE  of  the  just  man.  There  mast  be  perseverance  in  the  way 
of  fiuth.  There  must  be  a  readiness  to  wait  on  Qoi's  time.  Therefore  it  is  that  we  are 
warned  on  trying  to  enter  the  life  of  faith.  Can  we  go  on  believing  even  though  our 
present  life  be  full  of  adversity?  Our  faith  must  continue  against  the  persuasions  of 
worldly  success  and  through  the  pains  of  all  suffering  to  the  flesh.  It  is  to  the  prophet 
Habakkuk  the  writer  refers  in  reminding  us  how  the  just  by  faith  lives;  and  that  just 
man  of  the  prophet  keeps  his  faith  even  tliough  the  fig  tree  do  not  blossom,  nor  fruit  be 
in  the  vines ;  tiiough  the  labour  of  the  olive  fail,  and  tl:ie  fields  yield  no  meat ;  though 
the  flock  is  out  off  beta  tha  fold,  uid  there  is  no  herd  in  the  stalls.— Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFTEB  XL 


Ver.  1. — Kow  faith  is  the  substance  (so 
A.  v.,  with  marginal  readings,  "  or  ground, 
or,  confidence")  of  things  hoped  for,  the 
evidence  of  thing*  not  seen.  On  the  senses 
in  which  the  word  )Sit6irra(rts  (translated 
"  substance  ")  may  be  used,  see  under  ch.  L 
2.  As  to  the  sense  intended  here,  views 
differ.  There  are  three  possible  ones,  ex- 
pressed in  the  text  and  margin  of  the  A.V., 
substance,  ground,  and  confidence.  The  first 
is  understood  by  the  Fathers  generally,  the 
idea  being  supposed  to  be  that,  inasmuch  as 
things  not  yet  experienced,  but  only  hoped 
for,  become  real  to  us  by  faith,  faith  is 
metaphysically  their  substance,  as  sub- 
stantiating them  to  us.  So  Theopliilus: 
Quffiuffis  rav  lir^no)  ivTtay,  i}v6ffTafns  ruv 
fiil  v<j>e<rT7iK6Tuv:  and  Chrysostom,  who 
illustrates  thus :  "  The  resurrection  has  not 
yet  taken  place,  but  faith  substantiates 
( u^Wijo-ii')  it  in  our  souls."  So  also  Dante, 
following  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  in  a  striking 
passage  quoted  by  Delitzsoh  (' Paradise/ 
xxiv.  70—75)— 

'  Le  profonde  oose 
Che  mi  largiscon  qui  la  lor  parvenn 
Agli  occhi  di  laggiil  son  si  nascose, 
Che  I'esser  loro  v%  in  sola  oredenza, 
Sovra  la  qual  si  fonda  I'alta  spene : 
E  per6  dl  sustanza  prende  I'intenza.* 

"  The  things  profound 
That  here  vouchsafe  to  me  tiieu  apparition 
From  all  eyes  here  belo^  are  so  concealed 
That  all  their  being  is  in  faith  alone. 
Upon  the  which  high  hope  doth  base  itself: 
And  therefore  faith  assumes  the  place  of 
suljetanee." 

The  rendering  ground,  which  involves  only 
the  simpler  idea  of  faith  being  the  founda- 
tion on  which  hope  is  built,  has  not  much 


support  from  the  use  of  the  word  elsewhere, 
nor  does  it  seem  suitable  here.  For  it  is 
not  the  things  hoped  for,  but  rather  our 
hopes  of  them,  that  are  grounded  on  our 
faith.  The  subjective  sense,  confidence,  or 
assurance,  is  most  in  favour  with  modem 
commentators,  principally  as  being  the  most 
usual  one  (of.  ch.  iii.  ll ;  2  Cor.  ix.  4 ;  xi. 
17 ;  also  Pa  xxxviii.  11,  'H  !nr6ara<ris  /iov 
wapi  cod  IcTtvi  Ezek.  xix.  5,  'AiriSAeTo  v 
iTt6irTa(ns  avriis :  Ruth  L  12,  'Eitti  /toi  vt6' 
ffraffts  Tov  yeveBrivai  /46  av^pi).  One  objection 
to  this  sense  of  the  word  here  is  that  it  is 
usually  followed,  when  so  intended,  by  a 
genitive  of  the  person,  not  of  the  thing; 
though  Ruth  i.  12  is  an  instance  to  the 
contrary.  But  apart  from  this  considera- 
tion, the  consensus  of  the  Greek  Fathers  is  a 
weighty  argument  for  the  retention  of  the 
rendering  of  the  A.V.  Either  rendering,  be 
it  observed,  gives  the  same  essential  mean- 
ing, though  under  different  mental  concep- 
tions. Faith  is  further  said  to  be  (Ae 
evidence  of  things  not  seen ;  ^Xeyxos  mean- 
ing, not  as  some  take  it,  inward  conviction 
of  their  existence,  but  in  itself  a  demonstra- 
tion, serving  the  purpose  of  argument  to 
induce  conviction.  So  Dante,  in  continua- 
tion of  the  passage  quoted  above — 

"  E  da  <}uesta  credenza  oi  oonviene 
Sillogizar  senza  avere  altia  visa ; 
E  per6  intenza  d'argomento  tiene." 

"  And  from  this  credence  it  is  fit  and  right 
To  syllogize,  though  other  sight  be  none : 
Therefore  futh  holds  the  place  of  argu- 
ment." 

Is  this  meant  as  a  definition  of  faith,  or 
only  a  description  of  its  efFeot  and  opera- 
tion, with  especial  regard  to  the  subject  in 
hand?  Virtually  a  definition,  though  not 
in  the  strict  logical  form  of  one.  At  any 
rate,  *'  the  constituents  and  essential  oha- 


OH.  XI.  1— dC] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS. 


29T 


racteristics  of  faith  are  here  laid  down" 
(Delitzsch) ;  i.e.  of  faith  in  its  most  general 
sense — that  of  belief  in  such  things,  whether 
past,  present,  or  future,  as  are  not  known 
by  experience,  and  cannot  be  logically 
demonstrated.  "  Licet  quidam  dieant  prse- 
dicta  apostoli  verba  non  esse  fldei  rlelini- 
tionem,  quia  definitio  indicat  rei  quiddity  tern 
et  essentiam,  tamen  si  quis  recte  consideret, 
omnia  ex  quibus  fides  potest  definiri  in 
prsedicta  desoriptione  tanguutur,  licet  verba 
non  ordinentur  sub  forma  deflnitionis " 
(St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  'Secunda  Secuudsa,* 
qu.  4,  art.  1).  Faith,  in  the  general  sense 
indicated,  is  and  has  ever  been,  ag  the 
chapter  goes  on  to  show,  the  very  root  and 
inspiring  principle  of  all  true  religion. 
And  be  it  observed  that,  if  well  grounded, 
it  is  not  irrational ;  it  would  rather  be  iraa- 
tional  to  disregard  it,  or  suppose  it  opposed 
to  reason.  Even  in  ordinary  affairs  of  life, 
and  in  science  too,  men  act,  and  must  act, 
to  a  great  extent  on  faith ;  it  is  essential 
for  success,  and  certainly  for  all  great 
achievements— faith  in  the  testimony  and 
authority  of  others  whom  we  can  trust, 
faith  in  views  and  principles  not  yet  veri- 
fied by  our  own  expeiience,  faith  in  the 
expected  outcome  of  right  proceeding,  faith 
with  respect  to  a  thousand  things  which 
we  take  on  trust,  and  so  make  ventures,  on 
the  ground,  not  of  positive  proof,  but  of 
more  or  less  assured  conviction.  Keligious 
faith  is  the  same  principle,  though  exercised 
in  a  higher  sphere ;  and  it  may  be  as  well 
grounded  as  any  on  which  irreligious  men 
are  acting  daily.  Various  feelings  and  con- 
siderations may  conspire  to  induce  it:  the 
very  phenomena  of  the  visible  universe, 
which,  though  themselves  objects  of  sense, 
speak  to  the  soul  of  a  Divinity  beyond 
them ;  still  more,  conscience,  recognized  as 
a  Divine  voice  within  us,  and  implying  a 
Power  above  us  to  whom  we  are  responsible ; 
then  all  our  strange  yearnings  after  ideals 
not  yet  realized,  our  innate  sense  that 
righteousness  ought  to  triumph  over  ini- 
quity, as  in  our  disordered  world  it  does 
not  yet ; — which  things  are  in  themselves 
prophetic :  and,  in  addition  to  all  this, 
the  general  human  belief  in  Deity.  And 
when,  further,  a  revelation  lias  been  given, 
its  answering  to  our  already  felt  needs  and 
asjiirations,  together  with  the  usual  con- 
siderations on  which  we  give  credence  to 
testimony,  induces  faith  in  it  also,  and 
in  the  things  by  it  revealed ;  natural 
faith  is  thus  confirmed,  and  faith  in  other 
verities  is  borne  in  upon  the  soul ;  which  is 
further  itself  confirmed  by  experience  of  the 
effects  of  entertaining  it.  In  some  minds, 
as  is  well  known,  and  these  of  the  highest 
order,  such  faith  may  amount  to  oertituite, 
rendering  the  "things  unseen"  mora  leal 


to  them  than  "  the  things  that  do  appear."" 
It  cannot  be  said  that  to  accept  such  faith 
as  evidisnce  is  contrary  to  reason ;  our  not 
doing  so  would  be  to  put  aside  as  meaning 
notliing  the  deepest,  the  most  spiritual,  the 
most  elevating  faculties  of  our  mysterious 
nature,  by  means  of  which,  no  less  than  by 
our  other  faculties,  we  are  constituted  so  as 
to  apprehend  the  truth.  And  we  may  ob- 
serve, lastly,  that  even  to  those  who  have 
not  themselves  this  "  fulness  of  faith,"  its 
very  existence  in  others,  including  so  many 
of  the  great  and  good,  may  surely  be  ration- 
ally accepted  as  evidence  of  realities  corre- 
sponding to  it. 

Ver.  2.— For  in'  this  (i.e.  faith,  h  ratrri) 
the  elders  obtained  a  good  report ;  literally, 
were  witnessed  of ;  i.e.  it  was  in  respect  of 
their  faith,  whicli  inspired  their  deeds,  that 
they  were  praised.  (I'or  a  similar  use  of  the 
preposition  iv,  at  1  Cor.  xi.  22,  kwawk<ra>  iy 
TovTCf).  Thus  is  introduced  the  illustrative 
review  of  Old  Testament  instances,  the  pur- 
pose of  which  has  been  explained  above.  It 
begins  from  the  beginning,  Abel  being  the 
first  example.  But  in  the  Old  Testament 
the  account  of  the  creation  precedes  that  first 
recorded  instance;  and,  therefore,  it  is  in 
the  first  place  fittingly  referred  to,  the  exist- 
ence of  an  unseen  creative  power  mentally 
perceived  beyond  things  visiLile,  being  the 
primary  article — the  very  foundation — of 
all  religious  faith  (cf.  below,  ver.  6). 

Ver.  3. — ^By  faith  we  perceive  that  the 
worlds  have  been  framed  by  the  word  of 
God,  so  that  the  things  which  are  seen  (or, 
that  which  is  seen)  have  (or,  has)  not  been 
made  of  things  whioh  do  appear.  "  By  the 
word  of  God  "  has  reference  to  "  and  God 
said,"  of  Gen.  i.,  which  chapter  enunciates 
the  [jrimary  article  of  all  definite  religious 
faitli,  viz.  the  existence  and  operation  of 
God,  as  the  unseen  Author  of  the  visible 
universe.  Even  without  a  revelation  to 
declare  this,  faith's  office  is  to  apprehend  it 
from  observation  of  the  phenomena  them- 
selves ;  as  is  intimated  in  Rom.  i.  20,  where 
even  to  the  Greek  "  the  invisible  things  of 
G(jd  from  the  creation  of  the  world "  are 
said  to  be  "  clearly  seen,  being  understood 
[irooi^eva  I  cf.  voovfiev  in  the  passage  before 
ns]  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his 
eternal  power  and  Godhead."  The  drift  of 
both  passages  is  the  same,  viz.  this,  and 
no  more — that  faith  recognizes  an  unseen 
"  power  and  Godhead  "  behind,  and  account- 
ing for,  the  seen  universe.  Commentators, 
who — taking  /*^  Ik  <paivo/j.hav  as  equivalent 
to  Ik  /ii)  <j)aivoiihuv,  and  hence  seeking  to 
explain  what  is  meant  by  "  non-apparent 
things" — perceive  here  a  reference  either  to 
the  formless  void  (Gen.  i.  2)  out  of  which 
tlie  present  creation  was  evolved,  or  to  th« 
Platonic  conception  of  eternal  ideas  in  the 


298 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oH.  XL  1—40. 


Divine  mind,  read  into  the  text  what  is  not 
there. 

Ver.  4. — By  faith  Abel  offered  nnto  God  a 
moie  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,  through 
which  (i.e.  faith,  not  sacrifice,  "  faith  "  being 
the  ruling  idea  of  the  whole  passage)  he 
ohtained  witness  (liteiallj,  was  witnessed  of) 
that  he  was  righteous,   God    testifying  of 
(literally,  witnessing  upon,  or,  in  respect  to) 
his  gifts :  and  through  it  (faith)  he  being 
dead  yet  speaketh.    In  the  traditions  pre- 
served in  Genesis  of  the  dim  and  distant 
antediluvian  period,  three  figures  stand  out 
prominently  as  representing  the  righteous 
seed  in  the  midst  of  growing  evil — Abel, 
Enoch,  and  Noah.      These  are,  therefore, 
first  adduced  with  the  view  of   showini; 
that  it  is  iu  respect  of  faith  that  they  are 
thus   distinguished   in   tlie  sacred    record. 
Wiih  respeet  to  Abel,  it  is  not  necessary  to 
inquire   or  conjecture  whether  the  bluody 
character  of  bis  ofi'ering  is  to  be  considered 
as  constituting  its  superior  excellence.    The 
record  in  Genesis  simply  represents  the  two 
brothers  as  offering  each  what  he  had  to 
offer  in  accordance  wilh  his  occupation  and 
pursuits,  the  only  difference  being  that  Abel 
is  said  to  have  offered  \\i3  firstlings  and  the 
fat  thereof,  while  nothing  is  said  of  Cain 
having  brought  his  firstfruits  or  his  best. 
Then,  in  the  account  of  the  result,  we  are 
only  told  that  unto  one  the  Loud  had  re- 
spect, and  not  to  the  other,  without  mention 
of  the  reason  why.    It  is  usual  to  find  a 
reason  in  the  nature  of  Abel's  offering  as 
signifying  atonement,  and  to   suppose  his 
faitli  manifested  in  his  recognition  of  the 
need  of  such  atonement,  signified  to  him,  as 
has  been  furtlier  supposed,  by  Hivine  com- 
mand.   This  view  of  the  intention  of  the 
narrative  is  indeed  suggested  by  the  de- 
scription of  what  his  offering  was,  viewed  in 
the  light  of  subsequent  sacrificial  theory; 
but  it  is  not  apparent  in  the  narrative  taken 
by  itself,  or  in  the  reference  to  it  in  the 
passage  before  us.      The  acceptablcness  of 
the  (offering  is  here  simply  attributed,  as  of 
necessity,  to  the  failh  of  the  offerer,  witliout 
any  intimation  of  how  that  faith  had  been 
evinced.    And  with  tliis  view  of  the  matter 
agrees  thereourd  itself, where  it  is  said  that 
"  unto  Abel  and  his  ottering  the  Louu  had 
respei-t;"  i.e.  to  Abel  first,  and  then  to  his 
offering — the  offering  was  accepted  because 
Abel  was,  not  Abel  on  account  of  Ijis  kind 
of  offering.     "Omne  quod  datur  Deo  ex 
dantia   mente    p'  nsatur  .  .  .  Neqne    enim 
b.i  rum  eloiuinni  dieit,  Respexit  ad  munera 
Abel  et  ad  C.iin  niiiiiera  nnn   respexit,  sed 
piius  ait  quia  re^puxit  ad  Ahel,  ac  il  iuJo 
buhjunxit,   'et    ad   munera  ejus.'      idc  roo 
n  in  Abel  ex  mmieribns,  sed  ex  Abel  mu- 
nera   oblata    placuerunt"     (St.    Gregory' 
quoted  b/    Delitzsch).     -And   lie  being 


dead,"  etc.,  refers  plainly  to  Gen.  iv-.*^ 
"  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth 
unto  me  from  the  ground."  The  same  voi.e 
of  innocent  blood,  which  appealed  at  the 
beginning  of  human  history  to  the  God  of 
righteousness,  cries  still  through  all  the 
ages ;  it  sounds  in  our  own  ears  now,  telling 
us  that  faith  prevails  on  hi^h,  and  that 
"  right  dear  in  the  sight  of  the  Lobd  is  the 
death  of  his  saints."  Of.  ch.  xii.  2+  for  an 
allusion  again  to  the  cry  of  the  blood  of 
Abel.  The  word  \a\eTv  is  tliere  also  used, 
supporting  the  reading  \a\€'!,  rather  than 
the  \aKe^Tai  of  the  Textus  Receptus  here. 

Ver.  5. — By  faith  Enoch  was  translated 
that  he  should  not  see  death ;  and  was  not 
found,  because  God  had  translated  him  :  for 
before  his  translation  he  had  this  testimony, 
that  he  pleased  God;  litera'ly,  huth  been 
witnessed  of  that  he  had  heen  well-'pUasing  to 
God.  The  allu^ion  is,  of  course,  to  the 
testimony  in  Genesis  (v.  24),  the  LXX. 
being  closely  followed,  which  has,  Eiijj- 
peffTTjffev  *Ey^x  "^V  ©ecS",  Kal  oux  v^P^'^kgto 
ShSti  neriBriKfv  aurov  6  @eis,  whereas  the 
literal  translation  of  our  Hebrew  text  is, 
'■  Enoch  walked  with  God ;  and  he  was  not, 
because  God  tooJi  him." 

Ver.  6. — But  without  faith  it  is  impossible 
to  please  him:  for  he  that  cometh  to  God 
must  believe  that  he  is,  and  tliat  he  is  a 
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him. 
The  purpose  of  this  verse,  in  connection 
with  the  conclusion  of  the  last,  is  to  shnsv 
that  the  Scripture  record  does  imply  faitli 
in  Enoch,  though  there  is  no  mention  of  il 
there  byname:  it  is  of  necessity  involml 
in  the  phrase,  eurjpeo'Teo-e  tm  SeiiJ.  The  ex- 
pression in  the  Hebrew,  "walked  with  Go  i  " 
(be  it  observed),  involves  it  eq\iully;  so  that 
the  argument  is  not  affeeted  by  the  quo- 
tation being  from  the  LXX. 

Ver.  7. — By  faith  Noah,  being  warned  of 
God  of  things  not  seen  as  yet,  moved  with 
fear  (euXaySijflels),  prepared  an  ark  to  the 
saving  of  his  house ;  through  which  (i.  e. 
faith)  he  condemned  the  world,  and  became 
heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is  according 
to  faith  (/cari  iricriv).  The  "  things  not 
seen  as  yet"  were  the  divinely  predicted 
events  of  the  Deluge.  The  word  euAa^ijflels 
(tran.-lated  as  above  in  the  A.V.)  is  taken 
by  many  commentators  as  implying  gvdl j 
fear,  a  sentiment  of  piety,  with  reference  1 1 
the  previous  xpiMO'r'i'^Sf'i,  since  the  noun 
eiha&sia  seems  to  have  this  special  sense  in 
ch.  xii.  28,  jueri  aiSovs  koX  evhaPelas  (s^e 
what  was  said  under  ver.  7,  where  the  word 
occurred);  so  too  the  adjective,  euXo^Tjs, 
Luke-ii.  25;  Acts  ii.  5;  viii.  2.  Hence  tiie 
emendation,  "moved  with  godly  fear,"  in 
the  recent  "  Revised  Version."  But,  inas- 
much as  the  verb  ciKa^eiirBai  has  in  the 
New  Teatumeut,  as  elsewhere,  only  its  ori- 


cit.  XI.  1—40.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa 


209 


iflaol  import  of  oantion  or  oiromngpeotion, 

Luere  is  uo  need  to  suppose  here  a  further 
meaning  (of.  Acts  xxiii.  10,  the  only  other 
passage  in  the  New  Testament  where  the 
Terh  occurs).  Ebrard,  taking  only  prudent 
forethought  to  be  expressed,  enlarges  on  the 
lesson  thus  conveyed  to  the  effect  that  he  who 
acts  on  simple  faith,  regardless  of  the  world's 
opinion  or  of  ridicule,  is  the  one  who  is 
truly  prudent.  And  we  may  add  that  such 
prudence  legitimately  comes  in  as  a  motive 
in  the  religious  life.  The  antecedent  of 
"which  "  Qi'  ^s),  though  the  ancients  gene- 
rally understand  KiParhn,  is  taken  as  above 
by  most  moderns ;  the  reason  being,  not  only 
that/ai7A  (see  in  ver.  4)  is  the  ruling  idea 
of  the  whole  passage,  but  also  that  it  suits 
better  the  expressed  results,  especially  the 
second,  "became  heir,"  etc.  For  to  say 
that  he  became  heir  Of  the  righteousness 
which  is  according  to  faith  through  the 
ark,  as  being  the  evidence  of  his  faith,  or  as 
liL'ing  the  means  of  his  preservation,  is  less 
intelligible  than  to  say  that  through  faith 
he  became  so.  The  sense  in  whicli  Noah 
"condemned  the  world"  is  illustrated  by 
Matt.  xii.  41,  42,  "The  men  of  Nineveh," 
etc.,  "  The  queen  of  the  South,"  etc.  (cf. 
Kom.  ii.  27).  His  becoming  "heir,"  etc., 
rests  on  the  view  of  the  fulfilment  of 
primaeval  promise  being  transmitted  as  an 
inheritance  to  the  faithful.  Noah,  as  he 
appears  in  Genesis,  was  eminently  heir  in 
this  sense,  as  alone  in  his  day  appropriating 
it  and  as  transmilting  it  to  his  seed.  In 
like  manner  Abraham,  who  is  next  men- 
tioned, was  the  prominent  heir  among  the 
subsequent  patriarchs  (cf.  Bom.  iv.  13). 
The  idea  running  through  the  whole  Old 
Testament  is  that,  in  the  midst  of  a  sinful 
world,  an  inheritance  of  salvation  was 
transmitted  through  a  chosen  seed,  tUl  the 
Christ  should  come  as  the "  Heir  of  all 
things,"  the  perfected  Head  and  Representa- 
tive of  all  redeemed  humanity.  The  word 
SmcuoffviTTi,  as  that  of  which  Noah  was  heir, 
may  have  been  suggested  with  reference  to 
him  by  his  being  the  first  who. is  called 
Sixaios  in  Genesis  (vi.  9),  and  by  this 
being  hia  usual  designation  (Ezek.  xiv.  14, 
20;  Bcclus.  xliv.  17;  Wisd.  x.  4,  6,  Sir. 
xliv.  17;  of.  2  Pet.  ii.  5,  mipu^  Sixaioffimis'). 
The  whole  phrase,  rris  Karit  tIo-tiv  5ikoi- 
oa-dvris,  may  be  taken  to  imply  the  Pauline 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  which 
may  be  supposed  to  have  been  familiar  to 
the  readers  of  this  Epistle,  having  been 
already  fully  enunciated  by  St.  Paul,  and 
dwelt  on  by  him  as  especially  exemplified 
in  Abraham.  St.  Paul,  indeed,  does  not  use 
this  exact  phrase,  but  SiKaiocnJi/}]^  viffT^us 
(Bom.  iv.  11, 13);  ix  via-reas  (Bom.  x.  6);  4ir\ 
rri  irlffTti  (Phil,  iii.  9) ;  but  still  the  mtnniug 
may  be  the  tame.  Tli«  correspondence  is  an 


instance  of  Pauline  thought  in  this  Epistle, 
while  the  diiTerence  of  phrase  affords  a  pre- 
sumption, though  by  no  means  in  itself 
conclusive,  against  Pauline  authorship. 

Ver.  8. — By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was 
called  to  go  out  into  a  place  which  he  should 
after  receive  for  an  inheritance,  obeyed  (liter- 
ally, mlien  called,  obeyed  to  go  out,  etc.)  ;  and 
he  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went. 
The  reference  is  to  the  first  call  of  Abraham 
(Gen.  xii.  I),  hia  obediejioe  to  which  is  the 
first  instance  of  the  faith  which  the  whole 
life  of  the  father  of  the  faithful  so  eminently 
exemplifies.  The  fact  of  the  place  he  was 
to  go  to  being  so  far  unrevealed  (intimated 
only  as  "a  land  that  I  will  show  thee")  en- 
hances the  faith  displayed.  He  followed 
the  Divine  voice  as  it  were  blindly,  not 
seein.'  whither  it  was  leading  him,  knowing 
only  Ihat  it  was  right  to  follow  it.  So  to 
those  who  walk  by  faith  now  the  future  may 
be  unknown  or  dim, 

"  Lead  thou  me  on. 

...  I  do  not  ask  to  see] 
The  distant  scene  ;  one  step  enough  for  me." 

Vers.  9,  10. — By  faith  he  sojourned  in 
(rather,  went  to  tojoum  in)  the  land  of 
promisa,  as  in  a  strange  country  (literally, 
as  one  belonging  to  others;  i.e.  not  his  own  ; 
"  As  in  an  alien  laud"  (Wickliffe)  ;  cf.  Gen. 
xxiii.  4,  "  I  am  a  stranger  and  sojourner 
with  you"),  dwelling  in  tahemaoles  with 
Isaac  and  Jacob,  the  heirs  with  him  of  the 
same  promise :  for  he  looked  for  a  city 
which  hath  foundations  (literally,  the  /oun- 
datlom)  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God. 
Of  course,  here,  "loith  Isaac  and  Jacob " 
means  "  as  did  also  Isaac  and  Jacob."  The 
three  successive  patriarchs  are  presenteil  in 
Scripture  as  representing  the  period  of 
nomailic  life  in  the  land  of  promise,  not  yet 
possessed ;  alike  supported  by  faith  in  the 
Ui.ine  word;  and  hence  they  are  ever 
grouped  together  (cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  18 ; 
xxxii.  9;  xlviii.  15;  1.  24;  Exod.  iii.  6; 
Deut.  ix.  5 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  36,  etc. ;  also 
Matt.  xxii.  .S2  ;  Luke  xiii.  28).  The  mean- 
ing of  their  history  to  us,  and  the  object  of 
their  common  hope,  are  further  set  forth  in 
vers.  13 — 17,  and  will  be  under  them  con- 
siitered.  In  the  mean  time  an  instance  of 
Abraham's  faith,  peculiar  to  himself,  is 
adduced. 

Vers.  11, 12. — By  faith  also  Sarah  herself 
received  strength  to  conceive  seed,  even 
when  she  was  past  age  (erexev,  as  in  the 
Textus  Beceptus,  after  Kal  irapa  Ktup6v  7j\iKias^ 
niay  be  rejected,  being,  perhaps,  an  interpolu 
tion  suggested  by  xal),  because  she  judged 
him  faithful  who  had  promised.  Therefore 
sprang  there  even  of  one,  and  him  as  good  at 
dead,  so  many  as  the  stars  of  the  sky  in 
multitude,  and  as  the  sand  which  ia  by  tha 


300 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[CH.  il.  l^iO. 


sea-shore  innumeraUe.  The  Titality  of 
Abraham's  faith  is  repreeented  as  evinced 
by  its  surviving  and  triumphing  over  a 
succession  of  trials,  over  apparent  impos- 
sibilities. One  such  peculiar  trial  was  the 
long  delay  of  the  birth  of  a  legitimate  heir 
througl)  wliom  the  promise  of  an  innumer- 
able seed  might  be  fulfilled,  and  this  till  it 
seemed  out  of  the  question  in  the  natural 
course  of  things.  Yet "  he  staggered  not  at  the 
promise  of  God  through  unbelief, .  .  .  being 
fully  persuaded  that  what  he  had  promised 
he  was  able  to  perform  "  (see  Eom.  iv.  17—23, 
which  is  a  fuller  statement  of  the  idea  of 
this  verse,  including  the  use  of  the  words 
veveKpcifisvov  and  vdnptaats  to  express  effcte- 
ness,  and  iSuva/ideri,  corresponding  to  Swa/iiv 
f\aBe  here.  This  is  a  further  instance  of 
Pauline  thought  in  this  Epistle — id<  as 
alreiiiy  enlarged  on  by  St.  Paul  being  taken 
for  granted  as  understood.)  In  Bomans 
Abraham's  failh  in  this  regard  is  treated 
as  typifying  Cliristian  faith  in  the  resur- 
rccliou  from  the  dead  (ver.  24),  as  is  also, 
in  the  chapter  before  us  (ver.  19),  his  faith 
displayed  on  the  occasion  of  the  offering  of 
Isaac.  For  to  us  also  our  inability  to  con- 
ceive the  mode  of  accomplishment  of  what 
well-grounded  faith  assures  us  of  is  no  just 
cause  for  staggering.  "How  are  the  dead 
raised  up  ?  and  with  what  kind  of  body  do 
they  come?"  wns  asked  by  the  Corinthian 
doubters.  St.  Paul  directs  them,  in  reply, 
to  faith  in  "the  power  of  God"  (cf.  Mark 
xii.  24)  to  accomplish  his  purposes  and 
fulfil  his  promises  in  ways  unknown  to  us, 
trauscendiag,  though  aunlogous  to,  the 
mysterious  processes  of  nature  that  we  see 
befijie  our  eyes.  For  "with  God  all  things 
are  possible."  Sarah  is  here  joined  with 
Aliraham,  as  also  "receiving  power"  by 
faith,  i,e.  her  own  faith,  as  the  structure  of 
ver.  11  seems  evidently  to  imply.  But  how 
is  this  eonsstent  with  the  account  of  her  In 
Genpsis,  where  she  is  nowhere  held  up  as 
an  exam|ile  of  faith;  nay,  is  censured  for 
incredulity  (Gen.  xviii.  12 — IG)  with  respect 
to  the  promise  of  offspring?  The  answer 
may  be  that  her  temporary  unbelief  is  con- 
cluded to  have  been  succeeded  by  faith,  as 
proved  by  the  result,  viz.  that  she  "  received 
power."  And,  indeed,  her  laughter  recorded 
in  Gen.  xviii.  does  not  seem  intended  to 
imply  any  permanent  "heart  of  unbelief;" 
for  even  Abraham  had  laughed  as  she  did 
whun  the  same  announcement  had  been 
previously  made  to  him  (Gen.  xvii.  17),  and 
the  "  laughter  "  associated  with  her  memory 
has  quite  a  different  meaning  given  it  when 
that  of  temporary  incredulity  was  changed 
into  that  of  joy  on  the  birth  of  the  promised 
son,  who  was  consequently  called  Isaac 
(equivalent  to  "  laughter  ").  It  is,  however, 
Abiaham  himself  who  is  put  prominently 


before  ns  as  the  great  example  of  faith ; 
Sarah  is  only  introduced  by  his  side  (with 
the  words  ical  avrr))  as  sharing  it  and  co 
operating  to  the  result.  To  him  singly  the 
writer  re!  urns  in  yer.  12,  Aid  koI  a<f>  ivis,  etc. 

Ver.  13. — These  all  (j.e.  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  the  nomadic  patriarchs,  not  in- 
cluding the  antediluvian  heroes,  to  whom 
what  is  further  said  does  not  apply)  died  in 
faith  (literally,  according  to  faith,  Kara 
iritTTiv,  as  in  ver.  7),  not  having  received  the. 
promises,  but  having  seen  and  greeted  them 
from  afai  off  (omitting  the  ill-supported 
Kal  xeiaBevres  of  the  Textus  Rcceptus),  and 
confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and  pil- 
grims on  the  earth.  The  reference  is  to  the 
confession  of  Abraham  to  the  sons  of  Heth 
(Gen.  xxiii.  4),  "I  am  a  stranger  and  a 
sojourner  with  you,"  together  with  Jacob's 
words  to  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xlvii.  9),  "The 
days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage,"  etc. 
The  import  of  such  confession,  intimated 
in  the  preceding  part  of  the  verse,  is  now 
educed. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — ^For  they  that  say  such 
things  declare  plainly  (or,  make  manifest)  that 
they  seek  a  country  (i.e.  a  native  country,  & 
fatherland,  warpiSa).  And  truly  if  they 
had  been  mindful  of  that  country  from 
whence  they  came  out,  they  might  have  had 
opportunity  to  have  returned.  But  now 
(i.e.  as  it  is)  they  desire  •  better  country, 
that  is,  a  heavenly:  wherefore  God  is  not 
ashamed  to  be  called  their  God  (see  reffs. 
under  ver.  9):  for  he  hath  prepared  for 
them  a  city.  In  consideration  of  the  drift  of 
the  whole  of  this  interesting  and  suggestive 
passage  (vers.  9,  10,  13 — 17),  the  question 
arises  whether  the  patriarchs  are  represented 
as  actually  themselves  looking  forward  to  a 
heavenly  inheritance.  In  their  history  as 
given  in  Genesis,  as,  indeed,  in  the  Old 
Testament  generally  (at  any  rate,  in  the 
earlier  books),  there  is,  as  is  well  known,  no 
distinct  recognition  of  the  life  to  come.  The 
promise  to  Abiaham  seems  to  imply  only  an 
innumerable  seed,  its  possession  as  a  great 
nation  of  the  earthly  land  of  promise,  and 
throu!:;h  it  some  undefined  blessing  to  all 
the  families  of  the  earth.  Nor  are  the 
patriarchs  represented  as  looking  forward 
to  a  fulfilment  of  the  promise  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  present  world.  Even  so  their 
history  is  singularly  instructive.  They  lived 
in  hope  of  things  not  seen  through  faith  in 
the  Divine  promise.  The  very  fact  that 
they  were  content  to  die  without  themselves 
attaining,  if  so  God's  purpose  might  b« 
accomplished  to  their  seed,  invests  them 
with  a  peculiar  grandeur  of  unselfishness. 
Their  faith  was  essentially  the  same  prin- 
ciple as  that  of  Christians,  even  though  thu 
final  object  of  Christian  hope  were  hidden 
from  their  eyes;  while  their  dwelling  in 


m.  XL  1 — 40.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


SOI 


tentt  M  strangen,  and  the  home  and  city 
seen  afar  off,  are  apt  emblems  of  the 
present  life  and  the  heavenly  citizenship 
of  Christiana.  It  may  be  that  this  is  all 
that  is  intended  in  the  Epistle,  the 
history  being  allegorized,  as  that  of  Isaao 
and  Ishmael  is  in  the  Epistle  to  tlie  Gala- 
tiiins.  If  80,  the  apparent  attribution  of 
a  heavenly  hope  to  the  patriarchs  them- 
st  Ives  must  be  accounted  for  by  a  blending 
of  the  actual  history  with  its  ideal  meaning, 
such  as  was  observed  in  the  chapter  about 
Mulehizedek.  But  it  is  difficult  to  under- 
stand the  expressions  used  as  implying  no 
more  than  this.  Abraham  is  said  to  Ijaye 
himself  looked  for  the  "city  that  hath  the 
foundations,"  of  which  God  is  the  Builder — 
a  description  which  cannot  but  denote  the 
"  heavenly  Jerusalem,"  of  wiiich  the  city 
whose  fonndations  were  on  the  holy  hills 
below  is  regarded  elsewhere  as  but  a  type 
and  emblem  (cf.  oh.  zii.  22 ;  xiii.  14 ;  Gal. 
iv.  26 ;  Bev.  xxi.  14 ;  also  infra,  ch.  viii.  2, 
where  iiv  eTni^ev  6  Qcis  is  said  of  the  heavenly 
tabernacle).  This  interpretation  is  further 
supported  by  our  finding  in  Philo  similar 
views  of  a  heavenly  counterpart  to  Jeru- 
salem as  the  final  object  of  Israel's  hope. 
Again,  the  country  desired  by  the  patriarchs 
is,  in  ver.  16,  distinctly  called  a  heavenly 
one.  Nor  is  the  view  at  all  untenable 
thiit,  notwithstanding  the  silence  of  the 
ancient  record  on  the  subject,  they  did 
look  forward  to  a  life  after  death  with  God, 
seeing  in  the  promised  earthly  inheritance 
an  emblem  and  earnest  of  a  heavenly  one. 
Well  known  is  Bishop  Warburton's  argu- 
ment that  a  belief  in  a  future  state,  which 
was  so  ancient  and  universal,  and  so  pro- 
minent especially  in  the  religion  of  Egypt, 
must  almost  of  necessity  have  been  shared 
in  by  tlie  race  of  Abraham,  and  hence  that 
the  silence  about  it  in  the  Mosaic  record 
must  be  due,  not  to  its  absence  from  the 
creed  of  Israel,  but  to  the  peculiar  purpose 
of  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  Worthy  of 
attention  also  are  Dean  Stanley's  words 
(  Lect.  vii.  on  '  Jewish  Church  ') :  "  Not  from 
want  of  religion,  but  (if  one  might  use  the 
expression)  from  excess  of  religion,  was  this 
void  left.  The  future  life  was  not  denied 
or  contradicted,  but  it  was  overlooked,  set 
aside,  overshadowed,  by  tlie  consciousness  of 
tlie  living,  actual  presence  of  God  himself." ' 

■  One  reason  of  the  absence  from  the 
Mosaic  code  of  the  doctrine  of  a  future  state 
may  have  been  the  corruption  of  that 
doctrine,  and  the  superstitions  connected 
with  it,  tn  the  popular  Egyptian  religion. 
If  in  that  religion,  as  seems  to  have  been  the 
case,  there  was  an  elaborate  system  of  ritual 
ibr  scouring  the  soul's  welfare  after  death, 
it  may  have  been  good  for  the  Israelites,  at 


But  though  such  void  there  li,  kawvrer  to 
be  accounted  for,  there  are  still,  evaa  in  the 
Pentateuch  (as  certainly  in  the  Psainu  and 
prophets),  occasional  glimpses  of  the  hope 
of  immortality.  The  mystic  tree  of  life  in 
the  midst  of  the  garden,  the  predicted 
bruising  of  the  serpent's  head,  the  mystery 
of  Enoch's  departure  from  the  world,  and 
notably  (as  our  Lord  himself  points  out) 
God  still  calling  himself  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob  after  they  had  been 
long  ago  gathered  to  their  fathers,  are  inti- 
mations, even  in  the  Pentateuch,  of  a  belief 
in  man's  immortal  hopes.  And  it  may  be 
added,  with  reference  to  the  history  imme- 
diately before  us,  that  Jacob's  application  of 
the  idea  of  his  being  a  "  sojourner  " — naed  by 
Abraham  with  reference  to  the  abode  in 
Palestine— to  the  whole  course  of  his  life 
upon  the  earth,  in  itself  suggests  the  meaning 
attached  to  such  language  in  the  Epistle. 
Hence  no  violence  is  done  to  the  meaning 
of  the  history,  rather  it  may  be  that  its 
deeper  meaning  is  brought  out,  if  the  patri- 
archs are  regarded  as  entertaining  a  hope  of 
a  heavenly  inheritance  to  themselves,  and 
seeing  beyond  the  earthly  types.  But  even 
if  we  suppose  such  immortal  hopes  as  haviuK 
been  in  them  at  the  most  but  vague  and 
dim,  still  their  faith  in  and  longing  for  a 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  any  sense  was 
really  a  feeling  and  reaching  after  the  eternal 
realities  which  the  first  fulfilment  typified. 
Compare  the  view  taken  in  oh.  iv.  of  the 
meaning  of  "God's  rest."  Delitzsch  thus 
enunciates  this  view  of  the  passage  before 
us:  ''The  promise  given  to  the  patriarchs 
was  a  Divine  assurance  of  a  fnture  rest. 
That  rest  was  connected,  in  the  first  instance, 
with  the  future  possession  of  an  earthly 
home ;  but  their  desire  for  that  home  was  at 
the  same  time  a  longing  and  a  seeking  after 
Him  who  had  given  the  promise  of  it,  whose 
presence  and  blessing  alone  made  it  for 
them  an  object  of  desire,  and  whose  presence 
and  blessing,  however  vouchsafed,  makes 
the  place  of  its  manifestation  to  be  indeed 
a  heaven.  The  shell  of  their  longing  might 
thus  be  of  earth ;  its  kernel  was  heavenly 
and  Divine,  and  as  such  God  himself  vouch- 
safed to  honour  and  reward  it." 

From  the  general  mode  of  life  of  the  patri- 
archs the  review  now  passes  to  particular 
acts  of  faith,  beginning  with  Abraham'e 
memorable  one,  the  offering  of  Isaac. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — By  faith  Abraham,  when 


first  at  least,  to  be  exclusively  directed  to  a 
sense  of  their  responsibility  to  a  God  of 
righteousness  during  life,  lest  their  hope 
of  future  reward  should  be  mixed  up  with 
the  superstitious  conceptions  they  bad  become 
BO  familiar  with  in  Egypt. 


302 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


LOH.  XL  1—10 


he  was  tried,  offered  np  (literally,  hath  offered 
up,  denoting  an  aooomplislied  act  of  which 
the  significance  continues)  Isaac :  and  he 
that  had  received  (rather,  accepted,  implying 
his  own  assent  and  belief)  the  promises 
offered  up  his  only  begotten  son,  he  to 
whom  it  was  said.  That  in  Isaac  shall  thy 
seed  be  called  :  aoconnting  that  God  is  able 
to  raise  up,  even  from  the  dead ;  from 
whence  also  he  received  him  in  a  figure. 
The  above  rendering  varies  slightly  from 
the  A.V.  in  vers.  18, 19.  For,  in  ver.  18,  wpds 
hv  is  more  naturally  connected  with  the 
immediate  antecedent,  i  ivaSe^dn^ms,  than 
with  liovoyfy?) :  and,  in  ver.  19,  there  is  no 
need  to  supply  "  him  "  after  iyelpeiv :  the 
Greek  seema  obviously  to  express  belief  in 
God's  general  power  to  raise  from  the  deaxl, 
not  his  power  in  that  instance  only.  The 
offering  of  Isaac  (speciiilly  instanced  also 
by  St.  James,  iL  21),  stands  out  as  the 
crowning  instance  of  Abraham's  faitli.  The 
very  son,  so  long  expected,  and  at  length, 
as  it  were,  supematurally  given, — he  in 
whose  single  life  was  bound  up  all  hope  of 
fulfilment  of  the  promise,  was  to  be  sacri- 
ficed after  all,  and  lo  seemingly  all  hope 
cut  off.  Yet  Abraham  is  represented  as 
not  hesitating  for  a  moment  to  do  in  simple 
faitli  what  seemed  God's  will,  and  still  not 
wavering  in  his  hope  of  a  fulfilment  some- 
bow.  Such  faith  is  here  regarded  as  vir- 
tually faith  in  God's  power  even  to  raise  the 
dead.  (For  a  similar  view  of  Abraham's 
faith  as  representing  "  the  hope  and  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,"  oomp.  Bom.  iv.  17, 24.) 
The  expression,  "  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be 
called  "  (literally,  "  In  Isaac  shall  be  called 
to  tlice  a  seed  "),  quoted  from  Gen.  xxL  12, 
means,  not  tliat  the  seed  should  be  called 
after  the  name  of  Isaac,  but  that  the  seed 
to  be  called  Abraham's  should  be  in  Isaac, 
i.e.  hia  issue.  The  concluding  phrase, 
"  Wlience  also  he  received  him  in  a  figure  " 
(literally,  "  in  a  parable,"  ev  vapa$o\f),  has 
been  variously  interpreted.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  authority  of  many  modern  commen- 
tators, we  may  certainly  reject  the  view  of 
irapaPoXf  carrying  here  the  sense  borne  by 
the  verl)  Trapa$i}iAe<r9ai,  that  of  venturing 
or  exposing  one's  self  to  risk,  or  that  of 
the  adverb  irapaPdKas,  unexpectedly.  Even 
if  the  noun  irapafioXii  could  be  shown  by 
any  instance  to  bear  such  senses,  its  ordi- 
nary use  in  the  New  Testament  as  well  as 
in  the  LXX,  must  surely  be  understood 
here.  It  expresses  (under  the  idea  of  com- 
parison, or  setting  one  thing  by  the  side  of 
another)  an  illustration,  representation,  or 
figure  of  something.  Its  use  in  this  sense  in 
the  Oospels  ia  faimliai  to  us  all;  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament  it  occurs  only  in  this 
Spistle^  ch.  ix.  9,  where  the  "first  taber- 
nacle" ia  spoken  of  •■  a  iro^a^oAi).    Still, 


the  question  remains  of  the  exact  drift  ol 
this  expression,  hv  ■irapafio\y.  It  surely  is, 
that,  though  Isaac  did  not  really  die,  but 
only  the  ram  in  his  stead,  yet  the  transac- 
tion represented  to  Abraham  an  actual 
winning  of  his  son  from  the  dead ;  he  did  so 
win  him  in  the  way  of  an  acted  parable, 
which  confirmed  his  faith  in  God's  power 
to  raise  the  dead  as  much  a*  if  the  lad  had 
died.  For  such  use  of  the  preposition  iv 
we  may  compare  1  Cor.  xiii.  12,  jS\eira/ifi/ 
5('  kff6inpov  iv  alviyfiari,  which  may  mean 
(notwithstanding  the  different  view  of  it 
given  doubtfully  by  the  distinguished  com- 
mentator on  the  Epistle  in  the  '  Speaker's 
Commentary'),  "  We  see,  not  actually, 
but  in  the  way  of  an  enigmatical  represen- 
tation, as  through  a  mirror."  The  above 
seems  a  more  natural  meaning  of  the  pbmse, 
4v  irapa$o\f,  than  that  of  the  commentators 
who  interpret  it  "in  such  sort  as  to  be  a 
parable  or  type  of  something  else  to  come," 
viz.  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ. 
It  does  not,  of  course,  follow  that  the  trans- 
action was  not  typical  of  Christ,  or  that  the 
writer  does  not  so  regard  it ;  we  are  only  con- 
sidering what  his  language  in  itself  implies. 
Eendered  literally,  and  with  retention  of 
the  order  of  the  words,  the  sentence  runs : 
"  From  whence  [i.e.  from  the  dead]  him  [t.e. 
Isaac,  avT6y  being  slightly  emphatic,  as  is 
shown  by  its  position  in  the  sentence,  equiva- 
lent to  iUum,  not  eum  ;  and  this  suitably  after 
the  general  proposition  preceding]  he  did  too 
in  a  parable  win  [iKo/ifa-ara,  equivalent  to  sibi 
acquisivit  ;  cf.  ver.  39,  ouk  iKoitiaavro  r^f 
iirayye\iav\."  With  regard  to  what  we  may 
call  the  moral  aspect  of  this  peculiar  trial  of 
Abraham's  faith,  a  few  words  may  be  said, 
since  a  difficulty  naturally  suggests  itself  on 
the  subject.  How,  it  may  be  asked,  is  it  ~ 
consistent  with  our  ideas  of  Divine  righteous- 
ness, that  even  readiness  to  day  his  son 
should  be  required  of  Abraham  as  a  duty  ? 
Uow  are  we  to  account  for  this  apparent 
sanction  of  the  principle  of  human  sacrifices  1 
To  the  latter  question  we  may  reply,  in  the 
first  place,  that  the  narrative  in  Genesis, 
taken  as  a  whole,  affords  no  such  sanction, 
but  very  much  the  contrary.  All  we  are 
told  is  that  the  great  patriarch,  in  the  course 
of  his  religious  training,  was  once  divinely 
led  to  suppose  such  a  sacrifice  to  be  required 
of  him.  The  offering  of  sons  was  not  un- 
usual in  the  ancient  races  among  whom 
Abraham  lived;  and,  however  shocking  such 
a  practice  might  be,  and  however  condemned 
in  later  Scripture,  it  was  due,  we  may  say, 
to  the  perversion  only  of  a  true  Instinct  of 
humanity — that  which  suggests  the  need  of 
some  great  atonement,  and  the  claim  of  the 
Giver  of  aU  to  our  beat  &nd  dearest,  i( 
demanded  from  us.  That  Abraham  should 
be  even  divinely  led  to  suppose  for  a  time 


CH.  XI.  1—40.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


ao) 


that  his  God  required  him  to  express  his 
acknowledgment  of  this  need  and  this  claim 
by  not  withliolding  from  him  as  much  aa 
even  the  heathen  were  accustomed  to  offer 
to  their  gods,  ii  consistent  with  God's 
general  way  of  educating  men  to  a  full 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  But  tlie  sacrifice 
was  in  the  end  emphatically  forbidden  by  a 
voice  from  heaven ;  to  Abraham  thenceforth, 
and  to  his  seed  for  ever,  it  was  made  clearly 
known  that,  though  God  does  require  atone- 
ment for  sin  and  entire  submission  to  bis 
will,  he  does  not  require  violence  to  be  done 
to  tender  human  feeling,  or  any  cruel  rites. 

Ver.  20. — By  faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob 
and  Esau,  even  (or,  also)  conoeming  things 
to  come.  Here  the  word  ical  (omitted  in 
the  Tuxtus  Receptus)  gives  force  to  what  is 
meaut ;  words  uttered  by  the  patriarcljs  in 
the  spirit  of  prophecy  being  now  adduced  as 
furtlier  evidence  of  their  faith.  To  those 
inspired  by  this  spirit  even  the  distant 
future  is  realized  as  present;  and  faith  is 
not  only  a  condition  of  such  proplietic  visions 
being  granted  to  them,  but  is  also  evinced 
by  their  trusting  the  visions  as  Divine 
revelations,  and  speaking  with  confidctice 
accordingly.  The  prophet  seems  as  though 
able  himself  to  control  the  future  by  giving 
or  withholding  blessing  (of.  Jer.  i.  10) ;  but 
it  is  really  that  his  mind  and  will  are  at 
one  with  the  mind  and  will  of  God :  a 
Divine  voice  speaks  within  him,  and  through 
faith  he  is  receptive  of  it  and  gives  it  utter- 
ance. Thus  it  was  that  even  the  future 
characters,  and  changing  relations  to  each 
other,  of  the  yet  unborn  races  of  Israel  and 
Edom  are  represented  as  having  been  fore- 
shadowed in  the  blessings  of  that  dying 
patriarch. 

Ver.  21. — By  faith  Jacob,  when  he  was  a- 
dying,  blessed  each  of  the  sons  of  Joseph ; 
and  worshipped,  leaning  upon  the  top  of  his 
staff.  Here  two  distinct  incidents  are 
referred  to,  both  at  the  close  of  Jacob's  life. 
That  first  mentioned,  the  blessing  of  the 
eons  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xlviii.  2),  closely 
resembles  the  dying  act  of  Isaac  already 
spoken  of,  and  has  a  similar  significance.  In 
both  cases,  too,  human  intention  is  over- 
ruled, in  that  the  younger  son  obtains  the 
higher  blessing ;  and  each  patriarch  accepts 
alike  the  Divine  intimation  to  this  effect, 
thus  further  evincing  faith  in  a  power  and 
a  will  above  his  own.  The  latter  part  of 
the  verse, "  and  worshipped,"  etc.,  is  quoted 
from  Gen.  zlvii.  31,  and  refers  to  a  previous 
instance  of  the  dying  Jacob's  faith,  in  hit 
charge  to  Josepli  to  bury  him  with  his 
fathers  in  the  land  of  promise.  Tho  reversal 
in  the  text  of  the  historical  order  of  the  two 
instances  may  be  because  the  one  referred 
to  first  is  cognate  with  the  instance  of 
Isaao'a  faith  which  has  gone  before,  the 


other  with  that  of  Joseph's  which  follows. 
For  tho  benedictions  of  Isaao  and  Jacob, 
when  a-dying,  expressed  faith  in  revelations 
made  to  them  about  the  several  races  of  their 
future  seed ;  the  deathbed  charges  of  Jacob 
and  Joseph  expressed  faith  in  the  chosen 
seed's  inheritance  of  the  promised  land. 
Though  in  the  verse  before  us  Jacob's 
charge  to  Joseph,  with  a  view  to  this  inheri- 
tance, is  not  mentioned,  yet  the  quotation 
from  the  account  of  it  in  Genesis,  "  and 
worshipped,"  etc.,  would  be  sufficient,  in 
this  concise  summary  of  instances,  to  recall 
it  to  the  mind  of  readers,  and  lo  intimate 
the  writer's  meaning.  The  variation  of  the 
LXX.,  which  is  iiere  followed  as  usual, 
from  the  Massoretic  text,  in  reading  "  staff  " 
instead  of  "  bed,"  is  due  to  the  ambiguity  of 
the  Hebrew  word,  which  has  one  meaning 
or  the  other  according  to  its  pointing.  "Bed" 
seems  more  likely  to  have  been  intended, 
inasmuch  as  the  bed  on  which  the  patriarch 
lay  is  twice  again  mentioned  (Gen.  xlviii.  2 ; 
xlix.  33)  in  the  account  of  the  closing  scene ; 
and  we  find  also  a  similar  expression  usoil 
of  David  in  his  old  age  (1  Kings  i.  47).  But 
the  variation  is  unimportant,  the  essence  uf 
the  passage  being  in  the  word  translated 
"  bowed  himself,"  which  in  the  Hebrew  as 
well  as  the  Greek  certainly  expresses  an 
act  of  worship.  The  only  difference  is  that, 
according  to  one  rendering,  this  worship 
was  expressed  by  his  bowing  over  the  stalf 
on  wliich  he  leant  as  he  sat  upon  the  bed 
(Gen.  xlviii.  2);  according  to  the  other, by  his 
turning  round  to  prostrate  himself  with  his 
heail  upon  the  pillow.  The  view  of  some  of 
the  Fathers,  who,  adopting  the  LXX.  render- 
ing and  supposing  tlie  staff  to  be  Joseph's, 
regard  the  act  as  expressing  reverence  to 
Joseph  himself,  in  fulfilment  of  Gen.  xxxviii. 
5 — 11,  has  little  probability  in  its  favour, 
and  is  controverted  by  St.  Augustine.  But 
so  Chrysostom,  and  apparently  Theodoret. 
And  suitably  to  this  idea,  the  Vulgate  has 
in  Hebrews,  "et  adoravit  fastigium  virgse 
ejus,"  thougli  in  Genesis,  "  adoravit  Israel 
Deum,  conversus  ad  lectuli  caput."  Quite 
untenable,  and  only  worthy  of  mention 
because  of  the  use  that  has  been  made  of  it 
in  support  of  image-worship,  is  the  idea 
that  Joseph's  staff  was  surmounted  by  some 
sacred  image  which  Jacob  adored. 

Ver.  22. — By  faith  Joseph,  when  dying, 
made  mention  of  the  departing  {Exodus)  of 
the  children  of  Israel;  and  gave  oommaad- 
meut  conoeming  his  bones.  The  reference  is 
to  Gen.  1.  24,  25,  which,  after  what  has  been 
said  above,  requires  no  further  comment. 

Ver.  23. — By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was 
bom,  was  hid  three  months  of  his  parents, 
because  they  saw  that  he  was  a  proper 
(do'Tfioi',  the  word  used  of  the  child  in 
KTod.  li.  2,  there  translated  "  goodly,"  and 


304 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[CH.  XL  1—4.0. 


in  AoU  vii.  20,  "fair")  child;  and  they 
were  not  afraid  of  the  king's  commandment. 
Here  the  usual  following  of  the  LXX. 
again  appears  in  the  hiding  being  attri- 
buted to  both  parents  (tbia  is  certainly  the 
meaning  of  naTcpav,  not — as  some  interpret 
because  of  the  masculine  form — fatlier  and 
grandfather).  In  the  Hebrew  it  is  tlie 
mother  only  that  i§  gpoken  of  as  hiding 
him ;  whereas  in  the  LXX.  the  verba  are 
in  the  plural,  iSdnres  Se,  etc.,  though  with 
no  expressed  nominative.  It  is  not  necet- 
mry  to  understand  a  special  faith  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promises  through  the  child 
thus  hidden  to  be  implied,  though  it  may 
i>e  BO  intended.  But  the  mere  fearlessness 
in  obeying  the  dictates  of  heart  and  con- 
ticience  in  the  face  of  danger,  and  the  mere 
leliance  on  Providence,  thug  displayed, 
expressed  faith. 

Vers.  24 — 26. — By  faith  Hoses,  when  he 
was  come  to  years,  refused  to  he  called  the 
sun  of  Pharaoh's  daughter ;  choosing  rather 
to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God, 
than  to  enjoy,  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a 
season;  esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ 
greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  (or,  of) 
Egypt;  for  he  had  respect  unto  (literally, 
looked  away  to)  the  recompense  of  reward. 
As  in  the  speech  of  Stephen  (Acts  vii.), 
su  here,  the  narrative  in  Exodus  is  supple- 
mented from  tradition,  such  as  is  found 
also  in  Fhilo.  Moses'  refusal  to  be  called 
the  ion  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  t.e.  his  re- 
nunciation of  bis  position  in  the  court  in 
order  to  associate  himself  with  his  oppressed 
fellow-countrymen,  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
original  history,  though  it  is  consistent  with 
it,  and  indeed  implied.  St.  Stephen  further 
regards  his  taking  the  part  of  the  Israelite 
against  the  Egyptian  (Exod.  ii.  11 — 13)  as 
a  sign  that  he  was  already  conscious  of  his 
mission,  and  hoped  even  then  to  rouse  bii 
countrymen  to  make  a  struggle  for  freedom. 
The  reproach  he  subjected  himself  to  by 
thus  preferring  the  patriot's  to  the  courtier's 
life  is  here  called  "  the  reproach  of  Christ." 
How  so  ?  Ohrysostom  takes  the  expression 
to  mean  only  the  same  kind  of  reproach  as 
Christ  was  afterwards  subjected  to,  in  re- 
spect of  his  being  scouted,  and  his  Divine 
mission  disbelieved,  by  those  whom  he  came 
to  save.  But,  if  the  expression  had  been 
used  with  respect  to  Christians  suffering  for 
the  faith  (as  it  is  below,  oh.  xiii.  18),  it  would 
certainly  imply  more  than  this;  viz.  a 
participation  in  Christ's  own  reproach,  not 
merely  a  reproach  like  his.  (Cf.  2  Cor.  L  5, 
TO  TraB^iiuTtt  rov  XpirroO,  and  Col.  i.  24,  tSv 
e\l\f/tuy  rov  XpKFToS,  where  there  is  the 
further  idea  expressed  of  Glirist  himself 
suffering  in  his  members.)  And  such  being 
the  idea  which  the  phrase  in  itself  would 
at  once  convej  to  Christian  readers,  and  es- 


pecially as  the  very  same  ii  nsed  below  (ch. 
xiii.  13)  with  reference  to  Christians,  it  must 
surely  be  somehow  involved  in  this  passage. 
But  how  so,  we  ask  again,in  thecaseof  Moses? 
To  get  at  the  idea  of  the  phrase  we  must 
bear  in  mind  the  view  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  being  but  two  parts  of  one 
Divine  dispensation.  The  Exodus  was  thus 
not  only  typical  of  the  deliverance  through 
Christ,  but  also  a  step  towards  it,  a  prepara- 
tion for  it,  a  link  in  the  divinely  ordered 
chain  of  events  leailing  up  to  the  great 
redemption.  Hence,  in  the  first  place, 
the  reproach  endured  by  Moses  in  further- 
ance of  the  Exodus  may  be  regarded  as 
endured  at  any  rate  for  the  sake  of  Christ, 
i.e.  in  his  cause  vrhose  coming  was  the  end 
and  purpose  of  the  whole  dispensation. 
And  further,  inasmuch  as  Christ  is  else- 
where spoken  of  as  the  Head  of  the  whole 
mystical  body  of  his  people  in  all  ages — all 
to  be  gathered  together  at  last  in  him— he 
may  be  regarded,  even  before  his  incarna- 
tion, as  himself  reproached  in  the  reproach 
of  his  servant  Moses.  Compare  the  view, 
presented  in  ch.  iii.,  of  the  Soh  being 
Lord  of  the  "  hoase  "  in  which  Moses  was  a 
servant,  and  the  comprehensive  sense  of 
"God's  house"  implied  in  that  passaa;e. 
Nor  should  we  leave  out  of  consideration 
the  identification,  maintained  by  the  Fathers 
generally  (see  Bull,  '  Def.  Fid.  Nic.,'  1.  L), 
of  the  Angel  of  the  Pentateuch,  of  him  who 
revealed  himself  to  Moses  as  I  AM  from  the 
bush,  with  the  Second  Person  of  the  holy 
Trinity,  the  Word  who  became  incarnate  in 
Christ.  (Cf.  John  i.  1 — 15 ;  also  John  viii. 
58,  read  in  oonnection  vnth  Exod.  iii.  14 ; 
and  1  Cor.  x.  4,  where  the  spiritual  rock 
that  followed  the  children  of  Israel  in  the 
wilderness  is  said  to  have  been  Christ.) 
Whatever,  however,  be  the  exact  import  of 
the  expression,  "  reproach  of  Christ,"  in 
its  application  to  Moses,  it  is  evidently 
selected  here  with  the  view  of  bringing  his 
example  home  to  the  readers  of  the  Epistle, 
by  thus  intimating  that  his  faith's  trial  was 
essentially  the  same  as  theirs. 

Ver.  27. — By  faith  he  forsook  Egypt,  not 
fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king :  for  he 
endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisihle. 
This  forsaking  of  Egypt  must,  because  of 
the  order  in  which  it  comes  and  of  Moses 
alone  being  mentioned,  be  his  flight  related 
in  Exod.  ii.  15,  not  the  final  Exodus.  The 
only  seeming  difficulty  is  in  the  expression, 
"  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king,"  whereas 
in  the  history  Moses  is  represented  as  flying 
in  fear  from  the  face  of  Pharaoh,  who  sought 
to  slay  him.  But  the  two  views  of  his 
attitude  of  mind  are  reoonoileable.  The 
assertion  of  his  fearlessness  applies  to  hii 
whole  course  of  action  from  the  time  when 
he  elected  to  brave  the  king  in  behalf  o{ 


dh.  XI.  A--40.] 


THE  EPISTLE  tO  THE  HEBREWS. 


305 


Israel.  411  pursiifiTHje  of  this  course,  it 
became  necessaiy  for  him  to  lenve  Egypt 
for  a  time.  In  this,  as  well  as  in  staying, 
there  was  danger ;  for  the  king  might  pur- 
sue him:  he  might,  perhnps,  have  secured 
his  own  safety  ly  returning  to  the  court 
ind  giving  up  his  project;  but  he  perse- 
rcred  at  all  hazards.  And  thus  the  appre- 
bension  of  immediate  danger  under  which 
he  fled  the  country  with  a  view  to  final 
success,  was  in  no  contradiction  to  his 
general  fearlessness.  Further,  his  being 
content  to  leave  Egypt  at  all,  and  that  for 
so  many  years,  and  still  never  relinquishing 
his  design,  was  an  additional  evidence  of 
faith,  as  is  expressed  by  the  word  iKapri- 
pri<re,  "he  endured."  The  vision  through 
faith  of  the  unseen  heavenly  King  kept 
alive  his  hope  through  those  long  years  of 
exile :  what  was  any  possible  wrath  even 
of  the  terrible  Pharaoh  to  one  supported  by 
that  continual  vision  ? 

Vers.  28,  29.— By  faith  he  kept  Qiterally, 
hath  kept,  neirol-iiKev,  the  perfect  being  used 
rather  than  the  historical  aorist,  as  denoting 
an  accomplished  act,  with  continuing  efiect 
and  significance  (of.  irpotrevifmxey,  ver.  17). 
But  ireiroit)Kev  does  not  mean,  as  some  sup- 
pose, "hath  Instituted,"  iroieiv  ri  niaxa 
being  the  nsaal  expression  for  the  celebra- 
tion) the  FasBover,  and  the  sprinkling  of 
blood,  leat  he  that  destroyed  the  firstborn 
shonld  toaoh  them.  By  faith  they  paired 
throngh  the  Bed  Sea,  as  by  dry  land ;  wh^oh 
the  Egyptians  assaying  to  do  were  drowned. 
The  faith  of  Moses  himself  is  still  mainly 
intended  here,  though  the  eoniunction  of 
TricTci  with  iU^Tiaav  seems  to  imply  faith 
in  the  people  too.  Kor  is  this  inconsistent 
with  the  narrative;  for,  though  they  are 
represented  as  having  cried  out  in  their 
sore  fear,  and  even  reproached  their  leader 
for  bringing  them  out  of  Egypt  to  die  in 
the  wilderness,  yet  on  his  exhortation, 
"  Fear  ye  not,  stand  still,  and  see  the  sal- 
ration  of  the  LoBD,"  they  may  be  supposed 
to  have  trusted  him,  and  caught  sometliing 
of  the  inspiration  of  his  faith.  Moses, 
indeed,  stands  out  as  a  prominent  example 
(and  this  is  one  point  in  the  moral  teaching 
of  his  history)  of  the  strong  faith  of  one 
great  man,  not  only  availing  in  behalf  of 
others,  but  also  in  some  degree  infecting  a 
whole  community,  little  disposed  at  first  to 
make  heroic  ventures. 

Ver.  30.— By  fiiith  the  walls  of  Jerioho 
fell  down  after  they  were  compaBsed  about 
seven  days  (see  Josh.  vi.  1 — 21).  The 
capture  of  Jericho  may  be  selected  for 
mention,  not  only  because  of  its  extraordi- 
nary character,  but  also  as  being  the  be- 
ginning of  the  campaign  in  Canaan,  the 
first  necessary  conquest  that  opened  the 
way  to  the  rest.    The  history  is  not  further 

UEBBEWa. 


pursued  in  detail,  this  being  sufiicient  to 
suggest  it  all.     Only,  for  a  special  reason, 
the  case  of  Rahab  has  attention  drawn  to  it. 
Ver.  31.  —  By  faith  Bahab   the    harlot 
perished  not  with  them  that  were  disobedient, 
when  she  had  received  the  spies  with  peace. 
Bahah  is  instanced  also  by  St.  James  (ii.  25) 
as  having  shown  her  faith  by  works.     Such 
special  notice  of  her  is  accounted  for  by  her 
being   so    remarkable  an    instance    of    a 
heathen,  an  alien,  one  of  the  very  doomed 
Oauaanite  -race,  being  through  faith  adopted 
into  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  so  as  even 
to  become  an  ancestress  of   the  Messiah 
(Matt.  i.  i5).    Faith  is  thus  exhibited  as  the 
acceptable  principle  of  religious  action,  not 
in  Israel  only,  but  in  all  races,  as  in  all 
times.    Bahab's  faith  was  in  tlie  omnipo- 
tence and  supremacy  of  the  God  of  Israel, 
induced  by  evidence  of  which  she  could  not 
resist  the  force  (Josh.  ii.  9 — 12).     Her  con- 
sequent action  was  to  protect  the  spies,  of 
course  with  great  risk  to  herself,  lest  she 
should   oppose    the    Divine    will    as    she 
believed  it.     Her  fellow-countrymen  had 
the  same  evidence    before    them ;    but   it 
caused  them  only  to  lose  courage  and  faint, 
not  to  act  on  faith  at  all,  either  in  their  own 
gods  or  in  the  Lord  ;  hence  they  are  here 
called  "  those  who  were   disobedient  (jois 
iireie-^traari),"  i.e.  resisted  God's  will — the 
same  expression  as  is  used  of  the  Israelites 
who  fell  in  the  wilderness  (ch.  iii.  18),  and 
of  the  contemporaries  of  Noah  (1  Pet.  iii. 
20;  cf.  Acts  xix.  9).    That  Rahab  was,  at 
the  time  when  she  thus  evinced  her  faith,  a 
harlot  (such  is  certainly  the  meaning  of 
vopt^);    that    she    lied    to   the    King   of 
Jericho's  messengers  (Josh.  ii.  4,  5) ;  and 
that  she  treacherously  aided  the  invaders 
of  her  country  ; — have  been  felt  as  difficulties 
with  regard  to  the  position  assigned  her 
among  the  faithful.     In  reply  to  such  as- 
persions on  her  character,  it  is  usual  to 
allege  as  follows  :  As  to  her  harlotry,  there 
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  her  profession 
was    held    in   any    disrepute    among    the 
Canaanites,  or  that  she  was  aware  of  there 
being  any  harm  in  it;  and  tliat,  at  any  rate 
after  her  conversion,  she  became  the  honour- 
able wife  of  a  chief  in  Israel.    As  to  her 
lying,  strict    truthfulness   in   all   circum- 
stances was  not  likely  to  be  known  to  her 
as   a   necessary   virtue;    Michal,   not   to 
mention  others,  lied  to  Saul's  messengers 
in  order  to  save  David's  life,  and  even  some 
Christian  casuists  allow  falsehood  in  such 
cases.    As  to  her  treachery,  what  she  held 
to  be  her  religious  duty  properly  took  pre- 
cedence of  any  sentiment  of  hopeless  pa- 
triotism; and,  after  all,  what  she  did  was 
only  to  save  the  spies  from  a  cmel  death, 
not  to  correspond  with  the  enemy  or  open 
the  gates  of  her  city  to  them.    Such  excuses 


306 


THE  EPJ.STLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS. 


[oh.  XI.  1 — 40, 


for  what  might  seem  amiss  in  her  are  valM. 
But  the  main  point  to  be  obserred  is  this— 
that,  whatever  her  enligliteiiment,  as  a 
heathen,  in  [irinciples  of  morality  familiar 
to  us  Christians,  slie  stands  out  in  tlie  sacred 
record  as  having  been  s.ived  and  ailmitted 
into  Israel  on  account  of  her  faith  in  the 
one  true  God,  and  action  in  aocordnnee 
with  her  faith.  What  is  said  of  Jael  (Dr. 
Arnold's  '  Sermons  on  Inti  rpretation  of 
Scripture')  maybe  still  more  said  of  her: 
"  They  who  serve  him  honeatly  up  to  the 
measure  of  their  knowledge  are  according 
to  the  general  course  of  his  providence 
encouraged  and  blessed;  tl  ey  whose  eyes 
and  hearts  are  still  fixed  upwards,  on  duty, 
not  on  self,  are  precisely  that  smoking  flax 
which  he  will  not  quench,  but  cherish 
rather,  till  Ihe  smoke  be  blown  into  a 
flame."  Be  it  observed,  however,  that' 
Jael's  murderous  deed— much  less  easily 
defensible  than  Rahab's  conduct — is  no- 
where adduced  in  the  New  Testament  as 
an  instance  of  faith.  Among  the  names 
that  follow  here  Barak  is  mentioned,  but  not 
Jael.  The  only  ground  for  supposing  her 
to  be  approved  in  Scripture  is  her  heing 
called  "  blessed "  in  Deborah's  tiiumphal 
song,  ultered  in  the  flush  of  victory.  But 
«e  are  not  bound  to  ac>  ept  that  "  prophet- 
ess," however  inspired  for  her  peculiar 
mission,  as  an  oracle  on  questions  of 
morality. 

Vers.  32 — 34. — And  what  shall  I  more  say  1 
for  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  Gideon, 
and  of  Barak  and  Samson  and  Jephthah ; 
and  of  David  and  Samuel  and  the  prophets : 
who  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms, 
wrought  righteousness,  obtained  promises, 
stopped  the  mouths  of  Uons,  quenched  the 
power  (Siira/iic)  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the 
Bword,  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong, 
waxed  valiant  in  fight  (literallv,  were  made 
itrong  in  war),  turned  to  fiight  armies  of 
aliens.  The  names  thus  mentioned  nre 
meant  as  prominent  specimens  of  the  long 
array  of  Israel's  heroes  to  the  end  of  tne 
sacred  history,  though,  for  the  avoid  'uce  of 
prolixity,  the  list  is  not  continued  beyond 
the  founilation  ot  the  kingdom  under  David 
and  Samuel.  Among  the  judges,  Gi  icon  is 
mentioneil  Gist,  though  he  came  after  Barak, 
prob.ibly  as  being  the  most  famous  hero, 
Bs  well  as  more  remarkable  in  the  his- 
lory  for  faith  and  heroism.  "The  day  of 
Jlidian"  is  referred  to  by  Isaiah  (ix.  4;  x. 
2U)  as  the  memorable  tjiunjph  of  ancient 
days.  Hence  (the  arrangement  of  the  re'* 
and  Kai'ti  of  the  Textus  Ueceptus  being  re- 
tained) Gideon  is  first  mentioned  singly, 
and  is  succeeded  by  two  groups — viz.  Barak, 
Samsun,  and  Jephthah,  representing  the 
period  of  the  judges  generally  ;  then  David 
and  Samuel,  representing  that  of  the  kings 


and  prophets.  The  deeds  enumerated  in 
the  following  verses  need  not  be  appropri- 
ated exclusively  to  particular  heroes,  but 
may  be  rather  taken  as  denoting  generally 
the  kind  of  exploits  by  which  faith  wag 
evidenced  throughout  the  history.  Some, 
however,  seem  to  have  special  references, 
as  the  stopping  of  lions'  mouths,  and 
quenching  the  power  of  fire,  to  the  inoidenta 
recorded  in  the  Book  of  Daniel.  "  Escaped 
the  edge  of  the  sword,"  though  peculiarly 
applicable  to  Elijah  (cf.  1  Kings  xix.  10, 
14,  "  have  slain  thy  prophets  vvith  the 
sword,  and  I,  even  I,  only  am  left,"  etc.), 
has,  of  course,  many  other  applications. 
Some  Bee  in  "  out  of  weakness  were  made 
strong"  a  special  allusion  to  Samson's  re- 
covery of  his  strength,  but  it  is  better  taken 
in  general  reference  to  the  frequent  in- 
stances of  the  weak  things  of  this  world 
being  enabled  through  faith  to  confound 
the  strong,  and  the  few  to  prevail  against 
the  many.  Numerous  expressions  to  this 
effect  in  the  Psalms,  when  the  psalmist 
rises  out  of  the  depths  of  humiliation  and 
weakness  into  confident  reliance  on  Divine 
aid,  will  suggest  themselves  at  once;  and 
the  instances  of  Gideon,  Jonathan,  David, 
and  others,  will  occur  readily  to  the  mind. 
In  the  four  concluding  clauses  of  ver.  34 
DelilZBch  supposes  the  Maccabean  heroes 
to  be  specifically  alluded  to — partly  because 
of  the  word  7rope/i/3oAi)  being  used  here,  as 
it  is  also  frequently  in  1  Maccabees,  in  the 
sense  of  "encamped  army,"  instead  of  ilg 
proper  and  usual  one  of  "  camp  "  as  in  ch. 
xiii.  11,  13  (cf.  Acts  xxi.  10 ;  xxiii.  10) 
This  coinciilence  of  usage  does  add  to  the 
probability  that  the  MacCibean  history,  to 
which  all  the  expressions  are  very  suitable, 
was  at  any  rate  included  in  the  writer's 
view.  But  in  the  history  of  Gideon  too 
(Judg.  vii.  2)  the  LXX.  has  TrapE/j/SoA^  for 
the  host  encamped;  «a!  eSpafjiei/  iracra  ij  ira- 
pili$o\-/i.  .Allusion  to  MaccabLes  is  more 
distinctly  evident  in  ver.  35,  as  will  be  seen. 
The  expression,  "obtained  promises  (c'lre- 
Tuxov  iirayy(\tiiy),"  surely  expresses  having 
promises  fulfilled  to  them,  not  merely  having 
promise  made  to  them.  "Promises"  being 
in  the  plural,  and  without  an  article,  so  as 
to  include  all  prophetic  promises  even  of  a 
temporal  character,  such  as  that  to  David 
that  he  should  reign  inste.id  of  Saul, — there 
is  no  need  here  to  reconcile  the  a  sertion  with 
that  of  ver.  39,  "  received  not  the  promise 
(oii/c  e/cojUiffaj/To  tt)^  eira77c\£o»') ;  "  On  which 
expression,  however,  see  below. 

Ver.  35. — Women  received  their  dead 
raised  to  life  again  (literally, /»-o/n,  or,  out  of 
resurrection.  The  A.V.  gives  the  sense  in 
good  E)iglisli ;  only  the  force  of  the  repe- 
tition of  the  word  "  resurrection  "  at  the 
end  of  the  verse  is  lost) ;  and  others  w«r« 


CH.  XI.  1 — 10.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


807 


tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance,  that 
the;  might  obtain  a  better  resurrection. 
Tlie  first  part  of  this  verse  evidently  refers 
to  1  Kings  xvii.  22  and  2  Kings  iv.  36 — the 
memorable  instances  in  the  Old  Testament 
of  mothers  having  had  their  sons  restored 
to  them  from  death.  The  latter  part  is  as 
evidently  suggested  at  least  by  the  narra- 
tive of  2  Maoo.  vii. ;  where  it  is  recorded 
liow,  under  the  persecution  of  Antiochus 
Epiplianes,  seven  sons  of  one  mother  were 
tortured  and  put  to  death ;  how  one  of  them, 
ill  tlie  midst  of  his  tortures,  having  dehver- 
aiioy  and  advancement  offered  him  if  he 
would  foisake  the  Law  of  his  fathers,  cour- 
ageously refused  the  offer ;  and  how  both 
tliey  and  their  mother,  who  encouraged 
them  to  persevere,  reiterated  their  hope  of  a 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  The  "better 
resurrection "  means  the  resurrection  to 
eternal  life  by  them  looked  for,  which  was 
"  better  "  than  the  temporary  restoration  to 
life  in  this  world  granted  to  the  sons  of  the 
widow  of  Zurephath  and  the  Shunammite ; 
while  the  article  in  the  Greek  before  "  de- 
liverance" (ti^i/  oiroXi/'Tpoxrii')  may  be  due 
to  the  thought  of  that  which  is  recorded  to 
have  been  offered  to  those  in  the  writer's 
immediate  view.  There  is  some  doubt  as  to 
the  exact  import  of  the  word  irviiiraviaSitaav 
(translated  "  tortured  ").  The  usual  mean- 
ing of  the  Greek  word  is  "  to  beat,"  as  a  drum 
Is  beaten,  fiom  rvfiiravov,  a  drum  or  drum- 
stick :  and  aTroTvfj,Trayl^^iv  means  "  to  beat  to 
deatli."  But,  inasmuch  as  the  instrument 
of  torture  tfi  wliich  Eleazar  (whose  martyr- 
dom is  related  in  the  preceding  chapter  of 
2  Maccabees)  was  brought  is  called  tA  Tii/t- 
Travov  (vi.  19,  28),  it  has  been  supposed 
tliat  the  punishment  referred  to  was  the 
stretching  of  the  victims,  in  the  way  of  a 
rack,  on  a  sort  of  wheel  o<illed  a  tympanum, 
ou  which  they  were  then  beaten  to  death, 
as  Eleazar  was.  So  Vulgate,  diatenti  eunt. 
The  fact  that  the  seven  of  2  Maco.  vii.  were 
not  so  martyred,but  by  fire  and  other  tortures, 
is  not  inconsistent  with  this  view  ;  for  our 
author  need  not  be  supposed  to  confine  his 
view  to  them,  but  uses  the  won!  suggesttd 
by  Eleazar'a  case.  Wliatever  be  the  exact 
import  of  the  word,  the  A.V.  ("were  tor- 
tured ")  Bufiiciently  gives  the  generally  in- 
tended meaning. 

Vers.  36— 88.— And  others  had  trial  of 
mockiugs  and  sconrgings,  yea,  moreover 
of  bonds  and  imprisonment  :  they  were 
stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder,  were 
tempted,  were  slain  with  the  sword:  they 
wandered  about  in  sheepskins  and  goat- 
skins ,  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented 
(rather,  evil-entreated) ;  (of  whom  the  world 
was  not  worthy :)  wandering  in  deserts,  and 
mountains,  and  dens,  and  the  oaves  of  the 
eartli.     In  this  gtneral  review  particular 


cases  may  again  have  sng^^ested  some  of 
the  expressions  used.  Tlie  mention  of 
"  mookings  "  is  prominent  in  the  Maooabean 
history;  "  bonds  and  imprisonments"  recall 
Hanani,  Micaiah,  and  Juremiali ;  "  they 
were  stoned "  rccills  Zacliariah  son  of 
Jehohida  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  20;  of.  M..tt. 
xxiii.  35 ;  Luke  xi.  51 ;  also  Matt,  xxiii.  37 ; 
Luke  xiii.  34).  "  They  wandered  in  slieep- 
skins  (/t7)A.a)Tar?)  and  in  desi  rts  "  peouliiirly 
Buggeiits  Elijah  (hia  mantle  being  called 
^TjAtoTTjs  in  the  LXX.,  2  Kings  fi.  13,  14), 
tliough  the  Mat'cabean  hLioes  also  took 
rt-fuge  in  "deserts  and  mountains"  (1 
Maco.  ii.).  "Sawn  asunder"  (denoting  a 
mode  of  executing  martyrs  of  which  there 
is  no  instance  in  the  Old  Testament  or 
Apocryplia)  most  probably  refers  to  a  well- 
known  tradition  about  Isiiiuh,  who  is  said 
to  liave  so  buffered  under  Manasseh.  Alford 
tlius  gives  the  notices  found  elsewhere  of 
this  tradition:  ^'Justin  Martyr  'Trypho,' 
§  120  ;  Ti  rtullian,  '  Cent.  Gnost.  Scorpiac.,' 
8,  and  '  De  Patient.,'  14 ;  Origen,  '  Ep.  ad 
African. ; '  Lactantins,  '  Inst.,'  iv.  11 ;  Ps.- 
Epiphanius, '  Vit.  Proph. ; '  Augustine,  '  De 
Civ.  Dei,'  xviii.  21 ;  Jerome,  on  Isa.  Ivii.  1." 
Jerome  calls  it  a  "  certissima  traditio  apud 
Juilseos,"  and  says  that  tliis  pnssage  in  ihe 
Epistle  was  by  most  referred  to  the  passion  of 
Isaiah.  The  tameness  and  apparent  unappro- 
priateness  of  the  verb  eiteipda-e-ria-av  ("  were 
tempted  ")  in  ver.  36,  in  the  midst  of  an  enu- 
meration of  cruel  modes  of  death,  has  led  to  a 
prevalent  view  that  it  is  a  corruption  of  tlie 
original  text.  Various  conjectures  have  been 
made,  the  most  tenable  being  (1)  that  it  is  an 
interpolation,  arising  from  the  repetition  by 
some  copyist  of  iwpiirdria-av,  which  was  after- 
wards altered  to  IjreipiJo-flrjo-aj/ :  or  (2)  th?  i,  it 
is  a  substitution  for  some  other  word  through 
error  in  transcription,  the  most  likely  con- 
jecture as  to  the  word  originally  written 
being  hpiiadricrav  or  knvfiiaSnaav,  equiva- 
lent to  "  were  burnt."  Either  form,  especially 
the  latter,  might  easily  be  changed  to  eirei- 
pdffdria-ay :  and  thus  death  by  fire  would  h:ive 
tieen  originally  included  in  the  enumeration, 
w  hich  was  likely  to  have  been  the  case,  espe- 
cially since  it  is  mentioned  promin^itly  in 
the  account  of  the  martyrdom  of  the  seven 
sons.  But,  as  there  is  no  authority  of  any 
manuscript  for  a  different  word,  this  is 
mere  conjecture;  though  the  omission  of 
the  word  altogether  in  some  few  manu- 
scripts and  versions,  and  variations  of  read- 
ing in  others,  suggest  some  uncertainty  as  to 
the  original  text.  The  word  iireipia-  Briaav 
if  genuine,  may  possibly  have  been  sug- 
gested by  alliteration,  and  by  thought  of 
the  temptations  to  apostatize  prominent  in 
the  account  both  of  Eleazar  and  of  the  seven 


sons. 
Vers.  39,  40. 


theta  all,  having  o1» 


108 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


[oh.  XI.  1 — iO, 


tained  a  good  report  (literally,  having  been 
witnessed  of,  as  in  yer.  2)  throngh  faith, 
received  not  the  promise :  God  having  pro- 
vided {oTjforeseen)  some  better  thing  for  (liter- 
ally, (xmcermng)  va,  that  they  without  ns 
shoold  not  be  made  perfect.  There  is  no  con- 
tradiction between  tlie  assertion  here  made, 
that  none  of  the  saints  of  old  "  received  the 
promise  {^icofiiffavro  rilv  67ra776\/ai/)  "  and  its 
being  said  of  Abraham  (ch.  vi.  15)  that  he 
did  "obtain  tlie  promise  ((Ve'ruxe  tijs  6ir- 
ayye\tas)."  For  tlioiigh  in  both  passages 
"the  promise,"  i.e.  the  great  Messianic 
promise  (not  "  promises,"  as  in  ver.  33, 
supra),  is  spoken  of — or  at  any  rate,  in  the 
ease  of  Abraham,  ultimately  referred  to — 
yet  the  verbs  used  are  different  and  have 
different  meanings.  He  "  obtained  "  or  at- 
tained to  it,  in  the  sense  of  having  it  con- 
firmed and  assured  to  him  and  liis  seed 
(see  note  on  ch.  vi.  15);  but  he  did  not 
actually  get  it  so  as  to  re'duce  it  to  posses- 
sion and  enter  into  the  enjoyment  of  it. 
The  realization  of  all  that  is  meant  by  the 
word  here  used  u,  indeed,  even  to  Christian 


believers,  still  future  (for  of.  eh.  x.  36, 
iva  KOfiitTTiade  rrjv  birayycKiav),  Nay,  it  is 
future  also  in  its  fulness,  even  to  the  saints 
at  rest ;  for  in  the  passfip;e  just  quotcil  it  is 
plainly  intimated  that  the  entire  fulfilment 
will  not  be  till  "  he  that  shall  come  "  comes ; 
i.e.  till  llie  second  advent.  The  redeemed 
whose  probation  on  earth  is  over  are  indeed, 
in  one  sense,  said  to  be  already  "  perfected  " 
(of.  ch.  X.  14 ;  xii.  23) ;  but  still  the  "  per- 
fect consummation  and  bliss  both  in  body 
and  soul "  is  nowhere  in  the  New  Testament 
contemplated  till  "  the  end."  In  the  mean 
time,  even  the  saints  under  the  heavenly 
altar  still  cry,  "  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  and  the 
Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  "  Come,  Lord 
Jesus."  The  full  idea,  then,  of  ver.  40  may 
be  that,  according  to  the  eternal  Divine  pur- 
pose, the  promise  of  redemption  should  not 
be  fully  realized  till  the  number  of  the  elect 
shall  be  accomplished,  and  aU  the  redeemed 
of  all  ages  since  the  world  began  sliall  be 
gathered  together  through  Christ  in  one, 
and  God  shall  be  all  in  all. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 3. — TTie  nature  and  power  of  faith.  In  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter,  the 
apostle  has  spoken  of  faith  as  the  principle  of  spiritual  life,  and  the  spring  of  patient 
<ndurance.  He  has  quoted  a  great  saying  from  Habakkuk,  " The  just  shall  live  by 
fxith ;  "  and  be  now  proceeds  to  vindicate  its  truth  in  a  series  of  brilliant  biographical 
illustrations.  Fii^t  of  all,  however,  the  apostle  supplies  a  theoretic  definition  or  descrip- 
tion of  saving  faith. 

I.  The  nature  of  faith.  (Ver.  1.)  Faith  is  a  natural  princiiile  of  the  mind.  All 
men  exercise  it  with  regard  to  earthly  things.  But  spiritual  faith  has  for  its  objects  a 
higher  class  of  realities — the  truths  of  religion  revealed  in  the  Bible.  In  the  text  this 
faith  is  looked  at  in  the  most  general  and  comprehensive  way.  It  is  viewed,  not  so 
much  as  an  act,  but  as  a  state  of  mind,  and  as  antithetical  to  sight.  1.  Faith  it  the  eye 
of  the  soul.  It  is  "the  conviction  of  things  not  seen" — the  organ  by  which  we  look 
upon  the  invisible  and  the  eternal.  And,  if  faith  is  the  eye,  the  Bible  is  the  eye-glass 
through  which  faith  looks.  The  objects  of  spiritual  faith  are  all  supernaturally  revealed 
truths — "  the  things  of  God,"  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit."  These  embrace  all  the  great 
truths  concerning  God,  man,  the  way  of  salvaticm,  lh«  Church,  the  last  things.  The 
believer's  conviction  of  these  "  things  not  seen  "  rests  upon  the  testimony  of  God,  given 
not  only  outwardly — by  the  lips  and  pens  of  inspired  men,  but  inwardly — by  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit  himself  within  the  soul.  "  Seeing  is  believing  "  in  the  world  of  sense ;  but 
in  the  domain  of  faith  this  maxim  is  reversed,  for  in  spiritual  things  "  believing  is 
seeing."  2.  Faith  is  the  hand  of  the  soul.  It  is  "  the  confidence  of  things  hoped  foj." 
The  universe  of  the  unseen  contains  those  glorious  realities  which  are  the  objects  o( 
spiritual  hope.  And  those  realities  faith  grasps.  Saving  faith  is  approprinting  faith, 
'i'he  "  things  hoped  for  "  are  all  involved  in  the  coming  of  Christ's  kingdom,  which  shall 
bring  with  it  the  final  triumph  of  truth  over  error,  and  of  good  over  evil.  They  include 
also,  in  subordination  to  this  crowning  hope,  whatever  is  necessary  for  the  spiritual 
cleansing  and  culture  and  comfort  of  the  individual  believer ;  as  e.g.  the  forgiveness  of 
sins,  peace  with  God,  victory  over  indwelling  evil,  growing;  likeness  to  Christ,  the  coiu- 
munion  of  saints,  and  the  prospect  of  a  blessed  imujortality.  The  man  whose  heart 
reposes  on  these  hopes  will  be  no  longer  dominated  by  the  things  "  which  are  seen  " 
and  "  temporal."  He  will  become  heavenly-minded.  His  faith  will  make  him  Uie 
longer  the  mora  humble,  pure,  laborious,  courageoui,  meek,  long-suffering,  forgiving. 
"  The  just  shall  live  by  faith." 


CH.xi.  1— 40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  309 

II.  The  roTjNDATioN-DooTBiNB  OP  FAITH.  (Ver.  3.)  Here  the  author  specifies,  ai 
one  of  the  great  objects  of  faith,  what  is  really  the  Tundamental  truth  of  all  religion,  as 
it  is  also  the  first  utterance  of  revelation  (Gen.  i.  1) — the  doctrine  of  the  creation  of  the 
world  by  the  living  God.  For  our  knowledge  of  this  truth  we  are  indebted  exclusively 
to  the  Bible.  Human  theories  regarding  the  origin  of  the  universe  have  been  mere  con- 
jectures. Heathen  philosophers  have  dreamed  of  the  eternal  existence  of  matter ;  or 
they  have  taught,  in  some  form  or  other,  the  doctrine  "  that  what  is  seen  hath  been 
made  out  of  things  which  do  appear."  Unaided  reason  has  never  ascended  by  the  steps 
of  the  design-argument  "up  to  nature's  God."  Paley's  famous  illustration  of  tlie 
watch  euggests  a  conclusive  syllogism  only  to  the  Christian  theist.  What,  then,  does 
the  apostle  assert  here  regarding  creation?  1.  That  all  that  exists  in  time  and  space 
was  skilfully  framed  and  finished  by  a  simple  fiat  of  the  Almighty.  2.  That  it  follows 
that  the  universe  was  not  formed  out  of  any  pre-existing  materials  whatsoever,  but  was 
created  by  God  out  of  nothing.  The  question  of  the  mode  in  which  "  the  worlds  have 
been  framed  "  is  one,  when  regarded  from  the  spiritual  point  of  view,  of  very  slight 
importance.  It  matters  Uttle  whether  "  what  ia  seen  "  assumed  its  present  form  in 
connection  with  a  series  of  creative  acts,  or  by  a  process  of  evolution.  What  faith  lays 
stress  on  is  this,  that  the  universe  is  in  no  sense  self-existent,  but  owes  its  genesis  to 
the  will  of  a  personal  Creator  or  Evolver.  Ancient  paganism  deified  the  power  o( 
nature,  and  atheistic  evolution  in  our  own  time  sees  in  matter  the  "  promise  and 
potency  "  of  all  life.  But  the  candid,  aober  confession  of  science  still  is,  that  "  behind 
and  above  and  around  the  phenomena  of  matter  and.  of  force,  remains  the  unsolved 
mystery  of  the  universe."  "Now,  revelation  explains  this  mystery.  The  doctrine  of  a 
personal  Creator  is  the  foundation-doctrine  of  faith.  If  this  truth  he  accepted,  it 
follows  that  miracles  are  possible,  and  that  a  supernatural  revelation  is  not  an 
unlikely  blessing.  If  God  has  made  us  in  his  own  image,  then  surely  we  are  heirs  of 
immortality ;  and,  although  we  have  gone  astray  from  him,  peradventure  he  may  hear 
us  when  we  call  upon  him,  and  may  graciously  receive  us  back  into  his  favour. 

III.  The  poweb  of  faith  to  fobm  chaeaoter.  (Ver.  2.)  The  "  things  not  seen  " 
and  "  hoped  for  "  control  the  life  of  the  believer.  They  engage  his  attention.  They 
call  forth  his  energies.  They  mould  his  habits.  They  direct  his  affections.  The  con- 
viction and  the  confidence  which  make  his  character  what  it  is  are  grounded,  not  upon 
knowledge,  but  upon  testimony.  This  truth  receives  splendid  illustration  in  the  lives 
of  the  saints  who  lived  during  the  twilight  before  the  rise  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness. 
"  The  elders  "  are  the  Hebrew  fathers,  and  "  the  world's  grey  fathers  "  of  antediluvian 
times.  They  trusted  in  a  Saviour  who  was  yet  only  "  hoped  for,"  and  in  a  sacrifice  for 
sin  that  was  "  not  seen."  Although  they  lived  so  very  long  ago,  and  although  the 
truth  which  they  rested  on  was  still  but  imperfectly  developed,  yet  theirs  was  saving 
faith,  and  it  was  vigorous,  valiant,  victorious.  For,  faith  is  the  belief  of  a  Divine  testi- 
mony, whatever  that  testimony  may  be.  Under  every  dispensation  the  believer  has  ven- 
tured his  eternal  interests  upon  the  bare  word  of  God.  "  The  elders  had  witness  borne  to 
them,"  i.e.  the  approving  testimony  of  God  and  his  Word.  And  the  apostle  proceeds,  in 
the  verses  which  follow,  to  name  some  of  these  illustrious  elders,  and  to  show  that  their 
excellence  of  character  was  due  to  the  moral  power  of  their  faith.  This  chapter,  accord- 
ingly, may  be  said  to  point  out  some  of  the  great  constellations  which  blazed  in  the 
firmament  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  Or  it  may  be  compared  to  a  national  picture- 
gallery  of  the  soldiers  of  faith,  and  their  battles.  Or  its  verses  may  be  likened  to  the 
epitaphs  on  the  ancient  monuments  in  the  fair  and  venerable  abbey  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Church. 

In  conclusion,  have  we  this  faith  ?  The  assent  of  the  intellect  to  Bible  truth  la  not 
enough.  Faith  for  us  means  personal  trust  in  a  personal  Saviour.  Spiritual  faith  is  a 
grace ;  it  is  God-given.  Only  the  Holy  Spirit  can  enable  us  to  be  guided,  in  our  whole 
walk  and  conduct,  by  the  unseen  and  eternal  realities. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Faith  of  the  antediluvian  saints.  The  apostle,  having  gone  to  tke  first 
page  of  the  Bible  for  the  foundation-doctrine  of  faith,  has  only  to  turn  the  leaf  to  find 
his  first  historical  illustrations. 

I.  The  example  of  Abel.  (Ver.  4.)  In  what  respect  was  Abel's  sacrifice  "  more 
excellent "  than  Cain's?   1.  Some  answer — Because  its  materials  were  more  valuable,  and 


310  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWa  [ch.  xi.  1— 40. 

also  more  carefully  selectecU  Cain  presented  an  oblation  of  vegetables,  taking  the  first 
that  came  to  hand ;  while  Abel  offered  an  animal  sacrifice,  and  the  choicest  which  his  flock 
could  supply.  2.  Others  judge  that  Abel's  sacrifice  was  "  more  excellent "  because  of 
the  living  faith  of  which  it  was  the  expression.  He  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth ; 
whereas  Cain's  offering  was  that  of  a  formalist  and  a  hypocrite.  3.  Bat  the  true  view, 
we  apprehend,  must  go  deeper  than  either  of  these.  Abel's  sacrifice  was  better,  not 
merely  because  he  brought  it  in  faith,  but  because  his  faith  led  him  to  select  an  offer- 
ing which  was  in  itself  more  appropriate  than  that  of  Cain.  "  The  Lord  had  respect 
unto  Abel"  for  what  he  himself  was,  as  reflected  in  what  he  gave  (Gen.  iv.  4).  His 
offering,  we  may  presume,  was  an  act  of  faith  resting  upon  the  Divine  testimony 
regarding  "  the  seed  of  the  woman,"  and  the  necessity  of  atonement  by  blood.  But  Cain, 
in  presenting  only  fruit,  declared  thereby  his  disbelief  in  the  gospel  promise,  and  his 
repudiation  of  the  appointed  way  of  salvation.  So,  God  bore  visible  witness  to  Abel 
"  that  he  was  righteous "  (Gen.  iv.  4 — 12) ;  and  the  first  maityr  has  in  consequence 
become  distinguished  as  "righteous  Abel"  (Matt,  xxiii.  35  ;  1  John  iii.  12).  Indeed, 
Abel  still  speal<s  to  the  whole  Church  by  his  faith.  He  teaches  us  that  we  can  only 
approach  God  through  the  propitiation  of  Christ,  and  that  in  pleading  the  one  propitia- 
tion we  must  bring  also  the  sacrifice  of  "a  broken  spirit." 

II,  The  example  of  Enoch.  (Vers.  6,  6.)  What  a  contrast  between  the  end  of 
Abel's  earthly  life  and  that  of  Enoch !  And  what  a  pleasant  break  in  the  melancholy 
monotone  of  Gen.  v., "  And  he  died,"  are  the  sweet  words  used  regarding  Enoch's  removal: 
"  He  was  not,  for  God  took  him  "  (ver.  24) !  Here  we  have :  1.  A  statement  regarding 
Enoch's  translation.  (Ver.  5.)  His  faith  is  represented  as  the  reason  on  account  of  which 
he  was  transported  to  heaven  without  tasting  of  death.  His  wonderful  removal  was 
the  reward  of  his  singularly  holy  life;  and  that,  in  turn,  was  the  fruit  of  his  faith.  2. 
An  argument  in  support  of  this  statement.  (I)  Such  is  the  representation  of  the  Old 
Testament  (ver.  5).  Enoch's  translation  is  there  said  (Gen.  v.  24)  to  have  taken  place 
in  consequence  of  the  peculiar  favour  of  God.  Scripture  bears  witness  to  him  "  that 
he  had  been  well-pleasing  unto  God"  before  it  informs  us  of  his  glorification.  (2)  It  is 
self-evident  that  none  hut  a  believer  can  obtain  the  Divine  favour  (ver.  6).  The  spring 
of  holiness  is  always  faith.  Enoch,  like  Abel,  had  met  with  the  unseen  Jehovah  over 
a  bleeding  sacrifice.  He  had  lived  under  a  sense  of  the  Divine  presence.  He  had  con- 
fided in  God,  and  cultivated  congeniality  with  him.  He  had  been  a  witness  for  him  to 
a  sensuous  and  ungodly  world.  The  apostle  mentions  in  this  connection  two  indis- 
pensable articles  of  faith  regarding  God.  First,  his  being.  To  believe  in  God  is  to  be 
convinced  of  a  truth  "  not  seen,"  and  made  evident  only  by  revelation.  Secondly,  hia 
benevolence.  To  believe  in  God  as  "  a  Eewarder  "  is  to  cherish  "  the  confidence  of  things 
hoped  for."  But  the  gospel  revelation  alone  assures  us  of  Jehovah's  accessibility,  and 
of  the  principles  of  his  moral  administration.  Yet  Enoch,  albeit  he  lived  in  the  scanty 
twilight  of  the  patriarchal  economy,  firmly  grasped  these  great  doctrines ;  and  the  faith 
of  them  led  him  on,  step  by  step,  until  he  found  himself  in  the  glorious  presence  of  God 
iu  heaven. 

IIL  The  example  op  Noah,  f  Ver.  7.)  The  name  of  Noah  is  associated  with  a  stu- 
pendous catastrophe,  the  faith  of  which,  while  it  was  "  not  seen  as  yet, "  brought  deliver- 
ance to  himself  and  his  family,  and  constituted  him  the  second  father  of  the  human 
race.  1.  Noah's  faith  was  severely  tried.  'J'he  Deluge,  of  which  he  was  forewarned, 
was  an  unprecedented  event,  and  could  only  take  place  by  a  miracle.  Then,  for  more 
than  a  century  after  the  warning  waa  given,  and  indeed  until  the  very  day  when  it 
began  to  be  fulfilled,  there  were  no  premonitions  of  its  fulfilment.  During  all  that 
time,  too,  Noah  had  to  labour  at  the  gigantic  task  of  constructing  the  ark,  amid  the 
jeers  of  an  ungodly  world.  2.  His  faith  bravely  triumphed.  The  victory  is  seen  in  his 
"  godly  fear,"  and  his  unquestioning  obedience.  It  appears  in  his  invincible  persever- 
ance as  the  builder  of  the  ark,  and  as  "  a  preacher  of  righteousness."  It  is  refiected  in 
the  confidence  with  which  he  obeyed  the  Divine  summons  to  enter  the  ark  while  the 
sky  was  yet  cloudless.  And  Noah's  triumphant  faith  "  condemne'd  the  world  j  "  for  the 
event  showed  that  the  doom  of  its  unbelief  was  just.  3.  Hisfaith  wan  richly  rewarded. 
It  brought  him  the  highest  honour.  It  was  the  means  of  confirming  his  already  emi- 
nent piety,  and  of  certifying  hia  possession  of  "  righteousness.'*  It  made  him  an  "  heii 
ufGod." 


OH.  XI.  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  311 

Lessons.  In  Abel,  we  see  faith  a«  the  condition  of  acceptable  worship ;  in  Enoch,  as 
the  root  of  godliness ;  in  Koab,  as  the  principle  of  separation  from  the  life  and  destiny 
of  the  ungodly.  Again,  Abel's  faith  condemns  the  spirit  which  denies  the  necessity  of 
an  expiatory  atonement;  Enoch's,  the  spirit  of  secularism,  positivism,  agnosticism; 
Koah's,  the  spirit  which  stumbles  at  the  possibility  of  miracles. 

Vers.  8 — 19. — Faith  of  the  Hebrew  Pilgrim  Father$,  What  Anglo-Saxon  could 
look  without  emotion  on  the  granite  boulder  at  New  Plymouth — "  the  corner-stone  of  a 
nation  " — upon  which  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  Kew  England  stepped  ashore  from  the 
Mayflower  f  And,  in  like  manner,  what  Jew  can  think  but  with  enthusiasm  of  those 
three  glorious  names — Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ?  The  verses  before  us  were  well 
fitted  to  stir  the  hearts'  blood  of  the  Hebrews  to  whom  this  treatise  was  addressed. 
And  they  should  stir  ours  too;  for  these  patriarchs  are  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  all  the 
men  of  faith.  We  shall  consider  the  passage  chiefly  in  connection  with  Abraham,  the 
father  of  the  faithful.  In  his  spiritual  life  there  were  at  least  four  great  crises — four 
occasions  upon  which  his  faith  was  severely  tried,  and  came  forth  victorious.  The 
apostle  introduces  his  reference  to  each  of  these  with  the  expressioa  which  is  the  refrain 
of  the  whole  chapter—"  By  faith  "  (vers.  8,  9, 11, 17). 

L  Abraham's  faith  was  shown  in  his  bmiqbation.  (Ver.  8.)  It  was  a  hard 
command  which  he  received,  to  leave  his  native  country,  and  to  cast  himself  upon  the 
bare  promise  of  God  for  another  home.  He  had  to  break  the  ties  which  bound  him  to 
the  scenes  of  his  youth.  He  was  at  first  ignorant  as  to  what  country  he  was  going. 
His  long  journey  would  expose  him  to  hardships  and  dangers.  Yet  Abraham  did  not 
hesitate  to  obey.  He  gathered  his  flocks  together,  and  set  out  with  his  houseliold 
caravan.  It  was  impossible  that  be  could  have  comprehended  the  large  plan  of  Provi- 
dence, of  which  only  one  little  corner  was  unfolded  ia  his  call ;  but  the  precept  and  the 
promise  were  sufficient  to  determine  his  action.  So  he  put  his  hand  trustfully  into  the 
great  hand  of  God,  and  allowed  him  to  guide  his  feet.  Abiaham's  emigration  was  the 
first  link  in  the  gcilden  chain  of  the  triumphs  of  his  fnith.  It  t'aches  us  such  lessons 
as  these — that  personal  religion  (1)  takes  its  rise  in  God;  (2)  is  the  fruit  of  a  Divine 
revelation ;  and  (3)  is  the  product  of  an  earnest  faith. 

II.  Abkaham's  taith  was  shown  in  his  lifelong  pilgrimage.  (Vers.  9,  10, 
13 — 16.)  When  he  arrived  in  Canaan,  the  patriarch  found  that  he  was  hot  to  receivu 
immediate  possession  of  the  land.  Indeed,  while  he  lived,  it  remained  still  but  "  the 
land  oi promise."  He  dwelt  in  tents.  He  did  not  build  any  walled  city.  The  only 
piece  of  ground  which  he  ever  acquired  was  a  burying-place.  But  his  view  of  the 
meaning  of  the  covenant  expanded  with  his  spiritual  experience.  Abraham  and  Sarah, 
Isnac  and  Jacob,  gradually  learned  that  the  promise  of  an  inheritance  in  the  literal 
Canaan  was  in  their  own  case  an  illusion.  Yet  they  did  not  conclude  that  it  had  been 
a  delusion.  They  learned  to  understand  the  promises  spiritually,  and  wt-re  persuaded 
that  God  would  fulfil  his  word  even  to  themselves,  in  a  deeper  way  than  at-first  they 
had  dreamed.  So  they  steadfastly  maintained  their  faith ;  and,  viewing  Canaan  as  a  type 
of  heaven,  "confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth."  Abraham 
was  content  to  feel  always  from  home  in  this  world.  Although  he  became  immensely 
wealthy,  he  continued  spiritually  a  pilgrim.  His  maxim  was  not  that  of  sense,  "A 
bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush ; "  rather,  as  a  prince  of  the  men  of  faith,  "  he 
looked  for  the  city  which  hath  the  foundations."  The  fatherland  for  which  he  longed 
was  not  the  place  of  his  birth,  else  he  could  easily  have  recrossed  the  Euphrates  (ver. 
15).  "  '1  he  heirs  of  the  promise  "  sought  their  home  in  heaven.  And  so,  "  These 
all  died  in  faiih,"  is  the  epitaph  common  to  all  the  monuments  in  Patriarchs'  Corner 
of  the  abbey  church  of  the  Old  Testament.  And  because  they  so  died,  God  conde- 
scinded  to  take  one  of  his  great  Bible-names  from  those  Hebrew  Pilgrim  Fathers — 
"  The  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob." 

HI.  Abraham's  faith  was  shown  durino  his  pbotbaoted  ohildlgssness.  (Vers. 
11, 12.)  This  severe  trial  Sarah  shared  with  him.  If  the  faith  of  Abraham  forms,  as  it 
were,  the  magnificent  frontispiece  of  the  volume  of  Jewish  history,  Sarah's  laith  occupies 
the  position  of  the  vignette  upon  the  title-page  (Isa.  li.  2).  The  time  came  when  the 
birth  of  a  child  to  them  was,  humanly  speaking,  doubly  impossible ;  and  yet  God  said 
that  the  covenant  would  not  be  fulfilled  in  the  line  of  Ishmael.    Had  it  not  been  for 


312  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [cu.  xi.  1—40. 

tlieiv  faith,  accordingly,  Sarah's  son  Isaac  would  never  have  heen  horn ;  and  the  promise 
could  not  have  heen  realized  that  Ahrahara  should  have  a  posterity — hoth  natural  and 
spiritual — numerous  as  the  stars  in  the  Eastern  sky,  or  as  the  sand-grains  upon  the 
shore  of  ocean. 

IV.  Abraham's  paitu  was  shown  in  the  sacbifick  of  his  son.  (Vers.  17 — 19.) 
This  extraordinary  event  was  the  final  strain  to  which  his  faith  was  suhjeoted.  It  was 
a  dieadful  ordeal,  and  one  from  which  even  most  good  men  would  have  recoiled  with 
horror.  The  patriarch  was  commanded  to  offer  up  the  most  precious  of  all  sacrifices. 
He  was  to  perform  a  deed  ahhorreiit  to  the  most  sacred  human  affection.  He  was 
required  to  put  to  death  the  heir  of  the  Divine  promise,  and  thus  appear  to  destroy  the 
hopes  which  clustered  round  him.  Yet  by  faith  Abraham  sustained  this  last  and 
crowning  trial.  His  submission  was  entire.  His  obedience  was  perfect.  The  apostle 
says  definitely  that  he  "offered  up  Isaac;"  for  the  sacrifice  was  completely  accom- 
plished in  the  patriarch's  will  before  the  angel  stayed  his  hand.  And  what  was  the 
faith  which  comforted  his  heart  and.  nerved  his  arm,  at  this  unparalleled  crisis  of  his 
spiritual  life?  Abraham  accounted  that  "God  is  able  to  raise  up,  even  from  the 
dead."  He  was  sure  that  Isaac  would  be  restored  to  life  again,  rather  than  that  the 
promise  should  fail.  Isaac's  resurrection  would  not  bo  a  greater  miracle  than  his  birth 
had  been.  And,  the  apostle  adds,  the  patriarch  really  did  receive  Isaac  from  the  dead, 
figuratively  speaking  (ver.  19).  An  achievement  so  sublime  evinced  that  complete 
self-consecration  and  6ubmi^sion  to  God's  will  which  belongs  only  to  perfect  faith,  and 
thus  certifies  Abraham's  right  to  the  lofty  title  of  "  father  of  the  faithfuL" 

Afplioation.  1,  Are  wo  ready  to  obey  any  call  of  God,  whether  relating  to  eui 
outer  life  or  to  our  soul-life  ?  2.  Do  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  "  strangers  and  pilgrims 
on  the  earth,"  or  could  we  take  an  eternity  of  our  present  life,  provided  oar  material 
circumstances  were  comfortable?  3.  Have  we  the  faith  which  can  laugh  at  im|X)s- 
sibilities  rather  than  disbelieve  the  Divine  promise  ?  4.  Have  we  unreservedly  conse- 
crated to  God  our  soul,  our  life,  our  all  ?  Happy  is  each  heart  that  MB  "  make  melody 
to  tha  Lord  "  in  the  words  of  the  hymn — 

"  The  Ood  of  Abraham  praise^ 
At  whose  supreme  command 
Vrom  earth  I  rise,  and  seek  the  Jeyt 
At  his  right  hand. 
I  all  on  earth  forsake, — 
Its  wisdom,  fame,  and  power; 
And  him  my  only  Portion  makei 
My  Shield  and  Tower." 

(OUven.) 

Vers.  20— 22.— Faith  of  Iscuus,  Jaeoh,  and  Joseph.  Each  of  these  patri&rcliB  died  In 
the  firm  confidence  of  "  things  hoped  for,"  and  pronounced  prophetic  blessings  upon 
his  descendants  accord iiigly.  The  patriarchal  benedictions  weio  the  expressions  of  a  faith 
in  the  promises  of  the  covenant,  which  was  strong  enough  to  bear  the  test  of  a  death-bed. 

I.  Isaac's  blessinq.  (Ver.  20.)  The  prophecy  here  referred  to  was  divinely 
inspired.  It  was  not  the  utterance  merely  of  parental  love.  The  Holy  Spirit  revealed 
to  Isaac  the  fortunes  of  his  two  sons;  and,  believing  the  revelation,  he  felt  himself 
impelled  by  an  irresistible  impulse  to  declare  it.  The  sin  of  Rebel;  ah  and  Jacob  in 
intercepting  for  the  latter  what  his  father  had  intended  for  Esau  did  not  make  the 
promise  of  none  effect.  Had  Isaac  been  announcing  only  his  own  pleasure,  he  would 
most  certainly  have  recalled  the  words  which  Jacob  had  appropriated  so  treacherously ; 
but  the  patriarch  felt  that  he  dared  not  do  so.  He  was  (ersuaded  that  he  had  been 
made  only  the  mouthpiece  of  the  Divine  will  respecting  the  person  who  stood  before 
him  at  the  time.  He  saw  that  the  blessing  of  the  firstborn  had  been  providentially 
directed  towards  his  younger  son,  and  he  confessed  his  inability  to  reverse  it  (Gen. 
xxvii.  33).  Isaac  blessed  his  sons  "  by  faith "  in  the  revelation  regarding  tlum  of 
which  he  was  the  recipient. 

II.  Jacob's  blkssino.  (Ver.  21.)  It  was  faith  in  a  Divine  testimony  made  in  turn 
to  Jacob  that  caused  him  (Gen.  xlviiL  6, 15—20)  both  to  predict  that  Joseph  should 
have  a  double  portion  in  Israel  through  liis  two  sons,  and  to  bestow  the  hu-ger  blessing 


OH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE   TO  THE  HEBEEWS.  813 

upon  Ephraim,  the  younger.  The  patriarch  knew  that  it  would  be  a  greater  honour  to 
these  two  young  men  to  become  each  the  head  of  a  little  Israelitish  clan,  than  even  tc 
take  rank  through  their  mother  as  Egyptian  princes.  And  behind  this  benediction  of 
his  grandsons  there  lay  also  Jacob's  firm  faith  in  that  provision  of  the  covenant  which 
gave  the  land  of  Canaan  to  his  posterity.  He  had  exacted  from  Joseph  a  promise  upon 
oath  that  he  should  not  be  buried  in  Egy[)t,  far  from  the  graves  of  his  kindred ;  and  he 
devoutly  thanked  God,  "  leaning  upon  the  top  of  his  staff,"  for  the  assurance  that  his 
body  should  rest  in  the  land  of  promise  (Gen.  xlvii.  29 — 31).  All  this  shows  Jacob's 
faith  in  the  future  return  of  the  Hebrews  to  Canaan  as  the  land  of  their  inheritance. 
And  his  faith  looked  also,  we  are  persuaded,  to  the  "  heavenly  country  "  of  which  the 
land  promised  to  Abraham  was  only  the  type. 

III.  Joseph's  blbssino.  (Ver.  22.)  Amid  the  stern  realities  of  the  dying  hour,  the 
illustrious  Joseph  evinced  the  same  bright  and  strong  faith  which  had  distinguished 
his  father  and  his  grandfather.  It  had  never  counted  for  much  to  him  that  he  was 
Pharaoh's  prime  minister.  He  had  always  been  at  heart  a  Hebrew,  not  an  Egyptian. 
His  hope  was  in  the  covenant  promises.  So,  foreseeing  the  affliction  of  liis  people  in 
Egypt,  and  their  eventual  exodus,  he  resolved  that  his  body  should  not  be  buried  in 
that  land.  His  embalmed  remains  must  be  made  useful,  during  the  whole  period  of 
their  bitter  bondage,  as  a  witness  to  Israel  of  the  faithfulness  of  the  God  of  Abraham. 
And  the  tribes  must  carry  his  bones  with  them  when  they  go  to  take  possession  of 
their  inheritance.  Joseph's  faith  is  so  great  that  he  is  content  that  his  coffined  clay 
should  meanwhile  remain  unburied.  So  he  died,  leaving  with  his  bretliren  this 
blessing:  "God  will  surely  visit  you"  (Gen.  1.  2+,  25).  His  tender  farewell  shows  us 
how  steadfastly  the  eye  of  his  faith  was  gazing  upon  the  unseen. 

Conclusion.  The  Christian  Hebrews  of  the  first  century  needed  "  like  precious 
faith"  with  these  three  patriarchs,  to  enable  them  to  discharge  the  duties  and  endure 
the  sufferings  to  which  they  were  called  in  connection  with  their  Christian  discipleship. 
And  so  also  do  we  Gentile  believers  of  these  last  times.  Only  faith  in  "  things  to 
come  " — confidence  in  the  life  and  immortality  which  have  been  brought  to  light  through 
the  gospel — will  enable  us  to  live  obediently  and  to  die  triumphantly. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — The  faith  of  Moses.  These  verses  exhibit  specimen  deeds  of  faith 
done  in  connection  with  the  redemption  of  Israel  from  Egypt.  None  of  the  heroes  of 
faith  in  this  illustrious  roll  is  more  eminent  than  Moses,  and  no  other  biography  is 
more  dramatic.  He  shines  amongst  the  constellations  of  "  the  elders  "  as  a  star  of  the 
first  magnitude.    Consider — 

I.  Tbb  paith  of  Mobeb'  pabents  DnRiNO  his  infancy.  (Ver.  23.)  Had  it  not 
been  for  their  piety,  the  child  would  have  perished.  The  preservation  of  his  infant 
life  was  due  to  an  act  of  faith  in  the  covenant  God  of  their  fathers.  On  what  revelation 
did  this  faith  rest?  It  maybe  that  Amram  and  Jochebed  saw  in  the  pre-eminent 
beauty  of  the  child  a  forecast  of  the  Divine  favour.  More  probably,  however,  they 
had  received  a  revelation  from  heaven  respecting  him,  and  had  been  taught  to  regard 
his  beauty  as  a  sign  for  the  confirmation  of  their  faith.  So  their  confidence  in  the 
God  of  Abraham,  and  in  the  promise  of  deliverance  from  bondage,  and  in  the  testimony 
regarding  the  part  which  their  newly  born  son  was  to  act  in  the  emancipation,  led 
them  to  disreirard  Pharaoh's  crUel  edict.  Jochebed  was  quite  consciously  resting  the 
floating  cradle  of  papyrus  in  the  hollow  of  God's  hand  when  she  left  it  among  the 
reeds  on  the  brink  of  the  Nile.  She  believed  that  he  would  protect  the  rhild,  although 
she  herself  could  do  so  no  longer.  And  the  romantic  rescue  of  Moses,  and  his  adoption 
by  Pharaoh's  daughter,  were  the  reward  which  God  gave  to  his  parents'  faith. 

II.  The  faith  of  Moses,  as  seen  in  his  life-choice.  (Vers.  24 — 26.J  Being 
himself  the  only  free  Hebrew  of  his  time,  he  occupied  the  unique  position  of  hdvmg  it 
within  his  power  to  make  a  life-choice.  And  he  did  this  "  when  he  was  grown  up ; " 
i.e.  after  his  judgment  had  ripened,  and  as  the  result  of  sober  and  manly  deliberation. 
Hoses  elected  to  acknowledge  Jehovah  as  his  God,  and  to  claim  kindred  with  tho 
Hebrews  as  God's  peculiar  people.  His  choice  was  purely  voluntary,  and  in  making 
it  he  was  actuated  by  principle  and  impelled  by  conscience.  Notice :  1.  Eis  choice 
involved  hii»  in  tremendous  sacrificet.  (Ver.  24.)  Moses'  prospects  in  Egypt  were 
very  brilliant.   He  was  a  nian  of  great  natural  genius  and  of  extraordinary  atteinmenti 


814  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xi.  1—40 

(Acta  Til.  22).  Wealth,  rafinement,  esie,  pleasure,  power,  were  within  his  reach.  E« 
might  have  become  a  great  Btatesman— perhaps  Pharaoh's  grand  vizier.  Josephus  says 
that  he  was  destined  for  the  throne  itself;  and  in  those  days  Egypt  was  the  most 
powerful  of  kingdoms.  Yet,  without  auy  misgiving,  he  forsook  the  court,  and  renounced 
for  ever  these  dazzling  prospects.  2.  His  choice  exposed  him  to  sore  afflictUnu.  (Yer. 
25.)  It  involved  his  identifying  himself  with  a  nation  of  wretched  slaves,  who  were 
oppressed  by  a  grinding  tyranny.  It  brought  him  into  close  contact  and  companion- 
ship with  hordes  of  ignorant  bondmen.  It  called  him  to  undergo  persecution  as  the 
leader  of  the  movement  for  their  emancipation.  Moses  made  his  choice  at  the  risk  of 
his  life;  for,  when  he  had  avowed  it  in  act,  by  killing  the  Egyijtian  slave-driver, 
"Pharaoh  sought  to  slay"  him  (Exod.  ii.  15).  8.  It  was  a  heavenly-minded  choice. 
(Vers.  25,  26.)  It  was  not  patriotism  alone  that  dictated  it,  although  Moses  was 
passionately  patriotic.  Neither  was  it  mere  sympathy  with  his  distressed  countrymen, 
although  he  had  a  tender  and  feeling  heart.  His  choice  was  determined  by  his  faith 
in  Christ,  in  the  future  of  his  people,  and  in  fke  realities  of  the  unseen  and  eternal 
world.  Moses  chose  (I)  "  reproaeh  on  account  of  Christ."  He  was,  so  to  spealc,  a 
Christian  before  Christianity.  He  knew  about  the  promised  Messiah,  although  he 
might  not  know  him  by  that  name.  He  believed  on  him  as  the  Deliverer  that  was  to 
come;  as  the  "Prophet"  who  was  to  be  "raised  up;"  as  the  seed  of  Abraham,  in 
whom  all  nations  were  to  be  blessed.  And  he  resolved,  through  grace,  to  adhere  to  the 
cause  of  Christ,  however  greatly  it  might  be  des|  lised.  He  chose  (2)  to  join  "  the  people 
of  Ood."  Moses  had  learned  from  his  mother-nurse  of  the  glorious  destiny  of  the 
Israelitish  nation ;  and  had  Iiecome  persuaded  that  to  belong  to  that  nation,  even  in 
its  miserable  exile,  was  a  greater  honour  than  to  stand  upon  the  topmost  step  of  the 
Egyptian  throne.  So,  when  he  took  God  for  his  Portion,  he  allied  himself  with  the 
people  of  God,  whose  were  "  the  adoption "  and  "  the  promises."  He  chose  (3)  "  the 
recompense  of  re/wardP  Moses'  faith  looked  beyond  the  grave.  His  eye  searched 
the  eternal  future  until  it  rested  upon  the  heavenly  Canaan.  Realizing  that  "  better 
and  abiding  possession,"  he  felt  that  he  could  not  remain  a  prince  of  the  house  of 
Pharaoh.  To  him  even  those  pleasures  of  the  court  which  were  in  themselves  innocent 
would  be  "  the  pleasures  of  sin ; "  and  these,  such  as  they  were,  he  could  enjoy  only  for 
a  few  short-lived  years.  So,  after  comparing  the  best  of  the  world  with  the  worst  of 
religion,  Moses  decisively  resolved  to  choose  Jehovah  as  his  God  and  heaven  as  his 
final  home.  And  this  life-choice,  from  whatever  point  of  view  we  regard  it,  is  thus 
seen  to  have  been  determined  by  his  faith. 

in.  Thb  faith  of  Mosbs  as  been  in  his  life-wobk.  (Vers.  27 — 29.)  For  he  not 
only  took  Jehovah  for  his  Portion;  he  served  him  courageously,  and  to  the  end.  1. 
Eis  faith  inspired  the  Exodui.  (Ver.  27.)  "  He  forsook  Egypt,"  the  reference  being, 
as  we  judge,  to  his  final  departure  at  the  head  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  Moses  believed 
the  Divine  promise  regarding  Israel's  redemption.  His  confidence  in  God  nerved  him 
for  the  unparalleled  enterprise.  He  felt  that  he  could  not  seriously  be  afraid  of 
Pharaoh,  for  his  faith  saw  alwaj's  the  approving  smile  of  the  invisible  Lord.  Had  it 
not  been,  however,  for  his  trust  in  Jehovah,  the  great  leader  could  not  for  forty  years 
have  sustained  so  nobly  his  onerous  o£Sces.  It  was  this  humble  confidence  in  the 
I  AM  who  had  sent  him,  that  kept  Moses  from  either  developing  into  a  despot  or 
degenerating  into  a  demagogue.  2.  Eis  faith  prompted  to  the  celebration  of  the  Pass- 
over. (Ver.  28.)  Moses  believed  the  Divine  threatening  respecting  the  destruction 
of  the  firstborn  of  the  Egyptians,  and  the  promise  of  exemption  for  every  blood- 
besprinkled  Hebrew  dwelling.  His  trust  in  God  was  the  root  of  his  fearless  courage  in 
obseiTing  the  Passover  feast  amidst  the  bustle  and  excitement  of  that  last  eventful 
night  in  Egypt.  3.  Eis  faith,  together  with  that  of  the  Israelites,  led  to  the  passage  of 
tlte  Red  Sea.  (Ver.  29.)  There  was  much  unbeUef,  doubtless,  mixed  with  the  faith 
of  the  mass  of  the  host,  when  they  stood  before  the  waters  through  which  they  were  tc 
march.  Still,  the  fact  of  then:  obedience  to  the  command  to  "  go  forward  "  did  evince 
some  faith  on  their  part.  The  confidence  of  Moses,  however,  never  wavered.  And  it 
was  his  faith  and  theirs  that  moved  the  arm  of  the  Almighty  to  prepare  a  pathway  for 
them  through  the  bed  of  the  sea.  The  Egyptians,  pursuing  them,  sank  in  the  sands 
and  waves ;  for  Pharaoh  had  received  no  revelation  and  no  promise,  and  his  pursuit 
was  not  an  act  of  faith,  but  of  prwumotion. 


OH.  XI.  1—40.]  THB  £FISTLS  TO  THE  HEBB£W&  815 

OoHOLiTSioH.  The  chief  lesson  of  this  section  centres  la  the  choice  of  Moset.  It 
requires  faith  still  to  enable  one  to  make  the  right  life-choice;  for  worldly  advantage 
does  not  always  seem  to  be  on  the  side  of  godliness.  The  question  is  sometimes  asked, 
"  Is  it  possible  to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds?"  And  from  the  point  of  yiew  o( 
sense  the  answer  is — No.  Moses  certainly  did  not  make  the  best  of  this  world,  according 
to  a  worldly  estimate  of  his  life.  He  did  not  follow  the  principle  of  self-help,  in  the 
secular  way  in  which  unapiritual  men  do.  Bather,  his  choice  led  him  "  to  be  evil- 
entreated,"  and  to  endure  "reproach."  But  from  faith's  point  of  view  the  unhesitating 
answer  to  the  same  question  is — Fes.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things ; "  although 
the  benefit  of  it  in  "the  life  which  now  is"  consists  almost  certainly  in  the  profit  of 
affliction  and  tribulation,  the  profit  of  taking  up  the  cross,  and  of  treading  in  the  foot- 
steps of  the  Man  of  sorrows. 

Vers.  30 — 38. — Exploits  and  endurances  offaiih.  The  last  two  specific  examples 
here  cited  are  connected  with  the  entrance  of  Israel  into  Canaan  under  Joshua,  1. 
The  fall  of  Jericho.  (Ver.  30.)  That  stronghold  was  not  reduced  as  the  result  of  a 
long  siege.  It  was  not  successfully  assaulted  with  engines  of  war.  The  only  means 
employed  were  processions,  trumpets,  and  shouts.  But  the  Israelites  did  not  doubt 
that  the  word  of  Jehovah  would  be  fulfilled;  and,  as  the  Divine  reward  of  their  faith, 
which  they  had  shown  in  a  sevenfold  or  perfect  manner  in  "compassing  Jericho  about 
seven  days,"  the  wall  fell  down  flat.  2.  2%e  safety  of  Rahab.  (Ver.  31.)  Bahab  had 
been  a  heathen  woman,  and  at  one  time  a  woman  of  abandoned  character;  but  she  is 
now  known  to  the  world  only  as  a  heroine  of  faith.  The  object  of  her  faith  was  the 
God  of  Israel  himself,  and  his  purpose  to  procure  Canaan  for  the  chosen  people.  The 
ground  of  it  was  the  miraculous  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea,  and  the  overthrow  of  the 
Amorites.  Its  fruit  was  seen  in  her  deteimination  at  whatever  risk  to  befriend  the 
two  scouts,  as  being  Jehovah's  servants.  And  the  reward  of  Eahab's  faith  lay  in  her 
preservation  amid  the  general  destruction,  and  the  honour  which  she  received  in 
becoming  an  ancestress  of  the  Messiah. — In  this  chapter  the  author  had  begun  at  the 
beginning  of  Genesis ;  and  he  has  been  turning  over  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures 
almost  page  by  page,  and  finding  everywhere  noble  specimen-deeds  of  faith.  But  the 
time  would  fail  him  were  he  to  continue  as  he  began.  Although  the  galleries  of 
Hebrew  history  are  crowded  with  portraits  of  spiritual  heroes,  our  inspired  guide  tells 
us  that  we  may  not  linger  any  longer  over  individual  pictures.  He  will  permit  us 
only  a  very  hurried  walk  through  the  exhibition ;  for  he  is  anxious  to  introduce  us  to 
the  masterpiece  of  the  whole — the  portrait  of  "Jesus,  the  Author  and  Perfecter  of  our 
faith "  (oh.  xii,  2).  What  a  splendid  sentence,  or  group  of  sentences,  this  in  vers. 
32 — 381  How  rhetorically  resonant,  and  how  spiritually  triumphant!  These  verses 
may  be  said  themselves  to  form  "one  great,  magnificent  picture,  full  of  figures 
individually  striking,  and  admirably  disposed  with  regard  to  one  aaother"  (Dr. 
Lindsay). 

I.  SuMHABT  OF  DEEDS  DON!  THBOUOB  FAITH.  (Vers.  32 — 34.)  The  men  of  faith 
are  all  workers  or  soldiers.  1.  Six  famous  heroes  are  mentioned  by  name  (ver.  32). 
These  are,  four  eminent  judges;  David,  the  illustrious  king;  and  saintly  Samuel, 
the  first  of  "  the  prophets."  2.  There  follows  a  condensed  and  vivid  description  of  the 
achievements  of  the  heroes  of  faith  (vers.  33,  34).  The  preacher  may  verify  every 
one  of  these  references  from  those  great  eras  of  Jewish  history  which  extended  in 
succession  from  the  time  of  Joshua  to  the  age  of  the  Maccabees. 

II.  Summary  op  suFFERiNGa  bornb  THRonoH  faith.  (Vers.  35 — 38.)  For  the 
workers  and  soldiers  of  faith  are  also  sufferers.  Each  expression  in  this  eloquent 
epitome  may  be  amply  vindicated  from  the  same  eras  of  Hebrew  history,  and  especially 
from  the  later  periods,  the  time  of  the  prophets,  of  the  Captivity,  and  of  the  restoration. 
It  is  evident  that  the  apostle  has  here  prominently  in  view  the  sufferings  of  Judas 
Maccabsaui  and  his  brave  compatriots  in  the  days  of  that  monster  of  cruelty,  Antiochus 
Epiphanes.  The  parenthesis  in  ver.  38,  while  it  is  in  itself  a  sweetly  beautiful 
exclamation,  also  sums  up  the  character  of  the  men  of  faith  in  a  weighty  monograph. 
Their  persecutors  condemned  them  as  unworthy  of  living  in  the  world ;  but,  instead 
of  that,  the  world,  was  not  worthy  of  them.  These  godly  exiles  and  martyrs  were 
"  the  salt  of  the  earth."    Their  Uvea  decked  humanity,  even  in  its  periods  of  grosa 


316  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [en.  xi.  1-40 

darkness,  with  a  coronal  of  spiritual  lisht.  The  apostle's  design  in  this  chapter  is  to 
convince  bis  readers  that  in  trusting  Christ,  and  daring  and  bearing  all  things  for  him, 
they  are  exercising  the  very  same  principle  that  made  "  the  elders "  of  the  Jewish 
nation  the  men  they  were.  The  apostle  stops  at  the  time  of  the  Maccabees.  But  it 
is  for  us  to  remember  that  the  exploits  and  endurances  of  faith  have  been  as  great— 
in  some  respects  greater  (John  xiv.  12) — in  New  Testament  times  than  in  the  ages 
before  Christ.  We  are  prone  to  draw  oftentimes  too  sharp  a  line  between  what  we  call 
"sacied  history"  and  "profane  history,"  and  we  sometimes  forget  that  the  living 
God  is  as  really  present  in  the  one  as  in  the  other.  Reflect  then,  in  closing,  upon  the 
triumphs  of  faith:  (1)  In  the  first  century.  M.g.  John  the  Baptist;  the  multitudes 
whom  Christ  healed;  the  holy  women  who  ministered  to  him;  the  apostles  after 
Pentecost.  Think  of  the  faith  of  (2)  the  world's  explorers  and  colonizers.  Columbus, 
the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  New  Engl  ml,  Livingstone,  etc.  (3)  Our  men  of  science, 
Newton,  Kepler,  Faraday,  etc.  (4)  The  reformers.  Wickliffe,  Luther,  Knox,  Wesley, 
Chalmers,  Howard,  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  etc.  (5)  The  missionaries.  Columba, 
Xavier,  Williams,  Marlyn,  Pattcson,  Moffat,  Alexander  DuflF,  etc.  (6)  The  martyrs. 
Polycarp,  Huss,  Tyndale,  Savonarola,  Bunyan,  the  Covenanters  of  Scotland,  etc.  (7) 
God's  "hidden  ones."  E.g.  the  business  man  who  will  rather  lose  his  trade  than 
soil  his  conscience ;  the  Bible-woman,  working  amid  squalor  and  vice  in  the  back  lanes 
of  our  cities ;  the  dying  believer,  showing  amid  the  pains  of  dissolution  a  beautiful 
resignation  to  the  Divine  will.  There  are  multitudes  living  just  now  in  obscurity,  "of 
whom  the  world  is  not  worthy,"  and  of  whom,  until  time  shall  hare  run  its  course, 
the  world  will  never  know. 

Vers.  39,  40. — JP erf  ection  through  the  promise.  In  discoursing  upon  this  confessedly 
difficult  text,  we  shall  not  discuss  the  various  interpretations  that  have  been  given  to 
it,  but  simply  unfold  what  we  ourselves  humbly  judge  to  be  its  meaning.    Consider— 

I.  The  promise.  (Ver.  39.)  Tliat  is,  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  or  the  promised 
blessing.  The  apostle  can  refer  in  this  expression  only  to  the  great  substantive 
promise  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  that  of  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  It  is 
the  promise  of  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  "  (Gen.  iii.  15)  and  the  seed  of  Abraham  (Gen. 
xxii.  18) ;  the  promise  of  the  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  the  "  Child  born  " 
(Isa.  ix.  6,  7),  and  of  the  "  pouring  out  of  God's  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  "  (Joel  ii.  28). 

II.  The  disadvantageous  position  op  the  Old  Testament  saints  in  relation  to 
IT.  "  These  all,"  whose  names  appear  in  this  chapter,  are  honourably  mentioned  in 
Scripture  for  their  exploits  and  endurances  as  believers.  The  promise  had  been  con- 
stantly made  to  them,  and  they  "had  seen  it,  and  greeted  it  from  afar"  (ver.  13). 
But :  1.  They  "  received  not  the  promise."  (Ver.  39.)  Successive  generations  of  godly 
men  hoped  for  the  advent  through  the  weary  centuries,  and  passed  away  before  the 
Messiah  had  been  born,  or  the  true  sacrifice  offered,  or  the  way  into  the  holiest  made 
manifest,  or  the  great  gift  of  the  Spirit  bestowed,  'i'hey  continued  to  the  end  of  their 
lives  under  the  temporal  and  preparatory  economy — the  dispensation  of  law  and  cere- 
mony and  shadow.  2.  They  were  "  not  made  perfect."  (Ver.  40.)  Old  Testament 
believers,  while  on  earth,  did  not  obtain  the  clear  knowledge  of  gospel  doctrine  which 
we  possess  who  have  received  "  the  Spirit  of  truth ; "  and  they  did  not  attain  to  the 
high  level  of  spiritual  happiness  which  is  within  our  reach,  now  that  Christ  has  sent  us 
"  the  Comforter."  And  even  in  heaven,  as  this  passage  seems  to  imply,  their  know- 
ledge and  joy  did  not  become  full  until  the  realization  of  the  promise,  through  the 
finished  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  There  is,  of  course,  no  waiTant  in  Scripture  for  the 
patristic  and  Bomish  doctrine  of  the  limbus  patrum.  The  souls  of  Old  Testament 
saints,  after  they  departed  this  life,  did  not  experience  a  dreamy  sort  of  existence  in 
some  dreary  under-world  until  the  time  of  Christ's  ascension.  Abel  and  Abraham, 
Moses  and  David,  passed  at  once  from  earth  to  glory.  This  is  true ;  and  yet  it  woull 
appear,  from  the  apostle's  language  in  the  verse  before  us,  that  these  ancient  heroes 
had  to  hope  and  wait  for  their  perfection  in  knowledge  and  blessedness,  until  the  deatV 
and  resurrection  and  exaltation  of  the  Son  of  God.  Although  safe  in  heaven,  the' 
continued  to  long  and  pray,  as  they  had  done  on  earth,  for  the  coming  of  "  the  fuln^f 
of  the  time."  Just  as  the  entire  humanity  of  the  believer  shall  not  be  "  made  perfect " 
until  the  morning  of  the  general  resurrection,  so  even  "  the  spirits  of  juit  men  "  (ch. 


CH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  317 

in.  23)  under  the  Jewish  economy  were  not  "  raarle  perfect "  until  the  accompIiBhment 
of  Christ's  atuning  work,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era. 

III.  The  coRRBSPONDiNa  abvantaob  enjoyed  by  New  Testament  belikvees. 
God  has  "  provided  some  better  thing  concerning  us  "  (ver.  40).  That  is,  we  have 
received  the  fulfilment  of  the  great  gospel  promise.  Christ  has  come.  He  has  achieved 
our  redemption.  He  has  sent  to  the  Church  his  Holy  Spirit.  He  has  given  us  a  com- 
pleted Bible.  Ha  has  founded  a  dispensation  which  is  evangelical  and  spiritual,  catholic 
and  permanent.  He  has  opened  heaven  over  the  world;  and  we  see  the  angels  of  God 
ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  man.  Nor  is  this  earthly  life  of  higher  pri- 
vilege the  only  advantage  which  we  possess.  For  at  death  the  believer's  spirit  now  goes 
at  once  to  be  with  Christ — a  blessing  which,  prior  to  the  advent,  was  in  some  mysterious 
sense  denied  to  Old  Testament  saints.  His  soul  has  not  to  wait  for  its  beatification. 
Itiimediatuly  after  death  it  is  "  made  perfect."  In  the  presence  of  the  glorified  Christ, 
nothing  whatever  is  wanting  to  complete  its  blessedness,  except  only  the  resurrection 
of  the  body. 

IV.~  The  perfection  and  unitt  of  the  Church  since  the  advent.  (Ver.  40.) 
When  the  promise  of  an  accomplished  salvation  was  fulfilled  to  the  Church  on  earth, 
its  fulfilment  brought  long-looked-for  perfection  to  the  Church  In  heaven.  The  coming 
of  Christ,  while  it  may  be  said  to  have  cut  the  world's  history  in  twain,  was  at  the 
same  time  the  meeting-place  of  the  two  great  dispensations  of  religion,  and  of  the 
universal  Church  of  God,  The  centuries  circle  round  the  cross,  and  in  it  the  Church 
of  all  ages  finds  its  unity.  The  fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  the  earthly  work  of  Christ 
raised  both  the  Church  militant  and  the  Church  triumphant  to  a  much  loftier  level 
than  either  had  occupied  before.  The  ancient  heroes  of  faith  could  not  have  attained 
their  new  position  except  in  connection  with  our  accession  of  privilege.  And  thus  all 
the  saints  who  are  now  gathered  in  heaven,  whether  nurtured  at  first  in  the  Jewish 
Church  or  in  the  Christian,  have  alike  been  "  made  perfect,"  and  form  one  undivided 
society.  It  follows,  too,  that  believers  of  all  nations  who  are  pres'-ntly  on  earth  are  in 
real  union  with  this  united  society  of  glorified  spirits.  The  Church  militant  and  the 
Church  triumphant  constitute  "one  army  of  the  living  God." 

Conclusion.  Although  "  the  elders  "  laboured  under  great  disadvantage,  as  regards 
the  extent  of  their  privileges,  compared  with  the  Christian  Hebrews  of  the  first  century 
and  with  us,  their  confidence  in  the  promise  was  vigorous  and  persistent,  valiant  and 
victorious.  They  cherished  this  faith  while  on  earth,  and  they  continued  to  cling  to 
it  in  heaven  until  it  became  changed  to  sight.  How  shameful,  then,  will  it  be  to  us, 
if  we  allow  our  faith  to  decline  1  For  God  has  already  largely  fulfilled  his  promise  ot 
salvation.  The  first  advent  is  now  matter  of  history.  Christendom  presents  to  our 
view  an  ever-accumulating  mass  of  Christian  evidence.  Our  encouragement  to  per- 
severance is  much  greater  than  any  which  Jewish  believers  enjoyed  under  the  old 
covenant.  How  miserably  infatuated,  therefore,  shall  we  be  if  we  allow  our  faith  and 
hope  in  the  Lord  Jesus  and  in  the  second  advent  to  fail,  or  even  to  vacillate  I 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

Ver.  1. —  The  nature  of  faith.  "  Now  faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,"  etc 
This  is  not  a  definition  or  description  of  what  is  called,  in  theological  phrase,  saving 
faith.  It  does  not  set  forth  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  in  particular,  but  faith  in  its  general 
meaning  and  its  comprehensive  exercise.    The  text  teaches  us  that — 

1.  Faith  is  the  demonstration  of  invisible  realities.  It  is  "  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen ;  "  Eevised  Version,  "  the  proving  of  things  not  seen."  There  are  two 
classes  of  unseen  things:  1,  Things  which  are  dbaolutely  invisible.  Of  these  we  may 
mention :  (1)  God,  a  Being  of  almighty  power,  of  infinite  wisdom,  of  perfect  holiness,  etc. 
"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  "  Whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see."  (2) 
The  human  soul.  That  part  of  his  being  which  thinks  and  feels,  hopes  and  fears,  loves 
and  hates,  no  man  in  our  present  state  has  seen.  (3)  Spiritual  truth  is  invisible  to 
our  bodily  eyes.  We  perceive  it,  but  we  cannot  see  it.  2.  Things  which  are  relatively 
invisible,  (1)  There  are  great  historical  facts  which  are  invisible  to  us.  Some  of  these 
are  mentioned  in  this  chapter ;  e.g.  the  Creation,  the  Deluge.     But  those  are  of  the 


313  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  [oh.  xi.  1—40. 

greatest  importance  to  as  which  are  connected  with  the  life  and  work,  the  Buffering  and 
death,  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  great  facts  in  the 
accomplishments  of  human  redemption.  These  were  witnessed  by  many,  hut  to  us  they 
are  invisible.  Our  attitude  in  relation  to  them  is  a  thing  of  the  utmost  moment  to  us. 
If  we  accept  them,  it  must  be  by  faith.  (2)  There  are  important  future  events  which 
are  invisible  to  us  at  present.  The  heaven  into  which  our  Lord  has  entered,  and  where 
God  is  enthroned,  is  at  present  hidden  from  oux  eyes.  And  Hades,  the  great  world  of 
departed  spirits,  is  impenetrably  veiled  from  men  in  the  flesh.  The  great  and  solemn 
judgment,  and  the  different  abodes  and  states  of  men  after  the  judgment,  are  as  yet 
invisible  to  our  senses.  Now,  faith  is  the  evidence,  the  "  demonstration,"  the  "  actual 
proof,"  of  these  invisible  things  which  are  declared  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  "  It  is  an 
act  which  itself  gives  the  knowledge  and  proof  of  the  existence  of  those  things  not 
seen."  "  The  essential  meaning  of  the  word,"  says  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold,  "  is  '  power  of 
holding  on  to  the  unseen.' "  It  is  a  deep  and  intense  conviction  of  the  existence  and 
reality  of  things  and  persons  which  are  not  apprehensible  by  tlie  senses. 

II.  Faith  is  the  asbubance  of  desibablb  possessions.  "Now  faith  is  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for ;"  Revised  Version,  "  the  assurance  of  things  hoped  for."  It  is  a 
firmly  grounded  confidence  of  things  hoped  for.  Two  observations  are  suggested :  1. 
Some  of  these  invisible  things  which  are  apprehended  by  faith  are  regarded  as  desirable 
and  attainable.  They  are  "  hoped  for."  Hope  is  the  "  desire  of  good  with  a  belief  that 
it  is  obtainable ; "  it  is  "  well-grounded  desire."  We  hope  to  receive  in  this  present  life 
Divine  grace  and  guidance,  provision  and  preservation,  spiritual  help  in  our  daily  work 
and  warfare,  and  illuminating  aud  sanctifying  influences.  And  in  the  life  that  is  to 
come,  we  hope  for  heaven  and  all  its  blessedness;  its  entire  freedom  from  sin  aud 
suffering ;  its  perfect  purity  and  peace ;  the  holy  and  deli>:htfu]  fellowship  of  glorified 
saints ;  the  perpetual  presence  of  our  adorable  Saviour  and  Lord ;  and  the  enrapturing 
manifestation  of  God  (1  John  iii.  2^  3).  We  regard  these  things  as  attainable  because 
they  are  promised  to  the  sincere  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  we  hope  for 
them  through  him.  2.  Faith  gives  assurance  of  these  desirable  and  attainable  things. 
It  appropriates  such  of  them  as  may  be  obtained  at  present,  and  confidently  anticipates 
those  that  are  reserved  for  the  future.  It  was  well  said  by  Ambrose,  "  The  heir  must 
believe  his  title  to  an  estate  in  reversion  before  he  can  hope  for  it ;  faith  beliaves  its 
title  to  glory,  and  then  hope  waits  for  it.  Did  not  faith  feed  the  lamp  oi  hope  with  oil, 
it  would  soon  die."  And  more,  it  brings  future  blessings  into  our  present  ex[)erience, 
and  it  gives  to  us  foretastes  of  heavenly  blessedness,  which  are  a  pledge  and  an  earnest 
that  our  holiest  and  brightest  hopes  will  meet  with  full  and  glorious  firuition— 

"  Where  faith  is  sweetly  lost  in  sighti 
And  hope  in  full,  supreme  delight, 
▲ad  everlasting  love." 

W.J. 

Ver.  8.— 7^  creation  e/  the  visibh  universt.  "  Through  feith  we  understand  thitt 
the  worlds  were  framed,"  etc.  The  text  suggests :  1.  3%a(  God  existed  befor*  thi 
visible  universe.  As  the  architect  must  have  lived  before  the  edifice  which  he  designed 
was  built,  so  he  who  designed  and  "  built  all  things  "  existed  before  any  of  his  creations. 
"  Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ever  thou  hadst  formed  the  earth  and 
the  world,"  etc.  2.  That  Ood'$  existence  is  distinct  from  and  independent  of  the  visible 
universe.  God  and  nature  are  not  identical.  Nature  is  not  God.  God  is  not  a  poetic 
name  for  an  infinite  and  impersonal  spirit  of  the  univei'se.  He  thinks,  wills,  and  works ; 
and  the  universe  is  the  expression  and  embodiment  of  his  thoughts.  The  painter  does 
not  lose  his  personality  in  the  productions  of  his  imagination  and  his  pencil.  And  the 
Divine  Artist  existed  before  his  works,  and  exists  independently  of  his  works.  The 
text  teaches  :  3.  ITuU  Ood  is  the  Creator  of  the  visible  universe.  "  The  worlds  were 
framed  by  the  Word  of  God,"  etc  Very  early  in  this  Epistle  this  truth  is  asserted. 
"  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and  the  heaven^ 
are  the  works  of  thy  hands."    Our  text  brings  before  our  notice^ 

I.  The  absoluteness  or  the  cbeation.  "  Things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  o< 
things  which  do  appear."  This  statameat  implies :  1.  That  matter  m  not  eternai.  The 
universe  was  not  made  by  God  out  of  pre-existent  materials.     2.  That  the  visible 


aE.zi.1— 40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  tl9 

univene  it  neither  it^-etiginated  nor  th*  product  of  chance.  On  this  point  ArohUsbop 
Tillotson  forcibly  observes,  "  How  often  might  a  man,  after  he  had  jumbled  •  set  of 
letters  in  a  bag,  fling  them  out  upon  the  ground  before  they  would  fall  into  an  exact 
poem?  How  long  might  one  sprinkle  colours  upon  canvas,  with  a  careless  hand, 
before  they  would  make  the  exact  picture  of  a  man  ?  How  long  might  twenty 
thousand  blind  men,  who  should  be  sent  out  from  the  remote  parts  of  Eno;land, 
wander  up  and  down  before  they  would  all  meet  on  Salisbury  plain,  and  fall  into 
rank  and  file,  in  the  exact  order  of  an  army  ?  And  yet  this  is  much  more  easy  to  be 
imagined,  than  how  the  innumerable  blind  parts  of  matter  should  rendezvous  them- 
selves into  a  world."  3.  The  universe  was  absolutely  created  hy  Ood.  He  not  only 
formed  and  arranged  its  materials  into  order  and  beauty,  but  be  created  the  materials 
themselves.  As  to  the  alleged  impossibility  or  difficulty  of  creation  in  this  absolute 
sense.  Cud  worth  has  well  said, "  It  may  well  be  thought  as  easy  for  God,  or  an  omnipo- 
tent Being,  to  make  a  whole  world,  matter  and  all,  ^{  six  ivrui',  as  it  is  for  us  to  create 
a  thought  or  to  move  a  finger,  or  for  the  sun  to  send  out  rays,  or  a  candle  light,  or, 
lastly,  for  an  opaque  body,  to  produce  an  image  of  itself  in  a  glass  of  water,  or  to  project 
a  shadow ;  all  these  imperfect  things  being  but  the  energies,  rays,  images,  or  shadows, 
of  the  Deity.  For  a  substance  to  be  made  out  of  nothing  by  God,  or  a  Being  infinitely 
perfect,  is  not  for  it  to  be  made  out  of  nothing  in  the  impossible  sense,  because  it  comes 
from  him  who  is  all." 

II.  Thk  vast  extent  of  the  obeatior.  "  The  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of 
God."  Not  simply  our  world,  but  all  worlds.  It  is  stated  that  in  our  sky  there  are 
one  hnndred  millions  of  stars  visible  by  the  aid  of  a  telescope,  each  of  which  is  the 
centre  of  a  cluster  of  tributary  stars,  making  together  "  a  great  multitude  which  no 
man  can  number."  All  these  worlds  were  created  by  the  Almighty.  And  the  pro- 
bably far  more  numerous  host  of  worlds  as  yet  undiscovered  by  man  he  created.  How 
amazing  is  the  extent  to  which  the  creative  energy  of  God  has  been  exercised  I 

IIL  The  beautiful  obdeb  or  the  cbeatiok.  "The  worlds  were  framed,"  or 
arranged,  or  adjusted  by  the  word  of  God.  How  perfect  are  the  relations  of  the  worlds 
to  each  other  1  Carlyle  says,  "  A  star  is  beautiful.  ...  It  has  repose ;  no  force  dis- 
turbs its  eternal  peace.  It  has  freedom ;  no  obstruction  lies  between  it  and  infinity." 
May  we  not  say  this  of  all  stars  ?  How  beautifully  and  beneficently  are  all  things 
framed  and  ordered  in  our  world  I  The  earth  upon  which  we  tread,  and  from  which  we 
derive  our  subsistence,  has  been  fashioned  in  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  to  tke  natures 
and  necessities  of  the  creatures  which  dwell  upon  it.  In  its  structure  it  is  not  only 
useful  but  beautiful.  It  ministers  to  the  needs  of  both  our  physical  and  our  sjuritual 
natures.     It  stimulates  thought ;  it  awakens  admiration,  etc. 

IV.  Thb  Divine  instbument  op  obeatioh.  "  The  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word 
of  God."  "  God  said.  Let  there  be  light ;  and  there  was  light."  "  By  the  word  of  the 
Lord  were  the  heavens  made,"  etc.  "  He  spake,  and  it  was  done,"  etc.  This  mode  of 
expression  is  suggestive  of  the  ease  with  which  creation  was  effected.  There  was  no 
painfiil  effort  in  the  production  of  the  universe;  no  struggle  to  overcome  difficulties 
in  framing  the  countless  hosts  of  worlds.  God  has  but  to  utter  his  command,  and 
that  command  at  once  becomes  an  embodied  and  beautiful  reality.  The  continuous 
activities  and  developments  of  nature  illustrate  and  confirm  the  fact  that  the  creative 
acts  of  God  are  accomplished  with  sublime  ease.  All  the  forces  of  nature  work  without 
friction,  with  regularity  and  order,  with  highest  efficiency  and  deepest  repow.  Now, 
these  truths  concerning  God  and  his  creation  are  not  the  discoveries  of  human  reason, 
but  the  disclosures  of  Divine  revelation.  F.  W.  Robertson  says,  "  Man  may  tell  us  of 
the  development  ^of  the  world  from  the  theistical  or  atheistical  point  of  view,  but  the 
simplest  and  most  religious  way  is  to  look  at  this  world  as  the  expression  of  the  will  of 
God.  It  is  sufficient  if  we  feel  that  the  light  reveals  to  us  something  of  the  will  of  the 
Eternal ;  enough  if  the  beauty  of  nature  can  speak  to  us  of  the  mind  of  God ;  if  the 
blue  heaven  above  and  the  green  earth  below  tell  of  our  Father's  home ;  if  day  and 
night,  light  and  darkness,  are  symbols  of  the  word  God  has  spoken  out  of  himself  in  the 
creation  of  the  world."  And  these  aspects  of  the  visible  universe  we  apprehend  by 
faith.  We  credit  the  Scripture  testimony,  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven 
and  the  earth."  Thus  "  by  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the 
woid  of  God,"  etc.— W.  J. 


320  THE  EtlSTLE  tO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  xi.  i— 46. 

Ver.  4. — The  sacrifice  oj-  Abel.  "  By  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent 
sacrifice,"  etc.     The  text  brings  before  our  notice  three  chief  points. 

I.  The  superiobity  op  Abel's  sacmfiob.  "By  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a 
more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain."  This  superiority  was  manifest :  1.  In  the  sacrifice 
which  was  offered.  In  itself  Abel's  sacrifice  was  "  more  excellent "  than  that  of  Cain. 
In  endeavouring  to  ascertain  in  what  respect  it  was  more  excellent,  it  seems  to  us  tha^t 
we  are  not  justified  in  going  beyond  the  statements  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  And  we 
are  not  aware  of  any  satisfactory  reasons  for  entertaining  the  o|iinion  that  Cain  and 
Abel  had  a  knowledge  of  the  si;^ni  ficance  of  the  different  kinds  of  sacrifices  corresponding 
to  that  which  was  communicated  by  the  Mosaic  legislation.  The  narrative  in  Gen.  iv. 
shows  in  what  the  superiority  of  Abel's  iffering  consisted.  " Cain  brought  of  the  fruit 
of  the  ground  an  offering  unto  the  Lord.  And  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of 
his  flock  and  of  the  fat  thereof."  Each  brought  of  his  own.  Cain,  being  "  a  tiller  of  the 
ground,"  offered  of  the  things  which  the  earth  had  yielded  as  the  result  of  his  culture ; 
Abel,  being  a  shepherd,  offered  from  his  flock  that  which  had  been  reared  as  the  result 
of  his  care.  This  seems  appropriate.  But  Abel  selected  the  best  of  his  flock  for  his 
offering,  while  Cain  does  "not  appear  to  have  made  any  such  selection,  but  to  have 
offered  that  which  was  most  readily  obtained.  Gurnnll  states  the  case  well :  "Abel  is 
very  choice  in  the  matter  of  his  sacrifice ;  not  any  of  the  flock  that  comes  first  to  hand, 
but  the  firstlings.  Neither  did  he  offer  the  lean  of  them  to  God,  and  save  the  fat  for 
himself,  but  gives  God  the  best  of  the  best.  But  of  Cain's  offering  no  such  care  is 
recorded  to  be  taken  by  him."  When  the  heart  is  right  even  the  best  of  our 
possessions  will  seem  too  poor  to  offer  unto  (Jod.  2.  In  the  spirit  of  the  offerer.  This 
is  the  chief  thing.  The  quality  or  the  quantity  of  the  offering  itself  is  of  little 
importance  as  compared  with  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  offered.  "By  faith  Abel 
offered."  This  is  the  grand  distinction.  Abel  had  faith  in  God,  while  it  is  clearly 
implied  that  Cain  had  not.  Abel  seems  to  have  been  humble ;  Cain  was  manifestly 
proud  and  presumptuous.  This  is  clear  from  his  anger  at  the  non-acceptance  of  his 
offering,  and  his  dreadful  daring  in  bandying  words  with  Jehovah.  How  could  an 
offering  from  such  a  character  be  acceptable  to  God?  In  his  sight  it  is  not  the 
material  but  the  moral  and  spiritual  qualities  that  determine  the  worth  or  worthleasness 
of  an  offering.  "The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit:  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."  "  I  desire  mercy, and  not  sacrifice."  "Therefore 
if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  23,  24). 

II.  The  Divine  testimony  to  Abel's  ohabaoteb.  "By  which  he  obtained 
witness  that  he  was  righteous,  God  testifying  of  his  gifts."  1.  The  matter  of  this 
testimony,  "  That  he  was  righteous."  He  was  a  true  believer  in  God,  a  sincere  and 
humble  worshipper  of  him,  an  upright  and  honourable  man.  Our  Lord  spake  of  him 
as  "  Abel  the  righteous ; "  and  St.  John  says  that  his  works  were  righteous.  "  Jehovah 
had  respect  unto  Abel  and  to  his  offering."  2.  The  manner  of  this  testimony,  "  God 
testifying  of  his  gifts."  In  what  way  did  God  manifest  his  acceptance  of  Abel's 
offering?  Many  suppose  that  it  was  consumed  by  fire  from  heaven,  while  that  of  Cain 
remained  untouched.  But  this  seems  to  us  very  improbable ;  for  the  descent  of  fire  to 
consume  a  sacrifice  was  very  exceptional,  and  if  it  had  taken  place  on  this  occasion  it 
would  almost  certainly  have  been  recorded.  We  are  acquainted  with  only  six  cases 
recorded  in  the  Bible  in  which  a  sacrifice  was  consumed  by  fire  of  supernatural  origin 
(Gen.  XV.  17  ;  Lev.  ix.  24 ;  Judg.  vi.  21 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  38 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  26 ;  2  Chron, 
vii.  1).  And  each  of  these  cases  was  an  extraordinary  one.  That  no  mention  is  made 
in  the  Scriptures  of  such  fire  in  connection  with  Abel's  offering  points  to  the  conclusion 
that  there  was  no  such  fire.  Alford  says,  "  We  must  rather  think  of  some  appearance 
or  word  of  Jehovah  by  which  the  preference  was  shown."  Probably  Abel  was  conscious 
that  his  offering  was  accepted  by  God,  and  Cain  that  his  was  rejected,  by  an  inward 
witness ;  the  acceptance  and  rejection  were  intimated  to  the  offerers  by  the  direct  action 
of  the  Divine  mind  upon  their  minds. 

III.  The  abiding  influence  of  Abel's  litk,  "  By  it  he  being  dead  yet  speaketh." 
By  reason  of  his  faith  his  life  is  a  permanent  power  for  good  to  men.  He  speaks  to  us 
truths  of  the  greatest  importance ;  e.g. :  1.  That  Ood  will  grade  'xsly  accpt  the  worship 
of  sinners  when  it  is  offered  in  a  right  spirit.  2.  That  faith  is  essential  to  the  true 
spirit  «/  worship,    "By  faith  Abel  offered  onto  God,"  eta      ' Without  iaith  it  is 


ctt.  XI.  1— 40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  SEBRFAVS.  &21 

impossible  to  please  him,"  etc.  3.  That  when  the  true  spirit  of  worship  exists  man 
will  ofer  his  best  to  God.  Abel  offered  "  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock  and  of  the  fat 
thereof."  When  we  feel  aright  toward  God  we  shall  humbly  and  heartily  present  unto 
him  the  best  of  our  thoughts,  affections,  services,  and  possessions. — W.  J. 

Ver.  5. — The  character  and  the  translation  of  Enoch.  "By  faith  Enoch  was  trans- 
lated that  he  should  not  see  diath,"  etc.  That  Enoch  should  immediately  succeed 
Abel  in  this  record  of  the  ancient  heroes  of  faith  is  not  a  little  significant.  How 
remarkable  is  "  the  contrast  between  the  fate  of  Abel  and  Enoch !  The  one  was 
crushed  to  the  earth  by  the  hand  of  a  brutal  and  ferocious  murderer ;  the  other  was 
conveyed  to  heaven,  most  likely  by  the  ministry  of  some  benevolent  intelligence.  The 
one  met  death  in  its  most  repulsive  form,  and  will  probably  be  the  longest  tenant  in 
the  sepulchre ;  the  other  entirely  escaped  it,  and  was  the  first  to  possess  the  happiness 
of  perfect  and  immortal  humanity.  There  is  something  instructive  in  these  characters 
being  placed  side  by  side  on  the  page  of  revelation.  The  contrast  seems  to  furnish  an 
ilhistiatioa  of  the  mysterious  diversities  of  fact  and  circumstance,  which  are  per- 
petually occurring  in  the  moral  government  of  God."  •    Our  text  brings  before  us— 

I.  The  ohaeactbk  op  Enoch's  life  upoh  eabth.  "  Before  his  translation  he  had 
this  testimony,  that  he  pleased  God."  It  is  a  groat  and  blessed  thing  that  it  is  possible 
for  man  to  please  God.  We  know  that  we  h  ive  grieved  him  by  our  many  and  heinous 
sins ;  and  it  is  a  fact  full  of  encouragement  that  we  may  so  live  as  to  yield  him 
positive  satisfaction.  In  his  infinite  condescension  he  is  so  interested  in  us  that  our 
character  and  conduct  are  viewed  by  him  either  vrith  delight  or  with  sorrow.  That 
man  should  please  God  implies :  1.  A  revelation  of  his  will.  Enoch  had  no  portion  of 
the  sacred  Scriptures.  His  revelation  of  God  was  small  and  dim  as  compared  with 
ours.  But  evidently  he  believed  in  the  existence  of  the  Supreme  Being,  was  convinced 
"  that  he  is,"  and  he  knew  something  of  his  holy  will.  We  live  in  the  clear  and  full 
light  of  Divine  revelation.  "  God  hath  spoken  unto  us  in  his  Son."  We  know 
without  any  uncertainty  wh.t  to  do  and  what  not  to  do,  if  we  would  please  Gud. 
2.  Personal  sympathy  with  him.  The  moral  separation  which  sin  causes  between  the 
soul  and  God  had  been  removed  in  the  case  of  Enoch.  The  consciousness  of  the 
Divine  presence  was  not  painful  to  him,  but  blessed.  "Enoch  walked  with  God." 
The  will  of  Gud  must  have  appeared  to  him  not  tyrannical  or  harsh,  but  reasonable 
and  gracious ;  for  otherwise  his  life  could  hot  have  been  brought  into  such  relations 
with  it  as  would  please  God.  And  still  moral  sympathy  with  him  is  an  indispensable 
condition  of  pleasing  him.  While  we  regard  hira  with  suspicion  or  distrust,  while  we 
esteem  his  commandments  as  grievous,  our  lives  cannot  be  viewed  by  him  with 
complacency.  As  a  first  step  towards  pleasing  God  we  must  heartily  "receive  the 
ri  conciliation "  which  he  offers  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ  (Rom.  v.  10,  11).  3.  Sincere 
effort  to  do  his  will.  To  know  and  approve  the  will  of  God  without  cordial  and 
continuous  effort  to  conform  to  it  cannot  be  pleasing  to  him.  Enoch  embodied  his 
relii^ious  knowledge  in  his  practical  life;  ho  translated  his  convictions  into  actions. 
And  so  must  every  one  who  would  please  God  (cf.  John  xiv.  21 — 24;  Jas.  i.  25).  It 
was  by  faith  that  Enoch  pleased  God.  He  walked  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  presents  to  us  the  supreme  and  perfect  example  of  pleasinc;  God.  His  joy 
was  to  do  the  will  of  him  who  sent  him.  Twice  the  Father  testified  of  him  from 
heaven,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased:  hear  ye  him."  Him 
the  Father  ever  viewed  with  infinite  complacency.  He  is  also  the  Reconciler  of  man 
unto  God.  Moreover,  "  he  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might 
he  increaseth  strength,"  that  they  may  please  God  in  their  lives.  Let  m  trust  him, 
acceiit  him,  imitate  him. 

II.  The  nature  of  Enoch's  ebmoval  rBOM  eabth.  "By  faith  Enoch  was 
translated  that  he  should  not  see  death;  and  he  was  not  found,  because  God  had 
translated  him."  Notice  two  points.  1.  The  nature  of  this  translation.  We  have  no 
means  of  satisfying  all  the  inquiries  which  curiosity  may  make  as  to  how  this  man  of 
God  was  translated ;  but  we  may  bring  together  a  little  of  the  light  which  the 
Scriptures  shed  upon  it.  It  is  certain  that  he  did  not  pass  from  earth  by  the  same  way 
as  other  men;  that  he  entered  heaven  without  passing  through  "  the  gates  of  death." 

'  Binney's  '  Practical  Power  of  Faith.* 
aBBUswn  T 


822  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xl  1—40. 


But  hi8  body  must  have  undergone  some  great  change ;  for  "  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  This  change  was  probably  similar  to  that  which  is 
reserved  for  those  who  are  alive  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord.  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  xv.  50 — 54).  St.  Paul  says,  "  There  is  a 
natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body."  What  the  properties  and  characteristics 
of  the  spiritual  body  are  we  know  not  as  yet.  But  we  think  that  the  body  of  Enoch 
was  spiritnahzed  by  God.  Its  vital  relations  with  earth  were  severed ;  it  underwent 
an  essential  change  or  changes.  Previously  it  was  mortal  and  corruptible ;  then  it 
became  immortal  and  incorruptible.  Previously  it  was  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  then  it 
became  of  lieaven,  heavenly.  So  changed  was  it  that  Enoch  was  no  longer  fit  for 
earth ;  his  body,  aR  well  as  his  spirit,  unable  to  find  its  true  sphere  on  earth,  rose 
heavenward,  Godward.  His  body  was  so  refined  and  purified  by  God  as  to  be  capable 
of  the  blessedness  and  glory  of  heaven.  And  thus  "he  was  not ;  for  God  took  him." 
*'  He  was  not  found,  because  God  translated  him."  2.  The  design  of  this  translation. 
Why  was  Enoch  thus  removed  from  earth?  (1)  His  translation  was  a  distinguished 
honour  and  reward  to  Enoch  himself.  By  it  he  was  taken  from  that  dark  wickedness 
and  daring  blasphemy  (Jude  14,  15)  which  must  have  been  so  painful  to  a  soul  in 
sympathy  with  God,  as  was  Enoch's.  But  two  men  of  all  the  departed  myriads  have 
been  honoured  by  God  with  a  triumphant  entrance  into  Paradise  without  passing 
through  the  gloomy  portals  of  death.  Of  these,  Enoch  was  one.  His  character  was 
extraordinary,  and'  extraordinary  was  his  reward.  There  is  a  beautiful  propriety  in 
such  a  reward  for  such  a  life.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  only  two  men  who  passed  from 
this  world  without  tasting  of  death  were  distinguished  as  prophets  fearless  in  rebuking 
evil-doers  and  asserting  the  Divine  claims,  and  each  in  an  age  of  dominant  wickedness. 
And  it  would  seem  that  their  translation  was  a  decided  testimony  from  Heaven  that  he 
who  stands  unmoved,  though  alone,  fur  God,  is  the  man  whom  the  King  delights  to 
honour.  (2)  His  translation  was  fitted  to  impress  beneficially  the  men  of  that  age. 
Enoch  was  a  prophet  to  a  race  of  daring  sinners.  His  serene  and  holy  walk  had  failed 
to  benefit  them  ;  his  prophetic  exhortations  and  rebukes  had  embittered  them  against 
him ;  and  now  perhaps  his  sudden  and  strange  removal  from  them  will  give  new  and 
additional  emphasis  and  energy  to  the  words  which  he  had  spoken,  and  the  life  which 
he  had  lived  amongst  them.  They  were  living  in  the  material  and  temporal  alone ; 
this  translation  was  suited  to  impress  them  with  the  reality  and  importance  of  the 
spiritual  and  eternal.  They  were  atheistic,  some  of  them  anti-theistic ;  but  this 
extraordinary  removal  of  the  holy  prophet  of  God  from  sublunary  scenes  would  perhaps 
force  upon  them,  at  least  for  a  time,  the  conviction  of  the  existence  and  presence  of  a 
Power  unacknowledged  by  them  heretofore. 

Let  us,  through  Jesus  Christ,  seek  in  this  life  to  please  God,  and  then,  through  Jesus 
Christ,  death  will  prove  our  introduction  to  an  everlasting,  ever-increasing,  and  ever- 
brightening  life. — ^W.  J. 

Yer.  6. — The  impossibility  of  pleasing  Qod  without  faith.  "  But  without  faith  it  is 
impossible  to  please  him,"  etc.  The  fact  that  Enoch  walked  by  faith,  and  that  his  life 
was  well  pleasing  to  God,  suggested  to  the  writer  this  general  axiom  on  the  indispen- 
sableness  of  faith  in  order  to  secure  the  Divine  complacency.  Two  principal  observa- 
tions will  bring  before  us  the  chief  teaching  of  our  text. 

I.  The  affboaoh  of  the  sonii  to  God  is  essential  to  cub  t^easino  hiu. 
"  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  him :  for  he  that  cometh  to  God,"  etc. 
Having  asserted  that  apart  IVom  faith  man  cannot  please  God,  the  writer  proceeds  to 
show  this  by  affirming  that  he  who  comes  to  God  must  believe  certain  truths  concern- 
ing him,  thus  clearly  implying  that  we  cannot  please  God  without  coining  to  him. 
1.  Coming  to  Oud  implies  distance  from  him.  The  unrenewed  soul  is  far  from  God 
.  by  sin.  Sin  against  liim  geneiates  suspicions  concerning  him,  dread  of  him,  and  so 
banishes  the  soul  far  away  from  him.  Like  the  prodigal  son,  the  sinner  wanders  away 
irom  the  gracious  Father  "  into  a  far  country."  The  expiession,  "  them  that  seek  him," 
also  suggests  that  the  seekers  have  not  the  consciousness  of  his  presence  and  favour ; 
they  do  not  always  realize  his  nearness  unto  them,  or  they  would  not  need  to  seek  aftei 
him.  2.  Coming  to  Oud  is  the  approach  of  the  soul  unto  him.  As  the  implied  distance 
from  him  is  not  local  but  moral,  so  the  coming  to  him  is.not  physical  but  spiritual. 


OH.  XI.1— 40.J  IBB  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  823 

It  is  the  soul  drawing  near  to  him  in  thought  and  desire,  in  affection  and  devotion. 
The  penitent  thus  comes  to  him  with  confession  and  prayer  for  pardon.  The  poor  and 
needy,  with  petitions  for  succour  and  supply.  The  thatAful,  with  warm  tributes  of 
gratitude  and  pi-aise.  The  pious,  with  lowly  loving  adoration.  3.  This  approach  of  the 
soul  to  Qod  is  gratifying  unto  him.  That  his  creatures,  created  in  his  image  and  for 
fellowship  with  himself,  should  stand  aloof  from  him  in  distrust,  or  suspicion,  or 
indifference,  or  by  reason  ofabsorption  in  other  things,  is  painful  to  him.  His  fatherly 
heart  yearns  for  the  confidence  and  love  of  his  children.  He  welcomes  the  first  approach 
of  the  penitent  sinner  to  him,  even  as  the  father  of  the  returning  prodigal  saw  him 
"  while  he  was  yet  afar  off,  and  was  moved  with  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his 
neck,  and  kissed  him."  He  is  pleased  when  his  children  regard  him  with  assured 
confidence  and  warm  affection,  and  come  to  him  in  their  necessities  and  satisfactions, 
their  sorrows  and  joys,  etc. 

11.  Thk  bxbecisb  of  faith  in  God  is  essential  to  oitb  approach  to  him. 
"  For  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is,"  etc.  Ebrard  says  wisely  con- 
cerning this  faith,  "Piecisely  tlie  faith  that  there  is  a  God,  and  One  who  will  reward 
those  whoseeK  after  iiim,iuuad  place  in  Enoch,  and  co\ild  find  place  in  him.  Far  from 
intenditig  to  ascribe  to  Enoch  the  New  Testament  faith,  the  author  defines  the  faith 
here  in  its  general  form  as  it  applied  to  the  time  of  Enoch."  The  faith  which  is 
essential  to  the  approach  of  the  soul  to  him  is :  1.  Faith  in  his  Being.  "  Must  believe 
that  he  is."  And  we  have  the  amplest  and  firmest  groimd  upon  which  to  base  this 
article  of  our  faith.  The  Bible  says  "  that  he  is  ; "  the  universe  witnesses  to  the  same 
great  truth  ;  and  human  consciousness  confirms  the  testimony.  2.  Faith  in  his  entreat- 
ihleness.  "  That  he  is  a  Rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him."  This  implies 
faith  in  his  accessibility;  the  belief  that  we  may  approach  unto  him;  that  our  prayers 
will  reach  his  ear.  He  hears  the  sigh  of  sorrow,  the  moan  of  misery,  and  the  wliispered 
aspiration  of  the  pious  heart.  He  is  pcTfectly  acquainled  with  the  godly  "  soul's  sincere 
desire,  uttered  or  unexpressed."  He  not  only  hears  prayer,  but  he  also  answers  it.  The 
teaching  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  on  this  point  is  buth  full  and  explicit  (Ps.  xxxvii.  4; 
1.  15 ;  Matt.  vii.  7—11 ;  xviii.  19  ;  xxi.  22 ;  John  xv.  7 ;  xvi.  23,  24 ;  Jas.  i.  5,  6 . 
V.  16 — 18 ;  1  John  v.  14,  15).  The  testiuiony  of  the  godly  is  no  less  clear  and  decisive 
"  He  is  a  Rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him."  This  means  more  than  that  the 
exercise  of  prayer  to  God  in  itself  exalts  and  enriches,  calms  and  cleanses  the  praying 
soul.  The  reflex  benefits  of  prayer  are  undoubtecUy  very  great  and  precious,  but  their 
existence  depends  upon  the  belief  that  God  hears  and  answers  prayer.  Prayer  would 
lose  its  reality  and  become  a  mere  pretence,  offensive  to  all  honest  souls,  if  we  had  not 
faith  in  God  as  "a  Rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him."  But  the  seeker  must 
be  diligent ;  he  must  be  earnest.  "  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  find  me,  when  ye  shall 
search  for  me  with  all  your  heart."  The  prayer  must  be  fervent  and  persevering,  or 
it  may  fail  of  its  reward.  "  When  prayer  mounts  upon  the  wing  of  fervour  to  God, 
then  answers  come  down  like  lightning  from  Gud." 

Thus  we  see  that "  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  Our  subject  shows : 
1.  The  necessity  of  ctdtivuting  and  exercising  faith  in  Ood.  2.  The  advantages  of 
believing  prayer  to  Qod. — W.  J. 

Ver.  7. — The  faith  of  Noah.  "By  faith  Noah,  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not 
seen  as  yet,"  etc.  Very  exalted  was  the  character  of  Noah  as  briefly  described  in 
Gen.  vi.  8,  9.  And  his  purity  and  piety  are  the  more  conspicuous  and  commendable 
by  reason  of  the  terrible  corruption  and  violence  which  were  universal  in  his  age  (Gen. 
vi.  5 — 7,  11 — 13).    Our  text  leads  us  to  look  at  the  faith  of  Noah  in  thiee  aspects. 

I.  In  its  basis.  Noah  was  "  warned  of  Gud  of  things  not  seen  as  yet."  His  faith 
rested  upon  a  Divine  communication  (Gen.  vi.  13 — 21).  1.  This  basis  was  exclusive. 
Noah  had  nothing  else  upon  which  to  ground  his  hi'.h — nothing  which  could  serve 
as  an  auxiliary  support  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  matters  were  not  lacking  wliich  were 
calculated  sorely  to  test  his  confidence  ;  e.g. :  (1)  The  entire  absence  of  any  precedent  of 
an  event  corresponding  to  that  which  had  been  announced  to  him.  The  world  had 
existed  long,  but  no  such  devastating  flood  had  ever  occurred.  (2)  The  uniformity  of 
the  courses  and  operations  of  nature.  It  uurely  would  not  have  been  strange  if  he  had 
icasoned  thus  with  himself — 


324  IHB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBliWa.  [oh.  xi.  1—40 

"  Not  but  by  a  miracle 
Can  this  thing  be.    The  fashion  of  the  world 
We  heretofore  have  never  known  to  change ; 
And  will  God  change  it  now?" 

(3)  Hli  own  ioul  might  have  suggested  serious  doubts.  Would  God  destroy  all  his 
human  creatures — the  creatures  whom  he  had  created  in  his  own  likeness  ?  True,  the 
race  had  become  terribly  depraved,  men  were  great  sinners ;  but  could  he  not  save 
them  ?  Would  lie  destroy  the  innocent  child  as  well  as  the  hardened  rebel  ?  And 
would  he  wreck  the  beautiful  and  fertile  earth  which  he  had  made  and  embellished  ? 
Or  the  question  may  have  arisen — Why  should  he  and  his  family  alone  be  spared  in  the 
universal  destruction?  He  was  conscious  of  imperfections  and  sins,  his  family  too  were 
sinners ;  then  why  should  the  Almighty  bestow  his  mercy  upon  them,  and  upon  them 
only?  To  meet  doubts  and  questionings  of  this  or  any  other  kind,  5ioah  had  simply 
the  word  of  God  which  had  been  made  known  unto  him,  and  his  fitith  rested  upon  that 
word.  2.  This  basis  was  sufficient  for  Noah.  He  founded  his  faith  upon  the  com- 
munication which  he  had  received  from  God,  as  upon  a  rock  ;  and  his  faith  remained 
Arm  and  steadfast  throughout  its  protracted  and  severe  trials.  God  had  spoken  to 
him,  and  that  was  enough  for  him. 

II.  In  etb  expression.  Noah, "  moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of 
his  house."  He  manifested  his  belief  in  the  Divine  communication  by  his  obedience 
to  the  directions  therein  conveyed  (Gen.  vi.  14 — 16).  His  faith  was  expressed  in  an 
appropriate  and  very  remarkable  course  of  action.  That  we  may  the  more  fully  realize 
the  strength  of  his  conviction,  let  us  notice  that  the  work  in  which  it  found  exjiression 
was  :  1.  A  work  of  great  magnitude.  The  dimensions  of  the  ark  are  stated  in  Gen.  vi. 
15.  .  If  we  take  the  cubit  to  be  twenty-one  inches,  "  the  aik  would  be  five  hundred  and 
twenty-five  feet  in  length,  eighty-seven  feet  six  inches  in  breadth,  and  fifty-two  feet  six 
inches  in  height.  This  is  very  considerably  larger  than  the  largest  British  man-of-war. 
The  Great  JSosiem,  however,  is  both  longer  and  deeper  than  the  ark,  being  six  hundred 
and  eighty  feet  in  leno:th  (six  hundred  and  ninety-one  on  deck),  eighty-three  in  breadth, 
and  filty-eight  in  depth."*  2.  A  work  of  long  duration.  From  Gen.  vi.  3,  some  have 
concluded  that  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  intervened  between  the  comtnencement 
of  the  ark  and  the  coming  of  the  Deluge.  But  the  interpretation  of  that  verse  on  which 
thia  conclusion  is  based  is  doubtful.  Yet  the  work  of  preparing  the  materials  for  and 
constructing  the  ark  must  have  been  a  very  long  one — a  work  of  many  years.  And 
through  all  those  years  he  was  nerved  and  sustained  by  faith,  and  faith  alone.  3.  A 
work  involving  very  great  expenditure.  The  building  of  such  an  ark  in  any  age  and 
in  any  circumstances  would  have  been  utterly  impossible  apart  from  great  expense 
of  time  and  toil  and  wealth.  But  to  these  demands  also  the  faith  of  Noah  was  equal. 
4.  A  work  prosecuted  despite  of  derision.  There  were  probably  men  of  science  and 
philosophy  who  pronounced  the  predicted  deluge  an  impossibility,  and  pitied  the 
prophet  as  a  deluded  fanatic.  And  there  were  men  of  a  lower  type  who  would  greet 
him  with  scoffs  and  jeers,  and  make  him  the  butt  of  their  scornful  laughter  and  con- 
temptuous sarcasm.  Yet  the  faith  of  the  man  of  God  failed  not.  The  great  work  was 
steadily  prosecuted,  and  in  due  time  was  fully  accomplished. 

IH.  In  its  bbsult.  "  By  which  he  condemned  the  world,  and  became  heir  of  the 
righteousness  which  is  by  faith."  1.  The  condemnation  of  the  unlelieving  world.  "His 
holy  fear  condemned 'their  security  and  vain  confidence;  his  faith  condemned  their 
unbelief;  his  obedience  condemned  their  contempt  and  rebellion.  Good  examples  will 
either  convert  sinners  or  condemn  them."  2.  Tlie  acquisition  of  a  character  eminent 
for  righteousness.  "Became  heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is  according  to  faith." 
"  Noah  was  a  just  man  and  upright "  before  he  was  commanded  to  build  the  ark  • 
but  in  that  work  his  faith  was  splendidly  exemplified  and  his  righteousness  greatly 
increased.  His  righteousness  was  great  as  his  faith.  It  is  important  to  observe  that 
the  faith  of  Noah  which  was  manifested  in  such  an  extraordinary  and  exemplary 
manner,  and  by  reason  of  which  and  in  the  measure  of  which  he  was  regarded  as 
righteous,  was  not  fixed  upon  the  coming  Messiah  as  its  special  object,  but  upon  the 
communication  which  he  had  received  from  God  concerning  the  Flood.  He  fully 
^  Dean  Porowne,  In  Dr.  Smith's  '  Biblical  Dictionary.' 


OH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  320 

accepted  the  Divine  testimony  and  nobly  acted  upon  it,  and  as  •  consequence  GM 
accepted  liim  as  righteous.  "  Even  as  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  reckoned 
unto  him  for  righteousness."  And  he  who  believes  in  God  now  will  accept  his  Son 
whom  he  hath  sent.  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath 
sent."  3.  The  salvation  of  himself  and  his  family.  Wliile  all  other  human  beings 
were  destroyed  by  the  flood,  he  and  bis  wife,  his  three  sons  and  their  wives,  were  saved 
in  the  ark  which  be  had  built. 

Many  are  the  lessons  which  our  subject  suggests.  We  mention  a  few  of  them. 
1.  ITiat  there  is  justice  as  well  as  mercy,  severity  as  well  as  hin^ness,  in  God.  2.  That 
it  is  foolish,  and  it  may  be  ruinous,  to  refuse  to  believe  a  thing  because  it  seems  to  us 
improbable,  or  is  to  us  incompreliensible.  3.  The  sacred  Scriptures  announ-e  the  coining 
of  events  of  stupendous  importance  and  solemnily — the  destruction  of  the  world,  the 
judgment  of  mankind, etc.  Let  us  believe  the  announcement.  4.  A  secure  Refuge  is 
provided  for  man  in  view  of  th'se  coming  trials,  and  it  is  adequate  for  all,  open  to  all, 
and  free  for  all — even  Jesus  Christ.  Let  u>  enter  in  by  faith,  and  eternal  security 
and  blesstdness  will  he  ours, — W.  J. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — The  faith  of  Ahraham,  "By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  called,' 
etc.  Abraham  was  a  good  and  a  great  man.  "  He  was  called  the  friend  of  God." 
Even  amongst  the  heroes  of  religious  faith  he  is  conspicuous  as  a  believer  in  God. 
St.  Paul  speaks  of  him  as  "  the  father  of  all ''  the  faithful.  Let  us  consider  the  exhibition 
of  his  faith  which  our  text  presents.     We  discover  it — 

L  In  his  obedience  to  the  Divine  call.  "By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was 
called  to  go  out  into  a  place  which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  inheritance,  obeyed," 
etc  The  summons  here  mentioned  is  recorded  in  Gen.  xii.  1 — 5.  This  call  was  (1)  of 
Divine  origination.  It  was  not  solicited  from  God  by  Abraham,  but  addressed  by  God 
to  Abraham.  The  initiative  was  Divine,  not  human.  Every  summons  to  the  true  and 
good  is  from  above.  Every  aspiration  and  effort  after  holiness  and  usefulness  is  the 
result  of  Divine  influence.  This  call  was  (2)  a  Divine  communication.  How  it  was 
addressed  to  Abraham,  whether  throuj^h  his  bodily  senses  or  direct  to  his  spiritual 
consciousness,  we  know  not.  But  we  know  the  fact  that  the  summons  came  to  hiisi, 
and  was  felt  by  him  to  be  a  sacred  and  Divine  command.  A  mysterious  and  mighty 
impulse  came  upon  him,  and  he  felt  that  it  was  from  God.  The  call  was  to  depart 
from  his  country  and  kindred  to  a  land  whither  God  would  lead  him.  And  it  seems 
that  either  then  or  formerly  he  was  called  to  a  truer  and  higher  life.  Whether  he  was 
ever  an  idolater  we  cannot  tell;  but  if  such  were  the  case,  he  was  summoned  from 
polytheism  to  monotheism.  Most  glorious  and  animating  was  the  destiny  which  was 
set  forth  for  him  and  his  posterity  (Gen.  xii.  2,  3).  But  at  present  we  have  to  do  with 
his  call  to  leave  his  home  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  and  to  follow  whithersoever  the  unseen 
hand  might  lead  him.  In  his  prompt  and  pious  obedience  to  that  call  we  have  an 
impressive  illustration  of  his  faith.  1.  He  obeyed,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  his 
obedience  involved  considerable  sacrifices.  Unto  a  man  like  Abraham  it  could  not  have 
been  a  light  thing  to  depart  "from  his  country,  and  from  his  kindred,  and  from  his 
father's  house."  It  must  have  been  a  trial  to  him  to  go  forth  from  places  which  were 
hallowed  by  precious  and  sacred  memories,  to  sever  many  close  and  tender  social 
associations,  and  without  any  prospect  of  returning  to  these  cherished  friends  and 
familiar  scenes  again.  Yet  he  obeyed  the  heavenly  call.  His  faith  in  God  was  mightier 
than  his  strongest  human  feelings.  2.  Be  obeyed,  notwithstanding  his  ignorance  of  his 
destination  and  of  the  way  by  which  it  was  to  be  reached.  Abraham  must,  we  think, 
have  had  some  idea  as  to  the  direction  and  destination  of  his-  journey.  But  he  was 
called,  not  to  any  country  which  is  named  in  the  call,  but  "  unto  a  land  that  I  will 
show  thee."  "  And  he  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went."  The  distance  he 
might  have  to  travel,  the  difficulties  and  dangers  he  might  have  to  encounter,  the  scene 
and  circumstances  in  which  his  journey  would  end,  he  knew  not.  Yet  he  went  out, 
obedient  to  the  voice  which  faith  alone  could  hear,  and  guided  by  the  hand  which  faith 
alone  could  see.  The  Divine  call  is  addressed  at  some  time  or  other  to  every  man. 
The  summons  from  carnal  existence  to  spuitual  life,  from  selfish  pursuits  to  generous 
sympathies  and  services,  from  tlie  local  and  temporal  to  the  universal  and  eternal,  from 
sin  to  holiness, — the  call  to  God  by  Christ  Jcsns  sounds  at  some  time  in  the  soul  of 


326  TliE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  xi.  1— 40. 

every  man.  It  is  addressed  by  various  voices  and  at  dilferent  times;  to  some  it  comes 
iigain  and  again ;  ani  it  is  variously  treated  by  those  who  hear  it.  Be  it  outs  like 
Abraham  to  attentively  hear,  heartily  believe,  and  promptly  obey  the  heavenly 
mandate.  If  we  have  believingly  received  the  summons,  let  us  not  hesitate  to  go 
forward,  though  the  way  be  unknown  to  ug.  Complying  with  the  Divine  command, 
the  Divine  conduct  will  never  fail  us. 

II.  Ik  its  continued  exercise,  notwithstandiko  the  long-delated  fulfilment 
OF  the  promise.  "  By  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  promise,  as  in  a  strange 
country,"  etc.  When  Abraham  arrived  in  Canaan  Jehovah  appeared  unto  him,  and 
promised  to  give  that  land  to  him  and  to  his  seed  (Gen.  xii.  7  ;  xiii.  15,  17 ;  xv.  18) ;  yet 
be  never  possessed  that  land.  Very  forcibly  is  this  fact  stated  by  Stephen:  "And  he 
gave  him  none  inheritance  in  it,  no,  not  so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on  :  and  he  promised 
tl'.at  he  would  give  it  to  him  for  a  possession,  and  to  his  seed  after  him,  when  as  yet  he 
had  no  child."  Once  in  the  life  of  Abraham  the  fact  that  he  had  no  actual  possession 
in  that  land  was  very  forcibly  and  feelingly  expressed.  In  his  great  and  sacred  sorrow 
by  reason  of  the  death  of  his  beloved  wife,  he  had  to  purchase  a  place  in  which  to  bury 
her  mortal  remains.  "  And  Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  dead,  and  spake  unto  the 
sons  of  Heth,  saying,  I  am  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  with  you  :  give  me  a  possession 
of  a  burying-place  with  you,  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight."  And  he  paid 
four  hundred  shekels  of  silver  for  the  field  and  the  cave  of  Machpelah  for  a  possession 
of  a  burying-place  (Gen.  xxiii.).  The  points  which  we  wish  to  bring  out  as  taught  in 
ver.  9  are  these:  1.  'ITiough  the  land  was  promised  to  him,  yet  he  never  possessed  it. 
"He  sojourned  In  the  land  of  promise,  as  in  a  strange  country; "  or,  "  as  in  a  land  not  his 
own."  2.  Though  he  dwelt  in  the  land,  it  was  as  a  stranger.  He  became  a  sojourner 
there,  not  a  settler  or  a  citizen.  He  bad  no  home  tliere.  He  did  not  attempt  to  build 
a  fixed  dwelling-place,  but  took  up  his  abude  in  tents,  which  could  easily  and  speedily 
be  removed  from  place  to  place.  3.  Yet  he  believed  Qod — lived  "  iy  faith  "  in  Ood  and 
in  his  promise,  l^ow,  as  Eobertson  says,  "  the  surprising  point  is  that  Abraham, 
deceived,  as  you  might  almost  say,  did  not  complain  of  it  as  a  deception ;  he  was  even 
grateful  for  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  promise ;  he  does  not  even  seem  to  have  expected 
its  fulfilment ;  he  did  not  look  for  Canaan,  but '  for  a  city  which  had  foundations  ; '  his 
faith  appears  to  have  consist' d  in  disbelieving  the  letter,  almost  as  much  as  in  believing 
the  spirit  of  the  promise."  Abraham's  life  in  Canaan  as  exhibited  in  the  ninth  verse 
may  be  viewed  (1)  as  a  picture  of  our  life  upon  earth.  There  is  no  abiding-place  for 
man  in  this  world ;  and  the  Christian's  treasure  is  in  heaven,  not  upon  earth ;  his 
inheritance  also  is  not  here,  but  is  "  resei  ved  in  heaven  for  "  him.  This  part  of  Abra- 
ham's life  may  be  viewed  (2)  as  a  pattern  for  our  life  u|  on  earth.  We  should  emulate 
the  spirit  of  the  illustrious  patriarch.  "  Seek  the  things  that  are  above,"  etc.  (Col. 
iii.  1,  2). 

III.  In  the  sublime  hope  which  it  inspired.  "For  he  looked  for  the  city  which 
h.ith  the  foundations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God."  We  must  not  attribute  to 
Abraham  views  of  the  future  state  as  full  and  clear  as  those  which  are  unfoded  in  the 
New  Testament.  Yet  it  is  evident  that  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  intended  to  teach  that 
be  and  the  other  patriarchs  expected  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  Canaan  in  some- 
thing higher  than  any  earthly  city.  Abraham  believed  God's  promise ;  but  by  faith  he 
looked  for  even  more  than  its  literal  fulfilment.  His  faith  hoped  for  and  anticipated  a 
more  glorious  inheritance  than  the  earthly  Canaan,  and  a  fairer,  firmer,  and  diviner  city 
than  was  ever  designed  by  human  skill  or  constructed  by  human  strength.  He  looked 
forward  to:  1.  .il  state  of  social  blessedness.  "He  luoked  for  the  city."  A  city  is  sug- 
gestive of  society.  In  Canaan  Abraham  was  a  sojourner  amongst  stranp'ers;  he  antici- 
pated being  a  citizen  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  at  home  in  congenial  society. 
Heaven  is  a  scene  of  the  most  delightful  fellowships.  2.  A  state  of  permanent  blessid- 
nesB.  "  The  city  which  hath  the  foundations."  The  inhabitants  of  the  heavenly  world 
ire  immortal ;  and  th6ir  "  inheritance  is  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  fadeth  not  away." 
The  crowns  which  the  faithful  wear  in  that  high  realm  are  "  crowns  of  glory  that  fade 
not  away."  Its  holy  enjoyments  are  everlasting.  3.  A  stale  of  Divine  blessedneu. 
"  Whose  Builder,"  or  Architect,  "and  Maker  is  God."  As  an  edifice  illustrates  the  mind 
of  the  architect  and  the  character  of  the  builder ;  so  in  the  new  Jerusalem  will  be 
specially  displayed  the  skill  and  the  strength,  the  goodness  and  the  glory,  of  the  great 


OH.  zi.  1-^0.]  IHB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWb.  827 

God.  "He  hath  prepared  for"  his  people  this  dtjr.  Ite  securiiies  and  sanctities,  its 
ocoupatioDS  and  enjoyments,  are  all  from  him.  "  And  he  shall  dwell  with  them,  and 
they  shall  he  his  people,  and  Ood  himself  shall  he  with  them,  their  God."  This  state 
Ahraham  was  eagerly  expecting.  The  suhlime  hope  of  it  sustained  him  in  his  earthly 
sojomm.  To  us  a  fuller,  clearer,  brighter  revelation  of  the  future  is  given.  If  we  have 
obeyed  the  Divine  call  and  are  following  the  Divine  guidance,  let  us  hold  fast  and 
cherish  the  inspiring  hope  of  perfect  holiness  and  perpetual  hlessednesa,  in  "  the  city 
which  hath  the  foundations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  GtMi." — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  13, 14. — TTie  Chri$tian'i  condition  in  this  world.  "  These  all  died  in  faith,  not 
having  received  the  promises,"  eto.  By  "  these  all "  we  understand  Ahraham  and 
Sarah,  Isaac  and  Jacob.  They  died  in  faith.  Their  faith,  though  at  times  it  was  sorely 
tried,  continued  unto  death.  And  their  death  wag  accordia^  to  or  consistent  with 
their  faith.  They  departed  this  life  still  believing  in  the  promises,  and  anticipating 
their  fulfilment  in  the  life  beyond.  We  take  what  is  said  of  the  patriarchs  in  these  two 
verses  as  descriptive  of  the  Christian's  condition  in  this  world. 

I.  The  Christian  does  not  realize  ms  obeat  hopes  hbbe,  but  antioifates 
THEiB  realization  HEREAFTER.  The  patriarchs  "  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received 
the  promises,  but  having  seen  them  and  greeted  them  from  afar."  They  did  not 
inherit  Canaan.  The  promises  of  God  to  them  were  not  fulfilled  in  this  life.  The 
hopes  which  those  promises  awakened  were  not  realized  when  they  died.  But  our  text 
teaches :  1.  That  they  firmly  believed  in  the  blessings  promised  to  them.  By  faith  they 
saw  them  from  afar.  2.  They  anticipated  the  possession  of  these  blessings.  They 
"  greeted  them."  "  From  afar,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  they  saw  the  promises  in  the  reality 
of  their  fulfilment ;  from  afar  they  greeted  them  as  the  wanderer  greets  his  longed-for 
home,  even  when  he  only  comes  in  sight  of  it  at  a  distance,  drawing  to  himself  as  it 
were  magnetically  and  embracing  with  inward  love  that  which  is  yet  afar  off.  Ttie 
exclamation, '  I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  0  Lord '  (Gen.  xlix.  18),  is  such  a  greet- 
ing of  salvation  from  afar."  "  The  image  is  that  of  sailors  who,  catcwng  a  glimpse  of 
the  shores  they  wish  to  reach,  salute  them  firom  a  distance."  Oowper  expresses  the 
idea.    He  speaks  of 

"  The  savage  rook,  .  .  . 

That  hides  the  seamew  in  his  hollow  olefts 

Above  the  reach  of  man.    His  hoary  head, 

OonspiououB  many  a  leagne,  the  mariner. 

Bound  homeward,  and  in  hope  already  thei% 

Greets  with  three  cheers  existing." 

Such  was  the  attitude  of  the  patriarchs  to  the  blessings  promised  nato  them  hy  the 
Lord.  And  in  this  respect  Christians  to  some  extent  resemble  them.  The  highest  and 
brightest  hopes  of  the  Christian  are  not  attained  here.  This  world  is  the  scene  of  the 
pursuit  rather  than  the  attainment  of  the  divinest  satisfactions.  Is  there  any  one 
whose  brightest  and  best  hopes  have  been  realized  in  this  world?  Is  our  life  as  good 
and  glad  and  great  a  thing  as  we  pictured  it  in  our  early  days  ?  Are  we  as  true  and 
pure,  as  brave  and  noble,  as  we  hoped  and  expected  to  he  ?  Verily,  we  have  not 
attained ;  we  are  not  satisfied ;  we  have  not  received  the  promised  blessings.  But  these 
blessings  still  beckon  us  onward.  We  long  and  hope  tor  the  realization  of  them.  Dr. 
Martineau  profoundly  and  truly  says,  "  So  far  as  we  are  religious,  we  are  in  a  state  of 
aspiration  and  unsatisfied  desire.  ...  In  disappointment  ever  renewed,  in  thoughts  and 
affections  ever  transcending  all  our  possibilities,  consist  all  the  noble  unrest,  the  progres- 
sive goodness,  the  immortal  capacities  of  our  nature,  rendering  it  the  creator  of  poetry 
and  the  moral  creature  of  God."  We  anticipate  the  fruition  of  our  hopes  hereafter. 
"  As  for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness :  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake, 
with  thy  likeness." 

IL  The  Christian  is  not  a  bebident  herb,  but  a  MtrouBNEB — a  filobim. 
"  Confessed  that  they  were  pilgrims  on  the  earth  "  (c£  Qea.  xziii.  4 ;  xlvii.  9),  A]! 
men  are  pilgrims  in  this  world.  David,  in  the  height  of  his  power,  confessed  this 
CI  Ohron.  xxix.  15).  Whether  they  will  or  not,  every  man  is  moving  ever  onward 
from  the  seen  to  the  unseen,  from  the  temporal  to  the  eternal.  Some  are  unwilling 
pilgrims.     If  they  could  they  ,would  be  citizens  hero,  not  sojourners.     Bnt  it  they 


328  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  XL  1— 4a 

attempt  to  settle  down,  some  sharp  shock  soon  reminds  them  that  their  condition  here 
is  not  stationary,  but  itinerant  and  changeable.  The  Christian  cheerfully  recognizes  the 
fact  that  he  has  no  coutinuinr;  city  here;  he  confesses  that  he  is  a  pilgrim  on  the  earth. 
Mark  some  of  the  features  of  this  pilgrimage.  1.  It  is  irretraceable.  There  is  no 
opportunity  of  going  back  to  past  scenes  and  experiences.  The  movement  is  invariably 
onward.  2.  It  is  continuous.  There  are  no  stoppages  on  this  journey.  Life  never 
pauses  in  its  motion.  3.  It  is  rapid.  Compared  with  the  work  to  be  done  in  it,  and 
with  the  boundless  and  solemn  future  to  which  it  leads,  how  brief  is  life  ! 

IIL  The  Chkistian  is  not  at  home  heee,  bdt  a  strangee  seeking  his  home 
ELBBWHERB.  "  Confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.  For  they 
that  say  such  things  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  after  a  country  of  their  own." 
They  seek  a  fatherland,  a  home.  There  is  much  in  this  world  which  is  uncongenial  to 
the  true  Christian.  He  has  desires  which  this  world  cannot  satisfy.  He  does  not  want 
to  stay  here  permanently.  He  does  not  feel  at  home  here.  But  he  is  seeking  his  home 
in  heaven  ;  he  is  pressing  onward  to  his  Father's  house.  There  many  of  his  best  and 
dearest  friends  have  already  entered ;  there  many  of  his  spiritual  kinsfolk  dwell ;  there 
the  elder  Brother  uid  the  heavenly  Father  are  at  home ;  and  as  he  journeys  thither 
he8ing»— 

*  There  is  my  house  and  portion  fair, 
Uy  treasure  and  my  heart  are  there. 
And  my  abiding  home." 

While  on  thejonmey  let  the  Christian  pilgrim  rejoice :  1.  In  the  exceUence  offhe  teay 
on  which  he  travels.  "  A  highway  shall  be  there,  and  a  way,  and  it  shall  be  called 
The  way  of  holiness,"  etc.  2.  In  the  attractiveness  of  the  prospects  which  heckon  him 
forward.  3.  In  the  delight/ulness  of  the  companionships  of  the  Journey.  "He  him- 
self shall  be  with  them,  walking  in  the  way.  .  .  .  The  redeemed  shall  walk  in  it."  4. 
In  the  blessedness  of  the  destination  to  which  he  travels.  They  "  shall  come  to  Zion  with 
songs,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxxv.  10).    The  journey  ends  at  home. — W,  J. 

Vers.  15,  IS.— The  Christian's  attitude  in  this  world,  "  And  truly  if  they  had  been 
mindful  of  that  country,"  etc.  These  words,  telling  us  how  the  patriarchs  regarded  the 
country  which  they  had  left  and  the  country  for  which  they  looked,  suggest  to  us  that 
the  Chiistian's  attitude  in  this  world  is  that  of — 

I.  Eesolutb  renunciation  op  the  things  which  abb  BEHIND.  And  truly  if  the 
patriarchs  "  had  been  mindful  of  that  country  from  whence  they  came  out,  they  might 
have  had  opportunity  to  return."  Though  having  no  possession  in  Canaan,  they  did 
not  wish  to  go  back  to  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  Though  strangers  in  Canaan,  they  did  not 
desire  to  return  to  their  old  home  to  seek  for  friendships  there ;  for  had  they  wished  to 
do  so,  opportunities  were  not  lacking  for  the  realization  of  such  a  wish.  There  are  at 
least  two  senses  in  which  the  Christian  has  renounced  the  things  which  are  behind. 
1.  Se  has  no  desire  to  return  to  a  life  of  worldliness  or  of  sin.  He  could  do  so  if  he 
wished,  but  he  is  not  disposed  to  do  so.  He  has  no  rehsh  for  those  pursuits  and 
pleasures  of  this  world,  which  are  followed  without  any  thought  of  the  hfe  and  the 
world  which  lie  beyond.  And  a  life  of  sin  is  abhorrent  to  him.  To  go  back  to  the  old 
life  would  be  to  pass  from  light  into  darkness,  from  liberty  into  bondage,  from  noble 
unrest  to  seek  for  ignoble  satisfactions,  and  the  true  Christian  will  not  entertair.  such 
an  idea.  2.  He  has  no  desire  to  return  to  the  past  seasons  and  experiences  of  life. 
There  may  be  times  when  he  has  a  brief  and  unhealthy  longing  for  the  lost  innocence 
of  childhood,  or  for  the  too-fleeting  enjoyments  of  youth,  or  for  the  recurrence  of  past 
opportunities  which  were  neglected  or  only  partially  improved.  There  are,  we  con- 
ceive, few  persons  but  at  times  have  painfully  felt  such  longiugs.  But  the  calm,  con- 
liderate  desire  of  the  Christian  is  net  to  go  back  to  any  of  these  things.  His  judgment 
assures  him  that  if  he  could  return  to  the  past,  or  recall  departed  seasons  and  oppor- 
tunities, he  would  probably  make  no  better  use  of  them  than  he  has  already  done. 
Hence,  like  St.  Paul,  he  endeavours  to  "  forget  those  things  which  are  behind." 

II.  Baoee  desire  fob  the  things  which  are  before.  "  But  now  they  desire 
•  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly  :  whereibre  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their 
Ckid:  for  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city."    1.  3%»  object  i/ their  desire.    **They 


OH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBllEWa  829 

desire  a  better  eountry,  that  is,  a  heavenly."  Heaven  ia  better  than  the  best  of  earthly 
countries  or  homes.  It  is  better :  (1)  la  its  society.  The  Christian  will  not  feel  himself 
a  itrauger  there ;  for  he  will  be  with  kindred  spirits.  Good  people  here  are  not  always 
agreeable ;  but  in  heaven  the  society  is  always  genial  and  refreshing.  (2)  In  its  services. 
The  service  of  God  is  delightful  at  present,  though  that  which  we  render  is  very  imper- 
fect in  its  character,  and  often  interrupted  in  its  exercise,  and  very  contracted  in  its 
sphere.  But  hereafter  we  shall  consecrate  our  perfected  powers  to  him,  and  "serve  him 
day  and  night  in  his  temple,"  without  weariness  and  with  joy  unspeakable.  (3)  In  its 
enjoyments.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy ;  at  thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures 
for  evermore."  The  heavenly  enjoyments  are  distinguished  for  their  purity,  their  pleni- 
tude, and  their  perpetuity.  (4)  In  its  security.  Sickness,  sorrow,  death,  and  sin,  the 
prolific  parent  of  suffering,  cannot  enter  heaven.  Verily,  the  heavenly  is  a  better 
country.  2.  The  propriety  of  their  desire.  They  who  have  received  the  Divine  call, 
as  the  patriarchs  had  and  the  sincere  Christian  has,  should  aim  at  the  end  of  their  call- 
ing ;  they  sliould  seek  to  realize  it,  and  endeavour  to  act  up  to  it.  In  seeking  the 
better  country  Christians  are  doing  so ;  "  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed  of  them,  to  be 
called  their  God."  It  is  fitting  that  the  children  should  long  for  tlieir  Father's  house  ; 
"  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed  of  them,"  etc.  3.  The  blessedness  of  their  desire.  It 
will  end  in  full  fruition.  The  longing  which  is  never  satisfied  is  only  a  protracted  pain. 
The  longing  for  what  is  worthy,  and  which  is  lost  in  its  fulfilment,  issues  in  blessedness. 
Such  is  the  desire  of  the  Christian.  "  Gud  is  not  ashamed  of  them,  to  be  called  their 
God ;  for  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city."  If  God  by  his  promises  had  kindled  their 
hopes  only  to  disappoint  them,  he  might  be  "ashamed  to  be  calleil  tlieir  God."  If  he 
was  their  God  and  Father,  yet  provided  no  home  for  his  children,  he  might  be  "  ashamed 
to  be  called  thair  God."  JBnt  he  has  provided  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  hopes  which  he 
has  awakened ;  and  the  home  for  which  they  long  he  has  established.  "  He  hath  pre- 
pared for  them  a  city." 

Since  we  are  journeying  homeward :  1.  Let  us  not  he  much  concerned  for  either  the 
pleasures  or  the  possessions  of  this  world.  2.  Let  us  not  count  it  a  strange  thing  if  we 
have  some  discomforts  on  the  way.  3.  Let  us  not  dread  death,  for  it  is  the  gate  of 
admission  into  the  city  which  Ood  hath  prepared  far  his  people. — W.  J. 

Vers.  17—19. — Faith  sorely  tried  and  sublimely  triumphant.  "  By  faith  Abraham, 
when  he  was  tried,  offered  up  Isaac,"  etc.  Our  subject  naturally  divides  itself  into  two 
branches. 

I.  Faith  bobelt  tried.  The  supreme  trial  of  Abraham's  faith  will  appear  if  we 
consider  the  sacrifice  which  he  was  summoned  to  make.  He  was  commanded :  1.  To 
offer  up  as  a  burnt  offering  Ms  only  and  much-loved  son,  Isaac.  "  Take  now  thy  son, 
tliine  only  son  Isaac,  whom  tliou  lovest,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  ot  Moriah ;  and  offer 
him  there  for  a  burnt  offering  upon  one  of  the  mountains  which  I  will  tell  thee  of." 
"  By  faith  Abraham,  being  tried,  offered  up  Isaac ;  yea,  he  that  had  gladly  received  the 
promises  was  offering  up  his  Only  begotten  son."  Isaac  was  called  his  "only  son" 
because  Ishmael  had  been  finally  sent  forth  from  the  paternal  home,  and  because  Isaac 
was  the  only  son  which  Sarah  the  wife  of  Abraham  bare  unto  him.  He  was  now  a 
young  man,  and  inezjiressibly  dear  to  the  hearts  of  his  parents ;  and  his  &ther  is  com- 
manded by  God  to  offer  him  up  as  a  sacrifice.  Being  a  human  sacrifice,  Abraham's 
conviction  of  the  sacredness  of  human  life  would  rise  up  against  the  fulfilment  of  the 
command.  Can  such  a  behest  proceed  from  him  who  had  so  solemnly  asserted  the 
sacredness  of  human  life  (Gen.  ix.  5,  6)  ?  Being  his  own  son,  his  only  son,  his  Isaac, 
the  lai^hter  of  his  heart,  his  deep  and  pure  and  strong  paternal  instincts  would  rebel 
against  the  dread  summons.  Is  it  possible  that  the  holy  and  Divine  Father  can  make 
such  a  demand  upon  any  human  father  ?  2.  To  offer  up  his  son  who  was  in  a  special 
sense  the  gift  of  Cfod  to  him.  Isaac  was  the  child  of  Divine  promise,  and  he  was  bora 
when  his  parents  were  far  advanced  in  years,  and  when  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature 
his  birth  was  impossible  (cf.  vers.  11,  12;  Gen.  xvii.  16 — 19;  xviii.  10,  14;  xxi.  1 — 3). 
For  twenty-five  years  Abraham  had  vvaited  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise ;  twenty- 
five  years  more  had  elapsed  since  the  birth  of  Isaac,  during  which  he  had  been  growing 
ever  more  and  more  precious  and  beloved ;  and  now  God  is  asking  back  the  gift  so  long 
waited  for,  and  which  had  become  so  inexpressibly  dear.    Can  such  a  demaai  proceed 


980  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW&  [oh.  XL  1— *a 

from  that  God  whose  "  gifts  are  not  repented  of  "7  Can  it  he  that  he  should  try  his 
servant  thus?  3.  To  offer  up  his  son  upon  whose  life  the  fulfilment  of  the  hopes  which 
God  had  inspired  seemed  to  depend.  Isaac  was  not  only  the  son  of  promise,  but  the 
other  promises  made  to  Abraham  were  connected  with  him  as  to  their  fulfilment.  The 
promise  that  he  should  inherit  Canaan,  that  he  should  he  the  father  of  a  countless 
piisterity  and  the  founder  of  a  great  nation,  that  in  his  posterity  all  nations  should  be 
blessed, — all  these  were  to  be  fulfilled  in  Isaac.  "  To  whom  it  was  said.  In  Isaac  shall 
tliy  seed  be  called."  Only  the  descendants  of  Isaac  were  to  be  known  as  Abraham's 
seed,  and  only  in  them  were  the  promises  to  be  fulfilled  (cf.  Gren.  xvii.  19, 21;  xxi.  12). 
These  promises  the  patriarch  "  had  gla<lly  received."  "He  had  as  it  were  with  open 
arms  accepted  and  taken  to  himself  each  and  all  of  the  promises ; "  he  had  drawn  from 
them  assured  hopes — hopes  which  he  had  cherished  during  many  years.  But  if  Isaac  be 
■acrificed  as  a  burnt  offering,  how  shall  these  hopes  be  realized  ? — ^nay,  how  shall 
they  not  each  and  all  expire,  leaving  the  soul  of  the  patriarch  in  dark  disappointment? 
It  seems  that  God  is  asking  him  to  give  back  the  promises  which  he  had  made  to  him, 
and  which  had  so  long  sustained  and  cheered  him.  But  is  it  possilile  that  "  the  faitlifiil 
God,  which  keepeth  covenant  with  them  that  love  him  and  keep  his  commandments  to 
a  thousand  genei  ations,"  should  make  a  demand  like  this  ?  Can  it  be  his  voice  that 
summons  to  the  terrible  sacrifice?  4.  And  there  is  a  sore  aguravation  of  this  trial. 
Abraham  is  himself  to  be  the  sacrificing  priest.  He  is  to  kill  and  to  present  this 
precious  and  awful  offering.  The  knife  that  was  to  slay  the  victim  must  be  driven  into 
tlie  heart  by  the  hand  of  his  own  father,  and  the  same  hand  must  kindle  the  fire  for  the 
consumption  of  the  sacrifice.  When  Ishmael  seemed  near  unto  death  in  the  wilderness 
of  Beersheba,  his  mother  laid  him  "  under  one  of  the  shrubs.  And  she  went,  and  sat  her 
down  over  against  him  at  the  distance  as  it  were  of  a  bowshot :  for  she  said,  Let  me 
not  see  the  death  of  the  boy.  And  she  sat  over  against  him,  and  lifted  up  her  voice,  and 
wept."  But  for  Abraham  there  is  no  such  relief.  He  must  "see  the  death  ot "  his 
beloved  son;  and  more  terrible,  himself  must  strike  the  death-inflioting  blow.  Can  it 
be  God,  the  good  and  the  holy  One,  that  commands  this?  And  is  it  possible  that  any 
loving  father  can  comply  with  the  terrible  requirement? 

II.  Faith  sublimely  triumphant.  Abraham  made  the  awful  sacrifice.  "By  fiith 
Abraham,  being  tried,  offered  up  Isaac,  ...  his  only  begotten  son."  Virtually  he  as 
fully  offered  Isaac  as  if  he  had  sheathed  the  knife  in  his  heart  and  consumed  his  body 
on  the  altar.  And  he  did  it  by  faith.  The  triumph  was  the  triumph  of  faith.  1.  Faith 
in  the  righteousness  and  supremacy  of  the  authority  of  Ood.  Abraham  believed  that 
God  had  a  right  to  his  obedience  in  this  also ;  that  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "  would 
not  command  what  was  wrong.  The  reason  of  the  command  to  otTer  up  Isaac  as  a  liurnt 
offering  was  dark  and  utterly  mysterious  to  the  patriarch;  moreover,  it  pierced  liis 
inmost  soul  with  sharpest  and  bitterest  sorrow,  and  convulsed  hig  being  with  fierce 
agony;  yet  God  was  supreme  and  righteous,  therefore  he  would  obey  him.  Faith  was 
victorious.  2.  Faith  in  the  unlimited  power  of  God,  "  By  faith  Abraham  offered  up 
Isaac,  .  .  .  accounting  that  God  is  able  to  raise  up,  even  from  the  dead."  How 
extraordinary  and  astonishing  was  this  faith  in  that  early  age!  3.  Faith  in  the 
unchanging  fidelity  of  God  to  his  word.  Abraham  believed  that  God  would  fulfil  his 
promises,  however  unlikely  or  even  impossible  that  fulfilment  might  appear  to  him. 
How  he  would  do  so  after  Isaac  was  sacrificed  the  patriarch  knew  not.  But  he  felt 
assured  of  the  fact.  And  so  by  faith  he  obeyed  the  dread  command,  and  offered  up  to 
God  his  only  begotten  son.  Faith  in  God  triumphed  over  doubts  and  fears,  the 
questioning-i  and  reasonings  of  the  intellect,  and  the  pathetic  pleadings  and  passionate 
appeals  of  the  heart.  And  how  God  honoured  this  sublime  and  conquering  faith  1 
Isaac  was  truly  offered  to  God,  yet  he  was  untouched  by  the  sacrificial  knife.  He  was 
given  by  his  father  to  God,  and  then  given  back  by  God  to  his  father  unhurt,  and 
inestimalily  more  beloved  and  more  sacred.  And  high  Is  the  encomium  given  to 
Abiaham :  ■'  Now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God,"  etc.  (Gen.  xxii.  12).  We  know 
what  it  was  that  God  required  of  Abraham.  It  was  not  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac,  but  the 
eomplete  surrender  of  himself  to  God.  When  that  was  made  the  Divine  purpose  in  this 
awfnl  trial  was  accomplished,  and  "  the  last  and  culminating  point  in  the  Divine  education 
of"  the  patriarch  was  attained.  And  still  God  requires  this  from  us.  He  demands  the 
iKureserved  surrender  of  ourselves  to  him.    "  Whatever  ii  dearest  to  us  upon  earth  is 


OH.  XL  1— Ml]  THB  BFISTLB  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  881 


our  Isaac"  And  when  God  summons  us  to  give  that  Isaac  up  to  him,  his  object  in  so 
doing  is  to  lead  us  to  present  ourselves  wholly  and  heartily  to  him  as  "living  sacrifices." 
"  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,"  etc.  (Matt.  x.  37 — 39). — W.  J. 

Ver.  21. — Faith  giving  lerenity  and  magnanimity  in  death.  "By  ai  i  h  Jacob,  when 
he  was  a-dying,"  etc.    Let  us  notice — 

L  The  important  event.  "He  was  a-dying."  In  any  ciroumstinces  and  in  any 
case  death  is  an  important  and  solemn  event.  It  is  so  for  several  reasons.  1.  Think  of 
the  mysteriousness  of  death.  There  is  the  mystery  of  the  dissolution  of  the  soul  from 
the  body.  There  are  the  mysteries  of  Hades.  Where  is  Hades ?  What  is  it?  What 
is  the  mode  of  human  existence  there?  There  is  no  authoritative  response  to  our 
inquiries.  2.  Think  of  what  death  terminates.  It  ends  our  visible  association  with 
earthly  scenes,  circumstances,  and  societies ;  it  writes  "  finis  "  upon  all  the  privileges  of 
this  life;  it  concludes  our  opportunities  for  the  discbarge  of  the  duties  of  this  life.  3 
Think  of  what  it  inaugurates.  It  introduces  us  to  the  retributionary  and  eternal  state. 
Tes,  death  is  important  and  solemn.  Jacob's  death  is  worthy  of  study;  it  is  interest! til', 
instructive,  and  sublime. 

II.  Thb  iNTBRBSTiNO  ATTITUDE.  "  Leaning  upou  the  top  of  his  Staff."  Some  thin;j.s 
of  little  worth  in  themselves  are  yet  very  precious  by  reason  of  their  association.^. 
Such  in  all  probability  was  this  staff.  It  was  rich  in  associations,  fruitful  in  sug- 
gestions. It  was,  perhaps,  the  same  one  that  is  mentioned  in  a  former  portion  of  his 
life :  "  With  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  Jordan."  Probably  he  took  it  with  him 
when  he  left  his  home  and  his  parents  with  a  guilty  and  sorrowful  spirit;  with  him, 
perhaps  in  his  hand,  at  Luz  when  he  slept  with  the  stones  for  his  pillow,  and  dreamed, 
etc. ;  with  him  that  other  night,  when  "  there  wrestled  a  man  with  him  until  the 
breaking  of  the  day."  It  supported  his  feeble  frame  when  he  met  his  long-lost  Joseph 
at  Goshen ;  and  now  it  is  with  him  in  the  "  last  scene  of  all,"  as  he  worships  leaning 
upon  the  old  staff.  What  associations  clustered  round  it!  What  emotions  it  would 
evoke  1  what  gratitude  1  trust!  etc. 

III.  The  sublime  engagement.  The  venerable  patriarch  was  engaged:  1.  In 
blessing  men.  "  Blessed  each  of  the  sons  of  Joseph."  The  meaning  of  this  may  be 
ascertained  by  referring  to  Gen.  xlviii.  15 — 20.  The  blessing  comprised  petition,  bene- 
diction, and  prediction  of  good.  A  bequest  like  this  is  better  than  proud  titles  or  vast 
domains.  The  richest  human  bequest  is  the  blessing  of  a  holy  man.  Parents,  bestow 
upon  your  children  this.     Children,  prize  this. 

"My  boaat  is  not  that  I  deduce  my  birth 
From  loins  enthroned,  and  rulers  of  the  earth; 
But  higher  far  my  proud  pretensions  rise — 
The  son  of  parents  passed  into  the  skies." 

(Cowper.) 

Now  tnm  to  the  staff  for  a  minute.  In  blessing  the  lads  Jacob  thought  and  spake  oi 
God's  goodness  to  himself.  Would  not  the  staff  inspire  him  with  confidence  in  assuring 
that  goodness  to  others?  As  it  reminded  him  of  that  sad  departure  from  home,  and  of 
other  trials,  and  of  the  way  in  which  God  had  led  him  and  sustained  him  and  prospered 
him,  it  would  fill  him  with  assurance  and  hope  for  these  two  grandchildren.  Observe 
how  self-forgetful  and  magnanimous  the  patriarch  was  in  this.  He  has  not  a  thought 
or  purpose  for  himself.  He  does  not  seek  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  he  ministers  unto 
others.  Such  is  his  attitude  towards  men  in  dying.  He  passes  from  this  world  pro- 
nouncing benedictions  upon  men.  2.  In  worshipping  Ood.  "  And  worshipped,"  In 
this  also  the  staff  would  stimulate  the  aged  saint,  as  it  revived  his  recollections  of  the 
fidelity  and  forbearance,  the  mercy  and  munificence,  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  him. 
Towards  God  his  dying  attitude  was  religious  and  reverent.  He  died  devoutly  adoring 
him.  How  different  is  the  death  of  the  impenitent  I  and  of  those  who,  although 
penitent,  have  to  seek  God  on  the  bed  of  death !  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the 
righteous,"  etc.    But  how  may  we  do  so  ? 

IV.  Thk  means  bt  which  Jacob  aocomflibhed  this.  "  By  faith."  This  is  true  as 
regwds:  1.  2%e  blessing.  Unbelievers  would  pronounce  his  blessing  on  absurd  super- 
stition, empty  sentiment,  wasted  breath.    The  patriarch  believed  in  the  power  of  inter- 


432  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBfiJSWa  to»^ii.  1— 4a 

cessory  prayer,  and  so  he  prayed  for  the  song  of  Joseph.  He  beliered  that  God  often 
Cdnveys  his  blessing  to  men  through  men,  that  he  blesses  man  by  man.  So  h« 
utters  words  of  blessing  on  the  lads.  Do  you  think  tliey  were  vain  ?  I  am  sure  they 
were  not.  Th«  memory  of  them  would  be  a  mighty  influence  for  good  in  their  lives. 
And  as  their  father  would  tell  them  in  after  days  of  their  grandfather  and  his  blessing, 
high  and  holy  purposes  would  kindle  within  them.  2.  IJie  worship.  Jacob  believed 
in  the  Being  of  God.  God  was  a  reality  to  him,  or  he  would  not  have  worshipped.  He 
believed  in  the  holiness  and  spiritual  beauty  of  God,  that  he  is  worshipful,  or  he  could 
not  have  worshipped  him.  3.  The  dying.  That  by  faith  the  aged  saint  worshipped 
God  and  blessed  men  ''when  he  was  a-dying"  is  a  point  of  importance.  Life  and  immor- 
tality were  not  brought  to  light  then  as  they  are  now.  The  revelation  as  to  the  departed 
was  very  dim.  Yet  by  faith  Israel  died  calmly,  victoriously.  It  was  by  faith  in  God 
rather  tlian  in  immortality.  He  could  trust  all  his  intensts  and  all  his  being  to  QtoA. 
He  was  confident  that  he  would  do  well  and  wisely  and  kindly  with  him  and  for  him ; 
and  so  he  fell  asleep  in  the  everlasting  arras.  Faith  in  God  is  the  secret  of  victory  both 
in  life  and  in  death.    Let  us  cultivate  it. — W.  J. 

Ver.  22. — The  faith  of  Joseph}  or,  assured  confidence  in  the  cloie  of  life.    "By  &ith 

Joseph,  when  he  died,  made  mention,"  etc.    We  have  here— 

I.  Physical  life  ending  in  assured  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  of 
God  to  his  people.  The  end  of  Joseph's  life  upon  earth  was  at  hand,  and  he  was  well 
aware  that  such  was  the  case.  Very  extraordinary  had  been  his  career — remarkably 
chequered  and  eventful,  now  dark  and  anon  dazzling,  now  full  of  trial  and  anon  full  of 
triumph,  useful  beyond  any  other  in  that  age,  and  very  illustrious;  yet  it  is  now  nearly 
ended.  It  reminds  us  that  the  most  distinguished  and  powerful,  the  most  holy  and~ 
useful  life,  must  come  to  an  end  here.  At  this  time  Joseph's  glances  were  not  cast  back 
regretfully  to  the  greatness  and  grandeur  which  he  was  about  to  leave,  but  forward 
hopefully  to  a  splendid  future.  He  had  a  firm  assurance  that  a  great  future  awaited  his 
family,  and  this  faith  rested  upon  that  God  who  in  his  providence  had  so  wonderfully 
led  him  and  so  richly  blessed  him.  "  By  faith  Joseph,  when  his  end  was  nigh,  made 
mention  of  the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel."  "  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren, 
I  die ;  and  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  bring  you  out  of  this  land  unto  the  land 
which  he  sware  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob."  1.  This  assurance  forme  a 
fitting  conclusion  to  a  life  of  distinguished  piety.  The  faith  which  had  sustained  him 
in  the  changeable  and  often  trying  experiences  of  life  is  clear  and  vigorous  in  its  clodng 
scenes.  In  Joseph's  case  the  testimony  of  his  active  and  public  life,  and  the  testimony 
of  his  last  hours,  beautifully  harmonize.  2.  This  assurance  was  suited  to  the  needs  of 
his  kinsfolk  at  this  time.  (1)  As  a  caution  against  entertaining  the  notion  that  Egypt 
was  to  be  their  home.  The  Israelites  at  this  time  were  peaceful  and  Teiy  prosperous 
in  the  land.  They  were  in  danger  of  loMng  sight  of  the  destiny  to  which  God  had 
called  them,  and  of  endeavouring  to  find  a  final  settlement  in  the  land  of  their  tem- 
porary sojourn.  The  word  of  Joseph  wag  fitted  to  guard  them  against  thig  periL  It  is 
in  worldly  comfort  and  prosperity  that  men  are  most  prone  to  be  unmindful  of  their 
heavenly  calling.  (2)  As  a  comfort  to  them  under  the  loss  of  his  protection.  It 
would  not  have  been  strange  if  the  Israelites  had  feared  for  their  peace  and  safety 
when  their  kind  brother  and  powerful  patron  was  removed  by  death.  But  Joseph's 
calm  assurance  would  encourage  them  to  believe  in  God's  continued  interest  in  them, 
in  his  providential  care  over  them,  and  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  which  he  made 
to  their  fathers.  When  friends  die,  when  great  and  good  men  are  summoned  home,  let 
this  be  our  encouragement,  that  God  ever  Uves  to  save  his  people  and  to  carry  on  his 
work. 

II.  Physical  life  ending  with  a  beautiful  desire  fob  continued  identifica- 
tion with  the  people  of  God.  Joseph  was  a  great  man  in  Egypt.  His  elevation 
and  honour,  the  triumph  of  his  genius  and  the  success  of  his  plans,  his  prosperity  and 
power,  had  all  been  won  and  enjoyed  in  Kgypt.  He  had  contracted  a  distinguished 
marriage  with  an  Egyptian  princess.  Pharaoh  "gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  the 
daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest  of  On."  In  Egypt  "  the  priestly  caste  was  the  royal 
caste  also."  In  authority  and  rank,  in  state  and  splendour,  in  greatness  and  power, 
Joseph  was  inferior  only  to  the  king  himselC    Yet  he  wished  both  in  life  and  in  death 


OH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE   TO  THE   HEBHEWS.  '  333 

to  \»  numbered  amongst  the  Israelites.  Hence  he  "gave  commandment  concerning 
his  hones."  "  And  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  Israel,  saying,  God  will 
surely  visit  you,  and  ye  shall  carry  up  my  bones  from  hence."  We  discover  in  this  an 
evidence  of:  L  5ts  warm  affection  for  his  family.  For  some  years  of  his  life,  for 
more  than  seven  years  of  his  prosperity  and  power,  we  have  no  evidence  of  any  interest 
taken  by  Joseph  in  his  father  and  brothers;  but  now  he  manifests  a  tender  and 
tenacious  attachment  to  them.  This  is  the  more  worthy  of  commendation  when  we 
call  to  mind  the  grievous  injury  which  his  brothers  had  done  him  aforetime.  Joseph 
loves  his  kindred  who  had  treated  him  so  ill  more  than  the  Egyptians  who  had  treated 
him  80  well.  "  Love  as  brethren."  2.  His  unwavering  fidelity  to  hit  Ood.  Joseph's 
faith  in  Jehovah  had  not  been  undermined  or  shaken  by  his  residence  in  idolatrous 
Egypt.  Through  life  and  in  death  he  was  faithful  to  the  God  of  his  fathers,  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.    "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,"  eto. 

III.  Fhtbioal  ijfb  ending  with  a  buogestitb  intimatiov  ov  the  hope  of 
IMMORTALITT.  Joscph  " gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones."  He  "took  an 
oath  of  the  children  of  Israel "  that  they  would  cany  his  dead  body  with  them,  when 
God  should  lead  them  into  the  land  which  he  had  promised  unto  their  fathers.  Why 
should  so  wise  and  good  a  man  be  so  concerned  concerning  his  body  ?  Such  concern 
in  such  a  man  is  inexplicable  apart  from  the  craving  of  the  human  heart  for  immortality ; 
and  not  for  a  vague,  shadowy  existence  after  death,  but  for  immortality  associated  with 
a  distinct  and  recognizable  form.  The  samis  craving  found  expression  amongst  the 
Egyptians  in  their  embalming  of  their  dead.  Joseph  must  have  had  some  measure  of 
faith  in  such  an  immortality.  This  craving  is  met  in  Christianity.  "Our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel."  "  There 
shall  be  a  resurrection  both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust."  "  The  hour  cometh,  in  which 
all  that  are  in  the  tombs  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth,"  etc.  Both  the 
immortality  of  the  soul  and  the  resurrection  of  the  body  are  revealed  to  us  as  facts  in 
the  Christian  Scriptures.  Therefore,  with  our  clearer  revelation  and  richer  privileges, 
as  the  end  of  our  earthly  life  draws  nigh  we  may  realize  a  fuller  and  firmer  assurance 
than  he  did  whose  faith  we  have  been  considering.  "  For  we  know  that  if  the  earthly 
house  of  our  tabernacle  be  dissolved,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  ▼.  1).— W.  J. 

Ver.  23. — The  faith  of  the  parents  of  Moses.  "  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  bom, 
was  hid,"  eto.  The  writer  now  passes  from  Joseph  to  Moses ;  from  the  time  of  the 
peace  and  prosperity  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  to  the  time  of  their  heavy  oppression 
and  bitter  persecution.  This  persecution  culminated  in  the  terrible  edict  that  all  their 
male  children  that  should  be  born  should  be  cast  into  the  Nile.  It  was  at  this  time 
that  Moses  was  bom.  Hence  the  Jewish  proverb,  "  When  the  tale  of  bricks  is  doubled 
then  comes  Moses."  Some  of  our  own  proverbs  set  forth  the  same  truth.  "Man's 
extremity  is  God's  opportunity."  "  The  darkest  hour  of  the  night  is  that  which 
precedes  the  dawn."  Our  text  tells  how  by  faith  the  parents  of  Moses  protected 
their  child  from  the  fate  decreed  by  Pharaoh,  and  preserved  his  life  in  infancy.  We 
notice— 

L  Faith  in  the  Divine  intebbbt  in  human  life.  "By  faith  Moses,  when  he 
was  bom,  was  hid  three  months  of  his  parents,  because  they  saw  he  was  a  goodly 
child."  They  seem  to  have  believed  that  their  lovely  child  was  the  gift  of  God,  and 
that  he  was  not  unmindful  of  the  gift  which  he  had  bestowed.  Moses  was  distinguished 
for  his  beauty.  "  He  was  a  goodly  child  "  (Exod.  ii.  2).  "  He  was  exceeding  fair,"  or 
"  fair  unto  God "  (Acts  vii.  20).  Josephus  tells  that  when  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh 
saw  the  babe,  "  she  was  greatly  in  love  with  it,  on  account  of  its  largeness  and  beauty." 
He  also  tells  that  when  he  was  three  years  old  every  one  who  saw  him  was  "  greatly 
surprised  at  the  beauty  of  his  countenance :  nay,  it  happened  frequently  that  those  who 
met  him  as  he  was  carried  along  the  road  were  obliged  to  turn  again  upon  seeing  the 
child ;  that  they  left  what  they  were  about,  and  stood  still  a  great  while  to  look  on 
him ;  for  the  beauty  of  the  child  was  so  remarkable  and  natural  to  him  on  many 
accounts,  that  it  detained  the  spectators,  and  made  them  stay  longer  to  look  upon 
him."  ^  Probably  his  parents  believed  that  so  strikingly  beautiful  a  child  was  destined 
by  Ood  for  some  great  and  good  end.    They  may  have  had  a  presentiment  that  God 

•  'AntVU.  ix.  5,6. 


334  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBU^WS.  [oh.  xi.  1—10. 

designed  him  for  the  accomplishment  of  acme  iiuportaut  work.  His  beauty  was  to 
tbem  a  presage  of  his  illustiiuus  career.  It  awakened  or  strengthened  their  confidence 
in  the  Divine  interest  in  the  life  of  the  child.  A  truth  of  unspeakable  preciousness  is 
tliis.  Qod  is  interested  deeply  and  graciously  in  erery  human  life.  He  cares  not  only 
for  the  young  life  before  which  a  great  career  extends,  but  for  the  obscurest  and  feeblest 
human  creature.  "  The  Lord  is  good  to  all ;  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his 
works."  There  is  not  a  sparrow  which  "  is  forgotten  in  the  sight  of  God.  But  the  very 
hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered."    "  He  careth  for  you." 

II.  Faith  in  the  Divine  foweb  as  tbansobndino  the  AurnoBiTT  and  mioht 
OF  HUMAN  80VEREIQNS.  The  parents  of  Moses  believed  that  God  could  protect  their 
child  notwithstanding  the  cruel  edict  of  the  mighty  Pharaoh.  They  showed  their  faith 
by  concealing  their  cherished  treasure  in  their  house  for  three  months.  They  showed  it 
yet  more  clearly  and  impressively  when  they  placed  that  treasure  in  its  frail  little  vessel 
amongst  the  flags  on  the  brink  of  the  Nile.  They  committed  their  beloved  child,  not  to 
the  margin  of  the  river  and  its  flags,  but  to  the  ever-observant  and  almighty  providence 
of  God.  Their  faith  was  as  reasonable  as  it  was  strong.  God  can  either  preserve  from 
danger  or  deliver  out  of  the  very  midst  of  it.  The  most  determined  edicts  of  the 
mightiest  monarchs  are  utterly  powerless  against  his  counsels.  "  He  shall  cut  off  the 
spirit  of  princes ;  he  is  teiTible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth."  "  He  poureth  contempt  upon 
princes."  "  God  is  the  Judge ;  he  putteth  down  one,  and  setteth  up  another."  He  is 
able  to  guard  his  faithful  servants  against  the  wrath  and  the  power  of  fierce  sovereigns. 
He  can  preserve  his  people  unhurt  in  the  fiery  furnace  (Dan.  iii.  19 — 27) ;  or  can  make 
even  hungry  lions  to  be  unto  them  as  gentle  companions  (Dan.  vi.  16 — 23).  Trust  in 
him  is,  therefore,  the  highest  wisdom ;  for  his  gracious  interest  in  humanity  is  infinite, 
and  his  power  to  defend  and  save  is  almighty. 

III.  Faith  in  God  insfibino  human  maENmrr  and  coubaoe.  It  did  so  in  the 
parents  of  Moses.  Notice :  1.  Their  ingenuity.  For  three  months  they  successfully 
concealed  their  beloved  babe.  They  managed  to  hide  the  infant  from  Egyptian  eyes, 
and  to  prevent  his  cries  firom  reaching  Egyptian  ears.  They  skilfully  constructed  the 
ark,  and  judiciously  selected  a  refuge  for  it.  They  did  these  things  by  faith.  Faith 
stimulates  ingenuity ;  it  quickens  the  inventive  faculties.  And  when,  as  in  the  case 
before  us,  love  is  engaged  as  well  as  faith,  and  the  object  of  affection  is  in  danger,  then 
the  inventive  faculties  are  stirred  to  their  highest  and  utmost  exercise.  Great  inventions 
and  discoveries  are  impossible  apart  from  great  fitith.  2.  Their  courage.  "  They  were 
not  afraid  of  the  king's  commandment."  It  has  been  well  said  that  "  faith  has  an 
eagle's  eye  and  a  lion's  heart.  It  has  a  lion's  heart  to"  confront  the  difiiculties  and 
dangers  of  the  present,  and  it  has  an  eagle's  eye  to  descry  the  success  and  blessing  of 
the  future.  The  servant  of  Elisha  was  terrified  when  he  saw  the  Syiian  army 
surrounding  Dothan ;  but  Blisha  was  perfectly  calm,  because  by  faith  he  beheld  the 
hosts  of  his  heavenly  guardians.  Faith  nerves  the  soul  with  invincible  courage.  The 
most  earnest  believers  are  the  greatest  heroes.  The  ancient  religious  believers  "  through 
faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness,"  etc.  (vers.  33 — 38).  How  splendidly 
was  the  faith  of  the  parents  of  Moses  vindicated!  God  kept  the  infant  in  safety 
during  the  three  months  in  which  it  was  concealed  in  the  house.  His  eye  was  fixed 
on  that  little  ark  of  bulrushes  on  the  brink  of  the  Nile,  making  it  more  secure  than  if 
it  had  been  enclosed  by  castle  walls  or  guarded  by  hosts  of  mailed  warriors.  His  hand, 
unseen  and  unsuspected,  led  Pharaoh's  daughter  to  that  part  of  the  river  where  the  frail 
barque  with  its  priceless  treasure  floated.  And  in  his  providence  he  ordered  all  things 
for  the  protection  and  education  of  the  life  of  that  Hebrew  child,  and  for  the  fulfilment 
of  his  great  destiny.  Therefore,  "trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart;  and  lean  not 
unto  thine  own  understanding.  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  him,  and  he  shall  direct 
thy  paths."— W,  J. 

Vers.  24 — 26. — The  great  ehoiee  of  Most*.  "  By  feith  Moses,  when  he  was  come  to 
years,"  etc.  In  the  providence  of  God  the  adoption  of  the  infant  Moses  by  the  daughter 
of  Pharaoh  was  the  means  by  which  he  received  the  education  and  training  necessary 
for  the  great  work  for  which  God  had  destined  him.  To  the  human  mind,  taking  into 
consideration  the  condition  of  the  Israelites  at  that  time,  there  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  any  other  means  by  which  he  could  have  obtained  instruction  so  complete  and 


OH.  XLl—M.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  835 

discipline  ■>  thorough.  "By  means  of  this  princely  education,"  gays  Eitto,  "ha 
became  a  person  most  accomplished  in  his  temper,  demeanour,  and  intellect ;  he  was 
also  trained  in  that  largeness  of  view  and  generosity  of  spirit  which  are  supposed  to 
result  from  such  relations,  and  which  qualified  him  to  sustain  with  dignity  and 
authority  the  offices  of  ruler  of  a  people  and  general  of  armies,  which  eventually 
devolved  upon  him.  This  education,  also — involving,  as  it  must  have  done,  an 
intimacy  with  the  highest  science  and  philosophy  of  Egyptian  sages — was  well 
calculated  to  secure  for  him  the  attention  aiid-respect  of  the  Egyptians  when  he  stood 
forth  to  demand  justice  for  an  oppressed  race."  "Moses  was  instructed  in  all  the 
wisdom  of  the  Egyptians;  and  he  was  mighty  in  his  words  and  works"  (Acts  vii.  22). 
The  choice  of  which  our  text  spealts  was  his  calm  and  deliberate  decision  to  separate 
himself  from  the  Egyptians  among  whom  he  had  hitherto  lived,  and  to  identify  himself 
with  the  Israelites  to  whom  he  belonged  by  descent  and  parentage.  He  freely  chose 
the  oppressed  people  of  God  as  his  people.  This  involved  the  great  avowal  that  their 
God  was  his  God ;  that  he  rejected  the  gods  of  Egypt,  and  reverently  and  heartily 
accepted  Jehovah  as  his  God — the  Sovereign  of  his  being  and  his  Supreme  Good.  But 
brought  up  in  the  Egyptian  court,  instructed  by  Egyptian  teachers,  how  would  Moses 
become  acquainted  with  his  connection  with  the  Israelites,  with  their  history  and  their 
hopes,  and  with  the  sublime  character  of  the  God  whom  they  acknowledged  ?  In  the 
providence  of  God  it  was  so  ordered  that  his  own  godly  mother  was  his  nurse,  and  she 
would  instil  these  things  into  his  active  and  receptive  mind,  and  teach  bim  the  simple 
and  holy  faith  of  their  religion.  Moreover,  when  we  call  to  mind  the  place  which,  in 
the  Divine  purposes,  he  was  to  occupy  and  the  work  he  was  to  do,  we  cannot  but 
conclude  that  God  communicated  directly  with  his  mind  and  spirit,  and  he  received 
immediate  enlightenment  and  impulse  from  him.  *  And  thus  prepared,  in  due  season  he 
makes  the  great  decision  actual,  and  openly  chooses  the  living  and  true  God  for  his  own 
and  only  God,  and  the  down-trodden  people  of  God  for  his  people.  Several  aspects  of 
this  choice  are  mentioned  in  the  text. 

I,  It  was  made  at  a  significant  season  of  life.  "  When  he  was  grown  up." 
"When  he  was  full  forty  jears  old"  (Acts  vii.  23).  Moses  made  the  great  choice 
neither  in  the  heat  and  impulsiveness  of  youth,  when  the  jud>>ment  is  immature  and 
the  decisions  hasty,  nor  in  the  decadence  of  age,  when  the  faculties  are  failing,  and 
the  mind  no  longer  perceives  with  its  former  clearness  or  considers  with  its  former 
comprehensiveness  and  force.  He  came  to  the  great  decision  at  a  time  when  his  mental 
faculties  may  reasonably  be  held  to  have  been  in  full  maturity  and  vigour,  and  when 
he  was  able  correctly  to  estimate  the  significance  and  importance  of  that  decision. 
Moreover,  the  choice  was  made  at  a  time  when  it  would  require  an  effort  to  break  away, 
from  old  associations  and  modes  of  life.  Genei  ally  speaking,  a  person's  habits  are  formed 
and  fixed  at  forty  years  old ;  and  he  does  not  easily  take  to  new  circumstances  and 
associations  and  customs.  But  Moses  did  so.  These  considerations  point  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  choice  was  made  intelligently,  deliberately,  and  with  entire  decision. 

II.  It  intolted  great  sacbificeb.  1.  Eminent  position  and  hrUliant  prospects. 
"  Moses  .  .  .  refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter."  He  was  the  adojjtcd 
son  of  the  king's  daughter ;  but  he  sacrificed  that  princely  position.  If  Jewish  traditions 
are  at  all  reliable,  he  occupied  a  position  of  great  eminence  and  influence  amongst  the 
Egyptians.  His  prospects  also  were  dazzling.  Some  say  that  he  would  probably  have 
succeeded  to  the  throne.  All  these  things  he  renounced  in  making  his  great  choice. 
2.  The  pleasures  of  the  wmid.  Moses  declined  "  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a 
season."  What  are  these?  (1)  The  gratifications  which  are  prohibited  by  God: 
"  The  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  vain-glory  of  life,  is  not  of  the 
Father,  but  is  of  the  world."  (2)  The  pursuits  which'  are  condemned  by  conscience. 
"  To  him  who  accounteth  anything  to  be  unclean,  to  him  it  is  unclean.  "He  that 
doubteth  is  condemned  if  he  eat,  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith  :  and  whatsoever  is  not 
of  faith  is  sin  "  (Rom.  xiv.  14, 23).  (3)  Anything  which  diminishes  spiritual  susceptibility 
or  strength,  or  retards  spiritual  progress.  There  is  pleasure  in  some  of  the  things 
which  are  divinely  prohibited.  There  are  gratifications  connected  with  sin.  It  were 
folly  to  deny  it.  But  they  are  only  "  for  a  season."  They  will  not  bear  refiection  even 
in  this  present  life.  They  will  have  no  existence  in  the  future  life.  All  these  pleasures 
Moses  cast  asida.     8.  The  treasivrea  of  the  wm-ld.     Moses  turned  away  from  "the 


836  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xl  1— 4<X 

treasures  of  Egypt."  It  seems  beyond  doubt  that  he  must  have  lived  in  affluence  in 
I']gypt ;  and  as  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  he  must  have  had  prospects  of  great 
wealth  for  his  own  portion.  How  strong  the  fascination  of  riches  is  for  maoy  persons ! 
And  this  fascination  is  more  fully  realized  when  men  have  reached  the  age  of  Moses 
than  in  earlier  days.  At  the  age  when  he  made  his  great  decision  it  costs  no  small 
effort  to  relinquish  voluntarily  the  almost  certain  prospect  of  great  wealth.  Yet  Mosei 
did  so. 

JIT.  It  nrvoLVED  thb  pbobabilttt  op  great  sufferings.  1.  TKe  endurance  of 
evil  treatmmt.  IMoses  was  well  aware  that  by  reason  of  his  choice  he  would  very 
likely  have  "  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  Otod,"  The  Israelites  were  treated 
by  the  Egyj)tians  as  slaves ;  they  were  an  oppressed,  a  cruelly  ill-used  people. 
Muses  knew  this  when  he  determined  to  cast  in  his  lot  with  them.  "  To  be  evil 
entreated  "  was  almost  certain  to  be  his  portion  ;  but  it  would  be  "  with  the  people  of 
God."  An  important  fact  that.  They  were  a  people  of  a  pure  faith,  sustained  by  a 
mighty  hand,  and  inspired  by  a  glorious  destiny.  2.  The  endurance  of  hitter  reproach. 
Moses  looked  forward  to  "  the  reproach  of  Christ "  as  a  probable  result  of  his  choice. 
"  He  would  be  exposed  to  ridicule  for  his  folly  in  leaving  his  brilliant  prospects  at 
court  to  become  identified  with  an  oppressed  and  despised  people."  "The  writer," 
says  De  Wette,  "  calls  the  reproach  which  Moses  suffered  the  reproach  of  Christ,  as 
Paul  (2  Cor.  i.  6 ;  Col.  i.  24)  calls  the  sufferings  of  Christians  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
i.e.  of  Christ  dwelling,  striving,  suffering,  in  his  Church  as  in  his  body ;  to  which  this 
reproach  is  referred  according  to  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
and  of  the  eternal  Christ  (the  Logos)  already  living  and  reigning  in  the  former." 
Beproaches  do  not  strip  a  man  of  his  worldly  goods  or  break  bis  bones ;  but  to  some 
they  are  even  harder  to  bear  than  these~  things.  They  enter  terribly  into  the  Boul. 
Thus  David  cried,  "  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart." 

IV.  It  was  associated  with  a  great  expectation.  Moiet  "  had  respect  unto  the 
recompense  of  reward."  He  looked  forward  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  made 
unto  their  fathers — that  they  should  possess  the  land  of  Canaan,  that  they  should  be 
a  great  and  independent  nation,  and  that  in  them  all  nations  should  be  blessed.  And 
beyond  earth  and  time  he  looked  for  a  great  reward  and  an  eternal.  He  had  yearnings 
for  immortality.  And  his  hopes  reached  beyond  the  bounds  of  time  and  space  to  a 
perfection  heavenly,  everlasting,  and  Divine.  This  was  not  the  grand  motive  for  his 
great  choice.  He  did  not  consecrate  himself  to  the  true  God  because  of  the  rewards  of 
his  service.  Higher  and  purer  were  the  motives  which  determined  his  choice.  But 
the  prospect  of  these  rewards  encouraged  him  in  making  the  choice.  And  as  to  our- 
selves, we  should  choose  to  believe  the  true,  do  the  right,  love  the  beautiful,  and 
reverence  the  holy,  even  if  no  advantage  accrued  to  us  by  so  doing.  But  there  is  an 
advantage  in  godliness,  there  is  a  peerless  prize  for  the  f^iithful  servant ;  and  we  may 
take, encouragement  in  the  duties  and  difficulties,  the  sufferings  and  crosses  of  life,  by 
the  contemplation  thereof. 

V.  It  kecessitated  a  great  exercise  of  faith.  If  he  had  been  guided  by  his 
senses,  Moses  would  have  viewed  these  matters  in  an  entirely  different  li^ht,  and  have 
made  the  directly  opposite  choice.  He  was  guided  by  his  soul.  He  listened  to  the 
higher  voices  of  his  being,  and  complied  with  them.  He  looked  at  tl)ings  with  the  eye 
of  faith.  By  faith  he  saw  the  vanity  and  transitoriness  of  the  things  he  was  renouncing, 
the  reality  and  righteousness,  the  essential  and  abiding  worth  of  the  things  he  was 
embracing,  and  he  made  the  choice — the  true,  the  wise,  the  blessed  choice.  Let  those 
who  are  not  yet  decidedly  religious  copy  the  example  of  Moses,  To  be  guided  simply 
by  sight  and  sense  in  making  the  great  election  is  irrational  and  ruinous.  Let  £iith 
and  reason  be  brought  into  exercise,  and  then  your  choice  will  be  hearty  and  earnest 
for  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesug  Christ. — W.  J. 

Yer.  27. — Seeing  the  invisible  One.  "  He  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  inTifdble." 
These  words  suggest  the  following  observations. 

I.  That  God  is  essentiallt  invisible  to  the  senses.  He  is  the  invisible  One. 
"  God  is  a  Spirit ; "  and  the  physical  eye  cannot  behold  pare  spirit.  Organs  of  sense 
have  no  fitness  for  immediate  dealing  with  the  great  verities  of  the  spiritual  realm. 
Truth,  holiness,  love,  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses ;  for  they  have  neither  material 


Ob.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HERREWS.  337 

form  nor  visible  colour.  Neither  can  the  Infinite  Spirit  be  seen  by  our  finite  sense. 
When  he  is  represented  as  manifesting  himself  to  man  (Oten.  xii.  7  ;  xvii.  1 ;  xviii.  1), 
it  does  not  mean  that  the  essence  or  substance  of  God  was  seen  by  human  eye,  but  that 
he  assumed  some  visible  form  in  which  he  communicated  with  man.  When  Jacob  is  said 
to  "have  seen  God  face  to  face"  (Gen.  xxxii.  30),  and  a  statement  of  similar  import  is 
made  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii,  11),  we  must  understand  thereby  that  he  drew  near  to 
them  in  a  very  remarkable  theopliany,  that  he  granted  to  them  some  full  and  clear 
manifestation  of  the  Divine,  and  at  the  same  time  admitted  them  to  intimate  spiritual 
communion  with  him.  To  Moses  himself  the  Lord  said,  "  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face . 
for  there  Shall  no  man  see  me,  and  live  "  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20).  "  No  man  hath  seen  God 
at  any  time,"  etc.  (John  i.  18).  He  is  "  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible ;"  "dwelling 
in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto ;  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see  " 
(1  Tim.  i.  17  j  vi.  16).  We  infer  the  unlawfulness  of  any  attempt  to  represent  God  to 
the  senses.  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,"  etc.  (Exod.  xx.  4, 5) ; 
"To  whom  will  ye  liken  God  ?  or  what  likeness  will  ye  compare  unto  him  ?  "  (Isa.  xl.  18). 

II.  That  God  mat  be  pkrceivbd  bt  the  soul.  Moses  "  endured  as  seeing  him  who 
is  invisible."  The  Infinite  Spirit  cannot  be  sensuously  apprehenrled,  but  he  may  be 
spiritually  apprehended.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God." 
The  pure  heart  is  the  organ  by  which  the  invisible  One  may  be  seen.  "  There  is 
another  vision  beside  the  vision  of  the  body ;  faith  itself  is  si^^ht ;  and  where  faith  ia 
complete,  there  is  a  consciousness  of  God's  presence  throughout  uur  life  and  service 
which  amounts  to  a  distinct  vision  of  (lod's  personal  presence  au.l  government."  Thus 
may  we  blessedly  realize  his  presenco  n  our  hearts  and  lives.  Thus  did  Enoch,  as  he 
"  walked  with  God."  And  David, ''  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me :  because 
he  is  at  my  right  hand,  I  shall  not  be  moved."  "  I  will  fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with 
me."    And  Paul,  "  The  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened  me." 

III.  That  the  vision  or  God  sufplieb  the  soul  with  its  strongest  and  sublimkst 
INSPIRATIONS.  "  He  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible.'  Tiiis  realization  of  the 
Divine  presence  :  1.  Raises  the  toul  above  the  fear  of  man.  By  faith  Moses  did  "  not 
fear  the  wrath  of  the  king ;  for  he  endured,"  etc.  This  enabled  the  psalmist  to  utter 
the  triumphant  challenge,  "  Tlie  Lord  is  on  my  side ;  I  will  not  fear ;  what  can  man 
do  unto  me  ?  "  (see  also  Dan.  iii.  13—18  j  Acts  iv.  18 — 20 ;  v.  27—29).  2.  Inspires  the 
soul  tuith  patience  in  the  trials  of  life.  It  enables  the  Christian  to  say  even  of  severe 
sufferings, "  Onr  light  affliction,  which  is  for  the  moment,  worketli  for  us  more  and 
more  exceedingly  an  eternal  weiglit  of  glory  ;  while  wo  look  not  at  the  things  which 
are  seen,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).  3.  Inspires  the  soul  with  energy  and  perseverance 
for  the  difficult  duties  of  life.  Sometimes  the  sympathetic  presence  of  a  friend  is  very 
encouraging  and  helpful  in  arduous  and  dispiriting  labour.  But  the  consciousness  of 
God's  presence  and  approbation  always  im[iarts  courage  to  the  heart,  resolution  to  the 
will,  and  energy  to  the  arm  of  his  faithful  servants.  4.  JSxalls  the  tone  and  spirit  of 
(he  entire  life.  "Seeing  him  who  is  invisible,"  a  life  of  unworthy  aims  or  sinful 
practices  will  be  impossible.  Realizing  his  presence,  both  character  and  conduct  must 
grow  in  purity  and  power,  in  piety  and  usefulness.— W.  J. 

Ver.  30. — Unquestioning  faith  expressed  and  vindicated,  "By  faith  the  walls  of 
Jericho  fell  down,"  etc.  Let  ub  endeavour  to  exhibit  the  principal  features  of  this 
example  of  the  exercise  of  faith. 

I.  Faith  in  the  Divine  word  of  direction  and  promise.  Directions  were  given 
by  the  Lord  to  Joshua  for  the  taking  of  Jericho,  with  the  jwomise  that  on  their  fulfil- 
ment the  walls  of  that  city  should  fall  to  the  ground  (Josh.  vi.  2 — 5).  This  com- 
mimication  Joshua  conveyed  to  the  people ;  and  they  believed  it,  they  received  it  as 
a  message  from  God.  They  exercised  faith  (1)  in  his  righteous  authority  over  them  ; 
(2)  in  his  power  to  fulfil  his  promises;  and  (3)  in  his  fidelity  to  his  word.  In  these 
respects  their  faith  is  exemplary ;  for  bis  authority  is  supreme,  his  power  is  almighty, 
and  his  faithfulness  infinite. 

n.  Faith  in  the  Divine  word  when  there  was  no  nbcessabt  relation  between 
THE  DIBECTIOKS  GIVEN  AND  THE  RESULT  PROMISED.  Generally  speaking,  in  the  Divine 
arrangements  the  means  ordained  are  wisely  adapted  to  accomiJish  the  ends  for  which 
they  are  employed.    But  it  is  quite  the  opposite  in  the  case  now  before  us.     The  course 

HEBREWS.  ■ 


838  THE  EPISTLE  TO.  THE  HEBiiEWS.  [cH.  XL 1—40. 

of  action  presented  and  the  consequence  promised  cannot  possibly  be  regarded  ai 
cause  and  effect.  The  marching  round  the  city,  the  blowing  of  rams'  horns,  and  the 
uttering  of  great  shouts,  cannot  by  any  stretch  of  imagination  be  looked  upon  even  as 
means  for  levelling  strong  city  walls  to  the  ground.  Such  proceedings  have  ne  necessary 
relation  with  such  a  result.  If  related  at  all,  the  relation  is  altogether  arbitrary.  The 
things  enjoined  upon  the  Israelites  were  simply  conditions  with  which  they  were  to 
comply — tests  of  faith  and  obedience ;  and  the  Lord  guaranteed  a  certain  result  upon 
the  fulSlment  of  the  conditions.  And  without  raising  any  objections  or  proposing  any 
questiou  they  believed  his  word. 

"Theirs  not  to  make  reply, 
Theirs  not  to  reason  why." 

And  if  we  are  assured  of  his  will  in  any  matter,  we  should  follow  it  irresj-'ective  of 
appearances  and  of  probabilities  as  they  present  themselves  to  our  minds.  When  he 
commands,  it  is  ours  to  obey.  When  he  promises,  it  is  ours  to  accept  the  promise, 
leaving  the  method  of  its  fulfilment  to  him. 

in.  Faith  manifested  in  praotioal  obbdienob.  The  Israelites  proved  the  reality 
of  their  faith  in  the  Divine  communication  by  complying  with  its  requirements.  "  It 
came  to  pass,  when  Joshua  had  spoken  to  the  people,  that  the  seven  priests,"  etc.  (Josh, 
▼i.  8 — 20).  Genuine  faith  always  leads  to  a  course  of  conduct  in  harmony  with  its 
own  character  (of.  Jas.  iL  14 — 26). 

IV.  Faith  leading  to  pbbsevbbino  obedienob  bvbn  when  no  apparent  effect 
WAS  PEODtJCED  BY  THEIB  ACTION.  The  Israelites  went  round  the  city  as  thty  were 
directed,  "  but  not  a  brick  of  the  walls  fell ;  and  they  went  round  a  second  time,  and  a 
third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  time,  and  still  all  the  bricks  were  there,  firmly  cimcntpd, 
and  the  walls  stood.  The  defenders  of  Jericho  would  look  on  those  wonderful  wallters, 
and  one  can  imagine  them  saying, '  It  is  a  new  mode  of  assault  you  are  adopting.  We 
wonder  how  long  you  will  have  to  walk  before  the  walls  fall ;  Jericho  will  stand  for  a 
long  time  if  it  is  to  be  taken  by  walking.'  Nevertheless,  the  Israelites  held  in  their 
hands  the  promise,  and  they  felt  it  in  their  hearts,"  and  they  persevered  in  their 
obedience  notwithstanding  tlie  utter  absence  of  any  sign  of  success.  They  completed 
the  prescribed  process,  and  then  their  obedience  was  rewarded  with  success.  And  in 
our  case,  faith  and  obedience  must  be  persistent,  though  our  discouragements  be  great. 
We  are  called  to  be  "imita'ors  of  them  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the 
promises."  "  Ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  ths  will  of  God,  ye  may 
receive  the  promise  "  (of.  Matt.  x.  22 ;  Kom.  ii.  7 ;  Bev.  il  10). 

V.  Faith  completely  vindicated  bt  God.  "  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell 
down."  When  the  Israelites  had  completely  carried  out  the  directions  which  the  Lord 
had  given  them,  "  the  wall  fell  down  flat,  so  that  the  people  went  up  into  the  city, 
every  man  straight  before  him,  and  they  took  the  city."  Thus  the  result  fully 
justified  their  confidence  and  their  conduct.  And  no  one  ever  trusted  God  in  vain. 
Faith,  resting  upon  God's  word  or  character,  honours  him  and  gratifies  him ;  and  he 
will  not,  he  cannot,  fail  the  soul  that  trusts  him.  If  we  honour  him  with  our  hearty 
confidence,  he  will  honour  us  with  his  glorious  salvation. — W.  J. 

Ver.  31. — The  faith,  of  a  heathen  woman,  "  By  faith  the  harlot  Bahab  perished  not," 
etc.  What  did  Bahab  believe?  What  does  the  Bible  teach  us  concerning  her  faith? 
She  exercised:  1.  Faith  in  Jehovah  a»  the  true  and  supreme  Ood.  She  believed  in 
him  not  simply  as  a  superior  and  powerful  local  or  national  deity,  but  as  supreme  ovei 
all  beings  universally.  This  is  her  confession,  "  Jehovah  your  God,  he  is  God  in 
heaven  above,  and  in  earth  beneath"  (Jo-^h.  ii.  11).  2.  Faith  in  the  fidelity  and 
power  of  Jehovah  to  fvilfil  hit  purposes  in  relation  to  his  people.  "  She  said  unto  the 
men,  I  know  that  Jehovah  hath  given  you  the  land  "  (Josh.  ii.  9)  j  and  therefore  she 
was  confident  that  they  would  actually  come  into  possession  of  it,  3.  Faith  in  th» 
fidelity  of  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah.  She  showed  kindness  to  the  spies,  entered  into 
an  important  agreement  with  them,  and  fulfilled  her  part  of  the  agreement,  evidently 
expecting  them  to  fulfil  their  part  (Josh.  ii.  12,  13,  21).  Three  aspects  of  the  faith  m 
B^ab  are  suggested  by  our  text. 

L  Varh  u  av  iniUKXi.y  rxBSOB.    1.  Eahab  uwi  on  tddlatroiu*  Canaanife,    iha 


OH.  n.  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  »3» 

had  not  Wn  blessed  with  parental  instructions  and  home  influences  inclining  bar 
heart  to  faith  in  the  true  and  holy  God ;  but  the  reverse.  She  was  the  daughter  ol 
heathen  parents,  instructed  in  a  loathsome  and  degradino;  idolatry,  and  belonged  to  a 
people  whose  "  abominations  and  iniquities  had  become  full,  so  that  the  land  spued  out 
its  inhabitants,  and  the  Lord  could  deal  with  them  only  in  sheer  destruction."  Yet 
she  believed  sincerely  and  strongly  in  the  living  and  true  God.  2.  Rahab  was  a 
hnovm  harlot.  Whether  she  was  such  at  the  time  she  received  the  spies  we  know  not, 
probably  she  was  not;  but  if  not  then,  she  had  been  formerly,  and  was  still  known  by 
the  disgraceful  title  of  "Eahab  the  harlot."  But,  as  Bishop  Hervey  remarks,  "it  is 
very  possible  that  to  a  woman  of  her  country  and  religion  such  a  calling  may  have 
implied  a  far  less  deviation  from  the  standard  of  morality  than  it  does  with  us ;  and, 
moreover,  with  a  purer  faith  she  seems  to  have  entered  upon  a  pure  life."  ^  We  should 
not  have  expected  true  religious  faith  in  such  a  woman,  much  less  conspicuous  faith ; 
but  such  faith  she  exemplified.  Learn  that  the  outwardly  moral  and  respectable  may 
be  further  from  the  kingdom  of  God  than  the  openly  disreputable.  "  A  woman  which 
was  in  the  city,  a  sinner,"  was  accepted  by  the  blessed  Saviour  much  more  than  the 
prosperous,  respectable  Pharisee,  Simon  (Luke  vii.  36 — 50).  Jesus  said  unto  "  the  chief 
priests  and  the  elders  of  the  people, .  .  .  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  publicans 
and  the  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  you,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxi.  23,  31,  32). 

IL  Faith  olbablt  evinced.  Bahab  manifested  the  reality  of  her  faith :  1.  In 
receiving  the  spia.  She  would  not  have  shown  courteous  hospitality  to  any  of  the 
Israelites,  who  were  dreaded  and  detested  by  her  countrymen,  but  for  her  faith.  "  By 
faith  Eahab  received  the  spies  with  peace."  2.  In  concealing  and  delivering  the 
imperilled  spies  ai  her  oton  Hsk.  (Josh.  ii.  2 — 7, 15, 16,  22.)  Grave  objection  has  been 
raised  to  the  conduct  of  Bahab  in  telling  a  lie  in  order  to  conceal  and  protect  the  spies. 
We  have  no  wish  to  apologize  for  falsehood;  but  the  objection  is  not  a  reasonable  one. 
"  Strict  truth,"  says  Bishop  Hervey,  "  either  in  Jew  or  heathen,  was  a  virtue  so  utterly 
unknown  before  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel,  that,  as  far  as  Bahab  is  concerned, 
the  discussion  "  of  her  conduct  in  deceiving  the  King  of  Jericho's  messengers  with  a  false 
tale  is  quite  superfluous.  The  objection  also  overlooks  a  very  precious  truth  as  to  the 
relations  and  dealings  of  CM  with  man.  "God  demands  not  of  the  feeble  at  the 
bi'ginning  the  great  works  of  consummate  faith;  he  beholds  even  in  the  iniperfect  act 
the  faith  which  prompts  it,  if  faith  is  actually  operating  in  its  performance."  St.  James 
inquires,  "  Was  not  Bahab  the  harlot  justified  by  works,  in  that  she  received  the 
messengers,  and  sent  them  out  another  way  ?  "  (Jas.  ii.  25).  3.  In  entering  into  a 
solemn  contract  with  the  spies  and  carrying  out  the  terms  of  that  contract.  The 
compact  she  agreed  to  was  a  thing  of  life  or  death  to  her ;  and  she  kept  her  part  of 
the  compact,  and  exhibited  even  to  the  end  steady  confidence  in  the  fidelity  of  the  two 
spies  to  their  engagement.    Her  actions  proved  the  reality  and  strength  of  her  faith. 

IIL  Faith  biohlt  bewarded.  1.  In  the  preservation  of  herself  and  her  kindred 
when  her  fellow-citizens  were  destroyed.  (Josh.  vi.  22,  23,  25.)  "  By  faith  Bahab  the 
harlot  perished  not  with  them  that  were  disobedient."  Her  fellow-citizens  had  heard 
the  reports  of  what  God  had  done  for  Israel,  and  of  the  remarkable  victories  which  the 
Israelites  had  achieved,  but  they  believed  not  in  the  God  of  Israel.  "They  balieved 
not  that  Israel's  God  was  the  true  God,  and  that  Israel  was  the  peculiar  people  of  God, 
though  they  had  evidence  sufficient  of  it."  Or,  as  Alford  expresses  it,  ■"  The  inhabitants 
of  Jericho  were  disobedient  to  the  will  of  God  manifested  by  the  signs  and  wonders  which 
he  had  wrought  for  Israel;  as  is  implied  by  Rahab's  speech  (Josh.  ii.  9 — 12)."  And 
they  perished.  But  Eahab  and  her  family  were  saved.  2.  In  the  honourable  distinction 
to-  which  she  attained.  She  is  exhibited  in  this  Epistle  as  an  example  of  distinguished 
faith,  and  by  St.  James  (iL  25)  as  an  example  of  conduct  consistent  with  her  faith. 
And,  far  higher  than  these  commendations,  as  the  wife  of  Salmon  and  the  mother  of 
Boas  she  became  an  ancestress  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

Our  subject  is  full  of  encouragement  for  sinners  to  turn  to  God  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts  i  and 
let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  (Isa.  It.  6,  7). — W.  J. 

Ver.  88. — The  extellent  of  the  earth.    "  Of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy  *     tlia 
■  Dr.  Smith's  ■  Bible  Dictionaiy,'  art «  Bahab." 


340  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xL  1—40. 

text  teaebes  that  the  world  could  not  bear  comparison  in  respect  to  worth  irith  the 
persons  named  and  referred  to  in  this  chapter ;  their  character  was  elevated  far  above 
that  of  the  world  in  general.    Let  us  look  at  our  text — 

L  Ab  the  statement  of  an  histobioal  faot.  In  all  ages  there  have  been  men 
"  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy."  Enoch,  Noah,  Job,  Abraham,  Joseph,  Moses, 
Joshua,  Caleb,  Samuel,  et  dl.,  are  examples.  In  the  apostasy  and  exile  of  the  Jews 
there  were  Jeremiah  and  Daniel,  and  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abed-nego.  Amongst 
the  Greeks  there  was  Socrates.  Amid  the  corruptions  of  the  Papal  Church  there  was 
Savonarola,  and  after  him  Martin  Luther.  And  at  present  there  are  many  who  are 
lar  superior  to  the  world ;  who  are  in  the  world,  yet  far  above  it. 

II.  As  AN  HISTOBIOAL  FAOT  OP  THE  UTMOST  IMPOETANOB  TO  THE  WOBLD.  With- 
out the  presence  in  the  world  of  men  "  of  whom  the  world  is  not  worthy,"  it  would 
hasten  to  its  doom.  A  few  scientific  men  "of  whom  the  world  is  not  worthy"  save 
it  from  scientific  stagnation  and  death.  Some  of  the  statesmen  of  the  past  who  were 
much  abused  by  the  world,  and  far  superior  to  it,  are  now  recognized  as  its  great 
binefactors.  And  as  for  the  heroes  of  faith,  the  godly  amongst  men,  they  are  the 
saviours  of  society — "  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  arresting  its  progress  towards  utter  moral 
corruption,  "  the  light  of  the  world,"  saving  it  from  unrelieved  moral  darkness.  The 
presence  of  ten  righteous  men  would  have  averted  the  doom  of  the  cities  of  the  plain. 
The  world  know  s  not  its  benefactors  and  saviours.  For  those  who  prophesy  smooth 
things  to  it,  it  has  crowns  of  honour  and  thrones  of  power ;  but  for  those  who  proclaim 
the  truth,  it  has  crowns  of  thorns,  and  for  a  throne  the  cruel  cross.  So  it  treats  the 
men  of  whom  it  is  not  worthy ;  so  it  treated  the  Divine  Man  (cf.  Matt.  x.  24,  25 ;  John 
XV.  18—20;  xix.  1—18). 

III.  The  OBEATER  the    DNWOBTHINESS    of    the  WOBLD    the   HOBE    tTBOENT  IB  ITS 

NEED  OF  MEN  OF  WORTH.  The  darker  the  night  the  greater  is  our  need  of  the  street 
lamps.  When  the  night  is  darkest  and  the  storm  most  fiirious,  the  lonely  watcher  in 
the  lighthouse  most  diligently  trims  and  tends  his  lamp.  So  in  the  darltest  moral  night 
God  has  often  lit  and  sent  forth  some  of  the  brightest  stars  in  the  firmament  of  the 
Church.  Israel  was  in  a  terrible  condition  under  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  and  God  raised 
up  the  intrepid  and  holy  Elijah.  When  vice  was  rampant  in  the  Komish  Church  God 
summoned  forth  the  fearless  and  faithful  Martin  Luther.  At  a  more  recent  date,  when 
religion  seemed  almost  extinct  in  our  laud,  God  called  and  commissioned  the  Wesleys, 
and  Whitefield,  and  Fletcher  of  Madeley,  and  Selina  Countess  of  Huntingdon.  It  was 
because  of  the  unworthineas  of  the  world  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  it. 

lY.  The  CHBisnAir  iHonLD  bo  live  that  the  text  will  be  true  of  him. 
Is  it  not  true  that  the  world  ia  perfectly  worthy  of  many  "  who  profess  and  call  them- 
selves Christians"?  In  bnsiness,  in  amusements,  in  politics,  it  their  standard  higher 
than  that  of  the  world  ?  Let  us  test  this  question  in  the  matter  of  gambling :  are  our 
hands  clean  of  it  ?  Is  it  not  spreading  amongst  professedly  Christian  people  in  the 
forms  of  card-playing,  rafiBing,  and  lotteries?  But  listen  to  our  Lord;  "Ye  are  not  of 
the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world  j "  "  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest  take  them 
out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil."  And  St.  John : 
"If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  Let  us  live  aboTo 
the  world ;  let  ns  live  to  God.    Be  this  our  ideal,  "  For  to  me  to  live  is  Clirist." 

V.  Fob  men  of  whom  this  woelh  is  not  wobtht  there  is  a  wobld  which  is 
WELL  wobthy.  Into  heaven  the  worthj'  of  all  peoples  and  all  ages  are  gathered.  There 
men  are  treated  according  to  their  own  inherent  worth.  The  worthy  are  worthily 
received  and  honoured.  How  the  judgments  of  earth  are  reversed  in  that  world  I  All 
true  worthiness  is  "  hy  faith  " — by  faith  in  the  unseen,  in  the  soul,  in  truth,  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  great  and  gracious  God.  Let  us  cultivate  this  faith.  Let  us 
live  up  to  such  measure  of  it  as  we  already  possess,— W.  J. 

Vers.  39,  40. — Successive  stages  in  the  dispensation  of  God's  Hissings  to  man,  "  And 
these  all,  having  obtained  a  good  report  through  faith,"  etc.     Let  us  consider— 

I.  The  good  eealized  by  the  Old  Testament  believers.  The  better  thing 
provided  for  Christians  implies  that  some  good  thing  was  bestowed  upon  the  godly 
under  the  former  covenant.  They  had :  1.  Divine  nromists.  Many  were  the  promises 
made  to  the  ancient  saints ;  e.g.  promises  of  temporal  good,  of  fKVvidential  guidance 


oa.  iLl— 40.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBEEWS.  841 

and  oTisrgigbt;,  of  gplritnal  forgiveness  and  help,  eto.  These  promises  encouraged  theii 
hopes,  and  raised  the  tone  and  character  of  their  lives.  2.  Fulfilments  ^  Divine 
promises.  Many  of  the  blessings  promised  to  the  saints  of  the  earlier  dispensation 
were  received  and  enjoyed  by  them.  They  "obtained  promises"  (ver.  33) j  i.e.  they 
obtained  certain  promised  blesslngi.  A  glance  at  the  names  mentioned  in  this  chapter 
will  at  once  show  that  this  was  the  case.  Abraham  received  the  promised  son ;  Jacob 
was  blessed  in  hi(  worldly  circumstances,  purified  and  ennobled  in  his  character,  and 
brought  to  the  goal  of  his  pilgrimage  ia  a  good  old  age,  in  peace  and  in  honour. 
Joseph  was  wonderfully  preserved,  guided,  exalted,  etc.  3.  Divine  commendations. 
They  "obtained  a  good  report  through  faith."  They  "had  witness  borne  to  them 
through  their  faith."  Each  one  mentioned  or  referred  to  in  this  chapter  was  commended 
for  some  distinguishing  excellence,  and  every  one  for  faith.  Abel  "  had  witness  borne 
to  him  that  he  was  righteous,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  Enoch  "  had  witness  borne  to  him  that 
he  had  been  well-pleasing  unto  God  (ver.  6).  They  had  within  tliemsclves  the  witness 
of  a  good  conscience ;  they  enjoyed  the  smile  of  the  Most  High ;  and  in  his  holy  Word 
God  has  expressed  his  approbation  of  their  character  and  conduct. 

II.  Thk  betteb  pobtion  bealized  bt  New  Testament  believers.  The  heroes 
and  heroines  of  faith  who  are  mentioned  or  referred  to  in  this  chapter  "received  not 
the  promise,  God  having  provided  some  better  thing  for  us."  The  promise  which  they 
received  not,  and  the  better  thing  provided  for  us,  we  take  to  be  the  actual  fulfihnent 
of  the  promise  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  blessedness  of  the  gospel  age.  "  Blessed  are 
your  eyes,  for  they  see :  and  your  ears,  for  they  hear.  For  vurily  I  say  unto  you.  That 
many  prophets  and  righteous  men  desired  to  see  the  things  which  ye  see,  and  saw  them 
not;  and  to  hear  the  things  which  ye  hear,  and  heard  them  not."  Oar  portion  is  a 
better  thing :  1.  Because  the  realization  of  any  genuine  good  is  better  than  the  antici- 
pation of  it.  2.  Beeauteof  the  clearer  revelation  of  redemptive  truth.  "  God,  having  of 
old  time  spoken  unto  the  fathers  in  the  prophets  by  divers  portions  and  in  divers 
manners,  hath  at  the  end  of  these  days  spoken  unto  us  in  his  Son"  (ch.  i.  1 — 4). 
"  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  He  embodied  the  will  of  the  Father 
in  his  character  and  words  and  works.  He  revealed  the  heart  of  the  Father  toward  us 
hie  sinful  and  suffering  children.  3.  Because  »f  the  greater  fidness  and  power  of 
redemptive  influence.  Atonement  for  sin  ia  now  accomplished.  The  mighty  influences 
of  the  love  of  God  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  are  now  brought  to  bear  upon  us.  Our 
restraints  from  sin  are  more  pathetic  and  powerful  than  were  theirs  of  the  earlier 
dispensation ;  our  incentives  to  righteousness  and  reverence  and  luve  are  more  exalted 
and  constraining  than  thei^ 

III,  The  best  blessings  in  which  both  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New 
Testament  believers  are  sharers.  "  That  apart  from  us  they  should  not  be  made 
perfect."  This  perfection  is  the  holiness  and  blessedness  of  the  taints  in  light.  "The 
writer  implied,"  says  Alford,  "as  indeed  ch.  x.  14  seems  to  testify,  that  the  advent  and 
work  of  Christ  has  changed  the  estate  of  the  Old  Testament  fathers  and  saints  into 
greater  and  perfect  bliss ;  an  inference  which  is  forced  on  us  by  many  other  places  in 
Scripture.  So  that  their  perfection  was  dependent  on  our  perfection  :  their  and  our 
perfection  was  all  brought  in  at  the  same  time  when  Christ  '  by  one  offering  perfected 
for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified.'  So  that  the  result  with  regard  to  them  is,  that  their 
spirits  from  the  time  when  Christ  descended  into  Hades  and  ascended  up  into  heaven, 
enjoy  heavenly  blessedness,  and  are  waiting,  with  all  who  have  followed  their  glorified 
High  Priest  within  the  veil,  for  the  resurrection  of  their  bodies,  the  regeneration,  the 
renovation  of  all  things."  Then  all  God's  people  of  all  ages  and  of  all  lands  shall  enter 
into  the  joy  of  their  one  Lord,  and  participate  in  the  blessedness  and  glory  unspeakable 
and  eternal. — ^W.  J. 

Ver.  1. — Faith  in  its  relation  to  the  future  and  the  unseen.  I.  Faith  in  its  relation 
to  the  fdtdbe.  1.  Nothing  is  more  to  be  desired  than  a  hopefui  outlook  towards  the 
future.  The  future  may  be  regarded  doubtfully,  fearfully,  or  even  despairingly ;  on 
the  other  hand  the  question  rises  if  it  be  not  possible  to  regard  the  future  with  a  hope 
which  shall  become  a  duty.  Doubtless  there  are  many  who  do  look  hopefully  forward, 
but  they  are  hopeful  simply  because  of  a  disposition  constitutionally  sanguine.  They 
may  aTen  make  a  brightness  where  there  is  nothing  in  the  circumstances  to  warrant 


342  THE  EPISTLE  XO  THE  HEBREWa'  [oh.  xl  1-40 

it.  They  think  it  Is  qaite  m  likely  chance  may  bring  to  them  snccess  as  failun.  But 
this  lort  of  hope  never  can  become  a  duty,  a  feeling  which  a  man  ought  to  have,  potent 
and  governing  in  his  breast.  We  do  not  want  a  future  dependent  on  chance,  or  natural 
endowments,  or  favourable  circumstances.  We  want  a  future  which  shall  become 
bright  to  every  human  being  because  of  his  humanity,  because  of  his  character,  because 
one  of  the  elements  in  bringing  it  about  is  his  own  choice.  2.  This  bright  outlook 
towards  the  future  is  secured  by  Christian  faith.  "  Faith  is  the  substance  of  things 
hoped  for."  More  correctly,  faith  is  a  substance  of  things  hoped  for.  Bengel  alleges 
that  the  metaiihur  is  taken  fium  a  pillar  standing  under  a  heavy  weight.  We  accept 
the  explanation,  only  adding  to  it  that  this  heavy  weight  rests  on  more  pillars  than  one, 
and  all  of  them  are  necessary.  The  things  hoped  for  will  never  come  into  existence 
for  us  unless  they  he  related  to  us  by  a  present,  practical  faith.  Suppose  to  each  of 
two  men  a  quantity  of  seed  is  given.  One  of  them  sows  his  portion,  and  then  to  him 
a  harvest  is  among  the  things  hopud  for,  his  hope  being  reasonable  and  based  upon  an 
act  of  faith  when  he  put  his  seed  into  the  ground.  Tlie  other,  not  sowing,  if  he  hopes 
for  a  harvest,  is  clearly  under  a  delusion.  The  thing  he  hopes  for  has  no  substance ;  ha 
has  done  notliing  to  show  real  faith.  The  thing  indicated  by  the  word  "faith"  is 
something  practical ;  not  a  man  merely  saying  he  believes,  but  showing  his  faith  by 
his  works.  Such  a  faith  becomes  a  matter  of  conscience.  God  gives  to  the  man  who 
wishes  for  the  gift  a  peculiar  insight,  a  deep  conviction  in  the  heart,  which  is  worth 
more  than  any  argument.  The  course  taken  may  not  satisfy  others,  may  provoke  their 
laughter,  their  wonder,  their  pity ;  but  after  all  the  one  thing  needful  is  not  that  our 
course  should  be  clear  to  others,  but  clear  to  ourselves.  If  we  go  wronw  in  our  course 
through  neglect  of  the  Divine  voice  speaking  within  us,  it  is  we  who  suffer  the  most. 
We  must  look  to  God  altogether,  and  he  will  give  us  the  right  impulse,  and  concentrate 
our  faculties  so  that  we  shall  not  drift  through  life,  hut  rather  speed  onward  witti  a 
definite  aim,  concerning  which,  in  our  own  best  moments,  we  shall  have  a  full  assurance 
that  we  cannot  miss  it.  These  heavenly  certainties  are  not  to  be  revealed  by  flesh  and 
Uood.  So  much  turns  on  faith  that  it  is  no  wonder  it  is  so  much  dwelt  on  in  the 
New  Testament.  Of  what  •  glorious  life,  of  what  beatific  imaginations,  does  unbelief 
deprive  as  ? 

II.  Faith  is  m  belation  to  thk  unsebn.  "  Faith  is  the  subitance  of  things 
hoped  for ; "  it  is  not  called  the  substance  of  things  unseen.  For  it  is  in  no  sense  the 
substance  of  things  unseen.  They  exist,  whether  we  believe  them  to  exist  or  not. 
But  &ith  may  become  to  our  hearts  the  evidence  of  these  unseen  things.  Certainly 
there  can  be  no  other  evidence.  To  all  our  natural  faculties  there  is  presented  nothing 
but  a  bundle  of  phenomena,  and  whatever  we  may  think  of  beyond  them  comes  into 
our  minds  simply  because  we  are  unable  to  believe  that  there  is  nothing  beyond  them. 
There  is  an  outward  man,  perceptible  to  the  senses,  feeling  through  the  senses  a  like 
pleasure  and  pain ;  bat  there  is  also  an  inward  man,  a  deep,  invisible  existence,  to 
which  God  and  Christ  appeal,  as  having  the  proper  sphere  of  its  life  in  the  great  invisible 
outside  of  it.  It  is  by  faith  that  the  invisible  in  us  is  to  profit  by  the  invisible  outside 
of  us.  Trajer  is  a  recognition  of  the  invisible.  We  are  to  endure  as  seeing  him  who 
is  invisible.  The  only  source  of  inspiration  for  a  real  and  full  Christian  life  is  to  be 
found  in  the  invisible.  And  when  the  invisible  rules,  when  faith  lays  hold  of  its  riches, 
then  even  the  visible  becomes  a  more  glorious  and  profitable  thing  than  it  ever  can  do 
while  sense  rules  alone.— T. 

Ter.  2. — Th«  great  characteristic  of  the  ddtn.  I.  The  term  bt  whioi  thgt  abb 
INDICATED.  The  dders.  Those  spoken  of  are  those  who  had  lived  the  life  of  the  flesh 
centuries  before,  but  the  term  is  not  used  merely  to  indicate  this  fact.  We  know 
from  the  subsequent  illustrations  that  the  men  of  long  ago  are  meant ;  but  there  is  a 
much  more  comprehensive  meaning  in  their  being  spoken  of  as  rpeafiirepou  IIpcirjSuTe^ai 
is  a  relative  word,  its  correlative  being  ytArtpn  (see  1  Pet.  v.  5).  The  elder  and  the 
younger  are  to  be  taken  together  as  part  of  one  community,  and  the  younger  are  to  be  . 
in  subordination  to  the  elder.  These  elders  are  to  be  thought  of,  not  as  the  dead,  but  as 
the  still  living.  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  are  among  these  elders,  and  the  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  is  the  God,  not  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.  Abraham, 
or  Isaac,  or  Jacob,  or  any  other  of  the  glorified  believers,  could  have  appeared  on  the 


OH.XI.  1— 40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  843 

Mount  of  Transfiguration  as  easily  as  Moses  or  Elijah,  had  this  been  the  necessary  thing. 
And  these  elder*,  who  haye  received  a  good  report  through  faith,  are  notto  be  made 
perfect  without  us. 

II.  Theib  eelation  to  faith.  They  received  a  good  report  They  had  witness 
borne  to  them.  Surely  there  is  great  inclusiveness  In  this  word.  1.  Their  faith  stood 
to  them  Ml  the  place  of  evidence  from  experience  or  observation.  They  were  at  the 
beginning  of  things.  They  had  no  histories,  traditions,  and  customs  to  fall  back  on. 
They  had  to  trust  the  deepest  impulses  of  their  own  hearts.  We  are  the  inheritors  of 
discoveries  and  benefits  which,  in  the  beginnings  of  them,  can  have  had  little  ground 
but  faith.  2.  Their  faith  is  the  great  element  which  makes  them  memorable.  The  good 
men  among  them  were  better  men  because  they  were  believers.  Indeed,  the  only  good- 
ness that  can  be  anything  more  than  a  matter  of  fashion  and  convention  must  come 
through  faith.  Take  faith  out  of  the  lives  of  Noah,  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  and  you 
have  nothing  that  should  lift  these  men  out  of  the  common  multitude.  Testimony 
could  be  borne  as  to  then  faith  ;  but  we  know  that  testimony  could  not  be  borne  to 
other  very  desirable  qualities  in  human  character.  Abraham  had  no  very  great  regard 
for  truth,  and  Jacob  was  utterly  disingenuous.  But  they  were  believers,  and  in  this  one 
fact  was  BufScient  leverage  to  secure  their  ultimate  salvation,  and  make  them  adequate 
agents  for  the  Divine  purposes.  3.  Jn  tha/r  faith  they  become  vntnesses  to  us.  We  see 
plain  results  of  their  faith  up  to  a  certain  point.  We  see  Noah  justified  in  building  the 
ark.  We  see  Abraham  justified  in  leaving  his  own  country.  We  see  Joseph  justified 
in  giving  commandment  concerning  his  bones.  We  do  see  that  he  who  sows  in  bare 
faith  reaps  a  harvest  corresponding  to  his  faith.  And  so  we  must  take  heed  lest  these 
elders,  now  being  witnesses  to  us,  may  one  day  become  witnesses  against  us. — ^Y. 

Ver.  8.— Faith  beginning  where  science  ends.  In  the  fir^t  verse  of  the  chapter  things 
not  seen  are  spoken  of.  Faith  is  the  evidence  of  these  things  not  leen.  There  can  be 
no  other  evidence,  for  things  not  seen  are  eternal ;  they  are  beyond  the  ken  of  our 
senses ;  if  we  cannot  be  certified  of  them  by  spiritual  intuitions,  we  cannot  be  certified 
of  them  at  all  (2  Cor.  iv.  18).  But  the  things  tliat  are  seen  have  also  to  be  dealt  with ; 
we  want  to  know  the  connection  of  the  seen  with  the  unseen ;  and  the  origin  of  the  seen 
we  also  want  to  know.  Faith  has  something  to  say  concerning  the  ov  P\eir6niva;  what 
has  it  to  say  in  respect  to  the  0\eir6fieya  ?  The  answer  is  that  as  faith  gives  our  only 
resource  for  being  sure  of  the  reality  of  unseen  things,  so  faith  gives  our  only  resource 
for  being  sure  of  the  origin  of  seen  things.  The  seen  things,  at  least  as  to  the  surface 
of  them  and  certain  manifestations  of  them,  lie  before  us.  Especially  there  are  before 
us  those  seen  things  which  have  life  in  them.  We  see  them  spring  into  being,  have 
their  time  of  growth,  maturity,  decay;  and  then  they  pass  out  of  any  life  that  we  can 
see.  They  are  not  only  seen  things,  but  also  famiieva,  things  that  appear.  Tester- 
day  they  had  not  appeared ;  to-day  they  appear;  to-morrow  they  will  disappear.  And 
yet  in  disappearing  they  leave  behind  them  that  out  of  which  will  come  a  succession  of 
phenomena  like  themselves.  Thus  generation  is  mysteriously  linked  to  generation,  and 
the  world  goes  on.  Suppose  we  have  before  us  a  field  of  grain.  A  little  time  ago  that 
stretch  of  waving  stalks  was  not;  nothing  but  an  extent  of  broken  soil.  We  look  for 
an  antecedent ;  and  the  first  antecedent  we  find  is  the  seed  that  has  been  sown.  We 
do  know  that  if  grain-seed  is  sown  in  the  earth  the  result  will  be  a  crop  of  grain,  but  to 
say  this  does  not  satisfy  us.  The  heart  cannot  believe  that  natural  observation  has  the 
last  word  to  say  on  the  matter.  Scientific  inquiry  goes  as  far  as  it  can  into  the  seen, 
and  then  faith  spreads  its  wings  for  a  flight  into  the  unseen,  and  declares  that  if  genera- 
tion so  regularly  succeeds  generation,  and  age  so  regularly  succeeds  age,  it  must  bo 
because  God  is  joining  them  all  together— framing  the  ages,  as  in  this  verse  it  is  sublimely 
expressed.  The  verse  must  be  taken  as  referring,  not  only  to  the  original  creation  of 
the  world  and  all  that  is  therein,  but  also  to  the  continuance  and  reproduction  of  life. 
The  first  origin  of  life  is  not  more  mysterious  than  the  continuance  of  it.  And  faith  says 
that  the  word  of  an  unseen  God  has  to  do  with  these  mysteries,  and  the  word  "  God  " 
carries  all  the  rest  that  hag  to  be  said.  To  say  that  God  speaks  the  life-giving  word 
U  to  say  that  all  is  spoken  in  love,  in  wisdom,  and  in  all-comprehending  powers— Y. 

¥er.  i.—I7ie  faith  of  Abel.    L  In  his  action  there  WM  KO  bbIiATion  ubasubable  bt 


344  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEWS.  [oh.  zl  1— ia 

HUMAN  BBABON  BETWEEN  MEANS  AND  ENDS.  Where  something  is  done  perceptible 
to  the  senses,  and  the  result  is  also  perceptible  to  the  senses,  then  reason  can  see  that 
there  is  a  relation  between  means  and  ends.  But  here,  while  the  something  done  is 
perceptible  to  the  senses,  the  result  is  in  no  way  perceptible  to  sny  natural  faculty  of 
man.  To  the  pure  rationalist,  the  killing  of  a  beast  in  sacrifice  must  ever  seem  an 
aimless,  resuUless  act,  always  a  mere  superstition,  always  a  waste.  It  is  rational  to  kill 
a  beast  in  self-defence,  and  plausible  reasons  may  be  urged  why  beasts  should  be  killed 
for  food ;  but  there  is  no  reason,  save  that  of  a  deep,  inward,  authoritative  impression, 
why  a  beast  should  be  killed  in  sacrifice.  Abel  certainly  could  give  no  other  reason. 
And  yet,  looked  at  in  the  light  of  the  subsequent  death  of  Christ,  certain  great  prin- 
ciples of  sacrificial  action  are  seen  in  this  first  recorded  sacrifice,  and  all  the  numberless 
similar  ones  which  followed.  There  is  the  acknowledgment  of  human  fault  as  well  as 
of  Divine  goodness.  There  is  the  acknowledgment  of  Divine  goodness  in  giving  back 
to  God  what  God  first  of  all  had  given.  But  this  might  have  been  done  by  an  ofiering 
lilie  that  of  Cain.  There  has  to  be  something  more,  and  it  is  reached  when  a  life 
is  taken.  The  innocent  suffers  for  the  guilty.  Granted  that  Abel's  state  of  mind  is 
one  inconceivable  to  us,  one  which  we  cannot  imagine  being  produced  in  us,  yet  it  may 
have  been  appropriate  enough  to  that  stage  in  human  history.  If  we  had  been  in  Abel's 
place  we  should  have  done  right  in  following  Abel's  example. 

II.  The  faith  that  is  required  fob  the  taking  awat  of  ant  life.  Life  is 
taken  away  recklessly,  thoughtlessly,  upon  very  slight  occasion — even  human  life.  And 
yet,  as  a  child  is  reported  once  to  have  said,  it  ought  to  require  great  faith  to  put  a  man 
to  death — a  very  clear  conviction  that  the  thing  is  right  and  necessary.  Liberty,  if 
wrongly  taken,  can  be  restored.  Life,  however  taken,  is  gone  for  ever.  And  there 
should  be  consideration,  surely,  in  taking  the  life  of  even  a  brute  beast.  Hence,  when- 
ever there  was  real  obedience  in  such  a  sacrifice,  there  must  have  been  a  very  deep  faith. 
Faith  that  what  looked  like  waste  was  really  using  a  brute  life  to  the  very  best 
purpose.  The  natural  life  was  yielded  up, and  there  came  back  an  accession  of  spiritual 
life.  The  brute  was  for  the  time  of  greater  service  as  a  sin  offering  than  in  any 
other  way. 

III.  The  extent  of  Abel's  faith.  It  cost  him  his  life.  He  died  through  it. 
The  first  example  of  faith  that  the  writer  finds  is  one  where  the  believer  loses  his  life 
through  his  faith.  Moreover,  he  loses  his  life  through  faith  that  had  Divine  testimony 
borne  to  it.  God  makes  it  plain  that  he  accepts  the  true  obedience,  but  he  does  not 
preserve  the  natural  life  of  him  whom  he  thus  accepts.  The  path  of  faithful  obedience 
may  be  the  path  to  natural  death. 

IV.  Cain's  unbelief.  By  the  results  of  that  unbelief  Cain  still  speaks.  He  did 
not  believe  that  a  sin  ofiering  was  needed.  Then  came  the  results  of  the  unbelief.  1. 
Non-acceptance  of  what  he  did  offer.  2,  Consequent  envy  and  malice  of  his  brother, 
who  had  been  witnessed  to  as  righteous.  3.  Malice  leads  to  actual  murder.  4.  Cain, 
filled  with  remorse,  looses  the  links  that  bind  him  to  his  feUow-men.  Abel's  faith  has 
to  be  looked  at,  not  only  in  its  results  to  him,  bat  in  contrast  with  the  results  of  Cain's 
unbeliefl— Y. 

Ver.  6. — The  faith  of  Enoch.  Of  Enoch  we  knownext  to  nothing  in  one  sense.  We 
are  ignorant  of  the  details  of  his  life ;  not  even  one  great  striking  event  is  preserved  to 
us.  But  of  the  great  principle  and  result  of  his  life  we  are  not  ignorant,  and  it  is  quite 
permissible  for  us  to  make  conjectures  by  way  of  illustration.  In  considering  what  is 
here  said,  we  must  notice  the  order  of  the  argument. 

I.  What  happened  to  Enoch.  He  was  translated  so  as  not  to  see  death.  This 
must  have  happened  in  some  way  manifest  to  his  neighbours,  so  that  they  might  take 
knowledge  of  the  event  and  profit  by  it.  The  translation  is  to  be  looked  on  in  the  light  of 
a  reward ;  but,  after  all,  this  may  not  be  its  chief  significance.  It  may  have  been  for  the 
sake  of  others,  to  whom  God's  approval  of  Enoch  had  to  be  made  manifest.  It  is  no 
slur  upon  Enoch  to  imagine  that  men  as  holy  as  he  have  been  on  the  earth,  yet  they 
have  had  to  die  j  perhaps  live  in  privation,  and  die  in  pain.  Therefore  we  can  hardly 
be  wrong  in  assuming  that  Enoch's  translation  was  in  such  a  public  way  as  to  teach 
those  willing  to  be  taught,  and  act  as  a  rebuke  to  the  unbelieving.  Tiieie  is  something 
eminently  evangelical  in  such  an  operation  of  God.    He  would  draw  Qiao  to  laith  vx 


OH.  XLl— M.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEW8.  S45 

him  by  sho^ng  what  can  happen  to  bis  believing  ones.  He  shows  the  way  of  blessin" 
before  he  shows  the  way  of  cursing.  The  translation  of  the  holy,  righteous  man  comes 
before  the  drowning  of  an  impenitent  race. 

II.  What  there  was  in  Enoch's  life  to  make  this  tbanslation  possible.  "  He 
pleased  God.''  Long  before  his  translation  he  had  had  proof  of  this.  God  does  not  defer 
the  signs  of  his  pleasure.  He  baa  made  us  so  that  the  way  of  obedience  is  the  way  of 
pleasantness,  even  while  we  walk  in  it.  But  all  that  God  had  thus  given  Enoch  by  the 
way  was  for  his  own  sake.  The  common  unheeding  world ,  knew  nothing  of  the  joys 
coming  to  Enoch  through  his  religion.  Now  at  last,  in  his  translation,  something  shall 
be  given  for  a  joy  to  Enoch,  and  at  the  same  time  an  instruction  to  the  world.  Enoch 
might  have  pleased  God  and  yet  not  been  translated;  but  he  could  not  have  been 
translated  unless  he  had  pleased  God.  Then  from  this  inference  the  writer  proceeds 
to  yet  another — that  Enoch  must  have  lived  a  life  of  faith.  To  please  God  certain 
conditions  are  requisite,  and  in  the  very  front  of  these  is  faith.  We  cannot  please  God 
unconsciously,  as  the  lieavenly  bodies  do  in  their  movements,  or  a  plant  in  its  growth. 
We  must  do  such  things  as  the  will  of  the  Invisible  requires.  He  will  not  be  pleased 
with  anything  we  do  simply  because  we  do  our  best  according  to  the  liglit  of  nature. 
But  this  is  a  matter  which  may  be  dealt  with  in  a  homily  by  itselC 

III.  Enoch's  expectations.  God  translated  Enoch,  but  it  does  not  follow  that 
Enoch  expected  to  be  translated.  All  that  Enoch  could  be  sure  of  was  that  a  good 
present  would  be  followed  by  a  better  future.  Enoch  left  this  world- by  a  gate  that  has 
been  very  rarely  opened— a  gate  the  mode  of  whose  opening  we  can  hardly  comprehend. 
It  may  never  be  opened  again  till  that  day  which  is  hinted  at  in  1  Thessalonians,  when 
Christ's  people  then  living  will  be  caught  up  to  meet  their  Lord  in  the  air.  If  Enoch 
had  expected  translation  without  the  pains  o^  death,  he  would  not  have  been  showing 
the  spirit  of  true  faith.  True  faith  will  go  on  humbly  serving  God  on  earth,  and  feel- 
ing that  entrance  to  heaven  will  come  in  God's  good  time. — Y, 

Ver.  6. — Faith  needed  to  pleaie  Ood.  I.  It  ib,  then,  possible  to  fleabc  God. 
Some  there  are  who  care  nothing  whether  he  be  pleased  or  not.  God's  will,  God's 
delight  in  the  obedience  of  men,  never  enters  into  their  thoughts.  They  live  to  please 
themselves.  They  can  even  understand  that  some  object  may  be  served  by  trying  to 
please  other  men.  And  yet  those  who  live  for  self-pleasure  are  sure  to  be  disappointed. 
God  has  meant  our  pleasure  to  come  through  first  of  all  pleasing  him.  The  great  law 
of  man's  being  is  that  he  should  serve  the  purposes  of  God,  and  he  can  only  serve  those 
purposes  by  finding  out  what  they  are,  and  taking  God's  means  to  carry  them  into 
effect.  If,  then,  it  is  God's  will  that  we  sliould  please  him,  be  will  surely  show  us  what 
to  do  and  how  to  do  it.  There  ought  to  be  in  our  hearts  a  desire  to  please  God.  We 
are  not  without  the  wish  to  stand  well  with  our  fellow-men,  to  have  their  good  word. 
How  much  more,  then,  we  should  desire  to  become  acceptable  to  him  who  is  perfect 
goodness  I  If  Enoch  pleased  God,  we  may  do  it.  '  And  the  first  thing  to  be  considered 
is,  not  whether  it  be  difficult  or  easy  to  do  it,  but  whether  it  be  possible, 

II.  How  God  is  to  be  pleased.  Bemember  always  that,  in  the  writings  of  apostles 
and  evangelists,  when  God  is  spoken  of  Jehovah  is  meant.  Jehovah  as  over  against  the 
gods  of  heathendom.  Their  priests  taught  that  it  was  possible  to  please  them,  and 
showed  how  the  thing  was  to  be  done,  by  offerings  of  all  sorts,  and  by  adding  constantly 
to  the  wealth  of  their  shrines.  The  offerings  in  themselves  were  reckoned  good ; 
and  well  they  might  be,  for  they  made  many  priests  rich.  Jehovah  also  received 
offerings,  but  to  him  the  offerings  had  no  value  except  as  expressive  of  intelligent 
obedience.  The  offerings  were  for  the  sake  of  men  rather  than  of  God  himself.  He 
must  be  pleased  by  something  different  from  mere  gifts  of  what  he  has  himself  created. 
And  here  the  writer  gives  us  one  of  the  essentials  towards  pleasing  God.  Apart  from 
faith  we  cannot  please  him.  Q'here  are  many  elements  in  the  character  that  is  pleasing 
to  God,  and  one  element  is  made  prominent  at  one  time,  another  at  another.  We  know 
that  Enoch  must  surely  have  been  a  loving  man,  for  without  love  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God.  Here  the  important  thing  was  to  insist  on  his  being  a  believer.  Idols 
could  be  approached  without  faith,  for  they  were  really  not  approached  at  all;  no  heart 
of  man  ever  came  into  living  contact  with  ihem.  But  of  Gud  thciu  was  no  image;  the 
worshipper  bad  to  believe  that  there  was  a  real  existence  »U  unseen.    Suppose  for  • 


3M  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  [oa.  XL  1—40. 

moineiit  that  we  had  set  before  us  for  search  and  discovery  an  object  perceptible  hj  the 
senses.  Before  beginning  the  search,  should  we  not  be  wise  in  assuring  ourselves  on  the 
following  points?  1.  The  real  existence  of  the  object.  2.  The  probability  of  finding  it. 
3.  A  corresponding  reward  for  the  possible  toil  of  the  search.  There  has  been  faith  on 
these  points  which  has  had  no  rational  basis,  and  of  course  has  ended  in  disappointment; 
e.g.  the  enthusiastic  searching  for  the  philosopher's  stone.  But  liere  is  an  object,  the 
object  supreme  of  all — God,  the  Fountain  of  being  and  blessedness;  and  this  object 
cannot  be  known  by  the  senses.  There  are  many  so-called  arguments  for  the  existence 
of  a  Qod,  but  men  who  think  that  they  therefore  really  believe  in  the  existence  of  a 
God  are  self-deceived.  Believing  in  the  existence  of  a  Being  to  wliom  this  name  of  God 
is  given  must  be  an  act  of  pure  faith.  Men  must  say,  "  1  cannot  believe  otherwise ;  I 
canuot  believe  the  contrary."  Then  to  this  must  be  added  the  practical  impulse  to 
come  in  contact  with  him.  Note  here  exactly  what  is  demanded,  as  the  ordinary 
version  fails  to  give  us  quite  the  meaning.  He  th.it  comes  to  God  must  believe  in  God's 
existence,  and  that  when  men  seek  him  out  and  come  to  know  him  in  actual  experience 
and  service,  he  gives  tliem  most  real,  substantial  rewards.  For  the  seeking  out  diligence 
is  01  course  required,  but  diligence  is  not  the  quality  primarily  referred  to,  •'  Seek  out " 
is  only  a  more  suggestive  way  of  saying  "  find," — Y. 

Ver.  7. — The  faith  of  Noah.  Going  from  Enoch  to  IToah,  we  pass  from  a  mere  hint 
as  to  character  into  the  greatest  fulness  of  detail.  Enoch's  faith  we  have  to  take  upon 
tmst,  for  no  act  of  his  life  is  recorded  from  wliich  we  could  infer  his  faith.  Noah's 
faith,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  see  for  ourselves.  It  is  get  before  us  in  a  great  and 
notable  action,  and  not  to  see  it  would  drgue  great  spiritual  blindness  on  our  part.    Note — 

I.  The  TB0B  siQNinoANCB  OF  THE  D^UGB.  There  is  much  about  the  Deluge  that 
we  cannot  understand,  never  shall  understand.  Its  mode,  its  details,  its  extent,  we 
shall  have  to  leave  unsettled  questions.  Difficulties  inherent  in  the  record  we  must  con- 
fess. But  at  the  same  time,  our  ignorance  and  perplexity  will  be  a  small  niat'er  if  only 
we  take  care  not  to  lose  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  record.  We  have  in  the  Deluge 
a  great  illustration  of  human  faith  on  the  one  side,  human  unbelief  on  the  other.  Noah 
had  a  revelation,  an  intimation  of  impending  destruction,  which  he  believed  to  be  from 
God  and  to  be  the  truth.  Straightway  he  began  to  show  his  faith  by  his  works,  thus 
becoming  by  his  very  action  a  prophet  to  his  neighbours  and  a  test  of  their  disposition. 
Noah,  the  believer,  is  the  great  central  figure  in  connection  with  the  Flood,  and  the  nar- 
rative of  it  is  given,  not  for  the  sake  of  recording  a  stupendous  physical  change,  but  for 
the  Bake  of  illustrating  how  the  character  of  one  man  may  influence  the  destiny  of  a 
whole  race. 

II.  Noah  had  no  ground  for  action  bxoept  pure  faith.  Everything  in  the 
way  of  human  experience  and  ordinary  probability  was  against  him.  He  was  not 
guarding  against  any  of  those  things  which  men  take  trouble  to  guard  against.  Possibly 
the  certainty  of  a  greater  evil  led  him,  comparatively  speaking,  to  neglect  smaller  ones. 
It  would  seem  to  the  world  that  he  might  have  employed  his  time  more  profitably,  and 
also  his  substance.  He  could  not  make  his  work  appear  a  prudent  or  a  rational  one ;  as 
he  went  on  with  the  work  and  felt  his  loneliness,  he  would  often  be  compelled  to  ask 
whether  he  was  deluding  himself,  or  was  really  in  the  path  of  duty. 

III.  The  corkbspokdbnoe  op  Noah's  action  with  his  professed  faith.  It  does 
not  aiipear  that  he  went  about  proclaiming  destruction.  The  revelation  was  made  to 
him  to  secure  his  own  safety.  His  real  belief  in  the  Deluge  was  shown  in  the  most 
convincing  way  by  his  building  of  the  ark.  Many  beliefs  are  only  in  word  ;  they  do 
not  at  all  influence  life ;  nay,  more,  the  stress  of  necessity  may  bring  action  that  con- 
tradicts them.  We  have  to  watch  what  a  man  does  if  we  would  know  what  he  really 
believes. 

IV.  Noah's  implicit  condemnation  op  others.  In  building  the  ark,  he  condemned 
the  world.  The  believer  cannot  help  condemning  the  unbeliever.  He  does  not  wish  to 
condemn,  but  his  very  action,  is  a  censure  ;  and  the  more  full  of  spirituality  the  action, 
the  more  does  it  look  like  a  censure  of  others.  And  in  the  case  of  Noah  the  condem- 
nation was  unusually  manifest.  For  if  he  was  right,  then  all  round  him,  on  every 
side,  ark-building  ought  to  have  begun.  The  condemnation  indeed  was  mutual,  and 
only  time  oould  sbow^wbich  condemnation  was  grounded  in  right  and  tuthority. 


CH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS*  »47 


V.  Noah's  besponsibility.  He  built  an  ark  for  the  saying  of  his  house.  To  neglect 
the  Divine  demand  for  faith  will  not  only  ruin  us,  but  may  bring  suffering  to  others. 
Noah  had  his  family  to  think  of.  Blessing  and  security  came  to  his  children  through 
bis  obedience.  The  highest  things  can,  of  course,  only  come  by  individual  faith  and 
submission,  but  something  will  come  to  others  if  only  we  believe.  The  believer,  while 
he  serves  himself,  cannot  but  1>e  of  service  to  others. — Y. 

Ver.  8. — The  faith  of  Abraham  going  forth  into  the  unknown.    We  hAve  to  notice 

what  Abraham's  faith  rested  on. 

I.  Ok  a  Divine  oall.  It  was  not  an  impulse  of  his  own.  Not  in  ambition,  not  in 
discontent,  not  in  self-will,  did  he  go  forth.  Nor  was  it  a  suggestion  from  some  other 
human  being.  The  voice  came  from  above,  speaking  to  what  was  inmost  in  him. 
Jehovah  had  chosen  him  for  a  purpose  of  his  own,  and  therefore  made  the  authority  of 
the  summons  indisputably  clear.  It  is  the  fact  of  this  Divine  call  at  the  beginning 
which  makes  the  observation  of  Abiahara's  subsequent  course  so  interesting.  We 
desire  to  see'  what  God  will  make  out  of  a  man  to  whom  he  gives  a  special  summons. 
It  is  a  great  deal  when  any  of  us  can  be  quite  sure,  amid  the  difficulties  and  perplexities 
of  life,  that  we  are  where  God  has  put  us. 

II.  On  a  Divine  pbomise.  The  promises  of  God  give  a  belter  resting-place  for  faith 
than  any  projicts  of  our  own.  God  had  said  definitely  to  Abraham  that  there  was  a 
land  of  inheritance  for  him.  Abraham,  so  far  from  going  out  on  the  great  journey  of 
life  with  nothing  better  than  s  peradventure,  really  had  the  best  of  prospects.  All  be 
had  to  do  was  to  show  the  obedience  of  faith.  God  always  presunts  us  with  a  hope 
when  he  calls  us  to  a  duty.  He  sets  before  us  great  ends  corresponding  to  our  nature 
and  to  his  interest  in  us. 

III.  On  Divine  guidance.  This  was  the  element  in  the  Divine  call  which  would 
try  Abraham  most,  that  he  knew  not  where  he  was  going.  This  would  expose  him  to 
the  wonder  and  the  ridicule  of  his  neighbours.  Human  prudence  seems  such  an  excel- 
lent principle  of  action,  seems  to  keep  men  out  of  so  many  troubles,  seems  to  achieve 
such  satisfactory  results,  that  men  can  hardly  think  of  a  higher  and  a  better  one.  But 
then  human  prudence  has  its  value  only  in  a  certain  path.  We  cannot  begin  by 
choosing  our  path  according  to  God's  directions  and  then  going  on  in  it  according  to 
our  own  judgment.    Everything  must  be  begun,  continued,  and  ended  in  God. — ^Y. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  tent  and  the  aity.  I.  Observe  the  contrast  undbbltino  these 
VERSsp.  The  tent  is  in  one  place  in  the  morning,  and  may  be  miles  away  at  night. 
The  city  always  remains  in  the  same  place.  Thns  there  is  forcibly  indicated  an 
altogether  diffurent  kind  of  occupation  and  interest  for  the  dweller  in  tents  from  that 
for  the  dweller  in  cities.  As  the  one  class  of  men  increases  the  other  must  decrease. 
The  fathers  dwell  in  tents ;  the  children  in  cities.  He  who  dwells  in  a  tent  can  have 
no  particular  interest  in  the  land  where  he  happens  to  be  at  the  time.  If  it  supplies 
his  wants  for  the  passing  day,  that  is  all  he  needs  to  care  fur.  But  he  who  has  a  house 
built  in  that  land  must  feel  the  deepest  interest  in  its  fame,  prosperity,  and  development. 

II.  The  partiai.  b'ulfilment  of  a  promise.  He  who  called  Abraham  gave  him 
a  promise,  and  guided  him,  brought  him  at  last  into  the  land  of  promise.  He  dwelt 
in  the  land  of  promise,  in  however  imperleot  and  fugitive  a  way.  Thus  we  see  how 
God  gives  us  all  that  can  be  given  under  present  conditions.  The  time  had  not  yet 
come  to  possess  the  land — the  seed  of  Abraham  had  to  be  immensely  increased  and 
vigorously  disciplined  before  that  was  possible — but,  nevertheless,  Abraham  could  dwell 
in  the  land.  Satisfaction  and  joy  would  begin  the  moment  obedience  began.  And  have 
not  we  also  entered  in  part  on  our  inheritance  ?  Do  not  the  blessings  of  the  heavenly 
state  stream  down  upon  us  even  now?  Abraham  enjoyed  Canaan;  he  himself  and  his 
dependants  got  food,  and  there  was  abundant  herbage  for  his  cattle.  He  was  happier  in 
Canaan,  even  as  a  wanderer,  than  he  could  have  been  anywhere  elw  in  thii  world,  for 
he  was  there  by  the  will  of  God. 

III.  The  fibmeb  obasp  of  a  promise.  Abraham  probably  had  alwayi  led  a 
nomadic  life.  Even  in  the  land  of  his  nativity  and  earlier  days  he  would  be  more  or 
leas  of  a  wanderer.  The  wandering  spirit  would  be  in  him  by  nature,  habit,  tradition. 
Tlicrefore  as  far  m  he  personally  was  ooncerneci,  Canaan  gave  him  all  that  earth  Wttl4 


848  THE  EFISTLB  TO  *THE  HEBREWS.  [ol  XL  1—40 

prorld*  for  the  wiehea  of  the  heart.  But  he  rises  shove  the  individual  and  the  present. 
Ag  he  advancee  in  ohedience,  the  aims  of  OoA,  the  possibilities  of  bis  own  life,  the  needs 
of  all  his  posterity,  rise  more  distinctly  before  his  mind.  For  himself  and  his  children, 
and  all  the  families  of  the  earth  that  are  to  be  blessed  in  him,  he  looks  for  something 
better  than  a  land  to  live  in  fur  a  few  years  and  then  be  buried  in.  There  is  a  corre- 
spondence which  cannot  fail  to  be  noted  between  what  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  says 
here  concerning  the  tent  and  the  city  of  foundations,  and  what  Paul  says  (2  Cor.  v.  1) 
concerning  the  tent  and  the  eternal,  heavenly  building  of  Qod. 

IV,  Patience  having  its  pkefeot  work.  He  discerned  that  the  city  which  was 
to  have  foundations  worth  calling  foundations  must  come,  not  from  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  men,  but  from  the  planning  and  fabricating  of  God.  And  foundation-work  of 
this  kind  went  on  very  slowly,  according  to  human  computation.  The  great  thing  to 
be  remembered  is  that  the  foundation  of  this  city  of  God  lies  outside  the  limits  of  the 
seen  and  the  temporal.  The  city  of  God  is  to  be  looked  at  in  a  similar  way  to  the  rest 
provided  for  God's  people  already  spoken  of  (ch.  iv.).  There  remaineth  a  city  which 
hath  foundations,  a  house  of  God,  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  Waiting 
is  our  great  duty,  rejoicing  in  the  present  indwelling  of  God's  Spirit  u  the  earnest,  and 
knowing  that  the  fulness  will  come  in  its  own  order. — T. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  two  fatherlands.  I,  That  fbom  which  they  had  come.  The 
writer  of  this  Epistle  has  been  a  student  of  the  recorded  experiences  and  habitual  feelings 
of  his  devout  ancestors.  Many  of  the  descendants  of  Abraham  had  no  devoutness  in 
them.  They  cared  nothing  where  they  lived  so  long  as  they  conid  get  gain  and  their  fill 
of  the  pleasures  of  life.  Such  were  really  not  reckoned  in  the  exceeding  multituile  at 
all.  They  that  are  of  faith  are  the  children  of  faithful  Abraham,  And  few  as  they  were 
probably  out  of  the  bulk  of  Abraham's  descendants  according  to  the  flesh,  nevertheless 
they  may  have  been  a  great  number,  more  than  we  have  any  idea  of.  The  Lord's 
people,  tbough  far  from  being  as  many  as  they  ought  to  be,  are  yet  more  numerous 
than  we  think.  Remember  Elijah's  ignorance  of  the  seven  thousand  who  had  not  bowed 
to  Baal.  Such  people  must  ever  express  their  longings  for  something  far  beyond  what 
any  earthly  locality  can  supply.  And  as  the  writer  says,  these  longings  are  ever 
expressed  in  the  spirit  of  faith.  Looking  away  from  earth,  and  from  self,  and  from  the 
})re8ent,  they  see  what  an  abundance  of  promises  is  theirs.  They  dwell  in  Canaan  as 
strangers  and  sojourners  dwell  in  a  land.  They  pass  through  it  as  seeking  something 
which  they  do  not  expect  to  find  in  it.  It  is  part  of  the  necessary  way  ;  it  docs  nut 
contain  the  journey's  end.  All  travellers  have  a  choice ;  they  can  press  forward  into 
the  unknown  or  they  can  go  back.  Ismelites  might  have  sought  the  home  of  Abraham, 
on  the  possibility  that  there  might  be  found  a  peace  and  satislaction  not  to  be  found  in 
Canaan,  There  is  something  in  the  power  of  fatherland,  Eiiglislimen  will  go  to  live 
abroad  for  many  years,  but  they  like  to  come  back  for  the  last  chapter  of  life.  We 
all  know  the  popular  belief  that  people  out  of  health  may  benefit  by  going  to  their 
native  air. 

II.  The  hbavenlt  fatherland.  Our  Father  in  heaven  makes  in  heaven  the 
satisfying  provision  for  his  children.  All  the  meanins;  of  the  passage  here  is  only  to  bo 
apprehended  by  bearing  in  mind  the  fatherhood  cf  God.  Spiritual  relations  are  more 
than  natural  ones  j  heavenly  relations  than  earthly  ones.  Abraham  left  the  land  of 
his  fathers  because  only  by  doing  so  could  the  seeds  of  a  new,  a  better  condition  ut 
things  be  sovm.  And  then  little  by  little  it  must  have  become  clear  that  outward 
change  was  to  make  clear  the  need  of  something  more — ^individual,  inward  chan  e. 
Spiritual  aspirations,  strongly  expressed  because  they  are  deeply  felt,  draw  forth  God's 
response  of  special  interest  in  those  who  cherish  such  aspirations.  God  holds  forth  the 
heavenly  land,  the  land  of  his  full  manifestation  and  his  unobsoured  glory,  before  all 
believers.  Prophecy  is  full  of  that  which  encourages  faith  in  this  respect.  As  to  the 
nature  of  the  heavenly  state,  the  Lord's  true  people  may  have  been  in  much  ignorance ; 
but  as  to  the  satisfying  reality  of  it  they  were  fully  assured.  God  never  asks  for  faith 
without  giving  something  corresponding  to  cheer  his  people,  to  lift  them  above  the 
tttractions,  the  delusions,  and  the  temptations  of  the  present. — Y, 

Vera,  17 — 19, — Abrafutm't  faith  in  offering  Isaac    This  is  to  be  considered  here  as 


OH.  XL  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEW8.  8*» 

an  illnstration  of  faith.  All  our  modern  difficulties  as  to  the  right  and  wrong  of 
Abraham's  conduct  never  occurred  to  the  writer  of  this  Epistle.  A  human  sacrifice  was 
not  abhorrent  to  Abraham's  views  of  religious  necessity.  Here  we  have  simply  to  look 
at  the  faith  a  father  showed  when  called  to  give  up  his  only  son.    See— 

L  Faith  triumphing  ovbb  natubal  inolinationb.  Not  over  natural  affections; 
for  Abraham,  having  loved  his  son,  loved  him  to  the  end.  The  very  depth  and  intensity 
of  his  natural  affection  make  his  faith  appear  the  stronger.  We  must  not  for  a  moment 
admit  that  natural  affection  could  be  even  deadened  in  his  heart  to  allow  him  to  do 
such  a  thing.  But  assuredly  his  natural  inclinations  must  have  had  a  struggle  with 
his  faith  before  they  surrendered.  It  is  an  almost  universal  tendency  among  parents 
to  wish  that  their  children  should  have  the  rewards  and  comforts  of  life.  Wherever 
failure  and  suffering  may  come,  they  are  not  to  come  to  them.  The  mother  of  Jamea 
and  John  showed  this  feeling  very  strongly.  This  is  the  way  in  which  natural  affection 
°;etB  spoiled  and  made  a  hideous  thing  through  selfishness.  This  is  the  way  in  which 
natural  affection  often  defeats  itself,  and  instead  of  doing  the  best  thing  for  children 
does  the  worst.  Here  surely  is  an  example  for  parents  in  dealing  with  their  children. 
Let  them  try  to  find  out  what  QoA  would  have  them  do,  what  is  really  best  upon  a 
large  view  of  the  future,  and  not  what  seems  best,  not  what  is  easiest  and  most  com- 
fortable. God  called  both  Abraham  and  his  son  to  self-sacrifice,  and  his  view  was  far 
better  than  any  inclination  or  judgment  of  their  own. 

II.  Faith  tkiumphinq  ovee  plaubibli  objections.  Was  there  ever  a  finer  chance 
for  the  tempter  to  make  the  worse  appear  the  better  reason,  to  strengthen  natural 
inclination  by  plausible  representations  as  to  what  was  the  Divine  will  ?  It  seems 
most  reasonable  to  say,  "  Isaac  is  the  child  of  promise ;  the  future  for  generations 
depends  ou  his  life;  whatever  else  may  happen  to  him,  it  is  clear  he  is  not  to  die  now." 
And  only  too  often  in  life  plausible  reasons  for  what  turns  out  in  the  end  an  utterly 
wrong  course  are  found  with  very  little  ingenuity.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  way  should 
seem  right  to  love  and  prudence.  Opportunities  may  come  seeming  on  the  surface  of 
them  to  have  signs  of  Providence,  and  yet  all  the  time  the  real  pointings  of  Providence 
may  be  neglected.  The  mind  gets  led  away  with  unconscious  sophistries.  Now,  it  is 
in  view  of  just  such  circumstances  that  Ood  comes  in  with  his  clear  authority  to  take 
the  place  of  our  plausible  views  and  arguments.  There  are  times  when  distinct, 
impressive  intimations  are  not  needed,  when  ordinary  common  scn.se  and  right  feeling 
are  quite  enough.  But  also  there  are  times  when  one  clear,  significant  word  from  above 
wiU  settle  everything  to  the  humble  and  docile  mind. 

III.  Faith  abbubgd  or  the  omnipotence  of  God.  Notice  that  God  did  not  come 
in  with  this  trial  of  faith  at  the  beginning  of  his  dealings  with  Abraham.  He  showed 
him  first  of  all  much  of  his  power  and  his  guiding  hand.  The  child  whom  he  asked 
in  sacrifice  had  first  of  all  been  given  in  miracle.  Divine  demands  are  always  propor- 
tioned to  strength  and  to  previous  experiences.  And  so,  however  hard  the  trial  might 
be  to  the  feelings  of  the  father,  yet  it  had  its  eminently  reasonable  side  when  it 
appealed  to  the  experience  of  the  believer,  God  was  putting  honour  upon  Abraham 
in  judging  him  fit  for  such  a  demand  as  this. — Y. 

Ver.  21. — A  lle$singfor  each.  The  emphatic  word  here  is  "  both,"  or,  as  the  Bevised 
Version  much  better  puts  it, "  each,"  We  see  this  emiihasis  at  once  on  reading  the  narra- 
tive in  Gen,  xlviii.  Jacob  bad  a  blessing  for  each  of  his  own  sons,  but  when  he  comes  to 
Joseph  he  individually  is  passed  over  as  it  were,  because  Manasseh  and  Ephraim  cannot 
be  comprehended  in  a  common  blessing.  AU  these  blessings  of  Joseph  are,  of  course,  to  be 
taken  as  predictions,  having  a  particular  emphasis,  solemnity,  and  memorable  character 
as  the  words  of  a  dying  man  concerning  sons  and  grandsons.  The  distinctions  then  made 
could  not  be  afterwards  ignored  or  destroyed.  There  was  a  correspondence  between 
the  blessings  and  the  after  history  of  the  tribes.  Jacob  did  not  thus  speak  because  of 
some  peculiar  interest  of  his  own  in  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  The  father  and  the 
grandfather  assumed  the  prophet  while  he  spake  the  blessings.  He  laid  his  right  hand 
on  the  head  of  the  younger,  his  left  on  the  head  of  the  elder.  He  did  it  wittingly, 
eontrary  to  the  wish  of  his  son.  If  we  would  have  God's  blessing,  we  must  leave  God 
to  apportion  it  according  to  his  own  purposes.  Jacob  knew  nothing  at  the  time  of  the 
way  in  which  Levi  would  be  merged  as  t  were  in  the  other  tribes,  and  bo  leave  a  place 


360  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xl  1—40. 

for  Eptraira  to  come  in.  But  he  knew  that  somehow  or  other  a  place  of  distinction 
was  reserved  for  Ephraim.  Thus  faith  transcends  all  natural  anticipations,  and  con- 
tradicts oftentimes  natnral  prohabilities.  Then  it  is  worth  while  noting  how  the 
triumph  of  foith  is  blended  with  the  work  of  retribution.  Here  is  the  true  exaltation 
of  Joseph.  Here  is  the  true  fulfilment  of  those  dreams  which  brought  him  so  much 
suffering.  Something  he  got  of  honourin  Egypt ;  but  beyond  this  and  more  significant 
is  the  position  of  his  two  sons  as  being  each  the  founder  of  a  tribe.  God  can  bring  to 
a  permanent  exaltation  those  whom  jealousy  would  humble.  As  to  the  eminence  of 
Ephraim,  notice  that  it  begins  eyen  in  the  wilderness,  where  the  numbers  of  Ephraim 
exceed  those  of  Manasseh  (Numb.  i.).  And  as  to  the  importance  of  Ephraim  in 
after  history,  it  m&j  be  enough  to  cite  the  pontion  of  this  tribe  in  the  prophecies  of 
Hosea.— T. 

Ver.  22. — !I%e  faith  of  the  dying  Joseph.  I.  Faith  oocitptinq  itself  with  thb 
PKB80NAL  rnTUEB.  Joseph  had  lived  long  in  Egypt,  been  held  in  great  honour  there, 
and  had  brought  his  kinsfolk  into  great  comfort.  All  the  ordinary  probabilities  pointed 
to  a  continued  residence  of  the  descendants  of  Jacob  in  Egypt.  Who  had  better  chances 
than  they?  One  might  compare  them  with  the  Dutch  companions  of  William  of 
Orange  who  came  over  with  him  at  the  Bevolution,  and  m^^ny  of  whose  descendants 
now  stand  high  in  rank  and  wealth  amongst  Englislimen.  Joseph,  however,  had  the 
promises  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  distinctly  before  his  mind.  The  solemn  and 
unique  experiences  of  father  and  grandfather  and  great-grandfather  were  doubtless 
frequent  topics  of  meditation.  Canaan,  not  Egypt,  was  the  destined  home  of  his  people. 
And  in  this  future,  though  he  knew  not  how  it  was  to  come  about,  he  felt  he  had  a  share. 
And  a  feeling  of  this  sort  should  prevail  in  our  hearts  as  we  ponder  the  future  of  the 
Church  of  Christ.  We,  while  we  have  our  day  of  earthly  opportunity,  are  bound  to 
contribute  towards  the  manifestation  of  the  inheritance  of  the  sanctifled,  and  we  must 
do  it  ever  with  the  distinct  conviction  that  we  have  a  part  in  the  inheritance.  We  do 
something  for  those  who  have  lived  before  us,  and  something  for  those  who  have  come 
after  us.  And  so  also  our  successors  will  do  something  for  us.  Each  generation  of 
believers  adds  its  part  to  the  capacious  and  magnificent  building  in  which,  when 
completed,  all  believers  are  to  dwell  together  in  immortality  and  glory. 

II.  Faith  taking  an  unnbcessabv  peecaution.  It  really  mattered  nothing,  as  to 
the  essence  of  the  inheritance  and  the  promise,  where  Joseph's  bones  were  laid.  But 
that  is  a  view  which  to  Joseph  himself  would  probably  have  been  quite  unintelligible. 
Sentiment  is  almost  omnipotent  in  these  matters.  The  dead  are  taken  hundreds  of 
miles,  OTM  land  and  sea,  to  repose  with  their  own  kindred.  Joseph's  faith,  therefore, 
was  not  a  perfectly  instructed  faith.  But  we  may  even  be  glad  of  this,  for  the  very 
error  of  his  anticipations  only  makes  the  reality  of  his  faith  in  the  essential  truth  mora 
manifest.  We  must  labour  to  get  rid  of  all  error,  but  intellectual  error  is  a  small 
matter  if  only  our  hearts  have  hold  of  spiritual  truth.  We  may  be  cured  of  a  great 
many  vain  traditions  and  popular  superstitions,  yet  not  be  one  whit  nearer  to  a  part  in 
the  place  which  Christ  is  preparing  for  his  people. — ^T. 

Ver.  23. — Faith  in  an  infants  destiny.  I.  The  possibilitieb  nr  evbbt  infant  lipb. 
These  must  often  be  in  the  view  of  every  thoughtful  parent,  and  the  view  must  be  mixed 
with  a  good  deal  of  confidence  and  sanguine  expectation.  Parents  sometimes  wish  to 
stamp  their  own  views  and  purposes  on  their  children,  and  it  is  a  dreadful  shock  to  them 
when  they  find  individuality,  originality,  strength  of  will,  asserting  themselves  in  wholly 
unexpected  directions.  Where  one  thing  is  expected  another  thing  is  found.  Where 
Miuch  is  expected  little  is  found.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  where  little  is  expected  much 
is  found.  One  knows  not  what  may  have  been  lost  to  the  world  through  the  deaths  of 
Bo  many  in  early  life.  The  possibilities  need  to  be  constantly  borne  in  mind.  Not 
that  we  are  to  Ije  particularly  on  the  look-out  for  genius  and  exceptional  ability. 
As  a  rule,  these  have  to  be  manifested  and  strongly  aescrtcd  before  they  are 
recognized.  But  we  never  know  what  the  opporlunities  of  people  of  ordinary  abilities 
and  acquirements  may  be,  and  so  all  children  should  be  guided  in  the  ways  of  Christ 
and  guarded  from  the  snares  of  evil,  so  far  as  guiding  and  guarding  wUl  avail  foi 

ty«. 


OH.  XL  1— 4a]  TUB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  851 


*  Hen  think  it  is  an  awful  sight 

To  see  a  soul  just  set  adrift 
On  that  drear  voyage  from  whose  night 

The  ominous  shadows  never  lift; 
But  'tis  more  awful  to  behold 

A  helpless  infant  newly  bom. 
Whose  little  hands  unconscious  hold 

The  keya  of  darkness  and  of  mom." 


IL  Thk  cebtaintieb  with  bespect  to  some  children.  IVJoses  is  by  no  means  th« 
only  child  mentioned  in  Scripture  for  whom  a  memorable  future  might  be  predicted. 
Isaac,  Samuel,  John  the  Baptisjt,  all  stand  in  the  same  category.  And  if  we  believe 
that  there  is  a  Divine  purpose  in  every  human  life,  then  in  every  generation  we  are 
certain  some  will  be  raised  to  do  a  great  work.  There  will  come  the  needful  corre- 
spondence between  character,  circumstances,  and  opportunities.  And  one  very  noticeable 
point  ill  the  biographies  of  some  distinguished  men  is  their  neglected  childhood.  They 
seem  to  have  grovra  up  anyhow — plants  that  should  have  been  in  a  garden  left  to  the 
chanceii  of  the  wiLlernesB.  But  all  the  time  God  is  really  watching  over  them,  guiding 
them  in  a  way  they  know  not,  making  hindrances  and  vexations  to  turn  out  for  their 
good.  As  we  look  back  on  the  past  of  the  world  and  count  up  its  eminent  saints,  its 
evangelists,  its  philanthropists,  its  discoverers,  its  pioneers  in  paths  of  usefulness,  we 
may  assure  our  hearts  with  the  confidence  that  the  future  will  not  be  lacking  in  men 
of  the  same  lort.  We  have  not  the  wisdom,  and  there  is  no  need,  to  make  predictions 
with  reipect  to  particular  individuals.  But  we  may  infer  the  future  from  the  past,  and 
say  that  somewhere  now  there  are  "  proper  children  "  who  will  rise  to  do  their  work  in 
the  Church,  the  senate,  the  university,  the  exchange,  in  every  place  where  men  may  be 
made  better  and  the  legitimate  comforts  of  life  increased. — Y. 

Yen.  24, 26. — Moset  relinquishing  earthly  advantages.  I.  The  obitioaIi  moment  in 
EVEBT  BCHAN  LIFE.  Moses  has  come  to  manhood,  has  passed  through  all  the  perils  of 
infancy  and  childhood,  perils  in  which  the  prudence  and  courage  of  others  count  for  the 
etfective  safeguards,  to  find  Liniself  at  last  face  to  face  with  the  worst  perils  that  can 
beset  a  human  life.  The  edi6t  of  a  tyrant  is  not  so  dreadful  an  evil  as  the  tempta- 
tions to  self-advancement.  The  hour  of  temptation  is  the  hour  when  aU  available 
considerations  of  duty  and  interest  should  be  gathered  together  to  fortify  the  heart.  The 
peril  to  Moses  as  an  infant  was  practically  nothing ;  Jehovah's  miraculous  intervention 
could  come  in  any  moment  to  shield  him.  But  the  peril  to  Moses  as  a  man  was  very 
great  when  the  prospect  of  high  rank  in  the  Egyptian  court  stood  right  before  his  eyes. 
Nay,  more ;  fron^  Moses  we  may  pass  to  Jesus.  Jesus  was  in  no  real  peril  when  Herod 
sent  out  his  band  of  destroyers  to  Bethlehem  ;  but  in  those  after  years,  when  he  had 
to  face  the  prospect  of  toil  and  suffering,  there  was  a  real  peril  to  his  inner  man — the  pres- 
sure of  considerations  which  only  the  peculiar  strength  of  his  nature  enabled  him  to  resist. 

n.  The  8EBTICE  OF  FAITH  IK  SUCH  A  CRITICAL  MOMKNT.  The  Spirit  of  the  world 
says,  "  Look  at  the  position  which  you  at  present  occupy— a  position  thousands  would 
give  anything  to  attain."  Moses  is  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  what  more  can 
he  have  but  the  kingdom  ?  If  he  gives  up  his  position,  what  has  he  left  ?  Nothing, 
truly,  unless  he  has  had  the  revelations  given  to  faith.  And  these  revelations  we  are 
sure  Moses  must  have  had  in  abundance.  If  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph,  had 
revelations  of  the  coming  inheritance  and  glory  of  their  people,  is  it  credible  Moses 
would  not  also  have  revelations  such  as  would  effectually  strip  the  aspect  of  the  court 
wherein  he  lived  of  all  its  glitter?  When  we  have  the  spirit  of  faith  in  us,  the 
discouragements  of  the  present  are  dwarfed  before  the  attractions  of  the  future.  It  Is 
seen  that  the  life  of  faith  has  joys  beside  which  the  joys  of  the  lire  of  sight  are  poor 
indeed.  What  are  the  Pharaohs  of  Egypt  compared  with  Moses  ?  Mere  names. 
Whereas  Moses  has  contributed  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  that  is,  to  the  uplifting  and 
purifying  of  the  whole  world.  When  the  critical  moment  came,  the  eye  of  Moses  was 
to  purged  that  he  saw  where  his  own  real  interest  lay.  He  saw  which  was  the  better 
thine;  for  him  -to  choose  for  his  own  sake.  He  saw  that,  in  choosing  affliction  with  the 
people  of  God,  he  was  choosing  an  exceeding  great  reward,  which  would  more  and  more 
mwifest  it«slf  as  suoli. 


862  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oh.  xl  1—40. 

in.  The  consequent  need  fob  a  constant  odltitation  of  faith.  Wo  kno\» 
not  when  the  critical  moment  may  come,  therefore  we  must  be  ever  ready  for  it.  Men 
must  not  leave  the  making  of  weapons  for  the  day  of  battle.  The  experience  of  a 
lifetime  makes  the  physician  wise  and  successful  in  the  hour  of  disease.  We  must  be 
assiduous  in  laying  up  treasures  of  faith  against  the  day  when  the  persuasions  of  this 
world  will  try  us. — Y. 

Ver.  29. — Faith  and  presumption  in  terrible  amtrast,  I.  A  wat  made  wbebi 
NONE  SBKMS  POSSIBLE.  It  must  be  remembered  how  completely  the  Israelites  were  shut 
in.  The  land  had  shut  them  in ;  mountains  on  each  side  which  they  could  not  over- 
pass ;  the  sea  in  front  of  them;  the  Egyptian  host  behind.  Something  they  must  do — 
either  turn  upon  their  pursuers,  or  march  on  into  the  sea,  or  submit  without  a  struggle. 
The  choice  which  God  gave  to  them  was  that  of  trust  in  him  or  destruction.  As  it 
were  he  drove  them  into  the  necessity  of  faith.  He  did  not  first  of  all  make  the 
channel  through  the  waters  and  let  the  whole  of  Israel  see  it,  for  in  that  there  would 
have  been  no  calling  forth  of  faith.  They  were  told  to  go  forward  while  as  yet  there 
was  no  sign  of  escape.  God  never  makes  interferences  with  the  ordinary  course  of 
nature  unless  for  a  sufficient  reason,  and  therefore  be  does  not  make  them  before  the 
time.  Enough  was  done  if  the  waters  opened  to  let  God's  people  pass  and  closed  again 
the  moment  they  were  through.  Our  business  is  to  listen  and  wait  for  the  Divine 
command  telling  us  what  to  do.  That  is  our  only  safety  when  difficulty  and  danger 
appear  in  every  direction.  There  are  many  positions  in  life  when  human  prudence  will 
do  something ;  there  is  at  least  a  choice  between  going  on  in  the  lower  path  of  human 
prudence  or  changing  to  the  higher  one  of  conformity  with  the  will  of  God.  But  there 
are  also  positions  when  acceptance  of  God's  provisions  is  the  only  chance  of  safety. 
After  all,  difficulty  and  danger  are  relative  words.  They  only  indicate  our  weakness. 
They  are  meaningless  in  relation  to  the  power  of  God.  To  him  there  is  neither  ease 
nor  difficulty,  danger  or  absence  from  danger.  The  greatest  difficulty  and  danger  men 
have  to  face  come  from  being  opposed  to  God.  God  can  make  a  way  through  the 
deepest  waters  for  his  friends,  and  where  his  enemies  appear  to  hare  a  smooth  and 
straight  way  he  can  suddenly  fill  it  with  causes  of  the  worst  disaster. 

II.  A  WAY  CLOSED  WHERE  ONE  SEEMS  OPENED.  "  When  two  do  the  Same  thing,  it  is 
not  the  same  thing,"  says  BengeL  The  Israelite  is  one  sort  of  man,  the  Egyptian  quite 
another.  The  Israelite  is  involved  in  a  covenant,  a  purpose,  and  a  plan.  He  has  not 
come  into  this  present  strait  by  a  kind  of  chance ;  he  has  not  drifted  there  by  his  own 
negligence,  or  rushed  there  by  his  own  folly.  Therefore  a  way  is  made  for  him  through 
the  sea.  But  the  Egyptian  goos  down  into  this  way  through  the  sheerest  presumption. 
The  conduct  of  the  Egyptian  host  is  perhaps  never  sufficiently  considered  when  this 
narrative  is  being  dealt  with.  The  power  of  Jehovah,  the  miracle  itself,  so  fills  the 
mind  that  the  amazing  rashness  of  the  Egyptians  does  not  appear.  And  yet  how  rash 
they  were !  Their  recollections  of  the  immediate  past  should  have  combined  with  their 
present  observations  to  make  them  pause  while  yet  they  were  safe.  True  it  is  that 
God  destroyed  them,  but  equally  truu  is  it  that  they  were  self-destroyed.  A  man  cannot 
be  reckoned  presum|ituous  when  he  acts  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  things,  hut 
here  were  people  presuming  on  the  continuance  of  a  miracle.  The  greatest  unbelievers 
are  ever  the  greatest  presumers. — Y. 

Vers.  30,  81. — Believer*  and  unbelievers  at  Jericho.  L  Bbliisvbbs  outside.  No 
illustration  of  faith  is  given  firom  the  wanderings  in  the  wilderness.  In  truth,  those 
wanderings  were  conspicuous  for  unbelief  rather  than  faith,  for  apostasy  rather  than 
fidelity.  At  times  the  people  mounted  high  in  faith,  and  then  they  fell  as  low.  Just 
at  the  time  they  came  to  Jericho  there  was  everything  in  the  circumstances  of  their 
outward  life  to  inspirit  them.  They  were  escaped  from  the  wilderness,  they  had 
crossed  the  Jordan,  the  land  of  promise  was  under  their  feet.  The  faith  asked  from 
them,  it  will  be  observed,  did  not  involve  anything  very  difficidt  in  practice.  All  thev 
had  to  do  was  to  march  in  a  certain  order  for  seven  days  round  a  fortified  city.  Still 
though  the  deed  was  not  ditficult,  it  was  a  deed  of  real  faith.  For  the  people  might 
well  ask  what  connection  there  could  be  between  marching  round  the  city  and  the 
dowuMl  of  it.    And  a«siuedly  there  was  no  connection  of  cause  and  effect  between 


en.  XI.  1—40.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  853 

ilie  mere  marching  and  the  mere  falling.  Another  oompany  might  have  marched  till 
the  day  of  doom  without  produolng  the  slightest  result.  In  the  great  works  jof  the 
Church  of  Christ  instruments  are  nothing  save  as  the  occasions  of  faith. 

II.  Unbelievebb  inside.  Our  attention  is  specially  called  to  their  unbelief.  The 
world  would  say,  "  Why  should  they  be  anything  else  than  unbelieving  ?  If  Israel  had 
come  with  all  the  regular  appliances  of  siege,  then  the  people  of  Jericho  would  have 
felt  there  was  something  to  believe.  Then  a  real  danger  would  be  reckoned  as  present." 
We  have  always  to  be  on  our  guard  against  the  deceitfulness  of  appearances,  and 
especially  against  the  appearances  of  safety.  It  was  hot  by  might,  but  by  the  word  of 
Jehovah,  that  Jericho  was  to  fall,  and  the  procession  round  the  city  only  signified  that 
the  word  of  doom  had  gone  forth.  The  procession  was  a  sign  of  the  times.  Who 
knows  what  might  have  happened  in  those  seven  days  if  only  Jericho  had  wakened 
up  to  inquiry,  repentance,  and  negotiation?  Whereas  the  attitude  of  the  people 
inilicated  the  most  complete  self-confidence.  It  is  one  of  the  worst  follies  of  unbelief 
that  unbelievers  are  so  assiduous  in  guarding  against  visible,  external  evils,  and  so 
negligent,  go  indifferent,  with  respect  to  the  worst  evils  of  all. 

III.  One  believeb  inside.  One,  and  only  one.  A  woman  of  no  very  good  reputa- 
tion, and  yet  able  to  discern  afar  off  the  ill  that  was  coming.  What  an  encourage- 
ment to  sinners  the  faith  of  Bahab  is  I  For  if  in  her  heart  conld  be  lodged  the  power  of 
faith,  then  what  heart  should  be  reckoned  impenetrable?  Bahab,  with  all  her  faults, 
stood  far  higher  than  many  reputable  people  in  Jericho.  She  had  the  one  thing 
needful  by  way  of  beginning.  Her  faith  saved  her  in  the  hour  of  temporal  destruction 
to  the  other  inhabitants  of  Jericho.  But,  of  course,  in  the  end  her  faith  would  do  her 
no  good  unless  it  led  to  a  life  of  righteousness  and  full  obedience.  Faith  saved  many 
in  physical  matters  who  came  in  contact  with  the  miraculous  workings  of  Jesus.  But 
another  power  must  come  in,  working  conviction  of  sin  and  spiritual  need.  Then  the 
faith  which  was  found  so  mightily  operative  in  the  lower  sphere  will  be  found  equally 
operative  in  the  higher  one. — Y. 

Vers.  32 — 38. — A  summary  of  the  sicfferings  and  Mats  of  lelieveri.  Note— 
L  How  Tma  writee  speaks  from  fulness  of  knowledge.  As  one  might  think, 
he  has  already  been  tolerably  copious,  but  he  hints  that  there  is  really  much  more  to 
tell.  He  has  looked  through  all  the  records  of  God's  people,  and  he  finds  faith  every- 
where. Thus  has  been  produced  in  his  mind  a  strong  conviction  of  what  man  can  do 
when  he  believes  in  the  right  way.  And  might  we  not  attain  to  a  similar  fulness  of 
knowledge?  Reading  ecclesiastical  history,  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term,  we  should 
see  how  much  stronger  is  the  man  of  simple  faith  than  the  man  of  this  world,  with 
all  his  resources  and  ingenuity.  As  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  right  things  grow, 
so  must  convictions  with  respect  to  them  deepen. 

II.  How  BE  CLASSIFIES  THE  EXAMPLES  OF  FAITB.  He  shows  US  faith  activo  and 
passive — what  it  can  do  and  what  it  can  bear.  By  his  function  the  prophet  had  to  be 
a  man  of  action,  and  as  the  result  of  his  action  he  had  also  to  be  a  man  of  suffering. 
God  sent  him  out  to  do  special  deeds — deeds  beyond  ordinary  resources — and  then  he 
had  also  to  make  ready  for  sufferings  out  of  the  ordinary  way.  He  who  would  do  great 
things  in  the  sight  of  God  must  be  ready  also  to  suffer  great  things.  Live  on  the 
level  of  the  world,  and  you  may  escape  much  in  the  way  of  toil  and  strain ;  but  try  to 
achieve  the  things  which  Christ  sets  before  you,  and  then  you  will  find  you  must  not 
only  have  strong  hands,  but  a  brave  and  patient  heart. 

III.  Thbbb  is  plenty  of  work  fob  FAITH  TET  TO  DO.  There  are  kingdoms  to 
be  overcome,  not  by  physical  force,  not  by  disciplined  armies,  but  by  those  who,  having 
yielded  first  of  all  to  truth,  know  its  claims  and  its  power,  and  believe  in  persistent 
pressing  of  that  truth  on  others.  Righteousness  has  to  he  worked  out,  promises  have  to 
be  appropriated ;  and  if  we  would  inherit  the  promises,  we  must  accept  the  conditions 
of  faith  and  patience.  Our  faith  can  achieve  great  things,  and  therefore  great  things 
are  set  before  it.  The  faith  of  a  simple,  humble  Christian  has  far  greater  things  within 
Its  reach  than  anything  to  be  attained  by  the  unaided  human  intellect  even  at  its  best. 

IV.  Similarly  there  is  plenty  of  trial  fob  faith  yet  to  endure.  The  more 
there  is  to  be  done,  the  more  there  is  to'  be  suffered.  Ingenioiis  torments  and  cruel 
deaths  there  may  not  be,  hut  the  spirit  of  the  world  is  unchanging.    Let  a  man  perse- 

■KBBEW8.  2  A 


354 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEW8. 


[oh.  xil  1—29. 


vera  as  seeing  the  invisible  one,  and  he  will  have  to  suffer.  He  may  not  be  stoned,  but 
be  will  be  pelted  with  the  sneers  of  thoughtless  ami  ignorant  men.  Those  who  through 
mere  self-respect  would  refrain  from  a  blow  with  the  fist  yet  delight  in  the  most 
cutting  words. — ^Y. 

Ver.  38. — Seeming  unworthinttt,  real  worthineu.  I.  Thb  appeabanob  of  0nwob- 
THINGBS.  Men  going  about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,  wandering  in  deserts  and 
mountains,  sheltering  themselves  in  dens  and  caves,  have  had  this  judgment  passed 
upon  them,  in  effect  if  not  in  form,  that  they  are  not  worthy  of  the  world.  They  are 
banished  from  this  world's  social  toleration,  being  held  to  trouble  their  fellow-men 
concerning  existing  institutions  and  habits  without  sufficient  reason.  The  world  knows 
no  higher  standard  whereby  to  judge  a  man  than  its  own  accepted  code.  If  he  travels 
beyond  that  code  of  traditions,  proprieties,  and  decencies,  be  must  be  ready  to  be  put 
down  among  fanatics,  madmen,  and  incomprehensible  people  generally.  In  setting  out 
upon  a  genuine  Christian  life,  we  must  reckon  among  other  elements  in  counting  the 
cost  that  of  our  relation  to  the  world's  good  opinion.  If  we  will  not  go  anywhere  or 
do  anything  that  may  lose  us  the  world's  good  opinion,  then  we  may  at  once  spare 
ourselves  the  trouble  and  effort  of  being  Christians.  If  we,  living  in  the  world,  would 
be  reckoned  worthy  by  the  living  world  around  us,  then  we  must  be  conformed  to  the 
world.  We  must  consult  its  fashions,  its  prejudices,  its  vested  interests.  Originality 
will  be  pardoned  so  long  as  it  keeps  to  the  sphere  of  the  intellect;  but  once  let  the 
conscience  break  forth  into  originality  and  individuality,  seeing  a  right  and  a  wrong 
where  the  world  has  not  troubled  to  consider  whether  there  be  right  or  wrong  at  all, 
then  hencefurth  for  such  •  daring  spirit,  faithful  to  the  light  from  on  high,  there  is 
banishment  from  tolerance  by  the  world.  To  speak  the  words  "for  Christ's  sake" 
from  the  very  heart  means  persecution.  For  then  one  cannot  keep  to  mere  gene- 
ralities ;  renewing  of  the  mind  brings  that  transformation  which,  is  itself  a  loosening  of 
those  common  projects  and  views  that  have  bound  us  to  the  common  society  of  men. 

IL  Beal  worthiness.  By  a  decisive  expression  the  writer  turns  the  tables  on  the 
calm  assumiitions  of  worldly  criticism.  The  world  says  of  the  Christian,  "This 
man  is  not  worthy  of  me ;  he  does  not  coiTespond  with  my  attainments,  my  philosophy, 
my  art,  my  refinements ;  he  says  unappreciative,  not  to  say  rude,  things  about  them." 
But  now  the  Spirit  of  God  steps  in  to  pass  a  judgment  on  this  same  judging  spirit  of 
the  world.  The  lamp  that  has  been  kindled  from  light  of  human  making  presents 
but  a  poor  show  when  set  beside  the  lamp  kindled  from  him  who  is  the  true  Light  of 
the  world.  Everything  in  this  matter  depends  upon  the  eye  with  which  we  look  at 
things.  Many  there  must  have  been  in  Jerusalem  to  lament  the  dreadful  change  from 
SauTthe  Pharisee  to  Paul  the  disciple  of  Jesus.  To  them  it  meant  apostasy  from  all 
that  was  godly,  honourable,  and  true.  But  we  know  that  Christian  character,  shining 
by  its  own  light,  is  its  own  justification.  And  we  also  know  that  the  man  of  this 
world,  fully  exposed  in  the  light  of  actual  Christian  character,  is  his  own  condemnation. 
Out  of  his  own  avowed  and  justified  words  and  acts  he  is  condemned.  The  very  fact 
that  he  thinks  himself  right  proves  how  utterly  he  U  wrong. — Y» 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 
The  exhortation,  begun  at  ch. 


X.  19,  but 

interrupted  at  ch.  xi.  1  by  the  chapter  on 
faith,  is  now  taken  up  again  with  increased 
force  ftom.  the  array  of  examples  that  have 
been  adduced  to  support  it.  Observable 
in  the  Greek  is  the  fine  roll  of  the  majestio 
and  well-ordered  phrases  with  which  this 
chapter  begins,  as  if  the  writer  had  feU  the 
dignify  of  his  tubjeot,  and  the  commanding 


power  with  which  he  can  now  approach  it 
Even  the  initiatory  word  roiyapovv,  rather 
thfin  the  nsual  SScy,  or  oSn,  or  Si^,  adds  to 
the  effect. 

V^r.  1. — ^Wherefore  let  ns  too  («  we  also," 
in  the  A.V.,  is  wrongly  placed^  seeing  we 
are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  olond 
of  wituesBes,  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the 
sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  ns,  and  let  us 
run  with  patlenoe  (rather,  endurance)  the 
race  that  is  set  before  ns.  Christians,  still 
"  fighting  the  good  fight  of  bith,"  ai*  her* 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  TIE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


855 


regarded  under  the  image  of  athletes  in  the 
palsestra,  contending  for  a  prize.  It  ia  • 
favourite  image  with  St.  Paul,  not  only,  we 
may  suppose,  because  of  its  appropriateness, 
hut  also  because  of  the  probable  appreciation 
of  it  by  his  readers  in  consequence  of  the 
general  interest  taken  in  the  famous  games 
(of.  1  Cor.  ix.  24,  etc.;  1  Tim.  vi.  12; 
2  Tim.  iv.  7).  Tlie  idea  in  this  first  verse 
is  that  of  a  race  (TpexaJ/iei'  hyava).  The 
word  irpoKetfievtiv  {rhj/  irpoicelfiLeyov  7]fufi  ayuva) 
is  the  usual  one  in  the  case  of  a  contest 
appointed  in  public  games,  though,  of  course, 
otherwise  applicable,  as  in  ch.  vi.  18  and  xii.  2. 
"  Every  weight "  (6yKov  nivra),  which  we 
are  to  "  lay  aside,"  or  rather  put  off  from  ui 
(dirdfleo-Soi),  means,  probably,  in  the  figure, 
any  heavy  accoutrement,  or  other  incum- 
brance, which  the  runner  might  have  about 
him.  Some,  indeed,  take  iyKov  to  denote 
"obesity" — a  sense  in  which  the  word  is 
Bometiines  used,  as  by  Hippocrates,  Diodorus, 
.ffilian — and  think  the  allusion  is  to  the 
training  required  of  athletes  for  getting 
into  condition.  But  the  word  airoBifievoi 
rather  suggests  as  above.  In  the  word 
anapriav,  that  follows,  the  figure  is  dropped, 
■o  as  to  make  evident  what  is  meant,  but 
Btill  retained  apparently  in  the  epithet 
euirfpi<rTarov.  This  word,  which  is  found 
nowhere  else  either  in  biblical  or  classical 
Greek,  has  to  be  interpreted  fiom  its  deriva- 
tion, tile  analogy  of  similar  words,  and  the 
context.  The  usual  and  most  probable 
view  is,  deriving  it  from  jrcprfo-Too-flai,  to 
understand  "  that  which  easily  surrounds 
ns  "  (equivalent  to  tjii/  tiK6\ws  trepiXaTaiiiiirtv 
ij/ua$).  Thus  Chrysostom :  Eu'irEpfcrTOTOv 
yhp  ij  afiapTiof  irdvToBev  ItTTo/i^vTjf  efiwpoffdeVf 
HirtffBeVf  Kol  oKtwj  '/fficis  KaTofi&Wovffa  (Ohry- 
gostom,  •  Horn.'  ii.  on  2  Cor.).  Cf  irep/KeiTai 
dadeveiav  (ch.  V.  2).  It  is  true  that  other 
verbals,  similarly  derived  from  IffTTi/n  or 
its  compounds,  are  not  active,  but  intransi- 
tive or  passive;  thus  TreplaraTos  means 
"  surrounded,"  not  "  surrounding ;  "  iirc 
plarraTo!  means  " unguarded,"  i.e.  "not 
surrounded."  Still,  as  such  verbals  derived 
from  otiier  verbs  are  often  active,  this  may 
be  so  here,  and  thus  have  an  intelligible 
sense  in  connection  with  the  context.  We 
may  understand  the  figure  of  a  race  to  be 
still  kept  in  view,  with  regard  to  the  runner 
not  only  laying  aside  encumbrances,  but 
also  stripping  himself  of  his  clothes,  which 
would  cling  round '  him  and  impede  his 
course.  (The  idea  of  close  personal  en- 
circlement thus  supposed  to  be  expressed 
by  tuTrepiVTOTOK  seems  better  to  suit  the 
figure,  as  also  the  governing  verb  dwoBfixevoi, ' 
than  that  preferred  by  Delitzsch;  viz.  of 
■in  getting  in  our  road  as  we  run,  as  might 
surrounding  obstacles  in  an  actual  race ; 
*'Pecoat«  currentem  et  implicant  ao  sun- 


plantant,  ut  prorsus  a  cursu  impediatur  vel 
in  meilio  subsistat  aut  coiTuat,"  Horneias, 
quoted  by  Delitzsch.)  The  application  of 
the  whole  figure  to  Christian  athletes  is  not 
hard  to  understand.  The  encumbrances  to 
be  laid  aside  by  them,  lest  they  should  be 
weighted  in  their  ra'e,  may  include  old 
associations,  lingering  Jewish  prejudices, 
ties  to  the  world,  habits  and  customs  which, 
whether  or  not  in  themselves  blameless, 
might  prove  .clogs  and  hindrances.  Then 
the  "easily  besetting  sin"  would  be  all 
such  as  might  cling  to  them  personally, 
whether  in  the  heart  or  in  habits  of  life; 
whi 'h,  if  not  got  rid  of,  would  be  ever  like 
an  encircling  and  impeding  robe,  crippling 
alaoHty  and  arresting  speed.  But  further, 
as  runners,  however  unencumbered  for  the 
race,  require  what  in  modern  phrase  is 
called  "  pluck  "  to  keep  it  up  to  the  end,  so 
with  the  Christian  athlete;  for  there  will 
always  be  danger  of  his  flagging  as  his 
course  goes  on  under  trials  and  difficulties, 
and  this  especially  in  times  of  persecution. 
This  further  requirement  is  expressed  by  Si' 
rfTro/joi/^f,  "  with  endurance,"  i.e.  through- 
out to  the  end.  Thus  we  have  presented 
to  ns  a  grand  conception  of  Christians 
being  as  athletes  contending  on  the  arena 
of  this  present  world  for  the  crown  of 
immortality;  and,  as  is  expressed  at  the 
beginning  of  the  verse,  under  the  eager 
gaze  of  a  vast  multitude  of  unseen  specta- 
tors, corresponding  to  those  in  the  crowded 
seats,  rising  higher  and  higher,  of  an 
earthly  amphitheatre.  These  unseen  spec- 
tators are  the  iimumerabla  saints  before 
us,  who  have  finished  their  course  and  are 
now  at  rest,  but  who  are  as  it  were  in  the 
air  around  ns,  watching  us  from  above  with 
sympathy.  The  word  "cloud"  (vi<l>oi), 
though  applicable  to  any  great  multitude,  is 
peculiarly  appropriate  here,  as  suggesting 
the  idea  of  an  aerial  company.  The  word 
"  witnesses,"  too  (jiitprvprnp),  though  here 
most  obviously  to  he  understood  in  the 
sense  of  Ofarai,  i.e.  witnesses  of  our  contest, 
miiy  be  intended  to  convey  also,  as  it 
certainly  suggests  to  the  mind,  its  other 
well-known  meaning— that  of  witnesses  to 
the  faith,  or  martyrs  (cf.  Acts  xxii.  13; 
Kev.  ii.  13 ;  xi.  3  ;  xvii.  6).  So  the  Fathers 
generally  understand  it  here.  'I'he  saints 
before  us,  as  they  bore  witness  to  God  in 
life,  so  are  conceived  as  witnesses  also  of 
our  like  witness  now,  awaiting  the  day 
when,  "not  without  ns,"  they  shall  be 
finally  perfected. 

Ver.  2. — Looking  unto  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  our  faith  (rather,  the  Leader,  or 
Captain,  as  in  ch.  ii.  10,  and  Perfecter  of 
ttie  faith,  or  of  faith — faith's  Captain  and 
Completer),  Jesus  J  who  for  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  him  endured  the  cross,  despising 


366 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS, 


[oh.  zil  1—29. 


ihame,  and  is  let  down  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  throne  of  God.  The  idea  is  not,  as 
implied  in  the  A.V.  and  understood  by 
OhryBoetoin  and  other  ancients,  that  Jesus 
first  inspires  (ind  then  brings  to  its  complete 
result  the  individual  Christian's  faith  ("quod 
csepit  in  nobis  consummabit "),  but  (as  im- 
plied in  the  word  dpxvy^s,  and  suiting  the 
context  better)  that  he  is  the  Leader  of  the 
whole  army  of  faith,  whoso  standard  we  are 
to  follow,  and  whose  own  completed  victory 
is  the  enabling  cause  as  well  as  the  earnest 
of  our  own.  It  is  no  valid  objection  to 
this  view  that  he  could  not  have  been  a 
Leader  in  this  sense  to  the  faithful  ones 
before  his  coming,  referred  to  in  the  last 
chapter ;  for,  as  has  been  before  observed 
(see  on  "  the  reproach  of  Christ,"  oh.  il.  26), 
he  is  regarded  as  the  Head  and  Leader, 
ia  all  ages,  of  the  faithful ;  and  in  virtue 
of  his  future  warfare  fur  manHnd  the 
saints  of  old  endured  and  triumphed : — and 
certainly  Christians,  to  whom  the  exhorta- 
tion is  addressed,  may  look  to  him  in  an 
ohvious  sense  as  their  Captain  to  be 
followed.  Nor,  again,  is  there  ditBculty — 
apart  from  that  of  the  whole  mystery  of  the 
Incarnation — in  his  being  presented  to  us  as 
himself  an  example  of  triumphant  faith. 
For  he  is  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  having  so 
"emplieil  himself"  of  his  Divine  glory  as 
to  have  become  like  unto  us  in  all  things, 
sin  except ;  and  thus  to  have  been  sustained 
during  his  human  life  by  faith  in  the  un- 
seen, as  we  are.  His  addresses  to  the  Father 
(see  especially  John  xvii.)  are  strikingly 
significant  in  this  regard.  The  expression, 
"  for  the  joy,"  etc.  (ij/rl  ttjs  irpoiceineyris  avr^ 
Xffas),  does  not  mean,  as  some  take  it, 
"instead  of  the  joy  which  he  might  have 
had  on  earth  "  (such  e.g.  as  was  offered  to 
him  by  the  tempter),  but,  as  is  evident  from 
the  word  irpoKfL/iivris,  "as  set  against,  t.e. 
for  the  sake  of,  future  joy "  (cf.  clvtI  ppd- 
(Tcttis  fiias,  ver.  16).  Such  looking  forward 
to  joy  with  the  Fathe;:  and  the  redeemed 
after  triumph  is  expressed  in  the  great 
intercessory  prayer  above  referred  to  (John 
xvii.  5,  13,  22,  23,  24,  26).  It  may  be  here 
obseived  that  anticipation  of  reward  here- 
after is  among  legilimute  human  motives  to 
a  good  lite.  It  may  be  said,  indeed,  that 
the  highest  virtue  consists  in  doing  what  is 
right  simply  because  it  ia  right — in  fulfilling 
God's  will,  whatever  may  come  of  it  to  our- 
selves ;  but  the  hope  of  a  final  happy  issue 
comes  properly,  and  indeed  inevitably,  in  as 
an  inspiring  and  sustaining  motive.  Aspira- 
tion after  happiness  is  a  God-given  instinct 
of  humanity,  necessary  for  keeping  up  the 
life  of  virtue.  There  may  be  some  so  in 
love  with  virtue  as  to  bo  capable  of  perse- 
vering in  lifelong  si  If  denial,  though  with- 
vnl  any  laith  in  a  life  to  come.    But  human 


nature  in  general  certainly  requires  this 
further  incentive,  and  Christian  faith  sup- 
plies it.  Kor  are  those  who  thus  work 
with  a  view  to  future  joy  to  be  accused  o( 
selfish  motives,  as  though,  they  balanced 
only  a  greater  against  a  smaller  gain.  To 
the  true  Christian  the  grand  inspiring 
principle  is  still  the  love  of  God  and  of  his 
neighbour,  and  of  goodness  for  its  own 
sake,  though  the  hope  of  an  eternal  reward 
supports  and  cheers  him  mightily.  Nor, 
again,  is  the  joy  looked  forward  to  a  selfish 
joy.  It  is  the  joy  of  sharing  in  the  triumph 
of  eternal  righteousness  in  company  with 
all  the  redeemed,  wliose  salvation,  no  less 
than  his  own,  he  desires  and  strives  for.  - 
And,  further,  with  regard  to  his  own  indi- 
vidual joy,  what  is  it  but  the  joy  of  attaining 
the  end  of  his  being,  the  perfection  God 
meant  him  for,  and  to  which  it  ia  his  duty 
to  aspire?  Hence  Christ  would  not  have 
been  a  perfect  Example  to  man  had  he  not 
been  represented  as  looking  forward  to  "  the 
joy  that  was  set  before  him." 

Ver.  3. — For  consider  him  that  hath  en- 
dured snoh  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
himself  (or,  of  the  sinners  against  him),  lest 
ye  be  weary  fainting  in  your  souls.  The 
word  ttVTi\oyla  ("  contradiction "),  though 
strictly  applicable  to  verbal  gainsaying, 
and  thus  especially  suggesting  to  our  minds 
the  blasphemies  and  false  accusations 
against  Christ,  inc!udes  opposition  of  aU 
kinds.  It  is  used  in  the  LXX.  for  "re- 
bellion" (Hebrew,  ni?),  2  Sam.  xxii.  41; 
Prov.  xvii.  11 ;  cf.  Jiide  11,  rp  iyTi\(iyi4 
Tov  Koae.  (Instead  of  eij  eavT6v  (at  €is  airhv) 
there  is  weighty  manuscript  authority  for  eis 
etivTois,  equivalent  to  "  against  themselves.") 
"  Lest  ye  be  weary,"  etc.,  keeps  in  view  the 
idea  of  getting  tired  in  a  race,  the  word 
iK\vea-6ai  ("  faint ")  being  used  primarily 
for  corporeal,  and  figuratively  for  mental, 
lassitude  (cf.  Matt.  xv.  82,  /i^irorc  ixXveSin 
if  TJ7  6Z^). 

Ver.  4. — Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto 
blood,  striving  against  sin.  Here  (as  in 
1  Cor.  ix.  26)  there  is  a  transition  of 
thought  from  a  race  to  a  combat.  Your 
trials  have  not  yet  reached  the  point  of 
dying  in  the  good  fight  of  faith,  as  has  been 
the  case  with  some  of  your  brethren  before 
you,  who  have  folio  vred  their  Leader  to  the 
end  (of.  ch.  xiii.  7). 

Vers.  5, 6.— And  ye  have  forgotten  (or,  have 
ye  forgotten  f)  the  exhortation  which  speaketh 
nnto  you  (more  correctly,  discourses,  or 
reasons,  with  you;  i.e.  in  the  way  of 
fatherly  remonstrance)  as  nnto  children, 
My  son,  etc.  This  verse  introduces  • 
further  motive  for  persevering  under  pro- 
longed trial,  viz.  our  being  assured  in  Holy 
Writ  of  its  beneficial  purpose  as  discipline. 
The  quotation  is  from  Prov.  iiL  11, 12,  a«  il 


cH.  xa  1—29.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE    HEBREWS. 


367 


li  in  the  LXX.  We  observe  that  the  word 
"  faint "  (e/cXu'ow)  is  the  same  as  was  used  in 
ver.  3.  In  the  seventh  and  following  verses 
this  scriptural  admonition  is  applied  and 
commented  on. 

Vers.  7,  8. — For  ohasteniug^  ye  eildnre; 
i.a  B  U  for  tihastening  that  ye  endure.  The 
reading  els  vaiSeiav  inroiiivtre,  inpported  by 
almost  the  whole  weight  of  manuscripts 
(including  all  the  uncials  that  contain  the 
text),  of  ancient  versions,  and  commentators 
(Theophylact  being  the  only  cerUiin  excep- 
tionX  ia  decidedly  to  be  accepted  instead  of 
the  B  iraiSelav  mo/iiveTf  (equivalent  to  "  if  ye 
endure  chastening")  of  the  Textus  Beceptns. 
Moreover,  it  is  required  for  the  sense  of  the 
passage  in  regard  to  the  proper  meaning  of 
the  verb  uwo/iiveTe  ("endure"),  which  is  "to 
submit  to,"  or  "endure  patiently,"  not 
simply  "to  undergo."  For  to  say,  "if  ye 
endure  chastisement  patiently,  God  dealeth 
with  you  as  sons,"  haa  no  meaning ;  our 
being  treated  as  sons  depends,  not  on  the 
way  we  take  our  chastisement,  but  on  our 
being  chastised  at  all.  The  use  of  the 
preposition  els  to  express  purpose  is  common 
in  this  Epistle  (of.  oh.  i.  14,  els  StoKoyiar: 
iii.  5^  fix  lupripiov :  iv.  16,  els  $oii6euw :  vi. 
16,  (it  |3c/3a(a>irii<) ;  and  the  essential  sense 
of  inuSela  is  discipline  or  education.  The 
drift  is  the  same,  whether  we  take  biroii4vert 
as  an  indicative  or  an  imperative.  Thus  the 
next  clause  of  the  verse  follows  suitably: 
God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons ;  for  what 
son  is  there  (or,  who  i$  a  son)  whom  his 
father  ohasteneth  not  1  Bat  if  ye  be  with- 
out chastening,  whereof  all  (i.e.  all  God'i 
children,  with  reference  to  oh.  xi.)  have 
been  made  partakers,  then  are  ye  bastards, 
and  not  sons  (ye  are  not  your  father's  real 
ehlldren  whom  he  cares  for  as  such). 

Ver.  9. — Furthermore  we  have  had  fathen 
of  onr  flesh  which  corrected  us  (more  cor- 
rectly, w<  once  had,  or,  we  used  to  have,  the 
fathers  of  our  flesh  as  chasteners),  and  we 
gave  them  reverence:  shall  we  not  mneh 
rather  be  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of 
spirits,  and  live  t  This  in  trod  uces  an  a/ortiori 
argument.  We  are  reminded  of  the  days 
of  our  youth,  while  we  were  under  parental 
discipline,  and  bore  with  it  submissively: 
much  more  should  we  submit  to  the  disci- 
pline of  our  heavenly  Father,  to  whom  we 
are  as  children  under  training  all  our  life 
long!  Oommentators  differ  as  to  what  ia 
exactly  meant  by  the  contrast  between  "  the 
fathers  of  our  flesh "  and  "  the  Father  of 
spirits  (rail'  irveviidTar/)."  Some  (among 
modems  Delitzsch)  find  here  a  support  to 
the  theory  of  creationism  as  against  tra- 
ducianism;  i.e,  that  the  soul  of  each  in- 
dividual, as  distinct  from  the  body,  is  a  new 
creation,  not  transmitted  from  the  parents. 
This  view  would  have  more  to  go  on  than  it 


has,  were  we  justified  in  implying  tJiuSh 
after  wvivfiiTai'  ("  our  spirits,"  in  opposition 
to  "  our  flesh,"  preceding).  But  t£» 
irvevfidrav  seems  evidently  meant  to  be 
understood  generally;  and  the  expression 
(suggested  probably  by  Numb.  xvi.  22  and 
xxvii.  16,  "  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all 
flesh  ")  need  imply  only  that,  though  God 
is  the  original  Author  of  fleah  as  well  as 
spirit,  yet  the  latter,  whether  in  man  or 
otherwise  existing,  has  in  a  peculiar  sense 
its  parentage  from  him  (of.  Gen.  ii.  7,  "  The 
LoBD  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of 
the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils 
the  breath  of  life;  and  man  became  a  living 
Boul;"  also  Job  xxxiii.  4,  "The  Spirit  of 
the  LoBD  hath  made  me,  and  the  breath  of 
the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life").  Our 
earthly  parents  transmit  to  us  our  carnal 
existence;  our  spiritual  part,  in  whatever 
mysterious  way  derived  or  inspired,  is  due 
to  our  Divine  parentage ;  and  it  is  in 
respect  of  this  that  we  are  God's  children 
and  accountable  to  him.  But,  as  has  been 
intimated  above,  it  ia  not  human  spirits 
only  that  are  here  in  the  writer's  view. 
God  is  the  Father  of  all  "the  spirits," 
whether  in  the  flesh  or  not;  all  are  of 
Divine  parentage,  for  God  himself  is  Spirit 
— Ui/evna  i  Be6s  (Jolin  iv.  24).  Ohrysostom 
explains  thus ;  ti^  irarpl  twv  irvevfjuniav*  IJTOi 

T&v  X"?"'!'^''''"'  ^^^'t  ^'^0^  'rai''  ebx^" 
Q^vx(^v  f),  i^Toi  Ttov  kawfuiTtav  Svvdfietov. 

Ver.  10.— For  they  verily  for  a  few  days 
chastened  ns  after  their  own  pleasure ;  but 
he  for  our  profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers 
of  his  holiness.  Tlie  a  fortiori  argument  is 
thus  continued.  The  discipline  of  our 
earthly  fathers  was  "  for  a  few  days,"  i.e. 
during  our  childhood  only,  since  which  we 
have  been  left  to  ourselves ;  and  even  then 
not  necessarily  for  our  greatest  advantage ; 
it  waa  only  as  seemed  good  to  them  (/cara 
T^  SoKovy  auTois);  it  might  be  injudicious, 
or  even  capricious.  But  our  heavenly 
Father's  discipline  we  may  trust  to  be 
always  good  for  us,  and  with  a  definite 
1  .j1  purpose.  Though  there  is  here  no 
di.atinctly  expressed  antithesis  to  the  "few 
days"  of  ordinary  parental  chastisement, 
yet  one  is  implied  in  the  last  clause;  for  if 
God's  purpose  in  chastening  us  is  to  make 
us  partakers  of  his  own  holiness,  we  may 
conclude  that  the  discipline  will  be  con- 
tinued till  the  end  be  attained;  and  thus 
also  a  further  reason  is  implied  why  Chris 
tians  should  not  "faint"  under  even  life, 
long  trials. 

Ver.  1 1. — Now  no  chastening  seemeth  for 
the  prpsent  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous 
(literally,  not  of  joy,  hut  of  grief) :  neverthe- 
less afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit 
of  righteousness  to  them  which  have  beer 
exercised  thereby.    This  i«  a  general  stat 


BQS 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS.  [aDB.ziLl— 2% 


ment  with  leBpect  to  all  chastening,  though 
the  expression  of  its  result  at  the  end  of 
the  verse  is  suggested  by  the  thought  of 
Divine  chastening,  to  which  alone  it  is 
certainly,  and  in  the  full  sense  of  the  words, 
applicable.  "  Of  righteousness"  is  a  genitive 
of  apposition;  StKaiotrivri  is  the  peaceable 
fruit  yielded  by  iroiSefo.  And  the  word 
here  surely  denotes  actual  righteousness  in 
ourselves ;  not  merely  justification  in  what 
is  called  the  forensic  sense :  the  proper 
effect  of  chastening  is  to  make  us  good,  and 
so  at  peace  with  our  own  conscience  and 
with  God.  It  is  by  no  means  thus  implied 
that  we  can  be  accepted  and  so  have 
peace  on  the  ground  of  our  own  imperfect 
righteousness ;  only  that  it  is  in  the  fruits 
of  faith  perfected  by  discipline  that  we 
may  "  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and 
ft!-sure  our  hearts  before  him  "  (of.  Jaa.  iii. 
18,  "  The  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in 
pence ; "  also  Isa.  xxxii.  17,  "  And  the  work 
of  righteousness  shall  be  peace  "). 

Ver.  12. — 'Wherefore  lift  up  (or,  straighten 
aneiv)  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and  the 
feeble  knees  (rather,  the  relaxed  hands  and 
the  loosened  or  enfeebled  hnees).  The  word 
7rapaA.6Au/»eVa  is  used  Only  by  St.  Luke  else- 
where in  the  New  Tes.tament,  and  with 
refereiice  to  persons  paralyzed  (Luke  v.  18, 
24 ;  Acts  viii.  7;  ix.  33).  The  form  of  the 
exhortation  is  taken  from  Isa.  xxxv.  3, 
'IffX^SffOTe  x^"P^s  &.vet/xevai  Kol  yifara  irapa- 
\e\viieva.  The  figure  of  the  palsestra  is 
thus  again  brought  into  view,  with  refer- 
ence both  to  boxing  and  running, 

Ver.  13. — ^And  make  straight  paths  for 
7onr  feet,  lest  that  which  is  lame  be  turned 
out  of  the  way;  but  that  it  rather  be  healed. 
The  ideas  in  this  verse  correspond  to,  and 
may  be  suggested  by,  those  that  follow  in 
Isaiah  the  passage  above  referred  to.  For 
there  tuo  the  prophet  goes  on  to  speak, 
among  other  things,  of  the  lame  leaping, 
and  of  a  way  of  holiness  along  which  none 
should  err.  But  the  words  themselves  are 
suggested  by  Prov.  iv.  26,  Airis  Si  opBiis 
irotiifrst  Tcts  Tpox^is  ffov  (LXX.),  the  verb 
Sia(rTpf<pe(reai  having  been  previously  used 
for  turning  out  of  the  way.  It  is  observable 
that  the  words,  k«!  Tpoxi^f,  etc.,  are  arranged 
■0  as  to  form  an  hexameter  line.  This 
may  have  been  unintentional,  but  it  is  at 
any  rate  effective.  Delitzscb  remarks  on 
it:  "The  duty  to  which  the  writer  urges  his 
readers  is  courageous  self-recovery  in  God's 
strength.  The  tone  and  language  are 
elevated  accordingly,  and  ver.  12  is  like  s 
trumpet-blast.  It  need  not  surprise  us, 
then,  if  our  author  here  turns  poet,  and 
proceeds  in  heroic  measures."  With  regard 
to  the  purport  of  this  verse,  we  observe 
that,  while  the  figure  of  running  is  etill 
ountlaued,  a  new  idea  is  iutroduced — that 


of  pursuing  a  straight  course  with  a  yiew  to 
others  who  are  to  follow  on  the  same  track. 
"  That  which  is  lame  (xb  x"^^"^  "  denotes 
the  weak  and  wavering  brethren  —  the 
ao'BevovvTes,  euch  as  are  referred  to  in  Eom. 
xiv.  and  1  Cor.  viii.  The  expression  well 
suits  (Specially  those  among  the  Hebrew 
Ohristiaas  who  halted  between  two  opinions 
— between  the  Church  and  the  synagogue 
(cf.l  Kingsxviii.21,''Eaisiri(rc  ifieis  x"'^"^^''^^ 
fir'  afupOTfpais  Toil  iyviaa  ;).  The  strong  in 
faith  ought  to  desire  and  aim  at  the  healing  of 
such  lame  ones,  i.e.  their  he .  ug  strengthened 
in  the  faith,  rather  than  ek,^,,9e  them  to  the 
risk  of  apostasy  by  any  wavering  of  their 
own. 

Ver.  14. — Follow  peaoa  with  all  (i,e.  ai 
required  by  the  context,  with  all  the 
brethren ;  cf,  Eom.  xiv.  19),  and  holiness 
(more  properly,  sanctification),  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  Here  the  figure 
is  dropped,  and  two  cautions  given,  peculiarly 
needed,  we  may  suppose,  by  the  community 
addressed.  The  exhortation  to  "  peace  with 
all"  reminds  of  the  tone  of  St.  Paul's 
admonitions  both  in  Bomans  and  in  1 
Corinthians,  where  he  so  strongly  warns 
against  dissensions  and  party  spirit,  and 
enjoins  tolerance  and  mutual  allowance 
with  regard  to  the  weaker  brethren.  The 
word  ayiaff/ihs  ("sanctification")  need  not 
be  limited  (as  by  Chrysostom)  to  the  idea  of 
chastity ;  the  general  thought  implied  may 
be  (as  expressed  by  Limborch,  quoted  by 
Alford),  "Ne,  dum  paoi  studeat,  nimis  aliis 
obsequendi  studio  quidquam  contra  sanuti- 
moniam  Christiunam  delinquat ; "  but  the 
special  allusion  to  iropvela  in  ver.  16  (as  also 
in  ch.  xiii.  4)  is  evidence  that  chastity  was 
especially  in  the  writer's  mind,  with  definite 
reference  to  which  the  word  ayiaa-fiis  is 
used  in  1  Thess.  iv.  3.  The  frequent  and 
earnest  warnings  against  fornication  in  St. 
Paul's  Epistles  are  enough  to  show  how 
slow  even  some  in  tbe  Church  were  to 
recognize  the  strict  code  of  Cliristian  morality, 
nnknown  to  the  heathen  world,  and  by  the 
Jews  very  imperfectly  recognized,  in  this 
regard ;  and  the  case  of  1  (}or.  v.  illustrates 
how  easily  such  vice  might  creep  into  and 
infect  a  Christian  community  without 
general  reprobation.  Heuce  probably  the 
special  warning  here. 

Ver.  15.— Looking  diligently  lest  any  man 
fail  of  the  grace  of  God  (t.e.  fall  short  of  it ; 
or,  varfpiav  being  here  followed  by  oTrb,  the 
idea  may  be  rather  that  of  falling  back  from 
it) ;  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up 
trouble  you,  and  thereby  many  (or,  aocurding 
to  the  more  probable  reading,  the  many,  i.e. 
the  general  community) be  defiled.  In  this, 
the  usual  rendering  of  the  verse,  ^  is 
supplied,  so  as  to  niake  pii\ris  vvrfpHv  mean 
"Ubl  ihtre  be  any  one  that  tails."    But  thia 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBREWa 


369 


is  not  neoeasaiy ;  the  verb  IfoxJ^f  ("  trouble 
yott")may  be  common  both  to  the  first  n^ns 
and  to  /uiJTis  ^l(a,  thus:  "Lest  any  one 
failing  .  .  .  lest  any  root  .  .  .  trouble  you." 
The  sentence  may  have  been  broken  off 
after  its  first  clause  in  order  to  bring  in  the 
appropriate  quotation  from  Deut.  xxix.  18, 
which  in  our  A.V.  runs  thus :  "  Lest  there 
should  be  among  you  a  root  that  beareth 
gall  and  wormwood."  The  Vatioun  text  of 
the  LXX.  has  Mifris  itnlv  hv  iifxiv  (>iCa  &V(o 
(piovira  iv  xo^V  "■»'  "■iKpf? :  the  Alexandrian, 
which  seems  to  be  followed  here,  has  MTjnj 
ctrrlx  iv  i/itv  ^l^a  mxptas  &va)  ipiovtra  evox\ri 
Ka\  TtiKplif.  The  reference  in  the  speech  of 
Moses  is  to  the  future  possibility  of  any 
"  man,  or  woman,  or  family,  or  tribe  "  turn- 
ing from  the  Lord  to  go  and  serve  the  gods 
of  the  nations,  and  so  involving,  not  only 
themselves,  but  even  the  whole  people  in  a 
curse.  The  figure  is  that  of  a  plant  being 
allowed  to  giow  of  such  a  natuie  at  its  root 
as  to  bear  bitter  and  perniciuus  fruit.  There 
is  no  special  allusion  in  the  word  "  bitter- 
ness" to  disturbance  of  "peace"  by  dis- 
sensions ;  for  this  is  not  the  idea  in  the 
original  passage,  nor  is  it  carried  out  in  the 
following  verses  of  the  Epistle.  (Cf.  Acts 
viii.  23,  "  Thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
(f  is  X"^^"  iriKp(os).") 

Vers.  16,  17. — lest  there  be  any  forni- 
cator, or  profane  person,  as  lisan,  who  for 
one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birthright.  For 
ye  know  how  that  afterward,  when  he  would 
have  inherited  (i.e.  desired  to  inherit)  the 
blessing,  he  was  rejected:  for  he  found  no 
place  of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it 
carefully  with  tears.  The  word  "  fornicator  " 
is  to  be  understood  literally,  not  figuratively 
(as  Ebrard)  of  spiritual  fbmieatiou  (see 
ayian-fibv,  ver.  14).  Bfj37)\os  ("profane") 
denotes  one  outside  the  sphere  of  sanctity, 
and  so  debarred  from  sacred  privileges. 
Esau  is  appropriately  adduced  as  a  notable 
instance  in  the  Old  Testament  of  a  person 
thus  profane,  and  especially,  in  the  way  of 
warning,  of  one  who  lost  irrecoverably  the 
privileges  which  in  his  profaneness  he  had 
scorned.  It  is  immaterial  whether  Esau 
himself  is  intended  to  be  designated  as 
a  fornicator  (irSpyos)  as  well  as  profane 
(j8e;8i)Aoj).  The  essential  moral  of  his 
history  is  this:  being  the  firstborn  of  Israel, 
and  so  the  primary  inheritor  of  the  promises 
made  to  Abraham,  he  set  no  store  by  the 
privilege,  and  so  lost  it  irretrievably.  In 
early  life  he  so  lightly  ebteemed  his  birth- 
right as  the  eldest  born  (carrying  with  it, 
as  is  supposed,  in  the  patriarchal  age,  the 
priesthood  of  the  family,  and  in  his  case,  as 
might  be  presumed,  the  custody  and  trans- 
mission of  the  promises)  that  he  parted  with 
it  for  the  gratification  of  a  passing  appetite. 
Hii  words  on  that  ocoasion  expressed  the 


limit  of  his  aim's  and  interesta :  "  Behold,  I 
am  at  the  point  to  die:  and  what  profit 
shall  this  birthright  do  to  me  f  "  Later  in 
life  he  nevertheless  presented  himself  to 
claim  the  blessing  of  the  firstborn  from  his 
dying  father,  but  found  that  he  had  been 
forestalled.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  had 
meanwhile  changed  his  mode  of  life  or  made 
amends  for  bis  former  carelessness ;  still,  he 
felt  now  that  he  had  lost  something  worth 
having,  and  was  grieved  exceedingly.  But 
not  even  his  "grett  esd  exceeding  bitter 
cry  "  availed  then  to  recover  what  was  for- 
feited. And  BO  neither  he  nor  his  seed  had 
part  or  lot  in  the  Abrahamic  promises :  the 
time  of  opportunity  was  gone  for  ever.  There 
is  some  doubt  with  regard  to  the  latter  part 
of  ver.  17,  (1)  as  to  whether  "  it "  (aJTjjc)  in 
"  he  sought  it "  refers  to  "  repentance  " 
(fierayolas)  or  to  "  the  blessing  "  (tJ)v  iv\o- 
1  lav) ;  (2)  as  to  what  "  place  of  repentance  " 
means.  If  "it"  refers  to  "  repentance,"  it 
is  difScult  to  see  how  Esau's  own  repentance 
can  be  meant;  for  not  only  does  seeking 
repentance  with  tears  seem  in  itself  to 
imply  the  capability  of  it,  but  also  the 
"  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry  "  to  which 
allusion  is  made  was,  not  because  he  could 
not  himself  repent,  but  because  he  could 
not  get  the  blessing.  Hence,  if  "  it "  refers 
to  "  repentance,"  it  must  be  repentance,  i.e. 
change  of  miml,  in  Isaac  that  is  meant,  or 
rather  in  God,  against  whose  will  Isaac  could 
not  go ;  cf.  "  God  is  not  a  man  .  .  .  that  he 
should  repent "  (Numb,  xxiii.  19).  Of  such 
cliange  of  mind  and  purpose  it  may  be 
meant  that  Esau  found  no  place.  This 
seems  to  be  the  view  of  many  modern  in- 
terpreters, though  not  of  Bengel,  De  Wette, 
Bleek,  Hofmann,  Delitzsch,  Alford,  or  of 
Luther,  Calvin,  Grotius,  or  any  of  the  Greek 
Fathers.  Against  it  is  the  consideration 
that  such  is  not  the  more  obvious  meaning 
of  "  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,"  taken 
by  itself,  especially  as  lurafoia  is  always 
elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  (though 
not  always  in  the  LXX.)  used  for  a  person's 
change  of  mind  with  respect  to  his  own  mis- 
doings (of.  supra,  eh.  vi.  6).  Difficulty  on  this 
ground  is  removed  if,  taking  the  clause,  "  for 
he  found  no  place  of  repentance,"  as  paren- 
thetical, we  refer  airiiv  to  ti)j'  ei\oylav  pre- 
ceding. This  is  by  no  means  •  forced 
construction  of  the  sentence,  and  it  is 
supported  (as  above  intimated)  by  the  fact 
that  in  Genesis  it  is  the  blessing  itself  tijat 
Esau  is  expressly  said  to  have  craved  in  his 
"great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry:"  "Hast 
thou  but  one  blessing,  my  father?  bless 
me,  even  me  also,  O  my  father.  And  Esau 
lifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept"  Thus  we 
may  render  either,  "When  he  desired  to 
inherit  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected;  for 
lie  found  no  placa  of  lepentanM  f'-*-  o^ 


360 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWS. 


[oh.  XII.  1—29. 


change  of  mind  in  tlie  beetower  of  the  bless- 
ing], though  he  sought  it  [i.e.  such  change 
of  mind]  with  tears ; "  or, "  When  he  desired 
to  inherit  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected  (for 
he  found  no  place  of  repentance),  though  he 
sought  it  [i.«.  the  blessing]  with  tears."  If, 
the  latter  rendering  being  adopted,  Esau's 
own  repentance  be  intended,  the  idea  maybe, 
either  that  there  was  no  place  left  in  which 
even  a  real  repentance  could  avail,  or  that 
of  a  real  repentance  he  had  become  in- 
capable; for  his  tears  might  be  those  only 
of  vexation  and  remorse,  not  expressing  any 
more  appreciation  than  before  of  the  birth- 
right in  its  religious  aspect  Ebrard'i 
remark,  that  his  condnct  as  related  in  Gen. 
xxxiii.  shows  "  a  changed  heart,"  and  hence 
a  true  repentance,  is  not  to  the  point.  For 
all  that  there  appears  is  that  he  had  got 
over  his  angry  feeling  towards  his -brother; 
it  is  by  no  means  implied — rather  the  con- 
trary— that  he  would  have  preferred  his 
destiny  to  his  own,  or  that  his  views  of  life 
had  risen  above  thoughts  of  worldly  pro- 
sperity. We  observe,  further,  that  nothing 
is  implied  one  way  or  the  other  as  to  Esau's 
own  salvation ;  it  is  only  the  privilege  of 
being  the  patriarch  of  the  chosen  seed  that 
he  is  said  to  have  thus  irrecoverably  for- 
feited. But  liis  example  is  adduced  as  a 
warning  to  Christians  with  regard  to  their 
still  more  precious  inheritance,  which  does 
involve  their  own  eternal  prospects.  The 
warning  to  them  is  similar  to  those  of  ch. 
vi.  4,  etc.,  and  ch.  x.  26,  etc.,  to  the  effect 
that  sacred  privileges,  if  persistently 
slighted,  may  be  lost  beyond  recovery.  And 
if  the  passage  before  us  seems  to  imply, 
according  to  one  view  of  it,  what  the  former 
ones  were  found  not  to  do,  the  possible 
inefficaoy  of  a  true  repentance,  however 
late, — we  may  say  that,  even  if  tliis  is  im- 
plied of  Esau  with  respect  to  liis  lost 
blessing,  it  is  not  therefore  necessarily  im- 
plied of  Christians  with  respect  to  their 
personal  salvution ;  or  that,  if  it  is  implied 
of  them,  it  is  not  till  their  probation  in  this 
life  is  over  that  a  "  place  of  repentance"  in 
this  sense  can  for  them  be  found  no  more 
(cf.  tlie  parable  of  the  ten  virgins  (Matt. 
XXV.  1,  etc.);  also  Matt.  vii.  22,  etc.;  Luke 
xiii.  24,  etc.).  One  of  Dr.  Newman's 
Parochial  Sermons  ("Life  the  Season  of 
Repentauce,"  vol.  vi. '  Sermon '  2)  strikingly 
sets  forth  this  view.  See  also  '  Christian 
Year'  (Second  Sunday  in  Lent),  with  the 
appended  note:  "Esau's  probation,  as  far 
as  his  birthright  was  ooncerned,  was  quite 
over  when  he  uttered  the  cry  in  the  text 
His  despondency,  therefore,  is  not  parallel 
to  anything  on  this  side  the  grave." 

Vers.  18— 29.— There  follows  now,  both 
for  encouragement  and  for  warning,  a  grand 
eontrast  between  tha  Mosaic  and  Christian 


dispensations,  founded  on  the  phenomena 
that  accompanied  the  giving  of  the  Law. 
To  Mount  Sinai,  with  its  repelling  terrors,  is 
opposed  an  ideal  picture  of  Mount  Zion  and 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,-  expressive  of  the 
communion  of  saints  in  Christ.  And  then 
at  ver.  25  (as  previously  in  ch.  x.)  the  tone 
of  encouragement  changes  again  to  one  of 
warning,  the  very  excess  of  privilege  being 
made  the  measure  of  the  guilt  of  slightiug 
it. 

Ver.  18. — Per  yo  are  not  oome  unto  a 
mount  that  might  be  touched,  and  that 
burned  with  fire,  and  nnto  blackness  and 
darkness  and  tempest.  The  allusion  is  to 
the  Israelites  approaching  Mount  Sinai  when 
the  Law  was  given  (see  Deut.  iv.  II,  whence 
still  more  than  from  Exod.  xix.  the  whole 
description  is  taken,  "And  ye  came  near 
[ir()off7{AflcT6,  the  same  word  as  is  used  supra, 
oh.  iv.  16;  vii.  25],  and  stood  under  the 
mountain  ").  Though  the  word  "  mount  "  in 
the  Received  Text  has  the  support  of  no 
ancient  authority,  it  must  be  understood, 
whether  or  not  originally  written.  For  it 
comes  after  Trpoo-j}A.fleTc  in  the  passage  of 
Deuteronomy  which  is  evidently  referred  to, 
the  following  words,  "  blackness,  darkness, 
tempest "  ((t/ciJtos,  yi/6(t>os,  eieWa),  being  also 
found  there.  And  otherwise  we  should  have 
to  translate,  "  a  touched  [i.e.  palpable]  and 
kindled  fire ; "  but "  touched  "(i^TjAufayuiy^)) 
is  not  suitable  to  fire;  and  we  should  also 
lose  the  evidently  intended  contrast  between 
the  two  mountains  of  Sinai  and  Zion,  which 
appears  in  ver.  22.  Neither  may  we  trans- 
late, as  some  would  do, "  a  mountain  that 
might  be  touched,  and  kindled  fire ; "  for 
the  original  passage  in  Deuteronomy  has 
"and  the  mountain  burned  wilh  fire  (jcal 
t6  6pos  ixaifTo  irvpC)."  The  participle  ^TjXa- 
(paiiivtp  (literally,  "  that  wtis  touched  "), 
rather  than  xfirifaXriTf,  may  be  used  here, 
although  on  the  occasion  referred  to  all  were 
forbidden  to  touch  the  mountain,  by  way  of 
bringing  more  distinctly  into  view  the  actual 
Sinai,  which  was  touched  at  other  times,  and 
which  Moses  both  touched  and  ascended. 
If  so,  the  main  purpose  of  the  word  is  to 
contrast  the  local  and  palpable  mountain  of 
the  Law  with  the  ideal  Mount  Zion  which 
is  afterwards  spoken  of.  Or,  the  verb  i^ij^o- 
X<£»  may  here  carry  with  it  its  common  sense 
of  groping  after,  as  in  the  dark  (of.  Deut. 
xxviii.  29,  Kal  e<nj  ■^Kwpuv  ii^anix^pias,  dicrtl 
i('r)A.a(J)7J(rai  i  ru^Kits  iy  t#  <rK6Tci),  with 
reference  to  the  cloudy  darkness  about 
Sinai,  and  in  contrast  with  the  dear  un- 
clouded vision  of  Zion. 

Vers.  19 — 21. — ^And  the  sound  of  a  trumpet 
(Exod.  xix.  16),  and  the  voice  of  word* 
(Deut.  iv.  12) ;  which  voice  they  that  heard 
entreated  that  no  word  should  be  spoken  to 
them  more  (Dent.  xviiL  16 ;  ot  ver.  85  and 


CH.  XII.  1—29.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBKEW8. 


861 


Exod.  zz.  18):  for  they  oonld  not  endure 
that  which  was  oommauded  (rather,  en- 
joined). If  even  a  beast  touch  the  mountain, 
it  BhaU  be  stoned  (Kxod.  xix.  13;  "or  thrust 
through  with  a  dart  "  is  an  interpolation  in 
the  text  from  the  passage  in  Exodus) :  and 
so  terrible  was  the  sight,  that  Hoses  said,  I 
exceediogly  fear  and  quake  (Deut.  ix.  19, 
^K<l>o^6s  eifii,  to  which  Kal  ^vrpoiJLos  is  added 
in  the  text.  This  saying  of  Moses  was 
really  uttered  afterwards,  when  he  was  de- 
scending from  the  mount,  and  became  aware 
of  the  siu  of  the  golden  calf.  It  was  called 
forlh  by  the  people's  sin,  but  was  due  to  the 
alarming  character  of  the  preceding  phe- 
nomena, of  rb  (pavTa^iiiivov,  that  which  was 
being  revealed  or  manifested.  Mention  of 
it  is  added  here  to  show  that  the  general 
fear  extended  even  to  Moses,  the  mediator). 
This  whole  account,  thus  powerfully  con- 
densed from  Exodus  and  Deuteronomy, 
presents  a  vivid  picture  of  the  terrors  of  the 
Mosaic  revelation.  God  was,indeed,revealed 
to  man, but  still  as  unseen  and  unapproach- 
able, terrible  in  his  wrath  against  sin,  and 
surrounded  by  sounds  and  sights  of  fear. 
But  now  mark  the  serene  and  glorious  . 
cohtrast. 

Vers.  22 — 24.  —But  ye  are  oome  unto  Mount 
Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem.  Here,  as  in  Gal.  iv., 
Zion  and  Jerusalem,  ideally  regarded,  are 
contrasted  with  Sinai.  The  foundation  of 
the  conception  is  in  the  Old  Testament. 
When  David  at  length  won  ths  citadel  of 
Zion,  and  placed  the  ark  upon  it,  it  was  a 
sort  of  primary  and  typical  fulfilment  of  the 
promise  of  rest,  seen  afar  off  by  the  pa- 
triarchs and  from  the  wilderness.  Ps.  zxiv., 
which  was  sung  on  that  occasion,  expresses 
the  idea  of  the  King  of  glory  being  at  length 
enthroned  there,  and  his  people  of  clean 
hands  and  pure  hearts  being  admitted  to 
stand  in  the  holy  place  before  him  (cf. 
"  This  is  my  rest  for  ever  :  here  will  I  dwell," 
Ps.  cxxxii.  14).  In  the  Psalms  generally 
the  holy  hill  of  Zion  continues  to  be  viewed 
as  the  Lord's  immovable  abode,  where  he 
is  surrounded  by  thousands  of  angels,  and 
whence  he  succours  bis  people  (cf.  Fs. 
ilviii. ;  Ixviii. ;  cxxv. ;  cxxxii. ;  etc.).  Then 
by  the  prophets  it  is  further  idealized  as  the 
scene  and  centre  of  Messianic  blessings  (of. 
Isa.  xii. ;  zxv.  13 ;  zxxiii. ;  xxxv. ;  xlvi.  13 ; 
Micah  IT. ;  to  which  many  other  passages 
might  be  added)  Compare  also  the  visions, 
in  the  latter  chapters  of  Ezekiel,  of  the 
ideal  city  and  temple  of  the  future  age. 
Lastly,  in  the  Apocalypse  the  seer  has 
visions  of  "  Mount  Zion  "  (xiv.),  and  "  the 
holy  city,  new  Jerusalem "  (xxi.),  with  the 
presence  there  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  and 
with  myriads  of  angels,  and  innumerable 
multituuea  of  saints  redeemed.    If,  in  the 


passage  before  na,  a  distinction  b  to  be 
made  between   "Mount  Zion"  and  "the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,"  it  may  be  that  the 
former  represents  the  Church  below,  the 
latter   the  heavenly  regions,  though  both 
are  blent  together  in  one  grand  picture  of 
the  communion  of  saints.     For  so  in  Rev. 
xiv.  the  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand 
on  Mount  Zion    seem   distinct   from    the 
singers  and  harpers  round  the  throne,  whooe 
song  is  heard  from  heaven  and  learnt  by 
those  below ;  while  the  picture  of  tlie  holy 
city  in  Eev.  xxi.  is  one  entirely  heavenly, 
representing ,  there  the  final  eousummatiou 
rather  than  any  present  state  of  things. 
And  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels, 
to  the  general  assembly  and  Chnroh  of  the 
Firstborn  (rather,  and  to  myriads,  the  general 
assembly  of  angels,  and  the  Church  of  the 
Firstborn),  which  are  written  in  heaven,  and 
to  Qod  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits  of 
just  men  made   perfect,  and  to  Jesus  the 
Mediator  of  a  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood 
of  sprinkling,  that  speakcth  better  things 
than  that  of  Abel  (literally,  than  Abel).    Of 
the  several  ways  of  translating  the  beginning 
of  the  above  passage,  the  best  seems  to  be 
to  take  iivfiiffiv  by  itself  as  including  both 
the  angels  and  the  Church  of  the  Firstborn, 
and   to  connect  vafnyipet  with   "angels" 
only.     "Myriads"  is  a  well-known  expres- 
sion for  the  Lohd's  attendant  hosts  (ct.  Jude 
14;  Deut.  xxz.  2;  Dan.  vii.  10);  further, 
Kal,  which  throughout  the  passage  connects 
the  different  objects  approached,  conies  be- 
tween ■iiavr}yvpei  and  fKK\7i(rla,  not  between 
ayyf\Zii  and  iravriyjpsi:  and  the  application 
of  both  trai/Tiyvpei  and  eKK\7j(rla   to  irpuTo- 
T6Kai'  would  seem  an  unmeaning  redundancy. 
The  word  irai/jjyupis,  which  in  classical  Greek 
denotes  properly  the  assembly  of  a  whole 
nation  for  a  festival,  is  peculiarly  appro 
priate  to  the  angels,  whether  regarded  (as 
in  the  Old  Testament)  as  ministering  round 
the  throne  or  as  congregated  to  rejoice  over 
man's  redemption.     "  The  Church  of  the 
Firstborn  "  seems  to  denote  the  Church  mili- 
tant rather  than  the  Church  triumphant;  for 
(1)  fKK\r]crltt  U  elsewhere  used  for  the  Church 
on  earth  (so  also  in  the  Old  Testament ;  ot 
Fs.  Ixxix.  6);  (2)  the  phrase,  h  oupafoU 
i,Troyfypaij./j.iua>y,  expresses  the  idea  of  being 
enrolled  in  the  books  of  heaven  rather  than 
being  already  there  (cf.  Luke  x.  20;  PhiL 
iv.  3;  Kev.  xx.  12  ;  xxi.  27);  (3)  the  "spirits 
of  the  perfected  "  are  mentioned  afterwards 
as.  a,  class  distinct.    The  word  irpa-To-riRaf 
may  be  suggested  here  by  the  firstborn  of 
Israel,  who  were  specially  hallowed  to  th< 
Lord  (Numb.  lii.  13),  and  numbered  as  such 
by  Moses  (Numb.  iU.  43),  or  perhaps  still 
more  by  the  birthright  (irparoTciKio)  spoken 
of  above  as  forfeited  by  Esau.     God's  elect 
may  be  called  hia  flrstbam  ai  being  buUowed 


Bsa 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWB.  [oh.  xn.  1—29, 


to  Mm  ATid  hein  of  his  promisea  (cf.  Exod. 
IT.  22,  **  Israel  is  my  son,  even  my  firstborn ; " 
«nd  Jer.  xxxi.  9,  "  Epbraim  is  my  firstborn  "). 
They  thus  correspond  to  the  hundred  and 
forty-four  thousand  of  Eev.  xiv.,  standing  on 
Mount  Zion,  being  "redeemed  from  the 
earth,"  and  having  "the  Father's  Name 
written  on  their  foreheads ; "  seen  distinct 
Fjom,  and  yet  in  communion  with,  the  saints 
In  bliss,  whose  voices  are  heard  above.  Be- 
>ween  them  and  the  spirits  of  the  perfected 
is  interposed,  "  God  the  Judge  of  all ; "  and 
this  appropriately,  since  before  him  the 
saints  on  earth  must  appear  ere  they  join 
the  ranks  of  the  perfected :  the  former  look 
up  to  him  from  below;  the  latter  have 
already  passed  before  him  to  the  rest  as- 
signed them.  TCTeXeiM/ieVwi'  ("  perfected  ") 
expresses,  as  elsewhere  in  the  Epistle,  full 
accomplishment  of  an  end  or  purpose  with 
ngard  to  things  or  persons  (cf.  ch.  ii.  10 ;  v. 
9;  vii.  19,  28;  ix.  9;  x.  1, 14;  xL  40);  the 
word  is  used  here  of  those  whose  warfare  is 
accomplished,  and  who  have  attained  the 
rest  of  God.  Their  "spirits"  only  are 
spoken  of,  because  the  "  perfect  consumma- 
tion and  bliss  both  in  body  and  soul"  is 
still  to  come.  In  the  mean  while,  with 
respect  to  the  issue  of  their  earthly  course, 
they  have  been  already  perfected  (cf.  Eev. 
xiv.  13,  "They  rest  from  their  labours"). 
Corresponding  to  the  Lamb  in  Bevelation, 

The  Old  Covenant. 

Sinai,  a  palpable  earthly  mountain,  snr. 
rounded  by  gloom  and  storm. 

The  angels  through  whom  the  Law  was 
given  (of.  ch.  ii.  2 ;  Gal.  iii.  19 ;  Acts  vii. 
53;  Deut.  xxiii.  2),  unseen  by  men,  but 
operating  in  the  winds  and  in  the  fire  (cf. 
ch.  i.  7). 

Israel  congregated  under  the  mountain, 
afraid,  and  forbidden  to  touch  it. 

The  LoKD,  unapproachable,  shrouded  in 
darkness  or  revealed  in  fire. 

Moses,  himself  afraid,  and  winning 
through  his  mediation  no  access  for  the 
people. 

The  blood  sprinkled  on  the  people  to 
ratify  the  old  covenant,  but  which  could 
not  cleanse  the  conscience. 

The  sound  of  a  trumpet  and  the  voice  of 
words,  inspiring  fear. 

Such  IB  the  vision  by  the  contemplation  of 
which  the  inspired  writer  would  arouse  his 
readers,  amid  their  trials  and  waverings,  to 
realize  the  things  that  are  eternal.  He 
would  have  tliem  pierce  with  the  eye  of 
fiiilh  beyond  this  visible  scene  into  the 
world  invisible,  which  ia  no  less  real.     If 


there  is  seen  next  Jesns  the  Mediator, 
through  whom  is  the  approach  of  the  whole 
company  to  the  Judge  of  all,  and  the  ao- 
complishment  to  the  perfected.  The  "  new 
covenant "  is,  of  course,  mount  to  be  con- 
trasted with  the  old  one  before  Mount 
Sinai,  under  which  tliere  was  no  such  ap- 
proach or  accomplishment.  Then  "  the 
blood  of  sprinkling"  has  reference  to  that 
wherewith  the  old  covenant  was  ratified 
(Exod.  xxiv. ;  cf.  supra,  ch.  ix.  18).  Tlie 
blood  shed  by  Christ  on  earth  for  atonement 
is  conceived  as  carried  by  him  with  himself 
into  the  holy  place  on  high  (cf.  ch.  ix.  12), 
to  be  for  ever  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling  " 
for  effectual  cleansing.  And  this  blood 
"speaketh  better  tilings  than  Abel."  His 
blood  cried  from  the  ground  for  vengeance, 
with  the  accusing  voice  of  primeval  sin; 
Christ's  speaks  only  of  reconciliation  and 
peace.  Some  commentators  (Bengel  in  the 
fir=t  plaee,  whom  Delitzsch  follows)  see  in 
this  contrast  between  Sinai  and  Zion  a  dis- 
tinct parallelism  between  vers.  18,  19  and 
vers.  22—24;  seven  objects  of  approach  in 
one  case  being  supposed  to  be  set  against 
seven  in  the  other.  More  obvious  is  tlie 
corresjiondence  of  the  successive  clauses  of 
vpr.s.  22 — 24  to  the  general  ideas  connected 
with  the  giving  of  the  Law.  The  twe 
pictures  may  be  contrasted  thus— 


The  New  Covenant, 

Zion,  radiant  with  light  and  crowned  with 
the  city  of  God. 
Featal  choirs  of  assembled  angela. 


The  accepted  Church  of  the  Firsthora, 
with  free  approach  to  the  holiest  of  all. 

The  Judge  of  all,  without  his  terrors, 
accessible,  and  awarding  rest  to  the  per- 
fected. 

The  Divine  availing  Mediator. 


The  ever-cleansing  blood    of  oomplete 

atonement. 

The  voice  of  that  cleansing  Uood,  speak- 
ing of  peace  and  pardon. 

they  were  perplexed  and  disheartened  by 
what  they  found  around  them — by  the  oppo- 
sition of  the  world  and  the  fewness  of  the 
faithful — he  bids  them  associate  themselves 
in  thought  with  those  countless  mullitudos 
who  were  on  their  side.  The  picture  is, 
indeed,  in  some  respects,  ideal ;  for  the  actual 


OH.  xu.  1—29.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBEEWS. 


S63 


Church  on  earth  does  not  pome  up  to  the 
idea  of  the  "  Church  of  the  Firstborn ; "  but 
it  is  presented  aeoording  to  God's  purpose 
for  bis  people,  and  It  rests  with  us  to  make 
it  a  present  reality  to  ourselves. 

Yer.  25. — See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that 
speaketh.  Per  if  they  escaped  not,  refusing 
him  that  spake  (rather,  warned;  the  word 
here  used  is  not  \a\ovvTa,  as  before,  but 
XPwari^oiiTtx,  expressive  of  a  Divine  admo- 
nition or  warning.  In  the  passive  it  is 
translated  "  warned  of  God,"  "  admonished 
of  God,"  Matt.  ii.  12, 22 ;  ch.  viii.  5 ;  xi.J ;  of. 
Acts  X.  22,  ixP^f'"^''^'')  ""■*  ar/yi^o^  aylov) 
on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we  escape,  if 
we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh  (or, 
wameth)  from  heaven.  Here  tiie  warning 
begins.  "Him  that  speaketh  (Tii/AaAouyTo)," 
is  siiggested  by  XaXoivn  in  the  preceding 
verse.  But  the  subject  is  changed:  it  is 
God,  not  the  "  blood  of  sprinkling,"  that  is 
now  regarded  as  speaking  to  us  from  heaven. 
It  was  God  also  that  warned  on  earth ;  not, 
•8  some  take  it,  Moses,  whom  the  word 
XprjA'aT^foi'Ta  does  not  suit:  of  him  it  is 
said,  KeKpri/idTurTot  (oh.  viii.  5).  The  allu- 
sion is  to  the  voice  heard  from  the  earthly 
Sinai,  which  the  people  entreated  (supra, 
ver.  19,  iraprjT^o'Bi'To — the  same  word  as  is 
used  here)  should  be  heard  no  more.  But 
they  escaped  not  the  hearing  of  that  voice, 
or  the  consequences  of  disregarding  its 
warning  (cf.  ch.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  10). 

Ver.  26.— Whose  voice  then  shook  the 
earth  (see  Exod.  xix.  18,  "  The  whole  mount 
quaked  greatly,"  though  there  the  LXX. 
has  A.aiis  instead  of  Spos :  but  cf.  Judg.  v., 
"The  earth  trembled,"  and  Pb.  cxiv.  7, 
"  Tremble,  thou  earth,"  etc.,  with  reference 
to  the  phenomena  at  Sinai ;  aUo  Hab.  iii.  6, 
10) :  hut  now  he  hath  promised,  saying,  Yet 
once  more  I  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also 
heaven.  The  prophecy  referred  to  is  Hag. 
iL  6,  7,  "  Yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I 
will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and 
the  sea,  and  the  dry  land ;  and  I  will  shake 
all  nations,  and  the  Desire  of  all  nalions 
shall  come :  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with 
glory,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Again, 
ver.  21j  "  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  "  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  19,  21).  The  prophecy 
was  uttered  with  reference  to  the  second 
temple,  the  glory  of  which  was  to  be  greater 
than  the  glory  of  the  first,  in  that  it  should 
be  the  scene  of  the  Lord's  final  revelation 
of  himself  to  his  people.  Its  first  fulfilment 
is  rightly  seen  in  Christ's  first  coming  (cf. 
Hab.  ii.  9,  ''And  in  this  place  will  I  give 
peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ; "  and  Mai. 
iii.  1,  "  The  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  sud- 
denly come  to  his  temple").  But  the 
language  used  points  evidently,  even  in 
itself,  to  a  further  fulfilment;  nor  do  readers 
need  to  be  teminded  liei*  of  the  pregnant 


and  far-reaching  sense  of  all  Messianio 
prophecy.  "lUuatie  est  testimonium  Is. 
Newtoni  ad  Dan.  p.  91 :  vixque  in  omni  V.  T. 
aliquod  de  Chriato  extat  vaticinium,  quod 
lion,  aliqiiatenus  saltern,  secundum  ejus  ad' 
ventam  respioiat"  (Bengel).  The  ultimate 
reference  is  what  is  seen  dimly  afar  off  in  so 
many  of  the  prophetic  visions — the  final  dis- 
solution of  the  whole  present  order  of  things, 
to  be  succeeded  by  the  kingdom  of  eternal 
righteousness  (cf.  Ps.  oil.  25,  etc.).  By 
the  heaven  that  is  to  be  shaken  in  that  great 
day  is  meant,  of  course,  not  the  eternal 
abode  of  God,  but  that  which  is  created 
and  visible  (rav  weiroiri/ievav,  ver.  27).  'i  hig 
final  shaking  is  set  against  the  local  and 
typical  shaking  of  Mount  Sinai  in  two 
points  of  contrast — its  extending  to  the 
whole  creation,  and  its  being  once  for  all 
(?TiSjra{);  and  from  the  latter  expression 
the  removing  of  the  things  thus  finally 
shaken  is  in  the  next  verse  inferred.  This 
inference,  though  not  following  necessarily 
from  the  expression  itself,  is  involved  in 
the  general  drift  of  Haggai's  prophecy, 
taken  in  connection  with  other  cognate 
ones,  in  which  an  entirely  new  and  heavenly 
order  is  pictured  as  rising  over  the  ruins  of 
the  old  (cf.  Isa.  Ixv.  17 ;  Ixvi.  22,  referred 
to  la  2  Pet.  iii.  7, 10, 13,  "  new  heavens  and 
a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness." 

Yers.  27 — 29.^And  this  word.  Yet  once 
more,  slgnifieth  the  removing  of  those  things 
that  are  shaken,  as  of  things  that  have  been 
made,  that  those  things  which  are  not 
shaken  may  remain.  Wherefore,  receiving  a 
kingdom  that  cannot  be  shaken  (observe  the 
present  participle,  vapaKaji^ivovTes :  we 
already  belong  to  this  kingdom,  which 
exists  now  behind  the  veil  of  this  visible 
scene,  and  will  survive  its  catastrophe ; 
observe  also  that  the  phrase,  0afft\eiav 
TtapaKan^ivovTis,  corresponds  with  Dan.  vii. 
18,  Kal  Tra^dK'li'^ovrat  t))V  ^afftKeiav  &yioi 
i}fii(TTov, — it  implies  an  actual  share  in  the 
royalty  of  the  kingdom;  cf.  Eph.  v.  5; 
Bev.  i.  6;  T.  10),  let  us  have  grace  (or, 
thanlt/ulness ;  the  usual  meaning  of  ^x^'" 
X^tv  is  "to  be  thankful,"  or  "to  give 
thanks,"  as  in  Luke  xvii.  9 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12 ;  2 
Tim.  i.  3),  whereby  we  may  serve  God  ac- 
ceptably with  reverence  and  godly  fear :  for 
oni  Qod  is  a  consuming  fire.  This  last  verse 
is  from  Deut.  iv.  24,  where  the  Israelites  are 
being  warned  of  the  danger  of  forgetting 
the  covenant  of  the  Lobd  their  God.  The 
Lobd's  nature  is  not  changed:  he  is  still 
a  consuming  fire  against  evil,  as  he  declared 
himself  from  Sinai;  and  if  we  scorn  the 
present  dispensation  of  grace,  the  day  of 
judgment  will  still  be  to  iu  •  day  of  teiiat 
(of.  <ujM-a,  oh.  X.  26,  •to.> 


86i  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  fcH.  xii.  1—29. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vere.  1 — 3. — The  life  of  faith,  and  its  supreme  Exemplar,  In  these  verses  tha 
apostle  gathers  up  the  practical  lesson  to  be  derived  from  his  historical  demonstra- 
tion of  the  power  of  faith  contained  in  ch.  xi.  The  figure  of  the  passage  is  that  of  a 
race  which  the  believer  is  required  to  run,  the  reference  being  doubtless  to  the  foot-race 
in  the  Grecian  games. 

I.  The  Christian  race.  (Ver.  1.)  Glance  here  at  the  points  of  analogy,  or  truths 
intended  to  be  taught  by  this  figure.  The  life  of  faith  is :  1.  An  arduous  struggle. 
"  The  righteous  is  with  difficulty  saved"  (1  Pet.  iv.  18).  1'he  Christian  calling  is  not 
a  stroll  or  a  saunter,  but  a  race.  It  entails  strenuous  efibrt.  2.  A  struggle  which 
involves  fixedness  of  aim.  It  is  "  set  before  us."  There  is  a  goal  to  be  kept  in  view, 
and  a  prize  to  be  won ;  and  there  is,  accordingly,  a  prescribed  path  of  faith  and  duty. 
3.  A  struggle  which  involves  perseverance.  The  believer  must  "  run  with  patience." 
He  must  not  allow  his  ardour  to  decline.  He  must  not  desist  until  he  finishes  his 
course.  4.  A  struggle  which  will  soor,  be  over.  "  Yet  a  very  little  while,"  and  the 
Christian  shall  have  reached  the  goal,  and  won  Christ.  5.  A  public  spectade.  "  We 
are  compassed  about  with  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses."  We  run  this  race  under  the  eye 
of  God  himself.  Other  spectators  are  the  holy  and  the  fallen  angels,  "the  spirits  ol 
just  men  made  perfect,"  our  fellow-believers  on  earth,  and  the  ungodly  world  around  us. 

II.  The  c»ndition8  of  successful  eunninq.  (Ver.  1.)  The  Olympic  runner  put 
ofT  his  flowing  robes,  and  everything  else  that  might  impede  his  course.  So  the  Ghris' 
tian  is  to  "  lay  aside,"  1.  Weights.  This  woi-d  denotes  whatever  would  put  one  to 
disadvantage  in  running,  whether  it  be  in  itself  innocent  or  not.  Of  course  every 
evil  passion  is  a  weight,  which  can  only  clog  the  believer's  heavenward  progress.  But 
even  that  which  is  in  itself  lawful  may  become,  if  we  abuse  it,  a  heavy  load.  We  may 
pervert  a  good  gift  of  God  into  a  dead  weight.  And  some  habit  which  is  no  hindrance 
at  all  to  my  Christian  brother  may  have  proved  to  be  a  great  spiritual  cumbrance  to 
me.  There  is,  e.g.,  the  weight  of  prosperity,  of  care,  of  sorrow ;  the  weight  of  worldly 
business,  of  earthly  ambition,  of  human  affection.  "  The  things  which  are  seen  "  must 
not  be  allowed  to  lie  heavy  on  the  soul,  if  we  would  successfully  run  the  Christian  race. 
2.  iSin.  This  is  the  essential  burden.  It  "  easily  besets  us,"  i.e.  cleaves  to  us,  wraps 
itself  round  us  like  a  cloak,  clings  to  us  as  a  parasitical  plant  to  a  tree.  It  is  sin  in 
general  which  the  apostle  characterizes  as  "easily  besetting."  The  adjective  in  the 
original  does  not  refer  to  the  particular  sins,  whatever  these  may  be,  to  which  indi- 
viduals are  most  prone;  although,  of  course,  in  taking  home  the  exhortation  to  the 
conscience,  this  thought  will  naturally  be  suggested.  The  writer  probably  had  in  his 
mind  just  now  (indeed,  he  never  forgets  it  throughout  this  letter)  the  sin  of  apostasy — 
the  danger  to  which  the  Hebrew  Christians  were  exposed  of  drifting  back  to  Judaism, 
and  thus  of  "  falling  away  from  the  living  God  "  (ch.  iii.  12).  This  sin,  and  all  others, 
must  be  laid  aside.    If  we  do  not  renounce  sin,  we  give  up  the  race. 

III.  Encouragements  to  persevere  in  bunnino.  In  the  midst  of  affliction  and 
weariness,  as  well  as  of  powerful  temptations  to  apostatize,  how  are  our  fainting  hearts 
to  be  revived  ?  Two  great  motives  are  presented.  1.  The  presence,  as  spectators,  of  the 
former  heroes  of  faith.  (Ver.  1.)  The  Old  Testament  saints  are  "witnesses"  now  of 
the  race  which  they  once  ran  themselves.  They  not  only  testify  to  the  power  of  faith ; 
they  are  also  spectators  of  the  struggles  and  conflicts  of  their  successors.  The  apostle's 
language  is  not  that  merely  of  poetic  imagination.  He  seems  to  say  that  "  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect"  are  cognizant  of  what  is  done  upon  the  earth,  and  take  an 
absorbing  interest  in  it.  We  are  to  think  of  them  as  hovering  over  us  in  the  heavens. 
They  circle  and  crowd  around  us,  tier  upon  tier,  on  both  sides  of  the  race-course.  On 
the  one  side  is  the  gallery  of  the  saints  before  the  Flood,  that  of  the  Hebrew  Pilgrim 
Fathers,  of  the  heroes  of  the  Exodus,  of  the  judges,  and  of  the  prophets ;  while  on  th« 
other  side  is  the  gallery  of  the  apostles,  that  of  the  Christian  confessors  and  martyrs,  ol 
the  missionaries  of  the  Church,  and  of  our  own  departed  friends  who  have  gone  to  glory. 
These  spectators  are  a  "great  cloud" — multitudinous  in  number;  they  are  radiant 
with  the  brightness  of  immortality  ;  and,  having  themselves  passed  through  the  same 
"xperience  as  we,  they  keenly  sympathize  with  us.     We  should  therefore  take  hearty 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBHEWa  3b5 

as  we  hear  their  heavealy  greetings,  and  realize  the  fellowship  with  ns  which  they 
claim.  2.  The  example  of  Jesus,  the  Leader  and  Per/ecter  of  faith.  (Vers.  2,  3.) 
While  gratefully  conscious  of  the  presence  of  the  men  of  faith,  we  are  to  gaze  fixedly 
only  upon  Jesus.  The  writer  refers  to  the  Saviour  here  in  his  human  nature,  as  tht 
Pattern  Man,  and  as  our  supreme  Exemplar.  His  portrait  is  the  grandest  in  the  whole 
exhibition  of  the  heroes  of  faith;  indeed,  none  of  those  in  ch.  zL  can  for  a  momeut 
compare  with  it.  This  noblest  picture  is  arranged  in  two  divisions ;  we  see  Christ  on 
the  one  side  in  his  humiliation,  and  on  the  other  in  his  exaltation.  And  the  inscription 
set  over  it  reads  thus :  "  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Perfeoter  of  faith,"  He  is  the  Author, 
i.e.  Captain,  Prince,  Head,  or  Leader,  of  all  the  men  of  faith.  He  exhibited,  during  his 
own  earthly  life,  an  absolutely  perfect  example  of  trust  in  God.  By  faith  be  waited  at 
Kazareth,  with  his  high  destiny  stirring  in  his  heart,  during  thirty  years.  By  faith  he 
assumed  the  burden  of  the  world's  sin.  By  faith  he  conquered  Satan  in  the  wilderness. 
By  faith  he  performed  the  labours  of  his  three  years'  active  ministry.  By  faith  he 
endured  the  agonies  of  Gethsemane,  and  the  "  gainsaying  "  (ver.  3)  of  Gabbatha,  and 
the  soul-darkness  of  Golgotha.  Jesus  did  not  "  shrink  back  unto  perdition,"  notwith- 
standing his  unparalleled  temptations.  So  he^  is  also  the  "  Pe/rfecter  of  faith  ; "  for  in 
him  faith  has  had  its  perfect  work.  No  other  man  will  ever  appear  in  our  world  equal 
to  him  as  a  specimen  of  faith.  Therefore  he  is  our  great  Model.  The  early  Hebrew 
Christians  were  to  "consider  him."  That  very  "cross"  at  which  they  stumbled,  he 
"  endured."  If  they  were  being  treated  by  "  sinners  "  (ver.  3)  as  renegades  from  the 
religion  of  Israel,  much  more  had  he  been.  Their  sufferings  and  temptations  were  not 
nearly  so  dreadful  as  his.  Seeing,  then,  that  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  for  the  sake  of  the 
eternal  reward  in  store  for  him,  persevered  to  the  end  in  running  his  appointed  race, 
why  should  any  of  his  followers  allow  themselves  to  "  wax  weary,  fainting  in  their 
aouls  "  ?  It  was  his  endurance  of  the  cross  that  gave  him  his  place  "  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  throne  of  God;"  and  all  who  follow  him  as  their  Leader  in  the  race  of  faith  shall 
eventually  sit  with  him  upon  his  throne. 

CoNOLusioK.  L  Life  or  death  depends  upon  whether  or  not  we  run  the  Christian 
race.  2.  Christ  will  give  us  strength  to  run  well,  if  we  ask  Mm.  3.  He  will  crown  us 
at  the  end,  bestowing  himself  upon  ui  as  the  Prize. 

Vers.  4r— U. — Chastisement,  In  this  passage  the  writer  reminds  the  Hebrews  that 
although  doubtless  they  had  sustained  severe  trials  on  account  of  their  devotedness  to 
Christ,  none  of  them  had  yet  been  required  to  seal  their  faith  with  their  blood  (ver.  4). 
Other  children  of  God  had  suffered  much  more  than  they  (ch.  xi.  35 — 38),  and  had 
remained  faithful.  For  them  to  apostatize  would,  therefore,  be  very  heinous  sin. 
Bather  they  must  leam  to  view  their  afBictions  as  the  corrections  of  God's  fatherly 
love.    Consider— 

L  The  fact  of  chastisement.  1.  Our  afflictions  are  really  such.  Sometimes,  in 
forgetfulness  of  God,  the  believer  may  regard  his  sorrows  simply  as  calamities — 
untoward  events  which  have  no  particukr  spiritual  meaning.  At  other  times  he  may 
receive  them  merely  as  trials  of  his  faith,  or  as  sent  to  strengthen  his  Christian  graces. 
But  this  passage  reminds  us  that  we  greatly  err  if  we  do  not  find  in  our  troubles  the 
element  of  chastisement.  It  is  true  that  Jesus  Christ  has  borne  the  essential  penalty 
of  his  people's  sins ;  but,  though  he  has  done  so,  he  has  not  removed  any  lesser  punish- 
ment which  we  may  require  in  order  to  the  correcting  of  our  faults.  God  "  forgives  " 
us,  but  he  "  takes  vengeance  of  our  inventions "  (Ps.  xcix.  8).  2.  Chastisement  is 
inevitable.  The  Lord  "scourgeth  every  son"  (ver.  6).  "All  have  been  made  par- 
takers" of  it — all  the  Old  Testament  saints,  and  all  believers  in  Christian  times.  The 
unchastened  man  is  a  bastard.  3.  Chastisement  is  various  in  kind  and  in  degree. 
There  are,  e.g.,  disease  of  body,  distress  of  mind,  the  loss  of  property,  injury  of  character, 
the  profligacy  of  children,  the  faithlessness  of  friends,  persecution  for  righteousness' 
sake.  4.  Chastisement  is  severe.  He  "  scourgeth  "  (ver.  6).  The  Lord's  rod  draws 
blood.  It  checkers  the  believer's  life  with  wales  (Isa.  i.  6,  6).  The  Christian  "bears 
branded  on  his  body  the  marks  of  Jesus  "  (GaL  vL  16). 

U.  God's  pasFOSE  in  chastiskment.  It  is  a  gracious  purpose.  Divine  penalties  fall 
upon  the  believer  as  a  necessary  discipline.  The  love  as  well  as  the  righteousness  of 
God  prompts  to  these  retributions.     Chastisement  is  sent:  1.  To  correct  our  favlli. 


366  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xii.  1—29. 

Possibly  there  are  certain  sins  of  ours  in  regard  to  which  correction  is  needed,  that  we 
may  be  led  to  repent  of  them ;  and,  when  affliction  overtakes  us,  we  should  endeavour 
to  find  out  what  these  sins  are.  Or,  perhaps,  a  life  of  ease  and  prosperity  inay  have 
seduced  us  into  spiritual  carelessness,  and  favoured  the  growth  of  pride  within  the  soul. 
In  such  a  case  God  sends  chastisement  to  convince  us  of  the  vanity  of  the  world,  and 
to  attract  our  thoughts  towards  the  things  which  belong  to  our  peace.  2.  To  form  mi/r 
spiritvM  character.  CoiTection  is  sent  as  a  means  of  assimilating  our  moral  nature  to 
that  of  Gnd  himself  (ver.  10).  Sorrow  accepted  as  Divine  chastisement  refines  and 
sanctifies  the  soul.  It  stirs  its  tcnderest  emotions,  and  touches  its  richest  chords.  It 
draws  the  heart  towards  God  himself,  as  its  only  Best  and  Strength  and  Joy.  The  most 
beautiful  human  faces  are  not  those  which  show  merely  the  must  regular  features  and 
the  purest  complexion ;  they  are  those  saintly  faces  which  have  been  beautified  by 
chastisement — "  made  perfect  through  sufferings."  3.  To  promote  our  eternal  well-belny. 
The  ultimate  purpose  is  that  we  may  "  live  "  (ver.  9),  spiritually  and  eternally.  To 
become  "  partakers  of  God's  holiness"  is  to  be  educated  for  spending  eternity  with  Gud. 
Each  believer  must  pass  through  a  curriculum  of  chastisement  before  he  can  gradtiate 
to  gloiy. 

*'Ti8  sorrow  builds  the  shining  ladder  np^ 
Whose  golden  rounds  are  our  calamities, 
Whereon  our  firm  feet  planting,  nearer  Clod 
The  spirit  climbs,  and  hath  its  eyes  unsealed." 

(Lowell.: 

in.  OuB  DUTY  IN  RELATION  TO  CHASTISEMENT.  This  the  apostle  gently  censures  his 
readers  for  having  overlooked,  as  it  is  exhibited  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  He 
quotes  Prov.  iil.  11,  12,  and  adds  a  few  sentences  of  beautiful  and  suggestive  com- 
mentary. The  quotation  (vers.  5,  6)  exhibits  the  duty  negatively,  and  the  comment 
^vers.  7 — 11)  positively.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  We  are  not  to  "despise"  chastisement. 
(Ver.  6.)  We  do  so  when  we  proudly  strive  to  feel  it  as  little  as  possible,  treating  our 
troubles  in  a  stoical  spirit,  as  if  they  were  meaningless.  We  do  so,  too,  when  we 
refuse  to  see  God's  hand  in  them,  or  to  believe  that  they  are  determined  in  providence 
by  our  spiritual  condition.  We  despise  chastisement  when  we  insist  that  we  do  not 
deserve  any ;  and  when,  in  haughty  insubordination,  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  "  maHe 
cross  by  cross  providences."  (2)  We  must  not  "faint "  under  it.  (Ver.  5.)  This  is 
the  other  extreme — ^to  become  depressed,  despondent,  despairing.  We  abuse  chastise- 
ment if  we  do  notaing  but  bemoan  it,  as  Elijah  once  did  (1  Kings  xix.  4).  We  "faint " 
when  we  cherish  dark  and  hard  and  unbelieving  thoughts  regarding  our  afflictions — 
forgetting  the  blessed  purpose  that  is  behind  them,  and  the  grace  which  the  Sender 
will  supply  to  enable  us  to  bear  them.  2.  Positively.  (1)  We  mitst  "  be  in  subjection 
unto  the  Father  of  spirits"  (Ver.  9.)  This  is  the  opposite  of  "  despising  "  our  troubles. 
The  child  of  God  will  school  himself  into  unquestioning  submission.  He  will  receive 
his  afilictions  as  from  the  Lord,  on  whose  paternal  grace  he  depends  for  every  blessing. 
(2)  We  must  he  "exercised  thereby."  (Ver.  11.)  This  is  the  opposite  of  "fainting"  wiien 
God  reproves  us.  Chastisement  is  intended  to  brace  the  believer,  not  to  depress  him. 
AfSictions  are  the  gymnastics  of  the  spiritual  life.  They  are  like  the  exercises  of  the 
athlete,  who  is  in  training  for  a  contest.  We  are  "  exercised  thereby  "  when  we  accept 
our  troubles  as  sent  by  God  himself  for  our  correction ;  and  when,  recognizing  this,  we 
co-operate  with  him  in  carrying  out  their  gracious  purpose. 

IV.  Our  consolation  undeb  chastisement.  This  passage  suggests  many  com- 
forting thoughts,  which  should  help  us  submissively  to  bear  it.  It  is :  1.  Appointed 
by  Qod.  (Ver.  6.)  Afflictions  do  not  come  casually.  They  do  not  overtake  us  merely 
at  the  pleasure  of  our  enemies.  He  who  chnsteneth  is  "the  Lord,"  the  Sovereign  of 
til.  Let  us,  with  Job  (Job  i.  21)  and  Kli  (1  Sam,  iii.  18),  realize  this :  to  do  so  will 
strengthen  our  hearts.  2.  Bent  in  fatlwrly  love.  This  thought  runs  through  the 
passage  like  a  golden  thread  (vers.  5 — 10).  God  is  "  tlie  Father  of  our  spirits ;  "  and 
he  cherishes  towards  us  the  heart  of  a  Father.  His  corrections  are  a  token  of  his  loving- 
kindness.  He  loves  not  to  smite ;  but  he  smites  because  he  loves.  He  uses  the  rod 
only  because  necessity  requires  it.  And  if  a  dutiful  child  submits  patiently  to  the 
chastisements  of  his  earthly  parents,  although  he  has  derived  only  his  body  from  them. 


OB.  xn.  1—29.]  THK  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW  a  867 

how  much  more  submissively  should  we  bear  the  Divine  corrections,  seeing  they  proceed 
from  him  from  whom  alone  we  have   received  our  spiritual  and  immuital  nature ! 

3.  Dealt  vnth  unerring  wisdom.  (Vet.  10.)  We  who  are  parents  often  chastise  our 
children  wrongly.  Sometimes  our  motives  are  wrong,  as  when  we  punish  under  the 
influence  of  temporary  passion  or  caprice.  At  other  times  our  measures  are  wrong,  as 
when  we  choose  an  in6iction  of  an  unsuitable  kind,  or  mal^e  it  unduly  severe.  Parents 
also  are  prone  to  study  only  the  temporal  well-being  of  their  children,  and  to  chastise 
them  merely  with  a  view  to  the  "  few  days  "  of  their  earthly  life.  But  our  heavenly 
Father  makes  no  mistakes  in  his  chastisements.  The  pain  which  he  appoints  is  always 
wise  and  right  and  salutary.  He  never  punishes  beyond  our  deserts,  or  in  excess  of 
what  we  are  able  to  bear.    And  he  is  ever  seeking  our  spiritual  and  eternal  well-being. 

4.  Productive  and  profitable.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  The  "  profit "  is  that  we  may  share  the 
holiness  of  God.  The  "fruit  consists  in  "rijiliteousness,"  t".«.  moral  and  spiritual 
excellence — the  beautiful  graces  and  the  holy  habits  of  the  Christian  life.  This  blessed 
fruit  is  "  peaceable,"  in  sweet  contrast  with  the  "grievousness"  of  the  afliiction  con- 
sidered in  itself.  It  begins  to  be  reaped  even  here  on  earth  (Bom.  v.  8 — 5)  j  and  the 
full  harvest  ot  it  will  be  gathered  in  heaven  (Bom.  viiL  18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18). 

Vers.  12 — 17,— A  three/old  cord  of  duty.  The  word  "  wherefore  "  (ver.  12)  connects 
this  admonition  with  what  goes  before.  For  these  reasons,  says  the  apostle — since  the 
Saviour  was  subjected  to  such  hard  treatment  at  the  hands  of  wicked  men ;  since  your 
own  resistance  to  sin  has  not  yet  exposed  you  to  bloodshed ;  since  your  very  trials  are 
an  expression  of  God's  fatherly  love ;  and  since  his  chastisement!  are  fitted  to  be  so 
profitable  in  their  results — surely  you  will  never  allow  yourselves  to  fall  away  from  the 
Christian  faith.  The  direct  admonition  in  vers.  12 — 14  refers  to  ourselves,  to  our 
fellow-believers,  and  to  God — an  arrangement  of  thought  which  is  eminently  Pauline. 
And  the  three  parts  of  it  are  leduplicated  in  vers.  15 — 17,  each  being  introduced  with 
the  word  "  lest." 

I.  Cub  duty  to  ourselves.  (Vers.  12, 13, 15.)  Here  the  author  seems  to  return 
to  the  metaphor  of  "the  race  set  before  us"  (ver.  1).  "Hands "and  "knees"  and 
"feet"  represent  the  powers  of  action,  motion,  and  progression.  The  Hebrews  must 
no  longer  taint  in  the  presence  of  their  trials.  They  must  be  resolute,  manly,  courageous. 
The  exhortation  has  respect  mainly  to  the  spiritual  life  of  each  believer  himself.  Each 
ought  to  form  a  decided  purpose  to  correct  his  own  faults,  and  to  continue  faithful  at 
all  hazards  to  his  Christian  profession.  The  whole  Church  should  advance  in  the  right 
course  with  such  unanimity  that  the  highway  of  holiness  shall  be  beaten  smooth  by 
their  feet — so  smooth  that  even  the  "  lame  "  will  not  stumble  in  it.  If  we  remain 
remiss  and  vacillating,  we  may  finally  "fall  short  of  the  grace  of  God"  (ver.  15). 
Slothfulness  and  indecision  cause  one  to  lag  behind,  and  may  prevent  him  from  ever 
reaching  the  goaL  If  we  be  not  resolute  in  our  fidelity  we  shall  come  short  of  ultimate 
salvation,  and  shall  never  "  see  the  Lord." 

II.  Odb  duty  to  cub  fellow-believebs.  (Vers.  14, 15.)  The  personal  spiritual 
life  which  is  fed  by  the  Church  is  in  turn  to  react  for  good  upon  the  whole  congrega- 
tion. Two  prominent  duties  towards  our  brethren  are  here  indicated.  1.  To  "follow 
after  peace  with  all."  (Ver.  14.)  The  scope  of  the  passage  seems  to  restrict  this  '•  all " 
to  the  members  of  the  Christian  brotherhood.  We  need  not  expect  that  God  will  bless 
us  in  our  Church  relations  if  we  cherish  a  persistent  grudge  against  any  fellow- 
communicant,  resolving  never  to  forget  some  injury  that  he  may  have  done  us.  A 
vindictive  or  malignant  disposition  is  not  Christian.  The  soul  that  harbours  malice, 
and  that  takes  pleasure  in  exhibiting  its  animosities,  will  not  only  become  stunted  in 
its  spiritual  growth,  but  will  injuriously  afiect  the  life  of  the  Church  to  which  it  belongs. 
A  prominent  cause  of  ecclesiastical  disturbance  is  the  springing  up  of  "  any  root  of 
bitterness  "  (ver.  15).  Sometimes  the  noxious  weed  is  a  wicked  person,  like  Achan, 
who  "  troubled  "  Israel  (Josh.  viL  26) ;  and  sometimes  a  radically  bad  principle,  the 
growth  of  which  may  defile  the  Church  with  dissension.  In  either  case,  it  must  be 
rooted  up  and  cast  out.  2.  To  have  a  brotherly  care  over  all.  This  thought  underlies 
the  entire  passage.  Each  of  us  by  his  own  example  is  to  help  the  weak  of  the  flock 
to  become  strong ;  and  to  set  a  guard  upon  the  "  lame,"  so  that  they  may  not  wander 
out  of  th«  right  wajr.    While  tiie  cure  of  souls  is,  of  course,  the  especial  duty  of  the 


868  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  [oh.  xu.  1—29. 

Bpiritual  rolers  of  the  Church,  the  expression,  "  looking  carefully,"  in  ver.  16,  remindi 
us  that  the  ordinary  members  also  ought  to  exercise  the  ofSce  of  a  bishop  over  one 
another.  The  communion  of  our  Churches  would  be  purer,  were  tliis  duty  of  mutual 
spiritual  care  more  clearly  understood  and  better  practised  than  it  ia.  Indeed,  we 
cannot  place  too  much  stress  on  this  point,  as  one  main  purpose  and  function  of  our 
Church  life.  No  spiritual  work  is  more  restful  and  rewarding,  than  that  which  • 
Christian  man  does  in  connection  with  the  particular  congregation  to  which  he  belongs. 

Ill,  OuB  DUTY  TO  OUB  GoD.  (Vers.  14, 16,  17.)  We  must  be  "  pure  "  as  well  as 
"  peaceabla."  The  peace  that  we  follow  after  must  be  "  by  righteousness ; "  for 
"  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  This  is  one  of  the  most  solemn  sayings 
of  the  Bib:e.  How  short  and  simple  it  is ;  but  how  pointed  and  powerful  I  It  falls 
upon  the  ear  with  a  sharp  sound  of  authority.  It  reverberates  within  the  conscience 
like  the  echoes  of  thunder  among  the  bills.  God  is  pure  and  holy ;  therefore  only  the 
consecrated  and  sanctified  can  see  him.  Sanctification  must  be  "  followed  after,"  i.e. 
pursued  earnestly.  We  must  labour  to  cleanse  ourselves  from  our  carnality  and 
impurity  by  washing  in  Jesus'  blood,  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the 
use  of  the  means  of  grace,  and  by  living  always  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  Notice 
what  the  writer  says  in  particular  of  the  man  who  strives  after  this  "sanctification." 
1.  He  will  not  he  a  sensualist.  (Ver.  16.)  He  will  not  only  avoid  acts  of  gross 
immorality ;  he  will  hate  every  filthy  thought.  How  dreadful  for  any  one  to  sit  down 
at  the  Lord's  table,  as  a  professed  disciple  of  Christ,  who  is  in  the  habit  of  visiting  also 
the  disgustins!  haunts  of  secret  vice  1  2.  Ntiiher  will  he  be  o  "profane  person."  (Vers. 
16,  17.)  "  Profane "  means  common,  secular,  worldly;  and  such  a  person  loves  only 
the  things  of  sense  and  time,  and  has  no  appreciation  of  what  is  spiritual.  Esau  was 
such  a  man.  He  cared  nothing  for  the  blessings  of  the  covenant,  or  for  the  hopes  which 
centred  in  the  promised  seed  of  Abraham.  Hence  his  guilty  folly  in  bartering  away 
his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  lentils.  The  apostle,  in  one  or  two  forcible  expressions, 
depicts  the  consequences  of  this  act  of  profanity.  All  Esau's  subsequent  regrets  were 
unavailing.  On  the  second  occasion,  when  his  younger  brother  circumvented  him, 
his  father  Isaac  refused  to  recall  the  blessing  which  he  had  just  pronounced ;  for  Isaac 
realized  that  in  blessing  Jacob  he  had  unwittingly  been  the  mouthpiece  of  a  Divine 
oracle.  Esau,  therefore,  was  in  this  matter  God-rejected.  He  failed  to  induce  his 
father  to  clianie  his  mind.  And  he  found  no  means  of  undoing  his  own  first  act  of 
folly.  "  Now,"  says  the  apostle  in  effect  to  the  Hebrew  Christians,  "  beware  of  pro- 
fanity like  Esau's.  Yon  belong  to  God's  'firstborn'  nation;  and  the  gospel  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  for  'the  Jew  first.'  Take  care  that  you  do  not  forfeit  your  rights  of 
spiritual  primogeniture.  Should  you  forsake  the  new  and  final  covenant,  for  any  con- 
sideration whatever,  you  will  make  as  bad  a  bargain  as  Esau  did."  . 

Conclusion.  Esau's  character  and  life  are  a  beacon  still,  to  warn  us  also  back  from 
the  whirlpool  of  apostasy.  He  was  a  man  of  a  very  ordinary  type.  There  are  many 
snch  all  around,  who  for  the  savoury  meat  of  sensuous  pleasure  will  barter  away  their 
birthright  of  spiritual  opportunity,  and  at  last  irrevocably  sell  their  souls.  May  Divine 
grace  preserve  us  from  cultivating  the  character  ot  which  these  words  are  an  adequate 
epitome — "A  profane  person,  who  for  one  mess  of  meat  sold  his  own  birthright "  I 

Vers.  18 — 24. — Sinai  and  Zion.  This  grand  passage,  extending  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter,  forms  a  magnificent  finale  to  the  lengthened  general  exhortation  to  constancy, 
beginning  at  ch.  x.  19,  which  occupies  so  important  a  place  in  the  Epistle.  The  verses 
before  us  exhibit  a  highly  wrought  and  impressive  contrast  between  the  Mosaic  and 
the  Christian  dispensations.  Mount  Sinai  is  the  emblem  of  the  one.  Mount  Zion  of 
the  other.  And  Zion  is  incomparably  superior  to  Sinai,  in  the  privileges  and  blessings 
which  flow  from  it. 

I.  A  PICTURE  OF  THE  OLD  REVELATION  AT  SiNAi.  (Vers.  18 — 21.)  The  nature  of 
the  dispensation  inaugurated  there  was  reflected  in  the  character  of  the  scene  on 
occasion  of  the  giving  of  the  Law.  The  old  economy  was  :  1.  Sensuous.  Sinai  was 
"a  mount  that  might  be  touched  "  (ver.  18) ;  i.e.  a  tangible,  palpable,  physical  moun- 
tain. The  expression  suggests  the  ceremonialism  which  was  so  prominent  a  feature  of 
the  Mosaic  dispensation.  The  scene  at  Sinai  was  spectacular;  and  Judaism,  in  like 
manner,  was  a  religion  of  externals.    Its  teaching  was  elemental,  because  elementarj. 


CH.  Xu.  1—29.]  THE  iSISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  369 

Its  ritual  was  sensuous.  Its  precepts  were  sustained  by  earthly  sanctions.  2.  Obtcure. 
When  God  came  down  upon  Sinai,  he  made  "  blackness  and  darkness  "  his  pavilion  ; 
he  revealed  himself  in  flame  and  storm.  This  is  an  emblem  of  the  clouded  character  of 
the  Old  Testament  revelation.  Under  it  the  plan  of  redemption  still  remained  veiled 
in  mystery.  "  The  way  into  the  holy  place  was  not  yet  made  manifest"  (ch.  ix.  8). 
The  Jews,  in  their  ignorance  and  weakness,  could  only  bear  a  shaded,  shadowy,  por- 
tentous manifestation  of  truth.  3.  Exclusive.  God  spoke  »t  Horeb  only  to  one  small 
nation,  gathered  before  him  there  on  the  plain,  and  separated  by  the  rocks  and  passes 
of  the  desert  from  the  great  peoples  of  the  world.  The  Jews  were  a  little  flock,  and 
the  Shepherd  of  Israel  shut  them  into  a  little  fold  by  themselves.  4.  Remote.  The 
Hebrews  dared  not  approach  the  God  who  revealed  himself  to  them.  The  mountain 
was  fenced  round,  and  the  stern  penalty  of  death  was  threatened  upon  the  trespasser 
(ver.  20).  Similarly,  while  the  Mosaic  economy  granted  a  certain  access  to  God,  and 
Israel  was  "a  people  near  unto  him,"  this  access  was  yet  not  the  most  real.  For 
Jehovah,  to  the  mind  of  the  Jew,  was  clothed  with  thunder ;  legal  barriers  stood  between 
him  and  sinful  men ;  and  the  Levitioal  system  was  saturated  with  ceremonial  restric- 
tions. Moses  could  not  be  an  adequate  mediator  foi-  Israel,  to  bring  them  to  God ;  at 
the  giving  of  the  Law  he  was  himself  smitten  with  fear  and  trembling  (ver.  21).  5. 
Terrible.  This  is  the  most  prominent  feature  of  the  whole  picture.  At  Sinai  the  light- 
nings flashed  and  the  thunder  rolled ;  the  trump  of  God  sent  forth  its  wild  weird 
blasts,  and  the  awful  voice  of  the  Eternal  spoke  the  ten  "  words  "  (ver.  19).  But  the 
people  could  not  endure  the  revelation.    They  crouched  and  cowered  in  terror. 

*  When  God  of  old  came  down  from  heaven. 

In  power  and  wrath  he  came ; 
Before  his  feet  the  clouds  were  riven. 
Half  darkness  and  half  flame. 

*  Around  the  trembling  mountain's  baM 

The  prostrate  people  lay  ; 
A  day  of  wrath,  and  not  of  grace ; 
A  dim  and  dreadful  day." 

(Keble.) 

Now,  this  awful  scene  symbolized  the  spirit  and  genius  of  the  old  dispensation.  T^e 
Law  inspired  terror.  It  was  "  the  ministration  of  death  "  and  of  "  condemnation."  It 
"  bore  children  unto  bondage,"  The  ceremonial  system  became  an  unbearable  yoke, 
by  reason  of  its  burdensome  constraints  ;  while  the  moral  law  pronounced  its  pitiless 
curses  upon  the  disobedient.  6.  Temporary.  Sinai  rears  its  shaggy  cliffs  of  granite 
in  the  naked  wilderness,  and  Israel  made  only  a  year's  encampment  there.  The  tented 
plain  of  the  desert  was  not  their  home.  And  so  the  dispensation  set  up  at  Mount 
Sinai  was  provisional  and  preparatory.  It  was  only  to  stand  until,  under  the  Divine 
lending,  the  Church  should  be  brought  to  the  spiritual  Mount  Zion,  and  to  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem  as  its  "  city  of  habitation." 

II.   A    CONTRASTED    PICTURE    OF    THE   NEW   REVELATION   AT    ZiON.      (VerS.   22 24.) 

Although  we  did  not  attempt  to  trace  the  various  points  of  comparison  in  detail,  we 
should  yet  be  impressed  with  the  contrast  as  seen  in  the  large  outlines  of  the  two 
pictures,  and  in  their  general  tone  and  colour.  The  new  economy,  as  represented  by 
Mount  Zion,  is:  1.  Spiritudl.  The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  ideal  Zion.  It  is 
also  "  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,"  the  metropolis  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom.  The  New 
Testament  system  of  religion  is  inward,  supersensible,  experimental.  The  types  and 
ceremonies  of  Sinai  have  passed  away.  The  matter  of  the  new  revelation  is  more 
spiritual.  Christianity  speaks  of  righteousness,  not  of  ritual.  The  gospel  laws  are 
written  upon  the  heart.  2.  Clear.  No  night,  or  cloud,  or  storm  gathers  around  Mount 
Zion ;  its  very  name  means  "  sunny."  The  Sun  of  righteousness  shines  upon  its  towers 
and  palaces,  gilding  them  with  brightness  and  beauty.  The  new  covenant  is  "  clear  as 
the  sun"  in  its  teachings.  It  has  given  the  world  the  most  advanced  truth;  and  it 
presents  that  truth  in  the  simplest  and  the  most  explicit  form.  3.  All-emhraeing. 
Mount  Sinai  stands  in  the  lonely  and  silent  desert ;  but  Mount  Zion  is  the  centre  of 
a  populous  city,  whose  teeming  inhabitants  are  cosmopolitana.    The  Jewish  Church 

HEBBEWS.  2  B 


370  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  xn.  1— 29. 

was  s>iut  out  from  in'.ercourse  with  the  rest  of  the  world ;  but  our  fellow-citizens  under 
the  new  covenant  are:  (1)  The  holy  angels:  "myriads  of  angels,  a  festal  assembly" 
(vers.  22,  23) ; — the  cherubim  and  seraphim,  all  the  princes,  potentates  and  rulers  ol 
the  celestial  hierarchy.  (2)  The  saints  on  earth  :  tlie  "  Church  of  the  Firstborn  who 
are  enrolled  in"  the  album  of  heaven.  Israel  was  mustered  and  numbered  at  Sinai; 
and  so  the  New  Testament  Church,  although  dispersed  all  over  the  world,  forms  but 
one  society  of  firstborn  ones,  each  of  whom  is  a  prince  of  the  blood  of  God.  (3)  The 
helievers  of  the  ancient  Church:  "the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  The  disem- 
bodied souls  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  could  not  be  made  perfect  "apart  from  us" 
(ch.  xi.  40) ;  and  thus  we  now  form  one  brotherhood  with  them,  as  well  as  with 
departed  believers  who  lived  in  Christian  times.  4.  Access-giving.  At  Sinai  "the 
people  stood  afar  off."  They  could  not  draw  near  to  God.  The  presence  of  his 
attending  angels  brought  them  no  confidence.  The  mediation  of  Moses  could  not 
remove  the  barrier  of  their  guilt.  But  now  the  great  invitation  is,  "  Come."  The 
sum  of  gospel  privilege  is  expressed  in  the  words,  "  Ye  are  come  "  (ver.  22).  Believers 
have  been  admitted  to  the  mount  and  city  of  God,  to  the  companionship  of  his  angels, 
to  the  fellowship  of  his  redeemed  saints,  and  into  his  very  presence  as  the  righteous 
"  Judge,  the  God  of  all."  And  to  what  are  we  indebted  for  this  access  ?  We  have 
come  to  God,  because  we  have  come  "  to  Jesus,"  and  have  been  sprinkled  with  his 
"  blood  "  (ver.  24).  Christ  and  his  blood  are  the  ground  of  all  our  blessings,  and  the 
sum  of  all.  The  nail-pierced  hand  of  a  better  Mediator  than  Moses  has  opened  for  us 
the  door  of  access.  5.  Genial.  The  scene  at  Sinai  was  terrific ;  but  all  is  peaceful  in 
the  simny  garden-city  of  Zion.  It  is  true  that  the  punishments  connected  with  the 
new  dispensation  are  far  more  dreadful  than  the  merely  spectacular  terrors  of  the  old ; 
but  these  occupy  the  background  of  the  picture,  while  at  Sinai  the  terrors  were  in  the 
foreground.  And  all  who  really  come  "  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling  "  are  safe.  The 
atmosphere  of  the  new  covenant  is  balmy  and  genial  by  reason  of  the  merit  of  that 
blood.  Abel  spoke  (ch.  xi.  4)  by  his  sacrifice  only  of  a  coming  atonement  and  a  future 
redemption ;  but  Christ's  blood  certifies  that  these  blessings  have  been  secured.  And 
so  the  whole  panorama  of  Zion  is  genial  and  attractive.  Its  verdure  is  unfading  (Ps. 
Ixxii.  6);  all  is  winsome  and  gladsome  and  serene.  6,  Final.  "The  heavenly 
Jerusalem  "  is  "  the  city  which  hath  the  foundations  "  (ch.  xi.  10).  The  life  of  the 
Church  now  is  no  longer  a  tent-life.  It  has  exchanged  the  tabernacle  for  the  true 
temple.  The  covenant  of  which  Jesus  is  the  Mediator  is  a  "  new,"  ».e.  (according  to 
the  Greek  in  ver.  24)  a  fresh  covenant,  one  that  shall  never  become  stale  or  old.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  "  kingdom  that  cannot  be  shaken  "  (ver.  28).  As  this  whole 
picture  embraces  the  entire  history  of  the  Christian  Church,  its  truthfulness  will  bo 
more  and  more  appreciated  as  the  centuries  roll  on,  and  most  of  all  in  the  times  of  the 
latter-day  glory. 

Conclusion.  The  practical  improvement  of  this  graphic  and  pregnant  passage  !• 
indicated  in  the  solemn  verses  which  follow. 

Vers.  25 — ^29. — The  final  appeal.  The  body  of  the  Epistle  seems  to  conclude  with 
these  verses,  ch.  xiii.  being  of  the  nature  of  a  postscript.  The  solemn  warning  which 
they  utter  breaks  forth  abruptly.  It  drops  like  a  thunderbolt  out  of  the  sunny 
sky  of  Zion. 

I.  Our  New  Testament  pbivilkqbs.  1.  Ood  speaki  to  us  from  heaven.  (Ver.  25.) 
At  Sinai,  and  while  the  Jewish  dispensation  lasted,  God  spoke  as  it  were  "  on  earth," 
by  an  earthly  mediator,  Moses ;  and  largely  by  means  of  material  forms,  which  were 
only  "  copies  "  (ch.  ix.  23)  of  the  great  spiritual  realities.  But  now  God  speaks  "  from 
heaven," — from  his  home  at  the  heart  of  the  universe,  and  therefore  from  the  heart 
of  truth ;  and  by  his  Son,  the  Divine  Mediator,  who  is  "  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father."  The  whole  Epistle  is  clasped  together  with  the  emf'hatic  declaration — ^in  its 
opening  sentence  (ch.  i.  2),  and  here  at  its  close — that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Prophet  of 
the  new  covenant.  2.  Ood  has  removed  the  things  that  were  shaken.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  It 
was  only  "  the  earth"  that  shook  at  Sinai.  And  that  convulsion  speedily  subsided. 
Indeed,  the  Jews  became  lulled  into  the  delusion  that  the  Levitical  institutions  would 
never  be  overthrown.  But  Haggai  predicted  (Hag.  ii.  6,  7)  that  the  shaking  which  was 
to  accompany  the  introduction  of  Christianity  would  affect  "the  beavena,andthe  earth, 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKBW8.  371 

and  tlie  sea,  and  the  dry  land,  and  all  nations."  It  would  do  greatly  more  than  produce 
alteration  in  the  outer  form  and  state  of  the  Ohurch.  It  would  grasp  its  very  heait 
and  life — flooding  it  with  the  noonday  light  of  spiritual  truth,  and  with  the  abunrlant 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  movables  of  Judaism,  which  had  been  "made"  at 
Sinai — ^the  tabernacle,  the  priesthood,  the  ritual,  the  sacrifices,  the  festivals,  etc. — were 
"  shaken"  and  "  removed "  when  the  Church  " came  "  to  Zion.  Judaism  was  only  a 
soaffidding,  set  up  temporarily  with  a  view  to  the  erection  of  the  permanent  structure 
of  Christianity.  Its  ceremonial  was  the  mere  husk  of  religion ;  and  when  the  husk 
rotted  and  perished,  the  kernel  still  lived  and  became  fruitful.  3.  Ood  has  given  us  a 
kingdom  that  cannot  be  ihakm.  (Ver.  28.)  Believers  in  Christ "  receive"  tiie  kingdom  nf 
heaven ;  they  are  not  only  subjects  in  it,  but  kings.  And  this  kingdom  is  the  finished 
work  of  God — the  Divine  masterpiece.  Everything  connected  with  it  is  stable.  Nothing 
that  is  loose  or  perishable  can  adhere  to  it.  It  is  built  upon  those  great  facts  and 
truths  which  the  convulsions  that  overturned  the  Levitical  system  could  not  disturb, 
'i'he  "  things  which  are  not  shaken  remain ; "  e.g.  the  character  of  God,  the  moral 
nature  and  responsibility  of  man,  the  dark  fact  of  human  guilt,  the  doctrine  of 
acceptance  by  sacrifice.  Christianity  has  solved  the  problem  of  sin,  in  relation  to  the 
life  of  man ;  and  therefore  it  "  cannot  be  shaken."  Throughout  all  time  the  way  of 
salvation,  tlie  encouragements  to  believe,  the  rule  of  duty,  the  principles  of  the  Christian 
life,  the  fruits  of  holiness  (1  Cor.  xiii.  8, 13),  will  be  the  same.  And  what  a  joy  to 
live,  as  we  do,  among  these  abiding  realities  1  The  kingdoms  of  the  world  pass  away  ; 
but  Christ's  kingdom  "  shall  stand  for  ever"  (Dan.  ii.  37 — 45).  Systems  of  philosophy 
cease  to  be ;  but  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  endures.  Denominations  disappear  ;  but 
the  Church  continues.  Political  establishments  of  religion  are  shaken;  but  national 
religion  remains.  Creeds  decay  and  wax  olJ  ;  but  the  Bible  possesses  an  indestructible 
vitality.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  pass  away  ;  but  the  kingdom  of  the  saints 
cannot  be  moved. 

IL  The  rbsponsibimtiks  which  these  privileqes  htvolvb.  We  must :  1.  Ohey 
(he  voice  of  Ood.  (Ver.  25.)  That  voice  speaks  to  us  in  the  Scriptures,  and  in  the 
pleadiiiss  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  our  souls.  But  in  our  time  earth  is  "so  full  of  dreary 
noises"  that  our  weak  hearts  are  sorely  tempted  not  to  listen  to  the  words  nf  Goi. 
There  is  the  voice  of  the  philosophic  thinker,  of  the  political  leader,  of  the  social 
reformer,  of  the  scientific  teacher,  of  the  newspaper  editor,  of  the  popular  novelist.  But 
none  of  these  voices  are  prophetic.  The  man  who  can  speak  with  authority  regarding 
some  department  of  physical  science  is  not  on  that  account  entitled  to  deference  when 
he  discourses  about  God  and  the  future  life.  Only  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Logos,  by 
whom  God  now  speaks  from  heaven,  can  instruct  us  concerning  the  spiritual  universe 
and  the  way  of  salvation.  2.  Cherish  gratitude  for  the  kingdom.  (Ver.  28.)  "  Let 
us  have  grace,"  j.e,  gratitude.  To  cultivate  the  spirit  of  thankfulness  is  the  veiy 
essence  and  sum  of  Christian  duty.  When  God  in  his  mercy  invests  us  with  the 
kingdom,  what  can  we  say,  but  just  " Many  thanks " ?  "I  will  take  the  cup  o( 
salvation;"  "Thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  Gift."  3.  Devote  our  lives  to 
the  service  of  Ood.  (Ver.  28.)  For,  while  the  saint  is  a  king,  he  is  at  the  same  time 
a  servant ;  indeed,  he  is  a  servant  because  he  is  a  king.  The  service  is  involved  in  the 
kingdom.  The  entire  life  of  the  Christian  is  to  be  thsA  career  of  devout  consecration 
which  is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  grace  of  gratitude.  And,  while  thankfulness  is 
the  secret  motive  of  the  service,  its  befitting  spirit  is  "  reverence  and  awe."  The 
believer's  manner  and  tone  are  not  to  be  flippant  or  frivolous ;  but  grave,  chastened, 
solemn. 

IIL  Warnings  bt  whioh  these  responsibilities  are  enforced.  This  passage 
is  an  earnest  admonition.  It  opens  with  an  arresting  "  Beware "  (ver.  25) ;  anu  ii 
sounds  three  notes  of  warning.  1.  From  Hebrew  history.  (Ver.  25.)  When  God  sjioke 
by  Moses  and  the  prophets,  "his  people  would  not  hearken  to  his  voice;"  and  thus 
they  were  constantly  drawing  down  punishment  upon  themselves.  If,  then,  they  escaped 
not  who  spurned  the  less  adequate  revelation  made  by  the  heaven-descended  God,  how 
may  we  hope  to  escape,  if  we  turn  away  from  the  full-orbed  revelation  made  by  the 
lieaven-ascended  Bon  of  God?  2.  From  Hebrew  prophecy.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  God  has 
Qo  other  "  Yet  once  more  "  to  promise  to  the  world.  That  was  to  be  the  last  "  shaking" 
of  the  Obaieh  which  should  accompany  the  introduction  of  the  gospel.     "  It  is  the 


372  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xo.  1— £9. 

last  hour"  (1  JoTin  ii.  18).  The  final  overthrow  of  types  and  formB  is  proceeding. 
God  has  done  all  for  us  that  he  can  do.  He  has  given  us  the  "  eternal  gospel."  To 
reject  it  were  to  attach  ourselves  only  to  the  passing  and  perishing.  3.  From  Hebrew 
theology.  (Ver.  29.)  The  words  of  this  verse  fitly  close  the  prolonged  strain  of  exhorta- 
tion. They  are  horrowfed  from  Deut.  Iv.  24 ;  and  the  apostle,  in  citing  that  passage 
here,  reminds  us  that  the  Divine  character  is  not  one  of  "  those  things  that  are  shaken." 
If  the  Gk>d  who  spoke  at  Sinai  was  just  and  severe,  the  God  who  dwells  in  Zion  is 
not  less  so.  For  the  very  reason  that  God  is  gentleness  and  love  and  mercy,  he  must 
be  "  a  consuming  fire  "  to  all  who  are  essentially  alien  to  him.  Sometimes,  when  this 
warmng  word  is  quoted,  it  is  softened  after  this  fashion  :  "  Out  of  Christ  God  is  a 
consuming  fire."  But  such  a  gloss  is  unwarrantahle.  For  God  is  never  out  ol  Christ. 
Christ  is  the  manifested  God.  It  is  not  so  that  God  the  Father  is  all  justice  and 
severity,  and  God  the  Son  all  tenderness  and  grace.  Christ  the  Redeemer  is  "  a  con- 
suming fire."  The  most  dreadful  declarations  about  the  doom  of  the  impenitent  which 
the  Bible  contains  were  made  by  him. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yen.  1, 2.— Z%e  Christian  rac».  "  Wherefore,  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about 
with  so,"  etc.  The  "  wherefore  "  shows  the  connection  of  our  text  with  the  preced- 
ing chapter.  There  the  writer  has  exhibited  the  power  of  faith  in  a  host  of  illustrious 
examples.  To  the  exercise  of  a  like  faith  in  the  prosecution  of  the  Christian  race 
he  now  summons  the  Hebrew  Christians. 

I.  The  Christian  life  is  hgbe  compared  to  a  race.  The  Christian  is  represented 
as  a  runner  competing  for  the  prize ;  and  the  writer  would  arouse  him  to  activity  and 
perseverance  by  the  example  of  those  who  have  already  triumphed,  and  are  now 
bearing  silent  but  eloquent  testimony  to  the  power  of  faith.  The  comparison  of  the 
Christian  life  to  a  race  is  appropriate  and  suggestive.  1.  A  race  has  its  limitations,  so 
hat  the  Christian  life.  The  racer  may  not  run  anywhere,  but  must  pursue  the  course 
marked  out  for  him.  Beginning  at  the  starting-point,  he  must  pursue  the  definite  course 
until  he  reach  the  goal.  And  in  the  Christian  life  "  the  race  is  set  before  us ; "  it  is 
marked  out  by  the  Word  of  God,  by  the  examples  of  the  faithful  who  have  finished 
their  course,  and  we  may  ascertain  it  with  unerring  accuracy  by  marking  the  foot- 
prints of  Jesus  the  great  Leader  and  Ferfecter  of  faith.  2.  A  race  is  characterized  hy 
intense  activities,  to  is  the  Christian  life.  There  is  no  room  for  sloth  or  indifference. 
The  Divine  life  can  be  maintained  only  by  constant  diligence  and  strenuous  effort; 
and  it  can  be  perfected  only  through  conflict  and  suffering.  Our  progress  in  the 
Christian  course  is  opposed  by  strong  and  subtle  adversaries,  and  frequent  and 
fonmdable  difficulties.  We  have  to  battle  with  our  foes  and  grapple  with  our  difficul- 
ties, even  while  running  the  race  that  is  set  before  us.  3.  A  race  is  characterized 
hy  brevity,  to  is  the  Christian  life  upon  earth.  The  race  we  are  running  requires 
intense  effort,  but  only  for  a  short  season ;  the  goal  will  very  soon  be  reached.  The 
whole  of  our  earthly  life  is  but  of  short  duration ;  and  the  time  of  this  earnest  race  is 
still  shorter.  What  is  our  life  here  to  eternity  ?  What  is  the  period  of  effort  on  the 
course  to  the  age  of  rest  and  reward  ? 

IL  Compliance  with  certain  oonditionb  is  indispensable  to  success  in  this 
BAd.  1.  We  must "  lay  aside  every  weight " — cast  off  everything  that  encumbers.  The 
reference  here  is  to  things  which  in  themselves  are  not  positively  sinful,  customs  and 
associations  which  in  themselves  are  innocent,  but  which  may  wrap  themselves  tightly 
round  our  heart  and  impede  our  progress.  "Intercourse  and  friendship,"  says  Ebrard, 
"  with  old  Jewish  acquaintances,  the  relations  formed  by  trade  and  merchandise,  might 
be  hindrances  of  this  kind  for  the  readers,  and  in  such  a  case  it  was  right,  and  is  still 
right,  to  break  entirely  away  from  such  relations,  and  to  get  rid  of  the  fetters  which  they 
impose  as  soon  as  they  threaten  to  become  a  snare,  even  though  in  themselves  they  should 
be  innocent."  Everything  that  would  hinder  us  in  running  this  race,  every  weight  of 
cares,  of  interests,  of  attachments  to  the  things  pertaining  only  to  this  life,  of  relation- 
ships which  are  not  favourable  to  advancement  in  the  race,  must  be  given  up,  abandoned. 
2.  Wt  must  "  lay  aside  the  tin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us,"  or,  "  the  tin  which  lubtly 
tndrcht  ma"  With  trttj  ooa  of  lu  there  is  some  sin  to  which  we  are  especially  prone; 


CH.  XII.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  373 

let  us  Moh  take  heed  tbat  we  are  not  hindered  in  the  race  by  reason  of  it.  There  is 
some  weak  point  in  the  moral  defences  of  our  nature  where  the  tempter  most  easily 
obtains  access ;  to  this  point,  wherever  it  may  be,  special  attention  must  be  directed. 
With  some  it  is  an  ungovernable  temper ;  with  others,  a  strong  propensity  to  avarice ; 
with  others,  etc.  Let  every  man,  by  faithful  self-examination  and  by  prayer,  ascertain 
his  own  besetting  sin,  and  seek  to  be  quite  free  from  it.  3.  We  must  run  our  reuse  with 
patience.  Not  simply  with  patient  endurance  of  the  trials  which  may  befall  the  runner, 
but  with  perseverance  until  the  goal  is  reached.  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the 
battle  to  the  strong,"  but  "he  that  endureth  to  the  end  the  same  shall  be  saved." 
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  It  is  only  "  by 
patient  continuance  in  well-doing"  that  "glory  and  honour  and  immortality"  are 
won. 

in.  In  thb  PBOBEOunoN  of  this  bags  we  are  bubbodmded  bt  a  great  host 
OF  WITNESSEB,  OB  TESTiFiEBB.  "  We  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of 
witnesses."  Those  who  have  preceded  us  in  the  life  of  faith  in  immense  numbers 
surround  us  as  witnesses  to  the  power  of  faith,  as  testifiers  by  their  example  to  tijc 
might  of  that  principle  by  which  we  are  called  to  run  our  course  successfully,  and  war 
our  warfore  nobly,  and  do  our  life-work  faithfully.  The  writer  would  teach  us  to 
think  often  of  this  great  cloud  of  witnesses,  to  meditate  upon  the  noble  lives  and 
glorious  deeds  of  the  true  men  who  have  gone  before  us,  that  by  the  remembrance 
of  their  trials  and  triumphs  we  may  arouse  ourselves  to  greater  diligence  in  running  the 
race  that  is  set  before  us.  In  them  we  see  what  trials  can  be  borne,  what  victories  won, 
what  work  accomplished,  what  characters  built  up,  by  faith.  If  by  faith  they  over- 
came every  difficulty,  why  should  we  be  discouraged  by  the  difficulties  of  our  course  ? 
If  by  faith  they  conquered  their  many  and  mighty  enemies,  why  should  we  dread  to 
encounter  our  foes  ?  If  by  faith,  despite  outward  opposition  and  inner  weakness,  they 
came  off  victors  in  the  fight  and  winners  in  the  race,  why  should  we  despond  and  shrink 
from  the  contest  ?  "  Wherefore,  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a 
cloud  of  witnesses,"  eta 

IV.  In  the  PBOSSOUnON  of  this  race  we  are  sustained  and  animated  BT  THE 

HiQHEST  Example — the  perfect  Example.  "  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  our  faith,"  etc.  The  idea  of  the  writer  is  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Pro- 
ducer of  faith  in  us  and  the  Completer  of  the  faith  which  he  has  organized.  If  we  trans- 
late, "  Looking  unto  the  Leader  and  Perfecter  of  the  faith,  even  Jesus,"  we  shall  perhaps 
the  more  readily  apprehend  the  meaning  of  the  text.  In  the  long  procession  of  heroes 
celebrated  for  their  faith  our  Lord  stands  at  the  head ;  he  is  the  Leader,  and  in  him 
faith  appears  in  full  and  perfected  glory.  And  the  text  exhorts  us  to  look  to  him  as  our 
great  Exemplar,  and  to  draw  from  him  support  and  encouragement.  The  example  of 
our  Saviour  is  especially  sustaining  and  cheering,  for  the  course  he  had  to  run  was  one 
of  extreme  difficulty  and  danger  and  suffering ;  yet  he  overcame,  and  finished  his  course 
with  joy,  and  gained  the  highest  honours.  "  Who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 
endured  the  cross,"  etc.  (cf.  ch.  i.  8;  ii.  9, 10).  In  time  of  suffering,  then,  pursue  your 
course  "  looking  unto  Jesus,"  the  perfect  Example  of  patience ;  and  in  the  presence  of 
Oethsemane  and  Calvary  your  sufferings  will  appear  slight,  and  the  calm  face  of  the 
supreme  Sufferer  will  impart  patience  and  power  unto  you.  In  seasons  of  despondency, 
when  faith  is  weak  and  your  spirit  sinks  within  you,  look  unto  Jesus,  and  the  trust 
which  he  exercised  and  the  destiny  he  attained,  and  let  the  bright  example  brace  your 
heart  with  courage.  In  times  of  exhaustion  and  weariness,  when  you  faint  because  of 
the  duties  and  difficulties  of  the  way,  look  up  to  Jesus,  and  his  example  will  raise  and 
strengthen  your  powerless  hands,  and  nerve  your  whole  frame  with  new  energy.  And 
in  seasons  of  temptation  look  unto  him  who  "  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin," 
and  yield  not  in  the  conflict,  give  no  place  to  the  tempter.  Let  this  be  our  attitude, 
"  looking  unto  Jesus."  Let  the  eye  of  the  soul  be  fixed  upon  him  as  our  Pattern 
and  Helper ;  so  shall  we  finish  our  course  with  joy,  and  "  receive  the  crown  of  glory 
that  fadeth  not  away." — W.  J. 

Ver,  8. — The  Christian's  danger  of  weariness  and  his  defence.  "For  consider  him 
that  endured  such  contradiction,"  etc.  Our  subject  naturally  divides  itself  into  two 
branches. 


874  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  HEBREWa         [oh.  xn.  1— 2?, 

L  Trs  evil  to  m  sttabded  against.  "  Lest  je  be  wearied  and  faint  in  yom 
minds."  The  Christian  is  in  danger  of  weariness  in  the  course  which  he  is  called  to 
run.  This  weariness  springs  from  faintness  of  soul.  When  the  heart  loses  its  faith 
and  hope  and  enthusiasm,  the  step  soon  loses  its  elasticity  and  vigour  and  speed. 
And  this  may  arise :  1.  From  the  difficulties  of  the  course.  The  path  of  the  Christla'i 
is  not  always  through  green  pastures  or  beside  still  waters.  It  is  often  bleak  and 
nigged,  and  mountainous.  It  is  marked  by  trials  of  various  kinds,  which  sorely  straiii 
his  faith  and  patience  and  fortitude.  And  there  are  enemies  who  would  delay  hU 
progress  sometimes  by  subtle  solicitations  to  ease  and  enjoyment,  and  at  other  times 
by  opposing  liis  efforts  or  obstructing  his  way.  "  And  the  soul  of  the  people  was 
much  discouraged  because  of  the  way."  2.  From  the  downess  of  the  apparent 
progress.  There  are  times  when  the  Christian  runner  seems  to  make  little  or  no 
advancement  in  the  race.  Notwithstanding  reading  and  meditation,  aspiration  and 
resolution,  prayer  and  effort,  we  are  still  so  hampered  by  imperfections  and  sins,  so 
deficient  in  holiness  and  usefulness,  and  so  little  like  our  Lord,  that  at  times  all  that 
we  desire  and  do  seems  to  be  vain,  and  our  souls  wax  faint  within  us.  3.  From  afdse 
or  exaggerated  estimate  of  the  value  of  feeling  in  the  Christian  life.  There  are  those 
who  are  prone  to  test  their  spiritual  condition  and  progress  by  the  state  of  their 
feelings.  If  their  emotions  are  tender  and  confiding  and  cheerful,  they  conclude  that 
they  are  in  the  true  course  and  moving  onward  to  the  goal ;  but  if  their  hearts  seem 
unfeeling,  or  cold,  or  cheerless,  they  doubt  whether  they  are  in  the  course  at  all,  or  ever 
started  aright  in  the  race,  and  so  they  faint  in  their  souls  and  flag  in  their  footsteps. 
Feelings  fluctuate ;  they  ebb  and  flow ;  they  rise  and  fall.  But  we  run  this  race,  not 
by  feeling,  but  by  faith.  We  are  saved,  not  by  our  emotions,  however  delightful  they 
may  be,  but  by  our  confidence  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  4.  From  neglect  of  the  meam 
hy  which  hope  and  courage  are  maintained.  If  prayer  be  neglected ;  if  meditation  upoi 
the  spiritual  and  eternal,  upon  the  soul  and  truth  and  God,  cease ;  if  the  testimony  o 
the  "  great  cloud  of  witnesses  "  be  unregarded ;  if  "  the  Leader  and  Perfecter  of  the  faith  " 
be  not  contemplated, — the  soul  will  faint  and  the  limbs  become  weary,  and  the  atiniii- 
ment  of  the  prize  will  be  jeopardized.     How,  then,  is  the  evil  to  be  guarded  against  ? 

IL  The  safequard  aoainst  this  evil.  "Consider  him  that  endured  such  contra- 
diction of  sinners  against  himself,"  etc.  The  meaning  of  the  word  rendered  "consider  " 
is  not  easily  expressed  in  English.  Analogize,  compare,  think  on  him  and  on  his 
sufferings  by  way  of  comparison  with  ours.  The  "  contradiction  of  sinners  "  should  not 
be  confined  to  words,  but  indicates  the  opposition  of  the  wicked  against  him.  A  com- 
parison of  what  he  thus  suffered  and  the  trials  we  have  to  bear  will  preserve  the  sonl 
from  i^intness,  and  the  steps  from  faltering.  1.  He  suffered  more  than  hit  followers 
are  called  to  suffer.  He  was  assailed  by  slander,  by  contradictions,  by  ensnaring 
questions.  He  was  betrayed  by  one  disciple,  denied  by  another,  and  forsaken  by  all 
in  the  time  of  his  trial.  He  was  blasphemed,  scourged,  derided,  and  crucified.  Think, 
moreover,  how  intensely  susce])tible  to  suffering  he  must  have  been,  since  he  wa^ 
untainted  in  his  body  and  perfectly  holy  in  his  soul.  2.  Yet  his  sufferings  did  no' 
cause  him  to  falter  in  his  course,  or  to  turn  aside  from  it.  Resolutely  he  went  forwar> 
on  his  path  of  suffering  and  sacrifice ;  knowing  the  shame  and  anguish  that  awaitet 
him,  yet  still  he  steadfastly  pursued  his  appointed  way— 

"  Until  the  perfect  work  wae  done, 
And  drunk  the  bitter  cup  of  gall.' 

3.  In  this  he  it  an  Eosample  to  us.  "  If,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  ghall  tal^e 
it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  For  hereunto  were  ye  called  ;  because  Christ 
also  suffered  for  you,  leaving  you  an  example,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  ii.  20 — 23).  Consideration 
of  him  and  of  his  sufferings  makes  our  severest  sufferings  seem  small,  and.  laves  us 
from  weariness  and  discouragement  in  the  Christian  course. 

**  Lord,  should  my  path  through  suffering  lie, 
Forbid  it  I  should  e'er  repine; 
Btill  let  me  turn  to  Calvary, 
Nor  heed  my  griefs,  remembering  thine." 

(Oonder.) 

W.J. 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  373 

Vera,  6,  S.-'—Divint  discipline.  "  My  !\on,  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  th« 
Lord,"  etc.    Our  subject  is  Divine  discipline.    Let  us  notice— 

L  Its  ohabacteb.  Three  words  are  used  to  express  it— "  tebuke,"  "chastening," 
"scourging."  The  last  two  seem  to  be  used  synonymously  here.  Archbishop  Trench 
points  out  that  " '  to  rebuke '  and  '  to  chasten '  are  often  found  together,  but  they  are 
very  capable  of  being  distinguished.  '  To  rebuke  'is  so  to  rebuke  that  the  person  is 
brought  to  the  acknowledgment  of  his  fault — is  convinced,  as  David  was  when  rebuked 
by  Nathan  (2  Sam.  xii.  13)."  The  word  translated  to  "chasten,"  "  being  in  classical  Greek 
to  instruct,  to  educate,  is  in  sacred  Greek  to  instruct  or  educate  ly  means  of  correction, 
through  the  severe  discipline  of  lore."  *  The  object  of  the  discipline  is  to  deliver  the 
subjects  of  it  from  sin,  to  establish  them  in  the  faith,  and  to  perfect  them  iu  holiness. 
The  means  of  the  discipline  are  afflictions,  persecutions,  and  trials.  And  it  may  be 
administered  by  the  enemies  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  persecutions  of  man  may 
be  the  discipline  of  God.  "Persecution  for  religion  is  sometimes  a  correction  and 
rebuke  for  the  sins  of  professors  of  religion.  Men  persecute  them  because  they  are 
religious;  God  chastises  them  because  they  are  not  more  so:  men  persecute  them 
because  they  will  not  give  up  their  profession ;  God  chastises  them  because  they  have 
not  lived  up  to  their  profession." 

IL  Its  authob.  "  The  chastening  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chasteneth."  Some  of  our  trials  are  from  his  hand.  He  is  the  great  Husbandman,  and 
he  prunes  the  vines  that  they  may  bring  forth  more  fruit.  The  trials  which  are  not 
sent  by  him  are  permitted  by  him  (of.  Job  i.  12 ;  ii.  6 ;  2  Cor.  xiL  7).  And  he  gives 
to  all  our  trials  their  disciplinary  character.  He  makes  the  bitter  potion  medicinal. 
By  his  blessing  our  suflerings  become  salutary,  and  our  sorest  afflictions  our  sagest 
instructors.  The  fact  thut  the  Lord  is  the  Author  of  our  discipline,  that  our  trials 
either  proceed  from  him  or  are  permitted  and  regulated  by  him,  supplies  a  guarantee 
that  we  shall  not  be  tried  beyond  our  strength.  He  is  infinite  in  wisdom  and  in  love. 
"  He  knoweth  our  frame ; "  and  he  will  either  restrict  our  trials  so  that  they  exceed 
not  our  strength,  or  increase  our  strength  until  it  surpasses  the  severity  of  our  trials. 
"  He  gtayeth  his  rough  wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind."  "  I  will  correct  thee  in 
measure."  "  Though  he  cause  grief,  yet  will  ife  have  compassion  according  to  the 
multitude  of  his  mercies."  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  my  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness." 

III.  Its  subjects.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son 
whom  he  receiveth."  1.  They  are  filially  related  to  him.  "Every  son"  of  his  he 
subjects  to  reproof  and  chastisement.  "  God  has  one  Son  without  sin,  but  none 
without  suffering."  If  we  are  his  sons,  we  may  rest  assured  that  he  will  not  fail  to 
secure  to  us  tlie  discipline  that  we  need.  Thus  our  sufferings  may  be  an  evidence  of 
our  sonship.  2.  They  are  hehved  by  him.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth." 
Because  he  loves  us  he  corrects  us.  It  has  been  well  said,  that  "  lawns  which  we 
would  keep  in  the  best  condition  are  very  frequently  mown ;  the  grass  has  scarcely 
any  respite  from  the  scythe.  Out  in  the  meadows  there  is  no  such  repeated  cutting; 
they  are  mown  but  once  or  twice  in  the  year.  Even  thus  the  nearer  we  are  to  God, 
and  the  more  regard  he  has  for  us,  the  more  frequent  will  be  our  adversities.  To  be 
very  dear  to  God  involves  no  small  degree  of  chastisement." 

IV.  Its  beception.  "  My  son,  desjiise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,"  etc 
].  It  should  not  be  deemed  unimportant.  "Regard  not  lightly  the  chastening  of  the 
Lord."  "  We  may  be  said  to  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,"  says  Dr.  Wardlaw, 
"  in  the  following  cases :  (1)  When  it  is  not  felt ;  when  there  is  a  want  of  natural 
sensibility  to  the  particular  stroke  of  the  rod.  This  is  but  rare.  Men  in  general  are 
quite  sufficiently  alive  to  the  value  of  temporal  things.  But  the  value  is  comparative. 
There  are  cherished  and  favourite  possessions,  and  others  less  highly  thought  of,  less 
fondly  held.  The  Lord,  it  may  be,  deals  gently.  He  spares  the  '  gourd.'  He  does  not 
take  what  is  most  highly  set  by  And  instead  of  humbly  owning  the  kindness — being 
lowly  and  submissive,  and  seeking  a  blessing  on  the  gentle  strobe,  that  the  heavier  one 
may  be  withheld — ^the  preservation  and  safety  of  the  greater  produces  insensibility  to 
the  privation  of  the  less ;  and  the  correction  is  thus  disregarded,  and  proves  inefficient, 
(2)  When  it  is  not  duly  felt  as  from  God.    (3)  When,  although  Gtod  is  seen  in  it  and 

'  '  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  to  the  Seven  CLnroliei  In  Alia.' 


376  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  xu.  1—29. 

his  hand  is  felt,  it  is  not  felt  humhly  and  submissively ;  not  lowed  to,  hut  resisted.  (4) 
When  the  design  or  end  of  correction  is  not  laid  to  heart."  2.  It  should  not  be  deemed 
intolerable.  "  Nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him."  We  are  not  to  sink  under 
the  reproofs  and  strokes  of  the  Divine  discipline,  though  they  be  severe.  The  fact  that 
our  trials  are  regulated  by  our  Fatlier's  hand,  that  they  are  educational,  that  they  are 
intended  and  adapted  to  promote  our  spiritual  and  eternal  well-being,  should  keep  mm 
rrom  sinking  beneath  their  pressure. 

"  The  tears  we  shed  are  not  in  vain ; 
Nor  worthless  is  the  heavy  strife  | 
If,  like  the  buried  seed  of  grain, 

They  rise  to  renovated  life. 
It  is  through  tears  our  spirits  grow| 
'TIS  in  the  tempest  souls  expand. 
If  it  but  teaches  us  to  go 

To  him  who  holds  it  in  his  hand. 
Oh,  welcome,  then,  the  stormy  blast  I 

Oil,  welcome,  then,  the  ocean's  roar  I 
Te  only  drive  more  sure  and  fast 
Qui  trembling  bark  to  heaven's  bright  Aon." 

(T.  C.  Upham.)" 

W.J. 

Ver.  IL — DlteipliM  Ai  its  endurance  and  ^n  it$  restdts,  "  Now  no  chastening  for 
the  present  seemetb  to  be  joyous,"  etc.  Two  aspects  of  discipline,  distinct  yet  vitally 
related,  are  here  set  before  us. 

I.  BisoiFLiNB  IN  ITS  ENDUBAKCE.  "  All  chastening  seemeth  for  the  present  to  be 
not  joyous,  but  grievous."  All  life's  discipline,  while  we  are  enduring  it,  is  painful 
It  is  so  even  to  sincere  and  saintly  Christians,  for:  1.  2%e  Christian  is  not  insensible 
to  pain.  Christianity  offers  no  encouragement  to  stoicism.  It  does  not  call  upon  us 
to  repress  or  to  blunt  the  natural  susceptibilities  of  our  nature.  We  are  summoned  in 
the  Christian  Scriptures  to  feel  for  others  and  with  others.  "  Eejoice  with  them  that 
rejoice;  weep  with  them  that  weep."  Insensibility  is  neither  manly  nor  saintly, 
virtuous  nor  blessed.  Our  Saviour  was  deeply  moved  by  the  afflictions  and  griefs  of 
others  (cf.  Mark  vii.  34 ;  viii.  2 ;  Luke  xix.  41 ;  John  xi.  33,  35,  38).  And  he  felt 
acutely  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  which  fell  to  his  own  lot  (John  xii.  27  ;  Matt.  xxvi. 
38 ;  Luke  xxii.  44 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  46 ;  ch.  v.  7,  8).  2.  Fain  or  trial  is  an  essential 
element  of  discipline.  Our  text  speaks  of  discipline  as  "  chastening,"  and  that  is 
paioful.  If  we  speak  of  it  as  correction,  that  is  not  easy  to  bear.  It  may  be  adminis- 
tered in  various  forms,  but  in  every  form  it  carries  with  it  trial  or  suffering  of  some 
kind.  Take  away  the  trying  element  from  the  experience,  and  you  take  from  it 
the  character  of  discipline.  3.  The  endurance  of  discipline  demands  the  strenzums 
exercise  of  spiritual  powers.  The  writer  speaks  of  those  who  have  been  exercised  by 
the  chastening.  This  exercise  is  not  an  amusement,  but  an  arduous  putting  forth  of 
mental  and  moral  powers.  Suffering  sorely  tests  oiu-  submission  to  the  Divine  will. 
Tribulation  tries  our  patience  and  piety.  Enigmas  of  providence  and  dark  passages  in 
our  own  experience  test  our  faith  in  the  Divine  Father.  Bemember  how  Ood's  servant 
Job  was  "  exercised."  And  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  iv.  8—12  ;  xi.  23—30;  xii.  7,  8).  And 
tlie  Christians  in  Smyrna  (Bev.  ii.  9, 10).  If  we  did  not  feel  the  pain  of  the  discipline, 
we  could  not  derive  any  profit  from  it.  If  the  chastening  were  not  grievous  for  the 
present,  it  could  not  result  in  any  blessing  hereafter, 

II.  Discipline  in  its  fkuit.  "  Yet  afterward  it  yieldeth  peaceable  fruit  unto  them 
that  have  been  exercised  thereby,  even  the  fruit  of  righteousness."  It  is  a  well-attested 
fact  of  human  experience  that  trial  borne  in  a  right  spirit,  and  sanctified  by  Qod, 
results  in  rich  benefits.  But  notice :  1.  The  condition  of  the  fruit  of  discipline.  "  It 
yieldeth  fi:uit  unto  them  that  have  been  exercised  thereby."  The  chastening  mudt 
have  been  felt,  and  recognized  and  accepted  as  discipline,  in  order  to  the.  reception  of  its 
fruits.  Suffering  is  the  condition  of  the  deepest  serenity.  The  pain  of  moral  conflict 
must  precede  the  glory  of  moral  conquest.  2.  The  season  of  the  fruit  of  discipline. 
"  Afterward  it  yieldeth," eta    Not  while  we  are  passing  through  the  painful  exi)ericncei 


CH.  XII.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  377 

do  we  reap  the  rich  result  of  them,  but  "afterward."  Time  is  required  for  the  fruit  to 
form  and  to  ripen.  There  are  beautiful  pictures  which  cannot  be  truly  seen  when  we 
are  near  to  them.  So  viewed,  they  appear  to  be  inartistic  and  rough  daubs.  Buf, 
viewed  from  the  right  angle  a^d  from  a  suitable  distance,  their  beauty  captivates  tlie 
eye  and  delights  the  soul.  We  must  leave  our  disciplinary  experiences  and  travel 
into  the  "afterward,"  before  we  can  discover  their  true  significance  and  their  gracious 
uses.  3.  The  character  of  the  fruit  of  discipline.  CI)  The  fruit  of  righteousness. 
Alford :  "The  practical  righteousness  which  springs  from  faith."  "Before  I  was 
afflicted  I  went  astray,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxix.  67,  71).  (2)  The  fruit  of  peace.  "  Peaceable 
fruit."  Alford :  "  This  fruit  is  called  peaceable  in  contrast  to  the  conflict  by  which  it 
is  won."  Ebrard :  "  Exercise  in  hard  bitter  conflict  brings  peace  as  its  fruit." 
Tholuck :  "  Fruit  of  righteousness  to  be  enjoyed  in  peace  after  the  conflict."  Generally 
the  deepest  and  most  constant  peace  is  possessed  by  those  who  have  passed  through 
the  sharpest -sufferings  or  the  severest  struggles.  "  Our  afflictions  are  not  for  naught. 
They  are  the  fruitful  seed  of  future  glories.  They  are  blessings  in  disguise.  They  are 
meant  for  good,  and  are  productive  of  good.  They  are  like  the  early  processes  of  the 
garden,  when  the  soil  is  broken  up  and  weeded,  in  order  that  fair  flowers  may  at  length 
adorn  it.  They  are  the  quarrying  and  chiselling  of  the  marble  before  the  living  statue 
can  stand  out  in  symmetrical  proportions.  They  are  the  instruments,  without  wliich 
no  harmony  can  be  secured  in  the  ultimate  concert.  They  are  the  medicine  of  our  con- 
valescence, the  drudgery  of  our  education,  the  spring  pruning  of  our  vine  trees,  without 
which  we  can  never  be  healthy  or  happy,  fit  for  heaven,  or  qualified  to  bring  forth  fruit 
whereby  oai  Father  may  be  ^orified." 

In  conclusion,  our  subject  should  encourage  us  to  be :  1.  Patient  under  our  discipline. 
Discipline  is  like  a  tree ;  it  requires  time  and  seasonable  influences  to  produce  tlie 
ripened  fruit  of  peace  and  righteousness.  AVait  patiently  for  the  "  hereafter."  "Behold, 
the  husbandman  waiteth,"  etc.  (Jas.  v.  7).  2.  Resigned  under  our  discipline.  Let  us 
not  rebel  against  the  suffering  which  is  designed  for  our  sanctiflcation ;  but  let  iis  "  be 
in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live."  3.  Eopc/ul  under  our  discipline. 
The  triid  may  be  bitter,  but  it  will  be  brief,  and  the  fruit  thereof  will  be  blessed  autl 
eternal  (cf.  Rom.  vui.  18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).— W.  J. 

Vers.  12, 13. — The  Christian  treatment  of  the  feeble.  "  Wherefore  lift  up  the  hands 
which  hang  down,"  etc. 

I.  ThB    liability   to    FAINTNES8   AND     INFIEMITT   IN    THE    CHRISTIAN   LIFE.      This 

condition  is  variously  described  in  the  text.  "  The  hands  which  hang  down,"  relaxed, 
enervated,  incapable  of  vigorous  or  hialthy  action.  "  The  feeble  knees,"  tottering  and 
paralyzed.  "That  which  is  lame  "  indicates,  says  Alford,  "  that  part  of  the  Church 
which  was  wavering  between  Christianity  and  Judaism."  Christians  are  often  faint 
and  feeble  in  our  own  times.  Piety  may  be  sincere  yet  deficient  in  strength.  A 
genuine  Christian  may  suffer  with  lameness  in  some  element  of  his  character  or  some 
faculty  of  service.  This  feebleness  may  arise :  1.  From  the  discipline  to  which  we  are 
Bubjected.  We  may  faint  when  we  are  corrected  by  liim  (ver.  5).  The  first  effect  of 
discipline  may  be  to  discourage  us,  and  this  will  probably  lead  to  lack  of  earnestness 
and  vigour  in  Christian  life  and  service.  Discipline  misunderstood  or  resented  may 
disable  us  for  a  time.  .  2.  From  the  difficulties  of  our  coursed  3.  From  the  neylect  of 
the  means  by  which  htype  and  effort  are  sustained.^ 

II.  THB   danger  ARISING   FROU  FAINTNESS  AND   INFIBMITT  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE. 

1.  Cessation  of  Christian  effort.  Relaxed  hands  and  tottering  knees  may  cause  the 
Christian  runner  to  give  up  running,  and  to  relapse  into  ignoble  ease.  Instead  of 
imitating  Gideon's  heroic  three  hundred  who  were  "faint,  yet  pursuing"  their  fleeing 
foes,  the  feeble  may  relinquish  the  pursuit  altogether.  Thus  faintness  may  lead  to 
failure.  2.  Deviation  from  the  Christian  course.  If  the  way  be  very  rugged  and 
tedious,  requiring  painful  effort  to  walk  in  it,  those  who  are  lame  may  be  turned  out 
of  it.  The  Christian  race  is  easy  when  the  runners  are  strong  and  the  course  is  smooth. 
But  oil,  it  is  very  difficult  when  the  hearts  are  heavy,  and  the  hands  nerveless,  and 
the  limbs  are  lamed,  and  the  way  is  rough  and  steep !    Under  such  conditions  it  requires 

'  See  these  points  more  fully  stated  in  our  homily  on  rer.  0L 


378  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xn.  1—29. 

no  little  patience  and  heroism  to  keep  moving  onwardg  even  at  any  pace ;  and  tha 
temptation  to  turn  aside  is  very  great. 

III.  The  duty  to  be  pobsued  in  faintness  and  infirmitt  nr  th«  Christian 
LIFE.  1.  To  seek  renewal  of  strength,.  "  Lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and  the 
feeble  knees,"  How  shall  we  do  this?  (1)  By  believing  prayer  to  God.  "He 
giyeth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  he  iucreaseth  strength," 
etc.  (Isa.  xl.  29 — 31).  (2)  By  the  recollection  of  former  mercies.  Memory  may  be 
used  as  an  inspiration  of  hope  and  courage.  "  Because  thou  hast  been  my  Help, 
therefore  under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice."  (3)  By  consideration  of  the 
uses  and  benefits  of  our  trials  and  discipline  (cf.  Bom.  y.  3— € ;  Jas.  i.  2,  3, 12).  (4) 
By  contemplation  of  the  great  multitude  who  have  reached  the  goal  and  won  the 
prize  (cf.  ver.  1).  (5)  By  contemplation  of  "  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,"  Exercises 
such  as  these  are  calculated  to  inspire  moral  courage,  and  increase  spiritual  strength, 
and  promote  Christian  progress.  2.  To  seek  to  keep  each  other  in  and  help  each  other 
onward  in  the  way.  "Make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  that  that  which  is  lame 
be  not  turned  out  of  the  way,  but  rather  be  healed."  "  The  meaning  seems  to  be," 
says  Alford,  "  let  your  walk  be  so  firm  and  so  unanimons  in  the  right  direction, 
that  a  plain  track  and  highway  may  be  thereby  established  for  those  who  accompany 
and  follow  you,  to  perceive  and  walk  in  (cf.  Isa.  xxxv.  8).  If  the  whole  congregation, 
by  their  united  and  consistent  walk,  trod  a  plain  and  beaten  path  for  men's  feet, 
these  lame  ones,  though  halting,  would  be  easily  able  to  keep  in  it,  and,  by  keeping 
in  the  '  straight  tracks,'  would  even  acquire  the  habit  of  walking  straight  onward, 
and  go  be  healed ;  but  if  the  tracks  were  errant  and  confused,  their  erratic  steps 
would  deviate  more  and  more,  till  at  length  they  fell  away  out  of  the  right  way 
altogether." 

Conclusion.  1.  Let  not  the  faint  yet  sincere  Christian  yield  to  discouragement. 
2.  Let  not  the  vigorous  Christian  despise  the  feeble  and  halting,  hut  rather  cheer  and 
help  them.  3.  Let  aU  Christians  in  the  strength  of  Ood  press  onward  to  the  goal  and 
to  the  crown. — W.  J. 

Ver.  14. — The  pursuit  of  peace  and  holiness.  "Follow  peace  with  ail  men,  and 
holiness,"  etc.  The  primary  meaning  of  the  text  seems  to  be  that  the  Christians 
addressed  "  are  to  guard  against  differences  among  themselves ;  they  are  not  to  quarrel 
with  one  another,  but  every  one  is  to  be  earnestly  intent  on  his  own  sanctlfication ;  " 
for  without  holiness  no  one  shall  see  the  Lord  with  joy.  Three  chief  points  arise  for 
consideration, 

I,  Peacis  ab  an  object  of  pubsuit.  "  Follow  after  peace  with  all  men.''  Peace  here 
is  the  opposite  of  strife,  division,  or  misunderstanding  amongst  Christian  brethren.  "  Seek 
peace,  and  pursue  it."  "  Behold,  how  good  and  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell 
together  in  unity  1 "  etc.  (Ps.  cxxxiii.).  Notice :  1.  The  importance  of  the  object  of 
pursuit.  "  Peace."  It  is  essential  to  spiritual  progress,  to  Christian  usefulness,  and  to 
the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  presence.  Discord  drives  away  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  is 
fatal  to  personal  growth  in  grace,  to  mutual  edi&cation,  and  to  successful  evangelization. 
2.  The  extent  of  this  pursuit.  "  With  all  men."  The  primary  meaning  is  "  all  their 
fellow-Christians."  The  context  shows  this.  Our  text  immediately  follows  the  exhor- 
tation to  guard  against  any  feeble  Christian  being  turned  out  of  the  way,  and  it 
immediately  precedes  the  exhortation  to  take  heed  that  no  one  should  fall  short  of  the 
grace  of  God.  And  if  the  "  all "  signified  all  mankind,  the  exhortation  under  considera- 
tion would  be  exceedingly  unconnected.  "  It  is  clearly  the  brethren  who  are  here  meant 
by  all,"  as  in  Eom.  xiv.  19,  "  Let  us  follow  after  the  things  which  make  for  peace,  and 
things  wherewith  one  may  edify  another."  But  in  applying  it  to  ourselves  may  we 
not  take  it  in  its  widest  signification  ?  "  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live 
peaceably  with  all  men."  3.  The  limit  of  this  pursuit.  In  our  endeavours  after  peace 
we  must  not  sacrifice  anything  which  is  essential  to  the  pursuit  of  holiness.  "  First 
pure,  then  peaceable."    Follow  after  peace,  but  not  at  the  expense  of  Christian  principle. 

II.  Holiness  as  an  object  of  pukscit.  "  Follow  after  .  .  .  holiness,"  or, "  sanctifi- 
cation."  Delitzsch  says,  "  Sanctification  is  not  holiness,  but  is  the  putting  on  of  it  and 
becoming  holy."  But  for  popular  speech  we  may  use  the  term  "holiness."  Let  us 
consider  two  Inquiries.    1.   What  is  holinessi    It  is,  says  Ur.  Hunfington,  "thai 


OH.  XII.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEI5REWS.  879 

attribute  which  is  the  very  crown  of  all  the  culture  of  humanity ;  for  it  carries  the  soul 
up  nearest  to  the  everlasting  Fountain  of  wisdom,  power,  goodness,  from  which  it  came. 
It  enters  in  only  where  repentance  opens  the  way,  and  spiritual  renewal  puts  the  heart 
into  wholesome  relations  with  the  Divine  will.  It  is  the  peculiar  gift  for  which  the 
world  stands  indebted  to  revelation,  and  it  is  multiplied  just  in  proportion  as  the  heart 
is  formed  into  the  likeness  oi  Christ's.  It  is  the  summit  of  manhood,  but  no  less  the 
grace  of  God.  It  is  achieved  by  effort,  because  your  free  will  must  use  the  means 
that  secure  it ;  and  it  is  equally  the  benignant  inspiration  of  that  Father  who  hears 
every  patient  petition."  2.  Sow  shall  we  pursue  holiness  t  Not  by  efforts,  however 
sincere  and  earnest,  after  self-reformation  or  self-improvement.  It  is  assumed  that 
the  persons  who  are  exhorted  to  follow  after  holiness  have  accepted  Christ  as  their 
Saviour  and  Lord.  Supposing  that  we  are  sincere  Christians,  we  should  seek  for 
holiness.  (1)  By  keeping  our  spiritual  nature  open  to  Divine  impression  and  action. 
We  must  let  Christ  enter,  and  dwell,  and  work,  and  reign  within  us.  (2)  By  com- 
munion with  Jesus  Christ.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  sliall  be  wise."  "  We 
all,  with  unveiled  face  beliolding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iii.  18). 
(3)  By  conscious  and  deliberate  imitation  of  Christ.  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and 
leara  of  me."  "  I  have  given  you  an  example,"  etc.  (John  xiii.  15).  "  Christ  suffered 
for  you,  leaving  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps.''  This  imitation 
obviously  includes  endeavours  to  render  complete  and  hearty  obedience  to  the  Divine 
will.  (4)  By  diligent  use  of  Divine  ordinances.  The  holy  Book  will  be  prayerfully 
and  thoughtfully  read,  "  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together "  will  be  welcomed, 
and  the  ministry  of  the  Word  and  the  sacraments  will  be  devoutly  considered  and 
accepted.  (5)  This  pursuit  should  be  continuous.  "  It  is  not  by  fits  and  starts  that 
men  become  holy.  It  is  not  occasional,  but  continuous,  prolonged,  and  lifelong  efforts 
that  are  required;  to  be  daily  at  it;  always  at  it;  resting  but  to  renew  the  work; 
fulling  but  to  rise  again.  It  is  not  by  a  few  rough,  spasmodic  blows  of  the  hammer 
that  a  graceful  statue  is  brought  out  of  the  marble  block,  but  by  the  labour  of  con- 
tinuous days,  and  many  delicate  touches  of  the  sculptor's  chiseL  It  is  not  with  a  rush 
aiid  a  spring  that  we  are  to  reach  Christ's  character,  attain  to  perfect  saintship ;  but 
step  by  step,  foot  by  foot,  hand  over  hand,  we  are  slowly  and  often  painfully  to  mount 
the  ladder  that  rests  on  earth  and  rises  to  heaven  "  (Dr.  Thomas  Guthrie).  (6)  The 
pursuit  both  of  peace  and  of  holiness  should  be  zealous.  The  word  used  by  the 
writer  in  enjoining  it  shows  this.  It  means  to  pursue  rapidly,  to  follow  eagerly,  to 
earnestly  endeavour  to  acquire.  Half-hearted  efforts  are  of  little  avail.  As  the  miser 
seeks  to  amass  temporal  wealth,  as  the  enthusiastic  student  strives  after  knowledge,  so 
let  us  follow  after  peace  and  holiness.  And  with  even  greater  eagerness  should  we 
pursue  them  because  of  their  greater  importance. 

III.  Holiness  as  a  qualification  fob  heaven.  "  Sanctification,  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  1.  Heaven  is  the  place  of  the  supreme  manifestation  of 
Ood.  (Of.  Ps.  xvi.  11 ;  xvii.  15 ;  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Hev.  vii.  15 ;  xxii.  3,  4.)  2.  Holiness  is 
an  essential  qualification  for  the  perception  of  this  manifestation.  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  "  The  pure  heart,"  says  Tholuck,  "  itself  is  the 
organ  whereby  the  vision  of  God  becomes  attainable  by  us."  Without  holiness  a  person 
lias  no  more  fitness  for  heaven  than  a  blind  man  has  for  the  enjoyment  of  a  beautiful 
picture-gallery  or  a  glorious  landscape.  3.  If  it  were  possible  for  an  unholy  tovl  to 
enter  heaven  it  could  find  no  peace  or  happiness  there,  but  would  realize  intense  misery. 
"  Heaven  would  be  hell  to  an  irreligious  man.  .  .  .  How  forlorn  would  he  wander 
through  the  courts  of  heaven  I  He  would  find  no  one  like  himself;  he  would  see  in 
every  direction  the  marks  of  God's  holiness,  and  these  would  make  him  shudder.  He 
would  feel  himself  always  in  his  presence.  He  could  no  longer  turn  his  thoughts 
another  way,  as  he  does  now,  when  conscience  reproaches  him.  He  would  know  that 
the  eternal  eye  was  ever  upon  him ;  and  that  eye  of  holiness,  which  is  joy  and  life  to 
holy  creatures,  would  seem  to  him  an  eye  of  wrath  and  punishment.  God  cannot 
change  his  nature.  Holy  he  must  ever  be.  But  while  he  is  holy,  no  unholy  soul  can 
he  happy  in  heaven.  Fire  does  not  inflame  iron,  but  it  inflames  straw.  It  would 
cease  to  be  fire  if  it  did  not.  And  so  heaven  itself  would  he  fire  to  those  who  would 
fain  escape  across  the  great  gulf  from  the  torments  of  hell.  The  finger  of  Lazarus 
would  but  increase  their  thirst    The  very  '  heaven  that  is  over  thur  heads '  will  b» 


380  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xn.  1—29. 

'brass '  to  tliem "  (Dr.  J.  H.  Newman).    Therefore,  let  ns  "  follow  after  peace  with  all 

men,  and  holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." — ^W.  J. 

Vers.  16, 17. — Esau  ;  or,  the  sacrifice  of  the  spiritual  for  the  sensttous.  "  Lest  there 
be  any  fornicator,  or  profane  person,"  etc.  There  is  much  about  this  man,  Esau,  which 
is  noble  and  attractive.  "  Esau,  the  shaggy,  red-haired  huntsman,  the  man  of  the  field, 
with  his  arrows,  his  quiver,  and  his  bow,  coming  in  weary  from  the  chase,  caught  as 
with  the  levity  and  eagerness  of  a  child  by  the  sight  of  the  lentil  soup—'  Feed  me, 
I  pray  thee,  with  the  red,  red  pottage ' — ^yet  so  full  of  generous  impulse,  so  affectionate 
towards  his  aged  father,  so  forgiving  towards  his  brother,  so  open-hearted,  so  chivalrous, 
who  has  not  at  times  felt  his  heart  warm  toward  the  poor  rejected  Esau,  and  been 
tempted  to  join  with  him  as  he  cries  '  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry,' '  Hast 
thou  but  one  blessing,  my  father  ?  bless  me,  even  me  also,  0  my  father  1 ' "  (Dr.  A.  P. 
Stanley).  Yet  he  is  solemnly  held  up  in  our  text  as  a  beacon  against  certain  sins 
which  might  lead  to  apostasy  from  the  Christian  faith  and  life.  In  his  conduct  as 
mentioned  in  the  text  we  notice  two  things. 

I.  A   SACRIFICE    OF  BAOEED  BIGHTS    AND    PRIVILEGES    FOB     BENSUOUS  SATISFACTION. 

"  Esau  for  one  mess  of  meat  sold  his  own  birthright "  (cf.  6en.xxv.  29 — 34).  Peculiar 
rights  and  privileges  were  inherited  by  the  firstborn  son.  (1)  He  received  a  double 
portion  of  the  paternal  property,  which  probably  signifies  twice  as  much  as  any  other 
ton  received  (Deut.  xxi.  17).  (2)  The  priestly  office  pertained  to  him,  previous  to  the 
selt  ction  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  fulfil  that  office  for  the  nation  (Numb.  viii.  17 — 19). 
(3)  He  enjoyed  a  rank  and  authority  in  the  family  over  those  who  were  younger 
similar  to  that  exercised  by  the  father  (Gen.  xxvii.  29  ;  xlix.  3).  (4)  And  in  the  case 
before  us,  the  honour  of  being  in  the  patriarchal  line,  and  of  transmitting  the  promises 
made  to  Abraham.  These  rights  of  primogeniture  E^n  sold  for  one  meal  of  red 
pottage ;  and  in  the  sale  we  have :  1.  A  saariflce  of  a  great  and  lifelong  good  for  the 
saUifaction  of  present  need  and  desire.  Esau  was  tired,  faint  for  want  of  food ;  there 
was  the  appetizing  pottage ;  and  there  was  the  mean  and  subtle  brother  who  craved 
the  birthright,  and  saw  his  opportunity  for  gaining  his  end  by  disgraceful  means,  and 
who  proposed  that  the  birthright  should  be  given  to  him  for  the  mess  of  pottage,  and 
who,  deeming  others  as  unprincipled  as  himself,  would  have  the  bargain  ratified  by  an 
oath  ;  and  Esau  yielded,  and  sacrificed  the  long  future  for  the  brief  present.  Ee  allowed 
his  strong  impulse  to  overpower  his  reason  and  judgment.  2.  A  sacrifice  of  spiritual 
privileges  for  sensuous  satisfactions.  The  cravings  of  his  senses,  his  hunger  and  desire 
ior  the  potti.ge,  mastered  the  convictions  of  his  soul.  Carnal  appetite  conquered  the 
claims  of  Esau's  higher  interests.  3.  A  sacrifice  made  upon  the  solicitation  of  his  mean 
and  crafty  In-other.  Must  discreditable  was  the  action  of  Jacob  in  this  transaction.  If 
a  darker  guilt  attaches  to  the  tempter  to  evil  than  to  him  vrho,  being  tempted,  yields, 
then  Jacob's  sin  was  greater  than  Esau's.  Well  does  t)ean  Stanley  inquire,  "  Who 
does  not  feel  at  times  his  indignation  swell  against  the  younger  brother?  '  Is  he  not 
rightly  named  Jacob,  for  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  times?*  He  entraps  his 
brother,  he  deceives  his  father,  he  makes  a  bargain  even  in  his  prayer ;  in  his  dealing! 
with  Lahan,  in  his  meeting  with  Esau,  he  still  calculates  and  contrives;  he  distrusts 
his  neighbours,  he  regards  with  prudential  indifference  the  insult  to  his  daughter  and 
the  cruelty  of  his  sons ;  he  hesitates  to  receive  the  assurance  of  Joseph's  good  will ;  he 
repels,  even  in  his  lesser  traits,  the  free  confidence  that  we  cannot  withhold  from  the 
patriarchs  of  the  elder  generation."  Thus  tempted  by  hunger,  by  appetite,  by  opportu- 
nity, and  by  his  astute  and  scheming  brother, "  Esau  for  one  mess  of  meat  sold  his  own 
birthright."  "  Thus  Esau  despised  his  birthright."  To  what  a  large  extent  do  men 
still  sin  after  the  fashion  of  Esau's  transgression !  In  our  country  there  are  multitudes 
who  are  bartering  their  spiritual  interests  for  secular  prosperity — renouncing  godliness 
for  worldly  gain.  What  countless  numbers  are  risking  the  salvation  of  their  souls  for 
the  gratification  of  their  senses  1  sacrificing  their  well-being  in  the  endless  future  for 
their  pleasure  in  the  brief  present  I 

II.  A  SACRIFICE  WHICH  INVOLVED  IRREPARABLE  L08B.  "  Por  ye  know  how  that 
afterward,  when  he  would  have  inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected,"  etc.  We  have 
here :  1.  Earnest  desire  fw  the  forfeited  blessing.  "  He  would  have  inherited  the 
blessing."    Esau  was  neither  so  wicked  nor  so  worldly  as  to  contemn  the  blessing  eithei 


OH.  XII.  i— 2&.]  THK  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  381 

of  his  father's  God  or  of  hia  father.  And  when  he  was  defrauded  of  that  blessing  hy 
his  brother,  he  sought  for  it  with  a  most  pathetic  earnestaebs  (Gun.  xxvii.  30 — 40).  'I. 
Deep  distress  because  of  the  loss  of  the  forfeited  blessing.  Our  text  mentions  the 
"  tears"  of  his  great  sorrow.  "  He  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry,  and 
said  unto  his  father,  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  0  my  father.  .  .  .  Hast  thou  but  one 
blessing,  my  father?  bless  me,  even  me  also,  0  my  father.  And  Esau  lifted  up  his 
voice,  and  wept."  3.  Earnest  desire  and  deep  distress  which  were  of  no  avail  for  the 
recovery  of  the  forfeited  blessing.  "  He  was  rejected  :  for  he  found  no  place  of 
repentance."  We  do  not  understand  by  this  either  that  Esau  was  unable  to  change  his 
father's  mind,  or  that  he  could  not  himself  repent  of  his  sins ;  but,  as  Alford  expresses 
it,  "  that  he  found  no  way  open  to  reverse  what  had  been  done :  the  sin  had  been  com- 
mitted and  the  consequence  entailed,  irrevocably.  He  might  change,  but  the  penalty 
could  not,  iirom  the  very  nature  of  the  circumstances,  be  taken  off.  So  that  repentance, 
in  its  full  sense,  had  no  place.  And  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  '  place  of  repentance,' 
wherever  occurring.  We  do  not  mean  by  it  an  opportunity  to  repent  in  a  man's  own 
bosom,  to  be  sorry  for  what  he  has  done,  for  this  may  be  under  any  circumstances,  and 
this  might  have  been  with  Esau ;  but  we  mean  a  chance,  by  repenting,  to  repair." 
There  is  an  awful  permanence  in  deeds.  They  cannot  be  undone.  Words  once  spoken 
are  beyond  recall.  Opportunities  once  lost  are  lost  for  ever.  Others  may,  perhaps,  be 
granted ;  but  those  are  irrevocably  gone. 

Let  us  learn:  1.  To  cwrb  strong  impulses  by  reason  and  by  conscience.  2.  To 
maintain  the  proper  relation  between  the  present  and  temporary,  and  the  future  and 
abiding.  3.  To  keep  the  sensuous  subordinate  to  the  spiritual.  This  brings  us  to 
the  practical  point  of  the  writer  of  the  Epislle.  Let  us  not  forsake  what  is  right  and 
true  to  escape  from  any  present  difficulty  or  loss  or  pain,  or  to  secure  any  present 
pleasure.    Let  us  not  turn  away  from  Christ  to  escape  the  cross. — W.  J. 

Vers.  18 — 24.— Z%e  exalted  privileges  of  sincere  Christians.  "  For  ye  are  not  coma 
unto  the  mount  that  might  be  touched,"  etc.  This  paragraph  exhibits  a  striking  contrast 
between  Sinai  and  Zion — the  Mosaic  and  the  Christian  dispensations.  The  chief  points 
of  the  contrast  seem  to  be  these :  1.  The  sensuous  at  Sinai  is  contrasted  with  the 
tpiritval  at  Zion.  At  Sinai  the  manifestations  were  palpable,  visible,  audible  (vers.  18, 
19)  ;  at  Zion  they  were  heavenly,  and  to  some  extent  invisible  and  inaudible.  The 
former  appealed  chiefly  to  the  senses,  the  latter  to  the  soul.  2.  The  rigorous  at  Sinai 
is  contrasted  with  the  gracious  at  Zion.  The  former  mountain  was  palpable,  but  no 
one  of  the  people  might  draw  near  unto  it,  and  if  even  a  beast  touched  it  it  was  to  be 
stoned.  The  whole  of  the  proceedings  were  awful  and  terrible.  The  revelation  was  of 
Law.  Love  was  there,  for  love  was  the  fountain  of  the  Law ;  but  Law,  solemn  and 
inflexible,  and  not  love,  was  conspicuous.  But  at  Zion,  love  and  not  Law  was  con- 
spicuous. "  The  Law  was  given  by  Moses ;  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 
In  the  Christian  dispensation  grace  is  unmistakably  clear  and  prominent.  Here  the 
voices  are  musical,  the  utterances  are  inviting.  3.  The  repellant  at  Sinai  is  contrasted 
with  the  attractive  at  Zion.  At  the  giving  of  the  Law,  "  they  that  heard  intreated 
that  no  word  more  should  be  spoken  unto  them.  .  .  .  And  so  fearful  was  the  appearance 
that  Moses  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake."  But  in  this  later  dispensation  men  are 
drawn  by  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  To  the  sincere  soul  Christianity  is  bright, 
alluring,  and  blessed.  Let  us  now  consider  the  exalted  privileges  of  sincere  Christians 
%8  set  forth  in  our  text. 

L  Thet  ABE  MEMBEBS  OF  A  DISTINGUISHED  800IETT.  "Ye  are  come  unto  Mount 
Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  We  do  not  apply 
these  words  to  heaven,  but  to  the  Church  upon  earth,  the  kingdom  of  Christ  here  and 
now ;  because  (1)  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  Mount  Zion  is  not  set  foi-th  as  the  antithesis 
of  heaven,  but  of  the  Christian  Church  (Gal.  iv.  24 — 26) ;  and  (2)  the  text  affirms  that 
Christians  "  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,"  etc.  It  is  the  statement  of  a  present  fact, 
and  not  a  future  prospect.  Mark  the  characteristics  of  this  distinguished  society.  1. 
It  is  ^ritual  in  its  constitution.  "  The  heavenly  Jerusalem."  The  qualification  for 
admission  into  this  society  is  spiritual,  not  carnal;  a  thing  of  character,  not  of  circum- 
stance!; not  physical  descent  from  Abraham,  but  moral  approximation  to  Christ.  Its 
worship  is  mi  restricted  by  local  limitations,  or  by  conventional  and  artificial  rule*; 


332  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWSw  [oh.  xn.  1—29. 

but  by  spiritual  conditionB  only.  "  The  hour  cometh,  when  neither  in  this  mountain, 
nor  in  Jerusalem,  shall  ye  worship  the  Father.  .  .  .  The  hour  cometh,  and  now  is, 
when  the  true  worshipper  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  etc.  (John 
iv.  21 — 24).  Wherever  there  is  a  devout  soul,  there  is  the  true  Zion.  The  contrite 
heart  can  consecrate  for  itself  a  temple  wherever  it  may  be.  2.  It  is  hallowed  hy  the 
Divine  presence.  "  Te  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem."  Previous  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  the  name 
Mount  Zion  "  was  applied  exclusively  to  the  eastern  hill,  or  that  on  which  the  temple 
stood."  The  glory  of  the  Holy  Land  to  the  pious  Hebrew  was  Jerusalem,  and  the 
glory  of  Jerusalem  was  Mount  Zion,  and  the  glory  of  Mount  Zion  was  the  temple,  and 
the  glory  of  the  temple  was  the  Sheohinah  (of.  Ps.  xlviii.  1 — 3 ;  Ixxx.  1 ;  cxxxii.  13, 14). 
"  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple."  "  He  sitteth  between  the  cherubim.  The  Lord  is 
great  in  Zion."  But  in  a  higher  sense  he  dwells  in  the  consecrated  heart,  and  in  the 
Christian  Church.  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  Name,  there  am 
I  in  the  midst  of  them."  3.  Iti  members  are  individually  consecrated  to  God.  "  To 
the  Church  of  the  Firstborn."  The  firstborn  of  Israel  were  dedicated  to  God  as  his 
priests  (Exod.  xiii.  1,  2, 11 — 15).  Afterwards  the  tribe  of  Levi  was  selected  for  this 
seivice  instead  of  the  firstborn  of  all  the  tribes  (Numb.  iii.  11 — 13).  And  it  is 
characteristic  of  every  Christian  that  he  is  consecrated  to  God ;  he  is  a  priest  unto  God. 
"  Ye  are  a  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  through 
Jesus  Christ.  ...  Ye  are  an  elect  race,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  people  for 
God's  own  possession."  4.  Its  members  are  heirs  to  a  glorious  inheritance.  All 
Christians  are  called  "  firstborn"  because  they  are  all  heirs  of  the  heavenly  inheritance. 
"  We  are  children  of  God :  and  if  children,  then  heirs,"  etc.  Heirs  "  unto  an  inheri- 
tance incorruptible,  and  undefiled,"  etc.  5.  Its  members  are  individually  hnovm  unto 
Qod.  They  "  are  written  in  heaven."  They  are  "  not  yet  citizens  of  heaven  who 
have  taken  up  their  full  citizenship  by  passing  through  death,  but  persons  to  whom 
their  citizenship  is  assured,  they  being  as  yet  here  below."  This  enrolment  in  the 
book  of  life  is  the  sign  that  the  citizenship  of  the  Christian  is  in  heaven,  and  that  his 
name  and  character  are  known  unto  God.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his." 
The  good  Shepherd  "calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name"  (cf.  Luke  x.  20). 

II.  They  abe  favoukably  belated  to  angelic  beings.  "  Ye  are  come  .  .  .  to  an 
innumerable  company  of  angels."  Notice:  X.  The  great  nwmhef.  of  angelic  beings.  The 
text  speaks  of  "  myriads  of  angels,"  an  expression  which  is  employed  to  indicate  a  great 
multitude.  St.  John  in  spiritual  vision  saw  "  many  angels  round  about  the  throne ; 
.  .  .  and  the  number  of  uiem  was  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands 
of  thousands."  2.  The  joyful  spirit  of  angelic  beings.  "And  to  myriads,  the  festal 
host  of  angels."  Alford :  "  Tlav^yvpis  is  the  complete,  multitudinous,  above  all,  jubilant, 
festal,  and  blissful  assembly."  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over 
one  sinner  that  repenteth."  They  rejoice  in  the  progress  of  the  cause  of  Christ,  in  the 
extension  of  his  Church,  in  the  triumphs  of  his  cross  and  Spirit.  3.  The  gracious 
relation  of  angelic  beings  to  Christians.  Angels  were  present  at  Sinai  in  great  numbers, 
and  assisted  at  the  giving  of  the  Law  (cf.  ch.  ii.  2 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  Gal.  iii.  19).  But 
their  ministry  upon  that  occasion  seems  to  have  been  majestic  and  terrible,  fitted  to 
awe  but  not  to  attract  men.  But  their  relation  to  Christians  is  gracious  and  engaging. 
We  are  come  unto  them.  Invisibly  yet  beneficently  they  are  present  with  us  as  our 
spiritual  helpers.    "Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits?"  etc. 

III.  Thet  abb  stmpathetioallt  associated  with  the  febfeoted  sfibits  of  the 
eooD.  "  And  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  We  have  here :  1.  The  noblest 
portion  of  human  beings.  "  Spirits."  Having  laid  down  their  bodies  at  death,  these 
thinking,  reflecting,  loving,  worshipping  spirits  live  on  in  consciousness  and  in  blessed- 
ness. 2.  A  commendable  character  of  human  beings.  "  Spirits  of  just  men."  Not 
innocent ;  but  pardoned  and  pureed  from  sin  through  the  mercy  of  God.  Spirits  of 
all  the  just  who  have  entered  the  eternal  state,  from  righteous  Abel  down  to  the  spirit 
which  last  responded  to  the  home-call.  3.  The  most  excellent  condition  of  human 
beings.  "  Spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  Made  perfect,  not  in  degree,  but  in 
character  and  condition.  Perfect  as  being  without  error  and  sin,  but  not  as  being 
incapable  of  further  progress.  They  are  without  sin,  but  they  will  grow  in  holiness. 
They  are  without  error,  but  they  will  increase  in  knowledge.    "  Made  perfect  j "   (hen 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBKEWB.  383 

how  different  are  they  from  even  the  best  of  men  in  this  world !  Many  an  imperfection 
will  be  put  off  by  us  at  death;  many  an  error  will  be  corrected  soon  as  we  see  things 
In  the  clear  light  of  eternity.  "  We  are  come  ...  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect."  They  are  not  lost  to  us.  Life  and  immortality  are  broiiglit  to  light  in  the 
gospeL  Deep  and  tender  is  their  interest  in  us.  We  are  one  with  them  in  sacred  and 
blessed  sympathy. 

"  E'en  now  by  faith  we  join  our  hands 
With  those  that  went  before; 
And  greet  the  blood-besprinkled  bands 
On  the  eternal  shore." 

(0.  Wesley.) 

rV,  Thet  havb  onACious  access  to  the  gbeat  God.  "  And  to  God  the  Judge  of 
all."  At  Sinai  the  Israelites  were  terrified  at  the  signs  of  his  presence  as  Lawgiver ; 
but  in  this  later  dispensation  sincere  Christians  draw  near  to  him  with  confidence  even 
as  the  Judge  of  all.  Kay,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  this  aspect  of  his  being  attracts 
them.  They  are  yet  in  the  world.  They  have  enemies  to  contend  against  and  wrongs 
to  endure ;  and  they  look  up  to  God  as  their  righteous  Judge,  who  will  vindicate  their 
right  and  their  cause.  We  are  come  unto  him.  He  is  not  a  cold,  impassive,  remote 
being.  He  is  near  to  us ;  be  loves  us,  draws  us  to  himself,  arid  blesses  us  with  his 
gracious  presence.  We  confide  in  him,  and  realize  our  holiest  impulses  and  most 
blessed  experiences  in  fellowship  with  him. 

V.  Thet  abe  satinqly  belated  to  Jesus  Cbbist.  "  And  to  Jesus  the  Mediator 
of  a  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  better  things  than  that 
of  Abel."  1.  We  are  come  to  him  cu  our  Mediator.  By  him  God  is  brought  so  near 
to  us,  and  we  are  reconciled  to  Gkxl.  Through  him  we  enter  into  the  possession  of  all 
our  exalted  and  rich  privileges.  2.  We  are  come  to  him.  who  effected  hi*  mediatorial 
wrh  hy  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  Ufe.  The  blood  of  sprinkling  is  his  own  precious 
blood,  which  he  shed  for  us.  "  We  have  our  redemption  through  his  blood,"  etc.  And 
this  blood  speaks  of  the  infinite  love  of  God,  and  the  full  and  freb  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  spiritual  perfection,  and  endless  progress  and  blessedness. 

CoxcLusiON.     Oreai  privilege*  involve  great  rtiponsibilitiei, — ^W.  J. 

Ver.  28. — 2%e  kingdom  which  cannot  le  movett.  "  We  receiving  a  kingdom  which 
cannot  be  moved."  "  A  kingdom  which  cannot  he  moved."  Is  there  such  a  thing  ? 
What  is  it?  Where  is  it?  The  great  empires  of  antiquity — Egypt,  Assyria,  Greece, 
Kome — are  all  gone.  Where  is  the  immovable  kingdom?  Is  there  anything  that 
cannot  be  changed,  shaken,  and  destroyed  ?  Physical  comforts  are  torn  away  from 
their  possessors.  Health  is  not  immovable.  Wealth  is  not  a  lasting  kingdom. 
Property  is  "  unstable  as  water."  What  is  the  "  kingdom  that  cannot  be  shalcen  "  ? 
Men  are  removed  from  earth  and  from  the  dwellers  thereon.  Entire  families  some- 
times pass  away.  Generations  are  carried  hence  into  the  invisible  world.  Even  whole 
races  of  men  have  completely  disappeared  from  the  earth.  With  all  these  cliiinges, 
where  shall  we  find  the  unchangeable  and  the  permanent?  The  oak  that  has  braved 
the  storms  of  centuries,  and  the  cedar  and  the  yew  whose  years  must  be  coiintcd  by 
thousands,  will  one  day  crumble  into  dust  which  will  be  scattered  by  the  breeze.  But 
the  mountains  and  rocks — surely  they  abide?  The  sacred  Scriptures  speak  of  them  as 
"  the  everlasting  mountains,  the  perpetual  hills."  Those  Scriptures  also  say,  "  Surely 
the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  nought,  and  the  rock  is  removed  out  of  his  place.  The 
waters  wear  the  stones."  "  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed." 
Geology  proclaims  the  same  truth.  Even  the  very  Churches  pass  away.  The  Jewish 
Church  has  departed,  or  only  a  feeble  and  faded  remnant  of  it  is  left.  And  Christian 
Churches  are  planted,  flourish,  decay,  and  die.  Is  there  anything  here  that  is  immu- 
table—anything "that  cannot  be  moved"?  The  kingdom  which  our  text  says  is 
immovable  is  Christianity.  In  other  places  it  is  called  "  the  kingdom  of  God,"  "  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,"  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  We  also  read,  "  The  kingdom  of  God 
is  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  again,  "  The  Law,"  i.e. 
the  Jewish  economy,  "  was  given  by  Moses ;  grace  and  truth,"  t.«.  Christianity,  "  came 
by  Jesus  Christ."  "  Grace  and  truth,"  "  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  are  immutable  abd  eternal;  these  are  the  elements  whieh  constitute  the 


S84  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  foH.  xn.  1— ^9. 


"  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved."  Christian  Churches  may  pass  away ;  but  Chris- 
tianity ever  abides  and  ever  grows.  Christian  denominations  and  sects  may  die;  but 
the  Church  of  Christ  ever  lives  and  advances  towards  its  position  of  supreme  and 
world-wide  sovereignty.  Again,  "  grace  and  truth,"  "  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy 
in  the  Holy  Grhost,"  as  realized  by  the  individual  Christian,  are  not  constant  and  per- 
manent. Our  consciousness  of  these  things  may  vary  and  fluctuate ;  but  the  things 
themselves  cannot  be  moved.  The  presence  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens  may  be  veiled 
from  us ;  but  the  sun  is  there,  calm  and  luminous  as  ever.  Clouds  may  hide  every  star 
from  our  view,  and  present  to  us  a  canopy  of  pitchy  blackness ;  but  the  stars  are  not 
lost — ^beyond  and  above  the  clouds  they  pursue  their  appointed  courses.  So  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  kingdom  within  us  may  be  disturbed  and  suspended  and  lost  for  a 
time ;  but  the  kingdom  is  not  lost,  or  suspended,  or  disturbed.  If  we  have  received 
Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour  and  Lord,  we  have  "  received  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
moved."    Let  us  now  fix  our  attention  upon  some  of  the  chief  teachings  of  the  text. 

I.  Christianity  is  a  sovereign  poweb.  It  is  "a  kingdom;"  "the  kingdom  of 
God;"  "  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  "  "the  kingdom  of  heaven;"  the  "kingdom  which 
cannot  be  moved."  Jesus  claims  supreme  authority  over  the  heart  and  life  of  all  men, 
and  over  all  institutions  and  societies.  He  claims  to  be  the  King  of  men.  Have  we 
received  Christianity  as  a  ruling  puwer  in  our  lives  ?  Some  accept  it  only  for  purposes 
of  study  and  speculation ;  others  only  by  manifesting  towards  it  a  little  respect  and 
interest ;  others  admit  it  to  a  limited  measure  of  control  over  them.  But  none  of  these 
lias  received  the  "kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved,"  He  who  has  not  welcomed  the 
Lord  Jesus  as  his  Kfng  has  not  truly  welcomed  him  at  all.  Personal  Christianity  is  a 
sovereign  power  and  person  in  the  soul,  ruling  the  thoughts  and  words,  the  desires  and 
feelings,  the  purposes  and  actions  of  our  being — ruling,  in  a  word,  our  whole  life. 
Have  we  so  received  Christ  ? 

n.  Christianity  as  a  bovbbbign  poweb  is  mroHANOEABLE  ahd  eveelabtiho.  "  A 
kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved."  We  have  seen  that  this  kingdom  is  "  grace  and 
ti  uth,"  "  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  These  are  immutable 
and  abiding  things.  They  are  essential  to  the  being  and  character  of  God,  and  he  is 
unchangeable  and  eternal.  And  these  things  as  possessed  by  his  people  are  derived 
from  him.  Ephemeral  is  the  seeming  reign  of  falsehood  and  wrong ;  eternal  is  the 
reign  of  truth  and  righteousness — the  kingdom  of  God.  Amid  change  and  decay,  amid 
revolution  and  dissolution,  here  is  an  abiding  thing,  a  sovereign  and  eternal  thing. 
Have  we  received  the  "  grace  and  truth,"  the  "  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost"?  Then  we  have  received  the  immovable  kingdom,  the  kingdom  which 
rests  upon  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  Gk>d.  1.  Mark  Hie  blessedness  of  the  true 
Christum.  Amid  all  the  painful  uncertainties  and  changes  of  this  life,  he  possesses 
the  unalterable  and  the  certain.  He  has  a  portion  and  an  inheritance  which  shall  not 
be  taken  away  from  him.  He  will  carry  his  wealth  with  him  into  eternity,  and  it  will 
increase  for  ever.  "  Grace  and  truth,"  "  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  are  incorporated  with  his  very  being,  and  will  never  pass  away  from  him. 
The  blessed  and  permanent  "  kingdom  of  God  is  within  "  him.  2.  Here  is  the  basis  of 
an  argument  for  the  immediate  acceptance  of  Christianity,  or  rather,  of  the  Christ. 
Christianity  is  not  to  give  place  to  any  other  remedial  disj  ensation.  The  patriarchal 
form  of  religion  passed  away,  and  the  Mosaic  system  followed  ;  that  in  its  turn  passed 
away  with  the  advent  and  growth  of  Christianity,  which  will  never  be  removed  until 
the  end  of  time.  God  will  not  speak  to  us  with  any  voice  more  attractive,  persuasive, 
or  convincing  than  that  by  which  he  now  addresses  us.  "  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him 
that  speaketh.  For  if  they  escaped  not,"  etc.  (vers.  25 — 27),  Accept  at  once  the 
blessings  and  obligations  of  this  kingdom. — W.  J. 

Ver.  1. — The  cloud  of  witnesses.  I.  The  nuhbeb  of  thb  witnebsbs.  From  many 
ages,  of  both  sexes,  and  in  al  I  positions  of  life.  Uur  attention  is  called,  not  merely  to  a 
cloud,  but  to  so  great  a  cloud.  Birds  gather  together  in  clouds.  And  the  cloud  may  be 
so  great  as  to  compel  notice.  Whether  we  shall  be  impressed  by  the  number  of  the 
witnesses  depends  altogether -on  the  spirit  in  which  we  consider  them.  If .  we  are 
ourselves  of  a  believing  disposition,  we  shall  quickly  recognize  faith  in  the  lives  of 
others.    We  shall  notice  faith  in  the  peculiarity  of  its  beginnings,  in  the  nobleness 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEWa  Sd". 

of  its  progress,  and  the  certainty  of  its  results.  By  its  fruits  we  shall  distinguish  faith 
from  credulity.  Nor  shall  we  think  any  the  less  of  it  hecause  those  who  have  it  lack 
other  elements  of  life  which  are  valued  by  the  world.  Those  who  come  together  into 
so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses  because  they  have  faith  will  remain  together.  They  will 
be  found  to  have  other  qualities  giving  union.  The  figure  here  employed  has  already 
had  its  correspondence  in  the  expression,  "  Time  would  fail  me  to  tell."  The  cloud  of 
witnesses  is  but  another  way  of  saying  tliat  God's  true  people,  the  believing  host,  the 
children  of  faithful  Abraham,  are  as  the  stars  of  the  sky  for  multitude,  the  sand  by  the 
sea-shore  innumerable. 

II.  Thb  agreement  of  the  witnesses.  They  are  not  like  witnesses  in  a  court  of 
justice,  for  there  some  are  on  one  side  and  some  on  the  other.  All  have  the  same  story 
to  tell.  Faith  came  to  them  with  a  distinct  imperative  word.  The  course  they  took 
was  not  one  that  could  be  commended  by  reasons  suited  to  the  common  understanding 
of  men.  Their  life,  to  a  certain  extent,  has  been  separate  from  inen,  and  not  unfre- 
quently  men  have  opposed  them.  But  always  they  have  the  same  story  to  tell  as  to 
results.  The  way  of  the  wicked  perishes.  It  begins  with  self-indulgence  and  self- 
confidence,  with  the  fear  of  man  and  after  man's  wisdom,  and  so  it  goes  on  till  the  hour 
of  exposure  comes.  But  the  way  of  the  believer  is  out  of  darkness  into  light,  out  of 
the  midst  of  difBoulties  and  toils  into  a  path  where  he  can  run  with  enlarged  heart. 

III.  The  matter  of  their  testimony.  They  have  to  speak  of  God's  dealings, 
God's  guiding.  Their  lives  are  set  before  us  as  giving  occasion  to  manifest  the  Divine 
character.  Everywhere  in  Scripture  just  those  things  are  recorded  which  through 
human  lives  show  Divine  working.  The  testimony  of  believers  is  ever  valuable,  just 
in  proportion  as  they  make  it  clear  that  it  is  not  they  who  live,  not  they  who  work, 
but  God,  Christ,  living  and  working  in  them. 

IV.  The  manner  of  TBtsiR  testimony.  It  is  given  unconsciously.  It  is  given  out 
of  the  past  and  as  we  read  it  in  the  page  of  history.  Abel,  being  dead,  yet  speaketh. 
It  is  Abel,  dying  because  of  his  faith,  who  impresses  us.  Oftentimes  in  the  proceedings 
of  human  justice  that  which  helps  most  to  a  right  decision  is  some  silent  witness,  in 
the  shape  of  a  paper  or  a  weapon,  or  some  such  article,  the  existence  and  position  of 
which  are  incompatible  with  any  but  a  certain  conclusion.  It  has  not  been  sworn,  aud 
it  cannot  be  perjured ;  it  says  more  than  a  thousand  sworn  witnesses  can  say.  The 
great  believers  of  old  may  be  helpers  of  our  faith,  simply  by  our  taking  the  trouble  to 
consider  what  we  know  about  them  in  the  humble,  earnest  spirit  of  the  seeker  after 
truth. 

V.  The  consequent  bbsponsibilitt.  It  is  a  serious  matter  to  be  encompassed  by 
this  cloud  of  witnesses.  They  may  rise  up  in  judgment  against  ua,  whereas  they  were 
not  given  for  this,  but  to  help  us  into  like  precious  faith.  And  as  the  world  goes  on 
the  matter  becomes  more  serious  still.  The  cloud,  large  in  the.  days  of  this  writer,  is 
immensely  larger  now.  Luminous  then,  what  a  heart  of  light  it  now  has,  radiating 
forth  its  truth  and  encouragement  for  all  who  have  eyes  to  see  1— T. 

Ver.  1. — The  appointed  struggle.  L  The  fiqube  employed.  The  particular  form 
of  it  is  unfamiliar,  but  the  essence  is  &miliar  enough,  and  likely  long  to  be  so.  We 
are  led  to  think  of  the  natural  man,  ambitious  to  triumph  by  virtue  of  physical  or 
intellectual  strength.  His  motive  is  self-regarding,  yet  it  leads  him  to  a  measure  of 
self-restraint;  indeed,  he  will  go  extraordinary  lengths  in  checking  self-indulgence  if 
only  he  may  stand  first  when  the  struggle  is  done.  A  man  may  be  very  low  in  the 
scale  of  humanity  and  yet  have  the  spirit  of  emulation  in  him  very  strong.  Now,  by 
this  figure,  men  thirsting  for  fame  and  honour  have  their  thoughts  turned  away  from 
low  aims  to  the  highest  aim  a  man  can  cherish ;  from  aims  that  bring  envy,  waste  of 
human  faculties,  and  ultimate  disappointment,  to  an  aim  which  may  bring  to  every  man 
the  richest,  the  most  abiding  of  gains  without  the  slightest  loss  to  any  brother  man. 
While  there  is  a  stimulus  in  this  exhortation  for  every  Christian,  it  is  specially  directed 
to  ambitious  climbing,  striving  men.  It  tells  them  to  relinquish  purposes  that  at  the 
very  best  can  bring  them  only  a  corruptible  crown,  and  bend  their  energies  to  the 
attainment  of  that  divinely  produced  joy  which  is  set  before  them  even  as  it  was  before 
Jesus.  We  who  are  not  engaged  in  the  struggle  set  before  us  here  need  to  ask  what 
sort  of  a  struggle  we  are  engaged  in.  We  are  summoned  from  the  lower  to  the  higlier. 
IIEBBBWa.  2  0 


386  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xii.  1—29. 

n.  Thb  aim  fbofosed  to  us.  The  struggle  is  the  thing  mentioned,  but  behind  the 
struggle  stands  that  for  which  the  struggle  is  engaged  in.  Each  man,  looking  at 
possibilities  through  his  natural  eyes,  has  his  own  ideal  of  how  to  reward  the  exercised 
faculties  of  life.  So  many  kinds  of  mea,  so  many  ideals.  But  Q-od  our  Maker  has  also 
his  ideal  for  the  universal  man.  His  purpose  is  that  the  whole  man  should  win 
a  victory.  Not  that  the  intellect  should  be  victorious  while  the  spiritual  nature  lies 
crushed  and  dishonoured.  Jesus  had  a  joy  set  before  him ;  so  also  have  we.  And  even 
as  the  joy  of  this  world's  successes  lies  at  the  end  of  a  long  and  toilsome  struggle,  so  it 
must  be  in  the  joy  of  spiritual  success.  We  put  strugi^les  before  ourselves  in  order  to 
siitisfy  ambition ;  Qoi  puts  a  struggle  before  us  to  comply  with  a  sense  of  duty.  Here 
is  the  proposition  of  this  arduous  career  put  right  before  us  in  our  onward  path.  Shall 
we  accept  it  or  shall  we  evade  it?    We  cannot  very  well  ignore  it. 

III.  Fbelihinabt  conditions  op  peoqbess.  We  are  to  lay  aside  every  weight. 
Wherein  a  weight  consists  is  to  be  determined  by  its  character  in  relation  to  the  resuit 
of  the  struggle.  The  moment  anything  hinders  progress  in  spirituality  it  is  to  be  for- 
saken. As  to  the  easily  besetting  sin,  perhaps  that  is  best  taken  not  as  indicating  some- 
thing different  from  the  weight,  but  in  apposition  to  it.  The  variety  of  expression  enforces 
the  one  paramount  duty  of  putting  aside  everything,  external  and  internal,  which 
would  tend  to  failure.  The  easily  besetting  sin  is  generally  spoken  of  as  being  unbelief. 
But  it  is  not  enough  to  look  at  unbelief  on  its  negative  side;  we  must  look  at  it 
positively  as  a  state  of  the  heart  wherever  it  goes  out  after  things  that  are  seen,  mere 
appearances,  satisfactions  of  the  fleshly  appetite.  Then,  when  obstacles  are  thrown 
off,  we  can  patiently  pursue  our'  path.  We  shall  need  patience  because  there  will  be 
external  obstacles — a  world  not  sympathizing  with  us,  and  indeed  crossed  and  thwarted 
by  us  in  our  steady  adherence  to  the  course  God  has  marked  out.  But  the  patience 
must  be  that  quality  which  in  the  New  Testament  is  specially  dignified  by  the  name 
"  the  patience  of  hope."  The  toil,  the  strain,  the  seasons  of  weariness  and  of  special 
difficulty,  must  all  be  cheered  by  the  well-grounded  hope  of  ultimate  victory.  The 
dreadful  thing  in  all  struggles  is  when  they  end  in  failure,'  In  the  race  run  by  the 
Christian  all  succeed. — Y. 

Ver.  2. — Looking  to  Jetui.  L  What  we  look  aw  at  fbou.  For  the  idea  in  the 
verb  is  that  of  looking  away  from  one  thing  to  some  other  thing.  We  must  always 
have  some  object  before  the  eyes  of  our  mind,  and  very  often  it  is  an  object  that  will 
cause  the  natural  man  discomposure,  doubt,  vacillation  in  his  practice.  Looking  round 
on  your  companions  professedly  in  the  path  of  faith,  you  may  feel  that  they  are  doing 
anything  but  live  the  life  of  faith.  You  may  see  some  backsliding,  Demas-like,  through 
their  love  of  the  present  evil  world.  And  even  the  best  of  brother  believers  have  their 
moments  of  failure  and  misapprehension.  Then,  moreover,  as  we  look  round  us,  we  see 
not  only  the  cloud  of  testifying  believers,  we  see  a  cloud  given  over  to  the  things  of  this 
world.  To  mingle  with  them  in  many  relations  is  a  necessity  of  life.  Insensibly  they 
affect  that  standard  of  excellence  at  which  we  ought  to  aim.  We  see  something  which 
is  not  God's  standard,  but  in  our  self-deception,  honestly  enough,  we  take  it  to  be  so. 
And  so  we  must  look  away  from  the  ordinary  surroundings  of  life,  and  even  from  the 
actiievements  of  ordinary  believers,  to  one  in  whom  we  shall  find  every  good  we  find  in 
man,  without  alloy,  without  contradiction,  and  with  special  power  in  us  to  produce 
perseverance  and  aspiration. 

II.  Whom  we  look  to.  What  a  great  matter  it  is  to  have  an  Object  so  satisfactory, 
so  inspiring,  on  which  our  eyes  may  rest,  on  which  our  thoughts  may  dwell  I  But  we 
must  look  at  that  Object  in  a  certain  way.  As  we  have  looked  for  faith  in  Abraham, 
in  Moses,  in  the  piopiiets,  and  found  it,  so  we  must  look  for  faith  in  Jesus.  It  is  of  the 
greatest  importance  for  us  to  see  that  the  life  which  Jesus  lived  in  the  flesh  was  a  life 
of  faith — faith  in  his  Father  in  heaven,  faith  in  his  brethren  upon  the  earth.  And  what 
is  to  be  noticed  most  of  all  is  this  combination  of  Author  and  Finisher.  We  see  Jesus 
beginning  his  course  of  faith,  we  also  see  him  finishing  it.  With  regard  to  other 
beUevers,  it  is  by  an  act  of  faith  on  our  part  that  we  comprehend  a  reward  to  be  in  store 
for  them.  But  the  reward  of  Jesus  is  before  otir  eyes.  That  reward  is  to  be  clearly 
seen  by  us  if  we  have  any  power  of  spiritual  perception  at  all.  We  see  the  faith  of  one 
who  aubmits  to  death  with  the  certainty  that  he  will  rise  again,  and  in  due  time  he 


CH.  XII.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS  387 

does  rise  again.  Jeans  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  for  he  does  actually  rule  oyer  many 
human  hearts.  He  did  not  pass  through  suffering  and  shame  into  an  obscurity  which 
was  only  the  last  stage  of  the  suffering  and  shame.  His  present  glory  is  a  manifest  thing, 
manifest  in  the  light  of  more  tests  than  one.  It  is  a  glory  perceptible  from  the  common 
historian's  point  of  view.  The  richness  and  depth  of  that  glory  become  more  and  more 
apparent  when  the  eye  of  a  real  Christian  is  turned  upon  it ;  he  looks  for  things  and 
sees  things  which  to  the  world  are  only  names.  And  yet  what  appears  to  our  eyes  is 
a  very  imperfect  representation  of  the  reality  proposed  to  him  and  seen  by  him.  He 
saw  more  with  his  sense  of  truth,  his  power  of  insight,  his  superiority  to  this  world's 
considerations,  than  we  can  see.  And  along  with  the  end  he  saw  the  way  to  it.  Well 
might  he  warn  rash,  would-be  disciples  to  count  the  cost,  for  he  himself  had  counted 
the  cost  to  begin  with.  Thus  must  we  ever  look  at  Jesus,  not  in  one  part  of  his  career, 
but  in  all  taken  together.  The  cross  and  the  shame  must  not  be  separated  from  the 
seat  of  honour  and  of  power.  Nor  must  the  end  be  looked  at  apart  from  the  way.  Wo 
also  have  a  joy  set  before  us,  namely,  that  of  attaining  to  companionship  with  Jesus. 
When  we  look  away  to  Jesus  we  look,  not  only  to  an  example,  to  an  inspiration,  but 
also  to  a  goal. — Y. 

Vers.  2,  S.-!-WTuit  Ohrist  uxu  exposed  to.  I.  Phtsioal  paik.  He  endured  a  cross. 
When  the  hour  and  authority  of  darkness  came  upon  him,  he  was  left  to  those  tender 
mercies  of  the  wicked  which  are  cruel.  It  was  part  of  his  victory  to  endure  whatever 
men  chose  to  inflict  in  the  way  of  pain.  All  who  afterwards  had  to  endure  crosses,  all 
who  were  thrown  to  wild  beasts,  burnt,  etc.,  knew  that  their  Saviour  had  been  in  exactly 
the  same  path.    He  did  not  choose  the  cross ;  it  came  in  the  way  he  had  to  take  to  the 

i'oy.  If  it  had  been  the  Soman  amphitheatre,  the  stake,  or  the  rack  of  the  Inquisition^ 
le  would  have  gone  with  equal  willingness.  Whatever  suffering  evil  men  in  their 
recklessness  thought  fit  to  inflict,  he  was  ready  for  it.  And  we,  always  determined  in  the 
way  of  duty,  service,  honour,  and  reward,  must  also  be  ready  for  all  that  comes  in  the  way 
of  pain.  Notice  the  force  of  "  endure,"  the  verb  corresponding  to  the  substantive  iiiran6vri. 
Not  only  did  he  bear  the  cross  as  a  Stoic  might  have  done,  in  grim  silence,  but  with 
the  veritable  patience  of  one  testifying  for  God.  In  all  his  bearing  there  was  love, 
meekness,  and  patient  waiting  for  the  joy  yet  to  be  revealed. 

II.  A  SHAMEFUL  REFUTATION.  Christ  might  have  been  put  to  death  cruelly  and  yet 
not  shamefully.  Shame,  according'  to  human  reckoning,  was  added  to  keen  pain.  But 
human  shame  could  not  reach  to  the  height  of  our  Leader's  magnanimity.  He  bad  too 
clear  a  view  of  everything  to  be  affected  by  mere  reputation.  The  cross  is  not  shameful 
to  us.  Things  reckoned  shameful  are  largely  so  according  to  custom.  What  would  be 
shameful  in  one  age  and  country  has  no  such  repute  in  another  age  and  country. 
Hence,  while  we  can  at  once  see  the  pain  of  the  cross,  we  cannot  see  the  shame.  But 
we  can  understand  that  there  would  be  a  shame  when  we  recollect  that  it  has  even  been 
counted  a  privilege  to  die  by  the  headsman's  axe,  and  not  by  the  hangman's  rope.  And 
this  shame  would  be  a  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  apostles  in  preaching  Chri§t ; 
indeed,  we  know  it  actually  was  so.  It  is  not  the  slightest  difficulty  now,  however. 
How  an  old  Boman  would  have  laughed  to  hear  it  predicted  that  the  cross  of  crucifixion 
could  ever  become  an  ornament  1  What  men  reckoned  shameful  has  proved  the  way  to 
glory  and  exaltation.  He  who  conquered  the  worst  men  could  do  to  him,  might  well 
take  a  place  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

III.  BiTTBE  TAUNTS.  The  shameful  repute  of  hanging  on  a  cross  could  not  but  come 
into  the  reflections  of  Jesus ;  but  alsu  to  the  silent  insult  of  the  cross  itself  was  added 
the  bitterest  words  men  could  find.  But  let  men  do  their  worst.  "  All  things  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  And  surely  of  such  Jesus  is  facile  princeps. 
Taunts  bound  back  from  the  innocent  and  the  God-fearing  as  arrows  do  from  one  who 
is  thoroughly  clad  in  armour. — Y. 

Vers.  5 — 10, — Ood's  discipline  of  his  children.  Continually  in  the  New  Testament, 
when  we  get  into  circumstances  of  doubt  and  pain,  we  are  brought  back  to  the  rich 
truth  and  comfort  to  be  found  in  the  fatherhood  of  God.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  an  d/or- 
tiori  argument  is  employed,  if  an  earthly  father,  being  evil,  gives  good  gifts  to  hia 
children,  how  much  more  will  the  heavenly  Father  give  his  Holy  Spirit  to  them  asking 


888  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [cu.  xu.  1— 29. 

him?  And  even  so,  if  an  earthly  father  disciplines  his  children,  making  them  do  and 
bear  many  hard  things  that  they  may  grow  into  a  useful  manhood,  how  much  more 
will  the  heavenly  Father  make  his  children  to  suffer  hardness  that  they  may  be  fit  to 
run  in  the  way  of  his  commandments  hereafter  ? 

I.  How  A  BKisHT  SIDE  MAT  BE  FOUND  TO  suFFEBiNO.  They  Were  evidently  a 
sadly  tried  community  to  whom  this  letter  was  written.  What  shall  be  done  to  comfort 
and  encourage  them  ?  In  the  fourth  verse  there  is  a  very  common  and  not  altogether 
useless  ground  of  comfort  suggested.  Things  are  bad,  no  doubt,  but  they  might  be 
worse.  "  You  have  to  suffer  a  good  deal  in  resisting  sin,  but  not  yet  have  you  resisted 
to  blood."  This  view  of  suffering,  however,  useful  as  it  is  for  the  moment,  soon  leads 
on  to  the  question,  "  Why  should  others  suffer,  or  seem  to  suffer,  more  than  I  ?  "  And 
so  the  writer  quickly  turns  to  bid  his  friends  remember  that  they  are  the  children  of 
God,  and  if  they  only  recollect  their  character  and  destiny,  and  live  under  the  ever- 
deepening  influence  of  this  recollection,  then  they  will  see  that  not!)ing  can  do  them 
abiding  harm.  All  the  comfort  of  the  exhortation  passes  away,  unless  it  mingks  with 
the  assurance  of  the  Spirit  bearing  witness  with  our  spirits  that  we  are  indeed  the 
children  of  God.  Suffering  must  cast  an  ever-thickening  gloom  upon  the  heart  unless 
the  hopes  of  a  child  of  God  come  in  to  shed  abroad  an  amply  countervailing  light. 

IL  The  responsibility  that  suffebinq  lays  upon  us.  It  is  a  serious  thing 
for  one  who  reckons  himself  a  Christian  to  pass  through  suffering  and  difi&oulty.  He 
is  expected  to  be  the  better  for  it  all.  If  he  uses  it  aright,  according  to  the  wisdom 
communicated  from  above,  then  assuredly  he  will  emerge  from  it  with  a  purified  heart 
and  a  clearer  spiritual  vision.  The  first  rule  is  that  suffering  is  to  be  escaped  if  possible. 
But  if  it  cannot  be  escaped,  it  must  not  merely  he  endured.  It  must  be  reeeived  as  an 
agent  of  God's  will  in  making  us  better  and  more  capable  children.  Hence  the  plain 
truth  that  we  shall  be  held  responsible  for  all  we  have  had  in  the  way  of  pain. 

III.  The  use  God  can  make  of  human  wickedness.  Those  here  sought  to  be 
comforted  were  evidently  suffering  persecution.  This  is  distinctly  suggested  in  the 
expression  "striving  against  sin."  And  thus  it  is  made  manifest  how  the  discipline 
comes  in.  Much  suffering  could  have  been  escaped  by  yielding  to  the  temptation  of 
compromise,  or  of  total  retreat  from  the  Christian's  position.  Little  do  the  enemies  of 
Christ  imagine  the  service  they  render  his  true  people  by  the  demonstrations  of  hostility. 
We  are  forced  to  a  firmer  grasp  of  truth  and  to  ft  more  penetrating  and  exact  estimate 
of  our  spiritual  possessions. — Y. 

Ver.  11, — The  fruit  of  discipline.  L  A  lebson  from  boyish  experience.  The 
discipline  of  earthly  parents,  while  we  are  passing  through  it,  is  all  pain  and  no 
pleasure.  Even  when  exercised  with  wisdom  and  consideration,  the  discipline  must  be 
painful ;  and  in  many  instances  there  is  a  needless  harshness  which  increases  the  pain. 
Parents  are  apt  to  take  the  course  of  discipline  which  gives  them  the  least  trouble. 
But  even  harsh  and  stern  discipline  is  better  than  indulgence,  infinitely  better  than 
letting  the  child  have  its  own  way.  What  bitter  pain  men  have  had  to  suffer,  because 
as  ehUdren  they  suffered  little  or  none !  The  boy  at  school  finds  it  very  hard  to  be 
kept  at  the  desk  and  the  book,  when  the  sun  shines  bright  through  the  window,  and  he 
hears  the  merry  cry  of  other  lads  at  play;  and  hard  it  must  seem  while  he  is  going 
through  it.  But  it  will  soon  slip  past  and  manhood  come,  and  then  how  glad  he  will 
be  for  knowledge  gained  and  for  facility  in  the  use  of  the  knowledge  I  How  he  will 
then  rejoice  over  the  encircling  rigour  of  the  parental  will ! 

II.  Thk  fallacy  of  present  estimates.  We  are  bad  judges  of  the  experiences 
through  which  we  are  passing.  A  schoolboy's  estimate  of  life  is  amusing  to  listen  to,  hut 
when  we  come  to  reflect  over  it,  the  reflection  makes  us  sad.  For  we  know  well  how 
different  things  nre  from  what  he  thinks  them  to  be.  And  what  changes  there  must  be 
in  his  view  of  life  hefore  it  can  be,  even  approximately,  a  true  one!  Therefore,  when- 
ever we  listen  to  the  confident  and  artless  prattling  of  boyish  ignorance,  let  there  be  in 
it  a  warning  for  us,  a  fresh  admonition  to  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.  What  wo 
know  not  now  and  cannot  know,  we  shall  know  hereafter.  We  must  not  kick  against 
circumstances,  for  they  are  douljtless  the  very  safety  of  our  life  if  we  only  knew  it. 
It  is  the  greatest  folly  to  say  that  a  thing  must  be  had  for  us  because  it  is  painful  and 
■trai^jht  opposite  to  the  strongest  inclinations  of  the  moment, 


ca.  xn.  1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  3a9 

III.  The  DisoiPLims  of  God  need  not  be  obievous.  As  a  general  rule  disciplina 
is  grievous,  always  grieTons  to  the  child.  And  even  to  one  who  is  sure  of  his  position 
of  sonship  towards  God,  discipline  comes  as  a  hard  thing.  But  what  makes  it  hard  is 
that  the  flesh  as  yet  counts  for  more  than  the  spirit.  Only  let  the  spirit  have  free 
course  and  be  glorified,  and  then  joy  will  spring  up  in  the  very  midst  of  the  discipline. 
The  man  who  wrote  this  letter,  whoever  he  was,  had  not  yet  himself  got  out  of  the  era 
of  discipline ;  but  the  grievousness  of  discipline  must  have  been  abundantly  sweetened 
by  all  the  divinely  born  hopes  and  assurances  that  would  throng  into  his  heart.  All 
the  considerations  here  pressed  upon  the  suffering  believer  are  meant  to  bring  joy  in  the 
midst  of  discipline.  Joy  especially  there  should  be  in  the  certainty  of  fruit.  Youthful 
discipline,  however  careful  and  however  successful  in  appearance  for  the  time,  yet  may 
show  little  of  result  in  after  life.  Something  that  no  discipline  can  avert  spoils  the 
manhood.  But  we  have  the  joy  of  feeling  sure  that  Gud's  discipline  of  lu  cannot  fail, 
if  we  work  together  with  him  in  submissive  docility  and  patience, — Y. 

Vers.  14, 15. — The  worst  perils  of  the  Christian  life.  It  may  be  presumed  that  these 
people  suffering  persecution  are  somewhat  discontented  and  murmuring  under  it.  Thus 
persecution  may  become  a  temptation ;  it  may  bulk  so  largely  before  the  eye  as  to  hide 
far  worse  perils.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  the  writer  had  the  Beatitudes  in  mind. 
He  has  been  seeking  to  illustrate  the  blessedness  of  those  who  are  persecuted  for 
righteousness'  sake.  And  now  in  ver.  14  he  urges  not  to  lose  the  blessedness  of  the 
peacemaker,  and  the  blessedness  of  those  who  are  made  able  to  look  on  God.  There  are 
four  important  counsels  in  these  two  verses. 

I.  The  diligent  pueshit  of  peace.  This  is  a  recommendation  both  to  the  indi- 
vidual and  the  Church.  The  maltreated  man  is  very  likely  to  have  4  settled  feeling  of 
anger  against  the  man  who  maltreats  him.  That  we  should  behave  rightly  under 
suffering  is  far  more  important  than  that  we  should  escape  suffering.  Notice  the  inten- 
sive force  of  the  verb.  The  same  verb  is  used  to  signify  persecution.  The  same  pur- 
suing energy  that  persecutors  employed  against  Christians  was  to  be  employed  by 
Christians  themselves  in  preserving  a  feeling  of  settL  d  peace  towards  the  persecutors. 
Animosity  and  irritation  towards  others,  however  justified  it  may  seem  by  their  conduct, 
will  destroy  all  peace  in  our  own  hearts.  Even  when  the  necessities  of  duty  bring  us 
into  marked  controversy  with  others,  we  must  in  the  very  height  of  the  dispute  show 
that  our  aim  is  concord,  not  discord. 

IL  The  equally  diligent  pdbsott  of  holiness.  Holiness  here  may  be  taken 
as  the  equivalent  of  what  is  elsewhere  called  purity  of  heart.  That  is  the  blessedness 
of  the  pure  in  heart  that  they  are  made  able  to  look  on  God.  Our  right  state  towards 
all  men  is  to  have  perfectly  peaceful  inclinations  towards  them,  and  doing  everything 
that  shall  incline  them  to  reciprocate  the  peace.  Our  right  state  towards  God  is  to 
have  a  heart  perfectly  consecrated  to  him.  And  the  diligent  pursuit  of  peace  and 
holiness  must  go  together.  You  cannot  follow  the  one  without  following  tba  other. 
That  can  be  no  true  peace  towards  man  which  is  gotten  by  compromising  our  position 
towards  God.  Nor  can  that  be  true  holiness  which  is  very  profuse  in  services  to  God 
and  yet  leaves  room  to  indulge  animosities  toward  man. 

III.  Watchfulness  to  make  full  use  of  the  Divine  grace.  We  must  not 
lose  the  loving  favour  of  God.  We  must  keep  in  such  paths  of  spiritual  courage  and 
enterprise  as  will  preserve  to  us  continually  his  loving  smile.  What  shall  we  be  if  God 
be  ao'ainst  us  ?  It  will  be  a  poor  compensation  to  escape  trial,  if  at  the  same  time  wu. 
miss  God's  help  out  of  our  life. 

IV.  Watchfulness  to  stop  thb  beoinnings  or  Church  mischief.  Watch  the 
Christian  community  as  you  would  watch  a  garden.  You  have  not  only  to  nourisl 
what  has  been  planted  so  that  it  may  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness, 
but  you  must  watch  against  the  entrance  of  noxious  plants.  In  a  larp;e  garden  some- 
thing of  this  kind  may  easily  make  headway  unless  there  be  the  most  vigilant  eye  upon 
it,    All  mischief  must  be  stopped  in  the  very  beginning,  if  possible. — Y, 

Vers.  16,  17. — Esau — o  warning.  Esau  is  an  excellent  example  of  what  serious 
results  may  come  out  of  sheer  thoughtlessness.  There  were  special  reasons  why  Esau 
(hould  be  a  careful,  thoughtful,  prudent  man.    Thoughtfulness  is  the  need  of  every  man 


390  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xn.  1—29. 

in  such  a  maze  as  life  is  continually  tending  to  become,  but  the  position  of  some  makes 
thougbtfulness  a  special  duty.  So  it  was  with  Esau.  He  had  the  birthright.  To  him 
it  specially  belonged  to  continue  and  increase  the  prosperity  and  credit  of  the  family. 
Yet  for  the  sake  of  a  single  meal,  because  in  his  hunger  he  could  not  wait  a  little,  he 
sold  his  birthright.  He  did,  indeed,  make  a  pretext  of  saying  as  it  were,  "  What  shall 
it  profit  me  to  keep  my  birthright  and  lose  my  life?"  but  this  very  question  showed 
that  he  had  never  made  a  careful  estimate  of  his  privileges  and  responsibilities.  The 
i'oD.y  of  Esau's  conduct  is  plain  enough  to  us ;  woidd  that  we  could  see  as  clearly  how 
often  it  is  reproduced  in  the  reckless,  self-destouctive  conduct  of  those  to  whom  belocgf 
the  birthright  of  children  of  Godl 

I.  OuB  FBEQXTENT  THOUGHTLESSNESS  AS  TO  OUB  POSITION.  Esau  IS  Called  a  profane 
person.  A  profane  person  is  one  who  treats  sacred  things  as  if  they  were  common. 
Esau  was  himself  a  sacred  person  as  the  firstborn,  but  the  thought  of  his  peculiar 
position  never  seems  to  have  gained  real  entrance  to  his  mind.  And  so  it  too  often  is 
with  us.  The  serious  and  sublimer  side  of  life,  the  side  that  connects  us  with  God, 
Christ,  and  eternity,  is  too  seldom  in  our  minds.  Too  seldom !  Why,  that  is  too  com- 
plimentary a  word  as  regards  many ;  they  never  seem  to  think  of  this  side  of  life  at  all. 
And  assuredly  none  of  us  thinks  of  it  as  we  ought  to  do.  We  are  more  valuable  in  the 
eyes  of  God  than  we  are  in  our  own.  God  looks  on  each  one  of  us  as  on  a  pearl  of 
great  price,  but  we  view  the  pearl  of  our  position  with  only  swinish  eyes. 

II.  The  ultimate  BEsniiT  op  that  thoughtlessness.  Man  is  made  to  think, 
and  think  deeply,  on  his  position,  duties,  and  destiny ;  and  to  this  actual  course  of  reflec- 
tion he  is  driven  sooner  or  later.  Man  cannot  escape  the  necessities  inherent  in  his 
nature.  The  hint  here,  in  this  parallel  from  Esau,  is  that  these  reflections  may  come 
too  late.  Omnipotence  cannot  bring  back  the  past.  If  you  have  failed  to  sow  in  the 
spring,  you  cannot  reap  in  the  autumn.  Nor  will  you  be  able  to  escape  the  bitterness 
of  reflecting  that  this  absence  of  the  proper  harvest  is  your  own  fault.  Thousands  in 
the  earlier  years  of  life  do  as  Esau  did.  They  barter  the  joys  of  self-denial  and  holy 
aspiration  for  self-indulgence.  The  fragrance  of  worldly  pleasures  rises  into  their 
nostrils,  and  they  never  stop  to  consider  the  height  and  depth,  the  breadth  and  length, 
of  a  life  redeemed  by  Christ  and  sanctified  by  his  Holy  Spirit.  Then,  when  the  passing 
pleasure  is  pttst  and  gone,  they  come  face  to  face  with  eternal  Tealities,  and  they  are  not 
ready  for  them.  Yet  the  parallel  with  Esau  mu-st  not  be  pushed  too  far.  He  found  no 
place  of  repentance  so  far  as  the  earthly  birthright  was  concerned.  But  that  is  not  to 
say  that  Esau  has  lost  his  share  in  spiritual  and  eternal  realities.  Isaac  could  not  give 
him  the  blessing  that  belonged  to  another.  As  long  as  he  sought  the  earthly  blessing 
ho  might  well  seek  with  tears,  and  seek  in  vain.  Along  with  the  folly,  suffering,  and 
futile  regrets  of  Esau  we  must  take  the  folly,  suffering,  and  profitable  repentance  of  the 
prodigal  in  the  parable. — Y. 

Vers.  18 — 24. — Sinai  and  Zion.  Esau  bewailed  his  lost  birthright,  and  yet  to  what 
did  that  birthright  lead  the  posterity  of  him  who  gained  it?  See  the  posterity  of 
Jacob  gathered  round  the  terrible  mountain  in  the  wilderness.  The  posterity  of  Esau 
might  perhaps  congratulate  themselves  on  having  escaped  the  constraints  of  Jehovah 
that  fell  so  sorely  on  the  kindred  children  of  Jacob.  If,  then,  this  birthright,  over  the 
foolish  casting  away  of  which  Esau  shed  such  copious  and  fruitless  tears,  led  to  such 
terrible  experiences,  how  should  we  guard  the  privilege  that  brings  us,  not  to  Sinai, 
but  Zion,  with  all  its  durable  attractions  and  companionships  ?  Such  seems  to  be  the 
thought  underlying  the  exhibition  of  these  two  contrasted  pictures. 

I.  The  same  God  manifests  his  pkbsenob  in  two  different  ways.  Zion  is 
very  different  from  Siuai,  but  for  all  that  Sinai  must  precede  Zion.  This,  it  may  be 
said,  is  not  true  to  every  individual  experience.  Not  true,  perhaps,  in  strict  sequence  of 
time ;  but  every  human  life  must  know  something  of  Sinai  if  it  would  know  Zion  to  the 
full.  Every  human  being  must  know  something  of  the  Law  coming  by  Moses,  as  well 
as  the  grace  and  truth  coming  by  Jesus  Christ.  Let  no  complaint  be  made. that 
preachers  impose  on  the  ignorant  and  the  timid  by  fictitious  and  exaggerated  terrors. 
Jehovah  is  none  the  less  God  of  Sinai  because  since  then  he  has  become  God  of  Zion. 

II.  Sinai  is  meant  fob  the  passing  experience,  Zion  fob  the  permanent  one. 
The  children  of  Israel  came  to  Sinai  for  a  very  short  time.    God's  auger  with  the 


OH.  xn.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HBBREWa  891 

wicked  abides— he  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day — ^but  it  would  be  clean  against 
his  character  as  a  pitiful  and  long-sufTering  God  to  have  Sinai  contimially  involved  in 
smoking  flame  and  roaring  tempest.  Sinai  is  Qod's  appointed  halting-place  for  us 
somewhere  in  the  solemn  and  arduous  journey  of  life.  Zioa  is  the  goal  of  the  journey. 
Many  of  those  who  trembled  along  with  Moses  at  the  literal  Sinai  have  surely  bem 
gathered  with  Moses  since  upon  the  heavenly  Zion. 

III.  Note  points  ik  the  contbast.  Sinai  was  in  the  vnlderness,  and  there  is  some 
reason  to  suppose  that  it  has  now  more  of  the  wilderness  than  ever,  that  its  desolation 
is  greater  than  when  the  children  of  Israel  camped  there.  Zion  was  in  the  citi/.  Men 
lived  about  it  all  their  lives.  He  who  cornea  to  Zion  comes  to  an  abiding  company. 
The  earthly  Jerusalem  where  the  ark  dwells,  typifies  that  heavenly  Jerusalem  where 
the  God  of  the  ark  really  dwells.  Thence  the  messengers  of  God  issue  forth  on  their 
errands  of  righteousness  and  mercy,  and  thither  they  return  to  resume  the  service  of 
the  higher,  holier  sphere.  At  Sinai  just  men,  struggling  with  their  sense  of  sin,  were 
made  to  feel  their  imperfection.  On  Zion  just  men  are  gathered  in  their  purity  of  heart 
and  spiritual  completeness,  enabled  for  ever  to  look  on  the  face  of  God.  The  two  con- 
trasted pictures  must  not  be  pushed  too  much  into  detail.  Let  the  imagination  rather 
try  to  group  each  as  a  whole.  The  passage  suggests  two  frameworks,  in  one  of  which 
we  may  gather  the  peculiarities  of  the  old  covenant,  and  in  the  other  the  peculiarities 
of  the  new. — ^Y. 

Ver.  27. — 2^  purpose  of  the  shakings.  This  chapter,  which  has  been  full  of  comfort- 
ing elements,  rises  to  the  highest  kind  of  comfort  at  the  close — that  to  be  drawn  by 
the  believing  heart  from  the  conviction  that  stable  good  is  coming  out  of  all  present 
vicissitudes.  Terrible  as  was  the  shaking  at  Sinai,  that  only  affected  an  infinitesimal 
part  of  the  crust  of  the  earth  for  a  short  time.  There  remains  a  far  more  terrible  and 
searching  experience.  The  shaking  at  Sinai  was  only  a  sign  of  Jehovah's  power,  but 
the  shaking  yet  to  come  will  be  more  than  a  sign ;  it  will  bring  a  result  the  most 
desirable  of  any  we  can  imagine.  Heaven  and  earth  will  be  shaken,  so  that  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  place  of  Jehovah's  glory  and  the  abode  of  his  saints,  may  at 
last  appear  in  all  its  strength  and  all  the  excellency  of  its  beauty.  The  alternate  rising 
and  falling — the  one  generation  going  and  the  other  coming — of  the  present  scheme 
of  things  will  cease.  The  things  of  eternity  will  then  be  finally  freed  from  all  the 
weights  and  encumbrances  of  time,  sin,  and  death. 

I.  This  obeat  oatastbophe  of  the  futube.  Vain  to  speculate  on  the  mode  of 
its  happening.  Far  more  important  to  be  well  assured  that  this  catastrophe  is  coming, 
and  to  rejoice  that  something  inexpressibly  glorious  and  beautiful  lies  beyond.  Only 
then  will  the  perfect  men  in  Christ  Jesus  be  constituted  into  the  perfect  society. 
Only  some  such  revolution  in  human  afiairs  as  is  here  indicated  can  set  things  right 
finally  and  completely.  Good  and  evil  are  not  to  be  for  ever  mingled.  The  Lord  who 
has  so  often  shaken  the  earth  will  shake  both  earth  and  heaven..  Then  it  will  be  seen 
who  is  on  the  rock  and  who  on  the  sand,  who  has  built  gold  and  silver  and  precious 
■tones,  and  who  wood,  hay,  and  stubble. 

II.  Things  which  can  be  shaken  ought  to  be  shaken.  Shaken  in  order  that 
they  may  be  utterly  removed  from  us.  Each  of  the  elect  and  glorified  now  within  the 
walls  of  the  new  Jerusalem  is  there  because  he  has  known  within  his  own  experience 
what  it  is  for  both  earth  and  heaven  to  be  shaken.  The  whole  process  of  life  is  but 
a  continual  loosening  and  steady  progress  towards  the  dissolution  of  all  the  corruptible 
frame.  We  are  in  the  hands  of  both  Builder  and  Destroyer.  The  spiritual  life  is 
strengthened  and  enriched,  while  the  natural  is  weakened  and  diminished.  That  it 
is  so  shows  that  it  ought  to  be  so.  All  bitter  and  trying  experiences  only  bring  the 
weak  and  unwoi'thy  to  the  surface  and  cast  it  out.  Like  the  corn  placed  in  the  ground, 
we  must  be  ready  to  decay  and  die ;  that  even  as  it  presently  breaks  forth  to  the  air  and 
sunlight,  so  we  may  break  away  from  our  limitation  and  darkness  into  a  sinless  and 
sorrowless  eternity.  This  truth  may  be  illustrated  (1)  from  the  physical  frame; 
(2)  from  the  present  mixed  relations  of  life. 

III.  A  very  practical  question  is—  Have  we  experience  of  the  unshaken  thinos? 
Do  we  know  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  our  only  secure  refuge  amid  the  tempests 
and  earthquakes  of  our  life  ?    Can  we  look  away  through  vicissitudes  of  time  and  sense, 


S92 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [ch.  xui.  1— 25. 


and  feel  that  far  out  of  their  reach  is  a  kingdom  of  eternal  life,  which  the  Lord  fills  with 
his  life  and  love  and  power?    Our  citizenship  must  be  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem. — Y. 

Ver.  28. — The  unshaken  kingdom.  1.  The  carnai,  hopes  op  Isbael.  We  know 
well  from  the  Gospels  what  notions  the  disciples  liad  of  a  visible  kingdom,  with  its 
centre  of  jiower  and  glory  in  the  earthly  Jerusalem.  It  was  a  dominating  thought 
among  them  down  lo  the  very  departure  of  their  master.  They  greeted  him,  getting 
ready  for  his  ascension,  with  the  inquiry  whether  he  was  ahnut  to  restore  the  kingdom 
to  Israel.  And  we  may  well  suppose  that  among  all  the  Hebrew  Christians  this  hope 
prevailed  to  the  last.  A  spiritual  and  invisible  kingdom  could  not  all  at  once  become 
manifest.  And  as  a  visible  kingdom  retreated  further  and  further  into  the  region  of 
improbabilities,  this  would  add  another  trial  to  whatever  came  in  the  way  of  personal 
suffering.  They  had  prayed  the  praj  er,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  but  prayed  it  too  much 
after  their  own  &iicie8.  And  now  to  their  sorrowing  eyes  it  looked  a  kingdom  clean 
going  for  ever. 

II.  The  cx)Nteabted  object  or  evert  Christian's  hope.  The  writer  has  just 
been  dividing  existing  things  into  the  shaken  and  the  unshaken.  Naturally,  therefore, 
considering  what  the  hopes  of  Hebrew  Christians  had  been,  there  follows  a  reference 
to  an  unshaken  kingdom.  The  true  Israelite  does  well  to  keep  his  thoughts  fixed  on 
a  kingdom.  But  let  hini  be  careful  not  to  neglect  the  reality  for  the  phantom.  God 
desires  a  kingdom  based  on  something  more  than  material  force,  for  such  kingdoms  can 
only  got  built  up  through  ambition,  cruelty,  violence,  and  injustice.  God  has  promised 
a  kingdom,  and  his  promise  cannot  be  broken;  but  it  must  be  kept  in  his  own  way. 
That  kingdom  has  its  foundation  in  the  accepted  claim  and  power  of  Christ  over  the 
individual  human  heart.  We  may  say  of  that  kingdom  what  Paul  says  of  the  love  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,  "  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  .  .  .  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  come,  .  .  .  nor  any  other  creature,  should  be  able  to  shake  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  It  cometh  without  observation ;  the  inspection  of  the  natural  eye  will 
never  discern  it ;  the  assaults  of  the  natural  man  operate  in  another  realm  altogether. 

III.  The  effect  of  this  eeckivbd  kingdom.  "Let  us  have  grace,"  says  the 
V  riter.  What  he  really  means  is,  "  Let  us  show  thankfulness."  Instead  of  sorrowing 
over  a  corrupt  ideal  vanished,  let  us  be  deeply  thankful  for  a  Divine  reality  that  cannot 
pass  away.  The  old  mode  of  serving  God  has  gone  for  ever.  The  old  temple,  with  its 
altar  and  its  holy  place,  its  sacrifices  and  its  priests,  can  never  be  aught  but  a  memory. 
The  foreshadowing  service  of  outward  ceremonies  is  gone,  and  the  true  spiritual  service 
has  for  ever  taken  its  place.  And  recollect  especially  the  same  God  remains.  God 
appointed  the  old  Karpela  (ch.  ix.  1)  from  amid  all  the  terrors  of  Sinai.  And  he  is  not 
the  less  Gk)d  of  Sinai  because  he  appears  in  the  gentler  aspect  of  Father  of  Christ  Jesus. 
Israel's  God  Jehovah  was  a  consuming  fire  upon  occasion,  and  the  same  indignation  and 
power  reside  in  him  still.  Whatever  outward  form  our  Xarpeia  may  take — and  there 
is  much  latitude  in  this — there  must  ever  be  a  deep  feeling  of  personal  unworthiness 
and  of  humblest  adoration.  Outward  pomp  in  itself,  however  costly,  however  laborious, 
cannot  please  the  spiritual  God  ;  if  it  have  no  heart  of  spirituality  and  sincerity,  the 
fires  of  nis  wrath  mil  soon  lick  it  all  away. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFTEB  Xm. 

COKOLCniNO  ExHOBTATIOm. 

As  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  practical  direc- 
tions as  to  couduet  conclude  the  treatise^ 
snoh  as  the  readers  may  be  supposed  to  have 
eapecially  needed.  They  are  urged  to 
evince  and  confirm  the  faith  which  was  the 
lubjectof  ch.  zi.,aDd  to  maintain  their  com- 
[ninioii  with  the  world  invisible  spoken  of 


in  ch.  xii.,  by  attending  especially  to  those 
daily  duties  which  they  might  be  in  danger 
of  forgetting.  By  perseveianoe  in  a  life 
consistent  with  profession  faith  is  not  only 
evidenced,  but-  also  kept  from  faltering.  In 
the  course  of  these  hottations  (vers.  10 — 
13),  being  suggested  by  one  of  them,  there 
is  introduced  a  yet  additional  view  of  the 
meaning  of  the  Levitical  symbolism. 
Ver.    1. — ^Let   brotherly    love    oontiniu. 


OH.  xm.  1—25.]         THE  EPISTLE  fO  THE  HEBREWS. 


393 


*t\ateKipla  does  not  mean  general  philan- 
thropy, but  the  peculiar  love  of  Christians 
to  each  other  as  bretliren ;  "  a  narrower 
sphere  within  the  wider  sphere  of  oTciinj  " 
(DelltzBch) ;  ef.  1.  Pet.  ii.  17,  "  Honour  all 
men,  love  tlie  brotherhood ; "  and  2  Pet.  i.  7, 
where  Christians  are  exhorted  to  add  aydirn 
to  their  <pt\aSf\(pla.  This  grace  of  ^t\a- 
Sf\(pla  they  had  already,  and  had  evinced  it 
by  their  conduct  (cf.  ch.  vi.  10,  etc.) ;  they 
are  only  to  take  care  that  it  continue;  and 
let  them,  among  other  ways,  evince  it  in 
hospitiility  (ver.  2),  and  in  sympathy  with 
the  afflicted  brethren  (ver.  3). 

Ver.  2. — Be  not  forgetfol  to  entertain 
strangers  (or,  of  hospitality):  for  thereby 
some  have  entertained  angels  unawares. 
Allusions  to  this  duty  are  frequent  in  the 
Epistles ;  its  exercise  would  be  of  especial 
importance,  in  those  days  of  persecution, 
towards  scattered  and  destitute  brethren  as 
well  as  towards  missionaries,  though  it  by 
uo  means  appears  that  it  was  mr  ant  to  be 
confined  to  "  them  that  are  of  the  household 
of  faith."  Possibly  some  of  the  wavtring 
Hebrew  Christians  might  be  becoming  less 
ready  to  open  their  doors  to  the  persecuted 
from  fear  of  "  reproach "  in  Jewish  circles. 
The  allusion  of  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  is 
evidently  to  Abraham  and  Lot  ((ien.  xviii. 
and  xix.).  At  any  time  the  visits  even  of 
our  fellow-men  may  be  to  us  as  visits  of 
angels,  as  being  messengers  of  God's  purposes 
for  good,  when  least  expected.  And  especi- 
ally to  be  noted  are  our  Lord's  own  words, 
"  He  that  receiveth  you  reeeiveth  me,"  etc., 
and  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one 
of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have 
done  it  unto  me  "  (Matt.  xxv.  40). 

Ver.  3. — ^Bemember  them  that  are  in 
lionds,  as  bound  with  them;  and  them 
which  suffer  adversity,  as  being  yourselves 
also  in  the  body.  The  Hebrew  readers  have 
been  also  specially  commended  for  their 
past  sympathy  with  their  impri.'-oned  and 
despoiled  brethren  (oh.  x.  33,  etc.),  having 
been  themselves  also  at  the  same  time  per- 
secuted. Wliether  or  not  sufferers  them- 
selves now,  they  must  not  be  forgetful  of 
those  that  are.  "As  bound  with  them" 
seems  best  taken  as  expressing  the  sym- 
pathy of  one  member  with  another  (cf.  ch. 
X.  33,  34  and  1  Cor.  xii.  26,  "  If  one  mem- 
ber suffer,"  etc.).  "As  being  yourselves," 
etc.,  reminds  them  that  they  are  still  in  the 
fiesh,  and  so  not  only  on  this  account  bound 
to  sympathize,  but  also  liable  themselves  at 
any  time  to  the  like  afflictions.  Exhorta- 
tions to  personal  purity  and  to  contentedness 
follow  next.  Of  the  need,  and  prominence 
in  the  Epistles,  of  warnings  against  im- 
purity see  what  was  said  on  ayia(rij,6ii  (ch. 
xii.  14).  St.  Puid  is  given  to  couple  cove- 
toiuneM  and  uncleanness  toget>^er  in  h^'s 


warnings,  as  cognate  sins,  and  alike  incom- 
patible with  the  kingdom  of  God  (cf. 
1  Cor.  v.  10,  11 ;  vi,  9,  etc.  ;  Eph.  v.  3,  6; 
Col.  Hi.  .5).  Greediness,  or  inordinate  desire 
(irKeove^la),  may  be  for  sensual  indulgence 
or  for  wealth — the  same  word  is  used  in 
botli  senses ;  and  such  irXeove^ia,  whatever 
its  object,  is  fatal  to  the  spiritual  life.  So 
here,  after  a  warning  against  impurity,  comes 
a  like  one  against  covetousness. 

Ver.  4. — Marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  and 
the  bed  nndefiled:  hut  whoremongers  and 
adulterers  God  will  judge.  So  in  the  A.V. 
the  first  clause  of  this  verse,  which  is  taken 
as  an  assertion,  the  copnla  eart  being  under- 
stood. So  it  is  also  taken  by  Chrysostom 
and  other  ancients.  If  so,  it  is  a  declaration, 
interposed  among  hortations,  of  the  honour- 
ableness  of  the  "  estate  of  matrimony,"  with 
the  hortatory  purpose  of  suggesting  this 
"remedy  against  sin  "  (as  in  1  Cor.  vii.  9),  or 
as  a  protest  against  false  asceticism,  such  as 
is  alluded  to  in  1  Tim.  iv.  3,  "forbiilding  to 
marry."  And  certainly  the  expression, 
il/uos  6  7(J;nos,  taken  by  ilself,  would  most 
naturally  have  this  meaning.  But  most 
modern  commentators  understand  it  as  an 
exhortation,  supplying  eo-tu;  and  this  for 
the  following  cogent  reasons:  it  occurs  in 
the  midst  of  a  series  of  exhortations,  and  is 
therefore  more  likely  to  be  one ;  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  understand  the  connected  clause, 
"and  the  bed  undefiled  (ical  ri  Koirri  afiiavros)," 
as  a  statement;  and  the  exactly  similar 
phrase  in  ver.  5,  A(pi\iipyvpos  6  rpdiros,  seems 
evidently  hortatory.  Hence  we  take  it  to 
mean  "  Let  marriage  be  tI/uos  in  ma-iv." 
Two  questions  remain — that  of  the  import 
of  Ti/uos,  and  whether  irSffiy  is  masculine  or 
neuter.  Tifuos  elsewhere,  when  applied  to 
persons,  means  "held  in  honour"  (as  in 
Acts  V.  34,  of  Gamaliel) ;  when  applied  to 
things,  it  means  "precious"  (as  in  1  Cor. 
iii.  12;  Rev.  xvii.  4;  xviii,  12,  16;  xxi.  19, 
of  precious  stones ;  in  1  Pet.  i.  19,  of  the 
blno  J  of  the  Lamb ;  2  Pet.  i.  4,  of  promises ; 
Acts  XX.  24,  of  "  my  own  life ;  "  Jas.  v.  7, 
of  the  fjuit  of  the  earth).  Bengel  explains 
thus :  "  Cselibes,  quibus  periculum  scorta- 
tionis  imminet,  hurlatur  ut  matrimonium 
contrahant,  tanquam  pretiosum  quiddam 
agnoscentes,  ejusque  bono  digne  utantur. 
Conf,  1  Thess.  iv.  4."  And,  taking  mfftv 
as  masculine,  he  explains  further :  "  Omnes- 
que  debent  matrimonium  magni  faoere,  ut, 
si  quis  eo  ipse  non  utatur,  alios  tamen  non 
prohibeat."  According  to  this  view  the 
first  clause  is  an  injunction  to  all  to  appre- 
ciate marriage,  the  second  warns  those  that 
are  married  against  any  violation  of  the 
bond:  "Tl/tiot  ya/ios  antitheton  ad  scorta- 
tores,  Koirr)  a/ilavTos  ad  adulteros  "  (Bengel) 
But  the  more  natural,  and  the  usual,  mean- 
ing of  the  common  expression  4r  vSrti'  ii 


394 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xra.  1— 25 


"in  all  things,"  not  "among  all  persons" 
(of.  infra,  ver.  18;  also  Col.  i.  18;  Titus 
ii.  9 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  5).  If  so 
here,  lifuos  i  ydfios  must  be  taken  ralher  as 
an  injunction  with  respect  to  the  sanctity  of 
marriage  when  contracted  :  "  Let  it  be  held 
in  I  onour  in  all  respects ;  in  all  ways  rever- 
ently regarded  as  a  holy  bond ; "  the  suo- 
CLcding  clause,  ^  koItti  a/xtavros,  being  a 
furthtr  explication  of  the  sime  idea  (cf. 
I  Thess.  iv.  i,  "  That  every  one  of  you  sliould 
know  how  to  possess  his  own  vessel  [meaning, 
probably,  as  seems  to  be  required  by  the  verb 
KrSffflai,  'get  to  liimself  his  own  wife']  in 
sanctifioutiou  and  hnnour  {iv  ayiaff/i^  /cal 
TL/iri) ;  "  where  Ij/  Ti/up  may  express  tiie  same 
Idea  as  rt/jnos  in  the  text).  In  tlie  conclusion 
of  the  verse  "  for "  (yap)  suits  the  drift  of 
tlie  sentence  as  above  understood,  and  is 
considered  to  be  su|iported  better  than 
"  but"  (5e)  of  the  Textus  iieoeplus.  Observe, 
lastly,  tliat,  in  "God  will  judge,"  "God" 
IS  empliatic,  being  placed  last.  Though 
the  liind  of  sin  spoken  of  is  lighlly  regarded 
among  men,  and  may  escape  di  tection  or 
punishment  now,  yet  certainly  God  will 
judge  it  (cf.  1  Thess.  iv.  6,  "  God  is  the 
Avenger  of  all  such,  as  we  have  also  fore- 
warned you  and  testified ; "  and  1  Cor.  vi. 
9,  where  fornicators  and  adulterrrs  are  in- 
cluded among  those  about  whom  Christians 
are  not  to  deceive  themselves,  as  though 
they  would  "  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  "). 

Ver.  5. — Let  your  conversation  (i.e.  mari- 
ner of  life,  or  disposition)  be  without  cove- 
tousness ;  be  content  with  such  things  as  ye 
have :  for  he  (auros,  emphatic)  hath  said,  I 
will  never  (i.e.  in  no  wise)  leave  thee,  neither 
will  I  ever  forsake  thee.  The  reference  seems 
to  be  to  Dent.  xxxi.  6,  Kiptos  i  @e6s  <rov  .  .  . 
oSre  fvfj  (T€  dvf,  oUre  fi-i]  as  iyKaTaKitrji,  the 
same  assurance  being  repeated  in  ver,  8. 
But  similar  promises  occur  elsewhere  in  the 
Old  Testament  (see  Gen.  xxviii.  15 ;  Josh. 
i.  5;  1  Ohron.  xxviii.  20;  Isa.  xli.  17;  "Est 
igitur  ihstar  adagii  diviui,"  Bengel). 

Ver.  6.— So  that  we  may  boldly  say,  The 
Lord  is  my  Helper,  and  I  will  not  fear  what 
man  shall  do  unto  me ;  rather,  I  will  not 
fear :  what  shall  man  do  unto  me  t  The 
quotation  is  from  Ps.  cxviii.  6. 

The  memory  of  their  former  pastors  who 
had  finished  their  course  is  next  urged  upon 
the  readers  as  an  encouragement  to  perse- 
verance in  the  life  of  faith. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Remember  your  leaders  (twv 
riyou/xhaiv  v/uip,  wrongly  rendered  in  the 
A.V.,  "  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you ; " 
for  the  reference  is  to  departed  chiefs.  U'he 
word  is  similarly  used  by  St.  Luke  (see 
Luke  xxii.  26 ;  Acts  xv.  22 ;  also  below, 
ver.  17  and  ver.  24).  St.  Paul,  with  a,  like 
meaning,  calls  the  rulers  of  the  Church  oi 


tcpoiaTiiiivoi :  see  Som.  xii.  8 ;  1  Thess.  v. 
12 ;  1  Tim.  v.  17),  who  spake  to  you  the 
Word  of  Ood ;  of  whose  conversation  (i.e. 
course  of  life,  avatTTpo^rts),  considering  the 
end  (or  issue,  eicPcurtp),  imitate  their  faith, 
Jesus  Christ  is  yesterday  and  to-day  the  same, 
and  for  ever.    This  allusion  to  departed 
leaders  shows  the  comparatively  late  date 
of  the  Epistle.      Those  who  had  died  ai 
martyrs,  and  lience,  having  a  peculiar  halo 
round  them  in  the  issue  of  their  lives,  may 
be  supposed  to  be  especially  refei  red  to ;  such 
as  Stephen  the  protomartyr  at  Jerusalem, 
James   the  son  of  Zebedee,  and  possibly 
James  the  Just,  the  acknowledged  leader 
of  the  Jewish  Christians.     It  may  be  that 
Peter,  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision,  had 
also  suffered    before    the    writing   of   the 
Epistle.    This  supposition,  however,  which 
would  involve  a  date  for  the  Epistle  after 
St.  Paul's  death  also,  is  by  no  means  neces- 
sary.    Others,  too,  may  be  alluded  to  of 
whom  we  have  no  record,  but  whose  memory 
would  be  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  readers. 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  martyrs  only  are 
intended.      Others  also  who  had  died  in 
peace,  and  whose  end   had  been  blessed, 
might  be  pointed  to  as  models  for  the  imita- 
tion of  survivors.    Ver.  8  must  be  taken  as 
a  distinct    appended  sentence,  the  watch- 
word on  which  the  preceding  exhortation  is 
based.    Its  drift  is  that,  though  successive 
generations  pass  away,  Jesus  Christ  remains 
the  same — the  Sa\  lour  of  the  living  as  well 
as  of  the  departed,  and  tlie  Saviour  of  all 
to  the  end  of  time.     It  may  be  here  ob- 
served that,  though  his  eternal  Deity  is  not 
distinctly  expressed — for  "  yesterday  "  does 
not  of  necessity  reach  back  to  past  eternity — 
yet  tie  sentence  can  hardly  be  taken  as  nut 
implying  it.    For  his  unchangeableness  is 
contrasted  with  the  changing  generations  of 
men,  as  is  that  of  Jehovah  in  the  Old  Tes- 
tament  (e.g.  in  Fs.  xo.  2 — 4),  and  surely 
such  language  would  not  have  been  used  of 
any  but  a  Divine  Being. 

Ver.  9. — ^Be  not  carried  away  (so,  ac- 
cording to  the  best  authorities,  rather 
than  carried  about)  by  divers  and  strange 
doctrines.  For  it  is  a  good  thing  that  the 
heart  be  established  with  grace;  not  with 
meats,  in  which  they  that  were  occupied 
(literally,  that  loalked)  were  not  profited. 
From  the  exhortation  to  imitate  the  faith  of 
the  departed  leaders,  the  transition  is  na- 
tural to  warnings  against  being  carried  away 
from  it  by  new  teachings.  The  faith,  which 
was  their  laith,  remains  unchanged,  as  Jesus 
Christ  remains  unchanged  ;  why,  then,  these 
doctrines,  new  and  strange  (of.  1  Cor.  iii. 
11 :  Gal.  i.  6—10)?  What  these  doctrines 
were  is  not  shown,  except  so  far  as  is  inti- 
mated by  the  word  Spaiiaaiv  ("meats"), 
which  reminds  us  at  once  of  similar  warn- 


OH.  XIII.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


395 


ings  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  (of.  Eom.  xiv.  2, 
14,  21;  Ool.  ii.  8,  16—23;  1  Tim.  iv.  3). 
These  passnges  seem  to  refer  in  the  first 
place  to  purely  Jewish  distinctions,  still 
held  to  by  Jewish  Christians,  between  clean 
and  uncleiin  or  polluted  meats ;  and  further 
to  a  new  kind  of  asceticism,  not  found  in 
the  Old  Testament,  but  based  probably  on 
notions  of  the  impurity  of  matter,  which 
led  to  entire  abstention  from  flesh  or  wine, 
and  also  in  some  (1  Tim.  iv.  3)  fiom  mar- 
riage ;  also,  as  appears  from  the  passage  in 
Culossians,  a  false  philosophy  about  angels 
and  the  spiritual  world.  We  may  perceive 
in  these  allusions  the  germs  at  least  of  later 
Gnostic  heresies,  such  as  found  (as  that  of 
the  Ebionites)  their  first  congenial  soil  in 
Jewish  circles ;  Oriental  theobopliy,or  neo- 
Platonic  philosophy,  being  supposed  to  have 
been  engrafted  on  Jewish  modes  of  thought. 
Some,  misled  by  what  is  said  in  ver.  10,  see 
in  the  word  ^p^itatrtv  an  allusion  to  those 
sacrifices  of  the  Law  which  were  eaten  by 
the  worshippers,  against  any  fancied  obliga- 
tion to  partiike  in  which  the  readers  are 
supposed  to  be  warned.  But  the  word  is 
never  so  applied  in  the  Old  Testament  or 
the  New  (see  above,  ch.  ix.  10;  Lev.  xi. 
34;  1  Mace.  i.  16;  Eom.  xiv.  15,  20,  31; 
1  Cor.  vi.  13;  viii.  8,  13);  nor  would  such 
error  be  likely  to  be  classed  among  "strange 
doctrines."  The  drift  of  the  warning  is 
that  the  religion  of  tlie  gospel  does  not 
consist  in  any  of  these  notions  or  observ- 
ances, the  supposed  importance  of  meats 
being  specially  noted,  and  that  to  make 
them  its  essence  is  a  misconception  of  its 
wliole  meaning,  and  a  departure  from  the 
faith :  "  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not 
meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness  and  peace 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Bom.  xiv.  17). 

Ver.  10. — We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they 
have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  taber- 
nacle. Here  there  is  a  plain  allusion  to  the 
eating  of  offered  sacrifices.  If,  then,  there- 
was  no  such  allusion  in  the  preceding  verbie, 
what  is  the  connection  of  thought '(  It 
appears  to  be  this :  "Some  would  teach  you 
that  meats  are  of  religious  importance. 
Nay,  but  what  are  meats  to  us  who  have 
Christ  himself  for  our  spiritual  food?  This 
is  our  peculiar  privilege,  not  shared  by 
the  very  priests  of  the  old  dispensation." 
Ttien,  in  ver.  II,  "  That  this  is  so  is  shown 
by  the  very  symbolism  of  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment." Then,  in  ver.  12,  "Let  us,  then, 
be  well  content  to  leave  Judaism  entirely, 
and  cleave  to  Christ  alone."  By  "  those 
that  serve  (KarpeioyTes)  the  tabernacle " 
are  meant  the  priests  of  the  Law,  whose 
service  is,  as  in  former  passages,  referred 
to  as  still  going  on.  It  is  evidently  implied 
that  we  have  the  right  which  they  have  not. 

Ven.  11,  12.— 7oi  the  bodies  of  those 


beasts,  whose  blood  is  brought  into  the 
sanctuary  by  the  High  Priest  for  sin  (i.e. 
as  sin  offerings;  for  this  sense  of  nepl  a/xap- 
tUs,  cf.  ch.  X.  6),are  burned  without  the  camp. 
Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify 
the  people  through  his  own  blood,  suffered 
without  the  gate.  The  allusion  is  to  the 
sin  offerings  on  the  Day  of  Atonement — the 
bullock  for  the  hitch  priest,  and  the  goat 
for  the  people.  Of  the  flesh  of  some  sa- 
crifices— of  ordinary  peace  oft'erings— the 
people  ate,  being  themselves  "partakers  of 
the  altar;"  that  of  ordinary  sin  offerings 
was  partaken  of  by  the  priests  alone:  but 
the  special  sin  offerings  of  the  great  day, 
which  typified  complete  atonement,  and 
the  blood  of  which  alone  was  taken  into 
the  holiest  of  all,  were  consumed  entirely 
by  fire  without  the  camp,  and  not  even  the 
priests  might  eat  of  them  (Lev.  xvi.  27,  etc.). 
This  part  of  the  ceremonial,  not  mentioned 
in  ch.  ix.,  completed  the  symbolism  of 
the  Day  of  Atonement.  It  not  only  typi- 
fied (together  with  the  other  goat  that 
was  set  free)  the  entire  removal  of  sin 
from  the  congregation ;  it  also  signified 
that  the  Law  itself  made  none,  not  even 
the  priests,  partakers  in  such  complete 
atonement.  Christ  fulfilled  the  first  signi- 
ficance of  this  type  by  suffering  "  without 
the  gate ; "  the  Jews,  in  casting  him  out 
from  their  midst,  were  the  unconscious  in- 
struments of  his  BO'  fulfilling  it;  he  thus 
bare  and  took  away  the  sins  of  all  outside 
the  holy  city  which  represented  the  Israel 
of  God.  But  further,  in  him  is  supplied 
what  under  the  Law  was  wanting;  for  of 
him,  the  true  Sin  Offering,  we  may  all  par- 
take :  he  declared  this  himself  when  he 
spoke  of  our  eating  his  flesh  and  drinking 
his  blood — in  which  words  the  mention  of 
the  blood  as  well  as  of  the  flesh  is  pecu- 
liarly signiflcant ;  for  of  the  blood,  which 
was  "  given  upon  the  altar  to  make  atone- 
ment for  sins"  (Lev.  xvii.  11),  none  mit;ht 
in  any  case  under  the  Law  partake ;  but  of 
him  we  even  diink  the  blood,  in  token  that 
atonement  is  completed,  and  that  we  are 
now  full  partakers  in  all  its  benefits.  The 
only  seeming  discrepancy  between  the  type 
and  the  Antitype,  as  above  set  forth,  is  in 
the  order  of  the  different  parts  of  the  old 
ceremonial.  The  sin  offering  was  slain  in  the 
camp  before  it  was  burnt  outside,  whereas 
Christ  fulfilled  both  these  parts  of  the  type 
by  one  act  upon  the  cross  outside.  Again, 
the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  was  taken 
into  the  holy  of  holies  before  the  body  was 
consumed  by  fire  outside,  whereas  Christ 
entered  the  heavenly  sanctuary  "with  his 
own  blood  "  after  he  had  suffered  "  without 
the  gate."  But  the  general  significance  of 
the  symbolism  in  its  several  parts  is  not  thus 
disturbed ;  it  is  viewed  as  a  whole,  and  all 


396 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xiu.  1—26. 


parti  of  it  are  found  to  be  fulfilled.  In 
saying,  "  we  have  an  altar,"  and  implying 
tlint  we  eat  of  it,  the  writer  has  surely  the 
Eucharist  in  view,  though  it  does  not  follow 
that  dviTta<TT'f]ptov  means  definitely  the  table 
on  which  it  is  celebrated.  He  may,  as 
some  explain,  have  especially  in  his  mind 
the  cross  on  which  the  sacrifice  was  once  for 
all  completed  ;  or  be  may  have  had  no  defi- 
nite local  Image  before  him,  seeing  rather 
(as  elsewhere  in  the  Epistle)  in  spiritual 
realities  and  relations  the  counterparts  of 
the  Levitical  symbols.  But  that  the  Holy 
Communion  is  alluded  to,  even  if  it  were  not 
apparent  here,  might  be  concluded  from 
1  Cor.  X.  14 — 22,  where  similaT  phrases  are 
used  with  distinct  reference  to  it.  There 
St.  Paul  is  dissuading  from  participation  in 
heathen  sacrificial  feasts,  as  being  incon- 
sistent with  piirtaking  of  the  Holy  Com- 
munion; and  he  says  in  this  connection, 
"  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh  :  are  not  they 
which  eat  of  the  sacrifices  QaSlovrts  r&s 
Bvirlas)  partakers  of  the  altar  (^koivwvoI  tov 
BuamiTTTiplov)  ? "  It  is  evident  that  "  par- 
takers of  the  Lord's  table"  (ver.  21)  are 
regarded  as  being  thereby  partakers  of  the 
Christian  altar,  of  whioli  mention  is  made 
in  the  text  before  us.  It  may  be  observed 
that  the  use  here  of  the  word  dva-tatrrrtpioi/ 
may  be  held  to  justify — and  this  without 
implying  any  actual  repetition  of  the  one 
accomplished  sacrifice — the  application  of 
the  term  "  altar  "  to  the  table  on  which  the 
Eucharist  is  celebrated,  as  does  I  Cor.  x.  21 
the  term  "  the  Lord's  table."  Both  terms 
were  so  applied  from  very  early  times.  The 
holy  tables  in  our  ohurches  are  altars,  in 
that  on  them  is  continually  commemorated 
and  pleaded  the  one  sacrifice  of  the  cioss, 
and  that  from  them  the  spiritual  food  of  the 
body  and  blood  is  given  to  the  faithful. 

Ver.  13. — Let  ns  go  forth  therefore  nnto 
him  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach. 
By  a  happy  turn  of  thought  Christ's  having 
suffered  without  the  gate  is  viewed  as  repre- 
senting his  exclusion  from  tlie  Jewish  Church 
and  polity,  outside  which  we  are  now  to 
follow  him,  though  we  with  ■  him  be  re- 
proached by  the  Jews  as  outcasts.  There 
may  be  a  tacit  reference,  such  as  Eengel 
sees  in  the  word  ipepovres,  to  our  bearing  our 
cross  after  him. 

Ver.  14. — For  here  we  have  no  abiding 
oity,  but  we  seek  that  which  is  to  come ;  t.e. 
not  Jerusalem,  representing  the  transitory 
dispensation  of  the  Law ;  but  the  "  city  of 
the  living  God,"  which  is  eternal. 

Ver.  15. — Through  him  therefore  let  ns 
offer  the  saorifioe  (or,  a  taerifiee)  of  praise  to 
God  oontinaally,  that  is,  the  fruit  of  lips 
oonfessing  to  his  Name.  @v<rla  aiviaaes  is  the 
designation  in  the  ritual  of  the  Law  of  the 
rolnatary  peaee  offering,  offeree!  by  indivi- 


duals on  occasions  calling  for  special  thanks- 
giving (Lev.  vii.  12).  In  the  psalms  it  is 
used  to  express  generally  [iraise  and  thanks- 
giving (see  Ps.  1.  14,  23  r  cxvi.  17.  ®d(rov  t^ 
©eijf  6v<rlav  alveireais,  KUl  dTr6Sos  Ty  ui/'drrija 
Tckj  eixds  aov,  etc.).  In  virtue  of  their 
partifipation  in  the  true  and  complete  Sin 
Offering,  Christians  may  fulfil  this  part  ot 
the  ancient  symbolism,  not  oocasionally,  but 
"  continually ; "  bringing  to  God,  not  fruits 
of  the  earth,  liut  the  "  fruit  of  the  lips  "  (an 
expression  found  in  Hos.  xiv.  2,  wliere  the 
LXX.  has  Kapirhv  x^iK^wv  ^pMv\  %.e.  con- 
tinual praise,  springing  from  thankful  hearts. 
In  the  Eucharist  especially  (hence  so  called) 
such  sacrifice  is  continually  offered,  over  the 
one  atoning  Sacrifice  which  is  pleaded  and 
partaken  of.  But  not  in  communions  only, 
but  ever  in  their  daily  lives,  such  "  sacrifice 
of  praise  and  thanksgiving  "  is  due.  But, 
as  the  next  verse  reminds  the  readers,  the 
"  fruit  of  the  lips  "  is  not  enough ;  there  is  a 
further  sacrifice  of  our  own,  whereby  we 
must  show  that  we  are  true  partakers  of 
Christ,  and  truly  thankful. 

Ver.  16. — But  to  do  good  and  to  communi- 
cate forget  not  (ttjs  Se  fiirodas  Koi  Koivuvlas 
fi^  liTi\av6cLvi(rS^ '.  where  tivoitai  means 
"  doing  good  to  others  "  (of.  Mark  xiv.  7) ; 
while  Koivavlas  expresses  the  sense  of 
Christian  fellowship  evinced  by  oommuni- 
catingto  others  a  share  of  what  we  have;  cf. 
Eom.  IV.  26 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  13)  :  for  with  such 
sacrifices  Ood  is  well  pleased. 

Ver.  17. — Obey  them  that  have  the  rule 
over  you  (toii  ■ftyovp.ivois  tS/iav,  as  in  ver.  7), 
and  submit  yourselves  (to  them):  for  they 
watch  for  your  souls,  as  they  that  must  give 
account,  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and 
not  with  grief  (literally,  groaning);  for  that 
is  (rather,  were)  unprofitable  for  you  (i.e.  > 
their  ministry  is  for  your  profit ;  if  its  result 
be  their  giving  in  their  account  with  groans, 
its  whole  purpose  will  be  frustrated).  In 
this  allusion  to  the  TJyov/tcVoi,  as  in  vers.  7 
and  24,  there  is  evidence  of  the  existence  of 
a  regular  order  of  ministry  in  the  Hebrew 
Churches,  such  as  many  allusions  in  St. 
Paul's  Epistles  show  to  have  formed  part  of 
the  constitution  of  the  Churches  to  whom 
those  Epistles  were  addressed  (cf.  also  Acts 
xiv.  23  and  xx.  17,  28,  etc.).  The  word 
itself  ( fiyovfifvoi)  which  is  here  used  might, 
indeed,  denote  any  persons  who  took  the 
lead  in  the  congregations ;  but  the  urging 
of  the  duty  of  submission  to  them,  in  virtue 
of  their  ofSce  of  watching  for  souls  for  which 
they  would  have  to  give  account,  shows 
pliiinly  that  a  special  order  is  here,  as  else- 
where, referred  to.  Observe  also  below, 
ver.  24,  where  "  all  the  saints,"  i.e.  what  we 
should  call  the  laity,  are  mentioned  in  dis- 
tinction from  the  rfyoviiivoi.  (For  similar  in- 
I  junctions,  of.  1  Thesi.  t.  12  and  1  Tim.  v.  17  • 


OH.  XIII.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 


397 


Tobs  TrpoeffTCfi4vovs  iifiwy  and  ol  vpoeffTwres 
Trpea-pvTepoi  being  the  words  there  used.) 
The  Bpecial  injunction  here  to  obey  and 
submit  may  have  been  called  for  by  some 
deficiency  in  this  respect  among  the  Hebrew 
Christians.  Possibly  it  was  among  the 
people  rather  tlian  the  pastors  that  there 
were  any  signs  of  wavering  between  the 
Church  and  the  synagogue,  and  that  one 
purpose  of  the  admonition  is  to  strengthem 
the  hands  of  the  former, in' whom  confidence 
is  placed. 

Ver.  18. — ^Pray  for  nfl ;  for  we  trust  (rather, 
we  are  persuaded,  vetBd/ieBa)  that  we  have  a 
good  consoienoei  in  all  things  willing  (<.«. 
desiring)  to  live  honestly.  When  St.  Paul 
uses  t)ie  plural  TJfueis  he  usually  at  least, 
if  not  always,  includes  his  colleagues  (of.  1 
Thess.  V.  26  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  1 ;  Col.  iv.  3).  So 
probably  the  writer  here,  especially  as 
there  is  a  transition  to  the  singular  in  the 
following  verse.  Whoever  he  was,  he 
associates  himself  in  sending  the  Epistle 
with  his  fellow-labourers,  i.e.  with  others  of 
what  we  may  call  the  Pauline  circle,  who 
were  engaged  with  him  elsewhere.  Both 
this  and  the  request  for  prayer,  and  also 
the  assertion  of  integrity,  which  seems  to 
imply  suspicion  of  possible  mistrust,  are 
quite  in  St.  Paul's  way,  and  confirm  the 
view  that,  though  the  author  may  not  have 
been  St.  Paul  himself,  it  was  at  any  rate 
some  one  who  was,  or  had  been,  cloeely 
connected  with  him. 

Ver.  19.— And  I  beseech  yon  the  more 
abundantly  (the  Pauline  word,  ircpurtrordpas) 
to  do  this,  that  I  may  be  restored  to  you  the 
sooner.  The  author  of  the  Epistle  proceeds 
here  for  the  first  time  to  speak  of  himself  in- 
dividually ;  and  what  he  thus  says  shows  that 
the  Epistle  was  addressed  to  some  definite 
circle  of  Hebrew  Christians,  and  one  which 
he  had  been  among  before.  What  circum- 
stances, whether  of  imprisonment  or  other 
hindrances,  wei  e  in  the  way  of  his  revisiting 
them  does  not  appear.  We  remark  that  this 
verse  again  reminds  us  strongly  of  St.  Paul 
(of.  Philem.  22).  The  possibility  may  be 
here  noted  (see  Introduction,  p.  zii.)  that,  if 
the  Epistle  was  composed  by  one  of  St. 
Paul's  friends,  and  sent  under  his  authority, 
he  may  have  himself  dictated  this  conclud- 
ing portion  (beginning  possibly  at  ver.  17) 
which  is  in  a  more  epistolary  style  than  the 
rest,  and  contains  personal  allusions. 

Vers.  20,  21.— Now  the  God  of  peace,  that 
brought  again  from  the  dead  the  great 
Shepherd  of  the  sheep  tiiroagh  (literally,  tn) 
the  blood  of  the  eternal  covenant,  our  Lord 
Jesus,  make  yon  perfect  in  every  good  work, 
to  do  bis  will,  working  in  yon  that  which  is 
wdl -pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  JesoB 
Christ ;  to  whom  (<a  to  God,  the  snbjeot  of 
the  sentence)  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 


Amen.  It  is  St.  Paul's  way  also  to  intiodnoet 
in  the  end  of  his  Epistles,  a  sDlemn  prayer  or 
benerliction,  couched  in  terms  suitable  to 
the  subjects  that  have  been  dwelt  on  (see 
e.g.  Bom.  xvL  25,  etc.).  The  term,  "God 
of  peace,"  is  also  usual  with  him ;  and  it  is 
appropriate  here  after  so  many  warnings 
against  disturbing  the  Church's  peace ;  as  is, 
with  reference  also  to  what  has  gone  before, 
"make  you  perfect"  (kotopt/tcu),  and  what 
follows.  On  "the  great  Shepherd,"  etc., 
Bengel  says,  "  Habemus,  inquit,  antistites 
multos,  ver.  l7,  sed  hie  omniam  est  Antistes. 
Ego  sum  absens,  ver.  19,  sed  Decs  non  abest, 
neque  deerit."  The  expression  is  taken  from 
Isa.  Ixiii.  11,  "Where  is  he  that  brought 
them  out  of  the  sea  with  the  shepherd  of  his 
flock?  (naC  i  avafiiPJuras  ix  rrjs  0a\dtraris 
rhv  wot/xfva  ray  irpoPirav ;  LXX.)."  The 
reference  in  Isaiah  is  to  Moses  and  the  Bed 
Sea,  the  well-known  types  of  Christ  and 
his  resurrection,  and  of  ours  to  •  new  life, 
leading  to  eternal  life,  through  him.  He 
is  called  "the  great  Shepherd,"  as  in  oh. 
iv.  14  the  "  great  High  Priest,"  as  being  the 
true  fulfilment  of  the  ancient  types.  "  In 
[t.a.  'in  virtue  of]  the  blood  of  the  cove- 
nant "  seems  to  be  suggested  by  Zech.  ix.  11, 
Kol  ah  iv  aX/iari  SiaS^mjj  <rou  i^airiffrtiXas 
SetTfilovs  <Tov  4k  \dKKov  oJk  Ix'""^"'  SSt^ : 
aiavtov  being  added  (as  u4yai>  before)  (o 
distinguish  the  new  covenant  from  the  old. 
The  suitableness  of  the  word*  to  the  con- 
tents of  the  Epistle  ii  obvious.  It  is 
observed  that  the  above  is  the  only  distinct 
allusion  in  the  Epistle  to  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion, the  writer'a  treatment  of  his  sabjeot 
having  led  him  to  pass  at  once  firom  the 
sacrifice  to  the  heavenly  intercession.  Bat 
"  non  concludit  apostolns,  antequam  menti- 
onem  fecerit  resurreetUmii  Christ! "  (Bengel). 

Ver.  22. — Bnt  I  beseech  yon,  brethren, 
suffer  the  word  of  exhortation:  for  I  have 
written  a  letter  unto  yon  in  few  words. 
This  and  the  following  verse  are  in  the 
manner  of  a  postscript,  such  as  is  usual  with 
St.  Paul.  Some  little  apprehension  is  im- 
plied (cf,  ver.  18)  of  tlie  admonitions  not 
being  taken  well  by  all.  Though  the 
Epistle  is  not  short  as  compared  with  others, 
yet  it  has  been  compressed  with  as  "few 
words"  as  tho  subject  would  allow  (of. 
ver.  11).  If,  however,  this  concluding  por- 
tion of  the  Epistle  was  written  or  dictated 
by  St.  Paul  himself,  as  suggested  under 
ver.  19,  the  "few  words"  may  possibly  refer 
to  it  only. 

Ver.  23. — Enow  ye  that  our  brother 
Timothy  is  set  at  liberty;  with  whom,  if  he 
come  shortly,  I  will  see  you.  This  allusion 
to  Timothy  shows  that  the  Epistle,  whatever 
its  exact  dute,  was  at  any  rate  written 
in  the  apostolic  age,  before  his  death. 
Further,  though   not   proving   Si  Paul'* 


398 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xni.  1— 2{t 


authorship,  it  supports  the  conclusion  that 
the  writer,  if  nut  himself,  was  one  of  hia 
associates,  Tiiiuthy  having  been  peculiarly 
his  disciple  and  companion.  It  seems  that 
Timothy  had  been,  as  the  readers  were  aware, 
iu  prison ;  and  the  joyful  news  is  commu- 
nicated of  his  release,  and  of  the  prospect 
of  his  visiting  them.  This  again  shows 
that  the  Epistle  was  addressed  to  a  definite 
circle  of  readers.  It  is  observable  that  the 
word  airoXieaBai,  which  does  not  occur  in 
St.  Paul's  writings,  is,  like  so  many  expres- 
sions throughout  the  Epistle,  one  usual 
with  St.  Lulie  (Luke  jtxii.  68;  xxiii.  16, 
etc. ;  Acts  iii.  13 ;  iv.  21 ;  where  it  expresses 
release  from  prison  or  captivity).  He  uses 
it  also  for  dismissal  of  persons  on  a  mission 
(Acts  xiii.  3 ;  xv.  30) ;  and  hence  one  view 
is  that  Timothy's  having  already  set  out  to 
visit  the  Church  addressed  is  all  that  is  here 
meant.  But  the  other  meaning  of  the  word 
is  more  likely. 

Ver.  24. — Salute  all  them  that  have  the 
rule  over  you  (robs  rjyovfievovs,  as  before), 
and  all  the  saints.  They  of  Italy  salute  you. 
The  fact  that  no  names  are.  here  mentioned, 
Etd  is  usual  with  St.  Paul  in  sending  saluta- 
tiona  to  Churches  he  was  personally  well 


acquainted  with,  leads  ns  to  infer  that  thera 
had  been  no  such  close  association,  at  any 
rate  recently,  between  the  writer  and  the 
readers  in  this  case;  or  else  that  a  circle 
of  Churches  in  some  locality  is  addiessed. 
Nothing  certain  can  be  concluded  as  to  the 
writer's  whereabouts  at  the  time  of  writing 
from  the  expression,  "  they  of  Italy  (ot  Itirh 
TTjs  'iTaKias),"  thougji  it  seems  to  favour  the 
idea,  rather  than  otherwise,  that  he  was  in 
Italy  at  the  time,  possibly  at  Rome.  For 
the  phrase  means  simply  "natives  of  Italy  " 
(cf.  Acts  X.  23;  x.  38;  xii.  1;  xvii.  13;  xxi. 
27 ;  xviii.  13 ;  all  these  being,  we  observe, 
expressions  of  St.  Luke's) ;  it  by  no  means 
implies  that  they  had  left  Italy.  In  fact, 
as  Uelitzsch  observes,  "  if  the  author  was 
then  in  Italy,  and  at  the  same  time  was  not 
a  native  of  Italy,  he  could  not  have  selected 
a  more  appropriate  designation  for  the 
Italian  Christiana." 

The  Epistle  is  concluded  by  St.  Paul'g 
accustomed  words,  which,  with  some  varia- 
tions, seem  to  have  been  appended  to  all  hia 
letters  as  his  authenticating  autograph  (see 
2  These,  iii.,  etc.) — 

Ver.  25. — Oraoe  b«  with  yon  aU. 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Personal  exhortations.  This  book  "to  the  Hebrews"  begins  like  a 
doctrinal  treatise  ;  but  it  ends  like  a  letter.  Ch.  xiii.  is  written  quite  in  the  epistoliry 
ibrm ;  and  concludes  with  some  personal  notices — the  only  such  that  are  to  be  found 
in  the  book.  The  verses  before  us  contain  counsels  suited  to  the  individual  Christian 
life.  Here  the  apostle  says  in  efifect  to  his  readers — Be  not  selfish  (vers.  1 — 3);  be  not 
sensual  (ver.  4)  ;  be  not  sordid  (vers.  5,  6). 

L  An  exhortation  to  bbothbrlt  love.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  In  the  New  Testament, 
love  of  the  brethren  means  love  of  the  spiritual  brotherhood  of  believers.  The  natural 
affection  which  subsists  between  brothers  and  sisters,  nlthough  very  sacred  and  beautiful, 
is  not  in  itself  Christian  brotherly  love.  No  more  is  patriotism,  or  love  of  country, 
a  distinctively  Christian  sentiment.  The  brotherly  love  which  the  gospel  inspires 
forgets  all  differences  merely  of  kindred  and  nation.  It  is  a  spiritual  bond,  and  unites 
the  saint  to  all  his  fellow-believers  everywhere.  This  love  is  not  one  of  the  things 
••that  can  be  shaken"  (ch.  xii.  27);  it  "never  faileth"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  8, 13).  So,  the 
apostle  exhorts  the  Hebrews  to  make  sure  that  it  shall  "  remain  "  among  themselves, 
and  be  as  actively  exercised  in  the  future  as  in  the  past  (ch.  vi.  10).  For,  the  spirit 
which  rejoices  to  recognize  fellow-believers — taking  pleasure  in  their  society,  labouring 
to  promote  their  welfare,  and  throwing  the  veil  of  charity  over  their  failings — is  one  of 
the  richest  and  ripest  fruits  of  the  Christian  life.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  the  cement 
of  a  congregation.  And  only  the  man  who  cherishes  it  is,  in  the  proper  meaning  of  the 
word,  a  gentleman.  In  vers.  2,  3,  the  apostle  specifies  two  modes  by  which  it  is 
essential  thai  brotherly  love  should  be  manifested;  those,  viz.  of  hospitality  and 
sympathy.  It  is  to  be  shown  towards :  1.  Brethren  who  are  stranger*.  (Ver.  2.)  The 
Christian  Hebrews  were  to  account  it  a  sacred  duty  hospitably  to  entertain  fellow- 
believers  from  other  lands  or  districts,  who  might  be  travelling  either  on  business,  or 
in  the  service  of  the  Church,  or  because  driven  from  home  by  persecution.  And  not 
only  a  sacred  duty,  but  a  blessed  privilege.  For  as  Abraham  and  Lot  (Gen.  xviii.,  xix.) 
"  entertained  angels  unawares,"  so  the  stranger  whom  the  Christian  receives  may  turn 
out  to  be  a  messenger  I'rum  God  to  his  soul — one  whose  presence  may  fill  his  house  with 
the  atmosphere  of  heaven.     Should  the  stranger  be  a  man  whose  mind  is  stored  with 


OH.  xm.  1—25.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  399 

the  treasures  of  spiritual  truth,  and  whose  affections  are  devout  and  pure,  his  visit  may 
prove  a  means  of  direct  quickening  to  the  religious  life  of  the  household.  Samuel 
Rutherford  experienced  this  privilege,  when  one  Saturday  evening  he  received  a  stranger 
into  his  pleasant  manse  at  Anworth ;  for  after  being  impressed  at  the  family  catechizing 
with  the  guest's  answer  that  the  number  of  the  commandments  was  eleven,  the  "  new 
commandment "  (John  xiii.  34)  being  cited  as  proof,  he  discovered  by-and-by  that  his 
visitor  was  Archbishop  Usher,  the  learned  and  devout  primate  of  the  Church  of  Ireland. 
But  another  and  a  still  sweeter  thought  is  not  remote  from  the  motive  to  hospitality 
contained  in  this  verse,  viz.  that  in  entertaining  Christ's  servants  we  are  receiving  the 
Master  himself :  "  I  was  a  Stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in  "  (Matt.  xxv.  35).  2.  Brethren 
who  are  sufferers.  (Ver.  3.)  The  Hebrews  were  to  "  remember"  the  saints  who  might 
be  in  prison.  They  were  to  do  so  "  as  bound  with  them ; " — a  beautiful  expression, 
breathing  the  aroma  of  true  Christian  sympathy.  They  were  to  pray  earnestly  for 
them,  if  possible  visit  them,  minister  to  their  wants,  and  strive  to  secure  their  liberation. 
Brotherly  kindness  would  lead  them  to  conceive  of  themselves  as  occupying  the  position 
of  the  sufferers.  It  would  cause  them  to  realize  the  "  bonds  "  of  their  brethren  as  an 
affliction  personal  to  themselves,  just  as  the  elder  Brother's  love  does  (Acts  ix.  4).  But, 
since  imprisonment  is  not  the  only  calamity  to  which  believers  are  exposed,  the  apostle 
proceeds  to  bespeak  sympathy  for  all  who  in  any  way  "  are  evil  entreated  "  for  Jesus'  sake. 
We  ourselves  are  liable  to  the  same  adversities  which  our  brethren  endure.  Let  us, 
therefore,  identify  ourselves  with  them.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  contribute  to  public 
charities.  Neither  do  we  discharge  all  our  duty  when  we  employ  some  person  as  our 
proxy  to  care  for  the  sufferers.  True  Christian  sympathy  requires  that  we  bring  our- 
selves into  personal  contact  with  them.  Strength  is  often  received  from  the  glance  of 
a  sympathizing  eye,  or  the  grasp  of  a  loving  hand,  or  the  utterance  of  a  tender  word 
of  holy  comfort. 

II.  A  WAKNiNO  AGAIKBT  mpcBiTT.  (Ver.  4.)  The  first  part  of  this  verse  should 
certainly  be  translated  as  an  exhortation.  Marriage  is  to  be  "  had  in  honour; "  not  so 
much  here,  however,  as  against  celibacy,  but  in  opposition  to  unchastity.  The  apostle 
in  this  precept  elevates  marriage  to  its  rightful  place  as  a  Divine  ordinance.  The  ethics 
of  the  New  Testament  magnify  family  life.  The  Christian  religion,  in  honouring  the 
family,  guarding  its  rights,  and  proclaiming  its  duties,  has  invested  home  with  a  halo 
of  loveliness.  Wherever  the  sacred  character  of  marriage  is  recognized  and  felt,  the 
result  will  be  purity.  And,  adds  the  apostle,  there  is  judgment  in  reserve  for  those 
who  dishonour  God's  ordinance  in  this  matter.  For  the  adulterer  is  guilty  of  the 
greatest  of  tJl  social  crimes,  murder  alone  excepted.  Whether,  therefore,  the  breaker  of 
the  seventh  commandment  be  a  single  or  a  married  person,  he  shall  not  escape.  The 
doom  of  impenitent  sensualists  will  be  none  the  less  dreadful  that  the  apostle  does  not 
here  enlarge  upon  it.  He  feels  it  enough  to  say  solemnly  regarding  such  persons, 
"(Jod  will  judge." 

III.  A  DISSUASIVE  AOAIKST  THE  LOVE  OF  MONET.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  Constantly  in 
the  Kew  Testament  sensuality  and  avarice  are  mentioned  together  as  being  sins  of  the 
same  class  (Mark  vii.  21,  22 ;  1  Cor.  v.  10;  vi.  9, 10;  Eph,  v.  3;  Col.  iii.  6 ;  2  Pet.  iL 
14).  If  sensuality  bavdens  the  human  heart,  sordidness  does  so  also.  The  love  of  filthy 
lucre  will  drag  a  man  down  to  perdition  quite  as  readily  and  insidiously  as  the  love  of 
filthy  lust.  Avarice  is  often  regarded  as  the  national  sin  of  the  Hebrew  race.  The 
natural  man  Jacob  is  very  prone  to  develop — ^unless  Divine  grace  prevent — into  the 
sordid,  grasping  Shylock.  But  the  Anglo-Saxon  nations  are  all  powerfully  predisposed 
to  this  sin  too.  in  our  own  time  how  largely  are  riches  over-estimated,  both  as  a  means 
of  happiness  and  as  an  evidence  of  success  in  life  I  Even  the  Church  of  Christ  is 
tempted  to  pay  couit  to  wealth.  Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  Saviour  forbids  his 
people  to  make  it  cme  of  their  chieF  aims  to  accumulate  gold.  We  are  to  be  diligent  in 
business,  and  neither  despise  money  nor  set  our  hearts  upon  it.  To  be  "  content  with 
present  things  "  (ver.  5)  is  a  high  Christian  attainment.  And  a  man's  habits  of  thought 
and  life  in  connection  with  money  are  a  touchstone  of  his  character.  "  A  right  measure 
and  manner  in  getting,  saving,  spending,  giving,  taking,  lending,  borrowing,and  bequeath- 
ing, would  almost  argue  a  perfect  man  "  (Henry  Taylor).  The  apostle  sustains  his  precept 
hy"an  appeal  to  Scripture  (ver.  5).  The  words  quoted,  "  I  will  in  no  wise  fail  thee," 
etc.,  contain  in  the  original  no  fewer  than  five  negatives,  and  are  thus,  as  it  were, 


400  THE   EPISTLK  TO  THE  HEBEEW8.         [ch.  xiii,  1—25. 

a  fivefold  assurance  of  the  Divine  support.  God  gave  this  same  promise  to  so  many 
of  the  ancient  saints — to  Jacob,  Joshua,  Solomon,  etc. — that  it  possesses  the  force  oi  a 
spiritual  adage,  and  thus  may  be  personally  appropriated  by  every  believer.  In  all  ages 
thousands  of  the  people  of  God  have  rested  on  it,  and  have  accordingly  exemplified 
the  rare  and  difficult  grace  of  contentment.  This  is  matter  of  history  and  of  obser- 
vation. 

"  O  earth,  so  full  of  dreary  noises  I 
O  men.  with  wailing  in  your  voices  I  ' 

O  delved  gold,  the  wallers  heap  I 
O  strife,  O  curse,  that  o'er  it  fall  t 
God  strikes  a  silence  through  you  all. 
And  giveth  his  belovM  sleep." 

(Mrs.  Browning.) 

Seeing,  then,  that  we  who  believe  are  assured  of  the  Divine  presence  and  help^  why 
should  we  not  have  the  "  good  courage  "  (ver.  6)  to  say  with  the  psalmist,  "  I  will  not 
fear:  what  shall  man  do  unto  me"  (Ps.  cxviii.  6)  ?  Avarice  has  its  root  in  want  of 
faith  in  God  ;  but  no  one  who  is  persuaded  that  the  Lord  is  with  him  need  dread  any 
kind  of  poverty.  Having  Jehovah  for  his  Champion,  he  will  not  "  make  gold  his  hope, 
or  say  to  the  fine  gold.  Thou  art  my  confidence."  Divine  grace  will  root  up  out  of  his 
heart  the  noxious  weed  of  covetousness,  and  plant  in  its  room  the  fair  and  fragrant 
flower  of  contentment. 

Vus.  7,  8. — Deceased  pastors.  Passing  from  admonitions  bearing  upon  the  individual 
Christian  life,  the  writer  now  proceeds  to  exhort  the  brethren  about  matters  arising  out 
of  their  Church  relations.  He  charges  them  to  cherish  the  memory  of  their  departed 
Christian  teachers. 

I.  The  wobk  of  the  pastobate;.  The  duties  of  the  gospel  ministry,  when  these 
are  faithfully  discharged,  may  be  said  to  be  threefold.  1.  To  bear  rule  over  the  Ohureh. 
Christ  has  given  to  his  Church  the  "  power  of  the  keys,"  vesting  it  in  her  pastors  and 
presbyters.  This  power,  however,  is  simply  ministerial.  The  rulers  of  the  Church 
merely  administer  the  laws  given  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  her  King  and  Head. 
While  at  liberty  to  frame  bye-laws  which  may  promote  the  edifying  celebration  of  the 
ordinances  which  he  has  founded,  they  dare  not  prescribe  new  laws  or  appoint  new 
ordinances.  They  are  to  admit  to  Church  communion  and  exclude  from  it;  but  only 
upon  the  lines  laid  down  in  the  New  Testament.  2.  To  speak  the  Word  cf  Ood. 
The  main  function  of  the  ministry  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  teach  Christian  truth. 
The  gospel  is  a  definite  "  word ; "  and  it  is  enshrined  in  a  Book  which  is  called  "  The 
Word."  The  preacher's  text-book  is  not  the  newspaper,  or  the  current  literature  of  the 
day,  but  "  the  oracles  of  God."  The  great  design  of  the  Christian  pulpit  is  to  promote 
the  intellectual  and  experimental  knowledge  of  the  Bible.  And  no  minister  "shah 
have  lived  in  vain  if  it  can  be  written  over  his  grave, '  He  made  the  people  understand 
the  Scriptures ' "  (Dr.  John  Hall).  3.  To  live  a  consistent  Christian  life.  When  a 
pastor  is,  like  Barnabas,  "  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith,"  it  is 
to  be  expected  that  "  much  people  will  be  added  unto  the  Lord  "  (Acts  xi.  24).  A  holy 
example  lends  incalculable  momentum  to  Christian  teaching.  "The  life  of  a  jnoui 
minister  is  visible  rhetoric  "  (Hooker). 

•To  draw  mankind  to  heaven  by  gentleness 
And  good  example,  was  his  business.  .  . 
And  Jesus'  love,  which  owns  no  pride  or  pel( 
He  taught ;  but  first  he  followed  it  himselt" 

(Ohanoer.) 

n.  The  dutt  of  bblievbbs  towabds  theib  deceabed  pastobs.  Although  these 
are  removed  from  us,  we  still  have  duties  towards  them.  Indeed,  the  relationship  of 
pastor  and  people,  being  spiritual  in  its  nature,  may  be  said  to  be  prolonged  intr 
eternity.  We  must :  1.  Rememher  their  official  work.  We  should  recall  the  strain  ol 
their  Christian  teaching,  and  think  with  gratitude  of  thejr  spiritual  supervision.  I( 
we  continue  to  "  esteem  them  exceeding  highly  in  love  for  their  work's  sake,"  th»y 
"  being  dead,  shall  yet  speak "  to  us.     Many  a  believer  feels  that  he  has  had  o^a 


OH.  xni.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   HEBREWS.  401 

spiritual  guide  in  particular  whose  influence  over  his  heart  and  life  must  continue 
unaffected  by  change  or  time ;  viz.  tlie  pastor  under  whose  ministry  he  was  converted, 
or  whose  teaching  helped  most  powerfully  to  mould  his  Christian  thought  and  give 
direction  to  his  spiritual  energies.  2.  Consider  their  consistent  Christian  life.  When 
a  man's  career  is  finished,  it  can  he  surveyed  as  a  whole,  and  its  moral  worth  appraised. 
So  the  character  of  a  godly  minister  comes  to  he  appreciated  at  its  full  value  only  when 
we  are  in  a  position  to  "  consider  the  issue  of  his  life."  The  early  spiritual  guides  of 
the  Hebrews  had  all  died  in  faith ;  and  some  of  them,  it  may  be  (e.g.  Stephen,  James 
the  son  of  Zebedee,  and  James  the  Little),  had  obtained  the  crown  of  martyrdom. 
And  what  an  evidence  still  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  is  the  blameless,  unselfish, 
beneficent  career,  continued  through  perhaps  two  generations,  of  a  faithful  Christian 
minister!  What  a  magnificent  sunset  the  close  of  the  life  of  the  pastor  who  can  say 
upon  his  death-bed,  "  1  have  fought  the  good  fight,  I  have  finished  the  course,  1  have 
kept  the  faith  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  7)  1  3.  Imitate  their  holy  fidelity.  These  primitive  pastors 
had  been  sorely  tried ;  yet  they  had  never  swerved  from  their  loyalty  to  Christ  and 
to  his  truth.  Like  the  heroes  of  the  old  dispensation,  whose  exploits  are  recounted  in 
ch.  xi.,  they  had  "lived  by' faith."  Why,  then,  should  any  of  the  members  of  the 
Church,  whom  they  had  taught,  he  guilty  of  apostasy  ?  Those  doctrines  of  grace  which 
the  teachers  had  held  fast  were  surely  worthy  of  the  adherence  of  the  disciples.  Let 
us  also  continue  steadfastly  in  the  pure  gospel  truth  which  our  departed  spiritual 
guides  adorned  in  their  lives,  and  let  us  copy  their  holy  and  persevering  fidelity  to  the 
Redeemer. 

III.    A   BLESSED   EKGOURAGEMENT   TO   DISCHABGE   THIS   DUTT.       Ver.  8    is  tO  be  lead 

as  an  affirmation :  "  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,"  etc.  It  expresses  the  glorious 
thought  of  the  changelessnesB  of  the  Redeemer.  He  is  ever  the  same  in  his  Divine 
nature,  in  his  true  humanity,  in  his  mediatorial  power,  in  his  love  and  tenderness,  in 
his  gospel  and  its  promises.  More  particularly  here  he  is  immutable  :  1.  At  the 
theme  of  the  pulpit.  The  preacher  of  the  gospel  dies,  but  "  the  Word  of  God"  which 
he  spoke  i.s  immortal.  That  Word  has  its  focus  in  the  person  and  work  of  the  Saviour. 
Its  central  fact  is  the  death  of  Christ.  The  backbone  of  evangelical  preaching  is  the 
scheme  of  redemption  by  him.  And  the  singular  vitality  of  the  pulpit,  as  compared 
with  other  institutions — as,  e.g.  schools  of  philosophy,  scientific  societies,  commercial 
guilds — is  due  to  this  undying  theme ;  undying,  because  coeval  with  the  deepest  needs 
of  men  in  all  time.  We  should,  then,  remember  those  who  "spake  the  Word  of  God," 
because  the  Word  which  they  spoke  is  indestructible.  2.  As  the  ctmfidence  of  the  saints. 
The  apostolic  missi'inaries  who  had  first  preached  to  the  Hebrews  had  made  Jesus  Christ 
their  own  Stay  during  life,  and  tl;eir  "Guide  even  unto  death."  It  was  he  who  had 
succoured  them  under  all  their  afflictions  and  persecutions  as  ministers  of  the  Word. 
And,  although  they  were  now  dead,  the  same  Saviour  still  lived.  It  was  fitted  to  be 
a  powerful  stimulus  to  the  Hebrews  to  imitate  the  faithfulness  of  their  ministers,  that 
the  immutable  Redeemer  remains  for  ever  with  his  people ;  and  that  they,  too,  could 
link  their  souls  with  him,  and  share  in  his  immutability.  3.  As  the  perpetual  Pastor 
of  the  Church.  The  uiider-shepherds  are  taken  away,  but  the  chief  Shepherd  abides. 
Each  of  them  was  one  of  his  "  gifts  for  men,"  lent  only  for  a  season.  Biit  the  ministry 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  is  perennial  and  inexhaustible.  During  the  "yesterday" 
of  the  Jewish  dispensation  he  made  his  sheep  "  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures  "  (Ps.  xxiii. 
2).  During  the  "  to-day  "  of  the  Christian  dispensation  he  presides  over  his  flock  by 
his  Spirit,  "  that  they  may  have  life,  and  may  have  it  abundantly "  (John  x.  10). 
And,  during  the  blessed  "  for  ever  "  which  shall  begin  with  the  second  coming,  when 
all  his  sheep  shall  have  been  gathered  from  their  various  folds  into  the  infinite  meadows 
of  heaven, "  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  be  their  Shepherd,  and 
shall  guide  them  unto  fountains  of  waters  of  life  "  (Rev.  vii.  17). 

Vers.  9 — 16. — "  Without  the  cnmp."  These  words  occur  repeatedly  in  this  passage; 
and,  used  as  a  motto,  they  express  appropriately  the  nerve-thought  which  pervaides 
it.  Indeed,  the  entire  Epistle  may  be  described  as  an  urgent  and  affectionate  exhor- 
tation to  the  Hebrews  to  "  go  forth  unto  Jesus  without  the  camp,  bearing  his 
reproach."    We  are  required  to  withdraw  from  the  polity  and  life  of  Judaism — 

L  As   BE0AED8   DOCTPINB.     (Ver.  9.)     The   reference   here   seems   to   he   to   the 

HEBREWS.  2  D 


402  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xin.  1— 26. 

Levitical  distinctions  between  clean  and  uncleati  "  meats,"  and  perhaps  also  to  the 
traditional  customs  on  the  same  subject  which  had  been  elevated  to  equal  authority 
with  those.  The  apostle  reminds  his  readers  that  all  such  precepts  are  only  "  carnal 
ordinances,"  which  the  coming  of  Jesus  Christ  has  rendered  no  longer  necessary, 
and  the  observance  of  which  can  now  have  no  influence  upon  a  man's  spiritual  life. 
Christ  has  "  made  all  meats  clean  "  (Mark  vii.  19).  The  principle  and  power  of  his 
religion  consists  in  "grace,"  and  not  in  fanciful  distinctions  connected  with  food. 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  eating  and  drinking  "  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  No  conscious- 
ness of  external  observances  can  ever  "profit"  a  man  spiritually.  Only  the  "grace" 
of  God,  given  by  his  Spirit,  can  regenerate  and  ennoble  the  human  soul.  We  must 
therefore  forsake  the  materialistic  "  teachings "  of  Judaism  for  the  spiritual  doctrines 
of  Christianity. 

II.  As  BEOABDS  OUB  SIN  OFFERING.  (Vers.  10 — 13.)  Our  "  Altar  "  is  Christ  (ver. 
10),  and  he  is  also  our  Sacrifice  "  for  sin "  (ver,  12).  He  is  at  once  High  Priest, 
Altar,  and  Victim.  Under  the  Levitical  law,  while  the  priests  were  allowed  to 
partake  of  many  of  the  sacrifices,  there  were  certain  sin  offerings  of  which  they  were 
expressly  forbidden  to  eat  (Lev.  vi.  30).  Those,  e.g.  which  were  presented  on  the 
great  annual  Day  of  Atonement  were  wholly  consumed  by  fire  "  without  the  camp." 
This  ordinance  typified  the  fact  that  Christ,  the  true  Sin  Offering,  was  to  suffer  for 
us  "  without  the  gate "  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  that,  if  we  would  particip?te  in  the 
atonement  which  he  has  made,  we  must  voluntarily  renounce  the  Jewish  Church 
from  which  he  was  expelled.  The  law  of  the  tabernacle  forbade  those  who  remained 
in  connection  with  the  camp  of  Judaism  to  eat  of  the  flesh  of  any  sin  offering  the 
blood  of  which  had  been  presented  within  the  tabernacle ;  but  every  one  who  worships 
before  the  true  altar  which  has  been  set  up  on  Calvary  is  encouraged  freely  to  partake 
of  the  flesh  of  Christ,  which  he  has  "  given  for  the  life  of  the  world."  To  cleave  to 
the  Law,  therefore,  is  to  reject  the  gospel.  If  we  would  eat  of  the  real  sin  offering 
which  has  been  provided  under  the  new  covenant — i.e.  obtain  the  blessings  of  pardon 
and  peace,  of  access  and  sanctification,  which  the  atonement  of  Jesus  has  purchased 
— we  must  "go  forth  unto  him  without  the  camp." 

III.  As  KBQABDS  OUR  THANK  0FFF,RiNG8.  (Vers.  15,  16.)  These  are  not  to  be 
presented  any  longer  through  the  medium  of  the  Aaronical  priesthood  and  of  the 
Levitical  oblations.  Christ's  people  are  to  offer  them  "throngh  him"  as  Mediator, 
and  depending  for  their  acceptance  upon  his  atonement  and  intercession.  So  soon 
as  we  partake  of  the  Kew  Testament  sin  offering,  we  are  ourselves  constituted  "  a 
holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus 
Christ"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  The  great  substantive  thank  offering  which  the  believer 
presents  is  himself  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  5).  But  the  man  who  has  given 
himself  to  the  Lord  will  also  offer :  1.  Word*  of  praise.  (Ver.  15.)  The  most  direct 
means  by  which  we  can  honour  God  is  publicly  to  "make  confession  to  his  Name" 
iL  words  of  faith  and  songs  of  adoration.  When  the  spirit  of  praise  takes  root 
within  the  soil  of  the  heart,  it  will  spread  its  buds  and  blossoms  over  all  the  soul, 
and  adorn  the  "  lips  "  with  its  "  fruit."  2.  Worki  of  piety.  (Ver.  16.)  These  are 
spiritual  sacrifices  also.  Christianity  is  eminently  a  practical  religion,  and  regards 
every  deed  of  charity  done  for  Jesus'  sake  as  a  sweet  and  holy  psalm.  The  truly 
grateful  heart  is  always  generous,  and  "  willing  to  communicate "  for  the  relief  of 
brethren  who  are  in  need.  And  "  God  is  well  pleased "  with  every  act  of  beneficence 
done  out  of  gratitude  for  his  grace.  He  accepts  such  as  a  "  sacrifice "  offered  to 
himself. 

IV.  As  EBGARD8  OUB  BPTRITUAL  CITIZENSHIP.  (Ver.  14.)  Very  soon,  now,  Jerusalem 
and  its  temple  were  to  be  razed  to  their  foundations ;  and  the  entire  Jewish  polity, 
both  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  thus  to  be  brought  to  a  perpetual  end.  But  that  event 
would  entail  but  small  loss  upon  the  Christian  Hebrews,  if  only  the^y  remained  steadfast 
in  the  faith.  For,  in  embracing  the  gospel,  they  had  transferred  their  affections  from 
the  earthly  Jerusalem  to  the  heavenly.  Not  only  so,  but  all  believers— Jew  and 
Gentile  alike — must  "  go  forth  unto  Jesus  without  the  camp,"  in  the  sense  of  living  a 
life  of  separation  from  the  prevailing  spirit  of  the  world.  The  believer  is  to  cultivate 
h;ibits  of  reserve  in  reference  to  earthly  pursuits  and  interests.  His  "  citizenship  is  in 
heaven  "  (Phil,  iii.  20).     He  looks  beyond  even  the  kingdom  of  grace  to  t  .vt  of  glory. 


OH.  xiu.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  403 

He  knows  that  the  ''irhole  visible  order  of  things  in  this  world  shall  pass  away,  and  jnst 
as  completely  as  the  Jewish  polity  has  already  done.  And  be  anticipates  for  himself  a 
permanent  home  in  the  New  Jerusalem  that  shall  "  come  down  out  of  heaven  from 
God." 

CJoNOLUBiON.  Seeing  we  possess  such  transcendent  privileges  "outside  the  camp,"  let 
us  bear  patiently  the  "  reproaoli  "  of  Christ,  We  must  be  content  to  appear  "  singular  " 
for  his  sake.  We  must  be  willing  to  be  ostracized  by  the  world  on  account  of  our  love 
for  him.  The  spirit  of  devotion  to  Jesus  will  be  always  diametrically  opposed  to  the 
prevailing  spirit  of  the  ungodly.  But  what  an  honour  to  be  permitted  to  suffer  with 
him  1    And  "  if  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him." 

Vers.  n—19.-:-Duty  to  present  pastors.  In  ver.  7  the  apostle  had  exhorted  the 
Hebrews  to  honour  the  memory  of  their  deceased  ministers.  But,  if  this  was  a  duty 
incumbent  on  them,  it  was  equally  their  duty  to  render  Christian  obedience  to  their 
living  spiritual  guides.  These  precepts  connected  with  the  pastoral  relation  remind  us 
that  even  in  the  earliest  times  the  Churches  possessed  a  definite  organization,  and  were 
presided  over  by  regularly  appointed  spiritual  ofSce-bearers,  A  twofold  duty  towards 
their  leaders  is  pointed  out  in  these  verses. 

I.  To  OBEY  THEM.  (Ver.  17.)  The  spiritual  government  of  the  Church  is  an  ordi- 
nance of  Christ,  and  a  means  of  grace  to  his  people.  It  is  not,  however,  a  despotic 
government.  Pastors  and  presbyters  are  simply  to  administer  the  Law  of  Christ, 
They  may  not  demand  submission  to  what  is  based  only  upon  their  own  will  or 
caprice.  But,  within  the  limits  of  their  rightful  authority,  they  are  to  be  honoured 
and  obeyed.  Their  public  teaching  is  to  be  received  with  a  view  to  personal  edification. 
Their  piivate  pastoral  admonitions  are  to  be  accepted  as  "  an  excellent  oil "  (Ps.  cxli.  5). 
The  censures  of  the  Church,  administered  after  conviction  of  scandalous  sin,  are  to  be 
submitted  to,  not  as  a  penance,  but  as  a  means  of  spiritual  benefit.  The  exhortation 
of  this  verse  is  needed  in  our  own  time.  The  present  age  is  characterized  not  only  by  a 
healthy  independence  of  thought,  but  also  by  an  unhealthy  impatience  of  legitimate 
authority — at  once  in  the  family,  in  the  state,  and  in  the  Church.  Yet  there  must 
be  both  government  and  discipline  in  every  ecclesiastical  society ;  and  the  proper 
administration  of  such  is  indispensable  to  the  order  and  purity  of  the  Church,  if  not 
even  to  her  visible  existence.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  some  reasons  and  motives 
are  presented  by  which  to  enforce  this  duty  of  obedience  in  spiritual  things.  1.  The 
solemn  worh  of  the  pastor.  He  "  watches  in  behalf  of  your  souls."  If  the  Church 
ruler  be  worthy  of  his  office,  he  will  be  full  of  vigilant  solicitude  for  the  salvation  of 
the  people  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  has  committed  to  his  care.  He  will  take  trouble  for 
their  souls.  He  will  seek  to  know  the  flock  personally — their  individual  condition, 
character,  and  needs.  He  will  try  to  establish  true  sympathy  between  himself  and 
them.  He  will  watch,  that  he  may  teach  and  warn  and  comfort  with  a  view  to  their 
salvation.  2.  His  responsibility  to  the  chief  Shepherd.  Every  minister  knows  that  he 
"  shall  give  account."  In  his  private  communion  with  his  Mast«r  he  ought  from  time 
to  time  to  report  to  him  upon  the  condition  of  his  charge.  And  he  must  not  forget 
that  at  the  end  of  the  days,  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  separate  the  sheep  from  the 
goats,  he  shall  add  i  ess  to  him  the  solemn  question,  "  Where  is  the  flock  that  was  given 
thee,  thy  beautiful  flock  ? "  (Jer.  xiii.  20).  3.  The  hurtful  recoil  upon  the  souls  of  the 
people  if  they  fail  in  obedience.  A  spirit  of  docility  in  the  congregation  will  encourage 
its  spiritual  guides  to  do  their  responsible  work  with  cheerfulness  and  joy.  But  when 
there  is  resistance  to  counsel  and  contumacy  under  discipline,  the  heart  of  the  pastor 
Tvill  become  cast  down  ;  he  will  bs  prone  to  feel  his  work  irksome,  and  to  do  it  "  with 
grief,"  if  indeed  he  be  not  tempted  to  abandon  it  altogether.  And  such  a  frame  of 
mind  in  him  will  react  in  turn  upon  the  congregation.  A  dejected  minister  will  be 
more  or  less  inefficient.  The  people  will  suffer  much  spiritual  loss,  for  which  they  can 
only  have  themselves  to  blame. 

II.  To  FBAY  FOB  THEM.  (Vers.  18, 19.)  In  the  verse  preceding,  the  apostle  has  had 
in  view  the  anxieties  and  burdens  of  the  Christian  ministry ;  so  he  now  requests  the 
prayers  of  the  Hebrews  for  the  pastors  of  the  Church,  and  specially  for  himself.  Here, 
for  the  first  time  in  the  course  of  this  Epistle,  the  author — whoever  he  was — allows  his 
personality  to  appear.    He  claims  to  stand  in  a  pastoral  relation  to  the  Hebrews,  not 


404  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW8.         [oh.  xin.  1— 25 

only  on  the  ground  of  former  Intercourse,  but  in  virtue  of  this  letter,  which  he  has 
weighted  with  precious  instruction  and  affectionate  appeal.  Now,  if  apostles  and 
inspired  men  felt  the  need  of  the  intercessions  of  the  Church,  how  earnestly  ought  she 
to  pray  for  her  ordinary  pastors  and  teachers !  And  a  congregation  should  not  only 
imiJore  Divine  grace  for  "  our  beloved  pastor  " — a  duty  which  is  sometimes  done  in  a 
spirit  of  parochial  selfishness;  we  should  also  embrace  in  our  intercessions  the  ministers 
of  all  the  congregations  with  wliich  we  are  associated  in  Church  fellowship,  and  all  the 
Lord's  servants  in  the  gnspel  everywhere.  The  writer  advances  two  considerations  in 
support  of  his  request.  1.  His  purity  of  conduct.  (Ver.  18.)  He  had  the  testimony 
of  "  a  good  conscience ;  ^  and  yet  he  yearned  for  the  sympathy  of  his  brethren  in  all 
his  labours  and  sufferings.  Jewish  zealots  might  asperse  his  motives  and  defame  his 
character;  but  the  prayers  of  his  fellow-Christians  would  fortify  him  against  such  trials. 
And  the  Church  ought  still  to  pray  for  her  godly  pastors,  that  they  may  have  grace  "  to 
live  honestly  in  all  things,"  preserving  "a  good  conscience"  in  keeping  their  own  hearts, 
in  maintaining  habits  of  stridy,  in  faithfully  preaching  the  gospel,  and  in  watching  for 
souls  by  means  of  pastoral  work.  2.  His  desire  to  revisit  the  Christian  Ifehrews. 
(Ver.  19.)  The  writer  had  resided  among  them  at  some  former  peiio'l,  and  he  strongly 
wished  to  return  to  them  so  soon  as  circumstances  mi>2ht  permit.  He  solicits  their 
prayers,  that  the  hindrances  presently  in  his  way  may  be  removed.  He  makes  this 
request  very  earnestly,  and  as  a  great  personal  favour  to  himself.  We  are  reminded 
here,  accordingly,  that  prayer  is  one  of  the  powers  which  co-operate  in  the  government 
of  the  world.  The  author  of  this  Epistle  was  persuaded  that  the  almighty  energy  of 
Qod.  is  roused  into  action  by  the  sup|iIications  of  his  people.  He  was  quite  sure  that 
human  prayers,  not  less  than  human  deeds,  are  a  factor  in  the  Divine  government.  So 
he  begged  that  the  "  voice  "  of  the  Church  might  "  rise  like  a  fountain  for  him  night 
and  day." 

Vers.  20,  21. — Concluding  prayer  for  the  Hebrews.  The  apostle,  having  earnestly 
requested  the  prayers  of  the  Christian  Jews  for  himself,  proceeds  to  plead  for  them  at 
the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  He  virtually  says,  "  Pray  for  me,  brethren  ;  I  pray 
for  you."  And  what  a  wonderful  prayer  is  this !  How  brief,  yet  how  coraprehenriive ; 
how  exquisitely  simple,  yet  how  deeply  sublime  I  It  is  a  benedic  ion  as  well  as  a 
petition.  And  it  is  so  richly  coloured  wiih  the  doctrine  which  the  writer  has  been 
discussing  that  it  reads  almost  like  a  summary  of  the  Epistle.    Consider — 

I.  The  title  under  which  God  is  addressed.  "  The  God  of  peace."  This  is  a 
Pauline  expression.  Outsiile  of  this  book  it  occurs  only  in  the  wriiings  of  Paul.  The 
appellation  is  profoundly  suggestive.    God  is  "  the  God  of  peace  "  (1)  in  his  own  being 

'  and  character — he  loves  peace,  and  it  dwells  within  him;  (2)  in  his  moral  ailminis- 
tration,  the  end  of  which  is  to  work  peace  in  the  world,  and  within  the  hearts  of  men. 
These  Hebrews  lived  during  a  time  of  political  turmoil  and  of  religious  persecution  ; 
but  the  apostle  directs  their  thous^lits  to  the  Lord  that  "sitteth  upon  the  flood,"  who 
"  win  bless  his  people  with  peace."  There  are  some  very  solemn  and  terrible  passages 
in  this  Epistle  about  the  sin  and  doom  of  apostates  ;  but  the  writer  points  us  once  more 
to  the  raiohow  of  grace  shining  in  front  of  the  gloom,  and  tells  us  how  the  hands  oi 
"  the  God  of  peace  "  have  bended  it. 

II.  The  special  bedemftivb  act  hebb  oelebbated.  It  is  that  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  Lord  Jesus — an  event  not  referred  to  elsewhere  in  the  Epistle.  The  God  who 
works  peace  had  sent  his  Son  to  obey  and  suffer  and  die  for  man's  sin ;  and  the  same 
God  had  brought  him  again  from  the  dead,  and  confirmed  him  in  his  high  dignity  as 
"  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep."  Throughout  this  prayer  of  benediction  the  writer 
seems  to  have  in  view  Isa.  Ixiii.  11 — 14,  and  to  think  of  the  Lord  Jesus  by  contrast 
with  Moses,  and  the  other  shepherds  of  ancient  Israel.  Jacob  and  Joseph,  Moses  and 
Aaron,  Samuel  and  David,  hal  all  been  true " shepherds  of  his  flock;"  but  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  "  the  great  Shepherd."  The  H  ebrews  were  to  chei  ifh  the  memory  of  their  own 
former  pastors  (ver.  7),  and  they  had  other  pastors  set  over  them  now  (ver.  17) ;  but  the 
Lord  Jesus,  the  crucified  and  risen  One,  was  ever  their  chief  Pastor.  He  had  laid  down 
his  life  as  "  the  good  Shepherd,"  but  in  rising  from  the  deafJ  and  ascending  to  heaven 
he  had  shown  himself  to  be  "  the  great  Sheplierd."  On  every  account  he  is  entitled  to 
be  called  "  great ; "  e.g.  because  all  the  propb«ts  spoke  of  him,  because  all  former  true 


OB.  xm.  1—26.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBBEW&  406 

shepherds  were  types  of  him,  because  he  is  himself  mighty  to  Mive,  and  because  of 
the  vastness  of  the  flock  over  which  he  shall  preside.  Here  in  particular,  however, 
the  apostle  calls  him  "  great "  because  he  has  sealed  the  new  and  "  eternal  covenant " 
with  his  "  blood."  That  blood  was  the  blood  of  God  himself  (Acts  zx.  28)  ;  and  so 
the  covenant  confirmed  with  such  a  costly  sacrifice  cannot  but  be  everlasting.  Not 
only  80,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  died,  not  merely  as  a  federal  offering ;  he  died  as  a  Sin 
Offering.  His  death  completed  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  stipulations  on  his  and 
our  part ;  and,  as  we  know  that  God  also  will  be  faithful  to  the  treaty  on  his  side,  we 
are  sure  it  shall  stand  for  ever.  Christ  is  "  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant "  and 
"  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,"  through  virtue  of  the  merit  of  his  blood. 

III.  Thb  BFiBiTUAL  BLESSING  FRAYED  FOB.  (Ter.  2L)  It  is  the  gift  of  perfect 
sanctification,  a  blessing  that  had  been  expressly  promised  and  guaranteed  in  connection 
with  the  new  covenant  (Jer.  xxxi.  33,  34).  The  God  who  has  elevated  the  Lord  Jesus 
to  be  the  Head  of  the  final  dispensation  is  both  able  and  willing  to  perform  his  own 
covenant  promise.  "Make  you  perfect;"  t.e.  put  you  into  order,  restore  you,  equip 
you.  Naturally,  every  man  needs  to  have  his  soul  reorganized  before  he  can  learn  to 
do  God's  will.  And  sometimes  a  good  man  requires,  as  many  of  these  Hebrew  believers 
did,  a  second  conversion.  The  apostle  prays  that  their  equipment  may  be  thorough  ; 
that  it  may  be  a  deep  and  comprehensive  work  within  the  soul,  wrought  there  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  which  shall  bear  fruit  outwardly  in  a  career  of  perfect 
holiness  that  shall  be  "  well-pleasing  in  God's  sight."  It  is  not  enough  to  practise 
only  some  of  the  virtues  of  the  Christian  character ;  we  must  be  "  perfect  in  every  good 
thing" — ^in  worship  and  work,  in  thought  and  feeling;,  in  body  and  spirit.  The  rule 
of  our  perfect  equi|iment  is  "  his  will" — the  mind  of  God  as  made  kno.wn  to  us  in  Holy 
Scripture.  And  the  medium  by  which  it  is  accomplished  is  "through  Jesus  "Christ" 
— by  means  of  his  gracious  operations  upon  the  heart  by  his  Spirit.  Perfect  holiness 
in  man  is  all  of  his  creation:  not  by  his  doctrine  merely,  or  by  faith  in  him;  but 
through  himself,  and  by  virtue  of  the  believer's  union  to  him. 

IV.  The  doxolooy  with  which  the  pratbb  closes.  "  To  whom  " — t.e.  as  we 
take  it,  to  "  the  God  of  peace  "  who  is  addressed  in  the  prayer.  And  yet,  when  "  tlie 
glory  "  is  ascribed  to  him,  it  is  given  to  all  the  three  Divine  Persons — to  Ood  the 
Father,  who  "  brought  again  our  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead ; "  to  God  the  Son, 
"  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep"  and  Mediator  of  "the  eternal  covenant;"  and 
to  G"od  the  Spirit,  the  executive  of  the  Deity,  who  personally  "worketh  in  us" 
and  "  makes  us  perfect."  This  doxology  is  the  language  of  spiritual  instinct ;  and, 
being  such,  it  is  irrepressible.  So  soon  as  any  human  heart  really  apprehends  thnt 
Jehovah  is  "  the  God  of  peace,"  and  feels  grateful  for  his  unspeakable  gift  of  "  the 
great  Shepherd,"  and  accepts  the  blessings  of  "  the  eternal  covenant,"  and  becomes 
conscious  of  the  transforming  influence  of  grace  within  itself, — how  is  that  heart  to  be 
restrained  from  breaking  forth  into  adoring  praise,  and  from  uttering  the  desire  that 
the  Divine  glory  should  be  universal  and  eternal?  May  our  souls  be  in  such  full 
sympathy  with  this  prayer  of  benediction  m  to  join  with  emphasis  is  the  apostle'^ 
rapturoua  and  fervent  "  Amen"! 

Vers.  22 — 25. — Last  worda.  If  the  previous  part  of  this  chapter  is  of  the  nature  ul' 
%  postscript,  these  closing  verses  seem  to  be  a  second  and  briefer  postscript  appended 
to  the  first.  The  apostle's  loving  heart  lingers  fondly  over  the  close  of  the  letter,  and 
prolongs  its  last  words. 

I.  He  obaves  a  kindly  beceftion  fob  the  Efistlb.  (Ver.  22.)  Although  his 
book  is  an  inspired  message,  he  does  not  urge  its  Divine  authority  as  the  reason  why 
it  should  be  carefully  studied.  He  rather  solicits  the  Hebrews  as  his  "  brethren,"  and 
"  for  love's  sake,"  to  "  bear  with  the  word  of  exhortation."  It  is  interesting  to  mark 
the  description  of  the  book  which  is  thus  given  by  its  author.  Tlie  theologian  deals 
with  it  as  a  profound  theological  treatise;  the  expositor  regards  it  as  the  New  Xestameiit 
counterpart  of  the  Book  of  Leviticus;  but  the  writer  himself  calls  it  simply  a  "word 
of  exhortation."  But  when  we  study  the  structure  of  the  Epistle,  we  find  that  this 
description,  although  modest,  is  most  appropriate.  What  is  often  spoken  of  as  the 
doctrinal  part  (ch.  i.  1 — x.  18)  is  itself  full  also  of  earnest  expostulations  and  warnings; 
^nd  these  but  prepare  the  way  for  the  prolonged  and  solemn  practical  appeal  of  the 


106  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xin.  1—25. 

closing  cliapters  (z.  19  to  the  end).  The  Epistle  was  written  for  the  purpose  of 
pressing  upon  its  readers  the  duty  of  unflinching  loyalty  to  Christ.  "  The  key-no'e 
of  it  is  struck  and  heard  throughout  in  the  hortatory  parts,  to  which  the  doctrinal 
elements  are  subservient"  (Dr.  A.  B.  Davidson).  The  apostle  might  have  enforced  his 
request  in  this  verse  by  many  weighty  reasons ;  but  he  mentions  only  one,  viz.  the 
brevity  of  the  Epistle.  He  haid  written  "  in  few  words  " — few,  as  compared  with  (1) 
the  extent  and  importance  of  the  subject;  (2)  his  own  burning  interest  in  it,  which 
would  have  made  it  easy  for  him  to  dilate ;  (3)  the  gravity  of  the  Crisis  in  relation  to 
the  spiritual  life  of  the  Hebrews.  But  he  had  rigorously  condensed  his  matter,  that 
his  readers  might  not  be  deterred  from  the  study  of  the  Epistle,  or  their  patience 
exhausted  beroie  the  close  of  the-  argument.  It  was  desirable  that  when  it  should  be 
read  aloud  in  their  Churclies — a  task  which  would  occupy  less  than  an  hour — the  last 
words  of  it  should  leave  the  people  longing  rather  than  loathing.  And  what  a  marvel 
of  condensation  is  this  book  to  the  Hebrews!  During  the  preparation  of  these 
homilies,  the  writer  has  had  his  conviction  of  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Epistle 
greatly  deepened,— especially  in  view  of  its  wealth  of  holy  thought,  its  lucid  expositions 
and  ar:^uuieiits,  its  rhetorical  splendour,  its  singular  spiritual  elevation,  and  its  living 
power  to  pierce  the  heart  and  conscience.  What  a  blank  there  would  have  been  in 
Holy  Scripture  had  this  book,  which  is  the  key  to  the  entire  Levitical  system,  been 
excluded  from  the  canon  I  Had  such  a  calamity  been  allowed  to  happen,  the  New 
Testament  would  have  been  utterly  silent  about  the  priesthood  of  Christ — this  great 
theme  being  dealt  with  exclusively  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

n.  He  sends  kikdly  tidings  and  oreetinos.  (Vers.  23,  24.)  Cheering  news  is 
given  about  Timothy ;  he  "  hath  been  set  at  liberty."  The  expression  seems  to  imply 
that  this  \ie\'  >ved  spiritual  "  son  "  of  Paul  had  been  in  prison  and  had  been  discharged. 
It  was  the  writer's  intention,  should  Timothy  and  he  meet,  that  the  two  should  together 
visit  the  Hi  brews.  (This  reference  to  Timothy,  as  well  as  the  salutations  in  ver.  24, 
have  been  eagerly  canvassed  by  commentators,  in  their  vain  endeavouis  to  arrive  at 
certainty  regarding  the  author  of  the  Epistle,  the  place  of  its  composition,  and  the 
Churches  to  which  it  was  addressed.)  The  apostle's  greetings  are  sent  throagh  the 
members  to  the  spiritual  rulers,  as  if  to  remind  ua  that  it  is  the  members  of  congrega- 
tions that  constitute  the  Church,  and  not  their  pastors  alone.  Still,  the  apostle  is 
careful  to  give  honour  to  the  office-bearers:  he  has  already  exhorted  the  people  to 
"  ohey  "  them  (ver.  17),  and  now  he  sends  his  farewell  salutation  first  to  them.  "  Ttey 
of  Italy  "  refers  to  the  greetings  of  Italian  brethren ;  but  it  cannot  be  determined  from 
the  words  whether  the  Epistle  was  sent  from  Italy  or  to  Italy.  Such  Christian 
courtesies  as  those  of  ver.  24  are  not  to  be  dismissed  as  mere  formalities.  They  remind 
us  of  the  duty  of  loving  our  brethren  in  the  Lord  everywhere.  Spiritual  love  is 
international.  It  is  cosmopolitan.  Wherever  Christians  are,  our  hearts  should  warm 
to  them.  Salutations  like  those  before  us  derive  their  value  (1)  from  the  character  of 
the  sender,  and  (2)  from  their  substance.  Here  we  have  the  affectionate  messages  of 
a  great  apostle,  or  at  least  of  an  eminent  apostolical  man — the  author  of  one  of  the 
noblest  of  the  Epistles  of  the  New  Testament.  And  his  greetings  are  not  empty 
compliments.  He  has  shown  himself  on  every  page  of  his  letter  to  be  deeply  in 
earnest,  and  to  have  a  heart  brimful  of  loving  solicitude  for  the  souls  of  those  to  whom 
he  writes.  Let  us  learn,  accordingly,  the  duty  of  courtesy  and  kindliness  in  oar 
Christian  intercourse.    "As  ye  enter  into  the  house,  salute  it"  (Matt.  x.  12). 

III.  He  closes  vnTH  the  Pauline  benediction.  (Ver.  25^  The  same  form  of 
blessing  is  used  by  Paul  at  the  close  of  every  one  of  his  thirteen  lei  ters ;  and,  apparently 
because  Paul  had  already  appropriated  this  form,  none  of  the  other  writers  of  New 
Testament  Epistles  conclude  with  any  expression  which  is  at  all  similar.  This  fact 
seems  to  corroborate  the  opinion  that  this  anonymous  Epistle  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
Apostle  Paul,  so  far  as  regards  the  authorship  of  its  thoughts,  and  although  it  may  have 
received  its  literary  form  from  another  mind  and  hand;  The  final  adieu  is  brief;  but  it 
could  not  be  richer  or  more  comprehensive.  The  word  "  grace  "  expresses  the  sum  of 
all  blessing,  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  The  author  desires  for  his  dear  readers  grace 
of  every  kind — efficacious  grace,  preventing  grace,  co-operating  grace,  habitual  grace. 
For  grace  blesses  with  pardon.  It  purifies  from  sin.  It  comforts  Amid  soxto^,  H 
strengthens  for  duty.     And  it  will  at  length  ripen  into  glory. 


CH.  XIII.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  407 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vere,  1—S. — Broiherly  love.  "  Let  brotherly  love  continue.  Be  not  forgetful  to," 
etc  The  vrriter  now  proceeds  to  exhort  his  readers  to  the  practice  of  sundry  Christian 
virtues.  He  begins  by  enjoining  the  maintenance  and  manifestation  of  brotherly 
love. 

L  The  maintenanob  of  beothbblt  lovb.  "Let  brotherly  love  continue."  1. 
That  this  affection  existed  is  implied.  That  it  had  been  exercised  in  former  times  is 
clear  from  ch.  x.  32 — 34.  That  it  was  existent  and  active  at  the  time  when  this 
Epistle  was  written  appears  from  ch.  vi.  10.  2.  That  this  affection  was  imperilled  is 
also  implied.  There  are  several  things  which  may  check  the  growth  and  extinguish 
the  life  of  brotherly  love.  (1)  Diversity  of  opinion.  We  are  each  gifted  with 
individuality ;  we  sometimes  look  at  things  from  different  standpoints ;  we  arrive  at 
different  conclusions.  This  is  the  case  in  the  interpretation  of  the  sacred  Scriptures, 
and  in  other  matters.  Differences  of  opinion  sometimeK  lead  to  differences  of  leeling, 
to  coldness  and  estrangement.  (2)  Diversity  of  gifts.  The  great  Master  gives  to  one 
man  five  talents,  to  another  two,  and  to  another  one.  There  is  danger  that  pride  in 
those  of  superior  gifts,  or  envy  in  those  who  are  less  gifted,  may  crush  this  holy 
affection.  (3)  Misunderstandings  may  arise  amongst  Christian  brethren  and  blight 
their  love  of  each  other.  3.  That  this  affection  should  ie  maintained.  "  Let  brotherly 
love  continue."  Let  it  remain.  Guard  against  those  things  which  endanger  its  exis-' 
tenc«.  Cherish  it.  This  love  of  the  brethren  is  not  to  be  limited  to  those  who  belong 
to  the  same  ecclesiastical  community,  or  to  those  who  hold  the  same  views  of  Christian 
doctrine ;  it  should  embrace  all  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  Grace  be  with  all 
them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  uncorruptness."  The  importance  of  maintaining 
this  affection  is  manifest  from  many  Divine  utterances  (John  xiii.  34,  35 ;  xv.  12,  17  ; 
1  John  iii.  11, 14—18 ;  iv.  7,  8, 11,  20,  21). 

II.  The  manifestation  of  brotherly  love.  Two  forms  in  which  this  affection 
should  be  expressed  are  adduced  in  our  text.  1.  Hospitality  towards  strangers.  "  Be 
not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers :  for  thereby  some  have  entertained  angels  unawares." 
Consider :  (1)  The  duty.  Hospitality  is  frequently  enjoined  and  commended  in  the 
Bible  (Matt.  x.  40—42 ;  xxv.  34—46  ;  Luke  x.  4— 7 ;  Rom.  xiL  13 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ; 
Titus  i.  8 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  9).  "  The  primitive  Christians,"  says  Calmet,  "considered  one 
principal  part  of  their  duty  to  consist  in  showing  hospitality  to  strangers.  They  were,  , 
in  fact,  so  ready  in  discharging  this  duty,  that  the  very  heathen  admired  them  for  it 
They  were  hospitable  to  all  strangers,  but  especially  to  those  who  were  of  the  house- 
hold of  faith.  Believers  scarcely  ever  travelled  without  letters  of  communion,  which 
testified  the  purity  of  their  faith,  and  procured  for  them  a  favourable  reception  wherevei 
the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  was  known."  In  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  the 
great  Teacher  presented  to  his  disciples  a  perfect  example  of  Christian  hospitality.  (2) 
The  motive  by  which  we  are  encouraged  to  perform  tliis  duty.  "  For  thereby  some 
have  entertained  angels  unawares."  There  is  a  reference  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.)  and 
to  Lot  (Gen.  xix.).  Many  a  guest  has  proved  as  an  angel  to  his  entertainers,  brighten- 
ing the  home  by  his  presence,  and  leaving  behind  him  precious  memories  and  saving 
influences.  The  kindness  we  have  shown  to  strangers  has  often  come  back  to  us  with 
compound  interest,  and  in  higher  and  holier  forms.  Therefore, "  forget  not  to  show  love 
unto  strangers."  2.  Sympathy  towards  sufferers.  "  Remember  them  that  are  in  bonds, 
as  bound  with  them ;  and  them  which  suffer  adversity,  as  being  yourselves  also  in  the 
body."  Notice  two  points  :  (1)  The  obligation.  "  Remember  them,"  etc.  All  who  are 
distressed  should  be  remembered  tenderly,  sympathized  with  heartily,  and  succoured  as 
far  as  opportunity  will  allow.  "  Weep  with  them  that  weep."  "  Bear  ye  one  another's 
burdens,"  etc.  (2)  The  consideration  presented  as  an  incitement  to  the  fultllment  of 
this  obligation.  "  As  being  yourselves  also  in  the  body."  We  are  not  beyond  the  reach 
of  persecution  or  distress.  We  may  be  called  to  suffer  as  some  of  our  Christian 
brethren  are  now  suffering,  and  then  we  should  need  the  sympathy  which  they  now 
require.  Here  is  a  beautiful  example  of  this  sym|)athy.  "  Thomas  Samson  was  a 
working  miner,  and  working  hard  for  his  bread.  The  captain  of  the  mine  said  to  him 
on  one  occasion,  'Thomas,  I've  got  an  easier  berth  for  you,  where  there  is  compara- 


106  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.        [oh.  xm.  1—25. 

tively  little  to  do,  and  where  you  can  earn  more  money.  Will  you  accept  it?'  What  do 
you  think  he  said  ?  '  Captain,  there's  our  poor  brother  Tregoney.  He  has  a  sick  body, 
and  he  is  not  able  to  work  as  hard  as  I  am.  I  fear  his  toil  will  shorten  his  useful  life. 
Will  you  let  him  have  the  berth?'  The  captain,  pleased  with  his  generosity,  sent  for 
Tregoney,  and  gave  him  the  berth.  Thomas  was  gratified,  and  added, '  I  can  work  • 
little  longer  yet.'"— W.  J. 

Ver.  6. — Christian  contentment  enjoined  and  encouraged.  "  Let  yonr  conversation 
be  without  covetousness,"  etc.    Our  subject  naturally  falls  into  two  main  branches. 

I.  The  duty  to  which  wb  abb  summoned.  This  duty  is  here  stated  negatively 
and  positively.  1.  Freedom  from  tKelove  of  money,  "  Let  your  conversation  be  without 
oovetousness."  Revised  Yersion,  "  Be  ye  free  from  the  luve  of  money."  This  is  a  sin 
to  which  many  are  very  proue,  and  the  descendants  of  Jacob,  to  some  of  whom  this 
letter  was  addressed,  as  much,  or  perhaps  more  so,  than  others.  It  is  an  exceedingly 
insidious  and  perilous  sin.  It  does  not  carry  any  outward  and  visible  stigma,  as  some 
sins  do.  They  who  are  guilty  of  it  may  be  respectable  in  appearance,  maintain  a  good 
reputation  in  society,  and  retain  their  position  in  the  communion  of  the  Christian 
Church,  while  the  vigour  and  health  and  even  the  very  life  of  their  Christian  character 
are  being  subtly  consumed  by  it.  There  is  no  sin  more  destructive  of  spiritual  life,  or 
more  fatal  to  the  highest  and  divinest  things  in  man.  It  quenches  the  nobler  aspira- 
tions of  the  soul.  It  degrades  the  soul  itself  until,  oblivious  of  its  high  calling,  and 
looking  simply  upon  material  or  perishable  possessions,  man  says,  "Soul,  thou  hast 
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years ;  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  be  merry."  And  it  is 
the  prolific  parent  of  other  sins, "  the  root  of  all  kinds  of  evil "  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  Let  us 
endeavour  to  be  free  from  this  ensnaring  and  destructive  sin.  2.  Contentment  with 
present  possessions.  "  Be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have."  Ward  Beecher  says 
well,  "  It  is  not  to  be  the  content  of  indifference,  of  indolence,  of  unambitious  stupidity, 
but  the  content  of  industrious  fidelity.  When  men  are  building  the  foundations  of  vast 
structures,  they  must  needs  labour  far  below  the  surface  and  in  disagreeable  conditions. 
But  every  course  of  stone  which  they  lay  raises  them  higher ;  and  at  length,  when  they 
reach  the  surface,  they  have  laid  such  solid  rock  under  them  that  they  need  not  fear 
now  to  carry  up  their  walls,  through  towering  stories,  till  they  overlook  the  whole 
neighbourhood.  A  man  proves  himself  fit  to  go  higher  who  shows  that  he  is  faithful 
where  he  is.  A  man  that  will  not  do  well  in  his  present  place  because  he  longs  to  he 
higher,  is  fit  neither  to  be  where  he  is  nor  yet  above  it :  he  is  already  too  high,  ami 
should  be  put  lower."  When  we  consider  how  few  our  real  needs  are,  we  may  well 
cultivate  contentment  "  with  such  things  as  we  have."  "  Having  food  and  raiment,  let 
us  therewith  be  content."  And  contentment  is  blessed.  It  softens  our  privations  and 
sweetens  our  provisions.  "  Contentment  will  make  a  cottage  look  as  fair  as  a  palace. 
He  is  not  a  poor  man  that  hath  but  little,  but  he  is  a  pour  man  that  wants  much."  In 
St.  Paul  we  have  an  illustrious  example  of  this  virtue :  "  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therein  to  be  content,"  etc.  (Phil.  iv.  11 — 13).  Like  him,  let  us  seek  to 
learn  this  lesson  completely,  and  to  practise  this  virtue  constantly  "  in  him  that 
strengthenelh  "  us. 

II.  Thb  fact  by  which  we  abb  bncoubagbd  to  fulfil  this  duty.  "For  he 
hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  These  exact  words  do  not  occur  in 
the  sacred  Scriptures ;  hut  the  sentiment  is  frequently  expressed  therein  (cf.  Deut. 
xxxL  6 ;  Josh.  i.  6 ;  1  Chron.  xxviiL  20).  Extraoidinary  is  the  emphasis  of  expression 
in  this  assurance.  No  less  than  five  negatives  are  employed  by  the  writer  to  give  force 
to  this  one  brief  yet  blessed  promise.  The  argument  of  the  text  is  this,  that  the 
abiding  presence  of  God  with  us  is  a  suOScient  reason  for  contentment.  It  is  so  because 
his  presence  guarantees :  1.  The  supply  of  all  our  need.  We  have  all  things  in  him ; 
«.g.:  (1)  Provision  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11 ;  Matt.  vi.  25—34).  (2)  Protection  (Ps.  cxxi.  1; 
Rom.  viii.  31 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  13).  (3)  Guidance  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  23,  24 ;  Prov.  iii.  5, 6).  "  My 
Ood  shall  fully  supply  every  need  of  yours,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  in  Christ 
Jesus.'  2.  Z%e  sanctification  of  owr portion.  His  gracious  presence  will  sweeten  the 
poorest  fare,  and  cheer  the  most  depressed  condition,  and  exalt  the  lowliest  circum- 
stances. To  his  faithful  suffering  servants  his  presence  transformed  a  loathsome 
dungeon  into  a  pnlace  beautiful  (Acts  xvL  24,  26).     It  is  stated  that  Seneca  .laid  Ir 


CH.  xm.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  409 

Polybius,  *'  Never  complain  of  thy  hard  fortune  bo  long  as  Caesar  is  thy  friend."  How 
much  more  may  we  say  to  every  true  Christian, "  Never  complain  of  such  thlnga  as  you 
have  so  long  as  you  have  God  for  your  Portion"  1 

"The  rich  man  in  his  wealth  oonfldea. 
But  In  my  God  my  trust  abides. 

Laugh  na  ye  will,  I  hold 
This  one  thing  fast  that  he  hath  taught  t 
Who  trusts  in  God  shall  want  for  naughi 

"Tes,  Lord:  thou  art  as  rich  to-day 
As  thou  hast  been,  and  ihall  be  aye; 

I  rest  on  thee  alone. 
Thy  riches  to  my  soul  be  given, 
A&d  'tis  enough  for  earth  and  heaven  I" 

(Hani  Baehs.) 

W.J. 

▼er.  6. — A  Mumphant  atsnrane$.  "  So  that  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  is  my 
Helper,"  eto.  The  writer  in  our  text  adopts  the  language  of  Ps.  cxviiL  A.  Three 
distinct,  yet  closely  related  topics  for  meditation  are  suggested. 

L  Man's  nebd  of  help.  What  a  dependent  creature  is  man  I  Mark  this  in  the 
different  stages  of  his  life.  1.  How  utterly  helpless  in  infancy  1  2,  How  needy  in 
youthl  Instruction,  direction,  counsel,  support,  are  indispensable  to  youthful  life,  if  it 
is  to  grow  into  usefulness  unto  men  and  acceptability  unto  God.  3.  How  dependent  m 
manhood  I  No  one  is  independent.  Even  the  wealthiest,  the  wisest,  the  mightiest, 
cannot  stand  alone.  We  need  help  (1)  from  each  other.  "  We  are  members  one  of 
another."  "  The  members  should  have  the  same  care  one  for  another  "  (cf.  1  Cor.  xiii.) 
We  need  help  (2)  from  God.  "  He  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things; ...  for 
in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  It  was  truly  said  by  Fenelon,  "  Cbd 
has  but  to  withdraw  his  hand  which  bears  us,  to  plunge  us  back  into  the  abyss  of  our 
nothingness,  as  a  stone  suspended  in  the  air  falls  by  its  own  weight  the  moment  it 
ceases  to  be  held."  4.  How  imbecile  in  old  age  f  This  is  often  a  "  second  childhood," 
a  season  of  almost  complete  dependence  upon  others  both  physically  and  mentally. 
6.  There  are  times,  when  man  specially  feels  his  need  of  hdp.  In  af9iction  we  fee' 
our  need  of  patience ;  in  sorrow,  of  consolation  ;  in  perplexity,  of  guidance,  etc. 

XL  Ck)D'B  PB0TI8I0N  OF  HELP.  Gk)d  has  put  it  into  our  hearts  to  help  each  other. 
Many  are  the  ways  in  which  this  is  done  ;  e.g.  by  sympathy,  by  counsel,  by  gifts,  etc. 
But  God  himself  is  the  great  Helper.  A  helper  does  not  do  everything  for  us.  He 
supplements  our  weakness  with  his  strength  ;  our  ignorance  and  inexperience  with  his 
wisdom.  We  must  do  our  ]}art,  and  he  will  not  fail  in  his.  Consider  what  a  glorious 
Helper  God  is,  1.  He  is  all-sufficient.  His  wisdom  is  iofinite.  The  treasures  of  his 
grace  are  inexhaustible.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  sun,  after  the  lapse  of  many  and 
vast  ages,  may  become  dark  and  cold,  or  that  the  waters  of  old  ocean  may  be  drank  up ; 
hut  it  is  impustiible  and  inconceivable  that  the  infinite  resources  of  our  Divine  Helper 
should  ever  fail.  2.  lie  is  ever-available.  We  cannot  seek  him  and  discover  that  he 
is  inaccessible  to  us.  We  cannot  ajiproach  him  inopportunely.  He  is  "  a  very  present 
Help  in  trouble."  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble :  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  glorify  me."  3.  He  is  ever-gracious.  His  willingness  to  help  is  as  great  and  as 
constant  as  his  ability.  Man  varies  in  his  moods:  to-day  ho  is  genial  and  kind, 
to-morrow  he  is  cold  and  harsh.  But  God  is  ever  merciful,  ever  disposed  to  help  and 
bless  his  creatures. 

III.  Thb  believer's  assurance  of  the  help  of  God.  "  So  that  we  may  boldly  say. 
The  Lord  is  my  Helper;  I  will  not  fear:  what  shall  man  do  unto  me?"  1.  This 
confidence  rests  upon  ths  promise  of  Ood.  "He  haih  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee"  (ver.  5).  His  promises  are  perfectly  reliable.  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that 
he  should  lie ;  neither  the  son  of  man,"  etc.  (Numb,  xxiii.  19).  "  Heaven  and  earth 
shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  away."  "  The  Scripture  cannot  b« 
broken."  "  He  abideth  faithful  j  fur  he  cannot  deny  himself."  His  promise,  then,  is  an 
immovable  basis  for  our  confidence.     2.  This  conjidenae  intmrei  thi  eourage  </  On 


410  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.        [oh.  xm.  1—25. 

believer,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Helper ;  I  will  not  fear :  what  shall  mail  do  unto  me  ? " 
The  man  over  whom  God  casts  his  shield  is  invulnerahle.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  ?  "  "  Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is 
good?"  No  crafty  foe  can  elude  the  vigilance  of  his  eye;  no  subtle  scheme  can 
surprise  his  infinite  mind ;  no  strong  antagonist  can  cope  with  his  almighty  arm.  If  he 
is  our  Helper,  man  cannot  injure  us.  If  he  is  our  Helper,  our  resources  cannot  fail.  If 
he  is  our  Helper,  we  may  pursue  our  life-path  chanting  cheerfully,  "  Gud  is  our  Befuge 
and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  in  trouble,"  etc.  (Ps.  xlvi.). — W.  J. 

Ver.  8.-2^  unchangeahleness  of  Jesu$  Christ,  "  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday, 
and  to-day,  and  for  ever."    The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  unchangeable — 

L  In  HI8  Pebson.  "  Our  Lord's  Godhead  is  the  seat  of  his  personality.  The  Son  of 
Mary  is  not  a  distinct  human  person  mysteriously  linked  with  the  Divine  nature  of 
the  eternal  Word.  The  Person  of  the  Son  of  Mary  is  Divine  and  eternal.  It  is  none 
other  than  the  Person  of  the  Word,"  ^  This  personality  is  immutable.  This  has  been 
already  asserted  by  the  writer  of  this  Epistle :  "  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid 
the  foundation  of  the  earth,"  etc.  (ch.  i.  10 — 12).  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever  "  in  his  great  attributes — his  eternity,  spirituality,  omniscience, 
omnipotence,  etc.  He  is  the  same  in  his  perfect  and  blessed  chviracter — in  his  right- 
eousness and  faithfulness,  his  love  and  mercy,  his  forbearance  and  tenderness,  etc  In 
this  respect  how  vast  is  the  difference  between  him  and  usl  We  are  ever  changing  in 
many  respects.  Our  outward  appearances,  the  particles  of  which  our  bodies  are  com- 
posed, the  opinions  which  we  entertain,  the  experiences  which  we  pass  through,  the 
characters  which  we  are  forming, — all  these  change.  Bat  he  ia  sublimely  unchangeable, 
eternally  and  infinitely  perfect. 

IL  Im  his  Wobd.  The  teaching  of  our  Lord,  like  his  personality,  continues  and 
changes  not.  His  words  are  true,  vital,  suited  to  the  conditions  and  needs  of  human 
nature  and  life.  More  than  eighteen  centuries  have  passed  away  since  they  were, 
uttered ;  but  they  have  lost  none  of  their  clearness,  or  freshness,  or  force.  They  are 
still  the  great  fountains  of  religious  light  to  our  race.  And  the  noblest  human  spirits 
still  say  to  him,  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life." 
It  has  been  well  said  by  Dr.  Parker,  "  Plato's  definitions  are  practically  forgotten, 
but  the  Nazarene's  words  intermingle  with  universal  civilization;  A  great  composer 
said  he  was  spending  a  long  time  over  his  work  because  he  intended  it  to  live  long,  but 
this  Galilean  peasant  talks  extemporaneously,  as  if  simply  answering  the  question  of 
the  hour  ;  yet  his  words  float  over  all  generations,  and  are  prized  by  men  to-day  as  if 
they  had  been  addressed  exclusively  to  themselves.  These  '  sayings '  are  not  local 
lamps,  but  suns  set  in  the  firmament  commanding  the  range  of  all  nations.  ...  In 
Christ's  '  sayings '  there  was  always  something  beyond — a  quickening  sense  that  the 
words  were  but  the  surface  of  the  thought ;  there  was  nothing  to  betoken  conclusion, 
much  less  exhaustion ;  there  was  ever  a  luminous  opening  even  on  the  clouds  that  lay 
deepest  along  the  horizon,  which  invited  the  spectator  to  advance  and  behold  yet  fuller 
viaions "  ('  Ecce  Deus ").  How  different  is  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  firom  the 
changing  opinions,  specmations,  and  theories  of  men — even  of  distinguished  men  I  Of 
every  province  of  human  thought  and  investigation  we  may  truthfully  say^ 

"Ooi  little  systems  have  their  day  ; 
They  have  their  day,  and  cease  to  he." 

Bnt  Jesus  said,  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass 
away."  "  The  Word  of  God  liveth  and  abideth.  .  .  .  The  Word  of  the  Lord  abideth 
for  ever." 

III.  In  bib  wobk.  Part  of  his  great  work  was  perfectly  and  splendidly  accomplished 
while  he  was  upon  earth.  The  work  which  was  given  him  to  do  upon  earth,  says 
Dr.  Wardlaw,  "  was  the  expiation  of  human  guilt,  and  the  provision  of  a  righteousness 
(or  the  justification  of  the  ungodly ;  the  laying  of  the  groundwork  of  man's  redemption 
— the  foundation  on  which  might  rest  together  the  glory  of  God  and  the  hopes  ol 
■iiuwn.    But  hii  mediatorial  work  did  not  cease  then.    It  does  not  properly  terminate 

'  Dr.  Liddon'i '  Divinity  of  our  Ixwd.' 


OH.  xui.  1— 26.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  411 

till  'the  end  come,'  when  he  shall  have  accomplished  all  the  ends  for  which  his  office 
as  Mediator  had  been  assumed." 

"  He  who  for  man  their  Stirety  stood, 
And  poured  on  earth  his  precious  blood. 
Pursues  in  heaven  his  mighty  plan ; 
The  Saviour  and  the  Friend  of  man." 

(Logan.) 

Many  of  the  miracles  which  he  wrought  when  upon  earth  are  illustrations,  parables,  of 
the  work  which  he  is  ever  perljorming  in  human  spirits.  1.  As  Saviour  of  sinners  he 
is  the  same.  The  cross  upon  which  be  gave  himself  in  death  for  us  has  lost  none  of  its 
ancient  power.  By  his  glorious  gospel  and  his  Holy  Spirit  he  is  still  convincing  men 
of  sin,  drawing  them  to  himself,  and  imparting  to  them  pardon  and  peace,  liberty  and 
joy.  2.  As  the  Helper  of  his  people  he  is  the  same.  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  inter- 
cession for  them  "  (ch.  vii.  25).  "  Christ's  perpetual  presentation  of  himself  before  the 
Father,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "  is  that  which  constitutes  his  intercession."  He  is  in 
the  presence  of  God  as  our  Eepresentative,  our  Advocate,  and  our  Friend. 

From  the  unchangeableness  of  Jesus  Christ  we  infer :  1.  That  he  is  essentially  Divine. 
All  created  beings  change.  This  is  one  thing  in  which  each  and  all  of  them  are  alike. 
We  are  different  to-day  from  what  we  were  yesterday,  and  to-morrow  we  shall  differ 
from  what  we  are  to-day.  Immutability  belonss  only  to  God  (of  ch.  i.  10 — 12).  2.  That 
he  is  worthy  of  our  utmost  confidence.  If  he  were  fickle,  changeable  in  his  character  and 
purposes,  loving  man  to-day  and  regarding  him  with  indifference  to-morrow,  how  could 
we  trust  him  ?  Nay,  if  it  were  even  po-ssible  for  him  to  change,  how  could  we  calmly 
and  confidently  commit  our  souls  to  him  ?  But  seeing  that  he  is  what  he  is  in  his 
character  and  in  his  relation  to  us,  and  that  he  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and 
for  ever,"  we  may  repose  in  him  the  fullest  confidence  of  our  being.  3.  Tliat  the  success 
of  his  cause  is  assured.  In  the  preceding  verse  we  were  reminded  of  the  death  of 
Christiati  ministers  and  elders ;  but  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  ever  liveth  and  is 
ever  the  same.    "  He  shall  not  fail,  nor  be  discouraged,"  etc.  (Isa.  xlii.  4). — W.  J. 

Ver.  10. —  The  Christian  altar.  "  We  hare  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no  right  to 
eat,"  etc.    Here  are  three  points  which  require  notice. 

I.  The  Christian  ALTAB.  "We  have  an  altar."  One  of  the  positions  which  the 
writer  of  this  Epistle  endeavours  to  establish  is  this,  that  by  the  renunciation  of 
Judaism  these  Hebrew  Christians  had  not  lost  anyihing  of  real  value,  or  that  the  good 
in  Judaism  was  perfected  in  Christianity.  He  shows  that  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Head  of 
the  Christian  dispensation,  they  had  One  far  greater  than  Moses,  by  whom  the  elder 
economy  was  given.  For  giving  up  the  Levitical  priesthood  there  was  far  more  than 
compensation  in  the  possession  of  an  interest  in  the  great  High  Priest.  MoreoTer,  the 
tabernacle  in  which  our  great  High  Priest  appears  for  us  is  "  greater  and  more  perfect" 
than  either  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  or  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  And  in  our  text 
he  points  out  that  Christians  have  also  an  altar  with  its  provisions  and  blessings.  By 
this  altar  we  understand  the  cross  upon  which  our  Lord  offered  himself  a  Sacrifice  for 
human  sin.*  1.  On  this  altar  the  perfect  Sacrifice  was  offered.  (We  have  already  dealt 
with  the  perfection  of  Christ's  saciifice  in  our  homilies  on  ch.  x.  5 — 10,  and  12,  13.) 
2.  This  altar  has  superseded  all  other  altars.  The  perfection  of  this  sacrifice  rendered 
its  repetition  unnecessary,  and  abolished  for  ever  the  imperfect  and  typical  sacrifices  of 
the  earlier  dispensation  (of.  ch.  vii.  27 ;  x.  10 — 18). 

IL  The  provision  vthioh  this  altab  ftjbnisheb.  The  writer  speaks  of  eating  of 
this  altar.  The  reference  is  to  the  fact  that  certain  portions  of  some  of  the  sacrifices 
under  the  Mosaic  economy  were  eaten  by  the  priests,  and  certain  by  the  Levites  also 
(cf.  Lev.  vi.  14—18, 24—30;  vii. ;  Numb,  xviii.  8—11 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  13).  The  provision 
from  the  Christian  altar  is  Jesus  Christ  himself,  the  great  Sacrifice.  By  faith  "  we  become 
partakers  of  Christ;"  we  appropriate  him  as  the  Life  and  the  Sustenance  of  the  souL 
Our  Lord  said,  "  I  am  the  living  Bread  which  came  down  out  of  heaven  :  if  any  man 
eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever,"  etc.  (John  vi.  51 — 58).  1.  This  provision  is 
spirituaL    Not  of  the  literal  or  material  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus  do  we  eat  and  drink ; 

*  For  the  various  fbterpretations  of  this  altar,  see  Alford,  In  loot. 


412  THJB  EPlaTLK  10  XHK  HEBitEWS.         [oh.  xm.  1—26. 

but  by  faith  wn  become  partakers  of  his  mind,  his  feelings,  his  principles,  his  spirit,  hii 
life,  himself.  Hence  St.  Paul  writes,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  etc, 
(GaL  ii.  20).  Again,  "  Christ  oar  Life  "  (Ool.  iii.  3,  4).  2.  This  prooision  is  delightful. 
To  those  who  are  healthy  the  eating  of  suitable  provision  is  not  only  necessary  and 
satisfying,  but  pleasurable.  It  gratifies  the  palate.  The  spiritual  appropriation  of 
Christ  is  joy-inspiring.  In  Ohristia- ty  we  have  "a  feast  of  fat  things."  3.  This 
provision  is  free,  and  free  to  all,  fcjume  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  belonged  to  the 
sacrificing  priest  only,  others  only  to  the  priest  and  Levites.  But  all  may  come  to 
Christ  by  faith,  and  partake  of  the  inestimable  benefits  of  his  ,'great  sacrifice.  "  Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  1,  2 ;  Rev.  xxii.  17). 

III.  The  BxcLUsioiT  op  some  from  participation  in  this  pbovision.  "Whereof 
they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  tabernacle."  .  The  reference  is  to  the  Jewish 
priests  and  Levites.  They  who  clung  to  Judaism  rejected  Christianity,  and  were 
necessarily  excluded  from  its  benefits.  They  were  self-excluded.  They  would  not 
come  unto  Christ  that  they  might  have  life.  All  who  reject  the  Lord  Jesus  are  in  a 
similar  condition:  e.g.  the  self-righteous  moralist,  the  modern  representative  of  the 
ancient  Pharisee;  the  captious  and  the  scoffing  sceptic;  the  worlding  who  elects  to 
have  his  portion  in  this  life ;  and  others.  The  provision  is  free,  -free  for  all ;  but  these 
exclude  themselves  from  participation  therein.  How  is  it  possible  for  any  one  to  enjoy 
the  blessings  of  Christianity  who  rejects  the  Christ  ? — W.  J. 

Vers.  15, 16. — Acceptable  saerifice$.  "By  him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of 
praise,"  etc. 

I.  The  natube  of  the  saobificeb  which  are  bequired  of  Chbistians.  1.  Praise 
to  Ood.  "  Let  us  offer  up  a  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  that  is,  the  fruit  of 
lips  which  make  confession  *o  his  Name."  The  sacrifices  which  are  obligatory  upon  us 
are  not  expiatory  or  atoning,  but  eucharisiic.  The  great  atoning  sacrifice  in  all  its 
perfection  has  been  offered.  To  it  nothing  can  be  added.  But  we  should  confess  the 
Name  of  God,  and  gratefully  acknowledge  his  great  goodness  to  us,  and  celebrate  his 
infinite  perfections.  Two  things  show  our  obligation  to  offer  this  sacrifice.  (1)  The 
number  and  preciousness  of  the  blessings  we  receive  from  him.  "  What  shall  I  render 
\mto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me?  ...  I  will  offer  to  thee  the  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving."  "  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,"  etc.  (Ps.  ciii.  1 — 5).  (2)  The  perfection 
and  glory  of  his  own  being  and  character.  We  ought  to  bless  GSod  because  of  what  he 
is  in  himself.  "  For  who  in  the  heaven  can  be  compared  unto  the  Lord  ?  "  etc.  (Ps. 
Ixxxix.  6,  7).  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  etc.  (Isa.  vi.  3).  2.  Benefi- 
cence to  man.  "  But  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not."  dcA.  requires  not 
only  "  the  fruit  of  our  lips,"  but  the  fruit  of  our  lives.  Our  gratitude  to  him  is  to  be 
expressed  in  kindness  to  our  fellow-men.  "  Thanksgiving  is  good,  but  thanks-living  is 
better."  Dr.  South  has  well  said,  "  The  measures  that  God  marks  out  to  thy  charity 
are  these :  thy  superfluities  must  give  place  to  thy  neighbour's  great  convenience;  thy 
convenience  must  yield  to  thy  neighbour's  necessity ;  and  thy  very  necessities  must 
yield  to  thy  neighbour's  extremity." 

II.  The  medium  thkodgh  which  these  sackipioes  should  be  offebbd.  "  By  him 
let  us  offer,"  etc.  More  correctjy,  "  through  him  let  us  offer."  Our  sacrifices  should 
be  offered  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the 
Life :  no  one  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me,"  or,  "  through  me."  "  There  is  one 
God,  and  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  We  offer  our 
sacrifices  through  him  because :  1.  He  represents  Ood  to  us  as  accessible  and  attractive. 
"No  man  knoweth  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  willeth  to 
reveal  him."  •'  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is 
in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."  "  He  that  hath  seen  mo  hath  seen 
the  Father."  "The  Father  himself  loveth  you."  Through  this  revelation  we  are 
encouraged  to  draw  near  to  God  with  our  thanksgiving  and  praise.  2.  He  represent* 
Mt  to  Ood  in  his  own  humanity.  "  When  he  had  made  purification  of  sins,  sat  down 
on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  "  Christ  entered  into  heaven  itself,  now  to 
appear  before  the  face  of  God  for  us."  He  is  there  still,  bearing  even  in  his  glorified 
body  the  marks  of  the  wounds  which  he  endured  for  us.  "  A  Lamb  standing,  as  tbougb 
ttbtd  been  slain." 


CH.  xiiL  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  413 

III.  The  time  when  these  sacrifices  should  bb  offered.  1.  2%«  socrt/Sce  of 
firaise  to  Ood  should  he  offered  "  continually."  "  Daily  praise  should  ascend  from  each 
of  us  to  God,  as  the  perfume  of  the  daily  sacrifice  ascended  in  olden  times ;  there  must 
not  be  fewer  sacrifices  under  the  new  dispensation  than  there  were  under  the  old ;  we 
are  priests  to  offer  up  unto  G>od  the  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving."  Praise 
should  be  not  an  occasional  exercise,  but  an  abiding  disposition  of  the  aoul.  We 
should  cnltivata  » thankful,  praiseful,  adoring  spirit.    "  In  everything  give  thanka." 

"  Not  thankful  when  it  pleaseth  me ; 
As  if  thy  blessings  had  spare  daya: 
But  such  a  heart  whose  pulse  may  b« 
Thy  praise." 

(George  Herbert) 

2.  The  ioerifices  of  henefkemce  to  mm  thould  he  offered  according  to  our  opportunities. 
"As  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  work  that  which  is  good  unto  all  men,  especially 
unto  them  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith."  Let  us  not  neglect  any  opportunity  of 
kiniiness  and  beneficence ;  for  all  our  opportunities  may  soon  be  ended,  and  that  forever. 

IV.  The  favour  with  which  these  baorificbs  abb  reqarded  bt  God.  "  With 
such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  He  not  only  accepts  them,  but  he  is  gratified  by 
them.  He  is  "  well  pleased  "  with  them,  because  they  are  expressions  of  that  spirit 
in  which  he  delights.  He  is  infinitely  beneficent.  He  is  "  good  to  all,  and  his  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  his  works."  "  He  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful,  and  to  the  evil." 
He  loves  to  find  the  same  disposition  in  his  creatures.  Moreover,  our  Lord  regards  our 
acts  of  beueScence  as  done  to  him  (cf.  Matt.  xxv.  40).  And  not  even  the  least  of 
them  escapes  bis  notice,  or  will  fail  of  its  reward  (cf.  Matt.  x.  42 ;  ch.  vi.  10), — W.  J. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Concluding  prayer  and  doxology.    "  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who 

brought  again  from  the  dead,"  etc,  (vers.  20,  21).     Let  us  notice — 

I.  Tub  oitEAT  Beiso  who  is  here  addressed.  "  The  God  of  peace."  This  title  is 
fitly  applied  to  the  Most  High.  1.  He  is  infinitely  peaceful  in  himself.  All  those 
elements  which  disturb  and  distress  souls  are  entirely  absent  from  Ids  nature.  Pride, 
anger,  jealousy,  remorse,  fear,  foreboding, — these  are  the  things  which  agitate  and  alarm 
us;  but  they  have  no  existence  in  him.  He  is  infinitely  pure  and  perfect,  and,  there- 
fore, he  is  infinitely  peaceful.  2.  Se  is  the  Oiver  of  peace  to  others.  He  gives  peace  in 
the  conscience  by  means  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  ; . . .  thy 
faith  hath  saved  thee  ;  go  in  peace  "  (Luke  vii.  48,  50 ;  cf.  Rom.  v.  1).  He  gives  peace 
in  the  heart  by  the  expulsion  of  evil  passions  therefrom  and  the  inspiration  therein  of 
holy  affections.  Anger,  revenge,  jealousy,  he  expels  from  the  heart,  and  he  awakens 
in  it  supreme  love  to  himself  and  love  to  our  fellow-men.  He  quickens  within  us  con- 
fidence in  himself,  and  so  gives  us  peace  as  we  contemplate  the  possibilities  of  our 
future.  A  calm  trust  in  his  fatherhood  is  an  unfailing  antidote  to  our  anxieties  and 
forebodings.  "  Be  not  anxious  for  your  life,"  etc.  (Matt.  vi.  25 — 34).  He  gives  peace 
in  the  Church.  There  is,  perhaps,  an  allusion  to  this  fact  in  the  present  application  of 
the  title  to  him.  The  nineteenth  verse  suggests  that  there  was  danger  of  disobedience 
and  insubordination  amongst  those  who  are  addressed.  And  it  was  appropriate  to 
remind  them  that  God  is  the  Ck>d  of  peace  and  the  Giver  of  peace,  and  to  wish  for 
them  the  enjoyment  of  this  blessing. 

II.  The  great  work  attributed  to  him.  "  .Who  brought  again  from  the  dead 
the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  eternal  covenant,  even  our 
Lord  Jesus."  We  must  notice  here  what  is  said  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  I%e 
relation  which  he  sustains  to  his  people.  "The  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep."  This 
relationship  implies  (1)  provision  for  the  wants  of  his  people.  "The  Lord  is  my 
Shepherd ;  I  shall  not  want,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxiii.),  (2)  Direction  of  their  way.  "  The  sheep 
hear  his  voice :  and  he  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out,"  etc. 
(John  X.  3,  4).  (3)  Protection  of  them  from  dangers  and  enemies.  "  I  will  save  my 
flock,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  a  prey."  "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd :  the  good  Shep- 
herd giveth  his  life  for  the  slieep,"  etc.  (John  x.  11 — 14;  cf.  Ezek.  xxxiv.  11 — 31). 
2.  The  means  hy  which  he  entered  into  his  relationship.  "Through  the  blood  ol 
the  eternal  covenant."    Jesus  Christ  became  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  through 


414  THE  EPisTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  [oh.  xm.  1—25, 

the  great  sacrifice  of  himself  which  he  offered.  Ehrard :  "  Christ  is  the  greaf,  true, 
chief,  and  superior  Shepherd,  inasmuch  as  he  has  made  an  everlasting  covenant  by  his 
blood  (of.  ch.  X.  11,  etc.).  The  best  commentary  on  these  words  is  found  in  John  x. 
He  is  the  good  Shepherd  because  he  has  given  his  life  for  the  sheep."  This  great 
Shepherd  of  the  sheep  was  brought  again  from  the  dead  by  the  God  of  peace.  In  the 
New  Testament  the  resurrection  of  our  Saviour  la  almost  invariably  attributed  to  Gotl 
the  Father.  "  God  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  gave  him  glory  "  (1  Pet.  L  21). 
Thus  his  resurrection  was  an  evidence  that  the  work  which  was  given  him  to  do  npon 
earth  was  perfectly  completed,  and  was  accepted  by  the  Divine  Father. 

HI.  The  blessino  bouoited  from  him.  "  Make  you  perfect  in  every  good  thing 
to  do  his  will,  working  in  you  that  which  is  well-pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  Jesus 
Christ."  Perfection  is  the  blessing  prayed  for.  1.  The  nature  of  this  perfection. 
"Make  you  perfect  in  every  good  thing  to  do  his  will."  Absolute  perfection  is  not 
solicited  here ;  but  that  they  may  be  enabled  fully  and  heartily  to  accomplish  the  holy 
will  of  God.  Cf.  ch.  x.  36,  "  That  having  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive  the 
promise."  2.  The  means  of  this  •perfection.  "  Working  in  you  that  which  is  well- 
pleasing  in  his  sight."  To  the  same  effect  St.  Paul  writes,  "  Work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ;  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both  to  will 
and  to  work,  for  his  good  pleasure."  The  inspiration  and  strength  for  our  out-working 
of  his  will  must  come  from  his  in-working  with  us.  3.  The  medium,  of  this  perfection. 
"  Through  Jesus  Christ."  God  works  within  us  through  the  Saviour,  through  his 
mediation_and  by  his  Spirit.  Through  him  alone  can  man  attain  unto  perfection  of 
being. 

IV.  The  honour  abcbibeo  to  him.  "  To  whom  be  the  glory  for  ever  and  over. 
Amen."  1.  Olory  i$  ascribed  to  Ood  the  Father.  Some  hold  that  the  glory  is  attri- 
buted to  Jesus  Christ.  But  it  seems  to  us  that  it  is  ascribed  to  Gkid  the  Father,  "  the 
chief  Subject  of  the  whole  sentence,"  as  Alford  says ;  "  God,  who  is  the  God  of  peace, 
who  brought  up  the  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead,  who  can  perfect  us  in  every  good  work, 
to  accomplish  his  will,  and  works  in  us  that  which  is  well-pleasing  to  him  through 
Jesus  Christ.  The  whole  majesty  of  the  sentence  requires  this  reverting  to  ita  main 
Agent,  and  speaks  against  the  referring  '  to  whom  be  the  glory'  to  o<ir  blessed  Lord, 
who  is  only  incidentally  mentioned."  To  the  God  of  all  grace  the  highest,  fullest, 
divinest  honours  are  due.  2.  Olory  is  ascribed  to  Ood  perpetually.  "  For  ever  and 
ever."  "  Unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.  Amen."  His  own  essential  glory  is  eternal,  and 
the  honours  attributed  to  him  will  not  only  continue,  but  increase  throughout  endless 
ages. — W.  J. 

Ver.  1. — Brotherly  hm.  L  Especiaixt  hecessabt  at  the  pbesbnt  bsasor.  It 
was  a  time  of  trial  from  outside.  Brothers  needed  to  be  brotherly,  helping  one  another. 
We  cannot  expect  anything  from  stiangers,  and  must  be  ready  even  for  their  hostility. 
But  we  must  do  everything  to  guanl  against  alienation  amongst  friends  at  a  time  when 
the  closest  union  will  be  serviceable. 

II.  The  counsel  necessary  because  belf-reoard  n  such  a  subtle  bin.  Carnal 
views  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  such  as  seem  to  have  been  prevalent  among  these 
Hebrew  Christians,  inevitably  led  to  each  one  of  them  thinking  what  in  the  expected 
glorious  state  of  things  he  would  get  for  himself.  So  it  was  among  the  disciples  of 
Jesus.  They  disputed  who  should  be  greatest.  There  was  even  intrigue  to  get  a 
promise  of  the  principal  places.  Christians  need  to  be  ever  on  their  guard  lest  any 
feeling  get  dominion  in  their  hearts  hostile  to  the  good  of  the  whole  body. 

HI.    We   are   reminded    of    abiding    THINOS   that    defend    on    cub    own    DIBFO- 

sition.  The  writer  has  just  been  referring  to  things  that  can  be  shaken  and  removed, 
and  tilings  that  cannot  be  shaken.  These  are  things  that  God  deals  with  by  his 
power.  But  the  continuance  of  some  things  depends  on  whether  we  will  have  them 
continue.  Whether  brotherliness  shall  be  a  deep  and  abiding  thing  depends  on  the 
state  of  our  hearts. 

IV.  Continual  remembrance  of  the  real  relation  of  eykbt  GHBisriAir  to 
ETKBT  OTHER  CHRISTIAN.  By  the  Same  Spirit  we  are  all  bora  again,  and  therefore 
members  of  the  same  Divine  family.  Each  of  us,  therefore,  is  under  certain  obligations ; 
eadi  of  us  may  prefer  certain  claims.    But  there  can  be  no  proper  treatment  either  oi 


OH.  xiu.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  416 

tbe  obligations  or  the  claims  unless  there  be  real  affection  nndemeath.  It  is  in  the 
spiritual  sphere  as  in  the  natural ;  the  mere  relation  may  only  irritate  unless  there  be 
the  feelings  that  properly  belong  to  the  relation. — Y. 

Ver.  2. — Hospitality.  Note  the  connection  of  vers.  1  and  2.  First  ^i\o8e\(/>fa  Is 
enjoined,  then  ^lAoieffo.  The  stranger  as  well  as  the  brother  must  have  a  proper  place 
in  our  consideration.  Brotherliness  must  not  lead  to  exclusiveness.  We  must  go  by 
the  golden  rule.  If  we  came  to  a  strange  place  at  nightfall,  footsore  with  a  long  day's 
walking,  we  should  be  very  grateful  to  any  who  would  open  the  door  and  give  us 
shelter  and  food.  The  injunction  to  hospitality  very  needful  in  times  when  facilities 
of  travel  were  not  what  they  are  now.  Hospitable  feelings  are  strong  in  many  who 
have  not  yet  attained  to  Christian  virtues  ;  let  the  Christian,  then,  be  in  no  way  behind. 
He  will  be  prudent  and  cautious  in  his  treatment  of  strangers,  he  will  be  wise  as  the 
serpent,;  but  he  will  remember,  too,  that  he  is  under  the  protection  of  God.  Now  and 
then  he  will  he  deceived  and  robbed,  but  this  is  a  little  matter  compared  with  the 
maintenance  of  hospitable  duties.  It  may  seem  at  first  as  if  a  low  motive  for  hospitality 
were  here  introduced ;  but  if  it  be  considered,  we  shall  see  that  it  is  not  so  much  a  motive 
to  hospitality  as  to  unremitting  watchfulness  in  hospitality.  Let'  the  stranger  be  ever 
in  your  mind.  Let  not  one  slip  past  your  gates,  or  go  away  knocking  in  vain.  What 
will  it  avail  to  admit  a  thonsand  who  bring  you  nothing  but  their  needs,  if  you  let  the 
one  go  who  will  bring  yon  blessings  far  more  than  anything  you  can  do  for  him  ? — Y, 

Yer.  3. — Sufferers  to  be  remembered.  I.  Those  in  bonds.  Doubtless  those  in  bonds 
for  Christ  and  conscience'  sake.  In  the  worst  of  persecuting  times  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  Iwdy  of  Christians  suffering  nothing,  or  comparatively  little.  Some,  in  bonds, 
have  preached  all  the  more  effectively ;  others  have  continued  free  to  make  known  the 
gospel  far  and  wide.  This  admonition  becoming  ever  less  needful  so  far  as  literal 
imprisonment  for  Christ's  sake  is  concerned.  But  still  we  must  hear  in  mind  the 
admonition,  so  far  as  the  essence  of  it  is  concerned.  For  the  persecuting  spirit  of  the 
world  remains ;  the  world  persecutes,  not  meaning  to  persecute ;  does  not  know  all 
the  suffering  it  inflicts.  We  muf^t  be  quick  to  discover  all  sufferers  for  conscience'  sake, 
and  intercede  for  them.  Then  let  the  exhortation  also  include  those  in  bonds  as  evil- 
doers. Of  such,  alas  I  there  is  still  abundance.  Civilization  is  not  able  to  do  without 
the  prison.  Let  us  consider  that  in  less  favourable  circumstances  we  also  might  have 
been  criminals.  Let  Christians  be  forward  in  all  that  tries  to  prevent  the  child  growing 
into  a  criminal  manhood,  and  the  liberated  criminal  lapsing  again  into  evil  ways. 
"  Put  yourself  in  his  place,"  and  so  let  your  heart  go  out  in  pity  and  effort  for  the  vilest 
of  mankind. 

n.  Them  which  butfeb  advsrsitt.  All  that  a  man  can  suffer  because  h«  is  in 
the  body — let  that  draw  out  your  pity  and  help.  Here,  again,  no  doubt,  the  primary 
reference  is  to  a  state  of  things  that  has  largely  passed  away.  Christians  had  to  suffer 
physical  violence.  This  was  a  readier  and  cheaper  way  of  venting  hatred  against  them 
than  putting  them  in  prison.  The  fist  and  the  cudgel  are  soon  got  in  action.  And  here 
again,  too,  let  the  exhortation  pass  far  beyond  the  limits  of  its  first  occasion.  You  are 
in  the  body,  and  can  suffer  pain  through  the  senses ;  and  what  you  can  suffer,  many 
actually  do  suffer. 

III.  The  meaning  op  the  bbmbmbrancb.  Merely  to  remember  would  do  no  good. 
The  remembrance  must  be  so  constant,  so  burdensome,  as  to  make  you  act.  There  is 
a  kind  of  reproach  in  the  word ;  it  implies  that  we  only  too  eadily  forget  the  prisoner 
and  the  oppressed. — ^Y. 

Ver.  5. — The  love  of  money.  No  body  of  the  most  important  precepts  for  practical 
Christian  life  can  be  without  some  admonition  bearina;  on  the  proper  use  of  money. 
Money,  with  all  it  represents,  has  a  most  insidious  and  potent  charm  for  the  great  majority 
of  men.  Even  in  times  of  trial  and  persecution  this  spiritual  peril  has  to  be  remembered. 
A  man  may  become  so  deluded  by  external  possessions  that  the  risk  of  losing  them  may 
lead  him  to  apostasy.  Money  must  not  be  allowed  to  become  the  great  centre  of 
attraction,  the  controller  of  our  life's  orbit,  else  how  shall  we  he  properly  influenced  by 
nobler  things?  Distinguish,  of  course,  between  the  possession  of  money  and  the  love  oi 


tie  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xm.  1—26. 

money.  There  may  be  possession  of  much  wealth  with  no  love  of  it,  and  there  may  be 
'very  little  in  actual  possession  with  a  moat  intense  desire  after  it.  The  writer  indicates 
two  reasons  especially  for  guarding  against  lore  of  money.  1.  There  can  be  no  content- 
ment along  with  this  love.  The  Christian  is  to  attain  his  true  contentment  in  that 
which  becomes  an  integral  part  of  his  own  life.  2.  There  can  be  no  honouring  trust 
in  Grod.  God  has  said,  "  I  will  not  leave  thee,"  yet  every  act  of  the  money-loving  man 
expresses  doubt  on  this  point. — Y. 

Yer.  7. — Treatment  of  the  leaders.  In  properly  treating  all  Christian  leadera  and  rnlers 
four  acts  are  enjoined,  coming  in  a  regular  and  appropriate  sequence. 

I.  Listening.  These  men  lead  and  rule  because  they  speak  the  Word  of  (Jod.  II 
they  spoke  their  own  word  then  it  would  not  be  right  to  follow  them.  And  because 
they  speak  the  Word  of  God  we  have  no  choice  but  to  listen.  The  writer  has  just  been 
quoting  a  word  of  God  intended  to  guard  against  a  great  spiritual  peril — the  love  of 
money.  All  who  really  speak  the  Word  of  God  are  to  be  reckoned  as  our  leaders,  Jesus 
himself  in  the  very  front,  giving  in  his  own  words  a  sure  test  whereby  every  other 
word  is  to  be  tried. 

II.  Kememberino.  All  instructions  and  promises  must  be  at  hand  in  the  mind 
when  they  are  wanted.  Spoken  before  being  wanted,  they  were  ready  when  the  want 
came.  Hence  the  value  of  regularly  and  penetratively  reading  the  New  Testament. 
We  cannot  go  far  anywhere  in  it  without  coming  across  the  most  profitable  directions 
for  our  daily  life. 

III.  Studyino  the  experience  of  thk  leadebs.  As  they  spoke  they  acted.  The 
Word  of  God  they  pressed  on  others  they  first  of  all  believed  themselves.  There  was 
no  inculcated  dutjiin  which  they  did  not  lead  by  practice  as  well  as  by  precept.  Some 
of  these  leaders,  at  least,  had  now  passed  beyond  the  vicissitudes  of  earth.  Their  whole 
Christian  life  was  open  to  observation.  Results  could  be  seen.  Take  a  life,  for  instance, 
like  that  of  Stephen,  consummated  by  a  revelation  of  glory  and  reward  such  as 
might  well  inspire  any  follower.  And  especially  the  faith  of  the  leaders  is  to  be 
studied.    Examine  the  true  riches  that  have  come  to  men  by  trusting  in  God. 

IV.  Imitating  them,  or  rather  imitating  one  particular  thing  in  them — their  fi»ith. 
We  are  no  real  followers  of  any  Christian  leader  unless  we  do  this.  It  is  not  pecu- 
liarities in  a  man's  teaching,  commanding  influence  of  a  personality,  that  should  m^ke 
him  a  leader.  It  is  the  reality  of  his  faith  in  Gtod.  Such  a  leader  we  follow  most  and 
honour  most  when  his  example  makes  us  as  true  believers  as  himself. — Y. 

Ver.  8.— Ke  unchanging  Jesas.  I.  The  needs  op  men  do  not  crangb.  No  donbt 
tliere  is  change  and  progress  in  some  respects.  Each  generation  of  the  human  race, 
like  each  succeeding  wave  when  the  tide  is  flowing,  is  an  advance  on  the  generation 
going  before  it.  As  the  world  grows  older  this  advance  is  more  marked.  Our  fathers 
travelled  in  stage-coaches,  we  by  express  trains;  they  had  to  wait  weeks  for  the 
answer  of  a  letter,  we  have  the  telegraph  to  bring  the  same  answer  in  an  hour.  But  all 
these  changes,  however  impressive,  are  only  on  the  surface  of  life.  Our  nature  has  not 
changed.  It  wants  the  same  ministries,  though  they  may  come  in  a  different  way. 
Though  each  wave  is  an  advance  on  the  preceding  wave,  they  are  all  composed  of  the 
same  elements.  We  who  travel  in  railway  trains  are  exactly  the  same  sort  of  beings 
as  those  who  rode  in  stage-coaches.  The  great  facts  of  existence  are  the  same — ^birth 
and  death,  sin  and  sorrow,  hope  and  fear.  A  picture  is  not  altered  because  you  put  it 
in  a  different  frame.     Man  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

II.  The  service  of  Christ  does  not  change.  Let  the  words  be  taken  as  true  of 
Christ  in  his  relation  to  us,  that  relation  arising  out  of  his  life  among  men  in  the  flesb. 
He  has  come  into  special  relations  to  us,  and  it  is  in  those  special  relations  that  we  have 
to  consider  him  as  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  He  came  to  this 
world  to  do  a  work  for  all  generations.  As  to  us,  the  closer  we  keep  to  the  evident  and 
pressing  wants  of  our  generation,  the  better  work  we  shall  do.  We  know  not  the 
wants  of  posterity,  and  therefore  we  had  better  leave  it  to  look  after  its  own  wants. 
But  Jesus  in  his  brief  life  did  a  work  for  the  whole  world — for  all  who  ever  have  lived 
or  will  live  on  the  broad  surface  uf  the  earth.  Because  there  are  sinners  still,  Christ  is 
still  k  Saviour.     The  world  is  still  full  of  Pharisees  and  Sadduoeea,  pablioua  and 


cH.  xni.  1— 26.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREW  a  *17 

harlots,  sinners  of  every  type  and  shade;  full  of  the  sick  and  the  sorrowing;  full  of 
women  like  the  widow  of  Nain  and  the  sisters  of  Lazarus,  weeping  for  their  departed 
kindred. 

IIL  No  CHANGE  IN  THB  THINGS  TO  BE  SAID  ABOUT  Chbibt.  Do  not  be  carried  away, 
says  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  with  new  doctrines  concerning  Chiist,  however  attractive 
and  plausible.  Let  us  ever  remind  ourselves  of  what  Christ  has  been  in  the^  great 
yesterday.  Especially  let  us  consider  that  yesterday  which  is  revealed  to  us  in  the 
Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament.  If  that  day  was  not  a  dream  of  the  imagination, 
then  it  is  one  of  the  most  glorious  of  soul-supporting  realities.  Jesus  justified  the  name 
he  bore,  for  he  did  indeed  save  his  people  from  their  sins.  The  yesterday  of  which 
we  are  now  able  to  speak  ia  a  long  one.  It  has  known  many  changes  in  the  world,  but 
none  in  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  No  OHANOE  in  THE  FUTURE.  The  world  will  not  change  in  its  need  of  him. 
They  are  certainly  wrong  who  tell  us  the  religion  of  Christ  has  seen  its  best  days.  Look 
at  the  future  in  the  light  of  the  past,  and  you  will  be  assured  of  your  Saviour  ever  standing 
in  the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks,  watching  that  their  light  goes  not  out.  We 
may  change  in  our  faith  and  hope  and  patience,  but  Christ  changes  not.  Rising  to  the 
measure  of  our  duties  and  opportunities,  this  would  become  a  practical  truth  to  us. 
We  are  not  straitened  in  him,  but  in  ourselves.  He  asks  to  let  him  do  for  us  what  he 
has  done  for  those  going  before.  He  asks  for  admission.  Let  the  door  no  longer  be 
locked  with  the  key  of  unbelief  and  double  bolted  with  indolence  and  worldliness. 
Let  us  not  go  from  the  world  without  leaving  a  testimony  that  shall  if  possible  have 
a  savour  of  life  unto  life  to  those  following  in  our  steps.— Y. 

Ver.  14. — The  continuing  city.  The  two  previoui  verses  express,  in  a  thoroi^hly 
Hebraistic  way,  an  invitation  to  be  crucified  together  with  Christ.  At  the  same  time, 
these  Hebrew  Christians  are  reminded  of  the  wilderness  and  tent  life  which  their  fore- 
fathers led  for  forty  years.  What  they  experienced  in  the  outward  reality  let  ua 
experience  by  the  inward  spirit     We  belong  to  the  future  more  than  to  the  present. 

I.  Our  view  of  present  subroundinos.  We  have  cities,  but  not  continuing  ones. 
It  would  be  very  foolish  in  us,  knowing  all  we  do  and  hoping  for  all  we  do,  tc  look 
upon  the  states  and  governments  of  this  world  as  do  those  in  whom  nationality  is  the 
very  strongest  feeling.  We  must  pray  to  be  preserved  from  that  narrow  and  one-sided 
idealism  which  so  glorifies  fatherland  as  to  make  it  the  chief  object  of  one's  enthusiasm 
and  effort.  Our  hearts  must  not  lie  deceived  by  the  outward  splendours  of  capital 
cities.  And  yet,  while  the  pilgrim  spirit  is  in  us,  let  it  not  be  a  restless  and  a  carping  one. 
No  one  should  be  more  interested  in  the  life,  prosperity,  and  good  government  of  ■  state 
than  the  Christian. 

II.  Our  OUTLOOK  towards  the  future.  An  abiding  city,  a  city  where  there  is  true 
stability  and  true  glory,  is  no  dream.  We  have  it  not  yet,  but  we  shall  have  it  if  we 
seek  for  it.  What  an  interest  the  Christian  is  exhorted  to  have  in  abiding,  continuing 
things  I  Faith,  hope,  and  love  are  to  abide ;  all  abiding  things  will  be  manifested  after 
the  great  shaking ;  and  they  will  cohere  into  the  true  dignity  of  the  heavenly  state. 
Never  has  the  human  imagination  been  more  nobly  employed  than  in  bodying  forth 
the  conditions  and  appearances  of  a  perfect  state.  But  those  indulging  such  imagi- 
nations had  no  definite  way  of  reducing  them  to  fact.  Here,  however,  the  Christian  ia 
spoken  of  as  seeking  for  the  coming  city  in  a  very  definite  way.  True,  our  present  life 
is  as  it  were  a  camp-life,  but  not  for  all  that  like  the  life  of  savage  or  gipsy.  Our 
camping-places  are  all  stages  in  the  journey  to  the  new  Jerusalem. — ^Y. 

Vers.  15, 16. — The  taerifices  with  which  Ood  ia  wdl  pleased.  Vain  is  any  attempt  of 
ours  to  take  in  the  full  significance  of  this  exhortation.  We  have  not  to  turn  away 
from  any  Uteral  altar  or  any  literal  sacrifice.  But  the  injunctions  in  themselves,  apart 
from  the  special  aspect  of  them,  are  permanently  important. 

I.  OuB  CONSTANT  aim  MUST  BE  TO  PLEASE  GoD.  Literal  sacrifices  had  degenerated 
into  a  traditional  safeguard  against  displeasing  God.  The  ordinances  of  Sinai  with 
respect  to  sacrifice  had  aimed  to  lift  it  into  a  great  teaching  and  self-revealing  insti- 
tution. But  probably  only  a  few  in  every  geiieration  had  grasped  the  spiritual  signifi- 
cance of  sacrifice.    Though,  doubtless,  many  too,  because  their  motive  was  sincere  as  far 

BEBBKWa.  2 1 


418  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xin.  1—25. 

as  it  went,  were  accepted,  as  was  the  woman  with  her  alabaster  box,  and  the  widow  with 
the  two  mites.  The  illuminating  gospel  of  Christ  leaves  us  without  excuse  as  to  what 
will  please  God.  We  know  that  the  old  sacrifices  never  could  have  pleased  him  in  them- 
selves. He  could  not  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats.  Bat  now  no 
offering  can  please  unless  it  be  in  itself  helpful  to  men  or  glorifying  to  God. 

II.  Intelligent  praise  pleases  God.  Praise  which  comes  from  overflowing  heart- 
experiences  must  always  be  acceptable  to  God.  For  the  fruits  from  outward  possessions 
are  substituted  the  fruits  from  an  inward  life.  The  habitual  acknowledgment  of  God's 
Name  means  an  habitual  consciousness  of  all  the  services  he  renders  in  supplying  all 
our  needs  from  the  higliest  down  to  the  lowest.  It  is  not  enough  that  there  be  praise ; 
it  must  be  praise  abounding  in  the  right  elements.  Mere  wordB  of  the  lip  can  give  no 
more  pleasuve  to  God  than  the  mere  slaying  of  animals. 

III.  The  doing  of  good  plkases  GfoD.  Praise  cannot  stand  by  itself.  Real  doing 
of  good  shows  that  God's  Spirit  of  love,  direction,  and  power  is  working  in  us.  Work 
must  not  stand  instead  of  praise,  nor  praise  instead  of  work ;  going  together,  they  are  as 
the  sacrificial  body  and  the  smell  proceeding  from  it.  Note  the  significant  injunction 
not  to  forget.  How  much  easier  it  is  to  go  through  a  round  of  praise  than  to  muster 
the  self-denial  needed  for  a  course  of  practical  goodl 

IV.  Fellowship  pleases  God.  Christians  must  associate.  Real  Christians  coming 
together  cannot  but  associate.  God  delights  in  the  process  of  mutual  giving  and 
receiving  observable  in  every  Christian  community.  Making  up  for  each  other's  defects, 
bearing  each  other's  burdens,  having  fellowship  as  the  eye  has  with  the  hand,  the  head 
with  the  feet,  let  this  be  the  sight  God  ever  sees  when  he  looks  upon  his  people.  So 
shall  the  carcases  of  all  beasts  slain  in  sacrifice  be  glorified  when  we  think  of  the  real 
offerings  which  they  typified,  and  towards  which  they  in  some  manner  prepared.— Y. 

Yer.  17. — TJi*  watchful  leaders.  Under  the  details  of  this  exhortation  there  seems 
to  lie  a  reference  to  the  shepherding  of  sheep.  The  shepherd  goes  before  his  sheep, 
leading  them  out  and  in,  and  finding  pasture.  This  reference  made  probable  by  the 
further  reference  in  ver.  20.    Consider,  then — 

I.  The  shepherd's  authority.  Christians  must  maintain  the  liberty  wherewith 
Christ  hath  set  them  free,  but  at  the  same  time  there  is  a  discipline  also  to  be  main- 
tained, a  provision  and  protection  to  be  accepted.  Few  are  the  Christians  who  can  do 
without  counsel,  comfort,  and  spiritual  supply  from  those  who  in  various  ways  are 
qualified  to  give  these.  We  must  look  for  the  shepherd  ability  and  tenderness 
wherever  we  can  find  it.  Those  formally  constituted  shepherds  may  have  very  few  o£ 
the  qualifications.  Let  intrinsic  authority  be  recognized ;  more  than  that,  let  it  be 
looked  for.  It  is  quite  possible  to  be  the  shepherd  in  relation  to  certain  fellow-Chris- 
tians and  the  sheep  in  relations  to  others. 

II.  The  shepherd's  fidelitt.  He  remembers  that  he  has  to  give  account.  If  any 
of  the  sheep  be  lost  or  slain  he  has  to  explain  how  it  happened,  and  show  that  the 
blame  did  not  lie  with  him.  This  makes  a  true  shepherd  ever  vigilant  and  foreseeing, 
always  ready  to  suspect  danger  under  an  appearance  of  the  greatest  safety. 

III.  The  shepherd's  difficdltt.  The  literal  shepherd  has  difficulties  enough.  He 
has  to  do  with  stupid  sheep  who  have  to  be  watched  continually.  But,  then,  he  can 
always  employ  main  force.  The  spiritual  shepherd,  on  the  other  hand,  deals  with 
human  beings.  They  have  to  be  persuaded.  If  they  are  bent  on  going  into  pasture- 
less  and  dangerous  places,  then  the  shepherd  cannot  stop.  He  warns,  he  expostulates, 
he  entreats,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  again  and  again  ;  and  that  is  all  he  can  do.  Hence 
the  need  of  appeal  to  those  who  add  the  responsibility  of  a  human  being  to  the  help- 
lessness of  the  sheep. 

IV.  The  shepherd's  account.  The  faithful  shepherd  can  keep  the  day  of  account 
before  him,  with  a  calm  and  ready  heart.  He  can  justify  himself  for  every  sheep  com« 
mitted  to  his  trust.  But  all  this  will  not  prevent  him  bewailing  the  sheep  that  are  lost. 
Every  one  with  the  shepherd  instinct  in  him  will  think  wilh  deepest  sorrow  of  those 
who  would  listen  to  no  counsel  and  believe  in  no  peril. 

V.  The  shepherd's  reward.  He  is  rewarded  according  to  his  faithfulness.  He  may 
have  to  present  a  most  deplorable  list  of  lost  sheep ;  bat  if  he  can  show  that  no  blame 
is  his  ■  thst  vTwjr  one  has  been  lost  purely  tbroi^^  Mlf^wUV— tkan  Us  profitiiif  wit) 


OH.  xm.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBRBW8.  «» 

appear  all  the  same.  The  shepherd  will  have  sorrow  for  a  season,  but  ha  cannot  laffer 
in  the  end.  The  sole  suffering  and  loss  remain  in  the  end  with  those  who  reject  the 
counsels. — Y. 

Vers.  18, 19. — A  request  for  prayer.  Here  is  a  new  and  unexpected  relation  between 
the  shepherd  and  the  sheep  j  for  as  a  shepherd  the  author  of  this  Epistle  must  be 
viewed,  whoever  he  may  be.  The  shepherd  instinct,  striving  to  guard  Christians  from 
error  and  backsliding,  is  manifest  in  every  page.  But  while  there  is  authority,  the 
authority  of  one  who  sees  with  a  clear  eye  right  into  truth,  there  is  also,  as  expressed 
in  this  request,  a  most  touching  sense  of  need.  The  guiding  and  comforting  of  Chris- 
tians is  an  awful  burden.  To  be  in  any  way  charged  with  the  diffusion  and  enforce- 
ment of  the  truth  keeps  the  heart  continually  on  the  strain.  There  are  so  many  things 
to  say,  so  httle  time  in  which  to  say  them,  and  such  lack  of  the  best  words,  as  makes 
one  say,  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  Hence  the  earnestness  with  which  one 
who  is  busy  from  the  heart  in  working  for  Christ  asks  for  the  intercession  of  others. 
Only  a  man  himself  knowing  the  power  of  prayer  could  utter  such  a  request.  A 
prayerless  man  will  never  have  an  inward  impulse  prompting  him  to  say,  "  Fray  for 
us."  Note  where  this  request  comes  in — ^just  at  the  end  of  the  Epistle,  As  if  the 
writer  intended  his  4iends  to  feel  that  he  would  first  of  all  do  all  he  could  for  them 
before  he  asked  snythJiig  from  them.  If  indeed  they  had  profited  by  his  instructions 
then,  both  intellectually  and  spiritually,  they  would  be  in  tlie  fittest  mood  to  pray  for 
him.— Y. 

Vers.  20,  21,— A  mo$t  eomprehtmtivt  with.  This  is  both  a  wish  and  a  prayer.  None 
the  less  a  prayer  because  referring  to  Gh>d  in  the  third  person.  The  writer  both  prays 
that  God  may  prosecute  a  course  of  operations  in  the  hearts  of  these  Christians,  and 
indirectly  solicits  them  at  the  same  time  to  make  this  course  possible  by  their  submis- 
sion and  co-operation.  This  prayer-wish,  it  will  be  noted,  was  peculiarly  correspon- 
dent with  the  position  of  Hebrew  Christians. 

L  The  bgfebenoe  to  the  covenakt.  There  had  been  a  covenant,  not  everlasting, 
seeing  there  was  no  possibility  of  everlastingness  in  it.  But  now  there  is  a  new  cove- 
nant, stable  and  consecrated  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  himself.  The  very  Lord's  Supper, 
in  which  these  Hebrew  Christians  must  repeatedly  have  taken  part,  made  it  impossible 
for  them  to  forget  the  blood  of  the  new  covenant.  This  new  covenant  was  really 
established  in  the  raising  of  Jesus  from  the  dead.  And  well  might  God  b«  called  a 
God  of  peace  in  connection  with  it.  As  God  of  the  old  covenant  he  had  too  frequently 
to  be  a  God  of  wrath  and  of  hostility  to  those  transgressing  the  terms  of  the  covenant. 

II.  The  coufobtino  befbbenoe  to  God's  poweb  and  disposition.  Great  as  the 
troubles  through  which  these  people  were  passing  seemed,  yet  they  were  not  as  the 
troubles  of  ancient  Israel,  idolatrous  and  apostate  from  the  living  God.  It  is  a  matter 
of  the  greatest  importance  to  be  assured  that  one  is  not  contending  with  the  Divine 
wrath.  If  God  be  against  us,  all  comforts  and  hopes,  however  promising,  are  only 
delusions.  But  here  is  the  proof  that  God  is  for  us,  in  raising  Jesus  from  the  dead. 
Jesus  had  been  the  great  Benefactor  of  men,  a  true  Shepherd.  Had  he  not  compassion 
on  the  crowd,  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd  ?  And  when  he  died, 
how  many  lost  their  hope  and  comfort  then  I  But  God  raises  him  from  the  dead, 
brings  him  back  from  among  the  corpses,  and  so  constitutes  him  in  a  higher  sense  than 
ever  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep. 

nL  The  obeat  things  tet  to  be  bxfeoted  and  fbefabed  fob.  A  risen  Saviour 
is  not  only  to  secure  us  immortality,  but  to  confirm  us  in  a  new  life  in  every  way. 
Things  are  prayed  for  that  belong  to  the  very  essence  of  the  Christian  life,  whatever  its 
external  circumstances  may  be.  We  need  to  be  properly  placed  and  endowed  for  every 
good  work ;  we  need  to  be  fitted  to  carry  out  the  will  of  God,  The  Divine  intent  is 
that  we  should  in  all  ways  be  strong  for  usefulness  as  well  as  strong  to  bear  trial.  The 
God  of  the  resurrection  can  work  in  us  all  that  is  acceptable  to  himself,  and  he  will  do 
it  through  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  The  doxolooy.  How  fittingly  it  comes  in  after  this  recital  of  the  Divine  power 
and  ability  1  All  true  praise  must  be  based  upon  a  real  and  deep  apprehension  of  tha 
grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. — Y. 


420  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         [oh.  xui.  1— 25. 

Ver.  Wi.— Buffering  the  word  of  exhortation.  The  writer  wishes  to  be  prepared  for 
every  state  of  mind  iu  those  to  whom  he  writes.  He  knows  very  well  that  much 
of  what  he  has  said  will  not  be  welcome  upon  the  first  reading  of  it.  He  may  seem 
not  to  be  sufficiently  sympathetic,  not  sufficiently  alive  to  the  present  troubles  of 
others.  More  than  that,  in  the  midst  of  their  troubles  he  calls  them  to  exercises  of 
thought  and  feeling  which  run  counter  to  old  hopes  and  old  associations.  And  now, 
in  conclusion,  he  lets  them  know  how  he  quite  understands  their  attitude  of  mind 
towards  his  letter.  He  does  not  expect  his  exhortations  to  commend  themselves  at 
first.  But,  knowing  the  word  of  truth  to  be  in  them,  he  knows  they  will  guide  his 
friends  to  higher  duties  and  higher  hopes,  if  only  they  will  consider  them.  Thus  ha 
shows  at  the  same  time  regard  for  the  feelings  of  his  friends,  and  anxiety  that  truth 
va»g  not  ba  levelled  becaus*  at  first  it  does  not  look  serviceable. — Y. 


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX 


«0 


THE  EPISTLE  OF 

ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  HEBKEWS. 


OHAPTBE  X 

The  Tiro  Berelations        ...  „. 

The  Glory  of  the  God-Man 
Christ  Greater  than  the  Angeli 
Gud'B     Bevelation    of     Bedemptive 

Troth  to  Man  ... 
The  Transcendent  Glory  of  the  Son 

of  God 
The   Exaltation  of  the   Son  of  God 

above  the  Angela  of  God 
The  Soa  of  God  the  Beoipient  of  the 

Worship  of  the  Angels  ...  ... 

The  Son  and  the  Angels    ... 

The  Son  and  the  Universe 

The  Sovereignty  of  the  Son  and  the 

Service  of  the  Angels    ... 
The  Two  Testaments  a  Progressive 

Bevelation  of  God 
The  Surpassing  Glory  of  Christ,  who 

is  the  Substance  of  the  Christian 

Revelation 
The  Greatness  of  the  Angels  reveal- 
ing the  Greatness  of  the  Lord 
Christ  as  Prophet  of  the  Churoh     ... 
Christ  Saperior  to  the  Angels  ... 

The  Glory  of  Christ  in  his  Creative 

Power,  and  in  the  Unchaugeable- 

ness  of  his  Natore         ...  ... 

God  speaking  to  Men         ...  ,., 

Jesus  Inheritor  of  All  Thingi 

Jesiu   aa   ihe   Brightness  of   Qod'a 

fllOTT 


rAoa 
17 
19 
20 

21 


24 

25 
27 


29 


ai 


33 

35 
37 
38 


39 
39 
40 

41 


THmi  rAM 
Jesus  as  the  Express  Image  of  the 

Divine  Substance            ...             ...  41 

Beality  over  against  Phenomena      ...  42 

Christ  exalted  above  the  Angels       ...  42 

The  Mission  of  the  Angels              .^  43 


CHAPTER  n. 

A  Solemn  Parenthetical  Warning    ...      62 
The  Royalty  of  Man  ...  ...      63 

The  Necessity  of  Christ's  SnfEerings      54 
Jesus  our  Brother  ...  ...       65 

The   Superior  Privileges    of    Chris- 
tians...  ...  ...  ...       (6 

The  More  Solemn  Responsibilities  of 
Christians        ...  ...  ...       58 

The  Divine  Destiny  for  Man  ...      59 

Perfection  throngh  Suffering  ...      61 

The  Oneness  of  the   Saactifier  and 
the  Sanctified  ...  ...  ...      62 

The  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  ...       63 
The   Reasons  why  Christ  redeemed 

Men  rather  than  Angels  ...       64 

Our   Great  High  Priest — his  Puno- 
tions  and  Qualifications  ...  ...       66 

An  Exhortation  against  Drifting  away 

from  the  Glorious  Sou  of  God      ...       67 
The  Dignity  of  Human  Nature  shows 
that  the  Inoamation  was  not  do- 
grading  to  the  Godhead  ..,      tg 
The    Incarnation,     beine    tha    obIt 


mDEX. 


THEHI  rt»M 

Means  of  seonring  Perfect  Salva- 
tion for  Men,  was  becoming  to  God      71 

The  Incarnation  a  Necessity  of  the 
Eedeeming  Work  of  Christ  ...       73 

Christ's  Humanity  the  Besalt  of  his 
Desire  to  be  More  than  a  Saviour 
from  Sin  ...  ...  ...       75 

The  Qlory  of  the  Gospel    ...  ...       76 

The  Hnman  Nature  of  onr  Lord  fore- 
shadowed and  his  Sovereignty  over 
All  Things  realized  through  his 
Sufferings  and  Death     ...  .„       77 

His  Exaltation  endears  hia  Associ- 
ation with  his  Followers  ...       78 

The  Sublime  Besults  of  the  Incarna- 
tion and  Death  of  Christ  in  their 
Influence  upon  the  Present  Temp> 
tation  and  Death  of  Believers     ...      78 

God's  Sure  Judgment  on  those  who 
neglect  the  Great  Salvation         ...       79 

The  Completeness  with  which  the 
Great  Salvation  is  made  known  ...       80 

The  Seen  Present  as  a  Ground  of 
Confidence  in  the  Unseen  Future  ...      81 

The  Father  bringing  the  Sons  to 
Glory  ...  ...  ...       82 

Christ  and  his  Brethren    ...  ...       82 

Christ  robbing  Death  of  its  Terrors        83 

The  Incarnation  needed  for  an  Effi. 
oient  Priesthood  ...  ...      84 

CHAPTBE  III. 
Consider  Jesus     ...  ...  •••      91 

Christ  Greater  than  Moses  ...       91 

Beware  of  Unbelief  ....  ...      92 

The  Sablimest  Contemplation  ...       93 

The  Chm'oh,  God's  Temple  ...      95 

On  hearing  God's  Voice     ...  ...      96 

A.postasy  ...  ...  ...       96 

An  Awful  Peril  and  an  Inspired  Pre- 
ventive ...  ...  ...      97 

The  Dread  Disability         ...  ...       98 

The  Superiority  of  Christ  to  Moses 
the  Beason  why  they  should  cleave 
to  Christ  ...  ...  ...       89 

The  Comparison  of  Christ  and  Moses 
suggests  the  Possibility  of  Apos- 
tasy from  Christ  ...  ...     100 

The  Superiority  of  Christ...  ...     101 

in  Example  of  the  Eesources  and 
Adaptation  of  Old  Testament  Scrip- 
ture to  New  Testament  Conditions     102 


THEUS  VA*1 

The  Need  of  Mutual  Xxhortation  to 
avoid  Unbelief  and  follow  Christ 
fully  ...  ...  ...  ...     102 

As  Bedemption  from  Egypt  did  not 
protect  Israel  from    Punishment, 
so  Misbelief  in  Christians  will  be 
visited,with  the  Divine  Displeasure 
and  Final  Failure  ...  ...     103 

Heavenly  Things  ...  ...     103 

What  Christ  is  to  ns'  ...  ...     104 

What  we  are  to  Christ       ...  „.     104 

The  Evil  Heart  of  Unbelief  ...     105 

The  Deceitfulneas  of  Sin  ...  ...     106 

CHAPTBB  rV. 

The  Gospel  Best ...  ...  ,„    114 

The  Power  of  the  Divine  Word        ^    115 
Christ's  Sympathy  and  Help  ...     116 

Fear  of  Failing  to  realize  the  Promised 
Best  ...  ...  ...  ...     117 

Best   a  Present    Possession  of   the 
Christian  Believer         ...  ...     118 

Best  a  Future  Portion  of  the  Chris- 
tian Believer    ...  ...  ...     120 

Characteristics  of  the  Saored  Scrip- 
tures... ...  ...  ...     121 

The  Omniscience  of  God  ...  ...    122 

A  Summons  to  Steadfastness  ...     123 

The    Christian's  Approach    to    the 
Throne  of  Grace  ...  ...     124 

The  More  Terrible  Besult  of  Apos- 
tasy from  Christ  seen  in  the  Better 
Best  to  which  Christ  leads  ...     125 

The  Word  of  God  discovering,   the 
Great  High  Priest  delivering  from, 
the  Apostate's  Sin         ...  ...     126 

Believers  in  Israel  and  in  Christ     ...     127 
The  Course  of  Christian  Effort  is  jus- 
tified by  the  Certainty  of  a  Futrnv 

Best  ...  ...  128 

Success...  ...  ...  ...     129 

Steadfastness       .u  ...  ...    130 

The  Two  Gospels  ...  ...     131 

The  Gospel  profitless  to  an  Unbeliev- 
ing Heart         ...  ...  ...     131 

The  True  Sabbatic  Rest     ...  ...     132 

Characteristics  of  the  Word  of  God    133 
Our  Great  High  Priest  paused  into  the 
Heavens  ...  ...  ...     133 

The  Helpful  Nearness  to  Man  of  the 
True  High  Priest  ...  ...     134 


INDEX. 


Ill 


CHAPTER  V. 

rASc 

The  High  Priesthood  of  Christ         ...     142 
A  Sharp  Beproof  for  Ignorance        ...     143 
An  Essential   Qaalification  for  Sno- 
cessfnl  Ministry  ...  ...     144 

The  Suffering  Saviour        ...  ...     145 

Salvation — its   Author    and    its  Be- 
cipients  ...  ...  ...     147 

Spiritual  Obtuseness  ...  ...     148 

Christ's  Divine  Appointment  to  the 
High  Priesthood  the  Fulfilment  of 
One  Essential  Qualification  for  that 
Position  ...  ...  ...     149 

Christ's     Hnman     Experience    the 
Second    Qualification     for     High 
Priestly  Work  ...  ...  ...     150 

The  EtU  of  Inability  to  apprehend 

the  Deeper  Truths  about  Christ  ...     152 

The    Character    and    OfiSce    of   the 

Aaronio  High  Priest  foreshadows 

theHigherGloryot  Jesus  Christ...     153 

The  Honour  of  the  Priesthood        ...     153 

Sacrificial  Sorrow  ...  ...     164 

Dolness  of  Spiritual  Perception      ...    154 
The  Qnalifioations  and  Functions  of 
the  True  Priest  ...  ...    155 

Getbaamane        ...  ...  ...    156 

A    Special  Hindranoe  to  Ohristian 
Truth  ...  ...  ...     156 

The  Powers  of  the  Fall-grown  Chris- 
tian ...  ...  .M  —    X67 

OHAPTEE  VI. 

No  Standing  still  in  Beligion          ...  163 
Another  Exhortation  to    Steadfast- 
ness ...            ...            ...            ...  164 

Our  Anchor  and  Anchorage  ...  165 

A  Sninmons  to  Christian  Progress  ...  166 

Deo  Tolente         ...  ...  ...  167 

The  Belapse  for  which  there  is  no 

Bestoration      ...  ...  ...  168 

Ministering  to  the  Saints  ...  ...  169 

Imitating  the  Inheritors  of  the  Pro- 
mises... ...  ...  ...  171 

The  Anchor  of  the  Soul     ...  ...  172 

The  Danger  of  Apostasy  arising  from 
Immature  Apprehension  of  Chris- 
tian Truth        ...  ...  ...  173 

The  Influence  of  Hope  on  Christian 

Steadfastness  ...  .m  ...  174 

First  Principles  .m  m<  m.  176 


The  Motives  to  Perseverance    sup- 
plied by  the  Sin  and  Punishment 
of  Apostasy     ...  ...  ...     176 

Confident  Expectation        ...  ...     176 

The  Encouragements  to  cherish  the 
Hope  of  Eternal  Life     ...  ...     177 

Pressing  Forward  to  the  End  ...     178 

The  Critical  State  of  Backsliders     ...     179 
Teaching  from  the  Good  Land  and 
the  Bad  ...  ...  ...     180 

Great  Attention  needed  to  maintain 
the  Christian's  Hope      ...  ...     180 

Imitation  of  those  who   inherit  the 
Promises  ...  ...  ...     181 

The  Anchor  of  the  Soul    ...  ...     182 


CHAPTEB  VII. 

Melchizedek 

...     188 

Christ  Greater  than  Aaron 

...     189 

Salvation  to  the  Uttermost 

...     190 

Separated  from  Sinners     ... 

...     191 

Melchizedek  a  Type  of  Christ 

...     192 

The  Constitution  of  our  Great  High 
Priest  ...  ...  ...     193 

The  Inability  and  Capability  of  the 
Law  ...  ...  ...  ...     194 

Christ's  Perfect  Power  to  save         ...     195 
The  High  Priest  in  whom  Man's  Need 
is  met  ...  ...  ...     197 

Christ  a   Priest  after  the  Order  of 
Melchizedek     ...  ...  ...     198 

Further  Proofs  of  the  Superiority  of 
Christ's  Priesthood  involved  in  the 
Symbol  of  Melchizedek  ...  ...     199 

Christ'3    Superiority  in   the    Infinite 
Perfection  of  his  Personal  Charac- 
ter     ...  ...  ...  ...     200 

Melchizedek  a  Typical  Priest  ...     201 

Christ  Superior  to  Melchizedek        ...     202 
A  Divine  Priesthood  ...  ...     203 

The  Increasing  Evidence  of  the  Ap- 
pointment of  our  Lord  to  be   an 
Unchangeable  Priest      ...  ...     203 

The  Weakness  and  Unprofitableness 
of  the  Commandment     ...  ...     203 

The  Divine  Priest  ...  ».    204 

The   Immortal  Priesthood  of  Christ 
enhanced  by  Weighty   Considera- 
tions ...  ...  ■•  ...    205 

The  Two  Priesthoods :  a  Contrast  ...     106 


tv 


INDEX. 


The  Priesthood  for  Eyer  after  the 
Order  of  Melohizedek     ...  ...     206 

The  Power  of  an  Endless  Life         ...     207 

The  Law  failing,  the  Gospel  sncceed- 
ing     ...  ...  ...  ...     207 

The  Priest  made  Separate  from 
Burners  ...  ...  ...    808 

CHAPTEB  VIIL 

The  Chief  Point  ...  ...  ...  212 

The  New  Covenant  ...  ...  213 

Three  Better  Things  ...  ...  214 

Law  and  Love  in  the  New  Covenant  216 
Knowledge  and  Mercy  in  the   New 

Covenant  ...  ...  ...  217 

Decaying  and  Departing  ...  ...  218 

Heaven  the  Place  where  this  Great 

High  Priest  ministers    ...  ...  219 

Christ  in  Heaven,  the   Mediator  of 

the  New  Covenant  ...  ...  220 

The  Substance  of  the  Argament,  and 

Blnstrations  hitherto  adduced  ...  221 
The  Reasons  assigned  for  the  Intro- 
duction of  the  New  Covenant  ...  223 
The  Minister  of  the  True  Tabernacle, 

his  Position  and  Office    ...  ...  224 

The  High  Priest — for  wiiat  appointed  224 

A  Verse  of  Comparisons    ...  ..  225 

The  Advent   of   the   New    and  the 

Doom  of  the  Old  ...  ^  226 

CHAPTER   IX. 

Arrangements  of  the  First  Covenant  237 

Superiority  of  the  New  Covenant    ...  238 

Eatifioation  by  Blood         ...             ...  239 

Perfection  of  Christ's  Atonement    , . .  240 
The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  a  Symbol 

of  B^demptive  Truth      ...             ...  242 

The  Pre-eminent  Priesthood            ...  243 

Ceremonial  and  Spiritual  Cleansing  244 

Forgiveness  through  Sacrifice          ...  246 

•'Heaven  itself"...             ...              ...  247 

rhe  Two  Deaths,  and  the  Two  Ap- 

pearings  after  Death       ...             ...  249 

Passing  Reference  to  the  Symbolism 

of  the  Jewish  Tabernacle             ...  250 
The  BymboUgm  of  the  Jewish  Sacri- 
fices  ...            ...             ...             ...  262 

The  Day  of  Atonement  fulfilled,  and 
its  Imperfeot  Blessings  perfected, 

in  Christ           ...             ...             ...  253 


THEKB  VAGI 

Symbolism  of  the  Tabernacle           m.  25i 
Symbolism  of  the  Sacrifices              ...  2511 
Christ's  Eternal  Priesthood              ...  25<'' 
Ceremonial  and  Spiritual  Purification  257 
"The   Mediator  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment"               ...              ...              ...  258 

The   Orderly   Arrangements   of    the 

New  Covenant...             ...             ...  258 

The  Parabolic  Function  of  the  Taber- 
nacle Services  ...             ...             ...  259 

The  Eternal  Redemption  ...             ...  260 

Christ  a   Self-presented  Offering  to 

purify  the  Consciences  of  Men     ...  260 

The  Eternal  Inheritance    ...             ...  261 

The  Death  of  Jesus  the  Seal  of  the 

New  Covenant                ...             ...  261 

The  Difference  between  Christ's  First 

and  Second  Advent        ...            ,..  262 


CHAPTEB  X. 

Close  of  the  Argument      ...  ...    271 

The  Great  Admonition       ...  ...     272 

The  Guilt  and  Doom  of  Apostasj     ...     274 
Persnasives  to  Steadfastness  ...     275 

The    Imperfect    Sacrifices    and    the 
Perfect  Sacrifice  ...  ...     276 

The    Sacrifice    and    Sovereignty    of 
Christ  ...  ...  ...     278 

Complete   Forgiveness'  through    the 
Perfect  Sacrifice  ...  ...     279 

The  Christian's  Access  to  the  Holy 
Place ...  ...  ...  ...     279 

Christian  Fidelity  ...  ...     281 

The  Dity  and  Design  of  Mutual  Con- 
siderations        ...  ...  ...     282 

Warning  against  the  Neglect  of  Social 
Worship  ...  ...  ...     283 

The  Darkest  Sin  and  the  Most  Dread- 
ful Doom  ...  ...  ...     284 

Falling  into  the  Hands  of  God :  a  Con- 
trast ...  ...  ...  ...     285 

The  Recollection  of  Past  Sufferings 
an    Encouragement     to     Present 
Steadfastness    ...  ...  ..,     286 

Christian  Fidelity  and  its  Reward    ...     287 
Life  by  Faith       ...  ...  ...     288 

The  Law,  its  Service  and  its  Limits       289 
Beminding  Men  of  Sins     ...  ...     290 

Approaching  God  ...  ...     291 

The  Christian's   Steadfast    Aoknow- 
ledgrment  of  his  Hope     ...  „.    893 


INDEX. 


Hntnality  in  the  Cliristian  Life  ...  292 
FaUing  into  the  Hands  of  the  Living 

God 293 

The   Bight    Estimate    of   Temporal 

Possession        ...  ...  ...     294 

Something  to  do  and  Something  to 

wait  for  ...  ...  ...     295 

The  Jnat  Han,  hia   Charaoter   and 

Safety  ...  .»  •••    295 


CHAPTER  XI. 

The  Nature  and  Power  of  Faith      808,  317 

Faith  of  the  Antedilnvian  Saints     ...  309 

Faith  of  the  Hebrew  Pilgrim  Fathers  311 

Faith  of  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Joseph    ...  '312 

The  Faith  of  Moses             ...            ...  313 

Exploits  and  Endni-ances  of  Faith  ...  315 

Perfection  through  the  Promise  ...  316 
The     Creation  of  the  Visible    Uni- 

Terse ...             ...             ...             ...  818 

The  Sacrifice  of  Abel         ...             ...  820 

The  Character  and  the  Translation  of 

Enoch               ...             ...             ...  821 

The   Impossibility  at   pleasing  God 

without  Faith  ...             ...             ...  822 

The  Faith  of  Noah  ...  823,  346 

The  Faith  of  Abraham      ...             ...  325 

The    Christian's    Condition    in    this 

World               ...             ...             ...  827 

The    Christian's    Attitude    in    this 

World                828 

Faith    sorely    tried    and    sublimely 

triumphant       ...              ...              ...  329 

Faith   giving   Serenity  and    Magna- 
nimity in  Death              ...             ...  331 

The  Faith  of  Joseph;    or.  Assured 

Confidence  in  the  Close  of  Life     ...  332 

The  Faith  of  the  Parents  of  Moses  ...  833 

The  Great  Choice  of  Moses              ...  334 

Seeing  the  Invisible  One  ...             ...  336 

Unquestioning  Faith   expressed  and 

vindicated         ...             ...             ...  337 

The  Faith  of  a  Heathen  Woman       ...  338 

The  Excellent  of  the  Earth  ...  339 
Successive  Stages  in  the  Dispensation 

of  God's  Blessings  to  Man  ...  340 
Faith  in  its  Relation  to  the  Future 

and  the  Unseen              ...             ...  841 

The    Great    Characteristic    of    the 

Elders               ...             ...             ...  842 

Faith  beginning  where  Science  ends  343 


XHBm 

The  Faith  of  Abel 
The  Faith  of  Enoob 
Faith  needed  to  please  God 


MSI 

843 

844 

845 


The  Faith  of  Abraham  going  forth 

into  the  Unknown          ...             ...  347 

The  Tent  and  the  City       „,            ^  847 

The  Two  Fatherlands        ...            ...  848 

Abraham's  Faith  in  offering  Isaao  .^  848 

A  Blessing  for  Each          ...             ...  849 

The  Faith  of  the  Dying  Joseph        ...  850 
Faith  in  an  Infant's  Destiny            ...  860 
Moses  reUnqnishing  Earthly  Advan- 
tages ...             ...             ...             ...  861 

Faith  and  Presnmpiaon  in  Terrible 

Contrast           ...            «.            ...  852 

Believers  and  Unbelievers  at  Jericho  862 
A   Summary  of   the  Sufferings  and 

Trials  of  Believers         ».            ...  853 


OHAPTEE  Xn. 

The  Life  of  Faith,  and  its  Snpreme 

Exemplar         ...             ...            ...  864 

Chastisement       ...             „,            ...  865 

A  Threefold  Cord  of  Duty...             ...  367 

Sinai  and  Zion    ...  .^  868,  390 

The  Final  Appeal               ...            ...  370 

The  Christian  Race            ...            ...  872 

The  Christian's  Danger  of  Weariness 

and  his  Defence              ...            ».  873 

Divine  Discipline                ...             ...  875 

Discipline  in  its  Endurance  and  in  its 

Results              ...            ...             ...  876 

The    Christian    Treatment    of    the 

Feeble               ...             ...             ...  877 

The  Pursuit  of  Peace  and  Holiness  878 
Esau ;  or,  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Spiritual 

for  the  Sensuousl            ...             ...  880 

The   Exalted    Privileges   of   Sincere 

Christians         ...             ...            ...  881 

The  Kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved  883 

The  Cloud  of  Witnesses    .m            ...  884 

The  Appointed  Struggle    ...             „.  885 

Looking  to  Jesus...             ...             .„  886 

What  Christ  was  exposed  to            .„  887 

God's  Discipline  of  his  Children       ...  887 

The  Fruit  of  Discipline      ...             ...  388 

The  Worst  Perils  of  the  Christian 

Life   ...             ...             ...             ...  889 

Esau— a  Warning               ...             ...  889 

The  Purpose  of  the  Shakings          „,  891 

The  Unshaken  Kingdom    ...             ...  892 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  Xm. 

THEKB  PAOE 

Personal  Exhortations       .m             ••.  398 

Deceased  Pastors                ...             ...  400 

"Withont  the  Camp"        401 

But  J  to  Present  Pastors    .^             ...  403 

Concloding  Prayer  for  the  Hebrews  404 

Last  Words          ...             ...             ...  405 

Brotherly  Love    ...  ...  407, 414 

Christian  Contentment  enjoined  and 

encouraged       ...              ...              ,,,  408 

A.  Triumphant  Assurance  ...             ...  409 

The  TTnchangeablenesa  of  Jesus  Christ  410 

The  Ohriitian  Altar           m            m.  iU 


THBHB  PAGI 

Acceptable  Sacrifices         ...  ...  412 

Concluding  Prayer  and  Doxology  ...  413 

Hospitality            ...              ...  ...  415 

SafEerers  to  be  remembered  ...  415 

The  Love  of  Money             ...  ...  415 

Treatment  of  the  Li  aders  ...  ...  41G 

The  Unchanging  Jesus       ...  ...  416 

The  Continuing  City           ...  ...  417 

The  Sacrifices  with  which  God  ia  well 

pleased              ...             ...  ...  417 

The  Watchful  Le.iders       ...  ...  418 

A  Request  for  Prayer        ...  ...  419 

A  Most  Comprehensive  Wish  ...  419 

SofCering  'M  Word  ot  iUhortatioD  ,,  420 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

nCAK  AND   RURAL   DEAN   OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND   EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO   THK   LOKD 
BISHOP   OF   GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL  ! 


AND  BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


JAME  S. 

(Exposition  nnb  i^omilctits : 
By    rev.    E.   C.    S.    GIBSON,    M.A., 

rKIHCIFAL  OF  WELLS  THEOLOGICAL  COLLEGE,  AND  PREBENDARY  IN   WELLS  CATBEDKAL 

i|omilics  bg  Ijarions  ^ntljore : 

IkEV.   C.  JERDAN,    M.A.,  LL.B.  REV.   T.   F.   LOCKYER,   B.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto, 


THE  aBNBRAL  EPISTLE  OF 

JAMES. 


INTRODUCTION. 


L  The  Weiteb  or  thk  Bmstlk. 

Oh.  i.  1,  •*  James,  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ." 

The  following  is  a  list  of  all  those  of  this  name  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament ; — 

1.  James  the  brother  of  John,  the  son  of  Zebedee  and  Saloma :  put  to 
death  by  Herod,  A.d.  44  (Acts  xii.  2). 

2.  James  the  brother  of  the  Lord  (Matt.  xiii.  56  ;  Markvi.  3 ;  Gal.  i.  19). 
8.  James  the  son  of  Mary  (Matt,  xxrii.  56 ;  Luke  zxir.  10,  equivalent  to 

James  the  Little  ;  Mark  xv.  40). 

4.  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus  (Matt.  x.  8 ;  Mark  iii.  18 ;  Luke  tL  15 ; 
Acts  i.  13). 

5.  James  the  father  of  Jade  (Luke  vi.  16 ;  Acts  i.  13.  The  ellipse  in  the 
expression,  'lovSav  'laKii/Sov,  is  rightly  supplied  in  the  Bevised  Version, 
"  Judas  the  son  of  James,"  not  as  A.V.  "  brother  "). 

6.  James  (Acts  xii.  17 ;  xv.  13  ;  xxi  18 ;  1  Cor.  xr.  7 ;  Gal.  ii  9,  12). 

7.  James  the  brother  of  Jude  (Jude  1). 

8.  James,  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (oh.  i.  1), 

Of  these  eight,  (1)  numbers  2  and  6  are  certainly  the  same  (cf.  Gal.  i.  19 
with  ii.  9, 12).  (2)  3  and  4,  and  perhaps  5,  may  also  be  identified ;  as  may 
be  (3)  7  and  8.  Next,  there  oan  be  little  doubt  that  (4)  7  and  8  may  be 
farther  identified  with  2  and  6.  It  is  true  that  the  oldest  manuscripts 
simply  ascribe  the  Epistle  to  "  James."  K,  A,  C,  have  no  superscription. 
B  has  loKiofiov  iiriaroXij.  In  the  subscription,  B  has  simply  lajctofiov :  K, 
iirurroXij  'IcucajSov:  A,  laKio^ov  iTnarrokq.  But  no  other  James  was  of 
sufficient  importance  in  the  early  Church,  after  the  death  of  the  son  of 
Zebedee,  for  there  to  be  any  hesitation  about  thia  identification.  The  Tiew 
that  the  Epistle  was  the  work  of  the  son  of  Zebedee  soaxcely  reqnrres  serious 
consideratioD,  It  rests  on  the  subscription  ia  the  Codex  Corbeiensis  (ff), 
jamh.  I 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


a  Latin  manuscript  of  the  ninth  century :  "  Explicit  Bpistola  Jacobi  filii 
Zebedei."  It  has  lately  been  adv^anced,  with  arguments  which  are  ingemons 
rather  than  solid,  by  Mr.  Bassett  ('  The  Catholic  Epistle  of  St.  James,' 
1876).  A  refutation  of  this  theory  (if  such  be  needed),  may  be  found  in  Dean 
Plumptre's  volume  in  the  Cambridge  Bible  for  schools,  'Epistle  of  St. 
James,'  pp.  6^10. 

We  have  now  reduced  the  list  to  <Are«— 

1.  James  the  son  of  Zebedee. 

2.  James  the  son  of  Alphssus,  one  of  the  twelve, 

3.  James  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  the  first  Bishop  of  Jemsalem,  and  writer 
of  the  Epistle,  one  of  the  most  prominent  figures  in  the  early  Church. 

Shall  we  proceed  a  step  further,  and  identify  2  and  3  ?  This  brings  us  to 
«  very  difficult  question,  and  one  with  regard  to  which  much  may  be  .urged 
on  either  side.  On  behalf  of  the  identification,  reference  may  be  made  to 
Dr.  Mill's  volume  on  the  '  Mythical  Interpretation  of  the  Gospels,'  p.  219,  teq^. 

Against  it,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  direct  the  reader's  attention  to  Bishop 
Lightfoot's  dissertation  on  "The  Brethren  of  the  Lord"  in  his  'Commentary 
on  the  Epistle  to  the  Oalatians,'  p.  247,  seq^.  The  identification  rests  mainly 
on  John  ziz.  25  as  compared  with  Matt,  zxvii.  56  and  Mark  xv.  40 ;  and 
requires  us  (1)  to  take  "  Mary  the  wife  of  Clopas  "  as  "  his  mother's  sister; " 
(2)  to  identify  Clopas  with  Alpheeus ;  and  (3)  to  give  dSeX^os  a  wide  mean- 
ing, so  as  to  include  first  cousin.  None  of  these  things  is  impossible ;  indeed, 
thej  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  improbable ;  and  in  favour  of  the  identifica- 
tion it  may  be  urged  (1)  that  if  the  two  Jameses  are  distinct,  then  one  of 
them,  James  the  son  of  Alphseus,  one  of  the  twelve,  disappears  altogether 
from  the  New  Testament  after  Acts  i.  13,  his  place  being  silently  taken  by 
another  "  James,"  whose  relationship  is  not  specified  in  the  Acts,  and  who  at 
once  takes  a  prominent  position  in  the  Church.  This  is  an  important  con- 
sideration, and  has  scarcely  had  sufficient  weight  attached  to  it.  Elsewhere 
St.  Luke  is  very  careful  in  specifying  and  distinguishing  characters ;  e.g 
the  tfwo  Philips  are  distinguished ;  the  other  James  is  "  the  brother  of 
John,"  etc.  It  is,  therefore,  most  improbable  that,  after  having  mentioned 
"  James  the  son  of  Alphaaus  "  in  Acts  i.  13,  he  should  introduce  an  entirely 
now  character  in  Acts  zii.  17  without  any  clue  to  his  identity. 

Again,  (2)  if  the  two  are  distinct,  we  have  certainly  two,  and  in  all  pro- 
bability three,  pairs  of  cousins  bearing  the  same  names :  James,  Joseph,  and 
Simon,  the  Lord's  brethren ;  and  James,  Joses,  and  Symeon  (see  Euse- 
bius,  iv.  22),  the  sons  of  Clopas  (equivalent  to  Alphaeus).  The  names, 
however,  being  all  common  ones,  not  much  stress  can  be  laid  upon  this 
argument. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  favour  of  the  distinction  of  the  two  Jameses,  it  may 
be  urged — 

(1)  That  it  enables  us  to  give  the  term  "  brother  "  its  natural  meaning. 

(2)  That  if  the  two  are  identified,  James  the  Lord's  brother  must  have 
been  one  of  the  twelve ;    whereas  we  are  expressly  told  in    John  vii.  6 


THE  GENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMBS.  HI 

that  his  brethren  did  not  belieye  on  him.  This,  however,  is  not  conclnsiTe, 
for  St.  John  only  speaks  in  general  terms,  and  one  of  the  brethren  may  have 
been  an  exception.  (It  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  no  sufficient 
reason  for  supposing  Simon  Zelotes  to  have  been  a  brother  of  James,  and 
that  Jndas  the  apostle  was  the  son  not  brother  of  James.  Hence  the 
random  assertion,  so  often  made,  that  on  this  view  two  or  even  three  of  the 
"  brethren  "  were  apostles,  falls  to  the  ground.)  The  statement  of  St.  Paul 
in  Gal.  i.  19  is  too  doubtful  in  meaning  for  any  stress  to  be  laid  on  it  in 
either  way.  The  primd  fcbcie  Triew  is  that  he  does  include  the  Lord's  brother 
among  the  apostles.  But  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  this,  as  it  may  fairly 
be  asserted  that  dirdo-roXos  is  applied  to  others  besides  the  twelve ;  or  it  is 
even  possible  (with  B.V.  margin)  to  render  el  /i^  "  but  only,"  in  which  case 
St.  James  will  be  excluded  from  the  number  of  the  apostles. 

(3)  A  third  argument  may  be  given  in  Bishop  Lightfoot's  words :  "  The 
Lord's  brethren  are  mentioned  in  the  Gospels  in  connection  with  Joseph  his 
reputed  father,  and  Mary  his  mother,  never  once  with  Mary  of  Clopas  (the 
assumed  wife  of  Alphseus).  It  would  surely  have  been  otherwise  if  the 
latter  Mary  were  really  their  mother  "  ('  Galatians,'  p.  266). 

(4)  The  identification  is  apparently  due  to  St.  Jerome  in  the  fourth  cen- 
tury, never  being  heard  of  before  his  day. 

These  last  considerations  are  weighty,  and  will  show  us  that  there  are 
difficulties  in  either  view.  If  the  identification  be  given  up,  there  still 
remains  two  competing  theories,  known  as  the  Helvidian  and  the  Epi- 
phanian. 

(a)  The  Helvidian,  which  supposes  that  the  "  brethren "  were  own 
brothers  of  our  Lord,  the  sons  of  Joseph  and  Mary, 

But  (a)  the  passages  quoted  in  favour  of  this  view  utterly  fail  to  establish 
the  point  for  which  they  are  adduced  (see  Lightfoot,  '  Galatians,' p.  263). 

(fi)  If  Mary  had  other  children  of  her  own,  why  did  our  Lord,  on  the 
cross,  commit  her  to  the  care  of  the  beloved  disciple,  who  took  her  to  his 
own  home  from  that  hour  ? 

(y)  The  "  brethren  "  appear  to  have  been  older  than  onr  Lord,  from  the 
part  which  they  took  in  endeavouring  to  restrain  him,  in  advising  him,  etc. 

(8)  The  early  Church  must  have  had  knowledge  on  such  a  point  as  this. 

(b)  The  Epiphcmian  theory,  which  supposes  that  the  brethren  were  sons 
of  Joseph  by  a  former  wife,  has  a  considerable  amount  of  support  from  early 
writers,  and  has  lately  been  revived  and  supported  with  consummate  ability 
by  Bishop  Lightfoot.  It  has  the  advantages  mentioned  above,  and  is  not 
open  to  the  same  formidable  objections  as  the  Helvidian.  But  at  the  same 
time,  the  points  urged  in  favour  of  the  Hieronymian  theory  are  weighty 
objections  to  it.  The  real  choice,  however,  must  lie  between  these  two — the 
Hieronymian  and  the  Epiphanian.  The  arguments  are  so  evenly  balanced, 
and  the  objections  to  both  so  considerable,  that  it  is  difficult  to  decide  posi- 
tively in  favour  of  either;  and  the  writer  of  these  lines  is  inclined  to  think 
that  the  question  is  one  of  which,  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge,  a 


INTSODUCTION   TP 


solution  is  impossible.  He  will,  therefore,  leave  it  undecided  whether  the 
author  of  our  Epistle  was  the  first  cousin  of  the  Lord,  or  hia  reputed  half- 
brother,  a  Bon  of  Joseph  bj  a  former  wifo< 


n.    Characteb  and  PosiTioir  Of  THB  Weiibb. 

His  position  throughout  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  appears  as  that  of  Bishop 
of  the  Church  of  Jerusalem,  the  only  example  of  diocesan  episcopacy  before 
the  closing  years  of  the  apostolic  age.  The  earliest  [reference  to  him  in 
this  capacity  is  found  in  Acts  xii.  17,  just  about  the  time  when  persecution 
first  fell  on  the  members  of  the  apostolic  college.  Subsequent  notices  of 
him  are  in  Acts  xv.  and  zzi.  At  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  he  acts  as  presi- 
dent, sums  up  the  debate,  and  gives  sentence  (lyoi  KpiVm,  Acts  xv.  19)  ;  and  it 
has  been  thought,  from  certain  slight  coincidences  with  his  Epistle,  that  the 
letter  to  the  Syrian  Churches  was  drawn  up  by  him.  Later  on, -St.  Paul,  on 
the  occasion  of  his  last  visit  to  Jerusalem,  "  went  in  onto  James,  and  all  the 
elders  were  present  "  (Acts  xxi.  18). 

As  might  be  expected  from  the  bishop  of  the  Church  of  the  circnmcision, 
the  glimpses  we  get  of  him  show  us  one  who  is  zealous  for  the  Law. 

1.  While  St.  Peter  "  proposes  the  emancipation  of  the  Gentile  converts 
from  the  Law,  it  is  James  who  suggests  the  restrictive  clauses  of  the 
decree." 

2.  Very  characteristic  is  the  allusion  made  by  him  to  the  fact  that 
"  Moses  of  old  time  hath  in  every  city  them  that  preach  him,  being  read  in 
the  synagogues  every  sabbath  day  "  (Acts  xv.  21). 

3.  Equally  characteristic  is  the  tenderness  shown  by  hiTu  for  the  feelings 
of  the  "  many  thousands  of  the  Jews  which  believe,  who  are  all  zealous  of 
the  Law  "  (Acts  xxi.  20),  and  the  suggestion  with  regard  to  the  tow 
(ver.  23). 

4.  Li  accordance  with  all  this,  it  is  not  unnatural  that  the  Judaizem  in 
GaL  ii.  12  are  spoken  of  as  having  come  "  from  James."  "  It  is  not 
improbable,"  says  Bishop  Lightfoot,  "  that  they  came  invested  with  some 
powers  from  James  which  they  abused." 

This  is  all  that  can  be  gathered  from  Holy  Scripture  with  regard  to  the 
person  and  position  of  St.  James.  To  fill  in  the  outline  of  the  picture  thus 
sketched,  we  must  have  recourse  to  tradition  and  early  historical  notices, 
some  of  which  are  interesting  and  suggestive. 

(1)  The  fact  that  one  of  the  early  appearances  of  the  risen  Saviour  was 
to  "  James  "  is  stated  by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  7 ;  but  there  is  no  further 
mention  of  it  in  the  New  Testament.  We  learn,  however,  from  Jerome, 
'  GataloguB  Scr.  Eccl.'  («.».  "  Jacobus "),  that  the  '  Gospel  according  to 
the  Hebrews '  contained  an  account  of  this  appearance.  The  passage  from 
this  apocryphal  Gospel  is  given  by  Mr.  Nicholson,  in  his  edition  of  the 
'  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews '  (p.  62),  as  follows : — 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


"  And  when  the  Lord  had  given  his  linen  cloth  to  the  servant  of  the 
priest,  he  went  to  James,  and  appeared  unto  him. 

"  For  James  had  sworn,  that  he  would  not  eat  bread  from  that  honr 
wherein  he  had  drank  the  cnp  of  the  Lord,  until  he  saw  him  rising  again 
from  the  dead. 

"...  bring  a  table  and  bread. 

"...  [and  ?  ]  he  took  up  the  bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  after- 
wards gave  to  James  the  Just,  and  said  to  him.  My  brother,  eat  thy  bread, 
for  the  Son  of  man  is  risen  from  them  that  sleep." 

Without  giving  credence  to  the  details  thus  brought  before  ns,  it  is  at 
least  interesting  to  notice  how  the  Jewish  character  of  St.  James  comes  out 
in  the  vow  attributed  to  him.  Compare  the  oath  of  more  than  forty  men, 
"  neither  to  eat  nor  drink  till  they  have  killed  Paul "  (Acts  zxiii.  12). 

(2)  Ensebius  (Bk.  II.  zxiii.)  has  preserved  the  following  remarkable 
account  from  Hegesippns,  a  writer  of  the  second  century,  "  who  flourished 
nearest  the  days  of  the  apostles  :" — "  James,  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  who, 
as  there  were  many  of  this  name,  was  surnamed  the  Just  by  all,  from  the 
days  of  our  Lord  until  now,  received  the  government  of  the  Church  with  the 
apostles.  This  man  was  holy  (ayios)  from  his  mother's  womb.  He  drank 
neither  wine  nor  strong  drink,  and  abstained  from  animal  food.  A  razor 
never  came  upon  his  head,  he  never  anointed  himself  with  oil,  and  never 
used  a  bath.  He  alone  was  allowed  to  enter  the  sanctuary  (eis  rot  c[y(a). 
He  never  wore  woollen,  but  linen  garments.  He  was  in  the  habit  of 
entering  the  temple  alone,  and  was  often  found  upon  his  bended  knees,  and 
asking  for  the  forgiveness  of  the  people  ;  so  that  his  knees  became  as  hard 
as  camels',  in  consequence  of  his  habitual  supplication  and  kneeling  before 
God.  And,  indeed,  on  account  of  his  exceeding  righteousness,  he  was  called 
the  Just  (8ta  r-qv  {hrep^o\r]v  rrji  SiKaiocrvvrjs  avrov  ckoXeito  SiKaw^),  and  Oblias 
('0/JXias),  which  is  in  Greek  'bulwark  of  the  people  '  and  '  righteousness,' 
as  the  prophets  declare  concerning  him." 

It  is  impossible  to  accept  this  account  as  literally  true.  There  are  diffi- 
culties  in  it  which  cannot  be  explained  (see  Lightfoot  on  '  Galatians,' 
p.  349 ;  and  Routh,  '  Reliquiae  Sacrse,'  vol.  i.  228,  »eg.). 

But  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  there  is  some  foundation  for  the  portrait 
thus  drawn ;  and  his  surname  of  "  the  Just  "  bears  witness  to  his  rigid 
observance  of  the  Mosaic  ritual.  This  appears  to  have  been  a  name  not 
uncommonly  given  to  those  who  were  signalized  by  an  extreme  devotion  to 
the  observance  of  the  Law  (Acts  i.  23 ;  zviii.  7 ;  Col.  iv.  II ;  of.  Schottgen, 
'Horse  Hebraioae,'  voL  i.  p.  407). 

(3)  Clement  of  Alexandria,  in  a  fragment  of  his  '  Hypotyposes,'  preserved 
by  Euflebins  (Bk.  II.  i.),  has  thus  recorded  St.  James's  appointment  to  the 
charge  of  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  :  "  Peter  and  James  and  John,  after  the 
ascension  of  our  Saviour,  did  not  contend  for  the  honour,  but  chose  James 
the  Just  as  Bishop  of  Jerusalem."  And  in  another  fragment  he  says,  "  The 
Lord  imparted  the  gift  of  knowledge  to  James  the  Just,  to  John,  and  Peter, 


vi  INTaODUCTION   TO 


after  his  resnirectioii ;  these  delivered  it  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  and 
they  to  the  seventy." 

(4)  Epiphanius  ('  HsBr.,'  Ixxviil  14)  strangely  enough  transfers  to  St. 
James  the  well-known  statement  of  Polycrates  with  regard  to  St.  John, 
that  he  wore  the  iriraXov  M  t^s  K€<jia\rji  (cf.  Busebius,  V.  xxiv.)-^a  state- 
ment which  cannot  be  literally  true,  but  could  never  have  been  invented 
except  of  one  who  was  known  to  regard  the  Mosaic  ritual  with  the  utmosi 
veneration. 

(5)  Of  the  death  of  St.  James  two  accounts  have  been  preserved,  (a)  A 
brief  one  in  Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  xix.  iz.  §  1 :  "  CsBsar,  having  learnt  the  death 
of  Festns,  sends  Albinus  as  governor  of  Judsea  .  .  .  Ananus  .  .  .  supposing 
that  he  had  a  favourable  opportunity  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  Festus, 
Albinus  being  still  on  the  way,  assembled  the  Sanhedrim,  and  brought 
before  it  James  [the  brother  of  him  who  is  called  Christ],  and  some  others, 
and  having  charged  them  with  breaking  the  laws,  delivered  them  over  to 
be  stoned.  Bat  those  of  the  city  who  seemed  most  moderate  and  most 
accurate  in  observing  the  Law  were  greatly  offended  at  this,  and  secretly 
sent  to  the  king,  entreating  him  to  send  to  Ananus  with  the  request  not  to 
do  these  things,  saying  that  he  had  not  acted  legally  even  before  this." 
Eusebius  (Bk.  II.  xxiii.)  and  Origen  (in  '  Matt.'  xiii.  55, '  Contr.  Celsns,'  i.  47 ; 
ii.  13)  also  ascribe  to  the  Jewish  historian  the  statement  that  the  murder  of 
James  was  the  immediate  cause  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  and  the  troubles 
which  fell  upon  the  Jews.  "  These  things  happened  to  the  Jews  to  avenge 
James  the  Just,  who  was  the  brother  of  him  that  is  called  Christ,  and 
whom  the  Jews  had  slain,  notwithstanding  his  pre-eminent  justice."  There 
is,  however,  no  sort  of  doubt  that  the  passage  is  spurious.  It  is  not  found 
in  the  existing  copies  of  Josephus. 

(6)  A  longer  and  very  remarkable  account  is  given  by  Hegesippus  in 
Eusebius,  Bk.  II.  xxiii.  The  passage  is  so  familiar  that  there  is  no  need  to 
repeat  it  here,  more  especially  as  it  contains  serious  difficulties,  and  is 
unhesitatingly  set  aside  by  Bishop  Lightfoot  in  favour  of  the  shorter  version 
of  Josephus  (see  Lightfoot's  'Galatians,'  p.  348,  seq.;  and  cf.  Routh's 
'  Reliquiae  Sacrse,'  vol.  i.  p.  228,  seq.). 

The  date  of  St.  James's  death  is  fixed  for  us  by  Josephus  as  happening 
between  the  death  of  Festus  and  the  arrival  of  his  successor  Albinus,  i.e.  in 
the  year  a.d.  62  (see  the  date  discussed  in  Lewin's  '  Fasti  Sacri,'  p.  Ixxiz. ; 
cf.  No.  1931). 

m.  Object  and  Chaeactbr  of  thi  Epibtli. 

As  might  be  expected  from  the  position  and  character  of  the  writer,  the 
Epistle  is  addressed  to  Jewish  Christians. 

1.  "  To  the  twelve  tribes  .  .  .  scattered  abroad  "  (ch.  i.  1).  "  The  stand- 
point of  the  Epistle,"  it  has  been  well  said,  "is  essentially  Jewish:  the 
address,  as  we  have  seen,  is  to  the  twelve  tribes ;  the  terms  *  rich '  and '  poor ' 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE   OF  JAMBS. 


are  distributed,  after  the  manner  of  the  Old  Testament  writers ;  the  place 
of  worship  is  the  sjnagogae  (oh.  ii.  2) ;  the  defini^^ion  of  the  faith  they 
possessed  is  the  Jewish  creed,  the  Sh'ma  Israel,  that  '  God  is  one,' 
(ch.  u.  19)  ;  the  oaths  prohibited  are  Jewish  (ch.  v.  12,  etc.)  ;  the  sins 
denounced  are  those  to  which  the  Jews  were  addicted — pride,  self-conceit, 
ostentation,  overbearing,  fraud "  (Bassett,  *  The  Catholic  Epistle  of  St. 
James,'  p.  xlii.). 

2.  The  somewhat  wide  salutation  is  practically  limited  to  Ohristians  by  the 
following  aSe\<ltoi  iwv,  and  ch.  ii.  1.  That  it  is  addressed  to  Christian  Jews 
is  also  implied  in  ch.  i.  18 ;  ii.  7 ;  v.  7,  14.  There  is  force  also  in  Huther's 
remark,  that  "if  the  author  as  a  8ovXo$  of  Christ  had  written  to  non- 
Cliristians,  his  Epistle  could  only  have  had  the  intention  of  leading  them  to 
faith  in  Christ ;  but  of  such  an  intention  there  is  not  the  slightest  trace 
found  in  the  Epistle  "  (Introduction  to  '  Commentary  on  St.  James,'  p.  11). 

We  cannot,  however,  understand  the  Epistle  aright  unless  wo  remember 
that  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed,  in  becoming  Christians,  had  not  ceased  to 
he  Jews.  We  are  probably  prone  to  exaggerate  the  gulf  which  existed 
between  Jews  and  Christians  in  the  early  days  of  the  Church.'  At  first 
the  preaching  of  the  apostles  was  "  rather  a  purification  than  a  contra- 
diction of  the  popular  doctrine."  Those  who  were  present  in  Jerusalem 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  must  have  carried  home  little  more  than  the  fact  of 
the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  and  the  barest  rudiments  of  Christianity.  The 
ifdspel  preached  by  those  "  who  were  scattered  abroad  upon  the  persecution 
wliich  arose  about  Stephen"  would  be  somewhat  fuller,  though  still  incom- 
plete. It  was  preached  "  to  none  but  Jews  only ;  "  but  it  spread  the  new 
faith  over  a  wide  region — "as  far  as  Phenice  and  Cyprus  and  Antioch." 
Thus  Chx-istian  communities  would  be  founded  in  the  Jewish  quarters  in 
most  large  cities ;  but  it  must  have  been  years  before  they  ceased  to  be  Jews 
and  were  entirely  separated  from  the  synagogue  with  a  definite  and  com- 
plete organization  of  their  own.  A  careful  examination  of  the  account  of 
St.  Paul's  missionary  labours  as  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles 
shows  us  that,  even  with  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  it  was  often  a  matter 
of  time  before  his  converts  wei-e  separated  from  the  synagogue. 

(1)  At  Antioch  in  Pisidia  the  separation  was  made  after  two  sabbaths. 

(2)  At  Iconium  it  was  made  at  once. 

(3)  At  Thessalonica  for  three  sabbaths  St.  Paul  was  suffered  to  preach 
ill  the  synagogue. 

(4)  At  Beroea  apparently  the  whole  synagogue  was  converted  en  maste. 

(5)  At  Corinth  for  some  time  St.  Paul  "  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every 
sabbath." 

(6)  At  Ephesus  it  was  three  months  before  "Paul  separated  the 
discit 


'  Very  striking  and  significant  is  the  fact  that  men  who  "  had  not  so  much  as  heard 
whether  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,"  and  who  had  been  Mily  baptized  "  into  John's 
baptism,"  are  nevertheless  styled  liaeriral  (Acts  xix.  1—7), 


INTBODUCTION  TO 


In  other  cases,  where  men  laboured,  hj  whom  the  "  liberty  of  the  gospel " 
was  not  so  emphaticaUj  preached,  it  was  probably  far  longer  before  the 
separation  was  made.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  Beroea  was  the  solitary 
synagogue  whose  members  were  won  over  en  mouse  to  the  Christian  faith. 
For  some  years  Jewish  Christians  would  go  on  attending  their  synagogues 
and  observing  the  Law  as  strictly  as  other  Jews,  only  superadding  to  it  "  the 
faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord  of  glory."  That  they  would  do  so 
is  evidently  supposed  by  St.  James,  from  his  remark  about  Moses  in  Acts 
XV.  21,  and  again  from  his  description  of  the  "  many  thousands  of  the  Jews 
which  believe,  who  are  all  zealous  of  the  Law  "  (Acts  xxi.  20).  It  is  to  such 
as  these  that  he  is  writing.  Not,  perhaps,  to  a  definitely  organized  and 
mixed  Christian  Church  consisting  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  but  rather  to  those 
synagogues  which,  like  that  of  Beroea,  had  embraced  Christianity.  To  these 
he  writes  in  the  style  of  ontf  of  the  old  prophets.'  Their  synagogue  was 
still  open  to  all  Jews.  Into  it  the  rich  man  might  freely  enter.  Though 
not  actually  a  "  brother,"  still  there  was  sufficient  likelihood  of  the  message 
reaching  him  for  St.  James  to  pen  words  of  sternest  denunciation,  bidding 
him  weep  and  howl  for  the  miseries  that  were  coming  upon  him.  These 
communities  of  Jewish  Christians,  in  the  mind  of  St.  James,  stood  in  the 
position  of  Israel  of  old,  and  required  just  the  same  treatment  at  the  hands 
of  Christian  teachers  and  prophets  as  Judsea  and  Samaria  had  received 
from  the  prophets  of  the  old  covenant  (see  especially  ch.  iv.  1 — 10  and 
v.  1 — 6,  with  notes).  This  theory  of  the  relative  position  of  the  writer  and 
his  hearers  will,  it  is  believed,  satisfactorily  account  for  the  remarkable 
language  used,  and  the  allusions  to  sins  which,  on  any  other  theory,  appear 
almost  incredible  in  a  Christian  community. 

The  object  of  the  Epistle  is  evidently  to  exhort  these  Jewish  Christians  to 
patience  under  the  trials  to  wbich  they  were  exposed.  The  Epistle  begins 
and  ends  with  this  (ch.  L  2  and  v.  7).  The  special  trials  were  probably 
those  of  persecution  from  unbelieving  Jews.  To  this  there  is  apparently 
allusion  made  in  ch.  iL  6  (see  note).  But  while  writing  with  this  special 
object,  St.  James  is  not  unmindful  of  the  general  needs  of  his  readers,  and 
takes  occasion  (1)  to  warn  them  against  various  sins  and  evil  tendencies  of 
which  they  stood  in  danger ;  and  (2)  to  instruct  them  in  various  points  of 
Christian  morality,* 

The  Epistle,  like  the  sapiential  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  hare 
so  largely  influenced  the  thoughts  and  phraseology  of  its  writer,  is  almost 
impossible  to  analyze.  The  following  scheme  wUl,  however,  serve  to  show 
the  principal  subjects  treated  of,  and  th«  order  in  which  they  are  dia> 
cussed : — 


■  "  The  Epistle  of  St.  James  is  the  farewell  voice  of  Hebrew  prophecy  "  (Words- 
worth). 
»  On 

than  of 
l,teq. 


the  position  of  St.  James  as  the  great  teacher  of  moral  rectitude  rather 
f  doctrine,  aee  a  itrikiug  passage  in  F.  W.  Bohertson'g '  Sermons/  ToL  iii.  p 


THE  GENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


Oh.  L 1.    Salutation. 
L  Oh.  L  2—27. 

(1)  Yen.  2—18.    The  subject  of  temptatiim. 

(2)  Vers.  19 — 27.  Exhortation  (a)  to  hear  rather  than  speak ;  (b)  not  only  t« 
hear,  but  to  do. 

2.  Ch.  ii.— iy.  12. 

(1)  Ch.  ii.    Warnings  against  (o)  respect  of  persons  (vers.  1 — ^13) ;  (6)  a  mere 

barren  orthodoxy  (vers.  14 — 26). 

(2)  Ch.  iii.  Further  warnings  against  (a)  over-readinesa  to  teach,  leading  to 
general  remarks  on  the  need  of  governing  the  tongue  (vers.  1 — 12) ; 
(6)  jealousy  and  faction  (vers.  13 — 18). 

(3)  CIl  It.  1—12.    Bebuke  of  quarrels  arising  from  pride  and  greed. 
8.  Oh.  iv.  13— V.  6. 

(1)  Ch.  iv.  13 — 17.  Special  denunciation  of  overweening  confidence  In  our  own 
plans  and  our  ability  to  carry  them  out. 

(2)  Ch.  V.  1 — 6.    Special  denunciation  of  rich  sinners. 
4.  Oh.  ▼.  7 — end.    Concluding  exhortations. 

(1)  Vers.  7 — 11.    To  patience  and  long-suffering. 

(2)  Ver.  12.    Against  swearing. 

(3)  Yen.  13 — 20.    With  regard  to  behaviour  in  health  and  sickness. 


rV.  The  Date  of  thb  Bpistlb. 

1,  The  termintu  ad  quern  is  definitely  fixed  by  the  death  of  St.  James  in 
A.D.  62. 

2.  How  much  earlier  the  Epistle  was  vfritten  will  depend  upon  the  -view 
taken  of  its  relation  to  the  writings  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter. 

(1)  There  are  coincidences  between  St.  James  and  the  First  Epistle  of 
St.  Peter  which  can  hardly  be  accidental,  but  must  point  to  a  knowledge  on 
the  part  of  one  writer  of  the  work  of  the  other  (see  the  notes  on  ch.  iv.  6 
and  v.  20,  where  reasons  are  given  for  thinking  that  St.  James  ifl  the  earlier 
of  the  two). 

(2)  The  relation  between  the  teaching  of  St.  James  and  St.  Panl  on 
the  subject  of  justification  is  examined  in  the  notes  on  ch.  ii.  14,  teq.  If 
St.  James  is  writing  (as  many  think)  with  direct  reference  to  a  perversion 
of  St.  Panl's  teaching,  his  Epistle  will  be  subsequent  to  those  to  the 
Romans  and  Galatians,  and  will  thns  belong  to  the  last  years  of  his  life, 
about  A.D.  60 — 62.  But  there  are  strong  reasons  giyen  in  the  notes  for 
holding  that  the  teaching  of  the  two  apostles  is  really  entirely  independent 
of  each  other,  and  that  the  error  which  St.  James  is  combating  is  a 
strictly  Jewish  one.  Thus  we  are  still  left  entirely  free  in  our  search  for 
a  terminus  a  quo.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible  to  fix  one  with  any  degree 
of  exactness,  but  the  arguments  for  an  early  rather  than  a  late  date  seem 
to  the  present  writer  overwhelming.    They  may  be  summed  up  as  follows : — 

(a)  The  very  slight  line  which  appears  to  exist  between  Judaism  and 
Christianity. 

(6)  The  absence  of  definite  Christian  phraseology.     Contrast  the  saluta- 


mTEODUCTIO>T  TO 


tion  in  ch.  i.  1  wiili  that  in  other  Epistles.     The  term  tvayyeXtov  nevei 
occurs,  etc. 

(c)  The  absence  of  dogfmatio  teaching.  Our  Lord's  name  is  only  men- 
tioned twice  (ch.  L  1  and  ii.  1).  "  The  apostle  calls  Christianity  the  law 
of  freedom,  the  royal  law  of  love  which  God  writes  on  man's  heart  by 
faith ;  bat  otherwise  the  weightiest  New  Testament  doctrines  are  not  once 
touched  on  "  (Bollinger's  '  First  Age  of  Christianity,'  p.  106).  An  acknow- 
ledgment of  oar  Lord's  divinity  would,  however,  underlie  the  expression  in 
ch.  iL  1,  and  it  mast  not  be  overlooked  that,  by  designating  himself  as  the 
servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  writer  places  Christ  on  an 
equality  with  God.  Further,  "  the  circumstance  that  the  author  directly 
unites  the  Divine  judgment  with  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  indeed  designates 
the  Lord  himself  as  the  Judge,  points  to  this  higher  dignity  of  Christ " 
(Huther,  p.  18).  Still,  it  must  strike  every  reader  that  there  is  very  little 
specifically  OhrisUan  doctrine  in  this  Epistle. 

In  this  respect  it  is  interesting  to  compare  it  with  St.  John's  Epistles, 
the  latest  of  New  Testament  writings.  Like  St.  James's,  they  are  remark- 
able for  the  absence  of  allusion  to  the  historic  facts  of  Christianity,  but 
how  full  of  doctrine  which  is  based  upon  those  facts  ! 

(d)  From  the  absence  of  all  reference  to  Oentile  Christianity,  and  the 
questions  which  arose  between  Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians,  it  may  fairly 
be  argued  that  the  Epistle  was  written  even  prior  to  the  Council  of  Jeru- 
salem, A.D.  60. 

On  the  whole,  then,  we  conclude  that  we  have  before  ns  the  very  earliest 
of  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament.  With  this  accords  its  position 
(so  far  as  the  Epistles  are  concerned)  in  the  oldest  manuscripts,  in  which, 
as  is  well  known,  the  Catholic  Epistles  precede  those  of  St.  Paul.  "And 
this  position,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  in  a  remarkable  passage,  which  it  is  well 
to  quote  at  length,  "  does,  in  fact,  exactly  correspond  to  its  character,  both 
historically  and  morally.  "Whether  it  be  or  be  not  the  earliest  in  time, 
which,  however,  there  is  much  reason  to  believe,  it  is  certainly  the  earliest  in 
spirit.  It  belongs,  if  not  to  an  age,  at  least  to  •  mind,  which  knew  nothing 
of  the  contest  which  shook  the  whole  Christian  society  to  its  very  founda- 
tions in  the  time  of  St.  Paul;  not  only  is  the  Gentile  Christian  completely 
out  of  sight,  but  the  distinction  between  Jew  and  Christian  is  itself  not 
yet  brought  to  view ;  both  are  equally  addressed  in  the  Epistle  as  belonging 
to  the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad;  it  passes  at  once  from  rebuking  the 
unbelieving  Jews  of  the  higher  orders  to  console  the  believing  Jews  of  the 
lower  orders ;  the  Christian  assembly  is  still  spoken  of  under  the  name  of 
'  synagogue  ; '  the  whole  scene,  in  short,  is  that  which  appears  before  us  in 
the  earlier  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  .  .  .  And  as  in  these  out- 
ward circumstances,  so  also  in  its  inward  spirit,  this  Epistle  exactly  coin- 
cides with  the  character  of  him  in  whom  the  Jew  and  the  Christian 
throughout  his  whole  life  were  indistinguiahably  blended  together. 
Christianity  appears  in  it,  not  as  a  new  dispensation,  but  as  a  development 


THE   GENEBAL  EPISTLE   OP  JAMES. 


and  perfection  of  the  old ;  the  Christian's  highest  honour  is,  not  that  he  is 
a  member  of  the  universal  Church,  but  that  he  is  the  genuine  type  of  the 
ancient  Israelite;  it  instils  no  new  principles  of  spiritual  life,  such  as  those 
which  were  to  '  turn  the  world  upside  down,'  in  the  teaching  of  Pan!  or  of 
Jolin,  but  only  that  pure  and  perfect  morality  which  was  the  true  fulfil- 
ment of  the  Law  ;  it  dwells,  not  on  the  human  Teacher  or  Friend  whose 
outward  acts  and  words  are  recorded  minutely  in  St.  Mark,  or  on  the  human 
Sufferer  whose  sorrows  and  whose  tenderness  are  brought  out  in  St.  Luke, 
nor  yet  on  the  inward  and  essential  Divinity  impressed  upon  us  by  St.  John  ; 
but  as  we  might  again  expect  from  the  position  of  its  author,  it  is  the 
practical  comment  on  that  gospel  which  internal  evidence  as  well  as 
general  tradition  ascribes  to  the  Church  of  Palestine,  and  in  which  our 
Lord  appears  emphatically  as  the  Judge,  the  Lawgiver,  and  the  King  "  ('Ser- 
mons on  the  Apostolic  Age,'  p.  305).' 

The  place  from  which  the  Epistle  was  written  was  undoubtedly  Jerusalem. 
Every  notice  of  St.  James,  scriptural,  historical,  and  legendary,  connects 
him  with  this  city,  and  no  other  place  has  ever  been  seriously  suggested. 
Internal  evidence  points  to  the  same  locality,  e.g.  the  allusions  to  the 
aataral  phenomena  of  Palestine,  the  "  early  and  the  latter  nun,"  the 
xavtrtN'i  the  bitter  springs,  eto. 


V.   AUTHENTICITT  Of  THB  EPISTLB. 

So  far  this  has  been  taken  for  granted.  It  will,  however,  be  well  to  say  a 
few  words  on  this  head  before  concluding  the  Introduction. 

The  testimony  of  Eusebius  in  the  fourth  century  is  given  in  '  Hist.  Eccl.,' 
Bk.  II.  zxiii. :  "  These  accounts  are  given  respecting  James,  who  is  said  to 
have  written  the  first  of  the  Catholic  Epistles ;  but  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
it  is  considered  spurious  (voOeveTcLi).  Not  many,  indeed,  of  the  ancients  have 
mentioned  it,  nor  yet  that  called  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  which  is  also  one 
of  the  seven  called  Catholic  Epistles.  Nevertheless,  we  know  that  these 
with  the  rest  are  publicly  used  in  most  of  the  Churches." 

From  this  passage  we  gather — 

1.  That  the  Epistle  was  ascribed  to  James. 

2.  That  doubts  were  current  as  to  its  genuineness. 

3.  That  not  much  use  was  made  of  it  by  early  writers. 

4.  That  nevertheless  it  was  generally  read  in  the  Churcfiea. 

In  Bk.  III.  XXV,  Eusebius  ranks  it  among  the  diTtXeyo/zevo,  "  which  are 
nevertheless  well  known  and  recognized  by  most  (yvuipi/jimv  rots  wdAAois)." 

*  The  frequent  references  to  the  recorded  discourses  of  our  Lord  in  this  Epistle  can- 
not faal  to  strike  the  most  careless  reader.  They  are  all  pointed  out  in  the  notes  on  the 
text.  But  it  is  worth  noticing  in  this  connexion  that  we  "find  a  statement  in  the 
works  of  Athanasius  (torn.  ii.  p.  102)  that  the  Hebrew  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  wm 
translated  into  Greek  by  James  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem"  (Suinley,  ubi  tupra). 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


But  his  own  opinion  with  regard  to  it  may  be  shown  fz-om  the  fact  that  he 
makes  free  nse  of  it  in  his  other  writings,  and  ascribes  it  to  "  the  apostle  " 
(see  Westcott  on  the  '  Canon,'  p.  392). 

At  a  later  date  than  that  of  Ensebins  it  was  apparently  rejected  by 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  but  there  is  no  need  to  discuss  his  witness.  Turning 
to  earlier  writers,  we  find  that  St.  Oyprian  has  no  reference  to  it,  and  that 
there  is  nothing  in  the  writings  of  TertuUian  to  show  that  he  was  acquainted 
with  it.  Further,  Dr.  Westcott  says  that  "  there  is  no  external  evidence  to 
show  that  the  Epistle  of  St.  James  or  the  Second  Epistle  of  St.  Peter  was 
included  in  the  Vetus  Latina.  The  earliest  Latin  testimonies  to  both  of 
them  .  .  .  are  those  of  Hilary,  Jerome,  and  Bufinus  in  his  Latin  version 
of  Origen"  ('Canon  of  the  New  Testament,'  p.  234).  Considerations  of 
style  and  language  are  also  said  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  did  not 
form  part  of  the  original  African  Version  of  the  Scriptures.  It  is  found, 
however  in  what  appears  to  be  an  early  Italian  recension  in  Codex  Cor- 
beiensis  (ff). 

Thus  the  Epistle  would  seem  to  have  been  unknown  to  the  African 
Church  of  the  first  three  centuries.  Elsewhere  the  case  is  different. 
Against  the  absence  of  allusions  in  the  remains  of  Novatus  (Westcott  on 
the  '  Canon,'  p.  345),  and  the  silence  of  the  '  Muratorian  Fragment,'  we  may 
set  the  fact  that  Hippolytus  (a.d.  220)  has  one  (unacknowledged)  quotation 
from  it :  'H  yap  Kpio-n  dciXeois  eorl  ru  /i^  iron^avTt  i\.toi  (edit.  Lagarde,  p.  122 ; 
cf.  Jas.  ii.  13),  and  that  Irenoew  (a.d.  180)  has  one  fairly  clear  allusion  to 
it :  "  Ipse  Abraham  .  .  .  credidit  Deo  et  reputatum  est  illi  ad  justitiam 
et  amicus  Dei  vocatus  est "  ('  Adv.  Hser.,'  IV.  xvi.  2 ;  cf.  Jas.  ii.  23)  ;  while 
at  a  still  earlier  date  there  are  two  important  witnesses  to  the  knowledge 
of  this  Epistle  in  the  West,  viz.  Hernias,  the  author  of  '  The  Shepherd,'  and 
Clement  of  Borne.  With  regard  to  the  former  of  these.  Dr.  Westcott  writes 
that  "  '  The  Shepherd  '  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  Epistle  of  St.  James 
as  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas  does  to  that  of  the  Hebrews.  The  idea  of  a 
Christian  law  lies  at  the  bottom  of  them  both  ;  but,  according  to  St.  James, 
it  is  a  law  of  liberty,  centering  in  man's  deliverance  from  corruption  within 
and  ceremonial  without ;  while  Hermas  rather  looks  for  its  essence  in  the 
rites  of  the  outward  Church."  Again, "  whole  sections  of  'The  Shepherd'  are 
framed  with  evident  recollection  of  St.  James  "  ('  Canon  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment,' p.  180).  The  passages  in  question  are  too  numerous  for  quotation, 
but  may  be  seen  in  full  in  Professor  Charteris'  admirable  volume  on 
'  Canonicity,'  p.  293.  [The  date  of  '  The  Shepherd '  is  somewhat  difficult  to 
fix  precisely.  Zahn  puts  it  as  early  as  A.D.  97 ;  others  as  late  as  a.d.  140. 
(See  'Dictionary  of  Christian  Biography,'  ii.  p.  918.)]  Clement  of  Borne  (a.d. 
96)  was  nndonbtedly  familiar  with  our  Epistle,  although  he  never  names 
the  author  and  makes  no  formal  quotation  from  it.  He  speaks  of  Abraham 
as  called  "  the  friend  "  (6  ^iXos  vpoa-ayopevOeCs,  ch.  x. ;  cf.  Jas.  ii.  23),  and 
instances  Bahab  as  saved  by  faith  and  hospitality  (ch.  xii.),  an  instance 
"doubtless  suggested  by  Heb.  xi.  31  and  Jas.  ii.  26  "  (Lightfoot,  tn  foe.).  His 


THE  GENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  xiil 

• 

quotations  of  Pror.  iii.  34  and  x.  12  in  ch.  xxx.  and  xlix.  agree  closely  with  St. 
James's  version  of  these  passages,  differing  from  both  Hebrew  and  LXX. 
There  appear  also  to  be  reminiscences  of  Jas.  i.  8  in  ch.  xi.,  and  of  ir.  1  in 
ch.  xlvi.  (see  farther  Charteris, '  Ganonicity,'  p.  292).  So  strong  did  these 
coincidences  seem  to  Bishop  Lightfoot,  that  he  actually  spoke  of  them  as 
"  nnmerons  and  patent  quotations  "  ('  Commentary  on  Colossians,'  p.  53), 
although  he  has  since  withdrawn  the  expression  as  "  too  strongly  worded," 
while  still  maintaining  that  the  references  seem  to  be  perfectly  clear  (ibid.,  p. 
413).  And  yet  Alford  speaks  of  the  allusions  in  both  Hermas  and  Clement 
as  "  very  doubtfu^  indeed  "  ! 

To  pass  from  the  Western  Church  to  the  East.  In  the  third  century 
our  Epistle  was  probably  known  to  Gregory  Thautnaturgui  (a.d.  250.  See 
Westcott  on  the  '  Canon,'  p.  353).  It  is  directly  quoted  by  Dionysiut  of  Alex- 
andria (l.D.  260.  Ibid.,  p.  333);  and  Origen  in  one  passage  refers  to  it  as  "  the 
Epistle  in  circulation  under  the  name  of  James  "  (this  is  apparently  the 
first  occasion  on  which  it  is  directly  assigned  to  St.  James).  Elsewhere  he 
quotes  it  without  further  remark  £s  irapa  'IaKii)j3(j>,  and,  according  to  the  Latin 
version  of  his  '  Homilies,'  he  calls  the  writer  "  the  apostle,"  and  cites  it  as 
"  divina  scriptura"  (Westcott,  p.  331).  It  is  uncertain  whether  it  was  known 
to  Origen's  teacher,  Clement  of  Alexandria.  Ensebius  (Bk.VI.  xiv.)  says  some- 
what vaguely  that  "  Clement  in  his  '  Hypotyposes  '  has  given  us  abridged 
acoconnts  of  all  the  canonical  Scriptures,  not  even  omitting  the  disputed 
ones,  1  mean  the  Book  of  Jude  and  the  other  Catholic  Epistles."  This  state- 
ment  is  criticized  and  examined  by  Dr.  Westcott  ('  Canon  of  the  New 
Tostament,  p.  322),  and  the  conclasion  at  which  he  arrives  is  that  St.  James 
was  probably  an  exception,  and  that  Clement  had  no  knowledge  of  it. 
Against  this  we  may,  however,  fairly  set  the  fact  that  the  Epistle  is 
included  in  both  the  ancient  Egyptian  Versions,  the  Memphitic  and  Thebaic, 
which  belong  to  the  third  or  even  possibly  to  the  second  century.  While 
even  earlier  it  finds  a  place  in  the  Peschilo  Syriac,  which  undoubtedly  dates 
from  the  second  century.  "  This  testimony,"  saysHuther,  "is  of  the  greater 
importance,  as  the  country  from  which  the  Peschito  proceeded  closely 
bordered  on  that  from  which  the  Epistle  originated  j  and  as  that  testimony 
was  repeated  and  believed  in  by  the  Syriac  Church  of  the  following  age." 
Melito  of  Sardis  (a.d.  180)  has  one  strong  coincidence  with  it  (see  Westcott 
pp.  201,  202),  which  exhausts  the  list  of  references  in  early  writers. 

From  the  days  of  Ensebius  down  to  the  sixteenth  century  scarcely  a 
doubt  was  raised  with  regard  to  its  authenticity.  At  the  time  of  the  Refor- 
mation its  claims  were  again  subjected  to  a  close  scrutiny,  and,  on  grounds 
of  internal  evidence  and  supposed  opposition  to  "  Pauline  "  teaching,  some 
writers  were  inclined  to  reject  it.  Lather's  hasty  and  unjust  estimate  is 
well  known.  In  the  preface  to  the  New  Testament  (1622)  he  calls  it  "  a 
right  strawy  Epistle,  for  it  has  no  true  evangelical  character."  This 
remark  disappears  from  later  editions,  but  was  never  formally  retracted. 
Nor  does  it  stand  i^lone.    Huther  quotes  also  statements  to  the  effeot  that 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


it  is  "  no  genuine  apostolic  Epistle  "  ('  Sermons  on  the  Epistle  of  St.  Peter,' 
1523)  ;  that  it  "  was  neither  written  by  an  apostle  nor  has  the  true  apos- 
tolic ring,  nor  does  it  agree  with  the  pare  doctrine  "  ('  Kirchenpostille,' 
delivered  in  1527-8).  So  in  his  'Table  Talk,'  " Many  have  endeavoured 
and  laboured  to  reconcile  the  Epistle  of  James  with  Paul.  Philip 
Melancthon  refers  to  it  in  his  '  Apology,'  but  not  with  earnestness ;  for 
'  faith  justifies '  and  '  faith  does  not  justify '  are  plain  contradictions. 
Whoever  can  reconcile  them,  on  him  I  will  put  my  cap,  and  allow  him  to 
call  me  a  fool." 

This  depreciatory  verdict  of  Luther's  rests  on  an  entire  misconceptien 
of  apostolic  teaching,  and  has '  not  convinced  many  of  the  non-apostolic 
origin  of  our  Epistle.  The  "contradiction"  between  St.  James  and  St. 
Paul  is  shown  in  the  notes  on  ch.  ii.  to  be  purely  imaginary.  And  it  is 
believed  that  the  references  to  the  Epistle  in  early  writers  which  have  been 
given  above,  taken  together  with  the  steady  manner  in  which  it  won  its 
way  to  general  acceptance,  are  amply  sufficient  to  prove  it  to  be  a  genuine 
work  of  him  whose  name  it  bears  ;  especially  when  we  consider  that  it  is 
not  difficult  to  account  for  the  hesitation  felt  in  early  days  as  to  the  recog- 
nition of  its  claims.  "  The  Epistle  was  directed  only  to  the  Jewish-Christian 
Churches,  and  the  more  these,  by  holding  to  the  original  type,  distinguished 
and  separated  themselves  from  the  other  Churches,  the  more  difficult  must 
it  have  been  to  regard  an  Epistle  directed  to  them  as  the  common  property 
of  the  Church,  especially  as  it  appeared  to  contain  a  contradiction  to  the 
doctrine  of  the  Apostle  Paul "  (Huther,  p.  24).  That  the  Epistle  was 
finally  accepted  by  the  whole  Church  in  spite  of  these  adverse  circumstances 
is  surely  a  consideration  to  which  great  weight  should  be  given. 


VI.  AnTHOEiriBS  fob  th«  Text. 

1.  The  Epistle  is  contained  in  the  following  uncial  manuscripts  :— 

The  four  great  Bibles  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  Codex  Vaticanus 
(B)  and  Codex  Sinaiticus  (n),  of  the  fourth  century;  Codex  Alexandrinus 
(A)  and  Codex  Ephreemi  (C),  of  the  fifth  century.  (The  last-mentioned 
manuscript  is  defective  towards  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  and  only  contains 
ch.  i.  1— iv.  2.) 

Besides  these,  it  is  found  in  three  secondary  uncials  :  Codex  Mosqueusis 
(K"),  of  the  ninth  century;  Codex  Angelicus  (L,  formerly  G),  of  the 
ninth  century  (quite  a  different  manuscript  from  the  very  valuable  L,  God6.< 
B/Cgius,  of  the  Gospels) ;  Codex  Porphyrianus  (P),  a  palimpsest  of  tho 
ninth  century,  published  by  Tischendorf  (in  this  ch.  ii.  12 — 21  are  barely 
legible). 

2.  Besides  these  uncial  manuscripts,  it  is  contained  in  mora  than  twti 
hundred  cursive  manuscripts. 

3.  Versions'^ 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


(1)  Syriac ;  the  Pesohito  (second  century);  and  Philoxenian  of  the  fifth 
or  sixth. 

(2)  The  Memphltic  and  Thebaic  (second  or  third  century)  Egyptian 
Versionfl. 

(3)  As  has  been  already  mentioned,  it  was  not  in  the  original  old  Latin 
Version,  as  made  in  Africa.  It  is  fonnd,  however,  in  Codex  Corbeiensi* 
(ff),  which  apparently  contains  an  Italian  recension  of  the  text,  and,  partially 
in  (m)  the  readings  extracted  by  Mai  from  a  speculum  wrongly  ascribed  to 
Angnstine.  This  contains  ''  an  interesting  but  not  early  old  Latin  text " 
(Hort,  Introduction,  ii.  p.  89).  The  fragments  found  in  ■  (Codex  Bob- 
biensis),  often  quoted  as  "  Old  Latin,"  are  said  by  Dr.  Hort  to  be  "  appa- 
rently Vulgate  only."  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  mention  that  the 
Epistle  is  contained  in  St.  Jerome's  version  ;  but  the  reader  should  note  that 
the  readings  quoted  in  the  Commentary  as  Vulgate  are  taken  (unless  it  is 
stated  to  the  contrary)  from  Codex  Amiatinus,  and  not  from  the  Clemen tinr 
edition. 


TH£l  GENEllAL  EPISTLE  OF 

JAMES. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAFTEB  L 


Ver.  1. — Saltitation.  Tamea,  a  servant 
•f  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesns  Chiist.  (On 
the  pereon  who  thus  describea  himaelf,  see 
the  Introduction.)  It  ia  noteworthy  that  he 
keeps  entirely  out  of  sight  his  natural 
relationship  to  our  Lord,  and  styles  him- 
self simply  "a  bond-servant  of  God  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That,  and  that  alone, 
gave  him  a  right  to  speak  and  a  claim  to 
be  heard.  AouAoi  is  similarly  used  by 
Bt  Fanl  in  Bom.  L  1 ;  Pliil.  L 1 ;  Titus  1 1 ; 
by  St  Peter  in  2  Pet  i.  1 ;  and  by  St  Jude 
ver.  1.  It  is  clearly  an  official  designation, 
implying  that  his  uffice  is  one  "  in  which, 
not  his  own  will,  not  the  will  of  other  men, 
bnt  only  of  Gud  and  of  Christ,  is  to  be 
performed  "(Huther).  To  the  twelve  tribes, 
eto.  Compare  the  salutation  in  Acts  xv.  23, 
which  was  also  probably  written  by  St. 
James :  "  The  apostlei  and  the  elder 
brethren  unto  the  brethren  which  are  of  the 
Gentiles  in  Antioch,  and  Syria,  and  Cilieia, 
greeting."  (1)  Xaipnv  is  common  to  both, 
and  not  found  elsewhere  in  apostolic  greet- 
ings. (It  is  used  by  Ignatius  in  the  opening 
of  all  liis  epistles  except  that  to  the 
Fhiladelpliians.)  (2)  The  letter  in  the 
Acts  is  addressed  to  Gentile  communities 
in  definite  regions ;  St  James's  Epistle, 
to  Jeioe  of  the  dispersion.  So  also  his  con- 
temporary Gamaliel  wrote  "  to  the  bods  of 
the  dispersion  in  Babylonia,  and  to  our 
brethren  in  Media,  and  to  all  the  dispersion 
of  Israel "  (Frankel,  '  Monatsschrift,'  1853, 
p.  113).  tats  S^SsKa  </>i>Aau  (cf.  SuSfKd<l>v\oy 
in  Acts  xxvi.  7 ;  Clem., '  Bom.,'  1,  §  It.  ; 
'  Protev.  Jacob,,'  c.  L).  Such  expressions  are 
important  as  tending  to  show  that  the  Jews 
were  regarded  as  representing,  not  simply 
the  tribes  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  but  the 
whole  nation,  including  those  so  often 
spoken  of  as  "  the  lost  tribes  "  (cf.  1  Badr. 
vii.  8).  AiotrTTopf.  The  abstract  put  for 
the  concrete.    It  ia  the  word  used  by  the 

JAUES. 


LXX.  for  the  "  dispersion  "  (2  Mace.  i.  27 ; 
Jud.  ▼.  19 ;  cf.  Deut  xxviiL  25,  e(e.X_  i.e. 
the  Jews  "so  scattered  among  the  nation! 
as  to  become  the  seed  of  a  future  harvest " 
(Westcott  on  St  John  vii.  35).  (On  the 
importance  of  the  dispersion  as  preparing 
the  way  for  Christianity,  see  the  '  Dictionary 
of  the  Bible,'  vol.  i.  p.  441.)  It  was  divided 
into  three  great  sections :  (1)  the  BabyUmian, 
i.e.  the  original  dispersion ;  (2)  the  Syrian, 
dating  from  the  Greek  conquests  in  Asia, 
Seleucus  Kicator  having  transplanted  large 
bodies  of  Jews  from  Babylonia  to  the 
capitals  of  his  Western  provinces ;  (3)  the 
Egyptian,  the  Jewish  settlements  in  Alex- 
andria, established  by  Alexander  and 
Ptolemy  I.,  and  thence  spreading  along 
the  north  coast  of  Africa.  To  these  we 
should,  perhaps,  add  a  fourth — (4)  the  Soman, 
consequent  upon  the  occupation  of  Jerusalem 
by  Pompey,  B.o.  63.  All  these  four  divisions 
were  represented  in  Jerusalem  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  (see  Acta  ii.  8 — 11) — a  fact 
which  wiil  help  to  account  for  St  James's 
letter.  The  whole  expression,  "  the  twelve 
tribes  which  are  scattered  abroad,"  makes 
it  perfectly  clear  that  St.  James  is  writing 
(1)  to  Jews,  and  (2)  to  those  beyond  the 
borders  of  Palestine. 

Vers.  2 — 18. — The  Subject  of  Tbmpta- 
TiON.  This  section  may  be  subdivided  as 
follows : — (1)  The  value  of  temptation 
(vers.  2 — 4).  (2)  Digression  suggested  by 
the  thought  of  perfection  (vers.  5 — 11). 
(3)  Betum  to  the  subject  of  temptation 
(vers.  12—18). 

Vera.  2 — 4. — The  value  of^  temptation. 
Considered  as  an  opportunity,  it  is  a  cause 
for  joy. 

Ver.  2. — Kj  brethren.  A  favourite  ex- 
pression with  St.  James,  occurring  no  less 
than  fifteen  times  in  the  compaas  of.  this 
short  Bpistle.  Connt  it  all  joy,  etc.;  cf. 
1  Pet.  i.  6,  "Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice, 
though  now  for  a  little  while,  if  need  be, 
ye  liave  been  put  to  grief  in  manifold  temp- 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLK  OF  JAMES. 


[oh.  1. 1—27. 


latiotiM,  that  the  proof  of  your  faith  (rk 
SoKl/iMy  inwy  rris  ttlartrnt)  •  .  •  might  be 
found  unto  praise,"  ete.  The  coincidence 
is  too  close  to  be  accidental,  although  the 
shade  of  meaning  given  to  SoKi/uor  is  slightly 
different,  if  indeed  it  has  any  right  in  the 
text  in  St.  Peter  (see  Hort,  vol.  ii.  p.  102). 
Uere  it  has  its  proper  force,  and  signifies 
that  by  which  Ote  faith  is  tried,  i.e.  the 
instnunent  of  trial  rather  than  the  process 
of  trial.  Thus  the  passage  in  ver.  3  becomes 
parallel  to  Bom.  v.  3,  "  tribulation  worketh 
patience."  With  regard  to  the  sentiments 
of  ver.  2,  "  Count  it  all  joy,"  etc.,  contrast 
Matt,  vi  13.  Experience,  however,  showB 
that  the  two  are  compatible.  It  is  quite 
possible  to  ihrink  beforehand  &om  temp- 
tation, and  pray  with  intense  earnestness, 
"Lead  na  not  into  temptation,"  and  ye^ 
when  the  temptation  comes,  to  meet  it 
joyfully.  nipateiTiiTe.  The  use  of  this  word 
implies  that  the  temptations  of  wliich . 
St.  James  is  thinking  are  external  (see 
Luke  X.  30,  where  the  same  word  is  used  of 
the  man  who/ell  among  thieves).  1  Tbess. 
ii.  14  and  Heb.  x.  32, 33  will  show  the  trials 
to  which  believing  Jews  were  subject.  But 
the  epithet  "  manifold  "  would  indicate  that 
we  should  not  confine  the  word  here  to 
trials  such  as  those. 

Ver,  3. — ^Fatienoe.  'Xirofieyii  in  general  is 
patience  with  regard  to  thingi,  iiaxpoBuiiia  is 
rather  long-suffering  with  regard  to  persons 
(see  Trench  on  '  Synonyms,'  p.  186,  and 
compare  the  notes  on  ch.  v.  7,  etc.). 

Yer.  i. — ^Patience  alone  is  not  sufScient. 
It  must  have  scope  given  it  for  its  exercise 
that  it  may  have  its  "  perfect  work."  That 
ye  may  be  perfeot  (Tra  ^te  te\cioi);  cf.  Matt. 
T.  48,  "Be  ye  therefore  perfect"  Both 
Tc'xeioi  and  i\^K\ripas  were  applied  to  the 
initiated,  tile  fully  instructed,  as  opposed 
to  novices  in  the  ancient  mysteries;  and 
as  eaily  as  1  Cor.  ii.  6,  7  we  find  r4\eu)s 
used  for  tke  Christian  who  is  no  longer  in 
need  of  rudimentary  teaching,  and  possibly 
this  is  the  thought  here.  The  figure,  how- 
ever, is  probably  rather  that  of  the  ftitt- 
groum  man.  Te'Xeioi,  equivalent  to  "  grown 
men"  as  opposed  to  children;  t\6K\rjpot, 
sound  in  every  part  and  Umb  (cf.  i\o- 
K\riplai>  in  Acts  iii.  16).  From  this  te\cioi 
assumes  a  moral  complexion,  that  wliich  has 
attained  its  aim.  Compare  its  use  in  Gen.  vi. 
9  and  Dent,  xviii.  13,  where  it  is  equivalent 
to  the  Latin  integer  viUe,  and  the  following 
passage  from  Stobieus,  which  exactly  serves 
to  illustrate  St  James's  thought  in  vers.  4 
and  5,  Thv  ayaOiy  ivSpa  T4\iioy  ehai  Ktymi- 
aiv,  ilk  rh  infitiiias  ittohtiiteaBiu  hpi-n)!. 
The  "perfection"  which  Is  to  be  attained 
in  Uiis  life  may  be  further  illustrated  from 
Heb.  xii  28 — a  passage  which  is  often  mis- 
understood, bnt  whiob  undoubtedly  means 


that  the  men  were  made  perfect  (jiviiiuun 
itKoiav  reTeKitujiivtcv),  and  that  not  in  a 
future  state,  but  here  on  earth,  where  alone 
they  can  be  subject  to  those  trials  and  con- 
flicts by  the  patient  endurance  of  which 
they  are  perfected  for  a  higher  state  of  being. 
The  whole  passage  before  us  (vers.  2 — 6) 
affords  a  most  remarkable  instance  of  the 
figure  called  by  grammarians  anadiplosis, 
the  repetition  of  a  marked  word  at  the  close 
of  one  clause  and  beginning  of  another. 
"  The  trial  of  your  faith  worketh  patience  ; 
but  let  paiience  have  her  perfect  work,  that 
ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  lacking  in 
nothing.  But  if  any  maa  look  wisdom,  let 
him  aSt  of  the  giving  God  .  .  .  and  it  shall 
be  given  him;  but  let  him  ask  in  faith, 
nothing  doubting,  for  he  that  doubteth,"  etc 

Vers.  5 — 11. — Digression  suggested  by  the 
thought  of  perfection.  There  can  be  no  true 
perfection  without  wisdom,  which  is  the 
gift  of  God,  and  must  be  sought  from  him. 
It  is  possible  that  the  thought  and  connection 
of  the  passage  is  due  to  a  reminiscence  of 
Wisd.  ix.  6,  "  For  though  a  man  be  never 
BO  perfect  (reXEios)  among  the  children  of 
men,  yet  if  thjr  wisdom  be  not  with  him, 
he  shall  be  nothing  regarded."  But  whether 
this  be  so  or  not,  the  teaching  is  manifestly 
founded  on  our  Lord's  words  with  regard 
to  prayer,  Matt.  vii.  7,  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be 
given  yon;"  and  Mark  xi.  23,  "Have  faith 
in  God.  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Whoever 
shall  say  .  .  .  and  shall  not  doubt  (Smirpi6q) 
in  Us  heart,"  etc.  ToS  SiS6vtos  @eov.  The 
order  of  the  words  shows  that  God's  cha- 
racter is  that  of  a  Giver :  "  the  giving  God." 
His  "nature  and  property"  is  to  give  as 
well  as  to  forgive.  Man  often  spoils  his 
gifts,  (1)  by  the  grudging  way  in  which 
they  are  given,  and  (2)  by  the  reproaches 
which  accompany  them.  God,  on  the  con- 
trary, gives  to  all  (1)  liberally,  and  (2)  with- 
out upbraiding.  'AirXas :  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  bnt  cf.  air\6rris  in  Bom. 
xu.  8;  2  Cor.  viii.  2;  ix.  11,  13.  Vulgate, 
affluenter;  A.V.  and  B.V.,  "Uberally."  It 
is  almost  equivalent  to  "  without  any  arriere 
pens^."  Kh  ovsiSlCovTos :  cf.  Ecclus.  xli.  22, 
McTck  t6  Sovvai  fi^  bvelSi^f, 

Ver.  6.— The  A;V.  "nothing  wavering. 
For  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the 
sea,"  is  unfortunate,  as  suggesting  a  play 
upon  the  words  which  has  no  existence  in 
the  original.  Bender,  with  B.V.,  nothing 
doubting:  for  he  that  doubted  is  like  the 
surge  of  the  sea.  KKiStav,  the  surge;  avftu- 
i6ii.tvos  and  pmi^iiuvos  both  occur  here  only. 

Vers.  7, 8. — ^The  A.V.,  which  makes  ver.  8 
a'h  independent  sentence,  is  certainly  wrong 
Bender,  Let  not  that  man  thinh  that  he  shah 
receive  anything  of  the  Lord,  double-mindea 
man  that  he  is,  unstable  in  aU  his  ways. 
So  Vulgate,   Vir  duplex  animi,  inoonstan$ 


cii.  I.  1—2  7.] 


THE   QENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAUES. 


in  omnOnu  viis.  (The  Olementine  Vulgate, 
by  reading  egl  after  inamstant,  agrees  with 
A-Y.)  Another  possible  rendering  is  that 
of  the  B.Y.  margin,  "Let  not  that  man  think 
that  a  double-minded  man,  unstable  in  all 
his  ways,  shall  receiva,"  ete.  But  the  ren- 
dering given  above  ii  better.  Double- 
minded;.  Sfi|<uxoi  occura  only  here  and  in 
oh.  iv.  8  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  not 
found  in  any  earlier  writer,  and  was  perhaps 
coined  by  St.  James  to  represent  tiie  idea 
of  the  Hebrew,  "an  heart  and  an  heart 
(Jr\  shf)"  (1  Chron.  xii.  33).  It  took 
root  at  once  in  the  vocabulary  of  ecclesi- 
astical writers,  being  found  three  times  in 
Clement  of  Bome,  and  frequently  in  his 
younger  contemporary  Hermas.  St.  James's 
words  are  apparently  alluded  to  in  the 
Apoet.  Const,  VII.  xi.,  M^  yimv  Sl^uxos  iv 
TTponvxS  """  "  Icrai  fi  oi>:  and  cf.  Clem., 
'Rom.,'  «.  xziii.  The  same  thought  is  also 
found  in  Ecclus.  i.  28,  "Come  not  before 
him  with  a  double  heart  (,iv  xapSitf  Sltrffji)," 
Unstable ;  iKoriirTaTot,  only  here  and  (pro- 
bably) ch.  iii.  8. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — A  very  di£Scult  passage, 
three  interpretations  of  which  are  given, 
none  of  them  entirely  satisfactory  or  free 
from  difficulties.  (1)  "  But  let  the  brother 
of  low  degree  glory  in  his  high  estate  [i.e. 
his  Christian  dignity];  bnt  let  the  rich 
[brother  glory]  in  his  humiliation "  {i.e.  in 
being  poor  of  spirit,  Matt.  v.  3).  (2)  '•  But 
let  the  brother,  etc.  (as  before);  "but  the 
rich  man  [rejoices]  in  his  humiliation" 
(t.e.  in  what  is  really  his  degradation ;  of. 
"whose  glory  is  in  their  sliarae,"  Fhil.iii.  19). 
(3)  "But  let  the  brother,  ...  but  let 
the  rich  [grieve]  in  his  humiliation."  The 
ellipse  of  raitdvoiaOa  in  this  last  is  very 
harsh  and  unexampled,  so  that  the  choice 
really  lies  between  (1)  and  (2).    And  against 

(1)  it  may  be  urged  (a)  that  the  "  rich " 
are  never  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  "brothers" 
in  this  Epistle.  See  ch.  ii.  6;  v.  1,  and  of. 
the  way  in  which  they  are  spoken  of  in 
other  parts  of  the  New  Testament  (e.g. 
Luke  vi.  24;  Matt.  xix.  23;  Eev.  vi.  15); 
and  in  Ecclus.  xiii  3;  (b)  that  in  ver. 
11  the  thought  is,  not  of  riches  which 
make  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away, 
but  of  the  rich  man  himself,  who  fades 
away;  (e)  that  -rmtiivwais  is  elsewhere 
always  used  for  external  lowness  of  condi- 
tion, not  for  the  Christian  virtue  of  humility 
(see  Luke  i.48;  Acts  viii.  33;  Pliil.  iii.  21). 
On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  best  to  adopt 

(2)  and  to  supply  tlie  indicative :  "  but  the 
rich  man  [not  'brother']  gloi-ies  in  his 
liumiliation ; "  t.e.  he  glories  in  what  is 
really  lowering.  Because  as  the  flower,  etc. 
A  clear  reference  to  Isa.  xL  6,  which  is  also 
quoted  in  1  Pet.  L  21. 

Ver.   11. — 'AfirtiX*  .  ,  ,   i(fipayi   ,   .   , 


Utittat  .  .  .  iw^ktro.  Observe  the  aorisU 
here  and  in  ver.  2i.  The  illustration  or 
case  mentioned  by  way  of  example  is  taken 
as  an  actual  bust,  and  the  apostle  falls  into 
the  tone  of  narration  (see  Winer,  'Orammar 
of  New  Testament  Greek,'  §  xl.  5,  6,  1). 
Bender,  For  the  sun  arose  with  the  scorching 
wind,  and  withered  the  grass;  and  the  flower 
thereof  fell  away,  and  the  grace  of  the  fashion 
of  it  perished.  Kai<ra!v  may  refer  to  (1)  the 
heat  of  the  sun,  or  (2)  more  probably,  the 
hot  Samiim  wind,  the  'D<':ip^  of  the   Old 

Testament  (Job  xxvii.  21 ;  Ezek.  xvii.  10, 
etc.). 

Vers.  12— 18.— iietttm  lo  the  subject  of 
ttmptation.  Ver.  2  taught  that  temptation 
regarded  ai  an  opportunity  should  be  • 
cause  for  joy.  Ver.  12  teaches  that  the 
endurance  of  temptation  brings  a  blessing 
from  God,  even  the  crown  of  life.  Comp. 
Rev.  ii.  10,  the  only  other  place  in  the 
New  Testament  where  the  "  crown  of  life  " 
is  mentioned;  and  there  also  it  stands  in 
close  connection  with  the  endurance  of  temp- 
tation. Elsewhere  we  read  of  the  "crown 
of  righteousness"  (2  Tim.  iv.  8),  and  the 
"  crown  of  glory  "  (1  Pet.  v.  4).  The  genitive 
(rhi/  rrt^avor  TJjs  (aris)  ia  probably  the  geu. 
epex., "  the  crown,  which  is  life."  'O  Kiipioi 
of  the  Received  Text  has  but  slight  authority. 
It  is  wanting  in  A,  B,  k,  ff,  and  ia  deleted 
by  the  Revisers,  following  all  recent  editors. 
Bender,  which  he  promised,  etc.  The 
subject  is  easily  understood,  and  therefore, 
as  frequently  in  Jewish  writings  {e.g.  1  Mac- 
cabees), omitted  from  motives  of  reverence. 

Ver.  13. — God  is  not  the  author  of  temp- 
tation; cf.  Ecclus.  XV.  11,  12,  "Say  not 
thou.  It  ia  through  the  Lord  that  I  fell 
away;  for  thou  oughtest  not  to  do  the 
things  that  he  hateUi.  Say  not  thou,  He 
hath  caused  me  to  err ;  for  he  hath  no  need 
of  the  sinful  man."  From  God  j  Inrd  0eo5  (the 
article  is  wanting  in  n.  A,  B,  0,  E,  L).  Con- 
trast  inri  ttjs  ISias  iiriBviJ.las.  'Airh  @eov  is  a 
more  general  expression  than  iirh  ecoS,  which 
would  refer  the  temptation  immediately  to 
God.  'Airb  @eou  is  frequently  used  aa  a 
kind  of  adverb  divinittu.  Cannot  be  tempted ; 
dirclfittirTos :  an  fin-aj  \ey6iievov.  Syriao,  "  is 
not  tempted  with  evils ; "  Vulgate,  tnien- 
tator  malorum;  B.V.,  "cannot  be  tempted 
of  evil ; "  E.V.  margin,  "  is  untried  in  evil." 
Alford  has  a  good  note  on  this  word,  in 
which  he  points  out  that  it  haa  but  two 
meanings:  (1)  that  has  not  been  tried; 
(2)  that  has  not  tried.  The  rendering  of 
the  Vulgate  is  thus  etymologically  possible, 
but  is  against  the  context.  The  use  of  the 
word  may,  perhaps,  be  extended  somewhat 
wider  than  the  renderings  given  above 
would  allow,  so  that  it  may  be  paraphrased 
as  "out  of  the  sphere  of  evila"  (Farrar). 
Neither  tempteth  he,  etc.     Here  the  wrltel 


tHS;   GBNEBAL  EPISTLE  OP   JAMES. 


[oh.  I.  1—27. 


has  in  his  mind  the  conception  of  a  direct 
temptation  from  God.  Avt6s  is  emphatic. 
Bender  with  B.V.,  And  he  himself  temptelh 
no  man. 

Ver.  14  state*  the  true  origin  of  tempta- 
tion. While  the  occasion  might  be  of  Ood 
"  in  the  order  of  hia  providence  and  of  our 
spititual  training,"  tiie  inclination  is  not 
of  liim.  Compare  with  this  verse  the 
description  of  the  harlot  in  Prov.  vii.  6 — 27. 
Here  lust  is  personified,  and  represented  as 
a  seducing  harlot,  to  whose  embraces  man 
yields,  and  the  result  is  the  birth  of  sin, 
which  in  its  turn  gives  birth  to  death. 

Ver.  15  shows  where  temptation  passes 
into  sin.  "ETriSu/ufo,  lust,  is  clearly  not  in 
itself  "true  and  proper  sin,"  but  it  is  no 
less  clear  that,  as  our  Article  IX.  says,  it 
"hath  of  itself  the  nature  of  sin."  With 
this  whole  passage  we  should  compare  St. 
Fanl's  teaching  on  imOvijila,  a/^apTia,  and 
eavaris,  in  Eom.  vii7 — 11.  'AiroKiJeii'  occurs 
only  here  and  in  ver.  18;  translate,  gen- 
dereth. 

Vers.  16—18. — The  connection  of  thonght 
with  what  goes  before  appears  to  be  this, 
God  cannot  be  the  author  of  temptation, 
which  thus  leads  to  sin  and  death,  because 
all  good  and  perfect  gifts,  and  these  only, 
come  from  him. 

Ver.  16. — ^Do  not  err;  better,  he  not 
deceived;  iiH]  -jrhavcuree.  The  same  formula 
is  also  found  in  1  Cor.  vi  9;  xv,  33;  GaL 
vi.  7. 

Ver.  17. — Every  good  gift,  etc.  The  words 
furm  a  hexameter  verse,  though  this  is 
probably  accicienfsl,  and  no  sign  that  they 
are  a  quotation.  A6<rts  and  Sdprnia  should 
be  distinguished.  "  Every  kind  of  gift  that 
is  gowl,  and  every  one  that  is  perfect  in  its 
kind"  (Dean  Scott).  A6iris  and  Sapov  occur 
together  in  the  LXX.  in  Prov.  xxi.  14. 
They  ore  expressly  distingnished  by  Fhilo, 
who  says  that  the  latter  involves  the  idea  of 
magnitude  and  fulness,  which  is  wanting  to 
the  former  (see  Lightfoot  on '  Revision,'  p,  77), 
"  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  boon," 
B.V  The  Father  of  lights  (oTrii  toD  narpis 
Tuy  <i><iTaiv).  The  word  must  refer  to  the 
heavenly  bodies,  of  which  God  may  be  said 
to  be  the  Father,  in  that  he  is  their  Creator 
(for  "  Father,"  in  the  sense  of  Creator,  cf. 
Job  xxxviii.  28),  From  him  who  "  made 
the  stars  also  "  comes  down  every  good  and 
perfect  gift,  and  with  him  "  tliere  can  be  no 
variation,  neither  shadow  that  is  cast  by 
turning."  These  last  words  appear  to  fix 
the  meaning  of  ^ara,  as  rpoirr)  is  used  in  the 
LXX,  as  in  classical  writers  for  the  changes 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  (see  Job  xxxviii. 
33  ;  Dent,  xxxiii.  14 ;  Wisd,  vii.  18).  Ou/c 
fvi, "  there  is  no  room  for."  It  negatives,  not 
only  the  fact,  but  the  possibility  alao  (cf. 
Gal,  iU,  28;  Col.  iii.  11). 


Ver.  18.— Begat;  literally,  hrought  forth; 
aircKiriafv.  The  word  has  been  already  nsed 
of  sin  in  ver.  15.  The  recurrence  of  it  here 
points  to  the  connection  of  thought.  The 
offspring  of  sin  has  been  shown  to  be  death. 
God,  too,  who  is  both  Father  and  Mother 
(Bengel),  has  his  offspring.  But  how  dif- 
ferent! Vb  (vfiiS.s).  To  whom  doeg  this 
refer?  (1)  To  all  Christiana.  (2)  To  Chris- 
tians of  the  apostolic  age.  (8)  To  Jewish 
Christians,  to  whom  the  Epistle  is  specially 
addressed.  Probably  (3).  Just  as  Israel  of 
old  was  Jehovah's  firsthom  (Exod.  iv.  22), 
so  now  the  germ  of  the  Christian  Church,  as 
found  in  these  Judseo-Christian  communi- 
ties, was  to  be  "a  kind  of  flistfruits."  _  The 
thought  may  be  illustrated  from  s  striking 
parallel  in  Philo  ('De  Great.  Prino.'):  T» 
<ri/iTrav  'lovSaCav  ISvos  ...  toS  (rifaraanos 
avQp^irav  yeyovs  i.ireyefi'tiQT}  ota  ris  i-vapxh 
T^  iroiTjTp  Kol  irarpt.  Transfer  this  from  the 
Jewish  to  the  Judseo-Christian  communities, 
and  we  have  the  very  thought  of  the 
apostle.  By  the  word  of  ferath  (cf.  1  Pet.  i, 
23,  where,  as  here,  the  new  birth  is  con- 
nected with  the  Word  of  God).  A  kind  of 
firstfmits  of  his  creatures  (oTropx^)-  The 
image  is  taken  from  the  wave  sheaf,  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  harvest,  the  earnest  of  the  crop 
to  follow,  St,  Paul  (according  to  a  very 
possible  reading)  has  the  same  figure  in  2 
Thess.  ii.  13,  "God  chose  you  as  firstfruits 
(imapx^|l')',"  seeB.V.  margin.  Elsewhere  he 
applies  it  to  Christ,  "  the  Firstfruits  of  them 
that  are  asleep  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  "  His  crea- 
tures (ieTi<rniTcn>)."  It  does  not  appear  to 
be  absolutely  necessary  to  extend  the  use  of 
this  word  so  as  to  include  the  irrational 
creation  as  well  as  mankind.  nns  is 
frequently  nsed  in  rabbinical  writings  for 
the  Gentile  world,  and  Kria-iia  may  be  given 
the  same  meaning  here,  and  perhaps  ktIo-is 
in  Mark  xvi.  15 ;  Bom.  viii,  19,  etc. ;  Col. 
1.23. 

Vers.  19 — 27. — Exhobtation  (1)  to  hbab 

BATBEB    THAN    TO    SFEAE,   (2)    NOT  ONLY  TO 
HEAB,  BUT  ALSO   TO    DO. 

Ver.  19. — The  text  requires  correction. 
For  SiTTe  .  .  .  ^trra  ms  of  the  Textus  Be- 
ceptus,  read,  'Itrre  iSe\<t)ol  /itiii  a7a7r>)T0i  lara 
Si  nas,  « ',  A',  B,  C,  Lati  'IffTe  is  probably 
indicative,  and  refers  to  what  has  gone 
before.  "  Ye  know  this,  my  beloved  brethren. 
But  let  every  man,"  etc.  The  verse  gives 
us  St.  James's  version  of  the  proverb, 
"Speech  is  silver.  Silence  is  golden." 
Similar  maxims  were  not  nnirequent 
among  the  Jews.  So  in  Ecolus.  v.  11,  "  Be 
swift  to  hear ;  and  let  thy  life  be  sincere ; 
and  with  patience  give  answer ; "  of.  iv.  29, 
"  Be  not  hasty  in  thy  tongue,  and  in  thy 
deeds  slack  and  remiss."  In  the  rabbini- 
oal  work,  'Pirqe  Aboth,'  I.  xii.,we  have  the 
following  saying  of  Babbi  Simeon,  the  soa 


OH.  1. 1—27.] 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


of  Gamaliel  (who  must,  therefore,  have  been 
a  contemporai7  of  St.  James) :  "  AH  my 
days  I  have  grown  up  amongst  the  wise, 
and  have  not  found  ought  good  for  a  man 
but  silence ;  not  learning  but  doing  is  the 
groundwork ;  and  whoso  multiplies  words 
occasions  sin."  This  passage  is  curiously  like 
the  one  before  us,  both  in  the  thoughts  and 
in  the  expressions  used, 

Ver,  20  gives  the  reason  why  men  should 
be  slow  to  wrath.  Because  man's  wrath 
doei  not  work  God's  righteousness  (Sikhio- 
aiiniy  eeoS),  the  righteousness  which  God 
demands  and  requires. 

Ver.  21. — With  the  form  of  expression  in 
this  verse,  comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  1,  "Putting 
away,  therefore,  all  wickidnest  (aTroBe/iepoi 
oZv  Tiaaav  Kaxlav),  and  all  guile,  and  hypo- 
crisies, and  envies,  and  all  evil-speakings, 
as  new-born  babes  long  for  the  spiritual 
milk,"  etc.  Filthiness  {(luiraplai').  Here 
only  in  the  New  Testament,  never  in  LXX. ; 
but  the  adjective  ^vn-ap6!  is  the  word  used  of 
the  "filthy  garments"  in  Zeoh.  iii.  3,  4 — 
a  narrative  whiuh  illustrates  the  passage 
before  us.  Kaxla  is  not  vice  in  general,  but 
rather  that  vicious  nature  which  is  bent  on 
doing  harm  to  others  (see  Lightfoot  on  Col. 
iii.  8).  Thus  the  two  words  pmapta 
and  KaKia  comprise  two  classes  of  sins — the 
sensual  and  the  malignant.  Engrafted; 
rather,  implanted.  The  word  is  only  found 
again  in  Wisd.  xii  10,  where  it  signifies 
"inborn."  St.  James's  teaching  here  is 
almost  like  a  reminiscence  of  the  parable  of 
the  sower  (Matt.  xiii.  3,  etc.).  The  "un- 
planted  Word"  is  the  gospel  teaching. 
"The  seed  is  the  Word  of  God"  (Luke 
viii  11). 

Ver.  22. — They  are  not  merely  to  receive 
and  hear  the  Word ;  they  must  also  act  upon 
11  Compare  St.  Paul's  teaching  in  Bom. 
ii.  13,  "  For  not  the  hearers  (avpoarai)  of  a 
law  are  just  before  God,  but  the  doers  of  • 
law  shall  be  justified."  'AKpoariis  occurs 
nowhere  else  except  in  these  passages.  De- 
ceiving your  own  selveB  Qirapa\oyiC€ii')i  to 
lead  astray  b^  false  reasonings ;  only  here 
and  in  Col.  ii.  1.  Not  uncommon  in  the 
LXX. 

Vers.  23^  24. — lUnstration  from  life,  show- 
ing the  foUy  of  being  led  astray.  Hia 
satnial  face  (rb  vpScanrov  rrjs  yeviaaat 
axirov);  literally,  the  face  ofhiihirth.  The 
expression  is  an  unusual  one,  but  there  is  no 
doubt  of  its  meaning.  In  a  glass ;  rather, 
in  a  mirror,  iv  itrimpif :  of.  1  Cor.  xiii.  12, 
^i'  iariiTTpov.  The  mirror  of  burnished 
brass. 

Ver.  24. — Observe  the  tenses;  literally, 
He  considered  (_KaT(y6ri<re)  himself,  and 
ha$  gone  away  (late\ii\vBt),  and  straight- 
way  forgot  (iire\iideTo)  uihat  he  was  like 
(compare  note  on  ver.  11). 


Ver.  25. — Application  of  the  illustration  in 
the  form  of  a  contrast.  Looketh  into  (irapa.- 
Ki\lias:').  For  the  literal  sense  of  the  word, 
see  John  xx.  5,  11 ;  Luke  xxiv.  12.  The 
figurative  meaning  occurs  only  here  and  in 
1  Pet.  i.  12.  Properly  it  signifies  to  "peep 
into."  See  its  use  in  the  LXX.,  Gen.  xxvi. 
8 ;  Prov.  vii.  6 ;  Ecclus.  xxi.  23.  When  used 
figuratively,  it  conveys  the  idea  of  looking 
into,  but  scarcely  with  that  intensive  force 
which  is  often  given  to  it,  and  for  which 
iyKviTTety  would  be  required  (see  Dr.  Field's 
•Otium  Norvioense,'  p.  147).  Its  use  in 
St.  Peter,  he.  eit.,  is  easy  enough  to  explain. 
Angels  desire  even  a  glimpse  of  the  mys- 
teries. But  what  are  we  to  say  of  its  use 
here?  Is  it  that,  though  the  man  took  a 
good  look  at  himself  in  the  glfiss  QxaTavoeiy, 
consider,  is  a  very  strong  word ;  cf.  Bom.  Iv. 
19),  yet  he  forgot  what  he  was  like,  while 
the  man  who  only  peeps  into  the  law  of 
liberty  is  led  on  to  abide  (wapa/itlyas) 
and  so  to  act?  The  perfect  law  of  liberty; 
rather,  the  perfect  law,  even  the  law  </ 
liberty ;  vofiov  t4\giov  Thy  t^s  iKevdepias.  The 
substantive  is  anarthrous,  yet  the  attributiTe 
has  the  article.  This  construction  serves  to 
give  greater  prominence  to  the  attributiTe, 
and  requires  the  rendering  given  above  (see 
Winer,  §  xx.  4).  The  conception  of  the 
gospel  as  a  "law"  is  characteristic  of  Bt. 
James  (of.  cb.  ii.  8,  "  the  royal  law,"  and  eh. 
IT.  11).  A  forgetful  hearer  (i/tpooT^js  imXti- 
aiioviis) ;  i.e.  a  hearer  characterized  by  for- 
getfulness,  contrasted  with  ironjTJ)!  ipyov,  a 
doer  characterized  by  worlc. 

Ver.  26. — Seem  (Sokci);  seems  to  himself 
rather  than  to  others ;  translate,  with  B.V., 
thinketh  himself  to  he.  Vulgate,  Si  quis 
putat  se  esse.  Beligious  {dpijaKos).  U  is 
difficult  to  find  an  English  word  which 
exactly  answers  to  the  Greek.  The  noun 
Spiiincda  refers  properly  to  the  external  rite* 
of  religion,  and  so  gets  to  signify  an  over- 
scrupulous devotion  to  external  forms 
(Lightfoot  on  Col.  ii.  18);  almost  "ritual- 
ism." It  is  the  ceremonial  service  of  reli- 
gion, the  external  forms,  a  body  of  which 
fia-eP^ia  is  the  informing  soul.  Thus  the 
6pr,<ncos  (the  word  apparently  only  occurs 
here  in  the  whole  range  of  Greek  literature) 
is  the  diligent  performer  of  Divine  ofBces,  of 
the  outward  service  of  God,  but  not  neces- 
sarily anything  more.  This  depreciatory 
sense  of  BpitaKcia  is  well  seen  in  a  passage  of 
Philo  ('Quod  Det.  Pot.  Jus.,'  7),  where, 
after  speaking  of  some  who  would  fain  be 
counted  among  the  eliKaPels  on  the  score  of 
divers  washings  or  costly  offerings  to  the 
temple,  be  proceeds:  JltirKinrirai  yitp  koX 
oZtos  T^t  wphs  tiai0etav  6Sov,  BpTiaKeiiw  dvrl 
iridTiiros  riyointvos  (see  Trench  on  *  Bynch 
nyms,'  from  whom  the  reference  is  here 
taken).    "  How  delicate  and  fine,  then,  St 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMEa 


LOH.  L  1 — 27 


James's  ohoioe  of  BprjirKos  and  BpTiffKflal 
'  If  any  man,'  he  would  say,  'seem  to  him- 
self to  be  SprjffKos,  a  diligent  observer  of  the 
offices  of  religion,  if  any  man  wuuld  render 
a  pure  and  undefiled  ipi\<TKela  to  Ood,  let 
him  know  that  this  consists,  not  in  outward 
lustrations  or  ceremonial  observances ;  nay, 
tliat  there  is  a  better  BpriaKtia  than  thousand! 
of  rams  and  rivers  of  oil,  namely,  to  do 
justly  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  hum- 
bly with  his  God  (Micah  vi.  7,  8);  or, 
according  to  his  own  words,  '  to  visit  the 
widows  and  orphans  in  their  affliction,  and 
to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world ' " 
(Trench  on  '  Synonyms,'  p.  170 :  the  whole 
passage  will  well  repay  study.  Eeference 
■hould  also  be  made  to  Coleridge,  'Aidi 
to  Be6ection,'  p.  15).  Bridleth  not  {n^ 
Xa^wayayiiv).  The  thought  is  developed 
more  fully  afterwards  (see  ch.  iii.  2,  etc., 
and  for  tiie  word,  of.  Polyc, '  Ad  Phil.,'  c.  v.). 
Yer.  27. — God  and  the  Father;  rather, 
ow  God  and  Father.  The  article  (t^ 
binds  together  Oef  and  Harpif  lo  that  they 


■honld  not  be  separated,  aa  in  the  A.V.  To 
visit  the  fatherless  .  .  .  and  to  keep  him- 
self nuspotted.  Observe  that  our  duty 
towards  our  fellow-men  is  placed  first;  then 
that  towards  ourselves.  'EmiTKeTrTeaBai  is 
the  regular  word  for  visiting  the  sick;  cf. 
Ecclus.  Til.  35,  "  Be  not  slow  to  visit  the 
sick  (jiii  iKVfi  imiTKiTetrirBai  i/tpaxrToy)." 
The  fatherless  and  tiridows  {opifiavaiis  kbI 
xfipat)-  These  stand  here  (as  so  often  in  the 
Old  Testament)  as  types  of  persons  in  dia- 
tress;  the  "persones  miserabiles"  of  the 
Canon  Law  (see  e.g.  Deui  x.  18 ;  Fs.  Ixviii 
5 ;  Ixxxii.  3 ;  Isa.  i.  17 ;  and  of.  Ecolus.  iv. 
10).  "Be  as  a  father  uuto  the  fatherless, 
and  instead  of  an  husband  unto  their  mother ; 
so  shalt  thou  be  as  the  son  of  the  Most  High, 
and  he  shall  love  thee  more  than  thy  mother 
doth."  To  keep  himself  unspotted.  Man's 
duty  towards  himself.  (For  &a-iri\oi>,  of.  1 
Tim.  tL  11;  1  Pet  i.  19;  2  Pet.  iiL  14.) 
From  the  world.  This  clause  may  be  con- 
nected either  with  Ti)ficu>  or  with  turrAoy, 
at  in  the  phme,  KaSofht  i,wi  in  Aoti  sz.  86. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Temptation  at  eouse  for  Joy.  What  •  rererial  of  the  ordinary  view, 
which  regards  trial  and  temptation  as  an  unwelcome  visitation  1  Fro.sperity  is  the 
blessing  of  the  old  covenant,  adversity  is  the  blessing  of  the  new.  Temptations 
should  be.  regarded,  not  only  as  probations,  i.e.  as  testing  what  we  are,  but  as  designed 
also  for  moral  discipline  and  improvement.  The  character  that  has  never  been  tried 
may  be  innocent,  but  it  is  liable  to  be  crushed.  It  is  lacking  in  the  strength  and  vigour 
which  eome  from  the  formed  habit  of  resistance,  and  therefore  temptation  may  be  the 
meaui  of  strengthening  him  who  is  subjected  to  it.  It  thus  becomes  an  opportunity, 
and  as  such  should  be  welcomed  with  joy.  It  produces  oattencc,  that  "queen  of 
Tirtues,"  which  bears  up  under  the  heaviest  weight,  and  purifies  and  ennobles  the  whole 
character.  Patience  must  next  be  allowed  her  "perfect  work;"  for  the  Christian  can 
never  consider  himself  Wacioi  till  he  has  come  "  to  the  perfect  man,  to  the  mmsiira  ol 
the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ," 

"  Bweet  are  the  nses  of  adversity, 
MThich,  like  the  toad,  ugly  and  venomonii 
Wears  yet  a  precious  jewel  in  his  head." 

(Shakespeam) 

(On   temptaticn   regarded   u  an   opportunity,  see  Mozley's  'Parochial   Sermons,' 
Sermon  ii!) 

Vers.  6 — 8.— 1.  The  need  of  wisdom,  which  Holy  Scripture  never,  withoat  a  tonch 
of  irony,  ascribes  to  any  but  God  and  good  men,  and  which,  therefore,  is  not  merely 
intellectual  wisdom,  but  rather  that  practical  knowledge  of  things  Divine  which  can 
enable  a  man  to  say  with  the  psalmist,  "  I  am  wiser  than  the  aged,  hecause  I  keep  thy 
commandments."  This  it  is,  and  not  intellect  and  brilliancy,  which  is  here  promised 
to  be  given  to  all  that  ask  in  faith.  (All  through  Scripture  the  use  of  the  terms 
"  wise  "  and  "  foolish  "  should  be  noticed.  It  is  the  "  fool "  who  said  in  his  heart, "  There 
is  no  God."  They  are  "  fools  "  who  make  a  mock  at  sin.  The  "wise"  who  shall  "shine 
as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament "  are  parallel  with  those  "  who  turn  many  to  right- 
eousness," etc.).  2.  Th*  reason  why  so  many  prayers  remain  unanswered,  Man  too 
often  ketakes  himself  to  prayer  as  a  dernier  ressort  when  all  other  means  have  fuled, 
h<^g  against  hopo,  not  entirely  disbelieving  aoA  yot  not  entirely  beUeving;  now 


CH.I.1— 27.]  THE   GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES,  7 

buoyed  up  for  a  moment  witk  hope,  anr!  now  again  sinking  into  the  depths  of  despair. 
'I'o  such  a  one  there  is  not  merely  no  promise  ;  we  are  especially  told  that  he  is  not  to 
think  that  he  will  receive  anything  from  the  Lord.  "  A  doubtful  petitioner  offers  not 
to  God  »  steady  hand  or  heart,  so  that  God  cannot  deposit  in  it  his  gift  "  (StierX 

"  Faith  and  unfaith  can  ne'er  be  eqnal  powers; 
Uufaith  in  aught  is  want  of  faith  in  all." 

(Tennyson.) 

Vers.  9 — 12. — T%e  only  true  ground/or  boasting.  High  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  can 
glory  in  their  Christian  exaltation.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  said  St.  Paul ;  and,  referring  to  that  same  cross,  the  Saviour 
said,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  Thus  the  cross  forms  part  of 
the  "  lifting  up,"  the  "  exaltation  "  in  which  the  Christian  is  to  glory,  "  Per  crucem 
ad  lucem."  Our  Christian  privileges  cannot  be  separated  from  our  Christian  sufferings. 
In  both  alike  we  are  to  rejoice  and  glory. 

Vers.  13 — 18, — The  genetis  of  sin,  1.  Four  stages  are  described.  (1)  The  desire — 
the  appetite  draws  the  man  towards  evil  indulgence,  (2)  The  wt22  yields  to  the  desire, 
which  thus  becomes  pregnant  with  action.  (3)  Sin  is  born,  the  offspring  of  the 
unhallowed  union  between  will  and  desire  or  lust.  (4)  Lastly,  sin,  "  when  it  is  full 
grdwn,  bringeth  forth  death"  (cf.  Milton's  allegory  in  'Paradise  Lost,'  bk.  ii.  1. 
745,  etc.).  "  First  there  cometh  into  the  mind  a  bare  thought  of  evil,  then  a  strong 
imagination  thereof,  afterwards  delight,  and  evil  motion,  and  then  consent.  And  so 
little  by  little  our  wicked  enemy  gctteth  complete  entrance,  for  that  he  is  not  resisted 
at  the  beginning  "  (Thomas  k  Kempis).  2.  God  is  not  tempted  with  evil,  and  he  doth 
not  tempt  to  evil.  "  Ascribe  it  not  to  the  Father  of  lights,  but  to  the  prince  of  dark- 
ness. But  ascribe  all  good,  from  the  smallest  spark  to  the  greatest  beam,  from  the  least 
good  giving  to  the  best  and  most  perfect  gift  of  all,  to  him,  the  Father  of  lights  " 
(Andrews, '  Sermons,'  iii.  p.  363).  If  there  can  be  no  change  with  the  Father  of  lights, 
no  "  shadow  cast  by  turning,"  what  folly  to  suppose  that  the  works  of  darkness  come 
from  him  !  Temptation  may  be  regarded  (1)  as  a  test  to  prove  a  man ;  (2)  as  a  discipline 
to  improve  him  ;  (3)  as  an  allurement  to  entice  him.  In  the  two  former  aspects  it  has 
been  already  treated  of  by  the  apostle,  and  has  been  shown  to  be  a  cause  for  joy.  As 
an  allurement  it  can  have  no  power,  unless  it  meets  with  some  response  in  man.  Thus 
man  has  no  right  to  charge  his  sins  upon  God,  or  to  make  God  the  author  of  his  temp- 
tations. The  outward  occasion  may  indeed  be  from  him,  sent  either  as  a  test  or  a 
discipline ;  but  the  inward  inclination,  that  which  leads  a  man  away  and  entices  him, 
is  entirely  eviL 

Vers,  19 — 27, — Deeds,  not  toords,  1.  The  right  spirit  for  the  Christian  is  the  receptive ; 
ready  to  hear,  and  to  receive  with  meel;  ness  the  engrafted  Word,  which  is  to  be  as  the 
seed  falling  on  the  good  ground  (comp.  Matt.  xiii.  3,  etc.),  A  heathen  philosopher  has 
noted  that  man  has  ttao  ears  and  only  one  mouth ;  showing  that  he  should  be  more 
ready  to  hear  than  to  speak.  2.  A  receptive  spirit  is  not  alone  su£Scient.  Action  must 
Ibllow.  Holy  Scripture  is  a  mirror,  in  which  a  man  may  see  his  own  image  reflected. 
The  man  who  merely  listens  to  it  sees  his  own  likeness,  perhaps,  but  "  goeth  his  way, 
and  straightway  forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  was."  Without  doing,wh&t  is  the 
flood  of  Jiearing  sermons  ?  Knowledge  without  obedience  only  increases  condemnation. 
So  our  Lord's  severest  denunciations  were  for  those  cities  which  had  known  most  of  his 
mighty  works;  and  "  many  stripes"  were  reserved  for  that  servant  who  knew  his  Lord's 
will  and  did  it  not  (Luke  xii.  47).  (On  the  subject  of  ver,  22,  see  a  good  sermon  of 
Bishop  Andrews,  '  Sermons,'  vol.  v.  Serm.  ix.)  3.  Government  of  tongue  may  serve  as 
a  test  of  a  man's  religion,  it  being  "  a  most  material  restraint  which  religion  lays  us 
under ;  without  it  no  man  can  be  truly  religious."  Sins  of  the  tongue  include  not  only 
such  flagrant  ones  as  lying,  swearing,  filthy  conversation,  etc.,  but  what  Bishop  Butler 
calls  "  unrestrained  volubility  and  wantonness  of  speech,"  which  is  the  sin  more 
particularly  alluded  to  by  St,  James,  and  which  is  "  the  occasion  of  numberless  evils 
and  vexations  in  life,"  "  If  people  would  (1)  observe  the  obvious  occasions  of  silence  j 
if  tiiey  would  subdue  (2)  the  inclination  to  tale-bearing,  and  (3)  that  eager  desire  to 


8  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES,  [oh.  1. 1—27, 

engage  attention  which  is  an  original  disease  in  some  minds,  they  would  be  in  little 
danger  of  offending  with  their  tongue,  and  would,  in  a  morril  and  religious  sense,  have 
due  government  over  it"  (Bishop  Butler.  See  the  whole  sermon  'On  the  Government 
of  the  Tongue : ' '  Sermons,'  No.  iv.).  It  has  been  well  said  that  the  talkative  often  do 
more  harm  than  the  wilfully  false  and  malicious.  They  betray  secrets,  part  friends, 
embitter  foes,  wound  hearts,  blight  characters,  hinder  truth.  Is  not  this  true  of  many 
a  man  who  seems  to  himself  to  be  religious  ?  4.  It  the  external  service,  the  ritual  of 
Christianity,  is  a  life  of  purity  and  self-devotion  in  the  service  of  others,  what  must  its 
inmost  spirit  be? 

HOMILIES  BY  VAKI0U8  AUTHOE& 

Vera.  l—i.—A  Joyful  talutation  for  a  time  of  adversity.  Jamss,  in  the  opening 
sentence  of  his  letter,'  "  wisheth  joy  "  to  the  Christian  Jews  who  were  scattered  over 
the  Soman  world  (ver.  1).  He  knew  that  they  were  environed  with  adversity ;  they 
suffered  from  the  persecution  of  the  heathen,  and  from  the  upbraidings  of  their 
unbelieving  countrymen.  Yet  his  loving,  sympathetic  heart  wishes  them  joy  even  in 
all  time  of  their  tribulation. 

I.  The  Chbistian  should  bejoiob  amidst  trials.  (Yer.  2.)  It  was  natural  that  the 
readers  of  the  Epistle,  when  they  received  this  counsel,  should  as  It  how  they  could 
reasonably  be  expected  to  do  so.  1.  This  is  possible.  Only,  however,  to  the  Christian. 
The  worldly-minded  man  will  regard  such  a  suggestion  as  unnatural,  and  indeed 
unintelligible.  The  Stoic,  when  plunged  into  adversity,  can  at  best  only  school  himself 
to  submit  to  inevitable  fate.  The  Epicurean  becomes  quite  helpless  in  presence 
of  calamity.  Only  the  man  who  holds  the  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  possesses 
the  alchemy  by  which  sorrow  may  be  turned  into  joy.  2.  It  is  dutiful.  To  rejoice 
amidst  trials  is  in  the  line  of  all  Christian  knowledge  and  faith  and  hope.  The 
believer  knows  that  God  is  his  Father,  and  that  he  "  pitieth  his  children."  Ho  is  sure 
that  God's  arrangements  for  him  must  be  absolutely  the  best.  He  is  persuaded' that, 
although  God  chastises  his  sons,  he  has  still  the  heart  of  a  Father.  Not  only  do  tribu- 
lation and  distress  not  separate  the  believer  from  the  Divine  love ;  they  work  for  him 
"  more  and  more  exceedingly  an  eternal  weight  of  glory."  So  it  belongs  to  the  afflicted 
Christian  to  adorn  in  his  own  experience  this  paradox  of  the  renewed  life — "  Sorrowful, 
yet  alway  rejoicing."  3.  It  is  often  exemplified.  Only,  however,  in  the  most  exalted 
ranks  of  the  peerage  of  faith.  Moses  "  accounted  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches 
than  the  treasures  of  Egypt."  Paul  sang  hymns  to  Cbd  in  the  prison  of  Philippi, 
although  his  feet  were  fast  in  the  stocks.  The  apostles  "rejoiced  that  they  were 
counted  worthy  to  suffer  dishonoiu*  for  Christ's  name."  Latimer  closed  his  brave  career 
at  the  stake  with  the  famous  words,  "Be  of  good  comfort,  Master  Ridley."  Bunyan 
lay  for  twelve  years  in  an  execrable  prison,  but  he  made  his  cell  the  vestibule  of  heaven. 
Dr.  Arnold  could  say,  between  the  paroxysms  of  angina  pectoris,  "  Thank  God  for 
pain."  And  from  thousands  of  death-beds,  of  which  the  world  has  never  heard,  there 
has  gone  forth  the  testimony  of  God's  hidden  ones:   "  We  glory  in  tribulations  also." 

II.  The  reasons  fob  such  rejoicing.  These  may  be  reckoned.  Vers.  3  and  4 
supply  a  basis  of  judgment.  1.  Trial  promotes  self-knowledge.  It  is  "  the  proof  of 
your  faith  "  (ver.  3).  It  tests  the  reality  and  the  strength  of  character.  The  person 
who  stands  on  the  deck  of  a  sinking  ship  will  learn,  if  he  did  not  know  it  before, 
whether  he  is  a  hero  or  a  coward.  Affliction  shows  a  man  "all  that  is  in  his  heart." 
The  strain  caused  by  some  unexpected  calamity  may  reveal  defects  of  character  which 
he  would  not  otherwise  discover,  or  possibilities  of  holy  attainment  about  which  he 
might  never  have  dreamed,  2,  It  developes  patience.  (Ver.  3.)  James,  throughout 
his  Epistle,  exalts  and  inculcates  this  grace.  His  word  for  it  here  means  "  persevering 
endurance."  Christian  patience  is  not  the  submission  of  indifference,  or  merely  the 
determination  of  an  obstinate  will ;  it  is  inspired  by  living  piety,  and  is  therefore  fiiU 
of  intelligence  and  manliness.  Patience  consists  in  the  holding  still  of  some  parts  of 
our  nature  in  calm  waiting  upon  the  Bivine  will,  in  order  that  other  parts  may  be 
exercised  and  educated.  The  apostie's  words  show  that  he  regards  this  grace  of 
endurance  as  inexpressibly  precious.  He  looks  upon  its  possessor  as  in  the  truest  sense 
a  wise  and  wealthy  man.    The  man  who  uses  every  fresh  trial  m  8u«h  a  way  as  only 


OH.  1.1— 27.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  9 

to  Increase  his  |iower  of  holy  endurance  is  unspeakably  a  gamer  by  Us  calamities, 
and  should  receive  the  congratulations  ("greeting")  of  bis  brethren  rather  than  their 
sympathy.  3.  It  contributes  to  moral  perfection.  (Ver.  i.)  This  is  the  end  which 
God  has  in  view  in  all  his  dealings  with  his  people.  He  wants  them  to  be  "  perfect 
and  entire;"  that  is,  complete  and  all-accomplished  in  spiritual  culture.  Now,  the 
habit  of  persevering  and  joyful  endurance  conduces  to  the  maturity  and  the  symmetry 
of  the  soul.  Sanctified  trial  educates.  Some  of  the  most  refined  Christian  virtues — such, 
e.g.,  as  resignation  and  sympathy — can  be  acquired  only  in  connection  with  affliction. 
A  delicately  balanced  Christian  spirit  is  not  the  outcome  of  a  smooth  and  unruffled  life. 
No  character  can  approximate  in  finish  to  the  ideal  standard  which  does  not "  come  out 
of  the  great  tribulation,"  and  which  is  not  made  "  perfect  through  sufferings."  This 
thought  is  emphasized  everywhere  in  the  New  Testament,  from  the  Gospels  to  the 
Apocalypse.  It  has  interpenetrated  all  literature.  Our  life  must  be  "  battered  with 
the  shocks  of  doom,  to  shape  and  use."  "  'Tis  sorrow  builds  the  shining  ladder  up,"  on 
which  our  souls  climb  nearer  God. 

Notice  in  conclusion :  1.  While  it  is  positively  unchristian  to  murmur  amid  trials, 
the  model  Christian  frame  is  not  mere  submission.  2.  It  is  very  comforting  to  the 
believer  to  know  that  his  crosses  are  sent  to  promote  his  perfection.  3.  The  child  of 
Qod  has  here  a  crucial  test  of  the  measure  of  his  spiritual  attainment. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  6—8. — Wisdom  for  thou  who  ask  it.  The  apostle  has  just  been  saying  that 
the  trials  and  burdens  of  life  should  conduce,  if  wisely  borne,  to  the  purifying  of  the 
believing  soul,  the  bracing  of  its  moral  energies,  and  the  perfecting  of  its  spiritual  life. 
But  how  hard  it  is  to  bear  severe  afflictions  thus  wisely  1  Every  one  needs  a  wisdom 
above  his  own,  who  would  "  count  manifold  trials  all  joy,"  and  "  let  patience  have  its 
perfect  work." 

I.  A  tmiVERSAii  WANT.  (Ver.  5.)  Wisdom  means  the  right  use  of  knowledge.  A 
man  may  know  a  very  great  deal,  and  yet  not  he  a  wise  man.  Wisdom  classifies  the 
materials  of  knowledge,  and  studies  to  use  them  so  as  to  build  up  and  beautify  the  life. 
It  proposes  right  ends,  and  chooses  the  best  means  by  which  to  reach  them.  It  shows 
itself  not  so  much  in  doing  the  right  thing,  as  in  doing  it  at  the  proper  time.  In  the 
highest  use  of  the  word,  "  wisdom  "  is  just  another  name  for  piety.  It  is  that  state  of 
mind  and  heart  which  is  produced  by  the  believing  reception  of  gospel  truth.  The  one 
fool  of  the  Bible  is  the  sinner.  The  only  wise  man  is  he  who  regarda  the  glory  of 
Otoi  as  the  end  of  his  life,  and  who  makes  his  acts  and  habits  means  to  that  end. 
Now,  we  all  naturally  lack  wisdom,  and  a  thoughtful  man  realizes  this  lack  most 
thoroughly  in  the  time  of  triaL  What  a  rare  and  difficult  attainment  is  that  holy 
discretion  which  can  welcome  even  the  contrary  winds  of  calamity,  and  the  driving 
storms  of  tribulation,  because  it  can  make  them  helpful  in  steering  joyfully  towards  the 
desired  haven  1 

II.  An  ABUNDAirr  source  of  supply.  "  God,  who  giveth  to  all  "(ver,  5);  literally, 
"  the  giving  God."  The  living,  loving  Jehovah  is  the  one  Source  and  Fountain  of 
wisdom.  That  is  one  of^his  essential  attributes ;  and  it  is  his  prerogative  to  impart  it 
to  his  creatures.  He  gives  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  wisdom  in  the  hearts  of  believers. 
Now,  the  God  of  wisdom  is  the  Giver  of  all  good  things.  His  resources  are  infinite,  and 
his  gifts  are  universal  and  unceasing.  In  his  common  providence  he  imparts  blessings 
to  all  his  creatures — to  the  barnacle  that  clings  to  the  rocks,  and  to  the  archangel  that 
ministers  before  the  throne.  And  he  is  "  the  giving  God  "  in  grace  also.  "  He  that 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  also  with  him 
freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  So  he  is  ready  to  bestow  wisdom  at  all  times,  and  especially 
in  the  day  of  trial;  he  waits  to  impart  to  every  devout  sufferer  a  wealth  of  holy 
patience  and  of  spiritual  joy.  And  the  dving  God  gives  liberally  and  unreproachingly. 
it  is  his  characteristic  habit  to  be  exceedingly  bountiful. 

III.  An  east  uethod  of  obtainino.  "Let  him  ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  him  " 
(ver.  5).  Holy  wisdom  is  not  the  result  merely  of  thought  or  speculation.  No  Aristo- 
telian or  Baconian  method  can  produce  it.  No  habit  of  sullen,  dodged  Stoicism  reveals 
its  presence.  It  is  to  be  had  from  God,  and  for  the  asking.  Ood  is  the  living  Qod^ 
and  he  is  very  near  us ;  and  we,  his  children,  have  the  freest  access  to  him.  He  gives 
"  simply  "  to  those  who  pray  simply.     He  bestows  "  liberally  "  upon  those  who  petition 


10  THE  GENERAL  ElISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oa,  1.1—27. 

liberally.  It  b  his  way  "  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  aik  er  tbink." 
When  Solomon  asked  only  for  wisdom,  God  gave  him  riches  and  honour  too.  When 
the  prodigal  requests  only  the  place  of  a  hired  servant,  his  Father  assures  him  of  the 
station  and  honour  of  a  beloved  son.  The  Lord  always  gives  liberally ;  never  with  a 
grudge — never  ungraciously.  He  always  gives  with  his  heart  when  he  opens  his  hand. 
Does  the  consciousness  of  much  personal  guilt  make  any  of  us  slow  to  "  ask  of  God  "  ? 
Does  our  past  neglect  or  abuse  of  his  gifts  deprive  us  of  childlike  confidence  in  coming 
to  him  ?  Then  let  us  remember  that  he  "  upbvaideth  not."  What  a  sweet  word  is 
that  1  It  limns  for  our  comfort  a  most  touching  trait  of  the  character  of  the  giving 
Oroi.  How  unlike  he  is  to  human  benefactors  I  Instead  of  reproaching  the  returning 
prodigal,  he  welcomes  him  with  kisses  of  love,  God  upbraids  no  one  for  his  great 
ignorance,  or  for  his  enormous  guilt,  or  for  his  repeated  backslidings,  or  for  his  long 
delay,  or  for  making  himself  a  last  resource,  or  for  coming  too  often,  or  for  asking  too 
much.  How  easy  this  God-appointed  method  of  obtaining  wisdom  I  We  have  only  to 
"  ask,  and  it  shall  be  given"  us.  And  how  great  the  encouragement  I  "God  giveth 
to  all  Uberally,  and  upbraideth  not," 

IV.  An  indispbnsablb  requisite  to  success.  (Vers.  6 — 8.)  Prayer  is  not  real 
unless  it  be  the  expression  of  faith.  It  must  issue  "  from  a  living  source  within  the 
will,"  and  be  inspired  by  perfect  confidence  in  God's  readiness  to  help.  How  much 
unbelief  prevails  in  our  time  on  the  subject  of  prayer  I  The  scientific  temper  of  the  age 
merely  allows  •  man  to  "  pray  to  God,  if  there  be  a  God — ^to  save  his  soul,  if  he  have  a 
BOuL"  And  the  forcible  words  of  James,  in  these  three  verses,  suggest  that  still,  in  the 
case  of  very  many  Christians,  an  imperfect  faith  in  God's  readiness  to  respond  to  their 
prayers  is  one  of  the  greatest  defects  of  their  spiritual  life.  We  are  apt,  even,  to  speak 
of  evident  answers  to  prayer  as  unusual,  and — when  they  do  occur — as  remarkable. 
Now,  the  gift  of  wisdom  is  promised  only  to  him  who  asks  it  with  •  steady  faith,  and 
who  evinces  the  reality  of  his  faith  by  a  life  of  consistent  purpose.  God  our  Father 
demands  the  confidence  of  his  children.  "  Nothing  doubting  "  should  be  the  Chris- 
tian's motto  in  prayer.  The  petitioner  must  not  shift  backwards  and  forwards  between 
faith  and  doubt,  like  a  tumbling  billow  of  the  sea.  He  must  not  swing  like  a  pendulum 
between  cheerful  confidence  and  dark  suspicion.  It  must  he  his  fixed  persuasion  that 
God  is,  and  that  he  is  the  Hearer  of  prayer.  He  must  expect  an  answer  to  his  supplica- 
tions, and  be  ready  to  mark  the  time  and  mode  of  it;  else  he  may  rest  assured  that  no 
answer  will  come.  Transient  emotions  are  not  religion.  It  is  the  men  and  women 
within  whom  faith  is  the  dominant  power  trho  take  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  force. 
God  is  all  simplicity  himself,  and  he  gives  with  simplicity ;  so  he  can  have  no  sympathy 
with  an  unstable,  double-souled  man.  A  mind  that  continually  vacillates  in  its  choice 
will  be  prone  in  the  end  to  fail  in  both  the  purposes  between  which  it  has  hesitated. 
Certainly  it  will  not  obtain  that  Divine  wisdom  which  every  human  heart  so  greatly 
needs  for  the  exigencies  of  adversity.  Steadfast  faith,  and  that  alone,  will  ^ve  a  man 
singleness  of  eye,  make  him  strong  to  keep  hold  of  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  and  draw 
down  upon  him  the  richest  blessings  of  gospel  grace. — 0,  J. 

Vers,  9 — 11. — 7%e  poor  and  the  rich  brother.  The  counsels  contained  in  these 
verses  spring  out  of  the  general  exhortation  of  ver.  2.  Riches  and  poverty  are  among 
the  "  manifold  trials  "  which  the  subjects  of  them  are  to  "  count  all  joy."  This  passage 
has  also  a  real  connection  with  ver.  8,  as  the  introductory  conjunction  in  the  original 
shows.  The  connection  may  be  either  in  the  thought  that  the  love  of  money  is  a  pre- 
vailing source  of  "  double-mindedness ; "  or,  that  the  comparison  of  one's  own  outward 
circumstances  with  those  of  one's  neighbour  may  tend,  apart  from  grace,  towards  spiritual 
unsteadiness  rather  than  Christian  simplicity. 

I.  Two  SPECIAL  F0BM8  OP  TRIAL.  (Vcrs.  9, 10.)  There  are  found  together  in  the 
Church,  as  well  as  in  the  world  outside, "the  rich  brother"  and  "the  brother  of  low 
degree."  Everywhere  inequalities  obtain  among  men,  which  are  of  the  Lord's  appointing. 
He  gives  to  one  man  larger  intellectual  possibilities  than  to  another.  In  his  providence 
he  places  one  man  in  a  more  favourable  pnsition  than  another  for  the  development  of  his 
energies.  Fortunes  vary  according  to  abilities  and  opportunities,  as  well  as  in  connec- 
tion with  causes  which  entail  personal  respon.sibility.  Now,  "  the  brother  of  low  degree  " 
finds  his  poverty  a  trial.    It  tries  his  body,  by  exhausting  it  with  labour.    It  tiies  hi? 


CH.1. 1— 27.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  U 

mind,  by  placing  obstaclaa  in  tlie  way  of  his  acquiring  knonrledge.  It  tries  his  heart, 
by  limiting  narrowly  his  enjoyment  of  tlie  luxury  of  giving.  It  tiies  his  temper,  by 
wearing  out  his  patience  and  inclining  him  to  be  fretful  and  satirical.  But  "  the  rich 
brother"  has  his  trials  also,  arising  out  of  his  riches.  The  temptations  of  wealth  are 
more  serious,  because  more  subtle,  than  those  of  poverty.  The  rich  man's  mind  is  often 
distracted  with  care;  he  finds  that  "a  great  fortune  is  a  great  slavery."  Or,  he  may 
suffer  the  weariness  and  misery  of  ennui.  Especially  is  he  in  danger  of  allowing  his 
spiritual  life  to  become  corrupted  by  his  abundance.  A  wealthy  man  is  prone  to  grow 
high-minded  and  self-sufiicieot.  He  has  to  contend  against  the  inveterate  tendency  of 
our  fallen  nature  to  abuse  prosperity.  When  Jeshurun  the  upright  "  waxes  fat,"  he  is 
kpt  to  "  kick,"t'.e.  to  become  self-willed,  petulant,  insolent,  and  neglectful  of  Qod.  A 
rich  man  needs  special  grace  to  make  and  keep  him  a  Christian. 

IL  How  TO  TBiuMPU  OVER  THE  TRIAL  OF  POVERTY.  (Ver.  9.)  The  apostle,  in 
nsing  here  the  term  "  brother,"  supplies  a  hint  as  to  the  secret  of  patience  and  joy  under 
this  form  of  trial.  A  Christian  man  may  be^  "  of  low  degree,"  but  he  is  all  the  same  a 
"  brother."  Straitened  resources  are  no  barrier,  but  the  reverse,  to  the  love  and  sympathy 
of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  they  should  be  no  barrier  to  that  of  his  people.  Well,  the 
Christian  who  is  in  humble  life  is  to  "  glory  in  his  high  estate."  He  is  to  accustom  his 
mind  to  the  thought  of  his  exaltation  as  a  believer.  He  has  a  real  dignity :  he  is  rich 
toward  God.  He  belongs  to  the  Divine  fomily.  "  His  elder  Brother  is  a  King,  and 
hath  a  kingdom  bought  for  him."  He  moves  already  in  the  best  and  blessedest 
society ;  and  he  is  an  heir  of  the  heavenly  inheritance.  Angel-guardians  minister  to 
him,  and  use  the  very  trial  of  poverty  as  a  means  of  investing  him  with  the  true 
riches.    What  a  blessed  antidote  is  there  in  these  things  to  the  ills  of  penury  I 

IIL  How  TO  TRIUMPH  OVER  THE  TRIAL  OF  RICHES.  (Ver.  10.)  The  "  fich " 
man  here  means  a  wealthy  man  who  is  a  Christian  "  brother."  There  were  a  very  few 
such  persons  in  the  membership  of  the  early  Church.  Now,  to  the  Christian  who  is 
wealthy,  his  very  wealth  is  a  God-sent  trial.  He  is  apt  to  make  his  material  resources 
a  ground  of  glorying  or  boasting.  But  James  says  here  that  the  rich  believer  ought  to 
boast  "  in  that  he  is  made  low."  Although  a  rich  man,  let  him  strive  to  be  "  poor  in 
spirit."  It  is  not  necessary,  at  least  in  ordinary  circumstances,  that  he  divest  himself 
of  all  his  goods  for  Christ's  sake.  Bather  is  it  desirable  that  the  capital  which  drives 
the  wheels  of  our  commerce  should  be  in  the  hands  of  Christian  men,  provided  they 
use  it  aright.  But  the  rich  believer  should  give  very  liberally  out  of  his  profits.  He 
should  be  a  servant  of  servants  to  his  brethren.  He  should  constantly  remember  the 
Divine  Giver  of  his  prosperity ;  and,  finding  that  it  is  hard  to  carry  the  full  cup  steadily, 
he  should  pour  it  out  before  the  Lord.  The  greatest  honour  that  can  attach  to  the  rich 
man  is  that  he  be  a  humble  Christian.  Humility  is  in  his  case  particularly  beautiful 
and  becoming.  In  spiritual  things  he  is  a  pensioner  upon  the  charity  of  Heaven  equally 
with  other  men.  When  he  realizes  bis  own  guilt  and  sin,  he  ought  to  feel  the  more 
humbled  that  Providence  is  filling  his  lap  out  of  the  horn  of  plenty.  Let  him  exult  io 
the  grace  of  Christ  which  has  enabled  him  to  pass  through  "the  needle's  eye."  And  let 
him  realize  how  transient  and  perishable  all  earthly  riches  are.  "  As  the  flower  of  the 
grass  he  shall  pass  away."  Some  providence  may  suddenly  strip  him  bare  of  all  his 
wealth.  And  at  least  he  will  not  be  able  to  carry  it  with  him  into  the  next  world. 
Therefore,  let  him  not  glory  in  his  outward  possessions.  The  rich  Christian  brother 
will  triumph  over  the  trial  of  material  prosperity  by  glorying  in  his  humiliation  as 
sharing  with  the  lowliest  the  true  riciies. 

IV.  The  doom  of  the  ungodly  rich.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  Although  these  verses 
speak  directly  of  the  blight  which  may  fall  \ipon  the  wealth  of  a  Christian  man,  yet 
this  other  thought  is  suggested  none  the  less.  A  believer  may  so  use  his  wealth  as  to 
help  him  towards  heaven  (Luke  xvi.  9) ;  but  an  evil  rich  man  will  do  the  very  reverse 
Material  possessions  are  uncertain  and  perishable;  and  the  man  who  joins  on  his  life 
to  them,  and  identifies  his  being  with  them,  must  inevitably  perish,  as  they  do.  The 
sirocco-blast  of  the  eternal  storm  shall  wither  np  both  the  "grass"  and  the  "flower." 
"  The  rich  man  shall  fade  away  in  his  goings,"  i.e.  when  engrossed  with  his  commercial 
journeys  and  purposes.  The  wealthy  farmer  shall  be  summoned  from  the  world  when 
he  is  drawing  out  the  plans  of  his  enlarged  premises.  He  shall  stumble  out  into  eternity 
a  fool  (Luke  zii.  20).    "  He  is  like  the  beasts  that  perish  "  (Ps.  xlix.). 


12  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [ch.  1. 1— 27 

Learn  from  this  subject  that  neither  poverty  nor  wealth  is  anything  more  than  a  cir- 
cumstance in  a  man's  life.  Each  of  these  conditions  brings  its  blessings  and  its  burdens. 
Each  "  doth  place  us  proximate  to  sin,  to  suffer  the  conta';;ion.''  But  a  man  may  through 
grace  rise  to  equally  great  attainments  in  spiritual  culture  and  in  purity  of  life,  whether 
he  be  very  poor  or  very  rich,  or  possessed  of  that  moderate  competency — less  perilouj 
than  either  extreme — ^for  which  Agur  prayed  (Prov.  xxx.  8). — 0.  J. 

Ven.  12 — 15. — The  natural  history  of  evU.  In  the  previous  part  of  the  chapter 
James  has  spoken  of  "  temptation "  in  the  general  sense  of  "  trial,"  and  as  coining 
mainly  in  connection  with  outward  circumstances.  In  this  passage  he  proceeds  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  now  ordinarily  used,  as  meaning  only 
internal  trial  by  solicitation  to  sin.  Yer.  12  marks  the  transition  from  the  one  sense 
to  the  other,  and  predicates  "blessedness"  of  "the  man  that  endureth  temptation" 
in  either  form. 

I.  The  genesis  of  temptation.  (Vers.  13,  14.)  The  sacred  writers  very  rarely 
deal  in  such  abstract  psychological  analysis  as  we  have  in  this  passage.  These  verses 
remind  us  that  there  is  natural  history  in  the  moralworld  as  well  as  in  the  physical — 
"  the  law  of  sin  and  of  death"  as  well  as  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus." 
There  are  two  conflicting  theories  always  prevalent  regarding  the  origin  and  develop- 
ment of  temptation.  1.  The  false  theory.  (Ver.  13.)  Men  are  prone  to  ascribe  the 
authorship  of  temptation  to  God.  This  heresy  is  as  old  as  the  garden  of  Eden  and 
the  Fall.  Our  first  parents  blamed  God  for  the  first  sin.  And  the  world  has  adopted 
the  same  excuse,  in  various  forms,  ever  since.  Systems  of  philosophy  have  done  so. 
Pantheism,  for  example,  says  that  man  is  only  a  mode  of  the  Divine  existence,  and 
that  good  is  God's  right  hand,  while  evil  is  his  left  Fatalism  teaches  that  all  events 
— good  and  evil — come  to  pass  under  the  operation  of  a  blind  necessity.  Materialism 
in  our  day  regards  the  vilest  passions  of  bad  men  and  the  holiest  aspirations  of  believers 
as  alike  ouly  products  of  our  physical  organism.  And  the  same  dreadful  error  prevails 
equally  in  common  life.  Superstitious  persons,  from  the  time  of  James  until  ours, 
have  had  the  impression  that  their  misdeeds  are  necessitated  by  the  Divine  decrees. 
Some  blame  their  nature  for  their  siiis,  and  ascribe  to  their  Maker  the  origination  of 
their  corrupt  propensities,  as  the  poet  Bums  did  once  and  again  in  lines  of  daring 
blasphemy.  Others  trace  their  sins  to  their  circumstances,  blaming  God's  providence 
for  surrounding  them  with  evil  influences,  which,  they  submit,  lay  them  under  an 
inevitable  necessity  of  sinning.  But  the  apostle  advances  reason  and  argument 
against  this  impious  theory.  Think,  he  says,  of  the  purity  and  perfection  of  the 
Divine  nature.  Moral  evil  has  no  place  in  God.  There  is  nothing  in  him  that 
temptation  can  take  hold  of.  And  if  he  is  not  himself  open  to  the  seductions  of  sin, 
it  is  impossible  that  he  can  be  a  tempter  of  others.  God  is  the  infinite  Light,  and  sin 
is  darkness.  God  is  the  eternal  Righteousness,  and  sin  is  crookedness.  God  is  the 
UQchaogeable  Beauty,  and  sin  is  deformity.  So,  he  will  not  and  cannot  solicit  men 
towards  what  is  opposed  to  his  own  nature.  He  tries  and  tests  men  ;  but  he  does 
not  tempt  them.  He  does  not  cause  sin ;  he  simply  permits  it.  When  we  pray, 
as  Christ  has  taught  us  to  do,  "  Bring  us  not  into  temptation,"  we  beg  that  God  may 
not  in  his  providence  place  us  in  circumstances  from  which  our  hearts  may  take 
occasion  to  sin,  2.  The  true  theory.  (Ver.  14.)  Temptation  originates  within  the 
heart  of  the  sinner  himself.  It  is  in  vain  for  him  to  blame  his  Maker.  Sin  is  no  part  of 
our  original  constitution,  and  it  is  not  to  be  excused  on  the  plea  of  an  unfavourable 
environment.  A  man  sins  only  when  he  is  "  enticed"  by  the  bait,  and  "drawn  away" 
l>y  the  hook  of  "his  own  lust."  That  is,  the  impelling  power  which  seduces  towards 
evil  is  the  corrupt  nature  within  us.  The  world  and  tiie  devil  only  tempt  effectually 
when  they  stir  up  the  filthy  pool  of  depraved  personal  desire,  "  Lust "  includes, 
besides  the  appetites  of  the  body,  the  evil  dispositions  of  the  mind,  such  as  pride, 
malice,  envy,  vanity,  love  of  ease,  etc.  Any  appeal  made  from  without  to  these  vile 
principles  and  affections  can  be  successful  only  with  the  consent  of  the  will.  Every 
man  is  personally  responsible  for  his  sin ;  for  each  man's  sin  takes  its  rise  in  "hit 
otun  lust."  Conscience  brushes  away  the  cobwebs  of  the  false  theory,  and  assures  us 
all  that  we  are  "  merely  our  own  traitors."  Only  one  Man  has  ever  lived  within  whose 
soul  there  was  no  hook  or  bait  of  corrupt  desire  on  which  any  evil  suggestion  could 


OH.1,1— 27,J  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  13 

'  — ^—  ^  1^"^^^ 

fasten ;  and  no  one  but  he  could  say,  "  The  prince  of  the  world  cometh,  and  he  hath 
nothing  in  me." 

II.  The  obngalooy  of  sin.  (Ver.  15.)  "  Lust "  is  throughout  this  passage  per- 
sonified in  allegorical  fashion  as  a  harlot,  ever  striving,  like  the  harlot  Polly  of  Prov. 
ix.  13—18,  to  allure  and  captivate  the  will.  First,  she  draws  the  man  "  who  goes 
right  on  his  way  "  out  of  the  path  of  sound  principle  and  wholesome  pleasure ;  and 
then  she  entices  him  into  her  embrace  with  the  siren  strain,  "  Stolen  waters  are 
sweet."  Lust  may  be  said  to  "conceive,"  when  it  obtains  the  consent  of  the  will, 
or  disarms  its  opposition.  The  man  who  dallies  with  tomptation,  instead  of  meeting  it 
with  instant  and  prayerful  resistance,  will  be  sure  eventually  to  succumb  to  it.  From 
the  guilty  union  of  lust  with  the  will,  a  living  sin  is  born.  The  embryo  corruptio» 
becomes  developed  into  a  deed  of  positive  transgression.  And  this  is  not  alL  Sin,  the 
progeny  of  lust,  itself  grows  up  from  the  infancy  of  mere  choice  to  the  adult  life  of 
settled  habit ;  and  "  when  it  is  full-grown,"  it  in  turn  becomes,  as  the  result  of  union 
with  the  will,  the  mother  of  death.  It  was  so  with  the  sin  of  our  first  parents  in 
Paradise.  It  was  so  with  the  sin  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  21) ;  he  saw,  coveted,  took, 
and  died.  It  is  so  with  the  sin  of  licentiousness,  which  has  suggested  the  figure  of  this 
passage ;  the  physical  corruption  which  the  practice  of  sensuality  entails  is  just  a 
sacrament  of  spiritual  death.  Death  is  the  fruit  of  all  sin.  Sin  kills  peace ;  it  kills 
hope ;  it  kills  usefulness ;  it  kills  the  conscience ;  it  kills  the  soul.  The  harlot-house  of 
lust  and  sin  becomes  the  vestibule  of  perdition.  As  Milton  has  it,  in  a  well-knowu 
passage  of  bk.  iL  of  '  Paradise  Lost ' — a  passage  suggested  by  this  very  verse — Sin  is 

**  The  snaky  aoroeTess  that  sat 
Fast  by  hell-gate,  and  kept  the  fatal  key ; " 

while  Death,  her  son,  is  "  the  grizzly  Terror  "  on  the  other  side,  which  stood 

"  Fierce  as  ten  furiea,  terrible  as  helL" 

III.  The  globt  awaitino  him  who  endubeb.  (Ver.  12.)  This  som&Ttable  word 
reminds  us  of  the  Beatitudes.  The  blessedness  of  which  it  speaks  belongs  not  only 
to  all  Christians  who—"  lettins  patience  have  its  perfect  work  " — endure  "  tempta- 
tions" in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  used  in  ver.  2,  but  to  all  also  who  escape 
victorious  from  the  solicitations  of  evil  desire,  referred  to  in  the  verses  which  we  have 
been  considering.  Kotice  here :  1.  The  character  of  the  hlessed  man.  He  "  loves  the 
Lord,"  and  in  the  spirit  of  this  love  he  "  endures  temptation."  Love  is  the  substance 
of  the  Christian  character,  and  love  "  endureth  all  things."  Love  alone  will  enable 
a  man  to  stamp  out  lust.  2.  His  glwioits  reward.  "  He  shall  receive  the  crown 
of  life.''  Not  a  chaplet  of  parsley,  not  even  a  diadem  of  gold  ;  but  a  crown  composed 
of  life.  Eternal  life  itself  will  be  the  believer's  reward.  Temptation  unresisted,  as 
we  have  seen,  is  always  pregnant  with  sin  and  death ;  but  holy  endurance  entails 
upon  one  the  gracious  reward  of  spiritual  life,  which  shall  be  confirmed  in  spotless 
purity  for  ever  and  ever.  This  <;lorious  blessing  is  guaranteed ;  the  believer  has  for 
it  a  definite  warranty  from  his  Redeemer.  3.  The  time  and  condition  of  Us  bestowal. 
It  is  "when  he  hath  been  approved;"  i.e.  tested  as  gold  or  silver  in  the  white  heat 
of  the  refiner's  fire.  The  one  way  to  the  kingdom  is  the  way  of  persevering  endurance. 
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  lite." 

Lessons.  1.  Flee  from  spiritual  death.  2.  Crucify  sin.  3.  Mortify  lust.  4.  Cul- 
tivate the  grace  of  endurance.  5.  Watch  and  pray  against  outward  occasions  of  evil. 
6.  Sprinkle  the  conscience  with  the  blood  of  atonement,  and  wash  the  soul  in  the  lavei 
of  regeneration. — C.  J. 

Vers.  16, 17. — All  good  is  from  Ood.  The  exhortation  of  ver.  16  introduces  addi- 
tional oon&mation  of  the  truth  that  God  cannot  tempt  men  to  sin.  He  is  the  Author  of 
all  good.  He  not  only  abhors  evil,  but  from  him  come  those  gracious  influences  which 
destroy  it.     Three  shades  of  thought  appear  in  the  argument  of  ver.  17. 

L  CoNSlDEB  HIS  GIFTS.  Each  of  these  is  "  perfect "  in  its  matter,  and  "  good  "  in 
the  manner  of  its  bestowal.  While  raw  sins  (ver.  14)  and  ripe  sins  (ver.  15)  alike 
spring  from  one's  "  own  lust,"  "  every  gooil  gift  and  every  perfect  boon  is  from  above." 
All  temporal  blessings  come  from  God ;  and  even  in  this  lower  province  his  bounty 


14  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMBS.  [oh.  1. 1—27. 

is  supreme.  But  especially  he  is  the  Author  of  all  spiritual  blessings — every  good  gift 
of  grace,  and  every  perfect  boon  of  glory.  Jesus  Christ  came  down  from  heaven.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  from  above.  Ministering  angels  descend  the  stairway  "  whose  top  reacheth 
to  heaven."  The  regenerated  are  born  from  above  (ver.  18 ;  John  ill.  3).  The  graces  of 
the  new  life  aie  from  God:  e.g.  wisdom,  to  bear  trials  (ver.  5);  single-mindedness,  to 
rise  above  outward  circumstances  (ver.  8) ;  steadfast  endurance  of  temptation  (ver.  12). 
And,  at  last,  "  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  shall  come  down  out  of  heaven  from 
God."  It  is  impossible,  then,  that  God,  the  universal  Benefactor,  can  be  in  any  way 
responsible  for  a  man's  sin. 

II.  Consider  hib  works.  He  is  "  the  Father  of  the  lights."  What  a  splendid  title ! 
and  how  sii>igebitive  of  the  purity  of  God !  He  is  Light  in  his  own  nature,  and  he  is 
Light  in  all  his  relations  to  the  universe.  He  made  the  starry  lights — to  which, 
indeed,  the  expression  seems  primarily  to  refer.  He  is  the  Author  of  all  intellectual 
and  spiritual  illumination — all  Urim  and  Thummim,  "  lights  and  perfections."  "  The 
first  creature  of  God  in  the  works  of  the  days  was  the  light  of  the  sense ;  the  last  was 
the  light  of  reason  ;  and  his  sabbath  work  ever  since  is  the  illumination  of  his  Spirit " 
(Lord  Bacon).  Thus  Jesus  Christ,  as  Mediator,  is  "  the  l-ight  of  the  world  ;  "  and,  in 
relation  to  the  absolute  God  whom  he  reveals,  he  is  "  Light  of  light."  His  people, 
again,  are  "children  of  light;"  they  reflect  the  lustre  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness. 
In  God  "  is  no  darkness  at  all ; "  but  sin  is  darkness,  so  it  cannot  proceed  from  him. 
He  is  only  "  the  Father  of  the  lights." 

III.  Consider  his  nature.  The  expressions  in  the  last  two  clauses  have  almost  an 
astronomical  savour.  They  have  evidently  been  suggested  by  the  mention  of  the  upper 
starry  lights.  The  thought  which  they  present  is  that,  while  God  is  the  Creator  of  sun, 
moon,  and  stars,  he  is  not  subject,  like  them,  to  revolutions  and  mutations.  "  With  him 
can  be  no  variation;"  literally,  "  parallax."  Parallax,  inastronomy,denotes  the  apparent 
displacement  of  a  star  from  its  true  position ;  but  with  "  the  Father  of  ihe  lights  "  there 
can  be  no  parallax,  no  real  change  of  place  or  purpose.  "God  is  always  in  the  meridian." 
Tlie  shadow  of  the  Almighty  is  not  "cast  by  turning."  Astronnmy  treats  of  the  revolu- 
tions and  eclipses  of  the  heavenly  bodies ;  while  piety  reposes  upon  the  unchangeable- 
ness  of  the  eternal  Light.  Being  in  his  own  nature  immutable,  Gud  will  be  "  bounteous 
still  to  give  us  only  good."     He  never  has  been,  nor  could  be,  the  author  of  sin. 

Lessons.  1.  Be  grateful  for  God's  gifts.  2.  Admire  his  works.  3.  Rejoice  in  his 
faithfulness.    4.  See  that  these  sentiments  fructify  in  holiness  of  life. — C.  J. 

Ver.  17. — "  Z%e  Father  of  the  lights : "  a  sermon  to  children.  Light  is  one  of  the  most 
wonderful  things  in  the  world.  Some  heathen  nations  have  been  worshippers  of  fire 
or  of  the  sun ;  but  we  should  be  thankful  that  we  know  better  than  they.  Our  souls 
want  a  living,  loving  God ;  and  the  sun  does  not  love  or  live.  We  worship,  not  light, 
but  "  the  Father  of  the  lights."  Let  us  think  ot  some  of  the  lights  of  which  God  is  the 
Father. 

I.  SuN-LiOHT.  The  sun  is  a  great  work  of  God.  It  is  adorned  like  a  "  bridegroom," 
and  it  is  strong  like  a  "  giant."  Our  whole  world,  and  many  others,  get  all  their  light 
from  it.  The  moon  takes  the  sun's  place  during  niglit;  but  its  light  is  just  sun- 
light second-hand.  Star-light,  too,  is  sun-light,  for  all  (he  twinkling  stars  are  suns. 
Now,  God  made  all  these  upper  lights.  He  made  also  all  light  and  fire  which  man  has 
on  earth.  Every  coal-field  is  jnst  so  much  "sown"'  light.  Every  lump  of  coal  is  full 
of  bottled  sunshine.    Man  mny  strike  a  light,  but  only  God  is  its  Father. 

II.  LiFB-LiOHT.  The  light  of  life  is  a  higher  kind  of  li^lit  than  sun-light,  and  it  also 
conies  from  God.  We  see' it:  1.  In  plants.  What  makes  a  flower  so  beautiful?  It 
is  I  he  light  of  life.  The  eye  of  the  daisy — the  "  day's  eye  " — is  bright  with  this  light. 
2.  In  animals.  Life-light  mnkes  the  birds  sing  and  the  lambs  gambol,  and  fills  the 
air  with  the  buzz  of  insect  gladness.  The  lion  is  the  king  of  beasts  so  long  as  he  has 
the  light  of  life,  but  "a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion."  3.  In  man.  In  him 
tins  light  is  of  a  more  precious  kind,  which  shall  burn  on  forever.  "The  soul  that 
rises  with  us,  our  life's  stai,"  shall  never  set.  It  shall  blize  on  after  the  great  lights  oi 
heaven  shall  have  been  put  out.  4.  In  angels.  Every  angel  is  "a  flame  of  fire.* 
Those  who  stand  before  God's  throne  are  the  brightest ;  they  are  the  seraphim,  the 
shining  ones.     The  angels  are  "  the  mornra^  stars,"  and  God  is  their  Father. 


BH.  1,1— 27.]  THE  GBNEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMBS.  15 

III.  Tkuth-liqht.  This  gives  us  the  light  of  knowledge.  Every  useful  book  which 
tells  US  truth  about  nature,  or  the  world,  or  our  own  bodies  and  minds,  is  a  light  from 
God.  But  the  hijjhest  and  best  kind  of  truth  is  about  God  himself,  and  about  the 
w;iy  to  him.  We  have  this  truth  in  the  Bible ;  and  so  the  Bible  is  "  a  lamp  shining 
in  a  dark  place."  Those  lands  are  in  darkness  which  have  not  the  Bible ;  for  it  tells 
of  Jesus  the  Saviour,  who  lived  and  died  and  lives  again — "  the  Light  of  the  world," 
the  dear  Son  of  "  the  Father  of  the  lights." 

IV.  Gbaoe-liqht.  Truth-light  is  a  light  outside ;  but  grace-light  is  one  which  God 
kindles  within  our  hearts.  Only  those  persons  have  the  light  of  grace  whose  souls  are 
illuminated  by  God's  Holy  Spirit.  No  sooner  does  he  touch  our  sin-blinded  minds  and 
our  sin-darkened  hearts  than  they  be^n  to  shine  with  God's  light.  This  new  soul-light 
will  "  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  All  the  lamps  of  grace  are  fed,  as 
well  as  kindled,  by  "  the  Father  of  the  lights." 

V.  Heaven-lioht.  The  home  of  God  there  is  full  of  light.  In  hell,  all  is  darkness ; 
on  earth,  there  is  mingled  light  and  darkness ;  in  heaven,  there  is  only  light.  "  There 
shall  be  no  night  there."  God  and  the  Lamb  are  "  the  light  thereof."  And  everything 
in  heaven  reflects  its  light — the  jasper  walla,  the  pearly  gates,  the  golden  streets,  the 
crystal  river,  the  white  robes.  Now  it  is  holiness  that  is  the  light  of  heaven.  All 
there  is  pure.  Grace-light,  when  a  good  man  dies,  blazes  up  into  glory-light.  And  all 
the  holinesB  of  heaven  streams  from  the  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  One — "  the  Father  of  the 
lights." 

Conclusion.  1.  "The  Father  of  the  lights"  is  the  Father  of  little  children,  and  be 
wanta  them  to  call  him  by  that  name.  2.  He  wishes  to  set  the  children  among  hii 
lights.— C.  J. 

Ver.  18. — The  chief  good  it  from  Ood.  In  this  verse  the  apostle  singles  out  for  special 
mention  the  highest  and  best  of  all  God's  gifts  to  his  people — that  of  regeneration. 
His  arg  umeut  is,  that  if  God  voluntarily  breathes  a  new  life  into  those  who  are  spiritually 
dead,  it  is  inconceivable  that  he  should  ever  seduce  to  that  which  "  bringeth  forth  death." 

I.  The  best  of  all  oifts.  Regeneration  is  the  summum  honum,  being  a  gift 
which  at  once  snpiilies  man's  deepest  want,  and  satisfies  all  that  is  highest  in  his  nature. 
The  new  birth  is  a  necessity ;  for  man  comes  into  the  world  destitute  of  the  principle 
of  spiritual  life.  It  is  sad  that  so  much  of  the  fashionable  literature  of  the  day  should 
isnore  this,  and  represent  natural  virtue  and  amiability  as  everything  in  character. 
But  regeneration  is  a.  fact;  as  every  Christian  knows,  both  from  observation  and  from 
his  own  experience.  It  does  not  consist  in  reformation ;  it  is  a  new  "  birth " — ^the 
re-creation  of  the  whole  soul  after  the  Divine  image,  through  the  infusion  of  a  new 
spiritual  principle.    It  involves  a  new  heart,  a  new  self,  a  new  character,  a  new  life. 

II.  The  boubcb  of  the  gift.  Where  resides  the  power  that  can  renew  the  soul  ? 
Not  in  a  man  himself;  one's  birth  is  not  one's  own  act.  It  is  "  the  Father  of  the  lights  " 
who  performs  the  miracle  of  regeneration.  Such  a  change  can  only  be  effected  by  his 
almighty  power.  To  bestow  this  gift  is  the  special  office  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost;  we 
are  "  born  of  the  Spirit."  And  what  induces  God  to  confer  this  invaluable  blessing  ? 
He  gives  it  "  of  his  own  will."  He  is  not  constrained  to  give  it  by  fate.  He  is  not 
moved  by  fitful  impulse.  He  is  not  incited  by  any  deservings  on  our  part,  for  we  have 
none.  He  is  not  even  prevailed  upon  to  regenerate,  as  the  result  of  the  work  of  Christ. 
The  ultimate  cause  is  simply  "the  good  pleasure  of  his  will."  It  is  his  nature  to 
love,  and  bless,  and  bestow  gifts  of  grace  upon  the  undeserving.  Man's  will  in  union 
with  his  lust  generates  sin  and  death  (ver.  15) ;  but  the  will  of  "  the  Father  of  the 
lights  "  imparts  new  life  to  dead  souls. 

III.  'i'HE  iNSTKUMENT  OP  THE  GIFT.  "  By  the  Word  of  truth;"  t.e.  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ — the  doctrines  of  grace  contained  in  the  Scriptures.  The  gospel  is  in  our  hands 
as  a  definite  "  word,"  and  one  which  is  absolutely  and  divinely  true.  While  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  Agent  in  regeneration,  he  employs  the  Word  as  the  instrument.  Although 
the  Scriptures  are  charged  with  moral  power,  man's  understanding  is  so  blind,  and  his 
affections  are  so  corrupt,  that  they  could  never  by  themselves  impart  life  to  any  soul ;  but 
in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  the  doctrines  of  grace  become  "  living  and  powerful."  Thousands 
have  been  regenerated  in  connection  with  the  private  reading  of  the  B;ble,  and  hundreds 
of  thousands  as  the  result  of  public  preaching.    The  Word  is  needed  in  regeneration 


16  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [ch.  L  1—27 

as  the  means  of  calling  forth  the  new  thoughts  and  feiilings,  the  new  desires  and 
resolves,  of  the  new  lite.  Only  in  connection  with  the  a|i(irehension  of  revealed  truth 
can  a  man  begin  to  believe  the  gospel,  or  love  the  Saviour,  or  in  any  way  "  exercise 
himself  unto  godliness." 

IV.  The  purpose  of  the  gift.  "  That  we  should  be  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  his 
creatures."  These  words  refer  to  God's  gracious  piir|iose  towards  his  people  themselves. 
They  suggest  the  dignity  and  honour  which  belong  to  the  regenerate.  The  image  is 
derived  from  those  provisions  of  the  Hebrew  ceremonial  law  by  which  the  firstfruits  of 
the  harvest,  and  the  firstborn  of  man  and  beast,  were  deilicated  to  God.  The  consecration 
of  the  firstfruits  asserted  their  own  intrinsic  value  as  Divine  gifts ;  and  it  also  symbol- 
ized and  foreshadowed  the  consecration  of  the  harvest  that  was  to  follow.  Now,  these 
Helirew  Christians  of  the  dispersion  were  th«  precious  "  firstfruits,"  in  the  first  century, 
of  the  entire  world  of  the  redeemed.  Similarly,  we  in  this  age  are  the  "  firstfruits  " 
in  relation  to  the  Church  that  is  still  future.  Not  only  so,  but  the  entire  company  of 
belicTers  of  all  ages  and  of  both  worlds  is  "  the  Church  of  the  Firstborn."  They  are  all 
of  them  elect,  precious,  devoted  to  God.  Every  regenerate  man  is  a  pledge  of  the 
ultimate  regeneration  of  the  multitude  which  no  man  could  number;  as  well  as  of  "  the 
restoration  of  all  things,"  when  the  new  creation  of  the  world  shall  be  accomplished, 
and  Paradise  be  restored. 

In  conclusion,  have  we  the  assurance  that  this  incomparable  gift  is  ours?  Can 
we  say,  individually,  "He  begat  us"?  What  a  joy  to  know,  from  the  marks  of  grac« 
upon  us,  that  "  we  have  passed  out  of  death  into  life  "  I — G.  J. 

Vers.  19—21.-3^  reception  of  the  Word.  "  The  Word  of  truth  "  being  within  oui 
reach,  as  the  means  of  conveying  to  us  the  great  gift  of  regeneration,  it  is  most  important 
that  we  cultivate  those  dispositions  u  hich  are  most  favourable  to  the  realization  of  its 
•Bving  power.  These  three  verses  accordingly  contain  four  counsels,  each  of  which 
touches  a  deeper  part  of  our  nature  than  the  one  preceding.  If  we  would  rightly 
**  receive  "  the  Word,  we  must  have — 

L  A  QUICK  KAB.  "  Swift  to  hear.'  This  precept  refers  to  the  acquisition  of  religious 
knowledge,  whether  in  connection  with  reading  or  hearing.  We  should  be  careful  as 
to  the  entire  matter  of  our  reading,  makisg  the  staple  of  it  not  fugitive  literature,  far 
less  frivolous  books,  but  such  as  are  solid  and  improving.  For  direc.i  ly  spiritual  instruc- 
tion we  should  go  seldomer  to  books  about  the  Bible,  and  oftener  straight  to  the  Word 
of  QoA  itself,  that  we  may  hear  him  speaking  in  it.  We  sViould  also  be  "  swift  to  hear  " 
the  oral  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  "Belief  c<imeth  of  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 
Word  of  Christ"  (Rom.  x.  17).  His  word  appeals  to  the  heart  more  powerfully  when 
spoken  by  a  living  earnest  man,  than  when  it  is  read  even  from  the  written  page  of 
Scripture,  We  should,  therefore,  embrace  every  opportunity  of  hoiiring  in  the  sanctuary, 
and  be  attentive  and  teachable,  and  follow  up  our  hearing  with  reflection  and  obedience. 

II.  A  CAUTIOUS  TONGUE.  "  Slow  to  speak."  This  exhortation  naturally  follows 
the  preceding,  for  the  man  who  is  exceedingly  fbnd  of  hearing  himself  speak  will  never 
be  a  ready  listener.  The  precept  is  good  for  common  use  in  the  conduct  of  our  life ; 
but  its  specific  reference  in  this  passage  is  to  caution  in  the  declaration  of  "the  Word  of 
truth."  While  we  are  under  a  sacred  obligation  to  "  exhort  one  another  day  by  day  " 
(Heb.  iii.  13),  and  to  "  speak  often  one  to  another  "  (Mai.  iii.  16),  we  are  to  be  "  slow 
to  speak  "  in  the  sense  of  weighing  well  our  words,  and  of  realizing  the  responsibility 
which  attaches  to  them.  Ministers  should  preach  only  what  they  have  carefully 
thought  out ;  and  they  should  beware  of  publishing  crude  speculations  on  theological 
subjects.  It  is  right,  too,  that  candidates  for  the  ministry  should  be  required  to  undergo 
a  lengthened  curriculum  of  training  before  they  are  entrusted  with  the  continuous 
instruction  of  a  congregation  (ch.  iii.  1,  2 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  6). 

III.  A  CALM  TEMPEE.  " Slow  to  Wrath:  for  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the 
righteousness  of  God"  (vers.  19,  20).  Much  speaking  tempts  to  passionate  speaking; 
every  one  knows  what  is  meant  by  "  the  heat  of  debate."  At  all  times  we  ought  to  be 
"  slow  to  wrath : "  to  cultivate  such  a  spirit  is  an  important  part  of  the  imitation  of 
God.  But  we  should  particularly  guard  against  irritation  of  temper  at  Church-meetings, 
and  in  conversation  or  conference  upon  religious  subjects.  The  clergyman  must  labour 
to  avoid  the  odium  theolofieutm.    The  preacher  muat  threaten  and  warn  only  in  love 


CH.  1.  1—27.]  THE  GENERAL   EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  IT 

and  tenderness.  The  hearer  must  not  listen  in  a  captious  spirit,  or  quarrel  with  the 
truth  when  it  comes  to  him  in  practical  form.  For  an  angry  heart  will  destroy  ediflca- 
tion  (ver.  20).  Scolding  from  the  pulpit  will  not  "  work  the  righteousness  of  Ood"  in 
the  hearts  of  the  hearers ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  resentful  feelings  against  the  preacher 
can  only  hinder  regeneration  and  sanctification. 

IV.  A  PCKB  HEART.  (Ver.  21.)  If  "  the  Word  of  truth  "  is  to  sanctify  and  save,  it 
must  be  received  in  a  docile,  humble,  tractable  spirit ;  and  this  involves  the  "  putting 
away  "  of  all  malice  and  impurity.  Hasty  and  passionate  speech  is  just  a  foul  overflow 
from  the  deep  depravity  of  the  heart ;  and,  if  we  would  prevent  the  overflow,  we  must 
cleanse  out  the  dark  pool  of  corruption  itself.  If  we  put  away  the  "  filthiness  "  of  the 
heart  by  a  gracious  process  of  earnest  renunciation,  that  filthiness  will  no  longer  soil 
the  tongue  or  spoil  the  temper.  Those  who  cultivate  the  quick  ear  and  the  cautious 
tongue  and  the  calm  temper,  in  connection  with  the  purifying  of  the  heart,  prepare 
themselves  as  good  soil  for  "  the  implanted  Word  "  (Luke  viii.  15).  The  grandest  joy 
of  life  is  to  have  the  scion  of  the  Word  so  "  implanted  "  that  it  shall  prove  itself  to  be 
the  power  of  God  to  the  soul's  salvation,  by  working  out  visibly  in  the  life  "  the 
righteousness  of  God."  And  the  teaching  of  this  passage,  is  that  if  a  man  would  attain 
that  blessing,  his  own  will  must  co-operate  with  the  grace  of  God  and  the  power  of 
"  the  Word  of  truth."— C.  J. 

Vers.  22 — 25,— Hearers  and  doeri.  The  writer  has  said  in  ver.  21  that  the  wise 
hearer  Is  a  "  receiver  "  of  the  Word,  and  he  now  proceeds  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  he 
is  also  a  "doer"  of  it.  "Beceiving"  represents  the  root  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
"  doing  "  indicates  its  fruit. 

I.  Thb  iNJUNonoN.  (Ver.  22.)  Very  many  hearers  of  the  gospel  are  not  sufficiently 
upon  their  guard  against  the  dreadful  danger  of  being  "  hearers  only."  Some,  when  the 
service  is  over,  seldom  think  of  anything  but  going  home.  Others  will  pass  a  remark 
about  the  sermon,  and  then  dismiss  the  subject  finally  from  their  thoughts.  A  few  will 
express  more  deliberately  the  pleasure  with  which  they  listened  to  the  discourse ;  but 
perhaps  even  these  are  satisfied  merely  with  having  enjoyed  it.  The  purpose  of  preach- 
ing, however,  is  not  that  the  people  may  be  "  very  much  pleased,"  but  that  they  may 
lie  profited,  edified,  and  inspired  to  live  an  uptight,  generous,  godly  life.  The  highest 
praise  that  can  be  bestowed  upon  a  Christian  minister  is  not  to  tell  him  how  much  his 
preaching  is  enjoyed  on  sabbaths,  but  to  let  him  see  bow  well  it  is  being  translated  into 
the  life  on  the  other  days  of  the  week.  We  live  in  a  practical  age ;  and  the  mission  of 
the  pulpit  is  as  practical  and  definite  as  that  ot  any  other  institution  of  our  time.  It 
is  an  agency  for  man-building.  Its  work  is  to  promote  the  doing  of  the  Word  of  God 
in  the  everyday  lives  of  men.  Those  people,  therefore,  are  the  victims  of  a  miserable 
self-deception  who  regard  "  hearing  "  as  the  sum  of  Christian  duty.  Such  persons  have 
no  idea  of  the  nature  of  true  piety.  Their  profession  is  nothing  better  than  an  empty 
form.  They  may  be  strictly  orthodox  in  doctrine  and  evangelical  in  sentiment ;  but 
what  does  this  profit,  if  their  church-going  carries  with  it  no  power  to  direct  their  daily 
life  into  the  ways  of  holiness?  A  theologian  is  not  necessarily  a  Christian.  The 
"  hearer  only  "  is  on  the  road  to  final  spiritual  ruin. 

II.  A  CMMPARisoN  TO  ENFOBCB  THB  INJUNCTION.  (Vers.  23 — 25.)  Our  Lord  had 
illustrated  the  same  thought  by  the  figure  of  the  wise  and  foolish  buiMers  (Matt.  vii. 
24 — 27),  The  simile  here  is  that  of  two  men  looking  at  their  faces  in  a  mirror.  "  The 
Word  of  truth"  is  the  sjiiritttal  glass  in  which  we  may  see  the  reflection  of  our  own 
souls.  The  Bible  not  only  reveals  the  holy  God  to  man ;  it  also  discovers  sinful  man  to 
himself.  But  the  mere  hearer,  after  he  has  momentarily  recognized  himself  in  it,  goes 
on  his  way  and  forgets  his  moral  uncomeliness.  He  finds  it  convenient  not  to  remember 
that  what  he  saw  was  the  features  of"  the  old  man,  which  waxeth  corrupt  after  the  lusts 
of  deceit."  The  wise  hearer,  on  the  other  hand,  looks  into  the  mirror  that  he  may  learn 
the  law  of  his  renewed  life.  The  gospel  law  brings  no  bondage  or  terror  to  him.  It 
does  not  constrain  him  to  an  unwilling  obedience.  It  is  to  him  "  the  perfect  law,  the 
law  of  liberty"  (ver.  25),  which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  writing  within  his  heart.  The 
apostle  indicates  three  elements  of  contrast  between  the  conduct  of  the  two  men  in 
relation  to  the  gospel  mirror.  1.  I'he  one  man  "  beholdeth ; "  the  other  "  looketk,"  In 
the  case  of  the  mere  hearer  it  ia  only  a  passing,  cursory,  careless  glance  of  the  eye — 

JAMES.  0 


18  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [ch  i.  1—27 

•  look  $tt  the  mirror,  and  at  himself  in  it.  But,  in  th«  case  of  the  wise  hearer,  it  is  the 
serious,  eager,  anxious  gaze  of  the  soul :  this  man  stoops  down  to  take  a  close  look 
"  into  "  the  law  of  liberty.  2.  The  one  man  "goeth  away ;"  tJie  other  "  continueth  "  to 
look.  The  mere  hearer  glances  hastily  and  brieBy,  because  unin teres tedly.  He  thinks 
always  of  sermons  as  dull,  ar^d  is  glad  to  dismiss  the  subject  of  religion  so  soon  as  the 
church-service  is  over.  But  the  wise  hearer  goes  on  looking.  His  gaze  is  persistent 
and  unwearied.  He  looks  so  long  that  what  he  sees  becomes  indelibly  impressed  upon 
his  heart.  3.  The  one  man  " straightway  forgeiteth ; "  the  other  is" a  doer  that  worketh." 
The  mere  hearer  soon  dismisses  the  thought  of  the  spots  and  blemishes  which  he  saw 
upon  his  spiritual  features  when  he  glanced  at  them  in  the  gospel  mirror.  But  tbe 
wise  hearer  looks  carefully  and  continuously,  because  he  wants  to  know  himselT,  and 
because  it  is  his  purpose  to  be  always  a  "doer."  He  has  learned  that  it  is  the  business 
of  his  life  to  obey  the  perfect  law  of  liberty.  By  the  doing  of  this  work  lie  will  attain 
both  self-knowledge  and  self-government.  And  in  the  doing  of  it  he  shall  he  "  blessed." 
CoNCLUsioif.  We  learn  from  this  passage,  what  is  insisted  upon  throughout  the 
whole  Bible,  that  the  secret  of  true  human  happiness  lies  in  holy  obedience  to  the  will 
ofGod.— €.  J. 

Vers.  26,  27. — Th»  true  ritualism.  These  two  verses  enforce  by  an  example  what 
those  immediately  preceding  illustrate  by  a  simile.  The  words  "religious"  and 
"  religion  "  denote  external  religious  service — ^the  body,  or  outward  attire  of  godliness, 
rather  than  its  inward  spirit.  The  a[)ostIe  indicates  in  these  two  sentences  the  "  work  " 
of  which  every  one  who  truly  "  receives  "  the  gospel  is  a  "  doer." 

L  An  example  of  vadi  belioious  service.  (Ver.  26.)  This  statement  points  back  to 
the  exhortation  of  ver.  19.  The  tongue  is  an  unruly  member ;  it  requires  to  be  "  held 
in  with  the  bit  and  bridle  "  of  Christian  principle.  A  man's  words  are  a  true  index  or 
evidence  of  his  character ;  and  they  also  react  upon  that  character,  and  tend  to  confirm 
it  tor  good  or  evil.  Should,  therefore,  a  person  who  has  been  for  many  years  a  member 
of  a  Christian  Church  indulge  always,  without  restraint,  in  evil-speaking ;  should  he  be 
in  the  habit  of  soiling  his  tongue  with  impure,  or  malicious,  or  false,  or  foolish  words ; 
what  other  conclusion  can  be  drawn  about  his  character  than  just  that  he  is  not  a  true 
Christian?  Such  a  man  if  •"hearer  only,"  and  therefore  either  a  self-deceiver  or  a 
hypocrite.  He  may  cherish  some  of  the  sentiments  and  instincts  of  religion ;  but  the 
most  sublimated  sentiment  is  quite  worthless,  if  it  cannot  be  translated  into  everyday 
life.  Where  there  is  no  government  of  the  tongue,  what  avails  love  for  the  Church  and 
its  services?  "This  man's  religion  is  vain;"  it  is  an  idle,  empty,  useless,  unreal  thing 
— a  counterfeit  of  genuine  worship.  The  apostle's  language  here  is  exceedingly  strong ; 
but  it  is  the  language  of  inspiration,  and  it  runs  parallel  with  what  we  read  in  other 
jiarts  of  Scripture  (Matt.  xii.  36, 37).  Many  professing  Christians  may  well  tremble  when 
they  read  tliis  verse.  How  prone  we  all  are  to  sin  with  our  lipsl  How  constantly  we 
are  tempted  to  idle  speaking !  Let  us  guard  against  the  sin  of  slander,  of  depreciating 
goodness,  of  imputing  selfish  motives ;  and  against  every  other  form  of  uncharitable 
speech.  If  we  do  not  "  keep  our  mouth  with  a  bridle"  (Ps.  xxxix.  I),  we  "deceive  our 
hearts  "  as  to  our  spiritual  state  before  God ;  in  which  case  there  is  danger  that  all  our 
psalm-singing  and  sermon-hearing  may  only  help  to  drag  us  down  to  a  deeper  perdition. 

II.  An  exhibition  op  teue  eehgious  service.  (Ver.  27)  James  here  submits 
a  rubric  for  the  ritual  of  the  Church.  It  is  to  this  effect,  that  the  services  which  God 
loves  are  not  ceremonial  observances,  but  habits  of  purity  and  charity.  The  moral  in 
our  Chuioh  life  is  infinitely  more  important  than  the  liturgic.  Indeed,  the  moral  and 
spiritual  are  the  great  end  which  our  fellowship  contemplates,  and  to  that  end  rites  and 
ceremonies  are  but  the  means.  1.  The  true  ritvcd  consists  in  the  maintenance  of  personal 
purity  in  a  world  of  sin.  The  Christian  is  a  man  who,  having  been  once  washed  all 
over  in  the  blood  of  atonement,  must  labour  in  the  strength  of  God's  Spirit  to  keep 
himself  from  fiesh  defilement.  He  is  to  guard  himself  against  the  contaminations  of 
the  world,  its  pursuits,  ambitions,  counsels,  and  its  grosser  pleasures.  He  must  not 
become  an  ascetic  or  a  hermit ;  rather,  he  is  to  show  to  his  fellow-men  that  he  can 
live  in  the  world  an  unworldly  life.  It  's  hard  to  do  so,  doubtless ;  it  requires  rare 
moral  courage  to  resist  evil,  and  to  brave  the  contempt  and  persecution  which  such 
resistance  entails.    Yet  this  is  the  worship  to  which  God  calls  us.    He  will  nut  accept 


CH.  1.1—27.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  19 

onr  "devotions"  if  we  refuse  him  our  devotion.  A  holy  life  is  the  most  heautiful  oi 
psalms.  It  is  the  hlossom  and  fruit  of  all  other  praise.  It  is  grander  than  the  finest 
cathedral  service,  for  it  is  the  perfect  rtaliz  ition  of  the  Divine  ideal  of  worship.  2.  The 
tiue  ritual  consists  in  the  exercise  of  active  benevolence  in  a  world  of  suffering,  Christ, 
when  on  earth,  "went  about  doing  good;"  and  every  Christian  is  an  imitator  ol 
Christ.  "  A  doer  that  worketh"  (ver.  25)  finds  his  chief  sphere  of  social  activity  in 
kindness  to  the  poor  and  suffering.  We  are  joined  together  in  the  fellowship  of  the 
gospel  that  we  may  be  helpful  to  our  fellow-Christians  and  our  fellow-men  who  are  in 
affliction  and  poverty.  All  our  public  worship  is  "vain"  if  no  hearts  are  made  happier, 
and  no  firesides  warmer,  because  of  it.  The  Church  exists  that  its  members  may  be 
inspired  to  become  a  fountain  of  spiritual  sympathy  to  the  widow,  and  a  ministry  of 
moral  help  to  the  orphan,  A  congregation  can  offer  no  comelier  praise  than  the  music 
of  constant  acts  of  loving-kindness  and  tenderness  and  self-sacrifice.  Where  this 
worship  is  not  rendered,  the  grandest  sanctuary,  so  called,  will  be  rather  only  a  sepulchre 
of  souls,  and  the  most  sasthetic  church-service  a  "  vain  oblation."  The  true  gospel 
cuUus  lies  in  personal  acts  of  sympathy  and  kindness,  done  to  the  poor  out  of  love  to 
Jesus,  and  because  the  poor  are  his  "brethren"  (Matt.  xxv.  34 — 40).  Every  profess- 
ing Christian  should  therefore  try  the  reality  and  strength  of  his  piety  by  this  test : 
Dues  he  give  himself  to  the  celebration  of  the  true  full  ritual  of  Christ's  house— that 
which  lies  in  a  life  of  purity  and  charity  ? — C.  J. 

Ver.  1. — The  writer  and  his  work.  Our  business  t»  identify  writer,  trace  life  and 
character,  consider  special  aim  in  Epistle,  and  note  its  main  characteristics.  (See 
especially  Flumptre.) 

I.  Identify  wbiteb.  Four  men  of  this  name  come  before  us  in  New  Testament :  (1) 
James  son  of  Zebedee ;  (2)  James  son  of  Alphaeus ;  (3)  James  the  Less,  son  of  a  certain 
Mary,  the  wife  of  Clopas ;  and  (4)  James  "  the  Lord's  brother."  So  far  as  writer's 
ilescription  of  himself  goes,  he  might  have  been  any  one  of  the  four.  Therefore  evi- 
dence must  be  sought  elsewhere.  As  to  James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  never  seriously 
maintained  till  lately,  and  on  grounds  by  no  means  conclusive.  Never  been  attempt,  d 
to  asciibe  it  to  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus,  except  on  the  supposition  that  he  was  the 
same  as  James  the  son  of  Clopas,  and  identical  likewise  with  him  who  was  called  "  the 
brother  of  the  Lord."  But  neither  of  these  identifications  can  be  established.  And 
therefore  the  ancient  and  general  opinion,  with  which  internal  evidence  agrees,  remains 
as  the  most  probable  hypothesis,  that  the  Epistle  was  written  by  "  the  Lord's  brother." 
In  what  sense  this  appellation  given?  See  Lightfoot  ('  Galatians'),  Plumptre,  Smith's 
'  Bible  Dictionary,'  Neander,  and  critical  notes.  Whether  or  not  an  actual  son  of  Mary, 
in  all  probability  a  son  in  some  sense,  and  therefore  one  of  the  household  of  Nazareth. 

II.  Life  and  chabaoteb.  For  early  life,  left  to  conjecture.  One  of  the  elder 
brothers,  perhaps,  in  the  Nazareth  home,  watching  the  unfolding  of  that  young  life. 
Trained  devoutly  by  parents.  Passing  at  father's  death  into  world,  leaving  the  mother 
to  be  maintained  by  her  Son  Jesus,  whom  men  thenceforward  called  "  the  carpenter." 
So  till  the  preaching  of  the  Baptist,  when  the  brothers  became  baptized  unto  John's 
baptism,  and  Jesus,  no  longer  the  carpenter,  unfolded  his  mission  as  the  Son  of  man.  And 
now  follows  the  offence.  The  reading  at  Nazareth,  and  avowal  that  the  promises  of  the 
prophets  were  fulfilled  in  him.  "  They  were  filled  with  wrath,  and  rose  up,  and  thrust 
him  out  of  the  city,  and  led  him  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon  their  city  was  built, 
that  they  might  cast  him  down  headlong  "  (Luke  iv.).  The  brethren  tremble  for  him, 
but  are  not  prepared  to  believe  in  his  mission  (Mark  vi.  4).  The  mission  proceeds. 
Disciples  gather,  but  plots  thicken.  Pharisees  and  Herodians  combine  to  bring  him 
to  his  death.  Still  he  teaches  and  works.  And  his  brethren  and  mother,  anxious  to 
save  him,  and  thinking  him  beside  himself,  come  to  Capernaum  seeking  him,  and  bring 
upon  them  the  rebuke  of  Matt.  xii.  48 — 50,  But  still  his  heart  yearns  towards  them 
(Matt,  xiii,  54),  But  still  they  disbelieve.  And  even  to  the  last  (John  vii.  5).  Then 
the  betrayal,  the  trial,  the  death.  Their  worst  fears  were  realized;  their  misguided 
Brother  had  brought  this  doom  upon  himself.  Ah,  as  yet  their  eyes  were  sealed  I 
But  Boon  would  the  nnveiling  come,  and  the  giving  of  sight  to  the  blind.  The 
Crucified  rosia,  and  appeared  to  his  disciples,  and — "  to  James "  (1  Cor.  xv.  7).  And 
now  the  tme  belief,  the  sincere  discipleship,  the  steadfast  witnessing  and  work,  the 


20  THE  GENERA.L  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [<«•  »•  1—2^ 

martyr'i  death.  For  this  an  outline  of  the  subsequent  history  of  James.  But  mora 
fully.  Durins;  the  waiting  in  the  upper  room  "  these  all  continued  in  prayer  .  .  .  with 
iiis  brethren "  (Acts  i.  14).  They  took  part  in  the  election  of  Matthias ;  they,  with 
the  rest,  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  Natural  prominence  now  among  disciples.  Paul, 
three  years  after  his  conversion,  coming  to  Jerusalem,  was  received  by  Peter,  and 
by  "James  the  Lord's  brother"  (Gal.  i.  18, 19).  Then  the  death  of  James  the  son 
of  Zebedee  (Acts  xii.),  and  probable  election  of  namesake  to  the  vacant  place.  And 
(Acts  xii.  17)  on  Peter's  departure,  probably  left  in  charge  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem. 
And  out  of  this  new  position  probably  originated  the  Epistle  with  which  we  have  to  do. 
Then  the  council  (Acts  xv.),  James  acting  as  president,  and  speaking  with  the  authority 
of  a  recognized  head.  Gives  Paul  and  Barnabas  the  right  hand  of  fellowship,  and 
publicly  sanctions  their  work  among  the  Gentiles.  And  he,  at  Paul's  last  visit, 
recommends  the  presentation  of  himself  in  the  temple,  which  led,  unfortunately,  to  such 
ill  results  (Acts  xxi.).  Here  the  New  Testament  record  ends.  Tradition  tells  us  of  his 
martyr's  death.  (See  account  by  Hegesippus,  quoted  by  Plumptre  from  Eusebius.) 
Such,  then,  the  life.  And  the  character  ?  It  Stands  out  from  the  life,  strongly  marked. 
Belief  in  Christ  slow  to  form,  but,  once  formed,  formed  for  ever.  Attachment  to  the 
old  religion  in  its  outward  expression,  at  least  in  part,  as  a  national  institution.  Spot- 
less integrity ;  James  the  Just.  True  charity  of  heart.  Faithful  imto  death.  With 
all  this,  as  indicated  by  text,  humility ;  "  a  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
sinking  his  relationship  according  to  the  flesh. 

III.  Am  OF  Epistle.  Have  considered  its  probable  origin :  his  elevation  to  rirtnal 
apostleship,  and  superintendency  of  Churches  of  Judaea.  An  encyclical.  Addressed 
primarily  to  Churches  of  Judasa  themselves.  References  to  persecution.  And  of  these 
alone  a  personal  knowledge.  But  the  feasts  brought  to  Jerusalem  those  of  the  disper- 
sion, as  in  ActiS  ii.,  with  some  of  whom  he  would  come  into  contact.  From  Parthia, 
Perua,  and  Media,  the  descendants  of  the  ten  tribes ;  from  Mesopotamia,  children  of  the 
Babylonian  captivity  j  from  Egypt  and  Ethiopia ;  and  from  every  province  of  the 
Roman  empire.  His  heart  was  drawn  towards  them.  Fellow- worshippers.  In  some 
sense  holders  of  the  truth.  But  greed,  respect  of  persons,  and  bitter  wrangling,  as 
among  his  own  countrymen.  Their  monotheism  was  the  substitute  for  holiness :  "  The 
Name  uf  God  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  through  them "  (Bom.  iL  24).  With 
this  in  view,  his  letter  should  be  to  them  also,  summoning  them  at  least  to  live  up  to 
their  ideal.  But  especially  to  Christian  Jews.  Their  belief  in  Jesus  Christ  as  much  a 
mere  dogma,  in  many  cases,  as  monotheism  of  their  brethren.  And  the  fruits  of  faith 
must  be  set  forth  to  them  as  necessary  to  the  validity  and  life  of  the  faith  itself.  So, 
then,  to  the  Jews  of  the  ciispersion,  to  Christian  Jews,  and  especially  to  Christian  Jews  of 
Judsea,  his  words  were  addressed.  And  the  aim  throughout  was  to  bring  the  practice  of 
religion  up  to  its  ideal,  to  urge  the  necessity  of  a  true  life  as  the  outcome  of  a  tme  futh. 

IV.  Chabactebistics.  Little  mention  of  distinctive  doctrines  of  Christianity; 
remember  aim,  as  above.  Let  the  scattered  Jews  but  be  true,  and  they  would  then  be 
likely  to  recoguize  him  who  was  the  Truth.  Yet  there  is  distinct  and  uncompromising 
mention  of  Christ  as  the  Lord  and  Saviour.  Insistence  upon  necessity  of  works. 
Imagined  antagonism  between  this  and  the  teaching  of  Paul.  But  see  sequel.  One 
other  noticeable  feature — ^prominence  given  to  wisdom.  The  Christian  life  is  not  divided ; 
it  is  one.  But  the  same  life  takes  on  diverse  forms.  So,  as  Plumptre  remarks,  while 
faith  is  the  special  characteristic  of  Paul,  hope  of  Peter,  and  love  of  John,  wisdom  was 
the  special  characteristic  of  James :  "  The  wisdom  that  is  from  above — first  pure,  then 
peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  variance, 
without  hypocrisy." 

And  BO,  in  conclusion,  let  ns  thank  God  that  he  has  spoken  his  own  truth  to  us,  not 
only  in  human  voices,  but  in  divers  tones,  that  each  one  may  hearken  to  the  tone  which 
most  quickly  touches  a  responsive  chord  in  his  own  heart.  And,  entering  upon  the 
study  of  this  book,  let  us  remember  that  "  every  Scripture  inspired  of  God  is  also  profit- 
nble  for  teaching,  for  reproof,  lor  correction,  for  instruction  which  is  in  righteousness : 
that  the  man  of  God  may  be  complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work  " 
(2  Tim.  iii.  16, 17).— T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Tlie  strange  paradox.    He  has  given  them  "greeting"  (ver.  l),or, 


DH.  l1— 2?.|  THE  GENEBAL  EPlSTLB  Ol"  JAitE9.  21 

literally,  wished  them  "joy."'  Was  this  a  bitter  irony  ?  For  in  what  condition  were 
they  ?  Persecuted,  as  Jews  and  especially  as  Christian  Jews ;  oppressed,  the  poorer 
by  the  richer;  and  all,  in  the  common  heritage  of  human  woe,  afflicted  in  a  hundred 
ways.  And  does  he  wish  "joy  "  to  these  ?  Yes,  even  so.  And,  as  though  surmising  the 
question,  he  goes  on  to  insist  yet  more  emphatically  on  the  "  greeting  "  which  he  has 
given.  Joy  ?  Yes,  "  count  it  all  joy,  when  ye  fall  into  manifold  temptations."  Joy  in 
spite  of  these  thin£;8  ?  Bather,  joy  by  reason  of  these  things.  Nor  was  this  teacliing; 
unique  among  the  apostles  of  the  new  faith  (comp.  Rom.  v.  3 — 5 ;  1  Pet.  i.  6,  7). 
And  confirmed  by  the  common  experience  of  Christendom:  not  merely  joy  in  sorrow, 
but,  by  the  blessed  transmuting  power  of  the  gospel,  joy  wrought  out  through  sorrow, 
strength  out  of  weakness,  life  out  of  death.  In  the  text  we  have  these  three  truths 
presented— our  religion  is  a  faith,  a  faith  tested,  a  faith  perfected. 

I.  A  FAITH.  The  fundamental  condition  of  all  life  is  faith.  We  must  believe  in 
ourselves,  nnd  in  the  instincts  and  promptings  of  our  nature ;  in  the  world  of  nature, 
with  its  facts  and  forces  and  laws ;  in  the  world  of  men,  with  the  relationships  which 

■  it  involves ;  and,  largely,  in  the  conduct  and  intents  of  our  fellow-men  respecting  us; 
for  daily  we  place  practical  trust  in  others  in  a  thousand  ways.  Yes,  faith,  not  know- 
ledge, is  the  flrst'condition  of  all  life — faith  as  checked  and  regulated  by  knowledge, 
truly,  and  as  leading  to  fuller  knowledge ;  but,  primarily  and  essentially,  faith.  So  with 
the  spiritual  life,  the  life  in  Qod ;  we  must,  as  a  first  condition,  believe  in  him,  in  his 
relation  to  us,  in  his  will  coDcerning  us.  But  why  is  faith  in  him  called  distinctively 
"  foith,"  when  it  is  but  one  application,  however  important,  of  a  principle  which  runs 
through  all  our  manifold  life?  Because,  in  this  application,  it  is  the  new  use  of  a 
disused  faculty  ;  it  is  faith  in  One  who  is  saving  us ;  who,  in  saving,  is  dealing  with  us 
in  a  way  we  know  not.  So  our  faith,  religiously,  is  our  practical  realization  of  spiritual 
things,  and  an  absolute  trust  in  God  as  the  God  of  our  life  and  God  of  our  salvation. 

II.  Faith  tested.  "Divers  testings."  What  are  these?  A  world  of  sense,  to 
which  we  have  been  enslaved  ;  a  world  of  sin,  to  which  likewise  we  have  been  enslaved ; 
and  a  world  of  suffering,  besetting  us  on  every  side.  The  first  testing  our  practical 
realization  of  unseen  things ;  the  second,  our  faith  in  the  dictates  of  duty ;  the  third, 
our  trust  in  God,  as  dealing  with  us  in  love.  Why  is  our  faith  thus  tested  ?  To  prove 
it,  whether  true  or  false.  Ko  real  holiness  is  possible,  without  the  possibility  of 
unholiness ;  hence  what  we  call,  specifically,  "  temptation."  And  no  real  trust  is 
possible,  without  the  possibility  of  untrust ;  hence  what  we  call,  specifically,  "  trial." 
Consider  the  infinite  possible  cost  of  holiness,  in  the  constitution  of  a  moral  world.  Sin ; 
and,  if  sin,  atonement.  But  God  would  allow  that  price  to  be  paid,  that  holiness  might 
be  secured.  Consider  the  terrible  cost  of  a  chastened  trust,  in  the  redemption  of  a  moral 
world :  suffering,  alas,  how  bitter  and  prolonged  1  But  Goid  will  allow  that  price  to  be 
paid,  that  trust  may  be  secured.  Yes,  he  will  test.  The  allusion  of  SoKliuor :  testing 
of  precious  metals.  So,  "  that  the  testing  of  your  faith,  being  much  more  precious," 
etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  But  the  figure  fails,  for  a  test  applied  to  a  dead  thing  is  only  a  test ; 
whereas  a  test  applied  to  a  living  thing  becomes  more  than  a  test — developing, 
strengthening  that  which  is  tested.  So  the  tree  rocked  by  the  storm,  the  army  on  the 
long  march.  So  here :  "  The  proof  of  your  faith  worketh  patience."  Untried  innocence 
developes  into  holiness,  and  holiness  becomes  an  enduring  holiness,  by  the  testing  of 
"  temptation ; "  trust  developes  into  enduring  trust,  and  endurance  becomes  more 
enduring,  by  the  testing  of  "  trial."  So,  by  these  "  divers  testings,"  does  God  work  out 
our  salvation.  And  in  and  through  all  there  is  the  glorious  power  of  the  great 
redemption. 

III.  Faith  pbbfectbd.  God  is  working  towards  an  end :  "  That  ye  may  be  perfect 
and  entire,  lacking  in  nothing."  "  Entire."  Hence  the  divers  testings,  by  which  each 
part  of  our  character  is  put  to  the  proof.  Importance  of  a  many-sided  education ;  so  a 
many-sided  Christian  life.  God  tests  us,  therefore,  in  this  way  and  in  that  way,  that, 
not  halt  or  maimed,  but  with  a  completed  manhood,  we  may  enter  into  life.  "  Perfect" 
>rot  only  must  each  part  be  proved,  but  each  part  put  to  the  full  proof;  just  as  the 
artist  will  not  only  chisel  the  marble  into  a  complete  statue,  but  also  chisel  each  part 
if  the  statue  to  a  perfection  of  exquisite  finish.  The  goal,  then,  "  perfect  and  entire; " 
tested  sufficiently,  in  manifoldness  and  in  continuance,  till  "  lacking  in  nothing." 

"  Count  it  all  joy."   Yes,  a  joy  sacred  and  awftil,  as  of  the  martyr  in  the  flames.    But 


22  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  l  1—27. 

very  real.  Frr  only  so  can  it  be  said  of  us,  "  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great 
tribulation "  (Rev.  vii.  14) ;  and,  "  They  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they  ara 
worthy  »  (Rev.  iii.  4).-^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  prayer  of  faith.  In  the  former  verses  the  writer,  after  the 
apparent  paradox  of  wishing  "joy  "  (ver.  1)  to  those  so  persecuted  and  tried,  proceeded 
(vers.  2 — 4)  to  urge,  not  merely  joy  in  spite,  but  joy  by  reason,  of  these  things.  For, 
said  he,  by  these  thin.^s  the  I'aith,  which  is  of  so  great  price,  is  developed  and  perfected. 
It  might  seem,  however,  that,  with  God  so  purposing,  and  man  thankfully  concurring 
in  the  Divine  purpose,  yet,  from  lack  of  true  discernment,  of  wise  judgment,  man  might 
fail  to  realize  the  profit  of  the  Divine  purpose ;  might  lose,  not  gain,  by  the  testings. 
Fo/  surely  it  requires  much  Christian  judgment  so  to  meet  temptation,  and  so  to  bear 
trial,  that  the  continued  testing,  instead  of  depressing  and  damaging  our  life,  shall  be 
evermore  bearing  us  upward  and  onward.  And  now,  in  the  verses  before  us,  this  is 
provided  for.  "If  any  of  you  lacketh  wisilom,  let  him  ask  of  God."  In  order  that  at 
last  we  may  be  "  lacking  in  nothing,"  God  will  supply  this  present  lack,  which  is 
so  urgent.  And  the  general  principle,  which  gives  force  to  this  special  application,  is 
here  set  forth.    The  main  thoughts  are  two — God's  giving ;  man's  receiving. 

L  God's  givins.  An  essential  element  of  God's  nature  is  self-impartation,  if  we  may 
reverently  speak  of  him  as  he  has  revealed  himself.  So  the  inmost  significance  of  the 
d;ictrine  of  the  Trinity ;  so  the  great  fact  of  the  creation.  And  so  to  all  created  things 
there  is  a  constant  streaming  forth  of  God's  goodness.  Like  the  shining  of  the  sun. 
But  the  streaming  forth  of  God's  goodness  is  conscious,  deliberate,  free.  We  may  have 
regretfully  to  relinquish  the  etymology  which  identifies  the  words  "  God  "  and  "  good ;  " 
but  never  need  we  relinquish  the  truth  that  God  is  essentially  the  Good  One.  "  God 
giveth : "  1.  Our  life,  including  existence  itself,  so  sacred  as  being  thus  from  him  ;  our 
appetences  and  their  satisfactions ;  our  powers  and  scope  for  use;  our  ideals  and  their 
realization ;  our  idiosyncrasy  of  life,  and  of  life-history.  2.  Our  redemption,  including 
the  gift  of  the  Son;  the  Spirit ;  our  penitence;  our  faith;  the  blessedness  of  the  new 
life  in  God.  3.  And  now  the  blended  life,  in  the  world  and  in  God;  all  "  good  things" 
(Matt.  vii.  11).  "  Liberally ; "  i.e.  simply,  absolutely,  disinterestedly.  Out  of  the 
abundance  of  his  goodness.  Hence,  "  to  all ; "  no  caprice  in  such  a  One.  And  hence, 
"  upbraideth  not."  Selfishness  gives,  grudges,  and  rebukes ;  he  gives  with  a  perfect 
love,  and  hence  delights  to  give.  Let  us  realize  this  conception  of  God.  How  it  alters 
the  complexion  of  life  1  what  effect  it  has  upon  character !  We  may  not,  indeed,  forget 
his  inflexible  holiness,  his  absolute  demands  on  our  obedience.  This,  indeed,  the 
fundamental  relationship ;  so  probably  the  true  etymology  of  "  God,"  as  meaning  "  Ruler." 
This  the  one  deep  significance  of  the  cross,  which  shows  God's  holy  love.  And  this  the 
meaning  of  the  absolute  call  to  repent,  as  preceding  the  gift  of  life ;  an  imconditional 
surrender.  Yes,  remember  that,  realize  it,  act  upon  it — the  truth  that  God  is  holy. 
But,  so  soon  as  the  barrier  of  unrepented  sin  is  removed,  realize  all  the  infinite  afSuence 
of  his  love — that  he  dehghteth  in  mercy,  that  he  is  emphatically  the  Good  Being,  whose 
goodness  is  ever  surging  and  streaming  forth  that  it  may  lavish  itself  upon  his  creatures, 
upon  me !  As  regards  your  life-history — realize  God's  yearning  love  ;  the  boundless 
possibilities  of  your  future.  As  regards  your  salvation — all  grace,  in  a  world  of  conflict ; 
all  glory,  in  the  world  of  perfected  conquest. 

II.  Man's  kbceiving.  The  higher  the  nature  of  any  creature,  the  more  are  iis 
development  and  growth  conditional  upon  its  own  appropriation  of  the  material  of 
development  and  growth.  Consider,  in  this  respect,  mere  existences  and  forces ; 
vegetation ;  animal  life ;  man.  Hence  the  life  of  man,  the  creature  of  freedom,  is  at 
once  a  life  of  the  greaiest  perils  and  of  the  greatest  possibilities.  Lordship  over  the 
world;  mental  acquisitions.  He  may  climb  so  high;  hemay  sink  solow  1  Is  it  not  well 
thus?  Does  not  our  manhoid  dwindle  in  proportion  as  we  become  mere  passive 
recipients?  Illustrate  the  hi^h  manhood  of  personal  achievement  by  artist  and  his 
work — would  he  care  to  find  his  picture  finished  by  an  unseen  hand  ?  also  by  enterpriie  of 
a  people,  which  calls  forth  their  powers  and  goes  to  make  them  what  they  are.  So  the 
glory  of  our  spiritual  life  is  that  it  is  not  necessitated,  but  free.  And  bo  the  supremo 
glory  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  a  kingdom  of  redemption,  is  that,  humanly  speaking, 
it  "  lufiereth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force."    Hence,  if  wa  would  becoma 


CH.I.1— 27.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  23 

possessors  of  spiritual  blessings,  we  must  possess  ourselves  of  them.  If  God  gives  grace 
freely  to  free  beings  such  as  we  are,  his  giving  is  conditional  upon  our  asking,  and 
asking  in  faith.  In  the  nature  of  things  this  is  reasonable  and  right.  "  Let  him 
»sk ;  "  that  he  may  realize  more  fully  his  own  dependence  and  need ;  that  he  may  value 
more  truly  the  blessings  sought ;  that  he  may  learn  God's  large,  free  love.  Could  any- 
thing be  simpler,  more  natural  ?  Because  of  the  creaturely  relationship,  a  recipient  of 
the  bounty  of  the  Creator ;  because  a  conscious,  intelligent,  free  creature,  a  conscious, 
free  recipient,  a  suppliant.  Ask,  and  have.  "In  faith."  This  the  acti\o  element  in  the 
asking,  the  appropriating  power.  To  truly  realize  God's  power  and  blessing,  we  must 
have  a  trustfal  appreciation  of  Goil's  purposes  of  love.  So  for  a  wise  endurance  of  trial ; 
so  fur  a  wise  meeting  of  temptation.  It  is  better  tn  endure,  better  to  resist;  this  must 
be  our  assurance  of  faith.  Contrast  with  this  the  waverer,  or  doubter ;  douliting  in  the 
sense  of  hesitating  between  God  and  the  world,  halting  between  two  opinions;  most 
miserable.  A  double-minded  man,  to  his  own  cost ;  unstable ;  like  the  surge  of  the  sea. 
He  shall  receive  nothing,  for  the  true  spirit  of  recipiency  is  altogether  vitiated.  The 
man  is  shutting  his  soul  towards  God  even  while  professing  to  open  it.  No,  "  the  just 
shall  live  by  faith;"  by  a  constnnt  aliveness  to  spiritual  realities;  by  an  earnest, 
trustful  appropriating  of  spiritual  blessings. 

The  two  great  lessons :  God  is  single-minded  in  giving ;  we  are  to  be  single-minded 
in  receiving.  But  how  does  this  bear  on  the  special  gift  in  question  here — spiritual 
wisdom?  This  is  largely  an  intuitive  faculty  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  it  is  educated 
by  communion  with  God's  mind  and  will,  which  brings  our  spiritual  wisdom  into 
harmony  with  his  own.  So  the  very  prayer  itself  is  the  instrumentality  of  the  answer 
to  the  prayer.  And  such  wisdom,  let  us  remember,  is  wisdom  "  unto  salvation."  A 
constant  choosing  between  good  and  evil,  which  results  at  last  in  tlie  total  abolition  of 
evil  and  triumph  of  good.  May  we  thus  prove  to  the  uttermost  "  what  is  that  good, 
and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  God  " ! — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  9 — 11. —  The  glory  of  manhood  in  Christ.  Diversities  of  condition  among  men — 
the  millionaire  and  the  pauper,  the  autocrat  and  the  slave.  The  cry  for  a  levelling— com- 
munism, socialism,  nihilism.  So  other  differences — of  station,  of  education,  and  even  of 
natural  gifts.  But,  after  aU,  what  are  these  diti'erences  in  comparison  with  thnt  which 
is  common  to  all — the  royal  humanity  which  each  one  has  received  from  God  ?  For  take 
the  highest,  the  most  cultured,  the  best  endowed,  and  again  a  poor  peasant  man  or  woman, 
and  let  some  crisis  of  juy  or  of  sorrow  sound  the  depths  of  their  common  nature,  and 
bow  utterly  do  the  surface  differences  disappear  in  presence  of  the  deep  stirrings  of  the 
common  manhood  or  womanhood  I  Yes,  when  the  great  deeps  are  broken  up,  we  take 
little  account  of  the  surface  waves.  This,  then,  the  great  truth,  in  presence  of  which  all 
bickerings  amongst  men  well  might  disappefir.  "  Speak  to  my  brother,  that  he  divide 
the  inheritance  with  me"?-  Nay;  "a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
things  which  he  possesseth  "  (see  Luke  xii.  13 — 15).  A  man's  manhood  is  more  than 
everything.  But  this  is  only  true  in  all  its  truth  when  manhood  becomes  really  manhood. 
What  are  we  now?  The  wreck  of  a  splendid  ship;  the  ruins  of  a  glorious  temple; 
discrowned  kin-^s.  Ob,  let  our  manhood  be  re-maile,  let  the  crown  of  true  royalty  be 
placed  on  the  brow,  let  Christ  dwell  in  our  hearts  by  faith,  and  then  how  little  and 
paltry  will  seem  either  the  possession  or  lack  of  the  things  which  in  their  folly  men  call 
great  I  This  is  the  exact  thought  which  James  urges  in  the  text :  "  Let  the  brother  of 
low  degree  glory  in  his  high  estate" — as  being  a  man  in  Christ ;  "and  the  rich,  in  that 
he  is  made  low" — in  the  stripping  off  of  his  adventitious  greatness,  by  the  estimate  of 
Christianity,  that  his  true  greatness  may  be  realized.  We  have  to  consider — the 
exaltation  of  the  poor,  the  humiliation  of  the  rich. 

L  The  exaltation  or  the  poob.  To  Christianity  belongs  the  unique  glory  of 
having  recognized  the  worth  of  man  as  man,  whether  wjth  or  without  the  extraneous 
advantages  on  which  other  systems  have  laid  such  stress.  How  was  it  in  cultivated 
heathendom?  The  foreigner  was  a  "  barbarian,"  forsooth ;  and  the  slave?  In  some 
cases  worse  than  the  brute  beasts  1  Judaism,  too,  had  become  exclusive — ^nay,  worse 
than  exclusive,  proudly  bigoted — in  its  relation  to  other  people ;  and  even  amongst  the 
Jews  themselves  there  was  the  same  contemptible  pride  (Matt.  ix.  11 ;  Luke  xviii.  11 ; 
John  vii.  49).    But  it  remained  for  Christianity  to  show  that,  however  bemired  and 


24  TUB  GENliRAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  1. 1—27 

liefouled,  a  human  loul  is  a  jewel  of  the  rarest  worth.  Listen :  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
is  npon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor"  (Luke  iv. 
18);  and, "  Go  and  show  John  those  things  which  ye  do  hear  and  see : . .  .  the  poor  have 
the  gospel  preached  to  them  "  (Matt.  xi.  4,  5) ;  and  again, "  Blessed  he  ye  peor :  for  yours 
is  the  kingdom  of  Ckid  "  (Luke  vi.  20).  Now,  this  is  the  exaltation  of  the  brother  of 
low  degree  of  which  James  speaks ;  the  recognition  of  his  "  high  estate  "  as  possessing 
a  God-made  manhood — a  manhood  endowed  with  all  the  privileges  and  blessings  of  the 
salvation  of  Christ.  1.  "  In  our  image,  after  our  likeness  "  (Gen.  i.  26).  That  the 
inalienable  dignity  of "  man"!  Man's  range  of  swift-winged  thought,  man's  wealth  of 
tender  affection,  man's  intrepidity  of  heroic  purpose;  man's  discernment  of  the  eternal 
law  of  holiness,  and  power  of  freely  choosing  the  good  which  he  discerns ;  and  man's 
immortality; — all  these  are  flashes  from  the  very  life  of  God  himself,  communicated  to 
man,  and  constituting  man  by  native  right  God's  child.  Man  has  fallen  ?  Yes,  truly. 
But  the  very  depth  of  the  fall  betokens  the  loftiness  of  the  pricnal  calling ;  the  very 
degrHdation  tells  or  the  intended  dignity.  2.  And  man's  redemption?  Oh,  words  can 
never  tell  the  worth  i>i  the  human  soul  in  the  sight  of  God,  as  evidenced  by  so  wonderful 
a  redemption  of  the  soul  of  man  from  the  degradation  and  death  of  sin.  This  truly  is 
the  sign-manual  of  the  worth  of  man,  as  well  as  of  the  love  of  God :  "  Ye  were  redeemed 
.  .  .  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ"  (1  I'et.  i.  18,  19).  And  the  salvation  itself? 
"Heiis  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ:"  ye  see  your  calUng,  brethren  1  Well 
may  "  the  brother  of  low  degree  glory  in  his  high  estate,"  so  created,  so  redeemed  I 

II.  The  humiliation  of  the  rich.  The  antithesis  is  only  one  of  outward  seeming, 
for  the  rich  is  really  endowed  with  all  the  glory  of  redeemed  manhood  equally  with  the 
poor,  if  he  would  but  recognize  and  realize  his  endowment.  But  he  is  tempted  to 
exalt  himself  by  what  is  really  a  self-humiliation,  and  make  his  manhood  depend  upon 
his  appendages  and  trappings.  And  therefore  his  real  exaltation  can  only  be  by  what 
might  seem  to  the  world  as  a  self-humiliation.  Let  him  throw  off  his  regard  for  this 
Tain  show,  and  prize  that  wealth  of  human  privilege  and  Divine  blessing  which  are  his 
in  common  with  his  "brother  of  low  degree."  Let  go  the  shadow  and  grasp  the 
substance;  for  these  things  are  yours  too,  if  you  will  have  them,  and  they  are  the  true 
riches.  This  needs  no  arguitig,  but  it  may  need  enforcing.  1.  The  false  glorying  of 
the  world — glitter,  pride,  and  power.  The  supercilious  scorn  of  the  "  high,"  as  speaking 
of  the  "  musses,"  and.  of  them  as  the  "  vulgar,"  the  "  ignorant,"  the  "  plebeian."  The 
essential  vulgarity  and  ignorance  is  in  the  people  who  so  speak;  their  words  recoil 
upon  themselves.  Again,  the  false  ambition  of  the  "low;"  they  covet  those  things 
that  are  above  their  reach,  and  so  deserve  most  strongly  the  stigma  of  vulgarity.  Yes, 
the  vulgar  man  is  he  who  cares  inordinately  about  either  the  possession  nr  the  lack  of 
these  things ;  the  true  patrician  is  the  man  who  values  his  manhood  infinitely  above 
I  hem  all.  For  these  things?  "  As  the  flower  of  the  grass  "  they  "  pass  away."  The 
great  statesman  and  the  mighty  author — they  die  like  common  men.  They  are  one 
with  the  grass  of  the  field.  2.  A  false  glorying  in  the  Church.  This  which  Janus 
hinted  at;  this  which  he  directly  rebukes  in  ch.  ii.  Let  us  beware.  Pride  on  one  side, 
envy  on  the  other.  Both  alike  betray  an  utterly  false  estimate  ot  worldly  things  in 
comparison  with  the  "common  salvation"  of  the  grace  of  God.  Ah  yes!  it  is  the 
"grace"  of  the  common  salvation  that  abides,  and  is  alike  our  glory  in  life  and  our 
support  in  death.  The  humblest  Christian  upon  whom  Christ's  Name  is  truly  named 
ranks  as  high  in  the  sight  of  God  as  the  Christian  millionaire  or  princ>' ;  and,  when  death 
comes,  the  man  of  consecrated  wealth  and  the  preacher  of  consecrated  gifts  die,  like  the 
poorest  Christian  peasant,  clinging  to  the  Name  of  Christ.  Therefore,  let  "  the  rich '' 
rejoice  "  in  that  he  is  made  low ;"  for  what  seems  his  self-humiliation  in  thn  eyes  of 
a  false  world,  viz.  his  light  esteeming  of  things  that  are  but  paltry  and  vain.  ,.iis  is  his 
true  exaltation,  "  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price"  (1  Pet.  iii.  3,  4^. 

May  it  be  ours  to  possess,  and  duly  to  prize, "  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace, 
through  Christ  Jesus*  (Eph.  ii.  7)1    Amen.— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  12 — 18. — Temptation  and  itt  history.  We  are  carried  twck  by  the  first  word 
to  our  Lord's  pronouncement  of  the  Beatitudes  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount.  And  here, 
as  there,  we  are  confronted  with  paradox.  The  words  of  the  earlier  Beatitudes  had 
doubtless  come  with  a  shock  of  astonishment  to  many,  who  listened  for  statements  that 


o«.  1. 1— 27.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OS  JAMES.  25 

■honld  aeemi  with  their  carnal  life»  "  Blessed  are  "—the  proud,  the  strong,  the  conquer- 
ing? Nay;  but"  the  poor  in  spirit,  the  mourners,  the  meek,  the  merciful  ones."  So 
now.  Not, "  How  blessed  are  they  that  escape  the  multiplied  ills  of  life  1 "  but, "  Blessed 
is  the  man  that  endureth."  Here,  of  course,  is  a  return  to  the  strange  "  greeting  "  with 
which  the  Epistle  opened. 

I.  Thb  kmdubanck  of  temptatioh.    The  word  must  he  taken  in  the  broad,  generic 
sense  of  "testing."    Of  this  there  are  two  forms— enticement  to  sin,  and  afflictions  of 
rigliteonsness.    It  enters  into  the  very  essence  of  a  moral  universe  that  there  should  be 
testing,  and  certainly  into  the  moral  recovery  of  a  fallen  world  that  the  processes  uf  the 
testing  should  be  intensified.     For  in  a  world  of  innocence,  |f  innocence  is  to  develop 
into  an  established  holiness,  there  must  be  such  possiliilities  oif  a  fall  into  sin  as  the  very 
fact  of  freedom  implies;  and  the  resistance  of  "  tem])tation  "  (as  we  specifically  call  it) 
inTolvea  auch  self-denial  as  makes  well-doing  difficult;  or,  in  other  words,  posiiive 
"trials"  (as  we  call  them)  are  necessarily  bound  up  with  the  ri<;hteou3ness  which 
pursues  its  way  in  spite  of  "  temptations  "  to  unrighteousness,  and  both  tociether  con- 
stitute the  test  (iTfi/xur/tdt)  of  character.    And  if  all  this  be  true  of  a  world  of  innocence, 
how  much  more  of  a  world  into  which  sin  has  already  come  I     Both  the  temptations  to 
■in  and  the  trials  of  righteousness  are  intensified  now,  the  lieart  itself  being  so  prone  to 
evil,  and  the  world  an  evil  world.    Hence  the  immense  difficulties  of  salvation  from  sin. 
We  have  an  index  to  this  in  the  intensity  of  temptation  to  even  a  Sinless  One  in  a  world 
of  sin,  as  shown  in  the  conflicts  of  the  Son  of  man.    View  the  wiebtling  in  the  desert, 
and  the  agony  in  the  garden  1   And  how  much  more  to  us,  whose  nature  is  so  responsive 
to  the  influence  of  the  world  1    But  his  conquest  ia  the  pled:;e  of  ours,  if  we  do  but 
put  our  trust  in  him  (John  zvi.  83  ;  1  John  v.  4).    And  the  beatitude?     We  cannot 
write  "blessed"  over  the  fierce  wrestling  in  the  desert,  nor  over  the  agony  of  blood. 
But  we  can  over  the  victorious  result.  And  so  with  ourselves;  not,"  Blessed  is  the  man 
that  ia  tossed  and  troubled ; "  but,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth."  For  what  is  the 
result  of  the  enduring?    A^kijuos  yev6nevot :  we  can  hardly  give  the  force  of  these  words, 
save  by  periphrasis,  in  our  ton;^iie.     "Havuig  acquired  the  quality  of  triedness;"  t.e. 
having  been  put  to  the  test,  having  borne  the  test,  and  being  now  certified  as  true. 
Like  gold  in  the  fire.     And  the  prize  ?    "  The  crown  of  life."  Figurative  expression  as 
regards  the  word  "  crown ;"  so  1  Pet.  v.  4  and  2  Tim.  iv.  8.     Familiar  thought  of 
contention  for  a  reward.      But,  dropping  the  figure,  let  us  ask  what  is  the  "life"  itself 
that  is  set  forth  as  the  crown  of  our  rejoicing?    And,  for  the  answer,  compare  some 
words  of  Christ:  "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart:  for  they  shall  see  God;"  "This 
is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast 
sent ; "  "  He  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will 
manifest  myself  unto  him ; "  "  And  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto 
him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him  "  (Matt.  v.  8 ;  John  xvii.  3  ;   xiv.  21,  23).    Such 
the  life ;  the  full  fruition  of  God,  which  is  possible  only  to  a  pure  soul. 

II.  Temptation  not  of  God.  Now  as  to  the  source  of  the  temptatiun,  the  endurance 
of  which  results  in  blesstd  life.  A  right  and  a  left,  a  good  and  an  evil,  are  possible 
alternatives  always,  and  to  free  creatures  that  which  is  possible  may  become  actual. 
God  cannot  constrain  them  to  well-doing,  or  they  would  cease  to  be  free.  In  the  case, 
then,  of  allowing  for  temptation  in  the  very  constitution  of  a  moral  world,  God  may  be 
said  to  be  its  source,  its  author.  But  how  readily  men  push  the  responsibility  of  their 
actual  sin  away- from  themselves  to  God  I  They  are  placed  in  such  and  such  circum- 
stance! by  God,  therefore  God  is  tbe  author  of  the  sin  to  which  those  circumstances 
lead.  So  they  argue  with  their  own  hearts.  But  illustrate :  a  position  of  trust,  with 
its  involved  temptations.  Does  the  employer  tempt  the  trusted  servant  to  wrong-doing? 
Nay,  verily.  So  man  is  placed  in  a  post  of  trust  by  God,  and  the  trust  necessarily 
involves  the  poBsibility  of  a  betrayal  of  trust;  but  may  we  therefore  say  that  God  tempts 
us  to  do  wrong?  The  very  thought  is  blasphemy  I  Only  an  evil  being  can  tempt  to 
evil ;  on  tbe  other  hand,  an  essentially  holy  Being  must  seek  to  work  out  holiness. 
This  is  the  true  genesis  of  sin :  man's  will  yielding  to  his  desire,  not  resisting  it.  The 
result  is  the  presence  of  an  actual  power  of  sin ;  for  sin  is  no  longer  a  mere  possibility 
to  us,  but  a  positive  entity.  And  again,  when  the  will  weds  itself  to  this  positive 
power  of  sin,  as  before  to  the  mere  desire,  the  result  is  death.  Just  as  the  fruition 
of  Qod  is  the  life  of  a  pure  soul,  so  a  godless  desolation  is  the  death  of  the  soul 


26  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [cH.  1. 1— 27 

that  has  permanently  espoused  itself  to  sin.  Such  the  dark  pedigree  set  forth  by 
James. 

Ill,  Evert  good  oift  fbom  God.  The  negative  has  been  stated  in  regard  to  the 
goodness  of  .God ;  now  we  have  the  positive.  The  very  sufferance  of  temptation  itself 
is  in  love,  that  the  highest  good  of  a  created  universe  may  be  wrought  out.  And  this 
love  is  God's  essential  nature.  He  cannot,  then,  work  harm  in  any  way.  God  the  autlior 
of  sin  ?  a  good  God  work  this  unutterable  evil  ?  Nay ;  "  God  is  Light,"  and  a  shadow 
can  only  be  cast  by  the  resisting  will.  And  in  this  he  is  unchangeably  the  same ;  there 
is  no  parallax  in  these  heavens.  And  therefore  the  great  pledge  and  proof  of  his  eternal 
good  will  of  holy  love  towards  us  consists  in  the  fact  that  he  has  already  begotten  us  to 
the  new  life.  He  would  not  lift  us  from  sin  to  holiness  that  then  he  might  cast  us 
down  to  sin  again.  No ;  we  are  "  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the 
earnest  of  our  inheritance  "  (Eph.  i.  13, 14).  And  so  our  new  creation  is,  as  it  were, 
the  first  fruits  of  the  new  creation  of  all  things. 

Our  danger  still  is  this,  that  we  are  tempted  to  think  God  is  making  it  hard  for  us 
to  be  good.  Our  safety  is  in  holding  fast  to  the  eternal  truth  that  "  God  is  love ; "  and 
that,  as  the  Good  One,  and  Father  of  all  good,  he  can  so  control  our  troublous  circum- 
stances and  troubled  nature,  that,  if  we  are  only  willing  to  do  his  will,  all  things  shaU 
work  together  for  our  good  (see  whole  of  Rom.  viii.). — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  19 — 27.— The  law  of  the  new  life,  "Ye  know  this,  my  beloved  brethren;" 
viz.  that  ye  have  been  begotten  again  by  God.  But  now,  from  this  vantage-ground, 
he  presses  the  necessity  of  a  consistent  life.  They  have  espoused,  by  God's  grace,  a 
new  ideal  of  character  and  conduct ;  let  their  whole  life  show  forth  its  power.  This  is 
the  topic  of  the  whole  passage,  and  it  divides  itself  very  naturally  into  the  related 
subjects  of — meekness,  self-knowledge,  and  practical  religion  (see  Funchard,  in  Bishop 
EUicott's  '  Commentary '). 

L  Meekness.  There  is  evidently  a  reference,  in  vers.  19 — 21,  to  the  deportment  of 
the  Jews  in  their  religious  gatherings,  to  which  we  have  more  direct  reference  in  ver. 
23  and  in  ch.  ii.  1 — 13.  And  the  words  of  warning  are  aimed  at  one  of  their  most 
besetting  sins ;  they  were  clamorous,  accusing,  wrathful.  What  examples  we  have  of 
this  spirit,  as  manifested  at  their  public  gatherings  for  worship,  in  the  accounts  of  our 
Lord's  first  proclamation  of  his  mission  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  28,  29), 
and  of  the  first  setting-forth  of  the  gospel  by  Paul  in  the  synagogue  of  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  (Acts  ziii.  45)1  So  perhaps  it  was  also  at  the  Jewish-Christian  gatherings; 
they  would  contradict,  and  accuse.  Tes;  they  were  impatient  of  hearing,  eager  to 
speak,  wrathful. in  speech ;  rebutting  what  seemed  the  blow  of  the  truth  against  them- 
selves, turning  that  blow  against  others,  perhaps  against  the  speaker.  What  a  Babel  of 
confusion!  And  all  this  in  the  thought  that  they  were  doing  God  service  1  As  opposed 
to  this  spirit  of  censorious  anger,  James  urges  a  quiet,  gentle  humility  in  the  hearing 
of  the  Word.  1.  For  what  was  this  Word  ?  It  was  God's  Word,  his  message  to  the 
heart.  Tes,  with  whatever  of  human  alloy  it  might  sometimes  be  mixed,  through  the 
infirmity  of  the  speaker,  there  it  was,  a  thing  Divine  1  There  should  be,  then,  in  its 
presence,  a  certain  awe  of  silence :  "  Let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak." 
And  as  this  Word  was  the  searching  Word  of  the  living  God  (Heb.  iv.  12),  there  should 
be  the  meekness  which  hears  for  one's  self,  not  for  others — Is  there  any  wrong  in  me? 
For  this  Word  was  "  able  to  save : "  with  what  solemn  gladness  should  they  welcome 
its  healing,  cleansing  power  1  2.  Oh,  how  opposed  to  all  the  intended  influence  of  tlie 
Word  of  God  was  the  spirit  of  passionate  assertion  and  acctisation  I  How  it  defiled  the 
nature,  as  with  filthiness,  making'  it  an  utterly  unfit  receptacle  for  Grod's  holy  truth  ! 
And  how  the  "overflowing  of  wickedness"  bore  back  the  living  germ  of  the  truth, 
which  being  implanted  in  the  heart  would  save  unto  the  uttermost  1  Yes,  man's  wrath, 
so  far  from  working  GK>d'8  righteousness,  utterly  hindered  that  working.  The  truth  was 
"  able  to  save,"  but  only  if  the  conditions  of  true  humility  in  the  hearer  were  fulfilled. 

II.  Self-enowlesoe.  But  the  very  hearing  liiay  become  a  snare:  we  hear  the  Word, 
we  "  feel "  its  power,  and  delude  ourselves  with  the  notion  that  therefore  the  Word  is  ours. 
1.  What  is  this, but  a  mere  transient  sentiment?  Like  the  man  with  the  mirror,  beholding 
a  while,  then  going  away  and  forgetting ;  so  we  may  gaze  into  the  marvellous  mirror 
«f  the  Word,  which  shows  us  so  wondrously  the  fair  ideal  of  truth,  the  beauty  of  holiness, 


OH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


27 


aod,  in  contrast,  th«  deformity,  the  unholiness  of  onr  real  Belt  Bat  lo  IlkeiHse,  being 
channed  with  the  ideal  beauty,  and  equally  loathing  our  sin,  we  yet  may  go  away  and 
forget  what  manner  of  men  we  are.  2.  What  is  required  of  us  ia  an  abiding  practice  of 
the  perfect  law,  that  can  only  result  from  a  continued  gazing  into  its  excellence  of 
beauty  and  consequent  knowledge  of  our  own  distance  from  its  perfectness.  So.Ps. 
i.  2,  which  sets  forth  the  Law  of  God  as  the  very  element  of  the  good  man's  life.  For 
it  is  a  Law  which  is  a  living  power,  evermore  working  its  perfection  into  our  imperfect 
life.  A  Law,  therefore,  of  liberty,  making  us  free  from  sin,  as  being  a  law  of  holiness ; 
and  free  from  servile  fear,  as  being  a  law  of  perfect  love.  Well  may  the  man  who  abides 
in  the  doing  of  such  a  Law  be  designated  blest  1  For  while  merely  to  hear  the  Word 
and  feel  its  power,  and  then  to  go  away  and  forget,  is  to  be  drugged  as  with  an  opiate 
that  makes  us  insensible  to  our  danger ;  on  the  other  hand,  to  hear  and  to  do,  and  to 
abide  in  the  doing,  is  to  realize  the  1x>uuding  gladness  of  the  full  flow  of  Uving  health 
(see  also  the  beatitude  of  Ps.  i.). 

III.  Pbactioal  beligion.  There  is  an  easy  transition,  in  vers.  26  and  27,  from  the 
hearing  of  the  Word  to  all  the  cult  of  worship.  For  just  as  some  of  these  Christian 
Jews  might  be  satisfied  with  the  mere  hearing  of  the  truth  as  distinct  from  its  practical 
realization  in  the  diuly  life,  so  many  of  them  might  rest  satisfied  at  least  with  the 
ceremonial  cleanness  and  "  service "  on  which  their  old  training  bad  led  them  to  set 
such  exaggerated  value.  They  were  "  very  religious  "  because  of  their  multiplied  religious 
observances,  their  $priaKfla,  their  ritual  of  service ;  and  this  "  religion "  was  pure, 
undefiled,  no  taint  of  ceremonial  pollution  attaching  to  its  performance.  And  yet  the 
filthy  wickedness  (ver.  21)  of  the  unbridled  tongue?  Vain,  indeed,  is  the  religiousness 
of  such  a  one!  Nay ;  the  cult  of  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  the  life,  and  the  ceremonial 
cleanness  is  cleanness  of  conduct  and  heart.  1.  The  ritual.  Doing  good.  So  Eom. 
xii.  1 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16.  A  concrete  instance  is  given  here,  viz.  the  visiting  of  the  father- 
less and  widows  in  their  afSiction,  but  only  as  an  instance  of  the  ritual  of  the  law  of 
love.  And  notice  the  immense  significance  of  the  words, "  before  our  Gfod  and  Father." 
Such  as  he  is  we  must  be,  viz.  "  pitiful,  and  of  very  tender  mercy  "  (see  ch.  v.  11).  2. 
The  cleanness.  "  Unspotted  from  the  world."  An  evil  world,  the  evil  of  which  was  so 
exhibited  by  these  "  clean  "  men  in  their  clamorous  evil-speaking.  Would  they  be 
really  clean  ?  There  are  no  works  like  works  of  love  to  hush  the  anger  of  the  heart. 
We  learu  for  ourselves,  in  this  ago,  that  no  ritual  of  religion  is  of  any  worth  as  such. 
Collective  "  worship  "  truly  is  good,  as  a  means  to  an  end,  viz.  the  replenishment  of  our 
life-power,  and  maintenance  of  loving  relationship  with  the  Father.  But  as  for  any 
cult,  as  such,  Christianity  knows  none,  save  that  of  a  holy  and  loving  life.  Your 
ritualism,  as  Christians  ?    Doing  good ! 

In  conclusion,  the  faith  that  humbly  receives  God's  saving  Word,  the  faith  that 
abides  in  the  knowledge  of  that  Word  day  and  night,  the  faith  that  works  itself  out  in 
the  religiousness  of  a  holy  love — this  is  the  sum  of  the  whole  matter,  this  is  the 
very  essence  of  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Lord,  •Termors  give  us  this 
faithl— T.  F.  L. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  II 


Vers.  1 — ^18. — Wjlbnino  aoainst  Besfeot 

or  PsBSONS. 

Ver.  1. — The  translation  is  doubtful,  two 
renderings  being  possible.  (1)  That  of  the 
A.V.  and  B.V.,  "  Hold  not  the  faith  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord  of  glory,  with 
respect  of  persons."  (2)  That  of  the  E.V. 
margin  and  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Do  ye,  in 
accepting  persons,  hold  the  faith  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord  of  glory?" 
Acorfling  to  this  view,  the  section  com- 
niuuL'es  w.th  a  iinest^nn,  as  does  the  follow- 
ing one,  ver,  H.     Accurling  to  the  former 


view,  whtoli  is  «n  tlie  wliole  preferable,  it 
is  parallel  to  ch.  iii.  1.  The  faith  of  our 
lord.  "  The  faith  "  here  may  be  either  (1) 
objective  (,fide>  qum  creditur),  as  in  the 
Epistle  of  tjt.  Jude,  8,  20 ;  or  (2)  subjective 
(Jides  qua  creditur),  "  Have  the  faith  which 
believes  in,"  eto.  (cf.  Mark  xi.  22).  Onr 
lord  Jesus  Christ.  Bxaotly  the  same  title 
occurs  in  Acts  xv.  26,  in  the  letter  written 
from  the  ApostoUo  Council  to  the  Syrian 
Churches — a  letter  which  was  probably  ^awn 
up  by  St.  James  himself.  The  Lord  of  glory. 
The  same  title  is  given  to  our  Lord  in  1  ( 'or. 
ii.  8,  and  seems  in  be  founded  on  Pa.  xxiv. 
7,eto.    The  giuuive,  r^i  Sii^iti,  must  (lepeu4 


28 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


[CH.  II,  1—26. 


on  Kvp[ov.  in  spite  of  the  intervening  'IrjuoB 
XpiffToB.  Similar  trajeotions  occur  elsewhere; 
e.g.  Heb.  xii.  11,  where  SiKaioaivris  depend, 
on  KapTr6v,  and,  according  to  a  possible  view, 
Luke  ii  14  (see  Hort's  '  Greek  Testament,' 
vol.  ii.,  appendix,  p.  56).  Bungel's  view, 
that  rrjs  S6^ris  is  in  apposition  with  Kvpiou 
'Ir)(roDXpi(rTov  can  scarcely  be  maintained, 
in  the  absence  of  any  parallel  expression 
elsewhere.  Bespect  of  persons  (cv  Ttpoatmo- 
KTfi/ia.ii);  literally,  ret^ption  of  faces.  The 
substantive  is  found  here  and  three  times  in 
St.  Paul's  Epistles — Bom.  ii.  11 ;  Eph.  vL  9; 
Col.  ili.  25 ;  the  verb  (vpoaairo\i\TrTiiv) 
only  here  in  ver.  9;  •npoaw7ro\'f]trT7js  in 
Acts  X.  31.  None  of  them  occur  in  the 
LXX.,  where,  however,  we  find  irp6irairov 
haii^ivftv  in  Lev.  xix.  15;  Mai.  ii.  9,  etc. 
(cf.  Luke  XX.  21),  for  the  Hebrew  D'JS  NtoJ. 
Bishop  Lightfoot  has  pointed  out  ('Oala- 
tians,'  p.  108)  that,  in  the  Old  Testament, 
the  expression  is  a  neutral  one,  not  neces- 
sarily involving  any  idea  of  partiality,  and 
more  often  used  in  a  good  than  in  a  bad 
sense.  "  When  it  becomes  an  independent 
Greek  phrase,  however,  the  bad  sense  attaches 
to  it,  owing  to  the  secondary  meaning  of 
irpitruTrov  as  *a  mask,'  so  that  trpiaoyirov 
\aii.0dveiv  signifies  'to  regnrd  the  external 
circumstances  of  a  man ' — his  rank,  wealth, 
etc. — as  opposed  to  his  real  intrinsic  cha- 
laoter.  Thus  in  the  New  Testament  it  has 
always  a  bad  sense."  It  is  exactly  this 
regard  to  external  eircnmetances  against 
which  St.  James  is  warning  his  readers; 
and  the  fact  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
had  himself  been  known,  when  on  earth,  as 
no  respecter  of  persons  (Luke  xx.  21),  would 
give  point  to  his  warning.  The  plural  (eV 
Trpa(ranro\ri<fiiais)  is  perhaps  used  to  include 
the  different  kinds  of  manife^itations  of  the 
sin. 

Vera.  2 — 4. — Proof  that  they  teere  guilty 
of  respect  of  persons.  Obiierve  the  insight 
which  this  passage  gives  us  into  the  cha- 
racter of  the  assemblies  of  the  early  Chrig- 
tians,  showing  (1)  that  the  entrance  of  a 
rich  man  was  not  entirely  unknown,  but 

(2)  that  it  was  probably  exceptional,  be- 
cause so  much  was  made  of  I  dm.    Notice 

(3)  avvayayl]  used  here,  and  here  only  in 
the  New  Testament,  of  a  Christian  assembly 
for  worship  (cf.  Ignatius, '  Ad  Polyc.,'  o.  iv., 
T\uKv6Tepoy  ffvvayoyyai  yiviaOuaav).  (On  the 
distinction  between  awayayii  and  iKKK-naia, 
and  the  history  ot  the  terms  and  their  use, 
see  an  interesting  section  in  Trench's '  Syno- 
nyms,' p.  1.) 

"Ver.  2.— A  man  with  a  gold  ring  (4i/%p 
XpuaaSaKTiXtos).  The  word  is  foiind  here 
only.  The  English  Versions  (both  A.V. 
and  R.V.)  needlessly,  limit  its  meaning. 
The  man  was  probably  bedecked  with  a 
number  of  ring«,  and  had  not  one  only. 


In  goodly  apparel.  The  same  phrase  is 
rendering  "gay  clothing"  in  ver.  3.  The 
variation  is  quite  unnecessary,  the  Greek 
being  identical  in  both  places,  and  rightly 
rendered  by  B.V.  "  tine  clothing."  It  is 
curious  to  find  a  similar  needless  variation 
in  the  Vulgate,  which  has  tn  veste  Candida 
in  ver.  2,  and  veste  praeclara  in  ver.  3. 

Ver.  4. — The  copula  (/to!)  of  the  Receiveil 
Text  is  certainly  spurious.  It  is  found  in 
K,  L,  but  is  wanting  in  K,  A,  B,  G,  Vulgate, 
Syriac,  Coptic.  B  also  omits  the  ni  Miative 
oil  (so  Westcott  and  Hort  margin).  If  this 
manuscript  if  followed,  the  sentence  must 
be  read  as  a  direct  statement,  and  not  as 
interrogative.  But  if  (with  most  manu- 
scripts and  editions)  the  interrogative  be 
retained,  the  translation  is  still  doubtful. 
Ai€Kp(d7}TE  iv  eavTois  may  mean:  (1)  '*Are 
ye  not  divided  in  your  own  mind?"  so  the 
Syriac  and  E.V.,  which  would  imply  that 
this  respect  of  persons  showed  that  they 
were  halting  between  God  and  the  world — 
in  fact,  double-minded.  (2)  "Do  ye  not 
make  distinctions  among  yourselves  ?  "  B.V. 
margin ;  this  gives  an  excellent  sense,  but 
is  wanting  in  authority,  as  there  appears  to 
be  no  other  instance  forthcoming  of  the 
passive  with  this  meaning.  (3)  "  Did  you 
not  doubt  among  yourselves  ?  "  this  (doubt) 
is  the  almost  invariable  meaning  of  Siaxpl- 
vo/iai  in  the  New  Testament,  and  the  word 
has  already  been  used  in  tliis  sense  by  St. 
James  (i.  6).  Hence  this  rendering  is  to 
be  preferred.  So  Huther,  Plumptre,  and 
Farrar,  the  latter  of  whom  explains  the 
passage  as  follows:  "It  shows  doubt  to  act 
as  though  Christ  had  never  promised  his 
kingdom  to  the  poor,  rich  in  faith ;  and 
toicked  reasonings  to  argue  mentally  that 
the  poor  must  be  less  worthy  of  honour 
than  the  rich."  Judges  of  evil  thoughts 
(tfpiral  5ta\oyu7fjmv  7roj/7}p»p);  SO.  their  own 
(thoughts),  which  caused  them  to  respect 
persons.  Thus  the  phrase  is  equivalent  to 
"evil- thinking  judges."  (On  the  genitive, 
see  Winer, '  Gram,  of  N.  T.  Greek,'  p.  233 ; 
and  cf.  ch.  i.  25,  inpoiTris  ^iriAijir/ioi'^;.) 

Vers.  5 — 9.— Proof  of  {he  sinfulness  of 
respect  of  persons. 

Ver.  5. — Hearken  (ixo^iraTc).  This  has 
been  noticed  as  a  coincidence  with  the 
speech  of  St.  James  in  Acts  XT.  13.  It  is, 
however,  too  slight  to  be  worth  much  (of. 
Acts  Tii.  2;  xiii.  16;  zzii.  1).  For  toS 
nia/iov  Toirou,  read  t^  K(!(r/xa)  (S»,  A,  B',  C), 
"  poor  as  to  the  world  ;  "  perhaps  "  in  the 
estimation  of  the  world."  These  God  chose 
(to  be)  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  king- 
dom, eta  The  kingdom;  mentioned  hero 
only  by  St.  James  (and  even  here,  N',  A 
read  ejro77€A(ov) ;  of.  v6ixoy  fiairiKiK6v  in  ver.  8. 
Which  he  hath  promised.  As  Bean  Plump- 
tre has  pointed  out,  "  it  is  scarcely  posiiblt 


OH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMEa 


29 


to  exclude  a  direct  refennee  to  the  woids  of 
Ohiist,  as  in  Luke  vi.  20;  xii.  31,  32;  and 

to  we  get  indirect  proof  of  a  current  know- 
ledge, st  the  early  period  at  which  St.  James 
wrote,  of  teaching  which  was  afterwards 
recorded  in  the  written  Gospels." 

Ver.  6. — You  have  dishonoured  by  your 
treatment  the  poor  man,  whom  God  cliose ; 
while  those  rich  mep  to  whom  ye  pay  such 
honour  are  just  the  very  peieons  who  (1) 
oppress  you  and  (2)  blaspheme  God  and 
Christ.  Poor  .  .  .  rich.  In  the  Old  Testa- 
ment we  occasionally  find  the  terra  "  poor  " 
parallel  to  "righteous"  (Amos  ii.  6;  v.  12); 
and  "  rich  "  to  "  wicked  "  (Isa.  liii.  9).  St. 
James's  use  here  is  some » hat  similar  (see 
on  oh,  i,  9,  etc.).  "  Christiani  multi  ex  pau- 
peribus  erant:  pauci  ex  divitibus  "  (Bengel). 
The  "rich  men"  here  alluded  to  are  evi- 
dently such  as  was  the  Apostle  Paul  before 
his  conversion.  (1)  They  dragged  the  poor 
Christians  before  the  judgment-seat  (eKicov 
<rii>  ii/ius  tis  KpiTiipitt).  So  Saul,  "haling 
(crvpaii')  men  and  women,  committed  them  to 
prison  "  (Acts  viii.  3).  (2)  They  blasphemed 
the  honourable  Name  by  wliich  Christians 
were  called.  So  Saul  thought  that  he  ought 
to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the  Name  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  strove  to  make  them 
blaspheme  (Acts  xxvi.  9 — 11).  (3)  All  this 
they  did  in  perion  (ourof);  "themselves," 
iiist  as  Saul  did.  No  difficulty  need  be  felt 
about  the  presence  of  tliese  rich  men  in  the 
synagogues  of  the  Christians  (see  Introduc- 
tion, p.  viii.).  It  will  be  noticed  that  St. 
James  jiever  calls  them  "  brethren."  Further, 
it  must  be  remembered  that,  at  this  oarly 
date,  the  Church  had  not  yet  learnt  by  bitter 
experience  the  need  for  that  secrecy  with 
whicli  in  later  days  she  shrouded  her  wor- 
ship. At  this  time  the  Christian  assemblies 
were  open  to  any  who  chose  to  find  their 
way  in.  All  were  welcome,  as  we  see  from 
1  Got.  xiv.  23,  eto.,  where  the  chance  entry 
of  "  men  unlearned  or  unbelieving  "  is  con- 
templated as  likely  to  happen.  Hence  there 
is  no  sort  of  difficulty  in  the  presence  of 
the  "  rich  man  "  here,  who  might  be  eagerly 
welcomed,  and  repay  his  welcome  by  drag- 
ging them  to  the  judgment-seat.  Draw  yon 
before  the  judgment-seats.  The  account 
given  by  Jo:jephus  of  the  death  of  St.  James 
himself  affords  a  good  Illustration  of  the 
manner  in  which  Christians  were  liable  to 
tliis  (see  Introduction,  p.  vi.).  But  the 
tribunals  need  not  be  confined  to  Jewish 
ones.  Other  instances  of  similar  treatment, 
illustrating  the  thoughts  and  language  of 
the  passage  before  us,  may  be  found  in  Acts 
xvi.  19 ;  xvii.  6 ;  xviii.  12,  Litigation  of  an 
entirely  different  character  between  Chris- 
tians themselves  is  alluded  to  and  con- 
demned by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  vi. 

Vei.  7. — That  worthy  Name   (rb  Ha3>!bv 


tvo/jia) ;  the  honourable  NatM ;  probably  the 
Name  of  Olirist,  by  which  the  disciples  were 
known  (Acts  xi.  26),  and  for  which  they 
suffered  (Acts  T.  41 ;  1  Pet.  v.  14—16).  By 
the  which  ye  are  oalled ;  literally,  which  iua$ 
called  upon  you  (ri  imK\-n9(i>  i<p'  ifias).  A 
similar  expression  is  found  in  St.  James's 
speech  in  Acts  xv.  17,  in  •  quotation  from 
Amos  ix.  12. 

Ver.  8. — ^What  ia  the  connection  with  the 
foregoing?  MeWot  is  ignored  altogether  by 
the  A.V.  Translate,  with  E.V.,  howbeit  if 
ye  fulfil,  eto. ;  Vulgate,  tamen.  According 
to  Huther,  St.  James  here  meets  the  attempt 
which  his  readers  might,  perhaps,  make  to 
justify  their  conduct  towards  the  rich  with 
the  law  of  love ;  whilst  he  grants  to  them 
that  the  fulfilment  of  that  law  is  something 
excellent,  he  designates  ■npoffavoKiiTtTetv 
directly  as  a  transgression  of  the  law.  Alford 
thinks  that  the  apostle  is  simply  gui<rding 
his  own  argument  from  misconstruction — a 
view  which  is  simpler  and  perhaps  more 
natural.  The  royal  law.  Why  is  the  law 
of  love  thus  styled  ?  (The  Syriao  has  simply 
"  the  law  of  God.")  (1)  As  being  the  most 
excellent  of  all  laws;  as  we  might  call  it 
the  sovereign  principle  of  our  conduct  (cf. 
Plato  '  Min.,'  p.  317,  o,  Th  opBiv  v6im>s  eVri 
Pa(ri\iK6s).  Such  an  expression  is  natural 
enough  in  a  Greek  writer;  but  it  is  strange 
in  a  Jew  like  St;.  James  (in  the  LXX..  Pacn- 
KtKos  is  always  used  in  its  literal  meaning) ; 
and  as  tlje  "kingdom"  has  been  spoken  of 
just  before  (ver.  5^  it  is  better  (2)  to  take 
the  expression  as  literal  here — "  the  law  of 
the  kingdom  "  (cf.  Plumptre,  in  he.).  Thou 
Shalt  love,  etc.  (Lev.  xix.  18).  The  law  had 
received  the  sanction  of  the  King  himself 
(Matt.  xxii.  39 ;  Luke  x.  26—28). 

Ver.  9.— And  are  convinced,  etc. ;  better, 
with  R.V.,  being  convicted  by  the  law  Qx^y- 
xififvoi  uirA  ToB  v6ij.ov).  The  Law  of  Moses 
directly  forbade  all  respect  of  persons;  see 
Lev.  xix.  15  (tliree  verses  above  the  passage 
just  quoted  by  St.  James),  Ov  \i]\fiji  trpi- 
axavov  wtwxov  ouSe  fi^  Bavfidffys  vp6(TW7rov 
ivvdcTOv), 

Ver.  10. — In  this  verse  the  subjunctives 
Tiipiiari,  irraiffj),  are  rightly  read  by  the  Re- 
visers, with  »,  B,  C.  The  Law  was  express 
on  the  need  of  keeping  all  the  command- 
ments ;  see  Lev.  xix.  37  (the  same  chapter 
to  which  St.  James  has  already  referred), 
Kal  (pvKdieaBe  iriura  rhv  vS/ioy  piov,  xal  TrduTa 
Toi  TtpoariyixaTi  fwv  koI  irotiiaeTe  aiird).  He 
is  giiilty  of  alL  The  very  same  thought 
is  found  in  rabbinical  writers  (Talmud, 
'  Schabbath,'  fol.  70);  a  saying  o^  R.  Joha- 
nan :  "  Quodsi  faciat  omnia  unum  vero 
omittet  omnium  est  singulorum  reus."  Other 
passages  to  the  same  effect  may  be  seen  in 
Schottgen, '  Horse  Hebraiese,'  vol.  i.  p.  1017, 
etc. ;  and  of. '  Firqe  Aboth,'  ir.  15.    Was  it  a 


30 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE   OF  JAMBS. 


[cH.  n.  1—26. 


false  inference  from  St.  James's  teaohing  in 
this  Terse  that  led  the  Judaizers  of  Acts  XT. 
to  lay  down  the  law  "  Except  ye  be  circum- 
oised  after  the  customs  of  Moses  ye  cannot 
be  saved "f  "Whosoever  shall  keep  the 
whole  Law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he 
is  guilty  of  all,"  might  seem  to  suggest  such 
an  inference :  "  To  whom."  says  St.  James 
•  himself,  "we  gave  no  commandment"  (Acts 
XT.  i24).  (On  the  teaching  of  this  tenth 
verse  there  ia  an  interesting  letter  of  Augus- 
tine's to  Jerome,  which  well  repays  study : 
'Bp.'olivii.) 

Ver.  11. — Do  not  oommit  adultery  ...  do 
not  kill.  The  order  of  the  commandments 
is  remarkable ;  what  is  now  the  seventh  is 
placed  before  the  sixth.  This  appears  to 
haTe  been  the  usual  order  at  that  time.  In 
this  order  our  Lord  quotes  them  in  Luke 
XTiii.  20,  and  St.  Paul  in  Bom.  xiii.  9.  Fhilo 
also  has  the  same  order,  and  expressly  com- 
ments on  it,  drawing  from  it  an  argument 
for  the  heinousnesB  of  adultery  ('  Deo.,'  zii. 
24).  In  the  Vatican  Manuscript  of  the 
LXX.  in  Exod.  xx.  13 — 15  the  order  ig, 
"Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.  Thou 
shalt  not  steal.  Thou  shalt  not  kill."  But 
the  Alexandrian  Manuscript  has  the  usual 
order,  which  is  also  found  in  Matt.  xix.  18 
and  Mark  x.  19  (according  to  the  correct 
reading). 

Vers.  12,  13. — Conelvtion  of  the  subject : 
vi/ios  iXevBeplas  (of.  ch.  i.  25). 

Ver.  13. — ^A  clear  reminiscence  of  our 
Lord's  teaching  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount 
(Matt  vii.  1,  etc. ;  v.  7) :  Mcucdpui  oi  i\efi- 
noves  in  aftrol  iKfriBiitromai,  'Av4\eos  la  Cer- 
tainly the  right  form  of  the  word  (tt,  A,  B, 
0,K),  not  avi\4us  (BeceptuB  with  L),  and  the 
Kol  of  the  Textus  Beceptus  is  entirely  want- 
ing in  manuscript  authority,  and  should  be 
deleted.  The  subject  is  ended  by  the  abrupt 
declaration,  almost  like  a  cry  of  triumph, 
"  Mercy  glorieth  against  judgment." 

Vers.  14 — 26. — ^Warning  aoainst  besting 

CONTENT  WITH  A  MERE  BaRBEN  ORTHODOXY. 

Preliminary  note ;  This  is  the  famous  pas- 
sage which  led  to  Luther's  depreciation  of 
the  whole  Epistle,  which  he  termed  a  "right 
strawy "  one.  At  first  sight  it  appears, 
indeed,  diametrically  opposed  to  the  teaching 
of  St.  Paul;  for:  (1)  St.  Paul  says  (Bom. 
iii.  28), "  We  conclude  that  a  man  ia  justified 
by  faith  apart  from  Ofop's)  works  of  Law," 
whereas  St.  James  asserts  (ver.  26)  that 
"  faith  without  (x<»p'i)  works  is  dead,"  and 
that  man  is  "justified  by  works  and  not  by 
faith  only"  (ver.  24).  (2)  St.  Paul  speaks 
of  Abraham  as  justified  by  faith  (Bom.  iv. ; 
eL  Oal.  iiL  6,  etc.) ;  St.  James  says  that  he 
was  justified  by  works  (ver.  21).  (3)  St. 
Paul,  or  the  Pauline  author  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews,  appeals  to  the  case  of 
Bahab  as  an  ioatanoe  ot  faith  (Heb.  si.  81) ; 


St.  James  refers  to  her  as  an  example  oi 
justification  by  tcorJce  (ver.  25).  The  oppo- 
sition, however,  is  only  apparent;  for:  (1) 
The  two  apostles  use  the  word  ^pyaia  differ- 
ent senses.  In  St.  Paul  it  always  has  a 
depreciatory  sense,  unless  qualified  by  the 
adjective  Ka\h  or  iyoBa,  The  works  which 
he  denies  to  have  any  share  in  justification 
are  "legal  works,"  not  those  which  he 
elsewhere  denominates  tlie  "fruit  of  the 
Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  22),  which  are  the  "  works  " 
of  which  St.  James  speaks.  (2)  The  word 
irla-Tis  is  also  used  in  different  aenses.  In 
St.  Paul  it  ia  irlffns  Si'  iyanis  iixpyov/iivii 
(Oal.  V.  6);  in  St.  James  it  ia  simply  an 
orthodox  creed,  "Even  the  devils  irio-Tei- 
ovvi "  (ver.  19) :  it  may,  therefore,  be  barren 
of  works  of  charity.  (3)  The  apostles  are 
writing  against  different  errors  and  ten- 
dencies: St.  Paul  against  that  of  those 
who  would  impose  the  Jewish  Law  and  the 
rite  of  circumcision  upon  Gentile  believers ; 
St.  James  against  "the  self-complacent 
orthodoxy  of  the  Pharisaic  Christian,  who. 
satisfied  with  the  possession  of  a  pnre 
monotheism  and  vaunting  hia  descent  ftom 
Abraham,  needed  to  be  reminded  not  to 
neglect  the  still  weightier  matters  of  a  self- 
denying  love"  (Lightfoot  on  'Galatians,' 
p.  370).  [The  tendency  of  the  Jews  to  rely 
on  their  claim  as  "  Abraham's  children  "  is 
rebuked  by  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  9)  and 
by  our  Lord  (John  viii.  39).  So  Justin 
Martyr  speaks  of  the  Jews  of  his  day :  Oi 
\4yovirw  Sti  kUv  a/uofiT&iXol  Siirt,  Beiv  S4 
ywdaKuirty,  ov  /»%  \oyl<niTai  aiiTois  auaprlav 
C  Dial.,'  S  141).]  (4)  The  apostles  regarded 
the  new  dispensation  from  different  stand- 
points. With  St  Paul  it  is  the  negation  of 
law:  "Ye  are  not  under  Law,  but  under 
grace"  (Bom.  vi.  14).  With  St.  James  it 
is  the  perfection  of  Law.  But,  as  Bishop 
Lightfoot  has  pointed  out,  "  the  ideas  under- 
lying these  contradictory  forms  of  expres- 
sion need  not  be  essentially  different."  The 
mere  ritual  has  no  value  for  St.  James. 
Apart  from  anything  higher  it  is  sternly 
denounced  by  him  (ch.  i.  26,  etc.).  The 
gospel  is  in  hia  view  a  Law,  but  it  is  no 
mere  system  of  rules,  "Touch  not,  taste 
not,  handle  not ; "  it  is  no  hard  bondage,  for 
it  is  a  law  of  liberty,  which  is  in  exact 
accordance  with  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul, 
that  «  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there 
is  liberty"  (2  Cor.  iii.  17).  But:  (5)  The 
question  now  arises.  Granting  that  St. 
James  does  not  contradict  the  doctrine  of 
St.  Paul,  is  he  not  opposing  Antinomian 
per7ersions  of  it,  and  writing  with  conscious 
reference  to  the  teaching  of  the  apostle  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  the  misuse  which  some 
had  made  of  it?  To  this  question  different 
answers  have  been  returned.  "So  long  as 
our  range  of  view  is  confined  to  the  apostolic 


OH.  II.  1 — 26.] 


THE  GENEEAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


31 


writiogs,  it  seems  scarcely  possible  to  resist 
the  impression  that  St.  James  is  attacking 
the  teaching,  if  not  of  St.  Paul  himself,  at 
least  of  those  who  exaggerated  and  perverted 
it.  But  when  we  realize  the  fact  that  the 
passage  in  Oenesig  was  a  common  thesis  in 
the  schools  of  the  day,  that  the  meaning  of 
faith  was  variously  explained  by  the  dis- 
putants, that  diverse  lessons  were  drawn 
from  it— then  the  case  is  altered.  The 
Gentile  apostle  and  the  Pharisaic  rabbi 
might  both  maintain  the  supremacy  of  faith 
as  the  means  of  salvation ;  but  faith  with 
St.  Paul  was  a  very  different  thing  from 
faith  with  Maimonides,  for  instance.  With 
the  one  its  prominent  idea  is  a  spiritual  life, 
with  the  other  an  orthodox  ereed ;  with  the 
one  the  guiding  principle  is  the  individual 
conscience,  with  the  other  an  external  rule 
of  ordinances ;  with  the  one  faith  is  allied 
to  liberty,  with  the  other  to  bondage.  Thus 
it  becomes  a  question  whether  St.  James's 
protest  against  reliance  on  faith  alone  has 
any  reference  direct  or  indirect  to  St.  Paul's 
language  and  teaching.  Whether,  in  fact, 
it  is  not  aimed  against  an  entirely  different 
type  of  religious  feeling,  against  the  Phari- 
saic spirit  which  rested  satisfied  with  a 
barren  orthodoxy  fruitless  in  works  of 
charity"  (Lightfoot  on  '  Galatians,'  p.  164; 
the  whole  essay  should  be  carefully  studied). 
In  favour  of  this  view  of  the  entire  inde- 
pendence of  the  two  writers,  to  which  he 
inclines.  Bishop  Lightfoot  urges  :  (a)  That 
the  object  of  the  much-vaunted  faith  of 
those  against  whom  St.  James  writes  is 
"the  fundamental  maxim  of  the  Law," 
"Thou  believest  that  God  is  one"  (Dent, 
vi.  4) ;  not  "  the  fundamental  fact  of  the 
gospel,"  "  Thou  believest  that  God  raised 
Christ  from  the  ^ead"  (Rom.  x.  9).  (b) 
That  the  whole  tone  of  the  Epistle  recalls 
our  Lord's  denunciations  of  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  and  seems  directed  against  a 
kindred  spirit.  To  these  we  may  add :  (e) 
That  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  James 
is  combined  by  St.  Clement  of  Borne  ('  Ep. 
ad  CorV  o-  xii.)  in  a  manner  which  is  con- 
clusive as  to  the  fact  that  he  was  unaware 
of  any  divergence  of  view  between  them, 
whether  real  or  apparent.  We  conclude, 
then,  that  the  teaching  of  St.  James  has  no 
direct  relation  to  that  of  St.  Paul,  and  may 
well  have  been  anterior  in  time  to  his 
Epistles  to  the  Bomans  and  Galatians. 
(For  the  opposite  view,  see  Farrar's  '  Early 
Days  of  Christianity,'  vol.  ii.  p.  79,  where 
an  able  discussion  of  the  subject  may  be 
found.) 

Vers.  14— 17.— (1)  First  point:  Faith 
without  works  is  equivalent  to  profession 
without  practice,  and  is  therefore  dead. 

Ver.  14.— Omit  the  article  (with  B,  C), 
and  read  ri  «^e\ai:  no  also  in  ver.  16.    Can 


faith  gave  him  ?  rather,  with  B.V.,  thai  faith 
(jl  ttiVtis)  ;  the  faitli  in  question. 

Vers.  15, 16. — Observe  the  practical  cha- 
racter of  the  illustration  chosen,  from  works 
of  mercy  (cf.  ch.  i.  27).  ''a<n  in  ver.  lii 
should  be  deleted  (omitted  by  B,  0,  K) ; 
also  the  disjunctive  particle  sl  'at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  verse  (with  k,  B). 

Ver.  16.— Bepart  in  peace  ^vTrdyere  iv' 
(Ip'liini);  of.  Acts  xvi.  36.  This  is  some- 
thing quite  different  from  the  fulness  of 
our  Lord's  benediction,  "Go  into  peace 
(Snaye  eh  ei'p^j'tji')"  (Mark  v.  34;  of.  Luke 
vil.  50;  viii.  48). 

Ver.  17. — Being  alone  (naff  iccvr-liv);  E.V., 
in  itself.  But  the  rendering  of  the  A.V. 
appears  to  be  justified  by  the  LXX.  in  Gen. 
xliii.  31,  IliipeBijKOLV  axn^  ii6vtp  Kal  aiijois 
Kaff  eavToiSf  k.t.X. 

Vers.  18, 19.— (2)  Second  point:  Even  the 
devils  believe  (n<rTfioviri).  How  worthless, 
then,  must  be  faith  (vtims)  alone  t 

Ver.  18. — Tea,  a  man  may  say  (4\\'  ipe't 
Tis).  The  objection  in  1  Cor.  xv.  35  is  intro- 
duced by  precisely  the  same  words.  It  is 
somewhat  difficult  to  see  their  drift  here,  as 
what  follows  cannot  be  an  objection,  for  it 
is  just  the  position  which  St.  James  himself 
adopts.  The  formula  must,  therefore,  be 
taken  as  introducing  the  perfectly  fair  retort 
to  which  the  man  who  gives  utterance  to 
the  sentiments  of  ver.  16  lays  himself  open. 
Without  thy  works.  Instead  of  x<ic«  (*«.  A, 
B,  C,  Latt.,  Syriao,  Coptic),  the  Beceived 
Text  has  the  manifestly  erroneous  reading 
ix  (K,  L),  in  which  it  is  happily  not  fol- 
lowed by  the  A.V. 

Ver.  19.— (1)  «  Thou  believest  that  God 
is  one,"  B.V.,  reading  "On  els  d  &e6s  ia-nv. 
or  (2)  "Thou  believest  that  there  is  one 
God,"  A.V.  and  R.V.  margin,  reading  'On 
els  ®ehs  itrriy.  The  reading,  and  by  conse- 
quence the  translation,  must  be  considered 
somewhat  doubtful,  as  scarcely  any  two 
uncials  read  the  words  in  precisely  the 
same  order.  The  illustration  is  taken  from 
the  central  command  of  the  Old  Testament 
(Deut.  vi.  4),  indicating  that  the  case  of 
Jews  is  under  consideration.  The  following 
quotations  from  the  Talmud  will  show  the 
importance  attached  by  the  Jews  to  this 
command  (Farrar, « Early  Days,'  etc.,  p.  83). 
It  is  said  (■  Berachoth,'  fol.  13,  6)  that  who- 
ever in  repeating  it  "  prolongs  the  utterance 
of  the  word  '  One,'  shall  have  his  days  and 
years  prolonged  to  him."  Again  we  are 
told  that  when  Babbi  Akibah  was  murtyred 
he  died  uttering  this  word  "  One ; "  and 
then  came  a  Bath  Kol,  which  said, "  Blessed 
art  thou,  Babbi  Akibah,  for  thy  soul  and 
the  word  '  One '  left  thy  body  together." 

Vers.  20— 24.— (3)  Tliird  point:  Proof 
from  the  example  of  Abraham  that  a  man 
i»  justified  by  works  and  not  by  faith  only. 


82 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES, 


[CH.  II.  1—26 


In  Gen.  xv.  6  we  read  of  Abraham  that  "  he 
believed  in  the  Lord ;  and  he  accounted  it 
to  him  for  righteousness"  (LXX.,  'EiritrTevaev 
'APpaii  Ty  0ey  (cal  iAoylaSii  out^j  els  Stxai- 
oaiiniv,  quoted  by  fit.  Paul  in  Bom.  iv.  3 ; 
Gal,  iii  S).  But  years  after  this  we  find 
that  God  "  tested  Abraham  "  (Gen.  xxii.  1). 
To  this  trial  St.  James  refers  as  that  by 
which  Abraham's  faith  was  "perfected" 
(«T6\eiii9r)"),  and  by  which  the  saying  of 
earlier  years  found  a  more  complete  reali- 
zation (of  Ecclus.  xUt.  20,  21,  "  Abraham 
.  .  .  kept  the  Law  of  the  Most  High,  and 
was  in  covenant  with  him  .  ,  ,  and  when 
he  was  proved,  he  was  found  faithful. 
Therefore  he  assured  him  by  an  oath,  that 
he  would  bless  the  nations  in  his  seed,"  etc.). 

Yer.  20. — Faith  without  works  is  dead. 
The  Received  Text,  followed  by  the  A.V., 
reads  vtKpi,  with  n.  A,  C,  K,  L,  Syriao, 
Vulgate  (Clementine).  The  Revisers,  fol- 
lowing B, ,0',  ff,  read  ofiyij,  "barren"  (so 
Vulgate  Amiat.  by  a  correction,  otiosa). 

Yer.  23. — And  he  was  called  the  Friend  of 
God.  The  expression  comes  from  Isa.  xli.  8  j 
2  Chron.  xx.  7  (in  the  Hebrew,  '3ni«^  -^anh ; 
LXX.,  iv  iiydirrjira,  t^  ijyaTnjfieutp  aov).  The 
same  title,  tpiiuis  eeov,  ia  giren  to  Abraham 


by  Clement  of  Rome  ('  Ad  Cor.,*  x. ;  xvii.), 
and  was  evidently  a  standing  one  among 
the  Jews.  Philo  actually  in  one  instance 
quotes  Gen.  xviii.  17  as  'A$pcAn  rov  <l>i\oi 
nov  instead  of  rod  iraiS6s  fibv.  Illustrationi 
from  later  rabbinical  writers  may  be  found 
in  Wetstein,  and  cf.  Bishop  Lightfoot  on 
'  Clement  of  Rome,'  p.  61.  To  tuis  day  it 
is  said  that  Abraham  is  known  among  the 
Arabs  as  El  Khalil,  equivalent  to  "the 
Friend." 

Ver.  25. — (i)  Fourth  point:  Proof  from 
the  case  of  Rahab  the  harlot  of  justification 
by  works  (of.  Josh.  ii. ;  vi.  25).  Rahab  is 
mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament 
in  Heb.  xi.  31,  where  she  also  appears  as 
'Paa$  71  -nipvrfi  and  is  spoken  of  as  haTing 
"  received  the  spies,"  Sfictfifini  roiis  KarmrKi!- 
•jrovsl  of.  {uroBe^a/x^vij  robs  ayy^\ous  here. 
There,  however,  she  is  regarded  as  an 
instance  of  faith  (see  above  in  preliminary 
note).  The  only  other  place  where  her 
name  occurs  is  in  the  genealogy  of  our  Lord, 
in  Matt,  i  5,  "  Salmon  begat  Booz  of  Ra- 
chab  [ix  TTJs  'Paxi$y' 

Ver.  26. — Conclusion  of  the  whole  matter : 
"  As  the  body  apart  from  the  spirit  is  dead, 
even  so  faith  apart  firom  works  is  dead." 


HOMILETlCa 

Vera.  1 — 18. — 1.  Sespeet  of  persons  it  inconsistent  with  the  first  prineiple$  of  Chris- 
tianity. 1.  One  great  function  of  Christianity  was  to  create  a  sphere  in  which  there 
should  be  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  Greek  nor  barbarian,  bond  nor  free.  "  AU  equal 
are  within  the  Church's  gate  "  is  true,  not  only  of  the  material  feuilding,  but  equally  ol 
the  spiritual  fabric  of  the  Catholic  Church,  which,  like  her  Divine  Head, is  no  respecter 
of  persons.  Bengel  well  remarks  that  the  equality  of  Christians,  indicated  by  the  name 
"  brethren  "  (ver.  1),  is  the  foundation  of  the  admonition  with  which  the  chapter  opens. 
2.  St.  James  gives  but  one  instance  of  the  kind  of  respect  of  persons  which  is  forbidden, 
viz.  the  resjiect  shown  to  the  rich  in  assemblies  of  Christians  for  worship.  Other  forms 
of  the- same  sin  are  common  enough  and  are  equally  reprehensible,  e.^.  the  homage  paid 
to  a  man  in  society  because  he  is  rich,  without  regard  to  his  character  and  moral  worth. 
At  the  same  time,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Christianity  accepts  as  a  fact  class  dis- 
tinctions, and  that  we  are  bidden  to  give  "  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due."  "  The 
Christian  religion  allows  not  that  contempt  for  even  earthly  dignities  afTected  by  some 
of  her  followers,  but  springing  more  from  envy  and  unruliness  than  aught  besides. 
True  reverence  and  submission  are  in  no  way  condemned  by  this  Scripture,  but  their 
excess  and  gross  extreme,  the  preference  for  vulgar  wealth,  the  adulation  of  success, 
the  worship,  in  short,  of  some  new  golden  calf"  (Punchard).  3.  Bespect  of  persons, 
regard  to  outward  appearances,  the  gold  ring  and  the  gay  clothing,  evince  not  merely 
evil  thinking  but  want  of  faith  (ver.  4) ;  «,«.  a  halting  between  God,  who  is  no  respectei 
of  persons,  and  the  world,  which  judges  only  by  that  which  is  external.  How  foolish 
also  to  regard  the  persons  of  men,  when  the  object  of  our  faith  is  the  Lord  of  glory 
himidfl 

Ver.  6. — Worldly  poverty  is  hy  no  means  inconsistent  with  true  WeAes;  rather  it  is 
often  accompanied  by  them,  for  "God  ohpse  the  poor  as  to  the  world  to  be  rich  in  faith ; " 
not  as  if  poverty  were  necessarily  accompanied  by  goodness,  or  as  if  all  the  rich  were 
rejected.  But  "  not  many  wise  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are 
called ; "  while  » the  poor,*'  as  a  class. "  have  the  gospel  preached  to  tham."    It  has  been 


oa.U.i— 26.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  33 

well  said  that  "the  temptations  of  riches  assumed  in  that  age  very  gross  forms  of 
sensuality  or  of  greed;  but  do  they  become  less  dangerous  by  losing  a  portion  of  their 


Ver.  10. — The  obedience  which  Ood  requirei  is  absolute,  "  Whosoever  shall  keep 
the  whole  Law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all."  Why,  since  the  breach 
of  but  one  command  is  certainly  not  as  sinful  as  the  breach  of  all  ?  Because  (1)  "  the 
principle  of  duty  and  of  obedience  to  all  the  commandments  is  one ;  so  that  if  we  choose 
for  ourselves  nine  commandments  to  keep,  and  one  to  break,  we  are  not  doing  God's 
will,  but  our  own ;  (2)  all  the  precepts  are  alike  expressions  of  one  Divine  will,  and  rest 
on  one  authority ;  (3)  all  the  precepts  are  manifestations  of  love  at  work — ^love  first  to 
Gnd,  and  then  to  our  neiglibour;  and  each  particular  failure  shows  defect  in  this" 
(jji-an  Scott).  "A  garment  is  torn,  though  you  only  take  away  one  piece  of  it ;  a  har- 
mony in  music  is  spoiled  if  only  one  voice  be  out  of  tune  "  (Starke).  The  perfect  figure 
of  the  circle  is  marred  by  a  flaw  in  any  one  part  of  it.  So  to  break  one  command  out 
of  all  is  to  violate  the  whole  principle  of  obedience.  Thus  men  have  no  right  to  pick 
and  choose  which  commandments  they  will  keep,  or  to 

**  Compound  for  sins  they  are  inclined  to. 
By  damning  those  they  have  no  mind  to." 

As  Christians,  we  are  not  entitled  to  bow  down  in  the  house  of  Rimmon,  nor  does  the 
strictest  obedience  to  one  command  give  us  a  dispensation  to  break  another ;  e.g.  spotless 
chastity  on  the  part  of  the  unfallen  will  not  atone  for  Pharisaism  and  harshness  to  the 
fallen,  for  "if  thou  commit  no  adultery,  yet  if  thou  kill,  thou  art  become  a  transgressor 
of  the  Law."  (On  this  verse  see  a  sermon  in  Dr.  Pusey'*  '  Parochial  Sermons,'  vol. 
iii.  p.  70.) 

Ver.  13. — The  character  of  merc^.  The  most  suggestive  commentaijr  OB  thia  verse 
mi^  be  found  in  Shakespeare's  lines — 

"  The  quality  of  m(  rcy  is  not  strain'd ; 
It  droppeth,  us  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven 
Upon  the  place  beneath :  it  is  twice  bless'd ; 
It  blesseth  him  that  gives,  and  him  that  takes: 
'Tis  mightiest  in  the  mightiest;  it  becomes 
The  throned  monarch  better  than  his  crown; 
II  is  sceptre  shows  the  force  of  temporal  powei^ 
The  attribute  to  awe  and  majesty, 
Wiierein  doth  sit  the  dread  and  fear  of  king!  | 
But  mercy  is  above  this  sceptred  sway, 
It  is  enthroned  in  the  heart  of  kings. 
It  is  an  attribute  to  God  himself; 
And  earthly  power  doth  then  show  likest  God'l 
When  mercy  seasons  justice." 

(•Merchant  of  Venice,'  act  ir.  le.  1.) 

Vers.  14 — 26. — Faith  and  works.  I.  The  hollowness  of  pbofbssion  without 
PBAOTICB ;  of  a  mere  orthodox  creed  without  the  deeds  of  love,  which  are  as  the  fruits 
by  which  the  tree  is  known.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the  Pharisee  of  the  one 
parable  was  unorthodox,  or  that  Dives  in  another  was  a  heretic ;  but  the  faith  of  each 
of  these  was  worthless,  because  not  a  "  faith  which  worketh  by  love."  The  good 
Samaritan  was  a  stranger  and  an  alien,  but  did  by  nature  the  deeds  of  the  Law ;  and  thus 
(although  "  salvation  is  of  the  Jews  ")  is  held  up  for  an  example.  The  barren  fig  tree 
stands  forth  as  the  type  of  profession  without  practice— a  great  show  of  foliage,  the 
ordinary  sign  that  marked  the  presence  of  fruit,  but  after  all  "  nothing  but  leaves."  So 
is  the  man  who  says  to  his  destitute  brother,  "  Depart  in  peace,  get  warmed  and  filled," 
but  gives  him  none  of  those  things  which  be  needful  for  the  body ;  and  the  fate  of  the 
fig  tree  is  a  warning  to  all  ages  of  the  danger  in  which  such  stand. 

IL  The  need  op  works.  1.  In  the  case  of  Abraham  his  faith  was  perfected  by  his 
obedience.  2.  Rahab  the  harlot  was  justified  by  works.  Works  are  necessary  for  all 
Christians,  wherever  they  are  possible,  (1)  as  the  fruits  of  faith,  and  (2)  as  the  evidences 

JAUES.  D 


84  TEE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  a.  1—26. 

that  the  faith  is  genntne.  Hence  Judgment  by  worki  is  expressly  taught  in  the  New 
Testament.  So  in  the  Athanasian  Creed,  "  They  that  have  done  good  shall  go  into  Ufa 
everlasting,"  etc. 

IIL  On  the  apparent  difference  between  the  teaching  of  St.  James  and  of  St.  Paul, 
see  Farrar's  '  Early  Days  of  Christianity,'  vol.  ii.  p.  99.  "  We  may  thank  God  that 
the  truth  has  been  revealed  to  us  under  many  lights ;  and  that  by  a  diversity'  of  i^ifts 
the  Spirit  ministered  to  each  apostle  severally  as  he  would,^  inspiring  the  one  to  deepen 
our  spiritual  life  by  the  solemn  truth  that  works  cannot  justify  apart  from  faith,  and 
the  other  to  stimulate  our  efforts  after  a  holy  life  by  the  no  less  solemn  truth  that  faith 
cannot  justify  us  unless  it  be  the  living  faith  wliich  is  shown  by  works.  There  is  in 
the  diversity  a  deeper  unity.  The  Church,  thank  God,  is  '  Circumamicta  varietatibus ' 
— clothed  in  raiment  of  many  hues.  St.  Paul  had  dwelt  prominently  on  faith;  St. 
Peter  dwells  much  on  hope ;  St.  John  insists  most  of  all  on  love.  But  the  Christian 
life  is  the  synthesis  of  these  Divine  graces,  and  the  works  of  which  St.  James  so  vehe- 
mently impresses  the  necessity,  are  works  which  are  the  combined  result  of  operative 
faith,  of  constraining  lore,  and  of  purifying  hope." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOB& 

Vers.  1 — L—Rttped:  of  persons.  In  the  closing  sentences  of  the  preceding  chapter 
James  has  been  speaking  of  the  true  cultus  or  ritual  of  the  Church  ;  and  here  he 
warns  his  readers  against  a  violation  of  it  which  they  were  in  danger  of  committing, 
and  of  which  indeed  they  had  been  already  guilty,  even  when  assembled  for  public 
worship. 

I.  The  evil  hebb  condemned.  (Ver.  1.)  It  is  that  of  Pharisaic  contempt  of  the 
poor.  The  apostle  does  not,  of  course,  mean  that  social  distinctions  are  nowhere  to  be 
recognized  by  God's  people.  The  Scriptures  teach  no  such  doctrine.  Pather  they 
enjoin  Christians  to  "render  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due"  (Rom.  xiii.  7).  In 
ordinary  society  we  are  to  act  with  manly  deference  towards  our  superiors,  whether 
they  be  such  in  age,  rank,  office,  knowledge,  wealth,  or  influence.  Tlie  apostle  refers 
in  this  exhortation  to  the  spiritual  sphere.  He  urges  that  within  the  sacred  circle  of 
our  Clnirch  life  respect  is  to  be  paid  to  religious  character,  and  not  to  material  wealth. 
A  true  pure  .faith  in  "  the  Lord  of  glory  "  is  incompatible  with  the  entire  spirit  of 
snobbery,  and  especially  with  the  maintenance  of  unchristian  distinctions  of  caste 
within  the  Church.  The  British  Churches  of  the  nineteenth  centuiy  unhappily  need 
the  warning  of  this  passage  almost  as  much  as  the  congregations  of  the  Dispersion  in 
the  apostolic  age  (see  Kitto's  '  Daily  Bible  Illustrations,'  voL  L  twelfth  week, 
first  day). 

II.  A  PRACTICAL  ILLUSTKATION  OF  THE  EVIL.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  The  case  supposed  is 
in  all  respects  an  extreme  one ;  yet  how  correctly  it  depicts  human  nature  I  It  presents 
the  thought  of  ''  the  influences  of  clothes,"  or  that  "  society  is  founded  upon  cloth  " 
(Carlyle).  The  deference  jiaid  to  the  gold-ringed  man  in  presence  of  the  congregation 
is  described  with  dramatic  realism.  A  cordial  welcome  greets  him  when  he  enters,  and 
he  is  conducted  fussily  to  a  principal  seat ;  while  the  poor  man  in  the  squalid  clothing 
is  coldly  pointed  to  a  place  where  he  may  stand,  or  at  most  is  permitted  to  sit  in  an 
uncomfortable  comer.  The  apostle's  graphic  picture  suggests  to  the  thoughtful  reader 
other  examples  of  the  same  sin.  We  shall  mention  only  one  or  two.  The  arrangements 
for  seating  a  congregation  amongst  ourselves  sometimes  show  "  respect  of  persons,"  as 
in  tlie  case  of  an  elevated  and  luxurious  pew  for  the  lord  of  the  manor.  Ministers  in  the 
pulpit  are  tempted  to  avoid  enforcing  practical  duties  too  pointedly,  lest  their  exhorta- 
tions and  reproofs  should  be  unpalatable  to  influential  families.  (Yet  how  many 
examples  of  ministerial  fidelity  may  be  readily  recalled!  Numerous  cases  are 
historical:  Elijah,  Micaiah,  John  the  Baptist,  Knox,  Howe,  Massillon,  etc.)  Church 
courts  are  sometimes  prone  to  mete  out  different  measures  to  different  classes  of 
offenders.  Congregations  have  been  known  to  elect  men  of  substance  to  spiritual 
ofiBce,  rather  than  those  who  possessed  the  requisite  qualifications  of  mind  and  cha- 
racter ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  membeis  of  Churches  are  sometimes  actuated  by  mean 
jealou«y  of  •  wealthy  fellow-worshipper,  even  to  such  an  extent  that  they  would  itm. 


ch/h.!— 26.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  85 

were  It  possible,  abridge  his  liberty  in  the  exercise  of  his  ordinary  rights  as  a  member 
of  the  congregation.  In  these  and  many  other  ways  Christian  people  have  often  shown 
themselves  to  bo  "  evil-thinking  judges,"  and  have  thereby  entailed  upon  the  Church 
much  mischief  and  damage. 

III.  The  grounds  of  the  condemnation.  The  apostle's  reproof  is  faithful,  but 
it  is  also  affectionately  tender  (vers.  1,  5).  He  indicates  from  various  points  of  view 
the  wrongfulness  of  the  partiality  which  he  is  denouncing.  1.  Mere  earthly  distinctions 
should  he  indiscernible  in  the  presence  of  "  the  lord  of  glory."  (Ver.  1.)  There  is  an 
argument  in  the  very  use  here  of  this  great  title.  Worldly  distinctions  of  wealth  and 
rank  should  be  dwarfed  into  nothingness  before  our  minds  when  wo  realize  that  those 
who  assemble  in  the  house  of  God  are  the  guests  of  "the  Lord  of  glory."  2.  Respect 
of  persons  is  inconsistent  i^ith  sound  Christian  principle.  (Ver.  4.)  The  believer 
"  looks  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen ; "  and  he  ought  not  to  do  so  with  a  wavering 
mind  or  •  vacillating  will.  Ecclesiastical  servility  towards  the  rich  is  a  form  of  mam- 
mon-worship ;  while  the  one  power  which  the  Churoh  should  exalt  is  that  of  character. 
3.  "  Ood  is  no  respecter  of  persons."  (Ver.  5.)  The  New  Testament  rings  with 
declarations  of  this  truth.  "  The  Lord  of  glory,"  when  he  lived  on  earth,  was  no 
sycophant  of  the  rich.  He  was  himself  a  poor  man.  He  chose  the  poor  rather  than 
the  rich  to  possess  spiritual  means  in  his  kingdom.  In  "dishonouring  the  poor  man," 
therefore,  the  Church  was  despising  one  for  whom  Christ  died,  and  a  possible  heir  of  the 
heavenly  glory.  4,  The  rich  as  a  class  had  been  the  enemies  both  of  Christ  and  his 
people.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  With  a  few  noble  exceptions,  the  upper  classes  persecuted  the 
Christians  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  They  harassed  them  with  lawsuil;s.  They 
slandered  them  before  the  judges.  They  cursed  the  blessed  Name  of  Christ  which  it 
is  the  mission  of  the  Church  to  exalt.  It  was,  therefore,  contrary  to  "the  spirit 
of  a  sound  mind  "  to  court  the  rich.  To  do  so  showed  a  deficiency  of  common  sense. 
It  indicated  a  lack  of  self-respect.  And,  above  all,  it  was  disloyal  to  the  blessed 
Name. — 0.  J. 

Ver».  8 — 11. — Stumlling  in  one  point.  In  these  verses  James  take*  the  high 
ground  that  "respect  of  persons"  is  a  transgression  of  the  law  by  which  we  are  to  be 
judged  ;  and  one  which,  like  every  other,  involves  the  guilt  of  breaking  the  whole  law. 

I.  To  KESPECT  PERSONS  IS  TO  COMMIT  SIN.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  It  involves  disobedience 
to  "  the  royal  law."  This  is  a  noticeable  expression.  Any  Divine  commandment  may 
be  described  as  "  royal,"  seeing  that  it  emanates  from  the  supreme  Sovereign  of  the 
universe.  Bather,  however,  may  the  moral  law  receive  this  epithet  because  it  is  regal 
in  il;s  own  character.  God's  law  is  the  law  of  love ;  and  love  is  kingly.  The  Divine 
nature  itself  is  the  foundation  of  virtue ;  and  "  God  is  love."  Hence  the  Divine  law 
is  the  eternal  rule  and  final  standard  of  rectitude.  It  possesses  supreme  excellence  and 
supreme  authority.  Every  other  system  of  legislation,  and  all  other  rules  of  duty, 
ought  to  be  subordinate  to  "  the  royal  law."  This  law,  we  know,  cannot  be  unjust; 
for  it  is  a  transcript  of  the  moral  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  is  therefore  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  laws.  The  royal  law  is  to  be  fulfilled  "  according  to  the 
Scripture;"  for,  while  its  ultimate  source  is  in  the  nature  of  God,  the  one  authoritative 
record  oi»  it  to  which  sinful  men  have  access  is  to  be  found  in  the  Bible.  We  must 
consult  "  the  law  and  the  testimony "  if  we  would  ascertain  the  edicts  of  the  great 
King,  and  learn  the  "newness  of  the  spirit"  in  which  these  are  to  be  obeyed.  God's 
Word  lays  bare  before  us  our  half-buried  and  forgotten  moral  convictions ;  it  restores 
the  weather-worn  inscriptions  upon  the  gravestones  of  our  sin-dead  hearts.  The  apostle 
cites,  as  the  great  precept  which  forbids  respect  of  persons,  the  words  of  Lev.  xix.  18, 
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself" — the  same  precept  which  our  Lord  had 
employed  as  his  summary  of  the  principle  underlying  the  last  six  commanilments. 
We  are  to  love  our  neighbour,  i.e.  any  one  to  whom  we  have  it  within  our  power  to 
become  helpful,  even  although  he  may  be  a  stranger  and  a  Samaritan.  Those  who 
"discharge  this  duty  aright  "  do  well."  But,  enlightened  love  for  one's  neighbour  is  incon- 
•istent  with  respect  of  persons.  We  may  not  limit  the  precept  either  to  our  wealthy 
neighbour  or  to  our  poor  neighbour.  Indeed,  to  show  ]'artiality  is  not  so  much  to 
limit  the  precept  as  to  discard  it  altogether.  Favouritism  is  the  outcome  of  selfish- 
oesB,  rather  than  of  the  love  that  "seeketh  not  its  own."     Those,  therefore,  wIm 


3«  THE  GEXERAL  liPlSTLE  OF   JAMES.  [oh.  ii.  i— 2ft 

practise  it  are  not  guilty  of  a  trifling  impropriety,  but  of  direct  and  palpable  sin,  both 
against  the  Old  Testament  law  ami  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus." 

II.    To  TBANSGRKSS  IN  ONE  POINT  IS  TO  TRANSQBBS8  THE  WHOLE  LAW.     (Vers.  10,  11.) 

Let  no  one  plead  that  resjiect  of  persons  in  the  Church  is  so  trivial  a  fault  that  it  ought 
to  be  overloolsed,  especially  in  view  of  the  social  and  pecuniary  benefits  which  may  be 
expected  to  result  from  it.  The  apostle  assures  us  that  partiality  is  a  sin,  and  that 
he  who  indulges  in  it  disobeys  the  whole  moral  law.  To  unthinking  minds  this  latter 
assertion  may  sound  very  doubtful  doctrine,  leading  them  to  aslt — Is  this  statement  of 
the  nature  of  casuistry,  or  is  it  sober  truth  in  the  form  of  paradox?  Does  it  not  seem 
contrary  to  true  moral  perspective  to  affirm  that  a  man  who  is  noted  for  his  blameless  lile 
"  becomes  guilty  of  all "  when  he  "  stumbles  in  one  point"  ?  Do  not  some  sins,  like 
some  diseases,  shut  out  the  possiMlity  of  others  which  lie  in  an  opposite  direction  ? 
But  a  little  consideration  will  reveal  the  deep  moral  truth  of  this  saying.  For:  1.  The 
J.awgiver  is  one.  (Ver.  11.)  Every  precept  of  the  law  possesses  the  same  Divine 
authority.  The  sixth  commandment  is  invested  with  the  same  solemn  sanctions  as 
the  seventh.  "God  spake  aZZ  thuse  words."  To  disregard  any  one  precept,  therefore, 
is  to  violate  the  entire  authority  by  which  the  whole  Law  has  been  ordained.  It  fol- 
lows from  this  that :  2.  Hie  Law  itself  is  one.  How  immeasurably  "  the  royal  law  " 
is  exalted,  in  its  grand  essential  unity,  above  human  systems  of  jurisprudence !  The 
common  law  of  England  has  to  submit  to  have  its  defects  supplied,  and  its  rigours 
miiigated,  by  equity;  but  how  very  far  yet  are  our  common  law  and  equity  and 
statute  law  from  coalescing  into  a  unity!  But  the  Divine  legislation  forms  a  perfect 
code ;  for  it  is  a  perfect  reflection  and  expression  of  the  mind  of  God.  The  Bible  juris- 
prudence knows  no  distinction  between  law  and  equity.  It  is  independent  of  glosses 
and  commentaries.  It  abhors  legal  fictions.  Having  for  its  Author  the  God  of  iDve, 
its  vital  unity  is  found  in  the  principle  of  loving  obedience.  "  Love  worketh  no  ill  to 
his  neighbour:  love  therefore  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  law"  (Bom.  xiii.  10).  So,  to 
"  stumble  in  one  point"  is  to  break  the  whole  law.  For,  as  has  been  said,  the  law  is 
a  seamless  robe,  which  is  torn  although  only  a  part  be  torn ;  or  a  musical  harmony, 
which  is  marred  if  one  voice  be  singing  out  of  tune ;  or  a  necklace  of  pearls,  from 
which  a  single  peail  cannot  be  dropped  without  breaking  the  string  upon  which  the 
others  hang,  and  letting  them  faU  to  the  ground.  3.  The  spirit  of  obedience  is  one. 
True  reverence  for  the  law  is  inspired  by  love  to  the  Lawgiver ;  and  therefore  obedience 
is  impartial,  and  strives  to  be  perfect.  Our  first  parents,  in  eating  the  forbidden  fruit, 
fell  from  the  spirit  of  obedience,  and  dishonoured  the  whole  law.  In  like  manner,  the 
man  who  habitually  breaks  one  of  the  commandments  shows  that  in  principle  he  is 
disloyal,  and  that  he  would  transgress  any  other  precept  were  he  exposed  to  similar 
temptation  to  do  so. 

CoNOLUsioN.  We  should  not  be  able  to  contemplate  this  subject  without  being 
impressed  with  such  considerations  as  these :  1.  The  obligation  which  rests  upon  us  to 
render  perfect  obedience  to  the  law  of  God.  2.  The  impossibility  of  our  doing  80  in 
our  own  strength,  or  during  the  present  lite.  3.  The  necessity  of  clothing  ouiselves 
with  the  righteousness  of  Christ. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  12,  IS. — Law  and  judgment.  In  these  weighty  words  James  reminds  his  readers 
that  they  are  on  their  way  to  a  dread  tribunal  where  they  shall  be  judged  according  to 
tht-irworks,  and  wherewith  what  measure  they  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  themselves. 

I.  The  certainty  of  jddoment.  The  apostle  takes  the  fact  for  granted.  This 
certainty  is  attested  by  :  1.  Human  nature.  Man  possesses  intuitively  the  conviction 
of  his  moral  responsibility.  Conscience  anticipates  even  now  the  sentence  which  shall 
proceed  from  the  bar  of  God.  If  he  be  not  our  Judge,  the  deepest  dictates  of  morality 
are  illusions.  2.  Divine  providence.  While  there  is  abundant  evidence  that  the  world 
is  under  moral  government,  it  is  also  plain  that  there  are  many  inequalities  which  require 
adjustment.  The  world  is  full  of  unredressed  wrongs  and  undiscovered  ci  lines.  Provi- 
dence itself,  therefore,  points  to  a  day  of  rectifications.  3.  The  Word  of  Ood,  The 
Bible  everywhere  represents  the  Eternal  as  a  moral  Governor ;  and  the  New  Testament 
in  particular  describes  the  final  judgment  as  a  definite  future  event  which  is  to  take 
place  at  (he  second  advent  of  Christ. 

II.  The  btandabd  of  judoment.    The  poor  heathen,  since  they  sin  without  law, 


CH.  n  1—26.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMBS.  S7 


shall  te  judged  without  law.  Those  who  possess  the  Bible  shall  be  tried  by  the 
higher  sfeindavd  of  that  written  revelation.  Believers  in  Christ,  however,  shall  be 
"juilged  by  a  law  of  liberty"  (ver.  12).  This  law  is,  of  course,  just  the  moral  law 
viewed  in  the  light  of  gospel  privilege.  In  the  Decalogue,  the  form  which  the  law 
assumes  is  one  of  outward-  constraint.  As  proclaimed  from  Sinai,  it  constituted  really 
"an  indictment  against  the  human  race;"  and  it  was  surrounded  there  with  most 
tenil  lie  sanctions.  But  now.to  the  Christian,  the  law  comes  bound  up  with  the  gospel; 
and  the  power  of  gospel  grace  within  the  heart  places  him  on  the  side  of  the  law,  and 
mnkes  it  the  longer  the  more  delightful  for  him  to  obey  it.  In  the  believer's  ear  the  law 
no  longer  thunders,  "Thou  shalt  not."  To  him  "love  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  law." 
Tlie  commandments,  being  written  now  upon  his  heart,  are  no  longer  "grievoua" 
(1  John  V.  3).    The  law  has  become  to  him  "a  law  of  liberty." 

III.  Tub  SUBJECT-MATTER  OP  JUDGMENT.  "  So  Speak  ye,  and  SO  do"  (vef.  12).  The 
standard  will  be  applied  to  our  words  and  to  onr  actions.  The  apostle  has  already 
touched  upon  the  government  of  the  tongue  in  ch.  i.  19,  26 ;  and  he  has  dealt  with 
practical  conduct  in  the  intervening  verses.  His  teaching  here  is  an  echo  of  that  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  upon  the  same  theme  (Matt.  xiL  34 — 37  ;  vii.  21 — 23).  A  man's  habits  of 
speech  and  action  are  always  a  true  index  of  his  moral  state.  If  we  compare  human 
character  to  a  tree,  words  correspond  to  its  leaves,  deeds  to  its  fruit,  and  thoughts  to  its 
root  underground.  Words  and  actions  will  be  judged  in  connection  with  "  the  counsels 
of  the  hearts"  of  which  they  are  the  exponents. 

IV.  The  pbinciplb  op  judgment.  (Ver.  13.)  This  doctrine  of  merciless  judgment  to 
the  unmerciful  is  enunciated  in  many  parts  of  Scripture.  It  receives  especial  prominence 
in  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  v.  7 ;  vl.  12,  14,  15 ;  vii.  1 ;  xviii.  23 — 35).  We 
can  never,  of  course,  merit  eternal  life  by  cherishing  a  compassionate  spirit.  But,  since 
mercy  or  love  is  the  supreme  element  in  the  character  of  God,  it  is  plain  that  those  who 
do  not  manifest  active  pity  towards  others  have  not  themselves  been  renewed  into  his 
imao;e,  and  are  therefore  unsaved.  The  purpose  of  the  gospel  is  to  restore  man's  likeness 
to  God,  who  "  is  love ;  "  so  that  the  man  who  exhibits  no  love  shows  that  he  has  not 
allowed  the  gospel  to  exercise  its  sanctifying  power  within  him,  and  he  shall  therefore 
be  condemned  for  rejecting  it.  But  the  medal  has  another  side;  for  the  apostle  adds, 
" Mercy  gloiieth  against  judgment."  This  seems  to  mean  that  the  tender-hearted  and 
actively  compassionate  follower  of  Christ  need  not  fear  the  .final  judgment.  His  merci- 
fulness is  an  evidence  that  he  is  himself  a  partaker  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  He 
shall  lift  up  his  head  with  joy  when  he  stands  before  the  bar  of  Heaven  (Matt.  xxv. 
34 — 40).  His  Judge  will  be  the  Lord  Jesus,  over  whose  cradle  and  at  whose  cross  mercy 
and  judgment  met  together.  God  himself,  in  order  to  effect  our  redemption,  sheathed 
the  sword  of  justice  in  the  heart  of  mercy ;  and  his  redeemed  people,  in  their  intercourse 
with  their  fellow-men,  learn  to  imitate  him  by  cultivating  the  spirit  of  tenderness  and 
forgiveness.  Thus  it  is  an  axiom  in  the  world  of  grace,  acted  on  both  by  God  and  by 
his  people,  that  "mercy  glorieth  against  judgment." — 0.  J. 

Vers.  14 — 19. —  WorJcs  the  test  of  faith.  God  has  joined  faith  and  works  together; 
but  perverse  human  nature  will  insist  upon  putting  them  asunder.  In  the  apostolic 
»je,  Paul  met  with  many  people  who  made  works  everything,  to  the  neglect  of  faith ; 
and  James  met  with  others  who  made  faith  everything,  to  the  neglect  of  works.  In 
our  time,  too,  multitudes  outside  the  Church  are  saying  that  good  conduct  is  tlw  ono 
thing  needful,  while  oithodoxy  of  creed  is  comparatively  unimportant. 

"  For  modes  of  faith  let  graceless  zealots  fight; 
His  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  Is  in  the  right." 

(Pope.) 

Within  the  Church,  on  the  other  hand,  many  are  clinging  to  a  lifeless  formal  faith — a 
faith  which  assents  to  theological  propositions,  but  which  does  not  influence  dispositions. 
This  latter  error  the  apostle  here  exposes  and  refutes. 

I.  The  insufficibnct  op  a  barren  faith.  (Ver.  14.)  The  case  supposed  is  not 
that  of  a  hypocrite,  but  of  a  self-deceiver.  The  man  has  faith,  of  a  sort ;  but  it  is  only 
the  cold  assent  of  the  intellect.  It  does  not  purify  his  heart,  or  renew  his  will,  or 
MTOlutiouize  his  moral  nature,  as  saving  faith  always  does.    Its  weakness  i«  seen  in  th« 


88  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  U.  1—26 

fact  that  it  is  unproductive.  It  does  not  stir  up  its  possessor  to  any  habit  of  self-denial 
or  of  sympathetic  benevolence.  This  faith  coexists,  perhaps,  with  respect  of  persons 
(vers.  1 — 13) ;  or  with  an  unbridled  tongue,  or  a  passionate  temper,  or  a  disposition  to 
decline  accepting  the  blame  of  one's  own  sins  (ch.  i.).  How  many  persons  who  "  say 
they  have  faith  "  by  assuming  the  responsibilities  of  Church  membership,  yet  "  have 
not  works"!  How  many  do  not  observe  family  prayer,  or  impart  religious  iiistruction 
to  their  children,  or  make  any  real  sacrifice  of  their  means  for  Christ's  cause,  or  devots 
themselves  to  any  personal  effort  to  advance  his  kingilom !  James  asks  concerning  such 
inoperative  faith— C«t  honof  And  the  answer  is,  that  no  good  use  can  be  made  of  it. 
A  faith  which  does  not  fill  one's  heart  with  love  to  Groil,  and  which  does  not  produce 
practical  sympathy  towards  one's  fellow-men,  is  a  spurious,  wortliless,  bastard  faith. 
Such  a  faith  not  only  leaves  its  possessor  unsaved,  but  increases  the  moral  deterioration 
which  shall  make  him  the  longer  the  less  worth  saving. 

11.  BVIDENCB  ADDUCED  TO  SHOW  THIS  INSUFFICIENCT.    (Verg.  16 19.)    1.  All  ttluslrU- 

tive  rase.  (Vers.  15 — 17.)  It  is  the  bitterest  mockery  for  a  man  who  is  himself  living 
in  ease  and  comfort  to  say  to  his  shivering  starving  brother,  when  he  sends  hfm  away 
empty-handed,  "  Depart  in  peace;  do  not  give  way  to  despondency ;  God  has  said  he 
will  never  forsake  his  people ;  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning  you ;  and  I 
myself  will  pray  for  you.  Sentimental  professions  of  sympathy  which  have  no  outcome 
of  practical  help  do  not  "profit"  either  person.  1'hey  tempt  the  destitute  man  to  become 
a  misanthrope;  and  they  ruin  tho  moral  health  of  the  false  sympathizer  (1  John  iii. 
16 — 18).  Mere  lip-charity  is  not  true  charity;  and  a  professed  faith  which  is  palpably 
barren  of  good  works  "is  dead  in  itself."  2.  A  direct  challenge.  (Ver.  18.)  This 
challenge  is  represented  as  offered  by  a  true  and  consistent  believer.  He  defies  the 
professing  Christian  who  divorces  faith  from  practice,  to  exhibit  his  faith  apart  from 
works.  He  says  in  effect,  "  A  believer  is  to  '  let  his  light  shine.'  Well,  I  point  to  the 
new  life  which  I  aipa  living  as  the  appropriate  manifestation  of  my  faith  ;  but,  since  you 
neglect  good  works,  it  is  for  you  to  indicate  how  you  can  manifest  your  faith  otherwise." 
A  faith  which  produces  no  works  is  unable  to  show  itself;  therefore  it  is  not  true  faith 
at  all.  3.  An  actwd  example.  (Ver.  19.)  Should  any  professing  Christian  of  "  the 
Dispersion  "  have  been  pluming  himself  upon  his  coriect  theology  and  his  notional  faith, 
here  was  a  solemn  warning  to  him.  Should  he  have  been  resting  satisfied  with  the 
thought  that,  living  in  the  midst  of  polytheism,  he  was  holding  fast  by  the  Hebrew 
doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God,  this  verse  would  remind  him  of  the  piofitlessness  of  such  a 
conviction,  unless  it  expanded  into  the  blossoms  and  fruits  of  holiness.  "  The  demons 
believe,"  and  yet  they  remain  demons.  The  unclean  spirits  whom  Jesus  exorcised  had 
plenty  of  head-knowledge  and  head-faith  about  both  God  and  Christ ;  but  their  faith 
was  of  a  kind  that  made  them  "  shudder  "  with  terror  when  they  realized  the  great 
verities.  Being  a  merely  intellectual  credence,  it  could  not  cleanse  the  soul ;  it  could 
only  produce  the  "  fear"  which  "  hath  punishment." 

Learn,  in  conclusion,  that  "  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  True 
saving  faith  not  only  asks,  with  Paul,  "Who  art  thou,  Lord?"  but  with  him  also 
passes  from  that  question  to  this  other,  "  What  shall  I  do.  Lord  ?  " — 0,  J. 

Vers.  20 — 26. — Justification  hy  faith  and  works.  The  meaning  of  this  notable 
passage  has  been  much  contested,  because  its  teaching  seems  to  many  minds  to  contra- 
dict the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  It  was  this  apparent  antagonism  which  led 
Martin  Luther  fora  time  to  denounce  the  whole  Epistle  of  James  as  a  mere  handful  of 
"  straw."  Since  his  day,  however,  good  men  have  been  coming  more  and  more  to  see 
that  Paul  and  James,  so  far  from  opposing  one  another,  are  in  reality  presenting 
different  sides  of  the  same  great  truth.  Paul,  in  Romans  and  Galatians,  fights  against 
self-righteousness;  James,  in  this  Epistle,  contends  against  formalism  and  licentiousness. 
James's  "faith  without  works"  is  not  the  justifying  faith  of  Rom.  iii.  28 — "working 
through  love ; "  it  is  rather  the  useless  faith  without  love  of  which  Paul  speaks  in  1  Cor. 
xiii.  The  two  apostles,  as  we  understand  the  matter,  both  treat  of  the  same  justifica- 
tion, but  they  do  not  contemplate  it  from  the  same  point  of  riew.  Paul  looks  at 
justification  metaphysically,  in  its  essence  as  meaning  acceptance  with  God  on  the 
jground  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  while  James  views  it  practically,  in  its  vital 
eoimecti<»  with  sanctiflcation,  and  its  efflorescence  in  a  holy  life.     The  "  works  "  «rf 


OH.  IL 1—26.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  39 

James  are  Just  the  "  faith  "  of  Paul  developed  in  action.  In  the  verses  before  us,  James 
continues  his  illustration  of  the  operative  fruit-bearing  nature  of  justifying  faith.  He 
adduces  two  examples  from  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

L  The  example  op  Abraham.  (Vers.  21 — 23.)  It  is  remarkable  that  Paul  employs 
the  nme  illustration  in  setting  forth  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  alone;  and 
that  he  appeals  also  to  the  identical  Old  Testament  statement  (Gen.  xv.  6)  here  quoted 
respecting  Abraham's  acceptance  (Rom.  iv. ;  Gal.  iii.  6,  7).  Paul  says  that  Abraham 
was  justified  by  faith  before  Isaac  was  bom;  while  James  says  that  he  was  "justified 
by  works,  in  that  he  offered  up  Isaac  his  son  upon  the  altar  "  (ver.  21).  But  James  is 
careful  to  add,  that  in  this  crowning  manifestation  of  his  piety  the  patiiarch's  faith 
co-operated  with  his  works.  The  confidence  which  Abraham  had  reposed  in  God  for  so 
many  years  was  the  very  life  of  his  obedience  to  the  dreadful  command  to  kill  hia 
only  son;  and  the  reflex  influence  of  his  victorious  passage  through  such  an  awful 
ordeal  was  that  his  strong  trust  in  God  was  still  further  strengthened  and  "  made  per- 
fect" (ver.  22).  Abraham's  faith  alone  had  been  "  reckoned  unto  him  for  righteousness" 
ever  since  the  day  when  he  first  "  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went  j "  but  the 
longer  that  he  persevered  in  believing,  and  kept  adding  practical  virtues  to  his  faith, 
his  original  justification  was  the  more  confirmed.  So,  as  good  works  are  vitally  con- 
nected with  saving  faith — being,  in  fact,  wrapped  up  within  it  in  germ  from  the  begin- 
ning— Abraham  may  be  said  to  have  been  "  justified  by  works."  The  faith  which 
saved  him  was  a  works-producing  faith.  And  he  was  so  greatly  distinguished  for  the 
fruitfulness  of  his  faith  that  he  became  known  in  Hebrew  history  as  "the  friend  of 
God." 

II.  Thb  example  or  Rahab.  (Ver.  25.)  Her  case  seems  to  have  been  selected 
because  it  was  so  unlike  the  preceding.  Abraham  was  a  Jew,  and  the  father  of  the 
chosen  nation ;  Rahab  was  a  heathen  woman.  Abraham  had  for  many  years  received  a 
special  training  in  the  school  of  faith  ;  Rahab  had  enjoyed  no  training  at  alL  Abraham 
was  a  good  and  pure  man ;  Rahab  had  lived  a  loose  and  sensual  life.  Yet  this 
degraded  Canaanite  obtained  "like  precious  faith  "  with  the  illustrious  patriarch.  The 
same  two  Old  Testament  examples  are  cited  also  in  Heb.  xi. ;  and  certoinly  they  take 
rank  as  the  two  extreme  cases  selected  for  special  mention  in  that  chapter.  The  con- 
trast is  useful  as  showing  that,  invariably,  good  works  are  found  flowing  from  a  living 
faith.  The  object  of  Rahab's  belief  is  expressed  in  her  own  words  in  Josh.  ii.  9 — 1 1 ; 
and  her  strenuous  exertions  for  the  safety  of  the  two  spies,  made  at  the  risk  of  her  life, 
bring  her  faith  into  prominence,  as  "  working  with  her  works." 

Conclusion.  In  ver.  20  the  apostle  begins  the  paragraph  with  a  restatement  of  his 
thesis ;  and  in  vers.  24  and  26,  after  presenting  the  scriptural  examples  respectively, 
he  introduces  a  triumphant  "Q.E.D."  He  has  shown  that  the  faith  which  lies  only  in 
the  cold  assent  of  the  intellect  to  a  system  of  divinity  is  more  like  a  lifeless  corpse  than 
a  living  man  (ver.  26).  Truly  saving  faith  consists  in  such  a  warm  personal  trust  of 
the  heart  as  will  manifest  itself  in  a  life  of  holy  obedience.  So  the  ethical  in  religion 
ought  never  to  be  divorced  from  the  evangelical.  Every  Christian  minister  should 
preach  many  sermons  on  distinctively  moral  subjects,  taking  care,  however,  that  such 
discourses  are  informed  with  gospel  motives.  And  every  member  of  the  Church  should 
practise  in  the  market-place  and  the  workshop  the  morality  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount — not  simply  because  a  holy  life  is  the  appropriate  evidence  of  faith,  but  rather 
because  it  is  the  great  end  in  order  to  which  the  believer's  faith  is  reckoned  for 
righteousness.— C.  J. 

Vers.  1—13. — Bespeet  o/penoni.  Amongst  the  other  evils  of  which  these  Christian 
Jews  were  guilty,  was  the  gross  evil  of  respect  of  persons.  James  presents  the  scene 
graphically,  according  to  his  wont.  There  is  the  synagogue,  with  the  worshippers 
gathering  for  worship,  some  taking  the  good  places,  as  it  were  the  chancel-seats,  near  to 
the  ark  with  the  roll  of  the  Law,  and  to  the  table  of  the  Lord ;  some  the  lower  seats, 
away  from  the  speaker  and  the  Word.  When,  lo,  a  rich  man  enters,  some  stranger  to 
the  place,  blazing  in  Tyrian  purple,  all  embroiilered  o'er  with  gold,  and  heavily  laden 
with  jewelled  rings.  And  him  the  ofiicious  ministrants  conduct  with  ostentatious 
honour  to  the  stalls  in  the  chief  part  of  the  synagogue.  A  poor  man  enters,  likewise  a 
stranger,  in  squalid  garb,  and  with  some  cmtempt  of  gesture  or  of  tone  the  deacon 


40  THE  GENEEAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  n.  1—26 

points  him  to  a  remote  place  in  the  huilding,  or  bids  him  nt  below  the  rich  man's  foot- 
stool on  the  ground.  So  did  the  Christian  Church  do  homage  to  the  pomp  and  wealth 
of  the  world,  and  despise  the  poor.  Against  this  practice  James  levda  his  rebuke,  and 
shov/s  the  inconsistency  and  the  sin  of  such  respect  of  persons. 

I.  The  incoksistenct.  He  points  out  the  inconsistency  of  such  conduct :  1.  With 
their  fnith.  (Vers.  1,  4.)  The  faith  of  Christians  is  precisely  that  faculty  of  their 
nature  by  which  they  discern  and  espouse  spiritual  things  as  distinguished  from 
the  things  of  the  world.  And  in  virtue  of  this  faith  they  are  supposed  to  be  raised 
iibove  the  tyranny  of  world-attractions.  The  glory  of  earth  does  not  dazzle  them,  for 
their  faith  has  caught  the  vision  of  a  higher  glory,  even  a  heavenly,  of  which  Jesus 
Christ  is  Lord.  They  sit  in  heavenly  places  with  him.  And  in  virtue  of  this  faith 
they  must  estimate  a  man  according  to  his  relation  to  the  invisible  world,  his  relation 
to  Christ  and  God.  There  is  to  them  a  citizenship,  a  brotherhood,  which  takes  prece- 
dence of  all  other  social  claims.  How,  then,  with  such  a  faith,  the  faith  of  the  Lord  of 
glory,  could  they  be  canght  with  the  glitter  of  rings  and  of  cloth  of  gold  ?  And  how 
ignore  the  equal  relationships  to  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  God  ?  Their  conduct  was  in 
utter  inconsistency  with  their-  belief,  their  faith ;  they  were  double-minded,  evil- 
thoughted  judges.  2.  Also,  with  their  world-relationships  themselves.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  For 
they  were  in  the  world,  though  properly  not  of  it.  And  what  were  their  relations  to 
the  several  classes  of  the  world  as  such?  Their  relation  to  the  rich  was  unques- 
tionably that  of  persecuted  and  persecutors,  of  oppressed  and  oppressors  (ver.  6).  And 
to  such  would  they' cringe  and  pay  homage;  to  men  of  such  a  class?  To  those 
likewise  who  not  only  oppressed  them,  but  blasphemed  the  name  by  which  they  were 
called  (ver.  7)?  The  inconsistency  of  their  conduct,  then,  was  sufficiently  glaring  : 
they  were  inconsistent  with  their  professed  faith,  double-minded,  trimming  between 
the  world  and  God ;  and  they  were  inconsistent  with  their  own  relation  to  the  world, 
for  they  did  reverence  to  that  very  power  which  was  often  turned  against  themselves, 
and  against  the  holy  Name  they  bore. 

IL  The  sin.  All  inconsistency  may  with  truth  be  charged  home  upon  the  inconsis- 
tent man  as  being  essentially  sinful.  But  the  inconsistent  conduct  of  these  Jews  was 
more  directly  and  immediately  open  to  that  charge,  as  being  a  breach  of  the  royal  law, 
the  law  of  love.  1.  The  specific  sin,  i.e.  the  particular  aspect  which  the  sin  of 
iincharity  assumed  in  this  special  case.  (1)  Want  of  regard  for  the  spiritual  interests  of 
the  poor.  They  were  brothers  in  their  common  need,  but  these  had  not  treated  them 
as  such.  The  most  commanding  claim  of  one  on  the  love  and  help  of  another,  that  ol 
spiritual  necessity,  had  been  almost  ignored.  (2)  Want  of  considerate  tenderness  for 
their  special  lowliness  of  estate.  The  greater  their  want,  the  greater  should  be  the 
regard  of  Christians  for  them.  So  God's  special  regard  for  them  (ver.  5).  So  God  in 
Christ  (Matt.  xi.  5).  2. .  The  generic  sin,  i.e.  its  general  nature,  as  uncharity,  apart 
from  this  special  manifestation.  (1)  Transgression  of  the  law  of  a  King — his  will  dis- 
regarded. (2)  Transgression  of  a  kingly  law — the  sway  of  the  principle  destroyed. 
Viewed  either  way,  it  loses  its  character  of  isolated  transgression,  of  a  particular  fault, 
and  runs  up  into  the  dark  character  of  tin !  And  all  sin  is  essentially  one.  As  has 
been  said,  it  is  "  only  accident,  or  fear,  or  the  absence  of  temptation,  that  prevents  our 
transgressing  "  other  commandments  also  (Plumptre) ;  potentially,  when  one  is  broken 
all  are  broken.    Yes ;  adultery,  murder,  and  all  other  deadly  evil.     "  Guilty  of  all." 

The  conclusion  of  all  is,  "  With  what  measure  we  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  us 
again."  A  law  of  liberty,  but  not  of  liberty  to  sin.  And  if  we  disregard  the  law 
that  should  make  us  free,  for  us  there  is,  not  love,  but  judgment.  A  merciless  judg- 
ment, if  we  have  bten  merciless.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  our  hearts  have  been 
loving,  and  our  lives  merciful,  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  then  judgment  shall  be  dis- 
armed, and  we  shall  learn  what  those  words  mean,  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful :  for  they 
shall  obtain  mercy."— T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  14 — 2G.'— Faith  and  works.  The  supposed  antagonism  between  Paul  and 
James.  Misapprehension.  Paul's  great  argument  is  that,  not  by  seeking  to  fulfil  an 
impossible  righteousness  do  we  make  ourselves  just  before  God,  but  by  acknowledging 
our  sin  and  accepting  his  salvation.  James's  argument  is,  that  the  very  faith  which 
saves  Ui  is  a  faith  which  brings  forth  after-fruits,  or  it  is  not  true  faith  at  all.     So,  then, 


OH.  II.  1—26.]  THE  GEiNERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  41 

the  "  works  "  to  which  the  one  refers  are  works  done  with  a  view  to  salvation,  that 
God's  favour  may  be  won  by  them ;  the  works  to  which  the  other  refers  are  works 
springing  out  of  salvation,  because  God's  favour  has  been  so  freely  and  graciously 
bestowed.  Let  us  study  James's  presentation  of  this  truth — faith  as  a  mere  profes- 
sion ;  faith  as  a  practical  principle. 

L  Faith  as  a  mere  profession.  All  profession  which  is  mere  profession  is  vain, 
and  worse  than  vain.  This  needs  no  proving,  and  therefore  James,  in  his  usual  grapliio 
style,  illustrates  rather  than  proves  the  truth.  1.  The  faith  oj  mere  profession  is  a 
mockery.  (Vers.  15, 16.)  Picture  the  scene  which  he  supposes:  "  If  a  brother  or  sister 
be  naked,"  etc.  What  mockery !  So  is  it  possible  for  our  "  faith  "  to  be  a  consummtuc 
caricature  of  the  truths  we  profess  to  hold.  Take,  e.g.,  the  central  creed  of  our  religion  : 
"  I  bi'liove  in  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  the  Holy  Ghost."  What  does  this  mean  to  us  ? 
That  we  live  to  God  as  our  Father,  by  the  grace  of  his  salvation,  and  through  the  power 
of  his  Spirit?  Or  are  these  mere  names  to  us?  The  world  knows.  And  better  no 
professed  faith  at  all  than  a  faith  which  is  belied  by  all  our  life.  2.  The  faith  of  mere 
prqfession  is  hut  the  dead  semblance  of  the  living  Ihing.  (Vers.  17,  20, 2t).)  Take  tl  c 
living  man,  and  you  have  spirit,  expressing  itself  in  body,  and  actuating  the  body  in 
all  the  active  movements  of  the  outer  life.  But  mere  body?  A  ghastly,  pseLidu- 
expression,  not  real ;  and  no  movement,  no  life.  The  spirit,  the  living  principle,  is 
gonel  The  analogy:  what  the  spirit  is  to  the  expression  of  the  spirit  in  the  bodily 
form,  and  to  the  movements  of  active  life  which  are  carried  on  through  the  bodily 
instrumentality,  that  faith  is  to  the  profession  of  faith  which  shows  it  forth  to  men,  an<l 
to  the  works  by  which  it  lives  and  moves  in  the  world.  But  mere  profession  ?  Corpse- 
like!  For  there  is  no  quickening  principle  there,  and  consequently  no  movement  ol 
life.  So  our  creeds  may  be  dead  bodies,  not  instinct  with  any  quickening  principle,  not 
bringing  forth  any  fruits.  3.  The  faith  of  mere  prof ession  may  consist  with  the  deepest 
damnation.  (Ver.  19.)  Orthodoxy?  You  have  it  there!  But  to  what  result?  A 
shuddering  1  Oh,  let  us  learn  this :  a  truth  that  is  not  wrought  into  the  life  is  no  truth 
tons;  nay,  it  may  but  ensure  our  speedier  and  more  dreadful  ruin !  Who  are  the 
■itheists  of  the  present  day  ?  Who  the  Christless  ones  ?  To  whom  was  it  said,  "  Thon, 
which  art  exalted  unto  heaven,"  etc.  (Matt.  xi.  23)?  Let  us  learn,  that  the  belief 
which  now  we  trifle  with,  and  glibly  profess,  may  one  day  make  us  shudder ! 

II.  Faith  as  a  practical  principle.  "Can  that  faith  save  him?"  No, 
indeed ;  impossible  per  se  I  For  whatever  saves  us  mnst  change  us ;  and  therefore 
the  faith  must  be,  not  mere  profession,  but  vital  principle.  True  faith  is  trust ; 
what  we  believe  we  live  by.  And  faith  in  Christ,  being  a  trustful  surrender  to 
Christ,  is  essentially  operative.  It  must  work;  if  it  have  not  the  "promise  aiid 
potency  "  of  work,  it  is  not  faith  at  all.  1.  Faith  manifested  by  viorks.  (Ver.  18.) 
So  far  as  there  are  true  works,  there  is  virtually  true  faith  in  the  Christ  of  the  heart, 
with  whatever  error  mingled.  We  are  warranted  by  Christ's  own  words  in  saying 
this:  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them"  (Matt.  vii.  16—20).  So,  then,  true 
works  are  an  evidence  to  all  of  the  true  faith  from  which  alone  they  can  spring. 
But  the  converse  is  true :  a  lack  of  works  is  sure  proof  of  a  lack  of  faith.  2. 
Faith  Justifying  by  works.  (Vers.  21, 23,  24,  25.)  Only  in  so  far  as  the  faith  is  vital 
and  operative  does  it  justify,  though  the  works  themselves  are  really  the  outcome  oi 
the  faith,  or,  more  strictly,  the  re.sult  of  the  salvation  of  which  the  faith  lays  hold. 
James  does  not  use  the  phrase,  "justified  by  works,"  with  metaphj  sical  precision,  but 
rather  for  broad,  popular  effect;  and  what  he  really  means  is,  "justified  by  a  working 
faith."  Mingled  with  this,  there  may  be  likewise  the  idea  in  his  mind,  according  to 
ver.  18  (see  above),  "accredited  to  the  woild  as  a  justified  man."  So  Abraham;  su 
Hahab.  3.  Faith  perfected  by  works.  (Ver.  22.)  (1)  Perfected  as  a  principle  by 
coming  to  a  practical  issue — for  this  the  true  natural  history  of  all  principles  of  action. 
Compare  the  passing  of  a  law  and  its  ultimate  application.  (2)  Perfected  as  a  principle 
in  itself,  by  the  reaction  upon  it  of  its  own  exercise.  For  this  the  law  of  all  exercise  : 
the  muscle,  the  brain.  So  faith  itself  the  stronger  for  the  very  works  which  it  originates 
and  sustains.   Abraham  again. 

All  which,  being  translated  into  perhaps  more  experimental  language,  means,  "Christ 
in  you;  "  and  the  Christ  within  must  live  and  woik  (Gal.  ii.  20).  May  the  faith  that 
appropriate*  such  a  1  fe  be  ours ! — T,  P.  L. 


42 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


[oh.  III.  1—18 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  in. 


Vers.   1 — 12. — Warning  against  Ovbb- 

BBADINESS  TO  TEAOH,  LEADING  TO  A  DlSCOT]BSE 

ON  THE  Importance  op  Gotebnment  op  the 

ToNOtJE. 

Ver.  1. — (1)  Warning.  Be  not  many 
teachers.  The  warning  is  parallel  to  that 
of  our  Lord  in  Matt,  xxiil.  8,  teq.,  "  Be  not 
ye  called  Babbi;  for  one  is  your  Teacher 
[SiSatr/coAos,  and  not,  as  Textus  Keceptus,  /co- 
flrjyjjT^s],  and  all  ye  are  brethren."  Comp. 
also  '  Pirqe  Aboth,'  i.  11,  "  Shemaiah  said, 
Love  work  and  hate  lordship  (nimn)" 
The  readiness  of  the  Jews  to  take  upon  them 
the  office  of  teachers  and  to  set  up  as  "guides 
of  thi>  blind,  teacliers  of  babes,"  etc.,  is 
alluded  to  by  St.  Paul  In  Jlom.  ii.  17,  teq., 
and  such  a  passage  as  1  Cor.  xi7.  26,  eeq., 
denotes  not  merely  the  presence  of  a  similar 
tendency  among  Christians,  but  also  the 
opportunity  giveo  for  its  exercise  in  the 
Ohurch.  (2)Ileason  for  the  warning.-  Know- 
ing that  we  shall  receive  heavier  judgment 
(\7)i(/(</ieflo).  By  the  use  of  t)ie  first  person, 
St.  James  includes  himself,  thus  giving  a 
remarkable  proof  of  humility.  (The  Vulgate, 
missing  this,  has  wrongly  samitie.')  Comp. 
vers.  2,  9,  -where  also  he  uses  the  first  person, 
with  great  delicacy  of  feeling  not  separat- 
ing himself  from  those  whose  conduct  he 
denounces.  Meifoi/  icpl/jia.  The  form  of  ex- 
pression recalls  our  Lord's  saying  of  the 
Pharisees,  "These  shall  receive  greater 
condemnation  (wepiffa-6T€pov  Kpi/io)"  (IVlark 
xii.  40 ;  Luke  xx.  47). 

Ver.  2. — rap  gives  the  reason  for  this 
(cp/fio.  We  shall  be  judged  because  in  many 
things  we  all  stumble,  and  it  is  implied  that 
teachers  arc  in  danger  of  greater  condemna- 
tlon,because  it  is  almost  impossible  to  govern 
the  tongue  completely.  With  the  thought 
comp.  Eccles.  vii.  20,  "  There  is  not  a  just  man 
upon  earth  that  doeth  good  and  siiineth 
not."  IIoMci  is  adverbial,  as  in  Matt.  ix.  14, 
and  may  be  either  (1)  "  in  many  things,"  or 
(2)  "  oft."  'AnaKTcs.  "  Ne  se  ipsos  quiJem 
cxoipiunt  apostoli "  (Bengel).  If  any  stum- 
bleth  not  in  word  (E.V.).  "Control  of  speech 
is  named,  not  as  in  itself  constituting  per- 
fection, but  as  a  crucial  test  indicating 
whether  the  man  has  or  has  not  attained 
unto  it "  (Plumptre).  TeXeios  (see  ch.  i.  4). 
Xo\u'a70)7erc  (of.  oh.  i.  26).  It  is  only  found 
io  these  two  passages;  never  in  the  LXX. 

Ver.  3. — niudration  of  the  last  stalemerit 
of  ver.  2.  The  bit  in  the  horse's  mouth 
ena))les  us  to  turn  about  the  whole  body. 
So  the  man  who  can  govern  his  tongue  has 
tlie  mastery  over  thi!  whole  body.  A  re- 
markable parallel  i«  afforded  by  tjophocles. 


'Antigone,'  L  470,  2/u>/>^  X"^"'^  '    *^* 

robs  6vixovfi4»9vs  'tinrous  KaraprvBevTat.  So 
also  Philo,  'De  Op.  Mundi,'  p.  19,  Th  flu^i- 
KtiraTov  ((Sov  Xttvos  ftt^bias  Ayerai  xo^lI'w06ts. 
The  manuscript  authority  is  overwhelming 
in  favour  of  ei  Se  (A,  B,  K,  L ;  n,  eiSe  yap, 
etc.;  and  Vulgate,  si  autem)  instead  of  Idoi 
of  the  Beceived  Text  (C  has  iSe^  and  the 
Syriao  ecee) :  thus  the  apodosis  is  contained 
in  the  words,  koI  S\ov,  k.t.a.  Translate,  with 
E.V.,  now  if  we  put  the  horses'  bridles  into 
their  mouths  that  they  may  obey  us,  we  turn 
about  their  whole  body  also.  (For  a  similar 
correction  of  ISe  to  el  Se,  see  Rom.  il  17.) 

Ver.  i.—Seoond  illustration,  showing  the 
importance  of  the  tongue  and  its  government. 
The  rudder  is  a  very  small  thing,  but  it 
enables  the  steersman  to  guide  the  ship 
wherever  he  will,  in  spite  of  the  storm. 
Whithersoever  the  govemor  listeth  (87rov  ri 
op/iii  Tov  ivBvvovTos  SoiKerai,  K,  B);  whither 
the  impulse  of  the  steersman  wiUeth  (E.V.); 
Vulgate,  impetus  dirigerUis. 

Ver.  5.  — (1)  Application  of  illustration. 
The  tongue  is  only  a  little  member,  but  it 
boasts  great  things.  The  true  reading  ap- 
pears to  be  fieydXa  aix^'  (A,  B,  C).  The 
compound  verb  of  the  Textus  Beceptus, 
HeyoKavxety,  is  found  in  the  LXX.  (E/ek. 
xvi.  50 ;  Ze'ph.  iii.  1 1 ;  2  Maco.  xv.  32 ;  Bccl  us. 
xlviii.  18).  (2)  Third  illustration.  A  very 
small  fire  may  kindle  a  very  large  forest. 
'HA(/coj'(N,  A',  B,  C,  Vulgate)  should  be  read 
instead  of  oKlyov  (A',  0^  K,  L,  ff).  It  is 
equivalent  to  quantulus  as  well  as  quantus.  A 
somewhat  similar  thought  to  the  one  before 
us  is  found  in  Ecclus.  xi.  32,  "  Of  a  spark 
of  fire  a  heap  of  coals  is  kindled."  "TAjj. 
"  Matter,"  A.V. ;  "  wood,"  B.V.  The  word 
is  only  found  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
In  the  LXX.  it  is  used  for  a  "matter"  of 
judgment  in  Job  xix.  29 ;  "  matter  "  in  the 
phfiosophical  sense  in  Wisd.  xi.  18.  (of.  xv. 
13);  the  "matter"  of  a  book  in  2  Maco.  ii. 
24 ;  the  "  matter  "  of  a  fire  in  Ecclus.  xxviii. 
10  (tlie  whole  passage,  vers.  8 — 12,  is  worth 
comjiaring  with  the  one  before  us) ;  and  for 
"forest"  in  Job  xxxviii.  40  ;  Isa.  x.  17.  It 
is  most  natural  to  take  it  in  this  sense  here 
(so  Syriao  and  Vulgate,  lilva).  "Tlie  literal 
meaning  is  certainly  to  be  preferred  to  the 
philosophical "  (Lightfoot  on  Eevision,  p. 
140).  Forest  fires  are  frequently  referreii  to 
by  the  ancients.  Virgil's  description  of  one 
('Georgics,'  ii.  303)  is  well  known;  so  also 
Homer's  ('  Iliad,'  xi.  165). 

Ver.  6. — Apjilication  of  illustration.  The 
translation  is  doubtful,  oKtms  of  the  Received 
Text  must  certainly  be  deleted.  It  is  want, 
ing  in  K,  A,  B,  C,  K,  Latt.,  Syrla«.  Thres 
renderings  are  then  possible.  (1) »'  And  th* 


OH.  m.  1—18.] 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


tongue  ii  a  Are :  the  world  of  iniqaity  among 
our  members  is  the  tongue,which  denleth  the 
whole  body  and  setteth  on  fire  the  wheel  of 
nature."  (2)  "  And  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  that 
world  of  iniquity :  tho  tongue  is  among  our 
members  that  which  deiilcth  the  whole 
body,"  etc. :  so  Vulgate.  (3)  "And  the  tongue 
is  a  fire :  that  world  of  iniquity,  the  tongue, 
is  among  our  members  that  which  defileth 
the  whole  body,"  etc.  Of  these,  the  first, 
which  is  that  of  the  Revisers,  appears  to  be 
preferable.  A  fourth  rendering,  which  is 
wholly  untenable,  deserves  notice  for  its 
antiquity,  viz.  that  of  the  Syriao,  "The 
tongue  u  •  fire :  the  world  of  iniquity  (is 
the  forest)."  The  world  of  iniquity  (i  Kiv/ios 
Tris  iSi»c(os)-  The  tongue  is  thus  charac- 
terized, because  it  leads  to  and  embraces  all 
kinils  of  wickednesses.  As  Bishop  Words- 
worth points  out,  it  contains  within  itself 
the  elements  of  all  mischief.  A  somewhat 
similar  use  of  Kiaiios  is  found  in  the  LXX. 
of  ProT.  xvii.  6,  To5  vunov  ii\os  i  Kdr/ios  tS» 
;tp7ijiiaTft)i',  ToO  8^  AiriffTov  ovdh  oj3eA(Js,  **The 
whole  world  of  wealth  is  for  the  faithful :  for 
the  faithless  not  a  penny."  KaBiaTaTm:  "is 
set "  or  "  has  its  place,"  and  so  simply  "  is." 
The  tongue  (1)  defiles  the  whole  body,  and 
(2)  sets  on  fire  rhv  rpox^i'  t3s  yfveaeas,  "the 
wheel  of  birth"  or  "of  nature" — a  very 
strange  expression,  and  one  almost  without 
parallel.  (Tpox6s  only  here  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. There  ia,  however,  no  doubt  about 
its  meaning  "wheel."  The  A.V.,  which  took 
it  as  TpcJxoJ,  equivalent  to  "course,"  is 
universally  given  up  (see  Winer, '  Gram,  of 
N.  T.,'  p.  62).  For  ylveais,  comp.  oh.  i.  23. 
The  Vulgate  has  rotam  nativitatii  nostra.) 
Alford  translates  the  phrase, "  the  orb  of  tha 
creation,"  and  in  favoiu  of  this  the  use  of 
the  word  rpoxis  in  Ps.  Ixxvii.  (Ixxvi.)  19  may 
be  appealed  to.  But  more  natural  is  the 
interpretation  of  Dean  Plumptre,  who  takes 
it  as  "a  figure  for  the  whole  of  life  from 
birth,  the  wheel  which  then  begins  to  roll  on 
its  course  and  oontinties  rolling  until  death." 
So  Huther  and  Dean  Scott  in  the '  Speaker's 
Commentary.'  This  \iuw  has  the  support 
of  the  Syriao  Version:  "The  course  of  our 
generations  which  run  as  a  wheel; "  and  is 
implied  in  the  (false)  reading  of  K,  t^i 
yiviSius  ■hnuv  (compare  the  Vulgate).  It 
should  also  be  noticed  that  life  is  compared 
to  a  wheel  in  Eccles.  xii.  6  (LXX.,  rpoxis). 
And  is  set  on  fire.  The  tongue  has  already 
been  called  a  fire.  It  is  now  shown  how 
that  fire  ia  kindled — ^from  beneath,  from 
Gehenna.  A  similar  expression  is  found  in 
the  Targum  on  Ps.  cxx.  2,  "  Lingua  dolosa 
.  .  .  cum  carbonibus  juniperi,  qui  incensi 
■unt  in  Gehenna  inferne."  Gehenna,  here 
personified,  is  mentioned  also  in  Hatt.  t.  22, 
29,  30;  X.  28.;  xviii.  9;  xxiii.  15,33;  Mark 
ix.  4.S,  45, 47;  Luke  xil.  S.    Thus  the  pas- 


sage befor*  wt  ii  the  only  ona  in  the  New 
Testament  wher*  the  word  is  used  except 
by  our  Lord  himself.  The  word  itself  is 
simply  a  Grsecised  form  of  D'uri  <i,  "  valley 
of  Hinnom,"  or  fully,  "  valley  of  the  sons  of 
Hinnom  "  (variously  rendered  by  the  LXX. 
^lipay^  *Evv6ij.  or  vlov  'Ei/i'o/i  or  TaUyifa,  Josh. 
xviii.  16).  This  valley,  from  its  associations, 
became  a  type  of  hell ;  and  hence  its  name 
was  taken  by  the  Jews  to  denote  the  place  of 
torment.  In  this  sense  it  occurs  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  frequently  in  Jewish  writ- 
ings  (see  Buxtorf,  •  Lexicon,'  sub  verb.  Djn:), 
and  it  is  said  that  the  later  rabbis  actually 
fixed  upon  this  valley  as  the  mouth  of  hell. 

Ver.  7. — Fourth  illustration,  involving  a 
proof  of  the  terrible  power  of  the  tongue  for 
evil.  All  kinds  of  wild  animals,  etc.,  can  be 
tamed  and  have  been  tamed:  the  tongue 
cannot  be.  What  a  deadly  power  for  evil 
must  it  therefore  be  I  The  famous  chorus 
in  Sophocles, '  Antigone,'  L  332,  seq.,  IIoAAa 
ri  Sewa  KoiShy  av6p<lmov  Suvirepov  TrtXti,  is 
quoted  by  nearly  all  commentators,  and 
affords  a  remarkable  parallel  to  this  pas- 
sage. Everykind  of  beasts,  etc.;  literally.every 
nature  (<piais)  of  beast)  .  .  .  liath  been  tamed 
by  man's  nature  (tjj  (pvau  xp  avSpanrinri) ; 
Vulgate,  omnis  enim  naiura  hestiarum  .  .  . 
domita  sunt  a  natura  humana.  (On  the  dative 
tjT  ^lierei,  see  Winer,  'Gram,  of  N.  T.,'  p.  275.) 
\Vith  this  fourfold  enumeration  of  the  brute 
creation  ("beasts  .  .  .  birds  .  .  .  serpents 
.  .  .  things  in  the  sea"),  cf.  Gen.  ix.  2, 
"  The  fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you  shall 
be  upon  all  the  beasts  (fl^pio)  of  the  earth, 
upon  all  the  fowls  (tt^tuvo)  of  the  heavens, 
and  upon  all  that  moveth  upon  the  earth, 
and  upon  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea."  Berpentt 
(^IpTTiTd)  would  be  better  rendered,  as  E.V., 
creeping  things. 

Ver.  8. — It  is  an  unruly  evil;  rather, 
restless,  reading  aimTiarafov  (n.  A,  B)  for 
&KoT<£{rx6To»  of  Textus  Eeceptus  (C,  K,  L) ; 
Vulgate,  inquietvm  moZum  (cf.  ch.  i.  8).  The 
nominatives  in  this  verse  should  be  noticed : 
"  The  last  words  are  to  be  regarded  as  a 
kind  of  exclamation,  and  are  therefore  ap- 
pended in  an  independent  construction" 
(Winer,  p.  668).  A  restless  evil  1  Full  of 
deadly  poison  I  Compare  the  abrupt  nomi- 
native in  Phil.  iii.  19  with  Bishop  Light- 
foot's  note.  Deadly  (eavaTri(j>6pos') ;  here  only 
in  the  New  Testament.  In  the  LXX.  it  is 
found  in  Numb,  xviii.  22;  Job  xxxiii.  23; 
4  Maco.  viii.  17, 24 ;  xv.  23.  For  the  figure, 
cf.  Ps.  cxl.  3,  "  They  have  sharpened  their 
tongues  like  a  serpent ;  adders'  poison  is 
under  their  lips." 

Vers.  9,  10. — Examples  of  the  restless 
character  of  the  tongue :  "  With  it  we  bless 
the  Lord  and  Futhi  r,  and  with  it  too  wo 
curse  men  who  are  made  in  his  image." 
In  the  first  clause  we  ihould  read  Kiipio* 


!4 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.         [oH-ui-l— l^. 


(k.  a,  B,  C,  Coptic,  Syriac,  ff,  and  some 
manuscripts  of  the  Vulgate)  for  0e((>'  (Re- 
ceptus,  with  E,  L,  and  yulo;ate).  Kade 
after  the  similitude  of  God ;  better,  likeness 
(diioluxris).  The  words,  which  are  taken 
from  Gen.  i.  26  (/cal  etirey  i  0ehs  iroi^ffw/ieK 
&v6puiTOV  hCT*  eiKdva  Tifierepav  Kal  KoB'  b^wi' 
iaiv),  are  added  to  show  the  greatness  of 
the  sin.  Theologically  they  are  important, 
as  showing  that  the  "  likeness  of  God "  in 
man  (in  whatever  it  may  consist)  was  not 
entirely  obliterated  by  tlie  Fall.  St.  James's 
words  would  be  meaningless  if  only  Adam 
had  beun  created  in  the  image  and  likeness 
of  God.  So  St.  Paul  speaks  of  fallen  man 
as  still  "the  image  (fiKtoy)  and  glory  of 
God  "  (1  Cnr.  xi.  7 ;  and  cf.  Gen.  ix.  6). 

Vers.  11,  12. — Illustrations  showing  the 
absurdity  of  the  conduct  reprobated.  From 
one  principle  opposite  things  cannot  be 
produced.  Nothing  can  bring  forth  that 
which  is  not  corresponding  to  its  nature. 
(1)  The  same  fountain  cannot  give  both 
sweet  and  bitter  water.  (2)  A  fig  tree 
cannot  yield  olives,  nor  a  vine  figs.  (3)  Salt 
water  cannot  y'  Id  sweet.  How,  then,  can 
the  tongue  yield  both  blessing  and  cursing? 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  thought  in  ^2)  is 
different  from  that  in  Matt.  vii.  16,  to  which 
it  bears  a  superficial  resemblance.  There 
the  thought  is  that  a  good  tree  cannot  yield 
lad  fruit.  Here  it  is  that  a  tree  must  yield 
that  which  corresponds  to  its  nature;  a  fig 
tree  must  yield  figs  and  not  olives,  etc.  So 
can  no  fountain  both  yield  salt  water  and 
fresh.  The  Received  Text,  which  the  A.V. 
follows,  is  wrong  here.  Read,  otre  &\vk6i> 
y\vKv  TTOi^irai  vSaip  (A,  B,  C,  and  K,  except 
that  it  reads  oiiSf),  and  translate,  neither  can 
salt  water  yield  sweet;  Vulgate,  me  neque 
saZsa  dulcem  potest  facere  aquam;  Syriac, 
"Thus  also  salt  waters  cannot  be  made 
•weet."  The  construction,  it  will  he  seen, 
is  suddenly  changed  in  the  njiddle  of  the 
verse,  and  St.  James  ends  as  if  the  previous 
clause  hud  been  ofirt  Sii/arai  ffn/ci)  iKaias, 
K.T.\.  (cf.  Winer,  p.  619,  Grimm's  '  Lexicon 
of  N.  T.  Greek,'  p.  824). 

Vers.  13 — 18. — Waenikg  against  Jeal- 
ousy AND  Faction.  Ver.  13  contains  the 
positive  exhortation  to  meekness ;  ver.  14 
the  negative  warning  against  jealousy  and 
party  spirit;  and  then  the  following  verses 
place  side  by  side  the  portraits  of  the  earthly 
and  the  hi  avenly  wisdom. 

Ver.  13. — Who  is  a  wise  man  and  endued 
with  knowledge  among  yon?  (t(j  (ro<phs  Kal 
iiriiTT^iJuev  iv  iiitv ; ) ;  better,  who  is  noise  and 
under-landing  among  youi  "ETna-riiiiuy  is 
fonnd  here  only  in  the  New  Testament.  In 
the  IiXX.  it  is  joined  with  iro(pi)s  (as  here) 
In  Deut.  i.  13 ;  iv.  6.  "  The  itriaTiiixaiv  is 
one  who  understands  and  knows:  the  aotphs 
is  one  who  carries  out  his  knowledge  into 


his  life "  (Dr.  Farrar,  who  aptly  quotes 
Tennyson's  line,  "  Knowledge  comes,  but 
wisdom  lingers  ").  Out  of  a  good  conversa- 
tion (^K  t5)s  KaXTjs  Aj-affTpot/j^s) ;  better,  as 
R.V.,  hy  his  good  life.  "  Conversation  "  is 
unfortunate,  because  of  its  modern  meaning. 
Meekness  (7r/)ai!Ti)s);  cf.  ch.  i.  21. 

Ver.  14. — Bitter  envying.  Zrj\os  in  itself 
may  be  either  good  or  bad,  and  therefore 
■KMpiv  is  added  to  characterize  it.  Bishop 
Lightfoot  (on  GaL  v.  20)  points  out  that 
"  as  it  is  the  tendency  of  Christian  teaching 
to  exult  the  gentler  qualities  and  to  depress 
their  opposites,  ^Kos  falls  in  the  scale  of 
Cliristiaa  ethics  (see  Clem.  Rom.,  §§  4 — 6), 
while  Tair€£>'iiTr|i,  for  instance,  rises."  It  may, 
perhaps,  be  an  incidental  mark  of  early  date 
that  St.  James  finds  it  necessary  to  charac- 
terize (ti\os  as  TTiKpiv.  Where  St.  Paul  joins 
it  with  ipiBilat  and  Ipts,  there  is  no  quali- 
fying adjective  (Bom.  xiii.  18;  1  C!or. 
iii.  3;  2  Cor.  xli  20;  Gal.  v.  20).  (On. 
tlie  distinction  between  (tj\os  and  tpBii/os, 
both  of  which  are  used  by  St.  James, 
see  Archbishop  Trench  on  'Synonyms,' 
§  xxvi.).  Strife  (kpiBeiav');  better,  party 
spirit,  or  faction  (of.  Eom.  ii.  8;  2  Cor. 
xii.  20 ;  Gal.  v,  20 ;  Phil.  i.  17 ;  ii.  8).  The 
A.V.  "strife"  comes  from  a  wrong  deriva- 
tion, as  if  iptSela  were  connected  with  Ijpis, 
whereas  it  really  comes  from  IpiSos,  a  hired 
labourer,  and  so  signifies  (I)  working  for 
hire ;  (2)  the  canvassing  of  hired  partisans ; 
and  (3)  factiousness  in  general  (see  Light- 
foot  on  Gal.  v.  20).  Glory  not ;  i.e.  glory 
not  of  your  wisdom,  a  boast  to  which  your 
whole  conduct  thus  gives  the  lie. 

Vers.  15 — 18. — Contrast  between  the  earthly 
and  the  heavenly  wisdom ;  (1)  the  earthly 
(vers.  15,  16) ;  (2)  the  heavenly  (vers.  17, 
18). 

Ver.  15. — "  This  wisdom  [of  which  you 
boast]  is  not  a  wisdom  which  cometh  down 
from  above."  Vulgate,  non  est  enim  ista 
sapientia  desursum  descendens.  Bnt  is  earthly, 
sensual,  devilish.  Dr.  Farrar  well  says  that 
this  wisdom  is  "earthly  because  it  avari- 
ciously cares  for  the  goods  of  earth  (Phil, 
iii.  19) ;  animal,  because  it  is  under  the 
sway  of  animal  lusts  (1  Cor.  it  14) ;  demon- 
like, because  full  of  pride,  egotism,  ma- 
lignity, and  ambition,  which  are  the  works 
of  the  devil  (1  Tim.  iv.  1)."  Sensual 
(i|/ux'K^);  Vulgate,  animalis;  E.V.  miirgin, 
natural  or  animal.  The  position  of  the 
word  is  remarkable,  occurring  between 
tmyeLos  and  Scuiiofii^BTjs.  It  is  never  found 
in  the  LXX.,  nor  (apparently)  in  the 
apostolic  Fathers.  In  the  New  Testament 
it  occurs  six  times — three  times  of  tiie 
"  natural "  body,  which  is  contrasted  with 
the  iTuiia  ■rvtviiaTM6v  (1  Cor.  XV.  44  (twice), 
46) ;  and  three  times  with  a  moral  emphasis 
resting  upon  it,  "  and  in  every  instance  it 


cH.ni.l— la]         THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMEa 


45 


rruat  depreciatory  "  (see  1  Cor.  ii.  14),  "  The 
natural  man  receireth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spiiit  of  God,"  and  Jnde  19,  Tux'tol, 
wveviui  liii  UxovTts.  The  ifivx'h  in  general 
in  the  New  Testament  is  that  which  is 
common  to  man  with  the  brute  creation, 
including  the  passions,  appetites,  etc. ;  and 
therefore,  by  the  use  of  this  word  ^uxik6s 
to  describe  the  wisdom  which  cometh  not 
from  above,  but  is  "earthly,  sensual  [or, 
'  animal  'J,  devilish,"  we  are  reminded  of  the 
contrast  between  the  spirit  of  man  which 
goeth  upward  and  the  spirit  of  a  beast 
which  goeth  downward  (Eccles.  iii.  21).  The 
"animal"  man,  then,  is  one  who  is  ruled 
entirely  by  the  if'ux^  in  the  lower  sense  of 
the  word;  and  by  the  depreciatory  sense 
given  to  the  adjective  we  are  strongly  re- 
minded that  "  natiue  "  is  nothing  without 
the  aid  of  grace.  See  further  Archbishop 
Trench's  •  Synonyms  of  the  N.  T.,'  §  Ixxi., 
and  for  the  later  history  of  the  word  (it  was 
applied  by  the  Montanists  to  the  ortho- 
dox), Suicer's  '  Thesaurus,'  vol.  ii.  p.  1589. 
Ver.  16  substantiates  the  assertion  just 
made  in  ver.  15.  Bender,  as  in  ver.  14, 
jealousy  and  faction.  'AKarcurrcurla  :  con- 
fusion, of  which  God  it  not  the  author 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  33). 

Yer.  17. — ^Ihe  wisdom  which  is  from  above ; 
Ti  iyuBev  go(f>ta,  equivalent  to  rwhy  nnan 
— an  expression  not  unknown  among  rab- 
binical writers  (see  Sohottgen,  *  Horse 
Hebraicaa,'  vol,  i.  p.  1026).  Pirst  pure,  then 
peaceable.  "  The  sequence  is  that  of  thought, 
notof  time"  (Plumptre).     Purity  must  be 


Becured,even  at  the  expense  of  peace.  Gentle, 
and  easy  to  be  entreated  (itntiKl)!  elnreiSiis'). 
The  former  of  these  two  terms  signifies 
"  forbearing  under  provocation  "  (cf.  1  Tim. 
iii.  3;  Titus  iii.  2;  1  Pet.  ii.  18);  the  latter 
is  found  only  here.  Vulgate,  guadibilis; 
Syriae,  "obedient;"  R.V.  as  A.V.,  "easy 
to  be  entreated,"  i.e.  ready  to  forgive.  Thus 
the  conjunction  of  the  two  terms  ^iticik^s 
and  evneiBis  reminds  us  of  the  Jewish 
saying  in  '  Pirqe  Aboth,'  v.  17,  describing 
four  characters  in  dispositions,  in  which  the 
man  who  is  "hard  to  provolce  and  easily 
pacified"  is  set  down  as  pious.  "Without 
partiality  (o5h£k/)itoj)  ;  here  only  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  word  is  used  in  the  LXX. 
in  Prov.  xxv.  1;  and  by  Ignatius  (Eph.  3; 
Magn.  15;  Trail.  1),  but  none  of  these 
passages  tlirow  light  on  its  meaning.  It 
may  be  either  (1)  without  variance,  or  (2) 
without  doubtfulness,  or  (3)  without  par- 
tiality ;  probably  (1)  as  E.V.  text.  Without 
hypocrisy ;  avmSKpnos  applied  to  vuttIs  in 
1  Tim.  i.  5 ;  2  Tim.  i.  5 ;  to  ayarl)  in  Bom. 
zii.  9;  2  Got.  vi.  6;  and  to  ^t\aU\<bta  in 
1  Pet.  i  22. 

Yer.  18. — ^The  fruit  of  righteousness ;  an 
expression  tiiken  from  the  Old  Testament ; 
eg.  Prov.  xi.  30 ;  Amos  vi.  12 ;  and  occurring 
also  in  Phil.  i.  11.  Of  them  that  make  peace. 
ToTs  irotovariv  up7\viiv  may  be  either  (1)  '^for 
them,"  or  (2)  "  hy  them  that  make  peace." 
This  verse  gives  us  St.  James's  version  of 
the  beatitude,  "Blessed  are  the  peace- 
makers {juucipiQi  ot  fiptivmau^"  (Matt.  T. 9). 


HOMILETFCS. 

Vers.  1 — 1,2. — Speech.  L  The  great  besponsibilitt  of  teachers.  This  is  forcibly 
shown  by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  iii.  15,  etc.  Even  of  those  who  have  built  upon  the  right 
foundation  the  work  is  to  be  tested  by  fire,  and  "  if  any  man's  work  shall  be  burned,  he 
shall  suffer  loss :  but  he  himself  shall  be  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire."  What,  then,  must  be 
the  "  greater  condemnation  "  in  store  for  others  whose  very  foundation  was  faulty  ?  In  a 
commentary  especially  designed  for  teachers  of  others,  a  strong  recommendation  may  be 
permitted  of  Bishop  Bull's  noble  sermon  on  the  text,  "  Be  not  many  masters  : "  '  Con- 
cerning the  Great  Difficulty  and  Danger  of  the  Priestly  Office '  (Bull's  '  Works,'  vol.  i. 
sermon  vi.). 

II.  Impoetancb  of  masteet  of  the  T0N8UE.  Without  a  bit  in  the  horse's  mouth 
it  is  impossible  for  the  rider  to  have  command  over  his  steed.  So,  without  a  bridle  on 
the  tongue,  no  man  can  govern  himself  aright.  David  felt  this,  and  said,  "I  will  take 
heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue :  I  will  keep  my  mouth  with  a  bridle, 
while  the  wicked  is  before  me  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  1).  Even  Moses,  the  meekest  of  men,  was 
shut  out  of  the  land  of  promise  because  he  "  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips."  And 
with  regard  to  the  one  sin,  of  which  we  read  that  it  "  bath  never  forgiveness,  neither  in 
this  world  nor  in  the  world  to  come,"  it  is  clear  that  it  is  a  sin  of  the  tongue,  for  it  is 
always  spoken  of  as  "  hlaspheimy"  and  never  in  general  terms  as  "  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost."  "  We  rule  iiTational  animals  with  a  bit ;  how  much  more  ought  we  to  be  able 
to  govern  ourselves  1  "  (Wordsworth). 

III.  The  varied  character  of  sins  of  speech.  1.  Sins  directly  against  God;  e.g. 
hlMphemy,  the  mockery  of  holy  things,  swearing,    2,  Sins  againrt  our  neighbour ;  e.$b 


46  THE  GBNEfiAL  KHSTLB  OF  JAMES.         [oh.  ui.  1—18. 

eyfl-apealnng,  lying,  and  slandering.      8.  Sins  against  ourselves,  infringing  sobriety, 
discretion,  or  modesty.     (See  Bairow's  'Sermons,'  vol.  i.  sermon  xiii.) 

IV.  Impoktance  op  little  thinos.  The  bridle  is  a  very  litile  tiling,  but  the  rider 
cannot  do  without  it.  The  rudder  is  very  small,  but  it  enables  the  stfersman  to  guida 
a  very  kr^te  vessel.  A  tiny  spark  may  set  on  fire  a  huge  forest.  So  the  size  of  a 
battle-field  is  quite  disproportionate  to  the  extent  of  country  won  and  lost  upon  it.  The 
tongue  is  a  very  little  member,  but  a  victory  over  it  will  save  the  wliole  man;  on  the 
contrary,  a  failure  to  rule  the  tongue  involves  far  more  than  the  sin  of  the  moment ;  for, 
small  as  it  is,  the  tongue  "  boasts  great  things,  and  defiles  the  whole  body,"  and  so  leads 
to  the  ruin  of  the  whole  man. 

V.  The  tongue  is  a  firb.  The  apostle  is  speaking  of  the  tongue  as  an  instrument 
of  ruin,  destruction,  and  devastation.  As  such  it  is  kindled  from  beneath — -"set  on  fire 
of  hell "  (ver.  6).  But  there  is  another  sense  in  which  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  kindled  from 
above,  cheering  and  warming  and  gladdening  men's  hearts,  and  if  its  power  for  evil 
is  great,  so  also  is  its  power  for  good.  "  The  fire  of  man's  wrath  is  kindled  from 
beneath,  as  the  fire  that  cleanses  is  kindled  from  above.  Bearing  in  our  minds  the 
wonder  of  the  day  of  Pentecost,  it  is  hardly  too  bold  to  say  that  we  have  to  choose 
whether  our  tongue  shall  be  purified  by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit  or  defiled  by  that  of 
Gehenna"  (Plumptie). 

VI.  Tub  ouilt  of  slander.  1.  The  slanderer  injures  himself .  "The  tongue.  .  . 
defiles  the  whole  body."  2.  Slander  is  uncontrollable.  "The  tongue  can  no  man 
tame."  It  "  sets  on  fire  the  wheel  of  birth  ;  "  that  wheel  "  which  catches  fire  as  it  goes, 
and  burns  with  a  fiercer  conflagration  as  its  own  speed  increases.  .  .  .  Yon  may  tame 
the  wild  beast ;  the  conflagration  of  the  American  forest  will  cease  when  all  the  timber 
and  the  dry  undeiwood  is  consumed  ;  but  you  cannot  arrest  the  progress  of  that  cruel 
word  which  you  uttered  carelessly  ;  .  .  .  that  will  goon  slaying,  poisoning,  burning, 
beyond  your  own  control,  now  and  for  ever."  3.  Slander  is M»)?oto-a/.  "These  things 
ought  not  so  to  be."  It  is  a  contradiction  to  nature,  as  much  as  for  a  fig  tree  to  bear 
olives,  or  for  a  fountain  to  produce  both  fresh  and  salt  water.  4.  Slander  is  diabolical 
in  character.  "  The  tongue  ...  is  set  on  fire  of  hell."  The  very  name  of  Satan  is  "  the 
slanderer."    (See  Eobertson's  '  Sermons,'  vol.  iii.  sermon  i.) 

Vers.  13 — 18. —  Wisd(nn.  I.  Wisdom  shown  by  its  fkuits  in  hbabt  and  mfb.  The 
following  are  some  of  the  fruits  of  the  heavenly  wisdom :  (1)  purity ;  (2)  peacefulness ; 
(3)  forbearance  under  provocation,  ».e.  slowness  in  taking  offence  ;  (4)  placability,  i.e. 
readiness  to  forgive  an  offence  actually  committed.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them ; "  and  therefore  the  presence  or  absence  of  such  qualities  as  these  form  tests  by 
which  every  one  may  recognize  the  presence  or  absence  in  his  own  heart  of  the  wisdom 
which  is  from  above. 

II.  The  sinfulness  of  party  spirit.  A  sin  which  is  not  always  recognized, 
especially  in  religious  circles,  as  being  a  sin.  Its  true  character,  however,  may  be 
seen  by  a  consideration  of  (1)  its  source,  which  is  not  from  above,  but  from  beneath 
(ver.  15) ;  and  (2)  its  results.    It  leads  to  "  confusion  and  every  evil  work  "  (ver.  16). 

III.  The  character  of  the  natural  man.  The  meaning  of  "animal "  or  "natural " 
(}liuxiic6s)  in  Scripture  requires  careful  consideration.  The  fact  that  wherever  a  moral 
emphasis  rests  upon  this  word  it  is  always  depreciatory,  and  that  here  (ver.  15)  it 
stands  between  "  eartldy  "  and  "  devilish,"  forms  one  of  the  clearest  indications  of  the 
absolute  need  of  grace.  Scripture  has  nothing  but  condemnation  for  the  man  who  is 
ruled  by  the  }jivxli.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God." 
Mere  good  nature  will  never  save  a  man.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  "  well  disposed." 
Esau  was  all  this.  He  stands  out  in  Holy  Scripture  as  the  type  of  the  natural  man, 
ruled  only  by  the  i//ux^ — good-natured,  generous,  brave,  and  kindly,  but "  not  having  the 
Spirit ; "  no  grace,  and  therefore,  by  the  verdict  of  an  inspired  writer,  hia  character  is. 
itamjped  aa  that  of  "  a  profane  person  "  (Heb.  xii.  16). 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  dissuasive  from  ambition  to  teach.  Throughout  this  chapter  the 
apostle  sounds  a  loud  note  of  warning  against  sins  of  the  tongue.     The    opening 


ai.iii.l->18.1         THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES,  41 

exhortation  directs  our  tlioughts  to  the  responsibilities  and  dangers  of  the  religious 
teacher.  No  one  is  under  more  constant  temptation  to  sin  with  his  lips ;  for  it  is  the 
daily  work  of  his  life  to  speak  regarding  the  most  solemn  themes. 

L  The  caution.  "  Be  not  many  teachers,  my  brethren  "  (ver.  1).  It  would  appear 
that  the  Pharisaic  Jews  of  the  time  of  the  apostles  vied  with  one  another  for  dis- 
tinction as  teachers.  At  Church  meetings  it  often  happened  that  the  time  for  free 
conference  was  consumed  by  those  who  had  least  to  say  which  was  likely  to  be  profit- 
able. So  James  counsels  the  members  of  the  Church  to  be  "  swift  to  hear  "  and  "  slow 
to  speak  "  in  the  religious  assembly.  While  the  office  of  the  spiritual  teacher  is  highly 
honourable,  it  is  difficult  to  sustain  it  with  honour.  To  do  so  demands  superior 
intellectual  power,  keen  spiritual  insight,  intimate  acquaintance  with  Scripture,  accurate 
knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  a  variety  of  other  aptitudes  which  few  possess.  This 
dissuasive  is  needed  by  the  modern  Church  little  less  than  by  the  congregations  of  "  the 
Dispersion."  Our  young  men  who  aspire  to  the  pulpit  should  consider  well  whetlier 
they  have  received  a  heavenly  call  thither.  They  should  ponder  the  wise  advice  of  an 
experienced  pastor  to  a  young  student :  "  Do  not  enter  the  ministry  if  you  can  hdp  it ; " 
i.e.  unless  you  have  a  burning  desire  to  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  a  preacher. 
This  dissuasive  reminds  us  also  of  Paul's  rule :  "  Not  a  novice  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  6).  How 
often  is  the  young  convert,  especially  in  times  of  feverish  revivalism,  encouraged  to 
narrate  his  "experience,"  and  to  address  large  religious  meetings,  greatly  to  his  own 
spiritual  detriment,  and  to  the  damage  of  the  cause  of  Christ  I  James's  counsel  has 
a  relation  also  to  the  pew.  In  its  spirit  it  enjoins  those  who  "  hear  the  Word  "  to 
cultivate  a  docile  and  teachable  frame  of  mind.  Nothing  hinders  edification  more  than 
habits  of  pert  and  paltry  criticism  of  the  accidents  of  preaching. 

II.  Its  gkound.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  How  weighty  is  the  responsibility  of  the  religious 
teacher  I  He  undertakes  to  perform  the  most  important  of  all  kinds  of  work,  and  by 
the  use  of  means  which  involve  the  most  difficult  of  all  attainments,  even  to  a  godly 
man.  The  minister  of  the  gospel  is  especially  tried  as  regards  the  government  of  the 
tongue;  and,  alas!  the  most  experienced  pastors,  even  James  and  his  fellow-apostles, 
— often  "  stumble  in  word."  Teachers  who  are  habitually  unfaithful  are  guilty  of 
peculiarly  heinous  sin ;  they  shall  be  indicted  at  the  bar  of  God  for  blood-guiltiness. 
Since  the  pastor  is  like  a  city  set  on  a  hill,  his  errors  work  more  mischief  in  society 
than  those  of  an  ordinary  member  of  the  Church.  The  lowest  deep  of  perdition  shall 
be  occupied  by  unconverted  preachers  of  the  gospel. 

JjEBSONS.  1.  To  Christian  teachers.  Let  us  labour  and  pray,  with  heart  and  mind, 
and  with  books  and  pen,  so  that  our  pulpit  utterances  shall  not  be  hasty  or  unguarded, 
and  that  we  may  be  "  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men."  2.  To  the  members  of  the  Church. 
Give  your  minister  your  loving  sympathy,  and  do  not  continually  advertise  and  bewail 
his  iudrmities.  Seeing  that  bis  work  is  so  arduous,  maintain  the  habit  of  constantly 
"  helj)iiig"  him  with  your  prayers. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  2 — 6. —  The  power  of  the  tongue.  Passing  from  the  peculiar  responsibility 
which  attaches  to  teachers  of  rehgion,  James  proceeds  to  speak  generally  of  the  enormous 
influence  of  the  faculty  of  speech,  especially  upon  the  speaker  himself,  and  of  the  abuse 
to  which  it  is  liable. 

I.  A  DiBECT  STATEMENT  OF  THIS  POWBE.  "  If  suy  stumbleth  uot  in  word,  the 
same,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  In  most  cases,  the  capacity  to  control  one's  utterances  indicates 
the  measure  of  one's  attainment  as  regards  the  keeping  of  his  heart.  Sins  of  the  tongue 
form  so  large  a  portion  of  our  multitudinous  "  stumblings  " — they  so  frequently  help  to 
seduce  us  into  other  sins — and  they  afford  such  a  searching  test  of  character,  that  any 
one  who  has  learned  to  avoid  falling  into  them  may  without  exaggeration  be  described 
as  "  a  perfect  man."  Of  course,  no  person  lives  in  this  world  of  whom  it  can  be  affirmed 
that  he  never  errs  in  word.  James  has  just  remarked  that  "  in  many  things  we  all 
stumble."  But  he  is  now  suggesting  an  ideal  case — that  of  a  man  who  is  perfectly  free 
from  lip-sins ;  and  he  asserts  that  such  a  person  would  be  found  to  be  both  blameless 
and  morally  strong  over  the  whole  area  of  his  character.  The  power  which  can  bridle 
the  tongue  can  control  the  entire  nature.    So  great  is  the  influence  of  human  speech  1 

II.  Some  illubtkatioks  op  this  powbb.  (Vers.  3 — 6.)  The  apostle  here  compwrea 
the  tongue  first  to  two  familiar  mechanical  api^iauces,  and  then  to  one  of  the  m%hty 


48  THE  GENEBAli  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [oh.  m.  1—18 

foroM  of  nature.  In  all  the  three  selected  cases  very  insignificant-looking  mean*  suffice 
to  accomplish  great  results.  The  illustrations  are  extremely  graphic ;  each  is  more 
telling  than  the  preceding.  They  to,:;ether  show  that  James,  the  apostle  of  practical 
Christianity,  possessed  the  perceptions  and  the  instincts  of  a  poet.  1.  The  horse-bridle. 
(Ver.  3.)  The  first  illustration  only  emphasizes  the  thought  which  underlies  the  word 
"  bridle "  in  ver.  2,  and  in  ch.  i.  26.  The  wild  horses  that  roam  at  will  over  the 
American  prairies  seem  quite  unsubduable.  Yet  how  comiilete  is  the  control  which 
man  acquires  over  the  tame  horse !  By  means  of  the  bit — the  part  of  the  bridle  which 
the  animal  hites — he  is  kept  completely  under  command.  The  horse  is  controlled 
literally  by  the  tongue.  Now,  in  like  manner,  a  man  may  "  turn  about  his  whole  body  " 
by  subjecting  his  speech  to  firm  self-government.  The  spirited  steed  of  this  vtrse  n^ay 
be  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  flesh,  with  its  lusts  and  passions.  But  the  man  who 
uses  his  tongue  aright  will  find  its  influence  very  powerful  in  helping  him  to  subdue 
his  depraved  carnal  nature.  2.  The  ship's  rudder.  (Ver.  4.)  Both  romance  and  poetry 
gather  round  the  idea  of  a  ship.  Even  the  old  " galley  with  oars"  was  a  "gallant" 
spectacle  i  and  in  our  time  there  ia  no  sight  more  picturesque  than  that  of  a  sailing- 
ve«aeL 

"  Beliold  !  upon  the  murmuring  waves 

A  glorious  shnpe  appearing! 
A  broad- winged  vessel,  through  the  ■howat 

Of  glimmering  lustre  steering  I 

•  She  seems  to  hold  her  home  in  vieWi 
And  sails  as  if  the  path  she  knew  ; 
Bo  ealiu  and  stately  in  her  motion 
Across  the  unfathomed,  trackless  ocean.' 

(John  Wilson.) 

The  merchantmen  of  the  ancients  were  of  considerable  size    Acts  xxvii.,  xxviii.);  but 

in  our  day  naval  architecture  works  on  a  colossal  scale  of  which  the  ancients  never 
dreamed.  And  what  is  it  that  directs  the  largest  vessel  so  steadily  on  its  course,  and 
enables  it  to  persevere  even  in  spite  of  furious  storms  ?  It  is  simply  that  little  tongue, 
or  rudder,  at  the  stern.  The  steering  anparatus  is  "very  small"  in  proportion  to 
the  bulk  of  the  ship;  but  how  wonderfully  great  its  influence!  It  not  only  "turns 
about "  the  body  of  the  vessel  itself ;  its  action  is  also  powerful  enough  to  counteract 
the  driving  force  of  "rough  winds."  Now,  the  faculty  of  speech  is  the  rudder  of 
human  nature.  The  tongue  "  boasteth  great  things ; "  and  well  it  may,  for  "  death  and 
life  are  in  its  power  "  (Prov.  iviii.  21).  If  the  spirited  horse  is  a  symbol  of  the  flesh, 
the  "  rough  winds  "  which  beat  u|)on  the  ship  are  suggestive  of  the  world.  The  rudder 
of  speech,  rightly  directed,  will  help  us  to  continue  straight  on  our  heavenward  course, 
despite  the  fierce  gusts  and  gales  of  external  temptation.  3.  The  little  fire,  (Vers. 
5,  60  What  a  terrific  power  there  is  in  fire  1  One  tiny  neglected  spark  may  kindle  a 
conflagration  that  will  consume  a  city.  The  great  fire  of  1666  in  Loudon,  which  began 
in  a  little  wooden  shop  near  London  Bridge,  burned  down  every  building  between  the 
Tower  and  the  Temple.  And  how  ten  ible  are  the  seas  of  fire,  kindled  often  by  some 
casual  spark,  which  roll  along  the  prairies  of  North  America!  The  power  of  a  little 
tongue  of  flame  is  simply  stupendous ;  and  thus  it  is  a  most  ap^'osite  illustration  of  the 
destructive  energy  of  human  speech.  For  "the  tongue  is  a  fire."  Sometimes  this 
tremendous  power  is  exerted  for  good;  indeed,  the  "tongue  of  fire"  is  the  ajipropriate 
emblem  of  Christianity  as  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  ii.  3).  More 
usually,  however, fire  is  contemplated  as  an  instrument  of  evil.  So  "the  tongue  is  a 
fire  "  as  regards  its  intense  energy.  Unsanctified  speech  scorches  and  consumes.  The 
liar  scatters  firebrands;  the  slanderer  kindles  lambent  flames;  the  profane  swearer  spits 
the  fire  of  hell  into  the  face  of  God.  "  The  world  of  iniquity  among  our  members  ia 
the  tongue  ; "  »'.«.  a  whole  microcosm  of  evil  resides  within  the  sphere  of  its  operation. 
It"defileth  the  whole  body;"  just  as  fire  soils  with  its  smoke,  the  tongue  stirs  up 
the Jieart's  corruption,  and  uses  it  to  stain  one's  own  life  and  character.  It"setteth 
on  fire  the  wheel  of  nature  ; " — for  the  whole  circle  of  an  unsanctified  life,  from  birth 
onwards,  is  kept  burning  by  the  evil  tongue.  And  it  " is  set  on  fire  by  hell; "  for  the 
ultimate  inspiration  of  this  destructive  agency  is  of  infernal  origin.    This  fire  ia  deril- 


OH.  in.  1—18.]         THE  GENEKAL  EPISrLB  OF  JAMES.  49 

lightecl,  hell-kindled.  Satan  loaded  the  human  tongue  at  the  Fall  with  dynamite; 
and  every  day  he  ignites  the  tieacherous  raag.iziiie  from  the  unquenchable  fire.  Thus, 
as  the  spirited  horse  represents  the  flesh,  and  the  fierce  winds  the  world,  the  raging  fira 
leads  us  to  think  of  the  devil — the  power  of  "  the  evil  one." 

CoNOLCSiON.  Let  us  earnestly  seek  the  grace  of  God,  to  deliver  our  tongue  from  the 
deceits  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  ami  the  devil.  Let  us  guard  the  portals  of  our  lips,  so 
that  no  uncharitable  or  slanderous  words  may  issue  from  them.  Let  us  welcome  the 
Pentecosbil  "  tongue  of  fire,"  that  it  may  purify  us  from  the  evil  tongue  which  ia  "set 
on  fire  by  hell."— 0.  J. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — The  tongue  ungovernable  and  inconsistent.  At  first  the  apostle  had 
reminded  his  readtrs  that  speech  may  be  made  a  great  power  for  good  (vers.  2 — 4). 
Then  he  went  on  to  say  that  in  actual  fact  it  is  employed  by  most  men  as  an  engine  of 
evil  (vers.  5,  6).     He  proceeds  now  to  justify  his  strong  languao;e  on  this  puint. 

L  The  untamadlbness  op  the  tonoub.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  We  have  here  a  fourfold 
classification  of  the  inferior  creatures.  God  gave  man  dominion  over  them  at  the 
creation,  and  intimated  his  supremacy  anew  after  the  Flood.  There  is  no  variety  of 
brute  nature  that  has  not  yielded  in  the  past,  and  that  does  not  continue  to  yield, 
to  the  lordship  of  human  nature.  The  horse,  the  dog,  the  elephant,  the  lion,  the 
leopard,  the  tiger,  the  hyena  ;  the  partridge,  the  falcon,  the  eagle ;  the  asp,  the  cobra ; 
the  crocodile ; — these  names  suggest  ample  evidence  of  man's  power  to  tame  the  most 
diverse  species  of  wild  animals.  But,  says  James,  there  is  one  little  creature  which 
human  nature,  in  its  own  strength,  finds  it  impossible  to  domesticate.  The  tongue  of 
man  is  fiercer  than  the  most  ferocious  beast.  The  rebellion  of  our  race  against  good  is 
far  more  inveterate  than  any  insubordination  of  the  brutes.  Indeed,  the  revolt  of  the 
lower  creatures  against  the  authority  of  man  is  only  the  shadow  and  symbol  of  man's 
revolt  against  the  authority  of  God.  Year  by  year  man  is  subduing  the  earth  and 
extending  his  dominion  over  it ;  but  his  natural  power  to  govern  the'  tongue  remains  as 
feeble  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Cain.  This  "  little  member  "  reveals  the  a  ppalling  depths 
of  human  corruption.  "It  is  a  restless  evil;"  unstable,  fickle,  versatile;  ever  stir- 
ring about  from  one  form  of  unrighteousness  to  another;  assuming  Protean  shapes 
and  chameleon  hues;  its  words  sometimes  filthy,  sometimes  slanderous,  sometimes 
profane,  sometimes  angry,  sometimes' idle.  And  the  untamed  tongue  "is  full  of 
deadly  poison."  It  is  a  worse  poison-bag  than  that  of  the  most  hurtful  serpent.  The 
words  of  a  false  tongue  are  fangs  of  moral  venom,  for  which  no  human  skill  can  supply 
an  antidote.  Is  not  calumny  just  a  foul  virus  injected  into  the  .social  body,  which  kills 
character,  happiness,  and  sometimes  even  life?  Its  venom  spreads  far  and  wide,  and 
man  is  powerless  to  destroy  it, 

II.  The  inconsistenct  of  the  tonode.  (Ters.  9 — 12.)  The  same  person  may 
just  now  put  the  faculty  of  speech  to  its  highest  use ;  and,  almost  immediately  after- 
wards, wickedly  abuse  it.  The  tongue  has  been  given  us  that  therewith  we  may 
"  bless  the  Lord  and  Father ; "  and  to  utter  the  Divine  praise  is  the  most  ennobling 
exercise  of  human  speech.  The  Christian  calls  him  "  Lord,"  and  adores  him  for  his 
eternal  Godhead ;  he  also  calls  him  "  Father,"  and  blesses  him  for  his  adopting  grace. 
Then,  with  melancholy  inconsistency,  the  same  mouth  which  has  been  praising  God 
may  be  heard  invoking  evil  upon  men.  How  often  do  those  who  profess  godliness 
speak  passionate  and  spiteful  words  I  Do  not  Christians  who  belong  to  the  same  con- 
gregation sometimes  backbite  one  another?  Do  not  believers  of  different  communions 
often,  out  of  mere  sectarian  rivalry,  denounce  one  another's  Churches?  Even  godly 
men  sometimes  cherish  the  spirit  which  would  "  forbid "  others  to  work  the  work  of 
the  Lord,  simply  because  these  are  not  of  their  company.  Now,  such  inconsistency  is 
seen  in  all  its  aggravation  when  we  consider  the  fact  that  truly  to  bless  God  forbids 
the  cursing  of  any  man.  "  The  Lord  "  is  the  "  Father  "  of  all  men,  for  men  "  are  made 
after  the  likeness  of  God."  In  his  princely  intellect,  and  his  hungering  heart,  and  even 
in  his  uneasy  conscience,  man  reflects  the  image  of  his  Maker.  God  and  he  are  so  close 
of  kin  to  each  other — by  nature,  and  through  Christ's  incarnation — that  real  reverence 
for  God  requires  that  we  "honour  all  men."  How  inconsistent,  then,  for  the  same 
mouth  to  bless  the  Father  and  to  curse  the  children !  The  inconsistency  appears  on 
the  very  face  of  the  English  word  "  curse."  To  curse  means  primarily  "  to  invoke  evil 
JAMKS.  K 


5d  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.         [oh.  in.  1—18 

upon  one,  by  the  sign  of  the  cross."  The  cross  is  the  symhol  of  the  highest  blessing  to 
the  world;  and  yet  those  who  enjoy  the  blessedness  which  it  brings  have  used  it  as  an 
instrument  of  cursing.  We  bless  God  for  the  cross ;  and  then  we  curse  men  in  the 
name  of  the  cross.  Such  inconsistency,  the  apostle  adds,  is  flagrantly  unnatural  (vers. 
11, 12).  None  such  is  to  be  met  with  in  the  physical  world.  A  spring  of  water 
cannot  transgress  the  law  of  its  nature.  A  fruit  tree  can  only  bear  fruit  according  to 
its  kind.  How  unnatural,  then,  that  in  the  moral  world  the  same  fountain  of  speech 
should  emit  just  now  a  rill  of  .clear  sweet  praise,  and  soon  afterwards  a  torrent  of  bitter 
slander,  or  a  stream  of  brackish  minced  oaths!  Where  a  true  believer  falls  into  this 
sinful  inconsistency,  it  is  because  the  fountain  of  the  old  nature  within  his  heart  has 
not  yet  been  closed  up.  He  nccils  to  have  the  accursed  tree  on  which  Jesus  died  cast 
into  the  bitter  stream  within  him,  to  sweeten  it,  and  to  make  it  a  river  of  living  water. 
In  the  case  of  a  soul  that  lias  experienced  the  renewing  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  this 
unnatural  inconsistency  of  speech  not  only  "  ought  not  so  to  be,"  but  does  not  need  to 
be.— O.J. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — False  wisdom.  The  apostle  suggests  here  that  those  who  aspired  too 
hastily  to  become  Christian  teachers  (ver.  1)  showed  themselves  to  be  sadly  deficient  in 
wisdom.  They  were  unwise  at  once  in  their  estimate  of  their  own  powers,  and  in  their 
judgment  as  to  the  kind  of  public  discussions  which  would  be  profitable  for  the  Church. 
The  cause  of  gospel  truth  could  never  be  advanced  by  dogmatic  disputations  or  bitter 
personal  wrangling.  Attend,  therefore,  says  James  in  ver.  13,  to  a  description  first  of 
false  wisdom  (vers.  14 — 16),  and  then  of  true  (vers.  17, 18).  Many  members  of  the 
Churches  of  "  the  Dispersion  "  desired  to  appear  "  wise  "  (ver.  13),  but  only  some  were 
really  so.  Many  might  even  be  "  knowing,"  or  "  endued  with  knowledge,"  who  were 
not  wis*. 

"  Knowledge  and  wisdom,  far  from  being  one^ 
Have  ofttimes  no  counectioD." 

(Oowper.) 

Knowledge  is  only  a  hewer  of  wood,  while  wisdom  is  the  architect  and  builder.  A 
man  may  possess  a  large  library,  or  even  amass  vast  stores  of  knowledge,  and  yet  be  "  a 
motley  fooL"  Indeed,  no  fool  is  so  great  as  a  knowing  fool.  The  wise  man  is  he  who 
can  use  his  knowledge  for  the  largest  moral  and>spiritual  good.  And  the  true  wisdom 
is  bound  np  with  the  life  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Jobxxviii.  28 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15). 
It  makes  the  will  of  God  its  rule,  and  his  glory  its  end.  So  the  man  who  lives  without 
God  shonld  be  thought  of  as  the  impersonation  of  stupidity,  and  Satan  as  the  supreme 
fool  of  the  universe.  But,  if  a  man  be  "wise  unto  salvation,"  how  will  his  wisdom 
appear  ?  1.  By  "his  good  life."  (Ver.  13.)  The  quiet  even  flow  of  one's  daily  occupation 
will  furnish  an  ample  sphere  for  it.  Even  the  heathen  philosopher,  Seneca,  has  said, 
"  Wisdom  does  not  show  itself  so  much  in  precept  as  in  life — in  a  firmness  of  mind 
and  a  mastery  of  appetite.  It  teaches  us  to  do,  as  well  as  to  talk ;  and  to  make  our 
words  and  actions  all  of  a  colour."  The  weighty 'Kssays 'of  Lord  Bacon  "come  home  to 
men's  business  and  bosoms ; "  yet  their  author  cannot  justly  be  called  "  the  wisest,"  if 
he  was  in  his  own  life  "  the  meanest  of  mankind."  2.  By  "  hit  works  in  meekness  of 
wisdom."  Cliaracter  is  perceived  not  only  by  its  subtle  aroma,  but  in  connection  with 
in^lividual  actions.  Wisdom  shows  itself  in  acts  of  holiness.  And  these  acts  are  done 
"  in  meekness,"  which  is  one  of  wisdom's  inseparable  attributes.  True  wisdom  is 
mild  and  calm,  patient  and  self-reslraining.  And  yet  a  meek  spirit  is  not  a  mean 
spirit  The  "  poor  in  spirit "  are  not  the  poor-spirited.  The  "meekness  of  wisdom" 
consists  with  the  greatest  courage  and  the  most  ardent  zeal.  An  old  commentator  says, 
"  Moses  was  very  meek  in  his  own  cause,  but  as  hot  as  fire  in  the  cause  of  God."  And 
the  Man  Christ  Jesus  was  mild,  just  because  he  was  strong  and  brave.  There  was  no 
fierceness,  no  fanaticism,  no  sourness,  about  hjm.  He  is  our  perfect  Pattern  of  the 
"  meekness  of  wisdom  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  22,  28 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  12 — 14).  The  spirit  of  strife 
and  wrangling  is  not  the  spirit  of  Christ.  James  now  proceeds  to  a  statement  of 
principles  regarding  false  or  earthly  wisdom  (vers.  14 — 16). 

I.  Its  natube.  (Ver.  14.)  The  spurious  wisdom  of  the  "  many  teachers  "  carried 
in  it  not  so  much  burning  zeal  'as  "  bitter  zeal."  Its  spirit  was  factious, .arrogant, 
bigoted.    Its  roots  lay  in  the  an^'ry  passions  of  the  heart.    Its  aim  was  personal  victory 


on.  in.  1—18.]         THE  OKNEBAL  EflSTLB  OF  JAM£a  6i 

ratlier  t>ian  the  triumph  of  the  truth.  While  it  may  be  sometimeB  dutiful  to  contend 
earnestly  in  defence  of  the  gospel,  the  love  of  controversy  for  its  own  sake,  and  the 
cherishing  of  a  contentious  spirit  towards  brethren,  is  always  sinful,  muc'i  less  a  ground 
for  "  glorying."  A  professing  Christian  who  lives  to  foster  either  doctrinal  wranglinga 
or  social  quarrels  presents  to  the  world  a  caricature  of  Christianity,  and  ia  himself 
a  living  lie  "  against  the  truth." 

_IL  Its  origin.  (Ver.  15.)  1.  "  Earthly.^  Every  good  gift  is  from  above ;  but 
this  so-called  wisdom  is  of  earthly  origin,  and  busies  itself  about  earthly  things.  Thosa 
cultivate  it  whose  souls  are  wholly  immersed  in  worldly  pursuits.  2.  "  Sensual;"  i.e. 
psychical  or  natural,  as  opposed  to  spiritual.  It  originates  in  the  lower  sphere  of  man's 
intellectual  nature ;  it  is  the  wisdom  of  his  unspiritual  mind  and  his  unsanctified  heart. 
Until  the  human  spirit  becomes  possessed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  its  works  will  be  "  the 
works  of  the  flesli."  3.  "  Devilish."  The  false  wisdom  is  demoniacal  in  source,  as  it  ia 
in  character.  The  envious  heart,  like  the  evil  tongue,  "  is  set  on  fire  by  hell "  (ver.  6). 
Implicitly  followed,  this  wisdom  will  tend  to  make  a  man  "  half-beast,  half-devil." 
These  three  adjectives  correspond  to  our  three  great  spiritual  enemies.  Earthly  wisdom 
has  its  origin  in  the  world ;  natural  wisdom,  in  the  flesh ;  demoniacal  wisdom,  in  the 
devil.  And,  recognizing  this,  our  prayer  should  be,  "From  all  such  deceits,  good 
Lord,  deliver  us." 

III.  Its  results.  (Ver.  16.)  Where  there  are  "bi'ter  zeal  and  faction"  in  the 
heart,  these  may  be  expected  to  produce  commotion  and  wretchedness  in  society. 
What  misery  has  not  the  spirit  of  strife  and  self-seeking  wrought  in  the  midst  of  fami- 
lies, and  in  the  bosom  of  Churches  I  It  is  a  fruitful  source  of  heart-burnings  and  of 
lifelong  alienations.  It  sows  tares  among  the  wheat.  And  the  harvest  of  "this 
wisdom"  shall  be  "a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow." 

Lessons.  1.  Loathe  the  vile  spirit  of  strife.  2.  Covet  earnestly  the  gift  of  holy 
wisdom.   3.  Bemember  that  th«  climax  of  the  true  wisdom  consists  in  meeknew. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  17,  18. — True  wisdom.  These  two  verses  exhibit,  with  much  terseness  and 
beauty,  the  features  of  the  true  or  heavenly  wisdom,  ix.  the  characteristic  qualities  of 
the  state  of  mind  which  is  produced  by  a  sincere  reception  of  saving  truth.  The  picture 
here  presented  forms  a  direct  contrast  to  the  description  of  false  or  earthly  wisdom  given 
in  vers.  14 — 16. 

I.  The  nature  of  true  wisdom.  (Ver.  17.)  In  origin  it  is  "  from  above."  It  is 
not  the  product  of  self-culture,  but  altoj;ethi.r  supernatural  and  gracious.  And,  being  a 
gift  of  God,  it  is  "  good  "  and  "  perfect "  in  all  its  characteristics  (oh.  i.  5, 17).  James 
here  represents  the  heavenly  wisdom  as  possessed  of  seven  great  excellences.  Seven 
was  the  perfect  number  among  the  Jews ;  and  there  are,  so  to  speak,  seven  notes  in 
the  harmony  of  Christian  character;  or  seven  colours  in  the  rainbow  of  the  Christian 
life,  which,  when  blended,  form  its  pure  white  sunlight.  Of  these  seven,  the  first  is 
marked  oflf  from  the  others,  because  it  refers  to  what  a  man  is  within  his  own  heart ; 
while  the  other  six  deal  with  the  qualities  shown  by  true  wisdom  in  connection  with 
one's  deportment  towards  his  fellow-men.  1.  In  respect  of  a  man  himself.  Here  true 
wisdom  is  "pure."  This  word  means  chaste,  unsullied,  holy.  Purity  is  the  funda- 
mental characteristic  of  everything  that  is  •'  from  above."  Righteousness  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  all  that  is  beautiful  in  character.  Christian  wisdom  leads  a  man  "  to 
keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world,"  and  to  "  cleanse  himself  from  all  defilement  of 
flesh  and  spirit."  Every  person,  therefore,  who  lives  a  sensual,  selfish,  or  openly  sinful 
life,  shows  himself  to  be  destitirte  of  the  heavenly  wisdom.  For  its  chief  element  is 
holiness — that  purity  which  is  obtained  through  the  blood  of  Christ  and  by  the 
indwelling  of  his  Spirit.  2.  In  respect  of  his  demeanour  towards  hit  fellovi-men.  The 
expressions,  "  first,"  and  "  then,"  do  not  imply  that  the  wise  man  must  be  perfectly 
"pure"  before  he  begins  to  be  "peaceable."  They  indicate  the  logical  order,  and  not 
merely  the  order  of  time.  The  phrase,  "first  pure,  then  peaceable,"  has  often  been 
Badly  abused  in  the  interests  of  the  "  bitter  jealousy  and  faction  "  which  belong  to  false 
wisdom.  But  surely,  even  in  doctrinal  matters,  we  are  to  be  peaceable  with  a  view  to 
purity,  as  well  as  pure  for  the  sake  of  peace.  "Peaceable ;"  indisposed  to  conflict  or 
dissension.  "  Jealousy  and  faction  "  are  characteristics  of  earthly  wisdom.  The  heaTenly 
wisdom  deprecates  disputatious  debate,  and  labours  to  quench  animosities.    "  Oent3»i 


62  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMESb        [oh.  m.  1—14 

forbearing,  courteous,  considerate.  Gentleness  is  just  the  outward  aspect  of  the  ^ce 
of  peaceableness,  the  vesture  in  which  the  peaceable  spirit  should  be  clothed.  "  Ecug 
to  he  entreated ;"  accessible,  compliant,  open  to  conviction,  and  willing  to  listen  to 
remonstrance.  The  wise  man  tliinks  more  about  his  duties  than  his  rights.  "  FaU  of 
•mercy  and  good  fruits;"  overflowing  with  ft-elings  of  kindness  and  compassion,  and 
finding  a  healthy  outlet  for  these  in  acts  of  practical  beneficence.  "  Without  variance;  " 
steady,  persistent,  unmistakable,  never  "  divided  in  its  own  mind  "  (ch.  ii.  4  ;  i.  6),  and 
therefore  never  halting  in  the  fulfilment  of  its  mission.  "  Without  hypocrisy;"  per- 
fectly sincere,  always  really  being  what  it  seeius  and  professes.  Wisdom's  ways  are 
not  tortuous.  It  knows  that  a  straight  line  is  the  shortest  distance  between  two 
points. 

II.  Tub  besultb  of  tbce  wisdom.  (Ver.  18.)  The  fruit  of  the  earthly  wisdom  is 
"  confusion  and  every  vile  deed  "  (ver.  16),  but  the  fruit  of  the  heavenly  wisdom  con- 
sists in  "  righteousness."  "  Peace  "  is  the  congenial  soil  in  which  this  wisdom  takes  root 
and  grows  ;  the  seed  "  sown"  is  the  precious  Word  of  Goil ;  they  "that  make  peace" 
are  the  spiritual  farmers  who  scatter  it  in  hope ;  and  "  righteousness "  is  the  blessed 
harvest  which  shall  reward  their  toil.  The  eternal  recompeuse  of  the  righttous  shall  be 
their  righteousness  itself.     The  heavenly  wisdom  shall  be  its  own  reward  in  heaven. 

Lessons.  1.  The  harmony  between  this  doctrine  and  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  in  the 
Beatitudes  (Matt.  v.  3 — 12),  as  well  as  that  of  Paul  in  his  portraiture  of  love  (1  Cor.  xiii.). 
2.  The  excellency  and  attractiveness  of  the  true  wisdom.  3.  The  rarity  of  its  acquisi- 
tion, especially  as  regards  its  choicest  features,  even  on  the  part  of  professing  Christians. 
4.  The  necessity  of  asking  this  wisdom  from  God  bimgel£  6.  The  character  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Model  in  our  endeavours  after  it. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  ethics  of  speech.  In  these  verses  ii  dealt  a  rebuke  against  the 
craving  for  authority,  which,  as  he  reminds  them,  involves  "  heavier  judgment."  How  ? 
Partly  as  coming  under  judgment  itself  (see  Matt,  xxiii.  8 — 10) ;  partly  as  involving 
increased  responsibility.  And  responsibility  and  judgment  are  very  near  akin.  More 
especially,  in  these  words  of  warning,  he  h^  in  view  that  confused  assembly  of  theirs, 
in  which  all  vied  together  in  attempts  to  speak.  How  great  the  danger  of  "  stumbling  " 
in. such  speech  I  A  stirring  up  of  impatience,  rancour,  strife.  This  leads  to  thoughts 
on  the  power  of  the  tongue,  for  good  and  for  harm ;  with  practical  conclusions  as  to  the 
inconsistency  of  unbridled  speech. 

I.  The  poweb  op  the  tongub.  1.  For  good.  (Vers.  2 — 5.)  Speech?  It  la  the 
quick,  instinctive,  volatile  expression  of  the  man.  A  subtle  efSuence,  showing  the 
inner  life.  And  as  the  inner  life  is  agitated  and  stirred,  tossing  first  this  way,  then 
that,  how  readily  may  the  words  also  be  committed  to  the  impulses  of  the  heart  I  And 
as  those  impulses  may  so  easily  be,  for  the  moment,  wrong  impulses,  how  easily  may 
wrong  words  be  spoken  I  And  so  the  transient  feeling  has  fixed  itself  in  a  word  that 
bites,  and  is  not  forgotten.  And  the  feeling  itself  is  fixed  by  the  word  that  has  uttered 
it;  the  man  is  committed  to  what  otherwise  he  might  have  been  glad  to  forget.  James's 
first  meaning,  then,  in  the  statement  that  the  man  who  stumbles  not  in  words  is  "  a 
perfect  man,"  is  perhaps  this :  that  one  who  has  attained  to  mastery  over  so  subtle  and 
delicate  an  activity  of  the  nature  as  speech,  is  perforce  a  man  who  has  mastered  all  the 
more  tangible  and  more  oontrdllable  activities.  The  "whole  body,"  all  conduct,  is 
brought  into  subjection,  if  this  element  of  life  is  rightly  swayed.  Is  it  not  so  ?  Your 
experience  will  tell  you  that  this  is  the  last,  the  most  intractable  of  the  activities 
which  you  are  called  on  to  subdue.  But  there  is  another  meaning  in  the  words  than 
this.  The  man  who  schools  himself  to  such  restraint  as  absolute  mastery  over  speech 
implies,  has  not  merely  learned  perfection  of  self-control  in  the  matter  of  other  and 
more  tangible  activities,  but  is  learning  a  belter  perfection  than  that — even  the  self- 
restraint  of  his  whole  inteiior  nature.  To  restrain  conduct  is  much;  but  to  restrain 
thought,  purpose,  passion !  to  lay  a  firm,  a  mastering  control  on  all  the  complex  desires 
and  impulses  of  our  nature  1  Oh,  surely  that  is  a  perfection  of  self-restraint  indeed  I 
And  the  bridli  ng  of  the  tongue  means  thus  the  bridling  of  the  unruly  passions  of  the  heart. 
The  restraint  of  exprti^sion  is  the  restraint  of  the  impulse  that  seeks  to  express  itsd/ 
(see  for  converse  of  this  law  the  former  exposition,  where  we  have  noticed  how  the 
exercise  of  a  faculty  perfects  the  faculty  that  is  exercised :  ch.  iL  22)!    Do  you  not 


CH.  Ill,  1—18.]         THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  53 

know  this  alBo  from  your  experience  ?  Let  loose  the  word,  and  you  have  let  loose  Ou 
feeling  ;  conquer  the  word,  and  you  have  conquered  the  feeling.  So,  then,  the  illustra- 
tions :  the  bridle,  the  helm.  And  the  tongue,  a  little  member,  boasteth  great  things, 
2.  For  harm.  (Vers.  5 — 8.)  The  remarks  under  this  head  have  been  partly  anticipated 
above.  Let  loose  the  word,  and  youhave  let  loose  the  passions.  An  unbridled  tongue 
is  an  unbridled  nature.  Unchecked  speech  is  unchecked  wickedness.  Yes;  the  activities 
of  the  man  and  the  interior  impulses  are  alike  let  loose  for  harm  if  the  tongue  be 
uncontrolled.  Illustrations:  fire  among  wood.  So  the  "world  of  iniquity,"  defiling 
the  boiiy,  setting  on  fiie  the  wheel  of  nature,  and  itself  set  on  fire  of  hell !  And  then  ? 
Tame  the  tongue,  and  tame  the  nature,  who  may !  Even  ravenous  and  noxious  creatures 
are  not  untaniable  as  that  is ;  a  restless  evil ;  full  of  deadly  poison.  So  the  psalmist 
(c«l.  3).  And  your  experience  ?  A  subtle,  insinuating  poison,  which  works  its  way  into 
your  whole  nature,  and  infects  all  social  joy. 

II.  The  inconsistency  op  unbridled  speech.  Picture  their  quarrelsome  assemblies 
again :  their  invectives  against  one  another,  their  common  virulence  towards  the  Gentile 
Christian  Churches.  And  withal  hymns  to  God  I  That  is,  hate  and  love  in  the  same 
heart  together,  and  all  essentially  towards  God  himself  (ver.  9)  1  The  inconsistency 
(ver.  10).  So  illustrations :  fountain,  tree  (vers.  11,  12).  These  contrarieties,  impos- 
sible in  nature,  can  exist  in  us  I  And  yet  in  truth  they  cannot.  For  ours  is  one 
nature.  Can  salt  water  yield  fresh  (ver.  12)?  Neither  can  a  cursing  nature  bless,  or  a 
hating  nature  love.  And  so  our  very  praise  is  vitiated,  and  our  worship  becomes 
blasphemy.  Oh,  what  are  our  dangers  daily  in  this  matter  of  speech  I  And  perhaps,  to 
shun  them,  we  say  we  will  hold  our  peace,  even  from  good  (Ps.  xxxix.).  Nay,  but  we 
must  rather  learn  of  him  who  was  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  And  so  our  speech  shall 
be  pure  as  his  was,  and  our  turbulent  nature  shall  find  rest.— -T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — Wisdom,  true  and  false.  The  temptation  to  be  "teachera"  (ver.  1) 
arose  from  the  notion  that  they  possessed  wisdom.  How  shall  they  show  this  wisdom, 
how  shall  they  even  use  it,  if  they  may  not  teach  ?  The  life  is  to  be  at  once  the 
practice  and  the  manifestation  of  a  wisdom  that  is  true  (ver.  13).  James  here  reverts 
to  his  earlier  theme  (ch.  i,  5)  ;  and  we  have  for  our  consideration — The  false  wisdom  and 
the  true,  in  their  origin,  nature,  and  fruits. 

L  The  false  wisdom.  1.  What  ivas  the  nature  of  the  false  wisdom  wkich 
prompted  them  to  much  speaking  f  It  was  nothing  other  than  the  spirit  of  faction  and 
jealousy — competing  with  one  another  for  precedence ;  envying  one  another.  And  this 
wasa  lying  against  the  truth  1  What  truth  ?  Their  brotherhood  in  Christ,  and  the 
love  which  euch  brotherhood  required.  Such  false  wisdom  was :  (1)  Earthly  :  it 
pertained  altogether  to  the  corrupt  ways  of  this  world,  (2)  Sensual:  it  was  prompted, 
not  by  the  spirit  which  God  had  made  his  home,  but  by  the  passions  (see  critical  notes). 
(3)  Devilish:  they  were  as  demoniacs,  in  their  ungoverned  rage  and  wild  clamouriugs. 
2.  What  were  the  fruits  of  such  wisdom  as  this  f  "Confusion."  Think  of  their  assemblies, 
with  the  wrangling,  cursing,  and  swearing  I  so  also  confusion  in  all  the  relations  of 
social  life.  "And  every  vile  deed ; "  for  what  would  not  men  descend  to,  to  further  their 
base,  party  aims?  8,  What  was  the  origin  of  luch  wisdom  t  "Not  from  above:"  no, 
indeed,  but  rather  "  set  on  fire  of  hell "  1 

II.  The  true  wisdom.  1.  Its  nature.  "  First  pure : "  for  at  any  cost,  even  at  the 
cost  of  peaceahleness,  a  Christian  must  be  true.  So  Christ,  even  though  it  involved 
the  "  woes "  of  Matt,  xxiii. ;  even  though  it  involved  the  cross  I  And  his  followers 
likewise  (Matt.  x.  34).  "  Then  peaceable,"  as  against  the  jarrings  and  discords  of  the 
false  wisdom;  "gentle,"  as  against  faction  and  jealousy;  "easy  to  be  entreated,"  as  against 
the  sullen  resentments  shown  by  those  who  imagine  themselves  to  be  offended;  "with- 
out variance,"  i.e.  fickleness  of  purpose ;  and  "  without  hypocrisy,"  to  which  double- 
mindedness  so  easily  leads.  2.  Its  fruits.  Peace,  as  opposed  to  confusion ;  and  the 
good  fruits  of  mercy,  as  opposed  to  vile  deeds.  3.  Its  origin.  "Prom  above:"  yea, 
from  the  Father  of  lights  (ch.  L17).     So  the  tongues  of  fire  (Acts  ii.  3). 

Who  is  a  wise  man  ?  Alas,  who  1  But  let  us  ask  of  Gfld,  who  giveth  liberally ; 
remembering  that  "  he  that  winneth  souls  ia  wise,"  and  that  "  they  that  be  wise  shall 
thine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  and  ...  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever"  (ProT. 
xi,  30;  Dan.  xii.  3),— T.  F.  L. 


64 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTIiE  OF  JAMliS.         [oh.  iv.  1—17. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ven.  1  — 12.  —  Rebcke  or  Quarrels 
ABISINO  TEOM  Pride  AND  Gkeet).  A  terribly 
sadden  transition  from  the  "peace"  with 
wliinh  ch.  ill.  closed. 

Ver.  1. — "Whence  wars  and  whence  fight- 
ings among  youl  The  second  "whence" 
(Trieeif)  is  omitted  in  the  Received  Text,  after 
K,  L,  Syriao,  and  Vulgate ;  but  it  is  supported 
by  N,  A,  B,  C,  the  Coptic,  and  Old  Latin. 
Wars  .  .  .  fightings  (ir(jAe/ii)i .  .  .  fidxai).  To 
what  is  the  reference  ?  Miix"'  occurs  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  2  Cor. 
vii.  5,  "Without  were  fightings,  within  were 
fears;"  and  2  Tim.  ii.  23;  Titus  iii.  9,  in 
both  of  which  passages  it  refers  to  disputes 
and  questions.  It  is  easy,  therefore,  to  give  it 
the  same  meaning  here.  Tl6\ffioi,  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament,  as  in  the  LXX.,  is 
always  used  of  actual  warfare.  In  behalf  of 
its  secondary  meaning,  "contention,"  Grimm 
('Lexicon  of  New  Testament  Greek')  appeals 
to  Sophocles,  'Electra,'  L  219,  and  Plato, 
'  Phsed.,'  p.  66,  o.  But  it  is  better  justified  by 
Clement  of  Rome,  §  xlvi.j'lj/a  H  ^peis  /col  Bv/iol 
Koi  Stxo(FTa(rlai  Kal  irxifffiaTiX  n6\€fi6s  re  iv 
v/uv — a  passage  which  has  almost  the  nature 
of  a  commentary  upon  St.  James's  language. 
There  is  then  no  need  to  seek  an  explanation 
of  the  passage  in  the  outbreaks  and  insur- 
rections which  were  so  painfully  common 
among  the  Jews.  Lusts  (tiSopSv);  R.V., 
"  pleasures."  "  An  imusual  sense  of  iiSonai, 
hardly  distinguishable  from  eViflu/tfcti,  in  fact 
taken  up  by  iiTiBuiie7Te"  (Alford).  With 
the  expression,  "  that  war  in  your  members," 
comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  H,  "  Abstain  from  fleshly 
lusts  which  war  against  the  soul." 

Ver.  2  gives  us  an  insight  into  the  terrible 
difficulties  with  which  the  apostles  had  to 
contend.  Those  to  whom  St.  James  was 
writing  were  guilty  of  lust,  which  actually 
led  to  murder.  So  the  charge  in  1  Pet.  iv. 
15  evidently  presupposes  the  possibility  of 
a  professing  Christian  sufTering  as  a  murderer 
or  thief.  Ye  kill.  The  marginal  rendering 
"  envy  "  supplies  a  remarkable  instance  of  a 
false  reading  once  widely  adopted,  although 
resting  simply  on  conjecture.  There  is  no 
variation  in  the  manuscripts  or  ancient  ver- 
sions. All  alike  have  (fo^'et  ETC.  But,  owing 
to  the  startling  character  of  the  expression 
in  an  address  to  Christians,  Erasmus  sug- 
gested that  perhaps  (j>8oi>e7Te,  "ye  envy,"  was 
the  oiiginal  reading,  and  actually  inserted 
it  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Greek  Testa- 
ment (1519).  In  his  tliird  edition  (1522) 
he  wisely  returned  to  the  true  reading, 
although,  strangely  enough,  he  retained  (he 
false  one,  "  ir"'~'^i»,"  in  his  Latiu  version. 


whence  it  passed  into  that  of  Beza  and 
others.  The  Greek  (peoi/eire  appears,  how- 
ever, in  a  few  later  editions,  e.g.  three 
editions  published  at  Basle,  1524  (Bebelius), 
1546  (Herwagius),  and  1553  (Beyling),  in 
that  of  Henry  Stephens,  1576 ;  and  even  so 
late  as  1705  is  found  in  an  edition  of  Oritius. 
In  England  the  reading  obtained  a  wide 
currency,  being  actually  adopted  in  all  the 
versions  in  general  use  previous  to  that  of 
1611,  viz.  those  of  Tyndale,  Coverdale, 
Taverner,  the  Bishops'  Bible,  and  the  Geneva 
Version.  The  Authorized  Version  jelegated 
it  to  the  margin,  from  which  it  has  been 
happily  excluded  by  the  Revisers,  and  thus, 
it  is  to  be  hoped,  it  has  finally  disappeared. 
Ye  kill,  and  desire  to  have.  The  combina- 
tion is  certainly  strange.  Dean  Scott  sees 
in  the  terms  a  possible  allusion  to  "the 
well-known  politico-religious  party  of  the 
zealots,"  and  suggests  the  rendering,  "ye 
play  the  murderers  and  zealots."  It  is,  per- 
haps, more  probable  that  fjj^ouTc  simply 
refers  to  covetousness;  of.  the  use  of  the  word 
(although  with  a  better  meaning)  ia  1  Cor. 
xil.  31 ;  xiv.  1,  39. 

Ver.  3. — An  evident  allusSon  to  the  ser- 
mon on  the  mount,  Matt.  vii.  7,  "  Ask,  and 
it  shall  be  given  to  you  ...  for  every  one 
that  asketh  receiveth."  And  yet  St.  James 
says,  "  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not,  because  ye 
ask  amiss ; "  for  our  Lord  elsewhere  limits 
his  teaching,  "All  things  whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  in  prayer  ielieving,"  etc.  (Matt. 
xiL  22).  AlreiTe  .  .  .  alretaBe.  The  active 
and  middle  voices  are  similarly  interchanged 
in  1  John  v.  15,  on  which  Dr.  Westcott 
writes  as  follows :  "  The  distinction  between 
the  middle  and  the  active  is  not  so  sharply 
drawn;  but  generally  the  personal  reference 
is  suggested  by  the  middle,  while  the  request 
is  left  wholly  undefined  as  to  its  destination 
by  the  active."  That  ye  may  consume  it 
upon  your  lusts ;  render,  with  B.V.,  Hiat  ye 
may  spend  it  in  your  pleaturet ;  r/Soiial,  as  in 
ver.  1. 

Ver.  4. — ^Ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses 
Omit  luoixol  tal,  wilh  fi',  A,  B.  The  Vulgate 
has  simply  adulteri;  the  Old  Latin  (ff), 
fornicatores.  Similarly  the  Syriao.  Very 
strange  is  this  sudden  exclamation,  "ye 
adulteresses  I  "  and  very  ilifBoult  to  explain. 
The  same  word  (/uoixa^is)  is  used  as  a 
feminine  adjective  by  our  Lord  in  the  ex- 
pression, "an  evil  and  adulterous  genera- 
tion "  (Matt.  xii.  89 ;  xvi.  4 ;  Mark  viii.  38) ; 
and  in  this  possibly  lies  the  explanation  of 
St.  James's  use  of  the  term.  More  probably, 
however,  it  should  be  accounted  for  as  a 
reminiscence  of  Ezek.  xxiii.  45,  where  W8 
read  of  Ivamaria  a^d  Jerusalfem  under  the 


EH.  IV.  1—17.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


55 


titles  of Aholah  and  Aholibah:"Tha  righteous 
men,  they  shall  judge  tliem  after  the  manner 
of  adulteresses,  and  after  the  manner  of 
women  that  shed  blood;  because  they  are 
adulteresset,  and  blood  is  in  their  hands." 
It  is  remarkable  too  that  in  Mai  iii.  5  the 
LXX.  has  iioixaMSes,  although  the  Hebrtsw 
has  the  masculine,  and  men  are  evidently 
referred  to.  If,  then,  in  the  Old  Testament 
the  Jewish  communities  were  personified  as 
adulteresses,  it  is  not  unnatural  for  St.  James 
to  tritnst'er  the  epithet  to  those  Judseo- 
Christian  communities  to  which  he  was 
writing;  and  the  word  should  probably  be 
taken,  just  as  in  the  Old  Testament,  of 
spiritual  fornication,  i.e.  apostasy  from  God, 
shown  in  this  case,  not  by  actual  idolatry, 
but  by  that  "  friendship  of  the  workl "  which 
is  "enmity  with  God,"  and  by  "covetous- 
ness  which  is  idolatry."  *i\fo.  The  word 
occurs  here  only  in  the  New  Testament. 
With  the  thought 'of  this  verse,  compare  our 
Lord's  words  in  John  xv.  18, 19. 

Vers.  5,  6. — The  difficulty  of  the  passage 
iswell  shown  by  thehesitationof  the  Revisers. 
The  first  clause  is  rendered,  "Or  thiuk  ye 
that  the  Scripture  speaketh  in  yain  ? "  but 
as  an  alternative  there  is  suggested  in  the 
margin,  "Or  think  ye  that  the  Scripture 
saith  in  vain?"  as  if  the  following  clause 
were  a  quotation  from  Scripture.  And  of  this 
following  clause  three  possible  renderings 
are  suggested.  (1)  In  the  text:  "Doth  the 
Spirit  which  he  made  to  dwell  in  us  long 
unto  envying?  But  he  giveth  more  grace. 
Wherefore  the  Scripture  saith,"  etc.  (2) 
Margin  1 :  "  The  Spirit  which  he  made  to 
dwell  in  us  he  yeameth  for  even  unto  jealous 
envy.  But  he  giveth,"  etc.  (3)  Margin  2 : 
"  That  Spirit  which  he  made  to  dwell  in  us 
yeameth  for  us  even  unto  jealous  envy. 
But  he  givetli,"  etc.  Further,  it  is  noted 
in  the  margin  that  some  ancient  authorities 
read  "dwelleth  in  us,"  i.e.  KaT'iK-ntrev,  which 
is  the  reading  of  the  Received  Text,  and  so 
of  the  A.V.  resting  upon  K,  L ;  K  and  B  being 
the  primary  authorities  for  Kar^Kurev.  With 
regard  to  tlie  first  clause,  the  rendering  of 
tlie  K.V., "  speaketh,"  may  be  justified  by 
Heb.  ix.  5.  It  is  possible  that  St.  James  was 
intending  to  quote  Prov.  iii.  34  immediately, 
but  after  the  introductory  formula,  tj  SotceTre 
in  Kevas  fi  yptufA}  \eyet,  he  interposes  with 
the  emphatic  question,  "  Is  it  to  envy,"  etc.  ? 
and  does  not  arrive  at  the  quotation  till 
ver.  6,  when  he  introduces  it  with  »  fresh 
formula  of  quotation,  Sih  \eyii,  a  looseness 
of  construction  which  is  quite  natural  in  a 
Hebrew.  Other  viuws,  for  which  it  is 
believed  there  is  less  to  be  urged,  are  the 
following :  (1)  that  the  words,  -irphs  <^Sov6v, 
K.T.A.,  are  a  quotation  from  some  (now  lost) 
early  Christian  writing.  On  this  view  the 
passage  is  parallel  to  Eph.  r.  14,  where  a 


portion .  of  a  Christian  hymn  is  introduced 
by  the  words,  Sib  \eyu.  (2)  That  St.  James 
is  referring  to  the  general  drift  rather  than 
to  the  exact  words  of  several  passages  of  tlie 
Old  Testiiment;  e.g.  Gen.  vi.  3 — 5;  Deut. 
xxxii.  10, 19,  etc.  (3)  That  the  allusion  is  to 
some  passage  of  the  New  Testament,  either 
Gal.  V.  17  or  1  Pet.  ii.  1,  etc.  Passing  on 
to  tlie  translation  of  the  second  clause,  vfAs 
ip9ov6v,  K.T.K  ,  it  must  be  noted  that  <p9ovis  is 
never  used  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament 
or  in  the  LXX.  (Wisd.  vi.  25 ;  1  Mace.  viii. 
16)  or  in  the  apostolic  Patheis  except  in  a 
bad  sense.  True  that  Exod.  xx.  5  teaches 
us  that  God  is  a  "  jealous  God,"  but  there 
the  LXX.  renders  Nip  by  the  far  nobler 
word  frjAwTljs :  of.  Wolf, '  Our»  Phil.  Orit.,' 
p.  64,  where  it  is  noted  that,  wliile  Q/fKos  is 
a  vox  media,  the  same  cannot  be  said  of 
^6ov6s,  which  is  always  vitiosa,  and  is  never 
used  by  the  LXX.  uM  vox  Hebraica  HKip 
od  Deum  vel  homines  relatus  exprimendue 
eel.  This  seems  to  be  a  fatal  objection  to 
the  marginal  readings  of  the  Revised  Version, 
and  to  compel  us  to  rest  content  with  that 
adopted  in  the  text,  "Doth  the  Spirit 
which  he  made  to  dwell  in  us  long  unto 
envying?"  or  rather,  "Is  it  to  envying  that 
the  Spirit  .  .  .  longs?"  irphs  <t>9oy6i/  being 
placed  for  emphasis  at  the  beginning  of  the 
sentence. 

Ver.  6. — God  resisteth  the  proud.  The 
connection  of  this  with  ver.  4  is  very  close, 
and  is  favourable  to  the  view  taken  above 
as  to  the  meaning  of  the  first  clause  of  ver.  5, 
as  the  words  appear  to  be  cited  in  support 
of  the  statement  that  whosoever  would  be  a 
friend  of  the  world  makes  himself  an  enemy 
of  God.  The  quotation  is  from  Prov.  iii. 
84,  LXX.,  Kipios  inepjitpdvois  ivTiriirireTai, 
rmreivois  Se  SlSairt  X'^P'"-  St.  James's  version 
agrees  with  this  exactly,  except  that  it  has 
d  ®eSs  instead  of  Kipios  (the  Hebrew  has 
simply  "he,"  wn).  The  passage  is  also 
quoted  in  precisely  the  same  form  by  St. 
Peter  (1  Pet.  v.  5),  and  with  Oe6s  instead  of 
6  @e6s  by  St.  Clement  of  Rome.  In  St. 
Peter  the  quotation  is  followed  by  the  in- 
junction, "  Humble  yourselves  therefore 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God.  .  .  .  Your 
adversary  the  devil,  as  a  'oaring  lion  walketh 
about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour :  whom 
withstand  (^  avTitrrnre)  steadfast  in  the 
faith."  There  ia  clearly  a  connection 
between  this  passage  and  the  one  before  us 
in  St.  James,  which  proceeds,  "  Be  subject 
therefore  unto  God ;  but  resist  the  devil  (^ivri- 
(TTijTe  Se  T^  StaP6\cf),  and  he  will  flee  from 
you."  This  passage,  it  will  be  felt,  is  the 
simpler,  and  therefore,  probably,  the  earlier 
of  the  two  (cf.  ch.  i.  3). 

Vers.  7 — 10. — Exhortation  based  on  the 
preceding,  quite  in  the  style  of  a  prophet  ot 
the  Old  Testament. 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


COH.  IV.  1—17 


Vm.  7, — ^Read,  but  tenet,  etc.  (fivjlaTtirt 
St),  N,  A,  B,  Coptic,  Vulgate. 

Ver.  8.— Draw  nigh  to  God  iiyyla-are  rf 
0ea).  A  phrase  used  of  approach  to  God 
under  the  old  covenant  (see  Exod.  xix.  22 ; 
xxxiv.  30 ;  Lev.  x.  3).  Equally  nfioesaary 
under  the  new  covenant  is  it  for  those  who 
draw  near  to  God  to  have  "  clean  liands  and 
a  pure  heart"  (Ps.  xxiv.  4).  H«noe  the 
following  injuni'tion  :  "  Cleanse  your  hands, 
ye  sinners;  and  purify  your  hearts,  ye 
dcmhle-minded." 

Ver.  9.— St.  .Tamea's  version  of  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn:  for  they  shall  be 
comforted"  (Matt.  T.  4).  Be  afflicted. 
TaKai-irmpiiaaTe  :  only  heie  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, occaBionally  in  the  LXX.  Heavi- 
ness. Ka.T-fi(p€ia:  another  27ro{  KeyS/iemy, 
apparently  never  found  in  the  LXX.  or 
in  the  apostolic  Fathers;  it  is,  however, 
used  by  Josephus  and  Philo.  It  is  equiva- 
lent to  "dejection,"  and  "exactly  dosoribes 
tlie  attitude  of  the  publican,  who  would  not 
lift  up  so  much  as  bis  eyes  unto  heaven, 
Luke  xviii.  IS"  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  10.— Humble  yourselves,  eto.  A 
further  parallel  with  our  Lord's  teaching, 
St.  James's  words  being  perhaps  suggested 
by  the  saying  recorded  in  Matt,  xxiii.  12, 
"  Whosoever  shall  humble  himself  shall  be 
exalted"  (ui|/ai8^)irET0i,  as  here,  "Ho  sliall 
/(/(  you  up,"  ui)/i^cr«).  In  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  (ivdmoi'  Kvpiov).  The  ai  tiole  (toO)  in 
the  Received  Text  is  certainly  wrong.  It  is 
wanting  in  n,  A,  B,  K.  The  anarthrous 
Kiptos  is  used  by  St.  James  here  and  in  cb. 
T.  4,  10  (with  which  contrast  ver.  11),  and 
11,  as  equivalent  to  the  "  Jehovah  "  of  the 
Old  Testament,  which  is  represented  in  the 
LXX.  by  Kipios  without  the  artiile. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Warning  cigainsl  censorious 
depreciation  of  others, 

Ver.  11 — SpeaknotevU.  KaTa\a\etv:  only 
here  and  1  Pet.  iL  12 ;  iii.  16.  Vulgate, 
detrahere.  But  the  context  shows  that  the 
writrr  is  thinking  rather  of  harsh  censorious 
judging.  li.V.,  "  Speak  not  one  against 
another."  And  judgeth ;  rather,  orjudgeih ;  ^ 
(n,  A,B,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  Coptic)  for  koI  of  the 
Textus  ReceptuB.  Speaketh  evil  of  the  law. 
What  law  ?  According  to  Dean  Pliimptro, 
"the  royal  law  of  Christ,  whieh  forbids 
judging  (Matt.  vii.  1—5)."  AlforJ  :  "  The 
law  of  Christian  life:  the  old  moral  Law, 
glorified  and  amplified  by  Christ:  the  v(i,iiov 
ficuTiMKis  of  ch.  ii.  8;  vinos  ttjs  iAeuBiplas 
ofoh.i.25."  Hnther:  "the  law  of  Christian 
life  which,  according  to  its  contents,  is  none 
other  than  the  law  of  love," 

Ver.  12. — To  play  the  part  of  a  censor  is 
to  assume  the  office  of  a  judge.  But  tliis  is 
an  olljce  which  helcpiigs  to  God  and  not  to 
man  (cf.  Rom.  xiv.  3,  4).  The  first  words  of 
th*  verse  should  be  rendered  as  follow*: 


"  One  only  is  the  Lawgiver  and  Judge :  "the 
last  words,  /tol  Kptriis,  omitted  in  the  Received 
Text,  being  found  in  s,  A,  B,  and  most 
versions,  the  Latin,  Byriac,  and  Coptic.  In 
the  last  clause  also  the  Received  Text 
requires  correction.  Bead,  2i>  5^  ris  tl  (insert 
Be,  »],  A,  B,  L,  K,  Latin,  Syriao,  Coptic)  S 
KplfOiv  ihv  ■nKi\<7iov  (N,  A,  B). 

Vera.  13— 17.— Denunciation  of  Oveb- 
WKENiNQ  Confidence  in  oub  own  Flans 
AND  oub  Ability  to  pebfoem  them. 

Ver.  13. — Go  to;  "Aye,  properly,  the  im- 
perative, but  here  used  adverbially,  a 
usage  common  in  Greek  prose,  and  found 
again  in  ch.  v.  L  (For  the  word,  comp. 
Judg.  .Tix.  6 ;  2  Kings  iv.  24 ;  and  for  similar 
instances  of  the  singular  where  more  than 
one  person  is  referred  to,  see  Wetstein,  vol.  ii. 
p.  676.)  The  Received  Text  (Stephens) 
requires  some  correction  in  this  verse. 
Read,  aitiiepov  %  aiptov  with  M,  B ;  the  futures 
Ttop^^trofiiQa,  Troi-fiaojxev,  ^fnropevo-d/ieda  and 
KepSTjffo/iev  (B,  Latt.,  Syriae)  instead  of  the 
subjunctives;  and  omit  Ira  after  ^vioutJc,  with 
N,  B,  Latt,  Coptic.  Continue  there  a  year ; 
rather,  spend  a  year  there,  ivtavrliv  being 
the  object  of  the  verb  and  not  the  accusative 
of  duration.  For  iroiitr,  used  of  time,  ct 
Acts  XV.  33;  xviii.  23;  xx.  3;  2  Cor.  xi.  25. 
The  Latins  nse/acfo  in  the  same  way;  e.g. 
Cicero, '  Ad  Attic.,'  v.  xx,  "  Apamea  quinque 
dies  morati .  .  .  Iconii  decern  fecimus." 

Vtr.  14  fortifies  the  rebuke  of  ver.  13  by 
showing  the  folly  of  their  action ;  cf.  Prov. 
xxvii.  1, "  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow  (to, 
fti  aSpwv),  for  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day 
may  brinj;  forth."  Whereas  ye  know  not ; 
rather,  seeing  that,OT,inasmuch  as  ye  hnownot, 
etc.  {o'Itivis  oJk  diriffrairBe).  The  text  in  this 
verse  again  in  a  somewhat  disorganized  con- 
dition, but  the  general  drift  is  clear.  We 
should  probably  read,  Ohivis  oix  kirlarTaa-ee 
rh  T>)j  avpioV  irola  i]  faj)  iimv}  &t;u1j  yhp  itrre  r) 
TTp&s  a\iyov  ^atvo^ivf)  eireiTO  Kol  d(paviCofievTj, 
R.V.,  "  Whereas  ye  know  not  what  shall  be 
on  the  morrow.  What  is  your  life  ?  For  ye 
are  a  vajiour  that  appcareth  for  a  little  time 
and  then  vanisheth  away." 

Ver.  15.— For  that  ye  ought  to  say  (irrl 
ToS  \4yeiv) ;  literally,  instead  of  your  saying  ; 
avrl  ToB,  with  the  infinitive,  "ssepe  apud 
Grseoos  "  (Grimm).  Tliis  verse  follows  in 
thought  on  ver.  13,  ver.  14  having  beeo 
parenthetical.  "  Go  to  now,  ye  that  say  .  .  . 
instead  of  your  saying  (as  ye  ought).  If  the 
Lord  will,"  eto.  Once  more  the  text 
requires  correction,  as  the  futures  ii<roiJ.ev 
and  iroiiiaoiiev  should  be  read  (with  N,  A,  B), 
instead  of  the  subjunctives  of  the  Received 
Text.  It  is  generally  agreed  now  that  the 
verse  should  be  rendered, "  If  the  Lord  will, 
we  shall  both  live  and  do  this  or  that." 
But  it  is  possible  to  divide  it  difterently, 
and  to  lender  as  follows :  ■*  If  the  Lord  wi£^ 


OH.  IV.  1—17.]  THE  GENERAL  BPlsTLB  OB'  JAMES. 


57 


and  we  live,  we  shall  also  do  this  or  that." 
Vulgate,  81  Dominus  voluerit  et  si  [omit  si. 
Codex  Amiat.]  vixerimus,  faciemus,  etc.  (of. 
Winer, '  Grammar  of  N.T.  Greek,'  p.  357). 

Ver.  16. — But  now.  As  is  actually  the 
ease, "  ye  glory  in  your  vauntings."  'AKaCo- 
mla :  only  here  and  in  1  John  ii.  IG ;  in  the 
LXX.,  in  2  Maeo.  ix.  8  and  Wisd.  v.  8.  It  is 
a  favourite  word  with  St.  Clemint  of  Home. 
On  its  mianing  and  distinction  from  Inrep- 
■nipavla  and  other  kindred  words,  see  Trench 
on  '  Synonv  ms,'  p.  95 ;  and  of.  Wesfcott  on 
the  '  Epistles  of  St.  John,'  p.  64.  The  vice 
of  the  d\d(<i>v  "  centres  in  self  and  is  con- 
siimraated  in  his  absolute  self-exaltation, 
while  the  inrepii<l)avos  shows  his  character  by 
I  is  overweening  treatment  of  others.  The 
aAd^oiy  aiua  most  against  truth ;  the  inrcp- 


■^(t>avos  sing  most  against  love."  This  extract 
will  serve  to  show  the  fitness  of  li,\a(ai>eia 
rather  than  irepriipayta  in  the  passnge  before 
us.  The  verse  sliould  be  rendered,  as  in  B.V., 
"  But  now  ye  glory  (Kavxaade)  in  your 
vauntings:  all  such  glorying  (KaixV's)  is 
ovil."  Kauxi"'"  is  tlie  act,  not  the  matter 
(nxvxma),  of  glorying. 

Ver.  \7.—  Conelugionoftheeeetion.  "Some 
have  su])posed  a  direct  reference  to  Eom. 
xiv.  23,  'Whatsover  is  not  of  faith  is  sin.' 
We  can  scarcely  assume  so  much  ;  but  thi; 
correspondence  is  very  remarkable,  and  St- 
James  supplements  St.  Paul.  It  is  sin  to 
doubt  whether  a  thing  be  right,  and  yet  do 
it.  It  is  also  sin  to  know  that  a  thing  is 
right,  and  yet  to  leave  it  undone "  (Dean 
Scott,  in  the  '  Speaker'i  Commentary '). 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  l,~The  origin  ofitri/e  and  conflict  to  be  sought  in  lelfish  lunt.  Our  "memlierB" 
are  the  field  of  battle  in  which,  or  rather  the  Instruments  with  which,  the  conflict  is 
fought;  and  all  the  while  they  are  really  warring  against  the  soul  (1  Pet,  ii.  11).  The 
conflict,  therefore,  is  a  suicidal  one. 

Vers.  2,  3. — "  Ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  spend  it  on  your  pleasures,"  Prayer  is  not 
to  be  selfish,  or  for  the  satisfaction  of  corrupt  appetites  ;  and  where  the  spirit  of  prayer 
is  absent  there  is  no  promise  lo  prayer.  "Incredible  as  it  might  seem  that  men 
plundering  and  murdering,  as  the  previous  verses  represent  them,  should  have  been  in 
any  sense  men  who  prayed,  the  history  of  Christendom  presents  but  too  many  instances 
of  like  anomalies.  Cornish  wreckers  going  from  church  to  their  accursed  work;  Italian 
brigands  propitiating  th(ir  patron  saint  before  attacking  a  company  of  travellers;  slave- 
t'aders,  such  as  John  Kcwton  once  was,  recording  piously  God's  blessing  on  their  traffic 
of  the  year  j — these  may  serve  to  show  how  soon  conscience  may  be  seared,  and  its 
warning  voice  come  to  give  but  an  uncertain  sound  (Plumptre). 

Ver.  4.—"  The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God."  And  yet  men  still 
strive  to  retain  the  friendship  of  lioth;  to  "make  the  best  of  both  worlds;"  to  serve  God 
and  mammon.  Holy  Scripture  st^adily  sets  its  face  throughout  against  compromise  in 
matters  of  principle,  against  that  spirit  of  "give  and  take"  which  is  o'ten  the  world's 
hijihest  wisdom,  and  in  whic-h  the  worldly  politician  is  prone  not  merely  to  acquiesce 
but  to  delight.  God's  claims  are  abso'ute,  and  adinit;  no  rival.  Whoever  hankers  after 
the  friendship  of  the  world  is  ipso  facto  (KaeiaTorai)  God's  enemy.  Nay,  more;  such  a 
sin  in  one  who  has  given  his  h<  art  to  God  becomes  the  sin  of  the  unfaithful  wife  looking 
away  from  her  husband,  and  casting  longing  eyes  on  a  stranger;  and  those  who  are 
guilty  of  it  are  therefore  branded  with  the  name  and  fame  of  adulteresses.' 

Ver.  8. — "  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you.^  A  truth  to  which  all 
experience  bears  witness,  and  a  most  important  one  in  teaching  the  doctrine  of 
repentance.  God  not  only  tempers  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb,  but  he  also  makes  the 
path  easy  to  the  returning  sinner  and  meets  him  half-way.  The  prodigal  arose  and 
came  to  his  father,  but  while  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off  the  father  saw  him  and  ran  to 
meet  him.  It  is  theirs*  step  in  rcp(  nfance  which  is  the  difBcult  one,  and  yet  even  this 
is  not  taken  without  Divine  assistaice.  It  is  God  who  first  supplies  the  impulse  to 
draw  nigh  to  him,  and  then  himself  cumes  to  meet  the  sinner  who  yields  to  the  impulse. 
His  spirit  stirs  the  ^illner  to  cry  to  hiir,  and  then  himself  listens  to  the  cry,  accord- 
ing to  the  psalmist's  saying,  "Thou  preparest  their  heart,  and  '.hine  ear  hearkeneth 
thereta" 


M  THE  OENBKAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  it.  1—17. 

Ver.  10.—"  Ilumbh  yourselves  in  the  sight  ef  Ood,  and  he  shall  lift  you  ttp."  "  As 
•  tree  must  strike  root  deep  downwards  that  it  may  grow  upwards,  so  a  man's  spirit 
must  be  rooted  in  humility,  or  he  is  only  lifted  up  to  his  own  hurt "  (Augustine). 

Vers.  11, 12. — 2%e  sin  of  detraction.  Observe  how  this  differs  from  slander.  Slander 
inrolves  an  imputation  of  falsehood.  Detraction  may  be  couched  in  truth  and  clothed 
in  fair  language.  It  is  that  tendency  to  disparage  good  actions,  to  look  for  blemishes 
and  defects  in  them,  udng  care  and  artifice  to  pervert  or  misrepresent  things  for  that 
purpose.  It  is  a  poison  often  infused  in  sweet  liquor  and  administered  in  a  golden  cup. 
On  the  nature  and  character  of  this  sin,  see  a  good  sermon  by  Isaac  Barrow  (from  which 
the  above  is  taken),  'Works,'  vol.  ii.  sermon  xix.  By  the  addition  of  the  word  "  brethren" 
— "  Speak  not  evil  of  one  another,  brethren  " — St.  James  enforces  the  precept  by  a  strong 
argument ;  for  brethren,  who  are  members  one  of  another,  are  bound  to  love  each  other, 
•ud  should  be  the  last  to  deny  the  merit  or  destroy  the  reputation  of  each  other. 

Vers.  13 — 17.— ITie  uncertainty  of  human  plans  and  schemes.  Best  illustrated  by  the 
parable  of  the  rich  fool,  boasting  of  his  "  much  goods  "  laid  up  for  "  many  years  "  on 
the  very  night  on  which  his  soul  was  required  of  him.  It  is  such  a  spirit  as  his  that 
St.  James  denounces  so  sternly ;  not  the  careful  forethought  and  providence  which  Holy 
Scripture  never  condemns,  but  the  forming  plans  and  designs  without  the  slightest 
reference  in  word  or  thought  to  that  overruling  will  on  which  all  depends.  It  is  not 
the  mere  looking  forward  that  is  forbidden,  but  the  looking  forward  without  the 
recollection  that  while  "  man  proposes,  God  disposes."  The  whole  of  human  history 
forms  a  comment  on  these  verses.  Alexander  seized  with  mortal  illness  just  at  the 
moment  when  the  world  is  at  his  feet;  Arius  "  taken  away  "  the  very  night  before  he 
was  to  be  forced  into  communion  with  the  Church ;  the  statesman  struck  down  by  the 
knife  of  the  assassin  just  when  his  country  seems  to  need  him  most ; — all  these  show 
the  truth  of  the  words  which  St.  James  had  probably  read,  and  which  may  well  be 
compared  with  his  own :  "  Our  life  shall  pass  away  as  a  cloud,  and  shall  be  dispersed  as 
a  mist  that  is  driven  away  with  the  beams  of  the  sun,  and  overcome  with  the  heat 
tliereof"  (Wisd.  ii.  4).  The  vanity  of  human  schemes  is  well  shown  by  th«  old 
epitaph — 

"  The  earth  goeth  on  the  earth  glisteuing  with  gold; 
The  earth  goeth  from  the  earth  not  when  it  wold ; 
The  earth  buildeth  on  the  earth  castles  and  towers;* 
Bal— 

"The  earth  saith  to  the  earth,  'These  shall  be  oats.'" 

Ver.  17. — The  greatness  of  sms  of  omission.  It  is  not  only  sinful  to  do  wrong;  k  is 
also  sinful  to  lose  an  opportunity  of  doing  good.  God  means  us  not  only  to  be  harmless, 
but  also  to  be  useful;  not  only  to  be  innocent,  but  to  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good. 
How  miserable  is  the  satisfied  acquiescence  in  the  thought,  "  I  never  did  anybody  any 
harm  " — a  thought  which  is  falsely  used  as  a  consolation  at  many  a  death-bed  I  The 
slothful  servant  who  hid  the  talent  in  a  napkin  did  no  wrong  with  it,  but  nevertheless 
he  was  condemned.  He  had  failed  to  do  good.  So  God  claims  from  all  of  us,  not  merely 
that  we  should  "  cease  to  do  evil,"  but  also  that  we  should  "  learn  to  do  well ; "  fiar  "  to 
him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin." 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOIffl. 

Vera.  1—9.— Wars  and  fightings.  Grazing  upon  the  fair  portraiture  of  the  heavenly 
wisdom  with  which  ch.  iii.  closes,  we  perhaps  feel  as  if  we  could  make  tabernacles  foi- 
ourselves  in  its  peaceful  presence,  that  we  might  continue  always  to  contemplate  its 
beauty.  Immediately,  however,  James  brings  us  down  again  from  the  holy  mount  into 
the  quarrelsome  and  murderous  world.  He  points  us  to  the  "  wars  "and  "  fightings  " 
that  rage  throughout  the  human  family.  He  returns  to  the  "bitter  jealousy  and 
faction  "  that  eat  like  a  gangrene  into  the  heart  of  the  Christian  Church.  For  the 
congregations  which  the  apostles  themselves  formed  were  ^inted  with  the  ssm'' 
impurities  which  cling  to  the  Church  in  our  own  time. 


ch.it.  1—17.]         THE  aSNEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  59 

I.  The  pbbvalenob  op  strife  among  Christians.  (Ver.  1.)  In  the  believing 
communities  of  "the  Dispersion"  there  were  many  elements  of  discord.  The  time  was  ona 
of  political  agitation  and  of  social  turbulence.  Within  the  Churches  there  were  some- 
times bitter  theological  disputes  (ch.  iii.).  And  in  private  life  these  Jewish  Christians 
were  largely  giving  themselves  up  to  the  besetting  sin,  not  only  of  Hebrew  nature,  but 
of  human  nature;  they  struggled  for  material  self-aggrandizement,  and  in  doing  so 
fell  into  violent  mutual  conflict.  But  do  not  quarrels  and  controversies  of  the  same 
kind  rage  still?  Christian  nations  go  to  war  with  one  another.  Employers  and 
workmen  array  themselves  against  each  other  in  hostile  camps.  Churches  cherish 
within  their  bosoms  the  viper  of  sectarianism.  Fellow-believers  belonging  to  the  same 
congregation  cease  to  be  on  speaking  terms  with  one  another,  and  perhaps  indulge  in 
mutual  backbiting.  How  sad  to  contemplate  the  long  "  wars  "  waged  in  hearts  which 
should  love  as^  brethren,  and  to  witness  those  outward  "  fightings "  which  are  their 
inevitable  outcome  1 

IL  The  origin  of  strife.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  "Whence"  comes  it?  asks  James; 
and  he  appeals  in  his  answer  to  the  consciences  of  his  readers.  The  source  of  strife 
is  in  the  evil  desires  of  the  heart.  Usually,  it  is  true,  all  wars  and  fightings  are  traced 
no  further  than  to  some  outward  cause.  One  nation  attacks  another  professedly  to 
maintain  the  country's  honour,  or  perhaps  to  rectify  an  unscientific  frontier.  Trade 
strikes  and  locks-out  are  to  be  explained  by  an  unsatisfactory  condition  of  the  labour 
market.  Ecclesiastical  contentions  are  all  alike  justified  by  some  assumed  necessity  in 
the  interests  of  truth,  and  sometimes  also  by  a  misinterpretation  of  the  words,  "  first 
pure,  then  peaceable  "  (ch.  iii.  17).  And  the  personal  quarrels  that  break  out  among 
individual  Christians  are  sure  to  be  ascribed  to  severe  and  gratuitous  provocation.  But 
here,  true  to  his  character  as  the  apostle  of  reality,  James  sweeps  away  these  excuses 
as  so  many  dusty  cobwebs.  He  drags  out  into  the  blaze  of  gospel  light  the  one  true 
origin  of  strife.  "  Wars  "  and  "  fightings  "  have  their  fountain  within  the  soul,  and  not 
without.  They  come  "of  your  pleasures,"  t.e.  of  the  cravings  of  your  carnal  hearts. 
It  is  royal  pride,  or  the  lust  of  power,  or  sometimes  the  mischievous  impatience  of  an 
idle  army,  that  "  lets  slip  the  dogs  of  war  "  between  nations.  It  is  avarice  and  envy 
that  foment  the  social  strife  between  capital  and  labour.  It  is  the  spirit  of  Diotrephes 
that  produces  the  evils  of  sectarianism.  It  is  the  wild  and  selfish  passions  of  the 
natural  heart  that  stir  up  the  animosities  and  conflicts  of  private  life.  These  passions 
"  war  in  your  members ; "  issuing  from  the  citadel  of  "  Mansoul,"  they  pitch  their 
camp  in  the  organs  of  sense  and  action.  There  they  not  only  "war  against"  the 
regenerated  nature  (1  Pet.  ii.  11),  and  against  one  another,  but  against  one's  neighbour, 
— clamouring  for  gratilicatiun  at  the  expense  of  his  rights  and  his  welfare.  This  truth 
is  further  expanded  in  ver.  2,  and  in  a  way  which  recalls  ch.  i.  14, 15 ;  or  which  suggests 
the  analysis  of  sin  given  by  Thomas  k  Kempis:  "Primo  occurrit  menti  simplex 
cogitatio;  delude  fortis  imaginatio;  postea  delectatio  et  motus  pravus  et  assensio." 
The  first  stage  is  that  of  unreasonably  desiring  something  which  we  have  not.  The 
second  is  that  of  murderously  envying  those  whose  possessions  we  covet — cherish- 
ing such  feelings  as  David  did  towards  Uriah  the  Hittite,  or  Ahab  towards  Naboth. 
The  third  stage  is  that  of  open  contention  and  discord — ^"ye  fight  and  war."  But 
common  to  all  the  stages  is  the  consciousness  of  want;  and  at  the  end  of  each,  as 
ver.  2  reminds  us,  this  consciousness  becomes  further  intensified.  Ye  "  have  not ;  " 
"  cannot  obtain ; "  "  ye  have  not," — even  after  all  your  fierce  strivings.  The  war-spiri  t, 
therefore,  is  generated  by  that  unrest  of  the  soul  which  only  the  God  of  peace  can 
remove.  It  has  its  source  in  that  devouring  hunger  of  the  heart  which  only  the  bread 
of  God  can  appease.  And  to  cure  it  we  must  ascertain  what  the  great  nature  of  man 
needs,  in  order  to  make  him  restful  and  happy. 

HI.  The  remedy  fob  strife.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  It  lies  m  prayer.  If  we  would  have 
our  nature  restored  to  restfnlness,  we  must  realize  our  dependence  upon  God.  To 
struggle  after  the  world  in  our  own  strength  will  tend  only  to  foster  the  war-spirit 
within  us.  Perhaps  we  have  not  hitherto  directly  consulted  the  Lord  about  our  worldly 
affairs.  If  not,  let  us  begin  to  do  so  now.  Or  perhaps  we  have  "  asked  amiss,"  in 
praying  chiefly  for  what  would  gratify  only  the  lower  elements  of  our  nature,  or 
requesting  blessings  with  a  view  to  certain  uses  of  them  which  would  not  bear  to  be 
tuentioned  before  his  throne.     We  cannot  e.g.  expect  God  to  answer  the  prayer  that 


60  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  iv,  1—17 

our  worldly  business  may  prosper,  if  we  secretly  resolve  to  employ  what  aaccess  he 
sends  in  catering  for  selt-glorifioation.  The  things  that  we  ask  must  be  what  we  need 
for  the  Lord's  service ;  and  we  must  honestly  purpose  so  to  use  them.  The  cultivation 
of  the  true  spirit  of  devotion  is  the  way  to  contentment  with  our  lot  in  life.  We  shall 
secure  peace  among  the  powers  and  passions  of  the  heart,  if  we  "  s(  ek  first  our  Father's 
kingdom  and  his  righteousness,"  Begular  soul-converse  with  God  will  exorcise  the 
demons  of  discord,  and  call  into  exercise  the  gracious  affections  of  faith,  submission, 
gratitude,  and  peace. 

Lessons.  1.  The  wickedness  of  the  war-spirit.  2.  The  defilement  and  degradation 
which  result  from  allowing  selfish  motives  to  govern  the  heart.  3.  The  blessedness  of 
making  God  our  Portion,  and  of  re-sting  contented  with  our  allotted  share  of  temporal 
good.  4.  The  duty  of  forgiving  our  enemies,  and  of  promoting  peace  in  the  Church 
and  in  society. — C.  J. 

Vers.  4 — 6. —  WorUliness  enmity  with  Ood.  Here  the  apostle  follows  np  the  words 
of  rebuke  and  warning  with  which  the  chapter  Ojjened.  The  doctrine  which  he 
enunciates  is  uncompromising ;  and  his  language  startling,  as  well  as  solemn. 

L  Thb  antagonism  between  the  love  of  the  wobld  and  the  love  of  God. 
(Ver.  4.)  This  painful  epithet,  "  Ye  adulteresses,"  is  the  kuy-note  of  the  chord  which 
James  strikes  in  his  appeal.  God  is  the  rightful  spiritual  Husband  of  every  professing; 
Christian ;  and  thus,  if  such  a  one  embraces  the  world,  he  or  she  resembles  a  woman 
who  turns  away  from  her  lawful  husband  to  follow  other  lovers.  The  world  is  an  evil 
world,  alien  in  its  ijinciples  and  pursuits  from  the  will  and  glory  of  God;  and 
therefore  "the  friemlsliip  of  the  world"  is  incompatible  with  the  love  of  him.  But 
what  precisely  is  this  "friendship"?  It  does  not  lie  (1)  in  habits  of  friendly  intercourse 
with  worldly  men ;  or  (2)  in  the  diligent  pursuit  of  one's  daily  occupation ;  or  (3)  in 
an  appreciation  of  creature  comforts  and  innocent  pleasiu-es.  Worldliness  does  not 
depend  upon  outward  acts  or  habits.  It  is  a  state  of  the  heart,  Tk«  word  denotes  the 
spirit  and  guiding  disposition  of  the  unbeliever's  life — the  wiU  to  "  be  a  friend  of  the 
world."  Since,  accordingly,  this  friendship  represents  direct  opposition  to  the  Divine 
will,  every  man  who  seeks  it  first  and  most  declares  himself  by  that  very  act  "  an 
enemy  of  God." 

II.  Confirmation  or  this  tbcth.  (Vers.  6,  6.)  We  accept  as  accurate  the  Greek 
reading  of  ver.  6  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  Kevisers,  together  with  their  transla- 
tion :  "  Or  think  ye  that  the  Scripture  speaketh  in  vain  ?  Doth  the  Spirit  which  he 
made  to  dwell  in  us  long  unto  envying?"  The  agjostle,  accordingly,  confirms  his 
representation  regarding  the  antagonism  between  the  love  of  the  world  and  the  love  of 
God  by:  1.  TAe  tenor  of  Scripture  teaching.  The  sacred  writers  with  one  consent  take 
up  an  attitude  of  protest  against  worldliness.  They  uniformly  assume  that  "  the 
friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God."  They  urge  the  duty  of  moderation  in 
one's  desires,  and  of  contentment  with  the  allotments  of  Providence.  The  worldly 
disposition,  which  shows  itself  in  covetuusness  and  envy  and  strife,  is  opposed  both  to 
the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  Holy  Scripture.  And  the  moral  teaching  of  God's  Word  on 
this  subject  is  not  "  in  vain."  The  Bible  means  what  it  says.  In  all  its  utterances  it 
is  solemnly  earnest.  2.  The  consciousness  of  the  renewed  heart.  "  Doth  the  Spirit  [i.e. 
the  Holy  Spirit]  which  he  made  to  dwell  in  us  long  unto  envying?"  If  the  Holy 
Ghost,  speaking  in  the  written  Word,  condemns  the  spirit  of  envy,  he  does  so  also  in 
the  law  which  he  writes  upon  the  hearts  of  Christ's  people.  Some  of  those  to  whom 
this  Epistle  was  addressed  had  "bitter  jealousy  and  faction  in  their  hearts  "  (ch.  iii.  14) : 
it  was  seen  in  their  worUlly  "  wars"  and  "  fightings."  But  the  apostle  appeab  to  their 
consciences  to  confess  whether  such  a  state  of  mind  was  not  due  to  their  walking 
"  after  the  flesh  "  instead  of  "  after  the  Spirit."  They  knew  well  that  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  within  their  souls,  in  so  far  as  they  yielded  themselves  to  it,  produced 
always  very  different  fridt  from  that  of  envy  and  strife  fGal.  v.  19 — 23 ;  ch.  iii.  14 — 
18).  8.  The  substance  of  the  Divine  promises.  (Ver.  6.)  "  Grace"  is  the  name  for 
the  influence  which  the  Holy  Spirit  exerts  upon  the  heart  in  order  to  its  regeneration 
and  sanctification.  And  how  does  grace  operate,  but  just  by  killing  the  love  of  the 
world  within  the  soul,  and  breathing  into  it  the  love  of  Ood?  He,  by  his  Spirit, 
gives  to  his  believing  people  "mure  grace,"  ».e.  supplies  of  grace  greater  in  force  and 


OT.IV.  1— 17.]         THE  GENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  61 

volume  than  the  strength  of  their  depravity,  or  the  temptationg  against  which  they 
have  to  contend.  Not  only  go,  but  those  who  employ  well  the  grace  which  they  already 
possess,  shall  receive  more  in  ever-increasing  measure  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  And  "the 
humble,"  who  realize  most  deeply  that  they  do  not  deserve  any  grace  at  all,  are  those 
upon  whom  God  has  always  bestowed  the  most  copious  supplies.  The  further  we 
depart  from  pride,  which  is  the  fruitful  mother  of  envy  and  strife,  the  more  freely  and 
abundantly  shall  we  receive  that  supernatural  energy  which  will  drive  the  love  of  the 
world  out  of  our  hearts  (Prov.  iii.  34). 

Conclusion.  Let  us  impress  upon  our  minds  the  intensity  with  which  God  cbhors 
pride.  All  history  echoes  the  truth  that  "he  setteth  himself  in  array  against  the 
proud."  Take  the  case  of  Pharaoh,  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  ot  Haman,  of  Wolsey,  of 
Napoleon.  For  ourselves,  therefore,  let  us  "  fling  away  ambition "  in  every  form. 
Especially  let  us  crucify  spiiitual  pride.  "  Many  labouring  men  have  got  good  estates 
in  the  Valley  of  Humiliation ; "  and  if  we  go  there  "  in  the  summer-time  "  of  prosperity 
we  shall  learn  the  song  of  the  shepherd  boy — 

"He  that  is  down  needs  fear  no  fall; 
He  that  is  low  no  pride; 
He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 
Have  Qod  to  be  his  Guide." 

(Bnnyu.) 

a  J. 

Vera.  7 — 10. — Submission  to  Chd.  This  passage  is  %  powerful  and  heart-ttirring 
appeal  to  those  professing  Christians  whose  hearts  had  been  full  of  worldly  "  pleasures  " 
(ver.  3),  and  whose  hands  had  been  occupied  with  "  wars  "  and  "  fightings."  Within 
these  four  verses  there  are  no  fewer  than  ten  verbs  in  the  imperative  mood ;  but  the 
cardinal  precept  of  the  whole  paragraph  is  the  exhortation  to  submission,  with  which  it 
both  opens  and  closes.  The  other  counsels  in  vers.  7 — 9  have  reference  to  elements  of 
conduct  which  are  included  in  subjection  to  the  Divine  will. 

L  The  ddtt  of  submission  to  God.  (Vers.  7,  10.)  The  immediate  connection  of 
"  therefore  "  in  ver.  7  is  with  the  quotation  at  the  close  of  ver.  6.  "  Qod  sets  himself 
in  array  against  the  proud ;  therefore,  be  subject  unto  God."  You  must  either  willingly 
humble  yourselves,  or  be  precipitately  hurablid  by  Divine  Providence.  "God  giveth 
grace  to  the  humble  ;  therefore,  be  subject  unto  God."  Clothe  yourselves  with  humi- 
lity, that  you  may  enjoy  this  "grace."  "  Be  subject"  to  the  Captain  of  your  salvation, 
as  a  good  soldier  is  to  his  commander.  Subjection  to  God  includes :  1.  Acquiesoene$  in 
his  plan  of  salvation.  These  Christian  Jews  of  the  Dispersion  were  to  avoid  the  eln  of 
the  Hebrew  nation  generally,  in  "  not  subjecting  themselves  to  the  righteousness  of 
God"  (Rom.  X.  3).  And  we  "sinners  of  the  Gentiles"  must  throw  away  that  pride 
of  self-righteousness  which  tempts  us  also  to  reject  a  method  of  redemption  from  which 
all  boasting  is  excluded.  We  must  make  the  blood  of  Jesus  our  only  plea,  and 
surrender  our  hearts  to  the  gracious  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Obedience  to 
hit  law.  If  we  submit  ourselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God  in  the  gospel,  we  shall 
begin  to  reverence  and  admire  and  obey  the  moral  law.  We  shall  be  willing  that  God 
should  reign  over  us  and  rule  within  us.  We  shall  allow  him  to  control  us  in  body 
and  mind,  in  intellect  and  conscience,  in  heart  and  will,  in  act  and  habit.  We  shall 
lorsake  our  sins.  We  shall  long  and  labour  to  be-  holy.  3.  Acceptance  of  his  dealings 
ill  providence.  We  are  to  be  contented  with  the  lot  in  life  which  God  has  assigned  to 
us.  We  are  to  be  willing  to  receive  evil  as  well  as  good  at  his  hand.  We  must  bear 
affliction  patiently,  nut  because  it  is  useless  to  muriuur,  but  because  it  is  wrong  to  do 
so.  In  our  times  of  sorrow  we  must  not  challenge  God's  sovereignty,  or  impugn  his 
justice,  or  arraign  his  wisdom,  or  distrust  his  love.  1'he  spirit  of  Christian  submission 
says,  "  Let  us  also  rejoice  in  our  tribulations  "  (Rora.  v.  3). 

II.  Elements  op  character  which  enter  into  this  budmission.  These  are  set 
forth  in  the  body  of  the  passage  (vers.  7 — 9).  1.  We  must  resist  Satan.  (Ver.  7.)  To  "  be 
subject  unto  God"  necessarily  involves  resistance  to  God's  great  enemy.  Human  nature 
has  in  it  the  element  of  combativeness;  and  the  greater  any  man's  force  of  character, 
he  is  likely  to  be  the  more  thorough  a  hater.  But  the  Christian  should  not  "  fight  and 
war"  witii  his  fellow-believers;  his  quarrel  is  to  be  with  Satan,  and  with  Satan's  worki. 


62  THE  GBNEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  it.  1^17. 

We  are  to  "  resist "  the  devil ;  we  must  not  dispute  on  parley  with  him.  We  must 
not  "  give  place  "  to  him  (Eph,  iv.  27)  by  cherishing  covetousness  or  envy ;  for,  if  we 
allow  him  any  place  at  all,  he  may  speedily  take  possession  of  the  entire  area  of  the 
heart.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  "  stand  up  against "  Satan, "  he  will  flee  "  from  us.  The 
power  of  the  truth,  the  power  of  faith,  the  power  of  prayer,  will  silence  his  artillery. 
There  is  no  giant  temptation  which  may  not  be  overcome  with  some  small  stone  out  of 
the  brook  of  Holy  Scripture,  if  we  hurl  it  from  the  sling  of  faith,  and  with  an  arm 
guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  We  must  come  near  to  Qod.  (Ver.  8.)  The  design  ot  all 
Satan's  assaults  is  to  prevent  us  from  doing  so;  and  the  best  way  in  whicli  to  "  resist " 
liim  is  resolutely  to  "  draw  nigh."  What  a  blessed  privilege  to  us  sinners  to  be  allowed 
to  approach  to  the  holy,  just,  and  merciful  Jehovah !  He  has  opened  for  us  a  new  and 
living  way  of  access  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  We  draw  near  (1)  when  we  pray,  for 
prayer  is  just  the  converse  of  the  soul  with  God  ;  (2)  when  our  deepest  soul-longings 
go  out  towards  him,  who  alone  can  be  our  Portion ;  and  (3)  when,  along  with  our 
supplications  and  our  heart-yearnings,  we  live  a  pure  and  godly  life.  Nor  shall  any 
man  who  truly  seeks  God  seek  him  in  vain.  God  will  bo  propitious  to  him,  and  visit 
him,  and  take  up  his  abode  with  him.  3.  We  must  put  away  ow  sins.  (Vers.  8,  9.) 
For  we  cannot  really  "  draw  nigh  "  to  God  if  we  persist  in  hugging  them.  The  act  of 
coming  near  involves  repentance ;  it  carries  with  it  resolutions  and  endeavours  after 
amendment.  We  must  "  cleanse  our  hands  "  from  the  open  sins  of  which  our  neigh- 
bours may  be  cognizant,  and  "  purify  our  hearts  "  from  those  secret  faults  which  are 
known  only  to  God.  Self-loathin  ^  should  possess  us  when  we  realize  our  covetousness 
and  double-mindedness,  our  diviled  affections  and  unstable  spiritual  purposes.  Our 
repentance  must  be  such  as  to  involve  us  in  misery;  and  we  must  cry  out  to  God  for 
pardon.  Does  any  one  object  that  we  have  in  this  a  somewhat  gloomy  picture  of  the 
religious  life?  The  answer  is,  that  such  is  only  a  representation  of  it  upon  one  side. 
Here  we  see  the  shadows  of  the  life  of  grace ;  but  its  shadows  are  only  the  reflection  of 
its  joys.  It  is  a  blessed  mourning  of  which  the  text  speaks  ;  and  they  that  mourn  thus 
"  shall  be  comforted."  Godly  repentance  is  the  true  humility ;  and  it  conducts  to  the 
highest  exaltation.  "He  shall  exalt  you  "  (ver.  10),  giving  you  always  "more  grace" 
in  this  life,  and  a  rich  reversion  of  glory  in  the  life  to  come. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Evil-spealcing  and  evil-Judging.  Here  James  still  continues  his 
warning  against  the  spirit  of  selfishness  and  worldliness.  In  these  two  verses  he  issues 
a  solemn  interdict  against  the  habit  of  calumny  and  unjust  censure  of  brethren.  For 
evil-speaking  is  one  of  the  most  familiar  manifestations  of  that  spirit  of  strife  which  he 
has  already  rebuked. 

I.  The  prohibition.  (Ver.  11.)  1,  Fundamentally  it  is  directed  against  evil-judg- 
ing. The  apostle's  words  are  to  be  interpreted  according  to  their  spirit.  He  does  not 
condemn  all  judging.  God  has  implanted  within  us  the  critical  faculty,  the  judgment; 
and  we  cannot  avoid  using  it.  Indeed,  it  is  a  Christian  duty  to  pronounce  upon  con- 
duct wid  character.  We  require  to  do  so  within  our  own  breasts  for  our  own  moral 
guidance;  wliile  to  judge  publicly  is  a  function  of  the  civil  magistrate  and  of  Church 
rulers.  What  James  condemns  here  is  evil-judging — all  judging  that  is  censorious  or 
calumnious.  We  are  not  to  judge  rashly,  harshly,  uncharitably;  Even  good  Chris- 
tians are  tempted  to  transgress  in  this  matter  in  many  ways :  e.g.  from  listening  to 
mere  rumour,  from  trusting  to  our  own  first  impressions,  from  narrow-mindedness,  from 
self-conceit,  from  mistaken  views  of  the  suB'erings  of  others,  from  forgetting  that  we 
cannot  look  into  our  neighbours'  hearts.  In  forming  our  judgments  of  conduct  and 
character  we  should  have  regard  to  such  principles  as  these :  (1)  We  have  no  right  to 
come  to  an  unfavourable  conclusion  unless  we  possess  full  knowledge  of  all  the  facts. 
(2)  We  ought  to  guard  against  undue  severity  of  judgment.  (3)  We  must  not  allow 
bad  motives  to  warp  our  decisions.  (4)  When  acts  are  capable  either  of  a  favourable 
or  an  unfavourable  construction,  we  are  bound  in  charity  to  take  the  favourable  view. 
2.  But  the  prohibition  refers  also  to  the  expression  of  our  judgments.  It  forbids  evil' 
speaTcing.  The  vilest  form  of  this  sin  consists  in  the  wilful  creation  of  false  reports 
•gainst  brethren.  To  originate  such  is  literally  diabolical  True  Christians  may 
seldom  fall  into  this  lowest  and  guiltiest  form  of  calumny ;  but  how  readily  do  some  of 
us  yield  ourselves  to  the  circulation  of  slanders  which  have  been  pouied  into  out  ears) 


OB.  IT.  1—17.]         THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAME8.  63 


How  frequently  do  we  "  take  up  a  reproach  against  our  neighbour  "  (Ps.  xv.  3)  I    We 

find  it  lying  in  our  way,  and  we  pick  it  up  and  pasa  it  on,  whereas  we  ought  to  allow 
it  to  remain  where  it  is.  Alas  1  even  in  Christian  circles  a  small  and  slight  rumour 
will  sometimes  expand  speedily  iato  a  huge  inflated  calumny,  which  will  scattti 
mischief  and  misery  along  its  path.  And  even  mere  idle  speaking  degenerates  into 
evil-speaking.  Gossip  soon  becomes  backbiting ;  scandal  grows  out  of  tittle-tattle.  It 
is  so  much  easier  to  talk  of  persons  than  of  principles,  that  our  dinner  and  tea  parties, 
instead  of  being  occupied  with  profitable  subjects  of  conversation,  are  sometimes  largely 
given  over  to  the  retail  of  scandal.  We  should  ever  bear  in  mind  such  principles  as  the 
following  for  our  guidance  in  the  expression  of  our  judgments  concerning  others  : 
(1)  The  end  of  speech  is  to  bless  and  serve  God,  while  evil-S|  leaking  is  work  done  for 
^atan.  (2)  We  should  direct  attention  to  the  excellences  rather  than  to  the  defects  of 
our  neighbour's  cliaracter.  (3)  When  we  require  in  private  life  to  use  the  language  of 
condemnation,  we  ought  to  condemn  princi|iles  rather  than  persons.  (4)  We  should  tell 
his  fault  to  the  erring  brother  himself  rather  than  to  others. 

II.  The  geounds  of  tbe  prohibition.  One  strong  argument  is  introduced  inci- 
dentally, in  the  use  of  the  words  "  brethren "  and  "  brother."  Depreciatory  and 
calumnious  language  towards  one  another  is  subversive  of  the  whole  idea  of  brother- 
Jiood.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  recognition  of  the  common  brotherhood  of  the  race, 
and  tenfold  more  so  in  relation  to  the  special  spiritual  brotherhood  of  believers.  The 
apostle,  however,  submits  expressly  two  grounds  for  his  condemnation.  To  judge  and 
speak  evil  is:  1.  2b  condemn  the  Divine  Law.  (Ver.  11.)  "The  law"  refers  to  the 
moral  code  which  was  given  by  Moses,  and  fulfilled  and  made  honourable  by  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  the  same  which  James  has  spoken  of  in  ch.  i.  as  "  the  law  of  liberty."  Of 
this  law  the  second  great  commandment  is, "  Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself" 
— a  precept  which  embraces  within  it  the  "judge  not "  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (Matt.  vii.  1). 
But  the  man  who  speaks  evil  of  his  brother  virtually  condemns  the  New  Testament 
ethics  as  unsound,  and  pronounces  the  moral  law  to  be  unworthy  of  obedience.  2.  To 
usurp  the /unctions  of  the  Divine  Judge.  (Vers.  11,  12.)  Our  proper  place  and  work 
as  Christians  is  that  of  humble  submission  to  the  authority  of  the  law.  If,  however, 
we  speak  evil  regarding  our  fellows,  we  in  so  doing  withdraw  altogether  from  the 
attitude  of  subjection.  In  "judging  our  brother"  we  climb  up  to  the  judicial  bench ; 
we  usurp  the  seat  of  him  who  administers  the  law,  and  who  is  not  himself  under  it. 
But  how  frightful  the  impiety  that  is  involved  in  such  usurpation !  "  One  only  is  the 
Lawgiver  and  Judge  ;"  he  alone  pronounces  infallible  judgments,  and  possesses  power 
to  execute  them.  His  sentences  are  spoken  for  doom  ;  yet  he  loves  to  "  save,"  and  it 
gives  him  "  no  pleasure"  to  "  destroy." 

Lessons.  1.  The  presumptuousness  of  evil-judging.  "  Who  art  thou  that  judgest 
thy  neighbour?"  Man  lacks  the  requisite  knowledge  and  wisdom  and  purity.  2.  The 
duty  of  cultivating  love  of  the  brethren.  3.  The  importance  of  copying  in  our  lives 
the  perfect  character  of  the  godly  man,  as  mirrored  in  Ps,  XT.  4.  The  reasonableness 
of  fearing  God,  as  the  one  true  and  final  Judge. — C.  J. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — "  Man  proposes,  but  God  dispotea."  The  subject  here  ia  another 
prevalent  manifestation  of  pride  and  worldliness;  namely,  the  propensity  to  indulge  in 
presumptuous  self-reliance  in  relation  to  the  future. 

I.  The  spirit  of  vain  confidence  which  the  apostle  rebukes.  (Ver.  13.)  He 
appeals  directly  to  worldly-minded  merchants  and  money-makers.  The  Jews,  like  our- 
selves, have  been  a  nation  of  shopkeepers.  In  these  early  times  many  of  them  carried  the 
products  of  one  country  to  the  commercial  centres  of  another.  The  same  trader  might  be 
found  one  year  at  Antioch,  the  next  at  Alexandria,  the  following  year  at  Damascus,and 
the  fourth  perhaps  at  Corinth.  Now,  the  apostle  solemnly  rebukes  those  who  formed 
their  business  plans  without  taking  into  account  the  providence  of  God,  or  even  the 
uncertainty  of  human  life.  He  is  very  far  from  stigmatizing  commercial  enterprise  as|a 
form  of  worldliness.  He  does  not  censure  the  formation  of  buisiness  schemes  even  for 
long  years  to  come,  provided  such  be  contemplated  in  subordination  to  the  Divine 
will,  and  be  not  allowed  to  interlere  with  spiritual  consecration  to  his  service.  What 
he  condemns  is  the  spiiit  of  self-sufficiency  in  regard  to  the  continuance  of  life  and 
activity  and  success  (Ps.  xlix.  11;  Isa.  Ivi.  12;  Luke  xii,  19).     He  rebukes  tba 


«4  THE  GENEBAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMEa  [oh.  it.  I— IT. 

practical  atheism  which  would  shut  out  God  from  business  arrangements.  And  his 
"Go  to  now"  is  quite  as  much  needed  amoni!;  us  Gentiles  of  the  nineteenth  century  aa 
it  was  among  the  Jews  of  the  (irst.  In  presence  of  the  inaumerable  business  interests 
of  our  time,  and  amidst  the  wasting  anxieties  of  competition,  how  prone  men  are  to 
ignore  the  eternal  laws,  and  exclude  from  their  calculations  the  sovereign  will  of  the 
great  Disposer  1  How  apt  busy  men  are  to  act  as  if  they  were  the  lords  of  their  own 
lives  I  When  we  allow  the  spirit  of  worldliness  to  steal  over  our  souls  like  a  creeping 
paralysis,  then  we  begin  to  "  boast  ourselves  of  to-morrow." 

II.  The  GROUNDS  OF  THE  REBUKE.  (Vers.  14 — 17.)  The  apostle  reminds  his  readers 
that  this  confident  expectation  of  a  successful  future  betrays :  1.  A  foolish  and  irrational 
spirit.  (Ver.  14.)  Although  man  is  endowed  with  reason,  he  often  neglects  to  use  his 
reason.  Thesemerchant  Jews  of  "the  Dispersion"  knew  thoroughly  well  the  brevity  and 
frailty  of  human  life,  but  were  in  danger  of  allowing  their  proud  thoughts  to  eflaoe  from 
their  consciousness  so  commonplace  a  truth.  They  forgot  that  we  "  know  not  what  shall 
be  on  the  morrow."  In  the  political  world  "  the  unexpected  generally  happens."  In  the 
commercial  world  what  startling  surprises  occur  1 — poor  men  raised  to  affluence,  and  rich 
men  reduced  to  sudden  poverty.  And  the  duration  of  our  lives  is  as  uncertain  as  any  other 
event.  "  For,"  asks  James, "  what  is  your  life  ?  "  What  is  it  like  ?  What  is  its  most  pro- 
minent outward  characteristic  ?  "  Ye  are  a  vapour ; "  human  hfe  is  like  the  morning 
mists  that  mantle  the  mountain.  It  spreads  itself  out,  indeed,  as  vapour  does ;  for  it  is 
manifold  in  its  schemes  and  cares  and  toils ;  but,  like  vapour,  it  is  frail  and  transient. 
We  know  this  to  be  true,  but  how  little  do  we  realize  it!  We  form  plans  about  our 
business  and  family  affairs,  plans  about  our  houses  and  fields,  plans  to  improve  our  social 
status ;  and  we  forget  that  all  these  are  dependent  upon  an  unknown  quantity — our  con- 
tinuance in  life  and  health,  our  possession  of  the  future,  and  of  property  in  it.  Now,  in 
all  this,  do  not  we  act  quite  irrationally  ?  How  can  our  calculations  be  correct,  when 
we  leave  out  the  factor  of  the  frailty  of  life?  This  thought  should  be  uppermost  in  our 
minds.  It  is  the  part  of  a  wise  man  often  to  reflect  that  he  will  soon  be  in  eternity. 
Again,  this  vain  confidence  reveals ;  2.  An  impious  and  wicked  spirit,  (Vers.  15 — 17.) 
It  is  impious  to  forget  to  carry  the  will  of  the  supreme  Disposer  into  all  our  calculations, 
and  to  neglect  to  qualify  our  plans  by  a  reference  to  that  will.  It  is  wicked  for  a  finite 
and  sinful  man  to  cherish  the  proud  confidence  that  he  may  map  out  the  future  of  his 
life  at  his  own  pleasure.  To  act  as  if  the  keys  of  time  were  in  one's  own  keeping,  and 
as  if  one  could  eusure  life  and  health,  like  papers  locked  up  in  a  fire-resisting  s.  fe, 
involves  an  arrogance  which  has  in  it  the  essence  of  all  sin.  "  All  such  glorying  is 
evil;"  for  it  originates  in  pride,  which  is  the  fountain-head  of  sin.  It  is  the  spirit 
which  makes  an  idol  of  self,  and  which  would  practically  thrust  out  God  from  his  own 
world.  The  apostle  concludes  with  a  general  moral  statement  on  the  subject  of  the 
relation  between  knowledge  and  responsibility.  Our  guilt  will  be  the  greater  if  we  do 
not  practice  what  we  clearly  know  (ver.  17).  But  every  professing  (Jhristian  knows 
perfectly  well  the  uncertainty  of  life.  How  aggravated,  then,  is  our  sin,  when  we 
"  boast  ourselves  of  to-morrow  "  I 

III.  The  DUTY  OF  BE  ALiziNG  CUB  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  Loan's  WILL.  (Ver.  15.)  We 
should  always  remember  that  our  times  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  be 
ready  upon  every  fitting  occasion  to  acknowledge  it,  not  only  with  suimiission,  but  with 
confidence  and  joy.  Some  good  men  habitually  say  or  write  "  D.V.,"  while  others 
equally  in  their  hearts  recognize  the  Lord's  will,  although  they  do  not  often  refer  to  it 
after  such  fashion.  The  great  matter  is  for  every  one  really  to  permeate  hig  business 
life  with  religion,  and  to  live  up  to  the  measure  of  his  spiritual  knowledge.  Thomas 
Puller's  remarks  on  this  subject  are  excellent  in  spirit ;  "Lord,  when  in  any  writing  1 
have  occasion  to  insert  these  passages, '  God  willing,  '  God  lending  me  life,'  etc.,  I  observe, 
Lord,  that  I  can  scarce  hold  my  hand  from  encircling  these  words  in  a  parenthesis,  as 
if  they  were  not  essential  to  the  sentence,  but  may  as  well  be  left  out  as  put  in. 
Whereas,  indeed,  they  are  not  only  of  the  commission  at  large,  but  so  of  the  quorum, 
that  without  them  all  the  rest  is  nothing ;  wherefore  hereafter  1  will  write  those  words 
fully  and  fairly,  without  any  enclosure  about  them.  Let  critics  censure  it  for  bad 
grammar,  I  am  sure  it  is  good  divinity  "  ('  Good  Thoughts  in  Bad  Times '). — C.  J. 

Ten,  1— 10.— ir«w  or  peace  t    He  has  just  been  speaking  of  peace     But  this  leada 


OB.IV.  1— 17.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  65 

him  to  survey  the  actual  state  of  thiags ;  disputes,  strifes,  murders,  (For  oondition  of 
Jewish  society  at  this  time,  see  Plumptre's  notes:  "rife  with  atrocities,")  And  h« 
will  ascend  to  the  oiigia  of  them.  Whence  come  they?  They  proceed  from  the  rest- 
lessness  of  the  unregenerate  nature,  seeking,  but  seeking  in  vain,  its  satisfaction  in  the 
world.  These  two  topics,  then,  are  introduced  to  us :  dissatisfaction  with  the  world ; 
satisfaction  in  God. 

L  Dissatisfaction  with  tee  world.  Man's  nature  consists  of  higher  and  lower, 
spiritual  and  psychical,  the  one  designed  by  God  to  govern  and  regulate  the  other. 
But  without  such  goTernaiice  the  desires  of  the  lower  life  are  riotous  and  rampant,  and 
the  members  of  the  ungoverned  man  are  the  battle-ground  for  base  cravings.  And 
from  the  man  himself  the  battle  is  projected  into  the  world.  1.  But  what  it  the  result 
of  this  unbridled  craving  for  the  world  t  A  nature  that  is  never  satisfied.  (1)  Baffled 
desires  and  efforts  towards  the  world.  Ever  more  and  more  inflamed,  for  there  is  a  cer- 
tain infiniteness  in  man's  cravings ;  ever  more  and  more  disappointed,  for  there  is  a 
palling  finitenesB  in  the  world  towards  which  man's  infinite  cravings  go  forth.  (2)  The 
non-existence  of  desires  towards  God,  who  alone  can  satisfy.  "  Ye  ask  not "  (ver.  2) ;  or, 
"Ye  ask  amiss;"  not  sincerely  for  God's  blessing  itself,  but  merely  for  the  selfish  gratifica- 
tion of  worldly  desires  (ver.  3).  2,  And  what  the  guilt  of  this  condition  f  The  guilt  of 
absolute  ungodliness  1  (1)  The  world-desires  themselves,  unbridled  and  lawless  as 
they  are,  are  evidence  of  divorce  from  God  (ver.  4).  (2)  The  spirit  of  envy  which 
they  provoke  is  absolutely  opposed  to  God  (ver.  5).    Yes,  it  is  from  below. 

IL  Satisfaction  in  God.  But,  it  may  be  said,  we  are  naturally  so  prone  to  sin ; 
we  covet,  we  envy,  as  being  to  the  manner  bom.  Yes,  truly ;  and  only  God's  grace 
can  suffice.  But  God's  grace  can  suffice,  and  it  is  abundantly  given  (ver.  6).  1.  Let 
us  notice  the  terms  upon  which  this  grace  is  given.  (1)  Towards  God:  humility 
(ver.  10),  and  submission  (ver.  7).  (2)  Towards  the  tempter:  resistance  (ver.  7). 
(3)  Towards  sin :  repentance  (a)  of  the  will — cleansing  the  hands  and  purifying  the 
heart  (ver.  8) ;  (i)  of  the  feelings  (ver.  9).  (4)  Towards  God,  again :  drawing  nigh, 
as  to  a  Befuge  (ver,  8).  2.  And  the  results  of  this  craving  after  God  ?  (1)  God's 
nearness  to  man  (ver.  8 ;  so  John  L  61 ;  xvii.  22,  23).  (2)  Man's  exaltation  to  God 
(ver.'  10),  So,  virtually,  in  the  ascension  of  Christ ;  so  actually  by-and-by  (John 
xiv.3). 

The  same  old  war  in  the  members,  from  the  beginning  until  now.  It  must  be  put 
down  by  a  more  righteous  war.  A  war  which  demands  all  the  abounding  grace  of  God. 
Let  us  learn,  then,  sternness  towards  sin ;  strong  trust  towards  God.  And  so  he  will 
give  the  victory, — T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Judgment,  human  and  Divine.  The  besetting  sin  of  the  Jews ;  the 
besetting  sin  of  man :  evil-speaking.  But  to  speak  evil,  is  to  judge  ;  and  who  are  we, 
that  we  should  judge  ?    One  is  the  Judge,  even  God. 

L  Thb  judgment  of  man.  In  some  cases,  where  great  public  ends  are  to  he  served, 
man  seems  to  be  justified  in  exercising  a  power  of  delegated  judgment ;  so  the  magis- 
trate, the  minister,  the  historian.  But  even  here  the  power  is  qualified ;  the  judgment 
of  motives  is  not  absolute.  The  besetting  sin,  however,  is  to  judge  of  motives  where 
only  the  act  is  known ;  and,  which  generally  accompanies  the  former,  to  conjecture  the 
act  where  little  is  definitely  known.  So  in  the  world ;  so,  alas,  in  the  Church  1  But 
why  is  this  judgment,  why  is  this  evil-speaking,  wrong  ?  There  is  a  law  against 
which  it  sins — the  law  of  love.  Indicated  in  "  the  Law "  (Gal.  vL  2) ;  also  in  the 
word  "brother."  Yes,  a  law  which  has  said,  "Judge  not"  (see  Matt.  vil.  1).  But 
such  judgment  has  a  more  uniquely  evil  relation  to  law  than  tms.  1.  False  relation  to 
law:  "Speaketh  against  the  law,  judgeth  the  law."  What  a  subtle  hypocrisy  is 
this  I  When  we  think  we  are  championing  the  law  by  our  censorious  speaking,  we 
are  in  reality  blaming  it,  condemning  it;  for  we  are  virtually  denying  its  right  to  teach 
us  charity  I  So  do  we  sit  in  judgment,  forsooth,  on  the  law  itself.  2.  2Vi(e  relation 
to  law.  "  A  doer,"  By  charity,  we  recognize  the  validity  and  rectitude  of  the  great 
law  of  charity,  and  ourselves  obey  its  precepts.  This  law,  let  us  remember,  is  imper- 
sonated in  Christ.  If,  then,  we  do  not  bow  to  its  svcay,  we  do  not  receive  Christ ;  and, 
not  receiving  Christ,  we  have  no  salvation, 

IL  TfiE  JUDSMENT  OF  God.  The  great  principle  is  here  stated  th»t^  ultimately  and 
Mina.  W 


66  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.         [«*•  ^- 1— !'• 


absolutely,  there  is  one  Lawgiver,  one  Judge.  1.  The  legislative  authority  of  Ood  s 
rooted  in  his  very  nature,  as  God.  And  the  special  law  of  love  rooted  in  this,  that 
"  God  is  love."  2.  The  judicial  authority  of  Ood.  He  discerns  infallibly  the  sin  of 
the  creature.  (1)  As  being  himself  perfectly  good :  an  essential  requisite.  The 
mirror  and  the  breath.  So  that  infinite  holiness!  (2)  As  being  the  One  to  whom  all 
sin  is  adversely  related.  Whatever  its  exact  bearings  directly,  it  is  essentially  hostile 
to  God.  And  as  in  him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,,  its  hostility  is 
immediately  known  by  God.  3.  The  executive  authority  of  God,  "  Able  to  save,  and 
to  destroy."  (1)  To  save:  taking  into  blessed  fellowship  with  himself,  as  having 
affinity.  (2)  To  destroy :  casting  oif  from  himsell',  as  being  alien  (see  2  Tliess.  i.  9). 
So  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  the  judgment  of  God,  from  first  to  last.  The  legisla- 
tive, the  judicial,  the  executive  functions  are  all  rooted  in  his  nature,  and  in  the 
essential  relation  of  that  nature  to  us. 

"  Who,"  then,  "  art  thou  that  judgest  thy  neighbour  ?  "  Actually  judging,  not  thy 
neighbour,  but  the  law;  nay,  not  the  law,  but  the  great  God  from  whom  all  law 
siirings,  and  to  whom  it  all  returns  1    May  God  save  us  from  this! — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — "What  is  your  lifef"  The  life  of  the  savage  is  characterized  by  an 
almost  total  lack  of  true  foresight ;  no  calculations  of  the  future.  True  civilization,  on 
the  contrary,  is  largely  built  up  on  the  principle  of  far-seeing  prudence.  Yet  there 
may  be  a  false  use  of  a  true  principle.  And  so  it  may  come  to  pass  that  we  manifest 
an  unchristian  reliance  on  the  future,  and  an  absoibed  engrossment  in  plans  for  its 
direction.  It  is  this  which  James  condemns.  He  sets  forth  the  false  glorying,  and, 
over  against  the  false,  the  true. 

I.  The  false  gloryino.  1.  A  foist  love  of  the  world,  "Trade,  and  get  gain." 
So  the  parable  of  the  rich  fool  (Luke  xii.  16 — 21).  And  the  essence  of  such  sinful 
worldliiiess  is  this:  "Layeth  up  treasure  for  himself."  But  the  gains  on  which  men's 
hearts  are  set  may  be  other  than  these  material  ones :  position,  power,  fame,  intellectual 
achievements.  It  matters  not  what  they  are,  if  they  be  sought  covetously  and  selfishly, 
tliey  come  under  the  condemnation  of  a  false  love  of  the  world.  2.  A  false  view  of  Ijfe, 
"Spend  a  year  there."  So  the  parable,  as  above.  Eeally?  (1)  The  transiency , of 
life  in  itself.  "A  vapour."  As  compared  with  the  agps  of  history.  How  that  dwmdles 
our  little  day  I  As  compared  with  the  life  of  God  (Ps.  xc.  4 ;  xxxix.  5).  (2)  The 
permanence  of  its  spiritual  results :  left  for  inference,  how  immensely  important  every 
moment  now!  So  Ps.  xc.  12;  xxxix.  13.  The  glorying  is  evil,  then,  whether  of 
speech  or  of  heart.  Por  the  principle  is  not  one  of  words.  A  man  may  talk  piously 
of  the  brevity  of  life  and  of  the  will  of  God,  while  really  his  heart  is  as  essentially 
worldly  as  that  of  the  man  who  makes  no  pretensions  to  better  things. 

II.  The  true  oloeyino.  So  also  the  contrasted  glorying,  "  If  the  Lord  will,"  etc.. 
Is  not  one  of  words — "  D.V.,"  and  the  like.  Use  of  words  not  unimportant  as 
regards  practical  results  j  but  it  is  really  the  attitude  of  the  heart  which  God  regards, 
and  which  constitutes  us  what  we  are.  So,  then,  "he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in 
the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  i.  31).  1.  A  true  view  of  life.  "  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  live." 
(1)  His  governance  of  human  vicissitudes :  "  The  Lord  reigneth."  Fate,  chance, 
human  wilfulness — all  governed  by  his  wilL  (2)  His  regard  for  human  destiny: 
educating  us.  That  mighty  future,  shall  we  be  made  ready  for  it?  Yes;  for  "he 
that  spared  not,"  etc.  (Eom.  viii.  32).  2,  A  true  love  of  the  world.  "Do  this  or  that." 
A  living  will  runs  through  all  these  things,  and  it  is  given  to  us  to  blend  our  wills 
with  it,  and  ao  help  to  work  out  God's  design. 

**If  on  our  daily  course  our  iniii4 
Be  set  to  hallow  all  we  find  " — 

that  is  the  secret  of  a  true,  a  godly  love  of  the  world. 

We  have  knowledge  of  these  things,  for  we  have  "  tasted  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come "  (Heb.  vi.  5).  Therefore,  what  shall  be  our  sin,  if  still  our  glorying  is  in  the 
world  (see  John  ix.  41)  ?  Oh,  to  us,  as  from  heaven,  the  warning  oomes:  "  Ye  Christians^ 
arouse  yoarselTes,  and  live  fw  heaven  and  Godl" — ^T.  P.  L, 


CH.V.  1— 20.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


61 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Vert.  1—6. — Denunciation  op  the  Eioh 

FOB  (1)  GBINDINO  DOWN  THE  POOB  AND  KEEP- 
ING BACK  THEin  Wages;  (2)  Luxury;  (3) 
MuRDBB.  The  ■whole  sectiim  rosembles 
nothing  bo  much  as  an  utterance  of  one  of 
the  old  Jewish  proiiliets.  It  might  almost 
be  a  leaf  torn  out  of  the  Old  Testament. 

Ver.  1. — Go  to  now  (see  on  ch.  iv.  13). 
The  Vulgate  there  has  eece ;  here,  agite. 
Ye  rich  men  (see  on  ch.  ii.  6).  Weep  and 
howl,  etc. ;  of.  ch.  iv.  9,  but  note  the  differ- 
ence of  tone;  tliere,  more  of  exhortation; 
here,  more  of  denunciation.  'OAoAiifoi'Tes : 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  but  several 
times  in  the  LXX.,  in  passages  of  which 
the  one  before  us  reminds  us ;  e.g.  Isa.  x. 
10;  xiii  6;  xiv.  31;  xv.  2;  xxiii.  1,  6,  14. 
Miseries.  TaAamaptais :  only  again  in  Bom. 
iii.  16  (equivalent  to  Isa.  lix.  7);  frequent 
in  the  LXX. 

Ver.  2. — Description  of  the  miieriea  that 
art  coming  upon  them.  The  perfects  ((re<n;:re 
.  .  .  yeyofev)  are  probably  to  be  explained 
at  "  proplietic,"  in  accordance  with  a  com- 
mon Hebrew  idiom  (see  Driver  on  the 
'Tenses  of  the  Hebrew  Verb,'  §  14;  and 
of.  Winer,  'Grammar  of  New  Tistametrt 
Greek,'  p.  342 :  "  The  perfect  does  not  stiind 
for  a  present  or  future,  but  the  case  indicated 
by  the  apostle  in  raXanrciiplais  ufiuv  tols 
^■nepxoiifvais  ii  viewed  a«  already  present, 
and  consequently  the  ir^ircii'  of  the  riches  as 
already  completed  ").  For  an  instance  of  the 
prophetic  perfect,  used  as  here  after  o\o\i- 
(eiv,  see  Isa.  xxiii.  1, 14, "  Howl, ...  for  your 
stronghold  hai  been  wasted."  The  miseries 
coming  upon  the  rich  are  thus  announced 
to  be  the  destruction  of  everything  in  virtue 
of  which  they  were  styled  rich.  Their 
costly  garments,  in  a  great  store  of  which 
the  wealth  of  an  Eastern  largely  consists, 
should  become  moth-eaten.  Tlieir  gold  and 
silver  should  be  rusted.  Ben;,'el  notes  on 
this  passage:  "Scripta  hsso  sunt  panels 
annis  ante  obsidionem  Hierosolyraorum ; " 
and  certainly  the  best  commentary  upon  it 
is  to  be  found  in  the  terrible  account  given 
by  Josephus  of  the  sufferings  and  miseries 
which  came  upon  the  Jews  during  the  war 
and  siege  of  Jerusalem.  The  Jewish  his- 
torian has  become  the  unconscious  witness 
to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  of  our 
Lord  and  his  apostle.  'S,i(Tr)irev :  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament ;  in  the  LXX.,  Job  xvi.7. 
'Zfiri^ptara  is  also  an  aira^  Kiy6(xivov  in  the 
New  Testament ;  in  LXX.  used  also  of  gar- 
menti  fai  Job  xiii.  28. 

Ver.  8. — With  this  and  the  preceding 
verse  contrast  our  Lord's  words  of  treasure 
laid  up  in  heaven,  "where  moth  and  rust 


do  not  corrupt"  (Matt.  t1.  19).  Cankered 
(/caTfaiTtti) ;  better,  rusted.  Only  liere  in  the 
New  Testament;  never  in  the  LXX.  except 
Ecclus.  xii.  11.  The  rust  of  them.  '!<!;: 
used  here  for  "rust"  as  in  the  LXX.  in 
Ezekiel's  parable  of  the  boiling  pot  (Ezek. 
xxiv.  6,  etc.) — a  passage  which  (according 
to  one  interpretation)  may  have  suggested 
the  following  clause,  "  and  shall  eat  your 
flesh,"  etc.  (see  vers.  9 — 12).  Shall  be  a 
witness  against  you  (^^U  iiaprvptoi/  ifuv).  The 
rendering  of  the  A.V.  is  quite  defensible 
(see  Winer,  p.  265),  but  it  is  equally  possible 
to  take,  the  words  as  the  E.V.  margin, "  for  a 
testimony  unto  you."  "  The  rust  of  them," 
says  Alford,  "  is  a  token  of  what  shall  ha[>pen 
to  yourselves;  in  the  consuming  of  your 
wealth  you  see  depicted  your  own."  Two 
interpretations  of  the  latter  part  of  the  verse 
are  pes  ible,  depending  on  the  punctuation 
adopted.  (1)  As  the  A.V.  and  R.  V.,  putting 
the  stop  after  irvp :  "  Their  rust  .  .  .  shall 
eat  your  flesh  as  fire.  Ye  have  laid  up 
your  treasure  in  the  last  days."  The  "  fire," 
if  this  remlering  be  adopted,  may  be  ex- 
plained from  Ezek.  xxiv.  9,  etc.  (2)  Putting 
the  stop  after  vix&v  and  before  ws  ivvp ; 
"  Their  rust  .  .  .  shall  eat  your  flesh.  Ye 
have  heaped  up  as  it  were  Are  in  the  last 
days."  J  his  has  the  support  of  the  Syriac 
("  Ye  have  gathered  fire  for  you  for  the  last 
diiys  "),  and  is  adopted  by  l)rs.  Westcott  and 
Hort.  The  "  fire  "  will,  of  course,  be  the 
fire  of  judgment ;  and  the  expression,  ij  irDp 
iBi\aavplaaTi,  may  easily  have  been  suggested 
by  Prov.  xvi.  27,  *Ai/^p  &(ppuy  opvatrei  eavr^ 
KaK&,  ^Trl  6^  Toju  eavrov  x^^^^^^  6riiravpi^€i 
irvp.  The  whole  form  of  expression  also 
reminds  us  of  St.  Paul's  "  treasurest  up  for 
thyself  wrath  in  the  day  of  wrath  "  (Bom. 
ii.  5),  to  which  it  is  exactly  parallel,  the 
"  wrath  in  the  day  of  wrath  "  there  answer- 
ing to  the  "fire  in  the  last  days"  liere. 
(The  rendering  of  the  Vulgate  is  evidently 
influenced  by  this  parallel,  as  it  has  thenau- 
rizastis  tram.)  For  the  last  days;  rather, 
in  the  Uist  days  (ei/  ^(rx^rats  7ifispais')i  of. 
2  Tim.  iii.  1.  If  the  words  are  connected 
with  TrDp  as  suggested  above,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  them.  If  the  punctuation  of 
the  A.V.  be  retained,  we  must  suppose  that 
the  writer  is  speaking  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  last  day  of  all.  "When  the  end 
came  it  found  them  heaping  up  treasures 
which  they  could  never  use"  (Dean  Scott). 
But  the  other  view,  though  not  so  generally 
adopted,  seems  fai  preferable. 

Ver.  4  accounts  for  the  miseries  that  are 
coming  upon  them.  Their  sins  are  the 
cause.  The  language  is  modelled  upon  the 
Old  Testament,  and  the  special  sin  de. 
nounced  is  one  that  is  expressly  forbidden 


68 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMEa 


[flH.  T.  1—20 


in  the  Law  (see  Dent.  xxiv.  14, 15,  "  Then 

Bbalt  not  oppress  an  hired  servant  that  ii 
poor  and  needy.  ...  At  his  day  thou  shalt 
give  him  his  hire,  neither  shall  tlje  sun  go 
down  upon  it :  for  he  is  poor,  and  setteth  his 
heart  upou  it :  lest  he  cry  against  thee  unto  the 
Jjvrd,  and  it  he  sin  unto  thee ; "  cf.  Mai.  iii. 
■%  "  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  .  .  .  against 
those  that  oppress  tlje  hireling  in  his  wages 
(LXX.,  inl  robs  CLTroai  epoivras  filtrdhv  /jLtadoi- 
ToK)."  Later  allusions  to  the  same  sin  are 
found  in  Tobit  Iv.  14;  Ecclus.  xxxiv.  22. 
Which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,  crieth. 
For  aireirTepij/ieVos  of  the  lieceived  Text, 
read  o^uo-teptj/jcVoj  (n,  B).  It  is  possible  to 
join  tlie  words  &(j>'  ip.av  with  Kpd(ei,  but  it  is 
more  natural  to  take  them  as  the  A.V.  with 
a<l>v<rTepnii4yos.  Beaped . . .  reaped  (d/ijiirdf tiok 
. . .  e^pia-a.i'Tuv') ;  K.V., "  mowed  .  .  .  reaped." 
But  it  would  seem  that  the  words  should 
have  been  reversed,  as,  judging  by  Old 
Testament  usage,  aixda  is  always  used  of 
corn  (Lev.  xxv.  11;  Deut.  xxiv.  19;  Isa. 
xvii.  5  ;  xxxvii.  30 ;  Micah  vi.  15) ;  while 
Bepi^iiv  is  the  wider  word,  including  all 
"harvesting,"  and  used  of  x'^P^os  in  Ps. 
oxxviii.  (cxxvii.)  7;  Jer.  ix.  22.  Into  the 
ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth.  These  words 
are  adopted  from  Isa.  v.  9,  Kipios  iaPaiiS, 
a  Grecized  form  of  the  Hebrew  mxax  nin<, 
fiequent  In  the  I -XX.  Found  in  the  New 
Testament  only  here  aud  Kom.  Ix.  29  (in 
a  quotation) ;  elsewhere,  e.g.  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse, it  is  represented  by  TravroKpaTap  (Rev. 
i.  8,  etc.) ;  so  also  in  2  Cor.  vi  18  (equiva- 
lent to  2  Sam.  vii.  8). 

Ver.  5. — Further  description  of  their  sin. 
Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  {erpvip-ficraTe,  here 
only)  on  the  earth,  aud  been  wanton  (e<nro- 
AaT^o-are,  only  liere  and  1  Tim.  v.  6);  ye 
have  nourished  your  hearts  in  a  day  of 
slaughter.  The  as  of  the  Received  Text 
("  <u  in  a  day,"  etc.,  A. V.)  is  quite  wrong ; 
it  ia  wanting  in  «',  A,  B,  Latt.,  Memphitio. 
The  clause  seems  to  imply  that  they  were 
like  brute  beasts,  feeding  securely  on  the 
very  day  of  their  slauirhter.  Vulgate  (Olem.), 
tn  die  ocdsionis;  but  Coilex  Amiat.,f?i  diem 
OBcisionis.  The  actual  expression,  ei>  vfiepif 
(r<l>ayris,  may  have  been  suggested  by  Jer. 
xii.  3, "  Preparo  them  for  the  day  of  slaugh- 
ter (LXX.,  6(5  rifj.€pap  fftpayTJs  avrap)." 

Ver.  6. — The  climax  of  their  sin.  Ye  have 
condemned,  ye  have  killed  the  righteous  one. 
Does  this  alluile  to  the  death  of  our  Lord? 
At  first  sight  it  may  well  seem  so.  Com- 
pare St.  Peter's  words  in  Acts  iii.  14,  "  Ye 
denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just  (Slicaiav);" 
St.  Stephen's  in  Acts  vii.  52,  "the  coming 
of  the  Just  One  (toD  Si/cai'ou);"  and  St.  Paul's 
in  Acts  xxii.  14,  "  to  see  the  Just  One  (rhv  SI- 
Kcuov)."  But  this  view  is  dispelled  when  we 
remember  how  throughout  this  whole  pas- 
sage the  ideas  and  expresoons  are  borrowed 


from  the  Old  Testament,  and  when  w«  And 
that  in  Isa.  iii.  10  (LXX.)  the  wicked  vtt 
represented  as  saying,  Mfaaiuv  rhv  ilKmov 
8ti  SiffxpifTos  Tiiiiv  iart — a  passage  which 
lies  at  the  root  of  the  remarkable  gection  in 
Wisd.  ii., "  Let  us  opjiress  the  poor  righteous 
man.  . . .  Let  us  condemn  him  with  a  shame- 
ful death."  It  is  pr>  ibable,  then,  that  passages 
such  as  these  were  in  St.  James's  mind,  and 
suggested  the  words,  and  thus  that  there  is 
no  direct  allusion  to  the  Crucifixion  (which, 
indeed,  could  scarcely  be  laid  to  the  charge 
of  his  readers),  but  that  the  singnlar  riv 
SUcuop  is  used  to  denote  the  class  collectively 
(cf.  Amos  ii.  6 ;  t.  12).  It  is  a  remarkable 
coincidence,  pointed  out  by  most  commen- 
tators, that  he  who  wrote  these  verses,  him- 
self styled  d  Alxatos  by  the  Jews,  suffered 
death  at  their  hands  a  very  few  years  after- 
wards. He  doth  not  resist  yon.  According 
to  the  view  commonly  adopted,  St.  James 
simply  means  to  say  that  the  righteous  man 
suffered  this  evil  at  their  hands  without 
resistance.  Another  interpretation  seems 
more  possible,  taking  the  cfouse  as  interro- 
gative, "Does  he  not  resist  you?"  the  sub- 
ject, implied  but  not  expressed,  being  God ; 
as  If  he  would  say,  "Is  not  God  against 
you?" — ^that  God  of  wliom  it  has  already 
been  said  tnat  he  resists  (jLvririaaeTai)  the 

Eroud  (comp.  Hos.  i,  6,  "I  will  no  more 
ave  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  but  i 
will  utterly  take  them  away  (LXX.,  &AA' 
^  h-VTiTaffffi^evos  avTird^ofiai  ahrdis)  "). 

Vers.  7 — 20. — Concluding  Exhobtations 
(1)  TO  Patience  (vers.  7 — 11);  (2)  against 
Swearing  (ver.  12) ;  (3)  to  Practical  Con- 
duct IN  Health  and  in  Sickness  (ver.  13, 
etc.). 
Vers.  7 — 11. — Exhortation  to  paiienM. 
Ver.  7. — Be  patient  therefore.  In  his  con- 
cluding remarks  St.  James  reverts  to  the 
point  from  which  he  started  (comp.  ch.  i. 
3,  4).  yiaKpoBu/ieiv  is  here  given  a  wider 
meaning  than  that  which  generally  attaches 
to  it.  As  was  pointed  out  in  the  notes  on 
oh.  i.  3,  it  ordinarily  refers  to  patience  in 
respect  of  persons.  Here,  however,  it  cer- 
tainly includes  endurance  in  respect  of 
things,  so  that  the  husbandman  is  said 
fiaxpoeufjiuii  where  we  should  rather  have 
expected  !nroiieve7v  (of.  Lightfoot  on  OoL  i. 
11).  Unto  the  coming  of  tba  Lord  (lois  t^s 
■napovaias  toS  Ki;p(ou);  Vulgate,  utque  ad 
adventum  Domini.  The  word  wapomria  had 
been  used  by  our  Lord  himself  of  hia  letnm 
to  judge,  in  Matt.  xxiv.  3,  27,  37, 39.  It  la 
al^io  found  in  St.  Paul's  writings,  only,  how- 
ever (in  this  sense), in  Thessalonians  (1  Theaa. 
ii.  19;  iii.  13;  iv.  15;  v.  23;  2  These,  ii.  1, 
8)  and  1  Cor.  xv.  23.  St  Peter  nses  it  is 
his  Second  Epistle  (i.  16 ;  iii.  4, 12),  as  doea 
St.  John  (1  John  ii.  28).  Behold,  the  hna- 
bandman,  ata.     OuiuiAenMm,  m»Wii|  If 


OH.  T.  1—20.]  THE   QENEBAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMEa 


patience,  drawn  from  on  example  hefore  t\» 
eyet  of  alh  TTntil  he  reoeiye;  better,  taking 
yll  as  the  subject  of  the  verb,  untilit  receive. 
The  early  and  the  latter  rain.  'TeT(!»  of  the 
Beceiyed  Text  has  the  authority  of  A,  K,  L, 
and  the  Syriao  Versions ;  ^»  (with  which 
agree  the  Coptic  and  Old  Latin,  ff),  Kapw6v, 
B  and  the  Vulgate  omit  the  substantive 
altogether.  In  tliis  they  are  followed  by 
most  critical  editorg  (e.j.  Laohmann,  Ti- 
schendorf,  Tregelles,  Westcott  and  Hoit),  but 
not  by  the  Revisers ;  and  as  the  expression, 
TTpdiijiov  Kol  o'fiifi.oi',  without  the  substantive, 
is  never  found  in  the  LXX.,  it  is  safer  to 
follow  A  and  the  Syriac  in  retaining  i^rdv 
here.  (For  "  the  early  and  the  latter  rain," 
comp.  Deut.  xi.  14;  Jer.  t.  24;  Joel  ii.  23; 
Zeoh.  X.  1.)  "  The  first  showers  of  autumn 
which  revived  the  parched  and  thirsty  soil 
and  prepared  it  for  the  seed ;  and  the  later 
showers  of  spring  which  continued  to  refresh 
and  forward  both  the  ripening  crops  and 
the  vernal  products  of  the  field"  (Eobinson, 
quoted  in  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  ii.  994). 

Ver.  8. — Application  of  illustration,  re- 
peating the  exhortation  of  ver.  7,  and  sup- 
porting it  by  tlie  assurance  that  "  the  coming 
of  the  Lord,"  till  which  they  are  to  endure, 
*'  is  at  hand."  Stablish  your  hearts  (comp. 
1  Thess.  iii.  13,  "  To  the  end  he  may  atahlish 
your  hearts  unblameable  in  holiness  before 
our  God  and  Father  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  saints").  The  coming 
of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh.  So  Isaiah  had 
announced  (xiii.  6),  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  is 
near  (^77!is  fiij,4pa  Kvplmi)." 

Ver.  9. — Grudge  not,  brethren;  better, 
with  R.V.,  murmur  not — a  meaning  which 
"  grudge  "  had  in  the  seventeenth  century ; 
cf.  Fs.  lix.  15  (Prayer-book  version),  "  Tliey 
will  run  here  and  there  for  meat,  and  grudge 
if  they  be  not  satisfied."  What  is  the  con- 
nection of  this  verse  with  the  preceding? 
"Murmuring"  implies  sitting  in  judgment 
npon  others,  which  has  been  expressly  for- 
bidden by  the  Lord  himself.  It  is  also  the 
opposite  to  that  liaxpoSv/tla  to  which  St. 
James  has  been  exhorting  his  readers.  lest 
ye  be  condemned ;  rather,  (hat  ye  be  not 
judged,  'iva  /tii  KptSrJTe,  as  in  Matt.  vii.  1. 
KuTaKpiBriTe  of  the  Keoeived  Text  has  abso- 
lutely no  authority,  nor  has  the  omission  of 
the  article  before  Kptriis  in  the  following 
clause.  Behold,  the  Judge,  etc.  The  near- 
ness of  the  judgment  is  expressed  by  saying 
that  the  Judge  is  actually  standing  "  before 
the  doors  (irp4  tSk  Bvpav)."  So  also  our 
Lord,  in  his  great  discourse  on  the  judg- 
ment, says  (Matt.  xxiv.  33),  "When  ye  see 
all  these  things,  know  that  he  is  nigh,  even 
at  the  doors  (£771!?  iariv  iitl  Bipais);"  aud 
comp.  Bev.  iii.  20,  where  he  says,  "Behold, 
I  stand  at  the  dooi  (lo-ngica  M  t^v  evpcw% 
MdHmock." 


Ver.  10.  —  The  injunction  ii  further 
strengthened  by  an  appeal  to  the  example 
cf  the  prophets  of  the  old  covenant,  an 
"example  of  suffering  and  of  patience." 
Bead  ir  t»  iv6nari,  with  ti,  B,  and  observe 
the  anarthrous  Kvpiov  (cf.  on  ch.  iv.  10).  Suf- 
ering  affliction.  Tf,i  KOKOTraSffoj :  here  only; 
in  the  LXX.,  Mai.  i.  13;  2  Maco.  ii.  26. 

Ver.  11. — Behold,  we  count  them  happy. 
VlaKopiQeiv :  only  here  and  Luke  i.  48  (comp. 
oh.  i.  12,  "Blessed  is  the  man  thatendureth 
temptation;"  Dan.  xii.  12,  "  Blessed  is  he 
that  waiteth").  Which  endure ;  rather,  toRicA 
endured,  reading  viroueivavras,  with  >t,  A,  B, 
Syriac, Latt.(5««««s<mMeruBt).  Tehave heard 
of  the  patience  of  Job.  A  book  very  rarely 
referred  to  in  the  New  Testament ;  only  here 
and  in  1  Cor.  iii  19,  where  Job  T.  13  is 
quoted.  And  have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord. 
"IScTc  ("  see  ")  is  found  in  A,  W,  L,  but  «WeT« 
of  the  Eeceived  Text  has  the  support  of 
K,  B',  K,  Vulgate  (vidiatis),  and  is  now 
generally  adopted.  The  "  end  of  the  Lord 
(t6  TeXos  Kvpiov)"  cannot  possibly  be  in- 
terpreted of  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
our  Saviour.  The  whole  context  is  against 
this,  and  Kvpiov  would  certainly  require  the 
article.  The  Syriac  Version  rightly  inter- 
prets the  clause,  "  the  end  which  the  Lord 
wrought  for  him."  It  clearly  refers  to  the 
end  which  God  brought  about  in  the  case  of 
Job,  whose  "latter  end  the  Lord  blessed 
more  than  his  beginning"  (Job  xlii.  12;- 
cf.  Winer,  •  Grammar  of  New  Testament 
Greek,'  p.  309).  That  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful, 
and  of  tender  mercy.  Xlo\vair\a,xvos :  here 
only ;  never  in  the  LXX,  but  equivalent  to 
Hebrew  non  an ;  cf.  Ps.  ciii.  (cii.),  8 ;  oxi. 
(ex.),  4,  which  may  have  suggested  the  phrase 
to  St.  James.  OixTipiioiv :  only  here  and 
Luke  vi.  36 ;  several  times  in  the  LXX.  'O 
Kipios  is  omitted  entirely  in  K,  L,  and  some 
manuscripts  of  the  Vulgate;  the  article  ia 
also  wanting  in  B. 

Ver.  12. — Exhortation  against  swearing, 
founded  on  our  Lord's  teaching  in  the  ser- 
mon on  the  mount.  Matt.  v.  33 — 37 — a  passage 
which  was  evidently  present  to  St.  James'i 
thoughts.  He,  like  his  Master,  "  lays  down 
rules  and  maxims  and  principles  without 
specifying  the  limitations  and  exceptions." 
The  sermon  on  the  mount,  as  interpreted  by 
our  Lord's  own  actions,  is  a  clear  witness 
that  this  formed  his  method  of  teaching. 
If,  then,  his  words  do  not  touch  the  case  of 
oaths  solemnly  tendered  to  men  in  a  court 
of  justice  (and  his  own  acceptance  of  an 
adjuration  on  his  trial  shows  that  they  da 
not),  no  more  do  St  James's.  Both  our  Lord 
and  his  apostle  had  probably  in  view  "  only 
those  profane  adjurations  with  which  men 
who  have  no  deep-seated  fear  of  God  garnish 
their  common  talk"  (sea  Sadler's  'Coim. 
uentary  oa  St.  Matthew,'  fb  M>     Xto 


TO 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES. 


[OB.  T.  1 — Kl 


special  oaths  mentioned  were  those  invogne 
among  the  Jews,  and  just  the  very  ones 
which  our  Lord  himself  had  specified 
(comp.  Llghtf'oot's  '  Horse  Hebraicae,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  127,  edit.  Gandell).  On  the  need  of 
such  teaching  as  tliis,  see  Thomson's 
•Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  190:  "  This  people 
are  fearfully  profane.  Everybody  curses 
and  swears  when  in  a  passion.  No  people 
that  I  have  ever  known  can  compare  with 
Ihese  Orientals  lor  profaneness  in  the  use  of 
the  names  and  attributes  of  God.  The  evil 
habit  seems  inveterate  and  universal.  When 
Peter,  therefore,  '  began  to  curse  and  to 
swear'  on  that  dismal  night  of  temptation, 
we  are  not  to  suppose  that  it  was  something 
foreign  to  his  former  habits.  He  merely 
relapsed,  under  high  excitement,  into  what, 
as  a  sailor  and  a  fisherman,  he  had  been 
acouetomed  to  all  his  life.  The  people  now 
use  the  very  same  sort  of  oatlis  that  are 
mentioned  and  condemned  by  our  Lord. 
They  swear  by  the  head,  by  their  life,  by 
heaven,  by  the  temple,  or  what  is  in  its 
place,  the  church.  The  forms  of  cursing 
and  swearing,  however,  are  almost  infinite, 
and  fall  on  Ihe  pained  ear  all  day  long." 
So,  too,  Aben  Ezra  speaks  of  the  practice  of 
swearing  as  almost  universal  in  his  day,  so 
that  he  says,  "  men  swear  daily  countless 
times,  and  then  swear  that  they  have  not 
sworn  I "  With  regard  to  tlie  translation  of 
the  verse,  two  renderings  are  possible :  (1) 
that  of  the  A.V.  and  of  the  E.V.  (text),  "  Let 
your  yea  be  yea,  and  youi  nay,  nay."  (2)  That 
of  the  R.V.  margin,  "  liCt  yours  be  the  yea, 
yea,  and  the  nay,  nay ;"  viz.  those  enjoined  by 
our  Lord  (Matt.  v.  37),  "  Let  your  communi- 
cation be  Yea,  yea ;  Nay,  nay ;  for  whatsoever 
is  more  than  these  cometh  of  evil."  On  behalf 
of  this  latter  rendering,  may  be  pleaded  (o) 
the  clearness  of  the  reference  to  our  Lord's 
teaching ;  and  (6)  the  fact  that  this  is  the 
interpretation  given  to  the  clause  in  the  two 
leading  versions  of  antiquity,  the  Syriac  and 
the  Vulgate,  both  of  which  have  exactly  the 
same  words  liere  and  in  St.  Matthew.  Vul- 
gate, Sit  autem  eermo  vester  est  eet,  non  rum. 
Lest  ye  fall  into  condemnation.  Happily  the 
A.V.  here  follows  the  text  of  the  Elzevirs, 
iira  Kpiaw  («,  A,  B,  Latt.,  Syriac,  Coptic),  and 
so  avoids  the  erroneous  reading  of  Stephens, 
els  inr6KpiaiP  (K,  L). 

Vers.  13 — 20. — Exhortation!  with  respect 
to  practical  conduct  in  health  and  sickness. 

Ver.  13. — (1)  Is  any  among  you  suffering  1 
let  him  pray.  (2)  Is  any  cheerful  1  let  him 
sing  praise.  Prayer  in  the  narrower  sense 
of  petition  is  rather  for  sufferers,  who  need 
to  nave  their  wants  supplied  and  their 
sorrows  removed.  Praise,  the  highest  form 
of  prayer,  is  to  spring  up  from  the  gratefnl 
heart  of  the  cheerful.  VdKKev  (et  IUm.  bt. 
9i  1  eat.  xiT.  15 ;  Eph.  t.  !•> 


Vers.  14, 15. — Direction*  in  ease  •/  Heh- 

ness.  Let  him  caU  for  the  elders  of  the  Ohnroh. 
Of  the  original  creation  of  the  presbyterate 
no  account  is  given,  but  elders  appear  aa 
already  existing  in  Judeea  in  Acts  xi.  30 ; 
and  from  Acts  xiv.  23  we  find  that  St.  Paul 
and  St.  Barnabas  "  appointed  elders  in  every 
Church  "  which  they  had  founded  on  their 
first  missionary  journey.  Nothing,  therefore, 
can  be  concluded  with  regard  to  the  date  of 
the  Epistle  from  this  notice  of  elders.  The 
elders  were  to  be  summoned  for  a  twofold 
purpose :  (1)  that  they  might  pray  over  the 
sick  person  (on  the  accusative  iir'  avT6v,  see 
Winer,  p.  508);  and  (2)  that  they  might 
anoint  him  with  oil  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 
The  result  anticipated  is  also  twofold :  (1) 
"  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick " 
("  save,"  aiC^iv,  here  as  in  other  passages, 
e.g.  Matt.  ix.  21,  22,  etc.,  refers  to  bodily 
healing) ;  and  (2)  "  if  he  have  committed 
sins,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him."  (Prom  the 
manner  in  which  this  last  clause  is  intro- 
duced, it  may  fairly  be  inferred  that  the 
sins  in  question  are  presumed  to  have  had 
some  connection  with  the  sickness,  and  to 
have  been  its  cause.  Vulgate,  Et  si  tn  pec- 
catis  sit  dimittentur  et.)  Anointing  him  with 
oil  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  By  the  omission 
of  the  last  words,  toS  Kvpiov,  B  has  the 
striking  reading,  "  anointing  him  with  oil  in 
THE  Name  "  (compare  the  use  of  ri  bi/o/ta 
absolutely  in  Acts  v.  41;  3  John  7).  A 
similai*  use  is  also  found  in  the  Epistles  of 
Ignatius.  The  Vatican  Manuscript,  how- 
ever, appears  to  stand  quite  alone  in  this 
reading  here.  If  the  words,  toB  Kupfou,  be 
admitted,  they  must  be  taken  as  referring  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  (contrast  ver.  10,  ii/  rf 
6v6fiaTi  Kvpiov).  So  also  in  ver.  15  the 
Lord  (a  Kipias)  who  shall  raise  him  up  is 
clearly  the  Lord  Jesus,  Had  God  the 
Pather  been  alluded  to  we  should  probably 
have  had  the  anarthrous  Kvpios  after  the 
manner  of  the  LXX.  (see  note  on  ch.  iv.  10). 
Unction  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
sick  also  in  Mark  vi.  13.  The  apostlen 
"anointed  with  oil  many  that  were  sick,  and 
healed  them  ;  "  and  compare  the  parable  of 
tlie  good  Samaritan  (Luke  x.  34),  "  pouring 
in  wine  and  oil."  "  Josephus  mentions  that 
among  the  remedies  employed  in  the  case  of 
Herod,  he  was  put  into  a  sort  of  oil  bath. .  . . 
The  medicinal  use  of  oil  is  also  mentioned  ir 
the  Mishna,  which  thus  exhibits  the  Jewish 
practice  of  that  day "  ('  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,'  vol.  ii.  p.  595 ;  see  Mishna, '  Shab- 
batb,'  xiii.  4 ;  and  compare  Lightfoot,  *  Korea 
Hebraipffl,'  vol.  ii.  p.  415).  According  to 
Tertullian,  "  the  Christian  Proculus,  sur- 
named  Torpaoion,  the  steward  of  Euhodus,' 
cured  with  ml  Sevenu,  the  father  of  Antonine 
(i.e.  CanM3«U«),who  **iii  gratitude  kept  him 
ia  Ui  piJMs  MU  tke  day  of  his  death." 


OH.T.  l-2a]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE   OF  JAMES. 


71 


Tertullian,  'Ad  Seapntam/e.  !▼.  (see  Oehler's 
notes  on  the  passage).  But  in  the  case  be- 
fore us  if,  as  in  these  other  instances,  the  oil 
was  used  as  an  actual  remedy,  (1)  vfhy  was 
it  to  be  administered  by  the  elders?  and  (2) 
why  is  the  healing  immediately  afterwards 
attributed  to  "  the  prayer  of  faith  "  ?  These 
questions  would  seem  to  suggest  that  oil  was 
enjoined  Ijy  St.  James  rather  as  an  outward 
symbeil  than  as  an  actual  remedy.  A  further 
question  remains  to  which  a  few  lines  must 
be  devoted.  Is  the  apostle  prescribing  a 
rite  for  all  times  ?  Ou  the  one  hand,  we  are 
told  that  the  use  of  oil  was  connected  with 
the  miraculous  powers  of  liealing,and  there- 
fore ceased  "  when  those  powers  ceased " 
(of.  Bishop  Browne  on  the  Articles,  p.  589). 
On  the  other  hand,  the  passage  is  appealed 
to  as  warranting  the  Roman  Catholic  sacra- 
ment of  extreme  unction.  With  regard  to 
the  practice  of  the  early  Church,  there  is  a 
constant  stream  of  testimony  to  the  use  of 
oil  for  purposes  of  healing ;  e.g.  the  case  in 
Tertullinn  already  quoted,  and  many  others 
in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  (see  '  Dic- 
tionary of  Christian  Antiquities,'  pp.  1455, 
2001,  2013).  But  (1)  as  originally  practised 
it  wag  administered  by  laymen  and  even  by 
women.  (2)  After  the  blessing  of  the  oil  was 
restricted  to  bishops  it  was  still  regarded  aa 
immaterial  by  Ttrhom  the  unction  was  per- 
formed. So  FB.-Innooent, '  Bp.  ad  Decent.,' 
§  8,  "  Being  made  by  the  bishop,  it  is  lawfiU 
not  for  priests  only,  but  for  all  Christians,  to 
use  it  in  anointing  in  their  own  need  or  in 
that  of  their  friends."  (3)  Not  till  the  middle 
of  the  ninth  century  do  we  meet  with  any 
express  injunction  to  the  priest  to  perform 
the  unction  himself.  (4)  "  The  restraint  of 
the  unction  to  the  priest  had  momentous 
consequencei.  The  original  intention  of  it 
in  relation  to  healing  of  the  body  was  prac- 
tically forgotten,  and  the  rite  came  to  be 
regarded  as  part  of  a  Christian's  immediate 
preparation  for  death.  Hence  in  the  twelfth 
century  it  acquired  the  name  of  '  the  last 
unction,'  unetio  extrema  (Peter  Lombard, 
'  Sent.,'  iv.  23),  t.&  ai  the  Catechism  of  Trent 
asserts  (*  De  Extr.  Unct.,'  3),  the  last  of  those 
which  B  man  received  from  the  Church.  In 
the  thirteenth  it  was  placed  by  the  school- 
men among  the  seven  rites  to  which  they 
limited  the  application  of  the  term  sacra- 
ment" ('  Dictionary  of  Christian  Antiquities,' 
S.  2004).  In  the  sixteenth  century  it  was 
eflnitely  laid  down  at  the  Council  of  Trent, 
(1)  that  it  is  a  sacrament  instituted  by  o\ir 
Lord ;  (2)  that  by  it  grace  is  couferred,  sin 
remitted,  and  the  sick  comforted, "  sometimes 
also  "  the  recovery  of  health  is  obtained ;  (3) 
that  it  should  be  given  to  those  in  danger  of 
death,  but  if  they  recover  they  may  receive 
it  again  (Session  xiv.  e.  iz.)>  Further,  the 
OateoUm  tl  tha  OoomU  omidwttnt  m  • 


grievous  error  the  practice  of  waiting  to 
anoint  the  sick  "  until  all  hope  of  recovery 
being  now  lost,  life  begins  to  ebb,  and  the 
sick  person  to  sink  into  lifeless  insensibility." 
In  spite  of  this,however,the  common  practice 
in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  at  the  present 
day  appears  to  be  to  administer  the  rite  only 
to  persons  in  extremis.  Turning  now  to  the 
Eastern  Church,  we  uutice  that  a  rite  of 
unction  has  been  continued  there  up  till  the 
present  time.  The  service,  which  is  a  some- 
what lengthy  one,  may  be  seen  in  Daniel's 
'  Codex  Liturgious,'  bk.  iv.  o.  v. ;  and  cf. 
Neale's  'Holy  Eastern  Cliureh,'  Introd., 
vol.  ii.  p.  1035,  where  it  is  noted  that  it 
diifers  from  the  Western  use  in  tliree  points : 

(1)  the  oil  is  not  previously  consecrated  by 
the  bishop,  but  at  the  time  by  seven  priests ; 

(2)  the  unction  is  not  conferred  only  in  ex- 
tremis, but  in  slighter  illness,  and  if  possible 
in  the  church ;  (3)  it  is  not  usuall;^  consi- 
dered valid  unless  at  least  three  priests  are 
present  to  ofSciate.  It  has  been  thought 
well  to  give  this  slight  historical  sketch,  as 
affording  the  best  answer  to  the  claims  of 
Romanists  by  showing  how  they  have  gradu- 
ally departed  from  the  primitive  custom  and 
changed  the  character  of  the  rite.  But 
the  sketch  will  also  have  shown  that  it  is 
scarcely  accurate  to  imply  tbatunction  ceased 
when  the  miruculous  powers  ceased.  At 
the  Reformation,  when  the  English  Church 
wisely  rejected  the  mediaeval  service  for  ex- 
treme unction,  she  yet  retained  in  the  flrit 
English  Prayer-book  a  simple  form  of 
unction,  to  be  used  "if  the  sick  person 
desire  it,"  consisting  of  (1)  anointing,  "upon 
the  forehead  or  breast  only,"  with  the  sign 
of  the  cross;  and  (2)  prayer  for  the  inward 
anointing  of  the  soul  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  for  restoration  of  bodily  health  and 
strength.  Thus  the  service  was  entirely 
primitive  in  character,  and  it  is  hard  to  see 
what  valid  objection  could  be  raised  to  it. 
It  was,  however,  omitted  from  the  second 
English  Prayer-book  of  1552,  and  has  never 
been  restored.  The  justification,  I  suppose,  of 
this  disuse  of  unction  must  be  sought  in  the 
entire  absence  of  evidence  that  the  primitive 
Church  understood  the  passage  before  us  as 
instituting  a  religious  rite  to  be  permanently 
continued.  All  tlie  earliest  notices  of  unction 
refer  simply  to  its  use  for  liealing  purposes 

Ver.  16. — Confess  therefore  your  sins,  etc. 
The  authority  for  the  insertion  of  oSi/ 
(omitted  in  the  Received  Text)  is  over- 
whelming (n,  A,  B,  K,  Vulgate,  Syriac, 
Coptic),  as  is  also  that  for  the  substitution 
of  rSts  aixaprias  for  ra  irapairT^fiaTa,  whicli 
includes  the  three  oldest  manuscripts,  K,  A,  B, 
the  two  latter  of  wliich  also  read  irpo(reixf(rSe 
for  eSxeo-Be.  It  is  difficult  to  know  exactly 
what  to  make  of  this  injunction  to  confess 
"one  to  Miother,"  which  is  stated  in  Um 


7a 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


[oh.  t.  1— 20t 


form  of  aa  inference  from  the  preceding. 
The  form  of  the  expression, "  one  to  another," 
and  the  perfectly  general  term,  "  a  righteous 
man,"  forbid  us  to  see  in  it  a  direct  injunc- 
tion to  confess  to  the  clergy,  and  to  the 
clergy  only.  But  on  the  other  hand,  it  is 
unfair  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  it  is 
directly  connected  with  the  charge  to  send 
for  the  elders  of  the  Church.  Marshall,  in 
his '  Penitential  Discipline,'  is  perfectly  justi- 
fied in  saying  that  St.  James  "hath  plainly 
supposed  the  presence  of  the  elders  of  the 
Ohuioh,  and  their  intercession  to  God  for 
the  sick  penitent,  and  then  recommended 
the  confession  of  his  faults  in  that  piesence, 
where  two  or  three  assembled  together  in 
the  Name  of  Gbrist  might  coiiblitute  a 
Church  for  that  purpose"  (' Penit.  Dis- 
cipline,' p.  80).  We  may,  perhaps,  be  con- 
tent with  saying,  with  Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor, 
**  When  St.  James  exhorts  all  Christians  to 
confess  their  sins  one  to  another,  certainly 
it  is  more  agreeable  to  all  spiritual  ends 
that  this  be  done  rather  to  the  curate  of 
souls  than  to  the  ordinary  brethren"  ('Dis- 
suasive from  Popery,'  II.  i.  1 1 ;  cf.  Hooker, 
'  Eocl.  Pol.,'  VI.  iv.  5,  7).  The  effectual  fer- 
Tent  prayer,  etc. ;  rather,  the  petition  of  a 
righteom  man  avaUeth  much  in  it%  working. 
On  the  distinction  between  Je'ijitis  the  nar- 
rower, and  vpoar^vxh  the  wider  word,  see 
Trench  on  '  Synonyms,'  p.  179. 

Vers.  17,  18. — Illustration  of  the  last 
statement  of  yer.  16,  from  the  case  of  Elijah, 
"  a  righteous  man  "  under  the  old  covenant, 
but  one  "of  like  passions  with  us,"  and 
therefore  one  from  whose  case  it  is  lawful 
to  argue  to  our  own.  Subject  to  like  passions 
as  we  are.  'OpoioTraeJis  7)ij.tv;  simply  "of 
like  passions  with  us;"  cf.  Acts  xiv.  15, 
where  it  is  used  in  just  the  same  way.  In 
the  LXX.  only  in  Wied.  vii.  3.  He  prayed 
earnestly,  npoffeuxj;  TrpoffijiifoTo:  a  Hebraibm, 
not  unfre^uent  in 'the  New  Testament  (see 
Luke  xxii.  15;  John  iii.  29;  Acts  iv.  17; 
V.  28;  xxiii.  14),  in  imitation  of  the 
Hebrew  absolute  infinitive  (cf.  Winer,  p. 
584).  For  the  incident  alluded  to  by  St. 
James,  see  1  Kings  xvii.  1;  xviii.  1;  but 
note  (1)  that  we  are  never  told  that  the 
famine  was  in  consequence  of  Elijah's 
prayer;  and  (2)  nothing  is  said  of  the  dura- 
tion of  time  (three  years  and  a  half)  during 
which  it  rained  not  upon  the  earth.  All 
we  read  is  that  "after  many  days  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  Elijah  in  the  third 
year;"  but  there  is  no  clear  indication  from 
what  period  this  "third  year"  is  dated. 
With  regard  to  (1),  it  may  have  been  St. 
James's  own  inference  from  the  narrative, 
or  may  have  been  due  to  tradition.  With 
regard  to  (2),  the  very  same  time  is  men- 
tioned by  our  Lord  in  his  allusion  to  the 
incident  (Luke  iv.  25),  "tiw  heaven 


was  shut  up  three  years  and  six  months." 
And  as  the  same  period  is  said  to  be  given 
in  the  Yalkut  Shimeoni  on  1  Kings  xvi.,  it 
was  probably  the  time  handed  down  by 
tradition,  being  taken  by  the  Jews  as  a 
symbol  of  times  of  tribulation  (of.  Dan.  vii. 
25;  xii.7;  Eer.  xi.  2). 

Ver.  19. — Final  exhortation ;  introduced, 
as  was  the  opening  one  (ch.  i.  2),  by  the 
emphatic  "my  brethren."  The  Eeceived 
Text  omits  iiov,  but  it  is  found  in  N,  A,  B,  K, 
Vulgate. 

Ver.  20. — let  him  know.  So  n,  A,  K,  L, 
Latt.,  Syriao.  B  lias  yiviiaKeTe,  "  know  ye." 
After  i|;ux^i',  n,  A,  and  Vulgate  add  avrov. 
B  has  it  after  Bavdrov.  And  shall  cover  a 
multitude  of  sins  (ica\iif/£i  irX^floj  a/iapTiSv). 
The  same  expression  occurs  in  1  Pet.  iv.  8, 
"Charity  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins." 
It  is  founded  on  Prov.  x.  12,  D'y^e-^a  hy) 
ram  Hmij,  "Love  coveieth  ali  sins,'' 
where  the  LXX.  goes  entirely  astray: 
Tldrras  Sh  robs  nil  (ptKoveiKovyras  KoAiyn-rei 
(l>i\(a:  but  cf.  Ps.  xxxi.  1 ;  Ixxxiv.  3,  in  the 
LXX.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  St. 
Peter  and  St.  James  independently  hit  upon 
the  rendering  irKrjSos  a/iapriuv  for  the 
Hebrew  wy^t^-hs,  aa  there  was  nothing  to 
suggest  it,  the  LXX.  never  rendering  hb 
by  Tr\7j6is.  Probably  the  one  was  consciously 
or  unconsciously  influenced  by  the  other. 
The  striking  position  which  the  words 
occupy  here,  as  those  with  which  the  Epistle 
closes,  would  make  them  linger  in  the 
memory;  and  there  is  nothing  to  militate 
against  the  conclusion,  which  appeared  pro- 
bable on  theoecasion  of  previous  coincidences 
between  the  two  writers,  that  St.  James  is 
the  earlier  of  the  two  (comp.  on  eh.  iv.  6). 
The  expression  used  by  the  apostle  leaves 
it  undetermined  whose  sins  are  thua 
"covered,"  whether  (1)  those  of  the  man 
who  is  "  converted  from  the  error  of  his  way," 
or  (2)  those  of  the  man  who  wins  him  ba<k, 
and  through  this  good  action  obt;iiiiB,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  pardon  for  his  own  "  mul- 
titude of  sins."  It  has  been  well  noticed 
that  "there  is  a  studied  generality  in  the 
form  of  the  teaching  which  seems  to  empha- 
size the  wide  blessedness  of  love.  In  the 
very  act  of  seeking  to  convert  one  for  whom 
we  care  we  must  turn  to  God  ourselves,  and 
in  covering  the  past  tins  of  another  our 
own  also  are  covered.  In  such  an  act;  love 
reaches  its  highest  point,  and  that  love  in- 
cludes the  faith  in  God  which  is  the  con- 
dition of  forgiveness"  (Pliiniptre). 

The  Epistle  ends  abruptly,  with  no  salu- 
tation and  no  doxology.  In  this  it  stands 
almost  by  itself  in  the  New  Ti  stament ;  the 
First  Epistle  of  8t.  John  alone  approaching 
it  in  the  abruptnew  of  its  oanoliision. 


CH.T.  1—20.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  73 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  fiidgmeni  «i  selfishnesB.  Selfishness  lay  at  the  root  of  the  sitiful- 
nesB  of  the  rich  men,  whose  conduct  is  so  sternly  denounced.  The  sin  (1)  (ilsplayed 
itself  mainly  inheapins;  together  treasures  and  living  in  pleasure  upon  the  earth,  as  did 
Dives  in  the  parable ;  but  (2)  it  led  them  to  injustice  (ver.  4)  and  even  murder  (ver.  6). 
So  now  the  selfishness  of  those  who  live  in  splendour  and  luxury,  while  they  detain  the 
money  due  to  tradesmeic,  and  neglect  the  payment  of  accounts  rendered,  is  similar  in 
character  to  thn  detaining  the  wages  of  the  labourers  of  which  the  apostle  speaks 
in  such  scathing  terms.  "  Ye  have  nourished  your  hearts  in  a  day  of  slaughter."  The 
judgment  falls  when  least  expected.  In  the  days  of  Noah  they  were  eating  and 
drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the 
ark,  and  knew  not  until  the  flood  came  and  took  them  all  away.  The  judgment  on 
Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  on  Babylon  in  the  night  of  Belshazzar's  feast,  when  men  were 
cherishing  their  hearts  in  the  day  of  slaughter, — all  these  are  well-known  types  of  the 
suddenness  of  the  judgment  that  is  continually  falling  upon  individuals  now,  when  the 
Son  of  man  comes  to  them  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  and  of  that  final  judgment  which 
shall  fall  upon  the  whole  world  at  his  last  advent. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — Four  eontlderationi  moving  tht  Christian  to  patience.  1.  The 
example  of  the  husbandman — an  illustration  from  nature.  If  patience  is  needful  in 
things  of  this  life,  is  it  not  also  in  the  world  of  grace?  2.  The  approach  of  the  second 
advent.  3.  The  example  of  the  prophets.  4.  The  example  and  experience  of  Job — 
an  instance  of  one  whose  latter  end  the  Lord  blessed  more  than  his  beginning.  The 
nearness  of  the  Lord's  advent  a  reason  for  patience.  To  most  men  the  thought  of  the 
advent  is  a  thouglit  of  warning  and  of  judgment.  St.  James,  following  his  Master's 
example,  makes  it  a  thought  of  consolation.  "  When  ye  see  these  things  begin  to  come 
to  pass,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads;  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigli." 
Thus  Cliristians  may  test  their  spiritual  condition  by  coiisidering  whether  the  thought 
of  its  approach  is  to  them  one  of  consolation  or  of  warning, 

Ver.  12. —  Warning  against  the  sin  of  swearing.  On  this  text  see  Barrow's  gieat 
sermon,  serm.  xv., 'Against  Rash  and  Vain  Swearing,'  in  which  is  discussed  (1)  the 
nature  of  an  oath — "  an  invocation  of  God  as  a  faithful  Witness  of  the  truth  of  our  words 
or  the  sincerity  of  our  meaning;"  (2)  the  lawful  use  of  oaths,  as  showing  our  religious 
confidence  in  God,  and  as  a  service  conducible  to  his  glory ;  (3)  the  harm  of  rash  and 
vain  swearing  (a)  to  society  at  large,  and  (6)  to  the  person  who  is  guilty  of  it;  and  (4) 
the  folly  and  agsjravation  of  the  offence,  in  that  it  has  no  strong  temptation  alUuing  to 
it — it  gratifies  no  sense,  yielils  no  profit,  procures  no  honour;  the  vain  swearer  has  not 
the  common  plea  of  human  infirmity  to  excuse  him. 

Ver.  13. — The  power  of  Divine  worship.  On  this  verse  there  is  a  striking  sermon 
by  J.  H.  Newman  (vol.  iii.  No.  xxiii.),  'Keligioiis  Worship  a  Remedy  for  Kxcitement.' 
"There  is  that  in  religjous  worship  which  supplies  all  our  s^iiritual  needs,  which  suits 
every  mood  of  mind  and  evury  variety  of  circumstances,  over  and  above  the  supernatural 
assistance  whicli  we  are  allowed  to  expect  from  it."  Divine  worship  may  thus  be 
viewed  as  the  proper  antidote  to  excitement.  In  suffi  ring,  praj  er ;  in  joj',  praise. 
These  relieve  the  heart,  and  "  keep  the  mind  from  running  to  waste  ;  calming,  sooth- 
ing, sobering,  steadying  it;  attuning  it  to  the  will  of  God  and  the  mind  of  the  Spirit, 
teaching  it  to  love  "all  men,  to  he  cheerful  and  thankful,  and  to  be  resigned  in  all  the 
dispensations  of  Providence  towards  us." 

Vers.  14 — 18. — I.  The  foweb  and  value  op  intercesboet  fratbb,  enforced  by  the 
instance  of  the  effect  of  Elijah's  prayers — the  petitions  of  a  man  who  was  of  like  passions 
with  us,  and  therefore  one  from  whose  case  it  is  fair  to  argue  to  our  own.  Intercessory 
prayer  may  be  viewed  as  a  piivilege  and  work  in  which  all  can  have  their  share. 
While  Joshua  is  down  in  the  valley  fighting  with  Amalek,  Moses  in  the  mount  must 
lift  up  holy  hands  to  God  in  prayer ;  and  when  Moses  lifted  up  his  lands,  Joshua  and 


74  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [oh.  T.  1—20- 


Israel  prevailed.  So  with  the  Church's  warfare  against  her  spiritual  foes.  Those  who 
shall  intercede  and  cry  unto  God  day  and  night  are  i.eeded  equally  with  those  who  will 
hear  the  hurden  and  heat  of  the  day  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle.  "  They  also  serve 
who  only  stand  and  wait." 

II.  The  nked  of  confession  and  acknowledgment  of  sin.  This  most  necessary 
part  of  repentance  is  taught  throughout  the  Bible.  It  is  seen  under  the  Law  in  the 
ordinances  of  the  day  of  atonement  (Lev.  xvi.  21),  and  in  the  directions  with  regard  to 
the  sin  oifeiiiig  (Lev.  v.  1—5;  cf.  Numb.  v.  6,  7).  It  is  found  in  the  ministry  of  the 
Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  6;  Mark  i.  5),  and  continued  under  the  Christian  dispensation 
(Acts  xix.  18).  How  much  of  modern  repentance  is  sliallow  and  superficial,  because 
men  shrink  from  this  !  They  excuse  their  sins,  and  content  themselves  with  the  general 
acknowledgment  that  they  are  sinners,  instead  of  acknowledging  the  particular  sins  of 
which  they  are  guilty,  even  to  God  in  secret.  In  cases,  too,  where  the  fault  has  been 
against  man,  these  confessions  (sometimes  the  only  reparation  left)  should  be  made  to 
him  who  has  been  wronged;  and  in  vaii.us  sins  we  may  say  that  "  it  is  good  to  open 
the  soul's  grief  to  a  wise  and  kind  friend.  The  act  humbles,  it  tests  the  penitence;  a 
fairer  judgment  than  one's  own  is  gained,  with  the  help  of  advice  and  prayers.  If  the 
need  be  felt  great,  or  the  soul's  questions  be  hard,  tlie  buidened  one  will  naturally  go 
to  some  discreet  and  learned  minister  of  God's  Word,"  aslhe  Prayer-book  directs  him 
(see  the  first  exhortation  in  the  Communion  Service). 

III.  Elijah  a  man  of  like  passions  with  vs  ;  and  yet  he  was  one  of  the  greatest 
saints  under  the  old  covenant,  and  honoured  in  an  especial  way  by  exemption  from  the 
common  lot  of  mortals,  being  taken  up  to  heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire.  Hence  in 
our  own  case,  too,  holiness,  even  saintliness,  is  by  God's  grace  attainable  (cf.  Goulburn's 
'  Pursuit  of  Holiness,'  c.  i.). 

Vers.  19,  20.— The  blessedness  of  winning  back  a  single  sinner  from  the  error  of  hig 

waya, 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers,  1 — 6. — Hie  jvdgments  coming  upon  the  wicked  rich.  This  apostrophe  Is  bo 
dreadful  that  we  cannot  imagine  it  to  have  been  addressed  to  professing  Christians.  It 
would  ratlier  seem  that  the  apostle  hero  turns  aside  to  glance  at  the  godless  rich  Jews 
of  his  time,  who  were  in  the  habit  of  persecuting  the  Church  and  defrauding  the  poor 
(ch.  ii.  6,  7).  His  words  regarding  them  are  words  of  stern  denunciation.  Like  one  of 
the  old  Hebrew  prophets,  he  curses  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  His  design  in  doing 
so,  however,  must  have  been  in  unison  with  his  life-work  as  a  Christian  apostle, 
labouring  in  "  the  acceptable  time ; "  he  sought,  by  proclaiming  the  terrors  of  the 
Lord,  to  persuade  to  repentance  and  a  holy  life.  The  paragraph  breaks  naturally  into 
three  sections.  Ver.  1  refers  to  the  future ;  vers.  2, 3  to  the  present;  vera.  4 — 6  mainly 
to  the  past.    We  sball  consider  these  three  sections  in  the  inverse  order. 

I.  The  causes  of  jddgmbnt  in  the  pabt.  (Vers.  4 — 6.)  James  mentions  three. 
1.  Heartless  injustice.  (Ver.  4.)  The  humane  Law  of  Moses  forbade  that  the  wages  ot 
tiie  hired  labourer  be  kept  back  even  fur  a  single  night  (Deut.  xjiv.  14, 15)  ;  but  these 
wicked  men  had  paid  no  heed  to  that  Law.  They  had  grown  rich  by  defrauding  the 
poor.  Instead  of  relieving  the  needy  by  a  liberal  charity,  they  had  not  even  paid  the 
lawful  debtB  which  they  owed  them.  And  does  not  this  sin  linger  in  the  heart  of 
Christendom?  What  was  American  slavery  but  just  a  crushing  of  the  poor?  What 
was  villeinage  in  our  own  country  but  a  defiauding  of  the  labourers?  It  is  not  yet 
a  century  since  the  Scotch  collier  was  attac"hed  by  law  to  the  coal-work  where  he  had 
been  born — the  right  to  his  services  being  bought  and  sold  with  the  mine  itself.  In 
more  recent  times  our  poets  have  once  and  again  given  voice  to  great  social  wrongs  in 
.  words  that  have  rung  like  a  tocsin  through  the  land  (e.g.  Mrs.  Browning's  '  Cry  of 
the  Children,'  and  Hood's '  Song  of  the  Shirt ').  Or,  to  take  the  form  of  labour  referred 
to  in  ver.  4,  we  may  ask — Is  the  condition  of  the  English  ploughman  even  yet  what 
it  ought  to  be,  and  what  our  rich  landlords  ought  to  help  to  make  it  ?  James  says  that 
the  robbing  of  the  poor  is  a  "  crying  "  sin.  The  victims  themselves  cry ;  and  even 
their  wages,  fraudulently  irithheld,  "cry  out"  also  from  the  coffen  of  the  rich.     But 


OR.  T.  1—20.]  THIS  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  75 

there  i>  One  who  has  ears  to  ear,  and  a  heart  to  resent,  the  injnstice.  "  The  Loid  of 
hoBto"  will  avenge  the  poor  of  the  people  who  trust  in  him,  2.  Lavish  luxurioua- 
ness,  (Ver.  6.)  The  wealthy,  wicked  Jews  sinned,  not  only  against  righteousness, 
but  against  temperance.  They  were  luxurious  in  their  living,  and  prodigal  in  their 
expenditure.  And  this  wasteful  life  of  theirs  was  largely  maintained  at  the  expense 
of  the  poor  whom  they  defrauded.  It  was  "  the  hire  of  the  labourers  "  that  had  built 
their  magnificent  palaces,  and  bought  the  beds  of  ivory  upon  which  they  lay.  They 
did  all  this  "  on  the  earth,"  and  as  if  they  "  should  still  live  for  ever  "  (Fs.  zlis.  9)  here. 
They  forgot  that  in  their  godless  self-indulgence  they  were  acting  like  "mere  animals, 
born  to  be  taken  and  destroyed  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  12).  Unconscious  of  impending  ruin,  they 
were  still  living  voluptuously ;  like  the  fat  ox,  which  continues  to  revel  among  the  rich 
pastures  on  the  very  morning  of  the  "day  of  slaughter."  3.  Murderous  cruelty. 
(Ver.  6.)  By  "the  righteous,"  or  "just,"  many  understand  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ; 
this  statement  being  a  historic  allusion  to  the  scenes  of  Gabbatha  and  Calvary.  And  it 
is  very  probable  that  the  murder  of  our  Lord  was  in  the  apostle's  mind.  But  we  judge 
that  the  words  are  rather  to  be  regarded  as  describing  a  prevalent  practice  of  the  wicked 
rich  in  every  age.  They  apply  to  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  also  to  that  of 
Stephen,  and  to  that  of  James  the  brother  of  John ;  and  they  were  soon  to  be  illustrated 
again  in  the  martyrdom  of  the  writer  himself.  For  our  apostle,  by  reason  of  his 
integrity  and  purity,  was  surnamed  "  the  Bighteous ; "  and  he  was  by-and-by  condemned 
and  killed  by  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  of  Jerusalem.  But  why  all  this  oppression  of 
"  the  righteous  "  ?  It  is  inflicted  simply  because  they  are  righteous.  Every  holy  life 
is  an  offence  to  evil  men.  Because  Christ  was  holy,  he  was  crucified.  Because 
Stephen  was  "  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  he  was  stoned.  Because  James 
was  truly  righteous,  he  was  thrown  from  the  battlements  of  the  temple,  and  killed 
with  a  fuller's  club.  Finally,  the  apostle  adds,  "He  doth  not  resist  yoiu"  The 
righteous  man  submits  patiently  to  your  persecuting  violence.  He  endures  your 
murderous  cruelty  with  holy  meekness.  Jesus  did  so  (Isa.  liii.  7).  Stephen  did  so 
(Acts  vii.  60).  James  presently  would  do  so :  he  ia  said  to  have  offered  the  very  prayer 
fur  his  murderers  which  his  crucified  Master  had  done.  Such  patient  endurance,  how- 
ever, only  increases  the  guilt  of  the  persecutors,  and  shall  make  their  doom  more  awful. 

II.  The  n3ST  dboppings  of  judgment  dj  the  pbesent.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  The  material 
for  their  punishment  was  being  prepared,  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  retribution, 
out  of  the  very  wealth  on  which  they  doated.  "  Of  our  pleasant  vices  "  Divine 
Providence  makes  "  instruments  to  plague  us."  "  Your  riches  are  corrupted ; "  that  is, 
their  treasures  of  grain  and  fruits  were  already  rotting  in  the  storehouses.  Since  these 
were  not  being  used  to  feed  the  hungry,  God's  curse  was  upon  them  all.  "  Your 
garments  are  moth-eaten;"  because  these  rich  men  did  not  clothe  the  naked  out  of 
their  costly  wardrobeSj  the  moth  was  cutting  up  these  with  his  remorseless  little  tooth. 
''  Your  gold  and  your  silver  are  rusted ; "  that  is,  their  money,  not  being  used  for  doing 
good,  lay  in  their  treasure-chests  morally  cankered  by  the  base  avarice  which  kept  it 
there.  And  that  rust  shall  not  only  eat  up  the  wealth  itself;  it  shall  also  gnaw  the 
conscience  of  its  faithless  possessor.  It  shall  be  a  witness-bearer  to  his  sin,  and  an 
executioner  of  his  punishment.  By-and-by,  the  remorseful  thought  of  his  unused 
riches  shall  torture  his  soul  as  with  the  touch  of  burning  fire.  {Vide  T.  Binney  on 
'  Money,'  p.  126.)  These  men  had  "  laid  up  their  treasure  in  the  last  days ; "  that  is, 
immediately  before  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  judgment  to  make  an  end  of  the  entire 
Hebrew  polity.  And  their  wealth  would  avail  them  nothing  in  the  presence  of  that 
great  catastrophe.  These  corrupting  treasures  of  theirs  would  corrupt'still  further  into 
treasures  of  wrath.    After  the  first  droppings  would  come  the  deluge. 

III.  The  FDLi.  FLOOD  OF  JUDGMENT  IN  THIS  FUTURE.  (Ver.  1.)  The  "miseries" 
spoken  of  refer  primarily  to  the  sorrows  connected  with  the  impending  siege  and  ruin 
of  Jerusalem.  These  were  to  fall  with  especial  severity  upon  the  influential  classes ; 
wd  the  Hebrews  of  the  Dispersion,  in  whatsoever  land  they  might  be,  were  to  share 
them.  The  wealthy  men  among  the  nnbelieving  Jews  had  sinned  most ;  ao  they  were 
to  suffer  most.  Well,  therefore,  might  they  "  weep"  at  the  prospect,  as  only  Orientals 
can  weep ;  and  "  howl "  as  only  brute  beasts  can  do.  But  these  words  point  onward 
further  in  history  than  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  full  flood  of  "  miseries  " 
which  providence  is  preparing  shall  overtake  the  ungodly  rich  onlj  at  the  Lord's  second 


76  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  [oh.  ▼.  1—20. 

corninf,  when  he  shall  appear  to  judge  the  whole  world.  The  ruin  of  Jerusalem  wp'^ 
bat  a  faint  foreshadowing  of  the  "  eternal  destruction  "  of  the  wicked  which  shall  hegiii 
at  that  day  (Matt.  zxir.).  These  "  miseries  "  suggest  solemn  thoughts  of  the  doom  of 
eternity. 

Lessons.  1.  To  remember  the  moral  goTemment  of  God,  and  to  make  ready  to 
meet  him  in  the  judgment  (vers.  1 — 6).  2.  The  sin  of  the  wicked  prepares  its  own 
punishment  (vers.  2,  3).  3.  One  of  the  greatest  social  wants  of  our  time  is  that  of 
mutual  sympathy  between  the  capitalist  and  the  labourer  (ver.  4).  4.  A  Christian 
should  avoid  debt  as  he  would  avoid  the  devil  (ver.  4).  5.  The  right  use  of  wealth  is 
not  to  spend  it  upon  self-indulgence,  but  to  do  good  with  it  (ver.  5).  6.  A  man 
has  reason  to  suspect  the  purity  of  his  own  character,  if  no  one  ever  persecutes 
him  (ver.  6). — 0.  J. 

Vers.  7,  9.— Long-suffering  in  vkw  of  Chrisfs  coming.  These  words  strike  one  of  the 
leading  chords  of  the  Ep'stle.  There  is  no  grace  which  its  readers  are  more  earnestly 
exhorted  to  cultivate  than  that  of  patience.  In  the  preceding  verses  James  has  been 
denouncing  the  rich  ungodly  Jews.  The  Epistle  was  not  addressed  to  them,  however, 
but  to  the  Christian  Jews  who  were  suffering  from  their  oppression  and  cruelty.  So, 
the  apostle  here  resumes  the  ordinary  tenor  of  his  letter.  He  exhorts  the  Church  to 
continue  patient  and  unresisting,  like  the  ideal  "  righteous  one "  of  ver.  6.  He  sug- 
gests the  thought  that  the  Lord's  coming,  while  it  would  usher  in  the  doom  of  the 
wicked  rich,  would  also  bring  deliverance  to  his  own  people.  The  same  event  which 
their  oppressors  should  contemplate  with  weeping  and  howling  (ver.  1)  would  be  to  the 
righteous  a  joyful  jubilee. 

I.  The  gxhostatiok.  (Vers.  7,  8,  first  parts.)  To  uoait  constitutes  a  large  portion 
of  religious  duty.  Indeed,  patience  is  not  a  segment  merely  of  the  Christian  character ; 
it  is  a  spirit  which  is  to  pervade  every  fibre  of  it.  In  all  ages  spiritual  wants  and  trials 
are  the  same;  and  believers,  therefore,  have  always  the  same  "need  of  patience."  To 
"wait  upon  God"  is  a  frequent  exhortation  of  Scripture.  The  cultivation  of  this 
patience  is  perfectly  consistent  with  holy  activity.  It  springs  from  the  same  root  of 
faith  from  which  good  works  spring.  We  show  our  faith  not  only  by  our  active 
"works,"  but  also  when  we  "endure,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  Again, 
Christian  patience  is  to  coexist  along  with  the  fullest  sensibility  of  suffering.  "  Long- 
suffering"  necessarily  involves  the  consciousness  of  suffering;  and  so  does  "patience," 
as  the  etymoloe;y  of  the  word  reminds  us.  Christian  comfDrt  does  not  come  to  us  in 
connection  with  any  incapability  of  sorrow ;  it  comes  as  the  result  of  the  subjugation 
of  the  passions,  and  the  cultivation  of  complete  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will.  The 
apostle  indicates  the  limit  of  this  long-suffering — "  until  the  coming  of  the  Lord." 
What  advent  does  this  mean  ?  To  the  early  Hebrew  Christians  it  meant  mediately  the 
impending  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  To  us  it  means  in  like  manner  any  interposition 
of  Providence  to  deliver  us  from  trouble,  including  our  removal  by  death.  But  the 
ultimate  reference,  both  for  the  early  Church  and  for  us,  is  doubtless  to  the  Lord's 
final  advent  at  the  close  of  time.  Then  the  Saviour  shall  appear  as  the  Judge  of  all, 
and  shall  for  ever  put  an  end  to  tyranny  and  wrong.  The  thought  of  that  great  event 
is  surely  well  fitted  to  "  stablish  our  hearts,"  i.e.  to  stren  gthen  them  for  patient  endurance. 

II.  The  example.  (Ver.  7,  second  part.)  As  an  illustration  of  his  subject,  and  in 
order  to  excite  the  grace  of  patience  within  the  hearts  of  his  readers,  James  introduces 
•n  allusion  to  the  pursuits  of  husbandry.  Think,  he  says,  of  the  long-suffering  of  the 
farmer.  His  is  a  life  of  arduous  toils  and  of  anxious  delayi.  He  must  wait  for  the 
"early  rain  "  in  the  late  autumn  before  he  can  sow  his  seed ;  and  for  the  "  latter  rain" 
in  April,  upon  which  his  crops  depend  for  the  filling  of  the  ear  before  the  harvest 
ripens.  This  patience  is  necessary.  Although  sometimes  sorely  tried,  it  is  reasonable. 
The  "  fruit "  which  the  farmer  desires  is  "  precious ; "  it  is  worth  waiting  for.  And 
his  long-suffering  is  also  full  of  hope.  It  has  been  rewarded  by  the  bounty  of  Provi- 
dence in  former  years;  and  besides,  if  he  be  a  pious  man,  he  remembers  the  Divine 
assurance  that  "seed-time  and  harvest  shall  not  cease."  Now,  says  the  apostle, 
afflicted  Christians  are  to  learn  from  this  example  a  lesson  of  long-suffering.  Trial  and 
perseoutioa  are  designed  to  yield  an  infinitely  more  "  precious"  harvest  than  that  for 
which  the  husbandman  waits.     This  harvest  is  "  the  fruit  of  righteousness  "— "  the 


OB.  ▼.  1-20.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  77 

fruit  of  the  Spirit."  And  spiritual  fruit  takes  far  longer  time  to  mellow  than  the 
natural  harvest  does.  So  "  it  is  good  for  a  man  quietly  to  wait "  for  it.  We  have 
the  assurance  that  in  spiritual  husbandry  the  ultimate  reward  is  never  disappointing, 
"  In  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not." 

III.  The  encoubaqement.  (Ver.  8,  second  part.)  "The  coming  of  the  Lord  is  at 
hand."  This  implies,  first  of  all,  that  the  Lord  is  sure  to  come.  Wliile  no  farmer 
possesses  an  absolute  certainty  in  reference  to  the  harvest  on  his  own  particular  farm, 
every  one  who  in  the  spiritual  sphere  "  sows  to  the  Spirit "  may  rest  assured  that  the 
(lay  of  an  abundant  and  blessed  ingathering  will  arrive.  The  Lord  Jesus,  who  came  to 
our  world  nearly  nineteen  centuries  ago,  is  to  come  again.  His  second  coming  is  the 
greatest  event  in  the  future  of  the  Church.  It  is  the  pole-star  of  her  hopes.  When  h« 
appears,  the  spiritual  harvest  shall  be  reaped.  We,  accoidingly,  shall  cherish  the  true 
spirit  of  long-sufferiDg,  only  in  so  far  as  we  "  love  his  appearing,"  and  realize  that  the 
purjjuse  of  it  is  to  reward  his  people  and  take  vengeance  upon  their  enemies.  It  is  a  sign 
that  our  faith  is  weak,  if  we  meditate  seldom,  and  pray  little,  about  our  Lord's  second 
coming.  How  different  was  it  in  this  respect  with  the  apostles  and  the  early  Church! 
But,  if  the  final  advent  was  near  in  the  first  century,  it  is  still  nearer  now ;  and  in  the 
interval  what  arrears  of  vengeance  have  been  accumulating  I  It  should  be  our  comfort 
in  the  time  of  trouble  to  reflect  that  "  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  The  whole 
New  Testament  Church  lies  under  the  shadow  of  the  second  advent.  It  will  be  an 
event  of  infinite  moment,  and  therefore  it  is  never  far  away.  To  the  view  of  God,  with 
whom  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,"  this  event  is  nigh ;  and  the  men  of  faith 
learn  to  see  it  from  God's  point  of  view.  Oimipared,  also,  with  the  great  eternity  on 
the  other  side,  the  second  advent  seems  "  at  hand,"  What  an  encouragement  does  thif 
thought  supply,  in  the  direction  of  devout  patience,  both  in  working  and  in  Buffering  I 
It  should  be  at  once  a  spur  and  an  anodyne,  to  know  that  the  Lord  is  already  on  his 
way.  For,  when  he  comes,  he  will  reward  all  service,  and  right  every  wrong,  and 
take  his  people  home  to  himself. — C.  J. 

Vers.  9 — 11.— Bear  and  forbear.  Here  we  have  another  exhortation  to  patience, 
with  other  examples  of  its  exercise.  In  ver».  7,  8,  however,  the  apostle  has  had  in 
view  the  persecutions  which  believers  suffer  at  the  hands'  of  the  ungodly ;  while  he 
now  refers  to  the  trial  ol'  patience  which  arises  from  collision  of  feeling  among  Christian 
brethren  themselves. 

I.  A  WARNING  AGAINST    IMPATIBNCB  WITH  ONE  AKOTHEB.       (Vef.    9.)       "Murmur 

not,  brethren,"  implies  that  believers  are  apt  within  their  hearts,  if  not  also  openly,  to 
complain  of  each  other.  Indeed,  it  sometimes  requires  greater  patience  to  bear  with 
comiosure  the  little  Irictions  of  feeling  to  which  close  contact  with  Christian  brethren 
exposes,  than  to  endure  open  and  overt  wrongs  at  the  hands  of  persons  who  are  not 
such.  The  warning  has  a  lesson  :  1.  For  the  family  circle.  What  a  happy  society  is 
that  of  a  well-ordered  family,  where  love  reigns  between  husband  and  wife,  and  where 
the  parents  enjoy  the  confidence  and  obedience  of  wisely  trained  children !  But  this 
fireside  happiness  can  be  enjoyed  only  in  connection  with  constant  mutual  forbearance. 
How  prone,  sometimes,  are  even  husband  and  wife  to  misunderstand  each  other  I  And 
how  often  are  households  made  unhappy  by  envying  and  quarrelling  among  the  chil- 
dren 1  Let  us  remember  that  the  persons  who  live  in  the  same  house  with  us  are  in 
the  very  best  position  for  appraising  the  value  of  our  Christian  profession.  They  know 
at  least  whether  we  are  learning  to  bear  kindly  with  the  infirmities  of  our  own  relations, 
and  to  endure  with  patience  petty  discomforts  in  domestic  life.  The  grace  of  God 
within  the  soul  will  enable  us  to  "walk  within  our  house  with  a  perfect  heart" 
(Ps.  cL  2).  2.  For  the  business  circk.  How  many  offences  arise  among  Christian 
men  when  engaged  in  the  toil  and  strain  of  commercial  competition  I  One  brother 
grudges  the  worldly  successes  of  his  neighbour ;  and  perhaps  his  heart  harbours  against 
liim  uncharitable  accusations  of  dishonest  dealing.  But,  as  Abraham  long  ago  was 
content  that  Lot  should  appropriate  to  himself  the  best  of  the  land  rather  than  that 
their  herdmen  should  quarrel,  so  still  it  will  do  a  Christian  man  less  harm  to  make 
sometimes  what  is  financially  a  bad  bargain,  than  to  soil  his  soul  by  cherishing  evil 
thoughts  regarding  any  brother  believer.  3.  Far  the  Church  circle.  There  is  apt  to  be 
murmuring  and  gnnnbling  in  ecclesiastical  life.    Sometimes  tha  apiritual  o£Sce-beareri! 


78  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oiu  t.  1— 2a 

of  a  congregation  get  but  little  thanks  for  the  work  which  they  do.    Sometimes,  also, 

the  people  forget  that  they  ought  to  have  large  mutual  patience  with  one  another.  The 
liberal  progress-loving  member  is  apt  to  groan  over  the  attitude  of  his  conservativB  let- 
things-alone  brother ;  and  the  educated  and  cultured  Cliristian  may  fail  at  times  to 
forbear  with  the  man  of  narrow  and  exclusive  views.  The  exemplary  Church  member, 
while  ready  at  all  times  to  maintain  and  defend  his  own  opinions,  is  yet  willing  grace- 
fully to  yield  (wherever  conscience  does  not  forbid)  to  what  the  majority  decide  upon, 
that  thereby  he  may  promote  the  general  peace  an(l  elification. 

II.  The  sakction  by  which  this  warning  is  enforced.  (Ver.  9.)  James 
employs  a  sweetly  persuasive  motive  in  the  word  "brethren."  To  complain  of  each 
other  is  to  sin  against  the  liigh<st  and  most  sacred  brotherhood.  This  motive,  however, 
is  only  lightly  touched,  in  passing.  The  apostle  backs  up  his  warning  with  a  solemn 
sanction.  Echoing,  as  he  does  so  often,  his  Master's  wonls  iu  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  (Matt.  vii.  1),  he  speaks  of  the  bar  of  God,  and  of  the  Lord  Christ  the  Judge. 
To  refuse  to  forbear  with  brethren,  he  says,  amounts  virtiiallv  to  an  assumption  of 
the  judicial  office,  and  will  expose  one's  self  to  be  "  judged."  For  what  right  have  we 
to  judge  our  brethren  ?  We  lack  the  necessary  discrimination ;  our  own  hearts  are 
impure ;  and  we  shall  very  soon  have  ourselves  to  appear  before  the  judgment-bar. 
Already,  indeed,  "  the  Judge  stsmdeth  before  the  doors."  He  is  near  at  band,  to  dis- 
charge perfectly  those  functions  which  we  are  so  prone  to  usurp ;  and,  in  doing  so,  to 
condemn  all  who  may  have  been  guilty  of  such  usurpation. 

III.  The  encouragement  afforded  by  certain  Old  Testament  ezaufleb. 
(Vera.  10,  11.)  It  should  cheer  us,  under  this  and  every  other  form  of  trial,  to 
remember  how  the  groat  seers  and  saints  of  old  endured  their  afflictions.  1,  The 
example  of  the  prophets.  (Ver.  10.)  The  Jewish  Christians  had  a  deep  reverence 
for  the  memory  of  these  noble  men.  The  prophets  had  been  the  religious  teachers  of 
ancient  Israel ;  through  them  the  Divine  S|pirit  himself  had  spoken.  The  influence 
which  they  exercised  while  they  lived  had  sometimes  been  prodigious ;  indeed,  their 
power  was  often  greater  than  the  power  of  the  sovereign.  Yet  the  lot  of  the  prophets 
had  been  one  of  sore  affliction.  They  were  an  example  to  the  New  Testament  Church  : 
(1)  Of  suffering.  Their  trials  came  upon  them  as  the  result  of  the  fideliiy  with  which 
they  "  spake  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  It  was  so  with  Moses,  Elijah,  Micaiah,  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  Daniel.  The  Jews  indeed  were  accustomed  to  confess  that  the  prophets 
generally  had  been  persecuted  (Matt,  xziii.  30,  37 ;  Acts  vii.  52 ;  Heb,  xi.  36-— 38). 
No  wonder,  then,  since  trouble  fell  on  these  great  men,  that  it  should  fall  on  us.  We 
may  be  well  contented  to  follow  in  the  faith  that  has  been  trodden  by  "the  goodly 
fellowship."  (2)  Of  long-suffering.  We  are  to  think  also  of  the  meekness  of  the 
prophets  when  enduring  their  unparalleled  afflictions.  They  were  sorely  tried  by  the 
murrauiings  of  their  "brethren,"  to  whom  they  spoke  the  Word  of  God;  yet  how 
patiently  they  bore  it  all  I  They  laid  hold  upon  the  Divine  strength,  and  thus  learned 
to  bear  and  forbear.  And  so,  despite  their  infirmities  and  occasional  lapses  from 
patience,  of  these  men  "  the  world  was  not  worthy."  2.  The  example  of  Job.  (Ver.  11.) 
Although  the  Book  of  Job  is  a  poem,  our  apostle  evidently  believed  it  to  have  an 
underlying  basis  of  veritable  history.  The  man  Job  actually  existed ;  and  his  proverbial 
patience  is  an  example  to  the  Church.  Think  of  the  dreadful  distresses  which  came 
thick  and  fast  upon  him.  By  successive  strokes  he  was  deprived  of  property,  family, 
health,  reputation,  and  true  sympathy.  Tet  Job  left  bis  sufferings  with  God.  He 
learned  to  forbear  with  the  bigotry  and  stupidity  of  his  friends.  He  evinced  at  last,  in 
spite  of  tome  serious  failures,  a  spirit  of  perfect  submission  to  the  Divin*  will.  He 
interceded  for  his  misguided  comforters ,'  and  God  forgave  them.  Job's  case,  however, 
is  introduced  here  chiefly  with  the  view  of  pointing  to  "the  end"  or  conclusion  whicli 
the  Lord  gave  to  him  (Job  xlii.  12).  His  God,  whom  he  feared,  rewarded  signally, 
even  in  this  life,  his  wonderful  patience.  And  the  great  lesson  which  we  should  learn 
from  Job's  career  is  "  that  the  Lord  is  full  of  pity,  and  mercifiil."  He  is  so  in  the 
very  sending  of  trial,  in  the  measure  of  it,  in  the  grace  which  he  gives  to  bear  it,  in  the 
unravelling  of  its  merciful  purpose,  and  in  the  happy  issues  with  which  he  rewards  his 
people,  when  they  "  have  been  approved  "  (ch.  i.  12).  Trial  is  a  goodly  discipline 
intended  to  prepare  for  the  "  goodly  heritage ;  "  and  thus  they  will  be  "  blessed  "  who 
shall  have  "  endured."— Ci.  J. 


o«.T.  1— 20.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  79 

Ver.  12. — Against  swearing.  The  apostle  has  been  exhorting  to  long-sufFering  under 
trials ;  and  he  now  prohibits  profanity.  For  impatience  in  the  time  of  afSiction  nnay 
betray  a  man  into  speaking  unadvisedly,  and  may  even  tempt  him  to  take  the  Namo 
of  God  in  vain. 

L  Thk  kind  of  swbarino  which  is  here  prohtbitbd.  We  believe  that  James 
condemns  only  what  is  called  profane  swearing.  He  exhorts  the  brethren  to  abstain 
from  hasty  and  frivolous  oaths.  Some  coninientators,  indeed  (as  De  Wette),  some 
philosophers  (as  Bentham),  some  Fathers  of  the  early  Church  (as  Chrysostom  and 
Augustine),  and  some  Cluistian  sects  (aa  the  Quakers),  interpret  this  command,  with 
that  of  our  Lord  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (Matt.  v.  34r— 37),  as  an  absolute  con- 
demnation of  all  kinds  of  swearing.  The  prevailing  judgment  of  the  Church,  however, 
is  that  upon  solemn  occasions  oaths  may  be  not  only  lawful,  but  sometimes  also  dutiful. 
For  what  does  an  oath  meaii  ?  It  means,  to  call  upon  God  to  take  notice  of,  and  to 
ratify,  some  particular  assertion.  And  Christian  intelligence  suggests  that  there  can 
be  nothing  sinful  in  this,  provided  it  be  done  only  upon  a  solemn  judicial  occasion  and 
in  a  reverent  sidrit.  The  words  in  the  third  commandment  which  are  emphatic  aie 
evidently  the  words  "  in  vain,"  it  being  assumed  that  there  is  a  lawful  use  of  the 
Divine  Name.  Passages  are  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament  in  which  God  enjoins 
upon  his  people  the  taking  of  solemn  oaths  (Oeut.  vi.  13  ;  x.  20 ;  Jer.  xii.  16) ;  aud 
it  was  ordained  in  the  Law  given  from  Sinai,  that  persons  accused  of  certain  offences 
might  clear  themselves  by  an  adjuration  (Exod.  xxii.  10, 11).  Prophets  and  apostles  often 
attested  their  inspired  messages  with  an  oath :  e.g.  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  1),  Micaiah 
(1  Kings  xxii.  14),  Paul  (Gal.  i.  20;  2  Cor.  i.  23).  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  put 
upon  his  oath  by  the  high  priest,  accepted  the  adjuration,  although  he  had  before 
been  silent  (Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64).  And,  hight'St  of  all,  Jehovah  himself  is  represented 
as  swearing  (Ps.  ex.  4 ;  Heb.  vi.  13).  When,  therefore,  Jesus  and  James  say,  "  Swear 
not,"  they  do  not  forbid  solemn  oaths,  if  used  sparingly,  upon  appropriate  occasions, 
and  as  an  act  of  worship ;  but  only  such  swearing  as  is  passionate,  purposeless,  profane. 

II.  The  need  that  there  is  for  such  a  prohibition.  Colloquial  swearing  was 
a  clamant  sin  among  the  Hebrews,  as  it  still  is  among  the  Orientals.  The  people' 
generally  were  adepts  in  the  use  of  profane  expletives.  Rabbinical  casuistry  had 
ilevisod  many  subtle  refinements  with  the  view  of  permittin<;  inrlnlgence  in  the 
habit  on  all  occasions  (Matt,  xxiii.  16 — 22).  The  scribes  taught  that  while  it  was 
sinful  to  swear  expressly  by  the  Divine  Name,  it  was  allowable  to  do  so  by  heaven,  by 
the  earth,  by  the  prophets,  by  Jerusalem,  by  the  temple,  by  the  altar,  by  the  blood  of 
Abel,  by  one's  own  head,  etc.  The  extreme  commonness  of  this  sin  of  careless  swear- 
ing led  our  Lord,  once  and  again,  to  rebuke  it,  aud  to  point  out  the  evil  lying  under  it ; 
and  the  Apostle  James  here  catches  up  his  spirit,  and  echoes  his  words.  But  we  in  this 
country  require  the  apostle's  warning  perhaps  as  much  as  the  Christian  Jews  of  "  the 
Dispersion."  The  strong  tendency  of  human  nature  to  the  use  of  profane  language  is 
a  remarkable  illustration  of  our  depravity.  How  much  profanity  there  is  in  the  popular 
literature  of  the  day,  even  in  that  section  of  it  which  is  considiered  "  high  class,"  and 
which  is  read  by  the  cultured  portion  of  the  community  I  This  objectionable  element 
in  many  of  our  works  of  fiction  is  at  once  a  symptom  of  much  evil  already  existing, 
and  a  cause  of  more.  How  prevalent  also  is  the  sin  of  swearing  in  our  public  streets  I 
It  is  distressing  to  overhear  the  most  profane  expressions  coming  sometimes  from  the 
lips  of  the  merest  children.  And  even  persons  who  profess  to  fear  God  will  allow  them- 
selves to  use  his  Name — ^in  some  mutilated  form,  it  may  be — as  a  needless  exclamation  ; 
or  employ  similarly  the  sacred  word  which  expresses  some  Divine  attribute ;  or  swear 
by  the  dread  realities  of  death  and  eternity.  Christians  ought  to  remember  that  all 
such  forms  of  speech  are  an  offence  against  the  Majesty  of  heaven,  and  a  grief  to  the 
heart  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  this  region  there  should  be  a  clear  aud  wide  separation 
between  believers  and  unbelievers.  Lips  which  use  the  first  petition  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer—"  Hallowed  be  thy  Name,"  ougbt  never  to  speak  of  God  and  of  Divine  things 
except  in  «  spirit  of  reverent  worship. 

III.  The  EABNE8TNE88  OF  THE  PROHIBITION.  We  have  considered  the  matter  of  the 
apostle's  counsel ;  let  us  look  now  to  his  manner  in  giving  it.  He  writes  with  burning 
earnestness.  "But  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  not;"  <.e.  guard  yourselves 
with  peculiarcare  against  the  sin  of  profanity.    We  should  exercise  this  special  watch< 


so  tHE  GENEftAL  EflSTLE  OF  JAMES.  lm.r,l—26L 

fulness  for  many  reasons ;  amongst  these,  because :  1.  Profcme  twearing  U  a  great  tin. 
It  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  Christian  patience  and  long-suffering  which  the  apostle  hag 
been  inculcating.  No  man  dare  insult  a  fellow-creature  as  many  men  every  day  insult 
the  Majesty  on  high.  The  great  Jehovah  should  be  contemplated  with  the  profoundest 
reverence ;  but  to  swear  is  to  insult  him  to  his  face.  2.  This  tin  m  very  easily  com- 
mitted. Our  corrupt  nature  is  prone  to  it.  The  temptations  which  beset  us  are 
abundant.  Both  round  oaths  and  minced  oaths  are  to  be  heard  everywhere.  So,  Jamea 
says,  "Let  your  yea  be  yea;  and  your  nay,  nay."  The  bare  word  of  a  Christian  man 
should  be  enough.  Even  to  say,  "  Upon  my  word,"  is  to  swear ;  such  an  asseveration 
is  contrary  to  Christian  simplicity.  If  one  is  strictly  truthful,  his  simple  "  yes "  or 
"no"  will  always  be  believed.  3.  Swearing  it  a  ruinous  sin.  James  adds,  " That  y« 
fall  not  under  judgment."  A  foul  tongue  is  the  index  of  a  foul  heart.  Indeed,  the  two 
act  and  react  upon  one  another.  The  profane  man,  therefore,  is  destroying  his  own  soul. 
He  who  swears  by  hell  in  jest  may  well  tremble  lest  he  go  to  hell  in  earnest.  The  Lord 
our  God  will  not  suffer  him  to  escape  his  righteous  judgment  (Deut.  xxviii.  58,  59). 

Conclusion.  What  need  we  have  to  offer  the  prayer  of  David — "Set  a  watch, 
O  Lord,  before  my  mouth ;  keep  the  door  of  my  lips"  (Ps.  cxli.  3) ! — 0.  J. 

Vers.  13 — ^15. — Prayer  and  praise  as  a  medicine.  The  previous  exhortatioii  was  a 
dissuasive  against  profane  swearing.  In  these  verses  the  apostle  suggests  that  the  right 
use  of  the  Divine  Name  is  reverently  to  call  upon  it  in  all  time  of  our  tribulation, 
and  in  all  time  of  our  wealth.  The  most  healthful  relief  for  a  heart  surcharged  with 
deep  emotion  is  to  engage  in  religious  worship.  James  relers  here  to  three  different 
cases. 

I.  The  case  or  the  afflicted.  (Ver.  13.)  The  believer  must  not  allow  his  trials 
to  exasperate  him.  Insteal  of  swearing  over  them,  he  should  pray  over  them.  That 
is  a  graceless  heart  which,  when  under  the  rod,  challenges  God's  sovereignty,  or 
impugns  his  justice,  or  distrusts  his  goodness,  or  arraigns  his  wisdom.  The  child  ot 
God  prays  always,  because  he  loves  prayer ;  and  especially  when  under  trial,  because 
then  he  has  special  need  of  it.  He  prays  for  a  spirit  of  filial  submission ;  for  tlie 
improvement  of  his  chastisement ;  and  for  the  removal  of  it,  if  the  Lord  will.  And 
only  those  who  have  proved  the  efBoacy  of  prayer  know  how  efficacious  it  is.  Even  to 
tell  God  of  our  trials  helps  to  alleviate  them.  Prayer  brings  the  soul  near  to  him  who 
bears  upon  his  loving  heart  the  burden  of  bis  people's  sorrows.  As  we  pray,  our  cares 
and  trials  pass  into  the  Divine  breast,  and  we  are  made  of  one  will  with  our  Father. 
But,  besides  this,  our  petitions  will  be  directly  and  substantially  answered.  God  will 
give  us  either  the  particular  blessing  which  we  ask,  or,  if  that  would  not  be  good  for 
us,  something  still  better.  When  we  crave  relief  from  present  suffering  we  may  get 
instead,  as  Paul  did  (2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 10),  the  power  of  higher  moral  endurance. 

IL  The  oabb  of  the  liqht-beabted.  (Ver.  13.)  Sorrow  and  joy  constantly  meet 
in  human  life.  There  are  many  people  who  are  "  cheerful : "  some,  because  they  are 
in  easy  circumstances;  others,  because  they  are  of  a  buoyant  disposition.  Now,  a 
Christian  ought  to  keep  his  hilarity  from  running  to  waste  by  expressing  his  gladness 
in  praise.  Cheerfulness  naturally  overflows  into  song.  And  the  believer  is  to  use  as 
the  vehicle  of  his  joy,  not  the  favourite  ditties  of  the  worldly  man,  which  are  often  full 
of  levity  and  sometimes  tinged  with  profanity,  but  "psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs."  This  counsel  reminds  us  that  praise  is  a  means  of  grace,  not  for  the  congre- 
gation and  the  family  alone,  but  also  for  the  individual  believer.  Praise  is  the  art  of 
adoration ;  and  its  outward  attire  is  music,  the  most  spiritual  of  the  fine  arts.  To 
"  psalm  "  with  voice  and  instrumental  accompaniment  affords  the  best  safety-valve  for 
joyous  emotion.    Music 

<*  Gtentlier  on  the  spirit  Uea, 
Than  tired  eyelids  upon  tired  eyes." 

(TennyMO.) 

It "  is  the  art  of  the  prophets,  the  only  art  that  can  calm  the  agitation  of  <he  soul , 
one  of  the  most  magnificent  and  delightful  presents  God  has  given  as"  (Luther). 
Those  German  hymn-writem  did  well  who  wrote  hymns  for  young  people,  hooaekeepers, 
miners,  etc.,  to  sing,  instead  of  the  profane  songs  of  the  day.    And  now  thankful  we 


m.  V.  1—20.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  81 

should  be  for  onr  treaBures  of  sacred  poetry— the  grand  old  Hebrew  psalms  and  oui 
Christian  hymns  I 

IIL  Thk  oasb  op  thk  biok.  fVers.  14, 16.)  The  sick  brother  is  to  "  call  for  the 
presbyters  of  the  Church."  This  implies  that  it  belongs  to  the  elders,  or  bishops,  to 
visit  the  diseased  and  infirm.  In  early  times  they  were  to  do  so,  not  only  to  render 
spiritual  aid,  but  to  exercise  such  "gifts  of  healings"  (1  Cor.  xii.  9)  as  they  might 
possess.  It  is  enjoined,  or  rather  taken  for  granted,  that  they  would  "  anoint "  the 
sick  man  "with  oil."  Why  so?  Either  because  this  was  the  accredited  medical 
panacea  in  that  age  ^Isa.  i.  6 ;  Luke  x.  34),  or  because  oil  is  a  symbol  of  the  gracious 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Divine  Healer  (Mark  vi.  13).  If  we  judge  that  the 
anointing  was  medicinal,  the  lesson  is  that  in  sickness  we  are  to  have  recourse  both  to 
"  the  prayer  of  faith"  and  to  the  prescriptions  of  an  enlightened  pharmacy.  If,  how- 
ever, we  regard  it  as  symbolical — perhaps  the  better  view — in  that  case  it  would  remind 
all  parties  that  the  miraculous  cures  were  effected  only  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  the 
Lora  Jesus  had  given.  And  bo  the  apostle  expressly  says  that  the  anointing  is  to  be 
done  "  In  the  Name  of  the  Lord,"  and  that  "  the  prayer  of  faith  "  which  accompanied 
it  would  be  followed  by  a  cure.  The  gift  of  healing  was  granted  to  the  apostles  as 
a  temporary  aid  in  the  woA  of  founding  the  Christian  Church.  At  first,  before  the 
gospel  was  sufficiently  understood,  signs  and  wonders  were  needed  as  helps  to  faith. 
This  gift  would  cease  with  the  death  of  the  last  person  who  ^ad  been  endowed  with  it 
by  the  last  of  the  apostles.  The  injunction  to  use  oil  as  a  s  /mbol  was,  therefore,  only 
temporary.  Many,  however,  have  judged  otherwise.  1.  Koman  Catholics,  who  base 
their  rite  of  extreme  unction  upon  this  Scripture.  But  that  so-called  sacrament  differs 
entirely  from  the  ordinance  before  us.  Here,  it  is  the  elders;  there,  a  priest.  Here, 
it  is  a  sick  man  who  is  to  be  restored  to  health  ;  there,  one  who  is  about  to  die.  Here, 
the  object  of  the  anointing  is  the  recovery  of  the  patient ;  there,  it  is  to  prepare  him-  for 
death,  2.  The  "  Peculiar  People  "  in  England,  and  the  "  Tunkers  "  in  the  United  States, 
who  in  times  of  illness  still  rely  upon  this  unction  and  prayer,  rejecting  all  medical 
advice.  At  Mannedorf,  in  Switzerland,  Miss  Dorothea  Triidel  for  many  years  superin- 
tended an  establishment  in  which  prayer  was  employed  in  preference  to  medicine  for 
the  cure  even  of  the  most  serious  diseases.  And  at  Bad  Boll,  in  Wiirtemberg,  Pastor 
Blumhardt  has  prosecuted  upon  a  large  scale  a  similar  enterprise.  Hundreds  of 
cures  have  been  authenticated  as  having  been  wrought  in  these  institutions.  What, 
then,  ar«  we  to  say  to  this?  First  of  all,  that  the  promised  recovery  is  doubtless  con- 
nected in  Ter.  15,  not  with  the  anointing,  but  with  the  prayer,  and  with  the  faith 
which  breathed  in  it.  If  there  were  faith  on  the  part  of  the  praying  presbyter,  and  of 
the  sick  brother  himself,  his  sickness  would  be  healed ;  and  his  sins,  of  which  perhaps 
his  disease  was  a  punishment,  would  be  forgiven.  But  again,  although  we  do  not  now 
look  for  evidently  miraculous  cures,  "  the  prayer  of  faith "  still  pierces  the  saper- 
natural ;  and  thus  it  is  as  reasonable  now  as  ever  to  pray  for  the  recovery  of  the  sick, 
provided  also  we  diligently  use,  at  the  same  time,  the  best  physical  means  of  cure. 
It  is  a  Divine  law,  in  every  department  of  life,  that  we  must  employ  the  means  if  we 
would  secure  the  blessing.  During  sickness,  therefore,  we  must  piay  as  if  all  depended 
upon  prayer;  and  avail  ourselves  of  medical  skill  as  if  we  had  no  other  resource  than 
that.  But  what  Christian  can  doubt  the  efiicacy  of  prayer  as  a  means  of  cure  ?  If 
Jesus  Christ  and  his  apostles  could  heal  the  sick,  may  not  our  Father  in  heaven  still, 
although  in  occult  ways  which  medical  skill  cannot  trace,  touch  the  secret  springs  of 
hdmau  life?  and  may  he  not  do  so  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  his  own  people? 
Certainly  diseases  are  under  law.  But  even  a  medical  man  has  some  power  to  direct 
the  action  of  the  physical  laws  of  disease.  And  is  not  the  power  of  the  Lawgiver 
greater  still  than  that  of  the  most  eminent  physician?    Is  it  not  literally  omnipotent  V 

Lessons.  1.  Prayer,  although  by  no  means  of  the  nature  of  a  charm,  is  a  real 
medicine  for  sickness.  2.  While  this  is  true,  the  supreme  end  of  prayer  is  the  attain- 
ment of  spiritual  ble£.jing.  3.  We  should  therefore  ask  more  earnestly  for  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins  than  for  temporal  mercies. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  16—18. — Mutual  confession  and  prayer.    In  the  latter  part  of  ver.  15  t\e 
apostle  has  hinted  at  the  connection  between  sin  and  suffering.    He  proceeds  now  to 
urge  upon  the  sick  and  the  erring,  on  proper  occasions  to  acknowledge  to  their  brethi  «b 
jAMaa.  o 


Sa  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  v.  1— 2a 

th«  sini  of  which  they  may  have  heen  guilty,  if  they  would  be  "  healed"  in  body  and 
soul,  as  a  result  of  tlie  intercessions  offered  on  their  behalf. 

I.  The  duty.  (Ver.  16.)  It  is  twofold.  1.  Mutual  confession.  The  subject  here 
is  not  confession  of  sin  to  God,  although  that  is  an  essential  part  of  true  penitence 
(Prov.  xxviii.  13 ;  1  John  i.  8 — 10).  Neither  is  it  auricular  confession  to  a  priest ; 
although  the  Church  of  Borne  bases  her  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  such  mainly  upon 
this  passage.  That  Church,  while  recommending  the  confessiou  of  venial  sius,  makes 
the  rehearsal  of  all  mortal  sins  essential  to  salvation.  But  history  testifies  that  the 
confessional,  instead  of  proving  a  means  of  grace,  has  been  to  an  unspeakable  degiee  a 
school  of  wickedness.  The  confession  here  spoken  of  is  occasional,  not  regular.  It  is 
particular,  not  indiscriminate.  It  is  mutual, "  one  to  another,"  and  not  on  the  one  part 
only.  It  is  in  order  to  edification,  and  not  for  absolution.  Chri-'t  has  given  his  minis- 
ters no  power  to  pardon  sin.  "  The  only  true  confessional  is  the  Divine  mercy-seat " 
(Wardlaw).  The  exhortation  before  us  is  addressed  to  the  brethren  generally,  whether 
presbyters  or  ordinary  members  of  the  congregation.  And  it  is  only  some  sins  which 
it  is  proper  to  confess  to  our  fellow-men.  There  are  many  "secret  faults"  of  impure 
thought  and  corrupt  desire  on  which  we  should  keep  the  lids  closely  down.  But  we 
ought  to  confess:  (1)  Wrongs  done  to  hreihren.  If  on  any  occasion  we  have  acted 
unjustly  by  a  brother,  or  calumniated  him  to  others,  we  should,  so  soon  as  we  come  to 
ourselves, confess  our  fault,  ask  his  forgiveness^  and  make  all  possible  reparation.  Our 
Saviour  has  enjoined  this  (Matt.  ▼,  23,  21).  It  was  a  beautiful  practice  of  the  primi- 
tive Church  to  see  that  all  quarrels  among  brethren  were  made  up,  in  the  spiiit  of 
Christian  love,  before  the  celebration  of  tiie  Lord's  Supper.  And  the  Church  of 
England  has  an  earnest  counsel  to  the  same  effect  in  her  Communion  Service.  (2) 
Scandalous  sins.  A  scandalous  sin  is  one  which,  on  account  of  its  publicity,  is  a 
scandal,  and  is  calculated  to  bring  reproach  upon  religion.  The  discipline  of  the 
Church  requires  that  such  an  offence  be  confessed  openly.  Discipline  is  an  ordinance 
of  Christ,  and  is  intended  to  conserve  the  purity  of  the  Church,  as  well  as  the  spiritual 
profit  of  her  members.  A  good  man,  therefore,  when  he  has  fallen  into  gross  and  open 
sin,  should  be  willing  to  ms^e  public  confession  before  the  Church  and  to  his  fellow- 
members.  (3)  Sins  which  deeply  xuound  the  conseitnet.  There  are  occasions  when 
we  may  profitably  speak  of  such  to  a  pious- pastor  or  to  some  prudent  Christian  friend. 
"  Certainly  they  are  then  more  capable  to  give  us  advice,  and  can  the  better  apply  the 
help  ot  their  counsel  and  prayers  to  our  particular  case,  and  are  thereby  moved  to  the 
more  pity  and  commiseration ;  as  beggars,  to  move  the  more,  will  not  only  represent 
their  general  want,  but  uncover  their  sores "  (Manton).  Happy  is  the  man  who  has 
such  a  friend.  If  any  persons  in  the  world  should  confer  with  one  another  about 
matters  of  spiritual  ezpeiience,  it  is  surely  husband  and  wife.  If  such  never  "  confess 
their  sins  one  to  another,"  certainly  they  are  not  married  in  the  Lord.  2.  Mutual 
prayer.  This  is  the  main  advantage  to  be  derived  from  mutual  confession.  We 
should  take  our  friends  into  our  confidence  about  our  sins,  that  we  may  induce  them 
with  intelligent  sympathy  to  intercede  for  us.  Not  only  are  the  spiritual  officers  of  the 
Church  to  pray  for  the  sick  and  the  erring;  this  duty  is  incumbent  upon  the  whole 
congregation.  An;  meml>er  who  cherishes  strong  opinions  about  the  remissness  of  the 
elders  or  of  the  pastor  in  sick-visitation,  should  labour  as  much  as  possible  to  supple- 
ment their  deficiencies.  We  should  all  remember  at  the  throne  of  grace  the  afflicted 
of  our  company,  and  those  who  have  confessed  sin  to  us.  God  wants  us  to  pray  "  for 
all  men,"  and  "for  all  the  saints."  To  pray  for  others  will  help  to  free  us  from 
sjiiritual  selfishness ;  it  will  develop  within  us  sympathy  for  brethren,  and  thus  tend 
to  knit  the  Church  together  in  love. 

II.  An  encoubaggment  to  dibohaboe  tbib  duty.  It  is  an  inestimable  blessing  to 
be  able  to  engage  on  our  behalf  the  spiritual  sympathy  and  the  earnest  applications  of 
our  fellow-Christians.  We  have  here :  1.  A  statement  of  the  power  of  prayer.  (Ver.l6.) 
It  "  availeth  much."  The  evolution  of  events  is  controlled  by  the  living  God,  as  the 
Firat  Cause  of  all  things;  and  prayer  occupies  the  same  place  in  his  moral  government 
that  other  second  causes  do.  God  is  roused  into  action  by  the  prayers  of  his  people. 
Prayer  is  thus  more  than  merely  a  wholesome  spiritual  discipline ;  it  moves  the  arm  of 
tiie  Almighty,  and  virtually  admits  the  believer  who  presents  it  to  a  share  in  the 
goverunieui  of  the  world.    The  apostle  recommends  intercessory  supplication  as  pecu- 


CBL  r.  1-20.]  THK  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  SS 

liariy  effectual.  The  petitioiler,  however,  must  be  "  a  righteous  man.''  He  who  would 
intercede  succpssfully  must  himself  have  faith  in  Christ — that  faith  which  is  made 
perfect  by  holy  deeds  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18 ;  John  ix.  31).  "  'J'he  supplication  "  of  such  a  man 
"  availeth  much  in  its  working,"  i.e.  when  energized  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  "  maketh 
intercession  for  us  "  (Rom.  viii.  26).  Mere  routine  prayer  avails  nothing.  A  form  of 
sound  words  is  not  enough.  We  must  put  our  heart's  blood  into  our  request.  Indeed, 
what  we  desire  mnst  be  begotten  within  us  of  "  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplica- 
tions." 2.  An  historical  example  of  this  power.  (Vers.  17, 18.)  With  such  examples 
the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament  are  thickly  strewn ;  but  the  apostle  selects  one  case 
only — that  of  Elijah.  Although  an  extraordinary  personage,  and  a  very  eminent 
prophet,  Elijah  was  by  no  means  a  demigod:  he  was  "a  man  of  like  passions 
[literally, '  homoeopathic  *]  with  us."  He  had  the  same  human  nature  which  we  have — 
the  same  susceptibilities,  dispositions,  and  infirmities.  He,  too,  had  his  secret  faults,  and 
his  presumptuous  sins.  But,  being  "a  righteous  man,"  he  was  a  man  of  prayer;  and 
his  success  as  a  suppliant  should  be  an  example  to  us.  Two  special  petitions  presented 
by  this  prophet  are  cited.  (X)  A  prayer  far  judgment.  (Ver.  17.)  The  Old  Testament 
history  does  not  mention  the  fact  that  the  long  drought  which  fell  upon  the  land  of 
Israel  in  the  days  of  Ahab  was  sent  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  Elijah.  It  was  so, 
however.  The  prophet  had  been  brooding,  among  the  uplands  of  Gilead,  over  the 
wickedness  of  the  court  and  of  the  people;  and  at  length  he  prayed  by  the  Spirit  that 
Jehovah,  for  his  own  glory  and  for  the  well-being  of  the  nation,  would  send  this  drought 
upon  the  land.  And  God  heard  him,  and  closed  the  windows  of  heaven  for  three  ytars 
and  a  half.  (2)  A  prayer  for  mtrey.  (Ver.  18.)  This  request  Elijah  presented  upon 
Mount  Carmel,  on  the  evening  of  that  memorable  day  when  God  had  answered  by  fire, 
and  the  prophets  of  Baal  had  been  slain.  God  had  intimated  to  Elijah  at  Zare[ihalh 
that  he  was  aibout  to  send  rain ;  and  now  the  prophet  wrestled  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise,  and  sent  his  servant  seven  times  to  the  mountain-top  to  watch  for  the  visible 
answer.  And  soon  "the  heaven  was  black  with  clnuds  and  wind,  and  there  was  a 
great  rain."  Both  of  these  chapters  in  Elijah's  life  illustrate  vividly  the  power  that 
there  is  in  "  the  prayer  of  faith."  And  should  any  one  ask,  "  Where  is  the  Lord  God 
of  Elijah?"  the  answer  is,  that  he  ii  "  with  us"  yet ;  and  that  prayer  is  still  the  golden 
key  which  opens  the  door  of  heaven,  and  brings  us  "  in  its  working  "  salvation  mani- 
fold.~C.  J. 

Vers.  19,  20. — The  conversion  of  a  sinner.  With  this  emphatic  sentence  the  Epistle 
closes.  There  are  no  personal  references.  Christian  greetings,  or  notices  of  friends,  such 
as  Paul  would  have  had.  Perhaps  James  ends  thus  abrujitly,  because  he  desires  to 
impress  upon  his  readers'-hearts  this  last  thought,  that  every  Christian  should  aim  at 
being  a  soul-winner.    We  have  here — 

I.  A  BEOTHEB  ooiNO  A8TBAT.  The  case  supposed  is  the. apostasy  of  a  professing 
Christian.  We  must  notice,  at  the  outset,  the  supreme  importance  which  our  apostle 
ascribes  here,  and  throughout  his  Epistle  (ch.  i.  18,  21—23;  iii.  14),  to  "the  truth." 
He  strikes  as  loyal  a  note  as  Paul  does,  regarding  the  necessity  of  "consenting"  to 
sound  doctrine  if  one  would  live  the  Christian  life.  He  assumes  that  all  backsliding 
is  aberration  from  the  truth.  His  words  cover  both  forms  which  apostasy  may  take — 
errors  of  creed  and  of  conduct.  A  brother  may  go  astray :  1.  As  regards  doctrine. 
Many  in  oxa  times,  alasl  attach  small  importance  to  error  of  this  kind.  Libertines 
in  practice  are  apt  to  be  latitudinarians  in  opinion.  Many  "moral"  men  act  as  if 
they  do  not  regard  any  of  the  doctrines  of  the  creed  as  vital.  Some  really  pious  people 
seem  to  believe  that  the  Christian  life  can  be  lived  with  eq.ial  success  by  men  hdlding 
the  most  diverse  views  regarding  the  central  facts  of  Ohri.stianily.  But  Scripture 
teaches  that  it  is  through  the  knowledge  and  faith  of  certain  great  truths  alone  that 
men's  hearts  will  be  imbued  with  Christian  principle,  and  their  lives  become  acceptable 
to  God.  Among  the  essential  doctrines  are  those  of  human  depravity  and  inability; 
the  Divine  inspiration  of  Holy  Scripture;  the  supreme  Deity  of  Jesus  Christ;  his 
substitutionary  atonement;  and  man's  dependence  on  the  gracious  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  To  deny  any  of  these  doctrines  is  to  "  err  from  the  truth,"  and  to  "  fall 
from  grace."  Among  the  causes  of  such  doctrinal  aberration  are  (1)  pride  of  intellect; 
(2}  giving  one's  self  over  to  the  guidance  of  speculation ;  (3)  aversion  of  heart  to  evan- 


tt  THE  G£iN£BAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.t.1— 2a 

gelical  troth ;  (4)  the  vanity  of  desiring  to  be  tbought  independent ;  (5)  neglect  uf  the 
meang  of  grace.  Or,  again,  a  brother  may  err :  2.  As  regards  practice.  He  may  turn 
bis  back  upon  the  gospel  without  formally  renouncing  any  of  its  doctrines.  Immo- 
rality is  a  departure  from  the  faith,  no  less  than  error  in  opinion.  To  "walk  in  the 
truth "  is  to  follow  holiness.  The  man,  therefore,  who  professes  zeal  for  orthodoxy, 
and  all  the  while  is  wallowing  in  sin,  or  becoming  entangled  with  the  world,  is  really 
a  heretic.  Such  a  man  is  •  living  lie  against  the  truth.  But  what  temptations  there 
are  everywhere  to  leave  the  narrow  way  1  And  do  not  professing  Christians  in  large 
numbers  succumb  to  these?  The  masses  of  our  home  heathen  are  in  a  great  measure 
composed  of  members  of  Churches  who  have  finally  lapsed  into  worldliness.  It  is  a 
sure  sign  of  spiritual  declension  to  cease  to  find  pleasure  in  public  worship,  and  to 
allow  one's  place  in  the  house  of  God  to  be  empty. 

II.  Anotheb  bbotheb  coNVEBTiNa  THE  EBBING  BBOTUEB.  Usually  the  term  "  con- 
vert"  is  employed  to  describe  that  great  moral  revolution  within  the  soul  which 
is  effected  by  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And,  doubtless,  we  may 
understand  it  here  in  this  radical  sense,  as  well  as  in  its  secondary  meaning  when 
applied  to  the  reclamation  of  a  backsliding  believer.  For  there  are  members  of  the 
visible  Church  who  are  not  true  Christians.  They  make  for  some  time  a  fair  pro- 
fession ;  but  by-and-by  they  visibly  fall  away.  Well,  the  counsels  and  prayers  and 
pious  example  of  a  fellow-member  of  the  congregation  may  be  blessed  to  the  real  con- 
version of  such.  But,  again,  the  erring  one  may  be  already  a  believer;  and  a  brother 
believer  may  become  instrumental  in  reclaiming  him  from  his  apostasy.  This  also  is 
a  conversion,  although  as  such  only  supplementary  to  "  the  great  change."  Simon 
Peter  was  a  truly  godly  man  when  he  denied  bis  Master;  yet  Jesus  called  his  repent- 
ance after  that  foul  sin  his  "conversion"  (Luke  xxii.  32).  Some  Christians  are  in  this 
sense  converted  many  times.  Their  religious  life  ebbs  and  flows ;  and  each  turn  of  the 
tide  after  a  period  of  declension  amounts  to  a  fresh  conversion.  Of  course,  it  is  only 
God  who  can  "  convert  a  sinner "  in  either  sense.  But  he  employs  believers  as  his 
instruments.  The  Holy  Spirit  bestows  his  grace  in  connection  with  human  prayer  and 
effort  (Acts  xxvi.  18;  Luke  i.  35,  16;  1  Cor.  iv.  15;  Philem.  19).  And  any  Christian 
may  become  such  an  instrument.  James  does  not  say,  "  If  any  preacher,  or  pastor,  or 
^lder,  convert  him;"  the  work  may  be  accomplished  by  the  humblest  member  of  the 
congregation.  Even  a  servant-maid,  or  a  little  child,  may  be  honoured  to  do  it.  Each 
member  is  bound  to  seek  the  spiritual  good  of  every  other  member.  For,  we  are  our 
"  brother's  keeper." 

III.  The  OLOBions  be8ctlt8  of  such  cokvebsion.  The  full  fl<iwer  of  this  glory 
shall  bloom  in  eternity;  but  its  bud  appears  just  now  in  time.  The  ultimate  result 
is  the  salvation  of  the  soul;  and  the  immediate  result  is  the  covering  of  many  sins. 
But  who  can  estimate  the  blessedness  of  such  an  experience?  These  last  burning 
words  of  the  Epistle  remind  us  of  the  priceless  value  of  the  human  s|irit.  Man  is 
"  the  image  and  glory  of  Gkid."  Think  of  the  high  endowments  of  the  soul,  its  lofty 
powers,  its  iminortal  destiny,  the  price  paid  for  its  redemption,  and  the  dreadfulness 
of  its  ruin,  should  it  continue  unsaved.  The  unconverted  sinner  is  an  beir-apparent 
to  eternal  death ;  and  the  backsliding  professor,  if  he  be  not  restored,  must  slip  down 
into  the  same  undone  eternity.  Now,  the  glorious  effect  of  conversion  is  to  deliver 
from  the  power  of  sin  in  the  future,  and  from  its  guilt  in  the  present.  The  convert's 
sins  are  "a  multitude,"  for  every  day  has  contributed  to  their  number;  but  now  they 
are  covered  with  the  Bedeemer**  merit.  The  blood-sprinkled  mercy-seat  hides  the 
violated  Law  from  Jehovah's  eye.  And  what  a  joy  to  the  sinner  to  be  made  the  subject 
of  such  a  conversion!  "Blessed  ia  he  whose  sin  is  covered"  (Ps.  xxxii.  1).  Where 
past  sin  is  thus  hidden,  much  future  sin  it  prevented.  Tbi^  therefore,  is  the  best 
"  turn"  whloh  one  can  do  to  his  neighbour — ^to  "convert  him  from  the  error  of  his 
way." 

IV.  Thk  encoueaobmemt  thus  supplied  to  Chbistian  effobt.  '•  Let  him  know  " 
(ver.  20).  These  animating  words  express  the  main  thought  in  the  text.  The  Christian 
worker  must  not  forget  that  to  restore  an  erring  soul  is  one  of  the  noblest  of  achieve- 
ments. It  is  a  far  grander  triumph  than  even  to  save  a  man's  natural  life.  Let  him 
remember  this  for  his  comfort  in  thinking  of  the  work  which  he  has  already  done,  and 
for  his  encouragement  ia  seeking  to  do  more.    It  is  inspiring  to  realize  that  snt 


6H.T.1— 26,]  tHi!  GENERAL  fiflSTLE  OP  jAMEa.  IS 

has  plucked  brands  from  the  everlasting  burning,  and  helped  to  add  new  jewels  t« 
Immanuel's  crown.  God  works  for  this  end ;  and  as  often  as  it  is  gained,  there  is  joy 
in  heaven  in  the  presence  of  the  angels.  For  this  the  apostles  laboured.  For  this  the 
maityrs  bled.  For  this  evangelists  toil.  Who  does  not  envy  the  life-work  of  men 
like  Luther,  Wesley,  Whitefield,  M'Cheyne,  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  a  Sciipture 
like  this?  Yet  there  are  many  humble  Christians  who  have  tasted  of  this  joy,  and 
whose  heavuQ  shall  be  "two  heavens;"  because  they  have  "turned  many  to  righteous- 
ness ".  (Dan.  xii.  3). 

LESiiONS.  1.  Let  us  beware  of  backsliding  ourselves ;  and  let  us  ask  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  "see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  us,"  2.  Let  us  be  concerned  about  oui  erring 
brctliren,  and  labour  to  compass  their  conversion.  3.  Let  us  take  encouragement  to 
missionary  effort  from  the  melting  motive  presented  in  this  closing  counseL — C.  J. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — ITie  doom  of  misrtsed  wealth.  We  have  in  these  opening  words  an 
erho  of  ch.  iv.  9 ;  but  with  a  difference.  There,  a  ctfU  to  repentance;  here,  a  denunci- 
ation. The  very  word  "  howl "  recalls  old  prophecies  of  doom  (Isa.  xiiL  6 ;  xiv.  31 ;  ^ 
XV.  3).  So  here,  the  coming  doom.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem?  Yes ;  but  this  only 
the  "beginning  of  sorrows."  The  culminating  judgments,  and  the  second  advent. 
These  rich,  these  delicate-living  and  pleasure-taking  ones?  Yea,  let  them  weep  and 
howl ;  for  their  miseries  are  coming  upon  them ! 

L  The  sin  of  the  high.  Professedly  religions  or  not,  they  were  great  sinners,  and 
as  sinners  alone  does  he  regard  them.  And  as  sinners  he  denounces  them.  1.  Indul- 
gence. "  Ye  have  lived  delicately  on  the  earth,  and  taken  your  pleasure."  What  is 
the  law  of  the  true  life?  A  thankful  acceptance  of  such  joys  as  God  gives,  and 
incrensed  service  in  the  consecration  of  such  joys.  But  they?  Their  pleasure  was 
their  all.  They  were  pampering  their  lusts.  Instead  of  making  self  a  centre  from 
which,  under  God,  all  blessing  should  radiate,  they  made  it  a  centre  to  which  ail 
pleasure  must  converge.  2.  Luxury.  "  Your  riches  are  corrupted,  and  your  garments 
are  moth-eaten."  What  is  the  law  of  property  ?  A  thankful  use  of  such  things  as  God 
gives,  that  we  and  the  world  may  be  the  better  for  them.  But  they  ?  They  were 
guilty  of  a  wanton  accumulation  of  wealth,  and  so  their  very  plenty  was  corrupting 
in  its  idleness.  Like  corn  in  a  famine,  heai<ed  up  and  mouldering.  3.  Selfish  opprei- 
eion.  "  The  hire  of  the  labourers," etc.  What  is  the  law  of  work?  A  mutual  ministry 
of  employers  and  employed,  involving  •  recognition  of  the  rights  of  labour.  How 
spoke  their  Law  on  this  matter,  and  the  prophets  (see  Lev.  xix.  13 ;  Deut.  xiiv.  14^ 
15;  Jer.  xxii.  13;  Mai.  iii.  6)?  But  they?  The  words  suggest  sufficient.  So  their 
indulgence  and  luxury  were  not  merely  selfish  in  themselves,  but  at  others'  expense. 
They,  forsooth,  were  all  in  all,  and  others  must  work  for  them,  and  yet  starve  and 
be  naked,  while  they  heaped  up  their  riches  I  Verily,  they  were  thieves  and 
robbers.  4.  Buthlest  persecution.  "Ye  have  condemned,  ye  have  killed,"  etc  The 
histoiical  fact;  probably  judicial  tyranny,  these  rich  men  refusing  justice  to  the  poor, 
when  pleading  against  the  fraud  perpetrated  towards  them  by  their  rich  employersi 
But  what  was  the  essential  fact?  Him,  the  Just  One,  they  had  virtually  condemned 
and  killed  I  Yes,  for  so  they  were  filling  up  the  measure  of  their  fathers  (see  Matt, 
xxiii.  32 ;  xxvii.  25).  For  the  spirit  which  actuated  them  was  the  selfsame  spirit  «t' 
unjust  cruelty  which  had  actuated  those  to  whom  Stephen  spoke  of  the  Just  On»— 
"of  whom,"  he  said,  "ye  have  been  the  betraytrs  and  murderers."  So  also  Jamea 
"  the  Just"  was  afterwards  their  victim. 

II.  The  doou  or  the  bich.  Sin  and  judgment,  in  the  ways  of  God,  are  ever  doieljr 
joined.    For 

"Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small; 
Though  with  patience  he  stands  waiting,  with  exactness  grinds  he  alL" 

1.  Thus  their  selfish  indulgence  was  but  indulgence  for  the  slaughter;  they  wera 
fattening  themselves  for  the  shambles.  We  are  reminded  of  the  time  of  the  slaughter 
that  came,  when  "  the  temple  floors  ran  with  blood,  and  the  roofs  raged  in  fire  till  hU 
was  utter  desolation"  (see  Punchard,  EUicott's  'Commentary').  2.  The  canker  of 
their  wealth  was  premonitory  of  the  judgment  of  remorse,  that  should  eat  their  flesh 
as  fire  (Luke  xvi  24),    3.  Their  oppression  and  fraud,  likewise,  were  marked  by  oat 

•  8 


86  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  lea.  y.  1—20 

eye,  and  the  cries  of  the  oppressed  had  entered  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Ths 
Lord  of  hosts?  Yes,  power  belonged  unto  him,  and  it  had  been  written,  "Be  shall 
deliver  the  needy  when  he  crieth;  the  poor  also,  and  him  that  hath  no  helper"  (Ps. 
Ixxii.  12,  etc.).  4.  And  their  murder  of  the  Just  One,  as  it  really  was?  "Behold,  ha 
cometh  with  clouds;  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  thiy  also  which  pierced  him: 
and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  btcnuse  of  him"  (Rev.  i.  7).  Yes,  judgment 
should  come,  swift  and  sure;  "for  as  the  lightning,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxiv.  27). 

The  great  lesson  is  one  of  stewardship;  let  rich  and  poor  alike  learn  this.  And  to 
all  there  is  one  Lord,  and  he  cometh!  yes,  "  to  judge  the  earth:  with  i  ighteouanesi 
shall  he  judge  the  world,  and  the  people  with  equity  "  (Ps.  xcviii.  9). — T.  P.  L. 

Vers.  7 — 11. —  Ttte  coming  of  the  Lord.  Following  the  warning*  for  the  rich,  wa 
have  encouraging  counsel  for  the  poor.  Yes,  even  the  poor  persecuted  ones  just  spoken 
of  in  the  previous  verses.  The  coming  of  tlie  Lord  is  set  forth  as  being  nigh  at  hand, 
and  they  are  exhorted  to  a  patient  waiting  till  that  coming  be  accomjilis'ied. 

I.  The  coming  of  the  Lord.  1.  Its  nature.  (1)  For  mercy  :  "  to  them  that  look 
for  him  .  .  .  unto  salvation  "  (Heb.  ix.  28).  So  here,  "  the  end  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  The  • 
"end"  towards  which  God  always  works  for  his  people  is  their  deliverance;  so  shall  it 
be  emphatically  then.  Nor  is  the  deliverance  a  cold,  deliberate  putting-forth  of  power; 
he  is  "  full  of  pity."  So  he  saves  out  of  tha  fulniss  of  love  that  yearns  towards  tha 
oppressed.  But  the  pity  and  the  deliverance  are  both  alike  "  of  grace,"  for  we  deserve 
them  not;  so  we  are  reminded,  in  that  ha  is  "mercifuL"  (2)  For  judgment:  "to 
them  that  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and  wrath  "  (Rom. 
ii.  8).  So  here,  "  the  judge  standeth,"  etc.  Tha  "  end  "  towards  which  God  is  com- 
pelled to  work,  by  tha  sins  of  men,  is  their  judgment;  lo  emphatically  then.  And  the 
very  pity  of  his  heart  becomes  intanser  indignation,  when  sin  spurns  his  pity.  And  the 
judgment  shall  be  one,  therefore,  of  accumulating  penalties;  judgment  because  they 
"obey  not  the  tmth  ;"  yet  heavier  judgment  because  they  "obey  not  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesns  Christ"  (2  These.  L  8).  2.  £i  neamesi.  Certainly  there  is  a  seeming 
nearness  in  the  a]  ostolic  days;  ho#  shall  it  be  explained?  (1)  Actually,  it  was  very 
near,  the  intervening  time  being  compared  with  tha  vast  leons  of  God's  working;  so 
2  Pet.  iii.  8.  And  even  we,  studying  the  history  of  the  past,  can  view  tha  lapse  of 
ages  somewhat  according  to  the  measurement  of  God.  (2)  Ideally,  it  was  near  indeed 
to  those  to  whom  it  was  the  one  burning,  glowing  hope.  For  illustration,  the  parting 
with  a  much-loved  friend  for  a  separation  of  many  years :  wa  dwell  so  fondly,  in 
the  lingering  farewells,  on  the  reunion  time,  that  all  tha  long  interval  is  forgotten 
in  the  absorbing  hope  of  that  better  day.  So  Christ,  parting  with  his  disciples: 
"  I  will  come  again "  (John  xiv.  3).  So  the  disciples,  looking  for  their  Lord :  his 
coming  "draweth  nigh."  Yes,  the  high  mountain-peak  stood  out  so  clear  and 
beautiful  against  the  distant  sky,  that  it  seemed  nigh,  almost  as  one  might  touch  it 
even  now!  (3)  Virtually,  it  was  near.  There  miyht  be  many  a  climb  before  that 
mountain-peak  should  he  gained,  but  each  ascent  of  the  intervening  hills  lessened  the 
distance  towards  that  high  summit.  So  the  successive  "comings"  of  the  Lord,  through 
all  the  ages,  are  preparing  for  and  bringing  near  that  advent,  which  shall  ba,  after  all, 
but  the  culmination  of  the  judgments  and  deliverances  that  are  proceeding  now.  (4) 
Potentially,  as  has  well  been  said,  it  might  be  even  nearer  then  than  now,  for  the 
spiritual  alertness  of  the  Church,  and  the  rapidity  of  the  evangelization  of  tha  world, 
were  the  fulfilment  of  conditions  upon  which  depends  the  "hasting"  of  "the  coming  of 
the  day  of  God  "  fsee  2  Pet.  iii.  12,  margin).  So,  then,  in  all  these  senses  it  might  well 
be  said,  "  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand ; "  "  the  Judge  standeth  befure  the  doors." 

II.  The  patient  waitino.  But  as  yet  they  must  wait,  and  be  patient  in  their 
waiting.  For  when  the  ideal  of  their  hopes  burned  feeble  and  dull,  and  the  weary 
routine  of  common  life  was  oppressive  to  their  hearts,  how  distant,  sometimes,  might 
that  coming  seem  I  And,  seeming  distant,  it  would  actually  become  mora  distant, 
for  their  faith  and  work  wouTd  slacken,  and  so  his  way  would  not  be  prepared.  Yes, 
there  must  be  a  looking  for  their  Lord,  that  they  might  rightly  do  his  will,  and  also 
that  they  might  patiently  wait  for  his  appearing.  So,  then,  as  regards  this  patient 
waiting :  1.  Its  character.  (1)  Endurance  of  evil :  one  feature  of  the  economy  of 
tedemptioB.    Yes,  **  we  caU  them  blessed  j "  so  ch.  i.  2 — 1, 12.    (2)  Strength  of  heart : 


CH.  T.  1—20.]  THE  GENERAL  KPISTLB  OP  JAMBS,  87 

evil  without  could  not  touch  that  inward  strength.  In  thia  craisisti  the  "  blessedness" 
of  the  enduring.  Therefore  "  stablish  your  hearts."  (3)  Trust  in  God :  a  God  with  us 
now ;  a  God  working  for  our  deliverance  hereafter.  Huvin,'  hira,  we  have  all  things; 
and  hoping  in  liim,  we  shall  not  bo  put  to  shame.  2.  Its  mcouragemehts.  (1)  The 
processes  of  nature  may  teach  us  patience:  " Behold,  the  husb.tudman  waiteth,"  etc. 
(2)  The  propliets  of  grace  teach  the  same  patience  :  "  Take,  brethren,  for  an  example," 
etc,  And  the  patience  manilested  by  them  was  that  of  men  who  can  "  suffer,  and  be 
ttrong ; "  an  active  patience — "  spake."  (3)  The  patience  of  Job  is  the  typical  example 
of  God's  dealings,  so  mysterious  and  yet  so  merciful ;  and  of  man's  faith,  so  tossed  aad 
tried,  yet  ckaving  to  the  God  who,  he  is  sure,  will  not  forsake. 

One  penalty  of  impatinnce  and  unfaith  is  mutual  discontent:  "Murmur  not  one 
agninst  another."  As  against  this,  the  reward  of  patient  trust  in  God  is  "  the  peace  of 
God,"  which  "  shall  keep  yovir  hearts  and  minds  tlirough  Clirist  Jesus."  Therefore,  for 
duty's  sake,  for  society's  sake,  for  your  own  hearts'  sake,  for  Christ's  sake,  "be  patient, 
brethren,  until  the  coming  of  the  Lord ; "  for  "  yet  a  little  while,  and  be  that  shall 
come  will  com%  and  will  not  tarry  "  (Heb.  z.  37). — ^T.  F,  L. 

Ver.  12. — Simplicity  of  speech.  Why  "above  all  thini^'s"?  Unless  that  this  was 
one  of  their  chiefly  besetting  sins.  But,  indeed,  the  intrinsic  importance  of  the  subject 
itself  is  sufi5oient  warrant  for  the  use  of  such  words.  It  is  the  great  subject  of  verity — 
verity  of  speech.  And,  indeed,  if  the  verities  of  speech  be  trifled  with,  soon  all  verity 
is  gone ;  and  if  a  man  be  not  a  true  man,  of  what  worth  is  he  ?  "  Swear  not."  We  need 
not  take  these  words  as  prohibiting  the  use  of  the  oath  on  solemn  public  occasions. 
For  our  Lord  himself  was  put  on  his  oath  by  the  high  priest  (Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64),  ami 
accepted  the  position.  Paul  also  (Rom.  i.  9 ;  2  Cor.  i.  23  ;  Gal.  i.  20 ;  PhiL  1. 8)  several 
times  in  his  public  communications  with  the  Churches  substantiated  his  words  with 
some  solemn  formula.  No;  the  world  being  what  it  is,  imperfect,  and  some  being  so  far 
under  the  influence  of  higher  realities  that,  when  brought  consciously  into  their  presence, 
they  will  speak  truly,  through  fear,  whereas  apart  from  such  avowed  appeal  to  God  they 
niiglit  not  speak  truly,  it  does  appear  to  be  quite  lawful  for  society  to  take  advantage 
even  of  this  lower  religious  motive  to  secure  true  testimony,  as  before  magistrates. 
And,  this  being  so,  the  man  who  needs  no  such  constraint,  who  lives  always  as  before 
God,  and  whose  word  is  therefore  as  good  as  his  oath,  will  yet  conform  to  the  usages  of 
society  for  the  sake  of  their  general  benefit.  It  is,  then,  not  the  use  of  solemn  speech 
on  such  public  and  special  occasions  that  is  here  prohibited,  but  artificial  asseverations 
in  the  common  intercourse  between  man  and  man.  And  we  may  profitably  consider — 
simplicity  of  speech,  and  its  reward. 

I.  Simplicity  of  speech.  1.  And  first,  as  opposed  to  duplicity.  For  amongst  the 
Jews  certain  ingenuities  of  oath-taking  had  become  a  veil  for  the  most  flagrant  falseness. 
To  the  rabbis  "  the  third  commandment  was  simply  a  prohibition  of  perjury,  as  the 
rixth  was  of  murder,  or  the  seventh  of  adultery.  They  did  not  see  that  the  holy  Name 
might  be  profaned  in  other  ways,  even  when  it  was  not  uttered;  and  they  expiessly  or 
tacitly  allowed  many  forms  of  oath  in  which  it  was  not  named,  as  with  the  view  of 
guarding  it  from  desecration.  Lastly,  out  of  the  many  forms  thus  sanctioned  (as  here — 
Matt.  V.  33 — 37 — ^and  xxiii.  16 — 22)  they  selected  some  as  binding  and  others  as  not 
binding,  and  thus,  by  a  casuistry  at  once  subtle,  irrational,  and  dishonest,  tampered  with 
men's  sense  of  truthfulness  "  (Plumptre,  on  Matt.  v.  33 — 37,in  EUicott's '  Commentary '). 
Our  Lord's  words,  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  afterwards  in  Matt,  xxiii.,  were 
intended  to  smite  through  all  this  sophistry  of  falsehood ;  and  James,  in  echoing  our 
Lord's  words,  "  Swear  not  at  all,"  doubtless  has  the  same  end  in  view.  For  whether 
they  solemnly  invoked  God's  holy  Name,  or  used  some  seemingly  less  solemn  formula,  or 
used  no  formula  at  all,  and  yet  were  false,  their  lying  was  in  reality  lying  against  God, 
who  is  present  everywhere,  and  without  whom  nothing  is  real  and  no  speech  is  sacred. 
So,  then,  our  Lord's  words,  and  the  words  of  James,  smote  all  the  duplicity  of  the  Jews 
in  those  dayg.  And  does  not  the  same  condemnation  smite  all  the  prevarications  of 
our  day?  Whether  with  or  without  false  oaths,  all  speech  which  insinuates  the 
wrong  meaning,  under  whatever  cover  of  seeming  veracity,  is  false,  and  must  for  safety's 
sake  be  Iwanded  with  its  real  name,  lying — ^yes,  lying  against  God  I  _  And  so  all  shifty, 
'  uisleading  daadi ;  all  trausactioua,  whether  of  business  or  of  political  life,  or  in  any  other 


88  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  [oh.  v.  1—20. 

Ephen^  whiflh  have  for  their  aim  to  conTey  wrong  impressions,  are  lying — flying  against 
God  I  Oh,  let  us  learn,  "Thou  God  seest  me;  and  let  our  yea  be  yea,  and  our  nay, 
nayl  2.  Again,  as  opposed  to  all  flippant  trifling.  Douhtless,  then  as  now,  oaths  were 
bandied  about  lightly  from  mouth  to  mouth  in  irreverent  wantonness.  This  wag  to 
trifle  with  the  God  to  whom  the  oaths  referred.  And  so  still ;  we  make  light  of  him 
when  we  lightly  use  these  sacred  names  1  But  all  flippant  speech,  whether  with  or 
without  oaths,  is  equally  a  sin  against  God,  if  we  would  rightly  regard  it.  How  many 
there  are  who  can  scarcely  speak  but  to  jest  1  to  whom  life  seems  one  huge  comedy  ! 
Ab,  Gud  is  not  real  to  us,  when  the  life  which  God  has  given  can  be  so  frivolously 
treated  I  3.  And  yet  again,  as  opposed  to  all  artificial  solemnities  of  common  speech 
for  the  purpose  of  attesting  its  veracity.  This  leads  us  back  to  the  thought  with 
which  we  started.  A  true  character  needs  no  vouchers.  The  man  who  protests  his 
truth  is  almost  certainly  a  false  man;  as,  if  certain  coius  out  of  a  large  number  were 
marked  "  genuine,"  we  should  at  once  suspect  them  to  be  spurious.  Or,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  thuy  were  ascertained  to  be  genuine,  we  should  naturally  suspect  the  coins  not 
so  marked  to  be  false ;  so  a  fortified  manner  of  speech,  if  true  itself,  implies  that  speech 
when  unfortified  is  not  true.  Yes,  by  our  artificial  asseverations  we  lay  open  our  whole 
converse  to  suspicion.  For  all  these  reasons,  then,  let  your  yea  be  yea,  and  your  nay, 
nay.      Your  speech — let  it  be  simple,  lacred,  true. 

II.  Its  reward.  1.  The  reward  of  social  life.  Think  of  it — when  every  man  may 
trust  his  neighbour  1  Each  of  us  is  contributing  his  part  towards  this  consummation 
by  simplicity  of  speech,  helping  to  build  up  the  truthfulness  of  the  world.  2.  The 
reward  of  the  man.  Aud  this  ?  The  man's  own  trueness.  For,  as  we  have  seen  (on 
ch.  iii.  1 — 5),  a  man's  speech  makes  a  man's  self ;  truth  or  falseness  distils  through 
all  his  nature  from  his  words.  And  what  better  reward  than  this :  a  brave  bearing 
towards  men,  a  true  faith  in  God? 

Again,  as  a  reminder,  "that  ye  Call  nut  under  judgment."  Yes,  every  false 
asseveration,  every  false  flippancy,  every  essentially  false  solemnity,  he  notes  down ;  and 
the  day  of  reckoning  is  at  hand  I  Our  untruth  will  eat  our  soul  as  doth  a  canker ;  and 
then  ? — our  own  cankered,  hollow  self  for  ever  1  Yes,  that  shall  be  our  portion.  For  "  all 
liars  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  bumetb  with  fire  and  brimstone ;  which  is 
the  second  death."  Well  may  it  be  said,  as  was  said  once  (Robertson's  '  Sermons,' 
first  series,  p.  291),  "  The  first  lesson  of  the  Christian  life  is  this — Be  true ;  and  the 
second  this — Be  true;  and  the  third  this — Be  true."  But  how?  "  I  am  the  Truth." 
Yes,  thank  God,  this  is  our  refuge.  And  so  shall  we  "  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 
judgment ;  because,  as  he  is,  w  are  we  in  this  world  "  (1  John  iv.  17). — ^T.  F.  L. 

Vers.  13—18. — The  life  in  Ood.  The  guiding  thought  of  these  verses  is  the  intimacy 
of  connection  between  our  life  and  God.  And  the  Christian,  above  all,  should  realize 
this  truth,  so  attested  in  the  incarnation  and  ascension  of  our  Lord.  For  heaven  has 
come  down  to  earth ;  nay,  earth  has  been  raised  to  heaven.  So,  then,  according  to  these 
verses,  our  sorrowing  and  rejoicing  are  to  be  "  in  the  Lord ; ''  in  sickness  we  are  to  seek 
our  restoration  from  the  Lord ;  at  all  times  our  effectual  prayer  is  to  be  towards  the  Lord. 

I.  The  thirteenth  verse  teaches  us  that  the  natiu'al  expression  of  all  the  Christian's 
experiences  should  be  Godward.  "  Is  any  among  you  suffering  ?  "  How  readily  we 
murmur  against  man,  or  in  heart  against  Godl  For  the  natural  effect  of  pain  on  the 
natural  heart  of  man  is  to  make  it  fretful  and  impatient.  How  must  it  be  with  the 
Christian?  "  Let  him  pray."  Yes;  let  him  hide  his  suffering  in  the  mighty  love  of 
God,  like  •  troubled  child  flinging  itself  into  its  mother's  breast  I  "  Is  any  cheerful  ?  " 
Hiiw  readily  we  vent  our  joy  in  levity  and  hilarious  mirth  I  The  true  resource  is 
thankful  praise.  Like  the  lark  mounting  up  into  the  inorniDg  sky,  so  should  we  pour 
out  our  full  heart  to  God.  And  so  with  all  the  manifold  experiences  of  life,  of  which 
these  are  but  two  typical  examples :  all  our  life,  waking  and  sleeping,  work  or  rest, 
pleasure  or  pain,  is  to  be  a  life  in  God.  So  will  all  our  life  run  into  worship;  so  shall 
we  "  pray  without  ceasing."    And  so  will  those  words  be  fulfilled  to  ua— 

"  Tbrioe  blest  whose  lives  are  faithful  pTayei% 
Whose  loves  in  higher  love  endure; 
What  souls  possess  themselves  so  pure, 
Or  if  there  blessedness  like  theiaY" 


0H.».  1— 20,]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  M 

— ^^— .^■—  ^*^— *  ^—         ^^^^^^j^,^,,^^.^ 

n.  Yen.  11  and  16  teach  us  that  in  sickness  our  faith  should  be  in  God.  1.  In  our 
Lord's  public  healing,  prominence  was  given  to  the  fact  that  all  healing  is  of  God,  but 
there  was  the  recognition  likewise  of  the  use  of  proper  means.  Symbolized  in  his 
miracles:  thus,  "looking  up  to  heaven,"  he  "touched  his  tongue,"  etc.  (Mark  vii. 
33,34).  So  in  practice  prescribed  by  James:  recognition  of  fact  that  only  God  can 
heal,  but  also  of  fact  that  God  uses  human  means  for  effecting  his  healing  work — former 
in  exhortation  to  prayer,  latter  in  direction  to  anoint  with  oil,  which  was  perhaps  the 
great  symbol  of  medical  remedies  (see  Mark  vi.  13  ;  Luko  x.  34 ;  also  Plumptre,  ia  he.  j 
and  notice  the  interpretation  of  these  words  now  by  Greek  Church,  Roman  Church, 
and  "  Peculiar  People  ").  What  to  us  is  the  spirit  of  these  directions  now  ?  Use  the 
highest  appliances  of  medical  skill  which  God's  providence  has  in  these  latter  days 
supplied  to  the  world ;  but  in  and  throsgh  all  recognize  God's  working.  Pray  to  God 
for  the  exercise  of  his  healing  power,  and  if  the  sick  one  be  raised  up,  kdow  that  "the 
Lord"  hath  raised  him  up.  Yes,  the  Lord,  the  living  Christ,  who  is  the  Healer  still. 
2.  But  what  is  the  spiritual  concomitant  of  the  bodily  healing  ?  "  If  he  have  committed 
sins,*  etc  These  words,  as  to  confession,  have  been  more  sadly  misinterpreted,  iCnd 
more  fatally  abused,  than  the  former,  as  to  healing.  What  is  the  natural  interpretation, 
as  suggested  by  the  whole  connection  ?  The  sick  man  may  have  brought  his  sickness 
upon  himself  as  the  result  of  some  secret  sin:  shall  the  elders  pray  for  him?  Yes, 
they  may ;  but  it  must  not  be  as  for  a  saint  of  God.  If  the  intercession  is  to  avail,  it 
must  not  proceed  upon  a  total  misunderstanding  of  the  case,  the  faith  being  thus 
misplaced.  No,  the  sick  man  must  see  the  righteousness  of  the  chastisement,  and  own 
it  to  his  brethren,  acknowledging  his  sin ;  then  may  they  make  penitent  confession  on 
his  behalf^  and  "  it  shall  be  forgiven  him."  If  he  desires  their  prayers,  he  must  make 
at  least  some  general  acknowledgment  of  the  character  of  the  case.  Andwith  this 
thought  another  may  be  mingled.  How  much  of  quarrel  and  offence  there  is  among 
Christian  brethren,  poisoning  the  life  of  Christian  society,  and  corrupting  its  usefulness 
in  the  world  1  It  was  so  then,  as  the  chapters  before  have  shown ;  it  is  so,  alas  1  now. 
But  when  sickness  comes,  let  this,  at  least,  be  a  time  for  frank  acknowledgment  and 
mutual  pardon.  Such  in  part  may  be  James's  meaning  when  he  says,  "Confess 
therefore,"  etc.  (ver.  16). 

III.  Then  the  general  principle  of  prayer  is  enunciated,  with  an  illustration 
(vers.  16^8).  1.  The  operativeness  o/ prayer.  "  Availeth  much."  We  know  not  how, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  rain,  but  the  fact  is  sure.  God  does  not  violate  his  own  laws,  but 
works  through  them ;  and,  working  through  them,  he  yet  can  answer  our  supplications. 
For  he  lays  his  hands  on  the  innermost  springs  that  move  the  forced  uf  the  world,  and 
they  obey.  We  see  only  the  succession  of  second  causes ;  behind  all  these  is  the  great 
First  Cause,  the  living  God.  2,  The  condition  of  availing  prayer.  "  Of  a  righteous  man." 
Prayer  is  no  talisman,  operating  with  magic  effect,  but  a  child  asking  of  a  Father. 
Yes,  this  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  righteous."  Not  faultless ;  for  Elijah  was  of  "  like 
passions  "  with  ns.  But  one  of  the  family,  adopted  through  Christ  into  the  household 
of  Qoi.    And  the  prayer  of  such  a  one  he  heareth  always. 

So,  then,  the  truth  of  all  these  verses,  as  we  saw  at  the  beginning,  is  the  intimacy  of 
union  between  our  life  and  God,  We  see  heaven  opened,  and  the  angels  of  God 
ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  man.  Yes,  and  upon  us  his  brethren 
(John  i.  61).    And  the  link,  on  our  part  ?    Prayer.    Wherefore,  "  pray  always." 

"  For  so  the  whole  round  earth  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God." 

T.  P.  L. 

Yen.  19, 20.— 3^  lalvation  of  a  soul.  In  the  former  verses  he  had  supposed  a 
possibly  sinning  man,  when  chastened, "  sending"  for  the  elders  of  the  Church.  Now  the 
reverse  side  of  the  picture  is  presented,  and  we  are  taught  that,  not  merely  when  trans- 
gressors send  for  us  are  we  to  visifthem  for  their  salvation,  but  unsolicited  we  are  to 
seek  them  out,  if  by  any  means  we  may  save.  Of  course  the  exact  case  here  considered 
is  that  of  one  who  has  wandered,  but  the  general  principle  enunciated  is  true  in  all  its 
applications.    Conversion — its  nature,  its  agency,  its  results. 

L  Itb  nathbe.    1.  From/alsehood  to  the  truth.    All  sin  implies  wilful  self-deception 


N  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAUBS.  [oh.  T.  1—20. 

"  There  ii  a  way  which  leemeth  right  unto  a  man."  Hence  the  reasonableness  of  religion ; 
the  beauty  of  holiness.  And  so  conversion  presupposes  the  working  of  "  conviction." 
Yes,  a  uian  must  see  and  feel  his  mistake,  and  recognize  the  truth  to  which  he  has 
shut  his  eyes,  before  he  can  rightly  come  to  God.  2.  From  wrong  to  right.  For  it  is 
nut  enough  to  be  convinced  of  error ;  mere  knowledge  of  the  truth  can  never  save.  This 
the  mistake  of  Socrates,  identifying  virtue  with  knowledge,  and  vice  with  ignorance. 
No  ;  not  merely  must  the  conscience  be  convinced,  but  the  heart  must  be  influenced, 
the  will  must  be  persuaded.  "  From  the  error,"  truly ;  but  "  the  error  of  his  way." 
He  has  been  walking  in  a  wrong  way ;  the  way  of  transgression,  of  ungodliness.  But 
One  says,  "  I  am  the  Way."  We  must  come  to  him,  we  must  "  walk  in  him  "  (Col. 
ii.  6).  For  this  is  the  way  of  holiness,  the  way  to  the  Father.  Conversion  ia  never  true 
and  complete  conversion  till  the  converted  one  can  say,  "  To  me  to  live  ia  Christ " 
(Phil.  i.  21). 

II.  Its  aoenct.  1.  The  power  must  ie  of  God.  Conversion  in  all  its  parts  is 
ascribed  ultimately  to  God  in  Scripture.  Do  we  receive  knowledge  of  the  truth  ?  It  is 
because  "  God  is  light."  Do  we  receive  the  truth  into  our  hearts,  and  live  thereby  ? 
It  is  because  "  God  is  love."  2.  The  instrumentality  may  he  of  men.  May  be,  not 
must  be.  For  God  can  illumine  the  mind  which  is  untaught  of  man,  and  influence  the 
will  which  is  unmoved  by  man.  But  the  rule  is,  employment  of  human  means.  "  Oo  ye, 
and  make  disciples  .  .  .  teaching  them  "  (Matt,  zxviii.  19).  So  here :  "  he  which  con- 
verteth  .  .  .  shall  save."  Our  hi>jh  honour;  but  our  solemn  responsibility.  Yet  a 
responsibility  which  we  cannot  shake  off.     How  are  we  using  it  ? 

III.  Its  ebsdltb.  1.  The  individual  result.  "Save  a  soul  from  death."  Death? 
Death  of  the  Soul  I  Understanding  darkened ;  affections  corrupted  and  debased;  will 
depraved ;  whole  order  of  nature  out  of  course ;  God  gone  1  Think  of  it :  such 
capabilities,  and  such  a  doom  I  Ah,  this  is  death  indeed ;  and  from  this  a  soul  may  be 
saved  by  us !  Yes,  recovered  to  light,  purity,  strength,  goodness,  God  I  Oh,  what  a 
joy  to  put  our  hands  to  such  a  blessed  work  I  2.  The  generd  result.  "  Cover  a 
multitude  of  sins."  Think  of  the  dark  blot  on  God's  universe,  the  defilement  of  his 
ways,  which  is  caused  by  sin.  Think  of  the  atonement  of  Clirist,  and  the  gift  of  the 
Spirit,  God's  own  provision  for  the  removal  of  the  blot,  the  cleansing  of  the  defilement. 
And  then  think  of  the  special  application  of  that  rich  provision  of  God's  grace  which  we 
are  privileged  to  make.  The  glorious  result  at  which  he  aims  shall  be,  in  part  at  least, 
produced  through  us ;  that  "  multitude  of  sins  "  shall  be  done  away  1  Yes,  for  our 
efforts,  the  universe  shall  be  fairer,  God's  ways  clearer,  and  the  dawning  of  that  day 
hastened,  when  "  the  Lord  shall  be  to  us  an  everlasting  Light,  and  the  days  of  oui 
mourning  shall  be  ended  "  (Isa.  Ix.  19,  20). 

But  the  result  upon  ourselves  ?  The  work  is  a  sympathetic  work,  and  its  influence 
must  therefore  react  upon  us.  Yes,  we  must  be,  or  become,  lilie  what  we  strive  to  do. 
And  so  our  saving  love,  with  its  included  faith  in  God  through  Chiut,  shall  wash  w 
wliite  (1  Pet.  iv.  8).— T.  F.  L. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 
THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF 

JAMES. 


OHAFTBB  L 

man  'ass 

Temptation  m  Oknae  tot  Joj  m«  6 

Ihe  Need  of  Wiadom           ...  ...  6 

The  only  Trae  Oround  for  Boasting ...  7 

The  Genesis  of  Sin...           ...  ...  7 

Deeds,  not  Words  ...           ...  m.  7 

A   Joyful  Salutation  for  •  Time  (»f 

AdveTsity           ...           ...  —  8 

Wisdom  for  those  who  ask  it  .^  9 

The  Poor  and  the  Bich  Brother  m.  10 

The  Natural  History  of  Evil  m  12 

All  Good  is  from  God          ...  ...  13 

•*  The  Father  of  the  Lights : "  A  Sermon 

to  Children         ...           ...  ...  14 

The  Chief  Good  is  from  God  «.  IS 

The  Reception  of  the  Word ...  m.  IS 

Hearers  and  Doers...            m«  m.  17 

The  True  Bitualibm             m«  •«.  18 

The  \*'riter  and  his  Work    ...  „.  19 

The  Strange  Paradox          m.  ...  20 

The  Prayer  of  Faith             ...  ...  22 

The  Glory  of  Manhood  in  Christ  ...  23 

Temptation  and  its  History...  m.  24 

The  Law  of  the  New  Life    ^  ^26 


CHAPTEE  n. 

Bespeot  of  Persons  is  Inconsistent  with 

the  First  Principles  of  Christianity  ...    32 
?aith  and  Works   ...  ...  33,40 

Beipeot  of  Persons...  ...  34,39 


TRMf«  MAI 

Stumbling  in  One  Point       m«  :•.    35 

Law  and  Judgment              ...  ...    36 

Works  the  Test  of  Faith       ...  ,.    37 

Justification  by  Faith  and  llTorks  «.    38 


CHAPTEB  in. 


The  Great  Besponsibility  of  Teachers 

45 

Wisdom  shown  by  its  Fruits  in  Heart 

and  Life ... 

46 

A  Dissuasive  from  Ambition  to  Teach 

46 

The  Power  of  the  Tongue    ... 

47 

The  Tongue  Ungovernable  and  Incon- 

sistent ... 

49 

False  Wisdom        ...           ...           ... 

60 

True  Wisdom         ...           ... 

51 

The  Ethics  of  Speech           ... 

52 

Wisdom,  True  and  False      ...            m. 

53 

OHAPTEB  nr. 

The  Origin  of  Strife  and  Conflict  to  be 

sought  in  Selfish  Lust      ...  ...    57 

"  Ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  spend  it  on 

your  Pleasure "    ...  ...  ...     57 

"  The  Friendship  oi  the  World  is  enmity 

with  God"  57 

"  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw 

nigh  to  you"       ...  ...  ...     57 

"  Humble  yourselves  in  the  Sight  of  God, 

and  he  shall  lift  you  up"  ...  ...    58 


INDEi, 


rnzHB 

PASS 

The  Sin  of  Detraction 

a. 

58 

The  Uncertainty  of  Human  Plans  and 

Schemes 

.. 

58 

The  Greatness  of  Sins  of  Omission 

»■• 

58 

Wars  and  Fightings 

.. 

58 

Worldliness  Enmity  with  God 

!•• 

60 

Submission  to  God .. . 

•  ■ 

61 

Evil-Speali:ing  and  Evil-Judging 

,, 

62 

"  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes  " 

.. 

63 

War  or  Peace? 

•  • 

61 

Judgment,  Human  and  DiTine 

•  • 

65 

"What  is  your  Life?"         ^ 

•  • 

66 

OHAPTEB  V. 

The  Judgment  on  Selfishness  ...  73 

Four  Considerations  moving  the  C!hrii>- 

tian  to  Patience  ...  ...  ,  .  78 

Wuroinx  »|i;»iu»t  the  Sin  of  Sweariat;  73 


The  Power  and  Valne  of  Interoessory 

Prayer  ...  ...  ...  ...  73 

The    Blessedness   of  winning  back  a 
Single  Sinner  from  the  Error  of  his 

Ways 74 

The  J  udgments  coming  upon  the  Wicked 

Eioh 74 

Long-Suffering    in    View   of   Christ's 

Coming  ...  ...  ...  76 

Bear  and  Forbear  ...  ...  ...  77 

Against  Swearing  ...  ...  ».,  79 

Prayer  and  Praise  as  a  Medicine        w«  80 

Mutual  Conre^sion  and  Prayer  ««  81 

The  Conversion  of  a  Sinner...  m>  83 

The  Doom  of  Misuso-l  Wealth  „.  85 

The  Coming  of  the  Lord       ...  „,  86 

Simplicity  of  Speech  .»  mi  87 

The  Liff  in  God     ...  m  «.  88 

The  Salvation  of  a  Bool        «•  ■«  ti 


tfiiiliiiiiilil 


iliiii 


^^^^^^^ 


liiilii 


'^^mi^^mM^f^ 


^m^m^^^^s 


tii>^: 


^^'raiiiiiiiiliiiiip.... 


kijikiRtiWii 


-  tWmmmm 

.rr'H»»'"**t 

ji  imvtvHMU... 
f  II     iim>it(H!WM)Mirimii}Kt 


ittPHBimMHftmtRifW  ifl-t* 


.ai^^^^ll« 


||g|||SlSH|||«»s»ssi».iS 


iSiiiiSiiiiiitiiii' 


'i^i:^ismmm^&Mss, 


•   4  , ' ;     ,,      Li-ii  iHii-i-r.  null 


^^iiiliip 


iiiiSlilii 


iiiiiiiimiflifiiiiliilp 


m^mmmssBsm 


liBM' 


iSl=Sllliiiiiii:liiSi& 


sftiiil^ilili 


,.„.»S«'»Bil  iH 
nmmiMMmn". 


^'HiiiiiiSPlli 


'fSiS!iiiv.riii 


i=';i:tliirliailiailii 


'  I)  u 


liiliiiiiiiii ' 


lUllnllljJIMB 


ipiifiiiiii 


1    fimituulit 


.;■  '  "irij     im      mill  ""I""'!!  l!i ! 
' '  IlliglSiil'liiliii 


..Mliiiiiiluftii! 

'Hint  (iiiimjmiMiii,. 

■  imili!  iM.Mi  I  111  i 
]i  11  uniiniiiHi'io  iM  1 

iiidiimitiii  III    J 
'i  iiiJi.iHlnllniifn  n  I 

i!     iliiiioniiiiii'i       ! 

IjiiiiiilllllillilliillB 
1     llliy|l!i||i|iilili 

iriiiiuiiilil 


